

CATALOGUE
OF THE
CONVICT SHIP “SUCCESS."
OPEN DAILY FROM 10 a.m. till 10 p.m.
The only remaining Convict Ship of Victoria
in the Early Fifties.
PRICE= THREEPERCE.
Sydney:
JOHN SANDS, PRINTER, GEORGE STREET.
1891.




THE
CONVICT SHIP “SUCCESS."
OPEN DAILY
FROM TEN A.M. TILL TEN P.M.
The oldest and only remaining Convict Ship of
Victoria in the Early Fifties.
ONE SEEIXJH.IZSTO-.
02n.ild.ren under lO Half price.
£>girittg :
John Sands, Printer, George Street.
1891.




CATALOGUE.
THE SHIP
WAS built at Maulmain (now Moulmein), a rice settlement in British
India, near the coast, and is constructed of solid teak, a wood
peculiar to that place. On looking at the top of the main mast,
it will be noticed that a slight indent was made during the mutiny of the
crew, who were Indians, at the time of the Indian mutiny, the shot being
fired from Fort William, in Calcutta. It is the intention of the pro-
prietors to exhibit her at London, and then at the World’s Fair, in
Chicago, in 1893. She was built as a first-class passenger ship, and
traded for nearly half-a-century as an East India trader, and has con-
veyed many thousands of passengers to and from England and the Indies.
Fler first trip to Australia was made in the year 1849, when she arrived
with a full complement of emigrants. Returned again to England, and
made a second visit with another lot of emigrants in the year 1851, when
her crew deserted and went to the goldfields of Victoria. Being left totally
unmanned, she was sold at Port Phillip to the Victorian Government,
who speedily converted her into a prison ship of remarkable strength.
She is the only remaining convict ship of Victoria, the other four, viz.,
the “ President ” “ Lysander,” “ Sacramento ” and “ Deborah ” being
sold and broken up, this being the restriction placed upon them, but the
“ Success ” was sold without that restriction, hence her being on exhibi-
tion to-day.
UPPER DECK.
1. The Compulsory Bath. —The compulsory bath or “Coffin ”
was used for refractory prisoners who were unwilling to conform to the
regulations of the ship with respect to their “ toilet.” They were placed
therein, and sea water was pumped on four or five at a time from the
ocean, besides being scrubbed by the warders from the top with the aid
of a long-handled brush. This was a practice invariably performed each
morning, as there were always some of the prisoners to be washed by
force, to say nothing of the fun experienced by the warders, who really
enioyed the “ coffin soaking ” of the prisoners.
2. The Wheel. —This wheel was used for two purposes : —firstly,
the lowering below to the prisoners their food morning, noon, and
evening; but also for bringing on the top deck, for exercise, such
prisoners as were in solitary confinement, and who were unable to get
to the top unless raised by the wheel, as their irons were of such a weight
as not to allow of their being able to walk with the addition of the


punishment ball, which alone weighs 72 lbs., and the chain attached
8 lbs., total 80 lbs.
3. The Windlass. —This is the original windlass of the ship, and
has fully served its purpose, although as sound to-day as it was when built.
4. The Galley.—The exact position of the galley when in use as
a convict ship.
5. The Hatchway—With the exception of the iron stanchions
surrounding it, is truly original.
6. The Main-mast.—This is the original mast of the ship which
was built in British India, in the year 1790, at Maulmain, a rice settle-
ment near the coast. Like the whole of the ship it is decidedly good.
If, on looking up this mast, near the band at the top will be noticed a
slight indent. This was caused by a cannon ball striking it at Calcutta
during a mutiny which arose there.
7. The Old Pump.—The original and only pump used in the
ship. Previous to her departure from Melbourne the ship had not been
pumped for the space of six months.
8. The Sentry-boxes.—lmmediately over the forecastle and
behind the figure-head will be noticed the sentry-boxes, where two
warders or police were constantly stationed for four hours duty night
and day, in order to watch the gang ashore, and also to keep away from
the “ sacred or holy ground ” any intruder within the prescribed limit.
9. The Officers’ Quarters, 1852. —The office on the star-
board side was the superintendent’s room, whilst those abaft and on the
port were for the accommodation of the warders.
10. The Officers’ Bath is on the starboard side in the quarter
gallery, and is as it was built in 1790. The port quarter gallery was
used by the officers for accommodation purposes.
MIDDLE DECK.
BOW-
HENRY POWER. —Otherwise “Harry Power,” a native of
Waterford, Ireland. Captured by Superintendents Nicholson and Hare,
and Senior-Sergeant (now Inspector) Mountford, on sth June, 1870,
near Glenlyon Range, in a gunyah, lying asleep with his clothes on, a
revolver by his side, and a gun close to his head. He had been at large
for a considerable time. He had been sentenced to a long term of
imprisonment. He arrived in Victoria in the year 1848. Received a
sentence of 14 years in 1855, for firing at two troopers at Daisy Hill,
near Maryborough, who had accused him of horse stealing, and being the
person whom they were searching for, viz., Captain Melville, at large.
Power told them they were wrong, and offered to show them receipts
for the horse in his possession if they would accompany him to the
camp. They refused, and immediately attempted to arrest him, saying
to him “Oh ! yes, you are Melville, for he is riding a black horse, and
this one is black.” Power resisted, and getting away a little distance, one
•of the troopers fired at him, which was returned by Power firing also,


wounding one of the troopers. Five days afterwards he was arrested
and brought before Mr. Hardie, the Police Magistrate, who was then
on Circuit, who committed him for trial at Carisbrook Criminal Sessions,
when he was charged with horse stealing and shooting with intent. He
was found guilty, and sentenced to 14 years. He was sent to Melbourne
and forwarded to the hulk “ Success ” in October, 1855, where, a year
or two afterwards he formed one of the boat’s crew in the great Stevens
and Melville’s rush. He was tried with Melville and the others for the mur-
der of Owens, but was saved from the gallows on a point of law brought
forward by Mr. Ireland. He was sent back to the “ Success ” after a
few months elapsed, and remained there for about two and-a-half years,
but was returned to Pentridge, and there finished his sentence. On
becoming free he returned to his old haunts in the Glenrowan district,
where he shortly afterwards stuck up the mail coach near Porepunkah,
in the Ovens district, on May 7, 1869. He also stuck up the Buckland
mail coach within five miles of Beechworth. The Government of Vic-
toriaoffered for his arrest on August 28, 1869. He was captured on
Junes,lß7o, by Superintendents Nicholson and Hare and Sergeant Mont-
ford, while asleep in a hut on the Glenmore ranges, at the head of the
King River, Victoria. There was a revolver by his side, and a gun close
to his head. He was under the belief that he had been betrayed by
Edward Kelly, who subsequently became such a noted freebooter in the
same locality. He was found guilty at the Beechworth Assizes on three
charges of robbery, and sentenced on August 2, 1870, to five years
imprisonment on each charge, sentences to be cumulative. He evinced
bravado in Court, and on being sentenced requested the Judge to “ draw
it mild.” He was sent to Pentridge and fulfilled a greater portion of his
sentence, but being well-behaved, and his health failing, he was again
liberated, when he was taken in hand kindly by some lady friends who
had known him for some years, and whom he had “ stuck up” but had
not further molested. A great trait in Power’s character as a bushranger
was that he was never known to harm one of the weaker sex. He was
with the ship in the flesh up to a few weeks ago, and was engaged to
proceed around the world with the “ Success:” but taking ill, he left one
evening in October, and nothing more was heard of him until Saturday,
November 7, 1891, when it was reported that he had been found
drowned in the Murray, near Swan Hill, thus ending the career of one
of Victoria’s most notorious bushrangers.
DANIEL MORGAN.—This fellow carried the palm over all
bushrangers for cool audacity and bloodthirstiness. His murderous
exploits at the Round Hill Station were never equalled in Australia.
reward was offeied by the New South Wales Government for his
apprehension on January 5, 1864. In June of that year he shot
Sergeant McGinnerty dead, and went off with deceased’s horse and fire-
arms. A verdict of the wilful murder of John M‘Lean was returned
against him on June 23, 1864, and a reward of was offered for
his arrest by the New South Wales Government on June 27. In the
following September he shot Sergeant Smith, who died a few days after-
wards. The reward offered by Government was now increased to


the intimation bearing date March 8, 1865. On April 6, 1865, he putin
force a threat often attributed to him of making a raid on Victorian
territory, and stuck up the station of Mr. Evans at Whitefield. Several
carriers were also bailed up on the road near Wilton. On April 9
following, he reached Mr. M’Pherson’s house at the Peechalba Station,
some 20 miles from Wangaratta. He immediately bailed up all whom
he found on the station, save a servant girl, who ran to the house of Mr.
Rutherford, a partner of Mr. M'Pherson’s, situated at a distance of 400
yards. A man was despatched to Wangaratta, and the police force
arrived, which, combined with Rutherford’s men, made a party of
about 28. The highwayman meanwhile unsuspectingly spent the evening
in a free and easy manner, Mrs. M'Pherson playing for his delectation
on the piano. In the morning, after reconnoitring in front of the house,
he prepared to start. The force had been carefully placed in ambush all
round the place. After having duly breakfasted Morgan left, Mr.
M‘Pherson and three others going with him to the paddock to get a
mare. On his way he approached to within 100 yards of the ambush of
John Quinlan, a labouring man, who jumped from behind a tree and
shot the bushranger through the back. He died a few hours after without
confessing anything. Next day an inquest was held on the body, and
the jury returned a verdict of justifiable homicide.
THE TIGER’S DEN.
MIDDLE DECH-STERN.
PRICE’S MURDERERS.
JOHN CHESLEY.— A native of Oxford, England, arrived in
Sydney a prisoner of the Crown by the “ Eliza ” in the year 1841, and
after completing his original sentence was found guilty of assault with
attempt to rob. He was then sent to Norfolk Island, from whence he
escaped in 1852, and came to Victoria. He was one of the greatest
ruffians that ever trod fhe boards of this ship, as his sentence was
increased from seven years to n years whilst confined. He was a car-
penter by trade, and of the Church of England persuasion. He was
one of Mr. Price’s murderers, and was executed in his thirty-second
year. He was sft. 4m. in height, of stout build, pale complexion, brown
hair and grey eyes. He was executed by himself on the morning of
April 30, 1857.
FRANCIS BRANNIGAN .--Born 1814, at Birr, Ireland
labourer He arrived per “ Tortoise ”in Van Dieman’s Land in 1842,
under a sentence (crime unknown) of 14 years. Came to Melbourne,
per “Mary,” in 1854, under the name of Frank Bragan. Committed
for trial by the Maryborough Bench, November, 1854, on a charge of


three or four robberies, and when en route to Castlemaine for trial broke
out of the Tarrangower lock-up on the 7th December, 1854, along
with another prisoner ; the police sentry firing at them, captured one,
Brannigan escaping. A reward of was offered by the government
for Brannigan’s arrest, which was accomplished by the police in Bulla-
rook Forest (near Ballarat) on the 14th of April, 1855, in company with
five others, who were all sentenced to 15 years, first three years in irons,
for numerous highway robberies on the Creswick’s Creek and Mel-
bourne Roads. Condon, Dixon and Jackson belonged to Brannigan’s
gang, but were not present at his arrest. He was conveyed to the
“ Success,” where he took such a prominent part in the murder of Mr.
Price, and was executed on the 29th of April, 1857, and which is fully
described in the pamphlet.
WILLIAM BROWN— Was a mere lad, being scarcely 19 years
of age. He arrived in Victoria in 1852 as a free seaman in the
“ Helen,” who had worked his passage out to the colonies. He deserted
his ship, and on finding a mate went to the Forest Creek goldfields.
Being unsuccessful at the diggings he and his mate started a downward
career, for they were implicated in several robberies with violence. He
was secured and received a sentence of seven years. He was one of
Mr. Price’s murderers, and was executed on Wednesday, April 29, 1857.
In height he was sft. iin., of slight frame, fair complexion, with brown
hair and light grey eyes. He was born in Glasgow in 1838. He had
been brought up to the sea, and was a Presbyterian. His appearance
was far from repulsive.
RICHARD BRYANT— Or “Bryan Hennis,” was born in
Dublin in 1803. He had followed the trade of a sawyer, and was a
Roman Catholic, He arrived in Victoria by the “ Moffatt, ’ in 1840,
and after committing several highway robberies under arms on the
Melbourne road, near Keilor, in company with two others, he was
arrested, the other two getting away. After obtaining his liberty he was
on two different occasions convicted of robbery, for which he received
seven years. He was an old and hardened offender, in whom reforma-
tion was perfectly hopeless. He was a most designing man, and nothing
ever made him afraid. He was one of the prisoners concerned in the
murder of Mr. Price, and was executed on the morning of Wednesday,
the 29th of April, 1857. In height he was sft. of stout build,
sallow complexion, dark brown hair and hazel eyes. He was in his
54th year at the time of his execution. A more “tiger-like demon
never paced the boards of the “ Success,” and as for being concerned
in every deed of violence committed, he was one of the ringleaders.
JOHN PRICE— Late Inspector-General of Penal Establishments
for Victoria, was also the Chief Commandant of Penal Establishments
in Van Dieman’s Land. He was a son of Sir Rose Price, a Cornish
baronet, and was married to a niece of the late Sir John Franklin, and
at the time of his death left a widow and six children. He is supposed
to be the Maurice Frere of Mr. Marcus Clarke’s depicting in “ His
Natural Life,” and is here shown as he appeared after the fatal blows


were -struck on the afternoon of the 26th March, 1857, which were
committed by the prisoners along with him.
CELLS Nos. I TO 38 were for the better conducted prisoners
or those whose sentences were of a lighter nature than the lower deck,
and also for the prisoners who were working ashore in the quarries
after having served a probationary term of 2 years in the lower cells.
The STORE-ROOM adjoins the “tiger’s den” and is abso-
lutely as in use when in full “ rig” as a convict ship.
LOWER DECK-BOW.
Captain PRICE commanding GIPSY SMITH to return to
his cell at the time of the rush of Melville and his comrades on the
evening of the 22nd of October, 1856.
GIPSY SMITH.—Born in England, and at the time of his
execution was 36 years of age. He was transported when very young
from Liverpool to serve a sentence of 12 years at Van Dieman’s Land.
He effected his escape however, but was recaptured and sent to Norfolk
Island where he remained for some years ; at the time of the gold fever
in Victoria he escaped again from Norfolk Island, and turned up at
Ballarat, Victoria. He shortly afterwards, in company with a young
fellow named Twiggem, commenced a career of bushranging in 1855,
but the police being on the alert as to their whereabouts they were
tracked to Creswick’s Creek, 11 miles from Ballarat, and early one
morning Gipsy was captured in the hut which they were occupying whilst
Twiggem was absent obtaining victuals. He was proceeding to the
watch-house when a girl, who was apparently a confederate, ran to
I wiggem and informed him that Smith was being arrested. Twiggem ran
to the hut,, secured his gun and revolver, and hastening along the
road overtook the police and Smith. Twiggem then asked the sergeant
to remove the handcuffs from Smith, crying out “If you do not I will
shoot you through your black heart! ” - The sergeant refused, whereupon
Twiggem levelled the gun, shooting him there and then. The other two
police took to their heels, leaving Smith again a free man. They were
next heard of in the north-eastern part of Victoria, at the Ovens gold-
fields. A quarrel took place between them when they separated. A
substantial reward was offered by the Government for Twiggem’s arrest,
and was soon after captured whilst on a visit to some of his relations.
He was brought to Melbourne and tried for murder, when he was
sentenced to death by His Honor Judge Stawell and afterwards executed.
Gipsy Smith was also arrested a few days afterwards and was also brought
to Melbourne, and tried before His Honor Judge Stawell for the murder
of the sergeant shot by Twiggem. The Crown Prosecutor was overruled
and altered the charge to highway robbery, for which he received a sentence
of 16 years, a great portion of which he did on the “Success.” When


Mr. Price took charge as Inspector-General he noticed “ Gipsy,” and,
knowing him to be a well-behaved man at Norfolk Island and a good
worker, he was allowed to work on shore—a privilege seldom accorded
any of the others until two years’ probation had been done on board.
He finished his sentence at Pentridge, and being free again he went to
work for a Mr. Chirnside, a well-known squatter at Werribee, near
Geelong, where he remained some time, but returned to the Ovens
District where he was shortly afterwards married. He did not seem to
have lived happily, for he was soon convicted of drowning his wife in a
waterhole near Beechworth. The night preceding his execution he
attempted to cut his own throat with a small piece of razor which he
managed to conceal in the lining of his shoe. Executed 22nd April,
1861.
Nos. 1 to 4. Solitary Confinement Cells.
5- WILLIAM STEVENS.— -A native of Cornwall, England
He was partner with his brother in a brig which arrived in Victoria in the
latter part of 1853, laden with timber. Soon after their arrival the crew
deserted. The brothers, however, managed to discharge their cargo, and,
having employed a watchman for the craft, started also for the diggings,
whither the crew had gone The weather, however, was against travel-
ling, being awfully boisterous, and as their dray was constantly “ stuck ”
they were a long time on the roads, and as they were drinking freely,
their stock of grog soon ran out. One night they camped close to Saw-
pit Gully, near a party who were also proceeding to the diggings. In a
drunken state, William Stevens advanced to the travellers and demanded
a case of brandy, either by payment or otherwise ; but he would have it.
The carrier from whom the grog was demanded refused, which caused a
quarrel to ensue, the result being that firearms were used freely. One of
the travellers was wounded On the next day he was arrested and
brought to Melbourne, where he was tried for stealing brandy and firing
at with intent. He received a sentence of 10 years, and was forwarded
to the “ Success,” where he formed, in a few years, the leader of the gang
which made so desperate a struggle to escape with Melville, and who was
the one who struck Owens, the warder, and then, with the stonecutter’s
axe in hand, jumped overboard, the veritable instrument which he com-
mitted the deed with, and for whom the six men. including Melville,
were tried at Melbourne Gaol, and received such brutal treatment, as
is fully explained in the lecture and book published for the patrons of
the ship. His body was never recovered.
6. RICHARD JONES. —A native of Wales. He came to
the colony a free man, but on arrival started for the Ballarat diggings,
where, in a drunken brawl, he threw a tumbler at a man named Conroy,
injuring him seriously. He was arrested, after resisting violently, and
was sentenced to seven years on various charges. He was the prisoner
who feigned sickness for the space of 3 months for the purpose of
effecting his escape, having secreted 5 knives in cell; but after the
expiration of 3 months, seeing he had only managed to cut his way
half through the ship, his heart failed him and his plofwas discovered.


7 and 8, SOLITARY CONFINEMENT CELLS.
9. BROCKY MCINTYRE— Was a native of London,
England. He was supposed to have been transported, but escaped
from Van Dieman’s Land, and came to Victoria in 1855. He was not
in Melbourne long before he tried his hand at housebreaking, where he
was secured and tried, the result being that he received a sentence of
eight years, two-thirds of which he served on the “ Success.” He then
became deranged, and was sent to the Kew asylum. He was there
some time when he managed to get away, but was recaptured and taken
back. This little rogue was the most troublesome man on the “ Suc-
cess,” and he received more punishment than any two ordinary prisoners
received. He is still alive, an inmate of the Kew Asylum.
10. OWEN SUFFOLK— Was a native of London. He was
also transported to Van Dieman’s Land, but did not stay long there, as
he escaped and came over with nine others in the year 1853. His first
sentence in Victoria was for a period of three years for sticking up the
mail coach running between Melbourne and Geelong. The mail that
day was a comparatively light one, and he did not receive much recom-
pense for his labour. He, however, served his full time on that charge,
but as soon as free he started on a second expedition in the way of
forgery, for which he received 17 years. After doing a portion of his
sentence he was allowed on shore to work at Williamstown, and during
the whole of that time he was constantly concocting “ rushes,” but the
others, who were not pleased with him or his ideas, he being at that
time considered “ Price’s spy,” were not to be caught by him. He was
eventually taken on board the “ Success ” and “ President ” and never
allowed ashore. When hebecame free he went to Melbourne from Williams-
town, and in a few days wrote a book which was entitled “The Days of
Crime and Years of Sufferance,” for which he received a sum of
He was the most accomplished rogue that ever stepped into shoe-leather,
and whilst on the “ Success ” he was constantly concocting something
of a villianous nature. It was reported he afterwards went to London,
where he married a widow lady with an only daughter, and one day he
arranged with them for an outing on the water in a small skiff. This
was accomplished, and whilst on their way homewards he threw both
mother and daughter into the Thames. He then went ashore, and
immediately proceeded to the house in order to secure all his wife’s
deeds and property of a portable nature. He was followed by a boat-
man who had witnessed the whole affair, and from his evidence he was
sentenced to a term of imprisonment for 22 years. The pamphlet he
wrote soon after became one of the most used in Victoria from its
unique and graphic description of the early days of Victorian crimi-
nality.
11 and 12. SOLITARY CONFINEMENT CELLS.
13. RICHARD HILL. —A native of London. He was a well-
educated and pleasant-speaking man. He had been a lawyer’s clerk in
London, but came to Victoria in the year 1853. When at the Bendigo
goldfields he committed several robberies under arms, sticking up


Several small stores on the outside of the diggings. He was soon
arrested and sent to Melbourne, where he was tried on the above charge
and sentenced to io years’ imprisonment. He was sent to the
“ Success,” and being clever at stone-cutting was allowed on shore to
work. The slate, showing the various gangs, is a sample of his handi-
work. He was chosen by Stevens as one of the party in the rush, and
was the person to receive the first shot from the shore during that
escapade, and which is fully described in the pamphlet.
14. RICHARD ROWLEY. —A native of Limerick, Ireland,
born in 1817, convicted in his native town of attempted murder,
sentenced to 10 years transportation in Van Dieman’s Land. He
escaped from Port Arthur in 1854 and came to Victoria. After
working at the diggings a short time he took to bushranging between
Melbourne, Bendigo, and the Black Forest. He was captured at the
Lady of the Lake Hotel at Bulla, near Melbourne, on the road to
Bendigo, nine months after starting his exploits, and received in
Melbourne, where he was tried, a sentence of 22 years. He was sent
to the “ Success,” where he was confined four or five years. After the
death of Mr. Price, he was removed to Pentridge ; being there a few
months he assaulted one of the overseers (Kilmartin) by striking him
on the head with a pick handle, at the same time pushing him into a
quarry 30 feet deep. Kilmartin’s legs were broken at the thighs,
together with receiving a deep scalp wound on the forehead. He was
attended by the Chief Medical Officer, Dr. McCrea, who pronounced
his case hopeless. He lingered, however, for a period of two years, but
eventually recovered sufficiently to be able to walk about, but he was
the most pitiable object to be seen at Coburg, or ever the lot of man to
discern, although previous to the assault one of the most upstanding of
men. Rowly was then forwarded to the Melbourne Gaol and brought
up for trial for assault and attempted murder before His Honor Judge
Barry. He was sentenced to death and was executed a short time after.
15 and 16. SOLITARY CONFINEMENT CELLS.
17. JACKY WILLIAMS— Or “ Big Black Jack ”as he was
generally known amongst those on the “ Success.” He was the recipient
of a sentence of 15 years in London, when he was sent to Van Dieman’s
Land, for robbing a store and safe-cracking. He did a portion of his
time there, when he escaped and came to Victoria in 1853. He took
to the roads immediately after his arrival in Victoria, but was soon
arrested on a charge of highway robbery. Whilst serving this sentence
on the “ Success ” he was recognised by Mr. Price as an absconder
from Norfolk Island, and it did not require much insubordination on his
part to receive an additional three years from Mr. Price. He, however,
served his full time and became a free man, but nothing was heard of
him afterwards.
Subjoined is a report of this prisoner’s conduct by Mr. J. Price,
the Commandant at Hobart Town, in the Abstract of Criminals,
January 25, 1848.


ABSTRACT OF HISTORY OF CRIMINALS, JAN. 25, 1848.
JOHN WTLLlAMS.—Transported. Twice, vice; once, larceny;
once for feloniously entering a dwelling house, putting in bodily fear ;
and imprisonment, &c , for three years for stealing in dwelling house
and putting in fear ;49 times before the, court; once, violent assault;
once, assault and fighting ; five, disobedience of orders ; two, insolence;
once, gross insolence ; once, insubordination ; once, absconding ; three,
absent without leave; twice, idleness; once, bad language; once,
neglect of duty; n, disorderly conduct; once, fighting; once, being
improperly in possession of one button, one fork, one knife and two
caps; once, refusing to work; once, feloniously entering an officer’s
house and illtreating a servant; once, destroying a book ; once, pri-
vately lurking; once, throwing stones at an overseer; once, destroying
tools ; once, driving cattle amongst marshes, which were destroyed ;
three, tobacco in possession ; once, destroying his frock ; once, endea-
vouring by violent means to take liberties with a female servant; once,
flogged, 300 lashes.
18. JAMES KELLY—A native of the Hawkesburyßiver,Sydney-
He came to Victoria from there, where he was found guilty of horse
stealing on the Keilor Road, from a fellow traveller to the diggings, and
was sentenced to eight years on the “ Success.’’ Being a troublesome
prisoner, he was rarely out of solitary confinement, together with receiving
an additional two years and some months for insubordination. He was
one of the men implicated in the murder of Mr. Price, but as there was
not sufficient evidence to prove his guilt he was acquitted on that
charge.
19 and 20. SOLITARY CONFINEMENT CELLS.
21. THOMAS WILLIAMS —Was a native of Dublin, Ireland ;
arrived in the colonies in the year 1845 on board the “ Constant” as a
prisoner of the Crown, and after obtaining his liberty was convicted of
robbery, for which crime he was serving a sentence at the time of the
attack upon the unfortunate Mr. Price was made. He was by trade a
carpenter, and was of stout build, fresh complexion, light hair and blue
eyes. He was 32 years of age, and had a decidedly repulsive look. He
was executed 2 BthA pril, 1857.
22. HENRY SMITH.—Born in Dublin in 1838. He
arrived in Sydney per the “Sovereign” in 1833. He was then sen.
tenced to a term of seven years under the name of Christopher Brennan-
On becoming free he returned to England, but returned as a free immi-
grant in the “Coromandel” in 1847, and was subsequently convicted
of horse stealing. He would have finished his sentence in about two
months from the period of Mr. Price’s murder. He was on the launch
at the time of Melville’s rush, but conducted himself properly. In
height he was sft. of stout build, dark brown hair and hazel
eyes. He was executed for the murder of Mr. Price on the morning of
Tuesday, 28th April, 1857.
23 and 24. SOLITARY CONFINEMENT CELLS.


25. JAMES ANDERSON. —Was a native of London, and
arrived in the colony of Victoria as a Pentonville. He was landed at
Geelong, where he very soon received a sentence of eight years for
robbery. He completed this term and went to Wood’s Point as a
fossicker, but soon he committed various acts of highway robbery in
company with a second party. He was soon recaptured, and on re-
ceiving a second sentence was sent to the “ Success ” for 12 years. He
was also implicated in Mr. Price’s murder, but at the trial he was
acquitted, although the prisoners who formed the leaders in that affray
aver that Anderson was one of the most guilty concerned in it, as they
stated (although amongst themselves) that he was one of the men who
struck some of the blows which caused Mr. Price’s death. He served
his full sentence on the “ Success,” and afterwards at Pentridge, when
he became free, but died soon after gaining his liberty.
26. JOE FERRIS. —A native of London. He was transported
to Van Dieman's Land early in 1852 for robbing a house, but he
escaped from there in 1853 and arrived in Melbourne, where he re-
mained some time. He then struck up an acquaintance with a man,
and between them they arranged to try their luck at the Forest Creek
diggings. They proceeded about halfway when Joe, being a “little
fresh,” thought to obtain some gold from one of the diggers returning
to Melbourne. They rifled him of all he had, and proceeded on their
way. The digger instantly informed the police, and two of them were
sent in pursuit. On coming up to them his mate eluded the police by
firing at one and wounding him, but Joe was taken. He was taken
before Mr. Justice Stawell, who sentenced him to 15 years on board the
“ Success.” He was afterwards taken to Pentridge, where he completed
the whole of his sentence, and became free.
27 and 28. SOLITARY CONFINEMENT CELLS.
29. WILLIAM JONES—Otherwise “Black Bill”—was a
native of Cardiff, Wales. He was transported from his native town to
serve a sentence of 10 years in Van Dieman’s Land for attempting
arson. He escaped from there, and came to Melbourne, but hearing of
the diggings in 1853, he, in company with two others, started for Castle-
maine and Forest Creek diggings. On their way they started pilfering
and sticking-up, but were soon captured. They were all tried in Mel-
bourne together, and received various sentences. The Judge gave a
light sentence to the two comrades, viz., five years each, but Jones
received rather a severe one, as the Judge, taking into consideration
that he was an escaped convict, sentenced him to 22 years. He was
also implicated in the murder of Mr. Price, but as there was no evidence
to prove that he even struck a blow he was acquitted. After serving a
long sentence, with as much solitary as would have killed a dozen others,
he was transferred to Pentridge, where he served the remaining part,
and became free.
30- DANIEL DONOVAN.—Was a native of Ireland, but
was transported to Van Dieman’s Land for a period of seven years for
arson. After doing some of his time in Van Dieman’s Land he was


sent to Norfolk Island, where he became acquainted with Mr. Price.
Whilst at Norfolk Island he was witness to one of the most revolting
acts of humanity it was possible to see. The then Inspector-General of
Penal Establishments, a Mr. Machonochie, was rather of a humane
disposition towards the convicts and allowed them liberties of which
they were pleased, and won their respect. For instance, each prisoner
who was of good behaviour was allowed a little kitchen garden around
his hut, besides when at work the liberty of a “ billy ” of tea at dinner-
time. When Mr. Price took charge and succeeded Mr. Maconochie
absolutely, he did not fall in with this idea, and quickly confiscated the
“ billy of tea,” besides removing them to more remote portions of the
island, away from their gardens. This was the beginning of serious acts
of revolt and rebellion, and his life was not safe on the island. In order
then to put their plan into effect a man named “ Jacky Jacky,” who was
serving a sentence for life, murdered one of the watchmen of a gate at
the Stockade, and on Mr. Price coming amongst them, although always
on the alert, had to retreat speedily amongst the ranks of the soldiers
who were keeping guard over them. After this an order was issued by
the Government that on the next occasion of a like nature the soldiers
were to fire on the miscreants. The prisoners implicated were tried
within the gaol walls by the Visiting Judge, and 11 men were executed for
this affray. Donovan soon after this managed to effect his escape, and
crossed to Victoria, but started a series of highway robberies, and on
being arrested and tried received a sentence of 16 years, which he
served on the “ Success.” He became a freeman, but like many others
who had been in this “ocean hell” found that his health was seriously
impaired, and he soon afterwards died.
31 and 32. SOLITARY CONFINEMENT CELLS.
33. FREDERICK MACDONALD.— A native of Glasgow
Scotland, arrived in Victoria about the year 1852; was charged with
forgery, for which he received a sentence of nine years before Mr. Jus-
tice Stawell, when he was also sent to the “ Success.” On the evening
of the boat’s affray he was discovered sitting in the boat, having over-
heard the plot, and wishing to be free had secretly hidden there.
When Power discovered him he said to Macdonald, “What are you doing
here, and why did you not say you wanted to come?” to which he
replied, “Oh! don’t throw me overboard, Harry, for I want to get away ;
and thinking you were going to be free I would like to be the same.”
He was tried with the boat’s crew, and returned to the “ Success,”
where he served his full sentence.
34. THOMAS MALONEY. —A native of Limerick, Ireland.
He was transported with another to Van Dieman’s Land for attempted
murder, for a term of 10 years ; escaped from Van Dieman’s Land early
in 1854, when he came to Victoria, and proceeded to the Bendigo
goldfields. He soon committed a series of petty robberies, but being
caught was sentenced for a term of eight years, and was sent to the
Success” to complete it. He was one of the most insubordinate of
all the prisoners thereon, as his sentence accumulated to 14 years for


insubordination and breakages of prison discipline. He was one of the
gang who assisted in the murder of Mr. Price, for which he was executed
with the others. The records state that he arrived as a prisoner of the
Crown in the “ King William ” in 1840, and after obtaining his freedom
was convicted of felony. He was by trade a butcher. In height he
was sft. 7in., of stout build, pale complexion, brown hair and grey eyes.
He was 32 years of age, and anything but prepossessing; and at his
trial after the death sentence had been passed on him by J udge Barry for
the murder of Mr. Price, requested that he might be publicly executed
35 and 36. SOLITARY CONFINEMENT CELLS.
37. JOHN HEFFERNAN—Otherwise “Big Jack”—was a
native of Kilkenny, Ireland. He was also transported to Van Dieman’s
Land, and it is known he formed one of a party of 10 who left a boat at
Brighton Beach in which they had escaped. He found his way to the
Bendigo diggings, and was arrested for highway robbery, receiving a
sentence of 10 years on the “ Success.” He was the “ Chief Justice ”
of the ship and was generally respected by his comrades. On the 3rd
finger of his left hand will be noticed a ring which he was allowed to
wear, a concession seldom given to anyone, but as it was a closely
fitting ring and a present from a friend he was allowed to wear it.
38. JOHN YOUNG. —Was a native of Colford, Gloucester,
England. He was one of the Pentonville’s who were sent to the
colonies and landed quietly at Geelong. Went off to the diggings, and
there he settled down to a life of quietude for a considerable time, but
he again became anxious to gain the filthy lucre, as in an unguarded
moment on the part of his comrades, he placed a quantity of strychnine
in the tea, but his plot was discovered. He was arrested at Bendigo
and sent to Melbourne, where he was tried before Chief Justice Stawell,
and received a sentence of 12 years aboard the “Success.” He was
another of the most troublesome of prisoners, and although he got more
neddying than would kill a donkey, he was constantly in trouble. He was
kept on board the ship, never allowed ashore. He, however, served his
full time; but once free, he again became as violent as ever, and was
not long at liberty before he committed one of the most atrocious of
crimes.
He was executed in Castlemaine Gaol, 21st August, 1865. On the
28th December, 1864, a miner named Graham, residing in Daylesford,
on his return from his night shift, after 12 o’clock, found his young wife
Margaret—to whom he had been married only six weeks—lying on her
bed with her throat cut, her chemise thrown over her chest, and her
legs hanging over the side of the bed. On the Bth of the following
January, Constable Brady arrested Young for this most foul murder,
and after a great deal of delay and difficulty, sentence of death was
passed upon him on the 28th July. 1865. Born near Colford, Glouces-
tershire, about 1831 ;by trade a miner. He was also one of the men
tried for the murder of Mr. Price, but he was acquitted.
39. Refractory Cell.


40. The Refractory Cell of “Captain”
MELVILLE. Frank Melville, or better known as Frank M’Cul-
loch at Port Arthur, and Captain Melville in Victoria. He was sup-
posed to be a native of Glasgow, Scotland, but some assert he was born
at sea, but on what charge or how he came to the colonies is unknown ;
in fact it was a mystery whether he arrived a free man or otherwise.
Two ladies who are still living and are advanced in years stated when
they saw him on his trial at Geelong that he was the man who acted as
“ captain ” of the ship by which they came to Victoria (hence the
application Captain), and who have lived ever since at Point Henry.
He was not long in Victoria before he took to bushranging, and a
small army of police were sent to capture him. He, however, eluded
all their stratagems for a few years, but was captured in Geelong,
where he was tried before Mr. Justice Barry for bushranging, highway
robberies, and attempting to murder. He received a sentence of 32
years, and was sent to the “ Success,” where he performed so many
acts of daring, together with the attempted escape, and which is fully
described in the pamphlet.
41. A Black Hole.
42. A Black Hole.
43. THE Tiger’s Den.—ln which are placed, in order to
show the difference between criminals of the fifties against those of the
eighties of Victoria,
THE CELEBRATED KELLY GANG.
Ned Kelly, Bryne, Steve Hart and Dan Kelly.




. 11ST
NEW SOUTH WALES.
(:i!llll!l!ll!l!!lll!1l!!llli!!il!:lir!:il!inaillll;!;!l!nilinil!!l!l!!!!lll
WMMffIAB @§®E ft Sffi
iKf!
' JL
ARRANGE TRIPS TO
THE BLUE MOUNTAINS, JENOLAN CAVES,
HAWKESBURY RIVER, LAKE MACQUARIE,
KURRAJONG HEIGHTS, ILLAWARRA DISTRICT,
WOMBEYAN AND YARRANGOBILLY CAVES.
Special arrangements for Private Parties of any number visiting these or any other sights
in New South Wales. Tickets issued including Travelling and Hotels.
TOURISTS SAVE TIME, TROUBLE, AND EXPENSE, BY BOOKINC IN ADVANCE.
THOS. COOK & SON are
Agents for all principal Rail & Steamship Companies throughout the World.
For Tickets, Hotel Coupons, or particulars of Tours in
EUROPE, AMERICA, EGYPT, INDIA, CHINA, JAPAN, NEW ZEALAND,
TASMANIA, ETC.,
Apply to any of the undermentioned offices of j.
THOS. COOK & SON,
SYDNEY—4 Hunter Street.
AUCKLAND—4 Victoria Arcade.
WELLINGTON—S 2 Lambton Quay.
MELBOURNE—B 2 Swanston Street.
DUNEDIN—Grand Hotel.
BRISBANE—I 43 Queen Street.
ADELAIDE— Broken Hill Chambers, King William Street.
Agencies at Ballaarat, Bendigo, Geelong, Beechworth, Bairnsdale, Broken Hill, Newcastle,
s* Launceston, Christchurch, Invercargill, and Bluff.
CHIEF OFFICE ! LUDGATE CIRCUS, LONDON,
