

ERNATIONAL EXHIBITION,
1880-1881.
FIJIAN COURT
(fataloiiuf of Csliibits,
TOGETHER WITH A
Short description of the soil, climate,
PRODUCTS, AND RESOURCES
OF THE COLONY OF
F I J
ISSUED BY W. K. THOMSON,
EXECUTIVE COMMISSIONER FOR FIJI
AT MELBOURNE.
51 & S 3 Flinders Lane West.
1880.
Assistant Commissioner, M. W. LANGDQN.
v
— ;
Utelboum:
MASON, FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON, general printers,




I/oSoQlb
MELBOURNE INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION,
1880-1881.
FIJIAN COURT
O atiilttjtur jf Ksltiliils.
TOGETHER WITH A
SHORT DESCRIPTION OF THE SOIL, CLIMATE,
PRODUCTS, AND RESOURCES
OF THE COLONY OF
FIJI
ISSUED BY W. K. THOMSON,
EXECUTIVE COMMISSIONER FOR FIJI
AT MELBOURNE.
Assistant Commissioner, M. W. LANGDON.
IJitltommc:
MASON, FIRTH & M‘CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
51 & 53 Flinders Lane West.




THE COLONY OF FIJI,
The young Colony of Fiji is situate in the South
Pacific Ocean, between the latitudes of i6° and 21 0
South, and between the longitudes of 176° East and
178° West. It is composed of about 225 islands
(80 of which are inhabited), and occupies over 40,000
square miles of the ocean. The principal islands
are Viti Levu, or Great Fiji, Vanua Levu, or Great
Land, Taviuni and Kadavu, the first of these being
about 90 miles long by 50 miles wide, the second
about ico miles by 20. The scenery in general is
very fine, the rich, soft, green herbage being backed
by lofty peaks, rising, in some instances, to over
4000 feet in height. The distance from Melbourne
is about 2400 miles, in a north-easterly direction.
These islands were, on two occasions, offered to
the British Crown, and refused, and it was not till
the 10th October, 1874, that Sir Hercules Robinson,
then governor of New South Wales, proclaimed
them a British colony. The first Governor, Sir
Arthur Gordon, G.C.M.G., arrived at Levuka on
the 24th June, 1875, and assumed the reins of
Government on the Ist September of that year.
The progress of the colony from that time to the
present is shown by the statistics given at the end
of this paper.


It is estimated that there are about 5,000,000
acres in Fiji, less than one-seventh of which is
claimed by Europeans. The larger islands are well
watered by numerous rivers, many of them navigable
for a considerable distance inland. Along the banks
of these rivers there are thousands of acres of the
richest alluvial flats, on which the sugar-cane grows
to perfection. The Government sell the land at
the following upset prices, viz.: First-class, twenty
shillings; second-class, fifteen shillings; and third-
class, ten shillings per acre.
The climate is salubrious and healthy, the heat of
the sun being moderated by the prevailing S.E.
trade winds, which blow for nine months in the year.
The mean temperature is Bo°, the extremes being
6o° and 122 0 . Children thrive well there, and even
in the hottest part of the year the sun seems to have
no effect upon them.
The native population has been variously esti-
mated ; at one time it is believed there were as
many as 200,000, but a fair estimate at the present
day would be 100,000 souls. The white population
is now estimated at 3000 souls.
The islands are believed to be rich in minerals.
Iron ore is exhibited in the Fiji Court, and is
obtainable in quantities on the largest island—
Viti Levu —from Serua to Nadroga. Copper has
also been obtained on this island, but no mining has


been carried on, nor even prospecting, for any
metals.
The forests contain some very useful timber,
amongst which may be mentioned : Dakua, Vivi,
Vesi, Damanu, Assi, Bau, Moefi, Kau Solu, Kau
Naki, Dogo, and-Kamoi, specimens of which are
in the Exhibition. Parcels of some of these timbers
have already been placed on the Melbourne market.
Products.
The chief products of the islands are ; Sugar,
cotton, coffee, cocoanuts, maize, arrowroot,
peanuts, and the various tropical fruits.
A few words on each of these may be here inter-
esting.
Sugar. —The sugar-cane is indigenous to Fiji,
and grows luxuriantly on the flats along the river
banks; specimens of which are shown in the Exhi-
bition. On the banks of the River Rewa, in Viti
Levu, the present centre of the sugar industry, cane
is ripe for cutting in fifteen months from planting,
and ratoons in eleven months. As yet the cultiva-
tion has been but imperfect, and the mills at work are
only small; but still from 30 to 45 tons of cane to
the acre has been obtained, yielding from 2 to 2J
tons of sugar. The mills work all the year round,
but yet are inadequate to crush all the cane grown,
some of which has often to remain on the ground
months over ripe, yet the density averages io°
Baume, some yielding as high 12 0 Baume.


Value of sugar exported: 1875, I 7 > 76,
/10433; 1877, £16,170; 1878, ,£18,640; 1879,
£26,687. Mill power is all that is wanted to increase
the export of this article to any extent.
Cotton. —The samples of cotton exhibited show
the adaptability of the islands for the growth of this
article. The great fall in price in the London
market about the year 1872 somewhat checked the
production, but lately prices have rallied, and a
number of the settlers are again turning their atten-
tion to it. Two crops may be picked within twelve
months from the planting of seeds. The export in
1879 amounted to .£44,020.
Coffee. —The growing of coffee is only in its infancy,
yet the result shows that its future will be something
great. From trees barely two years old from 380
to 450 lbs. per acre have been picked. The hills in
the interior of the large islands have been pronounced
by competent authorities to be excellent coffee land,
and will soon rival Ceylon in the production of this
article.
Cocoanuts . —A large extent of ground is covered
with the cocoanut palm, and copra—the dried kernel
of the nut —has been very largely exported, the value
in 1878 amounting to ,£122,194. The other pro-
ducts from the cocoanut are fibre and oil, both of
which form articles of export from the colony.
Maize grows luxuriantly on the flats, yielding two


crops in the year ; the export value in 1879 amount-
ing to £ 10,651.
Tobacco. —The climate of Fiji is also well suited
for the growth of tobacco, but the want of knowledge
of the proper mode of curing has prevented its
cultivation to any great extent; some has been
placed on the London market successfully. Last
year the value of this article exported was £1 122,
and this after supplying local wants.
Arrowroot and Tapioca are grown to a small
extent, but the quality produced shows that they are
quite at home in these islands, the former in fact
growing wild.
Peanuts. —The value of the export of these last
year amounted to 77.
Besides the foregoing, small quantities of the
following tropical products have been grown with
such success as to show the climate is suitable for
their production—namely, cocoa, cinchona, tea,
pepper, rice, and vanilla. There are also indigenous
oil-producing nuts, such as the candle-nut and the
dilo-nut (the oil of the latter is said to be a specific
for rheumatism). Beche-de-mer, vegetable-ivory,
lime-juice, pearl-shell, tortoise-shell, turtle, and
colonial distilled spirits are also articles of export.
Live Stock. —For the first time these appear
amongst the exports in 1879, the value being


Cattle thrive remarkably well, the local demand
being now supplied with those reared in the colony.
Sheep are now being tried, but the effect of the
climate on the wool has not been ascertained.
Angora goats are doing well on the islands, where
they have been tried; and pigs and poultry are in
great numbers. There are no animals indigenous
to the islands. Reptiles are numerous, but none
venomous; snakes are from one to six feet long.
Lizards are in great variety, many of them beauti-
fully marked. The rivers and coasts abound with
fish of various kinds.
Government.
Fiji-is a Crown colony, and governed as such by
an Executive Council and a Legislative Council.
The seat of government and the capital of the colony
has up to the present time been Levuka, situate on
the small island of Ovalau; but the prescribed
limits of the town —being, in fact, a mere beach with
mountains rising abruptly therefrom, and thus pre-
cluding any extension, and without any land avail-
able for agricultural settlement —soon demonstrated
its unsuitability for occupying the position of capital
of what will soon become an important colony.
After inspection of sites on several of the islands,
and numerous consultations with the naval officers
and others on the station, and mature consideration,
the Governor recommended to the home authorities
that Suva, on the island of Viti Levu, be pro-
claimed the capital. This has been done, and the


first land sale in the new capital takes place on the
22nd November, 1880. Suva is situate on the south-
east of the island, and a good road has already been
formed from the site of the new capital to the Rewa
River. Suva harbour is acknowledged by compe-
tent authorities to be the finest in the colony. The
largest of our war vessels call there at the present
time to coal.
The Wesleyan and the Roman Catholic Churches
have long occupied these islands as a mission
station, and the natives now are nearly all nominal,
if not real, Christians. There is also an Episco-
palian church at Levuka, and one at Suva. The
Wesleyan body has the greatest hold on the native
population, and are very wealthy, being the owners
of a large part of the town of Levuka.
There is steam communication monthly from Mel-
bourne to Suva and Levuka; from Sydney to
Levuka, and from Auckland (N.Z.) to Levuka.
There are also several small steamers for the inter-
island trade, besides a large number of sailing
vessels; and the Government have arranged for
steam communication with the islands in the Tongan
Group.
The manufactured productions of the Fijians are
numerous, and by no means contemptible. They
have several useful and ornamental manufactures in
pottery, and mould many tasteful and serviceable
articles, some of which they glaze and vary in


colour. They take their models from flowers,
leaves, and birds; and the women are the chief
manufacturers.
The masi, or native garment, is made from the
bark of the malo, which, after being softened by
immersion in water in the manner of flax, is beaten
out, and several strips joined together. After being
stretched to the desired size, these are carefully
dyed, or, more correctly speaking, painted. The
“ masi” formerly constituted the principal clothing
and covering of the islanders, and is in the form of a
band around the waist, reaching nearly to the knee.
Mat-making is a source of wealth and occupation,
mats being used for many purposes, such as cover-
ing walls and floors, and as sails, and they are largely
exported to other islands. There are also “ nurs-
ing” and sleeping mats; and those used as floor
coverings are frequently from 25 to 30 feet square,
and painted in grotesque patterns. Hand-screens,
fans, and ornaments for the neck, arms, and ears are
also manufactured. A great trade is done with the
Tahitians and Sandwich Islanders in scarlet
feathers, which, in those islands, are a requisite por-
tion of the female toilet, and in Fiji are abundantly
furnished by the native parrots. Baskets and nets
form also items of industrial produce.
Mr. Horne, F.L.S., Director of the Botanical
Gardens, Woods, and Forests, Mauritius, spent
twelve months on the islands, and his testimony as
to the adaptability of the soil and climate for the


growth of sugar, coffee, &c., is worth being quoted
here. He says: —“ Every visitor to Fiji (even from
countries in which the sugar-cane is the only plant
cultivated to any extent) cannot fail being struck
with the size, the healthy appearance, and the
rapidity of growth of the sugar-cane in Fiji. These
remarks do not only extend to the ‘ pet canes’ of the
Fijians, which are to be found growing near the
houses in every native town; but they are general
and applicable to the canes on the settlers’ planta-
tions, as well as to those planted by the Fijians for
thatch, the neglected state of the latter plantations
duly considered. The wild canes (vicos) of these
islands are to the cane-grower subjects of admir-
ation. They suggest to him interesting ideas about
the parentage of the sugar-cane, which undoubtedly
originated in the islands of the South Seas, where
from time immemorial it has been cultivated by the
inhabitants for various purposes, and carried to the
islands and countries in the eastern parts of tropical
Asia by their inhabitants when on migrating or pirat-
ical expeditions. An experienced cane-grower
would at once pronounce the so-called ‘ China cane’
an improved vico were he equally acquainted with
both. From the foreging it will be noted that the
climate of Fiji is by its nature well adapted for
growing the sugar-cane, and so is the soil. This in
most places is rich alluvium —on the banks of rivers
loam, on gentle slopes and hillocks volcanic soils of
the richest descriptions, and at the bases of low hills
cUbris brought down by innumerable agencies from
the sides of the mountains. The cane lands do not


exist in any one part of Fiji in particular; they are
to be found in all parts of the group. The extent
and richness of these lands, in conjunction with a
climate extremely favourable for growing and matur-
ing the sugar-cane, ought to make all well-wishers of
Fiji long for the time when sugar will be made in it
and exported by the hundred-thousand tons, and to
the value of a million pounds sterling. Before, how-
ever, such results can be brought about, planters
will have to cultivate the cane properly, and, in so
doing, use modern mechanical contrivances for
ploughing, grubbing, drilling, hoeing, &c. The
canes will have to be cut at the proper season of the
year, instead of cutting all the year through as at
present.” This practice he describes to be“ a waste of
products which even expediency can scarcely excuse,
as about one-half of the canes are crushed when the
density of their juice is at the lowest, and, therefore,
yield a minimum amount of sugar.
“In Fiji there is a large extent of land which*
from a variety of causes, is better adapted for grow-
ing coffee than any other tropical product. The
greater portion of this land lies in the interior of
Viti Levu, Vanua Levu, Taviuni, and some portions
of Rabi, Ovalau, &c. These islands contain large
areas of almost incomparably fine coffee land, and
enjoy a climate which is at once healthy and well
adapted for the growth of the coffee tree, plant, or
bush. Next to sugar-cane growing that of coffee
will in future years claim a large share of attention.
Coffee-growing is now in its infancy in Fiji. It will
yearly extend, and become an important product of


these islands. Coffee will be second to none except
sugar in value; its export value will ultimately attain
to about a million and a-half or to two millions
sterling per annum. The plants of coffee seen in
the interior of Viti Levu, Vanua Levu, and Taviuni
were remarkably healthy looking; indeed, the
healthy appearance of the plants proves that coffee
will succeed in Fiji beyond a doubt.”
The great want of Fiji is capital, suitable plant,
machinery, and experienced planters. With these
wants supplied nothing can prevent Fiji from push-
ing to the front. When we consider the high
price of land in Mauritius, the sugar-producing
island, and in Ceylon, the coffee-growing island,
and learn from the opinion of such experienced and
reliable men as Mr. Horne that Fiji can hold her own
even with these favoured places, we must come to
the conclusion that the capabilities of our young
colony have but to be known to cause it to become
what Mr. Horne has stated it ought to be —viz.,
the exporter of sugar by the hundred-thousand tons,
and to the value of a million pounds sterling.


1876
/94>8o5
£20
00
l-H
132,855
140,893
16,237
1 13
1878
136,60;
192,865
19,321
504
1879
142,212
169,040*
20,308
106
The following statistics, taken from the official
returns published in June, 1880, show the great pro-
gress made by the colony during the last four years:—
Value of the total Imports and Exports, Duty Collected, and
Statement op Navigation.
Imports. Exports. Duty Collected. Dis gj|j Spirits.
Number and Tonnage of Vessels.
Nos. Entered. Nos. Cleared.
1876 83 15,761 tonnage 79 14,378 tonnage
1877 100 20,192 „
1878 124 23,180 „
1879 131 28,967 „
96 20,924
128 24,080 „
125 28,085 „
* The reduction in the amount of exports in 1879 is accounted for by the large
quantity of produce that was stored waiting for shipping; this is shown by the
exports for the first quarter of 1880, as compared with previous years.
1876 ... £14,998 1879 ... £29,228
1877 ... 29,704 1880 ... 62,003
1878 ... 32,268


CATALOGUE OF EXHIBITS.
Paul Joske, Wai Dra, Middle Rewa—6 stalks sugar-cane
aged 13 months.
Verata Plantation, Rewa River —6 stalks Honolulu cane,
aged 9 months.
Paul Joske, Wai Dra— 4 stalks Honolulu cane, aged 10
months.
Ellis and Jones, Casi Plantation, Rewa River —10 stalks
Honolulu cane, aged 7 months.
John Dodd, Lau Lau, Upper Rewa—Bundle Honolulu
cane, aged 10 months.
William Thomas, Wai Mana—l tub growing cane, aged 10
months.
T. F. Burness, Raki Raki, Vanu Levu—Pyramid of leaf
tobacco.
8
9
T. F. Burness, Vanu Levu—Pyramid of leaf tobacco.
T. F. Burness, Vanu Levu —Pyramid of leaf tobacco.
Hon. J. B. Thurston —1 bale cocoanut fibre.
Ryder Brothers, Mango Island—l case cotton, in pod
and seed.
H. L. Holmes, Bua, Vanu Levu— l bag arrowroot.
H. L. Holmes, Bua, Vanu Levu — 1 bag arrowroot.
H. L. Holmes, Bua, Vanu Levu— l bag arrowroot.
H. L. Holmes, Bua, Vanu Levu— l bag coffee.
COMMISSIONERS FOR FIJI :
Coloured drawing—Wesleyan French Mission Houses,
Lower Rewa.


17 Coloured drawing—Mr. Randall’s House, Rewa River.
18 Coloured drawing—Waterston’s Mill, Upper Rewa.
19 Coloured drawing—Fijian preparing Cava (native grog).
20 Coloured drawing—Suva, the new Capital.
21 Coloured drawing—Wai Mana, between Suva and Rewa.
22 Coloured drawing—Suva Harbour,
23 Coloured drawing—Road-making between Suva and Rewa.
24 Coloured drawing—Rewa Sugar Plantation Company’s Mill.
FIJIAN GOVERNMENT:—
25 Tapa, raw material of native cloth, in different stages.
26 Native baskets, made of cane.
27 Large native basket.
28 Bundle native rope, “dali vau.”
28A Turner and Edgerley, Nai Vali Vali Estate —Native axes-
(very rare).
FIJIAN GOVERNMENT:—
29 Native collection of beche-de-mer.
30 Oil-horn (a native bean).
31 Large mat, of native make, festooned over ceiling of Court,
all in one piece.
32 Grass mats, “ rotomaha.”
33 Grass mats, “rotomaha.”
34 Trophy of tapa (native cloth).
35 Cultivated yams.
36 Uncultivated yams.
37 Taklau mat, made of grass.
38 Native canoe.
39 Bowl, for cava
40 Bowl, for cava.
41 Native washing-basin.
42 Native dishes.


Native dishes.
Dyed tapa (native cloth).
Cava, green and dried (material from which spirit is made).
Baskets used for cooked yams.
Native fan, made from balava tree.
F. H. Dufty, Levuka—Large case, containing photographic
views of scenery and inhabitants.
William Hennings, Loma Loma—l case pearl-shells.
Fijian Government— Collection of coral.
Commissioners for Fiji —Sulu, full dress of native lady.
Ryder Brothers —Cocoanut fibre.
Fijian Government —Bundle sassafras bark.
P. Stooks, Levuka —Cava bowls.
Ryder Brothers, Mango Island—Samples of bricks.
Fijian Government —Fishing-net.
Hon. R. B, Leefe, Nana Island, Viti Levu—Sample of
angora hair; stock originally imported from the Victorian
Acclimatisation Society.
Fijian Government —Native fishing-net and basket.
Ryder Brothers, Mango Island —Lemon-grass, from which
a beverage is made occasionally, and drunk like tea.
Turner and Edgerley, Rewa —Bricks, from Rewa River.
Commissioners for Fiji —Collection of shells.
Ryder Brothers, Mango of stalactites,
pebbles, and samples of soil.
Mrs. R. L. Holmes —l jar preserved ginger.
Ryder Brothers —Sample of copra (inside of cocoanut),
as exported.
FIJIAN GOVERNMENT
Native nuts, for tanning.
Native rope, “ mangi mangi.
Native rope, “ dali-ni-viti.”
Fishing-net and basket.


Trophy of tapa (native cloth made from bark).
Model of native temple, made of fibre.
J. W. Meaden —Case of South Sea Island shells.
Fijian Government —Roll of cocoanut sinnett.
M. H. Fraser, Tai Levu—Preserved bananas.
Ryder Brothers, Mango Island 2 boxes sunbeam
bananas.
M, H. Fraser —r box tapioca.
M. H. Fraser —4 bottles dilo-nut oil.
Ryder Brothers — 2 bottles turmeric.
Ryder Brothers — 2 bottles ground coffee.
Ryder Brothers—i bottle dried ginger.
Ryder Brothers, Mango Island — 3 bottles candle-nut oil.
Ryder Brothers, Mango Island—l bottle dilo-nut oil.
Ryder Brothers, Mango Island—2 bottles cocoanut oil.
Jacob Storck, Rewa—i bottle ground coffee.
J. A. Boyd, Waidau, Ovalau —1 bottle edible sea-weed.
Ryder Brothers—i bottle guano.
Ryder Brothers—i bottle dried cava.
L. S. Smith, Pioneer Mill, Rewa—l bottle sugar.
Commissioners for Fiji—i bottle sugar (DR in diamond).
L. S. Smith, Rewa—i bottle sugar.
Ryder Brothers—i bottle cava.
Jacob Storck, Rewa— i bottle arrowroot.
Ryder Brothers—i bottle cinnamon.
Captain Barrack, Sava Sava Bay—l bottle turmeric.
Ryder Brothers— i bottle dilo-nuts.
T. F. Burness, Raki Raki—l bottle tapioca.
Ryder Brothers—i bottle coral lime.
T. F. Burness, Raki Raki—l bottle peanuts.
D. Waterston —1 bottle sugar (DW in diamond).
J. H. Peterson, Taviuni — 2 tins ground coffee.


100 Ryder Brothers—B bundles dried bananas.
101 E. MTherson—6 packets arrowroot, and 2 bags.
102 Shand and Crowe, Rewa —Green ginger.
103 Ryder Brothers— 3 large double cocoanuts (a natural
curiosity).
104 Ryder Brothers—Cultivated yams.
105 Henry Cave, Levuka—lvory-nuts.
106 G. M‘Evoy, Cicia, Lomo Lomo —1 bottle copra.
107 Henry Cave, Levuka —1 bottle candle-nuts.
108 G. M‘Evoy— 1 bottle cotton-seed.
109 Ryder Brothers —1 tin copra,
no Ryder Brothers —1 bottle coffee,
in Ryder Brothers —1 bottle tapioca.
112 Ryder Brothers —1 bottle coffee.
113 J. H. Peterson, Taviuni—l bottle coffee.
114 Ryder Brothers, Mango —1 bottle coffee.
115 T. E. Fisher, Taviuni—l bottle arrowroot.
116 J. H. Peterson —1 bottle coffee.
COMMISSIONERS FOR FIJI:
117 1 bottle sugar (TB/2536).
118 1 bottle broken rice (M H over XX, P under).
119 1 bottle broken rice.
120 T. E. Fisher, Taviuni—2 bottles arrowroot.
121 Ryder Brothers—l bottle mace.
122 Ryder Brothers—l bottle nutmegs.
123 M. H. Fraser —4 bottles cocoanut oil.
124 Captain Barrack— 3 bottles birds-eye chillies.
125 Ryder Brothers —1 bottle coffee.
126 Ryder Brothers —5 bottles limejuice.
127 Fijian Government —3 native water-basins.
128 Ryder Brothers —Sample of green ginger.


FIJIAN GOVERNMENT;—
129 Native head-dress.
130 Turtle-shaped water-bottles, made of clay.
131 Native water-bottles.
132 Vessels for boiling water.
133 L. S. Smith, Pioneer Mills—Green ginger.
FIJIAN GOVERNMENT
134 Raw arrowroot.
135 Native fungus.
136 Ryder Brothers, Mango—Maize,
137 T. F. Burness —Copra.
FIJIAN GOVERNMENT:—
138 Native dyes and war paints.
139 Candle-nuts, in the shell.
140 Native gum, “male a dree.”
141 2 native pillows, “ moce.”
142 R. L. Holmes, Bua—Sample of maize.
143 R. L. Holmes, Bua—Sample of dried ginger.
144 R. L. Holmes, Bua—Sample of copra.
145 D. Waterston, Kade Bua —1 bottle Kande coffee (DW in
diamond).
146 D. Waterston, Kade Bua—l bottle Kande coffee (DW in
diamond).
147 D. Waterston, Kade Bua- 1 bottle Kande coffee (DW in
diamond).
148 Fijian Government—Sample of coffee.
149 Commissioners for Fiji—Native fan.
150 J. M‘Ewan and Co. —8 boxes cigars, Fijian leaf (1693),
manufactured in Melbourne.
15 1 J. M'Ewan and Co. — 8 boxes cigars, Fijian leaf (1692),
manufactured in Melbourne.
152 T. F. Burness, Raki Raki—Leaf tobacco.




FIJIAN GOVERNMENT;—
Native head-dress.
Turtle-shaped water-bottles, made of clay.
Native water-bottles.
Vessels for boiling water.
L. S. Smith, Pioneer Mills—Green ginger.
FIJIAN GOVERNMENT
Raw arrowroot.
Native fungus.
Ryder Brothers, Mango —Maize.
T. F. Burness —Copra.
FIJIAN GOVERNMENT:—
Native dyes and war paints.
Candle-nuts, in the shell.
Native gum, “ mak a dree.”
2 native pillows, “ moce.”
R. L. Holmes, Bua—Sample of maize.
R. L. Holmes, Bua—Sample of dried ginger.
R. L. Holmes, Bua—Sample of copra.
D. Waterston, Kade Bua—l bottle Kande coffee (DW
diamond).
D. Waterston, Kade Bua —1 bottle Kande coffee (DW in
diamond).
D. Waterston, Kade Bua- 1 bottle Kande coffee (DW in
diamond).
Fijian Government— Sample of coffee.
Commissioners for Fiji —Native fan.
J. M'Ewan and Co. —8 boxes cigars, Fijian leaf (1693),
manufactured in Melbourne.
J. M'Ewan and Co. —8 boxes cigars, Fijian leaf (1692),
manufactured in Melbourne.
T. F. Burness, Raki Raki—Leaf tobacco.


ftodo^h
Cty


..C- ■’
