

No 1290. BRONZE LAMP AND FOUNTAIN.
(Height. 17) feet.)


CATALOGUE
OF
AN IMPORTANT COLLECTION
OF
JAPANESE AND CHINESE
PORCELAINS, BRONZES, ENAMELS, LACQUERS,
IVORY CARVINGS, SWORDS, SWORD GUARDS,
CABINET SPECIMENS, EMBROIDERIES, SCREENS,
ETC., ETC.
BELONGING TO
MESSRS. DEAKIN BROTHERS & CO.
FORMERLY OF
YOKOHAMA. JAPAN
TO BE SOLD BY AUCTION, WITHOUT RESERVE
ON TUESDAY, JANUARY 26TH, AND FOLLOWING DAYS
AT 2.30 O’CLOCK, P.M.
AT THE AMERICAN ART GALLERIES
6 EAST 23D STREET, MADISON SQUARE SOUTH
WHERE THE COLLECTION WILL BE ON EXHIBITION FROM
JANUARY 15TH UNTIL DATE OF SALE, INCLUSIVE
THOMAS E. KIRBY, AUCTIONEER
THE AMERICAN ART ASSOCIATION, MANAGERS
NEW YORK
1892




CONDITIONS OF SALE.
1. The highest Bidder to be the Buyer, and if any dispute
arise between two or more Bidders, the Lot so in dispute shall
be immediately put up again and re-sold.
2. The Purchasers to give their names and addresses, and to
pay down a cash deposit, or the whole of the Purchase-money, if
required, in default of which the Lot or Lots so purchased to
be immediately put up again and re-sold.
3. The Lots to be taken away at the Buyer’s Expense and
Risk upon the conclusion of the Sale, and the remainder of the
Purchase-money to be absolutely paid, or otherwise settled for
to the satisfaction of the Auctioneer, on or before delivery ; in
default of which the undersigned will not hold themselves re-
sponsible if the Lots be lost, stolen, damaged, or destroyed, but
they will be left at the sole risk of the Purchaser.
4. The sale of any Article is not to be set aside on account of any
error in the description, or imperfection. All articles are exposed
for Public Exhibition one or more days, and are sold just as they
are without recourse.
5. To prevent inaccuracy in delivery and inconvenience in the
settlement of the Purchases, no Lot can, on any account, be
removed during the Sale.
6. Upon failure to comply with the above conditions, the
money deposited in part payment shall be forfeited ; all Lots
uncleared within three days from conclusion of Sale shall be
re-sold by public or private Sale, without further notice, and the
deficiency (if any) attending such re-sale shall be made good
by the defaulter at this Sale, together with all charges attend-
ing the same. This Condition is without prejudice to the right
of the Auctioneer to enforce the contract made at this Sale,
without such re-sale, if he thinks fit.
THOS. E. KIRBY, AUCTIONEER.


PREFACE.
I had the pleasure and advantage, while in New York, of
inspecting this beautiful and typical collection of Japanese objects
of Art brought together in the show-room of my friend, Mr.
Deakin. In the departments of skilled production which they
represent, nothing could be more excellent, or more worthy to
exemplify the artistic genius of “Dai Nippon.” Among many
charming and precious things which I examined in the collection,
I especially recall the two large pieces of bronze, of noble dimen-
sions and superb boldness of design, which in color, finish, and
easy mastery of the metal, as well as in elaborateness of conception,
seemed to deserve places of honor in the mansion of any true and
wealthy lover of Art. There was, moreover, a gold lacquer cabi-
net, of imperial size, fashioned after the pattern of one in the
temples at Nikko, which is the very finest specimen of that rich
labor, with one exception, that ever came under my notice.
Apart from the faultlessly perfect toil exhibited in this majestic
piece, alike in the ensemble and in the minutest details, there w r as
in it the true Japanese spirit, which sacrifices everything to its
artistic ideal of fitness and fidelity, so that in some concealed por-
tions of the work might be discovered a freer use of gold in little
solid specks and nuggets than on the surfaces which most solicited
attention. I saw also, with delight, two gold lacquer boxes, of


the antique perfection and sober beauty, which were, of their
kind, unsurpassed ; and some Namikawa enamels of lovely tints
and delicate execution, particularly a small blue tray with goldfish,
which could not surely be surpassed by any old or new master.
Altogether, I consider the Deakin Collection one in the highest
degree creditable to the judgment and taste of its owners, and con-
taining, alike in its largest and smallest items, examples of Japan-
ese Art, desirable to possess, and of a character to pass the ordeal
of the severest critic’s examination, while their intrinsic beauty
must recommend them to the ordinary connoisseur and to the
appreciative public.
EDWIN ARNOLD.


CATALOGUE.
FIRST DAY’S SALE.
TUESDAY AFTERNOON, JANUARY 19TH, 1892.
BEGINNING PROMPTLY AT 2:30 O’CLOCK,
AT THE AMERICAN ART GALLERIES.
MAKUZA KOZAN PORCELAIN.
Makuza, the foremost living maker of Japanese porcelain, is about seventy
years of'age. His home and workshop are in Ota, almost a suburb of Yoko-
hama. Though his establishment is large, he is throughout the informing soul
of it. Daily he works at the wheel, modeling the exquisite forms that his
workmen copy later. His trained sense—almost, indeed, a sixth one—
regulates the heat that each object is to receive. He is at once unique and
original —a master of color such as Japan knew not before his day. His work
comes very near to the very finest of Chinese porcelain. He is the first
Japanese potter to use pinks and reds, in the use of which he is supremely
happy. His countrymen with one accord give him the first place among
modern potters.
1 Teapot, bluish green glaze, hydrangea decoration.
2 Another, dark green glaze, dragon decoration on side
and cover, signed “ Kozan.”
3 Bottle-shape vase, mottled, red and green.
4 Incense burner, green glaze. *
5 Vase, long neck, flower decoration.
6 Bottle-shape vase, mottled, red and gray.


7 Vase, green glaze.
8 Vase, sang de bceuf.
9 Bottle-shape vase, fish-roe crackle.
10 Water-pot, Seigi glaze, plum-blossom decoration, seal
mark “ Kozan.”
11 Incense burner, red mottled.
12 Another, same as above.
13 Vase, long neck, tree and bird decoration.
14 Incense burner, rich green glaze ; decoration, dragon in
relief.
15 Vase, long neck ; landscape decoration.
16 Vase, very fine texture; decoration, dragon in clouds,
“ shades of evening,” seal mark Kozan.
17 Bottle vase, Seigi green, fish decoration under glaze.
18 Vase, fine white texture ; decoration in bright colors,
children at play, seal mark Kozan.
ig Hibachi (hand warmer), red lacquered; decoration,
Tokugavva crests.
20 Vase, bottle shaped, green glaze; dragon decoration.
21 Vase, mottled ; willow decoration.
22 Vase, green glaze; flower and butterfly decoration.
23 Vase, Sang de ba;uf glaze, fine in color.
24 Vase, bottle shape, beautifully mottled, gray and red.
25 Water pot, Seigi glaze, landscape decoration.
MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTS.
26 Hirado incense burner exquisitely carved in imitation
of lace work, a fine specimen.
27 Pair enamel vases, beautiful gradation of color from
salmon pink to turquoise blue’; decoration, trees and
birds.


No. 37. ENAMEL PLAQUE,
No. 1101. ENAMEL PLAQUE,


28 Pair enamel vases, black goldstone, white and brown
dragon decoration.
29 Pair turquoise blue enamel vases, flower decoration, ex-
quisite workmanship.
30 Pair green goldstone enamel jardinieres, plum blossom
decoration.
31 Pair vases, French gray enamel, decoration plum blos-
soms and birds, designed by Dokaku of Nagoya.
32 Pair enamel vases, pale yellow, cherry-blossom and
butterfly decoration, exquisite.
33 Pair enamel vases, decoration blackbirds, designed by
Dokaku of Nagoya.
34 Pair green goldstone enamel vases, butterfly decoration ;
maker Honda of Nagoya.
35 Plaque, enameled; decoration, chickens; an exquisite
specimen, made by Namikawa Sosuke, the most
eminent enameler in Japan.
36 Enamel plaque ; decoration crows, ivy and moon, by the
same eminent artist, Namikawa Sosuke.
37 Enamel plaque; decoration chickens, designed by Shotei,
enameled by Namikawa Sosuke.
38 Enamel plaque; decoration wild geese, designed by
Shotei, enameled by Namikawa Sosuke.
39 Pair carved iron vases; decoration cherry-blossoms and
birds in relief, made by Sotetsu, forty years ago.
40 Bronze card receiver, figure of performer, worked up
with different metals, made by Suzuki Chokichi of
Tokyo.
41 Bronze rat, holding chestnut, by Suzuki Chokichi,
Tokyo.
42 Pair carved bronze vases; decoration in relief, gods of the
wind and thunder, made by Kobayashi Kojiro, Tokyo.
43 Bronze incense burner, boy and saki jar, made by Suzuki
Chokichi, Tokyo.


44 Bronze incense burner, inlaid with gold, silver, Shakudo
and Shibuichi bronzes ; decoration in relief, storks.
The name of carver, MIZUNO MITSUHARU, place of
residence, Kanazawa, Isiiikawa Ken, all carved
at foot. Close inspection of this specimen is requi-
site to a full appreciation of its artistic excellence.
45 Bronze figure, “ No Dancer,” worked up with different
metals, made by Suzuki Chokichi, Tokyo.
46 Japanese clock, too years old.
47 Another, same as above.
48 Another.
49 Another.
50 Japanese clock (weights 100 years old).
51 Japanese clock, large, 100 years old.
52 Temple gong, flat, in frame, 200 years old.
53 Another, same as above.
(The above known as prayer gongs, hang in front of entrance to temple ;
the devotee strikes them to call the attention of Buddha to his prayer.)
54 Bronze temple gong and stand, 97 years old, donated by
Oaka Wakasano Kami to Chojuji temple, Kioto ;
used in religious ceremonies. Made by Fujiwara
Tomochika; inscription carved on gong.
55 Bronze mask, gold plated, used by the No Dancers of
Japan.
56 Another same as above, silver plated.
57 Japanese gun, carved and inlaid barrel, curious and
interesting, 150 years old ; used as wall piece during
■ the feudal days.
58 Another inlaid barrel, crest of Daimio Tachibana, name
of maker Kunitomo, 120 years old.
59 Another, very large, inlaid barrel, crest of Daimio Ibaraki,
150 years old ; pearl inlaid ramrod.
60 Another, sacred sword and dragon inlaid on barrel; also
crest of Daimio Yasuda, 150 years old.


61 Another, small gun.
62 Shrine, image of Buddha Amida, 160 years old, from
Zojoji temple, Tokyo.
63 Large shrine, image of Kannon Buddha; inscription on
back reads “ Kannon Buddha, donated by Nakayama
Gennai in Kioto about 200 years ago. This image
was examined by Yasumura Hironaga, a famous
Buddha carver in Sakamachi Matsuzaka-Tokyo,
and pronounced genuine.”
64 Shrine, Senji Kannon Buddha, same age as above.
65 Incense burner, ancient shape, blue and white, exceed-
ingly fine texture, floral decoration.
SMALL OBJECTS SUITABLE FOR CABINET
PIECES.
66 Crystal spoon, carved, used by Daimios for tea dust.
67 Crystal cup, beautifully carved, used for medicine.
68 Crystal turtle, small turtle on back.
69 Crystal peach.
70 Rock crystal, Fujisan, sacred mountain seen at back.
71 Crystal netsuke, form of egg-plant.
72 Crystal figure, Daikoku, God of Wealth.
73 Crystal cup, used in taking medicine.
74 Crystal fish, beautifully carved.
75 Yellow crystal intended for seal; a fine specimen.
76 Crystal ball, one inch and a half in diameter.
SMALL OBJECTS—OLD SILVER.
77 Silver water bottle, for writing box, fan shape, lotus stem
for spout.


78 Silver tea caddie.
79 Silver basket for flowers.
80 Silver lip paint box, crest of Daimio Kudo.
81 Silver heart-shaped incense box, landscape engraved on
cover.
82 Silver incense box, engraved cover, plum, pine and bam-
boo, signification “ May you never grow old ! ” These
boxes are used by the court ladies on New Year’s
Day only.
83 Another, same as above.
84 Silver incense box, covered with Shakudo bronze in form
of letter box. Signed Masatoshi, 80 years old.
85 Silver incense burner, in form of war drum, studded with
Shakudo nails.
86 Silver sake cup, engraved, inside represents cotton
beater and house, outside entrance to temple ; signed
Hosetsu Beishu, over 100 years old.
87 Silver inro (medicine case), engraved both sides, signed
“ Jokan,” 80 years old.
88 Silver shrine, Jizobutsu; motto, "Long life,” cut
through opening.
.89 Silver and bronze perfume bottle, excellently carved
and inlaid with shakudo gold and silver.
90 Silver box, carved and inlaid cover-scene, Bay of Miyo,
mountains in the distance.
91 Iron incense box, in form of God of Wisdom, inlaid with
gold and silver.
92 Iron incense burner, for stick incense, inlaid with gold
and silver in form of Shinto drum.
93 Silver incense burner in form of helmet, gold inlaid,
made by Toshikatsu, Tokyo.
94 Ink pot, Shibuichi bronze, gourd leaves in relief, shaku-
do and gold.


95 Bronze crab, copied from nature, made by Suzuki Cho-
kichi, Tokyo.
96 Enamel vase, Ho-wo bird decoration, made by Honda,
Nagoya.
97 Wood figure and basket, carved, sparrow on top in
Japanese costume.
98 Red lacquer box (Cinnabar), Chinese scene on cover,
old specimen.
99 Another, same as above.
100 Seifu crackle vase, salmon pink glaze.
101 Seifu crackle vase, lemon yellow glaze.
102 Kutani vase, very old, signed with Kutani seal.
103 Tea caddie, blue and white porcelain, dragon decora-
tion, signed Kenzan, Kioto, old.
104 Teapot, yellow glaze, signed “ Yeiraku,” old.
105 Incense burner, blue and white Nabeshima porcelain,
fine specimen, old.
106 Nabeshima water bowl, chrysanthemum decoration in
relief, old.
107 Bishiu cup stand, Hotei, God of Wealth carved in relief,
white porcelain, blue decoration.
108 Water bottle, Shimeji, yellow glaze, blue decoration.
109 Tea caddie, Shimeji , yellow glaze, blue decoration,
signed.
no Ninsei incense burner; decoration, clouds and flowers
in red, blue and green ; fine specimen.
in Blue and white porcelain caddy, signed Kitei, old.
112 Hirado group, God Hotei and children, old.
113 Bishiu cup stand; decoration, flowers, old.
114 Another, same as above; decoration, flowers in panels,
old.
115 Small Bishiu cup stand; blue and white, old.


n 6 Chinese incense burner, seal mark, period of Kikei.
117 Waterpot, signed “ Kiyomizu,” old.
118 Kinkozan dish ; decoration, crest of Daimio Kuze, in
green and blue, flower decoration inside, very old.
119 Satsuma box, flower decoration.
120 Bottle-shaped vase, green glaze. Potter, Makuzu Kozan.
121 Chinese Seigi vase, fine glaze.
122 Pair red enamel vases with stands ; decoration, dragons
in white and green ; very fine workmanship.
123 Wood carving, frog and straw sandals, carved by Masa-
nawo.
124 Another, same as above.
125 Wood carving, rat, carved by Masanawo.
126 Another, same as above.
127 Polished bamboo tea scoop; decoration, lacquer grape
leaf and locust.
128 Bamboo, carved in form of the Koto musical instru-
ment.
129 Red lacquer sake cups ; decoration, landscape in gold
and silver lacquer, signed Kajikawa.
130 Twelve solid gold tea-pots in miniature, showing dif-
ferent shapes, made by Kobayashi Kojiro.
131 Old Kinkozan, incense burner, blue and yellow decora-
tion.
132 Enamel box; decoration, maple branch and white
pigeon, an exquisite piece of work, by Namikawa
Sozuke, Tokyo. An exceedingly fine specimen.
133 Another, in French gray enamel, yellow chrysanthe-
mum decoration, equally as good, and by same artist
as above.
134 Black goldstone enamel, incense box; decoration, im-
perial crests, dragon on cover, made by Honda of
Nagoya.


135 Goldstone enamel dish ; decoration, forget-me-nots,
exquisitely wrought, made by Namikawa Kiyoyuki,
of Kioto, who stands pre-eminent in this particular
1 branch of the enamelers’ art.
hW 136. Large bronze Koro and cover, carved with tigers and
/) //.•■#. dragon in relief, cover surmounted by Rakan priest,
- yjJiAll/ figure, made by Suzuki Chokichi, Tokyo; height 32
P finches. A magnificent specimen of Japanese art.
137 Goldstone enamel Koro, ball shape ; decoration, dra-
gon, ho-wo bird, and Kirein in panels, made by
Honda, of Nagoya.
138 Pair vases, green and goldstone enamel, flower decora-
tion, fine specimen, made by Namikawa Kiyoyuki, of
Kioto.
139 Pair vases, green goldstone, butterfly decoration, made
by Honda, of Nagoya.
140 Pair vases, bottle shape, mustard color enamel, chrys-
anthemum decoration.
141 Pair vases, light-yellow enamel ; decoration, flight of
sparrows. Very light and graceful.
142 Pair enamel vases, goldstone, with chrysanthemum
decoration, by Honda, of Nagoya.
143 Pair vases, shaded enamel; decoration, wheat sheaf,
birds and flowers, by Morimoto, of Nagoya.
144 Pair vases, pale-blue enamel, birds and chrysanthemum
decoration.
145 Pair vases, pale-bl«e enamel; decoration, plum blos-
som, birds and chrysanthemums.
146 Pair vases, shaded enamel, red maple leaves, birds and
cobwebs.
147 Enamel Koro, French gray color ; decoration, 47 Ron-
K HtV' ins, historical picture of old Japan.
0 x4B Pair enamel vases, bird and flower decoration, 80 years
old. Rare specimens.


COLLECTION OF FINE OLD LACQUER INROS.
149 Inro, or medicine case, black lacquer, crest of Daimio
Okabe, 70 years old.
150 Another, black lacquer, ornamentation in gold lacquer,
plum blossom and moon, signed Yoyusai, 45 years
old.
15 1 Another, black lacquer, ornamentation of landscape in
gold lacquer, signed Juken, 50 years old.
152 Another, black lacquer, in form of Japanese wood ham-
mer; ornamentation, stork in gold lacquer, o years
old.
153 Another, black lacquer; landscape in gold lacquer,
40 years old.
154 Another, black lacquer, ornamented with No Dancer’s
hat and musical instrument in gold lacquer, 90 years
old.
155 Another, vermilion lacquer, inlaid with Chinese char-
acters in mother-of-pearl, and floral decoration, 60
years old.
156 Another, black lacquer; ornamentation, shells in gold
lacquer, Netsuke wood carving of priest, 60 years
old.
157 Another, vermilion lacquer; ornamented with seal
stamps in relief, Netsuke wood carving of No Dancer,
40 years old.
158 Another, Kama Kuril lacquer; ornamented with fig-
ures of five Chinese sages, in gold lacquer, 80 years
old.
159 Another, black lacquer, form of tobacco bag; orna-
mentation, eagle in gold lacquer, 45 years old.
160 Another, gray lacquer; ornamented with crests of
Daimio Todo, in gold lacquer.


161 Another, black lacquer ; ornamented with musical in-
struments in gold lacquer, and mother-of-pearl inlaid.
80 years old.
162 Another, black lacquer; ornamentation of cherry-trees
and horses, in gold lacquer. 80 years old.
163 Another, of bamboo ; Netsuke and slide also of bamboo.
45 years old.
164 Another, black lacquer; ornamentation Shoki, the
devil-killer, in gold lacquer, and devil in red. 80
years old.
165 Another, dark brown lacquer, inlaid with mother-of-
pearl, showing the Mikado’s cart and three figures.
100 years old.
166 Another, rich green lacquer; ornamentation, willow
tree and stork in gold lacquer. 5° years old.
167 Another, black lacquer, round in shape ; ornamentation,
carving of dragon and ho-wo birds. 60 years old.
168 Another, wood; ornamentation of gold lacquer and
mother-of-pearl, in relief; signed by Kanyosai, 120
years old.
169 Another, black Kama Kura lacquer; ornamentation,
dragon in relief. 65 years old.
170 Another, of boxwood; ornamentation, gold lacquer
figures of Manzei dancers and floral design. 70 years
old.
171 Another, Togidashi lacquer; ornamentation, night
scene in gold lacquer, Netsuke wood carving of rat.
85 years old.
172 Another, of wood, gold lacquered with scene of water-
fall and turtle, emblem of longevity, in relief; signed
by Igawa, painter and Youken lacquer-worker. 80
years old ; very fine.
173 Another, black lacquer ; ornamentation of gold lacquer,
waterfall and birds. 60 years old.
2


174 Another, black lacquer; ornamentation, Chinese land-
scape beautifully inlaid with mother-of-pearl. 120
years old.
175 Another, black lacquer, stork in relief of gold lacquer;
signed Jokisai. 45 years old.
176 Another, of cherry bark; ornamented with cherry blos-
soms of gold lacquer; also verse of poetry. 80 years
old. Netsuke wood carving of Dancer.
177 Another, black lacquer; ornamentation, old tiles in
relief, of gold lacquer; Netsuke Kama Kura lacquer,
figure of No Dancer. 120 years old.
178 Another, gold and black lacquer; ornamentation, figure
in gold lacquer. 80 years old.
179 Another, black lacquer; ornamentation, gold lacquer,
temple in relief. 60 years old.
180 Another, gold lacquer, floral design in relief. 40 years
old.
181 Another, gold lacquer, plum blossom and chickens;
ornamentation, coral ojime, carved wood netsuke. 55
years old.
182 Another, black lacquer, melon vines of gold lacquer in
relief, carved ivory ojime, Netsuke ivory dish with
silver turtle inside. 80 years old.
183 Another, black lacquer and gold, carving of bears. 90
years old.
184 Another, gold and black lacquer, decorated with land-
scapes in gold. 90 years old.
185 Another, red lacquer, beautifully carved, Hotei and
children playing, netsuke carved, red lacquer, go
years old.
186 Another, of carved wood; Daikoku, God of Wealth
and rat. Horn netsuke. 50 years old.
187 Another, gold lacquer, landscape, showing Biwa lake.
80 years old.


No. 227. ENAMEL PANEL.


188 Another, gold and black lacquer, inlaid with mother-
of-pearl, floral design, wood netsuke, Hotei. 80years
old.
189 Another, Hirame gold lacquer, mother-of-pearl inlaid
and floral design in relief, wood netsuke, bucket and
frog. Signed Juyei. 120 years old.
190 Another, Okoya gold lacquer, inlaid with mother-of-
pearl, banana leaves in relief. Signed Teizo, netsuke,
carved nut. 90 years old.
191 Another, gold lacquer ; ornamentation, dragon in re-
lief.
192 Another, gold lacquer; ornamentation, landscapes.
Signed Kajikawa, carved wood netsuke. 120 years
old.
193 Another, gold lacquer, waterfall and figure in relief. 80
years old.
194 Another, gold lacquer; ornamentation, floral design
and horse, lacquer ojime, wood netsuke. Signed
Kajikawa, 120 years old.
195 Another, gold lacquer, landscape showing Biwa lake,
netsuke of Kama Kura lacquer, figure of dancer. 80
years old.
196 Gold lacquer letter box, inlaid with cherry-blossoms in
silver. A very fine specimen of old Nashiji.
197 Another, ornamented with pine trees, crest of Daimio
Makino. Nashiji lacquer.
198 Another, in form of book, floral design in gold lacquer
and mother-of-pearl in relief. Nashiji lacquer.
199 Gold lacquer incense box. An excellent specimen of
Hirame lacquer, ornamented with crests. 180 years
old.
200 .Gold lacquer box; ornamentation, chrysanthemums,
il U butterflies and fern leaves. One tray.
" 201 Gold lacquer cup stand and cover.


202 Black lacquer card tray, monkey and cart in gold
lacquer.
203 Black lacquer tray, musical instruments in gold lacquer.
Very fine.
204 Gold lacquer tray, ivory and mother-of-pearl inlaid,
Daimios hawking. Very beautiful specimen of the
/ t best modern lacquer, signed “ Joko,” 24 xl6 inches,
\r/~ eminently characteristic of the present trend of Jap-
-0 anese art -
\ A Y 205 Carved shtan wood box, Giobu gold lacquer inside.
I u Box represents a bundle of sticks covered with ants
* in Shakudo. Signed “ Asashi,” Tokyo. As unique
in design as perfect in execution.
206 Colored photograph of the famous temple “Yome
Mon” at Nikko, carving by Shidari Jingoro, 300
years ago. The temple was erected without the use
of nails or pegs. 21x17 inches.
207 Colored photograph of sacred red lacquer bridge at
Nikko, only opened when some member of the Im-
perial family wishes to cross. An exception was
made during General Grant’s visit to Japan. He was
invited to walk over it, being the only foreigner ever
allowed to cross. 21x17 inches.
208 Colored photograph of bronze image of Daibutsu, at
Kamakura, 46 feet high, erected in twelfth century to
the memory of the famous shogun, Yoritomo. 21 x 17
inches.
209 Colored photograph of sacred mountain Fujisan, and
village of Yoshiwara. 22 xl7 inches.
210 Incense burner, porcelain, pale blue, decorated in gold
and various bright colors; floral design, after the style
of Satsuma.
211 Hirado vase, fine, clear texture, with decoration of
clouds and dragons in delicate blue, by Takahashi,
Hizen. A choice specimen.


No. 228. ENAMEL VASES.


212 Porcelain vase, artistically decorated with boldly carved
dragon ; groundwork delicate green ; highly colored
clouds in red and blue. A unique specimen. By
Makuza Kozan, signed. ■
213 Hirado koro, incense burner, carved in imitation of lace
work; exquisite texture, ornamented in floral design,
delicate blue on white ground.
214 Another, same as above, smaller in size.
215 Four o’clock tea-set, fine Arita ware, tray, four cups
and saucers, teapot, sugar-bowl, and cream-pot ;
bamboo design in decorating.
216 Porcelain vase, blue and white ; ornamentation, dragons
in panels ; by Makuza Kozan.
217 Porcelain vase, “Shades of Evening,” incised waves,
dragon in clouds, by Makuza Kozan, signed.
218 Porcelain vase, shape lotus bud, after Chinese design ;
ornamentation, dragon on panel, in bright colors ;
Makuza Kozan, signed.
219 Porcelain vase, bottle shape, “Rosy Dawn,” very fine
texture, dragon in brilliant morning sky. Signed
Makuza Kozan.
220 Water-pots, Seiji glaze; Chinese landscape in brown
and blue. Signed Makuza Kozan.
221 Porcelain vase, jar shape, deep, rich blue in color;
decoration, bamboo in brown.
222 Porcelain vase, white ; decoration, dragon.
223 Porcelain vase, flambe, dragons in relief inside and out.
224 Bottle-shape porcelain vase, rich green glaze ; decora-
tion, hydrangea in white and blue.
225 Porcelain vase, green and red mottled glaze.
226 Porcelain vase, “ Shades of Evening.” Exceedingly
soft in coloring.
227 Enamel plaque, by the famous artist Namikawa So-
suke. White and purple pigeons on a thatched roof,
■ f y Is^


with a background of sky as blue and tender as ever
shone in May. The rendering of atmosphere is mar-
velous ; even more so is the texture of feathers that
give you all the half-tones and high lights of nature
and sunshine. Among the very finest enamels in the
collection—and hardly surpassed by the two that fol-
low.
228 Pair enamel vases, also by Namikawa Sosuke, his
A*', very finest work. Ground, white shading to mist
/ ' At ' spy. whh a decoration of “Niwatori” or garden
' A in English, chickens, —and banana leaves in
ft A*' shades of gray, and black.
229 The pearl of all enamels. A tray in pale blue, enam-
eled on silver to show a single gold fish swimming far
sy down in the depths of the sea. In one corner a trail
/ of sea-wraclg<LA_trulutdelicious hit also by Namikawa
' Sosuke. A' • (?£syiA/V\\/-/r'
230 Salad bowl. Very fine Arita ware. Decorated in
gold, blue and red. Made by Fukatsu, of Arita.
From the collection sent to Paris exposition, for
which he received gold medal.
231 Incense burner, by same artist .and from same collec-
tions.
232 Bronze tiger, finely carved work, by Suzuki Chokichi,
Tokyo.
233 Bronze vase, dragons in relief. Suzuki Chokichi,
Tokyo.
234 Wood carvings, Aino dancers (the aboriginals of Japan),
dancing for sake. Executed fifteen years ago. The
n a 0 work of the famous Yasuyoshi, with signature in
' ivory inlaid in sole of foot. From the collection of
* /> Edgar Abbott, thirty years a resident of Yoko-
hama -


No. 229. ENAMEI. TRAY,


COLLECTION OF WATER-COLORS.
235 Water-color, two quails in grass, signed Osawa Nankoku,
Tokyo.
236 Another, wild geese, evening, signed Seiko, Yokohama.
237 Another, yellow chrysanthemums, signed Osawa Nan-
koku, Tokyo.
238 Another, wild crane and grasses, signed Osawa Nanko-
ku, Tokyo.
239 Another, same as above, by same artist.
240 Another, Yumoto village and sacred mountain of Fu-
jisan, signed Soshin Ariyoshi.
241 Another, white peony in storm, signed Osawa Nankoku,
T okyo,
242 Another, crow on cherry tree, by same artist, signed.
243 Another, grapes and snail, by same artist, signed.
244 Another, snipe and grasses, by same artist, signed.
245 Another, white peony in storm, by same artist, signed.
246 Another, dragon riding waves of the sea, by Seiko,
signed.
247 Another, crow in snow-storm, by Os,awa Nankoku
Tokyo, signed.
248 Another, a misty evening, signed by above artist.
249 Another, crane and grasses, same artist, signed.
250 Another, pleasure boats at Mukojima, Tokyo, by Seiko.
251 Another, crow in snow-storm, by Osawa Nankoku,
Tokyo.
252 Another, Lake Chusenji, near Nikko, signed Tokunaga
Nobuaki.
253 Another, red lacquer (sacred) bridge, at Nikko, by To-
kunaga Nobuaki.


254 Another, white lotus, by Osawa Nankoku, Tokyo,
signed.
255 Another, quail in grasses, by Osawa Nankoku, Tokyo,
signed.
256 Another, fish in water, signed by above artist.
257 Another, white lotus, by above artist.
258 Another, fish in water, by Osawa Nankoku, Tokyo.
259 Another, same as above.
260 Another, Chusenji lake, near Nikko, signed Tokunaga
Nobuaki, Yokohama.
261 Another, yellow chrysanthemums, by Osawa Nankoku,
Tokyo, signed.
262 Another, crane and grasses, by Osawa Nankoku, Tokyo.
263 Another, same as above.
264 Another, crow and cherry-blossoms, Osawa Nankoku,
signed.
265 Another, same as above.
266 Another, stork and grasses, by Osawa Nankoku.
267 Another, crane, by same artist.
268 Another, wild flowers and locust, signed, Osawa Nan-
koku, Tokyo.
269 Another, wood duck, by same artist as above.
270 Another, snipe and grasses, by same artist.
271 Old gold Nashiji lacquer dinner set, of twenty-one
pieces, each with the family crest of Daimio Maida,
who was ennobled in the year 1570. This set is
guaranteed by Deakin Brothers & Co. to be 200
years old.
272 Black and gold lacquer traveling box, heavy silken cords
and tassels, gold-plated mountings, bears the crest of
Daimio Shimadzu, ol Satsuma, otherwise known as
Satsuma crest. The box is 80 years old.


■d^U*dy
I
\
273 Pair turquoise blue enamel vases, plum blossom and
..• 00 bird decoration. Very important pieces made by*
/r I . Goto Shozaburo, of Kenagawa, height 33 inches; 2 ps.
274 Bronze Koro, a most important piece instinct with
Japanese legends no less than Japanese art. The
aO dragon Suijin is king of the sea, whose tides ebb
/ . and flow as he casts in or takes out the ball that he
,L() * holds. He was lord of the waters but powerless on
fl earth. He had four daughters fairer than cherry-
blossoms or white doves. His arch enemy was a
centipede two hundred feet long, who lived on land
yet swam the sea, so was more than a match for the
king. Yearly he came and devoured one of the
king’s daughters till but a single one remained. In
despair the father sought out Genzanmi Yorimasa,
a renowned warrior, to whom he promised a large
reward for his enemy’s destruction. There was death
in each of the centipede’s hundred eyes and feet, but
Genzanmi courageously watched him to his lair, and
shot him through and through with sharp arrows.
In reward he got the king’s daughter, as well as the
sovereignty of the seas, which enabled him to raise
a tide high enough to wash away and overcome
Moko a Corean invader. For this he was made
Emperor of Japan. The dragon Suijin is a favorite
motif with the best Japanese artists, and has rarely
been so well rendered as in this important piece.
£. jyJ d^


SECOND DAY’S SALE.
WEDNESDAY AFTERNOON, JANUARY 20TH.
BEGINNING PROMPTLY AT 2:30 O’CLOCK.
275 Leather portfolio for holding water-colors.
276 Book of water-colors, by Chinese artists, 90 years old ;
gold-leaf ornamentation throughout the book.
277 Book, containing water-colored portraits of the sixteen
high priests of Buddhism, called the “ Rakan.”
278 Two volumes (flowers of Japan), containing no illus-
trations, painted and signed by Seizan, about 150
years old.
279 Book, illustrating story of the 47 Ronins (men without
a master), printed 30 years ago.
280 Book, map of city of Tokyo, showing possessions of
different Daimios, together with their crests, printed
150 years ago. Date on title page.
281 Book, illustrated, warriors of Japan.
282 Book, illustrating trip down the Tokaido, printed 32
years ago.
283 Two volumes, reprints of old pictures, by Kansai.
284 Two volumes, different views of Fujisan, by Hokusai,
printed 65 years ago. Date on title page.
285 Book, illustrated, birds and flowers.
286 Another, same as above.
287 Another.
288 Three volumes, illustrated, showing Hokuso, Nanso and
Kano style of painting.
289 Book, illustrated, showing Yoshitoshi style of painting.


290 Two volumes, showing designs used in lacquer work.
291 Three volumes, illustrated, showing Kiosai style of
painting.
292 Four makimonos (rolls of paintings), showing the Mi-
kado’s palace and festivals in the feudal days, beauti-
fully painted, each makimono fifty feet long.
293 Makimono, illustrating the evil spirits (one hundred
devils) of Japan.
294 Kakemono, painting of five monkeys and plum-tree, by
Kamada Gensen, a celebrated painter of Osaka,
80 years old. Signed.
295 Kakemono, monkeys and plum blossoms, painted by
Sosen, 90 years ago. Signed.
296 Kakemono, metal workers, 28 figures, painted by Ko-
suisai, 80 years ago. Signed.
297 Kakemono, peony flowers, sparrows, rice straw and
snow. Painted by Rikio, 70 years ago. Signed.
All of the above books, Makimonos and Kakemonos, are from the Edgar
Abbott collection, Yokohama.
298 Kakemono, painting on silk, landscape. Kara and
Fujiyama mountain, by Seiko.
299 Kakemono, beautiful Japanese scenery painted on
silk, by Seiko.
300 Kakemono, water scene on silk, by Seiko.
301 Kakemono, mountain of Fujiyama and Yoshiwara, on
silk, by Seiko.
302 Kakemono, painted on silk, fox and geese, by Seiko.
303 Bronze bell, formerly carried by messengers bearing
dispatches from the Mikado to different parts of the
empire. Persons carrying this bell were given right
of way, even in most crowded thoroughfares,
304 Another, same as above.
305 Another.
306 Pilgrim bell, brass.


307 Another.
308 Another.
309 Pair of carved brass sliding-door handles, Japanese
name, Tekeka.
310 Pair, same as above, enameled in various bright colors.
311 Inkstone water-pot, brass, gold plated.
312 Bronze nctsuke, in form of cannon.
313 Pistol, silver inlaid barrel ; old.
314 Another, same as above.
315 Another, with plain barrel.
316 Cloisonne bowl, 80 years old ; a splendid specimen.
317 Lady’s gold lacquer comb, 60 years old.
318 Ten engraved mother-of-pearl counters.
319 Bow and arrows, in Shitan wood box. Used in houses
by Japanese girls.
320 Household shrine, lacquered ; Amida Butsu. Exquisite
specimen of wood carving ; prayer inscribed on panels
each side of door.
321 Household shrine, lacquered, cut-brass mountings, Bud-
dha Kannon, prayers in Sanskrit, cut in ornament at
back of image. A rare piece, 80 years old.
322 Household shrine, red lacquer, cut brass mountings,
image of the god Bishamon, carved from Ginko
wood (an aromatic wood found in China and Corea).
Genuine, old.
323 Japanese clock, cut brass work, over 100 years old.
Dial revolves around indicator.
324 Another, same as above.
325 Another, very fine.
326 Another, with weight.
327 Another, long shape.
328 Another, beautiful old clock on stand. A rare speci-
men.


MAKUZA KOZAN PORCELAINS.
329 Bottle-shape vase, red and green mottled glaze.
30 Incense burner, deep, rich green glaze, ornamented
with dragon in relief.
331 Incense burner ; decoration, landscape in brown and
green, under glaze.
332 Vase, red mottled.
333 Incense burner ; decoration, clouds with dragon in re-
lief, “ Shades of Evening.” Signed.
334. Bottle-shape vase, red and brown shaded glaze.
335 Vase, bottle shape, white; decoration, carved waves,
dragon in brown under glaze. Signed.
336 Bottle-shape vase, olive-green glaze ; decoration, white
lily. Signed.
337 Vase, gourd shape, yellow glaze ; decoration, deep blue
waves, under glaze, brown dragon in relief. Signed.
338 Vase, chocolate color glaze.
339 Vase, brown and green mottled glaze.
340 Gourd-shape vase, white ; decoration, blue waves,
dragon in relief. Signed.
341 Vase, bottle shape, deep rich glaze ; decoration, morn-
ing-glory. Signed.
342 Vase, soft brown glaze.
343 Vase, red and gray mottled glaze. Handsome piece.
344 Vase, “ Makuza peach-blow ” glaze.
345 Vase, dark green glaze, floral design in white. Signed.
346 Vase, rich tortoise-shell mottled glaze.
347 Vase, Seigi glaze, lotus bud shape ; highly decorated
in various bright colors, dragons on panels. Signed.
348 Vase, “ Shades of Evening,” dragon and gray clouds.
349 Vase, white glaze ; decoration, Ho-wo bird in pink.


350 Vase, dark-green glaze ; decoration, lily and butterflies
in white.
351' Vase, Seigi green glaze; decoration, waves in brown,
and dragons carved in medallions, under glaze.
352 Vase, rich dark-brown glaze ; pink cherry-blossom
decoration. One of Makuza’s best pieces.
353 Vase, soft Seigi green glaze.
354 Bronze temple gong and stand, gong inscribed as fol-
lows : “ Donated by Bungonokami Masatoshi to
temple Hoyeji, at Kioto, year of Genroku (250
years ago), made by Iwasa Kinriu, Kioto.”
355 Bronze prayer gong and frame. 200 years old.
356 Another, same age as above, much larger.
357 Vase, beautiful goldstone enamel ; decoration, white
plum blossoms, four feet high, made by Goto Shoza-
buro, at Kanagawa (from Tokyo exposition of 1850).
An exquisite piece.
358 Koro, red enamel, octagon shape ; decoration, chrysan-
themums in white and pink, panels ornamented with
dragons and birds.
SMALL COLLECTION OF SOLID SILVER-
WARE.
359 Nine silver sword ornaments.
360 Nine miniature silver teapots, different shapes.
361 Silver salt dish, in form of lotus flower.
362 Silver basket, carved and inlaid with gold, made by
Shigeyuki. Signed.
363 Silver sake cup, carved, made by Chowosai. Signed.
364 Another, made by Masawo. Signed.
365 Silver and bronze box, made to represent day and night.
Used for seal and ink ; carved floral design.


366 Silver knife-handle, Japanese name Kozukano ye;
carved in imitation of bamboo fence, with morning-
glories in relief. Made by Ishiguro Koreyoshi, 65
years ago. Signed.
367 Another, carved with stork and crow in relief, by Mori-
chika, go years old. Signed.
368 Another, carved, hawk and crane in relief, by Ishiguro
Koreyoshi, 65 years ago. Signed.
369 Another, carved with figure of street peddler, in low
relief, by Itscho, 150 years old. Signed.
370 Another, carved ; decoration, flowers and butterflies, by
Harnaki Hogan. 80 years old. Signed.
371 Another ; ornamentation, sacred mountain of Fujisan
and waves, carved in relief, by Goto Kazuyoshi, 70
years old. Signed.
372 Another, carved figure of girl at play, in relief, by Yo-
shiyuki, 55 years old. Signed.
373 Another, carved figure of Shinto dancer ; same artist as
above. Signed.
374 Another; decoration, crane and willow tree, carved on
both sides, by same artist. Signed.
375 Another, carved figure of Daikoku, god of wealth, by
same artist. Signed.
376 Another, carved figure Kuge; same artist. Signed.
377 Another, carved figure of No Dancer; same artist.
Signed.
378 Another, carved Toriye (gateway) and pigeons, by
Toshi Yoshi, 60 years ago. Signed.
379 Another, carved temple ornament and cat, by Kazantu
Tomoyuki, 80 years ago. Signed.
380 Another, carving in relief, wistaria flower, by Itkin, 90
years ago. Signed.
381 Another, carving of Yugawo, fruit vine, by Hoitsu, 70
years old. Signed.


382 Another, carving of lion and monkey, by Jawa, 120
years ago. Signed.
383 Another, gold back, inlaid with Shakudo bronze, design
horse and willow-tree, by Nana Sadamasa, 50 years
ago. Signed.
384 Another, figure of Japanese lady inlaid with gold and
Shakudo. Modern.
385 Another, carved floral decoration. Tokugawa crest.
Modern.
386 Another, ornamented in relief, egg-plant in gold and
Shakudo. A genuine Somin, 190 years old. Signed.
387 Another, carving and peony flower in relief, by Yeimei.
40 years. Signed.
388 Another, carved with Tokugawa crest. Signed Ishi-
guro Masayoshi.
389 Another, beautifully carved with chrysanthemums.
Signed Akagiken.
390 Silver box, round ; carved with landscape, Fujisan
mountain and trees. Used by Japanese lady as
powder box.
391 Another, same as above.
392 Silver fire-pots and kettle, for making tea, in miniature.
Old and handsomely carved.
393 Silver incense burner, in form of Daimio’s helmet.
394 Silver incense burner, gold inlaid, in the form of
Mikado’s cart.
395 Silver incense burner, in the form of old Japanese
junk. An exceedingly fine specimen of silver work.
396 Silver money box, with Shibuichi cover, Japanese char-
acters gold inlaid, “ Sen Rio,” translated reads “ one
thousand dollars.”
When offerings to a certain temple reached this amount, it was put
into gold and placed in the box, which was then sealed and
deposited in a place of safety, contents to be used for the pres-
ervation of the temple only.


397 Silver incense box, inlaid gold and bronze. Japanese
inscription, “ Long life,” done with Shakudo
398 Silver incense box; Mikado’s- cart and maple leaves
beautifully carved on cover.
399 Another, same as above.
400 Silver teapot; beautifully carved floral design. 80
years old.
401 Another, carved floral design, inlaid with gold. Signed
“Choich.” Modern.
402 Silver sake pot, hammered from one piece. 5° years
old.
403 Tea set; four pieces—teapot, sugar, cream, tongs;
height of teapot 5J inches, diameter SJ; sugar,
height 5 inches, diameter 4J ; cream 3J high, diam-
eter 4 inches. Elaborately carved. Made at Canton,
China.
CRYSTALS, JADE, AND MISCELLANEOUS.
404 Carved crystal figure, Goddess Kannon, 4 inches high.
405 Another, same as above, inches high.
406 Crystal carving, sacred turtle of longevity.
407 Crystal carving of turtle, 6J x 3 inches.
408 Carved crystal, form of sacred mountain Fujisan, 61-
inches 10ng,3 inches high.
409 Crystal stand, dark in color. Carved from one piece.
410 Crystal stand; cut from one piece, absolutely without
flaw, of the first water. Unique and wonderfully
characteristic.
411 Crystal vase, shape square, with handles, 4J- inches
high. Cut from one piece. Should go with above
stand.
3


412 Crystal vase, inches high, 3]- inches wide. Carved
handles. One piece.
413 Crystal ball, diameter, 2| inches. Perfect.
414 Another, diameter ij- inches. Perfect.
415 Another, diameter ij inches.
416'White jade cup, carved in form of lotus leaf. Teak-
wood stand.
417 White jade incense jar, green jade cover. Carved floral
decoration. Teak-wood stand.
418 White jade tea-caddy.
419 Green jade Magatama. A fine specimen, presented by
the Mikado to victorious warriors, in the feudal
days.
420 Another, same as above.
421 Carved jade ornament. Chinese.
422 Chinese jade watch charm, carved. Fine specimen.
423 Four Chinese jade ornaments.
424 Solid glaze vase, green and white.
425 Snuff bottle, green and white glaze.
426 Solid green glaze jar. Beautiful color.
427 Six Japanese jade cups.
428 Six same as above.
429 Five same as above.
430 Crystal snuff bottle.
431 Agate snuff bottle.
432 Amethyst snuff bottle, carved.
433 Twelve solid gold teapots, in miniature, different sizes
and shapes.
434 Enamel vase, square; decoration, white, yellow, and
red chrysanthemums and butterflies. Panels orna-
mented with dragons and Ho-wo birds. Superb piece,
by Honda, Nagoya.


No. 448. ENAMEL PLAQUE.
No. 1248. ENAMEL PLAQUE.


435 Enamel cigarette case, silver mounted, soft French
gray enamel; decoration, water-lily and fish. Nami-
kawa Sosukc, Tokyo.
436 Gray enamel koro, round, floral decoration. (The fine
wire work of this piece should be examined with
magnifying glass.) Teak-wood stand.
437 Incense box, black enamel, medallion ornamentation,
finely-worked dragon on cover. By Suzuki, Kioto.
Teak-wood stand.
438 Goldstone enamel dish; decoration, forget-me-nots.
An exquisite specimen of workmanship, by Nami-
kawa Kiyoyuki, of Kioto. Same as No. 135.
439 Cigarette case, shaded enamel; decoration, cherry-
blossom and crow. Frame, Shakudo. A very choice
specimen of Namikawa Sosuke’s work.
440 Another, pale green enamel; decoration, narcissus
flower and bird; silver frame. Equally as choice as
above. Same artist.
441 Incense box, light brown enamel; decoration, cherry-
blossoms. Exceedingly choice. Also by Namikawa
Sosuke.
442 Diamond-shaped enameled koro: beautifully deco-
rated in close design of dragons, Ho-wo birds, butter-
flies and flowers, done on panels of different colored
enamels. Several of the panels are also worked in
with finest wiring, which call for careful inspection.
Handsomely carved teak-wood stand. By Suzuki,
Kioto.
443 Goldstone enamel koro, oblong; decoration, chrysan-
themum and Ho-wo bird. Teak-wood stand. By
Honda, Nagoya.
Bronze tiger, beautifully carved. Made by Suzuki Cho-
kichi, Tokyo.
445 Bronze figure, liegin, guard of Bishamon Temple,
condemned by Bishamon to forever hold a lamp


upraised upon his hand, as punishment forneglecfof
duties while guarding the temple gates. (Japanese
legend.) Height, 4 ft. 8 in. Made by Suzuki Choki-
chi, Tokyo.
446 Red enamel vase; decoration, maple tree, morning-
glories and birds. Neck, dark-green enamel, dragon
in white. 33 inches high.
447 Pair turquoise blue enamel vases; decoration, birds and
cherry-blossoms in pale pink enamel. Gray enamftl
around neck, with crest ornamentation. 3 ft. 6 in.
high.
448 Enamel plaque, shaded colors. Subject, “ Fight of the
Sparrows;” designed by Shotei, enameled by Nami-
kawa Sosuke, Tokyo.
449 Enamel plaque, shaded in color. Subject, white stork
and water-flowers; designed by Shotei, enameled by
Namikawa, Sosuke, Tokyo.
450 Enamel plaque. Subject, fish and water-flowers; de-
signed by Shotei, enameled by Namikawa Sosuke,
Tokyo.
451 Enamel plaque, shaded. Subject, chickens. Border
worked in light brown and black. Designed by Sho-
tei, enameled by Namikawa Sosuke, Tokyo.
452 Enamel panel, white and black. Subject, eagle on
rocks, surrounded by water. Designed by Shotei,
enameled by Namikawa Sosuke, Tokyo. 18 xl4 in.
453 Pair enamel vases, light blue, shaded. Subject, black-
birds in rice. 16 inches high. By Morimoto, Nagoya.
454 Pair enamel vases, shaded blue; decoration, cock and
hen, and floral design. Very fine specimens of Mori-
moto’s work.
455 Pair enamel vases, soft P'rench gray; decoration, flying
sparrows. inches high.


No. 452. ENAMEL PANEL.


456 Pair black enamel vases; decoration, floral design,
chrysanthemums in a variety of rich bright colors.
By Morimoto.
457 Pair shaded enamel vases, blue to gray; decoration,
floral design, wistaria and birds. By Yamada, Na-
goya.
458 Pair gray enamel vases; decorated with flowers and
flight of storks. By Yamada.
459 Pair enamel vases, beautifully shaded turquoise blue;
floral decoration.
460 Pair enamel vases, light green ; decoration, water scene
in panels and floral design.
461 Pair enamel vases, shaded salmon pink; decorated with
design, banana trees.
462 Pair enamel vases, shaded blue and gray; decoration,
plum blossoms and birds, by Morimoto, Nagoya.
Fine specimens.
463 Pair enamel vases, light blue ; decoration, chrysanthe-
mums and bamboo fence.
464 Pair enamel vases, French gray; decoration, plum blos-
soms and birds. A very dainty pair.
465 Pair goldstone enamel vases, green and brown, alter-
nate panels ; decoration, flowers and butterflies. Ex-
ceedingly fine work, by Flonda, Nagoya.
466 Another pair, goldstone enamel, panels of brown and
green ; decorated exquisitely in small floral design.
*Namikawa Kiyoyuki, Kioto.
467 Another pair, black goldstone enamel; decorated
with butterflies in various colors. By Honda, Na-
goya.
468 Two enamel dishes, silver wires and mountings. Made
to imitate old Nabashima porcelain plates. Decora-
tion, Tokugawa crest and waves.


469 Satsuma vase, gourd shape; black glaze with floral
decoration ; white panels, shishi (lion) in blue, under
the glaze. 21 inches high.
470 Porcelain vase; black hawthorn decoration, copied
from Chinese. 14 inches high.
471 Porcelain vase, light-colored green glaze ; decoration,
dragons in brown, clouds in red under glaze. 15
inches high. Signed Makuza Kozan.
472 White porcelain vase; landscape decoration in soft
gray and brown, under glaze. Signed Makuza
Kozan.
473 White porcelain vase, “ Rosy Dawn ; ” white dragon
carved in relief. Signed Makuza Kozan. 14 inches
high. Choice piece.
474 Porcelain vase “ Shades of Evening ; ” decoration, plum-
tree in blossom, faintly seen through gathering dark-
ness. 11 inches high. One of Makuza Kozan’s best
pieces.
475 Porcelain vase, “ Waves of the Sea by Moonlight; ”
rich blue glaze, light blue waves. By Makuza
Kozan. Carved teak-wood stand.
476 Porcelain vase, fine texture. “ Rosy Dawn ’’decoration.
Signed Makuza Kozan.
477 Porcelain vase; decoration, beautifully carved dragon
and high colored clouds. By Makuza Kozan,
signed.
478 Porcelain vase, crackle glaze, square neck ; red and blue
dragon decoration. Signed Makuza Kozan.
479 Porcelain vase, mottled purple and white. Makuza
Kozan.
480 Porcelain vase, red mottled. Makuza Kozan.
481 Porcelain vase, form of lotus bud ; floral and fish deco-
ration on panels. Makuza Kozan.


482 White porcelain vase ; brown dragon decoration under
glaze. Signed Makuza Kozan.
483 White porcelain teapot, fine texture; decoration,
carved waves, under glaze, fish in relief. Curious
shape. Makuza Kozan, signed.
484 Porcelain teapot; ornamentation, carved floral design,
white medallions with brown Shishi under glaze.
Dainty shape. Makuza Kozan, signed.
485 White porcelain teapot; ornamentation, finely carved
dragons in relief. Handsome shape. Makuza Kozan,
signed.
486 White porcelain teapot, artistic floral decoration in
reddish brown. Makuza Kozan, signed.
487 Porcelain teapot ; wave and fish decoration. Makuza
Kozan, signed.
488 Blue and white porcelain water-pot ; hawthorn decora-
tion. Makuza Kozan, signed.
489 Seigi green water-pot; decoration, landscape in brown,
under glaze. Makuza Kozan, signed.
490 Bronze flower vase, in form of Hecheina, the vegetable
sponge of China. The long, cucumber-shaped fruit
hangs in an_ arching upright frame. It is of iron,
solid in color; hanging from the stem at top a trail of
the vine, with leaves and tendrils, life size, falls almost
to the bottom. A miracle in metal work is the only
fit characterization of this exquisite piece. A ser-
pent writhes gracefully down the vine; there are
two sparrows aperch on it, and red-spotted beetles
crawling and eating over the leaves. All the orna-
mentation is in Shakudo enriched with gold and
silver—-the precious metals so applied as to pro-
duce the most exquisitely harmonious shading and
high lights. Indeed, the effect of the whole masterly
treatment is to produce a symphony in shaded bronze
and gold.


491 Pair of bronze pigeons, life size, beautifully carved.
By Suzuki Chokichi, Tokyo.
492 Gold bronze incense burner, or lamp, beautifully inlaid
with gold, silver, and Shakudo in crests and various
designs, surmounted by solid silver pigeon. A fine
piece of workmanship and one of the gems of the
collection.
Copied from an antique, once used in Japanese reli-
gious ceremonies, which belonged to the temple
of a great Shogun, and hung from the limb of a
huge pine that overhung its entrance. Every morn-
ing it was filled with burning incense, whose clouds
of smoke, ascending to heaven, were supposed to carry
upward the prayers of the faithful—a sweet savor to
the nostrils of Buddha.
493 Pair iron vases, gold inlaid and figures in relief. 40
years old.
494 Iron incense burner, silver inlaid. 80 years old.
495 Collection of sword ornaments (113). Each one signed
by well-known bronze workers.
496 Bronze incense box, in form of crab ; finely articulated.
By Suzuki Chokichi, Tokyo.
497 Bronze crab, articulated, by same maker as above.
COLLECTION OF SWORD GUARDS.
498 Carved bronze sword guard. Form of monkey with
persimmon. Leaves of Shibuichi. By Kaneyoshi.
499'Shakudo sword guard. Engraved figures of Japanese
lady and gentleman. Design by Haruki, carved by
Kokaji Min Riu. Date 1810.
500 Sword guard, carved figure of Arne Peddlar; wrought
with gold, silver, and shakudo. Made by Tamagawa
Yoshishima.


501 Sword guard, carved Shakudo ; ornamentation, both
sides gold lobsters, in relief. By Ishiguro Masatune.
Date 1780.
502 Sword guard, iron ; decoration, solid gold stork and
grasses in relief. Reverse side, carved waves and
floral design in gold. By Ichirin-sai Masamitsu.
Date 1780.
503 Sword guard, bronze; design snake, exquisitely carved.
By Seirinan Yoshitomo.
504 Sword guard, iron ; decoration, both sides solid silver
storks in relief, and grasses carved in iron. Made by
Toshimasa.
505 Sword guard, iron edged with shibuichi ; decoration,
finely carved figure of Yenma (King of Hades) pass-
ing judgment on new comers, who may be seen on
reverse side, pleading for mercy. King’s staff, solid
gold, inlaying gold and silver. Made by Sadakatsu.
Splendid specimen of modern metal work.
506 Sword guard, in form of house with thatched roof.
Shibuichi, shakudo, gold and silver enter into the
composition of this piece. The design represents an
old Japanese story. On the back may be seen figure
of Daikoku, engraved on kakemono. The story runs
that this kakemono was so well painted the figure
comes to life, and on opening the door in front of
house, the figure may be seen chasing out the devil,
by throwing peas at him. This custom of throwing
peas is still followed at-New Year’s. By Sadakatsu.
507 Sword guard, iron with gold, silver shakudo and
shibuichi inlaying; design, King of Hades summon-
ing the spirits for sentence. One of the best pieces
in the collection. Made by Hirochika.
508 Sword guard, iron, inlaid with gold, silver, shakudo and
shibuichi ; floral design, leaves of solid gold, and
hawk of shibuichi and shakudo, artistically carved in


relief; reverse side, storks of solid silver and pine-
trees carved in relief, with ivy vine of gold. By
Toshiyuki, date 1835.
509 Sword guard, iron, inlaid with gold, silver and shibui-
chi ; beautifully carved figure of high priest of
Buddhism, in shibuichi, holding staff of solid gold,
calling the dragon out of the heavens ; reverse side,
clouds carved in iron, streaks of lightning solid gold.
By Hamano Kizui; date 1775.
510 Sword guard, inlaid with gold and silver; design, nine
wild horses inlaid on either side.
51 1 Sword guard, one side shibuichi, reverse side iron, gold
and silver inlaid ; carved figure of Japanese court
lady, who resigned and retired to Ishiyama Temple,
where she spent her time writing poetry of the
moon. Trimmings of kimono and floral design in
gold ; on iron side carved waves and gold inlaid.
Made by Shoyo, date 1850.
512 Sword guard, very fine shibuichi, gold and silver inlaid ;
design, flowers and insects, both sides ; flowers
inlaid with gold and silver, insects of shakudo and
gold. Made by Goto Koran, date 1845.
513 Sword guard, iron one side, red bronze reverse, inlaid
with gold and silver; subject, seven gods. On the
iron side are seen beautifully carved figures of Dai-
koku and Yebisu, done in gold, silver and shakudo.
On reverse side, finely engraved, are the figures of
the other five gods, Benten, Bishamon, Fukurokujin,
Hotel, and Jurojin. Made by Katsuyoshi ; date 1840.
514 Sword guard, fine shido bronze, inlaid with gold, silver
and shakudo. On one side, carved in relief, is Kami-
nari, “ God of Thunder,” and on the other side,
inlaid in shibuichi, Kazenokami, “ God of the Wind.”
By Masachika, considered one of the best modem
bronze carvers.


515 Iron sword guard, gold and silver inlaid; design,
carved in relief, figure of Sosano-no Mikoto, brother
of the Sun God, placing jars of saki to tempt the nine-
headed dragon. This dragon was supposed to come
once a year and devour one of the fair daughters of
Suishin, until but one remained. Before his last
expected visit, Sosano-no Mikoto places nine jars of
sake on the rocks, where the dragon drinks until
intoxicated and is then slain by the bold warrior,
who, as reward, received the girl in marriage. On
the other side are waves carved in the iron, dragon
and sake jars inlaid in silver. By Katsuaki. Date
1855-
516 Sword guard, Shido bronze. Gold, silver and shakudo
inlaid. Figure of Taikobo, a wise man, carved in
relief. Taikobo fishing, on edge of lake. On reverse
side, carved in relief, the emperor and court officers
coming to consult him. By Katsuyasu. Date 1850.
A superb piece of work.
517 Iron sword guard, in form of the Imperial crest ; inlaid
with gold, silver and shakudo. Finely carved figure
of the warrior Kusunoki Masashige, about to commit
Hara-kiri, dictating commands and last wishes to
his son, Masatsura, Reverse side, floral design,
carved in relief, gold and silver. Made by Katsu-
hira. Date 1850.
518 Iron sword guard, inlaid with gold and silver; carved
figure of Kishing, Chinese sage, in act of blowing
miniature figure of himself to heaven, This feat he
was able to perform once a day. Other side, water-
fall and floral design, gold and silver inlaid. Made
by Hideoki. Date 1845.
519 Shibuichi sword guard, exquisitely inlaid with fine
design of peach-tree in bloom. Blossoms done in
gold and silver, carved figures of three Chinese war


riors, in relief; reverse side, camp inclosed by silk
curtains and trees; also done in gold and silver.
Made by Nagatsune in Yechizen. Date 1760.
520 Bronze sword guard, figures of the Rakan and physi-
cian. Halo of gold, carved in relief, reverse side, in-
cense burner of gold. Made by Hosho. Date 1850.
521 Iron sword guard, carved with waves, both sides, gold
and shibuichi inlaid, figure of high priest, calling
the dragon from the skies, priest’s cloak solid gold.
Made by Ikkin.
522 Sword guard, beautifully worked with gold, silver,
shakudo and shibuichi, figure of Daikoku, god of
wealth, finely carved. By Chiruiken, a well-known
modern artist.
523 Sword guard of fine shido bronze, inlaid with designs
in gold, silver and shakudo. A fine specimen of
modern work.
524 Carved red lacquer tray (Tsuishi) 14 x 8} inches, rare
color, fine specimen, about 150 years old, Japanese;
design peony flowers, sacred animals and birds.
525 Carved red lacquer tray, Chinese, round in shape, 11
inches across, about 200 years old; floral design.
526 Carved red lacquer tray, rich color, round, 7 J x 6 inches
across; design, carved figures of children at play,
border, dragons in clouds, Kien Leung era, 1736-
1790. Signed.
5,27 Carved red lacquer tray, round, 6 inches across ; floral
design, about 200 years old.
528 Carve.d red lacquer tray, square, about 150 years old.
529 Carved red lacquer box, round ; floral design. Signed
Chogai, 150 years old.
530 Ivory screen, six folds, solid silver hinges and trim-
mings, engraved ; frame work, gold lacquered, both
sides, with imperial crests and floral design. Height


No. 530. CARVED IVORY SCREEN.
(Six folds. Height, 12[? ] inches; length, 29 inches.)


I2f inches, length 29 inches; carved by Mitsutoshi,
son of Mitsuaki. Father and son considered the
most eminent ivory carvers of the present day. It is
impossible to convey in words the depth and delicacy
of the carving, which represents the Ra-kan, the six-
teen high priests of Buddhism, headed by O-ran, who
first introduced the religion from India into Japan.
One panel shows Ku-ran, lord of the heavens, calling
down the sacred dragon. Upon another the tiger,
king of beasts, appears doing homage for his king-
dom to the holy men. It is an article of Japanese
faith that whoso visits the temple and properly per-
forms his devotions will be able to recognize and
hold converse with his dead forefathers, now re-in-
carnate in other forms. The other side shows Bud-
dha’s paradise of mountains beyond a lake, across
which the Rakan —holy men—-are seen sailing from
the gate of the temple.
531 Pair ivory vases, 9 inches high, 4J diameter; exqui-
sitely gold lacquered and inlaid with mother-of-pearl;
handsome black and gold lacquer stands. Typical
specimens expressive of the highest development of
Japanese art. The microscope can show no flaw in
the workmanship, yet the most casual glance reveals
their wonderful beauty. The decoration shows the
Rakan —holy men—in various phases of worship, at
prayer, catching water, telling overheads of pearl, or
burning incense. Each figure is instinct with life,
spirit, and individuality. Even more perfect, and
certainly far more beautiful, are the lotus flowers of
pearl, amid a forest of golden leaves, rising up from
golden waves, with golden grass and gold and pearl
storks standing lower than the superb sacred flower of
Buddhism. Indeed T is not too much to say that
ownership and sympathetic study of these bits will
afford a liberal education in Japanese art.
45
SECOND DA Y’S SALE.


532 Ivory vase (one only), ornamented with gold lacquer
and mother-of-pearl inlaying; design, flowers and
storks, 10 inches high, diameter; handsome black
and gold lacquer stand.
533 Ivory vase (one only); ornamentation, birds, cherry
blossoms and flowers in gold lacquer and mother-of-
pearl, 8| inches high, diameter; handsome black
and gold lacquer stand.
534 Ivory screen, two folds, silver trimmings and hinges,
gold lacquered frame work, 11 inches high, 9 inches
wide ; beautifully carved decoration on panels, mon-
keys and flowers ; reverse side, monkey catching fish,
by Mitsuyoshi, a celebrated carver.
535 Ivory fan, gold lacquered and carved with monkeys.
By Mitsuyoshi.
536 Ivory cribbage board, 10 inches long, 2| inches wide,
cut from one piece; drawers containing pegs at each
end; dragon and crest decoration in gold lacquer, on
back ; carving of monkeys, seated at table, playing
cards.
537 Ivory incense box, round; silver trimmings, gold lacquer
borders, cover ornamented with mother-of-pearl fig-
ure of goddess Benten. Inlaid pearl signature, “ Yo-
shimatsu,” Tokyo. An exquisite piece.
538 Ivory paper knife, 18 inches long, carved both sides;
monkeys in low relief.
539 Ivory paper knife, exquisitely inlaid with pearl and tor-
toise-shell ; floral design.
540 Ivory paper knife, decorated with pearl inlaid figure of
girl and chickens on one side ; floral design on back.
541 Ivory paper knife ; decoration, pearl inlaid figure of
Shoki; other side carving of devils,
542 Ivory paper knife ; decoration, inlaid figure of girl and
cherry blossoms ; reverse side, flowers, inlaid with
pearl.


543 Ivory paper knife ; decoration, pearl inlaid figure of
boy, butterfly and flowers ; on the other side flowers.
544 Ivory parasol handle, one piece, 15 inches long ; carved
decoration of Musurne (Japanese girl) and plum blos-
soms.
545 Ivory parasol handle, same as above ; carved decoration
in low relief; monkeys in branches of plum-trees.
546 Ivory parasol handle, same length ; decoration, mon-
keys climbing after birds.
547 Ivory parasol handle, same length, carved design, same
as above.
548 Enamel koro in brilliant colors ; shape, oblong, 14x12
inches. From Tokyo exposition, 1890; by Honda,
Nagoya. One of the richest bits in color, as well
as peculiarly graceful in shape and design, which
though apparently conventional, reveals the luxuriant
grace and grotesque fancy, characteristic of Japan.
The pattern of Ho-wo birds alternating with the
sacred dragon appears all over in the most daring
yet delicious tones upon a background of dead-gold
that illumines the dark body color.
549 Pair of screens, dainty, delicate and beautiful, four folds
each ; frame of black lacquer with Shakuds hinges
and mountings. A triumph equally of Japanese art
and ingenuity. The cloth is woven over wire in plain
color, then the figure is stamped and cut so as to give
a velvety surface, after which the pattern is colored
to life. Ground color, dark gray, with decoration of
maple branches, grasses, crysanthemums, wistaria,
birds and beetle. Reverse, gilded silk with flights of
small embroidered birds, life-size, straying over it.
In the base of each panel, a medallion of interwoven
bamboo strips covered with old-gold satin.
550 Grand pair of enamel vases, most graceful in shape,
standing 4 ft. 8 in. high ; turquoise blue enamel dec


orated with cherry blossoms, in natural colors, and
birds. The rendering of both color and texture is
such as is possible only to Japanese art. So perfect
indeed are the flowers that it requires but a small
stretch of imagination to breathe their perfume.
That the modeling of twigs and bark is equally real-
istic will be admitted by all those who have seen a
Japanese cherry grove. Too much cannot be said
in praise of the color-scheme—tender gray-blue,
accented with dark branches and illumined with
pinky-white blossoms, the whole made softly har-
monious with gray shadings on bird and leaf.


THIRD DAY’S SALE.
THURSDAY AFTERNOON, JANUARY 21ST.
BEGINNING PROMPTLY AT 2:30 O’CLOCK.
551 Satsuma teapot, quaint shape, unique decoration,
black and gold.
553 Satsuma incense burner, gold decoration, cover orna-
mented with flowers in relief. Fine crackle.
553 Old Japanese watch, with flint fire-box, netsuke and
bronze enameled slide. 150 years old.
554 Satsuma incense burner, large; flower and wave deco-
ration.
555 Writer’s flat water vase; scalloped edge, peach-blow
glaze.
556 Imari biscuit jar, brilliant rich red glaze; decoration
gold borders, birds and peonies in white, blue and
gold, turtle in relief on cover. A very fine speci-
men.
557 Porcelain flower vase, in form of fish standing upright.
Rich red and gray mottled glaze.
558 Curious shaped porcelain incense burner, in form of
the Chinese wall and gateway; ornamented with
guard house on top.
559 Pair Arita porcelain vases, exceedingly fine texture;
decoration, bamboo groves, in blue and gold. Neck
and foot richly ornamented in red, blue and gold.
Inscription over gateway, “ Northern Entrance.”
4


SIXTEEN CHOICE EXHIBITION PIECES BY
KOZAN.
560 Bottled-shape vase, Seigi green glaze; very fine; morn-
ing glory decoration. Signed.
561 Bottle-shape vase, “ Rosy dawn,” and dragon decora-
tion. Signed.
562 Bottle-shape vase, “ Shades of Evening,” and dragon
decoration. Signed.
563 Bottle-shape vase ; fine texture ; blue and white decora-
tion, after the Chinese. A choice piece.
564 Bottle-shaped vase; exquisite coloring ; “ Shades of
Evening ; ” carved waves and dragon decoration.
565 Porcelain vase, strong color, sang de boeuf, made to
imitate Chinese.
566 Porcelain vase, mottled with strong clouds of deep
blue, red and white ; ornamentation, carved dragon.
567 Vase, thick body, long slender neck; decoration, waves
and clouds in brown, kirin in brown.
568 Vase, beautiful shade of lemon color; medallions of
white, bordered with blue, ornamented with Shishi
under glaze, done in brown. Signed.
569 Vase, decoration clouds and black dragon. Signed.
570 Vase, beautiful white porcelain ; decoration “ Rosy
dawn.” Signed.
571 Vase, smooth mauve color; decoration, stork in white ;
signature in glaze.
572 Water bottle, crackle glaze; band, peach-blow, decora-
tion around the body. Signed.
573 Vase, deep, rich blue glaze, splashed with yellow;
imitation of an old Chinese piece. Silver rim.
574 Vase, green and red, mottled glaze ; dragon carved in
relief. Signed.
575 Vase, “ Shades of Evening,” and dragon in clouds.


OLD JAPANESE PORCELAINS,
INCLUDING A COLLECTION OF NABASHIMA AND
IMARI PLATES.
FINEST SPECIMENS POSSIBLE TO OBTAIN.
576 Mishima tea jar and cover, exceedingly smooth
texture, lined in white and gray.
577 Imari cup stand, blue andwhite ; decoration in medal-
lions.
578 Imari cup stand ; blue and white decoration.
579 Imari incense burner; decoration, medallions, rich
blue.
580 Bishiu incense burner, fine texture, blue and white ;
decoration, storks.
581 Bishiu incense burner, in form of bag ; blue andwhite.
582 Bishiu incense burner, panels of openwork; decoration
in blue and white. A choice bit.
583 Bishiu saki pot, long spout; blue and white decoration.
584 Kenzan teapot, plum-blossom decoration. Unique
shape. Signed Kenzan.
585 Awata dish, decoration in brown and blue ; floral design
under glaze.
586 Hirado rice bow! and cover, beautiful blue decoration.
A rare specimen.
587 Kiyomyzu brush holder, curious decoration.
588 Imari dish, red, blue, gold, and green decoration. Ex-
ceedingly rich in color.
589 Kinkozan Awata bowl ; decoration, pine-trees and
flowers in green and gold. Crest of Daimio Date,
in rich blue enamel. Slightly cracked.
590 Hirado incense burner; decoration, Chinese figures,
trees and rock in beautiful blue.


591 Yatshiro bowl, very fine piece ; decoration, waves and
moon in white. Inscribed with verse of poetry in
black. Signed.
592 Kenzan sake pots. Fine crackle, decorated with trailing
vine.
593 Awata bowl. Tokugawa crest in gold.
594 Nabashima incense burner; decoration, Imperial and
family crest in gold, with rich red enamel embellish-
ments. An exceptionally choice piece.
595 Mishima Satsurna bowl. Unusually fine glaze and
crackle, decorated with flowers around the top, and
imperial crest in white ; Satsurna mark on bottom.
596 Kinkozan teapot, ivory cover; rich blue enamel, deco-
ration. Signed.
597 Hirado incense burner, very fine texture; decoration in
blue, boys at play.
598 Bizen incense burner, figure of Daikoka, God of Wealth.
599 Yatshiro bowl ; decoration, waves in white outside; in-
side black clouds. Slightly damaged.
600 Awata sake bottle, Mikado’s crest (Kiku) in blue and
brown, under glaze.
601 Imari bowl, rich blue ; gold and red decoration inside,
blue outside.
602 Sake bottle, old Kioto ; beautiful blue decoration in
panels and medallions.
603 Kishiu vase ; decoration, turquoise blue enamel, both
sides. A most curious piece.
604 Bishu sake bottle, square shape ; yellow glaze; floral
decoration in variety of colors.
605 Awata sake bottle, gourd shape, fine crackle glaze ; vine
decoration in brown and blue. Rare specimen.
606 Nabashima celadon sake pot, carved decoration under
glaze.


6oj Kinkozan teapot, curious shape ; decoration, rich blue,
green and yellow enamel. Panel on either side, deco-
ration in white. Signed.
608 Pair of Ninsey vases, square ; decoration, flowing black
enamel, flowers in gold, red and green, bamboo fence
and gate. Inscribed on foot.
609 Pair Kutani sake bottles, square ; decoration in rich red,
green, and gold.
610 Kenzan water jar, used in the tea ceremonies ; decora-
tion, landscape. Sendees (boatmen) pulling boat up
Yodogawa rapids, near Kioto; borders in black and
blue. Inscribed on bottom, “ Made by Kenzan First,
in Hoyei period,” 95 years ago. A unique and rare
specimen.
611 Set of 5 Yatshiro cups ; decoration, white cherry blos-
soms, under glaze.
612 Imari bowl; decoration, rich red, blue, and gold ; me-
dallions both inside and outside. Inscribed inside in
blue." Long life.”
613 Kutani dish, shape sexagon ; rich red and gold decora-
tion. A fine specimen. Seal mark in green enamel.
614 Mikamache sake pot, in form of Hotei, carving a sake
gourd. Rich blue and brown glazes.
615 White Yatshiro cups, 5, of soft creamy texture, cherry
blossoms in black enamel. Exceedingly rare and
choice.
616 Hirado vase ; decoration in blue, under glaze, seven
sages in bamboo grove.
617 Hirado biscuit jar with cover, octagon shape ; decora-
tion in blue, under glaze, landscape. Rare specimen
of this ware.
618 Nabashima bowl with cover, fine white texture ; , floral
and butterfly decoration in beautiful shade of blue.


6ig Jar and cover; exquisite blue decoration, seven panels,
four large and three small; design—landscapes, pine-
trees, bamboo and plum. There is no doubt but
that this jar was decorated by the original Gorodayu
Shonsui of the Province of Ise, in or about the year
1530. Dr. Ernest Hart, of London, writes of this
famous artist as follows: “ The first introduction
of the manufacture of porcelain into Japan dates
back not earlier than 1530, when one Gorodayu Shon-
sui, of the Province of Isc, traveled to China to learn
some of the secrets of the porcelain makers of Foo-
chow, and brought back to Arita, in Hizen, the art
of mixing and baking porcelain, and decorating it
with blue under the glaze. He brought with him
from China the clay, the glaze, and the color, for at
that time the ingredients of porcelain had not been
found, nor were the secrets of compounding it knozvn
in Japan. Thus he was limited both in his methods
and the amount of his product, but he showed con-
siderable skill, and has an enduring fame as the
father of Japanese porcelain under glaze, and his
works were mostly small pieces.”
We have dwelt at length on this for the reason we
firmly believe it to be absolutely and positively
a genuine piece of Gorodayu Shonsui’s work. The
jar was in the collection of the Korunsha Company,
at the late Paris exhibition. Seal mark of Go Shonsui
at foot of jar. Handsomely carved teak-wood stand.
620 Nabashima celadon hand warmer, rich, soft color;
carved in imitation of basket-work. From the Edgar
Abbott collection, Yokohama. A rare specimen.
Height, 5 inches ; diameter, 6J- inches. Nabashima
was first made in 1608.
621 Imari bowl and cover, decorated in rich colors, red,
blue and gold, eight panels with exceedingly fine
blue ornamentation (bowl is damaged). Inscribed


on cover and foot, “ Kigioku Hoki no Chin,” (mean-
ing curious, rich ware, or article). Inside is inscribed
with willow branches, “ Long life.”
622 Kutani bowl, red glaze ; richly ornamented inside and
out with figures in bright colors. Inscription on foot,
“ Kutani Rinzo, Kaga district.”
623 Imari rice bowl and cover, beautifully ornamented on
the outside in rich, deep shades of blue, red and
gold ; inside, both on bowl and cover, medallions of
blue. Signed.
624 Large Imari rice bowl and cover ; decoration inside,
pale blue and gold borders ; outside alternate panels,
ornamented in gold with character “ Long life,” and
dragons. Signed. Slightly damaged.
625 Imari rice bowl and cover ; decoration, floral designs
and panels, ducks on water.
626 Pair Hirado incense burners, blue and white, soft
texture ; landscape decoration. Shitan wood covers.
80 years old.
627 Ninsey incense burner, decoration leaves in rich blue
and green enamel. Rare specimen.
, 628 Banko vase, bottle shape; floral decoration in bright
colors. The red glaze of this piece has a peculiar
iridescence.
629 Imari saki pot, Chinese shape. Porcelain, unusually
fine texture. Floral decoration in blue. Panels rich,
red glaze, embellished with birds and floral design in
gold lacquer. Fine specimen. Carved teak-wood
stand.
630 Hirado incense burner, lace-work cover. Fine, delicate
blue and white; decoration, boys and pine-trees. A
dainty bit. Carved teak-wood stand.
631 Bishu cup; a specimen remarkable for the exquisite
coloring of blue, and fine texture in porcelain.
Dragon and floral decoration; landscape inside.


One of the choicest pieces in this collection. Sent
with the Koransha collection to the late Paris expo-
sition. Signed “ Uzan,” a famous potter, who lived
about 70 years ago. Carved teak-wood stand.
632 Two Imari plates, Seiji borders: decorated with Mika-
do’s crests in rich red and gold ; center of plates, fish
design in blue and gold. Signed “Tai Ming Seika
Ninsey,” meaning Chinese period Chinghwa, 1465-
1488. Fine specimens.
633 Imari cake dish, richly decorated in red, blue, and gold ;
floral decoration, chrysanthemum and peony. A
choice piece.
634 Imari cake dish, decorated with the fine crests, in red
and gold, of Daimios So, Mizuno, Naito, li, Inaba.
Blue floral groundwork. Choice pieces.
635 Imari bowl, large ; richly decorated in red, blue, and
gold, inside and outside. Signed with Imari seal.
636 Imari dish ; map of Japan carved in relief, showing all
the principal islands, with name of each island in
Japanese. A curious piece. Signed “ Tempo Ninsey,”
About 65 years ago.
637 Another, smaller ; same design and period as above.
638 Imari dish and standard, center piece, 9 inches high ;
decoration in blue. Border of open-work carving
around dish.
639 Nabashima plate, over 100 years old. Porcelain, exceed-
ingly fine texture, and exquisite shade of blue used
in decoration. Ornamented under side with floral
design and Nabashima comb mark in blue.
640 Nabashima plate, equally as good as above ; design,
“Daikon ” (Japanese radish), white, leaves and lattice-
work, fine shade of blue. Nabashima mark. Over
100 years old.


641 Nabashima plate, same fine texture; decoration, trellis-
work and wistaria leaves and flowers in blue. Japan-
ese design and Nabashima mark on under side. 65
years old.
642 Nabashima plate ; decoration, pine-trees in rich blue.
Vine and Nabashima comb mark on under side.
65 years old. Tempo period.
643 Set of three Nabashima plates ; decoration, bamboo
and plum blossoms, signifying “happiness;” under
side, Japanese design and Nabashima comb mark
in blue. Tempo period. 60 years ago.
•644 Set of ten Nabashima plates; decoration, cart-wheels
and cherry blossoms in beautiful blue ; underneath
floral vine and Nabashima comb mark. Tempo
period.
(Japanese sets are composed of five, ten, fifteen, or twenty pieces.)
645 Another set of ten plates, same in texture; decoration
and age as above.
646 Nabashima plate ; decoration, cherry-blossoms in beau-
tiful blue; under side Japanese design and Naba-
shima comb. 100 years old.
647 Nabashima plate, decoration, waves in white, bamboo
in blue ; Seiji border. Nabashima comb mark. 100
years old.
648 Nabashima plate ; decoration in blue, water-wheel.
Seiji border. Under side, floral design and Naba-
shima comb mark, too years old.
649 Two Nabashima plates; decoration in blue and Seiji
colors; floral design and Nabashima comb mark
under side, too years old.
650 Nabashima plate ; decoration, waves in blue, cherry-
blossoms in pink. Nabashima mark. Tempo period.
65 years old.


651 Two Nabashima plates; decoration, maple tree in red,
blue, and gold. Nabashima comb mark. Tempo
period.
652 Nabashima plate ; decoration, tea trees and bamboo
fence in blue ; border of Seiji; floral design and Nab-
ashima comb mark under side. An exquisite bit of
color. Over too years old.
653 Set of five Nabashima plates; decoration, wild grapes
and leaves. A rare set. Nabashima comb mark and
Japanese design on under side.
654 Seven Nabashima plates ; decoration, blue water, red,
green, and pink maple leaves floating on its surface.’
655 Nabashima plate; decoration, waves in blue, fans in
' beautiful shades of red, blue, yellow, and green.
Nabashima comb mark. Over too years old. Slightly
damaged.
656 Nabashima plate; decoration, waves in blue, maple
leaves in brilliant colors. Nabashima comb mark.
Over 100 years old.
657 Nabashima plate ; decoration, cart-wheels in blue,
cherry-blossoms in exquisite shade of pink. Naba-
shima comb mark. This is a gem of the Tempo
period.
658 Nabashima plate ; decoration, waves and cherry-blos-
soms. Nabashima comb mark. Over 100 years old.
659 Nabashima plate, beautiful celadon glaze; floral decora-
tion in red. Scalloped edge. Over 100 years old.
660 Nabashima plate, same glaze as above; decoration,
basket-work and rich maple leaves.
661 Nabashima plate ; surface, rich brown glaze ; decora-
tion, hydrangea in white and blue ; leaves of enamel.
Nabashima comb mark. A curious and rare speci-
men. Over 100 years old.


662 Nabashima plate, pale lavender glaze, rich brown bor-
der ; decoration, bed of pinks. Nabashima comb
mark. Over 100 years old.
663 Another, same as above. Slightly damaged.
664 Nabashima plate, Seiji glaze, fan decoration. Naba-
shima comb mark. Over 100 years old.
665 Nabashima dish, a magnificent piece ; decoration, plum-
tree in full blossom, rich coloring. 100 years old.
Diameter inches.
666 Nabashima dish ; decoration, plum-tree and bamboo
fence. Equally as old and good as above. Diameter
13 inches.
Note. —The above are all genuine old pieces of Japanese, and especially
valuable to collectors.
667 Twelve coffee cups and saucers, in compartment case.
Semi-eggshell porcelain ; decoration, landscape,
flowers, and flights of storks. Exquisitely painted
by Imuro, a well-known modern artist.
668 Incense burner; beautifully clear opaque porcelain,
carved in lines and floral design. Imitation of Korai.
A splendid specimen. By Kosai, Tokyo.
66g Vase, rich sang de boeuf glaze, imitation of Chinese.
By Kozan.
670 Incense burner; decoration, “ Shades of Evening ” and
dragon carved in relief; fine smooth texture. Signed
Kozan.
671 Flower jar, peach-blow tint; a beautiful bit of coloring.
Japanese imitation of Chinese. By Kosai.
672 Vase, long neck, mirror black glaze, by Inouye.
673 Incense burner, mottled red and gray glaze.
674 Bottle-shaped vase, red and gray clouded glaze.
675 Bottle-shaped vase,delicate Seiji glaze; decoration, floral
design, under the glaze, in rich red. Signed Kozan,


6y6 Bottle-shaped vase, white glaze ; decoration, clouds in
pink, dragon in deep blue, carved. Signed Kozan.
677 Vase, deep green glaze ; decoration, dragon in black,
under glaze. Signed Kozan.
67S Bottle-shaped vase ; decoration, “ Shades of Evening ”
and dragon ; carved waves in white at base. Signed
Kozan.
679 Vase, gourd shape; decoration, waves in blue, fish in
red. Signed Kozan.
680 Vase, rich green glaze, floral design in lighter shade.
Signed Kozan.
681 Incense burner, rich peach-blow tints. Choice bit of
color; Japanese imitation of Chinese. By Kosai,
Asakusa.
682 Vase, long slender neck, “ Rosy Dawn ” color, carved
dragon under glaze. Signed Kozan.
683 Incense burner, dark-green glaze, dragon in relief.
Kozan.
684 Incense burner, “ Shades of Evening,” dark gray, with
dragon in relief. Signed Kozan.
685 Vases, two; decoration, “ Rosy Dawn,” with dark-
colored dragon under glaze ; carved waves at base.
Sign ed Kozan.
686 Vase, Seiji glaze ; golden-brown dragon carved in relief.
Kozan.
687 Long neck vase, silver-gray glaze. A curious piece.
Kozan.
688 Vase, cream-colored glaze ; decoration, bamboo, plurhs,
roses and birds, in brown under glaze. Signed
Kozan.
689 Vase, green and red mottle. Kozan.
690 Vase, “Shades of Evening,” dragon faintly seen under
glaze. Signed Kozan.


6gi Vase, long neck, shaded greenish yellow; decoration,
plum blossoms. Signed Kozan.
692 Vase, dark-green glaze ; white lily decoration. Signed,
Kozan.
693 Vase, long neck; white glaze decoration. The “ Ra-
kan,” (high priests of Buddhism) in blue and red ;
brown clouds. Signed Kozan.
694 JAR, reddish glaze; cherry-blossom decoration. Ko-
zan.
ENAMELS.
695 Pair green goldstone enamel jardinieres; decoration,
white plum blossoms. By Suzuki, Nagoya.
696 Vase, one only; green goldstone enamel, butterfly
decoration. Suzuki, Nagoya.
697 Vase, one only; green goldstone enamel, butterfly
decoration. Suzuki, Nagoya.
698 Pair vases, black goldstone enamel.
699 Pair turquoise blue vases ; decoration, chrysanthemums.
Morimoto, Nagoya.
700 Pair vases, French gray enamel; decoration, flight of
swallows. Morimoto, Nagoya.
701 Pair gray enamel vases; decoration, birds and flowers.
By Dokaku, Nagoya. Signed.
702 Pair vases, same as above. By same artist.
703 One vase, shaded peacock blue enamel; decoration,
pink cherry-blossoms and birds. A rare color in
enamel. By Morimoto.
704 One vase, delicate, pale-blue enamel; decoration,
peony in white and pink, shaded around the base in
light green, with deep green leaves, By Morimoto.
705 Set of six copper trays, showing complete process of
cloisonne enamel; decoration, chrysanthemums.


706 Another, same as above ; design, maple leaves.
707 Another, decoration, white, red and yellow lilies.
708 Goldstone enamel koro, globular shape; panels with
dragon decoration. Very fine work.
709 Goldstone enamel incense burner; band of goldstone
decorated with birds and flowers, scalloped borders.
Fine work. By Namikawa, Kioto. Teak-wood stand.
710 Pair rich red enamel vases, bottle shape; single color.
Imitation of sang de bceuf porcelain.
711 Pair red enamel vases, jar shape; single color.
712 Another pair, same as above.
713 Pair enamel vases; beautiful shade of pale lilac; single
color.
714 Enamel vase, soft, rich shade of green ; single color.
715 Pair enamel vases, sang dc bocuf, long neck. Exceed-
ingly rich, single color.
.716 Enamel vase, long neck; single color. Exquisite imita-
tion of sang dc bwnf porcelain.
717 Enamel vase. Imitation of Chinese imperial yellow. A
beautiful specimen, single color.
718 Enamel vase, 12 inches high, delicate shade of lavender;
single color. One of the gems of this collection.
719 Bronze prayer gong, from Buddhist temple. 200 years
old. In frame. 24 in. diameter.
720 Another, same as above. 20 in. diameter.
721 Wood carving of large frog, with smaller one on its
back. Old.
722 Another, same as above.
723 Black lacquered shrine. Carved image of Shakaniorai.
Very old, about 190 years.
724 Carved image, Buddha. Old.


OLD CHINESE PORCELAINS.
725 Cup, rich yellow glaze; decoration, outside upper
border, dragon in deep green, inside incised border
green. Brown seal mark, six characters. Tai Ming
period.
726 Cup, fine lemon yellow glaze; dragons in green, tide-
ball in red, Exceeding fine porcelain. Ming period.
727 Writer’s water vase, pale green mottled glaze; Yung
Ching, 1723-35. Stamped seal mark.
728 Brush holder and writer’s water vase combined, in blue
and white; landscape decoration in panels. Kea-
King era, 1796.
729 Bowl of bright yellow glaze. Yung Ching period,
1723-35- Signed.
730 Vase, yellow glaze ; decoration, stand and flowers in
vases done in brown, under the glaze.
731 Bowl, celadon glaze, with floral design carved under-
neath.
732 Ivory white vase, square shape, with handles and en-
graved panels.
733 Pair vases, apple-green glaze. Modern.
734 Vase, tortoise-shell yellow glaze, handles, elephant
heads and rings in relief.
735 Flambe vase, rich colors, beautifully crackled. Kang-
he. Has carved teak-wood stand. 7 inches in height.
736 Magic water-pot, in form of peach ; spout and handle,
branches in blue. Modern.
737 Vase, cucumber rind glaze. Kang-he period. inches
high; has carved teak-wood stand. From the Brink-
ley collection, Tokyo.


738 Vase, crushed strawberry ; exceedingly fine color, grace-
ful shape. Kien-lung era, 1736-95. Signed with
six characters and double ring at foot, 8| inches
high.
739 Drinking cup, pure white porcelain; fruit decoration in
rich peach color. Bears the six marks of Yung
Ching period, 1723-35.
740 Vase, robin’s-egg glaze. Kang-he era, 1661-1722. A
beautiful specimen, 84- inches high ; has carved teak-
wood stand. From the Brinkley collection, Tokyo.
741 Blue and white vase, with spreading neck ; floral deco-
ration. Mark of the Ching-hwa period on foot,
1465-1488. 9|- inches high. Has handsome teak-
wood stand.
742 Gourd-shape vase, cucumber rind glaze ; fine crackle.
Kang-he era, 1661-1722. 44 inches high. From the
Brinkley collection, Tokyo.
743 Vase of sang de bocnf color, even and smooth. Kang-
he era, 1661-1722. 54 inches high.
744 Vase of graceful shap e, sang de bmif. Kang-he period,
1661-1722. 74 inches high. Has carved teak-wood
stand.
745 Vase, shade of crushed strawberry. Kang-he period,
1661-1722, 6 inches high. Teak-wood stand.
746 Ivory white vase, fine, smooth texture, elephant head
handles, diamond-shaped panel on either side; in-
scribed with poem carved in Chinese characters,
under the glaze.
747 Vase, coral red, exquisite shade. Yung-ching period,
1723-1736. 74 inches high. Has handsome carved
teak-wood stand.
748 Vase, white glaze ; decorated in high colors, figures and
clouds. Tai Ming period. 84 inches high. Teak-
wood stand.


749 Another, same as above. 6 inches high.
750 Liver-color vase, graceful shape, long neck, slightly
spreading at mouth. The glaze of this piece is re-
markably smooth, and perfect in coloring. Kang-he
period, 1661-1722. 12 inches high.
751 White crackle vase, square shape. Mark of Ching-hwa
period, 1465-1488. 11 inches high.
752 Cucumber rind vase, fine crackle. Kang-he period,
1661-1722. 44 inches high. Carved teak-wood
stand. From the Brinkley collection, Tokyo.
753 Vase, peach-blow tint. Kang-he period, 1661-1722. 7
inches high. Carved teak-wood stand.
754 White crackle vase, cylindrical shape, spreading at
mouth Ching-hwa period, 1465-1488. 8 inches
high. Has carved teak-wood stand.
755 Pair of candlesticks. Unique and graceful shape. Porce-
lain of pure white texture ; decoration in coral red
over-glaze. Kang-he period, 1661-1722. 9 inches
high.
756 Blue and white vase, fine texture and color. Kien-lung
period, 1736-1795. 64 inches high. Has carved
teak-wood stand.
757 Temple flower vase, curious shape ; upper part pome-
granate, lower part in form of bat. Glaze, blue and
peach-blow tints. Kang-he period. 124 inches high.
758 Gourd-shape vase, rich sang dc bmif color. Kang-he
period, 1661-1722. 9 inches high. Has carved teak-
wood stand.
759 Square vase, with trumpet neck ; powdered blue glaze
of a deep shade. Seal mark of the Kang-he period,
1661-1722. 18 inches high.
760 Vase, rich red glaze running into calf's-liver-color at
base. Yung-ching period, 1723-1736.


761 Vase, rich bronze glaze. Graceful shape, neck slightly
spreading at mouth. n|- inches high.
762 Vase, bottle shape, trumpet neck. Imperial blue glaze.
13J inches high.
763 Vase, square shape ; turquoise blue glaze. 134-inches
high. Ming period. Cloth mark.
764 Vase, tortoise-shell, yellow glaze ; ornamented with
waves and dragons carved, under the glaze. Han-
dles, elephant heads and rings. 18th century.
765 Vase, unique shape, splash glaze; light and dark purple
running into sang de bamf. Kein-lung seal mark im-
pressed in foot. Exceedingly fine specimen. Has
carved teak-wood stand. io|- inches high.
766 Vase, white groundwork enameled in five colors, red,
pink, purple, yellow, and green. Design on. panels,
dragons. Ming period. 141- inches high. Teak-
wood stand.
767 Vase, rich powdered blue glaze. 17 inches high.
Chinese poem, by Tan-Kin, a celebrated poet of
Kang-he era, in gold characters. Carved teak-wood
stand.
768 Vase, long neck, liver-color glaze. 131- inches high.
Has carved teak-wood stand.
769 Vase, graceful shape. 17 inches high, 10 inches diam-
eter. Clear white glaze painted in floral design, im-
perial five-clawed dragon, and Ho-wo bird in five
colors. Ming period. Carved teak-wood stand.
770 Vase, red mottled glaze, nd inches high. A strong
piece of color.
771 Vase, bottle shape, large body, white glaze ; decorated
in red and gold. Two large panels, two small ones;
paintings of figures. Kang-he.


77 2 Vase, orange yellow glaze ; lion handles, green en-
ameled ; decoration on body, lions and clouds in rich
blue, black and green enamels. 11 inches high.
Kang-he.
773 Vase, orange yellow glaze ; floral decoration in green,
white and purple enamel. 9 inches high.
774 Ginger jar, yellow glaze ; decoration, floral design,
brown and green ; carved dragon heads in relief.
Foot and cover marked with six characters of Kea-
tsing, 1522-1567.
775 Vase, iridescent chocolate glaze ; decoration, plum
tree in blossom and chrysanthemums in rich en-
amels ; lion-head handles. Impressed seal mark.
Kang-he period.
776 Vase, chicken-blood glaze; 12 inches high. Has teak-
wood stand, handsomely carved. Kien-lung.
777 Vase, balister shape, crushed strawberry glaze; Qi
inches high. Has carved teak-wood stand. Kang-he
period.
778 Vase, square shape, splash glaze; beautiful shades of
color, crushed strawberry predominating. 12 inches
high.
779 Hanging vase, tea leaf glaze. 12 inches high. Yung
Ching.
780 Bottle shape vase, beautiful crushed strawberry flambe,
exceedingly brilliant. 16 inches high.
781 Vase, celadon glaze; decoration, in white, blue and
peach color, mythological subjects. Kang-he leaf
mark.
782 Ginger jar, mottled blue and white. 9 inches high.
Has carved teak-wood stand; Kang-he.
783 Vase, beaker shape ; green family/ figure decoration.
After Kang-he. 171, inches high.


784 Fine crackle bowl ; six panels decorated in blue floral
designs, also at base inside.
785 Pilgrim vase, flat, circular, bottle-shaped, white dragon
handles at neck. Circular panels of pure white glaze,
framed by border of rich, deep blue, n-J- inches
high. Kien-lung.
786 Coral red cup, clear white glaze inside.
787 Garnet medallion bowl, incised and enamel floral
design ; four panels in white, bearing enamel land-
scapes of Chinese scenery; enamel decoration in
five colors at base inside; seal mark in blue, at
foot. Taou-Kwang.
788 Another, yellow incised design under glaze ; teak-wood
stand. Taou-Kwang seal mark on base.
789 Writer’s water vase, lemon yellow glaze, ivory cover.
Seal mark in blue.
790 Gourd shape vase, crackle glaze.
791 -Ruby red medallion bowl, enameled floral design; four
white panels decorated with lamps and vase in dif-
ferent colored enamels; inside white glaze; blue
decoration. Taou-Kwang seal mark on foot.
792 Flambe bowl, sang de bceuf predominating. Seal
mark in blue, at foot. Yung Ching.
793 Bowl, white porcelain of perfect texture, ornamented
with medallions of floral design in rich blue, inside
and out. Seal mark in blue, on foot, Yung Ching,
1723-1736. (From the Brinkley collection, Tokyo.)
Has been repaired.
794 Coral red bowl, clear white glaze inside, flower and
ring mark in blue. Kang-he.
795 Six eggshell cups, pure white texture, with gold band
around edge. Seal mark in blue, at foot of each
piece. Kang-he period, 1661-1795.


796 Pair of wine cups, black glaze with floral decoration in
malachite green, very rich coloring. Signed at foot,
in red, under glaze. Kien-lung, 1736-1795.
797 Writer’s water vase, peach blow glaze, fine color; solid
silver cover, carved in chrysanthemums. Has carved
teak-wood stand. Kang-he seal mark in blue, six
characters, on foot. (Has been repaired.)
798 Blue and white ginger jar; seal mark, Taou-Kwang,
1821-1851.
799 Hawthorn vase, deep blue ground, blossoms of haw-
thorn in white. Has ring mark of Kang-he period,
1661-1722. 7) inches high. Has carved teak-wood
stand.
800 Square vase, blue and white decoration, with peach
color leaves. 10 inches high. Kien-lung period.
Teak-wood stand.
801 Blue and white vase, cylindrical shape. Landscape
and figures in deep, rich blue. Ring mark of Kang-
he period, 1661-1722. Has carved teak-wood stand,
and is inches high.
802 Blue and white vase. Ring mark on foot. 18 inches
high. Has carved teak-wood stand.
803 Cylindrical shape vase, clear white texture, landscape
in blue. Has ring-mark Kang-he era. 18 inches
high.
804 Bottle shape vase, same decoration as above. 16 inches
high. Has teak-wood stand.
805 Bottle shape vase, flaring mouth, white glaze, land-
scape decoration in blue. Height 13 inches.
806 Vase, blue and white. Mythological beast, waves and
rocks on panels. 17 inches high. Has teak-wood
stand.
807 Vase, blue and white, bottle shape, long neck. Large
imperial five-claw dragon encircles body and neck.
Height 18 inches. Has carved teak-wood stand.


808 Blue and white vase, cylindrical shape. Chinese scen-
ery and figures. 18J inches high. Has teak-wood
stand.
809 Cylindrical shape vase, low neck; deep blue glaze of
even quality. 11 inches high.
810 Vase, crushed strawberry glaze. lif inches high.
811 Flambe vase, sang de boeuf glaze of exceptional qual-
ity. Butterfly handles.
812 Bottle shape vase. Red mottled glaze. Ring mark,
Kang-he period, 1661-1722. 13 inches high.
813 Vase, light liver color glaze, even quality. Height 11
inches.
814 Jar shape vase, perfect sang de bceuf color.
815 Bottle shape vase, red mottled glaze, shading to sang
de bceuf.
816 Vase, rich red glaze ; bamboo shape ; color uniform
and smooth. Silver rim around top. iB|- inches
high.
817 Apple green snuff bottle. A cabinet piece, good color.
Yung Ching era, 1723-1736. Height 3 inches.
818 Cabinet size; cucumber-rind color. Fine crackle.
Yung Ching era. Height 2-J inches.
819 Cabinet size bottle, cucumber-rind color. Yung Ching
era. Height 2J inches.
820 Cabinet size jar, excellent cucumber-rind color. Yung
Ching era. Has teak-wood stand. Height 21-
inches.
821 Cabinet size vase, cucumber-rind color. Y r ung Ching
era. Has teak-wood stand. Height 2|- inches.
822 Cabinet size snuff bottle, carved porcelain ; design, pine
tree, birds and deer ; enameled in white and pale
green. Has teak-wood stand. Height 2j inches.
823 Cabinet size snuff bottle; decoration, figures and
flowers in.bright colors. Height 2\ inches.


824 Small snuff bottle, rich heliotrope glaze ; silver ring
and stopper ; usually carried suspended from the
girdle.
825 Cabinet size, liver-colored vase of good quality. Has
teak-wood stand. Height 2 inches.
826 Seal box in form of turtle ; fine white porcelain, blue
decoration. Kien-lung era. Seal mark inside.
827 Chinese blue glass bottle vase, 7|- inches high. Seal-
mark carved in foot. Kien-lung period. Has
carved teak-wood stand. (Slightly damaged.)
828 Blue and white vase, trumpet mouth ; landscape deco-
ration, neck and body, ijh inches high.
829 Bottle shape vase, white glaze ; enamel decoration,
in five colors ; design, flowers, sacred bird, and im-
perial five-claw dragon. 18 inches high. Has teak-
wood stand.
830 Bowl of semi-eggshell porcelain ; inside, pure white
texture ; outside, imperial yellow glaze ; ornamented
with bats in coral red and gold. Has gold bands
around upper and lower edges. Height and diam-
eter, 4 x 8-J- inches.
(Note. —This bowl was presented to Prince Henri de Bourbon, of Ven-
ice, by the Imperial Prince of China, during the former’s visit to
Pekin, in 1889, from whom it was obtained by the present owners.
A guarantee to this effect will be given if desired. —D. B. & Co.)


FOURTH DAY’S SALE.
FRIDAY AFTERNOON, JANUARY 22D, 1592.
BEGINNING PROMPTLY AT 2:30 O’CLOCK.
JAPANESE IVORY CARVINGS.
831 Group of gray and white rats in basket of grapes.
4% inches long.
832 Group, fish, crabs, and rats. 4I inches long.
833 Group, rats and Daikon (Japanese radish). Fine
specimen. inches long.
834 Group of five rats in basket of grapes. Height and
width, 2-J by 3 inches.
835 Group, God of Thunder sleeping after a storm :
monkey in act of stealing his book. Height 2),
inches, width 2 inches.
836 Group, rats, twelve in number, playing with Diakoku’s
mallet. 2 inches in diameter, ball shape.
837 Grotesque figure of monkey doctor examining patient.
838 Group of three rats with eggplant.
839 God of the Wind trying to “ raise the wind.”
840 Group, two rats playing.
841 Group of monkeys, taking the little ones home. 33-
inches high.
842 Group, young woman with child on her back, and two
monkeys begging for fruit. Height 3 inches.
843 Group of street performers, man and child. Height
4 inches.


844 Group, three figures. Japanese legend of a man’s devo-
tion to his mother, who, in order to obtain the return
of his basket of fish, intended for her use, but cap-
tured by two robbers, humiliates himself by crawling
on his hands and knees at their command. Height
3J inches.
845 Group, “No Dancers ” drinking sake, two figures.
Height 3J inches.
846 Wood-chopper, with bundle of fagots, axe, and gourd-
shaped saki bottle. Height 2J inches.
847 Group, three wise men. 2 inches high.
848 Group, fight of the three blind shampooers. Height
if inches.
849 Figure of old man leaning on staff. Height inches.
A fine piece of carving.
850 Group, rats and crab. 4 inches long.
851 Figure of street peddler, who performs to attract atten-
tion. 2J- inches high.
852 Figure of Daikoku, God of Wealth, seated on bag of
rice ; movable rat running out of the bag, which is
also decorated with emblems of “ good luck.”
853 Figure of mask-maker, carving, Drawer in work-table
also contains mask.
854 Figure of rice toy-maker.
855 Group, Daikoku, God of Wealth, child, and rats.
856 Figure of child with mask.
857 Figure of child playing with turtle.
858 Mask-maker at work. Figure has movable head.
859 Mask-maker carving. Work-table ha-s drawer which
contains mask.
860 Another, similar to above.


861 Child catching cricket.
862 Carpenter sharpening his saw.
863 Fish peddler.
864 Man selling toys.
865 Monkey with basket of fruit.
866 Group, street peddler and child.
867 Group, of two monkeys and eagle. Height inches.
868 Group of two monkeys fighting for fruit.
869 Group, old man with trained monkey performing.
870 Group, monkeys. One sleeping and another trying to
steal fruit. A fine piece of work.
872 Group, rats and bee.
873 Figure of woman beating cotton.
874 Group, elephant, with eleven figures of blind men
climbing over him, endeavoring to ascertain his
measurements.
875 Another, similar to above.
876 Group, toy peddler and child.
877 Group, fight between crayfish, monkeys and frogs.
Beneath, carving of lotus leaves and frogs. 6J inches
long.
878 Another, similar to above. 4\ inches long.
879 Figure of old man, who has just lost the rats out of
trap. inches long, inches high.
880 Group, four monkeys, acrobats. An excellent piece.
4 inches high.
881 Group of figures on standard. Archer, old man and
monkey.
882 Figure of old man, and rats just escaping from trap.
883 Figure of monkey-doctor visiting patient.
884 Small carving, high priest and snake.


NETSUKES BY CELEBRATED CARVERS.
885 Netsuke, man and gourd.
886 Another, shell and rat.
887 Another, boy on the back of sacred turtle. Signed
Masatsugu. 20 years old.
888 Another, Jurojin, God of Long Life, feeding deer.
889 Another, devils being driven out by showers of peas
(Japanese legend). Signed Shumyn. 38 years old.
890 Another, devil weighing temple bell against his lamp
(Japanese legend).
891 Another, man and saki bottle.
892 Another, bridge, and figures of men fishing. Iposai.
80 years ago.
893 Another, monkey on stump of tree.
894 Another, devil weighing his lamp against temple bell.
895 Another, man with long legs, carrying drum ; another,
with long arms, beating it.
896 Another, similar to above.
897 Another, old man, and rat just escaping from trap.
898 Another, carved with household implements. Signed
by Hoitsu and Hodo, 90 years ago.
899 Another, worm-eaten chestnut.
900 Another, two figures, blind man shampooing old man.
901 Another, man, and bag of rice.
902 Another, chestnuts.
903 Another, preserved fruit and cakes.
904 Another, figure of old man drinking sake.
905 Another, weary traveler, resting. Signed Tsugutoshi.
25 years old.
906 Another, figures of two dancers. Signed Ikkosai. 70
years old.


907 Another, weary traveler resting.
908 Another, figures of two men.
909 Another, similar in description to above.
910 Another, same as above.
91 1 Another, same.
912 Another, figure of man, story teller. Signed Naga-
nytsu. Movable head.
913 Another, similar to above. Signed Yasushide.
914 Another, mask maker, movable head ; drawer at side
containing tools.
915 Another, mask maker, movable head.
916 Another, three figures of dancers.
917 Another, button shape ; carving, Niwo, guard of
temple. Signed Ishinsai, 70 years ago.
918 Another, button shape; carving, figure warrior and
mythological beast. Signed Shorinsai, 70 years ago.
919 Another, button shape ; Shoki, devil killer and devil.
Signed Kokumyn. 90 years old.
920 Another, button shape; figures of Daimios. Verse of
poetry on back. Signed Kofusai, 90 years ago.
921 Another, priest under the waterfall.
922 Another, button shape ; warrior slaying animal. Pine
tree on back. Signed Yoshitsu, 80 years ago.
923 Another, button shape ; elephant, inlaid with goldstone,
coral and malachite.
924 Another, button shape ; figure of warrior, and boy.
Signed Moriyoshi, 60 years ago.
925 Another, button shape; carved figure of warrior.' Signed
Doyen, 50 years ago.
926 Another, button shape: carving, priest under waterfall.
Signed Giyokuansai, 50 years ago.
927 Another, button shape: carving, group of seven gods.
Signed Buraku, 70 years ago.


No. 969. IVORY CARVING.
(16 inches high.)


928 Another, button shape; carving of Dorima. Signed
Nobukadsu, 60 years ago.
929 Another, button shape; carving, figure of “No Dancer.”
930 Another, button shape; carving, dragon cut through
on upper and lower part. Signed Tokaku, 90 years
ago.
931 Ivory dish, inlaid with mother of pearl. Yebesu (God
of Fish) holding large fish. Gold lacquer edge, fine
work, by Joko. Signature inlaid at foot.
932 Ivory dish, carved figure of girl playing musical instru-
ment, Biwa, embellished with gold lacquer. Signed
Kobayashi.
933 Another, carved figure of fisherman and octopus.
Same artist.
934 Another, carved figure of top-spinner. Same artist.
935 Ivory cane handle, group of five monkeys and crabs.
Finely carved.
936 Ivory shoe-horn, embellished with gold lacquer and
mother-of-pearl, floral design and birds. y| inches
long.
937 Another, similar to above. 7 inches long.
938 Group, two monkeys catching crab. Walrus ivory.
939 Group, three monkeys carving fish. Signed Seigioku.
Walrus ivory.
940 Group, eagle, monkey and snake. Walrus ivory.
941 Group, monkey and rats. Walrus ivory.
942 Group, three monkeys carving fish. Walrus ivory.
943 Group, three monkeys and owl. Walrus ivory.
944 Another, similar to above.
945 Group, three monkeys and persimmons.


FIGURE PIECES FROM TOKYO EXPOSITION,
1890.
946 Figure of girl, with flowers and letter-box in her hands.
Kimono and obi carved in Japanese patterns. 6j
inches high.
947 Another figure of girl carrying incense burner. Table
with incense burner at her side. Kimono, elabo-
rately carved in Japanese patterns. Signed Tosh-
itsugu. 6 inches high.
948 Another, figure of girl carrying fan and small insect
cage. Kimono and obi carved in pattern. Signed
Ichirinsai. 6J- inches high.
949 Group, girl carrying baby in her arms, and cat playing
with obi. Fine pattern carved on kimonos and obi.
Signed Yashshide. Height 6 inches.
950 Figure of dancing girl, with fan in her hand. Delicate
floral design on kimono and obi. Height 54 inches.
951 Another, girl and child with toys. 4J inches high.
952 Group, girl and chickens. Height 5 inches.
953 Figure of girl showing kakemono ; chest of drawers at
her feet. Signed Masayuki. Height 5J inches.
954 Figure of girl with kakemono. Height 54- inches.
955 Another, girl with fan, and a basket of grapes at her
feet. Height 4 inches.
956 Another, girl playing musical instrument, dog at her
feet. Height 4 inches.
957 Group, old fisherman and child playing with turtle.
Exquisitely carved. 6 inches high, 3J inches wide.
958 Another, girl with verandah hanging ornament in her
hand. Height 6J inches.
959 Another, girl with fan ;at her feet, small cage. Height
7j inches.


960 Another, girl carrying incense burner and ornaments.
Signed Ishin. Height 71 inches.
961 Another, girl and cat playing with strings. Height,
inches.
962 Magnificent group. Goddess Benten and heavenly
children playing musical instruments and dancing
(Japanese legend). Height, 9 inches. Signed
Nobuyoshi.
963 Group, girl with child in her arms feeding pigeon.
Signed Muneaki. Height, 8J inches.
964 Figure of girl, holding piece of cloth. Small cage at
her feet. Signed Yoshitoshi. Height, 10 inches.
965 Figure of girl carrying incense burner. Height, 9
inches.
966 Group, old woman and Daimio. Beautiful Japanese
pattern carved on clothing. Daimio showing verse
of poetry. Traveling box at their feet. A fine piece
of work. By Giyokusho. Height, inches; 41
inches wide.
967 Figure of girl, holding cage from which bird has just
escaped. Basket of fruit at her feet. Signed Ishin.
Height, loj inches.
968 Another, girl holding musical instrument. Musical
instruments and book-stand. ,A fine piece of work.
By Yumei. Height, 11 inches.
969 Another, girl carrying incense burner, and Chin dog
at her feet playing with cords. One of the largest
and most graceful ivory carvings ever seen. Supposed
to be the largest figure ever carved from one single
piece of ivory, measuring 16 inches in height.
Awarded medal at Tokyo exposition, 1890. Carved
by Riomin, Tokyo. Signed. Has handsome old
gold and black lacquer stand. See illustration.


97° Carved ivory jewel box, with cover. Carved in bold
relief, with many varieties of insects and reptiles.
Has frogs for feet and handle of cover.
971 Pair of ivory whist markers ; inlaid with mother-of-
pearl, and gold lacquer decoration.
COLLECTION OF CHOICE SATSUMA FROM
40 TO 100 YEARS.
972 Vase, of creamy-white texture. In two panels are
painted floral designs, border diaper arabesque. Two
other diamond-shaped panels are decorated with
Ho -wo bird. Embossed border, red and gold around
the neck, in which are medallions, with dragon dec-
oration and Imperial crest in gold. Red enamel
band also bearing the imperial crest, runs around
body just below handles, the latter being in the
shape of elephant heads. Height, 12 inches.
973 Another, decorated with designs of open fans, on which
are paintings in floral designs ; rich red, green, gold,
and black colors. Medallions on neck; Ho-wo birds
in green and gold. Border in red ; gold and green
around neck; elephant-head handles. Height, 12
inches.
974 Another, decoration fence and hedge of chrysanthe-
mums. Border around neck. Green, gold, and red
colors. Elephant-head handles. Height, 12 inches.
975 Another, jar shape, very fine crackle ; decoration
around the neck and base ; deep black border, with
embossed design in green, gold, and red. On body
are incense burners suspended by cords. Height,
12J inches.
976 Another, creamy-white texture; decoration on body,
Ho-wo bird and dragon ; upper part decorated in


blue, gold, red, and green floral design. 10 inches
high.
977 Another, gourd shape, elephant-head handles with
trunk running down side; decoration, floral design
in panels. Colors, red, blue and gold. Height 91-
inches.
978 Another, jar shape, yellow glaze; decorated around
the neck with border and wistaria in red, blue and
gold. Encircling the body are three open fans on
which are painted landscapes. Height 12J inches.
979 Another, extremely fine crackle; decorated with borders,
diaper pattern, medallions and clusters of chrysan-
themums, in red, green and gold. Height 104
inches.
980 Another, body has two panels of floral design in red,
gold and green, intervening space covered with
diaper pattern embossed in various colors. Lion
head handles. Height 14 inches.
981 Bowl, daintily decorated with plum blossoms in red and
gold, leaves in green. Borders, scalloped pattern,
around top and base.
982 Teapot in form of pomegranate; decoration, plum
blossom and bamboo. Height 4 inches.
983 Teapot, gourd shape. Peonies in panels in red, green
and gold, diaper arabesques in red and gold. Height
5 inches.
984 Another, similar to above, silver stopper. Height 51-
inches.
985 Another; decorated in various bright colors. Spout,
head of Ho-wo bird. Height 9 inches.
986 Another, egg-plant form ; neck, spout and base deco-
rated in rich blue and gold, body with plum blossoms
in red and gold. Height 8 inches.
9


987 Another, in form of picture-roll tied with cords; entire
surface decorated in various designs, red, blue, gold
and green colors. Height 7 inches.
988 Sake (wine) bottle, gourd shape; upper portion entirely
covered by decoration, in red, blue, gold and green,
medallions and Imperial crest. Lower part,’showing
creamy-white texture and painting of Ho-wo birds.
Silver stopper. Height 8| inches.
989 Another, similar to above ; more elaborately decorated.
Has silver stopper. Height 7s inches.
990 Another, neck and upper portion of body decorated
with fine diaper arabesques. Floral design on body.
Silver stopper. Height 7J inches.
991 Another; decoration border patterns, flowers and
butterflies, in green, red, gold and blue. Silver
stopper. Height 6 inches.
992 Another; decoration, fine pattern in red, green and
blue, diaper pattern; medallions and Imperial crest.
Height 6 inches. Silver stopper.
993 Another, similarly decorated ; silver stopper. 6|- inches
high.
994 Rose jar, decorated in panels of floral and other de-
sign. Bears genuine Tokugawa crest in gold. Has
carved silver cover. An exceedingly choice and
rare specimen. Height inches.
995 Incense burner; floral design in panels, diaper ara-
besques, and Tokugawa crest. Carved silver cover
also bears crest. Height 6 inches. Equally choice
as above.
996 Incense burner. Diaper pattern in red and gold,
Tokugawa crest in blue and gold, Ho-wo birds in
blue, red, and gold. Handsomely carved silver
cover also bears crest. Very choice. Height 61-
inches.


997 Another, beautifully decorated diaper pattern, red and
gold ; floral design and lion in panels. Carved silver
cover ; Ho-wo bird. Height 7 inches.
998 Another, fine diaper arabesques, green and gold ; floral
design in panels. Silver cover, carved lace pattern.
Height 44 inches.
999 Another, same as above, silver cover ; carved chrysan-
themums and open-work. Height 4 inches.
1000 Vase, yellow glaze ; scroll-work in blue enamel, Im-
perial family crest in green enamel. Panels, Ho-wo
bird and dragon in red, gold, green and blue.
Height 13 inches.
1001 Incense burner, in form of basket. Open-work, cover
and panels on basket ; decorated in fine work, rep-
resenting brocade pattern on base, sides and handle.
5l- inches high.
1002 Another, similar to above; decorating sacred birds
and fine border pattern. Height inches.
1003 Another, same ; chrysanthemum decoration, covering
base, sides and handle. Height 5J inches.
1004, Incense burner, with handles; chrysanthemum deco-
ration on panels in red, green and gold ; rich diaper
arabesques. Has carved silver cover. Height 4
inches, diameter 44 inches.
1005 Incense burner, fine border patterns and chrysanthe-
mums in red, blue and gold. Has carved silver
cover, chrysanthemum. Height 34 inches, diameter
4 inches.
1006 Incense burner, surface entirely decorated with diaper
arabesques and panels bearing sacred bird. Has
carved silver cover. Height 3| inches, diameter 4
inches.
1007 Incense burner ; blue, gold and red enamel border,
chrysanthemums in panels. Has carved silver
cover. Height 3 inches, diameter 4! inches.


1008 Incense burner; plum blossom and chrysanthemum
decoration in red, gold and green. Has fine carved
silver cover, inlaid with gold. Height inches,
diameter.
1009 Incense burner, with handles. Fine border work and
chrysanthemums in panels, red, gold and green.
Has carved silver cover. Height 3] inches, diam-
eter 4 inches.
1010 Incense burner, square, with handles ; decoration in
various designs and colors, covers entire surface.
Has carved silver cover. Height, 4 inches, width
inches.
ion Incense burner, round. Border of blue enamel, with
chrysanthemums in gold around top, panels on sides,
lion and flowers. inches high, diameter. Has
carved silver cover.
1012 Incense burner; decoration, border patterns, and
sacred birds. Has carved silver cover. Height 2|,
diameter 3 inches.
1013 Incense burner, square; handsome border, scalloped
design, running around top, base and sides. Peonies
in panels, red, blue, gold and green. Has carved
silver cover, enameled. Height 3 inches, width
3 inches.
1014 Incense burner. Diaper arabesques, in black, green,
gold and red. Leaves in green and blue enamel,
panels sacred birds. Has carved silver cover.
Height 3 inches, 3 inches wide.
1015 Tea jar; around neck and base alternate squares of
black glaze and gold diaper arabesques. Around
body, broad black band, ornamented with fans.
Shakudo cover, inlaid floral design in gold and
silver. Height 4 inches.


1016 Incense burner. Blue enamel and gold. Chrysanthe-
mums, in red, green and gold. Has carved silver
cover. Height 2 inches, diameter 3 inches.
1017 Tea jar, in form of temple drum. Scalloped panels,
alternately decorated in red diaper pattern, and
chrysanthemums in various colors of enamel. Has
Satsuma mark at base. A fine specimen of old
work. Height 2l- inches.
1018 Tea jar; border at top and base in red, blue and gold.
Panels on either side, chrysanthemums. Has metal
cover, crest of Daimio Kuroda. 3d inches high.
lOig Incense burner; borders neck and base in blue, gold,
green and red. Maple leaves around body. Has
beautifully carved silver cover, chrysanthemurq
design. Height inches.
1020 Incense burner; border, neck and base, blue, red and
gold. Peonies in panels. Has carved silver cover.
Height 2\ inches.
1021 Incense burner, same as above. Has metal cover.
1022 Incense burner, scalloped border design around top
and base. Has carved and enameled silver cover.
Height 2\ inches.
1023 Incense burner, similar to above. Has carved silver
cover.
1024 Incense burner, handsomely decorated in fine diaper
arabesques and floral panels. Has exquisitely
carved silver cover. 2} inches high. A choice
bit.
1025 Incense burner ; unusually fine specimen, decorated
with golden clouds, and branches of cherry-blos-
soms. Has silver cover, which of itself is a work
of art, carved in cherry-blossom design. A remark-
ably dainty piece. Height inches.
1026 Incense burner. The base is decorated to represent
the sea; carved dragon, in relief, supporting the


earth, represented by globe-shaped body; the whole
surmounted by the sacred Ho-wo bird, overlooking
the world ; decorated in a variety of designs and
various rich colors. Height 14 inches, diameter
of base 8-J- inches, 6.V inches globe.
A CABINET COLLECTION OF SMALL
OBJECTS BY THE BEST ARTISTS.
SIXTEEN SPECIMENS OF GENUINE MEIZAN SATSUMA.
(Not offered for sale elsewhere in America. These pieces are all painted
under magnifying glasses, and even the smallest figures are perfect in
form and features.)
1027 Tea jar and cover, ornamented with landscape, and 24
figures of men, women, and children ; painted in
various colors and gold. Cloud effect produced by
dots of gold. Height inches. Signed on base,
“ Yabu Meizan.”
1028 Vase, ornamented with floral design, and over 100
minute butterflies around neck. Thirty-seven figures
of children at play around the body ; painting in
various colors. Height 4 inches. Signed Yabu
Meizan.
1029 Pair of vases, barrel shape ; decoration, landscape
around base. Twenty-four figures around upper
half, showing different festivals of the year. Height
3J inches. Signed Yabu Meizan.
1030 Pair of vases ; mountain and water scenery around
base. Upper part, 20 figures ; festival procession.
3J inches high. Signed Yabu Meizan.
1031 Pair of vases; long neck, bottle shape. Over 100
butterflies in band running about neck, and 20 fig-
ures, boys at play, on body. 3Jinches high. Signed
Yabu Meizan.


1032 Pair of vases ; landscape and mountain scenery.
Seventeen figures of children at play, on upper por-
tion. Height 3 inches. Signed Yabu Meizan.
1033 Pair of vases ; unique, graceful shape. Around base,
landscape and water scene. Upper portion deco-
rated with figures and emblems representing the
different months of the year. Height 71 inches.
Signed Yabu Meizan. Have teak-wood stands.
1034 Pair of vases, in form of temple lamps. Covering the
base is floral design, chrysanthemums and blossoms
and a number of butterflies. Around the upper
part are six panels, painted with landscape, figure
or floral design. Height 6 inches. Signed Yabu
Meizan.
1035 Plaque. Decoration, festival wagon and 100 distinct
faces and figures. Handsome border pattern.
Diameter 8J inches. Signed Yabu Meizan.
1036 Plaque, oblong. Border decoration, and chrysanthe-
mums around outer edge. Surface ornamented with
landscape and figures of children playing in water.
inches. Signed Yabu Meizan.
1037 Pair of vases. Alternate panels of deep-green and
goldstone enamel, decorated with blossoms. Height
4} inches. By Namikawa of Kioto.
1038 Pair of vases ; panels of green and goldstone enamel;
decorated with dragons and sacred Ho-wo bird. By
Namikawa.
1039 P a ' r °f vases, different shape ; similar decoration to
above. By same artist. Height 5 inches.
1040 Another pair; similar.
1041 Another pair, barrel shape ; decorated with blossoms..
Same artist. 5 inches high.
1042 Another pair; same as above.


1043 Jewel box, shaded blue enamel; ornamented with
crow on branch of tree, and ivy leaves. By Nami-
kawa Sosuke, Tokyo.
1044 Another, oval shape, pale blue shaded enamel ; deco-
ration, lotus flower. By Namikawa Sosuke.
1045 Another, square, shaded blue enamel; decoration,
branch of tree, ivy leaves and sparrow. By Nami-
kawa Sosuke.
1046 Enamel tray, alternate half-diamond points of green
and goldstone emamel. A fine specimen. By
Namikawa, Kioto.
1047 Jewel box, egg-shape. Rich red enamel ; decoration,
dragon, sacred bird and floral design. Has teak-
wood stand.
1048 Incense burner, of various colors in enamel. Sacred
bird and mythological lion in panels. Has carved
teak-wood stand.
1049 Incense burner, French gray enamel, white cranes
seen through a mist. Oxidized silver cover, carved
to represent clouds passing in front of moon. Was
in the Namikawa Sosuke exhibit, at late Paris ex-
position, and considered one of his choicest pro-
ductions. Has carved teak-wood stand.
1050 Porcelain vase, peach-blow glaze. Height 3J inches.
By Inouye.
1051 Another, shading into liver-color.
1052 Another, same as above.
1053 Another, same.
1054 Another, rich red and green mottled glaze. By
Inouye.
1055 Another, bottle shape, deep green glaze. Height 4^
inches.
1056 Another, red and white mottled glaze. Height 5
inches.


1057 Another, gourd shape, white glaze ; decoration plum-
tree and blossoms. Signed Kozan.
1058 Another, bottle shape; decoration flight of sparrows.
Height 41 inches. Signed Kozan.
1059 Pair of incense burners, green and black mottled
glaze. 2 inches high.
1060 Bottle shape vase, red mottled glaze.
1061 Porcelain incense box, white glaze, divided in squares,
by blue lines. In center square is character of
“ Good luck.”
1062 Porcelain vase, jar shape, mirror black glaze. Height
8|- inches, diameter 7 inches. Imitation Chinese, by
Inonye.
1063 Another, same as above.
1064 Bottle vase, deep green glaze. Clouded at base, two
dragons in conflict around upper portion. Signed
Kozan.
1065 Bottle vase, decoration dragons in conflict.
1066 Bottle-shape vase, white glaze. Long slender neck.
Decoration, fish. Signed Kozan.
1067 Another, clouds in blue ; dragon, in relief, around
neck, which is shaded in pink. Signed Kozan.
1068 Another, gourd shape, white glaze with delicate tints
of pink. Dragon, carved under the glaze. Signed
Kozan.
1069 Another, “ Shades of Evening.” Dragon indistinctly
seen in dark clouds. Signed Kozan.
1070 Another, white glaze; decoration butterflies in a vari-
ety of sizes and colors. Signed Kozan.
1071 Another, bottle shape, mottled red glaze.


1072 Temple incense burner, Kaga porcelain, Chinese shape.
Rich red glaze, elaborate gold decoration. Height,
6 inches, 7 inches wide. Rare specimen, 60 years
old.
1073 Corean water-pot. Metal, covered with tortoise-
shell, bronze handle, spout and trimmings. One
of several objects taken from a Corean grave, two
years ago. From date of inscription, supposed to
be over 500 years old.
1074 Wood carving of warrior Kiyomasa, who 250 years
ago conquered Corea. Inscription on base.
1075 Long wall clock. Over 100 years old.
1076 Another, similar.
1077 Another.
1078 Another.
1079 Another.
1080 Another.
1081 Bronze rat, holding chestnut. Finely carved. By
Suzuke Chokichi.
1082 Another, similar.
1083 Bronze mirror, carved in relief on back. Old.
1084 Bronze vase, gourd shape ; ornamented with floral
design and birds, in relief. Height, inches.
1085 Bronze vase, square. Ornamentation in relief, various
metals. Height, xo inches.
1086 Pair black enamel and goldstone vases ; decoration,
storks, butterflies, and water-lilies. Height, 18
inches.
1087 Pair vases, pale-blue enamel ; decoration, chickens
and flowers in a variety of colors. Height,
inches. Made by Yamada, Nagoya.
1088 Pair vases, enamel, beautiful soft shades of gray, blue,
and yellow ; decoration, fleet of fishing junks under
sail. Height, inches.


1089 Pair vases, shaded gray enamel ; decoration, birds
and snow-covered trees. Height, inches.
1090 Shitan-wood cabinet, containing 24 drawers of differ-
ent sizes. 24 inches high, 23 inches wide.
1091 Short sword, blade 15 inches long, carved with
figures of the temple guards, and Sanskrit charac-
ters engraved, on either side. Kodzuka steel, han-
dle of shakudo, Imperial crests of gold and shakudo,
in relief. Tsuba, menuki, and end of handle, are of
shakudo, ornamented with Imperial crest, covered
with thin sheets of gold. Scabbard of red lacquer,
decorated with designs of Imperial crest.
1092 Short sword, blade 15 inches long. Has carved figure
of Fudo, god of war, and Sanskrit characters.
Reverse side, carving of temple sword. Made by
Masaoki (3d son of Masamune) for Daimio Nobu-
kane, 275 years ago. Signed. The scabbard is of
wood, covered with brocade, finished with a fine
transparent lacquer, through which the designs of
the brocade may plainly be seen. The end of the
scabbard, bridge and ornamentation are of solid sil-
ver, carved in dragon design. The kodsuka is of
steel, with solid silver handle, representing the
dragon on the waves. The ornamentation on han-
dle, end, menuki, and tsuba are also of solid silver,
carved in same dragon design. Handle of shark-
skin, covered with lacquered thread.
1093 Short sword, blade 11 inches long. Made by Kuni
Hide, 39 years ago. Signed. Scabbard handle and
tsuba of Shitan wood, inlaid with silver, carved
chrysanthemums and butterflies; ornamentation on
handle, solid silver. Kodzuka of steel, bronze in-
laid handle.
1094 Short sword, blade 16 inches long. Made by Yoshi-
michi, 75 years ago. Signed. Ribbed red lacquer


scabbard and handle. Mountings, shibuichi. Sil-
ver ornamentation on handle. Kodzuku and Kogai
steel, with shakudo handle; ornamentation floral
design.
1095 Long sword, corrugated blade, 27-3 inches long; finest
old steel, but unsigned. Black lacquer scabbard ;
ornamented with Tokugawa crest in gold lacquer,
and bronze mountings. Tsuba, menukt and end
of handle of bronze, corresponding with scabbard.
Handle of shark-skin, ornamented with same Toku-
gawa crest.
1096 Long sword, corrugated blade, 27 inches long.
Made by Masamitsu, 190 years ago. Signed.
Shitan-wood scabbard, mountings of silver. Tsuba
of shibuichi with silver edge. Handle of shark-
skin, covered with silk, and ornamented with sacted
sword, of silver.
1097 Swdrd, blade 2U inches long. Made by Osafuni
Tadamitsu, 140 years ago. Signed. Black lacquer
scabbard, ornamented with dragon in red and gold
lacquer. Silver mountings and tsuba. Handle of
shark-skin, covered with silk, ornamented.
1098 Pair of miniature swords, lacquered scabbards.
Length of blades and 5J inches. Mountings
and tsubas, solid silver. The tsubas are carved
in floral designs. Short sword has kodzuda of
silver. Handles of shark-skin covered with silk.
1099 Black lacquer sword rack ; decoration, mother-of-
pearl inlaying in various colors. Design, pine-
trees and bamboo. Holds seven swords. Over
100 years old.
1100 Plaque, delicately shaded enamel. Design, two
pigeons, mauve color and white. Designed by
Shotei, enameled by Namikawa Sosuke, Tokyo.
Eleven inches square.


1101 Another; enamel shading from white to turquoise blue.
Design, bunch of cherry-blossoms. Designed by
Shotei, enameled by Namikawa Sosuke. nJ
* inches square. See illustration.
1102 Another, by the same artists. Design, chickens.
1103 Pair of vases, ground of beautiful green enamel.
Body of the vases decorated by sprays of plum
blossoms, in white and delicate pink. A number
of birds are seen, perched among the branches.
Chrysanthemum decoration around the neck and
wave design at base. The vases are of graceful
shape and proportions, 41 inches high and diameter
of body 14 inches. Made by Gotoya, Kenagawa.
1104 Pair of vases; surface of pale yellow enamel. Free-
hand painting; design banana stalks and leaves,
morning-glories and birds. Border patterns around
base and neck. Height 41 inches, diameter 14
inches.
1105 Vase, bottle shape. Enamel, in crushed strawberry
color, beautifully smooth and lustrous, and abso-
lutely unique in richness of color. The design is
grace itself; slender, delicate chrysanthemums, with
trails of wild grape-vine, fruit, and worm-eaten
leaves, drawn and colored to the life. Soft gray
birds perch and cling to the vine. Altogether a
masterpiece of the highest artistic value. Height,
41 inches.


FIFTH AND LAST DAY’S SALE.
SATURDAY AFTERNOON, JANUARY 231).
BEGINNING PROMPTLY AT 2 :30 O’CLOCK,
COLLECTION OF OLD TEMPLE TAPESTRIES.
BROCADES, AND EMBROIDERIES,
HO6 Brocade, red ground; gold and blue dragon design.
Imperial and family crests woven in gold. 26 inches
square.
110/ Another, same ground ; dragons and clouds in various
colors. 26 inches square.
1108 Another, decoration peonies and dragons. 25 inches
square.
1109 Another, medallions in purple, white, blue, and gold.
27 inches square.
1110 Another, decoration Imperial and family crests of the
Emperor in gold. 28 x 25 inches,
mi Another, decoration peonies and sacred bird. 261
inches square.
1112 Another, red ground, shaded with green. Gold crest
decoration. 25 inches square.
1113 Another, light brown, with gold thread woven in.
Flowers in various colors. 38 x 25 inches.
1114 Another, rose color; with white and yellow chrysan-
themums. 26 inches square.


IUS Another, light brown colors. Peonies woven in a
variety of shades. 57 x 27 inches.
1116 Another, rose-colored ground ; dragon decoration. 56
inches long, 26 inches wide.
1117 Another, deep blue ground, with gold decoration;
dragon in the clouds. 27 x 24 inches.
XIIB Another, black ground; same design as above. 37
x 24 inches.
1119 Another, ground red and gold. Various designs in
decoration. 18 inches square.
1120 Another, three-corner piece; used as drapery for
shrine. Decoration woven in different colors, old
coins.
1121 Priest’s collar; made up of a variety of brocades. 47
inches long, 22 inches wide. Lined with white silk.
1122 Priest’s collar; brocade, light-yellow ground, in which
are woven floral designs in various colors. Lined
with salmon-pink silk. 57 inches long, 10 inches
wide.
1123 Priest’s collar; red and gold brocade, woven floral
design in medallions. Lined with white brocade.
68 inches long, 13 inches wide.
1124 Another, lined with white silk. 48 inches long, 11
inches wide.
1125 Another, lined with white brocade. 61 inches long,
12 inches wide.
1126 Another, dull red and gold; decoration sacred bird
and flowers. 64 inches long, wide.
1127 Another, red and gold ground. Emperor’s crest in
blue and gold. 64x12 inches. Lining, brown silk.
1128 Another, red and gold ground. Dragons and Ho-wo
bird in medallions. Lined with light-green silk.
60 x 13 inches.


li2g Another, belonging to high priest. Dull red ground,
in which is woven the Emperor’s crest in gold and
white. Royal purple lining. 54 x2O inches.
HIGH PRIEST’S ROBES.
Note. —These robes, made of many pieces, contributed by worshipers,
are considered especially valuable, and, in a measure, sacred. After
being worn by the priest for a period of ten years, the robe is again
cut into small pieces, and eagerly sought after by devotees, being
placed in safety until the death of the possessor. Then, together
with a small piece of money, it is placed in the mouth of the corpse,
and answers as ferryage over the river Sanzu (river of death).
1130 Priest’s robe of rich red, plum blossoms and Emper-
or's crest woven in gold ; lined with red silk. 80 x
45 inches.
1131 Priest’s robe, made of a variety of brocades, light
brown color predominating; lined with purple silk.
65 x 40 inches.
1132 Priest’s robe, white silk with peonies in bright colors
woven in ; lined with changeable silk. 74 x4B
inches.
1133 Another, made of light brocade and blue silk em-
broidery in cherry-blossoms, pink and gold thread ;
lined with light-blue silk. 80 x 46 inches.
1134 Another, light brown and deep blue brocade; floral
design ; lined with red silk. 45 x 39 inches.
1135 Another, rich red ground ; dragons and clouds in gold ;
lined with white silk. 75 x 39 inches.
1136 Another, white silk ground, woven in with medallion
designs in various colors ; lined with pink silk. 48 x
35 inches.
1137 Another, dull red ground; design, pinks and green
leaves ; pink silk lining. 73 x 43 inches.


1138 Another, blue ground, woven with medallions and
squares; different colors. Lined with white bro-
cade. 82 x 45 inches.
1139 Another, white gauze with gold thread woven in.
Flowers in different colors, embroidered. Lined
with white silk. Patches of red and gold brocade.
78 x 43 inches.
1140 Another, white Yamamai silk gauze. Medallions of
different colors, embroidered. Rose-colored silk
lining. 84 x5O inches.
XI4I Another, purple and yellow. Tokugawa crest in rich
red and white. White silk lining. 84 x 56 inches.
1142 Another, dull red and gold. Flowers woven in
various colors. Changeable silk lining. 78 x 44
inches.
1143 Another, brown brocaded ground, floral design in
many colors. 88 x 43 inches.
1144 Another, rich red ground; decoration flowers and
Inaba crests. 82x53 inches. Pink silk lining.
1145 Another, red ground with design woven in silver
thread. Patches of white and silver brocade.
Lined with purple silk. 82 x 46 inches.
1146 Another, ground bright red and gold. Designs in
various colors. Lined with red silk. 78 x 45 inches.
1147 Another, dull red ground, with flowers in blue, white
and other colors. Pink silk lining, gox 50 inches.
1148 Another, dull red ground, with Emperor’s crest and
clouds woven in. Lined with white brocade.
86 x 52 inches. (This robe, and all others bearing
the Emperor’s crest, have been worn by court
priests.)
1149 Another, combination of brocades, light brown and
rich blue. Floral designs. Red silk lining. 82x45
inches.
7


1150 Another, combination of brocades. Rich red, prevail-
ing color. Pink silk lining. 82x42 inches.
1151 Another, rich red, beautifully worked with gold.
Sacred bird and other designs woven in. Patches
of white. Blue silk lining. 84x45 inches.
1152 Another, light-brown ground. Peonies woven in.
Patches of red. Blue silk lining. 80x43 inches.
1153 Another, dull red, flower in blue and white. Beauti-
fully wrought with gold thread. Changeable silk
lining. 78x45 inches.
1154 Another, dull red ground ; decoration, woven in, Em-
peror’s crest, sacred bird and flowers, in various
colors and gold thread. Purple silk lining. 70x41
inches.
1155 Another, dull red ground; design woven, peonies and
chrysanthemums. Pink silk lining. 88x52 inches.
1156 Another, deep rose-color brocade. Crests of Daimio
Matsudaira in white and purple and gold. Pale-
green silk lining. 85 x 52 inches.
1157 Another, soft red ground; woven decoration, peonies
and chrysanthemums in white, blue and gold.
Changeable silk lining. 80 x 44 inches.
1158 Another, rose ground with woven design in gold col-
ored threads. Medallions in white. Pale-pink silk
lining. 68x43 inches.
1159 Another, white ground ; woven design, flowers in vari-
ous colors. Pale pink silk lining. 60x42.inches.
1160 Another, ground terra-cotta; woven design, sacred
birds and peonies in medallions. Patches of green.
Terra-cotta silk lining. 80x42 inches.
1161 Another, dull red, woven in with gold and silver
threads. Floral design in many colors. Lining,
white silk. 80x46 inches.


No. 1257. SILVER TRAY.


1162 Another, rich purple ground, woven with flowers in
various rich colors. Pink silk lining. 70x43
inches.
1163 Another, white ground, woven in with large designs
of flowers in different colors. Pink silk lining.
78 X 42 inches.
1164 Another, rich red ground ; decoration, woven design,
flowers and sacred birds. Changeable purple silk
lining. 78x45 inches.
1165 Another, combination of red and gold brocade, blue
silk woven in with white. Lining, red silk. 80 x 42
inches.
1166 Another, made of three different patterns of brocade.
Lined with green silk. 78 X 46 inches.
1167 Another, combination of rich red and light green bro-
cades. Emperor’s crest woven in white. Change-
able purple silk lining. 82x45 inches.
1168 Piece of brocade, light brown ground, chrysanthemum
decoration in colors. 27 inches wide, yards long.
1169 Piece of brocade, purple ground. Sacred birds and
dragons in medallions. 26 inches wide, 4 yards
long.
1170 Temple hanging, rich red brocade. Medallions and
squares in pink, blue, and yellow ; lined with silk.
26 inches wide, 3 yards long.
1171 Another, dull red ground, with Emperor’s crests
woven in gold thread. yards long, 24 inches
wide.
1172 Gorgeous temple hanging, from Shuganji temple,
Tokio. Brilliant red ground, woven with design of
sacred bird and flowers, in purple and gold. 65
years old. 2 yards square.


H 73 Temple hanging, squares and medallions in different
colors. Dull red ground. 34 x 39 inches.
1174 Another, woven in diamond pattern, different colors,
red predominating. 58x45 inches.
1175 Another, red and gold ground; decoration, Emper-
or’s crest and medallions. 39 x 39 inches.
1176 Another, red and gold ground. Emperor's crest in
white. 39 x 39 inches.
1177 Another, gold ground; decoration, Emperor’s crests,
large design in red and white. 59 inches square.
1178 Another, dull red ground; woven design, dragons and
peonies in gold, blue and white. 38 x3B inches.
1179 Another, alternate strips of red and gold, blue with
floral design. yards long, 29 inches wide.
1180 Another, robe, in blue and gold brocade, lined with
silk. 78 x 43 inches.
1181 Another, temple hanging, green and gold-colored
thread, woven in diamond pattern. 72 x 53 inches.
1182 Another, brilliant red and gold. Medallions in blue,
white, purple and gold. 53 x 53 inches.
1183 Another, rose-color ground; decorated with woven
pattern, dragons and chrysanthemums. Over 100
years old. 40 x4O inches.
1184 Another, rose-color ground; decoration in blue and
yellow. 5 yards long, 27 inches wide.
1185 Priest’s robe, dull red, with designs woven in, dragon,
sacred birds and flowers. Lined with silk. 62 x 36
inches.
1186 Temple hanging, deep red; decoration, Emperor’s
crest in silver, edged with green ; medallions in
various colors. 46x26 inches.
1187 Priest’s robe, brilliant red and gold ground, large pat-
terns ; floral designs of many colors. White brocade
patches. 72x41 inches.


1188 Temple hanging, red and gold ground; decoration,
medallions in bright colors. 2 yards 6 inches
square.
1189 Priest’s robe, light and dark shades of blue; em-
broidered with lotus flowers. Lined with red silk.
84 x 45 inches.
1190 Temple hanging, dark blue satin ground. Three
dragons in gold-thread embroidery ; clouds in white.
72 x5 1 inches.
1191 Temple tapestry, groundwork entirely of needle-
work ; design, birds, animals and flowers ; brocade
border. Lined with blue silk, embroidered. 50 x
50 inches.
1192 Double altar-piece, purple silk, embroidered in col-
ored clouds. Red crepe, with Emperor’s crest in
white crepe and gold thread.
1193 Piece of brocade, rich brown ground; floral design
and birds in white, purple and gold. 4 yards long,
21 inches wide.
1194 Square of dark blue satin, embroidered in design;
plum blossoms, pine-trees, bamboo, sacred turtle,
and storks in gold thread and various colors.
Used at time of marriage ceremony.
1195 Square of dark blue satin, embroidered design.
Daimio boxes and cords, in gold thread and red.
1196 Square of dark blue satin, embroidered. Design,
gate and fence in gold, chickens and flowers in vari-
ous colors.
1197 Square of dark blue satin, embroidered. Design,
court lady and cherry-blossoms.
1198 Square of crepe. Stamped and embroidered. Plum-
blossom trees and storks.
1199 Square of blue satin, embroidered in gold thread,
with crest of Daimio Mori.


1200 Square of blue satin, embroidered figure of “ No
Dancer ” in colors.
1201 Square of cut velvet. Design, trees and border
pattern.
1202 Square of dark blue satin, embroidered. Bamboo
in gold thread, flight of 39 sparrows.
1203 Square of light-blue satin. Embroidered with gold
thread. Design, daimio’s boxes.
1204 Square of dark-blue satin, elaborately decorated.
Embroidered design in gold thread ; landscape near
Biwa lake.
1205 Square of red Kobe crepe; woven in with gold
thread, crest of Daimio Seki. On back, embroid-
ered, stork and pine-tree.
1206 Square of dark-blue satin. Two fishes, embroidered
in gold thread.
1207 Square of red brocaded crepe. Embroidered in gold,
crest of Daimio Arima.
1208 Square of cut velvet. Floral design.
1209 Square of blue satin, embroidered. Design, temple
built in the sea at Shiroshima.
1210 Square of blue satin, embroidered. Boy and ele-
phant in colors. Clouds and trees in gold thread.
Crest in green. Seal mark in red and white.
1211 Square of gray crepe. Design, Emperor’s dress, hat,
sword and fan. Crest of Daimio Nishio, on back.
1212 Square of red crepe, printed and embroidered design,
rocks.
1213 Small square of red crepe, gold embroidered decora-
tion.
1214 Temple tapestry, entirely of needlework. At the
lower edge is the temple gate, worked in gold, red
and green. Higher up, the main temples, three in
number, and nine smaller ones, the greater portion


being worked in gold thread. Above these are
clouds and flying Ho-wo birds. The border is of
brocade. 2 yards long, ij- yards wide.
1215 Temple tapestry, same needlework, for surface. Em-
broidered with figures of men, women, children,
birds, animals, clouds, etc. Most prominent at lower
edge, is a representation of children pulling a
flower cart, and hovering over all is an immense
peacock, with plumage spread. The turtle of lon-
gevity is seen coming out of the sea, fish swimming
the waterfall, and numerous other designs. Border
of brocade. 8 feet long, 6J- feet wide.
1216 Another, same work. At lower edge are waves, with
camellas in bright rich colors, floating. Rocks in
the center, with large dragon, worked in gold ; three
other dragons in clouds, and at upper edge, sacred
bird, with plumage spread. Has border of brocade.
8 feet long, 4 feet 6 inches wide.
1217 Another, design embroidered, temples and the sacred
animals and birds, representing the Japanese idea
of Paradise. Has brocade border. 7 feet 5 inches
long, 4 feet 10 inches wide.
1218 Another. Subject, two warriors on horseback, crossing
a river. Gold thread and, a variety of colors in silks
are used. Has brocade border and backing. 6 feet
long, 2 feet 5 inches wide.
1219 Another, has border of floral design in medallions.
Five panels, representing deer, children at play, a
bamboo grove, tiger and chickens, are embroidered
in gold thread and colored silks. Has border of
brocade. 5 feet 3 inches long, 3 feet 3 inches wide.
1220 Another, waves, dragon in clouds and sacred bird at
top. Has brocade border. 5 feet 5 inches long,
3 feet 3 inches wide.


1221 Another, has 66 medallions, in each one of which is a
dragon, beautifully embroidered ; a large crest of
gold in center, and six Imperial crests, embroidered
in green, red and yellow silk. A number of sacred
birds at upper edge. Has brocade border, silk lin-
ing. 8 feet 8 inches long, 5 feet 4 inches wide.
1222 Another, slate-blue ground ; decoration, bunches of
peonies, bound with straw for protection against
frost. Numerous butterflies, clouds, and sacred
bird, embroidered in gold thread and colored silks.
Has brocade border. 2 yards 15 inches long, 2
yards wide.
1223 Another, light-brown ground ; embroidered design,
farm-house and chickens, bamboo trees, figure of
man and flying storks. Worked in gold thread and
colored silks. Border in green and red, embroid-
ered. Also border of brocade. 2 yards long, I
yard 15 inches wide.
1224 Another, brown ground. Design, 7 boys dancing
around sake jar, flowers and birds. Has brocade
border, i j yards long, I yard wide.
1225 Another, gray ground. Ten dragons embroidered in
gold thread, flowers and flying bats in colored silks.
Brocade border. 7 feet 8 inches long, 6 feet wide.
1226 Another ; ground, waves in black and gray. Gor-
geous design of dragon in gold thread and red silk.
Sacred bird reaching over the entire width. Has
brocade border. 6 feet 6 inches long, 5 feet 4 inches
wide.
1227 Another, light-brown ground, bordered by darker
shade, with design in gold thread. Maple leaves,
flowers and birds, in bright colors, at lower edge.
Old man painting a dragon so realistic that it comes
to life, much to the astonishment of the artist and
two boys seated near by. Crests of Daimio Saka-


No. 1279. EMBROIDERED PANELS.
(8 feet high.)
No. 1281. EMBROIDERED PANELS.
(8 feet high.)


kibara in gold, sacred bird in colored silks. 5 feet
6 inches long, 3 feet 8 inches wide.
1228 Another, gray ground. Design, dragon in the sea,
lashing the waves until they reach the branches of
an overhanging cherry-tree in blossom. Sacred
bird and floral design at top.
1229 Kakemono, black satin, bordered by blue brocade.
Embroidered design, chrysanthemums and birds.
1230 Square of green brocade, self-colored, backed with
metal-woven brocade in red, blue, green, purple,
pink, and metallic gold. Upon the green side,
heavily wrought in gold, appears the crest of Ka-
kagi. A rarely beautiful bit. Size 26 x 26 inches.
1231 Square of the richest satin, very lively dark blue,
backed and edged with very fine scarlet cr£pe.
Crest of Daimio So, heavily worked in gold, ap-
pears in the center. Extremely brilliant and deco-
rative. Size 32 x2B inches.
1232 Brocade temple hanging, ground rich red; very soft
arid delicate. Design peony branches and sacred
blossoms in green, darker red and metallic gold.
All the tones are peculiarly clear and good.
1233 Temple hanging. A typical piece. One of the largest
and most important embroideries. Ground, the
richest dark-blue satin. Across the base, the sea, in
violent commotion, rendered in harmonious tones
of gray, white, black, and metallic gold. In the
center of it a huge wave denotes the up-coming
of a dragon, spouting water furiously. Above,
dragons in metallic gold clutch and writhe amid a
sea of clouds in the “ five colors ” and gold. A solid
gold sun blazes in the upper margin with each side;
the sacred Ho-wo bird also in metallic gold.
1234 Kakemono. Wall-hanging from temple, hand-painted.
About 180 years old. Shows the “ thousand Kan


nons,” the Japanese pantheon in which all their
gods are represented. The coloring is miraculously
soft ; so mellow as to freely attest the great age.
Notwithstanding the multitude of figures, each is
as individual as though the sole flower of the artist’s
fancy. From the Abbott collection, of which it was
a distinguished part.
1235 Kakemono. Companion piece. Same age and sub-
ject, but differently treated. All the thousand
Kannons are not shown, but each who is pictured
has an assortment of hands corresponding to his
various incarnations. Even more striking than the
first, and like it, from the celebrated Edgar Abbott
collection.
1236 Pair of enamel vases, delicate blue shaded ; decora-
tion, drooping branches of plum-blossoms and
flight of birds. 10 inches high.
1237 Enamel vase, soft-blue ground ; decoration, wistaria,
chrysanthemum and birds. Most delicate work-
manship. 8J- inches high.
1238 Pair of vases, shaded blue enamel; decoration, nar-
cissus. Height inches.
1239 Pair of enamel vases, shading from blue to soft gray;
decoration, chrysanthemums in beautiful colors and
exquisite work. 10 inches.
1240 Pair of enamel vases, goldstone, alternate panels of
green and brown ; decoration, cherry-blossoms
and medallions. Height inches. By Nami-
kawa, Kioto.
1241 Enamel vase, shaded blue ground; decoration, water-
lilies. Height I3| inches.
1242 Pair of enamel vases, square shape, shaded blue and
gray; decoration, floral design and birds. Height
13 inches.


No. 1282. EMBROIDERED SCREEN. (6 fold.)
By Nishimura of Kioto.


1243 Pair of enamel vases, cream-colored ground ; decora-
tion, water-lilies and blackbirds. 12 inches high.
1244 Enamel vase, single color, exquisite turquoise blue.
Shape of pilgrim’s bottle, with trumpet neck.
Height 12 inches.
1245 Pair enamel vases, delicate fawn gray; decoration,
banana leaves and stalks, with sparrows huddled and
flying. Design in shades of gray, black and brown.
Masterpieces of enameling. By Namikawa ScSsuke,
Tokyo. Height 19 inches. Shakudo around, neck
and base.
1246 Enamel vase, bottle shape; shades of gray, tinged
with pink; design, dragon and clouds. An exceed-
ingly fine specimen. 12J- inches high.
1247 Another, similar in'design, differing slightly in color-
ing.
1248 Enamel plaque ; groundwork soft fawn-color; design,
bamboo tree with canary birds in branches. Sha-
kudo edge. By Namikawa Sosuke, Tokyo. See
illustration.
1249 Another, shaded enamel; design, pigeons.
METAL WORK—GOLD AND SILVER INLAID.
FROM TOKYO EXHIBITION, 1890.
1250 Iron plaque, elaborately inlaid and overlaid in gold
and silver. ‘ Center panel has carved figures in relief,
representing the three long-lived men of Japan and
China; beautifully wrought in gold, silver, shakudo
and shibuichi. Surrounding this panel are five
smaller ones with Japanese scenery, inlaid squares
alternating with the Emperor’s crests. The whole


inclosed in border, grape-vine patterns in gold and
silver. Leaves inlaid, grapes in relief. Diameter
14 inches. Made by Komai, Kioto. Signature at
back, inlaid in gold.
1251 Iron vase, inlaid with same metals; body of vase
inlaid with fine pattern and medallions, ornamented
with two figures, carved in relief. A large dragon
of gold and silver twines about the neck. Is also
decorated with the Emperor’s crests, in gold.
Height 19 inches. By Komai. Signature at base,
inlaid in gold.
1252 Iron incense burner; surface inlaid and overlaid in
grape-vine design, leaves of gold, grapes of silver.
Has on either side, in panel, Japanese landscape,
inlaid in gold, and two medallions. Base covered
by small pieces of gold, and signature of “ Komai.”
Height 6 inches, diameter 5 inches. Has teak-
wood stand.
1253 Another, similar work and design, by same artist,
signed. , inches high, 4 inches in diameter. Has
carved teak-wood stand.
1254 Another, inlaid with squares of different colored gold.
Panels, cherry-blossom and bird, carved in relief, in
gold, silver and shakudo. Cover, inlaid with gold,
ornamented with Dog Foo, of solid silver. Solid
silver fire-pot inside. Height 8 inches. Signature,
inlaid in gold at base, “ Shi Kiraku.”
1255 Another, square shape; ornamented by two panels,
carved in relief. One panel represents Rakan priest,
beautifully wrought in gold, silver, shibuichi and
shakudo; the other, floral design, in same metals.
The rest of the surface is entirely covered by gold
inlaid design. Base, fine inlaid work, and signature,
“ Ichiyosai,” in gold. Height 7 inches. Has teak-
wood stand.


No. 1283 EMBROIDERED PICTURE. “THREE MONKS.


sdfd
1256 Silver box, covered with shibuichi and shakudo. In-
laid, around sides and ends, with medallions in gold.
Cover decorated with bamboo tree, flowers and
birds, carved in relief, wrought in gold, silver and
shakudo. 10 inches long, wide.
1257 Silver tray, covered with shibuichi and border of
shakudo. Design, landscape from Arashiyama,
Kioto, exquisitely inlaid in gold, silver and shibuichi.
A collector’s piece. 8£ x6£ inches. Signature
carved on back, “ Jomi.” Was awarded medal at
exposition 1890. Has an ivory easel 24 inches high.
See illustration.
1258 Bronze incense box; figures carved in relief, “The
Rakan,” or 16 high priests of Buddhism; inlaid
with gold and shakudo. Carved dragon, inlaid with
gold.
1259 Iron incense burner ; stork. Can only be described as
“ true to life.” 12 inches high.
1260 Iron fish, flexible body and fins. Gold band running
along either side.
1261 Pair of sword ornaments, solid gold and shakudo.
1262 Pair bronze vases, gold and silver, inlaid floral design
and birds in relief. Height inches.
1263 Bronze vase, inlaid with silver. Dragon and waves
carved in relief. Jomi. Height 3 inches.
1264 Bronze crayfish, exact reproduction of nature, mov-
able joints.
1265 Another, similar.
1266 Long sword, scabbard, handle and tsuba of ivory,
carved in relief, figures birds and dragons. 35
inches long.
1267 Short sword, scabbard and handle of ivory, carved
similar to above. 19 inches long.
1268 Knife, scabbard and handle of carved ivory. 12
inches long.
l<>
l/
$


s 1269 Pair of swords. Blade of long one inches,
/» carved with dragon and sacred sword. Blade of
J \vV w shorter one, 18 inches long. Scabbards of gold
lacquer, decorated with imperial crests and dragon,
twined about sacred sword. Tsubas, iron carved in
relief, inlaid with gold. Mountings, shakudo, inlaid
with gold. Menuki of long sword, shakudo figures,
inlaid with gold ; of short one, solid gold dragons.
Made by Sasako Tadatsuna, by order of Daimio
Kumy. 240 years old. Inscribed.
\f 1270 Bronze temple gong and stand. Diameter 24 inches.
1 W in, Inscribed, “ Donated by Sakakami in the year of
JMV* Kioho,” about 150 years ago.
l/V1271 Bronze prayer gong and frame. Diameter 34 inches.
1272 Another, same as above. Diameter 31 inches. In-
scribed, “ Used by Arimano Kami Tadanori, in
year Genbun,” about 195 years ago.
Q 1273 Cherry-blossom, transparent lacquer box, with tray.
Rich color. Silver lacquer finish inside.
1274 Another, same transparent lacquer, under which may
. be seen the design of maple leaves. Inside and
S' Outside finish the same.
/ Fine gold lacquer paper and writing-box. Funji and
/ 1 Hirame lacquers are combined in decorating the
/ 0 / outer surface landscape design. Profusely scattered
V J over the top, sides and ends of both boxes, are
cherry blossoms, made of pure gold metal, in relief.
lnside finish, finest Nashiji lacquer, chrysanthemums
of raised Funji lacquer, red and gold, with rock of
Hirame. Water bottle in writing box, solid silver,
gold inlaid. Edges protected by silver binding.
Paper box 15x12 inches. Writing box 10x9
inches. 17th century.
Note.—The above boxes are referred to by Sir Edwin Arnold, in the
preface to this catalogue.


No. 1287. LIFE-SIXE WOOD CARVING, “THE WRESTLERS."


1276 Gold lacquer writing and paper box, of Nashiji lacquer,
inside and outside. Raised design in Hirame lac-
quer, covering outer surface, bamboo, plum and
pine tree, emblems of happiness. Same design
under side of cover of each box. Writing box
fitted with solid silver water bottle and holder,
decorated with emperor’s crest, in relief; gold
lacquer, silver mounted ink holder and kiri ; paper
knife in gold lacquer sheath, and a number of writ-
ing brushes with gold lacquer handles. Paper box
16x13 inches. Writing box 10x9 inches. 17th
century.
1277 Nabashima lacquer dispatch box. Outside, Shitan
wood, decorated with landscapes of raised lacquer,
on cover, sides, and ends. Nashiji lacquer finish
inside. About 200 years old. A rare specimen.
19 x 6 inches.
1278 Fan-shaped tray, of fine Funji gold lacquer, inlaid with
mother-of-pearl cherry-blossoms and leaves in natural
colors. Bird perched on the branch. Back, Nashiji
lacquer finish.
/f\ 1279 Pair embroidered panels. 8 feet 4 inchesx 19 inches,'
' black lacquer frames, ground black satin, visible
only at top. All the other surface is covered with
embroidery. Upon one panel the celebrated falls
of Nikko, pour in a snowy veil over gray rocks to
a foamy pool below. Japanese cedar trees spring
from the rock-cliffs, and thrust green arms out toward
the water. The effect of light, of foam, of uprising
spray, is most wonderfully rendered. The treat-
ment of stems and foliage is even more realistic—
and the skilled brush could not better represent the
rippled rock-strewn pool below. All this applies
fully to the secend panel, which pictures the falls of
Mino; a series of cascades famed all over Japan.
At the top is the placid stream with a background
'l~] \ f


of mountain and plain, then the foaming water
leaps down the gorge, amid which flaming maple-
trees light the darkness of rock and evergreens. By
Nishimura, Kioto. See illustration.
1280 Another pair, same design, equally fine work. 7 feet
high, 17 inches wide. By Nishimura, Kioto.
1281 Pair embroidered panels. 8 feet 4 inches high xl9
inches wide,- black lacquer frames, black satin
ground. One panel shows a mimosa trunk and
branches with a gay woodpecker clinging to the
bark, and vivid maple foliage accentuating the har-
mony of dull greens and browns. The wood sprites
themselves would own the lichens upon the trunk
as true forest growths, and knot-hole and broken
branch are no less truthful. The design is at once
chaste and exquisite. The second panel bears a
pyramidal Japanese cedar with foliage so light and
feathery, it seems a breath must stir it. A blossomy
plum bough shows behind it. Above a bird in
flight in mid-air, hangs poised on outspread wings.
By Nishimura, Kioto. See illustration.
1282 Six-fold screen. Panels, 5 feet 10 inches x 24 inches,
black lacquer frame, with rich bronze trimmings;
ground, very rich black satin embroidered to show
Maruyma, the mountain at whose base is located
the great Awata pottery. The River Sanja at the
foot is indicated in the base with piles, water-
grasses and schools of fish diversifying its bluish-
gray expanse. The screen itself is one of the
triumphs of needle-painting, showing as it does
houses, temples, blossoming cherry orchards, tall
pines and cedars, and the distant mountain forests.
It is so treated as to appear an island afloat in a
silver sea of mist, which floats high and faint in the
background, and veils.the lower reaches in front.
An especially notable piece, and wonderfully dec-
orative. By Nishimura, Kioto, See illustration.
f (<P
dfďs


No. 1289. GOLD LACQLER CABINET.
(9.1 feet high.)


dfdfd
1283 Embroidered picture. Subject, three monks with
musical instruments, serenading good provisions.
Copied from an oil painting, at Rome, by Nishi-
mura, Kioto. See illustration.
1284 Enamel vase, bottle-shape, 5 feet 8 inches high. One
of the largest pieces of cloisonne ever manufactured.
Base and neck band dull green, almost covered with
crests, butterflies, flowers, in red, white, gold and
black. Body color, rich turquoise blue, very soft
and tender. Decoration, plum trees in dark gray,
wreathed with pink and white buds and blossoms.
Doves in pale tints perch or fly amid the flowers,
and tiny white and black songsters poise on twig's
that seem to sway beneath their light weight. Has
carved teak-wood stand. Exhibition piece.
1285 Pair enamel vases, bottle-shape, forty-seven inches
high. Conventional design in gold and various
colors banding neck and base. Ground color, rich
dull red, harmonizing perfectly with the design of
westaria in white and green straggling over the
surface. Very graceful both in pattern and pro-
portion. Exhibition piece.
1286 Pair enamel vases, forty-seven inches high, bottle-
shaped, banded at base and neck, with rich conven-
tional design in blue-gray, black and gold. Ground
color clear mustard-yellow, enriched with design of
plum tree loaded with pale pink blossoms, springing
up from narcissus bloom. Delicate gray and
black singing birds perch about the branches, very-
fine in color. Exhibition piece.
1287 Wood carving, “ The Wrestlers,” life-size. By Han-
nanuma Masakichi. While these figures were on
exhibition at Deakin Bros.’ Art Rooms, Yokohama,
Sir Edwin Arnold, in a letter to the “ London
Daily Telegraph,” wrote: “I lately examined a
piece of wood-carving, of absolutely matchless ex-
-8
dfdfds
to
P V°
$ >
n 5


cellence in spirit and execution, representing two
life-sized wrestlers struggling in the ring—the whole
work cut and colored to nature, every muscle and
every vein delineated, every tendon and ligament
anatomically perfect, a triumph of faithful study
( and minute observation.” See illustration.
1288 Bronze koro, 14J feet high. In this large piece of
. v, work we see the grand soar of imagination and
’ jM/'i ' f (ly/ perfect skill of the artist. The standard is 4 feet 6
Wlr tj -S ( y inches in diameter, ornamented with carved demon-
iA heads. Above this a number of mythological lions
,l_'.support a second standard on which is coiled a
dragon, holding an urn, from the base of which falls
a fringe of flexible pendants. Dragons form the
handles of the urn, and an eagle with outspread
wings, perched upon rocks, surmounts the whole.
Every detail is conscientiously executed, and in per-
fect harmony. Made by Suzuki Masakichi, Tokyo.
This and the two following pieces are especially
mentioned by the distinguished writer of the preface
to this catalogue. See illustration.
1289 Gold lacquer cabinet 9 feet 6j inches high, and 5
) feet 2| inches wide, and is sustained by six figures
' ' /\/ * m P s - The general design of the upper part is
\tir C / taken from the famous temple at Nikko. On each
1 * >) ' / one of the lower steps, and on the planks of the
y /ty / portico are painted the minute grains of wood in
V 1 v / gold, and on each step that leads to the holy of
holies, golden dragons are vividly represented.
Each panel is decorated with exquisite ivory
carvings, fastened with wires, or figures of em-
bossed lacquer. The ceiling is divided into numer-
ous compartments, every one of which is beautifully
decorated with flowers, no two having the same
blossom. The roof and the beams have a large
number of crests in pure gold. The knobs on the


NO. 1288. BRONZE KORO.
(Height, 14) feet.)


posts of the balustrade, the bells hanging from the
corners of the roof, and the edge of each panel, are
of pure silver. The cabinet presents in its panels
and other parts, specimens of every kind of the
best gold-lacquer work, comprising Kinji, Nashiji,
Hirame, Takamakiye, etc. Entire frame work of
Shitan wood. (See illustration.)
1290 Bronze koro, feet high. Arranged for a fountain
and electric light. Standard, carved with mytho-
logical subjects, supporting an urn-shaped vase,
which forms the body of this grand piece, carved
with scenes representing old Japanese legends.
Dragons form the handles. Out of the urn a col-
umn of water shoots upright, about which is coiled
another dragon, supporting a globe. (See illus-
tration.)
OIL PAINTINGS.
1291 MUSCAT GRAPES, by Edward Deakin, California.
24 x 36 inches.
1292 CALIFORNIA GRAPES, by same artist. 20x29
inches.
1293 GOLDEN PRUNES, by same artist. 20x30 inches.
1294 GERMAN PRUNES, by same artist. 20 x3O
inches.
1295 MUSCAT GRAPES, by same artist. 24X 16 inches.
1296 FLAME TOKAY, by same artist. 24x16 inches.
1297 OLD STONE STEPS AND LANTERNS AT
NIKKO, JAPAN, by Mrs. Nellie Hopps-Howard.
30 x 45 inches.
THE AMERICAN ART ASSOCIATION,
Manager.
115
FIFTH DA Y’S SALE!'
