

QUEENSLAND
CATALOGUE
OF THE
Queensland Court.
|NMNAIIONALfHI|T(i
<VbF r THrCO LON v .- I >'
M c Eellar,l3th>Siis'b m. .


QUEENSLAND, AUSTRALIA.
CATALOGUE
OF THE
QUEENSLAND COURT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL
EXHIBITION
MELBOURNE, 1880.
WITH ESSAY DESCRIPTIVE OF THE Q'iF,ENSj.ANDT
B K ISBASE, QUEEN S L A N I).
JrDUCtJLXXX.


QUEENSLAND COMMISSION,
OFFICES: QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.
(Executive Commissioner:
GEORGE KING, Esq.
Chairman ;
A. C. GREGORY, Esq.
(Members;
R. D NEILS ON, Esq.
GEORGE GRIMES, Esq.
J. FENWICK, Esq.
J. HAMILTON SCOTT, Esq.
JOHN LITTLE, Esq.
JOHN PETRIE, E'Q.
GEESLEY LUKIN, Esq.
HON. S. W. GRIFFITH,
M.L.A.
Commissioners at Melbourne:
Yf. 13. SHAW, Esq.
R. G. MASSIF, Esq.
H, H. MASSIE, Esq.
D. S. WALLACE, Esq.
FRANK SCARE, Esq.
P. H. SCEATCHLEY, Esq.
GEORGE E. LAYTON,
Secretary.


CATALOGUE
OF
QUEENSLAND EXHIBITS.
MUST GROUP.—Forto 0/ ArA
Class I*—Oil Paintings. Paintings on canvas, on pauol,
and on other grounds.
1 BARTLEY, N,, Brisbane. “ Landscape with Cattle," £25.
2 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. The u Opportunity" for Elope-
ment. £2O.
3 BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. “ Stable Scene/ 1 by Woollctt, 185(5,
:ElB.
4 CLARKE, J. A. Brifsbn.no. Original Oil Painting by oxlubi-
tor, “ A Bush Scene near Brisbane."
0 DUIGLES, S., .Brisbane. Copy of liaiYaollou’s " Transfigura-
tion" in oils, painted by exhibitor,
C i&WART, W., liidiKivoomlly. Oil Painting, “ Aclmn and Eve
Ihuling the body of Abel.”
7 EWART, W., 1 mlodroopilly. A small full length portrait in
oil.
8 EWART, W., ludooroopiUy, Painting 111 oil, u Ho docs not
Bike It.”
D EWART, W,, Indooroopilly. Portrait of the late tl, ,’Jfarrott.
in oil."
10 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. View of Brisbane from
Bowmi-turvaoc, in oil, by J. A. Clarke.
Class 2. —Various Paintings anti Drawings. Minatuvos,
Water-color Paintings, Piistola, and Drawings of
every kind, Paintings on Enamel, Earthenware,
and Porcelain, Cartoons for stained glass windows
and frescoes.
11 CLARKE, J. A., Brisbane. Black and White Drawings ;
illustrations to Bnmton Stephens’ poem, " Marsupial
Bill, published in The Queensland?)'.
12 CLARICE, .I. A., Brisbane. Black and White Drawings;
illustrations to Brunton Stephens’ poom, " Holey Poloy
'People, published in The Queenslander.
QUEENSLAND.


13 LASCELLES, F, M., Brislmno. Seventy Engravings of
British Birds, colored to nature in water colors, By oxbi-
tor.
EXTRA.
14 HAMILTON, D. D., Brisbane. Picture, Petrified Smut.
Class 3. Sculpture and Dio Sinking. Sculpture iu high
relief, bas-reliefs, chased and repousse work
Medals, cameos, engraved stones, Niello work,
15 NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL AND INDUSTRIAL AS-
SOCIATION OP QUEENSLAND, Brisbane. Silver and
Bronze Prize Medals, issued as prizes by the Association.
Dies cut in Brisbane by R. Capncr.
Class 4, Architectural Drawings and Models. Studies and
details. Elevations and plans of" buildings. Res-
torations based upon existing ruins or documents.
13 ETRE, IV. M., Too wring. Collection of Architectural
Drawings.
Class 5. Engravings and Lithographs. Engravings,
colored engravings. Lithographs executed with
pencil and with brash, Chromo-Lithographs.
17 CLARKE, J. A., Brisbane. " Creek Crossing at As'hgroTO,"
near Brisbane ; original etching.
18 LUKIN, GRESLEV, Brisbane. Plan of route of Qaeejrs'/uuder
Trans-continental Expedition.
SECOND GKO [CP. —Education and Instruction, Apparatus
and Processes of the Liberal Arts.
Class S' Education of Children, Primary Instruction,
Instruction of Adults. Plans and models of
orphan asylums, infant schools; system of manage-
ment and furniture of such establishments;
appliances for instruction suitable for the physical,
moral, and intellectual training of the child
previous to its entering school. Plans and models
of scholastic establishment!) for town and country;
system of management, and fumitairc for these
establishments,' Appliances for instruction : hooks,
maps, apparatus, and models. Plana and models
of scholastic establishments for adult ami pro-
fessional instruction. System of mmigmimnt and
furniture for those establishments, Appliances
for adult and professional instruction. Appliances


for the elementary teaching of music, singing,
foreign languages, book-keeping, political economy,
practical agriculture and horticulture, technology,
and drawing. Appliances adapted to the instruc-
tion of the blind and of doaf mutes. Works of
pupils of both asms. Libraries and Publications.
19 BKENLEIGrtI STATE SCHOOL, Logan Liver. Two Maps,
by Otto Banth, aged 134 years.
20 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION,
Queensland, Building branch.
1 Sample of School Wall construction, having wrought
studding to the inside.
2 A School Window, now design; sashes fall into solid
rebate to the outside, hung by pivots at the top angles.
Ventilating upon the proper principle ; and. sashes
when frosted becoming aun-shadoa. They can also bo
kept open during rain.
3 A .Desk and Form, as used in the State Schools, Queens-
land. In Country Schools the furniture is of pine.
4 An Easel and two Blauk-Hoimls, with pointer and
chalk cup, as used in bho State Schools, Queensland.
5 An improved Map Stand, in use during 1880 only.
() A Book of Lithograph Plans of Country School Build-
ings of hardwood, Elbowing additions, including teacher’s
residence, latrines, play sheds, gymnasiums, fencing,
gates, and details.
7 A Series of Printed Specifications, with plans attached.
8 A Compound Easel, to be used aa a map stand or for
musie shoots,
9 A Pupil Teacher's Cabinet.
21 B32PAIITM.ISNT OP MINES, Queensland. Collection of Geo-
logical Maps.
22 POX, 11. W. Survey Office, Brisbane. Specimen of School
Map.
33 FORTITUDE VALLEY—Maps prepared by tho
Pupil Teachers and Scholars of the Boys’ Sfcato School.
1 NOIvTH AMERICA ; Politico Physical, from a copy i
tho size; Oliver Balzoll, pupil, aged 13 yra. ; 2 ft. by
i. ft. S ins.
2 AILSTitALIA ; showing explorer’s routes, from a map
$ tho size Alfred Hnnvorth, pupil, aged 12 yra,; 2
ft. by I ft. 8 ins.
8 QUEENSLAND ; Politico-physical, from copy 4 aiae ;
Win. Cunningham, pupil, aged 18 yra. ; 2 ft. by ,1 ft. 8
iiiH.
I SOOTLANDj Politico-physical, from a copy f, aizo ;
Walter Bemack, pupil, aged 14 yra, j 2 ft. t> ins. by 1
foot 10 ins.


” AMERICA; Politico-physical, from a copy
p Hizo ; Thomas Lackey, pupil, iumd 14 yra. ; 2 ft, G
im. l>y 1 ft. 10 ins,
(• ASIA ; physical, compiled from a copy aizo ; John
H) i tlij pupil, aged 13 yra.; S ft* (5 iua. by 1 ft.
*■ IUL1) • Mercator’s Projection, showing British
1 compiled from a copy £ size; John Afcthow,
pvqnl timelier, Ist yr., aged 14 yrs. ; 2 ft. G ins. by 1 foot
HI ms.
H HIUTIHU ISEES ; physical, compiled from a copy d
{ u/o ; Robert Catherwood, pupil teacher, Ist. yr., aged
t ,Vil, 2 ft. 0 ina. by 1 ft. 10.
‘ hyJ{()PTC, physical, compiled from a copy d size;
Uuury Collett, pupil teacher, 2nd yr., aged 1G yrs. ; 2
ff. $ ins, by X ft. ID iua.
1M hUUOPiiI • politico-physical, compiled from a copy \-
«tzis ; Win, Hobdeu, pupil teacher, 2nd yr., ugod[dG yra,;
2 ft. H ins, by i ft. IQ ina.
11 ASIA ; politico-physical, from copy .} size ; Percy Oat-
ndgo, pupil teacher, 3rd yr., aged 1G yrs. ; 2ft. 6 ins.
by 1 ft. 11l iua.
12 N OUT It and SOUTH AMERICA; physical, compiled
I’m in copy I, hikh ; Prank Eiohstadt. pupil teacher, 4th
.vr., aged 1|) yrs, : 2 ft. G iua. by 1 ft 10 his.
hi MAST INDIAN AROHIPISLARO; compiled from
Various; maps, showing islands. &c., butwoon the
Tropica ; Wm. Attlunv, teacher UI-3, late pupil
loavimr, 41. h yr., agod 18 yra. ; 3 ft. by 2 ft. 3 ins.
VA HER WORTH, i'., Ifortitudc Valley, fiend Teacher of the
Main School.
I‘upil Tuiuduir’H Oabinot, containing in a compact form
mmvumimeca for holding copy books, exorcises, pons,
p.-iii-ihi, and text bonks, requisite for class teaching.
ISq.il Tcmdiur’s Ejiaol, adapted for holding blackboard,
nod other convenient uses for pupil teachers.
Vh KNIUHTp SV., (Jovurnmuut Mngmvor, Brisbane. Now School
Map of p.iusouwlaucl, lithographud by If. W. Eox.
»d* Ml’SU’ll’Al# CyOtINCIL, Bowen, Ran of Raintvoc Goal
Hcimt, Hmven River, accompanying block of coal there-
from.
IST NORMAL SCHOOL, Brisbane. Senior Urawiuß Ginas.
1 UItAU.INOK, M., Brinbaur, Poll Drawing, from an
utebod portrait by Kombrant.
2 HI,UN DIStX. If 1 ., m-inbimi>. Pon Drawing, “ Worrited,”
from (HI otuhuig by K. Niclml.
31! RAID WOOD, T., Briibano. A flrook \aeo (from
tiio round).
OTUNNOR, Mias J., Briabano. I’an Drawing, from
(itching by IS. (loot-go ; tntorior of St. Albin’a Cafliadral.


5 O’CONNOR, Mies 1., Brisbane. Vase, 16 th century
(from the round).
G MILLER, Miss A. S.. Brisbane. Pilaster Ornament,
14th century (Indian iuh) from the round.
7 FLINT, E., Brisbane. The “Vanguard. 3 * Pen
drawing, from an etching by M'Whirter.
8 OHALLINOR, Miss M., Shafstone, Brisbane. Pen
drawing,from etching by H. Tonsaaint—Distant View
of Cambridge,
9 CORNEL, Miss 8., Brisbane. Corinthian Capital (from
the round).
10 NICHOLSON, Miss J., Brisbane. Egg Mou'ding {from
the round).
11 BLUNDELL, Miss F., Brisbane. “The last Gall.”
In liau ink. drawing, from a statue by G. E. Birch.
12 LAMPARD, Miss F., Brisbane. Child’s Head, from
an etching by Franz Fbuusng. Ben drawing.
18 OHALLINOR, Miss M., Brisbane. Diana (from the
round).
28 SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOL BUILDINGS,
Queensland. Two Plans, showing general character of
school construction in the colony, with set of illustra-
tive lithographs.
OIRSS 7. Organisation and Appliances for Secondary
Instruction. Plans and Models of Establish-
ments for Secondary Instruction, Lyceums,
Grammar Schools, Colleges, Industrial and Com-
mercial Schools. Arrangement and furniture of
such establishment.- 1 . Collections, Classical works,
Maps, and Globes. Appliances for Technological
and Scientific Instruction, and for teaching the
Fine Arts, .Drawing, Music, and Singing.
Apparatus and methods for instruction in Gym-
nastics, Fencing, and Military Exercises.
No Entries,
OIaSS 8. Organisation, Methods, and Appliances, for
Superior Instruction. Plans and Models of
Academies, Vnivcrsitieß, Medical Schools, Prac-
tical Schools, Technical and Practical Schools,
Schools of Agriculture, Observatories, Scientific
Museums, Amphitheatres, Lecture Rooms, Labora-
toiies for instruction and research. .Furniture and
arrangement of such Establishments. Apparatus,
collections, and appliances intended for higher in


stmotion and scientific reaemoh. Special exhibi-
tions of burned, technical, agricultural, ccnmuoroinl,
and industrial societies and institutions. Scien-
tific expeditions.
Ku Entries.
OIaSS Printing, Books. Specimens of Typography i
Autographic Proofs; Lithographic Proofs, block
or coloured; Proofs of Engravings. Now Books
and new Editions of Books already known ; Col-
lections of Works forming special Libraries;
Periodical Publications. Drawings, Athumes, Mini
Albums.
119 GAIII'IKMU & COOT, llrislrnui, Assortment of Vulcanite
Rubber Stamps.
30 THORNH, V’., Brisbaro. Pugh's Almanac, KSBO, binind.
Class 10. Stationery, Bookbinding, Painting, timl Drawing
Materials. Pnpor ; Card mid Pasteboard; Inks
Chalks; Pencils; Pastels ; all things necessary for
'writing-desks and oilmen; lid. stands ; Apparatus
for Weighing Letters, &o. ; copying presses.
Objects made of Paper ; Lamp similes, Lanterns,
Flower-pot Covers. .Registers, Copybooks,
Albums, .md Memorandum Rooks; Bindings,
loose Covers for Books, Cases, &<i. Yimous
products used in Water-colour Palming nml
Tinting ; Colours in OukiJH, Peihßilh, .Blmldera,
Tubes, and BlmlK liiMU'iummta and AppnmUm
for tho use t*f painbora, drirnglilKimui, eiigiuvtnw
and moflollwH.
31 BEAL, J. 0., (lovtsrnnuint IMntor, Qiu:unnlnud, Spunlnums
of Commercial, I.iiw, _ ami Library oxcoutmt at
tho (iuvonimont Printing Olluio, Briutmuo.
32 BEAT', .T. 0,, Govonimoiifc PHutm-, Quoutmlaiul. .Smudniona
of Baling.
3fl MAOBHEItSON, A., Briabauo. HpucimmiH of Pintor mtnlo
from tfitltt rofiixn, Fitmis Maor'tphijlhh uml toa-trao
bark.


OIaSS lh General Application of the Arts of Drawing
and Modelling. Designs for Industrial purposes ;
Designs obtained, reproduced, or reduced by
Mechanical processes. Decorative Paintings,
Lithographs, Chromo-lithographs, or Engravings
for Industrial purposes. Models and small Articu-
lated Wooden Models of Figures Ornaments, ito.
Carvings. Cameos, Seals, and various objects
decorated with engraving. Objects Modelled for
Industrial purposes produced by Mechanical
Processes, Reductions, Photo-sculpture, Jro. Casta.
;U ITT HER, S. 11., Brisbane. Model for a Town Hall, designed
and executed by the exhibitor,
OIaSS 12. Photographic Proofs and Apparatus. Photo-
graphs on paper, glass, wood, stuffs, and enamel.
Hcliographic engravings, lithographic proofs.
Photolithographic proofs, photographic stereotypes,
stereoscopic proofs, and stereoscopes. Enlarged
photographs. Colour photographs. Instruments,
apparatus, and chemicals necessary for photography.
Materials and appliances used in photographic
studios.
3D BARTLEY, N., Brisbane. “ Auld Lang Syne,” “Hoads of
the People,” Sydney, 1857 (each figure numbered \ a key
to the names at back of picture!
86 BAIITLEY, N.. Brisbane. “ Auld Lang Syne'—explorers,
poineers, early colonists, celebrities of Queensland and
Australia.
37 BUtTPEY, N., Brisbane. Natives of Brisbane (white), aged
three and seventeen years (coloured photographs, four
cahinota in diamond shaped frame).
38 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. PHOTOGRAPHS j Six
Enlarged Photographs of Views taken in the Gardens by
the Imperial Photo. Company, George-street, Brisbane.
Enlarged Photograph, Plaii/cerium IliiUi (New Fern).
30 PAVENC, ERNEST, Brisbane. Sketches made on Qumjw-
lanrffir Transcontinental Expedition.
40 M'LAREN, C,, Brisbane. Photographic Portrait of Dr.
Swecdenborg.
41 MUNICIPAL COUNCIL, Bowen. Photographic Views of
Bowen,
42 NORTON, A., M.L.A., Brisbane. Nine Photographic Views
of Gladstone.
43 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Collection of Photographs,
220, by the Into 11. Dniutree, ootarail in oils.


44 SLATER, G. f Brisbane, Photographic Copy of Sweetlonborg’s
Bible with Annotations.
Class 13. Musical Instruments, Noii-inetallie Wind In-
struments : with common mouth-pieces, with voeda
with or without air reservoirs. Metallic Wind
Instruments, simple, with lengthening pieces, with
slides, with piston, with keys, with reeds. Wind
Instruments with keyboards ; Organa, Accordions,
Ac, Stringed Instruments played with tiro lingers
or without keyboards ; String Instruments with
keyboards: Pianos, Am. Instruments played by
percussion or friction. Automaton Instruments,
barrel Organs, Bird Organs. Separate parts of
Musical Instruments mid Orchestral Appliances.
No Entries.
Class 14- Medicine, Hygiene, and Public lielinf.
Appliances, Instruments, and Apparatus requi-
site for Anotomioul and Histological Works.
Plastic Anotomioul Models, Instruments of Medical
research. Apparatus and Instruments for dressing
wounds aud for simple surgery, general aud local;
aniEsthetio apparatus, .Surgical Instruments
grouped according to their purposes ; Instruments
for Amputations and Dissection. Special Instru-
ments, Obstetrics, Ovariotomy, Urinary Channels,
Ophthalmology, Dentistry, Ac.; Bloctrci-theruputio
Apparatus. Apparatus for Plastic and iM nnhauioul
Prosthesis, Orthopedic Apparatus. Trusses. Ap-
paratus for restoring persons apparently drowned
or suffocated. Baths and Hydro-thorapontio Ap-
paratus j Gymnastical Apparatus for Medical and
Hygienic purposes. Plans and Models of Hospitals
Various Asylums, Houses of Kofuge, Poor Houses,
Lunatic Asylums. Arrangements and Hurnituvc
of such establishments. Various Apparatus for
Infirm Persons, Invalids, and Lunatics, Accessory
Objects for the Medical, Surgical, and Plmrnmccni-
tionl services in Hospitals or Infirmaries. Chests
and Oases of Instruments and Medicines, for Mili-
tary and Naval Surgeons. Means and Apparatus


for Succouring the Wounded on Battle Fields.
Civil and Military Ambulances. Appliances, In-
struments, Apparatus, and all things requsite for
Veterinary Surgery.
45 WALKER, J. H., South Brisbane. Ladies Cork Boot.
£4 Its.
OIaSS 15. Mathematical and Philosophical Instruments.
Apparatus and Instruments used for Mathematical
Purposes. Apparatus and Instruments illustrating
Practical Geometry, Land Surveying, Topography,
and Geodesy; Compasses, Calculating Machines,
Levels, Mariners’ Compasses. Apparatus and
Instruments for Measurement; Verniers, micro-
metric Screws, Dividing Machines, &c.; Scales for
Scientific uses. Optical Instruments. Astrono-
mical Instruments, Physical and Meteorological
Instruments, Ac. Instruments and Apparatus
requisite for Laboratories and Observatories.
Weights and Measures of various countries. Coins
and Medals.
46 WEABER, H-, Brisbane. Collection of Spectacles, made by
Exhibitor.
OIaSS 16- Maps and Geographical and Cosmographical Appa-
paratus. Topographical, Geographical, Geological,
Hydrographical, and Astronomical Maps, Atlasses,
&c. Physical Maps of every kind. Plans in Relief.
Terrestrial and Celestial Globes and Spheres.
Statistical Works and Tables. Tables and Ephe-
m srides for the use of Astronomers and Sailors.
No Entries.
THIRD GROUP.— and Accessories.
OIaSS 17. Cheap and Fancy Furniture. Sideboards, book,
cases, Tables, Dressing-tables, Beds, Sofas, Couches-
Billiard-tables, Ac.
47 BOWDEN, W., St. Helena. Inlaid Writing Desk of Woods
grown on St. Helena.
48 BOWDEN, W., St. Helena. Round Inlaid Table of Woods
grown on St. Helena.
49 CAREY, J. W. Brisbane. Cedar Show Case, in two parts
containing Messrs P. W, Wilson A Co.’s exhibits of
Biscuits, designed for centre or wall space.


50 KASCH, J., Rockhampton. Inlaid Table, showing varieties,
of timbers grown in the neighbourhood of Rockhampton
51 KASCH, J., Rockhampton. Cabinet made of Native Woods.
52 MACKINTOSH, Rockhampton. Dressing Table.
53 PETTIGREW, Hon, W„ M.L.C., Brisbane. Cedar Hall
Door, with side panels complete. £4O.
54 PETTIGREW, Hon. W., M.L.C., Brisbane. Cedar and
Pine Mantel Piece. £l7.
55 PETRIE, J., Brisbane. One Pedestal Dressing Table, with
Looking Glass, made of silky oak and cypress pine.
5(1 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Dutch Wardrobe,
Queensland Pine. £4O.
57 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Sideboard, Cedar and
other Queensland Woods. £5O.
5S QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Trophy of Wood Turnery
and Fret-work, including Curtain Poles and Rings. £5O.
59 ROCKHAMPTON COMMITTEE. Furniture.
60 STURGESS. H., Rockhampton. Hall Chairs made from
varieties of timber grown in the Rockhampton district.
GI THOMLE, P., Brisbane. Small Loo Table, inlaid with
50 distinct varieties of Queensland woods. £l6.
62 THOMLE, P., Brisbane. Two Chests of Drawers, manu-
factured from Queensland timbers. £32.
63 THOMLE, P., Brisbane. Writing Table, with Cabinet,
designed and manufactured solely by exhibitor of Queens-
land woods. £llO.
61 THOMLE, P. Brisbane. Jewel Cabinet, designed and manu-
factured by exhibitor iu 1876 ; inlaid with 34 distinct
varieties of Queensland woods. £BO.
65 THOMLE, P., Brisbane. Book-case, made of Queensland
timbers. £BO.
Glass 1®- Upholsterers’ and Decorators’ Work. Bed
Furniture, Stuffed Chairs, Canopies, Curtains,
Tapestry, and other Hangings. Decorative Furni-
ture, made of costly stones and substances.
Composition Ornaments and Objects moulded in
plaster carton-pierre, Ac. Frames.
Paintings and Decorations for churches and houses,
66 HISLOP. J. & J., Brisbane. 1 Drawing-room Suite, compris-
ing 1 Centre Ottaman, 4 Seats, 1 Settee, 1 Gentleman’s
Chair, 1 Ladies’ Chair, and Six Small Chairs, made of
Queensland Oak and Ebonised Black and Gold ; Uphol-
stered in Crimson and Gold, with Springs.
67 MURDOCH, J. S., Brisbane. Specimens of Graining and
Staining Imitation Woods.


OIaSS 19- Crystal, Glass, and Stained Glass. Drinking
Glasses of Crystal, Cut Glass, Plated, and Mounted
Crystal, Ac. Table Glass. Common Glass-bottles.
Window and Mirror Glass. Cast, .Enamelled,
Crackled, Frosted, and Tempered Glass Glass,
Crystals for optical purposes, Ornamental Glass,
Ac. Stained Glass. Mirrors, Looking Glasses,
Ac. Venetian Glass.
No Entries.
OIaSS 20. Pottery. Biscuit ware, liard and soft paste Porce-
lains Japanese, Indian, and Okinoao Porcelain.
Fine Earthenware with coloured glazing, Ac.
Earthenware biscuit. Terra cotta. Enamelled
Lava. Bricks and Tiles. Stoneware.
08 FENSOM, IX, South Brisbane, Collection of Pottery, manu-
factured by exhibitor, consisting of 2 neats Flower Pots,
2 Monkeys, -I Water Bottles, 3 Butter Coolers, 2 pairs of
Fancy Pots, 1 pair Vane Pots, 8 Jars, i Chum, 3 pairs
Hanging Pots, 1 18-inch Pipe, 1 12-inoh Pipe, S) 0-indi
Pipes, ami 4 4-inoh Pipes.
00 FISCHEU, Cl, Breakfast Greek. Fire Bricks.
70 PBTIUE, J, Brisbane, One box Fire Bricks.
71 PEXlillfl, J., Brisbane. One box Building Bricks (wbito
, pressed).
72 BETllllfl, J., Brisbane, One box Building Bricks, (rod
pressed).
73 SIMPSON", A., Allauttm Pottery, Clifton, Barling Downs.
Uouumt.
7*l SIMPSON, A., Clifton, Darling Downs. Firo-alay Goods,
Crucibles, Ilotorba, Bricks, &c.
7f» STAIUffI.U, K. x., F.L.S., Brisbane. Collection of Firebricks
(soft) s will stand heat exceedingly well, but nob testa of
being heated and thrown in lire and water consecutively.
Their .merit lies in their property to cement together
when walled in, like in roofs of puddling furnaces,
rousting furnaces j also for the flooring.
Class 21. Carpets, Tapestry, and other Stuffs for Fim.utn.rG.
Carpets and Engs, Morjuettus, Tapestry, Tony and
Velvet File, Ac. Felt Carpets, Matting, Ac. india-
rubber Floorcloth, Ao. FnmiturG Stuffs of Cotton,
Wool, or Silk, plain or figured. Horse-hair


fabrics and Leather Cloths, Moleskins, <ko.
Leather for Hangings, for Covering Furniture, &o.
Oilcloths.
7G DUNSDON, Mrs. G, Ipswich. Patchwork Quilt.
77 EAWLINS, Mrs., 'VT.-iroo. Two Marsupial Itugs.
OlflfiS 25. Paper Hangings. Printed Paper Hangings.
Flock, Marbled, Veined Paper, Sec. Paper for
Covering, Bookbinding, &o. Artistic Papers.
Varnished and Enamelled Paper. Imitations of
Wood and of Leather. Painted or printed Blinds.
Ho Entries.
Class 33. Cutlery. Knives, penknives, Scissors, Razors, &o.
Cutlery of every description.
No Entries.
Class 31. Goldsmiths’ and Silversmiths’ Work. Ohurch
Plate, Ornamental Plata and Table Plato, Gold
and Silver Toilet Articles, Writing Materials, &a.
F.leetrotypos, Enamels, Cloisonne, Ohamplevd.
No Entries.
Class 25. Bronzes and various Art Castings and Repousse
work, Statues and bas-reliefs in bronze, cast-iron,
zinc, tea. Castings coated with other motuls by
galvanic action. Repoussd work in copper, load,
zinc, Jto.
No Entries.
Class 36. Clocks and Watches. Separate parts of cloaks
of large or small size. Watches, Chronometers,
Pedometers, various timo-ksepars, lie. Time-pieces
and clocks working by springs or weights, regu-
lators, metronomes. Astronomical Clocks ; marine
Chronometers; Travelling Cloaks; Alarums, &o.
Water Clocks and Sand Glasses. Electric Clocks.
Turret and Church Clocks.
No Entries.
Class 27. _ Apparatus and Processes for Heating and Light-
ing. Fire-grates, Fire-places, Stoves, and Hot-air
Stoves, Accessory Objects for Heating Kitohon
Ranges, and Apparatus for Heating and Cooking by
Gas, Apparatus for Heating by the circulation
of hot water, steam, or heated air. Ventilating


Apparatus. Drying Apparatus; Drying Stoves.
Enameller's Lamps, Blow-pipos, Portable Forges.
Lamps for illuminating purposes, fed with various
oils. Accessory objects for lighting. Matches.
Apparatus and accessory objects for lighting by
gas. Lamps for the electric light. Apparatus for
the use of the electric and magnesium light,
No Entries.
OIaSS 28. Perfumery. Cosmetics and Pomatums. Per-
fumed Oils, Essences, Extracts and Scents,
Aromatic Vinegar; Almond Paste; Perfumed
Powders, Pastilles, and Scent Bags; Perfumes for
hurning. Toilet Soap.
No Entries.
Class 20. Leather Work, Fancy Articles, and Basket
Work. Dressing Oases, Work Boxes, small articles
of Fancy Furniture, Liqueur Cases, Qlova Boxes,
Caskets. Oases and Bags, Jewel Boxes. Purses,
Poaket-books, Note-books, Cigar-cases. Turned,
Egino-turnad, Carved, or Engraved articles in
Wood, Ivory, Tortoise-shell, *O. Snuff-boxes. Pipes.
Fancy Toilet Combs and Brushes. Lacquered
Waie. Fancy Basket Work; Wicker Work for
Bottles; Articles in Fine Straw.
No Entries.
FOV.TXIXH QEOUP,— Textile T'abrios, Clothing, and
Aecemmes.
Class 20. Cotton Thread and Fabrics. Cotton, dressed and
spun. Pure Cotton Fabrics, plain and figured.
Mixed Cotton Fabrics. Cotton Velvet. Cotton
Kibands and Tapes.
No Entries.
Class ill. Thread and Fabrics of Flax, Hemp, Ac. Flax,
Hemp, anil other Vegetable Fibres spun. Linen
and Drills, Cambric. Linen Fabrics mixed
with cotton or silk. Fabrics made from Yegotable
Fibres ns substitutes for flax and hemp.
No Entries.


Class 32. Worsted Yam and Fabrics. Carded Wool,
Worsted Yarn. Muslins de Laine, Scotch
Cashmere, Merinos, Serges, Fc. Ribands and
Laces of Wool, mixed with Cotton or thread, silk,
or floss silk, Hair Tissues, pure or mixed.
No Entries.
Class 33. Woollen Yarn and Fabrics. Combed Wool and
Woollen Yarn. Cloth and other Woollen Fabrics.
Blankets. Felt of Wool or Flair for Carpets,
Hats. Shoes. Woollen Fabrics, nmnilled or
slightly milled ; Flannel, Tartans, Swansdowu.
78 QUEENSLAND WOOLLEN MANUFACTURING COMP-
ANY, Ipswich, Assortment of White Blankets, White
Flannels, Fancy Tweeds, Serges, &c.
oj ass 3d-. Silk and Silk Fabrics. Raw and Thrown Silk.
Floss Silk Yam. Silk Fabrics, Bure, Plain,
Figured, Brocaded. Silk Fabrics mixed with
Gold, Silver, Cotton, wool, thread. Manufactures
of Floss Silk, pure or mixed. Velvet and Blush.
Silk Ribands, pure or mixed.
79. CHUBB, (J. F.j Ipswich. Collection Reeled Silk, grown by
exhibitor.
80 CHUBB, C. F„ Ipswich. Silk Materials, showing process
from the grain to the manufactured article ; grown in
Queensland, and manufactured at Macclesfield,
OIaSS 3D. Shawls. Woollen Shawls, pure or mixed.
Cashmere Shawls. Silk Shawls, &c.
No Entries
Glass 36. Lace, Net, . Embroidery, and Trimmings.
Thread or Cotton Laconuidc with the distaff, the
needle, or the loom. Lace made oi Silk, Worsted, or
Mohair, Gold and Silver Lace. Silk or Cotton Net,
plain or figured, Tambour Embroidery, Crotchet-
work, &c. Gold, Silver, and Silk Embroidery.
Church Embroidery. Embroidery, Tapestry, and
other work do re by the hand. Luce-work mid
Trimmings of Silk, Floss Silk, Worsted, Mohair,
Horsehair, Thread, and Cotton ; Laces. Lace-
work and Trimmings, real or imitation; Face-
work for Military Uniforms.


KXTI iA.
81 KUNZLI, 8., lloekhampton. 11 air-work.
Glass #7. Hosiovy and Underclothing and Accessories of
Clothing. .Hosiery of Cotton, Thread, Woo],
Oashnioi'o, Bilk, or Floss Bilk, pnro or mixed.
Klnstic Fabrics. TJndoivlothmg for mou, mnucii,
and oliildivu; Baby Linen. Flannel and other
Woollen. (.larmouts. Stays, S curves, Gloves,
Gftifcoi’M, Garters, Braces, Fans, Screens, Umbrellas,
Parasols, Walking-sticks, (to.
No Entries.
Glass **lB. Clothing for both Boxes. Mon’s Clothes;
Women's Clothes. Water proof Clothing. Men
and Womoida ii.oad-drusacH; Artificial Flowers
mwl Featliern. Wigs and 'Works in Hair. Boobs
anti Shoos. Children's Clothes. Clothing peculiar
to various professions and l-nulon. Native cos-
tumes of dillbrcmt countries.
82 M‘DONALD, tl., Penal KHtablisdimeub, St. Helena—
-1 pair (if warder’s lacc-up loots, Os. 5 I pair blutaher
boots, Oh, ; I pair warder's canvas shoes, Os. ;
I pair prison, hlutohcr boots, (Is. ; I pair men’s
canvas slimis, Bh. ; 1 pair warder's laeo-up slippers,
Us,
88 MCDONALD, J., Pcmal Katahliahniunt, Bt. Helena—
-1 pair of women's laco-np boots, os. Utl.; 1 pair prison
woman’s canvas shoes, Us.
Hi JVPIJONALD, J., Penal Batabludiment, -St, Helena—
-1 ]iair Native Police duck trousers, Bs. Ikb, 1 pair ditto
dress trousers, IDs. ; J sorgo jumper, Da. ; 1 warder's
surge coat, U»m. ; I ditto sorgo vest 3 I ditto sorgo
trousers. IBs. j 1 warder’s dross coat, 80s. ; 1 ditto
dress vest, 10.4.; 1 warder’s dross trousi'jra, 22a.; 1 great
emit, 45a.; I pair Water Police dross trousers, IPs, ;
T, Water Police bluu shirt, 15a. ; 1 dross coat,
steamer K.svte j 1 dross vent, ditto ; 1 dross trousers,
ditto ; 1 pair white duek trousers,Ha. (Id.; 1 navy shirt,
] 5h.; .1 pair of Orderly's dress trousers, IDs.; 1 Orderly’s
dreas emit; 1 pair dress trousers, Border Customs, 225.;
1 dress jumper, Border Customs; 1 pair Bedford
cord breeches, Border (Juntoms ; 1 cloth coat. Dim-
wich ; 1 pair cloth trousers, Hunwieh : 1 saddle cloth,
Cimmmlaiid Polioo, Ba. ; 1 saddle cloth, Coveniur’s
Orderly, Hs. ; J. saddlecloth, Telegraph Department,
8h.;1 ’cloth oapu j 1 uloth jacket, Bs. 5 1 pair prison
trousers, Ba. ’Jj
85 M. HIHULUS, Uympio, (Jolluoti.tu of Boots anil Show.


Glass 39- Jewellery and Proeiouß Stones. Jewellery in
precious metals (Gold, Hatinvm, Silver, Alnmimim)
Chased, Pilugveod, sat with Precious Stones, *O.
Plated and Imitation Jewellery. Ornaments in
Jet, Amber, Coral, Motlier-01-Pearl, Stool, &e.
Diamonds, Proeions Stones, Pearls, and Imita-
tions.
Ho Entries.
OIaSS 40. Portable Weapons, and limiting and Shooting,
Equipments. Dofoimivu Armour: Cuirasses and
Helmets. .Blunt Weapons : Minces, Lifo Preser-
vers. Side-arms ; Foils, Swords, Salims, -Bayonets,
Lances, Axes, limiting Knives. Missile Weapons,
Bows, Cross-bows, Slings. Pirn Anus; Guns:
llillos, Pistols, and Revolvers. Accessory Objects
appertaining to uvory kind of small arms : Powder
Flasks, Bullet Moulds, Ac, Umind, Oblong, Hollow,
and Explosive ; Projectiles Percussion Caps,
Priming, Cartridges. .(hinting and Sporting
Equipments.
Ho Entries.
OIaSS 41. Travelling Apparatus and linn]) Equipage,
Trunks, Valises, Saddle-Ik igs, *O. Dressing-cases
and Travelling-cases. Various Objects. Travel-
ling lings, Cushions, Caps, Travelling-costumes and
Boots, Iron-Shod Stick's, I Irapnol-hooks, Smi-sliiuliM,
&0., Portable Apparatus speoia.lly intended for
Scientific Voyages and Expeditions ; Travolling
Photographic Apparatus and Instruments for
Astronomical mul Meteorological Obsorvations;
Equipments and Implements for Geologists,
Mineralogists, Hatnralists, Colonists, Pioneers, Ssu,
Touts and Ciuiqi Equipage. Beils, Hummocks,
Folding Chairs, ka.
8G LADIt, IN., Brisbane, Assortment of I'ertiiiaiilcanii, (Ineeim-
land leather, made by exhibitor.
OIMS 42. Toys. Dolls and Playthings; Dolls and Figures
in Wax. Games for the annuxanout of children
and adults. Insh-uotivo Games.
87 TIIOMIJ3, It, Fortitude Valley, Brisbane. Antoinatie
hoy, entitled "The Successful Beggar." ,1;Ifi.


88 THOMLE, P,, Fortitude Valley, Brisbane. Automatic
Theatre.
IXFTPI G-.UOUP,— 'Maw and Mam.ifaat'wrod Products.
ClflSS 43, Products of tho Cultivation of Forests and of
the Trades appertaining thereto. Specimens of
different kinds of Forest Trees. "Wood for Cabinet
work, for Firewood, and for Building. Timber
for Ship-building ; Staves ; Cleft Timber Shingles.
Cork: Bark for Textile purposes. Thinning,
Colouring, Odoriferous, and Beamons substances.
Products obtained from Forests: Charcoal and
Dried Wood; Haw Potash j Turnery ; Basket-
work ; Straw-work; Wooden Shoos, Ac.
80 BOTANIC GARDENS. OODLEOTION OF QUEENS-
IAND TIMBERS, collected and arranged by Walter
Hill, Colonial Botanist, and Director of Botanic
Gardena, Brisbane.
Tho collections of Timbers indigenous to this colony,
exhibited here and at the various courts of England,
Vienna, America, Paris, and Sydney, have excited
general admiration, not only Cor their adaptability
for ordinary commercial purposes, but also from
many of them possessing peculiar qualities suitable
to particular climates and situations of country.
Tho Eucalyptus, in all its many varieties, has found its
way to tho four quarters of the globe ; and tho de-
mand for seed from those countries whore its qualities
are specially appreciated is considerably in excess of
the supply from Queensland. Central Africa will he
tho scouc of its cultivation shortly ; and India and
the continent of Europe have bath succeeded in its
acclimatisation, Borne of the species are best
adapted for swampy grounds ; some possess high
medicinal qualities 3 most of them are useful for
building and fencing purposes, and all of them
worthy of something bettor than consumption for
firewood.
Tho Hod Ocular (Cedrela Toona) scrubs arc still very ex-
tensive) in the colony, especially to the far north, but
the wholesale despoilago that has taken place, and is
still going on, goes so far to diminish the supply, ns
to make it a grave question whether some more
stringent measure should not ho at once framed Cor a
system having for its object the conaorvauco of this
valuable timber, as well as of our timber forests
generally.


Thu Moreton Bay Pine Scrubs, principally situated along
the coast line, are having (to use a colonial phrase)
* l their eyes picked out,” and, unless revised regula-
tions are issued, the cutters will not only'take the
best of the timber, but will make no provision for the
future in the way of recuperation. This question
occupies the attention of the Australian colonies
generally at the present time.
On a recent tour of inspection, undertaken by the direc-
tion of the Government, to Frazer’s Island by the
director of the Botanic Gardena, it was found that
the Kauri pine scrubs there had suffered from the
same reckless system referred to above, and a con-
siderable area, has since consequently been reserved
from the timber cutter.
The Hardwoods, in the timber producing districts of the
colony, arc not only in. groat variety, but at present,
so far as can be estimated, are in full supply. The
same remarks, however, apply to those as to the
pine and other soft woods. This, however, cannot
long continue to bo the case.
The present collection has boon made with the view of
exhibiting as far as possible the various timber ob-
tainable over a large extent of country—from the far
north to the boundary of the colony on tho south and
westward j and from tho particulars attached to each
sample, as to uses, habitats,_ &0., it will be seen that
Queensland has boon particularly favored in this
respect —probably more so than any other of tho
Australian colonies. The exports from Ist July 1871)
to 30th June 1880, wore, cedar, sawn, 111,1)1)1 foot}
cedar, in logs, 2,731)890 feet j pino, sawn, 486,623
feet,
With the view of initiating a system of forest conservancy
in the colony, the Government have devoted some
thirty acres of ground in the vicinity of Brisbane to
a nursery, in which many thousands of plants
(30,000 of cedar alone) have noon raised, and are now
distributed free of charge to those whose attention
has been called to this most important matter, ami
who have exhibited groat interest on tho subject.
CONIFKUzE.
1. Arawaria Hook. (Bimya Bunya.)—-Diametei’, 8(1 To
58 inches ; height, 100 to SUO foot. A noblo tree, inhabiting the
scrubs in the district between. Brisbane and tho Burnett lUvcrs. In
the 20th parallel it grows thickly over a portion of country, m ex-
tent about 30 miles long and by 12 broad. The tree lias a very singular
appearance ; tho trunk is quite straight; its bark is thick and
smooth; the branches arc produced m whorls of six, woven, or
eight; they are horizontal, innexod, and ascending at the extremities.


From the style of growth, singular foliage, and peculiar fresh colour,
■when surrounded with other trees of a different habit and greyish tint,
it produces a fine effect, from the striking contrast presented by its
rigid growth, and fresh green lauce-Miapcil leaves. The wood is not
only very strong and good, but it is full of beautiful veins, and
capable of being polished and worked with the greatest facility.
The conoa produced on the extreme upper branches, with their apex
downwards, are large, measuring !> to 12 inches in length, and .10
inches in diameter ; on coming to nmtnv ty they readily shed their
seeds, which arc 2 tn inches long by 1 inch broad, sweet before
being perfectly ripe, and after that resemble'roasted chestnuts in
taste. In accordance with regulations issued by the Government,
the tree is not allowed to bo cut down by those who arc licensed to
fall timber on the Crown lands, the fruit being used as food by the
aboriginals. The trees produce some cones every year, but the
principal harvest happens only every throe years, when the blacks
assemble from all quarters to feast oil it. The food seems to hive a
fattening effect upon them, and they eat large quantities of it, after
roasting it at a lire. Contrary to their usual' habits, they sometimes
store up tho Bunya nuts, lading them in a water-hole for a month or
two. ITero they germinate, and become offensive in taste to a white
man's palato, but arc considered by tho blacks to have then acquired
an improved flavour. Tho taste of tho Bunya when fresh has been
closcvihed as something between a chestnut and a raw potatoe.
2. Araucaria Cnitniuf/h/unii, Ait. (Morefcrm Bay Pino) —Diameter,
JW to 00 indies ; height, 150 to 200 feet. This majestic tree is, with-
out exception, the most ornamental and useful tree in Queensland.
Its beautiful regular pyramidal form, and the sombre green of its
awl-shaped foilago, command general admiration. It covers immense
tracts of laud along the coast, and in tho interior. It overtops all
other trees, whether growing on tho alluvial hanks near rivers, or
upon the steep and rugged mountains in the interior. Its branches
arc produced m whorls from six to eight, horizontally and spreading.
Tho bark is thick and brownish. The timber ia an article of great
commercial importance, and is used extensively in this colony. Thu
wood ia strong and durable when kept dry, but soon decays when
exposed to alternate damp and dry. When procured from the moun-
tains in tho interior it is line-grained, and is susceptible of a high
polish, winch excels that of satin wood or bird’s-eye maple. The
resin which exudes is very remarkable ; it has all the transparency
and whiteness of crystal, and that portion of it which adheres to the
trees hangs from them in tho shape of icicles, which are sometimes 3
feet long, and (5 to 12 inches broad. The sawyers receive at the
present time (>s. (Id. to 7s. per hundred superficial feet, some trees
yielding as much as 10,000 foot of saleable timber.
3. Dnmm-aru rofmsfti-, Moore. [Kauri or Dundathu ' Pine). —
Diameter, 8(> to 72 iuchuH ; height, SO to 130 feet. This huge troo
inhabits the alluvial banks on the rivers near the coast in the Wide
Bay District ; also in tho moist and sheltered valleys on Frazer’s
Island. It has a auumth-liarkud trunk, of a lead colour ; the branches


are produced in whorls from 3 to 10, distant, spreading, and of a large
size. The wood is line-grained, free of knots, and easily worked. It
is, however, not a plentiful tree. At the present time tho sawyers
are receiving 7s. 6d, per hundred superficial feet, some trees yielding
as much aa 23,000 feot.
■I. Brenda EvdJkho.ri, Parlat, F. M. (Cypress Pino). —Diameter,
20 to *lO inches ; height, 50 to 70 foot! This tree forma vast tracts
along tho coast, growing or. barren sandy soils. The timber is an
article of great importance ; it is durable, fine-grained, fragrant, and
capable of a high polish ; it is used for piles of wharves and for
sheathing punts and boats ; it resists tho attacks of cobra and white
ants, and the root is valued by cabinet-makers for veneering pur-
poses. The market value at tho present time ia 10s. per hundred
superficial feet.
5. French rhomhoidm, Endl. (Cypress Pina). —Diameter, 12 to
18 inches ; height, 40 to 50 feet. A handsome tree, scattered through
tho brigtilow scrubs and sand ridges ou tho Darling Downs District.
The timber is much used for tololograph posts, and by Bottlers for
building purposes,
6. Frenrla Parlatorei , F. M. (Mountain Cypress Pine). —Diameter,
12 to 24 inches ; height, AU to (SO feet j timber much valued for
cabinet purposes.
7. FotlocarpUH data, P, Ur. (Sho-piue) Diameter, 20 to 30
inches ; height, 50 to 80 feet. A very beautiful tree, trunk rarely
cylindrical, timber free from knots, soft, dose, easily worked ; good
for joiners* work, and used for spars. It occurs very frequently in
the scrubs along, the coast. Thu market val.no at the present time ia
about 7s. per hundred foot superficial.
OASUARINT4AS.
S. OaMiar'mu. Forst. (Swamp Oak). —Diameter, 12 to
24 inches ; height, 50 to 70 foot. Found growing in groat abundance
near salt water marshes and inlets. The wood is coarse-grained, and
beautifully marked, it is used for purposes where lightness and
toughness are required.
9. Oaumrina torulma, Ait. (Forest Oak or XJoefwood). —Diameter,
oto 18 inches ; height, 30 to 40 fact. A small tree occupying largo
tracts of land in the open forest. Tho timber ia much used for fukL ;
t is close and prettily marked, and gives handsome veneers.
10. Camarina iflauca t Scib. (The River She Oak).—Diameter, 24
to 30 inches ; height, 70 to 90 foot. A robust tree of general occur-
rence on the boarders of rivers and creeks. The timber ia strong and
tough, used for staves, shingles, &c.
IX. Casuavina Giin)iiiujhamia.va } Miq. (Scrub Sirs Oak).—Diameter,
6to 12 inches ; height, 20 to 35 feet. A-small but handsome tree ;
timber hard, close, and prettily marked,
KUTAUIAdS.
12. Bosk ton saphuUfonnk, F. M.—Diameter, (5 to 12 inches j
height, 15 to 20 feet. A small but very handsome tree, abounding
in most of tho scrubs near the sources of the Logan and Albert
Rivers. Wood close and light.


MIQfjUCBvK
IS. Ot’.fb'vla loona, Uoxb, (Ked Cedar). —Diameter, L’t to 75 inches ;
height, 100 to 150 foot. This maguilleont deciduous true Is found iu
bombs along the coast, and occasionally extending inland for a con-
siderable distance. It puts out) largo branches, the junctions of
which, with blm atom, furnish those hoiutfciful enrhul pieces of which
tho choicest veneers are made. The timber is light, very durable,
oasily worked, and is largely employed in house-joinery and furni-
tnro’making ; iu bud, whenever lightness and durability arc rcipumb
It Is an article of groat commi'ivl'il importance, ami is largely
exported to fcho other colonies. Tim market viihio at tho present
time i« from ‘ids. pm' hundred smporlleial fed), according to colour
and size.
.14 .l''/In'lrma amirull't, 14 Hr. (Klimkina), --1 dame ter, Jib to d$
inches ; height, 80 to 100 feet. A robust tree of general oeemTOUCG
ill the HaruUs oa the banks of rivers. The timber is hard, close, and
of great strength and durability, and would make excellent timber
for railway purposes, U shrinks very little iu drying, and dnos not
rust iron.' It has long been known to timber inorehauts as being a
very hanl Limbor and dlllieiilt to out with the saw, and for that
reason little attention Inis been paid to jirueiiring it,
15, hViiitfv.rHut. th’h'ifiwa,, 14 i\l. (bight Yellow-wood). --Diameter)
AM to dlMiieluis ; height, 80 to U)() feet. This line tree is found, in
the same situations 'as rod malar. Tim timber is strong, durable,
liim-grained, ami of good eohmr, used iu boat-building, cabinet-work,
ami lormany of the purposes to which malar in applied. It also
possesses dyeing properties. 'Phe present market value is from 7«. bo
IIH. hundred superlicial foot.
Id, /'Vna/ersuc ano'idovo, I* 1 . M. (Spotted Trim of the Colmusts).
Diameter, t!2 to IS inches i height, H(> to do feet. A muldlo-m’/ed
tree ; I. he trunk spotted by the falling oil' of the outer bark in
patelies, Timber used for simiglcs and staves of tallow casks and
pick handles.
17. /'Vmdmvdifc }k.n'\itU<iua> It M. (Huguin dhigmn).-•lHiuucter,
18 to 2(5 inehes ; height, 70 to J)0 feet, This huge tree mmnrfl in
most of the coast numbs ; Lius I imhor in close-grained, but in seldom
used. It splits well. might, probably, bo valuable for staves.
IS, b'tuuhu'.shi Si’liiillhnni', I l ’. M. -Diameter, 18 to 50 inelms \ height,
goto (>0 foot. Thin moder.'ilie-.sked tree on tends from tins boundary
of New South Wales to the Daiatree lUver. 1 1 irt_ eunliucd gene-
rally to forest gullies, Thu timber is liard, close-grained and prettily
marked.
1!). Onu:)>ia niiosn, 14 M. (Sinn* Hlnm)Din,metin’, 1) to lllj
inches ; height, llu lo in foot. A moderate-Hi/.ed true, common, in the
Hrigalow scrubs. Its great strength renders it suitable for many pur-
UtA fbn’jda ar'uluht, I l ’. M. Diameter, Di to 18 inches ; height,
lid to 51) feet, A, handsome small tree occurring in Die Imgalow
snubs of West Morel,ou and the Darling Downs, Wood close-grained
and nicely marked.


20. Amoom nltidula, Benth.—Diameter, IS to SO inches ; height,
70 to 90 feet. ' A large-sized tree of frequent ocenmmco iu scrubs
bordering the coast. Qualities of the timber not much known.
21. Synomi f/laiuhih-nttn, A Jusa.—Diameter, 18 to 24 inuhoa;
height, 40 to 6o’ feet, A moderate-sized tree of very general occur-
rence ; timber firm and easily -worked.
22. .DysoMjhn ilpi/leri, Dentil. (Pencil (Jcdar). —Diameter, 20 to
40 inches ; height, 70 to 80 feet. A large-sized tree inhabiting the
rich alluvial scrubs upon the scrubs of the banks of the rivers in
the district of Moreton Bay and Wide Bay. Timber of a rich color,
used for cabinet-making and window work, When fresh cut tho
timber bias much the smell of a Swedish turnip. Market value, from
os. to os. Cd. per hundred feet.
23. Dijhojujloii riifuni i Benfch. (bastard Cedar Pencil Wood.-—)
Diameter, 18 to 24 inches; height, 40 to 50 feet. A slender true,
occurring m many of tho scrubs on the coast, and also iu the in-
terior. Wood is nicely grained, and used for various purposes, but
principally for cabinet work.
24. Dyaoxt/hv. Fmsnmnum, Bentli. (Now Smith Wales lloaewooil).
—Diameter, 24 to 38 inches ; height, 80 to 100 foot, of frequent oc-
currence in the scrubs near Highuelds. Wood fragrant and beauti-
fully marked, used for various purposes but principally for cabinet;
work, for turning and for carving.
24. Meiia eofiipoAifa, Wild. (White Cedar), —Diameter, 15 to 24
inches ; height, 40 to 50 feet. An elegant deciduous tree-, never
rangingvery far from the coast. Timber soft and easily worked : not
In very good repute, though undeservedly, as the timber from a
wellmatured tree is found to be very durable,
PALMAS.
25. LwUtom nintm/in, Mart. (Cabbage-tree).—Diameter, 12 to
18 inches; height, 40 to SO feet. The lofty stem is covered with
leaves in a dense mass, orbicular in circumscription when fully out.
3to 4 feet diameter. The young leaves can be plaited as a material
for hats.
_2p. Limstona inernm, Ik Br. (Partridge Wood). —Diameter, 12 to
15 indies ; height, 14 tu 40 feet. A beautiful and handsome true ;
the outer portion of its trunk is very hard, beautifully marked, ami
takes a good polish.
27. Pti/idiOHjm'mu elegant, Blume, (Bungalow).—Diameter, (5 to
12 inches ; height, 80 to S'J feet. A lofty maguUicont feathery-
leaved palni-tres ; its wood is used for rails for fences. It is des-
tined to take here a prominent position in decorative plantations.
28. Pti/e/iospenna larcuspadix, Benth, (Black Palm).—Diameter,
oto 8 inches; height, 12 to 1G feet. A very handsome palm. Tho
outer portion of the wood is used for making walking sticks. .
PANDAM^E.
29. Paudaintspuhciiruluius, P L , Br. (Screw Pino).—Diameter, 0
to 1- niches ; height, 18 to 30 feet, This singular and stately plant
for scenic group g occurs iu great abundance mi the coast
Lands, ihc fruit is eagerly used by the aborigines.


F4UURS OR KERNS.
30. HH-sfralMf It. Br. (Tree Fern). —Diameter, 3to 9
inches ; height;, 20 to 30 tout. Tina beautiful troo is frequent iu
shaded ravines and permanently damp woods under .Mount Lindsay ;
wood prettily marked.
KUTAUbLF.
31. ttosisfoa mphifff/brmL, F.M.—Diameter, II to 12 inches ; height,
into 20 foot. A small but very handsome troo, abounding inmost
of tho scrubs near tho sources of the Logan and Albert .Rivers,
Wood close and light.
32. C'Urns andndis, Blanch. (Native Orange). Diameter, l> to 1.4
inches, height, 20in DO feet. Thin small and handsome tree grows
in abundance mi the borders of scrubs, both on tin. 1 coast and iu tho
interior. The trunk is erect, with many diffused branches, armed
with auxiliary straight thorns of about half mi inch long. The fruit
is about one and a-half inches iu diameter, almost globular ; an
agreeable beverage is produced from its acid juice. The wood is
hard, elnse-gmiiied, and of a line light yellow color.
33. Clint* fuWnffft.vic It,Al. (Native Lime). Diameter, (j to 10
inches; height, .15 to 20 feet. A low-sized and beautiful true,
growing in tlm senilis on tlm llrinbane and I'iuc Livers. 'Hie trunk
is erect and well diffused, with atnaU hranelma liunring fruit alumt
two inches lung, and of an oblong form. The wood is close-grained,
hard, and of a yellow color.
34. AtiLlunfiti- i/hnu'ii t I look. (Tlm Native Kumkuat).--Diameter,
2to II iuelicH ; (might, bto Id feet. A small tree or sbrnl), ariuotl
with straight or incurved auxiliary spines of a quartur of an inch
long upon the branches. The fruit is globular, about hidl ! an iueh iu
diameter, and produces an agreeable beverage from its acid juice.’
Tlm wood is close-grained, ami takes a line polish. Found in great
abundance in the Darling Downs and tlm Maranoa districts.
HA (l///cfWH.M lu'iiluphy/fa. Dorr.•“'•Diameter, 4 to (i inches ; height)
Bto 14 .foot. A small'tree oecuring sparingly in tho scrubs at the
entrance of the Mary Liver. Wood, close-grained.
3(1. Arriiny<‘hia Jiawri, Schott Diameter, llto 12iuchea; height,
111 to 2d feet. .Small-sized true, found in the scrubs bordering tho
coast. Wood close-grained, hub not used.
37. Ai'niHffi'hUt unjwtfftmtn, FAI.--Diameter 12 told inches;
height 20 to 30 feet. A handsome slmdy tree, oecurriug in tho
Hei;ul)B on the coast. Timber lino-grained, easily wrought, but not
imiuh used.
3.5. Acronyi'hia kmvh, Frost.—Diameter, 15 to 18 inches j i,d a ht.
30 to 40 feet. A tall, Blender tree ; timber nut used,
30. PcuiarcntH ausira/hs. Hook, {Scrub wliito (Jodar of tho
colimistti).---Diameter, I- to 24 inches ; height, 40 to (!(> foot. Occurs
principally in the scrubs near the coast. The timber is close-grained,
tough ami linn,
40. Zuiilhii.i'ulnuf hnn'liynnivtltiiHi' F. M. (Batinwnod).— Dia-
meter, oto 12 indies ; height. 20 to 30 feet, Found in small (jinui


titles in most of tho const scrubs of Queensland. The timber is
close-grained, of a yellow color, unci susceptible of a high polish.
41. Geijdra parmjlcm, Lindl.—Diameter, (i to 12 inches ; lieight,
2(J to 30 feet. Tree occurring in many of tlio brigalow scrubs.
Timber hard and close-grained; it is, however, apt to split in season-
ing.
42. Gdjnva Mudleri, Bouth (Balsam Cauivi troo). —Diameter,
12 to 13 inches ; height, 40 to 60 feet. This handsome and glabrous
tree is dispersed through tlio brigalow and Araucaria scrubs in the
East and West Mhretoa. districts. The timber is nicely marked, and
of agreeable fragrance when green.
43 Qeijera mlicifolia, Schott.—Diameter, 10 to 15 inches ; height,
30 to 40 feet. The long slender drooping branches with their long
narrow leaves, have a very beautiful appearance. Tt occurs in
brigalow scrubs on the coast, and in tlio interior ; wood is hard, close-
grained, and nicely marked.
44. Buodia / >mc3'Ococca l P. M.—Diameter, 10 to 15 inches ; lieight,
20 to 30 feet. A small-sized tree, of no groat beauty; met with in
the scrubs on the banks of tho rivers in the Moreton District.
CELASTINIiDE.
45. Celasirus dispennm, F. M.—Diameter, 3 to 5 indies ; height
12 to 16 feet. A small-sized glabrous troo of sumo beauty when not
overcrowded with other trees ; wood eloao-gmined and takes a lino
polish.
40. tiiphonnodon anstmk, Bcnth.—Diameter, 10 to 24 foot ; height,
40 to 50 feet. A handsome scrub tree of frequent occurrence ;
wood close-grained, of a yellowish color.
47. Denhamia pittosporoides, F. M.—'Diameter, 0 to 8 inohoa ;
height, 20 to SO feet. Slender true found found on the borders of
scrubs inland is hard, fine-grained, and takes a good polish.
48. Dmhamia obscura, Meian.—Diameter 3 to 4 inches ; height,
12 to 15 foot, Small tree, found in “brigalow scrubs noar Ipswich ;
wood hue-grained, and tough.
Elwodtndron austrak, Vent. —Diameter,4to 12 inches ; height,
20 to 30 feet. Slender-growing, glabrous tree ; timber, close-grained,
and prettily marked.
HHAMNE^E.
50. Alp/ufonia exceha, Beisaok (Mountain or Bed Ash]. —Dia-
meter, 18 to 24 inches ; height, 45 to 00 foot. Tin's valuable tree is
plentiful in the forest and in the scrubs, both on the coast and in
film interior. The timber is hard, close-grained, and durable ; takos
a high polish, and is suitable for gun-stocks and a variety of other
purposes.
PITTOSrOBK.E.
51. Pittospnrum rhomWoHum, A. Ouun,—Diameter, (i to 12
inches ; height, 40 to 55 feet. A hue troo with glossy foliage ;
found in the scrubs on the Brisbane river. Tho wood is of a white
color j not used.


52. Ifijiwiioaporiim ftmmm-, F. M.—Diameter, 0 to 12 inches ;
height, 20 to 41) foot. Pound in scrubs in oaab and west Moretem
districts. Wood close-grained, of a white color.
OAPPAIUDM.
53- PULisponm phlUynvmdfi-s, D. U,—Diameter, 4 to 0 inches ;
height 20 to 25 foot. Met with in brigalow scrubs ; wood cloao-
grainod, and of a white color.
54, Oa})parin nohiU.% FAT. (Native Pomegranate).—Diamoter, 0 to
14 inches ; height, 20 to 25 foot. A small tree. The timber is hard
and closing ained.
55. OappanH HUr.h'llk I jimll, (Small Native Pomegranate).—
Diameter, (5 to 12 Inches ; height 1L to 30 feet. This nuudi-lmiuehcd
small tree is very plentiful in the brigalow scrubs in the Darling
Downs; wood very hard.
50. A p(>]thi/Uunhan(n>iahim } F.M. Diameter, (5 to 1(i inches ; height,
20 to 30 foot. A shrub or small tree, almost leafless, with cylindrical,
often pendulous brunches ; occurring in the brigalow senilis in the
.1 hirling Downs District. Wood very hard.
ST MIIOTJI d AChkilS.
57. Strrailia i/mtlrl/iW.tt, 11, Ik*. Diameter, 18 to 24 Inches; height,
30 to 40 feet. A moderate sized deciduous tree ; wood soft and
spongy ; the bark is used for nobs and fishing linos.
58, '7'urrir/Ai nri/i/riult'iulron , lionkh. (Silver Tree).-—Diameter, 1R
to 30 million ; height 40 to GO feet. A large tree growing in great
quantities in the scrubs bordering the banka of the river Brisbane) ;
the timber is not much used.
50, Tarrh’da, Bp,, F.M.-Diameter, IS to 24 inches ; height, 00 to
?0 feet. Phmtifnl in the coast scrubs ; timber is tough and close-
grained. but seldom used.
00. (huuiituwuiia vrhin«la t Frost. —Diameter,obo 12 inches; height,
20 to 30 feet. A tall shrub or small tree, of general occurrence on
the banks of river* ; Ike aboriginals use the fibre of the hark for
kangaroo and limbing nets ; timber nob used.
rJNM/K
01. f'ji'i/iki'a.v-j/ltui ansli'a}i\ F.M.—Diameter, 0 to 12 inches ; height,
20 to 30 feet. ' 'Phis shrub or small-sized tree occurs in considerable
abundance in the brigalow scrub near Ipswich ; wood hard, fine-
grained, it bakes A good polish, can bo used for cabinet work.
SAPTNDAOK/R
02. lltirpnWa Pi'/uhUa, Planch (Tulip-wood),—-Diameter, W to 24
inches; height, Ro to 00 feet. Found in some abundance on the
alluvial banks of rivers. The timber Is close grained, linn, and
beautifully marked, ami is much esteemed .for cabinetwork.
03. ('u/iunia xi/Jowu'/ia, A. Chum. —Diameter, 12 to 24 inches ;
height, 40 to 50 feet. Moderate tree in good situations. Timber
close grained and hard, particularly so when dry.
04. (hi)utni'i R M.—■lHamcbor, 8 to 14 inches ; height, 20
to 3(1 feet Plentiful in the scrubs on the hanks of rivers. Timber
closed grained,


f)S. Chipmna amcardloidw, A. Rich.-—Diameter, 12 to 18 inches ;
height, 3(3 1« 40 feet, Slander tree in considerable abundance mi tho
alluvial banks of rivers. Timber seldom used.
(i(). Cit/nniiri pHmhrhn*, A. llich. —Diameter, 14 to 20 finches ;
height. 3d to 50 feet. Tree of moderate size ; growing in great
abmidaiioß in the scrubs bordering, the const. Timber fuio-graincd
and beautiful. ■ .
(57. Cvpanla sevriylaum, F. M.—Diameter, 10 to 13 inches ; height,
30 to (>() feet, Middle-sized tree ; wood soft, and is yet of no
recognised value. .
fis. JjipJiHjlottiu Cumwiglumii, Hook (Native Tamarind]. Diameter,
12 to 24 inches ; height, 40 to 55 feet. Timber seldom used, though
compact and durable.
00. Ralmiii pyrifonmH, Benth.—Diameter, 10 to 18 inches ;
height, 30 to 45 feat. Moderate-sized tree; timber firm and close-
grained.
70. A'vjJidlum M.—Diameter, 10 to 13 inches ;
height 30 to 40 feet. Small-sized tree. Timber not need.
71. Hrti niJenilron divtrHifoVmw, P. M.—Diameter, 4 to (3 inches ;
height, 10 to 15 feot. Common in brigalow scrubs ; wood of a reddish
color. Its great strength renders it fit for pick handles.
72. Dodonaea triqudrci, Andr (Hap Bush). —Diameter, 3 to 4
inches ; height, 10 to 12 feet. Branching Shrub ; wood hard,
close-grained.
73. Atahuja ttaJirifoUa, Blnme.—Diameter, 14 to 22 inches ;
height. 30 to 50 feet. A handsome glabrous, green or somewhat
glaucous tree, occurring in the alluvial scrubs on the coast. Timber
close-grained, hard, aim takes a good polish.
A R ACAIiDIA ('IDE.
74. Rhus rhodanthema, F, M. (Dark I’eHow-wood).—•Diameter, IS
to 24 inches ; height, 50 to 70 feet. A picturesque tree, of general
occurrence in (the scrubs on the banks of rivers ; the trunk ia of mo-
derate size, covered with a rough scaly hark ; the branches are small
and numerous, the leaves are pinnate, the dowers arc red. The wood
is and beautifully marked, and is much esteemed
for cabinet work, At the present time the sawyers are receiving J Os.
to_l2s, per hundred feet,
75. Si*,n(l\mphiogyna, F. M .—Diameter, 24 to 30 indies; height,
40 to (30 feet. A moderate-sized tree of rare occurrence in the
coast scrubs. Wood soft when cut, but afterwards becomes hard
and tough ; not as yet used.
ARABIA
7(3. Pmmx eltrjau*, F. M.—Diameter. 12 to IC inches : height, 30
to 40 feet. A singular, moderate tree, with. magnificent, birgn,
simple, or doubly pirmate leaves, occurring in dense scuds. Word
light, soft, and of little durability.
HDBJACEiP.
Wl *, (Ltachhardfa TreeJ.-Diameter,
-4 to 30 inches , height, 40 to CO feet. A • handfen.e and beautiful


mudurato-amod true, found ou tho alluvial banks of the Don river,
Port Denison, he,, he. Its wood is soft, close-grained, ami takes
a good polish ; often used for building ami othor purposes.
78, /»« Pimihi,, Box.—Diamotor, 2to 4 iuohoa ; height, 8 to 10
foot. A, beautiful llmvuring shrub fomul hi tho borders of scrubs;
wood very hard and line-grained.
70, Jlvdyl'iiiHmiia mntijlura, F. M.—Diameter, 3 to 10 inches ;
height, 12 to 2(1 foot. Small slender tree ; wood close-grained.
80. Canlkiim luchlum , Hook and Arn.—Diamotor, (i to 12 inolies ;
height, 20 to 80 foot. Small tree ; wood hard and close-grained, and
takes a good polish.
81. Otmlhimii ohifolimn, Hook.—Diameter, 3 to 10 inches ; height,
23 to 30 feet. In brigalow scrubs, near Ipswich ; wood hard, close-
grained, and capable of a high polish.
82. Oanthittm ntuwinii/oUiuu, F. M.—Diamotor, 1 to 4 inches ;
height, (i to 10 foot. Wood close-grained, used for walking sticks.
MYETAOKrE.
83. Etimhjplm pilalarh, Sm. (Blacklmtt). —Diamotor, 48 to 90
inches ; height, 00 to 100 foot. A largo tree with a dark-colored
rough and somewhat furrowed persistent bark, at least on tho trunk
and on tho main branches, that of the smaller branches smooth'and
deciduous; furnishes excellent timber for house carpentry, or any
purpose, where strength and durability are required, Market value,
7s. to Bs. pur hundred foot.
84. Jilimlyptiu hiwmaitumn, Shu. (Spotted Gum), —Dimeter, 2-1
to 28 inches; height, 0(1 to 120 foot. A very largo tree, with a
smooth deciduous hark, leaving a spotted or variegated trunk ; con-
sidered a lirat-olass timber for ship building, and much used for
wheelwrights’ work and othor purposes. Market value, 7a. to Bs.
per hundred feet.
83. KmUyplm microcoryn, F. M. (Peppermint Tree). —Diamotor,
18 to 30 inches; height 60 to 80_foot. A’tall tree, with a persistent
furrowed fibrous bark, occurring in tho forest near Logan, Brisbane,
and Pino Uivors ; timber strong and durable, used by wheelwrights
for naves, felloes, and spokes.
80. JUmUj/ptux lu’.mijihluta, If. WT. (Yellow Box).—Diameter 20 to
40 inches; height, 30 to (ill foot. A modorato-sizod tree, producing
an excellent timber, famous for its hardness, toughness, and
durability. Market value, from 7b. to Bs. per hundred feet.
87. .Hnruli/plm siitentph/oin, Bonth, (Ironbark). —Diameter, 20 to
40 inches ; lioight, 70 to 1011 foot. A tall tree, with a hard, per-
sistent, rough and furred baric. Oeuupaut of many ridgy, stony,
forest lauds in Hast and West Morotpu and Darling Downs districts.
Tins timber has tho highest reputation for strength and durability,
ami is used for large beams in building stores for heavy goods, rail-
way sleepers, and othor purposes whore groat strength is required.
Market value, 7s. to Bs. per hundred foot.
88. MumlypUm rmoahila, Hook, (Spotted (Bun), —Diameter, 20
to 30 inches ; height, 00 to 80 foot. A lofty tree with a smooth bark
falling off in patches so as to give tho trunk a spotted appearance.


It is uvery valuable timber, highly prized for many purposes mi
account of its strength and elasticity, used for buggy shafts, cogs of
wheals, Ac. In bridge-building it is used for mombura under tension,
ami is found to have the highest constant strength of any of Lius
Queensland timbers. Market valuo, 7s. to Bs. per hundred foot.
89. .[Cucalyptus salujm, Sm. (Grey Gum)). —Diameter, 2-1 to dO
inoliea ; height, GO to 90 feet. A tall tree, ■with a smooth silver-grey
shining bark, shedding in thick longitudinal strips, Of' frequent
occurrence on the forest ridges near the Ilriabano River. Useful
timber ■ in good repute for rails in fencing, as it does not readily
take lire, and building purposes, being both strong and durable.
Market value, from 7s. to Ss. per hundred feet,
90. Eucalyptus resini/era, Sin. (Hud Mahogany).—Diameter, 20 to
30 inches; height, 60 to 70 feet. A tall, tree with a rough persistent
bark on the trunk bub mors or less deciduous on the branches, Thu
timber is much prized for its strengh and durability, and is used fur
piles, as it is said to resist the action of cobra. Market value, from
7s, to Ss. per hundred feet.
91. Eucalyptus corymhusa, Sm. (Bloodwood). —Dhumdor, 2d: l;u 80
inches; height, 50 to 60 feot. A fair sized troo, with a persistent
furred bark ; timber subject to gum veins, but very durable, princi-
pally used for posts, does not readily take lire or snifter much from
white ants. Market value, from 7b. por hundred foot.
93. Eucalyptus hotryoides, Sm. (.Blue Gum), —Diameter, 30 to 50
inches ; height, 70 to 100 feet. A lofty spreading true, with a rough
furrowed persistent hark. Of frequent occurrence) both upon the
coast and in the interior; a valuable timber, bard, tough, and
durable. The only timber used for felloes of wheels, and one of tho
finest timbers for ship-building. Market value, Hs. toils, por hun-
dred feet.
93. Eucalyptus tcretiGornis, Sm. {Hod Gum). —Diameter, 18 to 30
inches ; height, 60 to 90 foet. A fair sized tree ; timber used in
fencing, building, plough-beams, polos and shafts of drays, and also
in ship-building. Market value, from 7a. to Ss. por hundred foot.
94. Eucalyptus nmirala, Suhlecht, {Flooded (linn,)--l)iiimotov,
40 to 48 inches ; height, 80 to 100 feet. A majestic tree, inhabiting
the rich alluvial fiats upon tho banks of tho rivers, and in Hindi
localities, has a pillar-like trunk clear of branches for throe-fourths
of its entire height. The timber is of high repute for strength tun!
durability. The market value at tho present time is from Bs. to 9s.
per hundred feet.
95. Eucalyptus fibrosa, F.M. (Stringyhavk). —Dim note r, 18 to 80
inches ; height, 40 to 75 feet. Timber much prized for flooring
boards, and of considerable strength and durability. Market valuo,
from Gs. to 7s. per hundred feet.
96. Eucalyptus tessidarls, F.M, (Moroton Bay Ash). —Diiimobor,
14 to 24 inches ; height, 30 to 60 feet. Timber of a brownish uolor,
not hard hut tough ; highly spoken of for building purposes in tho
northern parts of the colony. Market value, from 7s. to Ba. per
hundred feet.


97. Eucalyptus vielanophlota, (Silver-leaved Ironbark),- KM,
Diameter, 18 to 24 inches ; height, 30 to 70 foot, Middle-sized troo,
with a blackish, persistent, deeply-furred bark, the foliage more or
less glaucous or mealy white ; timber used lor railway sleepers, and
for fencing and other purposes. Market value, from Bs. to 10s. per
hundred feet.
OS. Eucalyptus creh?‘a, F.M. (Whitci narrow-leaved .Ironbark). —
Diameter, 20 to 30 inches ; height, 70 to 00 loot. A. fair-sized tree,
with a hard, blackish, rough persistent bark 3 producing an excellent
timber—hard, tough, and durable—valuable for building purposes.
Market value, from Bs, to os. per hundred feet.
91). Eucalyptus leptovhleha, F.M. —Diameter, IS to 3(5 inches ;
height, 50 to SO foot. Moderate-sized or largo troo ; timber hard and
durable.
100. Eucalyptus cltriodora, Hook (Citron-scented Gum}. Diameter
IS to 44 inches ; height, 40 to 70 feet. A middle-sized troo with a
smooth hark. The foliage omitting a strong odour of citron when
rubbed. Timber hal’d and durable ; used Cor hmiscwrarpuntry.
101. Eucalyptus ptaiyphylla } F.M.—Diameter,_ 12 to ,18 inches ;
height, 40 to 00 feet. A handsome troo, with a light green foliage,
and smooth white deciduous hark. The timber is dark, closo
grained, excellent to put in damp places.
102. Eucalyptus avmeimules, Schaii.—'Diameter, 18 to 30 inches ;
height, 40 to’ (50 feet. Of frequent occurrmice in the forest on. the
coast, Timber heavy, strong, and durable 3 has boon found good for
flooring boards and other purposes.
103. EucahijUm Phinckoulaua, F. M".—Diameter, 18 to ‘id inches ;
height, no to 80 foot. A tall troo, producing an excellent timber 3
valuable for wheelwright and other purposes,
304, Eucalyptus JJalkyana, F.M, —Diameter, 20 to 30 inches 3
height, 4U to 70 feet. A moderate-sized tree, with a furred and
fibrous Vandyke brownish coloured, bark. Of the quality of tho
timber hardly anything is known.
105. (MUistemon lunccnlatus, D.O. (Bottle Brush Tree).- Diameter,
12 to IS inches ; height, 80 to 40 foot. Small tree, growing in »r
near the hods of rivers ; wood hard and heavy ; is used for ship-
building, wheelwrights, and many ether implements, such as mal-
lets, &u.
101). CallMo.mon salkjnn.% D.O. (Broad-leaved Tea rlV(iiv).-~T)iamo-
ter, 18 to 24 inches ; height, 40 to 50 k Jhot. Wood bard and close-
grained ; very durable under ground.
107. Afdalcnca ycnisilfolla, Sm,—Diameter, 20 to 24 inches ;
height, 80 to 40 feat. Moderate-sized troo, wood close-grained, bard
and durable,
108, Mdaleum kucadmdi'ou, Linn, (White Tea Tree). —.Diameter,
24 to .40 inches 3 height, 40 to SO feet. Moderate-sized tree, timber
bard and close-grained, excellent for posts in damp ground, and piles
or wharves, and is said to be imperishable underground.


10U. Melaleuca xtj/jfhdioldcx, Sm.—(Prickly-luavcd Ten Tm!).--
Diameter, 4to 10 inches ; height, 20 to 30 feet. Small-aiml trues,
timber hard, close-grained; stands well in dump situations, it Ims
been said that this timber Las never been known to dootiy.
1,10. Melaleuca Hnuriifolia, Sin.—Diameter, 10 to Id- melius ;
height, 30 to 40 feet. Small-sized tree; timber hard,, oloso, and
durable.
111. Mdaleuea nodoaa, (Tea tree). —Diamotor, 10 to 20 inches ;
height, 30 to 40 foot. Small tree ; qualities same as 100 and 110*
112. Trktanla conferta, It. Br. (Box). —Diamotor, 35 to 50 inches ;
height, SO to 100 faet. A large spreading tree, with a smooth brown
deciduous bark, and dense foliage; very genevalty distributed on
open forest ground. The timber is much prized for its strength and
durable qualities. Market value, from Bs. tn Da per hundred fed:,
Used in shipbuilding; ribs of vessels from this treo have faded
unimpaired thirty years and more,
113. Tri&tmia ncriifoUa, 11.8 r.— A small but handsome trim,
found along the banks of fresh water streams ; timber very close
and elastic; used for carpenters 5 mallots, and cogs of wheels in
machinery.
114. Syncarjikt Ten. (Turpentine or Poarhhio of
Frazer's Island). —Diameter, 4S to 06 inches ; height, 70 tn 10<> foot.
A magniticcnt tree, with a rough persistent bark on the trunk, but
more or less deciduous on the brunches. Timber valuable for piles
and posts for timber fences ; very durable underground, and said to
resist the tesido navalis in salt water. Market value, 7a. tn .Ss, per
hundred feet.
115. Lymarpus terni/oUm, RM,—Diameter, IS to 24 inches ;
height, 4.0 to DO feet. A middle-sized tree with a soft, thick, dln-mm
banc. Timber is hard, heavy, and elastic, prettily marked ; used for
cabinet work, but more particularly for piles, bridges, railway
sleepers, &c.
116. Baul'liousia viyrti/oUa, Hook and Harv.—Diameter 12 tn 18
inches ; height, 20 to 10 foot. Small treo, timber closo-gramcd and
prettily marked.
117. Backhousfa clinodora, F.M,—Diameter. 6 to 12 imdioH ;
height, 20 to 30 feet. Smalhaized tree, wood hard and lino-grained ,
useful for several purposes.
118. XhodomyrtmpaitUoitZen, Bonth.—Diamotor, 12 to 20 inehen ;
height, 80 to 40 feet, Frequent in the scrubs ; wood closo-graincd •
not much known.
119. Myrius Hilln , Bonth, (Scrub Xronwocxl),—Diamotor*, 6to 12
inches; height, 20 to 40 feet. Small-sized tree; wood ronmrkaliiv
hard,
1 20 -; MyriusSklmllu, Bentli, -Diamotor, (it. TO inoluis ; lioigl.t,
15 to 20 feet. Timber, close-grained ; not much known.
dmenioides, F.M.—Diameter, 1240 18 indioa ; height,
80 to 40 feet. Small tree, frequent in tho scrubs j timber, closc-
gramed ; not much used.


122. lihodamnia tyineruia, Blum. —Diameter, 10 to 18 inches ;
height, 20 to ,30 feet. Small tree i wood, close-grained ami firm.
123. Modavrnin argmtea, Bonth.—Diamoter, 15 to 20 iuohoa ;
height, 40 to GO feet. Found in groat abundance in moist low
scrubs ; wood, tough and firm.
124. Eugenia Venir.uatii, Bcuth.—Diameter, 18 to 20 iuohoa ;
height, 40 to GO feet. Of frequent occurrence in moist scrubs ;
wood, close-grained, and of a pinkish hue.
125. Eugenia Sviithii, Poir, (Lilly Billion). —Diameter, 12 to IS
inches ; height, 30 to 40 foot ; wood, close, but apt to split in season-
ing.
126. Eugenia angophoroidc\% F.M.—Diameter, 1.2 to 18 inches ;
height, 30 to 40 feet. Sirmll-sizod tree ; timber hut little known.
127. Eugenia gnmilk, Wight.—Diameter, 20 to 30 inches ; height,
40 to 70 feet. A largo and handsome tree ; timber, cloao-gralnod ;
not much known.
128. Leptospermm Jlavesvcm, Bm.—Diameter, Bto 5 inches ;
height, 15 to 20 feet. Frequent about fresh water creeks ; wood,
hard and close-grained.
PB.OTEACE.iE.
12D. Gremlka rohudal R. Hr. (Silky Oak). —Diameter, 30 to 40
inches ; height, SO to 100 foot. A lofty fcvuo of frequent occurrence
in the scrubs along the coast, and for a considerable distance
in the interior. Tho wood is extensively used for staves for tallow
casks, and is in much repute for cabinet work. At the present tho
sawyers are receiving at the rate of Bs. to !)a. per hundred feet.
130. QreviUca llillima, XP.M.—Diamctor 10 to 18 inches ; height,
40 to GO feet. A beautiful tree, found in dense scrubs on the banka
of the Logan and Albert Rivers, Wood easily wrought; not used.
131. Gnevilka glhlom, 11. Br.—Diameter, Sto 12 inches; height
20 to SO feet- A small tree, occurring in the forest ground on tho
banks of the Don River. Wood, lino grained and nicely marked.
132. Grevillect pohjsiachja, XI. 'Br.—Diameter, 12 to 18 inches 3
height, 30 to 45 feet, A handsome tree ; timber, strong, durable,
prettily marked ; used for cabinet work, kc,
133. Macadamia iernifoUa, F.M, (Queensland Nut). —Diameter
3to 12 inches ; height, 30 to 50 feet. A small-sized tree with a
very dense foliage. Found in dense, moiat scrubs mi the banks of
rivers ; wood linn, line-grained, and takes a good polish. This tree
bears an edible nut of excellent Havor, which is relished by tho white
colonists as well as by the aborigines, It forms a nutritious article
of food to tho latter, and, in consequence, tho same restriction with
regard to this tree, ns in tho case of Araucaria IVulunlUi (Bunya
Bunya), is made in tho licenses issued for cutting timber.
134. SknooarpiiH sbmntus, Emil. (Tulip Tree).—Diameter, 18 to
30 inches ; height, 40 to 50 feet. A charming moderate-sized tree,
with dense, bright, glossy foliage. It occurs often in scrubs, aomo
distance from the const. Tho wood is nicoly marked, and would
admit of a good polish.


135. St&iocarpua ftalignus s B. Br. (Beefwood). —Diameter. IS to
24 inches ; height, 30 to 50 feet. A middle-sized bountiful tree.
Timber is red-colored, close in the grain, hard, and splits easily •
valuable lor the finer kinds of cooper’s work.
136 Orifes exedm, B. Br.—Diameter, Gto 14 inches ; height, HO
to 40 feet. Of frequent occurrence in the scrubs bordering bho
coast. Timber hard, nicely marked, and takes a good polish.
137. Banhslv inte.{jrlfoU<i t Linn. (Beefwood). —Diameter, 8 to 12
inches ; height, 26 to 30 fact. Occurring on sandy ridges near tho
coast ami for a considerable distance inland.
138. Banhsla aemnla, 11, Br.—Diameter, 0 to 15 inches j height,
20 to 30 feet. Small-sized tree, found on sandy ridges on the coast 5
wood prettily marked.
133. Xylomdtim pi/ryhrJM, Knight, (Native Pear). —Diameter, 3
to 6 inches ; height, 12 to IS feet. Small-sized tree, occurring on
sandy ridges ; wood nicoly marked.
UHIZOBHOEEiB.
140. Brugniem .Rlmdii, Bbime. (Mangrove).—Diameter, 6 to 12
inches j height, 12 to 20 feet. Small tree j timber handsome ; baric
is astringent and used for tanning purposes.
SANTALACM,
141. Mmcnrpus latifolw, Br. (Broad leaved Cherry-tree).—
Diameter, 6to 9 inches ; height, 15 to 25 feet. Small tree, of fre-
quent occurrence in scrubs on the coast; tho timber is very hard and
fragrant; excellent for cabinet-work.
142. JSxocarjms oupressiformu, Labill. (Cherry-tree).—Diameter,
4tn 8 inches ; height, 10 to 1G feet. Small tree, found sparingly on
open forest ground. The wood is close-grained and handsome.
148, Santalum lanceolatum, B. Br. (Sandalwood). —Diameter, 3
to fi inches \ height, 15 to 26 feet. A small tree sparingly distributed
through the brigalow scrubs. The wood is oloso-graiuod and takes ft
good polish.
MYOPOBINEiE.
144. JSi'&nopldlci Mit&helli , Benth. (Bastard Sandalwood).—
Diameter, 6to 13 inches ; height, 20 to 30 feat. Small tree, of fre-
quent occurrence in open forestland in the Darling Downs District.
Timber very hard, beautifully grained, and very fragrant j makes
handsome veneers for cabinet-work.
145. JSvemophila hifjnoniatfoliit,. F. M.—Diagnotor, G to 0 inches ;
height, 20 to 30 feet, A small tree, sparingly distributed through
the brigalow scrubs. The wood is white, close-grained, and takes a
good polish.
140. Myopcrum platymrpum, B. Br.—Diameter, 12 to 15 inches :
height, 15 to 25 feet. Timber soft and light.
VEBEENACEJ?.?
. -djuiaenwia oJioinciUs } Linn. (Mangrove).—Diameter. 19 to 24
inches 5 height, 20 to 80 feet. Found on salt water estuaries.
Timber used for knees of boats, stonemasons' mallets, Ac.


MS. (rinvlma LeUikhardlu, F. M. (Beech), —Diameter, 24 to 42
indies ; heigh b, 80 to 120 feet. Found in the scrubs hordering the
rivers on the coast. A. very useful timber, strong mid durable, and
easily worked; it duos nob expand by damp or contract by dry
weather; much priced for the docks of vessels and the Hearing of
verandahs.
Mil, V\tc.ji< Ihjhuni'i'Uui'i A, Cnnn. (Lignum Vitro). —Diameter, 20
to 2d inches ; height, 50 to 70 foot. A. tree of general occurrence in
the moist low scrubs bordering the coast. The timber is hard, close-
grained, and of a blackish color, used by cabinet-makers, &c.
MONIMIAOK/E.
150. Daphmndrti miiwantha, Bonth. — Diameter, 18 to 80 mohoa 5
height, (U) to 80 feet. Mndorato-siacd tree, occasionally found in low
moist Months. Timber quite yellow when fresh, takes a fine polish,
and ia easily worked.
LAUIITNM.
151. hhidhui'li'tt, finhm- Mcisam—Diameter, 19 to 2d indies ;
height, 4.0 bo 70 feet. Moderate-steed tree, of general occurrence in
the scrubs on the banka of the Brisbane and Albert llivera. Timber
nob as yet used.
151 a lindlmulva ijlanm, U. Hr.—Diamubor, 12 to Id inches ;
height, 111) to (50 fcoli. Of frequent oi'commcu in coast scrubs. Tho
wooil has an aromatic [mgmn.ee ; easily worked.
152. 'Vuiranthmi fwaijiiwi, 11. B.— Diameter, 14 to 20 inches ;
height, 80 to 40 foot. Wood close-grained, not used.
155. Ort/fftomriia /iiUrMwirin.% F. M.—Diameter, 1.2 to 20 indies ;
hoighb, 8()'bo 40 fact. A small-steed tree ; timber of apparent value,
hub not used fur any purpose,
158 a. Oriplmin,,!. ijhmwmm*, 11: Br. (White Laurel).—Diameter,
12 to 20 indies ; height, 40 to 00 feet. Wood fragrant, easily worked,
ami said bo be durable.
TXLDACMteIC.
154. tilmmu'im* ohovalns, G. Don.—Diameter. 12 to 20 inches ;
hdgVd, 80 to 40 feet. A tree common in the scrubs 011 tho banks of
the Brisbane River ; wood lino-grained, not jet used.
155. JCUmmrim* r/wmH*, Y. M. (Calllmu).—Diameter, 24 to 30
inches ; height, 80 to 9b Act. Tina tree is frequent in the momt
low scrubs along bho const, the trunk is erect, the bark smooth, the
branches, with their thin, bright-green, glossy foliage, are thinly
scattered over its lefty head ; tho wood is soft and easily worked, it
is likely to be serviceable for breaks for railway carriages,
15(1. (Ur.iola falifoUa, F. Br.—Diameter, (i to 8 indies ; height, 10
to 20 feet. Wood hard, close-grained, and tokos a good polish.
OOUNACMfi.
157. Marlcu oitiniHl s, Bonth. (Musk Tree).—Diameter, 8 to 12
inches ; hoighb, 20 to 80 foot. A small-sized tree, generally with a
gouty trunk; hark dark-colored, rough, and scaly; wood bright-
yellow, with a line undulating appearance, black at the centre;
found in motet low scrubs.


JASMINES.
1(58. Olea minlcidaia, R. Br. (Native Olive). —Diameter, IS to 24
inches ; height, 50 to 70 feet. A moderate-sized tree, of frequent
occurrence in the scrubs, both on. the coast and also in the interior ;
timber close-grained, hard, and durable.
159. Notdaea ovata, R. Br. (Danga Yuaga).—Diameter, oto 12
inches ; height, 20 to 80 feet. A slender tree, found in scrubs ;
wood close-grained.
160. Notdaea lonf/lfolia,V Q\ib. —Diameter, 12 to 18 inches j height,
SO to 40 feet. A small tree ; timber hard, close-grained,
161. Notchtea mlcrocarpn, R. B.—Diameter, 9to 12 inches ;
height, 30 to 45 feet. A tree of frequent occurrence on the border of
scrubs on the coast; wood bard and close-grained.
EUPHOREIACEiE.
162. Mallotm olaox;,hides, Muell.—Diameter, 1) to 16 inches ;
height, 15 to 30 feet. Occurring both in moiat low scrubs and in dry
rooky places. Timber white, hard, and close-grained.
103. Mallokie philipphiems, Muell.—Diameter, 6 to 14 inches ;
height, 30 to 45 feet. Small tree, generally found in rich scrubs.
Wood close-grained and very tough.
104. MaUolus ne-sophUu.ii, P.M.—Diameter 12 to IS inches;
height, 35 to 45 feet, Of frequent occurrence in low ami moist
scrubs on the coast. Wood of a uniform white colour, soft, ami
easily worked.
165. Petalostigma QuadrilomUare, P.M. (Crab-tree)-—-Diameter,
13 to IS inches ; height, 40 to 50 feet, Pound in great abundance
growing on poor sairly soil in the open forest. The timber is hard
and fine-grained, and promises to ba useful to the cabinet-makers.
16G. Pkeaecaria,' ar/allocha Linn. (River Poisonous Tree). —
Diameter, 6to 18 inches j height, 20 to 30 feet. Found on the
estuaries of saltwater creeks and rivers. Produces, by incision in
the bark, an acrid, milky juice, which is so volatile that nobody,
however careful, can gather a quarter of a pint without being affected.
The symptoms are an acrid burning sensation in the throat, sore eyes,
and headache ; a single drop faffing > into the eyes, it is believed, will
cause loss of sight. The natives of Eastern Australia, as well as
those of New Guinea, Fiji, &0., use this poisonous juico to
certain ulcerous chronic diseases (Mnrell’a testimony). Wood light,
white, and soft ; will answer for carving and marquetorio.
166 a. Mwaeoaria Dcdlaohyani, Baill. (Scrub Poison Tree). —
Diameter, 12 to 14 inches, height, 40 to 50 feet. A slender, spread-
ing tree, often_mefc within brigalow scrubs ; the wood is soft, lino-'
grained, and elastic. The juice is pure white, and nauseous in taste:
a single drop falling into the eye, will injure the sight. If properly
prepared a gum elastic could be made from it. 1 1 J
, _ 167 - prieddia exalt ata, P.M.—Diameter, 12to 18 inches; height,
30 to 4n feet. Not unfrequent in moist low scrubs on the coast.
Timber hard and close-grained.
. V’ 8, B^ l! iV' ia :. bal °(/ h ' EM. (Teak). —Diameter, 18 to 36
inches ; height, 40 to CO feet. Moderate-sized tree, found in groat


abundance hi the coast scrubs. Timber hard, dose-grained, and
durably.
1(1}}, AfalhiUii dinocloVf J. Mull.—Diameter, 12 to 18 inches ;
height, 35 to 45 foot. Of fmjuont occurrence in low moist scrubs
along tho coast. Wood of a uniform white color, soft, and easily
worked.
170. ('roinn Vvrreamli, Bnill, (Cascarilla). —Diameter, 8 to 12
inches ; height, 30 to 40 feet, A small-sized tree, bark gray and
rough, with a red sap. Wood of a yellowish-white color j wood
soft, and of no value ; the bark contains an agreeable bitter.
171. .ikhyhia hirhla, Kndl. (Scrub Bloodwoocl). —Diameter, 8 to
U» inches ; height, 30 to -10 feet. A emall-aiml tree, abumlaut in
the coast scrubs ; thubor not used,
uimoishK
172. Cvlih ii'ili'iw, F.M.-~--Diametor, (5 to 12 iucluiß ; height, 25 to
88 foot. A small tree of frcijuaiit occurrence in the const scrubs.
"Wood white, soft, ami pliable ; used for hoops for casks.
173. Aphananlhc, philiiqihieum, Han.—Diameter, 4 to IS inches ;
height, 20 to 40 feet. This species abounds in moist scrubs.
Timber not used.
174. h porlv.a fihidiniplijiUa, Wild. (Nettle-tree).—Diameter, 15
to 24 inches 5 height, 30 to 50 foot. A beautiful tree ; wood soft,
spongy : tho bark is used for making bailing nets.
175. Aa'jw Hspcr, Frost. (Uough-lcaved Fig).—Diameter, 1) to 18
inches ; height, 30 to 45 feet. Timber of no apparent value.
170. AVckk ivw'7, F.M, ({JluHtcfc.il Fig-treo).—Diameter, IK to 48
inches ; height, 50 to 8(1 feet. Found on the alluvial haulm of rivers
and creeks. Tho Emit, which is of alight ml colour when ripe,
hangs in clusters along the trunk and on some of the largest branches,
uml is used by the aborigines.
177, Piviiuvi vrunhuUrt , Deaf. (Morutuu Day Fig).—Diumuter, 3(5
to 70 inches ; height, 50 to 100 foot. A largo and inngniJioeut wide-
threading tree ; yielding its milk-sap copiously for caoutchoucs.
173. (Jiu/rama Jaiwimsin, Trmil. (Cockspur Thorn). —A rambling
thorny climber ; Duramen <.r Uuartwond. Dark yellow color, bard,
and used in dyeing yellow and brown.
170. Pwtuiomwii* .bVawmifmn, Tieanruau.---l)iamoter, (> to 15
inches; height, 15 to 20 toot. A small handsome spreading tree,
with a milky juice ; found in scrubs on the banks of tho Brisbane
Diver, &c.
SAI’OTAGK/R
180, Jlurmoy/fM tHdnuffifiu, lUt '••■Diameter, 0 to V indies ; height
20 to 30 feet. Small tree wood close-grained. _ >
lUI, Chriiaopfii/i/'tHL pr/diifrnuu, F.M- - Diameter, 12 to 20 inches ;
height, ii(> to 70 foot. Moderate-sized tree, sparingly distributed
over moist low scrubs. Wood of a uni form pahs yellow color, doso-
gmimul.
182, Ac/iw.s h\M.--Diameter, H to IB inches ;
height, 20 to 00 feet, .Small tree, froijucut hi moist scrubs. Timber
hard and close-grained.


183, Achra* A Cmm.—Diameter, 8 to 32 inches;
height, 20 to 85 feet. Small tree, frequent in low moist scrubs. Timber
hard and oloae-grained.
384. Afihvm clmatu, F.M.—Diameter, 8 to 12 indies ; height, 20
to 85 feet. Small tree, frequent in law moist scrubs, Timber, hard
and close-grained,
EBEKAOE/10,
185. Garf/illi* ami rat s, R. Bv.— Diameter, (1 to 12 inches ; height,
30 to 40 feet. Timber very tough and firm, and likely to ho used for
many purposes.
18(5. Mabafamcuhm, F-M.—Diametor, IS to 24 indies ; height,
GO to 80 feet. Of common occurrence in the scrubs bordering on
river hanks. Wood tolerably close-drained.
187. M oha geminate, 11. Br.—Diameter, 9 to 1 2 inches; height,
50 to GO feet. Slender tree, found growing in scrubs. Wood soft and
tough.
IMS. BioHi>uras hvhecarpa, A. Cmm.— Diameter, .12 to 18 inches;
height, 30 to'OO feet, Handsome tree, occurring in moist scrubs on
the coast. Timber soft, elastic ; used for pick handles, &a, do.
SAXIFRAGES.
189. Geratopeiahim apniahim, Don. (Couch-wood). —Diameter,
24 to 30 inches ; height, 70 to 90 feet, A beautiful troo, with long
cylindrical stem. Wood, soft light, tough, and close-grained, of
agreeable fragrance ; goo.l for joiners and cabinet work ; often in re-
quest for coach building,
AFOOYNEA'I.
190. Ahtonia const,rlrta. F.M. (Fever Bark).—Diameter, oto 20
inches ; height, 40 to 50 foot. This treo is of frequent occurrence in
low moist scrubs, us woll as in tlic dry brigalow scrubs, Bark thick,
yellow, deeply fiesiirated, of intense bitterness. It is said that this
bark possesses the same properties ns quinine, and is coming much
in demand. One firm of wholesale druggists have a contract to bo
supplied with 8 lens of the bark.
SCROPUIAEXWEArD.
190 a. Duhoma myo-poroith, 3.1, Br.—Diameter, 3 to 10 inches;
height, 12 to 30 feet, A small-sized tree, with rough, cork-like
bark ; wood white and soft, of frequent occurrence on the banks of
fresh and brackish water creeks in the neighborhood of Brisbane. A
decoction of the leaves is said to cure optimlmic affections, and it ie
much sought after by some of our wholesale druggists to export to
other countries.
LECrUMIN OSEyTI.
191. Aeaciafalcata, Willd.—Diameter, 6 to 12 inches ; height,
20 to 30 feet. Small tree, wood hard, and much prized for making
stockwhip handles.
102. Acacia (jlanmcens, Willd.—Diameter, 12 to 18 inches;
height, 80 to 45 feet. Of frequent occurrence both in the scrubs and
in open forest lands, wood close-grained, and prettily marked,


193, Ai.uwia Cwnihujhami, Hook. —Diameter, 0 to 12 iuehua;
height, 20 to 30 foot. Sumll-aiwul tree, wood ohma-grahusd, and takes
goml polish ; found on the banks of the Brisbane.
10-t. Aroma mfid.na, I,hull. I daiuctcv, <5 to I*2 inches ; height,
30 to 10 foot. Found on acrubby laud iu the Darling I.)u\vun dis-
trict ; timber cluse-grjuned, and nicely marked.
195, A atria impluxa, bcnth.—Diameter, 12 to Id iuchoa ; height,
SO to 40 feet. Small-tree, found ou open forest ground j wood hard,
and close-grained.
Anuria Jlarpoii7t.il/hL KM.—Diameter, 12 to 20 inches ;
height, *io to 70 feet. A tall tree of frequent ooemreneo in the
brigalow acruhs. Timber hard, heavy, ami clastic, of a reddish
color, ami suitable Cor cabinet work.
197. Ararh h.iuhJh'’, Bouth. (hrigalow).—Diameter, 20 to 30
iuchoa ; height, s<> to 30 foot. This aperies covers inmionmi tracts of
rich scrub laud ; wood hard, cluau-grahiud. of a dark color, giving a
strong odor of violets.
198. Atowla domfiuiihn, A. (hum.- Diameter, (i to 12 inches ;
height, 20 to 35 feot. .In scrubs and open forest ground ; wood hard
aud close-grained.
199. Acocia drrunrns (vur . uuilhh), Hindi,—Diameter. (» to .10
inches ; hoil-hfc, ;w to -10 feet. This species is of vwrj frequent
ooovirroncc through the Darling Downs.
200. AmrUi ptuultihr, A. Ounn. (Weeping Myall).- Diameter, 0
to 1.2 inches j height, 20 to 35 feet. Small weeping tree, well known
for its violet-aecmtud wood, which is hard, elumi-gmineil, and beauti-
fully marked ; used by cahmct-nuvkors and turners ; iu high repute
for tobacco pipes.
201. Acttrlo stioiophi/Un, A. Cum. (lrcmwood).--~Diium:ter, 15 to
24 inches ; height, dn (;e 00 foot. On upon forest ground on the
Darling Downs. Timber is very hard, heavy, dosc-granicd, dark,
beautifully marked, and taken a line polish.
202. Aoaria nrruJbJia, A. hametor, (I to .18 inches ; height,
40 to 50 feet. Found ou the Albert Uivor j the trunk is beautifully
streaked with green ami white. The duramen is of a light-yellow
color, not unlike yellow-wuul, but somewhat harder.
203. Araaia pmninmih, Sieb.--Diameter, 2 to 1,(1 imhen ; height,
(5 to 12 feet, Scattered through open stony ridge*.
20-t. A/■ aria marrmlrma. lieiith, (Myall or Toney).- Diameter, 2
to ,12 inches j height, 3D to 50 feot, in scrubs and open forests ;
beautiful black, hard, and eluHO-graiuod wood, taking a very high
polish.
205. Ar.m'kt Wild. (Dead. l |, miHh).-~Diiunotor, 3to (I
inches •, h night, 12 to 18 feet. Wood dose, heavy, taking a good
polish. . .
2d(). Ararh. milJti'ifurmii, A. Ounn. —Diameter, 2 to 3 inches ;
height, 1,2 to 1,8 fuofc. " AVuod soft, nicely marked.
20). Arabia lhi}foUa> Wild.—Diameter, *1 to 0 inches ; height, 12
to 18 fact. In more or less open forests ; wood soft and elastic, suit-
able for axe handles.


208. Acacia M.—Diameter, 6 to 15 inches ; height,
20 to SO foet. Timber very hard, heavy, tough, and close-grained.
209. Aoaci't Onidium, Benth.—Diameter, 6 to 12 indies ; height,
12 to 25 feet. Wood dose-grained, blade, hard, and takes a good
polish.
210. Avuaia Bidwilll, Benth.'—Diameter, 10 to 1(» inches ; height,
20 to 30 foot. A small-sized tree ; timber hard, oloao-gminod, and
takes a good polish.
210 a. Anodes yrund‘l,% W, H. (Bitter Wood Acacia}. —Diameter,
21 to 36 inches ; height, 40 to 60 feet. This large tree is found in
the thickly-wooded scrubs near Murphy's Creek. .Bark thick,
fifjsurated, and containing a good dealof tanning nuitbor j wood hard,
with a bitter taste when newly cut, beautifully marked, and suitable
for cabinet-work and other purposes.
211. Alhhzi-i oaneawns, Benth.—Diameter, 10 to 20 inches • height,
30 to .50 feet. A beautiful spreading tree, found in open forests ;
wood close-grained and tough.
212. Albbj/la pmoera, Benth.—Diameter, 18 to 24 inches ; height,
30 to GO feet. A very ornamental tree ; timber is cloao-gmiuod,
easily worked, and in use for building purposes,
213. Atbizzia F. M.—Diameter, 12 to GO inches ;
height, 40 to 60 feet. A tree of common occurrence in stony scrubs
in the Kennedy District. Timber very hard, heavy, tough, and close-
grained. May prove useful for guustoaks, izc,, &c.
214. Peltophonm fernuylneum, Bonth. —Diameter, 24 to 30 Inches j
height, 40 to SO feet. A large and handsome tree, in the open forest
ground on the banks of Mackay ; the timber is much in request for
cabinet-work, &c., ko.
215. Eriftkriiha vesperlllio, Bcuth, (Coral Tree), —Diameter, ,12 to
15 inches 30 to 40 feet. Bather frequent, both on the coast
and in the interior j a beautiful tree when in fiowor ; wood soft, and
is used by the aborigines for making their shields.
216. Casiauonpei'niwii australc, A. Cunn. (Moruton Bay Clientnut).
—Diameter, 24 to 36 inches ; height, SO to 00 foet. A magnificent
ornamental tree, with large pinnate, green glossy leaves ; of frequent
occurrence on the banks of rivers, &o, The timber is dark and
prettily grained, not unlike waluut; occasionally used for cabinet
work, for which purpose it seems to be well suited.
217. £aiMet/asp , ingifoliu l FM.~Disi.uiGtQi', 12to 18inches s height,
40 to GO feet. A handsome and beautiful tree, with dense bright-
green glossy foliage ; on fertile banks and flats of rivers ; also on
basaltic ridges.
218. Cauda Brewstcvi t F. M,~Diameter, 3 to G inches ; height, 30
to 50 feet. A small tree of frequent occurrence in the brigalow
scrubs; wood fine-grained,
219. Dame.ua avhowa, W. H, (Queen Wood). —Diameter Cto 12
India* \ height, 15 to 30 feet. A very ornamental spreading, drooping
tree, with, bright-green foliage ; occurring on the Darlington Kangcs.
Its wood is hard, close-grained, with beautiful pink streaked linos,
and takes a beautiful polish. It is destined to take a prominent
position with cabinetmakers, also for decorative plantations.


UOSAChhE.
221. Parincinwii nonda. F. M. (Tho Nouda tree of North-oast
Australia). Diameter, 18 to 24indies; height, 50 to GO foot. A very
ornamental spreading tree. withpomlant foliage. The aborigines uao
tho'esculcnt drupes as food. Timber is soft, close-grained, and easily
Workecl, OOMBBKTAOM.
222. j Carmii'difi discolor, F. M.—'Diameter, 3 to G inches ; height
10 to 15 foot. Yury plentiful in the scrubs near Rockhampton ;
■wood close-grained and tough.
223. Tfirnwiali'i mohnuHUirp m F, M. Diameter, 0 to 12 inches ;
height, 15 to 25 foot. Occurring in tho forest laud near Fort Deni-
son ; timber hard and tough, splitting freely.
MALVAUIMC.
224. Laifan'iTht Paitmmis Don.—Diameter, 18 to 30 inches;
height, 40 to GO feet. Found on the alluvial river hanks of the Don
River, Port Denison ; timber white, dose-grained, easily worked,
and used for building purposes.
225. JlibiHCii* Idinwua, Limn—Diameter G to 8 inches ; height, 20
to 50 foot. Of fmprunt uocufcnoo on the coast; wood soft; tho
bark is used for nets and halving lines by tho aborigines,
KPA'OUI I »E/K
220, / J. l i , ovhocm‘]>a itiur'na, F. hi.—Diameter, (» to 12 inches;
height, 20 to GO feet. Very plentiful in tho cedar scrubs ; also upon
the sandy ridges upon ihuxuv’s and other islands. Vvoed hard,
cloao-grained, tough ; useful for turning, &e.
227. .htuKutpo'jiiu Uviradol-HN, U. Hr.—Diameter, 3 to (> inches ;
height, 12 to 15 feet. Very abundant on Sfcradhroko and Feasor’s
Islands; wood hard, dose-grained and beautifully marked.
00 FLITOII MS. Koto.—Tho numbura correspond with those of
the foregoing blocks of the same timbers,
2 Aumcaria t ’uimhigluuuii (Moreton liny I’iuo) 3 pieces.
3 Dammam rolmsta (Kauri nr Dundatha Pine).
4 Frenohi KndUehori;Cypress Pino).
G Freuelu I’arUitoroi (Muuutaiu Cypress).
12 Ccdrcla Toonu (lied Cedar; 2 pieces.
1G I'Tindorsia Australis (Flmdosa),
.14 Flimlersia maculosa (Spotted Tree of the colonists).
1G Flimlersia Bcnnettlana,
17 Flinderstu Sehottinna.
23a Dysoxylon Frasorauum (Rosewood oEN.S. Wales).
50 Alphitouia exeulaa (Mountain or lied Ask),
58 Tarriotia argyilendron (Silver Tree).
74 Ilium rhodantUuma (Deep Tel low wood).
75 Spondias plciogua (Blue Oudgoroo).
87 I‘huialyptuH Siderophloia (Iron Bark).
88 Kuealyp bus imieulafca (Spotted C um).
80 Eucalyptus saligna (tCey Cum).
01 Eucalyptus eorymboaa (liloodwood).


100 Eucalyptus citriorlora (('itiuu-secntcJ Gum).
120 Grevillia robusta (Silky Oak).
148 Gmelina Leichhardtii (Benth).
165 Petalostigma quadulare (Crabtree).
19G Acacia narpophylla (Scrub Rosewood).
107 Acacia excelsa (Brigalowj.
20u Acacia pendula (Weeping Myall).
201 Acacia stenophylla (Tronwood).
210 a Acacia grandis (Bitter wood Acacia).
221 Parinarium nouda (The Nouda Tree).
91 SCANTLINGS. Three feet long and three to four inches
thick. (The numbers correspond with those of the blocks
of the same timbers.)
4 Frenela Endlicheri (Cj press Pine).
18 Owenia Venosa "(.Sour Plum).
19 Owenia acidula (Rose Apple).
24 Melia composita (White Cedar).
50 Alphitonia excelsa (Mountain or Red Ash).
77 Sarccephalus cordatus (Leichhardt Tree).
91 Eucalyptus corymbosa (Eloodwood) -
92 WALKING STICKS.
Piycospevma Caccoxpadrix, Tenth. (Black Palm). — "Diameter, 6
to 8 inches ; height, 12 to 16 feet. A eery handsome palm of fre-
quent occurrence in the scrubs near Cardwell. The outer portion
of the wood is used for walking sticks.
Kenikt minor, F.M, (Slender Walking Stick Palm). —Diameter, I to
\an inch ; height 4to G feet. This species of palm forms elegant
tufts, crowned with 12 to 10 leaves or fronds. The stems are in
great repute for walking sticks.
Kenlia monostachya, F.M. (Walking Stick Palm). —Diameter 1,
to inch ; height, 6to 12 feet. The stems have been exported to
England for umbrella handles, Ac.
liaphis Jiahciliformii, Alt. (Ground Rattan Palm). —A small palm
having many stems growing in tufts from the same roots.
Calamus Menlhri, Wind© and Drude. (Small Stemmed Lawyer
Palm). —Of frequent occurence in the scrubs on the Brisbane, Pine,
and other rivers.
Calamus australis; Mart. (Slender reclining Lawyer Palm). —
Climbs to a great height, is very abundant in the coast scrubs at
Rockingham Pay, the Johnston, Daintree and other rivers. The
stems are used for walking sticks.
FiarjcjeUarxo, im/ica, Linn.—A tall glabrous climber, ascending to
the tops of large trees, occurring in great abundance in the moist
scrubs, from the southern border of Queensland to Cape York.
93 GOVERNMENT OF QUEENSLAND. ORNAMENTAL
STAND, with 142 Cups turned and polished, illustrating
the varieties of Timber indigenous to the Colony. Base-
ment of lied (edar (Cedrela toona) with mounting of
Tulip Wood (Jlarpuiiia pendula ; 2nd shelf, Kauri Pine
(Dammara robnsta] ; 3rd, Beech (Gmelina Leichbardti) ;
4th, Cypress Hue (Frenela Endlicheri); pillars, White


Wood (Ligmuuia .Patumnu), Tree Fern (Akoplitla australis,
11. Br.) ; Hur-lmsa, Kauri Pino (Dammam vobusfca) ; 2nd
shelf, Bod Cedar (Codrcla toona) j 3rd shelf, Cypress
Pine (Eronela Emllieheri) ; 3rd tier, Oauworipra (Dift-
silaria balnghioules), the vnac, Acaria luirpuphylla (Tlosa-
wood), Tim turnery by W, 8. Mackie, Albert and
Elizabeth streets, Briisbano.
1 Diaaib-m balnghioldes (Cuiuvoripra nr Teak}.
2 Alstom a rousti-mUi !'. (Fever bark, 8 cups.)
3 Pontaelioras Australis (White (Judnr of the Unionists).
*1 Groyillua pnlyaiaehya.
5 Casnraiua otpusebifolia (.Swamp Oak).
0 Mftba gominata (Ebony).
7 Ilabonia pyvifurmis.
8 Paiulamia pednnculatua (Screw Pino)
9 Xylomelum pyrifonuo (Native Pear)
10 GxeviUua rolmsta (Silky Oak).
11 Gruvillea ITuiiana.
12 Grovilleu gibhasa,
18 Grovillea striata.
14 Maeadamia term folia (Queensland Nub).
15 Stonocarpus aimmbns (Tulip True).
15 Stemicavpiirt saligmis (Biiofwuod).
17 Vitox lignum vitas (lignum-viUr).
18 Aoacia glaucescenn.
19 Acacia pomlnla (Weeping .Myall).
20 Auacia nerriifnlia.
21 Pdialostlgma iiundrilocuhm: (Crab True).
22 Lyaieavpus termhiUa.
211 Aoacia maeradonia
24 Acacia cultriformia
25 Albm-ia Thozctiana,
20 Albmia prncera.
27 Aoaoia pemiinovvis.
28 Cuatanospermum auatmlc.
29 Aoaoia pendula (Weeping Myall).
30 Aoaoia JArnesiaua (T)ead Finish).
81 Acacia linifolia.
32 Acacia doratnxylou.
33 Acacia uxoulsa (Bvigalow).
34 Gafniarina cfpusotiftiliu (Swamp Oak).
35 Harpullia pemhiia (Tulipwood).
30 Uanthium oleifolium.
37 Eucalyptus Stuartiana.
88 Exocarpiift labifolia (Broudleavcd Cherry Tree).
39 Oasuarina torulosa (Forest Oak or Boofwnod).
40 Eucalyptus pilularis (Blackbutt).
41 Oupania xyloearpa.
'l2 Alpliitonia exeolsa (Mountain Ash).
48 Owouift vonoaa [Sour I'lmu).
44 Nobclca ovata


45 Livistonaoe incrmie (Partridge Wood).
4G Sarcocephalus cordatus (Leichhardt Tree).
47 Hormogyne cotiuifolia.
48 Oanthium luciclutn.
49 Caryea arborea.
50 Flindersia australis (Flindosa).
52 Apophylium auoraalum.
58 THmmara robusta {Kauri Pine).
64 Myrtus Hilli (Iron Wood).
55 Qmelina Leiehhardtii (Beech).
5(» Capparis nobilia (Native Pomegranate),
57 Frensla Parlatoroi (Mountain Cypress).
58 Atlantia glauoa (Native ICum-knat).
59 Eucalyptus crebra (White Narrow-leaved Ironbark).
GO Poclocarpua elata (She Pine).
61 Cupania Ciummghami (Native Tamarind).
62 Citrus australasica (Native Lima).
63 Excoeoaria agallocha (Poison Tree).
G 4 Acacia decumus.
65 Eucalyptus acmenioides.
CG Plincloraia Scliottiana.
G 7 Heterodendron diversifolium.
C 8 Santalum lanceolatum (White Sandal Wood).
09 Atalaya salicifolia,
70 Bronchi rhomboidca (Cypress Pino).
71 Eucalyptus corymbosa (Blood Wood).
72 Eucalyptus melanophloia (Ironbark, grey).
78 Eucalyptus fibrosa (Stringy Bark).
74 Tristania conferta (Box).
70 Baekhousia oifcriodom,
76 Phodorayrtua phsidioidea,
77 Acaoia harpopliylla,
78 Citrus australis (Native Orange),
79 Bosiatoa sapindiformia.
80 Araucaria Cunninghamii (Moreton Bay Pine).
81 Dysoxylon rufum,
82 Flinderaia Bcnnettiana (Bogum Bogum),
83 Syncarpia laurifolia.
84 Eucalyptus siderophloia (Ironbark).
85 Eucalyptus Planchoniana.
86 Eucalyptus teaaelaris
87 Myrtia triucrvia.
88 Orletes excelsa.
89 Calliatemon lanceolatua (Bottle-brush Tree).
90 Eucalyptus citriodora(Citron-scented Gum).
91 Callistemon saliguus.
92 Bramophila Mitchelli (Bastard Sandal Wood).
93 Eackliousia myrtifolia.
94 Eucalyptus inaculata (Spotted Gum).
95 Mellaeucanodosa.
96 Myrtua Eidwilli.


07 Eucalyptus hoteyoidea (Blue Gum).
93 Exocarpua cnpresaitonnia (Cherry Tree).
09 llhodaninia avgantoa, '
100 Bankaia ftoimua.
101 Acronyohia imporforata.
102 Acronyohia Bavieri.
109 llhus rhodanthoma (Bark-yellow Wood).
10 t Spondma Solamlri. '
105 Eucalyptus lopbdpliloba,
10(5 Goijora Muollori,
107 Acronyohia hums.
109 Goijera naliuifolia.
109 Evodia mieroccioca.
110 Oauuarina suberosa.
111 Dnphnandm micrautha.
IX2 Parimuamu umula,
113 Tormiunlia discolor.
IX-t Growia latifolia.
IXS Troolmoarpa lauriim.
IXO Loucopcigon lanoenlaiua.
IX7 Polbophorum femmuemm.
lift Biu'kluya syriugifoua.
HP Brioilulia uxaltata.
l*Jo Mallobiw discolor.
Xj»l, MaUatvw luwipbilus.
Xji'j lUimjiyyua luLucpi'pa,
Xoft Qargdlia australis,
X2l Ncpludinm tumontoaum.
125 Cupauia Horraba.
121 i Cupaula pHtuidovliuH,
127 Erytbroxyhm auatralo.
128 -Panax ologaus.
120 Pavi'intia ai^yrodcndvon.
X3Q t Umhanm pittospariildoa.
I,‘U Eugenia Vontouatit
.;12 nh;a paukmlafca {Native Olivo).
ijXft Eliudorsia Oxley an ft.
raHtanospomvuu auatralo.
1.15 Moruavnlotu* galli ((Jnokaxmr Thorn.)
X:UI llauthiuju viimniifolium.
157 (Nairobi toona (Bod Cedar).
IftS Marlon. vitiunsi* (Musk Tree).
IHfl TviaLiuiia nonhohn.
1-tti Molia oomposita (White Qodar).
1-H Baviusia arbmm (Queen Wood).
01 ({OVKUNMKNT OF QUEENSLAND OBN A MENTAL
STAN 1) with turned ami polialiod Cup a and Drops, illus-
trating 155 varieties o( timber indigenous to the colony.
Tlu‘ lower part n£ tlio stand and pillar are of turned
beech LdchhavilU), The upper portion and


pillar, turned from red cedar (Qsdr&la toonci Rox ). Th°
upper shelf of cypress pine (Frenala jßndlioheri Parlat„)»
and the urn oE dark yellowpod (Rhus rhodanthmah
The turnery by D. Hendrey, in the employ of Hon. V/*
Pettigrew s
CUPS.
1 Acacia faruesiana, Willd, (Bead Finish).
2 Santalum lanceolatum, R. Br. (White Sandal Wood),
3 Syucarpia lauxifolia, Ten. (Turpentine Tree or Pearbbi 0
of Fraser’s Island.)
4 Triatania oonferta (Brown Box).
5 Grevillea pulyalachya,
G Ficus, Sp. (Poison Tree).
7 Eucalyptus saligna, Sm. (Grey Gum).
8 Stenocarpua sinuatus, 8.. Br.
9 Eucalyptus resinifera, Sm. (Red Mahogany).
10 Citrus australis, Planch. (Native Orange).
11 Dissiliaria baloghioides (Teak),
12 Eucalyptus corymboaa, Sin. (Bloodwood).
13 Canfcmum lucidmm
14 Eucalyptus pilularis, Sm. (Blackbutt),
15 Maba fasciculosa, F.M.
10 Acacia silinia.
17 Eucalyptus crebra, F.M. (Harrow-leaved Iron Bark).
18 Chvysophyllum pruniferum, F.M.
19 Alsbonia consbricta, F.M. (Fever Bark).
20 Flindersia manulosa, F.M. (Spotted Tree).
21 Eucalyptus botryoides, Stn. (Blue Gum),
22 Eucalyptus plauchoniaua, F.M.
23 Stenocarpuß salignua, R. Br.
24 Tarriebia argyrodendron (Silver Tree),
25 Acacia pendula (Weeping Myall),
26 Termiualialatifolia.
27 Lagunaria Pafcarsoni, Bon, (White Hibiscus).
28 Banksia integrifolia (Honeysuckle).
29 Acacia Ounninchami, Hook.
30 Sarcocepbalus oordatus, Miq. (Leichhardt Tree),
31 Acacia fasciculifera, F.M.
82 Canthium lucidem, Hook.
33 Myrtus aemenoides, F.M.
34 Leptospermum Flavescens, Sm.
36 Alhizzia caneacens, Benth.
36 Owenia venoaa, F.M.
37 Acacia neriEolia—A Gun.
38 Eugenia grandis, Wight,
39 Acacia harpophylla, F.M.
40 Frenela rhomboidea, Endl. (Cypress Pine).
41 Achonychia Bauerii, Schott,
42 Acacia glauceacens, Willd,
43 Trochocarpa laurina, E.Br.
44 Hormogyne cotinifolia, Sm.


45 Exowii’jmfl oaproßßiformia, Lab. (Cherry tree).
45 Briodolia oxaltata, 4?,jNI.
47 Pcltßopliorum famiginenm, Benth.
48 Wmliudi’ft pubcna, Mcisaii.
40 Oivaunriua Oinmiugliami (She Oak).
50 I'kigonia Vontemitii, Bentli.
01 (Jryptocarya patontinerria, F.M.
52 Pctftloatigina miadrilooulare, F.M. (Crabtree').
OH Hriwillia Hilliaua, F.M,
54 Notulaca Miorocarpa, Il.Br.
50 .Davioaa arberoa (Queemvoodj,
5(5 Gvttwia latiEolia.
57 Livintmia auHtualiy, Tl.Bv, (Cabbage tree).
08 llhodannvia tmievvia, 81.
01) Harpullia pcndula, Planch. (Tulip wood).
00 Onpauia aoiTftbn, F. M,
01 Oallcßtmum lanocolatUH, B.C. (Bottlo-bmab tree).
02 Oaroya arharea,
08 (Uiijara Moullori.
04 Dammara vobuaba (ICauri pine).
05 Lcmoopognulancoolatna, 11. Br.
015 KUuh rbodauthema, F.M. (Yellow wood).
07 Hammara robuata, Moore. (ICauri pine),
OS b’romda Kndliehorl, Parlat. (Cypress pine).
Of) Mryhua lUllii, Bcuth, (Irouwood),
70 lUaigiiuiivi lllioiklii, Blmnc. (Mangrove).
71 Acacia Chudium, Bonth.
72 Acacia docurrens.
70 OaHuariiui toruloaa (Forest oak).
74 Paiidauus pedimealafcris, E.Br. (Screw pine).
75 Eucalyptus coryiubosa, Sm. (Bloodwood).
7(5 Glycosinia pontaplvylla, Corr.
77 Alpluiionia oxcolaa (Mountain Ash).
78 Acacia Falcata, Wiild,
71) Acacia glauueaccms, Willd.
7ft A. [larpuTlia pendulai Planoh. (Tulip wood).
SO I'Aoaria agailoolm, Linn. (Bivor Poison tree).
01 Sbcuocarpus sinuatus (Tulip tree).
82 Casuartmi oquoatifaliaj Foxat. (Swamp oak),
80 Acacia ImiEolia, Sm.
81- Acacia havpophylla, F.M,
85 Caprin MitcliotU.
Hfi KutiolyptUß oorymbosft (Bloodwood).
87 Acacia oxcolaa,
88 Biiortlyptna botryoidcs, Sm. (Blue gum).
SO Acacia Oimningbamii.
00 Acacia saliciua, Until.
01 Acacia oultiformis.
03 (Jupania sorrata, F.M.
1)3 Eucalyptus inicrooorys, P.M,
04 Eucalyptus aaligua (Grey gum).


€5 Owenia cerasifera (Rose apple).
06 Eucalyptus terminalis, F.M.
07 Eucalyptus botroides, Sm. (Blue gum),
98 Xylomeyum pyrifornie, Knight. {Native Pear).
96 Eremophilla, Mitchelli, Benth. (Bastard sandalwood).
100 Bauksia serrafca (Honeysuckle).
101 Maha germinata.
DROPS.
1 Myrtus Bidwilli, Benth.
2 Acacia Farnesiana, Willd.
3 Rhodomyrtus psidioides, Bentli.
4 Eucalyptus reaiuifera.
5 Vitex lignum vitte, A.Cunm
6 Mallotus phillipinensis, F.M.
7 Casuarina cquisitifolia, Forst.
8 Cupania aerrata, F.M.
9 Petalostigma cjuadriloculare, F.M. (Orab tree).
10 Myrtus aomenoides, F.M.
11 Flindersia maculosa, F.M.
12 Eugenia grandis, Wight.
IS Chryaophylhun pruniferura, F.M.
14 Myrtus Hilli, Benth.
15 Vitex (Lignum Vitas), A.Cnmi.
16 Leptospermura flavesoens, Sm,
17 Vitex Lignum Vitae, F.M.
IS Acacia Farnesiana, Willd.
10 Grevillia robusta, !R.Br, (Silky oak).
20 Eugenia Smithi, Poir.
21 Terminalia latifolia.
32 Rhus Rhodantheina, F.M. (Dark Yellow wood).
23 Backhousia citriodom, F.M,
24 Rhodamnia trinervia, Blume.
25 Geltis ingons, F.M.
2G Dissilaria baloghioidea, F.M. (Teak),
27 Sarcocephalns cordatus, Miq. (Leichhardt Tree).
28 Callestiuion salignus, D.C.
29 Flindersia Australis,
30 Acacia farnesiana, Willd.
95 BOTANIC) GARDENS, Brisbane. BARKS Medicinal and
and Tanning.
Bark of the Blue Gnm {Eucalyptus botryaides, Sm.)
Used in decoction as a domestic remedy for
dysentery.
Bark ol_ the Ironbark [Eucalyptus siderophloia y Benth).
Is in great estimation for its tanning qualities, and
can be obtained in any quantity.
Mangrove Bark {Brurjidera liheedii , Blume). Used for
tanning purposes, also an astringent in medicine.
Green Wattle Bark {Acacia moilissima. Willd). Used
for tanning purposes.


Black Wattle Bark -dcmoo (Incurmm, Wind.) This Lark
Is much prized for tanning purposes, containing from
13 to 33 per cent, of tannin when dry.
.Hitter Wood Bark (Aoiwi'ct i/rand «J W. H. This bark
contains much tannin, lint the per centage is not
known,
Bark of Anwia irunimroix, Liieb. Used for tanning.
Fever Hark (Aldonia caiiHrlcA, F.M.) Used in cases of
fever ami ague, having most of the of
quinine.
Crab-tree Bark (P ttalost <jaui <imdyVcoulare, F M.)
Possesses a powerful bitter, uml qualities somewhat
similar to Peruvian bark.
Loaves of DuhoUUi myoporiouln-t, A docootion of the
leaves is used as a remedy for opthalmia.
Leaves of Kuealvplus, Cibriodora. Leaves of Eucalyptus,
Citrata. Both of these species of citron scented
Kucalyps, am used in perfumery, the second being the
more stiongly fragrant. ■ The leaves are used by the
northern miners for stidling pillows, under the idea
that they act as a preventative of fever.
0(3 ''OOlvl'l. W. D., Westwood. Collection of Native Woods,
pel talicd.
07 ({OHDON, J., Townsville. Mangrove Bark.
08 MAOPHIOU.SON, A,, Brisbane, Timbers.
A collection of Polished. Specimens, both useful and
ornamental. Collected ami prepared by exhibitor.
00 IMSTHIK, J., Brisbane. Timbers.
Ouo Cedar Board, and one piece Yellow-wood.
1.00 .PETTUUIMW, Hon. W., M.L.C., Brisbane. Trophy of
Mouldings, illustrative of varieties of Queensland woods.
101 QUEENSLAND COMMISSION. Timbers, polished.
102 QUEENSLAND OOVKHNMENT. Trophy of Wood Panels,
. polished, allowing varieties of Quonaland timbers.
10.‘> Q.UMENSLANI.) UOVIMINMENT. Cross section of Queens-
land Kauri I’ino, grown at Nooaa; cut 12 feet from tho
ground.
104 ROCKHAMPTON COMMITTEE. Sixty varieties of new
Native Timbers.
10.1 ROCKHAMPTON COMMITTEE. Collection of Indi-
genous Timbers of the Rockhampton district; 10 varieties
polished.
100 SPENCE, I)., Cairns. Collection o£ Indigenous Woods.
107 BTUUGESB, K., Rockhampton. Trophy of Turnery Work,
executed to display indigenous Timbers.
108 STAICI'HI, K. T„ F.L.S., Brisbane. Duboisia leaves, dried,
louse, and pressed. .
100 ST ADIEU, K. T\, F.LS., Brisbane. Ptorosigma Yisonra
(Queensland Bitter Bark), 10 lbs., with preserved twigs of
the tree.


110 STAXGER, K. T., P.L.S., Briabunc. Alstonia tkmstrictn, lt>
lbs. (Quinine Bark).
Class 44. Products of Hunting, Shooting, Pishing, and Spon-
taneous Products. Machines and Instruments! coll-
ected therewith. Collections and Drawings of Tor-
restrial aud Amphibious Animals, of Birds, Kggs,
Pishes; of Cetacea, of Molluaoa, and Crustacea.
Products of Hunting and Shooting: Pam and
Skins, Hair, Bristles, Undressed Feathers, Bown,
Horn, teeth, Ivory, Bone, Tortoise-shell, Musk,
Oastoreum, and analogous products. Products of
Pishing : Train Oil, Spermaceti, tire. Whalebone,
Ambergris, Sheila of Molluaca, Pearls, Mothoi'-of-
pearl, Sepia, Purple, Coral, Sponge. Vegetable
Products of the Earth, obtained without culture,
Mushrooms, Truffles, ’Wild Fruit, Lichens used
as Dyes, Food, and Fodder; Fermented Sap;
Peruvian Bark; Useful Barks and Filaments ;
Wax, Resinous Gums • India-rubber, Gutta-porolia,
&o. Traps and Snares ; Fishing Lines and Hooks,
Harpoons, Nets, Baits, and Fishing Apparatus.
Apparatus and Instruments for gathering the
products obtained without culture.
11l ALDER, A., Brisbane. Natural History Specimens. “In
extremis.” Group, Native Boar and Wedge-tail Eagle. -
IX2 ALDER, A., Brisbane. Natural History Specimens “No
Laughing Matter.” Group, Carpet Snake and Laughing
Jackasses.
113 ALDER, A., Brisbane. National History Specimens. “A
Surprise at tha Mid-day Camp,” Group of three
Wallabies.
114 ALDER, A., Brisbane. Natural History Specimens. " The
Successful Hscator.” White-bellied Sea Eagle with
Bream.
113 ALDER, A., Brisbane. Natural History Specimens, Two
Lyre Birds."
116 ALDER, A.. Brisbane. Moretou Bay Turtle, preserved with
shell complete.
117 -jOXLN, Mrs. C.j Brisbane. I Case of Six Birds
(PiUorhh pw.idise tj, Rifle Birds fPtllorhis Virf-ofumj.
Queen Victoria Rifle Bird—male and female. Ora-Mic.-
dophera. magnified (Magnificent Rifle Bird)—male ami
female, and young male. -The above are contained in


yellow wood and collar oases, and were mounted by tlie
late Charles Coxon, C.M.2.5. £25 for any single case, or
£BO for tlie four.
118 OOXMN, Mrs. 0., -Brisbane. 1 Cnae Male and Female
Bower Birds and Playground {Chlumydodwa nuchalis).
Ill) CCXEN, Mrs. C. ( Brisbane. 1 Case Spotted Bower Birds
{(). males, with playground.
120 COX lON, Mrs. C., Brisbane. Regent Birils (Scrictths mhmut)}
two males in full plumage—two young males and one
female with them—bower and ornamentation.
121 DIGGEES, S., Brisbane. Cabinet Oollootion of Queensland
Beetles and Butterflies. £250.
122 iyi CKlb<iSB, S., Brisbane. One Case Foreign Beetles.
123 DIG-HUSH, S., Brisbane. Two Volumes—Birds of Aus-
tralia.”
121; COXEN, Mrs. 0., Hullmba, Brisbane. Pair of Nautilus
.Shells, carved; also Cowries.
125 CRATE,.I. 8., Brisbane. Collection of Vegetable Sponges,
Coiyainloth or Bitter Cucumber ; also seed of same.
120 CMJUjIVEU, T. A., Tliornbowmgh. Collection of Native
Birds from the Norman River (,£100), as under :
1, [StriiC
2 (SlriiJslia tip.)
{UaVadur Sp.)
4 Maminm minor
fi Haunctt
0 Faloo Melanoccphalus
7 Spuv-wiugod Plover
s (21jn« Sp.)
<) JS T ]feiiconrx OaJedonkuß
Podhcjm AnatruUft
11 OrtUcncMus Grallariws
12 (AWco tip-)
13 Black Xbm
11 Kwamp Pheasant
Id ydtapus PukheUa
jy .Duccio Lrovlvi
18 White Egret
ill Pink-eared l)uek Mnlarorhipirhm Mcmbranaceus
op Cacaiua Qah’Ha
Iferotlius Pkata
y.j Brown's Wren J\ fakir ns Ommtaiuß
23 Blue Wren „ hmnhcrti
21 White-throatedHi'meyoatox’ Afs.Hikrr.plnA Alhoyulans
25 Fnrd'ihdm Uropiyialis
20 Swallow Dlomam .Dtaami hivumlimeam
27 Sun Bird
28 Austral Sun Bird NwiirUvs Australis ■
22 Rod-throated Honoyoator HJnlomophila RubuguUms


30 White-eared Grass Finch Potplila Icvvotin
31 Banded ~ ~ Ciruta
32 Atrophyy’m 1* (Diggles)
33 Banded Honeyeater Jfyzomd / Fedora.is
34 Yeilowhellied Smierorinis Smic.ro/ ww/uwwpbs
35 Medium Grass Bird
36 Speckled-winged Dove {Ueopeh'a Sp.)
37 Black Fantail Flycatcher
(Shepherd’s Companion)
38 Banded Thickhead P Fada'a
39 Plain Honeyeater
40 Small Fantail Blipidura rvppins
■4l Little Micrceca _ ( Micrceca Sp. )
42 Yellow-breasted .Robin Eojsa tHa Australis
43 Kingfisher Podirhaiaph.vs j yrrhopyyia
44 Peaceful Dove. GeopeUa tri.ryii'Ca
45 Tawny-grass Bird Sphenvrvs ydvatv.s
-16 Horsfield’s Bush Lark Mir. fra HorfaVdi
47 Ground Lark Mirofra Brown'd
48 White-ramped Wood Artamus A/divert rs
Swallow
49 White-shouldcrd Campe- Compephaya hnmcra’.'s
phaga
50 Luuated Thickhead Parhycejhala Simplex
51 Black Shafted Robin
52 Small Cuckoo Tamproi oerix
53 Tree Climber (medium) Cllmaeteri'i^Melanocephahis
•54 Pigeon Soj ho] haps phtmiyera
55 Sordid Friar Bird TropidorhyncJms SonUdns
56 Temporal Pomatorhinus Fomotorh 'n> s tern; oralis
-">7 Ptistes Coecbieopterrs
58 Gracuh s p< virod/'is
59 Barred-shouldered Dove Qmpdia Jnimeralis
60 Galar
61 Eed-knee’d Dottrel Erythoyonys Clnctns
(52 Spotted Bower Bird Chlamydera Mncnlota
(53 Pitta Strep'tans
•54 CJamydodera Cervivmtris
05 Piiloris pare disens
66 Topknot Pigeon Leplialainms Antarcticus
67 Yellow-bellied Sphicorthens
6S “ Dollar,” or Roller Bird Cor a das pndfica
69 Magnificent Fruit Pigeon PUHnopus
70 Black Cockatoo
71 Cockatoo
72 Plain Turkey
73 Hhnantopus Jeueocepha’vs
74 Radjah Shiel Drake Tadorra Eadjnh
75 Curlew Sand-piper
76 Boohook Owl Athene Boohook


77 Bronze-wing Pigeon
78 _ Stamiopcra Umoolor
78 Australian 800-ontor Meropsornatus
HO Para Jacara
81 tfiießa striata
B*2 Biclumo’s Finch /iMrGWa! Biokammi
8» Crimson Finch ~ phaeton
H‘i Hcd-taded Finch „ ruficauda
8«1 .‘irtamiis mhiov
80 Donacola Gantaneothorax
H 7 Whitu-uhaftcd Fantailod
Flycatcher
88 Fautailed Heed Warbler
HI) Shrike
i)D White Goshawk
9l King Lory Aprosniirium Scapu’aius
i)2 Orange-fronted Ephthia-
miva
OH Beautiful Grass Finch (rare)
!)T Airntralian sluivullor Spatula .RhyuchoUs
Ho (Hare) Zodwopa GidlimHi
127 HARTMANN, C. H., Toowoomba. Collection of Insects
injurious to trues mid plants.
128 I’A lUUJKY. LAM 15, & KNOX, Sydney. Collection of Pearl
Shell from the Toms Straits iVishev.iea,
12!) FTl'd) HER, (T. L., Keerotaiy School of Arts, Rockhampton.
Six. cases Entomological Specimens, found near Rock-
hampton ; preserved by exhibitor.
Gill QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Collection of Coral from
the Groat Barrier Reef,
in I. QUEENSLAND GOVERN MENT. Colloctinn of Shells,
1.82 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. .Four Rams’ Heads
(preserved and monutod by A. Alder, Taxidermist, Bria*
bane).
inn QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT 1 . Guo Stuffed' Male
Dugoug or Sea Cow [ll iVr.om Autfra /s), estimated to be
•ii) years ohl wlum caught,
i;u QUEENSLAND COMMISSION. Scouted Irmiburk Gum
Lumvoh, from Alaybowu. and Essence extracted there-
i;to HOCK HAMPTON (JO.UMI [TEE. Natural dilatory Speei-
nmtiM.
mil UAINRIRD, Bowen. Collection of Laud and Mamie
Sheila. A(5 10h.
in 7 ROBINSON, W. K., Toowco nbu. Queensland Scrub Birds,
ms SANDROOJC, U. F„ Bowen, Cod.eetum of Coral and Shells,
ini) TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Two Native Cats.
I Water Rat, 2 Scrub Wallabies, 1 V Sugar
Sipum)!. 1 Kangaroo, 1 Koala (native hear) with yomig,


1 Koala (native bear), 2 Rock Wallabies, J Kau.aroo
Rat (male), 2 Rock Wallabies—mounted by A. Aider,
Brisbane.
140 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Collection of
Conchologic Specimens, as follows, viz, ■ —-I Uypruoa
tigris, Moreton "Bay; 2 0. Mnuritlana, Bowcm ; 2 ( .
Vitellus. Moreton Bay ; 3 0. Arabica, ditto j 4 (J, Annins,
ditto; 2 C. Ebnrna, ditto; 2 0. Caurica, ditto; 2 0.
Lynx, ditto j 2 Cl. Crosa, ditto ; S C. Linmcinn, ditto ; 1
0. Zanthoclon, ditto ; 30. Caput Sorpentia, ditto ; 3 0.
Helvola. ditto; 3 C. Moneta, ditto; SC. (JLindustina,
ditto ; 3 C. Macula, ditto ; 1 0. Subvimlia, ditto ; 2 O.
Ventriculus, ditto; 3 0. Ervones, ditto; 2 Avulti ovum,
ditto ; 1 Voluto Magnifica, ditto; 2V. Linoata, ditto ;
2V. Zebra, Kcppel Bay; 1 V. Huokeri ; 1 V. Morriaii j
IV, Maculato, Bowen ; 1 Conns C'apitanens, Mnroton
Bay; 2 Oliva Porphyritica, ditto; 2 ITydatitia I’hyeis,
ditto ; 4 Turbo Patholatus, Bowen; 2 T. Porpliyroads,
Moreton Bay ; 1 T Laimmiferns, ditto ; 2 Chrysnstunia
Nicobariea, ditto ; 1 Umbrella Indica, ditto ; 1 Scalaria
Pretiosa, Keppel Bay ; 1 Nerita Maxima, Mnrofcon Hay ;
X N. Annulata, ditto ; 1 N. Plicata, ditto ; I N. Groaaa,
ditto; IN. Costata, ditto ; 2 N. Lineata, ditto ; 3 N.
Brngeri, ditto ; 2N. Atro-purpuroa, ditto; 2 IST. Afcrata,
ditto ; 2 N. Delphinula, ditto ; 1 Plnronoctia Japouica,
ditto ; 1 Venus Sculpta, ditto j IV. Lamavltii,'ditto ; X
V. Pnerpera, ditto; 3 Tapes Litterata. ditto j 2 T. Turgidn,
ditto ; 1 Craasatella Cumiugi, ditto ; 3 Asaphia Ilugoaa,
Cape York ; 2 Felix Cunninghamii, Moreton Distrust;? 2
F. Xnformis, Mackay ; 2 F. Pachyatyla ; 2 F. Riuvnaloyi;
3i\ Rainbirdii; 3F. Coxi ; 2F. Bloomfield!; 2F. Ma-
conelli, Dunmdur; 1 F. Falconari, Brisbane; 2 F. Bi-
partita, Cape York ;2 F. Cruftoni j 3 F. Yulci; 3 I'V
Imei ; 3 F. Wbartnni ; 2 P. O’Comiellensis ; 2 P. Gratiosa-
-141 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. One pair of
Aquita Andax (wedge-tailed Eagle), mounted by A. Aider,
Brisbane.
142 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Stuff©X Sped-
men of Ceratodus Forsterii t witli preserved lung and con-
tents of stomach,
143 WICKHAM, G, Jr, Rosenthal. Opossums' Fur, Uj lbs,, tho
produce of two opossums.
144 WILLIAMS, A., Light-mile Plains, near Brisbane. Chinn-
mon Bark, fjo u Fodr-Yeah-Oi.I) Treks.
145 BI.AKKNLEy. 0. J., Brisbane. Autographs of ('olobratocl
Men.
BOYD. A.. 1., Brisbane. Collection of Aboriginal Curios
147 JOraSTONIi, I!.. Sub-Inspector, Herbert Hive,•. Collodion
ot Aboriginal Weapons unci Utensils.


148 i’AIxMWU, Hon A. JRM.L.A., Colonial Secretary of Queens-
land, Collection of Native Implements pud Aboriginal
Carina.
14Q PAIiMEU, Hem. A. H., Colonial Secretary of Queensland.
Collection of Now Guinea Cariosities.
150 PATiMBR, Mon, A. H., M.L.A. Two Mummies from the
coast of New Guinea.
.151 SACHS, I* 1 . L., Brisbane. Mummy from Central Queens-
land.
162 STAIUHU, IC T„ KTj.S., Brisbane. Collection of Queens-
land Spears, Shields, Swords, Nullah. Nullahs, and other
Aboriginal Curias,
01m Agricultural Products not used for Food.
Toxtito maturialti, Haw Gotten, Flax and Hemp,
you tolled and unaoutohod ; Textile Vegetable Fibres
of all kinds ; Wool, washed or unwashed;
Ooooous of the Silkworm. Various Agricultural
Products used in. Manufactures, in Pharmacy, and
for Household purposes ; Oleaginous Plants ; Oil,
Wax, Resin. Tobacco in Loaves or Maunfachired.
Gorman Tinder. Tanning and Dyoing substances.
Preserved Fodder, and Substances specially
intended for Feeding Cattle.
153 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. Indigenous Pasture
Grasses ami Fodder Hunts.
The gradual extinction of our Native Grasses, proceeding
principally from a system of overstocking which has
obtained in this colony, has rendered necessary the
introduction of now varieties, which from their
peculiar Imbita would, when cultivated, ensure a
supply of pasturage throughout the year, and especi-
ally at those seasons when the indigenous grasses are
in an inactive .state. At the, same time there are
many varieties found in Queensland whieh, when
sown with duo regard bo climatic influence, have been
found to llouriah exceedingly well. The serious
attention o i our graders baa been drawn to the
subject, and largo quantities of seed have been
distributed and grown with sue cess.
Aiu?ropfnim tmunlulu*, bVirek. (Blue Grass).—An excellent
Hummer grass of an upright habit of growth good
pasture, hub is not very productive during the winter
months.
Aiuh'oiHifjon ryhnthohh'.H) F. M.—Found on the Darling
Uow'im. lb is a very superior grass, and stock arc
considered to thrive bettor upon it than upon most
other grasses. It produces a heavy crop of rich


succulent herbage, much relished by all doHCriptioiiH
of stuck. It spreads from tho roots, and also stsuda
freely.
Avdropoyon Qryllm, Liun.—An excellent posture grass,
easily recognised by its golden beard. It produces a
large qiuantity of feed during tho uumiuur months,
and is met with throughout Queensland, generally
upon high land.
AntlropoyoiiJlalepenm* Sib.—-'MI growing perennial grass,
valuable for both hay and pasture. Is an excellent
cattle grass, though not much sought uffcor by sheep.
In the Northern districts it grows strong and auci-
culeiit, resembling a oultivated sorghum. There uro
several varieties of this Jiao grass.
Anclmpogon montanus, Itoxb.—A tall, strong-growing,
coarse grass, deep-rooted, and of stoloiiifornua habit,
found on the Darling Downs, and is partial to rich
hats. The flower panicles possess a peculiar perfume.
Amlropoyon nervotnis, Kott- (Ihit-taibgrasa),-—An upright-
growing grass \ found throughout the colony, mthar
coarse, but yields a fair amount of feed, which is
readily eaten by cattle,
Andropogon penums, Wilid.-—Good pasture grass, very
generally distributed, stands drought well mul is a
fair winter grass if the weather is not too novoro.
It may be recognised by the little pit upon the
glume
Androgen refyaetus, lb 13 (Kangaroo tlrana) --An
excellent grass for either pasture or hay, common in
open country m tho southern parts of the colony f t
. is a very productive summer grass, but nudum little
growth during the winter unless upon sheltered forest
land Its roots have a strong aromatic, flavor
Andropogm roU7>oel aides, Stoud—A large grass found on
•■. the rivers of northern Queensland Its uuhu rinoa bo
the height of Bft It yields a largo quantity of fodder
as its culm, seed, and foliage, together with tho base
of its thick stem are eagerly eaten by cattle and
horses
ATuiropogohiHtiaeiiß, lb B —A robust perennial and ono
of the 1 tallest of our tropical grasses Tho ilowor-
skalks attain a height of 9ft, and are.hard and ciuio-
like; but a quantity of leafy feed is produced at
their base Its strong and wiry roots penetrate from
|-wu to -three feet into the ground. Oattlo mid
horses are extremely fond of this grass
Ani/iudirki ahbtralis, h,. 13 (Ommncm Kangaroo (Irnas)
—A. tall, perennial upright-growing grass, often ,‘3
fcet:,m height The roots, are strong, fibrous, and
neiiebratiiig It is found in all parts of Australia,
forma but few perfect sued? 1 , and those do not


germinate freely It is one of the finest and moat
useful of the indigenous grasses _lt remains green •
during tho summer, hut turns a little brown in tho
autumn, when its nutritive qualities are at tlio
highest. Horses keep in hotter condition on this
grass, doing hard work, than cm almost any other
species of native grass
Anfhhih'ia aminwr, h\M. (Darling Downs). —Oat grass ;
one of the moab productive grasses in Australia, and
unlike other Kangaroo grasses, it possesses the ad-
vantage of hoing a prolific seeder,
AnifrHtiriu c’liutr, L. (Kangaroo gin as of Northern
Queensland). —This is an excellent grass for stock,
and makes a larger amount of bottom feed than the
other kangaroo grasses.
AnM/.si.na, vHonJn'umwa, Lindl, (llareoo flrasa). —One
of tho host pasture grasses in Queensland. This
grass is exceedingly brittle when dry ; stock arc
found licking the broken parts from tho ground.
Aruudind'a wpn mm, Trim.—A grass well adapted for
hay. On the Darling Downs, under cultivation, lias
been cut three times during the season,
('■'//bom i/huu'iv’ita, il, ,B. (Dog-tooth Star grass).—
An early grower, and although the stalks appear dry,
yields a.quantity of nutritious feed.
Oklona ivtUnrom, JU’.— (Blue Star grass)—An orcet
quick growing species, found along tho borders of
scrubs, and produces a large quantity of leafy feed.
('//nodon Dai'tj/ on, Para. (Gmich or Indian Doul> tlruss.)
This is generally considered an introduced grass,
hub ia indigenous to Northern Australia. It is found
throughout tho ooluny and is a good pasture grass,
. especially when mixod with white clover.
.Danthonh pwtinntn, Lindl. '(Mitchell dross).-'-This is
a valuable perennial desert grass, resisting drought,
and sought with avidity hy stock,
Danihonta lappawa, Lindl.—-This grass, although of
a rather coarser nature than tire preceding one,
possesses the same characteristics, and from the well-
known rattening and drought-resisting qualities of
both species, they are deserving of cultivation. Heed
has been sent to America for trial in tho Southern
States.
Elvudnc. •wiitfa, (hurt. —ln the southern districts this is a
strong succulent pasture grass hi summer ; hut fur-
ther north it iifTorda good pasture throughout tho
season, and may ho recognised by its deep green
color, strong stalks, and star-like panicle, tho spike-
lets of which are Hat and broad.


Feduva BUJavdierii, Stand.—Perennial grass ; grows about
two feet in height, does not perfect its seed well, pro-
duces plenty of tender foliage, and is not much
affected by dry seasons, or easily injured by over-
stocking. It is a valuable grass and may be considered
one of the best of our winter grasses.
Helopus anmdaltis, Nees. (Early Spring Grass). —This
grass stands well during the winter months, makes
early spring growth, and is valuable as a species
yielding feed throughout the year.
Iniperata anmlinaceo, Cyr. (Blady Grass). —This is ono
of tliegrasses moat frequently met with on rich allu-
vial land, and is one of the most common grasses of
the North, and produces, after being burnt, a largo
quantity of succulent feed relished by stock. When
kept eaten down in the spring, and not allowed to
become rank, it affords good feed for a considerable!
length of time.
Mierolma st'qwides, ll.B.—Perennial grass of quick
growth, producing abundance of seed, keeps green
during the driest summer, and vegetates freely during
the winter, and may be considered a good cattlo
grass.
Panictm losvi'mle, Lindl.—This very excellent grass was
discovered by Sir Thomas Mitchell, during his ex-
ploration in 1831. Tt was considered by him the best
grass met with during his journey. It is used by
the natives aa an article of food, and is gathered by
the women in large quantities, and the seeds pounded
between stones, mixed with water, are formed into a
kind of paste or bread.
Panicumfurvifiorum, 11.8. A hue pasture grass gene-
rally met with on ridges. There are two varieties—
one with line spreading panicles, and the other having
only one or two very long erect spikoleta in its panicle.
Both of them are excellent grasses, and worthy of
cultivation.
Patiicum crus-jjalli, Id tin.—A strong growing grass that
affords a large amount of feed to cattle in seasons of
scarcity, and is much improved by cultivation.
Panicum flscompovUim, R.B. —Ono of the most valuable
of the Darling Downs grasses. Under cultivation
this grass has yielded in one season over three tons of
hay per acre.
Panicum viryaUm-, Linn.—A good pasture grass, abun-
dant, on open clowns country. The seeds of this
grass are used at times as an article of food by the
natives.
P nicmu L.—This gnus, notwithstanding its
specific name, is of Indian origin, and is also a
native of Northern Australia. It is a good pasture


gvftaa, and possesses fattening properties, and thrives
well upon poor dry soils. Although it is an annual,
it increases quickly, from being an abundant seed-
bearer. The seeds, when pounded, mixed with water,
and baked, are used ns food ly the natives.
Putt Jii'uv'ttii, Noes.—There are several varieties of this
Hue grass, common on both rich and poor
soils, producing an abundance of foliage ; bears hard
feeding, and is quo of the best grasses to stand both
winter and summer.
Poa awpiltim. Noes. (Weeping Polly Grass). —A fine
grass, with rather a tufty habit of growth. Gene-
rally met with upon rieh soils, whore it produces
freely.
Poa parm'jlom, R.lh—-Very abundant annual grass, and
affords good feed to stock throughout the season.
Pun Uhiiu‘i\nin, Kmnig.—Excellent pasture grass. Much
relished by stock.
Prro/i* ram, It.lb—Hood pasture grass 5 quick grower,
and alTuvds succulent food.
Sjuu'tifitihin hut'i'm, 1\ ,11.--An excellent pasture grass,
generally found upon alluvial soils, and resists
drought well.
SjuimhuhtH i‘'uuiftituftf 11.8.- -Pino open pasture grass,
found throughout the colony. Its numerous pene-
trating roots enable it to resist severe drought.
BHpa J>hhrlorhne, Stood --One of tbo best winter grasses;
quick grower and abundant seeder,
UStipu Pamomiima, Siob. (Bamboo Grass),—Though
apparently a bard grass, it is highly spoken of as
horse-feed, aud produces a very largo quantity of
fodder
JhvtvnA hr'U'hl'ftw, Siub (Native Carrot).
ApiniA h-ptophytlnm, PM* (Wild Parsley),
Phntoiju mria, 1111. (Native Plantain).—This and the
two preceding plants are relished by stack.
Khrtifotiia pnrahulicn, R Hr (Salt-bush).
JfripUw Hi'iiiihttrcaUt, 11.8 (Salt bush).
\:A IiOTANtc uAUDMNS, Brisbane, Collection. o£ IfTBRES.
The indigenous Pibre-yiclding plants in this colony
am very numerous, ami experiment has shown that
they cim bo prolitably utilised to a considerable extent,
but us yet the Industry has not taken a practical
turn Some of the samples produced have excited
gnait attention, both for their excellence as products
and their commercial value Tho Sida retnsb
(Queensland Hemp) is about tho only kind thaa
at present is manufactured in anything like practical
quantity


Comparatively speaking there is but little cotton now
grown in Queensland, arising from the iaofc, asccr-
. taiued after a long and exhaustive trial, that tho
labor and expense consequent upon its growth and
.picking is too great to allow a margin for profit, and
the ceasing of the''Government bonus was the signal
for discontinuance by the larger planters West
Moreton still produces a small quantity, principally
grown by small fanners with families
Jute, Coreliovun rapmtlaris, Linn,; Jute, C'orrJioi'uti ozito-
nous, Linn ; Russian Hemp, QaunahU saliva ;
Rosella Hemp, Hihisnts Linn ; Sunn
Hemp, Qroialaria juncea, Linn, ; i?ita Hemp, Ayavn
amerkuiia, Linn ; Mexican Hemp, Fotircvotfa (jhjunU'.a,
Vent.; Imlian Rose Hemp, ITihimis Linn ;
White Mulberry, Moms alia, L ; Queensland H emp,
Sith.i rrt«s«,Liim ; Yaco.ua or Screw Pino, Pandavus
vflu, JBojer ; Libre made from nodal roots, Ar/ave,
ep.; Adam’s Needle Fibre, Yucca yhylom, Willd j
Silk grass 'fibre, Yuctur. Linn ; Vvarmm-
diwa, Linn Cuba Bast, Furitiim oh tom, Hon ;
Bowstring:Hemp, Sameniera JZeylanu’/r, Willd; Flax,
Limm injilalkshnum, Linn.; New Zealand Flax,
Phorviittm tenax, Forst; Cordage made from .Limim
Linn.; Cordage made from Queensland
Hemp, >SUIa ■ rdum, Linn.; Short Staple Cotton,
(Joasypuan Iterbaceum, Linn.; Sea Island Cotton, long
staple, (rosHf/jnion B'lflmdentse, Linn.
Ljo BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. GUM RESINS,
Bunya Buuya Giim [Araucaria Btrlivl Hi, Hook).
Bloodwood Gum (Eucalyptus eovjjmhoHn). Contains valu-
able tanning properties. YHth the assistance of this
fum resin, the collection of photographs were taken
y Mr. R. Dainiroe, illustrative of Queensland.
Cypress Pine Gum {Frehcla EndUcheYi, Parlat), The
exudation from this tree resembles that of the Sandrac
pine of the Mediteri'anean. .
Gateelm. This is obtained from the ttncahjpi.uHjlhi‘om )
F.M. It is a powerful astringent, mid is supposed to
he very efficacious in cases of diarrhoea.
Grass-tree Gum (AVm thouvho /t<i, R. Br, )■ Similar
if not identical with Benzoin, A spirituous varnish
can be manufactured from it, and it has also been
used as a dye for calico, and in the manufacture of
seauiig-wax.
Bottle-tree Gum tfterruiid mpeslri*, • Bentli). Exudes
freely from the tree, and somewhat resembles Traga-
canth. °
15G BIUpCrAIAJT, li , Mackay. Collection of Tobaccos, manu-
factured from leaf grown in Queensland.


157 (.n)inU KK,», Tobacco grown and maim-
factored by exhibitor.
153 ORI.BB & FOcT.R. Ipswich. Sample of Co'btbu, ginned.
grown near Ipswich
15J! (UIIUH & FOO'J .10, Ipswich. Sample of Cotton, in the 801 l
grown near Ipswich
Kit) HOOKhUI, d, H , Kangaroo Point, Brisbane. Tobacco Leaf.
10L .TONMS. A , ( ! awari'al, JlnckUampton. Tobacco Leaf.,
U 52 M.U TJI LUSON , A , Brisbane Collection of Queensland
indigenous Grosses, dried and meuntod on frames by
exhibitor
1 (>i> MAGI’IIFUS( IN, A,, Brisbano Specimens of Queensland
intUgmmui (|mnm)a, growing in tul»s.
.Uil MAC PHBUS(>N,' A , Brisbane Perennial I.lyo Grass, two
varieties of Now Zealand Grasses, lied Clover, Prario
(Iruss, and Italian Grass, giwvnby exhibitor.
Kio MACI’KMUSOK, A,, Brisbane .Specimens of dried Priokley
Ciunfrey ami White and Grey Millubfc, in sheaves
100 MACI.MI KfISOX, A, Brisbane, Varieties (2) dried Jute
Plants! Cinrhorux cvjwit* iWd, HI foot long; Corchorm
o'lobrr/*, Id foot long
107 MAcPHMUi-ICN*, Miss, .Brisbane. Glass Case containing
Wax Figure. dressed with Fibres collected and manufac-
tured by oxbibifcor
lOH M AGI'HKUSON, A., Brisbane. Textile Fabric, made from
tbo inner bark of the Finot vimwphi/tht,
10!) MACPHI'IUHUN, A., Hiislianu. .hibe 'Fibre.
17ii MACITI MIhSON, A., lirlabano. Flax Fibre.
171 M ACIMIKUSON, A., Brisbane. I’nsolla Honm Fibre.
172 MACIM! MJLSON, A., Brisbane. Wlda Uotim Fibre.
17,‘} MAtTHHIiSON', A., Brisbane. Collection of Queensland
Fibres, ground and prepared by exhibitor, as follows
Fiona miuwuphylla, Fiona mbiglnoaa, Corchorus capauhiris,
JSida rotiiHiv (S. rhonibifolia), Jiibiaetm tiliae.eus, Hibiscus
sorbifolia. 1 lihiseus umtahiloH, Hibiscus botorophyllus,
llihisriw Nplwuilens, Phormiinn tenax, J'lerotes longifolia,
Agave Amorktana, Agave Americana variegata, Fonveroya
gigantcii, Abntilim exycarpum, Dramma driven, Braeama
Australis, JBmmlmkih utilis, Ptuidanus «piralis,_ Yucca alou-
folin.Yucca glorinsa, .Kcraudrenia bookeriana, Agave
dwarf, v., AmuuisHu mitiva, Aiiana-nsa saliva, JJ., Mnaa
mamlata, M nan sui'pcrlia, Mnaa purpurea, Soaforthia
ologuns, Ibvpbia vudia, Cauorsonia, uofnimtii, Bambusa
armulbmcea, Camm cdiilis, Gahnia aspera, Fxerotis
bimvnii. iWdylino cabnaefoliii, Diamilla caorulea, (Jymbi-
ilium Himvo, Fkgellaria indiea, -Tnncns oommunia,
Abronm auguaU, Doinboyamn.storiiJAmim nmtatisaiimnn,
Linitm (b "hupnrton gigas, Almtilon, Spa., Sanacviura
ryUmlriru, (‘m chorus ohfcorius,


174 SOEQAARD, H., Logan River. Collection of Tobacco manu-
factured from leaf grown in Queensland.
175 TURNER, 3?,, Brisbane. 100 varieties of Queensland
Indigenous Rodder Grasses, dried and. mounted by
exhibitor.
Andropogou eriantlioidee, R. v. hi,—A most superior grtiwi
highly relished by stock. It produces a heavy crop of
sweet succulent herbage, Darling Downs.
Andropogou sericeus, R. Br.—The blue grass. Ono ol
the best pasture grasses; yields enormously during
the summer months. Round all over the colony.
Andropogou affinis, R. Br.—A good open pasture grutw,
will stand close feeding. Moreton Distinct.
Andropogou pertusus, Wilid.—A good pasture gram*,
stands the drought well, and will yield a fair amount
of fodder during winter. Southern and Wcstum
Queensland,
AndropoguU'intermedins, R, Br.—A strong erect growing
grass, yields a quantity of feed during tlio summer
months. North Queensland.
Andropogou bombycinus, R. Br.—A valuable pasture
grass, highly spoken of by stock owners, and said to be
very fattening. Goodamine River and north-western
districts.
Andropogou schcenanthus, var martini, Linn.—A ’strong
growing northern grass. : ■ ‘
Andropogou refractus S. Br,—Kangaroo grass of Southern
Queensland, a very productive summer grass, and
will make excellent hay. Yields a fair amount of
feed during winter in sheltered situations.
Andropogou laohnatherus, Benth.-Produces a heavy wop
KriKf,: p. ll6hed J 1?, Btock . on low wot Boils.
River and tho coast districts.
Anthistma inflate, Linn—An, upright growing apeoios,
yields a quantity of feed,highly relished by stock but
Effects very little seed. Australia. '
.
the flowering spike toaemhlhw “* r ' ,B B-e r °wiag {trass,
have highly- fattening eais wheat, sard to
IVarrogo. ® iialities. Baweon and tlu:


Astrebla var triticoides, F. v. M. —Not such a strong
grower as the last but its qualities are praised by
stock holders. Warrego.
Astrebla pectinata, F. v. M. —This is a valuable grass,
stands the drought well and is sought greedily after
by stock. Warrego.
Aristida arenaria, Vaudich.—A dry wiry grass bad for
sheep on account of its seeds. King’s Creek.
Aristida leptopoda, Benth. —A grass yielding a fair amount
of fodder, found growing on rich soils. Darling
Downs.
Aristida calycina, E. Br.—A dry wiry grass, not relished
by stock. Darling Downs and Peak Downs.
Aristida vagans, Car.—Superior grass to A. calycina.
Keeps green in the winter, Moreton district.
Athraxon ciliare, Beaur. —A broad-leaved creeping grass,
met with about the swamps of the Darling Downs.
It is a rare seeder.
Agropyrum scabrum, Beaur.—This grass is one of the
best winter species we have, and much in favor with
stock holders. Stands the drought well. Moreton
district.
Bromus arenarius, Sabill. —An annual grass, very rare in
Queensland. Makes its growth during winter and
early spring.
Cynodon tenellus, E, Br.—This is one of the creeping
grasses. It makes a quantity of feed during summer.
Stock are fond of it. North-west Queensland.
Cynodon dactylon, Pers. —Couch grass. This is a valuable
grass. Where land is cleared it makes a splendid
pasture. Sheep are very fond of it. Indigenous to
Northern Queensland ; but in the Southern portion
of the colony it covers thousands of acres.
Chrysopogon parviflorus, Benth. —A coarse grass being of
too dry a nature to be of value for fodder. Found
on rich' flats all over the colony.
Chloris diraricata, E. Br.—Star grass. The flower panicles
give it an uninviting appearance, but it gives a
quantity of fodder. Southern Queensland.
Chloris var. dirancate, E, Br, —A strong, upright growing
grass, yields a quantity of feed during the summer.
Northern Queensland.
Chloris ventricosa, H. Br. —Blue Star Grass. A tall, quick
growing grass, produces a fair amount of feed.
Bowen Downs.
Chloris truncata, E. Br. —An erect species found on the
Condamine Kiver.
Danthonia longifolia, R. Br.—White topped grass. This
grass is of a wiry nature on the Darling Downs, but
on the coast, yields a fair amount of fodder. Southern
Queensland.


Deyeima, forfitovi. Kuutli.—-Aii excellent winter .species,
its herbage sweet and Succulent ; also abundant, but
dies on the approach of summer. Southern Queens-
land.
Dichelaclme criuita, Hook-.—A. good winter grass, grows
quick and bears, abundance of seed, Moreton Dia-
. trict.
Diplaohno fusca, Beanr, —This species is found on low wet
ground, it yields a succulent herbage, relished by
stock. North and South Queensland.
Diplaclme coliifonms, E. v. M.-r—A.good pasture grass,of
slender habit. South and Western Districts.
Eriochloa pimctafca, Hnmb. and Kimbli. —Tills is one of
the finoat grasses of the colony, both for summer and
' winter ; a rapid Browing, sweet , succulent grass, and
greatly reli-hed by stoclc. North and South Queens-
land.’
Eriochloa amiulata, ICuhth and Emun.—A, quick-growing
succulent grass, highly relished by stock. North and
South Queensland.
Eragrostis tenella, Beanr.—An eroet tufted annual, a fine
productive grass for a sheep run. Northern Queens-
land.
Eragrostis pilosa, Ceaur.- —Au erect tufted annual, a very
productive grass. It grows all tlie year round, and
seeds in abundance. North and South Queensland.
Eragrostis leptostachya, Stevul. —A slender growing grass,
yields a fair amount of fodder, Moreton District.
Eragrostis var chcctophylla, Stand.—A wiry closo-grow-
ing species, of little value for feed.' Mitchell District.
Eragrostis Biwnii, Nees.—A hue pasture grass; yields
an abundance of feed both summer and whiter, North
and South Queensland.
Eragrostis bvownii var iuterrujita,, Noes.—-A stronger
grower than |5. Brownii, hut its qualities are much
the'same. North add South Queensland.
Eriachne squallola, It, Br.—An erect growing species,,, a
good,pasture grass, North, Queensland.
Eriachne obtuaa., K. Br. —A variable grass, makes a
. quantity of feed, and is a good pasture variety. North
Queensland,
Echinopogon omtus, Beaiir. An erect glabrous grass,
found plentifully, throughout the. winter months
along the banks of rivers and creeks. Moreton Dis-
trict.
Eleusina jogyptica, Pers.—Phis is a fine dwarf succulent
open , pasture grass, highly spoken of by sheep
owners. North-west Queensland.
Elensine indica, geetn.—A coarse erect tufted succulent
pasture grass, grows quick, producing u quantity of
feed. Moreton District.


Eliomirua citrous, Mmuu —A leafy «iass with slender
steins, bearing spikes of a strong citron scent. North
Queensland.
Hcmarthria compreasa, H. Br.—A strong hard grass, with
creeping roots, found on wot sour soils, and useful
for covering land of such, description. Moreton Dis-
trict,
Imperata arimdiiuicca, Oyr.—Blady gjrass. This grass is
usually mot with on rich alluvial Hats ; it yields a
lino succulent feed for several months after being
burned off. Found all over the colony.
Heteropogou inaignis, Ther.—A robust growing plant,
from 8 to 12 foot high ; Jlowcr stalks hard and cane
like, bub yields a quantity of food. Horses arc
extromly fond of it. North Queensland.
Heteropogou eoutortuH, Room. —The spear grass. A
splendid grass for a cattle run, as it produces a great
amount of feed, out dreaded by the sheep owner on
account of its scuds. South and West Queensland.
Isohanmmi peennatum, Tri.—This is u imo growing
grass, forming douse tufta of herbage. Morobou Dis-
trict.
lacluvamum hmmi, 11. Rr.—An upright slender-growing
apoeica • yields a fair amount of food, which is
readily oaten by stock, North-west Queensland.
Iscluonuim anstnvlo, .11, Br. -This species is found near
rivers and swamp ; it has it creeping underground
root, from which it springs up quickly, yielding a good
deal of fodder, Moroton District.
Sappago vaoemosn, WilUl.—An annual, found on ridges.
A good grass for winter ami early spiring, North and
youth Queensland,
Sonvaift hoxamha, ftwartx—Rice grass. A rough-leaved
species, common along the water courses of Queens-
land. Stock arc remarkably fond of it.
Soptuchhm ohineuais, Noes. ;Vu excellent pasture grass;
grows fro m 2 to H feet; herbage relished by stock.
North and South Queensland.
Kicroliena stipnidcß, 11, Br. -A valuable prennial apocios,
found in damp places ; grows quick, producing a
quantity of feed, and seeds abundantly. Southern
Qounaland.
OplismcnuH cmnpoaitus. Buauv.—This is a useful grass for
covering ground under the shade of trees. Not much
used for fodder, as abode seldom touch Ui Morutem
District.
rappophornm nigricans, R. Br, —The dower-spikes of
this epochs arc of a wiry nature, but it yields a fair
amount of leafy fodder at the base, and is relished by
stuck. North Queensland*


Povotia rara, B. Br —This ia a slender growing species,
ascending to one foot, is a quick grower and succulent,
stock are fond of it. North Queensland.
Peunisebum compressum, B. Hr.—A strong-growingcoarsc
kind of grass, found on the margin, of swamps, of
little value for fodder. Southern Queensland.
Paspahun scrobiculatiun, Limi.—An erect, coarse, quick-
growing pasture grass; stands through the winter
well, and will bear dose feeding. North and South
Queensland.
Paspalum aistichmn, Linn.—A creeping, rapid-growing
succulent grass, found growing in swampy ground,
sometimes in water, producing in the summer months
a quantity of feed, is a poor grass for making hay as
it turns black in drying. North and South Queens-
land.
Paspalum brevifolimn, Filing.—Steins erect and slender
from a creeping root, wifi, stand on high land, produces
a fair amount of feed and plenty of seed. North.and
South Queensland.
Panicum macractinuom, Bentli.—This species produces
immense dry and spreading panicles ; it is a fine grass
for feed. North West Queensland.
Panicum sanguinale, Linn.—A creeping quick growing
grass, a great pest to farmers, and called by them
summer grass. North and South Queensland.
Panicum indioum, Linn,—A grass usually found in wet
soils and swamps ; produces a fair amount of feed
during summer. North and South Queensland.
Panicnm foliosuin, B.Br,—A grtias with broad hairy
leaves, usually found on ground, that has been culti-
vated ; yields a fair amount of feed. North anti
South Queensland.
Panicum repeals, Linn.—Stems from, a creeping and
rooting base j too small a grass to be of value for
feed, hut will grow well under a dense shade. North
Queensland.
Panicum B.Br.—A small species, creeping
and routing at the nodes j will grow well under a
dense shade. North and South Queensland.
Panicum marginatum, B. Br.— A rigid coarse grass,
found on hard strong ground j o! little value for
fodder. Southern Queensland.
Panicum melananthum, F. v. M.—An annual, with a
creeping stem; yields a fair amount of feed during
the summer. This species ia easily distinguished by
its large panicle of dark-coloured seeds. Moreton
district.


Panic ;nn otl’uaum, U.Br —Au cruet growing grass, malting
a good pasture; is a free seeder, anil a favourite
auumg stock owners North and South Queens-
land
Paiiieum parvillorum, It Ur,—Au erect growing grass,
very productive (luring summer, stands the drought
well, ami produces plenty of scud. North amt South
Queensland
Pameum letieophumui, H.B. ut U.~A very good pasture
grass, produces an abundance of feed! during winter,
also a good seeder. North Queensland.
Panieum somilatuuu, ,U Ur.—This species produces a
quantity of feed from thick nodes at the base; stock
arc fond of it; will stand drought well North and
•South Queensland.
Panieum ilaridmu, LteU,—This is a hue succulent grass ;
when growing on alluvia! Hats the panicles are often
prostrate from the weight of sued ; a good winter
species. Western Queensland.
Panieum diskaehyum, Lam, —Stems creeping and rooting
at the joints : an immense yiolder; it is grown for
hay in tlu Northern Districts North Queens-
land.
Panieum cut mum, Linn.—Stems orcafc, from 2 to" 8 foot,
very Hucculout. Thu panicles arc used by the natives
as an article of food. The Hoods aro ponudod between
stones, mixed with water, and formed into a kiudof
bread. North Queensland,
Panieum orus-galli, Linn.—A. very coarse succulent grass,
from I to 8 feet, found in swamps. The panicle is
strongly bearded ; herbage much ’ relished by stuck.
North Queensland.
Panieum Mitchelli, Uimth.—An erect growing poroimial
grass, nearly allied to P. olXneuin, but of stronger
growbli; a quick grower, yielding a groat amount of
feed, highly relished by stock. North-western
Queensland.
Paulcum docampostum, 1.1 Br.—A semi-aquatic species—
a tall, coarse, succulent grass, producing au abundance
of feed, greatly relished by stock. South-western
Queensland
Panioum IraohyrucliiH, Bunth,—A valuable open pasture
grass of quick growth, producing a great amount of
feed during summer 5 is also a free seeder. South
and North-western Queensland
Paulcum prolutum, P.v M -An erect, rigid growing
species, producing a quantity of food during the
Hummer mouths, and a free seeder. Southern
Queensland.


Pollinia fulva, Bentli—The sugar grass of t colonists, so
called on account of its sweetness ; a highly produc-
tive kind, and praised by stockowners. South-
western Queensland
Sovglmin halepense. Pers.—A strong erect growing spouios,
varying from two to tan feet high, succulent when
young, a splendid grass for a cattle run, and a fvoo
seeder Coast o£ Queensland (This Bpoclea is
named S fulvmn on the specimen)
Setam glauca, Beam*.—An erect growing animal grass of
quick growth, producing an abundance of succulent
herbage, highly relished by stock ; is also a free
seeder North Queensland.
Solaria var-glauca, Beaur—A more slendov-growor than
6\ ylmca, and has nob that glaucous appearance on
the leaves as the last-named Is a fair yialder am,l
produces plenty of seed North Queensland
Solaria maevostachya, PI Bet. K —Found along the banka
of creeks, but will also stand on any ground. Pro-
duces a great amount of feed, of which oatblo nro
exceedingly fond. North and South Queensland.
Sporobolus virginicus, var-pallida, Kimth.—A lino graaa,
found near salt marshes, possessing highly fattening
qualities. L?oast of Queensland
Sporobaliis indicus, il Br —-An excellent tufted pasture
grass : stands the drought well, and is greedily eaten
by stock. North and South Queensland
S parabolas Liudleyi, Beuth —A skudcir-gTowiog spooios ;
makes a quantity of growth during vinter. Wes t
Queensland
SporohoUis clrmgatus, H, Br.—A good pasbino grow ;
yields a fair amount of fodder, and stands the drought
... , ITT r . North and South Queensland.
l»b \\ lUKHAM, H. A., Lower Herbert. PH 100.
Class dh—Chemical and Pharmaceutical Products. Aculh,
Alkalis, Salts of all kinds. Sea-salt and Products
extracted from Mother "Water. Various Products
of qa-JuisUy : Wax anti Kitty Suli.stuicea ; Soapa
ana Candles j raw materials tired in Perfumery;
■Resnw, Tuv, trad the products derived from them ;
Jissenee-s and VanUCies; various Coating tub-
stauees ; Biackmg, Objects made of India-rubber
-tml Cutta-percha; Dyes and. Odors. Mineral
\\ nU.iv, and NnbuaJ and Artificial iEnited Waters.
Raw materials used in Mmunney. Medicines,'
.simple aud made up.
177 ItUvliK, T„ Iteyhorougb. Glass tw, containingOoraMne.


178 BERKLEY, TAYLOR & CO, Brisbane. Dugong Oil, re-
fined.
179 BERKLEY, TAYLOR, CO., Brisbane. Uugong Oil, un-
refined.
180 BOLDEMANN, W., Rockhampton. Plain Soap. 1 block,
2 ewt.
181 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. ESSENTIAL OILS,
TINCTURES, &c., prepared by L. Carmichael,
Chemist.
The numerous varieties of Eucalypti, Melaleuca, Acacia,
Leptosperinuni, &e., besides flowering shrubs and
plants to be found in large quantites in the colony,
have been proved to be capable of producing not only
many essential oils, and essences, unique in them-
selves, but also tinctures possessing medicinal quali-
ties, that have been recognised by the faculty and
freely prescribed by our leading medical men, especi-
ally for complaints peculiar to the colony. It is a
matter of surprise that a more general attention has
not been paid to this pursuit that offers such profit-
able results.
Oil of Limes (Citrus Linv-tta) ; used as an antiscorbutic,
and is in fact concentrated Lime Juice.
Oil of Orange ( Citrus asrantium, 1 inn.,)
Oil of Citron ( Citrus wedir ).
Oil of Lemon ( Ctrus J/imoivnn.).
Essence of Lemon ; used for flavoring cordials, pastry,
effervescent drinks, &c.
Essence of Orange Fowers.
Essence of Acacia (Ac ri> f rnrslana).. The dowers of
this variety possess an exceedingly odoriferous
quality, the essence from which amalgamates freely
with oil or fat, and is extensively used in the manu-
facture of pomade.
The oil of Cassie is produced hy macerating the flowers
in olive oil.
Essence of Eucalyptus citriodora (Hook), or citron-
scented gum. The leaves of this tree, when rubbed
emit a strong odour of citron, and the essence is a very
powerful perfume.
Essence of Jasmine (Jasminum ijminlijhri'm, Linn.)
Essence of Tuberose Fuliantlxs luhi-rnsn Linn).
Tincture of Camomile (Anthem s nohi is), used as a power-
ful lonic or an e in-tic.
Tincture of Calendula (fjnhmln a officinalis), Marigold,
used as a tonic.
Tincture of Orange, used forllavoring purposes.
Essence of Verbena. This beautiful scent is obtained
from the Eucalyptus citrata, discovered on the
Palmer River, ami excels in dcTcacy of perfume any
other extract obtained from the Mijrtaa-


Tincture of Alstoiifa ccmstricta, F.M. Tbubark of this tree
produces an intense bitteipand is said to partake of
the same qualities of quinine. 1 lio tincture is consi-
dered cffieneenna in fever and ague cases.
Tincture of Crab Tree (PHahnfitpn lf.
yi.)._A powerful latter is extracted from the hark,
which is said to contain the fame properties as Peru-
vian bark {CVnchona ojffdna is).
Tincture of Gelsetmiim (Gdncmivm Midi.)
used as a therapeutic- and in cases of neuralgia.
Orange Peel. Lemon Peel. Orange Flower Water. Syrup
of Orange, Orange Wine. Castor Oil (lilchxv* <u>m-
vnmis,) i.imi. Ipecacuanha (Cephiidis Tfdaacuau/io,
Rich). Croton Oil (Crcicin TujH< m, Linn).
182 CLARKE, I). Warwick. Collection of Essences, IVu'fnmc.s,
and Tooth Powder?.
183 RUDDELL, R,, Rundaborg, Sample bars first quality Soap.
184 STAIGER, K. T., F.L.S. Samples of Pyroligneous Add ;
Acetic Acid ; Mcthyllated Alcohol ; Wood Tar ; Crude,
Refined, and Commercial Acetate of Soda ; Kerosene
Paraffine, made from Darling Downs Coal.
m STAIGER, K. T., F.L.S. Essential Oil, made from Urn
leaves of the hhrahjj Uis ciir'odora, found near Gluilkloui 1 .
ISG STAIGER, K. T., F.L.S. Essential Oil made from the
leaves of Ironbark tree on the Palmer River (not yet-
named), Samples of the leaves therewith,
LS7 STAIGER, K, T., F.L.S. Essence made (Tom the leaves of
the Embark tree on flic Palmer Paver (not yet named).
Samples of the leaves tberewiib,
ISS STAIGER, K, T., F.L.S, Essence made from the leaves of
the Evm’itfius chriodor", found near Gladstone.
ISO STAIGER, K. T., E.L.S., Brisbane. Duboisine, extract from
Dulioisift leaves.
15)0 STAIGER, K. T., F.L.S., Brisbane, Crystaliuc Alkaloid,
Alstouiua, Crystals, like quinine. " •
il. Amity Point, Horctou Bay. Bngong Oil.
1.'2 YEO, C. K. F., Brisbane. Collection of Essences and Per-
fumes.
01 a3S 47, _ Chemical Processes for Bleaching, Dyeing, Print-
and Dressing, Specimens of threads and
fiihrieg, blenched or dyed. Specimens of fabrics
prepared for dying. Specimens of Printed or Dyod
Linen, of Printed Cotton Fabrics, pure or mixed.
Specimens of Printed Worsted or Woollen .Fabrics,
pure or mixed, combed or carded. Specimens of
Printed Silk Fa' idea, pure or mixed. Specimens
, °* I rinted Felt or Cloth Carpels. Oilcloths.
U 3 BO f aNII'AL GARDEKS f Brisbane. COLLECTION OP
D\ElNif MATERIALS.


The growth of both madder and indigo has proved suo-
ceaful in many parts of the colony, but they are not
extensively cultivated. Many of our indigenous
plants also possess valuable dyeing qualities, among
which may tie numbered Laportea gitjas, kc. ; Log-
wood ( ffaeinatoxi/hu CampeehUmum, Linn), Cockspur
Thorn {Mortis Valcar yalU, A. Ounn). The Plpturm
prop nqmus, Madder (Ruhia tinctorum, Linn), Tur-
meric ( Curcuma Jomja, Linn), Indigo { lndigofern
tinetoria, Linn).
Class 48.—Leather and Skins. Raw materials used in the
dressing of Skins and Leather. Raw Hides, Salted
Hides. Tanned, Curried, Dressed, or Dyed
Leather. Varnished Leather, Morocco and
Sheepskin; Skins Grained, Shamoyed, Tawed,
Dressed or Dyed. Prepared Skins for Glove-
making. Skins and Furs, dressed and dyed. Parch-
ment. Gutwork : Strings for Musical Instruments,
Gold-beater’s akin, Sinews.
194 ALDERSON & SON'S. Dugong leather.
195 HATTON, W., Maryborough. Specimen of Dugong
Leather.
196 MORTIMER, \V., Stanthorpe. Collection of Kangaroo and
Wallaby Skin?,
197 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Collection of Rugs and
Mats, manufactured from Marsupial Skins,
198 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Collection of Skins,
tanned with hair on, consisting of Wild Horse, Kangaroo
Wallaroo, Native Bear, Opossum, Dingo, Squirrel, Native
Cat, Kmn, Black Swan.
199 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Collection of Marsupial
Skins, tanned with hair on.
200 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Collection of Leather,
comprising Harness, Bridle, Bag, Grain, Kip, Cow-tweed
Horse-tweed, Calf, Kangaroo-tweed, Kangaroo memel
grain, Kangaroo polished grain, Colored Morocco, and
Hogskins.
SIXTH GROUP.— Machinery—Apparatus and Processes
used in the Mechanical Industries.
OIaSS 49. Agricultural Implements and Processes used in
the Cultivation of Fields and Forests. Plans of
Culture, Distribution and Management of Crops.
Apparatus and Works for Agricultural Engineering,
Draining, Irrigation, Ac. Plans and Models of
Farm Buildings. Tools, Implements, Machines,


mid Apparatus used in Husbandry, Sowing
and Planting, Harvesting, _ Preparation and
Preservation of crops. Various Agricultural
Machines worked by horse-power or by atoum.
Carts and other Rural Moans of Trans-
port. Locomotives, Engines, and Horse-powers.
Manures, organic or mineral. Apparatus for tho
Physical and Chemical Study of Soils. Plans of
different systems of Re-Planting, Managing, and
Cultivating, Forests. Apparatus used in tiro
Cultivation of Forests, and in the Trades appertain-
ing thereto. Apparatus used in the Manufactory
of Tobacco.
201 FITZ ALLAN, E., Bowen. Model Gate, showing improved
fastening that can be easily opened on horseback.
202 MAOPHEIISON, A., Brisbane. Machine and Appliances
for dressing Rice, made by exhibitor.
Glass 50. Apparatus and Processes used in Agricultural
Works, aad in Works for the Preparation of Pood.
Apparatus used in Agricultural Works : Manufac-
ture of Arddcal Manures; of Drain Pipes ;
Cheese Factories, Dairies; Apparatus used iu pre-
paring Flour, Fecula, Starches. Oils; Apparatus
used in Breweries, Distilleries, Sugar MTuiufiuj-
torios and Refineries; Workshops for the Dressing
t>£ Textile Materials; Silk-worm Kursorios, &o.
A pparatus used in the Preparation of Alimentary
Products, Mechanical Appliances for' Kneading and
Baking; Apparatus used in making Pastry and
( onfcetloncry. Apparatus for the Manufacture of
Vermicelli, macaroni, drc. Machines for making
K*a Biscuits. Chocolate Machines. Apparatus
m Apparatus for making Ices
audUool Drinks; Manufacture and Preservation
ot Ices.
203 BOOTH, J. S., Fortitude Valley. Bone Dust. 3 samuloa
Pin -“i Cac \ a ,nut 2 cwt ' lliailuf aetured by exhibitor. ’
Wasa •>*. Apparatus used in Chemistry, Pharmacv, and
taiuuug. Laboratory Utensils and Apparatus.
Apparatus and Instruments used in Assays for
Industrial and Commercial purposes. Processes
d A l i r ,avaUls *wed 111 the manufacture of


Chemicals, Soaps, and Gandies. Processes and
Apparatus used iu the manufacture of Essences,
Varnishes, and articles made of India-rubber and
Gutta-percha. Processes and Apparatus used in
Gasworks. Processes and Apparatus used iu
Bleaching. Processes used iu the preparation of
Pharmaceutical Products. Processes used in Tan-
ya ids. and in Leather Dressing. Processes and
Apparatus used iu Glassworks and iu China and
Earthenware Manufactories,
Ido Entries.
OIaSS 52, Machines and Apparatus in General. doparato
Pieces of Machinery ; Hearings, Boilers, Slide-
bars, Eccentrics, Toothed Wheels, Cuuuectiug lUnla,
Chunks, Parallel Joints, Belts, Funicular Appa-
ratus, Ac. Gearing, Spring and Gateliwork, &«.
Regulators and Governors. Lubricators. Ma-
chines for Counting and H ogiatoriug. Dynamo-
meters, Steam Gauges, Weighing Machines.
Ganges for Liquids mul Gas. Maehiaus used for
moving Heavy Weights. Hydraulic Machines for
Raising Water, ike.; Nonius (chain pumps), Scoop
Wheels, Hydraulic limns, Ac, 1 lydmulio Engines,
Water'Wheels, Turbines, Hydraulic Lifts, Gcntri-
fugul, Steam, and otlior Pumps. Accumulators and
Hydraulic Presses. .Steam .Unglues Boilers
Steam Generators, and Apparatus appertaining
thereto. Apparatus for Condensing Steam.
Machines set in Motion by the Evaporation of
, Ether, Chloroform, ammonia, or by a combination
of Gases. Machines sot iu Motion by Gas, Unf-
air, and Compressed Air. Electro magnetic Ma-
chines. Windmills and Ihuieniime.s. Air-ballooUN.
No Entries, %
OIaSS 53. Machine Tools. Travelling (Jirculur Haw
Benches, self-acting, fur breaking down heavy
Timber, Machines for boring Timber used in
Policing, Engines anil Tools for props rim; Wood
for the workshop. Machines for Making Cashs,
Machines for Gutting (Jerk. Lathes, Boring and
Hailing Machines, Slotting, I trilling, and Wimping


Machines. Screw-cutting Engines and Riveting
Machines. Tarious kinds of Tools used in
Machine Workshops. Tools, Engines, and Appa-
ratus, for Pressing, Crushing, Workiug-up, Sawing,
Polishing, Ac. Special Tools and Engines used in
Tarious Trades.
No Entries.
OIaSS 5L Apparatus and Processes used in Spinning and
Bopo-ranking. , Hand-spinning Apparatus. Sepa-
rate parts of Spinning Apparatus, Machines and
Apparatus used in the Dressing and Spinning of
Textile Materials. Apparatus and Processes tor
the Subsidiary Operations appertaining thereto j
for Drawing, Winding, Twisting, Throwing, Dress-
ing. Apparatus for Separating the Qualities and
Numbering the Thread. Materials used in Hope
Manufacture. Hound, Elat, Tapering Cables,
Oord and Twine, Wire-ropes, Cables with Wire
Core, Rope Matches, Quick Matches, Ac,
204 FOBSYTH, A., A Oo„, Kangaroo Point Works, ’Brisbane.
Collection of Brisbane made Boyo.
OIaSS 55. Apparatus and Processes used in Weaving.
Apparatus used in the preparation of Materials for
Weaving: Warping Mills, Spooling (Winding)
Machines. Card-making for the Jacquard Looms.
Hand Looms and Mechanical Looms for the Manu-
facture of Plain Fabrics. Looms for the Manu-
facture of Figured aud Brocaded Stuffs : Damask
Looms, Electric Looms. Looms for the Manufac-
ture of Carpets and Tapestry. Mesh Weaving
Looms for the Mavmfactute of Hosiery and Net.
Apparatus for Making Lace. Apparatus used in
the Manufacture of Lace-work. High Warp Looms
and different modes of Preparing the Bobbins for
Weaving. Accessory Apparatus: Machines for
Fulling, Calendering, Figuring, Watering, Measur-
ing, Folding, Ac.
No Entries.
Glass 56. Apparatus and Processes for Sewing and for
Making-up Clothing. Ordinary Implements used


by Tailors and Seamstresses. Sewing, Quilting,
Hemming, and Embroidering Machines. Imple-
ments for Cutting Out Materials and Leather for
Making Garments and Shoes. Machines for
Making, Nailing, and Screwing Boots and Shoes.
Machines for the application of India-rubber.
EXTRA.
20“> WILSON. J , Rockhampton. Sewing Machine Oil, in Bottles,
price per b >ttle, Is. ; per iloz., !)s. ; per gross, £4 10s.
Class • r> '- Apparatus and Processes used in the Manufac-
ture of Furniture and Objects for Dwellings.
Machines for Cutting Yeneers. Turning Webs,
Vertical and Circular Saw-frames, Shingle Cutters,
Ac. Machines for Cutting the Mouldings and
Readings of Frames, the Squares of Inlaid Floor’s,
Furniture, Ac. Lathes and other Apparatus used
in Carpentering and Cabinet-making. Machines
for Stamping and Burnishing. Machines and
Apparatus for Working Stucco,
Ivory, Rone, and Horn. Machines for Pointing,
Carving, and Reducing Statues; for Engraving,
Engine-turning. Ac. Machines for Making Bricks
and Tiles; Machines for Making Artificial Stones.
Machines for Sawing and Polishing Hard Stones,
Marbles, Ac.
No Entries.
OlftSS 58- Apparatus and Processes used in Paper-making,
Dyeing, and Printing. Materials and Products of
the Manufacture of Pulps for making Paper, of
Wood, Straw, Alpha, Ac. Processes and Products
of the Bleaching of Wood Fibre. Apparatus for
making Paper by hand and by machinery. Appara-
tus for Pressing, Glazing, Watering, embossing, and
Ruling Paper. Machines for Cutting Out, Paring,
Stamping Paper, Arc. Apparatus for Bleaching and
Dyeing, and for the Preparation of Paper and
Tissues. Apparatus for Printing Paper-hangings
and Tissues. Machines for engraving Cylinders for
Printing. Materials, Apparatus, and Products of
Type-founding, Stereotypes, Ac. Machines and


Apparatus used m Typography, Stereotyping,
Coppcr-platc Printing, Autography, Lithography,
Chalcography, Paniconog r aphy, Chromo-litlio-
graphy, Ac. Machines for Setting-up and Sorting
Types. Printing of Bank-notes, Postage Stamps,
&c.
No Entries.
Class 59.—Machines, Instruments, and Processes used in
various Works. Coining Presses, Machines for
making Buttons, Pens, Pins, Envelopes ; Packing
Machines, Brush-making Machines, Machines for
making Cards, Capsules ; for affixing lead, Seals to
Merchandise, for Corking Bottles, &c. Tools for,
and Processes of, making Clocks, Toys, Marqueterie,
Baskets, &c. Machines for Binding Books.
Writing Machines.
No Entries.
OlflSS 60.—Carriages and Wheelwrights’ Work. Separate
Parts of Wheels and Carnages : Wheels, Tires,
Axles, Axle-boxes, Iron-work, Ac. Springs, and
various methods of hanging Carriages. Different
Systems of Harnessing. Breaks. Wheelwrights’
Work: Waggons, Tumbrels, Drays, and other
vehicles for special purposes. Carriages; Public,
State, and Private Carriages; Sedan Chairs, Lit-
ters, Sledges, &c., Velocipedes.
206 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Whitechapel Cart, to
show suitable Queensland woods ; varnished. £2U.
207 MORRIS, G. R,, Bowen. Model Waggon, made by exhibi-
tor’s apprentices.
OIaSS 61.—Harness and Saddlery. Various articles used
for Carriage Horses and Saddle Horses; Pack
Saddles, Saddles, Bridles, and Harness for Saddle
Horses, Beasts of Burden, and Draught Horses ;
Stirrups, Spurs, "Whips.
208 McDONALD, J., Superintendent Penal Establishment, St.
Helena. Saddlery, per list :
1 pack saddle, 60s. ; 1 best 'riding saddle, 725. fid. ; 1
common riding saddle, 725. Cd. ; 1 pack surcingle,
4s. ; 1 riding surcingle, 2s. 6d. ; 1 native poTice
handcuff pouch, Bs. ; 1 pair stirrup leathers, 3s, fid. ;
1 handcuff case, 3s. ; 1 leather girth, 3s. ; 1 saddle


strap, 7d. ; 1 pair white legging?, Os. ; 1 pair black
leggings, ss. ; 1 dress bridle, 255. ; 1 common bridle,
Bs. 6d.; 1 pair large canvas bags, 16s. 6d. ; 1 pair
small canvas bags, 12s. ; 1 side saddle strap ; 1 head-
stall, 6s. ; 1 gun bucket, 2s, 'Jd. ; 1 saddle pouch, 55.;
I pair hobbles, 3a. ; 1 pair leather saddle bags, 20s. ;
X waist belt, 6d. ; 1 native police w r aist belt, 6s. ;
1 tomahawk, belt and pouch, 3s. ; 1 despatch bag,
10s. ; I strap, 2d. ; I best breastplate ; 1 common
breastplate, 3s. 6d. ; 1 pair driving reins, ss. ; 1 pair
leading reins, os. ; 1 leather muff, ss. ; I cartridge
pouch. 6s. ; 1 letter bag, 10s. ; I cartridge belt with
pouch, ss, ; 1 revolver belt, pouch, and sling; 1 set
cart harness, less collar ; 1 telegraph pouch ; 1 pair
gold escort bags, 455.
OIaSS 62. Railway Apparatus. Separate Parts:
Springs, Buffers, Breaks. Permanent Way :
Rails, Chairs, Crossings, Switches, Fish Plates,
Turn-tables ; Buffers, Feeding Cranes, and Tanks ;
Optical and Acoustic Signals. Permanent Way
for Tramways. Polling Stock : Waggons for Pas-
sengers, for Carrying Earth, Goods, Cattle ; Loco-
motives, Tenders, Self-moving Carriages; Loco-
motives for Roads. Special Tools, and Machines
for the Maintenance, Repair, and Construction of
Railways. Apparatus for Inclined Planes and
Self-acting Planes; Apparatus and Engines for
Atmospheric Railways; Models of Engines,
of Systems of Traction, of Apparatus apper-
taining to Railways. Models, Plans, and
Drawingsof Platforms, Stations, and Engine-houses,
and other buildings necessary for the Working of
Railways.
208 STANLEY, H. 0., Chief Engineer, Public Works De-
partment. Series of Photographic Views, illustrating
recent railway construction in Queensland.
OlclSS 63 Telegraphic Apparatus and Processes. Appli-
ances for Telegraphs based on the transmission of
Light, Sound, <k c. Apparatus, for the Electric
Telegraph, Post, Wires, Stretchers, &c. Batteries
and Apparatus for sending and receiving messages.
Bells and Electric Signals. Telegraphs for Mili-
tary Purposes. Objects appertaining to Telegraphy ;
Lightening Conductors, Commutators, Prepared


Paper for Printing messages and for sending
A utograpliic Messages. Special Apparatus for
Pneumatic Telegraphy.
No Entries.
CJaSS G 4. Apparatus and Px-ocosses of Civil Engineering;
Public Works, and Architecture, Building Ma-
terials ; Stone, Wood, Metals ; Ornamental Stone;
Lime, Mortar, Cements, Artafical Stone aixd Con-
crete ' } Asplxalte j Roofing Tiles, Bx-icks, Paving
Tiles ; Slates, Pasteboard and Felt for Pooling.
Apparatus and Products of Processes used in the
Preservation of Wood. Ap pax at us and Instruments
for Testing Building Materials. Apparatus fox 1
Earthworks, Excavators. Apparatus used in Build-
ing Yards, ' Tools and Processes used by Sfcbmi
Dressers and Gutters, Masons, Carpenters, Tilers,
Blacksmiths, Joiners, Glaziers, Plumbers, House
Painters, &c. Locksmith’s Work; Locks, Pad-
locks, Railings, Balconies, Bannisters, &c. Appa-
ratus, and Engines used in Making Foundations;
File-drivers, and Pile-work, Screw-Piles, Pumps,
Pneumatie Apparatus, Dredging Machines, &c.
Apparatus used in Hydraulic Works connected
with Harbors, Canals, Rivers j Machines used in
Reducing Stones, Quartz, or other hard substances.
Apparatus used in the Supply of water and Gas.
Apparatus used in the Maintenance of Roads,
Plantations, and Public Walks. Models, Plans,
and Drawings of Public Works, Bridges, Viaducts;'
Aqueducts, Drains, Canal Bridges, Dams, Weirs,
&c. Lighthouses. Public Buildings for special
Purposes; Buildings for Civil Purposes ; Mansions
and Houses for Letting; Workmen's Towns, Indus-
trial Dwellings, ko:
No Entries.
Class G 5. Navigation and Life-saving, Drawings and
Models of Slips, Graving Docks. Floating Docks,
&e. Drawings and Models of Vessels of all kinds,
sea-going and for rivers. Models of the systems
of Ship-building adopted in the navy. Boats and
Barges. Materials for the Rigging of Ships.


Flags and Signals, Apparatus for the Prevention
of Collisions at sea. Buoys, Beacons, Ac. Appa-
ratus for Swimming, Diving, ami Life-saving
exhibited in action, Floats, Swimming-bolts, &u.
Diving-belts, Cork Jackets, Nautilus Lifo-bcits,
Ac, Submarine Boats; Apparatus for Saving Life
at Sea, Rocket Apparatus, Life-boats, Ac, Appara-
tus of all kinds used for Saving Life from Fires
and other Accidents. Pleasure Boats, Yachts, &a.
210 AOtI'P.IS, C. S., Townsville. Model of Hunt.
211 NORRIS, 0. ft, Townsville. Model of Ul fee;; Oeiitvo-’lioard
Skiff.
212 NORRIS, C, S., Townsville. Model of 7-ton (Jentrcd.riard
Yatcli “Maud.”
OIaSS idi Materials and Apparatus for Military Purposes,
Military Eugmoe.ring and Fortifications, Artillery,
Gun-carriages, and Weapons and Projectiles el'
every kind. Military Fipiipment, Clothing, ami
Encampments. Military Trans] rut Services,
Military Topography mid C oogmpl ly,
No Entries.
SEVENTH GROUP. —LUmmUru Prmlu-t*.
Class 67* Cereals, Farinacouua Products, mid Pmduots
derived from thorn, WlLiial:, Uyn, .Barley, Ilier,
Maine, Millet, mid other Cereals in grain mid in
flower. Grain without Husk, and Croats,
Fee ala from Potatoes, Kico, Lentils, etc,, Chiton.
Tapioca, Sago, Arrowroot, Cassava, and oilier
Fecula, Compound Fariuiuioims Products, etc.
Italian Pastes, Semolina, Ywiuitmlli, Macaroni,
Alimentary preparations as substitutes for lirend,
homo-unulu pirate, etc.
213 ATHERTON, J., UooUluiiupton, Tap; a Hm, I cm,,
Value, 14s.
314 ATHERTON, J,, Rockhampton. Purple Arrmvi'uiit, 1 rwt.,
Vtduo, £S Bur
21C BAKER, T., Maryborough. Anwi'iiot, white nud purple.
21G BAKER, T,, Maryborough, IJolkiction nl .Spurlies (mm
wheat, mala!, nriwnmt (2 kinds), potatom kinds),
rim, plantains, and yams.
217 BURNETT, J„ Bvialmuo, Sample of Tapiecu,


21S BOThNIO GARDEN'S, Brisbane. Colleotionof Ari-owmot,&c.
The cultivation oi arrowroot has been very siiou-aslul in
various parts of the colony, more particularly m tM
Loffna District, from whence the principal supply is
received ; although some of tho host soinplaH arc
produced from near Brisbane. Tho quantity iiinuu-
factored is greater than the demand in this ookmy
and a eonsidsrablo export to other oolouios talcoa
place, amounting in 167 S to 173/572 Ibs.> valuou iit
£3,099. „ ,
Weat Indian Arrowroot, white (Marcmta arunumarmaj.
East Indian Arrowroot, purple (Ccmm ethiUsJ.
East Indian Arrowroot, purple (Gamut
Arrowroot manufactured from Batatas ethyls, va.r luhnr,
white, red, rubra, purple.
Arrowroot, purple (Ganna ednlis).
Cassava, sweet (Manikot Janipha), Pohl,
Cassava, bitter (Mamhoi utilmhna), Pohl.
Tapioca fManlhot ntil'mima), l^ohl,
Zamia, flower prepared from the Miorozamut spiralis Uio/i
used as an article of food by tlic Aborigines.
SUGAR CANES.
2X9 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. Thirty varieties of Snmu 1
Cane in Stools, showing their growth, ago, ami habit.
Comprising —
Gniuham, Malabar, Salaugore, Bahama, Chuiuaooa,
Djoeudjoeng, Mecra, Outa'iiite. Troboo, Alma, T/Li-
lian, Socrat, Potei, Biard Hose, Muir No. .1, llappoo,
Bourbon, Belonquet, Bouron, Hauer, Ilhi, Giimi,
Aboe, Ardjoons, Schiainei, Passar, Malaman, K<en-
icug, Happoe Var, Diard.
220 CASTLES, IV., Pimpama. Arrowroot, purple, in bulk.
221 CASTLES, W., Pimnampa. Arrowroot, purple ; clidbreufc
process. • * 1 ’
222 CASTLES, W.. pimpama. Arrowroot, purplo jin paokota,
price £34 per ton ; in bulk, £25 per ton.
221 Oiilßß, T. 8., Gattou.
1 baa Maize.
1 Upland Rico, Orisa sativa, Linn.
2 Mortmain, Paddy rice.
3 Upland rico.
4 Tingoo, Paddy rioe.
5 Carolina, Paddy rice.
<• Red Paddy rice,
*‘ 24 SOSTB, Fim l ,aHl P a ‘ Purple Arrowroot CCkxnna
T,t ™»W. The Hon. W. Ground Bico
“' J lrow^sr ll ? E w'T? riS T ne: Ey ,°’ M Wsl3 s°’’ <“«>.
ffJ’S?.''* ?• F - "Wkw, Toowoomba.
r mwlhl 'm ris^ ne - oata - 45 b T»3hels per aoro,
grown b> R. F. Walker, Toowoomba.


228 BOTANIC GARDENS, llriabime. UOLEECTION OF
HOOTS:-
Ground Nut (Arar'hli hi/pvjn'n).
East Indian Arrowroot (Canna wln/is).
West Indian Arrowroot (Mni'unitt, m'nn<lauu'i‘a).
Brazilian Arrowroot {Mamhut Jutiiji/nt),
Brazilian Arrowroot {Mmihut uti(l^iunt).
Sweet Potatoes [Balaian etlutk) t four varieties-—namely,
tuber alba, tuber lutoo, tuber rubra, and tuber
purple.
Yams, three variotioa (JHnocoraa mfim).
Ginger, two varieties {ZUfjV>tn‘ oftrhuth’, Zinylht r ?.rnuti*
bet),
Taro (Chhc’tma J/'aerorrhiza).
220 GRIMES, U. & S.„ Brisbane. Arrowroot, s(Ubs. in packets
and bottles.
230 KATES, F-, Altova. Wheaton Flour, Ist quality.
231 KATES, lb Allora. Wheaton Flour, 2ml quality.
232 KATES, F,, Allova. Wheaton Moai.
23S KATES, If., Allora. Maize Meal,
23d KATES, F.. Allora. Buckwheat Mon I.
235 KATES, F., Allora. Hyu Moal.
236 LAHEY & SONS, Fitnpnnm. Arrowroot Trophy, containing
I Ton in Backets ; grown and inamiAu'Uued by
hibitora.
237 BARKY & SONS, Pimpama. Two (Mann Bottles, eontmnmg
samples of above.
238 MAOPHJARSON, A., Brisbane. 'Trophy of Uico in Slued,
grown near Brisbane by exhibitor. Those Vfu mtu'H take
3,4, Ci, and 6 Queensland mnmnor month* to ripen. Aver*
ago orovi, (18 buahola to the acre.
233 MAOPHEUSON, A., Brisbane. Paddy Uh-o.
240 MACPH.EKSUN, A.. Brisbane. Browed Uir«, grown find
prepared by exhibitor.
241 MACPI-lEIISON, A., Brisbane. Ulumi (Mho, containing
varieties of Uico in Ears, and Sample of Grain,
242 MAUPKKKSON, A., Briubnuu. live.
213 MAUPHERSON, A., Brisbane, Broom Millett, grown by
exhibitor. '
244 M'DOWALB, W.. Oxley. I Bag Mai*...
2*45 O’IJfIARY, A., Warwick, Mai/o, I Bag rnnalb
246 O%EAUY, A., Warwick. Maize, .1 Bag largo,
247 OXENFOHD, W, Ik, (’(minora. Kirn, grown on Alluvial
aorub land, without irrigation. Average yield, 'i {nit* p« r
aero.
248 KUBSON. li. T., Luidley. I Bag
241) STRONG-, ,l„ Kooky Water-hole*. Mai*nq an tall v»’Bow.
ahellad, 4 bushels.
250 WIIjSON,.iT. T., iSwau Crcok, Warwick. Wheat, i» buidu>t«
propagated from Tnlaw.ra Wheat, early, hardy. not *nb.
joot to mat J produced 43 bu«lmJ?* to the mji tl jg?y .
F


weight, 53,1 lbs, to the bushel. Grown by the nxluhilior
who has CO* acres sown tliia season.
Note.—An additional list of exhibits in this group will bo pub-
lished later.
01m 68. Bread and Pastry. Various kinds of Broad,
with ov without yeast, Fancy Bread and Broad lu
Shapes, Compressed Bread for travelling military
. campaigns, &c. (See Biscuits). Pastry of various
kinds peculiar to each country. Gingerbread and
Dry Cakes capable of being preserved.
251 WILSON, F. W. k Co., Brisbane. BiSemite in tin and show
case.
253 CLARKE, D., Warwick. Baking Powder,
253 SANDERSON,F., Brisbane. Baking Powder.
254 YEO, 0. H. I?., Brisbane. Baking Powder.
Glass 60. Fatty Substances used as food. Milk and
Eggs. Fatty substances and Oils good for fond.
Fresh and Preserved Milk ; Fresh and Halt
Butter; Cheese. Eggs of all kinds.
No Entries.
Glass TO. Meat and Fish, Salt Moat of all kinds. Mm,is
preserved by various processes. Meat and Soup
Cakes, Himis and prepared Meats. Poultry and
Game. Salt Fish, Fish in barrels : God, Herrings,
. etc.; Fish Preserved in Oil : Sardines, Tunnyj
. etc. Crustacea and Shell-fish : Lobsters, Shrimps,
Oysters, Potted Oysters, Anchovies, etc.
255 BEARDMORE, F. ,T. W., Cooktown. Assortment - of Bvcho-
de-iner, preserved in spirit from Reef Fishery. 10 miloH
from Cooktown.
25fi BEARDMORE & OLIVE, Cooktown. Collection of Ikclio-
de-mer, dried.
257 HARTLEY, VV. J., it On., Cooktown. Colloatioh of Ikelm-
de-mer, from barrier Reef,,
258 LAKE, Capt., Sydney. Specimens of Bitcho-do-mer. pre-
served m spirit, from the Barrier Roof, 30 miles E.K.E.
from Cooktown.
25‘J MUNICIPAL COUNCIL, Bowen. Collection of Bechu-du-
.: . , :,mer. dried.
■2GO SKINNER, 8,, Fortitude Valley. Assortment of Preserved
Moats, consisting of Savory Tongues and Delicacies, fur
breakfast and luncheon.
201 SKINNER 8., Fortitude Valley. Preserved Turtle, Soup,
9a * R te T? e<l, ii? CC^ + na^? g 1 i^ v »licls; al«° Pqljbc<l X>u^on^.
262 &KWTNER, 8., Fortitude Valley. Trophy of ProsJrved


263 STAIGER. K. T., F.L>., I'risLaiie. Unc jar Bcebc-de-mer,
in spirits of wine.
204 STILLER, V Co.. Amity Point, Moreton Bay. Dugong
Bacon.
263 STILLER & Co., Amity Point, Moreton Bay. Dugong Lard
(a sovereign remedy by outward application and absorp-
tion for all forms of defective nutrition).
OIaSS 71. Vegetables and Fruit. Tubers: Potatoes, etc.
Dry Farinaceous Vegetables ; Beans, Lentils, etc.
Green Vegetables for cooking : Cabbages, etc.
Vegetable Hoots : Carrots, Turnips, etc. Vege-
tables used for Flavouring : Onions, Garlic, etc.
Salads, Cucumbers, Gourds ; Pumpkins, Melons,
etc. Vegetables Preserved by Various Processes.
Fresh Fruit: Dried and Prepared Fruits ; Prunes,
Figs, Baisins, etc. Fruits Preserved without Sugar.
266 BAKER. THOMAS. Maryborough. Preserved Potatoes.
267 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. COLLECTION OP
FRUITS: —Bunya Bunya (Araucaria BklwiUii), Sweet
Sop f'Anoint Sqaamom), Chinese Date Plum (
Kal'lj, Jack Fruit (Ar!>trarpus /ntw/rifolia), Monster
Granadilla (Pa*s\Jlora mncrocYO'prd.Granadiila (Fassijtora
'lua/lra»yuJfU'i,H), Pineapples, six varieties, : viz : Smooth-
leavedCayenne, Black Jamaica, QneenEuville, and Prickly
Cayenne (Eothlina oMchuOU).
‘ 26S CHRLSTOE. Mr,, Rockhampton. Preserved Fruit.
266 CHUBB. 0. F., Ipswich. Olives, bottled.
270 MACDONALD, JOHN, St. Helena. Olives, bottled.
271 MARWEDEL, E., Raceview, L’oowoomba. Orange Marma-
lade, 1-lb. Tins, Scotch fashion.
272 SKINNER, E., Fortitude Valley, Brisbane. Collection of
Jams.
27*3 SKINNER, 8., Fortitude Valley, Brisbane. Collection of
27-1 SKINNER,, 8., Fortitude Valley, Brisbane. .Marmalades.
27-> SKINNER, 8., Fortitude Valley. Brisbane. Preserved Fruits
in Fyiup. consisting of Guavas, Loquats, Pine Apples, and
Kumquats,
276 THOZET, Mrs., Rockhampton. Preserved Fruits.
OIaSS ~ { -• Condiments and Stimulants, Sugar and Confec-
tionery. Spices, Pepper, Cinnamon, Allspice, etc.
Table Salt. Vinegar. Compound Condiments
and Stimulants: Mustard, Kari, English Sauces,
e:e. Tea, Coffee, and other Aromatic Beverages,
Chicory and Sweet Acorn Coffee. Chocolate.
Sugar for Household Purposes: Grape Sugar,


Sugar of Milk. Confectionery : Sugar Plums,
Bonbons, Nougats, Angelica, Aniseed, &c., Pre-
serves and Jellies. Dried and Preserved Fruits :
Cedrates, Lemons, Oranges, Pineapples. Fruits
Preserved in Brandy. Syrups and Liqueurs.
277 ACHESON & ALLEN, Rockhampton. Chutney, 1 dozen,
278 ACHESON & ALLEN, Rockhampton. Jellies. 1 dozen.
279 AMHERST, F. T., Foulden Plantation, Mackay. Golden
Syrup.
280 BOREHAM, J. H., South Brisbane. Chutney-
-281 BOREIIAM, J. H., South Brisbane, Chili Pepper.
282 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. TEA, COFFEE,
SPICES. &c.: —
There are many districts in the colony where the cultiva-
tion of both tea and coffee could be carried out with
success, but up to the present time no special interest
seems to have been manifested regarding either.
Coffee commences to bear in the North at about two
years old, and on the Herbert River it grows to
considerable perfection, but it is only cultivated in
such quantity as to meet local requirements. In
the Southern parts of the colony the tree takes six
years to come to maturity. Without proper appli-
ances it is extremely difficult to divest the bean from
a pulpy substance, which is very adhesive. Tea has
not yet got beyond its experimental stages, although
it might be cultivated with both advantage and profit
on the higher lands of the colony—such as the Darling
Downs.
In many of the Northern districts, cocoa (Theohroma
cacao), nutmeg, cinnamon, cloves, and other spice-
bearing plants, are all doing well, and give great pro-
mise of future succss,
Botanic Gardfm, —Black Tea {Thea hohea, Linn).
Coffee Leaves (Cofen aroJAca, Linn.),
prepared as tea.
Paraguay Tea (Ilex Paraguariemis, St.
Lik).
Coffee (Goffea aralica, Linn).
Tinnevelley Senna ( Cassia, acutifolia ,
Dhol).
Aleppo Senna {Cassia obovata).
Rosella. dried {lfihiscus sahdarifa,
Linn.) ; prepared in this manner, the
flavor is retained for a number of
years.


Nelunihlnm Lehhhardll. AV.H, (Pink
Water Idly),
* jlTacrozamia, Ltmglmi, W. H.
Coulbiiio.
* Maorozamki Minnelli, F.M.
* Oastanoxpermm ausimla {Aloreton
Bay Chestnut),
* MilleUia mcgaspermd, F.M.
Bnuya Buuya {Araucaria Bidwilli.
Hook), This nut is a favorite article
of food ■with tho aborigines, who eat
largo quantities roasted,
Queensland Nut tcrnifoUci)
Qycati Jlftdla, R.Jlv. This is also used by
tho aborigines as food. An excellent
farina is prepared from it.
Cinnamon [Lanrm tnimamomum, Linn),
Allspice {Pimento, vidyarin).
Cayenne Poper [Cctpuicivm haomtnm,
Linn.) Bird’s Eye.
Cayenne Paper (Capsicum arossum,
Willd). Bell Popper,
Cayenne Pepper ( C'apai/mm annum,
Lina.) {Spanish pepper.
Cayenne Popper hlcohr').
Ginger {Zlwjihcr o(Jbinafa).
Black (.linger {Zimjiher zermnhei).
Cappers [Gappari# animsa).
Turmeric {Curmma Imif/a).
Turmeric (Ciau umit. roimda, Bentli),
Mesquit or Algaruba Bean. This Hoe
is celebrated for its pasture shade
(qualities as well as the excellent
cattle fodder it produces, The beaus,
which are homo in great profusion,
are eaten eagerly by all descriptions of
cattle, including sheep and goats.
Packed in barrels they will keep for
a length of time, caul can bo used
when herbage is scarce.
Culomba root( OoccnimpahnatUH). Used
as a tunic or stomachic, also most
useful as a medicine in oases of
dyspepsia, diarrlura,. dyscutry, &c.
* The whole of th«i above are used os food by the
iilwrijfimw.


Mackay Bean (Entata wawhws, Bcnth*)
A woody climber, stretching over the.
largest trees. The pod is woody, at’
taining 2 to 4 feet in length, and 3 to
4 inches in breath. The seeds art*
large ; used for match boxes and ft'.!’
making ornaments.
283 COWLEY, A. S., Beinerside, Herbert River. Cayenne
Pepper.
284 MACDONALD, J., Superintendent, St. Helena. Trophy of
Sugars and Sugar Canes.
.285 SKINNER, 8., Fortitude Valley. Preserved .lams anti
Jellies.
2Sf5 STAIG-Ell, Iv. T., Brisbane, Spice, of a Queensland Nut-
meg tree.
287 VINCENT. J.E M., & Co,, Brisbane. Sample of Sugar
made by Victor hor.w.-power mill.
2SS WILLIAMS, A., Eight-mile Plains. Ginger, Cinnamon.
289 WILLIAMS, A, Eight-mile Plains, near Brisbane Coffee
Beaus.
SUGARS.
290 BOTANIC GARDENS, Brisbane. Ordinary Commercial
Samples, taken from bulk
The growth of the Sugar Cane and the manufacture of its
products now ranking amongst the leading industries
of Queensland, it is no longer necessary to refer to
the subject beyond noting the progress that has been
made. In 1871 there were 0581 acres under sugar
cane, of which the crop of 3078 acres was crushed,
yielding 3762 tons of sugar, 219,694 gallons of mo-
lasses, and 112,970 gallons 'of nun. In 1878 there
were i 6,084 acres under cane, 10,702 acres crushed,
yielding 13,525 tons of sugar, 070,301. gallons of
molasses, aid 10,395 gallons of rum. Besides pro-
riding for home consumption, a large quantity is ex-
ported, amounting in 1878 to 82,006 cwts. of sugar,
valued at .4119,018 ; 5583 cwts. of molasses, valued
at J il33S ; and 43,809 gallons of rum, valued at
£i>]9(). The returns for 1879 were net available
when tins catalogue was in preparation, but it is
** known that there was a large proportion ate increase
under every heading during last year, the exports
alone being for the year 1579-S0 to June bOth last,
sugar, 234,340 cwt. j and rum, 80,239 gallons,
biucc 1378 a large area of land has been taken up for
sugar growing, amounting to from twenty to thirty
thousand acres on the Johnstone River. and to a not
much less extent on the Burdckin River. Many
sciectionEi have .also been made in other portions of
the North-east Coast lands of Queensland, and


recent explorations have afforded proof of there being
a considerable area of sugar-growing country along
the rivers of the West Coast of Cape York Penin-
sula.
There are 78 varieties of sugar cane cultivated experi-
mentally in the Forest Reserve plantation at Oxley,
which is attached to the Brisbane Botanic Gardens.
I. Watt, A.. Bannockburn, Logan River. Molasses
Sugar, lime process, open pan. Market price, £2O
per ton
2 Watt, A., Bannockburn, Logan River. Molasses
Sugar, lime process, open pan. Market price, £l9
per ton
3. Cowley, A. J., Bemerside, Herbert Fiver. Sugar,
counter ; open pan, cheribon cane. Market price,
£2B per ton.
4. Cowley, A J., Bemerside, Herbert River Sugar,
counter ; open pan, cheribon cane. Market price,
£27 U's per ton.
Cowley. A. J , Bcmorside, Herbert River. Sugar,
counter ; open pan, cheribon cane. Market price,
£26 per ton
0. Cowley, A. S., Bemerside. Herbert River Sugar,
counter ; open pan, cheribon cane Market price,
£2B per ton
7 Cowley, A. S, Bemerside, Herbert River. Sugar,
counter ; open pan, cheribon cane. Market price,
£27 Ids. per ton.
8 Morris, C A M, Bundall, Xerang Creek. Sugar,
vacuum pan, ribbon and ribbon cane Market price,
£32 per ton
<), Cannv k Morton, Baton Valo, White Sugar, vacuum
pain Market price, £3l I Os. per ton
10. Canny & Morton, Baton Vale. White Susar, vacuum
pan Marker price, t'B2 per ton
11. Canny k Morton. Eaton Yale. White Sugar,
vacuum pan. Market value, £32 1 ‘s. per ton.
12. Canny & Mort 'U, Eaton Vale, White Sugar,
vacuum pan. Market value, k 32 per ton.
13. Canny & Morton, Eaton Vale. White Sugar,
vacuu m pan. Market value, £33 per ton.
14. Davy & ( V->o Beenleigh White Sugar, open
pan'. Market value. £25 10s. per ton.
15. Donaldson, Mr., Mackay. White Sugar, vacuum
pan. Market value, £3O per ton.
16. M f Leod, E.. Cleveland. Counter Sugar, vacuum pan.
Market value, £lB per ton.
17. Anihurst T. F., Mackay. White Sugar, vacuum pan.
Market value, £34 per ton.
18. Gartsirle, Muir, _v Black, Noyea Plantation. Sugar,
open pan. Market value, £2B per ton,


19. Garfcside, Muir, & -Black, Moycft Plantation. Sugar,
open pan. Market value, £2B per ton.
20. King, C. M.j Eranscombe, Mackay. Sugar, vacuum
pan, Market value, £29 per ton.
21. Monokton, 11., Nevada, Mackay. Sugar vacuum pan.
Market value, £32 per ton.
22. M'Creody, H., Tekowai, Mackay. Sugar, vacuum
pan. Market value, £3O per ton.
23. M'Cready, H., Tekowai, Mnokay. Sugar, vacuum,
pan, B. Market value, £3l 10a, per tun.
24. M'Cready, K„ Tekowai, Mackay. Sugar, vacuum
pan, Market value, £53 per ton.
25. M'Cready, H., Tekowai, Mackay. Sugar, vacuum
pau. Market value, £32 10s. per ton.
26. Holland & Miskin, Bnndall, Nerang. Sugar, Counter,
open pau, Ribbon Cano. Market value, £2O per ton.
27. Spillor, J., Pioneer Estate, Mackay. Sugar, White. 1 ,
vacuinn pan, 33. Market value, £3l per ton.
28. Spiller, J., River Estate, Mackay. Sugar, White,
open pan, A. Market value, £2O 10s.
20. Duval, L., Ba-m bon. Mackay. Sugar, White, vacuum
pan. Market value, £2!) JUs. per ton.
30. Duval, L., Bamboo, Mackay. Sugar, White, vacuum
pan. Market value, £2!) 10s. per ton.
31. Duval, L., Bamboo, Mackay. Sugar, White, vacuum
pan. Market value, £29 10s. per ton.
32. Duval, L., Kebia. Mackay. Sugar, White, vacuum
pan. Market value, £3l* per ton.
33. Cowley, L. J., Bemerside, Herbert River. Sugar,
Counter, Cheribon (Jane, vacuum pan. Market
value, £26 per ton
34. Neame, P., Herbert River. Sugar, White,
vacuum pan. Market value, £3B jjor ton.
35. Neame, I l '.. Duugenoas, Herbert River. Sugar, Wliito,
vacuum pan, A, Market value, £29 per ton.
36. Neame, P., Dungenesa, Herbert River. Sugar, Wliito,
vacuum pan. Market value, £3l per ton.'
37. Muir, A , Nerang. Sugar, White, vacuum pau, leery-
Muir process Market value, £26 per ton.
3S. Tooth & Cran, Yengm-ic. Sugar, vacuum pan, A.
Market value, £3O per ton.
30. Tooth & Cran, Yeiigavie. Sugar, vacnuiu pan, B.
Market value, £32 ] Os. per ton.
40. Dart, W., Coleridge Mill, Brisbane. Sugar,
vacuum pan. Market value, £29 per ton.
41. Couldery, W. H., Ageston, Bcenlcigh, Sugar,
yellow, vacuum pfm. Market value, £26 per ton.
4-. Couldery, W 11., Ageston, Beenleigh. Sugar
yellow, vacuum pan and refined. Market Value, £3O,
per ton.


43. Conldery, W. H., Ageaton, Beenleigh. Sugar,
white, vacuum pan. Market value, £3O per ton.
44. Conldery, W. H., Ageston, Bccnleigh. Sugar,
white, vacuum pan. Market value, £3l per ton.
45. Spiller, W., Pioneer, Maekay. Sugar, white,
vacuum pan. Market value, £33 per ton.
46. White & Robinson, Coomera, Sugar, counter, Tcery’s
process. Market value, £25 10s, per ton.
47. White & Robinson, Coomera. Sugar, counter, vacuum
pan. Market value, £27 10s. per ton.
48. Watt, A., Bccnleigh. Sugar, white, vacuum pan
refined. Market value, £3l per ton.
49. Watt, A., Beenleigh. Sugar, yellow, vacuum pan.
Market value, £22 per ton.
50. Davy & Gooding. Beenleigh. Sugar, white, vacuum
pan. Market value, £26 per ton.
51. Randle, G., Eagle Farm, Brisbane. Sugar, white,
Sutton’s patent process. Market value, £2B per ton.
52. Gartside, J., Otmoor, Coomera. Sugar, vacuum
pan Market value, £26 per ton
53. Martin, J. S., Hoimnaut, Brisbane. Sugar, vacuum
pan. Market value, £2B per ton
54. Muir. M. P,, Bogan Sugar Factory. Sugar, open
pan. Market value, £25 per ton.
55. Cran, R, & 00., Yengarie, Maryborough. Sugar,
refined, vacuum pan Market value, £34 per ton
56. Cran, 18, & Co, Yengarie, Maryborough. Sugar,
vacuum pan, refined. Market value, £34 per ton.
57. Cran, 18, &C, Yengarie. Maryborough. Sugar,
vacuum pan, refined. Market value. £34 per ton.
58 Oran, K, & Co., Yengarie, Maryborough. Sugar,
vacuum pan, refined Market value, £33 per ton
59. Muir, R, Bcnowa, Ncraug. Sugar, white, vacuum
pan. Market value, £
60 Muir. R , Benowa, Nerang Sugar, yellow, open pan.
Market value, £24 per ton.
61. Conldery, W. H., Ageston, Logan. Sugar, white,
vacuum pan Market value, £33 per ton.
62. Conldery, W. II Ageston, Logan. Sugar, white,
vacuum pan, Market value, £29 per ton.
63 Gibson, W., & Sons, Hemmant. Sugar, white, vacuum
pan. Market value, £3O per ton.
64. Gibson, W. } & Sons,, Hemmant. Sugar, white,
vacuum pan. Market value, £2B per ton.
65. Berry, T, H. Oxley. Sugar, counter, open pan.
Market price, £25 per ton.
66. Witty, W. K., Yatala, Albert River. Sugar, Counter,
open pan. £22 per ton.
67. Witty, W. K., Yatala, Albert River. Sugar, Counter,
open pan. £23 per ton.


(58. Oouldery, W. H., Agcston, Logan River. Sugar,
Coimter, vacuum pan T 27 pci* ton.
291 AMHERST, F. T., Fouldon Plantation, Mackay. Sugar,
lata, vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined
293 AMHERST, F. T., Foiildcn. Plantation, Mackay. Sugar,
2ada, vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined.
293 AMHERST, F. Fouldtm Plantation, Mackay. Sugar,
finis, vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined.
294 AMHERST, F. T. } Poulden Plantation, Mackay Sugar,
late, any process, open or vacuum pan, boiled, but not
refined.
295 AMHERST, E T., Fouldon Plantation, Maokay. Sugar,
2nds, any process, open or vacuum pan, boiled, but not
refined
299 AMHERST, P. T., Foulden Plantation, Mackay. Sugar,
Hrtls, any process, open or vacuum pan, boiled, but not
refined.
297 BLACK, M. K., The Cedars, Mackay. Sugar, Lsts, common
process, open pan, boiled.
298 BLACK, M. H , Tho Cedars, Mackay. Sugar, 2nds, com-
mon process, open pan, boiled,
299 BLACK, M. H., The Cedars, Mackay. Sugar, 3rcls, common
process, open pan, boiled.
300 CAIRO LL ft A VERY, Merolere, Mackay. Sugar, lsts, com-
mon process, open pan, boiled
301 CATROLL & AVERY, Mutxdcrc, Mackay. Sugar, 2uds,
common process, open pan, boiled.
302 CAfROLL ft AYERI, Moruluro, Mackay. Sugar, Brds,
common process, open pun, boiled,
303 DAVIDSON, J. E., Alexandra Plantation, Maokay. Sugar,
lsts, vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined,
301 DAVIDSON, J. E., Alexandra Plantation, Mackay. Sugar,
2n.ds, vacmitn pan, boiled, unrefined
305 DAVIDSON - , T. E., Alexandra Plantation, Mackay. Sugar,
-Srds, vacuum pun, boiled, unrefined.
300 DONALDSON ft (Jo., Cassada, Mackay. Sugar, lata,
vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined
307 DONALDSON ft Co. Cassada, Mackay. Sugar, 2nd 3,
vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined.
308 DONALDSON ft Co., Cassada, Mackay. Sugar, 2nds,
vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined
809 DUVAL, L, ISebiti, Mackay. Sugar, Bz’ower’a crystals,
common process, (NE).
310 DUVAL, L., Nebia, Mackay. Sugar, Boilers’prize
311 DUVAL, L, Nebia, Mackay. Sugar, white, vacuum, pan,
eoimnon process.
31.2 HEWITT ft Co., Pleyatowo Plantation, Mackay. Sugar,
Ist.
313 HEWITT ft Co, Plcystowe Plantation, 'Mackay. Sugar,
Ist, open pan (P anchor).


314 11K WITT & Co, Ployafcowo Plantation, Maokay. Sugar,
12ml, open pan (1’ anchor)
313 I I'll WITT vS: Co, Bleystowe Plantation, Maokay. Sugar,
3rd.s, open pan (V anchor).
3l« HIOWITT & On., Pleystnwe, Maokay vSngar, lata, common
proeosn, open pan. boiled
,‘U7 lIKWITT & Co, Pleyabowe, Maokay. Sugar, inils, com-
mon process, open pan, boiled.
318 HIIWITT & Co, Plcystowo, Maekay Sugar, 3rd*, com-
mon process. opisu pan, boilud
HU) HOIjLAND, MISKIN, -Sc. Co., Ihiudall Plantation, Nemng
Crook, Sugar, Iwfcn (A) Muvul'aeturml from. 10 mouths
ohl .Uappoo cano, ratoon crop, density of jumo 8” Uanmt'
Boiled in battery of opon pans, and (luiahod in a Wotaoll
pan. Manufactured hy monoanlpliite process
.■{2o lIYNB, W &00, Balmoral, Maokay. Sugar, labs, common
process open pan, boiled
Til HVNII, W & Co, Balmoral, Maekay vSugar, iuda, common
process, open pan, boiled.
322 HVN Ih W & Co., Balmoral, Maokay. Sugar, 3tda, common
process, open pan, boiled
323 HVNW, IV & Co, Moftilowlamls, Maekay. Sugar, Isfca,
vacuum pan, boiled, nnvelmcd
324 IIYNIC, W. & Co., Moadowlamls, Maokay. Sugar, 2iulh,
vacuum pan, boiled, nnroliimd.
Hi”) 11YNM, \V’. .k Co, Mcadovvlumls, Maokay. Sugar, Hrdu,
vacuum pan, boiled, nnrolined.
Hid JACK, I)., & SONS, Barrie, Maokay. Sugar, Into, common
process, open pan, boiled
327 JACK, !>., & SONS, Barrio, Maokay. Sugar, 2nda, oommon
process, open pan, boiled,
328 JACK. I)., & SONS, Barrio, Maokay. Sugar, Hnls, common
process, opon pan, boiled,
32!) KIN (I, C. H. M., Branseumbe, Maokay. Sugar, lets, com-
mon proceed open pan, boiled.
330 KTNC, {}. H. x\l., Bmmmombc, Maekay. Sugar, 2iulh,
common process, opt u pan, boiled,
331 KINC, (!, H. M., BnuiHeombe KwLate, Maekay. Sugars,
lets, open pan (bovne-shoe).
332 Id,OVD A, WADKKU, Dumlilebon Plantation, Maekay.
Sugar, Inks, oommon process, opon pan, boiled.
1133 IjLOVD & VCADKKH, lUimbletou Plantation, Maekay.
Sugar, Buds oommon pvoecNH, open pan, boiled.
334 Id,!) V|) WADKHU, Dmnblo.kmi Plantation, Maekay.
Sugar, 3nls. emmooii proeesw, upon pan, boiled.
333 ,M.'D<)NADD, .1., St. Helena. Sugar, 1 bag. yellow,
eonutcr, open pan. mmTmed, loiuvuraeburod by primm
labor at Hie penal eshiblislinient.
33(1 M'DCNALD, ■),. St. Helena., Sugar, 1 bag molaesew, open
pan. uurelinetb inaunfaetimal by prison labor, at Hie
penal cstablisliment.


337 M'CREADY, H., Tekowai, Mackay. Sugar, tats, K.
338 M‘CREADY, H., Tekowai. Mackay. Sugar, Ists, K.
° * *
330 MUIR, R. Benowa. 2 mats, Sugar.
340 RAFF, G., & CO., Inverness, Mackay. Sugar, Ists, common
process, open pan, boiled,
341 RAFF, G.j & 00., Inverness, Mackay. Sugar, Cuds, common
process, open pan, boiled,
342 RAFF, G., k CO., Inverness, Mackay. Sugar, 3rds, common
process, open pan, boiled.
343 SLOAN, W., k CO, Nebia Plantation, Mackay. Sugar,
Ists, vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined.
344 SLOAN. W., k CO., Nebia Plantation, Mackay. Sugar,
2nds, vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined.
345 SLOAN. W., & CO.. Nebia Plantation, Mackay. ■ Sugar,
3rds. vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined.
31(1 SLOAN, W., &CO , Tekowai Plantation, Mackay. Sugar,
Ists, vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined.
347 SLOAN, W, & Co., Tekowai Plantation, Mackay. Sugar,
2nds, vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined.
348 SLOAN, W, & CO., Tekowai Plantation, Mackay. Sugar,
3rr3s, vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined.
340 SLOAN, W., & CO,, Tekowai Plantation, Mackay Sugar,
Ists, any process, open or vacuum pan, boiled but not
refined.
350 SLOAN, W., & CO., Tekowai Plantation, Mackay Sugar,
2nds, any process, open or vacuum pan, boiled but not
refined.
351 SLOAN, W., & 00.. Tekowai Plantation, Mackay Sugar,
3rds, any process, open or vacuum pan, boiled but not
refined
352 SPILLER, J., Pioneer Plantation, Mackay. Sugar, Ists,
vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined.
353 SPILLER, J., Poincer Plantation, Mackay. Sugar, 2nds,
vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined.
354 SPILLER, «L, Pioneer Plantation, Mackay. Sugar, 3rds,
vacuum pan, boiled, unrefined.
355 SPILLER, J., River Estate, Mackay. Sugar, Ists, vacuum
pan, boiled, unrefined.
858 SPILLER, J., River Estate, Mackay, Sugar, 2nds, vacuum
pan, boiled, unrefined.
357 SPILLER, J*. Paver Estate, Mackay. Sugar, 3rds, vacuum
pan, boiled, unrefined.
358 WATT, A., Beenleigh. 2 Mats Sugar
OIaSS 73. Fermented Brinks.—Yin Ordinaire, red and
white. Sweet Wines and Still-Wines. Sparkling
Wines A ie, Porter, Cider, Perry, and other
Beverages made from Cereals. Fermented Drinks
made from Vegetable Sap, from Milk, and Sweet


HulmtaueuH nf nil kmdH. UmudioH uud Adcoholn.
Spidln; Whifsky, (tin, Hum, Tnilii, Kiiwuh,
35'.! C'.UUUB, Ik I' 1 ., hwwidi, Wiur» Kupar, 1877. In Mtuok, U)u
ilciKim jlUul, fuU .luuliua. linn. prr doztm, UK pov gallon.
IKK) OlllhlkS, 1). 4., & St»NV)Kmdml Viiusyard, Hnsduim. 18/7 ;
dry ami rulhhnduHl.
|)0l (’ll! MW, Ik 4., & SON, Toimihid Viuoyard. Mi'i«hauu. 1877 ,
Hot), dry.
1)02 OOULDKIUk W. 11., Aguahm., IkHmUdgh. Hum.
303 OOULDiiIHY, W, H., Aguaton, Brrnloigh. Uhi,
3(H t)AVII)SON, 4. K., Alexandra K«tatr, Mnrkay, iUuu,
305 QKIIhKU, (\ F., & SON, Carlulumg Viiwyanl, Bnnhmm.
hi abode, -1,000 gallons ; Hod, light, ami dry. 7a. inn*
gallon.
300 (VKUI.KR, & SON, Oarhilmrg Vhmyavd, Brmhaur.
hi Hfcouk, 3, IKK) gallons ; Rnd, hwiwU UK por dozon.
307 11KWITT & (JO,, I’luynlowo hi.stillory, Maokay. Hum, hulk
(Anohor).
308 HKWITT x <70,, I‘kystom* UUtilta'y* Murkily. Hum, hulk
(Anohor).
303 KIUOHMU. 4., Ahhiiuuuiluiuki'ii, Warwick. Vordoilho, wiiio,
1870. hi afcock. fH) galh»m. ; white, light, and dry. Oh.
rim* gallon.
370 KIROIIKU, J„ AMnniiuiHUauMi'n. Warwick. Stdvina. IH7B.
lu stork, 530 gftlrt; whito. light, dry. Oh. (hi. pirn
gallon.
371 KIROHIfIU. J, Atmiurnwhammu. Warwick, \u*iUullui, 1H77.
In afcook, 100 gallons ; whito, light, dry. *.K per
gallon.
372 KIUUHKU, J,, AnsinaimUmumn. Warwick. Ilonnitago, 1877.
In stock, 00 gallons ; rod. light, and dry, ok. pur
gallon.
373 KtiU'IIKII, AHHimudiaiiMeu, Warwick, Mataro. 1878.
hi abode, 3,000 gallons. rod, light, ami dry, Iht. od. per
gallon.
374 KmmiKU, ,1., AmmmuHluuiHun, Warwick. Mataro, 1877.
hi atomic, fiiuj gallons ; rod. light, ami dry. Oh. (Id. per
gallon.
375 KIM ’KICK, .h, AminmmihanHcn, Warwick, Hermitage,
LS"O. In stock, 5n gullmm : rod, light and dry. On. per
gallon,
370 KUhUUCR, .1., Amini!uuthan«on, Warwick. Hermitage,
1875. hi stock, 30 gallons ; rod, light, ami dry. Oh. pm*
gallon.
377 LARK, .1. 3. SunvmWn Vineyard, Samford, Brifdnme.
inahcUa, 1870. In stock, BUo gallona. 18h. mn- do?,mi.
378 LARK, 3. 4,, Sumnidru Vineyard, Samford, Umihanc.
Hermitage, White an I dry, fulhhodmd.
370 RAKK, U., Moravlh-hl, (‘ahooUiue, near Illinium'. Hum
11 years old.


380 HOMER, 0., Canning Downs. Warwick. Black Spanish,
1879. In stock, 1.400 gallons ; red, full-bodied. Ids.
per dozen.
381 HOMER, Canning Downs, Warwick. Tokay-Reisling,
made from two parts Tokay and one part Reisling,
1876. In stock, 800 gallons ; white, light, and dry.
18s. per dozen-
-382 ROWER, C., Canning Downs, Warwick. Tokay-Ueisling,
made from two parts Tokay and one part Reisling,
1879. In stock, 1.200 gallons ; white, light, and dry.
L6s. per dozen.
383 SLOANE. "W., & 00. Tekowai Plantation, Maekay. Hum.
384 YE-ARWOOD, H. B. Maekay. Hum, 2 gallons, manufac-
factured by exhibitor, (Y).
EIGHTH GROUP.— Agriculture.
ClclSS 74. Specimens of harm Buildings and Agricultural
Works. Examples of the Farm Buildings of
various countries Examples of Stables. Cattle-
sheds, Sheepfolds, Pig-sties, and of premises for
rearing and fattening such animals. Utensils
used in Stables, Cattle-sheds, Kennels, etc.
Apparatus for preparing the food of animals.
Agricultural Machinery in motion ; Steam Ploughs,
Reaping and Rinding and Mowing Machines,
Hay-making Machines, Threshing, Finishing, and
Dressing Machines, etc. Specimens of Agricul-
tural Works : Distilleries, Sugar-mills. Sugar
Refineries, Breweries, "Works for the preparation
of Flour. Eecula. Starch : Silkworm Nurseries,
etc. Apparatus for Artificial Hatching. Presses
for Wine, Cider, Oil.
No Entries.
NINTH GROUP. Horticulture.
CIaSS 75.—Conservatories and Horticultural Apparatus.
Gardeners’, Nurserymen’s, and Horticulturists’
Tools. Apparatus for Watering and keeping Turf
in order, ike. Large Conservatories, and Appaia-
tus appertaining thereto. Room and Window-
Conservatories. Aquarimns for Aquatic Plants.
Fountains, and other means for Ornamenting
Gardens.
No Entries.


OIaSS 76. —Flowers and Ornamental Plants, Species of
Plants and Examples of Culture exhibiting the
characteristic types of the Gardens and Dwellings
of each country.
385 QUEENSLAND COMMISSION. Two Macrozamias, from
the Leichhardt district.
EXTRA.
336 BAILEY, F. M. Illustrations of the Botany of Queensland.
6 vols.
Class 77.—Vegetables. _ of Plants and examples of
Culture exhibiting the characteristic types of the
Kitchen Gardens of each country.
No Entries.
CIaSS^S. —Fruit and Fruit Trees. Species of Plants and
Specimens of Products exhibiting the characteristic
types of the Orchards of each country.
No Entries.
Class 79. Seeds and Saplings of Forest Trees. Species
of Plants and Specimens of Products illustrating
the processes followed in each country for Planting
Forests.
387 FITZALI.T.fs, E., Bowen. Case containing samples of rare
indigenous seeds of the colony.
388 HARTMANN, C. id., Toowoomba. Box constructed of
Seeds, and Seed Cones.
389 MACPHERSON, A., Brisbane. Collection of Seeds of In-
digenous Grasses, 91 varieties, as follows :
1 Andropogon intirnedius, R Br.
2 Sporobolus elongatus, R.Br.; also Nos. 3 and 5,
forms of same.
4 Sporobolus indicus, R.Br.: also No. 6
7 Dichelachne crinita, Hook ; also Nos. S and 36. forms
of same.
10 Arundinella nepalensis, Tri.; also Nos. lo and 23,
forms of same
11 Andropogon erianthoides, F.M.
12 Panicum Bp.
13 Anthistiria Australis, R.Br.; also No. 14
16 Aristida ramosa, R. Br.
17 Panicum parviflorum, R.Br.; also Nos. 18 and 39,
forms of same.
19 Leptochloa cliinensis, Nees,
Chloris truneata, R.Br.: also No. 66
21 Sporobolus virginicus. Var pallida, F.M.
22 Panicum trachj rhaohis, Benth,; also No. 77
21 Panicum effusum, R.Br.


25 Eragrostis teptostachya, Stand.; also Nos. 32, SD, 78,
and S 7, forms of same.
26 Briza minor, Linn.
27 Perotis raro, Pv.Br.
£8 Olilorns divaricata, K.Br.; also No. 43
20 Eragrostris pilosa, Beam-.; also No. 43
30 Pn-meum Macractinium, Benth,; also No. 67
31 Sporobolus diander. Beaux.
38 Isobconmm Anstrale, K.Br.; also Nos. 44 and 83,
forms of same.
34 Eragrostis Brownii, Nees., also Nos. 47, 49,86, 89,
and 00 forms of same.
37 Loeraia hexandra, S.M.
38 i’anicum Mitohellii, Benth.; also No. 51.
40 Eragrostis Brownii, var interrupta
41 Kyllinga intermedia, K.Br. (A-Sedge)
42 X J eimisetum compressnm, K.Br, *
46 Aristicla vagans, lI.Br.
46 Imperata anmdinacea, Cyr.
48 Oypirna Sp. (A Sedge)
60 Panicnm cm a galli, Linn.; also No. 79
52 Agropyrum scabrum, Beaar,
63 Ohrysopogon parviflorus, Benth.; also Nos. 69 and
71, forms of same
64 Anthistiria mcmbranacoa, Lindl.
55 Selaria glauca, Beam*.
66 Eriochloa pivuotata, Hamilt.; also No. 78
67 Hcmarthria eompressus, K.Br.; also No. 81
58 Panicnm fiaridum, Katz.
60 Panionm Sauguinalo, Linn.
61 Andropogon rofructns, K.Br.
62 Audiopogon laclmatherus, Benth.
63 Andropogon Siriceus, 11, Br.
G 4 Andrupogon pertussus, Willcl.
60 Andropogon affmis, 11. Br.; also No. 92
CS Eleuaine indica, Goert.
69 Punicmn foliosum, K.Br.
70 Sorghum halpensc, Pars.
72 Panionm oolonum, Linn.
74 Aatrebla titrieoides, P.M.
76 Isdicemum tornm, ll. Br.
80 Pnspalnm Scrohioulutnm, Linn,
82 Bromns arenarins, K.Br.
84 A young growth of Anthistiris meinbranacea, Lindl.
85 Lapago raoemoaa, Schreb.
88 Eragrostis, Bp,
91 Paiucum indioum, Linn.
390 MACPBEKSON, A., Brisbane. Knte Seed; two varieties—
Oovphwm capnmlarls and Corchonts ollotaris.
391 MACPHEKSON, A.j Brisbane. "White Millet Seed.


393 OXENFORD, W. Ih, Ooomem. Flax Seed. Grown an
alluvial scrubland, without irrigation j average yield, 1 ,
cwt. per acre. : i, ; , ' ' i A'd
303 TULLOCII, W., Gian cairn Farm, Warwick. ~ Lucerne Seed,
grown on heavy black soil. ; ' , , ' ,
301 TUR.NET, F., Brisbane, 7d varieties of.-Qiieeuslaud Indige-
nous Grass Seeds, collected by exhibitor. 1 '
305 WAT, E., Givacbov,, Queen’s Park,, Toowoomba. Collection
■of seeds of indigenous grasses—ss varieties us follows
Agrostis Solandri, Andropogon hcicuhvm, Andropogon
anuulatus, Andropogon ainlulatus variety, Andropogon
eriantlioides, Andropogon halopensis, • Andropogon mon-
tanas, Andropogon iiorvosus, Andropogon trifcicens, An-
dropogon chrysocophillns, Andropogon ekmgatus, Airdro-
pogon isohremnTO, Autliistiria avenacea, JEgylops
oylindrica, Avistida- calycine, ■ Anmdinellrv nepalunais,
Bromus avenarins, Bromis OriontaUa pnrpurcn.s, GhUiris
divaricata, (Jhloris ventricosa, (Anna ovatu, Daiuuis
■brachiatua, Beuthonia tritiooidea, Banthnnia pictinata,
Elcusinc Indicft, Elbusine digitata, Eleuaino carauana.
Fcstuca billardiori, Helopus annulatua, Lappajm racc-
mosa, Microbena stipoidcs, Panicum devaricata, Panicum
Browuii, Panicum apootabilis, Ptinicmn vlrgatum, Pani-
cum pamflorum, Pauieum cccnicolnm, Panicum bmoides,
Panicum maxima (Panicum miliave shamay), Moha
Hungarian, Poa caipitosa, Pun. orientalis, PunniuQtnm
oompressum, Peunisotum glueum, PeiiiuiLlaria apicata
oiimbo pedda, Spore bolus'elongatua, Sporobblus pulchclla,
Stipavamosiasima, Sfcipa silaeca, Sbipa diuholachns, Sotaria
macrocVircba, Tricholrona rosaa (red grassa of Natal), 3
varieties of Rhagodia (saltbush).
Class 80. —Plants, for’ Conservatories. Illustrations ol the
mode of culture adopted in various countries, with
a view either' td pleasure or to utility.
3i'G FITZALLAN, E., Bowen. Collection of Orchids.
TENTH GROUP.- —Mining Industries — Machinery, and
Products.
OIaSS 81.—Apparatus - and Processes of the Art of Mining
and Metallurgy, i Boring Apparatus for. Artesian
Wells and Wells of Large Diameters. Boring
Machines and Apparatus for Breaking Down Coal
and Gutting Rooks. Apparatus for Blasting by
Electricity. Models, Plans, and Views of the
t?


mode of woi'king in Mines anti Quarries. Works
for . obtaining Mineral Waters. Machines and
Apparatus used for Extracting Ore, and for
Lowering and Hoisting Miners. Winding, Pump-
ing, and Ornsbing Machinery. Safety Gagas and
Hooka; Signals and other Appliances for Lessen-
ing the Danger in Alines. Machines for Draining;
Pumps. Ventilating Apparatus; Ventilators.
Safety Lamps; Lamps for Electric Light. Appa-
ratus for the Mechanical Dressing of Ores and
Mineral Fuel. Apparatus for Compressing Fuel
into Oakes. Apparatus for the Carbonisation of
Fuel. Smelting Furnaces. , Smoke-consuming
Apparatus. Apparatus used in Metal Works.
Special Apparatus used in Forges and Foundries,
jdectro-metallnrgical Apparatus. Apparatus used
in Metal Manufactures of all kinds. Drawings of
different classes of Machinery used in Mining.
No Entries.
Class S3.—Mining and Metallurgy. Collections and Speci-
mens of Rooks, Minerals, Ores. Ornamental
Stones. Hard Stones. Refractory Substances.
Earths and Olays. Various Mineral Products.
Baw Sulphur. Hook Salt; Salt from Salt Springs.
Mineral Fuel, various kinds of Coal, Coal Dust,
and Compressed Coal. Asphalt and Rock As-
phalt. Bitumen. Mineral 'Far. Petroleum, Ac.
Metals in a Crude state ; Pig-iron, Iron, Steel,
Oast-steel, Copper, Load, Gold, Silver, Zino, Anti-
mony, Ac. Alloys. Products of Washing and
Refining Precious Metals, of Gold-beating, etc.
Electro-metallurgy: Objects Gilt, Silvered,
or coated with Copper, Stool, Nickel, Ac.,
by the galvanic process. Products of the
Working of Metals: Rough-castings, Bells,
Wrought-iron, lion for Special Purposes, Sheet-
iron and Tin Plates, Iron Plates fur casing Ships
and Constructions, Ac. Sheet-iron coated with
Zinc or Lead; Copper, Lead, and Zinc Shorts,
&o. Manufactured Metals ; Blacksiui Ms' Work,


Wheels and. Tires, Unwelded Pipes, Chains, &c.
Wire Drawing. Needles, Pins, Wire-ropes, Wire-
work, and Wire-gauze, Perforated Sheet-iron.
Hardware, Edge-tools, Ironmongery, Copper,
Sheet-iron, Tinware, &c. Other Metal Manufac-
tures.
397 ALGAR, J., Sydney. 3 Specimens of Malachite from Peak
Downs.
398 BENNETT, Captain, Red Oxide Copper, Mount Perry.
899 BENNETT, Captain. Copper Regains, Mount Perry.
400 BENNETT, Captain. Chaleopyrites, Mount Perry.
401 BENNETT, Captain. Collection of Copper Ores from Mount
Perry.
402 BEARDMORE, F. J. W., Cooktown. Tin Ores, from
Granite Creek, Palmer River.
403 BOWEN MUNICIPAL COUNCIL. Block of Coal from
the Daintree Seam, Bowen River, Leichhardt district,
with plan of seam attached.
404 CRITCHLEY, R., Gympie. Antimony Ore.
405 CLARKE, D. S., Cairns. Samples of Tin Ore from the
Palmer District, Cape York Peninsula.
406 COULDERY", W. H. Gympie. Collection of Cold Specimens
from Gympie.
407 DAWSON, J. 8., Boyne River. 301bs. Auriferous Tailings,
from the Boyne River, Gladstone.
408 DEPARTMENT OF MINES, Queensland. Ores of Anti*
mony, Galena, Chrome, Manganese, Cinnabar, Bismuth,
ic. ‘
409 DOCTOR’S REEF, PROPRIETORS, Gympie. Specimens
of Mundic Stone.
410 DRAPER, Rev. W., South Brisbane. Two Pebbles. Derby-
shire.
411 ELDKED, Captain W. H., Sydney. Collection of Cinnabar
or Snlphuret of Quicksilver, in granite, sandstone, and
ealespar, from his mines, Kilkivan, Wide Bay district,
Queensland.
412 ELDRED, Captain W. H., Sydney. Cinnabar, in sandstone
and calcite, from his Kilkivan mines.
413 ELDRED, Captain W. H., Sydney. Cinnabar, with car-
bonates of copper in quartz and otherwise, from his Kil-
kivan mines.
414 ELDRED, Captain W. H.. Sydney. Cinnabar in quartz,
from his Kilkivan mines.
415 FISCHER, G., Breakfast Creek. Fire Clay.


410 FRIEND, H., jnnr., Gladstone. Sample of Tailings from
■ 'th'i Gladstone'district.
417 GLANMIII.E, NORTH, GOLD-MINING 00., Gympie. Ton
• tons rtf PJch Auriferous Quartz.
41S GREGOIIY, A, C., C.M.G., Brisbane. Colleotion of Speci-
mens of Coal from various districts of Queensland
: as udder :
Burrum Mine. Maryborough.—Analysis: Volatile in
coking, 51.5 ; fixed carbon, 04.0 ; ash, 4.5. Total.
100. - .
Thomas’ Mine, Dundamba, near Ipswich.—Analysis :
Volatile in coking, 29.8 ; fixed carbon, 50.2; ash.
11.0. ' Total, 100. • ■ . .
Jones’ Mine. Bundamba. near Ipswich.—Analysis :
Volatile in coking, 28.9 ; fixed carbon, 61.5 ; ash,
9.6. Total, 100. , . ■ T .
Watewrtown Mine, Ipswich.— Analysis ; Volatile in
coking, 25.2 ; fixed carbon, 62.0; ash, 12.8. Total,
Comet ’lUver, Rockhampton.—Analysis : Volatile in
coking, 25.0 ; fixed carbon, CD. 8 ; ash, 9.7. Total
100. ■ ‘
Tivoli Mine,'lpswich,—Analysis: Volatile in coking,
. 26,7 ; fixed carbon, 66.4 ; ash, 6,9. Total, 100.
Walloon, West Moreton.—Analysis ; Volatile m coking,
41 ; fixed carbon, 42 ; ash 17. Total 100.
419 GYMPIE COMMITTEE. 1C Samples-Fyn-tos, from Gympie.
420 GYMPIE 'COMMITTEE, Eock Gores, extracted by the
Diamond Drill at Gympie. .
421 HODKINSON, W, 0., Warden, George Town, Etheridge
Eiver, Geological Collection. ' ’ ' ' ' - ' .
422 HODGKINSON, W. 0.. Warden George Town. Geological
Suite, from the Etheridge • Eiver, .Tropical Queensland,
showing the formation, etc., of the gold bearing reefs of
■■: ’thatDistrict. i */. -m
423 HODSKINSON, W, 0,, Warden; Georgetown, Etheridge
■ River., •. 75 Ilia; Average Stone, Papa Prosjjeet Claim,
Etheridge River ; taken from 38 tone, which yielded
3.0x8. Iff dwt, of gold' per ton. Reef, 1 to 3 feot wide ;
1 mile from George Town. ,' .
454 HODGEINSON, W, 0., Warden, ..George Town. ,85 Ilia,
average Mnnclic Stone, Spero Melipra Claim ; taken irom
1,0 tons, yielding 4 oz. gold to the ton, Reef, Ito 2 feet
. , wido; I mile from George Town.
426 HODGKINSON, W. 0., Warden, .George Town. ' 70 lbs.
average, Raw Stone ; from 38 tons, yielding 2 ozs. 11
dwts. gold to the ton ; City of Glasgow Prospect Claim.
Eecf 1 to 2 feet wide ; 8 miles from George Town.


420 HODGKINSON, W. 0., Warden, George Town. 70 lbs.
Tailings, Papa Reef; 94 lbs. ditto, Spore Melioraj 05 lbs.
ditto City of Glasgow ; 80 lb ditto, “ Bnrdaus Pan,’ 1 City
of Glasgow ; 90 lbs. Blanketings,, Spare Meliora.
427 HODGKI NS ON, W. 0,, Warden, George Town. 144 lbs.
Average Stone, Better Luck Prospect Claim; 85 feet
level; former crushiuga up to 7 ozs. gold per ten.,
Width of reef, from 4to 20 inches ; -Jjinile from George-
Town.
428 HODGKINSON, W. 0., Warden, George Town, Etheridge
River. ISS lbs. average Mnndic Stone from Lord Byron
Beef Prospect Claim, at 130 feet level ; cm slings varying
from 18 dwta. up to 5 ozs. gold per ton. B.eef from 10
inches to 5 feet wide.
429 HODGXCLNSON, W. O, Warden, George Town, Etheridge
River. 108 lbs. Average Stone, Cumberland Beef Prospect
Claim. Latest crushing was 1,921 ozs. gold from 760 tons
of tliis stone. Beef from 2to 5 feet wide ; 1C miles from
George Town.
430 HODGKINSON, W. 0., Warden, George Town, Etheridge
River. 78 lbs. Blanketings from Cumberland Beef, os
above.
431 HAYS, W. p Townsville. Goppsr Ores from the Star River,
fifty miles from Townsville.
•132 HILL, W. E. 0., Warden, Bavenswood. Collection of Galena
and .Silver Lead Ore.
433 H[JETER, Captain 11. IvL, Rockhampton, Specimens of
varieties Marbles from Ins quarry, Northumberland
Group.
434 JACK, R. L. Townsville. Collection of Fossils, Tropical
Queensland, viz. Devonian and carboniferous fossils
from Star River, Oanooniv, Broken Bivcr, Bowen River
Coalfield, the latter equivalent to the “Lower marine
beds," “ Lower coal measures," “ Upper marine beds ” of
N.fi.W. coalfield. Also, from the upper or tertiary series
of the Bowen River coalfield, equivalent to the “ Upper
coal measures ” of Newcastle, Wollongong, and Bowenfels
Of New .South Wales.
435 JONES, D. M., MAybown. Gold Specimens from the Palner
River.
■I3G LONDON EXTENDED CLAIM PROPRIETORS, Two-
Mile, Gympie. Specimens of Rich Gold-bearing Quartz,
containing 35 ozs. gold.
437 LADY MARY, SOUTH, No, 5, GOLD-MINING C 0„
Gympie, Ten Tons of Rich Auriferous Quartz.


43S MA.YTOWN RESIDENTS (Per P. F. Selheim, Warden).
Emblematic Column, representing the exact bulk and
volume of gold, of the highest purity, extracted from the
Palmer Hirer Goldfield, on Cape York Peninsula, Tropi-
cal Queensland, between the elates of November, 1873,
and July, 1870, amounting to 016,710 ozs., of the value
(exceeding £4 per oz.) of 113,948,000 sterling,
439 MILLER, H. 0., Etheridge, Massive Specimens from the
Prospect Claim, Lord Byron Reef, Etheridge District,
6,000 tons of which yielded 12,000 ozs, of gold.
440 MILLER, H. C., Port Darwin, Agates from Gave Creek,
Gilbert River.
441 MILLER, H. 0., Port Darwin, Queensland. Collection of
Gold-bearing Ores, of Copper, Load, Iron, including
Galena, Cerusite, Malachite, Mmidic, &c., from tlie
various reefs of the Etheridge Districts.
442 MILLER, H. C., Port Darwin, Queensland. Rock Specimens
of Granite, ttc., from various reefs in the Etheridge Dis-
trict.
443 MORGAN BROTHERS, Charters Towers. Rich Gold
Specimens, containing 70 ozs. 10 dwts. gold 5 Caroline
Prospect Claim,
4-44- MUFFATT, D. k J., Brisbane. Waterstown Cool.
445 MOUNT ORANGE CUPPER CO., Maokay. Copper Ore.
44G' M'DONALD, Ht. Helena. Collection nf Manufactured
Tinware.
44? NICHOLES LEASEHOLD PROPRIETORS, Gympio. Gold
in Quartz.
*448 PALMER, E., Cloncurry River. Minerals and Aboriginal
Curios.
440 BEARIN', J., Brisbane. Rich Gold Specimen, ‘i, from Nos. 7
and 8 Mouklaud Reef, Gympie.
4GO PEAK DOWNS COPPER MINING 00. Refined and pre-
cipitate Copper.
451 PEARCE & CO,, Gin Gin. Silver Ore,
453 PETRIE, J., Brisbane. 2 Boxes Hard Stone, from the
neighbourhood of Brisbane,
453 PETRIE, J., Brisbane. 1 Box of Freestone, from Breakfast
Creek Quarry.
454 PETRIE, *L, Brisbane, 1 Box of Freestone, from Murphy’s
Creek, S. and W. Railway line.
453 PETRIE, J., Brisbane. ]. Piece of Stone from Gladstone.
4n(i PETRIE, J,, Brisbane, 1 Jinx Fire Clay.
437 PETRIE. J., Brisbane. 1 Box Silica Powder for polishing.


438 QUEENSLAND COMMISSION. Trophy of Queensland
Tin ingots and other forms, Stanthorpe.
459 Q.U 13ENSLAND COMMISSION. Trophy of Queensland
Copper in cakes and other forms.
m QUEENSLAND COMMISSION. Emblematic Column,
springing from a base of auriferous quartz, repre-
senting the exact hulk and volume of Gold,
both, alluvial and from quartz, raised within the
Colony of Queensland between the years 186 S and
1S7!) inclusive, amounting in all to 3,244,777 ounces,
of the value of £11,702,316 sterling (Eleven million
seven hundred and sixty-two thousand throe hundred
and sixteen pounds).
4GI QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Auriferous Specimens,
conl'flining Ores of copper, iron, load and zinc, from
Tropical Queensland ; from the Emmy Fern, Austra-
lia Felix, Cross Course, Napoleon, Melnauor, "Politi-
cian, Sunset, Bristol, Lone Star, Lighthouse, Papa,
Overland Telegraph, St, George, Connaught, General
Grant, Carpentaria, Golden Crown, Spero, Durham,
Mary, and other reefs at the Etheridge, Eavenswood,
and other goldfields,
403 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Gold in various Rums
of occurrence, and gold in quartz, in decomposed
nmiulie, linumite, and thread gold ; gold in ealespar
and galena, from Gympic, Ravonswoocl, the Gillert
and Capo Rivers, Also, gold in Granite, from I'avona-
wood.
463 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Gold ami Zinc, Black
Jack Reef, llavcmwood.
464 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Polished Sections of
Gold and Quartz.
405 QUEENSLAND OOVERNJVI3SNT. Polished Sections of
Linumite, Quartz, and Gold.
4GO QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Rich Gold ■'Leader”
Quartz, Tropical Queensland.
4G7 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Granitea-red, grey.
and green, polished and crude—from the gold. fields of
the Gilbert (red), Ravcuswood (green), and the
Etheridge (grey), in Tropical Queensland.
40S QUEENSLAND G-OVKIIKMENT. relished Section of Ores
containing gold, sulphide of copper, &c.


4(39 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Alluvial and Reef Casing
Gold from the following places in Tropical Queens-
land, viz.: Upper Gape River; 20-Mile Rush,
Gilbert River ; Marengo, Tort Denison ; Percy River ;
Talbot Creek, Gilbert River : Paddy’s Gully ; Even-
ing Star Reef; Australian Reef, .Upper Cape River ;
Buchanan’s Creek, Ravonsworid j (Stephens’ Lead,
Cape River district ; Union Lead. Capo River; Dee
River, Westwood ; Western Creek, Gilbert district;
Kroombit Creek ; Specimen Gully, Capo River dis-
trict Overlander Reef, Ravenswood ; Nigger Creek ;
Herbert Creek, Rockhampton.
470 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Massive Block of An-
timony, from the Nenrdic mine, Burnett district.
471 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Massive Block of Ga-
lena, 1*22 fists, silver to the ton, and slightly aurifer-
ous, from the Yarn.! mine Duwc’s Range,
472 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Polished Block of Cin-
nabar and Calcito.
473 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT, Carboniferous Sandstone,
from Ipswich Coal Measures.
474 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Rod Oxide andX'opper
Ores, also Nutivo <’oppcr from the Cloneurry^River,
475 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Copper Sulphide with
Zinc Blende two massive specimens), from the
Kennedy district.
47(3 ‘ QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Polished sections, Ohul-
eo-pyrites
■177 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Malachite and Clmlco-
pyrites, Mount Perry.
47a QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT Black Oxide and Green
Curl onatc «1! Copper, Mount Perry.
4/9 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Antimony Ora from
“Hungry Hill,'’
480 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT Dendritic Oxide of
Manganese, Star River,
451 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Silicate of Iron, from
* Eskda’e, Burnett district.
452 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Gold in Quartz, from
Gympio Reefs, viz : Alma, Caledonian, New Zea-
land, &c.
453 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Malaolnta.roakDowm
454 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Copper Ore of Raw
belle district,
4«S QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Copper Ore-, Lyud
River, Gulf of Carpentaria.


486 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Golden Pyrites, Ohar-
' ters Towera.
487 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Trappoau Hock, Tropi-
cal Queensland.
48S QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Basalt and Serpentine
Rock, Broken River, Tropical Queensland.
480 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Patters’ Lead (non-
argentiferous), Ravenawood.
4!I0 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Galena, Etheridge dis-
trict. ■
4111 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Goal and other Eossila.
402 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Oxide, Tin, Mica, Calciito,
and Quarto, from the Cape "York Peninsula.
403 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Agates in tlio Matrix
Uock, Gilbert River district; some specimens polished
in sections and some crude.
404 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT, Large rough Agate.
405 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Manganese Ore, from
Queensland and New Caledonia.
403 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Cobalt Ore, from Now
Caledonia,
■lB7 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Nickel Ore (silicate),
from New Caledonia.
4'.)S QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT, Alluvial Bismuth, from
Queensland, showing free gold.^ - *
4!)9 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Zinc Blonde, from New
South Wales and Queensland —the former showing
free gold.
500 QUEENSLAND G OVIfIiINMENT. Wolfram, from Victoria
and Queenalimd—the latter auriferous.
BOX QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Iron Ores, from the
Island of .Elba, Tuscany, Cornwall, Tasmania, Now
South IVales, New Caledonia, and Queensland ; some of
the New South Wales and Queensland ores showing free
gold
BU2 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Marmatite, from Italy.
503 QUEENSLAND GO VERNMENT. _ Carbonate of Lead,
very line crystals, pure and white, from Peelwood, New
South Wales.
504 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT Reef Gold in every form
of occurrence, in thread and in leaves, and in combination
with tourmaline, agate, chrysueella, ealcite, zinc, lime*
stone, antimony, malachite, azuvite, bismuth, nmnetene,
with oxides, sulphides, and carbonates of copper, galena,
wolfram, pumice stone, Ac., Ac.; and from tbs various


goldfields of New Caledonia, New Zealand, Tasmania,
Victoria, and New South Wales ; and from the following
rivers in Tropical Queensland, viz.: the Barron, the
Normanhy, the Palmer, the Hodgkinson, the Etheridge,
the Gilbert, the Burdokin, the Capo, the Broughton, tire
Fitzroy 5 from Gympia, Talgai, Canning Downs, Port
Denison, the Calliope, the Boyne, Morimah, Ridgelands,
and other gold-fields in Queensland.
505 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Pink Topaz from Siberia;
Emerald from Ireland ; Amber from Prussia.
506 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Red Granite of the
Gilbert and Green Granite of Itavenswood goldfields.
507 QUEENSLAND GfOVJDIUJMENT. Idoewiae, from Piedmont
Italy ; Epidote, from ditto ; Garnets and Diopskle,
Southern Alps.
508 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Noble Opal in matrix
rook, in massive blocks, from Barooo River, Western
Queensland ; .also from the Bulloo River and Cooper’s
Creek, and from New South Wales.
509 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Noble Hyalite or
*• Dewdrnp” Opal (a new gem), Springsnre ; Matrix of
the Noblo Hyalite, Springsnre ; .Red Tourmaline Chryso-
lite (a new gem), from Nanango ; grocu and brown
ditto.
510 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Aquamarine Topaz, from
Madagascar,j ditto, gigantic variety; Aquamarines,
from Queensland ; White Topaz, Queensland ; ditto, Flin-
ders’ Island, Bass’ Straits; Cairngorms, from Madagascar,
Aberdeenshire, Victoria, and Queensland.
01.1 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Amethysts, from Ger-
many, Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland.
512 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Yellow Topaz, from
Brazil ; Beryl, from Stanthorpc ; Rubies, from New
Caledonia; Baphiros,from New South Wales.
513 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Diorite Greenstone (or
Hornblende), 20-Milo Creek, Gilbert Gold district.
514 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Antimony Ore, from
New Caledonia, New Zealand, Victoria, New South
Wales, and Queensland ; that from Victoria and New
South Wales showing free gold.
515 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT, Cinnabar of Sulphnritc
of Mercury, in granite, ealospar, and sandstone, from
New South Wales and Queensland.
516 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Galena, from Western
Australia, Italy, South Australia, New South Wales,
and Queensland ; the latter showing free gold.
51V QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Collection of Ores of
Silver, from Nevada, California, Italy, Europe, Queens-
land, Western Australia, New South Wales, and South
Australia.


518 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Molybdenum Ore, from
Ipswich, Queensland.
519 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT, Chrome Ore, from Now
Caledonia.
520 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Agates. Jaspers, Cor-
nelians, Onyx, Chalcedony, and Sardonyx, from the
Victoria River (of Stokes) in N. Western Australia, the
rivers of Northern and Western Queensland, New South
Wales, Victoria, Tasmania, Isle of Man, Bohemia. &c.
521 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Alabaatar (or satin spar),
Italy; Green Tourmaline, in white dolomite, from
Mount St. Gothard.
522 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Stone Axe, extinct,
aborigines of Darling Downs.
523 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Oxides, Silicates,
Sulphides, Carbonates, and Chloride of Copper and Native
Metal, from various parts of England, Europe, New
Caledonia, Now Zealand, all parts of Queensland, New
South Wales, South Australia, Victoria, and Western
Australia : many of the Oxides, Silicates, and Carbonates
from Queensland and New South Wales showing free
gold. Also, Malachite, with gold and without it, from
Queensland and New South Wales.
524 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Fossil, from carboni-
ferous sandstone, quarried near Brisbane.
525 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Bone Fossil (encrusted
with lime crystals), from the Bono Oaves, Mount
Gambler, South Australia
D2G QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Lode Tin in various
forms, from Bohemia, Cornwall, Tasmania, New South
Wales, Victoria, and Queensland.
527 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Spinifor, Gympie ;
and Ooraie, Broken River.
538 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT, Fossils (supposed to
be the roots of a reed), Logan River.
529 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Oriental Agates of tiie
ribbon, moss, fortification, banded, and other varieties ;
Onyx and Sardonyx, Bloodstone and Cornelian, from the
Burnett and Gilbert Rivers.
C3O QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Matrix of the Burnett
River Agate.
531 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Quartz Debbies from
SUnthorj.e ; and Rock Crystal from New Caledonia,
532 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Onyx, black and white,
Queensland Sardonyx ; red and white, ditto, ditto.
538 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Gold in calcapar and
diorite, Gympie.
534 QUEENSLAND' GOVERNMENT. _ Golden Pyrites, from
Gympie. Charters Towers, Morinish, &e.
535 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Statuary Marble, Car-
rara, Italy.


630 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Polished Statuary
Marble, Ravenswood,
537 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Polished Black Fossil
Marble, from the Broken River, Tropical Queensland.
53S QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. .Steatite, ICilkivan.
539 QUEENSLAND ’GOVERNMENT. Turkey Stone, from
■ Dungog, New South Wales.
540 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Turkey Stone for hones,
etc., from the Paterson River, Dungog, New South
Wales.
641 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. China Clay (Kaolin),
New Smith Wales.
542 QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT. Antimony Regains, Vic-
toria.
543 QUEENSLAND DEIARTME NT OF MINES. Refined Lead
and Antimony.
544 ROBERTS, W. 8., Pikctlale, Tailings from Pikedale Gold
Reef, Darling Downs.
545 ROCKHAMPTON COMMITTEE. Marble, Limestone,
Oolite, Freestone, Copper Ore, Ingot ami Precipitate of
Cupper.
64G ROCKHAMPTON COMMITTEE. Six specimens Marble,
from Percy and other Islands on the Queensland Coast.
547 SELLHEIM, P. F., Haytowu, Stream and Lode Tin from
the Etheridge district.
54S SELLHEIM, P. F., Warden, Maytown. Miscellaneous
specimens of Ores and Rucks—comprising Lode Tin
from Cannibal Creek ; Gold Quartz from Try Again,
proftpeot claim ; Tailings and Blanketings from the
British Lion, Ida, Queen of the North, prospect
claims. Stream Tiu from Chow Txjg'b workings,
Lower Granite Crook. Slate from the Palmer River
Gold Reef; I.nstrusive Rocks from same locality ;
horizontal sandstones, topping the slate in places
from Hell's Gates, Jacob’s J.adder, Lone Star. Ac.
540 SELLHEIM, P. F,, Maytown. Gold in quartz from Palmer
River, viz. ;
1 Queen of the North, COlbs.
2 Ida, lease 14:, lOlbs
.1 Do. do., slbs.
4 Do. do., 1011.143.
5 Queen of the North, No. 1 Smith. 301bs. (lease 20).
(5 Do ” do., Whs. (lease 20).
7 Owners of the North, 8.C., lease 4, Whs.
3 Do. do do., Whs.
9 Do do. do., 17lbs
10 Smithfiold, No I, 21bs.
11 Caledonia, P. 0,, 221bs.
12 Sinithfielcl, P 0, 7lbe.
13 Victoria, P. 0., 31bs. '
14 Lady Hamilton, 11b,


550 SELLHEIM, P. F., May town. Collection of rich Golden
• Quanta Specimens, showing gold of higli Assay, from the
Palmer River reefs, Cape York Peninsula
650 A SHEAFFE, B. H., Chmcurry. Copper Specimens.
551 SIMPSON* ALLAN, Clifton, near Warwick. Specimens of
' Coal. '■ / ■ '
552 SMELLIE Sc Go ,B. 11., Brisbane. Moulding Sand.
553 STAICtER,, It. Xj, FL S. 'Chrome colours, prepared from
Ipswich ore, by exhibitor.' ' ’
55-1 STAIGEE, K. T , FL S , Brisbane. ,A Jet Pin,, made by
Mackie, from Ipswich Jet Coal.
555 SUTTON, Jl 'W;, Brisbane ' Collection of Queensland and
Foreign Mineral Ores, including gold, silver, lead, copper,
tin, antimony, bismuth, nickel, cobalt, platinum.,■ magne-
sium, palladium, uranium, mercury, sodium, arsenic,
iron, etc.
550 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM- Gypsum from
the Warrego, Western Queensland (Plaster of Paris can
■ he made from this).
657 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. 'Steatite, Bris-
bane:
558 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. China Clay
(Kaolin), Stonthorpe,- ■
550 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Cixlcspar, from
Gympie and Kilkivau. 1
500 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Native Salt,
Herbert River, Tropical Queensland.
501 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Native Soda,
from Warrego River, Western Queensland (containing 5G
per cent. Carbonate of Soda). • • -
503 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND. MUSEUM. Garnet Sand,
Cape York Peninsular. Impalpable Silicious Powder —a
substitute for emery. /.
COB TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. . Plumbago, Stan-
thorpe.
564 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM.' • Four Specimens
Polished Marbles. ■
' 563 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Specimens of
Bose, White, Black, Yellow, and other _ Marbles, from
, Calliope River, Gladstone. , ' >
SGG TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM.' -' Specimens of
Black and White Statuary garbles, from Warwick
5(37 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Two Diamonds
from Stanthorpe ; two Red Chrysolites, from Nanango.,


568 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Basaltic Matrix
of Gilbert River Agates.
569 TRUSTEES QUEESLAND MUSEUM. Three Specimens
of Topaz, from Stanthorpo
570 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Calospar from
Kilkivan.
571 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM, Common Salt
from Mulligan River, Cape York Peninsula, Queensland.
(07 per cent, pure Chloride of Sodium),
573 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. 2 Diamonds, Stan-
tliorpe ; 2 Blood-red Garnets, 1 Polished Opal, 1 Crystal
of Topaz.
573 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Diorites and Ser-
pentines of Queensland.
67 i TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Native Copper-,
from Cloncurry and Keclbottom Mines, in Tropical
Queensland.
575 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Stone Axe (ahori-
giual), from Kangaroo Point, Brisbane ; and one incipient
and unfinished ditto, from Port Denison.
576 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. B Palceozo’c Coal
Fossils.
577 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Z Lepidodendron
Clarke River.
578 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Section of Fossil
Tree,
579 TRUSTEES. QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Ammonites, from
Walsh River, Cape York Peninsula.
SSO TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Hyalite, from
Darling Downs ; Crystal of Calcite.
681 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Chrome Iron Ore,
Hiematite, Tin Specimens, Copper Pyrites, eight pieces
of Malachite, three of Azurite, two of Ruby Copper,
Bismuth from the Cloncurry River.
582 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Matrix Rock of
Bismuth, Stanthorpe.
583 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Opal, from the
Bnlloo Hiver } Semi-Opal from Springßure.
554 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Amethyst, from
Logan River j Garnets in clilorite slate, Cloncnrry River.
586 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Fossil Wood
(polished), Tropical Queensland,
58G TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Collection of
Copper Ores, some gold-bearing ; Malachite, with red
tile ore ; Ohrysocolla, dioptase, &c., from Rockhampton,
Peak Downs, Mount Perry, and other parts of Queens*
laud.
587 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Amethyst, from
Logan River.
686 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Garnets and
Chiastolita, Capo York Peninsula.


589 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Gold in oxide of
bismuth, Cloncurry River.
590 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Specimens of
Coal.
591 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Hcematito (Mag-
netic Iron), Molybdenite, and other ores.
592 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Paleozoic Fossils
as under :
Favoitea (specimen 2), Talgai; Fcnestella fossula, Rock-
hampton ; Producing Cora, Gympie ; Spirifeia biaul-
cata, Gympie j Enumphalus (specimen 2), Mount
Wyatt; Enomphalus, Clarke River; Actiuoorinites,
(specimen 2), Dawson River (3 specimens); Producing
Cora, Bowen River ; Productua Clarkii, Bowen River;
Lepidodendron Nothum, Clarke River ; Lepidoden-
dron Nothum, Olarko River, east; Stigmaria licoides,
Clarke River; Glossopteris Browniaua, Dawson
River ; Glossopteris Biwniana, Bowen River {2
specimens) ; Glossopteris Browniaua and Sphonop-
teris alata, Dawson River.
693 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Metallic Copper,
Cloncurry River ; Felspar, Stauthorpe ; Green 'Jar*
bonite, Leichhardt River ; Copper Ore, Mount Esk;
Brisbane Paver ; Crude Antimony, St. John’s Creek,
Burnett district; Serpentine Rock, near Chrome
deposits, Ipswich.
o'M TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Fossils from the
Cretaceous formation, as under :
Rib Bono of an Ichthyosaurus, Walsh River; Criocerns,'
specimen 2, (small specimen), Walsh River ; Hamites
(specimen 2), Walsh River ; Hamites (specimen 2)
Flinders River ; Ammonites clypoiformia, Walsh
River; Bclcmnitea {specimen 2) Walsh River ; Crus-
tacea (name unknown), "Walsh River ; Cypriua ex-
pansa, Maryborough ; Oyprimi expansa (young speci-
men), Maryborough; Cucullea robusta, Maryborough;
Panopcea plicata, Pelican Creek, North. Queensland ;
Inoccramus multiplicatus, Marathon, North Queens-
land (2 specimens) ; Leredo, Walsh River ; Cyjjrina,
Walsh River ; Byssoarca, Walsh River ; Hinnites,
Walsh River ; Aircula Hughendenonsis, Flinders
River.
ALLUVIAL FOSSILS.
s!)r, TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Fresh water
Sheila, Meliuia, Physa, etc,. These shells are found with
cmr extinct animals, such as Diprotordou, etc., Queens-
land.
,V.)[> TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Fresh water
Shells of the present day, representing the same genera,
ir not species, of the above mentioned fossil shells, Queens-
land.


597 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Hock specimens,
as under :
2 Melaphjris with amygdaloid siliceous deposits iu the
hollows. This mineral forms principally the black-
soil of the Darling Downs and other districts. 1
Slate (surface specimen), North Pine Kiver ; 1 Por-
phyry, Gilbert Ranges ; 1 Serpentine, near Rock-
hampton : 1 Porphyritic Greenstone, London Reef ;
1 Decomposed Porphyry (CTaystone Porphyry), from
Brisbane ; 1 Stone Axe, found near Brisbane ; 2
Stone Axes, found near Bowen (half finished).
598 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Fossil wood,
large trunk, from Springsure; Leophites, from Walsh
River, Cape York Peninsula : Crioceris, from Walsh
River, Cape York Peninsula ; Metallic Copper, Cloncurry
River.
599 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Copper Ores from
Mount Perry, Peak Downs, and Toromeo.
600 TRUSTEES QUEENSLAND MUSEUM. Galena, from
Ravcuswood, Queensland : -Oxide Manganese, from Glad-
stone ; Antimony, from Neardie, Wide Bay district : Gar-
nets, in glasses Gold Specimens from the Cape River,
Gilbert River, Ravenswood, &c. ; Clay Iron Ore (with
iron smelted therefrom with tpswieh coke), from Goodna,
near Ipswich.
601 TYREL, J. de P,, M.L.A.. Stanthorpe. Section show-
ing the strata of alluvial Tiu mine at Stanthorpe to
602 TYREL, J. de P., M.L.A., Stanthorpe. Stick of
Smelted Tin, Stanthorpe.
m TYREL, J. de P., M.L.A. Stream lode Tin Ore.
60-1 TYREL, J. de P., Stanthorpe. Six Ingots Tin.
005 WHITLEY, W., Burnmi. Maryborough. Specimen Block
of Coal from scam four feet thick, 115 feet from surface.
606 WILLS, K. H,, Mackay. Clay.


THE COLONY
OF
QUEENSLAND
BY C. A. FEILBERG.
i
'ATTEENSLAND is 80 large, containing 009,520 square
ygj, miles within its limits, that no accurate conception
of its wide diversities of soil and climate, or of its- varied
resources can be given in any general account. It is there-
fore proposed in those pages to describe separately each
natural division of the colony. Before doing this, however,
it is desirable to give the broad characteristic features of
the country,
In such a vast territory much of the country
must necessarily be a great distance from the coast, but the
long seaboard of the colony is studded with ports, and the
inland trathe is settling down on three distinct main lines of
transit terminating at the ports of Brisbane, Rockhampton,
and Townsville. In course of time, also, the deep indenta-
tion of the Gulf of Carpentaria, on the north coast, will
afford another important outlet for tiro produce of the
western territory. So obvious is this that a project lias long
been entertained of connecting the railway running inland
from the capital, Brisbane, the most southern of the main
ports of the colony, with a harbor on the Gulf, thus opening
a line of through communication across the very heart of the
inland country of Queensland. The project has been taken
up by the Government of the day, and there is some proba-
bility of its being carried out. The seaboard of the colony
embraces it in such fashion that, while enjoying all the
advantages of a compact territory, the greater part of it can,
and will ultimately be, brought within comparatively easy
communication with port. On the other hand, Queensland


has uo internal waterways such as are furnished elsewhere
by great navigable livers. Those in the interior are not
miming streams, and theooast rivers, although navigable for
.Short distances, and serving as means of communication for
small districts, only enable Email craft to penetrate a
comparatively narrow strip of coast country.
The most striking division of the country in Queens-
land is effected by the line of hill create or watershed known
as the Main Dividing Range. At the southern boundary of
idle colony these mountain ranges approach the coast closely,
sending spurs down almost to the sea. Going northward
they fall back, having between them and the coast the dis-
tricts of East and West Moreton, throwing out, however,
masses of broken country, which again approaching the sea
form the division of the next coast district, that of Wide Bay.
From there the watershed falls back rapidly, leaving a
broad tract of coast countiy which includes the districts of
Burnett, Leichhardt, Port Curtis, and South Kennedy, a tract
which is, however, broken up and subdivided by subsidiary
ranges running, for tiro most part, parallel with the coast
and flanked by numerous spurs and outlying buttresses. At
the northern boundary of the last-named district, the main
watershed divides, one branch runs westward, the other
northward; the latter trending rapidly towards the coast
till, at the lease of the Capo Tori,!; Peninsula, the hills form-
ing it, become visible from the tsoa, and for several hundred
Julies continue to rise like a mountain rampart mining close
to and almost parallel with the coast. The lino of mountain
watershed thus forms a rough angle, which, with tho western
boundary of the colony, encloses an irregular quadrilateral,
having its south-western corner out out by the intrusion of
a portion of South Australia. For tho purposes of this
paper tho quadrilateral will be spoken of as the Interior,
In climate and physical features it differs markedly
from the districts lying between the angle of watershed and
the sen, cither on the cast coast or on the great northern
Gulf of Carpentaria, and the countiy contained in it
hes, for tho most part, at a considerable height above the
sea level.
Speaking generally, in the coast districts tho country
is ■well watered, rivers and brooks are abundant, and
there are streams winch cither run always, or for consider-
able periods of time, and tho rainfall is more abundant
than in the interior. In the south it is more evenly
distributed throughout the year, in the north it is


governed by the regular tropical division, into a wet and dry
season. The air also is fairly, and in some places abundantly,
charged with moisture, and a nightly fall of dew is the rule
not the exception. In the southern coast districts frosts in
winter, although generally felt are not, severe, in the north
they are unknown.' The country, although in some places
sprinkled with open plains, is for the moat part covered with
trees, and the scrubs—or thick forests—which, everywhere
abound in lianas and creepers, assume the character of true
tropical jungles in the northern coast valleys. In the
interior the country, with the exception of one small portion
to he hereafter more particularly described, is dry, the rivers
consist mainly of channels containing only detached ponds of
water; permanently running streams are nowhere found,
and springs are exceeding rare. There is very little forest
or timbered country, but apparently endless rolling downs
and plains almost entirely devoid of trees, while the sorube
have little undergrowth and no creepers. The rainfall is
irregular and not so abundant as in the coast districts ; the
air is dry, and night dews are the exception not the rule.
The summer sun is very hot, but it fails to subdue the
elasticity of the dry pure air, and the nights are cool; the
difference of temperature when the sun sets being very
noticeable. The whiter frosts are very sharp, and the winds
that sweep over the wide plains throughout the year become
during that season exceeding'keen and biting. Experience
has shown that the climate is particularly flttted for sheep-
breeding ; the posture is excellent, and salt hush and other
saline plants abound. As pastoral country it is only equalled
in few parts of Australia and nowhere excelled.
Returning to-tho coast districts, and beginning at the
southern extremity ■of the colony, die first division is that
of
EAST and- WEST MOEETON,
lying between the Main Dividing Range and the sea, and
almost encircled by a rough semicircle of hills. This tract
of country of which Brisbane, the capital, end Ipswich,
twenty-live miles distant from it, arc 'the chief towns, was the
site of the original settlement of Moreton Bay. It is watered
by several rivers descending from the ranges, of, which the
most important are the Brisbane and Bremer, which, uniting
form a navigable stream. ; On this river, ata distance of about
twenty miles from its mouth, is the capital, Brisbane, a town
of about 35,000 inhabitants. Two long-shaped sandy islands


lie off tile coast, forming the sheltered harbor of Moreton
Bay, into which, beside the Brisbane, several smaller rivers
rising in the mountain ranges also fall.
In this tract of country the soil is of better average
■quality near the ranges, and worse near the sea, where
indeed the only really good land is on the banks of the
rivers and creeks. But that good land is nearly all in the
hands of selectors, who profit by the remarkable range of
production rendered possible by the mild climate of the
district, and its moderate, well-distributed rainfall, In no
part of Queensland and in few parts of the world is it
possible to grow such an infinite variety of plants, vege-
tables, and slinibs, as in these districts. Turnips, potatoes,
and cauliflower are grown within sight of fields of eane,
which mature and yield excellent sugar. Bananas,
oranges, pineapples, and peaches are the fruits most
commonly grown j but a wonderful variety of trees
indigenous to the tropical and tenperate zones me growing
and thriving in experimental gardens. Sugar cane is
cultivated in localities where the soil is suitable, generally
on the bank of a river, which, also serves as a waterway for
the transport of cancs from the field to the mill. In 1879
the outpmt of sugar was about 3,200 tons. Beside sugar,
arrowroot of very fine quality is produced, and its pircdnetion
is increasing. The settlers also grow for market maize,
piotatoes—English and sweet, —oats for hay, lucerne,
sorghum, and a little tobacco. There are a number of
vineyards, and the cultivation of the grape vine is increas-
ing, especially in the country around Ipswich and near the
range. The winter frosts, especially near the const, are
seldom severe enough to injure any hut the more delicate
tropical plants, while the cool season is sufficiently pro-
longed to give those from the temperate zone an
opportunity of gathering vigour and strength. Throughout
.southern Queensland it may ho here said that the winter
season, say from May to December, is most delightful.
There are weeks during which the bright, blue sky, cool
temperate air, sharpened and rendered exliiliratiug in
the morning by a touch of frost, make up a combi-
nation which nearly approaches climatic perfection.
The natural grasses and herbage of these districts
though positively good enough, are, when compared with the
magnificent pasturage of the interior, relatively inferior,
Sheep have not bean found to thrive, and the settlers and
squatters confine their attention to cattle, producing beef,


•which, though not In such largo carcasses as those which,
come down from, the west, is often of very prime quality.
As in all the coast districts, the country is pretty thickly
covered with, trees, and on the hanks of some of the
rivers the valuable pencil cedar is found. The local
pine furnishes employment to saw mills in Brisbane
and several of the town and townships of the districts.
The Moreton districts are not so rich in minerals as
some parts of the colony. Gold has been found in reefs in
different places, and has been worked in the immediate
neighbourhood of Brisbane; but the finds have not been
important. But the Brisbane mid its tributaries intersect an
important coal basin from which large and increasing
quantities of the mineral arc being raised. The production
now is about 00,000 tons annually, although the seams are
hardly properly tapped yet.
Directly inland from these districts is a portion of
what has hei*e been named the Interior, known as the
DABBING- DOWNS.
Although on the western side of the watershed of the
Main Dividing Bauge, the Darling Downs enjoys many of
the advantages of the coast districts. The atmosphere is
is fairly charged with moisture, and the rainfall frequent,
running streams are numerous, and the high average
fertility of the soil has gained for it the name of the
•‘Garden of Queensland.” Agricultural settlement has
made considerable progress in this district, especially in the
eastern portion of it, and several large and important towns
as Toowoomba, Warwick, and Dalby have grown up as
centres for the pastoral and agricultural population. Dor,
originally, the Darling Downs was the best known and most
highly esteemed pastoral district in Queensland. It pos-
sessed unusual advantages, having to a great extent the
same open grassy plains as the interior, unusually fertile
soil, growing a thick sward of sweet and very nutritious
pasturage, ns well as a reasonably abundant rainfall. But
these advantages attracted the attention of the land selectors
and agriculturists, to whom, after a Hither prolonged
struggle, the pastomlists had partly to give way. The
construction of the railway which runs from Brisbane
westward to Toowoomba, and thence is being extended in a
southerly direction past Warwick towards -Stanthorpe and
the New South Wales Border, and north-westerly past
Dalby to Boma and the Interior, gave a great impetus to
settlement. Still the Darling Downs district, though ap


pearing as,a very small patch on the map of Queensland, is
ft large .tract of country and contains some millions of acres
not yet-alienated from the crown. ' ' '■
The'graziers finds tlie Barling Downs. .equally suitable
for sheep or cattle, ami climate and natural‘-■•pHfcturage
ave of the kind. that suits either the merino or the larger
framed coarser woolled sheep. The sharp' -winter frosts,
however, debar the agriculturist from attempting tlie
cultivation of tropical plants or trees, hut on the other hand
they enable him to cultivate -with marked success all the
products of tlie temperate none. • There is every reason to
hope that this will become a great wheat district. Lust year
an unexampled epidemic of rust destroyed nearly the
whole wheat crop, but tlie farmers assured by tlie supcess
of previous years and the evident suitability of tha soil, ar.o
not discouraged and have again pat in a large breadth
of this grain.
'Phe principal mineral in this district is tin, found near
the southern border. The. discovery of stream tin in that
locality led to the foundation of the town of Stanthorpe,
which is about to be joined by railway with "Warwick. Gold
■has been found in one or two places ami some decidedly
promising vcofs are being worked near Warwick. But this
is a district which is so rich in the fertility of the surface
soil, that with its regular rainfall, temperate and bracing
climate, it would be certain to maintain m important position
in the colony even without the tin on its borders, its reeling
patches, or the coal , seams that have been discovered in more
tlmn one locality.
Returning again to the coast the next districts to be
noticed arc those of
WIDE BAY and BURNETT.
The first which lies nearest to the coast has taken its
name from a sheltered sheet of water, somewhat similar to
Moretou Bay, enclosed by a large island known as Frazers’
Island. Into this bay the Mary Raver, miming from south
to north and draining the larger half of the district falls,
and Maryborough the chief seaport town is built on the
navigable part of it, about 2n mUea from the mouth, Tlie
northern end of the district is crossed by the lower part of
the Burnett river, on which the rising seaport of Bundaberg
is built. Other smaller streams of which the Bumim is the
most consideral.de fall into the sea with ..the limits of the
Wide Bay district. *


Tlie same remarks made concerning the soil in the
Moreton district, applies also to "Wide Bay, and it enjoys a very
similar climate, though perhaps a little warmer.' Tiro bunks
of the Mary and its tributary creeks were originally clothed
with thick scrub, but on the lower reaches these have
been nearly all cleared, and sugar-growing as well as general
cultivation is carried on. The progress of the former indus-
try has been assisted by the largo factory of Tengarie
—owned by Messrs. E Gran and do.—at which cane-juice
is manufactured directly into high-class refined sugar. By a
patent process also the juice expressed on distant farms
is preserved from deterioration, and convoyed in suitable
punts to the factory, thus saving the heavy cost of carrying
cane. The sugar output on the Mary last year was about
5,750 toils. On the Upper Mary the prevalence of frost
and the absence of water carriage has prevented settlers
from growing cane; but the rich lands which flank the
mountain ranges that form the western watershed of the
Mary have been largely .selected, and are being used for
depasturing stock, and some cultivation. In the northern
Olid of the district, traversed by the Burnett Haver, the soil
is of more uniformly good character even close to the sea
coast, and it is fast becoming a very important agricultural
centre. At present the farmers confine themselves mainly
to maize, but steps are being 'taken to establish augur culti-
vation, for which soil and climate are both suitable, on an
extensive scale.
• . 1! The "Wide Bay district is extremely rich in mineral.
On the Upper Mary is the town and goldfield of Qympie,
the first at any importance discovered in Queensland. Al-
though not so extensive os the huge auriferous areas of the'
North, Gympie maintains a high average of productiveness
as a reofing-iiald. It was dissevered in 1807, mid the small, ex-
ceedingly rich alluvial field attracted a great “rush " from all
the colonies. The reefs were speedily found, and after the allu-
vial had been partly exhausted, were vigorously attacked,
The output of gold has averaged about 40,1101) ozs for many
years, and the reefs show no sign of deteriorating in the
lower levels of the mines, Last year the average yield of
gold per ton of stone, according to the Report of the Mines
Department, was 1 oa, 7 dwts. 17 grs,, and the average
earnings of each man, oiloulated on the total number em-
ployed, was £l9O. The total yield of an old quartz field
fluctuates from year to year, and it should be noted that the
returns for 1879 were rather below the average.


Besides gold, the ores of an immense variety of other
metals are found in this district. The ranges that form the
northern watershed of the Mary are literally seamed with
metallic veins. Of these a large proportion are copper lodes
which were worked some years ago when the high price
of the metal enabled the miners to overcome the dis-
advantages of lengthy .land carriage and inadequate
mining plant. The carnage difficulty will be partly
removed when a railway, now in course of con-
struction between Maryborough and Gympie, is completed.
Galena has been found in the same locality; and name ons
veins of cinnabar, -which have been superficially -worked to
extract quicksilver for the use of the Gympie machines.
Antimony lias been mined at Neardie—between Mary-
borough and Gympie,—and as it exists in large accessible
lodes it will probably be again utilised, Zinc and oilier
orc-s have been iound, —bismuth and cobalt among- the
number. Goal abounds. According to surface indications
the whole country from the Lower Mary to the Burnott
River appears to be more or loss of a coal basin. Outcrops
are noticeable in several places, particularly at Miva, about
half way between Maryborough and Gympie, and close to
the Mary River bed, but, unfortunately, above the head
of the navigable channel. But the most important seams
outcrop near the Bim-urn, a little river falling into the sea a
few miles to the north of the Mary, A number of pits
have been sunk on the scams, anil several thousand tons of
excellent coal raised. So important are the coal seams r.y,-
sidered that a Mr. Hurley and other raining EpKtilators, of
New South Wales, have obtained a concession from 'the
Government for the construction—on the land grant prin-
ciple—of a short railway from the Bui-rum pits to the
town and port of Maryborough.
The timber forests of Wide Bay are, and have always
been a considerable source of wealth to the district. They
contain some cedar, and immense quantities of pine. Most
excellent hardwood, consisting of iron-bark and other
timberß abound also. The chief centres of the lumbering
industry are Nonna., Mnrjborough, and Bnndaberg, In the
first-named locality the timber scrubs tire found in the neigh-
bourhood of a connected string of picturesque shallow hikes,
separated from the coast by a narrow' strip of land. The
timber is cut up on the spot, and sent around
by sea to Brisbane. ' The Maryborough saw-mills
are supplied with logs from the timber scrubs


of Frazer's Island, and tlie opposite; mainland as well
as the upper readies of. the Mary River. Those at Bnn-
claberg' draw their supplies from the extensive const scrubs.
It should be mentioned that both Wide Bay and Morefcon
Bay abound with fish. Li their sheltered waters also a num-
ber of men find employment in capturing that strange
marine animal the dugong, and preparing a valuable medi-
cinal oil from its fat, and thick tough leather from its hide.
The pasturage ot Wide Bay resembles that cf the Moveton
district, and is more suitable for cattle than sheep; but in the
Burnett district which lies directly west of it, the pastoral
country is of higher average quality. This district is as yet
mainly pastoral, it includes the whole watershed of the
Upper Burnett and its numerous tributaries. About 10,000
square miles of country are held under pastoral lease in the
district, and a good deal of land has been selected, but the
selections are almost exclusively used for depasturing stock.
Its climate is somewhat drier and colder than that of Wide
Bay, but still quits moist enough for agriculture, and as the
district resembles the Darling Downs, in this respect and
in the fertility of the black soil it will, no doubt |{ me
become as great an agricultural centre. *7lie Burnett is
suitable both for sheep and.catflb, out the latter description
of stock
in the north-eastern portion of the district very valu-
able and extensive copper deposits occur, and one mine,
that of Mount Perry, was worked for some time, yielding a
profit in throe or four years equal to about five times its
cash capital. A groat many oilier lodes "wore opened and
prospected at the same time, and the majority of them pro-
mised well. But a sudden collapse in mining speculation,
consequent on a fall in the price of copper, led to the preci-
pitate abandonment of most of the mining operations. At
present only a little work is being carried on at Mount Perry,
but the lodes remain and their undoubted richness will no
doubt lead to a revival of the industry, especially when
the completion of a line of railway, now being made from
Bimdaberg in that direction, has reduced the cost of carri-
age.
Directly to the north and north-west of those two dis-
tricts are
PORT CURTIS AND THE LEICHHARDT.
Together they embrace the whole watershed of all the
numerous tributaries of the Eitzroy River, which falls into
the sea in Keppcl Bay nt the very point where the tropic


of Capricorn intersects the coast line of Queensland. Port
Curtis is a comparatively narrow strip of country occupying
the whole seaboard. The Leichhardt is two or three times as
large, stretching westward to the watershed of the Main
Dividing Range, which at this point, is about two hundred
miles from the coast, and extending from about 21.30 to
26.30 south latitude.
Port Curtis itself is crossed by the Fitzroy River, which
is for the last twenty or thirty miles of its course a broad
navigable stream. The seaport of Rockhampton, built on
it, is the outport for the great central districts of Queens-
land, and the terminus of one of the three trunk lines of
railway now being extended westward from the coast. A
number of small streams rising in broken and hilly country
in various parts of the district also fall into the sea at
several points on the coast. Near the southern end of the
district is the fine sheltered harbor of Port Curtis, which has
given its name to it. But, although this is the finest harbor
in southern or central Queensland, and Gladstone, which has
been built on it, is one of the oldest aetl lements in the
colony, it has never grown beyond the size of a township;
the trade current having set entirely to Rockhampton.
However, that portion of the district of which it is the
natural outport may at any time become wealthy and pros-
perous, It is full of metalliferous veins and gold reefs ; but
mining of all sorts has been earned on in fits and starts.
This is no doubt due to an unfortunate peculiarity of the
country, which is much disturbed in its geological formation,
so that the ore lodes are erratic and unreliable in their
character. In a colony like Queensland where mining
speculators have so wide and varied a choice of mineral fields,
a defect of this kind, which necessitates patient search and
the expenditure of much capital, is enough to account for
the neglect of the Port Curtis mines. However, the gold is
being worked in a desultory manner, and at the moment of
writing there is a little “ rush ” for mineral selections in a
locality where large and apparently promising deposits of
stream tin have been found. Small gold reefing areas have
long been worked near Rockhampton also, but none of them
have attained any importance as mining centres. Copper
mines have been opened and worked in the district, but have
all been, for the present, abandoned, no doubt because the
fall in the price of the metal has discouraged speculators
from persevering in the search for the variable lodes of ore.
The output of gold tor the district in 1879 was 2947 oz.


There is very little agriculture carried on in the Port
Curtis district, although a good deal of land has been taken
up, especially in the neighborhood of Bockhampton. The
selectors confine themselves mainly to stock-keeping and
dairy work. The soil of the district is on the whole very
good, it is pretty thickly wooded, although with the excep-
tion of the ordinary hardwood there is not much marketable
timber. But the rainfall, though amounting in the twelve-
months to a satisfactory total, is unevenly distributed, and
rather prolonged intervals of dry weather militate against
agriculture. In climate it occupies an intermediate position
between the temperate . and tropical portions of the coast
country, and the temperature is decidedly high. It is
asserted that the neighbourhood of Kockharapton is suitable
for sugar-growing, and experimental plantings of cane have
done well. As yei>, however, the industry has not' bc?n
established.
For pastoral purposes Port Curtis is well adapted,
although stockowners are compelled to confine their attention
to cattle. But the native grasses are of rather higher
average quality than in Wide Bay. Tbe large district of
Leichhardt is distinctly pastoral country, the area of
available country held under lease in 1879 amounting to
18,732 square miles. Although portions of ifc are sandy
and scrubby, others enjoy the advantage of having exceed-
ingly fertile land. The blacksoil volcanic plains and downs
of the Oouiet were considered at one time to be equal to the
finest pastoral country in Queensland, and although a few of
the stations have deteriorated, owing mainly to overstocking,
the evil is likely to be remedied when the fertile soil passes
into ilie hands of selectors interested in maintaining its pro-
ductiveness. The Leichhardt is well watered, and contains
a very fail- proportion of running streams and brooks. The
country is adapted either for sheep or cattle, but the latter
description of stock are at present chiefly depastured on it.
Nest in order going northward are the
NOKTH AND SOUTH KENNEDY.
These two districts also consist of the extensive-watershed
of one river, the Burdekin, embracing an even larger area
of country than the affluents of the Eitzroy. But instead
of lying one beside the other parallel to the coast, they form
two very irregular triangles, joined by a base line running
about east and west. Of the South Kennedy district little
move than an angle touches the sea; of the North Kennedy,


n whole side is seaboard. The western boundary of botli'
districts is the Main Dividing Range, which, as already ex-
plained, forks opposite their connecting point, one division,
of the great watershed stretching westward, the other form-
ing the boundary of the North Kennedy, trending rapidly
towards the sea.
The small seaboard of the South Kennedy includes the
important sugar-growing district of Mackay, formed on the'
rich lands of the little Pioneer, river. The town of that
name situated on the navigable portion of the river owes its.
rise and importance entirely to the establishment of sugar-
growing, which prospered almost from the beginning. Not
only is tlm soil of Tvlackay very fertile, and of the chaiacter
most suitable for cane-growing, but the climate is unusually
favorable for the manufacture of sugar. It is distinctly
tropical rind free from frost, and while there is a sufficient
rainfall to ensure the growth of the cane, the planter can
nearly always reckon on a prolonged spell of dry weather
just when he requires to turn }ns crop into sugar, and rain
would interfere with crushing operations. The output of
sugar for 1879 was about 0500 tons, and it is last increas-
ing. As it is estimated that over 100,000 acres of excellent
sugar land are to be found in this locality, and only about
12,000 acres are as yet actually under crop, it is evident-
that the sugar production of Mackay is in its infancy.
In the southern inland angle of South Kennedy, on the
watershed of tire JBelyaudo, one of the tributaries of the-
Eurdekin, is tire fine pastoral and mineral district of Peak.
Downs, The surface of the country is covered with rich
fertile black soil clothed with a fine sward of grass and
herbage. The Peak Downs sheep stations have been and
are reckoned among the finest pastoral properties in the
colony, and immense sums of money have been spent on
improving them. A small goldfield near Clermont, the
chief centre of population, has been worked since tire separa-
tion of Queensland from New South Wales, and still con-
tinues to yield small quantities of gold. In 1879 tire output
was 6000 ozs. But the most important mine has been the
well known Peak Downs copper mine, This rich mineral
deposit, discovered in 1860, was taken in hand by a wealthy
New South Wales company and worked with vigor. The
lodes were large and produced immense quantities of very
rich ore, so that in spite of the cost of wood fuel, and the
long land cartage of about 180 miles to port, the operations
were profitable. During the years that copper was high


priced the mins gave dividends nearly equal to its whole
■capital, but it is said that these were to some ex tent produced
by unduly exhausting the ores “in sight,” and neglecting
■exploration. At nil events the speculative, mining fever,
followed by the fall in pried of copper, threw the affairs of
the company into confusion from which they did not recover.
'The mine is still being worked, though on a small scale, by
tributora, and it appears to be far from exhausted yet.
Several other as yet unworked copper lodes exist in the
■district, and it is probable that copper mining as an industry
will again be vigorously prosecuted there.
North Kennedy is pre-eminently a mineral, and above
all a gold-producing country. The reefing districts, of which
Charters Towers is the centra, produced last year 53,275 ozs.
gold, and the neighbouring reefing centre of Bavenswood
16,744 ozs. The average earnings of the miners employed,
that is the amount of gold divided over the number of men
working, equalled at Charters Towers .£2BO, and at Bavens-
wood £220 per man. But the actual gold production of this
district gives no idea of its capabilities. There is practically
no alluvial mining, and the quartz reefs extend over an area
of about 120 square miles of proclaimed auriferous ground, be-
sides a great deal of country not yet included in any official
proclamation. At the main centres capital and good mining
appliances have been brought to bear on the reefs with the
results above mentioned, but in the neighbouring localities
there are reef centres which are quite likely to become as
important when the same moans are adopted to bring them
into full production. As a goldfield this district is likely to
increase its output steadily, and it is impossible to guess
what maximum it will attain, Besides gold, the silver lodes
of Bavenswood are attracting attention, and from the reports
received it would appear that if taken in hand with adequate
appliances they are likely to prove very profitable. Copper
lodes have been found in several localities, but, as yet,
nothing has been done with them.
The muring centre of Charter's Towers having now been
established for many years, and the industry having assumed
a settled and permanent character, some attention is being
paid to the surface soil in its neighbourhood. Homesteads
embracing an aggregate area of about S,OOO acres have been
taken up, and the holders, although mainly engaged in
stock-keeping and dairying, are beginning to practise a little
agriculture. Although close on the 20th parallel of south
latitude, the country lying at a considerable elevation above


the son has a climate which is rather sub-tropical than tropi-
cal, and even grapes have been found to thrive and mature
good fruit. The summer though hot is distinctly healthy,
and there is a pleasant strengthening cool season. The in-
terior of the district contains a great deal of good and some
very excellent pastoral country, but unsuited for slieop.
On the coast of North Kennedy there is first the
beautiful and excellent harbor of Port Denison, a land-locked
sheet of water, unecpialled for shipping purposes hy any
other natural port north of Port Jackson. But the town of
Bowen, built on it has been commercially unfortunate.
Possessing this noble harbor, a climate that can hardly be
matched in the tropical zone, so temperate and equable that
the place is used as a sanitarium by those who have to
endure the fiercer heat of the far north, it has been deprived
of its inland trade by the newer settlement of Townsville, on
Cleveland Bay. Nevertheless, Bowen, though driven back
on its own surrounding locality, is a prosperous little place
and likely to prosper. It is the main centre of general
agriculture—ns distinotfrom sugar-planting—in the north. A
number of settlers have formed homesteads and cultivated
maize, potatoes, ire,, besides having planted orchards, in
which such fruits as oranges, mangoes, custard apples,
lemons, citrons, pineapples, limes, im., grow with marked
success. There is plenty of excellent agricultural laud in
the neighbourhood, and much of the soil is said.to be quite
suitable for 'sugar cultivation. Gold is also found at no
great distance, although no important finds have been made,
galena exists, and tin lias been discovered. Mr. Jock, the
Government geologist, speaking of the coal measures on the
Bowen River says ; “ That the coalfield is the geological
equivalent of the most valuable part of the New South
Wales measures.”
Whatever future may be predicted for that portion of the
North Kennedy, of which Bowen is the outpost, it cannot bo
denied that Townsville, on Cleveland Bay, la at present the
main commercial town of this part, of Queensland. Its
present importance is due to the fact that it is the port for
the extensive goldfields already mentioned, and its future
progress will be accelerated by the trade of the north-western
interior, which is already following til at route. Tins trade
will lie secured by a railway now in course of construction,
from Townsville to Charters Towers, which it is intended to
carry out westward.


At the extreme northern end of the seaboard of Uie
district, where the Main Dividing Range sends down its
spurs to the very sea, is the little mountain-bound port of
Cardwell, near which, on the rich alluval flats of the 1.1 er-
hert River, sugar-growing has been long established.
Although both soil and climate are very suitable for cane
cultivation, the industry has not advanced very fast in this
district, but its progress : has been delayed rather by the
isolated position of the settlement, and the want of sufficient
capital in the case of many of the pioneer planters, than by
any natural defect. Some plantations have struggled on,
and ns they now seem to have overcome their initiatory
difficulties, the future prosperity of the district may be re-
garded as assured.
The next clisti ict is that of the
COOK,
which occupies the whole of the Capo York Peninsula,
having on its seaboard on one side the ocean—the coast
here being sheltered throughout its length by the Great
Barrier Beef, —and on the other tire Gulf of Carpentaria.
This large district—the largest in tho colony—is hardly yet
thoroughly explored, and was almost unknown till iho
Palmer ‘ rush" of 1874; but, so far as it has been examined
it appears to possess in unusual variety and abundance, all
the sources of natural wealth with which Queensland, ns a
colony, is so richly endowed. Tho Main Range running
parallel to tho east coast from south to north, is visible
for several hundred audios from the sea. In some places
it runs to lofty crests such ns the Bellenden Kerr mountains
of which some peaks are 6,0.10 feet high ; in others it forms
a mountain wall which, viewed from the sea, appears to forbid
access to the interior. But tho mountains themselves are
clothed to their very summits with luxuriant vegetation, in
the bolt of coast land at their leet are tracts of good land,
they are pierced by valleys, carved out by swift rivers,
enshrouded by dense forests of pine, cedar', and other valu-
able timbers growing in the richest soil, and in places they
fall back and encircle barge tracts of tire richest agricultural
country
From the western slopes of the range descend rivers
which fall into tho Gulf of OiU'pmrtaria, ' The head waters
and tributaries of those rivers have all given names to gold
workings, such as the Gilbert and Etheridge, pvochdmed as
one field; the Hodgldusoii, including the Trite and Walsh;
and the Palmer, which, with its tributaries, form tho well


known goldfield of that name. It is the range which is
auriferous, or rather metalliferous, for even on- the narrow
belt of country between it and the east coast gold mul tin
have been form cl, and where, fiu’ther north, it trends more
towards the centre of the peninsula, the rivers descending
from it and falling into the ocean,,such as the Normanby and
Coleman also traverse auriferous.country.
It may almost be said of the Cook district, as far as it is
known, that it is one vast goldfield. The extensive but
shallow alluvial deposits of the Palmer attracted the first
great rush of miners, European and Chinese, but tire former
soon discovered reefs in all directions. The Palmer, llodg-
kinson, and Etheridge are names applied generally to what
are really provinces seamed with gold reefs. The extent of
auriferous ground actually included in the above-named pro-
claimed goldfields is i 4,000 square miles, but there are
literally thousands of square miles of gold-bearing country
on which no discovery of a sufficiently startling nature Ims
attracted a “ rush " of miners, and which has not, therefore,
been formally proclaimed. The last official report of the
Minos Department gives the number of distinct lines of reef
proved to be auriferous in the proclaimed fields as Sf)-±, hut
these constitute only a small percentage of the reefs known to
exist. The miners of the Cook district suffer literally from an
euibarras de richam. Their number and their capital arc
swallowed up in the immense field over which they
are thinly dispersed, picking here and there at the most
attractive spots, and having neither time or money to try
mostof the reefs,and hardly to work properly those they have
in hand. Therefore the accounts received from the fields are
most contradictory. The}' are described as stagnating, yet
the yield of gold per miner engaged in reefing is remarkably
large; last year it was £330 per man outlie Palmer, ami
£317 on the Hodghfrison. Of course this dispersion of the
two great motive powers of all industry—men and money—
over too wide afield, though a present disadvantage is a
future guarantee of prosperity Properly worked these gold-
fields could easily double the present gold production of
Queensland, and maintain it for as long a time as we need
take into account. The actual produce of cjnavtz-gold last
year was from the Palmer, 10,000 ozs.; Hodgdunson,
33,070 028,; and the Etheridge, 10,837 ozs. The total out-
put of gold from the Palmer m that year was 90,000 ozs.,
but that amount included the returns from the alluvial ground
which is fast being exhausted, and which, being worked


almost exclusively by Chinese, adds little or nothing to the
general capital stock of the colony.
Only about a third of the coast line on the eastern aide of
the district has been partly occupied, and the western
or Gulf side has , hardly, been oven examined. On
the east coast the principal ; sea port is Oooktowu, founded
by the rush to, the Palmer, of 'which, field it is the nut-
port, To the-,south .-of Oooktown are Port' Douglas
and Cairns, smaller, ports originally < opened as outlets for
the Hodgkinson. There is a good deal of agricultural land
in the neighbourhood of these places, which is now attracting
attention, and leading to some permanent settlement. Tin
is found in the mountainous country,-at the back of the two
last-named ports, and recent extensive discoveries of the
metal have attracted some attention. In 'the southern part
of the district a fine tract of agricultural country, on the
banks of the Johnstone River, have been taken up for sugar-
growing, and a party of pioneer anters have begun o])era-
tions. Very large quantities of cedar are cut on the river
side scrubs of the Daintree and Mossman Rivers, and
shaped south in log.
In describing the east coast, its peculiar formation
should be mentioned. It is everywhere sheltered by the line
of the Barrier Reef, which with a few breaks extends as far as
Cape York. Inside the Reef' are archipelagos ■of islands of
all sizes and shapes,.for the most part rocky and unfertile,
but of the moat picturesque : form. The coasting'steamers
follow a deep wide channel between the maiulnnd and the
reef and among the islands. Ho more pleasant or delightful
pleasure trip can be taken in Australia than a coasting voyage
along the north coast of Queensland. The sheltered water,
stirred only into a gentle ripple by the fresh cool trade wiud,
is seldom rough enough to discompose tbemost sensitive travel-
ler. As the boat pursues its journey, every mile'discloses a
new combination of mountain'and island.scenery; the grand
outlines of the former softened by-their mantle of luxuriant
green, and the fantastic shapes of- the latter, rendered attrac-
tive by the" contrast of gray rock, dazzling white sand, and
blue sparkling water. : When the natural wealth enfolded
by the mountains in their rich valleys, or hidden' in the
wide tablelands and rocky, gorges 1 have attracted , a • large
settled population to this part of Queensland, the infinite,
variety of beautiful scenery which meets the' eye in every
direction will make it the favorite haunt of artists who desire
to catch the aspect of tropical nature in its most attractive
dress. i; ,


Before leaving this district, the pearl shell and biSclie-de-
mer fishery, carried on among the islands off the coast,
especially in or near the Torres Straits, should ha men-
tioned. Thin industry, which is mainly in the hands of New
South Wales speculators, gives employment to a number of
boats and men. The Chinese have engaged in the collection
of that uninviting looking dainty, the beSohe-tle-nier, and a
regular junk, built by them in Oooktcwii, trades among their
fishing stations.
Having followed the coast country of Queensland from
South to North, it is next desirable to describe the
INTERIOB
as already defined in this paper, This includes the dis-
tricts of Marauoa, Warrego, Mitchell, North Gregory and
South Gregory. According to the last report of the,
Lands Department the extent of country held under
pastoral lease was, of available pasturage, 178,433
square miles, and of unavailable 72,360; in all a territory
about one-fourth larger than the colony of New South
Wales. There is a, certain amount of country not yet taken
up, so that the gross area of this division of the colony is
larger than the total amount of land held under pastoral
lease. Besides, it is probable that a considerable proportion
•of the 72,360 square miles at present classed as unavailable
is not really so. For the pastoral occupation of the districts
has been quite recent, and the pioneer squatters taking up
thousands of square miles on measurements calculated al-
most by guess are always likely to allow themselves a liberal
proportion of unavailable country in order to reduce their
gross rental, It has been found in the older settled districts
that subsequent official examinations reduces considerably
this proportion, and no doubt the same results will follow-
in this recently occupied portion of the colony. For this
reason it may fairly be calculated that the interior of Queens-
land contains at least 200,000 square miles of good pastoral
country,
And there is no county in Australia better fitted for
pastoral purposes, either for rearing sheep or cattle than the
interior-of this colony; As a rule it is all open, there is
very little of what is known as “forest,” Enormous plains
stretching to a vanishing point on the horizon, or undulating
downs over which--from an elevation—the eye can range
forty or fifty miles without a check, and the whole sheeted
with grass or nutritious herbs; —this is the general descrip-
tion of the Interior of Queensland. Belts of timber fringe


the watercourses, and there are in places extensive scrubs
comprised mainly of short gnarled trees with no entangling
creepers or vines, but often filled with saline shrubs or plants
which are eaten greedily by the stock.
The watercourses are mere channels connecting pools of
greater or less magnitude; there are very few springs, and
no i mining water, and the whole unite to form one or two
main channels leading into the huge shallow lakes of South
Australia. The scarcity .of surface water is the main defect
of the country, but it is one easily remedied by the construc-
tion of dams au-1 reservoirs, for which the formation of the
water channels is generally very s-uituble. The air is pure
and exceedingly dry, there is seldom any dew at night,
and the rainfall is scanty and irregular. Naturally under
these climatic conditions the temperature is variable and apt
to he in extremes. The sun’s heat in the daytime is very
great, but no means so oppressive as the thermometer
readings would lead one to suppose, for the air is always
elastic and the fresh breeze that plays incessantly over the
downs and plains is singularly invigorating. When the
sun sets the temperature falls rapidly, and it is rarely that
the buslnuah is inclined to dispense with his blanket even
in the, midst of summer. In winter the cold is quite severe,
and four, five, or even six degrees of frost dining the night
or early morning are not uncommon. It is decidedly a
healthy climate and Europeans preserve their vigor undi-
miriished through a great deal of hardship. In fact, for
persons having a tendency to phthisis, the Interior of
Queensland is one of the best climates in the world—its dry,
pure, invigorating atmosphere is a more efficacious remedy
for this disease than any medicine in. the pharmacopoeia.
As has been already pointed out, tills is essentially a
pastoral country, and peculiarly suited for reaving -merino
sheep. At present it is mainly occupied hy cattle, but tbe
fact is due to its recent occupation, as pioneers prefer this
description of stock when pushing out into the wilderness.
However, in all directions the squatters arc preparing their
runs for sheep, and it is probable that in a few years the
wool production of these districts will be very considerable.
Already Queenslanders are apt to speak of this territory as
their Riverina, but a Kaverina on a gigantic scale. It is,
however, doubtful whether it can be'used for any but pas-
toral purposes, as the dry climate seems to preclude the
possibility of growing anything but wheat, and perhaps, in
places grapes and deep rooting fruit trees. This, however,


need be no cause for regret in a colony possessing also at
least. 300,000 .square miles of country of which the suita-
bility for every kind of agriculture cannot be doubted. Nor
docs it seem to possess any great store of minerals. Indica-
tions of coal have been seen in some places, and nt one
locality a number of very beautiful opals have been found.
'Fhe northern boundary of this tract ot country is the
east and west branch of the Dividing Range already men-
tioned. Beyond it lies the great district of
BXTRKfi,
Which is hardly yet thoroughly explored, although 31,84:2
square miles of available and 7,3 1 5 square miles of un-
available country, are at present held under pastoral lease.
This, however, is only ti portion of the area included
within its boundaries. The southern part of the district
resembles, in its general character, the Interior, but as the
shores of tho Gulf of Carpentaria arc approached "its
appearance changes, and it becomes more thoroughly
tropical. The northern part of the district is well watered
by numerous rivers falling into the Gulf, and on one of
these the am nil town of Normanton is ’built; 1 If the
project of a transcontinental railway is carried out there
will, of course, be a large commercial town formed on the
Gulf. At present the population of the country is very
scanty, and it is only partly occupied even by pastoralists.
For pastoral purposes the greater part of the Burke is
very good. It is mainly cattle country, although sheep have
been put on runs near its southern boundary. And it
1b rich in minerals, the Dividing Range and spurs leading from
it shows indications of gold and other metals in a great
many places. One remarkable deposit of virgin copper and
rich ores of the same metal was discovered many years
ago near the upper part of tho Oloncurry River, but its
great distance from port and the absence of roads have, up
to the present time, prevented its utilization. For the same
reason there has been little regular oqdoratiou for metals,
which could not, in such remote country, be profitably
worked. Enough, however Ims been discovered to make
it pretty sure that the Burke district possesses a good deal
of mineral wealth in addition to its excellent pastoral
country.


SOCIAL AND POLITICAL CONDITION OP THE
COLONY.
Having briefly sketched the physical features of the
colony, it is necessary to describe what sorb of a place
Queensland is to live in. First, as to the climate, concern-
ing which upiny false impressions prevail. It is undoubtedly
hot, and in some parts of the colony it is distinctly tropical,
but it is nowhere unhealthy. Of course there are spots here
and there where the presence of swamps gives rise to malaria,
and in newly opened settlements sickness sometimes prevails
for a few years. But a similar result follows settlement on
virgin soil in every part of the world, and it is doubt-
ful whether even in the tropical zone the formation of a new
township in Queensland is attended by as great an outbreak
of fever, ague, or flysrulry as in the temperate regions of the
United States. The death rate of the whole colony has
averaged under 18 per 1,000 of tho population for tho lust
ten years, and it has been swelled by exceptional Cannes.
A number of Chinese, amounting at one time to over one-
tenth of the whole number of people, were attracted to the
colony by the northern goldfields, and there are about 5,000
or 0,000 Knakas employed on the sugar plantations. The
death rate among the Chinese has been unusually heavy, and.
among the Kanakas it has been from GO to 70 per 1,000
annually, Their deaths being included in tho total of the
Registrar-Generals tables, has increased the percent-
age of mortality considerably. It may be safely asserted
that in Queensland the death rate among Europeons idono
will compare favourably with the mortality returns of any
colony in Australia. And, as in tropical Queensland, the
roving population of miners are accustomed to expose them-
selves freely to all the influences of tho weather —-usually so
fatal to Europeans- in these latitudes—live roughly, and.
neglect all sanitary precautions, it is evident from the totals
quoted that the greater part of the colony must be exception-
ally healthy. And it ia so. Except whan people collect in
towns, neglect every precaution suggested by sanitary science
for preserving the health of urban populations, even in cold
climates, and live in violation of many of the laws of nature,
the greater part of this colony offers a distinctly healthy
home for Europeans. The heat of summer is compensated
in the southern, central, and western districts by a prolonged-
and delightful cool winter, and in tropical Queensland it ia
either tempered by the trade wind on the coast, or rendered
less oppressive by the general elevation of the country. And


as far us cun be seen Northern Queensland enjoys the re-
markable advantage of being a place in winch Europeans
can make their homes, rear heal thy families, and labour
with, their hands amidst all the abounding fertility of the
tropics. Every description of hard manual labor, from
mining to the making of roads, is performed by Europeans
in the full glare of the sun without any apparent evil
results.
That men can live and work hard and rear np families of
strong healthy lads and lasses, has been amply demonstrated in
tin southern and older settled portions of the colony, The
bronzed healthy tacos and stalwart forms of' settlers and
buslnnen who have spent twenty and even thirty years of
sue]] a life are common sights in the colony, and their chil-
dren are beginning to form a very considerable element in
our young society. It is true that the town bred boys and
girls occasionally look pale and delicate, but their country
reared brothers and sisters show no lack nf physical or mental
stamina.. T?or the strengthening of the latter the colony has
made and continues to make ample provision. Primary
education is quite free, and wherever a group of sotllcrh can
muster about thirty children of school ages among them, a
schoolliouse and teacher are provided at very little cost to
themselves. Grammar schools for imparting a higher class
education have been established at Brisbane, Ipswich, and
Toowoomba, and are about to be opened at Maryborough
and Pvockhampton. At these schools boys, and in Brisbane
girls, can obtain an excellent education on payment of
moderate foes, ami there are annually about 50 bursaries
offered for competition to the pupils of the Primary Schools,
which enable the winners to obtain secondary education free
of charge. Three scholarships of .£IOO a year, tenable for
three years, are also annually offered for competition to the
advanced pupils, to enable the winners to attend any
university selected by themselves. Thus primary education
is given to all children free, and tho most, capable pupils are
stimulated by the prospect of winning one of those prizes
to persevere in their efforts to attain a higher degree of
culture. It need hardly be said that all religious denomina-
tions are perfectly free and unfettered. In fact the separa-
tion between (Jhurcli and State is complete] in Queensland,
the one neither assists nor interferes with tho other in the
slightest degree.
But a suitable climate and educational advantages
would not alone make the colony a fib place for an emigrant


seeking a new home. In other respects it lias equally great
advantages. The sketch of the physical features of
the colony sufficiently Indicates that it offers a . wide,
varied, tmd prodnctive’field for the employment of capital.
The land is obtainable on very reasonable terms. The
average rental asked for the magnificent pastoral country of
the interior is 10s. 7d. per square mile —a charge which is,
in most cases a purely nominal one. For purposes of settle-
ment, land can be acquired in fee simple on equally reasonable
terms. The payment of sixpence an acre for 5 year’s, with per-
sonal residence during that term, will, without any other con-
dition whatever, entitle a selector to the freehold of his home-
stead, which may bo as much as IGO acres in extent, Se-
lectors desirous of acquiring larger areas may obtain them
by payment of a moderate price fixed by the Minister for
Lands at the time of proclaiming the land open to selection,
which is, in some cases, as low as 7s. Gd. per acre. The
price is payable in ten annual instalments without interest,
residence either by the selector himself or his servant is re-
quired, and, before obtaining a grant of the land in fee simple,
ho must have completed a moderate amount of improvements
on it. There is always an ample area of land kept open for
selection, that is not included in pastoral lenses. Tn the re-
port of the Lands Department the area at the close of 1870
was 23,130,774: acres for general, and 1,708,118 acres for
homestead selection. It should he observed that suitable
areas of country arc specially reserved for homesteads so ns
to protect the poorer class of selector’s, and not permit the
capitalists to monopolize all the choice portions of land,
Selection within the proclaimed area is free—the selector
picking out the piece he may want and getting it surveyed
afterwards.
As may be supposed, Queensland is a place where any man
accustomed to work is sure of making a living, and ultimately
acquiring a competency. Of course artisans accustomed to
particular trades, and unwilling to take the first work that
offers are very likely to find no employment. The popula-
tion, consisting only of 220,000 souls is too small to give un-
limited employment to handicraftsmen, and in a country so
vast and so rich in natural resources, the rough work of
developemeut is the main and most profitable industry. It
may, however, be asserted that no workman that has been
reasonably industrious, , sober and frugal, has lived
ten years in Queensland without acquiring property
and establishing himself as a prosperous and comfortable


man \ unless lie lias been unremittingly pursued by-
sickness or ill fortune. And what is true of the
past may be confidently predicted of the future, for not
one of the many natural resources of the colony has passed
beyond the initiatory stage of developement. The indus-
trial life of the colony is sure to go on in ever expanding
circles that will easily embrace all who may choose to come
to its shores.
Politically, Queensland may be described as a demo-
cratic community. Its Government is vested in two
chambers—a Legislative Council composed of gentlemen
nominated by the Governor by the advice of his Ministers,
and a Legislative Assembly elected by what is practically
universal suffrage, limited only by condition of residence
in the electoral districts. A system of local Government Ims
recently been inaugurated which commits the charge of the
smaller public works to Boards chosen by the inhabitants of
the localities interested, who, as in municipalities, collect rates
and receive an endowment on the locally raised income.
The people of Queensland rely with assured confidence
on the future that awaits them. In common with other
colonial communities they have suffered from fits of depres-
sion, and in their' case the pinch of hard times has been
more keenly felt because of the high standard of prosperity
to which they have been accustomed. People in this colony
have been in the habit of making such large earnings that
they rebel against the necessity of living on the more mode-
rate scale of income and expenditure to which the inhabitants
of less wealthy countries have perforce accustomed them-
selves. In the north, a gold reef which does not, after pay-
ing crushing charges at the rate of from 255. to 30s. par-
ton, cartage at equivalent rates, and being worked with the
rudest appliances, yield a very large annual profit,
for each man working, it is often thrown up as a a duffer,”
And tliis dissatisfaction with moderate earnings is charac-
teristic of the whole community. Agricultural settlement has
made comparatively slow progress mainly because the class
of workers who, in other colonics, chiefly engage in it, have
hero so many opportunities of making high wages that they
undertake with reluctance the toilsome, and, as a rule, ill-
remunerated work of pioneer farming. In fact it might
justly be said that the Queenslanders have been to a great
extent the spoiled children of Fortune, and that the occa-
sional " depressions,” which they have to endure are mainly


cine to the temporary collapse of high strung expectation
inflated beyond reasonable bounds by periods of exceptional
prosperity.
It is therefore felt that whatever temporary reverses
may overtake the colony, its future prosperity is secure and
cannot even be long delayed by a serious misfortune. The
in dustrial progress of the community which no longer leaves
it mainly dependent on the production of a single staple
gives yearly a firmer assurance against such natural evils
as drought, against which no precaution can entirely guard.
By the mere progress of internal growth Queensland must
become rich and prosperous. The whole surface of the
country is covered with natural pasturage which is
throughout good for cattle, and as regards some 300,000
square miles well fitted for sheep.
The soil is of unusually high average fertility, and the
climate, because of its variety, permits of the cultivation of
almost every tree, plant, dr vegetable good for the use of
man. Its goldfields, which are in the very earliest stage of
developcmenU are large and rich enough to find employment
for nearly all the miners in Australia. Copper lodes by die
hundred'have been discovered. Tin, both stream and ore,
has been found at different points, from the extreme north
to the far south. The coal measures of the colony cover
•small provinces; iron ore is abundant; silver has been
found in Severn,l places, and even precious stones, such us
opals, appear to abound in certain localities. With rich soil
ou the surface, useful and valuable’ metals under foot, a
healthy climate, an extended seaboard, —Queensland possesses
every one of those natural advantages that render nations
rich and powerful. The people already in the colony are a
mere handful, but without any special effort they would, by
the mere force of circumstances, grow into a wealthy and
powerful community. But the process of growth would be
vastly accelerated by adequate reinforcements both of men and
money. There is room in the colony for as’ many as like to
-coma’ to it, and even the spare capital of Great Britain,
enormous as it is, would find enough employment in utilising
the ia\v material of wealth with which it is so abundantly
tored.


Amount to Credit of 16,S49 depositors on 31st
July, 1880
£6911,737 7b. fid.
EXPORTS and SHIPPING
Customs Return for 1879.
Gold in dust and bars
Gold and silver in bullion and specie ...
Copper— Ore, regulns, and smelted ...
Tin—Ore, slag, and smelted ...
Drapery, apparel, silk, etc. ...
Shell fish (oysters) and boche-de-mer ...
Fruit—Green ' ...
Grain, pulse, etc!
Hides and skins
Livestock,/,
Pearl shell and tortoiseshell...
Preserved meat (other than salt)
Bum ... ... ...
Sugar
Tallow
Timber
Wool-Clean
Wool—Greasy
All other....
... 1,024,337
25,636
43,791
120,351
5.2S4
16,935
3,736
17,995
71.256
4,517
... 32,049
22,391
10,463
... 275,760
72,366
74,012
... *712,SIC
... t525,702
71,521
Total export seaward ...
.. 3,121,916
Shipping—Inwards from—
United Kingdom
Australasian Colonies
Singapore
Hongkong and China ... ... ...
All other countries ...
Tons.
37.072
... 508,574
22.S04
53,373
26,916
Total shipping inwards ...
... 637,(>09
Shipping—outwards to
United Kingdom ... ... ...•
Australasian Colonies
Singapore
Hongkong and China
All other countries ...
13,014
40!),000
35,4-64
44,230
15.872
Total shipping outwards
018,005
APPENDIX.
GOVERNMENT SAVINGS BANK.
WBijfht of Wool - * 0,070, S18J1>. tl2 t DOfl,filO.


Imports and Exports of Lire
Stock Overland.
1879.
■Live Stock—imported value
■ ... £131,570
Live Stock —exported value
812,118
EDUCATIONAL.
Report, of the Department of Publio Instruction for 1879.
Boys.
Girls. I
210 State Schools
21 Non-vested Schools
87 Provisional Sohools
18,245
2,007
1,550
15,550 I
6,COO i
1,360
POPULATION 1 .
Registrar-General's Preliminary Report for 1879.
Estimated Population on 31at December ... ... 217,851
Birth rate for the year ... ... ... 36*74 per 1,000
Death, rate ... ... ... ... 11*97 ~
(Notjs.—Tho death rata of Juab year way unusually low,)
RAILWAYS.
Report of the Commissioner for 1879.
Length of Railways open... ... ... 505 miles
Length of Railways under construction ... ... 240 \ „
STOCK.
Report of the Registrar of Brands and Inspector of Stock.
‘Total number of Cattle on let January ... 3,000,000
‘Total number of Sheep on Ist January ... ... 5,790,742
■ESTIMATED VALUE of RATEABLE PROPERTY in
MUNICIPALITIES.
Registrar-General’s Statistics for 1878.
,18 Incorporated Towns, Total value ... £5,124,352


I: ; f| B Pf Mf :flf ( ill;
li
- a
-pjs at d =- < . a a t=
Colour. -
~P Jf _?= - p . ~F : ~ "£ Z “*H -
p’.pfii-rrtfift **f ' hr? \l? w , I { w fjw |
1
lL-° p.=p-pp.= |p i |! ! p-“||g'??j|;5'' w ,e ||l|' r p-rr||i|||i-?||
SS s. - B SSSSSS SB SB BBSS SB SS S S BBS a sss s
H
a
||fj ffiflft#! 41
rf
5=S3 S S =3 3? <=sf3 PPS H»»
Colour.
P-t||f||p’P-.tS|t 1 i Pt f ?ff p||p-5-||p'p- |p-|
H
r ii III ill II I = m 1 IS! II ill III'ill
Tintagc
S2 gcEssSE E s gi g|: g g?2 15 sis lig;gr
Percentage of
Proof Spirit.
QUEENSLAND WINES.
Statement allowing the per centago for
Proof Spirit (British Standard) of the fol-
lowing Wines collected in Brisbane, Ipswich
and various other Districts of the Colony :
Distilled under the supervision of ! W, GL'
Chancellor, H. M. Customs,


INDEX.
A. I’AUK
Aboriginal Curios .. 64,102
Acid Pyroligneous, &c. ... 70
Agates 102, 105
Alcohol 7‘)
Alkaloid 7(1
Alstoninc 70
Antimony On, 104
Architectural Drawings .. .. 4
Arrowroot 70, HO, HI
Auriferous Specimens 108
Autographs .. ..64
Automatic Toys .. .. 18,10
B.
Barks 48, 40, 60. 64
Baking Powder 82
Basaltic Bock 106
Beulie-dennur 82
Binding, Specimens of .. .. 8
Birds (Scrub Collection of).. .. 63
Biscuits .. ~ .. .. HU
Bismuth it, 106
Blankets 10
Bunts, Models of .. .. ~ 711
Book Case (Queensland Timbers) .. 12
Boots and Shoos .. .. ..18
Bone Dust 72
80-jiny, Illustrations of Queensland DB
Bricks 13
C.
Cabinet, Pupil Teachers ~ .. (3
Cabinets, Native Woods, &c. .. 12
Capers .. .. 36
Cart, Whitechapel 70
Carbonate of Lend . . ~ 106
Cakspar 10!l
Cassava 80
Curas! to.. .. 102
Chairs .. 12
Chulcopyrilcs 00,104
Chrome Oil, 100
Chutney 84
Chili Pepper 84
China Clay .. .. .. .. 100
Cinnabar 00, 104
Cinnamon SB
Clothing 1"
Coal .. 00, 100, 102, 106, 100, 112
Coffee H 4, 80
Column, Emblematical, Gold pro-
duced at the Palmer Kivor .. 102
Collection,' Aboriginal Weapons ~ 66
CoJiuhologic Specimens .. .. 6-J
I l .* OH
Copper, Omifle of .. 07,10'.)
„ Uegulus 1)7
„ Hefined 102
■ „ Cm I'!!, 101, 102, 1(1-1
Cum)! ue Oi.
Cotton 01
Curios, Aboriginal 64, 66
Curiosities, New Guinea .. .. f«;“
D.
diamonds .. 10"
Drawers, Cheats of I'i
Drawing Itoum Suite 12
Drawings, Black and White .. 3
~ Architectural .. 4
~ Normal School .. .. (1, 7
Dressing Tables 12
Dugong, Stuffed Male .. 63
„ Lard H 2
„ Potted .. ~ H>
„ Oil («)
Dubuisia Ic./res 41'
Duboisine "0
Dicing .Muturiul.s 71
E.
Eagle, Wedge tailed ~ .. 64
Ennui, l*ujtil’ teachers .. 0
Engravings, colored .. . 4
Entomological Specimens .. 08
Essences (to, 70
Essential Oils CM), 7i)
F.
Fabrics, Textile 01
Elbrus, Collections 0f... SU, CO, 01, 08
Flannels 30
Flax Seed 07
Fire Clay 13,011,102
Fire Bricks 11l
Flour ... Hi
Flowers 06
Fodder Plants... 66 to 60
Fossils, Collections of JOl, 111, 332
Fruits, Collection of. 83
~ Preserved .., 83
Furniture, fisc., (states Schools fi
anil Accessories to KtaUm
Schools 31,12
Fur, Opossums 5-1


G. page
Galena 0re,99,101,102,103,104,105,109
Gate, Model of 72
Geological Specimens 100
Ginger 61
Golden Syrup 84
Gold Specimens
99. 101, 192, 103, 104, 105, 109
Gold and Zinc 103
Graining, Specimens of 12
Granites 102, 103
Grasses, Indigenous
55 to 59, 61, 65 to 68, 97
Gum Resins 60
Gypsum 109
H.
Hair Work 17
Hall Door, Cedar 12
I and J.
Imitation Wood (Graining) 12
Indigo .. • 71
Illustrations of Botany 95
Insects 63
Iron Bark Leaves, scented 53
Iron Ore ••• 102
Jams 83, 86
Jellies 83, S 4, 86
K.
Kauri Pine, Section of .. -• 49
Kerosine 70
L.
Lard, JDugong 82
Lead Ore 101, 102
Leather .. .. .. .. 71
Leaves Duboisia .. 49
~ Scented, Iron’bark .. 53
Limonite, Gold and Quartz .. .. 103
Lithographs ..4,7
Loo Table .. .. .. .. 12
Lucerne Seed .. .. .. ..97
M.
Machine, Rice-dressing .. .. 72
Macrozamias .. .. .. .. 95
Madder 71
Mantel Pieces (Cedar) .. .. 12
Manganese, Collection of .. 104, 108
Maps .. .. .. .. .. 5, 6
Maize 60,81
Malachite ... 99,102,104
Manure, Bone 72
Marbles 101,109
Mats 71
Meal, Wheaten 81
~ Buckwheat 81
~ Rye 81
Medals 4
Mil’ett 81
Minerals, Collections of 102,104,108,110
Models .. .. .. . • 9, 72, 79
Mouldings, Trophy of .. .. 49
Moulding Sand 109
Mnndic 99, 103
N. PAGE
Native Timbers 49
Native Woods, Collection of.. .. 49
Native Implements .. 55
Natural History, Specimens 50 to 54
Nuts .. .. .. .. SI, 85
O.
Oats 80
Oil Paintings 4
Oil, Dugong 00, 70
Oils, Essential ... 69
Oil, Sewing Machine 75
Olives 83
Orchids 97
Ores .. 99,101, 102, 105, 100,112
Ornamental Stand (indigenous
woods) 42 to 45
Ornazueutal Stand (indigenous
woods) .. 46 to 48
Oxides 104
P.
Paddy Rice 80
Paintings, Oil 4
~ Various .. .. .. 4
Panels, Trophy of .. .. ~ 40
Paper, Specimens of .. .. .. 8
Patchwork Quilt 14
Pearl Shell 58
Pebbles .. .. .. ..90
Peel, Lemon and Orange .. .. 70
Pepper 84, 65, 86
Photographic Views 77
Photographs .. .. .. 9,10
Picture, Petrilied Sand .. .. 4
Plans, Daintree Coal Seam .. .. 6
~ School Construction .. 7
Plumbago .. .. .. ..109
Portmanteaus .. .. .. IS
Potatoes 81, 83
Pottery, Collection of .. .. 13
Prickley Comtrey .. .. .. 61.
Preserved Meats .. .. .. 82
„ Fruits .. .. .. S 3
~ Jams .. ..86
Public Instruction (Department of) 5
Pyrites 100, 104
Q.
Quartz, Auriferous, Collection of 09
100, 101
R.
Roms Heads, Collection of Four 53
Reef Gold 101
Resins 60
Rice .. .. .. .. 80,81
„ in Sheaf 81
Bock Coves ... 100
Boots ... ... 81
Rock, Specimens in Granite 102, 112
Rubber Stamps .. .. .. 8
Rugs (Marsupial; 14
Rum .. .. .. .. 93,94
Ruling, Specimens of .. .. 8
Rye and Rye Meal .. .. 80, 81
INDEX.


S. pace
Saddlery 70,77
Salt, Native 10ft
Sand, Moulding 10ft
Sandstone, Carboniferous .. .. 104
School Constnictlon, &c 5
Section, showing Tin Strata ~ 112
Sewing Machine Oil 75
Seeds, Indigenous .. .. 08,110,1*7
~ ami Cones, Dox manufac-
tured of .. 3SB
•Seeds of Indigenous Grasses , ... ft"
Serges 10
Senna 84
Shells, Collection of .. .. 88,111
Show Case, Cedar .. ~11
Sideboard, Queensland Woods 12
Sills, Heeled 10
~ Materials .. Id
Silica Powder 102,109
Silicate of Iron 104
Silver Ore 102
Skins 71
Soda, Native 10ft
Soap 01)
Spices Bft, 3d
Starch 7D, su
Stone, Specimens of .. .. no
Suite, Drawing Boom .. ~12
Steatite 100
Sugar ~ 80 to 02
Sugar Cano 80,8(1
Sulphide of Copper with GOUI .. 10)i
„ ~ „ Zinc blemlc 104
T.
Table, inlaid (St. Helena Woods) .. 11
„ (HooJuunpton Woods) 12
~ (Queensland Woods 12
Taniuira TO
Tailings, Auriferous.. .. 00, 100
Tar, Wood 70,81
Tea .. ~ 84
PAGE
Timbers, Collection of ..10toll, dft
~ FHtchos 41
~ Scantlings 42
~ Indigenous d!)
Tin Ores 00,112
Tin Smelted .. .112
Tinware 102
Tooth Powder 70
Tobacco 00, 01, 02
Toys .. ... 18,10
Trnpnoan Kook .. 104
Trophy Arrowroot 81
„ Copper .. .. ~102
„ Preserved Meats .. .. 82
„ Sugar and Sugar Canos 8(j
~ Tin .. 103
Tnrnierio SO
Turtle Soup 82
W.
Water Color Paintings .. . 4
Waggon 70
Walking Slinks 42
Wardrono, Dutch Pine .. .. 12
Wine. Colonial .. .. 03, 04
■Weapons, Aboriginal ... 54
Wheat SI
Wheaton Flour SI
„ Meal 81
Wood, Tar ..70
Woods, indigenous 40
Wolfram 105
Wood Turnery 12
Y.
Yams 81
2.
Zinnia 8()
Kino, Blonde 10jj
Kino and Cold 103
INDEX.


BRISBANE:
PRINTED BY J. 11. REYNOLDS, GENERAL MACHINE PRINTER, GEORGE STREET,
