

CATALOGUE
OF
Very Important Manuscripts
SOTHEBY, WILKINSON & HODGE
34 & 35, NEW BOND STREET, W. (1)
BY OR RELATING TO
CAPTAIN JAMES COOK,
EXPLORER,
THE PROPERTY OF
H. W. F. BOLCKOW, ESQ., M.P., DECEASED,
Marion Hall, Marion-in-Cleveland, Yorkshire
(SOLD BY ORDER OF THE TRUSTEES).
Day of Sale.
WEDNESDAY, THE 21ST OF MARCH.
1928.
ILLUSTRATED COPY.


£
s.
d.
Antiquities (Primitive, Egyptian, Greek, etc.) ...
0
1
6
Autograph Letters ...
0
2
0
Books and Manuscripts
0
5
0
Coins and Medals
0
2
6
Engravings, Etchings, Drawings and Pictures
0
2
6
Japanese Colour Prints and Works of Art
0
1
6
Persian Drawings and Works of Art ...
0
1
0
Works of Art (including Armour, China, Furniture, Glass,
Jewellery, Miniatures, Silver, Textiles, etc.)
0
5
0
£1
1
0
*•
£
s.
d.
Antiquities (Primitive, Egyptian, Greek, etc.) ...
0
5
0
Autograph Letters ...
0
5
0
Books and Manuscripts
2
0
0
Coins and Medals ...
0
10
0
Engravings, Etchings, Drawings and Pictures ...
0
17
6
Japanese Colour Prints and Works of Art
0
5
0
Persian Drawings and Works of Art ...
0
2
6
Works of Art (including Armour, China, Furniture, Glass,
Jewellery, Miniatures, Silver, Textiles, etc.)
1
0
0
£ 5
5
0
TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION FOR MESSRS. SOTHEBY’S
CATALOGUES. FOR ONE SEASON.
PLAIN CATALOGUES.
(To include postage).
ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUES.
(To include postage, and also plain copies where no Illustrated Catalogues
are issued).


CATALOGUE
OF
Very Important Manuscripts
BY OR RELATING TO
CAPTAIN JAMBS COOK,
EXPLOBEB,
THE PROPERTY OF
H. W. F. BOLCKOW, Esq., M.P., deceased,
Marion Hall , Marton-in-Cleveland, Yorkshire
(Sold by Order of the Trustees).
WHICH WILL BE SOLD BY AUCTION
BY MESSRS.
SOTHEBY, WILKINSON & HODGE
(Sib Montague Barlow, K.8.E., LL.D., M.P. G. D. Hobson, M.V.O. & F. W. Warrb, 0.8. E., M. 0.)
Auctioneers of |Citerary property & Marks illustrative of ilje JFine Acts,
AT THEIR LARGE GALLERIES, 34 & 35, NEW BOND STREET, W.(l)
On WEDNESDAY, the 21st of MAECH, 1923,
AT 2.30 O’CLOCK PRECISELY.
MAY BE VIEWED TWO DAYS PRIOR. CATALOGUES MAY BE HAD.
PRINTED BY J. DAVY AND SONS, 8-9, FRITH-STREET, SOHO-SQUARK, LONDON, W., ENGLAND.


CONDITIONS OF SALE.
I. The highest bidder to be the buyer. If any dispute arise the
Auctioneer shall have absolute discretion to settle it; and to
put any disputed lot up again immediately.
11. No person to advance less than Is.; above five pounds 55., and
so on in proportion.
111. All lots are sold subject to the right of the seller or his agent to
bid or to impose a reserve.
IV. The purchasers to give in their names and places of abode, and to
pay down 10s. in the pound or more, if required, in part payment
of the purchase-money; in default of which the lot or lots
purchased may be immediately put up again and re-sold,
V. All lots are sold as shown and with all faults, imperfections and
errors of description. Messrs. Sotheby, Wilkinson & Hodge
act as agents ; they have full discretion to refuse any bidding or
to withdraw any lot or lots from the sale without in either case
giving any reason; they are not responsible for errors of
description or for genuineness or authenticity of any lot or for
any fault or defect in it, and make no warranty whatever.
VI. The lots to be taken away, at the buyer’s risk and expense,
immediately after the conclusion of the sale ; in default of which
Messrs. Sotheby, Wilkinson & Hodge will not hold themselves
responsible if the same are lost, stolen, damaged, or otherwise
destroyed, but they will be left at the sole risk of the purchaser,
and subject to a charge for warehousing. If, at the expiration of
Two Days after the conclusion of the sale, the lots are not
cleared or paid for, they may then be sold immediately, either
publicly or by private treaty, without any notice being given to
the defaulter.
VII. Upon failure of the buyer to comply with any of the above conditions,
the money deposited in part-payment shall be forfeited ; and the
defaulter at this sale shall make good to Messrs. Sotheby,
Wilkinson & Hodge any loss arising from the re-sale, together
with their charges and expenses in respect of both sales.
To prevent confusion no purchases can be claimed or removed
during the sale.
Gentlemen who cannot attend the Sale may have their Commissions
faithfully executed by their humble Set'vants,
SOTHEBY, WILKINSON & HODGE,
34 & 35, New Bond Street, London, TV. (l)
Telegraphic Address: Telephone : (2 lines)
“ Abinitio, Wesdo, London .” Mayfair 1784, 1785.
In sending Commissions this Catalogue may be referred to as "THETIS.”
Commissions sent by Telephone are accepted only at the sender’s
RISK, AND MUST BE CONFIRMED BY LETTER OR TELEGRAM.


Lot 1.




CATALOGUE
OF
Very Important Manuscripts
BY OR RELATING TO
CAPTAIN JAMES COOK,
EXPLORER,
THE property of
H. W. F. BOLCKOW, Esq., M.P., deed.
Marion Hall, Marton-in-Cleveland, Yorkshire
(Sold by Order of the Trustees).
Wednesday, March. 21st, 1923.
N.B.—We are requested to state, on behalf of the Trustees, that these Manu-
scripts are to be offered for sale by Public Auction, and that no private
offers for all or any of them before the sale will be considered.
NOTE. —These Manuscripts have been in the Library at Marion Hall
for upwards of fifty years, having been purchased by the late
Mr. Bolckow’s uncle, but from whom and in what circumstances
is unknown. Captain Cook was born in a labourer’s cottage
on the estate.
Lot 1.
Book, captain james, explorer, 1728-1779,
! Remarkable Occurrences on board His Majesty's
Bark Endeavour, May 27th, 1768 July 11th,
1771, being the AUTOGRAPH MANUSCRIPT OF


the Diary he kept during his First Voyage to the South
Seas, about 740 pp. folio, one leaf missing in the account of Tahiti ,
green morocco, in leather pull-off case
%* A Manuscript of unrivalled interest in the
History of Australian discovery. It was during this voyage,
by far the most important of the three undertaken by Cook, that
he charted the coasts of New Zealand and the eastern coast of
Australia.
For many years the existence of this Autograph Manuscript
was unknown to scholars, who were compelled to be content
with the three contemporary manuscript copies—one at Windsor,
one in the Public Record Office, and the third, known as the
“Corner” journal, because formerly in the possession of Mr. John
Corner, from which the version printed by Admiral Wharton
in 1893, was chiefly taken. This copy is now in the Australian
Museum, Sydney.*
A detailed comparison of this printed version with the Auto-
graph Manuscript would be out of place in a sale catalogue, but a
casual inspection shows that there are many verbal differences ;
for instance, the printed version for July 15th, 1770, omits Cook's
opinion of the first kangaroo ever eaten by Europeans :
To-day we din’d of the animal shott yesterday, and thought it
excellent food.
This sentence is written in a different ink, and was no doubt
added after the " Corner ” copy had been made : it is generally
considered that the copy was sent to Sir Philip Stephens,
Secretary of the Admiralty, from Batavia, so that the original
must have been written on board from day to day, and even the
sentences not in the copy may have been added very shortly
* A single leaf of another Autograph Journal, describing two days of the
stay at Botany Bay (May sth and 6th, 1770), was sold at Wellington Street, on
July 27th, 1911, for £451. It was shorter than the account of the same days
in the present Journal, and, in the opinion of Professor Arnold Wood, is a
fragment, not of a Journal, but of rough notes afterwards expanded into the
Journal (Discovery of Australia, 1922, p. 381).


afterwards.* Throughout the manuscript there are passages crossed
out, but still easily legible, which do not appear in the printed
version.
From the date when the Endeavour sailed (August 7th, 1768),
the Journal records the most notable happenings from day to day,
and often at considerable length. There are also long descriptions
of the various places visited—Rio de Janeiro, Tierra del Fuego,
Tahiti, the Society Isles, New Zealand, and Australia—which are
of the utmost interest, not only for their information, but also for
their revelation of the character and abilities of the writer.
One is amazed (says Professor Wood, speaking of the description
of Tahiti), when one thinks of early days in farm and stable, behind
grocer’s counter, and in collier-ship, to notice the breadth and
strength of mind, the appreciation of the points of special scientific
interest, the exactness of observation, and the careful detail of style.
Nor are touches lacking that reveal the man. “ The decay of the great
Marai or Temple shows,” he says, “ that this island hath been in a more
flourishing state than at present, or that religious customs are (like
most other nations) by these people less observed .... The mysteries
of most religions are very dark, and not easily understood even by
those who profess them.”—(Wood, op. cit. p. 399).
In comparing this manuscript with the printed version, one
naturally looks at the page in which the naming of Botany Bay is
recorded. It confirms the well-known fact, that this notorious
inlet was first called Sting Ray Harbour, then Botanists and
finally Botany Bay, the alteration in the name being due to the
great quantity of new plants found there by Banks and Dr. Solander;
but it is interesting to observe, in turning the leaves of the manu-
script, that many of the names have been altered and some inserted
in different ink, while in places there are marks of pencil writing
below the ink, as if Cook had submitted the proposed names to
Banks before deciding on them. The name New South Wales,
too, was an afterthought, being written over some words which
have been erased ; there being no space for the last word it is
* On the other hand, the note written by Cook in the copy under June 14th,
1770, does not appear in the autograph manuscript :
This day I restor’d M. Magra to his duty as I did not find him guilty of
the crimes laid to his charge.
The crime in question was that of cutting off pieces of the ears of Cook’s
clerk Orton, while he lay in a drunken sleep.


written above the line (Aug. 22nd, 1770); in other places the country
is called New Holland, for which in one passage is substituted
New Wales (Aug. 23rd, 1770). On the other hand, there is no
sign that the name “ Poverty Bay," applied to the first anchorage
in New Zealand, is an afterthought, so that Cook's first intention
to call it Endeavour Bay cannot have lasted long (Wood, op. cit.
pp. 380 and 402).
One other comparison of special interest may be made with
the printed version. Admiral Wharton, in his Preface to the
latter, states that the three manuscript copies are practically
identical, except for the period Aug. 13-19, 1770, during which
the wording is often different, though the events are the same.
The Autograph Journal agrees on the whole very closely with the
printed version. These six days were among the most thrilling
and perilous of the whole voyage, and perhaps Cook varied his
text in the attempt to find language adequate to describe them.
The Endeavour was sailing outside the Barrier Reef at the
northern-most part of the eastern Australian coast, near Cape
York; suddenly the wind dropped, the water was too deep to
anchor, the tide carried them on to the great coral reef :
.... between us and destruction was only a dismal valley the breadth
of one wave, and even now no ground could be felt with 120 fathoms
.... a reef such as is here spoke of is scarcely known in Europe, it is a
wall of coral rock rising almost perpendicular out of the unfathomable
Ocean, always overflowed at high water, generally 7 or 8 feet, and dry
in places at low water. The large waves of the vast ocean meeting
with so sudden a resistance make a most terrible surf, breaking
mountains high, especially as in our case when the general trade wind
blows directly upon it.
Fortunately a slight breeze sprang up, and the Endeavour
succeeded in entering an opening in the reef. With Cook’s
reflections on an explorer’s life, inspired by this narrow escape, our
notes on this most fascinating manuscript must come to an end :
Was it not for the pleasure which naturly {sic) results to a man
from being the first discoverer, even was it nothing more than sands
and shoals, this service would be insupportable, especially in far distant
parts like this, short of provisions and almost every other necessary.
The world will hardly admit of an excuse for a man leaving a coast
unexplored he has once discover’d. If dangers are his excuse he is
then charged with Timorousness and want of Perseverance and at


once pronounced the unfittest man in the world to be employ’d as a
discoverer ; if on the other hand he boldly incounters all the dangers
and obstacles he meets, and is unfortunate enough not to succeed, he
is then charged with Temerity and want of conduct. The former of
these aspersions cannot with Justice be laid to my charge, and if I am
fortunate enough to surmount all the dangers we may meet the latter
will never be brought in question.
[See Illustration.]


Lot 2.
Cook's First Voyage, 1768-71. Contemporary Copies of his
Correspondence with the Admiralty, Victualling Office, etc. relating
to the voyage, including the Secret Instructions and Addi-
tional Instructions to him, original marbled paper wrappers , in
pull-off case
*** An interesting correspondence, including copies of
Cook's letters from Rio de Janeiro, complaining of his treatment
by the authorities there, and of those written from Batavia on his
homeward voyage, in which he gives a brief account of his
discoveries.
But the chief interest of this Manuscript lies in the Instructions
contained in it, the originals and all other copies having perished ;
these Instructions therefore are known only from this
Manuscript {see Professor Wood, op. cit. Publisher's Note, where
however it is erroneously stated that these Instructions are in
Cook's writing).
The Additional Instructions open as follows :
Whereas the making Discovery of Countries hitherto unknown,
and the Attaining a Knowledge of distant Parts which though formerly
discover’d have yet been but imperfectly explored, will redound greatly
to the Honour of this Nation as a Maritime Power, as well as to the
Dignity of the Crown of Great Britain, and may tend greatly to the
advancement of the Trade and Navigation thereof ; and Whereas there
is reason to imagine that a Continent or Land of great extent, may be
found to the Southward of the Track lately made by Capt n Wallis in
His Maj B Ship The Dolphin (of which you will herewith receive a
Copy) or of the Track of any former Navigators in pursuit of the like
kind. You are therefore in pursuance of His Maj B Pleasure hereby
requir’d and directed to put to Sea with the Bark you Command as
soon as the observation of the Transit of the Planet Venus shall be
finish’d and observe the following Instructions. You are to proceed
to the Southward in order to make discovery of the Continent above-
mentioned until you arrive in the Lat de of 40° unless you sooner fall in
with it. But not having discover’d it or any evident signs of it in that


Run you are to proceed in search of it to the Westw d between the
Lat de beforementioned and the Lat de of 35° until you discover it, or
fall in with the Eastern side of the land discover’d by Tasman, and
now called New Zealand.
If Cook discovers the Continent, the Instructions proceed, he
is to make such observations of it as may be possible, and to take
possession of it for His Majesty ; but, if he does not discover it,
he is to survey the coast of New Zealand, and return to England
either by Cape Horn or by the Cape of Good Hope. New Holland,
or Australia, is not mentioned in the Instructions. All the greater
credit, then, is due to Cook for his toilsome and perilous explora-
tion of the East coast of Australia, since by the letter of his
Instructions he need not have undertaken this work at all.


Lot 3.
Log Book of H.M.S. Endeavour, May 26, 1768 (Remarks
at Deptford)—Oct. 5, 1770, original vellum boards, with the trade
card of the stationer who supplied the book —Bate of Birchin Lane,
Cornhill, folio
*** This most interesting log covers all the important part of
the voyage, and ends only five days before the arrival of the
Endeavour at Batavia on her way homeward.


Lot 4.
Log Book of H.M.S. Dolphin, Aug. 21, 1766-October 16,
1767, an important Manuscript of the Voyage to the South
Seas under Capt. Samuel Wallis, 2 vols. 4to, old vellum boards, in
pull-off case, lettered Log Book of H.M.S. Hunter
*** This is a record of singular interest in connection with
Capt. Cook, as it was during this voyage that Tahiti (called by
Wallis King George the Third's Island) was discovered : Wallis
reported strongly in favour of this island as the most convenient
place at which the Transit of Venus, due to occur in June, 1769,
could be observed, and it was his recommendation which led the
Royal Society to request the Admiralty that the Endeavour should
be sent there.
The log ends with the departure of the Dolphin from Tinian ;
at the end is the signature of the compiler “Jn Gore Master
Hunter”—a style which is probably explicable by the fact that
some of the crew were landed for purposes of hunting while the
ship lay at Tinian, where she stayed for a month. John Gore was
afterwards intimately associated with Captain Cook, for only two
months after the return of the Dolphin to England in May, 1768,
he sailed again to the South Seas as Third Lieutenant of the
Endeavour', keeping up his reputation as a hunter, he distinguished
himself by being the first European to shoot a kangaroo. On
Cook's third voyage he was First Lieutenant of the Resolution.
After Cook's death he was placed in command of the Discovery,
and after Captain Clerk's death on Aug. 22, 1779, he assumed
command of the expedition, and moved back to the Resolution.


Lot 5,
Cook, Capt. James, Description of the Coasts of Nova
Scotia, Newfoundland, Cape Breton, etc., Autograph
Manuscript, about 13 pp. large folio, including auto, index, with
two MAPS beautifully drawn in water-colours and pen and ink,
one of Harbour Grace and Carbonere, signed and dated 1762, the
other of a river, unsigned and undated, green morocco, in pull-off
case
*** This most important Manuscript was written while Cook
was Master of H.M.S. Northumberland (Captain Lord Colville),
flagship of the North American Squadron. The description of the
Coast of Nova Scotia would seem to have been compiled from
observations made by Cook throughout his service in North
American waters, one page being headed u From Cape Sambro to
Cape Canso, 1758, 59, 60 and 62." The observations of the Coast
of Newfoundland were mostly made between August and October,
1762, and chiefly in the former month, when the Northumberland
and her consorts were chasing a French squadron, which had
made a descent on the island and captured St. John’s. Lord
Colville had a very high opinion of Cook ; in a despatch to the
Admiralty, dated Oct. 25, 1762, he says :
Mr Cook has made a draught of Harbour Grace and Carbonera
[no doubt the map included in the present lot] Hitherto we
have had a very imperfect knowledge of these places, but Mr Cook, who
was particularly careful in sounding them, has discovered that ships of
any size may lie in safety both in Harbour Grace and Carbonera.
Again, in a letter of Dec. 30, 1762, to the Secretary of the
Admiralty, Colville says :
Mr Cook acquaints me that he has laid before their Lordships
all his draughts and observations relating to the River St. Lawrence,
part of the coast of Nova Scotia, and of Newfoundland. On this
occasion I beg to inform their Lordships that, from my experience of
Mr Cook’s genius and capacity, I think him well qualified for the work
he has performed and for greater undertakings of the same kind.
These draughts being made under my own eye, I can venture to say
that they may be the means of directing many in the right way, but
cannot mislead any.
(see Arthur Kitson, Capt. James Cook, 1907, pp. 55-60).


Lot 6.
Remarks taken on Board H.M. Sloop Porcupine in 1761,
Contemporary Manuscript, 19 pp. folio, with Notes on the
Harbour of Louisbourg, the Gut of Canso, the Coast from Gaspey
to Chaleur Bay, and from Gaspey to the Gut of Canso, Soundings
off Bonaventura Island, etc., in pull-off blue leather case
Lot 7.
COOK, Capt. James. Sailing Directions and Memoranda,
Manuscript, apparently Autograph, on about 58 pp. folio,
probably written 1755-62, marbled paper covers, in blue leather pull-
off case, lettered u Sailing Directions to the E. and W. Indies ”
*** This very interesting manuscript was evidently compiled
by Cook, partly from his own observations, and partly from
information supplied by other navigators. It is nowhere signed,
but that it was written by him seems to be proved, first by the
handwriting which, in our opinion, formed after very careful
examination, is undoubtedly Cook's, and secondly by the following
sentence which seems to record one of the writer's own obser-
vations :
Nov. 24, 1757 Sounding upon the Warner Sand, going into Spit-
head, I found upon ye Sand close to ye Buoy 20 foot Water, etc.
On Nov. 24, 1757, Cook was Master of H.M.S. Pembroke ,
and inspection of the Captain's Log of this ship at the Public
Record Office shows that on this date the Pembroke was lying at
St. Helens, in the Isle of Wight, at the entrance to Spithead. As


the Warner Sand is on the Isle of Wight side of the Channel,
Cook would have ample opportunity of making soundings on it
that day.
It is right, however, to say that in places the first person
singular is used in the manuscript where the observations cannot
possibly have been made by Cook himself, and, as the handwriting
is the same throughout, Cook must in these cases be taking down
the exact words of his informants. For example, one particularly
interesting passage gives directions for entering the harbour of
Boston, Mass. :
If you are bound for Boston and would sail in between the Island
call’d Brewster’s and Allberton Point, to this Point you must give a
good Birth there being a very Dangerous Ledge of Rocks Lying off
Itt. So you must keep over to ye Brewston, there is Likewise in
going in another Rock, on w ch ye Centurion struck when I was Master
of her.
Cook was never Master of the Centurion which, of course, was
Anson’s flagship when the latter sailed round the world, 1740-4.
In spite of considerable research, we have been unable to
ascertain when this accident happened to the Centurion. The
earliest chart of Boston Harbour that marks the Centurion Rock
is that of Samuel Holland, published 1770, but probably surveyed
1764-6. However, the Centurion was much in North American
waters between 1754 and 1759, and it was probably during this
period that she struck the rock. Her Masters at this time were
Charles Bowes, Oct. 1754-Oct. 1755.
George Mackenzie, Oct. 1755-Feb. 1758.
Emerson Baxted, Aug. 31, 1759-April, 1760.
Cook himself was on the North American station at this time,
arriving at Halifax in the Pembroke on May 8, 1758. He was
transferred to the Northumbeiland on Sept. 23, 1759, and stayed in
that ship till discharged on her return to England, Oct. 24, 1762.
The volume opens with a table of distances along the South
Coast of England, followed by a long series of observations,
headed “ Course and Distance from the S. Foreland to the Land’s
End of England,” which may well have been made by Cook when
Master’s Mate on his first ship, H.M.S. Eagle , 1755-7. These are
followed by notes on entering the harbour of Lisbon, on the


coasts of Tripoli and Algeria, the West Indies, Gulf of Florida,
New England, etc., which must be the result of information
supplied by others. Next come “ Remarks of an East India
Voyage. The thoughts of the Secret Committee of the East
India Co. which they judged might be of use to ye Commanders
of his Maj: Ships Bound jto ye East Indias: in ye year 1744.”
Then follow some miscellaneous notes, and the book ends with
a number of rough sketches of the outlines of some of the West
Indian islands.
On the last page is a short note, headed “from Mr. Cook,”
probably of information supplied by Cook’s name-sake, who was
Master of the Mercury in 1759, and was with the Gosport in New-
foundland in 1762, at the recapture of St. John’s; it is quite
certain, says Mr. Kitson, that the two James Cooks met at this
time, even if they had not done so previously at Halifax {op. cii.
p. 58).
We have no doubt of this most interesting Manuscript being
in the handwriting of the great explorer, and a most remarkable
proof of the diligence with which he studied his profession ; but
as it has never hitherto been ascribed to him, and as it is unsigned,
purchasers must form their own judgment of it, and it will be sold
entirely without guarantee.


Lot 8.
Epitome of Voyages, 1497-1685, XVIII Century Manuscript,
green morocco , green leather pull-off case
*** In addition to the title, as here given, which is not found
in the Manuscript, the binding and case bear the words 11 Captain
Cook," the inference being that this Manuscript was used by him.
It is impossible to say whether this is so or not; but it is interesting
to note that the voyages epitomized were chiefly to the South Seas;
they are as follows :
Americo Vesputio, Binot Paulmier de Gonneville, Ferdinand
Magellan, Carjaval, Ladrilleros, Garcia de Loaisa, Alvar de Saavedra,
Diego Hurtado, Simon de Alcazova, Francisco de Ulloa, Alphonzo
de Camargo, Juan Gaetan and Bertrand della Torre, Villegagnon,
Alvar de Mendoza, Sir Francis Drake, Pedro Sarmiento, Fenton,
Francisco de Gualle, Thomas Cavendish, Sir Richard Hawkins,
Fernand de Quiros, George Spelberg, James Le Maire and W.
Schouten, Garcia de Nodal, Jacques Le Hermite, Francis Pelsart,
Gerard Pool, Abel Tasman, Henry Brewer, Vink, Sir John Nar-
borough, Keyts, Bartholomew Sharp, Cowley, William Dampier.
The Manuscript seems to be based on Callender’s translation
of de Brosses, 1766-8 ; it ends abruptly in March, 1685, Dampier's
later voyages not being included.
Lot 9.
Log Book of H.M.S. Weazle, 1775-1777, 1781, folio , old
vellum , in marone leather pull-off case
*** During the War of American Independence, this sloop
seems to have been on service chiefly in the Atlantic and West
Indies.
END OF SALE.
Printed by J. Davy & Sons, 8-9, Frith-street, Soho-square, London, W., England.


VALUATIONS.
Messrs. Sotheby, Wilkinson & Hodge make Valuations for Probate,
Insurance, &c., at 1 per cent, with a minimum fee
In London ... ... ... ... £5 5 0
In the Country... ... ... ... £lO 10 0
Together with Travelling Expenses.
INSPECTIONS.
Properties are inspected and owners advised with view to a Sale by
Auction, at a fee
In London ... ... ... ... £2 2 0
In the Country... ... ... ... £3 3 0
Together with Travelling Expenses.
NOTICES OF SALES.
Notices of all Sales appear in the following Papers :
Mondays ... ... Daily Telegraph ; Morning Post.
Tuesdays... ... Times.
Saturdays ... Country Life; Spectator, and Manchester
Guardian.
Notices of Special Sales appear in the following Papers :
A. English.
Thursdays ... ... Times Literary Supplement; Scotsman,
and Glasgow Herald.
Saturdays ... ... Publishers’ Circular; Clique;
Illustrated London News ; Field ;
Sphere ;
and Monthly in the Burlington Magazine ; Connoisseur ; London Mercury,
and Bookman’s Journal.
B. Foreign.
Journal des Arts (Paris). Philadelphia North American.
Gazette de I’Hotel Drouot (Paris). New York Times.
New York Herald (Paris Edition), New York Evening Post.
... ily News. Boston Evening Transcript.
li|{ j|| And Monthly in the American Art News.


BAKEK, LEIGH & SOTHEBY.
THB TISM COMMENCING WITH SAIfOEL BAKES IN
1744.
SOTHEBY, WILKINSON & HODGE.
1923.
