

MELBOURNE BKANCH
HER MAJESTY’S MINT.
CATALOGUE OF EXHIBITS
SHOWN AT THE
6><
MELBOURNE INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION 1880, $
WITH EXPLANATION.
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE DEPUTY MASTER,
Y, Delves-Bkoughton,
MELBOURNE.
BY AUTHORIT Y : JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1880.




MELBOURNE BRANCH
HER MAJESTY’S MINT.
CATALOGUE OF EXHIBITS
SHOWN AT THE
MELBOURNE INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION 1880,
WITH EXPLANATION.
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE DEPUTY MASTER,
Y. Delves-Brooghton.
MELBOURNE.
BY AUTHORITY : JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
18 8 0.




PA'Jg
Introduction
1
Melting House ...
7
Assay Department ... ... , ...
7
Defining by Chlorine
9
Coining Department ....
10
Appendix
14-33
Description of the Medals and Coins exhibited, reprinted
from the Annual Deports of the Deputy Master and
Controller of the Doyal Mint, Loudon
14
Table showing Gold Deceived and Issued at the Melbourne
Branch of the Doyal Mint
29
Table showing the Quantity of Gold Deceived, and dis-
tinguishing the Produce of Victoria from that of other
Countries
30
Deports of the Deputy Master and Controller of the Doyal
Mint on the Weight and Fineness of the Coin Struck at
the Melbourne Branch
30
Mint Degulations for the Deceipt and Coinage of Gold
32
Degulations for the Admission of Visitors
33
Catalogue of Exhibits
34 s
CONTENTS.




THE MELBOURNE BRANCH OF THE ROYAL MINT.
The establishment of a Branch of Her Majesty’s Mint in Mel-
bourne was the result of prolonged discussion in the Colonies,
and between the Imperial and Colonial Governments.
The proposal first assumed definite shape when an address,
praying Her Majesty to be graciously pleased to establish a
Branch of the Royal Mint in Victoria, was agreed to by both
Houses of the Victorian Legislature in December 1859, and was
transmitted to the Imperial Government.
This address prayed that the gold coins issued from the
Melbourne Branch of the Royal Mint should be made legal
tender throughout the British Empire.
Much discussion ensued as to the currency which should be
given to the coinage of the Melbourne Branch of the Royal Mint,
the legal tender currency of the coins struck at the Sydney
Branch being, at that time, confined to the Australian Colonies,
New Zealand, Van Pieman’s Land, Ceylon, Hong Kong, and
Mauritius.
Subsequently, the Imperial Parliament passed an Act, dated
28th July 1863 (26 & 27 Viet. cap. 74), giving power to Her
Majesty to declare gold coins made at the Sydney Branch of the
Royal Mint to be legal tender for payments within the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
In May 1864, another address was agreed to by the Legislative
Assembly of Victoria, praying for the establishment of a Branch
of the Royal Mint in Melbourne, subject to the limitations exist-
ing in New South Wales. This address was also agreed to by
the Legislative Council, and was transmitted to the Imperial
Government by the Governor.
A despatch was received from the Imperial Government, in
answer to this address, in which it was suggested that, as a pre-
liminary condition to the issue of an Order in Council establishing
a Branch of Her Majesty’s Mint at Melbourne, the Legislature
of Victoria should make permanent provision for the expenses
of the Branch Mint; and an Act was passed by the Victorian
Legislature (Act 29 Viet. No. 285, dated 20th September 1865)
making provision accordingly. 1 his Act was objected to by the
Imperial authorities, one of the objections being that it was not
clear that the control of the Grant made under the Colonial Act
would be absolutely in the hands of the Imperial Government.
Another Act was then passed by the Victorian Legislature (31


Yict. No. 307, dated 6th September 1807) repealing the Act of
1865, and making provision in the manner required by the Im-
perial Government, as an indispensable preliminary to the estab-
lishment of a Branch Mint at Melbourne.
The yearly payments to Her Majesty under this Act were
to begin from the day upon which a Proclamation, issued by
Her Majesty in England, should be duly published in Victoria
declaring that the coin issued from the Melbourne Branch of the
Royal Mint was to be legal tender for payments within the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
Her Majesty exercised, on the 3rd February 1866, the power
given to her under Act 26 & 27 Yict. cap. 74, when a Royal
Proclamation was issued declaring gold coin struck at the
Sydney Branch Mint legal tender for payments within the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland ; and the extended circu-
lation thus given to the Sydney coin was afterwards conceded to
all Colonial Branch Mints, under certain conditions, by an Act
which the Imperial Parliament passed on 6th August 1866 (29
& 30 Yict. cap, 65), whereby Her Majesty was empowered to
declare gold coin issued from Colonial Branch Mints, which had
been established or might thereafter be established, to be legal
tender for payments within any part of Her Majesty’s dominions
in which gold coin issued from Her Majesty’s Mint in London
might, at the date of the issue of such Proclamation, be legal
tender.
The prayer of the address in 1864 of the Victorian Legislature
having finally been granted, and the required provision for defray-
ing the expenses connected with the establishment of the Branch
of Her Majesty’s Mint in Victoria having been made, in accord-
ance with the views of the Imperial Government, Her Majesty
issued her Royal Proclamation, on 7th August 1869, declaring
the gold coins made at the Melbourne Branch of the Royal
Mint legal tender for payments within all parts of Her Majesty’s
dominions in which gold coin issued from the London Mint were,
at the date of the issue of the Proclamation, legal tender.
The Branch of the Royal Mint at Melbourne opened on 12th
June 1872, and it has, since that period, issued gold coin of the
value of £15,596,300. It has also withdrawn from circulation
worn silver coin of the nominal value of £99,535 6s 6d., and
issued new silver coin of the nominal value of £194,467.
It has also withdrawn from circulation in Victoria the old
copper coinage of the Realm, which had been decried in the
Colonies by Her Majesty’s Royal Proclamation and an Order of
Her Majesty in Council dated 24th March 1876, and new bronze
coin of the nominal value of £2,772 has been issued.
These withdrawals and issues of subsidiary coinage have nearly
all been effected at the expense of the Imperial Government, to
the manifest improvement of the circulation of Victoria and the
neighbouring Colonies.


The Melbourne Branch of the Royal Mint is under the manage-
ment of an officer who holds a warrant under Her Majesty’s Sign
Manual as Deputy Master of the Royal Mint and chief officer
of the Melbourne Branch. The staff under him consists of four
principal officers, appointed by warrants of the Lords Commis-
sioners of Her Majesty’s Treasury, and the necessary number of
clerks and other officers, also appointed by their Lordships.
Melting House.
Gold is brought for coinage into the Melbourne Branch of
Her Majesty’s Mint in many different forms—dust, cakes resulting
from the retorting of amalgam, ingots, roughly melted lumps,
manufactured gold, &c.
The gold is weighed in the presence of the Depositor, and a
receipt given for the gross weight. It is then passed on to the
melting house, and there melted and cast into one or more ingots,
in the presence of the depositor if he should so desire.
When the ingot has been cast, two clips or samples are
taken from it, and one sent to each of the assayers, who work
independently, and report the contents in gold and silver.
An improvement in the construction of the melting furnaces
employed, which are of the ordinary 12 in. square wind-furnace
pattern, has been recently effected by W. Blackwell, Foreman
Melter.
Heretofore a difficulty had been found in maintaining the
exterior fronts of these furnaces, which the recent improvement
has effectually removed. If made of iron, the furnace fronts
radiate too much heat; if of bricks and mortar, or fireclay, the
joints soon fall out, and the bricks become loose.
The front of each furnace is now constructed of one block,
made on the premises, and consisting of three parts of Portland
cement, two of broken bricks, and one and a half of sand. When
once in position they need seldom be moved, as the furnace can
be re-lined without disturbing them, an air-space of in. being
left between the lining and the front.
Assay Department.
The method of assay in use is the ordinary one by cupella-
tion, with the addition of silver and subsequent treatment of the
hammered and laminated button with nitric acid. For this latter
operation, Johnson and Matthey’s platinum trays and thimbles
are used, glass beakers being employed for the acid.
Several improvements, tending to increase the accuracy of
the work performed in the Mint Assay Department, have been
introduced. One of these is the method of weighing by com-
pensation. It is equivalent to double weighing, the load is
constant, and the method as facile in use as that which it super-
seded.


A movable index scale has been devised and made, by means of
which a balance can be adjusted to a small fraction of a division,
which is scarcely obtainable by adjustments from time to time of
the tongue or flag of the beam.
For the assay of silver, Gay Lussac’s humid method is sub-
stantially followed.
One gramme of each sample of silver is dissolved in nitric
acid, and precipitated with a standard solution of common salt.
This solution is added fractionally by the aid of “ branch ”
pipettes, which greatly facilitate this operation.
For standard silver, a pipette is employed, which has a feed at
the bottom similar to those of Stas and Riemsdijk, and which is
constructed to deliver such a quantity of common salt as is equal
to and sufficient for precipitating one gramme of standard silver
in the form of chloride. This pipette, with its ingenious arrange-
ments for filling and for the overflow, was also devised and con-
structed in the Assay Department of the Branch of Her Majesty’s
Mint at Melbourne.
The silver dissolved during the process of gold assay is re-
covered by precipitation with common salt, and subsequent reduc-
tion of the chloride of silver with iron. The washed and wet
metallic sponge is afterwards placed in a cast-iron cylindrical
press, which turns out a cylinder of silver, .solid and ready for the
melting pot. It is placed in the crucible in this form, and cast
into bars. This useful tool was constructed in the Mint work-
shops, under the directions of one of the Assayers, much of its
merit depending on the ingenious and effective arrangement of
details furnished by the Foreman of Coining, Mr. G. Bint.
Among the exhibits will be noticed sliding scales of the kind
in daily use in the Assay Department for correction of surcharge.
This simple auxiliary is the result of a long series of experi-
ments prosecuted by Mr. Barton, Assayer in this Branch of Her
Majesty’s Mint.
In reference to corrections to be made in computing the results
of assays, it may be explained that as each assay may regulate
the treatment of thousands of pounds’ worth of the precious metal,
and as the greatest attainable accuracy is therefore requisite,
every minute source of possible error should be compensated ;
but, as a matter of fact, the several operations of the assay are,
each of them, liable to slight deviations, and the resultant error
from all these causes is technically known as “ surcharge.”
It is customary to place test pieces of pure gold among each
batch of assays, and the error in these test pieces gives the key to
the correction for surcharge for that batch. But the correction
for high and low gold, submitted to identical treatment during
assay, is found by experiment to be not quite the same, and Mr.
Barton’s results, afterwards confirmed by Mr. Foord, suggested


to the latter the sliding scale, which leaves little to he desired in
this department of the work.
All these improvements have been the result of investigations
carried out in the Assav Department of the Melbourne Branch of
the Royal Mint, and the credit for them is largely due to the
science, care, and inventive skill of Mr. George Foord, one of the
Assayers.
Refining by Chlorine.
All the gold received at the Melbourne Branch of Her Majesty’s
Mint contains more or less silver, and most of it is brittle from
the presence of base metals, and is unfit for coinage in that state.
It is therefore sent to the refining furnaces in the Melting
House, where it is subjected to the process for extracting the
silver and the base metals invented by Mr. F. Bowyer Miller,
Superintendent of the Bullion Office in this Branch of Her
Majesty’s Mint. This process consists in passing a stream of
chlorine gas through the molten gold, by which the silver and base
metals are converted into chlorides, some of which are volatile at
the temperature of the furnace, and pass away by the chimney ;
but the chloride of silver, of a less volatility, if protected by a
layer of borax, remains floating on the refined gold.
On the completion of the operation, which occupies about an
hour and a half, the crucible is removed from the fire, and allowed
to cool till the refined gold becomes solid; the chloride of silver,
still in the liquid state, is then poured off, and the gold is re-
melted and cast into ingots. About 9,000 ounces can be thus
operated on at once in the Mint refinery.
The chloride of silver is subjected to a special process for the
recovery of the silver in the metallic state, the method at present in
use being that originally proposed by Dr. Leibius, Senior Assayer
in the Sydney Branch of the Royal Mint.
The introduction of this method of refining has enabled the
Mint to eliminate the silver from all gold sent in for coinage,
instead of leaving it as alloy in the standard bars. The cost
of labor and chemicals rendered the adoption of the previously
known methods of refining, by nitric, or sulphuric acid, too costly
to be profitably employed in these Colonies.
The pale-green color in the old Sydney sovereigns arose from
the fact that the natural gold of New South Wales contains a
considerable amount of silver. Until the year 1869, when the
chlorine process was adopted at Sydney, 1 there was no economic
method of separating this silver. It therefore remained in the
coinage, taking the place of the usual copper alloy; the difference
in the value of the silver and the copper that should have been
employed for this purpose being lost to the Colony.
The adoption of the chlorine process has also rendered un-
necessary the highly objectionable use of corrosive sublimate for
• See Ninth Annual Report of the Deputy Master of the Royal Mint, presented to both Houses,
of the Imperial Parliament by Her Majesty’s Command, page 53. —[C. 2319.]


Gross Weight of Gold Keflned
by Chlorine.
Containing by Assay Standard
Gold.
Fine Silver Extracted.
ounces.
ounces.
ounces.
3,702,671-96
3,798,784-194
152,255-16
toughening brittle gold, which in former years gave rise to much
complaint. In short, it has saved to the Colonies many thousand
pounds’ worth of silver annually, and has solved the questionre-
specting toughening gold, which was previously one of the diffi-
culties in coining, not only here, but.also in the London Mint. 1
The amount and value of silver obtained is shown by the
figures in note. 2
- Each of the several ingots of fine gold, resulting from the
refining operation, is again assayed independently by each of the
Assayers, and upon their report copper is added by the Superin-
tendent of the Bullion Office in such amount that the alloy is in
the proportion of one part of copper to eleven parts of fine gold
(the British standard).
This standard alloy is melted in crucibles capable of holding
about 1600 ounces, and is poured into bars measuring about
2 feet long x li inches wide x i inch thick, weighing each (say)
180 ounces. “Clips” for assay are taken from these standard
bars, and a report is again made by each of the Assayers upon
their fineness.
If this should prove correct— i. e., if the metal is found to
contain 916-66 parts of gold in 1000, or within the legal allow-
ance of error (see Imperial Coinage Act 1870, 33 Yict. cap. 10,
schedule 11.) —the bars are passed on for coinage.
Coining Department.
In the Coining Department the standard bars cast in the Melt-
ing House are rolled into “fillets” till they very nearly approach
the thickness of a sovereign or half-sovereign, as the case may be.
The rolls employed for this purpose are strongly constructed,
and capable of delicate adjustment, but it is found impossible,
with the greatest care and skill, to obtain a fillet of gold of uni-
form thickness by these alone. Every sovereign must be as
nearly as possible the same weight, two-tenths of a grain being
the greatest deviation allowed by law from the standard weight.
Uniformity of thickness in the gold fillet from which they are
cut is therefore indispensable. A machine known as the “ Drag
Bench,” the invention of the late Sir John Barton, is employed
to obtain the necessary accuracy. In this machine the “ fillet ”
is drawn through two fixed parallel cylinders, as wire is drawn
through a draw-plate.
1 First Annual Report of the Deputy Master and Controller of the Royal Mint, 1870, page 47, and
Correspondence with the Rank of England in the Appendix thereto. —[C. 303.]
2 Table showing the Amount of Gold Bullion refined by the Chlorine Method, from the opening
of the Melbourne Mint in June 1872 to 30th June 1880
Thus the value of the silver extracted by this process, which would have been lost without it, may be
taken at nearly £40,000.


The aim of the coiner is to turn out the largest possible per-
centage of coin from the bars liq receives, and to the careful use
of this machine the highly satisfactory out-turn obtained in this
Mint is mainly due. The average yield of coin from bars is
between 05 and GO per cent.*, and this result is obtained without
tiling or dressing the blanks.
The fillets, after passing through the drag bench, are cut into
lengths of about 18 inches, and are then handed to the “cutters,”
workmen who, by means of machine punches, cut out the blank
discs destined for conversion into coin.
In order to check and control the action of the “ drag,” and to
indicate the adjustment necessary, a skilled workman, known as
the “ gauger,” punches a sample blank from each fillet, and, upon
ascertaining the weight of this trial piece, he adjusts the distance
of the cylinders of the drag bench so that every blank cut from
the fillet shall be within the limit of error allowed.
An excellent machine trial press ha's been designed and con-
structed for this purpose by Mr. Bint, the Foreman of Coining in
the Melbourne Branch of the lloyal Mint.
A useful gauge for the trial press, and for cutting the fillets
into the exact length required and at the desired angle, was con-
trived by Mr. John Barker, when in charge of the Coining
Department. This improvement effects a considerable saving in
the amount of work rejected, and has added nearly three per cent,
to the out-turn of good blanks.
To cleanse the blanks from grease and dirt, they are now
placed in a portable perforated cylinder and passed through a
series of washing tanks; the first containing a boiling solution of
potash, the other two water, heated by steam, the cylinder being-
revolved by machinery in these tanks in rotation. This washing-
arrangement, designed and constructed in the Mint workshops, is
a modification of the hand-driven apparatus in use in the Sydney
Branch of the Boyal Mint.
After cleansing, the blanks are transferred to the weighing-
room, where they are passed through Napier’s automaton
balances. These most ingenious machines sort the pieces into
three classes—light, good or standard, and heavy—weighing each
piece to the jof a grain.
Their action is as follows : —By the movement of the machine
the blanks are placed on the scale one by one; the beam is then
set free to oscillate, and takes either a level position, caused by the
equality of the weight and the piece weighed, or one at an angle
to the horizon according to the preponderating influence of the
weight on the blank. When the weighing is thus completed, the
beam is clamped in the position it assumes, and, being thus
secured, determines the adjustment of an oscillating shoot over
the entrance of one or other of three boxes destined to receive
severally the light, the medium, and the heavy pieces. The whole
of these several motions, from the feeding to the discharge of the


weighed blanks into their proper receptacles, are effected by the
machine itself, which receives its motion from a small turbine
placed beneath it.
But the chief point of interest in this most ingeniously con-
trived mechanism is the provision for what is technically called
the “ remedy.”
As all human work is subject to error of greater or less
amount, it follows that the sovereign blanks, after all the care and
skill bestowed on them, will vary in weight within narrow limits
—there will still be a very slight deviation on the light or heavy
side from the exact legal weight; to cover this, provision is made
by law for a slight margin or allowance of error. This is con-
trolled in the automaton balance by a peculiar arrangement of the
counterpoise weight, which consists of two portions: a glass disc,
which is a few hundredths of a grain lighter than a sovereign,
and a small supplementary piece of aluminium wire, which, when
added to the weight of the glass disc, makes the two together
amount to a weight a few hundredths of a grain in excess of the
sovereign. The wire rests in a crutch in such a manner that, in
the rise of the beam, it can be lifted up by it so as to form part
of the counterpoise, or when the beam falls it is left supported in
the crutch, the glass disc alone becoming, in that case, the coun-
terpoise weight. Thus, all blanks heavier than the sum of the
disc and the wire are separated as heavy, and all lighter than the
glass disc are sorted as light, while those of intermediate weights
are passed as within the “ remedy ” allowed by law, and average
about 95 per cent, of the whole.
In order to prevent the issue of any coin cracked or split at
the edge, the blanks are u rung ” by being thrown separately on a
steel disc, the workman detecting the slightest flaw by a charac-
teristic dulness in the sound emitted.
The next operation, known as “ marking,” consists in passing
each blank through an edge-compressor, or machine for turning
up or thickening the edge. This operation serves a three-fold
object; it ensures the blanks being absolutely of the same diame-
ter, while it produces a suitable surface for taking the impression
of the “ milling ;” and it also forms a rim for the protection of
the impression on the finished coin. The marking machine at
present in use was designed and constructed in this Branch of the
Boyal Mint.
The operations above described —namely, rolling, cutting out,
and marking—have each tended to compress and harden the metal
in the blanks, but this condition is not favorable to the operation
of coining, and therefore, before submitting them to the coining
press, it is necessary to soften them by annealing.
The annealing is effected after allowing the blanks, as they
leave the marking machine, to drop into a wrought-iron cylinder,
which, with its contents, is placed in a reverberatory furnace and
heated to dull redness, the gold being protected from the oxidizing


effect of the atmosphere by a layer of charcoal in a cage and on
the top of the charge of blanks, and the whole being closed over
by a tight-fitting cap.
The coining presses are of the lever or knee-joint construction,
and impart the obverse and reverse impressions and the milling
at the same instant..
The blank is placed by the action of the machine upon the
obverse die standing within a steel collar, on the inner rim of which
the “milling” intended to be imparted to the edge of the coin
is engraved. The reverse die descends upon the blank with a
pressure of about 15 tons, and imprints upon it its own design
and, by the re-action, that of the obverse die beneath, while the
lateral expansion resulting from the great pressure imprints the
milling on the edge.
The coin is examined on a table, over which revolves an endless
cloth, arranged in such a manner that both sides of the coin are
brought under the view of the examiner.
It is then again passed through the automaton balances, and
once more over the examining table.
After this, the sovereigns are issued to the public in bags
containing £lOOO each.
The canvas used for this purpose is cut into pieces of a uniform
size and weight by a machine designed and constructed on the
premises by Mr. G. Bint, so that the gross weight of each bag of
sovereigns is a constant quantity within a variation of a few
grains only.
From every delivery to the public one coin in five thousand is
taken, without preference, and part of it is sent to each of the
assayers, as a further check and security that the coin issued shall
be of the integral composition required by law.
As a still further check, and for the satisfaction of the Home
authorities, one piece is taken, without preference, from each £5OOO
issued, by an officer appointed by the Governor, and, after being
placed in an envelope sealed and signed by him, is sent to the
Master of the Mint in London, for such examination as the Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury may direct.
Appended are tables showing—
1. The receipts and issues from this Branch of Her
Majesty’s Mint since its establishment.
2. The results of the assay of the pieces sent home for such
examination as the Lords of the Treasury may direct.
3. A diagram showing the annual average of the assay of
coin in this branch.
4. Regulations for the Receipt and Coinage of Gold.
5. Regulations for the Admission of Visitors.
V. Delves-Broughton,
Deputy Master.


Appendix A.
The following descriptions of medals and coins, specimens and
models of most of which are exhibited, are reprinted from the
annual Reports of the Deputy Master and Comptroller of the
Royal Mint in London. The numbers originally referred to
photographs, but the specimens selected by Mr. Fremantle so
thoroughly represented the various phases through which art as
applied to coinage has passed, that it was determined to request
the authorities of the British Museum to permit the originals
1o be reproduced in electrotype with a view to their exhibition
at Melbourne.
Extract from Fifth Annual Report (1874).
I may perhaps in this place be allowed briefly to trace the
phases through which medallic art lias passed, in this and other
countries, since the middle ages. With this view, I have caused
to be prepared, and annex to this Report, autotypes of a few
typical medals illustrative of this branch of art at different
periods ; and in order that the more ancient examples may not be
altogether unrepresented, I have placed at the head of the plate a
Syracusan coin representing Philistis, wife of Hieron the Second.
The greater part of these photographs were taken from medals in
the British Musuem.
According to Pinkerton, 1 no medals appear in any country in
Europe till the 15th century, with the exception of the gold
medals of David 11., issued in Scotland between 1330 and 1370 ;
but as early as 1439 mention is made of a gold medal of the
Council of Florence, and from that time the art continued to
flourish in Italy. The medals of this period were modelled in
wax and cast in fine sand, and were afterwards, in some cases,
finished with the graving tool. Nos. 2 and 3 on the plate, the
latter by Albrecht Diirer, are excellent examples of early Italian
and German art, but the most beautiful series are the Papal
medals, commencing in the pontificate of Paul 11. (1464), many
of which were designed by Raffaele, Giulio Romano, Francia,
Cellini, and other great artists. Nos. 4 and 5 are by Francia and
Cellini respectively, and are as fine specimens of the art at that
time as could be given. From the close of the 15th century
medals were struck, instead of cast, and greater finish of work-
manship was no doubt thereby attained.
Next to Italy, France was the country most remarkable for
medals, but the French medals, were neither fine nor numerous
until the reign of Louis XIY., which produced many works of
good design and execution.
The oldest known English medal bears date 1480, 2 and is the
work of an Italian artist, but in the reign of Henry VIII. medals
were still uncommon in this country. Several examples, how-
1 “ Essay on Medals ” (London, 1789).
2 Medallic History of England (London, 1790), page 7.


ever, are extant of medals struck in the reign of Queen Mary,
and of these, one of the best is that by Trezzo of the Queen her-
self, given in the plate (No. 6). In the reign of Elizabeth many
medals were struck, but none which deserve special mention,
except one to commemorate the defeat of the Spanish Armada,
bearing the device of a fleet scattered by the winds, and the
legend “ Afflavit DeUs, et dissipati sunt.” This, however, is not
extant. Medals became numerous in the reign of Charles 1.,
whose artistic tastes are well known. In this reign, and sub-
sequently under the Commonwealth, the works of Thomas Simon,
the greatest of English medallists, form an important era in the
history of medals. A fine example, representing the head of
Thomas Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton, is given in the plate
(No. 7). After these, no remarkable medals occur till the reign
of Queen Anne, in which a series appeared commemorating the
victories of Marlborough. In the medals of succeeding reigns the
style gradually tended towards a revival of Roman types, and this
style has survived, with few exceptions, until within a com-
paratively recent period. As an instance may be mentioned the
Crimean war medal, the reverse of which represents Victory
crowning a warrior equipped in Roman armour. The Napoleonic
medals are pseudo-classic in design, but are generally creditable
to French art. A characteristic example, by Andrieu, is shown
in No. 8. The small head (No. 9) of Queen Caroline, beautifully
modelled by Pistrucci, Chief Medallist of the Mint from 1827 to
1851, is a successful imitation of Greek art. It is hardly necessary
for me to refer to the works of William Wyon, R.A., late Engra-
ver of the Mint, whose numerous medals, some of great merit,
are well known, and whose coins are still in circulation.
The remaining medals figured in the plate are No. 10, awarded
for “ distinguished conduct in the field,” “ long service and good
conduct,” &c.; No. 11, annually given, since 1870, to the best
shot in the army; and Nos. 12 and 13, the obverse and reverse of
the medal now in course of issue to the troops engaged in the
Ashanteee war. The first of these, designed by Pistrucci, well
represents the degraded style of art which for a time prevailed,
and which was followed, as in the case of the medals for the New
Zealand and Abyssinian wars, by designs of decorative and geo-
metrical ornament. In the “Best Shot” and “Ashantee” medals
an attempt has been made, and it is hoped successfully, to give
good examples of contemporaneous English art. With this view,
the designs for the reverse of both medals were entrusted to Mr.
E. J. Poynter, A.R.A., the obverse, bearing the effigy of Her
Majesty, being in each case the work of Mr. Leonard Wyon,
Engraver of the Mint, by whom also the dies for both medals
were engraved.
Addison, in his “Dialogues upon the Usefulness of Ancient
“Medals,” published in 1726, observes : “We ought to look on
“ medals as so many monuments consigned over to eternity, that
“ may possibly last when all other memorials of the same age are


“worn out or lost,” and pleads that medals shall represent, as
accurately as may be, the dress and customs of the time of their
issue. Evelyn contends, also, in his “ Discourse of Medals,” for
accuracy in portraiture and types of race, as of great importance
from an ethnological point of view, and urges that medals should
be truthful in these respects. In the design for the “ Best Shot”
medal it was impossible, owing to differences of uniform, to adopt
a dress common to the whole army, and it was necessary, there-
fore, to treat the subject allegorically ; but in the case of the
Ashantee medal, care has been taken, as will be seen, to represent
the actual conditions under which the war was conducted, and the
garb of the combatants on each side.
Extract from Seventh Annual Report (1876).
It must be evident, even to those who have not made a special
study of the subject, that the design of modern coins is in almost
all respects decidedly inferior to that of coinages in former times,
although the latter were equally well suited for the purposes of
circulation. In no respect has this inferiority been more apparent
than in the manner in which the important question of portraiture
has, from time to time, been treated; and I propose, without
attempting to exhaust all the authorities .on the subject, to make
a few observations on what would appear to be some of the more
interesting facts connected with the portrait coins of this and
other countries, in the hope that they may be of service, if only
by directing attention to a subject, which, I venture to think,
has not of late years received the consideration it deserves.
I do not propose to refer to Greek or Roman coins, which,
though in many cases of extreme interest and beauty, 1 were in
such high relief as to be unfit for the purposes of modern circula-
tion. In Saxon times, too, many coins bear evidence of the
influence of Roman art, the prevailing type of the effigies, how-
ever, until nearly the end of the fifteenth century, being that of
the penny of William the Conqueror, shown in
the annexed woodcut, although a gradual ad-
vance can be traced in their execution. 2 Martin
Folkes observes that during the period from
William I. to Henry YII. “ there does not appear
“ to have been so much as an attempt to preserve
“ any similitude of the several kings in the im-
“ pressions of their heads. They are all alike,”
“ pressions of their heads. They are all alike,” {From Rudwgs Flat<s)
he continues, “ and even those that are represented on their broad
1 Vatin, in his “ Histoire des Mddailles,” says, “ N’a-t’on pas de la satisfaction des id des que
“ nous donnent les vdritables portraits de tant d’illustres princesses Romaine ? L’adresse de Julie,
“ femme d’Auguste, la douceur de Timpdratrice Plotine, Thumeur enjoude de Faustine, &c.” . . .
(Paris, 1695.)
2 “ The first Frank and Gothic princes struck their money upon the Roman models, and some
“of our earlier Saxon princes did the same thing ; they had so much taste as to be pleased with im-
“ provements which they had not the skill to preserve The people sank by degrees into
“ a state of incredible barbarity in these respects, from which they never attempted to emerge, till the
“ European princes, by their Eastern expeditions, had acquired something of a better taste, and the arts
“ began to revive.” —Clarke on Coins (1767), page 435.


11 seals and monuments as wearing beards, do, nevertheless, appear
“ smoothfaced upon their coins, and, although Henry VI. became
u king wlien only nine months old, and reigned above eight
“ and thirty years, yet can no difference be observed in his
“ countenance by which his first moneys and his last may be dis-
“ tiuguished from each other.” On the other hand, of Henry VII.
he points out that “ this king did, about the eighteenth or nine-
“ teenth year of his reign, make a great alteration in the form of
“ his coin, upon which his head was now represented in profile,
“ and with a good resemblance of his other pictures.” 1 The fact
here stated, it may be observed, is curious, inasmuch as good
portraits are extant of earlier kings, such as those of Edward 111.
preserved in illuminated MSS. at Windsor, and that of Richard 11.
in Westminster Abbey; nor had the art of working in metal been
at a low ebb, for in the middle of the fifteenth century William
Austen, the first eminent English founder, and the contemporary
of Donatello and Ghiberti, produced excellent works, pronounced
by Flaxman to. be worthy even of those artists. 2 It is strange,
therefore, that up to the time of Henry VIII. coins should have
so inadequately represented the art of the period, but there can
be no doubt that, as above stated, the effigy on the shilling ot
that king, No. 1 in the annexed plate, resembles his portrait in
the print from the picture of his marriage, by Mebuse, of which
there is a copy in the British Museum. 3
The full-face effigy is again to be found in many of the coins
of Henry VIII. The portraits on these coins are excellent, and
it may safely be inferred that the genius of Holbein was not
without influence on the coinage of this reign, so closely do the
likenesses resemble the portraits of the king by that master, one
of the best of which is probably to be found in the well-known
picture representing the grant of a charter to the Barber-Surgeons.
An example is given in the plate (No. 2). Edward VI. is repre-
sented on his coins in profile, as well as full-faced. It is asserted
by Walpole that “ Holbein was still alive, and drew the young
“ king several times after he came to the crown ; ” but this can-
not have been the case if, as is now generally admitted, Holbein
died in 1543. The coins are, however, of great merit, as may be
seen by the pattern half-sovereign (No. 3) in the plate.
In the coin selected to represent the reign of Mary (No. 4),
the effigies of the queen and her consort Philip of Spain are
placed face to face, probably in imitation of coins of Ferdinand
and Isabella. The likeness of the queen on this coin bears a
close resemblance to the portrait on the medal by Trezzo given
in my Annual Report for 1874, 4 and to the fine portrait belonging
to the Society of Antiquaries.
1 “Tables of English Silver anil Gold Coins ” (1763), pages 9 and 16.
* Horace Walpole’s “ Anecdotes of Painting ” (Wornuin’s Edition, 1819), vol. 1., page 39.
3 Evelyn says that it is easy to see “ in Henry VII., painted by Holbein, a close, dry, vise, and
“ careful effigies; as in that of bis predecessor, Itichard 111., a twisted face, and not a line but what
“ bespeaks hypocrisy, craft, and cruelty.”—A Discourse on Medals (Loudon, 1607), page 310.
* Fifth Annual Kcport (1871), page 18.


The coins of Elizabeth are distinctly inferior to those of the
two preceding* reigns, both in portraiture and execution, notwith-
standing that considerable pains appear to have been taken to
secure a good likeness of the queen. A proclamation was pre-
pared in 1563, to the effect that “hitherto none hath sufficiently
“ expressed the natural representation of Her Majestie’s person,
“favor, or grace,” and declaring that “a special coining payntor”
should be appointed, whose works might serve as a model for
other artists. 1 Zuccaro is believed to have been accordingly
appointed court painter, and the portrait by him of “ Queen
“Elizabeth in a fancy dress,” now at Hampton Court Palace,
bears a resemblance to the effigy on some of the coins issued.
It should be remarked that advantage does not appear to have
been taken of the best art of the period, as a beautiful cameo
portrait of the queen exists at the South Kensington Museum
(No. 1003), attributed to Valerio Belli, called by Walpole Valerio
Vincentino. No. 5 represents the obverse of a “ quarter pound ”
of this reign. I also give (No. 6) a jeton of Mary Queen of
Scots, which is interesting from the well-authenticated fact that
Acheson, the engraver, visited Paris in 1553 for the purpose of
obtaining a faithful likeness of the queen, 2 and it is probable
that the die for this jeton was engraved from the portrait thus
taken.
As regards the earlier coins of James 1., the following record
has been preserved:—“January 1681. Item to my Lord Scytonis
“ painter for certane pictures of His Maiesteis visage drawin be
“ him and gevin to the sinkare to be gravin in the new cunyie.” :)
And Rymer mentions a grant in IGI7 to Nicholas Hillyard, who
is described as “ our principall Drawer for the small portraits and
“ Imbosser of our Medallies of gold.” The portraits on the coins
of this reign, of which the shilling, No. 7 in the plate, is a good
specimen, are very like existing prints in the British Museum.
Vandyck’s portraits have made the face of King Charles I.
so familiar, that there is no difficulty in judging of the correctness
of his effigy on the coinage. The designs were principally the
work of Nicholas Briot and Thomas Rawlins, of whom the former
was afterwards appointed General of the Mint in Scotland, and,
as Charles Dickeson, the engraver of the Scottish Mint, had “ not
“ beene in use to grave his Majesties face,” was commissioned to
engrave the dies, being “ best experienced with such livelie im-
“ pressions.” 4 The coin No. Bis a “ unit ” from the hand of this
artist.
The works of Thomas Simon, pupil of Nicholas Briot, and
engraver of the Mint in the reign of Charles 11., are without
question the best specimens of the art ever produced by an
1 “ Archceologia,” voi. 11., page 169.
- “Records of the Coinage of Scotland,” by R. W. Cochran-Patrick (1876), vol. 11., description
of plate VI.
3 Ibid., vol. 1., page 248.
* Ibid., vol. 1., page clxxx.


Englishman. 1 The example given (No. 9) of the coins of this
reign is the famous “petition crown,” on the edg-e of which is set
forth Simon’s prayer to the king to compare it, his trial-piece,
with the work of his Dutch rival Roettier. The effigy closely
resembles that on his ordinary crown piece, which was from a
picture by Cooper, whom Evelyn calls “ye rare limner.” 2 It is
thought that Simon secretly engraved the dies for Blondeau, 3
the inventor of important changes adopted about this time in the
mechanical operations of coinage. Pepys, it may be mentioned,
bears testimony to the accuracy of the portraits on coins of this
reign, which he states were “ very neat, and like the King.”
The likenesses on the coins of James 11. and William and
Mary (Nos. 10 and 11) are evidently good, but do not call for
any special remark, except that they were the work of the skilful
family of Roettier, whose names are so constantly found in the
Mint records of these reigns.
In the reign of Queen Anne, whose portraits on the coinage
have much merit, the designs were by Croker, whom Pinkerton
considers to rank as an engraver “ next to Simon.” 4 The
specimen given in the plate (No. 12) is a two-guinea piece.
Croker continued to be Engraver of the Mint from the time of
his appointment by Queen Anne until his death in 1740, when be
was succeeded by Dassier. The coins of George I. and George 11.,
a guinea and a two-guinea piece, given in the plate (Nos. 13 and
14) are, perhaps, the best examples of the coinages ot these
reigns.
The earlier years of the reign of George 111. show a marked
falling-off in art as applied to coinage, nor was any improvement
in design attempted until towards the close of the eighteenth
century, when the Committee of the Privy Council on Coinage
wrote to the Royal Academy requesting that body to “ select such
“ a committee as might be best furnished with that peculiar
“ information which would best enable their Lordships to improve
“ and perfect the coinage of this country as a becoming work of
“ taste and art.” No important result, however, appears to have
followed this step, though James Barry, the well-known Academi-
cian, offered to Lord Liverpool certain suggestions of his own for
the improvement of the coinage. s The coin shown in the plate
(No. Id) is a guinea by Pingo, Engraver of the Mint, the effigy
1 Evelyn mentions a medal, bv Simon, of the Protector Cromwell, “ from a picture of Walkers
“ most resembling him,” of which'he observes, speaking of course with bias, that “In bis ambiguous
“ and double face” maybe rend “without cither comment, characters of the greatest dissimulation,
“ boldness, cruelty, ambition, in every touch and streak,”—A discourse of Medals (London (1807 1
page 33b.
2 Kuding’s Annals of the Coinage, vol. 11., page 338.
3 “ Medals, Coins, Ac., of Thomas Simon,” by George Vertue. (2nd cd., 1780), page It).
4 “ An Essay on Medals” (1808), vol. lE, page 184.
* Part of his letter may be worth quoting, as showing that, in his opinion, portraiture on coin
was worthy of the attention of the greatest artists. He says, “ Many men may be very excellent
painters .... who never could have had any occasion to furnish themselves with information
“ respecting the taste of coins and other matters of antiquity, which many of them ridiculously
“ following tlic foolish part of the example of a great man, Itcmbrandt—despise and reprobate as con-
“ tcinptibic niceties below the notice of the imitators of nature.” —Works of James Harry, E.A.
(Loudon 1803), vol. 11., page Gil.


on which is very like the bust of George 111., hy Nollekens, in
the possession of the Royal Society. In the year 1816, on the
passing of the Act demonetising silver and constituting gold coin
the sole standard of value, it became necessary that designs
should be prepared for the new coins to be issued. The designs
for the sovereign, issued for the first time in the following year,
1817, were entrusted to Pistrucci, afterwards Chief Medallist of
the Mint, and the obverse was executed by him in jasper. The
original of the latter is in the Museum of the Mint. Excellent
as were the works of this great artist, it would not appear that,
so far as portraiture was concerned, his coins were always success-
ful, as Ruding remarks that “ the want of resemblance to our
“ venerable monarch ” in this design u could not escape the most
“ cursory inspection.” The first sovereign of George IV., of
which an example is given in the plate (No. 16), was also
designed by Pistrucci in 1821, but was superseded in 1823 by
another, the die for which was engraved by William Wyon, R.A.,
from a bas-relief by Chantrey, and which, both as a work of art
and as a portrait, is worthy of his reputation. The excellent
effigy on the sovereign of William IV., No. 17 in the plate, is
also by Wyon from a bas-relief by Chantrey ; and that of Her
present Majesty, No. 18, which still remains in use, was modelled
from life by the same artist at the beginning of the reign.
As it appeared desirable to compare the above selected speci-
mens of British coins witli the best examples of other, and
especially earlier, schools, I have added to the plate a few coins
of the fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth centuries. It would
be impossible within the limits of this Report to give any detailed
description of these coins with a view of showing how far they
may be considered trustworthy as regards portraiture, but it is
interesting to compare the records thus left of the persons repre-
sented on them with the knowledge of their general character
derived from history. The first point to be remarked is the
eminence of those who during this period devoted their attention
to designs for coins, and who, far from considering such work
beneath their notice, were content to sign themselves indifferently
“ aurifex ” or “ pictor.” Thus Francia, the greatest painter of
the earlier Bolognese school, two of whose coins are given in the
plate 1 (Nos. 19 and 20) was, at the time of his death in 1517,
Master of the Mint at Bologna. The first of these coins, how-
ever, which bears the effigy of Giovanni Bentivoglio, Lord of
Bologna, is rather suggestive of the style of Masaccio’s paintings
than those of Francia. The second (No. 20) is a beautiful work,
in low relief, representing Pope Julius the Second, and bears
some resemblance to the portrait of that Pontiff by Raphael in
the National Gallery, with which, however, it can hardly be com-
pared, as the face is bearded and the position of the head is very
different. Raphael, it should be remarked, also designed medals,
if not coins. The coins of Clement the Seventh are remarkable
1 Bolzcnthal’s “ Skizzeu zur Kunstgescliichtc dcr inodcrucn Medallen-Arbcit,” page 81.


as having been mainly the work of Benvenuto Cellini, 1 who ap-
pears himself to have drawn the designs for the coins which lie
engraved. 2 The coin of this Pope, by Cellini (No. 21 in the
plate), well represents the Florentine school. Of all the magni-
ficent series of pontifical coins and medals, however, perhaps
none were better than the coins of Innocent the Twelfth, whose
name is familiar to English readers from Mr. Browning’s poem,
“ The Bing and the Book.” These coins were the work of
Ferdinand Saint Urbain and Hameranus, and one by the former
artist is given (No. 22) in the plate. The works of both are
described at some length by Yenuti, who states that Saint Urbain
began, although he did not complete, a medallic history of the
popes. 3 I regret that space has not permitted me to give an
example of the works of Saint Urbain’s contemporary, J. C.
Hedlinger, the eminent engraver, whose coins of Charles XII.
and succeeding Swedish monarchs have a justly high reputation.
His medals will be found finely engraved in a work by Chretien
de Mechel. 4 The school of Mantua is represented by a coin (No.
25) of Francesco Maria Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua from 1484 to
1519, whose coinage was worthy of a period famous for the works
of Mantegna, himself a sculptor and engraver as well as a painter,
and in the service of the reigning family. These coins are figured
and described by Argelati in his well-known work on Italian
coinage. 3 Two fine examples of the school of Milan are given in
the coins Nos. 23 and 24, of which the first bears the portrait of
Giovanni Galeazzo Maria Sforza, Duke of Milan at the end of the
fifteenth century, and the second that of his uncle and successor,
Lodovico Moro. 6 No. 20 represents Louis XII., King of France
and Duke of Milan, whose coins are supposed to have been
designed by Leonardo da Vinci. 7 The names which I have men-
tioned by no means exhaust the list of painters who made a study
of designing coins and medals, which might have included Pisani,
Michael Angelo, 8 and other famous artists.
The French school is represented by coins of Francis 1.,
Charles IX., and Henry IV. (Nos. 28, 29, and 30), ami that of
Germany by a fine coin (No. 27), bearing the effigies of Maxi-
milian I, Charles V., and Ferdinand, Emperors, and Kings of
Spain. 9 The last coin on the plate (No. 31) is of the reign of
Charles Y., and appears to have been struck for the coronation of
the Emperor at Bologna in 1530. 10
• “ II Fiorino d'Oro,” page 205 (Firenze, 1738).
“ “Life of Benvenuto Cellini,’’ translated by Xugont, page 32.
5 “ Komanorum Pontiflcum historian numismatibus incisnm aggressus est; sed . . . neqnnqunm
“ absolvit.” —Vcnutl's Numisnmta Komanorum Pontiftcum (Koine, 1744), page xxx.
4 CEuvres du Chevalier Hedlinger (Basle, 1776),
‘ Tractatus de Monet is Italia:, sth part, page 10 (Milan, 1759).
6 Ibid., page 09. “II Fiorino d’Oro,” page 201 (Firenze, 1738),
7 “ Art applied to Industry,” by W. Burges (1805), page 68.
* Vita di M. Angelo Buonarotti, da Aurelio Gotti, voi. I, page 121. Vasari mentions steel dies cut
by Leone Leoni and other artists. “ Lives of the Painters” (Bohn’s edition), voi. V., pp. 429-433.
• This coin is described by Argelati ns “ moneta fatta gettare dall’ Imperatore Carlo V., qnando fece
“il solenne suo ingresso in Bologna.” ’Tractatus de Monetis Italia:, sth part, page < 5 (Milan, 1759),
»■ Tills coin is figured in the “ Catalogue des Monnoies en Argent du Cabinet Imperial” (Vienne,
1709), and in the “ Bescbrelbttng der Bohmischen MUuzen ” (I’rng, 1774).


The series of coins to which attention lias thus been directed
show how much care and artistic skill have in former times been
bestowed upon designs for coinage. The difference between the
portraiture on ancient Greek coins and those of Italy will be
understood by a comparison of the coin of Philistis figured in my
Annual Report for 1874 1 and the Italian coins given in this
plate. 2 In Italy, it cannot be doubted that the art of engraving
to a certain extent still maintains its excellence. In France,
designs of great merit for medals and coins are annually ex-
hibited in the Salon, and art literature has been enriched by
the publication, under Government authority, of the “ Tr6sor de
“ Numismatique,” elaborately illustrated, and containing the
finest known examples of coins and medals. In England, it
is to be regretted that far too little attention is devoted to the
systematic training of engravers, and that the greatest painters
of the day have not, as was the case in Italy, made a study also of
engraving.
Extract from Eighth Annual Report (1877).
The question of the general design of coins is far more com-
plicated than that of portraiture, winch was treated at some
length in my last Report. 3 To deal with it satisfactorily would
require a closer examination of artistic detail than could be
entered upon in a Report of this nature; but the subject is of so
much interest and importance, that I propose briefly to set forth
such facts in connection with it as will serve to show the phases
through which decorative art, as applied to coinage, has passed in
ancient and modern times.
It is well known that the impressions on the reverse of very
early coins were produced by the rough surface of the anvil, or by
the nail-head, on which they were placed while the obverse was
struck with the coining-tool or die. 4 Subsequently, indentations
were formed by points of metal arranged in a geometrical form,
and these eventually gave place to designs from engraved dies.
So far as this country is concerned, it may be well to dismiss
the consideration of the more primitive forms by a reference to
the gradual evolution of design on early British coins from
antecedent types. Mr. John Evans, F.R.S., has shown 5 that the
prototype of the British series is the gold “stater” of Philip of
Macedon, a perfectly finished Greek coin, which was so crudely
imitated by successive native copyists that ultimately the wreath
1 Fifth Annual Report (1874), page 17.
2 'I bis difference lias been well indicated by Mr. Buskin, who says, “ A Greek never expresses
“ momentary passion: a Florentine looks to momentary passion as the ultimate object of his skill.”—
Aratra I'cntellci, page 187 (London, 1872).
3 Seventh Annual Report (187 G), page 19.
* See “ Archiiologle der Kunst, by K. 0. Muller,” translated by J. Leitch (London, 1847), par. 98.
8 “ The Coins of the Ancient Britons ” (18C4), page 23,


round the head of the monarch alone survived, and was some-
times arranged, as shown in the annexed wood-cuts, in the form
of a cross.
Coins of the Ancient Britons,
Coin of I'hilij) of Macedon,
The fact that the art of die-sinking was practised hy hut com-
paratively few individuals has led to persistence in traditional
designs, and coins have not, therefore, always been faithful ex-
ponents of contemporary art. In other words, changes of design
have at times been less rapid and distinct in the case of coins
than in the case of architecture and paiiTting. It may be con-
venient, however, to consider numismatic art under the familiar
divisions of Classical, Gothic, Renaissance, and Modem.
A superficial acquaintance with Greek coins is sufficient to classical,
show that their treatment is sculpturesque. They have, in fact,
been taken by Mr. Poole, Keeper of Coins and Medals at the
British Museum, 1 and by Mr. Buskin, 2 to illustrate whole phases
of Greek art, particularly sculpture; and Mr. Poole has shown
with great clearness what are the different schools into which
Greel^art as applied to coins may be subdivided, and what are
the distinctive characteristics of each. Mr. Buskin divides the
nine centuries of Greek art before the Christian era three
groups of three centuries each, which he calls the archaic, the
best, and the corrupt, and gives as an example of the best period
a head of Hermes, the treatment of which is marked by “extreme
“ simplicity, unpretending vigor of work, which claims no admira-
“ tiou either for minuteness or dexterity, and suggests no idea of
“ effort at all.” I have chosen the coin figured No. lin the plate,
which represents the struggle of Hercules with the Nemean Ikup
because, as Mr. Buskin points out, it is very characteristic of
Greek work. In it, he says, there is not the “ slightest effort to
“ represent the agony of contest, .... the whole interest
“ being in the beauty or rightness of form, . . . _ . . as a
“ Greek never expresses momentary passion.” No 2in the plate
is a coin of Elis bearing a figure of Victory, from which was
taken the design for the Waterloo medal. Side by side with
these is placed (No. 3) the well-known design of St. George and
the Dragon, by Pistrucci, in order to show how purely classical
the works of this great artist were.
The influence of classical art on the British coinage is most
evident in the early British series ; in the modern copper and
1 “ Numismatic Chronicle” (18G4), page 23G,
3 “Aratrn rentcli.cl” (1872), page 111.


bronze coinages, the reverse of which was probably designed fiom
a Roman medallion of Commodus, too large to be shown in the
plate; and in the works of Pistrucci, of which a specimen has
been given.
From Saxon times to the present day certain coins have borne
a desio-n the gradual development of which it is interesting to
trace. °No. 4 in the plate, a penny of Ethelred 11., bears a grooved
cross, along which the coin could be divided into four parts. Hie
reverse of the penny of William I. (No. 5), is a simple cross, sur-
rounded by rough lettering. In No. 6, the groat of Edward 111.,
the ano-les formed by the cross, which extends to the edge of the
coin, are filled with pellets. In No. 7, the shilling of Henry YIL,
the pellets are replaced by the arms of England and France
arranged quarterly. In No. 8, the shilling ot Charles 11., the
arms occupy nearly the whole field, and almost obliterate the
cross. In No. 9, the half-crown of Charles 11., the quarterings of
the arms are themselves arranged in the shape of a cross, alter-
nated with the Royal cipher ; and in the florin of the present
reign (No. 10) this arrangement of the arms still survives.
°The British series embodies other types, well represented by
Nos. 13 and 21, which are eminently Gothic in treatment. The
“ noble ” bears the image of the ship, and, as Ruding says, 1 “ was
“thus remarkably distinguished from every other coin at that
“ time existing.” The “ angel ” of Henry YIL bears the design
of St. Michael contending with the dragon, and is one of the
numerous instances in which figures of saints are found on
Gothic coins.
Viewed as a whole, the Gothic series of British coins presents
many points of interest, and perhaps the most important con-
clusion to which a study of them leads is the imperfect way in
which they represent Gothic art at the periods at which they
w r ere struck.
For instance, the groat of Edward 111., No. 6 in the plate,
though simply and effectively designed, show's none of the rich
treatment which marks the great seal of that king ; and the
delicate tracery and ornament which abound in the illuminated
MSS., the architectural details, and the stained glass of the
period, find but imperfect equivalents on the coins.
This is the more remarkable, as the privilege of striking
coins w r as exercised in a great measure by ecclesiastics, under
whom art flourished, and who may be presumed therefore to have
had at their command the materials for making the best possible
designs.
Occasionally, it is true, characteristic details may be recog-
nised which there is no difficulty in referring to a distinct phase
of Gothic treatment.
Such, for instance, are the canopies and furniture of the
thrones, and the device on the crown of Henry VIII. (No. 15 in
• “ Ann Us of the Coinage," vol. 1., page 219.


the plate), which is frequently used in decorative work of the
sixteenth century.
The heraldic treatment of many of the coins of Elizabeth,
also, offer distinct examples of the ornament characteristic of
her reign; and a remarkable instance of the interlaced pattern,
peculiar to the Saxon and Irish art of the eighth and ninth
centuries, is to be found in some of the coins of Offa, 1 one of
which is given (No. 11) in the plate.
But it must nevertheless he admitted that the designs of the
whole series, though often beautiful, do not, so far as this country
is concerned, adequately represent contemporary art.
The reason would appear to be that very many of the coins
were copied directly from French examples, and that types
survived to a later date.
Tims, to select but a few cases, the reverse of the “ masse ” of
Philippe le Hardi survived almost unchanged in that of the
“mouton d’or” of Edward 111. (No. 14 in the plate), which
was in circulation a hundred years afterwards; and the “ gros
“ Tournois ” of Philip le Bel 2 (No. 12 in the plate) survives in
the “ gros ” of Henry YI. of England, 3 who reigned more than
a century later. In the florin, struck in 1850 (No. 10 in the
plate), the ancient arrangement of the Royal coat of arms is
retained, while the general effect of the design at once suggests
the phase of Gothic ornament which was in fashion at the time.
Heraldic devices, as might be expected, offer abundant scope
for treatment as designs for reverses of coins. In a coin of
Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg in 1640, a shield,
with supporters, bearing twenty-six quarterings and nine crested
helmets, is introduced. Of the examples given, No. 19 is a fine
but simple treatment of the arms of Ferdinand and Isabella of
Spain. No. 18, a coin of Sigismund of Austria, bears, as is often
the case, an equestrian figure. No. 25 shows how the arms of
the Medici family were arranged, in Renaissance times, by Cellini,
and No. 17 is the “broad” of Cromwell. The design of the last-
named coin is by Simon, and it is to be noted how little this great
artist availed himself of the opportunity afforded to him, by a
complete change of design at this period, to introduce a really
artistic reverse.
The Royal cipher or monogram was often the main feature
of the reverse of coins, as is shown in the ducat of Christian Y.
of Denmark, given (No. 26) in the plate. In Nos. 27 and 28,
shillings of George 111. and George IV., two specimens are given
of the heraldic treatment applied to coins in the earlier part of
the present century.
It will be readily admitted that the Renaissance was the period Renaissance,
most fruitful in designs, as beautiful as they were well suited for
1 See an Interesting paper on “ Art on the Coins of Offa,” by C. F. Keary, M.A. (Numismatic
Chronicle, New Series, vol. XV., page 20G).
a See Le Blanc’s “Traitd Ilistorique des Monnoics dc France” (1690), page 202.
’ See Ruding's Plates, Supplement (Part II.), plate XI., No. 17.


the purposes of coinage. It is easy to recognise in numismatic art,
as in all other arts, the superiority of the fifteenth century, which
was followed by a universal decline, from which the nineteenth
century, in spite of many earnest efforts, has by no means re-
covered. The relation of Greek to Renaissance art has been well
expressed by Mr. J. A. Symonds in a recent work, 1 and, as his
remarks are specially applicable to coins, I cannot do better than
quote him at some length. He points out that “it has been
“ granted only to two nations—the Greeks and the Italians, and
“ to the latter only at the time of the Renaissance—to invest
“ every phase and variety of intellectual energy with the form of
“ art If the methods of science may be truly said to
“ regulate our modes of thinking at the present time, it is no less
“ true that, during the Renaissance, art excercised a like control-
“ ling influence.” The difference between Greek and Renaissance
art is easily defined.
It has been shown above that the treatment of Greek coins
was in the main sculpturesque, whereas the designs on Italian
coins of the thirteenth and two following centuries may be con-
sidered to be essentially pictorial.
The reason for this difference would appear to be that sculpture
suited the requirements of Greek thought, which demanded the
highest excellence and beauty in the delineation of physical pro-
portions, while on the other hand the tendency of the religious
thought of the middle ages could only be adequately expressed by
the more subtle and varied means afforded by painting.
There is no doubt that the Renaissance was at first a revival
of classic art, and I regret that it has been impossible to find a
coin by Niccolo Pisano, who was the first to combine the study of
the antique with that of nature. Many examples might, however,
be given of the masters of the Renaissance, and three have been
selected as good illustrations of the fine work of this period.
The first (No. 22) is by Francia, and is of special interest as
having been struck at a time when Renaissance art, so far as
painting is concerned, may be considered to have culminated.
Nos. 23 and 24 are both by Cellini (so few of whose authentic
works, executed at a time when classical influence on the Renais-
sance was very strong, have been preserved), the first prepared
for Pope Clement VIII., and the second for Alexander, first Duke
of Florence. 2 The latter bears the figures of SS. Cosrnus and
Damianus, and was considered by the artist himself to be the
most beautiful coin in Christendom.
One circumstance contributed in no small degree to the ex-
cellence of coins of the Renaissance period, namely, that the
training of the great painters, many of whom designed coins,
commenced in the goldsmith’s workshop, where they gained a
1 “ Renaissance In Italy: The Fine Arts ” (London, 1877).
s Storia dclle Moucte de’ Granduchi di Toscana (Firenze, 1756), page C.


practical knowledge of metal work as well as delicacy of execu-
tion. The influence of Renaissance work, however, on the English
coinage must have been very slight. It might have been other-
wise if Cellini, who resided in France, and executed work for
Francis 1., had also accepted the' invitation of Henry YIII. to
visit his court, where, as pointed out in my Report for last year, 1
the Teutonic influence of Holbein was evident.
Of conventional ornament but few examples can be given,
although its influence on coinage must always be very great.
It would be difficult, perhaps, to select a better example than
that of the lily, which was the well-known emblem of the city of
Florence. The gold florins bearing this design were, according
to Le Blanc, 2 first struck in 1068, 3 and it was in use, with hardly
any variations, for many centuries. So universally, indeed, was
it imitated, that the coins bearing it may be said to have served
the purposes of an international currency. The coin (No. 16)
given in the plate is of a rather late type, but the modifications
of the original design were but slight.
No. 20 is a coin of Akbar, Mogul of Hindustan from 1556 to
1605, which is in many respects remarkable, as, underneath the
principal design of the coin, the surface is covered with a delicate
spiral arabesque, which differs from true Arab art in being
slightly instead of wholly conventional. It serves to represent
various branches of oriental art, of which other illustrations
cannot be given.
I must not omit to refer to the use which has at different times
been made of the reverses of coins to commemorate historical
events. This was especially the case in the Papal series, and
indeed Evelyn’s remark that reverses of medals are “so infinitely
“ fruitful and full of erudition, that had we a perfect and un-
“ interrupted series of them we should need almost no other
“history,” 4 is also true of coins. With regard to the reverses
adopted in this country at the general re-coinage of gold and
silver in 1817, Ruding expresses his regret that advantage should
not have been taken of the opportunity to “ render the reverses
“of our coins historical records,” and alludes to “ a pattern
“ crown by Mr. W. Wyon, which, in the true spirit of classical
“ historical coinage, commemorates the legislative union with
“ Ireland.” 5
It is easy to trace in the reverses of modern coins the gradual Modem,
decline of art from the reign of Anne to the beginning of the
present century, and, on the Continent, the artistic corruption
which pervaded the period antecedent to the French Revolution.
The fact that coins have not always exactly reflected contemporary
work has already been pointed out, and it is not surprising, there-
* Seventh Annual Report (1876), page 21.
2 “ Trade Historique ties Monnoies de France,” page 154.
3 More probably not until 1252. See “II Fiorino d'Oro” (Firenze, 1738), page 1.
* “ Numismata ” (London, 1697), page 48.
6 “ Annals of the Coinage,” vol. XI., page 401,


fore, that the coins of the present day hardly represent the revived
appreciation of art which is evident in this country and through-
out Europe. There appears to be a feeling that the reverses of
coins should express, either in words or figures, their denomina-
tion or value ; hut I can hardly think that the practice of thus
inscribing money is necessary or even advantageous. In a well-
arranged system of currency the coins of each metal should be of
but few denominations, readily distinguishable from each other,
and it is scarcely too much to say that in every country one of the
first things learnt by a child or a stranger is the relative value of
the coins in common use. During the last half-century the efforts
to secure an artistic reverse have been few and ineffectual, and
both in this country and abroad the public taste appears to have
been satisfied with such a design as a wreath surrounding words
or figures indicating the value of the coins. It is difficult, there-
fore, to suggest what would be an acceptable device for the reverse
of British coins, but it will, I think, be admitted that this indif-
ference to beauty of design is no sufficient reason for perpetuating
so feeble a method of treatment as that just mentioned and dis-
played in the example given (No. 29). The office of the decorative
arts has been well described to be that of giving pleasure in things
which must perforce be used, 1 and it may at least be hoped that
excellence of design and workmanship will eventually combine to
secure the fulfilment of this condition in the coins of the realm.
1 “ The Decorative Artsan Address by William Morris (London, 1878).


Table No. 1.
GOLD RECEIVED AND ISSUED, ETC.
Return of Gold Received and Issued and of the Receipts at the Royal Mint, Melbourne, from the
30th June 1880.
date of its
opening to the
GOLD RECEIVED.
GOLD ISSUED.
Total Value
Year. '
Coin.
Bullion.
of
Coin and Bullion
Receipts.
Quantity.
Value.
Sovereigns.
Half-
Sovereigns.
Total Value.
Quantity.
Value.
Issued.
ounces.
£
8.
d.
iso.
No.
£
ounces.
£
s .
d.
£
S.
d.
£
s.
d.
1872
190,738-14
764,917
6
9
748,000
...
748,000
1,205-468
3,610
9
7
751,610
9
7
3,945
6
5
1873
221,870-44
887,126
15
6
752,000
165,000
834,500
3,106-002
11,035
6
6
845,535
6
6
5,121
7,
11
1874
335,317-62
1,349,101
17
3
1,373,000
...
1,373,000
2,911-722
10,416
10
0
1,383,416
10
0
6,554
12
7
1875
489,731-59
1,947,712
14
3
1,888,000
...
1,888,000
3,552-872
13,857
4
8
1,901,857
4
8
7,927
10
2
1876
543,198-59
2,149,480
17
6
2,124,000
...
2,124,000
3,624-578
14,144
10
1
2,138,144
10
1
8,153
4
9
1877
378,310-33
1,491,819
4
9
1,487,000
80,000
1,527,000
3,326-060
13,004
4
9
1,540,004
4
9
6,514
5
9
1878
569,932-17
2,267,430
10
0
2,171,000
...
2,171,000
3,691-003
14,640
4
10
2,185,640
4
10
8,572
5
4
1879
656,555-84
2,637,738
8
9
2,740,000
...
2,740,000
1,740*276
6,829
12
11
2,746,829
12
11
9,348
10
11
1880*
382,492-98
1,543,748
17
6
1,540,800
...
1,540,800
862-708
3,363
2
5
1,544,163
2
5
5,089
3
5
3,768,147-70
15,039,076
12
3
14,823,800
1
245,000
14,946,300
24,020-689
90,901
5
9
15,037,201
5
9
61,226
7
3
* To 30th June 1880.


mng to the 30lh Jv
? other Countries.
me 1880, distmgui
shmg the i roducc
Gold Received.
Prior to 1880.
During 1880
(six mouths).
Total.
ounces.
ounces.
ounces.
2,319,308-25
283,339 • 92
2,802,618 • 17
2,987-21
338-67
3,325-88
698,060-2-1
67,626-11
765,686-68
1,598-10
...
1,598-10
68,180-62
5,208-77
73,389-39
75,596-11
21,605*05
100,201-16
18,560-67
1,371-13
19,931-80
1,362-92
...
1,362-92
3,385,651-72
382,192-98
3,768,117-70
Table No
. 2.
Table No. I— continued.
VICTORIAN AND OTHER GOLD RECEIVED.
Return showing the Quantity of Gold Received at the Royal Mint, Melbourne,
from the date of its opening to the 30lh June 1880, distinguishing the Produce
of Victoria from that of other Countries.
Country in which the Gold
was Raised.
Victoria
New South Wales
New Zealand ...
Queensland
South Australia
Tasmania
Unknown
Natal ...
Total
From the Reports of the Deputy Master and Controller of the Royal Mint to the
Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty’s Treasury, on the Weight and Fineness
of the Coin Struck at the Melbourne Mint, for the Years 1872 to 1879
Average Weight of each Coin.
Sovereigns.
Half-Sovereigns.
Average Fineness of each Coin.
Sovereigns.
0-25681
•25682
•25682
•25678
•25681
•25683
•25681
•25681
Parts in 1000.
916,684
916,913
916,788
0-12837
916,710
916,594
916,654
Half-Sovereigns.
Parts in 1000.
*12842
Nil
Nil
916,649
916,579
916,760
916,722
ounce.
The standard weight of the sovereign is 0-25682,
„ „ half-sovereign is 0-12841.
„ fineness (in 1000 parts) is 916,666,
Nil


Diagram showing the Average Annual Remit of the Assays of Gold Coin issued at the Melbourne Mint.
917-0
916*9
916-8
916-7
916-6
916-5
916-4
916-3
916-2
1
, <
»
»
4
► —-—-— i
standard
<
>
1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1877 1878 1879 1880
30 th Avgust 1880.


MINT REGULATION S.
The following Regulations respecting tlie receipt and coinage of gold at the
Melbourne Branch of the Royal Mint, to be substituted for those approved
by Order in Council of the 19th April 1875, have been issued by His Ex-
cellency the Governor in Council.
J Gbaham Bebby,
Treasury, Treasurer.
Melbourne, 7th October 1878.
EEQULATIONS FOB THE EECEIPT AND COINAGE OF GOLD AT THE MELBOUBNE
BBANCH OF THE BOYAL MINT.
Gold, in dust or bullion, can be deposited at the Mint for coinage, subject
to the following charges, allowances, and conditions
Charges.
1. For a deposit containing 1000 ounces of standard gold or over, Three
half-pence per ounce on the gross weight of the deposit before melting.
2. For a deposit containing less than 1000 ounces of standard gold, Two-
pence per ounce on the gross weight of the deposit before melting, provided
Four shillings shall be the minimum charge for any one deposit.
Allowances.
1. Any silver in a deposit in excess of four per cent, of the weight of the
deposit after melting will be allowed for at a rate per ounce fine, to be fixe
periodically by the Deputy Master. ... , , „
2. A reduction of one-sixth of the above charges will be made on all
deposits of unrefinable gold containing more than 21 ounces standaid.
Gold will be considered unrefinable that contains silver in less proportion
than four and one-half (4r|) per cent, of the weight of the deposit after melting,
and less than two (2) per cent, of base metal.
Mode of Payment.
On and after Ist January 1879 the following arrangement as to payment
for deposits will come into operation.
Provided that a day’s notice be given of the intention to bring gold for
coinage, payment for deposits will be made in coin over the Mint counter, as
specified below (excepting when holidays intervene), viz.
For Deposits exceeding 1000 ounces
standard—
Payment of not less than one-half the Value of the Deposit
will be made, if desired —
Before noon on
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
At 2 p.m. on Tuesday in the following week
At 2 p.m. on Wednesday „ „
At 2 p.m. on Thursday „ »
At 11 a.m. on Saturday „ „
As if deposited on the following Monday.
ie will be paid as soon as possible afterwards.
The balance of the
value
Even thousands only will be paid in coin; the complementary portion by
cheque.
N.B.—These arrangements respecting payment will be carried out as far
as possible, but the Deputy Master cannot be held responsible for their abso-
lute performance in case of accident to the machinery, or should unusually
heavy deposits be made on one day. In this latter case preference will be
given to the earlier depositors.
Deposits made under any other circumstances than the above will be paid
for as at present, by cheque, as also all deposits made on the first working
day, or during the last ten days, of each quarter.


Conditions.
1. Each parcel for which a separate assay is required shall he considered
as a separate deposit: Provided always that the value of all deposits shall be
determined upon the repoit of the Assay Department of this Branch of Her
Majesty’s Mint, which shall be final; and that the Deputy Master may refuse
any deposit which he may deem unsuitable for coinage ; and that jt shall be
in his discretion to make exceptional arrangements, in cases in which he may
consider it desirable to do so for the advantage of the public service.
2. The receiving-office at the Mint will be open daily for the receipt and
issue of bullion from II a.ra. to 3 p.m. except on Saturdays and holidays, and
on the last two working days of March, June, September, and December.
Note. —Gold and silver bullion, in ingots or bars, can be obtained at the
Mint to a limited extent; gold at £3 17s. the ounce standard, and silver
at such prices as the Deputy Master may think proper to accept. Not less
than £5 worth of either metal will be sold at one time.
Gold coin which has become light after issue from the Royal Mint or any
of its Branches will be received at the Mint, in parcels of not less than £5O
nominal value, at £3 17s. 10|d. per ounce.
Approved by the Governor in Council the 7th October 18/8.
Rob. Wadswoeth,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
REGULATIONS FOR THE ADMISSION OF VISITORS.
With the exception of persons having orders of admission signed by the
Deputy Master or his representative at the time, no one will be admitted to
any operative department unless on bond fide business with the officer in
charge.
Orders to view the Mint will be given to persons known to, or recom-
mended by some persons known to, the Deputy Master or one of the principal
officers of the Mint. As the number of orders must necessarily be limited,
some days may elapse before applications can be granted. No order can be
issued for the admission of visitors between the hours of 12 and 1 p.m. on
ordinary days, and 12 and 2 p.m. on days on which issues of coin are made to
the public, or for more than five persons at a time.
On arriving, Visitors will, if requested to do so, show their order to the
police on duty at the gate; they will then be received at the principal entrance
by the Visitors’ messenger, who will see that the names of all the party are
entered on the back of the order. He will then conduct them through the
Melting and Coining Departments, explaining the work in progress.
Visitors are requested not to interfere with the workmen in the perform-
ance of their duties, and on no account to offer money to the messenger or to
any person belonging to the establishment.
(Signed) V. Delves-Bkougiiton.
Royal Mint, Melbourne,
28th January 1879.


CATALOGUE OF EXHIBITS
SHOWN IN THE MELBOURNE INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION OF 1880-81 BY THE
MELBOURNE BRANCH OF HER MAJESTY’S MINT.
MELTING AND REPINING DEPARTMENT.
Apparatus employed in F. Bowyer Miller’s Patent Process for Refining Gold
P by Chlorine Gas, showing stoneware chlorine generator in its steam-heated
water-bath, reservoir for the supply of hydrochloric acid, and receiver for
waste chloride of manganese, with all the connections, &0., complete;
also the Refining Furnace employed with W. Blackwell’s improved
single-block front.
Ingots of Rough Gold before Refining.
Ingots of Fine Gold resulting from Refining of above.
Ingot of Silver extracted from ditto.
Section of White Fluxing Pot, showing relative positions of refined gold,
chloride of silver, and borax ; and also the Clay Pipe for the introduction
of the chlorine gas.
[Note. —These four are models only; the following are the real objects. ]
Slab of Chloride of Silver, as poured off the refined gold.
Slab of Chloride of Silver after the extraction of the entangled and combined
gold.
Slab of Metallic Silver, reduced from the above.
Granulated Fine Silver.
Osmiridium, separated from gold deposited for coinage, principally Tasmanian.
ASSAY DEPARTMENT.
Instruments and Materials illustrating the routine of the Gold Bullion Assay and that of the
Humid Silver Assay, as practised in the Melbourne Branch of the Royal Mint.
1. London-made Assay Balance, to which Mr. Foord’s improvements have
been added. These include adjustable index scale, divided reflector, and
series of weights for weighing by compensation.
2. Illustrations of the Method and Materials of the Gold Bullion Assay,
including—
( a) The gold sample.
{I) The quantity taken for each assay.
(c) The fine silver rolled and cut into discs.
(d) Rolled copper, and copper discs of 25, 23, 10, and 2|- grams.
( e ) The assay lead in its several forms.
If) Bone-ash and cupels. .
(q) Cupels saturated with lead oxide and oxides of the base metals.
(h) Cupels saturated with oxide of bismuth.
(i) The muffle.
(f) Examples of the several stages of the assay.
(l) Examples showing the effects of platinum, palladium, and osmi-
ridium on the assay.
( m ) Specimens of osmiridium.
3. Sliding Scales, auxiliary to the correction for “ surcharge.” These scales
are based on Mr. Barton’s results.
4. Series showing the Method of Recovering the Dissolved Silver from the
Waste Acid resulting from the Gold Assay—
(a) The moist chloride.
(b) Silver mud and silver press,
(c) Compressed silver cylinder.


5. Mounted Pipette, with feeder and overflow, delivering 92*5 cubic centi-
metres, for the humid assay of standard silver.
6. Mounted Branch Pipette, delivering 90 cubic centimetres.
7. Rotating Stand, with graduated Pipettes for 20 and 10 cubic centimetres
and subdivisions.
[Note. Nos. 5 and 6 are available for the assay of silvers of all fineness, without pre-
liminary trial in the muffle.]
8. Assay Bottles and Covers for the Silver Assay; Pipette and Jar for
measuring the Acid.
9. Specimens of Pure Silver, Pure Chloride of Sodium and Fused Rock Salt;
and Nitric Acid of G P 25, used in the humid silver assay.
COINING- DEPARTMENT.
The following in Model: —
Standard Gold Bars.
„ „ Fillets, rolled from above.
„ after passing through the “ Drag Bench.”
„ „ Blanks, as cut from Fillets.
„ „ Scissel.
„ „ Blanks “ marked ” {i.e) after passing through the edge com-
pressor.
Guager’s Trial Press, for cutting out blanks, designed and constructed under
the direction of G. Bint.
Machine for Cutting Canvas into Lengths suitable for the manufacture of
bags all of one size and weight, and to hold each £1,000; also designed
by G. Bint.
Napier’s Automaton Weighing Machine, for the separation of the gold blanks,
intended for coinage, into three classes viz., heavy, standaid or good,
and light; driven by a turbine, and shown in operation.
Pyramid representing Issue of Sovereigns from the Melbourne Mint during
the year 1879, amounting to £2,740,000, in 2,740 bags, each containing
£l,OOO sterling.
Cube representing Bulk of Fine Gold, equivalent in value to £1,000,000,
weighing 235,420'011 ounces troy.
Cube representing Bulk of Standard Gold, equivalent in value to £1,000,000,
weighing 256,821*8 ounces troy.
Cube representing Bulk of Copper in £1,000,000 worth of Standard Gold,
weighing 21,401*819 ounces troy.
Cube representing Bulk of Fine Silver in £1,000,000 worth of average
Victorian Gold, weighing 10,235*653 ounces troy.
LIST OF COINS AND MEDALS EXHIBITED BY THE ROYAL MINT.
British,
Gold Five-pound piece ... ... Two impressions
Sovereign (Shield reverse) ... 55
Q . ((St. George and \
Sovereign | j) ra g 0n reverse) )
Half-sovereign ... ••• 5.
Silver —Crown, George 111. ... •• • >?
Crown, George IV. ... »
Crown, Victoria (Shield reverse) ~
Crown, Victoria (Gothic) ... 55 Not current
Half-crown, George 111. ••• ?!


British,
Silver Half-crown, George 111. ... Two impressions
Half-crown, George IV. ... »
Half-crown, George IV. ... »
Half-crown, George IV. ... „
Half-crown, William IV. ... »
Half-crown, Victoria ... ~
Florin, Victoria ... ... »
Florin (small), Victoria ... „
Shilling, George 111. ... »
Shilling, George HI. (Irish) ... One impression
Shilling, George IV. ... Two impressions
Shilling, George IV.
Shilling, Victoria ...
Sixpence, Victoria ...
Fourpence or Groat, Victoria..
Fourpence, Victoria ( M * u % Money )
Threepence, Victoria
Twopence, Victoria (" ly Mone )
Penny, Victoria ( ~ )
Bronze—Penny
Halfpenny...
Farthing ...
Copper —Penny
Farthing ...
Half-farthing
Quarter-farthing
Canada.
Silver Fifty Cents
Two impressions
Twenty-five Cents
Twenty Cents
Ten Cents ...
Five Cents
Bronze—Cent, 1859
Cent, 1876...
Copper—Bank Token Penny ...
Bank Token Halfpenny
Ceylon.
Bronze —Five Cents
One Cent .
.. One impression
Half Cent ...
Quarter Cent
Cyprus,
Bronze—Piastre
Half Piastre
.. Two impressions
Quarter Piastre
Gibraltar.
Copper—Two Quarts
Quart
Half Quart
Not current
II
„ Not current
99 99
„ Not current


Silver —Dollar
Half Dollar
Twenty Cents
Ten Cents ...
Five Cents
Bronze —Cent
Mil
Gold One MoLur
Ten Rupees
Five Rupees
Silver Rupee
Rupee
Rupee (Empress)
Half Rupee
Quarter Rupee
Two Annas
Bronze —Half Anna
Quarter Anna
Half Pice ...
One-twelfth Anna
Silver Thirty Oboli
Copper —Oboli
Copper—Penny
Halfpenny
Farthing ...
Nickel —Penny
Halfpenny
Copper —Penny
Halfpenny
Farthing ...
Bronze —Penny, 1871
Halfpenny, 1871
Penny, 1877
Halfpenny, 1877
Farthing, 1877
Copper—One-third Farthing
Bronze—One-third Farthing
Silver Twenty Cents
Ten Cents
Bronze —Five Cents
Two Cents
Cent
Hong Kong.
India.
Two impressions
One impression
lonian Isles.
Isle of Man.
Jamaica.
Jersey.
)>
99
99
Malta.
Mauritius.
Two impressions
One impression
. Two impressions
. Two impressions
. Two impressions
. Two impressions
Not current
Not current
, Two impressions
Not current
.. Two impressions
Not current


Silver Twenty Cents
Five Cents
Ten Cents
Bronze —Cent
Gold Two Dollars
Silver Fifty Cents
Twenty Cents
Ten Cents
Five Cents
Bronze —Cent
Bronze —Penny
Halfpenny
Cent
Half Cent .
Bronze —Cent
Silver Twenty Cents
Ten Cents...
Five Cents
Bronze—Cent
Half Cent...
Quarter Cent
Copper—Cent
Half Cent...
Quarter Cent
Gold Twenty Dollars
Ten Dollars
Five Dollars
Three Dollars
One Dollar
Silver One Dollar
Half Dollar
Quarter Dollar
One Dime
Half Dime
Three Cents
Nickel—Five Cents
Three Cents
Bronze —Two Cents
One Cent
Gold One Piece
Silver Three-halfpence
New Brunswick,
Newfoundland,
Nova Scotia.
United States.
Tvvo-and-a-half Dollars
Japanese.
West Indies,
Prince Edward Island.
Straits Settlements.
Two impressions
Two impressions
Two impressions
... Two impressions
Two impressions
Not current
99
One impression
99
Two impressions
Two impressions
Not current


FOREIGN COINS.
Austria.
Gold 8 Florins, 1878
8 Florins, 1880
Belgium.
Gold 20 Francs, 1877
France,
Gold 20 Francs, Bonaparte First Consol
20 Francs, Bonaparte Emperor
20 Francs, Louis XVIII., 1814
20 Francs, Louis XVIII., 1819
20 Francs, Louis Philippe, 1831
20 Francs, Louis Philippe, 1847
20 Francs, llepublic, 1850 ...
20 Francs, Louis Napoleon, 1852
20 Francs, Napoleon 111., 1859
20 Francs, Napoleon 111., 1867
20 Francs, llepublic, 1875 ...
10 Francs, llepublic, 1851 ...
10 Francs, Napoleon 111., 1859
10 Francs, Napoleon 111., 1865
Silver — 5 Francs, Louis Philippe ...
Germany.
Silver Mark
Manaco,
Gold 20 Francs, 1878
Sardinia and Italy.
Gold 20 Lira, 1817
20 Lira, 1834
20 Lira, 1851
20 Lira, 1877
20 Lira, 1879
10 Lira, 1863
MEDALS.
Silver Board of Trade for Gallantry in Saving Life at Sea.
Bronze—Board of Trade for Saving Life at Sea.
FOREIGN OFFICE MEDALS.
Silver For Gallantry and Humanity.
For Saving the Life of a British Subject.
For Saving the Lives of British Subjects.
For Assisting a British Vessel in Distress.
CORONATION MEDALS.
Silver George IV.
William IV.
Victoria.
Two impressions
Two impressions
Two impressions
Two impressions
One impression
One impression
Two impressions


WAR MEDALS.
Silver Waterloo.
French War (Army); one with 28 clasps.
China; one with 6 clasps.
India, 1799-1826 ; one with 21 clasps.
Meeanee.
Hyderabad.
Meeanee, Hyderabad.
Sutlej, Moodhee.
Sutlej, Ferozeshuhur.
Sutlej, Alivval.
Sutlej, Sobraon.
Punjab ; one with 3 clasps.
Meritorious Service (East India Company).
Long Service and Good Conduct (East India Company).
First Burmese War.
Kelat-i-Ghilzie.
Jellalabad.
Cabul.
Ghuznee, Cabul.
Candahar, Ghuznee, Cabul.
India; one with 6 clasps.
India Mutiny ; one with 5 clasps.
South Africa.
Crimea ; one with 4 clasps.
Meritorious Service.
Distinguished Conduct in the Field.
Long Service and Good Conduct (Army).
New Zealand.
Abyssinia.
Ashantee ; one with 1 clasp.
French War (Naval); one with 86 clasps.
Naval Engineers for Ability.
Baltic.
Arctic, 1818-1855,
Arctic, 1876.
Long Service and Good Conduct (Navy).
Conspicuous Gallantry.
Best Shot in the Army.
Gutta Percha Impressions from the Dies of the Waterloo Medal, by Pistrucci.
MEDALS STRUCK AT THE MELBOURNE BRANCH MINT,
From, Dies 'prepared by Stokes and Martin, E. A, Altmann , and others.
Gold Geelong Juvenile Exhibition ... _ > ... One impression
Melbourne International Exhibition Commissioners _ „
Education Department ... ... ... Two impressions
Sil ver Geelong Juvenile Exhibition ... . , ••• >*
Melbourne International Exhibition Commissioners „
Education Department ... ... ... »>
Education Department (small)... ... ... »
Bi-onze —Ballarat Juvenile Exhibition ... ... ... >»
Bendigo Agricultural Society ... ... ... »»
Geelong Juvenile Exhibition ... ... ... >»
Education Department ... ... ••• >»
Education Department (small)... ... ... »>
Horsham and Wi mm era Agricultural Society ... >»


Bronze —Horsham and Wimmera Agricultural Society ... One impression
Mackay Agricultural Society ... ... ... Two impressions
Melbourne International Exhibition Commissioners „
Sandhurst Juvenile Exhibition ■ ... ... ~
Yilliers and Heytesbury Agricultural Society ... „
ELECTROTYPES OF MEDALS, ETC., IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM.
Described in the Fifth Annual Report of the Deputy Master of the Royal Mint.
1. Syracusan Coin, Philistis, wife of Hieron the Second.
2. Early Italian.
3. Medal, by Albrecht Purer.
4. Julius 11., by Erancia.
5. Clemens VII., by Cellini.
6. Queen Mary, by Trezzo
7. Thomas Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton, by Thomas Simon.
8. Napoleonic Medal, by Andrieu.
9. Queen Caroline, by Pistrucci.
10. “ Long Service,” &c., Medal, by Pistrucci.
11. “ Best Shot ” Medal, by Poynter ; engraved by L. Wyon.
12. Obverse Ashantee Medal by L. Wyon.
13. [Reverse Ashantee Medal, by Poynter ; engraved by L. Wyon.
Described in the Seventh Report.
1. Henry VII. Shilling.
2. Henry VIII.
3. Edward VI. Half-sovereign.
4. Mary and Philip.
5. Elizabeth. “ Quarter-pound
6. Mary Queen of Scots.
7. James I. Shilling.
8. Charles I.
9. Charles 11. Petition Crown of Thomas Simon.
10. James 11.
11. William and Mary,
12. Ann. Two-guinea piece.
13. George I. Guinea.
14. George 11. Two-guinea piece.
15. George 111. Guinea.
16. George IV. Sovereign.
17. William IV. Sovereign.
18. Victoria. Sovereign.
19. Bentivoglio, Lord of Bologna.
20. Pope Julius 11.
21. Pope Clement VII.
22. Pope Innocent XII.
23. Sforza, Duke of Milan, 1490.
24. Lodovico Moro, Duke of Milan, 1500.
25. Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua.
26. Louis XII., King of France and Duke of Milan.
27. Maximilian 1., Charles V., and Ferdinand, Emperors.
28. Francis 1., King of France.
29. Charles IX., King of France.
30. Henry IV., King of France.
31. Charles V.


Described in the Eighth Report.
11. Coin of Offa.
12. “ Gros Tournois” of Philip le Bel
18. Noble.
14. “ Mouton d’or ” of Edward 111.
15. Crown of Henry VIII.
16. Coin with “ lily” design.
17. Broad of Cromwell.
18. Coin of Sigismund of Austria.
19. Coin of Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain.
20. Coin of Akbar, Mogul of Hindustan.
21. Angel of Henry VII.
22 Coin by Francia.
23. Coin by Cellini.
24. Coin by Cellini.
25. Coin showing the arms of the Medici Family.
26. Ducat of Christian V. of Denmark.
27. Shilling of George 111.
28. Shilling of George IV.
29. Shilling of Victoria.
fiSi4~oQ>
1. Hercules struggling with the Nemean Ancient Greek.
3. Elis hearing a figure of Victory. Ancient Greek.
S. St. George and the Dragon, by Pistrucci.
4. Penny of Ethelred 11.
5. Penny of William I.
6. Groat of Edward 111.
7. Shilling of Henry VII.
8. Shilling of Charles 11.
9. Half-crown of Charles 11.
10. Florin of Victoria.
By Authority: John Fekkes, Government Printer, Melbourne.
3 1508 01361717 5




MELBOURNE BRANCH
CATALOGUE OF EXHIBITS
SHOWN AT THE
WITH EXPLANATION.
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE DEPUTY MASTER, .
MELBOURNE.
BT AUTHORITY : JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1880.
HER MAJESTY’S MINT.
* MELBOURNE INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION 1880,
V. Delves-Bkouguton,
