

INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION,
1873.
CATALOGUE OF OBJECTS
EXHIBITED IN THE
QUEENSLAND
AN N EXE.
price: sixpence.
LONDON;
JOHN KING & CO., QUEEN STREET PRINTING WORKS,
AND 35, OLD JEWRY, E.C.


/


INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION,
1872.
CATALOGUE OF OBJECTS
EXHIBITED IN THE
QUEENSLAND ANNEXE.
LONDON:
JOHN KING & CO., QUEEN STREET PRINTING WORKS,
AND 35, OLD JEWRY, E.C.
1872. •


.
\
* ■
■
, '
. •


INTRODUCTION.
The material resources of the Colony, as will be shewn in
the following pages, are both varied and valuable, and,
possessing as it does almost every kind of soil and
climate, is adapted for the growth of agricultural products
of temperate, semi-tropical and tropical countries.
By a glance at the population table it will be at once
seen that its great requirement is a sufficient supply of
colonists, and one of the main objects of this Exhibition is
to afford bond fide information to those seeking a new
and more remunerative field for their energy and capital,
than they can expect to find in the old country.
The entire collection in the Annexe is grouped under
one class of the Exhibition proper, viz:—Division I,
Class 3 (Photography, as applied to the illustration of
the geology, physical character and resources of a
country.)
It is hoped that the simplicity of this arrangement may
be the means of readily imparting information on the
subject to be illustrated, but if more details be required,
they can be obtained at the Offices of the Queensland
Government, 32, Charing Cross.
The Colony of Queensland is situated at the north-
eastern corner of the great Australian continent, and
embraces an area of 678,000 square miles.
Of this large expanse one fourth is valueless from the
peculiar geological conditions, while three-fourths are


more or less fitted for pastoral pursuits ; and in this latter
portion there are at least 24,000 square miles abounding
in inexhaustible supplies of coal and iron ore. A con-
siderable proportion of the land is rich in metals and
minerals, while for agricultural purposes it will compare
favourably with any in the Australian colonies.
The climate, as is natural in a country which passes
through so many degrees of latitude, varies much, being
warmer to the north (which is nearer the line) than the
south. But even here tropical fruits will ripen in the open
air, and particularly in the neighbourhood of the sea coast.
Although the summer is characterised by very warm
weather, the heat is never so great as to prevent Europeans
from working out of doors, wnile the winter is a most
enjoyable season, the nights being cold enough to make a
log fire pleasant, and the days recalling those of a bright
English autumn. The health of the country is remarkably
good, epidemics being very rare; and the report of the
Registrar General for 1869 tells us that the mortality of
the whole country was less than IV to 1,000 inhabitants.
Education is good and plentiful, it being free to all
children in the primary schools; and though, as a rule,
Queensland is not a country of easy work, labour is always
well rewarded.
The trading resources of the Colony are amply provided
for by a seaboard of considerable extent and large tidal
rivers, such as the Brisbane (which flows into Moreton
Bay), the Mary, the Fitzroy, &c.; and the inland districts
to the west, which embrace the important and beautiful
Darling Downs, lying at an elevation of 2,000 feet above
the sea, and well accommodated with railways.


The census taken on Ist September, 1871, furnished the
following data as to the population distributed throughout
the colony: —
Females.
Name of District.
Persons.
Adults.
Minors.
Balonne
Bowen
Brisbane
Burke
18,445
Burnett
Caboolture.
Cardwell .
Clermont
Cook
returns
Dalby
Darling Downs, Central ..
Ditto, East ..
Ditto, North
Ditto, West
Drayton and Toowoomba
Fassifem
Gilbert
Gladstone
Gyxnpie
Ipswich
Kennedy, North
Ditto, South
Leichhardt
Logan
Mackay
Maranoa
Maryborough
Mitchell
Moreton Bay, East
Ditto, West
Oxley
Peak Downs
Rockhampton
St. Lawrence
Springsure...
Stanley
Taroom
Townsville...
Warrego ...
Warwick
Westwood
Wide Bay
42,818
28,932
71,750
48,313
120,063




Division I—Class 3.
PHOTOGRAPHY,
APPLIED TO GEOLOGY, &C.
A series of photographs illustrates the Geology and Physical
character of Queensland, the greater number of which were
taken by Mr. R. Daintree for that purpose.
Most of the negatives, from which these are prints, were
taken on dry plates , prepared with a preservative coating of
Eucalyptus gum, a common production of nearly all the
Queensland forest trees.
A. Gregory Esq., the Surveyor-General of Queensland,
was the originator of this process, which is well-deserving the
attention of photographers in hot climates. The keeping
qualities of the plates are very good, and the gum-resin
coating is an effectual protection against the action of
dust, &c., which is one of the chief causes of failure in many
other dry processes.
The gum-resin used by Mr. Daintree was that of the
bloodwood (Eucalyptus Corymbosa ), the details of manipu-
lation being precisely the same as those employed in Major
Russell’s tannin process. The bloodwood gum was preferred
to that of the other Eucalypti, as it forms a clear solution
with alcohol, when diluted with water to the strength
required for preparation of the plates, whilst from other
varieties a resin is precipitated or remains in suspension,
forming a turbid solution.


The stock solution is thus prepared—
1 drachm gum resin,
1 oz. alcohol.
The preservative solution—
1 drachm stock solution,
1 oz. water.
To any photographer, desirous of testing the value of these
resins for photographic or other purposes, small samples will
be given on application at the Office in the Annexe.
The photographs, illustrative of the geology, &c. of Queens-
land are mostly arranged in frames, holding six each. The
following description will explain the subjects which they
represent. A Map of the Colony, with the various geological
features distinguished by different colours, is hung at the
East end of the Annexe, and to this all the frames of
photographs have reference.
Frame No. 1.
ALLUVIAL.
The area occupied by these deposits is not represented by
colour on the map.
Photograph No. I.—View looking up the Maryvale Creek,
in Northern Queensland, latitude 19° 30' S.
This is a view of a creek cutting through volcanic rocks,
the debris of which, re-deposited as alluvium, form the
richest soil of the table-lands of Queensland. Such are the
valleys of the Darling Downs, &c., and where the climate is
favourable, this description of soil has been found most suitable
for the growth of cereals ; it is par excellence the agricultural
land of the Colony.


Photographs Nos. 2 and 4.— Views, looking over a country
of nearly the same character as that of iNo. 1.
The physical character of a large extent of country in
Queensland is here illustrated, viz :
Open Downs of rich volcanic soil, through which narrow
creeks, fringed with alluvial deposits, find a tortuous way.
It is on areas such as these that the fine wheats, oats, and
other agricultural produce around Warwick are grown.
Photograph No. 3.—View from near the residence of
E, Towns, Esq., Townsville, looking west over the fiat
“ coast country ” towards the inner coast range.
This is a characteristic view of three-fourths of the land in
the immediate vicinity of the Eastern Coast, except where
the ranges closely approach the sea, as between Bowen and
McKay, the Town of Gladstone, &c.
This, from any elevated point, would be the, appearance of
the country as seen around Eockingham Bay, McKay, Eock-
hampton, Maryborough, &c.
Although the country presenting this appearance is not all,
strictly speaking, alluvial, yet over such areas the greatest
extent of alluvial deposits, those skirting the margins and
embouchures of the rivers, is to be met with. The richer
soils of such tracts have been and will continue to be selected
as the sites for the cultivation of sugar, cotton, and other
tropical and semi-tropical productions.
Photograph No. s.—View on Maryvale Creek, about three-
quarters of a mile above the Maryvale Homestead,
Northern Queensland.
On the left of the picture, where the man is seen sitting,
will be observed horizontally stratified breccia and indurated


Lucky Valley
INCLUDING
Canal Creek
The Two Mile
McDonald’s Flat
Gympie
Douglas Creek
Kilkivan
Oakey Creek
/ Black Snake
Gregory’ Creek
Eastern River
Gooramjam
Hurley’s
Jimna
Hurley’s Seven Mile
Yankee Camp
Calliope
Miclare
Cania
Spring’s Rush
muds; these contain bones of the extinct Marsupials of
Australia, such as Diprotodon, Nototherium, &c. This view
is a characteristic representation of those old alluvia which
are distributed over nearly all valleys of denudation subsequent
to the latest volcanic outbursts in Queensland.
Frame No. 2.
Photograph No. 6.—View in New Zealand Gully, near
Rockhampton.
Whilst the sediments deposited by fluviatile action have been
shown to be those most highly valued by the agriculturalist
and the planter, their importance to the miner, in areas where
auriferous veinstones are found traversing the rocks, is also
very considerable.
Along the Eastern seaboard of Queensland the number of
alluvia] gold mining districts is now very numerous, and
increases from year to year.
Commencing from the South they may be thus enu-
merated :
Ennogera Peak Downs


Cawarral Marengo
Crocodile Wyatt
Ravenswood
Herberts Creek Broughton
Morinish Cape River
Blackfellows Star
„ Gilbert
Canoona Cloncurry
In all these the alluvial deposits are shallow, and the gullies
containing them are comparatively soon “ worked out;” but
in most cases where gold has been found in paying quantities
in the debris of the creeks and rivers, auriferous quartz and
other vein-stones for permanent mining have also been
discovered.
The view is very characteristic of the method of digging
known in Queensland as “ shallow sinking.”
Photograph No. 7. —View of a temporary township near
the site of a newly-opened “gully,” where the proba-
bility exists that the gully will be “ worked out” in a
few weeks or months.
The bark from the nearest trees are here called into requi-
sition to form the covering of a framework hastily-constructed
of saplings, in which the stores to supply the diggers are
housed, whilst the miners themselves find shelter in tents
or rough bark huts, as suits their fancy or convenience.
When the “ diggings ” give greater promise of permanence,
these are of course replaced by more substantial buildings.
Photographs No. 8 and 9. —Views of miners at work in the
heads of ravines, where the gold is found almost on the
surface of the “bed rock this is technically known as
“ gully raking.”
In the reality the large boulders would be rolled out
of the way, and the few inches of-dirt covering the rock


would be roughly shovelled off, leaving only about half an
inch above the “ bottom,” &c. This half inch of alluvial
soil, together with a portion of the rock on which it rests,
would be then “cradled” and “panned off,” or. simply
“ panned off,” if the quantity to be treated was small.
The “cradle” (seen in No. 8) consists of a slightly in-
clined box on rockers, on the inner floor of which cross-bars
are arranged at intervals. At the higher end, at an elevation
of about 1A feet above the floor, is placed a moveable sieve,
with holes one-fourth of an inch in diameter, below which
a moveable slide is arranged, sloping downwards, with a ledge
at the lower end.
The “ wash dirt ” is placed on the sieve, and water poured
on gently and steadily, a rocking motion being given by the
handle attached, as seen in the photograph. The even flow
of water carries off the lighter particles of mud, sand, &c.,
whilst the gold, titanic iron, and other heavy minerals re-
main on the ledge of the sloping slide under the sieve, and
on the cross-bars on the floor of the box. What remains
behind is then “panned off” in a tin dish, an operation
which is represented in Photograph No. 9.
This is effected by combining a circular and side-throw
movement of the particles under water, by the action of the
wrist, so as to bring the heavier grains to the bottom of the
pan,—then gently washing off the upper and lighter particles,
by a forward motion of the tilted dish under the water, and
repeating the action until the gold alone remains. The tin
dish used for this purpose has a projecting rim, and is made
of stout tinned iron. If the “wash dirt ” is difficult to dis-
integrate on account of the clay associated with it, it is
left in the “ soaking trough,” which is seen in the photograph.


This, in the rough-and-ready style of the Queensland
miner, is generally made of a section of a hollow tree, like
an Indian “dug out” canoe, the ends being let in to a
groove, and made water-tight from the outside. In this
rude but effectual contrivance the “ soaking ” and “ puddling ”
is conducted, the latter process being the disintegration of
the tough clay, and its formation into a “ puddle,” a portion
of which is removed by water, while the remainder is ready
for the after “ cradling ” and “ panning off.”
Photograph No. 10. —View of the “Deep Lead Cape
River Diggings.
This is an illustration of the only case of “ deep sinking ”
yet discovered in Queensland. The gold was found at depths
varying from 6 feet to 120 feet, and formed a continuous
“ lead ” for about two miles ; its course is marked on the
map of the Cape District, exhibited over the photographs of
that mining area. On McGann’s flat, there marked, a drift
of large rounded quartz boulders was interstratified with white
and mottled clays, the “bed rock” being reached at from G
to 20 feet. This peculiar boulder drift was followed south,
though not pursuing the present course of the creek, until
the depth of sinking reached over 100 feet. This was on
the dividing table-land, between two creeks, where the
original positions of the white clay and boulder drift re-
mained comparatively untouched by the denudation effected
by the present watercourses.
The uppermost stratum of this deposit on the table-land
above alluded to is a pisolitic iron ore, which is identical
with one of the higher beds of the “ Desert Sandstone
series, met with in other localities. It is indeed probable
that this is a portion of that formation, as the same strata


are found south of this point, covering the entire country,
though the gold of this “ deep lead,” when followed further
south, was found to be very fine and too much scattered to
pay for the mining.
It is however suggestive of future mining operations, to
be carried on under this same “Desert Sandstone,” where its
gravels and conglomerates have been derived exclusively
from underlying auriferous vein-stones.
Photograph No. 11.— View of alluvial “ Creek Workings ”
at the Ravenswood Diggings, Northern Queensland.
In previous illustrations of alluvial mining, the operations
of “ gully-raking,” “shallow,” and “deep sinking” have been
shown.
In No. 11 another form of this class of work is depicted.
Here the miners are engaged removing the sandy debris
from the creek bed, until the “ bed rock ” is nearly reached,
throwing back the upper non-auriferous portion on to the
already worked ground. If, as in this case here, the ground
is wet, the Californian pump, seen “unrigged” in the fore-
ground. is set up, the water is thrown out, and the dirt above
the bed rock, as much as is found to pag } is passed through
sluice-boxes and the “ tom,” (seen on the right of the
picture,) to be finished off with the “cradle” and the “pan.”
These four systems of “alluvial” mining are the chief
modes by which free gold. , as distinguished from matrix gold ,
is obtained in Queensland. It remains only to observe that
the knowledge necessary to work successfully is soon acquired
by a “new chum” (as a newly arrived emigrant is called by
those already u colonised ”), so that the life, though rough, is
attractive to those who like to be certain of a fair remunera-
tion for their labor, with the chance at any moment of


obtaining a good prize; tbe average rate of earnings for the
entire population engaged in the pursuit would, however, not
be above £2 (Two pounds) per week.
Frame No. 3.
Photograph !No. 12. —View on the Mary River, opposite
the Town of Maryborough.
This shows the means adopted for the transport of goods
over the broader portions of the Queensland tidal rivers, viz.,
by the use of flat-bottomed punts. The banks of the Mary
River are in high repute for the growth of sugar-cane, as
the scrub land, which forms a narrow belt along the margin
of the stream, consists of a very rich vegetable mould, and is
found to bring to perfection a greater number of these ex-
hausting crops, without manure, than any other.
Photographs Nos. 13, 14 and 15, are Views of the Residences
of Farmers and Planters on the Mary River.
Photograph No. 16 shows the depth of alluvial deposit on
the banks of the Mary, which is here seen to be about
40 feet in the cliff bordering the river.
Photograph No, 17. — A view of a Farmer’s Residence in the
Mary River District, as usually constructed when first
coming to reside on his selected or purchased land.
On soil of this character in the elevated regions of Southern
Queensland, as in the vicinity of Warwick, nearly all the
products of a temperate climate can be grown in perfection,
whilst around Ipswich, which lies on the eastern side—the
dividing range,—cotton can be successfully added to the list
of the Warwick agriculturist. The house is constructed of
upright slabs, split from the timber on the round, and


roofed with “shingles” from the same source of supply.
In the foreground will be seen children, pigs, and poultry
all of which thrive admirably in nearly every part of the
Colony.
“DESEKT SANDSTONE.”
Frame No. 4.
Photograph No. 18. —View in the Gilbert District, near
which one of the earliest explorers of Northern Queens-
land (McKinlay) expressed the opinion that such country
was “ fit only for blackfellows and wallabi,” an opinion
which any one who has been compelled to travel over it
at a later period will probably endorse.
Photograph No. 19. —View on Cave Creek in the Gilbert
District.
In this view the weathering action by meteoric influences
on these sandstones is well represented. Sometimes such
isolated pillars can be seen resting on the slate, granite, or
other rocks of the locality many miles from the cliffs of
which they once formed a part.
Photograph No, 20. —Characteristic View of a cliff section
of “ Desert Sandstone.”
This sandstone at one time probably covered nearly the
whole of Australia, but has been removed at a subsequent
period by denudation. It occupies much of the higher table-
lands which divide eastern and western waters, and would
have been a very great drawback to the settlement of the
great western plains, had not outbursts of lavas taken place
at a more recent period.


These, flowing over the sandstones, have by their decom-
position formed belts of rich soil at intervals in the otherwise
barren waste, allowing free access of stock and produce from
East to West,
Photograph No. 21.—View of a Cave in ‘‘Desert Sand-
stone,” in which the Government Geological Survey
party fixed their head-quarters whilst prospecting the
Gilbert River District.
Photograph No. 22.— View near the Cave, with Nouda Tree
in the foreground—this is the extreme southern limit of
the Nouda, the fruit of which forms a staple food of the
natives of the Cape York Peninsula. It was also of
the utmost service to the indefatigable explorers of that
district, Kennedy and the Jardines, in supplementing
their scanty stock of provisions.
Frame No. 5.
Photograph No. 23.— Yiew of Mount Nation, near the
Township of Gilberton, in the Gilbert District.
This shows the denudation which the country has under-
gone since the upheaval above the ocean of the “Desert
Sandstone.” Mount Nation is one of many outliers of this
rock which remain to mark the history of that portion of the
Queensland past, which dates from the “Desert Sandstone”
period to the present time.
Photograph No. 24.— View on the so-called “ Granite Creek,”
in the Gilbert District, where a narrow belt of this
“ Sandstone” rests on the “ metamorphic” series; under
these conditions free gold has been found in the former
near the junction of the two.


Photograph No. 25.—View near the Junction of the Gilbert
and Percy Rivers.
Here the mica schists, &c., crop out in the river bed, whilst
in the distance is seen a ridge capped with horizontal beds of
the “Desert Sandstone,” which once rested directly on the
schistose rocks now seen in the foreground of the photograph.
Photograph No. 26.—View of Cave Creek, in the Gilbert
District.
This gives a fair representation of the sandy bedded creeks
which drain the Gilbert and other districts having similar
*
geological conditions.
A very characteristic feature of such water courses is the
tea tree ( melaleuca ), the timber of which is very durable.
the bark is also valuable, among other uses, for the manu-
facture of paper.
Photograph No. 27.—View on Bett’s Creek, a tributary of
the Flinders River,
Here the beds of Sandstone are covered with figures of
boomerangs, hands, feet, &c., executed by the natives; the
water-hole at their base is in consequence called the “ Figure
Waterhole.”
The method by which these primitive designs are depicted
is sufficiently novel to be described. The object to be re-
corded on stone is placed against its tablet, and the paint
previously prepared by the artist, by the semi-liquifying of
red-ochre in the mouth is ejected at and over the design,
resulting in the production of a rough and “ reddy " frieze
work on the horizontal sand-stones, which are selected for
such designs. The emu is seen on the right.


Photograph No. 28. —View of the edge of the “ Desert,”
■with pack-horses of survey party in the foreground.
In this picture the ordinary mode of travelling through the
bush is shown; the pack-horses, by which such journeys are
accomplished, have been brought to a halt by the ugly looking
barrier of rocks ahead, and, contrary to their usual habits,
are not availing themselves of the opportunity to lay in a
fresh store of provisions for the journey. The fact, however,
is that the coarse spinifex grass, the constant accompaniment
of “ Desert Sandstone,” is under their feet, and only in the
fast extremity of hunger will they be induced to stoop their
heads to such provender.
Had not nature thrown the accumulation of this great
■formation far enough back in time to allow of its subsequent
removal to a great extent by atmospheric influences, the
greater part of Australia would indeed have been entirely
useless for settlement.
MESOZOIC.
Frame No. 6
Photograph No. 29. — View of Cretaceous Strata on the
Flinders River, in Northern Queensland.
Whilst a belt of country comparatively valueless for settle-
ment is illustrated by Photographs 18 to 28, No. 29 gives a
representation of the strata whose decomposition forms the
soil of the great western plains of Queensland, which commence
on the east from the Flinders, Thoihpson, and Barcoo Rivers,


and extend thence -westward to the extreme limits of the
Colony. Except where covered by Desert Sandstone, it is
probable that this rock-system continues through Central
Australia to the West Coast.
Photograph No, 30. —A View in another Locality of a
Section of Cretaceous Strata, similar to that of Photo-
graph No. 29.
The thin hard bands are formed of argillaceous limestone,
while the intervening beds furrowed by rain are of soft shales
and indurated muds ; the upper beds are of sandstone, the very
counterpart of the Lower Greensand of England in their
lithological character, and agreeing very nearly in their con-
tained fossils.
The view is taken on Betts’ Creek, a tributary of the
Flinders, about ten miles below the Homestead, and represent
one of the very few cliffs of rock exposed over hundred
square miles of country.
Photograph No, 31.—Yiew from the top of Mount Walker
about three miles west of Hughenden Homestead, on
the Flinders River, The rock on which the figures are-
standing in the foreground is a ferruginous clay of the
Desert Sandstone series which caps Mount Walker, the
cretaceous shqles forming its base.
In the direction in which the travellers are looking—viz.,
south, towards the water-shed between the Flinders and
Thompson Rivers, (one of which empties itself into the Gulf of
Carpentaria, the other into Lake Torrens, in South Australia,)
for fully six hundred miles, plains intersecte l by shallow
water-courses, fringed with timber, would be the main and
almost only feature of the landscape.


Photograph No. 32,—View over the Western Plains from
the Marathon Homestead, on the Flinders River.
This view might give the impression that the pack-horses
in the foreground were refusing to eat for the same reason
assigned when they were halted before the Desert cliffs. The
opposite view of the question would, however, be nearer the
mark; sheer repletion, after two days spell, is the cause of
their inactivity in the present case. These plains are indeed
clothed with the most succulent grasses and herbage, which
both in the wet season and in the dry months, retain their
valuable qualities, so that where the water supply is abundant,
cattle and sheep keep in good condition at any season of the
year.
The Barcoo and Flinders stock are noted for their great
weight in proportion to their size, due to the excessive amount
of “ inside fat ” assimilated by animals fed on the Western
Plains. From herds of stock fattened on this description of
country, fair drafts have been fit for the butcher after being
overland to South Australia, a distance of 1400 miles. It
was to a country of this class that Stokes gave the name of
‘‘ The Plains of Promise.”
Photograph No. 33.—View of Water-hole near the Marathon
Station, Flinders River.
In this photograph is shown the chief source of water
supply in the Western Plains. This is an Ana branch of the
Flinders River, or “ backwater,” as it is technically called.
In seasons of flood these holes are filled, their permanence
depending of course on their depth and their capacity for
resisting evaporation from the amount of fringing foliage, &c.
The fact of the heads of the main rivers and many of their
branches rising from table-lands of “ Desert Sandstone,’


accounts for tlie non-retentive character of the main channels
of such water-courses. The sand from the desert sources
is carried down the streams, giving them as a rule deep sandy
beds, into which the water readily sinks soon after the rainy
season ceases. The Ana branches, however, which are only
tilled by water running off the neighbouring soil, or by the
flood waters of the main channels, do not receive any sandy
deposit, and therefore retain their water readily. As
population, and consequent local demand for stock increases,
artificial supplies of water, by means of dams, &c., will no
doubt be secured, as was the case in country of a similar
description in Eiverina, &c. Supplies of water on the Artesian
principle, also, need not be despaired of, as natural soda
springs, rising above the surface of the plains, are persistent
in all seasons, in more than one locality.
Photograph No. 34. —This view of the same Ana Branch
from a different point of view is included in the
Catalogue, as no other subject illustrative of the rock
system shown in this frame is available.
MESOZOIC.
LIAS CARBONACEOUS.
Frame No. 7.
Photographs No. 35, 36 and 37.—Illustrating various char-
acters of the Sandstones, Shales, <fec., which form members
of the valuable Carbonaceous deposits of Southern
Queensland.
By reference to the map it will be seen how large an area
in Queensland this formation covers.


At Tivoli, Redbank, Allora, in the neighbourhood of
Warwick and Ipswich, and on the Burrum River, in the
Maryborough District, some of the coal seams which occur
in this formation have been worked.
The seams vary in thickness and quality; all seem to yield
good household coal, but none have yet been discovered
shewing any superior excellence for steam purposes. The
Tivoli seams make an excellent coke, the entire elimina-
tion of the volatile products leaving about 8 per cent, of
white ash. From the microscopic examination, Mr. Newton,
Professor Huxley’s assistant (who has great experience in this
direction), wrote the following description :
“ I have made sections of the Coal which you gave me
from the Collieries at Tivoli, Darling Downs, Queensland,
Australia. “ I have been unable, with the microscope, to detect
any spore cases or spores, such as are seen in very many kinds
of coal, but the section made parallel with the bedding shows
small round spots about the size of spores , though they are
very indistinct. The transverse section shows a fine compressed
lamination such as is seen in Newcastle Coal; altogether the
microscopic structure is almost identical with that of the Coal
commonly called Wallsend.^
The great extent of the Queensland Coal formation, and
the number of included seams of that mineral induces the
belief, that this will ultimately be one of the main sources of
employment for a large settled population in that Colony.
Photogeaph No. 38. — A general view of the physical
character of the country occupied by Coal measures on
the east side of tbe dividing range, the Ipswich and Allora
Railway being seen in the foreground.


Photographs Nos. 39 and 40.—Views of Zamia and Cjcas
Groves, on the Coast near Rockhampton.
These are included under this group of rocks, as they are
the living representatives of the flora found in a fossil state
with the Mesozoic Carbonaceous rocks which Frame No. 7 is
intended to illustrate.
PALAEOZOIC CARBONIFEROUS.
Frame No. 8
Photograph No. 41.—View of Coal Seam on Pelican Creek,
a tributary of the Bowen River, Northern Queensland.
This is one of the natural outcrops of coal, of which there
are numbers in the district, drained by the north and south
tributaries of the Fitzroy River, above its junction with the
Comet, and also by the Bowen River and its tributaries still
further north.
This vast deposit of Carboniferous Strata seems to be older
than that of Southern Queensland, illustrated in Frame No. 7*
The included fossil fauna is more nearly allied to the true
Carboniferous series of Europe, although the flora is not in
accordance with the relations of fauna to flora of that period
in the Northern Hemisphere. Be that as it may, the fact
remains that over the space indicated, which may be seen at a
glance on reference to the map, numerous seams of good coal
are met with in natural sections, which have hitherto remained
unworked, as they crop out at a distance from an available
shipping port, and no local demand has yet sprung up.
Even at the Peak Downs Copper Mine wood is still used
for smelting, as it can be utilized at a cheaper rate than


-coal obtained from a seam some four feet thick, at no great
distance from the mine.
Photograph No. 42. —View of another natural outcrop of
Coal on Rosella Creek, a tributary of the Bowen Biver.
This presents similar features to that on Rosella Creek, and
the coal is of much the same quality.
Photograph No. 43.—General View of Carboniferous Strata,
Rosella Creek, Northern Queensland. Such is the general
appearance of that portion of the Carboniferous series in
which the coal seams are found.
Beds of brown sandstone and grey shale alternate, whilst
the base of the system has an extensive development of lime-
stone beds, containing an abundant marine fauna, allied to
the Carboniferous Limestone of England.
In this section, Glossopteris Browniani, the characteristic
fossil plant of this group throughout New South Wales and
Queensland, is found in a very perfect state of preservation.
Photograph No, 44.—View on Branch of Pelican Creek,
Northern Queensland.
This gives a tjqncal representation of a very common occur-
rence in all the Carboniferous Districts, viz., the intrusion of
trap dykes. It will be observed that there is no faulting of
the strata, and no appearance of outer fracture of the
sedimentary rocks, through which the dyke has been intruded.
This observation holds good for the action of all trap
rocks, subsequent to the Carboniferous period in Queensland.
Photograph No. 45. —View of Scrub-land in Carboniferous
areas.
The character of the soil, resulting from the decomposition
of the Carboniferous rocks, seems highly favourable to the


growth of large timber trees and a dense undergrowth of
scrub.
The position of a large proportion of the Carboniferous
rocks, lying as they do along the eastern flanks of the dividing
range, is also an evident cause of the superior growth of timber
usually found there.
The moisture borne landward by the prevailing south-east
winds from the Pacific Ocean, is condensed and re-dis-
distributed as mist and rain, thus keeping up the supply of
nutriment necessary for the jungle and timber growth there
developed.
PALAEOZOIC.
DEVONIAN LIMESTONES.
Frame No. 9.
Photographs No. 46,47,48,49,50 and 51.—Views in various
localities in Queensland where limestones and marbles
are largely represented, interstratified with the slates,
shales, sandstones, and conglomerates, together making
up an extensive rock system. From there included
fossils this may be co-related with the Devonian system
in England, where the Plymouth limestones are its
probable representatives. In photograph No. 50 a barrier
of such limestone is depicted, which can often be followed
for many miles, passable only through breaks made in it
by the river systems of the country, as shewn in Nos.
46 and 47.
The marbles of the Gladstone, Rockhampton, and Upper
Burdekin Districts belong to this same geological horizon.


Frame No. 10.
PALAEOZOIC (DEVONIAN).
Photograph No. 52. —View in the Corporation Quarry,
Eockhampton.
Here is exemplified the general appearance of a bare face of
this extensive rock system, as seen in creek and river sections
throughout the eastern portion of Queensland ; the average
inclination of the strata is also here shewn.
The lydianised slate and silicious limestones of the quarry
have been indurated and fitted for road metal for which they
have been used, by the action of a dyke of basalt which has
cut at right angles through the slates, &c.; beyond a limited
distance from the dyke the slates, &c., are no longer suitable
for road making.
Photograph No. 53. —View of the same character of rocks
as in No. 52, on Percy Eiver, a tributary of the Gilbert,
in Northern Queensland.
Photographs Nos. 54 and 55.—Two Views on the Gilbert
Eiver, about two miles below the junction of the Percy.
Here is exemplified the action of an intrusive dyke of
greenstone (diorite or diabase), which seems to play a most
important part in the mineralization of the sedimentary rocks
through which it has been intruded. At the intersection of
the dyke with the slates and sand-stones, a quartz vein will
be observed following one wall of the dyke ; this is auriferous,
and alluvial gold can be washed from the river sand in the
immediate vicinity, and also from the crevices of the rock
adjoining. It is, indeed, apparentl due to this combination
of geological phenomena, that certain areas in the Devonian
system of Queensland have been found to afford gold in


quantity sufficient to remunerate the miner for collecting it,
either from its matrix or from alluvial deposits resulting
from its disintegration and re-deposit, and the creeks and
gullies.
There are now opened in Queensland the following gold-
mining districts, where Devonian rocks, which have been
subjected to the influence of per- Carboniferous trappean
disturbance, form the geological conditions.
Commencing from the South, these are—
Lucky Valley,
Gympie,
Talgai,
Calliope,
Morinish,
Boyne,
Eosewood,
Mount Wyatt,
Broken Eiver,
Portion of Gilbert.
All these have been, and still are, centres of gold mining
enterprise ; and though most of the alluvial deposits have been,
comparatively speaking, “ worked out,” the value of the
original sources of supply, viz., the <c quartz veins,” are
becoming more and more attractive to the miner. The results
of the exploration of the a reefs ” of the larger “ reefing ’’
districts will be given when the photographs illustrative of
these localities are reached in their sequence.
Photograph No. 56. —Creek Sluicing in the ranges, showing
the method of concentrating the auriferous sand in a
creek bed, by passing the whole through a long trough
set at a gentle inclination, over which a steady flow of
water is conducted from the upper end.
The mud and lighter particles of sand are removed thus;
the large pebbles are rejected by throwing out with a £C sluicing
fork,” while the concentrated essence of the heavier particles


are caught by the cross-bars in the u tom,” placed at the
extreme end of the sheets of bark which, overlapping each
other, serve as feeders and preliminary concentrators to the
“ tom,” as does the il tom ” to the “ cradle.”
Photograph No. 57. —Yiew of the Township of “ Gilberton,”
from the Gold Commissioner’s Residence.
This affords a good general idea of the physical outline of
the country where Devonian rocks prevail. “ Gently sloping
ranges, lightly timbered with Iron-bark,” would be the usual
description of the surveyor in preparing a sale-plan of such
country, where it was sought to give the Colonial bidder an
dea of the country which he proposed to purchase.
METAMORPHIC.
Frame No. 11,
Photograph No. 58. —General Yiew of a Yalley cutting
through the “ Metamorphic ” system of rocks in Aus-
tralia.
The principal value of such areas is also shown in the piles
of earth thrown up from the shafts sunk by miners in search
of the gold, which this description of country is found to
produce.
The mining districts in Queensland confined to this rock-
system are—
The Cape, Part of Gilbert,
Ravenswood, Peak Downs,
Cloncurry,
most of which still employ a considerable population both for
alluvial and quartz mining.


Photograph No. 59.—View up the Einasleigh River, near
its junction with the Copper-field.
In the immediate foreground is a sterculia, whose bright
scarlet flowers form a very effective addition to the bush
scenery of Northern Queensland at the season of their
blooming, being all the more conspicuous, as at that time
the tree is entirely divested of leaves, and is a marked contrast
to the other forest-trees of the bush, which are evergreen.
The Einasleigh, which for many miles of its course runs
over the Mica and Hornblende schists of the metamorphic
series, is in that portion shewn in the photograph, a fair
representation of the rivers of this class in Queensland.
Photograph No. 60. —View of the rocky bed of the
Einasleigh River, near its junction with the Copper-field.
Here the structure of the various rocks of the meta-
morphic series is exemplified, the quartz veins which cross
their strike or trend, as well as the interla minated layers of
quartzite which form a part of their composition, being-
shown.
Mica and Hornblende schists and quartzites in recurrent
layers make up this extensive system, differing in no material
respect from the rocks developed in those portions of
Scotland where gold has lately been found, as in Suther-
landshire, <fcc.
Photograph No. 61. —View from the top of the Black
Mountain, in the Cape River District.
This is a very characteristic picture of the hill scenery,
where the rocks of the district are highly inclined, and of
varied capability in resisting the wear and tear of the
elements. The steep high ridge on the left is formed of a
very hard series of flinty quartzites, whilst the long line of


valley at its foot is scooped out from a parallel band of soft
mica-scbists. The valley is in turn succeeded on the right of
the view by a continuous chain of prominent hills, but lower
and more rounded than the range on the left. The Horn-
blende schists, of which these lower ridges are formed, resist
denudation with a force greater than that of the associated
mica-schists of the valley, but far less than the quartzites
of the leading range.
The physical contour of a country is indeed almost a sure
guide to the determination of its geology, when each great
rock system of a country has been previously studied.
Photograph No. 62. —View up the Cape River, near the
Upper Cape Diggings.
Whilst No. 61 is characteristic of the mountain ranges of
Queensland, wherever metamorphic or other highly inclined
strata crop out, this is equally so of the low ridges and open
undulating country pertaining to the same series.
The bed of the river in this photograph is also typical;
the water-hole in the foreground, where the washing
■operations of the alluvial miner are being carried on, is
succeeded in the distance by a waterless reach, a feature
common to many of the rivers of Queensland during the dry
season, that is, from .Tune to the end of October.
GRANITIC.
Frame No. 12.
Photographs No. 63 and 64.—Views showing Structure ot
Granite as exposed on numerous granitic ranges in
Queensland.


Photograph No. 65.—This view from the Low Country of the
Eastern Coast, looking towards the first Inland Range,
gives a good idea of the “ Bush ” country on granitic
tracts, such as those lying between Townsville and
Bowen, in the Kennedy District of the Colony.
On such areas both cattle and horses thrive very well, but
it is quite unadapted for sheep on account of the length of
the grass after the wet season, and the injury done to the
animal by the ripe seed of some of the coast grasses, which,
armed with hard barbed points, penetrate the skin, and
gradually force their way into the body, often causing death
and always great irritation and consequent loss of condition *
besides deterioration of the wool, from the hard seeds remain-
ing in it.
Photograph No. 66.— Fluted Granite Rock, shewing action
of rain-water on the hardest stone.
Photograph No. 67. — General physical character of granite
areas in the interior Districts of Queensland.
Photograph No, 68. —Ordinary Bush View in level granitic
districts.
TRAPPEAN.
Frame No. 13.
Photograph No. 69.—View of “ Basalt Dyke,” cutting
through “ Desert Sandstone,” on the so-called Granite
Creek in the Gilbert District.
This view is included in the group to show that the action
to which dykes of this kind are due, was continuous along


the eastern coast of Queensland beyond the period of
upheaval above the ocean of the Desert Sandstone.
Photograph No. 70.—View of Mount Wheeler, in the
Rockhampton District, which rises abruptly to a height
of about 800 feet above the surrounding country, the
most elevated of a series of nearly perpendicular dome-
shaped hills, by which it is surrounded.
These have probably been dykes intruded into the serpentine
by which they are surrounded, and then left as barriers by the
denudation of that soft and easily decomposed rock.
Within a limited radius of these, auriferous quartz veins
are found traversing the serpentine, and gold has even been
found in the serpentine itself, near Mount Wheeler, facts
which point to the direct association of such trappean action
with the formation of auriferous vein stones.
Photograph No. 71. —Yiew at McKenzie’s Copper Mine, in
the Broad Sound District.
The ordinary character of the bush, in areas where trappeah
rocks crop out, is here shewn, and their value as mineral
districts is indicated by the shafts in course of sinkjyig for
the exploration of a copper lode, which was discovered some
two years ago by Mr. McKenzie.
Samples of the Ore are shew in Case No. 5.
Photographs Nos. 72 and 73 —Showing the structure of trap
intrusions of diorite and diabase, so universally connected
in Queensland with the auriferous deposits that are met
with in the areas where Devonian rocks prevail.
The views were taken in the bed of the Gilbert River,
about two miles below its junction with the Percy.


Photograph No. 74. —View of the Junction of “Diorite
Dyke ” with Devonian slate, in the bed of the Gilbert
Eiver.
It will be observed that an auriferous quartz vein has been
produced along the line of intrusion at the absolute contact of
the two formations.
The occurrence of these peculiar geological conditions is
one of the surest theoretical guides to the gold prospector in
Queensland; the pick, shovel, and tin dish have also decided
the practical value of this knowledge. It will not be time
thrown away for the intending emigrant to Queensland to
make himself thoroughly acquainted with the group of rocks*
placed in Case No. 3, so that he may be able to recognize
them readily by their appearance ; for if he should turn his
attention to gold mining on arrival in that Colony, he may
find the information acquired here of great service.
“OLDER” VOLCANIC
Frame No. 14.
Phttograph No. 75. —View of a Railway Cutting on the
line between Ipswich and Towoomba.
The cutting at this point has been made through one of the
volcanic vents which afforded a passage for the flow of lava,
that has spread over the district known as Darling Downs,
and the decomposition of which, as before observed, forms sucli
excellent soil. It has been distinguished here by the term
“Older Volcanic,” as the “Desert Sandstone” separates this
from the “ Newer Volcanic ” of Mount Lang, and the Burdekiu
and Northern Queensland lavas generally.


Photograph No. 76. —View near the Township of Springsure.
This shows the bluff eastern escarpment which the volcanic
series of Southern Queensland often affects ; all along the main
range the descent from it towards the east is abrupt and often
precipitous.
Photographs Nos. 77 and 78 gives the general character of
volcanic country, such as Peak and Darling Downs;
richly grassed plains, broken here and there by isolated
ridges or hills of rock, round which the lava flowed.
In No. 77 the distant hill is of granite; on Darling and
Peak Downs, however, the lava streams as a rule filled valleys,
where the more elevated ridges were formed of Coal Measure
Sandstone, and coal seams are in consequence found under
the volcanic rocks on these areas.
These diversified rock features are often of the greatest
importance to the grazier, affording as they do a soil of a
sandy character, on which his stock can depasture during the
wet season, and so avoid foot rot and lung disease, which a
rich, adhesive, wet soil is apt to produce when there is little
shelter and no dry standing room.
In the soils resulting from the decomposition of carboni-
ferous and other sedimentary rocks, there is usually a fair
percentage of mineral salts, and especially of chloride of
sodium, or common salt, which has originally been deposited
with rocks having such an origin. Saline plants abound in
such areas, and the change of food is found to be most bene-
ficial to stock of all kinds, both as a preventive of such
diseases as fluke, and also as rapidly adding that extra
condition, technically called “ topping up,” which the most
succulent herbage in many parts of Queensland is not found
to give without salt. It will be well for any one who does


not possess the necessary Colonial experience, to bear in
mind when meditating the acquisition of a sheep or cattle
run in Queensland, that the ne plus ultra of a u run,” climate
apart, is volcanic soil for the open country , with salt-bush
ridges running through it.
Photograph No. 80. —View showing the structure sometimes
assumed by the Basalt, both older and newer, in Queens-
land.
This was taken in Northern Queensland, at a point opposite
the Bluff Downs Station on Basalt River, a tributary of the
Burdekin.
Though this is, strictly speaking, in a volcanic district to
which the term “ newer” has been applied, still it will serve
for the delineation of a structure common to both, that is, the
prismatic. Where the rock assumes this structure it is
generally very compact and resists denudation, forming rocky
ridges and table-lands, one of the two physical features into
which all the volcanic areas of the Colony may be divided, —
viz., open black or red soil plains, comparatively free from
stones and timber, and stony and rocky ridges and table-lands,
openly timbered with iron-bark ( eucalyptus ).
“ NEWER ” VOLCANIC.
Frame No. 15.
Photograph No. 81.—View of Alligator Pool, near the
junction of Copperfield and Einasleigh River.
The point selected for this Photograph was where a stream
of lava, which has filled the valleys of these two rivers, is
intersected by a deep chasm, into which the water of the


Copperfield rushes over a fall of about 100 feet. The
rock is swept clean by the summer floods, and so formed
•an excellent section for the delineation of the general
structure of the newer volcanic rocks.
This is the furthest point inland where alligators have
taken up a permanent residence in Queensland.
Photograph No. 82. —View looking down Basalt Creek
from the Bluff Downs Station, Northern Queensland.
It will be observed that, as shown in this view, the water
supply of the “ Newer Volcanic ” districts of Queensland is
abundant. Such indeed happens wherever, interstratified
with the various beds of lava, a stratum of volcanic mud (or
what is equivalent, a stratum whose decomposition has
resulted in the production of a ferruginous clay) occurs.
In such a case, this non-porous bed collects the water
filtering through the upper porous beds, and at various points
at the upper surface of the mud or clay-bed permanent
springs burst out. Where such non-porous beds are absent,
the water slowly filtering through the volcanic rock reaches
the underlying strata, and if these should happen to be
sandstones of the “ Coal Measures” or “Desert Sandstone ’’
series, it sinks into the earth below the level of the
a nd in such cases no permanent streams can be expected to
be found.
Photograph No. 83. —View of “Downs” Country, opposite
the “ Mary vale” Homestead in the Kennedy District in
Northern Queensland.
Though the locality above indicated is the actual point of
view of this photograph, it is representative of large tracts
of volcanic country, such as is on the map coloured red;


the soil is very good, and when the seasons are favourable,
the natural grasses and herbage are of the most varied and
nutritious character throughout the entire year.
Soils of this kind, as previously observed, are among those
most suited for the agriculturalist and planter.
Photograph No. 84.—View on Table-land near Muirsom’s
Station, on the watershed of the Flinders and Burdekin
Bivers.
In No. 83 the ‘‘Downs” Country (so called) is depicted,
while in this the lightly timbered “ table-land ” of volcanic
districts is typically shewn.
The physical characters here portrayed may be accepted
as the two representative types of ail the tC Newer Volcanic”
series of Queensland. The timber affecting such table-lands
is chiefly narrow leaved iron-bark, box and bloodwood,.
(eucalyptus crebra,e. polyaathemos, e. corymbosa ) respectively.
Photograph No. 85.—View in Volcanic Valley, on the
borders of a small Creek.
The line of “ flooded gums ” {eucalyptus tereticornis ) seen
in the foreground, marks the course of all such streams.
“ SQUATTEBS’ HOMESTEADS.”
Frame No. 16.
Photographs Nos. 86, 87, 88, 89, 90 and 91. —Views of
various Homesteads of “ Pastoral Tenants ” of the Crown,,
commonly called “ Squatters.”
In taking up “ new country ” the first idea of the “ squatter,”
generally, is to see that proper yards, &c., are constructed'
to secure his sheep from the attacks of native dogs, to build


drafting stock-yards and the necessary improvements, then to
look after his own comfort somewhat by building a shelter
for himself.
In the majority of instances the homestead at the end of
the first year of occupation consists of a slab-hut, of less
imposing appearance than that of the farmer on the Mary
Eiver, shown in Photograph No. 17. By degrees, if pro-
sperity justifies the action, or the past tastes of the owner
dictate such a course of proceeding, the kitchen is added, then
the men’s hut, then the garden, —all the buildings, how-
ever, up to this point generally have their sides constructed
of slabs, with roofs of bark. If wool goes up threepence a
pound, and the clip is good, then, perhaps, a more lavish
expenditure is incurred, and a house of sawn stuff, roofed
with “ shingles” or corrugated iron, dominates the land-
scape.
On the other hand, if the flocks of a pioneer are driven to
a country in the far North, which proves altogether unsuitable
for sheep, the homestead does not get beyond the first stage,
and its “ skeleton,” unroofed and de-slabbed (if such a word
may be coined for the occasion), marks the site of futile work
and ruined hopes. These are our failures, and such must
ever be, in all attempts to fight against nature.
On the pioneers fall all the experimental work in a Colony,
and by a merciful dispensation of Providence, they have
usually a fair share of the Mark Tapley disposition, and one
failure does not dispirit them from “ seeking fresh fields and
pastures new.” Thanks to them, the lines of demarcation
are now well drawn, where sheep and cattle will, or will
not, thrive in Queensland, and any one entering into squatting
there can invest in such properties on their known merits.


The “ Darling Downs ” are acknowledged to be the best
pastures for sheep, where quality of wool and size of animal
are both taken into consideration. The Western Plains of
the Barcoo, Thompson, and Upper Flinders also produce well-
framed and very fat sheep, but the climate affects the wool in
a prejudicial manner.
It may safely be asserted that all Queensland is suitable for
cattle.
PHASES OF PASTORAL LIFE.
Frame No. 17.
Photograph No. 92. — View of Shearing Shed on Darling
Downs, with sheep penned up ready for shearing.
This is one of the busiest times in the life of the sheep
farmer, a fact easily realized, when it is remembered that on
some stations on Darling Downs 100,000 sheep are shorn
each year.
Photograph No. 93. —View of Wool Shed, with Bullock
Dray loaded up with wool, and shearers standing about
outside awaiting the “cheque” which rewards their
labors on the shearing floor.
Practised hands will shear one hundred sheep a day
sufficiently well to pass muster with the overseer of the shed,
and as from three to four shillings a score is paid for
shearing, according to locality, the wages earned would
certainly be a recommendation to many a toiling labourer in
England, whose pay per week about equals the earnings per
day of a Queensland shearer. Many men follow this occupa-
tion the greater part of the year, as it has become the practice


on many stations in Northern Queensland to shear after the
rainy season, i.e., about April, whilst in the south, September
and the two following months constitute the shearing time.
Mounted on a good roadster with a dash of blood in his
veins, and a ditto, ditto following him with his “ swag,’ the
genuine Queensland shearer, accompanied by his “ mate,”
for every man has his “ fidus Achates,” travels from station
to station during the shearing season, and to fill up the other
portion of the year, perhaps takes a turn at the Diggings.
Specimens of the type of these in their ordinary dress, a
pair of moleskin trousers and Crimean shirt (for the climate
the greater part of the year necessitates no warmer clothing),
are before us.
Photograph No. 94. —“ Spell, oh! ”
Having got well out of rather a soft spot on the bush track,
which at certain seasons is subject to those local peculiarities,
the teamsters depicted in the photograph think it is a “ fair
thing ” to unyoke their bullocks, and replenish the inner man
themselves. This is another calling which pays well in
Queensland, the necessary funds for the purchase of rolling
stock having been previously earned at some other occupation.
The rate for cartage varies very much in different parts
of the Colony according to the goodness of the roads, the
obstructions of flooded rivers, &c. From £1 to £l 10s. per
ton for ten miles for a long trip in the north, and from ten to
fifteen shillings for the same in the south, would be about the
average of payment.
Eight to ten good bullocks will move a load of three tons,
eight to ten miles a day, and twelve good horses will move
four tons about 15 miles a day with the roads in fair order,
and the feed by the way abundant.


The wear and tear of horse teams and the original cost
of the stock is much greater than with, bullock teams, but the
rapidity gained more than counterbalances the increased ex-
pense ; it will be seen, however, that in either case the
“ teamster ” working his own team, if a steady industrious
man, can in a short time earn the means for laying the
foundation, as many have done, of a moderate competence.
Photograph No. 95. — The bullocks ie turned out” from the
dray of No. 94.
If bullocks, as we are given to believe, are ruminating
animals, the near side leader and bodij bullock in the photo-
graph certainly are, if there is any truth in facial expression.
The leader is evidently too tired to think in a standing
position, so he lies down to it, his yoke-fellow with an air of
resignation bearing the most of his companion’s burden.
He is probably reflecting, “ why all this hard language, why
all this shouting and application of a defunct bullock’s hide
to his palpitating and already scarified cuticle? It is true
the bog was there, it is also true that the wool must be got
to market, and they are prepared to do it. Did Rowdy jib,
did Brandy refuse to do his “ level best” ? If not, then why,
when each and all are striving their utmost, comes down the
blow on blow, injustice on injury ?”
And echo answers, why ?
Photograph No. 96.—Empty teams on their way to the
Port for loading up.
A characteristic bit of bush scenery near the coast.
Photograph No. 97.—Mid-day camp in the bush for a
“ feed ” and a “ spell.”


“ PHASES IX MINING LIFE. 1 '
FRAME No. 18.
Photographs No. 98.— f£ Morning,” going to work.
No. 99.—“ Evening,” slinging the billy.
No. 100.—“ Sunday at Home.”
No, 101.—“ Fair exchange no robbery.”
No. 102, — a Chinese digger taking it easy.
No. 103.— u Chinese digger starting for work.
QUARTZ MINING.—GYMPIE DISTRICT.
FRAME No. 19.
Photographs No. 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, are illus-
trative of various claims on lines of auriferous lodes at
Gympie, one of the principal quartz mining Districts ia
Queensland. The means adopted for raising and remov-
ing the quartz from the veins, and carting it away to the
crushing machinery is here shewn.
This is rapidly becoming a very important interest in
Queensland, and one in which numbers of miners are finding
remunerative employment.
The regulations adopted by the Government of Queensland
for the acquisition of such properties are very simple in the
carrying out, and very advantageous and inexpensive to the
bona fide miner. Each holder of a “ miner’s right,” which is
obtained at a cost of ten shillings per annum, is entitled to
take up forty feet on a line of reef, by a width of 200 feet on


each side; or a party of six miners, can obtain 240 feet of a
continuous lode by total width of 400 feet. The only other
condition for securing the tenure is, that whilst the quartz is
remunerative to work, the full number of men shall be kept
employed every ordinary working day, and when temporarily
the lode becomes too poor to pay the working expenses,
half the full complement of men need only be employed.
Provision is made in the regulations for after amalgamation,
but no claim, in the first instance, is granted to more than
six men.
It is likely that, when the water level is reached in most
of the quartz mines in Queensland, and the gold becomes
more intimately associated with sulphurets of iron and other
metals, amalgamation and work on a large scale by asso-
ciated companies will be the order of the day, for there is
plenty of scope in Queensland for both forms of auriferous
lode mining, viz. that by Companies working their own
machinery and that by small parties of miners whose quartz
is to be crushed by public mills.
The former, with a proper amount of capital to start with,
will however be able to work remuneratively lodes which
would have to be abandoned by the latter.
A painting, lent for exhibition by Mr. John Harris of
Brisbane, gives an excellent bird’s eye view of Gympie,
(over Frame 19), which was first discovered in 1868, and at
once established a reputation for the richness of its alluvial
deposits and quartz veins.
Mr. Hackett, reporting on the district in the early part of
1869, says :
“ The area comprising the Diggings consists of a succes-
*‘ sion of low ridges, spurs, and gullies of a rounded character,


u presenting no steep inclinations or sections. This is sur-
rounded on all sides by higher ranges, bearing the same
general character. This gold field probably contains the
greatest known number of quartz reefs in a given area.
“ The number of reefs to which prospector’s claims have
“been granted is 175, of which 10 have been proved to be
“ distant continuations of the same reef, leaving 165 as the
“ absolute nuunber of the reefs worked, comprising 1,200
“ claims.
“ These are mostly confined within an area of 4|- square
“ miles, viz :—within a belt three-quarters of a mile in width
11 and six miles in length, bearing North 40° MTest to South,
“ 40° East.”
The map of this district, constructed by Mr. Racket,
shewing the position of the various reefs, with their names,
etc., hangs above the photographs of the district, for easy
reference.
The following statement of crushing represents the returns
in gold from the principal reefs of the district, sufficiently
complete to show the average quality of the stone of the
Gympie Reefs during 1869.
The total amount in tons according to this statement is
11-996 tons, for a yield of 76-870 ozs. which gives an
average of 6 oz. 8 dwts. 4 grs. per ton, the highest average for
quartz of any gold field in Australia.
Tors. ounces.
Alma . • . No. 5 South . . 20 . 82
Beehive . . • Prospect claim . . 11 . 5£
Bristol . . • Prospect . . . 25 . 79
> Specimens . • • I^o
. . . Prospect . • • 1 * *45
Canadian, . . Prospect • • . 6 . 8i


Caledonian . . No. 1, Lawrence & Co. . 3 367
. 3 . 450
Tons.
» . . Goodchap & Co. . . 39 . 708
n • . No. 1 North . . 56 1020
5» • • Prospect claim . . 38 , 1188
’i • . No. 3 , , . 11 . 73
sj • . Prospect claim . . 42 1278
>5 • . No, 1, North . . 14 343
» • • Prospect claim . .100 . 340
si • • j) . . 154 490
15 • • No. 5, North . . 89 481
5i • • No. 1 , . 63 . 84
• • No. 2 . . 70 . 52
No. 2
>5 • • No. 2 . . . 110 . 76£
No. 1, South . . 76 . 92
55 • • No. 2, North . , 70 330
» • • No. 2, North . . 50 . 30
California . . No. 1, North , .13 . 343
5j • • 55 . 13 353
55 • • * 55 . . 31 , 841
55 • • Prospect claim . .100 . 350
55 • . No. 1, North , , 22 . 103
No. 1, South (specimens) . . 200
ii • . No. 1, South . , 37 518
55 • • No. 2, North . . 27 . 57a
55 ... No. 1, South . . 50 308
Channan. . . No. 1, South . . 86 60
Columbian . . No. 3, South . 13 10
Chatsworth . , Prospect (few buckets) . .412
» • • No, 1, North . 97 g2£
” * * 55 . . 100 50£
” * 55 . 55 67f
* * * • • . . 40 . 37J
Dawn ... No. 1, South . . 9 9
Dodd’s Eeef . . Prospect claim . 10 . noo


Tons.
Dodd’s Reef . . » • .73 . 124
24 . 162
„ • • >»
Doctor’s Reef . . „ • . 6J . 16
Ellen Harkins . . .... . . 6 . 6£
Golden Bar . . (few buckets)
.. . 500
(12 tons rubble) . . • 670
Golden Currie . . No. 2, South . .28 . 66
. 13 . 7*
Glanmere . . No. 1, North . . 39 . 34
. 40 41t
Hamburg . . No. 1, South . . 14 . 7£
Hope Reef . . . . • . 39 . 59
. 25 11
Hilton ... No. 2, North . . 20 . 217
. 22 . 230 i
No. 3, North . .30 .100
. . . iuf. u,
„ . . . No. 2, North . .27 . 156
. . • • >
icward Bound . . . 18 . 162
Homeward Bound .
Inglewood . . No. 5, West . .140 . 100
. 155 . 142|
»»•••»>
. 35 , 144
»> • • ”
26 . 26
• • u
.30 . 26
» • • n
No, 5, North . , 25 . 8
John Bright . . (36 tons rubble)
Jones . . - No, 4, South • . 30 , ,75
. No. 5, . . . 22 . 58
„ . • ■ "“.“i
„ . . No. 1, . . 17 . CO
„ No. 3, . . . 13 . 16
„ . . . No. 4, . . CO . 155
99 * * # ’
, . . Prospect claim . . 10 .
cwt.
Lady Mary - . Prospect claim . . 3 . 267
Lawrence & Pollock . 7 . 1483
. 4 . 470
99 * 99 ‘
. . Brown, Lord & Co. . 7 . 1358


Lady Mary . . Prospect claim . . 60 3443
„ . No. 5, South . . 60 455
„ . . No. 4, South . .120 . 3351
„ . . No. 9, South . .27 . 127
„ . . No. 8, South . . 50 . 40
„ , . Prospect claim , .120 . 120
~ , . No. 1, North . . 26 . 44
„ . . No. 3, South . . 200 . 53
„ . . No. 1, South . . 80 . 13
„ . . No. 2, North . . 32 . 96
„ . . No. 5, South . . 41 . 26
)f . . No. 8, South . . 20 1167
„ . No. 9, North . . 24 . 47
„ . , No. 2, North . . 40 . 54
Louisa . . . No. 6, North . . 30 551
, . . No. 1, North . . 40 213
„ . . No. 5, North . . 10 . 62
Long Looked for. . Prospect . . 21 335
London . . . No. 2, South . . 18 40
„ . . . Prospect . . 80 2420
„ . . . No. 1, North . . 8 498
„ . . . Prospect . , 7 . 14
Lady Flora . . . . . .11. 7
Monkland
No. 6, North
3 . 300
Tons.
No. 3, South
No. 1, North
No. 4, South
No. 2, South
78 . 2346
65 . 1126
250 . 523
. 170 , 1345
. 160 . 777
No. 2 & 3, North
Prospect
. 100 . 140
. 100 . 730
yy
99
No. 3, South
No. 5, South
No. 3, South
. 38 . 114
. 10 . 274
. 174 . 668
. 115 . 1400
Fo. 2 & 3, North .
No. 1, South


Tons.
Monkland . . Gillespie & Murphy . 65 . 425
No. 2, South . . 400 , 400
No. 4, South . . 50 . 100
No. 3, North . . 217 . 525
No. 6, North . .126 .445
No. 3, South . .260 .1150
IB . . . 70 . 70
No. 3, Souih . . 110 . 4271
No. 4, South . . 200 . 959»
No. 2& 3, North (one bucket) . 110
No. 5, South . . 120 . 760 i
No. 2, South (top stone) .214 . 20
No. 4, South . . 165 . 592 1
Prospect . .10 . 10
Monkland . . McGann . . . 64 . 24J
New Zealand . . Prospect . . . 225 . 1540
No. 1, South . . 90 511
, Prospect . . . 196 925
No. 1, North . ~ 45 76
No. 1, South . . 45 800
No. 3, North (top stone) . 22 . 35J
• „ . 8 . 83i
Prospect claim . . 400 . 2098
. . „ . 300 . 2368
„ . . „ . 200 . 1065
Otago . . Prospect claim . . 60 250
„ • „ . . 70 . 126|
'One Mile Reef . . . . . . 10 . 50
No. 1, North . . 19 . 180
No. 2, North . . 17 . 339
No. 1, North . . 60 . 810
No. 2, North . . 28 . 80
No. 1, North . . 45 . 2381
Prospect claim . . 25 78|
Oro Reef . • Prospect . . . 14 . 22
„ . ' *k . 11


_ Tons.
Nicoll S'Reef . . . . , . 70 . 68
j, . . Prospect claim . . 35 * 85|
Never Mind . , Prospect claim . . 80 . 402
Nil Desperandum . . . . 69 . 252
47* . 113
3O . 7*
Nonpareil . , Prospect claim . . 12 . 12
O’Connel . . No. 2, North . . 14 . 30
•> • • ~ . . 8 . 24
Perseverance . . No, 1, North . . 60 . 1146
~ ' . . Prospect claim . . 42 340
n • • No. 2, North . . 101 . 87*
rr • • No. 2, South . . 16 18*
• No. 1, North . . 14 98*
»> • • No. 2, South . . 28 14
»»•’ • • No; 3, South . . 30 , 19J
Russell . . No. 4, North . . 31 . 80
Smithfield . . No. 1, South . 46 1192
Prospect . . . 255 . 261
’ - . No. 2, North . . 37 . 18*
it • . . Prospect claim . . 400 . 396*
n ‘ *. • No. 1, South . . 200 . 392
»» • . No. 1, North , . 75 . 71
» • . No. 1, South . . 100 . 110
’ • ♦ Prospect claim . . 100 . 65
Something Fresh . . . ■ . 4 . 4
St. Patrick • . . No. 1, North ", . 16 . 635
»> " • • Prospect’ . , 10 . 421
»»' • • Landj&Co. ‘ . , 10 . 387
»■ . . Prospect claim . . 18 . 75
j»' " . . No. , North ", ", 9 91
tt • . Prospect claim (tefuse) 80 42
Sadowa • . , , , , . 14 . 109
»’ ’ • . 300 ozs. washed by hand . . 300
. . - 30 . 300
St. Kilda * . • . No. 1, South * . * . 75 so*


Tons.
Unfortunate Female . . . , . 6 V 19£
Warren Hastings . Prospect ' 16 . 31
. 15 , 12
Welcome
Prospect . . 32 . 23
West Coast
No. 1, South . . 31 8J
The Escort Returns from this Gold Field in 1868—1869
were as follows :
1868. Ozs. dwts. grs.
Jan. 3526 17 7
Peb. 3490 1 4
„ 1478 11 9
Mar. 2191 9 10
„ 2218 0 5
April 3966 12 20
4488 8 17
May 6529 7 10
„ 4389 4 13
June 3512 10 15
„ 4221 14 8
„ 3579 3 16
July 3630 18 12
„ 2401 19 11
Aug. 4239 9 0
2179 10 23
Sept. 2560 12 7
„ 1791 11 1
Oct. 2332 3 3
„ 2564 17 13
Nov. 9026 2 22
1868. Ozs. dwts. grs.
Nov. 4664 8 0
Dec. 4738 10 21
„ 2069 19 16
1869.
Jan. 3323 4 3
• „ 3828 15 7
Feb. 3324 1 12
„ 1984 3 22
March 3390 5 23
„ 2291 8 9
April 2323 *l2 3
„ 3654 1 17
May 4006 4 11
1010 13 2
June 5062 3 17
1550 19 13
July 6406 17 22
„ 1234 18
Aug, 3618 17 1
„ 6000 2 15
Sept. 4085 17 3
Oct. 5868 17 6
Nov. 3123 11 22
Since this complete list was published there has been no
further available statement of the yields from all the reefs
for 1870. But the results of one of the best reefs on
Gympie was given in the Gympie Times of September 29th,


1869.
February 22nd
169
925
13
5
June 2nd
416
2,979
9
4
August 2nd
300
2,338
2
12
October 1st
312
1,061
3
12
December 20th
220
992
13
6
March 29th
168
1,135
0
6
June 13 th
142
1,843
2
12
1870, and as it shews the rate per ton obtained from the
surface to the lowest level reached in the claim, 140 feet, it
is valuable as giving promise of equally successful results for
other mines of the same character in depth :—According
to this Journal.
“ A magnificent yield has been obtained from the pros-
pector’s “New Zealand” Reef, viz., 140 tons, which we are
informed has been raised in the short space of six weeks and
has given a return of 1,755 ozs. 8 dwts., or an average of
over 12£ ozs. to the ton.”
The following is a list of all crushings since the claim was
taken up, and for which we are indebted to the manager.
1868. ounces dwts. grs.
November 10th 230 1,593 16 12
July 29th 166 614 5 0
August 30th 164 1,828 10 0
October 17th 140 1,755 8 0
Thus there have been crushed in the aggregate 2,42 7 tons for a
yield of 16,167 ozs. 4 dwts., or an average of nearly 6f ozs.
to the ton. It will also be noticed that up to the end of the
year 1869 there were crushed 1,647 tons for a yield of
8,990 ozs. 18 dwts. 3 grs., or nearly 5 \ ozs. to the ton, and
during the present year, 780 tons for a yield of 7,176 ozs.,
or over 9 ozs. to the ton. We mention this because we are
told that the whole of the stone crushed during the year


1868-1869 was procured from 80 feet level to the surface,
whilst that crushed during the present year was obtained
from the 140 feet level.
These figures show beyond doubt that the New Zealand
Reef improves in its yields in proportion to the depth of
sinking. It will also be seen that the two latest crushings
have given a return of 3,583£ ozs. for 304 tons of stone or
an average of over 10 ozs. to the ton. As this quantity of
i tone was all raised in ten weeks, the claim has been yielding
during that period the fine return of over 3500z5. per week.
The reef at the level of 125 feet averages about 1 foot in
thickness.
During 1870 the amount of gold forwarded from this gold
field per escort was 44,785 oz. 17 dwts. 3 grains. In 1871
it was 44,713 oz. 10 dwts. 6 grains, which, added to 1,985 ozs-
-7 dwts. 6 grains, forwarded privately in August, make a
grand total of 46,698 17 dwts. 19 grains for that year.
Whilst the New Zealand Reef maintained its richness,
(crushings like that in the early part of 1871, viz. 183 tons
for 1,509 ozs. of gold, being no uncommon yield), the Smith-
field, another celebrated reef at Gympie, seems lately to have
been producing more than ever. The correspondent of the
Brisbane Courier of date January 22nd, 1872, describing
a very rich discovery that had then taken place, says—
“ A splendid patch has been struck in No. 1. North Smith-
field. We did not see the specimens, for they have been banked
and sealed in bags, but we are informed by various parties
who did, and by the holders of the claim themselves, that
they are the richest that have ever been found on the
Smithfield line. The golden stone was first met with on
Tuesday afternoon, and on Wednesday the owners had a


continuation of their good luck all day ; in the afternoon the
specimens, ten bagsfull, were lodged in the bank; they are
estimated to contain fully 1,000 ozs. of gold, consequently the
next crushing from the claim promises to be an excellent one.
The patch was got in the southern drive, about twelve feet from
the shaft, and at the 105 feet level. Here the reef is fully
6 feet thick ; it however varies in size, and in other places it
is much larger than this, for instance, ten feet higher up
being quite 16 feet wide.”
In the previous May, from the prospector’s claim on the
same reef at a depth of ] IV feet 415 tons of quartz was raised
in eight weeks, yielding 2,230 ozs. of gold. It will be
seen, therefore, that the character of this District is still
maintained.
CAPE RIVER MINING DISTRICT.
Frame No. SO.
Photograph No. 110.— View of Mount Davenport in the
Cape River District. At the foot of this hill auriferous
quartz veins, of a greater general thickness than those
met with in most of the gold mining localities in Queens-
land have been discovered, and very rich patches of the
precious metal were found in a few claims. Other
localities, however, were more attractive, and most of the
reefs have in consequence been somewhat neglected.
Photograph No. 111. — General view over McGann’s Flat
from the top of Commissioners’ Hill.
Photograph No. 112.—Panoramic view of the Cape River
from the top of Commissioners’ Hill.


Balgay
... 12 inches
... ozs.
Albion
... 10 „
... 1 oz. 13
dwts.
Commissioners
... 10 „
... 1 oz. 13
dwts.
Victoria
... 10 „
... 2 ozs.
This gives a characteristic bird’s eye view of most of the
mineral districts of Queensland low ridges, moderately
timbered with iron bark, with here and there a prominent
hill, backed in the distance by granite ranges, whose outline,
as here represented, is typical of such ranges throughout the
Colony.
Photographs Nos. 113 and 114, — View up and down the
Cape Eiver from near the Upper Cape Township.
The mining in this district is now chiefly confined to
quartz.
The returns of some of the mines around Mount Remark-
able are tabulated as follows: p
Name of Reef. Average Thickness. Yield per Ton.
Eoot Hog or Die ... 18 ~ ... 3£ ozs.
Near Mount Davenport the General Grant and The Union
are the principal reefs. From Claim No. 1, South, on the
latter line of reef, 700 ounces of gold were extracted from
14 tons of quartz.
A general report on this Cape Eiver Field, by the Gold
Commissioner, in July last, speaks favorably of its relative
value as affording remunerative work to the miners, “who
are doing on the whole exceedingly well, and are earning good
wages. The yield of the Union lead is better than at first.
The Balgay Reef is at work, the depth of shaft being 134 feet.
Stevens’ prospective claim, granted three years ago, is yield-
ing equally as well as it did at first. The population is at
present about 850, viz.:—Europeans,* 2so ; Chinese, 600.”


EAVENSWOOD MINING DISTRICT.
Frame No. 21.
Photograph No. 115.— View of the Township of Ravens-
wood, shortly after the discovery of the auriferous reefs
of that district.
Scarcely a twelvemonth has passed since this view was
taken, and a commencement made of the exploration of
auriferous veins, which are now found to equal in value and
steadiness of yield those of any other district in the Colony.
The character of the reefs themselves was not then well
understood; to men accustomed to judge of the value of a
vein by the gold visible to the eye, the Eavenswood stone
appeared valueless, as it was rare indeed that a spec could be
thus detected.
In the case of the specimens which are placed underneath
this photograph, it will be seen that those representing the
character of the Eavenswood reefs are in most cases dingy
brown ferruginous looking stones, with nothing particular
to mark them from a lump of ironstone to be picked up
anywhere. But if they are crushed and pounded in a
mortar, and the iron, mud and the small particles of quartz
washed off, it will then be found that a heavy sediment of
very fine dust remains, which is in reality gold in an extremely
fine state of sub-division, through frequently shewing none
of the well-known colour of that metal until burnished, or
cleaned with acid. This more especially applies to the reefs of
the “Main Camp;” those of the Middle Camp and Burdekin
River have more in common with those of other localities, the


matrix of the precious metal being quartz. Unlike most of
the other Queensland Diggings, the rock in which the
auriferous veins are found is composed of granite, and in
this more resembles the mode of occurrence observed in some
localities in New South Wales.
The yield of gold from the reefs since the starting of the
first quartz mill (the Lady Mary) at Ravenswood, from the
20th April, 1870, to October 15th, of the same year, was at
the rate of 2 ozs. 14 dwts. of gold per ton. Thus tons
of quartz produced 5,682 ozs. melted gold. At the close of
the year 1870, the number of tons of quartz crushed had
been 3,266, and the average return was still 2 ozs. 14 dwts.
One hundred and nine distinct reefs had then been discovered.
The resident Gold Commissioner, Mr. Hacket, thus
describes the physical and geological features of the District
under his charge :
“ The area comprising the Diggings as seen from a neigh-
bouring hill represents a basin open on one side, or natural
amphitheatre, sloping south west, towards the Burdekin River
which forms its front, and bounded on the south east by the
Porter Range, on the east and north east by the Leichhardt
Range, on the north west by Scrubby Range. The Tacker
and Roby Ranges abut on this basin with their respective
ends. In thus presenting a basin in the break of the Ranges,
it resembles topographically most of the rich diggings and im-
portant mining districts. The basin is drained principally
by the Elphinstone and Conolly Creek. The surrounding
hills consist of hard granite with excess of pink felspar, ot
slate, and of felsite, whilst the rock in the said basin is granite
of soft description composed of quartz, mica, hornblende, and
a small mixture of felspar of a friable nature.


“ This rock is in most places decomposed near the surface’
and easily disintegrates. The reefs are found in this soft
granite, which they traverse in all directions, and the richest
have a bearing a few degrees north of west, with an underlie
to the east. The average bearing of 70 reefs is N. 16 W.,
with a general underlie to east north east. In thickness
they vary from 6 inches to 3 feet.
“ Some of the claims have already been worked to a depth
of 120 feet on the underlie of the reef, and some 50 shafts
have obtained a depth of 60 feet without any apparent
diminution either in the size of the reefs or in their richness.
The Commissioners report for June, 1871, embodying the
principal mining results from the first half of the year is here
reproduced, as affording the most authentic summary :
“ 1. The number of new reefs to which prospectors’ claims
have been granted is fourteen, making a total of 152 distinct
reefs to which claims have been granted, of which 140 are
being actually worked. The number of claims on these reefs
is about 400.
“2. The crushings have been 2,743 tons, yielding 4934 ozs.,
as per list annexed; of these the most important are ; —The
General Grant prospecting claim, which has already yielded
900 ozs. and is still being crushed ; Donnybrook No. 1 east,
28 tons, yielding 304 ozs.—a former crushing from this claim
was mentioned in my last report as producing 12 ozs. per ton,
say 356 ozs., so that the yield from this claim may be ex-
pected to be considerable ; the Sunset prospectors’ claim, 204
tons, yielding 725 ozs.
“ 3. The escorts have been : —3,894 ozs. on May 30, 4,925
ozs. on June 26 ; making a total of 26,304 ozs. since escort of


January last; shy about 1,000 ozs. per week, which
average will for the future be considerably increased.
“ Of the newly-discovered reefs the most important are the
Politician and the parallel reef at Australia Felix, both near
Sandy Creek. This reef, like most of the reefs in this neigh-
bourhood, usually contains solid and decomposed galena, of
which, on this field, gold is the constant concomitant. At
the Lower Camp, Kirker’s reef is the most important dis-
covery. It has been opened in six claims for a length of a
quarter of a mile, with an average thickness of one foot. The
stone is solid quartz, which on crushing has yielded 2 ozs. per
ton. The Abyssinia is a reef one foot in width, with very
coarse gold. A discovery has just been made by a Chinaman
of a reef five miles south of the Lower Camp, near Fish Creek,
in an entirely new locality. The outcrop of the reef has been
traced some quarter of a mile, with rich stone at intervals;
seven claims have already been taken up on the reef. In the
event of gold being found here in quantity, the numerous reefs
which now crop out on the surface in that locality would all
be prospected. As it is, a small rush has set in in that
direction.
“ The population on the gold-field has been gradually and
steadily increasing, the new arrivals being almost entirely from
other parts of Queensland. The number of miners’ rights
issued in this quarter, to the present, is 693. The township
has been gradually increasing, both in extent and in the per-
manent character of the buildings.”
The following List shews the progress made from June to
August of the same year.


Returns of the amount of Gold from the crushing machines
at Ravenswood from June 27 till August 10, 1871.
NAME OF CLAIM.
Working Miners Machine.
Hector prospectors’ claim
Bristol prospectors’ claim
Surface, Buchanan’s Gully
Eock of Cashel prospector’s claim
Surface
Ditto
Washdirt
General Grant prospector’s claim
Surface
Ditto
Ditto, Eight-mile
Eureka prospectors’ claim
Bodels Hill Reef prospectors’ claim
Beaton’s Surface
Welcome prospectors’ claim .
Charlmont prospectors’ claim
Surface
La Perouse 1 B
Surface, Buchanan’s Gully
Lady Marion Machine.
Surface (Swyney’s)
Hoppering (Squirs’)
Inkerman prospectors’ claim
La Perouse (surface) ...
Happy-go -Lucky
Cornish Bill (protection area)
Linger and Die (Hanson’s) ..
Washdirt, Nolan’s Gully
Ditto ditto
Ditto ditto
Weight Amount
of Stone. of Gold.
Tns. cwt. oz. dwt. gr
6 0 ... 5 0 0
26 0 ... 44 9 0
3 15 ... 6 0 0
10 0 ... 11 16 11
1 0 ... 0 16 0
7 10 ... 5 9 19
6 7 ... 10 0
375 0 ... 1570 0 0
1 ... 9 0 0
3 5 ... 3 0 0
2 1 ... 16 0
119 0 ... 242 0 0
15 8 ... 19 7 0
2 0 ... 1 12 0
115 0 ... 276 11 0
2 12 ... 7 1 10
2 0 ... 2 5 0
84 0 ... 96 11 0
2 0 ... 011 0
786 19 2302 14 16
14 0 ... 14 0 0
50 0 ... 61 0 0
24 0 ... 5 10 0
37 0 ... 37 0 0
15 0 ... 40 0 0
6 0 ... 14 0 0
41 0 ... 66 10 0
45 0 ... 48 0 0
23 0 ... 17 0 0
34 0 ... 27 0 0


Ditto ditto 32 0 ... 28 0 0
Ditto ditto 24 0 ... 19 0 0
Red Streak No. 1 N 23 0 ... 141 13
367 0 518 13
Mabel Machine.
Eldorado prospectors’ claim. Eight-mile ... 35 0 ... 51 9 7
London No. 1 N ... ... ... ... 51 6 ... 28 18 4
Duke of Edinburgh No. 1 N 17 6 ... 813 7
Berlin (surface) 19 0 ... 21 0 0
Rocky Point prospectors’ claim 30 0 ... 27 7 0
Hopperings 28 0 ... 9 4
Lady Louisa prospectors’claim 50 3 ... 20 11 18
The Brothers 1 S 44 0 ... 12 16
Union Jack prospectors’ claim 30 0 ~ 50 0 0
Slaughteryard 26 0 ... 26 1 0
Elphinstone Reef 63 0 ... 17 0 ©
La Perouse No. 1 A 55 0 ... 64 0 0
Surface... ... ... ... ... ... 30 0 ... 31 10 0
Mellnauer No. 1E 51 0 ... 59 0 0
Ahysinian prospector’s claim ... ... 22 0 ... 45 18 0
Surface, No. 1 N Grant 80 0 ... 29 18 0
631 9 503 6 18
Vulcan Machine.
Molly Malone prospectors’claim .. .. 238 0 .. 176 0 0
Hector prospectors’s claim 38 0 .. 31 0 0
Surface .. .. .. .. •• 40 0 . • 5670
Mary prospectors’ claim .. .. •. 80 0 .. 307 0 0
General Grant No, 2 N (cross reef) .. 73 0 .. 83 0 0
Surface .. ~ .. .. •• 132 0 .. 100 0 0
Ditto 24 0 .. 36 11 0
Molly Malone No. I S 1110.. 90 10 0
Surface .. .. '., .. .. 52 0 .. 24 0 0
788 0
904 18


Central Machine.
Star of Hope prospectors’claim ... ... 01 10 ... 57 ' 3 0
Trieste prospectors’claim (surface) ... 38 0 ... )
Ditto ditto (quartz) 59 0 ... '
Erin’s Hope prospectors’ claim 38 0 ... 11714 0
Donnybrook prospectors’claim ... » ... 46 0 ... 63 0 0
Trieste Nos. 1 and 2 S amalgamated ... 63 0 ... 240 13 0
Iron Dnke Prospectors’ claim ... ... 11 0 ... 37 10 0
Kirker’s Reef. 50 0 ... 99 17 0
Columbia prospectors’claim ... ... ... 44 0 ... 90 15 0
Star of the South No. 2 N ... ... ... 20 0 ... 19 0 0
Nil Desperandum prospectors’ claim ... 26 10 ... 53 18 13
Star of the South No. 1 S ... ... ... 41 10 ... 47 18 0
Donnybrook No. 1 N ... ... ... ... 38 0 ... 303 5 0
Donnybrook prospectors’claim 77 10 ... 171 0 0
Trieste No. 5 S ... ... 14 0 ... 16 12 0
Wheal Lena prospectors’claim ... ..... 17 0 ... 23 15 0
Protection Area ... ... ... ... 810 ... 25 11 0
Ditto 710 ... 16 17 0
Star of the South No. 1 N 20 0 ... 9 10 0
Hubert’s protection Area ... 21 0 ... 14 1 0
Sailor’s Reef prospector’s claim 25 0 ... 24 610
727 9 1,584 5 23
VAMif nu t'T s i\r Weight Amount
NAME OF CLAIM. of Stone. ef Gold.
Tns t cwt oz. dwt. gr.
Enterprise Machine.
Jolly Waternlan prospectors’ claim 29 10 ... 49 3 0
West of England, Eight-mile ... ” ... 10 0 ... 26 0 0
Golden Point, Eight-mile 1 ... ... ... 21 10 ... 15 10 0
Sunset (surface) ... ” ... ' * ... *• ... 68 0 ... 13 5 0
Surface ' ” ... '■ ... 15 10 ... 4 3 0
Rob Roy prospectors’claim ... ”... ■■ ... 44 10 ... 116 0 0
Surface, Sunset Gully ” ... •• ... ” ... 14 0 ... 10 6 0
Sam, Blackall prospectors’ claim 52 17 ... 65 9 0
Victoria prospectors’claim 34 10 ... 42 3 5


„ . Weight. Amount
NAME OF CLAIM. of Stone. of Gold.
Tns. owt oz. dwt. gr.
Enterprise Machine.
Wheel of Fortune No. IS 31 0 ... 22 3 0
Molly Malone No. 2 S 61 0 ... 53 4 0
Liverpool prospectors’claim 31 0 ... 92 0 0
Denmark prospectors’ claim 26 10 ... 40 4 0
Sam. Blackall No. IN 23 10 ... 46 0 0
Boomerang prospectors’claim 44 10 ... 76 15 0
Mcllnauer No. 2 N 52 10 ... 90 15 0
Sunset No. 1 S 74 10 ... 204 12 12
Wild Irish Girl prospectors’ claim 51 18 ... 49 0 0
Commissioners prospectors’claim 61 10 ... 87 18 0
Total. .. .. .. 751 6 1104 10 17
Working Miners’Machine 786 19 ... 2302 14 16
Lady Marion ditto 367 0 ... 518 13 0
Mabel ditto 631 9 ... 503 618
Vulcan ditto ... ... ... ... ... 788 0 "... 904 18 0
Central ditto ... 727 9 ... 1584 5 23
Enterprise ditto 751 5 ... 1104 10 17
4052 2 6918 9 2
The November report shows still greater energy in the
exploration of the Eeefs, and the continued success of the
crushings. A pumping-machine has been set up to drain
the Eureka reef, which is from 2 to 3 feet thick, and yields
above 3 oz. to the ton. Very improved machinery has been
erected for concentrating the “ tailings,” and thus prevent the
enormous waste of gold that has hitherto taken place. The
pyrites, iron ore, and other minerals found in the reef stone,
are known to contain a large quantity of gold, and the object
of this machinery is to separate then? from the remainder of
the “tailings,” and treat them by the necessary chemical or


fire process. Large stationary engines have been placed at.
the Mabel and Central machines, and a five-head battery at
the Vulcan Machine, through which 100 tons of stone were
passed per week—half as much again as can be crushed by
any other battery in the gold field—these operations pretty
clearly expressing the opinions of practical men as to the value
of the field. The Black Jack reef is becoming the most
lucrative of all the reefs. Nearly 700 tons of stone from
here are now being reduced at the Vulcan machine, from
which 2,728 ozs. of gold had already been obtained at the
date of the report, and the shareholders fully expect to
realise their 3,000 ozs. Good crushings have also been
obtained from the Mellanour prospectors’ claim, Nos. 1 and 2
South Sunset reef, the Rob Roy, Sir William Don, &c.
A Company with a capital of £2,500, all subscribed on the
spot, has been established to work the Amalgamated London
Reef claim, the length of which is 1,000 feet, the whole of
the reef being visible and of a paying character. The gold
escorts in September and October last were 6,789 ozs.,
making a total during the year of 42,333 ozs. This was
independent of 4,000 additional ozs. that were taken down
privately.
The report of the Commissioner for the month of January,
1872, bringing the statistics of this gold field up to date, says
that the number of prospectors’ claims granted on as many
distinct reefs, is 202, and the number of claims taken up at
different times on these reefs (including the above 202),
is 630.
The quantity of stone crushed in 1871 by the mills, now
numbering six, with eighty-eight head stamps, was:—Lady
Marion, 3,188 tons, yielding 4,326 ozs.; Vulcan, 6,502 tons,


yielding 15,107 ozs.; Enterprise, 6,292 tons, yielding 12,414
ozs; Central, 4,402 tons, yielding 9,027 ozs.; Working
Miners’, 4,640 tons, yielding 8,533 ozs.; Mabel, 4,617 tons,
yielding 6,295 ozs. ; Defiance (Deane’s), 676 tons, yielding
646 ozs.; total, 30,320 tons, yielding 56,352 ozs. The
quantity of gold forwarded during the whole of the last year
■amounted to 62,000 ozs., of which about 6,000 ozs. were
from the alluvial, and the remainder from the reef. The
Commissioner considers that with the increased stamping
power, and with the large number of Chinamen who are
working the alluvial, the escorts of the present year will
average 6,000 ozs. per month. During the latter part of
1871 the number of new reefs discovered was not so large as
in the first part, against which, however, a great many claims
were being worked by as many hands as could be con-
veniently employed, whilst some 100 claims had the “ red-
flag” flying, indicating that the respective claim was pay-
able, and that it was being worked by the full number of men
required by the Regulations. In short, most of the miners
are now employed on the payable claims, instead of being
distributed over the whole gold-field; and this would alone
account for the increased quantity of gold produced of late.
It has been gradually ascertained that the richest reefs are
eoufined to one zone or belt of ground, extending from the
Shellmaker and Nonpareil reefs, on the north-west, to the
Australia Felix and Fanny Fern reefs, on the south-east, a
•distance of 3| miles, the belt having a width of half-a-mile on
the average, but being rather wider near the township. From
this rich belt more than 9-10ths of the gold obtained on this
camp has been raised, the whole of the rich reefs and alluvial
gullies being therein enclosed, as shown by the map of the


claims lately forwarded. The reefs not enclosed in the belt
are called outside reefs, the principal of these being the Le
Breton, Republic, and Old Man reefs. The latter is of very
large size, probably 40 feet in thickness, and yields about
12 dwts, of gold to the ton of stone. Many of the reefs have
now been worked to the water level, down to which they
yielded the same results as near the surface (consisting of
various oxides of iron, of copper, and of lead, with ochre and
quartz). A short distance below the water level, however, a
great change takes place in them, the great body of the reefs
being iron pyrites and copper pyrites, with galena and anti-
mony ore; in fact, sulphurets or sulphides of the metals, with
but a small quantity of the above-named oxides and friable
quartz. This change in the mineral contents of the reefs had
long since been predicted, not only from the fact of the same
having occurred on other gold-fields, but because the casts of
the former crystals of iron and copper pyrites had been
observed in the quartz, which crystals had become decomposed 1
by atmospheric influences.
The number of miners’ rights issued during 1871, in
Ravenswood, was 2,334, and the number of business licenses
issued was 180.
On the whole, not only has the progress of the gold-field
been eminently satisfactory, but there is also every reason to
expect that the yield of gold will continue as large as at the
present time.
The Mining population of Ravenswood as taken near
the close of 1871 was—
Males. Females.
Upper Camp, Ravenswood ... ... ... 366 114
Suburbs ... ... 489 196
Sandy Creek ... 11-9 13-


Males. Females.
Middle Camp 277 41
Lower ditto 97 9
Hilsborough 133 23
Burnt Point 38 8
New rush, Burdekiu 35 0
Curr’s Station, and Native Police Camp ... 14
Total 1570 409
Mr. Hackett’s map of this mining district, shewing position
and number of reefs, with the result of crushings, will be
found over the specimens from these very reefs exhibited
in case No. 9.
Photograph No. 116. —View of Ravenswood in October,
1870, before the diggings had attracted very much
attention.
Photograph No. 117. —View towards Coast Range, from
the Wide side of the Ravenswood township.
Photograph No. 118.—View of Overlander.
Photograph No. 119. —Yiew of Curr’s Station, near
junction of Elphinstone Creek, with Burdekin.
Photograph No. 120.— View of Burdekin river, near the
junction of Elphinstone Creek with that River.
GILBERT MINING DISTRICT.
Photograph No. 121. —View up the Gilbert River from
near the township, with Mount Nation in the distance.
Photograph No. 122. —Panorama of the Gilbert from the
Prospector’s claim, on the Commissioner’s reef.
The mining district of the Gilbert embraces a very large
area, as will be seen by inspection of the map accompanying


these photographs. After a preliminary overhaul of the
alluvial deposits of this widely extended area, the attention of
the miners is now chiefly devoted to the quartz veins, the
centres of the “reefing” interest being Gilberton, Mount
Hogan and the Etheridge.
Photograph No. 122, gives a characteristic view of the
nature of the country in which this mining industry is being
carried on. At and near Gilberton, the reefs are generally
rather narrow, and lie either in greenstone or near the inter-
section of the greenstone and slate. This adds considerably
to the cost of the mining below the line of surface decompo-
sition.
In June last, the trial crushings of the first explored reefs,
were made with the following results: —
Tons. Ozs. dwts.
Sunday Eeef, Prospecting Claim 137 73 0
Artemus Ward, No. 3 North 60 180 0
(90 ounces forwarded to Mint previous
to crushing)
Commissioners Prospecting Claim... ... 39 80 0
Ditto Black Claim and No. 1 North ... 33 45 8
Ditto No. 1 South 71 53 8
Ditto No. 2 South 47 60 0
Caledonian 63 378 0
Evening Star),.. ... ... ••• ••• 55 145 15
Armageddon 22 33 O
Ingelheim ... ... •• ••• ••• 26 148 0
Artemus Ward 18 27 O
At Mount Hogan, the position of which in regard to
Gilberton is shown on the map, the quartz veins are thicker
than those at Gilberton, and appear to offer greater facilities
for mining. Two letters of late date printed in the Queens-
lander , the one from an occasional, the other from a regular


correspondent, give a good account of the prospects of this
field for future enterprise.
The first letter was written just prior to testing the quartz
by the stampers. It says :
«I hope you will give publicity to this letter, as it may be
the means of inducing some persons possessed of capital to
visit this part of the country and see for themselves; for a
better opportunity for the investment of capital in machinery
has never occurred in Queensland. I give you the number of
tons estimated to be upon the grass. The first on the list is
the Liberty reef, with between 200 and 300 tons ; next comes
the Independence reef—along this line of reef there are fully
500 tons upon the grass; Welcome reef, 100 tons; St.
George, 100 tons; Tasmania, 100 tons; Chance, 150 tons.
Then we have the Von Moltke, Easy Got, El Dorado, King
William, and a few others, all of which have a good few tons
upon the grass. And in those claims that I have enumerated,
the shareholders are still hard at it, getting out stone; when
talking to any of them they will tell you that they could
double the quantity in three months’ time, if they were sure
of a machine being on the ground by that time. About the
richness of the reefs there cannot be the shadow of a doubt.
So confident are the prospectors of the Liberty of its turning
out well, that they have already made arrangements with some
teams to cart 100 tons to the Gilbert (sixteen miles from
here) paying 30s. per ton cartage, besides crushing which is
another thirty; and I firmly believe that their expectations
(4 ozs. to the ton) will be fully realised. A trial crushing of
one ton from this claim went 6 ozs. 15 dwts.
“ The Welcome reef is on the top of the Mount. This is
much richer than the Liberty, although not so easily worked.


Any person going to their paddock can see gold in any of the
stone, no matter how small the stone he looks at. The
Independence line of reef 1 believe to be the best (without
any exception) ever opened as yet north of Gympie, and all
those that have seen it are of the same opinion; for the reef
is wide, easily worked, and beyond a doubt rich. The stong
in the Bt. George and Tasmania reefs is very much like the
Eavenswood stone ; splendid prospects to be got in any of it.
Altogether, there are something like 1400 tons ready for a
crushing machine, and any enterprising person coming here
could have a guarantee of almost twice that quantity; for the
reefs are wide, a good few of them easily worked, and, as I
have already stated, without a doubt rich.
“I enclose my address, which you can give to any party
wishing to know more about the reefs in this part of the
country.”
The second letter confirms the one just quoted, and also
gives the result of crushings from four reefs at the 20 Mile,
which is only a few miles from Mount Hogan. It is as
follows:
“ Gilberton.
“ December 7.
“ Through the courtesy of Mr. Benton, I am enabled to
furnish the returns of the crushings since the Yulcan started
at the Twenty-mile.
Tons ozs. dwts.
No. 1 East Independence 76 334 0
Von Moltke (corrected return) B3 0
No. 1 South, Welcome 67 39 1
St. George, prospecting 38 100 10
“ After obtaining the above, I made the best of my way to
Mount Hogan and passed a few hours amongst the reefs. The
Liberty, situated on about the highest point of the mount, sur-


passes in thickness and breadth of stone everything I have
seen in this district. The reef runs almost flat, and the
formation, in many parts of it, resembles the waves of the
sea. I should estimate the number of tons of quartz now at
grass to be between 600 and 700. Should the average yield
reach l£ oz. to the ton (a trial crushing of 100 tons yielded
300 ozs.), the Liberty will be the most valuable claim on the
Mount.
“ The Easy Got (Mr, Schlamelcher’s claim) shows a fair
-average quantity of gold in the stone j two pieces taken at
random from the heap and crushed gave a very fair prospect.
“ The Independence, Welcome, Von Moltke, and other lines
of reefs—in fact, the whole of the claims on the Mount—are
similar to those already described; the large body of stone,
and the comparative ease with which it can be raised, will
enable the shareholders to make a handsome profit at a much
lower yield per ton. There are several claims' within a mile
or so from the Mount and the Twenty-mile which are con-
fidently expected to turn out well; but, being pressed for
time, I deferred my visit. The estimated quantity of quartz
at grass-c-Mount Hogan and Twenty-mile district—is from
1,800 to 2,000 tons.”
From the “ Etheridge ” the reports are of a like satisfactory
character; and as machinery for crushing the quartz has by
latest advices now arrived on that field, the value of the field
will soon be ascertained. Scarcely a day passes without one
or more applications for protection areas being made in this
district, and, as the reefs are known to be more numerous
and to extend over a wider area than is included within the
boundaries of any mining district in the Colony, Etheridge
♦
will doubtless soon rise to the first rank in importance.


Numerous other quartz mining districts are in active work
in Queensland, of which photographic illustrations are
wanting. The principal of these are Rockhampton, Peak
Down, Calliope, Boyne, and the newly discovered Broughton,
The official record for the year 1870 of the amount of quartz
crushed, with the yield and the machinery employed, will
shew the relative value of this industry as at present
developed in these districts.
The word “ relative ” is used advisedly, because this
industry is now finding favour with the capitalists, and is
progressive everywhere in consequence :
Mining Companies Registered in 1870
Gape River ... 11
Crocodile Creek, Morinish, Cawarral, &c 4
Gympie 391
Peak Downs 1
Total 407
Quartz Reefs, and Extent of Gold Workings, 1870.
Alluvial
and Quartz
Ground
Auriferous Worked
Reefs, (square miles.)
Calliope and Boyne 12 ... 18
Cania and Kroombit ... 20
Cape River 5 ... 1,125
Crocodile Creek, Morinish, Carwarral, &c 17 ... 50
Gilbert Ranges 21
Gympie 100 ... 6
Kilkivan 6 ...
Ravens wood 109 ... 90
Yabber ... ... 2‘
Peak Downs 3 ... 60
Talgai, Canal Creek, and Lucky Valley 2 ... 14
275 1.37T


The Registrar-General states that the area of ground
actually worked at the Gilbert Ranges had not been ascer-
tained, but gold had been discovered over an extent of
country of about 4,000 square miles.
Machinery of the Gold Fields, 1870.
Steam Crushing
Machines. Stapms. Value.
Calliope and Boyne 2 ... 20 ... £2,600
Cape River 1 ... 10 ... 1,200
Crocodile Creek, Morinish, Carwarral, &c. 8 ... 93 ... 13,360
Gilbert Ranges 1 ... 10 ... 4,000
Gympie .. 4 ... 64 ... 13,033
Kilkivan 1 ... 10 ... 2,500
Ravenswood 5 ... 45 ... 17,000
Peak Downs 1 ... 12 ... 1,000
23 264 £54,693
In the above total estimated value is included that of an
18-horse power pumping and winding machine at the
Calliope, and 52 puddling-machines on different diggings.
Yield of Qcartz Ceushings, 1870.
• Average
Tons per ton.
crushed, ozs. dwts. grs.
Calliope and Boyne 240 2 0 0
Cape River 316 3 13 13
Crocodile Creek, Morinish, Carwarral, &c. ... 10,900 1 2 9
Gympie 10,168 2 8 6
Kilkivan ... 1,208 1 4 23
Ravenswood 3,266 2 14 0
Peak Downs ... ... ... 654 0 19 7
Total (omitting fractions) 26,753 1 10 21 i
The Commissioner’s report for July in 1871 gives a short
summary of the progress of the mines around Rockhampton
at that date, and is appended for the information it contains:—
“ I have much pleasure in stating that the progress of the
several gold-fields of the district since the date of my last


report has been steadily good. This will be apparent, on
referring to the returns of revenue and yield of gold for the
month of June, forwarded by this mail ; the latter showing
the quantity of 3,136 ozs. 15 dwts. 20 grs.; whilst in the
month of May only 1383 ozs. 13 dwts. 2 grs., and in April
1,718 ozs. 6 dwts. 18 grs., paid export duty.
“ This Increased yield is, I believe, chiefly gained from the
new diggings at Emu Creek, Westwood district, though Rose-
wood has sent in some fine nuggets, and the Morinish reefs
have given more than an average produce.
“ On Dee-side, Crocodile district, two fresh reefs have been
opened—one of them of exceeding richness, though of small
width.
“ At Carwarral the general appearance of the reef claims has
much improved of late, though, unfortunately, owing to the
purchase and removal by a Ravenswood company of the onty
crushing-machine in the neighbourhood, the miners have been
unable to avail themselves of the improvement. It is believed
that fresh machinery will be supplied to them in a short time.
Pending this, I have considered it but reasonable to register
their claims as exempt from work.
“Of Emu Creek I have no fresh report to make. The
ground originally opened still maintains a population of about
500 persons. No new ground has been opened, which I think
extraordinary, as the country for miles round presents precisely
similar features to that now in work, and I am in great hope
that careful prospecting will yet extend these diggings.
‘‘John Jardine,
“ Commissioner of Gold Fields, N.D.”
Samples of the auriferous vein-stones and alluvial gold of
most of the Queensland gold fields will be found the one in


Case No. 9, the other in Case No. 2, as well as in central
Case No. 11.
It may be safely asserted of quartz mining generally in
Queensland, that it admits of almost indefinite expansion,
with assured remunerative results, when good and sufficient
machinery is introduced, together with co-operation with a
proper metallurgical treatment of the ore raised.
Hitherto more than one-half the gold has passed into the
tailings from the mills associated with iron pyrites, copper
pyrites, galena, &c. ; but as the raining population is now
fully alive to this source of waste, the necessary steps will
doubtless be taken to obviate it, as has already been done in
the Ravenswood field.
QUEENSLAND TOWNS.
Photograph No. 123, 124, 125. — Three Panoramic Views
of Brisbane, the Capital of Queensland.
The river on which the city stands, so prominently shewn
in each of the Photographs, is the Brisbane, navigable by
steamers of light draught, while larger ships are compelled
to load and unload at Moreton Bay.
Photograph No. 126. — Panoramic view of Warwick, an
inland town and the centre of a large pastoral and
agricultural district on the western margin of the cele-
brated Darling Downs.
Photograph No. 127. — Panoramic view of Ipswich, an
inland town at the head of the navigable portion of the
Brisbane River, the centre of an extensive agricultural,
pastoral, and cotton-growing district. It is also the
eastern terminus of the Ipswich and Dalby Railway.


Warwick, Ipswich, and Toowoomba, are the three town-
ships which divide the trade of the Darling Downs squatters,
agriculturalists and planters.
Photograph No. 128.—View of the Wharf of the town
of Maryborough, the first important town on the eastern
seaboard, north of Brisbane.
This is the port of the very extensive sugar-growing dis-
trict, of the Mary River, a view of which stream is here
shewn.
It is also the entrepot for the gold mining areas of
Gympie, Kilkwan Black Snake, the Copper Mining Selec-
tions at Mount Perry, &c., and the Coal Mining District
of Bui’rura, and promises at some future time to become a very
large city.
Photograph 129, 130, 121. —Views of the town and
neighbourhood of Gladstone.
In importance this is the second Port on the East Coast,
north of Brisbane. The beauty of its situation, and the
security of its harbour are shewn in Photograph 129.
It has not at present become so large a town as its situa-
tion deserves. Apart from its trade with pastoral tenants of
the Crown, it has only the Calliope Diggings, and an inter-
mittent cattle trade with New Caledonia and Tasmania to
depend upon. The large extent of rocks, the equivalents of
those of Cornwall and Devon, in its vicinity, favour the
opinion, however, that the copper, manganese, and other ores
which are known to exist there (but have not yet been
thoroughly examined) may yet give an impetus to its rapid
extension at no remote date.


Photograph No. 132.—Position of the town of Rockhampton
from the barrier obstructing the navigation of the Fitzroy
River, on which that town stands.
Photograph No. 133. — Panorama of the Fitzroy River from
the town of Rockhampton, with view of Burnetville on
the opposite side the river, with the Berserker range in
the distance. Lent for exhibition by Mr. Burnet.
The district of which Rockhampton is the port is very
extensive, as will be seen by reference to the map. The
Fitzroy River at the head of the navigable portion of which it
is situate, drains a vast extent of country with varied resources.
The District of Peak Downs on its upper waters, possesses a
soil equal to that of Darling Downs, though the climatal con-
ditions are not so favorable to agriculture, and the natural
water supply is far inferior.
It is nevertheless a large wool-producing district, the
Peak Downs gold field and copper mine lying on its western
margin j between it and the junction ol the Isaacs River with
the Fitzroy (its northern and southern tributaries), the coal
measures are known to extend with numerous natural outcrops
of coal, and for a radius of 40 miles around Rockhampton
itself several gold mining districts have for many years
been in active work.
Photograph No. 134.—View looking south-east over the
Marine Parade of Townsville, and portion of the Harbour
of Cleveland Bay.
Photograph 135.—View of main street of Townsville.
Photograph 136.—View looking north from near the
residence of the agent of R. Towns, Esq., the enterprising
merchant by whose means the township was first formed.


Six years have scarcely elapsed since the first “ white
man ” took up his quarters on this spot, which is now the site
of one of the most rising ports in Northern Queensland.
Since then the discovery of gold field after gold field in
the interior, south, west, and north west of its site, has been
the means of making it the emporium of a very large trade,
its imports and exports ranking near in importance to those
of the capital.
The remaining photographs are of a miscellaneous cha-
racter, chiefly of timber trees, public buildings, &c., to which
the attached label is sufficiently explanatory.
The photographs as exhibited under Class 3 having
been briefly described, the products contained in the Cases of
representative exhibits will be now alluded to in the same
order.
ALLUVIAL PRODUCTS.
Case 1.
That I.— Soils from the Logan, Cabulture, McKay, and
Herbert River districts, chiefly alluvial and famed for their
high qualities for the growth of sugar cane ; with them is
shown the sugar from various plantations, as per label in the
glass boxes containing the same.
Tray No. 2. Other samples ot sugar from plantations
not represented in Tray No. 1,
It has now been proved beyond dispute that, where the soil is
suitable and the climatal conditions are favourable (districts
excepted from frost, &c.), sugar cane can be grown with very
satisfactory results to the planter. Of course, in a young
Colony such as Queensland, first experiments in this direc-


tion by amateurs were attended with considerable outlays of
money and often unsatisfactory results, before the general com-
mercial success now arrived at was achieved.
Experiments like those carried on by the Government of
the Colony at St. Helena, a convict establishment on an
Island in Moreton Bay, have generally to be gone through
before a new sugar growing district commences to grow rich;
and through this phase the Caboolture, Logan, Mackay,
Maryborough and some other districts have already passed.
The Report of the Inspector of Public Institutions, dated
Ist April, 1871, on the St. Helena Sugar Plantation, tells us
that prison labour is being chiefly made use of in the culti-
vation of the cane and the manufacture of sugar. At the
end of 1867, two acres only were planted, an area which has
since been increased to 70. Every variety of cane has been
tried, so as to ascertain which is best adapted to the soil and
climate, and the “ Bourbon ” seems best to fulfil "these con-
ditions. The “ Ribbon” and “Tahitian” canes probably
yield a larger return of sugar per acre, but they require from
18 to 24 months to come to first maturity, and the same time
between the cuttings, while the “ Bourbon ” requires only
12 months ; therefore, although the former yields tons per
acre and the latter only 2 tons, it would still appear to be the
most remunerative.
Crushing was first commenced with a horse-power mill, but
in the latter part of 1870, a small steam mill was erected and
16 acres of cane were crushed, with a product of 25 tons of
sugar. The average yield of the St. Helena Plantation up to
the end of 1870, was tons to the acre. This apparently
small yield, however, was principally due to the delay in the
erection of the mill, during which the canes passed the period of


maturity, and the density of the juice was much lowered. The
quality of the sugar, too, is certain to improve as the defective
manipulation disappears, and nobody who has taken any part
in the manufacture has the slightest doubt but that a large
future is in store for this district as a sugar producer.
The following description of the working the cane crop in
the Mary District, by a planter, is extracted from the
Queenslander. It shows how much has been done by the
pioneer of this industry to smooth the way for the new
comers, and also how necessary it is to get experience and
knowledge in detail, before embarking in this (when properly
managed ) remunerative business:—
“ Cane is generally planted here as early as possible in the
spring, in July and August. At that time labourers are plen-
tiful, and the cost of holing is much less than in later months.
The ground being cold, the sets lie dormant a long time, and
the first plants seldom throw up their shoots until the middle
of November. This involves extra expense to keep down
weeds. Cane planted in September is equal by January to
that planted two months before. There are some years when
an early, hot, and moist spring will give an advantage to
the earliest planted cane, but such seasons are exceptional.
“ Wltll a g° od staff of labourers, it is certainly preferable to
Jo all the planting in September. This will give a crop fit
for crushing about the end of November— i.e., in fourteen
months. The most profitable way ot working cane will be
thus: Planted in September, 1871, crushed at the end of
November, 1872 (fourteen months; crushed (rattoons) in
December, 1873 (thirteen months), and then allowed to stand
over until September, 1875.
“On drained land, or on land only slightly affected by


frost, lam inclined to prefer December planting. Plant cane
on alluvial lands, especially in a moist season, often ripens
very badly and tardily. If the season be hot and dry the
cane will ripen in the usual time, but as a rule the returns
from plant crops have not been satisfactory; the cane has been
there, but the sugar has not. By planting in December, the
cane has four months of good weather, and is fit to crush in
July, August, and September, as may be convenient; whereas
by the ordinary plan the cane has really only about eleven
months of good growing weather, for, at the very least, June,
July, and August must be considered as dead months, whilst
September is not always hot enough to help on the ripening.
“Ribbon cane (plant) is allowed two years; but here again
I think this early planting an error. It is during its very
slow growth that a great part of the expense of the crop is
incurred, but if planted in November, its growth is so much
more rapid that the cost of cleaning alone is lessened by 30s.
to £3 an acre. Experiments are being made with plantings
in January, April, and other times, but the results have to be
waited for.
“ As to the manner of planting, nearly all the land now
being put in cane is newly cleared scrub, so that the plough
is out of the question. The general distance is about six feet
by four, but the quality of the soil ought to be more considered.
The distance between the stoles, which may be proper for some
of the richer flooded grounds, ought to be lessened on the
higher lands, and still more so on poor and partly exhausted
soils. The depth of the cane holes ranges from eight to
fourteen inches, but it is beginning to be found out that deep
planting is a mistake. Bourbon cane planted in eight-inch
holes will, in six months, be two or three feet higher than


that planted fourteen inches deep, and it must be remembered
than an early rapid growth materially lessens the cost of the
crop. Ribbon cane appears to do best when planted about
six inches deep ; its roots take very firm hold, and there is no
fear of its being torn up by high winds. Much of the forest
land, which has been ploughed but is considered too wet and
cold for cane, might be made to yield an excellent crop. After
ploughing and harrowing, lay the sets in rows about six feet
apart, on the surface, leaving a space of a foot between each
set; then run a seven-inch furrow on each side, throwing the
soil towards but not on the sets, which should be then lightly
covered with the hoe. As the soil is not rich the cane can be
easily ploughed out every two years, and the ground manured
and replanted. Deeply-planted cane is more affected by cold
weather and by frost. It is a long time before the warmth
of a spring sun penetrates far into the soil, and if a set be
planted in a small mud hole (as is often the case in a hard
subsoil) the least frost must injure the vitality of the plant.
11 Cane cutting has been done here from the beginning of
August to end of January. With the exception of stand-
overs, which may be cut in September, it is now tolerably
certain that October, November, and December are our
crushing months, of which November is generally the best.
About the end of December, but sometimes early in January,
we usually get rain and the density rapidly lowers. It is
not advisable to cut in January, as the rattoons will have so
little growing weather should the winter set in early. Most
of the cane is cut here with bill-hooks, but sharp hoes are
coming into favor, as the scarifying of the stoles is no longer
necessary, and the roots are not so chopped and hacked
about.”


An exhaustive work on this subject has been published by
Mr. Angus Mackay of Brisbane, to which those contem-
plating sugar-planting in Queensland cannot do better than
refer for information. The samples of sugar in tray No.
1 are furnished by Messrs, J. and G, Harris, of Brisbane.
Those in No. 2 were furnished by Messrs. Clarke, Hodg-
son and Co., of Brisbane, and are exhibited by Messrs. A.
B, Cobb and Co., of London,
In addition to the Logan, Caboolture, Maryborough, and
Mackay Districts, where sugar-growing is now a settled in-
dustry, the Lower Burdekin and Herbert Rivers still farther
north are attracting the attention of the planter. On the
latter river (which falls into Rockingham Bay), 13,000 acres
of the very rich alluvial soil of which its banks are formed
have been already <£ taken up ” for cane growing. Selected
portions of the coast lands between Bowen and -Mackay are
also finding favor with selectors for the purpose of growing cane.
As one-half the area lying within twenty-five miles of the
coast line of Queensland is open for selection at from ss,
to 15s. per acre, according to quality, payable by instalments
extending over ten years, it will be seen that no obstructions
to bond fide settlement are included in the present Land Acts
of the colony. Emigrants paying their own passage and
sailing direct to Queensland are entitled to select free of cost
forty acres of such land, as well as those who receive assisted
passages in Government emigrant vessels.
Case No. 8
That No. 3.—Varieties of Maize, Maize Meal, &c., grown
in Queensland.
Nearly all the alluvial soils of the coast country are fitted


for the production, in the greatest perfection, of these pro-
ducts, the labour question being the only per contra item to
be considered. About the capabilities to produce there is no
dispute. The profit on the production depends on the
demand and market price when produced.
For maize the price is generally fairly remunerative, while
for arrowroot an increasing trade is also springing up, as the
annexed report extracted from the Queenslander will shew.
QUEENSLAND ARROWROOT.
“ The cultivation and manufacture of arrowroot is becoming
an important affair in this country. The export of the article
has gone on increasing for the last five or six years. In 1863
it scarcely had an existence; in 1869 it amounted to over
26,000 lbs., and the export of arrowroot during last year
must have reached 80,000 lbs But the quantity exported is
small in comparison with the quantity consumed in the
colony ; for it is in favor with all classes of the community,
and forms an easily digested, but nourishing and most
appropriate article of food during our long, hot summer.
“ The season of manufacture has just commenced, and as the
majority of farmers on the coast lands, and not a few of the
inland farmers as well, have a patch of roots and a mill and
appliances for reducing them to flour, the total quantity made
will nrobably be about 100,000 lbs. Many farmers manu-
facture for their own use only, and as the article goes a long
way when cooked, a bag or two of arrowroot is a good stand-
bye for a family during a whole year. Others manufacture the
article for sale, and supply the townspeople with it to such an


extent that West India and Cape arrowroot can no longer find
a market here. In a few instances horse-power is applied for
grinding up the roots, for washing, &c., and one firm have
applied steam power, and perhaps the most rapid and perfect
machinery in existence for the manufacture of arrowroot.
We refer to Messrs. S. and G. Grimes, of Oxley and Boggo,
who export nearly all the arrowroot sent from Queensland.
Some time ago, we visited the farms and factory of these
gentlemen. At that period they had a horse-power machine for
doing the heavy work j but the demand for their produce soon
called for an extension of operations, and a five-horse-power
engine has taken the place of the horse-power machine, and
the whole process of manufacture has been re-arranged and
very much improved.
Ie The arrowroot is ripe in this country as soon as the cold
weather blackens the leaves, which usually occurs in July.
The bulbs are in clusters close to the surface of the ground,
and turned out with a heavy chipping hoe ; women and boys
pick all the soil they can from the bulbs, which are then carted
away to the factory. Here they are put into a long trough
in which a shaft with arms revolves rapidly, and with the aid
of a continuous stream of fresh water washes them cleaner
than any hand power could do. This washer is arranged
upon the screw principle, and the roots are gradually worked
from the end they are thrown in at to the further end of the
trough. Here they encounter a broad rake attached to the
revolving shaft, which pitches the roots upon a carrier which
raises them in a continuous line up to the grinding mill, a
height of about twelve feet. At the mill the roots are handled
for the first and only time during the whole course of manu-
facture. The mill is in the form of a revolving drum, having


a rasp-like surface made of perforated iron. It, as well as all
the other parts of the machinery, is driven by steam power.
One man manages the mill. He arranges the roots in a
hopper over the grater as they are dropped by the carrier
and presses them towards the grating surface by means of a
lever. A strong stream of water passes into the mill alnog
with the roots, and they are literally melted into a brownish
pulp with much rapidity. The pulp is carried by the water
down into what is termed the first beater. This beater is a
grated cylinder, in which a series of revolving blades tear up
and dash the pulp against the outside grating. What passes
hrough is carried with a stream of water to the second beater,
a larger cylinder than the first. Here the dashing and separa-
ting is continued until every particle of arrowroot is extracted
from the pulp. The grating of the second beater is so fine
that only the starch of the arrowroot can get through along
with the water, while all the rougher parts of the root are
expelled from both beaters, and carted outside of the building,
where it is converted into manure and returned to the land.
“ Water, it will be seen, is an all important item in the
manufacture of arrowroot, and the Messrs. Grimes have a very
fine supply from a running creek. This water is lifted by a
pump to an elevated cistern, whence it is distributed all over
the factory by pipes.
“ When the fine starch or flour leaves the second beater at
Messrs. Grimes’ mill, it is carried with the water through a
long range of shallow troughs. The fall in these troughs
is just sufficient to make the water move along, and as it
travels the starch is deposited at the bottom. The water thus
passes over it until about four o’clock each day, when the
starch is dug out (it is a heavy and close-grained mass) and


put into large tubs. Here it is beaten up with water until
every trace of foreign matter is extracted, and the arrowroot
lies at the bottom in a pure white cake. It is then spread
out upon tables covered with white sheeting and dried by
exposure to the sun and air. By an ingenious arrangement,
the tables are covered with sheets of corrugated iron which
during the day reflects the rays of the sun upon them,
and, by turning them over, they cover the tables during the
night. The present bracing weather is just the thing for
drying arrowroot, and after exposure for two or three days it
is perfectly dry and fit- for packing in packages and bags.
“ Of the excellence of the arrowroot manufactured by
Messrs. Grimes little need be said. It is rapidly taking the
place of West Indian and Cape arrowroot in the Victorian,
New South Wales, and other markets, and has been recog.
nised at all exhibitions it has been sent to as the purest
article of the kind in the market. As the arrow-root of other
countries is got up and manufactured by the hand labour of
negroes, Caffirs, creoles, &c., we need not wonder that the
machinery of Messrs. Grimes turns out a cleaner and brighter
article than has been put into the market hitherto.
“ The Oxley Factory is now in full work, and produces
about 1000 lbs. of arrowroot daily. The total for the season
will be about 45,000 bis., the yield being equal to about
2000 lbs. per acre. The extraction of the starch from the
root is almost perfect, as will be understood by the circum-
stance that pigs now decline to eat the refuse of the roots
when cooked for them. While the work was carried on
by hand there was sufficient flour left in the refuse to make
the pigs eat it greedily.
“ Besides the laud employed in the 'cultivation of arrowroot,


Messrs. Grimes farm between 90 and 100 acres in sugar cane,
potatoes, corn, hay, crops, &c. They manure liberally, and
farm highly, according to the present Queensland standard,
using horse-power wherever it can be employed. The force
of the farm is usually about 9 men, 2 women, and 3 boys,
which, setting aside the lighter jobs for the females and boys,
is about 12 acres to the hand. Two teams and a spare horse,
with a very complete assortment of the most approved imple-
ments, make up the working stock of one of the most
skilfully managed farms in Queensland.
16,000 acres were planted with Maize in 1870, and 74,000
lbs. of arrowroot were manufactured in the same year.
ALLUVIAL PRODUCTS.
Case No. 1.
Tray No. 4.—Samples of Tea, Coffee, and Tobacco produced
, in Queensland, Though of the two former only experi-
mental crops have been grown in the Botanical Gardens,
Brisbane, from which source the specimens were obtained,
these trials show how suitable both soil and climate are
for their production.
The high lands at the back of Rockhampton Bay are said
to be specially adapted for the growth of coffee.
The cultivation of tobacco has received more attention in
the colony, but the dearth and high price of labour has been
in great measure the means of checking enterprise in this
direction. The following extract from the Queenslander ,
shews the progress made in the growth and manufacture of
this article up to the present time.
“Tobacco-growing and manufacture in this colony are


industries that have not yet attained any great dimensions,
although the soil and climate are unusually favorable for the
growth of the plant. The leaf which is raised here is said by
good judges to be of a superior quality, and all that is
required to work it up into first-class smoking tobacco and
cigars is the requisite skill and enterprise. Our importations
of tobacco and cigars from Great Britain and the adjoining
colonies during the year 18*70 amounted in value to £25,271.
That it would pay our farmers well to cultivate the leaf, there
can therefore be no question, and that it would also pay the
manufacturer, if his operations are properly carried out, has
been demonstrated. In his favour he has the duty of 2s. fid.
per lb. on imported tobacco, and ss. per lb. on cigars, and he
can also secure the leaf at a reasonable price, that at present
prevailing being from Bd, to Is. 2d. per lb. One of the most
successful attempts which has been made to manufacture
Queensland leaf into smoking tobacco and cigars is at present
being carried on by Mr. Hocker at a small manufactory at the
rear of Messrs, Finney, Isles, and Co., in Queen Street.
This gentleman has now been engaged in the trade for some
months, and the ready sale which his articles meet with is
sufficient proof of their excellence. The cigars are of capital
quality, and with a little more drying would pass muster as
the best Havanah. They have a peculiarly fine flavor, and
burn with that clear white ash which is so well known as the
best proof of a good cigar. The tobacco is also very good, and
resembles both in smell and appearance the best American.
A means has been obtained of ridding it of that quality which
creates a burning sensation in the mouth when smoking, which
has heretofore been the great defect of colonial tobacco. Of
course it was always known that this fault was altogether due


to bad curing, and that this difficulty in the manufacture of
the article has been overcome, must be a matter for congratu-
lation. We understand that the mode adopted is to subject
the tobacco, after pressing, to a great heat in an oven for a
considerable time. Up to the present, Mr. Hocker has been
unable to supply the demand which he has met with; and
although he has brought two cigar manufacturers from
Melbourne, he could sell double the quantity which he is able
to make. His principal difficulty now is the supply of leaf,
which is running very short, but next year he believes there
will be sufficient supply for all purposes. There is no waste
allowed in his establishment, the tobacco stalks being ground
into a strong pure snuff. But as the value of imported snuff
last year only amounted to £l9, and is daily growing into
disuse, that is not a subject of much importance. That the
tobacco trade will largely increase in this colony there is
every reason to believe, for the cultivation of the leaf, even
at the moderate rates we have named, would give a farmer a
splendid return per acre.”
During 1870 the tobacco manufactured in the colony was
14,600 lbs.
ALLUVIAL PEODUCTS
Case No. 1.
Teay No, s. —Cotton from various Queensland plantations
from Messrs. Clarke, Hodgson & Co,, of Brisbane, ex-
hibited by Messrs. A. B. Cobb & Co., of London.
Case No. 1.
Tray No. 6.— Samples of Alluvial Gold from various
diggings in Queensland, exhibited by the Queensland
Government.


DESERT SANDSTONE PRODUCTS
Case No. 2
Tray No. 7. —Soil and Rock Specimens illustrative of the
area occupied by the Desert Sandstone.
That portion of Queensland occupied by this rock system
is valueless for any purpose so far as we are yet aware, except
for local deposits of alluvial gold.
CRETACEOUS PRODUCTS.
Case No. 2.
Tray No. 7. —Soil and Rock Specimens of the great Western
plains of Queensland. The products of this area are
entirely pastoral, sheep and cattle being its only com-
mercial staples.
Case 2.
Trays 9, 10, 11.—Fossils from the Flinders and Mary-
borough cretaceous beds, named and arranged by
R. Etheridge, Esq., F.R.S.
MESOZOIC COAL MEASURES.
Case No. 2.
Trays 12, 13. —Mesozoic Coal Plants of Queensland named
and arranged by W. Carruthers, Esq., F.R.S.
Tray No. 14.—Varieties of coal from the various coal mines
worked in Queensland. The names of these mines are
Tivoli, Redbank, Allora and Burrum, and the quantity of
coal raised during 1870 was 23,000 tons.
Tray No. 25. - Soils and rock specimens of Mesozoic Coal
Measures.


PALAEOZOIC COAL MEASURES
Tray No. 16. —Palaeozoic Coal Plants, named and arranged
by W. Carruthers, Esq., E.R.S.
Tray No. 17. —Fauna of Palaeozoic Coal Measures, named
and arranged by R. Etheridge, Esq., E.R.S.
Tray No. 18.—Coal from various seams in Palaeozoic Coal
Measures.
PALAEOZOIC.—DEVONIAN.
Case No. 3.
Tray No. 19. —Rock specimens of the Devonian system of
Queensland.
Trays No. 20, 21, —Fossil fauna of the Gympie Gold Field,
named and arranged by R. Etheridge, Esq., F.R.S.
Tray No. 22. —Fossil flora of the Devonian Rocks of
Queensland, named and arranged by W. Carruthers,
Esq., F.R.S.
Tray No. 23. —Varieties of marbles of the Gladstone, Rock-
hampton, and Broken River Districts of Queensland.
They may be obtained in any quantity.
Tray No. 24. —Fossil corals of the Devonian limestones of
the Broken River series.
Trays No. 25, 26. — Representative minerals of the Devonian
areas, such as gold, copper, and lead ores.
METAMORPHIC.
Case No. 3.
Tray No. 7 —Rock specimens of the metamorphic system of
Queensland, such as mica, and hornblende schists,
gneiss, &c., as per labels attached.


Trays 28, 29, 30. —Representative minerals found in meta-
morphic areas, such as gold, copper, and lead ore, &c.,
as per labels.
GRANITIC.
Case No. 4.
Tbay No. 31. —Varieties of granite found in the Colony,
with microscopic sections shewing structure.
TRAPPEAN,
Tbay No. 32. —Varieties of trap rock found traversing palce-
ozoic and metamorphic systems, ultimately associated
with the auriferous veinstones of the Colony, chiefly
diorite, diabase, and porphyxite. Microscopic sections,
enlarged photographic transparencies, and analyses,
accompany these in order to give as exhaustive a
description of them as possible, since their practical
importance to the miner is very great.
TRAPPEAN.
Case No. 4.
Tbay No. 33.— Varieties of polished serpentine from the
Marlborough, Cawarral, and Calliope districts.
Tbay No. 34.—Minerals from Serpentine, as per labels,
with microscopic sections and specimens of the same rock.
Tbay No. 35.—Trap Rock, cutting through Mesozoic and
Cainozoic strata, chiefly dolerite, with microscopic sections,
shewing difference in structure and arrangement of minerals
between the traps of Tray No. 32 and those of No. 35.


VOLCANIC.
Case No. 4.
Tray No. 36. —Varieties of Volcanic Eocks, Soils, &c.,
with microscopic sections, skewing structure. Here, also, are
arranged the copper-bearing prehnite amygdaloids, and
epidote traps, of the Bowen Kiver and Collaroy Ranges.
Their similarity to the cupriferous traps of the Lake Superior
district of America is shown by specimens from that locality,
placed side by side with those from Queensland.
COPPER ORES.
Case No. 5.
Various Ores from Queensland Copper Mines. The fine
slab of Malachite, with the ingots and tiles of copper are from
the Peak Downs Copper Mining Company, and are exhibited
by Messrs. W. Mort & Co., the London agents of that mine.
This Company commenced operations in 1865, and had in
the outset great difficulties to contend with, the principal
one being that Rockhampton, the port first used for shipping
the copper, was 278 miles distant from the mine.
In June, 1870, 29,168 tons of ore had been smelted, with
a yield of 6,097 tons of metallic copper ; and from June, 1868
to June, 1870, the amount of dividend paidreached the sum of
£55,250. Since then, the smelting power has been increased
and improved, and about 50 tons of metal are turned out
weekly. This keeps 100 teams in constant employment for
the transmission of the copper to the Port (Broad Sound),
besides the large staff of miners employed in the works.
The average thickness of the lode is about two feet, though
it increases greatly on the Eastern levels, being fully 9 feet


thick at the 40 fathom level at the extreme Eastern portion
of the mine. The lode has been proved at the 40 fathom level,
about 1,700 feet on its strike or course, which is nearly east
and west, with a southerly underlie. At the 18th hall-yearly
meeting of the shareholders in January 1872, the balance-sheet
shewed a credit to profit and loss account of £63,828 4s. 3d.,
which was appropriated to writing off in round numbers
£II,OOO from the book value of the mine, the paying a
dividend at the rate of 80 per cent, per annum on the entire
capital, and the carrying £13,000 forward to credit of profit
and loss account to the next half-year.
In this case, also, are specimens from the Maxford, Stanage,
Princhester, Mount Perry, Kroombit, Great Australian (in
the Clou gurry district), and other copper mines in Queens-
land, which are now being explored, with more or less
satisfactory results. The Mount Perry mine bids fair to
rival that of Peak Downs, and some of the others are of
undoubted promise.
At Mount Perry a large development of the works is
taking place, which will open out an exceedingly rich block
of ground. Ebenezer’s shaft is being pushed down another
100 feet, and drives opened out north and south to facilitate
the easy extraction of lode stuff. Cherry’s shaft (which at
the time of the report was 50 feet below the 90 feet drive)
was being sunk 40 feet deeper, by which access to a very
rich part of the mine would be obtained. George’s shaft is
185 feet from the surface, and when the new drives
are finished north and south on the course of the lode,
immense blocks of “ ore ground ” will be ready for extraction.
At the Kroombit mine several shafts have been sunk, and
the deposit has been proved to be both rich and extensive


The ore—chiefly grey sulphide—has been tested, and found
to average from 20 to 25 per cent, of metal. Some of it
rims as high as 80 per cent., and cannot be smelted without
a mixture of poorer ore. A new reverberatory furnace of
the best construction was being erected, which will turn out
three tons of pure metal in 24 hours. Another furnace is
also being put up at the copper section of Messrs. Byerly,
Scott and Fane, at Rainbow Creek.
At Stauage Bay, near Thirsty Sound, the copper lode
crops out on the beach, about 50 feet from the cliff. It is
described as a large mass of ore about 42 feet high, the
cliff on one side being an igneous rock intersected with
quartz veins, and on the other, being more of a limestone
formation, abounding in white marble. At present the
lode is worked by blasting from its base and conveying the
pieces by a windlass to the top of the cliff, where it is broken
up and taken to the landing place. The whole beach is
strewn with blocks of copper ore, and a small islet South of
No. 8 Island is found to consist almost entirely of fine ore.
Although still in its infancy, there is no doubt that copper
mining will become one of Queensland’s greatest industries,
and it does not require a very sanguine judgment to pro-
nounce that, by the application of capital, perseverance, and
well-directed scientific knowledge, many a large fortune will
be realised here.


PASTOEAL.
Ca.se No. 6. Samples of meat from the numerous
preserving establishments in Queensland.
Full descriptions are attached to the exhibits, the
wholesale price, where to be obtained, etc., and any of
these can be purchased and tested at the buffet of
Messrs. Spiers & Pond, at the eastern end of the
Queensland Annexe.
Meat Preserving. (From the Bulletin.)
“The Rockhampton Meat Preserving Establishments.
“Laurel Bank (Messrs. Berkelman and Co.) —This
establishment has been busily engaged during the chief
part of the month, and there are now 500 cases of tinned
meat for shipment. For the past few days there has been
a suspension, but work begins again on Monday next, and
there is abundance of fat stock awaiting the tins and pots.
“ Lake’s Creek (C. Q. M. P. Co.) —The works of this
company have been opened by the slaughtering of several
fine bullocks from the stations of N. G. Newbold, Esq.,
and Messrs. Macartney and Mayne. Some of these animals
yielded fully 400 pounds of meat for preserving, and every-
thing appears to promise that the tins now put up will
turn out in excellent condition. The comjiany expect
to slaughter considerably larger quantities in a short time;
but at first they wished to experiment on a moderate scale,
in order to thoroughly test the machinery, water supply,
and other essentials Mr. C. H. Allen, the company’s attor-
ney, who lately arrived out from London, has taken the
direction of affairs into his own hands for the present,;
and we are informed that the agreements with the


manager and superintendent of works have been cancelled.
Mr. Allen is empowered to allot shares in the Colonies.
Operations were commenced on the 3rd instant by opera-
ting upon three bullocks killed on Saturday evening. The
cattle were selected from a mob of sixty-nine from Messrs.
Macartney and Mayne’s Waverley station. The animals
averaged upwards of 800 lbs. each. Another mob are
about to be brought in from Mr. Archer’s heifer station,
where the cattle are depastured and fattened, under the
charge of one of the company’s stockmen, until required
for slaughter. Another mob of 100 from Mr. Newbold’s
Torrilla station are awaiting the butchers.
“Pattison’s Boiling-down — At this establishment,
operations have been conducted during the month with
the usual success. The following are some of the results
obtained: —6o head bullocks from Banksia Plains averaged
301 lbs. of tallow; 64 head bullocks from Glenprairie
averaged 331 lbs.; 52 head cows and bullocks from Lang-
morn averaged 343 lbs.; 70 head bullocks from Graham’s
station averaged 329 lbs., and 42 head bullocks from
Marlborough averaged 318 lbs. In sheep, 1,601 fair
wedders, from the station of Mr. W. Kelman (Meteor
Downs), averaged nearly 23 lbs. tallow, with an average
weight of 7 lbs. of skin of eight months growth. 1,257
ewes from Huntley Downs, all culls, averaged some
14 lbs. tallow with very close on 6 lb. weight of skin.
The above averages speak for themselves. The yield
from Mr. Kelman’s wedders has never before been reached
in Northern Queensland. It supplies proof positive that
with proper attention on the part of the grazier and
boiler, sheep-farming will yet pay, even with no better
outlet than the pots.”


•paonpoij o o o
CO pXBrr C 2 O O
(H . O I - * O f—'
g JO Xjijtrenft H «
Pq
a -peJojqSnBig o g £
& W sgo H jo -ojq 2
n 3 -paonpojj; 3° co r*
s ffl §2 o § s s s *
Ph 2 JO ijIJUimfr H CO tH ri
W 02 5
H -poJOjqSmJis co
Uj jz 9rto paojoH : : g : g : g
P te }0 °N i-T r-T
p o
X Q <03 C3 O O 03 OS 03
(—1 •pOIOingn'BTS CO iO O O <M 03 rl
,K dgguo eo co Ci ® ■*
OQ O aaaqg « t» of of os co
g JO 'OM rH i-H 0} i-H H
P 3
H O -sjtiouiqsiiqBjsa tn >-i i—i « ao
H « jo -on
Q . -pootipajj . o o ci co co
02 un ™ T a •> O (N . J> . rl
Q H o rH , lO • O
•z . g JO Xjtjmmft H “
So g —
Jz; g •p9Dnpoj ( j . . o . o . ® . . oS
0 <1 gj 9 pj S • ® • O- • ' 'X,
® 2 jojDBjjxa 1-1 00 g r:
o oo^<
1 H H •poAaoso.a O . o . 3 g # 2
i g S ; B8 W „ fi tC * co" * • i-T : of
« g. ” J0*wmm& § S 2 g
g -pajajqHmqg 10 o o 10
h £ oiwbo poaiojj 50 : g 2 : « s ! S
g J° '°K
H •pojojqgruqg, g g 8 8 .2 . . S
p P3 dooqg o= rH „ rH „ • °°, *2
O io -OM tH co *o 00
jo t—t io •'
o g — ——
® 0 •sjnoraqsnqujSS H . <s
S JO -Oil
K 7 7 7 : : 7
O . . a . . . :
N a
§ 6 ? ; I : : : : :
g I I |
H X (2 . M S
P B • <8 m ' • 3 a ®
'S£^ r g* , OM > ’oi
pqPQ-OgSWH


PRESERVED MEATS.
„ Mr. W. B. Tooth, Darling Downs, Queensland, Mutton
and beef in tins. Exhibited by Mr. W. O. Hancock, 85,
Gracechurch Street.
fy/' Red Bank Company, Queensland. Preserved meats in
tins.
Bancroft’s desiccated meat.
Daniel Tallerman, Australian Meat Agency, 113,
~ Cannon Street, London, E.C., and Red Lion Wharf,
C/ 4, Bankside, S.E. —Preserved and Cured Meats, Essences,
Extracts, Soups, &c.


in Queensland showed a total of—
Horses - - -
83,358
Horned Cattle -
1,076,630
Sheep ....
8,163,818
Pigs
30,992
/\
/k. & w.\
\/
Jondaryan.
W. Bros., j
Queensland.
Fassifern n.
Bay-
Case No. 7. Angora Wool (Mohair).
Case No. 8. Samples of Queensland Wool, exhibited
by Messrs. Cobb & Co.
3 samples,
A, B, C quality; growers
Messrs. Kent & Wrenhold
1 sample Super Clothing.
1 sample Super Clothing.
1 sample Super Combing.
Rosewood \ 1 sample Super Clothing.
1 sample Super Combing.
These three cases, No. 6, 7, 8, are only representative
exhibits of a very large producing interest in Queensland,
the Pastoral; and when the size of the territory is taken into
consideration, and the very few attempts yet made to secure
artificial water supply, to fence in, etc., in fact, to increase
in any way the natural capacity of the outlying districts
for feeding stock, it may easily be understood how much
this material resource admits of expansion.
At the close of 1870, the official returns of live stock


QUARTZ MINING.
Case No. 9.
Contains samples of the reefs from Gympie, Calliope,
Ravenswood, Gilbert Peak Downs, &c., with the
variety of vein-stones in which the gold occurs.
Tray No. 37.—Contains varities of auriferous quartz
from Gympie.
Tray No. 38, —Auriferous quartz, Cape and Gilbert.
Tray No. 39, —Auriferous lode-stones, Ravenswood,
Tray No. 40. —Auriferous quartz from various Queens-
land “ reefing ” districts, Rockhampton, Calliope, &c.
Trays No. 41 and 42. — Varieties of gold bearing reefs
in Queensland.
The attention of all interested in gold mining is specially
directed to
Trays No. 41 and 42.—Here will be seen in the sections
cut by the lapidary, the different modes of occurence
of gold in the matrix in Queensland.
In Tray No. 42 is shown Mr. Makin’s experiments on
the precipitation of gold by various reagents and by
battery power.
As chemically pure gold can only be obtained by solu-
tion of the metal and reprecipitation; and as it then
takes very varying molecular forms dependent upon the
precipitant, the following are shewn as characteristic ones.
They are nearly all separated from auric terchloride
(Au. C 1. 3 ).
No. 1 tray. From a warm solution, by means of
oxalic acid (H 2 C a 0 4 ). By mutual decomposition of the


acid and gold compound, it results that a part of the ele-
ments of the former resolve themselves into carbonic
acid, which is evolved as a gas, and at the points of the
containing vessel where this happens the gold is deposited,
commencing in rings of metallic particles round the
bubbles of gas. These then fill up, and by the continued
action, the metal is in more or less of a spongy condition,
and in places crystalline. Its precise form varies according
to the density of the liquid, temperature used, rapidity of
action, &c.
No. 2 (glass slide). A microscopic ring showing com-
mencing deposit.
No. 3. A similar ring now filled by deposit, and show-
ing octohedral crystals.
No. 4. A larger mass in a spongy condition.
No. 5. Under granular side of a deposit.
No. 6. Upper side, crystalline.
No. 7 Tray. Gold precipitated by very slow action of
oxalic acid, hence the product is more compact and
metallic, and also more crystalline on its surface.
No. 8 Tray. Gold precipitated by solution of sulphu-
ric acid in water. Here by mutual decomposition the
sulphurous acid becomes sulphuric, and metallic gold is
thrown down.
Those labeled A in quartz (from various diggings).
„ ~ Bin calc spar (from Gympie).
„ „ Cin calc spar, with interspersed isolated
crystals and angular fragments of quartz, the gold
traversing both. (From Gympie.)


Case No. 10.
Sid a Retusa — A fibre used for Paper-making; though
apart from this discovery, the plant is one of the
greatest pests that the colonists have in their
cultivated land.
Case No. 11.
JEWELLERY.
In this case are exhibited articles manufactured from
Queensland gems—viz., the agate, onyx, and carnelian of
Agate Creek, in the Gilbert District, where tons of the
raw material may be procured. The rich crysophrase of
Marlborough, and the malachite of Peak Downs are also
here represented.
The jewels in this case, lent for the occasion, consist of—
[ Pearl shawl pin of large Moreton Bay pearl. (Exhi-
bitor, Sir D. Cooper.)
7 / Pearl necklace of Moreton Bay pearls. (Exhibitor
' Mr. J. Harris.)
Rough Pearls, Moreton Bay. (Exhibitor, Mr. J.
Harris.)
yS Broach and ear-rings of Marlborough crysophrase.
('Exhibitor, Mr. R. Daintree.)
Agate broach of Gilbert Agate. (Exhibitor Mr. R.
* , Daintree.)
x, Two emu egg goblets. (Exhibitor, Mr. Watts.)
All these are of colonial manufacture.
In addition, Mr. Streeter, the jeweller of Conduit Street,
exhibits articles manufactured from Queensland materials,
jy a branch of trade which he has undertaken to prosecute.
They consist of—
(/" Pearl necklace and pair of ear-tops.


Pebble brooch and pair of ear-rings.
Ditto do.
Ditto do.
Cameo and gold brooch, and pair ear-rings.
Cameo and do. do.
Onyx brooch.
Onyx locket.
Onyx ear-rings,
Onyx solitaires,
Malachite scarf pin.
Ditto cross and gold chain.
Ditto brooch and ear-rings,
Ditto bracelet.
Ditto brooch with wreath mounts.
Ditto pair of ear-rings do.
Chrysophrase and gold brooch and ear-rings
Emu egg, silver mounted (2 handle cup).
Ditto claret jug.
Ditto pair of cups.
Ditto mug.
Ditto sugar frame
Ditto goblet.
Ditto . inkstand.
Pearl and gold brooch and earrings.
Pearl and blue enamel brooch.
Ditto do. ring.
Oak dial.
Red Queensland marble clock.
Ditto clock.
Black Australian marble clock.
Two carriage clocks.


- ■


At the West end of the Annexe is arranged the very
complete collection of highly polished Queensland woods,
which were originally collected by Mr. Walter Hill, the
Director of the Botanical Gardens at Brisbane, and presented
to the Royal Museum at Kew. They have now been lent
by Her Majesty’s Department of Public Works for the
present Exhibition.
I.—Exocarpus latifolius, R.B. Santalacece. Broad-leaved
Cherry. Diameter, 6to 9ft.; height, 10 to 16ft.
A beautiful small tree, with scaly, black-coloured bark; the wood
very hard and fragrant; excellent for cabinet work.
2,—Erythroxylon australe, Ferd. Mueller. Erythroxy-
lacece. 4to 15; 20 to 30. Aboriginal name, Mool-
kellam.
A slender tree, with flexible branches. Wood hard and tough;
takes a good polish. The only plant of the order as yet found in
Australia. Contains no colouring matter, notwithstanding its near
connection with E. suberosum.
3.— Barrinqtonia or Careya. JBarringtoniacece. 6t012 ;
20 to 30. Aboriginal name, Barror.
A small tree of a crooked growth, but very graceful; with broad
leaves and handsome pink and white flowers. Found in abundance in
rich alluvial soils. The fruit is like a middle-sized apple; palatable
when ripe, in taste resembling a dried banana. Wood easily worked, of
a blood-red colour, subject to crack; requiring to be, like some
European timber, submerged before working.
4. — Bauhinia Hookeri, F. M. Leguminosce. 10 to 20 ;
30 to 40.
An ornamental, spreading tree, with pale green, handsome de-
ciduous foliage, and bearing large white flowers of sweet perfume..
Wood supple and heavy, of a dark reddish hue. Will answer well for
veneers.


s.— Rhizophora Mangle, W. Rhizophoracecc. Mangrove.
6 to 12; 12 to 16.
Small tree. Wood very pretty; the bark is stringent, and is used
for tanning purposes.
6.— Casuarina sp , R. B. Casuarinacece. Shingle Oak.
9 to 15 ; 20 to 13.
A small tree, forming thickets in open forest ground, where the
situation is moist. Wood close, prettily marked, but not durable.
7.— Heterodendeon diversifolitjm, F. M. Sapindacece.
3 to 8 ; 6 to 8.
A handsome little shrub, common in scrubs. Wood of a reddish
colour, finely grained.
sp. Rubiacece. 6to 12 ; 20 to 30. Atillo.
An elegant little tree, common in scrubs. Wood soft and brittle,
of a light yellow colour, and taking a tolerable polish.
9.- -Maba sp. Ehenacece. Ebony. sto 12; 20 to 30.
Aboriginal name, Ronon.
This tree is very abundant in all the Queensland scrubs, but does
not attain a large size. Wood hard and tough; black ebony at the
heart; sap white and pink.
10. —Acacia varians. Leguminosce. 6 to 12; 20 to 40.
Aboriginal name, Baka.
This is mentioned by Sir Thomas Mitchell as the tree the bark of
which is, from its deleterious properties, used by the Natives of New
South Wales for poisoning the fish in small lagoons. It is used for a
like purpose by the Natives of the Titzroy Kiver. Wood prettily
marked and easy to work.
11.—Polyphragmon sericeum, Desf. Rubiacece. 6t015 ;
20 to 40. Aboriginal name, Kavor Kavor.
. This tree is commonly met with in the beds of creeks. The wood
is hard, and takes a good polish. The natives are particularly fond of
me fruit, which has much the appearance of the crab or wild apple of
Europe.


12.— Eremophila Mitchelli, Benth. Myoporactce. Sandal
Wood. 6to 12; 20 to 30. Aboriginal name,
Balvora.
A small tree growing in scrubs, and occasionally in open forest
land. Wood hard, of browu colour. Owing to a strong aromatic
odour, resembling that of sandalwood, furniture made of this timber
is exempt from the attacks of insects.
13. Apocynacece. 4t012 ; 20 to 30.
A shrub with many stems. Very common in scrubs. Wood
hard and close grained. May prove a very good substitute for box-
wood.
14.— Ixiospoeum Spinescens, F.M. Pittosporacecß. 4to 6;
6to 15. Aboriginal name, Kary.
A small, ornamental, prickly shrub, of a spherical growth, with
small fasciculated leaves and white fragrant blossoms. Trunk short.
Wood hard and tough ; takes a good polish. Will answer admirably
in a garden for edgings or borders.
15.— Croton sp. Euphorbiacece. Cascarilla. 6to 12;
20 to 40.
This tree is very abundant in the scrubs. Wood tough and pliant,
of a white colour. The bark gives the Rockampton Cascarilla.
16— Maba geminata, R.B. Ebenacece. 9t012 ; 50 to 60.
Slender tree, found growing in the scrubs. Wood soft and tough.
17.— Eremophila Mitchelli, Benth. Myoporacece. Sandal
wood. 9t012 ; 20 to 30.
From Mr. C. Coxen, from the neighbourhood of Dalby. The
wood is very hard, beautifully grained, and very fragrant. It will turn
out handsome veneers for the cabinet-maker.
18.— Myrtus melastomoides, R.B. Myrtacea. 10 to 18;
20 to 30.
Small tree, beautiful when in flower. Wood close grained and
firm.


19.— Citrus australis, R.B. Aurantiacece. Lime. 9to
12 ; 30 to 40. ' ,
This small and handsome tree grows in abundance in the borders
of scrubs on the river bank. The trunk is erect, with many diffused
branches armed with prickles. The fruit is an inch and a half in
diameter, almost globular ; an agreeable beverage is produced from its
acid juice. The wood is hard, close grained, and of a fine light
yellow colour.
20. —Exocarpus latifolius, R.B. Santalacece. Broad-
leaved Cherry. 6to 9 ; 10 to 16.
A beautiful small tree, with scaly, black-coloured bark ; the wood
very hard and fragrant; excellent for cabinet work.
21.— Xanthoxylon brachyanthum. Xanthoxylacece. Satin
Wood. 6to 9 ; 30 to 40.
This tree is found in small quantities growing on the borders of
scrubs ; the wood is close, fine grained, and of yellow colour ; it is
susceptible of high polish.
22. —Melaleuca Ferrea, A. Cnnn. Myrtacecß. Prickly-
leafed Tea Tree. 9t012 ; 20 to 30.
Hard, close grained wood.
23. —Acacia Cunninghami, Hook. Leguminosoe. Black
Wattle. 9t012 ; 20 to 30.
This species is very generally distributed upon open forest ground;
the bark is much prized for tanning.
24. —NoTELiEA Longifolia, R. B. Oleaceoß. 12 to 18: 40
to 50.
Wood hard, close grained, and firm.
25—Eremophila Bignoniflora, F. M. Rlyoporaceoß. 6
to 12; 20 to 30. Aboriginal name, Pombel.
A small tree generally with many stems of irregular growth.
Wood fragrant and most elegantly marked; takes a high polish. It
has not yet been ascertained if this timber can be found in sufficient
quantities to make it available as an article of export.


26.
12 ; 30 to 40.
A small tree, found in small quantities in the bricklow scrubs.
Wood hard, fine grained, and beautifully marked.
27. —Canthium Lamprophylltjm, F, M. Rubiacece. Bto
12 ; 20 to 30.
Small tree. Wood hard, close grained, and firm.
28.—Backhousia Citrifloba, F.M. Myrtacece* 9to 12;
18 to 20.
Small tree or bush. The wood is hard, fine grained, and likely to
be useful for ornamental purposes.
29. —Erythrina Yespertilio, Benth. Leguminosce. Cork
Tree. 12 to 25 ; 30 to 40.
An ornamental, middle-sized tree of stoloniferous habit, with large
pinnated leaves, and racemes of yellow flowers. Seed, a broad flat bean.
The sap of this wood is of alight yellow colour; and not unlike cedar
toward the centre.
30. —Erythrina Yespertilio, Benth. Leguminosce,. Cork
Tree. 12 to 25; 30 to 40.
A beautiful tree when in flower; wood soft; the timber is used by
the aborigines for making their shields.
31. —Duboisia Myoporoides, E, B. Myoporacece. 9 to
15 ; 30 to 40. '
Timber soft and light.
32.—Croton Acuminates, Hill. Euphorliaceoe. 4to 6; 12
to 18.
A crooked-stemmed small tree, of seldom occurrence in the bricklow
scrub; wood hard, close, and takes a good polish.
33.—Maclura Calcar-galli, Cum. Moraceae. Cockspur
Thorn. 3to 4 inches ; 20 to 30. .
A rambling, thorny shrub; duramend, or heartwood, dark yellow
color, hard, and used in dyeing yellow and browm


34. —Jambosa, new sp. F. M. Myrtaceoe. 6to 12; 20 to
35. Aboriginal name, Buyan Buy an.
A beautiful little tree; would be highly ornamental in the shrubbery
or garden, having rich bright foliage, with abundant white blossoms,
and pyriform, drooping red fruit, pleasant and refreshing to the palate.
Wood tough and pliable; not subject to crack when drying. Common
in all sandy creeks.
35.— Croton Phebalioides, R. B. Euphorbiacece. Bto 12 ;
30 to 40.
A small tree found growing on the borders of scrubs; wood soft,
and of no known value; the bark contains an agreeable bitter.
36.— Hodokinsonia ovatifolia, F. M.
12; 12 to 16.
A small tree, or bush; wood close and pretty.
37.— Flindeusia Australis, R. B. 10 to 14; 30 to 50.
A slender growing tree, found in the scrubs. The trunk is smooth
and of a brownish colour; the branches are small and few. Wood of a
good texture.
38.— Bursaria incana, L. Pittosporacece. 6to 9; 80 to
40.
A slender-growing tree, found growing on the boarders of scrubs,
inland from the coast; the timber is hard, fine grained, and takes a
good polish.
39.— Barkerya syringifolia, F. M. Leguminosoe. 12 to
15; 40 to 50.
This is a most beautiful tree, with dense, bright green, glossy
foliage. The tree is common; wood hard, and close grained.
40.— Stenocarpus sinuatus, A. Cunn. Proteaceos. Tulip
Tree. 18 to 24 ; 40 to 60.
This is a most beautiful tree, on account of its clean growth and
large pinnatifid foliage. It occurs often in the scrubs, some distance
from the coast. The wood is nicely marked, and would admit of a good
polish.


41. —Celtis sp. Ulmaceae. 18 to 24; 40 to 60.
A fine-looking tree, its wood in bad repute for durability.
42.— Ixora, new sp., F.M. Bubiacece. 6to 12; 20 to 30.
Aboriginal name, Meranga.
A small tree found on the borders of scrubs. Wood hard, heavy,
and fine grained. Will probably be found to answer well for wood
engraving.
43.— Sersalisia sericea, E. B. Sapotacece. 12 to 20, 60
to 70.
Handsome tree, upright growth, with milky sap and bright glossy
leaves ; wood hard, close grained, tough, and firm ; frequent in the
scrubs.
44.— Cryptocarva glaucbscens, E. B. Lauracece. 18 to
24 ; 17 to 80.
A tall tree, with symmetrical bole. Wood soft, not durable, but
useful, and not without beauty.
45. —Myrtus Argentea, Hill. Myrtaceoe. 18 to 24;
60 to 70.
Tall, slender tree, found in great abundance in the scrubs along the
coast; wood close, tough, and firm.
46.— Banksia compar, E. B. Proteacece. Beefwood. Bto
12 ; 20 to 30.
Low branching tree, with handsome wood.
47.— Acacia Aulacocarpa. A. 0. Leguminosce. 6t012 ;
20 to 30.
A small tree, frequent in the dense scrubs inland from the coast,
wood hard, fine grained, and nicely marked.
48.— Melaleuca nodosa. Myrtaceoe. 12 to 18; 30 to 40.
A small tree with rough bark, which peels off in numerous thin
membranous folds. It has been suggested as a fit material to enter into
the manufacture of paper. The wood is very hard and heavy.


49.—Canthium ixorioides, F.M. Eubiacece. Bto 12; 20
to 30.
Small tree growing on the borders of scrubs along the coast.
Wood hard and fine grained.
50.— Sersalisia sp., Linn. Sapotacece, 12 to 20; 40 to 60.
Beautiful tree, with thick milky sap, in taste resembling fresh
cream. The wood is close grained and firm.
51.— Petalostigma quadroloculare, F.M. Euphorliacece.
Crab Tree. 12 to 18 ; 40 to 50. •
This beautiful weeping tree is found in great abundance growing
on poor sandy soil in the forests ; the wood is hard, fine grained, and
promises to be useful to the cabinet-maker ; the bark contains a very
powerful bitter, and is said to have the same properties as the
Peruvian bark.
52.—Rottlera tinctoria. Euphorliacece , 18 to 24, 60
to 70.
A handsome tree; the timber is hard, close grained, and of great
strength; not common.
53.— Eugenia sp. Myrtacece. Iron-wood. 9t012 ; 14 to
20.
Small tree, found in great abundance in all the scrubs along
the coast. Wood very hard, close grained, and heavy.
54.—Acacia Aulacocarpa, A.C.
Same as No. 47.
55.— Exocarpus sp,, R. B. Santalacece. Cherry. 6to 9.
10 to 16.
A small tree, with spreading loose habit of growth. It grows
sparingly upon the forest ground. The wood is close grained, and
promises to be handsome.
56.— Eugenia sp. Myrtacece. Ironwood. 9t012 ; 14 to
20.
Small tree, found in great abundance in all the scrubs along
the coast. Wood very hard, close grained, and heavy.


57. —Cargillia australis, R. B. Ehenacece. 18 to 24*
60 to 80. ’
Slender-growing tree, with elongated trunk and elegant rigid
foliage. Wood close, very tough and firm, of little beauty, but likely
to be useful for many purposes.
58. —Ceratopetalum apetalum, Don. Cunoniacece. Light-
wood, 24 to 36 ; 70 to 90.
A beautiful tree, with elongated cylindrical stem. Wood light,
fine grained, good for joiners’ and cabinet work. Found in great
abundance in the scrubs near the coast.
59. —Harpulia pendula. Planch. Sapindacece. Tulip
Wood. 14 to 24; 50 to 60.
A beautiful growing tree, with glossy green pinnate leaves, found
in great abundance on the banks of rivers. The wood is close grained
firm, and beautifully marked; much esteemed for cabinet work.
60. —SiPHONonosr Australe. Capparidacece. Grey Plum
18 to 24. 50 to 60. *
A tree common in the scrubs. The wood is hard and close
grained.
61. —Myrtus Acmenoides, F. M. Myrtacece. 12 to 18 *
30 to 40.
> A tree of considerable beauty, frequent in the scrubs. Wood close
grained and not much known.
■62. —Ratonia pyriformis, F. M. Sapindacece. 10tol5:
30 to 40.
A slender growing tree, with large glossy pinnate leaves. Wood
firm, close grained.
63. —Corypha australis, R. B. Pahnacece. Cabbage Tree
12 to 18 ; 100 to 120.
This noble tree is found in great abundance along the coast. The
unexpanded fronds, prepaied by being immersed in boiling water and
dried, are much valued for the manufacture of hats.


64.— Acacia sapindoides,, A. Cunn. Leguminosce. 6to 12 ;■
30 to 40.
This species is generally found in dense scrubs. The wood is soft,
but tough.
65.— Flixdersia oxleyana, Muell. Cedrelaeece. Light
yellow wood. 24 to 42 * 100 to 150.
This fine tree is found in great abundance in the same situations as
the cedar. It has a beautiful symmetrical trunk, which, towards the
upper part, throws out many branches; the head is conical, and occupies
about one-thirtieth part of the stem. The wood is strong, durable, and
fine-grained, and on that account capable of a high polish. It could be
applied to the same purposes as the cedar. It is further valuable for
its dying properties. It also resists the white ants.. The log, showing
the circumference, is cut twenty feet from the butt.
66.— Cupakia australis, Hook, Sopindacece. Tamarind
Tree. 12 to 24; 50 to 60.
A slender growing, elegant tree, with large pinnate leaves, pro
ducing every year large racemes of beautiful acid fruit, used for preserve
by the colonists. Wood white, close grained, and firm.
67. — Callistemon laxceolatum Dec, Myrtacece. Bottlo
Brush Tree. 12 to 18 ; 30 to 40.
A small branching tree, growing in or near the beds of rivers;
wood hard and heavy.
68.— Casuarixa sp,, L. Casuarinacece. Swamp Oak. 12
to 20 ; 50 to 70.
This species is found growing in great abundance near salt water
marshes, or inlets. The wood is close grained, and beautifully marked;
the timber is used for fuel.
69. — Pseuualaxgium PENTAMERUM, F. M. Alangiacece. 8 to
12 ; 15 to 20.
A low branching tree, its wood possessing considerable beauty for
cabinet work.
70. — Acroxychia Hillii, Gtertn, Xanthoxylacece. 6t012 ;
16 to 24.
Small tree; wood firm, and close grained.


71. — Ailantus sp. Terebintaceoe. 24 to 36 ; 80 to 100.
A large, noble, cylindrical, erect tree. The first of this genus yet
found in Australia. Branchy towards the top. Leaves pinnated with
racemes of fragrant flowers. Would be very ornamental in the
plantation. From wounds made in the bark, a resinous substance exudes,
which burns with a brilliant flame. Found in dense scrubs. Wood
light, soft, and appears to be of small durability.
72.— Acacia excelsa, Benth. Leguminosce. Brigalow. 20
to 36 ; 60 to 90. Aboriginal name, Orker.
An erect, tall tree; branchy towards the top; falcate, silvery Waves;
covers large tracts of the rich scrub lands of Queensland, giving a
singular appearance to the forest scenery. Wood hard, heavy, close
grained, and of a dark colour, giving out a strong odour of violets. In
use for building purposes, fencing, &c.
73. —Ingasp. Leguminosoe. 12 to 24; 30 to 50. Aboriginal
name, Kooomn.
A tree of common occurrence in stony scrubs. Trunk erect, with a
whitish bark. Small, dark-green foliage; very branchy towards the top.
Wood very hard, heavy, and close grained; takes a very high polish;
may be useful for wood engraving.
74. —Owenia cerasifera, F. M. Meliacecß. Sweet Plum
20 to 45 ; 70 to 100. Aboriginal name, Rancooran.
A beautiful tree, having a cylindrical, erect trunk, growing some-
times eighty feet in height without branches. Fine, dark-green, glossy,
pinnated foliage. Wood hard and heavy, of a dark red colour, finely
marked, and takes a very high polish. Fruit wholesome, slightly
acidulous to the taste when ripe. Common in scrubs and valleys. It is
worthy of remark, as a proof of the durability of this wood, that in some
scrubs one-half of the dead trunks on the ground are of this tree, while
the live trees bear a proportion of only about 1 to 200 of their contem-
porary forest companions.
76. — Capparis Mitciielli, Lindl. Capparidacece. 10 to
14; 14 to 20.
A small tree, of great beauty when in blossom; the wood is hard,
and close grained.
77.— Rhus Australasica, Hill. Anacardiacece. Dark Yellow
Wood. 18 to 24; 60 to 70.
A picturesque tree, of very general occurrence in the scrubs on the
banks of the rivers. The trunk is of moderate size, covered with a


rongh, scaly, grey bark; the branches are small, tortuous, and
numerous; the leaves are pinnate; the flowers terminal, and of a pinkish
colour; the wood is soft, fine grained, and beautifully marked; and is
much esteemed for cabinet-work.
78.— Celtis sp. Ulmacece. 18 to 24; 40 to 60.
A fine-looking tree, its wood in bad repute for durability.
79. —Catha Dxspeema, F. M. Celaslracece. 12 to 16 :
20 to 30.
A very beautiful small tree, with bright glossy foliage. The wood
is close grained, easily worked, and likely to be serviceable for turning.
80. — Mybtcs australis, Hill. Myrtacece. 14 to 20 : 40
to 50.
A very elegant tree, with very branching head, and bright glossy
green foliage; exceedingly umbrageous. Wood hard, close grained,
and beautifully marked.
81. —Melaleuca viridiflora Dec. Myrtacece. Broad-leafed
Tea Tree. 18 to 24 ; 40 to 50.
Handsome tree when in flower; wood very hard and close grained,
and has the reputation of being very durable underground; of common
occurrence.
82. —Eucalyptus sp. Myrtacece. Stringy Bark. 24 to 50 ;
50 to 70.
A species yielding timber much prized for flooring boards, of con-
siderable strength and durability.
83. —Backhousia Myrtifolia, Hook. Myrtacece. Myrtle,
12 to 18. 20 to 40.
Small tree, with very branching head and dark green foliage.
Wood close grained, and prettily marked.
84. —Yitex LignumvitjE, A Cunn. Verlenacece. Lignum-
vitte. 20 to 24 ; 50 to 70.
A most beautiful tree, with dense green foliage, generally found
growing on the borders of scrubs. The wood is hard, close grained, and
of a blackish colour. It is a useful timber for the cabinet maker.


85.— Acmeka floribunda, Dec. Moracece. 18 to 24 ;40
to 60.
Beautiful small tree, with very branching head, and bright, glossy,
green foliage. Wood soft, but tough. Frequent on sides or beds of
rivers.
86. —Acmena floribunda. Moracece. Fig. 13 to 18 ;
40 to 50.
Small tree of upright growth, with milky sap ; the Wood is soft
and light; very perishable.
87.
Ehenacece. 18 to 24 ;
50 to 60.
A handsome tree. Wood fine grained, and soft; frequent in the
scrubs upon the banks of rivers.
88.—Olea paniculata, E. B. Oleacece. Olive Tree. 18 to
24 ; 50 to 70.
A tree of frequent occurrence in the scrubs on the banks of rivers.
89.— Ratonia Australis. Sapindacece. 14 to 20 ; 40 to
50.
A handsome tree; wood fine grained and firm, and of considerable
beauty.
90.— Eucalyptus sp. Myrtacece. Grey Gum. 36 to 48 ;
90 to 100,
A valuable and durable timber, growing in great abundance upon
the forest ground.
81. — Myrtacece. 18 to 24 ;
60 to 70.
Upright slender tree, frequent in the scrubs. Wood remarkably
hard and brittle.
92. —Eucalyptus paniculatus, Sm. Myrtacece. Blood Wood.
24 to 30; 50 to 70.
A fine-looking tree. Its wood is in good repute for durability. It
is much used for posts for fencing. It is of common occurrence.


93. —Cupania Pseudorhus, A. Rich. Sapindacece. 14 to
20; 30 to 40.
Growing in great abundance on the banks of the rivers. Wood
fine grained and beautiful.
94. —Oasuariha Tenuissima, Sieb. Casuarinacece. River
Oak. 18 to 24; 40 to GO.
This species is found growing only in or near the beds of rivers.
Its wood is strong, light, and tough. It is used for bullock yokes.
95. —Avicennta tomentosa, L. Myoporaccce. Mangrove.
19 to 20; 20 to 30.
Low branching tree, growing in the mud of salt water estuaries.
Its wood, when small, valued on account of its inlocked fibre, for stone-
masons’ mallets, &c., and is used for knees of boats and vessels. The
ashes are used in soap manufacture.
96.—Rhus Australasica. Anacardiacece. 30 to 40; 80
to 90.
A tree of picturesque growth, frequently found in the scrubs along
the coast. The wood is soft and tough.
97. —Aralia elbgans, Cunn. Araliacece. 12 to 16; 30
to 40.
Elegant small tree, with large pinnate leaves; wood soft, white,
and spongy. (Two specimens.)
98. —Flindersia Australis. Cugerie. 24 to 36 ; 80 to
100.
A large tree, frequent in the scrubs along the coast. The trunk
is erect, smooth, and of greyish colour; the wood is soft, easily worked,
and is used for flooring boards and house carpentry.
99. —Flindersia Selwyniaha, F. M. 12 to 16 ; 60 to 70.
This species occurs plentifully in the scrubs near the coast. It is
of slender growth. The wood is soft, and soon perishes when exposed.
100. —Geijera multiflora, F. M. Eutacece, 24 to 30;
60 to 70.
A tree of moderate size, found growing in the scrubs along the
coast. Wood close, tough, and firm; the bark contains a powerful
bitter.


101. — Grevillea Robxjsta, R. Br. Silky Oak. 100 to 120.
Wood used for cabinet work, and staves for tallow casks.
102.—Eucalyptus sp. Myrtacece. Red Iron Bark. 30 to
40 ; 70 to 90.
Timber hard; common in forest ground.
103.— Eucalyptus sp. Myrtacece. Woolly Butt. 24 to
10; 50 to 70.
Very fine timber tree. Its wood much prized for felloes of wheels,
and other work requiring strength and toughness. Plentiful upon the
forest grounds.
104. sp. Verhenacece. Beech. 24 to 3G ;80
to 100.
This very useful tree has a lofty cylindrical stem; the bark ash-
coloured; the leaves are obovate, downy underneath; from four to six
inches long, and from two to three inches broad. The flowers are in
panicles, large, purple; the seeds in four-celled drupes. The wood has
by experience been found to be useful; it is easily worked, and at the
same time is both strong and durable. It does not expand by damp,
nor contract by dry weather. The river steamers use it principally for
the floats of their wheels. It is found in small quantities in the scrubs
bordering the rivers.
105.— Cupania Xylocarpa, F. M. Sapindacece, 20 to 30 ;
50 to GO,
A moderate sized tree. Wood soft, and as vet of no recognised
value.
106.—Tristania rhytiphlioia. Swamp Mahogany. 24 to
36 ; 50 to 70.
A tree producing fine timber, used in house carpentry,
107.— Melaleuca uncinata, Sm. Myrtacece. Common
Tea Tree. 24 to 36 ; 70 to 90.
A very hard, close, durable wood, but liable to split or open when
exposed to the air in drying. The tree is of common occurrence where
the situation is moist.


108. —Callitkis sp., Hill. Coniferce, Cyprus Pine. 20 to
30 ; 40 to 60.
This tree forms vasts tracts along the coast, growing on barren,
sandy soils. Its form is pyramidal, and of great beauty; the trunk has
a brownish, ridgy hark; the branches are numerous and ascending.
The timber is an article of great importance, but as yet has not received
that attention which it deserves from the timber merchants. The wood is
brittle, durable, fine-grained, fragrant, and is capable of a high polish.
It is used for piles of wharves, and for sheathing punts and boats; it
resists the attacks of cobra and white ants; the root also is used for
cabinet purposes.
109.— Owenia venosa, F. M. Meliacece. Sour Plum, 15
to 25 ; 40 to 60. Aboriginal name, Pyddharr.
A fine shady tree, common in scrubs. Wood hard, of a reddish
colour. Its great strength renders it fit for wheelwrights’ work.
110. —Atherosperma Micranthdm, Tulasne. Atherosper-
macece. Sassafras. 24 to 36 ; 50 to 80.
A most beautiful tree, with dense bright green, glossy foliage,
emitting an agreeable aromatic fragrance; the bark contains an agreeable
bitter, principally of repute as a tonic amongst the sawyers; wood
soft and weak, of little value, except for packing cases; a common tree.
111.— Araucaria Cunninghami, Ait. Coniferce. Moreton
Bay Pine. 36 to 66 ; 150 to 200.
This majestic tree is, without exception, the most ornamental and
useful tree in Queensland. Its beautiful regular pyramidal form, and
the sombre green of its awl-shaped foliage, command general admiration
It covers immense tracts of land along the coast and in the interior.
It overtops all other trees, whether growing on the alluvial banks near
rivers, or upon the steep and rugged mountains in the interior. Its
branches are produced in whorls from six to eight, horizontally and
spreading. The bark is thick and brownish. The limber is an
article of great commercial importance, and is used extensively in this
colony. The wood is strong and durable when kept dry, but soon
decays when exposed to alternate damp and dry. When procured from
the mountains in the interior it is fine grained, and is susceptible of a
high polish, which excels that of Satinwood or Bird’s-eye Maple. The
resin which exudes is very remarkable, as it has all the transparency and
whiteness of crystal, and that portion of it which adheres to the trees
hangs from them in the shape of icicles, which are sometimes three feet
long, and six to twelve inches broad. The log showing the circumference
was cut 25 feet from the butt.


112. —Eucalyptus sp. Myrtace.ce. Turpentine Tree. 36
to 48 ; 70 to 90.
This species, with its huge, massive arms, is of common occurrence.
The timber is hard, and said to be exceedingly durable under ground..
It is difficult to burn.
113. —Diospyros sp. Ehenaceoe. 18 to 24 ;60 to P
Beautiful tree, of common occurrence in the scrubs bordering on
the river banks ; wood tolerably close grained.
114. —Eucalyptus sp. Myrtaceoe. Blue Gum. 36 to 48
70 to 90,
A very valuable timber, harder, tougher, and more durable than
the last. Can be obtained in larger quantities. One of the most
durable woods known ; excellent for naves and felloes of wheels, and
for work under ground.
115. — Eugenia Marginata, Hill. Myrtaceoe. 24 to 36;
80 to 100.
A remarkably large tree, found in dense scrubs, where the situation
is moist. Wood very tough and of great strength.
116. —Castanospermum australe, R. B. Leguminosce.
Bean Tree. 24 to 36 ; 80 to 90.
A large and ornamental tree, with large pinnate, dark green, glossy
foliage; the timber is soft, fine grained, and takes a good polish ; ex-
perience has, however, proved that it is not durable.j
117.— Araucaria Bidwillii, Hook. Coniferce. Bunya
Bunya. Diameter, 30 to 48 inches ; height, 100 to
150 feet.
A noble tree, inhabiting the scrubs in the district between the
Brisbane and the Burnett Eivers. In the 27th parallel it grows thickly
over a portion of country in extent about 30 miles long by 12 broad.
The tree has a very singular appearance ; the trunk is quite straight,
its bark is thick and smooth ; the branches are produced in whorls of
six, seven, or eight; they are horizontal, indexed, and ascending at the
extremities. From its style of growth, singular foliage, and peculiar
fresh colour, when surrounded with other trees of a different habit and
greyish tint, it produces a fine effect, from the striking contrast pre-
sented by its rigid growth, and fresh, green, lance-shaped leaves. The
wood is also not only very strong and good, but it is full of beautiful


veins, and capable of being polished and worked with the greatest
facility. The cones produced on the extreme upper branches are large,
measuring nine to twelve inches in length, and nine inches in diameter;
on coming to maturity they readily shed their seeds, which are two to
two and a half inches long, by three-quarters of an inch broad ; sweet
before being perfectly ripe, and after that resemble roasted chestnuts in
taste. They are plentiful once in three years, and when the ripening
season arrives, which is generally in the month of January, the
aborigines assemble in large numbers from a great distance around, and
feast upon the fruit. Each tribe has its own particular set of trees, and
of these each family has a certain number allotted, which are handed
down from generation to generation with great exactness. Ths Bunya
is remarkable as being the only hereditary property which any of the
aborigines are known to possess, and it is, therefore, generally respected
by the settlers. The log showing the circumference was cut 34 feet
from the butt.
118. — Eucalyptus sp. Myrtacece. Grey Iron Bark. 30 to
40 ; 70 to 90.
The timber of this large, rugged-looking tree is also of the highest
reputation for strength and durability. Common in the forest ground.
119.— Flindersia sp. R. B. Cedrelacece. Flindosa. 36 to
60; 80 to 90.
A robust tree, of general occurrence in the scrubs on the banks of
rivers ; the trunk is of good size, covered with a smooth, scaly, lead-
coloured bark ; the branches thick, tortuous, and numerous. The wood
is hard, close, and of great strength and durability. It has long been
known to the timber merchants as being a very hard timber, and diffi-
cult to cut up with the saw; for that reason little attention has been
paid to procuring it. The log, showing the circumference, is cut twelve
feet from the butt.
120.— Podocarpus elatus, R. B. Taxacce. She-Pine. 24
to 36 j 50 to 80.
A very beautiful tree, with elongated, cylindrical trunk. It occurs
very frequently in the scrubs along the coast. The wood is hard, fine-
grained, flexible, and elastic.
121.— Tristania conferta, R. B. Myrtacece. Box. 36 to
50; 80 to 100.
A fine-looking tree—the largest of the genus; very generally dis-
tributed on open forest ground. Its wood is much prized for its strength
and durable qualities.


122.— Flindersia Oxleyana.
123. — Melia azedarach, L. Meliaceoe. White Cedar.
24 to 36 ; 40 to 60.
A deciduous tree. Wood soft, and not considered of value.
124.— Eucalyptus.
125. — Hartigshea Tricosiphonea, Meliaceoe. Rosewood.
30 to ,42 ; 80 to 100.
A large tree, abounding in the scrubs. Wood prettily grained and
takes a high polish.
126.— Eucalyptus sp. Myrtacece. Black Iron Bark. 30
to 40; 70 to 90.
A large tree, found plentifully upon the open forest ground. The
timber of this rugged lasting tree is of the highest reputation for
strength and durability.
127.— Rhus Australasica. Hill. Anacardiacece . . Dark
Yellow Wood. 18 to 24 ; 60 to 70.
128.— E1/eocarpus grandis, F. M. Tiliacece. Callhum.
24 to 36 ; 90 to 100.
This tree is frequent in the scrubs along the coast. The trunk is
erect, the bark smooth, and of a brownish colour. The branches, with
their bright, green, glossy foliage, are thinly scattered over its lofty
head. The wood is soft, and easily worked. It is likely to be service-
able for boarding.
129.— Cedrela australis, Auct, Cedrelacece. Red Cedar.
36 to 78,; 100 to 150.
This magnificent tree is found in great numbers in the scrubs along
the coast, and occasionally extending inland for a considerable distance.
The trunk is erect and massive, covered with a rough, scaly, brown bark,
which, on the young brunches, is of a grey colour; the branches have
an upward tendency, and have a very graceful appearance; the leaves
are deciduous. In favourable situations, where it has room to spread,
it puts out large huge branches, the junctions of which, with the stem,
furnish those beautifully curled pieces oi which the choicest veneers are
made. The timber is an article of great commercial importance, and
extensively exported to other colonies.


130.— Eucalyptus maculatus. Hook, Myrtaceae. Spotted
Gum. 36 to 42 ; 70 to 90.
Very large and fine timber.
101. Alphitonea excelsa. Rheisseck. HhamncicGCß,
Mountain Ash. 18 to 24, 46 to 50.
This valuable tree is found plentifully on the forest ground
and. upon the borders of dense scrubs. The wood is hard close
grained, and will take a high polish; it is also suitable for gun-
stocks.
132.— Acacia Lebbeck. Willd. 20 to 30.
Wood tolerably hard.
133.—Morus Brunoniana. Endl. 40 to 40.
Wood soft and light.
134, —Acacia pendula.
135.—Nelitris sp. 40 to 50.
Wood hard and close grained.
136,—W00d of a small unknown tree.
137.— Homalium alnifolium. F. Muell.
Wood white, close grained and dark.
SECTIONS OF FOREST TREES
Collected in the neighbourhood of Rockhampton, by Mr.
P. A. O’Shakesy, and forwarded for exhibition in London.
The remarks of the collector on the various woods are
appended.
Introductory Remarks.
With the exception of two or three species, the following
woods, indigenous to Rockhampton, have not hitherto been


exhibited from this place, and are chiefly intended as an
illustration of its great richness, more especially of the
jungles or scrubs, in useful and ornamental timber. In the
neighbourhood of Rockhampton alone there are nearly 200
different species of woods available for every purpose from
cabinet work to ship-building, several of which, as the
eucalypti or gums, surpass all other known timber in strength
and durability; and, as these constitute the main bulk of
vegetation in the open forest, the supply is inexhaustible.
It only remains to be noted that this collection is altogether
private, and will be presented to the Royal Dublin Society at
the close of the Exhibition.
The wood specimens marked (*) are accompanied with
flowering specimens.
I.—Alphitonia excelsa, Rheiss. Rhamnacece.
A middle-sized tree, with a grey rough, deeply-furrowed and
persistent bark; wood, bright red, hard, heavy, and close grained, takes
a high polish; in bushes and open forest land, common.
2. — Acronvchia imperforata, F. Muell. Rutacece.
A shrub of ten to fifteen feet with a yellowish, corky bark; wood
yellowish, hard, and heavy, smelling somewhat like turpentine; found
in dry as well as in moist scrubs; fruit eatable.
3. — Acronvchia Bauerii, Schott. Rutacea\
A tree of 20 to 25 feet, with an almost smooth, greyish bark,
yellow inside; wood, brownish yellow, hard and heavy; takes a good
polish; found in moist alluvial scrubs; very valuable for cabinet work.
6. — Randia hensiflora, Benth. Rubiacece.
A middle-sized tree, with an irregular trunk; bark, brownish, and
almost smooth; wood of a light brown colour, hard, heavy, and close-
grained; should make good veneers. This tree is highly deserving of
cultivation, it bearing a great profusion of white fragrant flowers, and
beautiful shining foliage; found in moist scrubs.


7.—lxora Pavetta, Roxburg. Bubiacece.
A handsome shrub of 10 to 12 feet; flowers white and fragrant *
scrubs rCJ; W °° d WhltC aQd hard; f ° Und in dry as well as in moist
10.— Cantiiiuh lucidum, Hook and Arntt. Bubiacece.
A beautiful flowering shub of 12 to 15 feet; bark grey; wood
white and hard; found in dry as well as in moist scrubs.
11*.—Ganophyllum faloatum, Blume. Burseracece.
A beautiful spreading tree of 30 to 40 feet; leaves pinnate; trunk
? f v reddlsh > falhn £ in thin sheets; wood reddish, hard
? 5 fr ? lt I SCar et) OVOId > obtusely acuminate, about f inch long
succulent, and slightly acrid; sap watery. This tree rare in the
neighbourhood of Rockhampton, is found in moist scrubs.’
l*j . Euroschikus falcatus, J. Hooker. Anacardiaceoe.
A spreading tree, often attaining a height of GO to 70 feet; trunk
bVht 5 n ark - rOU P h ’. and persistent; wood white, soft, and
exposure to the air; leaves pjnnate and shining; fruit ovoid, obtuse
3to 4 lines long, black, with a hot, biting taste; chiefly found amon<-
oiSt “ 11U,i0 ' scr ” bs >» h ”« “ “‘to
1 3. Eucalyptus melakophloia, F. Muell. Myrtacece.
l. a rftt lea ' ,ed i 0 7 il i Ironbark. A tree of 25 to 30 feet, with a
hard, black, lough, deeply furrowed, and persistent bark; which when
deprived of the outer hard portion, is used in the “ bush ” for covering
forest!’ Eucalypti are, without exception, found in the opeS
14.— Eucalyptus crebra, F. Muell. Myrtacece. Harrow-
leaved Ironbark.
, An erect tree of 50 to 60 feet, often with a clear trunk of 25 to 30
admittefTtoT! ’ f xtr ® mc and heavy. The /ronbarks are generally
nre irv I frongestand most durable of known timbers; they
™ r h ClnP i°v e< m fen , ClDg and huildir) fo and will stand unde-
the gr ° Un , d for S T ra 7 ears - The w ood and bark of this and
tic preceding number are aimost identical, and are used for the same


15.* —Eucalyptus tesselaris, F. Muell. Myrtacece. More-
ton Bay Ash.
A handsome tree of from 50 to 60 feet, with a trunk 4 to 5 feet in
diameter; bark in the lower portion of the trunk, dark coloured,
persistent, and splitting into numerous small angular pieces; the bark
on the remainder of the trunk and branches is smooth and ash-coloured,
falling off in the spring and early summer months in thin sheets; wood
brownish, not very hard, but tough; will answer admirably for staves.
18. —Eucalyptus polyanthemos, Schauer. Myrtacece.
Box.
A tree of 40 to 50 feet; bark grey, somewhat rough and persistent,
used without dressing, for covering houses; wood yellowish white,
very hard, and durable, but apt to crack; found in clay soil flats, known
us box fiats.
19. —Eucalyptus tereticornis, Sm. Myrtacece. Gum.
An erect tree of 80 to 100 feet, and a diameter of 9 to 10 feet;
bark ash-coloured or white, and smooth throughout, falling off in thin
sheet; wood red, hard, and durable; used in fencing and building. It
was from this, not from E. Microtheca , that the piles for the Great
Northern Railway were made; found iu swamps and rich alluvial flats.
20. —Eucalyptus Corymbosa, Sm. Myrtacece. Bloodwood.
A middle-sized tree; bark reddish and scaly; wood red, hard, and
durable, with a short grain; common on dry ridges; used in fencing,
&c.
24.* —Tristania suaveolens, Sm. Mytaceoe. Mahogany
and Stringy-bark.
A handsome tree of SO to 40 feet, with dark green foliage and
white fragrant flowers; bark brown, soft, and fibrous; used in remote
places as a substitute for candles; wood red, hard, heavy, and tough ;
found in wet places in the open forest land.
25.— Eugenia eucalyptoides, F. Muell. Myrtacece.
A beautiful flowering tree of 15 to 20 feet; bark dark and rough;
wood of a dull white colour, not very hard, but tough; the fruit, often
an inch long, has an agreeable acid taste, and makes a very good pre-
serve; it is common along the beds and banks of creeks.
26. —Backhousia sciadophora, F. Mnell. Myrtacece.
A slender growing tree of 30 to 40 feet, with' fragrant flowers and
leaves; bark brown, and fibrous, falling off in thin sheets; wood of a
light brown colour, hard, and tough, splitting; found in dry scrubs.


27.* —Myrtus acmenoides, F. Muell. Myrtacece. Myrtle.
A beautiful flowering shrub of 10 to 15 feet, with an irregular
trunk; flowers white and fragrant; bark green, thin, and smooth; wood
light brown, hard and heavy with a fine close grain; a few of the
leaves put to draw with tea gives it a beautiful flavour; found in dry
scrubs.
28 —Maba geminata, R, Br. Ebenacece. Ebony
A tree of 10 to 20 feet, with a short compact head; bark black,
and rough; wood of a bright red colour, black at the centre, hard,
heavy, close-grained and tough, taking a high polish, would make
beautiful veneers; chiefly found among rocks in dry, rich soils, but
often in moist alluvial scrubs, where it attains its largest dimensions.
29, —Maba humilis, F. Muell, Ebenacece. Ebony.
A shrub with a short, spreading head, seldom exceeding 10 or 15
feet; bark and wood similar to the preceding species, but the leaves are
much smaller, seldom exceeding half an inch in length, and often much
smaller, while those of the others are from 2| to 3£ inches long; found
both in dry and in moist scrubs.
30. —Maba fasciculosa, F. Muell. Ebenacece. Ebony.
A slender growing tree of 25 to 30 feet, with a clear, erect trunk;
bark brown, almost smooth, wood pink and white, black at the centre,
and the transverse cut showing pink ring; common in low moist scrubs.
No. 63, of the Rockhampton exhibition woods of 1866, appears to me
to be this species, sent as maba humilis.
31. —Maba laxiflora (?), Bentbam. Ebenacece.
A small tree of 15 or 20 feet, with the branches spreading
horizontally; bark brown, and almost smooth; white wood, not very
hard, and not black at centre. This tree has only been recently named,
and is not at present available for determining the species. Found in
moist scrubs.
32. —Mallotus tinctorius, F. Muell. Euphorbiaceoe.
A small tree generally with many stems; bark brownish and
almost smooth; wood pink, hard, and very tough; found in low rich
scrubs.
32* —Mallotus repandus, J. Mull. Euphorbiaceoe.
A handsome tree of 25 to 30 feet; bark grey and almost smooth;
wood of a uniform white colour, soft, and easily worked; found in low
moist scrubs.


34. —Mallotus claoxyloides, J. Mull. Euphorbiacece.
A slender tree of 12 to 15 feet, with large leaves, and yellowish
white fragrant flowers; bark grey, scaly and almost smooth; wood of
a yellowish brown colour, with white sap wood, hard and heavy; found
in dry as well as in moist scrubs.
35, —Hemicyclia sepiaria, Wight and Arntt. Euphorbiacece.
A tree often attaining a height of 30 to 40 feet, and generally with
many stems ; bark grey and almost smooth; wood white, hard, and
close-grained; found among rocks in dry places, and also in low moist
scrubs.
37.*— Ricinicarpus ledifolius, F. Muell. Euphorbiacece.
A handsome shrub or small tree, of very slender growth; bark
brownish and rough ; wood of a light honey colour, with a large por-
tion of the centre dark brown or almost black, hard, heavy, and close-
grained ; invaluable for cabinet work, but too small for various
purposes ; found in dry scrubs, and is very local in its distribution.
38.*—Croton insularis, Baill. Euphorbiacece.
An erect slender tree of 25 to 30 feet; bark grey and rough, with
a red sap; wood of a yellowish white colour, hard, and heavy. The
foliage of this tree turns scarlet in the winter months, giving it a
beautiful appearance; found in dry as well as in moi«t scrubs.
40. —Croton acronychoides, F, Muell. Euphorbiacece.
A tree of 20 to 25 feet; bark brown and somewhat rough; wood
white, with a large portion of the centre dark brown, hard, heavy, and
tough; found in scrubs in various situations.
42. —Alyxia ruscifolia, R. Br. Apocynacece.
A handsome shrub of 8 to 10 feet, with prickly-pointed leaves, and
large red berries; bark green and almost smooth, exuding a milky
juice when wounded; wood white and hard, with a fine, close grain;
smells somewhat like turpentine; found in dry scrubs, chiefly among
rocks.
45. —Strychnos psilosperma, F. Muell. Loganiacece.
Strychnine.
A tall shrub with many stems; flowers white; berry red; bark
green; wood white, with black centre, hard and heavy; common in dry
scrubs around Rockhampton.


47. —Celastrus dispermus, F. Muell Celastrinece.
A handsome tree of 16 to 20 feet, with pale green foliage; bark
whitish and rough; wood of a light pink colour; sap-wood white;
found among rocks on dry ranges.
48. —Denhamia obscura, Meissn. Celastrinecs.
A small tree, and like D. pittosporaides, remarkable for its striated
trunk; bark grey and almost smooth; wood white and hard, with a fine
close grain. The arillus or fleshy covering of the seed yields a large
quantity of a beautiful scarlet tincture; found on poor soils, bordering
on scubs.
51. —Lonchocarpus Blackii, Benth. Leguminosce. Bloody
Bark.
An immense woody climber, outgrowing the tallest trees of the
jungle, with long, showy racemes of crimson flowers, and pinnate
leaves; bark brown and almost smooth; wood dark brown, soft, sponsry,
and pervaded with numerous capillary tubes; apparently ot little
durability; a large quantity of an astringent, blood-red gum flows from
the bai'k on being wounded; common in moist scrubs, where the trunk
is found coiled on the ground like a huge serpent.
52.—-Ficus Fraserii, Miq. Urticece. Fig tree.
A tree of monstrous growth, the large spreading branches sending
down roots, which take firm hold in the ground ; leaves oblong, acu-
minate, 3 to 5 inches long; fruit about £ inch diameter, not eatable;
bark brown and almost smooth, yielding a large quantity of a white
elastic gum; wood white, soft, and splits very freely. One of these
trees which I measured was 38 feet in circumference at 2 feet from the
ground, the roots forming immense wall-like abutments, some of which
extended 20 feet from the base of the tree. Several persons could conceal
themselves in the large crevices in the trunk, while the main branches
stretched across a diameter of 100 feet; found in moist, rich, alluvial
scrubs.
55.—Ficus macrophylla, Desf. Urticece. Moreton Bay Fig.
A middle sized tree, with a grey, almost smooth bark; wood white
and soft; chiefly found growing on naked rocks, but frequently on other
trees where the seed had been deposited by birds. It sends down roots
to the ground, which in time encase and destroy the foster tree; when
the tree overhangs, the roots of the Fig fall perpendicularly, perhaps
from a height of 60 to 70 feet till they reach the ground where they
take firm hold.


66. —Morus Brunoniaha, Endl. Urticece.
A tree of 25 to 30 feet, with dark green, rough, crustaceous foliage,
and a milky sap; bark brown and almost smooth; wood yellow, very
nicely grained, and easily worked; found in low moist scrubs.
57* —Epicarpurus orientalis, Blume. Urticece.
A tree of 40 to 50 feet, with pendulous branches, and rough,
crustaceous, toothed leaves; sap watery; bark brown and scaly; wood
of a uniform white colour; not very hard; found in moist scrubs, but
not very common. .
59, —Nephelium divaricatum, F. Muell. Sapindacece.
A tree of 25 to 30 feet, with pinnate leaves; bark "rev and scaly;
wood of a bright pink colour, hard, heavy, and close grained; found in
low moist scrubs.
60. —Nephelium Cohnatum, F. Muell. Sapindacece.
A tree of 35 to 40 feet, with pinnate leaves; bark grey and scalv;
wood pink, hard, heavy, and tough; the scarlet covering of the seed is
eatable; found in scrubs, and also in open forest land.
61. —Nephelium tomenxosum, F. Muell. Sapindacece.
A small tree of slender growth, with rusty pinnate leaves; bark
grey and almost smooth; wood of a whitish colour, hard, heavy, and
very tough, with a fine, close grain; found in dry scrubs.
62. —Harpulia Hillii, F. Muell. Sapindacece; Tulip
Wood.'
A handsome tree of 40 to 50 feet, with large pinnate leaves ; bark
greyish and almost smooth ; wood of a light honey colour, soft, and
easily worked, with a fine, close, silky grain. This wood is invaluable
for cabinet work ; found in rich alluvial scrubs.
64. —Ehretia Memeranifolia, R. Br.,
A middle-sized tree, with pendulous branches and white fragrant
flowers ; bark grey and rough ; wood of a uniform white colour, light
and easily worked ; it deserves a place in every garden. It is common
in moist scrubs.


65. —Santalum lanceolatum, R. Br. Santalacece ; Sandal
Wood.
A tree of 15 to 20 feet, with pendulous branches and glaucous
foliage ; bark greyish, remarkably hard and rough ; wood of a light
pink colour, with a large portion of the centre yellow ; grain fine and
close. It is found on dry ridges, and could be obtained in considerable
quantity.
66. —Casuarina suberosa, Willd. Casuarineve ; Oak.
A handsome, erect tree, of 40 to 50 feet ; bark dark coloured,
rough, and deeply furrowed ; wood red, hard, very tough, and, if not
exposed to moisture, durable, but apt to crack; found in beds ot
creeks.
67. —Pisonia acculbata Nyctanginece,
An immense woody climber, the trunk attaining the dimensions
of a small tree; bark whitish and rather soft; wood white and soft,
somewhat resembling pine, and apparently of little durability. It is a
beautiful flowering plant, and deserves cultivation ; found in moist
scrubs.
68. —Panax elegans, Moore and Mueller. Araliacece.
A beautiful erect growing tree of 30 to 40 feet; bark greyish and
almost smooth ; wood of a uniform white colour, soft and light, pithy
in the centre; found in scrubs in various situations; highly deserves
cultivation.
69. —Marlea Vitiensis, Benth. Cornaceoe.
A middle-sized tree, generally with a gouty trunk; bark dark
coloured, rough and scaly; wood bright yellow, with a fine undulated
appearance, black at the centre; found in moist scrubs; the fruit is
eatable.
71* —Hibiscus divaricates, Grab. Malvaceae.
A shrub of 10 to 12 feet; flowers large and yellow, with crimson
centre ; bark green and almost smooth; wood white and soft, pithy in
the centre. Cattle are very fond of this plant, the leaves having an
agreeable acid taste. The whole plant contains a large quantity of
mucilage; chiefly found on the banks of creeks.
72. —Solanum verbascifolium, L. Solanaceoe.
A branchy shrub of 10 to 12 feet, with large, somewhat velvety
leaves and white flowers; bark green and almost smooth; wood white
and soft, pithy in the centre; found in moist scrubs and waste places.


DRIED SPECIMENS OF INDIGENOUS PLANTS.
73. —Baekleya syringifolia
74.—EljEocarpus obovata.
75. —Melaleuca linarii-folia, Tea Tree.
76. —Melaleuca genistifolia, Tea Tree.
77. —Laportea photinifolia, Nettle Tree.
The fruit, which is eatable, has an agreeable acid taste.
78.—Callystemon lanceolata.
79. —Cordyline hedychoides, 3 to 4 feet high.
80.—Monococus echiniphorus.
Cattle are very fond of this shrub, but it imparts to the milk and
butter a peculiar biting taste. Deserves cultivation.
81.— Climattis glycinoides.
A climber outgrowing the tallest trees of the jungle.
82. —Termlnalia porphyrocarpa.
Fruit eatable.
83.— Myriogyne minuta.
A spreading annual. This is a powerful sternutatory, and an
excellent snuff manufactured from it has already been exhibited by
Dr. F. Mueller, of Melbourne. It smells somewhat like camomile, and
could be obtained in large quantities.


84. —Yigna lanceolata, — The Queensland Earth Nut.
A twiner of 3to 4 feet, with yellow flowers. Botanists have not
been hitherto aware that this little plant produces underground nuts,
somewhat resembling the Arachis hypogaa , or Brazilian earth nut; the,
flowers which produce these nuts are found under ground, while
the ordinary flowers produce cylindrical pods.
85.—Herotes longifolia,
A perennial of 4 to 6 feet; flowers yellow; highly ornamental.
The leaves contain a large quantity of fibre, and it is from the unpre-
pared leaves that the Aborigines make their baskets or “ dilly bags.”
The base of the leaf is eatable; it is very delicate, and far superi >r to
Dendrohiwm Canalicalatum , or “ Native arrowroot,” found in beds
and banks of creeks.
86.—Eustrephus angustifolius.
A wiry perennial, with lilac flowers; it produces sweet, watery,
oblong tubers, about one inch long, on slender fibres at a great depth
in the ground.
87.—Geitonoplesium cymosum.
A wiry perennial climber, with white flowers, and from 15 to 20
feet in height. The young shoots are as tender as Asparagus, and
similar in taste; found in moist rich scrubs, and among rocks in dry
rich soil.
88.— Crotolaria juncea.
An erect annual of 4to 5 feet. This is the “ Sun ”of the Chinese,
from the fibre of which they manufacture some of their best clothes’.
It is very easy of cultivation, and is found in moist places.
89. —Poisonous tubers of Yitis Acris.
A tall climber with soft, flexible stems; leaves large and trifoliate,
somewhat downy. , It produces large, oblong, tubers of several pounds
weight. Having once mistaken these for the tubers of Vitis Opaca, or
“Native Yam,” I cut off a small piece, and put it into my mouth; but
I very soon discovered my mistake, for, in a few seconds. I was seized
with a fearful burning in the mouth, a sensation of choking, watering
of the eyes, and a copious flow or the saliva. It is found in scrubs in
various situations; the fruit is white and very acid.


PICKLES.
90. Capers, from Capparis Nobilis.
A tree of 20 to 25 feet, very common in all scrubs; it produces a
large quantity of capers annually, and would probably be the source of
remunerative industry. Capers could also be obtained from C.
Mitchellii , also very common in open forest land.
91.—Pickles from flower buds op Eugenia eucalyptoides
A tree very common along our creeks; Eugenia Myrlifulia is
also available for this purpose.
GUM RESIN.
92. —Gum resin of Eucalyptus crebra. Wood N. 14.
93. —Gum resin of Eucalyptus tesselaris. Wood N. 15.
94. —Gum resin op Eucalyptus corymbosa. Wood N. 20.
95. —Gum op Atalaya hemiglauca.
A small tree ; the gum exudes from the trunk, spontaneously or
by emission, in large tears, and is of a bright honey colour, and very
transparent. It possesses the same properties as Gum Arabic.
96. —Cones op Casuarina tenuissima.
PAPER MATERIAL.
97.—Bark of Melaleuca leucadendron, or Tea Tree.
A tree often attaining the height of 60 to 70 feet. The bark is
produced in several layers, and a large portion could be removed,
without injury to the tree ;it could be obtained in large quantities. A
similar bark is produced by melaleuca linariifolia , but the tree is not so
plentiful as the last. .
98. —Bark op Tristania suaveolens, wood specimen No. 24,
This tree is very plentiful in some localities.


.
■




3
7 1508 00075341




.
'
* ‘
