

“Eyes, nose, lip,
“The trick of his frown—his forhead, nay, the valley,
The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek—his smiles—
The very mould and frame of his hand, nail, finger,—
u
((
*
■Jr
/V
*
*
u
u m
The very life seem ~ warm upon her lip,
The fixture of her eye has motion in’t.” —Shakspeare
Open from 10 o’clock Morning till 10 Eve
ADMISSION TO ALL PARTS, Is.;
CHILDREN, HALF-PRICE.
CATALOGUE
OF
MADAME SOHIER’S
WAXWORKS
EXHIBITION,
26T PITT STREET, SYDNEY;
AND BOURSE ST. EAST, MELBOURNE.
(Sole Proprietors and Managers, MOYS. & MDME. 80HIER).
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., PRINTERS,
108 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.




“Eyes, nose, lip,
“The trick of his frown—his forhead, nay, the valley,
“ The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek—his smiles—
“ The very mould and frame of his hand, nail, finger
* * * * * *
“ The very life seems warm upon her lip,
“ The fixture of her eye has motion in’t.”— ShaJcspearc.
Open from 10 o’clock Morning till 10 Evening.
ADMISSION TO ALL PARTS, 1 s. ;
CHILDREN, HALF-PRICE.
- \
CATALOGUE
OF
MADAME SOHIER’S
WAXWORKS
EXHIBITION,
267 PITT STREET, SYDNEY;
AND EDUBKE ST. EAST, JIELBOUEHB.
(Sole Proprietors and Managers, MOM. k MME. SOHIEK).
GIBBS, SHALL ART), & CO., PRINTERS,
10S PITT STREET, SYDNEY.




CATALOGUE
OF
xiiAU soaxxa’s
WAXWORKS EXHIBITION
■»
FIEST ROOM.
LEFT HAND SIDE.
1. Wilkes Booth,
The cowardly murderer of President Lincoln, was a
native of Baltimore, and an actor hy profession, a
young man of violent passions and strong political an-
tipathies. His first design was to seize the President
and carry him to Richmond ; but having failed in this,
he and his co-conspirators —Harold, Payne, Atzeroth,
and Mrs. Suratt —determined to murder all the mem-
bers of the Cabinet. After the murder, Booth and
Harold escaped into Yirginia, followed by soldiers,
one of whom, named Baker, shot Booth in a barn
where he was concealed. The other members of the
conspiracy expiated their crime on the scaffold.
2. Miss Harris.
3. Mrs. Lincoln.


4. Abraham Lincoln, .
(Late President of the United States of
America. )
The martyr President of the United States, after
guiding the destinies of his country through the most
gigantic struggle known in history, was basely assassi-
nated by an actor named Booth, while sitting with his
wife in a private box at Ford’s Theatre, Washington,
on April 14th, 1860. No event of modem times created
so profound a sensation as this barbarous murder—
never were more spontaneous expressions of sympathy
called forth by any national loss.
5. Major Ea,thbone.
6. Jane Shore and the Good Baker.
This unfortunate lady was the wife of a wealthy gold-
smith of the City of London. In 1470 she became the
mistress of Edward IV., and on the death of that
monarch she was compelled to do public penance in the
Cathedral of St. Paul’s. She was imprisoned until the
latter end of 1484, when she was set at libex-ty, only
to find in the following year a miserable death of
starvation.
7. The Baker, who is in the act of relieving her,
was one Thomas Hey wood, who, for the act of hrrmanity,
was sentenced to imprisonment in Newgate, where he
put an end to his existence.
8. Mary Queen of Scots.
This unfortunate princess—a daughter of James V.,
King of Scotland, and Mary of Guise—was born in


1542. By the decease of her father she became Queen
when only eight days old. In 1559 she was married
to Francis, Dauphin of France, who, in 1562, became
King of France, and two years afterwards left Mary
a widow. She was next married to the Earl of Darnley,
but the union was productive of great unhappiness.
After having suffered great persecution, chiefly through
the jealousy of Queen Elizabeth, she terminated on
the scaffold an imprisonment of nineteen years, a.d.
1587.
9. Jefferson Davis,
The first and only President of the so-called Confede-
rate States of America.
10. Queen Elizabeth.
Elizabeth, Queen of England, daughter of Henry
VIII. and Anne Boleyne, was born September sth,
1533, and ascended the throne of England on the death
of her eldest sister, Mary, November 17th, 1558.
Phillip of Spain, in 1588, equipped an expedition for
the purpose of invading England, which, from its great
force, was styled the Invincible Armada. On this
occasion the Queen reviewed her troops at Tilbury,
and, by her speeches and conduct, inspired them with
heroism.
11. Sir Walter Scott.
Sir Walter Scott was born in Edinburgh, August
15th, 1771. In 1820 Sir Walter was created a baronet
by George IV., as a testimony of favour and friend-
ship, He is considered by many as the king of


modern novelists. In the summer of 1832 he wait
seized with paralysis, of which he died at his own seat
of Abbotsford, September 21st, in the same year.
12. Isabella 11., Queen of Spain,
* f* 'i\r• ' •. . ■ t • " •
Born October 10th, 1830, and began to reign in 1853.
13. Pope Pius IX.
His Holiness Pius IX., the descendant of a noble
family, was bom at Sinigaglia, in the Romagna, May
12th, 1792. After receiving an education suitable to
his high rank, he entered the Garde Noble, but soon
after left it to enter the Church, of which he became
one of the brightest ornaments. Cardinal Ferretti
was raised to his present dignity June 12th, 1846. In
1848 he was driven from Rome by the revolution,
and took refuge at Gaeta. After an absence of two
years from his capital he was reinstated by the inter-
vention of the French armv.
14. Donna Maria,
(The Late Queen of Portugal.)
15. Duchess of Buccleuch.
A celebrated beauty of the court of Queen Victoria.
16. Emperor Napoleon 111.
His Majesty is a native of Paris, and a son of the
amiable Louis, King of Holland, and the beautiful
Hortense, daughter of Josephine Beauharnois, and is
consequently the nephew of the great Emperor Napo-


leon, to which brilliant recollection he owes his present
position. His Majesty, after an unprecedented career,
was elected to his present high position by the suffrages
of 8,000,000 Frenchmen.
17. Eugenie,
Empress of the French.
The Empress is a Spaniard by birth, and is de-
scended from an illustrious house. She has a hand-
some person, and introduced the crinoline horror.
18. General Guiseppe Garibaldi.
19. Princess Louis of Hesse,
(Princess Alice.)
Born April 25th, 1843.
20. Prince Leopold.
21. Princess Helena.
Born May 25th, 1846.
22. Prince Arthur.
Born May Ist, 1850.
23. Princess of Wales.
Eldest daughter of the reigning King of Denmark.


24. Prince of Wales.
Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall
and Roth say. Earl of Chester and Carrick, and Lord
of the Isles, born November 9th, 1841, at Buckingham
Palace.
25. Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen
Victoria.
Alexandria Victoria, only daughter of Edward,
Duke of Kent, was born at Kensington Palace, May
24th, 1819; succeeded to the throne on the death of
her uncle, William IV., June 20th, 1837; was
crowned at Westminster, June 28th, 1838; married
February 10th, 1840.
N.B.—The best of constitutional sovereigns.
26. Princess Beatrice.
The youngest member of the royal family. Born
April 14th, 1857.
27. Princess Royal.
Victoria Adelaide Marie Louisa, was born 21st
November, 1840. In March, 1858, she was married
to the Prince of Prussia.
28. Princess Louisa.
Born March 18th, 1848.
29. The Archbishop of Canterbury.
The highest dignitary of the Anglican church, and,
by virtue of his office, the highest peer of the realm.


30. The Bishop of London.
The Right Rev. Dr. Tate, the present occupant of
the See, is a Scotchman by birth, and the first of that
nationality who has attained such a distinguished
position in the Established Church. The Rev. Pre-
late is a profound theologian, and, in point of elo-
quence and learning, ranks amongst the highest intel-
lects of the present age.
31. General Buwarrow.
This famous Russian General, after having gained
glory for the Russian arms, was appointed, in 1799,
Commander-in-Chief of the Russian and Austrian army,
to oppose Massena’s successful campaigns in Italy. He
drove the French from their strongholds in that
country, and followed them into Switzerland; but,
having met with some reverses, he was recalled by a
very severe message from the Emperor Paul, after the
reception of which, he was never seen to smile. He
retired to his residence in St. Petersburgh, where he
died of a broken heart on May 18th, 1800, and by
command of the Emperor was buried without honors.
32. G. V. Brooke,
In his Celebrated Character, “ Virginius.”
This great tragedian was bom at Dublin in 1815,
and about the age of 16 made his debut in the cha-
racter of “William Tell.” His progress from this
period was rapid, until he achieved a renown which it
will take centuries to efface. He perished, with about
300 others, in the wreck of the steamship “ London,”
when on his way to join old friends in these colonies.


33. The Sleeping Beauty.
A truly magnificent work of art. The entire figure
is cast in wax, and is most artistically finished.
34. The Swiss Bearded Lady.
(Madame Ghio.)
This singular phenomenon was born near Geneva, in
1831. At eight years of age her beard began to grow,
and is now some twelve inches long, jet black, and
very profuse. She has been the wonder and admira-
tion of thousands in most parts of the world, and re-
cently held her levees in Sydney, and also at Madame
Sohier’s Waxworks, Melbourne, when, during six
weeks, it is calculated that some 25,000 persons visited
her and
35. Her son Esau
(The Bearded Boy),
Nine years of age. He is very intelligent; can, like
his mother, speak many languages. He is also a capi-
tal dancer, and can sing a good song. He was born in
London.
36. E. M. Grace, Esq.
(The Celebrated Cricketer.)
He is one of the most dashing players that ever
handled a bat, and, amongst many large scores, has
made one of the most extraordinary on record—having
obtained over 200 runs in one innings. His scores are
generally very rapidly obtained ] and hence he is, per-
haps, less secure in defence than others of the remark-
able team with which he visited the colonies.


37. General Tom Thumb.
38. Lady Tom Thumb.
(The Smallest Couple in the World.)
39. Miss Warren.
i
40. Marguerie Scott.
(Aged 120 Years.)
The following are the original lines to be seen on
her tombstone in Scotland :
Stop, passenger, until my life you read,
that the living may get knowledge from the dead •
iletween my cradle and my grave I’ve seen
Eight mighty Kings of Scotland and a Queen :
ihrice I ve seen old Prelacy pulled down,
And thrice the cloak did sink beneath the gown •
And, which was worse than any civil war,
,'°, s l ce •] Khig arrayed before his subjects’ bar,
While thousands of sectarians, hot with hellish rage,
Gut oil his royal head upon open stage.
1 ve seen the Stuarts’ race out—no more
My country sold for English ore !
Twice ten years I lived a virgin life •
Five times ten years a virtuous wife’;
Ten times five years a widow grave and chaste,
lned of these elements, I’m now at rest.
41. Shakspeare,
The Immortal Bard.
42. Chinese Mandarin.
43. Madame Sappe.
This celebrated French coquette flourished in the
middle of the 18th century. On the eve of a ball at


the court of Louis XV., to which she had been
iftyttod, she perceived to her dismay that hei once
beautiful face was covered with blotches. A physician
was immediately sent for, who applied some very
powerful cosmetics, the result of which was she died
before morning.
N.B. Thus, like many tight-laced belles, she sacri-
ficed her life on the altar of coquetry.
44. Lord John Russell.
This venerable statesman has won the good opinion
of all by his singleness of purpose and evident working
for his country’s good instead of his own glory. There
are few names among England’s leading men which
will, in time to come, shine more brilliantly, because
purely, than that of this disinterested politician, tie
is now about seventy-seven years of age active in bode
and intellect.
45. Madame Dupree,
The celebrated French Fortune-teller, is principally
known by her predictions in many cases influencing
the actions of Napoleon Buonaparte, who frequently
consulted her. She is reported to have died about
1830, worth her weight in gold.
46. A Visitor to the Fortune-teller.
47. Artemus Ward (Chas. F. Browne),
The American humourist, who was universally known
as Artemus Ward,” was a remarkable instance of a
suddenly and comparatively easily acquired yet well


merited notoriety. Writing in a happy moment a
facetious communication, abounding in humour and
bad spelling, which lie signed Arternus Ward (the
writer representing himself to be a showman of “ wax
figgurs/’) he found himself raised from comparative
poverty to opulence. Making his acquaintance with
Mormon manners and people, he put his impressions
into the form of a most amusing lecture, which he read
night after night in l ew York, and his droll manners,
rather than his matter, amused thousands of people.
Having emigrated to England, he was immediately
engaged by Punch , lectured with immense success at
the Egyptian Hall, London, for three months, but was
then obliged by ill-health to seek retirement, and
finally, after much suffering, expired at Southampton,
on March 6th, 1867, acknowledged by all to have done
very much to develope and characterize American
humour.
48. A Lucky Digger.
One of the olden times. He used to light his pipe
with a bank note, &c.
49. H. E. H. the Duke of Edinburgh.
50. Henry J. O’Farrell,
The Assassin.
This notorious indiivdual suffered the extreme
penalty of the law on the 21st April, 1868, for an
attempt to assassinate His Royal Highness the Duke
of Edinburgh, at Clontarf, Middle Harbour, on the
occasion of the Sailors 5 Home Picnic, to which His Royal
Highness had been invited. The murderous assault
was committed in the very centre of the pleasure


grounds, immediately after the Prince had risen from
lunch, and was walking with Sir William M. Manning,
to whom he was also in the act of presenting a cheque
for the benefit of the institution, in aid of which the
picnic was being held.
SECOND ROOM.
51. Vane,
A Bushranger
Of Gilbert’s gang, who surrendered himself to the
police at Bathurst, November 28th, 1863. It will be
remembered that it was Yane who was most urgent
, o
for instant revenge when his mate Burke was shot at
the attack on Mr. Keightley’s house ; but he was over-
ruled by the others, and Mr. Keightley’s life spared.
C| jjt Stmtnkr oi tbe |Ur^nmigcrs
52. Thomas Clarke,
Charged within two years with (exclusive of murders
of which he was suspected) nine robberies of mails and
thirty-six robberies of individuals. Executed June
25, 1867, under sentence of wounding with intent.
53. John Clarke,
Brother to and companion in crime of Thomas Clarke,
charged with twenty-six robberies in one year. Exe-
cuted with his brother on the same verdict.


Extract from His Honor Sir A. Stephen’s speech
when passing sentence on the Clarkes : “I will read
you a list of bushrangers, many of whom have come to
the gallows within the last four years : Peisley exe-
cuted ; Davis, sentenced to death; Gardiner, sentenced
to 32 years’ hard labour; Gilbert, shot dead ; Hall,
shot dead; Bow and Fordyce, sentenced to death,
commuted to imprisonment for life ; Manns, executed;
O’Meally, shot • dead ; Burke, shot dead; Gordon,
sentenced to death; Dunleavy sentenced to death;
Dunn, executed ; Lowrie, shot dead; Yane, a long
sentence; Foley, a long sentence; Morgan, shot dead;
yourselves, Thomas and John Clarke, about to be
sentenced to death ; Fletcher shot dead; Patrick
Connell, shot dead ; Tom Connell, sentenced to death,
but sentence commuted to imprisonment for life; Bill
Scott, a companion of your own, believed to have been
murdered by you.”
54. Bub-Inspector Wright,
At the head of a party of police, succeeded in capturing
the Clarkes, in the neighbourhood of Braidwood, in
May, 1867, after a smart skirmish, during which
several wounds were inflicted.
55 and 56. Searle and Ballam.
Executed in Ballaarat, May, 1867, for the murder
and robbery of Mr. Burke, the Bank Manager.
57. R. Burke,
A New South Wales Bushranger, executed in Decem-
ber, 1866, at Melbourne, for the murder of Mr. Hurst,
a settler.


58. Lowry,
A Notorious Bushranger.
He was shot by Senior-Sergeant Stephenson, at a
public-house in Crookvale, on August 29th, 1863.
59. Morgan,
A Desperate Bushranger.
Of all the freebooters that have infested our Colony,
Morgan was the worst. To the miserable thieving and
idle propensities of such men as Gardiner, Lowry, and
others, he added that of an absolute thirst for blood,
the names of M‘Ginnerty, M‘Lean, Heriott, and Watson,
will be fresh in the memory of our readers, as victims of
the wretch’s ungovernable passions. He was said to be
a native of Appin, and was of a repulsive appearance.
60.’Gilbert the Bushranger.
(Taken from a Cast.)
This desperado, whose career of crime is familiar
throughout the colonies, first appeared as a bushrangers
in connection with Frank Gardiner, at the robbery of
the Escort, at Eugowra, in the middle of 1862, and for
a period of three years he and his lawless companions
subsisted on the proceeds of robberies committed with a
high-handed recklessness previously unheard of in the
annals of crime. His career was brought to a close on
the 12th of May, 1865, at Binalong where he was en-
countered by a party of police, and after a desperate
fight, in which trooper King and Dunn the bushranger
(Gilbert’s mate) were both wounded, Gilbert received
two bullets through the body, and died immediately.
His body was buried in the police paddock, at Binalong.


61. John Dunn,
The last of Ben Hall’s gang, executed at Darlinghurst
+ Ui J n^ ai ' C1 ’ He is represented tiring at con-
stable McHale, after being wounded by the same and
incapacitated from escaping.
62. Ben Hall,
The Determined Bushranger.
Hall, so long celebrated for his exploits, had at one
time the opportunity of becoming a man of wealth by
honest and persevering industry. The qualities he has
shewn in the course of his terrible career, if employed
m the service of the country, might have rendered his
name honorable. As it is, he has gone down to the
giave with the well-deserved execrations of all honest
men. —Sydney Morning Herald.
(L at (can: of g cspcraic Struggle
Between Gardiner and Troopers Middleton and
Hosie.
63. Sergeant Middleton.
Sergeant Middleton, with Trooper Hosie, is repre-
sented as engaged in the desperate struggle which took
place in the endeavour to capture Gardiner at Fish
rver. Middleton, in his evidence on Gardiner’s trial,
sajs. As Hosie fell, prisoner rushed at me with the
revolver, holding it by the barrel. I was about to de-
fend myself with a whip I had in my hand when Hosie
caught hold of prisoner from behind.”


64. Frank Gardiner,
A Notorious Bushranger.
He was convicted at Goulburn in March, 1854, on
two charges of horse-stealing, received his ticket-of-leave
December, 1859, got arrested after a desperate struggle
on Fish River, in July, 1861, and rescued the same
day, became leader of several daring robbers for nearly
two years, and was finally arrested by detective McGlone,
in March, 1864, at Aphis Creek, in Queensland, where
he carried on business as a storekeeper. Gardiner made
no attempt to escape when he was last captured ; but
most probably this was because the plan for taking him
was too well laid to allow him the slightest chance of
succeeding if he had attempted. There can be no doubt
the valuable horse he had with him was kept principally
for emergency, and would, if the police had given him
the slightest warning, have quickly conveyed him out of
their reach. It is fortunate for the community that he
was not allowed to escape, or we should probably ere
this have had additions to the list of the villain's
wrong-doings. His having retired himself from active
service argues very little in mitigation of his deserts,
as it is impossible to estimate the consequences of the
fearful flood of violence to which he has opened the
gates; many young men, who would otherwise have
led honorable lives, having been drawn by him into a
course of life ending in disgrace and misery to them-
selves, and unhappiness to their friends.
65. Trooper Hosie.
66. Wendlan,
The Person who Fired the Fatal Shot at
Morgan,


67. Mrs. Brown.
The Companion of Gardiner
68. The “Old Man” (White.)
One op Ben Hall’s Gang.


THIRD ROOM.
NEW ZEALAND CRIMINALS’ ROOM
69. James Stack,
A discharged soldier of the 65th. He was executed at
Auckland, in April, 1866, for the murder of Mary
Finnigan (bis mother-in-law) and her three sons, on or
about September 28th, 1865.
70. Captain Jarvey,
Executed at Dunedin, 1865, for poisoning his wife
with strychnine.
71. Horomona,
Or, Solomon the Prophet,
Executed at the same time as the above, for being an
accessory to the murder of Mr. Eulloon.
72. Heremita.
73. Mokomoko.
74. Hakaria,
Executed May 17th, 1866, for the murder of the Her.
Yolkner, at Opotiki, New Zealand.


75. Sullivan,
76. Levy,
77. Kelly,
78. Burgess,
The Maungatapu Murderers.
The last three were executed at Nelson, October
7th, 1866. Sullivans sentence was commuted to im-
prisonment for life for turning approver; they are
supposed to have committed at least twenty murders
on the West Coast of New Zealand.


FOURTH ROOM.
79. Henry Scott.
Convicted in February, 1867, for the murder of his
wife, Ellen Scott. This revolting case is known as the
“ Sussex-street ” tragedy.
80. The Notorious Franz Muller,
The murderer of Mr. Briggs, from a cast immediately
after execution.
81. Mrs. Kinder.
82. Mr. Kinder.
83. H. L. Bertrand.
These are the alleged actors in one of the most revolt-
ing tragedies ever heard of, not only in Sydney, but
in the world at large.
84. Miss Constance Kent.
Convicted in 1865, on her own confession, of the
murder of her step-brother, at Roadhill.
85. Black Harry,
An Aboriginal, executed at Maitland for tbe murder of
Mrs. Mills, abduction of her little girl, and assaulting
her boy. He was also guilty of other atrocious vil-
lanies, well meriting his end.


FIFTH ROOM.
% llhrd Utagnr&tnt (bump.
Nos. 86 to 94
The Judgment of Solomon.
. This beautiful incident in the life of the wise king
is lepiesented at the time when the king said u Divide
the living child, and give half to the one and half to
the other; then the woman to whom the child be-
longed cned, “O, my Lord, give her the living child
and in no wise slay it.”
95 and 96. Burke Dying in the Arms
of King.
Richard 0 Kara Burke, leader of the exploring ex-
pedition, and his companions, Wills, Gray, and King,
after crossing the continent, returned to where they
lad formed a depot, at Cooper’s Creek, expecting to
hnd some of their party there, but unfortunately the
place was deserted. After waiting for some time
they decided to try and reach Mount Hope, but
afterwards abandoned the attempt. They lived for
several weeks on nardoo seed, when Burke’s strength
gave way, and after giving instructions to his com-
rades how to act, he breathed his last in the arms of


his faithful assistant, King. Burke's body was left
where he died for some time, but was afterwards re-
moved to Melbourne and buried with great pomp.
Other Figures, Casts, &c., added as opportunity
offers.




