





PRESENTED TO
BY THE TRUSTEES OF THE
PUBLIC LIBRARY, MUSEUMS, AND NATIONAL
GALLERY OF VICTORIA.
President,
C/s/HiiA V!/ 1880.
7


w§im
mmM
■
S5i
==fa~S
Hip
||j|j|^||(M|
tHEiiinsi
giMklim BFI b
~
~
m
se
m
i=-
S
m
tjj
s
B
■
p
— .;■■;■.■>
'—^361
||
1
I
1
fiff
1
M
aii
*
HHIi
A
P
—
illIU |gjS
ST
fe
f Bin
if
M rf s pi p.
pi H II
111 1 r nr
n
Hfpi
1
il
■■
mm
Pi
In
i
jm
'in
II
ii
ir
1
P
I mmm
liippgpjg
i
i
lii
Ir.
ills imvwMJli
|r IF AHRlKIBMlt
mmr? ■ ‘. : ■
is
I;.va
tffcaW^:<C
■l
19
j|f
fl
1
iK» ?i
\'\ iM||>
■
a 'M
-;•-
m
||
*
K
mmmmm
#
mSmg^jgimjsss
r
a
B
piiipBgipi!gi
gffljgg
p^=
g|||||imj^J^
~
PUBLIC
LIBRARY, MUSEUMS,
AND NATIONAL
GALLERY
OF VICTORIA.


CATALOGUE
OF THE
STATUES AND BUSTS IN MARBLE
AND CASTS,
IN THE
NATIONAL GALLERY OF VICTORIA.
lifldbounu:
Fbrgusson and Moore, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East.


MELBOURNE:
PEEGUSSON AND MOORE, PRINTERS,
FLINDERS LANE EAST.


PUBLIC LIBRARY, MUSEUMS, AND NATIONAL
GALLERY OF VICTORIA,
Incorporated by Act 38 Vic., No. CCCLVII.
TRUSTEES.
His Honor Sir Redmond Barry, Knt. Bac., K.C.M.G., M.A.,
LL.D., President.
The Hon. Sir William Foster Stawell, LL.D.
David Charteris McArthur, Esquire, J.P., Vice-President.
The Hon. Sir John O’Shanassy, K.C.M.G., M.P.
The Hon. Sir C. Gavan Duffy, K.C.M.G., Speaker of
Legislative Assembly.
The Hon. Sir James McCulloch, K.C.M.G.
The Hon. James Goodall Francis, M.P.
The Hon. Thomas Turner a’Beckett.
The Hon. John Alexander MacPherson.
Charles Edward Bright, Esquire.
The Hon. Sir William Henry Fancourt Mitchell, Presi
dent of Legislative Council.
Martin Howy Irving, Esquire, M.A.
The Hon. Sir George Verdon, K.C.M.G., C.B,
The Hon. Sir Charles MacMahon.
The Hon. William Mountford Kinsey Yale.
The Hon. Frank Stanley Dobson, M.L.C.
The Hon. John Macgregor.
The Hon. Edward Langton, Treasurer.
Herbert Augustus Strong, Esquire, M.A.
Edward John Nanson, Esquire, M.A.
Edward Ellis Morris, Esquire, M.A.


NATIONAL GALLERY COMMITTEE.
1880. ’
The Hon. Sir James McCulloch, K.C.M.G., Chairman.
His Honor Sir Redmond Barry, Knt. Bac., K.C.M.G., M.A.,
LL.D.
The Hon. Sir William Foster Stawell, LL.D.
David Charteris McArthur, Esquire, J.P.
The Hon. Sir C. Gavan Duffy, K.C.M.G., Speaker of
Legislative Assembly.
The Hon. Thomas Turner a’Beckett.
Charles Edward Bright, Esquire.
The Hon. Frank Stanley Dobson, M.L.C.
The Hon. Edward Langton.
Herbert Augustus Strong, Esquire, M.A.


C ONTENTS.
Preface to the Collection of Statues, Busts,
Catalogue of Works in Marble—
STATUES
STATUETTES -
BUSTS
Catalogue of Casts —
STATUES
STATUETTES -
BUSTS
MEDALLIONS
RELIEFS
FRIEZES
MODELS AND ILLUSTRATIONS OF ART FOR
SCHOOL OF DESIGN
Introduction to the Collection of Dipttchs
Tripttchs
Catalogue of Dipttchs and Tripttchs
&C. i




PREFACE
TO THE
■COLLECTION OF STATUES AND BUSTS
IN MAKBLE, AND CASTS,
IN THE
NATIONAL GALLERY OF VICTORIA.
“ What tho’ no marble breathes, no canvas glows,
From ev’ry point a ray of genius flows!
Be mine to bless the more mechanic skill
That stamps, renews, and multiplies at will ;
And cheaply circulates thro’ distant climes
The fairest relics of the purest times.
Here from the mould to conscious being start
Those living forms, the miracles of Art;
Here chosen gems imprest on sulphur shine,
That slept for ages in a second mine.”
—Rogers.
The religious thought and feeling of the inhabitants of
Greece exercised a powerful effect on Sculpture. Greek
religion was at once a magnificent ritualistic system, and
a cycle of grand poetical conceptions. Greece may be
considered the country in which the art of Sculpture
achieved its highest perfection.


The rude * block of stone, or the heaps of stones t at the
places where roads met, the distorted trunk of a tree, the
composite monsters polluted by pagan rites, claimed no
continued reverence from a people endowed with a fancy
so rich, an imagination so fertile. To adore the elements
or the vivifying powers of nature in their abstract vague-
ness, to be satisfied with and to worship the Trident of
Neptune, the Spear of Mars, the Ivy-mantled Column of
Bacchus, suited to those content with the illusory con-
templation of what they were unable to define, did not
satisfy the sensibility of a nation gifted with a genius so
active.* In their primitive efforts to embody their ideas,
grotesque forms calculated to inspire terror occupied the
foremost rank. Centaurs, the Dragon, the Gorgon, Harpies,
Bears, Lions, and crude symbolical types rather than
personal representation of the deities prevailed. But
in the development of the exponents of their belief, the
Greeks lent to tradition a graceful and engaging credulity.
By interweaving the fictions handed down to them from
their ancestors, their mythological system became extremely
complicated. Heroes and heroines —associated with different
alleged manifestations of the gods—renowned for acts of
valour, famed for having introduced civilising arts, wise
laws, or useful inventions, were raised above the rank of
mere mortals to celestial honours.
* Jupiter was worshipped at Emesa, in Syria, under the form of an
aerolite.—Pausanias, vii. 22; ix. 27. The Eomans, when taking an
oath, held a stone in the hand and swore “ per Jovem lapidem,” because
as it is said, his mother, Ehea, when Jupiter was born, offered to his
father, Saturn, a stone, wrapped up like an infant, instead of the child,
as he had expressed his determination to devour all the males of his-
family.
+ 'Ep/xoua, or 'Ep/iaK^S.— Pausanias, vi. 22 ; viii. 14,10 ;x. 27.
+ The religion of the Persians was elemental; they had no images
of gods, no temples, no altars, and considered the use of them a sign
of folly.—Herodotus, i. 131,132.


At an early period the Greeks gave form to the great
divinities to which they ascribed the government of the
universe, also to the subordinate powers believed to super-
intend and direct the particular affairs of mankind. These
forms were at first invested with attributes, physical and
intellectual, superior to those conferred on man; next, with
a majesty and dignity emblematical of the divine nature;
lastly, in them was embodied the perfection of human
symmetry, to which was imparted an ideal grace and beauty,
and superadded a celestial halo which proclaimed their
conception of the god. Exhibited in temples, halls, and
public places, or enshrined in private sanctuaries, they
warmed the beholder to a sense of devotion more intelligible
than could have been aroused by the mysterious relics of a
barbarous antiquity.
Inspired by her handmaidens—Poetry and Painting, and
chastened by the enlightened criticism of successive genera-
tions—who, by familiarity from infancy with such sublime
works, had been schooled to a correct judgment—Sculpture
eventually, as it were, breathed life into the marble figure,
and touched into motion the complex group. This is con-
veyed by the lines of Walter Scott —
“ With blade advanc’d, each chieftain hold
Show’d like the sworders’ form of old ;
As wanting still the torch of life
To wake the marble into strife.” *
The history of Greek Sculpture may be divided into three
periods ;
The Daedalian.
That of Pericles ; or, The Heroic.
That of Alexander the Great.
The First ranged over several centuries, from b. c. 1200 to
b. c. 550. Deities and Heroes were the subjects which
chiefly engaged the attention of the Sculptor.
* “ Lord of the Isles,” Canto ii. 18.


Opening the eyes, separating the feet, liberating the arms,
and extending the limbs, marked the works of this age as
different from those of the primitive Egyptian stiff and
formal style, according to which the eyes were closed, the
feet placed together, and the arms held by the sides, indicat-
ing a representation ofj the dead rather than of the living
person. The materials* used were clay,t stone, marble,
metals of various kinds, and wood % —box, cedar, cypress,
ebony, fig, oak, olive, pear, and sycamore.
The names of some Statuaries distinguished in this era
have been preserved. For what is known respecting them
and the others alluded to, the reader is referred to the
numerous writings upon Art, ancient and modern, collected
in the Library. Amongst the Sculptors are Daedalus, the
Athenian; Smilis of Crete, Eugrammus, who, with Eucheir
and Diopus, followed the fortunes of Demaratus, father of
Tarquin, eventually King of Rome, in his flight from Corinth
to Etruria, b. c. 664, and gave a new direction to Etruscan
* Isaiah, xlv. 20 ; Herodotus, ii. 130; Pliny, xiii. 5 ; and xvi. 40;
Winckelmann, i. 31.
+ Pliny, xxxv. 43; Pausanias, i. 3.
J These wooden figures were washed, polished, painted, their heads
were ornamented with hair carefully dressed, adorned with crowns,
diadems, wreaths, earrings. Rohes in the Babylonian style, after-
wards in the Grecian fashion, were put on them. —Pausanias, ii. 4;
vi. 25; vii. 21; viii. 25; ix. 4.
“ Tunc melius tenuere fidem cum paupere cultu
Stabat in exigua ligneus aede deus.”
—Tibullus, Eleg. i. 10, 19.
“ Blush not ye’re fashioned from an ancient tree,
So were ye in my grandsire’s loved domain;
Then faith was fair, and offerings poor but free
Were yours, dear hearth-gods, in your humble fane.”
Cranstoun.


art. * Theodoras, son of Rhoecus, and brother of Telecles,
to whom credit is given for the invention, b. c. 600, of casting
in moulds, t also reputed inventor of the clavis, libella,
norma, and tornus, although, as it had been practised long
before by the Phoenicians, all justly due to him may be the
lEu ypd(f>w, good draugntsman,
Eu x e <7b neat hand, nimble fingers,
Aux oTrrtKOS, keen-sighted,
may have been given to them for their skill, as Theophrastus; or, in
more modern days, Beauclerc.
f For instances of the antiquity of images, see—
B. c.
1491, —Exodus xx. 4: “Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven
image.”
1491.—Exodus xxxii. 8: “ They have made them a molten calf, and
have worshipped it.”
1490. —Leviticus xix. 4 : “Turn ye not unto idols, nor make to your-
selves molten gods : I am the Lord your God.”
1452. —Numbers xxxii. 52 : “ Then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants
of the land from before you, and destroy all their pictures,
and destroy all their molten images, and quite pluck down
all their high places.”
1451. —Deut. ix. 12—16 : “ They are quickly turned aside out of the way
which I commanded them ; they have made them a molten
image.”
1005. —1 Kings vii. 16 : “ And he made two chapiters of molten brass,
to set upon the tops of the pillars; the height of the one
chapiter was five cubits, and the height of the other chapiter
was five cubits.”
725. —Hosea xiii. 2: “And now they sin more and more, and have
made them molten images of their silver, and idols according
to their own understanding, all of it the work of the crafts-
men ; they say of them : Let the men that sacrifice kiss the
calves.”
712. — Isaiah xi. 19 : “ The workman melteth a graven image, and the
goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver
chains.”
445.—Nehem. ix. 18; “ Yea, when they had made them a molten calf.”


honor of having introduced the practice into Greece.
Malas, his son Micciades, his grandson Anthermus (or
Archennus), with Bupalus and Athenis, his sons, sustained
for nearly a century the reputation of the Isle of Chios.
Dipoenus and Scyllis, Cretans, who* were the first to
distinguish themselves as Sculptors in marble, left their
native land, and were established, about b. c. 590, at Sicyon,
a town near Corinth, for ages the resort of artists. Endoeus
of Athens and Dorycleidas (the Lacedemonian) were their
pupils; as also Theocles, son of Hegylus.t
Glaucus, about b. c. 570, made the important discovery of
the mode of soldering + metals, at which time Theodoras,
grandson of him above named, obtained renown as a Statuary
in bronze.
About b. c. 565 Perillus fabricated for Phalaris of Agri-
gentum, in Sicily, a brazen bull—the well-known instrument
of torture used by that tyrant, of which the inventor was
the first victim. § Another, a golden bull, brought from
* “ Marmore s'mlpendo primi omnium inclaruerunt.” —Pliny.
+ Pausanias, v. 17; Herodotus, i. 25.
+ KnXX't/cris, ferruminatio, soldering. —Herod, i. 25; Plut. 2, 156 B.
§ It is of this and the Ear of Dionysius that Horace says—
“ Invidia Siculi non invenere Tyranni
Majus tormentum.” —Horace, Epis. i. 2, 58.
“Nor could Sicilia’s tyrants ever find
A greater torment than an envious mind.”
—Francis.
And Ovid attests the fate of the Statuary—
“ Et Phalaris tauro violenti membra Perilli
Torruit; infelix imhuit auctor opus.
Justus uterque fuit; neque enim lex aequior ulla
Quam necis artifices arte perire sua.”
—Ovid, Ars Amat. i. 653.
“ Phalaris, too, roasted inside the bull the limbs of the cruel Perillus;
the unhappy inventor was the first to make proof of his work. Each of


Pergamus to Constantinople, and used for a similar purpose,
in which the martyr Antipas was burned, is mentioned by
Cedrenus .*
Tectaeus and Angelion flourished about b.c. 548. t Dory-
cleidas and Medon, his brother, were of Sparta. The works
of these artists were distributed through Greece and its
islands, and found their way to the colonies on the continent
of Asia, and eventually to Italy. It is not probable that
many productions of this school are now in existence, at
least in a perfect state. No representatives of the period
are in this Collection.
The Second Period combined with the grosser figures
invented in the time of fable, as well as with the loveli-
them was just; and, indeed, no law is there more equitable than that
the contrivers of death should perish by their own contrivances.”
See also Propertius, 2,11, 25; Pausanias, x. 9 ; Diod. Sicul. xiii. 90 ;
Polybius, xii. 25.
“ It is doubtful whether, in the horrible autos-da-fe held at Seville,
A. D. 1481, the unhappy victims were enclosed in or bound to the
statues of the four prophets placed at the corners of the spacious stone
scaffold, erected for the purpose in the suburbs of that city.”—Prescott,
“ Ferdin. and Isab.” i. 262.
“ Mugghiava con la voce dell’ afflitto,
Si che, con tutto ch’e fosse di rame,
Pure e pareva dal dolor trafitto;
Cosi, per non aver via ne forame,
Dal principle del fuoco in suo linguaggio
Si convertivan le parole grame.”
—Dante, “ Inferno,” Canto xxvii. 4.
“ As the Sicilian bull, that rightfully
His cries first echoed who had shap’d its mould,
Did so re-bellow, with the voice of him
Tormented, that the brazen monster seem’d
Pierc’d through with pain ; thus while no way they found,
Nor avenue immediate through the flame,
Into its language turn’d the dismal words.” Cary.
* Byzant. Hist. i. 566. + Pausanias, ii. 32.


L viii ]
ness of female grace, the stateliness of heroic proportion
developed into sublimity in gods and demigods. The gods,
whom they represented in statues, seemed to the Greeks, as
it were, a peculiar nation of a nobler nature. If they had
made their appearance on earth, all others would have
looked like slaves beside them, as the barbarians beside the
Greeks.* It extended from B. c. 550 to b. c. 390, and rose to
the highest eminence after the memorable repulse of the
Persian Xerxes, b. c. 480. Then occurred a closer intimacy
with the rulers and people of Asia and Egypt. Wealth
increased, and a greater degree of refinement and luxury
was attained. Pericles, being established in power at
Athens, about b. c. 460, undertook. to reconstruct the
temples destroyed by the invader, and to embellish the
capital of his contemplated confederation of the States of
Greece —a bond to unite which would have been the
religion professed by all.
With the illustrious Phidias, pupil of Ageladas, as his
director of works, he built the Parthenon, the Temple of the
virgin-goddess Athene —Minerva of the Romans—of which
the architects were Callicrates and Ictinus; the Propylaea of
the Acropolis, of which Mnesicles was the architect; the
Odeum, a theatre for musical performances, and the Temple
of Eleusis, on which Coroebus, Metagenes, and Xenocles
were employed. These buildings were adorned by Alcamenes
and Agoracritus, instructed by Phidias, t and others of the
same school. To the Statuaries already named may be
added Polyclitus, Calamis, and Myron, the latter especially
celebrated for his representation of animals ; Chrysothemis
and Eutelidas, of Argos; Amphicrates, Agasias, or Hegesias,
* Aristotle, Polit. i. 2.
■f* “He employed Trot/aArou, weavers of tapestry, embroiderers of
robes for his statues of ivory and gold.”—Athenaeus, xii.


Menaechmus, and So'idas, of Naupactus. Antimachides,
Antistates, Callaeschrus, and Porinos, were the Architects
who laid the foundations of the temple of Zeus Olympius
at Athens in the time of Peisistratus.*
The impetus given to Art by these extensive operations
was much stimulated by the refinement thus produced, and
materially influenced by the scientific study of Homer, whose
poems had been collected by Peisistratus. The frequent
representations of the tragedies of AEschylus, Sophocles,
and Euripides, who flourished at this time, gave also to the
community an elevation of sentiment reflected in the severe
and simple grandeur of design, the majesty of conception,
the force, power, and delicacy of execution, which form the
characteristics of the first division of this period. To these
succeeded lyrics and dramatic poetry of the new comedy.
Gymnastic exercises, races, and games, were multiplied,
and a desire to reproduce the athletes and victors in the
various contests, who presented the human form in the
highest types of symmetry, manly vigour, and training,
induced the sculptor to adopt them as his models, and,
instead of labouring after the ideal, to adhere to portraiture.
Amongst the cotemporaries and immediate successors of
the above-named artists, were Ctesilaus, Nancydes of Argos,
Pythagoras! of Ehegium, in Italy, successful in a contest
with Myron*; Calamis,Phradmon,and Callimachus, inventor
of the Corinthian column ; Theocosmus, Dinomenes, Lycius,
* Vitruvius, vii. Praef. 15.
+ Pythagoras, whose Philoctetes the Limper is known from two gems,,
one at Berlin, one at Bonn, also represented the Wrestlers—Lentiscus,
Protolaus, Eutimus, and Dromaeus.—Overheck.
X The Heifer of Myron was of singular beauty.—See Ausonius, Epig.
58 to 68 inclusive. His Apollo is mentioned by Cicero, in Verr. iv. 43.
See also Pliny, xxxiv. 19; and Propertius, Eleg. xxxi. 7,


“Canaclius, and Patrocles, who, with others of greater or
lesser fame, followed in the course of time.
Gold, ivory, silver, many varieties of bronze and mixed
metals, and the finest kinds of marble were employed.
Statues made of the first two, when used in combination,
were called chryselephantine; when various marbles were
used for the purpose of producing variety of colour, either
to represent the hair, drapery, or ornaments, they were called
polylithic; when that effect was accomplished by painting *
they were called polychromic. Eyes made of silver, crystal,
glass, and paste, were not unfrequently inserted, and this
singular practice, so strangely at variance with our notions
of pure taste, prevailed during the meridian splendour of
the art. Amber t, aromatics, pitch, plaster, wax, and costly
perishable and combustible substances, were also employed,
according to the caprice of the artist or the extravagance or
ostentation of the person for whom he wrought. The
working of metals with sharp instruments, beating out, and
embossing them with punches after they had been partially
cast, was styled the Toreutic art.
The Third Period may be extended so as to include from
b. c. 390 to b. c. 146.
Moved by the success of the celebrated painters, Apelles,
Pamphilus, Parrhasius, and Zeuxis, impressed by the subtile
disquisitions of the Philosophers, and acted on directly
by the increase of national wealth and luxury, Sculptors
now bestowed more attention on the graceful flow of outline,
on the skilful arrangement of the hair, on the becoming
* During the fifteenth Century it was a common practice in Germany
to paint statuettes of gold and silver.
t In the Homan Forum in Olympia wei’e two statues, —one of
Augustus Caesar in amber, the other of Nicomedes, King of Bithynia
in ivory.—Pausanias, v. 12.


disposition of drapery. The ideal of human beauty was
now produced in its perfection.
To the study of boldness and grandeur, to the heroic spirit
and religious earnestness of the preceding age, succeeded
the imitation of Nature, heightened by the charms of
animated expression, enriched by the excellence and highly-
wrought finish of execution.
The great works of the early part of this period were the
Temple of Minerva at Tegea, in Arcadia, the largest and
most magnificent in the Peloponnesus, and the Mausoleum.
The former was built under the direction of Scopas of Paros,
whose Venus —removed subsequently to the Temple of Mars,
in Rome, dedicated by Brutus Callaicus, —was pronounced
by Pliny to have surpassed in excellence even that of
Praxiteles. The latter, a Sepulchre, reared B. c. 352, at
Halicarnassus, the modern Budrun, by Artemisia, Queen
of Caria, in honour of her husband, was decorated by the
same Scopas, and by Bryaxis, Leochares, and Timotheus,
Athenians, each of whom, as it is supposed, undertook the
execution of the bas-reliefs on one side of the frieze of the
peristyle, some of which were added in 1846 to the vast
collection in the British Museum.
Next in order of time and repute came Lysippus,* respect-
ing whom Alexander the Great published an edict that no
* “ Edicto vetuit, ne quis se praeter Apellem
Pingeret, aut alius Lysippo duceret aera
Fortis Alexandri vultum simulantia.”
Horace, Epist. ii. 1, 239.
“A solemn edict made,
That none but fam’d Apelles dare to trace,
In desperate colours, his imperial face;
And that Lysippus should presume alone
To mould great Ammon’s son in brass or stone.
—Francis.


other person should represent him in bronze, as he had also-
directed in favour of Apelles, the painter, with regard to
his portrait, and of Pyrgoteles,* the lapidary, with respect
to engraving his figure on gems.
Craterus painted a picture of Alexander the Great and
his dogs fighting a lion : the subject was also pro-
duced in brass by Lysippus and Leochares, and placed
in the Temple of Apollo at Delphi. + The school of
Lysippus, at Sicyon, was continued under Euthycrates,
Daippus and Bedas, his sons; Lysistratus, his brother ;
Chares, Eutychides, Phanis, Phoenix, and Tisicrates, his
pupils; while at Athens flourished Praxiteles, + with his
sons, Cephisodotus and Timarchus; Euphranor, skilled
also as a painter, and memorable as a writer upon
Art; and Apollodorus, father of Cleomenes, to whom the
Venus de Medici was for some time attributed. They
were followed by Pyromachus, to whom commentators on
Pliny give the credit of being the creator, in bronze, of the
figure known as the Dying Gladiator; and by Silanion,
whose statue of Sappho, styled by Cicero “so perfect, so
elegant, so elaborate,” is enumerated amongst the spoils of
Verres. § The building of Alexandria in Egypt, and of
* Pliny, vii. 38; xxxvii. I—4.
+ Plutarch, Alexander.
X Amongst the celebrated works of Praxiteles were his Apollo
Sauroktonos; Bacchus and Faun; Cupid; Satyr; two Yenuses.
Praxiteles was master of the younger as Phidias was of the elder
Attic school; he devoted himself almost entirely to the representation
of deities. Heroes he seldom produced; Athletes never.—Pliny,,
xxxiv. 8; xxxvi. 4; Pausanias, ix. 27.
§ Extorted by Yerres, through the instrumentality of his dependents—
Tlepolemus and Hiero, who were called by Cicero his hunting dogs.
“ Canes venaticos diceres, ita odorabantur omnia et pervestigabant, ut,
übi quidque esset aliqua ratione invenirent.” —Cicero, in Yerr. ii. 4, c. 13.
“ They were accustomed to scent out and track everything in so mar-
vellous a manner, you might have said they were bloodhounds, that,,
wherever anything was, they found it out by some means or other.”


many other cities in the East, by Alexander the Great, *
of Antioch, by Seleucis and his successors, and of temples of
extraordinary magnificence in Asia and Sicily, gave employ-
ment for a time to these artists, and to others of note. But
the intestine troubles which continued to distract Greece
after the death of Alexander, drove many distinguished
men forth to seek protection and encouragement from the
Ptolemies of Egypt, the Seleucidae of Asia, and the kings
and people of Sicily. When Carthage fell beneath the arms
of Scipio, b. c. 146, and Corinth was destroyed by Mummius,
b. c. 146, the Art treasures of both cities were transferred
to Rome, which began to absorb the wealth and attract the
talent of other countries. Then it was that the influence of
the Arts was first experienced there.f Other instances of
this occurred when Marcellus triumphed over the Syra-
cusans, b. c. 211 J; Fabius Maximus over the Tarentines,
b. c. 209 § ; Titus Quintius Flamininus over Philip 111. b. c.
1941|; Lucius Scipio Asiaticus over Antiochus 111. b. c.
19011 ; FulviusNobilior over the AEtoliansand Ambracians,
* Livy, xxxviii. 9 ; Polybius, xxii. 13; Choiseul Gouffier, Voyage
Pittoresque, ii. 15 ; Gibbon, “Decline and Fall,” cap. 23.
t “ Graecia capta ferum victorem cepit, et artes
Intulit agresti Latio.” TT „ . ,
° —Horace, Epist. u. 1, 156.
‘ When conquer’d Greece brought in her captive arts,
She triumphed o’er her savage conquerors’ hearts ;
Taught our rough verse its numbers to refine,
And our rude style with elegance to shine.”
—Francis.
J Livy, xxv. 23-31; Plutarch, Marcellus, 18 —21: Polyb. viii. 37;
ix. 10.
§ Livy, xxvii. 16 ; Plutarch, Fabius, 22.
|| Plutarch, Flamininus; Livy, xxxi. 4, 29.
If Pliny, xxxiii. 55 ; xxxvii. 6. Antiochus was killed in his attempt
to plunder the rich Temple of Elyma'is, in order to pay to the Romans
the tribute imposed on him by them. —Daniel xi. 18, 19.


b. c. 189*; Cneius Manlius over the Asiatic Gauls, b. C-
-1891; Lucius Paulus AEmilius over Perseus, b. c. 167 J ;
Sylla over the Athenians, b. c. 86 §; and Pompey over
Mithridates, b. c. 66. || Endeavours on the part of these
conquerors to gain the favour of the people by the magnifi-
cence of their triumphs and the splendour and extravagance
of their public shows drew artists of all kinds to Rome,
and created a taste wholly unknown before.
The removal of statues was practised in very early
times, either on the emigration of peoples from countries
or cities of their origin, or where they were taken from
their shrines in conquered towns, or when the theogony of
foreign nations was adopted. The Samothracian images,
brought by Dardanus to Troy, were carried away into
Italy by AEneas, with that of Pallas.lT Diomedes stole
the Palladium from Troy.** According to the poet the
gods themselves removed their images from the shrines
there. ++ The Artemis, Hercules, and Athene of Dipoenus
and Scyllis, were taken by Cyrus to Asia, when he made
war on Croesus. §§ The statue of Juno was brought to
Rome from Yen by Camillus ; that of Jupiter Imperator
from Praeneste by T. Q. Cincinnatus, of Venus Yictrix
from the Samnites by F, Fabricianus, of Hercules by
Fabius Maximus. Scaurus brought from Sicyon 3,000
bronze statues, and put them up in a theatre which he
* Livy, xxxviii. 43.
f Pliny, xxxiv. 8 ; xxxvii. 6. Juvenal, viii. 100.
t Plutarch, AEmilius; Livy, xliv. 32—46.
§ Sallust, Catiline, ii.; Plutarch.
|| Pliny, xxxvii. 6.
U Pliny, xxxvi. 17, Plutarch, Camillus, vii. 27.
** Yirgil, AEneid, ii. 163.


built at Rome. The Brazen Bull of Phalaris already
mentioned, or one assumed to be the same, was taken
by Himilco at the sack of Agrigentum, b. c. 406, and
transported to Carthage, where it was found by Scipio r
B. c. 146. He restored it to the citizens of Agrigentum.
Scipio also restored to the Segestians the statue of
Diana taken from them by the Carthaginians.* The
statues of Harmodius and Aristogeiton, made by Antenor,
b. c. 509, were carried away from Athens by Xerxes,
as was also the Apollo of Canachus. The former were
placed in the city of Susa, b. c. 480 ; they were restored
to the Athenians by Alexander the Great, b. c. 331.+
The statue of Apollo, taken by the Carthaginians from
Gela, in Sicily, and by them to Tyre, their parent city, was
also captured by Alexander. + Seleucus restored to the
Branchidae the brazen statue of Apollo, which had been
taken away from the Milesians by Xerxes, and carried to
Ecbatana. § Conquered states, and those which paid a
fixed tribute, or on which an income tax was imposed, were
allowed to retain their works of Art for a time. ||
X Quintus Curtins, iv. 3, 22; Diod. Sic. xvii. 42. See the account of
the removal of the statues of Damia and Auxesia, or Ceres and Proser-
pine, by the Eginetans f rom the people of Epidaurus, Herod, v. 83;
and the curious relation of the Tyrrhenians having carried away the
statue of Juno from Samos, Athenaeus, xv. 12; and the story of the
majestic female standing on la globe with flowing garments, expanded
wings, and a crown of laurel in her outstretched hands, transported
from Tarentum to Rome by Caesar, placed by him in the Curia Julia,
and decorated by Augustus with the spoils of Egypt.—Gibbon, cap.
xxviii.
§ Pausanias, i. 16.
|| “Ut illi haberent haec oblectamenta et solatia servitutis. Cicero,
in Yerr. ii. 4, 60. “In order that they might have them as sources of
delight and consolation during their slavery.”


During this epoch several distinct schools grew to
/eminence, flourished, and died out in turn ; of these were
Athens, Argos, Sicyon, Rhodes, and Sicily. In them were
taught and practised sculpture, chiefly in marble, casting in
metal, and minor arts of decoration and personal adornment,
producing bracelets, brooches, rings, seals, with inlaid armour,
furniture, sacred utensils, and pottery, brought to great
perfection. Individuals who studied in these brought their
birthplace into prominence on their return by their own
proficiency and that of their pupils.
With the decline of political power in Greece and in Asia
Minor, this period may be said to have closed.
The history of Sculpture under the Romans may, for
convenience, be made to embrace from b. c. 146 to A. d. 180
Architecture, the construction of roads to enable them
to extend and retain their conquests, aqueducts, theatres,
and vast arenas for the exhibition of their cruel sports,*
instituted to amuse, and finally employed to enthrall the
people, engrossed this warlike race. They may be regarded
as admirers of art, rather than as a nation producing artists
from amongst themselves. Unlike the Greeks, who forbade
the practice of Sculpture by any but persons of gentle birth,
and who annexed to the study of its rules a protracted and
expensive training, the Romans considered the arts of war
and government their chief pursuit. They esteemed most
highly the military distinctions which led to the principal
civil preferments, and they willingly surrendered to others
the supremacy in those accomplishments which required
more finely-organised perceptions, more discriminating habit
■of thought, more cultivated and polished manners than those
* “ Then cruel, by their sports to blood inur’d
Of fighting beasts, and men to beasts expos’d.”
—Milton, “ Paradise Regained,” iv, 139.


of which they themselves could boast. Thus it was that
they delegated the practice of most of the fine arts, as well
as the allied employments, to captives brought from abroad
to swell the pomp of successive triumphs, or to slaves
expressly educated for the purpose.*
Genius, repressed in this servile condition, refused to
display itself in such vigor as when, in the full enjoyment
of liberty, it had been courted and honoured by the great;
accordingly, it has been observed that the Romans seem to
have contented themselves at first with copies of those
remarkable statues which had not been transported to the
capital. These were not in all instances rendered with
strict fidelity to the originals, and a trifling deviation from
the model was accepted as a compensation for the absence
of the inventive faculty. As taste ripened, a more generous
spirit grew up, and the enfranchisement of the artist led to
the emancipation of the intellect, and a consequent improve-
ment in the style of Art. However, the creative power, the
“ Excudent alii spirantia mollius aera,
Credo equidem, vivos ducent de marmore vultus;
Orabunt causas melius, coelique meatus
Describent radio et surgentia sidera dicent.
Tu regere imperio populos, Romane, memento;
Hae tibi erunt artes ; pacisque imponere morem,
Parcere subjectis, et debellare superbos.”
—Virgil, AEn. vi. 847.
“ Others, methinks, may with superior art
To breathing brass the human form impart,
The living lineaments in marble trace,
Or causes plead with more persuasive grace;
Mark with a wand the motions of the sky,
And name the planets as they rise on high.
Remember, Roman, these thine arts, I say,
To govern nations with imperial sway,
To fix the rule of peace on basis true,
The conquered spare, the haughty foe subdue.”


[ xviii ]
embodiment of the workings of fancy and of the imagina-
tion, are not to be expected at the hands of a people
eminently practical in their social, political, and religious
institutions. Portraiture exact in minute detail, imitation
unenlivened by any departure from the actual and the real,
mark this Period. Pliny * states that Augustus placed in
the Temple of the Palatine Apollo, at Home, some statues
by Bupalus and Athenis, adding that they wrought in
Parian marble, t
The magnificence of the buildings erected in the age of
the early Caesars, of the Flavian family, of Hadrian, and
the Antonines, and the unprecedented splendour of the
public shows, gave ample occupation to artists; but the
spirit thus awakened soon degenerated, in consequence of the
growing effeminacy of manners, and artists were degraded
into ministers of the pride, caprice, and wanton luxury of
profligate Emperors.
There is considerable difficulty in fixing with precision the
works expressly due to this Period.
To inscribe on the plinth of the statue of an illustrious
foreigner of a former age the name of a Eoman warrior or
statesman was, according to Cicero, a reprehensible act of
frequent occurrence; and we are informed of a still more
violent appropriation by Caligula, X who collected antique
statues of gods, famous for their beauty and the veneration
Pliny, xxxvi. 4.
+ This was of a warm and creamy hue, called marpessian, also
lychnites, because of its sparkling brightness, or, as is said, because
it was quarried by the light of a link or torch. The Pentelic,
with a cold bluish tone, was called marxnor salinum, from the grain
resembling crystals of salt; the marble of Mount Hymettus, of Luna,
the modern Massa and Carrara.
X Suetonius, in Yit. Caligul.


paid to them, removed the heads, and replaced them with
his own. He carried his destructiveness still further, as he
demolished or dispersed the statues of many distinguished
personages set up in the public places in Eome; while Nero
exceeded him in barbarism, for in his progress through
Greece he overturned the statues which had been erected in
honour of victors at the different national games.
The best known Sculptors of this epoch are Caponius
and Posidonius, who embellished the theatre of Pompey;
Pasiteles, master of Stephanus, and Menelaus, his pupil;
Arcesilaus, employed by Lucullus, who produced the Venus
Genetrix, placed in his Forum by Julius Caesar ; Thaletion,
a freedman of Maecenas; Chimarus, who made the shrine
and statue of Germanicus; Zenodorus, who executed the
colossal figure of the Sun, 120 feet high, intended to repre-
sent Nero, which was put in front of his golden house ;
Agesander, Athenodorus, and Polydorus, authors of the
Laocoon, of which many reproductions were known to
exist. Apollodorus of Athens superintended the erection
of Trajan’s Column,* enriched with bas-reliefs, showing
powerful forms in natural and appropriate attitudes. Zeno
of Caria, Aristaeus, and Papias of Cyprus, flourished under
that Emperor, who revived the art, then hastening to its
decline.
The names of many of these persons sufficiently denote
the foreign extraction of those who bore them.t
“ What Sculpture rais’d
To Trajan’s glory, following triumphs stole,
And mix’d with Gothic forms, the chisel’s shame,
On that triumphal arch, the forms of Greece.”
Thomson, “ Liberty,” iii. 508.
■f* Other names might be added, as of Alcamenes, Aphrodiscus,
Artemon, Cleomenes ; Craterus, who worked with Pythodorus;
Diogenes of Athens, who decorated the Pantheon of A grippa; Euty-
chides, Hennochius, Hermolaus, associated with a different Pythodorus;


The period of primitive Christian Sculpture may be
briefly passed by, inasmuch as unfortunately our Gallery
does not yet possess any of its curious and suggestive
productions.
Drawing his inspiration from the pure sources of Holy
Writ, absorbed by a devout enthusiasm, the chief aim of
the early Christian Sculptor was a pious illustration of his
subject, rather than a display of technical dexterity or an
adherence to the rules of Art.
The oppression to which he was exposed by reason of his
creed, restricted the exercise of his abilities in a great
measure to sepulchral and monumental works, usually
executed in relief. At first, and for some time, it was
confined to Symbolism, which on altars and tombs repre-
sented that which expressed the Christian thought, to
which he dared not give utterance.
Thus the Fish represented typically the name of the
Redeemer; the word being composed of the initial
letters of ’lrjcrovs Jesus, Xpurros Christ, Oeov of God,
Yl6s the Son, Xwnjp the Saviour. The Lamb* the Dove,f
the Ark,+ the Anchor,§ the Cross, || in numerous suggestive
Heliodorus, Loedus, Menecrates, with his two sons, Apollonius and
Tauriscus ; Ophelion, probably the author of the statue of Pompey, at
the feet of which Julius Caesar fell; Polydectes, Posis, Philiscus,
Pythias, Teucer, Timarchides, Telecles, and Zopyrus.—Pliny, Nat.
Hist, xxxvi. 4.
* “Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the
world.”—John, i. 29.
“And he saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove.”—
Matthew, iii. 16.
i “There was seen in his temple the Ark of his testament.”—
Revelation, xi. 19.
§ “Which hope we have as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and
steadfast.”—Hebrews, vi. 19.
II “If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take
up his Cross, and follow me.” —Matthew, xvi. 24.


forms; the Triangle for the Trinity, and other devices
were employed. In architecture, the Cable, Chain, Billet,
Saw Tooth, Bird’s Beak, indicating the various implements
of torture used in persecution of the martyrs, were
introduced into the mouldings, and superseded the Greek
and Roman forms of decoration previously applied to
that purpose.
When burning bodies was forbidden by law in the time of
the Antonines, the use of the sarcophagus was restored, and
the ornamentation of that expanded gradually according to
the wishes of the relatives, or taste or design of the artist.
Still, a rare gleam of intellect occasionally shines through
some of these simple and truthful labours, and although
instances occur in which the mythology of ancient times is
strangely intermixed with the new religion, the innocence,
sincerity, and tenderness of motive of the designer may
well disarm criticism on the homely nature of the
execution.
Upon the change of the seat of government from Rome
to Constantinople, the Emperor Constantine was soon
impressed with the irresistible conviction that the principal
impediment to making the city of his choice surpass all
others in magnificence was the decline of Art. Unable to
resuscitate the expired genius of a former time, he imitated
the rapacity of his predecessors. In order to heighten the
splendour of his new Capital,—the noblest and most
favoured daughter of old Rome, —he denuded all other parts
of the empire of their fairest ornaments. The destruction
of these choice productions of Art occurred on different
occasions. The Metropolis of the Eastern world, unable to
produce any ancient domestic trophies, was enriched by
the spoils of dependent Provinces. About the year a. d. 356


the bodies of St. Andrew,* St. Lnke,t and St. Timothy,!
which had reposed in obscure graves, were transported § in
solemn pomp to the Church of the Apostles, founded by
the magnificence of Constantine on the banks of the
Thracian Bosphorus. ||
Trophies of memorable wars, the statues of gods and
heroes, of sages and poets, were transported to Byzantium,
so that “nothing seemed wanting except their souls to
animate the astonishing resemblances of these illustrious
beings.” IF Of these statues not fewer than 427 were
assembled in the temple dedicated to St. Sophia. ** “ The
Divine Wisdom.” ABIA 20d?IA ; This was four times
built; the first by Constantine, A. d. 326; the second by
Constantins, a. d. 360, who united with it the church of
Irene, or Peace, erected by his father. This, which had
resounded with the eloquent denunciations of St. Chrysostom,
was destroyed by fire, a. d. 404 ; the third, built by Theo-
dosius, a. d. 415, was burned during the tumults of the blue
and green factions, A. D. 532. Justinian erected the fourth,
which continues to the present day, having been converted
into a mosque on the taking of Constantinople by the Turks
under Mahomet 11. 29th May, a. d. 1453. On the Phiale,
or Fountain, in the Exonarthex, or outer porch of the
• * St. Andrew suffered martyrdom at Patrae in Achaia, now Patras
in North Morea, and was buried there, A. D. 70.
! St. Luke died at Patrae in Achaia, circa A. D. 90.
t A tradition is preserved that St. Timothy was slain A. D. 97, while
preaching at Ephesus.
§ As were the supposed remains of St. Mark, brought to Venice in
the time of the Doge, Angelo Particiaco, A. D. 815. He suffered
martyrdom at Alexandria, A. D. 68.
|| Gibbon, “ Decline and Pall,” cap. xxviii ; and Jerome ii. 122.
H Cedrenus, Byzant. Script. 369.
** Proverbs viii, and ix. Codinus, Byzant. Script. Ex. 8.


[ xxiii ]
church of Justinian, was inscribed the Palindromic line,
which, read backwards or forwards, has the like significa-
tion : ~ , . . . „,
vtif/ov dvojirjfiara fir] fiovav dxpiv.
Wash your sins not only face.
The Oriental character being unsuited to the severe study
of Sculpture, Art took in the East a new direction ; while
Italy, reduced to the humiliating position of a Power of
secondary dignity, became a prey to successive wild invaders,
whose only regard for works of Art was a superstitious
dread of injuring those which their ignorance invested with
a power of enchantment or sorcery. *
Statues being banished from churches, Art turned in
another direction. Sculpture was but little practised;
Painting employed itself in embellishment, and produced
a pictorial liturgy of exquisite finish and minute detail,
confined, however, within certain prescribed rules, which
left but little play for the fancy or imagination.t
For more than 600 years—from the time of Hannibal—no
foreign enemy had insulted the walls of Rome. Alaric was
the first who, in her hour of weakness, dared to aspire to
the conquest of the Eternal City. He led his Visigoths +
from his conquests in Macedonia and Illyria, besieged
thrice, and finally, A. D. 410, took and sacked the city—
-1163 years after its foundation. Ataulphus, his successor,
married Placidia, sister of the Emperors Arcadius and
Honorius. He pressed on the Vandals who had invaded
* The singularity of this exception was not admitted by the Icono-
clasts at a later period, under Leo 111. the Isaurian, about A. D. 730,
and his successors.
i* See Agincourt, Didron, Labarte. 'Ep/rrpeta rrjs
t Goth, man ; Yisi-Goth, Eastern of Sweden; Ostro-Goth, Western
of Norway.


Spain ; they, on the invitation of Boniface, who occupied
Africa for the Emperors, took possession of that province
under Genseric.
Genseric, a. d. 455, crossed with his Vandals from Africa?
and for fourteen days plundered Rome of what had been
left after or accumulated since the former pillage; and an
avenging Nemesis gave to Carthage, at the hands of a
barbarian, bom on the shores of the Baltic, the spoils of
her ancient and remorseless foe.*
Eudocia, widow of the Emperor Valentinian, shocked at
being compelled to become the wife of the ignoble Maxi-
mus, who seized the government, suggested to the King
of the Vandals to revenge her by making an attack on the
imperial city.
Vitiges, King of the Goths, A. D. 537 —beleaguered Borne,
broke down the aqueducts, and thereby cut olf the supply of
water, and rendered useless the vast baths. Belisarius pent
within the sepulchre of Hadrian, which, in his extremity, he
converted into a fortress, hurled upon the heads of the
besiegers the statues with which that remarkable structure
had been ornamented; and the defenders of the capital thus
reluctantly became the destroyers of its choicest and most
esteemed decorations, t After this Belisarius besieged and
took Vitiges in Ravenna. Totila, who succeeded Hildibald,
A. d. 541, Governor of Verona, chosen king of the Goths
after Vitiges was made prisoner, took Rome twice, A. d. 546
and 549. Narses, sent by Justinian to Italy, defeated and
slew him, and drove the Goths out of Italy, a. d. 552.
* Gibbon, “Decline and Fall,” cap. xxxvi.
+ When the ditch of the Mole of Hadrian, now the Castle of St,
Angelo, was cleared, by order of Pope Urban YIIL, The Sleeping
Faun of Praxiteles, called the Barberini, was found in it; a leg, a
thigh, and the right arm were broken. —Gibbon, “Decline and Fall, ,r
cap. xli. in note.


Under such rude shocks as these the Arts succumbed.
They suffered still more, however, from the utter exhaustion
of the human mind in the regions where they had formerly
flourished, from the obliteration of all refined sentiment
and the destruction of the whole spiritual and ideal world
of antiquity to which they had been so much beholden.*
Then closed on them the obscurity of that long and dreary
interval of many hundred years, during which the Sculptor
rarely showed his skill, except when associated with the
Architect.
Theodoric had restored some edifices of Roman origin,
and caused others to be erected on the principles of ancient
art. Charlemagne at the end of the eighth century exerted
his power to promote the revival of the Arts. In this he
was supported by Popes Adrian V. and Leo 111. In the
tenth century, Constantinople poured forth her artists to
the West. The Emperor Henry 11. invited Greek artists
to his court. Hildebrand, afterwards Pope Gregory YIL,
obtained from Constantinople the bronze gates which he
set up at the Basilica of St. Pauls, without the walls at
Rome, a. d. 1070. Nicetas enumerates the statues destroyed
on the taking of the city by the French and Venetians,
a. d. 1203 —under “Blind old Dandolo.”t
* The degeneration of the social condition of the world is well
expressed in the lines—
“ The last drear mood
Of envious sloth and proud decrepitude;
No Faith, no Art, no King, no Priest, no God —
While round the freezing points of life in snarling ring,
Crouch’d on the barren sod,
Babbling about the unreturning spring,
And whining for dead gods who cannot save
The toothless systems shiver’d to their grave.”
tl. The Victorious Charioteers; 2. The Sphinx, River-horse, and
Crocodile ; 3, She-wolf, suckling Romulus and Remus ; 4. An Eagle


Tbe Sculptor’s hand produced on such occasions the
accessory embellishments for those vast and elegant struc-
tures which remain monuments of the architectural ability
and the exquisite taste of the Ecclesiastics —the only deposi-
tories of learning in a rude and uncouth age.
The feudal system and the increasing power of the Church
in Northern Europe gave an impulse to Architecture, civil
and ecclesiastical. The confiscation of the estates of the
Saxon nobility after the Conquest, and the endowment of
the dignitaries of the Church, by William 1., led to the
building of the majestic cathedrals, conventual and other
churches, which mark the Norman style and period. In
the thirteenth century, the struggle between the Imperial
and Papal Powers—with, on the one side, Frederic 11. and
Ezzelino of Padua, who demanded palaces, fortresses,
and castles; on the other, Innocent IV., a. d. 1240, and
Urban IV., A. d. 1265, who restored old, and called for
new churches and cathedrals —engaged the attention of
distinct classes of architects, secular and ecclesiastical. At
the same time, the growth of the monastic orders in
numbers, wealth, and influence, rendered necessary the
erection of spacious monasteries and nunneries, with their
abbeys and conventual churches, the decorations* of which
holding and tearing a Serpent in his talons ; 5. An Ass and his Driver;
6. An equestrian Statue; 7. A square and lofty Obelisk of Brass;
8. The Phrygian Shepherd presenting to Yenus the Prize of Beauty—
the Apple of Discord; 9. The Statue of Helen; 10. The Statue of
Hercules by Lysippus; 11. Colossal Statue of Juno. —Nicetas, Manu-
script in the Bodleian Libraiy, Oxford.
* Mouldings, archivolts of arches, gurgoyles, corbels of capitals on
which the human face was represented in the most grotesque and
incorrect manner. In the twelfth century, bas-reliefs and statues
were executed which showed the influence of Byzantine practice;
long, attenuated, lifeless figures, with solemn and severe expression,
draped in small, close, and parallel folds, overladen with ornament. A


[ xxvii ]
evoked the energies of the Sculptor, and brought into new
existence the long-neglected art of Painting.
The inroad of the Turks into Europe, the taking of
Constantinople, A, d. 1453, the destruction of the Eastern
empire, and the establishment of the Ottoman empire
in its stead, again drove the Greeks, with their lan-
guage, into the countries of the West. About the
fifteenth century a fresh life was infused into the Arts,
and birth was given to the Renaissance. The recovery of
manuscripts of many of the classical authors, the circula-
tion and study of these, facilitated by the invention of
printing, the exhumation of some of the noble statues,
buried for centuries beneath ruins, the improved condition
of society in the principal States of Europe, and the
enlightened patronage of men of letters and of artists,
contributed to a development of the human intellect
in literature, science, and the fine arts, as rapid as it
was remarkable and brilliant. In the time of Martin V.,
A. d. 1417, mysticism was succeeded by the study of the an-
tique, worship of the senses, and realism; Art still served the
Church. Genii were grouped round the Virgin on tombs,
statues replaced sleeping figures awaiting resurrection.
Popes Martin V. and Paul 11., a. d. 1464, both promoted the
glyptic art.
The liberality and magnificence of the Medici family of
Florence, the zeal of Popes Julius 11. and Leo X. brought into
notice many artists; and the leading men of the Republic
of Venice, and the rulers of the Independent States of Italy
remarkable exception is to be observed at the Cathedral at Wells,
in Somersetshire, decorated with a vast number of figures. The
sculpture evinces a knowledge of the rules of art, possessed by the
statuary, far superior to that possessed by others of the period employed
on other buildings of the same class elsewhere.


[ xxviii ]
gave encouragement to the Sculptor, the Painter, the
Architect, and to those who brought in the various
refined modes of embellishment, fresco tapestry, alto-
and basso-relievo engraving, the lapidary art, and workers
in glass, pottery niello, in all their respective branches. They
endeavoured to combine the vigour of the pagan era and
the spirituality of the new belief, which displaced the old
merely human ideal. From that period to the present the
transition has been gradual. Temporary fluctuations have
occurred, according as the eminence or success of some
particular master has captivated the public and directed
the course of his admirers or imitators.
Comment upon the work of our contemporary Sculptor it
is not proposed to submit. A decision upon it involves not
only an acquaintance with the history of his art in its former
phases, but of that of Architecture, with which it has so
often acted in unison, and with that of Painting, to which it
is closely allied; it demands that a just allowance should be
made for the embarrassments which impede attempts to
render in the spirit of the antique,—yet without slavish
copying,—subjects taken from the remote history of people
whose manners, customs, habits, were so different from ours;
or those drawn from an extinct mythology, the mysterious
origin of which is in so many of its recesses unknown,
forgotten, or misunderstood. It requires, also, that con-
sideration should be shown on account of the obstacles which
encumber efforts to impersonate Christian virtues or abstract
ideas, of which our religion affords no prototypes, suggests
no external form or figure, the rendering of which is
completely arbitrary. It enjoins, moreover, an insight,
thorough and exact, into the influences which so frequently
fetter genius and confine the Sculptor to the duty of
pourtraying the common-places of living human passion,
and the unpicturesque incidents of modern days, subject to


the inappropriate adoption of ancient costume, the intract-
able management of the ungraceful modern, or the hetero-
geneous admixture of both.
Regarding the Sculptor as the expositor of man’s thought
and belief, the visitor to this Collection may form his own
opinion as to what has been in different ages esteemed the
faithful rendering of the grand, the sublime, the beautiful,
the true. '
One may well exclaim, with the polished scholar and
learned antiquarian, that “it is pity that there is not some-
thing like a public register to preserve the memory of such
statues as have been found from time to time, and to mark
the particular places where they have been taken up, which
would not only prevent many fruitless searches for the
future, but might often give a considerable light into the
quality of the place, or the design of the statue.” *
The authorities referred to may be verified, the works
cited may be consulted at large, and omissions necessary to
ensure brevity and to avoid prolixity, or which the absence
of means of obtaining exact information has caused, may
be supplied by the diligent reader in the Library.
It would be ungracious to conclude without adverting to
the fact that the Trustees owe to the generosity of friends
formerly resident here, as well as of others but incidentally
connected with the country, many of the interesting objects
which the Gallery contains. These represent several thousand
pounds expended by the purchasers ; and further, as furnish-
ing means of enlightened gratification and material instruc-
tion in the practical branches of Art manufacture and design;
* Addison, “ Travels in Italy.”—The greatest number of antique
statues was found between A. D. 1450 and 1560. Giovanni Angelo
Montorsoli was eminent as a restorer of many which had received
injury.


also, as affording testimony of the kind support of the givers,,
they possess an enduring worth much exceeding their mere
money value.
The pleasure originally afforded to the donors in presenting
their gifts to the Institution for the benefit of the community,
will doubtless be enhanced by the knowledge that the
usefulness of their well-directed liberality is thoroughly
appreciated by the Public of Victoria.


CATALOGUE
STATUES AND BUSTS IN MAEBLE, AND CASTS.
WORKS IN MARBLE
STATUES.
“ We came
To see the statue of our Queen . . .
. . . Prepare
To see the life as lively mock’d, as ever
Still sleep mock’d death: behold! and say ’tis well.”
—Wintee’s Tale, v. 3.
“Never saw I figures
So likely to report themselves : the cutter
Was as another Nature, dumb.” Cymbeline, ii. 4.
“ Graeca res est, nihil velare.” —Flint, xxxiv. 10.
Date of
THE QUEEN.
Born at Kensington Palace, 24th May 1819.
Height of Statue sft.
Acquisition
1878
His Royal Highness the PRINCE CONSORT (Francis
Albert Augustus Charles Emanuel).
Born at Ehrenberg, 26th August 1819; Died at Windsor
Castle, 14th December 1861.
Height of Statue sft. Bin.
His Royal Highness the PRINCE OF WALES (Albert
Edward).
Born at Buckingham Palace, 9th November 1841.
Height of Statue sft. Bin.
Her Royal Highness the PRINCESS OF WALES (Alex-
andra Caroline Maria Charlotta Louisa Julia).
Born Ist December, 1844.
Height of Statue sft.
Sculptor: Charles Summers. Born in Somersetshire,
1828 ; Died at Paris, 1878.
Presented by the Hon. William John Clarke, M.L.C.


Date of
Acquisition
DAPHNE. 1877
Sculptor: Marshall Wood. Height of Statue sft. 7in.
According to Pausanias, x. 5, Daphne was an Oreas, or mountain
nymph, and priestess of the Delphic Oracle, to which office she had
been appointed by Ge (Ft), the Earth). She was extremely beautiful,
and was loved and pursued by Apollo. When on the point of being
overtaken by him, she prayed to her mother, Ge, who opened her
bosom and received her. In order to console Apollo, she created the
evergreen laurel-tree Bac]n>rj, of the boughs of which Apollo made
himself a wreath. Ovid, Metam. i. 452. Another story relates that
Leucippus, the son of Oenomaiis, king of Pisa, in Elis, was in love with
Daphne and approached her in the disguise of a maiden, and thus
hunted with her, Apollo, jealous of him, discovered him while bathing
in the river Ladon with her, and Leucippus was killed by the nymphs.
Paus. viii. 20.
EYE. 1877
Sculptor: Patrick MacDowell, R.A. Height of
Statue 6ft.
Patrick MacDowell born 12th August 1799. He exhibited at the
Royal Academy in 1822, and in 1830 was admitted a student in the
Academy Schools. In 1841 was elected an Associate of the Academy,
and in 1846 a full Member. He died in London, 9th December 1870.
STATUETTES.
RAPE OF THE SABINES. 1878
From the original by John of Bologna at Florence.
Height of Statuette, with Pedestal, 6ft. sin.
Presented by the Family of the late James Purves,
Esquire.
REBECCA AT THE WELL. 1876
Sculptor : unknown. Height of Statuette 2ft. 6in.
VENUS DE MEDICI. . 1878
From the original, said to be by Praxiteles, in the
Royal Gallery, Florence. (See “ Casts of Statues.”)
Height of Statuette 3ft. Sin.
Presented by the Family of the late James Purves,
Esquire.


BUSTS.
Date of
Acquisition
BARELY, Sir Henry, G.C.M.G., K.C.B.
Governor of Victoria from 1856 to 1863.
Born 1815.
Sculptor: Charles Summers.
Presented by the Government of Victoria.
BARRY, Sir Redmond, Knt. Bac., K.C.M.G., M.A., iB6O
LL.D.
Judge of the Supreme Court of Victoria.
Born 1813.
Sculptor: Charles Summers.
Presented by the Subscribers,
BROOKE, Gustaves Vaughan. Tragedian, 1869
Born 1819; Drowned on the ship “London/ 11th
January 1866.
Sculptor: Charles Summers.
Presented by the Subscribers.
CANTERBURY, Viscount, Baron Bottesford, SIR JOHN
HENRY THOMAS MANNERS-SUTTON, K.C.B,
G.C.M.G. 1877
Governor of Victoria from 1866 to 1873.
Born 27th May, 1814; Died 24th June, 1877.
Sculptor: Charles Summers.
DUFFY, The Hon. Sir Charles Gavan, K.C.M.G. 1877
Born 1816.
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Victoria.
Sculptor: Charles Summers.
Presented by the Subscribers.
EDINBURGH, His Royal Highness the Duke op.
Prince Alfred Ernest Albert, Duke of Saxony,
and Prince of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha. 1873
Born 6th August, 1844.
Sculptor: Charles Summers.
Presented by Abraham Linacre, Esquire.
D


Date of
Acquisition
LA PUBERTA.
Sculptor: Lucca Flaminio.
Presented by Hon. Sir George Verdon, K.C.M.G.,
C.B.
MACLEAY, Sir George, K.C.M.G. 1872
He accompanied Captain Sturt on his expedition down the Murrum-
bidgee and Murray; and was for several years a prominent Member of
the Legislature of New South Wales.
Sculptor: Charles Summers.
PERRY, The Right Rev. Charles, D.D. 1876
First Church of England Bishop of Melbourne.
Born 17th February, 1807.
Sculptor: Charles Summers.
Presented by Hon. William John Clarke, M.L.C.
SEASONS. 1864
Four Busts, representing Spring, Summer, Autumn,
and Winter.
Sculptor : G. M. Benzoni.
Presented by Peter Davis, Esquire.
STURT, Captain Charles. Australian Explorer. 1872
Died at Cheltenham, England, 16th June, 1869.
Sculptor : Charles Summers.
Presented by the Subscribers.
WILSON, Edward. One of the Proprietors of the
Melbourne “ Argus.” 1868
Born at Hampstead, 1814; Died at Hayes, Kent, 10th
January, 1878.
Sculptor: Thomas Woolner.
Presented by the Subscribers.


CASTS
STATUES
ACHILLES.
Original in the Louvre, Paris.
Found at
Sculptor:
Height, 6ft 11 in.
Restorations ; fingers of right hand, left forearm,
extremities of toes.
Son of Peleus, King of the Myrmidons in Thessaly, and of Thetis,
killed at the Siege of Troy, B. C. 1184, by Paris, son of Priam and
Hecuba, whose elopement with Helen, wife of Menelaus, King of
Sparta, led to the Trojan War.—See Homer, “Iliad;” Virgil,
“AEneid,” vi. 57 ; Ovid, “ Metam.” 12.
ADONIS.
Original in the Vatican, Rome,
Found a. D. 1780, on the Via Labicana.
Sculptor:
Height, sft. Sin.
Restorations : both arms, right leg, top of nose ; by
Albracini.
Different accounts of the parentage of this youth are given by
ancient writers. He was beloved by Venus, who accompanied him in
hunting; he was killed by a wild boar. He is identified with the
Syrian Tammuz of Ezekiel, viii. 14; and with Baal Peor of the Ammon-
ites and Moabites.
“ While smooth Adonis from his native rock
Ban purple to the sea, supposed with blood
Of Tammuz yearly wounded.”
—Milton, “ Paradise Lost,” i. 450.
Identified by some with Osiris, by others with the Sun. See Hesiod ;
Apollodorus, hi. 14; Ovid, “Metam,” x. 726 ; Hyginus, Fab. ;
Theocritus, Id. xv. xxx; Bion, Id. i.; Lucian, “De Dea Syria”;
Shakespeare—“ Venus and Adonis;” Banier, “ Feasts of Adonis.”


AMAZON. Presented to the Trustees by John Weege
Howey, Esquire.
Original in the Vatican.
Found at the Villa Mattel, Rome.
Sculptor: Polyclitus ; flourished b. c. 450.
Height, 6ft. 2in.
Restorations: the arms.
The Amazons were a race of warrior women who inhabited the
territory of the Caucasus. Some believe that the name means that
they were not nursed at the breast, or were without breasts, or
that it was given to them because each had her right breast
burned or cut off that it might not impede the drawing of the
bow; others that it is derived from the Caucasian word for Artemis,
the Moon, of which deity they were the priestesses, and suggest
that the injury to the breast may be accounted for by the laceration
•of the body in the paroxysms of their religious orgies. This is
supposed to be a copy from one of the bronze statues placed in
the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, spoken of by Pliny. In order of
merit they stood thus : that of Polyclitus, first; of Phidias, second; of
•Ctesilaus, third; of Cydon, fourth; of Phradmon, fifth.
See Diodorus Sicul. ii. 45; iii. 52; Plutarch, “Theseus;” Pliny,
xxxiv. 19; Winckelmann, ii. 241; Virgil; and Herodotus.
“ Ducit Amazonidum lunatis agmina peltis
Penthesilea furens, mediisque in millibus ardet,
Aurea subnectens exsertae cingula mammae
Bellatrix, audetque viris concurrere virgo.”
—Virgil, “AEneid,” i. 490.
“ Penthesilea there, with haughty grace.
Leads to the wars an Amazonian race :
In their right hands a pointed dart they wield;
The left for ward, sustains the lunar shield,
Athwart her breast a golden belt she throws,
Amidst the press alone provokes a thousand foes,
And dares her maiden arms to manly foi'ce oppose.”
—Dry den.
“At medias inter caedes exsultat Amazon
Unum exserta latus pugnae, pharetrata Camilla.”
—Virgil, “ AEneid,” xi. 648.
“ Resistless, through the war Camilla rode,
In danger unappall’d, and pleased with blood.
One side was bare for her exerted breast;
One shoulder with her painted quiver press’d.”
—Dryden.
ANATOMICAL STATUE.
Presented by James Murphy, Esquire.
Sculptor: Houdon.


ANTINOUS.
Original in Capitol at Rome.
Found at Hadrian’s Villa, Tivoli. Presented by
Cardinal Albani to Pope Clement XII.
►Sculptor:
Height, 6ft. 6in,
Restorations; the head, right leg from below the knee,
left foot, two fingers of right hand, left forearm ;
the right hand originally held a Caduceus.
A Bithynian youth, page of the Emperor Hadrian, drowned in
the Nile, A. D. 131. The Emperor, inconsolable for his loss, rebuilt
the city of Besa, and called it Antinoo-polis. He caused him to be
enrolled amongst the gods, gave his name to a star, erected temples
for his honor in Egypt, Greece, and at his Tiburtine villa, and set
up statues of him in many places.
See Spartian. Hadrian, 14 ; Dion. Cassius, Ixix. 11; Pausanias, viii. 9 ;
II Yaticano, iv. 74; Merivale, viii. 2, 39.
APOLLINO, Apollo; or the Lycian Apollo.
Original in the Royal Gallery, Florence.
Found at
Scidptor: probably Philiscus of Rhodes, b.c. 160.*
Height, 4ft 6in.
Restorations: this statue was broken in pieces some
years since by the fall upon it of Vandyke’s portrait
of the Emperor Charles V. of Spain; restored by
Bartolini.
“ Hie juvenis, casta redimitus tempora lauro,
Est visus nostra ponere sede pedem,
Non illo quicquam formosius ulla priorum
AEtas, humanum nec videt illud opus.
Intonsi crines longa cervice fluebant;
Stillabat Syrio myrtea rore coma,
Candor erat, qualem praefert Latonia Luna,
Et color in niveo corpore purpureus ;
Ut juveni primum virgo deductu marito
Inficitur teneras, ore rubente, genas ;
Ut, cum contexunt amarantis alba puellae
Lilia; ut autumno Candida mala rubent.”
—Tibullus, iii. El. iv. 23-34.
“ A youth appear’d, with virgin-laurel crown’d,
He mov’d majestic, and I heard the sound. [Such
* Pliny, Hist. Nat. xxxvi. 5, 4.


Such charms, such manly charms, were never seen,
As fir’d his eyes, and harmoniz’d his mien :
His hair, in ringlets of an auburn hue,
Shed Syrian sweets, and o’er his shoulders flew;
As white as thine, fair Luna! was his skin,
So vein’d with azure, and as smoothly thin ;
So soft a blush vermilion’d o’er his face,
As when a maid first melts in man’s embrace;
Or when the fair with curious art unite
The purple amaranth and lily white.
A bloom like his when tinged by autumn’s pride,
Reddens the apple on the sunny side.”
—Grainger.
Also rendered in English by Elton and Cranstoun. See also Lucian;
Anacharsis; Galerie de Firenze, ii. 154.
APOLLO (The Belvidere).
Original in the Vatican ; placed there by Pope Julius 11.
Found, a.d. 1503, at Capo d’ Anzio, the ancient Antium,
birthplace of Nero, embellished by him at vast
expense.
Sculptor; probably Calamis, b. c. 440, or Praxiteles,
b. c. 364.*
Height, 7ft. 2in.
Restorations : left hand, or arm, according to Perkins,
vol. ii. 98, by Giovanni Angelo Montorsoli, born a. d.
1507. The right arm and leg are antique, but have
been attached, as Winckelmann remarks, vol. ii. 427,
not too skilfully; also i. 485.
A celebrated statue of Apollo, by Myron, was taken away from
Agrigentum by Yerres.—Cic. in Verr. v. 43.
Son of Jupiter and Latona, one of the great divinities of the Greeks.
The statue is supposed to represent the god in the act of destroying
the children of Niohe.
“ Not fair-hair’d Niohe abstained from food
When in the house her children lay in death.
Six beauteous daughters and six stalwart sons
The youths Apollo, with his silver how,
The maids the Archer Queen, Diana, slew.
With anger filled that Niohe presumed
Herself with fair Latona to compare,
Her many children with her rivals two,
So by the two were all the many slain.”
—Homer, 11. xxiv. 705. —By Lord Derby.
II Yaticano. iv. 252.


■“ Or view the Lord of the unerring how,
The God of life, and poesy, and light;
The Sun in human limbs ai’rayed, and brow
All radiant from his triumph in the fight,
The shaft hath just been shot, the arrow bright
With an immortal’s vengeance ; in his eye
And nostril beautiful disdain, and might
And majesty, flash their full lightnings by,
Developing in that one glance the Deity,”
—Byron, “Childe Harold,” iv. 161.
“ I turn my glance, and lo!
“ The Archer-God speeds vengeance from his bow :
Not as when oft, amid his Delian glade,
The Lord of Beauty knelt to mortal maid ;
Not as when winds were hush’d and waves lay mute,
Listing and lull’d beneath his silver lute;
But like the terrors of an angry sky
Clouds on his brow and lightning in his eye.
The foot advanced, the haughty lips apart,
The voice just issuing from the swelling heart,
The breathing scorn, yet ’mid that scorn appear
No earthlier passions mix’d with human fear —
The god speaks from the marble not the less
Than when heav’n brightens with his loveliness ;
And o’er each limb th’ enamor’d Graces play,
Leave wrath its pride, but steal its gloom away.”—Bulwer.
“ God of the silver bow, from thee
The race of hapless Niobe
Received just punishment, to teach
The sin of proud and impious speech ;
Thine arrows quell’d huge Tityos’ lust
And stern Achilles laid in dust
Beneath the battlemented town
Of yet unconquered Ilion.”
—Horace, iv. Ode 6.—By Lord Eavensworth.
See Homer, iii. 1; Hesiod, Theog.; Herodotus, ii. 156; Cicero De
Natur. Deor. iii. 29 ; in Yerr. v. 17; Muller Dorians, book ii; Flaxman.
APOLLO SAUROKTONOS (The Lizard Killer).
Original in the Louvre ; formerly in the Villa Borghese.
Found A. D. 1770, in the Palace of Caesars, Rome.
Sculptor; Praxiteles. Original probably in bronze.
Height, sft. 1-^in.
Restoration ; right hand from above wrist.
Supposed to represent the god when, in his early youth, banished from
heaven for having slain the Cyclop Steropes, one of the companions of
Vulcan, he passed some time in the service of Admetus, King of Sicily.
See Valerius Elaccus, Argon, v. 415 ; Pliny, Nat. Hist, xxxiv. 19,10;
Martial, xiv. 172; Winckelmann, ii. 267, 338.


ARIADNE. Presented to the Trustees by George
James, Esquire.
Original in the British Museum.
Found at
Sculptor:
Height, 4ft. loin.
Daughter of Minos, King of Crete. For her adventures with Theseus
and Bacchus, see Hesiod, Theog. 949; Plutarch, Theseus; Ovid,
Metam. viii. 178; Heroides, 10; Catullus, Epithal. of Peleus and Thetis.
Pausanias, i. 20; ii. 9 & 29.
ARISTIDES.
Original at Naples, in the Barberini Museum.
Found at Herculaneum, in the Villa of the Papyri.
Sculptor:
Height, 6ft. Sin.
An Athenian general and statesman, called the Just; banished from
Athens through the envy of the Democratic party.
See Herodotus, viii. 79; Plato, Gorgias; Plutarch; Museo Borbo-
nico, i. 60.
ATHLETE. Or Apoxyomenos, with a STRIGIL.
Original in the Vatican.
Found at Vicolo delle Palme in the Trastavere, a.d. 1849.
Sculptor: probably Lysippus.
Height, 6ft. 4in.
Restorations : extremity of right hand.
This statue pleased the Emperor Tiberius so much, that he ordered
it to be removed from the Baths at Agrippa to his Palace. The
indignation of the citizens of Borne was expressed so violently, that he
thought proper to restore it to its original position.
BACCHANTE (A).
Sculptor; Pradier.
Height, 2ft. 6in.
BACCHUS and AMPELUS.
Presented to the Trustees by Lachlan Mackinnon,
Esquire.
Original in the British Museum.
Found, a.d. 1772, at La Storta, eight miles from Rome.
Sculptor:
Height, 4ft. lOiin., including the plinth, 3fin.
Restorations: the whole of the right arm of B acchus.


Bacchus, the god of wine, son of Jupiter and Semele. Ampelus,
bis companion, a Phrygian youth, thrown from the back of a bull and
killed. His body was changed into a vine.
See Homer, Hymn v.; Cicero, De Natur. Deor. iii. 23 ; Ovid, Fasti,
iii. 409.
BACCHUS and ARIADNE.
Presented to the Trustees by Joseph Hawdon, Esquire.
Original at
Sculptor;
Height, 4ft. 4in.
BOXERS (The), or Lottatori, or Wrestlers, or Pancratiasts.
Original in the Royal Gallery, Florence.
Found A. D. 1535 or 1583, near the Lateran, at Rome.
Sculptor : Praxiteles or ScoPAS—if either.
Height, 2ft. 11 Jin.
Restorations : the head of each ; left arm, right leg
from knee, left foot of uppermost figure ; right arm,
right leg from above knee of lowermost.
Supposed to represent Phaedimus and Tantalus, sons of Niobe, slain
by Apollo, and to have formed part of the group of Niobe and her
children, which occupied the tympanum of the pediment of the temple
of Apollo, at Borne, in which was set up by Sosius, about B. C. 60, the
statue of Apollo, in wood, brought from Seleucia, and called the Apollo
Sosianus. Mengs is of opinion that these are imitations of statues made
at a period when taste was brought to the greatest perfection amongst
the Greeks. One of the proofs adduced to displace the idea that these
are boxers is, that in the statues of professional pugilists the cartilage
inside the ear is generally crushed and flattened, as if by blows. The
ears of these figures are perfect.
See Anthol. Graec.; Ausonius, Her. Ep. 27,28,29 : Ovid, Metam. vi.
the Story of Niobe; Pliny, xiii. 5, xxxvi. 4; and the account by
Propertius, Elegy ii. 21, of the opening of the Portico of the Temple
Winckelmann, ii. 237,
BOY (extracting a thorn).
Original in Villa Albani, Rome. A repetition is in the
Royal Gallery, Florence.
Found at
Sculptor :
Height, 2ft. din.


OANEPHORA.
No. 1. Presented to the Trustees by Mrs. General
Barry.
No. 2. By Sir William a’Beckett.
Original in the British Museum.
Found, a. D. 1766, at the Villa Strozzi, near Rome, close
to the tomb of Cecilia Metella, wife of Crassus, on
the Appia Via, draped in a Diplois, or double tunic,
with a Peplon attached by a fibula.
Sculptors: Criton and Nicolaus of Athens. They
flourished in the time of Cicero, about B. c. 60,* or
according to other writers in the time of the Antonines,
about A. D. 150. f
Height, 7ft. 3|in., including the modius or basket on the
head.
Restorations; the lower right arm, left foot, and a small
portion of the upper part of the modius.
The Canephorae were maidens of the highest rank at Athens, who
assisted at the sacred festivals held in honour of Pallas Athene (Minerva),
and bore upon their heads baskets containing offerings to the Goddess ;
two of these, of “ marvellous beauty,” the work of Polyclitus, are
enumerated by Cicero amongst the art treasures of which Yerres
despoiled the city of Messana in Sicily.—Cicero, Yerr. v. 3.
In the description of the ancient marbles in the British Museum,
Part 1., it is said that “this is evidently an architectural statue, one of
the Caryatides, which supported the portico of an ancient building,”
probably a tomb. The Caryatides were intended to represent either
the virgins who celebrated the worship of Diana Caryatis, or females of
Caryae, a town in the Peloponnesus, which took the part of the Persians
at the time of the invasion of Xerxes, B. C. 480. It was taken after a
protracted siege ; the men were put to the sword, the women reduced
to slavery. To commemorate the victory buildings were erected, the
columns of which were in the form of women robed in the style of the
captives.
Moore playfully alludes to them in his Fifth Fable for the Holy
Alliance:—
“ ’Tis like that sort of painful wonder
Which slender columns, labouring under
Enormous arches, give beholders;
Or those poor Caryatides,
Compelled to smile and stand at ease
With a whole house upon their shoulders.”
* Winckelmann, ii. 377.
+ Muller, 204.


Male figures used for similar purposes were called by the Greeks
Atlantes, from Atlas, who according to the early mythology, supported
the heavens upon his shoulders, and who was metamorphosed by Perseus,
by means of the head of Medusa, into the mountain chain of North
Africa, which still bears his name.—Pliny, xxxvi. 4 : Ovid, Metam.
iv. 630.
The Romans called them Telamones from Telamon, another name
given to Atlas.—Vitruvius, 6. 9.
See Pausanias, i. 37; iii. 10 : ix. 16; Lucian, De Saltat.; Herodotus,
viii. 26.
CASTOR AND POLLUX.
Original in Rome.
Found at
Sculptor:
Height, 4ft. llin.
Called the Dioscuri, sons of Jupiter and Leda, twin-brothers of
Helen and Clytemnestra.
See Homer, Hymn xiii.; Theocritus, Idyll xxii.; Horace, Odes, i. 12;
Cicero, De Nat. Deor. iii. 21; Statius Thebais, v. 440; Macaulay's Lays,
“Lake Regillus”; Max Miiller’s Lectures, ii. 399.
CUPID.
Original made for Signor Galli, a. d. 1499. From
Rome it was sent to Florence, and stood in the
Valfonda gardens of the Riccardi, which passed to
the Marquis Strozzi, who sold it to Mons. Gigli, from
whom it was purchased for the Kensington Museum.
Sculptor: Michael Angelo Buonarroti, a.d. 1499.
Height, 3ft.
Grimm, Life of Michael Angelo, ii. 128; Ausonius, “Cupido Cruci
affixus.”
•CUPID and PSYCHE.
Original in the Capitol, Rome.
Found on the Aventine Hill, Rome.
Sculptor:
Height, 4ft. lin.
Restorations: nose, chin, right hand, left foot of Cupid.
“ But far above in spangled sheen
Celestial Cupid her fam’d son advanc’d,
Holds his dear Psyche sweet entranc’d,
A fter her wandering labors long
Till free consent the gods among
Make her his eternal bride.”
—Milton, “Comus.”


See Apuleius, “Metam.”; Mrs. Tighe, “ Cupid and Psyche,” of which-
Moore sings—
“ Tell me the witching tale again,
For never has my heart or ear
Hung on so sweet so pure a strain ;
So pure to feel, so sweet to hear.”
See Lucian; Plato, Respublic. vii.; Plotinus, Ennead, i. 8; La
Fontaine, Fables.
CYPARISSUS.
Presented to the Trustees by James Malcolm, Esquire.
Original in St. Petersburg!!.
Found at
Sculptor:
Height, 4ft. Sin.
A youth of the Isle of Cea, one of the Cyclades. He inadvertently
killed his favourite fawn. Overwhelmed with grief, he was trans-
formed into a cypress-tree.
“ ’Twas when the summer sun at noon of day,
Through glowing Cancer shot his burning ray ;
’Twas then the fav’rite stag in cool retreat
Had sought a shelter from the scorching heat.
Along the grass his weary limbs he laid.
Inhaling freshness from the breezy shade ;
When Cyparissus, with his pointed dart,
Unknowing pierced him to the panting heart.”
Ovid, “Metam.” x. 10, 6.
DEMOSTHENES.
Presented to the Trustees by Moleswoeth Geeenb,
Esquire.
Original in Vatican.
Found near Villa Aldobrandini, at Frascati.
Sculptor :
Height, 6ft. sin.
Restorations : the hands and the scroll.
A renowned Orator and Statesman, born about B. c. 385. His most
splendid orations were delivered to excite his countrymen, the
Athenians, against the encroachments of the Macedonians, under Philip,
Alexander, and Antipater. To prevent falling into the hands of the
latter, he took poison and died, B.C. 322.
See Lucian, “ Encomium Demost.” ; Plutarch ; II Yaticano.
This statue appears to embody the ideas conveyed by the lines of
Milton describing Satan —
“ As when of old some orator renowned
In Athens or free Rome, where eloquence [Flourished


Flourished —since mute —to some great cause address’d,
Stood in himself collected ; while each part,
Motion, each act, won audience ere the tongue ;
Sometimes in height began, as no delay
Of preface brooking, through his zeal of right—
So standing, moving on to height up grown,
The tempter, all impassioned, thus began.”
—Milton, “ Paradise Lost,” ix. 670.
To Demosthenes, as well as to Pericles, Hyperides, and others, allu-
sion is made in the lines
“ Thence to the famous orators repair
Those ancient, whose resistless eloquence
Wielded at will that fierce democratic,
Shook the arsenal, and fulmined over Greece,
To Macedon and Artaxerxes’ throne.”
—Milton, “ Paradise Eegained,” iv. 270.
DIANA. Called “a la Biche.”
Original in Louvre, Paris ; formerly at Versailles;
brought from Italy by Primaticcio, in the reign of
Francis I.
Found at
Sculptor:
Height, 6ft. sin.
Restorations: part of right arm and both hands ; by
Giovann-Angelo Montorsoli.
Sister of Apollo; identified with the Greek Artemis, the Egyptian
Bubastes, the Phoenician Astarte, the Moon.—Cicero, inYerr. v. 33,34.
jj? This Huntress Diana is very different from the goddess worshipped
at Ephesus,—Acts, xix. 28; Montfaucon, —who was a supposed personi-
fication of Nature.
“ With these in troop
Came Astoreth, whom the Phoenicians called
Astarte, Queen of Heaven, with crescent horns.”
—Milton, “ Paradise Lost,” i. 437 ;
and Jeremiah, vii. 18 ; 1 Kings, xi. 5.
See Homer, Hymn xxv.; Hesiod, Theog.; Callimachus; Herodotus, ii.
137, 156; Ovid, Metarn. ix. 687.
DIANA. Presented to the Trustees by M. C. E. Labilliere,
Esquire.
Original in
Sculptor: G. M. Benzoni.
Height, 4ft. lOjin.
“ Chaste Goddess, guardian of the woods
And Lycia’s mountain solitudes,
In threefold power adored.”—Horace, iii. 22; Catul, 34.


DIANA (Robing).
Original in Louvre.
Found at Gabii
Sculptor:
Height, sft. 4in.
Restorations: nose, right hand, left sleeve, left elbow,
right foot to ankle, half of left leg.
“ But mild the beauties of Diana were,
And all her charms serene and sweetly fair ;
Her brother’s looks adorn her radiant face,
Her cheeks and sparkling eyes express his grace.
The same she were, did not her sex alone
A difference cause and make the virgin known :
Her arms are naked to th’ admiring eye,
And in the wind her careless tresses fly.”
—Claudian, “llape of Proserpine.”
DISCOBOLUS (standing).
Presented by James Murphy, Esquire.
Original in the Vatican.
Found at Colombaro, on the Appian Way, eight miles
from Rome, at a villa, supposed to be that of the
Emperor Gallienus.
Sculptor : Naucydes, born at Argos ; flourished
b. c. 400.
Height, sft. 6in.
See Lucian ; Pliny, xxxiv. 19.
DISCOBOLUS (throwing quoit).
Presented by James Murphy, Esquire.
Original in the British Museum.
Found, a. d. 1791, in the grounds of the Conte Fede,
in that portion of Hadrian’s Villa, Tivoli, called the
Pinacotheca.
Sculptor ; supposed to be an ancient copy, in marble,
from the work in brass by Myron, born at Eleutherae,
in Greece, b. c. 480.
Height, to top of head, 4ft. in. ;to top of quoit,
sft. 2Jin.
Restorations : left hand, by Albani; head, broken off
and rejoined.


Other representations of this figure, in somewhat differing attitudes,
are in the Massimi collection at Home, in the Vatican, in the Louvre,
and in the Feversham collection in England. It is objected that the
head has not been correctly readjusted. In the other reproductions it
is turned back, as described by Lucian :—“ ‘ The statue is known to
all.’ ‘What statue,’ said I, ‘do you mean?’ ‘That beautiful one
which you see as you enter the hall, made by Demetrius.’ ‘The
Discobolus, I suppose, bending as if about to cast the discus, and
looking hack at the person who gives it to him, with one leg bent as if
about to raise himself erect in the act of throwing.’ ‘ No,’ said he,
‘ that is one of the works of Myron.’ ”
See Cicero ad Keren, iv. 6 ; Quintilian, ii. 13; Statius, vi. 645; Pliny,
xxxiv. 19; Lucian, “ Philopseud.” 18 ; Barry, Lectures, vol. i. 479;
Flaxman, Lectures, 90.
DOROTHEA.
Presented to the Trustees by Henry Moor, Esquire.
Original in the Collection of the Marquis of Lansdowne.
Sculptor ; John Bell.
Height, 3ft. 11 in.
“ This exclamation was distinctly overheard by the priest and his
company, who, concluding that the person who spoke must be hard by,
arose to make further enquiry, and had not gone twenty paces when,
behind the fragment of a rock, they perceived a boy sitting under an
ash-tree, in the habit of a peasant, whose face, as he stooped to wash
his feet in a brook that murmured by him, they could not then survey.
Their approach they managed with softness and silence, while his
whole attention was employed in bathing his legs, which seemed two
crystal pillars produced among the pebbles in the rill. They were
surprised at the whiteness and beauty of his feet, which they could not
believe had been formed to tread the clods and follow the cattle or
plough, as his dress would have seemed to indicate ; and the curate,
who went foremost, finding himself still unperceived by the youth,
made signs to the rest to crouch down or hide themselves behind a
neighbouring rock. This being done, all three stood gazing attentively
at the apparition, which was clad in a double-skirted grey jacket, girt
about the middle with a white napkin, and wore breeches and hose of
the same cloth, with a grey hunting cap on his head, the hose being
pulled up to the middle of the leg, which actually seemed of white
alabaster. Having washed his delicate feet, he wiped them with a
handkerchief, which he took out of his cap, and in so doing lifted up
his head, showing to the bystanders a face of such exquisite beauty,
that Cardenio said, in a whisper to the curate, ‘ Since that is not
Lucinda, it can be no earthly, but some celestial being.’ The youth
taking off his cap and shaking his head, a large quantity of hair, that
Apollo himself might envy, flowed down his shoulders, and discovered
to the spectators that the supposed peasant was no other than a woman,
the most delicate and handsome that the curate and the barber had
ever beheld.” —“ Don Quixote,” Part I. Book IV. chap. 1,


EUTERPE.
Original in the Vatican.
Found in the Gardens of the Quirinal, Rome.
Sculptor:
Height, 4ft. 6in.
■One of the Nine Muses, daughters of Jupiter and Mnemosyne—
Calliope, who presided over Epic poetry.
Clio, „
History.
Erato, ,
Euterpe,
Love Poetry.
Lyric Poetry.
Tragedy.
Melpomene, ~
Polyhymnia, ~
The sublime hymn.
Dance and song.
Comedy.
Terpsichore, ~
Thalia, ~
Urania, ~
Astronomy.
See Hesiod. Theog. 77.
EYE (at the fountain).
Original at the Bristol Museum.
Sculptor : Edward H. Baily.
Height, 2ft. Tin.
“But Eve,
Undecked save with herself ; more lovely fair
Than wood nymph or the fairest goddess feigned
Of three that in Mount Ida naked strove,
Stood to entertain her guest from Heaven ; no veil
She needed, virtue proof ; no thought infirm
Altered her cheek.”
Milton,“ Paradise Lost,” v
“ That day I oft remember, when from sleep
1 first awak’d and found myself repos’d
Under a shade on flowers, much wondering where
And what I was, whence thither brought, and how.
Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound
()f waters issued from a cave, and spread
Into a liquid plain, then stood unmov’d
Pure as the expanse of Heaven; I thither went
With unexperienced thought, and laid me down
On the green bank, to look into the clear
Smooth lake, that to me seemed another sky.
As I bent down to look, just opposite
A shape within the watery gleam appear’d,
Bending to look on me : I started back,
It started back; but pleased I soon return’d ;
Pleased it return’d as soon with answering looks
Of sympathy and love. There I had fix’d
Mine eyes till now, and pin’d with vain desire,


Had not a voice thus warned me: What thou seest,
What there thou seest, fair creature, is thyself;
With thee it came and goes : hut follow me,
And I will bring thee where no shadow stays
Thy coming, and thy soft embraces, he
Whose image thou art; him thou shalt enjoy
Inseparably thine, to him shalt bear
Multitudes like thyself, and thence be called
Mother of human race.”
—“ Paradise Lost,” iv. 449.
FATES (The).
Original in the British Museum.
Found at Athens.
Sculptor of the school of Phidias.
Height of two, 3ft. llin.; the other, 4ft. sin.
Restorations :
These, with “Horse’s Head,” “Ilissus,” and “Venus Anadyomene,”
are taken from the Elgin Marbles, brought from Athens by Lord
Elgin, who obtained them while Ambassador at Constantinople, in the
beginning of the present century. His Collection was purchased for
the use of the public, A. D. 1815. These figures formed portion of the
majestic composition in the eastern pediment of the Parthenon, the
temple erected in honour of (Athene) Minerva, intended to represent
the birth of the goddess when she sprung, full-grown and completely
armed, from the brain of Zeus, Jupiter.—Pausan. i. 24. In the centre
was seated the ruler of Olympus; on his left hand, likewise seated,
was Here, Juno; on his right stood Hephaistos, Vulcan, leaning on
the axe with which he had opened the head of Jupiter. Close to him
stood the Virgin Goddess; opposed to her was Poseidon, Neptune;
on the extreme right is Hyperion or Helios, the Sun, the heads of the
horses of his chariot appear rising impetuous above the sea; close to
him is the figure of Theseus, a name accepted in the description of the
ancient marbles in the British Museum, iii. 3; though it is there said
that—“ Some authorities of great weight are nevertheless disposed to
consider it as Hercules. The lion’s skin on which he reposes, and his
position immediately above some of his labours in the Metopes,
warrant this.”
On the extreme left is the chariot of Night descending into the western
ocean, the horses’ heads visible, one of which is supposed to have been
touched by the master-stroke of Phidias himself. Next in order are
these figures, The Fates. According to the authority cited above, an
adjustment of them forms a group supposed with great probability to
represent Moirai, The Fates, accustomed to attend upon the occasion
of a birth, &c. They are—Clotho, sitting apart, expressive of vigorous
youth; Lachesis, supporting another, of sedate middle age; Atropos,
in the repose of the langour of declining life. The winged Victory at
their side is balanced by Iris, messenger of the gods, who conveys
intelligence of the birth to (Demeter) Ceres and (Persephone) Proserpine,
seated by Theseus on the confines of Olympus. Conjecture supplies
the remaining objects.


The statue called Ilissus is the deified impersonation of the river
which ran through the southern plain of Attica. This figure stood on
the extreme right of the western pediment of the same temple in
which was represented the victory of the goddess over Neptune, in
their contest for the sovereignty of the soil of Athens. Those who
favour the opinion that the figure of Theseus is meant for Hercules
suggest that this figure is with more probability that of Theseus than
of the river god.
FAUN". Dancing.
Presented by James Murphy, Esquire.
Original in the Royal Gallery, Florence.
Found at
Sculptor : attributed to Praxiteles.
Height, 4ft. 6in.
Restorations : the head and arms; by Michael Angelo
Buonarroti.
FAUISr. Usually called the Rondinini Faun, because placed
in the Rondinini Palace, in the Corso, at Rome.
Original in the British Museum, entered in the Cata-
logue as statue of a Satyr, playing on the Crotala, or
Cymbals.
Found at
Sculptor:
Height, sft. Sin.
Restorations attributed to Michael Angelo: the torso
is the only portion really antique.
FLORA.
Original in the Capitol.
Found A. d. 1744, in Ruins of Hadrian’s Villa, at Tivoli.
Sculptor:
Height, sft. 3jin.
Restorations: left hand.
The Latin Goddess of Spring and Flowers, identified with the Greek
nymph Chloris, wife of Zephyrus.
GERMANICUS. By some supposed to be a figure of
Mercury.
Original in the Louvre.
Found
Sculptor; probably Chimarus.
Height, sft. llin.
Restorations: thumb and forefinger of right hand.


Son of Nero Claudius Drusus, nephew of the Emperor Tiberius,
brother of the Emperor Claudius, father of the Emperor Caligula and
of Agrippina, mother of the Emperor Nero. A distinguished general ;
horn B. C. 15, died a. D. 19.—See Clarac; Winckel. ii. 405.
On the hack of the Tortoise is inscribed; —“Cleomenes, son of
Cleomenes of Athens, made this.”
Sextus Quintus placed it in his villa on the AEsquiline, brought from
Home to France, where it had stood in the Villa Negroni. It was
placed by order of Louis XIV. at Versailles, and was removed thence
to the Louvre.
GLADIATOR. Dying.
Original in the Capitol, Rome.
Found in Collis Hortulorum, on the Pincian Hill, near
the tomb of the Domitii, where Nero’s body w r as
burned by Acte, his freed-woman, and Ecloge and
Alexandra, his nurses, in the gardens of Sallust, at
Rome.
Sculptor ; supposed to be Ctesilaus, contemporary of
Phidias, B. c. 440 ; or by Pyeomachus, b. c. 240, in
bronze, of which the original is a copy.
Height, 2ft. Sin.
Restorations: right hand; said to be by Michael Angelo
Buonarroti.
“ Behold ! where, in his nerv’d and naked might,
Bushes the circus champion to the fight;
Stretches the gaunt arm in its sweeping length ;
Starts from each limb the eloquence of strength ;
On the bent brow pride, power, and conquest reign ;
From the curved lip the spirit breathes disdain ;
And all the savage, in his sternest mood.
Speaks from the form unawed and unsubdued.
Where, ’mid yon puny race of courts can be,
Son of the woods! the champion meet for thee ?
“ The strife is o’er. Ev’n as a broken bow,
Nerveless and spent, the Terrible lies low !
He leans upon his hand—the lion crest
Bows to the dust; and from the untam’d breast
Falls drop by drop, life’s tide; the eye is dim ;
And o’er the buckler droops the giant limb ;
And death is on the mighty. Aye, thou proud
And guilty city, let thy ruthless crowd
Pour o’er their prey the mockery of their mirth !
Blood with those echoes calls forth from the earth ;
And Heav’n full soon shall answer.”
Bulwer.


I see before me the Gladiator lie:
He leans upon his hand—his manly brow
Consents to death, but conquers agony,
And his drooped head sinks gradually low
And through his side the last drops, ebbing slow
From the red gash, fall heavy, one by one,
Like the first of a thunder shower ; and now
The arena swims around him—he is gone
Ere ceased the inhuman shout which hailed the wretch who won.
“He heard it, but he heeded not—his eyes
Were with his heart, and that was far away :
He recked not of the life he lost, nor prize,
But where his rude hut by the Danube lay,
There were his young barbarians all at play,
There was their Dacian mother—he, their sire.
Butchered to make a Roman holiday—
All this rushed with his blood. Shall he expire
And unavenged?—Arise, ye Goths, and glut your ire.”
—Byron, “ Childe Harold,” iv. 140.
Supported on his shorten’d arm he leans,
Prone, agonising ; with incumbent fate
Heavy declines his head ; yet, dark beneath
The suffering feature, sullen vengeance lowers,
Shame, indignation, unaccomplished rage;
And still the cheated eye expects his fall.”
—Thomson, “ Liberty,” iv. 157.
“ Single combat at funerals was common.”—Homer, iii. 23.
This statue, although usually known as that of a gladiator, and
invested accordingly with many charming poetical associations, is
supposed to be that of a herald. Ingenious conjectures suggest
Polyphonies, herald of Laius, King of Thebes, killed by OEdipus,
with his master; or Copreas, herald of Eurystheus, massacred by the
Athenians, —see Homer, 11. xv. 639 ; Apollod. i. 5,1; Eurip. Heraclidae :
or Anthemocritus, an Athenian herald, killed by the Megareans,—see
Pausanias, i. 9. Men who engaged in single combat are mentioned in
Athemeus, iv. 41, as known in early times in Greece; but they do not
appear to be of the class known in Italy as gladiators, first composed of
captives in war, slaves, and condemned malefactors,— see Cicero, Letters
to Atticus, iv. 4; Livy, xxiii. 30, xxix. 46; Dion. Cassius, xxxvii. 8 ;
Pliny, Nat. Hist, xxxiii. 3 ; Valer. Max. ii. 4,7; Suetonius, Csesar, 10.
Reasons adduced in support of this view are, that the Greeks wore the
beard until the age of Alexander the Great, who suggested that his
Macedonian soldiers should shave, see Ovid, Fast. ii. 30; Athenams, xiii.
18; Plutarch, Apophth. 180. In Homer, 10, Nestor talks of a razor’s
edge ; but Dolon in the same book tries to touch the beard of Diomede
when entreating that his life may be spared. This figure is represented
beardless. Gladiators did not carry a trumpet nor wear a cord round
the neck, as heralds in the Olympic games were used to do. There


is, however, more probability in the suggestion that it represents a
Celtic or barbarian soldier or messenger wearing the torques , or collar.
Gladiators were first exhibited in Rome, A. U. c. 490, B. c. 264. Ctesilaus
flourished about 176 years before that time. If this statue be his work
it cannot represent a Roman gladiator.
See Valer. Max. hi. 4, 7; Winckel. ii. 241, note to French edition.
GLADIATOR, The Fighting, or Borghese.
Presented by James Murphy, Esquire.
Original in the Louvre, Paris.
Found, a.d. 1503, at Capo d’Anzio, the ancient Antium - r
placed in the Villa Borghese.
Sculptor: Agasias, or Hegesias, son of Dositheus of
Ephesus; flourished b. c. 490.
Height, from left foot to head, sft.
Restorations : right arm and right ear.
“Of raging aspect, rushed impetuous forth
The Gladiator. Pitiless his look,
And each keen sinew braced, the storm of war,
Ruffling, o’er all his nervous body frowns.”
—Thomson, “Liberty,” iv. 152.
Notwithstanding the commonly received opinion that this figure
represents a gladiator, it has been suggested that it should rather be
considered to be that of a foot-soldier contending with a horseman. A
conjecture is offered that it is intended for Achilles fighting with
Penthesilea, Queen of the Amazons, who assisted the Trojans, and was
slain by him.
See Winckelmann, ii. 434; Thiersch.
GRACES. Aglaia, Euphrosynb, and Thalia.
Original in the Collection of the Duke of Bedford (!),
Sculptor: Antonio Canova ; born at Passagno, iu
Italy, a.d. 1757; died a.d. 1822.
Height, sft. 2|in.
Restorations :
“ Eurynome, from ocean sprung, to Jove
The beauteous Graces bore, inspiring love,
Aglaia and Euphrosyne the fair,
And thou, Thalia, of a graceful air.”—Hesiod, Theog,
“ Daughters of Jove.
From them flow all the decencies of life.
Without them nothing pleases. Virtue’s self
Admired not loved : and those on whom they smile,
Great though they be, and wise, and beautiful,
Shine forth with double lustre.” Rogers,


“ Great Aglaia, hear my lay
Sweet Euphrosyne, ye daughters
Of the god of strongest sway ;
Hear, Thalia, queen of song.”
—Translation by Morice.
“ O worshipful
Aglaia and Euphrosyne, who love
The sounds of song, ye daughters
Born to Zeus the king,
Of gods themselves, my invocation hear ;
And thou,
Thalia, who dost music’s blossoms cull,
On our procession now
Look kindly as it goes
To render thanks for good success
On tripping toes
In Lydian style
Asopichus I came to sing.”
—Translation by Baring.
See Pindar, Olymp. xiv; Horace, Od. i. 4, iii. 21.
CREEK SLAVE.
Presented to the Trustees by Major-General Valiant.
Original in possession of Albert Grant, Esquire, Albion-
street, Hyde Park.
Sculptor: Hiram Powers, bom in the United States
1805.
Height, sft. 2in.
HERCULES and OMPHALE.
Presented to the Trustees by Charles Hotson Ebden,
Esquire.
Original in the London University.
Sculptor : John Flaxman.
Height: Hercules (sitting), 6ft.-gin.; Omphale, 6ft. lin.
Restorations; the torso of Hercules was restored by
Flaxman ; he added the figure of Omphale.
The history and labours of the demigod, Hercules, are known.
Omphale was Queen of Lydia ; to her Hercules submitted himself as a
slave for three years, in order to expiate his crime of having mui’dered
Iphitus.
Plutarch, Theseus ; Lucian, Dial. Deor. xiii; Homer, Odys. xxvi. 14;
Propertius, lib. iv. xi.
HORSE’S HEAD.
School of Phidias, Athens.


ILISSUS.
School of Phidias, Athens.
INNOCENCE.
Presented to the Trustees by Henry Arthur Smith,
Esquire.
Original in Collection of Pearce, Esquire.
Sculptor; John Henry Foley; born at Dublin 1818.
Height, sft.
JASON.
Original in the Louvre. For some time known as
“ Cincinnatus.” Purchased by Louis XIV. and
removed from the Villa Negroni, at Rome, to Versailles.
Found A. D. 1814, at Tivoli.
Sculptor;
Height, 4ft. Sin.
Restorations : right hand and part of arm, left arm.
The head is not of the same marble as the rest of the
figure, probably supplied from another statue. It is
said, also, that the ploughshare was added.
Son of AEson, descendant of AEolus. Pelias, brother of AEson,
ruled in lolcus. He was warned by an oracle that one of the AEolidae
would kill him. He ordered their destruction. Jason alone escaped.
The oracle again warned Pelias to beware of a man with but one sandal.
On the invitation of Pelias, Jason attended a sacrifice to Neptune. In
crossing the River Amaurus, on the bank of which he lived as a
husbandman, he lost one of his sandals. Pelias, alarmed, sent him on
an expedition to Colchis, to bring the golden fleece. He sailed in the
ship “ Argo.” His success and ultimate return with Medea, and the
death of Pelias, are described differently by the numerous authors who
treat of this uncertain portion of history.
—Apollodorus, i. 9; Ovid. Metam. vii; Winckel. ii. 390.
JULIAN DE MEDICI.
Presented to the Trustees by John Vesey Fitzgerald
Leslie Foster, Esquire.
Original placed on the Mausoleum erected to his
memory by Pope Clement VII, in the Church of
St. Lorenzo, Florence.
Sculptor : Michael Angelo Buonarroti.
Height, sft. 7|in.
Duke of Nemours, youngest son of Lorenzo the Magnificent and
brother of Leo X. Born, 1478; died, 1516.


LAOCOOX.
Original in the Vatican.
Found, A. d. 1506, near the baths of Titus, Rome.
Sculptors : Agesander of Rhodes, Athenodorus, his
son, and Polydorus, supposed also to be his son.
They flourished, according to Winckelmann, ii. 289,.
in the time of Alexander the Great, about b. c. 330
according to Lessing and Thiersch, in the time of
Titus, about a. d. 76.
Height of Laocoon, sft. 9in., to top of hand 6ft. 10in.;,
of elder Son, 3ft. 10in.; younger Son, 3ft. Tin.
Restorations : the right arm, in terracotta, by Bernini;
right arm by Montorsoli; the arms and hands of
each of the Sons by Cornacchini. —Perkins.
See Pliny, who says he saw the group in the palace of Titus.
Son of Priam, Priest of Apollo, Laocoon opposed the admission within
the walls of Troy of the wooden horse, which was contrived to
introduce inside it some Greeks. His opposition drew on him the
vengeance of the gods who had resolved on the destruction of the city.
A head of the principal figure is in the collection of the Due
d’Aremberg, at Brussels, said by some to have belonged to the original.
See Pliny, Hist. Nat. xxxvi. 4; II Yaticano, iv. 214 ; Goethe ; Spence,
Polymetis.
The first restoration of this was by Bandinelli, in wax. He was
ordered by Pope Clement YII. to make a copy of the group for Francis
the First of France. The Pope was so much pleased with it, that he
kept it and placed it in his family palace at Florence.
The group was injured in a.d. 1527 by the Germans and Spaniards,
so that probably Bernini’s or Bandinelli’s restoration was undone, and 1
Montorsoli’s renovation became necessary. —Grimm, “Life of Michael
Angelo,” ii. 6 ; Appendix ii.
“ Laocoon, Neptune’s priest by lot that year,
With solemn pomp then sacrificed a steer;
When, dreadful to behold, from sea we spy’dl
Two serpents, ranked abreast, the seas divide >
And smoothly sweep along the swelling tide. J
Their flaming crests above the waves they show,
Their bellies seem to burn the seas below ;
Their speckled tails advance to steer their course,
And on the sounding shore the flying billows force.
And now the strand and now the plain they held.
Their ardent eyes with bloody streaks were filled ;
Their nimble tongues they brandished as they came,
And lick’d their hissing jaws that sputtered flame.
We fled amazed. Their destin’d way they take.
And to Laocoon and his children make. [ “ And


“ And first around the tender boys they wind,
Then with their sharpen’d fangs their limbs and bodies grind,.
The wretched father, running to their aid
With pious haste, but vain, they next invade ;
Twice round his waist their winding volumes roll’d
And twice about his gasping throat they fold ;
The priest thus doubly chok’d their crests divide.
And towering o’er his head in triumph ride.
With both his hands he labours at the knots,
His holy fillets the blue venom blots ;
His roaring fills the flitting air around.
“ Thus when an ox receives a glancing wound
He breaks his bands, the fatal alter flies.
And with loud bellowings breaks the yielding skies.”
—Virgil, “AEneid,” ii. 200.—8 y Dryden
Terrible ! Mark and tremble ! —Fold by fold
See round the writhing sire the enormous serpents roll’d !
Mark the stern pang—the clench’d despairing clasp—
The wild limbs struggling with that fatal grasp,
The deep convulsion of the labouring breath —
The intense and gathering agony of death.
Yet’mid the mortal’s suffering still is view’d
The haughty spirit shaken —not subdued :
Tho’ nature faint, tho’ every fibre burst,
Scath’d, stifled, crush’d, let vengeance wreak its worst;
Fate—terror —Hell—let loose your powers of ill,
Wring the rack’d form—the soul can scorn you still.”
—Bulwer.
At last her utmost masterpiece she found
That Maro fired. The miserable sire
Wrapt with his sons in Fate’s severest grasp ;
The serpents, twisting round, their stringent folds
Inextricable tie. Such passion here,
Such agonies, such bitterness of pain,
Seems so to tremble through the tortured stone
That the touch’d heart engrosses all the view.
“ Almost unmark’d the best proportions pass
That ever Greece beheld ; and seen alone,
On the rapt eye the imperious passions seize :
The father’s double pangs, both for himself
And sons convuls’d ; to Heaven his rueful look,
Imploring aid and half accusing, cast;
His fell despair, with indignation mix’d,
As the strong curling monsters from his side
His full extended fury cannot tear.
“ More tender touched, with varied art, his sons
All the soft rage of younger passions show :
In a boy’s helpless fate one sinks oppressed !
While, yet unpierced, the frighted other tries
His foot to steal out of the horrid twine.”
- Thomson, “Liberty,’’ iv. 185


“ Or, turning to the Vatican, go see
Laocoon’s torture dignifying pain—
A father’s love and mortal’s agony
With an immortal’s patience blending : vain
The struggle ; vain, against the coiling strain
And gripe, and deepening of the dragon’s grasp,
The old man’s clench ; the long-envenom’d chain
Rivets the living links—the enormous asp
Enforces pang on pang, and stifles gasp on gasp.”
—Byron, “ Childe Harold,” iv. IGO.
LYNCEUS and HYPERMNESTRA.
Sculptor: Charles Summers.
Presented to the Trustees by the Sculptor.
Height, sft. 4in.
Lynceus. One of the fifty sons of AEgyptus, King of Arabia, and
Argyphia, married to
Hypermnestra. One of the fifty daughters of Danaus, King of Argos.
Commanded by their father to put their husbands to death on the
night of their marriage. She alone (Fortissima Tyndaridarum, Hor.
Serm. i. 1, 100) spared her spouse. According to one of the numerous
traditions she assisted him to escape. He reached Lynceia ; a lighted
torch displayed by him there announced to her, at Argos, his safe
arrival. This event was celebrated annually by a torchlight festival,
Pausanias, ii. 25, 4.
After some time Danaus was persuaded to release his daughter from
confinement, and deliver her to her husband. On her father’s death he
succeeded to the throne of Argos.
Ovid devotes one of his Heroic Epistles (Heroid. xiv. 1) to the
subject of her communicating with him while she was detained by her
father. In it she justifies her compassionate behaviour ;—“ Femina
sum et virgo, natura mitis et aunis.’’ Woman I am, and virgin,
merciful by nature and my years.
See Pausanias, ii. 16, 19, 20, 21, 25; x. 10, 2 ; Apollonius Rhodius,
ii. 806; hi. 1315; Horace, Serm. i. 1, 100 ; Ovid, Epist. xiv. 55.
MARS (Resting).
Sculptor:
Height, 4ft. IGin.
MERCURY.
Original in the Collection of the Prince of Augustenberg.
A second was executed for Lord Ashburton.
Sculptor: Bertel Thorwaldsen ; born at Copen-
hagen, a.d. 1770; worked for many years at Rome;
died at his birthplace, a. d. 1844.
Height, sft. s|in.


“ O Mercury, great Atlas’ son
Skill’d with persuasive voice to tame
Fierce men from savage nature won
To learn th’ arena’s graceful game :
I sing thee, messenger of Jove,
Inventor of the tuneful lyre.
Cunning to hide whate’er thy love
Of theft and frolic may acquire.”
—Horace, i. Ode 10; hi. Ode 11.
See Homer, Hymn ii. by Shelley; Apollodorus, 310.
MERCURY.
Presented to the Trustees by Mrs. Williams.
Original in the Royal Gallery, Florence.
Sculptor: John of Bologna, born at Douay, a. d.
1524; died at Florence, A. D. 1608.
Height, 4ft. Sin.
The Roman Mercury was somewhat inconsiderately identified with
the Greek Hermes, son of Jupiter and Maia, daughter of Atlas. He
was Herald of the gods ; to him was attributed the invention of the
Alphabet, Astronomy, Music, Numbers, Weights and Measures, &c. the
encouragement of Commerce, protection of Travellers, and several
other functions.
“Maia of Atlas born and mighty Jove,
Join’d in the sacred bands of mutual love,
From whom behold the glorious Hermes rise
A god renown’d, the herald of the skies.”
—Hesiod, Theog. 938.
MINERVA GIUSTINIANI.
Presented to the Trustees by Major-General Sir
Edward Macarthur, C.B.
Original in the Vatican.
Found at Rome, near the ruin on the Esquiline, called
Minerva Medica.
Sculptor:
Height, 7ft. Ijin.
Restorations :
It was purchased by Lucien Bonaparte, who sold it to the Pope; but
it still retains the name of the family of the first possessors.
MOTHER and CHILD ; or Maternal Affection.
Presented to the Trustees by William Fletcher,
Esquire.
Original in the Collection of Joseph Neeld, Esquire.
Sculptor; Edward Hodges Baily ; born at Bristol
1788 ; died at Holloway, London, 1867.
Height, 2ft. llin.


MUSIDORA.
Presented to the Trustees by Mrs. Moor.
Original in the Exhibition of 1850.
Sculptor: James Legrew; born at Caterham, Surrey,.
1803; died at Kensington, London, 1857.
Height, sft.
An imaginary person introduced by Thomson in his poem of the
Seasons.
“ Lo ! conducted hy the laughing Loves,
This cool retreat his Musidora sought.
Warm in her cheek the sultry season glowed ;
And, rob’d in loose array, she came to bathe
Her fervent limbs in the refreshing stream.”
—Thomson, “Summer,” 1286.
NARCISSUS.
Presented to the Trustees by Mrs. Westby.
Original in the Collection of Her Majesty the Queen,
at Osborne.
Sculptor: William Theed; born, 1764; died, 1817.
Height, 4ft. 11 in.
This youth, son of Cephissus and the nymph Liriope, fell in love
with his image reflected in a fountain, pined and died. His body was
transformed into the flower which hears his name.
“ For him the Naiads and the Dryads mourn,
Whom the sad echo answers in her turn ;
And now the sister nymphs prepare his urn,
When looking for his corpse, they only found
A rising stalk with yellow blossoms crowned.”
—Ovid, “ Metam.” iii. 508.
PERSEUS.
Original in Vatican.
Sculptor; Antonio Canova ; born at Passagno, in
Italy, A. d. 1757 ; died, a. d. 1822.
Height, 7ft. 6in,
Son of Jupiter and Danae. Banished from and afterwards regained
the kingdom of Argos. He undertook to bring to Polydectes, King of
Seriphus, the head of Medusa, which possessed the property of con-
verting into stone whosoever looked upon it. Medusa \vas the only
mortal of the three Gorgons, daughters of Phorcys and Ceto ; their
names were, Stheno, Euryale, and Medusa.
See Hesiod, Theog. 276; Ovid, Metam. iv. 617.


POLYHYMNIA.
Presented to the Trustees by William Kaye, Esquire.
Original in Vatican ; removed from the Villa Mattel,
a. d. 1777, by Pope Clement XIV. Ganganelli.
Found at
Sculptor:
Height, sft. IGin.
Restorations ;
PUDICITIA.
Presented to the Trustees by Miss Barry.
Original in Vatican, Home.
Found at Herculaneum by the Prince Elbeuf, who sent
this and two others to Prince Eugene ; at his death
they were sold to the King of Poland for <£9oo.
Sculptor :
Height 6ft. sin.
Restorations : portion of drapery on left side.
An impersonation of modesty deified and worshipped in Greece and
at Rome, where she had two sanctuaries—one erected to Pudicitia, in
the Forum Boarium, near the temple of Hercules ; the other to Pudicitia
Pleheia, in the Yicus Longus. This figure has been supposed to repre-
sent Livia, wife of Augustus, died a. I). 29 ; or Sabina, wife of Hadrian,
died A. D. 137 ; but there is no sufficient authority for either position.
Spence, in his Polymetis, assumes that it is intended for Juno Matrona.
Winckelmann asserts that it resembles the Muse Melpomene, as is
displayed by the cothurnus.
See Winckelmann, ii. 392 ; Pausanias, i. 17; Livy, x. 23.
SHAKESPEARE (William).
From the Monument in Westminster Abbey.
Sculptor ; Peter Schbemakers, born at Antwerp, 1691 ;
died at Antwerp about 1770.
Height, sft. 2in.
“The Monument, which testifies the genius of Shakespeare, in
Westminster Abbey, was erected in 1741, out of the receipts from two
benefits played for the purpose, at each of the Theatres Koval, and the
additional contributions of eminent men, among whom the Earl of
Burlington, Pope, Garrick, &c. took the lead. It consists of a full-sized
statue, leaning on a pillar, in a pensive humour, with a scroll in front,
on which are inscribed his own immortal lines, descriptive of our
fugitive mortality:
‘ The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces,
The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
Yea, all which it inherits, shall dissolve,
And, like the baseless fabric of a vision,
Leave not a Avreck behind.’ [ “ The


“ The pedestal is decorated with the crowned heads of Henry V r
Eichard 11, and Queen Elizabeth. The design, which was happily
drawn by Kent, affects to preserve the hard, his person, dress, and air,
as faithfully as it is possible to collect such peculiarities from the
memorials transmitted to posterity.”—Smyth, “Monuments of St.
Paul’s Cathedral and Westminster Abbey,” vol. ii. 835.
SLAVE (The Listening). Known as the Arrotino or
Remoleur, or the Whetter ; also as the Spy.
Original in the Royal Gallery, Florence.
Found at Rome, in the Medici Gardens.
Sculptor ;
Height, 3ft.
Restorations : fingers of each hand, and the portion of
the knife between the right hand and the whetstone.
The conjectures respecting this statue are various. By some it is
supposed to represent the soothsayer A coins or Attus Karins, who
carried into execution the idea in the mind of King Tarquin, and
severed, by command of the King, the whetstone on which he was
sharpening his razor.—Livy, i. 36. By others, the slave who overheard
the plot into which the two sons of Junius Brutus entered for the
restoration of Tarquin. Some suggest that it is meant for the slave
who overheard the conspiracy of Catiline; others, for the Scythian
slave, commanded by Apollo to flay Marsyas when vanquished by the
god in a musical contest. —See Hobhouse; Notes to 4th Canto of
“Childe Harold.” While Lanzi asserts that the man is no other than
Licinus, the celebrated barber of Julius Caesar. The instrument in
his hands does not seem very suitable for either operation.
—Cicero, De Nat. Deor. ii. 3 ; iii. 6.
SOPHOCLES.
Presented to the Trustees by Colonel Barry, R. A., C.B.
Original in the Lateran, Rome.
Found at Terracina.
Sculptor ;
Height 6ft. Sin,
Greek Tragic Poet; born at Colonus, close to Athens, B. c. 495; died,
B. C. 405. He wrote 113, or, according to other accounts, 130 plays, of
which seven only are extant. They are “Antigone,” “Electra,”
“Trachiniae,” “OEdipusTyrannus,” “Ajax,” “Philoctetes,” “OEdipus
Coloneus.”
TAMBOURINE GIRL.
Presented to the Trustees by James Purves, Esquire.
Original at
Sculptor ; Canton.
Height 4ft. B|in.


TERPSICHORE. (The Muse of Dance and Song.)
Original in Gallery of Count Soinmariva, at Paris.
Sculptor; Antonio Canova.
Height sft. 6jin.
See Euterpe.
THESEUS.
Son of AEgeus, King of x\thens.
School of Phidias, Athens.
See The Fates.
TORSO. Life-size (Greek).
Ho. 1. Presented by James Murphy, Esquire.
No; 2. Presented by Marshall Wood, Esquire.
Original in the British Museum.
VENUS ANADYOMENE (Rising from the sea).
Presented to the Trustees by Edward William
Jeffreys, Esquire.
Original in Vatican, Rome.
Found at Salone, by the Spring of Aqua Virgine, about
eight miles from Rome.
Sculptor:
Height, 2ft. 7|in.
Restorations :
The Goddess of Beauty, Mother of Cupid; identified with the
Aphrodite of the Greeks, Mylitta of the Babylonians, Alitta of the
Arabians, and Mitra of the Persians; Astaroth, goddess of th
Zidonians, 1 Kings xvi. 32 ; Jezebel, Queen of Ahab, was daughter of
Ethbael, King of the Zidonians, 1 Kings xvi. 31.
See Homer, Hymn iii; Herod, i. 131; Lucretius, i; Ovid, Fasti iv. 15,
62, 143; Grote, Greece, i. 72.
“ Till now swift circling a white foam arose
From that immortal substance, and a nymph
Was quicken’d in the midst, the trifling waves
First bore her to Cythera’s heavenly coast ;
Then reach’d she Cyprus girt with flowing seas,
And forth emerg’d a goddess in the charms
Of awful beauty. Where her delicate feet
Had press’d the sands, green herbage flow’ring sprang.
Her Aphrodite gods and mortals name
The foam-bom goddess, and her name is known
As Cythera with the blooming wreath,
For that she touch’d Cythera’s flowery coast;
And Cypris, for that on the Cyprian shore
She rose amidst the multitude of waves.
And Philomedea from the source of life.”
—Hesiod Theog. 190.


■“ Orta salo, suscepta solo, patre edita coelo
AEneadum genitrix, hie habito, alma Venus.”
—Ausonius, Epig. xxxiii.
“ Emersam pelagi nuper genitalibus undis,
Cyprin Apellei cerne laboris opus,
Ut complexa manu madidos sales aequora crines
Humidulis spumas stringet utraque comis.
Jam tibi nos Cypri, Juno inquit, et innuba Pallas,
Cedimus, et formae praemia deferimus.”
—Ausonius, Epig. cvi.
Apelles painted his picture of Venus Anadyomene from the Athenian
Phryne, as did Praxiteles his statue of the Cnidian Venus.
Athenaeus. xiii. 59.
VENUS I)E MEDICI.
Presented by James Murphy, Esquire.
Original in the Royal Gallery, Florence, to which
place it was transferred from the Villa Medici, 1680.
It is supposed to be an imitation of the Cnidian
Statue of Praxiteles.
Found at Hadrian’s Villa, Tibur.
Sculptor; said to be Praxiteles. The name Cleomenes
on the pedestal is generally supposed to be a forgery,
as he lived between b. c. 363 and b. c. 146.
Height, sft.
Restorations : right arm, the whole left arm from the
elbow downward, by Bernini. —Pliny, xxxvi. 4. 10.
The original, of which that in the Florentine Gallery may be a copy,
was sold by the sculptor’ to the people of Cnidus, in Caria. It stood
with a Venus by Phidias, a Cupid by Praxiteles, a Diana by
Cephisodotus, and a group of Mars and Cupid, now in the Villa
Ludovisi, in the Portico of Octavia, dedicated by Augustus to his sister.
It was removed with the statues of Minerva of Lindus, in Rhodes, and
of Juno, of Samos, to Constantinople. All three, with other works of
art of inestimable value, were destroyed by fire in the reign of
Justinian, on the occasion of the riots between the Beveroi, or the
Blue faction, and the Hpacrti/oi, or Green faction, a. d. 532. The
figures on the Dolphin at the base are (Eros and Anteros) Cupids, sons
of Venus.
Hesiod, Theog. 201; Pliny, xxxvi. 4; Gibbon, “ Decline and Fall,”
xl; and authorities there cited; Horace, Odes, iv. 1,5; Cicero,
De Nat. Deor. 71.
"Epos and Hp,epos or the Cupids Celestial and Terrestrial of Plato.
The Romans gave to Venus Cupido and Jocus.—Horace, Carm. 2, 33.
Eros and Anteros. —Cicero, De Nat. Deor. 23.


Ovid, Fast. sv. 1, alludes to the twin sons of Venus, but does not
name them.
“ The Queen of Love arose, as from the deep
She sprung, in all the melting pomp of charms.
Bashful she bends, her well-taught look aside
Turns in enchanting guise ; where dubious mix
Vain, conscious beauty, a dissembled sense
Of modest shame and slippery looks of love.
The gazer grows enamoured ; and the stone,
As if exulting in its conquest, smiles.”
—Thomson, “ Liberty,” iv. 175.
“ There, too, the goddess loves in stone, and fills
The air around with beauty ; we inhale
The ambrosial aspect, which, beheld, instils
Part of its immortality : the veil
Of heaven is half undrawn ; within the pale
We stand, and in that form and face behold
What mind can make, when Nature’s self would fail;
And to the fond idolaters of old
Envy the innate flash which such a soul could mould :
“We gaze and turn away, and know not where,
Dazzled and drunk with beauty, till the heart
Reels with its fulness ; there—for ever there—
Chain’d to the chariot of triumphal art,
We stand as captives, and would not depart.
Away! there need no words, nor terms precise,
The paltry jargon of the marble mart,
Where pedantry gulls folly—we have eyes :
8100d —pulse—and breast, confirm the Dardan shepherd’s prize.”
Byron, “Childe Harold,” iv. 49, 50.
VENUS or DIONE.
Original in the British Museum.
Found, a. d. 1776, at baths of Claudius, at Ostia, by
Mr. Gavin Hamilton.
Sculptor:
Height 6ft. Him., including the plinth 4fin.
Restorations: left arm, right hand, tip of nose.
It has not been determined whether this be the statue of Venus, or
of the female Titan Dione, daughter of Tethys, who, according to
various writers, was the mother of Venus by Jupiter.
See Hesiod, Theog. 353; Homer, 11. v. 370.


VENUS GENETRIX. (Caesar’s Venus.)
Original in the Louvre.
Found at
Sculptor; Praxiteles (?). This is supposed to be the
draped Venus of Cos, which the inhabitants purchased
from him.
Height, sft. 4in.
Restorations:
See Ausonius Epig. xci, xcii.
VENUS VICTRIX. Called “Venus of Milo.”
Original in the Louvre, Paris, presented by the Marquis
de Riviere.
Found, a. D. 1820, at Milo, an island in the AEgean Sea,
the ancient Melos.
Sculptor; Scopas ; flourished in the fourth century B. c.
Height, 6ft. Sin.
She received from Paris the prize for her superior loveliness in her
contention with Juno and Minerva on Mount Ida.—Euripides, Iph. in
Aul. 1290 ; Lucian, Dial. Deor. xx.
“ Idalian Aphrodite beautiful,
Fresh as the foam new bathed in Paphian wells,
With rosy slender fingers backward drew,
From her warm brows and bosom her deep hair
Ambrosial, golden round her lucid throat
And shoulder ; from the violets her light foot
Shone rosy-white, and o’er her rounded form,
Between the shadows of the vine-bunches,
Floated the glowing sunlights, as she moved.”
—Tennyson, “OEnone.”
VENUS.
Original in the Pitti Palace, Florence.
Sculptor ; Antonio Canova : born at Passagno in Italy,
a. d. 1757; died, a. d. 1822.
Height, sft. 6in.
VENUS.
Presented to the Trustees by Charles Edward
Bright, Esquire.
Original in possession of Mr. Robert Berthon Preston,
of Liverpool.
Sculntor : John Gibson; born at Gyffin, near Conway,
1790.
Died at Rome, 27th January, 1866.
Height, sft. 6Un.


VENUS.
Presented to the Trustees by William Mitchell,
Esquire, R. Thompson, Esquire, and J. Richardson,
Esquire.
Original executed for Lord Lucan, 1824.
Sculptor; Bertel Thorwaldsen : born at Copen-
hagen, A.d. 1770; worked for many years at Rome;
died at his birthplace, A. d. 1844.
Height, sft. 5Hn.
YOUTH invoking the Celestial Gods.
Original in Berlin.
Found in the River Tiber at Rome.
Sculptor:
Height, 4ft. 3Hn.
Restorations:
The invocation of the infernal deities was performed with the palms
of the hands turned down, and other ceremonies were conducted in the
like inverted order.
—Virgil, AEn. ii. 153, 688; vi. 235-45; ix. 16.
■«#=+


CHRONOLOGICAL ARRANGEMENT
THE CASTS OF STATUES.
HEROIC PERIOD, from b. c. 550 to b. c. 390.
The Amazon.
Gladiator, Fighting.
Horse’s Head.
Discobolus, Standing.
Discobolus, Throwing Quoit.
The Fates.
Ilissus.
Theseus.
Gladiator, Dying.
ALEXANDER the GREAT PERIOD, from b. c.
TO B. c. 146.
Apollo, The Belvidere,
Apollo, Sauroktonos.
The Athlete.
The Boxers.
Venus Anadyomene.
Venus de Medici.
Venus or Dione.
Venus Genetrix.
Venus Victrix.
Faun, Dancing.
Faun (Rondinini Faun).
ROMAN PERIOD,
FROM
B. C. 186 TO A. D. 180.
Antinous.
Oanephora.
Castor and Pollux.
Cupid and Psyche,
Flora.
Germanicus.
Laocoon.
Pudicitia.
FIFTEENTH and SIXTEENTH CENTURIES,
Cupid.
Julian de Medici.
Mercury. By John of
Bologna.


ANTIQUES of
Achilles.
Adonis.
Apollino.
Ariadne.
Aristides.
Bacchus and Ampelus.
Bacchus and Ariadne.
Boy extracting Thorn.
Cyparissus.
Demosthenes.
Anatomical Statue.
A Bacchante.
Diana. By Benzoni.
Dorothea.
Eve at the Fountain.
The Graces.
Greek Slave.
Hercules and Omphale.
Innocence.
Lynceus and Hypermnestra.
Mercury. By Thorvaldsen.
Uncertain Date.
Diana “ a la Biche.’
Diana, Robin"
Euterpe.
Jason.
Minerva Giustiniani.
Polyhymnia.
MODERN TIMES.
Mother and Child.
Musidora.
Narcissus.
Perseus.
Shakespeare.
Tambourine Girl.
Terpsichore.
Slave, Listening.
Sophocles.
Youth invoking the Celestial
Gods.
Venus. By Canova.
Venus. By Gibson.
Venus. By Thorvaldsen.


STATUETTES.
HANDEL, George Frederic. Musical Composer.
Born at Halle, in the Duchy of Magdeburg, Lower
Saxony, 23rd February, 1685.
Died at London, 13th April, 1759.
Presented by the Subscribers.
HERCULES.
Presented by James Murphy, Esquire.
PRIESTLEY, Dr. Joseph. Theologian and Author.
Born at Fieldhead, near Leeds, 13th March, 1733.
Died at Northumberland, Pennsylvania, 6th February,
1804.
From the Statue by F. J. Williamson, erected at
Birmingham.
Presented by Dr. Aubrey Bowen.
ABORIGINES of VICTORIA. Sixteen Casts of Heads,
by Charles Summers.
Presented by the Commissioners for the Intercolonial
Exhibition at Melbourne, 1866-67.
ALBERT. The illustrious Prince Consort, Husband of Her
Most Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria.
Born at Ehrenberg, 26th August, 1819.
Died at Windsor, 14th December, 1861.
APOLLO. One of the great divinities of the Greeks,
according to Homer, the son of Zeus and Leto.
Original in the British Museum. This bust was obtained
by Mr. Townley, from Cardinal Alexander Albani, in
the year 1773.


AUGUSTUS, Caius Julius Caesar Octavianus, the
Young. First Roman Emperor.
Born at Yelitrae, Consulate of Cicero, b. c. 63.
Died at Nola, 19th August, a. d. 14.
Presented by Master Jeffreys.
BACON, Francis, Lord Verulam ; Viscount St. Albans.
Lawyer, Statesman, Philosopher; Lord High Chan-
cellor of England in the reign of James I.
Born at London, 22nd January, 1561.
Died in the Earl of Arundel’s house, at Highgate, 9th
April, 1626.
BRIGHT, John. Statesman.
Born at Greenbank, near Rochdale, Lancashire, 16th
November, 1811.
BROUGHAM, Henry, Lord. Statesman.
Born at Edinburgh, 19th September, 1778.
Died at Cannes, France, 7th May, 1868.
BRUNEL, Sir Marc Isambard, Knt. Engineer; invented
block-making machinery in Portsmouth Dockyard ;
designed and executed the Thames Tunnel, and many
other works of great ingenuity and usefulness.
Born at Hacqueville, in Normandy, 25th April, 1769.
Died at London, 12th December, 1849.
BUFFON, George Louis le Clerc, Comte de. Naturalist.
Born at Montbard, in Burgundy, 7th September, 1707.
Died at Paris, 6th April, 1788.
BUONARROTI, Michael Angelo. Architect, Sculptor,
Painter.
Born at Castel Caprese, Tuscany, 6th March, 1474.
Died at Rome, 17th February, 1564.
BURKE, Edmund. Philosopher, Statesman, and Orator.
Born at Dublin, Ist January, 1730.
Died at Beaconsfield, 9th July, 1797.


BYRON, George Gordon, Lord. Poet.
Bom at London, 22nd January, 1788.
Died at Missolonghi, in Greece, 19th April, 1824.
Original by Baily.
CAESAR, Catus Julius. Roman Emperor.
Born at Rome, 12th July, b. c, 100.
Assassinated in Senate House, Rome, 15th March,.
b. c. 44.
Original in British Museum ; purchased in 1818. In
Luni marble.
CARLYLE, Thomas. Essayist, Biographer, and Historian.
Born in the parish of Middlebie, near the village of
Ecclefechan, Dumfriesshire, 4th December, 1795.
CHANTREY, Sir Francis Legatt, Knt , R.A. Sculptor.
Born at Jordanthorpe, Derbyshire, 7th April, 1781.
Died at Pimlico, London, 25th November, 1841.
CHARLES I. King of England and Scotland.
Born at Dunfermline, 19th November, 1600.
Beheaded, 30th January, 1649.
CHATHAM, William Pitt, Earl of. Statesman and
Orator.
Born in Cornwall, 15th November, 1708.
Died at London, 11th May, 1778.
CLYTIE.
From the Antique in the British Museum.
Presented by James Murphy, Esquire.
COBDEN, Richard. Statesman.
Born at Dunford, near Midhurst, Sussex, 3rd June, 1804.
Died at London, 2nd April, 1865.
COLERIDGE, Samuel Taylor. Poet.
Born at Ottery St. Mary, Devonshire, 21st Oct. 1772.
Died at Highgate, 25th July, 1834.


COWPER, William. Poet.
Born at Berkhamstead, Herts, 26th November, 1731.
Died at Dereham, Norfolk, 25th April, 1800.
CROMWELL, Oliver. Protector of England.
Born at Huntingdon, 25th April, 1599.
Died at London, 3rd September, 1658.
CRUIKSHANK, George. Artist and Humourist.
Bom at London, 27th September, 1792.
Died at London, Ist February, 1878.
DEMOSTHENES. Greek Orator.
Born at Athens, b. c. 382.
Died in the Temple of Neptune, at Calauria, b. c. 322.
Original in the British Museum ; purchased in 1818.
DIANA. Robing. See Casts of Statues.
Presented by James Murphy, Esquire.
DIOGENES. Cynic Philosopher,
Born at Sinope, in Pontus, b. c. 412.
Died at Corinth, b. c. 323.
This Bust was bequeathed to the British Museum by
the late R. Payne Knight, Esquire. It is in
Pentelic marble.
DIOMEDES. One of the Homeric Heroes.
Presented by James Murphy, Esquire.
DRYDEN, John. Poet.
Born at Aldwinckle, Northamptonshire, 9th August,
1631.
Died at London, Ist May, 1700.
ELDON, John Scott, Earl of. Lord Chancellor of
England from 1801 to 1806, and from 1807 to 1827.
Born at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 4th June, 1751.
Died at London, 13th January, 1838.


FARADAY, Michael, Chemist and Natural Philosopher.
Born at Newington, Surrey, 22nd September, 1791.
Died at Hampton Court, 25th August, 1867.
FAWKNER, John Pascob, Founder of Melbourne.
Born at London, 20th October, 1792.
Died at Melbourne, 4th September, 1869.
FEMALE HEAD. Name unknown.
Best Greek Period.
Presented by Marshall Wood, Esquire.
FOX, Charles James. Statesman and Orator.
Born at London, 24th January, 1749.
Died at Chiswick, 13th September, 1806.
FRANKLIN, Benjamin. American Philosopher and
Statesman.
Born at Boston, Massachusetts, 17th January, 1706.
Died at Philadelphia, 17th April, 1790.
GLADSTONE, William Ewart. Statesman.
Born at Liverpool, 29th December, 1809.
•GOETHE, Johann Wolfgang von. Poet.
Born at Frankfort-on-the-Maine, 28th August, 1749.
Died at Weimar, 22nd March, 1832.
HADRIANUS, P. AElius. Fourteenth Roman Emperor.
Born at Rome, A. d. 76.
Reigned a. d. 117 to a.d. 138.
Original in the British Museum. Found at Hadrian’s
Villa, near Tivoli.
HANDEL, George Frederic. Musical Composer.
Born at Halle, in the Duchy of Magdeburg, Lower
Saxony, 23rd February, 1685.
Died at London, 13th April, 1759.


HARVEY, William. Physician.
Bom at Folkestone, Kent, Ist April, 1578.
Died at London, 3rd June, 1657.
HEALES, Richard. Statesman, Victoria.
Born at London, 1822.
Died at Melbourne, 19th June, 1864.
Original by Todt.
Presented by the Subscribers.
HERSCHEL, Sir William, Knt. Astronomer.
Born at Hanover, 15th November, 1738.
Died at Slough, near Windsor, 23rd August, 1822.
HOMER. Poet. Flourished, B. c. 1019 to b. c. 984.
Original found at Baiae, a. d. 1780,
HOVELL, Cart. William Hilton. Australian Explorer.
Born at Yarmouth, 26th April, 1786.
Died at Sydney, 1876.
HUNTER, John. Anatomist.
Born at Long Calderwood, near Glasgow, 1728.
Died at London, in St. George’s Hospital, 16th October.
1793.
Original by Chantrey.
INNOCENCE. In Parian.
Presented to the Trustees by Captain Lonsdale.
JOHNSON, Samuel, LL.D. Lexicographer.
Born at Lichfield, 18th September, 1709.
Died at London, 13th December, 1784.
JONES, Inigo. Architect.
Born at London, 1573.
Died at London, 21st June, 1652.
JUNO. One of the great divinities of the Greeks.


KEATS, John. Poet.
Born at Moorfields, London, 29th October, 1795.
Died at Rome, 23rd February, 1821.
LINNAEUS, Carl yon Linne. Naturalist.
Born at Rashult, Province of Smaland, Sweden, 13th
May, 1707.
Died at Hammarby, near Upsal, 10th January, 1778.
LOCKE, John. Philosopher.
Born at Wrington, in Somersetshire, 29th August, 1632.
Died at Oates, in Essex, 28th October, 1704.
MACAULAY, Thomas Babington, Lord. Historian and
Essayist.
Born at Rothley Temple, Leicestershire, 25th October,
1800.
Died at Campden Hill, London, 28th December, 1859.
MALE HEAD. Name unknown, probably one of the
Homeric Heroes.
Found in that part of Hadrian’s Villa called the
Pantanella, by Gavin Hamilton, 1771.
MALE HEAD. Name unknown. Best Greek Period.
Presented by Marshall Wood, Esquire.
MENDELSSOHN, Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy.
Musician.
Born at Hamburg, 3rd February, 1809.
Died at Leipsic, 4th November, 1847.
MILTON, John. Poet.
Born at London, 9th December, 1608.
Died at London, Bth November, 1674.
MOORE, Thomas. Poet.
Born at Dublin, 28th May, 1779.
Died at Sloperton Cottage, near Devizes, 26th February,
1852.


MULREADY, William. Artist.
Bom at Ennis, Ireland, 1786.
Died at Bayswater, 7th July, 1863.
NAPOLEON THE FIRST. Emperor of the French.
Born at Ajaccio, in Corsica, 15th August, 1769.
Died at St. Helena, sth May, 1821.
NELSON, Horatio, Viscount. Admiral.
Born at Burnham Thorpe, Norfolk, 29th September,
1758.
Killed at the Battle of Trafalgar, 21st October, 1805.
NERO, Lucius Domitius Nero Claudius Caesar.
Fifth Roman Emperor.
Born at Antium, A. D. 37.
Killed at Rome, a. d. 68.
The Original was brought from Athens by Dr. Askew,
in the year 1740.
NEWTON, Isaac. Philosopher and Astronomer,
Born at Woolsthorpe, Lincolnshire, 25th December,
1642.
Died at Kensington, London, 20th March, 1727.
O’CONNELL, Daniel. Statesman.
Born near Cahirciveen, Kerry, 6th August, 1775.
Died at Genoa, 15th May, 1847.
OWEN, Richard. Naturalist and Comparative Anatomist,
Superintendent of the Natural History Departments
in the British Museum.
Born at Lancaster, 20th July, 1804.
PALLADIO, Andrea, Architect.
Born at Vicenza, 30th November, 1518.
Died at Vicenza, 6th August, 1580.


PALMERSTON, Henry John Temple, Viscount.
Statesman.
Born at Westminster, 20tli October, 1784.
Died at Brockett Hall, Herts, 18th October, 1865.
PARKES, Sir Henry, K.C.M.G. Statesman of New
South Wales.
Born in the parish of Stone-leigh, Warwickshire,
27th May, 1815.
Presented by Sir James Martin.
PEEL, Sir Robert. Statesman.
Born at Bury, Lancashire, sth February, 1788.
Died at London, 2nd July, 1850.
PERICLES. Athenian Statesman.
Born supposed early part of fifth century b. c.
Died at Athens, B. c. 429.
Original found about a mile from Tivoli, in the Pianelli
di Cassio, 1781.
PITT, William. Statesman.
Born at Hayes, Kent, 28th May, 1759.
Died at Putney, 23rd January, 1806.
PLATO. Grecian philosopher.
Born at AEgina, b. c. 429.
Died at Athens, b. c. 347.
RAFFAELLE or RAPHAEL, Raffaello Sanzio da
Urbino. Painter.
Born at Urbino, in the Contrado del Monte, 6th April,
1483.
Died at Rome, on his birthday, 6th April, 1520.
REYNOLDS, Sir Joshua. Artist.
Born at Plympton, Devonshire, 16th July, 1723.
Died at Leicester-fields, London, 23rd February, 1792.
ROBINSON, G. A. Protector of the Aborigines, Victoria.
Presented by Henry Downie, Esquire.


RUSSELL, John, Earl. Statesman.
Born at London, 18th August, 1792.
Died at London, 28th May, 1878.
SADLEIR, Dr. Franc. Provost of Trinity Coll., Dublin.
Presented by William P. Corcoran, Esquire.
SCHILLER, Friedrich. German Poet.
Born at Marbach, in Wurtemberg, 10th November,
1759.
Died at Weimar, 9th May, 1805.
SCOTT, Sir Walter. Poet and Novelist.
Born at Edinburgh, 15th August, 1771.
Died at Abbotsford, 21st September, 1832.
SENECA, Lucius Annaeus. Roman Philosopher and
Statesman.
Born at Cordova, in Spain, a few years b. c.
Put to death at Rome, by order of Nero, a. d. 65.
SEVERUS, Marcus Aurelius Alexander. Irnperator.
Born at Arce, Phoenicia, A. d. 205.
Killed at Sicilia, in Gaul, a. d. 235.
SOPHOCLES. Greek Tragic Poet.
Born at Colonos, near Athens, b. c. 495.
Died at Athens, b. c. 405.
Original in the British Museum. Found at Gensano,
17 miles from Rome, 1775,
STEPHENSON, George. Civil Engineer.
Born at Wylam, Northumberland, 9th June, 1781.
Died at Tapton House, near Chesterfield, 12th August,
1848.
THACKERAY, William Makepeace. Novelist and
Essayist.
Born at Calcutta, 1811.
Died at Kensington Palace Green, 24th December, 1863.


TR A JANUS, Marcus Ulpius Nerya. Roman Emperor.
Born at Italica, in the Spanish Province of Boetica,
a. d. 53.
Died at Selinus, in Cilicia, a. d. 117.
Original in the British Museum. Found in the Cam-
pagna of Rome, in the year 1776.
VENUS YICTRIX, called “ VENUS of MILO.”
See Casts of Statues.
Presented by James Murphy, Esquire.
VERUS, Lucius Aurelius. Roman Emperor.
Born at Rome, a. d. 130.
Died at Altinum, A. D. 169.
Sold by Mr. Lyde Brown to the Empress Catherine 11.
of Russia. Notes and Queries, Ist Series, x. 364
VICTORIA. Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen.
Born at Kensington Palace, 24th May, 1819.
VICTORIA. Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen. In
Parian.
Presented to the Trustees by Captain Lonsdale.
VIRGIL, Publius Virgilius Maro. Roman Poet.
Born at Andes, near Mantua, 15th October, b. c. 70.
Died at Brundusium, 22nd September, B. c. 19.
VOLTAIRE, Francois Marie Aroubt de.
Born at Chatenay, near Sceaux, 20th February, 1694.
Died at Paris, 30th May, 1778.
WASHINGTON, George. President of the United States.
Born in Westmoreland, Virginia, 22nd February, 1732.
Died at Mount Vernon, 14th December, 1799.
WATT, James. Engineer.
Born at Greenock, 19th January, 1736.
Died at Heathfield, Staffordshire, 19th August, 1819.
Original by Chantrey.


WELLINGTON, Arthur Wellesley, Duke of. Soldier
and Statesman.
Born at Dangan Castle, Ireland, Ist May, 1769.
Died at Walmer Castle, 14th September, 1852.
WORDS WORTH, William. Poet.
Born at Cockermouth, Cumberland, 7th April, 1770.
Died at Rydal Mount, 23rd April, 1850.
WREN, Sir Christopher. Architect.
Born at East Enoyle, Wilts, 20th October, 1632.
Died at Hampton Court, 25th February, 1723.
YOUNG, The Right Honorable, Sir John, Bart., P.C.,
G.C.M.G., G.C.B. Lord Lisgar.
Born, 31st August, 1807.
Died, 6th October, 1876.
Governor of New South Wales from 1861 to 1867.
MEDALLION CASTS.
BARELY, Sir Henry, G.C.M.G., E.C.B.
Born 1815,
Governor of Victoria from 1856 to 1863.
By Charles Summers.
BROOEE, Gustavus Vaughan. Tragedian.
Born 1819.
Drowned on the ship “London,” 11th January, 1866.
By Charles Summers.
GOODENOUGH, James Graham, Commodore.
Born at Stoke Hill, near Guildford, Surrey,
3rd December, 1830.
Mortally wounded at Santa Cruz, by the Natives, 12th
August, 1875.
Died 20th August, 1875.
Presented by Signor Simonetti, Sculptor.


HEAD OF A FEMALE SAINT. From a bas-relief in
marble, attributed to Donatello, the property of
Lord Elcho.
Issued by the Arundel Society, London.
HORSLEY, Charles E. Musician.
By Miss M. Thomas.
LA TROBE, Charles Joseph.
Superintendent of Port Phillip, from 1839 to 1851.
Lieut.-Governor of Victoria, from 1851 to 1854.
Born at London, 20th March, 1801.
Died 4th December, 1875.
By Thomas Woolnbr.
MELBOURNE EXHIBITION, 1854, Medal.
By Joseph S. Wyon.
MELBOURNE INTERCOLONIAL EXHIBITION, 1866,
Medal.
By Charles Summers.
RELIEFS.
BATTAGLIA DI BALLEJO.
Sculptor : Buonarroti, Michael Angelo.
Born at Castel Caprese, Tuscany, 6th March, 1474.
Died at Rome, 17th February, 1564.
BOYS. Three Panels.
Sculptor: Hubert Longe, called Fiamingo.
Born at Brussels.
Died at Piacenza, 1709.
BOYS. Six Panels, in fictile ivory.
Sculptor; Hubert Longe, called Fiamingo.


CHRIST AND THE APOSTLES.
Sculptor : Donatello.
Born at Florence, 1383,
Died 1446,
CREATION of ADAM and EYE, and the EXPULSION
from PARADISE.
Sculptor ; Ghiberti, Lorenzo.
Born at Florence, 1378.
Died 1455.
Panel from the Gate of the Baptistry, Florence.
DEAD APOSTLE.
Sculptor: Donatello.
ENTRY of COSMO DE MEDICI into FLORENCE.
Sculptor: Buonarroti, Michael Angelo.
HOLY FAMILY.
Sculptor: Buonarroti, Michael Angelo,
Original at Florence,
HOLY FAMILY.
Sculptor: Buonarroti, Michael Angelo.
Original in the Royal Academy.
No. 1. Purchased by the Trustees.
No. 2. Presented by Marshall Wood, Esquire.
HOLY VIRGIN.
Sculptor: Davis.
HOURS (The) LEADING the HORSES op the SUN.
Sculptor : John Gibson.
Born at Gyffin, near Conway, 1790.
Died at Rome, 27th January, 1866.
No. 1. Purchased by the Trustees.
No. 2. Presented by Marshall Wood, Esquire.
MERCURY and PANDORA.
Sculptor ; John Flaxman.
Born at York, 6th July, 1755.
Died 7th December, 1826.
No. 1. Purchased by the Trustees.
No. 2. Presented by Marshall Wood, Esquire.


MORNING.
Sculptor: Thorwaldsen, Bertel.
Born at Copenhagen, 1770 ; worked for many years at
Rome.
Died at his birthplace, 1844.
NIGHT.
Sculptor: Thorwaldsen, Bertel.
SACRIFICE of NOAH.
Sculptor : Ghiberti, Lorenzo.
Born at Florence, 1378.
Died 1455.
Panel from the Gate of the Baptistry, Florence.
SACRIFICE op ABRAHAM.
Sculptor; Ghiberti, Lorenzo.
Panel from the Gate of the Baptistry, Florence.
VIRGIN and CHILD.
Sculptor: Donatello.
Bom at Florence, 1383.
Died 1446.
Original in the South Kensington Museum,
FRIEZES, &c.
ASSYRIAN orNIMROUD COLLECTION op FRIEZES,
in the British Museum. Two slabs.
PARTHENON (Frieze op).
PARTHENON (Frieze of).
Forty slabs.
Forty-seven slabs.
Reduced by Hemming.
TEMPLE op APOLLO (Frieze of). Twenty-three slabs.
SET of BASES and CAPS, representing the five Orders
of Architecture. Ten pieces.


1 Hand, with scroll.
1 „ male, clenched.
1 „ „ stone in.
2 Ears, large.
2 Ears, small.
2 Eye and nose of Bacchante.
1 )) 5)
Hadrian.
2 5) 5*
Jupiter.
COLLECTION OF
MODELS AND ILLUSTRATIONS OF ART,
FOE THE SCHOOL OF DESIGN.
PRESENTED TO THE TRUSTEES BY JAMES MURPHY, ESQUIRE.
I—CASTS OF MASKS.
Children of Niobe. ( Madonna.
Madonna. | Moses.
lI.—CASTS OF
PORTIONS
OF HUMAN BODY.
3 Anatomical Arm, foot, leg,
1 „ „ from
nature.
2 „ „ Laocoon.
1 Foot of Farnese Hercules.
2 Feet.
1 „ „ with stick.
1 „ „ throwing.
1 „ female, with bracelet.
1 „ „ on cushion.
1 „ „ from nature.
2 Groups of hands, four.
2 „ „ female.
9 Casts of hands and feet.
3 Hands, child’s.
1 „ „ with stick.
1 „ St. Peter.
1 „ with compasses.
1 „ drawing.
1 „ resting.
1 Leg, from nature.
Nose and mouth of—
Adonis Hadrian
111. —CASTS
AEsculapius Juno
Antinous Lucius Y erus
3 Anatomical.
1 Cow.
Caracalla Yenusd’Arles
OF ANIMALS,
1 Dog.
2 Goats.
1 Horse.
2 Greyhound’s legs.
1 Griffin.
2 Horse’s legs.
1 Lion.
1 Lion’s head, from nature.
1 Lioness.
1 Stag.


IV.-CASTS AND GROUPS OF FRUIT, FLOWERS,
SHELLS, AND LEAVES.
SINGLE CASTS.
3 Apples.
1 Bean and leaf.
1 Citron.
2 Dock leaf.
1 Gourd bottle.
1 Gourd, giant.
1 Melon.
2 Oranges.
2 Pears.
1 Pine.
3 Pomegranates.
1 Shaddock.
1 Thistle leaf.
GROUPS
1 Apples, large.
1 Apples, small.
1 Blackberries.
1 Fern, funeral.
Foliage, by Sansovino,
1 Gourd rock.
1 Grapes.
1 Lemon.
1 Lily.
1 Pear.
1 Plum.
5 Shells.
2 Stalks.
1 Vine and branch.
1 Vine and leaf.
1 Vine and leaf, large.
Y.—BUILDING ORNAMENTS.
ARCHITRAVES.
3 From the Gate of the Baptistry, Florence, by Lorenzo
Ghiberti.
1 From Gate of St. Denis.
FRIEZES.
1 From the Erechtheum, Athens.
2 „ Gate of the Baptistry, Florence, by Lorenzo Ghiberti.
1 „ Panathenaic.
1 „ Trajan’s Forum.
MOULDINGS.
1 From, the Erechtheum.
2 „ St. Stephen’s, Westminster.
1 Temple of Mars Ultor, leaf.
1 Trajan’s pillar, enriched.


ORNAMENTS.
1 Acanthus leaf, from temple of Jupiter Stator.
■1 „ St. Eustache.
1 „ small.
1 „ scroll.
1 Capital, Byzantine.
1 „ Stone Church, Kent.
1 „ Temple Church.
1 Finial, Lincoln Cathedral.
4 Rosettes.
1 Rosette, from antique.
1 „ from Brescia diamond.
2 „ from Scipio’s Tomb, small.
1 „ Scroll of Trajan.
SCROLLS.
1 Florentine, with swan.
1 Iron.
1 Lysicrates’ Monument.
1 Trajan’s Forum, from, large.
1 „ portion of.
1 Nest of scroll of pilasters, from the Villa Medici.
Spandril, from Stone Church, Kent.
Stele, or column tops.
VI
2 From Alhambra.
1 „ Bonn.
1 „ Chateau d’Anet.
1 Florentine, with Swan.
VII.—'
1 From Alhambra.
1 „ Bonn.
PANELS,
PILASTERS,
4 „ Florence.
■6 „ Tomb of Louis XII.
1 „ „ Louis XV.
2 From Madeleine.
1 From Gate of the Baptistry,
Florence, by Lorenzo Ghi-
berti.
3 From Martinengo Tomb.
2 „ Small Tracery.
4 Portions from Madeleine.
1 Section from Madeleine.
1 „ Villa Medici, Rome.


INTRODUCTION TO THE CATALOGUE
OF DIPTYCHS AND TRIPTYCHS.
Diptychs, from *Bt's, two ; a fold; known also as
Pugillares, held in the hand, Pugillum, Tabulae or Tabellae;
Yitelliani were boards or tablets of wood, commonly of
beech or fir, frequently of citron, or other choice timber, or
of ivory; fastened together at the back by wires or hinges ;
they opened or closed like a book. Three thus connected
were called Triptychs ;t five, Pentaptychs; a greater
number, Polyptychs ; in later ages, Agiothyrai, so styled
from the three doors of the apse of Sancta Sophia, at Con-
stantinople. The inside was covered with a thin layer of
wax,J a raised margin ran round it, to prevent the
one face from rubbing against the other. Leaves of
skins of animals, ultimately carefully prepared as parch-
ment § or vellum, with writing on both sides, or of
paper made from the AEgyptian Papyrus, || Avith writing
* Homer, 11. vi. 169. Martial, Apophoreta, xiv. Ito 9.
■f Triplices, Martial xiv. 6. Rigollot, Hist, des Arts de Dessin.
X Thence called ceratae tabellae —waxen tablets.
§ Diphthera Membrana, or Pergamena, invented in the time of
Eumenes 11., B.c. 197—159, King of Pergamus, who wishing to rival
the Alexandrian Library, caused it to be prepared, being unable to
procure papyrus through the jealousy of the Ptolemies, Vitalina;
Pliny.
“ Sic raro scribis ut toto non quater anno,
Membranara poscas.” —Horace, Sat. 11. hi. 1.
11 Biblos, whence Bible, of various kinds, called Charta AEgyptiaca
Niliaca, Saitica ; also Regia, Imperialis, Augustana, Liviana, Hieratica
of the largest size, Fanniana, Amphitheatrica, Claudia, Cornelia,
Leneotica, sold by weight; the Emporetica, used for packing.—
Herodotus, v. 58; Isaiah, xix. 7; Ovid, Tristia, i. 117; Pliny, xii. 23 ;
Diodorus, ii. 32.


on one side only, with a reed* pen and ink,t were
inserted between them. Materials employed for writing
upon were, in different countries and at different times,
leaves as at the present day in India, bark, or pith of trees,
whence, liber, a book; charta, a sheet or charter.
A Stylus, or iron pencil, was employed to write on the
wax. It was sharp at one end, to inscribe; thin and flat
at the other, to obliterate the letters. To turn the Stylus t
signified to erase, to do so frequently, to write with painful
correctness. The instrument was also called Ferrum§ and
Graphium, || the case of the latter Graphiarium or Graphi-
aria Theca.
* Calamus.
“ Culpantur frustra Calami.”—Horace, Sat. 11. iii. 7.
f Atramentum.
“ Sed veluti tractata notam labemque remittunt
Atramenta, fere scriptores carmine foedo
Splendida facta linunt. —Horace, Epist, 11. i. 235.
X Quintilian, I. i. 27. Livy, i. 24.
“ In versu faciendo
Saepe caput scaberet, vivos et roderet ungues,
Saepe Stylum vertas, iterum quae digna legi sint
Scripturus.” —Horace, Sat. I. x. 70.
“ Sed hie Stylus baud petet ultro
Quemquam animantem ; et me veluti custodiet ensis
Yagina tectus.” —Horace, Sat. 11. i. 39.
§ “ ©extra tenet ferrum, vacuam tenet altera ceram.
Incipit et dubitat; scribit damnatque tabellas
Et notat et delet mutat culpatque probatque
Inque vicem sumtas ponit; positasque resumit.”
—Ovid, Metam ix. 520.
Pistoclerus—Quid ?
Chrysalus—Stilum, ceram, et tabellas, et linum.*
—Plautus, Bacchides, iv. 4, 64 (Lipsius’ Note).
1| Haec tibi erunt armata suo graphiaria ferro.
Martial, xiv. 19.
* Thread or twine, to bind the leaves together, fastened by a seal.


They are classified as Consular or Roman, Byzantine,
Christian, or Mediaeval. On them were carved subjects,
mythological or classical, scriptural, traditional, ecclesias-
tical, devotional, or secular, or some taken from ancient
or contemporary history, with allegorical devices or
inscriptions. Precious stones and gems were inlaid. Of
these, the first bore the portrait of the Consul or
Emperor invested with the Consular authority and Tribu-
nitian power, with his name and titles, in his robes of office,
presiding at games or gladiatorial combats celebrated in
honour of his election. They were sent to the most dis-
tinguished magistrates and personages, and to his immediate
friends, to announce this solemn event. The Roman were
rectangular, carved on the outside, with occasionally a tym-
panum on the top. The Byzantine had usually a circular
top. The Christian were carved on the inside, and in
Mediaeval times were distinguished by a Gothic top.


CATALOGUE OF DIPTYCHS AND
TRIPTYCHS.
CLASS I.
ROMAN DIPTYCHS OF MYTHOLOGICAL
CHARACTER.
N<tt Object tke Su V ect °f the Sculpture.
a Both leaves 1. AEsculapius and Telespliorus. Fejervary Col-
SfSS cen* 2 Hygieia Cupid,
tury.
& ?° th P ro S ress °f Bacchus. An Public Library
e 3rd allegorical composition, pro- of Sens.
or Tin cen - iii p ■ • -i • i
tury, now the bably oi astronomical import.
book-cover of 2. Diana Lucifera, with various
the Office des attendant figures. A com-
position of similar character
to the preceding.
c Both leaves. 1, Muse, with a lyre. Apparently Treasury of the
a Roman lady in an ideal Cathedral of
character. Monza.
2. Portrait of an unknown author.
CLASS 11.
ROMAN AND BYZANTINE DIPTYCHS OF
HISTORICAL CHARACTER.
A.-DIPTYCHS OF PERSONAGES BELIEVED TO BE IMPERIAL.
Nature of the Possession of the
Object. Subject of the Sculpture. Original.
a One leaf. Three seated figures, perhaps the Fejervary Col-
Emperor Philip the Arab and lection ’
two other dignitaries, presiding


S^c/mscul^.
at the saecular games of the
millennial era of Rome, a. d.
248 ; below, men fighting with
stags in the amphitheatre.
h Both leaves. 1. Standing figures of a lady and Treasury of the
a boy, probably the Regent Cathedral of
Galla Placidia and her son Monza-
Yalentinian III.; the diptych
being, in this case, executed
about A. D. 428.
2. Warrior standing, perhaps
AEtius, or possibly Bonifacius,
B.—DIPTYCHS OF CONSULS, WITH THEIR NAMES
INSCRIBED,
c One leaf. Standing figure of Flavius Felix, Bibliotheque
Consul of the West, a. d. 428,
inscribed FLavii • FELICIS • 1 Antiques
Yiri • Clarissimi • COMitis • deS AntiqUe
AC • MAGistri.
d Both leaves. 1. Seated figure of Clementinus, Fejenrary Col
Consul of the East, a. d. 513, lection-
with the insignia of his office ;
beside him, Rome and Con-
stantinople personified; above,
busts of the Emperor Anas-
tasiusandthe Empress Ariadne,
with a cross between them;
below, the distribution of lar-
gesses ; inscribed FLavius ’
TAYR VS • CLEMENTINYS •
ARMONIYS • CLEMENTI-
NVS, with KAHMENTINOY
in a monogram.
2. Same subject, inscribed Yir *
ILlustris' COMes ’ SACRarum'
LARGitionum * EXCONSuIe *
PATRICius, * ET • CONSuI *
ORDlNarius.


Nature of the
Object.
* One leaf.
f One leaf.
g Both leaves,
FILOXENVS • SOTERICVS
• FILOXENVS • YIR * ILLVS-
Tris; on the unsculptured area,
the first verse of a dedicatory
distich to the Senate, in Greek
lambics.
2. Similar subject, with the inscrip-
tion COMes • DOMESTicus EX
MAGISTRO • Militum • PER.
THRACIAm • ET • CONSYL •
ORDINARius, and the second
verse of the distich.
Subject of the Sculpture. Original
Ornaments and Inscriptions in Biblotheque
honour of Petrus Justinianus, Imperial,
sole consul, a. d. 516. On a label Bans-Cabmet
at the top, FLavius • PETRus * desAntl( l ues -
SABBATius • IVSTINIANus •
Yir iLlustris; and in a cir-
cular panel in the middle the
following hexameter, alluding
to the destination of the
diptych MVNERA * PARYA *
QVIDEM • PRETIO • SED *
HONORIBus • ALMA.
Seated figure of Anastasius, Con- Kunstkammer,
sul of the East, a. d. 517, with Berlin>
the usual consular insignia;
below, men given to bears in
the amphitheatre ; inscribed
FLavius • ANASTASIYS '
PAVLus • PRObYS • SAVI-
NIANYS • POMPeius * ANAS-
Tasius.
1. Bust of Philoxenus, Consul of Bibliotheque
the East, A. d. 525, with a Imperial,
female bust, perhaps that of JesAntklues^
t> i ji n . U.CS 11 till Uco.
Rome underneath; and between
them the following inscription;
FLavius • THEODORYS •


C— DIPTYCHS OF CONSULS, WITH NO NAMES
INSCRIBED.
Nat olject. Subject 0f the Scul P ture ‘
h Both leaves. 1 . Consul standing, with the Mappa Treasury of the
Circensis , between two other Cathedral of
personages; above, the Emperor Halberstadt-
seated, with attendant figures ;
below, a group of captives, with
their armour.
* One leaf. 2. Similar subject. Consul, pro- Bibliotheque
bably of the Imperial family, Imp6riale,_
seated between the figures of
-r-v 1 /N j j • 1 uoo n.uiiu Uco,
Eome and Constantinople ; u
above, a laurel crown suspended.
CLASS 111.
ECCLESIASTICAL DIPTYCHS anterior to
A.D. 700,
TV fttuvP of the , POSSeSSIOTI of the
Object, Subject of the Sculpture . Original.
a One leaf, 4th Angel, with a cruciferous globe British Mu-
or sth cen- and a sceptre ; on a label above, seura—Collec-
ts- in raised letters, a Greek lambic ni
verse, of which the sense is
uncertain, being probably part
of a sentence completed on the
lost leaf of the diptych.
h Both leaves, 1. Virgin and Child enthroned, Kunstkammer,
probably of with two angels. Berlin,
the 6th cen-
tury. 2. Christ seated between St. Peter
and St. Paul.


Nature e Of the Subjgct of m Sct^ttre . Poss £f^J th *
c Both leaves, 1. Standing figure in the Roman Treasury of the
perhaps ongi- consular robes, but the hair Cathedral of
Lrdiptych S of exhibiting the ecclesiastical onza-
the sth or 6th tonsure, the Mappa C ircensis
century; sub- transformed into a Stcdarium,
sequently and the staff surmounted by a
altered and cross: above, SanCtuS GRE-
Goßius; and, in the blank
a cover to an
Antiphona- space, this distich
rium of St. GREGORIYS' PraeSYL * MERI-
SSE7£ ™'eT NOMINE'DIG-
have been -N V S
presented by • GENYS • DVCIT • S YM-
MVM • CONSCENDIT •
• HONOREM •
2. Similar figure, but without the
tonsure, and bearing the inscrip-
tion DAVID REX.
CLASS IV.
BOOK COVERS anterior to a.d. 700.
Nature of the Possession of the
Object. Subject of the Sculpture. Original.
a Cover of a 1. In the centre, the Agnus Dei Treasury of the
Gospel of the executed in iewellery : above. Cathedral of
»' the Nativity ;at the aides, six
subjects from the Gospels;
below, the Massacre of the
Innocents ; at the angles, heads
and symbols of St. Matthew
and St. Luke.
2. In the centre, a Cross in jewel-
lery ; above, the Adoration of
the Kings; at the sides, six
subjects from the life of Christ;


Nature of the
Object.
b Cover of an
Evangeliaire
both sides.
c Panel from
a book cover,
perhaps
Greek.
d Panel from
a cover.
e Panel from
a cover.
below, the Marriage-feast at
Cana ; at the angles, heads and
symbols of St. Mark and St.
John.
In the centre, Christ enthroned
between St. Peter and St. Paul;
at the sides, Christ healing the
blind man, the paralytic, the
woman with an issue of blood,
and the Centurion’s servant;
above, two angels; below, Christ
and the Samaritan woman, and
the raising of Lazarus.
Ascension of Christ.
Subject of the Sculpture.
In the centre, the Virgin and Bibliotheque
Child enthroned, with two tmperiale,
angels; at the sides, the An- aris ‘
nnnciation, Visitation, the meet-
ing of St. Joseph and St. Mary
(?) and their journey to Bethle-
hem ; above, two angels; below,
Christ entering Jerusalem.
Crucifixion, with St. Mary, St. Fejervary Col-
John, and soldiers; the sun lection,
and moon in the form of Apollo
and Diana ; below, the women
visiting the tomb.
Baptism of Christ with the Jordan Kunstkammer,
personified. Berlin.
Fejervary Col-
lection.


CLASS V.
DIPTYCHS AND BOOK COVERS OF THE EIGHTH,
NINTH, AND TENTH CENTURIES.
Nat oije°rt tke SubjeCt ° f the Scul P ture - P ° S Ordinal
a Diptych, 1. Christ washing his disciples’Treasury of the
both leaves. £ feet, Christ before Pilate, the Cathedral of
hanging of Judas, and the Mllan-
soldiers beside the tomb.
2. Mary Magdalen and Mary the
mother of James visiting the
tomb, following the description
of St. Matthew, xxviii. 1-4,
Christ appearing to them,
Christ presenting himself to
the Eleven, and the incredulity
of St. Thomas.
I Panel from Christ standing holding a book,
a book cover.
c Side of a book In the centre, Christ standing on Bodleian
COYer ' the lion and adder • around Library,
this, twelve small subjects from xor ‘
the life of Christ.
d Side of a book In the centre, Christ seated, Museum of
cover. delivering the keys to St. Peter Orleans.
(?), whilst on the other side of
the Saviour an angel is apply-
ing a live coal to the lips of
Isaiah; above, a pile of edifices,
perhaps Sion; below, Christ
preaching in the Temple;
round the edge, animals and
flowers.
€ Panel from Christ, with the Evangelistic Bodleian
a book cover. symbols, and two allegorical Library ’
figures beneath his feet, repre- xor
senting Earth and Ocean.


N<lt Object th<! SubjeCt of the Sculpture. P ° S Original
f Panel from The Crucifixion, with personifica- Unknown,
a book cover. tions of the Church and the ? r °? 1 a cast
Synagogue at opposite sides of of >sses '
the cross, the serpent at its foot, Carrand.'
and the dead rising from their
sepulchres ; below, the women
visiting the tomb.
9 Cover of an i. The Crucifixion : above, the Bibliotheque
Evangeliaire, Evangelists, and the sun and Impenale,
both sides. moon ; to the left of the cross, Pans *
the figures of the Synagogue
with her banner, and of Jeru-
salem (?) with a turreted crown ;
at its foot, the Church (?) seated
between Earth and Ocean.
2. Mary Magdalene, Mary the
mother of James, and Salome
visiting the tomb ; Christ and
the two disciples going to
Emmaus; and Christ appear-
ing to the Eleven.
h Panel from David enthroned amidst his Louvre,
a book cover. attendants, dictating Psalms to
four scribes.
i Panel from Judgment of Solomon. Louvre,
a book cover.
Jc Cover of an 1. Christ in glory, giving keys to Bibliotheque
Evangeliaire St. Peter and a book to St. Paul; Impenale,
belonging to below, an allegorical figure, with l ans ‘
vp n the combined attributes of
840 877, both Earth and Ocean,
sides. 2. Virgin and Child enthroned.
i Panel from The Crucifixion, with the Virgin
a book cover. anc l St. John ; above, the sun
and moon veiling their faces.
m Panel from Crucifix, with the four Evange- British Mu-
a book cover. fistic symbols. seum—Col-
u lection of


Kat 'ohje°/t tke Subiect of the Scul P ture - P ° S Original
n Panel from a Christ and the adulterous woman. Fejervary Col-
book cover. lection.
o Panel from a Same subject; or perhaps the M. Micheli.
book cover. healing of the crippled woman.
CLASS VI.
MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTS anterior to a.d. 1000.
r "‘Xe°{ UU ’ ****«. *»*<«. P °^J tke
aFigureinalto- A Consul seated in the sella a. Fountaine,
relievo, sth or curulis. Esq.
6th century.
b Circular box, A lion hunt. Treasury of the
perhaps a Cathedral of
serinium or Sens.
a pyxis.
c Piece of a box. A man addressing two youths. Rev. Walter
Possibly an unideal representa- Sneyd-
tion of the return of the prodigal
son (T).
d Ornament Two lions and a tree, inscribed Treasury of the
of a hair comb. j n l a ter characters Cathedral of
S. |T®p|, Comb of St. Loup, ens ’
who was Bishop of Sens about
A. D. 623.
e Situla, or The handle decorated with gro- Treasury of the
vessel for holy tesque animals. The body Cathedral of
encircled with five continuous Mllan *
arches ; under one of them the
Virgin and Child and two
angels, of whom one holds a
model of the vessel itself;
under the others, the four
Evangelists; round the edge the
following distich (proving the
vessel to have been dedicated
by Godfrey, Archbishop of


Nature of the
Object.
Subject of the Sculpture. o> Originat
Milan, a. d. 973-78, on the
occasion of the visit of the
Emperor Otho) :
YATES • AMBROSE * GOT-
FREDYs • DAT’TIBFSanCtE*
VAS • VENIENTE • SACRAm *
SPARGENDVm * CESARE *
LYm'PHAnr
CLASS VII.
CARVINGS of the GREEK SCHOOL of various
PERIODS posterior TO THE AGE OF JUSTINIAN.
Of tie Secure.
u Two pieces 1. Joseph quitting his father under Kuntskammer,
from a casket, the guidance of an angel, and Berlin.
Joseph taken up from the pit
and sold to the Ishmaelites,
who are mounted on camelo-
pards.
2. The steward searching the sacks
of Joseph’s brethren, and the
meeting of Jacob and Joseph.
h Panel from The Crucifixion, with numerous Kuntskammer,
a book cover. figures ; the soldiers in Byzan- Berlin,
tine armour.
c Panel from Ascension ; Christ seated on a Kuntskammer,
a book cover. rainbow, with an aureole sup- Berlin,
ported by angels.
d Panel from The Day of Pentecost ; above, the Kuntskammer,
a book cover. Twelve Apostles ; below, the Berlin.
Gentiles addressed in their
own tongues.


a. Sub]ec , 0J tte Sc , umre
e Ecclesiastical Each leaf has four compartments, Treasury of the
diptych, both the subjects of which are Cathedral of
leaves. explained by inscriptions in Mllaru
barbarous Greek:—
1. (a.) The Annunciation, in-
scribed: TO XEPE, roXaipe,
the address of the angel,
and Visitation, inscribed ;
O ACHACMO, 6 do-Tracr/ms,
the salutation of Mary to
Elizabeth.
(b.) The Nativity, lEENHCH,
rj yevvr](ris.
(c.) The Baptism of Christ, I
BAVIITHCHC, i) BaTTrurts.
(d.) The Presentation in the
Temple, I VHOHANTH,
‘ VTraTrdvTTjcris, or viravTrjms,
the meeting of the Holy
Family with Simeon and
Anna.
2. (a.) The Crucifixion, with
the words addressed by
Christ to St. Mary and
St. John. John, xix. 26, 27.
(b.) The women visiting the
tomb, inscribed : co TAd>o,
6 ratios.
(c.) The Resurrection of Christ
and of the righteous dead I
ANACTACI, rj dvd(TTa<Tis.
(d.) Mary Magdalene and Mary
the mother of James em-
bracing the feet of Christ,
Matt, xxviii. 9, inscribed :
TO XEPETE, to Xoupere,


Nature of the n,„ Possession of the
Object, Subject of the Sculpture. Original.
the word with which He
addressed them.
/ Triptych, On the central tablet, the Crnci- Bibliotheque
with the ex- fjxion : above, the Archangels Imperiale,
Sht^ng the Michael and Gabriel , beside
the cross, St. Mary and St. John;
at its foot, St. Constantine, the
Great, and St. Helena ; on the
left wing, heads of St. John
Baptist, St. Paul, St. Stephen,
St. Chrysostom, and St. Cosmas;
on the right, heads of St. Elias,
St. Peter, St. Pantaleemon, St.
Nicolaus, and St. Damianus —
all with their names inscribed
in Greek. Over St. Mary are
the words, lAE OVC C 8; over
St. John, lAB H M-P C 8 (John,
loc. cit.); on the cross above
the Saviour, the words, in
Greek, “Jesus Christ the King
of Glory;” below, in a Greek
iambic verse, “As man, literally
flesh, Thou hast suffered ; as
God, after suffering, Thou re-
cleemest;” on the exterior of the
right wing, a cross with the
inscription, in abbreviated
Greek, “ Jesus Christ con-
quers.”
ff Tablet, pro- Christ standing on a scabellum , Bibliotheque
bably executed which forms the apex of Impenale,
r^o-e^and” a cu P°^ a resembling that of ans ’
coronation of St. Sophia at Constantinople,
Komanus IV. and crowning Romanus IY.,
a. d. 1068, and Diogenes, and Eudocia Dalas-
now part of sena . over the Emperor,
the cover of an Pa)MA NOC BACIAEVC
Evangeliaire. __ _ _ . _ _ _ ~
PwMAIwN ; over the Empress,
EVAOKIA BACIAIC
PwMAIwN.


x *ss£ m *** * «* *<***. 'rstsi'*
h Panel from St. John Baptist standing, with a Fejervary Col-
li book cover. scroll inscribed lAE, k. t. A. ection -
John, i. 29.
i Panel from Christ enthroned, with part of a Bodleian Li-
a book cover. mutilated Greek inscription. brary, Oxford.
Jc Tablet, of un- Virgin and Child on a gorgeous Le Comte
certain appli- throne, with two angels above, Auguste De
capon. inscribed in cursive Greek, Bastard-
probably by its ancient pro-
prietor, “Allones, servant of the
Martyr.”
i Panel from Christ's Triumphant Entry into A.Fountaine,
a book cover. Jerusalem. Bs< b
w Panel from Christ standing under a canopy Rev. Walter
a book cover. between the Virgin and St. John Sne yd-
Baptist.
n Panel from Half-length figure of Christ, with Louvre,
a book cover. a cross behind His head in lieu
of a Nimbus.
o Side of a book Elaborately designed foliage, and Bibliotheque
cover - sixteen medallions with heads Lnperiale,
of the canonical Prophets. ans ‘
P Ornament The Glorification of the Virgin Soane Museum,
from the and Child, amidst a multitude
triptych * °f angels and saints, minutely
Russo-Greek. executed.
CLASS VIII.
ORNAMENTS OF A CASKET OF THE GREEK
SCHOOL, OP UNCERTAIN AGE, IN THE TREASURY OF
the Cathedral op Sens.
A - TWELVE PANELS from the SIDES, EACH CONTAINING
THREE TIERS OF SUBJECTS.
al. Lowest tier. David rescuing his flocks from a wolf.
2. Middle tier. Joseph relating his dream to his
brethren, whose flocks are seen behind. 3. Upper
tier. Two peacocks.


b 1. David killing a lion and a bear. 2. Joseph’s brethren
conspiring together, and stripping him. 3. Two
lions.
cl. Jesse passing his seven sons before Samuel. 2. Joseph’s
brethren casting him into a pit. 3. Two peacocks,
d 1. Samuel anointing David. 2. Joseph’s brethren
bargaining with the Ishmaelites. 3. Two lions.
e 1. David summoned by a messenger from Saul (?) 2. The
completion of the bargain for the sale of Joseph (?)
3. Two peacocks.
fl. Saul making David his armour-bearer (?) 2. Uncertain
subject; perhaps Joseph brought to Potiphar, mis-
placed. The upper space is occupied by the fastening
of the casket.
g 1. Samuel bringing David to Saul; a subject not in the
scriptural account, but determined by the Greek
inscription written in ink on the ivory. 2. Joseph’s
brethren bringing his coat to Jacob. 3. A gryphon
killing an ox.
h 1. David killing Goliath. 2. The Ishmaelites selling
Joseph to an agent of Potiphar. 3. A gryphon
tearing off the leg of an ox.
il. David returning with the head of Goliath. 2. Joseph
brought before Potiphar and his wife. 3. A lion
killing a deer.
k 1. Saul casting a javelin at David. 2. Joseph and
Potiphar’s wife. 3. A gryphon killing a snake.
11. David cutting the skirt of Saul’s robe. 2. Potiphar’s
wife showing Joseph’s garment to her husband.
3. A lion killing a goat.
ml. David restoring the skirt of Saul’s robe. 2. Potiphar
reproaching Joseph (?) The upper space is occupied
by the fastening of the casket.
B.—TWELVE PANELS FROM THE PYRAMIDAL TOP OF
THE CASKET.
n Joseph tried, and sentenced to prison.
o Joseph fettered in the prison.
p Joseph interpreting the dreams of the chief butler and baker
q Pharaoh’s dream of the fat and lean kine.


r Joseph taken out of prison.
s Joseph interpreting Pharaoh’s vision.
t The steward searching the sacks of Joseph’s brethren.
u Judah defending his brethren from the charge of stealing
Joseph’s cup.
v Jacob journeying to Egypt.
v) Joseph meeting Jacob; above, a group of uncertain
meaning, perhaps an awkward representation of the
killing of a fatted calf in honour of Jacob’s arrival.
x Joseph entertaining his father and brethren.
y Joseph riding in his chariot, and crowned by his guardian
angel.
CLASS IX.
CARVINGS OF THE ITALIAN SCHOOL, ALL
PROBABLY of the FOURTEENTH CENTURY.
Nat Zjec{ tke Subject ° f the Seul P fure - POS Orig7nal. the
a Piece from The Angel appearing to the M. Micheli.
a Retable. Shepherds, and their adoration
of Christ.
6 Piece from Last Supper. M. Micheli.
a Retable. (
c Piece from The Annunciation. Above, aM. Micheli. (?)
a Retable. vision of angels, holding the
promised Infant; in the back-
ground, a maid with a distaff.
d Piece from Baptism of Christ. M. Micheli.
a Retable.
e Part of a A king or officer addressing his M.r.Hawkins,
casket. attendants. Es( b
/Parts of a Scenes from an unknown legend. E. Hawkins,
casket, eleven Esq.
pieces,
arranged in
two series.
q Part of a Allegorical figure of Geometry. E. Hawkins,
casket; per- Esq.
haps the same
as the preced-
ing.


™ur, r ofa, s^ojmsnumr*. f “g
A Parts of . a i. Faith, Hope, and Charity. E. Hawkins,
casket; per- Esq.
Apiece™’ 2 ' Temperance, Justice, and Pm-
arranged in deuce,
two series.
i Parts of a Two men holding shields. B. Hawkins,
casket; per- Esq.
haps the same,
two pieces.
k Triptych. In the central portion, the Virgin Bodleian Li-
and Child, between St. Leonard hrary, Oxford,
and another saint; in the wings,
St. John Evangelist (?) and
St. Lawrence.
1 Triptych - In the centre, Virgin and Child, M ‘ MichelL
between St. Catherine and
St. Agatha (?) ; in the wings,
St. Peter and St. Paul.
m Two wings 1. The Angel Gabriel, the adora- M. Micheli.
of a triptych, tion of the Magi, St. George,
and three other saints.
2. The Virgin Annunciate and
legendary representation of
various saints.
CLASS X.
FRENCH, ENGLISH, AND GERMAN SCHOOLS,
ELEVENTH AND TWELFTH CENTURIES.
SutjeCof^Sc.lpt.re.
a Leaf of an Above, the Annunciation ;in the W • Maskell,
ecclesiastical middle, the meeting of St. Es d-
diptych. Joseph and St. Mary ; below,
the Nativity ; upon the upper
and lower edges, the remains
of an inscription referring
apparently to the annals of
some bishopric.


“* SMj,* Of m
I Tablet. Visit of the Women to the tomb, Louvre,
and. Christ appearing to them.
c Tablet. p a rt of a larger subject; above, Louvre.
Christ in glory, with the
Beatified ; below, expulsion
of the money-changers from
the Temple.
d Tablet. The meeting of Abner and the ouvre-
servants of Ish-bosheth with
Joab and the servants of David,
at the Pool of Gibeon, see
2 Samuel, ii. 12 —27.
e Two panels i. Christ in glory between two Lev. Walter
from a casket, angels, and St. Peter and St. Sueyd.
Paul.
2. The Crucifixion, with two
soldiers, and St. Mary and St.
John.
/ Panel from Two apostles or evangelists; Kunstkammer,
a casket. above, the zodiacal signs of Berlm -
Libra and Scorpio.
g Tablet. Twelve apostles, in two rows, Kunstkammer,
with their names and emblems. Berlm - .
h Side of a book Ascension of Christ; at the foot J. B - Nichols,
°° ver - of the mountain a half-length Es(l-
figure of the Prophet H abakkuk.
i Leaf of an Below, the Nativity ; in the Eritish
ecclesiastical middle, angels appearing to the Museum—Col-
yc l ' shepherds; above, the Baptism Antiquities,
of Christ.
k Panel from gt. John the Evangelist. Louvre,
a book cover.
I Panel from gt. Mathew with his Gospel open; Eritish
a book cover. upon it the words of ch. XX. 8, Museum— Col-
YOCA • OPERARIOS •ET • on of
REDE ILI MERCEDE (sic). m


Nature of the Possession of the
Object. Sub l ect of the Sculpture. Original.
m Panel from a The Annunciation ; or perhaps, Kunstkammer,.
book cover. Christ in the garden with Mary Berlin -
Magdalene (?).
n Chess piece. Bishop seated in a chair. w • Maskell,
Esq.
CLASS XI.
FRENCH, ENGLISH, AND GERMAN SCHOOLS,
THIRTEENTH and FOURTEENTH CENTURIES.
SACRED SUBJECTS.
P< TSS.f“*
a Devotional Below, the Presentation in the Jno.Lentaigne,
tablet. Temple; above, Christ and the • Es( i-
Virgin in Glory.
h Devotional Below, Adoration of the Kings; W. Maskell,
tablet. above, Coronation of the Virgin, Esci-
c Devotional Below, Adoration of the Shep- w. Maskell,
tablet. herds; above, the Resurrection. Es l-
d Devotional Virgin and Child, with two angels, B. Hertz, Esq.
tablet.
e Pair of devo- 1. Virgin and Child, glorified by Albert Way,
tional tablets, angels. 2. The Crucifixion, Es( b
with the Virgin, St. John, and
angels.
/ Devotional Virgin and Child, glorified by J- G-. Nichols,
tablet. angels. Es( b
g Pair of devo- Six compartments : — (a.) Judas Le Comte de
tional tablets, bargaining with the priests, and Escalopier.
his seizure of Christ, (b.) Christ
before Pilate, Pilate washing
his hands, and the blindfolding
of Christ, (c.) The hanging of
Judas, the Flagellation, and


Mature of the
Object.
Subject of the Sculpture. S Original
Bearing of the Cross, (d.) The
Crucifixion and Deposition.
(e.) The Anointment of Christ,
and Visit of the women to the
tomb, (f.) The Resurrection,
and “Noli me tangere.”
h Pair of devo- i. Below, The Betrayal of Christ; Bibliotheque
tional tablets. above, The Crucifixion. Dnperiale,
2. Below,the Flagellation; above,
The Deposition from the Cross.
i Devotional Three compartments:— (a.) The
tablet. Three Kings, part of an Ado-
ration, extending over the
companion tablet, (b.) Five
Apostles, (c.) Christ seated in
judgment.
J: Devotional Above, The Coronation of the M. Sauvageot.
teWet, proba- yi rg i n; below, St. John the
bly English. Evangelist; over the canopies,
the armorial bearings of John
Grandison, Bishop of Exeter,
a. D. 1327-69.
I Panel from a Nativity ; in the background,
box - angels appearing to the shep-
herds.
m Pair of devo- 1, Adoration of the Magi. A. J. Beresford
tional tablets. % The Crucifixion. Hope ’ Esq ‘
n Centre-piece Nativity; upon the edges of the British Mu-
of a small ivory, outside the hinges of the seum— Col-
triptych. win |’ j arabesque ornaments. ° f An '
o Piece from a Tbe Descent into Hades, within W- Masked,
box - a small quatrefoil. Esq ‘
p Devotional Above, The Entombment; below,
taWet. the women visiting the tomb.
il Devotional St. John Baptist, St. Christopher, Fejervdry
tablet. and St. James the Greater. Collection


Sa %]el the • Subject of the Sculpture.
r Devotional Four compartments;— (A.) The A. J. Beresford
tablet. Crucifixion, (b.) Christ appear- -Hope, Esq.
ing to Mary Magdalene ; beside
him, St. James the Greater.
(c.) St. Lawrence, St. Peter, and
St. Paul. (d.) St. Stephen,
St. James the Greater, and
St. James the Less.
CLASS XII.
FRENCH, ENGLISH, AND GERMAN SCHOOLS,
THIRTEENTH and FOURTEENTH CENTURIES.
SECULAR SUBJECTS.
Nature of the Possession of the
Object. Subject of the Sculpture. Original.
a Mirror-case, 1. Four groups of lovers under Louvre,
both sides. trees. 2. Similar subject.
b One side of Ginevra el opingwith Sir Lancelot; Fejervary Col-
a mirror-case, around the edge, four monsters. lectlon '
c One side of Siege and capture of the Castle Museum of Or-
a mirror-case. 0 f Love ; around the edge, namentalArt,
statuettes of lions. House° r ° US
d One side of A lady and gentleman playing at m. Sauvageot,
a mirror-case, draughts, two other persons
looking on ; round the edge,
four monsters.
e One side of A lady and her lover, with an Rev. W. Sneyd
a mirror-case, attendant, hawking ; around
the edge, four monsters crouch-
/One side of A lady and gentleman coursing W. Maskell,
a mirror-case. a hare. Esq.
g One side of Knight presenting a heart to aW. Masked,
a mirror-case, lady; on the edge, four leaves. Es d-


Nat Objec{. thß Object of the Sculpture.
h Three pieces i. Pyramus accosting Thisbe and Rev, W. Sneyd
from a box. her companion. 2. Pyramus
addressing Thisbe on the city
wall, and Thisbe concealing her-
self from the lion. 3. Death
of the lovers.
i Cover of a Four compartments :in the two Museum of
b° x - central, a tournament; on the ®oulogne-
right, the siege of the Castle
of Love, with a knight below
preparing to discharge a basket
of flowers from a balista; on
the left, a lady eloping with a
knight.
k Diptych, or i. Under a canopy, a lover gather- British
writing tablet, ing flowers, which his lady Museum— Col-
both leaves. makes into a wreath. 2. Under I ® ctlon
■ •i iii Antiquities,
a similar canopy, a lady and 1
gentleman riding to a hawking
party.
Writing tablet. A lady and gentleman hawking. M. Sauvageot.
CLASS XIII,
FRENCH, ENGLISH, AND GERMAN SCHOOLS,
THIRTEENTH and FOURTEENTH CENTURIES.
STATUETTES.
Suited of** Sculpture.
a and b St. Mary and St. John, two figures Louvre,
from a Crucifixion.
c The Virgin seated ; in her lap B. Hertz, Esq.
the infant Christ, holding
bird.
d The Virgin standing, with the Museum of
infant Christ. Troyes.


CLASS XIV.
ITALIAN, FRENCH, ENGLISH, AND GERMAN
SCHOOLS, FIFTEENTH AND SIXTEENTH
CENTURIES.
Nature of the Possession of the
Object. Subject of the Sculpture. Original.
a Devotional Adoration of the Kings.
tablet.
I Mirror-case, 1. Siege and capture of the Castle A. Fountaine,
both sides. 0 f Love. 2. Tournament. Esq-
Round the edges of each, four
monsters crouching.
c One side of a A lady and gentleman in a garden, m. Sauvageot.
mirror-case. inscribed ©R<E, probably as
intended for a present.
d Basso-relievo Virgin and Child with cattle W. Maskell,
below, part of an Adoration of Esq.
the shepherds.
£ Devotional The Penitence of St. Jerome. J. G. Nichols,
tablet. . . Esq.
/Pax. Virgin and dead Christ, “Pieta.” Fejervary Col-
lection.
g Piece from Procession of figures, of uncertain Louvre,
a casket, meaning, including apparently
Italian (?) Joshua, kamson, and Judith.
h Devotional Genealogy of Christ, the “Jesse Albert Way,
tablet. Tree ”• Esq.
i Devotional The Virgin in Glory, surrounded Rev. Walter
tablet, origi- by objects emblematical of Sne yd.
nally a com- p er perfections, with various
i™S>‘ he legends.
k Tablet, Flagellation of Christ. W. Maskell,
German. Esq,
l Panel from Christ receiving drink from the Museum of
a book cover, righteous: with the inscription, Ornamental
German. DEDISTIS MIHI BIBERE, £ rt ’ M , arl -
Matt. xxv. 35. Above and H °™^ e g
below, allegorical figures.


CLASS XV.
FAG-SIMILES WITHDRAWN from THE ARUNDEL
COLLECTION.
*•%& the s^ect tne s6uipture - f/te
C. 13. Sta- Virgin and Child,
tuette.
1). 13. Sta- Virgin and Child,
tuette.
E. 6. Griffin. Kev.W.Sneyd.
E. 14. Part of The Nativity. W. Masked,
a box, 13th or ™q.
14th century.
N. 11. Devo- The Crucifixion, and Adoration W. Masked,
tional tablet, of Magi. Esq.
double.
N. 13. Devo- The Annunciation and Nativity. Masked,
tional tablet, Esq.
double.
N. 14. Devo- Death of Blessed Virgin. W. Masked,
tional tablet, Esq.
double.
P. 11. Diptych. Consul seated. Eejervary Col-
lection.
P. 13. Diptych Ornaments and Inscriptions. Bibliotheque
of Justinianus. Imperiale,
Paris.
P. 45. Orna- The Crucifixion. Library of the
ment of a British
book-cover. , T . . Museum.
P. 48. Devo- Virgin and Child. C. P. Co.
tional tablet. . r , .. „
P. 49. Devo- Virgin and Child. g. f. 00.
tional tablet.
P. 54. Mirror- Hawking party. Sauvageot.
case.
P. 55. Mirror- Hawking party. M. Sauvageot.
case.
P. 68. Greek The Crucifixion. Louvre,
tablet.
P. 77. Russo- Death of the Blessed Virgin. C. P. Co.
Greek.
P. 86. Sta- Madonna and Child, seated, B. Hertz, Esq.
tuette. canopied.
i


Naf Object [ tJ " Suh i ect °J the Sculpture.
P. 93. Part of i. The Betrayal. 2. Scourging Bibliotheque
triptych, three an d Bearing the Cross. 3. En- Imperiale,
tombment, and meeting Mary. l ans
P. 95. Greek Christ, twelve Apostles, and two Louvre (?)
tablet. angels.
107. Devotional Virgin and Child,
tablet.
Devotional Dead Christ,
tablet.
Fergusson and Moore, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.


\
A'-v
E
/ "~" v ' '. _ • %d&r
S H‘ “ X
w <&
W A
i k ill
\\ f
w


