

! J W
OF THE
Objects ofEthnotypicalAht
IN THE
NATIONAL GALLERY,
PUBLISHED BY DIRECTION OF THE
TRUSTEES OF THE PUBLIC LIBRARY & MUSEUMS
OF VICTORIA,
IDrltroimu :
MASON, FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
51 & 53 Flinders Lane West.
MDCCCLXXVIII.
'
JSSb'r . 4 t '


fltd A tAc


OF THE•
Objects of Ethnotypical Af|t
IN THE
NATIONAL GALLERY,
PUBLISHED BY DIRECTION OF THE
TRUSTEES OF THE PUBLIC LIBRARY AND MUSEUMS
OF VICTORIA.
MASON, FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
vT n ~
CATALOGUE
51 & 53 Flinders Lane West.
MDCCCLXXVIII.




LIBBABY, MUSEUMS, & NATIONAL GALLEBY
OF VICTORIA.
INCORPORATED BY ACT 33 VIC., NO. CCCLVII,
The HON. SIR WILLIAM POSTER STAWELL.
His Honor Me. Justice BARRY, President.
DAVID CHARTERIS MCARTHUR, Esq., J.P., Vice-President
THE Hon. Sik JOHN O’SHAN ASSY, K.C.M.G., M.P.
The Hon. Sik C. GAVAN DUFFY, K.C.M.G., M.P.
The Hon. Sik JAMES McCULLOOH, K.C.M.G.
The Hon. JAMES GOODALL FRANCIS, M.P.
THE HON. THOMAS TURNER A’BECKETT, M.L.C.
THE Hon. SAMUEL HENRY BINDON.
the HON. JOHN ALEXANDER MACPHBRSON.
CHARLES EDWARD BRIGHT, ESQ.
The Rev. JOHN IGNATIUS BLEASDALB, D.D.
MARTIN HOWY IRVING, ESQ., M.A.
The Hon. Sir WILLIAM H. F. MITCHELL, M.L.C.
The Hon. Sir GEORGE VERDON, K.C.M.G., C.B.
The Hon. Sir CHARLES MAC MAHON.
The Hon. WILLIAM M. K. VALE.
THE Hon. FRANK STANLEY DOBSON, M.L.C.
The Hon. JOHN MACGREGOR.
The Hon. EDWARD LANGTON, Treasurer.
~*»33SS FI 3D9lq




CONTENTS.
I.—AUSTRALIA.
a. —Victoria.
b. —New South Wales.
c. —Queensland.
d. —North Australia.
e. —-West Australia.
11.— TASMANIA.
111.— FIJI.
IV.-ROTUMA.
V.—POLYNESIA.
a. —New Zealand
b. —The Navigator’s, or Samoa Islands.
c. —The Friendly Islands, or Tonga.
d. —The Hervey, or Cook’s Islands. Rarotonga.
e. —Niue, or Savage Island.
/. —The Society Islands. Tahiti.
VI.—MELANESIA.
ct. —New Caledonia, and the Loyalty Islands.
b. —Admiralty Islands, New Ireland, New Britain, the
mon Islands, and New Hebrides.
c. —New Guinea.
VII.—MICRONESIA.
Kingsmill Islands.
VII I.—ANDAMAN ISLANDS
Hill Tribes of Malabar.
IX.—AFRICA.
MISCELLANEOUS,
Sele-




PJREFACE.
Nearly all the ethnological specimens in the National
Gallery have been collected from various islands in the
large expanse of ocean stretching from the west coast
of America on the one side, to the east coast of Asia
on the other; and having for its southern limit the
Antarctic Circle, and for its northern the fiftieth paral-
lel of north latitude. This portion of the globe—
whose extent from west to east at the Equator is
equivalent to 150 deg. of longitude —forms two grand
divisions, known as the North and South Pacific
Oceans, in both of which are numerous groups of vol-
canic and coral islands. Oceanica—the name given by
French voyagers and geographers to this region—com-
prises Australia, the East Indian Archipelago, and
other smaller islands of the Pacific; and it has been
divided into five minor departments—namely,
Australia
Polynesia
Melanesia
Micronesia
Malaysia.
The arms, arts, and manufactures of the natives of
the first three divisions are very fully represented by
excellent examples in the National collection, Micro-
nesia but imperfectly, and Malaysia scarcely at all.
f E


Weapons and implements from Africa and America,
and archaic native weapons from the Old World, are
greatly to be desired ; but of these the specimens in
the Gallery are few, and scarcely to be regarded as
representative of any people or period.
Reference will be made in these pages only to those
regions and islands from which ethnological specimens
have been obtained and included in the Catalogue,
except in cases where it may he necessary to supply
information for the purpose of more completely
illustrating the character of the weapons and manu-
factures.
The occupation by natives speaking Polynesian
dialects of some islands in Kekenonesia (a division
hereafter referred to) —as for instance the group
of Yanikoro and Tikopia —is indicative of the enter-
prise of the brown race; and if the climate of
the islands to the westward were different, and not
inimical to light-coloured peoples, the black races
would have been driven still further back.
The areas within which the arms, arts, manu-
factures, and styles of ornamentation are in general
the same, do not correspond exactly with those in which
the physical character and the language serve to
separate the several races ; and this must be borne in
mind in comparing and contrasting the specimens in
this Catalogue, Even in former times the arts of one
island were carried to another. The Tongan borrowed
from the Fijian; and islanders far to the eastward in
like manner copied the practices and adopted the
inventions of their neighbours.
At the same time it is nearly impossible to attach a


proper value to any implements brought from the islands
of the Pacific, unless, indeed, they are ancient. There
is now so much communication between the islanders,
they copy one another so closely, and so many weapons
are carried from one island to another, that any imple-
ment or work of art, if modern, may be looked upon
justly with doubt. In the national collection there are
two boomerangs which were brought from Tanna.
These, no doubt, had been carried to their island-home
by natives who had been working in the sugar planta-
tions in Queensland. Such weapons are easily recog-
nised, and can at once be rightly placed; but others,
brought from islands but little known, and bearing a
close resemblance to weapons already well known, are
not so easily dealt with.
In the remarks and notes accompanying this Cata-
logue, information is given respecting the character-
istic weapons, implements, and manufactures of the
several races, and, though necessarily incomplete, may
assist those who desire to become better acquainted
with the habits of the savages of Oceanica.




1.-AUSTRALI A.
The natives of Australia, as regards features, colour,
and physical character generally, exhibit no very
striking differences, even when those most remote from
each other are compared. On the north-east coast there
is an infusion of Papuan blood, and on the north the
people have mixed with the Chinese; but the changes
produced have been slight. Throughout the country
there is a general conformity to one pattern.
The average height of the men is 5 feet 6 inches,
nearly; some exceed 6 feet, and some are below 5
feet, and amongst them one sees very often remarkably
fine figures. The average height of the women is 5
feet.
The colour of the natives of the south is a chocolate-
brown, in some nearly answering to No. 41 of M.
Broca’s colour-types, in others more nearly approaching
42; the eyes are very dark brown, almost black, corre-
sponding nearly to No. lin M. Broca’s types; the hair
is deep brown or black, abundant, and waved, or in long
curls; the beard is full, and generally crisp.
The most remarkable of their weapons are the
boomerang and the lever with which the spear is pro-
pelled. A plaything—the Weet-weet —is also an inven-
tion peculiar to this people, though an instrument
somewhat similar is in use in Fiji. They are skilful in
manufactures, and their nets, fish-hooks, bags, and
netted ornaments are well and neatly made. They use
stone axes, and, in the north, stone spear-heads. The
axes, over the greater part of the continent, are polished,
but in West Australia the edge is formed by striking
off flakes. In nearly all parts the axes are provided
with wooden handles; some tribes in Central Australia,
however, use them without handles, much in the same
manner as the Tasmanians did.


The Australians generally use canoes made of bark.
On the north-east coast they build and sail large canoes,
the form of which they have borrowed from the
Papuans.
They do not manufacture pottery.
a.— Victoria.
DEESS AND PEESONAL OENAMENTS.
1. A sash or band of network worn by the males as
a belt round the loins. In it the native carries the
tomahawk, boomerang, or other weapon or implement
that can be conveniently placed between the band and
his body. The material of which it is made is obtained
from a flag that grows on the banks of the Murray. It
is strong and elastic, and is 6 feet 4 inches in length.
The native name of this band on the Lower Murray is
Ni-yeerd.
2. A band tied round the head, extending from the
occiput over the parietal bones to the place of the
frontal suture. It is made of the fibrous root of the
wild clematis (Mo-u-ee); is closely woven and very
strong. These bands are usually made by the women ;
they are worn by males only. Wing feathers of the
cockatoo, called Wyrr-tin-nay, are stuck in the band,
one on each side of the head. The length of the band
is 12 inches, and the breadth 1|- inch. The native
name of this ornament on the Lower Murray is Mar-
rung-nul.
3. Mo-u-ee. The fibrous root of the wild clematis,
of which the Mar-rung-nul is made.
4. A band of network— Jimbirn —worn round the
forehead (Nern) by the natives of Gippsland. It is
made of the fibre obtained from the bark of a small
shrub which grows near Lake Tyers, and is coloured
with red ochre. It is 2 feet 3 inches in length, and 3
inches in breadth.


5. Jimbirn, 1 foot 2 inches in length and 2 inches in
breadth.
Note. —The Jimbirn was commonly worn by the
males, rarely by the females. To it was attached an
ornament made of the teeth of the kangaroo—named
Nerndoa jirrah (nerndoa, teeth; jirrah , kangaroo)—
and string formed of the wool of the opossum, which
was so arranged as to cause the teeth to hang against
each temple. At the hack of the head was suspended
from the string which fastened the Jimbirn a wild
dog’s tail, Wreka baanda (wreka, tail; baanda, dog).
Over the ears and pointing to the front was placed the
fur of the tips of the ears of a native bear (Koola).
Over the forehead was worn sometimes the feather of
the eagle, a tuft of emu feathers, or the crest of a
cockatoo.
6. Nerndoa jirrah. Set of kangaroo teeth attached
to opossum wool, as worn on the temples.
7. A band of network, called by the natives of the
Lower Murray Moolong nyeerd, worn across the fore-
head. Kangaroo teeth are attached as pendants, which
when lashed together are called Leangerra. When
stretched as it would be when worn, the broader part
of the network is nearly 12 inches in length and 3
inches in breadth. The material is the fibre of some
aquatic plant, twisted and made into a fine, hard,
durable twine. The teeth are fastened with the tai]
sinews of the kangaroo, Wirr-ran-nee. This band was
worn by both males and females.
8. Incisor teeth of kangaroo named Leanow and
sinews of the tail of kangaroo named Wirr-ran-nee,
used by the natives of the Lower Murray in making
the Moolong-nyeerd.
9. Awl made of the thigh-bone of the emu used for
boring the septum of the nose, also for perforating
opossum skins when sewing them together to form
rugs. After using the perforator for piercing the
septum, a piece of reed was slipped on to the point as


a canula, and as the awl was withdrawn with the reed
as a sheath, the latter was left to act as a tent so as to
dilate the opening. The size of the reeds was gradually
increased until the opening was large enough to admit
of the ornament of bone being inserted. The name of
this awl on the Lower Murray was Pin-kee.
10. Eeed worn in the septum of the nose.
11. Piece of bone worn in the hole pierced in the
septum of the nose of the natives, called on the Lower
Murray Mellee-mellee-u.
12. Bone— Kolko —from which sections are cut for
inserting in the septum of the nose.
13. Necklace —formed of sections of reeds of nearly
equal diameter, and each about eight-tenths of an inch
in length. The sections are strung on twine made of
some vegetable fibre. It is 30 feet or more in length,
and there are altogether 478 pieces of reed. This neck-
lace was commonly worn by both males and females.
The native name of it is at Lake Hindmarsh Jah-kul;
and on the Yarra Korhoort or Tarrn-goorrn. The
reed is called Djarrk.
14. Necklace of reeds —worn by males and females
of the Lower Murray, The native name is Kill-lid,.
15. Necklace of reeds— Korhoort. Liver Yarra.
16. Necklace formed of a strip of the skin of the
kangaroo, to which are attached the teeth (incisors) of
the same animal. The teeth are tied to the skin very
neatly with the tail sinews of the kangaroo. The skin
and the parts tied are coloured with ruddle.
17. Apron of emu feathers—worn by adult females
when dancing. The feathers are attached to a strong
cord. They are tied six or more together with a
thread-like twine; and the whole forms a rather thick
but short apron. It is fastened round the body by a
knot.
The native name of this apron amongst the Yarra
and Coast Tribes was Til-hur-nin or Jerr-harr-ning.


18. Portion of Til-hur-nin. Yarra Tribe,
19. Til-hur-nin. Yarra or Coast Tribe. The apron
is stained with red ochre.
20, Fringe formed of thick cords of opossum wool,
short and hanging loosely. Worn by girls until they
attained a marriageable age. The native name of this
fringe in Gippsland is Kyoong. During the period
that a girl wore the Kyoong she was called Kyoongal
Woorkut —that is, a girl who wears the Kyoong.
21. A crescent-shaped brass plate, with a brass chain,
engraved—“ Malcolm, Chief, Kukuruk Mum,” is sup-
posed to have been worn by “Malcolm,” a koradje, or
priest or doctor, well known in Melbourne some thirty-
live years ago. By whom the plate was given to Mal-
colm is not known. Malcolm was a very learned
doctor. The natives believed that he could cure any
disease, and his aid was often invoked. He pretended
he could fly, and when a warrior fell sick under the
belief that his kidney-fat had been stolen by a wild
black, the doctor would fly as the hawk flies, stoop
on the wild black, take the stolen kidney-fat and
replace it in the body of the patient.
Offensive Weapons.
clubs, ETC.
1. A roughly fashioned club—named by the natives
of the Yarra and Western Port Tribes Warra-warra or
Worra-ivorra. Usually a young tea-tree (melaleuca
ericifolia) was pulled up, cut short, and the root
fashioned into a knob. The root is called Koiu-un-o.
The weapon was sometimes used in a general tight,
but more often in single combat. When fighting, the
men were not allowed to protect themselves with the
Mulga or heavy shield. They struck and guarded with
thej Worra-worra.
2. Worra-worra. Wa-woo-rong Tribe, Yarra Yarra.
3, Worra-ivorra. Wa-woo-rong Tribe, Yarra Yarra.


4. Worra-worra. Wa-woo-rong Tribe, Yarra Yarra.
5. Worra-worra. Boonoorong Tribe, (?) Western
Port.
6. Worra-worra. Boonoorong Tribe, (?) Western
Port.
Note. —All those above described (except one —No.
4) are very rudely carved at the part grasped by the
hand. This was done in the first instance, not
for ornament, but to prevent the slipping of the
weapon; then, what utility originally necessitated
became, for other weapons used similarly, a motive for
styles of ornamentation that are far from unpleasing
in appearance. The length of the Wbrra-worra does
not usually exceed 2 feet 3 inches.
7. Fighting stick (Yarra), used by males, and named
Konnung. It is sharpened at both ends, and is 2 feet
6 inches in length. It was employed in close combat
principally. The native holding it by the middle was
able to stab his opponent. The stick was used also as
a missile, and birds and small animals were easily
killed with it. A very similar weapon was used by
the Tasmanians.
8, Konnung. The Lakes, Gippsland. A stronger
and much heavier weapon than No. 7.
9. Konnung or Worra-worra. This instrument is
a little over 2 feet in length; it is sharpened at both
ends like a Konnung, but one end is also roughly
carved so as to admit of its being grasped firmly by
the hand. This was used in close combat as a club,
and as a konnung, and also as a missile. Yarra,
Western Port, and other tribes.
10. Konnung or Worra-worra.
11. Konnung or Worra-vjorra. This specimen much
resembles the Worra-worra. Like 9 and 10 it is
sharpened at both ends. The part to be grasped by the
hand is cut in circles of decreasing diameter, and the
stick itself shows longitudinal grooves very coarsely
cut.


12. Konnung or Worra-tvorra.
13. Waddy or club.
14. Waddy or club.
15. Waddy or club.
16. Waddy or club.
17. Waddy or club.
18. Waddy or club.
19. Waddy or club.
Note. —Specimens from 13 to 19 inclusive show the
transition from the rude Worra-worra to the Kud-
jer-oong or carved club. Only two of the specimens
can be said to be ornamented. Numbers 17 and 18 are
covered with depressions like elliptical punch-marks,
arranged in circular lines around the weapon, each
circle about half an inch from the other.
20. An instrument 2 feet 5 inches in length and
Ido inch in diameter. The part to be grasped by the
hand is rudely carved, and the point is flat and
sharpened. This could be used as a digging stick, or
to remove bark from trees, after having been cut
with the tomahawk, or as a missile.
21. Kud-jer-oong (Wa-woo-rong Tribe) —a club or
waddy, used most commonly in single combat, when
both combatants protect themselves with the wooden
shield (Mulga). Blows are aimed at the head with this
weapon. It would be deemed unfair to strike at any
other part of the body. The length of this specimen
is 2 feet, and the breadth at the broadest part is
no more than inches. Some specimens are 2 feet 7
inches in length and 4 inches in breadth at the head.
The native name of this club, in some parts of the
River Murray, is Koom-ba-mallee.
22. Kud-jer-oong. Lake Tyers.
23, Kud-jer-oong. Wa-woo-rong tribe.


24. Kud-jer-oong. Wa-woo-rong tribe.
25. Kud-jer-oong. Locality unknown.
26. Kud-jer-oong. Lake Tyers.
Note. —The Kud-jer-oong, whether seen in Eastern
or Western Victoria, if ornamented, exhibits almost
invariably the same forms. Detached parallelograms,
filled in with elliptical punch marks, or incised lines,
touching at the corners, and alternating with blank
spaces, are seen on all of them. No. 23 shows this kind
of ornamentation very completely. Nos. 24, 25, and
26 are more rudely carved. The woods used for this
weapon are the burgan (mountain tea-tree, kunzea
peduncularis), box (eucalyptus leucoxylon), and red
gum (E. rostrata).
27. The club, called by the natives of the Yarra
Yeamherrn, and by the people of the Lower Murray
Moonoe or Munnup, is 2 feet 5 inches in length. The
shaft, which is little more than 1 inch in diameter,
forms with the head one solid piece of wood. The
head is conical, but so cut as to show six sides of equal
area. The sides are ornamented with a border of
punch-marks. The part grasped by the hand is deeply
cut in circles of decreasing diameter, and the point is
sharp. This weapon is used most often in close combat;
but it is sometimes thrown at the enemy, and a dan-
gerous wound is inflicted if the sharp point enters the
body. Any hard, heavy wood—as, for instance, red-
gum or box—is used for this instrument.
28. Yeamherrn. Lower Murray (?).
29. Kul-luk (Gippsland), Pirr-hen (Murray). This
club or waddy is shaped somewhat like the wooden
sword used by the natives of the north-east and north.
It is made of a tough, heavy, and hard wood. It is
2 feet 6 inches in length from point to point, and from
2 inches to 2-| inches in breadth. It is not a leaf-
shaped weapon, though it is curved, almost as a
dragoon’s sword is curved. It is really a club.


30. Kul-luk. Gippsland.
31. Kul-luk. Gippsland.
32. Kul-luk. Gippsland.
33. Kul-luk. Gippsland.
34. Kul-luk. Gippsland.
35. Kul-luk. Boonoorong, or Coast Tribe (?).
36. Kul-luk. Gippsland.
Note. —These weapons are quite smooth, except in
the part to be grasped by the hand. This part in each
is so roughened by deeply incised lines as to afford a
firm grasp. Some show only rudely-cut circles of
decreasing diameter; but others exhibit designs com-
posed of the herring-bone, flat bands, and parallel
incised lines.
37. Leon-ile, or Langeel. Lower Murray. This
weapon is shaped somewhat like a pickaxe. It is 2
feet 8 inches in length from point to point, and nearly
5 inches in breadth at the broadest part. Only that
part grasped by the hand is carved, and the carving is
of the rudest kind.
It is believed that this weapon is the same as that
named Darn-de-wan by the natives of Lake Tyers in
Gippsland.
38. Leon-ile. Wa-woo-rong Tribe (?).
39. Leon-ile. Wa-woo-rong Tribe (?).
Note. —A good Leon-ile is made of hard, heavy
wood, and in order that it may bear rough usage and
heavy blows a root or a branch with a curve must be
used. The native usually selects a sapling, and a part
of the root forms the head.
The Leon-ile is employed in single combat in the
same way as the Kud-jer-oong.
WOODEN SWORDS AND LEAF-SHAPED MISSILES.
1. A wooden sword or club 2 feet in length and
with a head 6 inches in breadth at the broadest part.


This weapon is somewhat like the Leon-ile, but is
broader and much flattened, and yet not flattened as
the Li-lil is. It could be used as a club or sword, and as
a missile. It shows the transition from the Leon-ile to
the Li-lil. It is not ornamented in any way.
2, Li-lil is a thin, almost leaf-shaped weapon, which
was used sometimes as a sword, and sometimes as a
missile. This specimen is very old. The incised lines
on each side of the broader part are intended to re-
present a lagoon, and probably an ana-branch of the
Broken River, the space enclosed by the lines showing
the country which the tribe of the owner occupied.
When holding the weapon in the position in which it
would be held, if it were to be thrown, it is seen to be
curved somewhat like a Wonguim. Its length is 2
feet 3 inches from point to point, and the greatest
breadth at the head is a little more than 5 inches. The
thickest part (the centre of the blade) measures half
an inch; it is smoothed to a fine edge; its weight is
14 ozs.
It is said that the men of the Mitta-Mitta called this
instrument Bunj-jul, and that on the Lower Murray it
was named 801-lair.
The woods commonly used for making the Li-lil are
Moe-yang (Acacia melanoxylon) or iron-bark (Euca-
lyptus sideroxylon ).
3. Li-lil made of the wood of Acacia melanoxylon.
Not ornamented in any way* Lower Murray.
4. Quirriang-an-ivun. A thin, much-curved blade,
measuring 3 feet from point to point, and rather more
than 2 inches in breadth. The head somewhat re-
sembles that of the Li-lil, but is smaller and sharper.
It was used as a sword and as a missile. Its weight
is about 9 ozs.
5. Quirriang-an-ivun. This specimen is not much
curved, and a slight alteration would reduce its form
to that of the Barn-gcet, or war boomerang. Like
No, 4 it could be used either as a sword or as a missile.


C. Barn-geet of the Yarra Black— Praah- ha-iuittoo-
ah of the people of the Lower Murray. This specimen
measures 2 feet 2 inches from point to point; its
breadth at the broadest part is 2 inches, and its greatest
thickness is three-tenths of an inch. For a length of
13 inches it is almost straight, but the upper part pre-
sents a fine even curve. Its form is much like that
which would be exhibited if the upper outer angle of
the Quirriang-an-wun were cut away, and shows
perhaps the transition from the Quirriang-an-wun to
the Barn-geet proper. It is not twisted as the Quirti-
ang-an-vJun is. This instrument does not return to
the thrower; it is a war boomerang.
7. Barn-geet. Victoria.
8. Barn-geet. Victoria;
9. Barn-geet. Victoria.
10. Barn-geet. Victoria.
11. Barn-geet. Lower Murray.
12. Barn-geet. Victoria.
13. Barn-geet. Victoria.
14. Barn-geet. Victoria.
15. Barn-geet. Victoria.
16. Barn-geet. Victoria.
17. Barn-geet. Victoria.
18. Wonguim, or Play boomerang, Wa-woo-rong
Tribe. This example measures 2 feet 1 inch from
point to point, and it is 2 inches and one tenth in
breadth. In its size and outline it much resembles the
Barn-geet, or war boomerang; but on holding it as if
it were to be thrown, it is seen that it is much twisted.
19. Wonguim. Wa-woo-rong Tribe.
20. Wonguim. Wa-woo-rong Tribe.
21. Wonguim. Wa-woo-rong Tribe,
22. Wonguim. Wa-woo-rong Tribe.
23. Wonguim. Wa-woo-rong Tribe.


24. Wonguim. Western District.
25, Wonguim. Victoria.
26. Wonguim. Victoria.
27. Wonguim. Victoria.
28. Wonguim. Wa-woo-rong Tribe. This instrument
was made by one of the natives of the Yarra, and pre-
sents some points of great interest. Whereas the
ordinary Wonguim hies from right to left, this is so
made as to fly from left to right. The limbs are nearly
at right angles to each other; the side that is towards
the earth when it is gyrating is flat and smooth,
and the upper side presents a curved surface. It is
very neatly made, and when skilfully thrown its flight
is excellent.
SPEARS AND THROWING STICKS,
1, Koy-yun. Wa-woo-rong Tribe.—This spear or
javelin is 10 feet 3 inches in length and eight-tenths
of an inch in diameter. The head is brought to
a fine, sharp point; and about 1 foot from the top
there are a few very shallow incised lines and circles.
Otherwise the weapon is without ornament. The
lower end is brought to a point. This weapon is
thrown with the hand alone. The Koy-yun was
usually fashioned with great care. A hard, tough wood
was selected for it.
2. Koy-yun. Victoria.
3. Koy-yun. Victoria.
4. Koy-yun. Victoria.
5. Koy-yun. Victoria.
6. Koy-yun. Victoria.
7. Koy-yun. Victoria.
8. Koy-yun. Victoria.
9. Koy-yun. Victoria.
Ten feet 3 inches in length.
Ten feet 3 inches in length.
Ten feet 3 inches in length.
Ten feet 3 inches in length.
Nine feet 3 inches in length.
Eight feet 8 inches in length.
Eight feet 9 inches in length.
Eight feet 9 inches in length.
10. Monguile , or jagged spear. This weapon is 9
feet 11 inches in length, and 1 inch in diameter at the


thickest part. It is exactly like the Koy-yun; but the
head, for a distance of 13 inches from the point, is
grooved in two lines opposite to each other. In this
groove are inserted chips of quartz or hard black basalt,
which are fastened in their places with a gum named
Fid-jer-ong —a gum which the Goulburn Blacks say
they procured from a tree named Mi-mee-rong. A gum
called Jark, which oozes from the wattle (Acacia
mollissima) was used occasionally. Many of the chips
are broken in this example, and some are gone alto-
gether. The lower end is brought to a point. This
spear was thrown with the hand alone, and was used
chiefly in fighting.
11. Nandum. A spear or javelin used chiefly in
war. It is 9 feet 9 inches in length, and 1 inch in
diameter at the thickest part. It is formed wholly of
hard, dense wood. For a distance of 14 inches from
the point it is barbed on one side, there being 8
barbs in all. The lower end is brought to a point, and
it is thrown with the hand alone.
12. Nandum. Same length and thickness as No.
11. Barbed on one side for a distance of 19 inches
from the point, there being 12 barbs. The barbs are
smaller, not so sharp, and not so neatly cut as those of
No. 11.
13. Nandum. Ten feet 3 inches in length. Nine
barbs.
14. Nandum. Nine feet in length and six-tenths of
an inch in diameter. Seven barbs. A very light
weapon.
15. Tir-rer, Da-aar, Djer-rer, or Jer-aor. The
upper part of this weapon consists of a hard, heavy,
tough piece of wood, about 3 feet 2 inches in length, and
six-tenths of an inch in diameter at the thickest part.
It tapers and is brought to a fine point. This shaft is
joined to a piece of reed 4 feet 3 inches in length, and
is securely fastened with twine or sinews and the gum
known as Fid-jer-ong. This spear is know n and used


in all parts of Victoria. The lower end is hollowed,
and it is thrown with the Kur-ruk.
Note. —A spear on some parts of the Murray is
named Kalkro, and in Gippsland Wall.
16. Kur-ruk or Gur-reek (Yarra tribe), Murri-wun
(Goulburn tribe), Meera or Womerah. The instrument
by which spears are propelled. This specimen is 2 feet
1 inch in length, and nearly 2 inches in width at the
widest part. The upper surface above the part grasped
by the hand is flat, and the lower part is curved.
There is a barb at the point (cut out of the solid wood)
which when it is used is inserted in the hollow at the
end of the spear; it is a lever, and enables a man to
throw a spear with much force and great accuracy.
The wood of which this specimen is made appears to
be red-gum. The woods most commonly used, how-
ever, are Bailee (cherry tree, Exocarpus cupressi-
formis) and Moe-yang (blackwood, Acacia melan-
oxylon).
When the barb of a Kur-ruk is broken, it is custom-
ary to insert a piece of bone or a tooth as a barb,
fastening it with the sinews of the tail of the kangaroo
and Pid-jer-ong. This Kur-ruk is not ornamented.
17. Kur-ruk. Victoria. Not ornamented.
18. Kur-ruk. Victoria. A figure in relief is very
rudely carved on the face of this weapon.
19. Kur-ruk. Wa-woo-rong tribe. Ornamented on
the face with elliptical punch marks and round dots in
lines, bands, and squares, and on the back with a line
of dots down the centre and other lines, parallel to
each other and forming an acute angle with the central
line.
20. Kur-ruk. Victoria, Rudely ornamented. Ap-
parently modern.
21. Kur-ruk or Womerah. Lake Condah. Profusely
ornamented. Modern.


22. Kur-ruk or Womerah. Lake Condah. Much
ornamented. Modern.
23. Kur-ruk or Womerah. Lake Hindmarsh. Much
ornamented. Modern.
24. Kur-ruk or Womerah. Lake Condah. Rudely
ornamented. Modern.
25. Kur-ruk. Apparently an old weapon that has
been carved since the introduction of European tools.
26. Kur-ruk. An old weapon. The back is covered
with incised lines of herring-bone form and chevron,
the latter so arranged as to present the lozenge form.
The face is carved somewhat in the same manner.
The handle is marked by minute square depressions
over a space of 3 inches in length, and a space of the
like extent below the barb is similarly ornamented.
This somewhat resembles the weapons of the tribes
north of Victoria,
27. Kur-ruk. An old weapon. Lines of the form
of the chevron and a human figure are carved on the
face. The back is ornamented with incised lines of
the same pattern as those on the face.
28. Kur-ruk or Womerah. Ornamented. The form
calling for notice is the St. Andrew’s Cross, which
appears in three places on the face. The bands form-
ing the cross are filled in with cross lines.
29. Kur-ruk. Victoria. Twenty inches in length.
A piece of bone forms the barb. Not ornamented.
30. Kur-ruk. Twenty-three inches in length. A
bone forms the barb. The back is ornamented with
numerous square and irregularly-shaped depressions
running in straight and curved lines.
Defensive Weapons.
shields.
1. Mulga. Strong wooden shield used for warding
off blows given with the Kud-jer-oong or Le-on-ile.
c 2


This specimen is 37 inches in length and 5 inches in
breadth at the broadest part. The form of a section
through the middle is nearly triangular. The aper-
ture for the hand (cut in the solid wood) is less than 4
inches in length. Ornamentation : Herring-bone, the
incised lines being filled in with white clay. Some
figures of an irregular form are probably the distin-
guishing marks of the owner’s tribe.
This shield was obtained from Larne-Gherin in the
Western District.
The woods used for making the Mulga are iron-
bark (Eucalyptus sideroxylon), box (E. leucoxylon),
and Garrong (wattle tree). Other hard woods are
used if those named are not easily obtainable.
The weight of the Mulga fit for an adult varies
from 2 lbs. 8 ozs. to 3 lbs. 8 ozs.
A warrior was accustomed to wrap a piece of
opossum skin around the shield in the place where
the aperture for the hand is, in order to protect the
hand, and perhaps to ensure a more secure hold of the
weapon.
This shield is named Murgon by the natives of the
Lower Murray, and Marr-aga by the natives of Gipps-
land.
2. Mulga. Lower Murray. Thirty-four inches in
length. Ornamentation : A band If inches in breadth
across the face, chevron, and incised parallel lines. The
hollows are filled in with white clay.
3. Mulga. Lower Murray. Thirty-five inches in
length. Ornamentation : St. Andrew’s Cross repeated
and placed feet to feet, and herring-bone. The lines
forming the crosses are coloured with red ochre, and
the incised lines with white clay.
4. Mulga. Victoria. Thirty-six inches in length.
Ornamentation: Three bands rather more than an inch
in breadth ; herring-bone, the lines so arranged as to
present lozenge-shaped spaces down the middle of the
shield.
5. Mulga. Victoria. Thirty-six inches in length.


Ornamentation: St. Andrew’s Cross repeated, and in-
cised lines parallel to each limb; centre, rude herring-
bone lines. The bands forming the crosses are curiously
ornamented with raised lines and small square and
oblong spaces in relief. The latter have been formed
by cutting across raised lines. The crosses are coloured
red, and the incised lines white.
6. Mulga. Victoria. Thirty-five inches in length.
Ornamentation: Narrow band in the middle of the
shield, with curved bands on each side and parallel
lines ; apparently a rude attempt to represent trees or
insects or lizards—probably the distinguishing mark
of the tribe to which the owner belonged.
7. Mulga. Avoca, Victoria. Length, 36 inches.
(From Western Australia collection.) Ornamentation:
Bands across the shield, chevron, and incised herring-
bone lines.
8. Mulga. Locality unknown. Length, 39 inches.
(From Western Australia collection.) Ornamentation :
Angular and curved bands, and rude incised parallel
lines.
9. Club shield of a flat, wedge-like form. Gipps-
land. Thirty-four inches in length, 4| inches in
breadth at the middle, and 1A inch in thickness at
the aperture for the hand, which is cut out of the
solid wood. Ornamentation: Incised lines, herring-
bone, This weapon is named Drunmung in the
Western District.
10. Drunmung. Gippsland.
11. Drunmung. Gippsland.
12. Drunmung. Gippsland.
13. Drunmung. Gippsland.
14. Drunmung. Gippsland.
15. Drunmung. Lower Murray.
16. Drunmung. Victoria.
17. Drunmung. Victoria.


18, Drunmung. Locality unknown. (From West-
ern Australia collection.)
19. Drunmung. Locality unknown. (From West-
ern Australia collection.)
Note. —All these weapons are of the same character
as regards size, shape, and ornamentation. Incised
herring-bone lines and incised parallel lines appear
invariably on the triangular spaces that form the front
of the shield. On some there are triangular spaces
left smooth, and on others hands and marks indicating
probably the tribes to which the owners belonged.
The bands are usually coloured with red ochre, and
the incised lines with white clay.
20. Gee-am or Kerreem. Used as a protection against
spears. Lower Murray. This weapon is made of the
bark of the gum-tree. The Binnap (manna gum-tree,
Eucalyptus viminalis) was commonly used.
It is 39 inches in length, 10 inches in breadth, and
from two to three tenths of an inch in thickness.
The handle is a strong piece of wood, bent, and with
the ends passing through holes made in the shield.
Shields with the handle cut out of the solid wood are
rare.
Ornamentation.—Band down the middle of the
shield, one across the centre at right angles to the first,
and one at each end—the spaces being filled in with
rudely-cut chevrons in lines parallel to each other.
The bands are coloured red and the incised lines white.
The name of this weapon at Lake Tyers is Bam-er-
ook, and on the Murray Karragame.
21. Gee-am. Victoria.
22. Gee-am (Bam-ar-ook). Gippsland.
23. Gee-am (Karragame). Lower Murray.
24, Gee-am. Victoria.
25. Gee-am. Victoria.
Note. —These shields are usually about 38 inches in
length, 10 inches in breadth at the broadest part, and


rather more than a quarter of an inch in thickness.
The same kind of ornamentation as that seen on the
club shields is not seldom used, though the most com-
mon arrangement of incised lines for the Gee-am is
that of No. 20. No. 22 is an exception. This shield
is 42| inches in length, 10 inches in breadth, and at the
middle, where the holes for the handles are, six-tenths
of an inch in thickness. It is ornamented with narrow
bands and herring-bone lines, and a blank space with
an irregular boundary near the centre probably in-
dicates the form of the tract of country that was
occupied by the tribe to which the owner belonged.
Implements and Manufactures.
STONE IMPLEMENTS.
HATCHETS.
1. Stone hatchet with wooden handle. Merring,
Karr-geing, Kal-baling-elareek, Gal-biling-n’garrook,
or Kul-hul-en-ur-uk. The stone—a dense quartzite,
resembling hornstone —is 5 inches in length, 2 inches
in breadth, and about seven-tenths of an inch in thick-
ness. The handle, which is 15 inches in length, is a
piece of tough wood, split, and bent round the head.
It is tied near the stone with the fibre of the stringy
bark, and further secured by gum.
The weight of this implement is 13 \ ozs. It be-
longed to a native of the Wa-woo-rong Tribe.
2. Stone hatchet with handle. Felstone, finely por-
phyritic. Victoria.
3. Stone hatchet with handle. Like a metamorphic
rock. Lake Condah,
4. Stone hatchet with handle. Dense greenstone
(diorite). Lake Condah.
5. Stone hatchet with handle. Felsite porphyry,
The Lakes, Gippsland.
6. Stone hatchet with handle. Dense diorite (a
pebble ?). The Lakes, Gippsland.


7. Stone hatchet with handle. Hard metamorphic
schist (a pebble?). The Lakes, Gippsland.
8. Axe. Fine-grained felspathic granite, like lepty-
nite. Bed of Moonee Ponds, Flemington.
9. Axe. Aphanite. Wa-woo-rong Tribe.
10. Axe. Very fine-grained hard greenstone. Bed
Bluff, Brighton.
11, Axe. Felstone. Biver Plenty.
12. Axe. Greenstone, porphyritic. Coranderrk
Creek.
13. Axe. Hard, dense, tough metamorphic rock
Mooroolbark.
14, Axe. Greenstone. Mooroolbark.
15, Axe. Dense silicious metamorphic rock. Biver
Werribee.
16. Axe. Quartzite, resembling greenstone. Near
Geelong.
17. Axe. Greenstone, very much decomposed on
the surface. Winchelsea.
18. Axe. Fine-grained metamorphic rock, Mun-
tham.
19. Axe. Metamorphic rock. Conconjella Creek.
20. Axe. Metamorphic quartzose schist. Yarriam-
biack Creek,
21. Axe. Greenstone (aphanite). Yarriambiack
Creek.
22. Axe. Very fine-grained greenstone. Glenorchy-
-23. Axe. Metamorphic rock. Lexington.
24. Axe. Greenstone. Leigh Biver.
25. Axe. Felsite. Beservoir, Malmsbury.
26. Axe. Fine-grained dense silicious metamorphic
sandstone. “ The Cups,” near Cape Schanck.
27. Axe. Metamorphic rock. Coolort.
28. Axe. Fine-grained greenstone, like gabbro.
Coolort.


29. Axe. Like metamorphic rock. Coolort,
30. Axe, Dense aphanite, with in places a por-
phyritic texture. Cranbourne.
31. Axe. Basalt, rich in olivine. Brandy Creek.
32. Axe. Felsite, porphyritic. Brandy Creek.
33. Axe. Dense basalt, rich in olivine. Brandy
Creek.
34. Axe. Metamorphic schist, nodular; the fahlu-
nitic minerals decomposed on the surface ; the silicious
base pitted. River Powlett.
35. Axe. Dense diorite (greenstone), very fine
granular. River Powlett.
36. Axe. Metamorphic sandstone, nearly like
quartzite. River Powlett.
37. Axe. Felsite porphyry. River Powlett.
38. Axe. Dense quartzite. River Powlett.
39. Axe. Dense quartzite. Near Wilson’s Promon-
tory.
40. Axe. Hard metamorphic rock. The Lakes,
Gippsland.
41. Axe. Hard, nearly black, metamorphic sand-
stone, probably from near boundary of granite. The
Lakes, Gippsland.
42. Axe. Serpentinous rock, like gabbro. South
Western Gippsland.
43. Axe. Metamorphic rock, resembling Hornfells
Tabberrabbera, Gippsland.
44. Axe. Fine-grained greenstone. Albury.
45. Axe. Hard, dense, nearly black, silicious por-
phyry. Chiltern.
46. Axe. Hard, dense, tough nephritic greenstone.
Kerang, Lower Loddon.
47. Axe. Quartzite, with felspar enclosed; fels-
pathic granite. Lower Murray.


48. Axe. Fine granular, nearly dense quartzite.
Swan Hill.
49. Axe. Dense quartzite, resembling hornstone.
Lower Murray.
50. Axe. Very fine-grained greenstone. Lower
Murray,
51. Axe. Felsite porphyry, like elvanite. Lower
Murray.
52. Axe. Porphyritic rock. Lower Murray.
53. Axe, Dense greenstone. Lower Murray.
54. Axe. Dense aphanite. River Delatite.
55. Axe. Dense aphanite (greenstone), in part fine
grained. River Delatite.
56. Axe. Black basalt. Mirrnyong heap. Cape
Otway.
57. Axe. Dense black anamesite. Cape Otway.
58. Axe. Dense black greenstone (aphanite). Vic-
toria.
59. Axe. Hard fine-grained metamorphic sand-
stone. Victoria.
60. Axe. Black silicious porphyry. Victoria.
61. Axe. Felstone. Victoria.
62. Axe. Aphanite. Victoria.
63. Axe. Dense aphanite. Victoria.
64. Axe (unfinished). Metamorphic sandstone.
Victoria.
65. Axe (broken). Felsite, in places porphyritic.
Victoria.
66. Axe. Very fine-grained hard silicious sand-
stone. Victoria.
67. Axe (fragment). Metamorphic rock. Victoria.
68. Axe (fragment). Chertz quartzite. Victoria.
69, Axe (broken). Fine dense metamorphic mica-
ceous rock, like cornubianite; pitted. Puzzle Range,
near Alexandra.


70. Axe. Fine-grained greenstone. Near Ingle-
wood.
71. Axe. Length, 8 inches; breadth, 5 inches; and
thickness, about 2 inches. Grooved for a wooden
handle. Weight, 72J ozs. Much decomposed on
the surface. Basalt or greenstone. This kind of axe
is named Pur-ut-three by the natives of one part of
the Murray, and it was used, they say, to cut open
large trees. Lake Condah.
72. Axe. Length, Cf inches; breadth, nearly 4
inches; and greatest thickness, about 2| inches.
Grooved for a wooden handle. Much decomposed on
the surface. Like fine-grained decomposing green-
stone. Lexington.
72a. Stone axe, 9 inches in length and 4f inches in
breadth. Grooved for the wooden handle. Found
near the southern boundary of the Alma Consols
Gold Mining Company’s lease, at a depth of 18 inches
from the surface.
72 b. Stone axe, 5 inches in length and 8 inches in
breadth.
72c. Stone axe
72d. Stone axe,
72e. Stone axe.
72f. Stone axe,
72g. Stone axe.
72h. Stone axe.
72i. Stone axe.
72J. Stone axe.
72k. Stone axe.
721. Stone axe, not quite 2 inches in length and
only 11 inches in breadth at the broadest part. Well-
formed cutting edge.
73. Stone implement, resembling a large axe. Made
by striking off flakes; the cutting part ground and


polished. Length, 14 inches ; breadth, 5 inches ; and
thickness, rather more than If inches. There is no
groove or mark indicating that it had been fitted with
a wooden handle. Daylesford.
CHIPS OF BASALT, ETC.
FOR JAGGED SPEARS, AND FOR CUTTING, SCRAPING, AND SKINNING
ANIMALS; AND OTHER STONE IMPLEMENTS.
74. Chips of basalt, found on the ranges near Cas-
tlemaine, Guildford, and other places. Fourteen
samples.
75. Chips of chert from a sand dune near shell
mounds. Coal Creek, Cape Patterson.
76. Chips. Shell mounds near high-water mark.
Dromana.
77. Cutting instruments of chert, fragments of
stone axes, bone awls, with teeth of the seal, tusk of a
native dog, fish bones, &c., dug out of a Mirrnyong
heap at Cape Otway.
78. Chip. Chert. Shell mound, Portland,
79. Chip. Chert. Shell mound, Portland.
80. Black basalt, used for chips, &c. Malmsbury.
81. Black basalt, used for chips, &c. Malmsbury.
82. Black basalt, used for chips, &c. Malmsbury.
83. Stone used for pounding roots, seeds, &c. Glen-
orchy.
84. Stone used for pounding roots, seeds, &c. Glen-
orchy.
85. Lah. A stone said to be used by the natives of
the Murray when engaged in fishing with nets. When
the nets are placed in the right position a diver goes
into the water at some point below the nets, and hold-
ing in each hand a stone of this kind he makes a noise
by striking them together, which frightens the fish, and


they rush up stream and are caught. One face is
ground flat and polished. It may have been used also
for pounding roots, &c.
86. Weenamong. Wa-woo-rong Tribe, River Yarra.
A stone used in basket-making. The women com-
mence by plaiting that part which is to form the
bottom of the basket, and having completed this they
work around, adding plait to plait. The stone, often
a pebble from a brook, is placed on the bottom to
steady the work.
87. Moom-newk. A basket begun.
88. Mirg-ma-rook or Yourri-u’rrok. Wa-woo-rong
Tribe, River Yarra. A stone used for sharpening the
heads of spears.
89. Yourri-u’rrok. Sharpening stone. Wa-woo-rong
Tribe. Yeringberg, near Lily dale.
90. Yourri-u’rrok. Sharpening stone. Crossover
Creek.
91. Yourri-u’rrook. Sharpening stone. Wa-woo-
rong tribe.
92. Mirg-ma-rook. Lower Murray.
92a. Sharpening stone.
92b. Sharpening stone.
92c. Sharpening stone.
98. Bulk. Gippsland. The stone with which the
coradjees or doctors worked enchantment.
BAGS, BASKETS, WATER-VESSELS, TOOLS, NETS, ETC.
1. Net-Bag— Bel-ang or Pel-ling of the Wa-woo-rong
Tribe, and Ba-thung of the people of Gippsland, When
not stretched, about 18 inches in length, and 12 inches
in depth. Victoria.
2. Net-Bag— Belang. Thirteen inches in length and
4 inches in depth. The twine of which it is composed


is made of the fibre of the bark of a eucalypt (E.
Ohliqua). Wa-woo-rong Tribe.
3, Net-Bag— Belang. Six inches in length and 5
inches in depth. Wa-woo-rong Tribe.
4. Net-Bag;. Eleven inches in breadth and 9 inches
o
in depth. Victoria.
5. Net-Bag. Nine inches in breadth and 9 inches
in depth. Victoria.
6. Net-Bag. Closely woven; twine made of material
obtained from the whites, and coloured red and white.
Victoria.
7. Net-Bag. Made of material obtained from the
whites; coloured black, blue, and white in patches and
stripes. Victoria.
8. Net-Bag. Made of material obtained from the
whites. The mesh is that of the fishing-net of the
natives. Victoria.
9. Net-Bag;. Made of material obtained from the
O
whites and variously coloured in stripes. Victoria.
10. Net-Bag. Made of material obtained from the
whites and variously coloured in stripes. Victoria.
Note. —The natives made their large bags usually of
the leaves of the common reed (Phragmites com-
munis), and the smaller bags of fibre obtained from
the bark of the g'um trees, of grass, or of the hair of
the native cat or opossum. The fur was picked off,
and the women sat down and worked it into twine by
rubbing it with their hands on the inside of the
thigh. When the whites came, and the natives were
able to obtain rags, they tore them up, and worked
the stuff into twine in the manner above described.
They continued, however, to use the same kinds of
loop, and mesh and knot, as when they had only the
native materials to work with.
11. Mid-jerr. An oval basket. Greatest diameter
at the top 17 inches, depth 6 inches. Lower Murray.


12. Mid-jerr. A round basket. About 8 inches in
diameter at the top and nearly 10 inches in depth.
Lower Murray.
13. Widging-nee. Perhaps a sort of carex. Used
in making the baskets called Mid-jerr. Lower
Murray.
14. Bin-nuk, Been-ak, or 80-ut. An oval basket,
7 inches in greatest diameter at the top and 9 inches in
depth. Yarra (?).
15. Bin-nuk. An oval basket. Greatest diameter
at the top 9 inches, depth 10 inches. Yarra. •
16. Bin-nuk. An oval basket. Greatest diameter
at the top 8 inches, depth 10 inches. Yarra (?).
17. Bin-nuk. An oval basket, with a broad handle
of the same material as the basket. Greatest diameter
at the top 10 inches, depth 8 inches. Victoria.
18. Basket with two handles. Lake Condah.
19. Basket with two handles. Lake Condah.
20. Three small baskets joined together, and with a
handle. Lake Condah.
21. A flat basket, named by the people of South
Australia Pool-la-da-noo-ko. Western District.
21a. Oval basket with handle. Elver Yarra,
Note. —The grass baskets used by the natives of
Gippsland are called Minni-gnal-ak. The large basket
from the Lower Murray was used for carrying the eggs
of the lowan (mallee hen).
In the Western District the natives adroitly turned
to account any differences in the colour of the material
with which they worked, so as to produce stripes on
the baskets.
The plants used were Kur-ra-wan, a kind of flag,
which was split with the nail and made fit for weav-
ing ; and others of poa Australis and Xerotes longi-
folia.


22. Tarnuk hullito or Tarnuk hullarto. Vessel used
for holding water at a place of encampment. A knarl
of a gum-tree hollowed out by fire and gouging. Thick
and very heavy. Shortest diameter at top 10 inches,
depth 5 inches. Yarra.
23. Tarnuk. The inner bark of the knarl of a
gum-tree. The walls are thin and the vessel is light.
It was carried by a string, and water was conveyed in
it when the natives were travelling. Diameter at the
top 10 inches, greatest depth 9 inches. Yarra.
24. No-been-tarno. —A shoe-shaped vessel of the
wood of a gum-tree, hollowed out by gouging and
scraping. Yarra.
Note. —The larger vessels were used not only for
holding water, but also for macerating the blossoms
of the honeysuckle and box, from which a sweet
beverage was obtained.
In some parts the skins of animals, human skulls,
and shells were used for carrying water.
25. Leange-ioalert. The lower jaw and incisor of the
opossum, which is firmty attached to a wooden handle
by twine made of the fibre of the bark of the Euca-
lyptus obliqua and gum. The tooth is very sharp, and
it was with this tool that the weapons, &c., were
carved. Wa-woo-rong Tribe.
O
26. Min-der-min. Bone awls. Wa-woo-rong Tribe.
27. Min-der-min. Two bone awls. Sand dune near
shell mounds. Coal Creek, Cape Patterson.
28. Lancets. Spines from the hinder part of the
porcupine (Echidna hystrix). They were used by the
natives for bleeding the sick, and extracting thorns,
pieces of spear-points, &c.
29. Cutty. Gum. Lower Murray.
30. Ba-arang. Fishing-net, made of kangaroo grass
(Anthistiria ciliata), called by the natives of Gippsland
Earn. Lake Tyers, Gippsland,


31. Lowrn. Hand-net. Lake Tyers, Gippsland.
Note. —The knot of the fishing-net is the same as
that of nets of European manufacture. The size of the
mesh from knot to knot is 2 inches. The natives
do not use the ordinary mesh in netting, hut regu-
late the size of the interstices with their fingers;
and instead of a needle they use a piece of stick with
the twine wound around it. For sinkers they use
stones, and for floats the bark of the tea-tree. The floats
are called Pliart. The net is not set with stakes, being
too fragile for that. It is drawn through the water by
two persons, each in a canoe. Others beat the water
and frighten the fish into the net.
The hand-net is used in procuring bait for fishing
with the hook. It is stretched on a bow, is let down
to the bed of the stream, and is drawn through the
water by the women.
The native name of the large net on the Lower
Murray is Kul-kul-ook, and that of the hand-net Moom-
gnil. A small square net—somewhat like Moomgnil,
and called Mook-kurra —is used to catch fish in small
streams.
The ordinary fishing-net of the Wa-woo-rong Tribe
was named Karrt-keerrt.
32. Fish-hook of bone. The cord attached to the
hook is made of the bark of the lightwood (Yowan).
Lake Tyers, Gippsland.
33. Weentfi-kalk-kalk. Fire-sticks. That placed on
the ground is 10| inches in length and 1| inches
in breadth. The upright stick is 23 inches in length
and half an inch in diameter. Wa-woo-rong Tribe,
Note. —The natives of the Yarra name the process
of getting fire Werrgarrk ; the name of the upright
stick is 800-ho-bo; the flat piece in a hole of which
the upright stick revolves, Bah-a-noo ; the dust which
collects in the hole, Kan-an-doorr; the first fire, Man-
noo-en ; and the flame, Kool-kool-hoo-noo-en.
The woods commonly used for making fire-sticks


(Weenth-kalk-halk), are the Djelwuk (Hedycarya Cun-
ninghami), and the Prostanthera lasianthos.
34. Weet-weet, Wi-tch-iui-tch, We-a-witcht, or Wa-voiL
A plaything which is thrown along the grass, and
can be made to leap from spot to spot onwards for
more than two hundred yards. The head—in shape
like two cones placed base to base —is about 4 inches,
in length and 1| inches in diameter, and the tail or
stem is about 24 inches in length and two-tenths of
an inch in diameter. The knob and handle are of one
piece. The weight of this missile is 1 oz. 17 dwts.
Yarra.
35. Weet-weet A smaller toy. The tail is tied to
the head with twine. Yarra.
36, Picture on smoked bark, drawn by a native.
2 feet 9 inches by 1 foot 7 inches. Lake Tyrrell.
Note. —The natives in many parts of Australia
ornamented caves, drew pictures on rocks, and carved
figures on trees. It was not rare in Victoria for a native
to draw figures on the sheets of bark that formed his
miami. He would first smoke the smooth side of the
bark until it was black, and then with a piece of bone
or the nail of his thumb draw figures of trees, birds,
animals, or men.
The bark picture in the National Gallery may be
said to consist of a series of sketches, illustrative of
incidents in the life of an aboriginal, and many of the
figures are drawn with spirit and accuracy.
6.—New South Wales.
Offensive Weapons.
LEAF-SHAPED MISSILES.
1. Barray an or boomerang, used in war.
2. Barragan or boomerang.
3. Barragan or boomerang.


4. Barragan or play boomerang.
5. Barragan or play boomerang.
THROWING STICKS.
6. Wammera. Throwing stick. Two feet 10 inches
in length. Rather broad and flat at the part intended
to be grasped with the hand.
7. Throwing stick. Of the same form as that of the
natives of Victoria. Ornamented. Modern.
8. Throwing stick. Ornamented. Modern.
9. Throwing stick. Ornamented. Modern.
Note. —There are no specimens of the spears used by
the natives of New South Wales in the collection in
the National Gallery. Those weapons did not differ
much from the spears of the Victorians ; and the
throwing stick was nearly of the same form throughout
South-Eastern Australia. No. 6, however, probably
from the northern part of New South Wales, is not
very unlike the Wondouk of the North Australians.
Defensive Weapons,
shields.
10. Hieleman. Shield for protection against clubs.
Twenty-seven inches in length and 4 inches in breadth.
Rudely ornamented with incised lines. Coloured
white, with a band of red down the middle.
11. Shield for protection against clubs. Apparently
made of blackwood. Twenty-nine inches in length
and 5 inches in breadth. Not ornamented.
12. Shield for protection against clubs. Apparently
made of blackwood. Twenty-five inches in length
and less than 4 inches in breadth. Not ornamented.
12a. Shield for protection against clubs. Twenty -
four inches in length and 2| inches in breadth. Not
ornamented.


13. Spear shield. Fifty-eight inches in length and
13 inches in breadth. Ornamentation: Incised lines,
herring-bone, and irregular, angular, and rudely-
curved lines, with numerous smooth spaces, perhaps
intended to represent a water-course and lagoons.
The handle is cut out of the solid wood.
14. Spear shield. Thirty-nine inches in length and
8-J inches in breadth. Ornamentation: Incised lines,
saltier. At the ends lines crossing each other so as to
form a lozenge pattern. Four narrow bands across the
shield, blackened. Colours in the body of the shield
white and red. Handle of wood, the ends passed
through holes.
15. Spear shield. Thirty-seven inches in length and
9|- inches in breadth. Ornamentation; An iguana and
incised lines running parallel to the lines of its form,
changing into irregular patterns towards the edges of
the shield. Handle cut out of the solid wood. River
Namoi or Peel,
Implements and Manufactures.
STONE IMPLEMENTS.
HATCHETS.
16. Mogo. Stone hatchet with handle. Dark green
aphanite. River Darling.
17. Stone hatchet with handle. Dense greenstone
resembling jade. River Darling.
18. Stone axe. Very dark, dense, tough granular
greenstone. River Darling.
19. Stone axe. Fine-grained greenstone. Like a
pebble. Port Stephens.
19a. Facsimile. Large axe. Eight inches in length
and 6 inches in breadth. River Darling.
KNIFE.
20. Knife. A piece of quartzite with edges rudely
serrated, fixed to a wooden handle with twine and
gum. North of the River Murray.


ADZES.
21. Adze. Dense quartzite, like porcelanite. North
of the River Murray.
22. Adze. Quartzite. North of the River Murray.
GRINDING STONE,
23. Facsimile. Wallong. Used for pounding the
fruits of the nardoo, &c. Murrumbidgee.
Note. —The stone Wallong, which is held in the
hand, is named Nay-ha on the Darling ; and the large
flat stone on which the seeds are placed is called Yelta.
As the native grinds the fruits of the nardoo or the
seeds of grasses he pours on a little water until a paste
is formed. This paste is scooped up with the forefinger,
and eaten as soon as made, or—if there be leisure —
baked into cakes.
c. — Queensland.
PERSONAL ORNAMENTS.
1. Band for the head. The twine made of opossum
fur and closely woven. When worn is usually covered
with white clay. Bulloo Downs.
2. Tuft of white feathers. Worn in the hair as an
ornament. Queensland.
3. Ngungy-ngungy. Fragments of shells ground to
an oval form, pierced with two holes, and strung on
thread. Usually worn round the forehead. Mackay.
4. Ngungy-ngungy. Mackay.
5. Garr-e-la. Two pieces of shell ground to a canoe-
like form, and attached to twine. Worn on the breast
—the string passing round the neck.
OFFENSIVE WEAPONS.
CLUBS, ETC.
6. Double-pointed Nulla-nulla,called by the natives
near Mackay Meero. Used in fights. A rougher in
t


strument of similar form is used for killing game.
Mackay.
7. Mattina. Double-pointed club with teeth on two
sides. Roughly scored at the part intended to be
grasped by the hand. Coloured red, the teeth white.
Mackay.
8. Club with teeth. Coloured red and white.
Mackay.
9. Club. In form like the Leonile of Victoria,
Mackay.
10. Club. In form like the Leonile, but broader
and flatter. A narrow band on one side filled in with
rudely incised lines. Coloured red and white. Mackay.
11. Bittergan. A wooden sword or club. Thirty-
five inches in length, and nearly 3 inches in breadth.
Weight 41 ozs. Coloured a bright red, and further
ornamented with serpentine streaks of white clay.
This weapon is wielded with both hands, and is used
to strike the back of an opponent’s neck and break it.
Mackay.
LEAF-SHAPED MISSILES.
12. Boomerang. Ornamented on one side with
rather shallow incised lines. Mackay.
13. Boomerang. Ornamented on one side. Mackay.
14. Boomerang. Ornamented on one side. Rather
deeply incised lines in. flowing, irregular curves. Rock-
ingham Bay.
15. Boomerang. Ornamented on one side. Rock-
ingham Bay.
15a. Boomerang. Ornamented on one side in the
manner usual on the north-east coast. Said to have
been brought from Tanna, New Hebrides. It may
have been taken thither by some of the natives returned
from the sugar plantations in Queensland.


15b. Boomerang. Ornamented on one side in the
manner usual on the north-east coast. Said to have
been brought from Tanna, New Hebrides.
16. A weapon somewhat resembling the Li-lil of
Victoria. Twenty-two inches and a-half in length
from point to point, and 3f inches in breadth at the
broadest part. Ornamented on one side. Incised
lines crossing each other so as to present a lozenge-like
pattern. Rockingham Bay.
DEFENSIVE WEAPON.
17. Ooolmarry. Shield. Twenty inches and a-
quarter in length and 7 inches in breadth. Weight
36 ozs. The front curved, the back flat, the space
for the hand being cut out of the solid wood. Rudely
but profusely ornamented with shallow incised lines
irregularly disposed, but so as to form patterns.
There is a shallow depression at each end, coloured
with white clay, and bordering each a double row of
detached circles coloured red. At the back there is a
figure—white on a red ground—perhaps intended to
represent some reptile. Mackay.
Note. —The weapons of the natives of Mackay and
Rockingham Bay differ as regards ornamentation from
those of the natives of the south. The clubs are
striated longitudinally, the boomerangs are orna-
mented on one side, and the distinctive forms that
appear again and again in Victoria, and with some
modifications in New South Wales, give place to
parallel incised lines and lozenge-shaped patterns.
Implements and Manufactures.
STONE IMPLEMENTS.
HATCHETS.
18. Stone tomahawk with handle. Greenstone.
Precisely similar to those of the Victorian natives.
Brisbane River.


19. Stone axe. Dense hard greenstone. Brisbane
River.
20. Stone axe. Fine-grained aphanitic greenstone-,
like gabbro. Ipswich.
21. Stone axe. Fragment of a large, well-shaped,
and very finely ground and polished axe. Fine-grained
porphyritic greenstone, densely impregnated with mag-
nated pyrites. Bremer River.
22, Stone axe. Dense greenstone. Bulloo Downs..
Paroo.
22a. Stones used for grinding seeds and fruits,
similar in form to those used by the Kaffirs. Said to
have been brought from the north.
BAGS, NETS, ETC.
23. Net-bag. Twelve inches in depth and six
inches in breadth. The loop like that of the Victorian
natives. Mackay.
24. Large net. Locality unknown.
25. Fishing net. Mesh six-tenths of an inch.
Northern part of Queensland.
26. Fish-hook made of a section of a Haliotis’ shell.
Highly polished, and with a very sharp point. The
line is attached with twine made of some vegetable
fibre. Rockingham Bay.
27. Message stick. The lines cut on it are said to
convey the following intelligence : —“Two blackfellows
come up in two days, seventeen days ago. One black-
fellow come up to where this fellow (Jacob) sit down.
The track shown on the stick means that from the
place where the blackfellows set out to Brisbane. The
message means that the aboriginals were taking steps
to aid Jacob in some attempt to escape.” This is the
translation which was given by Charhig, a native
trooper, before a court in Queensland. “ Jacob” was;
in prison.


d. —North Australia.
1. Oogee. Head-dress of feathers, said to be worn in
the corrobboree dance. It consists of a framework of
sticks, arched, and with feathers of the cockatoo set
around it as a border. The inner space is covered
with cloth or canvas. Two spaces which would appear
above the eyes when this decoration was worn have
a border of thick twine, and are coloured with red
ochre. The ends of the feathers are notched.
2. Knife. Modern. The blade is apparently a piece
of an iron hoop. It is firmly attached to a wooden
handle with twine and gum. Carpentaria,
8. Spear. Head of hardwood, three feet in length
and with fifteen barbs (on one side only) set in a shaft,
or reed, or bamboo ; the length of the whole from point
to point being ten feet. Port Darwin.
4, Spear. Head of hard wood. Twelve barbs on
one side only. Length ten feet six inches. Port
Darwin.
5, Spear. Head of hardwood. Twenty harbs on
one side only. Length ten feet three inches. Port
Darwin.
6. Pillara. Two-pronged spear, each prong barbed.
Length, 9 feet 11 inches. Locality unknown.
7. Pillara. Two-pronged spear, each prong barbed.
Length, 9 feet 8 inches. Locality unknown.
8. Three-pronged spear, each prong barbed. Length,
9 feet 5 inches. Port Darwin.
9. Three-pronged spear, each prong barbed. Length,
10 feet 2 inches. Locality unknown.
10. Spear, with a head of quartzite. About 8 inches
in length. Made by striking off flakes. Edges very
sharp. Shaft of reed. Length, 9 feet. Port Darwin..


11. Spear, with a head of quartzite, presenting three
cutting edges, and showing in section a triangle.
Length 10 feet 2 inches. Locality unknown.
12. Spear, with head of quartzite. Length 10 feet.
Locality unknown.
13. Spear, with head of stone like hard metamorphic
rock. Length 8 feet 11 inches. Port Darwin.
14. Spear, with head of stone like hard metamorphic
rock. Length 9 feet. Port Darwin.
15. Spear, with head of stone like hard metamorphic
rock. Length 9 feet 7 inches. Port Darwin.
Note. —Unlike the natives of other parts of Aus-
tralia, the people of the north make many of their
spear-heads of stone. The stones are brought to the
desired form by striking off flakes, and many of the
specimens are wonderful examples of skill. The long
spears are all thrown with the Rogorouk or Wondouk.
Each has a hollow at the end for the reception of the
tooth of the throwing stick.
16, Rogorouk or Wondouk. Throwing stick. Forty-
five inches in length. Port Darwin.
17. Rogorouk or Wondouk. Forty-three inches in
length. Locality unknown.
18, Club or Sword. Fifty-four inches in length, and
three inches in breadth. It has two hooks or grains at
the lower end. It is not certain that this is an Aus-
tralian weapon. It may, perhaps, be the sword which
Macgillivray saw at Port Essington, and described by
him as being 4 feet in length, and made of the tough
hardwood called Wallaru —a kind of gum-tree —the
ironbark of New South Wales. With such swords the
natives fight only at close quarters.
The weapon or implement in the National Gallery
is coloured with red ochre, and further ornamented
with stripes of white.


e. — West Australia.
PERSONAL ORNAMENTS.
1. A piece of wood 19 inches in length, and less
than three-tenths of an inch in diameter, nearly
covered with very thin shavings. When newly made
it would have somewhat the appearance of a plume ot
feathers. The natives of Port Lincoln (South Aus-
tralia), Mr. Charles Wilhelmi* says, used two sticks of
this kind on occasions of rejoicings and of ceremonies.
They were stuck through the head-band, behind the
ears, and so placed as to admit of the upper ends
being joined in front. At a distance they had the
appearance of long horns. Mr. Schurmann says that
he has seen this ornament with one tribe only of the
north-west, and that it may be confined to it.
2. A stick exactly similar to No. 1, and nearly of the
same length.
8. A stick 30 inches in length, and less than three-
tenths of an inch in diameter. The shavings extend
over a space of 4 inches only.
4. Shell—apparently intended to be suspended from
a string passing round the neck, and worn as an orna-
ment on the breast.
Offensive Weapons.
CLUBS OR STICKS.
5. Dow-ak. A stick 28 inches in length and 1 inch
in diameter. It is rounded at both ends. It is used
ordinarily as a missile, but could be employed also as a
club. It somewhat resembles the nulla-nulla of the
Lower Murray. It is striated longitudinally, and the
place intended to be grasped by the hand is rudely
scored.
6. Dow-ak. Slightly curved.
7. Dow-ak.
* Manners and Customs of the Australian Natives, p. 7, 1862.


BOOMERANGS.
8, Kylie, or Boomerang.
9. Kylie.
10. Kylie.
11. Kylie.
12. Kylie,
13. Kylie.
14. Kylie,
15. Kylie.
16. Kylie,
17. Kylie,
Note, —The Kylie of the natives of Western Australia
is essentially the same as the Wonguim or Boomerang
found in the Southern and Eastern Colonies, but it is
somewhat different in appearance. It is exceedingly
thin and leaf-like. Some are scarcely three-tenths of
an inch in thickness in the thickest parts, and they
have knife-like edges. The weight of weapon
seldom exceeds 4 ounces. When thrown skilfully it
flies to a great distance, and being exceedingly thin it
is sometimes invisible for a few moments. It has a
very true flight, and returns very near to the feet of
the thrower. They are usually made of a wood
resembling the blackwood of Victoria.
18. Light spear. Wholly of wood, 8 feet 6 inches
in length.
19. Light spear, 7 feet 9 inches in length.
20. Light spear, 7 feet 10 inches in length.
21. Light spear, 6 feet 10 inches in length.
22. Light spear, 7 feet 1 inch in length.
23. Light spear, 6 feet 6 inches in length.
24. Light spear, 6 feet 5 inches in length.
25. Light spear, 7 feet 7 inches in length.


26. Light spear, 6 feet 10 inches in length.
27. Light spear, 6 feet 3 inches in length.
28. Light spear, 6 feet 3 inches in length.
29. Light spear, 8 feet in length.
30. Light spear, 7 feet 8 inches in length.
Note. —These spears are merely long sticks. They
show all the curves of the wood as it grew. The hark
has been taken off and one or both ends sharpened.
Some are hollowed at the end for the reception of the
tooth of the throwing stick. The greater number are
coloured yellow and red, bands of the former alternat-
ing with bands of the latter.
31. Kiero. Spear of hardwood. The hardwood is
6 feet in length, and is inserted in a piece of grass-
tree about 20 inches in length; the whole length of the
spear being 7 feet 8 inches. The peduncle of the grass-
tree at the end would act much as the feathers of the
arrow. The ends of some are hollowed for the reception
of the tooth of the throwing stick. The hardwood is
merely a barked stem. All the natural curves of the
wood are shown.
32. Kiero. Spear of hardwood, with stem of grass-
tree.
33. Kiero. Spear of hardwood, with stem of grass-
tree.
34, Kiero. Spear of hardwood, with stem of grass-
tree.
35. Kiero. Spear of hardwood, with stem of grass-
tree. Six feet 11 inches in length.
35a. Kiero. Spear of hardwood, with stem of grass-
tree. Six feet 9 inches in length.
36. Gid-jee, Gee-jee, or Borral (spear-stone). A
hardwood spear, 8 feet 4 inches in length, and hol-
lowed for the reception of the tooth of the throw-
ing stick. For a distance of 9 inches from the point
(which is very sharp), there is on one side of the


spear fragments of quartz set in gum. Since the
natives have had intercourse with the Europeans
they have used fragments of glass bottles for these
spears, and some of the specimens in the National
Gallery show how skilfully the flakes of glass have
been struck off by the blacks.
37. Gid-jee.
38, Gid-jee.
89. Gid-jee.
40. Gid-jee.
41. Gid-jee.
42. Gid-jee.
43. Gid-jee.
44. Gid-jee.
45. Gid-jee.
46. Gid-jee.
47. Gid-jee.
48. Gid-jee. Hardwood spear, with fragments of
quartz set in gum on two sides and grass-tree stem.
Total length, 7 feet 8 inches.
49. Gid-jee. Hardwood spear, set with quartz on
two sides and grass-tree stem. Total length, 7 feet 8
inches.
50. Gid-jee. Hardwood spear, set with quartz on
two sides and grass-tree stem. Total length, 6 feet 9
inches.
Note. —These spears are thrown with the meero.
51. Hardwood spear, with a single barb spliced on.
52. Hardwood spear, with a single barb spliced on.
53. Hardwood spear, with a single barb spliced on.
54. Hardwood spear, with a single barb spliced on.
55. Hardwood spear, with a single barb spliced on.
56. Hardwood spear, with a single barb spliced on.


57. Hardwood spear, with a single barb spliced on.
58. Hardwood spear, with a single barb spliced on.
Note. —These spears are thrown with the meero.
They vary in length from 7 feet 4 inches to 8 feet 6
inches. They are ornamented. The shaft from the
point downwards is scraped smooth for a length of
about 9 inches, and is marked with black bands. These
weapons are used in the chase and for war over a large
extent of country. They are to be seen at Port Lincoln,
King George’s Sound, and northward of Perth.
59. Hardwood spear, with five barbs on one side
only. Eight feet in length. Thrown by the hand
alone.
60. Hardwood spear, with three rows of barbs set
close together. This is altogether unlike the spears of
the Australians. Perhaps it was carved by some of
the Malays.
60A. Reed spear, with four barbed prongs of hard-
wood.
61. Meero, or Womerah.
62. Meero.
63. Meero.
64. Meero.
65. Meero.
66. Meero.
67. Meero.
68. Meero.
Note. —Six of the above weapons are flat, thin,
broad, and shield-shaped. The tooth or point which
is inserted in the hollow at the end of the spear is
made of very hard white wood, and is fastened to the
head with gum. A lump of gum is placed also at the
lower end to prevent the weapon from slipping in the
hand. One has pieces of shell inserted in the gum, so
as to form it into a kind of chisel.


The usual dimensions of these weapons are as
follow : —Length 1 foot 10 inches, and greatest
breadth 6 inches. The weight varies from 7f
to 10 ounces. The meero is usually made of
Mang-art, a species of wattle called raspberry-jam,
from the scent of the wood being like that preserve.
One of the weapons in the National Gallery is very
narrow, and deeply scored with parallel longitudinal
lines. The others are not ornamented.
Defensive Weapons,
shields.
69. Woonda, wooden shield.
70. Woonda,
71. Woonda.
72. Woonda.
73. Woonda.
Note. —The dimensions of the wooden shields of
West Australia do not greatly differ in any part. They
are usually 2 feet 9 inches in length, and 6 inches in
breadth. They are very light, not more than 30
ounces, the wood being a species of bastard cork-tree.
The hole for the hand is cut out of the solid wood.
The ornamentation is peculiar. The front shows grooved
ridges, running in straight lines from the points, and
making a sudden turn near the middle, where they
unite. The hollows are coated with red ochre, and
the raised, grooved lines are painted white. The red
colour is prepared from a yellow clay (Wilgee), which
is burnt into red ochre, and the white from a sort of
pipe-clay ( Durda-ak ).
The Neam-nam, in the Nile district of Africa, just
under the Equator, have a weapon nearly of the same
size and form as that of the Western Australians, and
like it, the hole for the hand is scooped out of the solid
block. It is said, too, that as regards the ornamenta-
tion there is a similarity not only in shape and pattern,
but actually in the succession of colours in the pattern.


Implements and Manufactures.
STONE IMPLEMENTS.
HATCHETS, ETC.
74. Kadjo, Koj-jer, or Kaoit. Stone axe or hammer,
with handle.
75. Kadjo, or stone hammer, with handle.
76. Kadjo, or stone hammer, with handle.
Kote. —The stone hammers or axes of West Aus-
tralia differ from those known in Victoria, New South
Wales, Queensland, and North Australia. To a piece
of wood is fastened by a lump of gum (which becomes
almost as hard as stone) two pieces of granite or quartz.
One presents a rude cutting edge, and the other is
blunt. The gum is obtained from the tough top Xan-
thorrhoea. The handle is formed of hard wood, like
that used for spears—namely, Boondono or Mangart.
The end of the handle is brought to a sharp point. If
the stones used for a West Australian tomahawk were
discovered anywhere in the soil they would not be
recognised as the work of hands ; they would be passed
by as accidental fragments of granite or quartz.
77. Dabba or Taap, meat cutter or knife.
78. Dabba.
79. Dabba.
80. Dabba.
81. Dabba.
82, Dabba.
Kote. —The meat-cutter or native knife is made by
fixing to a stick (about sixteen inches in length) frag-
ments of quartz, quartzite, or, when they can be pro-
cured, pieces of glass. The fragments are firmly fixed
to the stick with gum, and the meat-cutter, indeed, is
very little different from the end of the jagged spear
( Gid-jee).
83. Dhabba, or chisel.
f E


84. Dhabha, or chisel.
85. Dhabha, or chisel.
Note . —A piece of quartz or quartzite is firmly fixed
to the end of a stout stick about 2 feet 4 inches in
length and 1 inch in diameter. The implement is
used for cutting and shaping boomerangs, shields, clubs,
&c., and is employed also in war and in hunting. It
can be thrown in such a manner as to turn over in its
flight, and if it strike a man or a kangaroo death is
almost certain. It closely resembles the stone chisel
or gouge used by the natives of the Grey Ranges.
The handle is grooved longitudinally.
BAGS, WATER VESSELS, ETC.
86. Bag, about 23 inches in length and 12 inches in
breadth, woven almost like open basket-work.
87. Bag, about 12 inches in length and 4 inches in
breadth, netted.
88. Native Twine.
89. Waalbee. Scoop or spade used for digging roots,
holding water, &c. It is made of the outside wood of
trees of the eucalyptus tribe, and is formed first by
burning it so as to hollow it roughly, and is finished
by scraping it with sharp stones and shells and polish-
ing it with a rasp made of the bark of the Banksia.
It is a sort of Tarnuk.
90. Shell water-vessel.
91, Bone awls.
92. Message sticks.
Stone Implements of the Natives of Aus-
tralia.
(Exhibited by E. H, Dunn, Esq., Loch-street, Beech-
worth.)
1. Tomahawk, with handle. Queensland.
2. Tomahawk. Silver Creek, Beechworth.


3. Tomahawks (fifteen, one imperfect). Carisbrook.
4. Tomahawks (seventeen, one imperfect). Glen-
gower.
5. Tomahawks (sixteen, several imperfect). Tarran-
gower.
6. Tomahawk. Ores wick.
7. Tomahawks (two, one imperfect). Mount
Greenock.
8. Tomahawk. Back Creek, Talbot.
9. Tomahawk. Buffalo, Ovens.
10. Tomahawk, Myrtleford, Ovens.
11. Tomahawk. Two-mile Creek, Beech worth
12, Tomahawks (five). Victoria.
13. Tomahawks (three, unfinished). Western Dis-
trict, Victoria.
14. Cutting instruments, chips, &c. Western Dis-
trict, Victoria.
15. Sharpening stones (twelve, some imperfect or
broken). Western District, Victoria.


11.-TASM AN I A.
A description of the now extinct Tasmanians might
properly follow that given of the New Caledonians.
The physical appearance of the Tasmanian is, as
Latham has observed, more New Caledonian than
Australian.
The complexion of the Tasmanians was a dull
black ; they had woolly hair; the nose was broad and
full, but not flat; the mouth wide ; and the lower part
of the face, in some, projected a great deal.
In many of their habits and customs they resembled
the people of the mainland; but in some important
respects they differed from them.
The origin of the Tasmanians is a question which
still occupies the attention of ethnologists, and cannot
be regarded as settled.
ORNAMENT.
1. Necklace, consisting of 565 shells (Elenchus Bel-
lulus) strung on thin, well-made twine. The native
name of a cluster of these shells was, according to one
writer, Merrina.
Note. —The males among the Tasmanians wore no
clothing of any kind when in good health. When
sick, they covered themselves with a rug made of the
skins of the opossum or kangaroo. The opossum skins
were laced together with the sinews of the tail of the
kangaroo, and the woolly side was worn next the body.
The women usually had a covering of skins.
They painted themselves with red-ochre, powdered
charcoal, and a substance resembling plumbago.
Unlike the Australians, they displayed a love for
flowers, and used these as well as feathers for purposes
of decoration.


The shells of which their necklaces were made were
cleaned by hanging them over a wood fire, and subse-
quent rubbing and polishing with the hands.
STONE IMPLEMENTS.
2 to 35. Thirty-four cutting implements of chert.
36 to 42. Seven facsimiles of cutting implements
made from specimens in the collection of the Royal
Society of Tasmania.
Note. —The stone implements of the Tasmanians
are mostly chertz varieties of metamorphosed sedimen-
tary rock, obtained probably from the neighbourhood
of granite or porphyry. Some have been split by hand
from larger blocks, and others are fragments of rocks
occurring naturally, and selected because they were of
suitable form. The fragments, whether detached by
blows, or picked up on the hills, have been treated in
one way only. Having selected that which appeared
to be the best for a cutting edge, the native has im-
proved it by simply striking off flakes all along the
edge, and from one side of the edge only. The edge is
not serrated. It would appear that the fragment was
held in the palm of one hand, with the edge outwards,
and that blows were given towards the palm and
away from the edge with a piece of stone held in the
other hand. Some specimens, however, have been
detached by one blow from a larger rock. These ex-
hibit a semi-conchoidal fracture, and the cutting edge,
not requiring alteration by clipping, is good. The
largest stones do not weigh more than six or seven
ounces, and the smallest are not much heavier than the
chips of black basalt used by the natives of Australia
for cutting and cleaning skins.
The native names of the stones used by the Tasma-
nians for skinning animals were Mungand and Tro-
wutta.
Not one of the implements is ground, and no attempt
has been made to give a cutting edge by grinding.
They were not provided with handles.


The weapons of the natives of Tasmania were rudely-
formed spears and sticks, about two and a-half feet
long, used as waddies. They knew not the use of the
throwing-stick, the boomerang, or the weet-weet, and
they had no shields.


lII.—FIJI.
The Archipelago of Fiji extends from 16° to 2° south
latitude, and from 177° to 182° west longtitude. It is
said to comprise more than two hundred islands, of
which about one hundred are permanently inhabited.
The language throughout the archipelago is the same—
with, however, various dialects and sub-dialects. Fiji
is not included in any of the great divisions before
mentioned, but in the character of the people and in
their arts they are Melanesian. The exact relation
this people bears to the other nations of Oceanica is,
however, a problem that presents some difficulty.
Dumont d’Urville,* who speaks of the Fijians as
belonging to the black tribes of the Southern Ocean,
observes that in many of their characteristic habits
they resemble the Polynesians. Hale,+ describing the
Fijians, says that the cheek bones project forward as
in the negro race, and not laterally as in the Mongol
variety. Their colour is a chocolate-brown, or a hue
midway between the jet-black of the negro and the
brownish-yellow of the Polynesian. There are, how-
ever, various shades—the brown predominating in
some and the copper in others; and, again, there are
the Tonga-Viti —those of mixed Tongan and Fijian
blood.
The Fijians, though fierce warriors and cannibals,
are in many respects superior to the natives of
Melanesia and Polynesia. Hale states that in every
large district there are towns inhabited by people
devoted to a particular trade or profession. In one all
the citizens are warriors (tamatai-valu ); in another,
fishermen (tunin-dau ); in another, carpenters (matai-
sau)\ and so in like manner are the several villages
* Voyage de L'Astrolabe, Vol. IV., 1832 ; Notes, page 696.
f United States Exploring Expedition, Vol. VI., 1846, p. 48.


distinguished. All are under the direction of the
head chief, who can, if he pleases, order the warriors
to assist the carpenters or compel the carpenters to
bear arms. They have also physicians ( Vu-ni-iuai)
and mid wives (mbui-ni-ngone), who are said to be
skilful and to employ many of the arts and specifics
that find favour amongst civilised nations. Hair-
dressers (Vu-ni-ulu) are numerous. The manufacture
of pottery is followed by women, who are termed
lewa tunindau.
There is much traffic between the different towns,
as well as between the different states and islands of
the group. The medium of exchange is the teeth of
the whale. The teeth are called tambua; and one
tooth, some years ago, would purchase 1000 yams, or
more, but the value has been greatly reduced by
whalers, who were accustomed to buy provisions with
the teeth they obtained. It may be supposed that
recent changes have still further reduced the value of
the ancient medium.
Tattooing (nggia) is confined amongst the Fijians to
the women (not as in Polynesia, where men only as a
rule are tattooed); the men, with a few exceptions,
are exempt. The marks form a broad band around
the loins and thighs. The tattooers are females, termed
leiva-vei-nggia; and they are paid for their labour.
The weapons of the Fijians are usually large and
very heavy. Some—and those not the largest—weigh
twelve pounds. They are usually neatly ornamented,
the forms being the zigzag, parallel raised bands, and
the chevron. They do not paint their weapons red
and white like the Australians and the natives of
many parts of Melanesia, but they are wrapped with
sinnet, very neatly braided.
DRESS, PERSONAL ORNAMENTS, ETC.
1. Wig, with inner network of twine, formed of
cocoanut fibre.
2. Wig, with inner network of twine, formed of
cocoanut fibre.


3. Wig, with inner network of twine, formed of
cocoannt fibre.
4, Wig, with inner network of twine, formed appa-
rently of the fibre of some root.
5. Wig, with inner coarse network of cocoannt fibre.
F. 6. Wig, with inner coarse lining of cane, like
basket-work.
F. 7. Wig, with inner lining of cane basket-work.
8. Ornament of hair.
Note. —The Fijian expends mnch time and care in
dressing his hair. The chiefs have hairdressers, who
are skilful in producing strange effects by cunning
arrangements of the stiff, wiry hair of their masters.
Seldom are two heads exactly alike, but all are in
accordance with approved designs. The Rev. Thomas
Williams* says that “the best coiffures have a surprising
and almost geometrical accuracy of outline, combined
with a round softness of surface and uniformity of dye,
which display extraordinary care, and merit some praise.
They seem to be carved out of some solid substance,
and are variously coloured. Jet black, blue black, ashy
white, and several shades of blue prevail. Among
young people bright red and fiaxen are in favour.
Sometimes two or more colours meet on the same
head. Some heads are finished, both as to shape and
colour, nearly like an English counsellor’s wig. In
some the head is a spherical mass of jet black hair
with a white roll in front, as broad as the hand; or,
in lieu of this, a white oblong occupies the length of
the forehead, the black passing down on either side.
In each case the black projects further than the white
hair. Some heads have all the ornamentation behind,
consisting of a crowd of twisted cords ending in tassels.
In others the cords give place to a large red roll, or
a sandy projection falling on the neck. On one head
all the hair is of a uniform height; but one-third in
front is ashy or sandy, and the rest black, a sharply-
defined separation dividing the two colours. Not a
* Fiji and the Fijians , Yol. L, 1858, chap, vi., pp. 157, 159.*


few are so ingeniously grotesque as to appear as if done
purposely to excite laughter. One has a large knot of
fiery hair on his crown, all the rest of the head being
bald; another has the most of his hair cut away,
leaving three or four rows of small clusters, as if his
head were planted with small paint brushes; a third
has his head bare, except where a large patch projects
over each temple. One, two, or three cords of twisted
hair often fall from the right temple, a foot or 18
inches long. Some men wear a number of these
braids so as to form a curtain at the back of the neck,
reaching from one ear to the other. A mode that
requires great care has the hair wrought into distinct
locks, radiating from the head. Each lock is a perfect
cone, about 7 inches long, having the base outwards,
so that the surface of the hair is marked out into a
great number of small circles, the ends being turned
in, in each lock, towards the centre of the cone. In
another kindred style the locks are pyramidal, the
sides and angles of each being as regular as though
formed of wood. All round the head they look like
square black blocks, the upper tier projecting horizon-
tally from the crown, and a fiat space being left at the
top of the head. When the hair, however, is not more
than 4 inches long, this flat does not exist, but the
surface consists of a regular succession of squares or
circles. , . . Married women often wear their hair
in the same style as the men, but not projecting to
quite the same extent. ... I have often girted
men’s heads which were 3 feet 10 inches, and one
nearly 5 feet, in circumference.”
The Fijians are excellent wig-makers, and that they
are able to imitate the grotesque forms into which the
hair-dressers torture the natural growth of hair on the
living subject is perhaps the highest praise that could
be given to them.
The wigs in the National Gallery are reddish-brown
and black.
J.B.F. 9. Masi. A man’s cloak. Coloured reddish-
brown and white.


J.B.F. 10. Masi. Cloak, coloured reddish-brown and
white.
J.B.F. 11. Masi. Twelve feet long, and 9 feet wide.
Coloured reddish-brown, and brown and white ; and
with a border 21 inches in depth, exhibiting the
characteristic Fijian diaper, and parallel lines in black,
red, and white.
12. Masi. Three pieces. Two coloured reddish-
brown and white, and one black and white.
12a. Masi. Coloured.
12b, Masi. Coloured.
12c. Masi. Coloured.
12e. Masi. White.
12f. Bark Cloth. White.
Note. —The dress of the men of Fiji is a sort of cloak
of masi, usually about 6or 10 yards in length. Some,
however, are 100 yards in length, and the ends form
long trains. The cloak or sash is passed between the
legs, and wound two or three times round the loins, one
end being secured in front, so as to fall over the knees
like a curtain. The end is fastened behind in a bunch,
or allowed to trail on the ground. Women are not
allowed to wear masi.
Masi is made of the bark of the malo, or paper
mulberry (Broussonetia). A plantation is like a
nursery of young trees, the average height being 10
feet, and the girth inches.
The Eev. Mr. Williams* says that “ the bark of the
malo tree is taken off in strips as long as possible, and
then steeped in water to facilitate the separation of
the epidermis, which is effected by a large volute shell.
In this state the masi is kept for some time, although
fit for immediate use. A log, flattened on the top side,
is so fixed as to spring a little, and on this the strips of
masi are beaten with an iki, or mallet, about 2 inches
square, and grooved longitudinally on three of its
* Fiji and the Fijians, Yol. 1., 1858, chap, iv., pp. 65-67.


sides. Two lengths of the wet masi are generally
beaten together, in order to secure greater strength,
the gluten which they contain being sufficient to keep
their fibres united. A 2-inch strip can thus be beaten
out to the width of a foot and a half; but the length
is at the same time reduced. The pieces are neatly
lapped together with the starch of the taro, or arrow-
root, boiled whole, and thus reach a length of many
yards. I measured a dress intended for a king on a
festive day, and found its length to be 180 yards.
The ‘ widths’ are also joined by the same means later-
ally, so as to form pieces of 15 or 30 feet square; and
upon these the ladies exhaust their ornamenting skill.
The middle of the square is printed with red-brown by
the following process: —Upon a convex board several
feet long are arranged parallel, at about a finger-width
apart, thin straight strips of bamboo a quarter of an
inch wide; by the side of these curved pieces formed of
the mid-rib of cocoa-nut leaflets are arranged. Over
the board thus prepared the cloth is laid and rubbed
over with a dye obtained from the laud (Aleurites
tribola). The cloth, of course, takes the dye upon those
parts which receive pressure, being supported by the
slips beneath, and thus shows the same pattern in
the colour employed. A stronger preparation of
the same dye, laid on with a sort of brush, is used to
divide the square into oblong compartments, with
large round or radiated dots in the centre. The kesa
or dye when good dries bright. Blank borders, 2or
3 feet wide, are still left on two sides of the square;
and to elaborate the ornamentation of these, so as to
excite applause, is the pride of every Fijian lady.
There is now an entire change of apparatus. The
operator works on a plain board; the red dye gives
place to a jet black; her pattern is now formed by
a strip of banana leaf placed on the upper surface of
the cloth. Out of the leaf is cut the pattern —not
more than an inch long —which she wishes to print
upon the border, and holds by her first and middle
finger, pressing it down with the thumb. Then taking
a soft pad of cloth steeped in the dye in her right


hand, she rubs it firmly over the stencil, and a fair
sharp figure is made. The practised fingers of the
women move quickly, but it is, after all, a tedious
process. When finished these large squares are used
as mosquito curtains, a comfort which the Fijian enjoys
but of which his neighbours are ignorant. . , . On
Kandavu a strong kind of masi is made, called liti,
which is the work of men.”
12g. Necklace of Whale’s teeth (in case in hall).
Yau.
12h. Necklace of whales’ teeth (in case in hall).
12i. Necklace of whales’ teeth (in case in hall).
13. Necklace of whales’ teeth.
13 a.. Necklace for a child, consisting of small rings
of shell and wood.
14. Whale’s tooth with braid of sinnet.
15. Whale’s tooth with braid of sinnet.
16. Whales’ teeth and a cylindrical ear ornament.
J.B.F. 17. Necklace composed of sections of shells
with a large shell attached.
J.B.F. 18. Neck ornaments (two) formed df sections
of shells.
J.B.F. 19. Liku. A woman’s dress. Black.
20. Liku. Black.
21. Liku. Black,
22. Liku. Black, red-brown fastening.
J.B.F. 23. Liku. Short and not very broad strip of
leaves, stained with turmeric.
24. Long and rather broad strips of leaves, coloured
white, yellow, red, and black; and somewhat in the
form of the liku.
J.B.F. 25. Dress Fringes, 6 inches in depth.


25a. Child’s dress (Liku).
26. Looped band or belt, of braided hair.
J.B.F. 27. Comb.
J.B.F. 28. Comb.
Note. —The ornaments worn by the natives of Fiji,
according to the Bev. Thomas Williams,* are white and
pink armlets, and others made of a black wiry root or
white cowries ; ivory and shell finger-rings ; knee and
ankle bands with a rose-shaped knot; necklaces made of
ivory, tortoise shell, dogs’ teeth, bats’ jaws, snake ver-
tebrae, native beads ground out of shells, and foreign
beads of glass; and breast ornaments, consisting of
pearl-shells as large as a dessert plate, plain or edged
with ivory, orange and white cowries, and crescents
and circles formed of a boar’s tusk. Chiefs and priests
sometimes wear across the forehead a frontlet of small
scarlet feathers fixed on palm-leaf, while a long black
comb or tortoise-shell hairpin —alias “ scratcher”—
projects several inches beyond the right temple. Ear
ornaments —not pendent, but passing through the lobe
of the ear, and varying in size from the thickness of
the finger to that of the wrist —are worn by both
sexes. Some insert a white cowrie, and a few have
the opening so distended as to admit a ring 10 inches
in circumference.
Weapons.
clubs.
J.B.F. 29. Club. Forty-nine inches in length;
diameter at the lower end 2 inches, and at the head
2| inches. Not ornamented. Wrapped with sinnet.
J.B.F. 30. Club. Forty-seven inches in length, about
2 inches in diameter at the lower end, and 2| inches
near the head. Not ornamented. Partly wrapped
with sinnet.
J.B.F. 31. Club. Forty-seven inches in length, and
from 2to 2% inches in diameter. Not ornamented.
Partly wrapped with sinnet.
* Fiji and the Fijians, Yol. 1., 1858, chap, vi., p. 159.


32. Club. Forty-four inches in length, and from
1| to 2 inches in diameter. Ornamented with zigzag
and parallel raised bands for a length of 8| inches at
the lower end.
33. Club, Forty-seven inches in length, and from 1|
to nearly 2 inches in diameter. Ornamented with zig-
zag and parallel bands for rather more than 9 inches,
having wedge-shaped or dentated figures as a border.
J.B.F, 34. Club. Forty inches in length. A rounded
head. Not ornamented.
34a. Club. Thirty-nine inches in length, A rounded
head. Not ornamented.
35. Club. Forty-one inches in length. For a space
of 18 inches the head is knotted, advantage having
been taken of the peculiarities of growth of the tree
from which the club was cut. Rudely ornamented in
one part with broad incised lines crossing each other
at such an angle as to form rhomboidal figures.
J.B.F. 36. Club, or staff. Seventy inches in length
and from eight-tenths of an inch to 1£ inches in
diameter. Ornamented over a space of 16 inches.
J.B.F. 37. Club, or staff. Thirty inches in length
and from seven-tenths to 1 inch in diameter. Not
ornamented.
J.B.F. 38. Club. Thirty-eight inches in length.
One end is conical, with a cup-shaped ornament below
it; and the other is ornamented with rude, incised,
almost herring-bone lines. This more resembles the
club of the Tongans than any made by the Fijians.
39. Club. Forty-three inches in length and 1| in
diameter. The head is apparently formed of the root
of the tree. The projections are nine in number, and
nearly symmetrical. The part to be grasped by the
hand is ornamented in the usual manner.
40. Club.
41. Club.


J.B.F. 42. Club.
43. Club.
J.B.F. 44. Club.
J.B.F. 45. Club.
J.B.F. 46. Club.
47. Club.
J.B.F. 48. Club.
J.B.F. 49. Club.
Note. —All the clubs from No. 39 to 49 inclusive are
of the same character. In some the part to be grasped
by the hand is ornamented, and in others wrapped
with sinnet. One (No. 49) is, as compared with the
others, a very light weapon.
50. Curved club. Thirty-eight inches in length, and
If inches in diameter. Head compressed globular, with
seven rows of spikes so arranged as to appear like the
extremities of long spikes proceeding from the shaft.
Point sharp. Not ornamented.
J.B.F. 51. Curved club. Six rows of spikes. Not
ornamented.
52. Curved club. Ten rows of spikes. Not orna
mented.
53. Curved club. Six rows of spikes. A tooth
and pieces of bone inlaid near the point. The part to
be grasped by the hand very neatly ornamented.
J.B.F. 54. Curved club. The part to be grasped by
the hand ornamented. A narrow zigzag line runs in
a spiral from the lower end to the head.
55. Curved club. The part to be grasped by the
hand ornamented. The pattern of the usual kind,
and finely wrought.
J.B.F. 56. Curved club. Ornamented throughout
its whole length. A narrow raised band crossing the
pattern runs in a spiral form from the lower end to
the head.


The clubs, 50 to 56 inclusive, are nearly all of the
same form.
J.B.F. 57. Curved club. Thirty-eight inches in
length and inches in diameter. Round from the
lower end to the head, which presents two points—one
point being apparently the base of a branch proceeding
from the main stem.
57a. Curved club, wrapped with sinnet,
J.B.F. 58. Curved club, round.
J.B.F. 59. Curved club, round.
J.B.F. 60. Curved club. The head ornamented with
rather shallow, elongated, elliptical punch-marks in not
very regular rows. Portion wrapped with sinnet.
J.B.F. 61. Curved club. Forty-two inches in length
and 21 inches in diameter. Head angular, edges sharp.
A portion wrapped with leaves and bands of sinnet;
variously coloured, and so arranged as to form a pat-
tern. The weight of this weapon is 10| lbs.
62. Curved club.
J.B.F. 63. Curved club. The part to be grasped by
the hand is ornamented.
64. Carved club. Inner surface of the head carved
into ridges. Wrapped with sinnet.
65. Curved club. Inner surface of the head covered
with raised hexagonal and rhomboidal figures, formed
by rather deeply-incised lines. Zig-zag between pa-
rallel bands near the lower point of the head, the upper
point being flat and broad.
66. Curved club. Head, wedge-shaped. Orna-
mented, chequer and zig-zag lines between parallel
bands. Wrapped with sinnet and a leaf neatly tied in
knots.
67. Curved club. Head, wedge-shaped and covered
with figures formed by deeply-incised lines crossing
each diagonally. Pierced with four holes, quatre-foil.


The change in the form of these clubs, though
the general outline is preserved, is worthy of note.
Those first described are round from the handle to the
head; the next succeeding, angular ; and the last, thin,
broad, and wedge-shaped.
68. Club. Forty-five inches in length and 4| in
width at the broadest part. Handle round, head flat
and notched over a space of fifteen inches. It is so
carved as to present eight wooden teeth on each side,
in form somewhat resembling sharks teeth.
J.B.F. 69. Club. Forty-four inches in length, and
nearly 5 inches in breadth at the broadest part.
Handle round; head flat and paddle-shaped. This
weapon is profusely ornamented in every part. The
patterns in the several divisions, formed by incised or
raised lines, are all different. It is encircled by four
raised bands, increasing in width towards the head,
and there are figures of men and animals on both sides.
70. Paddle-shaped club. Forty-two inches in length;
wrapped with sinnet.
J.B.F. 71. Paddle-shaped club. Wrapped with sinnet.
72. Paddle-shaped club. Eight pieces of bone inlaid.
73. Paddle-shaped club. Ornamented in every part.
Pattern in some parts almost obliterated.
J.B.F. 74. Paddle-shaped club. Greatest breadth
18 inches. Edges very sharp. A central ridge, to
give strength, on each side.
75. Paddle-shaped club. Imperfect,
75a. Paddle-shaped club. Four feet in length.
Partly encased in a sheath of matting, having zig-zag
lines and a diamond pattern in bands. The matting is
a shining yellow, and the patterns are worked in red
and black. The ornamentation much resembles that
of the Solomon Islanders.
J.B.F. 76. Ula. A club with a handle 12 inches in


length, and six-tenths of an inch in diameter. Head
nearly round, and about 2| inches in diameter. This
club is used as a missile.
J.B.F. 77. Ula.
J.B.F, 78. Ula.
J.B.F. 79. Ula.
J.B.F. 80. Ula.
J.B.F. 81. Ula.
J.B.F. 82. Ula.
J.B.F. 83. Ula.
J.B.F. 84. Ula.
J.B.F. 85. Ula.
J.B.F. 86. Ula.
87. Ula.
88, Ula.
J.B.F. 89.
J.B.F, 90. Ula.
91. Ula.
J.B.F. 92
J.B.F. 93. Ula.
94. Ula.
95, Ula.
96. Ula.
97. Ula.
98. Ula.
99. Ula.
99a. Ula.
99b. Ula.
The small clubs, called Ula, are carried in the
hand or stuck in the girdle, and they are used much in
the same manner as the knob-kerries in South Africa.
The knobs of some of those in the National Gallery
are globular and smooth, but formed evidently of the
f 2


root of a tree; others are cut into symmetrical patterns,,
and the greater number are ornamented in the place
intended to be grasped by the hand.
The Fijians paid much attention to their clubs. The
club was their favourite weapon. One form of the
dromo, as remarked by the Rev. Mr. Williams,* resem-
bles the spiked mace of the Scythians; the dui
approaches the double axe of the Phrygians, and the
totokea is like a spiked hammer. Many of the clubs
are made in the house, but some are cut out of trees
that have been trained to grow in a certain manner.
The kau loa is preserved just as it comes from the
woods, and one side of the waka is formed while the
tree is growing, and requires attention for several
months. The mada and the dromu are young trees,
torn up by the roots, which are cut off nearly close, so
as to form a knotty mace. The nokonoko, or iron
wood (casuarina), is used chiefly for clubs.
The clubs belonging to distinguished warriors have
remarkable names: one is named A sautu, lamolamora r
“ For War, though all be at peace;” another, Na tagi,
ka kere bole, “ The weeping” (i.e., for the dead I slew)
“urges me to action;” while a third is styled Veitalakote,
“ The disperser;” and a fourth, Kadiga ni damuni,.
“ Damaging beyond hope.”
SPEARS.
J.B.F. 100. Spear. Eleven feet ten inches in length.
Numerous barbs, varying in length from less than
7 inches to 15 inches, and cut out of the solid wood.
J.B.F. 101. Spear. Twelve feet nine inches in
length. Numerous barbs cut out of the solid wood.
Strengthened by bands of sinnet.
J.B.F. 102. Spear. Twelve feet nine inches in
length. Numerous barbs cut out of the solid wood.
103. Spear. Eleven feet ten inches in length.
Numerous barbs cut out of the solid wood. Strength-
ened by bands of sinnet.
* Fiji and the Fijians, Yol. 1., 1858, chapter iii., page 57.


104. Spear. Eleven feet nine inches in length.
Numerous barbs cut out of the solid wood. Strength-
ened by bands of sinnet.
104 a. Spear. Nine feet four inches in length.
Barbed.
105. Spear, Eleven feet in length. Numerous
small barbs, the parts undercut being strengthened by
bands of sinnet.
105 a. Spear. Twelve feet two inches in length.
Barbed.
J.B.F. 106. Spear. Twelve feet five inches in
length. Numerous small barbs, extending over a space
of 31 inches.
107. Spear, Eleven feet four inches in length.
Numerous small barbs ; the lines of barbs being alter-
nately downwards and upwards. Ornamented with
wrappings of sinnet. This spear is like one usually
found in Tonga.
107 a. Spear. Twelve feet nine inches in length.
Barbed.
108, Spear, Total length, 11 feet 5 inches. Four
barbed prongs, each 36 inches in length. Strength-
ened and ornamented with wrappings of sinnet.
108 a. Spear. Twelve feet, in length. The barbs,
cut out of the solid wood, extend over a space of 31
inches, the upper barbs of the lower sets pointing for-
ward and the lower backward. This spear is cut into
■an openwork pattern.
J.F.B. 109. Prong of a trident (so marked). Barbed.
Forty inches in length.
110. Spear. Total length, 12 feet 2 inches. Four
smooth prongs, each 48 inches in length and about 1
inch in diameter at the thickest part. Strengthened
and ornamented with wrappings of sinnet.


111. Spear. Total length, 10 feet 9 inches. Four
smooth prongs. Wrapped with sinnet.
112. Spear. Seven feet four inches in length.
Barbs of bone, tied to the wood with twine, and
strengthened with gum. Below the first set of barbs,
the wood swells into a slightly oval form, and it is
ornamented. A portion of the slender shaft is wrapped
with a plaiting of grass or cane of a bright-yellow
colour.
This exactly resembles a spear in use amongst the
natives of the Hervey Islands.
There are various forms of spears or javelins in
Fiji, a few having as many as four prongs, and show-
ing a round, square, or semi-circular section. The
barbs of some are formed of the sharp tail-bone of the
sting-ray, and others are cut out of the solid wood.
Not seldom the wood is cunningly chosen, being of a
kind that swells and bursts when moistened, so that
the barbs cannot be extracted. These weapons are
usually exceedingly well made, the patterns being
highly ornamented, and, where a bold open-work
pattern is employed, very elegant; but perhaps not so
strong as those less elaborately finished.
The natives give names to their spears as well as to
their clubs, and they are not of such a character as to
inspire courage in the breasts of their enemies.
Implements and Manufactures.
STONE IMPLEMENTS, ETC.
113. Adze. Head of very dense compact basalt.
Handle lashed to the head with sinnet. Not orna-
mented.
114. Adze. Head of very dense compact basalt.
115. Stone head for adze. Very dense compact
basalt.
116. Stone head for adze. Very dense compact
basalt.


117. Stone head for adze. Very dense compact
basalt.
U. 117 a. Stone head for adze (in case in hall).
U. 117 b. Stone head for adze (in case in hall).
J.B.F, 118. Adze. Head of iron. Modern.
BASKETS.
119. Basket, or bag.
120. Basket, or bag.
WATER-VESSELS, ETC.
121. Vessel of earthenware, 10J inches in diameter
and 12 inches in depth. Slightly ornamented. One
orifice.
122. Vessel of earthenware, about 11 inches in
length, 9 inches in breadth, and 11 inches in depth.
Ornamented with parallel lines and dots, triangles
filled in with minute pattern of waved or angular lines
and raised dots. Two orifices.
123. Vessel of earthenware, about 9 inches in dia-
meter. The upper part somewhat resembles the cara-
pace of a turtle. Ornamented with lines in a feather-
like pattern. Two orifices, one with a stopper of
earthenware.
124. Vessel of earthenware. Globular; about 6
inches in diameter. Upper part ornamented. The
pattern somewhat resembling that which would
result if the clay had been wrapped with twine. Two
orifices. Small handle, consisting of four stems con-
joined.
J.B.F. 125. Vessel of earthenware. Compressed
globular. About 5 inches in diameter. Two orifices.
Small handle.
J.B.F. 126. Vessel of earthenware. Small canoe


shaped. The upper part ornamented. Two orifices
Small handle.
127. Vessel of earthenware. Compound form.
Ornamented. Five globular vessels united with a
handle springing from the top of each and joined.
Two orifices.
128. Vessel of earthenware. Compound form.
Consisting of four globular vessels, with a handle
springing from each and joined. Ornamented. Two
orifices.
129. Vessel of earthenware. Compound form.
Four vessels conjoined, with handles. Ornamented.
Two orifices.
130. Vessel of earthenware. Compound form. Two
oval vessels conjoined, and with a handle. Ornamented.
Two orifices.
131. Vessel of earthenware. Compound form. Two
oval vessels conjoined. Ornamented. Two orifices.
J.B.F. 132. Vessel of earthenware. Compound
form. Two oval vessels conjoined, and with a handle.
Two orifices.
The Fijian is remarkable amongst the South Sea
Islanders for the excellence of his pottery, and for the
elegance of the designs he employs. Not one pro-
duct of his art can be said to be mean in conception.
Those in the National Gallery are nearly all of reddish-
brown or red ware, and though but slightly ornamented,
are, because of the forms given to them, well worthy
of study. They are not large specimens, but the
Fijian is able to make large pots. Their ordinary
cooking vessels contain from five to ten gallons, but
some are enormous —of the capacity of a hogshead.
The natives employ in this manufacture red and blue
clays tempered with sand ; and their apparatus, the
Rev. Mr. Williams* says, is simple enough, consisting
only “of a ring-like cushion, four flat mallets (tata),
and a round fiat stone; and yet the pots are often
* Fiji and the Fijians, Vo). 1., 1858, chapter iv., pages 70 —71.


made with as true an outline as if they had been
turned with a wheel. Lines and figures are traced on
the vessels while yet moist; and after drying a few
days, a number of them are placed together and
covered over with very light fuel—such as reeds, nut
leaves, grass, &c.; this is set on fire, and by the time
it is burnt out the pots are baked. While yet hot,
such as are to be glazed are rubbed over with the
resin of a species of pine. They are now fit for the
market. Women have the making of pottery entirely
in their own hands, and the art moreover seems to be
confined to the women of sailors and fishermen.”
The pots are glazed with the gum or resin of the
Dakua, or Fijian kauri-pine (Dammara vitiensis,
Seem.), which is not unlike the Dammara Australis, or
kauri-pine of New Zealand.
As may be conjectured, the pots are not very
durable.
J.B.F, 133. Water vessels. Cocoa-nuts (two), kept
together by two strands of sinnet, the ends passing
through holes in the fruits, and prevented from coming
out by two short pieces of wood.
J.B.F. 134. Yang-gono, or Ya-gono. Cup. Portion
of cocoa-nut. Glazed.
J.B.F. 135. Yang-gono, or Ya-gono. Cup. Portion
of cocoa-nut. Glazed.
136. Ya-gono, or Kara, or Ava. Bowl. The large
Kava-Bowl. Diameter, 35 inches.
137. Large Kava-Bowl. Diameter, 32 inches.
138. Kava-Bowl. Diameter, 26 inches.
139. Kava-Bowl. Oval, Longer diameter, 20 inches;
shorter, 13 inches.
The large Kava-Bowl is indispensable to the state
of a chief in Fiji. The Rev. Mr. Williams* says that,
■“like the inhabitants of the groups eastward, the
Fijians drink an infusion of the Piper methysticum,
* Fiji and the Fijians, Yol. 1., 1858, chapter vi., pages 141—142.


generally called Ava or Kava —its name in the Tongan
and other languages. In Fiji, however, it is termed
Yagony,. This beverage is not so commonly in use
on Vanua Leva and some parts of Viti Levu, as
it is on the other islands, where it is frequently
the case that the chiefs drink it as regularly as we
do coffee. Some old men assert that the true Fijian
mode of preparing the root is by grating, as is
still the practice in two or three places; but in this
degenerate age the Tongan custom of chewing is
almost universal, the operation nearly always being
performed by young men. More form attends the use
of this narcotic on Somosomo than elsewhere. Early
in the morning the king’s herald stands in front of the
royal abode, and shouts at the top of his voice, ‘ Ya-
gonaV Hereupon all within hearing respond in a sort
of scream, ‘Mama!’ —'Chew it!’ At this signal the
chiefs, priests, and leading men gather round the well-
known bowl, and talk over public affairs, or state the
work assigned for the day, while their favourite draught
is being prepared. When the young men have finished
the chewing, each deposits his portion in the form of a
round dry ball in the bowl, the inside of which thus
becomes studded over with a large number of these
separate little masses. The man who has to make the
grog takes the bowl by the edge and tilts it towards
the king, or, in his absence, to the chief appointed to
preside. A herald calls the king’s attention to the slant-
ing bowl, saying, ‘ Sir, with respects, the yagona is col-
lected.’ If the king thinks it enough, he replies, in a
low tone, ‘ Loba’ — c Wring it’—an order which the
herald communicates to the man at the bowl in a louder
voice. The water is then called for and gradually
poured in, a little at first, and then more, until the
bowl is full or the master of the ceremonies says,
‘ Stop!’ the operator in the meantime gathering up
and compressing the chewed root.”
The straining of the mixture is an art to be acquired
only by practice. It is fully described by Mariner.
The strainer is composed of a quantity of the fine
fibrous Vau (hibiscus) which is spread over the sur-


face of the infusion, on which it floats, and the man to
whom the work of freeing the fluid from the solids with
which it is mixed has a difficult operation to perform.
By skilful manipulation, however, the work is effected.
Then those entitled to partake of the drink produce
the Yagona cups—formed of the half of a cocoa-nut—
and the herald repeats a prayer. A libation is made,
and if the king he present, a cup-hearer, in a stooping
attitude, approaches him and hands him a cup. He
pours out a few drops—the lihation—and then drinks,
while the whole company chant, “Ma-nai di-na. La-
ha-si-ye : a-ta-mai-ye : ai-na-ce-a-toka: Wo-ya !yi !
yi ! yi /” All now clap their hands together, there is a
shout; and the cup-bearer carries the Yagona to the
next in rank, and then to the next, until each has par-
taken of the morning cup.
Very few of the females drink Yagona.
140. Priest’s bowl.
141. Priest’s howl.
142. Priest’s bowl.
142 a. Priest’s bowl.
142 b. Priest’s bowl.
SUNSHADES, FANS, ETC.
143. Sun-shade.
J.B.F. 144. Sun-shade.
J.B.F. 145. Sun-shade.
146. Sun-shade.
147. Sun-shade.
148. Fan,
149. Fan.
150. Fan.
151. Fan.
152. Fan.
152 a. Fan.


J.B.F. 153. Roi-roi, or mosquito whip, or, as it is
sometimes termed, the Orator’s Flapper. The native,
it is said, usually holds the Roi-roi in his hand while
he speaks in council.
J.B.F. 154, Boi-roi.
TOOLS, ETC.
J.B.F. 155. Ild, or mallet, used in the manufacture
of Masi for heating the bark of the malo tree. Square
head, with longitudinal grooves on three sides.
J.B.F. 156. Tata, or flat mallet, of soft and very light
wood, used by the women when making pots of earth-
enware.
J.B.F. 157. Tata, or mallet.
J.B.F. 158. Tata, or mallet.
J.B.F. 159. Wooden spoon.
J.B.F. 160. A pruning knife of tortoise-shell —used
for pruning bananas. The shaft is usually ten feet in
length.
O
J.B.F. 161. Cannibal Fork,
J.B.F, 162, Cannibal Fork.
163, Cannibal Fork.
164. Cannibal Fork.
165. Cannibal Fork.
Human bodies ( hakolo ) were generally cooked alone.
It was seldom that a man and a boar were cooked
in the same oven —and the dishes and forks used
for banqueting on human flesh were strictly tabu
for any other purpose. The forks were used for
taking up morsels of human flesh when cooked as a
hash, in which form it was, it seems, generally pre-
ferred.
165 a. Bone awl.


J.B.F. 166. Sinnet—commonly used by fishermen.
J.B.F. 167. Sinnet.
J.B.F. 167 a. Fibre from the husk of the cocoa-nut.
J.B.F. 167 b. Fishing net of very fine twine.
167 c. Net of very fine twine.
Sinnet is composed of the fibre of the cocoanut
husk. It is dried by baking, and combed out and
braided. It is used by the Fijians for nets, to lash
together the pieces of wood of which their canoes are
made, and for wrapping. When it is braided the
natives wind it either into a roll, a double cone, an
oval, honey-comb, or round ball, or keep it in plain
hanks. Some of their balls of sinnet have been seen
as high as nine feet and thirteen feet in circumference.
Sinnet has been long regarded as a very valuable
production.
J.B.F. 168. Pillow of wood.
J.B.F. 169. Pillow of wood.
170. Pillow of wood.
J.B.F. 171. Pillow of wood.
J.B.F. 172, Pillow of bamboo, with wooden feet.
J.B.F. 173. Pillow of bamboo, with wooden feet.
CANOES, ETC.
174. Model of a Drua, or double canoe.
J.B.F. 175. Model of a single canoe.
J.B.F. 176. Two pieces of wood with fastenings of
sinnet, showing how the planks of canoes are put
together.
J.B.F. 177. Two pieces of wood with fastenings of
sinnet, showing how the planks of canoes are put
together.


The Fijians, though not bold sailors, were for-
merly very skilful in building canoes, excelling their
neighbours, the Friendly Islanders. The Rev. Mr.
Williams* makes the following statements respecting
the building of canoes by the carpenters of Fiji:—“ A
keel is laid in two or three pieces, carefully scarfed
together. From this the sides are built up, without
ribs, in a number of pieces, varying in length from
3to 20 feet. The edge of each piece has on the inside
a flange; as the large pieces are worked in, openings of
very irregular form are left to be filled in, as suitable
pieces may be found. When it is recollected that the
edges of the planks are by no means straight, it will be
seen that considerable skill is required in securing neat
joints ; yet the native carpenters effect this with sur-
prising success. After the edges are fitted together,
holes of about three-eighths of an inch in diameter are
bored a hand-breadth apart, having an oblique direction
inwards so as to have their outlet in the flange ; the
holes in the edge of the opposite board are made to
answer these exactly. A white pitch from the bread-
fruit tree, prepared with an extract from the cocoa-nut
kernel, is spread uniformly on both edges, and over this
a strip of fine masi is laid, which is burnt through with
a small fire-stick, where it covers the holes. The piece,
or vono, is now ready for fixing, which is done by what
is commonly, but wrongly, called ‘ sewing the native
word better describes the process, and means ‘to hind.’
The vono being lifted to its place, well plaited but not
large sinnet is passed through the hole in the top flange,
so as to come out through the lower one ; the end is
then inserted in the sinnet further on, and the sinnet
run rapidly through the hole until eight or twelve loose
turns are taken; the inserted end is then sought and
laid on the round projection formed by the united
flanges, and fastened there by drawing one turn of
the sinnet tightly over it; the other turns are then
tightened, the last but one being made a tie to the last.
The spare sinnet is now cut off close, and the operation
* Fijiand the Fijians, Vol. 1., 1858, chapter iv., pages 73 and 74.


repeated at the next hole. The bindings, already very
strong, have their power increased by fine wedges of
hardwood, to the number of six or seven, being driven
in opposite directions under the sinnet, whereby the
greatest’possible pressure is obtained.”
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS, ETC.
J.B.F. 178. Trumpet or war-horn (Triton tritonis),
the favourite instrument of the native fishermen.
J.B.F. 179. Nose flute.
J.B.F, 180. Bamboo, perforated, and ornamented
with incised lines in various patterns.
J.B.F. 181. Bamboo, ornamented, the pattern having-
been burnt in. May have been used as an ear orna-
ment, or as a drinking vessel, or for carrying the milk
of the cocoa-nut.
J.B.F. 182. Bamboo, 40 inches in length.
The musical instruments of the Fijians are the
conch-shell; the nose-flute; the Jew’s harp made of a
strip of bamboo; the Pandean pipes; a long stick
used in the dance; and large and small drums, made of
a log hollowed out in the form of a trough, and having
cross pieces left near the ends. Bamboos are also used
as drums.
J.B.F. 183. Reed used in the sport known as tiga or
ulutoa. Forty-six inches in length, and with a conical
head. The game is played by throwing the instru-
ment from the fore-finger; which, when this is adroitly
done, skims along the ground to a distance of 100
yards or more. Each village has near it a level space
kept clear of grass for the practice of the sport.
The instrument somewhat resembles the Weet-weet
of the Victorians.
184. Dorsal buckler or carapace of the Turtle—of
which tools, &c., are made.


185. Model of a Burl, or Fijian temple. Made of
sinnet.
The Buri or Bure is described by Mr. Williams*
as a very useful place. It is the Council Chamber
and Town Hall. Small parties of strangers are often
entertained in it, and the head persons in the village
use it even as a sleeping-place. Though built expressly
for the purposes of religion, it is less devoted to them
than to any others. Around it plantains and bread-
fruit trees are often found, and Yagona is grown at
the foot of the terrace, the produce of each being
reserved for the priests and old men.
* Fiji and the Fijians, Yol. I, 1858, chapter vii., page 222.


I V.-ROTU M A,
Or GRANVILLE ISLAND.
Rotuma, which is situated in 12° 30' of north latitude,
and 177° lo of east longitude, and distant 300 miles
from any other land, cannot properly be included in
Polynesia, Melanesia, or Micronesia. Hale states that
the inhabitants resemble the Caroline Islanders in their
appearance and character, but their customs assimilate
them rather to the Polynesians. They are tattooed
over the middle of the body, and on the breast and
arms they have light marks, somewhat like a row
of arrow heads.
la. Spear, of hard, dark wood, 9 feet in length, and
half-an-inch in diameter at the thickest part. Pointed
at both ends, and well-balanced. Similar to spears
that are thrown with the loop.


V.-POLYNESIA.
That division of Oceanica which comprises Polynesia
proper, includes the following islands, viz.: —The Navi-
gators or Samoa Islands, the Friendly Islands, New
Zealand, the Society Islands, the Hervey Islands, the
Austral Islands, Gambler Group, the Low or Dangerous
Archipelago, the Marquesas Islands, and the Sandwich
Islands. There are, within the same area, many smaller
clusters and single islands, as Fakaafo or Bowditch
Island, with other smaller islands near it; Tracy’s
Island, Depeyster’s Island, Ellice’s Island, Cocoa and
Traitor’s Islands, or Nuia; Good Hope Island, or New
Nuia; the Horn Islands, Wallis’s Island, or Uea; Tiko-
pia (the most westerly island that is known to be inha-
bited by natives, whose physiognomy, language, and
character are Polynesian), Fotuna, or Erronau, and
Nuia (or Immer), two small islands east of Tanna, one
of the New Hebrides; Chatham Island, east of New
Zealand; Savage Island, east of Friendly Group; Pen-
rhyn Island, west of the Marquesas; and Easter Island,
or Yaihu, the most easterly of the Polynesian Islands.
The physical character of the natives of these islands
is not uniform throughout; there are differences so
great as to suggest a mixture of races; but in form, in
colour, and in the hair they present a contrast to the;
Melanesians.
No general description will serve to convey a correct
impression of the appearance of the Polynesian through-
out the vast region which his race inhabits. Some,,
even within the compass of one group, differ greatly
from one another. Though generally they do not
exceed the common stature, many are above six feet
in height, have broad shoulders, stout and strong
limbs, and generally a muscular appearance, and those
among them who are not compelled to labour often


attain a remarkable degree of corpulency. Many of
their faces are quite European, but a fulness at the
point of the nose is a peculiarity which is rarely if ever
absent. Their colour is also various. Some of the
women have pale olive complexions, and might be
deemed almost fair, whilst others are darker than
copper-brown, with rough skins unpleasant to the
touch. The natural colour of the hair is usually black,
but dyes are used, and not seldom a head is orna-
mented with a mass of purple, brown, or orange-
coloured hair. When left to grow naturally the hair
is commonly straight or waving, and thick and strong,
though often somewhat harsh and dry.
The Polynesians are bold and enterprising navi-
gators, often taking long voyages, and managing their
craft invariably with skill and judgment. The canoes
of the Polynesians are usually provided with the out-
rigger, which in its simplest form is a log of wood
lying parallel to the vessel, and fastened to it. Its
use is to prevent the canoe from upsetting. The sail
is triangular, broad at the top and narrow at the point
where it is fastened to the prow. In New Zealand,
where the natives can easily procure large trees, the
outrigger is not required. They make their canoes of
sufficient breadth of beam to sail safely without
such aids as those required by the natives of the
smaller islands. In one part of Polynesia —at the
Gambier group —it is said that canoes are unknown.
The people use rafts, which are propelled by paddles
or sails.
The canoes most commonly in use at the Friendly
Islands are made to sail with either end foremost.
The sail is carried from one end of the canoe to the
other, and the same side is always to leeward. This
is the form of canoe usually found in the Micronesian
Archipelago, and has been borrowed, it is believed,
from the Fijians.
Some of the canoes are 100 feet in length, and are
capable of carrying two hundred warriors.
The weapons of the Polynesians are the club, the
spear, and the sling. The spear is not propelled by
G 2


the throwing-stick as amongst the Australians, nor by
the loop as in New Caledonia and Mallicollo ; it is used
either as a lance or as a javelin, with the hand alone.
The bow, which is perhaps the most dangerous of the
weapons of war in Melanesia, is not found amongst
the Polynesians, except as a plaything. It is used in
their sports, but not in war.
The liquor known as Kava or A va, prepared from
the root of the Piper methysticum, which is found
growing on all th e high islands of the Pacific, is drunk
by all, or nearly all, the natives of Polynesia.
The following account of the weapons of the Poly-
nesians is extracted from Ellis’s Polynesian Re-
searches:— *
“ Originally their weapons were simple, and formed of
wood. They consisted of the spear, which the natives
called patia or tao, made with the wood of the cocoa-
nut tree, or of the aito, iron-wood, or casuarina. It
was 12 or 18 feet long, and about an inch or an inch
and a half in diameter at the middle or the lower
end, but tapering off to a point at the other. The
spears of the inhabitants of the Rurutu, and other of
the Austral Islands, are remarkable for their great
length and elegant shape, as well as for the high
polish with which they are finished.
“ The omore, or club, was another weapon used by
them. It was always made of the aito, or iron-wood,
and was principally of two kinds —either short and
heavy, like a bludgeon, for the purpose of close combat,
or long, and furnished with a broad, lozenge-shaped
blade. The Tahitians did not often carve or orna-
ment their weapons; but by the inhabitants of the
southern islands they were frequently very neatly,
though partially, carved. The inhabitants of the Mar-
quesas carve their spears, and ornament them with
human hair; and the natives of the Hervey Islands,
with the Friendly and Fijian islanders, construct their
weapons with taste, and carve them with remarkable
ingenuity.
* Polynesian Researches, Yol. 1., chapter xii., pages 296—301.
2nd Ed. n.d.


“ The paeho was a terrific sort of weapon, although it
was principally used at the heva, or seasons of mourn-
ing. It resembled, in some degree, a club; but having
the inner side armed with large sharks’ teeth it was
not used for striking a blow, but for almost embowel-
ling those assailed. Another weapon of the same
kind resembled a short sword; but, instead of one
blade, it had three, four, or five. It was usually made
of a forked aito branch; the central and exterior
branches, after having been pointed and polished, were
armed along the outside with a thick line of shark’s
teeth, very firmly fixed in the wood. This was only
used in close combat, and, when applied to the naked
bodies of the combatants, must have been a terrific
weapon. The bowels or lower parts of the body were
attacked with it, not for the purpose of piercing, as a
dagger is used, but drawn across like a saw.
“ They do not use the patia, or dagger, of the Sand-
wich Island, but substitute an equally fatal weapon, the
aero fai, a serrated back-bone of the sting-ray, and the
hoto, a short dart-like weapon, barbed and pointed
with this or other fish-bones, which, being rugged on
the edges and barbed towards the point, is very
destructive in a dexterous hand. Some of the natives
of the Palliser Islands used the ihi, javelin or short
spear, while fighting at a distance; and the South Sea
Islanders use the tiova —a polished dart about three
feet long, cast from the hand—generally in their naval
engagements, but occasionally on land. The jpuro, or
large mother-of-pearl oyster shell, was also used in
cutting the throats or severing the head from the
bodies of those who were overcome.
“ The dress and ornaments of the warriors of Tahiti
and the adjacent islands were singular, and unlike
those of most savage nations, being often remarkably
cumbersome. Their helmets, though less elegant and
imposing than the fine Grecian-formed helmet of the
Hawaiians, were adapted to produce considerable effect.
Some of the Tahitians wore only a fillet or bandage
round the temples; but many had a quantity of cloth
bound round in the form of a high turban, which not


only tended to increase their apparent stature, but
broke the force of a blow from a club or a thrust from
a spear.
“ The most elegant head-dresses, however, were those
worn by the inhabitants of the Austral Islands, Tubuai,
Rurutu, &c. Their helmets were considerably diversi-
fied in form, some resembling a tight round cap fitted
closely to the head, with a light plume waving on the
summit. Those used by the natives of Tubuai and
High Island resembled an officer’s cocked hat, worn
with the ends projecting over each shoulder, the
front beautifully ornamented with the green and red
wing and tail feathers of a species of paroquet. The
Rurutuan helmet is graceful in appearance and useful
in the protection it affords to the head of the wearer.
It was a cap fitted to the head, and reaching to the ears,
made with thick, stiff native cloth on a cane frame-work.
The lower part of the front is ornamented with bunches
of beautiful red and green feathers, tastefully arranged,
and above these a line of the long slender tail-feathers
of the tropic, or man-of-war bird, is fixed on a wicker
frame ; the hinder part of the cap is covered with long
flowing human hair of a light-brown or fawny colour,
said to be human beard. This is fastened to a slight
net-work attached to the crown of the helmet; and
being detached from any other part, often floats wildly
in the wind, and increases the agitated appearance of
the wearer.
“On each side, immediately above the ears, numerous
pieces of mother-of-pearl and other shells are fastened,
not as plates or scales, but depending in a bunch, and
attached to the helmet by a strong cord, similar to those
passing under the chin, by which the helmet is fastened
to the head. These shells, when shaken by the move-
ments of the wearer’s head, produce a rattling noise,
which heightens the din of savage warfare.”
“ The Rurutuan helmet, though more complete and
useful, was far less imposing than the fan worn by the
Georgian and Society Islanders. This was also a cap
fitted closely to the head, surrounded by a cylindrical
structure of cane-work, ornamented with the dark,


glossy feathers of aquatic birds. The hollow crown
frequently towered 2 or 3 feet above the head, and,
being curved at the top, appeared to nod or bend with
every movement of the wearer. This was a head
dress in high esteem, and worn only by distinguished
men, who were generally sought out by the warriors
in the opposing army. To subdue or kill a man who
wore a fan was one of the greatest feats. I have been
often told, by a gigantic man who resided some time
in my house, and was one of the warriors of Eimeo,
that when the army of the enemy has come in sight,
they used to look out for the fan rising above the rest
of the army, and when they have seen one, pointing to
it, animate each other by the exclamation, ‘ The man
with the fan ; ha ! whosoever shall obtain him, it will
be enough.’ But, however imposing in appearance
these high helmets may have been, they afforded no
defence; and, although formed only of cane-work and
feathers, must have been inconvenient.”
“ The slingers, and the most light and agile
among the fighting men, wore, in battle, only a maro,
a loose mantle, or ahubu.
“ Some of the fighting men wore a kind of armour
nf net-work, formed by small cords, wound round the
body and limbs so tight as merely to allow of the un-
encumbered exercise of the legs and arms, and not to
impede the circulation of the blood : or the Rv/arv/a, a
kind of wooden armour for the breast, back, and sides,
covered with successive folds of thick cloth, bound on
with ropes. Over this a costly cloth was spread. The
head was guarded with a corresponding quantity of
cloth; and thus defended, the warrior, secure against
either club or spear, was generally stationed with the
main body of the army, though so encumbered as to
render retreat impracticable, and, in the event of the
•defeat of his companions, was invariably captured or
slain. In general the dress of the Tahitian warriors
must have been exceedingly troublesome. To make an
imposing appearance and defend their persons, seems to
have been the only ends at which they aimed; differ-
ing greatly in this respect from the Hawaiians, who


seldom thought of guarding themselves, but adopted a
dress that would least impede their movements.”
a.— New Zealand.
It is said that the natives of New Zealand have no*
general name for the whole group; but two names
were given by Cook for the principal divisions— Te
Vai Pounamu, which means “the water of Jade,”
and is, according to Hale, the name of a lake in the
Northern Island near which jade is found; and He
ahi no Maui, or “ The Offspring of Maui,” which is
sometimes employed by the natives in allusion to the
prevalent belief that their island was produced by the
god Maui.
The Rev. Richard Taylor* says that the only name
the natives had for the North Island was Te
Ika A Maui, being literally the fish of Maui, the
Maori Creator, who first drew up the land from the
deep. The same author is of opinion that there are
two races in New Zealand —that the Melanesian pre-
ceded the Polynesian, and that the remains of the
older race are to be found everywhere in New Zealand,
especially among the Nga-ti-ka-hunu, to which the
derisive name of Pokerekahu —Black Kumara—is
applied. He adds that the Ware Kauri, or Chatham
Isles, were up to a very late date inhabited by a
portion of this dark race until the Maori found his
way there by the aid of whalers, and subjected them
to his rule. . . . They are called Moriori, but are
more generally known as Kiri walca papa, or bare
sides, also by the term of Paraki wara, a corruption
of the English word blackfellow.
Hale and other distinguished ethnologists are, how-
ever, of opinion that the difference of appearance in
the natives is due simply to their different modes of
life, the one (the lighter) being idle and luxurious,,
and the other (the darker) workers, half-starved and
ill-clad.
* Te Ika A Maui, 1855, chapter ii., pages 13 and 18.


The colour of the New Zealanders—and those only
that are true Polynesians are here referred to —is a
light clear brown, varying in shade, in some lighter
than that of a native of Southern Europe, and in
others —those of inferior birth —much darker. Their
features are prominent and tolerably regular; and
their physiognomy seldom bears traces of ferocity, but
is usually intelligent, open, and pleasing. The eyes are
dark-hazel, and those of some are large and beautiful.
Many of the men are tall and muscular, and few
incline to obesity. In appearance they resemble the
natives of the Sandwich Islands and Samoa, but are
stronger and more active in their movements.
The New Zealanders confine tattooing to the face
and thighs, and they adopt numerous spiral and curv-
ing lines, the arrangement of which constitute the
moko of the man. Amongst the women the tattooing
extends only to the lips and chin, though some amongst
them have their ankles also marked. Tattooing in
New Zealand, as in the Society Islands, is adopted
merely for purposes of ornamentation, and not as in
Samoa, Tonga, and other islands, for decency’s sake.
Hale says that in New Zealand the class of chiefs,
properly speaking, does not exist. Every tribe has its
rangativa raid ; rendered “ High chief,” but the more
exact translation would be “ chief citizen,” or “ Head
Freeman.” The office is not hereditary, but of course
is from circumstances often confined to one family.
The weapons of war of the New Zealanders before
they obtained fire-arms from Europeans were the spear
(now used only on occasions of ceremony), the merai of
wood, or stone, or bone; the patu, or club; and a sort
of dagger.
The staff of office, ornamented with feathers, though
it might on occasions do duty as a weapon, was carried
by men of rank when they made their appearance in
public, and was used to give effect to their oratory
when addressing an assembly.
The stone merai—often formed of very fine green
jade or nephrite —recalls to recollection a weapon also
formed of jade which is in use in New Caledonia.


In New Zealand, where the trees which furnish bark
suitable for making cloth are not found, the natives
make mats of the leaves of the flax-plant (phormium
tenax). These mats are woven on a frame.
The natives are ingenious in carving designs on their
canoes, their boxes, the posts of their pahs, and their
implements; many of the designs are elaborately
wrought, but the chief feature in all of them is the
loop-coil. The representations of the human face and
figure are always grotesque.
1. Mat or Cloak. The fringe on one side having
numerous cylindrical ornaments, each marked black
and yellow, in bands.
2. Native Cloth, being portion of a Mat or Cloak.
Ornamented with red, white, and blue wool.
The costume of the New Zealanders consists of
a square or oblong mat, which they wear closely
folded round the body so as to conceal nearly the
whole figure. In making these mats, which are of
various kinds —as for instance the E Mangaika or
rain mat, the E Wakaiwa, covered with ornaments,
somewhat resembling the quills of the porcupine, the
Parawai or war cloak, and others—the natives dis-
play a surprising ingenuity. The New Zealand flax,
Harakeke (Phormium tenax), is the material used.
The women, who are the mat makers, stand at a weav-
ing frame, upon which is arranged the weft of strings,
and they dexterously weave by hand on a fixed warp.
Some of the cloth is soft and pleasant to the touch.
The porcupine-quills-like ornaments are made of the
phormium leaf, which is rolled up into cylinders nearly
as thick as goose-quills. The black bands are produced
by a dye made of a decoction of bark. Wherever the
fibres have been removed the dye has taken effect, but
the epidermis has remained unaffected.
3. He Taiaha , or E Haul. Chiefs staff. Carved
head, and eyes of the haliotis shell.
4. He Taiaha, or chiefs staff. Carved head, and
eyes of the haliotis shell.


The carving of the heads of these implements is
excellent, and the patterns —the loop-coil, parallel
incised lines, and rows of tooth-shaped projections in
the interspaces —are characteristic of the art of the
New Zealanders. The staff was usually decorated
with tufts of dog’s hair and red feathers. The usual
length of the staff is 5J feet.
5. Toko-toko. Walking stick—elaborately carved,
and showing two human figures back to back—one
O O
apparently a female and the other a male. Eyes of the
haliotis shell.
sa. Merai of wood—elaborately carved,
G. Model of a canoe.
7. Model of a canoe.
8, Model of a canoe, elaborately carved, and orna-
mented with white feathers.
9. Head of a war canoe, said to have been used by
Hongi Heki, a chief of the Bay of Islands. It is a
representation of a human face, elaborately carved, and
with haliotis’ eyes. It is further ornamented with a
fringe of feathers, mostly black.
10. Paddle.
11, Paddle.
12. Paddle.
13. Paddle.
14. Paddle.
15. Paddle.
16. Paddle.
The ordinary canoe of the New Zealander is simply
the trunk of a tree hollowed out. Some of these,
which are called Kaupapas, are as long as 40 feet,
and no more than 3 feet in “ beam.” They are
easily upset, and are used only on inland waters. The


tiwai, the canoe of the lakes, resembles the Kaupapa,
and when in the water, sits so low as to appear to have
no gunwale. The war canoes, which are in some
instances 80 feet in length, are more carefully con-
structed. The trough-like vessel formed by hollowing
out the trunk of a tree has a “ beam” somewhat in
proportion to its length, and is furnished with gun-
wales, which are lashed firmly to the sides of the
canoe with ropes made of flax.
The head and stern are elaborately carved, painted
with vermilion, and profusely decorated with bunches
of feathers and dog’s hair.
The paddles are leaf-shaped, from 4 to 6 inches in
breadth at the broadest part, and from 4 feet 3 inches
to 5 feet 8 inches in length. The edges are sharp, and
they could be used effectively as offensive weapons.
None of the New Zealand paddles in the National
Gallery are ornamented in any way.
17. Fish-hook. Barbed. Five inches in length, and
with portion of line attached.
A section of the shell of the haliotis is firmly lashed
to a piece of iron-wood (totaro), and the barb is of
bone. It is said that this hook is not baited. It is
usually towed astern of the canoe, and, when moving
swiftly through the water, the bright colours of the
shell attract the fish, and they bite freely.
18. Eel net. Found in one of the canoes taken
after the fight at Rangiriri.
19. Stone axe, with wooden handle. Greenstone,
porphyritic.
20. Stone adze. Nephrite.
21, Chips from “Nuddens.” Sixteen specimens.
Chert, quartzite, &c.
b.— The Navigator’s or Samoa Islands.
The Navigator’s or Samoa Islands form a chain
extending east and west between the meridians 169°


and 173° west, and the latitudes of 13° 30' and 14° 30' S.
They lie north-north-east of the Tonga Islands, and
nearly east-north-east of the Fijian group. There are
eight islands, namely—Manua, Orosenga, Ofu, Tutuila,
Opolu, Manono, Aborima, and Savaii. The last-named
is the westernmost of the group and the largest.
The Samoans are the finest people, physically, in the
whole of Polynesia—except, perhaps, the Tongans.
Not a few are very light-coloured; their features are
beautiful ; and their limbs are of colossal proportions.
They tattoo the body from the waist to the knee, and
the effect is much the same as if they wore a tight
dress. Indeed, the old voyagers described these
islanders as being clothed in “ long hose.”
O O
Their canoes are built of separate pieces of timber
tied together; they are provided with the out-
rigger; and the covered part or deck is orna-
mented with rows of white ovulum shells. Their
larger canoes are kept beneath thatched sheds to pro-
tect them from the sun. These large vessels, in which
they make voyages to the neighbouring islands, are
capable of holding fourteen paddlers, besides the helms-
man, and are constructed, in addition to the floating-
outrigger, with a long spar projecting to windward,
on which stands one of the crew as ballast, regulating his
distance from the gunwale according to the strength of
the breeze. The sail is of matting —narrow at the top
and set between two masts.
Some of their articles of dress are worthy of
attention.
U. 22. Titi, a skirt or fringe of variously-coloured
leaves, brown, red, and white.
23. Titi, skirt or fringe of variously-coloured leaves,
yellow, reddish-brown, and black. The band is very
neatly plaited, and the colours are so arranged as to
form a pattern.
U. 24. Lava-lava or native cloth (coloured), similar
to the masi of the Fijians, and the tappa of the Tahi-
tians.


U. 25. Lava-lava or native cloth (coloured).
26. Lava-lava (coloured).
27. Lava-lava (white), with a very narrow fringe.
28. Lava-lava (white), with a very narrow fringe.
IT. 29. Tiputa, made of a very fine kind of matting.
30. Mat or petticoat (white).
31. Mat or petticoat (red).
32. Mat or petticoat (brown).
The dresses of the Samoans are artistically wrought.
The native cloth (Sidpo) is made of the inner bark
of the paper-mulberry, and the process of manu-
facture is similar to that employed by the Tongans
and other islanders. The cloth is gathered round
the waist in flowing folds, somewhat like a Koman
toga. The titi is a kind of petticoat, not unlike an
Australian tilburnine or the liku of Fiji, and is made
of the leaves of the dracaena or dragon tree. The
tiputa resembles a small poncho. It has a slit in the
middle, through which the head is passed, and it falls
so as to cover the bosom. The white mat or petticoat
presents on one side what appears to be rough, coarse
hair, like that of a goat, but it is composed wholly of
vegetable fibre. It is woven out of the bark of a species
of dwarf hibiscus. Another kind of mat (Je-tonga) is
composed of narrow strips of the leaves of the pandanus,
closely woven, and ornamented with tufts of scarlet
feathers. These are highly prized by the natives, and
the value of them increases with age. They are handed
down from one generation to another, and are used too
as a species of currency.
32. Mat. Twelve feet in length by 5 feet 9 inches
in breadth.
U. 33. Mat. Six feet 6 inches in length by 4 feet 6
inches in breadth.


U. 84. Mat. Six feet in length by 4 feet 9 inches
in breadth.
U. 35. Mat. Seven feet in length by 4 feet in
breadth.
36. Model of a double canoe.
c. —The Friendly Islands, or Tonga.
The Friendly Islands lie south-west of Samoa,
between the meridians of 173° and 176°, and the
parallels of 18° and 22° south. There are three
clusters —Tonga, Habai, and Hafulu Hau. Tonga is
the largest island of the group. The natives of the
Friendly Islands resemble those of the Samoan archi-
pelago, but many of them are lighter in colour. The
men are tall and fine looking, and the women also
are remarkable for their beauty. Erskine observed,
that the chiefs as compared with the common people
were tall and of light complexions, owing, he thinks,
to the care bestowed on their nursing and food during
childhood, and the degree of exposure they are sub-
jected to afterwards.
Their ornaments consist of necklaces made of the
fruit of the pandanus, or of shells or sharks’ teeth, or
of sweet-smelling flowers. They wear also armlets of
tortoiseshell; and Cook mentions hats or caps made of
red feathers.
The Tongans appear to have borrowed largely from
the Fijians, to whom they are indebted for the largest
of their canoes. It is said that all the double canoes
are built in the Fijis, where in the windward islands
of the group a number of Tonguese are constantly
employed in their construction.
U. 37. Club. Four feet 3 inches in length. Orna-
mented with sections of small shells strung on sinnet.
One part is coloured white, red, and black, in spiral
bands.
38. Spear. Six feet 7 inches in length, pointed at
both ends, and perhaps thrown with a loop. Orna-


mented with a small carved mask and incised lines.
Exactly similar to the spears of New Caledonia.
Said to have been brought from Tongatahoo.
39. Spear. Six feet 7 inches in length, pointed at
both ends, and perhaps thrown with a loop. Orna-
mented with a small carved mask and incised lines.
Exactly similar to the spears of New Caledonia.
Said to have been brought from Tongatahoo.
40. Spear. Six feet 7 inches in length, pointed at
both ends, and perhaps thrown with a loop. Orna-
mented with a small carved mask and incised lines.
Exactly similar to the spears of New Caledonia.
Said to have been brought from Tongatahoo.
d. —Hervey or Cook’s Islands.
RAROTONGA.
The Hervey or Cook’s Islands lie 10° south-west
from the Society group, or between 155° and 160° of
west longitude and 19° and 22° of south latitude.
The cluster consists of seven islands, of which the
largest and most westerly is Rarotonga. The inhabi-
tants resemble the Samoans.
They are remarkably ingenious. The people of the
island of Mangaia especially are patient and skilful in
manufacturing various products, and in ornamenting
their canoes and weapons. The handles of their adzes,
their spears, their paddles, and their bowls are most
elaborately carved; and some specimens now in Mel-
bourne are, in design and execution, far superior to
anything that might be expected of a savage people.
Minutely carved zig-zag lines, chequers and diaper,
with dentated patterns, are the common forms adopted.
Their drinking cups made of cocoa-nuts are often deli-
cately carved.
41. Spear. Eight feet 10 inches in length. Pointed
at both ends, and might be thrown with a loop. Por-
tions coloured black, and one band slightly ornamented
with incised lines. This is exactly similar to one kind


of spear in use in New Caledonia. Said to have been
brought from Rarotonga.
42. Spear. Eight feet 10 inches in length. Pointed
at both ends, and might be thrown with a loop. Por-
tions coloured black, and one band slightly ornamented
with incised lines. This is exactly similar to one kind
of spear in use in New Caledonia. Said to have been
brought from Rarotonga.
43. Specimens of Matting (three). Unusually fine
in texture.
e. —Nieu, or Savage Land.
The “Savage Island” of Cook lies between the
Hervey and Tongan groups. It is situated in 19° 8'
■south latitude, and 169° 50' west longitude.
The inhabitants are described by Erskine as of small
•stature, but clean-limbed and well made. The hair of
some is crisp, but of others smooth. They do not
tattoo themselves. Their colour is a clear brown.
They seem to have, in some respects, affinities with the
Melanesians.
U. 44. Paddle-shaped club, strengthened by a ridge
running down the centre; 3 feet 9 inches in length.
Made of cocoa-nut wood.
U. 45. Paddle-shaped club, strengthened by a ridge
running down the centre; 3 feet 9 inches in length.
Made of cocoa-nut wood.
4G. Spear, 8 feet 3 inches in length. Three strong
bone’points 8 inches in length. Barbed for a length of
2 feet with numerous sharp-pointed bones in six ridges
—set close together and pointing forwards. The barbs
bound to the shaft by wrappings of very fine sinnet.
The shaft apparently of cocoa-nut wood.
47. Spear similar to No. 46. The sinnet below the
barbs is bound with very narrow strips of leaves
bleached white, or coloured bright-red.


48. Spear. Similar to No. 46, It has, however,,
four strong and very sharp hone points, and the barbs
of bone are fewer in number. The manner in which
the barbs are secured with sinnet is highly ingenious.
49. Spear with twelve large barbs cut out of the
solid wood and pointing forwards; the point with
numerous small barbs pointing backwards, and the
barbed part ornamented with lines of dots forming a
lozenge pattern.
50. Spear of the same character as No. 49.
51. Spear. Barbed for a distance of 13 inches from
the point; the barbs cut out of the solid wood, and
pointing backward. Six barbs 2 feet from the point,
the barbs pointing alternately backward and forward.
Ornamented with double parallel lines of dots, forming
a lozenge pattern.
52. Double-pointed spear, the two points cut out of
the solid wood; the outer edges showing deep V-
shaped lines. The characteristic six barbs, alternately
pointing backward and forward, and the parallel lines
of dots, are seen on this weapon.
U. 53. Smooth spear of cocoa-nut wood, coloured
white and red near the point; the butt ornamented
with shells and variously-coloured feathers.
U. 54. Smooth spear, coloured red and white near
the point; the butt ornamented with small shells and
strips of leaves coloured bright-red.
55. Bamboo shaft, ornamented with longitudinal
lines, between which are oblong spaces separate and
parallel, made by cutting away the outer surface of the
bamboo. Point of bone 10 inches in length, and
secured to the shaft with sinnet so arranged as to form
a lozenge pattern.
U. 56. Spear formed of a shaft of light wood, and a
head of hard wood. Small leaf-shaped barbs.
U. 57. Spear of hard wood, conical at the butt.


U. 58. Spear of hard wood, conical at the butt.
59. Spear, head of hard wood, outer edge cut in V-
shaped lines, but not so deeply as to form barbs.
Shaft of bamboo. (Imperfect.)
The spears above described are from 7 feet 6 inches
to 10 feet in length.
The weapons of the Niuans are the spear, the club,
rounded staves, and a sort of double-handed wooden
sabre. They also make oval balls of stalagmites found
in caves, which they throw with the hand at their
enemies.
The dress of the men usually consists solely of a belt
round the waist. Some wear as an ornament a very
small apron about 10 or 12 inches square.
/ —The Society Islands.
TAHITI.
The Society Islands form a group consisting of two
clusters, of which the eastern was originally termed the
Georgian, and the western the Society Islands. Tahiti
is one of the eastern cluster. Its longitude is 149° 30'
west, and its latitude 17° 30' south. The Tahitians
are described as a fine-looking people. In stature they
are above the middle height, though less muscular
than some other natives of Polynesia. The women are
tall, and their figures slight and graceful. The com-
plexion of some is scarcely darker than that of the
inhabitants of the south of Spain, They used to tattoo
themselves, but the practice has been discouraged. It
appears that the face was usually untouched, but the
bust, legs, and arms of the men, and even the hands, were
covered with intricate patterns. The women had their
arms, ankles, and feet tattooed. Angas states that the
different stages of the operation were regarded as sacri-
fices agreeable to the gods, and the instruments with
which a great man had been tattooed were deposited
in the morai or tomb of his ancestors. Their weapons
—which, before the introduction of firearms, were the


60. Bark cloth, white.
spear, the club, and the sling—their canoes, their
houses, and indeed all their manufactures and their
customs, show that they are possessed of great intel-
ligence, and might under favourable circumstances
rapidly acquire the habits of civilised peoples.
61. Bark cloth, black, with red border; glazed.
62. Paddle-shaped club, 3 feet 2 inches in length and
nearly 4 inches in breadth at the broadest part. The
end of the blade on one side is ornamented with incised
curved lines, and a portion of the wood is cut away so
as to exhibit narrow bands. The part intended to be
grasped by the hand is covered with close netting,
coloured white, and a portion of the tassels that hung
from the netting yet remain.
63. Paddle-shaped club, 3 feet 3 inches in length,
and of the same character as No. 62. The three tassels
attached to the netting at the lower end are very
neatly wrought.


VI.-MELANESIA.
Melanesia includes New Caledonia and the Loyalty-
Islands ; Admiralty Islands ; New Ireland, New Britain,
the Solomon Islands, the New Hebrides, New Guinea,
and the Louisiade ; Arroo; Waygeoo ; Mysol; and the
interior of the Moluccas. These islands are occupied
in part by a mixed race. The western islands, which
form a part of the East Indian Archipelago, lie close
to islands inhabited by Malays; and Prichard, Hale,
and several distinguished French naturalists regard
the natives of Waygeoo, Boug, Bawak, and Manouran
—situated between the Moluccas and the eastern
extremity of New Guinea —as a hybrid race. Hale
says they are true Mulattoes, having a reddish-brown
complexion, with an abundance of twisted and
frizzled hair. Elsewhere the region is occupied by
real negroes, so like the African negro that many of
them, if placed in a crowd of African negroes, could
not be distinguished from them. There are, however,
great differences, as in Polynesia, between the natives
of the various islands of Eastern Melanesia.
The Melanesians generally are of a timid and un-
enterprising character; and they rarely leave their
homes on such expeditions as those voluntarily under-
taken by the Polynesians.
While the Polynesians seldom carry arms except
when about to engage in warfare, the Melanesians are
usually armed.
They are skilful in the use of the bow, which is their
favourite weapon of war. Their arrows are neatly
fashioned, and some of them are very curiously carved.
The Melanesians are potters, and the practice of the
art of making pottery is one feature which serves to
distinguish them from the Polynesians. Many of the
examples in the National Gallery are excellent, and
highly interesting as works of art.


Tattooing is not generally practised by the Melane-
sians, on account, it is supposed, of the darkness of
their skins, on which such fine and minute designs as
those affected by the Marquesans would not show to
advantage. Like the Australians, and the natives of
some tribes in Central and Southern Africa, they raise
cicatrices, and the men are not a little proud of the
effects produced by this style of ornamentation.
a.— New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands.
The natives of New Caledonia, the Papuas, the
negroes inhabiting New Britain, New Ireland, the
Solomon Islands, the New Hebrides, Tasmania, and
the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, as well as the black
races speaking Polynesian dialects, belong to a division
which Prichard has named Kelaenonesia. Under this
designation, he says, must be comprised all the insu-
lated countries which are situated under the same
latitudes, but to the westward of Oceanic Polynesia,
that is, further west than the meridian of the Fiji
Islands, and to the southward of Micronesia and the
Indian Archipelago. Among these tribes, he adds, are
to be seen some who recede furthest from the almost
European or Asiatic beauty of the Tahitian and
Marquesan islanders, and exceed in ugliness the most
ill-favoured brood of the African forests, whom they
rival in the sooty blackness of their complexion.
It will be observed that this division comprises the
islands included in Melanesia.
Cook* describes the New Caledonians as of the same
colour as the natives of Tanna, but having better
features and more agreeable countenances. He observed
some who had thick lips, flat noses, and full cheeks, and
in some degree the look and features of a negro. Their
hair is crisp, nearly woolly, and frizzled out like a mop.
Many of the men are very tall, and proportionately
* Voyages and Travels , Vol. V., 1773, book iii., chapter ix,, pages
118—119.


stout. They wear only a small wrapper and a head-
dress. The women wear a fringe round the loins. The
people of the Loyalty seem to have mixed much with
the race inhabiting the islands to the eastward. They
are of a chocolate colour, some being much darker than
others.
64. Chiefs hat, formed of cord closely woven;
cylindrical, and without a crown. Ornamented with
strings, which are covered with a sort of red worsted
(driUa drilla) made of the fur of the flying fox.
Between the strings and the hat are bunches of
shrubs, leaves, &c., tied with twine. Usually worn
with a plume of feathers at the top, and a long drooping
tuft of grass and baf s hair hanging down the neck.
64a. Hair comb. Formed of a piece of bamboo.
Ornamented.
64b. Two polished sticks, about 13 inches in length,
used in dressing the hair. TJea, Loyalty Islands.
65. Narrow fringe (black).
66. Narrow fringe (black).
67. Narrow fringe (black).
68, Narrow fringe (black).
69. Fringe (yellowish-white).
70. Fringe (yellowish-white).
71. Fringe (yellowish-brown)
72. Fringe (yellowish-brown)
73. Fringe (yellow).
73a. Fringe (yellow), for a child. Lifu, Loyalty
Islands.
74. Fringe (very light yellow).
The men of New Caledonia usually wear no more
than a single leaf hanging from their girdles, or


when elaborately attired, a strip of soft bark. The
fringes are worn by the adult females. These are
formed of some vegetable fibre, and most commonly
stained a deep shining black. The breadth varies
from 3 inches to 9 inches. The strips of fibre are
either twisted into a kind of twune or left separate,
when they are soft and pleasant to the touch. The
cord to which the fibres are attached is invariably very
neatly plaited. No. 74 differs from all the others. It
is 19 inches in breadth, and of no great length, and
much resembles the dresses of the people of the New
Hebrides.
75. Bark cloth, coloured red. This resembles the
Kata , or scarf of felicity. When two persons who.
are friendly meet each other, they exchange Katas.
76, Waist-net, with closely-woven bag attached.
The native of New Caledonia uses the sling (Wendat),
consisting of a double thong with a pouch in the
middle, in which the stone is placed. The pouch is
made of two small cords laid side by side. The stones
are usually formed of some serpentinous rock. They
are ground down to an oval shape, and made very
smooth. The bag attached to the waist-net is used for
carrying sling-stones. It is said that the native can
throw stones with his sling almost as fast as they can
be thrown by hand. He gives the sling but a half
turn in the air, and lets fly the stone with great force,
and with a good aim.
77. Necklace, with a section of a shell as a pendant.
78. Necklace, or breast ornament, with a large shell
as a pendant.
The necklaces of the natives of New Caledonia
are somewhat like those of the people of New
Guinea, consisting generally of string, covered with the
fur of the flying fox, to which is suspended a shell or
a piece of bone.
78a. Armlet. Formed of a section of a shell.


79. Momo, or Mask. Adorned with a sort of apron
of feathers. Altogether about 4 feet in length, and
which when worn would descend below the knees of
the wearer. The nose of the mask resembles the beak
of a bird, and the eyes protrude. It is painted a
shining black. The back part is formed of a sort of
cane, over which is woven twine made of vegetable
fibre. The hair of the head and the beard are repre-
sented by masses of plaited hair.
Some suppose that the mask is used by warriors to
disguise themselves when fighting; others, that it is
employed as an ornament when dancing; but it is now
commonly stated that prisoners taken in battle are
made to wear it.
It resembles the mask of the natives of Vancouver’s
Island,
80. A bag or basket made of some vegetable fibre,
81, Cord made of cocoa-nut fibre.
82. Club, not unlike the Langeel of the Australians:
The head is cut into a sort of helmet shape, and the
point projecting at right angles to the shaft, somewhat
resembles the beak of a bird. It is made of a light-
coloured wood, and smoothed, but is not ornamented in
any way.
83. Club with projecting point. Partly covered with
leaves, and tied with string made of vegetable fibre
and the fur of the flying fox. A shell is attached as an
ornament.
84. Club with projecting point.
85, Club with projecting point. Partly wrapped
with string.
86. Club with a rounded head, 22 inches in length,
and about If inches in diameter; coloured red and
white. Partly wrapped with sinnet and twine.
87. Club with a conical head. Twenty-six inches in
length.


88. Club with a conical head having six projections,
and exhibiting curves of unusual elegance. Twenty-
six inches in length. Partly wrapped with sinnet.
89. Club with a rounded head formed apparently of
a part of a root. Twenty-two inches in length. Partly
wrapped with sinnet.
90. Club with a rounded head formed of a root.
91. Club, massive, with a head having ten projec-
tions—symmetrical and very neatly cut. Forty-one
inches in length. At the part intended to be grasped
by the hands it is carved over a space of 8 inches.
The ornamentation consists of raised zig-zag bands
between parallel raised lines. This club is exactly
similar in form and ornamentation to many made in
Fiji, but the wood is not the same. It is said to have
been brought from Lifu.
92. Double-headed club —one point being apparently
the base of a branch proceeding from the main stem.
The head is very neatly carved on both sides. Over a
considerable space there are left, owing to the wood
having been cut away to the depth of one line or more,
raised hexagonal figures, measuring about two-tenths
of an inch, and so regular as to appear almost like
scales. Above, in the middle, and below this space
there are raised parallel bands, with raised bands in
the form of the chevron between each set of parallel
bands. The effect is excellent. The shaft is very
neatly wrapped with sinnet (black and yellowish-
brown). In form this is exactly like a Fijian club,
but the wood is different. It is said to have been
brought from Uea.
93. Staff.
94. Spear. Hard wood, made smooth and bright,
pointed at both ends, and well balanced. At a distance
of 26 inches from the head there are some parallel and
zig-zag lines rather rudely cut. This part, however, is
■concealed by a canoe-shaped piece of bamboo, usually


wholly covered with a fine wrapping of black cord,
into which is woven a bright-yellow thread, forming
patterns resembling the herring-bone and chevron.
The bamboo thus ornamented is fixed to the spear by
two thick folds and one thin fold of bark paper, and
the whole is tied with twine made of the fur of the
fiying fox. Above the piece of canoe-shaped bamboo
there is another covering of bark paper, into which the
end of the bamboo is inserted. The effect of the whole
is not unpleasing, and contrary to what might be ex-
pected from this description. The weapon is not a
clumsy one; it is elegant, and very light. The spears
of the New Caledonians are thrown with the loop, and
it is found on unwrapping the loosely-tied twine from
the canoe-shaped piece of bamboo and setting it free,
so that the spear can move in the ring formed of bark
cloth, that this little instrument, added apparently for
ornament, seems to be fitted to aid in balancing the
spear in securing a good aim and in propelling it. The
way in which it is attached to some spears shows, how-
ever, that it cannot have been used ordinarily in the
manner suggested. Whether it may not have been
held in the left hand when the ounep was used is not
known.
95. Spear. Similar to 94.
96. Spear. Similar to 94.
97. Spear. Similar to 94.
98. Spear. Similar to 94.
99. Spear, Similar to 94.
100, Spear. Similar to 94.
101. Spear. Similar to 94.
102. Spear. Similar to 94.
103. Spear. Similar to 94,
104. Spear. Similar to 94,
105. Spear. Similar to 94,
106. Spear. Similar to 94,


107. Spear said to be used in war dances previous to
a battle. Similar in all respects to 94. Uea, Loyalty-
Islands.
108. Spear. Similar to 94, but tied with red wool.
Lifu, Loyalty Islands.
109. Spear. Similar to 94,
110. Spear. Similar to 94, but without wrappings
of twine, &c.
111. Spear. Similar to 94, but without wrappings
of twine, &c.
112. Spear, ornamented with a small mask (carved
out of the solid wood).
118. Spear, ornamented with a small mask (carved
out of the solid wood).
114. Plain spear, pointed at both ends.
115. Spear with two prongs horizontal to the shaft,
and neatly lashed to it with cord. The prongs extend
12 inches beyond the point of the shaft, and are orna-
mented with punch marks.
116. Spear, with small barbs cut in a form resembling
those seen on the spears of the Niuans.
117. Spear, with numerous small barbs.
118. Spear, with numerous small barbs.
119. Spear, with barbs.
120. Spear, with barbs of bone (resembling the tail-
bones of the sting-ray) loosely attached to a network
fixed to the shaft at a distance of 12 inches from the
point. The barbs are 5 inches in length. The butt of
the spear is of very small diameter, and is flattened
and slightly ornamented with raised lines.
The spears or javelins of the New Caledonians
vary in length from 6 feet 9 inches to 9 feet.
They are thrown with the ounep, a loop made of


cocoa-nut fibre. It is about 7| inches in length, and
has a loop at one end and a knob covered with the
fur of the flying fox at the other. When about to
throw the spear the warrior casts the end of the
thong round it in a half-hitch, and draws it tight with
his forefinger, which is passed through the loop.
When he hurls the javelin the half-hitch is undone,
and nearly the same impetus is given as if he had
used an Australian womera, or throwing-stick.
The ounep resembles the amentum of the ancients.
See Ovid’s Metamorphoses XII., 321; Luc. 6, 221;
Virg. JEn. 9, 665, &c.
The spears of the New Caledonians are remarkable
for their lightness and beauty of finish, and they are
invariably well balanced.
121. Bow of hard (nearly black) wood. Five feet in
length.
122. Bow. Three feet in length.
123. Bow. Three feet in length.
124. Four arrows, varying in length from 3 feet
7 inches to 4 feet 5 inches. Each is formed of a
slender cane, having three prongs of hard wood, some
of them barbed.
125. Bow, six feet nine inches in length.
126. Bow and six arrows. The heads are formed of
hard wood, and very beautifully carved, the designs
being more than usually elegant. Lifu, Loyalty
Islands.
127. Bow and six arrows. The arrows are slender
canes with heads of hard wood measuring fifteen
inches or more. They are not ornamented.
128. Water vessel, A gourd, wrapped with sinnet.
129. Gourd, wrapped with sinnet.
130. Small gourd.
131. Small gourd.


132. Bamboo. Fifty inches in length and 2
inches in diameter. Closed at both ends. Orna-
mented with rude figures of men, animals, &c. These
are shewn by incised lines filled in with a black pigment.
132 a. Bamboo. Fifty-three inches in length and
1|- inches in diameter. Ornamented with numerous
figures.
133. Adze of Nephrite. The stone is lashed to the
wooden handle with sinnet. A mask is carved on the
handle.
134. Nhouet. Knife formed of a flat piece of neph-
rite, nearly oval in form. Longest diameter 8| inches.
Two holes are drilled in the stone, and the handle of
wood has a piece cut out in such a form as to admit of
the stone being inserted and tied to the two overlap-
ping pieces of wood, the twine passing through the
holes. The handle is 15 inches in length, and is
covered with bark cloth and a wrapping of sinnet. It
has a knob at the end, which is decorated with twine
made of the fur of the flying-fox, and a tassel of the
same to which a few small shells are attached.
135. Nhouet. Decorated with shells.
It is said that the New Caledonians used these
knives for cutting open the bodies of dead enemies
before cooking them. The women performed the
task of cooking the bodies, but the preparation of
them was a solemn business, in which only dis-
tinguished men took part. With the Nhouet the body
was cut open, and the intestines were torn out with a
fork made of two human arm-bones, and specially con-
trived for the purpose. Sometimes the bodies were
cut up for cooking, but most often they were baked
entire.


lh —Admiralty Islands, New Ireland, New
Britain, The Solomon Islands, and New
Hebrides.
The natives of these islands differ somewhat in
colour and physiognomy. Cartaret describes the
people of the Admiralty Islands as having a com-
plexion of a very dark copper colour, nearly black, and
with woolly heads. Their hair is crisp and black.
The features of many are not unlike those of Euro-
peans. The only covering of the men is a shell—the
ovulum ovum. The women wear a bandage round the
waist. They use earthen vessels, and they chew the
betel-nut with chunam or lime. Their spears, with
obsidian heads, are wonderfully made, and at the place
where the stone is joined to the wood ornamented
with coloured patterns of great beauty.
The people of New Ireland and New Britain have
good figures and features. On Sandwich Island, near
the north-western extremity of New Ireland, the
people are black and woolly-haired, like negroes, but
their noses are not flat, nor have they thick lips, like
the African.
The Solomon Islanders in general resemble the
natives of New Ireland and Bougainville’s Island,
The inhabitants of the New Hebrides are described
as of the middle size, and rather slender. Forster says
the natives of Mallicollo are a small, nimble, slender,
and ill-favoured set of beings —their complexions sooty,
their features harsh, the cheek-bones and face broad,
and the whole countenance highly disagreeable.
Many of the islanders of these groups build and sail
large canoes —some fully 90 feet in length and pro-
vided with outriggers.
Admiralty Islands.
136. Small apron, with a fringe, made of some
vegetable fibre, and closely woven. Decorated with
feathers, and four rows of small shells.


137. Small apron, with a fringe. The upper part
coloured red, yellow, and black, in horizontal stripes,
and decorated with three rows of small shells.
138. Necklace of small shells. Eighty-four inches
in length.
139. Flat necklace; greatest breadth, 1| inches.
Made of five bands of vegetable fibre, each larger in
circumference than the one above it, and set closely
with small white shells.
U. 140. Flat necklace. Greatest breadth, 2| inches.
Eight rows of small white shells.
141. Mother-of-pearl ornament; circular,and 6 inches
in diameter. To it is attached a circular plate of
tortoiseshell, very thin, and so perforated as to present
a pattern. Worn round the neck by chiefs. Very
similar to the pearl shell ornament, with open work of
tortoiseshell, seen by Brenchley at Florida, Solomon
Group,
142. Four armlets of shells, ornamented with incised
lines, which are filled in with a black or brown pigment.
143. Three armlets of shell.
144. Bracelet made of sections of shells, strung on
twine, and set closely together, and mixed with small
short cylinders of the shell of the cocoanut, so as to
form a pattern.
145. Ornament of bone, about 5| inches in length,
four sides, two marked with incised lines—blackened.
Attached to a string of beads.
146. Wooden comb, the handle coloured red, black,
and white, the latter filling curved and straight lines,
dentated; much resembling the forms in use in
New Guinea. Further ornamented with beads and
feathers.
146 a. Comb formed of thirteen rounded and
smoothed sticks, 16 inches in length, lashed together


with sinnet, and ornamented with a number of sticks
proceeding from the centre like rays, each wrapped
with vegetable fibre, and terminating in a tuft of
feathers, resembling somewhat the head-dress of the
Sandwich Islanders as described by Cook, and that
adopted by chiefs in Samoa.
147. Club carved in imitation of the toothed club of
the Fijians.
148. Club, almost paddle-shaped, but narrow. Or-
namented with tufts of feathers. Much resembling-
the paddle-shaped clubs similarly ornamented, seen by
Capt. Erskine, 1849, at the Nieu, or Savage Island.
149. Club, 27 inches in length, having a somewhat
conical head with projecting points. Not unlike the
clubs of the Fijians.
150. Gourd; ornamented; the figures burnt in.
151. Netted bag. Similar to the bags made by the
Australians.
152. Roll of sinnet.
153. Instrument somewhat resembling a jew’s-harp.,
of wood, ornamented with feathers ; said to be used as
a musical instrument.
153 a. Spear with head of obsidian.
153 b, Spear with head of obsidian.
153 c. Spear with head of obsidian.
153 d. Spear with head of obsidian.
These spears are from 6 to 7 feet in length.
The shafts are made of a light wood, and are coarsely
fashioned. The heads of obsidian have been made by
striking off flakes, and are remarkably well formed. A
kind of gum or resin is worked into a ball at the point
of junction, and continued downwards, lessening in
diameter, for about 8 inches. This portion of the spear
is ornamented with curved lines, toothed at the edges,


triangular and lozenge-shaped figures, and symmetrical
crosses (Maltese) painted white, red, and black. In one
there are rows of small shells impacted in the gum.
New Ireland and New Britain.
154. Necklace composed of teeth and sections of
shells, strung on strong twine; the several rows kept
in position by flat pieces of bone perforated.
155. Necklace formed of rings of shell, fastened on
red braid, each ring having one of the same size with
its axis at right angles to that lying flat on the braid.
156. Necklace of small hollow cup-shaped beads,
resembling portions of some marine plant.
157. Necklace of numerous strands of black braid,
with rings made of shells in three places.
158. Breast ornament. A flab, thin, circular plate of
shell, perforated, and with a braid of sinnet passing
through the perforation, to which is joined a necklace
consisting of rings made of shells ; somewhat like the
dihhi-dibbi of the North Australians.
159. Breast ornament.
160. Bracelet formed of rings made of shell, red
and white, and lines and triangular spaces filled in
with rings of wood forming a pattern of diamonds,
and rectangular and triangular figures bordered by
straight lines of black and white; so closely wrought
as to form a kind of shell cloth.
161. Bracelet formed of rings made of shell, red
and white, and lines and triangular spaces filled in with
rings of wood forming a pattern of diamonds, and
rectangular and triangular figures bordered by straight
lines of black and white; so closely wrought as to
form a kind of shell cloth.
162. Bracelet formed of rings made of shell, red
and white, and lines and triangular spaces filled in with


rings of wood forming a pattern of diamonds, and
rectangular and triangular figures bordered by straight
lines of black and white; so closely wrought as to
form a kind of shell cloth.
163. Bracelet formed of rings made of shell, red
and white, and lines and triangular spaces filled in with
rings of wood forming a pattern of diamonds, and
rectangular and triangular figures bordered by straight
lines of black and white ; so closely wrought as to
form a kind of shell cloth.
164. Bracelet composed principally of rings made
of shells.
165. Bracelet composed of matted braid stained red.
166. Bracelet composed of matted braid stained red-
U. 167. Slings (two).
Solomon Islands and New Hebrides.
168. Sash, 10 feet 8 inches in length and 18 inches
in breadth; somewhat like canvas, stained a deep
yellow, and ornamented with bands and fringes at each
end. The pattern of the bands consists of triangular
figures of a shining black. Solomon Islands.
O O
169. Sash, 6 feet in length and 27 inches in breadth,
the material somewhat resembling canvas. Fringes at
both ends, and tufts of vegetable fibre about 8 inches
apart at each side and down the centre. Further
ornamented with bands from 1 inch to 1| inches in
width, the patterns in shining black being diamonds
and the St. Andrew’s cross between parallel lines, or
the chevron between broken lines. Solomon Islands.
U. 170. Sash, 4 feet 6 inches in length, and 20
inches in breadth. Fringes at both ends. Striped
broad bands of dark grey alternating with yellowish
white. The material is a fine kind of matting.


U. 171. Sash or band, 4 feet 5 inches in length and
9 inches in breadth. Ornamented; pattern, hands,
diamonds, and triangular spaces; colours reddish-brown,
grey, and white. The pattern is large and hold; within
the larger spaces there are diamond-shaped figures on
a small scale. The material somewhat resembles
canvas. New Hebrides.
TJ. 172. Sash or band, 4 feet in length and 8 inches
in breadth. Ornamented in the same manner as 171.
New Hebrides.
U. 173. Sash or band, 5 feet 8 inches in length and
7 inches in breadth. The middle black, the ends
coloured brown, reddish-brown, black, red, and yellow,
in parallel lines, with here and there oblong spaces
coloured brown, and a brown band. A narrow fringe
at each end. The material is hard and rather harsh,
somewhat like haircloth. New Hebrides.
174. Fringe. Dress of a chiefs wife, made of the
bark of a tree, and worn on occasions of ceremony.
A similar dress is worn by the principal females of
Tanna. Aneiteum.
175. Fringe. Dress of a female made of the leaves
of the pandanus. The females chew the leaves, and
thus free the fibre, which is fastened to a cord made of
the bark of a tree. Aneiteum,
TJ. 176. Fringe. Female’s dress. Solomon Islands.
177. Portion of a fringe. Aneiteum
178. Fringe (black), said to be made of the twigs
of some plant. Only worn on occasions of ceremony,,
or when visiting friends at a distance. Tanna.
179. Narrow, short fringe, probably the dress of a
very young female of rank. New Hebrides.
TJ. 180. Fringe, consisting of a number of strands
of some vegetable fibre, neatly fastened to a stout cord.
Soft and pleasant to the touch. Solomon Islands.


181. Bark Cloth (white). Solomon Islands.
182. Bark Cloth (white). Solomon Islands.
183. Bark Cloth (reddish-brown). Solomon Islands.
184. Bark Cloth (reddish-brown). Solomon Islands.
184 a. Bark Cloth (coloured). Fotuna, New Heb-
rides.
185. Mat, 6 inches by 7 inches, with strings for
fastening it to the body. It is double, and forms a
pocket. Stained yellow; pattern, diamonds and tri-
angular figures in black. Further ornamented with
leaves, neatly folded, and fringes of a deep orange
colour.
186. Head-dress of a female, made of a kind of flag,
and ornamented with threads of some vegetable fibre,
stained red, yellow, and black. Niua.
187. Necklace of shells. Bouka.
188. Necklace made of small rings (sections of
shells). Solomon Islands.
189. Necklace. Sections of some reed or cane
strung on strong twine, made apparently of bark.
Solomon Islands.
190, Flat circular ornament of shell. Five inches
in diameter, somewhat like the dibhi-dihhi of the
North Australians. Erromango.
U. 191. Flat circular ornament of shell. Five
inches and a quarter in diameter. New Hebrides.
192. Flat circular ornament of shell. Four inches
and a half in diameter. New Hebrides.
193. Flat circular ornament of shell. Five inches
in diameter. New Hebrides.
194. Flat circular ornament of shell. Three inches
in diameter. New Hebrides.


U. 195. Section of a shell. Crescent-shaped. Worn
as a breast ornament.
196. Section of a shell. Crescent-shaped. Worn as
a breast ornament.
197. Ornament of shell for the leg. Erromango.
198. Bracelet made of strips of leaves plaited.
Black and bright yellow. Nina.
199. Ornament composed of sections of small shells
in two rows, divided by a band stained bright red, and
having tufts of variously coloured feathers at each end.
In the middle there is a spur formed of six teeth.
Said to be worn by the natives when fighting. This
ornament resembles that worn by chiefs in the
Admiralty Islands. Solomon Islands.
200. Comb, or Scratching Pin, made of separate
pieces of wood fastened together with twine, and orna-
mented with cocks’ feathers. New Hebrides.
Captain Erskine* observed that the natives of the
Island of Yatd had, by contrast with other islanders,
a decent dress, consisting of a broad belt of matting
seven or eight inches wide, and very neatly worked in
a diamond pattern of red, white, and black colours.
They pierced the cartilage of the nose, and wore in it
a circular piece of stone; and from the lobes of the
ears depended large ornaments of white shells or of
tortoise-shell. Round their arms were handsome
bracelets made of small rings ground out of shells.
Some had their hair gathered up into a large top-knot,
coloured yellow by lime, and in it was inserted the
“ Scratching Pin,” with its plume of cocks’ feathers.
Bougainville*!* described the Solomon Islanders as
being almost naked. They tied a piece of mat round
the loins, and wore large flat ornaments of pearl and
tortoise-shell on their heads and round their necks.
* Journal of a Cruise among the Islands of the Western Pacific,,.
1853, chapter vii., pages 324—325.
f A Voyage Round the World , 1772, chapter iv., page 291.


201. Club, Forty-five inches in length, conical at
both ends. New Hebrides.
202. Club. Fifty-one inches in length, conical at
both ends, the base of the cone at the head, having a
sharp edge. New Hebrides.
203. Club, Fifty-three inches in length, conical at
both ends, the lower end. having a small cone surmount-
ing a larger one. Ornamented in one part with spiral
bands of red and black.
203 a, Club. Fifty inches in length, conical at both
ends, the lower end having a small cone surmounting a
larger one. The point carved. Ornamented, in one
part with spiral lines of white and red. Tanna.
204. Chiefs staff or club. Forty-eight inches in
length.
205, Club. Thirty-nine inches in length; as neatly
made as if it had been turned in a lathe. The head is
ornamented with leaf-shaped figures joined base to
base and radiating from a centre, the spaces being
filled with incised lines arranged almost like the leaves
of the common fern. Santo.
206. Club. Thirty-eight inches in length ; and with
a conical head, the base having eight sharp spikes.
Ornamented nearly in the same manner as 205. Santo.
207. Club. Thirty-six inches in length. Very
similar in form and ornamentation to 205. Santo.
208. Paddle-shaped club, of cocoa-nut wood. Fifty-
seven inches in length. Santo.
U. 209. Paddle-shaped club, of cocoa-nut wood.
Fifty-five inches in length. Santo.
IT. 210. Axe, of iron, with handle 40 inches in
length. Near the head the wood is carved, and the
figures, composed of curved lines, are moderately well
executed. The head is that of an ordinary iron
tomahawk.


211. Axe of wood, with long handle cut in the form
of an iron tomahawk. The lower part of the handle
is paddle-shaped, and ornamented on both sides with
figures in the form of the crescent and wedge, and
the peculiar dentated pattern common to the people.
The figures are cut out of the wood, and painted
with red and black. The instrument is very light,
being made of the wood of the bread-fruit tree.
(Artocarpus incisa). Santo.
212. Axe of the wood of the bread-fruit tree ; the
lower part of the handle paddle-shaped, and carved
and painted white, red, and black. Santo.
213. Axe of the wood of the bread-fruit tree; the
lower part of the handle paddle-shaped, and carved
and painted white, red, and black. Bouka.
TJ. 214, Axe of the wood of the bread-fruit tree;
the lower part of the handle paddle-shaped, and carved
and painted white, red, and black.
215. Axe of the wood of the bread-fruit tree. The
maker has so closely imitated the axe of iron as to
have made the head separate from the handle, the
latter being inserted exactly as if the head was of iron.
The lower part of the handle is elaborately carved. A
human figure appears on each side, within a sort of
open frame-work. The wood is very brittle, and the
owner must have been in constant fear of damage to
the carving. The usual colours —white, red, and black—
are employed. Tanna.
U. 216. Axe of the wood of the bread-fruit tree.
Very elaborately carved. Near the head there are
curved lines; but the greater part of the handle is
covered with incised lines and wedge-shaped figures,
executed apparently long after the axe had passed from
the hands of the maker. The head is separate from
the handle, the latter being inserted in the same man-
ner as if the head was of iron.
217. Paddle-shaped instrument of the wood of the
bread-fruit tree. At one end there is a human figure,


probably a female, rudely carved, and surrounded by
open frame-work, and painted white, red, and black.
218. Paddle-shaped instrument of the wood of the
bread-fruit tree. At one end a human figure, rudely
carved, and surrounded by an open frame-work.
Painted white, red, and black.
219. Paddle-shaped instrument of the wood of the
bread-fruit tree. Painted white, red, and black. Said
to be used at feasts. Erromango.
220. Paddle-shaped instrument. At one end appears
a human face rudely carved, and set within an open
frame-work. Wood of the bread-fruit tree. Bougain-
ville.
221. Spear with five prongs tipped with bone
parallel to the shaft, and secured with wrapping, the
outer string so arranged as to form a diamond pattern.
The spaces coloured white, red, and black. Twenty-
one inches from the point there is a tuft of feathers,
the quill of each feather being ingeniously looped to a
string of cocoa-nut fibre. Said to be a chief’s war-
spear. New Hebrides.
222. Spear of cocoa-nut wood. One part carved
and painted black and white, and the point and the
wood below it wrapped with thin strips of reed or
some leaf of a shining yellow colour. Twenty-four
inches below the point there is a round ball formed of
leaves. The lower end tapers to a fine point, to which
a tuft of hair is tied. Said to be a chief’s war-spear.
Santo.
U. 223. Spear, very similar to 222.
U. 224. Spear, one small part carved, near which
there is the usual round ball, to which is attached, in
this specimen, a tassel made of some vegetable fibre,
and stained yellow and red. The wrappings of strips
of reed or leaves cover only two small spaces, but the
pattern is neatly wrought. The colours are yellow and
red. The lower end tapers, but the point is not sharp,


and, unlike the spears of the New Caledonians, the
shaft is not uniformly rounded and polished.
CT. 225, Spear, with usual ball made of leaves,
carved, and with wrappings of remarkable beauty.
The pattern, bands and zig-zag lines; and the colours,
shining yellow and light red. The extreme point of
the spear is wrapped with strips of reed or leaves,
alternately red and yellow. Over a space of nearly
three inches from the wrapping there are numerous
barbs of bone about two-tenths of an inch in length,
and over a further space of 11 inches there are four sets
of barbs, the upper being about one inch and the lower
three inches in length. Between the lower barbs there
are sets of very minute barbs. All the barbs point
backward. The barbed parts are painted dark brown
and white in a very effective pattern.
U. 226. Spear, similar to 225.
U. 227. Spear, similar to 225.
U. 228. Spear, similar to 225.
229, Spear used in war. Numerous wooden barbs
firmly fastened to the shaft, and strengthened with a
covering of gum. Just below the last set of barbs, and
about 20 inches from the point, there is a portion
carved, the pattern consisting of triangular spaces
between bands. The point and two other places are
wrapped with the bright yellow strips of reed. New
Hebrides.
230. Spear, with smooth point. The lower end
terminates in a bone about 11 inches in length. Near
where the wood is inserted in the bone there are
numerous rings made of shell arranged in rows. New
Hebrides,
U. 231. Spear, with smooth point, the lower end
terminating in a bone. New Hebrides.
U. 232. Spear of hard black wood, the head formed
of one piece of bone 9 inches in length, and very


elaborately carved. There are six small prongs and
one larger cut into an openwork pattern, all pointing
forward ; while near the lower end there are barbs like
long spines pointing backward, all cut out of the solid
bone. A few white, red, and blue beads are attached
to the prongs. The head of the spear is encased in
bamboo and tied with bark cloth, in order to protect
the very delicate carved work from injury.
U. 233. Spear of hard black wood, smooth point.
The lower end—4s inches in length —is made of bam-
boo. The joints have been cut away, and some parts
are ornamented with lines and figures in black on a
white ground.
234. Hardwood spear, with two barbs of bone.
Used by chiefs in war. Niua.
U. 235. Spear of cocoa-nut wood, with three barbs
of wood on one side and two on the other. The barbs
are firmly fixed to the shaft, and further secured with
a coating of gum. The wrappings of split reed or
strips of leaves form a diamond pattern, bright yellow
on black.
U. 236. Spear, similar to 235.
237. Spear, said to be used for spearing fish. It has
seven sets of barbs (bone) in four lines, and below the
barbs the wood is cut away in the middle, leaving an
opening about 2| inches in length and about | an inch
in width. This greatly reduces the strength of the
spear. The bright yellow reed wrapping appears in
two places. Bouka.
The spears used by the natives of the Solo-
mon Islands and the New Hebrides vary much as
regards the form, and less as regards the ornamentation.
Some are 10 feet 7 inches in length, and others no more
than 5 feet 10 inches.
238, Bow, 58 inches in length.
239. Three Arrows; reed, less than three-tenths
of an inch in diameter. The heads are of bone;


one is smooth, and two are barbed—the barbs being
cut out of the solid. The reeds are very slightly
ornamented near the heads. Santo.
240. Bow. New Hebrides.
241. Bow. New Hebrides.
242. Fifteen Arrows; the lower part of reed and
the upper part of hardwood, smoothed and brought to
a point. New Hebrides.
243, Five Arrows with bone points, and one with a
hardwood head rudely barbed. New Hebrides.
244. Two Arrows; hardwood heads, plain; the
points wrapped with a bright yellow reed or leaf.
Short sections of the shaft ornamented with longitu-
dinal incised lines coloured black, Bougainville.
245, Five Arrows; points of wood, slightly carved.
Erromango.
246. Two Arrows; hardwood heads ; points wrapped
with very fine thin strips of reed or leaf; resembling
arrows from Bougainville Island.
247. Two Arrows; hardwood heads; the points
of two wrapped with very fine thin strips of reed.
Bougainville.
248, Two Arrows; hardwood heads ; numerous leaf-
shaped barbs ; one with a set of very small barbs
of bone near the point, and the other with carved
open work below the leaf-like barbs. Niua.
249. Six Arrows; hardwood heads; the points
wrapped with very narrow strips of reed. Tanna.
250. Two Arrows; one with bone barbs and the
other with leaf-like barbs; the lower sets having
serrated edges, Bouka.
251. Two Arrows; one with numerous leaf-shaped
barbs, and the other with leaf-shaped barbs and
-spines; heads carved; patterns, wedge-like spaces


connected by bands and parallel incised lines diverg-
ing from a central line; colours, white, red, and black.
Tanna.
252. Arrow; ornamented in the same manner as
251. Several short and two long leaf-shaped barbs
carved out of the solid wood.
253. Two Arrows; ornamented in the same manner
as 251; barbs of bone.
254, Two Arrows ; hardwood heads ; carved.
255. Four Arrows; one with a head very slightly
carved, and three with barbs; said to be used for
striking fish.
256. Two Arrows ; hardwood heads, with barbs of
bone ; said to be used for striking fish. Tanna.
257. Bow and five Arrows, bone points. Solomon
Islands.
258. Bow and four Arrows, the heads of iron wire,
&c. (modern). Said to be used for striking fish. Solo-
mon Islands.
259, Four Arrows, hardwood heads, smooth. Like
those from Tanna. New Hebrides.
260. Eight Arrows, hardwood heads, the points
wrapped with narrow strips of leaves or reed. Solo-
mon Islands.
261. Six Arrows, heads of hardwood, carved, and
ornamented with wrappings of strips of leaves or reed ;
some coloured red, black, and white, in patterns to suit
the carving. Exactly similar to the arrows from Erro-
mango. New Hebrides.
262. Two Arrows, barbed in sets of four, decreasing
in size towards the points; the points with the usual
wrapping, Solomon Islands.
262 a. Two Arrows, hardwood heads. Similar to
arrows from Bougainville. Solomon Islands.


U. 263, Fifty-six Arrows, hardwood heads, and
nearly all with the usual wrapping at the points. Like
the arrows from Bougainville Island. Solomon Islands.
U. 264. Four Arrows, barbs of bone and wood.
Tanna.
U. 265. Two Arrows, short barbs cut out of the
solid wood; below the barbs incised lines and bands,
forming a diamond pattern; very neatly executed, and
painted black and white. Wrappings of the bright
yellow strips of leaves at the points, and in two places
below the carving in rings.
U. 266. One arrow-shaped weapon with five prongs,
perhaps used for striking fish.
267. Sixteen Arrows; heads of hardwood with the
usual wrapping at the points. Resembling the arrows
from Bougainville Island.
268. Bow. The ends of the bow, and the string in
a few places, are wrapped with bright yellow strips of
leaves or reed.
269. Bow. Similar to 268.
270. Bow. Similar to 268, but without the
wrappings. Tanna.
271. Bow. New Hebrides.
272. Bow. Santo.
273. Bow. New Hebrides.
274. Bow. Similar to 268.
274 a. Bow, New Hebrides.
JJ. 275. Bow. New Hebrides.
U. 276. Bow. New Hebrides.
U. 277. Bow.
The length of the arrows used by the natives
of the Solomon Islands and the New Hebrides varies


from 2 feet 9 inches to 5 feet. The shaft (of reed) of
the longer arrows, usually about 3 feet 6 inches in
length, and the head (of hardwood) from IS to 18
inches. The hardwood head is reduced in diameter at
the lower end, and is made to fit into the reed; the
junction is strengthened by a wrapping of very fine
twine or sinnet, and a coating of gum is sometimes
added. The plain smooth arrows are made with great
care, and those that are barbed often show workman-
ship that for neatness could not be surpassed. And
many of the forms seen on the carved heads are very
beautiful. The arrows are not feathered, but the
lower end is invariably strengthened with a wrapping
of twine. A great many of the canes are ornamented
with parallel incised lines and triangular and dentated
patterns, which appear in bands or in detached paral-
lelograms. The smaller bows are 4 feet in length, and
the longer 7 feet.
278. Shield of basket-work; 3 feet 2 inches in
length, 10 inches broad at the broadest (upper part),
and 7 inches at the narrowest. There are two small
loops of basket-work, to which the handle (made of
strips of tough strong leaf) is attached. There is also
a lining of leaves, &c., inside the shield. The shield
is ornamented back and front, with a pattern in a
black shining colour. Solomon Islands.
U. 279. Shield of basket-work, Solomon Islands.
U. 280. Shield. Two feet 2 inches in length, 7
inches in breadth at the upper part, and 5 inches at
the lower. It is formed of 18 sticks, lying parallel to
one another, with cross-pieces 2 inches apart, and se-
curely bound with plaited strips of reed or leaf. The
inside is lined with leaves, the outer leaf having a
pattern cut out. The handle is very small, and to it is
attached a loop of sinnet. There is a plume of cock’s
feathers at one end. This shield is probably from the
northern part of the Solomon group. Solomon Islands.
281. Trumpet Shell (Triton tritonis). New Heb-
rides.


282. Mat. Eight feet in length, and from 3 feet 3
inches to 5 feet 3 inches in breadth. Solomon Islands.
U. 283. Netted Bag, with shells. New Hebrides.
U. 284. Netted Bag, with shells. New Hebrides.
U. 285. Netted Bag, with shells. New Hebrides.
U. 286. Bark Cloth. White (covering a shield).
287. Gourd, New Hebrides,
288. Cocoa-nut, polished; with loops of sinnet to
hold it by; a water-vessel. Solomon Islands.
289. Gourd for holding chunam (lime).
U. 290. Gourd with flat stopper for holding chunam.
U. 291. Gourd with flat stopper for holding chunam.
U. 291 A. Gourd with flatstopper for holding chunam.
U. 292. Gourd for holding chunam, with smaller
projecting stopper, ornamented with plaited grass;
diamond pattern; colours, shining yellow, black, and
red.
U. 293. Gourd for holding chunam, similar to 292.
The gourds 292 and 293 closely resemble those
made by the people of the Marquesas Islands.
The natives of the Solomon Islands and Admiralty
Islands chew the betel-nut or betel leaf, and lime is
carried by those who indulge in the luxury.
U. 294. Roll of Sinnet.
U. 295. Roll of Sinnet.
U. 296. Roll of Sinnet.
U. 297. Roll of Sinnet.
U. 298. Bamboo used for holding water or cocoa-nut
milk.
298 a. Model of canoe, with outrigger and sail.


299. Canoe. Length, 14 feet 3 inches; breadth,
15 inches. Cut out of a solid log, and with gunwales
lashed to the sides with strips of cane, the apertures
being stopped with gum or resin. Both ends the same.
Very slightly ornamented, the pattern being somewhat
similar to that commonly seen on Tahitian weapons.
Solomon Islands.
300, Model of a canoe. Length, 10 feet; breadth,
14 inches. A hollowed log, with gunwales lashed to
the sides with sinnet. The ends ornamented with
elaborately carved open-work; human figures, pros-
trate and sitting, coils, and bands. The whole of the
exterior is also elaborately carved, the patterns being
like those of the New Zealanders. Colours white, red,
and black. In design and execution all the work is
excellent. Said to be from the Solomon Islands.
301. Paddle, Solomon Islands.
302. Portions of outrigger. Solomon Islands.
803. Paddle; the blade painted white, and orna-
mented on one side with a grotesque human figure, in
black and red. On the other there is a ridge painted
white, red, and black. Bougainville.
304. Paddle, The ornamentation is similar to that
of 303, but the execution is better. Bougainville,
305. Paddle. A crescent in relief on one side, and a
ridge on the other. Not painted, Erromango.
U. 306. Paddle. Solomon Islands.
U. 307. Paddle. Solomon Islands.
U, 308. Paddle. Solomon Islands.
U. 309, Paddle. Solomon Islands
The paddles vary in length, from 4 feet 8 inches
to 6 feet. Those most neatly fashioned have blades
2 feet 6 inches in length, and nearly 7 inches in
breadth.


U. 310. Image, within a frame, painted black and
white, and with eyes of mother of pearl.
U. 311. Grotesque figure, painted white, red, and
black.
c. —New Guinea
Dumont d’Urville found the north-western part of
the coast of New Guinea inhabited by people of the
Papuan race, but beside these, he distinguished two
other descriptions of people. The Papuans are men of
the middle stature, with light limbs and slender frames.
They are by no means very disagreeable in aspect, the
face being oval, their cheek-bones projecting but
slightly, and their lips thin. They are dark brown in
colour, and few have much beard. The hair of the
head is crisp.
The second variety have square flat and angular
faces, with projecting cheek-bones, large mouths, thick
lips, and noses widened and somewhat pointed. Their
colour varies from a deep brown to a dark and smoky
hue, while some are not different from the Malays.
They are, it is supposed, a mixed race.
The third variety, believed to be the indigenous
inhabitants of the island, are the Harfours or
Alfourous. These, however, Mr. Earl* thinks are not
a distinct people. Many contradictory accounts have
been given as to their colour and form ; and the name
Alforas, the Portuguese term for “manumitted slaves,”
Mr. Earl supposes, was applied to all the free inhabi-
tants of the Molucca Islands to distinguish them from
those who dwell with them in towns.
The men amongst the Papuans wear only a strip of
fibre or native cloth round the loins; and the women
a sort of petticoat of pandanus leaves —sometimes
dyed of various colours—or a kind of likv, made of soft
shreds, like twisted grass. They build their houses on
posts, fixed several yards beyond low-water mark, so
* Races of the Archipelago , 1853, chapter iv., page 62.


that, according to Forrest, whose remarks apply to
Dorey Harbour, their tenements are always sur-
rounded hy water. Each house contains many
families, and is approached by long stages from the
land. A passage runs through the middle of each
house, and the families live in cabins on either side.
The unmarried men live apart from the families, their
houses being built in deeper water, and on stronger posts.
Jukes* has given a minute description of the dwell-
ings he saw on the south-east coast.
The Papuans make pottery somewhat similar to that
of the Fijians.
The earlier navigators were astonished to observe
what at first appeared to be fire-arms in the hands of
this people. Lieutenant Modera, who, it is said, was
the first to handle these instruments, found them to be
hollow bamboos, containing wood-ashes and sand,
which, when swung sideways, produced the appear-
ance that misled the first observers.
312. Bow, 6 feet in length ; string apparently of
bamboo.
313. Arrows, 23 in number; shafts of reed, and
heads of hardwood.
314. Arrows, 23 in number; shafts of reed, and
heads of hardwood; about 2 inches below the point
the head is thicker, so as to balance the weapon, and
the wood is smoothed away towards the point and
below.
315. Arrows, 31 in number; shafts of reed, and
heads of hardwood; the points are conical.
316. Arrows, 6 in number; shafts of reed, and
heads of hardwood; the points of nearly all are
conical, and about 6 inches below the point of each
there is an attempt at ornamentation, the carving
covering a space of half an inch or more
* Voyage of H.M.S. “Fly” Vol. 1., 1847, chapter xi,, pages
271—274.


317. Arrows, 5 in number; shafts of reed, heads of
hardwood, and points of bone; there is on each, one
short barb of bone about 7 inches from the point and
directed backward ; one barb seems to be made of the
claw of a kangaroo.
318. Arrows, 8 in number; shafts of reed, and
heads of hardwood; on each there is a short barb of
bone a few inches from the point, and directed back-
ward. These weapons are elaborately ornamented
with raised spaces between parallel bands, zig-zag
lines, and double parallel rows of dots (raised). The
parts cut away are filled in with white clay, and the
raised parts are painted black. Barbs are also cut out
of the solid wood.
The arrows above described are, as compared with
those made in other parts of Melanesia, heavy and
clumsy. They are from four feet six inches to five
feet or more in length, and the diameter of the shaft
is in some as much as five-tenths of an inch. They
are painted black, and the greater number are not
ornamented in any way. The specimens in the National
Gallery are like those used by the natives of Dourga
Strait and the Outanata River.
319. War-drum, decorated with marine shells, nut-
shells, and feathers. One end is covered with the skin
of a lizard.
The ornamentation on some of the drums of
the natives of New Guinea is, line for line, like that
which appears on the razor-knives from Denmark of
the age of bronze.


VIL—MICRONESIA*
Micronesia may be said to include all those groups
and islands lying between the Philippines on the west
and the Samoan Archipelago on the east. It extends
from the meridian of 132° east to 178° west, and from
21° north latitude to 5° south latitude. Of all the
numerous groups within this division—many of them
mere coral rings or lagoon islands—only six belong to
the class of high islands: namely, the Pelew Islands,
the Ladrones, Yap, Hogolen, Banabe, and Ualan.
The Kingsmill Islands, the southernmost of Micro-
nesia, are alone represented in the National Gallery.
Hale* states that the Micronesians as a people do not
differ greatly from their neighbours of Polynesia.
Their colour varies from a light yellow in some of the
groups, particularly the western, to a reddish-brown,
common to the east and south-east. The features of
the men are usually high and bold ; the nose straight
or aquiline, and commonly widened at the base; and
the cheek-bones project. The hair is black, and
usually scanty, though among the darker tribes some-
what abundant. In stature they are below the middle
height, and of slender make. One of their peculiarities
is a great elevation of the forehead, and indeed of the
whole head, as compared with its breadth.
320. Bow. Six feet in length. Andaman Islands.
321. Bow. Five feet in length, Andaman Islands.
322. Arrows. Six in number. Andaman Islands,
Note. —The arrows are about 2 feet 4 inches in
length, and are feathered in four lines. The bows are
ornamented at the edges with incised lines, forming a
* United States Exploring Expedition , Vol. VI., 1846, page 71.


diamond pattern on short parallel lines, with other
lines at intervals crossing them; and down the centre
there is a line composed of rudely formed crosses.
The bow is S shaped, and flattened. The shaft of the
arrow is a reed, to the end of which is attached a cone
of hardwood; in the centre of this is fixed a bone.
The bone of the sting-ray is often used for pointing
the arrows.
Hill Tribes of Malabar.
323. Bow. Six feet in length.
324. Bow. Six feet in length
325, Arrows (five in number). Shafts of reed, and
heads of iron. The heads are blades, 7 inches in length,
and sharp at both sides. These arrows are from 32
to 34 inches in length, and are feathered.
326. Arrows (four in number). Iron heads. The
heads of three are heart-shaped blades, with one, two,
or three barbs below the blade, firmly lashed to a short
piece of wood or reed, which fits into a socket in the
shaft. The head is attached to the shaft by a cord
about 6 inches in length. One arrow has a knife blade
about 8 inches in length suspended from the end of
the shaft by a cord 4 inches in length. These arrows
are about 40 inches in length, not feathered, but near
the notch for the cord there is a wrapping of twine.
They are an intelligent race, naturally kind, good-
hearted, social, and enterprising. Wars are not
frequent among them, and there is constant inter-
course between the inhabitants of the several groups.
They are excellent navigators, guiding their canoes by
the stars with great accuracy.
In the Caroline Islands the canoes are made to sail
with either end foremost, resembling in this respect
those of the Fijians. The insides of their canoes are
whitewashed. They burn the coral-rock and make
lime, which, mixed with cocoa-nut oil, serves to make


the vessels water-tight. The outside is coated with a
shining varnish. These arts are not known to the
Polynesians.
The canoes of the Mulgrave Islanders are flat or
perpendicular on one side, and the other is inclined.
The flat side is that opposite to the outrigger, and is
kept always to windward, the canoes sailing with either
end foremost.
The condition of the Micronesians is, in some
respects, greatly superior to that of their neighbours.
They are architects, and in places their houses are
surrounded by high walls made of huge blocks of
basalt. Some are 20 feet in height, and from 10 to 12
feet in thickness.
Their national weapon is the spear, armed with
shark’s teeth. This amongst them takes the place of
the bow—the principal weapon of the black race.
Sharks’ teeth spears are, however, not restricted to
this division; they are found amongst the Polynesians
at the Navigator’s and Depeyster groups.
They exhibit much skill and ingenuity in manufac-
tures. Their sashes, or cinctures, which are made of
the fibrous filaments of the banana plant, are woven in
a rude kind of loom, their shuttle bearing some resem-
blance to that used by weavers in Europe.
They have a medium of exchange, which consists
of long strings of a sort of beads. These beads are
discs, with a hole through the centre, admitting of
their being strung on twine or thread. They are
alternately black and white—the black being formed
of fragments of cocoa-nut shell, and the white of
sea-shells. The method of stringing them has pro-
bably been copied from the Chinese, who string their
coins by passing a thread through a hole in the
centre.
These strings of beads are used in various places as
necklaces, or are worn round the waist. Kava is
drunk by the natives of some parts, and the method of
preparing the liquor is more cleanly than that
employed elsewhere. The root is not chewed; it is
pounded on a large stone and then mixed with water.


According to Hale,* the dress, ornaments, and arms
of the natives of the Kingsmill Islands do not differ
materially from those of the people of the low islands of
the Archipelago; but the “defensive armour intended to
protect the body from the formidable edges of the
sharks’ teeth weapons is probably peculiar to them. It
consists of a jacket and trousers of a very thick close
network, braided of cocoa-nut sinnet, and a cuirass made
likewise of this cord, but woven so compactly and of
so many thicknesses as to form a solid board half an
inch through, which would form a tolerable defence,
even against the blow of a sword. Its shape is nearly
that of the ancient cuirass, except that a square piece
rises up behind to protect the head from a side blow.
They have also caps or helmets, ingeniously made of
the skin of the porcupine-fish, cut off at the head and
then extended to the proper size. It becomes stiff
and hard on drying, and the spines protruding on every
side aid in warding off the blows of the dreaded
weapons.”
Numerous excellent specimens of the kind of defen-
sive armour described by Mr. Hale, including the
helmets, are in the collection in the National Gallery.
Kingsmill Islands.
U. 327. Spear. Eleven feet 10 inches in length.
What may be termed the shaft is 5 feet 6 inches in
length, and If inches in thickness. The blade, 6 feet
4 inches in length, is ridged, and to each of the two
sides there are sharks’ teeth set in a groove and firmly
xashed with sinnet, the teeth and the wood being
pierced for the purpose. The teeth are set closely.
U. 828. Spear. Six feet 7 inches in length. The
head is formed of a number of short prongs, resembling
the tail bones of the sting-ray.
329. Weapon of wood, set with sharks’ teeth on each
side. Said to be used as a dagger.
* United States Exploring Expedition, Yol. YI., 1846, page 103.


U. 330. Ridged Blade of wood, slightly curved and
set with sharks’ teeth.
U. 331. Ridged Blade of wood, slightly curved and
set with sharks’ teeth.
U. 332. Ridged Blade of wood, slightly curved and
set with sharks’ teeth.
333. Flat Blade of wood, curved, and set with sharks’
teeth.
334. Helmet of the skin of the porcupine fish.
U. 335. Helmet of cocoanut fibre.
33G. Armour for the body.
U. 337. Armour for the body.
338. Armour for the body.
U. 339. Armour for the body.
340. Jerkin.
341. Covering for the arms.
342. Dress complete.
343. Covering for the legs.
344. Belt of fish-skin.
The ordinary armour is composed of a coarse sort
of netting, the twine being made of cocoanut fibre.
Other kinds are closely woven, forming a very solid
covering about half an inch in thickness. Those parts
woven on a framework of wood are very heavy and
cumbersome. Some are ornamented with marine shells,
and some with diamond-shaped figures worked in
black braid.


Vlll.-AN DAM AN ISLANDS.
Conflicting statements have been made respecting
the appearance and character of the natives of the
Andaman Islands, “The sea of Andaman”was visited by
two Mahometan travellers in the twelfth century, who
described the natives of the islands as having frightful
countenances, a black complexion, and huge feet; and
that they ate human flesh quite raw. Marco Polo wrote
of them as a most brutish and savage race, having
heads, eyes, and teeth resembling those of the canine
species.
Lieutenant Colebrooke reported that the people are
small, seldom exceeding five feet in height; that their
limbs are ill-formed and slender, and their bodies pro-
tuberant. Their heads are large, their shoulders high,
and like the Africans they have woolly hair, flat noses,
and thick lips ; their eyes are small and red; their skin
of a deep sooty black, and their countenances exhibit
the extreme of wretchedness and ferocity. They go
quite naked, and are very ferocious.
Sir Charles Malcolm, on the other hand, who was
acquainted with one of the natives, spoke highly of his
gentleness and docility; and Dr, Mount’s* account
shows that they are not without ingenuity in the
fashioning of their weapons, and in making canoes.
The latter are said to be elegant vessels, and of remark-
able buoyancy, so much so that it is believed they
would make excellent lifeboats, such Dr. Mount thinks
as have never yet been constructed by any of our
most experienced boat-builders. The bows they use
are of a singular shape; their arrows, too, are of an
unusual form; but they are well designed, and perhaps
no more skilful archers are now found anywhere than
amongst the Mincopie.
* Adventures and Researches among the Andaman Islanders, 1863,
chapter vii., pages 315, 316, 317, 321.


1. Assagai.
2. Walking Stick.
3. Snuff Boxes.
4. Spoon.
5. Piano.
IX-AFRICA.
Kaffir Tribes.


X-MISCELLANEOUS.
345. Necklace of grass. Resembling the work of
the Samoans.
346. Necklace of grass. Resembling the work of
the Samoans.
847. Dress consisting of mat and fringe. Samoa.
348, Dress consisting of mat and fringe. Samoa.
349, Mat with fringe. Samoa.
IT. 350. Band of matting.
351. Cloak of bark-cloth, coloured.
U. 352 to 357. Baskets (small) made of matting.
Double, with lids and pockets. Perhaps from Samoa.
U. 358. Small basket.
U. 359. Sample of matting.
360, Basket.
861. Bag or basket of matting containing specimens
of vegetable fibre, coarse sinnet, and white-bark cloth.
Probably from the Solomon Islands or New Hebrides.
362. Small basket.
363. Braids of sinnet.
U. 364. Fine specimens of cord. Strips of leaves,
black and white, plaited on twine of cocoanut fibre.
U. 365 to 369. Bags or baskets of matting, with a
diamond pattern in light red. Might serve as cover-
ings for the head.
U. 370. Box with lid.


U. 371. Box with lid.
U. 372, Canoe-shaped vessel of wood.
U. 373. Cup.
IT. 374 to 380. Seven boxes bamboo, ornamented
for holding chunam.
381. Prepared cocoanut fibre. Probably from Fiji.
U. 382. Instrument of bamboo, somewhat resem-
bling a Jew’s harp. Probably from Admiralty Islands.
U. 383, Wooden disc, with framework of sticks.
384. Tubac.
U. 385. Bundle of palm leaves.
386. Spear, 12 feet 5 inches in length. Perhaps
from New Zealand-
U. 387. Spear or lance of heavy wood, 9 feet 6
inches in length, stained yellow. Perhaps from Nieu,
or Savage Island.
U, 888. Staff, or club, almost paddle-shaped at the
head. Nearly 7 feet in length. Very heavy wood,
stained yellow. Perhaps from Nieu, or Savage Island.
389. Spear (imperfect). Probably from West Aus-
tralia.
U. 390. Spear of extremely light wood, with a head
of hardwood. One barb.
391. Spear or dart of reed, with hardwood head.
Two prongs, barbed. Probably from West Australia,
392. Spear or dart of reed, with hardwood head.
Two prongs, barbed. Probably from West Australia.
U. 393. Six wooden prongs, probably used in spear-
ing fish.
IT. 394. Paddle, with carved handle.
TJ. 395. Club, Perhaps from Nieu.


U. 396. Club. Perhaps from Nieu.
U. 397. Bamboo, ornamented. Perhaps a portion
of a spear. Solomon Islands.
398. Bamboo, ornamented. Perhaps a portion of a
spear. Solomon Islands.
U. 399. Adze, of iron. Modern.
U. 400, Leaf, arrows. Nieu.
U. 401, Barbed heads of hardwood. Perhaps for
light spears or darts.
402, Samples of native cloth, brought from the
South Sea by Captain Cook in 1770.
403. Models of the weapons of the natives of Aus-
tralia, by Mr, and Mrs, A. C. Le Souef.
U. 404. Hammer or pestle of limestone. Perhaps
from Solomon Islands.
U. 405. Small roll of braid, stained red. Probably
from New Ireland.
U. 406. Shark’s teeth ; perhaps intended for gaunt-
lets. Probably from Samoa.
U. 407. Carved ornament of shell (fine, bold, open-
work pattern), to which strings of beads (sections of
shells) are attached, and broad, well-plaited red braid,
by which it could be suspended from the neck or tied
to the head. Probably from some part of the Solomon
group, or the Admiralty Islands.
U. 408. Pan-pipes, Probably from Tahiti.
U, 409. Small disc of plaited straw, with handles
and rattle attached.
U. 410 Small bracelet.
U. 411. Small box of turmeric. Perhaps from the
New Hebrides.


ADDENDA.
North Australia.
1. Club or Sword. Described in Catalogue, North
Australia, No. 18.
2. Three-pronged Spear, each prong barbed. De-
scribed in Catalogue, North Australia, No. 8.
3. Barbed Spear. Described in Catalogue, North
Australia, No. 3.
West Australia.
1. Woonda, wooden Shield. Described in Catalogue.
Western Australia, No. 70.
2. Kylie or Boomerang.
3. Kylie.
4. Kylie.
5. Kylie.
6. Meero. Throwing-stick for spear.
7. Meero.
8. Doiu-ah. Stick used as a missile. Described in
Catalogue, West Australia, No. 5.
9. Doiv-ak.
10. Hardwood Spear, with a single barb spliced on.
Described in Catalogue, West Australia, No. 52.
11. Light Spear.
12, Light Spear.


Fiji.
1. Adze. Head of very dense compact basalt. De-
scribed in Catalogue, Fiji, No. 113.
2. Adze. Head of very dense compact basalt.
3. Ula. Club. Described in Catalogue, Fin,
No. 76. 8 J
4. Club.
5. Club.
6. Club,
7. Club.
8. Club.
9. Club.
10. Club.
11. Club or Staff.
12, Paddle-shaped Club.
13. Spear, with four smooth prongs. Described in
Catalogue, Fiji, No. 110,
14. Head of barbed Spear.
15. Spear, ornamented.
New Hebrides.
1. Bow and bundle of Arrows,
2. Bow and bundle of Arrows.
3. Bow and bundle of Arrows.


Photographs, &c.
Portraits of natives of Victoria - - - - 125
Natives in groups ------ 13
Natives encamped ------ 1
Women in canoes, Lake Tyers - - - - 1
Woman cleaning and preparing an opossum skin
for a rug - -- -- -- 2
Man defending himself against spears - - 2
Woman making a basket ----- 2
Fight with leangle, &c. ----- 2
Women fighting ------ 2
Spear-throwing ------ 2
Producing fire ------- 1
Man climbing on a tree ----- 3
Portraits of natives of Queensland - - - 16
Portraits of natives of New Zealand - - - 12
Portraits of natives of Fiji and New Caledonia 25
Plaster-casts of heads of natives of Victoria - 16




MASON, FIRTH AND M‘CUTCHEON,
PRINTERS,
FLINDERS LANE, MELBOURNE.
I
■


