

ADVERTISEMENTS.
, €. I. MiXWS hh,
.id Agent & Manager of Estates,
i & % jaejwTiea cumbers,
CORNER OF
Bute iql JjjliiiWlt
Suburban H omesteads,
Poultry Farms,
Orchards,
Farms, etc.,
BLOCKS TO SUIT ALL CLASSES
TORRENS TITLE.
sabt vsavs.
GET PLANS AND ALL INFORMATION
FROM
C. ft JWJCWEMi,
LAND AGENT,
AND
AHAGER of ESTATES,
H
1 & 2 MONTAGU CHAMBERS,
CORNER OP
unter & Elizabeth Streets,


ADVERTISEMENTS.
COWAN & C 0„
PAPER MAKERS,
Wholesale jStatioiiei'g,
AND HUNTERS’ BROKERS,
49 WYNYARD ,
onriMiw*
18,000
OF THESE ENGINES
SOW IS DSE.
-i-KI
ALL SIZES
KEPT
IN STOCK.
Sole Agents for the “Otto” Silent
Gas Engine.
IMPORTERS OF ALL KINDS OF
PRINTING MACHINERY.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
MEW
mmi REMEDIES.
Dysentery
Diarrhoea
Cholera
TRADE MARK
KING TAWHIAO
Piles
Neuralgia
Genera!
Debility
, . MONK’S DIARRHEA AND DYSENTRY MIXTURE Cures abso-
lutely as no other Medicine (yet known to the world) can do, and gives
Instantaneous Relief in every case. See Testimonials. ’ Sold at
all Chemists. 2s. (id. per Bottle.
, MONK'S PILE MIXTURE is a Wonderful Medicine, which .
has never been known to fail to cure equally well in Chronic or Acifte
cases of any kind. See Testimonials. Sold at all Chemists
2s. 6d. per Bottle.
, MONK'S NEURALGIA MIXTURE acts like a charm and gives
almost Instantaneous Relief. See Testimonials. Sold at all
Chemists. &s. 6d. per Bottle.
„ MONK'S TONIC MIXTURE fc an Invaluable Medicine ; a Sure
Preservative of Health in hot, unhealthy, or tropical climates. It prevents
the approach of above mentioned diseases, and is the finest and most deli-
cate Tonic pi ocurable for use in General Debility, Indigestion.
Decline, <£c. Invalids who cannot take Quinine or Steel can take the
Tonic Mixture with the most fovourable results. See Testimonials
Sold at all Chemists. 2s. fid. per Bottle.
These Remedies can be administered to ’lnfants of the
most tender age, and to ail other patients however weak and
delicate, with perfect Safety, and certainty of Immediate
Kelief and Early Cure.
SO LIE AGENTS,
HATHEY, NATHAN & CO.
201 PITT STREET.
Wharves Waiting Rooms & Steamers Advertising Co.
For Spaces in the Above, Apply to
HOLLANDER AND GOVETT. LESSEES.
115 Glenmore Road, Paddington. P.O. Box 117, Sydney,


ADVERTISEMENTS.
R. CUNYNGHAME,
Machinery Merchant and Manufacturers’ Agent,
Bond Street Chambers, Sydney.
MACHINERY—PortabIe Engines, Vertical Engines, Hoisting
Engines, Boilers, Brick Machinery, Mortar Mills, Quartz
Crushing Plant, Planing Machines, <kc., &c., new and
second hand.
TlMBER—Northern Hardwood, Piles, Girders, Market Timber.
WHISKEY-—Celebrated “Galley ” Brand, bulk and case.
ALE—Cooper & McLeod’s India Pale Ale, bulk and case.
INKS—Printers’ Book and News’ Inks.
BRlCKS—Kilmarnock Fire Bricks.
ROPES—Haggie’s Steel Wire Ropes, round and flat.
SCOTCH COKE, PIG IRON, OAKUM, FELTS, OILS
SPECIAL GOLDENBLOOM GAS ENGINE OIL.
VISIT CAMPBELL'S
HAIR DRESSING AND BATHROOMS,
THE BEST IH THE CITY,
113 PITT STREET.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
m' LADIES ONLY.
8N this age of great wonders, though strange ’tis to say,
Where sewing was hard,work, it’s now only play.
And when boldly we state, don’t accuse us of chaff,
That the best Machines made are the Jones and the Pfaff.
A child may work either if only once shown.
These Machines every lady at least one should own.
Our time payment system’s the best in the town,
You may have a Machine for a Weekly Half-Crown.
A Hand one or Treadle, whichever you please,
Our ladies will teach you to work them with ease,
And we make you no charge for the teaching they give,
Though they go to your house or wherever you live.
Our clients’ Machines we will keep at our cost,
In repair should anything get broken or lost;
We can always afford to be generous in this.
Our Machines never break, or at all go amiss.
The Machines that we sell with others don’t mix,
Our Showrooms in George Street is 6,3, 6.
Just give us a call, you will never regret,
Should your visit decide you a Machine to get.
F. LIWSOI,
SOLE AGENT FOR
JONES’ SEWING MACHINES,
flliSe FOF TPS PEPFE OROWN,
636 George Street, Sydney.
NEEDLES, OILS AND FITTINGS FOR EVERY DESCRIPTION
OF SEWING MACHINES IN STOCK.
Sewing Machines Repaired, Adjusted and
Guaranteed.


CATALOGUE
OF
Fishes and other Exhibits
AT
THE ROYAL AQUARIUM,
BONDI.
The descriptions of the Specimens in this
Catalogue were prepared by
J. DOUGLAS OGILBY, Esq.,
Of the Australian Museum.
THE ROYAL AQUARIUM and Pleasure Grounds are open
to the public daily, including Sundays.
Admission—Adults, 1s.; Children, 6d.; except on Wednesdays,
when the admission is 2s. 6d. for Adults, and
1s. for Children.
Sydney:
W. M. MACLARDY, 319 GEORGE STREET.
1887.


CONTENTS.
Australian Fur Seal 3
Boar Fish ... ... .. .. 7
Bullseye, Red ... ... ... 9
Blue Fish ... . 10
Butterfly Fish ... 12
Butter Fish... ... ... ... 12
Bull’s Eye 14
Bat-fish ... ... 16
Box-fish, Three-sided 30
Beardie, The ... 24
Coral-fish 9
Cod, Red Rock ... ... ... 13
Cod, Black Rock ... ... 6
Cat-fish .. ... ~. ... 25
Cuttle-fish ... ... 31
Cray-fish 32
Dog-fish, Spotted 3
Drummer, The ... ... ... 11
Dragonet, The ... ... ... 19
Eel-like Cat-fish ... .. ... 25
Eel, The Stone ... ... .. 28
Eel, The Conger ... 28
Eel, The Silver ... ... .. 29
Eel, The Green 29
Fortescue, The 13
Frog-fish, The ... 18
Flathead, The Sand ... ... 18
Forehead fish, The 20
Flounder, The 23
Flying-fish, The 27
Gurnard, The Butterfly ... .. 19
Gurnard, The Flying 19
Golden Crest Fish, The ... .. 20
Gar-fish, The River 26
Gar-fish, The Short-billed ... 26
Hound, The... 3
Hardy Head, The ... ... ... 21
Herring, The 27
Herring, The Fresh-water ... 28
John Dory. The ... ... ... 16
Long-fin, The ... ... ... 6
Leopard-fish. The ... ... ... 17
Long Tom, The ... ... ... 26
Leather Jacket, Golden Spotted... 30
Leather Jacket, Granulated ... 30
Leather Jacket, Little Green ... 30
Mado, The 10
Morwong, The Banded 12
Mackerel, The 17
Maori, The .. 23
Maray, The .. ... ... 27
Mullet, The Flat-tail ... ... 21
Mullet, The Spotted Red... ... 10
Numb Fish, The... ... ... 5
Nannygai, The ... 14
Old Wife, The 6
Perch, The ... ... ... ... 5
Perch, The Pearl ... 7
Perch, The Trumpeter ... ... 7
Perch, The Red Gurnard ... ... 12
Perchlet, Striped, The 8
Pennant Fish, The... 15
Pike, The 20
Pipe Fish, The Rough-billed ... 21
Pig Fish, The ... .. ... 22
Parrot Fish, The ... ... ... 23
PipeFi sh, The Banded ... ... 20
Porcupine Fish 31
Roundhead, The ... ... ... 13
Roughy, The ... ... ... 14
Rainbow Fish, The ... ... 23
Rauning, The ... ... ... 25
Ray, The Shovel-nosed ... ... 4
Ray, The Sting ... ... ... 5
Shark, The Crested Port Jackson... 4
Shark, The Saw ... ... ... 4
Silver Billy, The ... ... ... 8
Salmon, The ... 8
Sweep, The... .. 10
Snapper, The ... ... 11
Surgeon Fish, The False 15
Samson-fish, The ... 15
Sucking Fish, The Great 17
Sting Fish, The .. .. ... 18
Spotted Reef Fish, The 22
Sole, The Banded ... ... ... 24
Sole, The Black ... .. .. 24
Sergeant Baker, The 25
Sea Horse, The ... ... 29
Squid, The .32
Tarwhine, The ... II
Teraglin, The 14
Tailor, The... u;
Trumpet Fish, The 22
Toado, The 31
Toado, The Great ... .. ... 31
Velvet Fish, The 13
Wirrah, The .. 7
Whiting, The Trumpeter 17


% JAN 1993 AftjIERTISEMENTS.
•* THE
MOTILE BUILDINQ, LAND
AND
INVESTMENT COMPANY, LIMITED,
And SAVINGS BANK.
HEAD OFFICE:
PARK &. CASTLEREAGH STREETS,
SYIDItTEY.
CAPITAL, £lOO,OOO. "RESERVE FUND, £22,000.
HIGHEST RATES OF INTEREST FOR DEPOSITS.
TWELVEMONTHS 7 per cent.
Six months ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 per cent.
At Call, withdrawable any time ... ... ... 5 per cent.
On June 30, 1885, the deposits amounted to £6017 19s
4d. ; on June 30th, 18&6, to £47,950 6s. 6d. ; and on June 30,
1887, to £94,984 6s. sd. No better evidence can b« given to
prove the confidence of the public in this Company.
NEW ISSUE OF SHARES.
A limited number of investing Shares or Coupons
are still available. Up to the present time the
Coupons taken up have advanced to £10,120, showing
that this class of investment INCURRING- NO
LIABILITY, at the same time returning such a
satisfactory rate of INTEREST —10 PER CENT.—
is becoming appreciated by investors.
ASSETS of the Company at JUNE 30, 1887:
£285,119 3s. Bd.
RESERVE FUND, £22,000.
Applications por New Shares received daily.
EDWIN J. C BRYANT,
General Manager.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
TELEPHONE No 591. ESTABLISHED 1878.
CHAPMAN & LAMB,
Property and Financial Agents
127 KING STREET
(N B :>C T BI TT BIJ.
SYDNEY.
PROPERTIES SOLD OR LET.
Rents Collected. Mortgages Negotiated.
Valuations made for Mortgage or Probate Purposes.
FUNDS INVESTED UPON MORTGAGE. WITHOUT CHARGE TO MORTGAGEES
The Entire Management of Estates Undertaken.
ABSENTEES REPRESENTED.
mum n mmttit n m mm mm.
JVfessrs. Chapman and Lamb will be glad to receive
full particulars of (Properties for Sale or <To Let; forms for
Instructions will be supplied upon application.
Pheir Offices are centrally situated, and well adapted
for their business, which is conducted under their personal
supervision, and clients can rely upon their best endeavours
to give satisfaction, and also upon receiving regular state-
ments and prompt returns.


Royal Aquarium Catalogue.
The Australian Fur Seal.
Euotaria cinerea.
This fine Seal was some years ago very common on the shores
of the mainland and islands of Bass’ Straits, but is now, according
to Prof. McCoy, likely to become extinct within a short time. The
males are polygamous and are credited with being more successful
in ruling their many wives than the lords of creation ” frequently
are in ruling one. The females produce their young at a consider-
able distance from the sea, generally one only is born, but sometimes
two, and the month of November is the usual date of production.
An old male occasionally attains to eight feet.
The Hound.
Mustelus antarcticus.
This little bluish-grey Shark is common on our coast, where
it grows, though rarely, to the length of five feet. It is perfectly
harmless, feeding as it does principally on molluscous and
crustaceous animals, which it crushes between its teeth, the
character of which being pavement-like is admirably adapted for
this purpose ; when, however, an opportunity occurs of making
a meal off decomposing animal substances, it is never neglected.
Theform of its teeth also serves to distinguish it at aglancefrom the
outwardly similar-looking “ School Shark ” (Galeus australis), in
which the teeth are separate, oblique, notched, and serrated. The
female produces from 12 to 20 living young. Owing to a
peculiarly disagreeable odor which exudes from the skin, an
allied species is known as “ Stinkard ” in parts of the British
Isles,
The Spotted Dogfish.
Scyllium anale.
This pretty little Dogfish is of a rich brown color above,
ornamented with darker spots forming ring-shaped patterns on
the back and sides. It does not seem to be common, and in any
case from its small size, which does not exceed three feet, is
quite harmless. They are voracious feeders, nothing which they
can overpower—small fishes, molluscs, crustaceans, worms, Ac.,
—being all equally palatable. Each egg is encased in an oblong
horny covering, having at each of the corners a moderately long
tendril, by which the case becomes attached to seaweeds at the
bottom; these cases are produced in pairs at intervals, and
incubation lasts about six months. The skin is rough, and that
of the European kinds was formerly used largely for polishing
wood.
The Palace Emporium, Hay market,
is of colossal dimensions.


The Crested Port Jackson Shark.
Heterodontus galeatus.
A remnant of a bygone era of the earth the Sharks
comprising this genus must be looked upon as the most interest-
ing of living fishes. Of the five species' now known to exist
Port Jackson is the favored possessor of two. Each one of the
known species is restricted in its habit, but where found is usually
plentiful. The above-named form may be at once distinguished
from the better known 11. phillipi by the much higher crest on
the head, which moreover descends abruptly behind the eyes
instead of fining off to nothing on the occiput. Armed with
these hard crests and a strong spine in front of each dorsal fin
these Sharks force their way into crevices between, and holes
under, rocks—by which means the spines are frequently worn
down almost, to the roots—in search of shell-fish, crustaceans,
and sea-urchins, of which they consume large quantities. A fine
stuffed example of this species is on view in the Australian
Museum, in which the teeth are stained to a beautiful rose-color
from its predilection for crustacean diet. Their eggs are laid in
a hard covering having a spiral flap on the outside, and the
empty cases may frequently be picked up on our sea-beaches.
The Saw Shark.
Pristiophorus cirrhatus.
This very curious Shark must not be confounded with the
much larger and more dangerous Saw-fish, which is a true Ray
having the gill-openings inferior not lateral, as in our fish It
is easily recognised from all other species found in Port Jackson
by possessing a long bony snout armed on either side with
irregularly sized sharp spines, and about midway along it a pair
ot long barbels protrude from the lower side. They only grow
to about four feet in length, and are therefore harmless, unless
t ,^. a I re exce pti° na lly plentiful, when they are accused of damaging
the fishermen’s nets.
The Shovel-nosed Ray.
Rhinobatus bougainvillei.
The Shovel-nosed Ray or, as it is often called, the “ Sand
Shark is another of those curious looking creatures with which
nature has delighted to people the waters of the ocean. It is well
mown to all fishermen, being by no means uncommon in our
harbor, whence however we have alone seen it so far, its place
being taken to the north by its much more widely distributed
congener R. granulatus, which extends its range southward at
least as far as Moreton Bay, where we ourselves have taken it.
that it is harmless may be inferred from the fact that its teeth
•ire gianular, and therefore adapted for crushing molluscs and
crustaceans only.
The Palace Emporium, IKaymarket,
Is the People’s Mart.


The Numb Fish.
Hypnos subnigrum.
Anyone who has inadvertently touched one of these fishes is
unlikely to forget the'sudden thrill which passed through him on
that occasion. The power of inflicting an electric shock is
possessed by all the members of the family Torpedinidce, and by
none more so than by our species. It is vested in a pair of organs
placed one on each side of the body immediately behind the head, and
serves the purpose of assisting these species, which are slow and
sluggish in their movements, in obtaining their food, which
seems to consist entirely of fishes, and also of protecting them from
their enemies. The ancients used the Mediterranean species as a
remedy in certain diseases in the same manner as we are accustomed
to see the galvanic battery used by physicians of the present day.
The Sting Ray.
Urolophus testaceus.
• This small Sting Ray is excessively common in our harbors,
in fact when trawling in Port Jackson we have invariably found
them an intolerable nuisance, as the net comes up time after time
hall full of them of all sizes from the thirty-inch adult to the
youngster which still shews the mark of the yelk-sac ; however
anyone who takes the trouble will find the skinned pectoral fins of
excellent flavor when nicely fried. The wound inflicted by the
caudal spine though excessively painful is not as some suppose
poisonous, the pain being caused by the laceration of the flesh
owing to the strong serrations on the edges of the spine ; never-
theless should the mucus which covers the body gain access to the
wound, it is possible, in view of the recent discoveries of bacterial
organisms in fish mucus, that symptoms of poisoning might be
present.
The Perch.
Percolates colonorum.
This well-known fish is abundant along the line of coast
stretching at the least from the estuary of the Richmond to that of
the Murray River, frequenting especially, and growing to the
largest size, in brackish waters, but also ascending rivers far up
into pure fresh water, and thriving well in isolated ponds. They
vary greatly in appearance, according to the localities which they
frequent. They are very voracious, and, as they will seize almost
any living thing which they can master, they give good sport to
the angler who baits either with a small fish, locust, worm, or
even small frog. Needless to say they are excellent food when
quite fresh.
The Palace Emporium, Haymarket,
is a beacon of economical hope.


The Old Wife.
Enoplosus armtus.
With its transversely striped body and elongate vertical fins
this beautiful little fisb forms a most conspicuous and ornamental
addition to any aquarium. It is very plentiful in Port Jackson,
and shoals of them may be seen floating about the piles of many
of the harbor piers ; wary old veterans are these though, not to
be inveigled by the most tempting baits, though willing enough
to eat any amount of bread thrown to them. They grow to the
length of nine inches, and feed on small crustaceans, molluscs, and
annelids, and are found along the southern and south-eastern sea-
boards of Australia. They are excellent eating. This is the
only known species of the genus.
The Longfin.
Caprodon schlegelii.
The sexes of this fish differ so considerably that it is only
two years since their relationship to one another has been
established : the female fish is of an immaculate pale red color,
while the male is ornamented with golden bars and a large black
blotch about midway along the dorsal fin, and is in fact one of the
most handsome fish which occurs in our seas, where however it is
rare, and only appears during the warm months. They reach at
least eighteen inches in length Their range though extensive is
curious, as they have been recorded so far from Japan and Port
Jackson alone yet never from the Malay seas, whose fish-fauna
has been most carefully studied ; it is possible therefore that it
may be a deep sea form.
The Black Rock-Cod.
Serranus dcemeli.
The genus to which this fish belongs contains a greater
number of species than any other genus of fishes, but it is highly
probable that the number might be greatly reduced by an ex-
haustive examination of the various forms ; be this as it may the
claims of our Black Rock-Cod to take rank as a good species stand on
a solid basis. It is found on the eastern coast of Australia, and
has been recorded from fresh water in the D’Entrecasteaux group
of islands off the east coast of New Guinea. It grows to two
feet and more in length, and though an excellent fish for the
does not merit the exaggerated enconiums which have been
published concerning it. Though it cannot be said to be a common
fish, neither can it be said to be rare, and several usually appear
in the market about the same time Its food consists of fishes
and it is only taken with hook and line.
The Palace Emporium, Haymarket,
is the Housekeepers’ Paradise.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
MARIE BRIZARD’S
Celebrated Brandies and Liqueurs.
imnvrnm
Merton*
*>T
IDIUIU
CHAMP
'Shaou*
o
SfeilkS
CURACAO.
BRAND V.
RUM.
ANISETTE.
MARIE BRIZARD’S BRANDY is World-Famed,
AND THEIR LIQUEURS UNSURPASSED IN QUALITY.
ESTA-BIaISHED 1755.
J. EYEJGNOUX & FIVS
“FLYING-HORSE” Label,
Are of the best growths and
vintages of the Bordeaux District,
well matured and flavoured.
Tpt/s
%
'/&
tip
DELBECK & Co.’s
CHAMPAGNE.
The Champagne of the
Ancient Court of
France.
Agents— J. J. ROTH & Co., BOND ST., SYDNEY.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
HaitiWood Tinker 1 Yard,
72. 74 & 76 LIVERPOOL STREET,
iliilf, H.8.V.,
Have in Stock and to arrive Monthly—
WALNUT in Boards, Planks, Long Squares, and Table Squares ; Counter
Tops up to 31*inch wide.
OAK in Boards, Planks, Long Squares and Table Squares.
ASH in Boards, Planks, Long Squares and Table Squares.
HICKORY, 2nd growth, Boards and Planks.
CHESTNUT in Boards and Planks.
WHITE WOOD in Boards and Planks, from i inch to 4 inch thick.
WHITE WOOD, figured, f inch for Panels.
VENEERS in Oak, Ash, Walnut and White Wood.
FLINT GLASS PAPER in Sheets and Rolls.
EMERY PAPER AND CLOTH.
SUPERIOR BUFFALO GLUE.
BRACKET WOODS, various Woods.
CURLED HAIR;
Pure Long Hair, No. 1, G. H. Hair I f . , 0 ~
No. 2 Hair, either Gray or Black jfrom Is. to 2s. per lb.
AMERICAN MOSS, XXXX superior quality.
Philadelphia “Eagle” Carriage and Tire Bolts, complete stock.
Star Axle Clips, Nos. 1,2, 3,4, 5.
DIMENSION STUFF.
(Of any American wood) imported to order, on the best of terms.
ARMIAN FURNITURE.
Any description, in knockdown shape or after design, imported to
order.
BESEMAR STEEL NAILS.
Finishing Nails, in kegs 100 lb., assorted from 1 inch to 3 inch.
Casing , ~ ~ 2£ inch to 4 inch,
latent Table Slides, cheap and good.
Wood Filler, and Patent Stains of all kinds of wood.
INDENTS for all kinds of American Goods executed on best of terms.
W
Manufacturers ’
and Saw Mill Agent.
SAW MlLLS—lndiana, Kentucky, Tennesse,
Arkansas, Texas and New York.


The Wirrah.
Plectropoma ocellatum.
This is a handsome fish of a yellowish-brown color, studded
with numerous bright blue dark-edged circular spots. It is
common on the entire length of the New South Wales coast line.
It is chiefly taken when fishing with hook and line in the open
sea, and as it is not fastidious in its tastes almost any fresh bait
suffices to lure it to its doom. Unlike its near ally, treated of above,
it is not thought much of as a table fish, being considered tough
and leathery, nevertheless a medium-sized one when well boiled is
not to be despised. They grow to sixteen inches long.
The Pearl Perch.
Glaucosoma scapulare.
This curious fish is easily distinguishable from all other fishes
of the Perch family by the possession of a conspicuous bony plate
or shield immediately behind the upper limb of the operculum.
This is a small and interesting genus, containing but three species,
two of which inhabit our seas, and the third those of Japan. The
species under consideration has been obtained in Port Jackson and
Moreton Bay, but is scarce in both places, and being caught as a
rule by pleasure parties out after Snapper, it is difficult to get
specimens because the fortunate angler is not inclined to give
away a fish, which all who have eaten agree in considering one
of the best, if not the best, edible fish in the colony. It grows to
twenty inches in length at least.
The Trumpeter Perch.
Therapon cuvieri.
This well known and handsome little fish has a very wide
range throughout the tropical and sub-tropical seas of Australia,
India, and the Malay Archipelago ; it is abundant in all our bays,
great numbers being occasionally taken by the seine net. Its colors
are bright green above fading gradually into white below, and
having from three to six longitudinal brown bands. It has earned
its trivial name from its habit when caught of drawing the air
into the oesophagus, and as quickly ejecting it, by which means it
makes a distinct noise. It grows to the length of twelve inches,
but is rarely found so large, and is worthless from a commercial
point of view.
The Boar-fish.
Histiopterus lubiosus.
This extraordinary looking fish is rare on our coasts, and
indeed does not seem to be common anywhere, since the same
remark applies to it in South Australia, whence it was originally
described. Any novice may recognise this species from our other
Percoids by the elongated snout and deeply concave upper surface
of the head. It is said to be an excellent food fish, as is also its
Tasmanian representative, H. recurvirostris, which may at once
be distinguished from it by the presence of a broad, oblique, black
band stretching from the shoulder to the anal fin.
The Palace Emporium, Haymarket,
is the place to buy everything.


The Silver-billy.
Gerres ovatus.
The Silver-billy or Silver-belly, for it seems to go by either
name indiscriminately, belongs to a genus of Percoid fishes which
are excessively difficult of determination, and though several
species have been recorded from Port Jackson, this is undoubtedly
the only one which is abundant, and it seems to confine itself
entirely to the south eastern sea-board of Australia. It is a
beautiful little silvery fish, rarely obtaining to nine inches in length,
and would form a great ornament to an aquarium. They swim in
shoals, feeding on minute organic substances, and are mostly
captured in the seine. Numbers may be seen any morning in the
Sydney market, where they command a ready sale, and are to our
mind one of the most delicious fishes of our seas, and fully able to
take the place on the breakfast table here that the Herring holds
at home.
The Salmon.
Arripis solar.
Like its namesake in the northern hemisphere our colonial
Salmon is essentially formed for rapid and sustained motion, but
unfortunately unlike that famous fish, it is held in little estimation
for the table, being dry and flavorless, nevertheless it is of con-
siderable commercial importance on account of its abundance and
size, which latter averages about two feet. If eaten it should be
quite fresh, as several cases of fish-poisoning have been traced to
this fish, which soon ofter capture becomes soft and flabby. As
might be expected from its shape it is extremely voracious, and as
it roams in large shoals it must be very destructive to all smaller
fish ; we have found ten Hardyheads in the stomach of one in-
dividual of ordinary size.
The Striped Perchlet
Apogon fasciatus.
This is another species which though attaining only to the
insignificant dimensions of four inches or thereabouts, would
nevertheless be most ornamental in aquaria. Of a plain reddish
or yellowish brown or even bright red ground color with four or five
black longitudinal bands and a black spot on the tail this beautiful
little fish would form a conspicuous object, well able to hold its
own with its larger companions. Their food consists of minute
crustaceous animals, such as shrimps, &c., and shells. This is a
very large genus, containing over one hundred species, the greater
number of which are inhabitants of the coral reefs of tropic seas.
They are all of small size, and of no use except to furnish food for
more valuable fishes.
The Palace Emporium, Hay marker.
is well-known everywhere


ADVERTISEMENTS.
PBABSOH & HOUGH,
Upholstery and Furniture Warehouse.
66 QUEEN STREET,
WOOLLAHRA.
ALL WHO ARE ABOUT TO FURNISH
SHOULD VISIT OUR WAREHOUSE AND INSPECT
OUR GOODS, WHICH FOR
Quality and Price cannot be surpassed
FURNITURE UPHOLSTERED. BEDDING RE-MADE.
Venetian and Holland Blinds made and fitted complete*
Linoleums, Oilcloth, Carpets, &0., kept in stock & laid on
THE SHORTEST NOTICE.
OItAWIN6>HdOM SUITES A SPECIALITY.
PEARSON & HOUGH,
66 QUEEN ST., WOOLLAHRA.


advertisements.
HAMMOQUETTE RECLINING CHAIR.
COMPORT FOR THE WEARY; THE INVALID'S FRIEND-
AND A HAVEN OP REST FOR ALL.
■
m
f
AS RECLINING CHAIR
m
. ,
•SpS’l
iiiii
as
folded. as CHair
THE HAMMOQUETTE RECLINING CHAIR
For COMFORT. CONVEN DURABILITY rt,
R. B. JONES, 6 Bridge Street, Sydney.


Red Bullseye.
Priacanthus macracanthus
The Red Bullseye is also a fish well adapted for aquarium
purposes, being of an uniform red color with large golden spots
on the dorsal fin ; its large eye and the strong spine at the lower
angle of the pre-opercle or inner gill-covert, will help the amateur
to recognise it from any other similarly colored and shaped fish
which is likely to be associated with it. These fishes often appear
in considerable numbers in the Sydney market during the summer
months. It rarely attains to the length of a foot, and is but a
moderately good fish for the table.
The Coral-fish.
Chœtodon strigatus.
The colors of this beautiful little fish cannot fail to make it
an object of interest to all who see it; of a pale straw-color,
with several oblique dark green, almost black, bands as broad as
the ground-color between, few of our fishes can exceed the
elegance of this pretty creature, though many of its tropical
congeners must, as was but to be expected, be acknowledged to do
so. The true metropolis of this genus is among the coral reefs of
the tropics, in the holes and crevices of which they find numerous
minute sea animals on which to feed. Our species rarely exceeds
five inches in length, but they are fat, plump, little fishes, and
what there is of them is exceedingly well-flavored. Several other
species have been recorded from Port Jackson.
Kner’s Coral-fish.
Chelmo truncatus.
By many people this handsome fish will be considered even
more worthy of admiration than the last, and we ourselves think
it quite equal in colors, and certainly much stranger in shape ;
posteriorly it appears as if it had been accidentally cut off, this
being due to the great angularity of the elongate vertical fins.
It is a much larger fish than the last, and grows to the length of
nine inches, and is proportionately higher in the body. It can be
easily recognised by the oblique black band on the head passing
through the eyes, the broad deep brown band along the posterior
part of the vertical fins and across the tail, and the greatly
produced jaws, which are used to draw its food from the narrow
cracks and crevices of the rocks. It has been recorded from Port
Jackson and King George’s Sound.
The Palace Emporium, Haymarket,
is the talk of the Town.


The Sweep.
Scorpis œquipinnis.
This is the only species of our scaly-finned fishes which lacks
ornamentation, nevertheless seen in its native element it is certainly
a handsome fish, and quick and graceful in its motions ; while as
if to console (!) it for being less favored in the matter of beautv
than its allies, it is the only species which is recognised as having
a commercial value. The Sweep is found on almost every part of
the Australian coast line, and is abundant in our waters. It grows
to above a foot in length and is said to be excellent eating.
The Mado.
Atypus strigatus.
This beautiful and vivacious little fish, the sole representative
of its genus, is very common in the neighbourhood of Sydney, and
as it has also been obtained on the Swan River, it is probable that
it frequents suitable localities round the Australian coast. They
go in small shoals, and its brilliant yellow body with the
conspicuous brown longitudinal bands, combined with its lively move-
ments, make it a general favorite with aquarium frequenters. It
grows to the length of six inches, and feeds on minute shells and
crustaceans.
The Spotted Red Mullet.
Hypeneus signatus.
This species does not attain to the size of the more plentiful
G. porosus , from which it may be distinguished at a glance by the
black spot which covers the upper half of the free tail ; it is much
the more handsome fish of the two, and in a living state has a broad
pale yellowish or lilac band along the middle of the sides. It rarely
exceeds nine inches in length. Whatever may be said of the
European species (Mullus barhatus) the “ Woodcock of the seas ”
as it has been termed, for which fabulous sums used to be paid by
the ancient Romans—as much as £240 for a single fish of 6 lbs.
weight is recorded—there can be no gainsaying that our two
species are excessively soft disagreeably flavored fishes.
The Blue-fish.
Girella cyanea.
This exquisite fish, a very gem among the finny tribe, is sure
to collect an admiring crowd round the tank in which it is
domiciled ; clad in a livery of brilliant blue, bespangled with golden
spots, none of the many gaudy forms which surround it can
approach it in surpassing loveliness. Like all its congeners it is
principally a weed-feeder, but we have found small fishes, squid,
and prawns in the stomachs of some we have examined. They
grow to the length of two feet, but when of that size have lost the
golden markings which so enhance the beauty of smaller examples.
At least three other species of Girella are found in Port Jackson,
of which the common Black-fisli {G. tricuspidata) is the most
important.
The Palace Pinporiuin, Haymarket,
is in the Haymarket Only.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
The Friend of the Poor as well as the Rich.
Get all Herbs and Compounds pure, or how can you depend on them
doing what you want ? Botanic remedies should be pure. There should
be no difficulty in obtaining them in any part of Sydney or suburbs, if any
difficulty should arise then write to my address, and I will do my best to
procure them if I should not have them in stock.
I now take the present opportunity of gratefully acknowledging the
liberal patronage with which I have been favoured during the last eleven
years, in which time it is well known that hundreds of cases have been
successfully treated by me, some of which had been declared incurable by
most eminent medical men, which is a proof that Medical Botany is worthy
the admiration of all. It is now obtaining a prominent position among
other sciences, and is daily increasing, owing to its superiority, simplicity
and efficacy over minerals to cure all diseases.
COUGHS, COLDS, BRONCHITIS, HOARSENESS, CROUP,
WHOOPING COUGH, and DIFFICULT BREATHING are speedily
and permanently cured by using
A. COLE’S WONDERFUL COUCH SYRUP.
RHEUMATISM, SCIATIC, SHARP AND NERVOUS PAINS,
SPRAINS, BRUISES, &c., absolutely annihalated by the use of
A. COLE’S RHEUMATIC CURATIVE LINIMENT.
WORM TI3ST CTU JRE.
An excellent medicine for the destruction and expulsion of every
description of WORMS from the system.
Prepared and Sold only by ALEX. COLE, 88 Bathurst Street.
FOR INWARD AND OUTWARD PILES.
TRY A. COLE’S HERBAL PILE OINTMENT.
COLE’S NERVE AND BRAIN TONIC.
Will cure all NEUVOUS COMPLAINTS, such as BRAIN AND
NERVE PARALYSIS, HYSTERICAL FITS, &c., and if taken
according to directions it will never fail to effect a cure.
EAR LINIMENT.
This Liniment will cure the most inveterate cases of DEAFNESS
if used according to directions.
TO BE HAD AT A. COLE’S, 88 BATHURST STREET.
The above Remedies are Prepared and Sold
ONLY by the Proprietor,
MEDICAL CLAIRVOYANT,
88 BATHURST, STREET SYDNEY.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
NEAYE & CO.,
Gas & Sanitary Engineers
AND IMPORTERS,
Boyle’s Chambers, BOND ST,
have oi sale
DOULTON AND CO.’S SANITARY APPLIANCES
r-
Enamelled Baths.
Gas-Fittings.
Chandeliers.
Burners of all kinds.
Globes.
Lamps.
Gas, Cooking, and
Heating Stoves.
Brassware.
Gas Meters.
Water Heaters.
Fire Bricks,
Fire-Clay.
Retorts.
Cast-Iron Pipes,
3, 4 and 6 inch.
Street Lamps and Columns.
Street Watering and
Sanitary Carts.
Street Sweeping Machines
Earth Cl:;sets.
Prismatic Pavement Lights
Glass Bottles of
Every description.
Galley’s Torbay Paint
For Ironwork, &c.
Sole Agents for k WALTER MACFARLANE & CO.,
Saracen Foundry, Glasgow,
ARCHITECTURAL, SANITARY & GENERAL IRONFOUNDERS.
DOULTON & CO., LAMBETH POTTERIES.
Indents executed on most favourable terms.
PRICE LISTS 01ST APPLICATION.
Bull Stores—No. 6 QUEEN’S PLACE k DOWLING ST., Woolloomooloo


The Snapper.
Pagrus unicolor.
From its large size, and the unfailing supply which comes
into our market, the Snapper is one of our most important fishes,
furnishing, as it does, a wholesome, plentiful, and, on the whole,
cheap article of food. It is found on all parts of the Australian
coasts, and also on those of New Zealand, and is everywhere held
in equal estimation. They frequent rocky points where the water
is deep, and sunken reefs some miles off the coast, and as they
occasionally grow to some 20 or 25 lbs. weight, and fight gamely
when hooked, it is little wonder that Snapper-fishing is the
recognised sport for anglers on our coast. Their natural food is
molluscs and crustaceans, and their strong lateral molars are
admirably adapted for triturating the hard shells of these animals,
while the anterior canines are no less adapted for prizing the
shellfish off the rocks.
The Tarwhine.
Chrysophrys sarba.
The Tarwhine may be easily distinguished from its more
appreciated relative the Black Bream [C. australis ) by the more
rounded profile, and the numerous narrow golden longitudinal bars
on the body, but if the tyro fails to detect the difference by means
of these two palpable signs, he has only to count the number ot
soft rays in the anal fin to find out an unfailing variation, as our
fish never has less than 11 while the Black Bream never has
more than 9 and generally only 8. They are taken in great
numbers both with line and net, and are held in great esteem foi
culinary purposes.
The Drummer.
Pimelepterus syaneyanus.
A large, thick, light brown fish which frequents rocky head-
lands and points in our harbors, and until last year, when we
pointed out the differences, had been confounded with the Black-
fish ( Girella ) tribe, from which it may at .once be distinguished by
having the roof of the mouth covered in places with minute teeth.
It is the only species of the genus as yet recorded from the
Australian coast, and seems to be of local distribution, Port Jack-
son and Port Stephens being the only two localities whence we
have seen it. It feeds entirely upon seaweeds, and is of little
value as an edible fish, being coarse and tasteless. It grows to
the length of at least 30 inches.
The Palace Emporium, II ay market.
is the place to buy a Silk Dress


The Butterfly Fish.
Cirrhitichthys aprinus.
The range °f this little fish is of considerable extent since it
was first described from Amboyna, and daring the last two years
the officers of the Australian Museum have taken half a dozen
n I ort Jackson by means of the trawl net, the largest of these
measured barely five inches, and this seems to be the full size to
winch it grows. This is a very pretty little fish, of a bright red
color banded transversely with broad stripes of rich brown, and
g the first soft ray of the dorsal fin produced. It is of
no economic value.
The Butter Fish.
Chironemus marmoratus.
This is rather a handsome fish having the body marbled with
ne.VfiSTv.’ ai l d Pal ? brownish y ell °w- It frequents the
iei ft l bourhood of rocks, and seems to be found in suitable localities
round the entire sea-board of the southern half of Australia. It
grows to about fifteen inches in length, and is not held in much
estimation as food. Like all the members of its family (Girrhitidce)
into brnnpb^ 8 of , lts P ecto / al fins are simple, that is not divided
nto branches, and are used as auxiliary organs of locomotion as
well as organs of touch.
The Banded Morwong.
Chilodactylus vittatus.
Q T hl - S *f. an °ther of the ornamental forms, and is sure to arouse
the admiration of those who are fortunate enough to see it in its
natiye element Its colors are pale yellow with two or three
oblique chestnut bands, the upper of which after following the curve
of the back for some distance, extends on to the lower lobe of the
caudal fin, where it becomes a deep black. It is a small species,
rarely exceeding eight inches in length, and is not common on this
coast, but has a wide range throughout the South Seas, certainly
beW 38 thG f fif n 2 WlCh Islands - To the genus Chilodactylus
b long some of the finest edible fishes of the colony, such as the
Morwong, ‘Jackass-fish,” and “ Carp,” while closely allied is
Latns containing the well-known and justly esteemed “Trumpeters.”
The Red Gurnard Perch.
Sebastes percoides.
v . , lh s J a “ d fpme fish has a wide range from New Zealand to
\ ictoria, but the latitude of Port Jackson seems to be rather far
north lor it, so that though caught in numbers off the rocks in the
sister colony with us it is only obtained by hook and line in deep
water off the coast. It is a handsome red fish transversely barred
wi i black the bars being as broad as the interspaces. The fishes
belonging to this family (Scorpcenidce), like those of the last, have
le ower pectoral rays simple. As there is no common name in use
< mong Sydney fisherman for this species we have adopted that by
which it is known in Melbourne. * J
The Palace Emporium, Haymarket,
is the House for Presents and Gifts.


The Red Rock Cod.
Scorpœena cruenta.
Every fisherman knows this bright-colored, spiny-headed,
coarse, ugly, ragged-looking fish, which is as unpleasant to
handle as it is worthless for edible purposes. Two species are
common in the harbor, but the kind under consideration may
always be distinguished from the closely allied S. cardinalis by the
presence of a large, black blotch on the last few dorsal spines.
They are lazy fishes, keeping near to rocks, where they hide
themselves among the seaweed, and entice small fish within their
reach by means of the skinny tentacles on the head and body.
They rarely reach a foot and a half in length, and their flesh is
soft and tasteless.
The Fortescue.
Centropogon australis
This is a pretty little fish, attaining to a maximum length of
five inches, of a pale yellowish brown color with several broad and
rather irregular transverse bands, but pretty though it be, and small
also, we would advise amateurs who are athirst for scientific
knowledge to beware how they handle it, for it is both able and
willing to defend itself ; the bones of the head are armed with strong
lancet-shaped spines, and these it has the power of rigidly erecting
at pleasure ; that on the preorbital stands straight out and with
this especially it strikes viciously sideways at any thing which
approaches ;on the whole they are best let severely alone. A
much larger species, the Bull-rout (C. rohustus), is common in the
Hawkesbury and other rivers of our eastern watershed.
The Velvet Fish
Haploactis milesii.
This very pretty and curious little species is found along our
southern and south-eastern coast-line in suitable localities from
King George’s Sound to Port Jackson. It is one of the weed-
hunting fishes, and never seems to exceed six inches in length.
It is not often caught in Port Jackson, but is probably sufficiently
common, its immunity from capture being due to the localities
it frequents. The entire body and head are closely covered with
short papillee, making the skin feel like the pile of velvet to the touch.
The Roundhead.
Flesiops bleekeri.
This is a fish of many colors, the principal of which are as
follows: ground color brownish yellow, with broad brown trans-
verse bands, and bright blue bands and streaks on the head. It
is a carnivorous fish, feeding on anything which it can master, and
as the extent of its gape is very great, it is able to swallow much
larger fishes than might be supposed. It grows to the length of
twelve inches, and does not seem common on this coast, where we
have seen it from Port Jackson and Port Hacking only.
The Palace Emporium. Ilaymarket,
is the Wonder of Australia.


The Roughy.
Trachichthys australis.
This very curious and interesting little fish is one of the
earliest described from the colony. It is a small species rarely
attaining to the length of six inches, and lives entirely at the
bottom in fairly deep water, and probably among weeds. In color
it is reddish brown, with the pectoral fins red, and a marginal
band of dull white on the soft dorsal, anal, and caudal fins ; the
scales are very rough and irregularly arranged. We have seen a
good many specimens, most of which were caught in fish traps in
Port Jackson, but some in shrimp nets in the Parramatta River.
Nothing whatever is known of its habits.
The Nannygai.
Beryx affnis.
The Nannygai has hitherto been recorded only from the
coasts of New Zealand and New South Wales. It is a deep sea
fish, and therefore caught only with hook and line, and more
commonly during the warmer months of the year. That they
roam about in large shoals may be inferred from the fact that
numbers usually appear about the same time. It is justly esteemed
as one of the most delicious edible fishes of the Colony, and
always commands a high price in the market, but its appearance
there is extremely irregular, owing to the difficulty attendant on
the successful pursuit of a fish living at such a depth and of such
roving habits ; and it happens, therefore, that the greater number
are caught by pleasure parties out Snapper fishing. It grows to a
length of twenty inches.
The Bull’s Eye.
Pempheris compressus.
This fish was first described by White nearly a century ago,
and so may claim to be one of the oldest known of the Australian
forms. It is a small species, rarely exceeding six inches in length,
of a curious shape, being very high at the shoulder and quickly
decreasing in height to the tail; it is brown in color with the
fins yellowish, and has a conspicuously raised lateral line. Two
other species are found in Port Jackson, both of which grow to a
larger size, but our present fish only is common.
The Teraglin
Otolithus atelodus.
Though not so numerous nor of so large asize as its relative the
“ Jewfish ” (Scicena) the Teraglin is a large and valuable species,
growing to the length of three feet, and always fetching a good
price in the market, as they are excellent for the table. They are
rapid swimmers, and being almost insatiable in their appetite, are
very destructive to the smaller kinds of fish. They usually swim
at a considerable depth, and are taken by hook and line as a rule
though occasionally some are surrounded at night in the seine.
The Palace Emporium, Haymarket
is a favorite resort.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
WOOD & COMPANY,
purmsbing Undertakers
SYDNEY-
ggg GEORGE ST,
OPPOSITE RAILWAY STATION.
SYDNEY.
BALMAIN.
PETERSHAM.
Telephone
No. 726.
SYDNEY
BALMAIN.
PETERSHAM.
Being possessed of one of the largest and most efficient plants
in Sydney we are prepared to furnish
STATE OR REFORM FUNERALS
ON THE MOST REASONABLE 2EBMS.
The business being conducted by the principals personally
the utmost respectability and accuracy are ensured.
Memorial Cards, Wreaths, Crosses, &«.
A. SPECIALITY.
FLORAL WREATHS, &c., of any description prepared
on the Shortest Notice.
PRIVATE CARRIAGES AND OTHER VEHICLES
FOE HIRE,
For Weddings , Balls, Parties, sc., at Reasonable
Charges.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
s NOTHING FIBHY ABOUT
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
gw
XX
XX
XX
GOODS
We shall be glad to see you in Pitt Street.
IT
mm
m
211 PITT STREET.
xx
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
• XX
XX
XX
XX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXNxxxxxxxxxxxxx
George Robertson & Co.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
and jStaliionei'g.
FXJBLISHEK.S.
BOOKBINDERS, RULERS, AND ACCOUNT BOOK MANUFACTURERS.
Central Depot for Artists’ & Surveyors’ Materials.
The Newest Publications and Stationery Novelties received bv
every Mail.
36) MEET, gYDjVEY,
AND AT MELBOURNE, ADELAIDE, BRISBANE AND LONDON.


Anthony Hordern & Sons
for Carpets , Floorcloths, and Linoleums.
The False Surgeon-fish.
Prionurus microlepidotus.
This strange fish belongs to the family Acanthuridce, or
“ Surgeon-fishes,” so called because the tail is armed in the typical
genera with an exceedingly sharp lancet-shaped spine on each side,
which, however, is used for purposes of defence, not for those of
healing ; in the species of which we are now treating these spines
are replaced by five strong blunt bony plates on each side, by which
it may be distinguished from any other fish which is likely to be
found in our seas. Little is known of the habits of this species
which has only been found in the neighbourhood of Sydney, and
is certainly not common there. It is of an uniform dark purple
color, grows to the length of twenty inches, and is excellent as food.
The Pennant-fish.
Caranx ciliaris.
This beautiful little species is sure to attract and rivet
the attention of all beholders, not so much for the delicate
tints of its almost transparent silvery body as for the
extraordinary development of certain of the rays of the
dorsal and anal fins, some of which measure four times
the length of the entire fish, whence its name of Pennant-
fish. For so small a species, and one which from its
shape must necessarily be a slow swimmer, the extent of its range
is enormous, it having been found from the Red Sea through all
the Indian and Malayan seas southward to Port Jackson, where,
however, it is not common. Six inches seems to be about its
limit of size. Two other species of Caranx are common in Port
Jackson, namely the “ White Trevally ” (G. georgianusJ, and the
“ Yellow-tail” (G. trachurus), the latter of which is found in the
temperate seas of both hemispheres, being as common in British
ns in Australasian waters.
The Samson-fish.
Seriola hippos.
The Samson-fish is not uncommon in the Sydney market
during the summer months, but, strange to say, all those which
we have seen came from one or other of our three inlets, Broken
Bay, Port Jackson, or Botany. It is a fine, thick, strong fish,
growing to about eighteen inches in" length, exception-
ally heavy for its size, and not by any means to be
•despised as a food producer. Like all its family, it is voracious
and wholly carnivorous. To the same genus belongs our “ King-
fish ” (S. lalandei), which is known as “ Yellow-tail ”in Melbourne,
and grows to a large size, and is of considerable commercial
importance when cured.
The Palace Emporium, Haymarket,
is a Public benefit.


The Tailor.
Temnodon saltator.
This is another almost cosmopolitan fish, being found through-
out the temperate and tropical seas of both hemispheres ; it is
very abundant in the neighbourhood of Sydney, where as above
mentioned it is known as Tailor, in Melbourne under the appro-
priate name of Skipjack, while in New York it is well-known and
justly esteemed as the “ Bluefish ; ” it is indeed when quite fresh
an excellent addition to the dinner table. It grows to the length
of thirty inches, but specimens of half that size are preferable as
food. Large specimens are said to be very destructive to the
nets which they cut in all directions with their sharp teeth, and as
they go in large shoals, the capture of a number, even should they
not succeed in cutting their way through, is by no means an unmixed
blessing to the fisherman. It is the only representative of the
genus.
The Bat-fish.
Psettus argenteus.
The Bat-fish, as its specific name implies, is of an uniform
silvery color on the body, the fins being tinged with gold. It is
a small fish of a rhomboidal shape, attaining to about ten inches
in length, and not uncommon in Port Jackson though its numbers
greatly increase to the northward. The extent of its range is
very large, comprising all the Australian seas, with those of the
Malay Archipelago and India, as well as the entire east coast of
Africa.
The John Dory.
Zeus australis .
Quin, the celebrated epicure, considered the British John Dory
to be the ne plus ultra of piscine excellence, but always insisted
that it should be cooked in pure sea water; even neglecting this
proviso we see little reason to dissent from the great gourmand’s
dictum, for in our opinion it is one of the best fish in the ocean,
no matter where it may occur • the differences between the British
-.ind Australian species are very slight, but seem to be constant.
Though a sluggish fish it is a confirmed wanderer, moving about
continually from place to place in search of its food, which consists
of small fishes, squid, sea-mice, and such-like, which are swallowed
whole, its enormous gape enabling it to engulf a comparatively
large prey with the greatest ease. Its appetite coincides with
the size of its gape. It takes a bait, such as a silvery piece from
the side of a fish, well, but a live bait—a small fish hooked
through the back fin—is preferable to any other. It grows to the
length of eighteen inches.
The Palace Emporium, Ilaymarket,
offers wonderful inducements to Buyers


ADVERTISEMENTS.
BROOK i GARKATT,
UPHOLSTEBEBS.
Bedding Manufacturers
—AND —
General Importers,
ZS& Pitt M.p Sydmy,
o
FACTORY: 215 & 217 PALMER ST., WOOLLOOMOOLOO.
FLOCK, FIBRE AND KAPOK
ALWAYS IN STOCK.
COUNTRY ORDERS Receive Prompt Attention.
o
Lowest quotations furnished, on application, for
Cedar and Pine Goods, Bedsteads, Austrian and
American Chairs.


ADVERTISEMENT.
THE
ational §uildinjg, 3[and
AND
INVESTMENT COMPANY,
LIMITED.
250 PITT STREET.
Authorised Capital - £200,000
Paid-up Capital - 20,000
Held on Deposit - 55,000
Reserve Fund - 10,500
DIRECTORS:
W. H. Hentsch
Hon. H. E. Cohen
J. T. B. Gibbs
F, A. Wright
John Broomfield
Hy. Chapman
Advances made on Freehold Security only.
NO APPLICATION FEES.
The funds of this Company being invested on
First Mortgages of Freehold Properties and in
Suburban Lands, carefully selected, no better security
can be offered to Depositors.
RATES FOR MONEYS ON DEPOSITS
12 Months 6 pei cent.
At Call ... 5 per cent, per annum.
Saving’s Bank, in which small sums may be deposited and
interest allowed on daily balance.
JAMES A. TODD,
Manager.


The Mackerel.
Scomber pneumatophorus
Our common Australian Mackerel shews no valid points of
difference with what is called the Spanish Mackerel at home. It
is at times exceedingly plentiful on our coasts, and sometimes gives
good sport in the harbor, but all the examples that we have seen
are small, certainly not more than half-grown. Like all the
Scombroids they are very voracious, and consume numbers of small
crustaceans, such as shrimps, along with the fry of other fishes.
Fifteen inches would be a large specimen on this coast. When
perfectly fresh these are delicious fishes, but they deteriorate
rapidly and are hardly fit for food twelve hours after japture.
The Great Sucking-fish.
Echeneis naucrates.
These curious fishes have been known from very ancient times,
when they were credited with extraordinary powers—Pliny states
that one affixed itself to the bottom of Antony’s ship at the battle
of Actium, by which means the ship was stopped, and Antony
was thus unable to encourage his men. The sucking-disc, which
is in reality a modified dorsal fin, is used entirely for purposes of
locomotion, in fact the fish is a “commensal” not a “parasite.”
Another species, E. remora , is also found in Port Jackson, and
both these species are cosmopolitan.
The Trumpeter Whiting.
Sillago ciliata.
This handsome and well known fish is fortunately very
common on our coasts, since there is no species in such demand in
the market, nor one which keeps up so steady a rate of value ;
taking it all in all, we have no fish held in such general and well-
deserved estimation. It is found all round the Australian sea-
board, and grows to twenty inches in length, but is rarely obtained
of that size. A second species, the “ Sand Whiting” (S. maculata),
is also common in Port Jackson, and is equally esteemed with its
congener, but does not grow to the same size, a foot being about
its average length. Both these are taken in seines, and the largest
specimens we have seen come from Lake Macquarie.
The Leopard-fish.
Opisthognathus jacksoniensis.
The Opisthognathi are by many naturalists placed in the same
family as the Whitings, from which, however, they differ so
materially that it seems necessary to form the separate family,
Pseudochromides, for the reception of these and certain kindred
forms. This is a very brilliant fish of a bright yellow color, spotted,
blotched, and streaked with rich brown. So far it has only been
recorded from Port Jackson, where it is by no means common.
Ten inches seems to be about its adult length. The species of this
genus are said to burrow holes in the sand, in which they live.
The Palace Emporium, Haymarket,
is a Monument of Commercial Enterprise


The Sting-fish.
Batrachus dubius
Like the “ Bull’s eye ” before described this little fish has the
honor of being figured by White almost a century ago. It is a
most repulsive looking creature with loose skin hanging about it,
and a huge head and mouth surrounded with short skinny append-
ages ; its colors are brown, marbled with dirty yellow. It is found
in suitable localities all round the Australian coast, delighting in
mud flats, and never found in sandy or clean ground ; the Parra-
matta River is a favorite haunt, and here they grow to the large
size of eight inches. Though a puncture from one of the spines
of the head is painful there is no poison present in this genus, as
there is in the allied Thalassophryne from the coasts of Central
America in which the spines of the opercles and dorsal fins are
perforated for the ejection of the poison as in the fangs of the
venomous snakes.
The Frog Fish.
Antennarius striatus.
This is the most common species in Port Jackson, though
four others have been recorded therefrom. It is greyish in color,
irregularly streaked all over the fins, body, and head with dark
brown and black. It is a small fish, rarely exceeding five inches
in length, but having a great capacity for food, and being a slow
swimmer, it resorts to an ingenious artifice to tempt unwary fishes
within reach; burying itself in the sand or mud it erects the
filament on the top of the head, and as this waves slowly about
according to the motion of the water it attracts small fishes, which
come up to nibble at it and are at once seized.
The Sand Flathead.
Platycephalus arenarius.
This species is by far the most handsome of the Port Jackson
Flatheads, being of a sandy color with numerous black specks on
the body, the caudal fin pure white with two oblique black bands
on the upper lobe and two longitudinal ones on the lower. It is
not uncommon on sandy beaches between Jervis and Moreton Bays
and probably extends further north. The largest we have seen
measured fifteen inches, and was a firm well flavored fish. Six
other species have been recorded from Port Jackson, of which the
common Flathead (P. fuscus) is the most important. This fish
grows to the length of three feet and is justly esteemed for the
table.
The Palace Fmporium, llaymarket,
contains forty-one Departments.


The Toado.
Tetrodon hamiltoni.
This is our common little Toado, which one may see any day
following the incoming tide on any of our shallow beaches, in so
eager a pursuit of such minute waifs and strays as the friendly
flood shall aid it to secure, that it may occasionally be seen left
high and dry until the succeeding ripple accords to it the requisite
depth to make its way again into its own element: nevertheless,
though its average length is but four inches, and its maximum five,
its flesh is of a most poisonous character,and many authentic cases
of death have been traced to its deadly properties.
The Great Toado.
Tetrodon stellatus.
Unlike the preceding species, that of which we are now
treating grows to at least twenty-eight inches in length, and has a
range extending over the entire Indian and Pacific Oceans. In
its young state it is beautifully marked on the lower half of the
body with brilliant golden and black bands or spots, but in its
adult state it is uniformly brown with small dark brown spots
over the entire body. All these fishes have the power of inflating
themselves with air, which causes them to float belly uppermost on
the surface, and by distending the skin to its utmost strength the
dermal spines with which most of them are covered stand out as a
cuirass against the attacks of any ordinary enemy.
The Porcupine-fish.
Dicotylichthys punctulatus.
Any person who incautiously grasps this interesting fish is
not likely to forget it in a hurry, as the dermal spines of these
Gymnodonts are enormously developed, and are so firmly founded
in the skin of the fish by their three roots, as well as being
erectile at will, that they are apt to startle most unpleasantly those
who unwittingly come into contact with them. These fishes are
moreover of no use whatever, not even as food for better kinds,
still to give them their due we have somewhere read of savages
making use of their skins for defensive purposes.
The Common Cuttle.
Sepia latimanns.
The Cuttle-fish belongs to the Cephalopodous Mollusca, and
the species above named is common in all the sheltered bays and
inlets of the Australian Coast. Owing to its repulsive appearance
it is not used as an article of food by ihe Anglo-Saxon race, but
it is freely eaten by members of other nationalities, and even in
Sydney commands a ready sale for edible purposes to French and
Chinese. Several other kinds of Cuttle-fish are found on the
New South Wales coast, the largest of which is known as S. apama,
which grows to the length of three feet, and a fine specimen of
which is on show in the Main Court of the Australian Museum.
The Palace emporium, llaymarket,
offers wonderful inducements to Buyers.


The Squid.
Sepiateuthis australis.
This is the common Squid of Port Jackson, and the Southern
and eastern sea-board of Australia. It is one of the most favorite
baits with anglers, since hardly any fish refuses it, while the fins,
are said by good judges to be excellent eating, and to have some-
thing of the flavor of tripe. Its means of defence by enveloping
itself in an inky cloud is too well-known to need any comment here.
The maximum length to which its body grows is one foot, and the
tentacles stretch forward about the same distance. A very beautiful
relative, Sepiola lineolata, of a white color with longitudinal blue
or opaque lines is also found, but not commonly in Port Jackson :
it would make an exquisite object in an aquarium.
The Cray-fish.
Palinurus hugelii.
This magnificent crustacean, which grows to a weight of ten
pounds and upwards, is one of the finest of its family. The meat,
though not as delicate as that of the Northern Lobster, is never-
theless of excellent quality, especially during the Spring and
Summer months, when they are in their best condition. The
female sheds its ova during the two first months of the year, and
it is questionable whether it should not be made illegal to offer for
sale at this period the female fish with or without the ova attached;
it is an undeniable fact that, whereas in the estuary of the Hawkes-
bury many dozens might nightly be caught by those employed in
the business, the pursuit is now abandoned on account of the
scarcity of fish ; now, let me strike a note of warning: our sole
supply for Sydney comes from Port Stephens, and, so sure as the
wanton destruction of gravid females continues in that locality, so
sure will the same thing happen to that fishery as has happened to
that of the Hawkesbury; now, however, that it has been plainly
proved that the fertilized eggs can be successfully hatched out by-
artificial means, it would be but right for the Government of the
Colony to engage some competent person to enquire into the
probability of works undertaken for the purpose of hatching out
and disposing of the young of this and kindred species being
remunerative.
The Palace Eimmrium, Hayinarkct,
JANI993 SJ) is the place to buy a Silk Dress.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE OLDEST ESTABLISHED
Music and Piano Warehouse
IN GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
»| TTir i@
WELL KNOWN FOR
Reliable Iron Frarije pianog
THE CHEAPEST HOUSE IN AUSTRALIA.
Til AMIMCAH OIteAKS,
The Fairest Time Payment System.
PIANOS FROM £2O, ORGANS FROM £8 8.
329 GEORGE ST„ SYDNEY.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
If you do not already use it, you certainly ought, as it far surpasses all
o her makes, and is appreciated as an inestimable boon by those who have
learned its value.
there is nothing else of the kind
EQUAL TO IT.
TM¥ IT! fMf IT I THY IT?
AND YOU WILL SOON BE CONVINCED OF THIS.
IS UNDOUBTEDLY THE BEST.
It is prepared with the utmost care by the aid of Special Mixing Machinery
and the ingredients used are the
PUREST AID BEST OBTAINABLE,
Puddings, Cakes, Pastry, &c., &c., are so much
better with than without it.
„ T Mixed with . D 'T Flour, it makes the very best SELF-RAISING
FLOUR, and this should be prepared o ly when you require to use it. It
will be found a great deal better than the so-called (ready-made) “SELF
RAISING FLOUR, which costs you more, and you do not know what is
in it.
The SUPERIOR QUALITY of WAUGH’S
BAKING POWDER is at once apparent the first
time you use it, and all who have used it can
testify to its excellence.
AT THE
Great International Exhibition
Where a number of different BAKING POWDERS were entered
in competition, the FIRST PLACE, and the only
first class award
Was given to WAUGH’S, and Waugh’s alone therefore received
Or. WAUGH’S BAKING POWDER
Prepared by JAMES CHANNON Only
A«d sold by a n Grocers. Manufactory, Harbour St.. Sydney


ADVERTISEMENTS.
P. LYONS,
Late Sub-Inspector of Police & of the Detective Force.
PRIVATE ENQUIRY,
MISSING FRIENDS,
-AND-
lime
STEPHEN COURT,
EWIABBTM ST.,
S Y U MT B Y.
Absconders and Wife Deserters traced, and all kinds of
Confidential Inquiries instituted. Evidence obtained in
Divorce, Libel, Fraud, and Incendiary Cases for the Legal
Profession and others. Copies of Wills, Certificates of Birth,
Marriage, or Death obtained in any part of fhe World, Rents
and Debts collected.
From Mr. Lyons’ long experience in the Police Service
of Birmingham—City of London —and New South Wales,
and has established Agencies in all parts of the Globe, he is
in a position to conduct all inquiries with caution, expedition,
and strictest secrecy, and to faithfully and promptly attend
to all business entrusted to his care.


ADVERTISEMENT.
w
Wholesale and General Ironmongers,
ARE
IMPORTERS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION OF
Brushes, Paints, Oils,
BAM, HOOF & SHEET IMOK,
Pumps, Lift and Force, and Piping,
}n|lif!l Jroip®Btoy,
Manufacturers of Colonial Saddlery, &e.
N.B.—Note the Address—
-254 GEORGE STREET,
NEAR BRIDGE STREET.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
GOODLET & SHITE
Timber, Galvanised Iron,
PLATE & SHEET GLASS MERCHANTS,
493 George St., Sydney.
VICTORIA SAW & JOINERY MILL, North End Harris St.
POTTERY & BRICKWORKS, Riley St, Surry Hills.
BRICK WORKS ••• Granville Junction.
BUSH SAW MILLS, Ooolongolook, Cape Hawke;
Kioloa, near Ulladulla.
DOORS> SASHES & JOINERY
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION
GALVANISED lEON,
CEMENT, PLASTER,
BRICKS,
BUILDING AND FIRE.
DRAIN PIPES,
POTTERY WARE, &c.
PLATE GLASS
SHEET & MILL ROLLED
- GLASS.
EMBOSSED & ORNAMENTED
PANELS*
PAN & SIDE LIGHTS.
Painted Lead work for
Church W indows or domes-
tic purposes made to order.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
IMPORTANT NOTICE !
Persons wishing a full insight into NERVOUS COMPLAINTS should read
Dr. RICHARDS, (M.A. Oxon., M.R.C.S. Eng.)
oust "lost manhood,”
ITS CAUSES AND CURE BY MEDICINE AND ELECTRICITY.
Price od. in New South Wales Stamps.
OM
P.O
LT
© 05
o s©
© t*
En
ARDS
CM
raHHK
©
■s ©
ft S'
as
Miiii
Wmm
© a.
ABOImTORY;
111 i
Dr. Richards desires to inform sufferers of both sexes that he has
permanently established himself in Sydney, and may in future be consulted
a.t bis rooms, No. 7 Spring Street, Free of Charge, by sufferers of both
Sexes from Nervous and Physical Debility, Exhausted Vitality, Premature
Decay, Pains in the Back, Head, or Chest, &c., &c. I Cure every Case
Undertaken. When I say I cure, Ido not mean merely stop them for a
time and then have them return again ; I mean a radical, cure. I have
made nervous and private diseases a life-lung study, and can safely
guarantee a cure in every case undertaken after a personal consultation.
Many persons, from the effects of youthful imprudence, have brought
about a state of weakness that has reduced the general system so much as
to induce almost every other disease, and the real cause of this disease,
scarcely ever being suspected, they have been doctored for every thing but
the right one. Notwithstanding the many valuable remedies that medical
science has produced for the relief of this class of patient, none of the
ordinary modes of treatment effect a cure.
During my extensive hospital and private practice in England, I have
discovered new and concentrated remedies, and with the use of my
extensive Galvanic Appliances I am in a position to guarantee a cure in
every case undertaken.
Persons living at a distance may consult Dr. Richards by letter free of
charge. Always enclose a full description of symptoms, &c., &c.
ADDRESS ALL ORDERS & COMMUNICATIONS,
iOJEfc RICHARDS
7 SPRING STREET, off PUT ST., SYDNEY.


1
ADVERTISEMENTS.
«.P.O Box, BS4 Telephone, 518
SPECIALLY LICSHSED
UNDER THE
REAL PROPERTY ACT.
SUCCESSORS TO
"W. HI. BIITSTED,
£iLABSTO«E SMAMBEIS, 9© PITT ST.,
SYDNEY,
BMANiQm OPFJQES-Allmrj,
MelbamaOt Yietesia
Pesthi Western Australia
H. M. L. PIKE, L. 8.,
(LflIE GOVERNMENT STAFF SURVEYOR.)
€. A. ®WEM, 1,.
(6 YEARS WITH MR. BINSTED),
A*
X


ADVERTIHEM ENTS.
A
o
4/
v/
K
T
A
4/
&
£
o
o
m
DR. FRED. WARE
■Surgeon gentist to the (Elite of Sijimen.
KIDMAN’S BUILDINGS,
CORNER GEORGE & MARKET STS
R. SHUTE,
Architect attb §urbegor,
2 3TEMPLE COURT,
KING ST SYDNEY


ADVERTISEMENTS.
252 a GEORGE STREET
SITDINp x,
6 Doors South of bridge St
AND
CHURCH ST;,
V PARRAMATTA. /
to
01
to
UJ
&
T
2
O
o
Q
<
c
H
» m
>-
H
<
O
o
ui
w
CO
<3
30
C£>
cc
3 O
“ p m
H 2
03
h
<c
\
Oh
o r
CO
- o
H H
QQ
S:n
w
<{ w
CO
“a
o
03
H
H
SO
p.
DC
02
W
>
ac
o
CO
o
P 3
UJ
23
H
o
PC
D
>
B
OJ
If
z
cd
or
m
IMPORTER
ID
■<
AN D
CM
OF
' EVERY DESCRIPTION OF >
Ladies’, G-ent.’s & Children’s
BOOTS &
SHOES


ADVERTISEMENTS.
BUCKINGHAM AND PEPPER,
The! People’s Drapers>
Iry them when in want of anything to adorn yourself
or your home.
BUCKINGHAM&PEPPER,SIO GEORGE ST.
(Opposite Central Police Court.)
mt Gfturo worn,
WAVERLEY.
C. F. STRATTON:,
PROPRIETOR.
iw >:
THE Proprietor of the above Hotel begs to inform his old
friends and the travelling public generally, that “ THE GRAND ”
is now open for Visitors and Tourists, and is replete with every
comfort and convenience. Having been for many years Chief
Steward in the P. and 0., A.S.N., and New Zealand S.S.
Companies’ service, his experience as a caterer for the travelling
public cannot be doubted.
The cuisine is attended by first-class men cooks, and the
Wines and Spirits are the best that money can procure. “ THE
GRAND ” commands splendid views of Botany Bay and Sydney
Harbor, and as a health-giving resort it is second to none in New
South Wales.
Visitors can reach the Hotel by either Tram or ’Bus, as they
pass the door every ten minutes.
Single Rooms or Suites of Apartments at Moderate Charges.
Two splendid Billiard Tables. Public and Private Bars. Table
d’Hote at 7 p.m.
In fact the host guarantees that nothing shall be wanting for
the comfort and convenience of those who may honor him with
their patronage and support.
Six years Caterer to the N.S.W. Cricket Association.


ADVERTISEME7 r TS.
TheSILBERBERG
0
»
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
0
TIE
IL
SOLE IMPORTERS-
J. SILBERBERG & Co., 32 Market St.
MEETS WJ.ITII THROUGHOUT THE COMMIES.
