

THE
J3 ir Thomas
ollection
Sa/e by Public Auction on
Tuesday, Wednesday, & Thursday,
jMay 18th, 19th, and 20th, 1920
IV. /?. LITTLE,
Auctioneer,
SYDNEY.




CATALOGUE
HRT GReasures
PICTURES
FURNITURE
Co be sold by public Ruction under instructions from perpetual
trustee Co., £td., punter stoet, Sydney, trustees late
sir Chomas )\nderson Stuart
In the Sale ffaoms, 42 Castlereagh Street
Tuesday, Wednesday & Thursday
MAY 18th, 19th and 20th, 1920
Each day at 11 o’clock a.m. sharp
W. A. IiITTUH,
Auctioneer and Valuer,
Castlereagh Street,
Sydney.
Websdale, Shoosmith Ltd., Printers, 117 Clarence St., Sydney.




SPECIAL NOTE
M r . LITTLE has no hesitation in stating' that this
Collection of Art Treasures, Curios, Pictures, and
Furniture is one of the finest private collections yet
offered at auction in Australia. Being very much larger
than at first anticipated, the whole of it has been removed
to the Central Sale Rooms, 42 Castlereagh Street, where
it is displayed to much better advantage.
THE COLLECTION WILL BE OPEN TO VIEW IN THE
SALE ROOMS. 42 CASTLEREAGH STREET. FRIDAY 14th,
SATURDAY 15th, and MONDAY 17th MAY, each day
from 10 till 5, and prior to the sale each day from 9 till 11.
Children will not be admitted to this Sale.
Purchasers are specially requested to strictly adhere to
the Conditions of Sale, as printed on the following page
of this Catalogue, and pay for and remove their goods
before 11 o'clock on the second day following the Sale
(viz., Saturday, 22nd May). Deposits must be paid on
all purchases. Goods will be delivered on production of
the Auctioneer’s invoice and receipt only.
W. A. LITTLE, Auctioneer.


TERMS AND CONDITIONS.
1. The highest bidder to be the Purchaser, and in case of dispute the Lot
to be put up again, and the Auctioneer’s decision to be final.
2. Every bidding shall be at least 5 per cent, in advance of the previous
one, and no party will be allowed to retract his' or her bidding
after once taken.
3. In the case of Lots upon which there is a reserve, the Auctioneer shall
have the right to bid on behalf of the seller.
4. The purchasers to give in their Names and Places of Abode, and to
pay down 25 per cent, or more, in part of payment, or the whole
of the Purchase-money, if required; in default of which, the Lot
or Lots so purchased to be immediately put up again and re-sold.
5. No Lots allowed to be removed during the Sale.
6. All goods must be removed before 11 o'clock on Saturday,
22nd May; if not so removed, the deposit (if any) will be for-
feited, and the Lot stored and re-sold, cither by public auction
or private contract, and any deficiency arising from such second
Sale, together with all costs, charges and expenses attending there-
on, shall be made good by the defaulter at this present Sale, and
it shall not be necessary to give any notice of such re-Sale.
7. The Lots to be taken away and paid for, whether genuine and
authentic or nut, with all faults and errors of description, at the
Buyer’s expense and risk, before 11 o’clock on Saturday 7 , 22nd
May, IV. A. Little not being responsible for the correct descrip-
tion, genuineness or authenticity of, or any fault or defect in,
any Lot, and making no warranty whatever.
S. To prevent inaccuracy in delivery, and inconvenience in the settle-
ment of the Purchases, no Lot can, on any account, be removed
during the time of Sale; and the remainder of the Purchase-
money must absolutely be paid before delivery.
9. Upon failure of complying with the above Conditions, the money 7
deposited in part of payment shall be forfeited; all Lots uncleared
within the time aforesaid shall be re-sold by public or private
Sale, and the deficiency (if any) attending such re-Rale shall
be made good by the defaulter at this Sale.
10. The Clerk to sign the Sale Book for and on behalf of the Vendor and
Purchaser.
W. A. LITTLE,
Auctioneer,
42 CASTLEREAGH ST., SYDNEY
(Directly opposite the Hotel Australia)


Catalogue
FIRST DAY’S SALE
TUESDAY, IStK MAY, 1920
At 11 o’clock a.m. sharp
At the Rooms, 42 Castlepeagh Street.
Dining Room
ELECTROPLATE, FURNITURE, WORKS OF ART,
PICTURES, &C.
ELECTROPLATE.
1 Two Old Sheffield-plated Saw-pierced Preserve Jars, on
copper
2 Large embossed water jug
3 Two Sheffield-design coasters
4 Electroplated butter and preserve frames
5 Embossed oblong cake basket
6 Engraved Hot-water Kettle and Stand, fitted with spirit lamp
7 Engraved Tea and Coffee Service, of teapot, coffee pot, cream
ewer and sugar basin
8 Electric kettle
9 Electric toaster
10 Oval Engraved Cahe Basket


11 Large engraved toast rack
12 Quaint-design Toast Rack
13 Sterling-silver Chamber Candlestick
14 Embossed Muffin Dish and Cover
15 Four-caster Soy Cruet, fitted with cut bottles
16 Afternoon Tea and Coffee Service, comprising teapot, coffee pot,
cream ewer and sugar basin (Queen Anne design)
17 A Fair of Sheffield-design Three-light Candelabra
18 Two Genuine Old Sheifield-plate Pillar Candlesticks, on
copper
19 Engraved and Embossed Sheffield-plate Circular Tray;
size 13in,
20 Very Fine Engraved Revolving Breakfast Dish, fitted with two
extra dishes
21 A Fair of Entree Dishes, fitted with movable handles, forming four
separate dishes (Hardy Bros.)
22 Asparagus servers
23 Ivory-handle fish slice and fork
24 Ivory-handle cheese scoop, and electroplated bread fork
25 Electroplated chutney spoon and sugar sifter
26 Engraved circular salver
27 Two chamber candlesticks, with extinguishers
28 Four Stel'ling-silver Tulip-shape Flower Vases
29 Valuable Old Irish Potato Ring, in sterling-silver. (Date, 1811)
Saw-pierced, and embellished with hand-cut figures, animals and foliage
A rare antique, in fine condition.
30 Two pairs nutcracks
31 Three meat skewers, marrow scoop, and four spirit labels
32 Four shell flower spills —“H.M.S. Powerful”
33 Five sparklets and refils
34 Oval Sheffield-plated Tray, with gallery sides; size 22in.
35 Twenty-four ivory-handled dinner knives
36 Twelve ivory-handled dessert knives


Dining Room
37 Best Quality Aacminster Bordered Carpet (planned to room);
size 15ft. 6in. x 15ft.
38 Walnut Cornice, fitted with pair of lace curtains and muslin drapes
39 Three fancy roller blinds
Magnificent Old Chippendale Complete
Dining Room Suite,
in Fine Old Dark Mahogany,
Comprising—
40 The Valuable Old Chippendale Bow-front Sideboard, in
fine old figured mahogany; fitted with damask drawer, original old
brass ring handles, centre and side enclosed cupboards, and bi‘ass
gallery back; size sft.
41 The Mahogany Three-tier Chippendale Dinner Waggon, en
42 The Beautiful Old Chippendale Dining Suite of Chairs, iu
carved mahogany, comprising Two Carver’s Chairs and Ten
Dining Chairs; upholstered in old scarlet horsehair; fitted with
slip-in seats
This magnificent old Chippendale dining-room suite was purchased in
England by the late Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart, and is considered by
experts to bo one of the finest in Sydney.
The suite will be sold in one lot or separately, according to the
wishes of buyers.
43 Rare Old Bight-day Bracket Timepiece, in old rosewood case —
Plavelle Bros., Sydney
JS-ty’ A most reliable timekeeper, in splendid going order.
44 A Pair of Fine Old Blue and White Delft China Vases, of
quaint design
45 Two Rare Old French Ormolu Figure Candlesticks, fitted
with cut lustres
46 A Pair of Valuable Old Oriental Gold Lacquered Spill
Vases. (Formerly the property of the late Dr. George Bennett).
47 Magnificent Old Wedgwood China Dinner Service, in rich
colouring, comprising soup tureen, cover and stand, salad bowl, thirty-
six dinner plates, eighteen soup plates, eighteen pudding plates,
eighteen cheese plates, twelve salad plates, four vegetable dishes and
covers, two sauce tureens, covers and stands, and seven various-size
dishes (total 123 pieces); enriched with gold and scarlet floral designs
jpgr*A very beautiful dinner service, in perfect order.


48 Fine Old Rosewood Carved Fire Screen, fitted with woolwork
(framed) landscape and figure of pilgrim
49 A Pair of Old Rosewood Banner Screens, with framed woolwork
pictures of peacock and floral designs in high relief
50 Solid 'American Walnut sft. Corner China Cabinet or
Bookcase, fitted with bevelled plate-glass doors and movable shelves,
with centre cupboard with panelled doors
jsgr’ Note the excellent cabinet work.
51 Fine China Breakfast Service, in spode Copeland china, compris-
ing twelve cups and eleven saucers, twelve large and twelve small
plates; painted in blue sprigs (total 47, pieces)
£557= A very beautiful service, in splendid order.
52 Pour sets of mustard, pepper and salt, with spoons; in old Dresden china
53 China bread plate, eight small plates, and slop pail; decorated in old gold
scroll border
54 Eight old white and gold bread and butter plates
55 Old Crown Dresden Triple Nut Dish, in rich Crown Derby
colourings
sfi Ten blue and gold band dinner plates, nine pudding plates, and thirteen
soup plates; in royal china (Worcester) (32 pieces)
57 Fine Old Ironstone China Dinner Service, comprising sixteen
dinner plates, sixteen pudding plates, eight soup plates, and eight salad
plates—Ashworth’s—(48 pieces); painted in very rich colourings
58 Eleven Royal Worcester Blue-band Dinner Plates
59 Valuable Old Chinese Centre Vase, embellished with varied
scenes of Chinese domestic life
GO A Pair of Smaller Chinese Vases, on carved hardwood stands;
enriched with hand-painted panels of scenes from Chinese domestic life
61 A Pair of Old Chinese Crackle-ware Vases, on hardwood
stands, bearing inscription “Good Luck,” in Chinese characters
62 Fine Old Inlaid Rosewood Writing Table, fitted with three
drawers
63 Three Fine Diamond-cut Water Jugs
64 Four diamond-cut liqueur bottles
65 Three Diamond-cut Sauce Jugs
66 Eight Very Fine Worcester Hand-painted Custard Cups,
embellished with gilt rams’ heads
67 Twelve Very Fine Old Red Lacquer Bowls, with raised bronze
leaf overlay (fine specimens)


68 Pour black lacquer bowls
69 Six brass finger bowls
70 Rare and Valuable Old China Dessert Service (Brownfield’s),
comprising tall comport, one oblong and two oval dishes-, and eight
plates
71 Twelve Valuable Venetian Glass Finger Bowls, decorated with
gold floral and leaf overlays
72 Six china menu holders
73 Fine Old Jasper-ware Dessert Service, comprising tall centre
comport, four oblong dishes, three oval dishes, and eighteen plates
(total 25 pieces)
A very fine old service, in perfect order.
74 Twelve Ivory-white Bisto-ware Menu Holders
75 Old Copeland Parian Jug, with raised figure decorations
76 Old Minton china plate
77 Two old stone china plates
78 A Pair of Very Rare and Valuable Old Nankin Blue China
Vases, with deep blue Oriental decorations; each standing 25in. high,
on hardwood stands
Fine specimens of early Chinese porcelain, of very beautiful proportions,
shape and design.
79 Two Solid Brass Lion’s Claw Door Porters, mounted in oak
Valuable Pictures
ALEXANDER NASMYTH
80 Valuable Oil Fainting (size 36 x 29) —Tivoli, and the Temple of
Vesta
Alexander Nasmyth, a Scotch landscape painter, was born at Edinburgh in
1758. He went early to London, and was a pupil of Allan Ramsay. After-
wards, he’went to Rome, where he remained several years and studied his-
torical painting, landscape and portraiture. On his return to Edinburgh he
commenced practice as a portrait painter, and had Robert Burns as one
of his sitters. His portrait of the poet is now in the National Gallery
of Scotland; a replica is in the National Portrait Gallery, London. He
was a member of the Original Society of Scottish Artists, and an
associate of the Royal Institution. His inclination, however, being
towards landscape painting, he ultimately confined himself to that
branch; but much of his time was occupied in teaching, in which he
was very successful. He exhibited landscapes occasionally at the
Royal Academy, in London, from 1813 to 1826. In 1822 he published
sixteen views of places described in the “Waverley Novels.” He died
at Edinburgh, April 10, 1840.
The above painting is a truly magnificent work, and is ’ considered
to be a fine example by this great Scottish master.


GEORGE VINCENT (Signed)
Valuable Oil Fainting (size 18 x 13) —Evening—Cattle drinking at
a stream
gqgp’ George Vincent, an English landscape painter, was born at Norwich in
1796. He learnt the principles of art from old Crome, and began to
exhibit at the Norwich Society at the early age of 17, and eighteen years
later was a regular exhibitor at the Boyal Academy (1814 to 1823).
Vincent was considered one of the four prominent painters of the Nor-
wich School, among whom were Crome, Cotman, and Stark.
The above picture is cleverly handled, and is considered a very
good example.
CONRAD MARTENS
Valuable Oil Fainting (size 16 x 12) —Near Wiseman’s Ferry, New
South Wales
A splendid example of this early Australian master. Oil paintings by
this eminent master are very rare.
MICHAEL, 1862. (Signed and dated)
Valuable Oil Painting (size 33 x 23) —Young woman sitting by an
open window sewing
Michael exhibited at the Royal Academy between the years 1839 and
1869. He was born at Hamburg, March 23, 1823. A genre painter,
pupil of Dresden Academy; then, in Paris, a pupil of H. Lehman and
Coutiere. He went to Italy about 1850, and with short interruptions
lived in Rome until 1870. He was professor at Berlin Academy from
1875. He painted almost exclusively scenes from Italian country and
convent life. Works by this great master will be found in all the prin-
cipal European galleries.
The above painting is considered a line example of his best work.
P. D. H.
Valuable Oil Fainting (size 27 x 24) —Dutch Interior. A woman
and a child in an interior
The excellent drawing, light and shade. It is a strong work, perfect in
technique, broad in treatment, yet the artist has not neglected the finer
details which make the picture so impressive.
A picture worthy of special attention.
H. GRITTEN (1856)
Valuable Early Australian Oil Fainting (size 24 x 16) —Sydney
Harbour in 1856; taken from Garden Island
A valuable work —should specially appeal to collectors of Australian
art and those interested in Australian history.


J. STARK (1794-1859)
A Pair of Valuable Cabinet Oil Paintings (size 12 x 9) —
Country Scenes
James Stark, a landscape painter, was born at Norwich, November 19th,
1794. He studied under Crome, of Norwich, for three years, and then
went to London, where he entered the Royal Academy in 1817.
There are works by Stark in the Edinburgh National Gallery, Lon-
don National Gallery, South Kensington Museum, and Sheffield Gallery.
The above paintings are considered to be fine examples of this
eminent British artist.
A. KAUFMANN, R.A. (1741-1807)
Valuable Oil Painting (size 14 x 11)—-Una and the Lion
The Companion Oil Painting (size 14 x 11) —Lady with Spaniel
Marie Anna Angelica Catharlna Kaufmann, a painter and etcher, was born
in' 1741 at Coirc, in the Orisons, where her father, Johann Joseph
Kaufmann, was then painting. At an early age she attained great
proficiency in music and languages, and showed a marked disposition
for painting, in which she was instructed by her father; and so rapid
was her progress that in 1754 the family removed to Milan, where she
spent her time in copying the works of the best masters. In 1757' her
mother died, and the family then went to Florence, and in 1759 to
Home, where her talents excited the greatest admiration, and where she
appears to have confined herself chiefly to portrait painting. In 1764
she went to Venice, from whence, in 1765, she came to England with
Lady Wentworth, and was received with great distinction; and on the
foundation of the Royal Academy, in 1768, she was nominated one of
the original thirty-six members. She contributed eighty-two pictures
to the Royal Academy between the years 1769 and 1797.
The above two extremely beautiful paintings are considered good
examples.
UNKNOWN
Panel Oil Fainting (size 10 x 9) —Dutch Interior
H. CAFFIERI, R. 1., R.B.A. (Signed)
Valuable Oil Fainting (size 18 x 14) —A Sunny Afternoon
Caffleri was a member of the Royal Institute of Painters in Water-
colours, and a member of the Royal Society of British Artists. He was
also a member of the new Water-colour Society, and a member of the
Society of British Artists. He exhibited at the Royal Academy, the’
Scottish Society, the New Water-colour Society, and the Groavenor
Gallery between the years 1869 and 1893.
Considered one of the best examples of Caffieri’s work yet offered
to the picture-loving public of Sydney.


Drawing Room
FURNITURE, WORKS OF ART, PICTURES, &C.
FURNITURE.
90a Valuable Axminster Carpet (planned throughout Drawing Room
and Recess)
jcgp A magnificent carpet of the best quality, in spotless condition.
91 Old French Carved and Gilded Fire Screen, with hand-woven
wool panels of bouquets of dowers worked in high relief
Fine Old Rosewood Mantelpiece, inlaid with fine marqueterie
work, representing the arts and science, griffins, musical instruments,
vases, etc., etc.
Carved and Gilded Chippendale Overmantel, with centre
bevelled plate-glass, eight side brackets with reflex bevelled mirrors
Pair Chippendale Telescopic Stands, fitted with banner fire
screens, in old art woven-wool work
Mahogany Sheratou-design Inlaid China Cabinet; the upper
portion fitted with plate-glass shelves, front panelled glass door and side
lights; beneath a spacious cupboard enclosed by inlaid panel door
Inlaid Rosewood Music Cabinet, with brass gallery back; the cup-
board is enclosed by bevelled plate-glass doors; the lower portion is
open, divided off into compartments
Solid Walnut Music Cabinet, fitted with movable shelves, enclosed
by bevelled plate-glass doors
Set of French Gilded Afternoon Tea Tables, with hand-painted
Old Rosewood Tea Caddy, inlaid with brass, and fitted with com
partments for tea; also heavy cut-glass bowl
Old Carved and Gilded Three-tier Wall Bracket, with bevelled
plate-glass mirrors
Old Carved and Gilded Four-tier Corner Wall Bracket, with
six old British plate-glass mirrors
White enamelled wall bracket
Inlaid Rosewood Oblong Occasional Table, on four spiral
supports


Solid Rosewood China Cabinet, relieved with fine satimvood
marqueteric inlays; admirably adapted and arranged for displaying
valuable china
Pair of Mahogany Tall Pedestals, forming cabinets of the upper
portion with lift-up top, with bevelled plate-glass to both sides and
top; beneath the door is fitted with bevelled plate-glass, enclosing
movable plate-glass shelves
jpgy 3 A pair of splendid cabinets, specially adapted for displaying objets d’art.
DRAWING ROOM SUITE, in solid old rosewood, relieved with
fine marqueteric and ivory inlays, and upholstered in figured silk
damask, comprising— The Lounge, Two Easy Arm Chairs,
Four Occasional Chairs, and Two Low Gossip Chairs
Valuable Genuine Old Chippendale Arm Chair, in fine old
dark mahogany, with upholstered seat and back in figured damask
IfCgr* A beautiful antique specimen in its original condition.
Set of Three Mahogany Chippendale-design Corner Arm
Chairs, upholstered in black and white striped damask
Magnificent Old Inlaid French China Cabinet, with inset
white marble top, and fitted Avith large bevelled plate-glass door and
side plate-glass reflectors, enclosing heavy plate-glass movable shelves
A very beautiful cabinet, specially adapted for displaying beautiful
china.
Rosewood Inlaid Oval-shaped Table, fitted with underplatform.
supported by tapering legs
Fine Old Mahogany Writing Desk, fitted with fall front, which
encloses pigeon holes and drawers; beneath is five drawers and knee-
hole. The whole is elaborately carved, and supported by cabriole legs
Avith ball and claw terminals
Old Chippendale Telescopic Stand, supporting banner screen
panel, Avhich is hand-painted in brilliant colours representing birds and
flowers
Two Specially-made Zinc-lined Cases, for blankets, rugs, etc.;
guaranteed both moth and Aveather proof
Two loose cushions, Avith shadotv tissue coA'ers and deep fringes (to fit the
above boxes)
MAGNIFICENT BABY GRAND PIANOFORTE— by the
great maker—Rosenkranz. (Specially imported by Elvy & Co.); in
highly-polished ebonized case
This very beautiful instrument was specially selected for Lady Anderson
Stuart. It is in magnificent order and possesses all those line qualities
of tone, touch and resonance so desired by musical artists. Those in
search of a truly high-grade pianoforte may purchase with confidence.


116 Rosewood Inlaid Music Stool, fitted with lift-up seat; upholstered
in flowered silk damask
117 Very Beautiful Two-fold Screen, with inlet satin panels
118 Very Handsome Corner China Cabinet, in solid rosewood,
relieved with fine marqueteric inlays; fitted with numerous shaped
bevelled mirrors, brackets, cabinets and recesses; specially adapted for
the advantageous display of valuable china specimens
Drawing Room
WORKS OF ART.
119 Royal Worcester Double-handled Oval-shaped Dish, with
esealloped edges, with old Chinese decoration
120 Pair of Royal Worcester Circular Plates (to match)
121 Small Royal Worcester Oval Dish, with foliage and fruit
decoration
122 Pair Old Wedgwood Oblong Plaques, with raised classical figure
subjects on green ground (cracked)
123 Two Old Persian Enamel (on Copper)‘Plates, with esealloped
edges, hawthorn flower decoration on rich royal blue ground
124 Two Old Florence-ware China Plates, with esealloped raised
edges; decorated with pink and blue flowers and green foliage
125 Fair of Old Worcester Deep Plates, embellished with pink
flowers, and enriched by royal blue and gold decorations
126 Old Swansea Circular Plate, decorated with Billingsley roses and
other flowers, with burnished gold enrichments
127 Pair of Old French Tall Blue and White Vases
128 Old Chinese Crachle-ware Vase, on square ebony plyuth
129 Very Valuable Old Capo-di-Monti Figure, in white porcelain
—Pan —Very beautifully modelled
130 Valuable Early Worcester Figure, in white porcelain—Sea
Nymph
131 Valuable Worcester Figure, in white porcelain—Venus
132 Valuable Worcester Figure, in white porcelain—Venus


Pair of Old Crown Derby Double-bandied Vases, with pink
and gold decorations
Fair of Old Bohemian Glass Tall Vases, tulip-shaped, with hand-
painted panels of flowers and foliage, enriched by fine gold scroll work
Old Minsi-ware Chinese Teapot —by Kanzan—with royal blue
and green decoration in rich enamel on brown ground; very quaint
design
Two Very Fine Carved Ivory Spill Vases —Landscape Scenes
Exquisite Royal Worcester China Vase, with elephant head
handles and old temple-design cover; very beautifully hand-pierced, and
decorated with very fine burnished gold enrichments
Two Old Chinese Eggshell China Cups, on small ebony plyuth,
with,pain tings of Japanese ladies, birds, butterflies and foliage
Set of Four Very Rare and Valuable Old Chinese Enamel
Saucers, finely decorated in rich colourings, representing warfare
landscapes and figure subjects
Two Very Fine Old Highly-decorated Lustre Cups and
Saucers
Set of Early English China, decorated iu the Chinese style, in rich
colours, comprising milk jug, slop bowl, and two cups and saucers
Pair Fine Old Rockingham China Vases, with exquisitely-painted
landscape scenes on apple green ground
Very Fine Royal Dresden Covered Vase, most highly decorated
with paintings of roses, and bearing initials “M.P.” iu a circlet of
flowers; the whole enriched with fine burnished gold decorations
Pair of Old Chinese Spill Vases, enriched with figure subjects and
Chinese characters
Fair of Wedgwood Mugs, with flower decorations on ivory-white
ground (one been repaired)
Pair Old Bohemian Bottle-shaped Vases, with painted panels
of flower decorations
Old French China Teaset (on tray), with flower decoration on ivory-
white ground with burnished gold enrichment; comprising tray, tea-
pot and cover, sugar basin and cover, cream jug, and two cups and
saucers
Two Old Worcester* Shaped Oblong Dishes, with vermilion
and gold scroll border
Two Old Worcester Cups and Saucers, with vermilion and gold
scroll border


Valuable Old Lowestoft China Bowl, with decorated interior and
exterior of roses and foliage (soft paste)
Old Bristol Bowl, decorated with paintings of vessels and flowers on
the exterior and flowers on the interior, with fish-scale border (has
been repaired)
Very Fine Old Chinese Covered Ginger Jar —Kanghi —with
exquisitely-painted figures in rich enamels on ivory-white ground (very
fine specimen)
Pair of Very Beautiful Bohemian Glass Vases, decorated in
white and gold
Valuable Old Capo-di-Monti Oval-shaped Deep Tray, with
birds and foliage in high relief, with floral burnished gold border
Pair Genuine Cut-crystals, in form of fish
Pair Genuine Cut-crystals, in form of pagodas
Exquisitely-carved Genuine Jade Circular Ornament, with
hand-carved movable centre
Exquisitely-carved Square-shaped Jade Ornament, with
finely-carved centre
Valuable Jade Hand-carved Circular Ornament, in the form
of wheel or leaf
Bare Old Chinese Snuff Bottle, painted inside with landscape on
the obverse and Chinese figures on the reverse
Old Chinese Porcelain Snuff Bottle, with paintings of flowers
and foliage
Similar Bottle (to match the above)
Old Limoges Blue and White Enamel (on Copper) Cup and
Saucer
Old Chinese Black Lacquer Cup, decorated with mother-o ’-pearl
inlays
Set of Four Old Persian Enamel Coffee Cups and Saucers,
foliage and flower decoration on royal blue ground
166 Old Battersea Enamel Case, with raised white flower decoration on
royal blue ground
167 Old Chinese Snuff Bottle, painted inside with landscape on the
obverse and birds and flowers on the reverse, with bright red enrich-
ments
168 A Similar Bottle to above, with landscape on the obverse and figure
subject on the reverse; enriched with jet black enamel


Old Chinese Tall Scent Bottle, with panel paintings inside of
flowers and insects, with outside enrichments of black enamel (very
Two Fine Old Chinese Enamel (on Copper) Bowls, with
dragon decoration in rich colours on pale blue ground
Old Chinese Enamel (on Copper) Snuff Bottle, with gold scroll
work decoration on delicate pink ground
Antique Genuine Cut Amethyst Scent Bottle, very finely
• carved body, with grotesque handles
Antique Seed-pearl Brooch, set in tine gold (very quaint design)
Antique Inlaid Tortoise-shell Work-box
Antique Inlaid Tortoise-shell Letter Case (very tine specimen)
Inlaid Mother-o’-pearl and Enamel Letter Case
Very Fine Old Wedgwood Medallion —Etruria, 1789 (in leather
case)
Very Rare and Valuable Set of Twelve Early Dutch
Crystal-glass Scent Bottles, with sterling-silver mounts (to be
sold separately)
Very Fine Carved Ivory Group
Carved Ivory Nesuka, carved to represent various animals, crabs,
tortoise, and insects
Carved Ivory Nesuka, pair of rabbits on base, decorated with fish
and shell-fish in mother-o’-pearl
Small Japanese Carved Ivory Figure, with mask
Carved Ivory Nesuka —Man with an axe
Carved Wood Nesuka —Man and boy with heron
Very Rare and Valuable Old Carved Jade Oblong Orna-
ment, with deep set carving of birds and foliage
Valuable Carved Jade Circular Ornament, with movable centre
Old Genuine Jade Snuff Bottle, with sterling-silver top
Two Old Dutch Scent Bottles, in blue and white
Rare and Valuable Old Carved Amethyst Bowl, standing on
tripod, with grotesque animal handles, and finely-carved ivory stand
Pair of old Chinese toy dog-shaped ornaments
Chinese Snuff Bottle, in crystal glass, with finely-painted interior,
representing birds and flowers


Old Chinese China Snuff Bottle, decorated with paintings of
grotesque figure subjects
Large Genuine Old Crystal-cut Snuff Bottle, decorated with
curious carvings (very rare)
Four old cut-glass bracelets
Carved Wood Nesuka —Tiger
Old Leather Snuff Box, with agate inlet top in silver frame; Scotch
(very rare)
Old Battersea Enamel Covered Box, with paintings of flowers on
delicate green ground
Old French China Covered Jewel Casket, with paintings of
Wassail scenes
Two Old Sange-de-Boeuf Snuff Bottles
Valuable Old Battersea Enamel Vanity Box, bearing inscrip-
tion on cover—“ Remember her who gives this trifle”
Tall Silver Snuff Box, decorated with fine tracery work, and hand-
beaten portrait cover
Tall Silver Snuff Box, with hand-beaten cover
Tall Silver Snuff Box, with hand-pierced gallery top
Tall Silver Snuff Box, with fine tracery work, with hand-beaten domed,
cover
Battersea Enamel Vanity Powder Pot, with screw-on lid;
inscribed—“ When this you see, remember me”
Old Ruby-coloured Crystal-glass Scent Bottle
Old Silver Snuff Box, with hand-beaten cover
Old Silver Snuff Box, with engraved cover—Windmill Scene
Old Silver Snuff Box, with engraved cover scroll work
Two Old Chinese Porcelain Scent Bottles, one dragon decora-
tion and one figure decoration
Old English China Paper-weight, in the form of a cup, and a
Pair of Old Worcester China Boots
Pair of hand-painted button butterflies
Old Persian Enamelled Covered Box, in three sections, on carved
ebony base; decorated with flowers on royal blue ground
Two Old Chinese Porcelain Scent Bottles, with figure decora-


Two Old Chinese Enamel (on Copper) Cups, with dragon
decoration on royal blue ground
Two antique glass bracelets
Antique Chinese red lacquered medicine box
Carved Wood Nesuka —Group of turtles
Turned-wood Specimen Paper-weight, with inlet carved mother-
o’-pearl disc
Collection of Coins (in case) —“Testa Mental Truths”
One Dozen Finger Plates
One Dozen Finger Plates
One Dozen Finger Plates
One Dozen Finger Plates
One Dozen Finger Plates
One Dozen Finger Plates
One Dozen Finger Plates
lily of the valley
One Dozen Finger Plates
lily of the valley
One Dozen Finger Plates
lily of the valley
One Dozen Finger Plates
lily of the valley
One Dozen Finger Plates
lily of the valley
One Dozen Finger Plates'
moss roses
(for doors); decorated with paintings of
(for doors); decorated with paintings of
(for doors); decorated with paintings of
(for doors); decorated with paintings of
(for doors); decorated with paintings of
(for doors); decorated Avith paintings of
(for doors); decorated with paintings of
(for doors); decorated -with paintings of
(for doors); decorated with paintings of
(for doors); decorated Avith paintings of
(for doors); decorated with paintings of
(for doors); decorated Avith paintings of
Antique Black Wedgwood Teapot, Avith festooned and fluted
boAvl, Avith cover surmounted with Avell-designed figure of a dog
Antique Black Wedgwood Coffee Pot, with raised allegorical
figure subjects surmounted by a female figure
Antique Black Wedgwood Bowl, decorated Avith raised allegorical
figure subjects and Avreath border


Antique Black Wedgwood Sugar Basin, with (luted body, scroll
handles, and Prince of Wales feather border; the cover is decorated
with four raised crowns
Antique Blue and White Cream Jug, with glazed interior; to
gether with small tray
Valuable Genuine Old Chelsea China Bust —Minerva
Two Bare Old Jacob Petit China Scent Bottles, with paintings
of dowers on the obverse and fruit on the reverse
Fine Old Dresden China Centrepiece, with paintings of Watteau
scenes, and surmounted by a figure of a winged Cupid
Two Old Chamberlain Worcester Cocoa Mugs (one faulty)
Very Fine Antique China Jug and Basin, exquisitely decorated
in festoons of drapery, musical instruments, etc.; heavily mounted in
hand-burnished gold (French)
Fine Old Black Lustre Jug, with landscape scenes depicted in stipple
gold
Very Fine Old Crown Derby Highly-decorated Plate
(repaired)
A Similar Plate (repaired)
The above two fine specimens of old Crown Derby were originally the
property of Governor Macquarie.
Handsome Dresden China Photo Frame, with raised (lower
decorations, surmounted by winged Cupids
Sea of Three Very Beautiful Tulip-design Vases, decorated
with hand-paintings of flowers, and enriched Avith burnished gold
(French)
Royal Worcester Deep Bowl, with hand-painted panels of (lowers
and gold enrichments
Pair Very Valuable Old Chinese Vases, with bird and foliage
decorations in rich enamels
Fine Old Crown Derby Deep Bowl, highly decorated in early
Crown Derby colourings
Old Chinese Circular Dish, Avith bird and fknver decorations in rich
enamels
Pair of Very Bare and Valuable Old Egg-shaped Covered
Vases, profusely decorated
Old Worcester Hand-painted China Chocolate Mug, painted
in the Chinese style —“Flight, Barr and Barr”


Very Fine Old Berlin China Covered Incense Burner, with
decorations of paintings of figures and cattle in a landscape, female
bust handles, supported by lion-claw feet on deep plynth
Valuable Old Lowestoft Chinese Figure, decorated in the
Chinese style and bearing a crest
A Similar Figure to the above, but bearing a crest of a different
character
Large Old Staffordshire China Double-handled Vase,
decorated in the Japanese style of rich colourings
Worcester China Figure of a Boy holding a Dolphin
Hand-painted Inkstand, with compartments for ink, sand, pens,
etc,; beautifully painted with bouquets of flowers on biscuit-coloured
ground
Two fine old Worcester china cups and saucers, with paintings in oval
medallion on salmon-pink ground
Two Bare Old Bristol Chocolate Mugs, decorated with paintings
in the Chinese style
Two Fine Hand-painted Pearl Shells, Chinese landscapes, on
carved rustic wood stands
Very Rare and Valuable Old Worcester China Cup and
Saucer, exquisitely painted with panels of flowers with burnished gold
enrichments on dark blue fish-scale ground; the cup bears the early
crescent Worcester mark; the saucer bears the early square Worcester
Bristol China Bowl and Saucer, decorated with paintings of
flowers, with pink lattice border
Fine Old Worcester Cup and Saucer, with paintings of bouquets
of flowers on white ground, relieved with French grey panels (saucer
faulty)
Pair of Old Royal Dresden Figures —Cupids
Set of Three Chantilly-ware China Bottle-shaped Vases,
with stoppers
Two Old Chinese Porcelain Miniature Dog Ornaments
Fine Dresden China Miniature Teaset, with raised forget-me-
nots, butterflies and insect decorations; comprising teapot, sugar basin.
cream ewer, and two cups and- saucers
Two miniature highly-decorated cups and saucers
Old Bristol China Bowl and Saucer (on stand)


Old Worcester Cup and Saucer (on stand); highly decorated in
the Chinese style
Old Worcester Spill Vase, with panel paintings of flowers on royal
blue ground
Pair Rare Old Capo-di-Monti Figures —Diana, and Vulcan
Hand-painted Old Worcester China Cup and Saucer, on
ebony stand
Old French Specimen Bowl and Saucer, on ebony stand, with
gold scroll decoration
Set of Six Old Chinese Porcelain Scent Bottles, various
figures and landscape decorations
Magnificent Old Dresden China Group —“ The Lovers”
Two Old Dresden China Figures —Ladies—in highly-coloured
costumes, wearing crowns
Valuable Old French Clock (under glass shade) —by Me Adam,
Paris; set in old French china; highly-decorated case
A beautiful old band-made clock, in its original condition and in splendid
going order.
Pair Exceedingly Rare Old Dresden China Groups —Spring-
time, and Summer; representing children garlanded with forget-me-
nots playing with sheep, and children garlanded with grapes and vine
leaves playing with a goat. (Fine specimens)
Two Old Royal Dresden Basket-shaped Vases, surmounted by
exquisitely-modelled figures
Pair Fine Old Pure White China Capo-di-Mouti Figures
‘ ‘ Gardening ’’ — (rare)
Pair of Old Dresden China Figures —“ The Dancing Girl,” and
“The Mask”
Moore Bros.’ China Specimen Flower Holder, surmounted by a
bird in flight
Magnificent Fair of Old Bohemian Glass Lustres, decorated
with panels of paintings of flowers; also fine gold scroll and tracery
work; each fitted with ten exquisitely cut-crystal drops
Fair Very Rare and Exceedingly Valuable Old Crown
Derby Figures, in a perfect state of preservation—Shepherd and
Shepherdess; vested in highly-coloured costumes, with rich gold and
flower decorations; one with a flowering shrub and dog at base, and the
other with a flowering shrub and lamb (particularly fine examples)


Old French China Hand-painted Vase, with centre medallion of
flower supported by two ornate handles enriched by gold scroll and
tracery work
Old Dresden China Inkwell and Duster
Two Old Persian Enamel (on Copper) Bowls, with flower
decorations on royal blue ground
Fine Old Davenport Tea Service, richly decorated with flowers
and foliage, with delicate green and burnished gold tinted border, com-
prising the quaint old teapot, sugar basin, with scroll handles, two
shaped bread and butter plates, and six cups and saucers
A very beautiful old service in perfect order.
Magnificent Hand-painted Old Worcester China Dessert
Service; each piece is painted with a different subject of fruit most
exquisitely done; with scroll border on vermilion ground; comprising
the large centre comport with double handles, two oval-shaped dishes,
two oblong-shaped dishes, and seven plates
jJSgp 3 A very beautiful old service, in magnificent order; worthy of special
attention.
Old French Bracket Clock —by Valerie, Paris; in old rosewood
ease; inlaid with cut brass, tortoise-shell, and mother-o’-pearl
Old French Bracket Clock— by Martin Barkett & Co., Paris; in old
rosewood case; inlaid with tortoise-shell, brass, ivory, and various
enamels
Valuable Old Cut-glass Bowl, decorated with paintings of fish (a
very rare specimen of old glass)
Rare Old Sulphur Cameo —Napoleon
Rare Old Sulphur Cameo —Marie Louise
Rare Old Sulphur Cameo —Bust of Napoleon
Rare Old Sulphur Cameo —Bust of Josephine
Rare Old Sulphur Cameo (smaller) —Napoleon Francois Joseph
Bronze Medallion —Inigo Jones; and on the reverse Banqueting Hall,
Whitehall
Bronze Medallion —Sir John Vanbrugh; and on the reverse Blenheim
Cathedral
Bronze Medallion —John Gibson, R.A.; and on the reverse a classical
figure


Bronze Medallion —Plaxman; and on the reverse group of allegorical
figures
Bronze Medallion —Etty
and on the reverse allegorical classical
figure
Bronze medallion—Sir Christopher Wren; and on the reverse St. Paul’s,
London
Fine Zinc Cast —Minerva
Pure Carrara Marble Figure, on onyx pedestal, with hand-
cut mounts—“ The Wounded Bird” —by IT. Moreali
A magnificent statue by this great Italian master. Note the exquisite
chiseling.
Old Empire Corner Mirror, in carved and gilded frame
Two Boldly-designed Hand-carved and Gilded Cupids, sup-
porting shell-designed brackets
Pair Boldly-designed, Carved and Gilded Wood Winged
Cherubs
Old wrought-brass wreath
Two Old Dresden Basket-sbaped Bowls or Jardinieres
Old Copeland china jardiniere
Old Copeland China Jardiniere, with raised Cupid and satyr
head decorations
Old Highly-decorated Papier Mache Tray, with brass handles
Bohemian Glass Tall Spill Vase, with gold scroll and tracery work
Old Bronze Card Receiver, with raised Cupid and scroll decorations
Rare Old Battersea Enamel Ewe* and Basin, in rich colour-
ings on royal blue ground. (The originals are in Warwick Cathedral,
England)
Old Chantilly China Perfume Bottle
China Vase, with raised bird in flight, and gilt handles
Old Dresden China Figure —Girl carrying grapes
Hand-carved gilt bracket
Hand-carved Chippendale bracket, in old rosewood
Fair Old Coalbrookdale China Cat Ornaments


Pair Dresden China Pug-dog Ornaments
Pair of Old Wedgwood Covered Vases, with raised classical
figure decoration on dark green ground
Set of Four Highly-decorated Old Genori-ware Vases
Pair of Old Wedgwood Wine Ewers and Platters, with raised
vine-leaf decoration on rich red ground
Old Staffordshire Covered Jar, decorated with classical figure sub-
jects, with vine-leaf border
Fair French China Tulip-shaped Vases
Old Bristol China Teapot, with bouquets of flowers and sprig
decorations; in a perfect state of preservation
Old Bristol China Teapot, with sprig and garland decoration
Old Turner-ware Teapot, in ivory-white, with raised classical
decorations in white on rich chocolate ground
Fine Antique China Turner-ware Teapot, in ivory-white, with
panels of raised Cupid on the obverse, and child and lion on the
reverse, on deep chocolate ground
Old French Teapot, with old gold scroll decoration
Copeland China Figure, on low pedestal—“ The Slave’
Very Fine Worcester China Vase, in royal blue and gold, relieved
with painted panels of flowers
Tall French Hand-painted Vase, with bird and flower decoration
White China Dresden VaSe, with raised flower decorations, sup-
ported by children at base
Valuable Old Chelsea China Vase, with raised flower decoration
in most'vivid colourings (slightly damaged)
Pair of Old Satsuma Vases, decorated with figure subjects on oblong
panels; formed into electric table lamps (fine specimens of old Satsuma)
Two Miniature Banner Fire Screens, with ormolu bases; one
worked in silk, the other in beads and imitation pearls
Chippendale-design corner bracket


Pictures
345 Very Rare and Valuable Miniature Painting (on ivory)—
Marie Leehsinski, Queen of Prance, wife of Louis XV., daughter of
Stanislaus Leehsinski, ex-King of Poland
jA remarkably fine work, beautifully executed and in perfect condition.
346 Pair of Old French Mezzotints —“Le Retour de L’enfant,” and
‘‘Yisite a la Nourice”
Two beautiful little specimens of early French art.
347 Very Fine Miniature Painting (on ivory)—Paj Mahl (Note
the exquisite detail and finish)
HENRY RYLAND, R.I.
348 Magnificent Water-colour Drawing —‘‘Dancing Girl”
A very beautiful work, painted in this prominent artist’s most delicate
and refined manner. A perfect gem.
Henry Byland exhibited at the Eoyal Academy and kindred institu-
tions between the years 1883 and 1893.
The above work is a particularly fine example.
349 Very Fine Water-colour Drawing —“ The Holy Sepulchre”—by
R. J. Grunwald
A clever work with perfect technique.
CONRAD MARTENS
350 Valuable Water-colour Drawing —Entrance to Sydney Heads
A particularly fine example, painted in this eminent artist’s best manner.
351 Fine Water-colour Drawing —English Village Scene
352 Fine Water-colour Drawing —English Country Lane
H. SOUTER (1893)
353 Very Fine Water-colour Drawing —St. Andrews Cathedral


CONRAD MARTENS
354 Valuable Water-colour Drawing —Rose Bay, showing “Redleaf ”
in the middle distance
Two Exquisite Paintings of Flowers, on mahogany panels — by
De Hoenisehe
Two Fine Old Baxter Prints— Old English Thatched Cottage, and
Cottage Interior—by La Blond & Co., London
jjJsp* Two good examples.
Fine Water-colour Drawing —Crimean Mounted Officers —by Henri
Martens
jpgp 3 A particularly clever painting, in brilliant colours.
Valuable Water-colour Drawing —View of Old Melbourne —by
11. E. Davies (1867)
An early work of great historic interest.
Exquisite Water-colour Drawing —Pheasants in a Landscape— by
J. F. Herring
A really good example of this eminent English bird painter.
Old Baxter Print —Rev. John Williams’ first interview with natives
[j-jgF* A really good example.
Two Old Baxter Prints —Fisher Folk, and Children Fishing at
Stream —by La Blond & Co., London
jpg?’ Two good examples.
Fine Water-colour Drawing —Landscape and River Scene —by H.
Tebbitt
END OF FIRST DAYS SALE.


SECOND DAY’S SALE
WEDNESDAY, 19tK MAY, 1920
at 11 o’clock a.m. sharp
At the Rooms, 42 Castlepeagh Street.
Eibrarp
FURNITURE, WORKS OF ART AND PICTURES.
FURNITURE.
Axminster Bordered Carpet, gigantic poppy design
Three spring-roller blinds
Two paii-s of art linen curtains, brass pole and tassels
Solid Walnut China Cabinet or Bookcase, fitted with three
bevelled plate-glass doors enclosing movable shelves; the upper portion
is fitted with three cupboards enclosed by vari-eoloured glass doors
A splendid specimen of cabinet work, exceedingly well made.
Solid Walnut Dwarf Bookcase or China Cabinet, with three
bevelled plate-glass doors enclosing numerous shelves
Similar Bookcase or China Cabinet (to correspond with the
above)
jjCjjp Both the above cabinets show fine cabinet-work,
Solid Walnut Dwarf Bookcase, with break-front; fitted with
enclosed cupboard and two side cupboards, each enclosed with bevelled
plate-glass doors
Another exceptionally well-made piece of furniture. The cabinet-work
is far above the average.
Valuable Old Hepplewhite Arm Chair, in rich dark mahogany,
with upholstered lift-out seat in old saddlebag
jjSSp* A fine antique in its original condition.
Jacobean Arm Chair, fitted with adjustable back, with fine cane-seat
and back, and loose cushions in tapestry; the chair is fitted with
hand-twisted spiral supports and stretchers
Easy arm chair, in saddlebags and plush, with loose cover
Similar chair (to match the above)
Jacobean Low Seat, with fine cane seat and cushions; in figured
tapestry


Cibrarp
WORKS OF ART.
Old English Carved and Gilded Shaped Pier Glass, with large
centre bevelled mirror and two large side bevelled mirrors
Hand-embroidered Banner Screen, with British eoat-of-arms
supported by brass adjustable arm
Antique Brass-mounted Door-stop, in form of a lion’s claw
Valuable Bracket Clock, in old Chippendale mahogany case; strikes
hours and halves on rich resonant gong
A perfect timekeeper in splendid'going order; in its original condition.
Pair Rare Chinese Bottle-shaped Vases, landscape decoration
in ancient blue
Pair Old Square-shaped Covered Glass Vases, lattice decora-
tion on rich green ground
Pair Very Fine Old Crown Derby White Porcelain Figures
jag?’ Very rare. In fine condition.
Pair of Old Lustre Mugs, decorated with old printed landscape and
cattle scenes
Two Old Dresden Covered Vases, with raised flower decoration
Porcelain Lustre Vase, with red flower decoration on tinted ground
Royal Doulton Jar, with festoons of raised flower decoration
Copy of an Ancient Tomb, in sculptured marble
Pair Very Fine Cameo Plaques, with raised classical figure subjects
in white on black ground
Old Japanese Plaque, with snake decoration in rich enamels
Very Fine Copeland Parian Figure —“ Fawn”
Copeland Parian Figure —Horse and rider attacked by Lioness.
(Foot of rider damaged)
Copeland Parian Figure —Horse and rider attacked by Lion. (Foot
of horse damaged)
Set of Three Old Worcester China Saucers, decorated in the
Chinese style in old blue and gold
Old Pottery Plaque, with perforated border
Pair of Old Chinese Vases, in deep Sange-dc-Boeuf colouring


Fair of Old Ming Chinese Figures, in white porcelain; very
beautifully modelled (rare)
Very Bare and Valuable Old Carved Wood Figure —St. Peter
(very rare)
Purchased by the late Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart at an old Monastery
in France.
Valuable Old Crown Derby Oblong Plaque, in rich colourings
Two Circular Extra-deep Plates (to match)
Two Circular Shallow Plates (to match)
The above five fine specimens of old Crown Derby wore originally the
property of Governor Macquarie.
Old Moorish Circular Plaque, with conventional scroll decorations
and pale green border
Fou'r Cups and Five Saucers, in old Copeland and Garrett china;
exquisitely decorated in ryband and festoons of flowers
Edinburgh exhibition mug (1886)
Sculptured marble obelisk
Old Spode Double-handled Sauce Tureen, richly decorated with
flowers and foliage
«
Old Chinese Porcelain Covered Bowl, green tinted ground
Two Antique Terra-cotta Figures. (The above are from the
collection of Lady Stanford)
Pair of Old Delft China Sauce Tureens, with covers and ladles
complete; in old blue and white
Four Old Russian China Saucers
Set of Three Old Chinese Bice Bowls, in rich colourings
Set of Four Handsome Flower Vases, beautifully painted in gar-
lands of flowers
Old Minton Tete-a-tete Afternoon Teaset, decorated with wild
roses and sprigs; comprising teapot and cover, cream ewer, sugar bowl,
two cups and saucers, and two small bread and butter plates (total,
10 pieces)
Old Lustre China Teapot and Cover
413 Pair of fine china pin baskets
414 Pair of old Staffordshire dogs
415 Pair of fine china pin baskets
416 Old Chinese rice bowl


Part of Old Worcester China Teaset, decorated in vermilion
and gold; comprising large bowl, two cups and saucers, and two extra
saucers
Old Lustre China Teapot
Pair of Old China Pillar Candlesticks
Five Old Turkish Coffee Cups and Saucers, iu rich blue
colouring with gold enrichments
China Teapot, with engraving of Government House, Sydney
China Teapot, with designs emblematic of the Federation of Australia,
Old Copeland China Bowl, decorated with paintings of flowers and
burnished gold edges; on ormolu base
Set of Five Old Green Bronze Ornaments, reproduction from
old Roman and Grecian ruins
Old Blue and White Chinese Vase, on ebony stand
Parian Marble Bust of Pope Pius X., on square marble plynth
The marble plynth was taken from the floor of St. Peter’s, Borne.
Set of Four Specimens of Early Egyptian China, representing
copies of early Saxon church monuments
Three Old Worcester China Jugs, with raised giraffe decorations
on vermilion ground
Set of Five Pieces of Old Silver Lustre, comprising teapot and
cover, two double-handled sugar basins, and two milk jugs
Tall pair of Sange-dc-Boeuf coloured vases
Pair of Sange-de-Boeuf coloured vases
Squat pair of Sange-de-Boeuf coloured vases
Fair of Very Fine Old Cut-glass Lustres, each with twelve
extra-heavily-cut prismatic drops
Pair of Exceedingly Rare and Old Glass Lustres, with
engraved candle globes
Small Old Crystal Cut-glass Lustre
Pair of Old Bohemian Glass Lustres, with panel paintings of
flowers, and each fitted with extra-long and heavily-cut drops
Pair of Very Fine Crystal-cut Lustres, each fitted with twelve
extra-long and heavily-cut drops
Pair of Old Spode Square-shaped Dishes, with elaborately-
decorated borders


Very Rare and Valuable Set of Figui’es— The Monkey Baud; in
Eoyal Crown Dresden
A magnificent complete set, in perfect condition.
Three Very Fine Old Crystal Cut-glass Dishes
Pair Old Crystal-cut Decanters, complete with stoppers
Pair of Extra-heavily Old Cut Decanters, complete with stop-
Three Beautiful Old Crystal-cut Tall Wine Glasses, on cut
Pair of Old Crystal-cut Sherry Glasses
Pair of Old Crystal-cut Sherry Glasses (small)
Set of Six Old Crystal Cut-glass Salts
Twelve Crystal-cut Ice Plates
Crystal Cut-glass Circular Dish, Avith escallopcd edges
A Similar Oblong Dish, Avith escalloped edges
Old Crystal Cut-glass Jar, on circular base
Six Old Extra-heavily Cut-crystal Glass Rummers, on circular
Three Fine Old Crystal-exit Goblets
Six Old Crystal Heavily-cut-glass Wine-glass Rinsers (rare
and good)
Set of Three Old Worcester China Plates, Avith hand-painted
centres, Avith lilac band and gold borders
Old Worcester China Plate, Avith escallopcd edges (‘‘Flight, Barr
and Barr”)
Old Etruscan Bowl; the interior is decorated Avith mounted hunter
of ihe period; in rich colouring
Old Worcester China Circular Plate, Avith hand-painted centre
and pink border
Very Fine Old Bohemian Glass Vase, Avith burnished gold scroll
decoration on blood-red ground
Old Bohemian Glass Quaint-shaped Covered Vase
Old Bohemian Glass Font-shaped Vase, Avith gold sprig decora
tion on blood-red ground
Old Bohemian Glass Tall Vase, Avith cameo deer and landscape
decoration on blood-red ground


Pair of Tall Bohemian Glass Vases, viue and berry decoration
in burnished gold on deep blue ground
Bohemian Glass Double-handled Vase, with allegorical figure
and other decorations in cameo on blood-red ground
A particularly fine and rare sample of early glassware.
Paiir of Tall Bohemian Glass Spill Vases, with hue cameo decora
tions on blood-red ground
Set of Three Dresden Fan-shaped Dishes, with flower decora-
tions in blue and white
Valuable Old Copeland Parian Marble Jug, with raised figure
decoration —Death of Duke of Wellington
A particularly fine specimen.
Bare Enamel Portrait (in colour) —Admiral Lord Nelson
Old Spade Guinea— George IV.
Kruger Half-sovereign
Kruger Shilling
Three Antique Silver Bings
Four Tassies
Old Silver Gilt Buckle
Two Old Silver Buckles
Old Verge Watch— by Eobert Oswald, Durham
Silver-gilt Commemoration Coin
Old Silver Coin
Large Silver Coin
Kirby Hall Commemoration Coin
Gold-mounted Seal
Bare Old Etruscan Bing, in wrought gold
Set of old Tongue Scrapers, Earpick, and Toothpick
Set of Three Old Tortoise-shell Inlaid Gold Earrings
Set of Three Inlaid, with Gold on Bronze, Miniature Fans
Set of Five Old Chinese Vases, with flower and foliage decoration
on royal blue ground
Fine Quality Japanese Tea Service, decorated in rich colourings
on white ground; comprising ten cups and saucers, deep bowl, and two
extra saucers (23 pieces)


Velry Choice Copeland China Coffee Service, with light blue
and burnished gold decorations; comprising two coffee pots and covers,
sugar basin, and twelve cups and saucers (29 pieces)
A very beautiful service, in perfect order.
Set of Six Very Finely-cut Venetian Glass Vases, with gold
sprig and berry decorations (in graduated sizes)
Four Old Worcester China Sweetmeat Bowls, with paintings
of bouquets of flowers and burnished gold decoration
Four Fine Old Adams China Scollop Dishes, with sprig and
blue flower decoration and burnished gold enrichments
Set of Four Beautiful Old Copeland China Sweetmeat
Dishes, exquisitely painted with bouquets of flowers and burnished
gold enrichments
Set of Twelve Very Rare Old Bohemian Glass Ice Bowls and
Plates, enriched with paintings of flowers and burnished gold
A very beautiful set.
Valuable Old Lustre China Tea Service, comprising the quaint
old teapot and cover, deep bowl, two bread and butter plates, seVen
cups and saucers, and two extra saucers; decorated in rich blues, pinks
and gold (21 pieces)
A beautiful service, in excellent order.
Magnificent Worcester China Tea Service, with burnished gold
enrichments on ivory-white ground; comprising the teapot and cover,
large bowl, two bread and butter plates, eight cups and saucers, and
three extra saucers (24 pieces)
Another very fine service, in beautiful order.
495 Very Valuable Old Worcester China Tea and Breakfast
Service, exquisitely painted with bouquets and sprigs of flowers with
burnished gold and blue enrichments; comprising the quaint old teapot
and cover, double-handled sugar basin and cover, cream ewer, slop bowl,
three bread and butter plates (in various shapes); twelve breakfast
cups and saucers, and eleven teacups (44 pieces)
[jcgp A magnificent old Worcester service, in very fine order.
496 Old Worcester China Tea and Breakfast Service, painted in
the Chinese style in rich colourings; comprising the double-handled
sugar basin and cover, quaint old milk jug, two shaped bread and butter
plates, eleven squat-shaped breakfast cups and saucers, eight tall shaped
teacups and one extra saucer (36 pieces)
A fine old service, in beautiful order.
497 Seven Old Chinese Octagonal-shaped Deep Dishes, decorated
in old blue and white. (To be sold singly)


Pair of Tall Blue and White Vases, hawthorn flower decoration
on pale blue ground
A Similar Pair of Vases (to match the above)
Pair of Valuable Old Spode Double-handled Covered Sauce
Tureens and Stands, in rich colouring (rare)
Pair of Old French Hand-painted China Vases, with painted
panels and raised flower decoration
Two Very Fine Old Spode Mugs, with snake handles (good)
Fair Very Fine Old Berlin China Double-handled Font-
shaped Vases, with painted panels of flowers and fine gold tracery
work on turquoise blue ground
Highly-decorated Old Mason’s Ironstone Wine Cooler (been
repaired)
Old Worcester 1 Shaped Plaque, with paintings of sprigs of flowers
in rich colourings
F|ne Old Spode Highly-decorated Circular Plaque
Pair Fine Old Mason’s Ironstone China Vases, highly decorated
in rich colourings, with swan-neck handles
Pair Fine Old Wedgwood Highly-decorated Plaques,
various flowers and foliage decorations in rich colourings
Old Staffordshire China Bust —Napoleon. (From the Fitzgerald
collection, England)
Fair Valuable Gilt-bronze Busts, on carved ebony stands
Magnificent Genuine Barbedienne Bronze Figure —“ Young
Fawn playing Flute.” (From the Late Dr. Belisaro’s collection)
jjqgP 3 An exquisitely sculptured figure, in fiuc proportions.
Genuine Italian Bronze Figure —“ Peace.” (Another exquisitely-
modelled figure)
Very Fine Chrystoleum —Napoleon at Wagram —after Horace Ver-
Fair Brown Terra-cotta Vases, with blue bands
Old Staffordshire Pottery Jug (to commemorate Crimean War)
Pair old Oriental saucers, and blue and white vase with Delft stopper
Very Fine Quality Satsuma Vase, with painting of numerous
figure subjects in procession
An exceptionally flue specimen, with magnificent detail.


Valuable Old Bristol China Bowl, with dower and leaf decora
tions
Old lieeds-ware China Bowl, with hand-painted border in rich
colourings
Fine Old Lustre-ware China Bowl, with old transfer decoration —
“Faith,” “Hope,” and “Charity”
Oak French China Cornucopia Inkstand, in the form of a ram’s
Old Rockingham China Model of a House
Pair of Old Pottery-ware Lion Head Plaques
Very Fine Old Eastwood Jug, in black basalt, with raised classical
figure decorations, with ascanthns-leaf decorated base
jagF 1 A beautifully-designed jug; the decorations are exceedingly well
executed.
A Very Beautiful-modelled Figure of a Pheasant, in royal
Copenhagen-ware
Valuable Old Plymouth-ware Jug and Two Cups and
Saucers, with the old transfer decoration —Maidens in a landscape;
hand-coloured
Four Small Wilkinson China Pots, with gold bauds, on apple-
green tinted ground
Handsome Old English China Double-handled Sugar Basin
and Cover and Large Slop Bowl, decorated with paintings and
fine gold scroll work
Old Majolica Vase, with raised figure and garland of flower decoration
Fine Quality Satsuma Teapot, with exquisitely-painted flowers,
embellished by fine gold tracery work
Old French China Spill Vase, Avith gold festoon decoration
Valuable Old Blue and White Bristol China Teapot, with
blue sprig decoration. (A good specimen)
Sevres China Cup, Avith gold festoon tracery Avork decorations
Small ash tray, Dresden china candlestick, and small flambe-Avare bowl
Fine Old Blue and White Decorated Rice Bowl and Cover
Very Fine Set of Three Double-handled Vases, in old Mason’s
ironstone; decorated in the Chinese style in rich Oriental colourings on
royal blue ground
Old Staffordshire China Match-box, in form of a settee, Avith two
people seated thereon


Valuable Old Stone-ware Mug, decorated with copies of ancient
classical figures in blue. (A rare specimen)
Old Opaque China Mug, in rich colouring
Pair Dog’s Head Tumblers, in white china (very excellently
modelled)
Exquisite Little Wedgwood Vase, with lion head handles, classical
figure subjects in raised cameo on blue ground
Fine Quality Wedgwood Incense Burner, with lion head handles
and allegorical figure subjects
Very Fine Small Wedgwood Ja'rdiniere, with lion head handles
and raised classical figures on cobalt blue ground
Fine Quality Wedgwood Covered Oblong Trinket Box, with
raised classical, allegorical and. flower decoration in the cameo style on
cobalt blue ground
Fine Quality Wedgwood Small Bowl, with raised figure and other
decorations on cobalt blue ground
Exquisite Specimen of Wedgwood China, decorated with raised
cameos, rybands and garlands of flowers on delicate turquoise blue
ground
Small Specimen of Wedgwood, with raised crest decorations on
cobalt blue ground
Five Specimens of Carmen China —Oxford University Com-
memoration
Fair of Handsome Covered Baskets, in silver-gilt, silver filigree
and rich enamels
Two rare examples of the silversmith's art.
Two Rare Old Handless Cups and Saucers, in old Worcester
china (crescent mark); rich blue and white decoration in the old
Chinese style
Finely-decorated Old Blue and White China Cup and
Saucer
Two Old China Hand-painted Flower Pots, with flowering
shrubs in porcelain
Fine Old Wedgwood Teacup and Saucer, with raised classical
figure on black ground
Old Bloor Derby China Cup and Saucer, decorated with green
sprigs on gold panels
Early English Hand-painted Cup and Saucer


Highly-decorated Old Lustre Cup and Saucer. (A fine
specimen)
Two Old China Hand-painted Flower Pots, with flowering
shrubs in porcelain
Old Worcester Cup and Saucer, iris flower and leaf decoration in
dark blue
Old Davenport Longport China Cup and Saucer, highly
decorated with birds, flowers and shrubs
Handsome China Sugar Sifter, decorated with paintings of flowers
and shrubs in the Lowestoft style
Two Fine Old Turner-ware Milk Jugs, with raised classical figure
subjects on rich chocolate ground
Fine Old Chamberlain Worcester Covered Honey Jar, in the
form of a bee-hive, with raised bee decoration, white flowers and gold
tracery work
Pair Old Wedgrwood China Barrels, with raised classical figure
decorations on cobalt blue ground
Old Blue and White China Worcester Double Egg-cup
Old Hand-painted French China Scent Bottle, with stopper
Small egg-shell ehina bowl
Old Crackle-ware China Vase, with fine gold work and other
decorations
Three Old Worcester China Hand-painted Cups
Old Dresden China Open-work Basket Nut Dish
Hand-painted China Open-work Basket Nut Dish
Fine Old Chelsea China Jewel Casket, with raised flower decora-
tions in vivid colourings (on lid)
Valuable Old Bristol China Bowl, very elaborately decorated with
paintings of basket of flowers, sprigs, bats and bouquets of flowers in
rich colourings. (Good specimen)
Large Porcelain Bowl, decorated with flowers and shrubs in the
Chinese style
Pair Valuable Old Porcelain China Vases, grained to represent
marble; fitted with swan head and neck handles
Valuable Old Stone Purri Pounder (very rare)
Pair sculptured marble wolf ornaments


Very Fine Old Mason’s Ironstone China Covered Double*
handled Bowl, with scroll handles and mask terminals; profusely
decorated in rich colourings
Brass Blectric Lamp, with opal shade and fittings (complete)
Fine Tortoise-shell Fire Screen, on Corinthian column, in ebony
and hand-cut ormolu
Ten Hand-painted Porcelain Paper-weights, mounted on wood
bases. (To be sold separately)
Set of Seven Genuine Old Oriental Bronze Paper-weights,
in the form of grotesque figures. (To be sold separately)
Three Crystal-glass Paper-weights —Scenes Stafford-on-Avon
Two flower glass paper-weights
Two picture glass paper-weights
Art embossed leather paper-weight
Thirty-three Old Bone Lace
Bobbins, enriched with various old
cut-glass beads
One-hundred-and-eighty Old Wooden Lace Bobbins,
enriched with vari-coloured beads
Hand-woven bright steel book cover, hand-woven bright steel brooch, hand-
woven bead purse, and an old-style pin cushion
Fourteen Old Commemoration Mugs, in Chapman’s finest por-
celain
Valuable Collection of Old Plaster Casts, combining allegorical,
classical, historical, etc.; in very fine condition
One-dozen Fine Hand-worked D’oyleys
One-dozen Fine Hand-worked D’oyleys
One-and-half-dozen Fine Hand-worked D’oyleys
Half-dozen Fine Hand-worked D’oyleys
Hare Collection of Trigonia Shells. (Collected from a patch at
the entrance to Sydney Harbour about fifty (50) years ago
This rare collection was presented to the late Sir Thomas Anderson
Stnart by the son of the late Judge Cheek. It is said that the
entrance to Sydney Heads is the only place where this particular shell
is found. These are fine specimens, and in excellent condition.
Collection of Sixteen Very Fine Hand-cut Tassies
Collection of Seven Hare Old Wedgwood Shields or Cameos


Set of Six Old Hand-made Horn Toddy Covers, with silver
mountings
Burns Toddy Ladle, hand-carved from wood
Antique Brass Taper Lamp
Old Tortoise-shell Box
Very Fine Old Gold Lacquered Papier Mache Tray
A fine example of early Oriental lacquer work.
Oriental Gold Lacquered Papier Maclxe Covered Box.
(Another fine example)
Old Hand-turned Wood Jam Bowl
Box of Hand-carved Mother-o’-pearl Counters
Genuine Old Bronze Incense Burner
Genuine Old Bronze Ornament, in the form of a church steeple
Small Bronze Lamp, and portion of electric cable
Portion of Original Letter (from Carlyle to his father)
Very Rare Old Steel Cross and Chain (Westphalian Empire
period)
Steel jewellery was worn at this period, in consequence of Napoleon
having taken the jewellery of the people to pay for war expenses.
Old Tortoise-shell Cigarette Box
Antique Dutch Brass Bell, bearing an inscription and date 1556
Two Old Silver Violet Holders
Old Russian Ikon, in old papier mache frame
615 Three Old Persian Enamel (on Copper) Trays, decorated with
flowers, etc., on dark royal blue
616 Two very fine papier mache lacquered trays
617 Twenty-two Carved Ivory Nesukas. (To be sold separately)
Fine examples of Oriental carvings.
618 Carved nut crackers, representing head of Bismarck
619 Old Horn Boot-hook
620 Block puzzle (Sorrento)
621 Royal Doulton Teapot, Jug, and Two Goblets
622 Four old glazed blue and white tiles


Three fancy bone and one tortoise-shell fan; hand-painted and hand-carved
Rare Miniature (on ivory), in ivory frame—Mary Queen of Scots
(a beautifully-executed work)
Rare Miniature Painting (on iv.ory) in ivory frame —Indian
Temple. (Another exquisite ivory painting)
Very Fine Cloisonne Enamel Parasol Handle, dragon decora-
Very Fine Cloisonne Enamel Parasol Handle, iris decorations
Very Fine Cloisonne Enamel Parasol Handle, peony decora-
Very Fine Cloisonne Enamel Parasol Handle, cherry-blossom
and chrysanthemum
Fair Old Copeland and Garrett China Plaques, profusely
decorated with flowers and foliage in rich blues, blacks, greens and
Fine Old Chamberlain Worcester Circular Plaque, with gold
and flower decoration
Worcester China Circular Plaque, richly decorated in Oriental
style
Old Mason’s Ironstone Circular Deep Plate, painted in the
Oriental style
Pair Sculptured Marble Sections (taken from old Grecian ruins)
Two Very Fine Oriental Bronze Bottle-shaped Vases, with
dragon decorations inlaid in gold. (Two rare and exquisite specimens)
Old Staffordshire China Bust —Addison
Old Staffordshire China Bust— Steam
Old Blue and White China Covered Vase, with shell and dolphin
fish handles. (A fine specimen)
Fair Wedgwood China Jardinieres, raised children decoration in
high relief
Dresden China Basket-shaped Ash Tray, with model of dog inside
Two Bare Capo-di-Monti Porcelain Plaques —Allegorical
figure subjects in bold relief
642 Two Exquisite Medallions —Napoleon III.; and the Empress
Eugene


G 43 Original Letter From Thomas Carlyle to his Sister Jean
(Mrs. Aitken)
644 Set Five Oriental Crackle-ware Bowls, with four-claw dragon
decorations in richly-coloured enamels
645 Four Old Original Convict Papers, Etc. (very rare)
646 Original Sketch of Old Sydney —by ,T. Eyre, 1812. (Of great
historical interest)
Pictures
CONRAD MARTENS
647 Pair of Original Hand-coloured Lithographs —Views of Syd-
ney, from North Shore. (Signed and dated 1842)
These are original lithographs, made and hand-coloured by Conrad
Martens himself.
SIR OSWALD WALTER BRIERLY, R.W.S., F.R.G.S.
648 Valuable Water-colour Drawing —Seascape — Tug bringing vessel
into Ramsgate
The late Sir Oswald Walter Brlerly was a member of the Royal Water-
colour Society, and a Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society; a mem-
ber of the Old Water-colour Society, and a member of the New Water-
colour Society; an exhibitor at the Royal Academy and other prominent
British institutions between the years 1839 to 1893. Brierly’s spe-
ciality was sea pieces. The picture in question is a magnificent ex-
ample.
A. WOOLNOTH
649 Very Fine Water-colour Drawing— Clay Pits. (A little gem)
This artist exhibited in the Royal Academy and other institutions,
1872-1889.
CONRAD MARTENS
650 Fine Water-colour Drawing —Sydney Harbour in the early days


lot WARREN WILLIAMS, A.R.C.A.
651 Very Fine Water-colour Drawing—Old English Landscape and
Wayside Cottage
(pgr 3 A charming little work, very cleverly handled.
H. A.
652 Two Fine Water-colour Drawings—lndian Street Scene and
Indian River Scene
La BLOND & Co., LONDON
653 Two Rare Old Baxter Prints—Old English Street Scene, and
Rabbit Hutch
[|sjsp Two excellent examples of Baxter’s early work.
R. SYDNEY COCKS
654 Valuable Water-colour Drawing—Australian Landscape
(pgp* A particularly good example by this favourite Australian artist.
END OF SECOND DAY'S SALE.


THIRD DAY'S SALE
THURSDAY, 2QtK MAY, 1920
at 11 o'clock a.m. prompt
At the Rooms, 42 Castlereagdi Street.
entrance
FURNITURE, WORKS OF ART, PICTURES.
ENTRANCE HALL.
Three Mohair Slip Mats
Rosewood Enclosed Hat Cupboard, enclosed by panel doors and
fitted with hat pegs
Valuable Old Chinese Cloisonne Enamel Bowl, in very rich
Oriental colourings (gold wired) ; standing on carved hardwood base
Very Fine Old Blue and White Oval China Dish —Landscape
and River Scenes
A Pair of Rare Old Wedgwood China Plaques of Captain
Cook, and Dr. Solander; in relief; on turquoise blue ground
Aneroid barometer, in carved oak frame
A Pair of Very Fine Old Baxter Coloured Prints —The Land-
ing of Rev. John Williams; and companion picture
Two very rare and valuable examples of this lost art.
Valuable Bronze Medallion Plaque of Carlisle —by Stuart
Burnett, A.R.S.A., 1886
jqp* Stuart Burnett was a celebrated sculptor, born at Glasgow, and exhibited
at the Boyal Academy between the years 1885 and 1887,
Old Copper Cross, and wreath of roses; mounted on polished oak
Valuable Old Grandfather Clock, with hand-painted group over
dial, with inscription—“ The Cottar’s Saturday Night”—date, calendar
and minute hands—by Samuel Law, Dumfries; in fine old Chippendale
trunk case; in rich dark mahogany. (A most reliable timekeeper, in
its original condition)


Valuable Pure Carrara Marble Statue —Cauova’s Venus—stand-
ing 3ft. high
A very beautifully-chiselled figure. An exquisite copy of the celebrated
original.
Verde and Black Marble Pedestal
Valuable Pure Carrara Marble Bust —“ Psyche of Naples”—
21in. high
An exquisitely-chiselled bust. A beautiful example of the sculptor’s
art.
Verde Marble Pedestal, with revolving top; 3ft. Sin. high; and
ebouised octagon base
Valuable Pure Carrara Marble Bust —Young Augusta—on grey
marble column; standing 50in. high
A superb and very beautiful example of the sculptor’s art.
Carrara Marble Bust —“ The Incognita of Rome”
A charming little specimen, exceedingly well executed.
GENUINE OLD CHIPPENDALE HALL SUITE, in line old
Spanish mahogany; comprising The Extra-wide Arm Chair, and
Two Occasional Chairs (to match); upholstered in figured
Utrecht velvet
This magnificent genuine antique Chippendale suite hag been in the late
Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart’s family since the battle of Waterloo. It
was purchased at that time by the late Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart’s
grandfather as genuine Chippendale. It is, undoubtedly, a very beautiful
suite in its original condition. Should command the special attention of
connoisseurs and collectors of antique furniture.
Dark Oak Hall Stand, fitted with drawers, cupboards, open side
recesses, and bracket centre; size 4ft.
Lustre White China Ewer and Bowl, with blue line decoration
Old Blue and White Stone China Dish, highly decorated in land-
scape and trees, with church in middle distance, (A fine specimen)
Old metal plate, and oak paper rack
Large Worcester Parian-ware Font, in octagon shape, and sculp-
tured in Gothic style
Valuable Old Hand-carved Monsha Bieyeh Three-fold
Screen
A beautiful old screen, most elaborately carved and in its original condi-
tion. One of the few genuine antique screens of its kind in Australia.
Collectors should not fail to note its beautiful workmanship and
antiquity. It was purchased by the late Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart,
in Cairo', about 30 years ago.
Very Fine Old Chippendale Corner Cupboard, in mahogany;
fitted with shelves enclosed by semi-circular doors with brass beading,
with original old lock and escutcheons. (A very fine piece)


Brass rod, and plush curtain
Oriental gong and beater
Old Staffordshire Dog Ornament
Old Stone China Dish, in rich Davenport colourings
Valuable Old Worked Sampler, date 1778 (very rare)
Two Old Stone China Plates, in Oriental design
Old Worcester China Dish, hand-painted floral centre and deep
orange border
Old China Plate, profusely decorated in floral design in deep blue
Two Old Dine and White Delft Porsellan-Byl Covered
Vases
Two Old Silvered Lustre Jugs
Rare Old Mason’s China Jug, standing on hardwood base. (Pine
specimen)
Old Lowestoft Sun Plaque, in unique colourings (very rare)
Two Large Oriental Plaques, decorated in red, blue and white
panels
Large Oriental Plaque, with serrated edges, various figure designs,
and gold scrolls
A particularly fine specimen, in most unusual colourings.
Rare Old Mason’s China Plaque, highly decorated in various
designs, with red and gold border
Mandarin’s Hat, in old papier inache; profusely overlaid in mother-
o’-pearl
Old Gold Lacquered Wall Plaque, unique design
Very Old Lowestoft China Plaque, hand-painted rose and gilt
tree decoration in the style of early Chinese
Two Old Lowestoft China Plaques, rose and floral decoration in
Oriental style
Valuable Old Persian Enamel (on Copper) Plaque, decorated
in flowers and sprigs on royal blue ground
Old Blue and White Bristol China Plaque, Oriental pattern
Old Blue and White Oriental Plaque
Valuable Old Battersea Enamelled Plaque, profusely decorated
in floral and print design, with shaped edges
A fine old specimen.


701 Valuable Old Bartolozzi Engraving —Ophelia—in solid rosewood
frame
702 A Pair of Valuable Old Bartolozzi Engravings —“lnnocence”
—and companion picture; in old rosewood frames
frssp 5, The above old Bartolozzi engravings are very fine and in good condition.
They are worthy the attention of collectors of old prints.
703 Valuable Old Wood-out Engraving —“ The Baptism of the
Covenanters” —by C. E. Wagsta'ff; in old rosewood frame
704 Valuable Old Engraving —“ The Expected Penny”—engraved by
Robert Bell (after Alexander Fraser, A.R.A.); in old rosewood frame
705 Old Coloured Lithograph —“ The Ouconvanience of Single Life” —
Thos. Maguire (after Erskine Nicol)
jpgp* The above collection of old engravings are worthy of special attention.
Stairs
70S First Quality Axminster Bordered Stair Carpet, with under-
pads, and twenty-three gun-metal rods and eyes
707 Extra Set of Eighteen Gun-metal Rods and Eyes
fanding
708 Axminster Bordered Runner; size 15ft. x 3ft.
709 Axminster Runner (to match stair carpet); size 7ft. Gin. x 2ft. Sin.
710 Three Axminster slip mats, and piece carpet
711 Walnut-finish telephone table
712 Cedar and Pine Linen Press, fitted with movable shelves and under-
drawers
713 Two Old Staffordshire Dog Ornaments
714 Two Old Large China Plaques (Copeland and Garrett)


715 Two Old Worcester China Saucers
716 Two Old Stone China Plaques
717 Four Old Worcester China Saucers
718 Two Old White and Gold Saucers, hand-coloured transfer figure
decoration
719 Two Old Staffordshire Dog Ornaments
720 Large Faience-ware Plaque, in rich colourings
721 Two Highly-decorated Opal Glass Vases
722 Old Blood-red Cut and Engraved Bohemian Glass Vase
723 Venetian Glass Centre Vase, standing on marble and ormolu base
724 Opal glass vase
725 Two Old Engravings (in maple frames)— Retriever and Woodcock;
Spaniel and Pheasant
726 Old Engraving (in maple frame) —“Scotland’s Queen
727 Large Engraving (in maple frame) —“Weighing the Deer”—
engraved by T. L. Atkinson (after Landseer)
728 Engraving (in maple frame) —“The Pointer”—Ellen Von Meyern
729 Small Water-colour Drawing —Maori
Bathroom
730 Axminster carpet runner
731 Green roller blind, brass rod, and short muslin curtain
732 Old camphorvvood five-drawer chest
733 Pine towel rail
734 Cane linen basket
735 Striped canvas bath curtain
736 Cane-seat chair
737 Small Axminster runner (in passage)


Bedroom t?o. 1
738 First Quality Axminster Bordered Carpet; size 12ft. x 12ft;
and pieces of bordering to match
739 Axminster hearthrug
740 Two Axminster slip mats
741 Brass rod and drape (to hay window); together with four lace curtains
and cord loops
742 Three fancy linen roller blinds
743 Brass rod and drape (to side window); together with four lace curtains
and cord loops
744 Three fancy roller blinds
Magnificent Bedroom Suite,
in Solid Old Rosewood and Marqueterie, inlaid with amboyna
and tulipwoods,
Comprising —
745 The Handsome. Wardrobe, fitted with centre bevelled mirror door,
two side panelled doors embellished with exquisite marqueterie inlays;
the whole enclosing spacious hanging space, movable shelves, sliding
trays and drawers; size 6ft.
The Full-pedestal Dressing Table, en suite, fitted with bevelled
swing mirror and side mirrors under side enclosed cabinets; open centre
footrest, and three drawers to each pedestal; size 4ft.
The Combination Washstand (to match); fitted with enclosed cab-
inets, centre recess with bevelled mirror, rouge marble top and back;
the nnderpart with centre drawer, enclosed cupboard, nickel towel
rails, and open side recesses; size 4ft.
The Pedestal Cupboard, and Three Upholstered Chairs, in
Genoa, fitted with loose shadow tissue covers
A very beautiful exhibition bedroom suite, specially made in England.
Note the superb cabinet work.
746 Rosewood and Marqueterie Inlaid 3ft. Bedstead, fitted with
box-hair mattress, and four pillows
jqgp* Specially made to match the bedroom suite.


Valuable Royal Doultou Toilet Service, decorated in dark blue
Horal designs and gilt borders; and slop jar and cover (16 pieces)
Cut-glass water bottle and tumbler
Oriental centre vase, decorated in flowers and foliage
Two Japanese china spill vases
Copeland china jardiniere
Old Rosewood Lozenge-shaped Work-table; specially fitted
Cane am chair, with loose shadow tissue cushion
Two Crown China Decorated Vases
Two Very Old Highly-decorated French China Perfume
Bottles
Two blue and white Delft mugs (Imperial standard half-pint)
Superior Box Couch, in fancy cretonne; fitted with loose shadow
tissue cover
Gilt Empire Overmantel, in sectional panels, with gadrooned frame
Rare Old French China Timepiece, surmounted with figure of
boy—“ The Grape Seller” —and decorated in hand-painted panels of
floral design and gilt borderings on high blue ground (under glass
shade)
Two Old French China Vases, hand-painted rose decoration
Two Parian Figures —“ The Water Carriers”
Two Old Staffordshire Dog Ornaments
Two Old Staffordshire Groups —Zebras and Sailors
Quaint Lustre China Vase
Highly-decorated Old Venetian Glass Perfume Bottle
Four-fold Hand-painted Fire Screen
Walnut Octagon Table, with underplatform
Rosewood and Marqueterie Inlaid Trefoil Table, fitted with
underplatform and fretwork gallery
Two Decorated China Bottle-shape Vases, on crimson ground
Three Old Copeland & Garrett China Plaques, in rich Oriental
colourings
Two highly-decorated Oriental vases
Two Oak and Solid Brass Lion’s Claw Door Porters


Bedroom no. 2
Axminster Bordered Carpet; s i zc lift. x 9ft. Gin.
Three brass rods and fancy draperies
Two roller blinds, short muslin curtains, and rods-
Commodious Cedar 'Wardrobe, with hanging compartment, trays
and drawers, and fitted with special zinc-lined moth-proof drawers
under; size 7ft. long by 2ft. deep
JSJr’ An exceptionally well-made piece of furniture.
Old Gamphorwood Five-drawer Chest
Bird’s Eye Maple Table, fitted with drawers and falling flap
Polished-oak pedestal cupboard
Woveu-grass square-back arm chair
Woven-grass arm chair
Polished-oak Five-drawer Chest
Walnut upholstered chair
Towel rail
Old Cedar and Gilt Wall Mirror
Folding box stand and two stools
Linoleum splash mat
Fine Old Adams Ironstone China Foot-bath and Water
Jug, profusely decorated in Chinese characters
China plaque—“Jesus on the Cross”
Four Biblical Coloured Prints —Matthew, Mark, Luke and St. John
Mosaic Inlaid Picture— “ The Flute Player”
Three Old Silhouette Portraits
Print— An Old-time Macquarie Street Mansion
Two coloured photographs—Eastern Scenes


Bedroom no. i.
Brussels carpet square
Linoleum (planned to room)
Brass rod and pair lace curtains, with cord loops
Bevelled Plate-glass Mirror, in tine old Empire gilt frame
Pine Old Walnut Bracket Clock, in line old figured walnut, with
hand-cut brass dial—by Barrie & Son, Edinburgh; strikes the hours
and half-hours; a perfect timekeeper; in splendid going order
Two Fine Old Staffordshire Dog Ornaments
Two Oriental spill vases
Walnut Four-fold Fire Screen, with panels; painted in flowering
shrubs, birds and animals
Copeland china jardiniere
Queensland Maple Combination Wardrobe, Dressing Table
and Washstand, fitted with bevelled mirror door enclosing spacious
hanging compartment; also side bevelled swing mirror, rouge marble
top, and drawers under
An exceptionally well-made piece of furniture.
American Walnut Pedestal Writing Table, fitted with eight
various-size drawers; size 4ft. 6in.
Electric Art Bronze Lamp, with shade and fittings (complete)
Bentwood revolving office chair
Morris Green Coin Cabinet (of four drawers)
Old Burr Walnut Stationary Case
Walnut Arm Chair; upholstered in morocco leather
Walnut boot cupboard
Rare Old Chippendale Bow-front Chest of Six Drawers; in
fine old Spanish mahogany; oak lined
A very beautiful piece of early cabinet work in its original condition.
Three Oriental bowls and lacquered boxes
Two Old Brass Pillar Candlesticks
Cane arm chair


816 Walnut foot-rest
817 Two Old Ironstone China Plaques, ■ with serrated edges; most
highly decorated with paiutiugs in the Oriental style
818 Old Bristol China Plaque, painted in the Chinese style
819 Three Old China Plaques, flowers and foliage decoration
820 Old Wedgwood china plaque, red and black Oriental design
821 Old China Plaque, festoons of flowers and ribbon decoration
822 Two Old Florence-ware China Plaques, floral decoration on light
green ground
823 Two Large Prints —“ The Tale of a Glorious End,” and “The Taking
of the Guns”
JAMES PATERSON
824 Artist-proof Engraving —Fortress
825 Artist-proof Engraving —Church Ruins
826 Artist-proof Engraving —The Marshes
827 Artist-proof Engraving —The Marshes
828 Fine Old Engraving —lnterior —Evening
T. PEERLESS
829 Black and White Oil Painting —On the Waikato River, Auckland,
N.Z.


Bedroom no. 4
630 Two walnut cornices, together with two pairs of shadow tissue curtains
831 Two fancy roller blinds
832 Queensland Maple Combination Wardrobe, Dressing Table
and Wash stand, fitted with bevelled mirror door, bevelled swing
side mirror, rouge marble top, and drawers under
833 Walnut Half-pedestal Writing Table, fitted with four drawers;
size 3ft. 6in.
834 Valuable Old Hepplcwhite Arm Chair; upholstered in old hand-
worked silk tapestry
835 Woven-grass arm chair
836 Walnut boot cupboard
837 Old Chippendale Chest of Drawers, in fine old Spanish mahogany;
fitted with six beaded-edge drawers
.jSgp* A beautiful antique, in its original condition.
838 Handsome Old Chippendale Toilet Glass, in mahogany
839 Stained corner cupboard
840 Woven-grass arm chair
841 Two Limoges hand-painted dishes
842 Two Oriental bowls; Dutch china box
843 Cane arm chair and cushion
844 Cane-seat chair
845 Stained side table
J. M. CANTLE
846 Two Water-colours —Blue Wren; and companion
847 Two small coloured prints—English Scenery
848 Water-colour drawing—Port Jackson
849 Framed Print —Old Double Bay


850 Two china plaques
851 Water-colour drawing—Seascape
852 Water-colour drawing—Seashore
Passage
853 Small Axminster runner
ELLEN VON MYERN
854 Two Water-colour Drawings —Maori Types
Smoke Room
855 Axminster carpet square (worn)
856 Brass rod, and pair of shadow tissue curtains
857 Fancy roller blind
858 High-back settee, in brown striped plush
859 Three walnut occasional chairs, in old gold plush
860 Fine Old Mahogany Card Table, on massive carved pedestal and
supports
861 Walnut Octagon Table, with underplatform
862 Electric table light
863 Bronzed figure candlestick


Two bronzed figures
Black Marble Timepiece, surmounted with bronzed figure
Four green miniature pots
Three plaster figures
Deep-seated Chesterfield Lounge; upholstered in morocco leather
Three Blue and White China Plaques
Two willow china plates
Two blue and white china plaques
Old Adams China Dish
Three blue and white Oriental plaques
Old Rosewood Coin Cabinet, fitted with three drawers and lift-up
top
Old Engraving (in rosewood frame) —“The First Letter from the
Emigrants”
Very Old Engraving (in rosewood frame) —English Battle Piece —
engraved by John Burnett, H.E.S.A.
Two Old Engravings —Dalmeney Park: Dalmeney
Very Old Engraving —“ Napoleon Et Son Fils”
Two hand-work cushions
879 a Mahogany Inlaid Marqueterie Pedestal, fitted with Sicilian
marble top; together with the Carrara Marble Figure, on verdq
marble base—“ The Thorn”
JSgp A beautifully chiseled figure. A fine example of the sculptor's art.
880 Electric Fan, with hand attachment


Back Ball
881 Two Axminster carpet runners
882 Oak Ice Ckest (Lassetter & Co.)
883 Two Old Wedgwood China Plaques
884 Old Adams China Plate
885 Three blue and white china plates
886 Two Blue China Plates— Pastoral Scenes
887 Oriental china plate
888 Large Old Adams Stone China Dish
889 Two decorated china plaques
890 Oriental circular plaque
891 Two Old Worcester China Plaques
892 Old Worcester China White and Gold Plaque
893 Two Old Blue and White Stone China Plaques
Pictures
C. H. WYMPERI
894 Valuable Remarque Artist-proof Etching— Salmon Fishing—
(after H. R. Robertson)


JAMES PATERSON
895 Two Artist-proof Etchings— Landscape and River
ARIIXIST
896 Valuable Etching —Ancient House in Rostock, on the Baltic
JAMES PATERSON
897 Two Valuable Artist-proof Etchings— Landscape—Bridge


Websdale, Shoosmith Ltd., Prieters,
117 Clire.vce Street, Stdset.


W. A. LITTLE
Expert Valuer and General Auctioneer
Great Auction Sale Rooms:
42 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY
(Directly opposite The Hotel Australia)
WITH SEPARATE ENTRANCE
51 and 53 Elizabeth Street*
(Midway between Hunter and King Streets)
The Most Modern and Up-to-date Auction
Rooms in the Commonwealth.
W. A. LITTLE,
Auctioneer and Valuer.


ART TREASURES^
IST. S'.
SIR T. ANDERSON STUART’S
COLLECTION.
Tie collection of art treasures and curios
gathered (together by the late Sir Thomas
Anderson Stuart during' his lifetime haa been
described as Ihe best one-man collection In
the State,- If not in Australia.. That would,
certainly seem to he borne out by a visit to
W. A. Little’s rooms, where the collection.
Is on' view, prior to sale. j
Sir Thomas Anderson atu&rt was a lover o T
all art. He did not specialise. When, in
i hla travels, he came across a rare or beautiful.
picture, a masterpiece of the scuptor s art.
a piece of glassware manufactured a century
or more ago, or a quaint piece of ancient
silverware, he acquired It. Much of the value
to the art- connoisseur of such things lies in
the history which they carry. in that re-
spect Mr. Little, who will sell the collec-
tion, is fortunate. Knowing the late pos-
sessor, he had often had chats with him about
many of his treasures. A beautiful silver
potato-ring, for instance, was found by Sir
Thomas Anderson Stuart In a by-street of
Dublin. So with many other articles. A
set of three Chippendale chairs— actually made
by that master-craftsman —have been in. tna
; Stuart family for more than * hun “ re . d
The late owner’s grandfather bought them at
the time of the Battle °f Waterloo.
The pictures are a striking collection*
A fine sample c£ Alexander Nasmyth’s work
would probably be placed at l op
list by most art-lovers. ,It Is entitled Tivoli,
and the Temple of Vista-” here are
also oils by Conrad Martens of typical Aus-
tralian scenery; and One by Michael, signed
and dated 1862. Of »t« r ert to Auamllm
historians Is an oil painting f>y H- GrlUen.
defecting Sydney Harbor, as seen from Oar
Island In 1556. There are but a few of the
oils ”* There are old French mezzotints, a
rare miniature painting on ivory, a number
of wawr-colors by different artists, old Baxter
nrlnts, and artists’ proof etchings.
Amongst the china and glassware alone a
lev “ of the rare and beautiful could spend
hours The collection of lustres is said to
ples of Bohemian glass and a range of goblets
and bowls that are. any thing from 120 to 15b
ye The curios are from many counties. Thera'
-rne ourioa _ . enamel, Chinese Jade,
steed jewellery of the
We stphaUan S Empire, and vases, and lacquer-
W ThVoXc?on will be open to the public t-
, „ „„ Monday. The sale commences on
Tuesday, and will be continued on Wednesday
and Thursday,
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
