

THE EEDY COLLECTION
TUNG PANG SO, CHINESE POET.


CONDITIONS OF SALE.
1. The highest bidder to be the buyer, and if any dispute arise between two
or more bidders the lot so in dispute shall be immediately put up again and re-
sold, and the Auctioneer’s decision to be final.
2. Every bidding shall be at least 5 per cent in advance of the previous one, and no
party will be allowed to retract his or her bidding after once taken.
3. In the case of lots upon which there is a reserve the Auctioneer shall have the right
to bid on behalf of the seller.
4. The clerk to sign the sale book for and on behalf of the vendor and purchaser.
5. The purchasers to give their names and places of abode, and to pay down five
shillings in the pound or more in part of payment, or the whole of the purchase
money if required, in default ot which the lot or lots so purchased to be im-
mediately put up again and re-sold.
6. The Lots to be taken away and paid for, whether genuine and authentic or not, with
all faults and errors of description at the buyer's expense and risk, before 11 a.m.
of day following sale, MR, JAMES R. LAWSON not being responsible for the
correct description, genuineness, or authenticity of, or any fault or defect in any
Lot, and making no warranty whatever.
7. To prevent inaccuracy in delivery and inconvenience in the settlement of the pur-
chases, no Lot can on any account be removed during the time of Sale, and the
remainder of the purchase money must absolutely be paid on delivery.
8. Upon failure of complying with the above Conditions, the money deposited in part of
payment shall be forfeited; all Lots uncleared within the time aforesaid shall
be resold by public or private sale, and the deficiency (if any) attending such
re-sale shall be made good by the defaulter at this sale.
JAMES R. LAWSON,
Auctioneer,
196 and 198 Castlereagh Street,
Near corner of Park Street


CATALOGUE
OF THE
EEDY COLLECTION
To be sold by Audion by James R.
Lawson, at 196-198 Castlereagh St., on
Tuesday, Odober 11, and following days
Sydney,
1921


INDEX.
Page
Lacquer, Lots 1 to 29 . . . . . . . . .. .. .. 9
Carved Ivories, Lots 30 to 47 . . . . . . .. .. .. 11
Carved Soapstone, Lots 48 to 62 . . . . .. .. .. 13
Sang-de-Boeuf and Flambe, Lots 63 to 88 . . .. .. .. 14
Blanc-de-chine, Lots 89 to 133 .. .. .. .. .. 16
Jade, Lots 134 to 194 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
Celadon and Claire-de-lune, Lots 195 to 237 .. .. .. . . 26
Rock Crystal, Lots 238 to 268 .. .. .. .. .. 29
Famille Verte and Famille Noire, Lots 269 to 399 . . . . . . 31
Agate and Carnelian, Lots 400 to 436 . . .. .. .. .. 41
Blue and White, Lots 437 to 545 . . . . . . .. 43
Amber, Amethyst and Lapis Lazuli, Lots 546 to 559 .. .. .. 49
Famille Rose, Lots 560 to 627 .. .. .. .. .. 51
Snuff Bottles, Lots 628 to 657 .. .. .. .. 55
Bronze and Brass, Lots 658 to 728 . . .. .. .. .. 57
Embroideries, Lots 729 to 764 .. . . .. .. . . 62
Paintings and Screens, Lots 765 to 778 . . . . . . . . 65
Enamels, Lots 779 to 792 .. .. .. .. .. .. 67
Primitive Period, Lots 793 to 815 .. .. .. .. .. 68
Miscellaneous, Lots 816 to 871 .. .. .. .. .. 70
Furniture, Cabinets, etc., Lots 872 to 886 . . .. .. .. 73
Books, Lots 887 to 940 .. .. .. .. .. .. 73


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE.
(REPRINTED FROM “THE SUN” 11.3.1920.)
There are few collectors, and certainly no others in Australia, who have such a
collection of Chinese porcelains and pottery as Captain Eedy. He is retiring from the
service of the China Navigation Co., and tor upwards of 25 years during his dodging in
and out of Chinese ports he has been getting together pieces of rare value.
His collection of pottery and sculpture totals about 1000 pieces. But he intends
to make a choice selection for exhibition at the Art Gallery with another selection for
exhibition at the Technological Museum.
These articles of virtue represent the works of the greatest potters during the
finest art periods in the history of China. Captain Eedy has a wonderful collection
of blues, and an unrivalled set of Sang de Boeuf. A large blue jar, 11 inches high, of
the Ta-Ming period, forms a crowning glory for the jars and vases of the more recent
Kang Hsi era. The decorations in blue are the finest work of artists who, in this age
of pottery painting are not outrivalled. The decorations, in many instances, represent
scenes of the period. The shapes, too, as they have been thrown off by the potters’
wheel, are full of symmetry. There is art in every curve.
There are few examples in this collection of the Chi-tsong period (A.D. 954).
It was the great Emperor Chi-tsong who issued the edict that the imperial porcelain was
to be the color of the sky after rain. This porcelain was greatly valued, and broken
fragments of it used to be set in gold and worn as ornaments.
Perhaps the most interesting part of Captain Eedy’s collection is the pottery
of the Sung Dynasty (A.D. 960-1260). Still bearing the marks of the mud in which
they had been buried for ages, are some examples which prove that the Chinese were no
mean sculptors, as well as decorative artists.


A camel bearing a load is rare in design and rich in coloring. It shows that the
art of the potter had traversed the great stretches of the earth between Mesopotamia and
Northern China. There are horses, too, richly caparisoned and modelled to life, which
show the style of animal most in favor before racehorses were invented.
The celadons of the period are particularly fine examples, soft in coloring, and
beautiful in glaze.
There is an interesting array of Buddhas and Krishnas, also of this period, but
without coloring, looking like carved ivory.
There is nothing finer anywhere than the three large and two small vases of
the famous Lang-yao, better known as Sang de Boeuf, for the coloring is that of ox-
blood. These vases belong to the Ming dynasty (1368-1648). The firing and glazing
have in every instance been the work of masters. The coloring resembles a shower of
blood. In parts there is a bloom-like lustre. The art of producing this colour died
with the Lang family when they passed out. The colouring is said to be due to oxide of
copper introduced in small proportions into the glaze.
Interesting exhibits are original old Yung Cheng vases from which the glazing
has been ground, and the decorations “clobberd” or repainted; but sufficient of the
original decoration is left to show the glory of the coloring.
Among the more modern porcelains is an Imperial basin of the Ling period.
It bears the Royal hall-mark, and was formerly the property of Kwang-Su, the last
Empress.
A chapter might be written on each article, which tells its own history, and the
history of the period. Captain Eedy claims that the Chinese are still great artists—
none finer in the world—and to prove this, exhibits modern porcelains perforated and
decorated.


To the ordinary lover of the beautiful the jades and crystals will appeal more than
the porcelains and pottery. There is nothing better outside of China than the jade
vase which stands 11 f inches in height. It is carved in a design with a dragon and
crane. The colour is deep green. It is rivalled by a smoky agate vase, about the
same height, the artist relying on the color of the stone and simple lines to get his effect.
Incense jars of pure crystal like diamonds have been cut out of the solid piece.
An eagle carved from a perfect piece of lapiz-lazuli is rich in color and rare in
workmanship.
Other rare carvings are in blue jade and carnelian.
There are hundreds of pieces; but the Art Gallery will show only a few of the
larger and more costly of them. Each piece almost requires a cabinet of its own to
display its beauty.
Captain G. W. Eedy, the owner of this costly collection of Eastern art and crafts-
manship, is a Sydney native, the eldest living son of the late Captain John Eedy, teacher
of navigation in Sydney, and his mother was one of the Malcolm family. During the
war he was on service with his ship, and had the misfortune to lose the Annui, which
was torpedoed in the Mediterranean. He treasures a small silver salver, which bears
the following inscription:—“To Captain G. W. Eedy, in appreciation of his gallantry on
the night of 12th of August, 1918, when his ship, the Annui, was topedoed, shelled, and
sunk off Cyprus.” Three lives were lost on this occasion.
The Captain was also on the Changsha. His last command was the Sinkiang. He
is going back to the East to settle up his affairs before settling down in a home at Chats-
wood which he is planning. The value of his collection is computed in thousands of pounds
sterling.


(REPRINTED FROM “THE SUN," 10.4.1921.)
According to cables received by his brothers, Captain G. W. Eedy, the well-
known porcelain collector, died from pneumonia in Shanghai on April 7, aged 56.
Captain Eedy’s collection of rare china and porcelain were some of the finest in
Australia, and may be seen at the Art Gallery and Technological Museum, where they
have been on loan for some time.
He came of a seafaring family (his father was the late Captain John Eedy, and
his grandfather (Dr. John Eedy, one of Nelson’s surgeons in the Royal Navy), and he
had an interesting career in China and the East as captain of various vessels. Amongst
his many adventures was a brush with Chinese river pirates when he was first officer on
a coastal boat. He was himself wounded in the arm, whilst his captain and a passenger
were murdered. At another time he was commanding a ship which struck a mine during
the Russo-Japanese war, but thanks to his clever seamanship he brought the vessel
safely back to port.
He was just about to retire from the service after many years of sea-experience
when his death occurred. In Sydney he leaves four brothers, William, Arthur, Harry and
Charles.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
This is the most remarkable collection ever offered for sale in the Commonwealth,
the whole forming a unique Gallery of Oriental Art.
It has many items worthy of any Art Gallery or Museum in the world.
The difficulties in forming such a collection as this are very great—the liveliest
manner of it seems to be undertaking tedious journeys, tempted by lurid visions of price-
less pieces to be had for a song, and in arriving travel-stained and weary to find the
promised'land a desert, the reputed treasure an imitation.
Acting under instructions from the Executors of the Estate of the Late Captain
Eedy, in conjunction with Mr. James R. Lawson, we have spared no trouble whatever
in describing faithfully each article in the collection and have arranged it in the manner
we deemed most suitable purchasers.
The notes throughout this Catalogue are taken from the standard works on
Chinese Art by Dr. Bushell, Cosmo Monkhouse, Laufer, Hobson, Gorer and Blacker,
Chaffers and others.
By arrangement with the Auctioneer, Mr. James R. Lawson, or Messrs. Tyrrell’s
Limited, Bonds and Negotiable Securities will be accepted.
Commissions to purchase can be arranged for, and the interests of clients in the
country, and other States, will be conserved and given the best attention.
TYRRELL’S LIMITED,
99 Casdereagh Street,
Sydney.


DYNASTIES.
The usual chronological classfiication of Chinese porcelain is as follows:
1. Primitive Period, Han, B.C. 203, including the Sung Dynasty A.D. (906-1279),
and the Yuan Dynasty (1280-1368).
2. Ming Period, comprising the whole of the Ming Dynasty '(1368-1643).
3. Kang Hsi (Kanghe) period, extending from the fall of the Ming Dynasty to the close
of the reign of Kang-Hsi (1662-1722).
4. Yung Cheng and Ch’ien Lung (Kienlung) Period (1723-1795), the two reigns
being conjoined. l
5. Modern Period, from the beginning of the reign of Chia Ch’ing to the present day
(1796-1921).
A carved blackwood stand is fitted to most of the items in this Catalogue; many
of these stands are works of art in themselves.
The photographs for this Catalogue
were specially taken by Mr. Harold Caze-
neaux, of Roseville, and the blocks were
executed by Mr. George Woods, 495 a George
Street, and the printing wholly set up and
printed by Winn & Co., Ridge Street,
North Sydney.


LOAN COLLECTION. NATIONAL ART GALLERY.


LOAN COLLECTION, TECHNOLOGICAL MUSEUM.


LACQUER.
Lacquer is occasionally inlaid or incrusted with mother-of-pearl, ivory, jade, lapis
lazuli and other materials, and has furnished a prized material for one of the earliest
industrial arts of the Chinese.
LOT
1 3 Black and Gold Lacquer Nut Bowls.
2 Red Lacquer Tray, decorated with numerous figures in procession, passing the
Emperor and Court Ladies. 18in. x 29in., Chien Lung.
3 Gold Lacquered Trinket Box and Tray.
4 Black Lacquer Necklet Box.
3 Pair Red Lacquer Bowls, with copper lining.
6 Black Lacqner and Mother 0’ Pearl Tray, 12in x BJin
7 Square Black Lacqner Vase, inlaid with Mother O’ Pearl, 4in. high.
8 Carved Bamboo Joss Stick Holder.
9 Pair of Papier Mache Brackets.
10 Papier Mache Tray, with figure decoration.
11 Chinese Geomancer’s Compass.
The masses regard Geomancers as fountains of wisdom and marvels of
learning, capable of fathoming all the mysteries of heaven and earth.
12 Blackwood Trinket Box, with Carved Jade Dragon on the lid, 2in. x siin.
13 Carved Wood Figure of “Chung Kns’lL”
A legendary personage, said to have spent his life in exorcising demons.
He is represented carrying the mushroom emblem of immortality, and in
his hand a bat—the emblem of happiness.


LOT
14 Blackwood Jewel Box, inlaid with rare stones. Mother O’ Pearl, etc., Chien-Lung
Period. 1736-1795.
This piece is of exceptional interest.
15 Small Carved Wood Cup, Dragon and Jui decoration. Kang Hsi.
16 Small Carved Wood Tazza, Dragon handles. Kang Hsi.
17 Carved Blackwood Box, fitted with nine Porcelain Sweet Meat Dishes, floral decora-
tion. 16in. dia. Chien Lung.
18 Cherry Wood Box, with carved White Jade Butterfly inlay on lid, 4in. x 6in.
The butterfly is a sign of conjugal felicity, in fact it might almost be
known as the Chinese cupid.
19 Cherry Wood Box, with carved Grey Jade Jui pattern inlay on lid, 6£in x 4Jin.
20 Cherry Wood Box, with carved Green Jade inlay on lid, 3Jin x 3in.
21 Cherry Wood Box, with carved White Jade inlay on lid, 3|in x 3in.
21a Cherry Wood Box, with carved White Jade inlay on lid, 4in. x 4in.
22 Black Lacquered Trinket Box and Tray, gilt decoration.
23 2 Chinese Oval Lacquered Trays.
24 2 Chinese Oblong Lacquered Trays.
25 5 Green and Gold Lacquer Finger Bowls.
26 Pair of Brown Lacquer Bottle Stands, 4in. dia.
27 Black Lacquer Tea Caddy, lined with pewter boxes. Beautifully decorated with
figures, etc.
28 Black Lacquer Box, with one tray and drawer, decorated with figures and landscape.
29 Pair Black Lacquer Tea Caddies, Tao Kuong.


CARVED IVORIES.
30 Set of Carved Ivory Figures —The Eight Immortals. 7Jin. high.
THE EIGHT TAOIST IMMORTALS ABE:—
1. CBCTTHG-LI CH’VAH, also known as Han Chung-li, represented as a
fat man, half draped, who holds a ling chih fungus in one hand, and a
fly-whisk in the other.
2. JaTJ TUNG-PIN, a figure of martial aspect, armed with a sword to
slay dragons and evil spirits. He is the patron of barbers.
3. 1.1 TXEK-KUAI, with the iron crutch, a lame beggar with crutch
and pilgrim’s gourd, from which issue clouds and apparitions. He is patron
of astrologers and magicians.
4. TS’OA KUO-CH’IU, in official robes, wearing a winged hat and
carrying a pair of castanets. He is a patron of mummers and actors.
5. LAN TS’AI«HO, of uncertain sex, carrying a hoe and a basket of
flowers. Patron of gardiners and florists.
6. CHANG KUO &AO, the necromancer with the magic mule, of which
he kept a picture folded up in his wallet. He would make thei beast ma-
terialise from the picture by spurting water on it; and at other times
he would conjure it out of a gourd. His attribute is a musical instrument,
consisting of a drum and a pair of rods. He is patron of artists and
calligraphers, and ranks as one of the gods of Literature.
7. SANG HSIANG TZU, who gained admission to the Taoist paradise,
and climbed the peach-tree of Immortality. He is shown as a young man
playing on a flute, and is specially worshipped by Musicians.
8. HO HSI£N KU, a maiden, who wears a cloak of mug-wort leaves
and carries a lotus. She is patroness of housewives.
LOT
31 Carved Ivory Spill Vase. Portion of an elephant’s tusk, decorated with birds,
flowers and pierced work.
32 Carved Ivory Figure of “Ho Seen Ku.” One of the Eight Immortals, BJin. high.
Chien Lung.
33 Carved Ivory Figure of “Wen Ch’ang,” God of Literature, Bin. high. Chien Lung.
34 Carved Ivory Figure of “Kuan Ti,” God of War, with his squire Chou Ts’ang,
carrying a halberd, 8 in. high, Chien Lung.


LOT
35 Carved Ivory Tusk Box, with figures and trees in relief, 3iin. high.
36 Carved Ivory Incense Burner, Kylin legs, two panels of figures, ring handles, and
pierced stand; on the lid is a disciple of Buddha riding a dragon. 7in. Tao Kuong
37 Carved Ivory Junk, with the figures of “Ho Seen Ku” and Han Seang Tsze,” two
of the Immortals (1 piece), 9in. long. Chien Lung.
38 Carved Ivory Junk, with the figures of “Tsaou Kuo-Ch’ieu,” and “Lan Tsae Ho.” two
Immortals (one piece), 9£in. long. Chien Lung.
39 Carved Ivory Figure of a Court Lady, decorated with semi-precious stones. 7in.
Japanese.
40 Ivory Figure of Kuan Yin. s£in. high.
41 Carved Ivory Group—Consulting the Dragon. 6£in. Old Japanese.
42 Carved Ivory Netsuki, Figure of “Ho Shang,” God of Contentment.
43 Carved Ivory Netsuki, Figue of a Buddhist Monk.
44 Carved Ivory Netsuki, Woman with a fan.
45 Carved Ivory Netsuki, Man with a scroll.
46 Carved Ivory Shoehorn, with figure of “Ho Seen Ku,” one of the Immortals.
47 Carved Ivory Handle, Numerous masks and faces.


Hot 30.—THE EIGHT IMMORTALS.


Lots 48—62. CARVED SOAPSTONE.


CARVED SOAPSTONE.
48 Soapstone Figure of “Chiang Tai Kung,” 4in. Chein Lung.
The wisdom and virtue of this sage was so great, that although he
angled with a barbless hook, the fishes vied with one another in attaching
themselves thereto that his needs might be supplied. This gave rise to
the popular proverb: “Only those who like get on the hook.”
LOT
49 Soapstone Seal—Kylin and Cub, 4i:i. Ch’ien Lung.
30 Soapstone Seal—Tortoise, 2iin. Ch’ien Lung.
31 Pair of Soapstone Kylins. 3Jin. Ch'ien Lung.
32 Soapstone Figure of “Chang Ko Laou” riding on his mule, 4in x 3Jin. Ch’ien Lung
One of the Eight Immortals—When the mule was not required it was
folded up and put away.
53 Soapstone Figure of “Han Hsiang Tzu,” one of the Immortals, on the back of an
ox. 3£in. Ch’ien Lung.
54 Pair of Soapstone Seals—Seated Figure, 2Jin. Ch’ien Lung.
33 Pair of Soapstone Seals, representing the figure of Po-sho Lo. 2£in. Ch’ien Lung.
36 Pair of Carred Soapstone Figures. 3in. Ch’ien Lung.
37 Pair of Soapstone Seals —Tortoise, 2iin. Ch’ien Lung.
•N
38 Canred Soapstone Seated Figure. 3in. Ch’ien Lung.
59 Pair of Soapstone Seals—Figure of “Chiang Tai Kung,” 3in. Ch’ien Lung
60 Soapstone Figure of Ho Shang.” 3in. Ch’ien Lung.
61 Soapstone Figure of Kuan Yin, 3in. Ch’ien Lung.
62 Soapstone Figure of “Shou Lao,” 4in. Ch’ien Lung.


SANG-DE-BOEUF AND FLAMBÉ.
The Imperial factories at Ching-te-chen came under the care of the celebrated Lang
Ting-tso, and an epoch of great brilliance began. The bulk of the finest porcelains
in our great collections dates from the Kang Hsi period. To Lang himself are attributed
the noble Sang de boeuf or ox-blood red glazes, and the cognate and equally prized
“peach bloom” red and apple green. The Sang de boeuf red and apple-green are always
crackled, though the cracks are often so fine that they are only apparent on close in-
spection; and the two colours appear frequently in the same piece. The finest peach
bloom too is frequently broken by passages of apple-green, which give it additional
beauty and value.
The glaze is really the master quality in porcelain, and many of the single
glazes of the Kang Hsi period cannot be passed over without notice. From this reign
we date the three most famous and costly of all, the rare apple green, the even more
celebrated ruby red or Sang-de-boeuf, and the much prized peach bloom, the glazes in
every case being derived from copper silicates with which were mixed, the Chinese tell
us, pulverized rubies and other precious stones. The brilliant Sang-de-boeuf of this
period is really a revival of the “sacrificial red” glaze of the Ming dynasty.
LOT
63 Sang-de-Boeof Bottle-shape Vase. s£in. Ch’ien Lung.
64 Flambe Vase, Red and Green glaze.. sin. Ch’ien Lung.
65 Pair Small Bowls, Sang-de-Boeuf. Tao Kuang.
66 Writer’s Water Bottle, Sang-de-Boeuf, with purple mottling. Ch’ien Lung.
67 Sang-de-Boeuf Vase, Bottle-shape. BJin. Ch’ien Lung.
68 Vase, Peach bloom crackle glaze, 9in. Ch’ien Lung.
69 Crackle and Flambe Vase, Bottle-shape, I4in. Ch'ien Lung.


LOT
70 Rice Bowl, Maroon, single glaze, Chia Ching.
71 Saucer Dish, Maroon Red. Chia Ching.
72 Writer’s Water Pot, Maroon colour. Chia Ching.
73 Pair Flambe Kylins, 6in. high. Tao Kuong.
74 Flambe Crackle Vase, 15in. Chia Ching.
75 Flambe Vase, Bottle Shape, s|in. high. Tao Kuong.
76 Flambe Vase, Lavender Glaze, 16in. high. Kuang Hsu.
77 Pair of Doves, Mauve glaze. 6Jin. Kuang Hsu.
78 Pair of Flambe Vases, 14Jin. high. Kuang Hsu.
79 Red Single Glaze Vase, conical shape, 13£in. high. Kuang Hsu.
80 Sang-de-Boeuf Vase, Bottle-shape, 15in. high. Yung Cheng.
81 Sang-de-Boeuf Vase, Bottle-shape, I3in. high. Yung Ching.
82 Flambe Vase, Bottle-shape, 1 5-Jin. high. Kuang Hsu.
83 Rice Bowl, liver color with famille rose panels, 6|in. dia. Ch’ien Lung.
84 Sang-ds-Boeuf Vase, Bottle-shape, 13in. high. Ch’ien Lung.
85 Flambe Vase, Gourd-shaped, 30Jin. high. Yung Cheng.
86 Sang-de-Boeuf Vase, Bottle-shape, 15in. high. Tao Kuang.
87 Flambe Glaze Medicine Jar, 9in. high. Tao Kuang.
88 Flambe Vase, Fluted design, II in. high . Tao Kuang.


BLANC-DE-CHINE.
In addition to Ching-te-chen there were during the Ming period two other centres of
some note where the manufacture of porcelain was carried on. One of these centres was
Te Hua in Fukien, where the white porcelain known to us as blanc-de-Chine was pro-
duced. It differs widely from other Chinese porcelain, the paste being of a creamy white
tint resembling ivory, of which, in fact, it is meant to be an imitation, while the thick
rich glaze which has a satiny aspect blends closely with the paste underneath. The
best examples of this ware are the well-modelled images of Buddhist divinities of which
owing to their careful preservation in temples, many yet survive.
The best known pieces of white porcelain are, of course, those statuettes of
deities, especially the Kwan-yin, or “Hearer of Prayers,” the God of War, the Kylin, and
the lion with the brocaded ball, the earlier specimens being generally of a mellow
ivory hue, whilst later examples are of a bluer tinge.
The name Feng-ting or “flour” ting has been given to this porcelain by the
Chinese, and it is famous for its wonderful satin-like glaze. Besides the statuettes, beauti-
ful little libation cups were made, and also cups and bowls of scarcely more than egg
shell thickness. In the Franks Collection at the British Museum are a pair of bowls of
such delicate fabrique and workmanship that it seems little short of a miracle that they
have survived for close upon 500 years.
Engraved designs were the sole decoration on these delicate little bowls and
cups, and were so finely executed as to be scarcely visible till the piece is held to the
light.
It is interesting to call to mind that in times of mourning white porcelain
only was used in the Imperial Palace, all coloured vessels being banished till the period
of mourning had expired.


JUI SCEPTRRS AND NECKLETS.


Lots 85 80 81
SANG DE BOEUF


LOT
89 Figure of Si Wang Mu —Queen of the Genii—crossing the waves on the back of
a dragon fish. Blanc-de-chine, I2in. high. Tao Kuang.
90 Pair of Kylins, Blanc-de-chine, Sin. high. Tao Kuang.
91 Wine Cups, Set of nine, Blanc-de-chine. Chia Ching.
92 Vase, Blanc-de-chine, bottle-shape, elephant trunk handles, Min. Ch’ien Lung.
93 Writer’s Water Pot, Blanc-de-Chine, incised decoration. Ch’ien Lung.
94 Libation Cup, Blanc-de-chine, decorated with embossed prunus blossom, dragon’s
head, etc. Ming.
95 Vase, Blanc-de-chine, 11 in. Yung Ching.
96 3 Blanc-de-chine Wine Cups. Ming.
This ware is known as "Fuchlen White,” and is greatly esteemed by the
Chinese.
97 6 Blanc-de-chine Cups. Ming.
98 3 Blanc-de-chine Cups. Ming.
99 Pair of Kylins, Blanc-de-chine. Ming.
The lion in Chinese Art, though ferocious in appearance, is in reality a
peaceful, docile creature who expends his energy on a ball of silk, the
streamers from which he holds in his massive jaws.
100 Incense Burner, Blanc-de-chine. Ming.
101 Wine Cup, Blanc-de-chine, Impressed decoration. Ming.
102 Figure of Kuan Yin and Attendants, Blanc-de-chine, 7in. high. Ming.
103 Incense Burner, Blanc-de-Chine. Ming.
104 Figure of Kuan Yin of the Grotto, with attendants, Blanc-de-chine. 9in. high. Ming.
105 Figure of Kuan Yin Seated on a Lotus Flower. Ivory glaze. Sin. high. (Stand
inlaid with silver wire). Ming.


LOT
106 Figure of Kuan Yin, Blanc-de-chine, 7in. high. Ming.
107 Figure of Kuan Yin, Blanc-de-chine.. sJin. high. Kang Hsi.
108 Figure of Kuan Yin and Attendant, Blanc-de-chine, 9in. high. Ming.
109 Figure of Kuan Yin of the Grotto. Blanc-de-chine, 9 Jin high. Tao Kuang.
11 0 Figure of Kuan Yin, Blanc-de-chim, 20in. high. Kang Hsi.
111 Figure of Chiang Tai Kung Riding on a Fish.. The Sage that fished with the
barbless hook. Cream glaze. 7Jin. high. Ch’ien Lung.
11 2 Libation Cup, Blanc-de-chine, raised decoration, 4in. high. Ming.
113 Tea Pot, Blanc-de-chine, dragon, handle and spout, 4Jin. high. Kang Hsi.
114 Figure of Kuan Yin, Blanc-de-chine, 1 7Jin. high. Ming.
11 5 Figure of Kuan Yin, Blanc-de-chine, 1 BJin. high. Ta-Ming.
11 6 Pi-tung (Brush Holder), Blanc-de-chine, with under the glaze decoration. Ming.
117 2 Blanc-de-chine Wine Cups. Ming.
118 2 Blanc-de-chine Wine Cups. Ming.
119 Figure of Kuan Yin, Blanc-de-chine, crackle glaze, Bin. Ming.
(See illustration).
1 20 Libation Cup, Blanc-de-chine, embossed decoration, 3Jin x 5-Jin. Ming.
121 Group of Figures, Kuan Ti, God of Literature, and Attendants, Blanc-de-chine.
6in. Ming.
122 Libation Cup, Blanc-de-chine, raised decoration. 2Jin. Ming.
123 Small Vase, Blanc-de-chine, Crackle, Raised Lizard Decoration, 6in. Ming.
124 Figure of Kuan Yin the Maternal, with attendants, Blanc-de-chine, lOin. Ming.
125 Bowl, Cream Crackle, incised decoration, 4in. Ming.


LOT
126 Ash Tray, Cream Crackle, Chia Ch’ing.
127 Water Ewer, Rice Colour Glaze, copper rim fitted to the mouth. Yung Cheng.
128 Vase, Mottled White Glaze, Raised Jui and Key pattern Decoration. Yung Cheng.
129 Writer’s Water Bowl, Rice Coloured Glazed Pottery. Ming.
130 Wall Vase, Rice Crackle Glaze, 6in. Yung Cheng.
131 Vase, White Crackle, Sin, silver inlaid stand. Fitted to silk-lined box. Kuang Hsu.
132 White Porcelain Incense Burner. Tao Kuang.
133 Figure of Kuan Yin of the Grotto, with attendants. Blanc-de-chine, 9in. high. Ming.
JADE.
Of all precious stones, jade is most esteemed by the Chinese especially because of
its finely polished surface and evenness and purity of quality, and it is idealised by
them as characteristic of the superior man.
Confucius in the sixth century B.C. tells us: “The model man of old compared
jade to virtue. It is of warm, liquid and moist aspect, like benevolence, it is solid,
strong and firm, like wisdom; pure and not easily injured like righteousness; when sus-
pended it hangs gracefully, like politeness; when struck it gives out a far-reaching
sound, vibrating long, but stopping abruptly like music, though faulty it does not hide its
good points; when superior it does not conceal its defect, like royalty; its brilliancy lights
up all things near it, like truth, it gives out a bright rainbow, like Heaven: shows a pure
spirit among the hills and streams, like earth; symbols of Jade rank alone as gifts to intro-
duce persons to virtue; and in the whole world there is no orie who does not value it
like reason.”
To us, the most natural of all uses which the Chinese have found for this most
beautiful of stones is that of personal adornment. Laufer, in discussing this subject, says:
"Personal adornment always exercised a deep influence upon social life, being full of


hidden emblematic significance and speaking a language of their own understood by the
donor and the wearer. Their shapes and their designs are living realities. In their
execution the Chinese genius shows at its best, and rivals that of the greatest lapidaries
of all ages. Neither the cut gems of Greece, nor the much praised netsuke of Japan
comes up to the ideal standard of these humble carvers, their refinement of taste, their
vigour and elegance of design, their zest for linear beauty, and their almost superhuman
mastery of the tough stone material with their crude implements. With all our progress in
technical matters, we often stand in bewilderment before these gems, puzzled as to
how they did it.”
The Chinese lapidary of to-day uses much the same tools for his work as his
ancient predecessor, and those of the generations intervening. No new tools have been
invented. The European craftsman adds the power of steam or electricity to the old tools,
but the Chinese workman patiently continues the use of the simple hand and foot power.
“Jade pieces were worn as girdle ornaments in most ancient times, and the
wearers rejoiced in their tinkling and clattering while walking, and imagined they
heard real musical tones produced by them.” The tinkling of these jades were supposed
to fill his mind, so that evil and depraved thoughts could not find entrance. Jade
here appears as the embodiment of excellent qualities, and instilling virtue into the heart
of its owner. Its musical qualities caused a joyful disposition, which may have led to
the observance of laying the pendants aside during the time of mourning.”
“Resonant stones,” says Laufer, “are much favoured as birthday presents or
congratulatory gifts in general, as their designation k’ing is punned upon with another
word k’ing of the same sound, meaning good luck, happiness, blessings, to congratulate.
The phrase ki-k’ing, ‘to strike the musical stone,’ is understood as ‘may blessings attend
you,’ or ‘good luck and best wishes.’ This stone, therefore has been popular as a gift
to brides.”
“As long as there exists in Chinese hearts the love of that which is beautiful;
as long as Chinese lapidaries continue to fashion gems of such beauty, with such mar-
velous delicacy and skill; and as long as travellers from other lands seek so eagerly these
precious stones, so long will the story of jade in China continue.”


LOT
134 Jui Sceptre, with three carved tablets of Grey Jade on a Blackwood stand, silk
tassel attached.
133 Jui Sceptre, with Mutton-fat Jade Tablets, beautifully carved with an emblematic
Elephant, Kylin and vase of Flowers. Blackwood stand.
136 Water Blue Jade Figure of Lan Tsae-ho and her Basket of Flowers. 4£in. high.
Ch’ien Lung.
137 Jui Sceptre, with three large carved tablets of Mutton-fat Jade, mounted on a
silver inlaid Blackwood stand.
A magnificent specimen.
138 Green Jade Water Well, 4in. x 3in. Ch’ien Lung.
139 Jui Sceptre of Blackwood and Jade Emblems of Happy Omen. With original silk
tassel.
140 Jui Sceptre of Blackwood and Jade, with carved stand. The Jade is carved with
the Peach emblem of good luck.
141 White Jade Sacrificial Bowl, with stand, Sin. dia. Han Dynasty.
142 Jui Sceptre of Blackwood and Jade Emblems.
A magnificent specimen.
143 Grey Jade Writer’s Water Pot, with carved blackwood lid and stand. Agate knob.
Ch’ien Lung.
144 String of 33 Green Jade Beads, and Pendant.
145 Green Jade Figure of Buddha, 3in. high. Ch’ien Lung,
146 Grey Jade Bird, siin. long. Ch’ien Lung.
147 Green Jade Dog, 2fin. long. Ch’ien Lung.
148 Brown and White Jade Dog of Fo, mounted on a silver inlaid stand. Han.
This specimen is over 2000 years old, and, like most pieces of Chow and
Han periods, shows signs of discolouration.


LOT
149 Green Jade Figure of Tung Fang So, as a boy stealing the peaches of longevity.
Mounted on an agate stand. Sin. high. Ch’ien Lung.
150 Jni Sceptre, with three large carved Mutton-fat Jade Tablets, Blackwood frame,
red silk tassel.
151 Grey Jade Carved Gourd, with brown patches. Sin. long. Han.
A gourd is an emblem of longevity,
152 Grey Jade Figure of La Tung-pin, one of the Immortals, 4Jin. high. Ch’ien Lung.
ISS Jui Sceptre in Solid White Jade, 15in. long, with the original silk tassel attached.
Mounted in a beautifully carved blackwood and glass case.
A Jui sceptre brings fulfilment of wishes, and is a symbol of longevity.
A specimen in solid Jade is extremely rare.
154 Grey Jade Figure of a Man With a Boy on His Back. 6in. high. Ch’ien Lung.
155 Grey Jade Wine Cup, with handle in the form of branch of a peach tree. 4fin.
long. Ch’ien Lung.
156 Jni Sceptre, blackwood with three caned Jade insets, and the original silk tassel.
157 Grey Jade Bird, 7£in. long. Ch’ien Lung.
158 Grey Jade Raft with Figures of Men. 6in. long. Ch’ien Lung.
159 Grey Jade Figure of Ho Seen Kn, crossing the sea on a dolphin, I Oin. high. Ch’ien
Lung.
160 Jui Sceptre of Carved Blackwood and Jade, with carved stand.
A choice specimen with three magnificent carved Jade Dragon emblems,
evidently used by a Prince of the first rank.
161 Covered Jasper Vase, with ring handles and embellished with carved fish, dragons
and birds. The base represents waves, 12in x silver inlaid stand. Ch’ien
Lung.
A magnificent specimen of Jasper Jade.
162 Water Blue Jade Junk, with figures of men, 7£in. long. Ch’ien Lung.


LOT
163 Grey Jade Bird, Sin. long. Ch’ien Lung.
164 Carved Jade Pendant, with design.
165 Grey Jade Horse and Monkey, Sin. long. Ch’ien Lung.
166 Rice Coloured Jade Tripod incense Burner, with Kylin lid, 6in. x Sin. Silver
inlaid stand, Ch’ien Lung
167 Water Blue Jade Incense Burner, with side vase and covered basin. Sin. x S^in.
and 4jin. Ch’ien Lung.
168 Pair large Carved Jade Buckles, dragon design.
169 Pair Carved Jade Buckles, dragon design.
170 Carved Jade Pendant, with dragon design.
171 Grey Jade Bracelet
172 Carved Jade Bird, on stand.
173 Green Jade Necklet (8S beads).
174 Green Jade Necklet (87 beads)
175 Grey Jade Bird, on stand.
176 Grey Jade Goat and Kid,
177 Carved Jade Mandarin Duck, on stand. Ch’ien Lung.
The Emblem of Wedded Bliss.
178 Grey Jade Bottle, on blackwood stand, Sfin.
179 Green Jade Figure of Kuan Yin, a rare example of the Kang Hsi Period, 6in. high.


LEGEND OF KUAN-YIN, GODDESS OF MERCY.
Many legends exist concerning the H(e and re-incarnation of Kuan-Yin, and
naturally enough, it is the one that tells of suffering, innocence of renunciation, and re-
ward, that has endeared itself to the heart of the people.
The legend goes that Kuan-Yin was the third daughter of the King of Hsingiin
(the Adorable). The girl was prophetically named “ Chunda,” the meaning of which
is “rare virtue.” She was generous, merciful, reverent, affectionate, and free from
worldly desire. Daily she recited the Buddhist prayers. Peace, purity and enlightenment
Were ideals upon which she constantly dwelt, and one night she dreamed of being led
to Sumeru the sacred Mountain, and there being instructed by the Buddha of Longevity.
Thereafter Chunda was numbered among the enlightened, having attained knowledge of
the six means of salvation.
The King was not pleased with his daughter's renunciation of royal pomp and
circumstance, and he commanded her to marry. Chunda did not wish to marry, and
at last, firmly refused, thereby so angering the King that he decreed her execution. The
Princess was miraculously saved by the sudden appearance of a purple aureole above
her head. The Supreme Buddha heard her prayer and suffered her death to be without
pain.
The Princess died in her nineteenth year, and her body was seized and carried
away by a tiger which suddenly sprang from a forest close at hand—legend says the
Ssu-to Forest. Many “signs and wonders” accompanied her passing away.
The soul of the Princess wandered to the realms of Yama, god of death, and by
the order of Yama, angels escorted it back to the place where her body lay. As if roused
from a dream the Princess found herself again on the edge of the Ssu-to forest, and saw
her body stretched upon the ground. Beside it stood an old man (Hui Chou), who
directed her to the purple bamboo grove at Hsiang Shan, saying that that was the place
whereat she might best study Buddhism; and with this advice, he gave her a peach, that
she might be well sustained upon this long journey to the grove.
Meanwhile the king was stricken with a strange disease. The Court Physicians
were baffled, and in agony His Majesty awaited the coming of death. Looking upon
his suffering with compassion, the Princess came to earth again in the form of a Bud-


Lots 414 15 8 254 409 157 149 236 413
JADE, AGATE AND CRYSTAL.


Lots 109 110 105 114 108
BLANC-DE-CHINE.


dhist Priest, and in an audience with him revealed an infallible remedy for his complaint.
Upon visiting the sacred mountain to offer thanks for his deliverance, he found that
the person who had sacrificed eyes and hands for his sake was the daughter whom he
had so cruelly treated.
For this act of renunciation, the Princess was promoted to be a Great Buddha,
with the crowning wreath of Buddha's Law, the gift of a thousand eyes and a thousand
hands being her reward. The Princess is now honoured, being one of a triad with
Manjusari and Samantabhadra, their divine attributes being Wisdom, Happiness, and
Mercy. The nineteenth day of the six moon is religiously observed as the day upon,
which Kuan Yin attained perception of the Perfect Law.
LOT
180 Carved Jade Bird, on stand.
181. Carved Jade Boat with Two Figures.
182 Pair White Jade Mandarin Buckles, dragon design.
183 Grey Jade Horse, on stand.
184 Grey Jade Parrot, on stand.
185 Pair of White Jade Kylins, on stands.
Said to attain the age of 1000 years, to be the noblest form of animal
creation and emblem of perfect good.
186 Grey Jade Bird, on stand.
187 Mutton Fat Jade Pendant, with Wild Goose Emblem of domestic felicity.
188 8 Carved Jade Hairpins.
189 Carved Jade Pendant, with the Yin-Yan Symbol of the duality of nature.
190 Grey Jade Writer’s Water Bottle and Tray, with figures of goats, carved from one
soild piece, blackwood stand. 9in. long. Kang Hsi.
191 White Jade Horse and Monkey.
192 Grey Jade, on stand.
193 Pierced Silver Gilt Trinket Box, with carved Jade lid, octagon shape, 2in. x 2in.
194 Pierced Silver Gilt Trinket Box, with carved Jade Lid, oblong shape, 3iin. x 2in.


CELADON.
The name “Celadon,” it should be explained, is used to describe both a class
•and a special colour, namely, the large and varied class of single glaze decoration and
a particular sea-green colour which was the commonest form of single glaze decoration
during both the Sung and the Ming periods. All the celadon produced at Lung Ch’uan
was of this particular colour. It was an atttempt on the part of the old Chinese potter
to imitate the much prized green jade.
Owing to the esteem, no doubt, in which it was held by Eastern royalties, the
marvellous property was attributed to Celadon of denoting by changing its colour the pre-
sence of poison in the fo'od served in it. At present this ancient ware is less prized in
Europe than by Chinese and Japanese connoisseurs, who give high prices for pieces of
exactly the correct shape and shade of green.
The name Celadon was first brought to notice in Honore D’Urfe’s famous novel,
"“L’Astree.” When this book was dramatised, his hero. Celadon, appeared upon
the stage entirely clad in sea-green, and about the same time, the Chinese porcelain
Lung-Chuang Yao made its first appearance in large quantities in France, when, owing
to its grey-green colour the name Celadon was at once applied to it. The colour was
produced by the introduction of a small quantity of protoxide of iron into the glaze.
XiOT
195 Celadon Bottle-shape Vase, Underglaze decoration. Ming.
196 Celadon Crackle Vaze, Bottle-shape, incised decoration, underglaze, 12in. Ming.
197 Celadon Incense Burner, Olive Green glaze, incised decoration, s£in. Ming.
198 Incense Burner, Blue and Grey, Celadon Crackle, Sin. dia. Ming.
199 Celadon Crackle Tripod Incense Burner, incised decoration, unglazed bottom inside
and base, showing rich red pottery, 7in. high and Min. diam. Ming.
A Magnificent specimen.


LOT
200 Small Celadon Crackle Bowl, siin. dia. Ming.
201 Writer’s Water Pot, Celadon Crackle, 3|in. Ming.
202 Figure of Kuang Ti, God of War, Celadon Glaze, lOin. Ming.
(See illustration).
203 Small Celadon Plate, engraved Lotus decoration. Ming.
204 Small Celadon Dish, Ming.
203 Tea Caddy, square shape, Celadon Glaze, Trigram decoration. Sung.
206 Celadon Crackle Incense Burner, Sin. dia. tripod stand. Kang Hsi.
207 Small Vase, Celadon Crackle, 6in. Yung Cheng.
208 Vase, Celadon Crackle, with figure and landscape decoration in apple-green and
coral red, 9in. Yung Cheng.
209 Brash Holder, Celadon Crackle, cone shape. Yung Cheng.
210 Covered Celadon Gourd Shape Vase, incised decoration, 7£in. Ming.
211 Covered Celadon Gourd shaped Vase, incised decoration. Ming.
212 Covered Celadon Glazed Porcelain Jar, raised decoration inscribed in Chinese
characters. 9in. high. Sung.
213 Celadon Saucer Dish, incised decoration. Floral, I2£in. dia. Ming.
214 Saucer Dish, Celadon Ground, floral decoration with quails, 1 0in. dia. Ch’ien Lung.
213 Small Celadon Plate, engraved Lotus decoration. Yung Cheng.
216 Celadon Crackle Basin, Incised decoration, Yung Cheng
217 Small Celadon Crackle Vase. Yung Cheng.
218 Celadon Dish, decorated with Ho Ho bird in the centre. Yung Cheng.
219 Celadon Crackle Bowl, 6in. diam. Yung Cheng.


LOT
220 Small Celadon Crackle Vase, sJin. Yung Cheng.
221 Vase, Bottle-shape, Celadon Glaze, lOin. Ch’ien Lung.
222 Celadon Crackle Saucer Plate, Chia Ch’ing.
223 Rectangular Shape Vase, Celadon Glaze with panels in blue and red. Isin.
Chia Ch’ing.
224 Vase, Celadon Glaze, 11 in. Chia Ch’ing.
225 Incense Burner, Elephant Design, Celadon Glaze. Tao Kuang.
226 Brash Holder, Celadon Crackle. 7Jin. Tao Kuang.
227 Three-legged Toad Incense Burner, Celadon Crackle, sJin. x 7in. Ming.
In ancient times there was a three-legged toad who lived in a deep pool,
and was able to expel a poisonous exhalation which injured people. Later
on a young fairy, named Liu Hae, hooked it with a gold cash and destroyed
it. This ancient legend is taken as symbolical of modern fact, viz. that
money is the attaction which will lure men to their destruction.
228 Vase, Bottle Shape, Clair-de-lune Glaze, 13in. Yung Cheng.
A fine specimen.
229 Vase, Gourd Shape, Mottled Claire-de-lune Glaze, 9in. Ch’ien Lung.
230 Vase, Clair-de-lune, square shape, with embossed floral decoration, 9in. Chi Ch’ing.
231 Porcelain “pi-tung” or Bush Holder. Ch’ien Lung.
Rare Clair de lune specimen with incised decoration.
232 Clair-de-lune, Square Vase, with bars in relief. Chia Ch’ing.
233 Puzzle Tea Pot, Peach Shape, Clair-de-lune glaze, Tao Kuang.
234 Vase, Clair-de-lune, glaze, ring handles. Dogs of Fo decoration, Ioin.. Kuang Hsu.
235 Small Vase, Bottle Shape, Clair-de-lune, Incised design under glaze, 6in. Tao Kuang.
236 Pair of Writer’s Water Pots, Mottled Turquoise blue glaze. Ch’ien Lung.
237 Group of Monkeys, 3in. Ch’ien Lung.
The Monkey is supposed to bestow heaUh, protection from malicious
spirits and success in life.


ROCK CRYSTAL
Sir Thomas Browne in his work on “Vulgar Errors,” in 1646, states that Crystal
is nothing else but ice, congealed beyond liquation. It is found in a variety of forms,
varying in color, and modern science has dispelled such illusions, and has proved it is
a pure and limpid form of quartz, he Chinese, during the reign of Ch’ien Lung worked
with it greatly, and have made and designed some most beautiful ornaments from
this medium. It is greatly sought for now by Europeans. Nero possessed two Crystal
drinking cups, one of which cost him a sum equal to £6OO. When ha heard of the loss
of his kingdom, he is said to have broken them in anger.
XiOT
238 Carved White Crystal Inkwell, emblematic design.
239 Carved Rock Crystal Kylin and Bird.
240 White Rock Crystal Sheep.
241 Carved Crystal Figure of a Buddhist Disciple, 2£in. high. Ch’ien Lung.
242 Carved Crystal Kylin, on round base, cut from one piece, 4in. high.
243 Rose Crystal Parrot Ch’ien Lung.
244 White Crystal Necklet
245 Carved Crystal Eagle, 7in. Ch’ien Lung.
246 Carved Rose Crystal Buffalo, 6in. long. Ch’ien Lung.
247 Crystal “Dog of Fo,” Ch’ien Lung.
248 Rose Crystal Cow, 6in. long. Ch’ien Lung.
249 Rose Crystal Rabbit, Sin. long. Ch'ien Lung.
250 Rose Crystal Dog of Fo, 4Jin. long, Ch’ien Lung.


LOT
251 Rose Crystal Ox, on stand (1 horn broken).
252 Rose Crystal Figure of Ho Seen Ku, 4in. high. Ch’ien Lung.
253 Rose Crystal Winged Horse, carrying an immortal, sin. long. Ch’ien Lung.
254 White Rock Crystal Covered Basket, on a Blackwood stand. 4£in. high. Ch’ien Lung.
255 Rose Crystal Parrot, 6in. high. Ch’ien Lung.
256 Rock Crystal Vase and Cover, surmounted by a Dog of Fo; elephant head handles,
with rings, carved from one piece. 6in. high, silver inlaid stand. Ch’ien Lung.
257 Rock Crystal Dog of Fo.
258 Rock Crystal Lion.
259 Rock Crystal Sheep.
260 Rock Crystal Sheep.
261 Carved Crystal Quail, 3in. x 2in.
262 Green Rock Crystal, 2£in. long.
263 Rock Crystal Dog of Fo,
264 Rose Crystal Duck, 2Jin. long. Ch’ien Lung.
265 Rose Crystal Tripod Incense Burner, with Kylin handles, fitted with rings, carved
from one piece. sin. high. Ch’ien Lung.
266 Rock Crystal Necklet, with 69 beads.
267 Rose Crystal Cow.
268 Block of Rose Crystal, 4 x 2-|in.


FAMILLE VERTE AND FAMILLE NOIRE.
Good specimens of the famille verte are not yet uncommon, but the demand
for them in England has made them very costly. Powdered blue vases with white re-
serves filled with famille verte are particularly sought after by Collectors.
Three-coloured pieces are so called because they are supposed to be decorated
with yellow, green and aubergine only. The ground is generally covered with a yellow
glaze on which the green and aubergine appear in diaper patterns or other designs. In
many cases, however, black is also employed along with the other three colours. To the
connoisseur there is a charm and fascination about this class of porcelain which is not
always apparent to the average man. Three-coloured pieces of the Kiang Hsi period
are becoming rare and already fetch fancy prices.
LOT
269 Figure of Kuang Ti, God of War, Famille Verte. Yung Cheng.
270 Porcelain Plaque, Famille Verte. Representing Taoist Immortals studying the Yin-
Yang (a circle bisected by a wavy line), which symbolises the duality of nature,
Yin being the female and Yang the male element. 1 lin. Ch’ien Lung.
271 Cup, Famille Verte, Figure decoration. Ch’ien Lung.
272 Small Vase, Bottle-shape, Famille Verte, floral decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
273 Pair of Parrots, decorated in green and yellow, 7in. Chia Ch’ing.
274 Bowl, Coral Red with Famille Verte panels, 6Jin. dia. Chia Ch’ing.
275 Vase, Club shape, five colours, decorated with birds, insects and flowers, 18^in,
Ch’ien Lung.


XiOT
276 Large Vase of the Kang Hsi Period. Grandly painted in colours, relieved by a
black enamelled ground. It is covered with a floral decoration of tree paeonies
magnolias and lilies with an open-work rockery underneath on which are perch-
ed two pheasants. The black ground is characteristically of somewhat greenish
tone and the decoration, sketched and shaded with the same black enamel, is
filled in with two brilliant shades of green, coral red and manganese purple.
23in. high. Kang Hsi.
“The black of the precious black-ground vases, the ‘famille noire,’ as they
are sometimes called, is formed by overlaying a dull black pigment with
washes of transparent green enamel. The result is a greenish black, the
enamel imparting life and fire to the dull pigment; and as the green 1s
fluxed with lead it tends to become iridescent, giving an additional green
reflet to the black surface. There is a wonderful series of these lordly
vases in the Salting Collection and in the Plerpont Morgan and Altmann
Collections in New York. To-day they are rare, and change hands at enor-
mous prices.”—Hobson.
277 Pair of Figures, Pu-tai-Ho-Shang, 6Jin. Tao Kuang.
278 Writer’s Rouge Pot, Coral red, Famille Verte decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
279 Bowl, Famille Verte decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
280 Dish, Famille Verte, Floral decoration, key pattern border, 11 Jin. dia. Chia Ch’ing.
281 Figure of Shon Lao, the God of Longevity. Yung Cheng.
Holding in his hand the fruit of the fabulous peach tree, Fan-tao, which
blossoms every 2000 years and only yields its peaches 3000 years after-
wards.
282 Dish, Famille Verte, floral decoration, lOJin. dia. Chia Ch’ing.
283 Dish, Famille Verte, floral decoration, I OJin. dia. Chia Ch’ing.
284 Dish, Green ground, with lotus flower in rose pink, 10Jin. dia. Chia Ch’ing.
285 Tea Pot, Famille Noire, decorated in green and yellow, wire handles. Chia Ch’ing.
286 Pair of Parrots, decorated in green and yellow, 6Jin. Chia Ch’ing.
287 Small Coral Red Vase, Famille Rose panels. Chia Ch’ing.
288 Small White Vase, Famille Verte decoration. Chia Ch’ing.


Lot 276.-FAMILLE NOIRE.


Lot 350.-PU-TAI HO-SHANG.


LOT.
289 Saucer Dish, Famille Verte Dragon and Floral decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
An imperial five-claw dragon piece.
290 Famille Verte Plate, Joo-ee border, centre decorated with buffaloes, in gold and
green. Chia Ch’ing.
291 Vase, Beaker Shape, Famille Noire, Hawthorne decoration. Ch’ien Lung.
292 Plate, Famille Verte, Landscape decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
293 Saucer, Coral Red with panels of Famille Verte. Chia Ch’ing.
294 Saucer Dish, Famille Verte decoration. Yung Cheng.
295 Vase, Bottle Shape, Famille Verte. Imperial five-claw dragon decoration, covered
with seal pattern, 9in. Ch’ien Lung.
296 Saucer, Mandarin Duck decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
297 Saucer Dish, Famille Verte, floral decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
298 4 Saucer Dishes, floral decoration in Famille Verte. Chia Ch’ing.
299 Bowl, Famille Verte decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
300 Covered Vase, Famille Noire, Flower decoration in green and coral red. 1 7iin.
Ch’ien Lung.
301 Bowl, Famille Verte, Floral decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
302 Figure of Kuan Yin, 7in. Chia Ch’ing.
303 Covered Vase, Famille Noire, Coral Red, Green and White, floral decoration. 17in.
Kang Hsi.
304 Oval Tray, Famille Verte, figure decoration. lOin. x Sin. Chia Ch’ing.
305 Vase, Club shape, Famille Verte, decorated with figures in over glaze enamels.
IBiin. Ch’ien Lung.
306 Saucer, Famille Verte, Imperial Dragon and Fish decoration. Yung Cheng.


LOT
307 The Eight Immortals and Lao-tzu, the founder of the Taoist religion. A collec-
tor’s set of 9 rare figures in Porcelain. Yung Cheng.
The eight Taoist Immortals, usually represented in pairs, each with fixed attributes,
are Chung-li Ch’uan with his fan or fly whisk; Lu Tung-pin with a sword; Li T’ieh-Kuai
with Pigrim’s gourd, and staff; Ts-ao Kuo-Ch’iu with castenets; Lan Ts-aiho with basket
of flowers; Chang Kuo Lao with bamboo tubes and rods; Han Hsiang Tzu with a
flute; and Ho Hsien Ku with a Lotus.
Sir John Davis tells a story of Chung-li, which may account for why the fan has
become his emblem. “Having married a young and beautiful wife, he retired to lead the
life of a philosopher. One day, meditating among a multitude of tombs, he found himself
near a newly constructed sepulchre. The tempered earth was not yet entirely dry. On
one side of the Tomb sat a young woman in deep mourning, holding in her hand a white
fan with which she constantly fanned the surface of the ground. . . When he pressed
her to explain herself, she made this reply: ‘You see a widow at the tomb of her
husband, from whom death has unhappily severed her. . Even in dying he could
scarcely bear to part with me, and his last words were. My dear spouse, if you should
hereafter think of marrying again, I conjure you to wait at least, until the earth of my
grave is entirely dry, after which you have my sanction to espouse whom you please.
Now, as it occurred to me that the surface of this ground which has been newly tempered,
would not very soon dry I thought I would just fan it a little to assist in carrying off the
moisture.’ The philosopher had much ado to avoid laughing outright at this plain
avowal. . . Turning to her he said, ‘Your wish is that the surface of this tomb should
dry with all speed, but delicate as you are, this exercise will soon tire you; let me,
therefore, give you some assistance.’ The young woman immediately arose, and making
him a profound reverence, accepted his offer by presenting him with another fan
exactly like her own. The philosopher struck the tomb several times with the fan, and
all appearances of moisture presently vanished. The lady upon this gaily thanked her
benefactor, and presented him with the fan as a token of her gratitude. The philoso-
pher’s wife, on hearing how he became possessed of the fan, protested she would never
so behave. The philosopher to test her pretended to be dead, and arranged for a very
handsome young man to make love to his wife, who in a few days agreed to marry him.


but on breaking open the philosopher’s coffin she found to her horror that the philo-
sopher was alive. ‘Unable to survive her shame,’ she hung herself, when the philosopher,
setting fire to the house, burnt her body and the wedding feast that had been prepared.”
LOT
308 Vase, Famille Noire with floral decoration in green, 6iin. Kang Hsi.
309 Vase, Octagon Shape, Famille Verte, decorated with Pheasant and Prusus blossom.
9'Jin. Yung Cheng.
310 Vase, Famille Verte, Bottle shape, richly decorated with Flowers and scroll pattern.
13in. Yung Cheng.
311 Bowl, Famille Verte, decorated with green, aubergine and yellow patches (Tiger
skin). Kang Hsi.
31/ Vase, Square shape tapering towards the base, five-claw dragon decoration in snake
green and aubergine, on a mottled ground. Mounted in padded box. Kang Hsi.
313 Figure of Ho Seen Ku, one of the immortals. She carries in her hand a lotus
flower which forms her emblem. Decorated in green, yellow and aubergine.
Kang Hsi
314 Small Kuan Yin, seated upon a lotus flower, decorated in green and aubergine (re-
paired). Kang Hsi.
315 Figure of Pu-Tai Ho-Shang, Three-colour, sJin. Kang Hsi.
316 Framed Porcelain Panel, with raised figures -- Immortals and fabulous animals;
Famille Noire ground, and figures in three colours (repaired) 16iin. x 11 iin.
Yung Cheng.
317 Model of a Junk, three colour. 4in. Kang Hsi.
318 Ginger Jar, Famille Verte, three colour, yellow ground, green and aubergine
floral decoration. Kang Hsi.
Three-color pieces from this period are very rare.
319 Figure of Kuan Yin, 6in. Chia Ch’ing.


LOT
320 Globular Shape Vase, Famille Verte, floral decoration with squirrels, 3Jin. high.
Tao Kuang.
321 Covered Cup, Famille Verte, floral decoration, with a cock in coral red. Tao Kuang.
322 Vase, Famille Verte, decorated with landscape and figures of Immortals, 7 Jin.
Tao Kuang.
323 Figure of Kuan Yin, Famille Verte, with creamy white cloak, beautifully incised
with scroll pattern, height, 14in. Tao Kuang.
324 Porcelain Ash Tray Figure decoration. Tao Kuang.
325 Brush Holder, Famille Verte, Kylin design. Tao Kuang.
326 Covered Cup, Famille Verte, Coral red figure decoration. Tao Kuang.
327 Writer’s Brush Holder, Figure decoration, sJin. Tao Kuang.
328 Ginger Jar, Famille Noire, with white panels of “Precious Things,” sin. Kang Hsi.
329 Figure of Kuang Ti, God of Literature. Famille Verte, Yung Cheng.
330 Figure of Ts’ao Kuo Chiu, one of the Immortals, Famille Verte, 9Jin. Yung Cheng.
331 Ginger Jar, Famille Verte, decorated with the figures of Buddhist disciple Manjusri
riding on a Kylin, and attendants, 6Jin. Kang Hsi.
332 Rice Bowl, Coral Red, Famille Verte Panels, 7Jin. diam. Ch’ien Lung.
333 Vase, Famille Verte, club shape, decorated with the figure of Kuan Ti in coral red,
7Jin. high. Kang Hsi.
334 Saucer Dish, Famille Verte, floral decoration, 11 in. dia- Ming.
335 Ginger Jar, Famille Verte, floral decoration, Sin. high. Ming.
336 Plate, Famille Verte, Figure and Landscape, Decoration, lOin. dia. Ch’ien Lung.
337 Pair of Mirror Black Vases, beaker shape, 22in. high. Kuang Hsu.


X.OT
338 Pi-tung or Brush Holder, Famille Verte, Dragon Decoration, 4|in. high, lung Cheng
339 Ginger Jar, Famille Verte, Wooden Cover, 6in. high. Ming.
340 Pierced Box Incense Burner, Famille Verte decoration, 6in. high. Ch’ien Lung.
341 Pair of Figures of the Twin Genii of Union and Harmony, each holding a flower
pot and Lotus. Famille Verte, 1 in. high. Yung Cheng.
342 Figure of Shou Lao, Famille Verte, 13in. high, decorated with emblem of longevity.
Yung Cheng.
The worship of longevity and the pursuit of the elixir of life were the prominent
features of the Taoist cult, and the foremost deity is Shou Lao, God of Longevity, who
lives on Mount Peng Lai in the Isles of the Blest, surrounded by those who have discovered
the elixir and attained immortality.
343 Figure of Kuan Ti, God of Literature, Famille Verte, 9in. high. Yung Cheng.
344 Figure of Lan Tsae-ho, one of the Immortals, Famille Verte, 9|in. Yung Cheng.
343 2 Small Plates, Famille Verte, floral decoration. Yung Cheng.
346 Pair of Kylins, Famille Verte, with holders for joss sticks, Yung Cheng.
347 Vase, Famille Verte, with four panels of landscape and floral decoration, Sin.
Yung Cheng.
348 Figure of Chan Kuo Lao, one of the Immortals, Famille Verte. Yung Cheng.
349 Ginger Jar, Famille Verte, floral decoration, and panels with the “Shou” emblem
of Longevity, Sin. Yung Cheng.
350 Figure of Pu-tai Ho-shang, Famille Verte, decorated with flowers and butterflies.
1 Ch’ien Lung.
Ho Shang is next in popularity to Kuan Yin. He was a jolly monk with
a bag full of precious things and is worshipped as the God of contentment,
(see illustration)
351 Crackle Vase, Famille Verte, decorated with figures of Immortals, I2in. Kang Hsi.


LOT
352 Vase, Famille Verte, decorated with frogs, butterflies and flowers in overglaze
enamels, Kang Hsi.
353 Saucer Dish, Famille Verte, dragon decoration. Kang Hsi.
354 Figure of Pu-tai Ho-shang, Famille Verte. Kang Hsi.
355 Figure of Kuan Yin, Famille Verte. Three colour, Bin. Kang Hsi.
356 Brush Holder, Famille Verte decorated with figure of Flower Fairy, Hua Hsien,
and her attendants, siin. Kang Hsi.
357 Pair of Small Bowls, Famille Verte, decorated with “Precious Things.” Tao Kuang.
358 Small Famille Verte Vase. Tao Kuang.
359 Figure of Tnng-fang So (Chinese Poet), Famille Verte, decorated with emblems of
longevity and happiness. 19in. Ch’ien Lung.
Who stole the peaches of Hsi Wang Mu, and acquired thereby a longevity
of 9000 years. (See block on cover.)
360 Saucer Dish, Famille Verte, floral decoration. Yung Cheng.
361 Beaker Shape Vase, Famille Verte, decorated with figures of Immortals, I4in. high.
Yung Cheng.
362 6 Saucer Dishes, Floral decoration in Famille Verte. Tao Kuang.
363 Square Shape Brush Holder, Figure and Flower decoration, sfin. Tao Kuang.
364 Plaque, Famille Verte, figure decoration, 16in. dia. Tao Kuang.
365 Two Saucer Plates, Famille Verte, Tao Kuang.
366 Vase, Bamboo shape, embossed floral decoration on yellow ground, Tao
Kuang.
•
367 Vase, Buff Crackle Glaze with dragon and lotus decoration, Jui, Key and Diaper
pattern designs, green, pink and Aubergine colours, 24in. Chia Ch’ing.
368 Wall Vase, Famille Verte, Two figures and floral decoration, 6Jin. Chia Ch’ing.


LOT
369 Figure of Kuan Yin, Famille Verte, three colour, Kang Hsi.
370 Eggshell Lantern Globe, Famille Verte, Figure decoration. 7Jin. dia. Tao Kuang.
371 6 Specimen Cups, green enamel interior. Tao Kuang.
372 Pair of Vases, Coral ground with Famille Verte panels, figures and landscape
decoration, high. Tao Kuang.
373 Bowl, decorated in Famille Verte, with figures and floral interior. Tao Kuang.
374 Small Mirror Black Vase, Yung Cheng.
375 Bottle Shape Vase, Famille Verte, Elephant head handles, floral decoration, with
numerous emblems of long life and happiness, 14in. high. Tao Kuang.
376 Bowl, Famille Verte, floral decoration, sin dia. Tao Kuang.
377 Set of Fine Bowls, Famille Verte, Size 3in. to sin. Landscape decoration.
Tao Kuang.
378 Small Ginger Jar, Famille Verte, decorated with “Ho Ho Bird” and flowers, 4in.
Tao Kuang.
379 Plate, Famille Verte, figure decoration, four panels of emblems, lOin. Tao Kuang.
380 Vase, Bottle Shape, Famille Verte, figure and landscape decoration, Bin. Tao Kuang.
381 Brush and Paint Tray, Famille Verte decoration. Ch’ien Lung.
382 Figure of Kuan Yin, the Maternal, Famille Verte. The Child is holding a Jui
Sceptre in one hand, and a peach emblem of long life in the other. Sin.
Chia Ch’ing.
383 Wine Ewer, Famille Verte, decorated with four panels of figures and landscape,
Ch’ien Lung.
384 Pair of Saucer Dishes, Famille Verte, Celadon ground, decorated with quail
and lotus flower. Ch’ien Lung.


LOT
385 Vase, Famille Verte, decorated with figures of the Eight Taoist Immortals. lOin.
Ch’ien Lung.
386 Dish, Famille Verte, decorated with flowers and butterflies, 9£in. Yung Cheng.
387 Pair of Plates, floral decoration, BJin. dia. Yung Cheng.
388 Bowl, Famille Verte, decorated with Figure of Immortals. Jin. dia. Yung Cheng.
389 Vase, Club shape, Famille Verte, floral decoration in panels, 1 Jin. Yung Cheng.
390 Bottle Shape Vase, Coral panels of figures and floral decoration, 11 £in. Kuang Hsu.
391 Small Globular Vase, Famille Verte, floral and squirrel decoration, 2Jin. high.
Kuang Hsu.
392 Pair Square Vases, green glaze, prunus blossom decoration, 20in. high. Kuang Hsu.
393 Pair Square Vases, yellow glaze, with green and aubergine, prunus decoration, 20in.
high. Kuang Hsu.
394 Large Beaker Vase, Apple green ground, decorated with prunus blossom and birds.
30in. high. Kuang Hsu.
395 Dish, Famille Verte, decorated with birds and prunus blossom, BJin. dia. Kuang Hsu
396 Plate, Famille Verte, Floral decoration. Sin. dia. Kuang Hsu.
397 Brush Holder, “Hundred Scholars” decoration. Tao Kuang.
398 Saucer Dish, Famille Verte. figure decoration. Kuang Hsu.
399 10 Coloured Wine Cups. Tao Kuang.


Lots 161 148 and 167 411, 41 7.
JASPER JADE AGATE


Lots 628 649 642 657 636 648
SNUFF BOTTLES. TRINKET BOXES AND BRONZE INCENSE BURNERS.


AGATE AND CARNELIAN.
The Chinese have for ages worked these stones into most elaborate and delicate 1
forms an prized it as one of the choicest products of the mineral kingdom. Carnelian
is nothing more than a variety of Chalcedony characterised by its translucency. It was
chosen by the Greeks and Romans for Cameos and intaglios on account of their
beautiful colour and hardness. One of the most famous of these stones represents
the birthday festival of Dionysious, and was once, it is said, possessed by Michael Angelo.
LOT
400 Carved Agate Kylin, 3£in high, 4in. long. Ch’ien Lung.
401 Carved Red Carnelian Goat, 2in x lin.
402 Red Agate Goat and Kid.
403 Red and Green Agate Magpie, Emblem of Happiness.
404 Pair of Carnelian Birds.
405 Agate Water Well, with carved leaves and fruit, 3Jin. long. Ch’ien Lung.
406 Olive Green Agate Parrot, Sin. long. Ch’ien Lung.
407 Grey Agate Covered Basket, with four rings carved from one piece, 4in. high.
Ch’ien Lung.
408 Agate Figures of Ho Seen Kn and Attendant, 7in. high. Ch’Sen Lung.
409 Covered Agate Tripod Incense Burner, with Kylin handles, fitted with rings, the
lid surmounted with the Dog of Fo, 6in. high. Ch’ien Lung.
410 Agate Figure of Kuan Yin, 6|in high, stand inlaid with silver. Ch’ien Lung.
411 Covered Agate Vase, with ring handles, lOin. x 6iin. Ch’ien Lung.
A magnificent specimen. (See illustration).
412 Agate Junk, with figures of men, 3in. long. Ch’ien Lung.
413 Covered Agate Vase, with ring handles. Sin. high, fitted with special hanging
frame of blackwood. Ch’ien Lung.


LOT
414 Agate Vase, with ring handles, 7|in. high, fitted with cherrywood hanging
frame. Ch’ien Lung.
415 Red and Grey Agate Bird, 6£in. long (1 foot repaired), Ch’ien Lung.
416 Agate Incense Burner. Ch’ien Lung.
417 Agate Jnnk, figures of men. Ch’ien Lung.
418 Red Agate Cat with Bird.
419 Black Agate Dog,of Fo,
Said to ward oft evil spirits.
420 Carved Agate Lion.
421 Red Agate Dog.
422 Cornelian Necklet, with 49 beads, including 3 Jade beads.
423 Red Carnelian Necklet, with 96 beads.
424 Red Agate Bird.
425 Mandarin Buckle, Red Carnelian on brass.
426 Red and Green Agate Horse.
427 Red Agate Dog of Fo.
428 Red Agate Bird.
Emblem of riches and fame.
429 Small Red and Grey Agate Vase with Rat.
430 Red and Grey Agate Dog.
431 Grey Agate Pony,
432 Grey Agate Hare.
The emblem of the moon.
433 Red Agate Bird.
434 Red Agate Bird and Dog of Fo.
435 Red Carnelian Bird.
436 Grey Agate Bird.


BLUE AND WHITE.
The reign of Kang Hsi is more famous perhaps for its blue and white than for any
other kind of porcelain produced during the sixty years it lasted. A specimen of blue and
white to be considered of the finest quality should possess five points—the blue should be
of the finest colour, the white of the purest while, the drawing perfectly clean and fine
in outline and shading, the shape elegant in form, and the glaze brilliant and uninjured.
The most beautiful and valuable specimens of this class are the hawthorn ginger
jars, decorated with risiifg and falling sprays of prunus blossom reserved in white on
a marble blue ground. One of these vases was recently sold in England for £5,900.
Many attempts have been made to imitate this class of porcelain, but no genuine
connoisseur can ever be deceived in a piece of good quality. There can be no doubt
that time has done something for the pieces of the 17th century, and to the experts
their counterfeits nev’er look the age ascribed to them. Blue and white has this advan-
tage over other kinds of porcelain that the eye does not need a special training to ap-
preciate its beauties, which are apparent to everyone.
These charming jars originally intended to hold New Year’s gifts of fragrant tea,
are painted with a floral symbolical design appropriate to the season. The prunus
flowers are bursting forth in the warmth of returning spring while the winter’s ice seen
through their meshes is just melting.
LOT
437 Ginger Jar, Blue and White, Hawthorn pattern, white flowers on a blue
ground, 7in. Ch’ien Lung.
438 Bowl, Blue and White, figure decoration with dragon on inside. Ch’ien Lung.
439 Brush Holder, Blue and White, dragon decoration, 4Jin. Ch’ien Lung.
440 Ginger Jar, Blue and White, unicorn and deer decoration, 9Jin. Ch’ien Lung.
441 Small Vase, Light Blue Stippled Glaze, sJin. Ch’ien Lung.
442 Vase, Blue and White with overglaze decoration, clobbered, in green and
aubergine, 18Jin. high. Ch’ien Lung.


LOT
443 Blue and White Vase, height 7in. Ch’ien Lung.
444 Small Ginger Jar, Blue and White decoration, with the “Shou” emblem of long
life, 'Ch’ien Lung.
445 Pair of Vases, square shape, Mazarin Blue ground, four panels decorated with
Hawthorn, Lotus and Birds, 16in. Ch’ien Lung.
446 Dish, Blue and White, dragon decoration, dia. Yung Cheng.
447 Small Tazza Shape Vase, Blue and White, Floral decoration, Yung Cheng.
448 Saucer Dish, Blue and White, lligure and landscape decoration, 6in. Yung Cheng.
449 Cup, Blue and White, Ho Ho Bird decoration. Yung Cheng.
450 Ginger Jar, Blue and White floral decoration, 4§in. high. Kang Hsi.
45 1 Rouge Pot, Blue and White dragon decoration, 4in. dia, Kang Hsi.
452 Vase, bottle shape. Blue and White floral decoration, 7in. high. Yung Cheng.
453 Ginger Jar, Blue and White Hawthorn decoration, sin. high. Kang Hsi.
454 Ginger Jar, fluted, panels of Blue and White, with emblems, s£ini high.
Kang Hsi.
455 Vase, Blue and White, bottle shape, dragon decoration. 7in. high. Kang Hsi.
456 Vase, Blue and White, bottle shape, floral decoration, 7Jin. high. Yung Cheng.
457 Pair of Vases, Blue and White, hexagonal shape, with blackwood caps, 9in. high.
Yung Cheng.
458 Vase, Figure Decoration, blue and white, lOin. high. Kang Hsi.
459 Blue and White Jar, (igu re decoration, 7in. high. Yung Cheng.
460 Rice Bowl, Blue and White, dragon and Jui head decoration, 7in. dia. Kang Hsi.
461 Figure of Kuan Yin of the Grotto, Blue and White, Isiin. high. Kang Hsi.


LOT
462 Powder Blue Vase, gold decoration, hexagonal shape, ISfin. high. Yung Cheng.
463 Covered Cup, Blue and White floral decoration, Yung Cheng.
464 Vase, Blue and White, Birds and floral decoration. Sin. Yung Cheng.
465 Bowl, Blue and White, Emblematic decoration. Yung Cheng.
466 Narghili Water-holder, Blue and White, 7in. Yung Cheng.
467 Small Bowl, Blue and White, Figure decoration. Ch’ien Lung.
468 Writer’s Water Pot, Light Blue Strippled Glaze. Ch’ien Lung.
469 Vase, Dark Blue Ground, gilt decoration, worn, 11 in. Yung Cheng.
470 Blue and White Rice Bowl, decorated with Jui head and bat emblem. Yung Cheng.
471 5 Blue and White Bowls, decorated with the 8 Immortals. Yung Cheng.
472 Blue and White Saucer, decorated with Buddhist emblems. Yung Cheng.
473 Pair Blue and White Bowls, Phoenix decoration. Yung Cheng.
474 Dish, Blue and White figure decoration, lOin. dia. Yung Cheng.
475 Saucer, Blue and White, dragon decoration, 4Jin. Yung Cheng.
476 Vase, with raised handles, Clair-de-lune glaze, s|in. Yung Cheng.
477 Ginger Jar, Blue and White, two panels with figures and floral decoration, 7^in.
Kang Hsi.
478 Blue and White Vase, with elephant head handles, 7-Jin. Yung Cheng.
479 Ginger Jar, Blue and White Lotus decoration, 9in. Yung Cheng.
480 Grey Crackle Dish, Blue decoration. Kang Hsi.
481 3 Small Bowls, decorated with the eight fabulous horses of Mu Wang. Kang Hsi.
482 Brush Holder, Blue and White, figure decoration, s|in. Kang Hsi.
A choice specimen of blue and white.


LOT
483 Framed Blue and White Plaque, decoration—a deer in a bamboo grove. 11x11 Jin.
Kang Hsi.
484 Writer’s Brush Pot, Blue and White, figure decoration, 4in. Kang Hsi.
485 Rouge Pot, Blue and White, landscape decoration, 3Jin. Kang Hsi.
486 Blue and White Jar, Bulbous shape, decorated with Mu Wang’s horses and flowers,
11 Jin. high, Blackwood stand, inlaid with silver wire. Ming.
487 Bowl, Blue and white, decorated with Ho Ho Birds, 4Jin. dia. Ming.
488 Rice Bowl, Blue and White, decorated inside and out with dragons and emblems,
Sin. dia. Kang Hsi.
489 Trumpet Shaped Vase, Blue and White, landscape decoration, 1 7in. high. Kang Hsi.
490 Vase, Blue and White, Pear Shape, decorated with Buddhist symbols, BJin. high.
Kang Hsi.
491 Pair of Square Rice Bowk, Blue and White, figure decoration, 6in. dia. Kang Hsi.
492 Vase, Blue and White, lantern shape, decorated with flowers and emblems, I3Jin.
high. Ch’ien Lung.
493 Vase, Blue and White, decorated with the fabulous horses of Mu Wang, lOin high.
Kang Hsi.
494 Teapot, Blue and White, floral decoration, 4Jin. high. Yung Cheng.
495 Vase, Blue and White, bottle shape. Hawthorn decoration, 7in. high. Kang Hsi.
496 Vase, Blue and White, Beaker shape, with figures and floral decoration. Kang Hsi.
A fine specimen.
497 Small Vase, Blue and White, emblematic decoration, sin. Kang Hsi.
498 Framed Plaque, Blue and White, landscape decoration, 7Jin. dia. Kang Hsi.
499 Blue Enamel Vase, decorated with Prunus and Lotus blossom, and two panels
of landscape, 17in high. Ch’ien Lung.


LOT
500 Ginger Jar, Blue and White, dragon decoration, BJin. Kang Hsi.
501 Vase, Dark Blue Ground with gilt decoration, BJin. Kang Hsi.
502 Gourd Shape Vase, Blue and White, figure decoration. Kang Hsi.
503 Small Vase, Beaker shape, blue ground, with gilt decoration, 7in. Chia Ch’ing.
504 Pair Small Covered Bowls, Blue and White, decorated with long life emblems
in blue enamel. Chia Ch’ing.
505 Vase, Bottle shape, Blue and White, floral decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
506 Jug, Blue and White, floral decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
507 Pair of Square Shaped Vases, Blue and White, dragon and floral decoration, 1 8Jin.
Chia Ch’ing.
508 Small Beaker Vase, Dark Blue glaze, gilt decoration, 7Jin. Chia Ch’ing.
509 Vase, Powder Blue, with 8 panels in Famille Verte, depicting figures of the Immor-
tals. 13in. Chia Ch’ing.
510 Vase, Blue and White, bottle shape, floral decoration, 12in. Ch’ien Lung.
511 Pair of Vases, Blue and White, dragon decoration. 18 Jin. Chia Ch’ing.
512 Vase, Turquoise Blue glaze, Bin. Chia Ch’ing.
513 Bowl, Dark Blue glaze, 7Jin. dia. Chia Ch’ing.
514 Four Blue and White Saucers, Emblematic design. Chia Ch’ing.
515 10 Blue and White Saucers, “Shou” Emblematic decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
516 Pair Blue and White Saucers, Vase with flowers decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
517 Pair Blue and White Saucers, Emblematic design, Chia Ch’ing.
518 Dish, Blue and White, decorated with fish in dark red, lOin dia. Chia Ch’ing.


LOT
519 Blue and White Ginger Jar, floral decoration, BJin. high. Yung Cheng.
f
520 Blue and White Vase, landscape and figure decorated, BJin. high. Kang Hsi.
521 Ginger Jar, Blue and White, fluted design, with panels of emblems. Sin. high.
Chia Ch’ing.
522 Blue and White Jardieniere, Hawthorn pattern, with panels of emblems, 9in.
dia. Ch’ien Lung.
523 Blue and White Vase, figure decoration, lOin. high. Yung Cheng.
524 Ginger Jar, Blue and White, decorated with the fabulous horses of Mu Wang, 11 in.
high. Yung Cheng.
525 Rice Bowl, Blue and White, dragon decoration. Yung Cheng.
526 Ginger Jar, with original cap, Blue and White, decorated with emblems, sin.
Chia Ch’ing.
527 Cup, Blue and White, with a figure of Shou Lao inside. Chia Ch’ing.
528 Dish, Rich Dark Blue glaze, 1 3in dia. Chia Ch’ing.
529 Blue and White Bowl, Phoenix and bamboo decoration. Tao Kuang.,
530 Incense Burner, Blue and White, dragon and tortoise design. Tao Kuang.
531 Blue and White Plate, floral decoration. Tao Kuang.
532 Peacock Blue Crackle Vue.. Tao Kuang.
533 Blue and White Saucer, Octagon Shape, dragon decoration. Tao Kuang.
534 Small Plate, Blue and White, dragon decoration, 4Jin. Tao Kuang.
535 Blue and White Vase, Octagonal shape, floral decoration, 1 Sin. high. Yung Cheng.
536 Bowl, Powder Blue with embossed and floral decoration.
537 Willow Pattern Dish, Blue and White, 12in. x 15Jin. Old Staffordshire.


Lot 704.—INCENSE BURNER.


Lots 711 678 712 706
BRONZE VASE AND INCENSK BURNERS.


LOT
538 Conical Jar with Cover, Powder Blue glaze, 17in. high, with carved stand. Kuang
Hsu.
339 Pair Small Blue and White Plates, decorated with emblems of happy Omen.
Kuang Hsu.
540 Pair Small Blue and White Plates, dragon decoration. Kuang Hsu.
541 Rice Bowl, Blue and White, dragon decoration. Kuang Hsu.
542 Pair of Plates, Blue and White, floral decoration, 9£in. dia. Kuang Hsu.
543 Painter’s Rouge Pot, Blue and White, Imperial five claw dragon decoration.
Kuang Hsu.
544 Bottle Shape Vase, Peacock Blue Crackle, 11 in. Kuang Hsu.
545 Saucer Dish, butterfly decoration. Kang Hsi.
545 a Ginger Jar, Blue and White Hawthorn pattern, decorated with panels of emblems,
7in. high. Kang Hsi.
AMBER, AMETHYST, AND LAPIS LAZULI.
AMBER.
This is a fossilised gum from pine trees and is found around the Baltic, in Burma,
Yunnan, Korea and Japan. The Chinese call it “tiger’s soul,” as they believe that
when a tiger dies his spirit becomes amber. The Ancients valued Amber greatly. The
Greeks very early received from the Phoenicians chains made of Amber both for the
neck and arms.
According to the legend, the sisters of Phaeton, mourning and weeping at his
unhappy end, attracted the pity of the Gods and their tears still flowing on became
Amber.
AMETHYST.
Amethyst is a variety of Quartz greatly sought after by the Chinese, in which
they carve into most elaborate ornaments. The word is oriental in origin, meaning “to
intoxicate”—whence the old notion that this stone was an antidote to drink, a charm
against intoxication.


LAPIS LAZULI.
This lovely deep blue stone was a great favourite in the old days in Egypt. The
Chinesle also have always been fond of it, and call it the blue gold stone, because often
in the blue are flakes of iron pyrites that look like gold. In Italy it is a favourite stone
for ornamenting churches. In the Zarkso Palace, St. Petersburg, there is an apartment
called Catherine ll.’s Chamber, formed entirely of Lapis and Amber. Marco Polo, in
his travels to the Princes of Tartary, 1271, spoke of its great value and beauty.
LOT
546 Amethyst Pendant —Carved Mouse and Nut.
547 Amethyst Pendant—Carved Pear and leaves.
548 Amethyst Plum Shaped Pendant.
Emblem of long life.
549 Amethyst Necklet of 73 beads.
550 Rosary of Amber and Amethyst Beads, with pendant.
551 Rosary of Amber and Crystal Beads, with Jade Beads and Pendant, composed of
108 Amber, divided by 3 large green Jade beads, and 3 strings of pink crystal
beads, 10 in each.
552 Amber Necklet, with 4 large Green Jade Beads and Jade Pendant.
553 Lapis Lazuli Necklet of 91 beads.
554 Carved Amethyst Eagle, Ch’ien Lung.
555 Amethyst Pendant, carved dragon design.
556 Carved Block of Amethyst, with a snake entwined, 2fin. high. Ch’ien Lung.
557 2 Amethyst Pendants.
558 Amethyst Pear Shaped Pendant.
Emblem of longevity.
559 Amethyst Pendant, carved peach.


FAMILLE ROSE.
The brilliant green which predominated in the polychrome decoration of the
reign of Kang Hsi, and earned for it the name of famille verte are now supplanted by
rose reds of crimson and pink shades. This new style of decoration is known as the
famille rose.
No class shows a greater variety of decoration than the famille rose. From
the boldly drawn designs of the earlier pieces it ranges to the miniature painting to
he found on the egg-shell dishes and plates of the latter years of Ch’ing Lung. It is
the opinion of many excellent judges that in time the famille rose will become the most
valuable of all descriptions of porcelain.
LOT
560 Pair of Figures—Ho Seen Ku and Chang Kuo Lao, two of the eight Immortals.
Famille Rose, 13Jin. high, repaired. Yung Cheng.
561 Tea Pot, Famille Rose, figure decoration, 3Jin. high. Tao Kuang.
562 Plate, Famille Rose, decorated with figures of Immortals. Tao Kuang.
563 Pair of Square Vases, Famille Rose, panels decorated with prunus and lotus, 11 in.
high. Tao Kuang.
564 Pair of Bowls, Tazza shape, pink glaze. Chia Ch’ing.
565 Bottle Shape Vase, Red ground, dragon decoration in blue, 11 Jin. Chia Ch’ing.
566 The Eight Immortals, set of 8 figures, Famille Rose, 13Jin. high. Yung Cheng.
Several figures have been repaired.
567 Plates, Famille Rose, Floral decoration, 9in. dia. Chia Ch’ing.
568 Pair Small Saucers, Famille Rose, Chia Ch’ing.
569 Lamp Globe on Stand, Famille Rose panels on coral red ground, decoration,
children playing, 11 in. Chia Ch’ing.
570 Square Famille Rose Vase, decorated with figures of Immortals and Chinese
verse, 9in. Ch’ien Lung.


LOT
571 4 Small Plates, Famille Rose, floral decoration. Qua Ch’ing.
572 Vase, Bottle shape. Pale Blue Stippled Glaze, with four panels of flowers in coral
red and green enamel, 18in. Ch’ien Lung.
573 Vase, Beaker shape, Famille Rose, decoration on white ground, figures, landscape
and floral, in coral red, blue and green, 23Jin. Ch’ien Lung.
574 Vase, Bottle shape, Famille Rose, Floral decoration, 12in. Ch’ien Lung.
575 Pair of Rice Bowls, Famille Rose, floral decoration, siin. dia. Tao Kuang.
576 Vase, Famille Rose, bottle shape, with figures of Immortals paying court to Shou
Lao, the God of Longevity, Ch'ien Lung.
577 Figure of Kuau Yin, Famille Rose, Bin. high. Ch’ien Lung.
578 Vase, Famille Rose, decorated with figures of the Immortals, 1 bin. high. Ch’ien Lung
579 Rice Bowls, Famille Rose, figure and floral decoration, dia. Ch’ien Lung.
580 Plate, Famille Rose, figure decoration, 9|in. dia. Tao Kuang.
581 Saucer Dish, Famille Rose, floral decoration with butterflies, lOin. dia. Yung Cheng-
-582 Rice Bowl, Famille Rose, floral decoration, 7in. diam. Yung Cheng.
583 Covered Dish, Famille Rose, figure and verse decoration, 11 in. dia. Chia Ch’ing-
-584 Fluted Tea Pot, Famille Rose, figure and verse decoration, 4in. high. Tao Kuang-
-585 Covered Jar, Famille Rose, floral decoration, Bfin. high. Yung Cheng.
586 Pair Framed Tiles, Famille Rose, figure decoration, 7in. x sin. Ch’ien Lung.
587 Set of Seven Sweet-meat Trays, Famille Rose, figure decoration. Ch’ien Lung.
588 Vase, coral ground, with heart shape panels of figures, 9Jin. Ch’ien Lung.
589 4 Rice Bowls, decorated in coral red, dragon and Ho Ho bird design. Yung Cheng-
-590 Porcelain Incense Burner, with pierced sides, Yung Cheng.
591 Pi-tung, or Brush Holder, Famille Rose decoration. Yung Cheng.


LOT
592 Plate, coral red, dragon decoration, lOin. dia. Yung Cheng.
593 Small Vase, coral red, bamboo decoration in gold, lOin. high. Ch’ien Lung.
594 Famille Rose Plate, floral decoration. Yung Cheng.
595 Pair Bowk, dragon and Ho Ho Bird decoration in coral red. Yung Cheng.
596 Plate, Famille Rose, butterflies and flower decoration, 9in. dia. Chia Ch’ing.
597 Vase, Beaker Shape, Famille Rose, five colours, with three panels depicting Taoist
Immortals and floral decoration, 16in. Yung Cheng.
598 Porcelain Plaque, Famille Rose, representing Hsi Wang Mu, Queen Mother of the
West, receiving the Emperor Mu Wang, on a visit to her palace. The peach tree
of longevity is seen growing in her garden. 11 in. Yung Cheng.
599 Vase, Club shape, landscape decoration in reddish brown glaze, BJin. Yung Cheng.
600 Famille Rose Perfume Bottle. Kang Hsi.
601 Five Cups, Famille Rose, floral decoration, in a fitted box. Tao Kuang.
602 Vase, Bottle shape, Famille Rose, Prunus and bird decoration, 12in. Tao Kuang.
603 Writer’s Rouge Pot, Famille Rose decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
604 Dish, Incised pale blue ground, decorated with poppies in rose pink, 10Jin.
Chia Ch’ing.
605 Brick Red Saucer Dish, Chia Ch’ing.
606 2 Saucers, Famille Rose, decoration depicting Ho Hsien-ku, one of the Immortals.
Chia Ch’ing.
607 Pair Round Boxes, coral red, with floral panels and figure decoration on lid,
Famille Rose. Chia Ch’ing.
608 Saucer, Famille Rose, decorated with figure of Ho Seen Ku. Chia Ch’ing.
609 Saucer Plate, Famille Rose, with figure decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
610 Vase, Famille Rose, figure decoration, 9in. Chi Ch’ing.
611 Bowl, Famille Rose, oblong shape, floral decoration. Chia Ch’ing.


LOT
612 Four Small Trays, Famille Rose. Chia Ch’ing.
613 Porcelain Plaque, Blackwood frame, Famille Rose, representing Shou Lao re-
ceiving a peach from the fabulous tree which blossoms every 2000 years, and
fruits 3000 years after. The three main figures represent the Taoist triad,
Shou-hsing, Lu-hsing and Fu-hsing, the star Gods of Longevity, Preferment and
Happiness, 11 in. Ch’ien Lung.
614 Pair of Small Plates, dragon decoration, in coral red and green, 4in. Yung Cheng.
615 4 Wine Cups, Famille Rose decoration. Tao Kuang.
616 Brush and Paint Tray, Famille Rose decoration. Tao Kuang.
617 Writer’s Water Bottle, pinkish red, monochrome glaze. Tao Kuang.
618 Saucer Dish, Famille Rose, lotus decoration. Tao Kuang.
619 Two Libation Cups, Famille Rose and Yellow, dragon handle. Tao Kuang.
620 Bowl, with landscape and figure decoration in coral red. Chia Ch’ing.
620 a Carved Jar, Famille Rose, decorated with Paeonies, Bjin. high. Yung Cheng.
A magnificent specimen.
621 Wine Cup, coral red decoration, and apple green enamel inside. Chia Ch’ing.
622 Conical Shape Vase, Famille Rose, decorated with birds, flowers and butterflies,
carved wood cap and stand, 15in. Kuang Hsu.
623 Pair of Gourd Shaped Vases, decorated with dragons and emblems in green and
coral red, Kuang Hsu.
624 Framed Plaque, Famille Rose, representing Taoist Immortals, 11 x Sin. Chia Ch’ing
625 Vase, Famille Rose, floral decoration, Sin. Kuang Hsu.
626 Pair Famille Rose Vases, Rectangular shape, coral handles, figure decoration, lOin.
high. Kuang Hsu.
627 Globular Vase, Rice Crackle, with Phoenix decoration in red, blue, green and
aubergine, BJin. Yung Cheng.
The Phoenix, the mark of the Empress, is almost invariably connected
with the richest and most superb expression of Chinese ceramic art.


SNUFF BOTTLES.
The Chinese potters lavished all their skill on these dainty little objects. Not
only do they include every kind of ware, crackled, or plain, translucent or opaque, but
they illustrate in miniature every variety of decoration, monochrome, painted, carved,
moulded, incised, pierced and embossed. Probably the choicest snuff bottles were
made in the Yung Cheng & Ch’ien Lung periods; but the Chiiiese have never ceased
to delight in them and many beautiful examples were manufactured in the nineteenth
century, particularly in the Tao Kuang period.
LOT
628 Carved Agate Snuff Bottle, Jade stopper, figure decoration and engraved verse in
Chinese character. Ch’ien Lung.
629 Porcelain Snuff Bottle, Blue and White, Ch’ien Lung.
630 Snuff Bottle, Blue carved glass. Ch’ien Lung.
631 Snuff Bottle, Red and White carved glass. Ch’ien Lung.
632 Porcelain Double Snuff Bottle, coral red Dragon decoration. Ch’ien Lung.
633 Porcelain Snuff Bottle, Blue and White. Kang Hsi.
634 Porcelain Snuff Bottle, Blue and White, figure decoration. Kang Hsi.
633 Porcelain Snuff Bottle, Insect decoration. Ch’ien Lung.
636 Glass Snuff Bottle, painting of figure and landscape on the inside, silver mounted
red glass stopper. Tao Kuang.
637 Carved Amber Coloured Glass Snuff Bottle, Jade stopper. Tao Kuang.
638 Two Canton Glass Snuff Bottles, with exquisite painting on the inside.
639 Porcelain Snuff Bottles, coral red dragon decoration. Ch’ien Lung.
640 Snuff Bottle, raised design in red. Tao Kuang.
641 Porcelain Snuff Bottle, figure decoration. Tao Kuang.
642 Cloisonne Snuff Bottle, with original stopper, floral design. Kang Hsi.


LOT
643 Porcelain Snuff Bottle, figure decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
644 Carved Crystal Snuff Bottle, with exquisite painting of figures on the inside.
Ch’ien Lung.
645 Snuff Bottle, Ruby glass, Ch’ien Lung.
646 Porcelain Snuff Bottle, Amber glaze. Ch’ien Lung.
647 Double Snuff Bottle, Yellow ground, floral decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
648 Carved Jasper Snuff Bottle, coral stopper, figures and floral decoration. Ch’ien Lung
649 Porcelain Snuff Bottle, with Jade stopper, coral red floral design. Ch’ien Lung.
650 Agate Snuff Bottle, with pink crystal stopper. Ch’ien Lung.
651 Peacock Blue Enamel Snuff Bottle. Ch’ien Lung.
652 Porcelain Snuff Bottle, coral red, decoration in gold. Chia Ch’ing.
653 Porcelain Snuff Bottle, apple green, raised design. Chia Ch’ing.
654 Three Blue and White Porcelain Snuff Bottles, landscape and figure decoration.
Ch’ien Lung.
655 Porcelain Snuff Bottle, Famille Verte, figure decoration, amber top. Tao Kuang.
656 Crystal Glass Snuff Bottle, Jade top. Ch’ien Lung.
657 Glass Snuff Bottle, painting with figures of children on the inside, silver mounted
glass stopper. Tao Kuang.


Lots 410 411 408
AGATE FIGURES AND INCENSE BURNER


Lota 585 598 620a.
FAMILLE ROSE GINGER JARS AND PLAQUE.


BRASS AND BRONZE.
“A small brass mirror either flat cr concave, but always round, is very frequently
hung up on the outside of the bed-curtain, or suspended somewhere near by. Its prin-
cipal use is to counteract, prevent, or dissipate devilish or unpropitious influences. It
is supposed that evil spirits, on approaching to do harm, will be apt to see themselves
reflected in the mirror, and, becoming frightened, will take themselves away without
delay.”
Mirrors of this character were often burial gifts to members of noble families,
and were placed with them in their graves to be the means of enlightenment in the
nether world.
The Metal Mirrors, which are generally circular in form, are moulded on the back
with mythological figures, animals, birds, floral scrolls, and other ornamental designs,
executed in strong relief. Some of them have the curious property of reflecting from
their faces in the sunlight on a wall, more or less distinctly, the raised decoration on
their back.
We learn from inscriptions on early bronzes that in some cases they were pre-
sented by sons to fathers, probably on the occasion of the anniversary of birthdays, and
they were used in offering sacrifices and libations to the spirits of ancestors.
The clouds gathering before a summer thunder-shower, took on the form of a
dragon with huge head, wide-spreading feet, and elongated tail. This was the spirit
of the wind and rain, which brought productivity to their spoil. Thus the dragon was
included among the four beneficent animals—“ Unicorn, Phoenix, turtle and dragon.”
The first two were associated with coming of spring life, and the last two with fructifying
summer rains. These four animal shapes were among the first used in decoration of
bronzes, and they were intended as stimulants to good thoughts.
With these kindly creatures were associated in decoration other objects of fright-
ful mien and sinister purpose, which were meant as a warning against evil deeds. One of
these found most frequently, is the ogre “T’ao-t’-ieh,” which Hirth allows to be a Chinese
invention. It has large protruding eyes and a terrifying face, thus warning the beholder


against greed and gluttony. It is among the earliest decorative motives. Whether male-
volent or benevolent, the creatures used for decorative purposes on the earliest bronzes
are in every instance products of Chinlese imagination based up on the type of life which
prevailed in the ancient life of the country.
The patina and the hue of antique bronzes is derived from the curious metals
forming the alloy, and on those which have lain buried for centuries, additional patinas
have formed by reason of natural chemical processes in the soil.
LOT
658 Bronze Figure of a Stork, 19in. Ming.
The Stork Is one of the emblems of longevity. It is said to reach a
fabulous age, and when 600 years old to drink but no longer eat;,after 2000
years to turn black. r
659 Bronze Libation Cup. Sung.
The form of design is that of an inverted helmet, supported by three legs
representing spear heads. The whole is intended to represent military spirit
660 Bronze Figure of Lan Tsae-ho, one of the Immortals, 6iin. Ming.
661 Bronze Figure of a Buddhist Disciple, holding a teapot, 6in. Ming.
662 Bronze Mirror, Lotus decoration on back, 4Jin. dia. Ch’ien Lung.
663 Bronze Mirror, raised design of a Junk on back. 7|in. dia. Sung.
664 Lacquered Bronze Kuan Yin. . Ming.
Before Kuan Yin attained perception of the Perfect Law of Buddha, she
was a princess who sacrificed her hands and eyes to restore her father,
the King, to health. For this act of renunciation the Princess was pro*
moted to be a great Buddha with the gift of a 1000 eyes and 1000 hands
as her reward; and so in the domain of her peer she took her seat upon
the golden lily radiantly aureoled.
665 Bronze Figure of Kuan Yin, 7in. Ming.
666 Bronze Figure of Kuan Yin, 7in. Ming.
667 Pair of Bronze Dogs of Fo, with bushy manes and tufted tails, 18i x 12in. Sung.
This animal often miscalled Kylin is the habitual defender of Buddhist
altars and temples.


LOT
668 Bronze Mirror and Knife Coin, mounted on carved blackwood stand to form a
screen. Emblems of long life and happiness are engraved on mirror back.
669 Bronze Vase, Beaker shape, dragon head handles, engraved designs, Ming.
670 Bronze Vase, Engraved Elephant handles, I4in. Ming.
671 Bronze Mirror, decorated on back, with raised figures of the fabulous horses of
Mu Wang, 7Jin. dia. Ming.
672 Bronze Vase, Beaker Shape, engraved designs, 11 iin. Ming.
673 Bronze Vase, Bottle shape, elephant head handles, with rings, 9in. Sung,
674 Lacquered Bronze Vase, beaker shape, square base, Ming.
673 Bronze Sacrificial Bowl, with elephant head handles and raised archaic designs and
key pattern, 6in. high, Sin. dia. Sung.
676 Bronze Vase, bottle shape, elephant head handles, 6Jin. Ming.
677 Pair Bronze Vases, beaker shape, sin. Ming.
678 Trumpet Shaped Bronze Vase, with vertical dentated ridges and archaic scroll
ornament, 12in. high. Sung.
(See illustration).
679 Bronze Vase, elephant head handles with rings, Min. Ming.
680 Pair Bronze Vases, bottle shape, with elephant head and ring handles, Sung.
681 Pair Bronze Vases, Beaker shape, siin. Ming.
682 Bronze Figure of Shou Lao, Mounted on a Deer, carrying a branch of the fabulous
peach tree (emblem of longevity). Min. high. Ming (probably Japanese).
683 6 Brass Finger Bowls, hand engraved.
684 Bronze Tripod Incense Burner, kylin legs, Imperial five-claw dragon handles, side
decorated with archaic designs, pierced lid, surmounted by a kylin, 24in. x 15in.
Sung.


LOT
683 Chinese Knife Money and “Cash,” 17 pieces. From B.C. 300.
686 Four Bronze Seals.
687 Small Bronze Mirror, 2f in. in dia. Sung.
688 Bronze Leaf Shaped Ladle, 4in. Ming.
689 Bornze Buddhist Deity on a Kylin. Sung.
A Kylin was said to establish great benevolence of disposition towards
other living animals.
690 Pair of Bronze Kylins, 5 in. Ming.
691 Bronze Temple Gong, bowl shape, with Chinese inscription on the rim. Probably
Ming period, mounted on a modern red lacquer stand.
692 Bronze Buddist Temple, with numerous figures of men, birds and animals, 12in.
Sung.
Probably Mount Kw’en Lun, where the Goddess Si Wang Mu dwelt sur-
rounded by genii; at the foot of the mountain, lies the Lake of Gems, and
those who drink of its waters escape death.
693 Bronze Joss Stick Holder, with trigram design, 4|in.
694 Bronze Incense Burner, with embossed designs and silver inlaid key pattern or
rim. 6in dia. Ming.
695 Bronze Incense Burner, the figure of T’ao-t-ieh the ogre who warns the beholder
against greed and gluttony, 16£in x 15in. Ming.
696 Bronze Incense Burner, with dragon handles and dragon lid, 6Jin. Ming.
697 Bronze Incense Burner, Lotus shape, Ming.
698 Bronze Tripod Incense Burner, Kylin legs and cap, 11 in. Sung.
699 Bronze Kylin, with foot resting on a ball, 10-Jin high. Ming.
A Kylin denotes good government which it should be the object of all
officials to promote.
700 Bronze Buddha, Black Lacquer and gilt decoration, 4|in. Ming.
701 Bronze Figure, Ming Dynasty, Kuan Ti, the God of War.
The original of this god was one Kuan Yu, a hero who distinguished
himself in the Civil wars of the third century. He was deified more than
a thousand years ago, and is still worshipped.


LOT
702 Bronze Figure, Vajrapani, one of the Gods of the four quarters of the Heavens,
who are guardians of Buddha. Ming.
703 Bronze Mandarin, decorated in colors. Ming.
704 Bronze Tripod Incense Burner, Elephant head handles and feet, hand cut floral de-
signs. 16in. Sung.
(See Illustration).
705 Small Gilt Bronze Buddha.
706 Small Bronze Incense Burner, on four legs, ornamented with emblems, Blackwood
cover and stand, 4£in. high. Ming.
707 Bronze Figure, Wen Ch’ang, God of Literature. Ming.
A rare specimen with portion of mandarin’s dress in colours.
708 Gilt Bronze Buddha, seated on a lotus flower, Tibetan.
709 Bronze Figure of a Crab, siin. Ming.
The Chinese liken a crab to the crooked ways of those who covet money.
710 Small Bronze Incense Burner, on four legs, carved blackwood lid and stand, s^in.
high. Ming.
711 Lacquered Tripod Bronze Incense Burner, with carved blackwood lid and stand,
6iin. dia. Ming.
(See illustration).
712 Bronze Incense Burner, on four legs, oblong shape. Archaic design on sides,
blackwood lid with coral figure handles, 4in. x siin. x 11 Jin. high. Ming.
(See illustration).
713 Gilt Bronze Figure of Buddha, 23in. high. Ming.
714 Bronze Basket Shape Incense Burner, 2\ x 5 Jin. Ming
713 Bronze Tripod Incense Burner, handle and tripod in the design of elephant trunks,
hand cut scroll decoration and pierced lid, 16in. Ming.
716 Pair of Bronze Incense Burners, two of the Immortals seated on oxen, siin x sin.
Yung Cheng.
717 Lacquered Bronze Incense Burner, with carved blackwood lid and stand, Sin. dia.
Ming.


IX)T
718 Pair Brass Vases, embossed with dragons.
719 Pair of Brass Stirrups, with hand carved designs.
720 Pair of Brass Stirrups, with hand carved designs.
721 1 Brass and Silver Alloy Stirrup, with hand carved dragon’s head and inlaid designs
in copper.
722 1 Brass and Silver Alloy Stirrup, with hand carved dragon’s head, and inlaid
copper designs.
723 Pair of Brass Stirrups, with hand carved dragon’s head ornamentation.
724 Pair of Brass Stirrups, with hand carved designs.
725 Engraved Brass Bell Gong.
726 Brass Tea Pot, engraved floral designs, 9in. Old Japanese.
727 Pair of Heavy Brass Pillar Candlesticks, with dragon decoration. I3in. high.
728 Pair of Brass Pillar Candlesticks, 1 Oin. high.
EMBROIDERIES.
The dragon is extensively used as a decorative ornament in China, but while four
claws suffice for the general population, five claws are placed on all vestments, utensils,
etc., used in the court. The owner of a coat when not a royal prince, would have the
end of the sleeve cut so that when obeisance is made before the Emperor it falls over the
hand in the same way that a trouser leg would; this action denotes that the wearer is
but a four-footed beast as compared with the Emperor.
The following, taken from Gutzlaff’s “Sketch of Chinese History.” vol I, p. 136,
explains the meaning of the twelvfe symbols that appear on the robes of State. “The Em-
peror Shun, considering his ministers as his feet and hands, was particularly anxious that
the executors of his commands should be trustworthy and zealous. To remind them
of their duty he pointed out to them the symbols in their robes of State. Some


had a sun, moon, and stars embroidered on them. This, he said, points out the know-
ledge of which we ought to be possessed, in order to rule well. The mountains indicate
the constancy and firmness of which we stand in need, the dragon denotes, that we
ought to use every means to inspire the people with virtue; the beauty and variety of the
colors of the pheasant remind us of the good example we ought to give by practising the
various virtues. In the upper robe, we behold six different kinds of embroidery, which
are to remind us of the virtues to be engraved on our breast. The vase, which we are
used to see in the hall of the ancestors, is a symbol of obedience and of piety; the
aquatic herb is a symbol of purity and disinterestedness; the fire, of zeal and love for
virtue; the rice, of the plenty which we ought to procure for the people; the hatchet is
a symbol of justice in the punishment of vice; and the dresses, Foo and Fuh, are symbols
of the discernment which we ought to have of good and evil.”
X.OT
729 Blue Silk Square, with five claw dragon in gold thread, 19§in. Kang Hsi.
730 Blue Silk Drape, with hand embroidered designs in gold thread, 4ft. 6in.
731 Embroidered Silk Drape, Red ground with black border, figures and floral decora-
tion, 22in. x 32in. Ch’ien Lung.
732 Red Embroidered Silk Square with Black Border, floral design, 21 in.
733 Red Embroidered Silk Square, Ho Ho bird and floral design, 18in. Ch’ien Lung.
734 Blue Silk Square, with five claw dragon centre in gold thread, 21£in. Kang Hsi.
735 Brown Embroidered Silk Square, with Blue Border, 20in. Kang Hsi.
736 Mauve Embroidered Silk Drape, Stalks and prunus design, 4 feet long.
737 Blue and Gold Embroidered Square, Ho Ho bird centre, Min. Ch’ien Lung.
738 Brown Silk Embroidered Table Square, 23in.
739 Pair of Silk Embroidered Squares on Black ground, floral design, 13in.
740 Set of Four Blue and Gold Drapes, five claw dragon design, 2ft. 6in x Min.
Kang Hsi.


LOT
741 Two Blue Silk Runners, with emblems in gold thread, 2ft. 3Jin. x lOin.
742 Pair of Brown Silk Cushion Covers, with dragon design in gold thread.
743 Pair of Richly Embroidered Silk Squares, with Ho Ho bird centre, Isin..
Ch’ien Lung.
744 Pair Golden Green Silk Squares, Min.
743 Richly Embroidered Orange Silk Two Piece Skirt, with gold thread border.
746 Red Silk Drape, with hand embroidered floral decoration, 2ft. 3in. x Ift. 10in.
Ch’ien Lung.
747 Red Silk Drape, with hand embroidered floral design, 21 in x 20in. Ch’ien Lung.
748 Richly Embroidered Silk Square, 17in. Ch’ien Lung.
749 Yellow Silk Cushion Cover, hand embroidered.
750 Hand Embroidered Silk Drape, 36in. x 3yds.
751 Pink Silk Drape, Richly hand embroidered, with fringe, 48in x 96in.
752 Cream Silk Embroidered Square, with tassels, 24in.
753 Olive Green Hand Embroidered Silk Drape, floral designs, 60in.
754 Pair of Richly Embroidered Pink Silk Cushion Covers, with tassels, 24in x 24in.
755 Richly Embroidered White Square Silk Drape, with long fringe, 54in.
756 Red Embroidered Silk Drape, floral design, 22in. Ch’ien Lung.
757 Green Silk Embroidered Tea Cosy, five claw dragon design, B£in. diam.
758 Richly Embroidered Tea Cosy, Sin. diam. Ch’ien Lung.
759 Pink Silk Hand Embroidered Mandarin Coat
760 Richly Embroidered Two-piece Skirt.
761 Blue Silk Mandarin Coat, hand embroidered.


Lots 782 788 790 780
ENAMBLS.


Lots 805 807
SUNG POTTERY.


LOT
762 Hand Embroidered Silk Two-piece Skirt.
763 Hand Embroidered Silk Skirt
764 Hand Embroidered Lady’* Silk Coat
PAINTINGS ON SILK AND GLASS, SCREENS, ETC.
Nearly all paintings may be divided into kakemono, or hanging pictures, and
makimono, which are like Chinese manuscripts, in the form of long scrolls. There are,
besides these, the two, four, or six-fold screens, and the paintings on sliding panels.
But the great mass of pictorial art is in the form of kakemono or makimono.
Literary ideas and literary traditions play a great part in this art. And both
these types of painting have always 'been used more as we should use books than as
part of the furniture of a room. That is to say, they would be unrolled and enjoyed
for an hour or a day, and then rolled up again and put away. “A picture is a voiceless
poem, a poem is a vocal picture,” is a Chinese Proverb.
LOT
765 Landscape Painting on a Silk Roll, depicting mountains and villages in blues and
reds on a brown ground, 7ft. long and 13in. wide. Ch’ien Lung.
766 Three Kakemonos, water colours on silk roll.
767 Small Kakemona, landscape.
768 Chinese Painting on Glass, representing Europeans in the 1 8th Century costume.
769 Framed Glass Painting, “Le Tee-kwae,” one of the Immortals, 6J x 7|in. Tao Kuang
770 Framed Glass Painting, “Lan Tsae-ho,” one of the Immortals, 6} x 7|in, Tao Kuang
771 Four-fold Blackwood Screen, decorated with Prunus, Lotus, Peony, also Cranes,
Wild Geese, Cocks and Hens. Size, 4ft. 1 lin. x 5 ft. 4in. Ch’ien Lung.
The PRDNT7S Is a symbol of good fortune.
The LOTUS, purity of soul.
The PEOmr, happiness and prosperity.
The CRANES, Longevity.
The PHEASANT, official preferment.
The wILD GEESE, conjugal affection.
The COCK, the divine bird, has five excellent points He is a CIVILIAN
wearing a “Hat” (Comb), a SOLDIER, wearing spurs, a BRAVE, never
flinching In a fight, SYMPATHETIC calling his hens to share his food,
and faithful to his duty of announcing the dawn.


LOT
772 Folding Screen of Famille Rose Tiles, framed in black Lacquer, decorations repre-
sent figures of the Eight Immortals and also— l, Emperor Mu Wang, visiting
Hsi Wang Mu; 2, Tung Fang So, who stole the peaches from Hsi Wang Mu,
and attained Immortality; 3, Wen Chang, Chief Deity of Literature; 4, Wang
Tzu, meeting Fou Chiu Kung and enquiring the way to Immortality; 5, Hsi
Wang Mu, and attendants: 6, Kuan Ti (God of War), and his son Kuan Ping.
Size, 2ft. 6in x 4ft. 6in. Ch’ien Lung.
773 Folding Screen of Famille Rose Tiles, framed, decorated with figures of the Eight
Immortals and Taoist Deities, 2ft. 7in. x 4ft. Chia Ch’ing.
774 Eight Black Lacquered Panels, carved and painted to represent the visit of Em-
peror Mu Wang, to the Queen of the Genii, Hsi Wang Mu, size, Bft. x 4ft. Sin.
Ch’ien Lung.
“THE TORTOISE TERRACE.”
In the Taoist Heaven, situated among the Kwen Lun Mountains, be-
tween the Jasper Lake and the Water of Immortality, lies the palace of
Hsi Wang Mu. The splendour of its surroundings are well nigh indescrib-
able, and since the earliest days artists and scribes have vied with one
another in their attempts to render an adequate picture thereof. Its
walls are piled high in nine-fold gradations, so run the fantastic legends,
the trees within its precincts are laden with various gems; it is peopled
with genii who cultivate upon its terraces sesamun and coriander, the
seeds of which furnish food for the Taoist Votaries of Longevity and
here Hsi Wang Mu, attended by her phoenix and the fairy hand-maidens
received some thousand years before Christ, the Emperor Mu Wang of
Chou, who journeyed, drawn by his eight famous steeds, “Wherever wheel-
ruts ran and hoofs of horses trod.” It Is also alleged that about 87
the Royal Lady herself visited, on his birthday, Wu Ti of Han bearing him
as a gift on a platter of jade, seven precious peaches of longevity, which
confer immortality upon those who partake of them. The Emperor, highly
delighted wished to preserve the stones and propagate the marvellous
fruit in his realm, but the attempt proved futile. The peach-tree of the genii
which blooms once in two thousand years and fruits three thousand
years after that, did not take kindly to the soil of this terrestrial globe.
775 Kakemona, water colour on silk roll, landscape and figures, by Tao-Mong-Tiao,
Duke of Weikono, Sung Dynasty, size, 57in x 7|in.
776 2 Kakemonos, Water-colour panels on silk, mountain scenes, by Kang Tao, artist
of the province of Chekiang, 1700, size 61 in. x 7fin.
777 Kakemono—Cluster of Chrysanthemums, by Ma Tseng, artist of the province of
Chile in the time of Kang Hsi. Size, 14in x 25in.
778 Three Chinese Water Colours, on Rice Paper—The God of Waters riding on a tor-
toise and two others.


Lot 817— BUDDHIST DISCIPLE.


Lots 796 799 798
HAN AND SUNG POTTERY FIGURES.


CLOISONNÈ, CHAMPLEVÉ, AND PAINTED ENAMELS.
Enamelling has been described by enthusiastic admirers as the “master art
craft of the world.” An enamel may be best described as a vitreous glaze or combina-
tion of vitreous glazes, fused to a metallic surface. In the broadest and most universal
sense, any vitreous glaze is an enamel, whether it be applied to pottery, porcelain, or
metal, but when “enamels” are spoken of, it is generally understood to mean those
which are applied to a metal surface. This metal may be gold, silver or copper. Copper
has been most generally used in China.
Cloisonne or cell enamels are made by soldering to the metal foundation a narrow
band or ribbon of copper, silver or gold, following all the intricacies of the decoration,
so as to divide the space into as many cells or cloisons as there are colors to be filled in.
The endless patience required and the great difficulty involved in this preliminary
part of the enameller’s art can be imagined when we learn that it is not unusual to find
more than one hundred pieces of ribbon set in intricate designs in a space of one square
inch.
LOT
779 Enamel Box, floral decoration, octagon shape, 2 Jin x 1 Jin. (chipped).
Chia Ch’ing.
780 Enamel Wine Cup and Saucer, decorated with emblems of “precious things”
Ch’ien Lung.
281 Square Shape Enamel Cup and Saucer, Famille Rose figure decoration. Tao Kuang.
782 Painted Enamel Wine Pot, decorated with colours of the Famille Rose, 6£in. high.
Ch’ien Lung.
(See illustration).
783 Pair of Enamel Cups, blue ground with coral red floral decoration. Chia Ch’ing.
784 Covered Enamel Sweet-meat Dish, fitted with eight small trays in pink Canton
enamel, floral decoration and centre panel with the “Shou” emblem of long
life, 14Jin. dia. Tao Kuang.
783 Square Shape Enamel Cup and Saucer, Famille Rose floral decoration. Ch’ien Lung.
786 Covered Enamel Cup and Saucer, Famille Rose, figure and floral decoration.
Tao Kuang.
787 Pair of Painted Enamel Wine Cups and Saucers, Famille Rose floral decoration.
Tao Kuang.


LOT
788 Painted Enamel Dish, landscape decoration in Famille Verte, Sin. dia. Tao Kuang.
(
789 Painted Enamel Cup, Famille Rose, panels of figures and floral decoration. 3in. dia.
Tao Kuang.
790 Painted Enamel Tea Caddy decorated with the colours of Famille Rose. 3|in. x 3£in.
Tao Kuang.
791 Round Enamel Plaque, on a carved cherrywood stand, decorated with figure of a
Mandarin and attendants, 7Jin. dia. Ch’ien Lung.
792 Cloisonne Buckle, with Imperial dragon and bat emblems. Tao Kuang.
SUNG AND PRIMITIVE.
The antiquity of Chinese Porcelain, its variety and beauty, and the wonderful
skill of the Chinese craftsman, accumulated from the traditions of centuries, have made
the study of the potter’s art in China peculiarly absorbing and attractive. There is scope
for every taste in its inexhaustible variety. Compared with it in age, European porce-
lain is but a thing of yesterday, a mere two centuries old, and based from the first on
Chinese models. Even the so-called European style of decoration, which developed at
Meissen and Sevres, though Western in general effect, will be found on analysis to be
composed of Chinese elements. It would be useless to compare the merits of the Eastern
and Western wares.
In their admiration of antiques the Chinese yield to none, and nowhfere have
private collections been more jealously guarded and more difficult to access. Even in
the sixteenth century relatively large sums were paid for Sung porcelain, and £3O was
not too much for a “chicken wine cup,” barely a hundred years old. The ownership of
a choice antique—say, of the Sung dynasty—made the possessor a man of mark; per-
haps even a marked man if the local ruler chanced to be of a grasping nature.
The opening up of China and the increased opportunities which Europeans en-
joy, not only for studying the monuments of ancient Chinese Art, but for acquiring
examples of the early masterpieces in painting, sculpture, bronze, jade, and ceramic
wares, have given the Western student a truer insight into the greatness of the earlier
phases of Chinese Art, and have awakened a new and widespread enthusiasm for them.
In dealing with any department of Chinese art it may be remembered that
China was a mature nation long before any of the present European nations existed.
Printing originated in China 400 years before Europe. The art of China, as we see it
preserved at the present day in museums and elsewhere represents the results of a
very complete and slow-moving evolution.


Lot 841—KWAN YIN.


Lots 202 483 669
SCREEN AND FIGURES.


The productions of this period are, as might be expected, of very primitive aspect.
The pieces that survive are covered with glazes of single colours either of uniform or
mottled tint and exhibit either plain or crackled surfaces.. The colours usually met
with are white, pale purple, often splashed over with red, celadon or other greens, pale
gray blue or clair-de-lune, and deep purple or aubergine. Genuine pieces are greatly
treasured by native collectors but are not often seen in foreign collections.
LOT
793 Tea Bowl, with thick purplish black glaze, s|in. dia. Chein yeo. Sung.
The dark colour of the glaze made these bowls specially suitable for the
tea testing competitions which were In fashion in the Sung period, the
object of the contests being to see whose tea would stand the largest
number of waterings, and it was found that the least trace of the tea
was visible against the black glaze of the chein bowls.
794 Glazed Pottery Bowl, sin. dia. Yuan Dynasty.
795 Figure of Kuan Ti, God of War, three-colour, glazed pottery, 15in. high. Sung
796 Pottery Figure of a Caparisoned Horse, 6in. high. Han Dynasty.
797 Shallow Bowl of Ting-Chou Porcelain, decorated in relief, rim bound with a cop-
per collar. Sung.
798 Pottery Figure of a Loaded Camel high. Han.
(See illustration).
799 Pair of Glazed Figures of Horses, 9in. x 7 2 in. Sung.
(See illustration).
800 Pottery Figure of Le Tee-kwae, one of the Immortals, 15in. high. Early Ming.
Lao Tsze summoned him to interview in the celesital spheres—his spirit left
his body which he entrusted to the care of a disciple, who was called away,
and when the disembodied spirit returned his body was gone. Le Tee-
Kwae therefore took refuge in the body of a lame beggar in whose
shape he continued his existence.
801 Glazed Pottery Jar and Cover, Sin. high. Sung.
802 Glazed Pottery Jar and Stand, Sin. high. Sung.
803 Glazed Pottery Bowl, sin. x Sung.
804 Pottery Figure of a Mandarin Duck, glaze with three-colour glaze, lOin. x 7in.
Ming.
805 6 Pottery Figures, 3 Men and 3 Women, 7in. high. Sung.
These figures are of exceptional interest and extremely rare.
(See Illustration).


Lot
806 Square Pottery Vase, Bronze glaze, griffen handles, 13in. Sung.
807 Brush Pot, Yellow Crackled glaze, 4in. high. Sung.
808 Glazed Pottery Vase, bottle shape, with floral decorations, Bin. high. Sung.
809 Writer’s Water pot. Yellow glaze, diam. Sung.
810 Glazed Pottery Vase, with raised figure decoration, 18£in. high. Sung.
811 Rice Crackle Bowl, with incised characters on side, dia. Ming.
812 Figure of Kuan-Ti, God of War, Rare glazed figure on horseback. Sung.
813 Vase, Coffee-coloured glaze, bottle shape, 9iin. high. Sung.
814 5 Small Pottery Wine Cups, Sung.
813 2 Black Glazed Pottery Bowls, Sung.
MISCELLANEOUS
816 Figure of the Twin Genii of Union and Harmony, one with a pandora box of
blessings, three colour glaze, high. Ming.
817 Figure of a Buddhist Disciple with a dragon, bluish mottled glaze head, hand and
dragon in Biscuit, lOin. Kang Hsi.
(See illustration).
818 Vase, Bottle Shape, Mustard Crackle, II in. Chia Ch’ing.
819 Porcelain Incense Burner, Liver colour. Yung Cheng.
820 Vase, Bottle shape, Tea-dust glaze, siin. Yung. Cheng.
821 Figure of Pu-tai-ho-Shang, coffee brown glaze, 6£in. Kang Hsi.
822 Vase, Yellow ground, with emblematic peach design in coral red. Yung Cheng.
823 Figure of Kuan Ti, God of War, on biscuit, and three-colour glaze. lOin. high.
Yung Cheng.
824 Medicine Jar, Mirror Black glaze, 9£in. . Yung Cheng.
825 Vase, Bottle shape. Mustard Crackle, Biin. Ming.


LOT
826 Figure of a Soldier, Mustard Crackle glazed pottery, 11 Jin. Ming.
827 Figure of Kuan Ti, the God of War, in biscuit and three colour glaze. Ming.
828 Molded Green Saucer Dish. Yung Cheng.
829 Small Apple Green Crackle Box. Kang Hsi.
830 Vase, Apple Green Crackle, sJin., with blackwood stand and box. Kang Hsi.
831 Vase, Bottle Shape, Apple Green glaze, 9Jin. Tao Kuang.
832 Four Cups, Apple Green glaze, floral decoration, fitted with box. Tao Kuang.
833 Wall Vase, green glaze. Sin. Tao Kuang.
834 Pair Apple Green Crackle Vases, bottle shape, 7in. Tao Kuang.
835 Tea Pot, Pear Shape, mottled Apple Green Ground with raised flower decoration.
Tao Kuang.
836 BotUe Shape Vase, Dark Mottled Green glaze, 11 Jin. Chia Ch’ing.
837 Brush Holder, Apple Green glaze, Chia Ching.
838 Green Saucer Dish, floral design. Chia Ch’ing.
839 Tripod Incense Burner, Apple Green, 7in. dia. Chia Ch’ing.
840 Seated Figure of a Disciple of Buddha, Black glaze on the biscuit. Sin. high.
Kang Hsi.
841 Marble and Blackwood Bust of Kuan-Yin (life size). Ming.
A rare example with a remarkable crown of Buddhist emblems.
(See Illustration).
842 Vase, Snake’s Skin Green glaze, 12Jin. Ch’ien Lung.
843 Pair of Bowls, Apple Green glaze, Yung Cheng.
844 Beaker Vase, Apple green prunus blossom decoration, panels of artemisia leaf em-
blem, BJin. Ch’ien Lung.
845 Crackle Vase, green glaze, beaker shape, 7Jin. Yung Cheng.
846 Green Dish, incised floral decoration, Yung Cheng.
847 Four Small Apple Green Plates. Yung Cheng.
848 Vase, three colours, bottle shape, 7Jin. high. Kang Hsi.
849 Covered Jar, five-colours, figure decoration—ladies of the Court picking lotus
flowers for the Emperor and Empress, BJin. high. Yung Cheng.


LOT
850 Jar, five-colours, decorated with flowers, birds and insects, fitted with a wooden
rim, BJin. high. Kang Hsi.
851 Figure of Tung Fang So, Blue Glaze, BJin. high. Yung Cheng.
852 Rice Bowl, decorated with flowers and “precious things,” 7Jin. dia. Kang Hsi.
853 Biscuit Porcelain Jui Sceptre, decorated with emblems of long life and happiness.
854 Ginger Jar, five-colours, decorated with figures of Immortals, Lotus flowers, 9in.
high. Yung Cheng.
855 Rice Bowls, with coral panels, 7in. dia. Ch'ien Lung.
856 Figure of a Frog, Apple Green glaze, lOin. long, 4Jin. high. Yung Cheng.
857 10 Mandarin’s Summer Cap Decorations.
The summer cap is surmounted, In persons of rank, by a red, blue, white
or gilded ball at the apex or point of the cone. From the ball descends all
round, over the cap, a fringe, or bunch of crimson silk or red horsehair.
On the commencement of hot or cold weather the first person In the pro-
vince assumes his winter or summer cap; this Is the signal for his officials
to do the same.
858 Porcelain Plaque, framed in cherrywood, decorated with the figures of the Immor-
tals. I2in. dia. Ch’ien Lung.
859 Puzzle Tea Pot, in the form of a peach, Kuang Hsu.
860 Peacock Feathers in a Red Lacquer Case, Peacock Feathers in Cloth Case.
Bestowed by the Emperor as a mark of Imperial favour, or reward of
merit.
861 Pair of Pigeons, green glaze, 6Jin. Kuang Hsu.
862 Brush Holder, Bamboo Shape, Yellow and brown glaze, 4Jin. Kuang Hsu.
863 Pair of Dishes, Apple green glaze. Sin. dia. Kuang Hsu.
864 Small Vase, Yellow glaze with floral and incised decoration, lOin. Chia Ch’ing.
865 Small Vase, Mustard glaze with floral and incised decoration, 7in. Chia Ch’ing.
866 Saucer, Chocolate ground with Famille Verte panels. Chia Ch’ing.
867 Writer’s Water Pot, Yellow glaze, raised animal decoration. Tao Kuang.
868 Vase, yellow glaze, with raised floral decoration, 6Jin. Tao Kuang.
869 Figure of a Man and Dog, Mustard glaze, decorated with brown and green,
lOin. high. Chia Ch’ing.
870 Bowl, Liver Colour with four panels of flowers. Chia Ch’ing.


LOAN COLLTECTION, NATIONAL ART GALLERY.


LOT
871 Figure of Pu-tai-ho-Shang, yellow crackle, with brown decoration, s£in. Chia
Ch’ing.
FURNITURE, CABINETS, ETC.
872 Black Lacquer Cabinet, 7ft x 3ft, decorated with trees and birds.
873 Walnut Inlaid China Cabinet, Ormulu mounted, 3ft. 3in x 2ft. sin.
874 Mahogany Bookcase, two glass doors and two drawers, 7ft. 6in. x 4ft.
873 Mahogany and Cedar Bookcase, 2 drawers and 2 cupboards, Bft. 6in. x 4ft. 3in.
876 Mahogany China Cabinet, 2 cupboards, Chippendale design, 3ft. Bin. x 4ft. 3in.
877 Blackwood China Cabinet, Ormulu mounted, 3ft. 6in. x 2ft. 9in.
878 Cedar Specimen Case, 2ft. 6in. x 2ft. 2in. x 1 Sin.
879 Oriental China Cabinet in three sections, glass both sides and ends, Cantonese
Blackwood, sft. x 4ft. 7in.
880 Rosewood Specimen Table, round shape, bevelled glass, 2ft. 4in. x Ift. 9in.
881 Blackwood Specimen Table, with under platform, oblong shape, 2ft. 3in. x Ift. Sin.
882 Blackwood China Cabinet, Ormulu mounted, 3ft. 6in x 2ft. 9in.
883 Bow Front Satinwood China Cabinet, with cupboards, Chippendale design.
884 Mahogany Corner Cabinet, Sheraton design, 4ft. lOin. x Ift. lOin.
885 Blackwood Specimen Table, with bevelled glass top, 2ft. sin. x Ift. Bin.
886 Mahogany China Cabinet, Sheraton design, 3 x 2ft.
BOOKS.
887 Art in Australia —The Art of Hans Heysen, col. plates.
888 Art in Australia —Numbers, 1,2, 3,4, 5,6, 7,8, 9; 9 vols. Rare complete set.
889 Wilson (Hardy) —The Cowpasture Road, col. plates.


LOT
890 Hilder (J. J.)— Water-Colourist, Limited edition of 500 copies.
891 Anzac Memorial Volume, 1916 —Special limited edition of 50 copies, hand-tooled
leather binding. Contains an original Water-colour drawing by Will Donald.
892 Banfield (E. J.) —My Tropic Isle.
893 Blacker (J. F.) —Chats on Oriental China.
894 Blacker (J. F.)— The A.B.C. of Collecting Old Continental Pottery.
895 Bland (J. 0. P.) —Recent Events and Present Policies in China.
896 Burgess (F. W.) —Old Pottery and Porcelain.
897 Burgess (F. W.) —Chats on Old Coins.
898 Burton (Wm.) —Porcelain, A Sketch of Its Nature, Art and Manufacture, with
50 plates.
899 Chaffers’ Marks and Monograms on Pottery and Porcelain, New ed. with 1500 new
marks.
900 Chinaman (John Coming) —Bright Celestials.
901 Cunynghame (H. H.) —On the Theory and Practice of Art-Enamelling Upon
Metals, coloured plates.
902 Dahlke (P.) —Buddhist Essays.
903 Davis (Sir J. F.) —Chinese Miscellanies.
904 Deane (Ethel) —By-ways of Collecting.
905 Dick (Stewart) —Arts and Crafts of Old Japan.
906 Dillon (E.) —Porcelain, and How to Collect It.
907 Dore (Henry) —Researches into Chinese Superstitions, Trans, with notes by M.
Keneally, S.J. Numerous Coloured Plates, 5 vols.


LOT
908 Farrer (R.) —In Old Ceylon.
909 Ferguson (John C.) —Outlines of Chinese Art.
910 Foster (J. J.) —Chats on Old Miniatures.
911 Gibb (W. and B. Rackham) —A Book of Porcelain—Fine Examples in the Victoria
and Albert Museum. Colored Plates.
912 Goodchild (W.) —Precious Stones with a Chapter on Artificial Stones, by Robert
Dyke.
913 Gorer (Edgar, and J. F. Blacker) —Chinese Porcelain and Hard Stones, with 254
coloured plates of Gems of Chinese Ceramic and Glyphic Art, 2 vols. Limited
edition of 1000 copies.
914 Guillemard (F. H. H.) —The Cruise of the Marchesa, Kamshatka and New Guinea.
915 Hamilton (A.) —The Art Workmanship of the Maori race in New Zealand (com-
plete set).
916 Hawks Pott (F. L.) —A Sketch of Chinese History.
917 Hayden (A.) —Chats on Old Prints.
918 Hodgson (Mrs. W.) —How to Identify Old Chinese Porcelain.
919 Hudson Moore (N.) —Wedgewood and His Imitators.
920 Hnlme (F. E.) —The Birth and Development of Ornament.
921 Irwin (D. H.) —War Medals and Decorations, with plates.
922 Janvier (C. A.) —Practical Ceramics for Students.
923 Lacroix (Paul) —Science and Literature in the Middle Ages.
924 Lacroix (Paul) —The Arts in the Middle Ages and at the Period of the Ren-
aissance. Coloured plates.


LOT
925 Lindsay (Lionel) —Conrad Martens, The Man and His Art. 6 coloured plates.
926 Low (David) —Caricatures. Australians of To-day and Yesterday.
927 Phil May in Australia, with the names of numerous characters written in pencil.
928 Mew (E.) —Chelsea and Chelsea-Derby China.
929 Moses (Henry) —A Collection of Antique Vases, Altars, Patera, Tripods, Candelbra,
etc., 170 plates.
930 Nesbk (Alex) —A Descriptive Catalogue of the Glass Vessels in the South Ken-
sington Museum. With col. plates.
931 Nivedita and Coomaraswany, Myths of the Hindus and Buddhists, with 32 col?
cured plates.
932 Percival (M.) —Chats on Old Jewellery and Trinkets, with 300 illus.
933 Petrie (Flinders) —Amulets, illustrated by the Egyptian Collection in University Col-
lege, London.
934 Reid (Sir George) —My Reminiscences.
935 Robinson (F. S.) —The Connoisseur.
936 Rowed (C.) —Collecting as a Pastime, 68 illustrations.
937 Shaw and Robinson —The Sea and Its Story, illustrated.
938 Smithers (Leonard C., Edin.) —The Transmigration of the Mandarin Fum Hoam
(Chinese Tales). Limited ed., 680 copies.
939 Stewart (Basil) —On Collecting Japanese Colour-Prints, illustrated.
940 Wylde (C. H.) —How to Collect Continental China, illustrated.
