



110 and ¥kt are tire Christian Israelites ?
BY THE AUTHOR OF “BRIGHTER MELBOURNE.’ 1
T.vn.ofF»ri from
4i £)iluolly Eatpreasj”
tHe
Wovemlber
22, 1222.
The question which heads this article is
one frequently asked, and one to which
numerous and diverse replies have been
made. It is the common fortune of all
people who advocate and defend principles
and opinions not clearly understood, or who
adopt manners and customs which to the
uninitiated appear strangely eccentric, to be
made the subject of misrepresentation, ridi-
cule, and too often scorn. The Society of
Christian Israelites have been singularly
Unfortunate in this respect, and sneers and
jeers of the most bitter kind have been
levelled at them Now, Ido not think that
this opposition has been altogether due to
personal hatred, but rather to a want of
correct knowledge of the subject, and in
part—it must be admitted—to the occa-
sionally indiscreet remarks of some members
of the Society itself, who, in their enthusiasm
to uphold the tenets, doctrines, and princi-
ples of the Christian Israelites, make use of
expressions which to unaccustomed eyes and
ears seem and sound strange.
In the present article I propose to fairly and
squarely reply to the question given above,
Humanly speaking, the founder of the
Society of Christian Israelites was a person
named John Wroe, who was born in the vil-
lage of Bowling, parish of Broadford, York-
shire, on the 19th September, 1782. His
was a life of singular hardship, and in bis
autobiography he tells bis story with an
artless simplicity, which often approaches to
the pathetic. John Wroe appears to have
been in some way connected with the people
who associated with Joanna Southcott, but
this does not appear to be very clear. On
page 25 of the first volume of “ The Lile
and Journal of John Wroe,” the writer
says t —“ After I began to have visions, it
was made known to me that the people who
believed Joanna Southcott to be the woman
spoken of in the 12th chapter of Revelations
were right.” On pages 82 33 John Wroe
appears to lay claim to lead the followers of
Mrs Southcott, whom he regards as being
partially inspired, but not gifted to clearly
make known the whole counsel of God.
When we compare the writings of Joanna
Southcott with those of John Wroe, we can
see plainly that the latter did improve and
add to the work of the former.
There is considerable difficulty in clearly
getting at authentic details of the life and
work of Mrs Southcott, because after she
left the Wesleyan Church, and her feme
began to be noised abroad, several women
in different parts of England passed them-
selves off as the prophetess, and as in those
days there were no telegraphs, telephones,
or cheap and rapid postage, these impostors
had an extraordinary advantage, and it is
the mixing up of their wild assertions with
the genuine remarks of Mrs Southcott her-
self, that creates so much confusion Suffice
it to say that the Christian Israelites regard
Joanna Southcott as the harbinger of the
work ultimately completed by John Wroe,
and the present organisation may be said to
date from Dec. 14, 1822
One of the most remarkable features of
the work of John Wroe is his wonderful
knowledge of the whole Bible, and this is
all the more remarkable when we recollect
that he was an uneducated man. In bis
“Sermons from the Sacred Scriptures”
this is shown in a marked manner. If John
Wroe was, as William Chambers says, “ a
clever impostor,” then all 1 could wish is
that the orthodox clergy of our time were
equally clever. To my way of thinking
(and 1 make the remark for what it may be
worth) the man who discovers new truths in
the Bible, whether it may be an eccentric
genius like Paracelsus, a distinguished
scholar like Emanuel Swedenborg, a poor
woolcomber like John Wroe, an enthusiast
like John Wesley, a reformer like Alexander
Campbell, or a persecuted man like Joseph
Smith, is entitled to more honor than he
who discovers a gold mine, or unearths a
diamond field. We are told that in the
multitude of counsellors there is wisdom,
and possibly at some period more or less
remote we shall find that Truth is not con-
fined to one sect or party, but that it is dis-
seminated amongst all people who name the
name of Christ.
John Wroe’s interpretations of the Scrip-
tures are decidedly novel, and to some extent
different from those of any other theologian,
Starting with the assumption that by the
sins of Adam mankind inherited a life of
blood and an evil heart, which results in the
death of the mortal body, he considers that
by a life of perfect obedience to all to
commands of God, it would be possible to
escape the death of the mortal body, in the
same way as Enoch and Elijah did, He
then goes on to show that man is a threefold
being, consisting of body, sool, and spirit,
each separate and distinct. The bodies of
such as fail to reach the perfection of
strict obedience perish entirely* the soul re-
mains in the grave until the resurrection, at
which period it is united to the spirit and
becomes a spiritual body, and as *uch lives
for ever. According to John Wroe these
are the last days of the old world of Satan’s
Kingdom, which will be destroyed, and the
Kingdom of God established in its place,
and that now 144,000 of the seed of Israel,
selected from amongst both Jews and
Christians, will seek and obtain the purifica-
tion of their mortal bodies from the evil
which pollutes the blood of all mankind, and
that accomplished, they will regain the Para-
dise lost by Adam. He further teaches
that all mankind, without exception, will be
saved, but that there are degrees of bless-
ings, the highest being attained by those
whose bodies by obedience become immortal,
and the lowest those who have died unre-
pentant. This is a brief summary of the
most important teachings of John Wroe, and
although to those of us who have been edu-
cated in what is known as “ the orthodox
school,” they read very strange, they are
none the less supported by hosts of Scrip-
tural quotations. The published writings of
John Wroe consist of three large volumes,
containing altogether nearly 1600 pages, and
are entirely different from any body of
divinity ever published before or since his
time. The pages abound with prophecies,
many of which have been fulfilled in a re-
markable manner. John Wroe was several
times in Australia. He died in Fitzroy on
February 4tb, 1863, at the age of 81, and
was interred in the Melbourne cemetery. It
has not been my good fortune to see John
Wroe, but in conversation with those who
knew him intimately I am assured that be
was a good man, full of the Scriptures, a
man who lived a pure life, and one whom to
know was to love and admire for bis mani
fold virtues and excellent qualities.
It appears to me that anyone whose
aspirations are so high as those of the
Christian Israelite must be morally, physi
cally, and religiously good. One of his
greatest ambitions is to escape the death of
the mortal body, and with this aim before
him his whole life must be one of strict
purity in actions, in manners, in body, and in
every other way ; and if by any defect he
fails to reach the goal before him, he has at
least the satisfaction of knowing that be has
lived a we ll ordered life, and that no stain
is atta^b to bis character.
The Christian Israelite obeys both the
Law a&d the Gospel He is thus, to some
extent at least, both a Jew and a Christian.
Obeying the Levitical law, be declines to out
either his hair or his beard. The objector
remarkst “This is wrong, because Paul said
1 It is a shame for a man to have long hair.’ ”
But it so happens that Paul does not say so.
The words of 1 Cor., xi, 14, are: “ Doth not
even Nature itself teach you that if a man
have long bair, it is a sbame unto him?”
But these words are not fairly translated.
The Latin gives the t.ue idea: “ Nec ipsa
natura docet quod vir quidem si coman
vutriat, igno'niinia est, ilia,” which can be
fairly translated thus; “Doth not even
Nature itself teach you that a man indeed,
if he nourishes his hair, it is a shame unto
him.” There is nothing in the Latin or
Greek about “ long hair.” Paul was merely
writing against vanity, and all that the text
teaches is that men must not waste their
time in mere hairdressing to the neglect of
other important matters.
In a book published by the Christian
Israelites called “ Commandment of the
Law and Testimony ” at page 50, this text
is compared with Leviticus xxi 5, and is
explained by emphasising the word “Na
ture,” which the writer regards as a state
of sin, aud says that while in a state of sin
man feels that long hair is a shame to him,
but not so in a state of grace. This ex-
planation is satisfactory, providing that the
authorised version is a correct translation.
Another peculiarity of this body of
Christians is their rejection of all pictures,
images, and profuse ornamentation. These
they regard as savoring of and apt to en-
courage idolatry. The sanctuary in Fitzmy
is therefore a remarkably plain structure,
without even windows, all light being
gained from skylights. This rejection of
pictures, &c., seems to have originated with
John Wroe, because Joanna Southcott,
shortly before she died, had her portrait
painted, and it was afterwards engraved.
In this portrait she is represented with a
Bible before her opened at Isaiah Ixv and lx vi.
The Christian Israelites in their public
worship avoid all prayers save and except
the occasional use of the Lord’s Prayer.
This is in strict accordance with the command
of Christ, in Matthew vi. 6. Paul in Ist
Timothy ii. 1 2 seems to encourage public
prayers, but a close consideration of the text
dissipates this idea. Paul’s object was to
outwardly and publicly show loyalty and
obedience to law and all constituted authority.
In all petitions to either House of Parlia-
ment they most be concluded with the
words “ And your petitioners, as in doty
bound, will evtr pray," which is merely an
expression of submission to the will and
determination of the legislature. There
seems to be no authority in the Bible to
offer public prayers in a mixed assembly.
The magnificent prayer of Solomon at the
dedication of the temple, was in reality an
invocation, and not a formal prayer in the
usual acceptation of the word. As far as I
know the Christian Israelites are the only
denomination which adopts no public
prayers.
The Society observes the Sabbath of both
Jews and Christians, and meets for worship
on both days. On Friday evening the
Sabbath commences at 6 o’clock, and until
12 o’clock it is kept very strictly, one hour
being kept with great solemnity. The
Christian Sabbath on Sunday is observed as
ordinary Christians observe it, worship in
private being held in the morning, outdoor
service in the afternoon ; and, again, Divine
service is held every Sunday evening in the
Sanctuary at 7 o’clock, which is open to the
general public.
Last year on the death of Mr John Perry,
an old and energetic member of the Society
of Christian Israelites, the Collingwood Ob-
server reprinted nearly the whole of the
article about the Society, which appeared in
the Dunolly Express at the beginning of 1891.
This led to an animated controversy, which
lasted several weeks, and attracted very
considerable attention. It had the effect of
giving the Christian Israelites much pub-
licity, and was successful in removing much
of the prejudice and misunderstanding which
bad before existed.
The Christian Israelites appear to be
slowly increasing in numbers, but I have
been unable to get together complete figures.
In the United States of America they appear
of late to be particularly active; at least I
judge so from the frequent references to the
Society which I notice in*my latest American
papers. There is in America a body of
Christians who call themselves simply
“ Israelites,” but these I imagine are not
connected with the Christian Israelites. I
assume this, as their wild and incoherent
assertions are totally at variance with the
calm, collected statements of John Wroe.
In Victoria the Society has between 200 and
300 adherents. There are congregations in
different parts of these colonies, but it would
be very difficult to give any idea of the total
number of adherents in Australia. Num-
bers, however, are no test of truth.
The Christian Israelites are a people
zealous of good works, active in aiding and
assisting every effort conducive to the public
welfare, and taking a large and intelligent
interest in everything calculated to make
men and women better. Freed from bigotry
and intolerance, they never countenance nor
encourage attacks on other Christians, but
disseminating the truth as they have learned
it, they try to live honestly and soberly in
this world, and as Paul says, “ Waiting for
the adoption, to wit, the redemption of the
body.”
And now a few words in conclusion. To
my mind, the more one carefully studies the
whole system of faith, doctrine, and practice,
which is taught and preached by the Society
of Christian Israelites the better, because
such a study opens up new avenues of
thought, enables one to have a more compre-
hensive grasp of the Holy Word, and finally
encourages him to hope for better things
and more glorious triumphs in the coming
age, where the abolition of sin introduces
the reign of perfect righteousness, and the
Kingdom of God and of His Christ ah.il!
exist throughout eternity.


OATEOHISM
FOR CHILDREN
OF THE SOCIETY OF
Christian Israelites.
SECOND EDITION.
Melbourne:
J, C. Stephens, Printer, 146 Elizabeth Street.
1892.




PREFACE.
THIS Catechism has been prepared for the purpose of supplying
the teachers of the children of the Society of the Christian
Israelites with an easy method of conveying instruction in the
tenets of the faith of the Church.
It is desirable that the instruction given to children should
be of as simple a character as possible ; consistent with giving
a clear insight into the doctrines we wish them to receive and
understand ; also that there should be thorough uniformity in the
teaching.
It is believed that the Catechism will contribute materially
to these requirements—the method of imparting instruction by
question and answer having always been found most successful in
its results.
It will hardly be expected that the Catechism will embrace
the whole of the Doctrines of the Church, but only its funda-
mental principles, clothed in simple language, and in a form
suitable for children’s comprehension. It is intended but as a
preparatory course to the deeper study of the Scriptures, and to
enable them to give an answer to every one who may ask them a
reason of the hope that is within them.
Melbourne, 1892




CATECHISM.
1. Question. —Who is the Creator of all things ?
Answer.—God Almighty.—Gen. i. 1 ; Exod. xx., 11 ;
Rev i. A
2. Ques. —When God created man, in whose likeness
did God make him ?
Ans.—“ In the likeness of God made he him, male and
female created he them ; and blessed them, and
called their name Adam.”—Gen. v., 1-2.
3. Ques. —How was Adam in the likeness of God 1
Ans.—As God was spirit, so was Adam when first created.
4. Ques. —If Adam was created male and female spirits,
is God the same ?
Ans.—Yes. God is the Father of us all, and also the
Mother of us all.
5. Ques. —Is God called in the Scriptures the Mother of
us all ?
Ans. —Yes, It is written.—“ Jerusalem, which is above,
is free, which is the mother of us all.”—Gal. iv., 26.
6, Ques. —Where is this further proved 1
Ans.—ln Genesis i., 26.
7. Ques. —What is said there ?
Ans.—“ And God said : Let us make man in our image,
after our likeness.”—Gen. i., 26.
8. Ques. —What does this prove ?
Ans.—lt proves that there is more than one person in
the Godhead.
9. Ques. —Is the Bride spoken of in the Scriptures 1
Ans.—Yes; in several places, but in one especially.—
John iii., 29.
10. Ques. —What is there recorded ?
Ans.—Speaking of Jesus after he had received the spirit
of God at the River Jordan, it says : “He that
hath the Bride is the Bridegroom.”


11. Ques. —What does this prove ?
Ans.—lt proves that he had the Spirit of the Mother as
well as the spirit of the Father with him.
12. Ques. —Under what name is the Bride generally
spoken of in the New Testament ?
Ans.—The Holy Ghost.
13. Ques, —Of what did God form the body of man ?
Ans.—God formed man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life.—
Gen. ii., 7.
14. Ques. —What was that breath ?
Ans.—The breath of the mortal life.
15. Ques. What did man then become ?
Ans.—Man became a living soul.—Gen. ii.. 7
16. Ques. —What did Adam call his wife ?
Ans.—Adam called his wife’s name Eve, because she
was the mother of all living.—Gen. hi., 20.
17. Ques. —Of how many parts is man composed ?
Ans.—Of three : Spirit and Soul and Body.—lst Thes.
v. 23.
18. Ques. —Then it is not true, as some suppose, that
the spirit and soul are one thing ?
Ans.—No; various parts of Scripture prove this.
19. Ques. —Mention one particularly ?
Ans. —“ The word of God is quick and powerful, and
sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to
the dividing asunder of soul and spirit,”—Heb. iv.,
12.
20. Ques. —When does this dividing take place ?
Ans.—The spirit is divided from the soul and body at
death.—Eccles. xii., 7 ; Psa. Ixxxix., 48.
21. Ques. —Did God create man to die?
Ans.—No; “God created man to be immortal, and
made him to be an image of his own Eternity.
—Wisdom ii., 23.
22. Ques. —How, then, came death into the world ?
Ans.—“ By envy of the devil, who tempted man to take
of the evil.”—Gen. hi., 13-14.
23. Ques. —Did God create the evil ?
Ans,—Yes ; and commanded man not to touch it.—Tsa.
xlv., 7 ; Gen. ii., 17.; hi., 3.
23a. Ques. —Where did God place the evil?


Ans. —In the body Eve, our first parent.— Gen.
ii., 9.
24. Ques. —Then she was both good and evil ?
Ans.—Yes ; she was the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil.
25. Ques. —Are mankind then compared to trees ?
Ans,—Yes ; God compared mankind to trees in many
parts of the Scriptures. Isa. Ixi., 3 ; John xv., 5.
26. Ques. —What did God command about the evil?
A ns,— He said : “ Thou shalt not eat of it, for in the
day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.
—Gen. ii., 17.
27. Ques. —Did Adam and Eve obey God’s command ?
Ans.—No; they took of the evil, and fell from a state of
innocence to a state of guilt. Gen. iii.
28. Ques. —What was the effect of this ?
Ans.—They received a life of blood, with an evil heart;
and were expelled from Paradise. Lev. xvii., 11;
Romans vii, 18. ; Gen. iii, 24.
29. Ques. —Did they die as God said ?
Ans.—Yes ; Adam lived 930 years and he died. Gen v., 5.
30. Ques. —Did he die within the day he eat of the evil ?
Ans. —Yes ; because one day is with the Lord as a
thousand years. 2nd Peter iii., 8.
31. Ques. —Why has death followed upon mankind since
then?
Ans.—Because of the evil in the blood received through
our first parents’ sin. Romans vii., 23.
32. Ques. —Does this cause death ?
Ans. —Yes ; it is the source of all evil diseases and death
itself until it is taken away. Romans vii., 23.
33. Ques. —Has God promised to take it away ?
Ans.—Yes. God says : “I will cleanse their blood that
I have not cleansed.” Joel iii., 21.
34. Ques.—Has God then cleansed the blood of anyone ?
Ans.—Yes. That of Enoch and Elijah.
35. Ques. —Who were Enoch and Elijah?
Ans,—Two men subject to like passions as we are. James
v., 17.
36. Ques.—When did Enoch live in the world ?
Ans.—Before the flood ; in the year of the world 987.
37. Ques.—When did Elijah live in the world ?


Ans.—After the flood ; in the year of the world 3108.
38. Ques. —Did God cleanse their blood ?
Ans.— Yes; The evil withered within them. Ezek. xvii, 10
39. Ques. —What was the effect of this ?
Ans. —Satan could not then tempt them to sin,
40. Ques. —Does Satan then attract man to sin 1
Ans.—Yes ; he attracts the evil in man, and causes man
to do evil when he would do good. Romans vii.,
18-21.
41. Ques, —Then when the evil is taken away will man
do good 1
Ans.—Yes ; he will then be able to keep the command-
ments of God, which he formerly disobeyed.
42. Ques. —Then are Enoch and Elijah alive now in the
body ?
Ans.—Yes; they were translated to heaven bodily, and
never saw death. Gen. v., 24 ; 2nd Kings ii., 11 ;
Hebrews xi., 5.
43. Ques. —Has God promised that anyone else shall live'l
Ans.—Yes ; in the Bible in many places.
44. Ques. —Name some of the passages where the promise
is recorded ?
Ans.—ln Deut. xxx., 15, 19 ; Prov. xii., 28 ; Ezek. xviii.,
19-32, and xxxiii., 11-19; John vi., 50 ; viii., 51;
x., 27, 28 ; Rom. viii., 13 ; Ist Cor. xv., 51 ; Gal. vi,
7, 8 ; Rev. xxii., 14 ; and many other places.
45. Ques. —In all these passages God promises life on
certain conditions, what are those conditions ?
Ans.—Perfect obedience to His laws and commandments.
Ezek. xxxiii,, 14-16.
46. Ques. —Does the life promised apply to spirit, soul,
or body ?
Ans.—To the body.
47. Ques. —Why so?
Ans—Because the body is the only part of man that
can perish, or cease to exist. Gen. iii., 19.
48 Ques. —But does not the body live again in the
resurrection ?
Ans.—No; Job says: “As the cloud is consumed and
vanisheth away, so he that goeth down to the grave
shall come up no more.” Job. vii., 9.


49. Ques. —What does the New Testament say about the
body rising ?
Ans.—Paul says : “ Thou so west not that body that shall
be.” Ist Oor. xv., 37.
50. Ques. —What, then, becomes of the spirit and soul
if the body dies ?
Ans.—The spirit returns to God who gave it. Eccles.
xii., 7 ; and the soul goes to the grave along with
the body. Psa. Ixxxix.. 48 ; and is raised a spiritual
body. Ist Cor. xv., 44,
51. Ques. —Is the soul then still alive after the body dies?
Ans.—Yes ; but sleeping either in happiness or misery.
Job. xiv., 12 ; Isa Ivii., 1, 2. ; Rom. ii., 9.
52. Ques. —What causes the difference ?
Ans. —If the person has repented before death, the soul
sleeps in happiness, and if not repented before death,
it sleeps in misery. Isa. Ivii., 1, 2 ; Rom. ii., 9.
53. Ques. —How long does the soul lie in the grave ?
Ans.—Until the day of the first resurrection. Job. xiv.
12 ; Rev. xx., 4-6.
54. Ques. —What takes place then ?
Ans. The souls of the repentant rise and become spirit-
ual bodies for their spirits to dwell in. Ist. Oor.
xv., 44.
55. Ques. —What becomes of the rest of the dead or the
unrepented ?
Ans.—They also come forth, but are sent from the pre-
sence of God until the final resurrection, Dan. xii.,
2 ; Rev. xx., 5 ; xxi., 8 ; John v., 28, 29.
56. Ques. —When is the final resurrection ?
Ans.—A thousand years after the first resurrection.
Rev. xx., 5.
57. Ques. —Are the unrepentant when they do rise equal
to the repentant ?
Ans.—No ; they are the least in the kingdom of heaven.
Matt, v., 19.
58. Ques. —How is this, that both repentant and unre-
pentant rise and go into heaven ?
Ans.—Because God sent Jesus to shed his blood to save
the souls of all mankind, specially of them that
believe. Ist Tim. iv., 9—ll.
59. Ques. —Who is Jesus, and when was he born?


Ans.—He is the pure seed of a virgin named Mary, and
God is his Father, and he'was born in the year 4001.
Matt, i., 18-25.
60. Ques. —Why is he called the pure seed of the virgin ?
Ans. —Because there was no evil in his blood, and he
never committed sin. John xiv,, 30; xv, 10 ; viii, 29.
61. Ques. —How was it that the blood of Jesus was
accepted as a sacrifice to remove the curse on the
soul ?
Ans.—The blood of Jesus not being mixed with evil, was
given for that which was so mixed, instead of the
blood of the animal. Gen. ix., 5 ; Heb. x., 5.
62. Ques. —Had the blood of animals previously been
offered for sin ?
Ans. —Yes ; for 4000 years, it being accepted till Jesus
came. Lev. xvii., 11.
63. Ques. —What did God command about these offer-
ings ?
Ans. — He said: “Your lamb shall be without blemish,
a male of the first year. Exod. xii., 5.
64. Ques —Did this point to Jesus ?
Ans.—Yes; Because he wa-s the only one of Adam’s
race who was without blemish or evil. Ist Pet. i., 19,
65, Ques. —Is Jesus spoken of in the Bible as a lamb?
Ans.—Yes ; in many places, as the lamb who taketh
away sin. John i., 29. ; Gal. i.,4 ; Acts viii., 32, &c.
66. Ques. —Was ever any other person offered ?
Ans.—Yes; Isaac was presented as a sacrifice, but not
accepted. But God chose a ram instead. Genesis
xxii., 1-19.
67. Ques. — Why was not Isaac accepted?
Ans.—Because of the evil in his blood, and thus he was
no better than other men. Jesus only could be
accepted. Psa xlix., 7 ; Matt, i., 21 ; Luke i., 35.
68, Ques. —But why did God allow the blood of this good
man to be shed ?
Ans. —Because of the charge Adam made against God in
giving him the woman.
69. Ques. —What was that charge ?
Ans.—Adam said : “ The woman Thou gavest to be with
me, she gave me of the tree and I did eat.” Gen.
hi., 12.


70. Ques. —How did God remove that charge?
Ans.—Jesus was the seed of the woman, and brought
salvation to mankind by his obedience ; as the first
woman brought death into the world by her dis-
obedience. Rom. v., 12—21.
71. Ques. —What did this prove ?
Ans. —It proved that the woman was really given to be
man’s help-mate, and that—
“ Now she helps the man to rise,
As once she helped his fall;
And now he owns that God was wise,
And just, and true in all.
She with her sister* now appears
To hand the precious food ;
And God’s intent in making her,
Is finished and made good.”
72, Ques. —What did God say about the seed of the
woman when man fell ?
Ans,—God said to Satan : “ I will put enmity between
thee and the woman; and between thy seed and
her seed ; it shall bruise thy head and thou shalt
bruise his heel.” Gen. iii., 15.
73. Ques. —When was the heel of the woman’s seed
bruised ?
Ans. —When Jesus was nailed to the cross, and slain to
save the souls of sinners.
74. Ques, —Has Satan’s head yet been bruised?
Ans.—Only in Enoch and Elijah.
75. Ques. —When will God fulfil His promise in bruising
the serpent’s head ?
Ans.— When the evil is slain in the bodies of Israel. Isa.
xxvii., 1 ; 2nd Thess. ii., 8 ; Rev. xx., 1,2, 3, 10.
76. Ques. —When this is done will that complete the
work of redemption ?
Ans. —No. But man will then regain the Paradise he
lost. Gen. ii., 9 ; Rev. ii., 7 ; xxii., 2, 14.
77. Ques. —What was that Paradise?
Ans.—The spirit of God to dwell in fully ; being the
partial redemption. Rom. viii., 23.
78. Ques. —What then is full redemption ?
Ans.—The spirit of God and the spirit of man dwelling
* Jerusalem above—the immortal helpmate.


in the body of man—making him immortal. John
xiv., 20 ; Ist Cor. iii., 16 ; Mai. iii., 1.
79. Ques. —Then Jesus Christ did not complete the work
of redemption by the shedding of his blood ?
Ans.—No. He said : “ I have come that they might
have life, and that they might have it more abun-
dantly.” John x., 10.
80. Ques. —What did he mean by a more abundant life ?
Ans —That as man had been seeking the salvation of
the soul by repentance, he might now obtain the
full redemption of spirit, soul, and body by
righteousness. Ist Thess. v., 23 ; Prov. xii., 28.
81. Ques. —What is repentance?
Ans.—Sorrow of heart for sins committed.
82. Ques. —What is righteousness ?
Ans.—Keeping all God’s laws and commandments and
not breaking any. Deut. vi., 25 ; John xiv., 15,
21, 23.
83. Ques. —Did Jesus Christ promise life if man would
do so ?
Ans.—Yes. He said : “ Yerily, verily, I say unto you,
If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death.”
John viii., 51.
84. Ques. —Any other passage ?
Ans. —Yes. “ This is the bread which cometh down from
heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die.”
John vi,, 50.
85. Ques. —Does he not say anything which proves that
he meant the body should not die ?
Ans.—Yes. He says: “Not as your fathers did eat
manna, and are dead : he that eateth of this bread
shall live for ever.” John vi., 58.
86. Ques. —What is this living bread ?
Ans.—The word of God. Deut. viii., 3; Matt, iv., 4 ;
John vi., 50, 63.
87. Ques.—What is meant by eating the bread?
Ans. —Eating is believing, and doing that which is
believed. Rom. ii., 13.
88. Ques.—Do men then believe and not do ?
Ans.—Yes, all. Whether Jew or Christian who only
repent and believe, have faith without works. James
ii., 14—20.
12


89. Ques. —Can faith save man ?
Ans.—Yes, It will save the soul, but not the body.
90. Ques. —What do the scriptures say upon this
subject 1
Ans. —Paul describes the righteousness which is of faith,
thus—“ If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the
Lord Jesus and shalt believe in thine heart that God
hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved.”
Rom, x., 9.
91. Ques. —What salvation did he mean ?
Ans.—The salvation of the soul.
92. Ques. —What proof is there of this ?
Ans.—Paul says: We are of them that believe to the
saving of the soul. Heb. x., 39.
93. Ques. —Is there further proof ?
Ans. —Yes. Peter says : “ Receiving the end of your
faith, even the salvation of your souls,” Ist Pet.
i., 9.
94. Ques. —How is the righteousness described that
cometh by keeping the law ?
Ans,—That the man which doeth those things shall live
by them. Rom. x., 5 ; Lev. xviii, 5 ; Ezek. xviii.,
21 ; xxxiii., 15, 16.
95. Ques. —What did Jesus tell the man who asked him
how to gain eternal life ?
Ans.—Jesus said : If thou wilt enter into life, keep the
commandments. Matt, xix., 17.
96. Ques. —Does this not prove that Jesus meant the life
of the body ?
Ans.—Yes. Because if it was necessary to keep the
commandments to gain the salvation of the soul,
neither Jew nor Christian would be saved.
97. Ques. —Why would they not ?
Ans.—Because though they may have faith and believe
in God’s laws and commandments, they do not keep
them. Rom. iii., 23.
98. Ques. —What did Paul answer those who asked him
what they should do to be saved ?
Ans.—He said : c< Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and
thou shalt be saved.” Acts xvi., 31.
99. Ques. —What salvation did he mean?
Ans.—He meant the salvation of the soul, which is to be


obtained by repentance and faith. Rom. x., 9, 10 ;
Heb. x., 39.
100. Ques. —How does the scripture divide faith without
works, and faith with works ?
Ans.—Paul says : “ By grace are ye saved through faith ;
and that not of yourselves : it is the gift of God :
not of works, lest any man should boast.” Eph. ii.,
8, 9.
101. Ques.—Any other passage 1
Ans.—Yes. He also says : “ To him that worketh not,
but believeth on Him that justitieth the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness.” Rom. iv., 5.
102. Ques. —But is it righteousness ?
Ans.—No. True righteousness consists in keeping God’s
laws and commandments ; not sinning at all. Deut.
vi., 25.
103. Ques. —What is said of faith with works 1
Ans.—Paul says; “Now to him that worketh is the
reward not reckoned of grace but of debt.” Rom.
iv., 4.
104. Ques. —What is the debt owing ?
Ans.—The life of the body is owing as the reward due
to those who shall attain to perfect righteousness.
Ezek. xviii, 21 ; xxxiii. 15, 16 ; Deut. xxx., 15—19,
105. Ques. —Is there further proof 1
Ans.—Yes. It says: “Blessed are they that do His
commandments, that they may have right to the
tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into
the city.” Rev. xxii., 14.
106. Ques. — What are the gates ?
Ans.—The gates are law and gospel, those who keep both,
enter the gates. Rev. xxi., 27.
107. Ques. —What is the city 1
Ans. —The spirit of Christ —and Jerusalem above —in
which man will dwell when immortal. Rev. xxi.,
2—7 ; Rev. iii., 12.
108. Ques. —Will either Jew or Christian gain this life
of the Body 1
Ans.—No. They will receive the end of their faith even
the salvation of their souls. Ist Peter i., 9.
109. Ques.—Then there are two sorts of bodies to be
saved ?


Ans.—Yes. “There are also bodies celestial, and bodies
terrestrial; but the glory of the celestial is one, and
the glory of the terrestrial is another.” Ist Cor.
xv., 40.
110. Ques. —What is celestial ?
Ans. —Angelic, spiritual, or heavenly.
111. Ques. —Who gain the celestial or spiritual glory?
Ans.—All whose bodies go to corruption, but whose souls
are saved in the resurrection. Ist Cor. xv., 35, 42, 44.
112. Ques. —What are they equal to?
Ans.—They are equal to the angels of God in heaven.
Luke xx., 36.
113. Ques. —What is terrestrial ?
Ans.—Terrestrial means earthly.
114, Ques. —Who gain the terrestrial glory ?
Ans.—All whose bodies go not to corruption, such as
Enoch, Elijah, and Jesus.
115. Ques. —Then is the terrestrial glory the highest ?
Ans.—Yes. Because then “ spirit and soul and body are
all preserved unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.” Ist Thess. v., 23.
116. Ques. —Then those whose bodies obtain the terres-
trial glory will be higher than the angels ?
Ans.—Yes. It is written : “ They will look for the
Saviour our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change
our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working whereby
he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.”
Phil, iii., 21. Also Heb. i., 5,7, 8, 13.
117. Ques. —What is the nature of the body of Jesus
Christ ?
Ans.—lt is a glorified body of flesh and bone. Luke xxiv.,
39 ; Rev. i., 13—16.
118. Ques. —How is it further described?
Ans.—As being the brightness of God’s glory, and the
express image of His person. Heb. i., 3.
119. Ques. —Is not the body of Jesus Christ the temple
or throne of God ?
Ans.—Yes. The spirit of the immortal Father' Christ,
and the spirit of the immortal Mother Jerusalem
above, with the spirit of the Son Jesus dwell within
his body—three in one. Rev. iii., 12, 21; Col. ii., 9,


120. Ques.—Who are they whose bodies will be made
like the glorious body of Jesus Christ ?
Ans.—The Israel of God, proved by Rom. viii., 16, 17,
29, 30; James ii., 5.
121. Ques. —Who are the Israel of God?
Ans.—To whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory
and the covenants, and the giving of the law and
the service of God, and the promises. Rom. ix., 4 ;
Rev. vii., 4—B ; xiv., I—s,
122. Ques. —Of what lineage are the Israel of God ?
Ans.—They are the descendants of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, whose name God changed to Israel. Gen.
xxxii., 27, 28.
123. Ques. —Where are they to be found?
Ans.—Mixed amongst Jews and Christians. Hos. vii., 8.
124. Ques. —Are they not all Jews?
An=*.—No. Because there are only about two tribes
amongst the Jews being the House of Judah. Ist
Kings xii., 21—24.
125. Ques —Where are the remaining ten tribes or
House of Israel ?
Ans.—Mixed by marriage amongst the Gentiles or Chris-
tians. Hos. vii., 8 ; Amos ix., 9 ; Micah v., 8.
126. Ques. —Can man find them or pick them out from
other men ?
Ans.—No. They are called the lost sheep of the House
of Israel. Matt, x., I—6.
127. Ques. —How will they be found ?
Ans.—God has promised to gather both Israel and Judah.
Isa. xi., 11, 12 ; Jer. xxx, 3, 10, 11, 18—24 ; xxxi,,
7—10; Amos ix., 9; Ezek. xxxiv., 11 —14.
128. Ques. —Are there not many other passages that
prove this ?
Ans.—Yes The scriptures teem with promises that God
will gather and redeem Israel.
129. Ques. —When are these promises to be fulfilled ?
Ans. —At the second coming of Christ, at the end of the
world, or as Jeremiah says, in the latter days. Jer.
xxx., 3, 23, 24.
130. Ques. —When will this be?
Ans.—We are now living in the day and the hour that
these promises will be fulfilled.


131. Ques. —Does it not say that no man will know the
day and the hour ?
Ans.—No. It says : “ Of that day and hour knoweth
no man.” Matt, xxiv., 36.
132. Ques. —Is that not the same ?
Ans.—No. It was not necessary that man should know
at the time those words were spoken.
133. Ques. —Why not?
Ans.—Because upwards of eighteen hundred years were
to pass first.
134. Ques. —Do the scriptures then say that man will
know.
Ans. —Yes. It says : “ There is nothing covered, that
shall not be revealed ; and hid, that shall not be
known.” Matt, x., 26.
135. Ques —But is there a promise that this particular
mystery shall be known to any ?
Ans.—Yes. It says : “Ye brethren are not in darkness
that this day should overtake you as a thief.” Ist
Thess. v., 4.
136. Ques. —Who are these brethren who will know the
time ?
Ans.—Jesus says : “Whosoever shall do the will of my
Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother,”
&c. Matt, xii,, 50.
137. Ques. —Who are these brethren that will do His
will?
Ans.—The Israel of God.
138. Ques. —What proof is there of this ?
Ans. —It says : “ The remnant of Israel shall not do
iniquity or speak lies; neither shall a deceitful
tongue be found in their mouth.” Zeph. iii., 13.
139. Ques. —What other proof ?
Ans,—lt also says that “ The iniquity of Israel shall be
sought for and there shall be none, and the sins of
Judah and they shall not be found.” Jer. 1., 20,
140. Ques. —Is not Jesus called the firstborn among
many brethren ?
Ans. - Yes. In Homans viii., 29, they being heirs of God
and joint-heirs with Christ. Rom. viii., 17.
141. Ques. —What is their number ?
An 5.—144,000, being twelve thousand out of each of the


twelve tribes of Israel. Rev. vii., 4—B ; xiv., I—s.
112. Ques. —Is the church of Israel described anywhere
in the scriptures as a distinct church from any other ?
Ans.—Yes. It is written : “ One shall say, I am the
Lord’s; and another shall call himself by the name
of Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his
hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the
name of Israel.” Isa. xliv., 5.
143. Ques. —Who are they who say they are the Lord’s?
Ans.—All denominations of Christians who claim to be
the Lord’s.
144. Ques. —And do they say right ?
Ans.—Yes. Jesus says : “ Ye call me Master and Lord
and ye say well, for so I am.” John xiii., 13.
145. Ques. —Who are they who call themselves by the
name of Jacob ?
Ans.—The Jewish church who claim to be descended
from Jacob.
146, Ques. —Who are the third class who subscribe with
their hands unto the Lord and surname themselves
Israel ?
Ans.—They are those who come out from both Jews and
Christians, holding the faith of both the Law and
the Gospel. Isa. viii., 20.
147. Ques. —What do these attain to?
Ans.—They come in the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of
Christ. Eph. iv., 13.
148. Ques. —What brings them to this perfection?
Ans,—The spirit of God working righteousness in them,
making them “ doers of the word and not hearers
only.” James i., 27.
149. Ques. —Then it is God who does the work for them ?
Ans.—Yes. He says : “I will yet for this, be enquired
of by the House of Israel, to do it for them.” Ezek.
xxxvi., 37.
160. Ques. —Is there any passage in scripture which
proves that this is necessary ?
Ans.—Yes. Jesus Christ says : “ Without me ye can do
nothing,” John xv., 5.
151. Ques. —Does he promise that any will attain to this


perfection ?
Ans. —Yes. It is written that “ He will present it unto
himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrin-
kle, or any such thing • but that it should be holy and
without blemish.” Eph. v., 26, 27. Rev. xiv., 1-5.
152. Ques. —Is there such a church upon earth yet ?
Ans.—No. But God is now preparing one, namely—The
Church of Christian Israelites.
153. Ques. —Can it not be either the Jews or one of the
Christian churches ?
Ans.—No. Because the Christians refuse the Law, and
Jews the Gospel,
151. Ques. —But we find among both Jews and Christians
many who do works of righteousness, although they
do not keep all; are all their good works lost as they
attain not to Life ?
Ans.—No. It says : “ Blessed are the dead which die in
the Lord ” —they “ rest from their labours and their
works do follow them.” Rev. xiv., 13.
155, Ques. —How do their works follow them?
Ans.—Jesus Christ says : “ Behold, I come quickly; and
my reward is with me, to give every man according
as his work shall be,” Rev. xxii., 12.
156. Ques. —Then as the good works of men vary much
in degree, their reward will also differ ?
Ans.—Yes. As “ one star differeth from another star in
glory, so also is the resurrection of the dead.” Ist
Cor. xv., 41, 42.
157. Ques. —Must not Christian Israelites strive to attain
to greater righteousness than either Jews or Christians
Ans.—Yes. They must keep both Law and Gospel.
Isa. viii., 20.
158. Ques. —What have Christian Israelites to do, to
fulfil both Law and Gospel ?
Ans.—They must deny themselves and take up their cross
daily and follow Jesus Christ. Matt, xvi., 24.
159. Ques. —How are they to do this ?
Ans.—They must “present their bodies a living sacrifice.”
Rom. xii., 1, 2.
160. Ques. —How is that done ?
Ans.—By crucifying the flesh with the affections and
lusts. Gal. v,, 24 ; vi., 7, 8.


161. Ques. —Then if we live after the flesh we shall die ?
Ans.—Yes. But if we through the spirit do mortify the
deeds of the body, we shall live. Rom. viii., 13.
162. Ques. —How do we mortify the deeds of the
body ?
Ans. —By not doing that which we are tempted to do,
when it is against God’s holy will and commandments.
Rom. xii., 2; Ist John ii., 15, 16, 17.
163. Ques. —Then is not this all done through the spirit
of God ?
Ans.—Yes. Israel will say—“ Lord, thou wilt ordain
peace for us : for thou also hast wrought all our
works in us.” Isa. xxvi., 12.
164. Ques, —Must not the House of Israel leave off seek-
ing the salvation of the soul only, if they wish to
gain the redemption of the body ?
Ans.—Yes. It says : “ Therefore leaving the principles
of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on to perfection.”
Heb. vi., 1.
165. Ques. —Does it not say what are the first principles ?
Ans—The passage reads thus: “Not laying again the
foundation of repentance from dead works, and of
faith toward God; of the doctrine of baptisms, and
of laying on of hands, and of resurrection of the
dead, and of eternal judgment. And this will we do
if God permit.” Heb. vi., I—3.
166. Ques. —Has God now permitted this?
Ans.—Yes. Israel is now called to “press toward the
mark for the prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus.” Heb. vi., 1 ; Phil, iff., 14, 15.
167. Ques. —What is that mark ?
Ans.—Perfection, Jesus says : “Be ye therefore perfect
even as your Pather which is in heaven is perfect.”
Matt, v., 48.
168. Ques. —Can man attain to this perfection without
keeping both Law and Gospel ?
Ans.—No. It is written : “To the law and to the testi-
mony ; if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no light in them.” Isa. viii., 20.
169. Ques. —When we say Law and Gospel; what is meant?
Ans.—We mean the Law as given by God to Moses ; and
the Gospel by Jesus Christ


170. Ques. —Did not Jesus do away with the Law when
he came ?
Ans.— No. He said : “Think not I have come to destroy
the Law or the Prophets.” “ I have not come to
destroy but to fulfil.” Matt, v., 17.
171. Ques —Did he fulfil the Law?
Ans.—Yes. He fulfilled all righteousness. Matt, iii.,
15 ; John viii., 29 ; xv., 10.
172. Ques. —Why could not the law be destroyed ?
Ans.—Because righteousness consists in keeping the laws
of God, and righteousness cannot be destroyed.
Rom. vii., 12.
173. Ques. —But why is it necessary to keep the whole
of the Law ?
Ans. —Because the Law is perfect, and God says: “Ye
shall not add unto the Law nor take from it,” Deut,
iv,, 2 ; Psa. xix., 7 ; Matt, v., 17, 18 ; James ii., 10 ;
Rev. xxii., 18, 19.
174. Ques. —Then the least of the commandments must
be obeyed as well as the greatest ?
Ans.—Yes. All. Jesus says : “Not one jot or tittle shall
pass from the Law till all be fulfilled.” Matt, v., 18.
175. Ques. —But as Jesus fulfilled the Law ; is it neces-
sary for Israel to do so ?
Ans.—Yes. If they would attain to perfect righteousness
and gain eternal life. Mai. iv., 4; Matt, xix., 17.
176. Ques. —What does Jesus Christ promise respecting
Ans. —Jesus says ; “ He that believeth on me, the works
that 1 do shall he do also, and greater works than
these shall he do.” John xiv., 12.
177. Ques. —What are the works he did ?
Ans.—The fulfilment of all righteousness by Christ in
Jesus. John xiv., 10.
178. Ques. —What are the greater works?
Ans. —When God fulfils in Israel the same righteousness
that he fulfilled in Jesus, it will be a greater work
done in them.
179 Ques. —How so.
Ans.—Because there was no evil nature in Jesus to over-
come and there is in us. John xiv., 30; Rom. vii., 18.
180. Ques. —Any other reason ?
21


Ans.—Yes. Jesus was slain ; but Israel will never die.
John viii., 51; x., 27, 28 ; xi., 26.
181. Ques. —If Jesus did not do away with the law, what
did he mean when he was crucified by sajing—“ It
is finished.”
Ans.—He meant the sacrificial law was finished by the
sacrifice of himself. Heb. ix., 12, 14, 26.
182. Ques. —Then was not the sacrificial law a part of the
law of righteousness ?
Ans. No. It was added because of transgression, and
could never make the comers thereunto perfect.
Gal. iii., 19 ; Heb x., 1.
183. Ques, —What is meant by being added because of
transgression ?
Ans. If the Jew broke any of the laws of righteousness
he had to offer the blood of an animal, to obtain the
salvation of his soul. Lev. xvii., 11.
184. Ques. —Then the blood of J esusisonly to save the soul;
Ans. —Yes. Only for the soul. Nothing can save the
body, but attaining to righteousness. Prov. xii,, 28;
Rom. x., 5.
185. Ques. —How is it, that the law which was ordained
to life, was found to be unto death ?
Ans.—Because they did not keep it, for the transgression
of the law is sin ; and the wages of sin is death.
Rom. vi., 23 ; vii., 10—12 ; Ist John iii., 4.
186. Ques. —What does Paul mean when he says : “By
the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified in
his sight.” Rom. iii., 20.
Ans.—The deeds of the Law there mentioned are the
transgressions of the Law ; and no one will be justi-
fied by transgressing the Law. Rom. vi., 15.
187. Ques. —But will not those who keep the Law be
justified ?
Ans.—Yes. It is written : “ For not the hearers of the
Law are just before God, but the doers of the Law
shall be justified.” Rom. ii., 13.
188. Ques. —Dothetencommandmentscontainall the law?
Ans.—No. And yet one word in those ten commandments
contains the whole of righteousness. Rom. xiii., 10.
189. Ques. —What word is that ?
Ans,—Love. Because love is the fulfilling of the law.


Rom. xiii., 10; Matt., xxii., 36, 37; John xiv., 21
—24 ; Ist John v., 3.
190. Ques. —Oan anyone keep the law, without also ful-
filling the Gospel ?
Ans.—N o. Because the Gospel showeth us how to keep
the law. Matt, v,, 17—48 ; xxii., 36, 37.
191. Ques. —How are those laws to be understood which
relate to wearing hair and beard ?
Ans.—God requires man to appear as he created him,
and not to conform to this world. Rom. xii., 2.
192. Ques. —But does not Paul say nature teaches us that,
if a man wear long hair, it is a shame unto him ?
Ans.—lt is written that we are by “ nature the children
of wrath,” and it is our fallen nature, that causes us
to be ashamed of keeping God’s laws, when against
the fashions of the world. Eph. ii., 3.
193. Ques. —Then we are not to follow the fashions of
the world ?
Ans.—No. Israel are commanded to come out from the
world, and be separate ; also not to love the world,
or the things that are in the world. 2nd Cor. vi.,
17 ; Ist John ii., 15—17.
194. Ques. —Why is this?
Ans. —Because that which is highly esteemed amongst men
is abomination in the sight of God. Luke xvi., 15.
195. Ques. —When is it an abomination ?
Ans. —When opposed to God’s laws and commands.
Rom. viii., 7.
196. Ques. —Are we not then to love the world ?
Ans. —No. God says: “If any man love the world the love
of the Father is not in him.” Ist John ii., 15—17.
197. Ques. —How is that law to be understood respecting
wearing apparel ?
Ans. —God expects those who wish to be clothed with
His spirit; to be also clothed temporally according
to His commands.
198. Ques. —Why are we not to wear a garment of divers
sorts, as of woollen and linen together? Lev. xix., 19.
Ans.—Because we are to seek to be clothed with God’s
spirit only, and not with good and evil as at present.
199, Ques. —Does not God say he will punish those who
wear strange apparel ?


Ans.—Yes. He says : I will punish “ all such as are
clothed with strange apparel. Zeph. i., 8.
200. Ques. —What is strange apparel ?”
Ans—Clothing in the fashion of the world, and not
according to His commands. Lev, xix., 19,
201 Ques —What did Jesus mean when he said : The
life is more than meat, and the body is more than
raiment ?
Ans—He meant that the immortal life was more to be
considered than food or raiment.
202 Ques —But why does he say : “ Take no thought
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall put on ”?
Ans—Because God has taken thought for both, and com-
manded us what we are to eat and to wear. Lev.
xix., 19 ; xx,, 25 ; Luke xii., 22—31.
203 Ques —Then what are we to understand by the laws
relating to clean and unclean meats ?
Ans—That as God has divided clean from unclean; so are
we to choose good and refuse evil. Deut. xxx., 15-19.
204 Ques —But does he not say : “ That which goeth
into the mouth doth not defile the man, but that
which cometh out 1 ”
Ans—The sin does not consist in the mere eating of the
unclean meat, but in disobeying the command of
God. Lev. xx,, 25 ; Rom. vi., 23.
205 Ques —Make that further appear ?
Ans—Jesus says: “ Out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts,” &c., these defile the man. Matt. xv. 18-19.
206 Ques —How do evil thoughts defile man 1
Ans—Evil thoughts are those opposed to God’s com-
mands, and when put into action, produce sin, and
sin defiles the man. James i., 14, 15.
207 Ques —Does not Paul say : “ Whatsoever is sold in
the shambles, that eat, asking no questions for con-
science sake ?”
Ans—Paul was addressing the Gentile or Christian
church, to whom everything is clean but blood.
Gen. ix., 3, 4 ; Acts xv., 19, 20.
208 Ques —Then of the Gentiles is not required the law
given by Moses ?
Ans—No. They are saved by grace through faith, and
not of works. Eph. ii., 8, 9.


209 Ques —Cannot the immortal life of the body be
obtained, without keeping these laws ?
Ans—No, All must be kept to be perfect, we must
neither add, nor diminish. Deut. iv., 2; xii., 32 ;
Matt, v., 17, 18.
210 Ques —Then the New Testament shows this also?
Ans—Yes. Jesus says : “Whosoever, therefore, shall
break one of these least commandments and shall
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the
kingdom of heaven.” Matt, v., 19.
211 Ques —Any other passage ?
Ans—Yes. James says : “ Whosoever shall keep the
whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty
of all.” James ii., 10.
212 Ques —How is that?
Ans—Because “the transgression of the law is sin,”
and “ the wages of sin is death.” Ist John iii., 4 ;
Rom. vi., 23.
213 Ques—Should the church of Israel fear the sneers
or opinions of mankind, while trying to keep these
laws ?
Ans—No. For God says : “ Hearken unto me ye that
know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my
law, fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye
afraid of their revilings.” Isa. li., 7.
214 Ques —Should they not rather rejoice ?
Ans—Yes. For Jesus says : “ Blessed are ye when men
shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad : for great is your
reward.” Matt, v., 11, 12,
215 Ques —In what words does Paul pray for those who
shall attain the redemption of the body ?
Ans—He says : “ The very God of peace sanctify you
wholly ; and I pray God your whole spirit and soul
and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he that calleth
you, who also will do it.” Ist Thess. v., 23, 24.
216 Ques —Why in all these answers do we refer to the
scriptures so often ?
Ans—Because all scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for cor-


rection, for instruction in righteousness. That the
man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished
unto all good works. 2nd Tim. hi., 16, 17.
217 Ques —What does Paul say about the study of the
scriptures 1
Ans—He says : “ Study to show thyself approved unto
God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the word of truth.” 2nd Tim. ii., 15.
218 Ques —How do the scriptures want dividing 1
Ans—The scriptures relating to the redemption of the
body, require dividing from those relating to the
salvation of the soul.
219 Ques —How is this to be done 1
Ans—By taking “here a little, and there a little,” and
“ comparing spiritual things with spiritual.” Isa.
xxviii., 9, 10 ; Ist Oor. ii., 12, 13.
220 Ques —What is prayer 1
Ans—The earnest desire of the heart, offered to God.
221 Ques —Should prayer be heard, or seen by another,
or be in secret 1
Ans—lt should be in secret; for Jesus says : “ When
thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou
hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in
secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall
reward thee openly.” Matt, vi., 6.
222 Ques —What is meant by the closet, and the door 1
Ans—The closet is the heart; and the door, the mouth.
Heb. iv., 12 ; Mic. vii., 5 ; Ist Sam. xvi., 7.
223 Ques —What is meant by “praying without ceas-
ing,” and “ being instant in prayer 1 ”
Ans—He is always at prayer, whose heart is always ear-
nestly desiring to keep God’s commandments, in all
he may think, speak, or do.
224 Ques —What do the scriptures say is the whole duty
of man ?
Ans—Solomon says : “ Let us hear the conclusion of the
whole matter : Fear God, and keep his command-
ments : for this is the whole duty of man.” Eccles
xii., 13.


CATHECHISM OF NAMES IN THE OLD
TESTAMENT.
225 Ques —Who was Adam ?
Ans —Adam was the first man God created, and. our first
parent.
226 Ques —Who was Eve ?
Ans—Eve was the first woman God created, and the
mother of all living.
227 Ques —Who was Cain ?
Ans-—Gain was the first-born son of Adam, and he slew
his brother Abel.
228 Ques —Wherefore slew he him ?
Ans—Because his own works were evil, and his brother’s
righteous.
229 Ques —Who was Enoch?
Ans—Enoch was a man who pleased God, and he was
taken up to heaven without dying.
230 Ques —Who was Methuselah ?
Ans—Methuselah was the oldest man ; he lived 969
years before he died.
231 Ques —Who was Noah ?
Ans—. Noah was the man who was saved in the ark, with
his wife and family, when the world was drowned.
232 Ques —Who were Shem, Ham, and Japheth ?
Ans—They were the three sons of Noah, who with their
wives were saved in the ark.
233 Ques —How many were saved altogether ?
Ans—Eight persons.
234 Ques —Who was Job ?
Ans—Job was the most patient of men, and in the midst
bf his sufferings, blessed the name of the Lord.
235 Ques —Who was Abraham ?
Ans—Abraham was the man who believed God’s pro-
mises to him, and it was counted to him for
righteousness.
236 Ques —Who was Lot ?
Ans—Lot was the man whom God saved, when Sodom
and Gomorrah were destroyed by fire.
237 Ques —Who was Isaac ?


Ans—lsaac was Abraham’s son, who was offered as a
sacrifice, but not accepted.
238 Ques —Who was Jacob 1
Ans—Jacob was the youngest son of Isaac, and he ob-
tained his father’s blessing.
239 Ques —What name did God give to Jacob ?
Ans—Jacob’s name was changed to Israel, because he
prevailed with God to bless him.
240—How many sons had Jacob 1
Ans—Jacob had twelve sons, from whom came the twelve
tribes of Israel.
241 Ques —Who was Joseph 1
Ans—Joseph was the beloved son of Jacob, and there-
fore hated of his brethren, who sold him into
slavery.
242 Ques —What became of Joseph?
Ans—He became a great man in Egypt, and then sent
for his father and brethren, and treated them well.
243 Ques —What became of his brethren ?
Ans—They died, and their descendants afterwards be-
came slaves in Egypt.
244 Ques —Who was Moses ?
Ans—Moses was the man whom God sent to deliver
Israel from slavery, and bring them out of Egypt,
into the land he had promised their fathers.
245 Ques —What land was that ?
Ans—The land of Canaan.
246 Ques —Did Moses bring them out of Egypt ?
Ans—Yes ; and brought them through the Red Sea, and
led them forty years in the wilderness, till they
came to Canaan.
247 Ques —What did God give to Moses ?
Ans—God gave His law to Moses, and promised that
whosoever kept it, should live and never die.
248 Ques —Who was Aaron ?
Ans—Aaron was the brother of Moses, and God gave
the priesthood to him and his sons.
249 Ques —Who was Joshua 1
Ans—Joshua succeeded Moses, and led Israel into the
Land of Canaan.
250 Ques —Who was Samson ?
Ans—Samson was the strongest man that ever lived, but


lost his strength when he disobeyed God, and let
people cut his hair.
251 Ques —Who was Samuel ?
Ans —Samuel was a prophet of God, chosen when a
child.
252 Ques —What is a prophet ?
Ans—A prophet is one to whom God reveals his will,
and also events to come to pass.
253 Ques —Who was David ?
Ans—David was a man whom God made King of Israel,
and who wrote the Book of Psalms.
254 Ques —Who was Goliath?
Ans—Goliath was a giant, who was killed by David with
a sling and a stone.
255 Ques —Who was Solomon ?
Ans —Solomon was the son of David, and reigned as
king after him. He was the wisest of men, and
wrote the Book of Proverbs and other books.
256 Ques —Who was Elijah ?
Ans—Elijah was a man who attained to righteousness,
and therefore never died. He was taken up to
heaven bodily, in a chariot of fire.
257 Ques —Who was Jonah?
Ans—Jonah was the prophet who was in the whale’s
belly three days and three nights, and came out
alive.
258 Ques —Who were Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-
nego ?
Ans—They were three Jews, who would not worship an
idol, and were cast into a furnace of fire and not
burned.
259 Ques —Who was Daniel ?
Ans—Daniel was the prophet who would pray to God,
and was cast into a den of lions, but who did not
hurt him.
260 Ques —Who were Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel ?
Ans—They were prophets, who wrote some of the books
in the Bible, which speak much of the redemption
of Israel.
261 Ques —Who was Malachi ?
Ans—Malachi was the last of the prophets in the Old
Testament, and who foretold the end of the world.


NEW TESTAMENT NAMES.
262 Ques —Who were the four Evangelists ?
Ans—Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, who wrote the
first four Books of the New Testament.
263 Ques —Who was John the Baptist ?
Ans—He was the forerunner of Jesus Christ, and bore
witness of him.
264 Ques —Who was the Virgin Mary?
Ans—She was the mother of Jesus, the Saviour of the
world.
265 Ques —Who was Joseph the Carpenter ?
Ans—He was the husband of the Virgin Mary, and
therefore supposed to be the father of Jesus, but
was not.
266 Ques —Who were the Disciples ?
Ans—They were those who believed in Jesus, and were
taught by him.
267 Ques —Who were the Apostles ?
Ans—They were twelve of the Disciples chosen by Jesus,
and sent forth to preach.
268 Ques —Who was Nicodemus ?
Ans—He was a ruler of the Jews, and came by night
to talk to Jesus.
269 Ques —Who were the Scribes ?
Ans—The Scribes were the writers and teachers of the
Law.
270 Ques —Who were the Pharisees?
Ans—They were a sect of the Jews who professed to be
very strict, and to know better and do better, than
any other people.
271 Ques —Who were the Sadducees ?
Ans—They were a sect of the Jews, who denied the
resurrection.
272 Ques —Who was Lazarus ?
Ans—He was a man whom Jesus brought to life, after
being dead four days.
273 Ques —Who was Martha ?
Ans—She was the sister of Lazarus, who was troubled
about too much serving when Jesus visited her
house.


274 Ques —Who was Mary, the sister of Martha ?
Ans—She it was, who chose rather to sit and listen to
Jesus, than help her sister; and Jesus commended
her for it.
275 Ques —Who was John ?
Ans—John was the Disciple whom Jesus loved ; and it
is believed that he never died.
276 Ques —Who was Simon Peter ?
Ans—Peter was the Apostle who denied Jesus, but after-
wards repented, and wept bitterly.
277 Ques —Who was Judas Iscariot?
Ans—He was the Apostle who betrayed Jesus with a
kiss, and afterwards went and hanged himself,
278 Ques —Who was Caiaphas ?
Ans—He was the Jewish High Priest who condemned
J esus.
279 Ques —Who was Pontius Pilate ?
Ans—He was the Roman Governor who delivered Jesus
to be crucified, after saying he found no fault in
him.
280 Ques —Who was Joseph of Arimathea ?
Ans—He was a rich man, who buried Jesus in a new
tomb.
281 Ques —Who was Thomas ?
Ans—He was the Apostle who at first doubted that
Jesus was risen from the dead.
282 Ques —Who were Ananias and Sapphira ?
Ans—They were a man and his wife, who told a lie to
the Apostles, and at once fell down dead.
283 Ques —Who was Stephen ?
Ans—He was a man who was stoned to death for being
a Christian.
284 Ques —Who was Paul ?
Ans—Paul was chosen by God, as the Apostle to the
Gentiles, and wrote most of the Epistles.
285 Ques —Who was Apollos ?
Ans—He was an eloquent preacher of the Gospel.
286 Ques —Who were Barnabas and Silas ?
Ans—Two preachers of the Gospel, who at times tra-
velled with Paul.
287 Ques —Who was Timothy ?
Ans—He was a preacher of the Gospel, much beloved


JHI p
fel&LIO
F yvb 32
by Paul, who had converted him; but he had
studied the Scriptures from his childhood.
288 Ques —Who was Elymas ?
Ans—He was a sorcerer, who was struck blind for
opposing Paul when preaching the Gospel.
289 Ques —Who was Dorcas 1
Ans—A kind woman, who was good to the poor, and
who having fallen ill and died, was raised from the
dead by Peter.
290 Ques —Who was Eutychus ?
Ans —He was a young man who slept while Paul was
preaching, and falling down was killed ; but Paul
raised him to life again.
291 Ques —Who was Agrippa ?
Ans—He was a king who was almost persuaded to be a
Christian by the preaching of Paul.
292 Ques-—What are the Epistles ?
Ans—They are letters written by Paul, Peter, James,
and John, &c., who were the Apostles of Jesus
Christ, and wrote and spoke by the power of the
Holy Ghost.
293 Ques —What is the Book of Revelation ?
Ans—The Book of Revelation was written by the
Apostle John, and contains the revelation of God
to him, of great events to come to pass, principally
relating to the end of the world, and the redemption
of Israel.
J. C. Stephens, Printer, 146 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.


,
. ■ n - '-I ~ ‘ ‘ ’ :V ;


