

CATECHISM
Issued with
Episcopal Authority
for General Use
Australia
SIXPENCE
Registered at the C.P.0., Melbourne,
for transmission by post as a book.


CATECHISM
yor general *ljse in uitraiia
*3ddued wi tit
CEpiscopal ~*sQuilioritfy
on the
occasion of the
4th Plenary Council,
1937.
Publishers: Australian Catholic Truth Society


Imprimatur :
I& DANIEL MANNIX,
Archiepiscopus Melbournensis.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by The Advocate Press,
143-151 a'Beckett Street, Melbourne, 1938.
Copyright. All rights reserved.


Prayers
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Amen.
THE LORD’S PRAYER
Our Father Who art in heaven.
Hallowed be Thy name;
Thy kingdom come:
Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread:
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
who trespass against us:
And lead us not into temptation;
But deliver us from evil. Amen
HAIL MARY
Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee.
Blessed art thou among women,
and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus.
Holy Mary, mother of God,
pray for us sinners,
now and at the hour of our death. Amen.
GLORY BE TO THE FATHER
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be,
world without end. Amen.


THE APOSTLES CREED
I believe in God the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven
and earth;
And in Jesus Christ, His only Son, Our Lord;
Who was conceived of the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin
Mary;
Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and
buried;
He descended into hell, the third day He rose again from
the dead;
He ascended into Heaven, sitteth at the right hand of God
the Father Almighty;
From thence He shall come to judge the living and the
dead.
I believe in the Holy Ghost;
The Holy Catholic Church; the communion of saints;
The forgiveness of sins;
The resurrection of the body;
And life everlasting. Amen.
THE MORNING OFFERING
O Jesus, through the most pure heart of Mary, I offer
Thee the prayers, works, joys and sufferings of this day
for all the intentions of Thy divine Heart.
GRACE BEFORE MEALS
Bless us, O Lord, and these Thy gifts which of Thy
bounty we are about to receive through Christ Our Lord.
Amen.
GRACE AFTER MEALS
We give Thee thanks, O Almighty God, for all Thy
benefits, Who livest and reignest world without end. Amen,
May the souls of the faithful departed, through the
mercy of God, rest in peace. Amen.


THE CONFTTEOR
I confess to Almighty God,
to blessed Mary, ever Virgin,
to blessed Michael the Archangel,
to blessed John the Baptist,
to the Holy Apostles, Peter and Paul,
and to all the Saints,
that I have sinned exceedingly in thought, word and
deed,
through my fault, through my fault, through my most
grievous fault.
Therefore, I beseech
the blessed Mary ever Virgin,
blessed Michael the Archangel,
blessed John the Baptist,
the Holy Apostles, Peter and Paul,
and all the Saints,
to pray to the Lord our God for me.
May the Almighty God have mercy on me, forgive me
my sins, and bring me to life everlasting . Amen.
May the Almighty and merciful Lord grant me pardon,
absolution, and remission of my sins. Amen.
AN ACT OF CONTRITION
O my God, I am sorry and beg pardon for all my sins,
and detest them above all things, because they deserve
Thy dreadful punishments, because they have crucified my
Loving Saviour Jesus Christ, and, most of all, because
they offend Thine Infinite Goodness; and I firmly resolve,
by the help of Thy grace, never to offend Thee again,
and carefully to avoid the occasions of sin. Amen.


A SHORT ACT OF CONTRITION
O my God, I am very sorry that I have sinned against
Thee because Thou art so good and I will not sin again.
AN ACT OF FAITH
O my God, I firmly believe all the truths that the Holy
Catholic Church believes and teaches; I believe these truths,
O Lord, because Thou, the Infallible Truth, hast revealed
them to her; in this Faith I am resolved to live and die.
Amen.
AN ACT OF HOPE
O my God, relying on Thy promises, I hope that through
the infinite merits of Jesus Christ, Thou wilt grant me
pardon of my sins, and the graces necessary to serve
Thee in this life and to obtain eternal happiness in the
next. Amen.
AN ACT OF CHARITY
O my God, I love Thee with my whole heart and above
all things, because Thou art infinitely good and perfect;
and I love my neighbour as myself for love of Thee.
Grant that I may love Thee more and more in this life
and in the next for all eternity. Amen.
TO THE GUARDIAN ANGEL
Angel of God, my guardian dear,
To whom God’s love commits me here,
Ever this day be at my side,
To light and guard, to rule and guide. Amen.


THE ANGELUS
V. The Angel of the Lord declared unto Mary
R. And she conceived of the Holy Ghost. Hail Mary,
V. Behold the handmaid of the Lord.
R. Be it done unto me according to Thy word. Hail
Mary, etc.
V. And the Word was made flesh.
R. And dwelt among us. Hail Mary, etc.
V. Pray for us, O Holy Mother of God.
R. That we may be made worthy of the promises of
Christ.
Let Us Pray
Pour forth, we beseech Thee, O Lord, Thy grace into
our hearts, that we to whom the Incarnation of Christ
Thy Son was made known by the message of an angel,
may, by His Passion and Cross, be brought to the glory
of His resurrection. Through the same Christ our Lord.
Amen.
HAIL 1 HOLY QUEEN
Hail, holy Queen, Mother of mercy; hail, our life, our
sweetness, and our hope! To thee do we cry, poor ban-
ished children of Eve; to thee do we send up our sighs,
mourning and weeping in this valley of tears. Turn, then,
most gracious advocate, thine eyes of mercy towards us;
and after this our exile show unto us the blessed fruit of
thy womb, Jesus. O clement, O loving, O sweet Virgin
Mary.


THE MYSTERIES OF THE ROSAfi.
The Joyful Mysteries
The Annunciation.
The Visitation.
The Birth of Our Lord.
The Presentation in the Temple.
The Finding of the Child Jesus in the Temple,
The Sorrowful Mysteries
The Agony in the Garden.
The Scourging at the Pillar.
The Crowning with Thorns.
The Carrying of the Cross,
The Crucifixion.
The Glorious Mysteries
The Resurrection.
The Ascension.
The Descent of the Holy Ghost.
The Assumption.
The Crowning of the Blessed Virgin.
THE DIVINE PRAISES
Blessed be God.
Blessed be His Holy Name.
Blessed be Jesus Christ, true God and true Man.
Blessed be the name of Jesus.
Blessed be His most Sacred Heart.
Blessed be Jesus in the most holy Sacrament of the
Blessed be the great Mother of God, Mary most ]
Blessed be her holy and Immaculate Conception.
Blessed be her glorious Assumption.
Blessed be the name of Mary, Virgin and Mother.
Blessed be St. Joseph, her most chaste Spouse.
Blessed be God in His angels and His saints.
i Altar,
Holy.


PRAYER BEFORE LESSONS
Come, O Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of Thy faithful and
kindle in them the fire of Thy love,
V. Send forth Thy spirit and they shall be created.
R. And Thou shalt renew the face of the earth.
Let Us Pray
O God Who hast taught the hearts of the faithful by the
light of the Holy Spirit, grant that in the same Spirit,
we may be always truly wise and ever rejoice in His
consolation. Through Christ our Lord. Amen.
Direct, we beseech Thee, O Lord, our actions by Thy holy
inspirations and carry them on by Thy gracious as-
sistance, that every prayer and work of ours may
always begin from Thee, and by Thee be happily
ended. Through Christ our Lord. Amen.
AFTER LESSONS
Grant us, we beseech Thee, O Lord, the help of Thy grace,
that what by Thy instruction we know is to be done,
by Thy assistance we may perfectly accomplish.
Through Christ our Lord. Amen.


"Suffer the little children, and forbid them not to come to
Me: for the kingdom of heaven is for such."
(Matt, xix, 14.)


Catechism
Chapter I.—GOD: THE CREATION: MAN’S DESTINY.
1. Who made the world?
God made the world.
2. How did God make the world?
God created the world,, that is. He made it out of
nothing.
3. Who is God?
God is the Creator of the world;
He is the living Being without beginning and with-
out end;
He is infinitely great and infinitely good.
4. Is there only one God?
Yes: there is only one God.
5. "Where is God?
God is in heaven, on earth, and everywhere.
6. If God be everywhere, why do we not see Him?
We do not see God because He is a Spirit, having
no body, and therefore cannot be seen by us in
this life.
7. Does God see us?
Yes: God sees us and always watches over us.
8. Can God do all things?
Yes: God can do all things.
9. Why did God make the world?
God made the world to show His power and wis-
dom, and to help us to reach our home in heaven.
10. Who made you?
God made me, giving me a body and a soul.


11. Did God create your soul?
Yes: God created my soul, and He made it like
Himself.
12. How is your soul like God?
My soul is like God because
it is a spirit;
it will never die;
and it can know and love God.
13. Why did God make you?
God made me to know Him, love Him and serve
Him here on earth, and to be happy with Him
for ever in heaven.
Chapter 2.—PRINCIPAL TRUTHS OF RELIGION.
14. How can we know God on earth?
We can know God on earth by seeing the wonder-
ful things He has made, and by learning the
truths which He has taught.
15. How do we know what God has taught?
We know what God has taught from the teaching of
His Church, which is the pillar and ground of the
truth. (I Tim. iii, 15.)
(See No. 57.)
16. Can we understand all the truths which God has
taught?
We can understand many of the truths which God
has taught, but there are some truths which we
cannot fully understand, and these are called Mys-
steries of Religion.
17. What are the chief Mysteries of Religion?
The chief Mysteries of Religion are the Blessed
Trinity and the Incarnation.


18. What does the Mystery of the Blessed Trinity mean?
The Mystery of the Blessed Trinity means that in
one God there are three really distinct Persons
equal in all things, and having only one and the
same Divine Nature.
19. What are the names of the Three Divine Persons?
The First Person is God the Father, the Second
Person is God the Son, the Third Person is God
the Holy Ghost.
20. What does the Mystery of the Incarnation mean?
The Mystery of the Incarnation means that God
the Son, the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity,
became man.
21. How did God the Son become Man?
God the Son became man by taking, through the
power of the Holy Ghost, a body and a soul like
ours in the womb of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
22. Why did God the Son become man?
God the Son became man to redeem us.
23. How did God the Son redeem us?
God the Son redeemed us by His sufferings and
death on the cross.
Chapter 3.—OUR FIRST PARENTS AND THEIR FALL:
THE ANGELS.
24. Why did we need to be redeemed?
We needed to be redeemed because our first parents,
Adam and Eve, who had been created heirs to
the kingdom of heaven, had sinned against God
and by their sin had closed heaven against all
mankind.
25. What sin did our first Parents commit?
Our first Parents disobeyed God when they ate the
forbidden fruit in the Garden of Eden.


Why did God command our first Parents not to eat
the forbidden fruit?
God commanded our first Parents not to eat the
forbidden fruit to test their obedience to Him,
their Lord and Master.
Who tempted our first Parents to eat the forbidden
fruit?
The devil, one of the fallen angels, tempted our first
Parents to eat the forbidden fruit.
Who are the angels?
The angels are spirits like our souls, but they have
no bodies.
Were the angels in heaven when they were created
by God?
No: the angels, like our first Parents, were placed
in a state of trial in which they could win or lose
heaven.
Did some of the angels fall into sin?
Yes: the angels were so great and beautiful fhat
some fell into a sin of pride. They rebelled against
God, and are punished in hell for ever. (See
No. 238.)
How did God reward the good angels?
God rewarded the good angels by allowing them to
see Him in heaven, thus making them happy for
Has everyone an angel to help him to serve God?
Yes: everyone has a guardian angel to help him to
serve God.


What are some gifts of God that our first Parents lost
by their sin?
Our first Parents by their sin lost the wonderful gift
of sanctifying grace, and with it the right to
heaven. They were driven out of the Garden of
Eden, and, with all their children to the end of
the world, were doomed to die. (See No. 150.)
Does the sin of our first Parents come down to us?
Yes: the sin of our first Parents does come down to
each one of us; we are bom in original sin.
What do you mean by saying that we are bom in
original sin?
By saying that we are bom in original sin I mean
that because of the sin of our first Parents, we are
bom without sanctifying grace, and without a
right to heaven; we have an inclination to wrong
doing; and must suffer the pains and miseries of
this life. (See No. 150.)
Was anyone conceived and bom free from original
sin?
Yes: the blessed Virgin Mary and she alone was
conceived and bom free from original sin. This
favour from God is called her Immaculate Con-
ception.
Chapter 4.—THE INCARNATION AND REDEMPTION.
37. What name was given to God the Son when He
became man?
God the Son, when He became man, was called
Jesus Christ.
38. Is Jesus Christ true God and hue man?
Yes: Jesus Christ is true God and true man.


"And they came with haste: and they found Mary and Joseph,
and the Infant lying in the manger." (Luke ii, 16.)


Why is Jesus Christ truly God?
Jesus Christ is truly God because He is the Second
Person of the Blessed Trinity, and therefore has
one and the same nature with God the Father
and God the Holy Ghost,
Why is Jesus Christ truly man?
Jesus Christ is truly man because, while truly God
He has also a human nature, that is, a body and
a soul like ours.
How many persons are there in Jesus Christ?
There is only one person in Jesus Christ, and that
person is the Second Divine Person of the Blessed
Trinity,
Are there two natures in Jesus Christ?
Yes: there are two natures in Jesus Christ, a divine
nature and a human nature.
What happened on the day of the Annunciation?
On the day of the Annunciation, the Archangel Gab-
riel announced to the Blessed Virgin Mary:
Behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb and shall
bring forth a son. and thou shall call His Name
Jesus. (Luke i, 31.)
What happened on Christmas Day?
On Christmas Day Jesus Christ was bom of the
Blessed Virgin Mary in a stable at Bethlehem.
Is the Blessed Virgin Mary the Mother of God?
Yes: the Blessed Virgin Mary is the Mother of God,
because her Son, Jesus Christ, is God.
What happened on Good Friday?
On Good Friday, Jesus Christ died nailed to a cross,
to redeem and save us.


Why do we call that day Good on which Jesus Christ
died?
We call that day Good on which Jesus Christ died
because His death has shown how much He loves
and has brought us so many blessings.
While the body of Jesus Christ was in the tomb, what
happened to His soul?
While the body of Jesus Christ was in the tomb His
soul descended to a place called Limbo.
What do you mean by Limbo?
Limbo is that place where the souls of all good
people who died before Christ were waiting until
He would redeem them and take them to heaven.
What happened on Easter Sunday?
On Easter Sunday, the third day after His death,
Jesus Christ arose glorious and immortal from
the dead.
What do the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ
prove?
The death of Jesus Christ proves that He is man,
and His resurrection proves that He is God.
What happened on Ascension Thursday?
On Ascension Thursday, forty days after Easter,
Jesus Christ ascended with His body and soul into
heaven.
Chapter S.—THE CHURCH.
What happened on Pentecost Sunday?
On Pentecost Sunday the Holy Ghost came down
upon the apostles in the form of tongues of fire.
Why did Jesus Christ send the Holy Ghost?
Jesus Christ sent the Holy Ghost to strengthen and
enlighten His apostles, and to guide and guard
His Church through all ages.


"And there appeared to them parted tongues as it were of
fire . . . and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost.
(Acts ii, 3-4.)


Did Jesus Christ come on earth to teach us as well
as to die for us?
Yes: Jesus Christ came on earth not only to die
for us, but also to teach us what we must believe
and do to save our souls.
Can we save our souls by doing good without believ-
ing the teaching of Jesus Christ?
No: to save our souls, in addition to doing good,
we must also believe the teaching of Jesus Christ,
for without faith it is impossible to please God.
(Heb. xi, 6.) (See No. 102.)
How can we know the teaching of Jesus Christ?
Jesus Christ founded a visible Society or Church to
give us His teaching, and to guide and help us
on the way to heaven. (See No. 15.)
Why must we believe the teaching of the Church?
We must believe the teaching of the Church be-
cause the Church has authority from Jesus Christ
to teach. For Christ said to His Apostles; All
power is given to Me in heaven and in earth. . . .
Going, therefore, teach ye all nations . . . and
behold I am with you all days, even to the con-
summation of the world. (Matt, xxviii, 18-20.)
Can the Church err in teaching the doctrines of
Jesus Christ?
No; the Church cannot err in teaching, for Jesus
Christ promised the Pastors of His Church that
He would send the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of
Truth, to teach them all truth, and to remain
with them for ever. (John xiv, 16, and xvi, 13.)
Will the Church last for all time?
Yes: Jesus Christ promised that His Church would
last for all time, and He said: The gates of hell
shall not prevail against it. (Matt, xvi, 18.)


61. What is the name of the true Church founded by
Jesus Christ?
The true Church founded by Jesus Christ is the
Holy Catholic Church.
62. Of all the various religious bodies that claim the
name of Christian, which is the true Church
founded by Christ?
The true Church founded by Jesus Christ is that
which is governed by the Pope, and the Bishops
in union with him.
Chapter 6.—THE MARKS OF THE CHURCH.
63. What are the marks or signs by which people may
know the true Church of Christ?
Christ’s words and our own reason tell us that there
are four chief marks or signs by which the true
Church can be known. The true Church is One,
Holy; Catholic, that is, Universal; and Apostolic.
64. What Church has these four marks?
The Catholic Church alone is one, holy, universal,
and apostolic, and is therefore the one true Church
of Jesus Christ.
65. Why do you say the Catholic Church is one?
The Catholic Church is one because all its mem-
bers —
believe the same truths;
offer to God the same Holy Sacrifice;
share the same Sacraments;
and are united under one visible head on earth—■
the Pope.


Why do you say the Catholic Church is holy?
The Catholic Church is holy because it was founded
by Jesus Christ; and through its holy teaching and
the Sacraments it gives us all the graces that in
every age make men and women remarkable for
holiness.
Why do you say the Catholic Church is universal?
The Catholic Church is universal because its Foun-
der, Jesus Christ, appointed it to teach all nations;
and everywhere and in every age it teaches every-
thing that He taught.
Why do you say the Catholic Church is apostolic?
The Catholic Church is apostolic because the Bishops
of the Catholic Church can trace back their
authority in an unbroken line to Jesus Christ and
the Apostles.
Are these four marks found in any religious body
except in the Catholic Church?
No: these four marks are found in the Catholic
Church alone.
Is everyone bound to belong to the Catholic Church?
Yes: everyone is bound to belong to the Catholic
Church, because Our Lord said to His Apostles;
Go ye into the whole world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and
is baptized, shall be saved', but he that believeth
not shall be condemned. (Mark xvi, 15, 16.)
Can those who are outside the Catholic Church be
saved?
Those who through their own fault are outside the
Catholic Church cannot be saved: those who
through no fault of their own are outside the
Catholic Church will be saved if they die in the
state of grace.


Chapter 7.—THE MEMBERS OF THE CHURCH.
72. Who are the members of the Church?
The members of the Church are our Holy Father the
Pope, and with him all the Bishops, priests and
people who are baptized, and who acknowledge
the Pope to be the Vicar of Christ on earth and
the visible head of the Church.
Whom does the Pope succeed as visible head of the
Church?
The Pope is the successor of St. Peter, who was
chief of the Apostles, Christ’s Vicar on earth, and
first Pope and Bishop of Rome.
How do you know St. Peter was appointed by Christ
as visible head of the Chinch?
We know St. Peter was made the visible head of
the Church because Jesus Christ said to him:
Thou art Peter (the rock), and on this rock I
will build My Church, and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it, and I will give to thee
the keys of the kingdom of heaven. And what-
soever thou shalt bind upon earth, it shall be
bound also in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt
loose on earth, it shall be loosed also in heaven.
(Matt, xvi, 18, 19.)
Did Jesus Christ fulfil His promise to St. Peter?
Yes: after the Resurrection, Jesus Christ appointed
St. Peter shepherd over His whole flock, when He
said: Feed My lambs . . . feed My sheep. (John
xxi, 15-17.)
Who are the successors of the other Apostles?
The successors of the other Apostles are all the
other Bishops of the Catholic Church.


What do you mean by the infallibility of the Pope?
By the infallibility of the Pope I mean that the
Pope cannot teach what is false when, speaking
as Head of the Church, and binding all the faith-
ful, he defines doctrines of faith and morals.
Where do we find doctrines of faith and morals?
Doctrines of faith and morals are found in the Bible
and in Tradition,
What do you mean by the Bible?
By the Bible I mean the Books of the Old Law and
of the New Law, which, as they were written
under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, have
God for their author.
Does the Bible contain all the truths given to us
under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost?
No: the Bible does not contain all the truths given
to us under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost;
some of these truths are contained in Tradition.
St. Paul says: Therefore, Brethren, stand fast;
and hold the traditions which you have learned,
whether by word or by our epistle. (2 Thess. ii,
14.)
What do you mean by Tradition?
By Tradition I mean those teachings of Christ which
were not written in the books of the Bible, but
have come down to us through the Apostles and
their successors.
Chapter B.—SIN: CONTRITIONs PURGATORY.
82. What is sin?
Sin is any wilful thought, word, deed, or omission
against the law of God.


83. How many kinds of sin can a person commit?
A person can commit two kinds of sin, mortal sin
or venial sin.
84. What is mortal sin?
Mortal sin is breaking God’s law in a serious way.
85. How does a person commit a mortal sin?
A person commits a mortal sin when he knowingly
and willingly consents to something which he be-
lieves to be a mortal sin.
86. What is the effect of mortal sin?
By mortal sin the soul rebels against God, it loses
sanctifying grace and all right to heaven. (See
No. 150.)
87. Is it a great evil to commit a mortal sin?
To commit a mortal sin is the greatest of all evils.
88. What should we do if we commit a mortal sin?
If we commit a mortal sin we should at once make
an act of perfect contrition, and then go to Con-
fession as soon as we reasonably can.
89. What do you mean by Perfect Contrition?
Perfect Contrition is sorrow for our sins because
they offend God, Who is so good Himself, and
deserves to be loved so much by us. (See Nos.
200, 201.)
90. What is the effect of Perfect Contrition?
Perfect Contrition immediately takes away sin by
giving sanctifying grace, and restores us to God’s
friendship even before we go to Confession.
91. Is it necessary to confess mortal sins which have
already been forgiven through Perfect Contrition?
Yes; we are bound to tell all the mortal sins which
have not been already confessed and forgiven in
the Sacrament of Penance.


"And plaiting a crown of thorns they put it upon His Head."
(Matt, xxvii, 29.)


What happens to those who die in mortal sin?
Those who die in mortal sin are lost for ever in
hell. (See Nos. 232, 233.)
What is venial sin?
Venial sin is breaking God’s law in a less serious
way than by mortal sin.
How does a person commit a venial sin?
A person commits a venial sin when he knowingly
and willingly consents to something which he be-
lieves to be a venial sin.
What is the effect of venial sin?
By venial sin our love for God is lessened, and so
we are in greater danger of falling into mortal sin.
What happens to those who die in venial sin?
Those who die in venial sin go to Purgatory.
What is Purgatory?
Purgatory is a place or state of punishment in the
next life where some souls have to suffer for a
time, because they are not yet fit to go to heaven.
Do all those who die in the state of grace go to
heaven immediately?
No: those who die in venial sin, and those who
have not done sufficient penance for sin forgiven,
are sent to Purgatory.
Can we help the souls in Purgatory?
Yes: we can help the souls in Purgatory by our
prayers and good works, by gaining indulgences
for them, and especially by the offering of the
Holy Sacrifice of Mass. (See Nos. 211-214.)
What does the Scripture say about helping the souls
in Purgatory?
The Scripture says: It is therefore a holy and whole-
some thought to pray for the dead, that they
may be loosed from sins. (II Mach, xii, 46.)


What do you mean by the Communion of Saints?
By the Communion of Saints, I mean that the mem-
bers of the Church on earth, the saints in heaven
and the suffering souls in Purgatory are all united
as one family of God.
Chapter 9.—THE COMMANDMENTS OF GOD.
d-ra.)
Can we save our souls by believing in God, without
doing good works?
No: we are bound not only to believe what God
has taught, but also to love and serve Him, for
faith without works is dead. (James ii, 26.)
(See No. 56.)
How de we love and serve God?
We love and serve God by keeping the Command-
ments of God and the Commandments of His
Church.
What are the Commandments of God?
I am the Lord thy God.
1. Thou shalt not have strange gods before Me.
2. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord
thy God in vain.
3. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath
day,
4. Honour thy father and thy mother.
5. Thou shalt not kill.
6. Thou shalt not commit adultery.
7. Thou shalt not steal.
8. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy
neighbour.
9. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s wife.
10. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s goods.


What are we commanded to do by the first Com-
mandment?
We are commanded by the first Commandment to
to give supreme worship and adoration to God
and to Him alone.
How do we give supreme worship and adoration to
God?
We give supreme worship and adoration to God by
the offering of Sacrifice; by prayer; and by acts
of Faith, Hope and Charity. (See No. 179.)
Why do we make an act of Faith?
We make an act of Faith to show that we firmly
believe the truths which God has taught.
How do we show mu' Faith?
We show our Faith by learning our religion care-
fully; by practising it faithfully; and by teaching
it to others.
Why do we make an act of Hope?
We make an act of Hope to show that we desire
eternal life, and the means to obtain it.
Why do we make an act of Charity?
We make an act of Charity to show that we love
God above all for His own sake, and our neigh-
bour as ourselves for the love of God.
(See Nos. 136, 137.)
How do we sin against the first Commandment?
We sin against the first Commandment by taking
part in any form of false religion or of super-
stitious practices.
Is it a sin against the first Commandment to take part
in non-Catholic services?
Yes: it is a sin against the first Commandment to
take part in non-Catholic services.


Is it lawful to honour the Blessed Virgin Mary and
the Saints?
It is lawful to honour the Blessed Virgin Mary and
the Saints, but not to give them divine or supreme
honour, which is due to God alone.
What are we commanded to do by the second Com-
mandment?
We are commanded by the second Commandment to
speak with reverence of God, and of holy per-
sons and things.
How do we sin against the second Commandment?
We sin against the second Commandment by cursing
or blaspheming or by taking oaths that are false,
rash, unjust or unnecessary.
What are we commanded to do by the third Com-
mandment?
We are commanded by the third Commandment to
give special worship to God at appointed times.
How do we sin against the third Commandment?
We sin against the third Commandment by wilfully
failing to sanctify Sunday and Holy Days as the
Church prescribes.
What does the Church prescribe for Sundays and
Holy Days?
The Church commands us to offer sacrifice to God
on Sundays and Holy days by assisting at Mass;
and forbids us to engage unnecessarily in bodily
toil on these days.
Chapter 10.—THE COMMANDMENTS OF GOD.
(IV-X)
What are we commanded to do by the fourth Com-
mandment?
We are commanded by the fourth Commandment to
love and honour our parents and superiors, and
to obey them in all that is not sinful.


How do we sin against the fourth Commandment?
We sin against the fourth Commandment by iH
contempt, ill-will or disobedience towards our
parents or to others placed over us.
What are the chief duties of parents under the fourth
Commandment?
The chief duties of parents are to provide for their
children, to instruct them in Christian doctrine, to
send them to Catholic schools, and, by good
example and every means in their power, to bring
them to God.
What are we commanded to do by the fifth Com-
mandment?
We are commanded by the fifth Commandment to
take proper care of our own health and life, and
to live in peace and charity with our neighbour.
How do we sin against the fifth Commandment?
We sin against the fifth Commandment by murder,
or by drunkenness, quarrelling, hatred, anger, or
revenge.
Do we break the fifth Commandment by scandal,
that is, by leading others to commit sin?
Yes: scandal is a sin against the fifth Commandment.
Woe to that man by whom scandal cometh, said
Our Lord. (Matt, xviii, 7.)
What are we commanded to do by the sixth Com-
mandment?
We are commanded by the sixth Commandment to
be pure in our looks, words and actions: Blessed
are the clean of heart, for they shall see God.
(Matt, v, 8.)
How do we sin against the sixth Commandment?
We sin against the sixth Commandment by giving
deliberate consent to impure looks, words, or ac-
tions, alone or with others.


What are we commanded to do by the seventh Com-
mandment?
We are commanded by the seventh Commandment
to be just in our dealings with our neighbour, to
pay just wages, and to do honest work.
How do we sin against the seventh Commandment?
We sin against the seventh Commandment by un-
justly taking or keeping what belongs to another,
or by cheating, or injuring any person’s property.
What are we commanded to do by the eighth Com-
mandment?
We are commanded by the eighth Commandment
to speak with truth and charity, for Our Lord has
said: As you would that men should do to you,
do you also to them in like manner. (Luke vi, 31.)
How do we sin against the eighth Commandment?
We sin against the eighth Commandment by false
swearing, rash judgment and lies, or by speaking
unkindly or unjustly of our neighbour.
What are we commanded to do by the ninth Com-
mandment?
We are commanded by the ninth Commandment to
keep ourselves pure in thought and desire, for
evil thoughts are an abomination to the Lord.
(Prov. xv, 26.)
How do we sin against the ninth Commandment?
We sin against the ninth Commandment by taking
wilful pleasure in immodest thoughts, desires, or
feelings.
Are immodest thoughts, desires, or feelings always
sins?
No: immodest thoughts, desires, or feelings are not
sins unless we knowingly and willingly consent to
them.


134. What are we commanded to do by the tenth Com-
mandment?
We are commanded by the tenth Commandment to
be grateful for God’s good gifts to us, and to re-
joice in our neighbour’s welfare.
135. How do we sin against the tenth Commandment?
We sin against the tenth Commandment by desir-
ing to take or keep wrongfully what belongs to
another,
136. Name one Commandment of Our Lord which will
include all ten Commandments.
All ten Commandments are included in these words
of Our Lord; Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul,
and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind,
and thy neighbour as thyself. (Luke x, 27.)
137. Must we love our enemies for the love of God?
Yes; we must love even our enemies. Love your
enemies, says Christ, do good to them that hate
you, bless them that curse you, and pray for them
that persecute and calumniate you • (Luke vi:
Matt, v.)
Chapter 11.—THE COMMANDMENTS OF THE
CHURCH.
138. Are we bound to obey the commandments made
by the Church?
Yes; we are bound to obey all the commandments
of the Church.
139. From whom does the Church get power to make
commandments?
The Church gets power to make commandments
from Jesus Christ. For He said: He that heareth
you, heareth Me; he that despiseth you, despiseth
Me. (Luke x, 16.)


What are the principal commandments of the Church?
The principal commandments of the Church are:
To hear Mass on Sundays and Holy days of obli-
gation.
To fast and abstain on the days commanded.
To confess our sins at least once a year.
To receive worthily the Blessed Eucharist each year
at Easter, or within the appointed time.
To contribute to the support of our pastors, and
to the upkeep of Catholic schools and charitable
institutions.
To send Catholic children to Catholic schools.
To observe the laws of the Church regarding the
celebration of the Sacrament of Matrimony.
What are the Holy days of obligation in Australia?
The Holy days of obligation in Australia are: Christ-
mas day; New Year’s Day; Ascension Thursday;
The Assumption (15th August); and All Saint’s
Day (Ist November).
What are fast days?
Fast days are days on which the Church limits the
amount of food a person may eat.
What are days of abstinence?
Days of abstinence are days on which the Church
forbids the use of meat.
Are there some days which are days both of fast and
abstinence.
Yes: there are certain days on which the Church
limits the amount of food a person may eat, and
forbids the use of meat.


Why does the Church command us to fast and
abstain?
The Church commands us to fast and abstain be-
cause fast and abstinence help us to practice self-
control, and so resist temptation. They can also
be offered to God in reparation for our sins. (See
No’s 208-210.)
Is God’s grace needed to keep His Commandments
and those of His Church?
Yes: God’s grace is needed to keep His Command-
ments and those of His Church.
Chapter 12.—GRACE AND PRAYER.
What is Grace?
Grace is a supernatural gift which God gives us to
make us holy, and to help us to save our souls.
Can we gain heaven without God’s Grace?
No: without Grace we can do nothing to merit
heaven. Without Me, says Christ, you can do
nothing. (John xv, 5.)
How many kinds of Grace are there?
There are two kinds of Grace, Sanctifying Grace and
Actual Grace.
What does Sanctifying Grace do for us?
Sanctifying Grace makes us sharers in the divine life
of Christ so that we become the temples of the
Holy Ghost; the adopted children of God; and
heirs to His heavenly kingdom.
Can Sanctifying Grace be increased?
Yes: Sanctifying Grace is increased by prayer and
good works, and especially by offering the Holy
Mass, and receiving the Sacraments.


What do we gain by an increase of Sanctifying Grace?
By an increase of Sanctifying Grace our souls be-
come more beautiful and more pleasing to God,
and by it we gain the right to greater happiness
in heaven.
How is Sanctifying Grace lost?
Sanctifying Grace is lost by mortal sin.
What does Actual Grace do for us?
Actual Grace helps us to know and to do what is
right.
What is Prayer?
Prayer is thinking about God; speaking to Him; de-
siring to love Him; and asking Him to give us
what we need for soul and body.
Why should we pray?
We should pray because God is our Creator and
loving Father, upon Whom we depend in all things.
When should we pray?
Christ Himself says we ought always to pray. (Luke
xviii, I.)
How can we always pray?
We can always pray by offering to God all our
thoughts, words, and actions—every morning and
every night, and frequently during the day.
When are our prayers pleasing to God?
Our prayers are pleasing to God when we trust in
His goodness, when we are ready to accept His
will, and when we humbly pray in the name of
Our Lord, Jesus Christ.
Should we ask the prayers of the Blessed Virgin
Mary and the Saints?
Yes; we should ask the prayers of the Blessed Virgin
Mary and the Saints, because they are God’s
friends, and are united with us through the Com-
munion of Saints. (See No. 101.)


Why does the Church teach us to pray frequently
to the Blessed Virgin Mary?
The Church teaches us to pray frequently to the
Blessed Virgin Mary because she is the Mother of
God, and therefore has special power in heaven.
Chapter 13.—THE SACRAMENTS: BAPTISM,
CONFIRMATION.
What is a Sacrament?
A Sacrament is an external sign or action chosen by
Christ to give Grace.
What bind of Grace do the Sacraments give?
All the Sacraments give Sanctifying Grace, and in
addition each Sacrament gives a right to special
actual Graces.
How many Sacraments did Christ give to His Church?
Christ gave His Church seven Sacraments; Baptism,
Confirmation, Blessed Eucharist, Penance, Extreme
Unction, Holy Order, and Matrimony.
What is the special effect of the Sacrament of Bap-
tism?
The Sacrament of Baptism cleanses us from original
sin by giving Sanctifying Grace, and so we be-
come the children of God, and members of Christ’s
Mystical Body, the Church.
Why do you call the Church the “Mystical Body
of Christ?”
The Church is called the “Mystical Body of Christ”
because its members, through Baptism, are joined
together in one body with Christ as Head, and
share His Life by Sanctifying Grace.
(See No. 150.)


How is Baptism given?
Baptism is given by pouring water on the head ol
the person to be baptized, Saying while puuring the
water: I baptize thee in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. (Matt,
xxviii, 19.)
Can we go to heaven without Baptism?
No: we cannot go to heaven without Baptism.
Unless a man, says Christ, be born again of water
and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. (John iii, 5.)
When Baptism of water is impossible, can anything
take its place.
Yes; either martyrdom for the Faith, or an act of
perfect love of God can take the place of Baptism
of water.
What happens to infants who die without Baptism?
Infants who die without Baptism go to a place of
happiness, but they will never see God in heaven.
What is the special effect of the Sacrament of Con-
firmation?
The Sacrament of Confirmation gives us the Gifts of
the Holy Ghost in their fullness, and courage and
strength to live always as good soldiers of Jesus
Christ.
How do we show ourselves good soldiers of Jesus
Christ?
We show ourselves good soldiers of Jesus Christ by
being ever ready to fight and to suffer for our
faith, even, if necessary, giving our lives for it.
Everyone, says Our Lord, that shall confess Me
before men, I will also confess him before My
Father Who is in heaven. (Matt, x, 32.)
What are the gifts of the Holy Ghost?
The gifts of the Holy Ghost are Wisdom, Under-
standing, Counsel, Knowledge, Fortitude, Piety,
and the Fear of the Lord.


"Do this for a commemoration of Me." (Matt, xxvi; Luke xxii.)


Chapter 14.—THE BLESSED EUCHARIST:
SACRIFICE AND SACRAMENT.
What is the Blessed Eucharist?
The Blessed Eucharist is the Sacrifice of the New
Law, and its greatest Sacrament, for in the
Eucharist under the appearances of bread and wine
Our Lord Jesus Christ is present, is offered, and
is received.
When did Jesus Christ give us the Blessed Eucharist?
At the Last Supper, the night before He was cruci-
fied, Jesus Christ took bread and blessed, and
broke, and gave to His Apostles, saying; Take ye,
and eat : This is My Body. And taking the
chalice (of wine), He gave thanks, and gave to
them, saying: Drink. . . . This is My Blood. And
He added: Do this for a commemoration of Me.
(Matt, xxvi; Mark xiv; Luke xxii; I Cor. xi.)
What became of the bread and wine when Our Lord
spoke the words of consecration?
When Our Lord spoke the words of consecration,
This is My Body, This is My Blood, the sub-
stance of the bread and wine was changed into
His own Body and Blood ,and only the appear-
ances of bread and wine remained.
What did Our Lord intend by the words: “Do this for
a commemoration of me?”
By the words, Do this for a commemoration of Me,
Our Lord
1. ordained His Apostles priests;
2. gave them power to ordain priests; and
3. commanded all priests in like manner to con-
secrate offer and administer His Body and Blood.
What is a priest?
A priest is one who, through the Sacrament of Holy
Order, has received special powers to carry on the
work of Jesus Christ, and in particular to offer
sacrifice to God.


THE EUCHARIST AS A SACRIFICE
What is Sacrifice?
Sacrifice is the highest act of religion in which a
priest offers a victim to God, to acknowledge God’s
supreme dominion over us and our total depen-
dence on Him.
When does a priest offer Sacrifice?
A priest offers Sacrifice in the Mass, when, acting in
the person of Jesus Christ, he uses the power of
consecration and changes bread and wine into Our
Lord’s Body and Blood.
At what part of the Mass are the bread and wine
changed into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ?
The bread and wine are changed into the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ at the Consecration.
Is the Mass the true Sacrifice of the New Law?
Yes: the Mass is the true Sacrifice of the New Law
for in it Our Lord, Jesus Christ, through the priest,
offers Himself to God the Father for the living
and the dead.
Is the Mass the same Sacrifice as that of the Cross?
Yes: the Mass is the same Sacrifice as that of the
Cross because in the Mass Our Lord Himself as
both Priest and Victim, and, though not suffering
or shedding His Blood, He continues the Offering
He made on the Cross.
Why do we go to Mass?
We go to Mass to offer Sacrifice to God.
What intentions should we form when offering the
Mass?
When offering the Mass we should unite our inten-
tions with those of Our Lord: 1, to praise God’s
holy Name; 2, to thank Him for His gifts; 3, to
offer reparation for our sins; and 4, to ask Him
for all we need in soul and body.


The Mass is the same Sacrifice as that of the Cross.


What is the best way to assist at Mass?
The best way to assist at Mass is—
to join with the priest in offering the Divine Vic-
tim to God the Father as though we were
present at the Sacrifice on Calvary; and
to unite ourselves with the Victim by receiving
Holy Communion,
Do those sin who neglect Mass on Sundays and Holy
days of obligation?
Yes: those who without just cause neglect Mass on
Sundays and Holy days of obligation commit a
mortal sin. (See Nos. 106, 118, 140.)
Is it good to go to Mass on other days besides
Sundays and Holy days of obligation?
Yes: since the offering of Sacrifice is the holiest act
we can perform, it is good to go to Mass as often
as we can.
THE EUCHARIST AS A SACRAMENT.
What do you mean by receiving Communion?
By receiving Communion I mean receiving the Sac-
rament of the Blessed Eucharist,
Is the Blessed Eucharist a Sacrament as well as a
Sacrifice?
Yes: the Blessed Eucharist is a Sacrament as well
as a Sacrifice. It is God’s greatest gift to man,
as well as man’s greatest offering to God.
Whom do we receive in the Sacrament of the Blessed
Eucharist?
In the Sacrament of the Blessed Eucharist we re-
ceive Jesus Christ, true God and true man.


\ hat is the special effect of the Sacrament of the
Blessed Eucharist?
In the Sacrament of the Blessed Eucharist the Giver
of all good gifts becomes the food of our soul.
How must we be prepared for Holy Communion?
Before Holy Communion we must be in the state
of grace, we must observe the laws of the Eucha-
ristic Fast (see page 64), we should make acts of
Faith, Hope and Charity.
How often should we receive Holy Communion?
We should receive Holy Communion frequently, even
every day if possible.
Is Jesus Christ present with us only at Mass and
Holy Communion?
No: Jesus Christ is present with us in the Tabernacle
wherever the Blessed Sacrament is reserved.
Chapter 15.—PENANCE.
What is the special effect of the Sacrament of
Penance?
The Sacrament of Penance forgives the sins we com-
mit after Baptism, and restores us to the friendship
of God. It also gives a special grace to avoid sin
and resist temptation.
By whose power are sins forgiven?
Sins are forgiven by the power of God, which Jesus
Christ has given to the priests of His Church.
When did Jesus Christ give to the priests of His
Church the power of forgiving sins?
Jesus Christ gave to the priests of His Church the
power of forgiving sins when He said to His
Apostles on Easter Sunday night: Receive ye the
Holy Ghost: whose sins you shall forgive, they are
forgiven them: and whose sins you shall retain,
they are retained. (John xx, 22, 23.)


What are the four parts of the Sacrament of Penance?
The four parts of the Sacrament of Penance are Con-
trition, Confession, Absolution, and Satisfaction.
What Is Contrition?
Contrition is a heartfelt sorrow for having offended
God, with a firm resolution of sinning no more.
It may be either Perfect Contrition or Imperfect
Contrition.
Why should we be sorry for our sins?
We should be sorry for our sins because they are an
insult to God our Creator, Who is infinitely good
and perfect, and because the Son of God was
scourged and crucified for our sins. This sorrow is
called Perfect Contrition.
Are there less perfect reasons for Contrition?
Yes: other reasons for Contrition are —the fear of
hell, the loss of heaven, and the wickedness of sin.
This sorrow is called Imperfect Contrition.
What should a person do who is in danger of death
and cannot go to Confession?
A person in danger of death who cannot go to Con-
fession should make an act of Perfect Contrition.
(See Nos. 88-90, 201.)
What is Confession?
Confession is the telling of our sins to the priest in
order to have them forgiven.
How would we prepare for Confession?
First we should beg of God the grace to make a
good confession; then we should carefully examine
our conscience; and before we go to Confession we
should make acts of Contrition and resolve sin-
cerely to sin no more.


"And when they were come to the place which is called Cal-
vary, they crucified Him there." (Luke xxiii, 33.)


What is the sin of those who conceal a mortal sin
in Confession?
Those who wilfully conceal a mortal sin in Confes-
sion commit a grievous sin by telling a lie to the
Holy Ghost. Their confession is bad, and must
be made all over again.
What is Absolution?
Absolution is the pardon given by the priest, as
minister of God, in the Sacrament of Penance.
What is Satisfaction?
Satisfaction is reparation to God for sin. When we
perform the penance we receive in Confession we
make an act of reparation or satisfaction.
How do our acts of reparation help us?
Our acts of reparation help us to share in the infi-
nite satisfaction offered by Our Lord for sin. They
lessen the temporal punishment due to sin, which
sometimes remains even after the sin itself has
been forgiven.
Should we often make acts of reparation for our sins?
Yes: we should often make acts of reparation for
our sins, and for the sins of the world.
Can the Church assist us in making reparation?
Yes: the Church can assist us in making reparation
by granting Indulgences.
What is an Indulgence?
An Indulgence is a remission, through the power of
the Church, of the temporal punishment due to
sin, after the sin itself has been forgiven.
Has the Church power to grant Indulgences?
Yes: the Church has power to grant Indulgences:
Whatsoever, said Christ to St. Peter, thou shalt
loose upon earth, it shall be loosed also in heaven.
(Matt, xvi, 19.)


214. How do we gain Indulgences?
We gain Indulgences by saying the prayers or doing
the works prescribed by the Church. We must be
in the state of grace, and must carry out any con-
ditions specially required, such as Confession, Holy
Communion, a visit to the church, or prayers for
the Pope’s intentions.
Chapter 16.- -EXTREME UNCTION; HOLY ORDER;
MATRIMONY.
215. What is the special effect of the Sacrament of Ex-
treme Unction?
The Saci ament of Extreme Unction gives grace and
strength to the soul of the person who is danger-
ously ill. It also remits sin, and may even restore
bodily health, if God so wills.
216. Should we wait until we are in extreme danger of
death before we receive Extreme Unction?
No; since Confession and Holy Communion are its
usual preparation, we should receive Extreme
Unction, if possible, before we are in extreme
danger of death.
217. What is the special effect of the Sacrament of Holy
Order?
The Sacrament of Holy Order gives Bishops and
Priests the power to offer the Holy Sacrifice of
Mass, and to forgive sin in the Sacrament of Pen-
ance. It also gives a special grace to carry out
all their sacred duties.
11.8 What is the special work of a Bishop?
The special work of a Bishop is to give the Sacra-
ments of Holy Order and Confirmation; to teach
with authority; and to govern the portion of the
Ch jrch under his charge.


What is the special effect of the Sacrament of
Matrimony?
The Sacrament of Matrimony unites husband and
wife in a holy and inseparable union. It also
gives them a special grace to live happily together,
and to bring up their children in the fear and love
of God.
Does a divorce given by the civil law break the bond
of Christian marriage?
No: the bond of Christian marriage cannot be
broken except by the death of husband or wife.
What God has joined together, says Christ, let no
man put asunder. (Matt, xix, 6.)
Are those Catholics married in the sight of God who
go through the ceremony before a civil registrar
or a non-Catholic minister of religion?
No: such marriages may be valid in the eyes of the
civil law, but they are not valid in the sight of
God.
What is a mixed marriage?
A mixed marriage is one between a Catholic and a
non-Catholic.
Does the Church forbid mixed marriages?
Yes: the Church forbids mixed marriages, because
they are a danger to the faith of the Catholic
person and of the children.
Does the Church sometimes allow a mixed marriage?
The Church sometimes allows a mixed marriage for
grave reasons, but only under certain conditions.


"I ascend to My Father." (John xx, 17.)


225. What are the conditions required before permission
is given for a mixed marriage?
The conditions required before permission is given
for a mixed marriage are:
1. The non-Catholic person must promise not to
interfere with the religion of the Catholic.
2. Both persons must promise that all their chil
dren will be brought up Catholics.
226. Should the Catholic party try to by prudent means
to convert the non-Catholic?
Yes: the Catholic party should, by good example and
prudent means, try to convert the non-Catholic.
Timely notice of the intended marriage should be
given to the parish priest so that the non-Catholic
party may receive some instruction in the Catholic
Faith.
Chapter 17.—DEATH: JUDGMENT: HELL; HEAVEN.
227. What happens to the soul after death?
Immediately after death the soul has to face its Par-
ticular Judgment, and the sentence then passed will
be confirmed by Jesus Christ, our Redeemer and
Judge, on the day of General Judgment
228. What do you mean by the day of General Judgment?
By the day of General Judgment I mean that last
day when we must all appear before the judgment-
seat of Christ, and then He will render to every-
one according to his works. (H Cor, v, 10; Matt
xvi, 27.)
229. In what manner will Christ come on that last day?
On the last day, Christ will come to judge us with
great power and majesty, and all the angels with
Him.


What does the resurrection of the body mean?
The resurrection of the body means that we shall all
rise again on the last day with the same bodies
that we had in this life.
What will Jesus Christ say to the wicked on that last
day?
Jesus Christ will say to the wicked on the last day:
Depart from Me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
which was prepared for the devil and his angels.
(Matt, xxv, 41.)
Where will the wicked go on that last day?
The wicked will go, both body and soul, into the
everlasting punishment of hell.
What is the punishment of hell?
The punishment of hell is the loss for ever of the
Blessed Vision of God; and the pain of everlasting
fire and remorse.
What will Jesus Christ say to the good on the last
day?
Jesus Christ will say to the good on the last day:
Come ye blessed of My Father, possess the king-
dom prepared for you. (Matt, xxv, 34.)
Where will the good go on the last day?
The good will enfer, both body and soul, into the
happiness of heaven.
What will be our reward in heaven?
Our reward in heaven will be the Blessed Vision of
God; we shall see His wondrous glory; share His
infinite knowledge; and rejoice in His unchanging
happiness for ever.


Serving at Mass
“Boys who serve at the altar should be distin o-uished by good
character and modest manner. They should be taught to answer
clearly, distinctly, and accurately, and to go through the ceremonies
with all gravity and decorum.”—Decrees of 4th Plenary Council,
of Australia and New Zealand, No. 133.
The Celebrant: In nomine Patris, et Filii, et Spiritus sancti. In-
troibo ad altare Dei.
The Server : Ad Deum, qui laetificat juventutum meant.
C.: Judica me, Deus et discerne causam meam de gente non
sancta: ab homine iniquo et doloso erue me.
S.: Quia Tu es Deus, fortitude mea: quare me repulisti,
et quare tristis incedo, dum affligit me inimicus?
C.: Emitte lucem Tuam et veritatem Tuam: ipsa me deduxerunt
et adduxerunt in montem sanctum Tuum et in tabemacula Tua.
S.: Et introibo ad altare Dei; ad Deum qui laetificat
juventutem meam.
C.: Confitebor Tibi in cithara, Deus, Deus meus; quare tristis
es anima mea et quare conturbas me.
S.: Spera in Deo, quoniam adhuc confitebor Illi: salutare
vultus mei, et Deus meus.
C.; Gloria Patri, et Filii, et Spiritu Sancto.
S.: Sicut erat in principio, et nunc et semper, et in sae-
Cula saculorum. Amen.
C.: Introibo ad altare Dei.
S.: Ad Deum, qui laetificat juventutem meam.
C.: Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.
S.; Qui fecit coelum et terram.
C.: Confiteor Deo omnipotenti, beatae Mariae semper Virgini, etc.
S.: Misereatur tui Omnipotens Deus, et dimissis peccatis
tuis, perducat te ad vitam aetemam.
C.: Amen.


S,; Confiteor Deo omnipotent!, beatae Mariae semper Vir-
gin!, beato Michaeli Archangel©, beato Joanni Baptistae,
sanctis Apostolis Petro et Paulo, omnibus sanctis, et tibi
Pater, quia peccavi nimis, cogitatione, verbo et opere, mea
culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa. Ideo precor beatam
Mariam semper Virginem, beatum Michaelem Archangelum,
beatum Joannem Baptistam, sanctis Apostolis, Petrum et
Paulum, omnes sanctos, et te Pater, orare pro me ad
Dominum Deum nostrum.
C.: Misereatur vestri omnipotens Deus et dimissis peccatis vestris
perducat vos ad vitam aetemam.
S.: Amen.
C.: Indulgentiam, absolutionem, et remissionem peccatorum
nostrorum tribuat nobis omnipotens et misericors Dominus.
S.: Amen.
C.: Deus, Tu conversus viviflcabis nos.
S.: Et plebs Tua laetabitur in Te.
C.: Ostende nobis, Domine, misericordiam Tuam.
S.: Et salutare Tuum da nobis.
C.: Domine, exaudi orationem meam.
S.: Et clamor meus ad Te veniat.
C.: Dominus vobiscum.
S,: Et cum spiritu tuo.
C.: Kyrie eleison.
C.: Kyrie eleison.
C.: Christe eleison.
C.: Kyrie eleison.
C.: Kyrie eleison.
S.: Kyrie eleison.
S.: Christe eleison.
S.: Christe eleison,
S.: Kyrie eleison.
C.: Dominus vobiscum, or Pax vobis (for a Bishop).
S.: Et cum spiritu tuo.
To Flectamus genua, which occurs occasionally, he
answers: Levate.
At the end of the prayers he says: Amen.


At the end of the Epistle: Deo gratias.
At the beginning of the Gospel he answers: Et cum
Spiritu tuo. He then makes the sign of the Cross on his
forehead, mouth and breast with the Priest, who says,
Sequentia, etc. The server answers: Gloria tlbi, Domine.
At the end of the Gospel the Server answers : Laus
tibi, Christe.
C.: Dominus vobiscu m.
S.t Et cum spiritu tuo.
C.: Orate fratres.
S.: Suscipiat Dominus sacrificium de manibus tuis; ad
laudem et gloriam nominus sui; ad utilitatem quoque nos-
tram totiusque Ecclesiae suae sanctae.
C.i Per omnia saecula saeculorum.
S.t Amen.
C.: Dominus vobiscum.
S.t Et cum spiritu tuo.
C.: Sursum corda
S.: Habemus ad Dominum.
C.: Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro.
S.t Dignum et justum est.
At the Sanctus, ring the bell thrice.
When the Priest spreads his hands over the Chalice, ring the
bell once.
At the Elevation, ring the bell at each genuflection, and at the
elevation of the Sacred Host and Chalice.
C.: Per omnia saecula saeculorum.
S.t Amen.
C.: Et ne nos inducas in tentationem.
S.t Sed libera nos a malo.
C.: Per omnia saecula saeculorum.
S.t Amen.
C.i Pax Domini sit semper vobiscum.
S.t Et cum spiritu tuo.


C.: Dominus voblscum.
S.t Et cum spirltu tuo.
C.; Per omnia saecula saeculorum.
S.t Amen.
C.: Ite missa est, or Benedicamus Domino,
S.: Deo gratias.
C.: Requiescant in pace.
S.t Amen.
N.B.—During Easter Week the Priest adds two Alleluias
to the Ite Missa est. The Server answers : Deo gratias.
Alleluia, Alleluia.
At the Priest’s blessing he responds: Amen..
Before the blessing a Bishop says: Sit nomen Domini
benedictum. The Server answers'. Ex hoc nunc et usque
in saeculum. The Bishop adds: Adjutorium nostrum in
nomine Domine. The Server responds : Qui fecit coelum
et terrain.
Bishop: Benedict vos, etc.
Server: Amen.
C.: Dominus vobiscum.
S.; Et cum spiritu tuo.
C.i Sequentia (as at first Gospel).
S.: Gloria tibi, Domine.
After the last Gospel the Server answers:
S.: Deo gratias.


PRAYER FOR THE CONVERSION OF AUSTRALIA.
O God, Who hast appointed Mary, Help of Christians,
St. Francis Xavier and St. Teresa of the Infant Jesus Pat-
rons of Australia, grant that through their intercession our
brethren outside the Church may receive the light of faith,
so that Australia may become one in faith under one
shepherd. Through Jesus Christ Our Lord. Amen.
Mary, Help of Christians, pray for us.
St. Francis Xavier, pray for us.
St. Teresa of the Infant Jesus, pray for us,
(See Fourth Plenary Council, 1937, Documenta V.)
MORNING PRAYERS.
The Sign of the Cross. The Morning Offering. The
Lord’s Prayer. The Hail Mary. The Apostles ’Creed. The
Angelus. Prayer to the Guardian Angel.
EVENING PRAYERS.
The Sign of the Cross. The Rosary, Three Hail Marys.
The Confiteor. The Act of Contrition. Hail, Holy Queen.
Prayer to the Guardian Angel. Aspirations.
(The family Rosary said by all at home every night
will be a source of great blessings. When saying it, pray
especially that Our Lady may help to keep the Faith
strong in your family and in Australia.)


Preparation for Confession and
Holy Communion
Before Confession
1. Ask God to help you to make a good Confession.
2. Find out your sins and the number of times you
have committed them.
3. Be sorry for your sins.
4. Promise God not to sin again.
1. Ask God to help you: O my God, help me to
remember all my sins. Help me to be truly sorry for
them, and to make up my mind not to sin again.
Mary, my Mother, obtain for me the grace to make a
good Confession.
I confess to Almighty God, etc. ... to .. . through
my most grievous fault.
2. Find out your sins: (But, first, How long is it since I
was at Confession last ? At my last Confession did I
confess all the sins I should have ?)
Have I said my prayers ? Did I try to think of what
I was saying when I was saying my prayers ? Have I
used bad words ? Have I missed Mass on Sundays or
Holy days through my own fault ? Have I been late for
Mass ? Have I disobeyed my parents or those in charge
of me ? Have I been angry or sulky ? Have I done any
bad, immodest thing ? Have I stolen anything, or spent
money that was not my own ? Have I told lies ? Have
I kept thinking about bad things after I knew they were
bad ? Have I eaten meat on Fridays or Ash Wednesday ?
How many times have I committed these sins ? Have I
done anything else I ought to confess ? Did I keep back


any sin in Confession on purpose ? Is there any sin I for-
got to tell at my other Confession?
(Say your sins over to yourself a few times so that you
will be able to tell them to the Priest.)
You are bound to tell all your mortal sins, and the
number of times you committed them. If you have no
sin to confess, tell some sin you have told in other Con-
fessions.)
[NOTE FOR TEACHERS. —In helping children in their
preparation for Confession, the Teacher will endeavour to
explain to the children the difference between mortal and
venial sins, and also to impress upon the children the
obligation of confessing all mortal sins and the number of
times they were committed. The Teacher will also ex-
plain to the children that, though it is not obligatory,
it is very desirable to confess even venial sins and the
number of times they were committed.]
3. Tell God you are sorry: Think how God punishes
sinners in Hell, and say: O my God, I am sorry for my
sins, because they deserve Your great punishments.
Think of the joys of Heaven which we lose by sin.—
O my God, I am sorry for my sins, because they would
keep me from seeing You in Heaven.
Think of what Our Lord has suffered for your sins.—
O my God, I am sorry for my sins, because they have
crucified my loving Saviour, Jesus Christ.
Think of the goodness of God to you. —O my God, 1
am very sorry that I have sinned against You, because
You have been so good to me.
Think of how good and great and holy God is, and
how sin insults and pains Him. —O my God, I am heartily
sorry for having offended You, because You are so very
good. Even though there were no punishment for sin, I


would be sorry, because my sins displease You, who are
so good, and because I love You I will not sin again.
4. Promise God not to sin again.— O my God, I firmly
resolve by Your holy grace never more to offend You.
At Confession
1. Make the sign of the Cross and say: Bless me, Father,
for I have sinned.
2. Tell how long it is since your last good Confession,
and whether you performed your last penance.
3. Tell your sins to the Priest.
4. When you have told all your sins, say: This is all I
can remember, Father, and I am very sorry for all my sins.
5. Listen to what the Priest has to say to you, and then
make the Act of Contrition. (See page 3.)
After Confession
1. Thank God and ask His help.— O my God, I thank
You for forgiving me my sins. Give me Your help, that
I may never sin again. Mary, my Mother, help me to
keep my promise.
2. Perform the penance given to you by the Priest.
HOLY COMMUNION
Say these prayers slowly, a few words at a time. It is
well to stop after every few words, that they may sink
into the heart. Each prayer may be said several times.
Before Holy Communion
PRAYER FOR HELP. —O my God, help me to make
a good Communion. Mary, my dearest Mother, pray to
Jesus for me. My dear Angel Guardian, lead me to the
altar of God.


ACT OF FAITH. —My dear Jesus, because You have
said: “This is My Body, this is My Blood,” I believe that
I shall receive Your Sacred Body to eat and Your Precious
Blood to drink. Dear Jesus, I believe this with all my
heart.
ACT OF HUMILITY—My God, I confess that I am
a poor sinner; on account of my sins I am not worthy
to receive the Body and Blood of Jesus. Lord, I am not
worthy that You should enter under my roof; say but
the word, and my soul shall be healed.
ACT OF SORROW. —O my God, I am very sorry that
I have sinned against You, because You are so good Your-
self, and for love of You I will not sin again.
ACT OF ADORATION. —O Jesus, Great God, present
on the altar, I bow down before You, I adore You.
ACT OF LOVE AND DESIRE. —Sweet Jesus, I love
You. I desire with all my heart to receive You. Most
sweet Jesus, come into my poor soul and give me Your
Flesh to eat and Your Blood to drink. Give me Your
whole Self, Body, Blood, Soul and Divinity, that I may
live for ever with You.
In Receiving Holy Communion
1. In going to the altar-rails, and returning to your
place, keep your hands joined, your eyes cast down, and
your thoughts on Jesus Christ.
2. At the altar-rails, take the Communion plate and
hold it before you, under your chin.
3. Hold your head straight up, keep your eyes cast
down, your mouth well open, and your tongue out, resting
on the under lip. Then, with great reverence, receive the
Sacred Host, saying in your heart, with all the faith of
St. Thomas, “My Lord and my God.”


/l/ter //o/y Communion
When you return to your place tell Our Lord in your
own words how much you love Him for coming to you.
Thank Him for coming, and tell Him how sorry you are
for all the sins committed against Him, your own especially.
Ask Him for your wants and ask Him to help your par-
ents and family, and all who are in need. Pray for the
Pope, the Bishops and Priests, your Teachers and the poor
suffering souls in Purgatory. Then you may take up your
book and read slowly the following prayers:
ACT OF FAITH. —O Jesus, I believe that 1 have re-
ceived Your Flesh to eat and Your Blood to drink,
because You have said it, and Your word is true.
ACT OF ADORATION. —O Jesus, my God, my Creator,
I adore You, because from Your hands I come, and with
You I am to be happy for ever.
ACT OF HUMILITY. —O Jesus, I am but dust and
ashes, and yet You have come to me, and my poor heart
may speak to You.
ACT OF LOVE. —Sweet Jesus, I love You. I love You
with my whole heart. You know that I love You, and
wish to love You daily more and more.
ACT OF THANKSGIVING.—My good Jesus, I thank
You with all my heart. How good , how kind You are to
me, sweet Jesus! Blessed be Jesus in the Most Holy
Sacrament of the Altar.
ACT OF OFFERING. —O Jesus, receive my poor offer-
ing. Jesus, You have given Yourself to me, and now lei
me give myself to You. I give You my body ,that it may
be chaste and pure. I give You my soul, that it may be
free from sin. I give You my heart, that it may always
love You. I give You every breath that I shall breathe,


and especially my last. I give You myself in life and in
death, that I may be Yours for ever and ever.
ACT OF PETITION.—O Jesus, wash away my sins with
Your Precious Blood. O Jesus, the struggle against temp-
tation is not yet finished. My Jesus, when temptation
comes, make me strong against it. Jesus, mercy! Mary,
help!
O Jesus, grant that I may lead a good life, die a happy
death, and receive You in my last illness. O Jesus, have
mercy on Your Holy Church; take care of it. O Jesus,
have pity on poor sinners, and save them from hell.
O Jesus, bless my father, my mother, my brothers and
sisters, and all I ought to pray for, as Your Heart knows
how to bless them. O Jesus, have pity on the poor souls
in Purgatory, and give them eternal rest. Sweet Jesus I
am going away for a time, but I trust not without You.
You are with me by Your grace. I will never leave You
by mortal sin. I do not fear to do so, though I am so
weak, because I have such a hope in You. Give me grace
to keep good till I die. Amen.
PRAYERS
Before Holy Communion
AN ACT OF FAITH. —O good Jesus, I firmly believe
all that You have said to me through Your Church,
especially that You are really and truly present in the
Consecrated Host.
AN ACT OF HOPE. —O good Jesus, trusting in Your
goodness and Your promises, I hope to receive from You
grace, all good things needful, and eternal life.


AN ACT OF CHARITY. —Because You are infinitely
good I love You, Jesus, with all my heart and soul ana
strength.
AN ACT OF CONTRITION—O my God, I repent of
all my sins because they have deserved Your punishments,
but especially because they have offended Your infinite
goodness.
AN ACT OF HUMILITY— O good Jesus, I am Your
creature, full of misery and sin, and unworthy to receive
You.
AN ACT OF DESIRE. —O good Jesus, I earnestly de-
sire to receive You into my heart; come to me quickly,
and do not delay.
After Holy Communion
AN ACT OF ADORATION.—I adore You, O good
Jesus present in my soul; I humble myself before You, I
am astonished at Your wonderful goodness.
AN ACT OF GRATITUDE. —O good Jesus, how can
I thank You properly ? I offer You all the thanksgivings
of Your saints, especially of the Blessed Virgin, and of all
who love You.
RULES FOR EUCHARISTIC FAST.
1. Water does not break the fast.
2. Solid food and alcoholic drink may be taken up to
three hours before Communion.
3. Non-alcoholic drink may be taken up to one hour
before Communion.
4. The sick, even if not confined to bed, may take non-
alcoholic drink and true medicines, either liquid or
solid, without any limitation of time.
