

CATHOLIC COLLEGE
OF
St. John the Evangelist.
A CORRECTED REPORT
OF
THE AGGREGATE MEETING
IN
St. Mary's Cathedral,
ON MONDAY THE 3RD OF AUGUST, 1857,
WITH
A COMPLETE LIST OE SUBSCRIBERS.
A Second Edition will be published in a month hence with the names of the additional Subscribers.


SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY DANIEL LOVETT WELCH, ATLAS OFFICE, BARRACK STREET,
OPPOSITE THE SAVINGS BANK.


PREFACE.
The Committee of the fund for the erection of the Catholic
College of St. John have demeed it desirable to publish, in the
form of a pamphlet, a full and corrected report of the proceed-
ings at the aggregate meeting of Catholics held at St. Mary’s
Cathedral, on Monday the third of August.
The great national object,—for the promotion of which the
meeting was convened, —the many and urgent enducements to
subscribe to this noble Institution which the speeches supply,
—and the generous enthusiasm with which the whole Catholic
community pressed forward to contribute to it, demand and
merit a lasting memorial of such an occasion and such conduct.
It was an exertion unsurpassed by any people in this, or any
other country, —demonstrating the determination of the Catho-
lics of Australia to provide an institution for sound and Superior
education for the present generation, and to bequeath the boon
—as a precious inheritance—to generations that shall succeed
it. To the contributors of this fund, their children and friends
hereafter may exultingly point, as to the performers of an act of
unselfish and truly partriotic munificence. In this munificence
we gratefully acknowledge many, belonging to other religious
communities, have borne a part by their liberal contributions.
Although much has been done, —yet much yet remains to be


done, —in the good cause that has been thus so auspiciously in-
augurated. A large sum ’tis true has been paid,—a still larger
one has been promised.—lt is to those, who have promised,—as
well as to those who as yet have neither paid nor promised,
that we wish it to be understood this little pamphlet is especi-
ally dedicated. A perusal of it, it is hoped, may persuade its
Catholic readers, that this is a time that calls, —if ever time did
call, —for a prompt, earnest and zealous co-operation. The
welfare of the present as well as future age, —the emulation
inspired by the good example of other religious communities, —
the great advantage to be reaped from early payment, so that
it may be literally and truly said that “ He gives doubly who
gives quickly ,” combine in inviting all Catholics to an earnest
participation in the merit of this great national design.
The proceedings of last Monday at St. Mary’s, and the list
of Subscribers in connexion therewith will furnish an important
and prominent page in the future history of the Catholics of
this country. It is for this reason mainly, that it is intended
in a month from the present date, to publish a second edition of
this pamphlet, in which the names of the additional subscribers,
who have not yet had an opportunity of subscribing, will be in-
serted. This will enable every Catholic in the country to have
his name enrolled in the illustrious band of contributors—to
whom, both present and future time shall owe a debt of deep
and lasting gratitude.
We trust, therefore, confidently, that on this day month
when our second edition shall appear, —every Catholic in the
Colony will have contributed according to his means, —and
thus we may be able to boast—that on that day there will not
be a single deserter from the cause, —not even one name
missing from our muster-roll.


THE PASTORAL LETTER
OF
JOHN BEDE,
BY THE GRACE OF GOD, AND FAVOR OF THE HOLY APOSTOLIC SEE,
ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY, &c.,
On the Subject of a Catholic College in the University of Sydney,
TO THE
Faithful of the Archdiocese, Clergy , and Laity.
torkf :
Circumstances have delayed to a period much later
than we could have wished, our address to the faithful of the
Archdiocese on the subject of the Sydney University. It is
a subject however so interesting in itself, and so fraught with
peculiar advantages to the Catholic body of this land, that we
have a good hope of finding that our unwilling delay has but
rendered the importance of such an institution more definite
and familiar to your minds, and so prepared you with a more
enlightened and earnest zeal to carry out measures necessary
for securing and realising to their full extent those benefits,
which this most wise measure of our Legislature bears within
it. If we have not been the first in the field, let us, as befits
our name, redeem the delay by an energy and devotion so
much the more noble and sustained. The government has
made a munificent provision, and has already accomplished a
liberal share of the great work; as much as we could reason-
ably expect, and as much, perhaps, as we could desire that it
should do single handed. The rest is to be forwarded con-
currently with those in whose behalf the University is founded*


And so best. The different bodies will thus be enabled to
manifest their appreciation of what has been done for them
severally, out of the common purse;—they will justify the
assignment of several portions by their kindly rivalry:—and
they will secure to themselves the unrestricted exercise of those
peculiar arrangements which they may feel themselves bound
in conscience to maintain. So far as human policy can be
hoped to solve the problem of securing a common tendency in
various paths, the plan adopted appears practicable, as it is most
certainly liberal. It shall not fail, we venture to promise in
your name, so far as a hearty co-operation from the Catholic
community can aid in achieving success. You are aware of
our share in the allotment. Eighteen acres of the land around
the stately building now in progress will be made over to us; an
allowance of £SOO a year towards the appointments of our pro-
fessors will be issued, and £IO,OOO for the erection of a College
will be granted, on the condition that we meet the grant with an
equal sum. This then is our immediate task—to raise a sum of
money, large perhaps in some aspects, —but small in relation to
our numbers, and small, we feel assured, in relation to the en-
lightened zeal with which the Australian Catholics will appre-
ciate and pursue its object. Let us then at once promptly and
vigorously set about completing a work of which the founda-
tions and so much of the superstructure are offered ready to our
hands. Our adopted country, in the true spirit of generous
hope, makes a great gift for a great purpose; be it yours to
give fruition to this hope, let men see that you have an intelli-
gence to scan the greatness of the purpose, and a temper apt,
and a will determined, to make a generous response to a noble
challenge.
For many unhappy years in the past,—years of which we
will soon with God’s blessing neutralize the bitterness of re-
membrance, our intellectual culture was, from well known
causes, difficult and precarious. But now we are invited to
a free career in acknowledged equality.—Since the eighth
Henry’s time, Catholics in British dominions have been con-
sidered either as men to whom intellectual culture was un-
welcome, or whose faith might be starved from the face of the
earth by the deprivation of it. They little knew either the
men or the faith, who thus deemed of them. However, in this
new Australian world of ours, whence all avowed inequality
and injustice have been banished, we have no reproaches to ex-
press nor bitterness to feel. But then we must now up and be
doing. It is possible that three hundred years of disqualifica-
tion and hindrance have had their effect, whatever that may


amount to, on the masses of our people, and we may start in
consequence at some worldly disadvantage. We have this to
make up. Neither are we in point of time first in the field.
The members of the church established by the state in England
have, as you are aware, raised, or are in the way to raise,
their ten thousand pounds, and have well nigh completed their
college. We are then anticipated a little by the members of
one community amongst us, but we are not, it is to be hoped,
content to remain behind; and the delay of a few months in the
erection of buildings and the subscription of money is not a
matter of much moment to men who are in earnest. For there
is this one other considerable difference between our position
here and that in which we stood in another hemisphere, the
difference between poverty and abundance. The great ma-
jority of our people have shared largely in the worldly pros-
perity of colonial life, and are comparatively affluent in pe-
cuniary resources. There will then be no difficulty in this
regard in making up a little lost ground, provided intelligence
to appreciate the grandeur of the design be as keen, and the
will to accomplish it as energetic, in them as in others. We
are not going at present to enter upon consideration of details,
nor to calculate into how many fractions ten thousand pounds
may be divided amongst all the Catholics who are within the
limits of the Archdiocese. We leave the matter to you in the
gross, believing that one hearty unpremeditated effort amongst
those who are nearest us might accomplish the whole of this
first step. All we say to you is, that we have lost the start,
and, that our proper place, our hereditary place in all kinds of
intellectual progress, is in the foremost ranks.
It is we repeat our hereditary place, though we are prepared
to hear the denial of this repeated in spite of the progress
recently made towards a recognition of the truth. But
perhaps the majority of those who are not with us you will
find pass by this subject with a good-humoured smile of con-
cession, and ask what we have to show in Literature and
Science. We would willingly refer them to their own pro-
fessors, provided they are men of tried repute, and ask them
for the history of their several branches of human learning.
Bid them trace the course of historical and political science,
of metaphysical philosophy, of mathematics, of medicine, of
jurisprudence, of astronomy, of philology, of every subject in
short of mental and physical science, and strike out Catholic
names that occur, especially in the list of discoverers, and
original authors, and patrons. We can answer for it, the result
will be in honest minds an entire surrender of the prejudice


against Catholic principles and habits in this regard. With
all who will take this trouble, we shall begin at least fair; the
future is now in own our hands.
One thing there is, perhaps, which might be perverted into
a color for the calumnious prejudice of which we speak. It
is this: Catholics do not love literature and science less than
others do, but we love and reverence revealed truth more.
Revealed truth is to us a matter of certainty, that is, of divine
faith, and therefore with us Theology is the queen and mistress
of all sciences. All are her handmaids, all minister to her.
We know it a priori , because truth can never be at war with
truth ; and we know it empirically , because we have always
found, that whenever a science may have seemed to some,
at first, to utter a voice not in accord with theology, a little
patience, and a more mature growth of the science, has de-
veloped the real harmony. And it is an obvious consequence
of our recognition of this queendom of divine science, or
Theology, that we do in truth value more highly, even those
human sciences; for besides that appreciation of their natural
beauty which we have simply as men in common with others,
we discern as Catholics a worth and dignity in them, derived
from their subordinate ministry to truths beyond their own
order. And if any be tempted to imagine that the relations of
human science with Theology are few and meagre, and the
tribute they may bring is a superfluous and vain homage, let
him be sure that he has not well weighed either the nature of
man or the scope of Theology.
We hold it to be the very final cause of all human know-
ledge. And hence it is that Catholics place what are ordi-
narily called Literature and Science, not in the very first rank,
they are simply the ministers of a queen, and yet in a far
higher rank than the rest of the world places them in, because
they are ennobled by the royalty of their service; they work
for an end immeasurably transcending all purely material and
intellectual results.
It is true that Theology is not, and cannot be, taught in
the University, and even in our affiliated College it can at
present keep pace only with ecclesiastical vocations. Still,
I have been anxious to impress upon you the true position and
relations of Theology, in order that you may be prepared with
an answer to superficial criticism, and that your own minds
may look abroad over the domain of knowledge from the only
point which can give to it safety, symmetry, and unity.
We have briefly put before you the higher motives which
should urge to immediate effort, viz:—that the liberal proffer


of our Legislature be met with a prompt and liberal response
—that we make up lost time and enter into generous emula-
tion with the Anglican and all other bodies—the vindication
of our name as Catholics from the vulgar slander that we fear
or do not love the diffusion of knowledge—and the actual
culture, which you may now begin on equal terms with others,
of universal knowledge, for the benefit of that which is the
flower and fruit of all science.
We pass on to what may be called the more selfish motives.
They are still important and praiseworthy. We mean the
social advancement of yourselves and children, and, again, the
increase of your political influence. Few words are needed.
We shall offer suggestions only. You know that institutions
of this kind are especially the friends of those who are on the
lower steps of the social scale. From the humblest parentage
young men are raised, and, being made intellectually and mo-
rally equal to, are placed amongst, the princes of the land.
Elsewhere it has been objected to Universities that they do
not benefit the poor, because of the great expenses they entail.
It will not be so here; first, because the expenses will not be
heavy, and next, because we have in this sense no poor here,
the great body of our people having abundant resources com-
pared with those expenses such as they will be. Never will
there be any necessity here for that severe, but generous self-
denial, which we have so often seen exemplified in families in
Ireland and England, in order that the poorest amongst us may
give a promising son an education which, so far, will place
him on a level with the wealthiest.
Now, for the increase of political influence. We would not
be misunderstood to mean political influence of Catholics as
Catholics. We desire earnestly that all religious topics be
banished from the arena of political strife. But we mean, that
intellectual culture, such as this University will supply and
encourage, can alone give that inflnence in the world, which
your numbers and worldly wealth give you a right to exercise ;
we would rather say impose upon you the responsibility of
exercising. It is far safer for us to think and speak of our
conduct under the aspect of duties than of rights. Never
again, except in times of anarchy, which may God avert, will
political influence be gained and preserved by mere wealth, by
mere numbers, by rude clamour, by unscrupulous partisanship,
by appeals to violent and evil passions. Knowledge reason-
ably accurate and profound, the calm strength of a well trained
and balanced judgment, the modest and patient consideration
of the wants and feelings of others, the cultivated taste, which,


if not itself good morality, is the appropriate garb of good
morality,—these, depend upon it, are the only instruments
which in the long run give to any man, or body of men, lasting
political influence. And these instruments are what intellect-
ual culture will in the main put into your hands. You have
seen from time to time how a good cause may be damaged by
rude and unmeaning vociferation, by absurd blunders in the
commonest elements of knowledge, by frantically unreason-
able projects. We can estimate from the damage and ridicule
thus brought upon a good cause, the degree of force and
dignity which might have been added. Do not let the world
have any occasion to reproach us, as a body, on this score.
Whilst we had not means of improvement it was right to do
what was necessary to be done in the best manner we could ;
now that we have the means, let us do what we do, in the way
it ought to be done. Whatever of political liberty there is in
Christendom has been in the main the result of Catholic
teaching, and the gift of Catholics, but most assuredly not of
Catholics who were one jot behind hand in knowledge and in-
tellectual force. Let us not then disgrace our ancestry: it is
a long line and a bright one.
On such grounds as these, and so far, do we urge the
increase of your political influence. And now we leave in
your hands the proposal and challenge of your fellow colonists
with respect to the University of Sydney. It may be the
means of incalculable benefit. If any one indulges in visions
of worldly ambition, and is smitten with what are in truth the
marvellous capacities and prospects of this country; let him
reflect, that those capacities can be wielded, and those pros-
pects realised, only then, when by means of such training as
Universities can give, the land shall supply its native race of
priests and statesmen, of lawyers and physicians, of soldiers,
and sailors, and artists. And if any one be more inclined to
look at the moral effects of such Institutions, he will very
rightly consider that education, as it is forwarded by Univer-
sities, trains in its happier subjects a noble and refined spirit.
It has something of the nature of faith in it; and works long
at the discipline of faculties and the promotion of tastes,
without turning aside to, and resting in, that more marketable
aptitude and skill which necessarily bound the aim of a lower
education. Neither is it to be overlooked that, next to the
influences of religion, the common pursuit of science and litera-
ture in their highest forms will tend to make us thoroughly
Australian in the best sense of the word. We are from all
nations under heaven, and need harmonizing and amalgamating


interests to make us wholly countrymen of this our country,
and to bar divergencies and-animosities which are at once an
incapacity and a disgrace. Two of the greatest sources of
temptation are open to us, wealth and power ; strive, we en-
treat you, so to have your sons formed, that, in the noble spirit
of Christians, they may have money as though they had it not;
that they may look upon power as a sacred responsibility, only
to be assumed, without ridicule and mischief, by men who are
fortified by every intellectual and moral fitness. Et sit splendor
Domini Dei nostri super nos , et opera manuum nostrarum dirige
super nos: et opus manuum nostrarum dirige.
The grace of God be with you all.
† JOHN BEDE, ARCHBISHOP OF SY DNEY.
It is proposed, for the convenience and speed of collection, to
divide the Archdiocese into several districts, of which the City
of Sydney will comprise a proportionate number. The clergy
in each of these districts, with the assistance of lay gentlemen
of their neighbourhood, will receive subscriptions, and His
Grace trusts that, to raise the sum apportioned to each district,
will not exceed the ability or the good will of any.
By order of the Most Reverend the Archbishop,
H. G. ABBOT GREGORY, D.D.,
Vicar General.
Feast of St. Aloysius, 1857.


MEETING.
The aggregate meeting of the Catholics of the Archdiocese, adjourned from
Tuesday last on account of the inclemency of the weather, was held on
Monday evening, in St. Mary’s Cathedral. His Grace the Arch-
bishop of Sydney took the chair shortly after seven o’clock. There were
present also near the chair, the Right Rev. the Bishop of Adelaide, the Right
Rev. Abbot Gregory, the Venerable Archdeacon McEncroe, the Very Reve-
rends Dean Coffey, Dean Lynch, Dean Grant, Dean Sumner, Dean Walsh,
Dean O’Connell; the Reverends J. Keating, J. Sheridan, S, Sheehy, P.
Birch, J. Gourbeillon, Newman, and Ford ; Mr. Justice Therry, the Hon. J.
H. Plunkett, (President of the Legislative Council,) Mr. Fawcett, M.P., Mr.
Egan, M.P., Mr. Dailey, M.P., Mr. Butler, Mr. Ryan Brenan, and Mr.
Lenehan.
The Archbishop having taken the chair, rose to address the meet-
ing, and was received with every mark of distinguished respect, the ap-
plause having subsided, his Grace said: Let no one be surprised that
we have chosen the Church of God as our place of meeting on the oc-
casion which has brought us together. For education is in itself a part of
religion, inasmuch as it is the drawing out to the utmost those faculties which
it has pleased our Creator to grant, so that men may be cultivated intellec-
tually and socially, and in that cultivation bring the whole growth of acquire-
ments and capacities under the sacred influences of religion. It is not then
simply because we require a very large space for the agregate meeting of the
Catholics of this City and of the Archdiocese, that we have desired to meet
you here, but also that our proceedings and our purpose may have the visible
sanction and blessing of religion. Having said so much, we now proceed to
speak more particularly on the subject which has brought us together, and
it is, my friends, that we may do that which heretofore has been the privi-
lege of royalty and of princely men, as we learn from the annals of Univer-
sites. Take, for instance, our own University of Oxford as an illustration,
and we find that one of the most noble of our kings was the chief founder of
its colleges. And after kings and princes, then came monastic and literary
bodies, as in the case of the colleges of Durham and of Gloucester, founded
by the Benedictines. And thus we might proceed. Now this glorious pri-
vilege has fallen to our lot, and there is not one who may not have part in
the noblest work in which man can be engaged. And here let us pay a tri-
bute to our Government. Whatever may have been its faults, whatever may
have been its misdoings in other matters, it cannt be denied that this our
Colonial Government has taken an enlarged view of the real interests of the
people in whose name they govern, and that they set an example which it


would well become long established kingdoms and potentates with revenues
ten times the extent of the revenues of this Governmept, to emulate and imi-
tate. (Applause.) But why should we go out of our own sphere ? If the
Government in our name have done so much, if our representatives have
nobly vindicated our characters, it becomes us now to place the seal upon
their doings and by our personal subscriptions to say, “ You have done a
noble act, and that which you have nobly commenced we will nobly conclude.
(Loud applause.) You have laid the foundations; you have called upon us
to build the superstructure ; and in the name of God we will do it.” And
now, my friends, we are called upon to subscribe a certain sum of money.
We mean to give a certain sum —large, if you look at it simply ; but if you
consider the number of individuals who are invited to contribute to it, if you
consider the object in view, the sum appears comparatively a small one.
And it would indeed involve us in everlasting shame, were we, in the raising
of this sum, to take advantage of the time that has been given us to raise it
in, namely, three years. J shall be ashamed of the people if the sum of
£IO,OOO be not paid in hard cash in less than three months. Let us come
nearer to the point, and say in less than three weeks. (Loud applause.)
And what will be our advantages? We spoke of them the other evening;
but as many of you were not present on that occasion, we will just mention
them again. We are required to collect £IO,OOO. Of that sum, £4OOO
must be at once lodged in a bank, or otherwise secured to the fund, in a
manner that shall be satisfactory to His Excellency the Governor. For the
raising of the remaining £6OOO we are allow'ed three years. In return, eigh-
teen acres of land will be placed at your disposal, that is to say, will be vested
in the name of trustees, not for church purposes, not for any individual branch
of our community, but it will belong to the Catholic people of this colony at
large. It will be their property, and their property as long as it shall please
God to continue this world in existence. (Applause.) On these eighteen
acres we shall build our College. And if we place down £IO,OOO, the gov-
ernment is bound to place down £IO,OOO also. And if, as we trust we shall,
raise £15,000, or £IB,OOO, we have a right to call upon the government to
pay down an equal sum. (Applause.) This being done, an annual endow-
ment of £SOO in perpetuum is made on the College. The representatives of
the people have consented to it; and it comes to us under the guarantee of
public faith, which never in any circumstances can be violated. (Loud ap-
plause.) lam most happy to bear my friends on this occasion. It is the
voice of the same spirit which spoke at our preliminary meeting a lew even-
ings ago. And that indeed was a glorious meeting. The numbers truly
were of necessity few, but in it was generated an enthusiasm which I have
no doubt has spread throughout the city. It has brought you here this night,
with willing minds and liberal hearts, determined that you will prove your-
selves worthy of the name you bear ; and that now the opportunity is given
to you, you will show that theie is no object in the world more dear to your
hearts than that of furthering the interests of the people by giving them a good
education. [At this period the Right Reverend the Bishop of Adelaide en-
tered the meeting , and was greeted with loud and prolonged applause .] The
Chairman continued: You see what interest my dear friend the Bishop of
Adelaide takes in this most important subject. Although for years he has been
absent from you, the affectionate solicitude which so many of you have per-
sounally experienced in years gone by, has not decayed in his most loving
heart. (Loud applause.) Had it been necessary he would have come from
Adelaide to have been present amongst us on such an occasion as this. You
know what travelling on our roads is ; and when I tell you that he has this
day come from Penrith along our roads in order to be present at this meeting,


1 think I give you a most evident proof of his solicitude for your welfare, and
of the interest that he takes in all that appertains to the interests of the church.
(Applause.) Indeed there is most ample and heart-stirring cause for mutual
congratulation amongst us on the noble spirit which has been manifest—a
spirit which seems as it were to gather you into one body ; —and thus you
come forward nobly to redeem your characters, and to show how earnest you
are in that which is indeed the cause of religion—the cause of sound intel-
lectual and social education. (Applause.) For whatever might be the dif-
ferences of opinion—and indeed there have been those differences of opinion
on the subject of education—in this our present movement all must combine.
Whatever advantages any one system might have are to be found combined
in that which we now adopt. And hence it is that it meets with universal
acceptance. I have no doubt that to night we shall reach the first stage in
the mountain we are determined to climb; and glorious will be the pros-
pect when we have attained the summit. That very evening I have no doubt
the.sum which we were determined should distinguish our first collection will
be paid upon that table, to be recorded to your eternal honour. (Loud ap-
plause.) But there is something more substantial than honour in the business.
Through your representatives you had assigned large sums of money for the
purpose of erecting the University. And a noble structure certainly it is.
But of what use will that University be if you have not the key to open the
door ? And you are preparing the key—it might be at the great price ; but
consider the treasures which will be unlocked, and for which you yourselves
must prepare to have access. 1 mean to say, it is in the College the students
will be prepared to reap the advantage of the lectures given in the University.
At the same time, in the College, religious and moral training will be made
the very first object of interest—a consideration I know of the greatest im-
portance in the esteem of all of you. 11 is not necessary for me to enter into
further detail. Several gentlemen will address you this evening—some of
whom have already given proof of the interest they feel in this cause; and
others you have not yet heard, whose absence must necessarily be attributed
to a cause we must all deplore. But now our young and esteemed friend
Mr. Dailey, having been restored to health, the very first use he makes of
his health is to come amongst us to show the interest he takes in the cause of
education, and his desire that others of his countrymen may become honours
to his country, as he himself has become, and he (the Chairman) trnsledever
would remain. (Loud applause.) It were fruitless for me to say more. 1
trust that having opened this meeting with such prospects of success, we
should close it in fulfilment, and that we shall retire to our homes with mu-
tual congratulations that we had accomplished so gloriously the object which
had brought us together. (Loud applause.)
Mr. Justice Therry rose and said, —My Lord Archbishop, Ladies and
Gentlemen, —The first resolution has been entrusted to me, and I propose in
the first instance to read it to the meeting,—it is as follows :
That in order to meet the munificent provisions made by the Go-
vernment for the promotion of a high order of education in the
Colony, immediate steps he taken hy the Catholics of the Archdiocese
to raise the sum of £IO,OOO required hy the Act of Council.
This resolution will, I feel confident, receive a ready response from the meet-
ing which I now address, and which I congratulate at finding so numerous
and influential. I have been foralongtime unskilled in the art of advocacy ;
v- neVer ’ * con f ess > ’f 1 possessed any portion of such art, did I feel more
ambitious of exercising it successfully, than on the present occasion. 11 is, in


my mind, an occasion of the most momentous interest on which our community
has been called upon to act, within the experience of the oldest man amongst
us. It is the first occasion within the last three hundred years, on which we,
as Catholics, have met in grateful recognition of the favour and service of a
truly parental government in conferring upon us an endowment of a College
for the education of our youth,—in affiliation with an University established
on thejust basis of civil and religious equality. (Cheers.) Neitherin theseatof
Empire at home—nor in the wide range of the vast British dominions abroad,
has an institution till now been established embracing all the subjects of the
state in one grand measure of comprehensive benevolence. At home the uni-
versities are in connexion with the national church, and strictly exclude from
all participation in its high honors and rewards all those who dissent from
it—for I will not recognize the miserable sum doled out to Ireland for the
maintenance of Maynooth as an exception to this general rule.—lt is a sum
not only disproportionate to the exigencies it is meant to supply, but exorbi-
tantly out of proportion to the immense revenues enjoyed by the church
which does not claim the membership of more than one-sixth of the popu-
lation, and, moreover, the sum, small as it is, is made the subject of annual
political contention,so that it is conferred without grace, and received without
gratitude. (Cheers.) Not such is the character of the endowment granted
to us. It is conferred in the true spirit of equal and impartial law ; —it im-
poses no condition but that of sincere and earnest co-operation on our part;
—it awakens no jealousy or suspicion, for it confers equal rights on all who
by their dispositions and exertions show that they deserve to enjoy them, ft
is moreover free from that illegitimate ascendancy gained by enriching one
portion of the community at the expense of the other. It recognises no as-
cendancy, in short, but that legitimate and just ascendancy which is won by
those who deserve to be in the ascendant, by reason of their activity, zeal, and
determination to surpass others in the good race in which we are all engaged
to run. (Loud cheers.)
There is this great national advantage, too, to be derived from this im-
partial distribution of the aid of the Statelt assuages those asperities,
and softens those animosities which prevail in communities where all
favor and affection are shown to one class of the community at the
cost of all other classes, and thus promotes that union and harmony which
happily prevail amongst all denominations here, and makes us prone rather
to consider the many points on w’hich we agree, rather than the few on which
we differ, and in the consideration of those few, to be governed by feelings of
mutual indulgence and charatible forbearance. (Applause.) Truly! this
is an occasion of great joy and, I confess, that my joy is the greater by
reason of the contrast which the munificent endowment of our government
presents to the discouragement and disadvantages which I aud some friends
now near me witnessed, and from which we suffered in our native land.
There, I have seen some of noblest talents wasted—and finest energies be-
numbed, because every object worthy of ambition was denied to all but the
favoured class. The career of a struggling man in the University of Dublin
was a truly painful one if he happened to be a Catholic. He was shut out
from all substantial honors and rewards, which were exclusively reserved
for the students of the National Church. Unfortunately, it did sometimes
happen that some—unduly greedy of mere emoluments—sacrificed their faith
to gain them, and such men mostly distinguished themselves by a revile-
ment of those whom they, in the pursuit of a selfish interest, deserted. A
few of them who surpassed others in abusing their Catholic countrymen
whom it was their duty to love and cherish, might, in those days hope for a
Bishopric. Or, if in the race of competition, one excelled in dealing out


impartial abuse to Catholics and Dissenters, an Archbishop’s mitre might
grace his brow, of which the late Archbishop Magee of Dublin furnishes a
felicitous illustration for having first insulted the Catholics by telling them
they had “a Church without a religion.” He turned round to the Dis-
senters and, by way of sly and saucy antithesis, told them they had “ a re-
ligion without a Church.” (Cheers.) I might easily multiply instances in which
this exclusiveness worked cruel injustice. It would be tedious to describe the
system and its effects. Instead of describing, I will follow the good ex-
ample of the Father of Poetry, Homer, who prefers rather to exemplify than
describe—to fix attention on some striking scene in a battle than give a
vague, general description of the battle-field. I will mention, then, only
one instance of the struggles of genius in my native land, but, as that was
the struggle of a man of mastermind, —of one who afterwards became dis-
tinguished pre-eminently as a scholar and a poet, —it may perhaps suf-
fice. He was, indeed, a man whose mental growth, whose gigantic genius,
no law, however arbitrary or tyrannical, could keep down.* I allude to the
illustrious bard of Erin, Thomas Moore. His case was that of very many
in my day, but with a man of so illustrious a name, the evil was more
marked and prominent, than it was in the many instances of nameless
strugglers who sunk under the persecutions and impediments that met them
in the way. Honours with emolument could only be obtained by them at
the sacrifice of their faith—a heavy and bitter price to pay for the advance-
ment they secured ; —whilst to resist the temptations held out to them, re-
quired, indeed, an iron will and a strong faith. Moore was both an Irish-
man and a Catholic, and never denied his country or his faith. He gives
the following account of the occasion on which he entered Trinity College.
It is to be found in the first volume of Lord J. Russell’s Memoirs of Mooore.
“Though by the bill of 1793 Catholics were admitted to the University, they
were still (and continue to be to this present day) excluded from scholarships,
fellowships, and all honours connected with emolument; —and, as with our hum-
ble and precarious means, such aids as these were naturally a most tempting
consideration, it was for a short time deliberated in our family circle, whether I
ought not to be entered as a Protestant. But such an idea could hold but a
brief place in honest minds, and its transit, even for a moment, through the
thoughts of my worthy parents only shows how demoralising must be the tend-
ency of laws which hold forth to their victims such temptations to duplicity.
My mother was a sincere and warm Catholic. The less sanguine nature and
quiet humour of my father led him to view such matters with rather less reverent
ears ; and though my mother could seldom help laughing at his sly sallies against
the priests, she made a point of always reproving him for them, saying, * I
declare to God, Jack Moore, you ought to be ashamed of yourself.’”
(Laughter) Well, Moore entered as a Catholic. He was not the victim
of that duplicity he so indignantly condemned. He had arrived at the end
of the fourth year when an emolumentary scholarship fell vacant. That,
no doubt, was a strong temptation to a struggling man ; but it caused him
not to swerve from his faith. Moore gives the following account of the
event: —
“ Whether at the desire of my mother, or from my own wish to distinguish
myself, probably from a mixture of both these motives, I went in, in this year,
as a candidate for one of the vacant scholarships, though well knowing, of course,
that my labour would be in vain, as, though I were to come furnished with all
the learning of an Erasmus, I should still —being like Erasmus, a Catholic, —
* The late learned Catholic Barrister, Francis Plowden, a remarkably tall man,
was wont to say, that he had grown to be seven feet high, notwithstanding all the
stringent laws enacted to prevent the growth of Popery in England.


have been shut out from all chance of the prize. On the list of those who
were adjudged worthy of scholarships I obtained a pretty high place, but had
only the barren honour of that place for my reward. How welcome and useful
would have been the sixty or seventy pounds a year, which I believe the scholar-
ship was worth, to the son of a poor struggling tradesman—struggling hard to
educate his children —I need hardly point out; nor can any one wonder that the
recollection of such laws, and of their bigoted though in some places conscien-
tious supporters, should live bitterly in the minds and hearts of all who have, at
any time, been made their victims.”
I can speak feelingly upon this point—to me and to others, as well as to
Moore, that sixty or seventy pounds a year “ would have been at that period
of our lives welcome and useful.” It was a post that did not require the
genius of a Moore to achieve, but with moderate industry I myself, with
many others, had then sufficient classical attainments to secure it. The
mischievous result was, that many were obliged to abandon the regular Col-
legiate course of studies, and to seek occupation on the press and in other
miscellaneous pursuits to provide a maintenance in prosecuting their studies,
which these small emoluments would have secured them. Through these
scenes and struggles the men of my early days passed and suffered. We “ best
can paint them” for “ we have felt them most.” (Loud cheers.) Well, then,
may I congratulate this young and happier generation—in this land of freedom
—on the contrast which their present position presents to our past condition. As
Catholics we have indeed fallen upon prosperous times. The charter of our
religious liberty was conferred upon us by that great and good man, Sir
Richard Bourke, in the Church Act that he passed ; and well do I remember,
as if it were yesterday, the words he uttered on the day it passed: “ I have
done my duty in conferring upon Australia the charter of her liberties, let
Australia now do her duty by preserving that charter inviolate.” (Cheers.) Next
to Sir Richard Bourke followed a man of the highest order of intellect,
a man whom it was as impossible to force from the path of honor and recti-
tude, as it would be to drive the sun from its course. Such a man was Sir
George Gipps. He was true to the trust that had been bequeathed to
him.—He strengthened our liberties, in the retrospect of the past. No-
thing has been a greater pride and consolation to me, than that I am able to
say I was honored with the friendship of these two great and good
men. And though I did not stand quite in the same relation with
the Governor who succeeded Sir George Gipps, it is but justice to Sir
Charles Fitz Roy to say that he possessed a large fund of sound common
sense, —coupled with the greatest liberality of disposition ; —and, furthermore,
we must not forget that it was his hand that set the seal to the Act under
which we now propose to establish this college, and that for that act alone
his name deserves to be held in grateful remembrance amongst us. Our
liberty is now secured to us, —but if ever the day arrive when bad men by
bad and arbitrary laws shall seek to disturb the religious equality with which
our land is now blessed, —the best bulwark against such an encroachment
will be the college that you have this night met to establish. Knowledge
is power, and it is strength, and there is not in the history of the world an
instance of an enlightened people being an enslaved people. (Loud cheers.)
The statesmen who, in the days of William and Anne and the early Georges,
ruled Ireland with a rod of iron, were consistent in what they did, adopting
the fit means to gain the end at w hich they aimed. Their end was the slavery
of the people.—and the means they adopted to secure it were to keep the people
in ignorance. They resolved that the people should be slaves, and in a due and
suitable spirit of consistency they enacted a law that the people should notread.
Schools were proscribed, and penalties imposed on teachers who attempted
to give instruction to Catholic children. But when the hour of enlighten-


ment arrived, —freedom dawned—for when once the human mind “ bursts
those cerements” in which bigotry and ignorance “ have inurned it,” it comes
forth in all the independence, dignity, and strength of manhood. (Loud
cheers.) Therefore, in establishing this College to-night, it should be borne
in mind that it both perpetuates our fame and preserves our freedom.
(Cheers.)
Another important point remains, on which I must not altogether be
silent. We must be up and doing. A great boon is presented to us, on
one condition—that we should “ act well our part.” We must within three
years contribute the sum of £IO,OOO. A large portion of it must be con-
tributed at once; and therefore it is that we must be active in the duty
we are now called upon to perform. We cannot delegate this duty to
others; —it must be done now or never. (Cheers.) We must now stand in the
pass of Thermopylae and fight our way,—because hereafter we will not have the
ground to stand upon to fight. In considering this question, lam reminded
of a lesson I learned in my youth, and which no doubt is familiar to most of
you. J refer to the story of the Sybil, who went to Tarquinius Superbus
and offered him nine books, and demanded three hundred pieces of gold for
them. The king, seeing the largeness of the price, refused to purchase
them. The Sybil returned again, and offered him six books, demanding the
same price. The king again refused. A third time she returned, and of-
fered him three books, and still demanded the same price. The king, struck
with the earnestness of her manner, and taking advice, purchased the three
books; but the six were lost forever. These three books were invaluable;
they were preserved with jealous care, and ten men were appointed to watch
them. They were consulted on every occasion of calamity. What a boon,
therefore, to ancient Rome would it have been to have bought the nine
books instead of the three! What was the fate of that king, let us take
care is not our own. To-day we might have eighteen acres, —but bye and
bye we might be “ pushed off our stools” by some denomination less nume-
rous, but more energetic than ourselves, and might not even get six acres.
Let us therefore avoid the example of the unwise king, and follow the wise
and good one of our Protestant fellow-citizens—and of that noble band, the
Wesleyans, who have been early in the field,—secured the whole boon
for themselves—and shown that though small in number, when fighting in a
good cause, “ how brave in the battle they are.” (Cheers.)
Exigui numero, sed virtus vivida bello.
For us, then, there is no excuse for inactivity or want of zeal. We are
strong in numbers—in wealth—in industry—in enterprize, and in success,
for we, with our fellow-colonists, have shared in the general prosperity of
recent times. In the arts that polish life, —and the accomplishments that
adorn it—we may not perhaps be as advanced as some other sections of this
vast community ;—but, by means of this College we will, in all the refine-
ments of social life, soon overtake those who may now be a short way before
us. Aye! this College, I pronounce emphatically and confidently, at no
distant date, will supply every deficiency in that respect, and speedily
symmetrize every disproportion. (Loud cheers.)
We may not expect, it is true, that all the benefits of the institution, of
which we this night lay the foundation, will be visible in our day.—lt is not
until time shall have developed the manifold advantages to be reaped from
it, in its growth and maturity that the good deed we this day do shall be duly
appreciated.— Then shall the merit of our beneficence be estimated, when the
shall be lighted up in our Collegiate Halls—and itsradiance
i use through the various pursuits of life in which the future disciples of our
ege, having been there fitted for their functions, —shall hereafter move.


Then shall the mighty service we perform be recognised and rewarded by a
grateful posterity, when our Senate shall shine forth with framers of wise
and judicious laws, and with bold and incorruptible assertors of their
country’s freedom; —the Church with learned and eloquent vindicators of
our creed; —and the varions professions for which a high order of education is
indispensable with men of competency and skill.— Then shall the lull
measure of our fame be filled up,—when some future Australian Frank-
lin shall arise, whose proud boast it was to snatch the lightning from the
skies, and the sceptre from the hands of despotic power—
Eripuit fulmen coelo, sceptrumque tyrannis.
Some future Australian Watt, —the great benefactor of mankind,—who
shortened distances and accelerated communications amongst nations (the
great advantages of which we enjoy) by the discovery and application
of the mighty power of Steam—Yes! in the coming on of time, we shall
yet reciprocate the benefits we have derived from the discoveries and
improvements of the old world, by paying back and lending to the Old
the discoveries and improvements of the New. (Loud cheers.) —Yes!
then shall young Australia be seen winging her eaglet flight against the
blaze of every science, with an eye that shall not wince, and a wing that
shall not tire; —her brow bound with the ornament of every art, and decked
with the wreath of every muse. Yes —
Then Minstrels we shall have of native fire,
And maids to sing the songs themselves inspire.
Onr very speech, methinks, in after time,
Shall catch the lonian blandness of our clime;
And whilst the light and luxury of our skies
Give brighter smiles to beauteous woman’s eyes,
The Arts, whose soul is love, shall all spontaneous rise.
His Honor sat down amidst long and continued applause, his speech
throughout having been repeatedly interrupted by the plaudits of the
meeting.
The Very Rev. Dean Lynch said : —My Lord Archbishop, Ladies and
Gentlemen. I feel very much relieved from the responsibility attaching to
the duty imposed upon me, inasmuch, as His Honor Mr. Justice Therry has
in such eloquent and impassioned language recommended and supported
the resolution. I cordially endorse the truly Catholic sentiments enunci-
ated by him, and I trust, that bearing my humble endorsement, they may
realise our mutual wishes. [ would fain leave the resolution in the hands
of our most reverend Chairman, and withdraw the passing shadow, which
my feeble advocacy must cast upon the bright and gorgeous picture painted
by a master hand; but the heartfelt interest I take in the noble object we
have met to struggle for prompts and emboldens me to lead you over the
canvas, upon which so many beauteous and smiling prospects have been
grouped. You, my Lord, Ladies, and Gentlemen, will, I hope, allow my
sincerity of purpose to weigh in the balance against the ordeal to which I
shall subject your patience. The resolution that has been read, and which
I have undertaken to second, calls upon the Catholic body to raise promptly
the sum of £IO,OOO, in order that we may avail ourselves of the munificent
provisions made by the Government for the promotion of a high order of
education throughout the colony—and surely such a call will be enthusias-
tically responded to. And here would I place upon record our full and
grateful appreciation of the liberal and generous conduct of the Legislature.
We take this opportunity of emphatically declaring that the boon has not
fallen on barren soil, and that we receive it with a public recognition of its


many solemn responsibilities. I look upon this beneficent endowment as
an earnest of Australia’s lasting freedom from the galling yoke of bigotry
and intolerance, for legislation upon such a broad and comprehensive basis,
and in such a Christian and catholic spirit, would never mark the councils
of men who aimed at an unholy and unjust ascendancy. The Government
has passed this equitable Act, to indicate that the waters of strife have sub-
sided, and like that token of peace which the Great Creator set in the
clouds, as a covenant of his reconciliation with the world, this charter of re-
ligious equality will be the talisman against the encroachments and ma-
chinations of the bigot or the despot. Education, you know, is the potent
and successful enemy of slavery—it is impossible to chain down the culti-
vated mind, for, like the cork, which however deeply it may be immersed
ever rises again to the surface, it will in due time vindicate its legitimate
position and freedom. I hail this permanent provision with unmixed satis-
faction, because it will prevent the periodical recurrence of those discussions
where religious antipathies are permitted to find vent, and because through
it an honorable relation is established between the Catholic Church and
the state, a relation honorable to both, as no degrading compromise is ex-
acted from the Catholic body. You have just heard of the difficulties
under which the Catholics, who wished to obtain a superior education, la-
boured, and you must have often witnessed the many injurious results of our
educational and political inferiority. I here freely acknowledge that, as a
Catholic and an Irishman, I have bitterly deplored the hostile and anti-
catholic spirit which hovered around the Universities of the British Empire,
and which damped the laudable ambition of our talented youth, as they
entered these sanctuaries erected by their sainted ancestors; and, in the
district over which I have been placed by His Grace the Archbishop, it has
been to me a source of pain and regret that, in the momentous struggle for
civil and religious equality, I missed from my side Catholics of cultivated
intellect. I ever sought to elevate the moral and social status of the people
confided to my care—and so 1 sincerely desired to see them take their stand
upon the same platform with myself. The deepest interests, therefore, of
the Catholics throughout the length and breadth of Australia are at stake
in this matter, and I confidently predict that we shall nobly discharge our
duty. We have been taunted with a systematic retention of knowledge
from our people, as though we dreaded its influence upon our clerical do-
minion; this calumny comes with a bad grace froip those who are now in
the unlawful enjoyment of those noble Universities endowed by the princely
liberality of Catholic bishops in olden times. Why, who are your leaders
and guides on this eventful occasion—your venerated Archbishop and his
Clergy—they now tell you that, as the shrine of knowledge can be safely
approached, you ought to make thereat an early and willing offering, and
they bid you go forth from the worse than Egyptian bondage in which il-
liberal and penal enactments had retained your mental and moral develop-
ment. I fervently hope that your subscriptions to-night will be worthy of
your chief Pastor’s paternal solicitude, and of the great object which has
congregated us around him. I will now tell a story which may have the
effect of bringing you to the Honorable Treasurer's table. “Once upon a
time, and a very good time it was too,” a number of persons met for the
purpose of collecting money in aid of a certain fund. The Chairman laid
down the three following excellent rules for the acceptance of the Meeting,
thus,—every one present was to give something—every one was to give
according to his means, and every one was to give cheerfully. The Chair-
man, who watched each contributor, appeared quite satisfied, until an old
gentleman of ample fortune came forward with a donation not at all in


keeping with his means. The Chairman refused it, on the ground that it
did not comply with the second rule. The old man after a short in-
terval approached with a larger sum, but his angry looks told of his
unwillingness to part with his money, again did the Chairman reject his
gift, because he failed in the observance of the third rule. Ultimately he
returned with a smiling countenance, and thus merited a blessing. Now, I
recommend each one in this vast and respectable assembly to give in pro-
portion to the abundance with which God has blessed him. “ God loves
the cheerful giver,” and will amply reward those who give in His name,
and for the advancement of his glory. His Honor Mr. Justice Therry has
by the magic wand of his eloquends, caused the future greatness of Aus-
tralia to pass in review before you, and has directed your attention to that
galaxy of talent, which, emanating from our proposed College, shall shed
lustre upon the Church, the Senate, and the Bar, and fondly 1 dwell upon this
cheering and joyous prospect. I too believe that Australia is destined to
rival, if not exceed, in religion, science, and in all that contributes to the
happiness and refinement of man, the greatest empires that ever flourished
on earth. Yes, to use the glowing words of Erin’s gifted bard, when pre-
dicting the bright future of Ireland-
The nations are fallen, and thou art still young,
Thy star is but rising when others are set,
And tho’ slavery’s cloud over thy morning hath hung,
The full noon of freedom shall beam round thee yet,
Yes ! Australia, tho’ long in the shade,
Thy star will shine out when the proudest shall fade.
1 have now to acknowledge with grateful courtesy the cordial reception
which I have received at your hands, but I will feel still more gratified,
if your contributions prove that I have, by enlisting your sympathies, found
the way to your pockets—in fact, that I have made a telling speech. Assist
to-night in placing upon an imperishable basis this noble institution, des-
tined to be the bulwark of your civil and religious rights—remember that,
from its sanctified and learned halls, your children will come forth fitted to
act their part upon the theatre of life, and qualified by their educational
acquirements and high moral principles to vindicate their holy religion, and
compel the unbeliever to respect in them what he has not the moral courage
to imitate. The Rev. Gentleman, who had been loudly applauded through-
out his address, sat down amidst renewed cheers.
The Hon. J, H. Plunkett, who was received with loud applause, said :
My Lord Archbishop, Ladies, and Gentlemen,— I am suffering from a severe
cold, and, I am sorry to say a sore throat, which will prevent me from in-
flicting on you a very long speech. Labouring under these two impede
ments, on no other occasion but one of such importance as this, would I
attempt to address a public meeting atall. (Applause.) But on soglorious an
occasion as this, so long as I could croak out my opinions and sentiments
at all, f would feel myself called upon to do so—for it is a glorious meet-
ing. It is a glorious crisis in the colony—for such a meeting as this could
not take place unless in the first place we were satisfied that civil and reli-
gious freedom was established in this land. It is merely carrying out what
is now established by the law—equal laws for all alike, without any dis-
tinction of sect, class, or nation. That is what is established here; and
it is because it is established that we are assembled here to-night. It is a
glorious race, a glorious competition that we see among all denominations
among us; not as the Church of England and other denominations were
set—one against the other, in the old country, by the iniquitous laws


referred to by his Honor Mr. Justice Therry, and which have not been en-
tirely obliterated in that country up to the present time. These laws set
class against class, and religion against religion. Here, instead of having
any hostility against each other, we all run in the same race, and wish success
to one another. (Cheers.) We all have the same object in view—the
general elevation of the country, and it tends to prove to the world that the
best way to make all classes satisfied is to have laws based on civil and
religious liberty. (Loud Applause.) His Honor Mr. Justice Therry referred
to the penal laws, which, I thank God, are now no longer in force. They
also occur to my mind, not for the purpose of complaiuing of their injustice
which at this time of day is so far remedied ; for here we have nothing to
complain of; still, although we may forgive, we cannot forget the state in
which we were—(it is in my own recollection, and there are many here whose
memory will go farther back) —the state of degradation and slavery which
every catholic felt himself branded with. Until the year mentioned by his
Honor Mr. Justice Therry, 1793, no Roman Catholic, not even a Duke or
the son of a Duke, not a Catholic nobleman or the children of any Catholic
nobleman, could get a degree in any of the Universities in the British
dominions. It was only in 1793 that Trinity College was so far opened to
Roman Catholics that they were allowed to enter, merely to take a degree,
but not to get a scholarship—not to get a fellowship, or to take any of the
emoluments of the University. The British colleges, that were originally
founded by Catholics—Oxford and Cambridge—(Applause)—although they
were founded in Catholic times, hundreds of years before what is called the
Protestant Reformation—although we all know that we are prond to point
our fingers at the memorials of Catholicity that these colleges bear about
them even at the present day—still up to the present moment no Catholic
can take a degree in either of them. A Roman Catholic could not get a
degree in England until, not many years ago, the University of London
was established. Trinity College, Dublin, illiberal as it was, was yet the
most liberal, inasmuch as a simple degree was open to Roman Catholics
from the year 1793 ; and we may refer to a great many Roman Catholics
who distinguished themselves in after life, who, with these limited means,
went through the course of studies in Trinity College. But I can speak
from experience, having resided within the walls of Trinity College for up-
wards of four years, and, strange to say, during my residence there, 1 lived
at No. 16, Botany Bay Square. (Cheers.) I little imagined when I en-
tered Botany Bay Square, Trinity College, that my destiny would be the
real Botany Bay, and much less did I think of seeing such a glorious meet-
ing as this in Botany Bay. (Applause.) But this 1 say from experience,
not only in my own case but hundreds of others also, that no Catholic
parent who determined upon sending his children to Trinity College, Dub-
lin, did,so with comfortable feelings, or without reluctance and great appre-
hension, because there was a feeling engendered there of the most Pro-
testant description—l mean, speaking in the Irish sense, Protestantism in
all its hues and colours was mixed up with a political as well as religious
hatred of all Catholicity. It was felt by every parent who was compelled,
for the temporal interest of his children, to send his sons at the tender and
the dangerous age that we generally enter there—fearful of his religion
being corrupted, and of having ideas inculcated that every Catholic parent
must shudder to think of. (Applause.) For although, even at the present
day, I can well see, from my recollection during my career in Trinity
College, and my experience in the mother country, that it was no atmos-
phere suitable for Catholics, yet it was the only alternative that was left them.
That alternative and ordeal many went through, and came out of it un-


scathed, and afterwards became ornaments not only of the country they be-
longed to but also to the religion they professed. I may mention many
gentlemen I know who were contemporaries of my own—the present Lord
Chief Baron of Ireland, the present Lord Chief Justice of Common Pleas,
Richard Shiel—all these and other distinguished Catholics went through
Trinity College, and the late Sir Michael O’Loughlan, than whom no man
ever did more honour to the bench of Justice, as was even acknowledged
by the greatest opponents of Catholicity. (Applause.) He and others
showed that they were not behind their Protestant neighbours in doing good to
the country, and that they possessed the proper qualifications to fill the
highest offices in the state. However, others whom I recollect, in pass-
ing through the same ordeal, took the bait ; and, when hooked to scholar-
ships and fellowships, they left (as I had reason to know) the religion they
had no doubts about, .and embraced that which they had no predilection for:
Their poverty, not their will, consented.
(Cheers.) Previous to the year 1793, we all know that a Catholic had no
footing in any office at all. I have too keen a recollection of the history of
my own family, not to have it impressed on my memory. My two grand-uncle s
were obliged to leave their native country almost to get their bread, and
they raised themselves to most eminent and distinguished offices in other
countries. Many others have relatives that were driven from their country,
for the sole cause that they could get no education in their own country,
who also, by their own exertions and merits in foreign countries did the
same. (Cheers.) In fact, there is hardly a Catholic family who cannot
point to similar instances, from these odious laws, which made it a trans-
portable offence to be taught by a Catholic schoolmaster, and made it penal
in a Catholic to be caught teaching as a schoolmaster. In those days, the
mere getting into office at all required giving up the faith handed down by
their fathers, and what their consciences and reasons approved of. They
had no other alternative. But why do I mention these things? It is to
contrast it with the present state of things. Although lam not here to
flatter the Roman Catholic community of this country, I am not here to
conceal the truth, to gratify myself or those by whom I am surrounded. No.
Although I feel as much as any one the humiliation of our status as to
education, as contrasted with other denominations—although I do feel
humiliation, on whose head should the responsibility fall? Not upon the
Catholics themselves. (Applause.) They had no chance to be educated in
the face of penal laws which made it not only penal in the schoolmaster to
teach Catholics, but made it penal in the father to have them educated at all.
And even when those laws ceased, no chance was given to the Catholic parent
to send his children to any University to be on an equality, or to get a fair
start with his Protestant fellow countrymen. But we have no such excuse now,
and it therefore behoves us to show them when we get the chance —when we
are on an equality with Protestant subjects—that we hail the boon as we ought
(Applause), and that we value education as much as those of our favoured
fellow-subjects who heretofore had advantages which we were shut out from.
(Applause.) Many who know not our principles or our feelings, but
judging of us as a body who laboured under the disadvantages which I have
alluded to, imagine that we are not friendly to the diffusion of education.
I think this meeting is a sufficient answer to that. (Cheers.) It shows at least
that the Catholic citizens of Sydney are alive to their interests in that re-
spect. I hope it will show that they feel thoroughly the value of those ad-
vantages now placed in their hands by the just and equitable laws of the
country they live in. (Applause.) But we will convince those of our fel-
low Protestant subjects to whom we have been, and are misrepresented in the


tracts and anti-Catholic publications that have been distributed in such
thousands even in this colony, and which go to show that Catholics are not
only steeped in ignorance, but their religion is hostile to their enlighten-
ment we will show that all we want now, all we ever wanted, was a clear
stage and no favour. (Cheers.) We will show and convince our Pro-
testant countrymen of our sincerity, that we never asked for anything for
ourselves that we are not ready to grant to others. (Applause.) And if we
were content with less than perfect equality they would, I am sure, think
meanly of us. We are not afraid of learning, or of knowledge. If it were
a Catholic principle to be afraid of learning or knowledge, would our
Catholic ancestors have founded Oxford and Cambridge, and all the other
noble monuments of the same kind which are exhibited before our eyes, not
only in our own country, but in every country throughout Europe? (Ap-
plause,) No: learning has been handed down; it has been preserved, as my
friend Mr. Justice Therry said, “ with the lover’s fondness and a miser’s
care,” by the Catholic Church and handed down into Protestant hands in
England. .We fear not competition. Although it is not for me to make
any profession of faith in this assembly, still I only give expression to what
will be echoed by every Catholic in the land, when I say we have such
thorough conviction of our religion that we have no more doubt upon it
than upon the sun at noonday. We are not troubled with any doubts of
that kind, and we fear not any discussion.
Magna est veritas et prcevalebit.
We have even more than human confidence in the steadiness and purity
of our holy and apostolic faith, to have any misgivings as to the result.
Now, having said so much, I do congratulate the country on the opportu-
nity offered to them to educate their children—to raise this community to
a level with any community upon the face of the earth—because in the pre-
sent day we have all the opporlunites that are afforded by learning, in all
countnes, and which is the lever to elevate every country in the world.
(Cheers.) Jam happy to say for the general interest of the community,
that this emulation prevails throughout the different denominations that are
existing in the country. We see it. We all row in the same boat, and the
Government, acting wisely as a Government, without favouring one sect or
denomination, holds out the hand of encouragement to all. I say although
we are all Catholics here, we are equally interested in seeing our friends of
the Church of England commencing their College, and taking the steps they
have to enlighten their portion of the community ; and our friends the Wes-
leyans and the Presbyterians are up and stirring. They all have a fair
start; and it is all for the benefit of the whole community ; and, as we are
interested in the general elevation of society, so we Catholics are all inter-
ested in the enlightenment of all these different denominations. I am sure
ffew will see it is equally for the interest of the state that so large a portion
as the Catholic community should be educated and elevated in the social
scale. And it may be that the sons, and some of the sons of sons, of the
Catholics whom I now address may be the leading stars to bring the at-
tention of the world to this colony at some future time. (Loud Applause,)
And when we talk of the greatness of the colony, it is not the greatness of
its gold-fields, or of its wool fleeces ; it is not its material prosperity in that
respect that will be referred to. No : it is the race of men it produces—
the men of mind and intellect, that will direct its destinies. (Cheers.) Then
it is a subject of congratulation to all of us as members of the community
to see this great educational movement take place; and I would indeed feel
humiliated if the Roman Catholics lagged behind in the race—if they
Jagged back in that educational movement, or if they did not go forward


not to be outdone by their neighbours. (Applause.) Although we cannot
boast of many amongst us being senators at the present moment, and fill-
ing high places, yet in future times,when the opportunity is offered of going
through that ordeal that all nations agree as one necessary to begone through
to fit men for public stations, and to put them on a par in bringing one
great mind in collision with another great mind, it will be otherwise. It is
necessary for a young man to go through something of a collegiate and
university education for that purpose, and when we have that opportunity
now without any danger of the contamination of our youth ; when we have
laws which have established equality and fair play in this country, so dif-
ferent from my unfortunate but beloved native land, we should rejoice at it.
(Loud Applause.) In Ireland everything that comes from the Govern-
ment is looked upon with suspicion. Even of late days, when the charter
schools failed—when every scheme of human ingenuity and unfairness
devised by the successive Governments, either to proselytise or tamper with
the Catholics of Ireland—when all that failed, they came forward to found
colleges of late days. The colleges are in all appearances very good, and
there is not much difference between them and the University we have in
this country ; but, coming from the source they do, every Roman Catholic
says
Timeo Danaos et donaferentes :
the experience of the Catholics of Ireland shows them they ought to look
with suspicion on everything in the shape of education. But I see no rea-
son to look with suspicion on the state of things here, where there is no such
object for proselytising, and where proselytism dare not show its head.
(Cheers.) If I went to Ireland to-morrow, from my recollection of former
times, the policy and spirit which guided everything connected with educa-
tion, all my suspicions would be as much aroused as ever (Applause); and
I would agree with the great body of my countrymen, who are afraid when
anything is brought forward, because they know that the snake lies in the
grass. But here we have our interests and our feelings respected ; the
balance is held fairly between all sects and denominations. The Church
of England have their University nearly completed; the Wesleyan body
will soon have theirs; and I am happy to hear that there is some hope that
the Presbyterians will unite for a similar object; and 1 hope the Catholics
will soon have theirs. I confess in this fair rivalry I take same interest in
seeing that the Catholics of the present day do not degenerate from the
Catholics of old, who built Westminster Abbey (Loud applause), who founded
Oxford and Cambridge, and a dozen score of other colleges, both in Eng-
land and Ireland of great architectural beauty. We know Ireland in
the seventh and eighth century, was the seat of learning for all
the countries of Europe, and the seats of learning there attained such
notoriety, that, with all the difficulty of travelling, which in those days was
very great, they travelled from every country in Europe in order to get the
benefit of the great learning for which Ireland was then distinguished ; and
we still have memorials in every part of that kingdom, of the architectural
magnificence of its ancient buildings, to confirm that part of history which
is so well authenticated and handed down to us. And, recollecting all
these things, I do hope that we may not now be outdone by our fellow-
subjects in the magnificence of their buildings. But many who are here
know better than I do that magnificent buildings cannot be got up without
a very large sum of money; and, although £IO,OOO is the sum that is abso-
lutely required to set us afloat, yet it will only set us afloat. But it will do
to secure the site and to make the commencement—and it will be a noble


commencement; but, if it comes up to my ideas of magnificence, and I
hope the majority here agree with me, we must look forward to handing
down to posterity that which will be creditable to this generation. Although
£IO,OOO are required to set it going, the more we get over £IO,OOO the
more creditable to us, and the more certain it is to be useful to all genera-
tions in time to come. (Applause.) Now my friend Mr. Justice Therry
said something in his eloquent and oratorical effusion about bright eyes, f
can tell you one fact, as one of the Treasurers: I saw no bright eyes come to
put down their names in my list. Now, the bright eyes l wish to see are those
of the young ladies who wish to subscribe to this undertaking,
and for myself 1 should have no objection to an old lady with
spectacles who will put down her subscription upon my list, and give the
example to those who have bright eyes. lam sorry to say that the fair sex
have kept back up to the present time. The work we are engaged in is for the
interest of posterity, and it is not impossible that many of the young ladies
here may look forward to their sons and grandchildren, or their near con-
nections, being benefitted by going to college, and so fitting themselves for
the high offices of the country, for all offices are open to those who go
through the university, because it shows they have had the mental training
necessary to fill those offices. When the fair sex recollect these things, they
will find they have not less interest than we have in raising the subscription
for this undertaking, I hope this hint will be taken by the ladies, and that I
shall see bright eyes and ladies with spectacles coming and giving their
names to the Treasurer. (Applause.) In order not to occupy the time of
the meeting longer, I will now read the resolution,
That this meeting, representing as it does the great body of the
Catholics throughout the colony, feels itself hound to direct atten-
tion to the many important and permanent religious, social, and in-
tellectual advantages which the proposed College will confer upon
the community.
It is the climax of civil and religious liberty, and I hope that we will show
that we are worthy of the freedom we enjoy. For this 1 say, (though no
heart in the universe breathes more freedom than my own) —I say that no
community is fit for freedom but an intelligent and virtuous community,
who wish to raise themselves in the social scale of progress now going on in
the world. lam proud to see, by the way in which you have so encou-
ragingly responded to the call of his Grace the Archbishop, that you are
alive to the benefit that is proposed to you. Those that show themselves
alive to it will never regret it, and their posterity will point out, when those
who hear me are long in the grave, the names of their ancestors who sub-
scribed to St. John’s College, and who have laid the noble foundation of
which they will so richly reap the benefit. (Long and continued applause.)
Archdeacon M'Encroe seconded the resolution, and gave as an instance
of the good feelings that existed amongst the members of the Church of
England towards the proposed Catholic College, a letter which he had just
received from Sir Alfred Stephen, in which the Chief Justice expressed his
satisfaction at their success, and offered some very useful suggestions
touching the Bill to be introduced into Parliament for the “ Incorporation
of the College.” This liberal spirit contrasts very favorably for Australia
with the reluctance of the home Government to grant a charter to the Irish
Catholic University lately established in Dublin. He feared it would be a
long day before the Chief Justice of Ireland or England would offer bis
services to get an Act of Incorporation for Ireland’s own University. But


the foundation of the good feelings that have sprung up of late years in the
mind of our Protestant fellow-subjects towards the Catholics of this colony
was laid by that wise and enlightened statesman, Sir Richard Bourke, in his
memorable Church Act, and he warned the Catholics of this country never
to consent to the repeal or to the alteration of a single clause in that master-
piece of sound legislation. The Church Act was the Charter of their Reli-
gious Freedom, and should the intrigues of a party, or the dupes of a
spurious liberalism, ever succeed, in repealing that Act, farewell to the civil
and religious liberties of the Catholics of New South Wales. It was a re-
markable coincidence that he should now be associated with his esteemed
friend Mr. Plunkett in collecting funds towards the erection of a Catholic
College in this far distant land, as he himself had been engaged in a simi-
lar work six-and-twenty years ago, when invited by the late revered Arch-
bishop Murray, of Dublin, to accompany Mr. Plunkett when coming out as
Solicitor-General to New South Wales. For soon after his return from
his mission to America he was commissioned by the Archbishop of Cashel
his native diocese, to preach and solicit subscriptions throughout the Arch-
diocese for the completion of that spacious edifice, the College of Thurles,
towards the erection of which the Most Rev. Dr. Everard had left £IO,OOO,
out of his own private property. Here is a proof that the clergy and people
of Ireland in the present age have not degenerated from the noble spirit
that animated their Catholic forefathers in times far past, to which allusion
has been already made, for the advancement of the great work of education.
It was in that splendid College that the great National Council of the Irish
Bishops held its sessions a few years ago: this was the only National
Council held in Ireland for upwards of 400 years. It was this innate love
of education that induced hundreds of Irish and English Catholics to con-
tribute towards opening Colleges, or founding burses in Colleges on the
Continent of Europe, when the odious penal laws had closed against them
the doors of those institutions which they had so munificently endowed at
home, and which were in fact enacted with the fiendish purpose of de-
priving the Catholics of the British empire of every sort of education, and
thus to reduce them if possible to the grovelling condition of African slaves.
Considering then what our forefathers have done and suffered in the en-
nobling cause of education, and seeing the splendid offer held out to us by
the enlightened Government of this country, we are bound by every motive
that can influence the best feelings of our nature, to strain every nerve, to
make every effort within our power, to secure to ourselves and to our Ca-
tholic posterity the manifold advantages to be gained by a good collegiate
education. And how different are our prospects in this regard from that of
our fellow Catholics in Ireland. They have made gigantic efforts of late
years to raise subscriptions, at home and in America, for the establishment
of a Catholic University in Dublin; they have, thank God! succeeded,
and, I may say in spite of the Home Government; for they could not get
a sixpence from that would be liberal Government towards the funds of
their University; nor can they procure from that same Government “A
charter for the University,” although that would cost nothing but the price
of a sheet of parchment for its engrossment. How different is our lot, and
how much more-favoured are we in this regard! Here we are presented
with all the benefits to be derived from a charter already granted, and we
are promised from ten to twenty thousand pounds by the Government, with
eighteen acres of valuable land on which to build a Catholic College.
Nothing can exceed the munificence of this offer, and it is made on the
very fair and practicable condition that we subscribe pound for pound with
the Government! This we can do, and with the blessing of God we shall


do. Recollect, if this offer be not now met with the proper spirit by us, it
will never again be made to us. And should we let slip this splendid op-
portunity for securing the blessings of a good Catholic Collegiate Education
for the present and for future generations, our names would descend with
disgrace and dishonor to our posterity. But I have no fear in this regard.
The Catholics of Sydney will to a certainty raise £10,000; and I have no
doubt that the numerous and wealthy Catholics throughout the country will
raise £IO,OOO more; and thus secure the maximum grant of £20,000 from
the Government. Nothing less will satisfy me, and nothing less can come
up to the educational requirements of the numerous and aspiring Catholic
youth of New South Wales. It may be said that much remains to be done
in the way of building Churches and Schools in every part of the country,
and that the people in the interior should rather subscribe for such pur-
poses than for building a College in Sydney. True it is that much is to be
done in this regard in many parts of the Archdiocese. But there is no im-
mediate and urgent necessity for getting up such buildings—there is not a
statute of limitation to three short years for subscribing to these local re-
quirements. Not so with the Catholic College; for if immediate and ef-
fectual steps be not taken at once, the offer of the Government will be lost,
and it will never again be within our reach or acceptance. Again, the Ca-
tholics of the interior are even more interested in the proposed College than
those residing in Sydney; for the Catholic students of Sydney might attend
the lectures in the University if no Catholic College existed at all, while
the young men from the country who wished to attend the University would
be obliged to take up their lodgings in the town, to the great loss both of
their time and danger to their morals, and at heavy expenses, if they had
no college in the University for a residence. Hence, in this point of view
there is a strong and additional motive for Catholic parents residing in the
interior to subscribe generously and according to their means to this one
paramount object. And there can be no fear that with the “ golden offer”
held out by the Government, and with the ample means that this “ golden
era” of Australia has placed in the hands of a large portion of this favoured
land, that the country will supply its quota of £IO,OOO, while the people of
Sydney have, with a spontaneous generosity poured in their £IO,OOO into
our College Fund. (Applause.)
The resolution was then put and carried.
Mr. Faucett, M.P., said he was sure they would not expect many ob-
servations from him on the present occasion, especially after what had been
said by his Grace the Archbishop about the lateness of the hour and the
amount of business which yet remained to be transacted. (Hear, hear, and
laughter.) Still he could not refrain from making a few remarks ; he could
not refrain from congratulating the congregation upon the high and dis-
tinguished position in which they stood. (Applause.) He could not re-
frain from slightly contrasting the present state of their affairs with
what it was some years ago in the old country. (Great and reiterated
applause.) He could not forget that even in his own times, and in his own
person, he had suffered when a young man from those restrictions under
which the Catholics in his country had laboured. (Applause.) He had
been a student of that ancient University, Trinity College, Dublin, and he
could well remember the fears and apprehension which those Catholic pa-
rents experienced who sent their sons to that College. As for him-
self, he had experienced all the benefits in that Institution which
Catholic students were suffered to eujoy ; and he had also experi-
enced all those feelings of bitterness and degradation which were as-
sociated with those advantages. He had entered Trinity College as


a poor young man—(applause)—as one who had to fight his own way
through the world. (Applause.) He had devoted himself to literature, and
through it solely he had been able to attain a position at that college.
(Applause.) It must be understood that he did not speak now of honours,
but of what his honorable and learned friend Mr. Justice Therry had
spoken of, namely, a scholarship—(great applause)—and he could tell
them that a scholarship was no unimportant object for a young man to
obtain. (Applause.) It gave him a position and some emolument. (Ap-
plause.) He should never forget the feelings of indignation which rose in
his breast, when he saw those whom he had excelled and surpassed—when
he saw them obtain those honours from which he, on account of his religion,
had been excluded—because he did not profess a favoured creed. (Hear,
hear.) And why did he now recall those feelings ? It was not for the pur-
pose of stirring those bitter feelings up in this country. (Great and reite-
rated applause.) Thank God ! they did not exist here. (Applause) They
stood here in the equal enjoyment of civil and religious liberty. (Immense
applause.) They no longer were degraded by their creed. (Applause.) In
the present University and in their own College no Catholic youth would
enter and feel as he would if he had been entering Trinity College. (Ap-
plause.) Here was an honor for which they could all contend on terms of
perfect equality, and he had no doubt the Catholics of this country would
show themselves worthy of the position which they occupied. (Great ap-
plause.) He for one trusted that the remembrance of the disabilities and
disadvantages under which they had laboured in the old country would be
“in the deep bosom of” oblivion “ buried.” (Great and reiterated applause.)
And he must say before concluding that the old Legislative Council of this
Colony were deserving of their gratitude for their liberality: they had
placed no restrictions on the working of these affiliated Colleges. (Great
applause.) Now, even in what were termed the Queen’s Colleges in the
old country there were restrictions—because the professors were appointed
by the State. (Hear, hear.) But he was proud to say there were no such
restrictions imposed upon the affiliated Colleges of this country. (Applause.)
The heads of various denominations had the power of appointing their own
professors. (Applause.) As the evening was now far spent, and as there
was much other important business to transact, he would conclude by
reading the resolution which had been placed in his hands, and would at the
same time most cordially move it—
That the following gentlemen be appointed a general Committee
for the purpose of organising such a comprehensive system of man-
agement as will ensure the sympathies and co-operation of the vari-
ous congregations throughout the colony in aid of the proposed Col-
lege All Clergymen, the Treasurers to the fund, the Secretaries,
Messrs. Macnab, Gorman, Hogan, Golden, Walsh, Coveny, Hurley,
Carraher, with power to add to their numbers, and all Subscribers.
The Very Rev. Dean O’Connell begged to second the resolution, and
said he was sorry his friend Dean Rigne.y was not present to do so. (Ap-
plause.) He would only make one more observation, and that was—he
thought the advantages of this College should be pointed out to the poorer
members of the Church. He had intended to have made some observations
upon that phase of the question, but there had already been so much said, and
the hour was so far advanced, that he must forego his intention. He
could not at the same time help saying that the foundations which
they were about to lay would be a basis of future grandeur and usefulness


to the Church. The College was intended for all—the poor as well as the
rich : all would receive equal advantages from it. (Applause.) It was a
clear stage and no favour for every one who desired to avail himself of its
benefits. (Applause.) He trusted that the Catholics would that evening
second the resolution and do honour to his Grace the Archbishop and to
themselves. (Applause.)
The resolution was then put and carried unanimously.
The Right Rev. Dr. Murphy, Bishop of Adelaide, begged to that he
had intended to make a most magnificent speech that evening. (Great laugh-
ter.) He intended it to have been better than those delivered by his friends
the honourable Mr. Plunkett and Mr. Therry. (Laughter.) But when he
considered the lateness of the hour, and that the subscription list yet wanted
filling up, he thought the best thing he could do was to sit down. (Laugh-
ter.) He believed the resolution which he held in his hand was one of the
most important which had been submitted to them that night.
That the Subscription list already opened he now proceeded with.
(Applause.) At the same time they must consider that all the eloquent
speeches which they had heard had only been made for the purpose of
getting up the steam. Now, when they arrived at the boiling point, he
hoped the cash boxes on the table would be overflowing. (Applause and
laughter.)
Mr. W. B. Dalley, M.P., on rising to second the resolution, was received
with long continued and reiterated applause. He said he must not attri-
bute those demonstrations of applause to any personal merit of his own, but
rather as a mark of their love and esteem for the right reverend gentleman
who had preceded him, and whom he was glad again to see among them,
in order that he might have an opportunity of identifying himself with that
congregation with whom he had at one time been closely connected. (Ap-
plause.) He was glad that his reverend friend now occupied a much
higher position than when he was among them before. (Applause.) He
thought he and his right reverend friend had some reason to complain of
the manner in which they were curtailed of their speeches, (Laughter.)
At the same time he could assure them, that he was very much rejoiced at
the circumstance, since he was not in a state of health which would allow
of his making any lengthy remarks. (Applause.) He trusted he would,
however, be permitted to take up the suggestion which had been made by
his reverend friend Dean O’Connell, in reference to the projected College
being equally for the poor as well as the rich man. (Applause.) He
thought the advantages their College offered to the poor should be fully ex-
plained (Applause), and perhaps they would not consider him tedious while
he enumerated some of the advantages which the College would confer on
the poor. (Applause).ln the history of collegiate institutions he found they
were designed almost exclusively for the poor. (Great applause.) From
the thirteenth century to the sixteenth century —From the laying of the
first collegiate foundation to the last, when the sovereign genius of that
mighty ecclesiastic, Wolsey, reared that splendid monument of learning,
Oxford College—they were founded principally for the poor scholars who
were unable to obtain a position in the University. (Applause.) And so
in France, in these institutions. The munificence of the clergy and laity
had been combined in rearing the splendid College of the Sorbonne. (Great
applause) He was sure that there were few men in this community who
but would be anxious to imitate and fully carry out the intention of the
Catholic Church in the establishment of collegiate institutions. (Hear,


hear.) At the present moment the Sydney University furnished nine scho-
larships which would be taken up by their children, and there was thus fur-
nished to them the strongest and best motives to exertion in this cause.
(Applause.) No doubt, from what he had heard that evening from his
honorable and learned friend Mr. Faucett, they had conceived a violent pre-
judice against Trinity College, Dublin; but he could tell them that Trinity
College Dublin, up to 1793, during its exclusive reign, did very little, and
had not produced any men of note; a curse appeared to rest upon it, and it
became a proverb
Scarce a bow-shot from the College,
Half the world from sense and knowledge.
Had they been permitted to meet some years ago on this subject, when
they had amongst them the late venerated Bishop Davis, who, perhaps, first
of all had conceived this scheme, he would have urged upon them with
feeling eloquence the necessity of united efforts in this cause; but it had
pleased heaven to remove the venerated Bishop from among them. But if
there was one thing which would testify their universal respect for him, it
would be the erection of a monument to his memory, which would be truly
honoured in the munificent establishment of this institution. (Great ap-
plause.) He again most cordially seconded the resolution. (Applause.)
The resolution was put and carried unanimously.
Mr. Faucett rose to propose that Mr. Plunkett, the Venerable Arch-
deacon McEncroe, and Mr Lenehan be treasurers of the fund. He felt
the responsibility those persons had taken upon themselves who initiated
the movement, a responsibility which also attached to every member of that
community. He fully appreciated the great advantages likely to accrue to
all the members of that community, if the project were successfully carried
out of establishing a Catholic College in connection with the University of
Sydney. The germ of a great idea had been suggested in one of the obser-
vations that had fallen from his Grace. This was a College about to be
founded by the people (cheers) —a College founded by the Catholic people
of New South Wales; a College in the foundation of which every indi-
vidual belonging to the Catholic community could take that part which, in
former days, kings, nobles, and great men thought they were entitled to take.
(Cheers.) He trusted the effects of that meeting would not be lost, but
that it would go forth that an enthusiasm was already excited which would
show that the Catholics at all events, were not liable to the imputation, that
they stood in the way of communicating knowledge to the people at large.
(Applause.)
The Rev. Dean Lynch begged leave to second the resolution, the cir-
cumstance of having attended that meeting should be recorded in the tablet
of his memory in years to come. (Applause.) He had had many opportu-
nities of observing the spirited enterprise of the people of this colony ; and
he felt convinced that there was in the minds of our Australian youths
germs of future greatness. (Applause.) It was amongst the most ardent
wishes of his life to see an institute such as that contemplated established in
this country —that he might see the Catholics of this country raised to that
position which they ought to occupy. (Applause.) He desired to see the
Catholics of this country standing on the same ground of religious equality
as other religious bodies, and this could only be done by the erection of an
educational institution such as that intended. (Applause.) They were
now placing a deep and wide superstructure of religious liberty in this
country, and to many of them this event would be made a cause of proud


rememberence in the evening of life. (Applause ) They would leave this
College as a legacy to their children and their children’s children, who would
feel proud of having ancestors who carried out so noble a work. (Applause.)
The Very Rev. Dean Sumner, moved
That the Very Rev. Dean O’Connell. W. B. Dailey, Esq., KI.P., and
Eyre Ellis, Esq., he Secretaries to the fund.
In rising to move the resolution he desired to make a few observations ; he
wanted to come to the main point. (Applause) They wanted pounds,
shillings, and pence,—(Applause)—and the more the better. (Hear, hear.)
He had no doubt, however, they would act on this as they had done on
other occasions, and contribute as far as their means would permit. (Ap-
plause) The benefits of this institution would not be confined to them-
selves ; it would extend to their children and to their children’s children.
(Applause.) It was an act which would redound to their honour, and they
would be spoken of as being the founders of that College by their children.
(Applause.) They should not place themselves in worse position than
other religious bodies, and why should the talents of their children be neg-
lected as they had been ; why, because hitherto the means of educating
them in the higher branches of education had not been within their reach.
(Applause.) But now from the very highest to the lowest all might'enjoy
the advantages of the best possible kind of education. (Hear, hear.) In
concluding, he could not help referring to the very liberal provision which
the Government had made in regard to these Colleges. (Applause.)
The Very Rev. Archdeacon M’Encroe rose to second the resolution. He
made no doubt that the gentlemen named in the resolution would give en-
tire satisfaction, and he also believed they would have as much work as they
could do in writing and answering letters, and in fact corresponding with all
parts of the colony (applause,) and he might add, be trusted their hands
would not be idle. (Hear, hear.) He was one of the gentlemen appointed
to take charge of the strong box, and he was glad to inform them that there
was £SOOO already subscribed, to be placed in the box, and it would re-
quire another £SOOO before they could obtain any aid from the Govern-
ment, as it was an indispensable consideration that they should first of all have
collected £IO,OOO ; and if within the three years prescribed by the Legis-
lature they could collect another £IO,OOO, they could claim a like sum
from the Government. If the Catholics of Sydney would subscribe
£IO,OOO, he made no doubt but that those in the country would subscribe a
like sum. (Applause.)
Mr. Plunkett begged to return thanks for the honour which had been
done him in chosing him as one of the treasurers ; although he believed
it was a post which would not be so troublesome as that of secretary. (Ap-
plause.) And in reference to the selection of gentlemen for secretaries, he
did not think three gentlemen more eligible could be chosen in the whole
Catholic community. (Applause.) He was glad they had appointed
three treasurers, because when they opened their account at the bank no
cheque would be issued unless it was signed, by at least two of the trea-
surers ; and if only two had been appointed in case one of them chanced to
be out of town it might involve some difficulty and delay; but he thought
it might be better if the cheques were, when practicable, signed by the
three treasurers. He would recommend, being now ex officio one of their
treasurers, that the money would be subscribed in solid cash, believing, as
he did, “ that the first blow was half the battle.” (Applause.) They


wanted to be in a position, when Parliament met on the 11th of next month,
to be able to present their bill, which could not be passed until four notices
were given, and no private bill could be introduced under thirty days
notice ; now unless they collected £IO,OOO immediately, it will be impossi-
ble to carry out these arrangements; if, therefore, this money was to be
raised, “it were well it were done quickly.” (Applause.) He would now
take his post as treasurer, and would assure them that a small donation in
this matter would be a great donation in any other case. (Laughter.)
The Subscriptions were then proceeded with, and at the close ol the
Meeting between £SOOO and £6OOO in cash had been received. The
amounts promised raised the gross sum to nearly £12,000.


LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
£ s. d.
Archbishop, His Grace the 500 0 0
Abbot, Right Rev. and St.
Mary’s Community.... 250 0 0
Arkins, John 50 0 0
Acheson, James 2 0 0
Adams, Thomas 1 0 0
Adams, John 5 0 0
Armstrong, John 100 0 0
Ainsworth, W. G 1 1 0
Ainsworth, R. J 1 1 0
Acheson, John 25 0 0
Alderson, Mrs 5 0 0
Bergin, Lawrence ...... 100 0 0
Birch, Rev. P 100 0 0
Butler, James 25 0 0
Bernasconi, Mr 3 3 0
Brenan, Thomas 3 0 0
B , Miss 1 0 0
Brehamy, M 3 0 0
Binney, John 1 10 0
Bennett, Catherine 1 0 0
Brogan, Thomas 2 0 0
Byrne, William 20 0 0
Birrell, Mr. and Mrs 20 0 0
Brenan, Miss 1 0 0
Brady, L 1 0 0
Bowes, Edward 1 1 0
Brenan, William 1 0 0
Brady, Philip 2 0 0
Baptist, John 50 0 0
Bainbridge, George. 25 0 0
Bailey, R. R 25 0 0
Brown, Richard 10 0 0
Byrnes, John 1 0 0
Barrett, James 10 0
Brenan, John Ryan 50 0 0
Bryan, Mrs .. 1 0 0
Birch, William 1 0 0
Breen, Patrick 1 0 0
Breen, James 1 0 0
Breen, Bernard 1 0 0
Breen, Catherine 1 0 0
Brady, William 10 0 0
Blaney, Patrick 1 0 0
Byrnes, P 5 o 0
Busher, Patrick 1 0 0
Butler, Edward 100 0 0
£ s. d.
Blanchfield, Miss Ellen .. 10 0
Barlow, John 50 0 0
Bern, Mr 5 0 0
Byrne, Thomas 10 0 0
Browne, John, Singleton. . 100 0 0
Banks, Thomas 10 0 0
Brady, Miss Bridget .... 3 0 0
Barrett, Mrs. J 1 0 0
Brenan, Miss Catherine .. 10 0
Burke, John 5 0 0
Birmingham, Miss Ann .. 10 0
Birmingham, Miss Mary.. 10 0
Brew, Miss 1 0 0
Byrnes, Francis 2 0 0
Baxter, Captain 2 0 0
Brehiney, William 3 0 0
Cooper, Honble. Daniel,
Speaker of the Legisla-
tive Assembly 100 0 0
Carraher, Owen J 100 0 0
Coveny, Robert 200 0 0
Clifford, Patrick, Maneroo. 100 0 0
Corcoran, Lawrence .... 100 0 0
Clinton, Mr 25 0 0
Curtis, James 25 0 0
Casey, W 5 0 0
Clarkson, Mr 20 0 0
Cleary, Mr 10 0 0
Callagher, James 5 0 0
Closkey, Joseph 1 0 0
Culheene, Mr 5 0 0
Conway, James 1 0 0
Carroll, Miss Bridget .... 1 10 0
Cahil, Michael 1 0 0
Cummins, Henry 10 0 0
Casey, Patrick 5 0 0
Corish, Rev. M. A 200 0 0
Coleman, Miss Alice .... 1 0 0
Cahill, Thomas 5 0 0
Corcoran, John 1 0 0
Cullen, Mrs 1 0 0
Campbell, Mrs. E 2 0 0
Carrick, Martin 2 0 0
Carney, John 50 0 0
Callachor, Mr 5 0 0
Coman, William 10 0 0
Cron an, Thomas 3 3 0


£ s. d.
Callaghan, Thomas 10 0 0
Callaghan, Thomas Milford 10 0 0
Callaghan, Fredk. Milford. 5 0 0
Cummins, Theresa 1 0 0
Chapman, Charles 5 5 0
Campbell, Edward 250 0 0
Cannovan, James 1 0 0
Cagney, John 1 0 0
Clark, Sophia 0 10 0
Curran, John 0 10 0
Connors, T 50 0 0
Condron, Richard 1 10 0
Cullen, P 50 0 0
Clune, Mr. 50 0 0
Costello, W 20 0 0
Casey, Michael 10 0 0
Campbell, Mrs 5 0 0
Carmichael, Donald 5 0 0
Coughlan, John 5 0 0
Conran, Michael 1 0 0
Collins, Robert 25 0 0
Consul (of Spain) 10 0 0
Coquelin, Joseph 10 0 0
Curran, J. J 5 0 0
Corcoran, Peter 1 0 0
Cranny, Mary 1 0 0
Collins, Mary 1 0 0
Corcoran, Mrs 1 0 0
Coston, John 1 0 0
Cleary, Mrs 1 0 0
Cuishen, Miss Johanna .. 10 0
Crowley, James 2 2 0
Cox, Miss Bridget 5 0 0
Cuthbert, John 50 0 0
Cassian, Daniel 1 0 0
Donovan, Jeremiah 100 0 0
Dwyer, John 50 0 0
Dolman, William 10 10 0
Doyle, Mr 4 0 0
Dolan, Mrs 1 0 0
Devlin, Michael 5 0 0
Devlin, Joseph 10 0
Doyle, William 4 0 0
Duffy, Thomas 1 0 0
Duffy, John 3 0 0
Duffy, Miss Hannah .... 2 0 0
Dwyer, John, Junr 20 0 0
Donough, Miss Mary Ann. 10 0
Doheny, James 5 0 0
Delhunt, Patrick 2 0 0
Deary, Patrick 5 0 0
Doyle, E. W 5 0 0
Doyle, James 3 0 0
Devlin, John 2 0 0
Dailey, William 8.,M.L.A. 100 0 0
Donovan, D 5 0 0
Donovan, Mrs. D 5 0 0
£ s. d. }
Dalziell, William 3 0 0
Daley, Miss Anne 2 0 0
Doyle, Miss Margaret 1 0 0
Doyle, Mr 1 0 0
Dailey, John 100 0 0
Daley, Thomas 1 0 0
Dogheny, Patrick 1 0 0
Dunn, James 1 0 0
Doyle, James 10 0 0
Doyle, Mrs 5 0 0
Delahunty, Mr 20 0 0
Davis, John 25 0 0
Daley, William 5 0 0
Dalton, Michael 20 0 0
Duneen, Miss Catherine.. 10 0
Doyle, Edward William .. 5 0 0
Daiey, Terence 50 0 0
Dillon, John Moore. 50 0 0
Deegan, John 1 0 0
Dogherty, John, Senr.. .. 10 0 0
Day, Miss Mary Ann .... 1 0 0
Drinkwater, Mrs 1 10 0
Dunn, Richard 3 0 0
Dickman, Miss Eliza .... 2 0 0
Doolan, Catherine 1 0 0
Doolan, Frances 1 0 0
Dick and Brown, Solicitors 10 10 0
Daley, John 5 0 0
Dwyer, John, St. Benedict’s 5 0 0
Dalziell, Mary 1 0 0
Devlin, Captain 2 0 0
Ellis, Eyre 50 0 0
Egan, Daniel, M.L.A 100 0 0
Elwood, John 1 0 0
Egan, John 1 0 0
Egan, Dr 10 0 0
Egan, Bartholomew 1 0 0
Egan, Richard 5 0 0
Elliott, Charles 5 0 0
Egan, Mrs 1 0 0
Friend 0 5 0
Farrell, Edmund 10 0 0
Faucett, Peter, M.L.A. .. 100 0 0
Fitzgerald, Patrick 100 0 0
Freehill, Patrick 100 0 0
Forster, Robert 15 0 0
Ford, Patrick 1 0 0
Flanaghan, Mr 2 0 0
Fogarty. Edward 2 0 0
Fitzpatrick, Miss Mary .. 10 0
Fitzpatrick, Mr 10 0 0
Farrell, Michael 25 0 0
Forster, George 1 0 0
Farrell, Thomas 25 0 0
Fogarty, John 5 0 0
Farrell, Patrick 5 0 0
Fox, Patrick 50 0 0


£ s. d.
Friends, Two 0 17 0
Fitzgerald, Mr 5 0 0
Fitzgerald, Miss 1 0 0
Friend 2/6. Friend 2/6 .. 0 5 0
Friend 0 5 0
Fox, Thomas 25 0 0
Farrell, James 5 0 0
Friend 0 10 0
Finn, Jeremiah 10 0 0
Farrelly, Patrick 100 0 0
Friend 1 0 0
Friend 1 10 0
Fleming, Miss Anne .... 1 0 0
Freaton, Thomas 0 10 0
Friend 1 0 0
Friend 1 0 0
Friend 0 2 6
Farrell, Michael, Junr.... 5 0 0
Frauley, Mrs 5 0 0
Flinn, John 5 0 0
Friend 1 0 0
Fagan, Miss Margaret.,.. 0 5 0
anson, Mrs 1 0 0
Finnerty, Malachy 1 0 0
Fitzgerald, Hon. Robert,
M.L.C 50 0 0
Grant, Very Rev. Dean .. 200 0 0
Goold, Pierce 5 0 0
Galvin, John 10 0 0
Gayner, Sarah 1 0 0
Glynn, John 10 0
Garnett, Rev. Henry .... 50 0 0
Goodie, Mr 50 0 0
Goold, Miss 25 0 0
Gilligan, Hugh 2 0 0
Gillespie, Mr 5 0 0
Gilroy, Mr 1 0 0
Geary, Misses 0 5 0
Geary, Mrs. T .. 1 0 0
G , Denis 2 0 0
Guilfoyle, Mr 5 0 0
Gauley, Richard 10 0 0
Gorman. John V 100 0 0
Gibson, Mrs. J. D 1 1 0
Gibson, J. D 1 1 0
Gregory, Anthony 1 0 0
Green, Master Henry .... 1 0 0
Gilligan, Timothy 5 0 0
Green, Mrs 1 0 0
Garratty, James 1 0 0
Gregan, Mr 10 0 0
Henderson, Mr 100 0 0
Hughes, John 100 0 0
Hurley, George 100 0 0
Halligan, John 25 0 0
Harper, Francis 5 5 0
Harper, Mrs. F. 1 1 0
£ s. d.
Harper, Patrick 5 5 0
Harper, Mrs. P 1 1 0
Hughes, Edward 1 1 0
Hill, Beruard 5 0 0
Hennessey, Michael 1 0 0
Hague, Mrs 5 5 0
Hoins, Mrs 5 0 0
Head, Nicholas 10 0 0
Head, Mrs. N 10 0 0
Hock, Aloes 2 2 0
Hore, Janies 110 0
Hickey, Patrick 2 0 0
Hourigan, John 25 0 0
Hand, Catherine 10 0 0
Hewitt, Morris 1 0 0
Hutchinson, Mr 10 0 0
Hart, James 50 0 0
Hoins, Daniel 1 0 0
Hoins, William 2 0 0
Hoins, Mary Ann 1 0 0
Hoins, John 1 0 0
Hoins, Ellen 1 0 0
Higgins, Mary 1 0 0
Harte, John 5 0 0
Hafferty, Edward 1 1 0
Highiam, Mr. and Mrs. .. 2 0 0
Hughes, Edward 25 0 0
Hynds, Mr 3 0 0
Hagerty, Mr 5 0 0
Hogan, Alderman 200 0 0
Hill, James 15 0 0
Hill, Edward 10 0 0
Hall, John 10 0 0
Huck, Richard 5 0 0
Holmes, William 10 0 0
Hickey, Michael 5 0 0
Harley, John 2 0 0
Hill, Miss Margaret .... 1 0 0
Halbert, John 10 10 0
Harold, Edmond 1 0 0
Handcock, John 1 0 0
Hornby, Mr 5 0 0
Hewitt, Miss 1 0 0
Harvey, Mrs. Mary 1 0 0
Healy, John 5 0 0
Healy, Miss Catherine.... 300
Hanlan, Patrick 0 10 0
Harper, Miss Susan 3 0 0
Harnett, Richard 50 0 0
Holaghan, Michael 3 0 0
Hanly, Rev. J 100 0 0
Hainess, Baron 2 2 6
Heydon, J. K 100 0 0
Jerdan, David 1 0 0
Johnson, Edward 10 0 0
Joyce, John 2 0 0
Jones, Miss 0 10 0


£ s. d.
Jones, John, Petersham .. 25 0 0
Kenny, Rev. John 100 0 0
Keating, Rev. Jerome.... 100 0 0
Keough, Mr 5 0 0
Kelly, Miss Mary 1 0 0
Kelly, Miss Margaret .... 1 0 0
Kiley, John 5 0 0
Keegan, John 5 5 0
Keegan, Mrs 1 1 0
Keenan, Miss Mary 1 0 0
Kinchela, Andrew 1 0 0
Kenny, Miss Alice 1 0 0
Keenan, Mr 0 10 0
Kane, Patrick 1 0 0
Kinchela, James ........ 10 0
Kelvin, Patrick 1 0 0
Keane, Patrick 10 0 0
Kinniery, Michael 10 0 0
Keller, Thomas 10 0 0
Keller, Mrs. T 10 0 0
Kimea, Miss Bridget .... 1 0 0
Kirby, Miss Mary 1 0 0
Kearney, Denis 50 0 0
Kelly, Mr 1 0 0
Kenslow, Andrew ...... 1 0 0
Kennedy, Matthew 1 0 0
Kavanagh, Rev. M 100 0 0
Kenyon, Rev. Patrick.... 50 0 0
Kelly, Miss Isabella Mary,
Manning River 30 0 0
Kiely, Miss Mary 0 10 0
Keane, Patrick 3 0 0
Kirby, James 2 0 0
Kelly, Oliver J 5 0 0
Lenehan, Andrew 500 0 0
Lynch, Very Rev. Dean .. 100 0 0
Luckie, Rev. Eugene .... 100 0 0
Lacey, Matthew 100 0 0
Logue, John 1 0 0
Lyons, Miss I 0 0
Lynch, Miss M. A....... 10 0
Lee, Thomas 1 0 0
Logan, James 5 0 0
Lynch, William 5 0 0
Linden, John, Junr 5 0 0
Lovatt, Mr 1 0 0
Lunt, David 5 0 0
Lacey, Michael 10 0 0
Lester, Thomas 3 0 0
Line, Margaret 1 0 0
Linden, Henry, Senr 50 0 0
Lawler, Michael 1 0 0
Lynch, Matthew 2 0 0
Long, John 5 0 0
Larkin, James 5 0 0
Leary, Mr 2 0 0
Leonard, Patrick 5 0 0
£ s. d.
Lett, Charles 10 0 0
Lunt, David 5 0 0
Landrigan, Miss Ailey.... 100
Lynch, Patrick 3 0 0
Lee, J. J 20 0 0
Leahy, Thomas 1 0 0
Larkin, Philip 5 0 0
Lee, Mrs 10 0
Lenane, Denis 4 0 0
Lamer, Miss Maria 1 0 0
McEncroe, the Venerable
Archdeacon 100 0 0
McEncroe, Denis 50 0 0
Moore, Jeremiah 50 0 0
Mahoney, Jeremiah 25 0 0
Macdonnell, R 25 0 0
McGill, Mr 5 0 0
Mullins, James 5 0 0
Maloney, Mr 5 0 0
Mulrooney, Mr 5 0 0
Macnamara.Hon. J.,M.L.C. 105 0 0
Munro, D 10 0
McDermott, Mr 5 0 0
Madden, James 5 5 0
M’Kewan, Thomas 10 0 0
McPhee, Daniel 1 0 0
McCarthy, Patrick 1 1 0
McMahon, Catherine.... 1 0 0
Magner, Thomas 1 0 0
McGinness, J 0 10 0
McKenna, Alfred 5 0 o
Moriarty, John 5 0 0
Murray Miss Mary 1 0 0
Murray, Miss Susan 10 0
Mclnnerney, Miss M. A... 0 10 0
Maher, Timothy 100 0 0
McConnell, James 5 0 0
Maloney, John 25 0 0
McGurn, Thomas 10 0
McCaffrey, Miss Kate.. .. 2 0 0
McGurn, Francis 5 0 0
McCaffrey, Patrick 2 0 0
McShane, J 10 10 0
Martin, Michael 5 0 0
McGill, Sarah Miss 2 0 0
Madden, Mrs. Ellen 50 0 0
McCarroll, Patrick . ... 50 0 0
Munro, William 10 0 0
M'Quade, William 100 0 0
Milford, Henry 50 0 0
Martin, P 21 0 0
Martin, Master T 0 5 0
Martin, Master W 0 5 0
Martin, Master John.... 0 4 6
Miley, Mr 5 5 0
Maloney, James 5 0 0
j Mulvin, Mary Ann 4 0 0


£ s. d.
Maher, Michael 5 0 0
Mulcahy, Mr 20 0 0
M’Carthy, Michael 25 0 0
M’Dermott, Captain J. J. 25 0 0
Molloy, John 10 0 0
Mackay, Redmond 10 0 0
Macnamara, Roger 5 0 0
M’Phelloney, W 10 0 0
M’Manus, Richard 10 0
M’Grath, Patrick 5 0 0
M’Mahon, Lewis 10 0 0
M’Dermott, Patrick .... 1 10 0
M’Dermott, Peter 1 10 0
Mongan, Charles 2 0 0
Magee, Thomas 5 0 0
Macnab, Francis 30 0 0
Murphy, Michael 1 0 0
M'Caffrey, Thomas 1 0 0
Morris, Alicia 1 0 0
Meehan, Thomas 1 0 0
M'Grath, John 5 5 0
Moriarty, John 5 0 0
M’Donough, Miss Ellen.. 10 0
M’Pbenna, P 1 0 0
Maher, Miss Catherine.. 10 0
Murphy, P. J 1 0 0
Murphy, J. S 1 0 0
Murphy, J. F 1 0 0
Murphy, H. H 1 0 0
Murphy, Michael 1 0 0
Murphy, Mrs 1 0 0
Murphy, Miss Bridget A.. 10 0
Murphy, Miss C. E 1 0 0
Morrissey, Michael 1 0 0
M’Phhillemy Mr 10 0 0
Mooney, Mr 10 0 0
M’Evilly, Walter 20 0 0
Morissey, Miss 1 0 0
M’Cauley, Patrick 10 0 0
Moloney, P. O’D 5 0 0
M’Dermott, Patrick 3 0 0
M‘Dermott, Mr 3 0 0
Magner, Michael 1 0 0
Madden, Mrs 50 0 0
M'Crath, Dennis 10 0
Murphy, Michael 10 0
M’Hugh, Redmond 5 0 0
M’Guire, Patrick 5 0 0
M’Guire, Thomas 5 0 0
Murphy, Miss Amelia.... 10 0
M’Donald. William 5 0 0
Mader, Mr.... 25 0 0
M’Phee, Mr 1 0 0
M’Keown, Thomas 10 0 0
McMahoney, Mr 1 0 0
Moran, Elizabeth 10 0
Montague, Mr., Cooma ..150 0 0
£ s. d.
M’Canna, Owen 1 0 0
McGinty, Rev. W 100 0 0
M’Canna, Patrick 1 0 0
M’Cann, James 1 0 0
Mehan, Charles 1 0 0
M’Dermott, Mr 5 0 0
Munro, Michael 1 0 0
M’Ewan, James 10 0 0
M’Guiggan, Patrick...... 10 0 0
Mann, P. G 1 0 0
M’Mahon, Patrick 4 0 0
M’Conville, Patrick 1 0 0
Minehan, Mr 1 0 0
Monaghan, Cormack.... 0 5 0
Mahon, Lewis 10 0 0
Mahon, John J 2 10 0
Mahon,Abraham 1 10 0
Makinson, T. C 20 0 0
Mullins, James ........ 1 0 0
Morgan Miss M. C 1 0 0
M’Grath, M 9 0 0
Murphy, Jeremiah L.... 10 0
Martin, Miss Mary 3 0 0
M’Mahon, Miss Kate.... 300
Maloney, John 2 0 0
M’Donald, Miss Mary.... 10 0
M’Govisk, S. K 1 0 0
M’Mahon, Terence 2 0 0
M’Hugh, Miss Sarah.. .. 2 2 0
M’Manus, Bernard 2 0 0
M’Namara, John 2 0 0
Miley, Mrs 1 l 0
M’Camley, Terence 5 0 0
Morley, Miss 2 0 0
Martin, Miss Catherine.. 10 0
M’Mullin, R 25 0 0
Murphy, J 10 0 0
Murphy, Hugh 10 0 0
M’Guire, Arthur 1 0 0
M’Mahon, F 25 0 0
M’Mahon, Michael 25 0 0
M’Elvogue, John 1 0 0
Murray, T.A., M.L.A., per
the Rev. Mr. Brenan .. 100 0 0
Macauley, Charles 5 0 0
M’Auley, R 10 0 0
Newman, Rev. P 20 0 0
Nolan, Hugh 50 0 0
Needham, Mr 20 0 0
Noe, Victor 1 0 0
Nowlan, Patrick J 1 0 0
Nowlan, Michae1........ 1 0 0
Nowlan, Joseph 1 0 0
Nixon, William 20 0 0
Nixon, Mrs. Wm 10 0 0
Nicholson, Miss Ann.... 10 0
Nelson, Nicholas 1 1 0


£ *. d.
Nestor, Michael 2 0 0
Nestor. Thomas 3 0 0
O’Neil, James 100 0 0
O’Connor, Richard 100 0 0
O’Meara, Mr 10 0 0
C’Connell, J 110 0
O’Hehir, John 10 0 0
O’Shaughnessy, John.... 10 0 0
O’Reilly, Joseph 5 0 0
O’Donohoe, James 0 10 0
O’Brien, Timothy 10 0 0
O’Brien, George 1 0 0
O’Shoughnessy, Mr 5 0 0
O’Connell, Charles Daniel 100 0 0
Orford, Mr 5 0 0
O’Connor, Patrick 10 0
O’Neill, John 17 0 0
Owens, E 50 0 0
Owens, Mrs. E 50 0 0
O’Neil, Thomas 10 0 0
O’Brien, Martin.. 20 0 0
O’Connor, Michael 10 0 0
O’Neill, Brian 10 0 0
O’Connell, Daniel 5 0 0
O’Callaghan, Miss 1 0 0
Oddie, Miss 10 0 0
O’Hehir, Mary 1 0 0
O’Meara, John 2 0 0
O’Neil, Mrs. Newtown .. 10 0 0
O’Connor, Hubert 1 10 0
O’Connor, Stephen 2 0 0
O’Brien Patrick 2 0 0
O’Hara, Edward 4 0 0
O’Brien, Cornelius 1 0 0
o’Biren,Rev.E. Braidwood 100 0 0
O’Dowd, Alderman 30 0 0
Plunkett, Hon. J. H. Presi-
dent Legislative Council) 100 0 0
Power, Bernard 1 0 0
Purcell, Peter 1 0 0
Phillips, Gerard 5 0 0
Proctor, John 2 0 0
Plunkett, William E.... 25 0 0
Punch, Peter 10 0 0
Purcell, Phillip 5 0 0
Purcell, James 10 0 0
Perkins, Mrs 1 0 0
Price, John 0 10 0
Purse, Mr 2 0 0
Quinlan, Mr 5 0 0
Quinlan, M. Junior 5 0 0
Quinlan, Henry 20 0 0
Rignev, Very Rev. Dean.. 100 0 0
Ross, Mr 25 0 0
Redmond Mr 30 0 0
Regan, James 2 0 0
Rawson, Richard 1 0 0
Regan, Patrick \ 9 q
Ryan, Alderman 59 9 0
Regan, James j 9
Ryan, Miss Ann j 9 q
Roach, Mrs 1 9 0
Raper, Alderman 100 0 0
Ryan, Miss Ellen 1 9 9
Rice, Thomas 10 10 0
Ryan, Miss Rosannah .... 1 q 9
Riley, Mrs 9 5 9
Ray, Mrs. T 50 0 0
Ray, Mrs 25 0 0
Ryan, Michael 10 0 0
Rafferty, S 2 0 0
Ryan, Master S 1 0 0
Regan, James 1 0 0
Riley, M 10 0 0
Riley, Cornelius 1 0 0
Ryan, Isidore 1 0 0
Richards, Thomas 1 0 0
Rutledge, William 5 0 0
Redhead, Dr 20 0 0
Reardon, Bernard 5 0 0
Reddin Daniel 1 0 0
Ramsay, W 9 0 0
Ryan, Matthew 10 0 0
Ryan,Patrick 1 0 0
Ryan, John 1 0 0
Sumner, Very Rev. Dean . 300 0 0
Sheridan, Rev. John F ... 100 0 0
Smith, James 100 0 0
Stephens, William George 5 0 0
Speerin, Mr 25 0 0
Stanley, Patrick 1 0 0
Styles, George 1 0 0
Slattery, John 1 0 0
Sullivan, Daniel 1 0 0
Shanahan, Patrick 1 0 0
Slattery, Daniel 110 0
Scanlan, Timothy 2 0 0
Slattery, Mr.. 1 0 0
Slattery, Patrick 1 0 0
Styles, George 1 0 0
Shalvey, Michael 20 0 0
Stewart, Miss Eliza 1 0 0
Sheerin, John 5 0 0
Sentis, (Consul de France). 20 0 0
Short, Thomas 10 0
Shanahan, James 1 0 0
Sums, sundry small, re-
ceived by Rev. Mr. She-
ridan Awto 8 0 0
Smidmore, . f/JU* 2OO 0 Oj
Sherbin, Mr 50 0 0
Sherbin, Mrs 50 0 0
Smith, Mr 10 0 0
Stenson, Edmund 5 0 0


£ s. d.
Smith. William 5 0 0
Smith, T 1 0 0
Sheehan, Miss Mary .... 1 0 0
Sprucen, Joseph 5 0 0
Smith, Thomas 5 0 0
Sharkey, John 25 0 0
Sharkey, Mr 20 0 0
Soldiers, two (11th Regt.). 010 0
Shaugnessy, Timothy .... 20 0 0
Sheehy, John 2 0 0
Searson, John •> 1 0 0
Scully, Bernard 5 5 0
Slattery, Master Thomas . 10 0
Slattery, Master John.... 10 0
Sarsfield, Miss Bridget.... 100
Scanlan, John 5 0 0
Therry, Very Rev. J. J. .. 500 0 0
Therry, His Honor Mr.
Justice 100 0 0
Tighe, Philip 5 0 0
Tighe, John, Illawarra .. 5 0 0
Tankard, Peter 25 0 0
Timmins, Francis 10 10 0
Timmins, Mrs. F 10 10 0
Tierney, Daniel 25 0 0
Thompson, John 6 0 0
Tierney, James 10 0 0
Tucker and Fesq 20 0 0
Treacy, Miss Jane 1 0 0
Toomey, Thomas 1 10 0
Tierney, John 5 0 0
£ s. d.
Trainer, James 5 0 0
Vaughan, James 1 0 0
Vaughan, Thomas 3 0 0
Walsh, Very Rev. Dean .. 100 0 0
Wright, Gilbert 50 0 0
Ward, Mrs 1 10 0
Wilkinson, Mrs 3 0 0
Walsh, James 2 0 0
Walsh, William 1 0 0
Ward, John 25 0 0
White, Miss 5 0 0
Walsh, Philip 100 0 0
Williamson, Mr., Sen 100 0 0
Whelan, Mr 1 0 0
Woods, James 5 0 0
Walsh, Patrick 010 o
Whelan, Mrs 5 0 0
Wheatly, John 5 0 0
White, Thomas 1 1 0
Webster, Mr. 1 1 0
Wilde, Edward 100 0 0
Wilde, Mrs. Edward .... 100 0 0
Wilson, Adam 25 0 0
Whelan, Walter 5 0 0
Walsh, Master Thomas .. 0 5 0
Young, Rev. P 25 0 0
Zahel, Mr 10 0 0
£13,602 15 6
The Lists of Country Subscribers have not yet been received.
D- M. O’CONNELL, l
w. B. dalley, flint:
EYRE ELLIS, J
Sr. Mary’s, August, 1857.
