

CATHOLIC EDUCATION:
P ASTORAL LETTER
OF THE
ARCHBISHOP AND BISHOPS
EXERCISING JURISDICTION IN
NEW SOUTH WALES.
SYDNEY
1879.




CATHOLIC EDUCATION:
PASTORAL LETTER
OF THE
ARCHBISHOP AND BISHOPS
EXERCISING JURISDICTION IN
NEW SOUTH WALES.
SYDNEY
1879.


SYDNEY:
Printed bt F. Cunninghame and Co.,
186 Pitt Street


TO OUR DEARLY BELOVED BRETHREN AND
CHILDREN IN CHRIST, THE CLERGY,
SECULAR AND REGULAR, AND THE
FAITHFUL UNDER OUR JURISDICTION.
HEALTH AND BENEKITION IN THE LORD JESUS CHRIST.
Having been convinced by many signs from
many quarters that existing dangers to Catholic .Education
are steadily increasing so as to become absolute perils to
religion, and that unfairness to Catholics is developing
into absolute injustice ; we, the Archbishop and Bishops
having jurisdiction in New South Wales, who are
responsible to God for the souls of parents and children
confided to our care, deemed it our duty to meet and take
counsel together regarding the present condition of affairs,
so that we might then, by the authority of our united
voice, instruct, warn and direct you as to your position
and your duties with regard to the education of Catholic
children.
The erection of costly Public Schools in every direction,
which is continually going on ; the steady, systematic
way in which our Denominational Schools are being
weakened and extinguished; the treatment of Catholics
at Bandwick and the Benevolent Asylum; the prospect
of secularist Grammar Schools springing up at the public
expense in Maitland, Goulburn, and Bathurst; of a secu-
larist High School for Girls being established in Sydney,
and partially endowed by the Government; of £1500 a
year being spent for five years on the education at
Grammar Schools of boys exclusively from Public Schools:
this lavish expenditure of public money on one section of
the community, to the exclusion of others who cannot in
conscience avail themselves of it, is, in a free community


like our own, where all are equally taxed, a species of
injustice which cannot be submitted to in silence.
And more than this: this expenditure on godless
education, this studding the colony with Schools which
the Church knows from experience will, in course of time,
fill the country with indifferentists, not to speak of
absolute infidels ; this use of Catholic funds—of taxes paid
out of Catholic pockets—for establishing a system of
education throughout the land, which not merely Catholics
cannot safely make use of, but which they firmly believe is
calculated to sap the foundations of Christianity; is an
act so galling to every feeling of fair-play, that we do not
see how any free man, with any spirit in him, can allow
it to pass unchallenged.
Not merely as Bishops of the Catholic Church, but as
citizens of a free country, which boasts that even-handed
justice is dealt out to all its tax-payers, we emphatically
lay claim to our share of that same even-handed justice ;
and believe it to be the duty of the Catholic body not to
rest until they have been placed on an equal footing with
their fellow-colonists. We, Catholics, who represent one-
third of the population, do not ask for or seek one jot or
tittle more consideration than our fellow tax-payers
receive ; and we do not see why we should be content with
one jot or tittle less.
Let it be borne in mind that this is distinctly a religious
question. With politics, as such, it was never our taste
to meddle. We prefer to do our work in peace, and
avoid the contention of rival parties. But when not
justice alone, but the future of religion itself is essentially
bound up with a certain position; when the question of
education is in point of fact the great religious question
of the day; we should be prevaricating against our
bounden duty, and should prove ourselves unfitted for our
trust, were we to hold our peace ; did we not, at the
present juncture, set forth the teaching of the Church
with great distinctness, and point out to you, Dearly
Beloved, with unmistakable clearness, your duties as
interpreted by that teaching.


Christ came on earth to renew the world by the graces
of His Spirit, by His perfect law of life, and by the
Supernatural revelation of His will to man. What the
highest paganism aimed at, and failed to accomplish, that
He did, in all its fulness and perfection. The first
Chapter of St. Paul’s Epistle to the Homans gives us an
outline of the degradation to which man can fall under a
civilization which is based upon the passions ; whilst the
higher philosophy of Plato, Socrates, Cato and Cicero,
has proved to us how impotent are literature and
philosophy and intellectual cultivation, when they set
themselves to purify the spirit of the inner man. The
hideous blots which disfigure the highest morality of
Pome and Athens arfe as so many fingers which point to
the utter imbecility of man when he thinks to civilize the
heart, instruct the conscience, and direct the will, apart
from the influences of true Peligion. And what the
history of the past has proved to be the case, the history
of the present is ever more and more confirming. We
find, on all sides, that where philanthropists have at-
tempted to educate the inner life of man by philosophy,
legislation, or intellectual culture, the effect has always
been the same. Every civilization which has not had
Christianity for its basis has been dwarfed, stunted and
deformed; and every effort, from that of the most remote
paganism to that of the most modern infidelity, to deal
with the conscience, the will, and the heart of man in their
inner sanctuaries, has resulted in the degradation of man,
and in the collapse of the philosophy which corrupted
him. The reason may have been exercised, and the
intellect may have been informed ; but, apart from
Christianity, the moral nature, on which man’s worth so
much depends, has never been educated, nor his powers,
passions, and motives elevated or refined.
What paganism could not and cannot do, that our
Lord did by bringing Christianity into the world. What
legislation cannot touch, or philosophy shape or sustain,
that our Saviour came to legislate for, to purify and
to ennoble, through the gifts and guidances of the


Christian dispensation. He, and He alone, was able to
convert and regenerate, and deal effectually with, the
inner heart of man, for this simple reason, that He was
man’s Maker. It required the power of holy Baptism,
with its interior and supernatural effects ; the light of
faith illuminating the intellect and informing the con-
science ; and the grace of the Sacraments, especially of
Penance and the Altar, together with a supernatural
life of piety and prayer, to bring their united action to
bear upon the world, before man could gain any adequate
notion of what Christian civilization really meant, and of
the effects on the entire man of Christian education.
These things, it is plain, are especial gifts of God to
fallen nature; they are graciously bestowed to supple-
ment man’s weakness, and to assist him in withdrawing
himself from the tyranny of passion and the thraldom of
pride ; away from that brutality which is produced by an
enslavement to the world, the devil and the flesh. Besides
these gifts, Christianity brought knowledge of a perfect
kind, compared with the obscurity of the past. It taught
man that in comparison with the next world, this world,
and all its wealth and knowledge, are as dross ; that
heaven is bought cheaply at the price of all the present
life can offer ; that man is made for God, and has to save
his soul, before all things else; and whatever he gain, if
he lose God, all is lost; and whatever he lose, if he gain
God, all is gained. Christianity brought into the world,
also, three invaluable gifts : a true knowledge of God,
a Divine living Model or Exemplar, and a clear law of
love towards God and man.
On these teachings, all civilization and legislation, all
morality, public, social and private, are founded. With-
out these man falls back into paganism and barbarism ; his
moral nature corrupts, and he gravitates towards the
condition of the savage. Whilst, on the other hand, with
Christianity thus acting as a moral force upon mankind,
through supernatural grace, the efficacy of the sacraments,
and the teachings of Bevelation, man is lifted up ; his
reason energizes in its fullest freedom, his conscience is


trained to a sense of highest duty, and his heart and will
are developed to a rectitude, fulness and ripeness which
are never to be found under less favourable conditions.
Now we are bound both by the natural and the revealed
law to educate children in the knowledge of God, in His
love, and in His commandments. As Christians we are
bound to educate them in the full revelation of Jesus
Christ, and to procure for them those blessings and gifts
which the Christian Church alone has the power to
bestow. By the law of nature parents are bound to
train their children; and by the law of Christianitv the
Church is bound to see that parents do their duty. "And
whilst Father and Mother, on the one hand, are obliged,
under strict obligation, thus to rear their children from
the dawning of their reason : the Church is bound, on the
other hand, to complete the work which the parents have
begun. “Go ye therefore and teach,” or make disciples
of “ all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost ; teaching
them to observe all things whatever I have commanded
you,” is her commission. Here the duty is imposed upon
her, and she receives the necessary gifts and powers.
Thus both parents and the Church inculcate the
same class of teaching ; they are in perfect harmony;
the education of the child at its mother’s knee is not
undone in the Christian Schools, but developed and
completed. Through the whole period the graces and
influences of Christianity are operating on the inner life
of the Christian child; the heart, the conscience, and
the will, are being moulded for life; and the entire being,
body, soul and senses, the complete personality becomes
saturated by a civilization, of which Christianity alone
can be the origin.
Thus it is self-evident that education without Chris-
tianity is impossible: you may call it instruction, filling
the mind with a certain quantity of secular knowledge,
but you cannot dignify it with the name Education;
for religion is an essential part of Education ; and to
divorce religion or Christianity from Education is to


return to paganism, and to reject the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. Thus it is that the Church condemns, with
marked emphasis, those schools, and that method of
teaching in which the religious element is divorced from
the secular. She knows that instruction is not education;
and that a system of national training from which
Christianity is banished, is a system of practical paganism,
which leads to corruption of morals and loss of faith, to
national eifeminacy and to national dishonour.
It is not, therefore, surprising that Pope Pius IX. should
have issued the following weighty instruction, which our
Catholic people and our Protestant Statesmen would do
well to ponder on. In it they will find no new doctrine,
but the old teaching of the Church, which springs from
immovable principles of religion. “ The greatest injury
is inflicted on society,” says the Supreme Pontiff, “ when
the directing and. salutary power of the Church is with-
drawn from public and private education on which the
happiness of the Church and of the commonwealth
depends so much. For thus Society is little by little
deprived of that truly Christian spirit which alone can
permanently secure the foundation of peace and public
order, and promote and direct the true and useful
progress of civilization, and give man those helps
which are necessary for him in order to attain after
this life his last end. And in truth a system of
teaching which not only is limited to the knowledge
of natural things, and does not pass beyond the
bounds of our life on earth, but also departs from the
truth revealed by God, must necessarily be guided by
the spirit of error and untruth; and education which,
without the aid of Christian Doctrine, and of its salutary
moral precepts, instructs the mind and moulds the
tender heart of youth, which is so prone to evil, must
infallibly produce a generation which will have no guide
but its own wicked passions and wild conceits, and which
will be a source of greatest misfortunes to the common-
wealth and their own families. Who does not see that
the same system will give rise to still greater evils if it
8


be introduced into primary schools ? for it is in these
schools above all that the children of the people ought to
be carefully taught from their tender years the mysteries
and precepts of our holy religion, and to be trained with
diligence to piety, good morals, religion, and civilization.
In such schools religious teaching ought to have so
leading a place in all that concerns education and
instruction, that whatever else the children may learn
should appear subsidiary to it. The young, therefore,
are exposed to the greatest perils whenever in the schools
education is not closely united with religious teaching.
Wherefore, since primary schools are established chiefly
to give the people a religious education and to lead them
to piety and Christian morality, they have justly attracted
to themselves in a greater degree than other educational
institutions all the care, solicitude and vigilance of the
Church. The design of withdrawing primary schools
from the control of the Church and the exertions made
to carry this design into effect are therefore inspired by
a spirit of hostility towards her and by the desire of
extinguishing among the people the divine light of our
holy faith. Those who pretend that the Church ought
to abdicate or suspend her control and her salutary action
upon the primary schools, in reality ask her to
disobey the commands of her Divine Author, and to
be false to the charge she has received from God of
guiding all men to salvation; and in whatever country
this pernicious design of removing the schools from
ecclesiastical authority should be entertained and carried
into execution, and the young thereby exposed to the
danger of losing their faith, there the Church would be
in duty bound not only to use her best efforts and to
employ every means to secure for them the necessary
Christian education and instruction, but moreover would
feel herself obliged to warn all the faithful, and to declare
that no one can in conscience frequent such schools as
being adverse to the Catholic Church.”*
♦Letter addressed by Pope Pius IX. to the Archbishop of Freiburg, July 14, 1864.


Wherever the question of Secularist Schools has arisen,
the Bishops of the Church have preached the same
doctrine, and have urged upon the people the same
truths with the same warnings. How the Bishops of
Ireland have spoken in Synod and out of Synod, again
and again, is known to all of you. The English hierarchy
has more than once considered it its duty to address the
Catholic people of England to the same effect. In one of
their recent Joint Pastoral Letters they say : “We have
already declared fchat education without Christianity
is impossible; or, to use a modern phrase, that the
secular and religious elements of education are insepar-
able ; that education is essentially religious, and there-
fore that where religion is excluded there is no
education. Hold fast by the old traditions and axioms
of your fathers. Schools without religion may give
instruction, but education they cannot give ; they cannot
educate a people. Let it be called national instruction,
but, in the name of Christianity, let it not be called
education. Not only is education without religion im-
possible, but instruction without religion is instruction
without morality. A people to whom morality is not taught
cannot be moral; but Christian morals cannot be taught
without religion; for what is morality but the law of
duty, which arises from our personal relations towards
God and our neighbour ? And how is it possible to teach
this law of duty without a knowledge of the persons
towards whom these relations exist ? But to know this
—unless men are going to reduce a Christian people to
the level of Deists—Christianity must be taught in our
schools. Christian morality cannot be taught without
the knowledge of Christ, and that again, by necessity,
involves the knowledge of His history, His teaching, His
commandments, His incarnation, His Divine personality.
And what is this but dogma ? for religion without dogma
is not Christianity. In whatsoever school, then, religion
is not taught, morality is not taught; and where morality
is not taught, the heart, the conscience, and the will of
children are not educated for the duties and conflicts of
10


life. "What can be more false, what more fatal to men,
to families, and to States, than to call this education ?*
Such, then, being the emphatic teaching of the Catholic
Church, we, the Archbishop and Bishops of this colony,
with all the weight of our authority, condemn the prin-
ciple of secularist education, and those schools which are
founded on that principled We condemn them, first,
because they contravene the first principles of the
Christian religion; and secondly, because they are seed-
plots of future immorality, infidelity, and lawlessness, being
calculated to debase the standard of human excellence, and
to corrupt the political, social, and individual life of future
citizens. Wherefore we urge our clergy to do all in their
power, in the pulpit and out of it, to instruct the people
in these teachings of the Christian religion. They should
not rest till each member of their congregation fully realizes
the true position of affairs. They should bring before the
minds of parents the terrible calamity to their children in
exposing them to loss of faith and morals, and endeavour to
make them feel that they could not do a greater service
to religion or to the State than to upset, by constitutional
means, a system which, whilst it is a crying injustice to
themselves, promises to be a source of incalculable evil to
the colony. Let them, moreover, warn parents, who
through a spirit of indifference or worldliness, are exposing
their children to proximate danger of perversion and of
ruin, that they are tempting the anger of the Almighty
God; and that they are jeopardizing the faith, the morality,
the eternal happiness of those who are too young to help
themselves, and who have been confided by Nature itself
to their guardianship and protection. Let them often
remind the people that they are gravely responsible if
they give encouragement to such schools, for, by so doing,
they are helping to perpetuate a great evil, and are stand-
ing as obstacles in the way of Christian men who are bent
on bringing about a change. Let one and all remember
what their fathers of old suffered for the faith, and let them
*Given, April 21, 1871. Signed by the Archbishop of Westminster and his
twelve Suffragans. + See Appendix,


not show themselves unworthy of their own flesh and
blood—flesh which was freely wounded, and blood which
was freely spilt, rather than "betray Christian principle or
compromise Christian Faith.
We are profoundly conscious that a latent sense of
fair-play exists in the community at large. Let all
Catholics unite in bringing before the minds of their
fellow-electors, and their representatives in Parliament
these two facts, first, that Catholics have to pay for schools
which they cannot safely use, and which they consider an
evil to the country; and, secondly, that whilst they are thus
made to pay, no equal provision has been made for them :
let the country fully comprehend our grievances, and a
sense of common, even-handed justice will assist us in
working out a remedy. Would secularists hold their
peace, if, without equal provision being made for them,
public treasure were lavished on Catholic Grammar
Schools, and Catholic Primary Schools, whilst £7500 were
spent on the training of boys, exclusively from Catholic
institutions ? Would they not hold that they were being
treated with extraordinary injustice and unfairness ? And
would not the whole world agree with them ?
It will be urged that the State leaves religion to parents
and priests, and lays claim to instruct children in secular
matters only.
True, the State does not, and cannot claim a commission
to educate. It is the bounden duty of the State to protect,
not to usurp the moral duties of its members. All
Christian Fathers and Mothers are required by the natural
and divine law to give their children a Christian education.
The State has no power or commission to usurp the
parental rights, and to compel parents to violate their
conscience by sending their children to schools where an
alien religion or no religion at all is taught. To do so
would be to indulge in the most cruel form of religious
persecution. The State has no rights higher or more
sacred than those of parents. Nor does the authority of
the Church cross or thwart the natural rights and duties
of parents : its commission is to see that those rights are
12


not invaded, and that those duties are performed. The
Catholic Church condemns godless schools and secularist
education because they are solvents of Christianity, and
tend towards depriving Christian children of a priceless
treasure. And no man can be a sound Catholic and
support that which the Church condemns.
The State may declare, and statesmen may teach, that
the secularist system is not adverse to Christianity and to
the Catholic religion. But, in matters of religion, are
Catholics to be guided by the world or by the Church %
Does not the Church know her own true interests best %
Has not she had experience of centuries, in point of time ;
and all over the world, in point of space ? Are not
her professed opponents on the side of secularist education,
and do not her best friends range themselves upon the
Christian side ? And to come to facts, has the secularist
system, so far as it has gone, fostered and developed a
Christian spirit ? Has not the Catholic episcopate, in
various quarters of the world, found that its direct
tendency is to quench such a spirit ? What is our own
experience, and that of the Catholic clergy in this colony ?
To their shame, it must be said, some of our people do
send their children to public schools. What is the
deliberate conclusion we have arrived at with regard to
such children ? That there is a marked difference between
them and children who have been educated in Catholic
schools. Their faith is visibly enfeebled, not to allude to
their morality : their manners are rough and irreverent:
they have little sense of respect and gentleness; they
have no attraction for prayer or for the Sacraments; and
promise to swell a class which is already far too large in
number. Our clergy look on the future of such wild,
uncurbed children with grave misgivings.
If in any country in the world signs are being held out
on every side of the necessity of an especial school of self-
control, reverence, piety, purity, obedience, faith, it is in
Australia. If in any country Catholic children require
a strong Catholic education, it is here. At home the
ancient traditions and monuments of piety and reverence,
13


a large staff of clergy, a Catholic public opinion, with
many other external helps, assist in the training up of the
young in a Christian spirit; but here, where all is new,
the clergy few, the population small and scattered, and
the external helps wanting, it is most difficult, with the
best efforts of the best Catholic training, to rear up the
children to Christian piety, and with thorough Catholic
instincts. How ruinous, therefore, is it not, to cast
Christianity out of the schools, and to confine it to a
Sunday catechism-class, under such circumstances as
these.
The only fair chance for Catholic children turning out
Catholic men and women in this colony is for them to be
most carefully and conscientiously taught their religion by
their parents from their earliest years; and then for them
to be sent to thorough Catholic schools, where the home
teaching is continued, and the mind and heart and
conscience and senses of the children are impregnated
with Catholic instincts, and moulded upon Catholic truth.
It may be interjected that some Catholics do not dis-
approve of Public Schools, for a certain number of
Catholic children are going to them. We reply, because
a certain number of Catholics do what is wrong, that is
no reason why we should not condemn what is wrong, and
teach them what is right. We declaim against and
condemn intemperance, and we declaim against and con-
demn secularist education; and we are led to do so all the
more strenuously in proportion as we are inclined to fear
that Catholics are beginning to feel less and less horror
at drunkenness and infidelity. The Church is not ruled
or guided by the practices or corrupt views of bad, or
indifferent, or ignorant Catholics; but by the successor
of St. Peter, and the Bishops of the Church who are in
communion with him. So long as Catholics obey, in
faith and morals, the voice that speaks with this
authority, they will be safe; to listen to and follow, in
such matters, any other voice, is to plunge into darkness,
and, finally, to make shipwreck of the faith.
14


What, then, are our practical recommendations ?
I. —First, let all parents love their children’s souls as the
apple of their eye. Let them bear in mind their grave
responsibility in the sight of God with regard to the
Catholic education of their children. Let parents, from
their children’s earliest years, teach them to pray ; and,
until they are fit for school, exercise them in Catholic
practices, and fill them with Catholic thoughts, and foster
within them Catholic instincts, and, by example as well
as word, systematically mould them to piety, faith, purity,
love, and reverence. Let all parents look upon careless-
ness or neglect in these duties as matter for confession,
and as a cause for grave spiritual alarm.
11. —Secondly, let parents send their children, when
of fit age, exclusively to Catholic schools. Let them
regard all other schools as no places for their children, who
have to learn, before everything else, to save their souls ;
and who should be sedulously prepared, by breathing a
Catholic atmosphere, by living amidst Catholic teachers
and companions, and by an exclusively Catholic training,
for encountering the perils of the world into which they
will eventually be thrown.
111. —Thirdly, let all Catholic parents know that they
cannot, without serious guilt, place their children in
proximate danger of perversion. Let them bear in
mind that to do so is to set at defiance the teachings
of the Catholic Church; and that, unless there be
exceptional reasons, and the danger be remote, of which
things the Church is the judge, no Confessor can absolve
such parents as are willing to expose their children’s souls
to the blighting influences of an alien creed or a secularist
system.
IV. —Fourthly, let those who are so unhappy as to be
sending their children at the present moment to public
schools, withdraw them as soon as possible. Let them
examine their children’s religious instincts and moral
condition ; and if, as is to be expected, they find faith and
morals weakened, and the germs of lawlessness apparent,
then let them, with great anxiety, do all they can to redeem
15


the time and to remedy the evil. Let them especially
prepare such children for the Sacraments, teach them to
hear Mass devoutly, to say their morning and night
prayers punctually, to make our Lord their Model, to
pray to our Blessed Lady, to love the Holy See, and to
be obedient, docile, and reverential to all who are placed
over them.
V. —Fifthly, let the clergy make such instructions as
these the frequent subject of their sermons and their
private exhortations ; and let them not weary till godless
and non-Catholic schools have been cleared of Catholic
children; and until all the Catholic children in the
District are receiving a sound Catholic education.
VI. —Sixthly, let Bishops, priests, and people do all
that lies in them, if necessary at personal sacrifice, to
render their present schools as efficient in every way as
possible; so as to be equal in secular instruction to non-
Catholic schools, whilst they surpass them in the genuine
education of the will, the conscience, and the senses.
VII. —Seventhly, and lastly, whilst strengthening
what they have, let Catholics unite as one man, and
insist, by means of legitimate yet persevering and
earnest pressure in the right direction, upon their equal
rights with their fellow tax-payers.
What is the present position of affairs ? Catholics are
paying for the support of schools which they can neither
approve of, nor make use of, whilst no analagous provision
has been made for them.
We may be met with the cry of the “religious diffi-
culty.” We admit the religious difficulty; but that
difficulty is aggravated, not solved or mitigated, by acts
of extraordinary unfairness to a large section of the
community.
The “ religious difficulty ” exists in Ireland, and still
more in England. But whilst the Catholics of Ireland
are receiving a larger share of justice as days go by, the
Catholics of this Colony are receiving a less and less
share of justice. Whilst the small Catholic minority in
England is rejoicing, with regard to education, in even-
16


handed justice, we, here, are retrograding, and are aggra-
vating that one-sidedness and unfairness from which the
broad spirit of a growing liberality has set Protestant
England free. Why should the Mother Country hold a
monopoly of even-handedness ? Why should not we walk
in the broad footpath of her legislation on this question ;
and learn from her great statesmen how to solve “ the
religious difficulty ” by the British panacea of fair-play ?
And how can this principle of fair-play be applied ?
The answer is simple. Introduce Payment by Results in
place of the present unjust and galling system.
According to this method, whilst no creed is subsidized,
each section of the community receives equal assistance
with the other, according to ascertained results (by
Government Inspection) of secular teaching. Thus the
common funds are made use of for what all admit to be a
common good. Thus no one can complain. The secularist
sect, indeed, would be deprived of a monopoly ; but, then,
a wide-spread irritation, springing from a cruel wrong,
would give way to happiness and peace throughout the
colony. Neither Catholic nor Protestant would be called
upon to support creeds which they condemn; nor would
large annual grants of money be lavished upon one section
of the community to the exclusion of another. There
would be one law of fair-play and no favouring, for all.
Those who were equally taxed would be equally treated.—
Is not this a broad, an intelligible platform, upon which
every just and honest man would naturally take his stand?
If there be a wide-spread sense of justice in the land, as
we firmly believe there is—ls there not some power
amongst us that will rouse it into action ? •
We recommend those interested in this subject to study
the Intermediate Education Bill for Ireland ; the Ele-
mentary Education Act for Englapd and Wales, with the
New Code of Regulations; and Sir John O’Shanassy’s
Bill to further amend the Law relating to Education.
In matters of vital importance and common justice
half measures generally turn out miserable and cowardly
failures. If it be worth while for the Catholic body to
17


assert its rights at all, it is worth while for it to assert its
full and entire rights. Let us all realize this fact: and
then we shall not be content till our present humiliating
position is exchanged for one of fairness and equality.
It is a great cause which we have in hand, nothing less
than keeping alive, in its integrity, in our adopted land,
the religion of Jesus Christ, and thus far securing the
salvation of souls, as well as the future greatness of the
Colony.
Let Catholics rouse themselves up to a sense of their
responsibilities : let them bring legitimate pressure to bear
in the right quarter; and never cease, in their persevering,
their organized importunity, until they have obtained
those rights which no man can refuse them without self-
evident injustice.
Dearly Beloved, “ Watch ye, stand fast in the faith,
do manfully, and be strengthened.”* “Keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace ; one body, one Spirit,
as you are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism; One Cod and Father of all,
who is above all, and through all, and in us all.”f
May the Cod of peace Himself sanctify you in all
things; that your whole spirit, and soul, and body, may
be preserved blameless in the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.” X
Given at our Meeting, in Sydney, June, 1879, and ordered
to be read in all Churches and Chapels on Sunday.
t ROGER BEDE, Archbishop of Sydney.
t MATTHEW, Bishop of Bathurst.
t JAMES, Bishop of Maitland
t WILLIAM, Bishop of Coulburn.
I Oor., xvi., 13. + Ephes., iv„ 3-6. J Thess., v., 23.
18


APPENDIX.
DECREES ON EDUCATION ADOPTED BY THE ARCHBISHOP AND
BISHOPS ASSEMBLED IN PROVINCIAL COUNCIL,
AT MELBOURNE, IN APRIL, 1869.
1. Since the Church cannot rightly discharge that most solemn duty
entrusted to her by Christ our Lord, namely, of instructing the faithful
in sound doctrine, and preserving them from dangerous and poisonous
pastures, unless she enjoys the fullest liberty and power of imbuing them
with the principles of Catholic faith, and of training them to good
morals, we cannot approve of any system of education which either
inflicts an injury on that power of the Church, or in any way whatsoever
impedes its exercise.
2. Hence we condemn that education of Catholic youth which is
separated from Catholic faith, and from the power of the Church, and
therefore we shall take care to remove Catholic children from those
schools which are called mixed schools, since in them, according to the
civil law, the Church can exercise no authority, nor have any power in
regulating the studies, selecting the books, or in the choice of the
teachers.
3. We admonish all the clergy and the faithful committed to our care,
that they are bound to use every exertion to erect, where possible,
Catholic schools in which the authority of the Church will be fully
recognized, and that method of instruction observed which has for its
first object the eternal welfare of souls, and where the true teaching of
religion is wisely combined with knowledge and progress in literature.
4. For the erecting and conducting of these Schools, we shall assert
our right to our just proportion of the public revenues which are yearly
set apart for the education of the people, so that the claims of all may be
respected, no prejudice being offered either to the faith of Catholics, or to
the conscience of non-Catholics ; and we shall make every effort to provide
Catholic education in every district for our Catholic youth.
5. ’ But all that, which has been asserted of the authority of the Church
in this matter of education, by no means prevents the different Govern-
ments from inspecting our schools, through their officials, and of making
themselves acquainted with the fitness and qualifications of the teachers.
6. Since the education of youth greatly depends on the choice of
teachers, it is right that they should be not only adorned with purity
and zeal for the Catholic faith, and imbued with good morals, but they
ought also to be very well instructed in all that they are bound to teach
in the Schools. That teachers possessing these qualities may be had, it
19


is quite necessary that training schools be erected, in which they shall be
properly trained in the principles of the Catholic faith, and diligently
acquire a knowledge of human science necessary for the fulfilling of this
office. But we affirm that it is only just that assistance should be
granted from the public Treasury for the building and the conducting of
these schools.
7. But that the Clergy may have before their eyes sound principles of
education, in which the faithful are to be continually instructed, the
Fathers desired to insert here three propositions condemned by the
Sovereign Pontiff, Pius IX., happily reigning, which are of the
greatest importance :
“ 45. The entire government of public schools in which the youth of any
Christian state is educated, except (to a certain extent) in the case of episcopal
seminaries, may and ought to appertain to the civil power, and belong to it so far
that no other authority whatsoever shall be recognized as having any right to
interfere in the discipline of the schools, the arrangement of the studies, the con-
ferring of degrees, in the choice or approval of the teachers.”
“47. The best theory of civil society requires that popular schools open to the
children of every class of the people, and generally, all public institutes intended
for instruction in letters and philosophical sciences, and for carrying on the
education of youth, should be freed from all ecclesiastical authority, control, and
interference, and should be fully subjected to the civil and political power, at the
pleasure of the rulers and according to the standard of the prevalent opinions of
the age.” . .
“48. Catholics may approve of a system of educating youth unconnected with
Catholic faith and the power of the Church, and which regards the knowledge of
merely natural things, and only, or at least primarily, the ends of earthly social
life.”
20




