

CECIL HEAIY
IN * MEMORIAM


tr * 'a
-&■/. /3<7/
r *P
(A


CONTENTS.
Recitation: “How did you die?” .2
Foreword 3
Biographical Sketch 7
Power of Oratory 12
Rescued at Manly 12
Literary Contributions by Cecil Healy to the
“Sunday Times” and “Referee”—
The Crawl Stroke 14
Utilitarian Aspect of Swimming 19
Manly compared with the Riviera 20
Picturing a Swimmer and a Shark 22
Anti-Lunch Creed 22
The Peace of Europe 24
Surf Bathing Abroad 28
Letters Written on Active Service —
Life on a Transport 29
A Soldier’s “Life” in Egypt 30
Getting ready for Christmas 33
Getting ready for the Front 34
Sport and War in France 40
His Final Letter from the Field 42
Epitaph: “Monument Enough” 42
Swimming in the Icy River 43
His Last Swim 43
How Lieut. Cecil Healy Died 43
An Eloquent Tribute 44
For Saving Life ..' 44
Obituary Notices 44
Extracts from Letters of Condolence 47
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Portrait of Cecil Healy with Signature 4
Portrait of Cecil Healy in Swimming Costume 9
Portrait of Cecil Healy with the Life Saving
Reel 13
Healy Demonstrating “The Crawl Stroke”— IS
Photos of Cecil Healy at Championship Meet-
ings 17
Surf Bathing at Manly 21
Block of Mid-day Swimming Enthusiasts 23
Cecil Healy in Championship Teams 27
Stadium on an A.I.F. Transport 31
Cecil Healy at Cambridge University 31
In the Shadow of the Sphinx 31
Portrait of Cecil Healy as Q.M.S. at Sydney.... 35
Portrait of Cecil Healy as R.Q.M.S. at Paris ... 35
Cecil Healy in Boat Crew at Cambridge 39
Cecil Healy’s Grave near Peronne 48


HOW DID YOU DIE?
Did you tackle the trouble that came your way
With a resolute heart and cheerful?
Or hid your face from the light of day
With a craven soul and fearful?
Oh, a trouble’s a ton, or a trouble’s an ounce,
A trouble is what you make it;
And it isn’t the fact that you’re hurt that counts,
But only—how did you take it?
You are beaten to earth. Well, well, what is that?
Come up with a smiling face;
It’s nothing against you to fall down flat,
But to lie there, that’s disgrace,
And the harder you’re hit, why, the higher you’ll bounce;
Be proud of that blackened eye!
It isn’t the fact that you’re licked that counts,
It’s how did you fight—and why?
And though you be done to the death, what then?
If you battled the best you could,
If you played your part in this world of men,
Why, the critic will call it good.
Death comes with a crawl, or comes with a pounce.
And whether he’s slow or spry,
It isn’t the fact that you’re dead that counts,
But only—how did you die?
—E. V. COOKE.
Recited by Mr. Lawrence Campbell at a complimentary dinner to Cecil Healy
on his return to Sydney after the Olympic Games at Athens in 1906.
Wholly set up and pritited in Australia hy
John Andrew W Co 2l Phillip Street, Sydney.


FOREWORD.
THIS memorial of the late Lieut.
Cecil Healy has been prepared at
the request of many friends and
admirers who wished to have a
permanent record of his achievements.
It comprises only a selection from his
literary contributions to the press, and
many tributes to him which appeared
before and after his death have been
omitted through limitation of space.
As far as possible acknowledgment
has been made of the sources from
which the photos, and other information
have been obtained and thanks are ten-
dered to the many friends who have
generously guaranteed the cost of pro-
duction. The profits from the sales of
the booklet will be invested in War Loan
Bonds, and the interest accruing will
provide prizes for the encouragement of
swimming amongst Juniors, under the
scheme controlled by the N.S.W.
Amateur Swimming Association.
H. HEALY.
N.S.W. Sports Club, Ltd.
10 Hunter Street, Sydney.


_ *0 "
k
**i^, J v -
k L
x X 1
Y l t^
fudith Fletcher, Photo.


CECILHEAIY
IN • MEMORIAM
Born November 28, 1882
Enlisted in A.I.F September 15, 1915
Killed in Action . . August 29, 1918


/ iD JAH fob a


41661
CECIL HEALY
SWIMMER AND SOLDIER
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
From The LONE HAND, March ist, igib
CECIL HEALY, the Australian
swimming hero of two Olym-
piads and countless other ama-
teur contests the world over, en-
listed Sept. 15, 1915, and is now serving
the Empire. At the time of writing
it seems likely that the scene of his first
fighting will be somewhere in Greece,
probably not far from Elio in Olympia,
the original centre of the Ancient Olym-
pic Games which of recent years had
been revived and held every ten years
in various centres of Europe and
America. Sturdy young amateur ath-
letes, representing the foremost of the
modern world nations, have met to-
gether in friendly rivalry at these Olym-
piads, and fought out in chivalrous
spirit contests in all sports and games.
Cecil Healy has represented Australia
at two of these famous meetings, the
first being at Athens, and on his return
from the last one (held at Stockholm,
1912), wrote a prophetic article, which
was published in a Sydney paper, in
which he referred to the great strength
and resources of Germany, and predict-
ed that the next Olympic Games intend-
ed to be held in Berlin in 1916 would
never eventuate, as the threatened great
war would have burst upon the world
before then.
The third son of the late P. J. Healy,
Barrister-at-Law, Cecil was born at Dar-
linghurst, Sydney, in the early eighties.
He was educated at Mr. J. Lee Pulling’s
school, Bowral, New South Wales, and
made his first public appearance as an
amateur swimmer in 1895, when he won
a silver cup for a sixty-six yards handi-
cap in the old Natatorium, Sydney. Fol-
lowing up this encouraging opening he
competed in many East Sydney Club
and interclub handicaps with consider-
able success, and steadily improved his
powers as a swimmer until in 1901 he
was chosen as one of the East Sydney
Club’s representatives for the five hun-
dred yards championship teams race, do-
ing next best time to the speedy F. C. V.
Lane, and having the satisfaction of
helping his team to carry off the cham-
pionship honours, which they held
against all comers for several years, in
course of which they lowered the world’s
500 yards teams record. In all of these
teams contests Healy was one of the
quintette representing his club.
During 1902, 1903 and 1904 Healy
frequently finished second to the then
famous Dick Cavill in a number of
sprints and middle distance champion-
ships, and in 1904 won his first indi-
vidual championship, defeating Alick
Wickham in the 100 yards Champion-
ship of New South Wales. In 1905 he
won the 100 yards Championship of
Australasia, equalling the then world’s
record of fifty-eight seconds. He re-
tained this title for a period of six years.
In 1911 he lost the title by a bare touch,
although he succeeded in retaining the
New South Wales State Championship
for another season. It was in 1907 that
Healy lowered the Australian record to
fifty-seven seconds, which was unbeaten
for many years. It is evidence of the
consistency of this swimmer’s form that


he was able to put up similar times for
this distance right up to last summer.
Healy represented Australia at the
Olympic Games held at Athens in 1906,
but was beaten by Daniels, the meteoric
American sprinter, and De Halmay, of
Hungary. He would probably have
done better had he not made such a hur-
ried departure at practically the eleventh
hour, which left him only a short time
to prepare for the contest after a long sea
voyage. A few weeks afterwards he
almost dead-heated Daniels in the 100
yards Championship of England, and
vanquished De Halmay and Derbyshire
in the same event, although the swim
was in a short bath, necessitating two
turns, at which Healy never excelled.
In the same season he gained the 220
yards Championship of England, after-
wards visiting Scotland and Ireland,
where he won more swimming honours
and established new records for those
countries. He met similar success in
Paris, winning the 100 metres Interna-
tional Scratch Race in record time for
France, also winning a 200 metres race
in two minutes thirty seconds, which,
under the conditions of the race—turn-
ing on a rope—was described by Mr.
Wm. Henry, the great English swim-
ming authority, as being equal to the
world’s best time for the distance.
Healy won the 100 metres at Ham-
burg in the same season in one minute
seven and two-fifths seconds, establish-
ing a world’s record, although the start,
was according to the conditions of the
race, without a dive. Continuing his
Continental Tour he also won the 100
and 200 metres championships in Bel-
gium with record figures for that coun-
try, and beat the Champion of Holland
at Rotterdam. In addition to figuring
in so many races in Europe, this repre-
sentative Australian swimmer went to
much trouble in teaching the crawl
stroke to swimmers of other countries,
where it was practically unknown.
Some of his pupils profited so well by
his lessons that they became champions
shortly afterwards, amongst these being
Meyboom of Belgium, R. Andersen of
Sweden, Haynes of Scotland, and Bret-
ting of Germany. Returning to Aus-
tralia too late for the 1907 swimming
season, Healy gave more attention to
longer distances, and in 1908 won the
300 yards, 440 yards, and 500 yards
Championships of New South Wales,
also die 220 yards Championship of
Australia, using the trudgeon stroke.
In 1911 he had developed his crawl
stroke (hitherto only used for sprinting)
for long-distance swimming to such pur-
pose that he lowered Beaurepaire’s
three-quarter mile Australian record,
and thereafter decided to use that stroke
instead of the trudgeon for all distances.
Visiting Tasmania during that season he
added to his laurels by winning the 100
yards, 220 yards and 440 yards Cham-
pionships of Tasmania at the Hobart
Jubilee Celebration, creating three new
Tasmanian records, and defeating that
fine swimmer, Alick Wickham, over the
first-mentioned distance.
His race with the world-famous Vic-
torian, Beaurepaire, in 1911, over the
three-quarter mile course drew by far
the biggest crowd to the Sydney Domain
Baths that had up till then witnessed a
swimming carnival. This event was a
memorable one, and brought to light the
hitherto almost unknown swimmer,
William Longworth, who, going to the
front early in the race, sprang a surprise
upon everyone by keeping in the lead
and winning the Australian Champion-
ship by twenty yards. Healy, however,
succeeded in defeating the Victorian for
second place.
In 1912 Healy was again chosen as
one of the team to represent Australia


I .......... .... -- - —
\ Jpapfe - IB
es '1IB
Jm 4
B ~ MB
JH % Jb
9L
w "
s jB
Photo Block from
“La Vie Sportive ”
Brussels ....
September 21, 1906


at the Olympic Games at Stockholm.
The Australians won the 800 metres
teams Championship of the World, and
Healy finished second in the 100 metres
after an exceptionally brilliant finish, be-
ing defeated by the Hawaiian coloured
swimmer, Duke Kahanamoku, thus be-
coming virtually the white champion
swimmer of the world. At the conclu-
sion of this race Healy received one of
the greatest tributes ever accorded him
by followers of swimming, due princi-
pally to the following incident, which is
worth recording as an example of his
true sportsmanship. In the semi-final of
the 100 metres, Kahanamoku and two
other American representatives did not,
through some misunderstanding, make
their appearance on the starting board,
and the semi-final was swum without
them, and resulted in Healy and Long-
worth from Australia, and Ramme and
Bretting, of Germany, qualifying for the
final. The position was a difficult one
for the officials, and the matter was re-
ferred to the International Jury to de-
cide. Healy strongly urged the Aus-
tralian representative to insist on the
Americans being given an opportunity
to compete in the final, insisting that it
would be unsportsmanlike to bar their
entry. Finally, mainly owing to the
Australian’s attitude, and in spite of the
opposition of the Germans, the Ameri-
cans were allowed to compete in a spe-
cial semi-final, with the result that
Kahanamoku and McGillivray qualified
for the final, in which the Hawaiian
swimmer finished first and Heady sec-
ond. This incident is typical of Healy’s
chivalry to his opponents on all occa-
sions, which has gone far towards mak-
ing him such a popular figure whenever
he appeared at swimming carnivals in
this or other lands.
After the 1912 Olympic Games he
again toured Europe, when he won a
half-mile scratch race at Spa (Belgium),
a 440 yards scratch race at Brussels, a
100 metre scratch race at Paris, in which
contest he met all the Continental cham-
pions, and successfully upheld the
prowess of Australian swimmers. At
Genoa he defeated the Italian champion,
Massa, in a 100 metres scratch race in
which he lowered the Italian record to
sixty-three seconds. Returning to Great
Britain, he disposed of the Irish cham-
pion in a 220 yards race at Dublin, and
in Scotland was successful in winning an
all-comers 220 yards race, on which
occasion he reduced Beaurepaire’s
worlds record by over three seconds.
Excepting for his two European trips,
Healy’s business kept him continually
occupied in earning his livelihood;
nevertheless he kept himself in splendid
training by mid-day and week-end swim-
ming. One of the many good things he
did for swimmers was to establish and
encourage the custom of mid-day swim-
ming, which has attracted a number of
business men to the Domain Baths every
lunch hour, winter and summer, for
several years. This band of enthusiasts
has provided some fine soldiers, amongst
them being the late Major Blair Swan-
nell, Lieut. Chas. Helsham, the late
Geo. T. Hill, Major Philip Chambers,
Lieut. Arch. Lockhart and J. McKinlay.
Healy was awarded the Royal
Humane Society’s silver medal for life
saving at Manly, a gold honour badge
of the Manly Surf Club for saving life
on another occasion, a gold watch and
chain from the father of one lad he res-
cued, and on numerous other occasions
has used his great swimming powers and
courage in saving persons from drown-
ing. He was a member of the Executive
Committee and a Vice-President of the
New South Wales Amateur Swimming
Association for several years, and a
Vice-President of the Surf Bathing As


sociation. From the very early days of
surf bathing Healy was an enthusiastic
supporter and devotee of that pastime;
in fact, he was one of the small band
who battled for the right to surf at any
hour of the day, which at one time was
strenuously opposed by the authorities.
He was also one of the founders of the
Manly Surf Club. As an exponent of
the art of shooting the breakers there
have been few better seen around our
beaches. A fluent and pleasing speaker,
he was always a power in swimming and
surf-bathing councils.
As a contributor to the press on swim-
ming and surf-bathing matters Cecil
Healy’s pen was well known, although
pressure of business recently had pre-
vented him from writing much on his
favourite subject. One of his articles on
the “Crawl Stroke,” which appeared in
the Sydney press, was thought so much
of by the Amateur Swimming Associa-
tion of England that they reprinted it
and issued 20,000 copies for free distri-
bution under its scheme for the Encour-
agement of Swimming in Great Britain.
Healy is still the holder of the 120 yards,
150 yards and 200 yards Australasian
swimming records—the latter distance
swum in two minutes eleven seconds.
during the the 1908 season, was perhaps
the best performance he ever put up
under record conditions.
For nearly fifteen years Cecil has been
a prominent figure in the Australian
swimming world, and the receptions
given to him during late years on the
occasions of his reappearances have de-
monstrated his great popularity. A
more popular figure among the rank and
file has never been known in the swim-
ming history of Australia. This was due
not only to his personality, but also
to the fact that he was always ready to
impart all he knew about his favourite
sport to any enquirer.
The outstanding point about Healy’s
swimming was his brilliant finishing
powers. Two examples will suffice.
The 100 yards English Championship in
1906 was held in a twenty-five yards
tank, and Healy had as his chief com-
petitors Daniels, the American, and the
Hungarian, De Halmay. At every turn
the American would gain a substantial
advantage which the Australian would
win back during the actual swimming;
but at the last turn he was two yards
behind the Olympic sprint champion.
The ensuing struggle over the last lap,
and the desperate effort of the Aus-
tralian resulted in a finish in which the
competitors could only be separated by
the judges. The last Olympic cham-
pionship provided another example of
Healy’s courage and dash. The only
Australian to appear in the final owing
to Longworth’s illness, he had as his
opponents the wonderful Hawaiian,
Duke Kahanamoku, the American Mc-
Gillivray, and the Germans Bretting and
Ramme, three of whom had previously
swam the distance in faster time than
Cecil. Ten yards from the finish Healy
was actually last, but in a sensational
finish he flashed past all the others and
was actually overhauling the famous
Duke at the end. The few Australians
present were anticipated by a rush of
Swedish officials and swimmers to carry
the Australian on their shoulders to his
dressing-room.
It was his never-say-die spirit and his
overwhelming sense of duty which im-
pelled him to enlist in the Expeditionary
Forces. The camp life was frankly dis-
tasteful to him, enlisting meant throw-
ing up prospects for which he had been
waiting for years; but like many other
Australians, he did not hesitate when the
time came. Weighing carefully every
consideration, he accepted the call of
duty.


POWER OF ORATORY.
By D. Levy, Esq., ML.A.,
Chairman of Committees, Legislative Assembly of NSW.
THE late Cecil Healy had a re-
markable gift of oratory. He
was clear and distinct in his
utterances. He expressed him-
self with that brevity which we are told
is “the soul of wit.” He did not strain
after effect, and yet he rose to heights
of true eloquence which are by no
means common in these days. 1 fre-
quently heard him on the political plat-
form, and I may say that he had nothing
to fear from comparison with seasoned
politicians. The general opinion of
those who heard him was that Cecil
Healy would have made his mark in
public life. Still more often 1 heard him
at festive gatherings, and as an after-
dinner speaker he was invariably inter-
esting and entertaining. On one occa-
sion after his return from Europe, I
heard him give a description of some of
his experiences in the old world, which
afforded a very marked contrast to the
platitudes we often hear from people
who have returned from abroad. He
gave us the first impression of a keen,
observant and reflective mind. In short,
I may say that he was an eloquent
speaker, conspicuous for the purity of
his language and the nobility of his
sentiments.
RESCUED AT MANLY.
Cecil Healy zvas in the ocean about twenty-five minutes
supporting an unconscious man, and zvas awarded the silver medal
by the Royal Humane Society for this meritorious act.
While several thousands of visitors
were watching the surf bathers at Manly
on Sunday afternoon, a cry for help was
heard from two bathers named P. A.
Hannelly, aged 26 years, and W. B.
Bradley, aged 13 years, who had been
suddenly taken off their feet and swept
seawards. Cecil Healy, Captain of the
Manly Surf Club, immediately went to
their assistance. They were soon out
in deep water, and it was impossible to
render efficient aid without the life-lines.
These were run out three times, but
when a strain was put on the line snap-
ped, and it seemed apparent that a casu-
alty would result. Healy,
however, bravely held them above water
until further assistance arrived, when
they were all towed to shore. The
younger of the two, who comes from
the country, was unconscious for a long
period, but after strenuous efforts at re-
suscitation, the lad came round. Cecil
Healy was greatly exhausted.
—“Sydney Morning Herald,” January 31, 1911.


■ t ' ‘
Cecil Healy
with Life Saving Reel
at Manly


THE CRAWL STROKE.
By the late Cecil Healy.
First published in “The Referee” Sydney, March 12, 1913.
The article was thought so highly of that the “Management Com-
mittee Scheme for the Encouragement of Szvimming” in Great
Britain, printed 20,000 copies for free circulation. It was sub-
sequently republished with a postcript by the author in “The
Blunderbuss” of April 6, 1918, a paper issued by the s th Officers'
Cadet Training Battalion at Trinity College, Cambridge. The
article has been largely quoted from by Australian, English and
American papers.
THE “crawl” stroke has this much
in common with other methods
of propulsion: no two persons
swim it exactly alike in every
particular. The broad principle, of
course, is the same, but there is always
observable some individual peculiarity
of adaptation, just as in the case of
finger prints, dissimilarity of detail is
perceptible.
But there is really no occasion to be
surprised at this. One needs only to
make a superficial study of the
mechanics of the thing to realise how
perfectly natural it is, and that it could
not very well be otherwise.
In the first place, we must bear in
mind that flotation is simply the art of
balancing the body on the surface of the
water. Its weight, width, size and di-
mensions generally are all factors that
affect the scales, as it were, and alter
its centre of gravity. Very well, then.
As we also know that human frames
differ, not only in parts, but in the sum
total, it stands to reason that if a specific
set of movements is appropriate to one
form, it cannot, of necessity, be abso-
lutely suitable where another is concern-
ed. In other words, it is an individual
equation, and the problem that con-
fronts a person who is desirous of attain-
ing speed is to find out what styles
answer his own requirements best.
Nature does not conform to the prin-
ciples of socialism; otherwise, there
would be no discrepancy in aptitude or
ability, and the choice of actions could
be left entirely to her. But, as a matter
of fact, she is most unreliable in this
respect, and more often than not it is
necessary to check her tendencies in
order to achieve the object desired. In
other instances she is unaccountably
prodigal in the bestowal of favours,
thereby producing what we term a
genius, who is developed without any
artificial aid whatsoever. We, however,
are not dealing with the great excep-
tions to the rule, because they have no
bearing on what happens in the ordinary
course of events.
What we have to concern ourselves
with is that which transpires usually, in
which case it is undeniably possible, as is
proven every day of our lives, to bring
brain power, allied with experience, to
bear in such a way as to perfect, de-
velop, and improve natural inclinations.
That is why it is invariably advisable to
take advantage of instruction, if it is
available from a duly qualified source,
because once a bad habit has been ac-
quired and practised, the longer it is al-
lowed to remain unchecked, so much
more difficult does it become to subse-
quently eradicate it. Tutorage, there-
fore, constitutes a sort of insurance
against the risks referred to.


There are two distinct modes of Duke Kahanamoku, the marvellous
“crawling” in vogue at present, and its Hawaiian, for instance, only breathes
exponents can be said to consist of four every fourth stroke. Daniels, another
classes, viz., those who breathe regu- wonder of the age, likewise only
larly, and those who take four or five snatches a breath periodically; in fact, 1
strokes before replenishing their lungs, do not know of any American who dif-
on the one hand, and those who strike fers in this respect,
with the right arm left leg alternately In Bmall bath in which k
and vice versa; and those who have an an(J most j compe t e) it is not nea rly so
independent leg action, on the other. tiring) because the momentary pause at
Exponents who do not breathe regu- the turn enables the system to recuper-
larly lie flat, with head down, shoulders ate some of its lost strength, and the
square, face sub- push off more than
merged, and use a compensates for the
short paddling arm delay in getting
action. The effect of round; Consequently,
keeping the head low- much longer journeys
ered is to float the legs can be negotiated and
as high as possible, ; quic k e r times re-
the body thus lying in corded in these cir-
a horizontal position jJ&tt -r cumstances than
near the surface when the course is a
which enables it to Wy* long one.
skim along. Undoubt- Another drawback
edly great speed can attached to swim-
be obtained in this ming with the head
way, but holding the lowered is the diffi-
breath for the length r | j culty of steering a
of time necessitated straight course.
causes the physical Nearly all indoor
exertion to become tanks on the other
much more acute and Healy " The side of the world have
exhausting. Its range of effectiveness is thick, black lines painted along the bot-
therefore limited, particularly in open tom, running from end to end, which are
water. Under the latter conditions, clearly visible even in the deepest part,
those who swim as described show a and overcome the objection, as far as
great slackening off in their rate of pro- they go, but at Stockholm, where there
gress after 100 metres have been covered was no such guide for them to rely upon,
compared with what they are capable of the Americans frequently deviated and
doing up to that distance. Some who swam crookedly, occasionally bumping
are tremendously fast for a sprint are other competitors.
absolutely unable to keep going for as It is granted that they are exception-
much as a couple of hundred yards at a ally fast, but is it not feasible to think
stretch, even slowly. The greatest thing that they, and others who affect this
that can be said in its favour is the fact style, would be able to maintain their
that most of the world’s fastest short- maximum rate of speed for a greater
distance performers swim in this fashion. length of time, if they succeeded in ac-


quiring the knack of obtaining breath
more without interfering in
the least degree with their momentum?
As has been proved beyond doubt, the
“crawl” is a style of swimming indigen-
ous to the South Seas. With the excep-
tion of Kahanamoku, all the natives the
writer has seen in the water seized the
opportunity of securing fresh air every
stroke of die right or left arm, accord-
ing to how it suited them. This is done
by flicking the face sideways, just as the
arm has reached its full extension, and
is about to take a downward course.
Practice enables this to be accomplish-
ed without throwing the head back or
altering the position of the body. In
this method the shoulders are brought
much more into play by a rolling move-
ment from the hips, which reduced the
strain on the body, acts as a propelling
force, and brings about a gliding motion.
I maintain that this is really an ad-
vanced stage in the evolution of the
practicability of the stroke for other than
100 yards dashes. Years ago, when the
potentialities of the “crawl” were first
discovered and popularised by the
Cavills, it was only utilised for putting
on an extra spurt over the last few yards
at the finish of a race. At that time every
one here swam in the way that the
Americans do now. Then the breathing
difficulty was successfully surmounted,
and the distance over which it was used
gradually increased, until we find it em-
ployed to-day for the purpose of estab-
lishing fresh records for three mile
swims.
The ideal stroke, of course, is the one
that gives the maximum of propelling
power with the expenditure of the mini-
mum of physical exertion. A funda-
mental principle of the “crawl” is to
float in such a way that the muscles are
relieved of the strain of maintaining the
body in the required position. This re-
suit is achieved by swimming with them
relaxed, except at the instant it is neces-
sary to bring pressure to bear to continue
the forward movement. As it is so
much a question of balancing the frame
at a clearly defined angle, it is only
natural that the depth of the water is an
important consideration, and plays a big
part in influencing the action of the
limb necessary to that end. The legs
and feet combined assume the function
of a gyroscope in the adjustment of the
body. Salt water being very buoyant,
not much assistance is required from this
source to keep it posed horizontally.
Therefore one kick with the legs to every
arm stroke is found sufficient for the
purpose. But in fresh water, the legs
and body sink much more rapidly,
and consequently additional support is
essential.
The Americans and other exponents
who learn in fresh water invariably have
an independent leg action, and kick two
or three times to each stroke with the
arms, and the writer opines that they did
this quite unconsciously in the first in-
stance, and that it is not the outcome of
a special study of the subject, but simply
a case of nature adjusting herself to
altered conditions.
When an infant is put in the water for
the first time its limbs describe the move-
ments in a crude form, and undoubtedly
the best way for a youngster to be taught
is simply to allow him to “dog paddle,”
and then afterwards encourage him to
lift his arms clear of the wave. It is
much easier to learn the trudgeon or
side-stroke later on than it is to com-
mence with one or other of them and
then tackle the crawl.
A grown-up person who is anxious to
adopt it, and has been used to kicking
scissors-like, finds that his greatest diffi-
culty is to keep his legs extended out
behind and move them up and down, in-


* * ' '
>•
as
13
H-
r-i
S
3
t*
<
a.
s-
—)
«£
LU
g:
is
o
IH
25
c i
63
Cecil Healy in Championships
at
i. Brisbane .... 1906
2. Newcastle upon Tyne 1918
3. St. Kilda .... 1905
4. Sydney 1904
5. Plobart 1910
6. River 7hames . . 1912


stead of sideways. 1, therefore, recom-
mend the following as the quickest
means of acquiring the habit, viz., hav-
ing taken a deep breath, lie as flat as pos-
sible on the surface of the water, lower
head well down, place hands alongside
hips, or straight out in front, thumbs
locked, and then kick the feet rapidly up
and down, just bringing them clear of
the water, and striking with the instep.
Start a yard or two from the steps of a
bath, and try and reach them before lift-
ing the head. After a little practice this
can be easily and quickly done.
Generally speaking, it prepares all the
muscles of the body for their new work
and use, besides doing away with the
awkward feeling of keeping them in that
position, which every person experi-
ences, who is unaccustomed to kicking
them in this fashion. After having
undergone this training for a little while,
the stroke proper can then be attempted,
as a rule, mere intelligently. It is ad-
visable to start off with a push from the
side of the bath. The head should be
again lowered, the arms bent at elbow,
thrust in just beyond the face, and fully
extended under water as they go round.
The pressure must be taken off as they
are about to come up. The movement
is exactly the same as that of a duck's
leg when swimming. The legs, above
all, must not be allowed to separate, but
should be worked close together. The
whole limb is moved, but the lower por-
tion more than the upper.
The beginner should try to flick the
instep as much as possible, as he will
have found out by practising the exer-
cise alluded to that more propulsion is
derived by this action than a stiff leg
movement. Beyond that, 1 am inclined
to believe that the other details of the
kick, such as length of thrash, how far
to lift legs out of the water, etc., can
be left to one's natural inclination. It
is not advisable to try and breathe regu-
larly at first. The learner should con-
centrate his attention on mastering the
general movements. When obtaining
breath, the face should be twisted round,
as previously stated, but the head thrown
back, ever so little, as the tendency is
to sink the legs, and when this is done
they act as a drag. Once the proper ac-
tion has been acquired the rest is merely
a question of practice and perseverance,
the rate of improvement and advance-
ment being determined entirely thereby.
POSTSCRIPT.
The writer, during his travels in Ger-
many before the war, was quick to note
that the Bosches, in their practical
Teutonic way, were causing much care
to be devoted to instruction in swim-
ming in their army and navy, particu-
larly in the latter, and on his return to
Australia, in articles on the subject, he
pointed this out and advocated the ad-
visability of paying stricter attention to
this phase of the training of the coun-
try's defenders.
No sooner had naval hostilities com-
menced, and German ships began to be
sent to the bottom, than the cables to
Australia describing the events made
special reference to the fact that un-
usually large percentages of the crews
had been picked up swimming about,
even when the happenings occurred at
night, and this was admittedly a tribute
to our humanitarian methods, but it also
indicated the capacity of the Huns to
maintain themselves on the surface of
the ocean; and it is unfortunately rarely
that we read news of this sort, when it
is a case of any of our own ships meeting
with misfortune, and I say, without fear
of contradiction, that the cause, in most
instances, can he traced to the inade-
quate tuition our men receive in the art
of natation.


In every land campaign that has been
waged in the history of war, which in-
cluded operations in the vicinity of
rivers, etc., the death roll has been ap-
preciably augmented by drowning, and
it is, therefore, obviously urgently neces-
sary that soldiers should be thoroughly
taught how to extricate themselves in
the event of their being precipitated into
the element, and also that their training
should make it possible for them, if sud-
denly called upon to do so, to be able to
cross a stream for the purpose of attack-
ing their foes. These are reasons apart
altogether from the encouragement the
practice of swimming gives to the assi-
milation of cleanly habits, so desirable
amongst troops, and without taking into
consideration that it is acknowledged to
be presumably a great aid to the
attainment of health and physical
development.
The up-to-date and business-like
Americans, soon after the declaration of
war against Germany, passed a law,
stipulating that no man was to be con-
sidered eligible to hold a commission in
the United States Army unless he could
prove himself a capable swimmer, and
it was, therefore, apparent to these cute
people that the exigencies of modem
warfare required, especially in the case
of those aspiring to posts of responsi-
bility, that they should have a know-
ledge of the art, and that ignorance of it
was incompatible with the position of an
officer, otherwise they would not have
taken the drastic action of making it a
sine qua non.
A committee for the encouragement
of swimming has been formed in Eng-
land, and the writer hopes that its pro-
paganda will eventually succeed in in-
ducing the British Government to follow
the lead of Australian State Parliaments
and make it compulsory for children to
learn how to swim properly whilst at
school, and thus tackle the problem, as
it were, at the root of the evil.
UTILITARIAN ASPECT OF SWIMMING.
C.H.
There are some, no doubt, who recog-
nise the necessity of being taught this
useful accomplishment, but fail to see
where the competitive aspect is entitled
to the same consideration. It is this
wise. To go in for it in a dilettante
fashion is not of much avail, and a cer-
tain standard of proficiency must be at-
tained before it really constitutes a safe-
guard. This, in its turn, calls for much
perseverance, and the devotion of a good
deal of time. Only in very exceptional
cases will children or adults be prepared
to make the necessary sacrifices without
an extra incentive. Contests, with their
accompanying kudos and notoriety,
answer the requirements. It is, there-
fore, a means to an end that the sport-
ing side, with its spirit of emulation, is
much an indispensable factor.


MANLY COMPARED WITH THE
RIVIERA
By C.H.
AFTER all, there is no place
like Manly.” This thought oc-
curred to the writer as he stood,
about 12 months ago, on the
parade of one of the famous seaside re-
sorts in the Riviera. “At any rate,” he
soliloquised, “to an Australian with his
inherent love of the unconventional.”
Everything that a highly artistic sense
could suggest; that science could pro-
vide; that money could purchase, had
been added to the natural attractions of
the place, to make it appeal to the gay,
pleasure seeking crowd, who are in the
habit of frequenting that part of the
world in search of distractions to rid
themselves of the ennui produced by
over indulgence in the great cities of
Europe.
The hotels were of the most costly and
palatial description; the dresses bespoke
wealth and extravagance; the equip-
ages represented small fortunes.
The procession of people moved
backwards and forwards. It was a con-
glomeration of humanity. Princesses
of the Royal blood were in its midst,
barons and counts galore. Every strata
of society had added its quota. The
ultra-successful business men were there
in force, leaders of the professions, to-
gether with the tribe which preys on the
social world.
MANLY IS REAL.
It was all very grand in a way, very
magnificent, but, methought, at the same
time, very unreal. The laughter had a
hollow ring; the gaiety was forced; self-
consciousness was apparent in every ac-
tion. Nevertheless, it was a sight calcu-
lated, at first, to hold one spellbound, to
make one marvel, even gasp, with aston-
ishment. There was a certain satisfac-
tion in having seen it; it stirred one’s
imagination.
But having become familiar with it,
by daily contact, its splendour diminish-
ed, in my eyes, until 1 eventually had to
confess to a longing for a glimpse of the
Corso at Manly, with its neglige, bare-
footed occupants, and bohemian exist-
ence. Perhaps to some minds it was like
turning from the sublime to the ridicu-
lous. Fortunately for all, tastes differ.
There was too much restriction; it
marked too much of the city life to be
endured for long, to my way of thinking.
The Mediterranean itself is a gorgeous
colour theme on a calm, tranquil day.
Its turquoise blue tint reflects the sun’s
rays until it shines like burnished gold.
But surrounded by all the evidences fic-
titious of modern civilisation, one begins
to wonder if it also is not the result of an
optical illusion, an effect produced by
artificial means.
Even in its angriest mood, the Medi-
terranean tosses no surf upon its shores.
Only big cumbersome waves that lash
themselves into a fury on the pebbly
beaches and rocky coastline. The
sound they produce is a revengeful, vin-
dictive roar, not like the purr of the
Pacific’s surge, which is as music to the
ear of the surfer. One misses the
breakers with their snow-white crests
that illumine the face of the water as
with a smile, revealing a row of glitter-
ing teeth.
A PERSONAUTY THAT MAKES ONE
FORGET ITS BLEMISHES.
Campers may become enraptured
with Freshwater, Bondi may have its
devotees, Coogee its habitues, and


■ * . r T '' *
py
«*&<®v» - v. • '* :ffy '-Hffi.. * ,<fe ‘^■*-**- ~ **V
i.|A. vly m * **&«* ;.,*#*. v~** -,. .M- "'■
Cronulla its enthusiasts. But none of
them enslave the mind, memory, and
heart, or worm themselves into the affec-
tions like Manly does those who learn to
know her. It has an indefinable some-
thing, a personality that makes one for-
getful of its blemishes, and, like it for
its very faults. Admittedly it has, as it
were, been badly brought up, its educa-
tion has been woefully neglected. Still,
its natural charm rises superior to every
militating circumstance. Always it is
Manly.
When one meets people on the other
side of the world, who have served their
apprenticeship in Manly, who have been
“Manlyites” for a time, in the true sense
of the word, the first enquiry that passes
their lips is: “How is Manly?” They
never forget their experience, the im-
pression is indelible. It establishes a
bond of sympathy, there is a feeling of
bon camaraderie at once.
Manly does not lay down any hard
and fast rules; it does not insist upon
conformity to any specific ideas or nar-
row groove of thought. All that it says
in effect is: “When you are in Manly, do
as we do. We have a tendency to follow
the line of least resistance.”
“One touch of Nature makes the
whole world kin.” Possibly that ac-
counts for its subtle influence.
To mention Manly’s bourgeois holi-
day crowd in the same breath with the
elegante of the French and Italian littoral
may be in the nature of an odious com-
parison; still, its blemishes are human.
It has no affectation. That is something
in its favour, a mitigating circumstance.
G. Bell, , Photo,
Surf Bathing at Manly


PICTURING A SWIMMER AND A
SHARK.
By C.H.
Many stories regarding the killing of
sharks by natives have shared the fate
of the usual run of “fish yarns” and
been received with the utmost incredu-
lity. There does not seem any radical
reason to my mind why some of our
champions could not prove that the
shark scare is really a “bogey” after all.
There is a plentiful supply of “white
hopes” when it comes to opposing the
dark-skinned gentry in the ring, but is
there likely to be any rush to take up the
cudgels on behalf of the white race in
order to achieve our reputation in the
water? There ought to be untold fame
awaiting the first white who can “do the
trick.” A toreador’s reputation would
pale alongside his. He could work up a
great vaudeville turn, and altogether
there is a very promising outlook. The
writer would not mind trying his hand,
provided his adversary was given a little
dental treatment beforehand. Anyway,
I think it would be money well spent if
some of our shire councils, who possess
nice surfing beaches, were to import a
native or two to establish “shark killing
schools.” Perhaps, if we saw them at
work once or twice, familiarity would
breed contempt, and we would not be
petrified with fear at the near approach
of our bete noir and thus do ourselves
justice.
ANTI-LUNCH CREED.
Healy’s Amusing Letter.
In explanation of this letter, we refer the reader to the
biographical article in which he mentions the mid-day swimmers
at the Domain Baths. These zvere generally knozvn amongst their
friends as the “Anti-lunch Brigade.”
“We have had a very calm passage so
far. It was bitterly cold at Hobart—in
fact, snowing on the mountain —but 1
nevertheless had a dip at New Norfolk in
fresh water. When the team came on
the scene and found me in the water,
while they themselves had overcoats on,
I got a great reception. We are a real
happy family, and all feel well and fit.
“1 intend, with the help and assistance
of my tried and enthusiastic henchmen,
Messrs. Daniell, Helsham, and Board-
man, who, as you are aware, are with us,
to preach the doctrine of anti-lunch
swims to fellow sportsmen wherever we
go, and you may very soon hear of a
branch of the brigade being formed in
London, with our High. Commissioner,
Sir George Reid, as the first convert and
Brigade Father. We feel sure that in
our absence there will be no falling-off
in the daily attendance of anti-lunchers
at the Domain Baths, because we are
confident that Hon. Secretary Blair I.
Swannell will perform his duties in the
same conscientious manner as hereto-
fore.
“Yours,
“CECIL HEALY,
“Father of the Sydney A.-L.8.”


I
m B l^ :i> MMBMHw W *% 0& j0r ,,, S
m ''' M -' 1 | yillmi "#wi:
" 4. _>
n '■" |1HBh| H -rf • *
I ■ Iff
1?% grV^t'ryn 5 « 1 » * w& jb^jv^
*~\j- ’ v vK- gji^^B
. ■ “* jr
•yy «yj»jBMorj'#.-i, -<.*- | '* ■. v? .<* » ; £«* •* .- ”-,. A>-
i .' r ' ''* * ■» v ‘ ” . lC?>
.. ,y r BBSa*'
||| jliW 1 :<
H... ':.’• lip zm&JmSi I jUh| .
Mid-day
Swimming
Enthusiasts


THE PEACE OF EUROPE.
A Warning in 1913 of Germany’s Aims.
OLYMPIADS AS A FACTOR IN ITS PRESERVATION.
ENGLAND AND GERMANY COMPARED.
FROM AN ATHLETE’S POINT OF VIEW.
C.H.
The late Cecil Healy sazv the war coming. This prophetic
article was contributed by him to “The Sunday Times” of
February 3rd, 1913.
THE thing that impressed me
most of all that I heard or saw in
connection with the Olympic
Games was the significance of
the remarks made by the Crown Prince
of Sweden in a speech delivered in Eng-
lish at a supper tendered the athletes,
and held in the Stadium. He had traced
the origin of the ancient Olympiads, and
explained that they were not organised
for the purpose of amusing the people,
but that they owed their initiation to a
much more worthy and practical object.
That was, to divert the minds of men
from the practice of cutting each other’s
throats, in which occupation they were
mostly engaged in those turbulent times,
and thus ensure, at any rate, occasional
periods of peace and quiet. They were
successful when all other means had
failed, by reason of the fact that they ap-
pealed to the manly spirit of the age, and
the heroes of the occasion were no less
renowned than those of the wars. He
then declared that the wonderful pro-
gress and development of the modern
Games, their growing importance in the
eyes of every civilised nation, and the
fact that they provided an opportunity
for
THE CREAM OF THE MANHOOD
of the different races to fraternise and
meet each other in friendly rivalry in
the held of sport, was assisting, to a
great extent, those factors at work pre-
serving the peace of the world to-day.
1 could not help thinking, as 1 strolled
amongst the crowd afterwards, and saw
representatives from various countries
drinking each other’s healths and laugh-
ing and joking together, that there was
a great deal of truth in what the Prince
had said.
These men, 1 imagined, must surely
return home to their respective coun-
tries full of enthusiasm of what they
had seen, and spread their impressions
broadcast. This, I felt convinced, would
have the effect of stimulating and in-
creasing the interest in physical develop-
ment, and at the same time inspire the
growing generation with an ambition to
emulate their deeds, and to some day re-
present their country at the “Mecca of
Sport,” where full play and scope is
given to their patriotic feelings, without
prompting them to long for war to give
them a chance of fighting for the honour
of their flag. Evidently those who are
bent on fostering and fanning the mar-
tial spirit in Germany hold the same
view regarding the Games, as I was told
on good authority that they viewed them
with suspicion, and looked askance at
the idea of their taking place in Berlin in
1916.
I should say the decision to hold them
there was


ONE OF THE FEW HOPEFUL SIGNS
OF THE TIMES,
as they will certainly tend to discourage
the continuance of that barbarous cus-
tom of duelling that still flourishes in
the Universities in that great country.
But the question arises, Will they ever
eventuate? Will 1916 prove to be too
late, and the storm have burst before
then?
Germany at present is not in any
sense of the word a sporting country,
although she possesses already some re-
markably good athletes, and all the more
credit is due to her on that account. It
shows the calibre of her manhood, and
what they are likely to do in sport when
it has been more generally adopted.
1 have travelled through Germany
several times now, and somehow, when-
ever 1 hear the name mentioned, I asso-
ciate it with the “tramp, tramp, tramp”
of soldiers. The place seems to me to be
alive with them, and they give one the
idea of being so grim and stern.
1 was tremendously impressed with
the power, strength, and resources of
the nation when 1 visited there for
the first time six years ago. lam even
more so now. On the railways, and
throughout the different services, mili-
tary precision seems to prevail. It was
noticeable even in sport. I have never
witnessed a better organised sporting
gathering than the 20th National Swim-
ing Festival, held in Hamburg in 1906,
and extending over the best part of a
week. They seem to have a genius for
detail, everything dovetails so complete-
ly. Nothing is out of place. 1 have seen
these characteristics confirmed over and
over again in other spheres. It all
prompts the thought that when the order
is given for her army to march
GERMANY’S BATTALIONS WILL MOVE
SWIFTLY AND SURELY,
whithersoever they are directed, without
hitch or hindrance.
We had something to learn from them
in the way of conducting sport, 1
thought, and on my return to Australia
in 1907 1 at once commenced to intro-
duce some ideas 1 had picked up in my
own little world of natation. They were
dubbed “Healy’s made - in - Germany
schemes,” but some prominent members
of our Olympic team were kind enough
to say that if it had not been for their
adoption our visit to Stockholm would
not have eventuated. 1 do not think the
Germans are what could be called an
adorable race, as far as their attitude to
strangers is concerned. They are too
aggressive in demeanour. One has got
to know them well to appreciate them
properly. But my experience is, they
improve greatly on acquaintance, from
the point of view of an Anglo-Saxon.
Above all, I admired their enthusiasm,
their patriotism, and their ambition. 1
was first struck by the loyalty that per-
vades the ranks of her sportsmen. The
following is a typical incident of what
1 mean. The president of one of the
associations, at a prize distribution, had
remarked that when the Kaiser had given
the trophy for competition amongst
the followers of the sport he sent a
message along to the effect that it was
his desire and wish that all his subjects
should learn to take care of themselves
in the water, because, as he remarked,
“our future is on the sea.” This caused
a spontaneous outburst of cheering that
seemed to shake the rafters, and made
one thrill with emotion. And then I re-
called to mind the fine, healthy, intelli-
gent stamp of men 1 had seen who com-
prise her navy. This thought in its turn
made me begin to wonder how far short
of our own Jack Tars, on whom we so


largely depend for our safety and inde-
pendence, these German sailors really
are. And then, again, it occurred to me
that they will have the assistance of a
huge, well-trained, well-equipped army.
THE THOUGHT WAS NOT COM-
FORTING.
On revisiting Hamburg again this
year 1 was amazed at the development
that had taken place. It has expanded
enormously during the last six years.
1 was shown over the great shipbuilding
yards, saw the “Imperator,” the largest
ship afloat to-day, and the keels of seve-
ral others of like dimensions. 1 also had
a close inspection of the latest Zeppelin
airship, the “Hansa,” of which they are
very proud. This, together with other
signs of progress noticeable in Berlin
and other large cities, the splendid phy-
sique of the people generally, the home
life and domestic happiness that exist
from one end of the country to the other,
all combine to create a feeling of uneasi-
ness when compared with certain phases
of existence in the United Kingdom, to
whom we in Australia look for such a
large measure of our protection. 1 have
no hesitation in thinking that, generally
speaking, the German people entertain
a strong dislike of England. 1 have
friends in different grades of society.
They invariably are curious to know our
feelings towards English people out
here, and sooner or later express an an-
tipathy, mild or otherwise, towards Eng-
lish snobbery. It has been my misfor-
tune to see more poverty, dirt and
drunkenness in the main thoroughfares
of the United Kingdom than I have ever
come across wandering about the alleys
and byeways of German cities. The
practice of allowing mothers to get
drunk in the public bars ? while their
children hang about the doors, as 1 have
seen times out of number in England,
has no equal anywhere, as far as my
humble knowledge extends.
Although there is
A BIG SOCIALISTIC ELEMENT IN
GERMANY,
judging from the remarks I have heard
from employers'in both countries, the
workmen appear to be much more re-
spectful and amenable to discipline (no
doubt due to their military training),
and this, 1 should think, will prove an-
other great national asset in case of
emergency, as against the undrilled
hordes that England will have to rely
upon if it resolves itself into a question
of draining the cup of its last dregs.
1 subsequently visited Dublin, where
the poverty and begging are quite on a
par with what one sees in Naples and
other Italian cities, for instance.
Of course, there are good, bad, and
indifferent everywhere; but the general
standard of education and condition of
the workers that, came under my ob-
servation in Germany appeared to me to
be higher than is the case in the United
Kingdom. They struck me as being
more thrifty and less improvident across
the North Sea.
EVERYBODY’S DUTY.
1 think it is the duty of everyone de-
pendent on the Union Jack for liberty,
who believes, as 1 do, that the power
and might of Germany are not realised
or sufficiently appreciated by Anglo-
Saxons as a whole, to, wherever pos-
sible, help a little towards an awaken-
ing of the fact, and counteract the self-
satisfaction which is such an unfortun-
ate national characteristic of ours. The
great majority of Englishmen 1 have
spoken to in the above strain have pooh-
poohed the idea of being beaten in any-
thing
BY A “BALLY FOREIGNER.”
Yet they have only got to stop and
think how many of their athletic laurels


-
East Sydney S. C. Team
Champions 1902-1903
C. Healy, R. Baker, J. Meade,
J Thompson and A. Wickham
Worlds’ Team Champions
Olympic Games, Stockholm
M. Champion H. Hardwick,
C. Heal\ and L. Boardman


have been captured by foreigners. A
few years ago such an idea would have
been ridiculed; to-day it is a fact.
Little straws have a habit of showing
which way the wind is going to blow.
They seem to think that that intangible
thing called “British pluck” will pull
them through in the end, no matter what
blunders are committed, as if it were
something quite different from any other
variety of pluck, and a special kind of
brand all its own.
When the last British army
manoeuvres were in progress 1 hap-
pened to be in Germany, where,
needless to say, they aroused a vast
amount of interest, and where every
movement was subjected to the
keenest criticism. Suddenly some-
thing happened in England. The
mimic war was hurriedly abandoned.
It was at first given out that this
was brought about through aeroplanes
revealing the presence of the attacking
forces. But a few days later the truth
leaked out. They had got hopelessly
mixed up, and could not be separated,
and Germany grinned from ear to ear.
Many people in England regard Lord
Roberts as an old alarmist when he
keeps on warning them that Germany
is perfecting details, getting ready to
strike like, she did in 1870. And he
never tires of ridiculing the Territorials;
but the “man in the street” knows bet-
ter. He pursues the even tenor of his
way, and does not worry his head about
what he considers to be absurd and im-
possible ideas. It seemed to me that the
equilibrium amongst the nations was
maintained principally because the enor-
mous expansion of Germany necessitat-
ed the borrowing of ready cash from
French banks, and until they can alter
this state of affairs the French capitalists
have only got to threaten to withdraw,
and Germany is face to face with a finan-
cial crisis; and thus are her talons effec-
tively clipped for the time being.
SURF BATHING ABROAD.
CECIL HEALY’S EXPERIENCES.
C.H.
Scotland was the only country where
1 had any real surf-bathing, and the
locality was Aberdeen. The beach is a
good one, and the waves were suitable
for shooting. It happened to be a
boisterous day when 1 arrived, and it
took me fully ten minutes before I could
persuade the man at the dressing box to
let me go out. It was the assurance that
I came from Australia that secured me
his permission at last. When I rode a
few waves he stood and gaped!
At Mount Lavinia, near Colombo, on
the way to Stockholm, 1 took advantage
of our stay and tried the surf there. The
waves were capable of being shot, al-
though small.
While bathing there an amusing inci-
dent occurred. While 1 was in the water
a young native armed with a big knife
kept running up and down the beach
and throwing out his chest. 1 was
puzzled to know his object, but after
some time discovered that he was sup-
posed to be protecting me from sharks!
On coming out of the water 1 was assail-
ed by loud demands for remuneration
for his services. He got a coin from me
for the originality of his “backsheesh”
extracting business.


EXTRACTS FROM CECIL HEALY’S LETTERS.
LIFE ON A TRANSPORT AT SEA.
I WAS one of the five detailed
to draw up the programme of
Boxing and Wrestling, and de-
spite my protests of ignorance
and inexperience in the handling of the
Queensbury pastime, was practically
forced into accepting the position of
Referee, no other nomination being en-
tertained. A ring was erected on No. B
hatch, which is overlooked by the bridge,
and nearly the whole ship’s comple-
ment managed to find accommodation.
The scene presented a familiar stadium
aspect. In the early stages of the tour-
nament there was a good deal of Slather-
em Whack, some terrific blows being
exchanged, which several times resulted
in my being smeared a vermilion hue.
Quite a number of the entrants are pro-
fessional performers, of more or less
repute, the best known being perhaps
Charlie Godfrey, of Queensland. God-
frey won the final of the middle-
weight division, scoring a points
victory over Pope, of Western Aus-
tralia. This match created much in-
terest. Pope had defeated McCarty, of
Newcastle, in a sensational manner by
dropping him with what might be de-
scribed as a beautiful right-handed
punch, soon after the commencement
of their bout. The Engineer Corps had
heavily backed McCarty, and his drama-
tic ending was the topic of conversation
for days. The author of his undoing,
of course, went up in the estimation of
the few, and a number were found will-
ing to show their confidence in his ability
when the time came for him to step into
the ring with Godfrey. Godfrey, how-
ever, was ever cautious, and did not
leave any such opening as McCarty to
enable Pope to connect his sinister wea-
pon, and he accumulated a substantial
lead of points by the time the gong
sounded at the end of the stipulated six
rounds. This exhibition was of a high-
class order, and both men boxed cleanly,
and I will always recall my having con-
stituted the third person in the arena for
this match with pleasure. 1 was deter-
mined, once 1 found 1 could not grace-
fully evade the duty, to at any rate con-
vince the spectators that 1 had the cour-
age of my convictions. 1 was obliged to
disqualify two or three, who in the heat
of the moment disregarded the clean
break regulation. Still there was no
manifestation of dissension, the only
untoward incident that occurred was
when, after ordering another round, 1
gave in favour of the opponent of a bad
tempered little Dago. With blazing
eyes he advanced to the middle of the
ring and voiced his dissatisfaction, but
was greeted with a storm of yells and
hoots, which continued till he beat a
hasty retreat. As a matter of fact, 1
had no right to have given him another
chance, as one judge had given it to his
adversary, and the other a draw at the
end of the prescribed quota of rounds.
At a concert held on Christmas night,
Colonel Onslow moved a vote of thanks
on my behalf, and 1 was accorded a good
reception. Small things considered, I
reckon 1 came through the ordeal safely.
We celebrated the crossing of the
Equator in traditional style, and, in re-
sponse to numerous requests, 1 elected
to play the part of Father Neptune.
The Bosun provided the regalia.
Travelling on a troopship has, at least,
one advantage over a P. & O. liner, in-
asmuch as one can go about practically
as one likes in the tropics, which liberty
appealed to me in the light of a real con-
cession. All superfluous clothing was
discarded, and those of the men and non-
coms. presented a state of semi-nudity.
It was not long before I regained my
wonted mahogany tint, which assisted
in some measure to make me feel nv' M>
at home.
Yours,
CECIL.


A SOLDIER’S LIFE IN EGYPT.
Zeitoum, 20th January, 1916.
IT was bitterly cold when we ar-
rived in camp. Our equipment
had been wrongly directed, and
I shall long remember the wait
we had until sunrise without blankets.
It is not that the temperature is very
low, but the atmosphere at this time of
the year has a damp chilliness in the
early hours of the morning, that seems
to freeze the marrow in one’s bones, and
defies the thickest of blankets. We have
certainly become a little more used to it
now, but still have to have “all sails set”
before we succeed in generating any
degree of warmth. All along the line
the Arabs kept on yelling “Backsheesh,
Backsheesh,” which recalled my past re-
membrance of the country. As was the
case previously with tourists, they are
cute enough to pick out the newcomer
soldier, whom they persistently pester
until he learns, which with Australians
only means a day or two, to swear for-
cibly in Arabic. Thanks to the drubbing
received at the hands of the lads from
our part of the world, they are much
more amenable than formerly. Not
only have they banged them about a
good deal, but also taught them to use
the most unseemly oaths that the Aus-
tralian soldier, in particular, is pecu-
liarly addicted to. The quantity of cash
which the latter have demonstrated he
is the possessor of, compared with those
from other climes, and the ready manner
in which he parts with it, has created a
general impression in Egypt that Aus-
tralia is an immensely wealthy country.
Of course, the evacuation of Gallipoli
occurred before we got here. Most of
the returned men are now located at the
new front. 1 have already run across in-
numerable acquaintances in khaki, and
every day meet a fresh batch of swim-
ming friends, etc..
No sooner had we arrived than I com-
menced to make enquiries as to whether
there were any facilities for bathing in
the neighbourhood. 1 learnt of the
existence of sulphur baths at Helwan,
a I-hour’s train journey from Cairo.
Hendy and self immediately went off to
them, but, greatly to our chagrin, dis-
covered they were dismantled. It was
a nice sunny day, and so we decided we
would at least have the satisfaction of
indulging in a sun bath. We partly
stripped with that object in view, and
while so engaged, who should happen
along but.two members of the Coogee
Surf Club, well known to both of us.
They reckoned it was quite appropriate
that they should come across me at the
only bathing resort in this part of the
country. They are Army Medical men,
and are attached to the local Australian
Hospital. We availed ourselves of a
cordial invitation to look over the estab-
lishment and have tea with them. It is
built on an eminence commanding a
splendid view, with Pyramid Sakkarah
some distance away directly opposite.
Prior to the war it was run as a hydro
convalescent home. The battle-scarred
warriors are very well looked after there,
being entertained by picture shows and
concerts nightly.
We have had two or three heavy
showers, lasting about ten minutes each,
and we are given to understand this is
considered to have been an exception-
ally wet season. Our unit (consisting
of five individuals) is occupying an un-
used officer’s hut, which is a big im-
provement on those erected for the men.
Still they are not built to keep rain out,


Stadium on an
Australian Transport
Cecil Healy at Cambridge
on Anzac Day, 1918
In the Shadow of the
Sphinx , 1916


as it so rarely puts in an appearance.
Consequently when it does sprinkle, the
roof affords very little protection.
Our camp at present is right on the
banks of the Nile, The Arab Dhoes and
Citadel (old Cairo) in background make
a very picturesque scene at sunset. The
river is about 60 yards wide. My first
thought was “how bonzer for a dip,”
but it was “out of bounds.” It is said
that grubs attack white men who swim
in it. That reminds me, right alongside
of us is the house (more like a palace)
of the Sultan’s brother. 1 could easily
throw a stone from where 1 am scrib-
bling this on to the harem. We often
catch sight of the darling little inmates
as they peep out of the windows. They
were in the habit of waving to the lads,
but “the old boy” caught them one day,
and that was the end of the chapter.
They are guarded by an armed sentry
at night. They are also a source of in-
terest to us, as they attain the size of
giants. The first thing the new arrivals
do is to make a bee line for the native
quarter, that is known as the “Wazzer.”
It consists mostly of narrow, tortuous
alleys. There is no sanitary system
whatever, and 1 do not think the light
of day ever penetrates part of it. Inas-
much of the number of inhabitants it
contains, it resembles a rabbit warren.
Most of the houses have iron doors and
barred windows. It is thronged just
now, one might say, day and night with
soldiers. Above the din is heard the
cry, “Come on, Australian.” It is like
a bazaar where the human element is the
sole commodity offered.
Yours,
CECIL.
NOT AFRAID OF SHARKS.
Cecil Healy’s Great Swim.
An Ocean Sprint.
Cecil Healy, the Australian short-
distance champion, shares the view with
a number of surf swimmers, that sharks
will not attack human beings off the sea
beaches. Yesterday he figured in a swim
that is probably unique. He swam in
the ocean from a point above the North
Steyne dressing sheds to the wall at
Fairy Bower, south of the South Steyne
dressing enclosure. The distance is
something more than a mile. A crew
manned the surf boat and accompanied
him on his trip. At intervals bathers
sprang out of the boat and swam with
Healy. But his pace beat them all off,
and even in the last 50 yards he stalled
off a sprinter, and finished up compara-
tively fresh. So far as the oldest resi-
dent of Manly knew this is the first time
that a swimmer has swum the length of
the Manly Beach. All the week huge
sharks have been seen there in pursuit
of schools of salmon. So far as they
were concerned, however, Healy had an
uninterrupted passage.
—“Daily Telegraph,” Sydney, December ig, 1910.


GETTING READY FOR CHRISTMAS.
At Divisional Base Depot, France,
December, 1916.
I MADE a suggestion to the O.C.
that, as our regiment’s funds
were in a healthy condition, and
our strength down to 2,000 odd
men, we should make an effort to outdo
all the other depots in the matter of
Xmas dinner. When I first mentioned
poultry, he rather laughed at the idea,
but 1 scoured the district, and eventually
discovered some farm people, who were
prepared to deliver excellent specimen
poulets at 6 francs apiece. Before sanc-
tioning the expenditure, the O.C. inti-
mated that he looked to me personally
to make the venture a success, as he
could not reconcile himself to the idea
of providing poultry for such a large
number of men on active service, and
was most sceptical as to the result. For-
tunately I had a capable man in charge
of cooking arrangements, and he proved
himself equal to the occasion. As far
as we could ascertain, no other camp’s
menu could compare with ours, and the
meal was the talk of the district. It con-
sisted of poultry, with an extra large
supply of mashed potatoes and boiled
onions, one whole ham per mess of 16
men, three tins of preserved pineapples
per mess, \ lb. of excellent plum pud-
ding, dates, bread, butter, etc., together
with f litre of beer and tea. At the con-
clusion the men were nearly beaten to a
standstill. They literally staggered to
their tents, fell upon their backs and
slept contentedly for the remainder of
the afternoon.
I have remarked to one or two field
officers who have passed through, if 1
have succeeded in winning the con-
fidence of the O.C. to the extent of per-
suading him that 1 can look after men
satisfactorily under disadvantageous cir-
cumstances, surely it is about time I was
offered a battalion Q.M.’s job. They
have one and all recognised the logic of
the argument, and promised to have
representations made, but nothing has
subsequently transpired.
I'sincerely hope you will not think
unkindly of me for corresponding so sel-
dom. Never before in my life have I
felt so disinclined to commit my
thoughts to paper. I regard my present
existence as something akin to that of
those oxen one sees in Egypt, blind-
folded, and attached to an apparatus for
drawing water that necessitates them go-
ing around and around and around, their
destiny decided by circumstances over
which they have no control.
Yours,
CECIL.


GETTING READY FOR THE FRONT.
A Prophetic Letter.
•sth Training Battalion, Wilts, England; June 9, 1918.
YOUR lines of March 21 have just
overtaken me here, having been
re-directed from the several
places I have been to since con-
cluding my course at Cambridge about
a month ago. It was fortunate they
were not delayed a couple of days longer,
as they have reached me on the eve of
my departure for the bring line, and in
all probability, had they not turned up
when they did, would have been chasing
me about France for weeks. I was aw-
fully glad to hear from you again, and
appreciated reading your lengthy and in-
teresting comments on the situation in
general.
Since your remarks were penned, the
Germans have launched the offensive
on the West Front. At the time you
wrote it was known that they were mak-
ing preparations. It proved to have
been organised on a colossal scale, with
the result that things have reached a
most critical stage. The German hordes
are closer to Paris, one, of course, of
their principal objectives since the begin-
ning of the war, and the question of the
moment is ‘Will they reach their goal
before sufficient American effectives ar-
rive to turn the scale of battle in our
favour.”
No one has had a greater admiration
for the fighting qualities of the average
British soldier, more particularly in the
case of the men from the Dominions
overseas, than myself.
1 do not doubt that they are as gallant
and as brave a type of officer as has ever
lived. One has merely to converse with
the average person a few minutes to
realise that. Germany’s strength, to my
mind, lies in the first place in the instinct
for organising which her people gener-
ally have, and always struck me as pos-
sessing, but more especially in the num-
ber of master-minds which she has suc-
ceeded in developing—men who have
the advantage, be it said, of being per-
mitted to exercise unrestricted sway, and
who are thus freed from the constant in-
terruption and interference with which
Lloyd George has to contend in his di-
rection of political affairs. As you are
aware, no one knew better than myself
how Germany was preparing for the
war. It is undeniable that she obtained
a big initial start, but I consider that it
has been her capacity to keep the lead in
all-round initiative that has enabled her
to wreak such havoc.
YANKEES TO THE FORE.
Until America ranged herself definite-
ly on our side, I entertained strong mis-
givings, but when U.S.A. declared war,
the Teutons’ chances of obtaining world
domination vanished for ever, in my
estimation. lat once ventured to pro-
phesy among my coterie of friends that
it would be Yankee brains, Yankee
wealth and Yankee resources that would
assist Verdun. The prediction, 1 need
hardly add, was received with incredu-
lity, if not ridicule, because at the time
of which I speak, things had a very dif-
ferent complexion from what they have
to-day. Later on the first Yanks put in
an appearance in France. I thereupon
took on myself to do a little propaganda
work on their behalf to any groups that
I happened to come upon in our camp
that were discussing them.


Cecil Healy as Q.M.S.,
Sydney, 1915
Photo by Judith Fletcher.
Cecil Healy as R. Q.M.S.,
Paris 1917
Photo by “Le Journal."


I related my own experiences for their
edification. I told them that 1 had made
one of a bunch of athletes who left Aus-
tralia to compete against Americans at
the Olympic Games, and that we enter-
tained the same opinion of their worth
and ability. We had been quite con-
vinced, 1 assured them, that the Yanks
were all talk, and that we had nothing
to fear from them. But I explained that
after we had had an opportunity of see-
ing for ourselves what they could do in
the way of organisation, had seen evi-
dence of their shrewd and business-like
system, and observed the fact that they
were equipped with everything that
brains could suggest and money buy,
and, moreover, had met them as man to
man —in most instances receiving a
sound trouncing at their hands—we be-
gan to regard them from a very different
standpoint. Ultimately we returned to
Australia with the firm impression that
the Yank was about as tough a proposi-
tion as could be met anywhere. I went
on to assert that when they were ready to
tackle Fritz it was perfectly safe to as-
sume that the Americans would demon-
strate the same characteristics and be of
very material assistance in preventing
the liberty-loving nations from being
trampled under by Prussian militarism.
1 could not help smiling when 1 read
in your letter the statements made in re-
ference to the Americans by one or two
of your correspondents on this side.
You will be able to understand the atti-
tude of people generally that I have en-
deavoured to depict. Gradually I suc-
ceeded in converting a number of those
persons in immediate contact with me
to adopt a more hopeful view of their
advent. How different is the aspect to-
day! Although they have not yet been
in a position to undertake any big move-
ment, the Americans have displayed
grit, dash and initiative in innumerable
minor engagements/ such as to make
eye-witnesses wildly enthusiastic about
their soldierly capabilities and what they
are likely to do when they have had time
to establish themselves at the front in
force. They are blamed still a good deal
for not being over earlier. But the
Allies have only themselves to thank, to
a very large extent, as there is no doubt
they had an idea that they could push
Fritz back themselves if America would
supply them with money, munitions and
foodstuffs in sufficient quantities, and
when she asked them at the outset to
name their requirements, the need of
men was not urgently set forth. By the
time this reaches your hands 1 trust they
will have done a good deal more to bear
out the glowing announcements 1 com-
mitted myself to concerning them.
LLOYD GEORGE’S HARD TASK.
Mr. Lloyd George must have been
obliged to surmount well-nigh insuper-
able obstacles before he induced the
Cabinet and the War Office to agree to
the appointment of Foch as Generalis-
simo, although it was evident we had not
yet brought to light anyone comparable
to him as a strategist. When the his-
tory of events is written, the nation will
learn how greatly it is indebted to the
little wizard from Wales, and it will
awake to a realisation of the fact that,
considering the extraordinary circum-
stances he was called upon to face, he
is one of the most remarkable men who
have ever been entrusted with its des-
tiny. It is beyond my comprehension to
conceive how Germany managed to
undermine the stability of so many
countries with her insidious influences.
I cannot help thinking that it has not
yet been entirely eradicated from spheres
in the United Kingdom. That is the
only way 1 can account for the idiotic
pampering of German prisoners here, in


the face of the cruelties and brutalities
heaped upon our men by the Huns in
their country, and such like crazy de-
partmental government.
To sum up my views, I do not antici-
pate that we will be able to crush the
German military machine sufficiently to
make it concede all the demands that we
have urged as our minimum conditions.
Before that day arrives, I look to the
people of Germany themselves to take
a hand in ending the dreadful slaughter
and misery. I know from personal
contact with the country that a
large percentage of the population
is socialistically inclined, and I main-
tain that it represents a volcanic
force at the present juncture which
only awaits a split in the upper
strata to burst forth and exert itself.
While they can continue to secure mili-
tary successes, the Junkers will be able
to sustain their hold on the nation’s
throat, but it will be otherwise, I think,
when the tide of battle turns in our
favour. If our authorities would insti-
tute a more vigorous policy of German
town-bombing, I feel sure it would
hasten the end.
THOUGHT HIM “WHITE HOPE.”
While at Cambridge, I rowed in the
company and platoon English (stroking
the latter), played Rugby, and actually
indulged in an early morning dip right
through the bitterly cold weather. Fre-
quently the snow lay thick upon the
ground, and invariably the temperature
was below freezing point, but I kept it
up, because it certainly agreed with me.
During the course I reduced my weight
from 14st. 81b. to 12st. 121b. 1 had a
sensational career in the heavyweight
boxing competitions. Owing to not be-
ing able to find anyone to train with me,
I abandoned the notion of taking part,
but at the very last moment, at the re-
quest of the commanding officer, 1
altered my mind. 1 drew a bye
first round. In the semi-final 1 met
a Guardsman who stood well over
six feet and who had earned the
reputation of being easily the best
exponent to come to light up till then.
1 skittled him with the first two
punches. This performance caused me to
be hailed as a veritable “White Hope,”
and the onlookers are said to have
wagered as much as £9O to £lOO on me
at most extravagant odds. I saw my
prospective opponent for the final spar,
but he did not impress me much, al-
though I noted that he was an exceed-
ingly well-built chap, tall, and vigorous
looking.
As soon as the gong clanged I bowled
straight over to him, with the intention
of finishing him off in the same manner
as I had done my previous vis-a-vis, but
he evaded my onslaught by ducking low,
and before I had time to recover my
equilibrium he swung a mighty punch
(which, by the way, he told me after-
wards was not aimed anywhere in par-
ticular), and, as luck would have it, it
struck me fair on the point. Proceed-
ings thereafter are a blank to me. It
appears 1 promptly measured my length
on the boards, but rose almost immedi-
ately, and stood a helpless target. I
took some more unmerciful bashes be-
fore assuming a recumbent position
again. And so it went on until the re-
feree declared my ring companion the
winner. The episode was the talk of
the sports of Cambridge for some time
afterwards. Everyone seemed to be of
the opinion that my adversary had the
“wind up” properly. When I tell you
that he has figured in many axe con-
tests, you will be able to realise that he
can put some weight behind his givings.
If it had been Jack Johnson’s jaw instead
of my own that had stood the impact, I
am inclined to the belief that the result


would have been much the same. At
any rate, 1 revealed the fact that 1 could
take a good share of punishment, so my
friends stated, but that was poor consola-
tion to me!
The last few weeks have been excep-
tionally warm here. Ido not remember
having struck such a spell of fine, bright
sunny days in England on any of my
previous visits. The country looks love-
ly. This can be said of most of the coun-
tries here at this time of the year, at
least, in the piping times of peace. I
spent last week-end camping on the
upper reaches of the Thames. It was
delightfully warm and 1 swam to my
heart’s content. The scenery on the
river was most picturesque. There was
a constant stream of pleasure craft pass-
ing backward and forward, with gaily
attired female occupants, lolling back in
indolent fashion. But from overhead
came the constant drone of aeroplane en-
gines and when one listened intently the
thud, thud of the Barking Berthas across
the channel could be distinctly heard.
This prevented me from being forgetful
that the world was not as peaceful as
one might have been led to imagine
from appearances at that particularly
favoured spot.
HOPED TO SELL LIFE DEARLY.
Men are dying in the effort to
stem the Teutons’ onward rush. 1
am prepared for the worst, and
am quite resigned to my fate. My
conscience would not permit me to
occupy a safe job indefinitely, not-
withstanding that I was assured by
my Commanding Officer that I was
doing good work where I was. It
was against the repeatedly given advice
of officer friends that I transferred from
the A.S.C. to the infantry. But 1 had
been under fairly heavy shell fire, and
knew what 1 was doing. 1 must say it
was out of no love of the military that
1 took the step, as I hate and detest
everything associated with the machine.
1 have seen too many inconsistencies
perpetrated in it, and too much of the
seamy side of it. 1 was influenced by
a desire to live up to the best expecta-
tions of my personal friends. That is
what it amounted to. I cherish the hope
that I will be able to sell my life dearly,
and earn the respect of the men whom 1
command.
If the unexpected happens, and 1 am
spared to return, we must dispose of a
drop of the cup that cheers together, old
chap. Meantime. —Yours, CECIL.


f |T| ' *. ?»lft N.
' c -« III'f LJer'J I It J I If I i , . e*: m^'Mi^'JS^'^^t >^wJ^pBIBBiif «| 1^
1 ■ ' ■?• ■ * ' : * Ww *3c ff< jf y s’ Sc ws J x fci& ' • f
.. Jjk - -iV**~ < ~ ****»■ ~ 7 X. J.. '\ 5T f
“B ” Company ,
yth Officers' Cadet Battalion
at Trinity College , Cambridge
Photo by Steam &r* Sons,
Cambridge, England.


THE STORY OF SPORT AND WAR IN FRANCE.
On Heels of the Germans.
In the Field, France, 4/7/’lB.
THE postcard you sent depicting
the scene in Martin Place on Red
Cross Day has just reached me.
It makes a very interesting pic-
ture. It certainly does not suggest that
the enthusiasm of the people for the
cause has dwindled to any appreciable
extent, and I consider it calculated to
impress the inhabitants on this side with
the fact that, notwithstanding the anti-
conscription vote, the will of the country
is centred in the right place. It is also
likely to convince them that we possess
some city, and I will take pride in show-
ing it round.
I obtained my commission in England
on the first of last month (June), and
immediately proceeded overseas. I am
attached to the 19th Battalion, some-
times referred to as the Sportsmen’s Bat-
talion. Whether it is any more entitled
to this pseudonym than any other unit
in the A.I.F. I have my doubts.
However, it undoubtedly possesses
its quota of prominent athletes. The
battalion was occupying billets in
close proximity to one of the largest
and best known provincial inland
towns in France when I joined up.
The last big push made by the Hun
toward it, some weeks previously,
brought it within range of the heavy
guns, and the Teuton savages thereupon
commenced to rain huge shells upon it
It was very hastily evacuated by the civil
population. So precipitate was their
flight that in most instances only such of
their belongings as could be carried by
hand were taken with them. Everything
else was left standing. The troops were
quartered in the vacant houses and en-
joyed the unusual luxury of having
spring beds to sleep in and furnished
apartments to live in generally. The
deserted state of the once thriving city,
and the damaged aspect of its boulevards
and buildings brought home to one
poignantly and vividly the wanton de-
structiveness of warfare.
A SWIMMING CARNIVAL.
No sooner had 1 put in an appearance
than it was proposed to organise a swim-
ming carnival. The town baths, situ-
ated on the river that runs through it,
were found to offer excellent facilities
for the purpose. We did not know,
from one moment to another, when we
would be ordered back into the line, so
the arrangements had to be hurriedly
completed. We secured the services of
Sid Riddington, the Manly diver, who
belongs to the same brigade, for the oc-
casion. I also discovered another school-
boy champion named Campbell, and I
got him to assist me in an exhibition of
the crawl and other strokes which I first
of all dilated upon for the edification of
the Diggers.
The fancy-dress parade was a pro-
minent feature of the show. Despite the
fact that they only had a very short time
at their disposal, the boys managed to
produce some exceedingly comical cos-
tumes, and their sustaining of the vari-
ous characters was none the less clever.
The battalion band was in attendance,
and a large crowd congregated to wit-
ness the programme. The inter-com-
pany teams race was, perhaps, produc-
tive of most enthusiasm, but keen in


terest was displayed in all the events,
which, as one who is ever anxious to
see the sport progress in popularity, I
was more than delighted to note.
MEN FROM OUR VILLAGE.
The affair was the means of bringing
quite a number of old Manlyites in con-
tact with each other again, and, as you
are well aware that there is no more
ardent lover of the Village by the Sea
than myself, it is really unnecessary to
add that this, to me, was another most
pleasing incident. It is generally ac-
knowledged that the function, if not
actually the most successful, was one of
the best sporting fixtures carried out
under the auspices of the battalion since
its departure from Sydney. We were
also fortunate, inasmuch as the Bosche
was quiescent that day and did not shell
the locality.
BILLETS DOUX FROM FRITZ.
A few days later we moved up to our
present position. We are in reserve, a
few kilometres behind the firing line.
Although, ever since we came here, large
calibre shells have been bursting in the
neighbourhood and bombs dropped
nightly, they did not come uncomfort-
ably close to our company until this
afternoon. The Hun was evidently
greatly enraged over another one of
those splendid successes achieved early
this morning by our boys, and which it
has now become quite customary to as-
sociate with the operations of Australian
troops. As we penetrated his line for
over a mile in depth, and captured some-
thing like 1,500 prisoners, his annoy-
ance is understandable. At the moment
of writing he is flinging his billets doux
about in all directions, and every now
and again pieces of shell strike the roof
of my dugout, which, by the way, does
not happen to be a very substantial one.
We stand-to at different hours, and are
quite expecting at any moment to par-
ticipate in the fighting.
A day or two ago 1 proceeded with my
Company C.O. to the forward area for
reconnaisance purposes. Things were
not very lively at the time in the ad-
vanced parts, but on the return jour-
ney we came under one of Fritz’s
periodical bursts of shelling. It was
not at all a pleasant sensation. 1
must say 1 do not relish the idea
of being knocked in a rearward
position, but very often nowadays
the strain on one’s nerves in such
places is more severe during a straafmg
than in the actual front-line trenches.
Lately he has been using a new form of
shell, which the boys term “Rubber
Belly.” It is a high velocity projectile,
and only a fraction of a second appears
to elapse after one’s ears detect its ap-
proach and the explosion, consequently
there is a beastly state of uncertainty
about it, and it has everyone guessing.
AWE-INSPIRING.
I have never witnessed anything more
awe-inspiring than the preliminary bom-
bardment in connection with this morn-
ing’s stunt. The barrages now are not
maintained for the same length of time
as formerly, but are greatly intensified.
The sector to be attacked is simply de-
luged with shells, and it is beyond com-
prehension how anyone lives through
such terrific and concentrated gunfire.
1 am afraid there is very little of the
sporting element in modem warfare.
The terrible engines of destruction and
diabolical accessories, such as poison
gas, now employed, resolve the issue for
the individual into being not one of the
survival of the fittest, but sheer luck,
nothing more or less.
Yours,
CECIL.


HIS FINAL LETTER TO A FRIEND.
In the Field, France,
13th August, 1918.
1 have often wondered
if you ever perused my article on “The
Peace of Europe,” written in 1913. In
the light of subsequent events, 1 think
you will agree it makes rather curious
reading. War, in my opinion, is a putrid
game, but, of course, 1 realise someone
has got to do the dirty work, and 1 try
to make the best of it.
1 am away from the front at the mo-
ment, but return again in a couple of
days’ time. The news recently has been
most encouraging, and 1 really think the
prospects of it finishing next Spring (if
not before) are promising, to say the
least of it. Yankee money, resources
and men have been the deciding factors,
as 1 have always imagined would be the
case. Keep that bottle of sparkling stuff
on the ice, on the off-chance of my hav-
ing the good luck to come through the
ordeal, and we will discuss old times
together whilst we dispose of it.
Meantime,
Yours,
CECIL.
“ There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will.”
This Epitaph, written for an American Soldier, is so appropriate to the
late Lieutenant Cecil Healy that the author will no doubt pardon us
quoting it.
MONUMENT ENOUGH.
Where I shall fall upon my battle-ground
There may 1 rest —nor carry me away.
What holier hills could in these days be found
Than hills of France to hold a soldier’s clay?
Nor need ye place a cross of wooden stuff
Over my head to mark my age and name;
This very ground is monument enough I
"Tis all 1 wish of show or outward fame.
Deep in the hearts of fellow countrymen
My fast immortal sepulchre shall be.
Greater than all the tombs of ancient kings.
What matter where my dust shall scatter then?
I shall have served my country oversea
And loved her—dying with a heart that sings.
—RAY GAUGER, in the "Chicago Tribune.”


SWIMMING IN THE ICY RIVER.
Extract from a letter written by a fellow
officer, London, June 26, 1918.
“Cecil will not age, and at Cambridge
he astonished the dons and others by every
morning, before breakfasting, plunging into
the then icy Thames. He would burst
over half a mile or so solus. He had these
swims unchallenged. Other cadets, tight
wrapped in mufflers and British *■warms,’
were present on occasions to witness his
‘devotions.’ They did it well up the bank,
however, and this phenomenal athlete added
to his laurels by winning the Cross Country
Championship at Cambridge, and was
runner-up in the boxing championship. In
an exhibition sprint at the Automobile and
Bath Club he demonstrated that the young-
sters at Home are not going to have it all
their own way when the boys come home.
Healy has lost weight these days. He was
a tidy 15st. on embarkation in Australia.
Now he barely tips 11.6, and reckons he is
as fit as ever he was in life before.”
Q. S. Spedding, Lieut.
HIS LAST SWIM.
France, September sth, 1918.
“You will no doubt be interested to know
that 1 was with Cecil in his last swimming
stunt. He strolled over to the 2nd Machine
Gun Battalion swimming carnival, and hear-
ing that there was an open 100 yds. event,
and that an Englishman with some reputa-
tion (it was rumored that he had beaten
Hatfield) was competing, Cecil decided to
have a go, and, of course, won easily. The
Englishman was a bit of a fraud.”
—Dave R. Fleming, Lieut.
HOW LIEUT. CECIL HEALY DIED.
“At dawn on August 29 they were or-
dered to push forward, and if possible
effect a crossing of the Somme, opposite
the now famous Mont. St. Quentin. When
about opposite the village, the whole attack
was more or less held up by intense machine-
gun fire from the front and left flank.
Everything now was confusion—they were
suffering a large number of casualties. Cecil
Healy and another officer decided to take
their platoons forward and clear the copse
holding them up in front. They reached
it safely—mopped it up, and raced up to
the high ground in the rear of it. It was
then that Healy met his death. He died
well in front of his platoon, looking for
machine guns, and his fearlessness supplied
the enemy with too good a target to miss.
A machine-gun bullet got him in the back
of the neck, and while lying wounded a
burst of machine-gun fire got him in the
right breast. When he fell a stretcher-
bearer ran over to him, and while bandaging
him up, was unfortunately, severely wound-
Ed himself. Comrades crawling across to
poor old Ces. asked him where he was hit,
but he was too far gone to answer. He
was breathing very heavily and making a
good, game fight for his life. He died an
hour after being hit—between 7 and 8
o’clock. It was his first stunt, and unfor-
tunately his last. He was indeed a great
loss to the Battalion, and was a very pro-
mising young officer. For the first time
under heavy fire, he displayed splendid
coolness, and any amount of courage, sev-
eral of his men have spoken since empha-
sising his coolness and courage under fire.
He died a true soldier—leading his men,
and with his face to the enemy. He has
left in the Battalion a name that will be
cherished by all who knew him, just as his
record in the athletic world can always be
recalled with feelings of admiration and
respect. He was buried at the edge of
Sword Wood, just west of the Somme Canal,
where it runs west of Peronne.”


AN ELOQUENT TRIBUTE.
The Rev. Father J. O’Gorman preached an eloquent panegyric at a Requiem Mass,
celebrated at St. Mary’s Cathedral, Sydney, on September 23rd, 1918, on the self-
sacrifice of the late officer.
There were one or two lessons which
were associated with the solemn ceremonies
they were celebrating that day, and which
served as object-lessons, and help in their
daily life. The incidence of the ceremony,
he continued, illustrated the loving princi-
ples of self-sacrifice and suffering. All who
knew the late Cecil Healy realised that he
was an excellent citizen, and possessed a
charming personality. I have seen boys
sitting around him, and looking up to him
with a sense of wonder, so charmed were
they by his kindly disposition and amiable
nature. He was their hero, who had fought
Australian battles in the athletic competi-
tions at Athens, Stockholm, and in many
other capitals of Europe. Everywhere, and
in all competitions the genuine sportsman-
ship of Cecil Healy had won for him the
greatest respect and esteem. There was no
blot on his escutcheon, for he’ was honor-
able and uncorruptible in all his doings.
There is another characteristic in his nature
which has been supplied in the sacrifice he
made in offering his life in the present war,
and which has added a note of the super-
natural to his character. In his last com-
munications he declared that he was fully
prepared to meet his Creator. Such evi-
dences of piety and devotion to his faith
are subjects of great joy and consolation
to his bereaved relatives and friends.
Though the deceased soldier has lost a few
years of his life in this world, still he has
gained a life in a glorious eternity. The
motive which urged Cecil Healy to go to the
war was grand and meritorious. He was
not attracted by the panoply of war, for
he had a horror of it. Neither was his
motive that of adventure; but it was the
desire to help Australia and the Allies be-
cause disaster to them would mean every-
thing to his native land.
FOR SAVING LIFE.
His Excellency the Governor (Sir Walter
Davidson), in moving the adoption of the
report of the Royal Shipwreck Relief and
Humane Society of N.S.W., referred to the
Society’s awards for Life Saving, and spoke
of the part that National pluck played in
the National Character, and of the prowess
of Australians as swimmers. The best
swimmers in the world were, he thought,
Australians.
The Chief Justice (Sir William Cullen),
in seconding the adoption of the report,
said .... His Excellency had referred to
Australians as swimmers. It recalled the
death of one who had gallantly given his
life in service abroad—-Cecil Healy—
(applause)—and an article supplied by
that notable figure about five years ago in
which his observations abroad had shown
him the menace that the world had to meet
from the growing power of Germany.
Sydney Morning Herald, 17/9/18.
OBITUARY NOTICES.
From “The Sydney Morning Herald.”
Nearly everyone in Australia has in the
war experienced some sense of loss—a son,
a brother, some near relation or close friend.
One of the best-known of the Australians
who now lies buried in France was Cecil
Healy. By thousands to whom he was
personally known, by many close and in-
timate friends (perhaps no other young
Australian who left these shores to do duty
for his country had more), by even his
many merest acquaintances, Cecil Healy
will be truly mourned, for, besides being
one of the world’s champion swimmers—
if not at one time the actual champion—
he was a man of a most lovable disposition,
modest in the hour of victory, ready at
once to generously acknowledge defeat if
beaten, chivalrous and courteous always.


He deserved to be a champion, for no man
ever took such assiduous pains to fit him-
self by every means in his power for his
arduous contests. He lived carefully, prac-
tised certain strokes patiently and with the
utmost perseverance, and whether the
weather was wet or dry, cold or hot, regu-
larly practised his exercises in and out of
the water. On more than one occasion he
trained right through the winter, going for
his swim regularly day by day, to prepare
himself for the races that were to come off
in the following summer. Quite a num-
ber of friends used to devote their lunch
hour for some years to that brisk walk
through the Botanic Gardens with him, and
a twenty minutes’ plunge in the baths in the
harbour.
Most champions, in whatever branch of
sport, and more particularly in swimming,
reach the zenith of their success in early
youth, generally at or about the age of 21.
Swimming beyond all other sports needs
great powers of endurance, but Cecil Healy
'.vent on competing with more and more
success as year followed year, and in the
course of his career he met all the great
amateur champions that the world has
known
Cecil Healy was one of the band who
fought for the freedom of the surf. Always
a lover of the surf as well as of swimming,
he was elected Captain of the Manly Surf
Club when the founders of that Club, to-
gether with those at Bondi, brought about
the popularity of surf-bathing and won for
all time the right of free bathing in the
Pacific Ocean. Healy competed with great
success in the Life-Saving Competitions held
in those days at the various Surf Carnivals,
and he received the medal of the Royal
Humane Society for Life-Saving in the surf.
In fact, he effected many rescues which
were not chronicled. On one occasion
Healy went into the surf at Manly to effect
a rescue when a storm was raging and the
undertow was running worse than usual. A
tremendous breaker brought the drowning
man shorewards where he was helped out
of distress by other bathers. Healy had
tried to cross the undertow in getting to his
man, and when he saw the latter was safe,
he turned and tried to swim ashore, but,
strong a swimmer as he was, he was slowly
drawn back by the tow. With his usual
presence of mind, he coolly did the only
thing that was possible, and turning again
went with the tow but towards the side of
it, where he gradually got out of the current
into the breakers, whence he easily reached
the shore.
It was not only at swimming that Healy
excelled. He was one of the best amateur
boxers in Sydney, and won a name for his
forcible hitting, good nature under punish-
ment and scrupulous fairness.
He was one of the finest public speakers
I have ever heard. Always a great reader
and thinker, Healy made speeches that al-
ways commanded rapt attention. He was
indeed an orator, and being possessed of
a good memory very often embellished his
speeches with particularly good quotations.
At one time he took an active part in an
election campaign, and was sought after by
Liberals to speak at their meetings, which
on several occasions he did with very great
success.
, Years hence, when history recounts the
deeds of Australians in the greatest world
war of the centuries, few individual names
will be mentioned, for so many heroic deeds
have been performed, so many marvellous
feats of bravery and endurance recorded by
individuals, as well as by bodies of men,
that the historian will pause and hesitate
to accord fame to any where so many have
richly deserved it. In the fighting at Pozi-
eres, Villers Bretonneux, and many other
places in France and Belgium the Austra-
lians excelled themselves, and they were
again and again referred to by General
Haig and the French generals in terms of
the very highest commendation. Perhaps
one of their most difficult and probably im-
portant undertakings was the capture of
Mont St. Quentin in the fighting that took
place between August 26 and 31 of this
year. Hefe temporarily the Germans held
up the British forces just when they were
commencing to get well into the stride of
their great offensive. The country was
ideal for defence but frightful for an at-
tack. Mont St. Quentin stands like a sen-
tinel, guarding Peronne, which lies on low
ground in a bend of the Somme. The
Bapaume road from Peronne runs up over
the nearer side of Mont St. Quentin, and
above it rises a series of naked clay cliffs.
Bare green slopes to the north and south
make it difficult for troops to advance with-
out great peril.


The attacking Australians had to contend
against heavy artillery from the northward,
but they gradually, though with utmost diffi-
culty, forced their way onwards, although
the Germans counter-attacked them fifteen
times in 24 hours.—Holding these attacks
up tenaciously they again battled on till they
had won the whole crest of the mountain. It
was in the early stages of this attack on
Mont St. Quentin at dawn on August 29,
and while leading his men to a glorious
victory, that Cecil Healy fell. So he died,
as gallant a man as ever lived.
From “The Referee.’ 1
Poor Cecil! His innings at the
front was not long. . . . He was one of the
four most famous swimmers the world has
known—the other three were Barney Kieran,
Dick Cavill, and C. M. Daniels. There
were others who approached those named
closely in celebrity, but 1 think Kieran,
Healy, Cavill, and Daniels stood out be-
yond their contemporaries, and beyond any
great swimmers who appeared before.
Beaurepaire and Kahanamoku arrived later.
At the time Kieran was making a name for
himself over the middle and longer dis-
tances, Cecil Healy had gathered in all the
sprint championships. A stylist, his crawl
stroke was distinguished from the Cavill
splash by the rhythmic movement of both
arms and legs.
. . . . My memory makes Cecil’s race with
Daniels in England his greatest. Both
athletes evidenced remarkable form. Only in
the turns did the American gain. The Aus-
tralian always had that advantage very near-
ly wiped out before the next stretch of water
was thrown behind. Nothing but Daniels’
adeptness and Healy’s well-known slowness
in the kick-off, as compared with his actual
swimming, gave the race to the man from
Yankeeland, and we Australians had to con-
sole ourselves with the knowledge that kick-
ing-off was not swimming Cecil Healy
was a great personality. He had all the
elements of character that make for popu-
larity, and was a distinctly unusual type of
man physically and otherwise. May the
earth rest lightly upon him.
WHAT CECIL HEALY WAS.
A sympathetic Belgian champion swimmer sends us the very
interesting personal recollections of Cecil Healy which are
given below: —
I read with real sadness, in ‘Sporting,”
of the frightful news of the death of that
good and fine fellow Cecil Healy.
If it is really true, if in reality that ex-
ceptional athlete has fallen in the field of
honour, the great family of sportsmen must,
alas! once again go into mourning.
Healy was the first swimmer who exhib-
ited in Europe the “crawl,” the wonderfully
nimble Australian stroke, which revolution-
ised the art of swimming. I had the hon-
our of being matched against him, at
Brussels, in a 100 yards, at the beginning
of his first European tour. Healy won in
an impressing style, beating me by 2
seconds. Feyaert came third, if I remem-
ber rightly. A few days before, over the
same distance Healy had beaten Derbyshire,
the champion of England, by 5 seconds.
Healy was a perfect swimmer, absolutely
classic, marvellously gifted. His vic-
Tories could not be counted and his renown
was universal. Nevertheless, allow me, for
the story of our sport, to rectify an error
which has appeared in the obituary note
that you have published on this subject.
Healy did not take part in the Olympian
Games of London, in 1908, and it was the
Hungarian, Zoltan La Holmay, who came
second, behind the American Daniels, in
the 100 metres. On the other hand, it
was at Etaples, and not at Havre, where
Cecil Healy lived several months before
leaving for the front. He was a sergeant-
major and waited impatiently for his
“officer’s commission.” He wrote me
several letters on this subject which all re-
flect honour upon him; the formal and en-
thusiastic proof of fighting with all his
strength for the victory of our cause.
The time that he did not spend at busi-
ness was given to sports, which he loved.


As a journalist, he contributed to a Sydney
paper, in which he spoke with authority in
the swimming column.
Healy only played, I think, one match of
water-polo in France—he did not distin-
guish himself very much in this sport—and
that was at Charenton, during the year 1907.
He took part in the team of *‘Great Brit-
ain,” of which William Henry, the secretary
of the Life Saving Association, was captain,
and of which Jarvis was at that time the
great star. That team beat, with one goal,
the national Belgian team, of which Jegaeris
was captain, and in which I had the honour
to take part—after a memorable struggle.
—Translated from the French '‘Sporting.
EXTRACTS FROM A FEW OF THE NUMEROUS LETTERS OF CON-
DOLENCE RECEIVED:—
Governor-General’s Office, Melbourne,
23rd September, 1918.
Dear Madam, —
I am desired by His Excellency the
Governor-General to transmit to you the
following message from their Majesties the
King and Queen: —
“The King and Queen deeply regret the
“loss you and the Army have sustained J>y
“the death of your son in the service of
“his country.
“Their Majesties truly sympathise with
“you in your sorrow.”
In addition to the above message, I am
desired by the Governor-General to express
their Excellencies’ heartfelt sympathy with
you on the death of this gallant officer, who
fell fighting for his Country and Empire.
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) George Steward, Lt.-Col.,
Official Secretary.
“I very much appreciate the
late Lieutenant Cecil Healy’s kind actions
and words on behalf of my countrymen in
France. I am sorry he could not have
been spared to more fully realise the truth
of his prophecy concerning the American
soldiers, but you have the assurance that he
died fighting for a noble cause.”
(Signed) J. I. Brittain,
American Consul-General.
“Cecil was a fine straight young
man who is a loss to this country and
one whom everybody hoped would be
spared. A man amongst men.”
...... “He did his duty, and putting
aside his own interests and feelings, came
forward to help his Country in its need.”
“I have never heard him cry
against an opponent who defeated him. He
was one of Nature’s real gentlemen, and I
feel his loss very sincerely.”
“He represented the very best
type of an Australian Sportsman, and the
credit of his Country was always safe in his
keeping. Would that we had more like
him.”
• t “At the time he enlisted, his
joining up meant a great deal to the re-
cruiting, and his wonderful example, not
only at that time induced many to join, but
later on induced others, on account of his
sportsmanlike action.”
“We shall more and more real-
ise what a remarkable personality Cecil was,
now that he has gone.”
“He was well known and very
much respected by the whole community,
for he did much, both by precept and ex-
ample, to encourage the moral development
of the younger generation. . . . His fine
both as a man and as a soldier, will
not die with him.”
“We will all miss him, an ex-
ample as a sportsman and citizen to all.”
“What a pity it is his type of
man always seems to be the one which gets
killed.”
“In his last letter he discloses
his true nobleness of character. He had a
clear presentiment that he would not get
through, yet was determined to do what
he felt to be his duty.”


IN LOVING
_ MEMORY OF
uwr O.HEALY en CT BCNTIN
m C GRAYING m E.W VAUGHAN
19IVBATN
■A.I.F.
KILLED IN
RIP
ACTION
29 018
“His sterling qualities as a
sportsman and a gentleman earned for him
the highest respect, and it is felt that by his
death the Sport has suffered an irreparable
loss.”
“Poignant with regret. His name
is already written among the greatest Aus-
tralians of our time.”
“A loss such as this should be
regarded as a National Loss, as he has done
so much for the Country in the Amateur
Sporting Arena.”
“No man has endeared himself
more to swimmers, and no greater pain has
been caused them in the War than the pass-
ing of this great athlete, whose career re-
quired no such classic ending to make his
figure heroic.”
“He was bravery in the ex-
treme—his courage unfaltering. He died
the glorious death of a magnificent man.
.... His example can leave nothing behind
him but good.”
“We shall always remember
him here at the Bath Club for his charm-
ing personality, his very generous, kindly
nature, conspicuous manliness and cheerful-
ness; but, above all, he will be remembered
as a great sportsman with all the attributes
of fairness, and chivalry to his opponents
—and unquenchable determination to do
his utmost in any task he undertook.”
“All who may happen to read
the above letter, will agree that Mr. Wilson
Taylor’s tribute to our mutual friend Cecil
is not only very fine, but also true in every
detail; it is a word picture of his record
among us, whose memory will always be
treasured and honoured, for besides being
thoroughly brave and a true sportsman, he
was a gentleman, with aims in life lofty,
with equal manly sympathy for all.”
“As a soldier he died as brave-
ly as one could conceivably wish, in the lead
of his men, who liked him and whose com-
plete confidence he had gained through his
winning personality, his fearlesness, his de-
votion to duty, and his absolute fairness.
As a citizen, his large circle of personal
friends and acquaintances stamped him as a
man of the world, who could command re-
spect and esteem from all grades of life.”
Cecil’s grave is situated on the
rise of a hill about 500 yards from where
he was killed. The Battalion have erected
a very fine cross of timber, on which is an
inscription per rough sketch. The three
fellows who were killed with Cecil are
buried with him in the same grave, side by
side; Cecil’s being on the right when fac-
ing the cross. 1 obtained the following
particulars:—Cecil was advancing with his
platoon in a scrub in which was hidden a
German machine-gun post. On the enemy
opening fire Cecil and three men fell, but
there is some satisfaction in knowing that
the remainder of the party went on and set-
tled every German in the party that manned
the guns.
■


'
.
-
v . t-
-v. V •:
*£■■■' **V ■'r
# v": ■ • . ■ <
‘
I '
. £ mr ' ?
X ‘ . vS ‘
K ' - ■
■ f " -V
't.
li
.
: •
