

THURSDAY. 17 TH DECEMBER, 1936
SI R JOHN FRANKLIN, K.N., K.C.H., K.R.
LADY FRANKLIN
CENTENARY
of the
SETTLEMENT
of the
HUON
SIR ERNEST CLARK, K.C.B., C.B.E.
LADY CLARK
Wholly set up and printed in Tasmania, and published by The Huon Newspaper Co. Pty. Ltd., Franklin.
Registered at the General Post Office. Hobart, for transmission by post as a Newspaper.


m:
9
Australia s
Best
T«
(P*
v-V-
-5?
Pure - Pal
- - Perfection
Bill Til ifflD
PIONEERS
Of Tasmania's Apple Export Trade
FRUITGROWERS !
We will be pleased to supply your requirements in any of the following
lines: —
APPLE WRAPPING PAPER, WOODWOOL, CORRUGATED STRAWBOARD,
NAILS, etc.
Also
IY I Liquid Lime Su, P hur ' Lime Su, P hur Powder, Spray IV I
■ ■■ Lime, and Powder Carbide Spray.
SPRAYS COST NO MORE THAN INFERIOR PRODUCTS. SPRAYS
Made in Tasmania by the Australian Commonwealth Carbide Company.
H. JONES & CO
PTY. LTD.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


ONE HUNDRED YEARS OF SETTLEMENT
“Unpromising Land” Yields Enormous Wealth
lt is with pride and pleasure that we publish this issue of the "Huon and Derwent
Times," as a recognition of the completion of 100 years of settlement of the Huon
District —that portion of Tasmania which has earned a world-wide reputation for
the State as an apple and timber producer.
EARLY VISITORS
Impressions of French Explorers.
Although Tasmania was added to the
British Empire without interference by
any other nation the honour of making
the first discovery of it belongs to the
Dutch and French. The latter con-
fined their attention to the South, and
many of the names by which mountains,
rivers,.and districts are known are those
of their French discoverers. In 1792
Admiral Bruny D’Entrecasteaux and
Captain Huon Kermadec led an expedi-
tion to Southern Tasmania in the two
ships Recherche and Esperance. The
object was to discover new lands, and
also to find some trace of Count La Per-
ouse, who had disappeared in 1788 after
a visit to Botany Bay settlement. The
mystery of the loss of the Count and his
two ships was not solved until 40 years
later.
D’Entrecasteaux first sighted the
coast of Tasmania (or Van Diemen’s
Land, as it was then known) in April,
1792. He desired to enter the Der-
went, but through a mistake on the part
of his navigator he anchored his ships at
the entrance to the channel between
Bruny Island and the Mainland, and
which became known as Storm Bay Pas-
sage, but is now called D’Entrecas-
teaux Channel.
A safe anchorage was found in what
is now known as Recherche Bay, so
sailed after the first ship that entered
it. Other portions of the coast and is-
lands were examined. The French
mistook quail for partridges and named
one of the islands Partridge Island in
consequence. As the expedition pro-
gressed the historian attached to the
party thus comments on the voyage:—
“Each ray of light displayed fresh
beauties. On all sides bays of great
depth were to be seen, all equally shel-
tered from the winds. The highlands
covered with trees surroundings these
bays promised good depth of water and
freedom from dangers. None of our
navigators had ever seen in their
voyages so vast and safe an anchorage;
all the fleets of the world might as-
semble there, and still leave room for
more.”
D’Entrecasteaux made a second trip
through the Channel after passing right
round Australia. He arrived at Re-
cherche Bay on January 23, 1793, and
remained there three weeks. He then
visited by boats the inlets and rivers,
including Port Cygnet. The French
vessels finally weighed anchor on March
1, 1793, and in his impressions of the
coastline of the Huon the explorer
wrote:—
“It seems that all the sheltered spots
of New Holland (Australia) are gath-
ered together in the neighbourhood of
South Cape, to the east of which one
finds an interrupted range of harbours,
ports, and bays, which form one vast
haven 18 leagues in latitude and 14 in
longitude. Ido not believe that else-
where in the globe there is such a great
number of excellent anchorages as-
sembled in so small an area.”
FIRST BRITISH EXPEDITION.
In March, 1804, Lieut.-Col. David Col-
lins, who was in charge of the newly
found settlement of Hobart, reported
to the Governor of New South Wales,
that Lieut. Bowen was making an ex-
cursion to the Huon River. Collins
also stated that Messrs. Robt. Brown (a
botanist) and Humphreys had been ab-
sent for nearly 14 days on an excursion
overland to the same river. To Messrs.
Brown and Humphreys therefore be-
longs the honour of being the first white
men to make their way overland to the
Huon River.
EARLY REPORTS NOT ENCOUR-
AGING.
There was not much encouragement in
the early official reports on the Huon
district to attract settlers, but results
have shown that those entrusted with
this work either misjudged the land or
the capacity of the pioneers to wage a
successful combat with the forces of
nature. Excerpts from these reports
are:—
Deputy Surveyor-General G. P. Har-
ris (December 8, 1804): —•
“The soil wherever we landed, or could
judge from seeing it from the hnat, had
one uniform appearance, consisting of
coarse hard clay with large stones —
HISTORY
scarcely a blade of grass on it but
thickly covered with lern or scrubby
brush. The trees are principally blue
gum and stringy bark, but not of any
considerable size. A few red wood
trees, called at Hobart Town the maho-
gany, grow near the fall. We saw no
run of fresh water from the mouth of
the fall. The sides arc either steep
hills or swampy flats.
“With respect to its eligibility for a
settlement, I am of the opinion that if
the soil wore sufficiently good to warrant
it, the want of runs of fresh water would
oblige the settlement to be formed on
some part of the river where it is fresh.
But the soil itself is sufficient to deter
any experiment being made.”
Lieut. Oxley (about 1808): —
“The Huon River is broad and navi-
gable at its entrance, but its navigation
is impeded by falls and mud flats about
17 miles from its mouth. It is impos-
sible to fancy a more miserable country
than is presented to the eye. On the
banks of the river about the falls, how-
ever, there is some good land, but none
that would repay the trouble of getting
to it.”
The “miserable country” referred to
is the area from Castle Forbes to
Franklin, the most prolific apple produc-
ing area of land in the Comomnwealth
of Australia, some of it having yielded
over 2,000 bushels of marketable fruit
off a single acre!
The exact date of the arrival of
the first settlers in the Huon cannot
be positively stated. There is a record,
however, of the first sale of Crown lands
that was effected in the Huon in 1836,
and one of the purchasers on this occa-
sion was John Clark, of Franklin, grand-
father of Messrs. A. J. and F. M. Clark,
the present occupiers of the property.
Long before this, however, the country
had been visited by prospective settlers
and searchers after any hidden wealth
that it may possess. It would appear
that the first directly remunerative work
done by settlers was in the Southport
district, which attracted timber getters,
for there is an official record of the ship
Harcourt having taken 200 tons of tim-
ber to London from the Huon in October,
1829. Southport developed into a busy
centre in the early part of the previous
century, and for a time occupied the
position of “capital of the Huon.” As
the timber was cleared, however, the
land was not taken up for production of
vegetables or fruit, and for that reason
the district made insignificant progress
until the last decade, when it began to
attract the attention of orchardists and
others.
The first indication of Government re-
cognition of the Huon is given in “The
Tasmanian,” a newspaper published in
Hobart Town. In October, 1829. that
journal records that a bridle track had
been cut from Hobart Town to the first
falls on the Huon River, just above the
present site of the township of Huon-
ville.
To Castle Forbes probably belongs the
credit of receiving the first contingent
of settlers. In the year 1836 three emi-
grant ships with passengers, consisting
largely of Irish women, set sail from
England for Tasmania. They arrived
at the island after a voyage lasting
about five months. One of the ships,
the Castle Forbes, entered the southern
end of D’Entrecasteaux Channel, and
the captain, mistaking the mouth of the
Huon for that of the Derwent, sailed his
ship up the stream in search of Hobart
Town. On reaching the portion now
known as Castle Forbes Bay, he found
he could go no farther owing to the
shallow banks that extended almost
across the river, and having sickness on
board, the captain caused a search to be
made for fresh water. This was dis-
covered in a stream which emptied into
the bay immediately south of Castle
I Forbes Bay, and which is now known as
APPROXIMATE SITE OF THE FIRST SETTLEMENT IN THE HUON. J. J. Barnett.
Port Huon, the rivulet from which the
water was obtained being the Kerman-
die. The captain anchored his ship just
off the mouth of the Kermandie, and his
crew and passengers disembarked.
Tents were erected on the shores of the
bay in order that those who were ill
could receive better attention. The
bay then became known as Hospital
Bay, but latterly it is more widely
known as Port Huon, as it is from here
that the bulk of the apples and pears of
the district are shipped to inter-State
and oversea markets. Some of the
present residents of Castle Forbes and
Franklin are direct descendants of these
emigrants.
THE BEGINNING OF
SETTLEMENT
The first real impetus that the Huon
got as a prospective settlement was
through the interest taken in the dis-
trict by Sir John and Lady Franklin,
especially the latter, who purchased from
John Price, Commandant at Port Ar-
thur, an area of about 640 acres on the
bank of the Huon, and which is now the
main portion of the township of Frank-
lin. Lady Franklin divided the land into
blocks, and let them out to tenants at a
low rental. Her Ladyship made occa-
sional visits to the Huon, and called on
her tenants to discuss with them the
problems they had to contend with in
clearing the land for crops, and at the
same time earning enough cash from the
sale of shingles and palings to purchase
what necessities they required beyond
the foodstuffs they could grow. The
river frontage at Franklin (called at this
time “The Settlement”) was a ti-tree
swamp, and it was impossible to land
anywhere between Castle Forbes Bay and
“Woodside,” the residence of John Clark,
even from as small a craft as Lady
Franklin’s yacht, Huon Pine. It was
possibly the comparative accessibility of
the property from the river that induced
Mr. Clark, an original settler, to take up
the particular holding of 100 acres, com-
prising Woodside, which he did. The
Huon Pine frequently called at the rough
landing place that was first erected there,
and on every occasion Lady Franklin
was a welcome guest of Mr. and Mrs.
Clark. In spite of the enormous diffi-
culties that this portion of the river pre-
sented to settlement, it became within a
few years the chief centre of the Huon.
This achievement must be largely
attributed to the energy and assistance
which Sir John and Lady Franklin dis-
played in developing their estate, and
subsequent history went to prove that
whereas Harris’s report, made after a
special tour of the district in 1804, indi-
| cated that the land was unfertile, and
that conditions were otherwise unfav-
ourable for cultivation and settlement,
Lady Franklin formed a very different
opinion, backed it up by spending a con-
siderable amount of money in having the
land tested out, and had the satisfac-
tion of realising that she was right in
believing that it was most suitable for
farming and horticulture.
Among the early settlers at Franklin
was Mr. Thos. Walton, who shortly after-
wards moved further up the river, and
took up a large area of land, which now
comprises the chief portion of the town-
ship of Huonville. Other settlers began
later to take up land at Grove, Crab-
tree, Lucaston; then later settlers went
further back, and land was taken up at
Judbury and Glen Huon.
On the Cygnet side of the river one of
the earliest settlers was Matthew Fitz-
patrick, who emigrated from Ireland in
1836, and about three years later settled
at Port Cygnet. Soon after his arrival
Mr. Fitzpatrick planted an orchard on
land overlooking Petchey’s Bay, which
was named after William Petchey, an
early pioneer of Tasmania, who in the
1820’s collected large quantities of
mimosa bark from this locality for ex-
portation to England.
A peculiar feature of the settlement of
the Huon has been the vast number of
townships or villages which it comprises.
It is doubtful if there is anywhere else
in the Commonwealth so many named
townships in such small areas, and each
has its own post office, general store,
school, and churches. On the other
hand, hotels are exceptionally few. Cyg-
net has three, Franklin two, Huonville,
Dover, and Kermandie one each. Geeves-
ton, the most populous town in the dis-
trict, has none, nor has any of the other
35 townships.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


THE HUON RIVER
Its Rugged Watershed
Glorious Mountain Scenery
By A. N. LEWIS.
The Huon! What a wide significance
the word conveys! It immediately vis-
ualises a picture of bounteous gardens,
ladened fruit trees, pasture hillsides
speckled with yellow buttercups and
white daisies, wild highland crags and
deep blue tarns, a jungle, tropical in all
but climate, of the surging southern
ocean boiling over treacherous reefs un-
der the lash of winds from half way
across the world, of a wilderness of
peaty bogs, and then back again to pros-
perous homes in modern townships.
The Huon is unique and distinctive. It
is one of the gems of the Common-
wealth.
Hobart has grown on the narrow
fringe of rolling country where Mt. Wel-
lington abuts on the more open land-
scape on the one side and the sea on
the other. But Mt. Wellington is no
more than the buttress of an extensive
plateau which runs westward from Ho-
bart for 30 miles at an altitude of 3,000
feet, and thence in an ocean of ridges
and peaks, troughed by jungle-clothed
gorges, to the West Coast. South of
THE HARTZ RANGE FROM ACCOMMODATION HUT.
this plateau lies the Huon, with no ac-
cess by land from the rest of the world
save round the east of the Mt. Welling-
ton plateau through Hobart. Through
this considerable tract of country runs
the Huon River, draining some 4,000
square miles of country so rough that it
is still one of the considerable unex-
plored areas of the world.
Although the Huon was only connect-
ed by road to Hobart within the memory
of some of the oldest inhabitants, it has
been well known since the earliest times
of settlement in Tasmania. Indeed, the
waterway of the Huon estuary was ex-
plored and charted before the Derwent.
The great French navigator, Bruny
D’Entrecasteaux, in the Recherche, with
his able lietuenant, Huon Kermadec,
in the Esperance, sailed into the south-
ern reaches of the Channel on April 21,
1792, previously unknown to the hand-
ful of earlier explorers, owing to a mis-
taken bearing given to D’Entrecasteaux
when he was making for the already
charted anchorage at Adventure Bay.
The French admiral remained in the
vicinity of the Huon until May 28,
and returned again on January 12 in the
next year, on which occasion he discov-
ered and explored the Derwent.
WHALING AND COAL MINING.
Hobart was founded in 1804 by which
time the coastline of Southern Tas-
mania had been well investigated, but it
was not until Captain James Kelly, Ho-
bart’s first harbourmaster, set out on
December 12, 1815, in “a small sized
open five oared whale boat to examine
the then unknown West Coast,” that the
Huon attracted official attention. Cap-
tain Kelly noticed seams of coal out-
cropping in the cliffs of South Cape Bay,
the first discovery of coal in Tasmania,
and this led to the first permanent
settlement in the Huon—at Recherche
Bay. From this time onward for many
years, bay whaling stations, the re-
mains of many of which can still be
seen, abounded from the mouth of the
Huon southward. So important in-
deed was this activity that Southport
was at one time the most important
settlement south of Hobart, and a resi-
dent magistrate was stationed there for
many years.
SETTLEMENT COMMENCES.
In these early days, communication
with the Huon was entirely by water,
and the localities most accessible by boat
and schooner were settled first. By Sir
John Franklin’s time—lB37-1843—the
township of Franklin was well settled,
and cultivation spread slowly to Huon-
ville and by the rugged spurs of Mt.
Wellington in the direction of Hobart.
Originally Huon pine, one of the world’s
finest timbers, grew freely along the
banks of the Huon. Indeed, there
exists today a painting by one of the
early exploring parties showing these
trees. It is by no means the least
catastrophe following the ignorance of
early settlers that these trees have now
entirely disappeared, a loss which it
would not be difficult to replace if only
our generation were wiser. It was not
until 1855 that the road from Hobart
was completed, nor till 1876 that the
Huon was bridged. Nevertheless, both
the fertility and the beauty of this part
of Tasmania were early recognised. In-
deed, Frankland, our second Surveyor-
General, visualised the hotels and bath-
ing boxes of an English watering place
on the shores of Recherche Bay, and be-
stowed the name of Ramsgate on the
town to spring up there. Unfortunate-
ly, 100 years later, the bathing boxes
are still a dream, and local inhabitants
are not very sure of the location of
Ramsgate, notwithstanding the name
appears largely on official maps.
LOSS OF THE HUON PINE.
Times have changed. Road trans-
port has replaced the cheaper but slower
water carriage. Apple trees have re-
placed Huon pine forests. Today, the
main road over the southern spurs of
Mt. Wellington, across the Huon at
Huonville, and round the spurs of the
Hartz Mountains, is the vital artery of
the district. Settlement has prospered
from Hobart to the Huon estuary, and
along this fine waterway. Still, the
settled areas are insignificant compared
with the land as yet untouched. To
the south of Southport, round South
Cape Bay to New River, up the many
valleys of the La Perouse Range, the
New River, Picton, Weld, and Huon
valleys provide land not a wit poorer
than the settled areas of the Huon val-
ley, but at present growing enormous
reserves of timber. Then comes the
wilder country of the Arthur and Frank-
land Ranges, and the little known fast-
ness of Port Davey—a considerable area
of land, with less promising aspect from
the point of view of happy rural com-
munities but nevertheless with interest-
ing possibilities of its own. That is the
Huon—Tasmania’s new province, a ro-
mantic hinterland still untouched by the
attack of the farmer.
THE UPPER HUON.
How many readers have seen the
source of this noble river? What is
more, how many have ever felt a desire
to see it? The Huon rises in many
small creeks which drain the southern
slopes of Mt. Wedge, some miles north-
east of Lake Pedder. It gathers water
from Mt. Anne and from the Arthur
Ranges, draining a wide plain bounded
by high mountains. This is known as
the Huon Plain, and is some 10 miles
long by five wide, a level expanse of but-
tongrass-covered black soil and white
pebble banks, a perfect garden of native
flowers in Summer time, and one of Tas-
mania’s widest natural open spaces. It
is surrounded by bare precipitous moun-
tain cliffs of pink rock, and charming
pine-girt lakelets nestle everywhere
amongst the higher ranges. The whole
of this country is sculptured by ice ac-
tion and the Huon Plain is the result
/of the outwash deposits of the glaciers.
SOURCE OF THE HUON.
The Huon passes Lake Pedder at a
distance of several miles, but the inter-
vening country is very flat and studded
with lakelets and pools in a wet year.
Early maps showed the Huon as rising
in Lake Pedder, but this is not so. That
lake drains northward to the Serpen-
tine, a tributary of the Gordon. Here
the divide between the Huon and the
Gordon drainage systems does not rise
more than a few feet above the level of
the rivers, which could easily be con-
nected with a canal should the work
ever be warranted.
From a point some five miles south of
Lake Redder a pass leads south-west-
ward between the Frankland and the
Arthur Ranges, giving easy access from
the Huon Plain to the Port Davey area.
The highest part of this divide is not
more than 300 ft. above the level of the
plain, and not more than I,oooft. above
sea level. It is probably the site of an
ancient river bed, perhaps an early fore-
runner of the Huon. One of the most
remarkable facts about the geography
of this part is that although the Huon
could reach the sea across a barely per-
ceptible divide at Lake Pedder and
across this low pass, its course runs
eastward instead of westward and cuts
right through the highest and broad-
est mountain range in the district—the
Mi. Weld-Mt. Picton group, which stand
well over 4,000 ft. above sea level. From
this fact, the deduction is probable that
the Huon Valley was in existence be-
fore the mountains, and these ranges
were elevated so slowly that the river
cut its course through the rising land-
scape more rapidly than the ranges were
being elevated, thus maintaining, more
or less, its course as it was at the time
when the elevation commenced.
THE WATERSHED.
The Huon runs southward through
the Huon Plain in a remarkably sin-
uous course, clearly marked by an al-
most impenetrable band of tea-tree and
bauera scrub, winding through the open
buttongrass flats. It is here a broad
river some 50 yards wide, and seldom
fordable, and is very liable to sudden
flooding after rains. In addition to
the main channel, which is usually con-
fined by steep banks, a number of paral-
lel channels, which in flood become rag-
ing torrents, often increase the width to
a quarter of a mile. The bauera grows
in tendrils often 20ft. long, and these
sweep down the flood channels and form
a dense thicket of vegetation. Alto-
gether the river is a most difficult bar-
rier to passage throughout its course,
and in wet seasons can only be crossed
near its source.
THE HUON GORGE.
South of the plain the Huon meets
the bare white flank of the Arthur
Range and turns eastward. It then
passes through the Huon Gorge, which
could well be described as a canyon,
as it runs through the ranges of Mt.
Weld and Mt. Picton. The summits
of these mountains stand nearly 4,000 ft.
above the river bed at this spot. From
the summits their flanks slope rapidly
in a tangle of boulders and forest to
the top of the canyon, which is I,oooft.
deep, a sheer wall cut in the mountains.
This is a barrier of the greatest difficulty
to passage up the Huon. It is virtually
impossible to follow along the edge of
the river except in very dry seasons,
but you can with difficulty push a way
over the top of the gorge.
THE LOWER REACHES.
Below the gorge the Huon gradually
quietens into the beautiful and tranquil
stream seen at Judbury. Before the
upper bridge is reached it receives its
two largest tributaries—the Weld from
the north and the Picton from the south,
as well as many smaller feeders. Even
without the main stream, the Weld and
Picton would be considered noble rivers.
The Weld rises under Mt. Mueller west
of Tyenna, and drains a wide valley
bounded by Mt. Anne and Mt. Weld on
the west and the Jubilee Range and
Snowy Mountains on the east. The
Picton rises on the south coast, not far
from Prion Bay, and drains the country
bounded by Mt. Picton on the west and
La Perouse, Adamson’s Peak, and the
Hartz Mountains on the east. Both
valleys are clothed with untouched
forests of enormous eucalypts with
dense undergrowth of horizontal, beech,
laurel, and ferns. The rivers flow in
long deep reaches between rapids, and in
their brown waters the feathery beech
trees, eucriphia with its never-failing
and sweet-scented white blossoms, and
gigantic tree ferns are ever shown in re-
flections which defy the delimination of
the water’s edges. They are both min-
iature Gordons. May they ever be pre-
served in their native state. Both val-
leys contain considerable areas of good
land suitable for general farming, but it
is rather a question whether timber is
not the best crop.
GLORIOUS SCENERY.
The mountain ranges mentioned may
be grouped amongst the finest in Tas-
mania. The Mt. Wellington Plateau
runs westward for 30 miles and termin-
ates in the Snowy Mountains. These
are the next largest prominences seen
when looking westward from the Pin-
nacle. They are separated from the
main plateau by the valley of the Rus-
sell River, now being opened up by
settlement, and whence farms will at no
very far distant date link up with the
settlements behind Mt. Lloyd and Ux-
bridge at the head of the Styx River.
Mt. Anne is the pick of these. It con-
sists of a number of peaks, the highest
some 4,700 ft. above sea level, all con-
nected by spurs which runs out to the
Huon Plain on the west and the Weld
Valley on the east, and connect the
mountains to Mt. Wedge and Mt. Muel-
ler on the north and Mt. Weld on the
south. A number of deep lakes nestle
among these spurs, the principal, Lake
Judd, being over a mile long and very
deep. Cliffs I,oooft. sheer drop from
knife-edged ridges straight into the
waters of the lakes, and up the
crevasses of these grow the unique
deciduous beech which sheds a blaze
of sunlight colours over the brown-
red rock faces when it puts on its
splendid Autumn colours of bril-
liant red and yellow. Romantic
groves of King William pines and giant
grass trees are clustered round the
white sands of the lake margins. Mt.
Weld is a similar mountain although
rather a long narrow ridge than a
plateau. Mt. Picton, across the Huon
Gorge, is a wider plateau with long
spurs extending for five miles south-
west, and a high central peak crowned
with three sharp pinnacles. Mt. Weld,
from the north, shows a small V slit in
its summit and from the top of Mt. Field
West the highest central peak of Mt.
Picton shows through the V notch in
the summit of Mt. Weld, just as the
foresight of a rifle shows through the
backsight when a correct aim is taken.
PIONEER’S GRAPHIC PICTURE.
The following description from the
pen of the pioneer farmer and pros-
pector, H. Judd (“The Dark Lantern,”
“The Mercury,” Hobart, 1898) is well
worth repeating:—
“You pass on up the same river (the
Weld) until you come under the north-
ern end of the Weld Mountain, which is
very high and rugged, and here you
hear the sound of a distant waterfall.
The next object is Mt. Anne, which has
a pinnacle of rock, of many different
forms, around the mount. On the
southern side is a stream of water that
flows over a ledge of rock upon the top
of the mount and falls into space. So
very high is it the water is thrashed
SOURCE OF HUON RIVER AND MT. WEDGE FROM SLOPES OF MT. ANNE.
Mt. Wedge is the conical hill in the background.
into vapour before it can get to the
earth, and has the appearance of a floss
of silk floating about in the air by a
change of wind. In this way the forest
is watered by a vapour from it. At
the western end of Mt. Anne is a small
belt of low gum trees; then comes one
of the most enchanting sights that one
could wish to behold.
“This mountain has been burst open
by some great power in Nature, leaving
it with perpendicular walls of over
4,000 ft. high on three sides, and filled
up with a beautiful lake called Lake
Judd, discovered in 1880. This lake is
about one and a half miles long and half
a mile broad; perhaps it is larger, as I
had no means of measuring it. The
beauty here cannot be exaggerated.
The water reflects all the surrounding
beauty of these high walls, with their
rugged rocks and lovely spots of all
sorts of green and dead vegetation re-
flected in the water below, with the drop-
ping water from the snow above. When
I first found this lake I was on the top
of the mountain and came suddenly upon
the edge of the large vault below, which
made me tremble with fear, as I was in
snow at the time (December). Oppo-
site to this, westerly, is another opening
between two mountains where the sides
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


HUON RIVER (Continued),
of the hill are broken back and a minia-
ture lake in the centre. Further on the
inner part of the high mountain is
thrown back on every side, opening out
the bowels of the earth to view, with
hundreds of different strata of rock of
all sorts and thickness, one above the
other down to the slate formation. In
the centre of this great amphitheatre
with its ledges of rocks to sit upon is a
large lake in the centre . . . .”
MINERAL PROSPECTS.
The rocks which have contributed to
the mineral wealth of the West Coast
mining fields do not continue south of
Macquarie Harbour, but trend eastward,
and form an intermediate belt of country
between the still older rocks of the
Arthur and Frankland Ranges and Port
Davey to the west, and the more recent
coal-bearing strata under the Bit. Well-
ington Plateau and southern coastal
ranges. The mineral-bearing groups,
however, outcrop amongst the foothills
of the Jubilee Range, Mt. Anne, Bit.
Weld, and Mt. Picton southward to New
River. Gold has been found on the
southern slopes of Mt. Anne, and in the
wash of the Weld River. A track exist-
ed 40 years ago up the valley of the
Weld to a gold reward claim discovered
by an early member of the Judd family,
of Judbury. This track has now almost
disappeared, but the original corner peg
of Judd’s reward claim is still distin-
guishable. There are distinct possibili-
ties of useful mineral finds in this local-
ity.
The Snowy Blountains make, with the
Jubilee Range to the north, a distinct
group, although they are really part of
the Mt. Wellington Plateau, barely sep-
arated by the Russell Valley. The
highest portion of the Snowys is several
hundred feet higher than Mt. Welling-
ton, and enfolds a number of romantic,
pine-girt lakes, one of considerable size.
The Jubilee Range, just a little further
north, is a succession of small peaks of
shining pink quartzite, not essentially
different from the wild mountains
around Queenstown, and also a potential
mineral district. The group forms the
best example of Tasmanian alpine scen-
ery and is only 30 miles from the G.P.O.
at Hobart. Yet so little are these out-
standing mountains known that until re-
cently they were not even marked on
the map. From the summit of La
Perouse, 30 miles further south, the
Snowy Mountains stand out of the Pic-
ton-Weld Valley rift in the plateau
like the twin towers of Westminster
Abbey viewed from down Victoria St.
A TOURISTS’ PARADISE.
Finally, the coastal range of the
southern Huon holds its own with any
part of Tasmania as a holiday-maker’s
paradise. This range runs for 30 miles
south from the Huon Valley to South
Cape. It is really one range averaging
3,000 ft., and without a pass or break,
but three outstanding pinnacles rise an-
other I,oooft. above the general level and
have been given separate names. These
are the Hartz, Adamson’s Peak, and La
Perouse. From these peaks, which are
really each groups of peaks, sharp
prominent spurs run to the seashore of
D’Entrecasteaux Channel, and from the
water give the appearance of isolated
mountains to the three groups named as
above on the map.
Of all these parts, the Hartz is the
best known—and worthily so. Through
the pioneering efforts of the Geeves
family, this romantic playground has
long been easily accessible by a good
pack track from Geeveston. Clusters
of charming lakes, wide open plains
ablaze with waratahs, grass tree, and
other sub-alpine plants, and rough
mountain peaks provide all that the
rambler could ask for. From the top of
the mountains is a view westward across
the dense jungle of the Picton Valley to
Bit. Picton, and the end of the Arthur
Range with its bare flanks strewn with
ice-dropped blocks of pink quartzite as
large as a house, but resembling in the
distance flocks of grazing sheep.
Adamson’s Peak is the finest single
mountain in Tasmania when viewed
from Dover, but its limited summit
proved insufficient catchment for the
glaciers of the ice age to scoop out the
rock basins and build the retaining walls
that give us the mountain jewels wo call
lakes.
Directly facing the South Pole is La
Perouse, Tasmania’s commemoration of
Franco’s greatest hero navigator, and
most enthralling of mountain parklands.
Today the plateau is virtually unassail-
able, as no proper track leads through
the jungle thicket which clothes its
3,000 ft. escarpment, but when progress
leads to its opening by a road, is des-
tined to be the pick of scenic wonder-
lands within a day’s trip from Hobart.
La Perouse offers something unique in
mountain tops. It is capped by sand-
stone flags which make walking wonder-
fully attractive. In addition none of
the other attractions is missing.
The whole face of the range is scal-
loped by ice action into much the form
of the remnants of pastry from which
biscuits have been made. The heads of
each of these bites are encircled with a
ring of cliffs over I,oooft. high and quite
unscaleable. The summit of La Perouse
is a bare flat dome of sandstone from
which protrudes remarkably fine combs
of harder rock. Two large lakes nestle
amongst pine and beech forests to the
north and on the east of the summit are
two circular tarns plastered on to the
side of perpendicular cliffs for all the
world like swallow nests. Other
smaller lakes abound and nowhere can
a greater variety of wild 'flowers be
found, many peculiar to this range, in
all the world. Proudest amongst these
is the Tasmanian geum, a large four-
petalled white flower, often as big as a
man’s land. From the south of the
range rises Pindar’s Peak, 4,200 ft. high.
From here a marvellous panorama can
be seen. Just below is the long sandy
beach of Prion Bay at the mouth of the
New River, so close that the sound of
the breaking surf can be heard dis-
tinctly. Further south, Eddystone and
Pedra Branca to the south-east, and the
Mewstone to the south-west can be seen
distinctly. To the west there lies a
jumble of white mountain peaks, so
thick that it is almost incredible that
so many could be jumbled in between the
New River and Port Davey. In the
other direction can be seen the Picton
and Weld Valleys to Mt. Anne, and be-
yond and past the Hartz to Mt. Welling-
ton, with the whole range of wooded
hill and quiet bay, which is D’Entre-
casteaux Channel and Bruny beyond,
stretched as a colourful map at your
very feet.
Even if the mountain tops do not at-
tract, there is still all that the bush-
lover could desire along the coastal
fringe. Southward from the Lune
River is country as typically Tasmanian
as any on the West Coast. Here the
ancient glaciers came down to sea level
and orchid and iris speckled button-
grass plains can be crossed by motor
road in a daily service car. Recherche,
with its three outposts of civilisation,
Leprena, Catamaran, and Cockle Creek,
is the southernmost settlement of the
Commonwealth of Australia. is
a coal-mining country with a West Coast
flora. Waratah and laurel, leatherwood
and horizontal grow in an impenetrable
jungle almost to the water’s edge. Any-
one who desires a thrill may be advised
to attempt the passage of the number-
less decaying bridges and elevated
tracks of now abandoned timber mills,
sprawling over tangles of tall cutting
grass. To the south of Recherche a
swampy pass—Cockle Creek Plain—
gives easy access to South Cape Bay,
fringed with a mile of sand dunes which
blaze in December with gold and red
blandfordia in unbelievable profusion,
and in the hollows of which horizontal
and laurel thickets abound.
Even in this extremity of Tasmania
spots of interest abound. The work-
ings of the Catamaran colliery are sit-
uated here and older workings abound.
Dr. Milligan, writing in 1849, describes
the then long abandoned tunnels and
shafts of the Southport Coal Company
on the coast of South Cape Bay. This
tunnel is still to be seen, and alongside
are the ruins of the stone houses which
were provided for the men who toiled
here a hundred years ago. On Sulli-
van’s Point at the northern entrance to
Recherche are the remains of an old bay
whaling station, with a deep well, sur-
rounded by perfectly masoned stone and
providing the only fresh water for miles.
I have seen the beaches of Recherche
pink with euphorsia, the food of the
whales. Out in the Channel are the
grim cruel rocks which caused disaster
to many fine ships and the loss of hun-
dreds of lives. The George 111., with
its sad tomb monument north of South-
port Lagoon, and the Acteons are the
ones with the most evil repute. And
right to the south is Bare Hill, overlook-
ing Whale Head and South-East Cape.
Here, during the “Russian Scare” of the
’Bo’s a lookout station was established
with poles to carry the then new inven-
tion, an “electric telegraph” line, to Ho-
bart.
From Cockle Creek the south coast
track winds along Tasmania’s wildest
seaboard towards Port Davey. It
skirts South Cape Bay, as wild a piece
of coast as could well be found, quite
impossible as an anchorage, with cruel
rocks and submerged reefs running miles
out into the always surging sea. Then
the track rises over South Cape—a veri-
table mountain projecting some miles
into the southern ocean and opposing a
sheer bluff 2,000 ft. high to the wind and
sea which has known no break since it
left the Antarctic Continent. The
track then descends, and after crossing
innumerable streams passes Rocky Boat
Harbour, a dangerous opening between
two rocks, and reaches New River. This
river, flowing southward between two
ranges 4,000 ft. high, empties into a
beautiful lagoon some three miles wide
and protected from the Southern Ocean
by a long sandspit passing seawards to
one of the finest beaches along our
coasts. To the east Precipitous Bluff
towers 4,000 ft., almost a sheer wall of
forest-covered brown rock with lime-
stone caves at the base, and to the west
Iron Bound Bluff rises, again 4,000 ft.
out of the ocean, with so sheer a face
that it carries no vegetation and is im-
passable across its seaward face. Some
15 miles above its mouth, the New
River thunders over the finest waterfall
Tasmania possesses, several hundred
feet high and with a fine volume of
brown water.
This, then, is the Huon. Land of
apple blossom? Yes, most certainly,
but that is not all. Land of wild ro-
mance rather. Just Nature’s play-
ground for those of her children who like
to contend with her. First she shows
the prize she holds for those who strive
and then she offers the promise of fur-
ther prizes beyond. Prizes sufficient
for the generations to come, and yet
fully ample to reserve for all time the
greatest of her gifts for those few for-
tunate men who have learnt to value her
largesse and to her unadorned.
ONE OF THE HUON'S ODDITIES.
“WHO STOPPED THE CLOCK.”
Among the many odd characters that
were well known in the Huon in former
days, was one who answered to either
of two nicknames—“Who (Stopped the
Clock,” or “Pull Me out.” He was a
quaint character, with more than usual
shrewdness, which he shrouded with
amusing mannerisms that afforded much
amusement to his acquaintances. He
seemed rather proud of the fact that for
a time he was a guest at Port Arthur,
explaining this by the circumstance
that he had been given a free passage
to Van Diemen’s Land for having helped
himself as a lad to some cherries tnat
were growing in a doctor’s garden, and
that he had neglected to obtain permis-
sion to do the picking. Previous to this,
however, he had gained some notoriety
as the tool of a gang of burglars. Being
of diminutive stature, and capable of
quick movements, he was adopted by the
gang as their chief assistant. One night
he was sent up a ladder to enter the
window of a house. The window was
carefully opened by the master burglar,
and the recruit was thrust through to
gather what he could and deliver at the
window. He had secured a fairly good
swag when the alarm was signalled that
someone was coming. The gang got away
as quickly as they could, and left the
youngster to face the music. The only
hiding place in the room appeared to
be a “grandfather” clock. He opened
this quickly, stepped inside and shut
the door. His ruse had apparently
succeeded, as the owner of the place,
after looking around and seeing no one
about was turned to go away when he
noticed that the clock had stopped. He
walked across the room, opened the door
of the clock to start the pendulum again,
and was surprised to find the lad
crouched in the bottom of the clock,
giving the pendulum no room to swing.
He never explained what punishment, if
any, he got for this, but when acquaint-
ances in the Huon got to hear about
it he was promptly named “Who Stopped
the Clock.”
He could never settle down to follow
any avocation for any length of time
without a change of scene, so he decided
one day to leave Port Arthur without
saying farewell or leaving his future
address. He stated that his escape was
made via the narrow neck of land that
was guarded by dogs, but his fleetness
of foot got him safely through. After
wandering about the country for a time
he came to the Huon and decided to
reside half way between Franklin and
Huonville. He now did most of his
travelling, as did most of the other
residents of the district at the time, by
boat, and on one occasion his craft ran
aground on the mud between Franklin
and Woodstock. He was stranded all
night, but kept up such a pitiful appeal
of “Pull me out” that this phrase was
substituted by many for his original
sobriquet.
“Who Stopped the Clock” had no less
than five ventures in matrimony, four
of his wives predeceasing him. He did
not appear to be greatly distressed as
the result of his many bereavements, and
lost no time after the death of a partner
to seek another. On the last occasion
it was related that he offered a com-
mission of 2/6 to the crew of one of
the sailing vessels that traded in the
Huon if they could secure a fifth wife
for him. So on Christmas Day,
1894, “Who Stopped the Clock” was seen
waiting on the wharf at Franklin for
his new bride. He was spruced up for
the occasion in a black suit and tall
black silk hat. As the vessel hove to
it was noticed that there was only one
female on board, an elderly woman.
The bridegroom-elect immediately con-
cluded that this must be his fifth, so
he presened himself with the curt com-
mand “Come along,” and picking up her
luggage went ahead on foot, and was
obediently followed by the newcomer.
As the pair proceeded along the Main
road they were followed by a crowd
of children, who amused themselves by
shouting first one and then the other
nickname and making off as quickly as
possible.
“Who Stopped the Clock” was a gener-
ally handy man, but devoted himself
chiefly to shoemaking and fishing. He
was well educated, and had a wonderful
capacity to memorise verse or prose.
One of his specialties was the Scrip-
tures, of which he could recite chapter
after chapter. This, he explained, was
one of the tasks imposed on him when
he was a guest at Port Arthur, and he
rather enjoyed the exercise.
Huon Nomenclature.
NAMES THAT LINK THE PAST
AND PRESENT.
The story of the development of the
Huon district forms one of the outstand-
ing passages in the history of Tasmania.
Now that the district has attained its
centenary an effort should be made to
save the relics and records of the pioneers,
which so fittingly record the events of
other days. In the Huon there are many
notable landmarks, but in its nomencla-
ture the Huon is linked with the pioneers.
The district was so called after Capt.
Huon de Kermandec, a French explorer,
who was the second in command of the
expedition under Rear-Admiral Bruny
D’Entrecasteaux, which visited the Huon
River and surrounding bays in 1792, re-
turning on a further visit of inspection in
17t : 3. The name also survives in Huon
Island, which lies near the entrance to
the Huon River, and which was discovered
by M. de Cretin, an officer of D’Entrecas-
teaux’s expedition, on May 2, 1792. The
year 1792 saw the discovery of the Huon
River, which was first charted by Rear-
Admiral Bruny D’Entrecasteaux, who
gave it the name which it still bears in
honour of Capt. Huon de Kermandec.
The township of Huonville, formerly
known as Victoria, which is 23 miles
from Hobart, forms yet another memorial
to the memory of the French navigator,
Kermandec. The Huon River was sub-
sequently visited by Captain, afterwards
Commodore, Sir John Hayes, who named
it Adamson’s Harbour, but that bestowed
by the French, however, survived.
Many place names in the Huon recall
the visit of D’Entrecasteaux, the most
important of which is perhaps that of the
Channel, which was discovered by the
French expedition on April 20, 1792, and
named in honour of the leader, Rear-
Admiral Bruny D’Entrecasteaux. The lat-
ter’s Christian name remains in Bruny
Island, discovered by Abel Jans Tasman,
in 1642, and named by the French in 1792.
Not only is Capt. Huon de Kermandec’s
memory preserved in the naming of the
Huon, but Kermandie and the Kermandie
River derive their name from that of the
French explorer.
Hope Island, near Port Esperance,
forms yet another link with the past.
It was discovered by M. de la Janice,
an officer of D’Entrecasteaux’s ship, the
Esperance, on May 20, 1792, and it was
named Lahaye by the French Com-
mander, in honour of a famous botanist
of his country, but it subsequently re-
ceived the more appropriate name, which
it now bears.
Port Esperance and Recherche and
Recherche Bay received their names from
the French ships, the Esperance and
Recherche, belonging to D’Entrecas-
teaux’s expedition.
Port Cygnet was discovered by D’En-
trecasteaux and was called Port de Cygne,
owing to the large number of swans seen
in the bay; the name eventually became
Cygnet. For a time the township was
spoken of as Lovett, being so called, it
is thought, after the ex-auditor-general.
FIRST SETTLEMENT.
Southport, which was the site of the
first known settlement of any kind in the
Huon, was originally called the Baie de
Moules by the French, and Mussel Bay
by the English explorers, Southport
Lagoon being known as Ormiers Cove,
but the origin of the present name is not
known.
Agnes Rivulet was discovered by the
French expedition under Commodore
Nicholas Baudin, in 1802, and was named
Fleurieu River, but received its present
name from the Surveyor-General, James
Sprent, in 1858.
Castle Forbes Bay and Hospital Bay
both received their names from the visit
to the river in 1836 or 1837 of the ship,
Castle Forbes, Hospital Bay being so
called because of the fact that the ship
anchored there owing to sickness on
board and tents were erected on shore
for the patients.
Gourlay’s Point was so called after the
original owner, Capt. J. Gourlay.
Shipwright’s Point appears to have
been named through the industry which
prevailed there 70 or 80 years ago, for
the Huon has always been spoken of
for its shipbuilding.
Geeveston, formerly Lightwood Bottom,
and subsequently Geeves Town, was so
called in honour of its founder, Mr. Wil-
liam Geeves.
Raminea probably was called after the
native name of Port Esperance, Raminea.
Franklin, of course, was named in hon-
our of Lady Jane Franklin, the wife of
Sir John Franklin, who became the
Governor of Tasmania in 1837.
Gordon was formerly known as Three
Hut Point.
Petchey’s Bay was so called after Mr.
William Petchey, an early pioneer.
Longley was originally known as Leslie,
and Huonville was called Victoria. So it
will be seen that in its nomenclature the
Huon has many associations with the
past.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


THE HUON
The portion of Southern Tasmania
now known as the Huon Municipality,
was, prior to 1908, divided into three
districts, and was under th'e control of
three Road Trusts each working inde-
pendently of one another. These were
known as Victoria, Upper Huon, and
Franklin. Fruit Boards and School
Boards of Advice were also functioned
separately.
Police Court work was conducted by
the State with its own officials. The
introduction of Local Government ab-
sorbed all the functions of these var-
ious bodies with added authority in res-
pect of the administration of the Public
Health Act, Foods and Drugs Act,
Places of Public Entertainment Act, the
Dog Act, and Weights and Measures
Act.
The first meeting of the Huon Muni-
cipal Council was held at the Court-
house, Huonville, in April, 1908, and was
late Mr. Courtney Frankcomb, Mr.
Daniel Edward Ryan, for seven terms,
the late William Page, one term, the pre-
sent treasurer, Mr. John Upchurch, for
three terms, Mr. V. J. Skinner, one term,
and then Mr. George C. Frankcomb, who
has retained the position for nine years.
The first Council Clerk was Mr. Wal-
ter Rust, who held office till 1913, when
he resigned to take a similar position at
Oatlands. Mr. C. V. Davey, who was
then assistant clerk at Devonport, was
appointed in his stead, and has filled the
position for the past 23 years.
The area of the municipality is 196,000
acres. The annual rateable value is
£39,325, and the population (1933 cen-
sus). 5,037. The revenue in 1909,
£3,000; 1935, £8,400.
The chief towns are Huonville and
Franklin, situated on the main highway.
Other smaller towns comprise Castle
Forbes Bay, Glen Huon, Ranelagh, Jud-
business at Huonville. Arrangements
were also made to close down the pub-
lic hall that had served for local enter-
tainments and public meetings at Huon-
ville, and to include a Town Hall in the
new set of buildings. The foundation
stone was laid by Sir John Evans,
C.M.G., on July 19, 1929, and the hall
was officially opened in the following
December. The total cost of the build-
ings was £6,000, and they are among the
best of their kind in the State.
The next Town Hall built in the Huon
Municipality was at Glen Huon, where
in 1932 the residents erected a splendid
hall capable of seating 500 persons at a
cost of £l,OOO.
Other district halls are the Ranelagh
Soldiers’ Memorial Hall, a handsome
brick building that cost £1,300; the
Church of England Parish Hall at Crab-
tree, and public halls at Judbury and
Braeside.
RECREATION GROUNDS.
Splendid recreation grounds have been
provided at Franklin and Huonville, each
being provided with grandstands, dress-
ing-rooms, and other improvements.
The Franklin ground was provided by a
local committee, which, by voluntary
effort, put improvements on the ground
to the value of about £1,500. The pro-
perty is entirely free of debt. The
Huonville ground comprises 12 acres
and was purchased from the late Wm.
Walton in November, 1926. The
ground and improvements cost about the
same as the Franklin ground, but por-
tion of the cost was provided by a 20
years' loan of £1,200.
WATER SUPPLIES.
The first town water supply in the
municipality was provided at Franklin,
in 1933, at a cost of £5,100. The source
of supply is Fleurty Rivulet, a mountain
stream so close to the township that
only two miles of mains were required
to provide the necessary service for all
the residents living along the Main
Road, and for a short distance up the by-
roads. The pressure was so great that
a break-down tank had to be provided,
and even now a pressure of over 1001 b.
to the square inch is provided at the
extreme end of the service. The rate
is only 9d. in the £, with a minimum of
30s. per household.
A larger scheme, costing £15,000, is
in course of construction to supply Rane-
lagh and Huonville with water. The
source of this supply is Rocky Creek, at
Crabtree, and is ideal for the purposes
required, the water being the purest and
the pressure much greater than can be
got in any of the capital cities of the
Commonwealth. The charges will be
approximately the same as for the
Franklin scheme.
Other water supplies are to be pro-
vided for the ratepayers at Judbury,
Swamp Road, and Castle Forbes. A
number of ratepayers in the Mountain
River district have had a supply instal-
led at approximately the same rate as
the other schemes in the Huon Munici-
pality. The Huon Council therefore
have five water schemes under their
control, the total capital outlay being
over £24,000.
LIGHT AND POWER.
The first lighting scheme undertaken
by the Huon Municipal Council was at
Franklin, in 1916. This was a small
hydro-electric plant driven by water
power in Price’s Creek. The scheme
was designed by Mr. G. H. Crofts, but
the demand for current became greater
than the water available was capable of
providing in Summer time, and as other
portions of the municipality were clam-
ouring for electric light and power, the
Council accepted a proposal from the
Hydro-Electric Department to provide a
block of power, which would absorb the
Franklin scheme and provide current
for Huonville, Castle Forbes, Glen Huon,
and Mountain River. In 1926 the Coun-
cil floated a loan of £7,500 for this pur-
pose. The undertaking proved satis-
factory to both the Council and the de-
partment, and the power lines were
gradually extended to reach such dis-
tant parts of the municipality as Crab-
tree, Lucaston, and Judbury. In 1929
the Council accepted a further proposal
of the Hydro-Electric Commission to
hand over the control of the sale of
electric current, together with all their
assets and liabilities in connection with
the scheme, and since then this service
has been entirely managed by the
Hydro-Electric Commission.
BRIDGES.
In 1926 the bridge across the Huon
River at Huonville was deemed to have
reached the stage at which it was liable
to collapse, and the Government decided
to erect a new one alongside it. The
first bridge had served duty for just 50
years, when the present one was ready
for use. The latter cost about £12,000
—more than double the price of its pre-
decessor.
In 1922 a second bridge was erected
over the Huon at Judbury at a cost of
£6,000. This has proved a great ad-
vantage in linking the Glen Huon and
Judbury districts, as there is much in
common in the activities of the settlers
in these districts. The bridge also pro-
vides one of the finest “round the river”
tourist drives in the Huon.
RECLAMATION WORK.
The biggest Government work car-
ried out in the Huon was the reclama-
tion of 23 acres along the frontage of
the township of Franklin. Silt from
the river bed was pumped on this area
and held by sheath piling. It made a
valuable addition to the township area.
The cost of the work was approximately
£30,000.
ROADS.
Reference has been made in another
section of this issue to the difficulties
that were encountered in making the
first roads. The metal roads were a
great improvement on the original bush
tracks, but now there is a bitumen road
from Hobart to Geeveston for the main
traffic. This road cost upwards of
£2,000 per mile. Exclusive of this and
the Federal roads grants the amount of
money spent on the by-roads of the
Huon Municipality between 1908 and
1936 totals nearly £60,000.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Work of the Municipal Councils
Creditable Achievements in Civic Progress
IN no part of the State have public spirited men shown more
* enterprise and business ability in the promotion of public
works, and the oversight of the various activities made possible
under the provisions of the Roads Trust Act, and later of the Local
Government Act, 1907, than those of the southern municipalities.
The evidence of this is the splendid public halls, electric light and
power services, water schemes, recreation grounds, and other public
utilities that have been provided all at an economic cost.
composed of the following:—Messrs. W.
J. Thomas, W. F. Casey, and D. E. Ryan,
Franklin Ward; W. Heron, V. J. Skin-
ner, and G. A. Griggs, Upper Huon
Ward; W. Page, A. Griffiths, and W.
Walton, Woodstock Ward; John Up-
church, W. Talbot, and C. G. Frank-
comb, Victoria Ward. The first War-
den was the late W. J. Thomas, then
followed in order Mr. W. F. Casey, the
bury, Grove, and Crabtree. It is the
largest fruit-producing municipality in
the State, and has the distinction of be-
ing the first district in the Common-
wealth to plant commercial apple or-
chards and to export apples overseas.
EXTENSIVE UNDERTAKINGS.
The remarkable progress made by the
Huon Municipality, especially during
the past two decades, is shown by the
number of useful public works which
the Council undertook on behalf of the
ratepayers, the annual payments for all
of which have been promptly made
without recourse to any increase in the
original commitments, and ample pro-
vision made for maintenance, repairs,
and depreciation.
On December 21, 1911, the foundation
stone of the Huon Town Hall was laid
by the then Warden, Mr. D. E. Ryan,
and the building was completed a few
months later at a cost of £2,500. In
1913 a public hall was erected at Castle
Forbes at a cost of £6OO, and in 1922
the existing hall at Mountain River,
which had been erected by a local com-
mittee, was handed over to the Huon
Council free of debt. Later additions
were made to this building at a cost of
£3OO.
In 1929 the Council decided to provide
up-to-date accommodation for their offi-
cials and for the transaction of court
BIRTH OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
Governor Arthur (1824-36) divided
Tasmania into police districts in 1827.
Fenton in his history of Tasmania says:
“The island was divided into districts,
to each of which were appointed a
stipendiary justice and police clerk, an
efficient police staff, a salaried surgeon,
a small detachment of soldiers, and that
necessary appendage, a fiagellator.
These establishments proved exceed-
ingly efficient for the maintenance of
law and order in the outlying parts of
the colony, and above all for the sum-
mary trial and punishment of assigned
servants.”
As the country became more settled
landowners, who played an important
pai't as Justices of the Peace and assist-
ed police magistrates (Mr. Richard Hill
was the first J.P. in the Geeveston area),
grew more powerful. Shortly after the
granting of responsible government a
system of local government began to be
introduced. The settled districts were
divided into municipalities. The prin-
cipal duty of the local governing bodies
at first was the management of the
police courts. Ratepayers elected a
Council which appointed a Warden and
Clerk. This system continued until the
police were centralised in 1899. It may
be noted that the headquarters of all the
midland districts have retained their
Council Chambers and are still looked
upon as the capitals of rural municipali-
ties. This did not happen in the Huon.
which developed later. Outside the
then settled districts there were others
gradually growing in importance, dis-
tricts accessible by water such as Cir-
cular Head, Devon, Ringarooma, and, in
the South, all those south of Hobart, in-
cluding Bruny, Huon, Kingborough, Cyg-
net, and Esperance.
So Tasmania had a hybrid system of
local government until 1907, when the
Local Government Act came into force.
It was early realised that police district
management required amplifying as
roads were an absolute necessity. Road
districts were formed within the police
districts, and of these road districts Port
Cygnet (1858) was one of the earliest in
the State. The members of these road
trusts faced a formidable task. They
had first of all to find out how to make
roads in the peculiar conditions of cli-
mate and soil in their localities. The
experience brought from England and
utilised in the construction of the Main
Road, was found to be of little use in
making the country roads in Tasmania.
SLAB ROADS.
The pioneers of Cygnet are credited
with making history when they con-
structed a road of split slabs. The road
trustees found that their limited funds
would not run to the construction of
roads on the English model. The solu-
tion was found when in 1877 Mr. James
Fincham, who came to Tasmania during
the building of the Main Line Railway,
and was later appointed Engineer-in-
Chief, designed the narrow roads and
the truss bridges.
The early road trusts in the Huon had
nothing to do with police activities, their
functions being entirely confined to the
making of roads. They were encour-
aged by the Government, which made
money available under engineers to do
the difficult work of bridge building un-
til 1907, when the Local Government
Act swept them all away.
TO THE PEOPLE OF THE HUON
Govermnent House,
Hobart, Tasmania.
As I travel through Tasmania—and I think I have now
done this from end to end—l am not only conscious of its
beauty, which is apparent to every visitor, but am reminded
of the enterprise and determination which enabled the earlier
settlers in this country to make of it a State worthy of the
race from which they sprang. This was accomplished in the
face of many difficulties, not the least being the unsuitability,
as founders of a State, of some of those tvho ivere sent to this
country. But among the emigrants there was a considerable
leaven of men and women who possessed all those qualities
of courage, of endurance and hard work, which have spread
the British Empire over such a large part of the Globe.
In no part of Tasmania are the results achieved by that
heroic band more evident than in what is known as the Huon,
a district where forest has been cleared, where homes have
been built, and tvhere, in the course of 100 years, a beautiful
rural district has been created, carrying more families in
proportion to its size than any rural area in Australia.
The Huon is an example of how mistaken one may be
in one’s first judgment, for over a century ago a surveyor
and geologist were sent from Hobart to the Huon to report
on the suitability of the district for settlement. Their report
teas most unfavourable; it is said that the land ivas poor, and
that there was no adequate supply of fresh water; but in spite
of that report, and encouraged as they were by that great
Governor whose Centenary will be commemorated early next
year, and by his talented consort, settlers came into the dis-
trict, and conquered it. Now, on areas from 10 to 15 acres in
extent, families are kept in comparative comfort, whereas in
other parts of the Commonwealth, many times that area
is necessary to keep a family in comparable circumstances.
As the people of the Huon look at their smiling orchards,
they should pause to think of how much has been done in their
midst to render nature subservient to man’s needs, and they
should be encouraged to devote to their main industry that
energy, that skill, and that discrimination which ivere
displayed by their forefathers with such beneficial results
to them and their successors.
E. CLARK.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


PORT CYGNET
FIRST ROAD TRUST.
Prior to the institution of Municipal
Government in its present form in 1908,
the different parts of the district were
under the control of a number of road
trusts, main road boards, and local com-
mittees, each working independently of
one another with little co-ordination of
effort and policy. Two road trusts and
a main road board controlled the roads
in what is now the present municipality.
These were the Port Cygnet Road Trust,
the Welsh Road Trust, and the Port
Cygnet Main Road Board. In addition,
health committees and boards of advice
were operating in their respective
spheres.
The Port Cygnet Road Trust first
functioned in 1864. The first trustees,
who were elected at a public meeting of
landholders at the Bush Inn on January
30, 1864, were: James Garth, James
Henry Walter, Matthew Fitzpatrick,
John Thorpe sen., Andrew Reily, James
Halton, and Daniel O’Rourke, with Mr.
J. H. Walter as the first Chairman, and
Mr. James Halton, treasurer. The first
collector appointed was Frederick
Glover, and the first road rate levied
was Is. in the £. The early road trusts
worked under the authority of “The
Cross and Bye Roads Act,” 29 Vic-
toria No. 21.
On January 20, 1908, Mr. Albert Bing-
ham was appointed as first Council
Clerk.
GORDON WARD SEVERED.
The bringing together of the different
road trust districts and the health,
board of advice, and other local commit-
tees under the control of- one body, was
soon shown to be of great advantage to
the district. The Council was vested
with much more authority than the var-
ious committees and trusts had been, and
it launched out with projects to improve
local conditions. It was soon found,
however, that little sympathy existed
between the ratepayers of the Gordon
Ward and the rest of the municipality,
and at the May meeting of the Council,
1909, a resolution was carried that the
Minister be asked to separate the Gordon
Ward and that part of the Welsh Ward
formerly controlled by the Margate
Road Trust, from the municipality. At
the April meeting, 1911, notification was
received from the Minister for Lands
that the Government had decided to
transfer the Gordon Ward to the King-
borough Municipality.
COUNCIL PROGRESSIVE.
The need for a Town Hall was also
brought forward in the Council’s first
year of office. At the August meeting
Councillor Davies moved that the Coun-
cil take the necessary steps to borrow
After having the question of a water
supply thoroughly investigated it was
resolved to borrow £4,500 to provide
the supply. A poll of electors within
the area was taken on November 20,
1913, which voted solidly in favour, only
two votes being cast in opposition. It
was considered feasible to establish a
hydro-electric lighting scheme in con-
junction with a water scheme, and a poll
of ratepayers within the lighting area
on this question was taken on the same
day as the water poll. Again the poll
was favourable and the Council pro-
ceeded with both schemes. Parliament
authorised the Council to borrow the
necessary money on September 3, 1914,
and work began.
The first steps taken by the Council
was to obtain complete control of the
whole of the water catchment area, com-
prising over 1,700 acres of land. Of
this area 1,000 acres was obtained from
the Crown, and 709 acres purchased
from various owners. A reservoir
holding 280,000 gallons was constructed
four miles from the town, and the supply
connected to the town by 4in. mains.
In recent years (1933) a second reser-
voir was constructed giving an addi-
tional storage capacity of 600,000 gal-
lons. The town now has a total stor-
age of close on one million gallons of
water. The supply was available to
ratepayers about the end of 1915.
pushing the department, and in 1921 a
promise to supply had again been ob-
tained, at a minimum payment by the
Council to the department of £l,BOO per
annum. On June 27, 1922, a depart-
mental report on a supply to the Huon
was made to the Minister for Works,
and it is interesting to note at this
date, remembering the State-wide de-
velopment of the Hydro-Electric De-
partment during the last 10 years, that
“the department considered that a ser-
vice into the country could not be re-
commended as a profitable one to the
State, nor one likely to lead to increased
development in the district.”
In spite of all opposition the Cygnet
Council fought its way through, and
eventually won. A supply from the
hydro-electric power mains was switched
on to Cygnet consumers on February
24, 1924, Cygnet thus becoming the first
municipality in Tasmania to take a bulk
supply of power from the State, for re-
tail to local consumers. Three-fourths
of the people in the municipality now
have the electric light and power in
their homes.
NEW DEEP WATER PIER.
On July 7, 1927, a move was made to
have a new deep water pier constructed
at Lymington Point, Warden Davies
moving that the Government obtain a
report on the cost. The Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Public Works
WELSH ROAD TRUST.
Welsh was proclaimed a road district
on March 22, 1895, under section 29 of
the Roads Act, 1884, the first trustees
being elected at a public meeting of
landholders held in the Gardner’s Bay
State School, on April 6, 1895. Those
elected were: J. W. Beamish, J. K. Clark,
H. W. Cockerill, Walter Merchant, and
Albert Merchant. The first meeting
was held at Mr. John Nicholl’s house on
April 13, 1895, when H. W. Cockerill
was elected Chairman, and J. K. Clark
treasurer. The Welsh Road Trust
also levied Is. road rate. An inter-
esting act of this trust at its first meet-
ing was to make a request to the Gov-
ernment to declare the Nicholls Rivulet
Road a Main Road, “as this road is the
nearest and most level route to Hobart,
and, we believe, will be the coach road
to the capital.” The present Council
is still trying to persuade the Govern-
ment to the same end.
MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT
INSTITUTED.
These road trusts continued to oper-
ate until they were displaced by the
present foi - m of Local Government,
which came into being under the auth-
ority of the Local Government Act,
1908. Under the authority of Section
10 of 6 Edward VII. 31, a commission
was appointed by the Governor, Sir
Gerald Strickland, to divide the State
into districts, and the districts into
wards; the wards of a district to be as
nearly as possible of an equal rateable
value. These districts became the pre-
sent municipalities. The Port Cygnet
Municipality then ' consisted of all the
territory south of a line between the
northern portion of the Huon district
and D’Entrecasteaux Channel, from the
Huon River to Great Oyster Cove. It
consisted of four wards—the Gordon
Ward with an annual value of £3,000;
Welsh Ward, annual value £3,000; Lovett
Ward, annual value £3,763; and Cradoc
Ward, annual value £3,763.
THE FIRST COUNCIL.
The first council meeting was hold
on January 6, 1908. The first Coun-
cillors were: —Matthew Fitzpatrick,
Thomas Mills, Arthur Davies, Robert
Harvey, Eli Baldwin, Charles Markham,
A. McDowell, William Baldwin, J. S.
Robertson, J. Bradley, William T. Har-
ris, and A. P. Devereux. At that meet-
ing Matthew Fitzpatrick was elected the
first Warden of the municipality, and
Mr. Arthur Davies the first treasurer.
TOWNSHIP OF CYGNET. 1933. J. Breaden.
£2,000 for that purpose. It was not
until four years later, however, on De-
cember 17, 1912, that authority was
given by Parliament for the Council to
proceed with this work. The founda-
tion stone was laid by Warden Arthur
Davies on August 7, 1913, and the hall
opened for use at the end of that year.
Prior to the erection of the Cygnet
Town Hall the Council had induced the
Government to erect a new court house
and offices on land jointly purchased by
the Government and Council. The
agreement for the joint purchase was
reached in June, 1910. The new court
house was erected, and the keys handed
to the Council on March 7, 1912.
CRADOC HALL BUILT.
Following closely upon the decision to
build the Town Hall at Cygnet, the ques-
tion of building a Public Hall at Cradoc
was brought forward, and on December
24, 1913, a bill authorising the Council
to borrow £5OO for that purpose was
passed by Parliament. The foundation
stone was laid by Warden Arthur Davies
on June 17, 1914, and the hall was
opened for use at the end of the year.
WATER SUPPLY AND ELECTRIC
LIGHT.
At this time the Council was also
pushing ahead with the establishment
of permanent water and electric light-
ing supplies for the town of Cygnet.
FIRST MUNICIPAL COUNCIL, PORT CYGNET, JANUARY, 1908.
Back Row: A. P. DEVEREUX, W. T. HARRIS. ELI BALDWIN, ROBERT HARVEY,
Wm. BALDWIN, J. S. ROBERTSON, Dr. B. THOMAS (Health Officer). Front Row:
J. BRADLEY, C. MARKHAM, THOS. MILLS, M. FITZPATRICK (Warden),
ARTHUR DAVIES (Treasurer), A. McDOWELL, A. BINGHAM (Council Clerk).
LOVETT WARD: Robert Harvey, T. Mills. Eli Baldwin. CRADOC WARD: C.
Markham, M. Fitzpatrick, Arthur Davies. WELSH WARD: A. P. Devereux, W. T.
Harris, J. Bradley. GORDON WARD: W. Baldwin, J. S. Robertson, A. McDowell.
Further investigation proved that an
electric lighting scheme could not be
run in conjunction with the water
supply, so a separate scheme was in-
stalled with a diesel engine to work the
generators. Electric light was avail-
able to consumers in October, 1915.
NAME CHANGED LOVETT TO
CYGNET.
On May 6, 1915, following representa-
tions from the Council over a period of
three years, and despite serious opposi-
tion from the Postal Department, the
name of the town, Lovett, was changed
to Cygnet, by proclamation.
HYDRO-ELECTRIC SUPPLY
WANTED.
After the inauguration of the water
and electric light, but chiefly because
of the war, little more was done for a
few years. The lighting scheme was
not very successful, and in 1917 the
Council began negotiations with the
State Hydro-Electric Department to
supply the municipality with power.
The then general manager (Mr. J. H.
Butters) offered to supply 100 K.V.A.
at £lO per K.V.A., in a letter dated July,
25, 1917, The Council accepted this
offer. Mr. Butters then replied that
ho was reluctantly compelled to the de-
cision that the department could not
undertake the work. The Council kept
reported favourably on building a pier
to cost £9,000, capable of expansion to
accommodate overseas ships when neces-
sary. Parliament voted the neces-
sary money on December 16, 1929, but
it was not until 1934 that the Council
could induce the Government to proceed
with the work. The pier was opened
by the State Treasurer (Mr. E. Dwyer-
Gray) on May 20, 1936.
IMPROVEMENTS TOWN HALL.
On the representation of the Council
the Government effected a big improve-
ment to the court house buildings in
1932. A second story was erected,
which is let to the Council as a social
hall and supper room, and is used in
conjunction with the Town Hall. This
was a much needed addition to the pub-
lic utilities of the district.
On March 1, 1934, the Council came
to a unanimous decision to hand over
control of the electric lighting and
power supply to the Hydro-Electric
Commission. The terms agreed to
were that the Commission took over all
the Council’s liabilities as well as assets
on lighting account, and the Council
guaranteeing to the Commission an an-
nual payment of £324 out of municipal
funds, for which the Commission would
supply and maintain a stated number of
street lights if desired.
SUCCESSIVE WARDENS.
The first Warden elected to preside
over the first Council was, as has al-
ready been stated, Mr. Matthew Fitz-
patrick. He retained the position until
the May meeting, 1912, a period of
slightly over four years. Mr. Arthur
Davies, who had acted as Deputy War-
den through part of the previous year,
was then elected to the position. He
held the office continuously until Feb-
ruary, 1918, a period of six years, when
he resigned owing to taking up an ap-
pointment in Sydney.
The next Warden to be elected was
Mr. Robert Harvey, who held office for
the balance of the municipal year, a
period of three months.
On May 2, 1918, Mr. C. Markham was
elected Warden, holding the position for
one year.
On May 1, 1919, Mr. Robert Harvey
was again elected Warden and held the
position for three years. The next
Warden elected, on May 4, 1922, was Mr.
P. W. Harrison, of Cygnet, who held
the office for two years. Then follow-
ed Mr. Edgar Norris, who was elected
Continued further on.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


■ST
m
%
"v.
■>*>
say-MM-y-y.;'
•WSS.
i#
*
¥
«
\ \
Ho
n
KE
v 3
£»
6
e-
W ■
*»»f,' -• +*‘' <• ,
■\ ■ - *r - , ,
*>/ ;-,* - |-' & ?' ! , \
/’ f ,i\s v; . > '
/vfr s &&& 1 il
A century old! In celebrating the centenary of "London
House," Brownells offer congratulations to the enter-
prising residents of Huon and district, and wish them every
success in their Centennial Celebrations. Since its
inception in 1836, "London House" has served the needs
of an ever-increasing population, in town and country
alike; serving to-day clients whose names have been on
Brownells books for three generations. It is with pride in
the achievement of a century of service that the store is
re-dedicated to that ideal—that people in the years to
come may say—as do the present generation—"Brownells
—the store of satisfaction."
'i
m
sj«|S|s
y
m
m
LONDON HOUSE," 98-108 LIVERPOOL STREET, HOBART
-BROWNELLS—
SERVICES
TO COUNTRY CLIENTS
With fast and dependable motor ser-
vices linking up the country districts
with the city, more and more country
residents are taking advantage of
Brownells PERSONAL mail order ser-
vice.
This service is unique—and to the
woman whose shopping opportunities
are necessarily limited by distance, this
service is a great boon—
To them is offered a personal, friendly
contact with one who is, at all times, at
their service—" Aunt Edna"—who does
not only buy at Brownells for her cor-
respondents, but anywhere in the city.
"Aunt Edna" has made many, many
friends, whose wants she understands
—with a PERSONAL understanding.
Over the length and breadth of Tas-
mania—north to Ulverstone, west to
Queenstown, and east to Swansea —
letters come for "Aunt Edna."
Many of -her correspondents, when in
town, meet her personally, and cement
a friendship commenced by the pen.
Take advantage of this unique service
The personal attention given leads to a
thorough understanding of your needs.
BROWNELLS LIMITED
“The Store of Satisfaction”
“ONLY AT BROWNELLS ”
So often is that phrase to be heard, “only at Brownells”—For
Brownells ideal is service, and to that end Brownells have stocked
line after line stocked by no other store in Hobart—There are in
all thirty-one of these brands, including cosmetics, hats, frocks,
lingerie, shoes, hosiery, etc.
FOR MEN there are three
new suits that are the yard-
stick by which all other suits
are measured. "London
House" has been catering for
men for 100 years, and the
experience so gained is
evident in these exclusive
suits —There is no feature,
either in style or
wearing qualities,
that these suits
have not got —-
They were made
specially to our
specifications, in
half sizes; sure
to fit suits —
They are—
"BUSINESS MAN
84/-
"FRONT ROW'
95/-
"WEST END"
110/-
V 7
&
%
i
V
sa
9
THREE
new exclusive frocks
"JAYNE ENFEL"
"Jayne Enfel" is the model class at 69/6 —and in
that group are some of the most exclusive frocks in
Hobart.
"BETTE CAREW"
"Bette Carew" is 39/6, and embodies all sizes—
chic and good taste making these frocks and
ensembles unique—the variety of patterns and
cloths is enormous.
"JOAN CAPRICE"
"Joan Caprice" is 21/-, and included in this group
are delightful little frocks in all the newest styles
and tonings.
None of these frocks, suits, or ensembles are obtainable elsewhere.
SSfirrWtrWtrSfltrWtrSrttrSrt
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


ESPERANCE
Formation Of Road Trusts.
The first Road Trust in the Esper-
ance Municipality was that of South-
port, which was gazetted in May, 1859,
and abolished in June, 1872. The mem-
bers of the Trust were:—David Chap-
man, B. Thompson, John Kennedy, Jas.
Dickinson, Thomas Edwards.
Honeywood was made a road dis-
trict in 1866, but became absorbed by
Liverpool when that district was
gazetted in 1868. The first members
for Honeywood were:—R. Hill (Chair-
man), 0. Geeves, W. Hawkins, T. Inches,
and S. Geeves. A rate of 9d. in the
pound was levied. The members for
Liverpool in 1868 were:—R. Hill (Chair-
man), O. Geeves, W. Hawkins, B. White,
and S. Geeves.
Esperance and Southport were gazet-
ted together in 1871, the members
being D. Chapman (Chairman), W.
Andrewartha, J. B. Boothman, W. Davis,
J. Hoskins, Rev. J. Murphy, Rev. T.
Stanfield, Henry Walpole, and E. A.
Walpole.
In 1882 Esperance was gazetted with
the word Southport omitted. The
members of trust then were:—W. An-
drewartha (Chairman), E. Tyler, J. C.
Judd, "H. Stubbs, W. Killingback.
The Surges Bay Road Trust was
formed in 1872. The members were: —
J. S. White (Chairman), R. Rowe, B.
White, M. Maley, and W. Scott. The
auditors* were J. Vincent and Jas.
Cairns. A rate of Is. in the pound was
levied.
A Board of Works was appointed for
Franklin in 1871, and also for Port Es-
perance. The members of the Board
for Franklin were:—R. Hill (Chair-
man), 11. Chesterman, John Hay, G. G.
Sherwin, J. Linnell, G. Whiting, and E.
A. Walpole (the Stipendiary Magis-
trate).
The members of the Board of Works
for Port Esperance in 1871 were;—E.
A. Walpole (Chairman), W. H. Andrew-
artha, J. B. Boothman, D. Chapman, J.
Graves, and J. Kennedy.
ESPERANCE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL.
After the passing of the Local Govern-
ment Act in 1907 the various Road
Trusts in the district were dissolved and
a Council was elected comprising:—W.
Jackson, A. E. Davis, E. Bennett, J. W.
Studley, W. J. Clennett, J. F. Davis, W.
Smith, R. Johnson, J. Fisher, F. Sharp,
R. Lincoln, Robt. Hay, A. E. Burrell, A.
Clark, and John Cairns. The first meet-
ing was held at the Albert Hall, Dover.
Mr. Jackson was elected Warden, Mr.
Clennett treasurer, and as Temporary
Clerk for one month, Mr. Macintosh
Brown.
A local Fruit Board for Central Huon
was appointed, the members being:—
R. Lincoln, G. Thompson, A. Burrell,
W. Hinton, W. Hankin, S. W. Geeves,
and F. B. Hill.
Mr. W. T. Brown, a solicitor, of New
Norfolk, was appointed Council Clerk on
February 1, 1908, but he never took
office, and in March Mr. Mason was ap-
painted. Dr. Allport was appointed
Health Officer at a salary of £lO per an-
num. In March also Mr. Joseph Bur-
gess was appointed Road Foreman, a
position which he held for many years.
Mr. Jackson resigned as Warden in
1910 and Mr. W. L. Clennett was ap-
pointed. He was succeeded in 1915 by
Mr. Richard Geeves, who resigned in
1929. Warden E. Burgess was then
appointed and has held that office up to
the present time.
COUNCIL CLERKS.
Mr. Mason retired from the clerkship
in 1909. Mr. Dobbie was appointed
but declined the position, and in Novem-
ber, 1909, Mr-. A. E. Davis became Coun-
cil Clerk, a position which he held with
distinction until his retirement in July,
1934. His successor was Mr. C. C.
Murdoch, who is at present Council
Clerk.
Councillor J. W. Studley, who was a
member of the first Esperance Munici-
pal Council, is still a member, a tribute
both to his zeal and his integrity with
which he has done his work in that capa-
city and to the appreciation of rate-
payers.
TOWN HALLS.
In July, 1913, the Council took over
the assets of the Geeveston Hall Com-
pany for the sum of £7OO. An addi-
tional sum of £l,BOO was borrowed and
the new Geeveston Town Hall was built.
The enterprise proved to be well based,
and the hall has handsomely paid its
way, as well as being an adequate centre
for the community life.
In December, 1911, the Council bor-
rowed £5OO to acquire the land and to
erect the Dover Hall.
PORT HUON WHARF.
The building of the inter-State and
overseas wharf at Port Huon was an
event of major importance in the his-
tory of the Huon district. It repre-
sented the culmination of the efforts of
Public men over a long period. In Feb-
ruary, 1918, the Premier (Sir Walter
Lee) and the Minister for Lands (Mr. J.
B. Hayes) attended a public meeting at
Port Huon and, on condition that grow-
ers would guarantee the erection of a
packing shed near the wharf (which was
immediately done), announced their wil-
lingness to advocate the building of the
wharf. The wharf has been construct-
ed by Government finance but the muni-
cipality of Esperance has paid pound
for pound in the re-erection of the sheds,
and of the last extension to the wharf.
It is now 700 ft. long and 60ft. wide
and can shelter 170,000 cases of fruit at
the one time. A levy of Id. per case
was made in 1922, but was subsequently
lifted after various fruitgrowers’ meet-
ings.
OVERSEAS FRUIT TRADE.
In 1932 the overseas trade was in-
itiated at Port Huon when five steamers
lifted 308,000 cases of apples and pears
for United Kingdom markets. The Es-
perance Council is rendering excellent
service in its management of the wharf,
and has now started the construction of
a water scheme which will greatly en-
hance the usefulness of the port.
HYDRO-ELECTRIC SERVICE.
In 1928 the hydro-electric network
reached Geeveston and the Council set
about lighting the central roads of the
town. These had already been pro-
vided with footpaths. The extension
of electric power to Dover took place
in 1932.
PROGRESS.
A glance through the minutes of the
Esperance Municipal Council (which
body has only been in existence for 28
years) will reveal how momentous a
period that has been. During it there
have been amazing changes—telephones,
electric light, wireless, motor-cars.
Motor-cars were treated with great
caution when the first Council was
elected, as is shown by a motion passed
without dissent in 1908; “That the speed
of motor-cars within the municipality
be limited to 10 miles per hour.”
Bicycles by 1909 were permitted 8 m.p.h.
on curves and 12 m.p.h. on straights.
EARLY TRAVELLING.
Much of the early travelling between
Shipwright’s, Franklin, and Huonville
was done on the river, owing not only
to the absence of a road along the river
bank, but the lack of vehicles. Old-
timers recall the fact that the early set-
tlers were mostly stuanch churchgoers,
and that every Sunday a large whale
boat, built of Huon pine, left Ship-
wright’s Point, and calling at various
points en route, picked up passengers
who attended the Congregational
Church and Sunday School at Franklin.
The latter was a thriving institution as
far back as the early ’40’s. The first
teacher (and founder) was Wm. Geeves,
and the first scholar enrolled was his
youngest son Osborne. That was in
1842.
Warden on May 1, 1924. On May 7,
1925, Mr. Arthur Davies was again
elected to the position, retaining it con-
tinuously until his death on September
24, 1935, a period of IOJ years. On
September 27, 1935, the present Warden,
Mr. Edgar Norris, was elected to fill the
vacancy and was re-elected on May 7
last.
COUNCIL CLERKS.
Mr. Albert Bingham was appointed
the first Council Clerk, holding the posi-
tion until 1921, a period of 13i years.
He was followed by Mr. Arthur Clarke,
who was appointed on September 23,
1921. Mr. Clarke resigned in March,
1923, after holding the position for 18
months. On March 28, 1923, the pre-
sent Council Clerk, Mr. C. C. Johnstone,
was appointed.
There is a great similarity in the
conditions Nature presented all parts of
the Huon district man, but in and
around Geeveston there was possibly
a wider area of land that could one day
be put to the plough and a greater ac-
cumulation of forest giants than in most
other parts of the district. The town-
ship itself on the hills and basins drain-
ed by the Kermandie River and its tri-
butaries—Riley’s Creek, Crooke’s Rivu-
let, and Scott’s Rivulet. The land is
fertile and lies within the 40-inch rain-
belt. In its forest grew a wealth of
stringy bark, swamp gum, blue gum,
and blackwood, providing a cash crop,
the realisation of which has been the
most important factor in building up
ESPERANCE ROAD TRUST.
Back Row, I. to r.—W. DWYER, W. GEEVES, J. W. STUDLEY.
Front Row, I. to r.—R. LINCOLN, R. GEEVES (Chairman), JOHN
GEEVES. T. Inches.
an orcharding community that at pre-
sent produces some GOO,OOO bushels of
apples yearly.
The timber splitting industry was es-
tablished on the hills about Port Huon
during the 1840’s. In such communi-
ties men always endeavoured as soon
as possible to burn off an area of ground
for cultivation. This was the more
necessary because of the uncertainty of
arrival of stores, and because the fluc-
tuating prices for their produce forced
them to limit cash purchases. Two
other things were needed very early—
somewhere to grind wheat if the settlers
were not to revert to pestle and mortar,
and a social gathering place. So
among the earliest buildings were flour
mills run by water power and the hotel-
store combinations. Wheat might travel
all day to be ground and brought home
as flour and bran and pollard, less the
percentage the miller retained in days
when there were very few cheque ac-
counts and a definite shortage of coin
of the realm. So flour mills were widely
spaced, Kellaway’s, at Woodstock;
Page’s, at Ranelagh; Clark’s, at Frank-
lin; and one on the Kermandie. This
last was located at the head of tide
water so that it might be resorted to by
boats and yet have the last rapids in
the creek as its source of water power.
The builder was the late J. B. Walter,
of Lower Wattle Grove, who erected
the mill and dug the water channel for
about a quarter of a mile by the help
of convict labour, somewhere during the
40’s. But the hotels were visited after
work in the evenings and had to be
within an hour of their clients’ homes.
Therefore there was a hotel at Flight’s
Bay, started probably by a Mr. Brittain
about 1851, and later one conducted by
the Eaves family at Waterloo. Brit-
tain a few years after started the Ala-
bama Hotel at Shipwright’s Point. The
skittle alley there was greatly patron-
ised. Mr. Richard Hill had a hotel for
a while adjacent to the flour mill on
the Kermandie, and later one near Mr.
E. Thiessen’s property at Hospital Bay.
His brother, Patrick Hill, had a hotel
which was also the Honeywood post
office till 1880, near Mrs. Hickey’s house
by the viaduct.
THE FIRST SAWMILL.
Richard Hill had been trained in en-
gineering at Messrs. Easby and Robert-
son’s in Hobart. On finishing his
articles he, with Brittain and D. Robert-
son, father of Mr. David Robertson, of
Geeveston, came down to install a frame
saw and circular saw at the water mill.
The three young men shortly acquired
the plant and Hill soon after bought out
the other partners, and also began store-
keeping and paling buying.
DEVELOPMENT OF GEEVESTON
Grit and Enterprise of Pioneers
Remarkable Difficulties Overcome
THE FIRST SETTLERS.
Some approach to Lightwood Bottom
(the name was changed to Geeves Town
about the end of 18G1), as the Geeves-
ton basin was called from the abund-
ance of blackwood trees in the alluvial
soil along the streams, had already been
made. The first Harwood and Thomp-
son families, now well established as
apple growers, had done some splitting
there. William Geeves, with his wife
and family, of whom there were with
him five sons, William, John, Stephen,
Isaac (later settled at Mount Pleasant,
Dandenong Ranges, Victoria, where his
sons ran stage coaches for many years),
and Osborne, and one daughter, Sophie
(later Mrs. Weavel) emigrated from
Cambridgeshire in 1842. On arrival at
Hobart Town they met the energetic
Lady Franklin, and were by her per-
suaded to settle on her block at Frank-
lin. In 1848 the family investigated
various areas up and down the Huon,
and the following year took up the first
80 acres of land alienated in Lightwood
Bottom. Osborne Geeves, who was a
persistent diarist and writer of sermons
and political treatises, relates how he
and his brothers started clearing on
January 1, 1850, and by the middle of
the year had some 12 acres scrubbed
and burned, and the area between
stumps and logs prepared for potatoes.
Slab huts had been erected to house the
various families, several of his brothers
being married, and on June 1 they had
a day of removal from Franklin, some
30 persons in all, including assigned ser-
vants.
A story which 0. Geeves tells in a
later writing is worth quoting because
it expresses very well the characteristic
independence, not only of his family,
but of the Geeveston people as a whole,
a quality which has done much to foster
the well based prosperity of the town.
He says: “When I was a little boy, 70
years ago (he was born in 1831 and died
in 1928), I, with others, used to climb
the Cromwell Hills on Triplo Heath,
Cambridgeshire, England. High mounds,
like sand dunes on a sandy beach. We
used to roll down from top to bottom
on their grass-grown, green sides, and
fight the battles of King and Parliament
over again in mimic warfare. Whether
I got scratched by the bones of Crom-
well’s Ironsides, and so inoculated with
the spirit of liberty or not, I cannot tell,
but certain it is that I stand today for
liberty of conscience, commerce, and
free trade.” He was politically a Lib-
eral and by religion an Independent or
Congregationalist, and was well suited so.
MODE OF LIVING.
In another passage O.G. describes
the mode of living of the early settlers:
“We lived in bark or slab huts, built by
ourselves, and split shingles and laths at
nights to buy rations. . . We worked
on the land in the daytime, planted pota-
toes, grew vegetables of all kinds and
lived on them largely; raised a few
fowls, your old mother making half a
pound of butter a week from goat’s
milk . . . dug eels out of the swamps.
In a year or two a cow was bought,
some little pigs reared on thistles till
the potatoes, peas, and beans grew. I
have known a thrifty wife gather Scotch
thistles and boil them for her pigs.
A little longer and how we enjoyed the
first pig! Ducks were kept. For-
tunately there were no stores at which
to go and get credit. That saved us
from luxurious ruin. . .!” He after-
wards became a storekeeper himself, as
did his brother John.
As to the numbers of eels in the
swamps, Mr. G. D. Bennett says that
while assisting his father and brothers
to clear what is now Mr. H. L. Ben-
nett’s orchard about 1880, they often
secured 20 eels a day.
EFFECT OF THE GOLD RUSH.
The settlement chanced upon a very
favourable time. The excitement of
gold discoveries in Victoria, whilst it
drew away temporarily many of the
young men, provided them with lucra-
tive employment on their return.
James Fenton, in his “History of Tas-
mania,” gives the following prices as
obtaining in Melbourne in 1853:—Flour,
£33; hay, £4O; bran, ss. per bushel; oats,
215.; potatoes, £2O; bricks, £l2 per
1,000; sft. palings, £5 per 100 or Is.
each; jams, Is. 3d. per lb.; apples, 17s.
6d. per bushel. The writer has a ship’s
log showing 70 tons of potatoes sold on
the Melbourne wharves at the time at
£22 10s. a ton.
FIRST APPLE TREES.
The first apple trees in Geeveston
were planted by William Geeves on the
property now held by his grandson,
Richard Geeves. He planted in 1851
two rows each of Windsor Pippin, Rib-
ston Pippin, Scarlet Pearmain, Blenheim
Orange, French Crab, Alexander, and
Continued further on.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.
PORT CYGNET (Continued).


SERVICE
IN THE INTERESTS OF THE FRUITGROWER AND FIRMER
is the keynote of the well-known firm of
MAX GEEVES
Port Huon Fruitgrowers" Co-op. Assoc. Buildings, Davey St.
HOBART
AGENT FOR
THE HOWARD ROTARY HOE
The ideal cultivator that does all the hard
work; gives better soil tillage and surer
crops.
m
M
r
rm
i-
m
THE HARVEY GRADER
Which is unequalled for accurate sizing. The patented special
new type grading element on the "HARVEY" APPLE GRADER
is adjustable to any size desired. Each grade is adjustable
without interfering with the grades on either side—no bruising.
Multiple speed gear contributes to the efficiency and extends
the working range by controlling the speed, as occasion
demands. Spring supported packing bins of good depth
obviate bruising.
A feature of the 1937 model is the independent sectional
driven adjustable grading element.
AND ALL HARVEY IMPLEMENTS
HOWARD MODEL "22" Fitted with Pneumatic Tyres.
This model is available with standard gear box of five forward speeds, or,
where distances have to be travelled, with a special overdrive gear box
giving 10 forward speeds.
The five lower speeds are identical with those of the standard model.
The five higher speeds are approximately as follows:
6th gear = 4 m.p.h.; 7th gear = 6 m.p.h.
Bth gear = 8J m.p.h.; 9th gear = 12 m.p.h.
10th gear = 15 m.p.h.
An extra charge is made for the special gear box.
NOTE. —On rubber tyred outfits, rear wheels are fitted with internal ex-
panding brakes with brake bands approx. ICin. x lain., as well as the standard
transmission brake.
RONALDSON-TIPPETT
SPRAYING PLANTS
CROWN DAHLIA
SEPARATORS
DAIRYING
Don't neglect this profitable indus-
try. Remember—it means Ready
Cash available all the year round.
If milking ONE or ONE HUNDRED
cows—we can supply a separator for
every requirement.
The popular "Crown Dahlia" will
give you greater satisfaction than
any other. Its high quality means
longer life and perfect skimming.
Easy to turn—easy to clean—and
LOW IN PRICE
-mm.
.V
<Sk
fi
* < *> ,
There can be no doubt as to the soundness of design of the barrel type
vat. Down through the ages barrels have been used as an ideal con-
tainer for all liquids. No design of vat can be compared with it when
viewed from any practical angle.
The barrel type vat permits of a light but exceedingly strong Plant with
a very low centre of gravity.
THE NEW TYPE "TG" SPRAY PLANT has been designed by "Ronaldson-
Tippett" Engineers in collaboration with prominent Orchardists to meet
the demand for a medium-sized high quality Plant at a comparatively
low price.
It embodies new and interesting features which immediately appeal to all
practical users.
All gears in this Pump are totally enclosed and run in an oil bath. Barrel,
50 gallons capacity.
This plant is capable of maintaining two sprays at a pressure up to 400
lbs. or higher, and a Duplex Myers type pump is now fitted.
AND
HUGH MURRAY & SON
HARROW SPECIALISTS
WHO SPECIALISE IN DRIVEN TINE, DIAMOND AND
"PASTURELAND" HARROWS.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” „ December, 1936.


development of geeveston
(Continued).
Stone Pippin- The stocks were im-
ported from England and being planted
24ft. apart grew into enormous trees.
(Incidentally it may be noted that trees,
planted in the early days on the humus
laden soils lately retrieved from virgin
bush, made extraordinary growth.)
These plantings were soon followed by
others on his sons’ properties, and Mr.
Hill also planted near his mill site.
Early came to the district representa-
tives of families, now extensive orchard-
ists. Among them were George Ben-
nett (who settled first at Franklin),
William Studley, Patrick O’Halloran,
and records are to be found of the fol-
lowing well-known familiies:—Ham-
mond, McKibben, Ford, Hopkins, War-
ren, Nicholas, Hoskin, Robertson, Reid,
Hickey, Doody, Burgess, Evans, Regan,
Drake, Riley, Lincoln, Sharp, Pepper,
Britcliffe, Russell, Ashlin, Costain, and
others. Thomas and William Geeves,
nephews of William Geeves, came out
in the 50’s also.
PRODUCTION INCREASES.
The Huon at that time was an im-
portant contributor to the very consid-
erable export of potatoes from Tas-
mania. Potato growing, in conjunction
with timber splitting, made possible per-
manent settlement. Apples at 17s. 6d.
a case, unwrapped and uninspected, en-
couraged also a rapid expansion of
planting in such a favourable locality,
and large blocks of orchard were put
out by the next generation.
The paling splitters depended for the
marketing of their produce upon organ-
ised buying and the provision of trans-
port. Among the buyers, besides the
Geeves brothers and Hill, were William
and Edward Hawkins, Dr. Crooke, and,
for a time, a Mr. Haig, who had a store
near the present overseas wharf at Port
Huon. The production of split palings,
shingles, posts and rails, barrel staves,
etc., assumed large proportions. Staves
were split 2ft. Sin. and 6ft. 3in., the lat-
ter being for whalers’ use. There was
a great demand for barrels, not only
from whalers, but from all shippers of
goods. Anyone who has seen a pic-
ture of ships loading in those days or
earlier will recall that almost invariably
they will be loading goods packed in
casks. This may have been because
the wooden boats shipped water freely
and, no doubt, was also due to the ease
with which tubs could be moved before
the days of steam winches. There was,
in any case, good reason for the cooper
to acquire his traditional agility.
While the splitters were near the
water’s edge, the palings were carried,
often by the women and children, who
shouldered their burdens over long dis-
tances, travelling along bush tracks,
over logs and along poleways. But as
the waterfront was worked out other
means of transport became necessary.
ROADS WANTED.
A meeting was held at the Culloden
Hotel in November, 1855, for the pur-
pose of forming Honeywood into a road
district, but it was not gazetted as such
till 1866. The only approach to the
waterside was along a rough bush track.
But on April 1, 1856, there was a meet-
ing held at the Kermandie Hotel, the
only hotel now serving the district, to
consider the erection of a tram-road.
The Liverpool and Honeywood Tramway
Company was formed, of which the
trustees were Dr. Crooke, Richard Hill,
and Stephen Geeves. The other share-
holders were William Geeves sen., John
and Osborne Geeves, Wm. Studley, and
Robert Wells. Dr. Wm. Crooke, after
whom Crooke’s Rivulet which drains the
valley of the Sixfoot Road is named,
was elected a member of the Legislative
Council under the Extension Act of 1854.
He was elected in 1856 first member for
Franklin in the House of Assembly in
the reconstituted Parliament under the
Constitution Act of 1855, by virtue of
which Tasmania became a self-govern-
ing dependency. Richard Hill had
taken over Crooke’s shares by August,
1859. A year earlier the tramroad had
been built as far as John Geeves’
Bridge, and, a short time after, to the
terminus of the trunk line opposite the
property for many years owned by the
Hopkins family and now by Jarrett
Bros.
TRAMWAY CONSTRUCTION.
The method of building the tram
would seem to have been that each
shareholder undertook the construction
of a section of line. Crooke and Hill
jointly constructed the trunk line from
the Beach Jetty at tidewater on the
Kermandie estuary up into the township.
Other _ shareholders undertook the con-
struction of branch lines. In August,
1859, the shares, valued at £lO each,
were held as follows:—R. Hill, 94 (after
absorbing Crooke’s shares); O. Geeves,
81; John Geeves, 43; Stephen Geeves,
25; William Studley, 20; Robert Wells,
10; William Geeves, 5. Isaac Geeves
was also a shareholder for a short time.
The company held jointly some 40 shares
which were allocated to one and another
as work was done, interest being paid
at 8 per cent until such time as they
were again redeemed from company
earnings. The tramway remained the
GOVT.
main artery of traffic until 1880, when
the main road reached Geeveston. Sub-
sequently the shares became concen-
trated in the hands of John and Osborne
Geeves, being taken over at £1 per
share. The company, in 1902, being
then in O. Geeves’ hands, sold its rights
to the Huon Timber Co.
Nowadays no one would think of con-
structing a tramway with a 6ft. gauge,
and a variety of suppositions and myths
have grown up about it. The sizes
have been perpetuated in road names.
Along the route of the Sixfoot Road
went Hill’s tram, which retained the old
gauge. Up the Fourfoot Road went a
tram of 4ft. gauge, erected by Henry
Hawkins, of Shipwright’s Point, who in
turn sold to R. and E. Geeves; later
Edward Geeves was sole owner, and he
was bought out by W. H. Burgess, of
Hobart. John and Osborne Geeves
built 4ft. trams (a third rail was later
added to the trunk line) in the Kerman-
die Valley, and Hill at one time operated
one reaching about half a mile above
Mr. J. Russell’s property on Riley’s
Creek. Later, when running sawmills,
John Geeves and Sons penetrated the
South Creek area, and O. Geeves fol-
lowed Riley’s Creek as far as the slopes
of Tongataboo. Hill’s tram towards
the end reached as far as Willy’s Saddle,
half a mile beyond the new mill erected
in 1935 by Mr. E. H. Bennett and
Messrs. Jones and Co. Ltd.
As for the Oft. gauge, some old-timers
say that it was designed so that trucks
might not overturn with a load of 6ft.
palings. Some hint that lack of ex-
perience explains the anomaly; but the
most reasonable explanation would seem
to be that the road was 6ft. wide so that
chock drays might be driven down it to
the barge jetty with wheels safely with-
in the rails. There were by-passes
bult at convenient places, of course.
TRAMWAY CHARGES.
From the trams there radiated the
tracks and shoots and sledge roads,
down which the goods were supplied.
Some idea of the local industries can be
obtained from the company’s scale of
charges for transport. In 1863 these
were, per mile: —Shingles, per 1,000, 6d.:
box palings, per 100, Is.; 6ft. palings,
per 100, 6d.; timber in the log, 4d. per
100 super; chair legs, set of 4, Id.;
staves, lightwood, 6ft. x 3in., gd.;
apples, per box, gd.; staves, wattle, 2ft.
Bin., per 100, 6d.; grain, potatoes, and
flour, per ton, 2s. Prices are also quot-
ed for table legs and bed posts in sets
of four, table tops, posts and rails, and
laths. The charges are about half the
amount levied in 1859. The timber re-
ferred to was either split or pit sawn.
It is evident in 1859 that already suffi-
cient apples were being forwarded to
warrant a special charge. The Beach
Jetty in the 60’s reached from the bridge
to the site of the present Kermandie
wharf. Five barges could load there
bow to stern and it was often fully oc-
cupied. There were at times as many
as 500 splitters working in the Geeves-
ton area, and Mr. J. O’Halloran, a son
of Mr. Patrick O’Halloran, recalls pass-
ing half a mile of paling stacks along
the tram on his way to Devlin’s School.
The construction of the trams was of
great advantage to the promoters, as it
gave them priority in buying; also by
virtue of the credit which they extended
as storekeepers they were largely in-
strumental in keeping the men in con-
tinuous employment. Not that the
workers were obliged to sell to mem-
bers of the company. They had always
the right to forward their products to
Hohart on consignment. There are
remarkably few complaints to be heard
in conversations with old splitters. Of
them there are now but few left.
The forest industries provided the es-
sential medium through which the
country became settled. The paling
buyers would purchase from the Govern-
ment considerable areas of land. These,
when worked out, were subdivided, the
land seeming to them of less value than
the money which they needed for fur-
ther extension of their trams. To do
them justice the old business men of the
town seem to have deliberately encour-
aged settlement. They had an absorb-
ing desire to see the township grow in
a stable fashion. In this respect the
old systems of exploiting the timber re-
sources of the country are better than
the new. 0. Geeves, who sailed before
the mast himself in a ship called the
Margaret Brock, trading to New Zea-
land, expresses this desire and faith in a
nautical simile: “This old world of ours
has not opened hatches yet. We are
only working on our deck load. Wait
till we open hatches and begin to dis-
charge our real cargo of valuables!”
He lived to see Geeveston what it is to-
day, one of the best examples of closer
settlement in the Commonwealth. But
he was a far-seeing man, and in his
old age he was continuously trying to
make the public and the Government
realise the untouched wealth of the
Upper Huon, the Arve, and the Picton
valleys. He believed that what had
been done on the Huon waterfront could
be repeated in the back country, if road
or rail gave access.
ENTERING GEEVESTON FROM THE SOUTH. J. J. Barnett.
SCHOOL HOUSES ERECTED.
In 1860 a public school under the
Board of Education was opened, a Mr.
G. Watson being headmaster. He was
followed after several years by Mrs.
Sloper, a sister of the Hawkins brothers
at Shipwright’s Point. The school,
which, of course, levied fees (as did the
State School later), was housed in a
building originally occupied as a dwell-
ing by Isaac Geeves, and then as a meet-
ing house for services by the Congrega-
tionalists. Finally in 1883 it was pulled
down, and the timber used in erecting
a shelter for Mr. Tom Webster’s coach.
On the location of the former school,
O. Geeves built his new shop, the old
one, started about 1851, having been
housed across the road before that.
Richard Hill’s hotel on E. Thiessen’s
property, formerly owned by Mr. Wach-
holtz, and before that by John Connors,
was, about 1867, used as a school, the
teacher being Mr. Devlin, later of Port
Cygnet. Great discretion was display-
ed by those interested in the purchase of
the present State School block, which
occupies one of the choicest positions in
the town. By 1870 the main building
on the eastern side of the present school
was erected, being then a school room
and dwelling house combined. It was
first occupied by William Crowther Bligh
(a cousin of Edward Lodewyck Crowther)
and, the other schools having closed at
that time, there was an attendance of
about 70 children. Bligh was succeed-
ed by Messrs. A. Blackwood, Samuel
Lovell, Curtis, and J. Mulligan. The
last-named being some 19 years at the
school till his transference to the New
Norfolk School in 1912.
Some estimate of the relative sizes of
the populations can be obtained from
the rise in school attendance from 70, in
1870, to 250 in 1936. During recent
times also schools have been built at
Hospital Bay and Cairns Bay, within
three miles in either direction, and these
schools have additionally about 40
scholars each.
CLERGY AND SCHOOL TEACHERS.
In early times the clergy and the
schoolmasters held positions of particu-
lar importance in the community. They
were generally the only educated men
and they represented the last courts of
appeal in questions of general knowledge.
They were also a class apart in that
they had more time and better oppor-
tunities for self instruction than their
neighbours.
LITERATURE AND MUSIC.
The first library by the Honeywood
Debating Society, was started in connec-
tion with the State School. The vol-
umes on its shelves, if one can judge
by the few that survive, were on the
whole of a better type than most of
those demanded by the novel-reading
public of today. There were many
more books of a general type in propor-
tion.
Funds were raised by means of penny
concerts held in the school. The great
difference between these concerts and
those of today seems to have been that
no instruments were used to accompany
singers. Nor had they indeed any in-
struments in the churches, and, for years
in the Congregational Church, Mr. Step-
hen Geeves acted as preceptor. Subse-
quently a Geeveston Public Library was
started which ran successfully for a
number of years under the secretaryship
of Mr. E. Diers (who arrived here with
his parents from Germany some 50
years ago and has always taken a keen
interest in educational affairs). The
town at present has a strong and suc-
cessful public library.
A STEAM SAWMILL.
A new era in the town was ushered
in when in 1874 Mr. John Geeves erected
the “Speedwell” steam-driven sawmill
opposite his residence, Cambridge
House. O. Geeves describes the event
in his diary as: “A red letter day for
Geeves Town, June 11th, 1874. Mr. John
Geeves formally opened his mill today,
and the frame saws and circular did
their work well, the engine driving both
to the admiration of the bystanders and
the satisfaction of the proprietor, and
the honour of Mr. John Hay the third,
a young man not turned 20 years, who
managed the mill and men like one who
knew what he was doing; and for one so
young the responsibility was great. The
builder of the mill, Mr. David Robert-
son, deserves honourable mention for
the tradesmanlike manner he has done
his work. At 1 o’clock the whole of
the visitors were invited to a sumptuous
spread in Mr. J. Geeves’ barn ... a
pleasant day was spent.”
In 1882 O. Geeves opened a similar
mill on the block at the rear of Mrs.
Chas. Sharp’s house. He and his
brother John worked for a while on a
common main tram which branches res-
pectively into the North and South
Creeks. Paling splitting meanwhile
went on as usual ahead of the log-get-
ters. Later O.G. turned to the valley
of Riley’s Creek as far as the slopes of
Tongataboo in the neighbourhood of the
mill now there, started by Chas. Palmer,
and now run by the Messrs. Herman.
The mills were cutting about 5,000 ft.
super a day each. Richard Hill’s mill
had cutting steadily in a smaller
way since 1850.
SPLITTING TIMBER DISCON-
TINUED.
The end of the great era of splitting
was definitely foreshadowed. Splitting
became of gradually less importance al-
though shipments were still made up till
1900.
The methods of logging employed by
the mills were at first exceedingly primi-
tive. Logs until well on in the ’7o’s
were hauled in by means of samsons
(like stump pullers) and hand winches,
the further bush being left to the split-
ters. Horses, and high wheeled timber
carriages, were tried, but abandoned,
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


= THE GRAND HOTEL =■
HUONVILLE
Huonyiile is the Natural Centre of the Huon District. From it roads radiate to
every point of the Compass
mm
mxe.
mm
SB
m
Wa
m
r.
Sk
8
THE GRAND HOTEL overlooks the Huon River. Boats for Anglers, or Cars for
Tourists Obtainable
AN IDEAL REST HOME or Headquarters for Visitors desiring to see all parts of the Huon Valley
or the Mountains, Rivers, Lakes, and Caves of the District.
MODERATE TARIFF
FIRST-CLASS CUISINE
CYRIL EAVES, Proprietor
'PHONE: HUONVILLE 1
HiimiiiiiiiiiiiiimimiiiiiiiiniiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiimiimiiimmmiMiiiiimiiiimiiinmiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiimimiimimiimiiiiiiiiiiimiimiiiiiiiMiiiimiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiimimiiMiiimiii’.:
I STANDARD CASE CO. PTY. LTD. I
| HUONVILLE I
| Telephone: Huonville 131 (3 lines) Telegraphic Address: "Standards," Huonville i
| The Largest and Most Up-to-date Fruit Case Making Factory in the Commonwealth I
| APPLES AND PEARS properly prepared, packed, and presented in Canadian Shaped Cases, are preferred i
= on English and Continental Markets |
mm
■lii
■W4
Si&t*
*•< <&
r
Hi
I
' ■
u
Mi lk*
>
AN EXPERT OPINION.
Referring to the different types of
cases that were being employed for
the packing of Tasmanian fruit for
the overseas markets, Mr. L, F.
Smeeton, Trade Representative of
the State in London, thus addressed
the State Fruit Board on sth
October, 1935; —
"I am emphatically of the opinion that
the dump case must go. There are
many reasons for it. The majority of
receivers claim that it does not pack the
full 401 b. of fruit. Fruit is sold by the
lb."
The Canadian Shaped Case is now manufactured by us
from TASMANIAN TIMBERS, which have been
scientifically kiln-dried and reconditioned. Tops
and bottoms supplied in Canadian Softwood.
These cases are light in weight—attractive in appear-
ance—will not shrink—are stronger than any case now
in use.
THERE WILL BE ABSOLUTELY NO WASTE OF
TIMBER.
PRICES AND FULL DETAILS
London and Continental Merchants definitely report
that there is no necessity to wire our cases. Tops and
bottoms are stitched to cleats in one piece, as research
tests prove this feature considerably increases holding
strength of container and facilitates handling.
CASES SUPPLIED MADE UP.
UPON APPLICATION. |
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


because the bush proved too wet for
wheeled traffic. Bullock teams grew in
favour but were expensive when much
chaff had to be fed. Mr. W. Ashlin,
whose family had been engaged in split-
ting from the earliest period in various
Huon localities, recalls that a team of
12 bullocks would eat up nine bags of
chaff a day. So, on the bigger mills,
the steam log haulers came generally
into use about 1886, and horses were
used only for taking back the wire and
on the trams. Associated with the
driving of teams on the tramroads at
this time were in particular members of
the Studley and Evans families, both of
which have retained their fondness for
horses to the present time.
With the growth of the apple indus-
try there arose an increasing demand
for boxes. Even after 1900 some split
paling boxes were still being used; but
during the nineties a number of enter-
prising people realised how favourable
an opportunity offered for using up
small sections of bush which though
split through still retained considerable
timber suitable for apple boxes. The
late Mr. Henry Thiessen and his sons in-
stalled a portable outfit at the corner of
the Fourfoot Road and Harwood’s Road.
They were soon followed by others,
among whom were James Ashlin and
Sons, who worked most of the slopes of
Brown Mountain along the Esperance
Road, and are still in the business;
Messrs. Alfred and William Bennett,
and Messrs. Louis and Walter Warren.
With the enormous growth of small mill
output since the war we are not con-
cerned at this stage.
VICE-ROYALTY AT ESPERANCE.
During the period 1876 to 1884
Geeveston was visited three times by
Vice-Regal parties, that were the
occasions of gala days. On April 16,
1875, His Excellency Frederick Aloy-
sius Weld, was the first Governor to
visit Geeveston. On December 14,
1880, His Excellency Sir J. H. Lefroy.
with Lady Lefroy, Miss Lefroy, Captain
Hussey, A.D.C., the Premier, the Hon.
Wm. R. Giblin, and the Hon. Wm.
Moore, Colonial Secretary, were con-
ducted on a trip to the end of the tram
in the Kermandie Valley. It was on
this occasion that, at the request of
Lady Lefroy, a huge tree was set aside
and later an inscription on a specially
prepared board was attached to it. It
is said that this stringy bark was by
no means the highest tree in the valley,
but carried its size very evenly well up
into the branches. The board read as
follows:—
The Monumental Tree.
This Giant of the Primeval Woods is
at the Special Request of
Lady Lefroy
to be preserved as long as Nature shall
spare it, to show posterity what the
forests of Tasmania were in the days
when “a man was famous according as
he had lifted up axes upon the thick
tree.”—Psalm Ixxiv., v.
By
John Geeves,
15 December, 1880.
Girth 6ft. above the ground in January,
1881, 38ft. lOin.
The tree has since fallen as a result
of fire, but is still lying in the bush,
above the second bridge in the Kerman-
die Gorge.
On March 20, 1884, His Excellency
Major Sir George Cumine Strahan paid
a similar visit, accompanied by his pri-
vate secretary, the Hon. John Wallop,
and the Hon. John Watchorn, M.L.C.,
Mr. B. S. Bird, M.H.A., Mr. R. J. Lucas,
M.H.A., members for the district, and Mr.
Wm. Burgess, M.H.A., member for
West Hobart.
PORT OF CLEARANCE
ESTABLISHED.
On September 12,1889, in the governor-
ship of Sir R. G. C. Hamilton, the sub-
port of Shipwright’s Point and Hospital
Bay was gazetted a Port of Clearance,
and a sub-port for the entry of goods. O.
Geeves’ wharf in Hospital Bay was at the
same time appointed as the place at which
dutiable goods might lawfully be landed.
Apart from the ships mentioned above,
the following names occur frequently in a
complete shipping register for Hospital
Bay kept by O.G- from ’87 to ’97:—
Barque Pet, Captain Harrison; barque
Freetrader, Capt. Bowden; ketch Huon
Chief, Jas. Hitchcock; ketch Mary, owned
and sailed by H. Thiessen; ketch Good In-
tent, T. Nichols; ketch One and All, J.
Sutton; steam ketch Amy Louise (the
first steam boat mentioned), W. Thorpe;
steam ketch Skipjack, J. Rowe; ketch
Elizabeth, J. Cairns (whose family gave
their name to Cairns Bay); cutter Rich-
ard and Emily, Ed. Clock; s.s. Huon (first
mentioned in June, ’88), W. Fisher; steam
ketch Victoria, Wm. Thorpe; ketch Re-
becca, J. Fitzpatrick; ketch May Queen,
E. McEvoy; schooner The Macbain, Geo.
Taymr; s.s. Bowra (carrying sleepers to
Melbourne), J. Simpson; ketch William
and Henry, G. Watts; ketch Coral, A.
Lloyd; s.s. Pioneer (loading railway sleep-
ers for Zeehan in 1890), D. Morgan. In
1890 the s.s. Huon, J. W. Evans, captain;
ketch Surprise, T. Purdon; ketch Sarah
Ann, H. Glover; ketch King Billy, E.
Continued further on.
POLITICAL HISTORY
Huon Representatives from
1856
Unique Initial Election
There was something unique, if not
amusing, in the appointment of the first
representative of the Huon in the House
of Assembly. No preliminary cam-
paign was undertaken by candidates,
in which promises were held out to
secure the support of electors. A can-
didate was nominated at a public meet-
ing and elected “on his face value,” and
the firing of a couple of guns com-
pleted the compact.
The following reference to the elec-
tion was made by the “Hobart Town
Advertiser” on September 15, 1856:
“On Friday last the electors of Frank-
lin met to choose a fit and proper per-
son to represent them in the House of
Assembly.
Mr. E. R. L. Scott, in a very ap-
propriate speech, proposed Dr. Crooke
as the person most competent to meet
all the wants of the Franklin district.
Mr. Merry seconded the nomination.
There being no other candidate pro-
posed, the doctor was declared duly
and unanimously elected.
Dr. Crooke then returned thanks for
the honour they had done him. At the
end of the doctor’s speech, two small
guns, which had been ready loaded,
were fired off.
The proceedings passed off with the
utmost order and good feeling.”
From 1856 to 1909 the electorates in
Tasmania had each only one member.
After that year six members were
elected for each of the five electorates.
The representatives in the House of
Assembly were:
William Crooke, September, 1856.
John Donnellan Balfe, February,
1857.
John Davies, September, 1871.
Russell Young, September, 1872.
Joseph Edward Risby, June, 1877>
Bolton Stafford Bird, May, 1882.
William Percival Brownell, April,
1903.
From 1909 the House of Assembly
representatives of the Huon have been:
April 30. 1909.
The Honourable John Earle.
David Edward Dicker.
The Honourable John William Evans,
C.M.G.
The Honourable Norman Kirkwood
Ewing.
i Thomas Christopher Hodgman.
The Honourable Alexander Hean.
April 30, 1912.
The Honourable John Earle.
David Edward Dicker.
The Honourable John William Evans,
; C.M.G.
; The Honourable Norman Kirkwood
| Ewing.
George Frederick Martin.
The Honourable Alexander Hean,
C.M.G.
January 23, 1913.
, Arthur Cotton.
David Edward Dicker.
. The Honourable John Earle.
The Honourable John William Evans,
; C.M.G.
The Honourable Norman Kirkwood
r Ewing, K.C.
i Succeeded by Daniel Edward Ryan,
Ewing, K.C. (Succeeded by Daniel Ed-
ward Ryan, October 11, 1915.)
’ George Frederick Martin.
I
’ March 25, 1916.
i Frederick Burbury.
David Edward Dicker - .
The Honourable John Earle. (Suc-
ceeded by Arthur Cotton, April 14,
1917.)
The Honourable John William Evans,
• C.M.G.
The Honourable Alexander Hean.
I William Ebenezer Shoobridge.
! May 31, 1919.
: David Edward Dicker.
1 William Henry Dixon.
The Honourable John William Evans,
> C.M.G.
1 The Honourable Alexander Hean,
1 C.M.G.
Albert George Ogilvie.
! : Benjamin Watkins,
r
I June 10, 1922.
The Honourable John William Evans,
; C.M.G.
! The Honourable Alexander Hean,
' C.M.G.
[ Peter Murdoch.
; Albert George Ogilvie.
' William Warburton Frederick Pearce.
; (Succeeded by William Ebenezer Shoo-
1 bridge).
John Peters Piggott.
»
; June 3, 1925.
i The Honourable Sir John William
Evans, K.B., C.M.G.
! Peter Murdoch.
The Honourable Albert George
Ogilvie.
, John Peters Piggott.
William Sheridan.
Benjamin Watkins.
(Continued on Column 4.)
“THE TASMANIAN NIGHTINGALE”
Madame Amy Sherwin
Talented Daughter of the Huon
(By B.W.R.)
By the death in London on September
21, 1935, of Madame Amy Sherwin,
Britain lost one of its greatest singers
and Tasmania a world-famous daughter.
Probably the greatest prima donna of
her age, Madame Amy Sherwin claimed
the Huon as her birthplace. Better
known perhaps as “the Tasmanian
Nightingale,” Miss Sherwin was born
at Forest Home, Judbury, now the
property of the Hon. W. H. Calvert,
M.L.C., in about the year 1855.
Of her earlier life very little is known,
but as her parents were somewhat
musical it is not surprising that
the young girl soon showed that she
possessed the gift of song. Encouraged
by her parents to develop her gift, she
soon gained the hearts of all whom
she came into contact with. Her voice
was the voice of a nightingale. Her intro-
duction to the musical public was when
she was invited to make her appearance
on the stage in Hobart in a small oper-
etta “Zillah.” This was produced and
conducted by William Russell in what
was then Delsarte’s Rooms, now the
Royal Yacht Club, in Harrington Street,
and Miss Sherwin showed such promise
that it was predicted she would one
MADAME AMY SHERWIN.
day rank with the leading prima don-
nas of Europe. Even amidst her early
training Miss Sherwin had many diffi-
culties and hardships to overcome be-
fore she eventually achieved success. On
one occasion her parents’ home at the
Huon was destroyed by a great fire,
which ravaged the district, and she and
her brothers and sisters, together with
their parents, barely escaped with their
lives. A few years after the great fire,
Amy Sherwin was sent to Europe to
be trained. She made her operatic
debut at the Hobart Theatre Royal on
May 1, 1878, in Donizetti’s “Don Pas-
quale,” produced by the Royal Italian
Opera Company. On the completion of
her studies at Frankfort, Paris, Milan,
and Florence, Miss Sherwin appeared
in “Lucia di Lammermoor” in Mel-
bourne, and shortly afterwards visited
America and there appeared as Mar-
guerite in the “Faust” of Berlioz, creat-
ing the part in 1880. This performance
brought her to the front, and Mr. Gar-
net Walch, a noted colonial poet of
the last century, was so inspired by
her singing that in a volume of verses
published in 1881, appeared the follow-
ing tribute to the singing genius of
Tasmania:—
Bravo Tasmania!
Remove yon mutton from my sight,
Yon pallid loaf and sordid pickle;
I’ve supped on melody to-night,
No grosser food my palate tickle,
Have I not sat entranced, bewitched
By her, our new found prima donna,
Then hurled her blessings, likewise
pitched
My partner’s bouquet down upon her?
(Excuse the rhyme, I own it’s crude,
But cannot wait to seek a neater.)
When with one’s subject one’s imbued,
What matter rhyme, or sense, or
metre ?
A voice that thrilled, a voice that stilled
The very hearts of all who listened,
And called up happy tears that filled
The eyes wherein they welled and
glistened.
The voice of warbling Philomel,
Lulling to rest the fair Titania.
It ceases, hark the plaudits swell,
Cheer upon cheer, bravo Tasmania.
I always liked good singing, yes,
Since I was quite a tiny shaver;
Though I don’t know, I must confess,
A crotchet from a semi-quaver.
I haven’t the remotest ken
Of sealed chromatic, diatonic,
(And yet I meet no end of men,
All members of the Philharmonic).
But I am strangely moved to-night;
I can’t be calm or analytic,
Nor vivisect my warm delight
With cold-nibbed steel like yonder
critic.
Her “D below the treble stave,”
Her “F” that soars so far above it.
Of these let wiseheads prate or rave,
They sift her voice, I simply love it.
Who say we have no birds of song,
Save those from other lands imported,
Does us, pardi, a grievous wrong,
The statement of a mind distorted.
We have sweet birds whose native
notes,
The public praise without demur win,
And latest, best the rhymester quotes
His countrywoman, Amy Sherwin.
In 1883, Madame Amy Sherwin made
her first appearance at Drury Lane
Theatre, London, and two years later,
in 1885, she made her first appearance
in Covent Garden Opera. Following
upon this, she appeared with even
greater success in the promenade con-
certs in the Queen’s Hall, the Richter
Concerts, and the Crystal Palace Con-
certs, and shortly afterwards she was
engaged by the world-famous Car] Rosa
Opera Company, and with this company
she toured Australia, New Zealand,
America, and Europe. She first return-
1 ed to the land of her birth in 1898,
and those of the other generation must
well remember the scenes of wild en-
thusiasm, and how her ardent admirers
unharnessed the horses from her car-
riage, and then dragged it in triumph
through the streets. Always with a
thought for others, unfailingly generous
and helpful to young musicians, it is
not unusual that the people of Tas-
mania loved this kind-hearted country-
woman of theirs, who brought nothing
but honour and fame to the land of her
birth. Following her tour of Australia
in 1898, Madame Amy Sherwin returned
to London to fulfil her engagement with
the London Philharmonic Society, and,
in 1902-03, she toured Europe with the
noted violin virtuoso, Kubelik. In 1906
she revisited Australia, and paid a brief
visit to Tasmania to renew old
acquaintances.
(Continued from Column 2.)
May 30, 1928.
The Honourable Henry Seymour
Baker.
The Honourable Sir John William
Evans, K.B., C.M.G.
The Honourable Albert George
Ogilvie.
Benjamin James Pearsall.
John Peters Piggott.
Benjamin Watkins.
May 9, 1931.
The Honourable Henry Seymour
Baker.
John Janies Dwyer, V.C.
The Honourable Sir John William
Evans, K.B., C.M.G.
The Honourable Albert George
Ogilvie, K.C.
Alfred Charles Seabrook.
Benjamin Watkins.
June 9, 1934.
The Honourable Henry Seymour
Baker.
Edward Brooker.
John James Dwyer, V.C.
The Honourable Sir John William
Evans, K.B., C.M.G.
The Honourable Albert George
Ogilvie, K.C.
Benjamin James Pearsall.
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
Members of the Legislative Council
representing the Huon have been:
Thomas John Knight, date of election,
December 2, 1856.
Richard Cleburne, May 28, 1857.
Alexander Kissock, November 19,
1864.
John Helder Wedge, June 22, 1866.
John Foster, July 23, 1868.
James Thomas Robertson, July 16,
1874.
William Fisher, August 3, 1881.
John Watchorn, April 29, 1882.
Thomas Moore Fisher, May 2, 1905.
Bolton Stafford Bird, May 4, 1909.
David Charles H. Calvert, May 6,
1924.
William Henry F. Calvert, December
2, 1924.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.
development of geeveston
(Continued).


Credit
TRADING
A
s**
w?.
m
m
P3M3
»li >
mm
Cox Bros, pioneered Credit
Trading in Tasmania! Their
system of Easy Terms pur-
chasing has become famous
throughout the State—a sys-
tem of purchasing that en-
ables your every household or
personal requirement to be
bought from your regular
weekly income! Investigate
this convenient buying TO-
DAY! Cox Bros, will gladly
help you!
COX
EASY
I Cox Bros.’ Credit
I Manager ivill be
jj pleased to explain ,
? in strictest confi-
I dence, the many con-
| veniences and ad-
I vantages oj a
I CREDIT
\ ACCOUNT!
| 1/- weekly for every
| £’s worth of Drapery
! goods —2- iveekly
| for every £’s worth
i of Furniture!
6
TERMS
143 ELIZABETH STREET
Also at; LAUNCESTON, BURNIE, DEVONPORT, QUEENST
ULVERSTONE
Mrs. B. Thrifty says —
It is so easy to Bottle Fruit by the
Simple, Scientific, and
SURE FOWLER METHOD
The Book of Instructions which accompanies each
Outfit gives full directions and is so easy to follow
that
A CHILD CAN DO IT.
The Patent "VACOLA" Vacuum Self-seal-
ing Bottles seal automatically during the
sterilising process and there is no screwing
down hot bottles as by the old-fashioned
method.
THE OUTFITS ARE MADE IN VARIOUS SIZES,
but the No. 2 size has proved the most popular for
the average home.
SEND FOR FULLY ILLUSTRATED PRICE LIST.
OBTAINABLE ALL LEADING STORES
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA.
$ll
-fit*®
CD
Q
I
“A thousand years in His sight are
as a day!” No other words that have
ever been written so adequately convey
such a complete comparison of time. A
thousand years! So long compared
with man’s little span of life, and yet
so short compared with aeons of time
since the dawn cf creation.
What changes such a “day” must have
seen the wide “world” over! From the
primitive warrior with his uncouth
weapons to this day of awful scientific
slaughter; from the slow and difficult
transport by men and horses to the swift
machine and the winged airship! To
look back even a hundred years is to see
vast changes indeed—and never more,
perhaps, than in the last century. Before
that time Australia was barely known,
and the name of Tasmania little more
than a mark on a map. For how many
years did the wattles bloom, and the
breezes murmur, or the tempests roar,
unnoted by humans, save the naked sav-
age before the white man set his conquer-
ing foot on this island of ours? Before
him the wilderness retreated; behind him
cultivated land spread itself in the sun-
light and cities raised their stately
towers.
Everywhere the story repeats itself!
Recently we celebrated the Centenary of
Melbourne, and this year we celebrate the
Centenary of the Huon. “Down the
Huon.” What those few words meant
to the early pioneers of the district!
Not the settled localities —Franklin,
Huonville, Geeveston, Cygnet, as we know
them —but just down the Huon to carve
a home out of the virgin forest.
For centuries did that silver river wind
its way through the forest, undisturbed
save by the cry of the wild fowl or the
corrobc-ree of the aborigines round their
camp fires. But one day the first sound
of the axe broke the silence—the fore-
runner of the settlement of the pioneer.
That was a historic day in the annals of
the Huon. Since then progress has piled
on progress, until the past is as a dream.
Down to the water’s edge come the fair
orchards; over its surface swift vessels
bear produce to and fro, and motor-boats
pursue their noisy way. Even in a
hundred years has this transformation
taken place, and it is to the courage and
enterprise of the pioneers of the Huon
that we owe this great development. In
this Centenary issue, the “Huon and
Derwent Times” relates the stories of
these men —names such as the Linnells,
the Waltons, Oates, Sherwins, and many
others—names that, as long as time lasts,
will be associated with the history of the
Huon.
But I want to lay a tribute at the feet
of the women—the wives and mothers of
these pioneers. I have always felt that
the heaviest burden fell upon the women
of these days. Imagine for yourselves,
readers, the leaving of settled districts or
maybe the town of Hobart to accompany
the pioneer to his forest home. What
misgivings and fears must have been the
portion of these women! What careful
preparations had to be made—so little
that could be taken and so much needed.
What stories of quiet bravery, of kindness
to far-off neighbours, might be told if
space were permitted. It was sufficient
that another woman needed help, and long
miles were trudged to give the assistance
that was required.
It is difficult to picture the Huon of
those days when we look at the fine
homesteads bordering the Huon road.
They are replete with modern con-
veniences and easy of access. In those
days roads (or what they called roads)
were mere bullock waggon tracks, for
this primitive method was the only means
of transport. From the home of the
iSherwins, for instance, on the bank of the
river, where “Forest Home” now spreads
far and wide, wheat had to be carted to
Clark’s mill at Franklin to be ground into
flour. This meant often that Mr. Sher-
win would not return until the next day.
How lonely the evening hours must have
been for the woman at home, shut in by
the deep bush and far from human
habitation. Yet from this lonely home
came that sweet singer—Madame Amy
Sherwin, whose golden voice made the
name of Tasmania known far and wide.
It is pleasant to think that the little
maiden trilled her earliest songs with her
feathered compeers as audience, them-
selves sweet singers also.
Hard work was the portion of the
pioneers, and the women worked as hard
as their menfolk. I remember one old
lady—long since dead—who told me that
she dug a hole in the ground, put a bag in
it, and placed her baby in the hole whilst
she toiled in the paddock or garden. Food
had to be produced, or the family went
hungry; so every able pair of hands was
pressed into action. Any little change
in the daily diet was an event—any little
convenience in the home sweetened life
for these women. Some of the early
settlers walked the long miles to Hobart
Town, carrying a few precious purchases
in a sack on their back to the waiting
THE PIONEERING DAYS
Women Played a Noble Part
A Tribute to Them All
(By OLIVE M. CALVERT)
family at home. Looking backwards, it
seems to us that progress came on rapid
feet, but many suns must have risen and
set, and babies grew to youths and
maidens, before much alteration was
apparent to the early settlers. Neverthe-
less, alteration there was. Roads were
no longer quagmires; folk began to drive
their horses and traps through to the city
with butter and eggs for sale. This
meant very early rising, because on such
a hilly road it was necessary to ease the
horse Iby walking up the hills. Think of
the long day, shopping in the town, and
then facing the tedious journey back
home! At that time the coach with its
four horses made a daily trip to the city,
leaving the Huon very early in the morn-
ing, and reaching Huonville about 8 p.m.
on the return journey. How pleasant it
was to stop at the Longley Hotel on cold
winter nights for a hot meal and a warm
by the fire whilst the horses were being
changed. Then away again, either up in
front in the bitter cold or in the dark un-
comfortable interior, with straw for a
floor covering.
Nor did this comprise the whole jour-
ney. The coach dropped its passengers
at crossroads, where perhaps a chaise
cart awaited if one were fortunate, but
more often the children came to help
carry parcels, and they all trudged home
together. Despite all these difficulties,
life was happy. Settlers came to out-
lying parts, such as Lucaston, Judbury,
Glen Huon, etc., and with increased
facilities it became easier to visit neigh-
bours and to receive visits, although
medical attention was not available for
years, unless one travelled to Hobart.
The name of Dr. Anderson is well known
to the women of the Huon, but long before
his day settlers had to rely upon them-
selves for ordinary treatment. Nor were
there the comfort and attention that now-
a-days is so necessary for mothers in
their hour of trial. Dependent upon the
good offices of a neighbour, or some good
woman whose knowledge of maternity
nursing had been gained in practical
experience—the ordeal was a very trying
one. Names such as Mrs. Weavil, of
Geeveston, Mrs. Roberts, old Mrs. Talbot,
of Huonville, recall the doughty deeds of
such workers, who faced cold, dark jour-
neys with indomitable courage to help in
many such crises. Compare it with to-
day, and it reads as a fairy tale.
Just recently I stayed a day or two with
a friend in the Huon district. A com-
fortably cushioned car ate up the miles in
less than an hour. Electric light blazed
a welcome from porch and rooms, and the
wireless crooned the latest melody. That
boon to country dwellers, the telephone,
shrilled a message, and it seemed incred-
ible to me that, though not in the same
house, yet in the same surroundings, the
dark and the loneliness not so long ago
defied the meagre candle light or the
kerosene lamp, and help was far if
needed and news already old when re-
ceived. As I mused, my surroundings
faded, and I saw again those women
whose endurance, whose faith in their
men and the future made this present
time possible. As they passed on silent
feet—those feet that had known such
weariness—l seemed to hear words
spoken by lips that had known how to
smile, even though pain had graven deep
lines around them, and this was the mes-
sage—“ Every age has its own problems;
we have finished with ours, but you,
the women who follow us, must face
yours bravely, with patience and courage.
Only thus can you come to the well-earned
rest that awaits all who labour, having
carried your torch well and passed it on to
hands which you have helped to make
worthy.”
Thus they faded, but I feel that in the
women of the Huon runs the pioneer
blood, lives the pioneer spirit, and
where they are none need be afraid.
The Pioneers
O road that winds o’er hill and dale,
Where runs the swift machine;
What aching feet have trod this way,
, What weariness has been!
What courage housed in human frame
Planned that this road should be
A gift —/or all time to endure —
To their posterity.
For us, shoidd mishap chance our way,
A hundred hands are spread;
For them, the toll of loneliness —
None near, but God o’erhead!
Yet undeterred, lit by that flame
That bums in Britain’s sons,
They sought no rest, nor recked the cost,
Until their work was done.
Brave hearts! Your beating now is still;
And still the gnarled hands.
Yet shall you live u’hile time shall last,
A fragrance in the land.
And we, who reap your years of toil,
To you our tributes pay,
May God’s own peace encompass you,
And endless perfect day. O.M.C.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1986.


SOME OF THE PIONEERS
Deeds of Valour and Perseverance
Forests Converted to Orchards
the parsons and linnells.
Grove, 19 miles from Hobart, may be
regarded as the front door of the Huon,
and it was in this part of the district
that one of the first families—that of the
late Silas Parsons with his wife and two
young children —decided to literally carve
out a home that subsequently became
one of the landmarks of the Huon.
Born at Wineanton, Somersetshire
(Eng.), in 1807, the late Silas Parsons
decided in 1835 to seek his fortune in
New South Wales, which at the time be-
gan to attract a considerable number of
SILAS PARSONS.
farmer settlers. On arriving at Hcbart
Town on_ 15th November, 1835, in the
sailing ship “The Brothers,” with his wife
and two daughters, Eliza (who after-
wards became Mrs. John Wallace Kel-
laway) and Roseanna (Mrs. A. Hawkes),
Mrs. Parsons was too ill to continue the
journey, and the family left the ship.
They made their home at Hobart Town
for about four years, when Mr. Parsons
decided to visit the Huon. He was greatly
impressed with the apparent fertility of
the land, and decided to select an area
near Blackfish Creek, and to build a home
there.
MRS. SILAS PARSONS.
At the time, the whole of the Huon
valley was covered with scrub and a dense
forest of giant stringy bark trees, the
clearing of which required stout hearts
and strong limbs. Progress was neces-
sarily slow. The first crops grown were
potatoes and wheat. As the scrub was
these crops were planted, and
the big trees ring-barked, so that they
could be subsequently felled and burnt.
The cleared land was further cultivated,
and after a few years—the exact date
cannot be stated, but is believed to be in I
the ’forties—apple trees were planted.
Some of these were grown from the pips
of apples, and others from scions of trees
supplied by Mr. Allport, of Hobart, who
was a close friend of Mr. Parsons. Some
idea of the magnitude of the task can he
formed from the fact that the young
settler had to walk every Saturday to
Hobart, leaving his home at about 4 a.m.,
and carrying the butter made during the
week, exchanged it for groceries, which,
with the district mail, he also carried
home. Later he was able to secure a pony,
and although there was nothing but a
blazed track to guide him, he accomplish-
ed the weekly journey in what he regard-
ed as comfortable conditions.
The Huon road does not follow exactly
the blazed track that was originally
marked out. The latter went to the east
of Bullock Hill instead of the line now
followed, and crossed Blackfish Creek
twice, and Fourteen Times Creek 14 times
in two miles! The hill, by the way,
has sometimes been referred to as “Bull
Oak’’ Hill. This is incorrect. It derived
its name from the fact that Mr. Parsons
grazed his bullocks there, and became
known as the “bullock hill” in conse-
quence.
As the number of settlers increased
and their needs became proportionately
greater, it was necessary to make more
adequate arrangements for the transport
of their produce and the back freight.
Barges, therefore, took up the trade, as
it was quite impossible to employ vehicles
on the road. The arrival and departure
of barges could not be set to any definite
schedule of time, as so much depended
on the wind, tide, and current in the
river. At times they would run aground
on one or other of the numerous shallows
between Shipwrights’ Point and Franklin,
and might remain there for a day or two
at a time. So tedious was the journey
in calm weather that the crews would
resort to hauling the vessels along with
the aid of a winch and a long rope tied
to a tree on the bank, or they would be
propelled by long poles where the depth of
water permitted this method of progress
to be employed.
APPLES PLANTED.
As the years rolled by, the Grove farm
expanded. Apples were found to do re-
markably well, the first varieties planted
being Crabs, Ribstons, Wellingtons, and
Alexanders. The fruit was all marketed
in Hcbart. It was , packed in cases made
of split palings of stringy bark, 27 in.
by 14 in. by 7 in., carted to Huonville in a
dray, and loaded on ketches. No attempt
was made at grading or packing in these
cases, possibly because they did not lend
themselves to any definate method, but
the fruit reached the consumer in a thor-
oughly satisfactory manner, and realised
payable prices.
; The settlers in these days grew most of
the food they required. There was al-
ways an abundance of milk, butter, eggs,
meat, fruit, and flour. The wheat was at
first ground at a mill owned by Wallace
Kellaway, at Woodstock, and later by
the mill owned by John Clark, father
of James Clark. These mills were driven
by water wheels. The one at “Woodside,”
now the residence of Mrs. James Clark,
North Franklin, was dismantled only a
few years ago, though, of course, it is
many years since it ceased operating.
The surplus produce of the farms was ex-
changed for necessities which could not
be grown locally.
THE TIMBER TRADE.
A big trade was also done in the first
days of the settlement of the Huon in
split palings. These were conveyed to
Hobart by ketches, and then exported to
Victoria. The discovery of gold at Bal-
larat and other Victorian centres in the
early ’sos, gave a great fillip to this trade.
The cutting down of the forests for the
export timber trade promoted settlement,
and enabled the settlers to get a double
benefit from the export of palings.
THE PARSONS FAMILY.
As already stated, the two eldest mem-
bers of Mr. Silas Parsons’ family were
born in England (Eliza and Roseanna).
The others were born in Tasmania, or
Van Diemen’s Land, as it was then called.
Emily (Mrs. J. Roberts) was born in
Hobart in 1836; Mary Ann (Mrs. E.
Nichols), in 1837 at Hobart; Charles, on
February 4, 1839, at Hobart; Ellen
(Mrs Aaron Clark), at Blackfish Creek,
on December 7, 1842; Silas George, at
Blackfish Creek, on June 22, 1843; Lucy
Marie (Mrs. Linnell), on March 27, 1846.
Mrs. Linnell is the only survivor of
the family. She celebrated her 90th
birthday this year, and received congra-
tulatory messages
from relatives and
friends in all parts
of Tasmania. She
married Mr. Isaac
funnel!, who came to
Tasmania with his
parents in the year
1845. Their first
home was at “Crow
Hall,” Ranelagh, but
they moved to
“Riversdale,” near
Huonville, in 1870,
where Mrs. Linnoll
has lived ever since.
Her husband met
with a tragic death
MRS. LINNELL.
on Christmas Eve, 1871. He was sailing a
small boat on the Huon River, near
Blackman’s Head, when the boat was
struck by a sudden squall and capsized.
Having a large quantity of ballast in it,
the boat sank, and although Mr. Linnell
was a good swimmer, and accustomed
to the management of a boat, he was un-
able to free himself. It was assumed
that he got entangled in the sail. He was
31 years of age at the time of his death.
The family comprised two sons and
three daughters, Messrs. Edward and
John Linnell, Mrs. Richard Skinner, Mrs.
Thos. D. Ball, and Miss Emily Linnell,
all of whom are living except the last
named, who died many years ago.
Mrs. Linnell’s name is the first on the
Franklin Church Register of Baptisms.
The church at this time was a small
wooden building, and was nearer the
main road than the present church
building.
PORT CYGNET
SOME EARLY VISITORS.
Port Cygnet is mentioned in history
as far back as 1793 by Comte de Fleurieu
in his records of the discovery and ex-
ploration by Admiral D’Entrecasteaux, of
what he named “Port de Cygne,” or as
we know it, Port Cygnet.
The first “Lady of Port Cygnet” to be
named in history was Oura Oura, an abor-
iginal girl of whom Peron, the historian
of the French expedition which landed at
Port Cygnet in 1802, wrote a most glow-
ing account. He describes her as a
“Belle Sauvage,” of between 16 and 17
years of age.
It is not definitely recorded when Port
Cygnet was next visited by white men, but
Garden Island (or as it was known then
Smooth Island) was used in May, 1804,
by Lieut. Bowen, the Governor of Risdon
Creek, to isolate eight mutinous prisoners
from Risdon, while he proceeded to ex-
plore the Huon River by boat. It is not
certain whether Port Cygnet was visited
by Bowen at that time-
The first white man to settle in Port
Cygnet was William Nicholls, about the
year 1834-5. Nicholls came to Tasmania
as a free emigrant in the year 1818,
settling at Brown’s River. Many will
remember his home at Brown’s River as
“The Old Curiosity Shop.”
Nicholls married and had a family of
eight children. After the birth of the
youngest child in 1833, and having heard
from some fishermen that there was good
land at Port Cygnet, he decided to pay the
place a visit in his long boat. Pleased
with what he saw he selected some land
on the eastern side of the bay, which was
conveyed to him as a free grant by the
Government. This is now known as
“Glenburn,” and was later acquired by
Mr. J. K. Clark. This land was well
watered by a permanent stream to which
Nicholls gave his name, and it has ever
since been known as Nicholls’ Rivulet.
William Nicholls made several trips to
Port Cygnet and by 1835 he had built a
house and brought his family from
Brown’s River. Part of the original
home is still standing, and is therefore
the oldest known building in Cygnet.
Nicholls is credited with having given
the names to many of the points and bays
in Port Cygnet.
In 1872 Thomas Nicholls, the youngest
son of William Nicholls, married Miss
Sarah Cowen. He started trading on
the river. He chartered the Lady Palm-
erston. Later he built a craft for him-
self, which he sold for £5OO. In 1877 he
had the ketch Good Intent, which had been
built by Mr. John Wilson, and traded in
her between Hobart and Port Cygnet till
1896. The family still carry on the river
trade. William Nicholls died about
1842-3. His wife lived to be 99.
SHIPBUILDING COMMENCES.
In 1841 William
Nicholls’ eldest
daughter married
Richard Wilson. In
the following year
their first child,
John, was born.
This John Wilson
was the founder of
the shipbuilding firm
of John Wilson and
Sons; he built ves-
sels in various parts
of the bay, and for
some years had his
shipyards located at
Martin’s Point. The
gradual silting up of the bay made it
necessary to transfer his plant to Rob-
ley’s Point on the opposite side of the bay,
at which place the sons still carry on the
business of shipbuilding.
The first vessel that John Wilson was
engaged on was, when, as a young man,
he worked' under Colin Walker in building
the Huon Belle, in 1863. Since then this
firm has built many fine vessels which are
trading in all parts of the Commonwealth.
VISITS BY LADY FRANKLIN.
During the period in which Sir John
Franklin was Governor of Tasmania
(1837-1843) Lady Franklin on more than
one occasion is known to have visited Port
Cygnet in her yacht, the Huon Pine. On
these visits she called on the residents
and questioned them about the district.
MRS. COWEN.
Fourth white woman settler at Cygnet.
MORE SETTLERS ARRIVE.
The Cowens were the second white
family to settle at Port Cygnet. They
arrived from Port Esperance in the year
1837, selecting land next to Nicholls’, at
Crooked Tree Point. This land is still in
the possession of the Cowen family. With
the Cowens a man named Poole arrived.
The Cowens had a family of two children
at this time, the eldest was a stepson to
Cowen and was the original Charles
Bleeze, whose son Charlie Bleeze is still
living here.
The next family to settle were the Par-
sells. By the year 1843 a number of
other white families had settled at Port
Cygnet, including the O’Rourkes, the
Henleys, and the Lancasters.
THOS. WALTON.
In 1836 Matthew Fitzpatrick emigrated
from County Cork, Ireland, with his wife
and two sisters. He took up a selection
at Petchey’s Bay, where he employed
many sawyers and splitters, sometimes
five or six hundred. His was the first
orchard at Petchey’s Bay. Afterwards
he moved to Cygnet and founded the home
“Glen Fern,” which is still owned and oc-
cupied by his descendants. His son
Matthew was born in 1849 and was sent
to England to be educated. In 1865
Matthew the younger returned to Port
Cygnet. He became a leading man in the
district: was territorial police magistrate
and afterwards Warden.
In 1855 Godfred Schultz came to Tas-
mania from Prussia, and settled at
Wattle Grove. With him was his son, a
boy of 10 years. He is Mr. William A.
Schultz, who is still living; an active
healthy man in spite of his great age.
For some years Mr. Schultz was a mem-
ber of the P.C. Fruit Board and the Road
Trust.
Joseph Harvey settled in Cygnet in
1849. His son, the late Mr. Robert Har-
vey, was born in 1855, and was for three
years Warden of the district, and inter-
Continued further on.
JOS. HARVEY.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


SIR JOHN & LADY FRANKLIN
THEIR VISITS TO THE HUON
Extracts from Lady Franklin's Diary
lyl 0 historical history of the Huon would be complete without a refer-
* ence to the part played by Sir John and Lady Franklin in the
early settlement of the district. Sir John’s love of adventure in
unknown lands prompted him to make a trip to the Huon shortly after
his arrival in Tasmania in 1837. Lady Franklin was no less anxious to
make personal acquaintance with a district that was so full of promise
and adventure, so she accompanied her husband on his first trip “down
south.”
BRIDLE TRACK TO THE HUON.
“The Hobart Town Gazette,” of Febru-
ary 13,1830, contains the following notice:
“A Bridle Road having been opened and
completed from Hobarton to the River
Huon, parties in search of land for loca-
tion have now the power of penetrating
with facility into the heart of an unex-
plored country in the south-western por-
tion of the Colony, and they can obtain
at the Survey Office further information
for their guidance.”
This notice, with its magic word “un-
explored,” would, of course, have an irre-
sistible attraction for that veteran ex-
plorer, Sir John Franklin, and his ener-
getic wife, and it is not surprising, there-
fore, to learn that, not long after their
arrival, the Franklins took up about 640
acres, close to the site of the present
Township which bears their name, and
that Lady Franklin is writing to her Blister
in London that she is off to Port Davey,
to see about “a small vessel of from 35 to
40 tons, for the service of my new settle-
ment in the Huon. She will cost,” she
says, “about £300.”
THE “HUON PINE” SAILING
VESSEL.
This vessel—a ketch —was named “The
Huon Pine,” and for three or four years
carried practically the whole of the trade
for the Huon district. When the Frank-
lin left, she was sold to Mr. John Clark,
and up to fairly recent years was to be
seen running on the Derwent, still under
her old name.
Having acquired her land, Lady Frank-
lin lost no time in settling people on it,
and in carrying on vigorous clearing
operations. She was accused, by the local
Press, of spending Government money and
employing Government labour for this
purpose, and for her own benefit, but there
is abundant evidence that this charge—
like so many other charges which were
levelled against her by her critics—was
quite unfounded. Indeed the publishers
had afterwards to withdraw and apologise
for the insinuation.
By the way, it is said that this intrepid
lady always went about the Huon bush in
men’s trousers—an unheard-of piece of
heroism in those days for a lady of her
station!
TRIP TO THE MAINLAND
In 1839, Lady Franklin crossed over to
the mainland and, after visiting Mel-
bourne, then in its infancy, journeyed on
horseback to Sydney, taking six weeks on
the trip and camping out in the bush on
the way. While she was away, Sir John
wrote lengthy letters to her reporting
various public matters, and telling her
of the progress being made at the Huon.
In May, 1839, he says: “Mr. Walter has
come from the Huon, to ask whether your
labourers may not receive twopence a
week more during the present very high
price of flour, as it is impossible for them
to get it on their present wages. Mr.
Walter tells me that they are working ex-
tremely well, and that they clear land, at
the rate they are now working, at £lO per
acre. I have, therefore, sanctioned this
, addition of twopence, under the express
condition of its coming down when the
price of wheat falls. Mr. Walter speaks
very favourably of his potato crop, for
which he has been offered twelve pounds
a ton. Your crop is not quite so good—
the potatoes as yet are not quite ready.
They will, however, make a good return ..
ST. MARY’S CHURCH, FRANKLIN.
“The Church” (St. Mary’s Church of
England) “is nearly ready, and, when it
is, I will beg of the Archdeacon” (Hut-
chins) “to go down with me. Mr. Walter
has got on with his new house. He has
made many bricks, and has found a
limestone that will do for cement, as he
thinks. There is not a happier or more
contented man.”
CAPT. ROSS’ SELECTION.
In 1840 Captains Ross and Crozier ar-
rived at Hobart Town in the Erebus and
Terror on their expedition to the
Antarctic, and spent much time with their
old friends, the Franklins, who apparently
fired Captain Ross with the desire to pur-
chase land at the Huon, for after he had
left on his return to England Lady Frank-
lin writes to her sister in London:
“I have at last executed Captain Ross’s
commission and bought him an estate in
Tasmania, at a sale of Crown land. A
few months ago an allotment of 640 acres
was put up by my Huon neighbour, Mr.
Clark, and knocked down to him at the
price of twelve shillings per acre. The
present price of land, whether good or
bad, is one pound per acre, but the allot-
ment in question had been originally put
up for sale when the upset price was only
twelve shillings. It was, therefore, put
up again, according to regulation, at the
same price, and Clark not being rich
enough to pay for the whole, and wanting
only 200 acres, I took the remaining 400
off his hands, and not having been able to
do anything better for Capt. Ross, it was
with the view of transferring it to him
that I completed the bargain. Capt.
Ross left with me £350, his half year’s
salary, for the purchase of land. This
has been augmented a little by interest.
“Thus, he will perceive that I have not
spent the whole of his money in the pur-
chase, but that, after paying for the 400
acres at twelve shillings, and after the ex-
pense of the deed and the survey, there
is still a considerable remainder available
for its improvement, or for any other pur-
pose . . . His kind desire was that, if pos-
sible, his land should be joined to ours—
now this is effected, the same side-line
that bounds our property of ‘Huon Fern-
lands’ at the upper end forms his side-
line at the lower end of his.
MARSHY LAND ALONG FRONTAGE.
“There is this peculiar feature in the
estate, however, that a swamp, or marshy
meadow, extends for some portion of the
river frontage, under the line of hill which
continues the Fernlands line. At the back
of the swamp the hill rises abruptly,
densely timbered, but the soil is very good.
I have sent down a surveyor, to divide it
into 50 or 100 acre blocks, and there are,
people already wanting to purchase por-
tion of it, or to lease it. If Capt. Ross
has never possessed 400 acres before in
the world, which may be his case, as it was
with Sir John, he will, I hope, feel himself
now a person of some importance!
“I shall bring Capt. Ross some speci-
mens of the soil, and of its wild produce
—a bit of wattle from his own Tasman-
ian estate will, I think, be acceptable to
him. I hope to get Bishop Nixon, who
is a beautiful artist, to make me a draw-
ing of Capt. Ross’s place, and of our
own.”
(It would be interesting to know
whether Bishop Nixon ever made this
drawing, and, if so, where it is now.)
FAREWELL VISIT.
“In a few weeks’ time,” continues Lady
Franklin, “we hope to pay a farewell
visit to the spot, in order that the Bishop
may perform some of his functions there,
and that we may try and get up a Church
and School. There is at present nothing
but my wooden Chapel, but no clergyman,
and no schoolmaster. In November, when
I was last there, there were on the settle-
ment 116 souls, now increased.”
In November, 1843, Sir John and his
wife, accompanied by Bishop Nixon, paid
their farewell visit, of which the follow-
ing account is taken from Lady Franklin’s
own diary:
November, 1843. “On arrival at the
Huon River we anchored under Huon
Island for the night, and next morning
proceeded up the river in a boat, with a
tew bundles and a basket of provisions.
Mr. Gell” (the Rev. John Philip Cell, who
was then engaged to Eleanor Franklin,
Sir John’s only child), “Eleanor, and my-
self, and my maid intending to stop for
the night at Mr. Clark’s.
ARRIVAL AT MR. CLARK’S.
“About ten o’clock we left Mr. Clark’s
in his boat, and were landed in the bush-
covered part of the swamp below, being
part of the 640 acres lately purchased,
just where the side-line is traced between
Clark’s and Capt. Ross’s division of it.
Clark has already cleared partially, by
contract, 25 acres of his own portion ad-
joining his old farm, and has potatoes
planted on it. I wished to tread upon and
look at a fair specimen of his land, and
took with me a box to bring away some
of the mould in. There is a tolerably
good foot-path through the bush swamp,
made by the splitters, who have been at
work here, and who then lay down
branches and logs across the path and cut
steps in the prostrate trunks of trees, to
facilitate their passage when loaded with
heavy burdens. I filled one of the divi-
sions of my box with soil. . .
“AND THE MOSQUITOES.”
“Returning to the boat we saw the
schooner party—Sir John, the Bishop,
Sophy” (Miss Cracroft, Sir John’s
niece), “Miss Williamson, and Mr. Kerr,
advancing up the river in their boat. We
greeted them on arrival amidst a swarm
of mosquitoes, which infested the shore
of the swamp. Mr. Gell said they were
all, as it were, strangers and birds of pas-
sage in these regions, except the Bishop,
who was a part of the natural history of
the country, the same as the birds and the
trees. When I reported this to the Bishop
I said, ‘the same as the birds, and the
trees, and the mosquitoes!’, for which he
menaced me with vengeance!
LOWER LONGLEY, HOME OF SMALL FRUITS AND MARKET GARDENS, TAKEN FROM SUNNYSIDE.
THE FIRST CHRISTENING.
“We were struck with the very pretty
position of Dr. Bright’s house (late Bar-
nett’s) , on its knoll, and with the Walter’s
cottage in the rear, completely enveloped
in creepers.. .
“The bell was ringing for church as we
landed at the jetty. Mr. Herring was
there to receive us, and a group of women,
with Mr. Kellaway, were waiting outside
the church door, including Mrs. Kellaway,
with her little daughter of about five
years old, who was to be christened. Mrs.
Clark, with her baby—a little girl of
nine months, who, it was settled, was to
receive my name. She is a fine young
woman, the daughter of William Kella-
way.
“The Bishop robed at Thorp’s cottage,
where some cold plum pudding and cake
had been provided for us. Mr. Cell hav-
ing also put on his surplice, and a chair
for the Bishop, and a table and cloth for
the Communion table having been pro-
cured, we entered the Chapel, which was
crowded. There were, I think, as many as
a hundred people inside, and a few re-
mained outside. In the midst of the ser-
vice the Bishop baptised four children,
viz., the little girl before-mentioned, who
stood before him with a look of great in-
terest and veneration as he laid his hand
on her head—a little girl of nine days old,
brought by Mrs. Coleman, who was
christened Maria, the child of an over-
seer or tenant of Dr. Bright, of the name
of Watson, a bouncing boy of nine months,
the child of a person named Parsons,
higher up the river, who was christened
Silas George, and Mrs. Clark’s little baby.
On the Bishop saying ‘Name this child,’
the answer was ‘Jane Franklin Louisa.’
“ ‘What?’ said the Bishop. It was re-
peated. The Bishop’s eyes twinkled, and
the sweet little baby, which had one of the
finest pair of eyes I ever saw, received its
name. Mr. Herring acted as Clerk, and
his Amens were given in a most profes-
sional style.
“The Bishop’s sermon was taken from
the text, ‘Ye are bought with a price.’
The people listened with much attention.
He closed it with an earnest exhortation
to attendance at the Communion which
was to follow .. .
“After service we went in Mr. Kella-
way’s boat to Clark’s, stopping on the way
to inspect Mr. Cell's allotment. His
tenants appeared to like him, and sug-
gested that he might stop and be their
Minister and schoolmaster, and if he knew
any Doctoring so much the better! When
I told the Bishop afterwards he said,
‘What? Cell? It would be like putting
a racehorse to draw a sand-cart!’
SUPPER AT CLARK’S.
“On arriving at Clark’s, we found Mrs.
Clark had gone to her father’s, with the
baby, to make room for us. Clark slept
by the kitchen fire, and the rest of the ac-
commodation was given up to us. He
had prepared a loin of roast pork and cold
plum pudding for our supper, with some
magnificent potatoes, and we left him in
exchange half a round of beef and several
joints of mutton. The evening closed with
Mr. Cell reading evening prayers. I gave
Clark a handsome Bible and Prayer Book,
for his baby, in which I wrote her name
and the following inscription in the Bible:
‘Suffer little children to come unto Me,’
and in the Prayer Book the text of the
Bishop’s sermon, ‘Ye are bought with a
price.’ ” (Are these books still in the pos-
session of that little girl’s family, I won-
der?)
LADY FRANKLIN VISITS HER
TENANTS.
The next morning was spent in visiting
tenants and transacting business. “I
signed,” she says, “Barnett’s deed, giving
him, at his request, another year’s grace.
I did the same thing for Herring. We
then took leave of the Geeves, and landed
at the Township, where I pointed out to
the Bishop the piece of land which I
destined for the clergyman, enclosed by
Good’s and Thorp’s locations, the brook,
and the Huon. I visited the new white-
washed cottage of Coleman, which is the
neatest I have seen on the settlement. It
consists of three rooms—the entrance one,
which is kitchen, parlour, and bedroom,
and a third, furnished with a table and
benches, which I thought looked like a
drinking room, but which Mrs. Coleman
informed me was used for praying.
Geeves, who is an Independent, was there,
with his follower®. They pray and sing,
and he reads a sermon from a book. I
looked into Ballantyne’s, and he
apologised for the non-payment of the
money due, but he had, as usual, such a
woeful, threadbare appearance, that I
could not find fault with him. We bought
of him a goat in milk, which I had
formerly given him, and his wife gave us
a few green gooseberries. We then pulled
down the river in perfect silence, and Mr.
Cell’s heart, no doubt, felt the hour of
parting was at hand.”
THE FAREWELL DINNER.
Then follows a description of the fare-
well dinner on board the schooner:
, “After dinner, at which Mr. Herring
sat down with us in his blue flannel
smock frock, Clark was sent for, and we
drank to the health of ‘Jane Franklin
Louisa,’ and her mother and father.
Clark learned with surprise, as Mr. Kella-
way had done the evening before, that I
had paid Sandy Mackay, some years ago,
five pounds to find a better road for them
from Hobarton. They knew that he had
only made a pretence of searching for a
road, and had merely gone into the bush
and come out again, reporting that no bet-
ter line of road could be found than the
existing one. The inhabitants are now
determined to make a bridle road for
themselves. Dr. Bright has promised £5,
Mr. Kellaway £5, Clark £5. I promised
them £5. Clark said if they could get
£3O it would do. ‘Well,’ says the Bishop,
T will give you £s.’ ‘And I, too,’ said
Sir John. The Bishop promised me he
would take a particular charge of them
all, for my sake.
“The time of parting had arrived. It
was already dark, and Mr. Cell had to be
taken back to Mr. Kellaway’s, with whom
next morning he was to walk through the
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


m
iw
mm
CLEMES COLLEGE
393 ARGYLE STREET, HOBART
(Established 1900)
THE SCHOOL WITH THE PERSONAL TOUCH
DAY and BOARDING SCHOOL for BOYS and GIRLS
Founder’s Ideals Strictly Adhered to. Situated in Beautiful Grounds.
Large, Airy Classrooms, Science Laboratories, Metal
and Sloyd Rooms Unrivalled.
Splendid Opportunity for those
: Undertaking Research Work :
Country Boys Encouraged to be Proficient in Engineering Branches.
TURF PRACTICE-WICKETS, TENNIS COURTS, SWIMMING POOL.
Fruit, Vegetables, Jam, Milk, Cream, etc., Produced on the Premises.
HOME ATMOSPHERE for Kindergarten Boarders a
SPECIAL FEATURE, Girls have facilities in all accom-
plishments—Art, Singing, Needlework, Dressmaking,
Deportment, Music, Elocution
PUPILS PREPARED FOR ALL EXAMINATIONS.
Principal W, H. CLEMES, B.A, B.Sc.
The first attempt to provide educa-
tion in Van Diemen’s Land was made
in 1806 when Governor Collins wrote
to Lord Castlereagh that he had bought
for £BOO a house and 100 acres of land
at Sandy Bay saying . . . “My principal
view in making this purchase is in ap-
plying the house to the purpose of a
school for the education of the children
belonging to the Colony . . . and I should
suppose that a respectable man and his
wife might be sent out in the capacity
of a school master and mistress who
might be supported from the produce
of the farm.”
Though the authorities failed to sup-
port the venture Collins evidently made
some effort to provide education, for
Governor Bligh in 1809 wrote disparag-
ingly of “a shell of a building called
the Orphan School a shelter alter-
nately for men and cattle.”
The first regular school was main-
tained in Davey Street, Hobart Town,
by an ex-convict, Thomas Fitzgerald,
who commenced teaching in 1807 and
charged weekly fees. In 1812 he was
definitely appointed by the Governor and
received £lO per annum salary, for
which he had to teach poor children
and the children of convicts. Later this
was raised lo £25 at the request of
Governor Sorell.
During the next decade these “Govern-
ment aid” schools increased to eleven
in six districts, Hobart Town, Pittwater
(Sorell), New Norfolk, Clarence Plains,
Humphrey’s River, and Port Dalrymple.
Meanwhile private schools kept pace and
among those established in the 1820’s
were:—A boarding school for boys (Mr.
T. Stone, master); a day school for
girls (Miss Garrett, mistress); a school
for French, Latin, and Fencing (Mr.
Rodd, master); Miss G. Clark conducted
a favourite and respectable school for
girls at Ellenthorpe Hall, near Ross; a
day school with curriculum to include
English, Latin, writing, and book-keep-
ing (Mr. Headlam, master).
All schools at this time were badly
in need of suitable apparatus, and it is
interesting to find that the spelling book
supposed to be used cost four shillings
a copy. An attempt to relieve the posi-
tion in 1821 resulted in the printing and
publishing in the Colony of a small read-
ing primer for infants at two shillings
a copy.
From 1824 to 1836 under Governor
Arthur the progress of education was
rapid. When he took control there were
but six public (State) schools in the
Colony. On his retirement in 1836
there were twenty-nine. Infant schools
had been established by the Hobart
Town Infant School Society which re-
lied on voluntary contributions for
funds. Its descendant still exists in the
same way as the Free Kindergarten
Association. In addition the idea of a
University had been brought before the
public mind.
MORE VIGOROUS POLICY
ADOPTED.
In consequence when Governor
Arthur’s successor, Sir John Franklin,
arrived in 1837 there was prepared at
least a foundation upon which the new
Governor could build his educational
policy. The appointment of Sir John
Franklin as Lieutenant-Governor marks
the beginning of a new era in educa-
tional effort in the Colony together with
the initial settlement of the Huon dis-
trict.
In 1838 all schools receiving Govern-
ment aid were brought under the con-
trol of a Board of Education and a code
of rules and regulations was drawn up
for their establishment and proper
management. Regulation 4 provides:—
“As a general basis, the lowest number
for which public assistance will be given
to form a school is limited, in Hobart
Town and Launceston, to 40; in town-
ships to 20; and in other places when-
ever 15 may with facility be brought
daily together, a school will be estab-
lished.”
To-day, 98 years later, it is still neces-
sary for a centre to raise 20 children
bush into town. I left the dinner table,
and retired into the back cabin, whither
Eleanor joined me. Mr. Cell soon came
in. I clasped him in my arms, whilst he
sobbed with intense emotion. Leaving
him with Eleanor I then stood upon the
ladder, to avoid the rain on deck, and the
company of anyone else.”
The next morning the schooner weighed
anchor and departed for Melbourne,
where Sir John and Lady Franklin
sailed in January for England.
Some years after her return to England
Lady Franklin gave her property at the
Huon to Christ College to endow the
Franklin Scholarship there, and that
scholarship is now available at the Hut-
chins School, though the land itself is now
m other hands.
THE EDVELOPMENT OF EDUCATION IN
THE HUON
before a school building is provided
from public funds, though a provisional
or Grade VII. school may be opened if
residents will provide suitable accom-
modation and 10 or more children at-
tend, while if there are less than 10,
but at least two families, a subsidy
from public funds is paid to a teacher
appointed by a committee of parents.
TEACHERS’ SALARIES.
The method of payment in these early
days to the teacher is worthy of notice.
A dual system was introduced. The
teacher obtained his salary partly from
Government aid and partly from school
fees derived from the parents. This
system was not abolished until 1910.
INDIFFERENCE TOWARDS
EDUCATION.
The next report available is made by
Thos. Arnold, Inspector of Schools in
Van Diemen’s Land in 1854, the son of
the famous Dr. Arnold, Headmaster of
Rugby, who was induced by Franklin
to take charge of the educational system
of the Colony. There were then m the
Huon district four schools—at Ship-
wright's Point, under A. Oldfield; Vic-
toria, H. Cane; Franklin, James Free-
man; and Flight’s Bay, Jas. McLean.
The next year schools were opened at
Port Cygnet and Castle Forbes Bay.
Arnold reports that “Public Education
in this Colony has much to contend
with in the indifference with which the
subject is frequently regarded. No plea
is thought too trifling to excuse a child’s
absence from school.”
“An amusing instance occurred while
visiting a school. I inquired the rea-
son why the children of a certain family
living within reasonable distance never
attended school—‘They don’t come in
Winter, Sir,’ was the reply, ‘because
their mother says the roads are so bad.’
‘Yes, but why do they not come in
Summer?’ The answer was, ‘Because
the Father says there’s snakes about.’ ”
The following year schools were es-
tablished at Port Esperance and Birch’s
Bay, but in 1860 Inspector J. J. Stutzer
reported that four schools only had con-
tinued for more than three years to
exist in this region. However, during
that year seven more were added, two
of which were under names now remem-
bered only by the few pioneers left, viz.,
Swanton and Lightwood Bottom.
EARLY DIFFICULTIES.
The schools in these early years of
the Huon Settlement were carried on
under the handicaps of untrained teach-
ers, makeshift accommodation of an in-
spectorial system improvement began.
For instance, in the early ’sixties we
find such reports as that furnished on
[Victoria (Ranelagh) School: “This
school was till recently in a very in-
efficient state. It is now conducted by
a passed Pupil Teacher and his mother.
The improvement has been very great.
The children write fairly from dictation.
They are nearly all taught geography
and grammar; 21 girls learn sewing;
7 boys and girls can work sums in
fractions; instruction is given in choral
singing. Victoria is the wealthiest part
of the Huon district and can always sup-
port a good school. The present build-
ing is very insufficient, but the inhabi-
tants have subscribed £lOO towards a
new one, which is about to be built.
The irregularity of attendance on the
part of the children is much to be re-
gretted.” In 1868 additions were made
at a cost of £134, of which £44 13s. 4d.
was raised locally. This building is
now part of the present teacher’s resi-
dence.
Of Franklin School in 1860 the report
states, inter alia:—“lrregularity of at-
tendance at Franklin is particularly
great. The children are withdrawn by
their parents on any frivolous pretext.
The school is a very handsome new
building, well situated with ample ac-
commodation (this is the main part of
the present building). Mr. and Mrs.
Chambers are thoroughly painstaking
and respectable. The school is well
visited, but the district is much divided
and local quarrels impede education.
The number of pupils has, however,
doubled in the last two years.” How
different is the situation to-day, when
the parents in their Association heartily
co-operate with the teachers for the
welfare and improvement of their
school.
SCHOLARSHIPS.
In 1860 the Government offered Ex-
hibitions, that is scholarships, worth
£l6 13s. 4d. per annum for three years,
to children under 13 for attendance at
Superior Schools. These superior
schools were the private secondary
schools chiefly in Hobart and Launces-
ton. It is not until 1880 that records
show the first Exhibition was awarded
to a Huon scholar in the person of
Annie E. Thyssen, probably from
Geeveston School. Thomas James Stubs,
of Upper Huon, and Lavinia Jane Thorp,
of Franklin, each gained one the next
It is more than probable that in the
very early days of the Settlement the
Church established a school, but the
first official reference to a school in the
Huon district is to a Government Grant
in 1848 of £l3 6s. 9d. for six months
to a school at Huon Settlement
(Franklin).
THE FIRST TEACHERS.
The first teachers at the principal
Huon schools and the year of their ap-
pointment were:—The Settlement
(Franklin), teacher’s name not recorded,
1848; Castle Forbes Bay, Eliza Wil-
liams, 1855; Birch’s Bay, Harriette
Storer, 1856; Franklin, Mr. and Mrs.
Chambers, 1858; Port Cygnet, Mr. and
Mrs. H. Lindsay, 1858; Long Bay, Mr.
and Mrs. Wm. Stevens, 1859; Light-
wood Bottom, Mr. Geo. Watson, 1859;
Victoria, Mr. Sami. Hammett and
mother, 1860; Lightwood Bottom, Mary
Sloper, 1860; Port Esperance, Mr.
Thomas Tutton, 1860; Shipwright’s
Point, Miss Blofield, 1860; Three Hut
Point, a male teacher, 1860.
Conly, later E. Jackson; steam ketch
Moonah, J. Mason; s.s. Nubeena, White-
house.
The outward cargoes, both local and
inter-State, consisted mainly of sawn tim-
ber and palings, but fruit becomes in-
creasingly prominent in its season. The
Rachel Cohen, Capt. Jas. Davis, owner O.
Geeves, was probably the first boat carry-
ing fruit inter-State from Port Huon with
anything approaching regularity.
SHIPBUILDING.
Several residents of Geeveston engaged
in shipbuilding, like the settlers further
up the river. A special article deals with
this industry but among the boats and
builders not referred to therein are the
ketch Thistle, owned by Mr. R. Hill, the
captain of which was the late H. Thiessen.
John Geeves owned the ketch Caledonia
and the Speedwell. Sam Sutton, who
skippered both, was killed by the fall of
the Speedwell’s mast. 0. Geeves owned
the Uncle Tom, sailed successively by him-
self and Messrs. Emmett, Patmore, and
John Connors. During the early 70’s he
leased the brig Camilla from Belbin and
Dowdell, of Hobart, and ran the first in-
ter-State boat from Port Huon to Sydney,
the cargo being timber. About 1886 O.
Geeves bought the brigantine Rachel
Cohen for the inter-State and New Zea-
land trade, and also ran the schooner Fal-
con and the brigantine Eliza Forth.
year, while three years later two more
Franklin scholars, Ellen E. McMullen
and Elsie I. Barnett, distinguished them-
selves in the same way.
HUON HIGH SCHOOL.
In 1921 a High School was established
at Huonville, but received so little sup-
port that after a few months’ trial the
classes were discontinued.
NEW NAM;ES ADOPTED.
During the ’seventies the centres of
population became fixed and the modern
names adopted. Thus in 1879 we first
read of Dover and Raminea instead of
Port Esperance No. 1 and No. 2. At
that time there were 19 schools in the
Huon and Channel districts.
BETTER BUILDINGS ERECTED.
Naturally, following this fixture of
settlement we find a considerable school
building boom, and in 1883 and 1884 no
less than 9 old buildings were discarded
and new ones provided at a cost of
nearly £3,000. To-day six of these are
still in use after further additions or
remodelling, while the remaining three
and many others throughout the Huon
have now thoroughly up-to-date build-
ings. A few of the older ones remain,
but in the near future a trip round the
Huon and Channel should discover a
modern school in every centre.
From 1890 until to-day the schools in
the district have steadily increased in
number, have been equipped with mod-
ern furniture and teaching aids, while
the Course of Instruction has developed
with the rapid growth of latter day
ideals in education. On the educational
tree the newest spur to bud, blossom
and fruit is the interest of the people
in their schools—so opposite from the
lack of it in early criticisms quoted. The
wider interests now invading school
curricula are more attractive, and reach
into the minds of scholars’ developing
powers that under the older and more
rigid type of teaching would possibly
have remained dormant, though the
criticisms of an elderly teacher on the
multiplicity of interests to the detriment
of thoroughness are not to be despised.
Little has been said of the teacher
pioneers of the Huon, but their names
are still recalled in many homes, some
with affection and gratitude, some, alas,
with other tender memories.
FIRST SCHOOL IN THE HUON.
Soon after Franklin’s famous journey
across Van Diemen’s Land a settlement
was formed on the Huon River at the
instigation of Lady Franklin and for
some time known as The Settlement,
jut was later called Franklin in honour
)f its founder, Lady Franklin.
December, 1936. • “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.
SIR JOHN AND LADY FRANKLIN (Cent.).
DEVELOPMENT OF GEEVESTON
(Continued).


Information, Literature, and Tickets from
TASMANIAN GOVERNMENT TOURIST BUREAUX
in all Capital Cities of the Australian Commonwealth
Hi
ciimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinii
II 11 11 11 1 11 1 11 1II 11 1 11 m 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 1 i 11 1 11 i 11 11 1M 1 11 11 11 11 1 1II
miiiuiiiiiiiiiiiimmiiiiiiiiui
I.—- — c • ' f;-*v
s- - . yy-Ar: i. :*!
■- -
r " ‘ ' ■< '■* ■fi ■ 5» ■’ t IviST-i,
' v, -
»* s .: .
* v Q-'j-wM
' - •
■••fvA
• ‘-.v i: ■
' l '
A
■ ■
*K* .
-l» ,x t
Kz
rk
* if
I i 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 1 11 1 11 11 11 LI I
11111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111
lllllllllllllilllllllllllllllllllllll
O =
warn • "
D. =
Q =
E
— I E
O =
c =
-I
to =
c =
3 =
Q- =
O =
3“
a>
3 3
3 n
2 =“
<
* a>
?o
g s
7 1
ro u*
HW
o n>
= 3
= to
>
to
7T
O =
DO =
O =
O =
=
o i
o E
3“
CD
to
□r*
HR •
3
(O
o
o
3
Q
O3 O
= . CD 2 ■
3 Q O
to n
" =- Q
<
O
O
Q &
a.
to
a.
± <s>
H £ 5
-i o a*
g z. 5
= n cq
Q f“
m °
2 *"
Q_
ur
n
o a.
S
to
fD
O
C
3 cr
Q O
5 -v< to
J" o H
<-+ Q
O to
S - 3
< Q
O 3
“T —•
U)
to
#*
*
*4
■*>*
■■ ■
-;.v ■
{
S ’
AwEmj.
>«;
ar
r-
a
o
Q
>
CO
a>
n
n>
o-
CO
n>
o
3
n>
co
n>
n'
n>
to
n>
JO
c
n>
3
fl>
-t
to
O
n
o
3
'T
Q
&:
r>
o
3
a.
c
X
c
3
n>
-i
to
O
<
n>
cr
CO
h a
FTII
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


"APPLE LAND OF THE COMMONWEALTH"
Romantic Development of a Great Industry.
From Forests to Smiling Orchards.
TASMANIA, and especially the Huon, appears to have been designed
by Nature for the production of apples, and it is somewhat re-
markable that the first Englishmen who landed on the Island had
provided themselves with a supply of fruit trees for the purpose of
planting them in the unknown lands in the South, for which their ex-
pedition was fitted out. History records that almost 150 years ago
the first fruit trees brought to Tasmania were planted at Adventure
Bay, Bruny Island. Further plantings took place near Hobart and
George Town in 1828; on the Huon, near Cygnet, in 1838; and later
at Franklin, Grove, and Geeveston.
The romantic story of the develop-
ment of the apple growing industry in
Tasmania is one of the most remarkable
aspects of the settlement of the island.
In 1788, when the first British settlers
landed in New South Wales, Van Die-
men’s Land (as Tasmania was then
known) was visited by the historic ship
Bounty, commanded by Lieutenant Wil-
liam Bligh. The vessel anchored off
Adventure Bay, Bruny Island, on the
morning of August 21, and remained in
that vicinity until September 3. In that
period Lieutenant Bligh, upon the re-
commendation of the botanist, David
Nelson, who was associated with the ex-
pedition of the Bounty, planted a num-
ber of fruit trees on a selected site on
the east side of the bay. This locality
was selected because the soil was good
and to avoid the risk of the trees being
destroyed by bush fires, which _ the
natives were said to be in the habit of
starting. The fruit trees planted were
three young apple trees, nine vines, six
plantain (species of banana) trees,
cherry, plum, peach, and apricot stones,
a number of orange and lemon seeds,
pumpkins, two sorts of Indian corn and
apple and pear pips. Unfortunately
Bligh’s chart of Adventure Bay, show-
ing the position of the plantations, was
lost during the famous mutiny on the
Bounty, but it is known that certain of
the fruit trees were planted near East
Cove. The assistant botanist. Brown,
planted the first apple tree in the island
in this vicinity. At the head of the
Cove, near Quiet Corner, potatoes, cab-
bage roots, and onions were planted,
the first potatoes being planted by the
Chief Botanist, David Nelson.
GROWTH OF THE FIRST FRUITS.
Bligh left Adventure Bay on Septem-
ber 3, 1788, but he revisited the island
in 1792 in command of two ships, the
Providence and the Assistant, which
anchored in Adventure Bay, near East
Cove, on the morning of February 8.
In the log of the Providence Bligh re-
corded that “It was a peculiar satisfac-
tion to me to find one of the apple trees
I planted here in 1788. Only one re-
mained, and this, although alive and
healthy, had not made a shoot exceeding
12 or 13 inches.”
In a further entry in the log, Bligh
stated that “the most valuable of the
articles I have this time planted are
nine fine young oak plants, about eight
inches high. They were planted in East
Cove, on the slope of the hill on the left
hand side of the flat as you land, about
200 or 300 yards from the waterside.
A little below the oaks are planted five
fig trees, three pomegranates, three
quinces, and 20 strawberries. On Pen-
guin Island and Grass Point we sowed
fir seed, apricot and peach stones.”
The Providence and Assistant left Ad-
venture Bay on Wednesday, February
22, and in February of the following
year, 1793, Van Diemen’s Land was
visited by the French ships under the
command of the celebrated navigator,
Rear-Admiral Bruny D’Entrecasteaux,
after whom the channel between Bruny
Island and the Mainland was named. In
his account of the French expedition’s
visit to the island, D’Entrecasteaux re-
ferred to Bligh’s visit to Adventure Bay,
and stated that in the vicinity of the
Bay the French saw three young fig
trees, two pomegranate trees, and a
quince tree, which the English had plant-
ed. The trees have grown well, but it
appears that one of them has perished,
for in the vicinity the following inscrip-
tion was found cut on a tree trunk:
“Near this tree Captain William Bligh
planted seven fruit trees, 1792. Messrs.
S. and W. (Wiles and Smith) Botanists.”
With the coming of the white settlers
to Tasmania in 1803, and the subsequent
colonisation of the island, fruit orchards
began to be planted in many parts of
the colony. But, although the history of
apple culture in Tasmania dates back
to the very first days of settlement, few
records survive of the early orchards.
The “Hobart Town Courier” of 1828 re-
ported that in the Government garden,
FRUIT
in the paddock, now known as the Do-
main, there was an apple tree of the
variety called “Humphrey’s Apple,”
which was forming its fourth crop for
the season. It was stated that several
blossoms were unfolding themselves,
and that the first crop had long since
been gathered, two or three of the
second still remained on the branches,
and that the third crop was very abund-
ant, although the crop was not quite as
large as the first two. Humphrey’s
Apple, it is interesting to note, was so
called after Humphrey, a noted pioneer
of early Tasmania, in whose memory
the rivulet at Glenorchy on the outskirts
of Hobart was named. In 1828 it was
also reported that apples were being sold
?,t lower prices, and were only bringing
m an average 10/ per bushel. Accord-
ing to what information is available, at
this time orchards had been planted in
the northern part of the island, and a
number of trees planted in 1827 at York
Town, West Tamar, are still in exist-
ence and bearing fruit.
FIRST EXPORT APPLES TO
SCOTLAND.
The year 1828 seems to have been an
outstanding one for the apple industry;
:'or in this year the late Mr. D. Stans-
reld, of Rokeby, then known as Clarence
Plains, despatched a quantity of apples
picked from his orchard to Mr. Robert
Neil, of the Commissariat Office at
Hobart, and the latter, in turn, forward-
’d them to Edinburgh by the brig Hind,
oy Captain A. Rodgers. This, it seems,
marked the beginning of the vast apple
oxport trade, which has been expanding
tor more than a century, and today
amounts annually to about four millions
of cases of fruit to inter-State and over-
seas markets. It affords employment to
thousands of pei’sons, and has been
chiefly responsible for the prosperity of
the Huon district.
DEVELOPMENT IN THE HUON. .
The establishment and growth of the
apple industry in the Huon forms an
even more remarkable story than that
of the development of the industry in
other parts of the State. Apple culture
in the Huon commenced in the ’forties
of the previous century, and as shown
by the latest export figures, has grown
so rapidly that the district has become
famous for its fruit throughout the Em-
pire. The first orchard, it is believed,
was laid out by a Mr. Williams, at
Garden Island Creek, about nine miles
below Cygnet, about the year 1838, and
this was followed by the planting of an
orchard by Mr. James Garth, near
where the jetty now stands at Police
Point, on the Huon River. The exact
date of the planting of the first com-
mercial orchards at Franklin or Grove,
which were the next places to attract
settlers, cannot be definitely stated. It
is probable that the late Mr. John Clark,
grandfather of Messrs. A. J. and F. M.
Clark, planted the first apple trees at
Franklin. He took up the property
known as Woodside in 1837, and very
shortly afterwards planted some apple
and pear trees, which he obtained from
Government House gardens, Hobart. It
is believed that some of these trees are
rtill bearing. Two years later (in 1839)
Mr. Silas Parsons, who arrived in Van
Diemen’s Land in 1833 with his wife
and two young daughters, and engaged
in dairying near Hobart, decided to move
down to the Huon. He took up a selec-
tion at Blackfish Creek, Grove. The
land was covered with big trees and
scrub. The first consideration was the
erection of a house for his family,
which Mr. Parsons accomplished with
the aid of his assigned servants. A
few weeks after the birth of his young-
er son, Charles Joseph, Mr. Parsons
moved his family to their new home,
which was a big undertaking in those
days, as there was only a blazed track
from Hobart Town to the Huon. The
young settler then gave his attention
to the growing of vegetables and wheat.
He brought his dairy herd from his pre-
vious property, so that there was al-
ways an abundance of milk and butter.
Clearing the land was a difficult pro-
blem owing to the size of the trees.
After the paling, shingle, and stave
splitters had picked out the best of the
timber the land was burnt off for more
intense culture. . The cleared area
gradually increased, and when this
r mounted to three acres it was planted
ORCHARDS AT CASTLE FORBES BAY.
out with apple trees. It is assumed that
this was in the ’forties. The scions of
the trees were obtained by Mr. Parsons
from his friend, Mr. Joseph Allport, who
was a loading solicitor in Hobart Town
at the time, and owned a fine property
in Upper Davey Street, extending up
the hill from Elboden Street. The first
tree which bore fruit was called a Hol-
lander, and is not now grown. The
Prince Alfred apple was a seedling,
planted by Mrs. Parsons, and bore its
first fruit the year the Duke of Edin-
burgh visited Tasmania (1868). She
named it Prince Alfred in honour of the
Royal visitor.
OTHER EARLY PLANTINGS.
Other settlers in the early ’forties
who planted apples were Thomas Bar-
nett, Thomas Judd, and William Cuthbert
at Franklin. All of these orchards are
still being cultivated, but very few of
the original trees remain. Many of them
were destroyed this year, while others
have been “refurnished” with new varie-
ties. Descendants of the original
settlers retain each of the properties
named.
FIRST GEEVESTON ORCHARD.
The planting of the first orchard at
Geeveston took place in 1851. In that
year Mr. William Geeves moved from
Franklin and took up a selection on the
banks of the Kermandie Rivulet, and on
June 3 of that year planted 22 apple
trees, comprising two each of Ribstone
Pippins, Windsor Pippins. Scarlet Pear-
mains. and Blenheim Orange; three
French Crabs; one Alexander; seven
Stone Pippins. The stocks of these
trees were brought from England, and
they made splendid growth. The site
of the orchard is the property now oc-
cupied by a grandson of the old pioneer,
Mr. Richard Geeves.
EXPORT TRADE BEGINS.
The export trade in apples, which was
commenced 108 years ago, seems to have
developed more rapidly during the late
’forties and ’fifties of the last century.
In 1849 the schooner John Bull, of 71
tons, took to New Zealand seven casks
and 53 cases of apples, consigned by Mr.
J. Waterhouse, and in the same year Mr.
Waterhouse exported 4 casks of dried
apples to Port Phillip, and a similar
quantity to San Francisco.
In 1851, it is recorded, Messrs. R.
Lewis and Sons, of Hobart, exported 17
cases of apples to India by the Hydera-
bad. and that Mr. J. Murdoch exported
9 cases and 3 casks of apples to Gee-
long. In July of this year the apple
shipments to Adelaide, Geelong, Mel-
bourne, Warrnambool, and Sydney com-
prised 818 cases, 36 barrels, 9 boxes, 12
packages, 7 casks, and one basket.
In 1884 the first trial shipment of 109
cases of apples to London was taken by
the steamer Warwick, and within three
years apples to the value of £20,000 were
being exported. By 1914 apple ship-
ments exceeded nearly a million cases,
and during the 1925-26 season almost
3,000,000 cases were shipped overseas.
Many of the best known varieties of
apples, which adorn the tables in homes
all over the world, originated in Tas-
mania, and these varieties include:
Prince Alfred, Geeveston Fanny, Crof-
ton. Duke of Clarence, Tasma’s Pride,
Lalla, Ranelagh, and Democrat.
REMARKABLE GROWTH OF THE
INDUSTRY
The production of apples in the Huon
went ahead by leaps and bounds from
the commencement of the present cen-
tury. The fruit having gained a favour-
able reputation at home and abroad for
J. J. Barnett.
its distinctive and pleasing flavour cap-
tured the markets of Sydney, Melbourne,
Brisbane, and the United Kingdom. For
many years the State enjoyed almost a
monopoly of the trade. By 1925 the
whole of the river frontage was gradual-
ly transformed into a series of orchards,
and these have since been linked up,
until now there is a continuous chain
of apple and pear plantations from
Grove to Geeveston, a distance of about
20 miles; on the opposite side of the
river a longer line of orchards has been
planted (though not so unbroken) from
Huonville through the Cygnet muni-
cipality; and a still greater distance,
though smaller total area of orchards,
along the Channel in the Kingborough
Municipality. There are now T about
10,000 acres of full bearing orchards in
the three municipalities of Huon, Cygnet,
and Esperance, and the average crop of
apples and pears is 2,360,000 bushels an-
nually. The average yield of a com-
mercial orchard in the Huon is from 400
to 500 bushels per acre, but there are
several orchards which annually yield as
much as 1,000 bushels per acre, and one
small holding at Franklin has produced
as much as 2,020 bushels of marketable
apples in a season off one acre.
Some idea of the expansion of fruit
growing in the Huon can be formed from
the fact that according to the “Gazette”
in 1851 the quantity of fruit grown in
the three municipalities at that time
amounted to 335,871 bushels from 3,137
acres of orchards. According to the
official returns for the year 1935, fruit
production in the same area provided
the following figures:
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Tim es” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


Make your export produce a safe Investment by shipping to and through
SOUTHAMPTON
The ideal distribution centre
Serving over 16,000,000 people within a radius of 100 miles
CHESTtsf^
•nr-LCH | CREWE
y r ~^sr
*Ca«»
STOKE
\
NOTTINGHAM
DERBY
M.OIM \f V
. \ BURTON
STAFFORDW 0 * TRENT.
SBURY
LOUGHOOO
SHREWSBUR
WELLINGTON
NORWICH
LEICESTER
PETERBORO • Mw "
WOLVEfi
IRMINGHAi;
■vSXOVEN
STOUR BRIDGE
KIDDERMINSTER
IMHOW
WARWIvR
BEOFOftO
I
a
a-
iftrirt
3
LAO'w 'J
' ■■/amt
* *
fi
\
r
ISOUTHAHPTONtX \
V y ll
*f * f * r \j SSciST
,'k/*
■»w **. yt«at>Qu«.t y;'
wcww»»ti» r. - - - * "
«** v
A <
THE RECEIVINQanoDISTRIBUTING
CENTRE
V
Vc> ■'
pog*
&
Ca<*e?2
-• Frflfi- ..' .tiKr *
P /
Sf'i'
■JQ3
\ wP
pr
PARIS-,
BRITAIN'S IMPERIAL GATEWAY
The importance of Southampton to
Australia in particular, is being recog-
nised more and more every day, as the
producers and shippers benefit by the
many advantages that Port has to offer.
There isn’t any Port elsewhere in the
world that can offer better facilities for
the handling of all classes of perishable
produce.
Southampton is the nearest first great
port of call for any ships from Aus-
tralia, and yet it is only 78 miles from
London —3 hours by express freight
train. The ships are able to berth at any
hour of The day or night, as there is no
waiting for tides. This means that a
vessel arriving at Southampton to-
day, can discharge a large proportion
of its cargo, which can be sorted to
mark and railed to London in plenty of
time for the early morning sales to-
morrow.
In the case of fruit —APPLES and
PEARS —this means an additional cost
of approximately-lid. per case—BUT—
compare this method and the time saved
as against the number of vessels that
call, first of all at a Continental Port—
then on to Hull—then London—ap-
proximately 5 days later than that same
vessel would discharge at Southampton.
Think what this saving in time alone
means as far as PEARS are concerned.
Every day saved often means pounds
saved owing to the better condition in
which the fruit is offered for sale.
Situated right in the Docks Area is
a modern Fruit Sales Room, where
buyers from a very wide radius gather
to buy the vast quantities and types
of fruit that are shipped to South-
ampton. Last season over 4,300,000
cases of Deciduous fruit from South
Africa were discharged at South-
ampton—portion to be sold on ship’s
arrival at the Sales Room and the rest
rushed to London and the other main
centres Iby express freight trains. Then
again, the Cold Storage accommodation
is unsurpassed—l,7oo,ooo cubic feet of
space divided into 61 different chambers
—each of which can be kept at a differ-
ent temperature if necessary.
PEARS can be unloaded at the Cold
Storage wharf—without any additional
charge—and sorted up to mark actually
in the Cold Store and loaded into re-
frigerated trucks.
From the time the fruit leaves the
ship’s cold chamber in the slings, until
it is being sorted to mark in the Cold
Store, is less than 5 minutes. The con-
dition of the fruit is, therefore, kept
practically in a refrigerated state until
it is actually delivered at Covent Gar-
den, .Spitalfields, or whichever market
in London to which the fruit is con-
signed. As mentioned before—all this
advantage costs only approximately
Hid. per case more than the present
method.
You will notice from the distributive
map printed herewith, how wonderfully
placed Southampton is for the quick
transit of produce, more especially to
that area which is shaded. Also, an-
other point well worth consideration, is
the use of Southampton as a trans-ship-
ment port for the Continent.
The demand for Australian fruit at
Southampton is considerable, and very
much greater than the quantity of fruit
which was shipped from Australia direct
to Southampton last season, with the re-
sult that fruit had to be railed from
London to Southampton from quite a
number of vessels. Some of this fruit
was sold by private treaty, and quite a
big proportion in the Sales Rooms. The
prices secured, in most cases, were very
satisfactory indeed, and in some cases
higher than those secured in London at
the same period.
Taking all these things into considera-
tion, you can see that Southampton is
of vital importance and benefit to the
producers and shippers of perishable
produce from Australia.
Owned and controlled by SOUTHERN RAILWAY. Full information and literature from
Australasian Agents: H. W. BEVAN b CO. LTD., 55 York Street, Sydney.
14 BOND STREET, MELBOURNE.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936,


FOR
YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 1935
Cygnet ..
Esperance
Huon
Apples
Bushels
644,890
500,820
... 1,134,300
Pears Cherries Currants
Bushels lbs. lbs.
27,170 5,470 31,890
6,430 5,890 35,780
53,270 48,680 89,450
R’berries
lbs.
186,750
13,860
793,620
S’berries
lbs.
160,800
148,270
’ 81,070
2,280,010
Total for State ... 3,934,000
86,870 60,040 157,120 994,230
280.000 740,000 2,212,000 4,603,000
389,040
1,207,000
MUNICIPAL STATISTICS Annual Total Total
No. of Value Rates Receipts Expenditure
Population F’growers £ £ £ £
Cygnet 3,143 367 28,774 3,730 6,546 6,229
Esperance ... 3,775 321 24,306 2,813 7,631 6,255
Huon ... 5,037 497 39,666 5,025 7,781 7,498
Adminis-
tration
£555
1014
937
Total
... 11,955 1,185 92,746 11,568 21,958
19,982
2,506
VALUE OF LANDS, ROADS, Etc.
Cygnet
Esperance
Huon ...
Capital Value Unimproved Roads Occupied Public
Land Value Miles Dwellings Loans
£ £ £
600,408 156,168 417 690 7,762
470,468 123,098 299 876 5,762
... 985,214 232,170 438 1,124 15,589
Road
Rates
£
1,718
1,454
2,661
Cultiv-
ated
Acres
4,069
2,414
5.877
Total...
... 2,056,090
511,436 1,154 2,690 29,113
5,833
12,360
Government Railways of Tasmania
For Holidays short or long —always Travel by Train
SPEEDY TRAINS AND COMFORTABLE CARRIAGES.
Purchase an All-Lines Rail Ticket and Travel Any Time or All the Time
First Second
2 Weeks for £4 15 0 £3 10 0
3 Weeks for £6 15 0 £5 0 0
4 Weeks for £8 0 0 £6 0 0
PRODUCTION OF THE HUON
SOME-REMINISCENCES.
Early Methods of Packing.
A Huon grower who has had about 50
years’ association with the industry
states that rather crude methods of
marketing apples prevailed for a long
time after the export trade commenced.
His early recollections were of long
split paling cases with Tin. ends. The
branding was done with chalk or char-
coal, and all it signified was the variety
of apple and the initials of the grower.
No attempt was made to grade the fruit
according to size, or pack to any defined
plan. The fruit was sorted like pota-
toes, separating “markets” from “chats,”
and was then poured into the case, given
a shake or two to consolidate the pack
a little, and then the lid was nailed on.
Frequently the fruit was sold by the
captain of the steamer on arrival at
Hobart, the money collected and paid to
the grower on the return trip. In 1883
it is recorded that fruit realised as high
as 10/ per case sold in this way, and
that the grower got the gross proceeds
of the sale. A great deal of the fruit
required for the overseas market was
purchased direct from the river steam-
ers as they arrived at Hobart. Incident-
ally, Mr. J. G. Turner is the only one of
the early buyers who is still operating.
He has bought many hundreds of
thousands of cases of apples and pears,
and throughout the many vicissitudes of
the trade still finds reason for optimism
about the future.
FRUIT PESTS DISCOVERED.
Consternation prevailed throughout
the Huon when, in 1898, Black Spot,
Scale, Codlin Moth, and Pear Slug were
found in some of the orchards. Grow-
ers got so pannicky about the discovery
that they thought they were ruined, and
one well-known resident left the State
with his family and settled in New Zea-
land.
The reason for alarm can well be un-
derstood when it is remembered that at
this time there were no known means
of combating insect and fungus pests.
The first advocate for the spraying of
trees with a poison mixture w 7 as the late
George Innes, of Narracoopa orchard,
Franklin. He had been a great student
of insects and the diseases of fruits; and
spent a considerable amount of money
in making experiments to control these
enemies of the orchardist. When he an-
nounced that he -was going to spray his
trees with a certain mixture other or-
chardists looked on with no small amount
of scepticism and even amusement. The
only means he had of carrying out the
operation was a Billen hand pump,
manufactured by a New Zealand firm,
and which cost about 50/. It was fit-
ted to a kerosene tin (4 gallons) and
carried from tree to tree. A spare tin
was employed to keep the pumper busy.
Later an improved hand pump was
brought over from New Zealand, which
had greater capacity and power, but the
person who introduced the machine had
great difficulty in persuading growers
that such a method would have any effect
at all in reducing the ravages of the
pests.
The first severe loss was that of the
pear crop. The trees were absolutely
denuded of their leaves about the year
1899, and the fruit was so small that it
was practically unsaleable. The owner
of this orchard had been asked to pur-
chase a spray pump, but ridiculed the
idea of its being of any value. Of course
he changed his views very soon after-
wards.
Codlin grub is said to have been first
discovered in apples and pears in the
Huon on February 8, 1898, when mem-
bers of the local fruit board discovered
some of the insects in two orchards at
Franklin. With the view of forcing
them to take drastic action to destroy
the pest the unfortunate orchardists
were brought before the court and the
stipendiary magistrate fined each of
them £3, with 8/ costs, at the same
time delivering to the defendants a
severe reprimand on the enormity of the
offence. It was admitted in evidence that
only seven infected apples were dis-
covered.
Referring to the early overseas re-
frigerated shipments of apples, Mr. W.
H. Kennedy states that some of them
were disastrous. On one or two occa-
sions they were frozen white, and need-
less to say were worthless on being
marketed. There seemed to be an idea
that the lower the temperature of the
fruit chambers the more certain would
the fruit open up in satisfactory condi-
tion. The cost of disproving this theory
was substantial, amounting in one in-
stance to 200 cases of fruit, plus £lO for
freight, etc. The engineers had to re-
vise their methods, especially in design-
ing their machinery to maintain an even
temperature within a range of 2 or 3
I degrees above freezing point. There has
always been some doubt about the ques-
tion of the best carrying temperature
of apples, Mr. W. E. Shoobridge ad-
vocating something in the vicinity of
45 deg. It is rather remarkable that a
try-out of this theory is not given on a
commercial scale, as it is certain that
there is still room for improvement in
the carrying of Tasmanian fruit to the
United Kingdom.
An interesting incident that is worth
recalling is the experiment made by the
late Dr. Benjafield with a case of Napo-
leon pears. He included this in the first
shipments of apples he made overseas,
and although the latter were frozen white
the pears opened up in perfect condition.
When the case was opened in the market
in the presence of market men and buy-
ers it caused many expressions of sur-
prise, and the agents who received the
fruit took advantage of the interest
shown by offering the pears for sale by
auction. Bidding was brisk in shilling
rises, and did not cease until it reached
the £3 call. This record probably has
remained unbroken throughout the long
years of the Tasmanian-London fruit
trade. It seems somewhat remarkable
that this variety of pears (known in
England as the Vicar of Winkfield)
should not have proved of some commer-
cial value. Its price in the Huon has
rarely gone above 2/ per case, yet it is
an excellent cooker and jam maker, and
is “on its own” as a carrier. The Napo-
A QUIET CORNER AT SHIPWRIGHT’S POINT. J. Breaden.
Icon originally came from England,
those first planted in the Huon having
been got from the Government House
gardens.
The man to whom the greatest credit
is due for the development of the over-
seas fruit trade was the late W. D. Pea-
cock, especially in the period 1890 to
1920. He lived at Franklin for some
time and became an extensive buyer,
and also shipped on consignment if
growers preferred to do so. The prices
paid varied from 2/9 to 3/3 per case,
which must be considered favourable to
the growers, especially when production
costs were not as high as they are now.
He was the originator of the dump type
of case, his preference for this shape
being largely influenced by the fact that
it stowed better than any other design
in the ships’ holds. Mr. Peacock made
nine trips from Tasmania to England
in connection with the fruit industry,
and gained much information which he
freely placed before growers to their ad-
vantage. For many years Mr. J. H.
Jacklyn represented Mr. Peacock at
Franklin, doing much of the buying and
supervising the grading, packing, and
despatch of the fruit from the Huon to
Hobart. After leaving Franklin about
18 years ago, Mr. Jacklyn entered the
Brisbane Fruit Exchange, and has es-
tablished a very successful business
there.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


PORT OF LONDON
BRITAIN’S PREMIER PORT
AND THE
WORLD’S GREATEST MARKET
i
I
mm
%
ft
m
i
J
I
n
&
i
M*
■awsy..?
m
w
m
m
m
4
m
o
BMI
LONDON imported 4,000,000 Cases of
Tasmanian Fruit last season.
%
&
VIA
LONDON
&
■sp*
&
£
*
20,000,000 potential customers reside within an
economic distribution area of the Port of London.
GREAT BRITAIN’S
LARGEST
MOST
WEALTHY
EASILY
ACCESSIBLE
MARKET
PORT OF LONDON AUTHORITY
Representative for Tasmania:
CAPT. A. W. PEARSE,
FRAZER HOUSE, 22 LOFTUS STREET SYDNEY, N.S.W.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


lston:
1
5*3
3*
windmills:
For All WATER SUPPLIES
The entirely Endosed-Self-Oiling‘ALSTON *
is the Highest Grade Mill. All working
parts enclosed in a Dust-Proof-Case tunning
in Oil-Bath. Fitted with Machine-Cut-Gears
and Ball-Beaiings, giving that Smooth Light
Running action and Life-Long Service for
which the ALSTON* Mill is renowned.
Expert Advice. Catalogues and Quotations
Free on application.
JAMES ALSTON & SONS Ptv. Ltd.
Queen'* Bridge, Melbourne mJ
Associated with Sir Henry Jones nearly
45 years ago in the firm that bears his
name were two other noted leaders of
Tasmanian industry, the late Mr. E. A.
Peacock and Mr. A. W. Palfreyman, the
present chairman of directors. With a
history older than the Tasmanian Parlia-
ment as at-present constituted, the firm
has the largest preserving premises and
plant south of the equator, and handles
more apples than any other industrial con-
cern in Australia. In the year 1853,
which marked the 50th anniversary of the
founding of tfie first white settlement in
Tasmania, there came to Hobart a young
Englishman, George Peacock, and he it
was who laid the foundations of the firm,
which has since become famous the world
over for its “IXL” Products. Commen-
cing in a small way, in a very short time
' Mr. Peacock’s firm began to be recognised
■throughout Tasmania for its high
standard of production. Of course, Tas-
manian fruit had been utilised for jam
manufacturing away back in the very
early days of the colony, but the estab-
lishment of Peacock’s brought new
methods into operation, and the jam pro-
duced was of a superior quality. Eight
years after the foundation of the firm, in
1861, Mr. W. D. Peacock, who was destined
to become the founder of W. D. Peacock
& Co., fruit and jam manufacturers, of
Hobart, came from England and joined
his uncle’s establishment, and in a few
years further and more extensive im-
provements were made to the factory.
FIRST EXPORTS.
In the first instance, the firm had to
depend entirely upon the markets within
the colony for the disposal of its products,
but as time went on mainland trade was
secured, and the firm gradually secured a
footing on the markets in other States.
The English export trade, however, was
not begun until 1884. In this year four
Huon fruitgrowers, including Messrs.
Albury, T. Walton, and D. Valentine,
after consultation with the local
authorities, decided to send a trial ship-
ment of 100 cases of apples to London
through Messrs. Fryer & Co., of Mel-
bourne. Though the venture met with
success, several years elapsed before the
export trade began to be developed. In
1887 apples to the value of £20,000 were
being exported, and it was largely due to
the firm of George Peacock & Sons that
the 1887 shipments were carried in the
refrigerated holds of the mail steamers.
By this time Peacock’s had established
branches and agencies at Hobart, Mel-
bourne, Sydney, Brisbane, and Dunedin.
During the late ’eighties or early ’nine-
ties Mr. W. D. Peacock left his uncle’s
establishment to found the well-known
jam manufacturing establishment,
Messrs. W. D. Peacock & Co., and it was
mainly due to this firm that in 1890 three
mail steamers were listed to call at Ho-
bart for overseas fruit shipments. An
Orient steamer loaded 6,068 cases, and two
P. & 0. steamers lifted 15,343 cases be-
tween them. In the following year P. &
0. boats loaded 59,584 cases.
H. JONES & CO.
Eighteen ninety one was a notable year
in the annals of the Tasmanian Fruit In-
dustry, for it saw the formation of the
firm of H. Jones & Co. For some years
previous Mr. G. Peacock had thought of
giving up his business, for he had ren-
dered valuable service to the growers of
Tasmania extending over a period of more
than thirty years. At the beginning of
the ’nineties there came into prominence a
young man, who, it was predicted, would
one day be a prominent figure in the in-
dustrial life of Australia. Mr. Henry
Jones, as he was then, was about 30 years
of age, and little did his companions think
that he would succeed Mr. George Pea-
cock as the head of the factory. Born on
July 19, 1862, on finishing his schooling
he entered the firm of George Peacock &
Sons, and although he at first occupied a
humble position, it was soon recognised
that he possessed the qualities of a leader,
and Mr. Peacock advanced him until in
1891 he was foreman of the factory and
one of Mr. Peacock’s right hand men. The
latter year saw the failure of many busi-
ness establishments, which were effected
by the closing of the banking houses all
ROMANTIC INDUSTRIAL
ACHIEVEMENT
LIFE STORY OF SIR HENRY JONES
From Messenger to Millionaire
Tasmania's Outstanding industrialist
IN the history of Tasmania there has probably never been such an
outstanding personality as the late Sir Henry Jones, the most
remarkable financial magnate of his day, and the firm of H. Jones and
Co. Ltd., with its vast enterprises in the processing of fruit, sawmilling,
mining, fruitgrowing, hopgrowing, and shipping, exists as a monument
to his ability as a commercial organiser.
over Australia and Tasmania, and like
other firms, that of Peacock’s was affected.
In the face of all the difficulties and ob-
stacles, Mr. Henry Jones secured the
whole-hearted support of Messrs. E. A.
Peacock and A. W. Palfreyman, the pre-
sent Chairman of Directors, and offered to
take over the whole establishment. Mr.
Peacock agreed, and the firm of H. Jones
& Co. came into existence, and began
active operations in January, 1892, in
premises which still form a part of the
extensive factory on the Old Wharf at
Hobart. At first only a small quantity of
jam was manufactured, and the week’s
output usually did not exceed 100 cases a
week. Slowly but surely the firm gained
the reputation as Australia’s leading jam
manufacturers.
SIR HENRY JONES.
INCREASED PRODUCTION. I
During 1892 a decided increase was j
made in the number of cases of apples '
shipped abroad, the total for the season
amounting to 68,259, and it must be ad-
mitted that the new firm had considerable
influence in bringing about this achieve-
ment. Altogether 13 mail steamers
called at Hdbart during the four months
from February to May for the purpose of
loading fruit. In addition to jam manu-
facturing, in 1892 the firm experimented
in the canning of rabbits for shipment
abroad, but this branch of the industry
was discontinued in 1893. From this year
until 1900 the P. & 0. line had control over
the export trade, and were responsible for
an efficient service to those shipping goods
abroad. In 1895 Jones & Co. entered the
export trade in earnest, and the apple
shipments increased by hundreds of
cases, for Mr. Jones carefully studied
the condition's overseas, and knew]
just where the markets could toe developed.
In 1896, in co-operation with Mr. W. D.
Peacock, Mr. Henry Jones introduced the
system of booking space on fruit steamers
for a specified number of cases before-
hand, and this had a material effect in
facilitating the export of fruit. From
1890 to about 1896 the growers were pay-
ing freight on their shipments to the ex-
tent of 4/6 per case, but, largely as a re-
sult of Mr. Jones’ work, this charge was
gradually reduced.
FACTORY EXTENSIONS.
In 1898 trade not only in fruit and jam
export but also in green fruits had in-
creased so rapidly that the firm’s
premises on the Old Wharf had to be en-
larged and modernised to cope with the
increased production. New premises
were erected adjoining the factory with a
frontage of 160 ft. and a depth of 80ft.,
and modern equipment installed in every
department. By 1900 the firm had a
floor space of 140,000 square feet, and the
installation of a 50 h.p. boiler by Messrs.
R. Kennedy & Sons, of Hdbart, in addition
to the 30 h.p. boiler already in use pro-
vided the necessary motive power for
packing cases and tins.
FACTORY AT FRANKLIN.
A branch of the firm had been estab-
lished at Franklin in the heart of the
fruit-growing area, and here the work
consisted chiefly of the manufacture of
jam from small fruits. Altogether the
jam manufacturing -was absorbing 800
tons of fruit during the season. In this
branch the raspberry was perhaps the
most valuable of the small fruits, straw-
berries and gooseberries were being used,
but not in the same quantities. At this
period the Tasmanian apricot was
also becoming a popular fruit, and a
demand for jam made from the fruit
was naturally experienced. The fruit
industry was benefiting the State
as a whole, and H. Jones & Co. had
become an important factor in the com-
mercial life of Tasmania. Fruit preserv-
ing and the manufacture of pulp, at the
beginning of 1900, had become an import-
ant branch of the fruit industry, and
Messrs. H. Jones & Co. were absorbing 600
tons of fruit in this manner, and each
season nearly 2,000,000 tins of jam and
preserved fruits were being turned out
by the factory, the labels for which cost
the firm something in the vicinity of £800.
Another important industry which Mr.
Jones had helped to develop was the hop
industry, and this, too, by 1900, had felt
the effect of Mr. Jones’ work, for the firm
had become one of the largest exporters
of hops in Tasmania.
SHIPMENTS OVERSEAS.
At the beginning of the present century
the Aberdeen line of steamers entered in-
to competition with the P. & O. boats for
the carriage of fruit to oversea markets,
but the company retired from the trade at
the end of twelve months. In 1902 the
shipping companies were actively com-
peting for the control of the export trade,
and in this year the White Star Company
began to send fruit steamers to Hobart,
and in 1903 Holt’s Blue Funnel line fol-
lowed, the Federal Houlder line entering
the trade in 1904. In the latter year 21
steamers called at Hobart to lift fruit
for the United Kingdom. Partial failure
cf the crops in the 1903 season caused a
number of contracts for the shipment of
fruit to fall through, and this gave Mr.
Jones the opportunity to come to the
front, and with Mr. E. A. Peacock’s co-
operation to bring about a better state of
affairs. Not only did he develop the fruit
industry, but he branched out ail over
the State. He became actively engaged
in the timber and hop industries, and gave
considerable support to mining. He was
the founder of the IXL Tin Dredging
Company, which subsequently led to the
formation of the Tongkah Harbour Tin
Dredging Company, and in co-operation
with Mr. E. A. Peacock and Mr. T. A.
Frankcomb, he established that notable
orchard, “Rcstrevor,” near Triabunno,
which, in a very short time, became the
largest in the State, Messrs. Jones and
Peacock, however, allowed their shares in
the enterprise to be taken over by the
firm.
DURHAM EXPERIMENT.
In 1907 a notable experiment was made
in regards to the fruit industry. In this
year the Durham, what was known as a
grid boat, loaded 125,000 cases of fruit at
Hobart for oversea markets, the largest
shipment taken from Tasmania at any one
time, and this remained as a record until
1921. The boat was fitted with fans in
the hold, and the air was not changed dur-
ing the voyage. Recalling this fact at a
meeting of fruitgrowers at Huonville in
November, 1923, the late Sir Henry Jones
said that a grower from the Broadmarsh
district was placed on the steamer with
full power to examine the cargo during
the voyage to England. When the
steamer left the wharf at Hobart the
temperature was 33 degrees in the hold,
and it never varied till the boat reached
Southampton. In this manner, said Sir
Henry, it was established that 33 degrees
was the best temperature; for the apples
when examined in England were found to
be perfect. Indeed, Sir Henry and Mr.
Peacock had a hard fight to prevent the
shippers altering the temperature of the
refrigeration holds of the ships carrying
fruit to England. By 1909 the firm of
Jones & Co. had reached such a stage that
whereas 100 cases of jam had been manu-
factured a week it was now required to
produce more than a thousand cases a
week to cope with the demand. The firm
of H. Jones & Co. was registered as a co-
operative company in November, 1909,
and in 1910 new and extensive premises
were erected for the firm on a site on the
Old Wharf by the existing factory.
GREAT WAR RESULTS.
During the Great War years, from 1914
to 1918, H. Jones & Co. became actively
engaged in the sawmilling industry, and
was directly responsible for the establish-
ment of mills in many parts of the coun-
try, which absorbed a great deal of labour.
The outbreak of war naturally affected
the markets, but it is to be said that H.
Jones & Co. rose to the occasion, and the
troops on active service were kept supplied
with the best quality products from their
home town. Mr. Henry Jones not only
brought his organisation into operation to
assist the country, but he purchased and
presented an aeroplane to the Common-
wealth Government for service abroad,
and gave a substantial donation towards
the cost of the one given by the Tasman-
ian people. The development of his over-
sea trade resulted in the establishment of
factories and agencies in America, South
Africa, and other parts, and this made
it necessary for “Mr. Henry,” as he was
generally spoken of, to pay numerous
visits overseas to inspect and supervise
the work abroad, but Tasmania benefited
by the extensive knowledge which he
gained in his travels. In the New Year’s
Honours of 1919 Mr. Henry Jones was
accorded the honour of knighthood as a
token of His Majesty’s appreciation of
his services to his country. Sir Henry
had to fight not only against the Naviga-
tion Act, which came into force and
seriously affected Tasmanian Trade but
to secure a reduction on the freights on
apples shipped abroad. From 4/6 a case
in 1895 he secured a reduction to 2/4i a
case in 1904, but on the outbreak of war
freights again increased, and by 1921
amounted to 8/- per case. Sir Henry and
those associated with him, however,
gained a reduction of fifty per cent. The
war years also seriously affected the apple
shipments. In 1905, 363,426 cases were
exported, and this number by 1911 had
been increased to more than half a mil-
lion, and in the latter year the total cases
shipped amounted to 782,588, in 1914 to
951,722 cases. In 1915 shipments decreas-
ed considerably, and only 493,217 cases
were sent abroad. In the following year
814,590 cases were exported, but the sub-
marine blockade of England and other
causes brought about a reduction in 1917
to 132,190. In 1918 this number was
drastically reduced, but in 1919 the ship-
ments were increased again, and in the
1920-21 season something like 2,005,567
cases were exported to various parts. In
1922 approximately 2,846,913 cases were
exported. In the latter year Sir Henry
arranged for a trial shipment of plums to
England by the Largs Bay, but the
venture was not successful, although
every possible care was taken. In 1922,
in addition to the fruit used in the manu-
facture of jam and that exported, Messrs.
H. Jones & Co.’s factories were consuming
vast quantities of apples in other branches
of the industry. Two hundred thousand
cases of apples were dried at evaporating
factories, 50,000 cases of apples were
used in the making of cider, and 30,000
cases in the manufacture of pulp and
jellies, and about 100,000 cases of apples
were used on the local markets. The
total apples produced during the 1921-22
season amounted to 3,226,913 cases.
Towards the latter part of 1923 Sir
Henry, accompanied by his wife, paid a
visit to his factories abroad, and on his
return, in an interview at Hobart on No-
vember 2 of the same year, he referred to
the extensive factory which he had estab-
lished in California, in the United States
of America. He said that the Californian
factory was probably the largest of its
kind in the world, and that it was impos-
sible to find a man there who was out of
a job. A fitting illustration of the part
which H. Jones & Co. plays in the life of
Tasmania. The company provides em-
ployment in the busy seasons to more than
I, hands in Hobart alone. At the
same time Sir Henry indicated that his
firm was extending operations by the es-
tablishment of a canning factory for
raspberries in the New Norfolk district,
and provided a market was secured he
would establish a similar factory at Huon-
ville. Cool stores for the storage of fruit
have been founded in the heart of the
fruit-growing areas, in all parts of the
State. In every possible manner the firm
of H. Jones & Co. has attempted to achieve
the highest possible standard of produc-
tion, not only in the manufacture of jam
of every variety, but in the preservation
of fruit, the making of pulp, the manufac-
ture of tomato sauce, the canning of scal-
lops. green peas, and other eatables.
Another important work developed by the
firm was begun by Sir Henry in 1923,
when he co-operated in the establishment
of a dehydration plant for apricots, and
a company was formed for the foundation
of a factory at Bellerive.
Continued further on.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


HISTORY OF THE FAMOUS COVENT
GARDEN FIRM—
T. J. POUPART LIMITED
The firm of T. J. POUPART was founded by Mr.
John Poupart in 1895 for the purpose of selling the
produce from his father's market garden at Twicken-
ham, Middlesex. The business gradually grew as other
English growers acquired the habit of sending their
consignments regularly to the firm.
Seasonal limitations imposed
by the handling of fruits and
vegetables emanating solely from
the nurseries, market gardens,
and orchards of home growers
and the demands of Poupart’s in-
creasing circle of customers made
it necessary for us to turn our
attention to the overseas trade,
and agencies were gradually es-
tablished in the various fruit-
growing centres abroad.
The whole of the shipments
originating from these sources
were sold on a purely commission
basis, and so satisfied were the
growers and shippers with the
results obtained, that it became
necessary to enlarge the firm’s
premises and even to establish
branches at Spitalfields and later
at Liverpool and Hull to deal with
the increasing arrivals. Ten or
twelve years ago establishments
were also opened at Southampton
and Bristol.
This briefly sums up the facts
of the history of Poupart’s from
a material point of view; but, of
course, the driving force of an
organisation of this description,
which entirely depends for its
success on the confidence inspired
in the minds of the senders, are
the principles which govern its
direction. “The reason why
there is something permanent
about Poupart’s,” whereas since
the inception of our business
hundreds of other firms engag-
ed in the sale of fruit have ap-
peared and either disappeared
quickly below the horizon or re-
mained in obscurity, is largely
because this firm has always been
consistent to its ideals; and specu-
lative ventures involving pur-
chasing, or the giving of absurdly
high advances, have never been
indulged in. From the very first
it has been recognised that the
growers’ interests and our own
are identical, and no pains have
been spared to give the producer
the most carefully thought ad-
vice on any matter affecting the
marketing of his fruit. Here it
may be noted in passing that per-
haps the ability to visualise the
trade from the growers’ point of
view originated in the fact that
the founder of the firm is de-
scended from a long line of Mar-
ket Gardeners who commenced
operations in this country some
two hundred years ago.
The grower is entitled to know
the price at which each individual
package of his produce has been
sold, and our Account Sales have
always given him the most pre-
cise details concerning the dis-
posal of his goods. Our books
are always open to inspection by
the shipper or his accredited
agent at any time, and we find
that such inspection has always
resulted in words of praise from
Chartered Accountants and even
Government Departments con-
cerning our system of account-
ancy. Specialisation is the key-
note of our organisation, and
each Department is in charge of a
Senior Salesman, many of whom
have been in our employ for
twenty-five and thirty years.
The main outlet, of course, is
Covent Garden, but our Branches
and Selling agencies, situated in
the most thickly populated dis-
tricts of the British Isles, cater
for a vast and increasing demand.
Customers in every town of im-
portance in the United Kingdom
are kept in constant touch with
market movements by telephone
and telegram, as well as by the
publication of weekly Price Lists
and Market Guides.
To cope with the ever-expand-
ing inflow of consignments from
all parts of the world the head-
quarters in Covent Garden are
shortly to be pulled down, to
make way for more commodious
premises, which will be the last
word in every detail that contri-
butes to the effective display and
rapid handling of large bulks of
fruits of all descriptions.
T. J. Poupart (Southampton)
Ltd. is likewise to undergo struc-
tural alterations, and new and
spacious warehouses are being
erected in one of the most com-
manding positions at that Port.
Tracing the progress of the
firm from its humble origin of one
small stand in the Market in 1895
to its present position, its
development has been character-
ised by a steady and gradual
extension, created by the confi-
dence of both producer and
buyer. It has been our policy to
urge the grower to ship high
quality, well packed and well
graded fruit, and that he has
in the main satisfied in this re-
spect the thousands of our cus-
tomers in this country and on the
Continent is proved by the mil-
lions of packages which find their
way each year to the shops,
stands, and warehouses of T. J.
Poupart Ltd.
The POUPART SERVICE is at your command
Inquiries solicited by
ERIC E. BURGESS,
Tasmanian Representative,
A.M.P. Chambers,
88 Collins Street,
HOBART.
Telephone 4573.
After Hours: 5157.
REGISTERED SHIPPING NO.:
397
TO ALL PORTS
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


ALWAYS AHEAD
1937 Model “LIGHTNING” 1937 Model “LIGHTNING”
THE MOST-PERFECT GRADER MADE
THE 1937 MODEL embodies
all of the distinctive “Lightning”
features, plus Independent Sec-
tion Rollers, for the first time
applied for practical use.
THE 1937 MODEL steadies
the fruit as it travels along to the
section where it is sized. The
sizing section consists of two mov-
ing elements to prevent injury to
the fruit and to enable pears and
every class and variety of fruit
to be sized.
THE 1937 MODEL has three
distinctive types of sizing
elements:
1. Independent adjustable
driven rubber rollers.
2. Independent adjustable free
rubber rollers.
3. Combined independent, free
and driven rubber rollers.
The “Lightning” is the
THREE MACHINES IN ONE
to be used as the owner desires,
or to each and every circumstance.
THE 1937 MODEL overcomes
all of the disadvantages associat-
ed with the present type of Single
Sided Grader. The method of
sizing enables bins of any width
to be used without injury or in-
accurate sizing, no matter how
misshaped the fruit may be.
1. The sizing section for each
size or count is always of the same
length.
2. The fruit is steadied until
it reaches the point where it is
sized. Misshapen fruit cannot be
sized by the wrong diameter.
THE 1937 MODEL is adapt-
able to fruit of any shape and is
not limited to only one or two.
The change-over from driven to
free rollers is made without any
trouble—a matter of minutes only.
GROWERS AND PACKING
HOUSES who have changed over
from old pattern “Lightning” to
other types have obtained no
better result. The 1935 Model
“Lightning” is the most accurate,
universal, and efficient of any.
The 1937 Model is better again.
Fruit sizes correctly in the first
twelve to sixteen inches. It is in
the following eighteen to twenty-
four inches that fruit sizes into
the wrong bins. The longer the
section, the greater the inac-
curacy. The independent section
rollers on the 1937 model are
specially arranged to obviate
this.
THE SIZING ELEMENT is
only one portion of a packing
outfit. Proper sorting is just as
important as accurate sizing.
“Lightning” Sorting Elevators
and Tables absolutely stand over
and above anything else. Sort-
ing facilities that can be obtain-
ed with any Grader other than
“Lightning” were out of date
to us six or eight years ago.
“LIGHTNING” GRADERS
have led the way for years. They
still lead. The 1937 Model will
put them further ahead.
only Grader that fills the Packing Houses’ every Requirement
WITHOUT INJURY ACCURACY ECONOMY CAPACITY.
ORCHARD IMPLEMENTS ORCHARD IMPLEMENTS
“Lightning” Tractor Implements are specially built for Tractor use. Strength—Convenience—Efficiency.
The Latest Two-way Disc Cultivator works right up to the Trees, no matter how low the
Branches might be.
THE “LIGHTNING” FRUIT GRADER CO., 517 Albion Street, West Brunswick
VICTORIA.
Manufacturers of everything for the Packing House. Apple Washers, Dry Cleaners, Sizers, Sorters.
LIDDING PRESSES. CONVEYORS.
TO CHOOSE THE BEST IS WISDOM. TO CHOOSE THE BEST IS WISDOM.
Some wit or cynic once wrote: “His-
tory is mainly a contradiction in terms.”
If there is any truth in this, surely it
is demonstrated by the fact that while
the nineteenth was the century of the
greatest industrial change that the
world has ever known and Great Britain
was the acknowledged leader of the so-
called “Industrial Revolution,” that
country was, at the same time, re-
garded by the rest of the world as the
most conservative of the nations. It
certainly would Jook like a contradic-
tion in terms to credit an intensely
conservative nation with the leader-
ship in change. Perhaps the explana-
tion is that there never was an “In-
dustrial Revolution” in England; in-
stead there has been a steady and pro-
gressive “Industrial Evolution” —■ the
old was retained and the new added
thereunto. As superfluity arose, the least
useful was discarded, the best retained,
and so the Evolution and development
went on, apparently slowly, but in ac-
tuality with considerable rapidity. Be-
cause at times the new was discarded
and the old retained as being the bet-
ter, the Englishman was dubbed “con-
servative.”
Today we find a curious mixture of
old and new. Incongruous, perhaps,
to the foreigner, but completely com-
monplace to the Englishman, who, even
if he does not always understand the
reasons why, at least comprehends and
agrees with the mentality that has
produced these conditions. It does not
surprise him to see an old-time town-
crier threading his way through the
motor traffic burdened street, his cry
being drowned by the shrill voices of
scampering newsboys shouting an
“Extra Final Edition” of the evening
paper. It is not curious to him to
hear the tinkle of the muffin man’s bell
as he perambulates through the streets
with his cloth-covered tray of muffins
on his head as he has done for centuries
past. Yet that same Englishman will
nonchalantly turn from this, telephone
for a reservation in the ’plane to Paris,
Brussels or Berlin, and then proceed
to listen to his completely modern
wireless. He mixes the old with the
new, and so long as they both are good,
sees nothing incongruous in the mix-
ture. If our Englishman has a guiding
principle in life it might possibly be
summed up as “Don’t cling to the old
just because it is old, don’t rush after
the new just because it is new, use the
useful, discard the useless, be practical
and consistent and use your common-
sense.”
THE GROWTH OF A FAMOUS ORGANISATION
J. and H. Goodwin Ltd.
It is the steady adherence to a guid-
ing principle more or less on these
lines that has built up one of the lead-
ing English, or, perhaps more ac-
curately, international fruit trading or-
ganisations of today.
During the last half of the last cen-
tury, Joel Goodwin, already a figure in
the business community of the North
of England, created a stir among his
fellow fruit traders by bringing to
Hull a ship of his own chartering filled
with fruit. True the ship only came
from Holland and carried little more
than 5,000 packages all told, but it was
an achievement, and a personal achieve-
ment. If history is correct, he per-
sonally arranged the Charter, per-
sonally supervised the loading of the
fruit and personally sold it. Half a
century later, in the Board Room in
Manchester, from the walls of which
Joel Goodwin’s picture looks down, his
descendants put the finishing touches
to a deal involving the season’s fruit
crop of over one million cases of one
of the British Dominions. In the in-
terval, steady evolution and develop-
ment had taken place, the new mixed
with the old, the good retained and
added to, the useless discarded, and
through it all has run an unbroken
Manchester Auction Rooms, where J. and H. Goodwin Ltd. sell.
train of personal endeavour and
achievement by the Goodwin descend-
ants of Joel Goodwin.
At the time of the Dutch Charter and
for a number of years after, the busi-
ness centred on Manchester and Hull
and was mainly concerned with home-
grown and Continental supplies. When
Henry Goodwin, Chairman of the firm
under its present name of J. and H.
Goodwin Ltd., became head of the firm,
its interests were widened. With the
opening of the Manchester Ship Canal
over 40 years ago, a direct water-borne
track was opened to the fruit producing
countries of the world and an auction
was established at Manchester. Con-
nections were developed in the United
States, Ontario, Nova Scotia and, later,
with British Columbia, again by per-
sonal touch, Henry Goodwin voyaging
back and forth to gain a personal
knowledge of the conditions and people
with whom he was dealing. Then
branches were established at Liverpool,
London and Glasgow. In those days
selling was done by private treaty at
each of these centres. In the meantime,
Australia, Spain, Italy, Jaffa, and South
Africa were added to the list of over-
seas connections. The volume of busi-
ness was growing year by year. A
third generation grew up in the per-
sons of Harry and Charles Goodwin,
the sons of Henry. The sphere of per-
sonal touch was correspondingly en-
larged.
The growth was such that once more
the new had to be added to the old, and
it was decided to establish an auction
at Liverpool. For this purpose, a com-
bination was formed with the old es-
tablished firm of Simons and Co., of
Glasgow, and from this arose the firm
of Goodwin, Simons Ltd., Liverpool.
With the reconstruction of the market
at Spitalfields, London, came a long-
waited-for opportunity, and as a result
of undertakings given to the Corpora-
tion of the City of London, a modern
and extensive auction building was
erected and the firm of Goodwin,
Simons (London) Ltd., was created.
This meant that the organisation now
had outlets in London, both through
the private treaty system at Covent
Garden and through the auction at
Spitalfields. Following the combination
with Simons and Co., the Glasgow
private treaty business was transferred
to the auction; this combination also
gave a direct outlet in Southampton
so that now the organisation covered
Manchester, Liverpool, Glasgow, Hull,
London and Southampton. The final
link in the chain was forged by the
creation of the firm of Goodwin,
Simons, Hardy Ltd., in Newcastle, as
a result of a combination with the
firm of William Hardy.
Through all this evolution and de-
velopment has gone the personal touch
of the Goodwin family, coupled now
with that of the Simons family and
supplemented by additional directors,
each of whom is wholly occupied in the
business. The general system of
administration throughout this wide-
spread organisation is aimed at re-
taining that personal touch. To achieve
this, each director, while he exercises
a general supervision, also specially
watches one or more particular terri-
tories. The registered office is in Man-
chester and from there Henry Goodwin,
as the Chairman, surveys all sections.
Harry Goodwin, well known on both
sides of the Atlantic, particularly
watches Canada and the United States,
Herbert Davidson looks after Spain and
Jaffa, in both of which countries sep-
arate companies have been established.
Charles Goodwin, who is located in Lon-
don, keeps in touch with South Africa
through the office of J. and H. Goodwin
(South Africa) Ltd. A. L. Burke,
Continued further on.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


=
2 ’S
| - 1
o
Lh
4-J
3
%H
Uh
3
o
pH
4-H
cd
pH
o
o
co
pH co
§ <
E £
Vh
o
CL
(U
3
Vh
a
o
o
H U
u-h
O
<D
QJ
•4—»
cn
CD
S
Q
to
CD
U-H
o
4—*
cn
CJ
a 3
to
<U
O
fct:
o
a
• P-H
cd
CO
cd
S-h
Qh
CO
CO
S-h
<U
CO
"ti °
Lh H—»
a) a
bf) co
c P "g
• PH LH
3
2
o ~9
3 >
•~ 3
Uh
(Si
. hh J-
to QJ
*3 £
cr 5
cu
c
i • -3
5 Oh
to
CU
_C
O
Qh
3
UH
S cd
o
(Si
UH
<u
■ pH
Qh
a
3
CO
f.
SL
I
m
(i
SB
i jk
mm
mM
m
ii
si
a
.■
A
m
m
gm
11
mm
id
co
LD
O
X
P
0
CO
cn
C
O
3
X
CL
CO
'o
0
U
CO
JDh
P
Qh
3
S-h
Uh
M-h
o
CO
S-H
0)
• PH
a
Qh
3
CO
(Si
H— I
3
3
Uh
Uh
3
u
U*
CU
3
(Si
CU
(Si
<U
CU
V J 3
UD
Qh
(Si
3
3
3
on
o
(Si
.au
* 3
i-i
<u
-JO
U*d 3
cu «
3 Q
CO
02 J DQ CU <
>-
u
z
0
D
1
to
Uh
<U
Qh
Qh
3
CO
(Si
(Si
cu
(Si
<U
3
UH
33
CU
3
3
3
CU
S _S
"a |
to cd
3 H
to
H-H
p
cd
Ll
S-H
3
u
3
cu
-JQ
o
3
CU
3
to
CU
cu
-Q
3
3
00 -
O -3
to
(Si
CU
CU
hJ3
to
H-H
o
CJ
■ PH
5-h
Qh
i cn CQ D 3 J CU U <!
CO
cd
<u
■2
co --g
3
Oh
3
O
O
u u
to
CU
Qh
Qh
<
cu
3
Du
» pH
O
CO
<-4-h
o
to
Uh
. 2^
’"Qh
Q-i
3
CO
<
H
CO
3
£
O
3
<U
£
i
i
i
<u
to
3
>»
UH
O
4—l
cu
3
3
3
to 3D
3
CU
U*
UH
3
3
to
3
CU
to
UH
<U
>
o
Uh
o
to
cu
Qh
Oh
<
to
J»H
<u
(Si
3
o
!-h
3
Du
3
Uh
3
<U
s
3
0-0
• pH
CO
3
0
U
1
H—l
3
<U
01)
<
00
3
• PH
Qh
Qh
L 3
CO
Q
H
e
O
3
<U
3
• pH
3
O
u
s
o
"TD
on
3
S
CU
H-H
• PH
3
D
v£>
3
3
Uh
CD
nMIIIIIIIIIMIMIinilIIIIIIIIIMIIIIIUIIIIIIIIIilIllllininillMIIIMMIIIIMIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIMIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIinnilllllillMinillllllMIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIMMIIIIIIMMIIMIMMIMIMIMMniMlllini(IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIlMIIIIIIIIIIIIII =
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


FROM NOTHING TO 100,000,000 BUSHELS
The 130 Years' Romance of the Fruit Import Trade
of Great Britain
FEW realise the vast extent and wide ramifications of the Fruit Trade
as it exists to-day in Great Britain, and fewer know the
romantic side of this apparently prosaic trade. The imports of fresh
fruit alone have, in the last 130 years, grown from literally nothing to
the enormous figure of 100,000,000 bushels. This is not all, because to
comprehend the magnitude of the trade there must be added the
importation of about 500,000 tons of fresh vegetables; 50,000 tons of
fruit pulp; 10,000,000 lbs. cf cut flowers; 850,000,000 flower bulbs; plus
the English fruit production averaging annually 8,500,000 cwts.; and
to complete the vision, one must add the enormous quantities of vege-
tables grown in Great Britain.
It will be seen from the above figures
that the fruit trade is one of England’s
main trading activities, giving employ-
ment to countless people in every direc-
tion— stevedoring, portering, rail and
road transport, wholesaling, retailing,
etc.
The romance of the trade lies on the
importation side* which was started from
nothing by far-seeing pioneers some 130
years ago, and which has been constantly
developed by their own and their succes-
sors’ unaided efforts.
The first quantities received were in-
finitesimal, but it may toe of interest to
Australian exporters to relate that the
greatest difficulties then encountered
were, as is still often the case in Aus-
tralia, the question of shipping trans-
portation. These first importations con-
sisted mainly of oranges and pineapples
from the Azores, frequently brought in
bulk, in small sailing vessels. Contrast
these methods with present packs and
modern Refrigerated Transportation,
which has done so much to widen the
world supplies cf fruit. From these
modest beginnings there has grown the
trade as we know it to-day, with numer-
ous well-developed markets, each receiv-
ing its share of direct imports from
every part of the Globe, and consisting
now of a diversity of supplies that was
certainly not dreamt of by the enterpris-
ing pioneers, who laid such secure
foundations for the present-day trade.
H. G. COLOMBIE.
turn, gave a fillip to production
in every part of the world, usually
fostered and aided by the British Import-
ing Pioneers and their successors, thus
increasing the supply and variety of fresh
fruit to the British community, and there-
by rendering invaluable service to the
public from the health point of view.
Moreover, these ever-growing supplies
provided ever-extending __ employment,
SECTION OF LONDON OFFICE, CONNOLLY, SHAW LTD.
OUTPT.
In contrast to
early days, there are
now thousands of re-
tailing shops
throughout the
length and breadth
of Great Britain
giving every house-
wife ready access to
this vast storehouse.
The early imports
necessarily came
from nearby coun-
tries, but with the
gradual improve-
ment in the means
of transportation,
supplies of an ever-
increasing character
were brought from
more and more dis-
tant lands. This, in
and gave material assistance to shipping
and other services.
A further notable change has taken
place since the great war. Not only have
quantities doubled since 1913, but where-
as importations were then still of a
seasonal character, a prolongation of the
supplies that are now received from every
part of the Globe, and consisting of every
type and variety of fruit, enables the
trade to serve, with profusion, the British
public with fresh fruit every day of the
year.
The Dominions figure prominently in
the progressive increases recorded, their
supplies now comprising over 50 per cent,
of the total fresh fruit imported into
Great Britain as against 15 per cent, in
pre-war days. This further development
is, in a large measure, also due to the
encouragement and assistance—financial
and otherwise —given toy the successors
of the pioneers.
What of these pioneers and their suc-
cessors? One of the household names of
the fruit trade is that of Mr. Michael
Isaacs and his family. Mr. Michael
Isaacs was one of the most active pioneers
of the trade in its very infancy. His
business then passed to his two sons,
Joseph and Sir Henry Isaacs, a past
Lord Mayor of London. The direct and
present successor is Mr. Harry M.
Isaacs, who has been carrying on the
family traditions for many years past.
The business is now incorporated with
Connolly Shaw Ltd., which is one of the
leading marketing organisations of the
fruit trade in the world, and of which
he is one of the Managing Directors.
It is interesting to relate that one of
Mr. Harry Isaacs’ brothers, the late Mar-
quis of Reading, possibly better known by
some as Sir Rufus Isaacs, who achieved
fame as one of the leading luminaries of
the Bar and Bench of Great Britain, and
who rendered brilliant service to the Em-
pire as Cabinet Minister, Chief Justice
of England, Ambassador, and Viceroy of
India, was in his early days also appren-
ticed to the fruit trade with his brother
Harry, in his father’s office, which, how-
ever, he soon abandoned to carve a most
successful career for himself in more ex-
citing fields. Another (brother was the
AUCTION SALE ROOMS, LONDON FRUIT EXCHANGE.
late Mr. Godfrey Isaacs, who was Manag-
ing Director of Marconi’s Ltd.
Other pioneers of the trade, whose suc-
cessors are still carrying on the family
traditions, are the Shaw, the Eastwood,
and the Jardine families, whose busi-
nesses have also been incorporated into
the Connolly Shaw organisation.
Whilst the Isaacs family mainly concen-
trated its attention to the London area,
the Shaw family pioneered the Hull dis-
trict, and the Eastwood and Jardine
families pioneered the Liverpool and
Manchester areas.
Mr. T. Eastwood is another of the Man-
aging Directors of the Connolly Shaw
organisation, and many of the Branch
Directors are also direct descendants of
the pioneers, such as Messrs. Henry and
Gerald Shaw, cf Hull, Mr. J. Jardine, of
Liverpool, and Mr. J. Jardine, of Man-
chester.
Another Director of the London office is
Mr. J. W. Sutton, whose lifelong experi-
ence has been devoted to the fruit trade.
Whilst Mr. Sutton deals with what may
be termed the Home side of the business,
another Director, Air. J. Q. Ivens, devotes
most of his attention to the business
abroad.
The various branches of the Connolly
Shaw organisation have their separate
staffs with separate Directors, and as all
the activities are co-ordinated by the Head
Office, there is that constant touch be-
tween the various markets which means
so much for successful marketing.
METHOD OF SELLING.
Even in the very early pioneering days,
it was realised that the most satisiactory
method of selling imported fresh fruit
was by auction, and there exists an old
print shewing buyers in frock coats and
top hats attending an auction sale of im-
ported fruit in the early 1800’s.
We are told that in these early auction
days, selling took place “by the candle,”
that is to say, that a pin was inserted in
the candle, and that when the flame had
burned low enough to release the pin, the
last bidder was adjudged the buyer of the
lot at the fall of the pin.
There have been other modifications,
mainly on the Continent, such as Dutch
Auction, which method, it is said, was
instituted in order to circumvent some
legislation enacted by Napoleon, whereby
ordinary auctions were liable to some
taxation. However, the present method
of selling to the highest bidder has been
in vogue for very many years in all the
auction sale rooms established in the
principal markets, including the Conti-
nent and America. It is noteworthy
that the system established by the Import-
ing section of the fruit trade has been
adopted by sellers of various other com-
modities, and that the Wool Auction Sys-
tem now in vogue in Australia is an exact
copy of the method which has been used
for so long and so successfully by the
thirty odd firms of Fruit Brokers who
are members of the Federation of Fruit
Brokers of Great Britain (not to be con-
fused with other Fruit Trade Federa-
tions). This Federation consists of the
Fruit Brokers’ Associations of London,
Liverpool, Hull, Manchester, etc. Each
Fruit Brokers’ Association consists of
the Brokers selling at auction in the ap-
pointed sale rooms of each port. For
instance there are six Brokers selling in
the London auction sale room, seven in
Liverpool, five in Hull, etc.
Numerous other firms receive fruit
from Australia, which is sold by Private
Treaty, and two or three others also sell
at auction from independent centres, but
the market is made and prices established
in the auction sale rooms of the Asso-
ciated Brokers, where supplies are re-
gulated with a view to keeping up market
prices.
AUCTION SALE ROOMS.
Selling facilities and accommodation
had to keep pace with the increased trade,
and some 10 years ago the Liverpool
Brokers vacated their 50 years’ old auc-
tion sale room, when the seven of them
occupied the present modern Liverpool
Fruit Exchange. Similarly, some eight
years ago the London Brokers changed
over from their 60 years old auction sale
room to the spacious building erected for
them by the City Corporation of London,
and known as the London Fruit Exchange.
CONNOLLY, SHAW LTD. CONDUCTING AUCTION IN ONE OF THE
LONDON FRUIT EXCHANGE SALE ROOMS.
LONDON FRUIT EXCHANGE.
It is the most up-to-date building of
its kind in the world, and cost £350,000.
It contains 2 large auction sale rooms,
enabling the six Brokers to deal with,
offerings in the most expeditious manner.
The total floor area is Upwards of four
acres. The basement, which covers the
whole area, together with the ground
floor, are used for storage and show-
room purposes.
There are extensive office accommoda-
tions of the most commodious and modern
character, including microphones, fixed
to the auction rostrum, enabling the
brokers to follow in their offices the pro-
gress of the sales in the two sale rooms.
There are banks, three cable companies,
numerous telephone booths for the use of
the buyers attending the sales, two res-
taurants, etc., etc.
Correlative with the immense strides
made by the fruit trade iin Great Britain,
and by the increasing share of the
Dominions, it is opportune on this aus-
picious occasion, and in this appropriate
Centenary Magazine, to record that Tas-
December, 1936. “Hucn and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


PINE CASES
e(JOli
WRAPPING PAPER
elSCin
STRAWBOARDS
WIRE
Hgfr]
SPRAYING MATERIALS
iCOT
FERTILISERS
PROGRESS
There are always a few firms that are outstanding in the matter
of Progress and continue to go ahead, even in bad times.
The reason for their progress is usually to be found in the fact
that the firms in question are giving SERVICE and SATISFACTION
to their clients —this is exactly the reason why we have found it
necessary to build new Premises at Davey Street, Hobart, which
provide modern facilities for the Careful Handling and Packing of
Fruit, Storage of Goods, Office Accommodation, etc., all under
the one roof.
Simultaneous with our growth in Tasmania, we are always
increasing our Sales Organisation Overseas to more efficiently
handle the ever-growing quantities of Apples and Pears passing
through our hands.
E. R,COTTIER L P m
HOBART AND EXETER
New Hobart Address:
DAVEY STREET, facing Franklin Square
GOODMAN'S QUALITY TREES
for Tasmanian Apples
V* r i
DEMOCRAT (DEM.)
(Tasma)
m
M
m
(An Apple of Tasmanian origin)
in one of our own orchards, 1936.
A great crop of well-coloured,
uniform clean fruit that was a
pleasure to pack and sold itself.
m
coauic lU pdLK aim sold Itseil. IA
\ 4 f* ~ /-
mim,
WB
m
m
s*m
m
m
m
m
f
'mm
m.
&
WM
SM
isWiliil
APPLES
All leading varieties for every purpose, worked
on Northern Spy, blight-proof stocks, also root-
grafted.
DEMOCRAT. DELICIOUS, DUNN'S, GRAVEN-
STEIN, GRANNY SMITH. JONATHAN, LALLA,
NEW YORK PIPPIN, STURMER.
APRICOTS
CHERRIES
NECTARINES
PEACHES
PEARS
SMALL FRUITS
PLUMS
PRUNES
QUINCES
CITRUS FRUITS
WALNUTS
ORNAMENTALS, Etc.
Wonderful Crops of
Great Commercial Value
Tasmania, the largest Apple-producing State in
Australia, has been supplied since 1889 with
Goodman's famous Trees.
This also applies throughout the Commonwealth.
In every State ... in every fruit-growing district,
large or small, Goodman's dependable Trees are
renowned for Quality of Fruit and Value of Har-
vest, yielding, season after season, bumper crops
of finest marketable fruit and bringing highest
possible prices both at home and overseas.
Being commercial fruit-growers as well as nur-
serymen, Goodman's are in active touch with all
phases of the industry . . . and supply to planters
the same quality trees as they plant in their own
orchards.
Goodman's Nurseries cover over 170 acres under
intense cultivation, and are regularly examined
each season previous to sending out trees. A
clean certificate can be had with each consign-
ment if desired.
Thus • • . grown by experts under ideal conditions,
backed by 46 years' experience, Goodman’s Fruit
Trees are the finest procurable—strong, healthy,
well-grown, fibrous-rooted, free from insect
pests, true-to-name, suitable for all climates.
Perfect packing and prompt despatch to any part
of the world.
WRITE FOR CATALOGUE.
C. J. GOODMAN
Picnic Point Nurseries P.O. Box 47 BAIRNSDALE, VICTORIA
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


FRUITGROWERS! Consign to
SIMONS
and CO. LTD.
(Capital £350,000)
London (Spitalfields), Liverpool, Southampton, Glasgow,
Hull and Manchester.
THE Firm of repute and the leading organisation in the
United Kingdom. By consigning to this firm growers are
assured of receiving the proceeds actually realised for their
fruit.
ADVANCES MADE AGAINST CONSIGNMENTS.
SHIPPING NO. 582 ALL PORTS
REPRESENTATIVE:
HERBERT ROWE
105 MACQUARIE STREET, HOBART. Tel. 4933-3933
W. H. BEAUCHAMP b CO.
PTY. LTD.
Fruit Exporters
Royal Exchange Chambers
129 MACQUARIE STREET, HOBART, TASMANIA.
Accredited Representatives:
CONNOLLY, SHAW LTD.
London, Liverpool, Manchester, Hull, Newcastle, Cardiff.
MACGEORGE & JARDINE LTD., Liverpool.
RUSSELL, TURNBULL & CO. LTD., Glasgow.
C. F. IVENS & CO., Bristol and Southampton.
One of the principal Manchester Docks (No. 9), where Australian steamers discharge.
BRITISH OUTPORT MARKETS IN THE
NORTH AND MIDLANDS
Value of Port at Manchester
THE total population of Great Britain is roughly 45 millions, of
whom about 30 millions reside in the Midlands, North of England,
and in Scotland, i.e., North of a line drawn across the map from East
to West some miles South of Birmingham,
Translated into costs of distribution, this means that imported
produce can be distributed more economically to two-thirds of the
consumers in Great Britain from one or other of the Northern ports
and markets than by the usual method of shipment and distribution
of the bulk of it via London.
Taking them in alphabetical order the
principal Northern ports are Hull, Glas-
gow, Liverpool, Newcastle, and Man-
chester, all of which are the economic
distributing centres for a certain pro-
portion of the 30 million consumers men-
tioned, in other words these ports are
the points from which imported goods
or produce can be distributed to places
in the adjacent areas at lower cost than
via any other route.
Overseas freights to all British ports
are the same, and the Port Charges and
Dock Dues are as nearly as possible
competitive, but because rail and road
transport charges are ordinarily based
on zone mileage, a map which indicates
the areas of greatest density of popula-
tion and the ports adjacent to them also
indicates which are the most economical
points from which imported produce can
be distributed.
On this basis it will be found that of
the Northern ports previously mention-
ed, Hull and Newcastle are the economic
distributing centres for populations of
possibly two millions each, Glasgow for
five or six millions, Liverpool for three
or four millions, and Manchester for no
less than twelve millions. The latter
remarkable figures are because there is
a relatively small area which lies be-
tween Birmingham at its southern ex-
tremity and Bradford in the north, and
embraces East Lancashire, West York-
shire, and most of the Midlands within
its limits: it contains over 200 cities and
towns, including many of the most
famous manufacturing centres in the
world, and for every one of these Man-
chester is the nearest port.
To name a few only and their popula-
tions according to the latest census,
there is Birmingham, 1,000,000; Bolton,
178,000; Bradford, 300,000; Halifax,
100,000; Huddersfield, 140,000; Leeds,
485,000; Oldham, 140,000; Manchester
and Salford, 991,000; Nottingham,
270,000; Sheffield, 512,000; Stoke,
278,000.
The construction of the Manchester
Ship Canal and Docks—the latter 40
miles inland—enables large Overseas
steamers to discharge cargoes of raw
materials and produce almost in the
centre of this densely populated area in
what has been aptly termed “the heart
of industrial England.”
MANCHESTER A DISTRIBUTING
CENTRE.
Whilst Manchester is known the world
over as the principal centre of the cotton
industry, it is not so generally known
that it is also the biggest centre of
British engineering, and that 140,000
people are employed in that industry
within seven miles of the City Hall.
Many other important industries for
which the Manchester Royal Exchange
is the Clearing House are established in
the Port and its immediate vicinity;
this institution is probably the largest
of its kind in the world. It has a mem-
bership of 13,000, all representatives of
important firms engaged in the cotton,
engineering, chemical, and other staple
industries, located in the area for which
Manchester is the principal centre.
The Co-operative Wholesale Society
of England and Wales established its
headquarters in Manchester many years
ago; the Society which supplies hun-
dreds of retail co-operative shops in the
surrounding area, has the amazing
number of 7 million members on its
books, and an aggregate trade of over
£100,000,000 sterling annually.
As an indication of the magnitude of
the business transacted in the City and
its immediate vicinity, the Manchester
Bank Clearings have for many years ex-
ceeded by several millions sterling an-
nually, those of Bristol, Hull, Liverpool,
and Newcastle combined convincing
evidence of Manchester’s commercial and
industrial supremacy as that of the
greatest British outport market.
COMMODIOUS DOCKS.
The port and docks at Manchester are
laid out and equipped with every modern
facility for efficient handling and dis-
tribution of cargo; there are commodious
transit warehouses on the quays for
receipt and distribution of refrigerated
and general cargo by rail or road, and
all the principal berths are alongside
railways directly connected with all the
main lines of the country. The ship
canal and docks are regularly used by
steamers of 10,000-12,000 tons; they have
a uniform depth of 28ft., and No. 9 Dock
(see the accompanying illustration) is
more than half a mile long and 250 ft. wide.
The Wholesale Food Markets of the
City are the principal centres of supply
for an enormous population, and whether
as regards the area they cover or the
volume of business transacted they un-
questionably rank next in importance to
those of London.
These markets include separate pre-
mises for the sale of meat, fruit, dairy
produce, etc., and as an indication of
their size it may be mentioned that the
Wholesale Fruit Market covers an area
of over six acres under one roof, in ad-
dition to which there are many adjacent
warehouses and other premises occupied
by market salesmen.
All sales are effected by private treaty,
and the markets are the principal
centres of supply for retail traders who
serve 41 to 5 million consumers within
25 miles radius of the City, i.e., within
easy van delivery distance. The annual
requirements of consumers within the
latter area are reliably estimated to in-
clude: Butter, 52,400 tons; imported
meat, 67,200 tons; apples, 55,000 tons;
dried fruit, 18,700 tons; eggs, 584 mil-
lions.
MANCHESTER AUCTION ROOMS.
Fruit imported into Manchester is
sold in centrally situated auction rooms
used exclusively for the purpose (see
illustration in J. and H. Goodwin Ltd.’s
advt.). The sales are held two or three
times weekly, and are attended by be-
tween 300 and 350 wholesale fruit
merchants from all parts of the North
and Midlands; upwards of 100,000
packages have been sold in these rooms
under the hammer in a single day.
A few years ago it became necessary
to extend the accommodation for buyers
in the sale room by the provision of a
gallery.
It is estimated that 130,000 tons of
apples are consumed annually in the
area for which Manchester is the
economic distributing centre, yet less
than 30,000 cases of Australian apples
have been shipped direct to the Port in
any recent year, as compared with the
equivalent of one million cases from
America and Canada in the opposite
import season.
This is so extraordinary that in the
interests of producers the causes and
influences responsible for such an anom-
aly must be ascertained and effectively
countered. Only one of two reasons
can explain the failure of Australian ex-
porters to use the Manchester markets
more fully, viz.;
(1) The importance and magnitude of
these markets and the savings
which can be effected by direct
shipment and distribution from
the port are not fully realised, or
(2) The operations of vested interests
prevent growers from securing
the advantage of direct trade with
Manchester when choice of des-
tination is made for such percent-
age of exports as it is obvious are
required in the North and Mid-
lands of England.
During recent years there has been a
progressive increase in the quantity of
New Zealand produce shipped to Man-
chester, and the Port has become the
leading provincial market for dairy pro-
duce and fruit imported into Great
Britain from the Dominion.
To summarise the position. There is
something fundamentally wrong with
methods of distribution which result in
centralising so large a percentage of
Tasmanian exports in London, and
thereby fail to take advantage of the
saving and increased trade which might
be secured by direct shipment to other
ports and markets which serve two-thirds
of the entire population of Great Britain.
It is an absurd anomaly that
brokers and merchants who operate in
Northern markets have to obtain the
bulk of their supplies of Australian pro-
duce at second hand from another market
approximately 200 miles away, thereby
involving additional transport charges,
multiple handling and risk of deteriora-
tion, plus the original importers’ com-
mission and (or) profit.
mania has made no mean contribution,
and that the now world-famous Huon
districts are well to the fore in the sup-
plies received in U.K.
It was, in fact, because the Connolly
Shaw organisation, covering every
U.K, and Continental Market, so fully
realised the potentialities of Tasmania
and of the Huon districts, and because of
its desire to foster and increase the busi-
ness to its fullest extent between the two
countries, that the organisation, in keep-
ing with their pioneering traditions, sent
their representative, Mr. H. G. Colombie,
to reside in Australia, to act as the direct
connecting link and place his vast market-
OVERSEAS FRUIT
TRADE
A Reputable Firm
The firm of Simons and Co. Ltd., of
Great Britain, which is represented in
Tasmania by Mr. Herbert Rowe, 105
Macquarie Street, Hobart, is one of the
most reputable and extensive organisa-
tions in the United Kingdom, its capital
being £350,000. The firm is established
and has large premises at London, Liver-
pool, Southampton, Glasgow, Hull and
Manchester, and branches are located in
Canada and U.S.A. The firm is also re-
presented by authorised agents in all the
important fruit-growing countries of the
world, millions of packages are sold by
the organisation annually, and the extent
of the firm and its connections ensures
satisfactory services to shippers, who
have the advantage of the services of the
organisation itself irrespective of the port
to which the fruit is consigned.
Simons and Co. Ltd. are not buyers of
fruit, and their aim is to obtain highest
possible prices in the open market for the
benefit of shippers. Catalogues of prices
realised are published each sale day, and
are available for perusal by any persons
interested. The standing and repute of
the firm is such that it would welcome an
examination of its books by any auditor
appointed by the Government, not only
for the future, but for the past seasons.
Growers can therefore safely entrust
their consignments to such an organisa-
tion.
Mr. Rowe also represents the important
firm of Robsons Pty. Ltd., Brisbane, from
whom growers are assured of receiving
prompt and efficient service. He is well
known to all growers, and is the son of
the late Jas. Rowe, of Cradoc, who for
many years had important shipping and
fruit-growing interests.
ing experience at the disposal of those in-
terested on this side.
Millions of bushels are regularly mar-
keted each year by the numerous branches
of the organisation situated in England,
Scotland, Wales, Ireland, and the Conti-
nent, through large indoor and outdoor
staffs of fully trained and competent men.
Although the bulk of the fruit is sold
at auction, in the manner and in the sale
rooms described, sales are also effected
by Private Treaty whenever it is advis-
able to do so—the Connolly Shaw or-
ganisation thus giving to their clients
the benefits of both systems.
FROM NOTHING TO 100,000,000 BUSHELS (Continued).
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


THE EMPIRE'S BIGGEST FRUIT
DISTRIBUTORS
The Remarkable Growth of a Great
Covent Garden Undertaking
MR. GEORGE MONRO, V.M.H.
(Founder of the firm).
The above are big figures, and
they give one to pause. They
illustrate, however, only in very
small measure the remarkable
strides which this undertaking
has made since its foundation.
For it must be remembered that
since its establishment in 1882,
methods of organisation have
been very greatly improved,
labour-saving methods have been
applied in various directions, so
that a staff of more than 1,000 to-
day represents far more than the
same number of employees would
have indicated twenty, thirty, or
forty years ago, or at the start of
this great and eminently success-
ful venture.
But it is not so much our pur-
pose in these notes to deal with
the past, interesting though it
has been, of the firm of Messrs.
Geo. Monro Ltd. Here we are
rather concerned with the great
organisation which has been built
up, as it exists to-day—an or-
ganisation which, it is readily
acknowledged, is the largest de-
voted to fruit distribution
throughout the whole of the
British Empire.
This is a remarkably compre-
hensive and self-contained busi-
ness, and no one can make a de-
tailed study of its various estab-
lishments and departments with-
out realising that, in addition to
representing a remarkable ap-
plication to practical effort of
those high early ideals to which
reference has been made, it is a
veritable triumph of organising
genius. There are many branch
houses and establishments be-
sides those, controlled by the
firm, which cluster in the neigh-
bourhood of Covent Garden. The
firm to-day are the largest distri-
butors of hothouse produce in the
world, while they handle more
than 800,000 packages of Eng-
lish orchard fruit every year,
while other figures could be
quoted showing that in all classes
of produce handled the totals are
extremely large.
The head office of the company
is at 41-42 King Street, Covent
Garden, W.C. 2, the four upper
floors being used entirely as offi-
ces, while the ground floor and
basement, both of which are close
on 200 ft. in length, are the firm’s
principal sale rooms for the over-
seas section. At number 40
King Street, the company has
premises, the four upper floors of
which are used entirely as offices,
The large London undertaking
with which we are here parti-
cularly concerned—the famous
firm of Messrs. Geo. Monro Ltd.,
of 41-42 King Street, Covent
Garden, W.C. 2—like a good
many other concerns whose names
to-day are household words, had a
humble beginning. For when Mr.
George Monro, V.M.H., founded
this firm in 1862, he was assisted
by a single employee. To-day,
the staff employed in the various
establishments controlled by the
company numbers well over 1,000,
while sales on commission, by
private treaty only, reach in the
aggregate the remarkable turn-
over of more than 4,000,000
sterling.
the ground floor and basement,
each some 70ft. in length, being
devoted exclusively to the sale of
Continental produce. At 37-38
Long Acre are premises which
were acquired in 1918 owing to
the remarkable growth of the
English and Canary Islands
tomato business. A huge volume
of produce is handled there, some-
times as many as 40,000 packages
of English tomatoes alone in a
single day. It is necessary, dur-
ing the summer months, for this
large warehouse to be kept open
both day and night. Its hydraulic
lift, which serves three floors, is
admirably adapted to dealing
with the huge volume of produce
which passes through.
Then at 475-483 North Row,
Covent Garden, the firm has
premises for the sale of cucum-
bers and orchard fruit, while at
Hyde House, Langley Street, are
exceedingly spacious four-storied
premises with a total floor space
of 16,500 square feet. There is a
very deep and spacious basement
which keeps wonderfully cool
and which has a storage capacity
of some 15,000 cases of apples.
An electric goods lift and an
escalator serve all the floors, and
between them are capable of
carrying no less than 600 cases
per hour.
For its transport work, such as
collecting produce from and
delivering to the docks as well as
from growers, the company has a
fleet of over forty-five lorries of
from two to ten ton capacity.
Two of the company’s govern-
ing directors have appeared in
honours lists, Major Edwin G.
Monro, the present chairman of
the company, being an 0.8. E. and
Mr. Geo. Monro a C.B.E.
The firm sell on commission
by Private Treaty Only, and do
not purchase.
They have specialised in the
sale of Australian apples and
pears by expert salesmen for
many years past, and have the
largest and best customers in
Great Britain amongst their
clients.
Their chief agent in Australia
is Major H. Dakin, V.D., of Golds-
brough House, Macquarie Place,
Sydney, and the Southern Tas-
manian representatives are W.
H. Ikin & Son, of Dunn Street,
Hobart.
THE PORT OF HULL
SITUATED on the North Bank of the Humber, Hull attained a place
of high importance as a port early in the twelfth century, since
when it has consistently played a great part in Britain's trade. The
natural advantages of the port, its extensive facilities, and the pro-
gressive policy adopted by the dock and port authorities, have secured
its continued prosperity, so that for many years it has ranked as the
third port in the United Kingdom. Its position in relation to the vast
populous industrial areas of the hinterland, and its unrivalled railway
communications, have combined to make it an ideal centre for the
import and export of merchandise from and to all parts of the world.
The keen competition which has developed as a result of the world-
wide trade depression of recent years has impressed upon both shippers
and importers the need for exercising the greatest economy in dis-
tributing their wares, and the value of a port situated near the consum-
ing areas as a means to this end is being widely recognised.
As nearly one-third of the
population of Great Britain is
economically served through
Hull, the advantages of that
port will be clearly evident to
those interested in trade with
the United Kingdom.
The port not only holds
an eminent place in the trade
of Great Britain, but it is the
most convenient for the con-
tinental trade. Its geo-
graphical position and the
splendid steamship services
make it the ideal centre for
the transhipment and re-ex-
port of goods to Scandinavian,
Baltic, and all near continental
ports.
Keeping pace with the city's growth as a port, there has been a rapid
development in industry at Hull, and it is now the home of innumerable
manufacturing and industrial concerns, many of whom are known
throughout the world.
The London and North-Eastern Railway maintain rapid and effi-
cient services by fast freight trains to all parts of the country, giving
delivery in the principal towns on the day following despatch.
The docks at Hull are owned solely by the London and North-
Eastern Railway Company, who have spared no effort in providing
ample up-to-date equipment, and the port is able therefore to cater
for the largest cargo vessels sailing to and from all parts of the world.
There are ten docks with a water area of 210 acres, two riverside quays,
and two oil jetties at which can be accommodated the largest oil tankers
afloat. The total length of the quays available is 12 miles, and there
are about 300 miles of standard gauge railway lines in and around the
docks. The port possesses ample storage accommodation, which
includes warehouses capable of holding 207,000 tons of goods, wool
sheds with space for 140,000 bales of wool, cold stores with 700,000
cubic feet of space, and a grain silo with a capacity of 40,000 tons.
THE FRUIT CENTRE OF EUROPE.—In Great Britain the port is
the natural gateway to the immense industrial areas of the North and
Midlands, and more than 13,000,000 people (almost one-third of the
total population) live within the territory most economically served by
it.
Hull occupies an unrivalled position in relation to the Continent,
and the splendid services of steamers to all ports in Northern and
Western Europe render it the most convenient port for the landing,
despatching, and re-export of fruit.
Fruit from overseas countries is dealt with mainly at the King
George Dock, which is one of the most modern in the country, or at
Alexandra Dock. The up-to-date cranes and spacious transit sheds at
these docks are particularly well adapted to the speedy and efficient
handling of fruit traffic.
No effort is spared to ensure rapid discharge and despatch by the
express trains provided by the London and North-Eastern Railway, with
the result that costs are low, the buyers are satisfied, and the prices
show a better return to the grower.
Buyers have free access to the docks and quays for the inspection
of fruit before and after the sales, which are held regularly each
Monday, Wednesday, and Thursday, and at other times as required.
These sales are largely attended by the principal buyers from the
industrial centres of England and Scotland and parts of Ireland.
A large number of the most important firms of fruit brokers and
importers are resident in Hull, many of whom specialise in the export
trade and are in close touch with Scandinavian, Baltic, and all near
continental ports.
The manifold advantages of shipping direct to Hull are readily
apparent, and the fact that 7,406,553 packages of fruit and vegetables
were imported in 1932 shows that these advantages are fully appreci-
ated by shippers.
AREA OF
DISTRISUTION
lIUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


ORGANISATION OF FRUIT INDUSTRY
Co-operative Movement Successfully
Launched
Facilities of the Port Huon Fruitgrowers' Co-operative
Association Ltd.
One of the most notable movements
during the last quarter of a century was
the birth and growth of the Port Huon
Fruitgrowers’ Co-operative Association
Ltd. For many years previously the
chaotic conditions that prevailed with so
many fruitgrowers shipping their fruit
to various markets without any co-
ordinated system, and under multi-
tudinous brands and methods of pack-
ing, led to most unsatisfactory results.
THE BEGINNING.
In 1917 a small band of fruitgrowers
met in the ante-room of the Geeveston
Town Hall to express their indignation
and distress at the small and inadequate
price paid for bag apples, namely, 6d. per
bushel of 501b5., delivered Hobart. After
a lengthy discussion, it was decided to
write to processors-and protest against a
price that did not cover collection and
freight. In due course a reply was re-
ceived from the Manager of Messrs. H.
Jones and Co. to the effect that if they
would get together and send their apples
under one brand, he would pay them Is.
per bushel. This they immediately did,
and benefited to the extent of 100 per
cent.
Elated by their first venture in co-
operation, and fully convinced that co-
operation would solve their problems,
they decided to continue as a committee,
and each member consented to put his
100 per cent, gain into a common fund for
future expenses. Mr. R. Lincoln was
elected President, and Mr. A. Dickson
Cecre’ary.
Following numerous meetings and dis-
cussions, it was decided to endeavour to
form a co-operative association, and the
following were appointed as provisional
Directors: —Messrs. R. Lincoln, C. G.
Thiessen, F. J. Hyndes, A. Dickson, R. H.
Thompson, H. D. Calvert, A. T. Ham-
mond, M. T. Scott, and G. D. Bennett.
THE BATTLE OF THE SITES.
At this stage after a hard battle to
convince them that this was essential,
the Government decided to build an inter-
state jetty at Port Huon.
Those interested could not agree as to
the site on which this jetty should be
erected. It was decided by the Harbour-
master that Regatta Point would be the
most suitable position, but this met with
such Concentrated opposition from co-
operative growers and their supporters
(who were convinced that the present site
of the Port Huon pier was the best), that
the Minister for Lands and Works (Mr.
J. B. Hayes) was invited down to meet all
those interested. The meeting was held
on the Regatta Ground, and after the
Minister had heard the various i-ecom-
mendations from a large attendance, the
meeting was adjourned to the Town Hall
at night.
After weighing the evidence of the
contending parties, the Minister stated
that if the co-operative growers could in-
duce twenty growers to give a guarantee
within a fortnight that they would put £5
each into a co-operative packing shed at
the site favoured by them, he would take
the responsibility of over-riding the Har-
bourmaster’s decision, and would have the
pier erected at that place. The Secretary
immediately took action, and in two days
forwarded to the Minister the signed
guarantees of thirty growers to put in £5
each.
The next move was the arrival on the
site of the works engineer, Mr. Reynolds,
who, in company with the Warden,
Messrs. M. R. Geeves, R. Lincoln, and A.
Dickson, inspected the ground. The best
spot was chosen, and the jetty pegged
out, and in due course the Port Huon
packing shed and the jetty were erected.
BUSINESS MANAGERS.
It was now decided that a Business
Mlanager should be appointed. Applica-
tions were called, and Mr. J. J. Kennally
was engaged. He was successful in get-
ting an f.o.b. price of 6s. 6d. per case for
a large quantity of apples, and as this was
Is. advance on ruling prices, it was the
means of numerous other growers joining
the Association.
In the meantime a body of fruitgrowers
at Huonville, with similar ambitions, were
struggling to the same goal. Through
their Secretary, Mr. F. Cole, they got in
touch with the Port Huon Association, in-
quiring as to the best methods of forming
a co-operative association. After some
discussion, it was decided that they should
join up with the original body already
formed, thus giving it additional strength
for the benefit of all.
CHAIRMAN.
It was shortly after this period that
Mr. R. Lincoln, the pioneer Chairman,
was forced to resign his office owing to
failing health. Mr. H. D. Calvert was then
appointed Chairman, a position he held
until his death in October, 1924. The
position of Chairman has been occupied
since that date by the Hon. W. H. Calvert.
About this time the Beard decided to
make a change in the management, and
Mr. C. V. Henry, who had experience in
managing packing sheds, was selected for
the position, and it was during his ad-
ministration that the Port Huon Asso-
ciation acquired its present processing
factory on the Esplanade, Hobart.
The Association now had a Committee
working in various parts of the State.
The original Directors considered it
would be in the best interests of the As-
sociation to secure wider representation
on the Board, and in order to do this the
majority of them unselfishly decided to
make way for members of other districts,
and refrained from standing for election.
The Manager, Mr. Henry, at this time
suffered a breakdown in health, and it
became necessary to consider the appoint-
ment of another General Manager. Out
of the many applications received for the
position, Mr. J. P. Piggott was chosen,
and in 1920 he became General Manager.
Soon after Mr. Piggott’s appointment
as General Manager, the Factory at
Castray Esplanade was fitted out with
up-to-date machinery, boilers, pulping
plant, case-making equipment, etc., and a
start was made to can and pulp fruits. In
January, 1921, as much as 1,700 tons of
raspberries were put into pulp for ship-
ment Overseas. The factory is capable
of dealing with 200 tons of jam fruits per
annum, in addition to a very large quan-
tity of apple products in tins.
In 1922 a large pulping factory was
erected at Huonville, as much as 200 tons
of fruit being pulped and packed there.
The following year the Association had a
factory operating at New Norfolk, where
a large tonnage of fruit was pulped and
packed.
It was found, with increasing activities,
that the position of the Hobart factory
was not a convenient place for growers to
call and do their business, and the rooms
occupied by the office were required for
factory purposes. It was, therefore, de-
cided in 1921 to move to offices in Eliza-
beth Street. These offices were latex-
found too small, and in 1926 the Associa-
tion moved to the present buildings in
Davey Street, which are now owned and
occupied by them, the building being of
three storeys, with entrances on three
streets, large, nicely designed offices, with
beautiful cool store rooms and store
department. Fertilisers, sprays, wood-
wool, machinery, etc., and general or-
chard requisites, of which they are large
suppliers, are stored here.
It was through its instrumentality and
enterprise that the Deep Water Port of
Port Huon was opened up. That port
has now an up-to-date wharf with ample
shed accommodation, and is capable of
handling steamers of 30ft. draught.
About 1922 the Association became very
active in getting direct ships to call at
Port Huon for fruit for the Interstate
and Overseas markets. The Manager
held meetings throughout the Huon and
Channel districts for the purpose of ob-
taining guarantees from the growers for
the purpose of getting Interstate boats
to call at Port Huon and Cygnet for the
carriage of fruit to Interstate ports, and
for this purpose the Association engaged,
on its own behalf, the Hassell line of
steamers, which carried on this trade for
12 months. The Company subsequently
arranged with Messrs. Huddart, Parker
and the Union Steam Ship Co. to continue
the service, which has been in active exis-
tence ever since, and the Association acts
as agent for these shipping companies,
including stevedoring, somewhere in the
vicinity of one million cases of fruit being
handled to Interstate markets during the
period of one year.
The need was felt for accommodation
for cool storage of apples in order to re-
gulate the feeding of the Interstate mar-
ket, and in 1929 the Association erected a
large up-to-date cool store with a capacity
of 110,000 cases of fruit. After a
thorough investigation of the different
systems employed for the cool storage of
apples, it was decided to use the direct
expansion system, which has proved most
successful, the out-turn of the apples
every year showing a gain in the pack-
out. Very small losses in the fruit itself
have been apparent.
In order to assist growers, packing
sheds have been erected throughout the
principal fruitgrowing districts, and sup-
ply a much needed improvement.
A principle of the Association has al-
ways been to advocate obtaining more
Overseas boats to call at Huon Ports
direct, in order to save the extra expense
to growers of forwarding their fruit to
Hobart, and more particularly to avoid
the double handling of the fruit. The
firm are large purchasers of apples for
Overseas buyers, and also consign large
quantities of fruit to the United King-
dom and Europe, where they have a very
economic and expeditious selling firm in
Messrs. J. O. Sims Ltd., who handle all
their consignment fruit to those markets.
For the sale of their factory products
they have also appointed agents through-
out the States, New Zealand, and the
United Kingdom.
The Association is one of the members
of the five shipping agents in Hobart,
through whom all the fruit is shipped
Overseas, and who arrange and guaran-
tee the Overseas steamers coming to Tas-
mania, Mr. Piggott being a member of the
Australian Overseas Transport Associa-
tion.
The Association is Manager of the
General Branch of the Prudential Go. in
Tasmania for the Fire, Marine and Acci-
dent Departments.
It is x-epresented through its General
Manager, Mr. J. P. Piggott, on the Aus-
ti-alian Overseas Transport Association,
the Australian Apple and Pear Council
of Australia, and through its Chairman,
the Hon. W. H. Calvert, on the State
Fruit Board.
The present Directors are Hon. W. H.
Calvert, M.L.C., F. Cole, B. J. Pearsall,
M.H.A., Jas. Combes. A. Dickson, P. A.
Foil, C. Hansen, C. W. Frost, M.H.R., and
L. R. Shield. The Secretary of the As-
sociation is Mr. A. R. Johnston.
THE 1937 MODEL
“LIGHTNING” FRUIT GRADER.
The 1937 model “Lightning” Triplex
Grader will do more to assist the grow-
ers to put up their fruit in accordance
with what is considered necessary for
both the Sydney and overseas markets
than any other machine at present in use
in Tasmania. In this machine three dis-
tinct principles of sizing are applied.
The main idea behind this model is to
give the packer whatever principle of siz-
ing he likes best. It is really a combina-
tion of three principles practically ap-
plied to give the full benefit of each,
and remove the disadvantages of any.
THREE DISTINCT PRINCIPLES.
The principle of the two moving ele-
ments, which is so essential for pears,
soft fruits and long apples, is retained
for use if, and when required. The com-
bination of the Screw Adjustable In-
dependent Free Rubber Rollers to steady
the fruit when it is ready to size and the
Screw Adjustable Independent Driven
Rubber Rollers for the operation of sizing
will appeal to every practical grower.
The principle of the Screw Adjustable
Independent Driven Rubber Rollers is
another variation. The principle of the
Screw Adjustable Free Rubber Rollers
can be used if desired.
The application of these principles is
made in such a manner that the change
over from one to the other is made with-
out any alterations to the sizing unit—,
a matter of minutes only—and it is not
expected that the cost of the triplex
machine will be increased. These im-
provements are covered by patent rights
and place the “Lightning” far ahead of
any other machine.
CAPACITY AND ACCURACY.
Slack packing is mainly due to the
quantity of fruit which has to be packed
in a very limited time, and to inaccurate
sizing. Tasmanian conditions require
a type of machine which is capable of
handling a large quantity of fruit—pro-
vides ample bin space for packers—and
sizes all classes and varieties without
injury. No matter how accurately a
machine might size under easy conditions,
it will size inaccurately when pushed be-
yond its capacity. Even when the sizing
is accurate, the packers cannot make a
good pack if they are crowded one against
the other because of the lack of space.
These are the greatest disadvantages of
packing houses throughout Australia in
all classes of fresh fruits. The equipment
too often is not in keeping with the size
of the pack.
COMMUNITY PACKING HOUSES.
The 1937 Model “Lightning” is also
specially suitable for packing houses of
10,000 cases or over, handling all the dif-
ferent varieties of apples and pears. The
sizing unit can be adjusted quickly for
each run of fruit to ensure accuracy of
sizing and prevention of injury. Each
independent section can be adjusted to
the slighest fraction without any trouble.
If the line of fruit is suited to the use
of free rollers, this principle can be used.
If to prevent injury the driven rollers
are essential, the change is made in-
stantly. When the variety calls for the
free rollers to steady it and the driven
roller to prevent it from being injured,
the combination is there for the purpose.
The Grader will size accurately, without
injury, in large quantities—long, short,
flat and misshapen apples, pears, plums,
apricots and peaches.
CLASSIFYING FOR QUALITY.
The “Lightning” roller type Sorting
Elevators and Sorting Tables provide
the most effective and economical method
of classifying. They are made from one
to five separate qualities. The Wavy
Motion Roller Sorting Table definitely
exposes the whole surface of the fruit to
the sorters, regardless of its shape and
size. The special Pear Roller is the only
method of handling pears without chop-
ping. These very necessary facilities can
only be obtained for use with the
“Lightning” Grader.
SINGLE-SIDED GRADERS.
“Lightning” Graders are supplied in
many different designs to suit every
purpose, including Single-sided Graders,
which can, with the addition of an extra
machine, be converted into a Two Quality
outfit at any time. The experience of
many years in every fruit district in Aus-
tralasia is available to anyone who is
anxious to obtain the best results at the
lowest cost in classifying, sizing, and
packing, and Tasmanian growers can
overcome the difficulty of slack packing,
wrong grading, etc., by the installation
of a 1937 Model “Lightning” suitable for
the size of their pack and the fruit which
they grow.
SPECIALISED ORCHARD
IMPLEMENTS.
The “Lightning” line of specialised
Orchard Implement is being increased
each season. The Tractor Implements
(fitted with either of two special Lifts),
because of their design and construction,
are now being used in preference to
another make or type. These implements
include a distinctive type of disc plough
—a new type of Spring Tooth Cultivator
—and a One Way and Two Way Disc Cul-
tivator, which cultivates up to the butt
of the tree, working right under the
lowest hanging branches.
T.S.S. ZEALANDIA LOADING FRUIT AT PORT HUON.
December, 1986. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


Put
A POWER PLANT
IN YOUR ORCHARD
m*
vy.'
m
Sept
.'V;
••VU ik '
V
McCORMICK
DEERING 0-12
Sun power ripens your fruit; McCormick-Deering
0-12 tractor power will lighten your orchard lab-
ours. Ploughing, harrowing, belt and haulage
work—it handles them all with speed and
despatch and at the lowest fuel cost. See us and
arrange for a free demonstration.
v
-yry;
¥
A
mm
m
EASY SPRAYING with
DERWENT JUNIOR
OUTFIT
The lightest-draught machine on the market,
the DERWENT JUNIOR spraying outfit is also
the lowest-set and designed from long experience
of orchardists 1 requirements . . . Powered by the
highly efficient and economical McCormick-
Deering Hto 2i h.p. engine ... Myers 2-cylinder
pump ... Huon pine vat (size optional), standard
capacity 65 gallons , . . 36-inch wood wheels with
3-inch tyres . . . The best machine for speedy,
thorough spraying work.
A complete line of equipment
for fruitgrowers . . . For full
information write to:
ROBT. NETTLEFOLD Pty. Ltd.
(MACHINERY DEPT.)
113-115 MACQUARIE STREET, HOBART
Corner YORK STREET AND KINGSWAY, LAUNCESTON
In the preparation of
Bordeaux Sprays use
ESA BLUESTONE
manufactured by
The Electrolytic Refining
and Smelting Company of
Australia Limited.
Distributing Agents:
Elder Smith & Co. Ltd.,
95 William Street,
Melbourne,
and all capital cities.
FARM MACHINERY, AND
TRANSPORT.
ROBT. NETTLEFOLD’S CONTRIBU-
TION TO THE HUON.
The fame of the Huon district for its
matchless timber and its magnificent
fruit, has spread throughout Australia
and far overseas because the Huon pion-
eers and their successors have devoted to
this rich and beautiful territory their
faith and labours for a hundred years.
To the development of national resour-
ces the people of the Huon have applied
progressive ideas as well as hard work.
As suppliers of power plant and farm
machinery, Robt. Nettlefold Pty. Ltd.
have been intimately associated with
Huon enterprises for the past 32 years.
When Robert Nettlefold was appointed
agent in Hobart for the International
Harvester Company 32 years ago, this
happy association began within a year of
his appointment. Mr. Nettlefold gained
the International Harvester Company s
first prize for individual sales success.
After a long period of progressive train-
ing, the business was converted into Robt.
Nettlefold Pty. Ltd., with Mr. Robert
Nettlefold as Managing Director. In
1926 this organisation was appointed sole
agents in Tasmania for the sale and dis-
tribution of the International Haryester
line of trucks, tractors, and machinery.
In its relation to the Huon district,
however, it was in pioneering power
spraying and motor transport and power
farming generally that the /’ r ™
largely in Huon development, the uer-
went Junior spraying outfit, International
motor trucks, and McCormick-Deering
tractors, have each played a big part in
the development of the Huon district.
If one looks back a quarter of a century,
the old 4-wheel spraying outfit with its
1 h.p. International Tom Thumb air-
cooled engine and Myers pump is recalled,
and it is a tribute to the sound finality
of these products that scores of these
plants are still to be found operating.
They are still being serviced by Robt.
Nettlefold Pty. Ltd.
The hilly nature of most Tasmanian
orchards demanded a spraying plant,
light in build, yet strong and low-set, and
it was only after long and careful study
that the firm evolved the Derwent Junior
2 j wheel outfit which became famous, not
only in the Huon Districts, but through-
out the length and breadth of the State.
This outfit was of the barrel type—capa-
city 40 to 50 gallons—and was accepted
enthusiastically by orchardists from the
first day it was released, and it still enjoys
great popularity. However, a further,
and what is considered a more progressive
move was made when the features men-
tioned below were incorporated in tne
latest model Derwent Junior outfit as
illustrated in this issue.
OLD AND NEW SPRAYING OUTFITS.
A comparison between the original
barrel type Derwent Junior outfit and the
new model, shows that in the latter the
capacity has been increased more than
50%, while the weight has been reduced
by approximately 2 cwt. McCormick-
Deering engines and genuine Myers
pumps are standard equipment on Der-
went Junior spraying outfits.
The Derwent Junior has been designed
specially for Tasmanian conditions, and
has established the record of being the
most popular portable power pump in the
State. This is all the more gratifying
When it is realised that the vats are manu-
factured in Hobart of Huon pine grown
within the State, and the outfit is com-
pletely assembled by local labour em-
ployed in the firm’s workshops.
PIPE LINE SPRAYING INTRO-
DUCED.
About six years ago, Robt. Nettlefold
Pty. Ltd. set out to pioneer the station-
ary method of spraying in Tasmania, and
their enterprise in this direction has been
rewarded and most favourably commented
on by the growers, many of whom have
adopted this system, which provides for
a centrally situated power plant and large
vat of 200 gallons to 400 gallons capacity.
Pipe lines are laid through the orchard
and served by laterals. The outstanding
advantage of the stationary system is
that the spraying can be done expedi-
tiously in every portion of orchard
that is connected with the main plant.
The owner is quite independent of bad
working conditions, which so often cause
delay when portable plants are in use.
Steadily the maj’or orchardists are adopt-
ing the stationary system of spraying,
using the plants as supplied by Robt. Net-
tlefold Pty. Ltd., which have McCormick-
Deering Type LA engines, and genuine
Myers 2,3, or 4 cylinder pumps as stan-
dard equipment.
Huon’s first century of success has been
marked by the ready adoption of pro-
gressive methods in production. Its sec-
ond century will therefore be faced with
an enlightened readiness to adopt and
apply all the wonderful mechanical aids
to industry which the future has in store.
With the residents of the Huon, Robt.
Nettlefold Pty. Ltd. look forward to a
splendid era of achievement and pros-
perity.
SPRAYING WITH
BORDEAUX MIXTURE
In the prevention and treatment of
diseases which affect deciduous and vine
trees, Bordeaux Mixture—a combination
of lime and bluestone—stands pre-
eminent. Over fifty years have elapsed
since the discovery of Bordeaux Mixture,
and it remains still the premier fungi-
cide. It was in 1882 that Millardet, a
French scientist, investigating Downy
Mildew disease of the vine, observed that
along the roadside at Medoc in the
Gironde, France, certain vines bore
leaves, although others had been de-
foliated by the disease.
Attributing this persistence of the
foliage to some treatment whereby it
had escaped the disease, he found on
inquiry that it was the practice to daub
the leaves of these particular vines with
a mixture of lime and bluestone. In this
way, passers-by, thinking that the fruit
below would be similarly treated, would
not touch it for fear of poison. Millardet
followed up this slender clue, and in
1885 was able to announce the successful
use of lime-bluestone mixture, or Bor-
deaux, as a fungicide against the disease,
and also that this fortunate action was
due to the bluestone and not to ■ the
lime.
Since this discovery, many improve-
ments have been made on the original
Bordeaux Mixture, not the least being
the use of ESA Bluestone, which,
guaranteed to be not less than 99 per
cent, pure, is the ideal bluestone for this
spray.
ESA Bluestone is an Australian
product, and is produced only by The
Electrolytic Refining and Smelting Com-
pany of Australia Ltd., at its Works at
Port Kembla, New South Wales.
Although ESA Bluestone is marketed
in various grades to meet differing re-
quirements, a grade of very fine crys-
tals —Granulated (Snow) Bluestone —is
specially manufactured for use in Bor-
deaux Mixtures. This is packed in 561 b.
cartons, and is eminently suited to the
requirements of the orchardist who
prepares his own Bordeaux Mixture, as
it rapidly dissolves in water.
The Bordeaux Mixture formula in
general use is the 6:4:40 formula, and
is prepared as follows: —
(a) Dissolve 61b. of ESA Bluestone
in 20 gallons of water in a
barrel.
(b) Slake 41b. of quicklime in
another barrel by adding small
quantities of water at a time.
When slaked, add water to bring
up to 20 gallons. Stir well.
(c) Pour the ESA Bluestone solution
and lime water simultaneously
into the spray vat through a
suitable sieve. The resulting
Bordeaux should be a good sky-
blue colour, and is ready for
immediate use.
The Electrolytic Refining and Smelt-
ing Company of Australia Ltd. has
issued a very interesting booklet entitled
“Better Yields by Spraying with ESA
Bluestone,” which fully discusses the
fungous diseases of fruits, vegetables,
and vines, as well as their various
treatments.
This attractive booklet, which has
been edited by experts, should be in the
hands of every orchardist, vigneron,
and farmer; it is available without cost
on application to the Company or their
distributing Agents, Messrs. Elder Smith
& Company Ltd., who are located in
each Australian capital city.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT, “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


PASSING OF THE FOUNDER.
In 1926 Tasmania lost a noble son in
the passing of Sir Henry Jones. Few
people perhaps realise how much Tas-
mania benefited by his financial ability.
Pages could be written on his work and
the part which he played in the extension
and development of its industries upon
which the prosperity of the State depends.
A MAN OF SIMPLE TASTES.
The greatest characteristic of Sir Henry
was his great simplicity. He had no hob-
bies, neither was he interested in any
sports or pastimes. Work, and the build-
ing up of a great business, so that he
might be able to give greater employment,
was his sole ambition. He walked to and
from his work twice daily, and was known
to never have a penny in his pocket. All
he earned went back into the great com-
mercial enterprise. His week-ends were
spent in visiting some sheep station, or-
chard, or hop-field, either to discuss the
many problems which beset the man-on-
the-land in those days or to help them out
of their difficulties.
It can be truly said that this captain of
commerce, yet humble man, gave employ-
ment to thousands, not only in his fac-
tories, but to the farmers and orchardists
through his ability to secure markets for
their products throughout the world.
The life of the late Sir Henry Jones
was indeed a (busy one, yet he was always
happy—happy in the knowledge that he
was making others happy through em-
ployment. He will ever be remembered,
not only through the business which bears
his name, but for his kindness and sim-
plicity.
It is interesting to know that Sir
Henry’s work in Tasmania is being car-
ried on ably by Mr. F. H. Peacock, a mem-
ber of the well-known Peacock family, his
father being a cousin of Mr. George Pea-
cock, the founder of the jam manufactur-
ing industry in Australia. Mr. F. H.
Peacock has acquired a thorough know-
ledge of all phases of the jam and fruit-
processing industry and the packing and
marketing of apples by hard work and
close study of modern methods, and was
selected by Sir Henry Jones to take charge
of the firm’s important operations in
.America, and afterwards chosen by him
to be his first assistant at the Head
Office in Hobart.
PRICE VARIATIONS
Not a Modern Feature
Primary producers sometimes complain
of the variableness of the prices paid for
their products, but a reference to the diary
•of the late Mr. Henry Judd, of Franklin,
goes to show that the early settlers were
much worse off in this direction than
modern tillers of the soil. Referring to
the conditions over half a century ago, Mr.
Judd says:—
"There have, during the past few years,
been many a change and drawback. At
one time a crop of potatoes would be worth
£2O a ton; the following year only about
’it- per ton clear of expenses would be
realised. Apples have been as high as
30/- per bushel clear of expenses; shingles
from 1/6 to £2 per 1,000 and laths at the
same price; palings have been £2 per 100,
and sawn timber £2 per 100 feet. A man
has been known to split 1,000 palings in
a day and get £2O for them.
ORCHARD MAINTENANCE
Essential Points to Observe
Some time ago, and not so very many
years iback, Tasmanian apples were in
constant demand almost all the world
over.
Tasmania had practically a monopoly
over many markets, and found little diffi-
culty in disposing of her products.
To-day we cannot claim to have any
particular market to ourselves, and every
year competition is becoming keener; in
fact, so keen that considerable difficulty
is at periods encountered in disposing of
our fruit products.
This condition has forced l orchardists
to adopt up-to-date methods of produc-
tion and to endeavour to market only
fruit of the highest grade.
Legislation has been introduced at
varying periods in order to protect the
man who places good quality fruit on the
market, and so reward his genuine effort
to maintain a high standard. No matter
how carefully a man may protect his trees
with sprays, disease will creep in and
blemish the fruit. If, however, that ef-
CAIRNS BAY.
fort had not been fully made, the fruit
so produced would never be permitted to
leave the State.
As some four million bushels of apples
are sent out of the State per annum, it
will Ibe readily seen that proved and effec-
tive working is carried' out by the
majority of the fruit producers.
It is claimed that apple trees are bear-
ing good crops that were planted three-
quarters of a century ago. Surely this
is sufficient proof that such apple-pro-
ducing districts have conditions that are
generally suitable for the growing not
only of trees that give long life, but also
a fruit that is of high quality. It is not
claimed that every orchard that has been
planted has been successful. Unfor-
tunately, some areas have proved most
unsuitable for the growth of healthy
trees; but where care has been exercised,
these instances are few.
The natural fertility and adequate
rainfall of the principal apple and pear
growing districts was such that little at-
tention had to be paid to artificial manur-
ing. If cultural methods were highly
maintained, the trees thrived and gave
of their best. As the planting areas ex-
tended, however, it was not possible to
always choose a fertile flat, and higher
country (even fairly steep hill sides)
was set out. The fertility of the high
levels was not of the standard of the river
levels, and this condition quickly brought
about new methods of cultivation. It
would not be casting any reflection on our
pioneers if it was said they knew very
little of the methods of artificial fertilis-
ing. Perhaps if they could have a quick
run through the fruit districts to-day
they could and would say: “There are a
lot of people about who have much to
learn, and we only wish we had had the
opportunities that the present-day grow-
ers have.” It would never do to disturb
their peaceful slumbers, so the world
must roll on just as man makes it.
The extensive planting of orchards had
to bring forth its crop of difficulties, and
sometimes Complete failures. How many
varying conditions were responsible for
the failures it is difficult to say. Some
men were unfortunate in choosing an
area to plant, as the sub-soil was bad and
root systems rotted; some planted l varie-
ties that were shy bearers, and came from
bad nursery stock; some left too much to
nature, and the punishment the trees re-
ceived through neglect dwarfed them be-
yond repair; disease played its part, if
not checked, and many other check-mates
have happened. In spite of all this, the
wonderful Huon district went on plant-
ing its orchards, and year by year her
production increased until it grew into
millions of bushels of fruit.
The problem to-day is to maintain this
large area of fruit-producing trees to a
high standard, and conserve the tremen-
dous capital value invested. Apples are,
without question, the main source of
revenue; but pears form quite a substan-
tial income, and berry fruits must not be
forgotten. Not only the Commonwealth
is supplied with berry fruit products, but
several! other countries some weeks’ sail
from the seat of production.
The maintenance of a fruit-producing
area is not an easy task. If it was only
a matter of following a practice or some
J. J, Barnett.
formula of cultivation, spraying, fertilis-
ing and pruning, the life of a fruit grower
would be pleasant indeed.
Men have been heard to say that every-
j thing and anything can happen to a fruit
crop, and perhaps the statement is not
so very much exaggerated. If what can
happen to a fruit tree could happen to the
human frame we might as a race dis-
appear, or our hospitals would be some-
what overtaxed to keep us on our legs.
Half a century ago the maintenance of an
orchard was more or less a “rule of
thumb.” To-day it is a highly scientific
business, and tremendous organisations
have been set up in order to attempt to
keep a huge industry solvent.
To find good markets for the products
is an ever-increasing difficulty, and is,
perhaps, comparable to the difficulty of
producing an article that is without a
blemish.
So keen has the selling of fruit become,
that only the very highest quality can
command a remunerative return. The
demand for this quality takes one right
back to mother earth, and it is there
a start has to be made. Nothing but a
healthy and vigorous tree can give the
best quality products. The best cannot
be counted as a little, but must be visual-
ised as the greatest a tree can produce.
The same amount of work can be given to
a tree producing an inferior crop as to one
giving the highest quality fruit, but if the
essentials for the promoting the health
of the tree are neglected, then all the work
put into the land may go for naught.
Neglect to spray at a certain period and
the repetition of certain sprays will play
a big part in failure —perhaps the great-
est part. If, however, the tree is not
healthy and cannot grow, spraying will
not assist. The foundation is all appar-
ent, and one must commence there.
Good cultivation is so essential that an
experienced orchardist will make this his
first task.
His second is to see that the tree can
obtain sufficient plant food to return to
him per crop the value and more for his
capital, so varyingly invested. At one
period it was considered the correct thing
to do to give a tree a dressing of blood
and bone and all the plant food that a
tree required was provided. Research
has now proved the error of our ways.
Lime,-for instance, has played a very big
part in keeping an orchard in good health.
In fact, many of our fruit areas are so
deficient in this soil-rejuvenating mineral
that it is well nigh impossible for a tree
to give of its best, or even a third of its
best.
Science has come to our aid, and told us
how necessary lime is, and when a soil is
deficient in it. Of course, this is not a
new-fangled idea by any means, but the
information to be supplied by tests is now
very definite.
Some day it is hoped lime, in its vary-
ing forms, will be so cheaply available
that one will not have to be advised to use
it; but, perhaps, to cut the cost for a year
or two.
The three well-known and essential
plant foods applied to fruit trees are
Phosphoric Acid, Nitrogen, and Potash.
These plant foods are available singly,
and in conjunction. They are used ex-
tensively throughout the fruit-growing
centres to-day. The fruit department of
the Department of Agriculture has been
conducting manurial experiments for a
long term of years in order to define suit-
able quantities of fertilisers to apply per
tree or acre and at varying periods.
The work of the Department has assisted
many growers in determining suitable
fertilisers for maximum results, but in
spite of their efforts seasonal conditions
continue to play a prominent part in the
results obtained.
In a wet season too much nitrogen may
do considerable harm. The fruit grows
too quickly, and may not carry Over-
sea as well as demanded. Potash
may have been neglected', and as it is
claimed that potash gives colour the fruit
may lack that bloom that buyers desire.
Phosphates are generally applied, as it is
recognised they are the base of all
manurial dressings.
If one could guarantee even seasons
what an easy matter it would be to deter-
mine fertiliser requirements! A com-
plete manure could be applied every year,
and with confidence. Some men do so,
and have been doing so for a long number
of years. Others apply superphosphate
for several years, and occasionally add
potash one year and nitrogen at another
period. By following this practice they
claim considerable amounts of money is
saved. How true or sound this is one
cannot say, but it does appear to be some-
what of guess work.
Years ago when blood and bone were
principally used the fruit produced varied
considerably.
It was applied in the midst of Winter,
when the trees were dormant, and if the
Winter and Spring proved rather wet the
blood was dissolved, and to a very great
extent was washed away with the heavy
rains. This meant that costly nitrogen
was wasted, and the trees received little
or no benefit. Research has proved that
old-fashioned customs have to be scrap-
ped, and easily dissolved fertilisers must
be applied at a period when their full
benefit must be derived.
Competition to-day demands the ut-
most, and the least possible expenditure.
This forces the use of fertilisers to be
made when every ounce as applied is
able to give its full measure. Fertilisers
that do not leach, such as superphosphate,
bonedust, and potash, may be safely ap-
plied during late Winter; but easily dis-
solved fertilisers must be applied when a
tree or vine can make immediate use of
it. Science and experiment have fully
demonstrated this fact to us, and the ap-
plication of fertilisers to-day is viewed
from a different angle from what it was
some years ago. The application of fer-
tilisers to apple orchards is not a choice,
but a necessity.
As it has been found that dressings
from 5 to 10 cwt. are really only effective,
it can be readily understood that indis-
criminate fertilising is costly and waste-
ful.
The orchardist of 1936 has to carefully
study his trees and determine what is
considered a suitable fertiliser and the
amounts to be applied.
The Tasmanian apple grower is offer-
ed facilities to assist in this work, and his
product proves that careful thought is
given to not only the sound fertilising of
his trees, but to all other procedures
necessary for the maintenance of a
healthy orchard.
A TRAGEDY RECALLED.
A correspondent, writing of his asso-
ciation with the inter-State fruit in-
dustry, says: “There is one tragedy in
the transport of the Huon fruit which
is recalled to my mind. The late Sir
Henry Jones built a sailing ship many
years ago and named her the Amelia J.,
after one of his daughters. Jones and
Co. loaded the vessel with fruit from
the Huon and set off for Brisbane, which
was eventually reached, and discharged
her cargo, but on the way back the
vessel, with all her crew, was lost. An
aeroplane was sent out from Tasmania
to look for the vessel, and she also did
not return.”
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.
romantic industrial achievement
(Continued).


A. G. WEBSTER & SONS LTD.
Established 1831
Stock and Station Agents and Auctioneers
Selling Brokers of Real Estate, Wool and Produce of all Kinds and Live
Stock.
Engineers and Suppliers of all kinds of Implements and Machines for
Orchard, Dairy, Agricultural, and Pastoral purposes; Artificial
Fertilisers, Sprays, Fencing, Tarpaulins, Twine, Jute Goods, Rubber
Hose, Belting, and other lines.
Agents for —
P. & O. Steam Navigation Company.
British India Steam Navigation Company.
Clan Line of Steamers.
Roosevelt Line ( America-Australia).
international Mercantile Marine Comoany (America).
Fastern and Australian S.N. (Australia-Japan).
Matson Line, San Francisco.
Chief Agents and Attorneys for the Roval Insurance Coy. Ltd.
THE HISTORY OF A. G. WEBSTER & SONS LTD.
TRADING for 105 years this
concern has been regarded
as a national institution and
counts in its ledgers about 5,000
farmers’ accounts, and can claim
to be the oldest business of its
kind in the State, going back
some twelve years before a fruit
tree was planted in the Huon dis-
trict. The liberal policy of the
firm and company has been the
means of salvation for hundreds
of growers in times of depres-
sion, such as in the ’nineties and
1929-31.
Summed up, this policy has
been to extend financial accom-
modation to growers in need who
are deserving of help.
The business was established
in 1831 by C. T. Smith, an uncle
of A. G. Webster, at the premises
on the Old Wharf, now occupied
by Messrs. H. Jones & Co. Pty.
Ltd., where he traded as a wool
and produce broker. The late A.
G. Webster entered his office in
1850, and took over the business
in 1856, at the death of his uncle,
and in partnership with his
cousin, the late John Tabart,
trading as Tabart & Webster.
Tabart retired in 1861, and was
replaced by the late Alexander
Corrie, for a short time trading
as Webster, Corrie & Co., and the
business then became A. G. Web-
ster’s. In 1879 C. E. Webster
entered the office, followed by E.
H. Webster, and both became
partners some years later, under
the title of A. G. Webster & Son.
In 1891 the business, like many
others, was very hardly hit by
the V.D.L. Bank closing, but
weathered the stoi’m after con-
siderable loss of capital.
From that time onwards the
general management was taken
over by Mr. C. E. Webster, and it
is in great measure due to his
wise and capable management
that the business is to-day in
such a strong position, and has
been so greatly extended.
In 1910 the business was
floated into a Company of
£lOO,OOO capital, under the pre-
sent title of A. G. Webster &
Sons Ltd.
In 1924 the late Sir Alfred Ash-
bolt acquired a large interest in
the Company’s shares, and be-
came Managing Director, and on
his death Mr. C. E. Webster re-
sumed control.
In 1935, owing to his advanced
age, Mr. Webster retired from
the position of Managing Direc-
tor, but retained the position of
Chairman until his lamented
death in September.
At his retirement in 1935 Mr.
Douglas Hopkins was appointed
Managing Director. He entered
the Firm’s service in 1906 as a
junior clerk, from which he has
risen to the head of the Company
by sheer merit, and hard work.
The position of Chairman has
been assumed by Mr. George
Murdoch.
The activities of the Firm and
Company have been very large
and diverse. From their original
small premises on the Old Wharf
they acquired, as offices, the
premises of P. 0. Fysh & Coy.,
in Elizabeth Street, now occupied
by Goodwills Ltd., and at the
same time built a large wool
warehouse on the premises of the
late F. H. Wise, on what was
Hunter Island, and now part of
Messrs. H. Jones & Coy.’s factory.
As the wool business continued to
expand, it was decided to con-
centrate it under one roof, and
four properties—including two
hotels and their licences—were
acquired, and the present fine
building in Liverpool and Argyle
Streets was erected in 1907. In
1925 the business again required
increased room, and the Stan-
more Factory property in
Salamanca Place was acquired
and altered. These two properties
together have show floor area of
63,000 square feet; but this has
had to be augmented in the wool
season by the lease of several
wharf sheds, and the Company
has therefore determined on
building a new wool warehouse—
now in course of construction—
beside the Sunderland Street
Railway Station, in which the
whole of its wool trade will be
eventually accommodated. It
will cover 4 acres, leaving the
present premises available for
general purposes.
In 1880, when the first string
binder came to Hobart, the Firm
decided to take up machinery,
and in 1889 extended its opera-
tions, in this line only, to Laun-
ceston, where a branch office
traded successfully for many
years under the able manage-
ment of the Hon. J. W. Cheek
and the late Henry Crawford.
Messrs. W. T. Bell & Co. act as
Agents for machinery now. In
the ’eighties operations were also
extended to embrace Devonport
and Burnie, where for a long
period a large trade was carried
on in produce and machinery,
under the management of Mr.
Duncan Loane, and a large
warehouse was built at Devon-
port, since sold to the Tas-
manian Woolgrowers’ Agency
Co. Ltd. Mr. R. A. Plummer
is the Company’s Agent at Bur-
nie.
In the Huon district a local
agency has been maintained for
many years under the manage-
ment of Alfred Griffiths, Herbert
Rowe, Albert Scott successively,
and now with Mr. George Frank-
comb, in whose capable hands the
Company’s interests are thor-
oughly cared for. For the con-
venience of customers, a stock of
requisites is maintained at Huon-
ville.
STEAMSHIP AGENCIES:
The Agency of the P. & O.
Company goes back nearly 50
years to the earliest days of over-
seas fruit shipment—the first
cargo was transhipped at Mel-
bourne to a P. & O. steamer in
1887, and two ships called here
for fruit in 1890.
The Agencies of the British
India Company and the Clan Line
are very important also for cargo
—many of the Clan ships are al-
ready refrigerated for fruit, and
some of the British India ships
also will be fitted before next
season for shipment to Indian
ports.
INSURANCE:
The Company acts as Chief
Agents and Attorneys in South-
ern Tasmania for the Royal In-
surance Company Ltd., one of the
strongest Insurance Companies
in the world, and is prepared to
effect cover for all manner of
Marine, Fire, Accident, Employ-
ers’ Liability and other risks on
the best terms.
LIVE STOCK:
The sale by auction and
privately of all kinds of Live
Stock, including Sheep, Cattle,
Horses, and Pigs, is one of the
largest departments of the busi-
ness. Sales are held at con-
venient centres from Campbell
Town to Huonville, as well as the
East Coast, Tasman’s Peninsula,
and South Bruny Island. The
firm took up trade in Store Stock
in the ’nineties, under the man-
agement of the late Aaron Phil-
lips, a highly trusted employee,
and later added that of Fat Stock,
when the business of J. W. Abbott
& Sons was acquired.
WOOL AND SKINS:
This rivals the Live Stock
Department, with which it is
closely allied, and its expansion
has been remarkable. From the
days of C. T. Smith in 1831 the
firm has been selling wool in
small quantity, as most of the clip
was, throughout last century,
shipped to England for sale.
After long endeavour, the firm es-
tablished in 1901 special sales for
overseas buyers. In the face of
strenuous opposition from Main-
land brokers, the sales have been
increased to nearly one-third of
the State’s clip, and to-day there
is not 5 per cent, of the clip sold
outside the State. These sales
are of particular value to wool-
growers, and have been a liberal
education in many ways. Skins
of all kinds are handled on com-
mission, and the Company acts
strictly as selling brokers.
IMPLEMENTS AND
MACHINERY:
This is one of the most import-
ant departments, and at the same
time probably the most difficult,
because with imported goods
much has to be taken on trust,
and, moreover, trouble may arise
through the customer’s own
fault in using the article im-
properly. The company handles
a wide range, embracing almost
every machine, engine, or imple-
ment required for primary in-
dustries, and specialises in
erecting plant for the supply of
water and spraying, much of
which is made in their own
engineer’s shop. The firm was
the first to introduce many
modern implements and mach-
ines into Australia, and the firm
and company have been largely
instrumental in maintaining by
their enterprise the most modern
methods of farming throughout
the State.
FERTILISERS AND SPRAY
MATERIALS:
They carry large stocks im-
ported from oversea and the
mainland, and closely study the
science of fertilising and spray-
ing and research, and specialise
in the blending of complete fer-
tilisers, giving the proper propor-
tions of the necessary plant foods
in their most efficient form for
the different crops. The
A.G.W.S. brands are a household
word throughout the Huon and
other districts. They also re-
present William Cooper and
Nephews’ well-known sprays, and
carry all kinds of other spraying
materials.
ENGINEER’S SHOP AND
MOTOR SERVICE:
Attention is particularly
drawn to these departments, at
the rear of the premises, in which
there is a very complete outfit of
modern tools and appliances and
a highly skilled staff. The firm
was the first importer of motor
cars for sale—the Oldsmobile
Runabout in 1903, when there
were only three private cars in
the State.
FRUIT:
The firm some years ago en-
deavoured to establish auction
sales here, in the hope of attract-
ing Mainland and Oversea buy-
ers, but after prolonged trial they
had to abandon the attempt ow-
ing to lack of support. There
seems no reason why a large
quantity of apples and pears can-
not be disposed of in this way to
the local and mainland trade.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


LICENSED FARM
PRODUCE AGENT
F. CHILTON
10 CITY FRUIT MARKETS, SYDNEY.
Established 1894.
Growers can rely on Correct Advice, Highest
Ruling Market Prices, Prompt Returns.
Distributor of Fruitgrowers’ requisites:—
White Lining Papers, Fruit Wraps (Plain or
Oiled, Tinted or White), Nails, Granulated
Cork, Woodwool (Local or Imported), etc., .
etc.
BEST QUALITY - - LOWEST PRICES.
i
WITH INTiCi
Telephone: MA 3846.
Established 1900.
LICENSED FARM PRODUCE AGENTS. |
|
I
I
i
i.
W. MUSGROVE & SON
8 CITY FRUIT MARKET, SYDNEY.
Reference: Bank of New South Wales,
Haymarket.
Our Motto: QUICK SALES AND PROMPT
SETTLEMENTS.
YOU WILL BE SATISFIED BY GIVING
US A TRIAL.
Forwarding Numbers:
Tasmania, Victoria,
South Australia
NO. 53.
Queensland, Northern
Rivers
NO. 18.
Until approximately ten years ago
Tasmanian growers considered the Syd-
ney Market as their own, second only
to overseas, and as such catered for
it, as all of them sent a reasonable pro-
portion of their fruit to Sydney. That
Sydney is still Tasmania’s second best
market, so far as quantity is concerned,
is undoubted, and on many occasions it
has even of recent years proved to be
the best of markets in respect to actual
net returns. Nevertheless, many grow-
ers of recent years have entirely
neglected Sydney Market irrespec-
tive of the crop position, and have
placed the whole of their products over-
seas with varying fortunes. On occa-
sions disastrous results have accrued.
However, many growers, despite the
fact that heavy bills for freight and
charges have been presented to them in
respect to overseas consignments (in
addition to the entire loss of the value
of their fruit) have held a prejudiced
view of the Sydney Market. The main
reasons that have caused growers to
refrain from giving due consideration
to Sydney Markets are: (a) Quota Sys-
tem. (b) Prejudiced view of market,
(c) Finance (Indebtedness to large
concerns).
THE QUOTA SYSTEM.
The quota system limits the quantity
each grower is permitted to ship over-
seas, and is determined on an average
of three years’ shipments. Therefore,
growers desiring to ship a certain quan-
tity annually need to keep shipping such
ouantity, otherwise, if they lessen it,
when the average is taken for the next
term, they will obtain a comparatively
low quota, and growers always fear for
the full cropping year, when such times
they deem Sydney and other Mainland
markets would not nearly absorb their
surplus. In that Tasmanian growers
may be justified.
PREJUDICED VIEW OF SYDNEY
MARKET.
That a prejudice towards Sydney and
other Mainland markets is held by
numerous Tasmanian growers is un-
doubted. Principals of firms catering
for business with Sydney have been fre-
quently held responsible by Tasmanian
growers for what are purported to be
the vagaries of the market (in many in-
stances an unwarranted accusation).
This was particularly the case, early
this year, owing to good returns re-
sulting from 1935 overseas shipments.
In the early days, marketing require-
ments being entirely different from
those of the present, there was an out-
let for many different varieties of
apples. Perhaps in those days an apple
was an apple, in much the same sense
as Bobby Burns said, “A man is a man
for a’ that.” But to-day there are a few
“apples,” and none of the other are
apples in the commercial sense.
Following upon the Great War, when
N.S.W. repatriated her soldier sons, new
fruitgrowing areas were planted out,
and the development of a few of the
popular varieties in reasonably exten-
sive Quantities altered the whole aspect
of apnle sales. N.S.W., hitherto an un-
theught-of competitor with Tasmania,
marketed her ever increasing quantities
in a much more presentable manner
than Tasmanian growers were doing.
Choice Granny Smiths, Jonathans, Rome
Beauty, and Delicious, carefully select-
ed, sized and packed in soft-wood Can-
adian cases, were the varieties chiefly
grown.
It was unbelievable by many Tas-
manian growers that N.S.W. could grow
a large quantity of quality apples. They
therefore did not attempt, excepting in
a few instances, to study the problem
of saving the Sydney market.
The growing of any old sorts, which
only were profitable because the supply
did not reach the demand, continued
until very recent years, and still remains
so in some instances. In the growing
of these innumerable sorts, lies the root
of the trouble. Having produced them,
the growers naturally wanted to send
them to market. Overseas they went
in their millions; up to Sydney thev
came in hundreds of thousands, until
they there reached over their million.
Most of the while numerous consign-
ments never returned the cost of pro-
duction. Something had to happen.
TASMANIA’S BIG SHIPMENTS TO SYDNEY
Difficulties of Growers and Salesmen
(By “Distributor”)
ALMOST from the beginning cf the export of apples from Tasmania,
Sydney became the chief buyer from within the Commonwealth.
At times the total quantity absorbed reached the enormous total of
a million cases per annum. In one week, in 1927, it is recorded that
102,000 cases of apples and pears were shipped from Tasmania to the
capital of New South Wales, and that the whole of this was sold at an
average price of 7/- per case. Such a sale would not he possible now,
owing to ccmpetiticn from the mainland States, but Sydney is still
Tasmania’s second best customer, the overseas market taking the bulk
of the production.
THE QUOTA SYSTEM.
Competition with better grades of im-
proved sorts, both overseas and in Syd-
ney, made its effect felt. Such were
the losses from overseas that the Aus-
tralian Apple and Pear Council was con-
stituted, and with it came the overseas
quota. A further development, and a
natural corollary, was the elimination
from overseas export of the unwanted
varieties, and this probably has since
proved beneficial. However, the un-
wanted sorts from overseas export
came to Sydney in their thousands.
Sydney agents until then considered that
they had seen all the varieties that had
been grown in Tasmania, but it would
not be an exaggeration to say that dur-
ing that particular year and the follow-
ing one, approximately thirty additional
varieties were introduced to Sydney,
and not in a single instance was one of
them even moderately good. This dis-
quieting feature happened when Syd-
ney, with the rest of Australia, was in
the centre of the depression with many
thousands of her people unemployed and
in the throes of economic stress.
NEAR LOSS OF SYDNEY MARKET.
During these times Tasmania was in
danger of losing almost entirely
Sydney Market as an income producing
source. Had the growers persisted for
a few more years in the production of
these unwanted varieties, never again
would they have an opportunity of
claiming the Sydney Market as a sat-
isfactory outlet. Yet Sydney was
blamed, and not the poor types and
quality of the fruit with its very ordin-
ary presentation. Providentially, how-
ever, came the new reworking system,
revolutionising the whole market posi-
tion. The happy result has been, and
is continuing to be, further realised—
that popular and profit-making varieties
are now available in place of the un-
wanted and unpayable and market value
lessening sorts. Within the short
space of five years a miracle has hap-
pened in Tasmania by which Tasmania
is saved from herself and for herself.
FINANCE.
The many bad years of overseas busi-
ness brought many growers (in most
instances through no fault of their own)
to the verge of bankruptcy. Certain
organisations came to their aid with the
necessary finance. Other bad years
following accentuated the position, until
the victims were financially in the hands
of their benefactors. The benefactors
having shipping and overseas marketing
interests, and desirous of increasing
such business, naturally in many in-
stances called the tune, and consider-
ably more fruit went overseas than
otherwise would have been the case,
when Sydney’s marketing features were
favourable. Because of all these rea-
sons, Sydney Market during the more
recent years has been used by Tas-
manian growers as a dump, or residuce
market.
Accepting that reworking will con-
tinue, thus eliminating all superfluous
varieties, and given that growers will
do their utmost to present their goods
for sale in a correct and attractive man-
ner, growers of Tasmania may confi-
dently look forward to a consistently
payable market in Sydney—a market
that will take increased quantities re-
gularly.
INCREASED CAPACITY OF
MARKET.
It is contended that it costs Tasmania
ss. to place a bushel case of fruit on
the Sydney Market—probably with a
Canadian soft-wood case and incidentals
the cost would reach ss. Cd. Taking
an average of ss. fid. as a basis, Tas-
manian growers may have courage and
confidence, for it is certain that Sydney,
under the improved conditions outlined,
will be certain to produce values con-
sistently above that figure and provide
an outlet for an additional quarter of
a million (250,000) cases readily.
Never yet has it been possible to plan
business ahead, and always to date it
has been difficult to efficiently handle
shipments. This has been due, owing
to: (a) Lack of forward advice: (b)
Insufficiency of quality lines; (c) In-
consistency and irregularity of sup-
plies: (d) Over-supply of unwanted and
unsuitable varieties.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


J. and G. ROUGHLEY
LICENSED FARM AND PRODUCE
AGENTS.
MUNICIPAL FRUIT MARKETS, 22 LACKEY
STREET, SYDNEY.
SHIPPING No. 5 5
Account Sales and Cheques forwarded immediately
TRIAL CONSIGNMENT SOLICITED.
Bankers, Commercial Banking Company of Sydney.
All Business Conducted and Fruit
sold by Principals.
Consignments promptly Acknowledged.
Established 1882.
Fruit is Sold.
Phone, MA 5256.
SttVICI WITH INffCI
If at any time you require an Agent in
Sydney or are considering a change of
Agents, or intend dividing your Sydney
consignments
Growers!
CONSIGN TO—
JOHN JENKINS
Sufficient Address: FRUIT MARKETS,
SYDNEY.
Who have maintained a position of trust since
1847 and have been proven sound and efficient.
May we have the opportunity of adding you to
our number of satisfied growers who are happy
to recommend us.
h
Changes with the Centenary
NEW METHODS FOR OLD.
The Australian Fruit & Produce Co.
SYDNEY.
(Manager; E. JOHNS.)
152
SEIVICC WITH IN TtC I M
Growers’ needs fully catered for by Competent Salesmen.
Prompt Wires and Quick Cheques the order of. the day.
Consignments v/anted for Sydney each week.
BANKERS; Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney,
Haymarket Branch.
Principals in Australia for VOLCK, KLEENUP, and
FLOTOX SULPHUR, THE RENOWNED AND
PROVED SPRAYS.
A. G. S. A.
Associated Growers Selling Agency
CITY FRUIT MARKETS, SYDNEY.
Specialists—Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area, Young,
Orange and Western Districts Fruits,
And Tasmanian Apples and Pears.
Shipping No. 242.
BANKERS: Bank of N.S.W., Southern Branch, Sydney.
GROWERS ! Our Organisation offers you 35 years’
experience in Fruit Salesmanship.
Associated Growers Selling Agency
Telegraphic Address:
“ACTIVE,” Sydney.
Telephone:
MA 1828.
Established 1901.
Sydney Agents for
Yenda Producers’ Co-operative Society Ltd.
BRUCE R. SMITH, Proprietor.
THE COUNCIL OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES CHAMBER OF FRUIT & VEGETABLE INDUSTRIES.
Back row (left to right): S. H. Pogson, H. P. Woodward, W. G. Roughley, E. S. Terrey. Middle row: C. C. Greentree, P.
Rutlidge, F. Sawyer, E. Cooke, S. J. Wills, A. Hing. Sitting: C. Dening, P. S. Macdermott (Hon. Treasurer), W. Musgrove
(Senior Vice-President), L. J. Jenkins (President), C. Russell Walker (Junior Vice-President), A. C. Ward. Absent: F.
Chilton, A. M. Weymark.
COST OF PRODUCTION FAVOURS
TASMANIA.
Authentic reports prove conclusively
Tasmania’s extraordinary advantage
over the Mainland in the production of
apples per acre. It would not, prob-
ably, be less than 40 per cent, advantage.
This is an advantage that if Tasmania
could use to her benefit by producing
and marketing according to the re-
quirements of the buyer, no State could
adequately compete against.
TRANSPORT COSTS.
Taking the average of N.S.W. Rail-
way charges to transport N.S.W. apples
to market—Tasmania again would be
found to have the advantage. None
of the N.S.W. apples are transported
by steamer, and rail charges are higher.
POINTS TO REMEMBER.
With reduction to a few varieties,
consignments will be handled with con-
siderably greater facility, for it can
readily be imagined the reduced amount
of floor space necessary to sort and
stack such lots separately, as compared
with a large number of varieties.
Analogous to this position is that of
the grower who severely splits his con-
signments. Many growers for reasons
of their own will send 100 cases to four
or five agents. These lots of 20 to 25
cases take up an unwarranted amount
of market space, for the whole 100 cases
would take up practically no more room
than each division of it. Thus three
and four times the space is taken up,
both in the markets and on wharves.
To split a large parcel into two lots
may be advantageous, but wholesale
splitting of moderate lines is a
ridiculous and costly procedure.
Another feature of split lines is the
loss of buyers’ interests. A complete
consignment would attract the large
and full price paying buyer. The
divided lots would not be considered by
him. A remarkably peculiar feature
of the Sydney fruit trade is that the
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


W. H. Southcott
Established 1884.
FRUIT AND VEGETABLE
MERCHANT
Bank Reference:
Bank N.S.W., George and Bathurst Streets,
Sydney.
Member Chamber of Commerce.
Municipal Fruit Markets and Municipal
Vegetable Markets
QUAY STREET, SYDNEY.
LICENSED FARM PRODUCE AGENT
Your Interests are Mine.
Telephones:
MA 5568 (Private), UM 6526.
Shipping No.
1 00
Member N.S.W. Chamber of Fruit- and
Vegetable Industries.
(Rep. Fruit Advisory Board of Tasmania.)
mCmbCR
Fidelity Guarantee Bond £2,000.
Established 1914.
Member of N.S.W. Chamber of
F. and V. Industries Ltd.
Bankers:
Bank of New South Wales, Haymarket.
For Service and Reliability
Ship Your Fruit to
LICENSED FARM AND PRODUCE
AGENTS.
Municipal Markets, Sydney
Bowen, Queensland, Fruitgrowers’ Association.
Portland, Victoria, Tomato Growers’
Association.
Nambucca River Tomato Growers’
Association.
Sole Agents, Selbest Packing House, Griffith,
N.S.W.
BROS.
Shipping No. 158
SELECTED AGENTS.
GROWERS!
Consign your Fruit and Vegetables
to
F. G. STEVENS & SONS
Established 1901.
LICENSED FARM PRODUCE
AGENTS.
FRUIT AND VEGETABLE
MARKETS.
Head Office:
3 Quay Street, Sydney
All Sales personally supervised.
Stencil your Consignments
F.G.S. & S.
127
SYDNEY.
GROWERS!
For best results with your Apples
and Pears ship your fruit under
Stencil No.
94
to
NEIL, JOLLY & GO.
Municipal Fruit Markets
Sydney
Suppliers to Local, Country, and
Shipping buyers.
Prompt advice and returns.
All sales under personal supervision.
buyers of the large parcels usually pay
more than any other buyers, and it
should be the aim of growers to attract
this type of buyer. No grower can
afford to have a good buyer disinterest-
ed in his fruit.
Tasmanian fruit is nowadays much
more difficult to sell than during pre-
war days. In those now distant days,
when the sorting and stacking charge
made by the shipping companies was
instituted, not less than 75 per cent, of
the total shipments was sold on the
wharf, and delivered to buyers’ stores,
rail and steamer. Thus there was es-
tablished a true wholesale feature of
sales. Buyers were expected to, and
usually did, buy a complete consign-
ment of every variety, grade, and size
contained in the particular consignment.
This was the established custom. This
allowed agents to completely clear the
majority of consignments early, and to
wire results of sales of the largest por-
tion of consignments to consignors on
day of arrival of the shipments. Under
this system of wholesale selling agents
did not need any more than 50 per cent,
of the quantity of space that is now
necessary to handle similar quantities.
When, however, the war intervened in
1914—entrance to the wharves was per-
mitted. only by presentation of a writ-
ten authority, all selling on wharves be-
ing discontinued. This meant that
practically overnight agents were forced
to take delivery of the whole of their
consignments and take them to the mar-
kets and make sales from that quarter.
INCIDENCE OF SORTING AND
STACKING CHARGE.
The facilitate sales so that fruit could
be delivered in time for despatch by rail
it was arranged with the shipping com-
panies to sort and stack the fruit ac-
cording to agents’ quantities, placing as
nearly as possible the whole of the con-
signments to one agent in one place on
the wharf. Upon this system being
developed agents were allotted numbers,
for identification, these numbers com-
mencing* at 50 for Sydney agents, the
smaller numbers up to 49 being reserv-
ed for Brisbane consignments. In-
cidentally Number 50 was allotted to
the Tasmanian Federated Fruitgrowers
(or some similar name), Mr. John Mc-
Mullen being President at the time.
When this service was first given to
the trade no charge was made. Sub-
sequently, however, despite protest, a
charge of a halfpenny was imposed, in-
creasing through the pre-depression
years to the present amount —and al-
though continuous and persistent en-
deavours have been made by agents to
have this charge eliminated or substan-
tially reduced, it remains unaltered.
The agents had to meet increased
costs for rental charges on the addi-
tional space required for their Tas-
manian consignments, and the fact that
there was a rush for space in the mar-
kets caused the City Council to increase
the rental charges, so that agents found
themselves meeting three different sets
of charges not previously occasioned.
A further cost to agents was occasioned
because additional labour was required
to sort and stack the fruit into the
agents’ premises, to watch it and attend
sales. The wholesale system of sales
was gradually broken down, as buyers
instead of purchasing whole consign-
ments commenced by taking only the
particular sizes and grades required by
them. To-day the entire business is
more a retailing feature of sales, whole-
saling, as previously known, being al-
most eliminated.
Thus it will be seen that agents had
forced on them increased costs from
four different sources by the elimina-
tion of the sales on the wharf, name-
ly: (a) The very considerable cost of
purchasing additional premises; (b) the
rent chargeable on such additional
premises; (c) the increase in rents gen-
erally applied by the City Council; (d)
the heavy costs of additional labour and
salesmen and other general costs.
LOSSES THROUGH BAD DEBTS.
Agents throughout the history of the
Sale of Fruit in Sydney have never im-
posed any charge for taking respon-
sibility of credit. It was never intend-
ed that an agent as such should take
the responsibility of credit business, but
since the inception of this trade agents
have voluntarily, but without prejudice,
shouldered this responsibility, and be-
cause of it have suffered at times excep-
tionally heavy losses. However, no
matter how great the loss, bona fide
agents always paid grower clients.
With the depression and its inevitable
list of bad debts, the trade has been
forced to be considerably more care-
ful, and now the credit position is much
more closely watched. It, however, is
always fraught with danger. It may
be argued that the buyer in such in-
stances should be made pay. Well, we
have all heard the age-old adage, “You
may take a horse to water, but you can-
not make him drink”; the same thing
applies to the majority of these cases.
It will be said that they could be forced
to pay through legal process. This
may be true, but what of one’s business ?
A perishable article needs to be sold.
The condition of the trade is such that
every salesman needs every buyer of
extensive quantity, and particularly as
buyers are the substance of the agent’s
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


CONSIGN YOUR FRUIT TO
W. E. BROMLEY
Sydney
Shipping No. 245
All States.
Established 1912.
All Sales under Personal Supervision.
Prompt Returns.
Bankers: New South Wales.
Telephone MA 2605.
Motto:
SERVICE AND SATISFACTION.
J. J. MASON
LICENSED FARM PRODUCE AGENT
No. 1 City Fruit Markets, Sydney
Reference; Bank of New South Wales, Haymarket,
also Hobart.
Forwarding Number
185
business must an agent compromise and
accept the losses of that part which he
cannot have made good.
DUMP V. CANADIAN CASES.
The question of which case is the most
advantageous, and secures to growers
the greatest amount of net profit, is one
that needs careful consideration, as it
has many aspects. The dump case for
many years generally supplied to a point
of satisfaction the Tasmanian market-
ing needs of the Sydney Market. In
those days comparatively no competi-
tion with the dump case was experienced
from other States, as they also had
dumps and similar type cases. How-
ever, with the use of the Canadian type
case throughout N.S.W., Sydney mar-
ket buyers were attracted by the im-
proved appearance of the consignments
presented for sale in the white soft-
wood Canadian type cases, attractively
labelled or neatly stencilled. The dump
case contrasted unfavourably with these,
mainly because the Canadian soft-wood
types were all of standard measure-
ment, and thickness of timber, and
whilst a proportion were trimmed, the
majority were roughly finished. More-
over, owing to influence of heat the
timber buckled badly, whilst contact
with water stained them, and ex-cool
store cases, owing to the moisture exist-
ing there, came out on many occasions
unsightly in appearance.
However, the main fault with the
dump case lies in the fact that it is not
kept a standard size, and is frequently
or rough presentation. The considered
opinion is that had Tasmania adopted
a standardised dump case of good ap-
pearance, the Canadian type would not
have become so highly competitive, but
as it is, it appears that the Canadian
type has gained the ascendancy, and will
become the Standard case for Tasmania,
as well as the majority of the other
States of the Commonwealth.
Tasmanian growers have the matter
in their hands still, provided that suit-
able timber in sufficient quantity is
available to standardise the Dump case
as a Tasmanian case, but the job must
be accomplished in a thorough and cor-
rect manner, furnishing a truly pre-
sentable Dump case.
INSPECTION OF TASMANIAN
FRUIT AT SYDNEY.
inspection of Tasmanian fruit is re-
gularly made ex shipments on Sydney
wharves. This has been the practice
almost since the trade between the two
States commenced, and had been car-
ried out reasonably and with sympathy
for the producers’ difficulties, until re-
cent months.
An understanding exists between Tas-
manian and N.S.W. Inspectors, who co-
operate with a view to establishing and
maintaining as near as possible the
commercially perfect presentation of
Tasmanian fruit on Sydney Market
—the two main objectives being, firstly,
the reduction of disease and blemish to
its practical minimum; secondly, the
improvement of the packing of, sizing
and grading of the fruit so that it will
conform to the respective regulations
and meet trade requirements, and to
generally assist in the improvement of
the fruit industry.
Growers are responding generally, and
well to the advice of the Inspectors, and
the majority of them now endeavour to
keep well within the regulations, but
there are others—a “Militant” minority
—who appear to be against the Govern-
ment, and in every way attempt to de-
feat the regulations. Their work in
this regard suggests deliberate intent.
These growers are comparatively few
in number, but they cause dislocation
of the trade, and occasion considerable
loss to all concerned, firstly, to their
brother growers, then to shipping com-
panies, carters, agents, and Government
departments.
During the first half of the present
year a careful check of the consign-
ments condemned for disease and
blemish was taken, and in no instance
have more than eleven growers’ lots
been condemned. They have ranged
from two lots to the maximum eleven.
There would probably be anything from
500 to 750 consignments at least in a
normal shipment, so that eleven out of
the total is light.
Unfortunately, however, the effect is
material, and retards all business, and
as mentioned previously, occasions ser-
ious loss. The fact that there are any
such lots on the steamers demand that
the inspection be much more rigid, par-
ticularly when the faulty fruit is found
only in the centre of the cases.
In a year like the present, when prices
have been good for several months with
a definite outlet for the poorer grades
at profitable prices, it would appear rea-
sonable and advisable to allow a higher
percentage of the sound but blemished
fruit to be marketed. Lowering of the
grade standard need not arise, but a
commonsense and more liberal inter-
pretation commensurate with trade re-
quirements and opportunities could be
applied.
Although Tasmanian growers may
lose this year due to the more rigid in-
spection, it may prove to be a blessing
in disguise, and assist them next year
to recapture the Sydney Market with
their high quality and attractively pre-
sented fruit.
BAD PACKING.
Instances of bad packing (mostly
negligent and several apparently de-
liberate) are unfortunately a feature
of each shipment to date. This is to be
regretted, as Tasmania has such a
splendid opportunity of securing a
major portion of the Sydney Market, due
to her low production costs and quality
fruit.
It has been suggested that a schedule
be made of all offending growers, and
that their fruit be held up each week
until the inspection and delivery of all
the other lots has been effected—so that
those causing the trouble will be penal-
ised. and those endeavouring to do their
work correctly, given greater privileges
and more freedom.
Once placed on the “detained” list
growers would have to prove by their
compliance with regulations that they
are prepared to reform before their
names would, be removed.
SHORTAGE OF INSPECTORS.
Another feature that occasions serious
delay in Sydney is the serious lack of
inspectors. On a certain Monday early
in May there were approximately eight
boats in port with fruit from other
States. There were only two Inspec-
tors available for all the ships, and
naturally serious delays occurred. This
position was a regular one, sometimes
modified a little, during the months of
April and May, when large shipments
from Northern Tasmania arrived. It
should be the duty of the N.S.W. Gov-
ernment to see that an ample number of
inspectors is made available, particu-
larly when the large amount of income
derived from inspection fees is taken
into account.
The N.S.W. Chamber of Fruit and
Vegetable Industries is performing a
service to Tasmanian growers. Its
representatives each week attend all
wharves, working separately, but co-
operating with and co-ordinating the
efforts of other representatives, particu-
larly with the Tasmanian Government
representative.
Particular features of the Chamber’s
representatives’ work relative to weekly
shipment is to check: (a) Arrivals of
steamers; (b) commencement of dis-
charge; (c) handling of fruit during
discharge, and methods of discharge
adopted; (d) handling by wharf labour-
ers, conveying fruit from sheds and
stacking into agents’ stacks; (e) and
attend any damaged cases; (f) attend-
ing inspection and watching growers’
interests generally, discussing relative
matters with inspectors; (g) loading by
carters; (h) delivery generally.
An instance of the Chamber’s success-
ful intervention and application was
when a certain steamer over-carried a
large parcel of fruit to another port,
subsequently discharging at that port
and reshipping by another vessel to
original destination. The Chamber
placed all the facts before the company
concerned, advising that claims would
be made, and asking that due considera-
tion be given such claims. The result
was that without prejudice the company
allowed Is. per case for all fruit claimed
for.
WHARF ACCOMMODATION.
Many times shipping companies have
been blamed when they have actually
given the best possible service, the
wharves being the source of the trouble.
The Chamber in conjunction with the
Fruit Section of the Sydney Chamber
of Commerce has repeatedly approached
the Maritime Services Board (formerly
the Sydney Harbour Trust) to provide
suitable wharfage accommodation, and
to build new wharves specially for the
Tasmanian fruit shipments—the Board
has promised to provide as soon as
money is available for the purpose.
THE N.S.W. CHAMBER
FRUIT AND VEGETABLE
INDUSTRIES
has pleasure in recommending to grow-
ers the services of the following firms,
accredited Members of the Chamber:—
FRUIT SECTION.
Associated Growers’ Selling Agency,
Australian Fruit and Produce Co. Ltd.,
Bart Allen and Son, W. E. Bromley, J.
W. Bryant, P. W. Chew and Co., Fred
Chilton, Seymour Dening, C. Gibbs and
Son, J. Hawke, Hay Bros., Hie Lee and
Co., Hop Lee and Co., John Jenkins,
J. W. Kirkwood, Macdermott and
Sheedy, Martin and Company, J. J.
Mason, McKellar and Devlin, Mitchell
and Lawless, Moore and Lloyd, W. Mus-
grave and Son, Neil Jolly and Co., Reedy
Bros., F. H. G. Rogers, J. and G. Rough-
ley, F. J. Salmon and Co. Ltd., Sam
Yick and Company, Sherringham and
Co. Ltd., W. H. Southcott, E. T. Stan-
ton, F. G. Stevens and Son, Joshua Ter-
rey, Trathen and Hall, D. C. Turnbull,
A. B. Valentine, R. Valentine and Sons,
L. L. Vince, A. H. Walker and Son,
Ward and Felton, Watkins and Evans,
Weymark and Son Ltd., Wilson Bros.,
Wilson and Croucher, Wing On and Co.
Ltd., Wing Sang and Co. Ltd., Wing Tiy
and Co., H. P. Woodward, Yocksui
Bros.
VEGETABLE SECTION.
B. P. B. and Co., H. M. Clarke,
Clarke and Son, J. Clayton and Son,
E. Cooke, W. J. Curtis, Dening Bros.,
Dunston and Norris, C. C. Greentree
and Son, J. Hawke, Messant and Gould,
Mitchell and Galvin, G. H. Molesworth,
E. W. Parker and Son, W. J. Pauli,
Reedy Bros., Sam Yick and Co., W. H.
Southcott, S. J. Rhodes, Terrill and
Means, Thompson and Smith, Yocksui
Bros.
List of Members of the Tasmanian
Section and their Shipping Numbers.
Bart Allen and Son 62
Associated Growers’ Selling
Agency 242
Australian Fruit and Produce Co.
Ltd 152
W. E. Bromley 245
J. W. Bryant 210
F. Chilton 56
Seymour Dening 150
J. Hawke 181
Hay Bros 158
John Jenkins 52
Neil Jolly and Company 94
J. W. Kirkwood 191
Martin and Company 275
J. J. Mason 185
W. Musgrave and Son 53
Reedy Bros 273
Mitchell and Lawless 93
F. H. G. Rogers 83
J. and G. Roughley 55
Sherringham and Co. Ltd 123
W. H. Southcott 100
E. T. Stanton 101
F. G. Stevens and Son 127
Joshua Terrey 70
Trathen and Hall 205
R. Valentine and Sons 229
L. L. Vince 277
A. H. Walker and Son 195
Ward and Felton 188
Watkins and Evans 90
Wilson Bros 132
Wilson and Croucher 146
Wing On and Co. Ltd 97
Wing Sang and Co. Ltd 114
Wing Tiy and Company 115
H. P. Woodward 281
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


INTERSTATE FRUIT TRADE
REGULAR SAILINGS TO SYDNEY, NEWCASTLE, AND BRISBANE from
Hobart, Port Huon, and Port Cygnet.
T.S.S. "Zealandia" and S.S. "Talune" to Sydney and Newcastle
S.S. "Ngatoro" to Brisbane
i
■s- 1 iWj-.y
daSSßSmgaLi...
'■i
m
mmmmm
T.S.S. “ZEALANDIA”
7,000 tons.
Maintains a regular
PASSENGER SERVICE
to Sydney, connecting with the
M.S. “Wanganella” (10,000 tons) to
New Zealand Ports.
T.S.S. “ZEALANDIA.”
Speedy Passenger Service
Between
Tasmania and Melbourne
by the magnificent liner
T.S.S. “TAROONA”
Launceston to Melbourne.
Tri-Weekly in Summer, Bi-Weekly in
Winter.
T.S.S. “NAIRANA”
Burnie and Devonport to Melbourne
Bi-Weekly.
WnMIdiniCHIIItM
mm
2?
T.S.S. “TAROONA.’
TASMANIAN STEAMERS PTY. LTD.
HUDDART, PARKER UNION STEAM SHIP CO.
LIMITED
OF N.Z. LTD.
Melbourne Frui
Market
J. G. MUMFORT
Merchant, Exporter, Banai
Ripener, and Fresh Fn
Salesman
Appointed by and under Agresnu
with—
Tasmanian State Fruit Boa
Committee of Direction of Fr
Marketing, Queensland.
Banana Growers’ Federation
New South Wales.
Geraldton District Tomato Growe
Association, Geraldton, W.A.
Portland and District Tom:
Growers’ Association, Victoria.
S.A. Fruit Growers’ and Mark
Gardeners’ Association, Sou
Australia.
Bowen Fruit Growers’ Associatic
Queensland.
31 Forwarding 31
INTERSTATE FRUIT TRADE
Steamship Companies' Good
Services
By maintaining a regular and reliable
service to Sydney, Newcastle, and Bris-
bane, the shipping concerns of Huddart
Parker Ltd. and the Union Steam Ship
Co. of New Zealand Ltd., have done much
in the interest of the Huon fruitgrower.
These two companies have co-operated in
the interests of the fruit shipper since
1889, but it was not until 1921 that the
first shipments were made direct to Syd-
ney and Brisbane from Huon ports.
The first shipment of fruit dates back
to about 1870, when the trade was carried
on by the Tasmanian Steamship Naviga-
tion Co., but in 1899 they were taken over
by the Union Co.
Many famous ships have been engaged
in the trade from that time, and have
given great service. The Oonah was the
first of the Union Company’s fleet, fol-
lowed by the Mararoa, Manuka, Moeraki,
Palcona, and Taviuni.
The first Huddart Parker steamer to
enter the trade was the Burrumbeet, and
was followed by the Elingamite, Tas-
mania, Tambo, Nemesis, Wendouree, and
Anglian, until 1921, when direct ship-
ments from the Huon commenced. From
then onwards, the service has been main-
tained by the Kanna, Ngakuta, Kiwitea,
Ngatoro, and Talune, for the Union Com-
pany, and the Westralia, Eiverina, and
Zealandia, for Huddart Parker Limited.
The Sydney and Brisbane markets ab-
sorb tremendous quantities of fruit an-
nually, and the maintanence of a speedy
reliable service is essential to the grower.
It is, therefore, very gratifying to have
two such excellent companies as Huddart
Parker Ltd. and the Union Steam Ship
Co. co-operating with the earnest en-
deavour to give the fruit shipper good
service, well-equipped steamers, and re-
gular sailings, throughout the season.
OVERSEAS FRUIT TRADE
Prominent English Firm
Among the numerous firms of fruit
brokers, of whose services the Tas-
manian orchardists avail themselves
year by year in disposing of the large
and ever-increasing quantities of apples
and pears, which they annually send to
the markets of the Old World, there is
none whose name is more widely or
more favourably known throughout the
State than that of T. Boss-Walker Pty.
Ltd., of Hobart. For 44 years the
name Boss-Walker has been a house-
hold word in the apple-growing districts
of Tasmania, and the fact that there are
numbers of shippers on the firm’s books
today, who, and whose fathers before
them, have maintained an unbroken
connection with the firm for from 30 to
40 years, and some of them for the en-
tire 44 years, is sufficient evidence of
their satisfaction with the treatment
which they receive.
Almost as well and equally favour-
ably known to the growers are the groat
overseas firms with whom Messrs. T.
Boss-Walker Pty. Ltd. have for so long
been associated, namely, Messrs. Yeo-
ward Bros., of Liverpool, Lon-
don, Hull, Glasgow, and New-
castle, in the United Kingdom,
and the Internationale Frucht Im-
port-Gesellschaft, m.b.H., in Hamburg,
one of the “Big Six” occupying the fam-
ous Fruchtof in that city, and, more re-
cently, The International Frught Im-
port in Copenhagen, all of them firms
of exceptional standing in their respect-
ive markets, firms to whom growers
who have had years of personal dealings
with them feel that they can entrust
their valuable consignments of fruit
without a misgiving as to the ability
and integrity with which they will be
handled.
TWO OF THE YEOWARD LINE FLEET UNLOADING AT LIVERPOOL.
It is firms such as these who form j
the backbone of the overseas fruit trade,
and it is gratifying and reassuring to i
know that, in common with other pro-
minent and old-established firms in the
same markets, they are of the emphatic
opinion that the Tasmanian orchard in-
dustry, so vital to the well-being of this
State, can still be made a prosperous
and profitable one, given three essential
main conditions: —■
(1) A voluntary determination on
the part of every grower to do his share
in maintaining the highest possible stan- i
dard of quality in regard to the fruit
exported.
(2) A determination on the part of
the shipping contractors to co-operate
with the shipping contractors on the
Mainland and in New Zealand in ar-
ranging a joint programme of ship-
ments which will ensure a reasonably
equal weekly delivery of fruit through-
out the season in the various overseas
markets, in place of the utter inequal-
ity and constant overlapping of arrivals,
which have wrought such havoc with
those markets during the past four
years.
(3) A determination on the part of
both orchardists and their shipping con-
tractors to be guided, not by their own
THE SATURATION POINT.
One of the strange features of the
fruit trade of Tasmania has been the
oft-repeated, prediction that production
had overtaken the demand, and it will
probably surprise the present generation
that such a foreboding is not by any
means modern. Mr. Hedley Geeves, of
the Brisbane Fruit Exchange, speaking
recently of the prospects of the fruit
trade, said he could remember as a small
boy 40 years ago hearing the late G. D.
Bennett, sen., of Geeveston, say to his
grandfather, Stephen Geeves: “There
will be no sale for fruit in another 10
years, Stephen, at the present rate of
plantings, as the price will not be pay-
able.”
ideas, but by advice sought and obtained
from the Executive of the National Fed-
eration of Fruit Trade Associations in
England, as to (a) the latest date up to
which it would be desirable and safe, as
a general practice, to land shipments of
Australasian apples and pears; and (b)
as to the varieties of apples, and sizes
which, in the opinion of the only men
who are really qualified to judge, it is
desirable to send, or not to send, to the
respective markets concerned.
A LINK WITH THE PAST.
Mrs. Hayward (a daughter of
John Price), writing to Mr. Thos. Judd
(now of Melbourne, but formerly of
Franklin) in April, 1934, gave the fol-
lowing interesting particulars of the
early visits of Sir John Franklin to the
residence of the late John Clark, at
Franklin:—
“I well remember the Judd family at
Park Hill, Kew, and can recall many ex-
changes of reminiscences between my
mother, Mrs. Price, and your uncle, Mr.
Thomas Judd. I was married from Park
Hill, in 1866, at Holy Trinity Church,
Kew. My husband and I left for Tas-
mania in 1870. My husband was ap-
pointed the last Imperial Chaplain of
Port Arthur, and afterwards returned,
when the Tasmanian Government took
charge, as Chaplain and Magistrate.
My father, Mr. John Price, came to Van
Diemen’s Land in 1835, or late in 1834,
and took up a grant of land on the Huon
River, where he lived till he married my
mother, Sir John Franklin’s niece. My
father was appointed Police Magistrate
in Hobart Town, and sold his property
on the Huon to Lady Franklin early in
that year, so he might claim to have
been the first settler. Of course, in his
ownership there was no idea of any town-
ship. His idea had been to make large
orchards there, and he had many apple
trees sent from Devonshire for planting.
“When I was a child I remember hear-
ing of a tree in the then ‘township’ called
‘Price’s Walking Stick,’ I think a Huon
pine. Among some of my husband’s
papers is an address on the eve of our
marriage from parishioners and friends.
One of the signatures is Judd, without
an initial, but it was, of course, your
uncle.” 1
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT,


For Reliability, Promptness, and Highest Price, send your Fruit to
6
MEDLEY GEEVES LTD.
HEDLEY GEEVES, Managing Director.
TURBOT STREET, BRISBANE
Largest Importer and Distributor in Queensland for Australian Growers.
CABLE AND TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESS: “APPLES, BRISBANE.”
All Sales under Personal Supervision.
6
Established 1892. Telephone B 4946.
BANKERS:
National Bank of Australasia, George Street,
Brisbane.
W. ARKELL & SONS
Growers’ Agents
BRISBANE
Best Prices, Prompt Advice, and Regular
Settlement.
SHIPPING No. ] 2
A. S. BARR
Fruit Exchange, Brisbane
Telegraphic Address: “Barr, Brisbane.”
Wholesale Fruit Merchant & Growers’ Agent
A Trial Solicited. Returns speak for themselves.
Established 1888.
SHIPPING No. ] 9
Bank Account: National Bank of Australasia, Hobart.
Tasmanian Representative: CLEMENTS AND MARSHALL,
Lower Macquarie Street, Hobart. Phone 4044.
Salesmen for Tasmanian Fruit
Robsons Pty. Limited
No.
28
Turbot Street
Markets,
BRISBANE
No.
28
Sole Tasmanian Representative:
MR. HERBERT ROWE,
Mercantile Mutual Buildings,
Macquarie Street, Hobart.
MENDOZA & WRIGHT PTY. LTD.
Brisbane Fruit and Produce Ex.
TURBOT STREET.
Invite your consignments of Fruit. Satisfaction
assured, account sales promptly rendered.
BRAND M&W
40
BRIS.
THE BRISBANE MARKET
An Important Outlet for Tasmanian Apples
Owing to its greater distance from
Tasmania, the corresponding higher
freight, and the smaller population,
Brisbane has not been of so much im-
portance to Tasmania as an outlet for
apples as Sydney. At the same time it
has been a most valuable customer, and
as settlement increases in the far west
and north the demand for some fruits
has kept on increasing. In the early
days of Tasmania-Brisbane fruit trade
—about the beginning of the present
century—2,ooo cases were considered a
good shipment; ten years later the de-
mand was capable of absorbing double
this quantity per week. At this time the
fruit used to be carted in spring or box
drays and placed on the sailing barge
Speedwell. This vessel took the fruit
on to Hobart, and from there it was
transferred to either the Oonah or the
Tambo, which were in the trade at that
time, and taken to Sydney. The cargo
was then discharged and reloaded into
a coastal steamer and sent on to Bris-
bane. There was a weekly service to
Brisbane, and the quantities going for-
ward were from about 4,000 to 5,000
cases per week, and in those days it was
not uncommon for apples to be sold in
Brisbane at 4/ to 5/ per case, and very
often 2/ to 3/ during a glut period. A
very good market would see prices
around 6/ to 7/.
Of later years the fruit trade in the
Commonwealth has expanded tremend-
ously, and particularly after the Great
War, when a number of returned soldiers
were placed on the land with the object
of growing fruit, and numerous new
districts came into existence, particular-
ly on the Mainland. This all meant
further competition against the Tas-
manian growers, but despite this, the
prices have been much better than in
the olden days. Not so many years ago
as high as 22/ and 23/ per case was
paid for Tasmanian apples at the end
of the season during a scarce period.
One of the pleasing features of the
business in recent years has been the
improved get-up of the fruit as com-
pared with 25 years ago. Growers are
making conditions better for themselves
and the trade generally by getting their
fruit up as attractive as possible. Some
of the consignments that came over at
the beginning of the inter-State trade
were crudely packed and graded, and
the cases were anything but pleasing to
look at.
The population of Brisbane in 1911
was 138,000; today it is about 310,000,
and the fruit trade of the city has grown
in proportion. It can therefore be
realised that Tasmania has an excellent
prospect of disposing of an ever grow-
ing quantity of her apple crop by
specially catering for the requirements
of Queenslanders.
Formerly Tasmanian apples were
sent from the Brisbane Market to
country centres only by train, but today
there are large motor-vehicles calling
almost daily and loading up apples for
centres as far as 200 miles away in the
country. This motor trade saves
handling, and the fruit gets less knock-
ed about than when sent by rail. Not
only that, but it is delivered direct to
tbe consumers’ door at the particular
place at which they happen to be doing
business. This, taken in conjunction
with the fact that the direct steamer
now loads at Huon ports and delivers
direct to Brisbane, saves a lot of
handling and bruising, with the result
that the Tasmanian fruit today is de-
livered to the consumer in a much better
condition than it was formerly, with the
natural result that it is more favourably
known, and gives better satisfaction.
A noticeable change in Huon fruit
consignments of the past few years has
been the reduction in the number of
varieties that are coming forward. Sell-
ing agents declare that this is all to
the good. Among the notable absentees
are the Adam’s Pearmain and Scarlets.
These kinds were becoming very un-
popular in Queensland, owing to their
poor keeping qualities in the hot climate
of that State. It is very difficult to
sell some varieties of apples when there
is an abundance of such sorts as Granny
Smiths and Jonathans available. At
one time French Crabs were very much
in demand in Brisbane, but now even
they will not sell alongside Granny
Smiths.
It is the opinion of leading salesmen
on the Brisbane Market that Tasmanians
do not give enough publicity to their
apples. In this regard they are very
much behind competitors. A great deal
could be made out of the fact that Tas-
manian apples have a distinct flavour,
that they can be carried successfully to
almost any part of Queensland (es-
pecially as suitable trucks are now
available for the transport of fresh
fruits), and that the Tasmanian season
is much longer than that of any other
apple-growing State. Not in any part
of Queensland, however, are advertise-
ments of this nature to be found. Of
course there must be no relaxing of the
effort to present the fruit in as attrac-
tive manner possible, for when competi-
tion comes into account outward ap-
pearances are nearly always the decid-
ing factor in determining the first sales.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


Australia is growing up. Melbourne,
Adelaide, and now the Huon of Tasmania
have each seen fit to celebrate their first
sensation of feeling what it is like to
be one hundred years old—and other
parts of Australia are beginning to get
agitated about the same subject. Thus,
we say, we are beginning to grow up.
MR. A. C. HOWARD,
founder of Messrs. Howard Auto-Cultivators
Ltd., manufacturers and patentees of the
HOWARD ROTARY HOE.
To those of the Mainland whose cir-
cumstances -have not yet permitted a
tour of Tasmania, it is probably difficult
to visualise the enormous difference be-
tween the scenes on the Huon which
confronted the first settlers and the
beautiful panoramas of today. So it is
elsewhere in Australia, and in other
ways. Places which cut no ice—or did
not exist a few years ago—have had
greatness thrown upon them, generally
through the fame of some particular
article which is manufactured there.
Such a place is Northmead, New South
Wales. Twelve years ago people living
ten miles away had never heard of it.
Today thousands of Australians—and
thousands who are not Australians too
—will unhesitatingly reply to the ques-
tion “What do you know about North-
mead?” by saying “That it is where
they build the Howard Rotary Hoe.”
They may not actually know that North-
mead is a northern suburb of the his-
toric town of Parramatta, but they do
know that it houses the now famous
home of the Rotary Hoe.
To the thoughtful there comes a real-
isation that the development of North-
mead, and that of the Huon, are to a
certain extent interdependent. Without
Tasmania’s contribution towards the to-
tal annual turnover of Messrs. Howard
Auto-Cultivators Limited, progress of
Northmead would have been correspond-
ingly less. Without the product of
Northmead the economic progress of the
Huon would have been appreciably less
also.
We realise that many and varied are
the ways in which businesses and condi-
tions may influence others, hundreds of
miles away.
Tasmania’s problems as far as the
products of tilled land are concerned are
identical with those of other States and
other countries. We must get the maxi-
mum of wanted produce both as regards
quality and quantity with a minimum
of time and expense.
Because of the inherent virtues in
soil tillage done the Rotary Hoe way,
Tasmania buys thousands of pounds
worth of these machines every year.
The distribution is in the hands of Mr.
Max Geeves, whose name is known from
one end of the Huon to the other, since
the history of the family is practically
synonymous with that of the Huon, and
Messrs. Howard Auto-Cultivators Limit-
ed have never regretted the appoint-
ment of Mr. Max Geeves as their Tas-
manian distributor.
This branch of one of the Huon’s
oldest families is in control of the world’s
latest and most versatile popular farm-
ing implement. To the uninitiated that
may seem in parts an inflated statement,
so let us consider facts.
Fifteen years ago a young man minus
everything except brains, ambition, and
energy, set out to do a rash thing—to
make an implement do soil tillage in a
different way from what had been the
vogue for centuries. His factory was
an old blacksmith’s shop in a little
country town in New South Wales, and
there he got a few tools and a couple of
men together and started to manufac-
ture Howard Rotary Hoes.
People of course said he was mad, and
for a while the only thing which was
made in the shop which did not stay
there was noise. We will not dwell on
the intervening years or attempt to de-
tail the growth of the business and the
FROM SMALL BEGINNINGS
Wonderful Progress in Tillage Problems
Australian Manufacturer Leads the Way
addition of various new models, but we
can say that on September 12 of this
year, Mr. Howard, accompanied by his
family, left for a trip abroad, which will
take him to practically every important
European country and will extend for
over a year.
From his little business which com-
menced at Moss Yale, he has seen two
businesses grow—Howard Auto-Culti-
vators Limited with a fully paid up
capital of £lOO,OOO, and Messrs. Rotary
Hoe Cultivators Limited, which controls
the distribution of Howard products for
New South Wales, and which has a
capital of many thousands of pounds.
His couple of employees have grown into
a staff of 475 men, and although two
shifts a day have been worked for over
two years, and continuous building and
extension to plant has taken place over
the same period, it is a noteworthy fact
that the demand for Rotary Hoes in-
creases in a greater proportion to what
the Company can increase their rate of
production.
To any thinking person that achieve-
ment surely carries its own message. It
is considered the very best reply to those
who may not have seen a Rotary Hoe in
action, and therefore have some doubt
as to the wisdom of its introduction.
Wherever there are orchards, nur-
series, vegetable growers, etc., of all
sorts and sizes, poultry farms, grow r ers
of flowers, vineyards, etc., there will be
found circumstances which almost ren-
der it imperative to have some such im-
plement. Rain falls, and it is necessary
to conserve moisture; weeds grow, rob-
bing the soil of moisture and plant food,
and so must be removed. Weeds which
have got beyond the stage in which or-
dinary implements can handle them, can
be cut up into piecemeal with a Rotary
Hoe, and thoroughly mixed up with the
soil; work may be done more easily and
with more effective results as far as
the condition and improvement of the
soil is concerned, owing to better mois-
ture conservation and better aeration,
and further, through extra attachments
which may be obtained for the use of
practically all models, furrowing, fur-
row covering, hilling, fertilising, spray-
ing, pumping, chaff-cutting, sawing, may
all be carried out per medium of these
machines.
But today conditions are changing,
and the manufacturers note that al-
though the demand still increases from
the sources mentioned above, a new de
mand has crept into the business. Not as
yet very applicable to the Huon district,
out of enormous importance on the Main-
land is the subject of improvement of
pastures. Here, perhaps, a Rotary Hoe
shows out to greater advantage than any
other implement in the world, because
it is undoubtedly true that what is quite
an easy proposition for them, is im-
possible to any other implement ever
devised for soil tillage.
Thus today, Messrs. Howard Auto-
Cultivators Limited can look with pride
on an ever increasing army of users
amongst the biggest and best known
pastoralists in Australia. ' They may
have undesirable growths such as ti-
tree, cotton-bush, seedlings of various
sorts, grass-tree, tufty-grass, rushes,
bracken, thistles, and so on, or they
may simply be wishing to convert their
ordinary virgin ground into lucerne-
carrying paddocks, but for whatever use
they still find a Rotary Hoe indispen-
sable and unapproachable.
In the dairying districts where the
well-known paspalum and similar
grasses thrive, it has come to be recog-
nised that nothing even approaches the
utility of the Howard Rotary Hoe when
fitted with a special pasture rotor and
tynes specially designed for the purpose
of renovating this well-known grass.
Other special tynes are obtainable for
renovating introduced grasses and
lucerne.
In hundreds of properties today can
be seen the larger Model Rotary Hoe,
either destroying unwanted growths, or
simply tilling the soil, but at the same
time spreading fertiliser and sowing
seed.
It is little wonder, therefore, that the
manufacturers’ constant query to the
public of “Have you any soil tillage
problems, which up to the present have
baffled?” is daily being answered by
scores of people, and thus day by day
the name and the fame of these wonder-
ful implements are being spread abroad.
The problem of growers of sugar-cane
as to how to dispose of all the side-
leaves and tops; the growers of maize
who have simply had to burn off valu-
able humus-making material for the
want of other means of dealing with it,
have now an ally beyond their wildest
dreams of a few years ago.
In British East African sugar planta-
tions, in the orange groves of Palestine,
in orchards and small farms in England,
amongst the coffee plantations in New
Caledonia, in New Guinea, amongst the
coconut groves of the New Hebrides,
in Capetown, amongst the sisal-hemp
grown in islands adjacent to Australia,
and in New Zealand and its Depend-
encies, Hawaiian Groups, and in South
America it will be possible to find num-
bers of Rotary Hotes of various models
in operation. In a number of instances
they are performing work which has
been found to be impossible to any other
implement previously.
FRANKLIN (LOOKING NORTH-EAST).
Many thousands of pounds worth of
Rotary Hoes were sold to South America,
and if it could only be calculated it could
be proved that much of their countless
acres of lucerne had been prepared and
increased in production by the use of
the Howard Rotary Hoe.
Thus it so happens that the same im-
plement will one day enable Australia
to make a better showing in the world’s
markets with the exports of beef and
fat lambs—in the meantime the citizens
of Tasmania are cordially invited to
send their soil tillage problems to Mr.
Max Geeves, Davey Street, Hobart, or
direct to the factory, and honest advice
will be immediately available.
QUAINT NICKNAMES.
One of the peculiarities of the early
sattlers of the Huon was their tendency
to apply nicknames to acquaintances
who were possessed of unusual appear-
ance or special characteristics. For in-
stance there were such personages who
answered to “Dancing Sweeney,”
“Walkin’ Joe,” “Butcher Dick,” “Forty
Quarts,” “One-Eyed Jack,” “Jimmy the
Nailer,” “Stuttering Jimmy,” “The Mad
Colonel,” and “Who Stopped the Clock.”
AN OLD ARM CHAIR.
In Mrs. Jas. Clark’s residence, Wood-
side, Franklin, is an arm chair made
by her late husband’s father, Mr. John
Clark, which was a favourite resting
place for Lady Franklin, who always
stayed at Woodside on her several
visits to Franklin during the ’forties of
the previous century. The chair was
made of Tasmanian blackwood by Mr.
Clark, and is still in an excellent con-
dition.
WHEN APPLES WERE APPLES
A PROBLEM FOR THE EXPERTS
“There is something to be learned
about the production of apples which
would be of infinite value if it could
be properly understood,” writes an old-
time fruitgrower. “We have been
advised to do certain things with regard
to the cultivation of the ground and
attention to the trees in order that we
might obtain crops of clean fruit that
can be marketed in good condition
months afterwards, but from experience,
I can definitely say that the crops we
grow nowadays are not to be compared
with those grown 40 years ago, either
for quality or keeping purposes.
“For instance, I can remember when
we packed our fruit in the long case.
This container was made of split paling,
28in. x 14in. x 7in., with a centre piece
similar to the ends. The orchards did
not get the intense cultivation, nor any
artificial fertilisers; the fruit was fre-
quently packed into bags, then placed
on sledges and dragged to the apple
house; up to 200 or 300 bags would be
emptied in a heap on the floor, and
from this heap the sorting and grading
was done! There was very little waste.
The fruit was then carted in drays to
one of the jetties and loaded on a ketch.
These vessels would be so low in the
water that during rough weather the
waves would break over the piles of
cases, but in spite of all this the fruit
would arrive at the market in good
condition. Nowadays it is said the
apples show finger-marks from picking.
I am not a scientist, so will not attempt
to explain the cause of the changes, but
suggest that if our departmental officers
cannot do something to restore the
former keeping qualities of our apples
they are not working on the right lines,
or that land will only produce the highest
quality apples for a limited period.”
J. J. Barnett.
RISE AND FALL OF PRICES
NOT A MODERN FEATURE
A Huonite of over half a century’s
experience in the growing of potatoes and
apples points out that the recent var-
iations in the prices of primary produce
are not peculiar to this present age. He
says that he can remember the time
when potatoes were £3O per ton. At
such a price people could not afford to
buy them for seed, so they saved all the
peelings and planted these. To their
dismay, there was such a big crop the
following year that the price dropped
to 30/- per ton! Then the demand rose
for jam, and settlers planted out large
areas of berry fruits. These proved
quite successful for some years, but
moneyed men then came into the
business, making larger plantations,
with the result that down came the
prices. So bad did the position become
that fruit was tipped into the river after
it was delivered at Hobart. Then a
recovery took place through Jones and
Co. opening up new markets for jam
overseas. To cope with the increased
trade, the fishing boats abandoned their
usual calling and carried fruit from the
Huon to Hobart. A jam factory at
Franklin gave a lot of work locally,
and later a pulping factory was started
at Huonville, but both these enterprises
were discontinued after a few years, and
all the fruit was taken to Hobart to
be processed there. The prices went up
and down at various periods. The best
time was during the Great War, when
Jones and Co. filled some enormous
orders for jam for the British Govern-
ment. Then followed another slump, and
many acres of canes had to be destroyed,
as there was no market for all the
fruit that was being grown. At the
present time, this trade is on the up-
grade again, and prices are quite
payable.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


W. D. PEACOCK & CO
PRINCE'S WHARF
PTY. LTD.
Pulping Factory:
GROVE, HUON
Fruit Canners, Jam Manufacturers
Fresh Fruit Exporters
Egg Pulp Manufacturers
SOLE AGENTS FOR
//
BLUEBELL" SPRAYS
It costs as much to apply bad material as good.
When ordering INSIST on "BLUEBELL" SPRAYS and you
will get the BEST that money can buy.
HOBART, TASMANIA
CABLES—POMO.
CODES:
A.B.C. 4th, sth, and 6th.
Bentley's
Western Union
CORRESPONDENCE
INVITED
I
I
i
f
I
j
i
i
i
i
I
f
f
i
i
I
I
I
\
\
i
j
j
\
f
i
j
l
l
i
i
j
\
BARNEY SPRINGER
Fruit Importer and Salesman
Covent Garden Market, London
All Business Under Personal Supervision of Mr. Barney
Springer, assisted by his Five Sons.
Every Attention Guaranteed.
Australian, New Zealand, and Tasmanian
APPLES AND PEARS A SPECIALITY
Bankers: Westminster Bank Ltd. (Shoreditch), London.
References: National Bank of Australasia Ltd., Hobart.
Shipping Numbers
484 to 490
Tasmanian Agent:
H. CLAUDE LITTLE
85a COLLINS STREET, HOBART,
TASMANIA.
i
I
\
j
I
I
\
\
I
\
\
(
\
i
i
i
i
i
1
2
i
l
\
i
\
i
i
j
i
i.
i
i
i
i
\
\
i
i
i
I
\
i
\
j
I
j
Clan Line of Steamers Limited
+
The Clan Line has a record going back as far as 1878. At
first it ran steamers to India, then gradually developed in
various directions until to-day it owns 60 vessels, aggregating
838,300 Tons Gross, running regular services to India, Africa,
America, and Australia.
TASMANIAN SERVICE.
The Clan Line was the first Company to cater for the
Tasmanian Wool Sales, and has continued to serve Tasmania
each year.
CARRIAGE OF FRUIT.
The “Clan Macarthur” called at Hobart on the 6th October,
1915, and lifted 33,730 cases of Pears and Apples, and 9,388
cases of Jams and Desserts for the United Kingdom, and the
fruit carried by this vessel turned out in excellent condition.
CALLS AT PORT HUON.
The first steamer of this Line to lift fruit at Port Huon
was the “Clan MacDougall,” in 1933, and was followed by the
same vessel in 1934. On the 27th April this year, the latest
vessel, the “Clan Macarthur,” called at Port Huon and lifted
54,800 cases of Apples.
We have the satisfaction of knowing that the whole of
the fruit carried by the Clan Line of Steamers this year was
carried and landed in most satisfactory condition.
REFRIGERATED VESSELS.
Refrigerated Vessels of the Company now serving
Australia are the “Clan MacDougall,” “Clan Urquhart,” “Clan
Farquhar,” “Clan Colquhoun,” “Clan Robertson,” and “Clan
Macarthur,” and vessels now in course of construction are
“Clan Macaulay,” “Clan Campbell,” and “Clan Cameron,” all
of which are coal-burning vessels.
AGENTS FOR TASMANIA:
A. G. Webster & Sons Limited
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


DRIED APPLE INDUSTRY
Its Origin and Development
(By E. LINNELL)
early in January, 1909, with plans and the
latest machinery as used at that time in
U.S.A. A rush was necessary to have the
change made ready for the near season,
but the work was completed in time.
This system, known as the Kiln
Evaporator, revolutionised the industry.
The apples were peeled by the power
machines, bleached in power bleachers,
and sliced in power slices, then dried on a
slatted floor over the heating furnaces,
in much the same way that hops are
dried. This method was at once adopted
by all the factories in the Huon.
SALES POOLED.
In the meantime, the selling of the out-
put of all the factories had been pooled.
The different owners combined and form-
ed an association for selling, only ap-
pointing Messrs. H. Jones & Co. sole
selling agents, and the price being fixed
each year by the association. This ar-
rangement worked well until a few T
years ago. The constant selling price
ensured a fair price for the raw material,
as there was still competition for the
available supplies, although that of sell-
ing had been eliminated.
In 1914 came the Great War, and in
1918, when shortage of shipping space
prevented any fresh apples from being
sent to England, the Imperial Govern-
ment, in order to partly recompense the
growers loss of markets, purchased
large quantities of evaporated apples,
and the Federal Government gave a
bounty, which enabled the evaporators
to pay 2s. per bushel for the apples that
would otherwise have gone Overseas. It
was not really a profitable arrangement
for the owners of the factories, as it
necessitated a very large outlay in erect-
ing extensive additions to their plants,
everything in the way of machinery at
that time being obtainable only at ex-
orbitant prices, and the large quantities
treated being required for one year only,
the owners were left with plants very
much larger than was necessary when the
output went back to normal.
DRIED VEGETABLES.
During the war there was a strong de-
mand from the War Office for dried vege-
tables, and several good orders were re-
ceived and dealt with at the factories, but
no one knew the correct way of dealing
with these products, and a rather indiffer-
ent article was turned out; so in July,
1918, the Evaporator Association and
Messrs. Jones and Co. deputed Messrs. R.
Harvey and the writer to visit Canada
and U.S.A., where very large lots of these
goods were being supplied to the Army in
Europe, in order to ascertain the best
up-to-date methods of treating vege-
tables. The required information was
obtained, but before they returned in
December, 1918, the war was over—and
the demand with it.
Many attempts were made to create a
demand in Australia for dried vegetables,
which should be a splendid substitute in
places where the fresh article is not avail-
able, but without success. Mr. Harvey
put up quite a lot of potatoes, which were
cooked and mashed before drying, but the
market, which was only small, could very
easily be overdone.
Many attempts have been made to find
a market for evaps. in England. If there
happened to be a shortage of American
apples on the London markets a few Tas-
manian could be sold, but prices were al-
ways low in comparison with the cost of
production, and it was obviously impos-
sible to work up a regular trade. Even
now, when green apples suitable for
evaporation can be obtained at very low
prices, it is not possible to sell at a pay-
able price in London. Many attempts
have been made to induce the Federal
Government to give a bounty to enable a
regular trade to be established overseas,
but without success.
OVERSEAS
APPLE SHIPMENTS
Amazing Growth of Trade
It is 46 years since the first shipment
of Tasmanian apples left Hobart for
London in refrigerated space, when
6,068 cases were carried by an Orient
vessel, and two P. & O. steamers follow-
ed, taking between them 15,433 cases,
making a total for the season of 21,411
cases.
Prior to 1890 four growers in the Huon
district sent 100 cases of apples to Lon-
don, this being the first time that Tas-
manian apples were wrapped in paper.
The thinnest brown paper bought at local
stores was used to wrap dessert varieties
only. From then until 1887, when the
first shipment of apples was made in re-
frigerated space, via Melbourne, this
early attempt was not followed up with
any vigour. From 1887 till 1890 mail
steamers in which the fruit was shipped
did not call at Hobart, it being necessary
to send overseas shipments to Melbourne.
In the latter year the late W. D. Peacock
arranged for three mail steamers to load
fruit at Hobart, and from that time the
trade steadily increased, till in 1905 it
was well established. The shipments to
England in 1905 amounted to 363,426
cases. The half million mark was pass-
ed in 1911, when 782,588 cases were ship-
ped. Although the quantity shipped
during the next two years was slightly
less, the total for 1914 was 961,722 cases.
Continued on next page.
also located in London, keeps in
touch with Tasmania, other Aus-
tralian States, New Zealand, and
South America. Most of these ter-
ritories are visited periodically by one
or other of the directors. While the
main business of the organisation is the
importation of fruit into England, it
moves fruit from one country to another
all over the world. Directories and
Trade Guides probably describe Good-
wins as “Fruit Brokers,” but Goodwins
will tell you, and with justification, that
they are fruit distributors and market-
ers, which is something far more com-
prehensive than simple fruit brokers, j
After all is there so great a difference
between the giant tree of J. and H.
Goodwin Ltd. of today and the sapling
of the middle of last century? Is it
not mainly one of magnitude?
Joel Goodwin, in the evening of his
Hie, retired to his farm in Lincolnshire.
Henry Goodwin today has a farm in
Cheshire, while Charles Goodwin has
one in Cambridgeshire. Hobbies it is
true, but very indicative of the direction
of their sympathies. When any of this
family meets a grower, it is not
long before they are on close terms,
they speak the same language, they
have kindred sympathies. So it comes
about that every young cadet entering
the business starts off by learning the
following lesson: “We as brokers are
custodians of the growers’ interests.
You must learn to devote all your time,
energy and brain, to the protection of
those interests. The measure of suc-
cess that you achieve in furthering the
growers’ interests will indicate exactly
how successful you are being in pro-
tecting your own interests.”
It is not surprising that from thous-
ands, nay, even hundreds of packages,
this organisatioin’s turnover has grown
to millions of packages each year and
is still steadily growing.
The name of J. and H. Goodwin Ltd,
is well known to Tasmanian fruit-
growers. Many thousands of cases of
Tasmanian apples are received and
sold by J. and H. Goodwin Ltd. each
year. The Tasmanian representatives
are the firm of E. Chas. Pratt Pty. Ltd.,
of which E. Charles Pratt is the man-
aging director. E. Charles Pratt has
been connected with the Tasmanian
fruit trade for over 20 years. Before
arriving in Tasmania from England,
where he was born, he had considerable
experience in the growing of apples and
other varieties of fruit. He periodically
visits England to study the marketing
problems which confront the Tasmanian
grower. He is, therefore, able to give
expert advice on all matters relating to
the growing and marketing of fruit.
Tasmanian growers should bear in mind
the service offered by this vast organi-
sation, which is today one of the largest
of its kind in the world.
The apple evaporating industry was
started as a direct result of the outbreak
in the Huon of that dread disease, black
spot, which was about the year 1890. The
late Rev. E. H. Thompson, who was the
Anglican clergyman stationed at Frank-
lin at the time, was a keen observer of
anything that was of importance to the
producing community, and realising the
dire calamity that had overtaken the
fruitgrowing industry, was eventually
appointed Government entomologist.
Largely through his interest in the mat-
ter, Messrs. J. W. and V. J. Skinner ob-
tained from Hobart for trial a portable
fruit evaporator of primitive design, and
they experimented with it in drying
apples and plums. This .machine was,
however, useless for commercial pur-
poses.
In 1892 the writer obtained from
America a catalogue describing an
evaporator built by the American M.F.G.
Company, which seemed to be more suit-
able. Messrs. Skinner Bros., on learning
that two machines of that make could be
bought in Sydney, purchased them. These
were set up at Huonville, and worked
very successfully, turning out a first-class
article, which was first sold through
Messrs. John Baily and Co., of Hobart.
These machines consisted of a large
stove-like heating furnace, with a sloping
tunnel about 25 feet long, to carry the
trays on which the sliced apples were
spread.
About a year later, a kiln for drying
apples was built on the Castray Esplan-
ade, from a French design, a Mr. Duflow
being the operator, and Mr. J. Weeden
the owner. One of similar design was
erected at Cygnet for Mr. Robert Har-
vey. Both of these kilns were absolute
failures. They consisted of rooms about
20 x 10 feet, filled with trays to hold the
fruit. There was a furnace at one end
and a small fan tried in vain to force
sufficient hot air through to dry the
apples.
THE FIRST SUCCESS.
In 1896 the writer came into the busi-
ness and built an evaporator at his or-
chard at Huonville. The inclined trunk
of this kiln was a copy of the American
machine imported by Skinner Bros., which
was so successful, but it was larger and
was heated by a furnace made of 18 inch
heavy cast-iron gas main, obtained from
the Hobart Gas Company. This was 4
feet long, and from the end stove pipes
ran backwards and forwards before en-
tering the chimney. The whole of the
heating apparatus was enclosed with
solid brick walls. This machine was a
complete success, and was the first suc-
cessful drier built in Tasmania.
In 1898 the ravages of black spot had
made such quantities of waste apples
available that the new machine was re-
moved to Franklin and re-erected with
three additional driers of the same de-
sign. Mr. Weeden, of Hobart, who had
now closed his evaporator, purchased the
whole of the output at the low price of 3d.
per lb. He packed fruit in Jack Cartons,
for which he had a good sale. The next
year Mr. V. J. Skinner, who was now sole
proprietor of the Huonville factory,
adopted the Linnell evaporator, which
was patented, and then Mr. Harvey, of
Cygnet, Mr. R. Geeves, of Geeveston, and
Mr. J. Sheppard, of Ranelagh, adopted
the same system.
With the advent of Federation in the
year 1900, the industry was placed on a
firm footing, for up to that time duty of
3d. per lb. had been charged on all dried
fruits imported into the Australian mar-
kets. Tasmanians had to pay that duty
and compete against the American
goods. It was only because the price
paid for green apples was low (about 9d.
per bushel) and the wages paid to
workers small compared to that of later
years, that the business could be carried
on. It can easily be understood that
with the duty of 3d. per lb. still paid by
the Americans and the Tasmanians ad-
mitted free, the business went ahead
with leaps and bounds.
POWER MACHINES EMPLOYED.
In the year 1908 I got in communication
with some manufacturers in U.S.A. with
regard to improved methods of evapora-
ting apples, for the tray system was be-
coming cumbersome, and there was diffi-
culty in making a tray that would stand
up to constant use, as the evaporators at
that time were working for about nine
months of the year. Not caring to risk
the cost of changing the system used,
Mr. V. J. Skinner and I, as representa-
tives of all those interested in the indus-
try, went to U.S.A. to personally investi-
gate the latest methods used. It only
took a few days among the evaporators in
New York State to satisfy them that a
change was necessary for handling large
quantities of apples, and we arrived back
TIMBER.
TASMANIAN SUPERPHOSPHATE
There is a close link between the Huon River district and the great works of the Electrolytic Zinc Company at Risdon.
The metal zinc is extracted to the extent of 70,000 tons per annum from ore which contains, in addition to the metal, a
considerable amount of the element sulphur. This sulphur, necessarily rejected from the main process, is converted
into sulphuric acid, one of the two materials which, when combined, constitute superphosphate.
It is well over a century since the process of converting insoluble phosphate material into a form suitable for assimila-
tion by plants was discovered. To-day the method is applied on a large scale in the up-to-date works of the Company.
The process is, comparatively, simple. Phosphate Rock, which contains the phosphorus so necessary for satisfactory
growth of orchard or crop, is crushed to a fine powder, which is then mixed with the by-product acid. A dough-like mix-
ture is formed, which is passed through a hot atmosphere, and finally is delivered to a belt conveyor suspended high above
the floor of an enormous storage shed. From this conveyor the superphosphate falls in a continuous stream to the storage
pile below. Automatic bagging machines deliver exactly the required amount of fertiliser to each bag, which is ready
then to begin its journey to Geeveston, Moorina, or Smithian, for the Company’s bags are known throughout the length and
breadth of Tasmania.
A comprehensive view of Electrolytic Zinc Company’s Plant at Risdon, Tas.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.
J. AND H. GOODWIN LTD. (Continued).


CHI
NIT
O F
E A N
ATE
THE NATURAL NITRATE
NITROGEN FERTILISER
for FRUIT, VEGETABLES,
PASTURES
Guaranteed Purity.
98-99 per cent. Nitrate Nitrogen.
100 per cent. Efficient.
The Fertiliser With the Vital Elements
It is a natural product, and in addition to sln addition to the manorial value it has a bene-
nitrogen contains small quantities of lodine, fida| effect on the soi | and p rev ents it from
Boron and Maonesium. each of which olavs an
becoming acid.
Boron and Magnesium, each of which plays an
important part either in plant or animal
nutrition.
■lt is completely soluble and immediately avail- 15 c l ean / dry, eas Y *° handle, and can be dis-
able to the plant. tributed evenly and economically either by
■lt supplies nitrogen in the exact form required hand or mechanical means.
for plant growth. . , , , . ,
nThe unique chemical and physical properties
■lt «s P a cked in machine stitched water- of this natura || y occurring product render it
nrnnfed linen hans. 1 rwf each, and reaches
proofed lined bags, 1 cwt. each, and reaches
you in perfect condition.
an ideal fertiliser.
NOT A SINGLE GROWER WHO HAS USED IT HAS ANYTHING BUT PRAISE FOR
CHILEAN NITRATE OF SODA.
There Is No Substitute. Ask Your Merchant for a Sample and Price
ADDRESS INQUIRIES
CH
I LEAN NITR AT
AGRICULTURAL
OF SO
SERVICE
44 MARGARET STREET, Box 2037 L, G.P.0., SYDNEY
A
Farmers and Fruitgrowers
Lame horses are a heavy liability
"REDUCINE"
cures by absorption and is the most powerful absorbent ever discovered.
Cures Sprung Tendons, Bog Spavins, Curb, Big Knee, Capped Elbow and
Hock, and all Bursal Enlargements.
"REDUCINE" will cure the most obstinate cases of Collar Gall, Sore
Neck, Sore Back, or any other indolent sore.
"REDUCINE" will remove the enlargement painlessly and without scar
or blemish.
PRICE, 12/6 PER CAN. Postage 1/6 extra.
No farmer having once proved its worth will ever be without a can of
"REDUCINE."
COUGHS, COLDS, STRANGLES, INFLUENZA—
"LARYNGINE"
is the latest specific for affections of the Throat and Lungs, and is the
outcome of considerable study and research.
It must be remembered that Powders, Drenches, and Balls go direct to
the Stomach without really touching the affected parts, and as the throat
is easily irritated, swallowing them is positively dangerous.
"LARYNGINE"
is the only remedy that attacks these complaints in a common-sense
manner. Simply spread on the tongue, it gives at once a most beneficial
and soothing effect.
PRICE, 5/- PER CAN. Postage 1/6 extra.
WRITE FOR FREE VETERINARY ADVICE AND 48 PAGE BOOKLET.
T. G. DOYLE, 9 KING STREET, RANDWICK, NEW SOUTH WALES.
Tasmanian Agents:
Charles Davis Ltd., Hobart; Hatton and Laws, Launceston; A. J. Collins,
Ulverstone; and all Chemists. Wholesale from L. Fairthorne and Son
Pty., Launceston.
ORIENT LINE
ROYAL MAIL STEAMERS
to ENGLAND
PACIFIC CRUISES
TASMANIAN SERVICE
CEYLON EXCURSIONS
NORWAY CRUISES
Orient Steam Navigation Company Limited. Incorporated in England.
AGENTS:
MACFARLANE BROS, and CO.
117 MACQUARIE STREET HOBART
From 1915 to 1921 the shipping was con-
trolled by the British Government, and in
1922 the quantity exported passed the
million mark. The annual shipments
from this time onwards were well main-
tained, except in 1929, when the crop was
very light, owing to adverse weather con-
ditions.
The following is a list of shipments
from 1922 to the present year:—
Shipments from Hobart and Port Huon.
1922 . . 1,332,357 1930 . . 2,334,316
1923 . . 1,418,463 1931 . . 2,086,236
1924 . . 876,456 1932 . . 2,978,443
1925 . . 1,254,244 1933 . . 2,693,150
1926 . . 1,812,885 1934 . . 2,533,411
1927 . . 980,851 1935 . . 2,215,179
1928 . . 2,441,640 1936 . . 2,243,050
1929 . . 842,310
Shipments from Port Huon.
(Inaugurated 1929.)
1929 (1 vessel) 29,621
1930 (1 vessel) 46,668
1931
1932 (5 vessels) 301,570
1933 (7 vessels) 373,743
1934 (7 vessels) 281,405
1935 (7 vessels) 263,167
1936 (7 vessels) 280,821
A FAMOUS KEEL.
Some magnificent logs have been ob-
tained at different times for the making
of keels for the numerous vessels that
were built on the Huon. In the early
days these were available close to the
shipyards, but as the export of timber
increased, the builders had to keep on
going further - and further back. One
of the most notable feats in this direc-
tion was the delivery of the keel of the
s.s. Togo to the Dover wharf. The
“stick” was got from a log 86ft. long
and 7ft. 6in. at the butt. It was cut
by Messrs. Sol Eaves and Ed. Maley on
the Deviation Hill, near Dover, and
transported to Dover by the late Council
Clerk of Geeveston, A. E. Davis. The
tree was a blue gum, and the timber was
subsequently declared to be of the high-
est quality possible. The Togo was
built at Launceston. The loading of the
keel at Dover on a steamer was no
small feat.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.
SHIPMENTS OVERSEAS (Continued).


THE BEGINNING OF THE
INDUSTRY.
Immediately after the first settlers
were established at Hobart Town the
Government sent small explotring
parties southward to report on the po-
tentialities of that then unknown coun-
try. Lieut. Bowen visited the Huon
River in 1804, but only went a short
distance. On his return he reported
that the land was “poor.”
In June, 1804, the Harbourmaster,
William Collins, came to the Huon, and
after spending a fortnight on the trip,
reported that “there was a favourable
place for a settlement, good land,
abundance of water, and fine trees.”
The botanist, Robert Brown (who
came with Governor Collins), visited
the Huon in July, 1804. He walked
overland, via North-West Bay, and was
accompanied by a man named Hum-
phreys. They also spent a fortnight at
the Huon River, and no doubt saw the
celebrated Huon pine. The Rev. R.
Knopwood mentions that one of these
parties took a specimen of pine to
Hobart, which was the first of that wood
seen there.
From all the districts visited, fine
forests were reported, in some cases
the trees reaching to the water’s edge,
so that with the growing demand for
all kinds of building timber, sawyers
and splitters were soon attracted to
the D’Entrecasteaux Channel, the Huon,
and the Southern districts. Then be-
gan a period that was full of hard
work, some successes, and many fail-
ures —which, had they been recorded,
would, have presented an amazing tale
of fortitude and privation.
TREES NOT VALUED.
It seems that very little value was
placed on the beautiful trees - they
were just there to be killed. First the
splitters and sawyers, and then the set-
tlers, all working to that end. They
served their purpose and have gone.
Some of the oldest residents tell of
the wonderful trees that grew on the
hanks of the Huon River, of blue gums
180 to 200 feet, with straight boles,
clear of a limb. One tree, at Geeveston,
cut 224 feet of logs, which were sent to
Osborne Geeves’ mill; one at Hastings, |
TIMBER AND SAWMILLS
Loss of the Pine Forests
Early Difficulties in Cutting and Transport
(By A. McMullen.)
kIOT the least interesting part of the settlement of the Huon is
B the story of the struggle waged by the early settlers in the
conversion of the magnificent pine and blue gum trees into com-
mercial timber. Many of those who engaged in the work obtained
little reward for the long hours of arduous toil that they imposed
on themselves, and not a few lost their lives.
TRAMWAY ENTERING THE FOREST.
156 feet; and another at Southport,
150 feet. And some of the trees from
which the keels of the vessels built
on the Huon banks were a great length;
but no complete records were kept.
There is one tree, still growing at the
base of Mount Adamson Peak, a stand-
ing evidence of what has been. There
may be others, but most of the best
have gone, bush fires playing a large
part in their destruction.
EARLY USES OF TIMBER.
In the early days shingles, palings,
posts and rails, staves, piles, and pit-
sawn timber, were all obtained. Mil-
lions of feet were sawn, without the
aid of machinery, and it was very hard
work. Before and after the Victorian
gold digging days, the prices were
very low —4s. per 100 feet, for a long
time, was the ruling rate for 7in. x iin.
weatherboards, and they were perfectly
cut.
PIT-SAWING.
There were several methods used in
pit-sawing. In the case of timber of
great length, it was usual, if possible,
to dig a ditch, alongside, and parallel
with, the trunk of the fallen tree. Skids
were put across the ditch, and the logs
rolled on them. The ditch had to be
of sufficient depth to allow the man
to stand upright under the log, and
work in comfort. In other cases, a
double row of posts was put in; then
two spars were placed along the top
of the posts to lie parallel with the log.
Then big pieces were put across these,
the height of the cross-pieces being,
perhaps, a little over six feet. The
length of the structure was according
to the timber to be cut. Beams would
overhang at each end. This frame was
strongly made and well braced. Skids
were made to enable the logs to be
rolled up. When the logs were on the
staging, they were “lined” top and bot-
tom (as a saw guide), and securely
fastened. They were then ready for
the sawyers. When the first cross-
piece was reached, another was placed
at the back of the saw, and tightly
wedged, the front piece was then re-
moved, and so on.
RISE IN PRICE AND EFFECT.
In 1850, timber of almost any sort
could be sold, the price having risen
from 255. to 30s. per 100 feet, but so
many men had gone to the goldfields,
it was often difficult for a man to get a
sawing mate. A story is told of one
man, who could not get a partner, so
he tied a 401 b. bag of stones on the tail
of his saw, and swung that all day—
and no 40 hours a week in those times!
Daylight until dark, was a working
day, and get ready for the morrow
after tea. Many of these men made
big money, they worked hard, and lived
and drank hard too.
Another story is told of a mrn who
had been paid £7O for his timber, he
took it to the publican, and said: “Here
Jim, take care of this, and tell me when
it is finished.” That was on Saturday
afternoon. On Monday morning, he was
able to inquire: “Well, Jim, how do we
stand now?” “Well, Sam, you just owe
me 32 bob,” was the reply, and Sam
was quite content to go and earn more.
Ho knew he had been “had,” but just let
it go.
HARDY PIONEERS.
It is also a fact that a man walked
from Franklin to Hobart Town, bought
a saw, and returned with it the same
day. Blany tales arc still told of these
men who cut the timber for the wooden
houses of old Hobart Town. It was a
very big undertaking to pit-saw large
logs.
The beams in the first Huon bridge
were 90 feet in length, 12in. x 18in.,
and free from heart and sap. Some of
them came from Musketts Hill, at North
Franklin, showing the class of trees
growing in that vicinity. They must
have been almost 100 feet clear of
limbs and large and straight.
There were hundreds of saw-pits all
over the countryside, the earliest (out-
side Hobart) being in the Brown’s
River district, followed by Esperance,
Southport, Cygnet, and the Huon. All
classes of timber were cut, the ends
for apple cases, cut in long lengths,
amongst them. Millions of shingles
and. palings were split for roofs and
fences, and later, 28-in. palings for the
“long”, fruit cases.
Swamp gum was always chosen for
splitting, the tree tested for suitability
by cutting out a large chip. At times,
although the chip proved satisfactory,
the tree, when felled, did not prove to
be wholly so, and would have to be
abandoned. Once felled, the tree was
sawn into suitable lengths, and split
into sections, and finally with a special
shingle knife into what was needed.
SIZE OF THE TREES.
Some of the large trees at the back
of Franklin have been known to turn
out 50,000 shingles. Another tree,
20,000 five-feet palings, but from 7,000
to 10,000 were more usual. The palings
were cut to measure five to two inches
in thickness.
Mr. A. E. Phillips told me that a good
man could split about 4,000 shingles in.
a. day, or about 1,000 sft. palings; the
average man would split from 500 to-
-600, and carry them to the road side.
The shingles were tied in bundles of'
100 in each, and two bundles were a
load; the 28in. palings were 50 to a.
load, and sft. palings three trips per
100. The palings were placed “V”
shaped, the wide ends over the man’s
shoulders, and were sometimes carried
8 or 10 “spells” or more. A spell was
about 350 yards, at which interval a sort
of platform was built of poles; on this
the man carrying would place his load
and take his “spell” by walking back
lor another load, his mates doing the
same at other sections along the track.
SLUMP IN PRICES
Mr. Phillips quotes these prices as ob-
tained. 51 years ago, at the water’s
edge: Shingles, 10s. per 1,000; sft. pal-
ings, Gs. per 100; and 6s. for 28in.
box palings, delivered. Only Franklin
has been mentioned, but vast quantities
were split at Cygnet and in all other
districts.
METHOD OF WORKING.
The splitters usually worked on con-
tract. Mr. M. Fitzpatrick, of Cygnet,
had at times as many as 500 men em-
ployed. Mr. Thorpe, at Franklin, was
also a large buyer of split timber.
There was another system under
which the men worked, a sort of cut-
ting licence, the men being allowed one
tree down and two marked.
A story is told of Mr. John Lloyd,
r.t Franklin. He had arranged with
seme splitters to pay him £1 per tree,
suitable for splitting, on his property.
He was then too old to go and see what
was being done, so used to sit at home
and listen for the trees to crash, and so
keep tally of what were taken. The
men got to know this, and arranged
whenever it was possible to fell several
trees at once, and so make only one
sound.
PINE LOGGING.
During the 1840’s, 1850’s, and 1860’s,
Huon pining was carried on extensively
in the Huon and Picton Rivers, and at
Port Davey. It was customary for a
couple of piners to row their keelless
boat up the river to the forest—the
rest of the gang walked. Once there they
cut the logs and then felled the scrub
to the water’s edge. One gang would
help another to roll the logs as near
as possible to the river bank, and then
they waited for a flood to carry them
down to Huonville or Franklin. When
the flood came, one or two men, accord-
ing to the size of the boat, followed
the logs down to free any that might
become stuck in the eddies or racks
A huge Blue Gum Tree being cut into sections for hauling to the Mill in the
Port Esperance District.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Tim es” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


IT'S HERE
c ltwd^few
GIANT TRUCK TYRE
8
'-the greatest achievement in the history
ofcommercial vehicle tyre manufacture
Now manufactured for the first time in
Australia—the Dunlop Giant “90 ” truck
tyre —famous and proved the world over.
It OFFERS and ENSURES
Jf UNPRECEDENTED MILEAGE.
Jf GREATER SAFETY UNDER ALL
ROAD CONDITIONS,
* A PROVED NON-SKID TREAD.
* LOWER MAINTENANCE COSTS.
FACTS ABOUT THE
DUNLOP “90”
The deeper tread of “tough compound”
rubber gives at least 15% more mileage. The
“flat,” full-width road-contact of its five-rib
pattern gives unequalled grip—and pro-
tection from both side and forward skids.
Remarkable casing life is given by Weftless
Cord and the “Disc Doubling” processing of
every cord both exclusive to Dunlop
interests in Australia.
Weftless Cord eliminates the destructive heat
which saps the life of ordinary truck tyre
casings. Disc Doubling, by giving more
“twist” to the cord during manufacture,
provides greater stretching power —allowing
the Dunlop “90 ” casing to flex under the
heaviest load without injury or “ fatigue.”
■H
i
I
■mi:
f
f
t
m
0
m
k
I
\■ * S
\ * \
* . * ,
' \ T*'
\ • \
HAVE NO TRUCK WITH INFERIOR TYRES ...
DUNLOP “90”
DUNLOP PERDRIAU RUBBER CO. LTD.—Branches all States
322-75
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


along the course. The boats were made
without keels, and high fore and aft to
allow of them being turned quickly, if
necessary, on the perilous journey.
Sometimes a saw-pit was made, and
boards cut, and a boat built out there,
but it was not the usual custom. At
the lower reaches of the Huon the logs
were collected and sorted, each gang
having their own brand.
Settlers along the river bank would
also look out for floating logs, and try to
secure them. For this they were sup-
plied with lengths of chain or rope and
staples, so that having secured the log
they could fasten it to a tree or bush,
always having to make certain to choose
something that would be sufficiently
elastic to allow for the tides and
flood heights—for this they were paid
a small fee.
Messrs. Longley and Voss, who were
pining in the ’6o’s, had a method of
branding, measuring, and numbering
their logs, all details of each one being
booked. So that after the pick-up, they
were able to know exactly how many
they had lost, and what their dimen-
sions and general characteristics were.
Most of the logs were taken to Hobart
in barges, but some were cut at Skinner
and Wise’s sawmill. The market be-
came overstocked, the prices paid from
Bs. to 12s. per 100 super feet—always
less than Id. per super foot, with, of
course, deductions for blemishes, so
that after freight was paid there was
little left for the men who did such
rough work, and ran such great risks.
It was while following their logs
down stream after the season’s cut, that
Messrs. Longley and Voss lost their
lives. When they did not arrive, as ex-
pected, a search party was organised,
the remains of the boat were found in
a rack, a little above the mouth of the
Picton River, and the men’s bodies a
little later.
Among the Huon piners these names
are remembered: Wm. Dean, H. Long-
ley, S. Voss, W. Fletcher, M. Galagher,
John and Harry Clark, Henry Judd, B.
and H. Griggs, C. Glover, Buxton,
Higham—there were scores of
others.
NATURE OP THE PINE.
Huon pine is a very slow growing
tree. It is indigenous to this country,
but grows only in the Huon, and on the
West Coast of Tasmania. It was par-
ticularly sought after for barge and
boat building, as it is very durable,
and does not shrink much. It is also
used for furniture making. No record
of the quantity obtained has been kept.
In 1877, John and Joseph Wise went
to a bed of pine that had been dis-
covered in a small creek, a tributary of
the Picton. It was too small to allow
the logs to float out, so they gave up
the project. Since then very little pin-
ing has been done in the Huon.
In 1879, Mr. George Nation discover-
ed a small bed of King William pine
at the Russell River. He succeeded
after much difficult work in getting
some logs to the Huon River, and took
them to Skinner and Wise’s sawmill,
where he sold them for Bs. per 100
super in the log. Skinner and Wise cut
it into sizes suitable for doors and
window sashes, etc., and sent it to Ho-
bart. It was the first ever sent to the
Hobart market, and quite unknown, and
none of the merchants would buy. Mr.
H. Chesterman yarded it for many
months, and eventually it was sold for
Bs., exactly the same as had been paid
in the log, with the loss of labour and
a Is. 3d. freight. Nowadays it is being
sought after for aeroplane construction,
as it is very light and strong.
THE EARLY MILLS.
Coming to sawmills the first was
built at Birch’s Bay, but I have been
unable to trace the name of the owner.
Very little, if any, timber was cut, and
the machinery was gradually sold. In
1868 Messrs. John Hay, No. 2, and
Henry Chesterman bought the saw-
sharpening machine for Hastings.
In 1835, Mr. Wallace Kellaway settled
in the Huon, at Woodstock, and shortly
afterwards built a flour and sawmill,
both operated by a large water wheel,
the water being carried in a race from
a dam in the Sandfly River. It is in-
teresting to note that the race, two
miles long, was cut by some 100
prisoners, who received Is. per day and
rations.
In 1838, Lady Franklin, writing to
Mr. Ballantyne in connection with the
cutting of a bridle track to Hobart,
says: “There is a third person at a
sawmill who must, I think, find it to his
interest also, to have an easy access to
his property, and who should be ap-
plied to on this subject.” Who that
person was, or where in the Huon the
mill was placed, is a matter for con-
jecture.
It was after his return to Tasmania,
in 1842, that Dr. W. L. Crowther, be-
came interested in sawmilling. He built
a mill at Oyster Cove—afterwards man-
aged by his son for a time—and later,
another at Castle Forbes Boy.
Mr. Richard Hill purchased Mr.
Walter’s flourmill at Honeywood, in
1849, which he converted into a saw-
mill. Those mills were both operated
by water power. Mr. Hill laid the first
tramway in the Huon.
The Rev. Andrewartha went to re-
side at Franklin about 1846, but being
interested in sawmilling, did not stay
long. He erected a mill at Flight’s
Bay (Waterloo), where he was joined
some time later by his nephew, Mr.
W. H. Andrewartha.
Mr. Charles Oates’ was engaged in
sawing and splitting for 10 years be-
fore he built his mill in 1852. He had
a very fine bed of timber at Mountain
River, nine miles from the shipping
place at Huonville. He built several
miles of tramway to the main road,
where the timber was reloaded into
drays, numbers of which were in con-
stant transit. Mr. Oates also had a
ketch built at Huonville for carrying his
timber to Hobart. As members of this
family are still engaged in sawmilling
they have a record of 94 years at that
kind of work.
Messrs. Thomas and William Walton,
and J. Wilson built a steam sawmill
about the year 1853, near the shipping
place at “Inlet Farm,” Huonville. It
was worked some years, and closed
down, when the price of timber fell
after the gold digging boom. Mr. John
Geeves bought the machinery for
Geeveston.
In 1853, Mr. John Hay No. 1 arrang-
ed with Mr. John Jolly (who was com-
ing from Scotland under engagement
to erect some mining machinery for a
Victorian firm) to bring out all the
necessary machinery fo: a sawmill. This
Mr. Jolly did, and arriving in Tasmania
in 1855, assisted to erect the mill on
Mr. Hay’s property at North Franklin.
Mr. Hay’s tram crossed the present road
and went up the hill at a grade of 1 in
6, which seems to have been rather
steep, as he frequently remarks in his
diary: “The truck got away today,” and
similar remarks. He also mentions
having cut apple case ends in long
lengths, and having supplied timber to
Mr. Cuthbert for • barge building at
Franklin. The mill was dismantled in
1867 and taken to Hastings. It was
the first in Franklin district. There
have never been any very big mills at
Franklin. The forest was taken by
splitters and sawyers, followed by set-
tlers. The largest, owned by Messrs.
J. and M. McMullen, is in operation at
the present time.
Another water power sawmill was
built by Mr. Lucas, in 1864, at Baker’s
Creek (Lucaston). He had a large
wheel 40 feet in diameter, which gave
ample power. This mill remained in
operation many years, and cut a lot of
timber. Mr. Lucas’ shipping place was
at Mosquito Point, which necessitated
the (building of several miles of tram-
way. In 1885 Mr. Lucas dismantled his
mill and sold the machinery. His
daughter described, with much amuse-
ment, how the purchaser of the great
wheel came to take it down. He brought
a rope little better than a clothes-line
to lower the wheel to the ground. As
soon as the rope got the weight it
snapped and the wheel crashed to
pieces.
In the 60’s Messrs. Skinner '(2) and
Wise built their sawmill on the Clifton
property. They cut all classes of tim-
ber, a lot for the barge building that
was being carried on at Shipwright’s
Point. They used the tides to punt it
down the river. It was at that mill
that Mr. Richard Skinner first began
sawmilling. In after years he owned
several mills at Huonville, at Swamp
Rd., Franklin, and later, with Mr.
Jolly, at Bruny Island.
In 1860 Mr. David Chapman built a
mill at Strathblane for a company, Mr.
W. H. Andrewartha taking a lease of
it until 1873, when it was bought by
Mr. Judd. Mr. Judd was followed at
Strathblane by Mr. W. Smith, then
Messrs. Facy and Fisher, and after-
wards by Mr. C. Palmer.
On leaving Strathblane, Mr. Andre-
wartha built another mill at Raminea,
afterwards sold to Mr. Chesterman. It
is still in operation.
After building at Strathblane in 1860,
Mr. Chapman, almost immediately,
erected another sawmill at Stringer’s
Creek, and later a third one at Hope-
toun, which he successfully worked until
his death. It was then purchased by
the Puller Bros., later by Edward Innes,
and eventually destroyed by a bush
fire. The freehold was purchased by
some English people and a large mill
was built close to the old mill site, and
under the management of Mr. Kems-
ley. The company was never able to
make it pay, and it was sold to Messrs.
Jones and Co. After a few years it
was destroyed by fire once again. It
was rebuilt and some years later again
burnt.
During 1865 the Kent sawmills were
built on the south side of Esperance
Bay by Mr. Drysdale sen., and worked
for many years by himself and his sons.
Mr. William Clennett also built the
Stanmore sawmill on the road between
Esperance and Geeveston. These are
the principal mills that have operated
in the Esperance district, but, as is
the case of other places, there have
been numbers of smaller plants.
In 1868 Messrs. John Hay No. 2 and
H. Chesterman built a mill at Hastings
—which a few years later was destroyed
by bush fire. Mr. Chesterman then re-
RICHARD HILL'S SAWMILL, AT KERMANDIE IN 1849, DRIVEN BY WATERWHEEL.
tired from the firm, his place being
taken by Messrs. Facy and Fisher.
The new firm carried on business until
1883, when Mr. Hay retired and built
a mill at Lady’s Bay. His place was
taken by his son, Mr. John Hay No. 3,
who shortly after purchased the pro-
perty.
In 1892 he was joined by Mr. Chop-
ping, and some years later they sold to
Messrs. Jones and Co.
Mr. John Hay No. 2 remained at
Lady’s Bay until 1889, when his sons,
Robert and Charles, took over the plant,
at their father’s retirement.
At Southport the first sawmill was
owned by Mr. Joseph Graves, who built
it in 1876. In later years he sold the
property to Messrs. Robert Hay and
W. Georgeson. This partnership was
broken by Mr. Georgeson commencing
business in Hobart, and Mr. Hay pur-
chasing the whole plant. In later years
there have been several smaller mills
at Southport and Sister’s Bay.
At Ida Bay, Mr. Tyler built a large
mill, which was successfully worked for
a number of years. It, too, has been
followed by a number of smaller mills,
and close by at the Lune River by one
built and owned by Messrs. W. Smith
and J. Davis. The Lune mill was
burnt and rebuilt, passing into the
hands of various owners. It is still
working.
At Geeveston in 1875 Mr. John Geeves
established a sawmilling business. He
purchased the machinery from Walton
and Wilson’s mill at Huonville. Mr.
David Robertson designed and built
the mill, and John Hay No. 3 acted as
foreman for a short period.
Another mill used chiefly for cutting
apple cases was erected later.
Mr. Osborne Geeves built a sawmill
in 1881 from plans drawn by Mr. John
Hay. Mr. Robert Hay managed this
mill for some years. These mills
were purchased by the Huon Timber
Co. and added to by two mills belonging
to that company. There have been
numbers of small plants at Geeveston
also. Two larger ones operating at
the present time are cutting large quan-
tities of timber. A lot of timber has
been taken from the forests at Geeves-
ton, and some of the largest shipments
of timber sent from Tasmania have left
Port Huon.
At Recherche the first mill was built
and worked by Messrs. W. H. Andre-
wartha and Gibbs in 1860 at the Water-
hole. Mr. Andrewartha retired and
Mr. Gibbs afterwards went to New Zea-
land. They were followed by Messrs.
Wm. and John McDougal in the early
80’s, at Catamaran; Mr. Smith, midway
between Catamaran and Leprena; Mr.
Robert Cuthbert, at Leprena, who built
about 1884; Mr. Kemsley, at the Cres-
cent mill; Jones and Co., at Cockle
Creek; and recently by Mr. Heather, at
Ramsgate.
The Catamaran mills cut a lot of tim-
ber. They were sold to Messrs. Jones
and Co. and a few years ago totally
destroyed by fire. Cockle Creek mill
was dismantled and the machinery
taken to Taranna. At Leprena, Mr.
Robert Cuthbert cut for some time, and
then closed down for years, until he
sold to McDougal Bros. Tom Mc-
Dougal took charge at Leprena, John
remaining at Catamaran until his death.
On the sale of Leprena and Catamaran
mills to Messrs. Jones and Co., Mr. Wm.
McDougal retired to live in the Chan-
nel.
At Recherche the McDougal Bros,
built a large loading stage for inter-
state ships, it being impossible for
them to berth at Catamaran or Le-
prena to load timber. They also had
the ship Annie McDougal built, only to
lose her shortly afterwards at Mac-
quarie Harbour. Leprena mill is still
cutting, and Mr. Heather’s also.
The only sawmill in the early days at
Port Cygnet was owned by Mr. James
Garth. It was worked chiefly by Mc-
Dougal Bros, and their father, and was
built, I believe, in the early 60’s. There
have been numbers of smaller mills in
the Cygnet district, and of late years
many operated by tractors.
Vast quantities of split and pit-sawn
timber were cut there, and a great lot
of blackwood and wattle staves. Ly-
mington and Deep Bay, in fact all the
valleys of the district streams, were
heavily timbered. It is said that there
is none of the original forest left in the
municipality.
At Garden Island Creek the first saw-
mill was built by Messrs. Ford, Deardon,
and Harris. They operated for many
years, and eventually sold to Mr. Wm.
Clennett.
Another large mill at Adventure Bay
was owned by Messrs. Gray Bros. They
also cut large quantities of timber and
shipped big cargoes of hewn beams to
England, both from Adventure Bay and
Channel ports.
STEAM DRIVEN MILLS.
The foregoing were the largest saw-
mills in Southern Tasmania. All those
built in later years were driven by
steam, and all of them had a vertical
saw frame for breaking down the logs.
There have been dozens of smaller
plants, some of which were in operation
for a number of years, especially since
the demand for apple case material has
been so great. Most of them are what
are called “billet mills,” the logs being
split into sections in the bush, and cut at
the mill by a circular saw only. Messrs.
Mansfield, Muskett, Nimmo, Page,
Baldwin, and Walker are amongst those
who cut a lot of timber in the Huon.
It is. quite impossible to say how much
timber has been exported from the Huon
and southern districts during the last
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


ffyXW&t
V
LVy
m
WD-40—Drawbar rating, 27.99 h.p.;
belt, 44.04 h.p.
W-30—Drawbar rating, 19.69 h.p.;
belt, 31.31 h.p.
SS?
Tf
inian*
1*33?
wm
Pi
TD-40—Drawbar rating, 33.51 h.p.;
belt. 43.12 h.p.
For more
than 30
years the
McCormick-
Deeringline
of tractors
has led the
vanguard of
mechanical
power march-
ing victoriously
to the relief of
farmers every-
where from the
bondage of profit-
less manual toil.
imt
will
■M
m
X-20 —Drawbar rating, 18.33 h.p.j
belt, 25.31 h.p.
10-20—Drawbar rating, 13.5 h.p.?
belt, 21.6 h.p.
STEEL WHEELS OR
PNEUMATIC TYRES
All McCormick-Deering
wheel-type tractors can be
supplied with steel wheels
or with pneumatic tyres.
A McCORMICK-
DEERING
TRACTOR FOR YOU
Any farmer who desires to see what
a McCormick-Deering tractor can do
on his individual farm should apply
to International Harvester for a free
demonstration on his property. Fill in
and mail the attached coupon or arrange
a date with your McCormick-Deering
local agent.
PRICES FROM S3.UP
WK-40—The new 6-cylinder tractor
replacing the 22-36.
THE BIG-POWERED SQUADRON
For the big power jobs use McCormick-
Deering Diesel-engined tractors. TD-40 —
the king of crawler tractors —has a power
rating of 33.51 h.p. on the drawbar and
43.12 h.p. on the belt. WD-40. the wheel-
type Diesel, delivers 27.99 h.p. at the
drawbar and 44.04 h.p. on the belt. These
tractors are a revelation in low-cost
Diesel operation.
THE MIDDLE BRIGADE
For all-round service the middle
range of McCormick-Deering
tractors operating on power
kerosene has built up amaz-
ing records for economy and
long service. See their indi-
vidual ratings under the
accompanying illustrations.
There's a tractor for every
farmer in the McCormick-
Deering line.
THE MOBILE
“12's”
The McCormick-
Deering squadron of
small, economical
mobile tractors in-
cludes the W-12 for
general service, the
pneumatic-tyred 0-12
for orchards, and the
all-purpose F-12 for
row-crop work, all
three operating on
F-12—Drawbar rating, 9.44 h.p,;
belt, 13.45 h.p.
1
E
W-12
Drawbar rating, 9.55 h.p.? belt, 13.88 h.p. IoW-COSt k©rOSGlie.
ROBT. NETTLEFOLD PTY. LTD.
(MACHINERY DEPARTMENT)
113-115 MACQUARIE STREET,
HOBART.
Cr. YORK STREET and KINGSWAY,
LAUNCESTON.
I Robe. Nettlcfold Pty. Ltd.—
I
I Please arrange lor a demon-
stration with your Model.
Name..
Address...
Tractor on my farm without any
obligation to me.
U 1811
0-12—Drawbar rating, 9.44 h.p.;
belt, 13.45 h.p.
RAMINEA SAWMILL, NEAR DOVER, WHERE MILLING BEGAN IN THE EARLY 50’s.
100 and more years. It has been sent
to all parts of the world, in constant
shipments of all varieties.
More than 40 years ago Mr. Graves
and Mr. Hay sent sleepers to Noumea,
by the Fairy Rock and Prospero. These
ships loaded at the Deep Hole wharf,
which had been built by Messrs. Facy
and Hay, for inter-State shipments
from the Hastings mill.
Paving blocks were sent to England,
as well as all kinds of timber for
wharves, docks, piers, and other public
works.
Very large quantities were shipped to
India, China, Africa, Manila, and New
Zealand, while on the Continent, Tas-
manian timber was largely sought after
for building railway trucks, etc., the
Germans saying that although our tim-
ber cost them twice as much as their
own, it lasted four times longer. It
1 was a growing market but was killed
by labour troubles.
DURABILITY OP EUCALYPTS
The durability of the eucalyptus is re-
markable. Before Mr. Graves com-
menced sawmilling, he had sawyers and
splitters working on contract at South-
port. Amongst his orders was one for
a number of piles for the Port Mel-
bourne pier. Seventy years after-
wards a contract to repair and extend
the pier was let, and on removing some
of the piles, the portions in the ground
were in such a perfect state of pre-
servation that they were used again as
points for concrete piles. A couple of
years ago a small stack of 28 inch pal-
ings was discovered in the bush at the
back of Franklin. They were in per-
fect condition, and must have Iain there
nearly 40 years.
The first sawn palings for apple cases
were cut at Hastings and sold to the
old Tasmanian Fruitgrowers’ Associa-
tion.
AGE OF TREES.
Mention has been made of the size
of the different kinds of gum trees. It
is interesting to count (or try to) the
t annular rings, shown on the log ends.
I have counted more than 500 and then
lost tally. It is said the growth,
whether it is wide or narrow, denotes
the kind of season the ring corresponds
with—whether it was dry or wet.
Some extraordinary growths of bark
have been found. In the Lune valley a
tree whose bark was 24 inches thick
was discovered and measured by Mr.
Hay. At the back of Franklin a speci-
men 14 inches thick was obtained, and
a sample sent to the Postal Institute
Museum at Canberra.
USEFUL FOR FURNITURE.
There is a growing appreciation for
different species of eucalyptus as furni-
ture woods. Much of it is beautifully
grained, and should not be spoken of as
oak or walnut. Blackwood and myrtle
equal any timber in the world for
beauty; the shades and markings shown
are wonderful.
Confusion has arisen in the minds of
some people as to the terms, light-
wood and blackwood. It is the same
species, the difference in colour being
occasioned by the different conditions of
growth, locality, and age. At Geeves-
ton, where there was a large bed of that
timber, the wood was light in colour.
Hence the former name of Geeveston,
“Lightwood Bottom.”
HUON’S FIRST POTATOES.
For many years after the settlers be-
gan to arrive in the Huon the chief pro-
duct of the district was potatoes. The
varieties most favoured were “Blacks”
and “Californian Blacks.” Hobart al-
most depended on the Huon for this
vegetable, which grew in vast quanti-
ties on new land. The chief centres of
production were; Glazier’s Bay, Cygnet,,
Cradoc and Huonville. At times the
surplus was shipped to New Zealand as
“Derwent” potatoes. A payable price
was £4 per ton, but in the year 18,54
they reached the pehnomenal figure of
£29 to £30 per ton. The following year
they were so cheap that they were
mostly left undug. From 1896 the
“Blacks” went out of favour as they
had a tendency to develop Irish blight,
and Up-to-Dates were then in demand
and are still the best variety to grow..
HUON FLOUR MILLS.
The early settlers in the Huon set
themselves one particular task each
year—the production of enough wheat
to provide themselves and their families
with flour until the following harvest.
The wheat was ground by water-wheel
mills. One of these belonged to John
Clark (later his son Aaron), at Wood-
side, Franklin; a second, to J. W. Kel-
laway, at Woodstock; and a third to E.
Hill, at Kermandie. The water was
conveyed considerable distances in each
instance in flumes, and drove an im-
mense wooden wheel which provided the
motive power for turning the mill stones.
The miller retained a percentage of the
flour in payment for the work of grind-
ing the wheat.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


A LOST INDUSTRY
PINE LOGGING ON THE HUON
Difficult But Profitable Undertaking
During the last 25 or 30 years of the
previous century, an industry that
yielded good profits for those engaged
in it was that of bringing Huon pine
logs down from the upper reaches of
the Huon and its tributaries to Frank-
lin. There were no roads at this time
beyond Glen Huon, so that the only
means of transporting the logs was by
the river itself. Even the journey up-
stream by the log-getters themselves
had to be made by water. The method
of transport of the gangs, together with
their food, tents, and tools, was by
specially constructed light draught
rowing boat. Mostly the journey
started from Franklin or Huonville, and
until the rapids were reached, just
above Mosquito Point, no particular
difficulty would be experienced. On
reaching the rapids, however, the crew
had to partially disrobe, disembark, and
carry or drag the boat and its contents
over the rapids to the next stretch of
deep water. This experience had to be
repeated at intervals until the camping
ground on the banks of the main stream,
or one of its numerous tributaries, was
reached.
The work was difficult under the best
_of conditions. It involved the felling of
‘the Huon pine trees and the lopping of
the branches, so that when the flood
waters rose the logs would be picked
up and carried downstream. The size
of the logs usually varied from about
18 inches in diameter to 4 feet. When
a logger prepared a tree he branded
the sawn end with his mark. The
brand was specially cut or cast on a
hammer-like tool, and although the logs
might be a year or two on the banks
of the stream before a flood came down
that would be high enough to lift them
and carry them into the current, the
brand would remain as clearly as the
day it was put on.
On the floods lifting the logs, they
would be carried along until they
reached the wide expanse of water
opposite Franklin. At this time, the
mud flats, where the recreation ground
now is, were an ideal place for landing
the logs. Almost every resident pos-
sessed a rowing boat, and when the logs
started to come past the township,
rowers would go out and tow them with
ropes to a shallow part of the flat and
anchor them there. Subsequently the
owners came along and paid the rowers
for their part of the log getting. It
was always a point of honour among the
log-getters that no one tampered with
a log which had already been branded.
Huon pine, even as far back as 50
years ago, was recognised as one of the
best timbers in the world. Indeed, there
are a great many authorities who assert
that for variety of uses and its wonder-
ful durability it is the best of all tim-
bers. Good prices were therefore paid
for the logs, especially those of a
diameter of 3 feet or over, as their great
age added to their value. It is an ex-
ceedingly slow growing timber, one of
the slowest known, and possibly this
accounts for the reluctance that the
Forestry Department has displayed in
planting out big areas of the beautiful
trees.
After the loggers had been operating
for about 30 years, practically all the
timber within reach of the flood waters
of the river was carried downstream,
and the industry ceased. Only occasion-
ally does a pine log come down the river
nowadays, but when it does, there is a
rush by boatmen below Ironstone Creek
to secure it. The timber is easily recog-
nised by the comparatively large area
it shows above water, the hardwoods
being almost submerged as they are
carried along by the flood waters.
The pine-getters had to suffer con-
siderable hardships at times, owing to
adverse weather holding up their food
supplies, or an occasional accident, when
one of the party would require im-
mediate medical or surgical attention.
The native game afforded some assist-
ance towards the food supplies, but a
shortage of flour, salt, or other neces-
sities at times causetj considerable
anxiety and sickness.
After a big flood in the 70’s, the mud
flats in front of Franklin were said to
resemble the vicinity of the lumber
mills in Canada, where this form of
transporting mill logs is quite general
all the year round. The Huon pine
logs were usually from 10 feet to 20
feet in length, and were easily towed
behind a rowing boat with only one
oarsman. Some of the loggers used
rafts for this purpose, but this class of
craft was slower than the rowing boat.
Among the men who made a practice
of securing the logs as they drifted past
Franklin were Henry Judd, Benjamin
and Henry Griggs, Charles Glover,
Michael and Peter Gallagher, Jabez
Norris, and many others.
EARLY TRANSPORT PROBLEMS
Difficulties by Land and Water
All new settlements are faced with the
problems of transport difficulties, but pro-
bably no part of the Commonwealth pre-
sented such a multitude of obstacles as
did the Huon when the first settlers began,
about 100 years ago, to force their way
across mountains, over deep gullies and
rushing streams of water to reach the
fertile valley of the Huon, only to find
when they got to the end of their journey
that the land was densely covered with
giant trees and thick scrub. It was im-
possible in the beginning to ride a horse
from Hobart to the Huon, those settlers
who defied the difficulties in the '3o’s of the
previous century having to walk the whole
distance, and carry what provisions they
urgently needed on their backs. Later,
small ketches and barges were employed,
making the much longer journey by water
via the D’Entrecasteaux Channel, but
these vessels were often held up by calms
cr unfavourable winds after entering the
river, or would get stranded on one or
other of the numerous sand bars and mud
flats which prevailed between Ship-
wrights’ Point and Huonville.
These early settlers engaged first in
supplying split palings, shingles, and
staves to merchants in Hobart, and as the
trees were removed the land was culti-
vated for potatoes, wheat, grey peas,
oats, and fruit. This produce had all to
be conveyed by river craft, which in-
creased with the ever-growing volume of
farm produce and timber. At one time.
it is said, there were between 20 and 30
ketches and barges, from 20 to 80 tons
register, doing the 60 miles run from Ho-
bart to Ironstone Creek. Most of these
vessels had a crew of only three or four
men. the skipper doing his share of the
loading and other work, as well as attend-
i„ B t. .h. navigation of the vessel
In the early ’6o’s a Hobart steamship
Co. decided to put two steamers in the
Hobart—Huon transport trade, and they
secured the paddle steamers Culloden and
Cobra for the purpose. These vessels
could only get up the river as far as Shin-
wrights’ Point, as the numerous shal-
lows prevented them from going any fur-
ther. The venture was under the personal
direction of Capt. Gourlay, but it did not
meet with the success it deserved, and
after a very brief period the service was
discontinued.
The sailing boats remained in the
trade uninterruptedly for some years
after this, but even they had their diffi-
culties. Loading and unloading opera-
tions had to be conducted without jetties
cr wharves for about 50 years, and at only
a few places was it possible for the river
craft to get close to the bank of the river
owing to the extent of the mud flats, es-
pecially along the western shore, where
most of the settlers lived. The system
adopted was to anchor out in the stream
and load or unload with the aid of flat-
bottomed punts. Produce was brought
to such places as Cradoc, Woodstock, Cali-
fornia Bay, Glazier’s Bay, Jackson’s
Point, Braeside Road, Watson’s Road,
New Road, and Castle Forbes Bay. At
several of these points canals had to be
cut through the mud flats to deep water,
and it was along these canals that the
punts were propelled, carrying the pro-
duce to or from the barges. Loading was
facilitated by block and tackle on the ves-
sel. The punts were, of course, only em-
ployed in the Huon, and were moored at
the last loading place to be picked up
again on return from Hobart.
These Huon punts were a feature of the
early trading days. They were practi-
cally all (built to the one design by a
Scotchman named James Littlejohn, who
resided at Franklin. He was one of the
best known identities of the district. In
addition to building the punts he also con-
structed most of the small rowing boats
that were used on the river at this time,
and almost every settler possessed a boat
of this kind, as it was a very popular
method of neighbours calling on one
another. Nurse Austin, of Beach Road,
Dover, is a daughter of the late Mr.
Littlejohn.
Some of the canals that were cut
through the mud flats can still be traced,
though it is many years since any of them
was used, among them being those op-
posite Swamp Road, Cairnbrook Estate,
Braeside Road, and Castle Forbes Bay
Road. Until the reclamation work was
carried out at Franklin, a very well de-
fined canal was to be seen opposite the
Lady Franklin Hotel. This one was large
enough for some of the barges to ne-
gotiate, and they landed their cargo al-
most on the main road. The canals were
cut out by the settlers who owned the near-
by land. They voluntarily undertook the
work to save themselves the expense and
difficulty of carting produce along the
track, which followed the river as closely
as possible, but which, for many months
in the year, was little more than a
partially cleared strip of land with bogs
at every few yards.
Continued further on.
THE TITAN NAIL AND WIRE PTY. LTD.
Pioneers of Barbed Wire and Nail Manufacture
Since 1888, when the original found-
ers of the Company commenced the
manufacture of barbed wire, the Titan
Nail and Wire Pty. Ltd. has held a lead-
ing place in Victorian industry.
The passing years, with their chang-
ing trends and widely differing demands,
have brought some adversity and pro-
blems which the Company has ably over-
come. To meet the ever increasing de-
mand for the Company’s wide range of
products a modern factory was erected
in January of this year, at South Mel-
bourne, Victoria.
The site, which is over an acre in
area, is bounded on three sides by Lori-
mer and Ferrars streets and by Nor-
manby Road.
The plant was specially designed for
the manufacture of barbed wire, wire
nails, and kindred products, and is pro-
bably the most modern plant of its kind
in the Commonwealth. It has a pro-
ductive capacity of over 250 tons per
month.
Employees’ working conditions are as
comfortable as modern efficient factory
planning can make possible. Conscious
of the important part cleanliness has on
safe working and its influence in the
well-being of employees, the manage-
ment has had an employees’ change
house installed, equipped with hot and
cold water, showers, and washing facili-
ties and steel clothes lockers.
Additional factors in works neatness
and efficiency are the shadow boards
erected in various departments for the
racking of tools, appliances and spare
parts. The system of shadow boarding
calls for a standardised wooden board,
painted olive green with steel brackets
affixed to hold the necessary tools, etc.
Each tool or spare part is outlined on
the board in orange paint so that there
is a proper place for every tool used.
NAIL SHOP.
The Company’s plant includes an
efficient battery of nail machines which
produce all classes of Nails, Brads,
Clouts, etc., together with the latest
polishing and cleaning equipment which
ensures the abstraction of all dirt and
nibs from the nails.
All nails are weighed before being
packed, and this ensures that every case
contains 1121 b. net. A patented device
is used to so place the nails when pack-
ing that much smaller cases than form-
erly are needed. This saves considerable
space in storing as well as making the
nails much more easy to handle.
PATENTED PROCESSED NAILS.
A few years ago a formula was pat-
ented for the “processing” of nails with
the object of giving them greater hold-
ing power and thereby enabling the
maker of packing cases to save a con-
siderable amount each year in case costs.
One dried fruit packing Company in
Victoria this year has saved over £l5O
in its nail costs in consequence of using
“Titan Processed Nails.”
In Tasmania, 1 3-8 x 14 gauge nails
are usually used in the manufacture of
cases. When 1 1-8 xl5 gauge processed
nails are used with their greater hold-
ing power a definite saving can be
gained. For instance, in one cwt. of
1 3-8 x 14 gauge the number of nails
per cwt. is approximately 55,000. Com-
pare this with 87,000, the number per
cwt. of 1 1-8 x 15 gauge, and it is seen
that 58 per cent, more cases can be
made with the same weight of nails.
This means that for every ton of 1 3-8
x 14 gauge only 13 cwt. of 1 1-8 x 15
gauge nails are required. A saving of
£5/6/ per ton is made at the outset of
purchase, and in addition by the same
ratio, there is the saving in freight,
wharfage, stacking, and cartage.
Even greater savings can be made by
using li x 15 gauge “Processed” in
comparison with 13 x 14 gauge ordin-
ary nails. For every ton of II x 14
gauge nails only 111 cwt. of li x 15
gauge “Processed” are needed. The
saving in this case is £7/8/ per ton in
the purchase price.
“Titan Processed Nails” should not be
confused with the old type of “Cement-
Coated Nail” inasmuch as the former is
not coated with any substance.
Large tonnages of these nails are used
in box-nailing machines which auto-
matically feed and drive in four or five,
or even more, nails at one operation.
To satisfactorily operate in such
machines the nails must be straight,
have heads concentric with the shank,
and of a certain minimum diameter.
The points must also be central; any
small defects in these respects result
in a jamming of the box-nailing machine
and an interruption of its output. All
these requirements are particularly in
Titan Nails.
SPECIAL POINTS AND HEADS.
Titan Nails are made with a variety
of points and heads. Many case makers
require points of nails to be of the
needle variety, while others consider the
ordinary point satisfactory.
In cases where the wood is apt to split
because the point of the nail acts as a
wedge, the difficulty can be overcome
by using Titan “Dump Point” Box and
Case Nails. The points of these nails
act as a punch and drive a hole through
the fibres instead of wedging them
apart.
Special Large Head Nails also assist
in overcoming this difficulty inasmuch
as the large head grips to a certain ex-
tent the two sides of the split.
Continued further on.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


SI!
B|§B|
I
mi
Va
m
%
/
S®|
k
M
i|||
i
£
wk
r m
IlSi
ii
' .U' C#
i
fig
11
a?
Ilf
fei
I
i
3®
m
*&
avt'^
m
n
ft
sap
m
m
m
m
%
m
I s§.
|ij
m
ill
11
Bs
mmrnm
m
%si:
m
m
'*is4
m
M
8
Si
ESS
■
ki
• -A
SI
M
m
m
m
ii
i\
l
m
m
tl
m
m
m
m
m
M
a
H
tm
s
SI
'm
iV
mi
Tm.
M
\\
w
m.
;-•
bs£:
m
r-
ffis
St
»B
£a£
rt ’ m
m
n
isi
4^3?
8S
HI
ms
> ' ,** £
And
so they come and go on
every road day and night
von r after year still more
INTERNATIONALS
The truck you
want is in the
INTERNATIONAL
line
The indomitable INTERNATIONAL line
includes the INTERNATIONAL 6-cylinder
Utility, combining INTERNATIONAL
engineering quality with modern adapt-
ability, comfort and style; the Model C-l, 6-
cylinder, half-ton van; the new Model C-15,
6-c linder, one-ton truck; the popular
INTERNATIONAL 6-cylinder, 34-cwt..
Model C-30 which handles 60 per cent, of
everyday truck work; Models C-25 and
C-40—the two and three-tonners—speed/,
adaptable, economical 6-c Under units
with plentv of power and dependable
INTERNATIONAL quality , . , great trucks
for all-round heavy haulage. The
INTERNATIONAL Models C-50, C-55. and
C-60 handle the heavier loads from four
tons upwards. There is also a full range of
INTERNATIONAL six-wheelers. Inspect
the INTERNATIONAL line. Whatever
your job, there is an INTERNATIONAL
that will make a success of it.
Models range from
2-ton to 5 tons
m
m
ss
NTERNATIONAL Trucks gain ground
all the time because they thrive on
hard work.
Every truck driver knows that INTERNATIONAL
trucks save time and money—not only because they
are speedy and easy on fuel consumption—but because
they are built to last! INTERNATIONALS have held
this reputation since truck building began. Many of
the earliest models are still in daily service. Because
they are so sound, they are given the roughest, toughest
jobs. But that makes no difference. You may batter
them, but you cannot break them! INTER-
NATIONALS have no weak points—chassis, engine,
and transmission are all of even high quality. That's
why you see INTERNATIONALS so frequently on the
roads, so rarely in the repair shops.
Write for information on any model that
interests you
ROBT. NETTLEFOLD PTY. LTD.
(MACHINERY DEPARTMENT)
113-115 MACQUARIE STREET, HOBART. Corner YORK STREET AND KINGSWAY, LAUNCESTON
A
A
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. ‘“Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


With a comparatively small band of
settlers, a Government with a chronically
depleted exchequer, and the high cost of
constructing a road between Hobart and
the Huon, it was obviously a better pro-
position to provide improved shipping
facilities; so when the Hon. B. Stafford
Bird represented the Huon in the Tasman-
ian Parliament (there was, of course, no
Federal Parliament in those days), he set
about providing each settler with a jetty.
This policy was afterwards continued by
his successor, Hon. J. W. (now Sir John)
Evans, both of whom earned the sobri-
quet of “the one-man one-jetty member.”
Nearly 80 of these jetties were erected
from Hobart along the D’Entrecasteaux
Channel and up the Huon River as far as
Mosquito Point.
In 1888 another attempt was made to
establish a steamboat service between
Hobart and the Huon. A vessel of about
80 tons was secured for the service and
named the “Huon.” Captain J. W.
Evans (above referred to) was appointed
in charge of the vessel, but before enter-
ing on the run he made a personal can-
vass of the Channel and Huon residents
and secured such promises of support that
the company had no hesitation in going
on with the venture. To the credit of all
concerned, the S.S. Huon opened up a new
era in the progress of the district it
catered for. Captain Evans and his crew
were more than carriers of cargo. They
became the medium for all kinds of deeds
of goodwill, which, while possibly not
bringing direct returns to the company’s
exchequer, established such a bond be-
tween settlers and themselves that busi-
ness automatically drifted towards the
little freighter. The hours for the
steamer people were long and arduous.
There were no guiding lights and very few
beacons, and when fogs prevailed the ut-
most difficulty was experienced in navi-
gating the river, which at the time had
many sand bars that had to be negotiated,
especially near and above Shipwrights’
Point. It is related that on occasions,
when the S.S. Huon was on the eastern
side of the river, the only guide that the
captain could get to enable him to reach
Shipwrights’ Point was the periodic firing
of a gun by the proprietor of the Alabama
Hotel (Mr. J. Dance). Many more
steamers were brought into the trade in
subsequent years, chiefly to cope with the
enormous output of timber and fruit.
THE HUON ROAD.
The need for communication with Hobart
by road became more and more urgent as
settlement progressed, especially as the
distance from Hobart to Franklin was
56 miles, compared with 28 by land.
A track had (been cut by some of the
pioneers in 1830, from Hobart to the falls
just above Huonville, and was improved
from time to time, but no attempt could be
made to form a road. It was little better
than a bridle track for many years, but
with some Government assistance, two of
the pioneers made it possible for a light
chaise cart to (be driven from the Huon to
Hobart. _ In acknowledgment of the feat,
a memorial was erected in front of the site
now occupied by the Congregational
Church, Huonville, and bears the following
inscription:—
This Stone is Erected
by a few Friends as
a Tribute to the Indomitable
Courage and Perseverance
as displayed by
Thomas Walton
and
Joseph Wilson
In pioneering this line of
Road from Hobart Town
to the Huon.
A.D. 1855.
Erected March, 1878.
Repeated appeals continued to be made
after this to induce the Government to
construct a road that would be suitable
for coach traffic. But the highway be-
tween Hobart Town and Launceston was
a big drain on the Colony’s small amount
of money available for road making. On
December 2, 1857, however, Mr.
Balfe presented a petition to Parliament
signed (by upwards of 100 residents of
Franklin and Victoria respectively, in
which it stated “That the Petitioners ob-
served with satisfaction that £5,000 were
to be placed on the Estimates for 1858 to-
wards the construction of a road from Ho-
bart Town to the Huon River.” The
various settlements on the Huon River
now contain a considerable population
and contributed a large proportion to the
colonial revenue. The exports of this
district in timber were in value second
only to that of wool in the staple exports
of the Colony, besides a large amount of
agricultural produce and fruit. It con-
tained four Road Districts, numerous
places of worship, and public schools.
Yet although the Huon River was within
22 miles of Hobart Town in a direct line,
there were no means of communication
between the two places, excepting by
steam-boat running, a distance of some
60 miles, or by a bush track which was al-
most impracticable even as a horse-road,
and to traverse which required from 6 to
7 hours of time.
TRNSPT.
The petitioners, in 1851, to fully
demonstrate practicability of a road for
vehicles between Hobart Town and the
Huon, spent £3OO to have a track cut
through the bush, which track had since
then been surveyed by Mr. Ballantyne,
and reported on by Mr. Calder, as proving
that a good road could be constructed with-
out more than ordinary difficulty. It was
claimed that the proposed road would
open up for sale some 30,000 acres of
agricultural and desirable land, and a
valuable tract of timber country, within
5 miles of Hobart Town, and this one of
the principal rivers of the Island, was
yet without a bridge.
It was claimed by the residents that
should the road be constructed together
with a bridge over the Huon River it
would form a direct key to the large and
valuable south-western district of the
island, the only extensive district then un-
located within an easy distance of Hobart
Town.
The grant of £5,000 made in 1857, was
supplemented by the succeeding Gov-
ernment with a further grant of £12,000
to complete the road; and 12 years
later Mr. Samuel Page drove the first
coach over the Huon road on March 9,
1869.
Prior to the building of the bridge at
Huonville, residents on the Franklin
side of the river desiring to go to Hobart
by road had to depend on a small ferry
that was available at Ironstone Creek,
and which was mostly rowed by Miss
Betsey Walton, who had a wonderful
reputation for the skill with which she
could handle the craft. The journey
was then continued with drays. In 1876
the bridge was completed, at a cost of
£4,016 3s. 6d. It was formally opened
on (behalf of the then Governor of Tas-
mania (F. A. Weld, Esq.), by Mr. Rus-
sell Young, M.H.A. for Franklin. Sixty
years later his son, Mr. Russell Young,
attended by special invitation the un-
veiling of the tablet placed on the pres-
ent bridge to commemorate the Diamond
Jubilee of the bridging of the Huon. This
ceremony was performed by the Lord
Mayor of Hobart, Mr. J. J. Wignall, who
is a Huon native, having been born at
Lymington.
The first bridge was erected largely as
the result of the activities of Mr. John
Davies, who became member for Frank-
lin in the House of Assembly in 1872, the
local committee comprising Messrs. Wm.
Andrewartha, E. A. Walpole, Richard
Hill, John Jolly, John Lloyd, jun., George
Innes, John W. Weavwell, T. Inches,
Osborne Geeves, Stephen Geeves, I.
Brown, John Helmer, S. Watson, Kenny
and Langford. The secretary of the
committee was Mr. W. Hawkins. The
construction was commenced in 1874, and
w r as completed on 3rd July, 1876. It was
stated that the ironwork used in the
bridge had been brought from England
for use in the bridge which was to be
constructed over the Derwent at Bridge-
water. In 1926 the old bridge was taken
down and the present one was opened on
June 29 of that year. It cost £12,000.
CONDITIONS PRIOR TO 1880.
Road transport difficulties were
enormous along the frontage of the river
at Franklin prior to the construction of
the main road. The greater portion of
the river bank was a swamp, the lower
area being subject to the rise and fall
of the tide. Mr. R. W. Leitch says that
before the erection of the jetties at close
intervals along the river, canals were cut
from deep water to the land above high
water level. Most of these canals could
only be used at high tide, as they were
so long that the persons using them could
not afford to dig them out to any great
depth. The only “roads” in existence
were those connecting the settlers’ homes
to the heads of the canals.. Some of the
canals were junctioned, so that the punts
could in this way travel from one set-
tler’s home to another. The first attempt
to make a road along the frontage at
Franklin was by placing bundles of ti-
tree cross-wise along the muddy bottom
and covering them with binding. Ti-tree
grew all over the flat in front of Frank-
lin, as it still does, near the end of Swamp
Road. It took some years to make a road
in this way from the Federal Hotel to
Wright’s Creek, the last contract being
completed by Martin Fitzpatrick. In 1883
trouble arose through the subsidence of
the ti-tree, causing the surface of the
road to crack. This was checked with
sand and further additions of metal.
Ultimately the road consolidated until
now there is a first-class bitumen sur-
face.
The lowest canal above referred to was
at the end of Chitty’s Road, South Frank-
lin; the next opposite the Catholic
Church; then one nearly opposite Mr.
Yeates’ residence, alongside which was
a brewery for a number of years. Higher
up there was a log jetty opposite the
Kent Hotel. This building was demolish-
ed about 18 years ago. It was alongside
the residence of Mr. J. E. Mitty. The
next canal was opposite Swamp Road.
This one is still clearly defined, and the
last one was in front of Arnold’s Estate.
The barges waited out in the river while
punts conveyed freight to and fro along
the canals. The produce at this time
comprised potatoes, palings, shingles,
staves, laths, etc. Very small quantities
of fruit were grown then. Long planks
were laid from the bank of the river to
the punts, and those who loaded the punts
had to walk these planks carrying the
freight. It was claimed that there was
one man who carried a sack of potatoes
under each arm and walked the plank.
It was no mean feat, but men in those
days were accustomed to such work.
There were several of them who could
carry a 2001 b. bag of flour on their backs
from the river to the top of the hill
THE SECOND HUONVILLE BRIDGE, OPENED IN 1926.
at Franklin. The timber splitters, too,
gave remarkable exhibitions of strength
and endurance in carrying heavy loads
of paling and other split timber from the
bush to the river side.
STONE BUILDINGS IN THE HUON
Surprise has sometimes been expressed
by visitors to the Huon that there
should be so many stone buildings in
the district when there was such an
abundance of beautiful timber when
these places were erected. The explan-
ation is that when the first settlers ar-
rived they had no means of sawing the
big timber. There is a splendid freestone
deposit along the banks of the river
above the Huonville bridge. Quarries
were opened up here, and the stone
conveyed by big flat-bottomed punts to
its destination. From the landing place
it. .was sledged to the site required.
Among the buildings erected in this
way were the Congregational and
Anglican churches at Franklin, Ken-
nedy’s stores, Casey’s residence, Iron-
stone Cottage, Franklin, the Congrega-
tional church at Huonville, and other
smaller places.
OLD-TIMERS' REFLECTIONS
“Any difference between the former
Huonites and the present generation?”
replied an old-timer to our representa-
tive. “Yes, I think there is. I can
well remember when there were no
mechanised aids for housekeeping, no
soap that would wash without rubbing,
and the only help was more elbow grease.
Bread delivered to the door was un-
thought of. But somehow the women got
through, and I can’t say there was any
more complaining than there is now. I
am not saying that we should go with-
out all the present advantages that
modern conditions have provided, but I
know this—there was much less sick-
ness, and men could work harder and
longer without cracking up like the
young fellows do now. Mother was the
family doctor, and usually there was
only one remedy. It was not nice to
take, but if the sickness was worse it
seemed to cure it and if the medicine
was worse there was nothing said about
feeling unwell.”
FIRST MOTOR-CAR IN THE HUON.
Dr. G. M. Anderson introduced the
first motor vehicle to the Huon in the
early part of the present century. It
was a motor buggy, with a chain drive.
Its approach could always be heard some
distance off, to the consternation of the
horses. Like other early internal com-
bustion engines, this pioneer machine
did not have too good a reputation for
reliability, and it sometimes had to be
helped home by other than its own
power. Subsequently the doctor pro-
cured better models of cars, and main-
tained his reputation as the pioneer of
mechanised transport in the Huon.
“BETSY THE FERRY GIRL.”
Old Huonites delight to relate in-
stances of endurance that some of the
early settlers exhibited in the ordinary
course of everyday life. Among them
are the feats of Betsy Walton, the ferry
girl, whose father for many years prior
to the erection of the first bridge across
the Huon River in 1876, conducted a
ferry service at Ironstone Creek, where
travellers desiring to reach Franklin or
further south were conveyed across the
river and sometimes right down to
Franklin. It is said that at the age of
eight, Betsy walked the rough bush
track from Huonville to Hobart with a
party of adults, and completed the
journey in a day. At the age of 14
years she frequently rowed a ferry boat
from Ironstone Creek to Franklin con-
veying a load of passengers, the return
trip being accomplished after sunset.
METRO MOTORS
PTY. LTD
TASMANIAN DISTRIBUTORS OF THE
FAMOUS CHRYSLER AND CHRYS-
LER-PLYMOUTH CARS AND MORRIS
TRUCKS.
The subsidiary Company of H. C.
Heathorn & Co. Ltd. was registered un-
der the name of Metro Motors Pty. Ltd. on.
October 1, 1928. The, first Directors and
executive . officers were:—Managing Di-
rector, Mr. H. C. Heathorn; Directors,
Messrs. C. W. Grant (Chairman), C. B.
Davies, J. P. Smale, and A. M. Boyes;
Manager, Mr. C. S. Neil; Secretary, Mr.
L. M. Newton. The Company did not
enter into the general garage business,
but it held the representation, at that
time, for the Hupmobile Motor Company,
Detroit, Michigan, U.S.A., The show
rooms and registered office were at 101
Macquarie Street, Hobart. In March,
1929, the Chrysler Corporation launched
its new product on the world market, and
Metro Motors Pty. Ltd. was appointed
Tasmanian distributor for Chrysler, De
Soto, and Plymouth cars and Fargo
trucks. This representation has con-
tinued, except that the Fargo and De Soto
franchise has been transferred to the
parent Company. Upon the resignation
of Mr. Neil as Manager, Mr. T. Brendan
Clarke was appointed. He held the
position until 1934, when his resignation
was accepted, and he was succeeded by Mr.
L. M. Newton, with Mr. G. Brown as Sales
Manager. The introduction of the
Chrysler product demanded increased ac-
commodation, and in 1933 new premises
were secured in Argyle Street. In 1932
Metro Motors Pty. Ltd. secured the fran-
chise for Morris Cars and Trucks. The
truck franchise has been retained, but the
car franchise has been transferred to H.
C. Heathorn & Co. Ltd. Following the
reorganisation, consequent upon the death
of Mr. Heathorn, the Board of Directors
was reconstituted as follows Messrs. C.
B. Davies (Chairman). C. W. Grant, F.
W. Smale, A. M. Boyes, and J. H. Gould.
Mr. Newton carries out the Secretarial
duties in conjunction with those of
Manager, and Mr. Brown continues as
Sales Manager.
At the present time new premises with
frontages on Argyle and Kemp Streets
are in course of construction, which,
when completed, will be the largest and
most completely equipped Show Rooms
and service station in this State.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.
EARLY TRANSPORT PROBLEMS
(Continued).


TWENTY-FIVE YEARS OF PROGRESS
H. C. HEATHORN & CO.'S RECORD, 1910 - 35 A Tasmanian Motoring Jubilee
THE story of the development of the firm of H. C. Heathorn & Co. Ltd., from its modest beginnings twenty-five years ago, is a record of
service to the Tasmanian motorist which parallels the progress of motoring in this State, from the days of its early uncertainty to the
consummation of the ideal of a universal form of efficient modern transport. The distinguished position of the Company in the business
community to-day is the proud achievement of a company born of the foresight of the three original partners, Mr. H. C. Heathorn, Mr. C. B.
Davies, and Captain J. D. Foster. Of the three, only Mr. C. B, Davies survives, but Mr. Heathorn’s name is perpetuated in the name of the
Company, and the sound business foundations laid by the three gentlemen remain as the sure basis upon which the business is conducted
to-day.
Petrol-driven vehicles were contem-
plated with a good deal of suspicion in the
year 1904, when Mr. H. C. Heathorn
established an engineering business at
39 Campbell Street, Hobart. However,
the sweep of progress was to capture the
public imagination in the years that fol-
lowed, and the Campbell Street business
was soon extended to handle repairs to
cars and trucks as the use of motor trans-
port became more popular. It was not
long before the engineering side developed
into a department of service to the motor-
ist. So rapidly did the project develop
that Mr. Heathorn, Mr. Davies, and Cap-
tain Poster, who were associated in the
partnership, decided, in 1910, that the
future possibilities of business demanded
a dissolution, and the formation of a
public company with fresh capital. The
new company was registered on December
2, 1910, with a nominal capital of £5,000,
the first Directors being Messrs. H. C.
Heathorn, C. B. Davies, E. A. Peacock,
and Captain J. D. Foster. The vision
which actuated this step was soon vindi-
cated, and increased business proved the
Campbell Street premises inadequate.
The first important extension in opera-
tions took place in 1912, when the Com-
pany acquired the premises known as
Ikin’s stables, situated off Macquarie
Street, at the rear of Hadley’s Hotel.
The new premises were used for garage
purposes and for general service, and_ the
Campbell Street property was retained
as the workshop.
NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT.
As early as 1911 the Directors broad-
ened the scope of their operations by ex-
tending the business to Launceston. They
acquired the business in Paterson Street
known as Saul’s Garage. Mr. C. G. Saul
was placed in charge, and was included in
the Directorate. After his retirement
from the Board, he was succeeded as
Northern Manager, in turn, by Messrs.
G. L. Blake, West, C. C. James, and A. T.
Hughes. In 1919, Mr. L. R. Reynolds be-
came Northern Manager. In its early
days the Company was agent for the sale
of the well-known B.S.A. cars, and at the
end of 1911 was appointed Tasmanian
Agent for the Studebaker products, which,
at the time, were known as the Flanders
and E.M.F. cars. Direct appointment as
Tasmanian representative of the Willys-
Overland Company of Toledo, Ohio,
U.S.A., was received in 1913, and is still
held, after 22 years of happy and mutually
advantageous relationship. The blow
which the infant motor industry received
as a result of the Great War had its in-
evitable reaction on the operations of the
Company, and the personnel of the organi-
sation was thinned by those who volun-
teered for active service. Changes oc-
curred, too, on the Board of Directors,
and Messrs. A. M. Boyes and C. W. Grant
were appointed to positions they have held
ever since.
FURTHER PROGRESS.
During the period from 1913 to 1917 the
Company imported and sold a number of
cars and trucks, the names of which are
household words in the motor industry.
They included Sunbeam, Humber,
Minerva, M.A.8., Arrol-Johnson. Argyle,
and Talbot cars, and Commer lorries. By
1917 the premises occupied by the Com-
pany proved totally inadequate, and a
move was made to premises in Murray
Street, at the rear of the Arcadia Hotel.
Both sections —the garage and workshop
—were brought under one roof for the
first time. An important development
took place in the following year, by which
the Company was brought into closer
touch with the f armer and agriculturalist,
with the result that additional avenues of
trading were opened up. The far-reach-
ing move was made possible by the Com-
pany’s appointment as the Tasmanian dis-
tributor of the Cletrac Crawler Type
Tractor, an agency which is still retained.
Concurrent with the increase in business
in Southern Tasmania, there had been a
steady growth of the Company’s Northern
activities, and, in 1919, the Directors were
obliged to lease new premises in Brisbane
Street. Launceston—the present Laun-
ceston home of the Company—to provide
additional accommodation.
PROSPEROUS YEARS.
Two important appointments were re-
ceived by the Company in 1922. The
Hudson Motor Company, of Detroit,
Michigan, U.S.A., and Messrs. Leyland
Motors Ltd., of Leyland, Lancashire, Eng-
land, placed the Tasmanian distribution
of their products in the Company’s hands,
and both agencies are still effective. The
establishment of a branch at Devonport
in 1923 was the natural corollary of the
fostering of the motor trade on the North-
West Coast. Mr. W. A. Dawson was ap-
pointed Manager. Such progress was in-
dicative of the prosperous period through
which the Company was passing, and it
was not surprising that by 1923 the de-
mand for more floor space at the Hobart
headquarters became so insistent that the
Company was obliged to plan substantial
extensions of its premises. It was de-
cided to secure a block of land at 53-63
Bathurst Street, Hobart, where, after ex-
tensive excavations, a modern garage was
erected. These premises are now the
headquarters of the Company in Southern
Tasmania.
ASSEMBLY WORKS.
By importing car and truck chassis un-
assembled, and building the complete car
unit in Tasmania, the Company was able
to offer employment to many Tasmanians
who otherwise would have been forced to
seek positions on the Mainland. In order
to maintain this position, the Directors de-
cided, in 1926, to acquire a block of land
in Campbell Street, Hobart, for the erec-
tion of assembly works. Special plant
was installed, and, to-day, 25 Tasmanians
are employed in this branch of the Com-
pany’s activities. The works assemble
and complete not only cars and trucks im-
ported by H. C. Heathorn & Co. Ltd., but
also those imported by its subsidiary,
Metro Motors Pty. Ltd. The bodies,
springs, bumpers, batteries, and tyres are
made in Australia, and are fitted in this
department. From the time the im-
ported chassis is received at the assembly
works, until the finished product is de-
livered to the Sales Department, every
care is taken to see that the workmanship
is of the highest standard, and that the
finished product is worthy of the manu-
facturer and the Company.
Interior of the original Garage, 39 Campbell Street, Hobart.
About 1908.
SUBSIDIARIES.
Mention of Metro Motors Pty. Ltd. re-
calls that during the year 1928 the Com-
pany received so many offers of other
valuable connections that it was con-
sidered advisable to float a subsidiary to
handle additional business as a separate
organisation. Metro Motors Pty. Ltd.
was registered in October of that year.
The year following, Mr. H. C. Heathorn
left for a business visit to the United
Kingdom and the United States of
America. He visited the factories of the
manufacturing companies in whose pro-
ducts his firm was interested, and while in
England was successful in obtaining the
franchise for Singer cars. The stocks of
second-hand cars began to cause con-
cern in 1930, and the Directors decided to
form a separate company to handle this
business. Guaranteed Used Cars Pty.
Ltd. was registered and was entrusted
with the re-sale of all second-hand units
on behalf of H. C. Heathorn & Co. Ltd. and
Metro Motors Pty. Ltd. Owing to
general business conditions, however, the
project proved impracticable, and before
the end of the year operations ceased. In
Launceston, however, the public’s appre-
ciation of the Company’s service increased,
and a gradual extension of the floor space
for storage, repair work, and show rooms
was necessary. From 12,000 square feet,
when the Brisbane Street premises were
taken over, the floor space has been ex-
tended to 32,000 square feet to-day.
THE TESTING TIME.
The depressed economic conditions with
which the world was assailed from the
middle of 1930 to the end of 1933 were re-
sponsible for a severe testing time for the
Company. The market for motor vehicles
was stagnant, but the Directors met the
situation resolutely until 1934, when the
upward sweep began again, and it was
found that the premises in Hobart were
insufficient to meet the steady growth of
trade. Additions and alterations were
immediately put in hand. In the
meantime, the Company suffered the loss
of Mr. J. P. Smale, who had been a
Director since 1920. On his death, his
seat was filled by his brother, Mr. F. W.
Smale. The Directors met the expansion
of the tourist traffic by an extension of the
Company’s service to provide complete
attention to visitors to Tasmania who
bring their own cars. The stocking of
spare parts came in for special atten-
tion, and a new store was included in the
scheme of alterations An additional
storey on the Hobart premises enabled
the Company to provide greater facili-
ties for repair work to cars and trucks,
and also to improve the working con-
ditions of the mechanics. The removal
of the repair shop to the first floor in-
creased the available garage space for
the service and storage of cars.
AFTER TWENTY-FIVE YEARS.
The Company has been entrusted also
with the distribution of the Morris, the
popular English car, and the Chrysler
Corporation, Detroit, Michigan, U.S.A.,
has granted it the franchise for the De
Soto car and the Fargo truck. The Com-
pany still holds the agency for the Federal
truck, in which it has been interested for
eleven years. This year the Company
was appointed Tasmanian distributor for
Messrs. C. I. Case Company, of Racine,
Wisconsin, U.S.A., manufacturers of the
Case Wheel Type Tractor, which is par-
ticularly adaptable for orchard work, and
maintaining the Company’s policy of pro-
gress with transport developments the
Leyland Trolley Bus, the first vehicle of
its kind in the State, was imported and
supplied to the Hobart City Council. In
order to show to the best advantage the
wide range of cars handled by the Com-
pany, it was found necessary to extend the
floor space available for show purposes at
Hobart. The show rooms were complete-
ly rebuilt, and are now the most up-to-date
in Tasmania. An important part of the
Company's selling organisation is the
network of country dealers and agents.
In North-Western Tasmania, agents are
located at Smithton, Burnie, Devonport,
and Ulverstone; in the Huon and Channel
districts, at Cygnet, Huonville, and
Geeveston; in the South-East, at Belle-
rive; and on the West Coast, at Queens-
town.
The Present Garage.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


THE COACHING DAYS
Old Huonites’ Remembrances
There are among the older generation
of Huonites many who delight in recalling
the days when the only means of com-
munication between Hobart and the Huon
was the four-horse coach. Among these
is Mr. J. Upchurch, of Ranelagh, who, in
spite of the fact that he has passed the
86th milestone, retains his faculties to a
remarkable extent, his only complaint
being that his legs are sometimes a
bit slow in responding to his desire
to get about. He has retained since the
inception of Local Government the repre-
sentation of the Victoria Ward in the
Huon Council, and for a considerable por-
tion of that period has been treasurer of
the municipality, besides having filled the
office of Warden on three occasions.
“I came from England with my
parents,” Mr. Upchurch said to our repre-
sentative, “when only four years of age,
and we settled in the Huon. My earliest
recollections of the district go back to
the time when there were no roads —just
tracks, and not too well defined at that.
‘Jimmy the Postman’ carried the mails
on foot, and used to announce his arrival
by blowing a horn. The first track trav-
ersed by vehicles went along the foot of
the hill to the east of Huonville, and the
ferry boat at Ironstone Creek took pedes-
trians and luggage across to what is now
Mr. Heron’s property. A track went
from there to the hill near Mr. Shield’s
orchard, and from there the river was
.followed to Franklin. The first hotel in
the district was the Ironstone Creek
Hotel. Portion of the building is still
in existence. Shortly before the bridge
was erected at Huonville in 1876, the Pic-
nic Hotel was built, and the licence trans-
ferred to it.
“Andrew Crawford carried the mails
after Jimmy the Postman discontinued.
He took them as far as the ferry at Huon-
ville, where they were picked up by Elijah
Brown, who had the Franklin Hotel (now
the Federal Hotel). The land on which
the Picnic Hotel was built was bought
from Thos. Walton. There were three
acres in the block and the price paid was
£lOO per acre. The hotel was built by
J. Helmer.
“About the year 1870 Sam Page, of
‘The Glen,’ put the first coach on the run
from Hobart to Huonville. The bullock
dray track was followed, the terminus
being near Walton’s property, ‘The In-
let.’ The coach was of the Yankee wag-
gon type, and accommodated from 15 to
20 passengers. The late Wm. Page was
one of the first drivers, and he took up
the work without any previous experience.
He soon became proficient, as there was
ample opportunity for drivers to learn
something fresh about the job every day.
It was only one-way traffic each day, so
that only three return trips were accom-
plished each week.
“The long journey was relieved of
monotony by the passengers having to
alight and walk up nearly all the hills.
It was no modest request either, but a
straight-out command to ‘get out and
walk’ that the driver issued whenever the
foot of a hill was reached.
“After Sam Page had been running the
coach for a time he sold out to a syndicate,
Ohas. Parsons, Geo. S. Parsons, and Wm.
Page. The last-named continued to act
as coachman. I was away from the Huon
between 1873 and 1877, during which time
I visited Victoria, Queensland, and New
Zealand. On my return Harry Hean
was in possession of the coach, but did not
stay long in the business. He sold out
to Frank and Walter Webster in 1878,
and this name has been associated with
the Hobart-Huon road trade ever
since.
“Several competitors tried to wrest the
trade from the Websters, but they were
unsuccessful. Among these were
Rometch and Duncan, but they ended up
by joining with the Websters. Finally
the firm comprised Webster and Rometch.
“The motors came on the road about
1910, and the conditions of travelling have
improved enormously since then. With
all the inconvenience and bad roads that
the old coaches had to put up with X never
remember a serious accident. This was
largely due to the skill of the drivers,
who showed remarkable judgment when
a fractious horse or broken harness
threatened to cause a capsize. The
worst happenings were when the coach
bolted going down hill. How the drivers
prevented an upset on some of these occa-
sions has been a wonder to those who ex-
perienced the thrill.
“No,” said Mr. Upchurch, in conclusion,
“I don’t want to go back to the old days;
but I can’t help thinking of the horses and
the drivers with feelings of pleasure and
admiration.”
The first motor ferry boat service be-
tween Cradoc and Franklin was run by
Geo. Innes about 1912, and for a few
years afterwards by Mr. John Carter, who
had a barber’s shop at Franklin. Sub-
sequently, the service was discontinued,
and the rowing boats reverted to, which
are still in use.
Early settlement along the banks of the
Huon River was, no doubt, inspired by the
facilities given for transport by the ex-
cellent marine highway that links it to
the capital. And what a wonderful
waterway it is! The two rivers, Huon
and Derwent, are connected by a deep,
enclosed, and sheltered channel formed by
Bruny Island— a3O mile length of nat-
ural breakwater, stretching from thr
south across the outlet of the Huon ro
opposite the estuary of the DerwenL
Through this passage vessels may pass
out of one river to the other amply pro-
tected from the full force of the storm-
driven surge of the Southern Seas. To
pleasure-seekers afloat it offers a vista
of superb scenic charm unsurpassed by
any other stretch of inland waters in the
sister States. Whilst from the more
practical aspect of utility, it was a gener-
ous gift of Nature to serve men’s needs.
BARGES AND KETCHES
This channel of communication was of
considerable importance to the Huon
pioneer producers. All traffic had, per-
force, to be water-borne. There was no
other outlet, and ships were a necessity
to progress. To suit the requirements of
this trade a type of vessel was evolved by
Tasmanian shipbuilders. Many of the
older vessels were more serviceable than
handsome. They were of the bluff-
bowed, box-shaped order—“built by the
mile-” They were then always termed
“barges.” The more shapely hulls that
followed had the exalted title of “ketches.”
It was a matter of artisan evolution. The
type once established, improvements, were
suggested by experience, and so we came
to the Tasmanian ketches of today —a
finished product of the circumstances that
first called for their employment. Of
trim design, shallow draught, easy to
handle, with a fine turn of speed, these
little blue-gum clippers are favourably
known in all nautical circles throughout
Australia, and their fame has gone even
further abroad. These useful ships were
necessary adjuncts to the pioneering of
Southern Tasmania.
THE FIRST TRADING VESSELS.
The names of the first trading vessels
that served the Huon have well-nigh
dropped into the limbo of forgotten days,
but fortunately, one is able to gather from
old files some few records of the sturdy
old craft that took part in its develop-
ment. These vessels were, in the earlier
days of settlement, mostly concerned in
the carrying of timber products—palings,
shingles, and split posts and rails culled
from the grand forest growth which lined
the shores of this virgin country. The
traders freighted on return the require-
ments of the residents, to whom timber
cutting provided a means of sustenance
whilst the ground was being cleared for
more ambitious production. They also
carried passengers. The accommodation
was restricted and primitive. When, as
frequently happened, through adverse or
RIVER DAYS IN RETROSPECT
The Blue-Gum Barges
By J. E. PHILP.
fickle winds, the trip took two to three
days to accomplish, it was a comfortless
undertaking for women and children. A
rough and ready part of pioneering condi-
tions, it was accepted as such. The
ketches were not governed by Marine
Board regulations to ensure the comfort
and safety of travellers.
TRADE IN POTATOES.
In course of time potatoes provided
many cargoes. Huon potatoes were in
demand, and deservedly so, though
strangely enough they were generally
marketed on the Mainland, and in New
Zealand, as Brown’s River potatoes—pos-
sibly from the fact that the excellence of
the Tasmanian product was first evi-
denced by tubers grown in that district.
One of the original traders, if not the
first, was the ketch, or barge, Huon Pine,
of 22 tons register. The date and place
of the building of this vessel are obscure,
and the writer has not been able to trace
her genesis. It is generally conceded
that Lady Franklin had Huon Pine con-
structed to her order as a pleasure vessel.
Built wholly of Huon pine, so the craft
was named. The ketch was altered in
later years, her high bow and cocked-up
THE HUON-HOBART TOWN ROYAL MAIL COACH OF 50 YEARS AGO.
stern being made to conform to a more
modern conception of a ship’s hull. She
had a long term of useful trading, and
was finally wrecked at Hope Beach, Storm
Bay, on April 21, 1925. Mr. Osborne
Geeves in his memoirs states that when
he first came to the Huon she was the only
trader. This will show that the old-timer
completed over 80 years of service, though
only the earlier part was in the Huon
River.
The next vessel to be given prominence
was the Caledonia, 27 tons, built by
Messrs. Inches and McLaren, at Hospital
Bay in 1844. This ship, if I remember
rightly, was fitted with lee-boards instead
of the centre-board of universal adoption
later. Lee-boards were an old-fashioned
contrivance to check lee-way when the
vessel was under-weigh. They were of
trapeziform shape and hung from the
gunwale, or rail, on either side and could
be easily raised on their pivots to lay
alongside the hull when not in use. The
Caledonia was, for many years, a house-
hold word in Huon trading-more parti-
cularly at Cygnet.
Another “first fleeter” was Huon Chief,
32 tons, then rigged as a schooner. Built
in 1849, a remarkable vessel, she is still
afloat, and a year or two ago could be seen
taking part in regatta races. Indeed, in
1896, 47 years after her launching, Huon
Chief won the second-class ketch event at
Hobart Regatta, and in 1929 was second in
the trading vessels’ race. She has been
a frequent and successful competitor at
the Huon regattas. The old veterans die
hard.
The May Queen, 36 tons, is also a time-
honoured hull. Built in 1867, she is still
in active employment carrying timber
cargoes. In 1882, and for the three fol-
lowing years, May Queen took first hon-
ours at Hobart Regatta, and followed this
record by finishing second in the four suc-
ceeding years. Again in 1927, 60 years
after she first took the water, the notable
old vessel renewed her triumphs by win-
ning her race over the same course. May
Queen was equally successful at other re-
gattas, and the total number of her wins
must be considerable.
Skipjack, 41 tons, built in 1861, was
one of the regular traders for a decade
or two. She was owned and sailed by
Mr. James Rowe. Skipjack was con-
verted into a steam ketch in February,
1888, the forerunner of the line of steam-
ers later operated by James Rowe and
Sons.
The following list gives the names of
some of the fleet that catered for the trade
for a number of years. It is by no means
complete: Janet, Caroline, Harriet, Pride
of Tasmania, Thistle, Mayflower, Esper-
anza Packet, Meteor, Jessie, Elizabeth,
William and Martha, William and Henry,
Lucks All, Sisters, George and Thomas,
Friendship, Franklin Belle, Sarah Ann,
Sailor Prince, Alabama, Governor Weld,
Uncle Tom, Trucaninni, Rebecca, Mary,
River Chief, Evening Star, Priscilla, Gert-
rude, Victory, Amy Louise, Good Intent,
Speedwell.
Some of these vessels were run by their
owner-masters in conjunction with land-
owning and cultivation. Amongst these
were Messrs. Ballantyne, Cuthbert,
Cairns, Fitzpatrick, W- Thorpe, Thiessen,
and Rowe.
The arrivals of the “mosquito fleet” at
Hobart, with their lading, were duly re-
corded in the press, under the heading
“Coasters Inward.” The most frequent
entry of cargoes from the Huon is: Tim-
ber, shingles, or potatoes. Fruit was not
yet an item to supplant these products.
The men in command were pastmasters
in handling their charges in all conditions
of weather—loaded or in light trim, and
the roll of accidents is surprisingly low.
A few capsized, but, covering a long
period, fatalities were comparatively few.
PRISCILLA CAPSIZES.
There was a lamentable disaster on
June 12, 1876, when Priscilla, owned by
Mr. A. H. Kennedy, the leading store-
keeper at Franklin, was capsized, and
quickly sank off Huon Island. The mas-
ter and one of the crew were drowned.
The sole survivor, George Madden, was
in the 90’s well known in the West Coast
trade as master of s.s. Yolla. Madden,
when Priscilla heeled over beyond recov-
ery, managed to get into the boat towing
astern, cast off the painter, and then
found there were no oars in the boat.
Using a piece of lining-board as a paddle.
Madden made a spirited effort to reach
his shipmates, one of whom was clinging
to the side of the sinking ketch. His
efforts were futile. Blown away by the
wind he eventually made a landing on
Woody Island. Eleven months later the
Priscilla was located by a fisherman, in
19 fathoms of water. Mr. Peter Old-
ham bought the wreck and, after over-
coming many difficulties, managed to
bring the derelict to the surface. There
was another fatality during the raising
operations—one of the divers losing his
life. Mr. Oldham also sacrificed two of
his fingers on the difficult job, which must
have been a strenuous and trying task.
Priscilla was in a bad way after her long
submergence, though comparatively a
new ship. Repaired and recommissioned
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


THE HUON HOME FOR
GENERAL MOTORS-HOLDENS CARS & TRUCKS
A, i
*2 F ** .fcJFST
Pi
MR
vacuum m
Timm
SHBi
SWI
f
<p»
»***
1
£
1%
■I
mm
WMfm.
m
SERVICE IN YOUR OWN DISTRICT
.. tf JT'
S V / > - : -*
-3
<. yv'M-w-AV' ''
%#■
S'*
OLDSMOBILE
The car that has everything.
PONTIAC
More beautiful than ever.
B U I C K
When a better car is built —
Buick will build it.
CHEVROLET
Lowest price full sized six.
BEDFORD TRUCKS
Of the new design.
They’re British, too!
LA SALLE
“Pace setter for style and
beauty.”
J\s
J\a
The Vauxhall Big Six
outside the oldest Inn
in England ... u Ye
Old Fighting Cocks,”
at Si. Albans (County
of Hertfordshire).
CHEVROLET TRUCKS
Solid strength combined with
the comfort of a sedan car.
; ■. -W-, r .
msm
:f.s*§r V:
■. SsK -4
&
00$
ss?*?
OLDSMOBILE TRUCKS
Here’s something new in
trucks.
VAUXHALL
“More British than the British”
GENUINE SPARE PARTS, ACCESSORIES, BENZINE OILS, AND UP-TO-DATE REPAIRS AND
SERVICE AT
MOTORS PTY. LTD. HUONVILLE GARAGE
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “H non and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


the vessel carried on for a span of 31
years, until she was driven ashore at Ad-
venture Bay on June 25,1909, and became
a total wreck.
There was another tragic happening
on board the Victory then lying in the
river, loaded for Hobart. The master,
William Kenyon, boarded his ship in the
grey dawn to get under-weigh. His re-
peated calls to the two men who were his
crew brought no answer. Kenyon, think-
ing the men were sleeping soundly im-
patiently dropped into the fo’c’s’le to
rouse them out, and was horrified to find
two dead men. The previous night had
been cold, and the men had taken a fire-
pot below to warm their quarters. The
hatch had apparently been left partly
open, but the boot that had, evidently,
been used as a chock had slipped and let
the hatch close, and the two men, over-
come by the fumes, fell into “that deep
sleep that knows no waking.” The mas-
ter never fully recovered from the shock
of his distressing discovery.
Another little incident with a happier
ending is reported in “The Mercury,”
23/5/74: “A narrow escape from drown-
ing took place on board (sic) the barge
Alabama on her trip up this time. The
barge was running down the river when
the boom gybed, and one of the crew
named Shepherd was knocked overboard.
The man was clad in heavy clothing, with
sou’-wester and large boots. The master
of the vessel, Mr. Cuthbert, managed to
get the boat off to him, and he was rescued
out of the water, but was extremely ex-
hausted, and a few minutes more would
have settled him.” The part in this re-
port that should appeal to readers, is the
description of clothing worn, particularly
the “large boots.”
FATE OF THE VESSELS.
It is not possible within the limits of
this article'to deal individually with the
doings of many of the vessels employed,
or of their owners and masters. Some
of the craft, worn out by hard service,
simply dropped out of the pages of ship-
ping registers. A few were broken up;
others were allowed to peacefully rot
away in some sheltered cove or creek, and
their last resting places are unrecorded.
On the eastern shore of the Derwent are
the remains of William and Henry, Eliza-
beth, and William and Susan, a pathetic
reminder of the stout-hearted men who
sailed them. Victory, Hawthorn, Truca-
ninni, Gertrude, and Kermandie (ketch)
went to Mainland waters; Meteor ended
on West Australian shores; Jessie finished
in N.Z.; Good Intent was put into the
Bass Strait fishing business, and was
wrecked at King Island, May, 1928; Ala-
bama, built 1864, was sunk in a collision
with s.s. Nubeena in D’Entrecasteaux
Channel, February, 1896; Rebecca, built
in 1853, had sailed for 72 years when
wrecked at Tinderbox Bay, March, 1925;
Shannon, built at Franklin, 1858, by the
Webb brothers, was sunk by s.s. Gundiah,
in the Channel, April, 1928. She had 70
years of hard work and good service be-
hind her. Sarah Ann, built at Huon,
1874, was lost “with all hands” on East
Coast, Tasmania, some time in April,
1893, whilst on a trip from Launceston to
Hobart with a cargo of 600 bags barley—
sharing the same fate as Rocket, Cath-
erine, and Ethel Cuthbert. Sarah Ann
was owned by Mr. Charles Oates, of
Huonville. Amy Louise was scuttled in
Storm Bay. Janet was sold to New Zea-
land owners in June, 1873. Catherine
was “lost with all hands” between Cape
Pillar and Pirates’ Bay. Sisters (built,
Huon, 1852), wrecked Waterhouse Island.
Governor Weld, wrecked Flinders Island.
River Chief, wrecked Adventure Bay.
Uncle Tom, wrecked near Slopen Island.
It is interesting to note that Captain J.
R. Gourlay anticipated, over 70 years ago,
direct shipment to the Mainland. He an-
nounced in “The Mercury,” 15/1/1866:
“Crest of the Wave to trade from Huon
ports to Melbourne to avoid tranship-
ment-” The innovation failed, however,
for lack of support.
AN EARLY HUON BOAT BUILDER
Mr. R. W. Leitch, of Cradoc, states
that many years ago he know an old man
at Franklin who had had a free passage
to Van Diemen’s Land when he was a boy
of 13. The old man stated that in 1829
he built boats for John Price, the Com-
mandant at Port Arthur, and who at one
time owned nearly 1,000 acres at Frank-
lin, Price’s Creek being named after him.
As the district got opened up it became
necessary to provide means of crossing
the Huon River at Franklin. Before the
canal was cut through Egg Island, W.
Keogh, who lived at Franklin, provided a
ferry service by rowing from Franklin to
the island, and then carried his boat on his
back to the other side of the island, and
continued the row across to Cradoc. This
service was continued for some years.
Mr. R. W. Leitch, of Cradoc, provided
the first motor-boat service on the Huon.
His run was from Surges Bay to Mosquito
Point, and he freighted firewood,
potatoes, and bag apples. It was a flat-
bottomed vessel, and provided with a 5
h.p. engine, and did a useful service for
many years.
There is another vigorous chapter
in Huon annals—its wonderful partici-
pation in the shipbuilding boom days. It
has already been noted that construc-
tion was undertaken in the ’4o’s. The
output was definitely increased in later
decades. From various yards on the
banks of the river, some scores of craft
of varying dimensions and tonnage
were, from time to time, set afloat, many
to find Mainland owners, and units were
to be seen in almost every Australian
port.
In the early ’7o’s there was a keen
demand for small ketches and schoon-
ers from outride sources. The ex-
pansion of the Gulf trade in South Aus-
tralia, Coincident with the extension of
the wheat-growing industry there, called
for more handy freighters of shallow
draught, and brought many buyers to
Tasmania, and so to Huon builders, for
this class of vessel. New Zealand was
also in the field for hulls for her coastal
trade.
These ship seekers knew where they
could be suited. Tasmanian artisans
had made an art of their own in the de-
signing and building of these little ships,
and their workmanship was beyond
criticism.
The following taken from South Aus-
tralian “Register,” Adelaide, 1876, con-
firms this pronouncement of praise:—
“The Hawthorn which arrived on the-
15th inst. is another addition to the al-
ready numerous fleet of ketches which
our grain trade Has called into service.
That they are handy vessels is certain,
and no better have ever been devised
to perform the work. A singular fact
is that, although many have attempted
to surpass the Tasmanian product,
people seem tacitly to agree that Hobart
Town produces the superior vessel by
going there to purchase instead of build-
ing here. In the present instance
Messrs. Debney and Foulis started a few
weeks back to select a ketch, and re-
turned with one ready built for the
trade, and quite as smart looking as
most of the others.” Hawthorn was
built at Franklin.
FIRST-CLASS TIMBER AVAILABLE.
The wonderful supplies of timber
close to hand was another incentive to
local building. Most of this was, at the
beginning, turned out by pit-sawyers,
who, though the work was exacting,
were proficient in meeting all demands
for long planking, beams, and frame
timbers.
It may prove of interest to note that
the first sawmill in Tasmania was
erected in the ’3o’s, by Mr. Peter De-
graves, at the Cascades, near Hobart,
now more familiarly known for its
brewery. This was worked by water
power. The Huon was not far behind,
for a little later, Mr. Richard Hill es-
tablished the first in that area. Others
followed and shipwrights no doubt
found all their wants easily supplied.
In giving the following particulars of
some shipbuilding, let it be understood
that this is by no means a setting down
of a total achievement. It briefly cov-
ers some results and should not be taken
as a comprehensive accounting.
Mr. Thomas Inches was a prominent
builder. He was trained as a ship-
wright at Aberdeen—the launching
place of many renowned passage-making
clippers, and where good workmanship
was assured. The fruits of that school-
ing were shown in his work as a master
builder. His location of a yard was
at the aptly named Shipwright’s Point.
Here in conjunction with his sons he
turned out a number of vessels, amongst
them the following:—ln 1871, Strath-
more, 90 tons; 1872, Clematis, 67 tons;
1873, Spindrift, 71 tons; 1874, Edith
Reid, 72 tons; 1875, Venus, 76 tons;
1876, Laurel (topsail schooner).
Of these Clematis was built for a New
Zealand firm. Spindrift, built for W.
H. Bundy, Adelaide, cost £1,550. Edith
Reid was constructed to the order of
Mr. G. H. Reid, of Dunedin. The
“Otago Daily Times,” 5/12/1874, des-
cribes her as “without exception the
most sightly craft of her class ever seen
in these waters. Tasmanian blue-gum
was the material used in her construc-
tion, but to ensure lightness above water
Huon pine was selected for her topsides,
whilst her decks are of kauri and Huon
pine. Her lines are exquisite, combin-
ing the requirements of fast travelling
and a profitable capacity in the way of
cargo carrying” . . . The ending of some
of the vessels above-mentioned may be
of interest. Strathmore was wrecked
at Mussel Roe, N.E. Tasmania, on June
9, 1895. Venus was wrecked at Orford,
April 27, 1880. The remains of this
vessel can still be seen. '
Messrs. Hawkins Brothers built at
Shipwright’s, in 1872, Bronzewing, 78
tons; 1875, Lily Hawkins; 1876, Percy,
35 tons, and Priscilla, 34 tons; 1877,
Gertrude, 35 tons; 1878, Rocket, 37 tons.
Of these Bronzewing and Lily Hawkins
went to Adelaide owners. Both were
in commission a year dr so ago. Percy
was built for Mr. J. W. Styles, Port
Wakefield, S.A. Rocket was “lost with
all hands” on East Coast, Tasmania,
April, 1880, Gertrude came to grief
by stranding in Port Phillip in June,
1892. The end of Priscilla has already
been told.
Robert Cuthbert built some fine hulls
at Franklin. These included: Janet; 1873,
Capella, 72 tons; 1875, Coral, 60 tons;
1876, Victory, 38 tons; 1877, Ethel Cuth-
bert, 44 tons. Janet was sold to a New
Zealand buyer in September, 1873.
Coral was a fine, useful seagoing vessel.
Capt. Harry Lloyd employed her in
West Coast trading, and for a long
period she carried stores and passengers
to Bass Strait lighthouses. Bought by
Captain M. Driscoll, she was then en-
gaged for some years on the N.S.W.
coast, and was wrecked near Cape
Hawke in the “Maitland” gale. Victory
went to South Australia. Ethel Cuth-
bert was another shipping casualty,
and a dire one, for she went “with all
hands” near the Pieman River in Jan-
uary, 1878.
Mr. W. Thorpe set afloat, in 1871,
Pride of Tasmania; 1875, Duchess of
Kent, 60 tons; Amy Louise, 29 tons.
Pride of Tasmania went to Adelaide in
1876. Duchess of Kent passed to the
Melbourne register. Amy Louise was
kept in the Franklin trade, and in 1888
was converted into a steam auxiliary,
and in that capacity rendered good ser-
vice to shippers. Later she traded to
East Coast, and was finally scuttled.
In 1876 Mr. James McLaren built at
Hospital Bay, for Mr. It. Hill, the top-
sail schooner, Annie Hill, 121 tons. Of
this vessel it was stated in the press
that Annie Hill “is the first vessel to be
built at the Huon from a specially pre-
pared design.” The designer was Mr.
Jeffrey, a Hobart shipbuilder. She
was of blue-gum throughout. The
lower masts were of hardwood. Annie
Hill made several intercolonial trips,
and on May 13, 1878, the schooner was
, sold, to a New Zealand buyer for
I £1,820. In October, 1892, this Huon-
built packet made a record trip from
Lyttelton to Auckland in four days.
Governor Weld, 49 tons, was built for
Mr. Hill in 1877.
At Franklin, Capt. John Philp had
built by day labour under the super-
vision of Mr. Joseph Mason in 1875,
Hawthorn, 54 tons. In 1876, Truca-
ninni, 40 tons. Hawthorn was sold to
an Adelaide firm for £1,250 in 1876.
Trucaninni, after a period of East Coast
trading, went on Melbourne register in
1888.
In 1876 Messrs. Griggs built the
Swallow. A few years ago the hull of
this craft was being used as a sort of
pontoon at Hobart.
In 1883, Messrs. McLaren and Risely
built at Hospital Bay, Kermandie, 38
tons. She went on Melbourne register
in 1888. There was another Kerman-
die built at Port Huon by the Messrs.
McKay in 1920. Of 343 tons register
she is the largest hull launched into
Huon waters. Kermandie is still
afloat and maintains a regular service
between Tasmania and South Australia.
In setting down the foregoing the
writer feels that he has not given the
subject the full measure of publicity
that it warrants. There is more to be
told—much more. The difficulty that
presents itself in the relation of these
matters is there is no special file, or
cubby-hole, housing all the facts. They
can only be gleaned by research work
amongst old news sheets. The press is
the one avenue available, and to sift the
desired information from a mass of re-
corded doings is a long task.
The salient points have been covered.
Enough has been told to indicate the
fine shipbuilding effort of some Huon
builders. There are other districts
equally meritorious for similar work-
manship—Cygnet, Esperance, South-
port—but . that is another story or a
series of them.
STEAMERS ARRIVE.
For a few years Huon residents were
enabled to exchange their restricted and
comfortless journeyings in sailing
ketches for the more expeditious and
convenient passages in a steamer.
However, this desired change was not a
permanent benefit. The old form gave
way to the new—for a period, and the
old method came into its own again.
In 1853 the s.s. Firefly, of 20 tons, by no
means a palatial liner, started a service
from Hobart Town to Franklin and Cyg-
net. This was maintained for a few
months. Then towards the end of that
year, Captain J. R. Gourlay, a kinsman
of the writer of these notes, took up the
running with the paddle steamer, Cullo-
den, which arrived at Hobart Town from
England in August, 1853. The steamer
had to put into Mauritius on the out-
ward passage to have a broken rudder
repaired. Culloden made her first trip
in November, 1853. In 1854 the ser-
vice was to Huon and New Norfolk al-
ternately, but in the following year the
itinerary was for Channel and Huon
ports only.
On March 3, 1885, the p.s. Cobre, 46
tons (built at Swansea, U.K., in 1849)
arrived at Launceston and was there en-
gaged in the river trade. In 1856 Cap-
HOSPITAL BAY, WITH HARTZ MOUNTAINS IN THE DISTANCE.
tain Gourlay bought Cobre and ran her
in conjunction with Culloden to Channel
and Huon ports, as well as excursion
trips to other places. In 1864 Culloden
after being laid up for some time was
extensively overhauled and refitted at
Hobart. The vessel was then taken to
Sydney and sold. She was wrecked in
N.S.W. waters in 1872.
The service was carried on by Cobre
until 1868. She left Franklin Wharf
(Hobart) for Franklin, Huon, every
Monday and Thursday, at 8 a.m., “call-
ing at intermediate places,” leaving on
return at the same hour on each Tues-
day and Friday. Cobre was not a pay-
ing proposition. In 1868 she was
withdrawn from the trade and laid up.
Sold later to Newcastle interests the
old-timer was employed as a tugboat in
the coal port. Captain Beilby Evans
was master of Cobre in the Huon run.
On June 20, 1866, when lowering a boat
off Petchey’s Bay to pick up passengers
the mate, Mr. Davidson, was drowned in
sight of crew and passengers.
STEAM REPLACES SAILS.
For nearly 14 years Franklin had
been served by steam. Its residents
had to wait another 14 years for that
benefit to be restored. The ketch trade
was constant. Their place on the river
was again challenged in 1883, when
Messrs. Facy and Fisher came in with
the s.s. Huon, 47 tons, specially built
for the service to Hobart and vice versa.
This vessel soon became a popular
trader, first with the genial Captain
William Fisher as master, in which
capacity he was followed by Captain J.
W. (now Sir John) Evans. From this
stage the trade developed rapidly. Sail
had outlived its usefulness and steam-
propelled craft took its place—and this
time kept it. Skipjack was converted
to steam, and the firm of J. T. Rowe and
Son, starting from this nucleus, created
a fine and effective fleet. Amy Louise
was similarly adapted to the new order,
and Messrs. Thorpe and Williams
brought in the s.k. Victoria.
Mr. W. F. Casey came in for his
share with s.s. Waldemar Star, and
ketch Alcairo. Huon passed to the firm
of Fitzpatrick and Piesse—Captain
John Fitzpatrick deserting sail and mov-
ing with the times to steam. The Huon,
Continued further on.
SHIPBUILDING INDUSTRY
High Reputation of Huon Vessels
Buyers In All Australian Ports
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.
RIVER DAYS (Continued).


HYDRO
POW
A
am
aH
m
m
m
m
w
sn
IHHi■
i*
»
Mi
w**
M
n
■n
ei
i
S*
s
*
a
m
m
m
mm
m
m
a
es
m
sr
/a.
Afl the HOUSE POWER You Require
AT
THE TOUCH OF A SWITCH
■ H B B ■
B B
FOR FACTORY, FARM. AND HOME
a
TASMANIA
offers the greatest opportunities in Australia for
Industrial Enterprise, with unlimited power for all
purposes. Ideal Climate —Deep Water Ports—Cheap
Factory Sites—Abundant Fresh Water Supply.
B
Water power resources have already been harnessed
in Tasmania to the extent of 83,000 horse power.
Further works now under construction at Tarraleah
Power Development will add, when completed, another
63,000, making a total of 146,000 horse power.
B B
Address inquiries to
HYDRO-ELECTRIC COMMISSION -- - HOBART, TASMANIA
or information may be obtained from the Agent-General for Tasmania, Australia House, London.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936,


GROWTH OF ELECTRICITY SUPPLY.
Year ended
June 30.
Cygnet.
Huon.
Esperance.
Kingborough.
1921
88
No record
Not supplied
Not supplied
1930
No record
661
317
508
1931
No record
752
344
572
1932
No record
793
467
607
1933
No record
876
489
685
1934
492
921
504
720
1935
522
951
551
749
1936
544
996
579
775
ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
Aids Industrial and Civic Progress
All Southern Municipalities Supplied
With Current
THE honour of being the first of the municipalities south of Hobart
■ to arrange for a supply of electricity falls very appropriately to
the Municipality of Huon, whose Centenary is being celebrated, as the
council obtained Parliamentary authority to borrow £4,500 for the
provision of a lighting service in Franklin, under the Franklin Lighting
Act, in December, 1913, followed by the application to Parliament of
the Cygnet Council, to borrow £2,000 to make electricity available in
Port Cygnet, and which was authorised by the Lovett Lighting Act, in
September, 1914.
Much of the early history of these
schemes is forgotten except possibly by
a few of the pioneering spirits, who as-
sisted to inaugurate them, but such in-
formation as is available indicates that
many difficulties of both a technical
and financial nature were encountered.
As an illustration of the financial diffi-
culties it is recorded that in 1921 one
of the municipalities had 88 consumers
and a debit balance in its lighting ac-
count of over £1,600.
The supply in the early days was by
direct current, and at Cygnet storage
batteries were used, so that electricity
could be obtained when the generating
plant was not running. However, the
storage batteries had a very short life,
and the time soon arrived when elec-
tricity could only be made available from
about sunset to 11 p.m. each day. De-
spite the early financial and technical
difficulties, residents realised that electric
service had much to commend it, and were
determined to improve and extend the
service as much as possible. To this end
the Wardens of Huon, Cygnet, King-
borough, and Esperance interviewed the
General Manager of the Hydro-Electric
Department (now Sir John Butters) on
May 19, 1921, and indicated that about
100 horse-power was required for Huon
and 100 to 150 horse-power for Cygnet.
The Kingborough and Esperance Councils
were uncertain as to requirements, but
were keenly interested in the proposal
to make electricity available to Southern
Municipalities.
The Department found it was an ex-
tremely difficult matter to design a line
to provide for the small amount of power
required at a cost which could be justi-
fied by the comparatively small revenue
to be recovered, but eventually, after
many discussions with the Councils in-
terested, Mr. Butters recommended to
the Hon. the Minister for Lands and
Works that a transmission line be built
to supply power to the Cygent Council,
and to certain parts of the Kingborough
Municipality at standard rates with a
guaranteed minimum of £1,750 per
annum.
The agreement was signed in August,
1923, and arrangements were made to
build the transmission line 17i miles in
length from Electrona to Cygnet, from
which a temporary supply was given to
the town of Cygnet in February, 1924,
at 6,600 volts, pending delivery of the
Council’s transformers when the pres-
sure was increased to 11,000 volts.
The official switching-on ceremony in-
augurating State Hydro-Electric supply
in the Cygnet Municipality, which was
the first municipality in the Huon area
to be linked up with the State Scheme,
took place on February 12, 1924.
The success of the Cygnet scheme was
in a very large measure due to the sound
business principles and careful layout
of the scheme by the Council’s Consult-
ing Engineer, Mr. C. B. Davies, M.I.E.
Aust., who is now an Associate Commis-
sioner of the Hydro-Electric Commission,
and as an illustration of the care taken
to ensure the financial stability of the
new scheme the estimates made out by
him were subsequently found to be
substantially correct. The chief items
of charges and revenue were set out as
follows:—•
Capital Charges—Transformers and
connecting existing supply, £900; reti-
culation, £1,940; total, £2,840.
Annual Charges—Existing capital
charges, £370; interest on transformers,
reticulation, house wiring, £242/10/-;
maintenance, £lBl/10/-; consulting fee,
£5O; power charge, £1,800; annual pro-
fit, £25; total, £2,669.
Annual Revenue.—Lighting rate at 6d.
in the £, £281; lights at £1 per annum,
£1,308; power for mills, hall, cool stores,
factories, irons, etc., £900; Kingborough
Municipality, £180; total, £2,669.
It is interesting to note that the esti-
mated revenue of £2,669 per annum has
been exceeded due to the connection of
many new customers and the increasing
use of electricity for domestic and other
purposes.
THE SERVICE EXTENDED.
Supply was next made available to the
towns of Kingston, Electrona, Snug,
Oyster Cove, Kettering, and Woodbridge
in October and November, 1924, thereby
inaugurating electric service in the
Municipality of Kingborough. This was
followed by an extension to Franklin
and Huonville, where supply from the
State Scheme was inaugurated in Feb-
ruary, 1926. This extension was quickly
followed by a further extension to Castle
Forbes Bay, then to the Kermandie
Paper and Pulp Works, and in August,
1928, a power supply was made available
to the Esperance Municipality, Cradoc,
Nicholls Rivulet, Glen Huon.
In order to bring about economies in
the operation of Municipal schemes and
to ensure uniformity of technical and
administrative practice, the late Com-
missioner (Mr. H. A. Curtis) submitted
a proposal to take over the management
and operation of the Huon, Esperance,
Kingborough, .and Cygnet lighting
schemes, which was agreed to by the
Municipalities of Huon, Esperance, and
Kingborough early in 1930, and in 1935
by the Municipality of Cygnet.
The improvement of service which has
resulted from unified control is fully
appreciated by the residents of the Huon
areas, particularly during the apple-
packing season.
CHIEF USES FOR ELECTRICITY.
When electricity was first introduced
to the Huon its principal purpose was for
lighting the homes and business pre-
mises of residents. Now, such lighting,
together with street lighting, only re-
presents about 22 per cent, of the total
units used, and very clearly demon-
strates the advance which modern ap-
paratus for cooking, water heating, etc.,
in the home and motors for the factory
and orchard have brought about.
In order that consumers in the
four Municipalities referred to in
this article may be able to call electricity
to their aid as and when required by the
touch of a switch, it is necessary to keep
constant watch on the many miles of
lines and to renew about 500 poles every
year. When interruptions to service
occur, due to trees being felled across
lines, cars running into poles, bush fires,
flying debris and lightning during
storms, etc., the Commission’s staff are
quickly on the scene to effect repairs,
no matter how bad the weather is.
Possibly very few users of electricity
realise that when they switch on a light,
MAP SHOWING HIGH TENSION TRANSMISSION WIRES THROUGHOUT HUON DISTRICT.
iron, radiator, motor or other device,
their demand for electricity is im-
mediately transmitted to Waddamana
Some idea of the increase in the num-
ber of consumers in the several Muni-
cipalities is given hereunder:—
and causes the nozzles of the turbines to
be opened up a little wider, which en-
ables extra water to enter the turbines
and generate the extra power they re-
quire.
FIRST HUON LAND SALE.
One of the blocks of land purchased in
the first Crown Lands sale in the Huon
was the block of 100 acres comprising
Woodside, the residence of Mrs. Jas.
Clark, Franklin. The transfer of the
land was effected by the Supreme Court
of Van Diemen’s Land, according to the
deeds, on 1st September, 1837.
Add to Church of England Geeveston.
FIRST BICYCLE IN THE HUON
The first bicycle was brought to the
Huon by Mr. R. W. Leitch, of Cradoc,
who, in 1882, rode from Kempton to
Franklin on one of the “penny farthing”
types of bicycle. Needless to say, he had
a number of falls en route.
EXTENSIVE IMPROVEMENTS.
One of the first improvements effected
by the Commission was the provision of
an alternative line to Huon via Sandfly,
which, in addition to safeguarding sup-
ply to the Huon, Esperance, and Cygnet
municipalities, enabled residents of Sand-
fly, Allan’s Rivulet, Longley, and Lower
Longley to receive the benefits of electric
service. Another improvement was the
installation of extra transformers and a
regulator at Electrona, together with
new switchgear.
An automatic sectionalising switch was
erected near Huonville, so that not more
than half the area would be affected by
trouble arising in the other half.
The map hereunder shows the High
Voltage reticulation and position of the
transformers which make electricity
available to 2,887 consumers in the Huon
and Channel areas, and it will be noted
that for all practical purposes the area
is completely reticulated, and that Crab-
tree is the only centre of importance not
yet supplied, which can be served on an
economic basis.
In 1924 the mileage of High Tension
lines in the Huon areas was 17J miles,
as compared with 150 miles in 1936. The
horse-power of transformers was 100, as
compared with 2,492, and the miles of
low voltage reticulation about 6, as
compared with 117 miles at the present
time. For the year ended June 30, 1936,
the number of units of electricity sold
for various purposes in the four Muni-
cipalities under consideration (exclusive
of units used at the Carbide Works)
was as follows:
Lighting 261,507
Domestic Power 507,114
Water Heating 345,496
Motive Power 473,744
Miscellaneous Uses .. .. 20,960
Street Lighting 112,800
Total 1,721,621
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


BRANCHES
AT
BURNIE,
CYGNET,
DELORAINE,
GEEVESTON,
HUONVILLE,
MOONAH,
NEW NORFOLK,
NORTH HOBART,
QUEENSTOWN,
SANDY BAY,
WYNYARD.
<s>
DEPOSITS
TOTAL
£2,994,278.
YOUR MONEY
EARNS GOOD
INTEREST.
THE
HOBART SAVINGS BANK
(Established 1845.)
i
ii
Huonville Branch.
If you open an account with
Tasmania’s Own Savings Bank
for any amount from 1/- to £5OO, the following facilities are
provided:
Interest oh Deposits from £1 to £300;
Deposits Fixed for 12 months at higher rate;
Withdrawals without notice;
Free Postal Service;
Safe Custody of Treasury Bonds, etc.;
Withdrawals elsewhere in Tasmania and Australia by arrangement.
THE HOBART SAVINGS BANK
Head Office; 26 MURRAY STREET, HOBART.
AGENCIES
AT
BELLERIVE,
MOLE CREEK,
RISDON
(Zinc Works),
ROSEBERY,
WESTBURY,
LAUNCESTON
BANK FOR SAVINGS,
LAUNCESTON
AND
BRANCHES,
AND
THROUGHOUT
AUSTRALIA.
<S>
RESERVE
FUND,
£167,500.
YOUR MONEY
IS SAFE.
The Agricultural Bank of Tasmania
Loans to Primary Producers
RURAL CREDITS—OVERDRAFT ACCOUNTS:
Rural Credit advances (by overdraft) for carrying on farming
pursuits are obtainable from the Agricultural Bank of Tas-
mania. Overdraft accounts are operated upon through the
nearest branch of the Commonwealth Bank, interest being
charged on the daily balance at the rate of 4 per cent, per
annum. Acceptable forms of security are mortgages over
land, stock, machinery, assurance policies, and guarantees.
ORCHARDISTS may obtain Rural Credits advances for the
production and marketing of crops, the advances being
repayable from the proceeds.
LOANS FOR PERMANENT IMPROVEMENTS:
Limited funds are available for advances to farmers under
“The Unemployed (Assistance to Primary Producers) Relief
Act,” provided bona-fide unemployed persons are engaged in
effecting permanent improvements. Loans are free of
interest (except where required for building purposes, when
21 per cent, is charged). Repayment by instalments up to
114 years, allowing 11 years before commencement.
The reworking of fruit trees is considered a permanent
improvement.
Further particulars and application forms obtainable from
the Agricultural Bank of Tasmania, Macquarie Street (G.P.O.
Box 646 C), Hobart; the Agricultural Department, George
Street, Launceston; and from District Agricultural Officers
stationed at Devonport, Ulverstone, Burnie, Smithton,
Scottsdale, and Campbell Town.
FARMERS’ DEBT ADJUSTMENT ACT:
This legislation provides assistance to farmers in adjusting
their debts.
Information as to the operations of the Act will be supplied
on application to the Farmers’ Debt Adjustment Board, c/o
the Agricultural Bank of Tasmania, Macquarie Street (G.P.O.
Box 606 E), Hobart, or to any District Agricultural Officer.
THE
English, Scottish and Australian
Bank Ltd.
with which is incorporated
The Commercial Bank of Tasmania Ltd.
Authorised Capital £5,000,000
Subscribed Capital £5,000,000
Paid-up Capital £3,000,000
Further Liability of Proprietors £2,000,000
The Perpetual Inscribed Stock of the Bank amounts to £1,872,966.
RESERVE FUNDS and Undivided Profits, £3,549,326.
Head Office:—s Gracechurch Street, LONDON, E.C. 3.
Australian Establishment; Chief Office, MELBOURNE.
ERNEST O'SULLIVAN, JOS. EWING, Joint General Managers in
Australasia.
C. T. DOCKER, Chief Inspector in Australasia.
Manager, Head Office, Hobart: A. E. WATSON. Inspector, G. E. MALE.
Launceston Manager: E. V. CHAPMAN. Accountant; C. THOMAS.
BURNIE—A. W. Tanner, Manager.
CYGNET—R. R. A. Coupe, Manager.
CASTLE FORBES—Agency of Franklin.
CRESSY—Agency of Longford.
DELORAINE—L. L. Steer, Manager.
DEVONPORT—L. Shirley, Manager.
EXETER—Agency of Launceston.
FRANKLIN—L. F. Lovett, Manager.
GLEN HUON—Agency of Huonville.
HUONVILLE—E. L. Solomon, Manager.
LATROBE—C. A. Cox, Manager.
LEGERWOOD—Agency of Launceston.
LILYDALE—Agency of Launceston.
LONGFORD, T. Bruce, Manager.
MOLE CREEK—Agency of Deloraine.
MOONAH—Agency of Hobart.
OATLANDS—L. T. Scott, Manager.
PENGUIN—Agency of Ulverstone.
RANELAGH —Agency of Huonville.
ROSEBERY—Agency of Zeehan.
SMITHTON—R. Wilkins, Manager.
TUNNACK—Agency of Oatlands.
ULVERSTONE—J. A. Woods, Manager.
WESTBURY, N. T. Patman, Manager.
WYNYARD, C. V. Drake, Manager.
ZEEHAN—E. V. Ockerby, Manager.
Banking and Exchange business of every description transacted with Branches and
Agents in the Australian States and throughout the world
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


EARLY TRADING
METHODS
No Banks Till 1904
Produce for Merchandise
As related in another article, the early
uethods of trading were largely in the
nature of exchange of produce for other
necessities between the settlers and the
Hobart business houses. Later, how-
ever, as the population increased and the
needs of the people became greater and
more varied, it became necessary for
banking accounts to be opened. The
tradespeople were the first to open ac-
counts with banks in Hobart, and for
many years they acted as bankers for
the settlers. Paper money was the
chief medium of exchange. The settlers
paid the cheques they received for tim-
ber and produce to the tradesmen.
These the tradesmen split up into
smaller cheques to enable their cus-
tomers to pay outside accounts, and
after deducting the amount owing to
themselves paid the balance in silver.
As such a small amount of silver was re-
ceived by the storekeepers for the sale
of goods, every two or three weeks they
had to obtain further supplies from Ho-
bart to enable them to change the paper
money. As this fact was fairly gener-
ally known, surprise has been expressed
that at some time or other the coach,
which was practically the only means of
transit between the Huon and Hobart,
was not raided in the hope of securing a
good haul of cash. Under these condi-
tions the turnover of the early stores,
like Kennedy’s, at Franklin; Harvey’s,
at Cygnet; Geeves’, at Geeveston; and
Marsh’s, at Huonville; reached very high
figures. As a matter of fact, the
volume of local trade in the Huon was
greater in the latter portion of the pre-
vious century and the beginning of the
present one than it is to-day, in spite
of the fact that the population is now
almost double of what it was then. The
chief cause of the falling off of local
trading has been the fast and cheap
facilities for travelling, which have
made the Huon practically a suburb of
Hobart.
FIRST BANK AT FRANKLIN.
While travelling was still slow and
costly—the coach journey from Hobart
to Geeveston (37 miles) took 51 hours' —■
there was no incentive for anyone re-
quiring to make everyday purchases to
go past the nearest district store, and
with the rapidly expanding volume of
trade in fruit and timber the desirability
of establishing a branch bank in the
district became very apparent. In 1904,
therefore, the Commercial Bank of Tas-
mania Ltd. (absorbed by the English
Scottish and Australian Bank Ltd. in
1921) established a branch at Franklin,
under the management of Mr. A. H.
Davis. The residence now occupied by
Mr. T. Casey was used as temporary
premises, but the business grew so
rapidly the commodious tw T o-storey build-
ing at the corner of Main and New
roads was built to cope with it, and a
staff of five officers was appointed. The
Bank’s enterprise was so appreciated
that it became necessary in 1907 to es-
tablish a second branch at Cygnet, and
in 1910 an agency of the Franklin
branch was opened at Huonville and
converted to a full-time branch in 1917.
Agencies are now conducted at Castle
Forbes, Glen Huon, and Ranelagh,
to meet the needs of the people in those
centres.
On May 1, 1919, the Hobart Savings
Bank, in response to many requests
from Huon residents, opened up-to-date
and convenient bank premises at Huon-
ville, under the management of Mr. E.
R. Pretyman. So successful was the
business here that sub-branches opera-
ting on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fri-
days in Cygnet, and Tuesdays and
Thursdays at Geeveston, were opened in
1926.
This year was also notable for the in-
auguration of the School Bank move-
ment in the Huon. The idea of teachers
receiving small regular deposits from
scholars was first put into practice by
Mr. F. W. James, at the Glen Huon
School, in co-operation with the Huon-
ville branch of the Hobart Savings Bank.
In the following year the School Bank
system was established throughout the
State by this Bank, and every State
School in the Huon now has its School
Savings Bank. By this means some
hundreds of children in this district have
been taught the value of thrift in a prac-
tical way, and already have ac-
cumulated between £2,000 or £3,000.
The free postal facilities afforded by
the Hobart Savings Bank have also been
instrumental in encouraging many
residents, unable by reason of distance
to reach the Bank offices, to start along
the road to financial independence.
Another direction in which the Hobart
Savings Bank has been closely associa-
ted with the progress and development
of the Huon district is the lending of
substantial sums to the municipalities
for the provision of public utilities, such
as the supply of water and electric light
power. Thus the thrift of the indi-
vidual is made to re-act to the benefit
of the whole community.
The banking facilities throughout the
Huon thus afforded fruitgrowers and
Continued at foot of next column.
ETC.
THE WORK OF THE CHURCHES
Immense Difficulties of the Early Preachers
Examples of Courage and Faithfulness
kIOT the least creditable aspect of the early settlement of the Huon
■ ' was the manner in which representatives of the various branches
of the Christian Church carried out their duties. Many of these
faithful and unselfish men endured great hardships in making period-
ical visits to the widely scattered and sparsely populated portions of
their parishes, frequently being compelled to walk long distances in
stormy weather, and over difficult tracks, neither horse nor vehicle
being available at times to assist them on their journeys. Notwith-
standing the trials and absence of material reward, the work was
unremittently continued and expanded. Those who were chiefly
associated with the work are referred to below.
CONGREGATIONALISM.
Congregationalism owes its establish-
ment in the Huon mainly to the activi-
ties of Mr. William Geeves, the founder
of Geeveston, who conducted the first
services in 1843 in a small room in the
home of Mr. James Coleman, at Frank-
lin. A start having been made a Sunday
school was established and Mr. Osborne
Geeves, who, in after years, was promi-
nently associated with the administra-
tion of the district, was the first scholar.
With the co-operation of Mr. Henry
Hopkins, who probably did more for the
Congregational Church than any other
layman in Tasmania, Mr. Geeves was
able to build a small weatherboard
church on the site now occupied by the
school hall at Franklin. In 1844 Rev.
Moses Parker, the minister _ in charge
of the Richmond Church, paid occasional
visits to the Huon, and in the following
year Mr. William Barnett took up his
residence at Franklin as a recognised
agent of the Congregational Union.
With the arrival in the district of those
intrepid pioneers, the Judds and the
Hays, the church was further developed,
and as a result of the activities of Mr.
Thomas Walton a small chapel was
erected at Huonville, then known as
Victoria. In 1850 when the Geeves
family commenced the foundation of
the town which was named Geeveston
in. honour of its founder, a Sunday
school was formed at that place, and
regular Sunday services were conducted
by Mr. W. Geeves.
In 1852 Mr. William Geeves and Mr.
Henry Hopkins were able to persuade
the Congregational Union to appoint
a missionary for work in the Huon. This
post was taken by the Rev. S. B. Tin-
ning, who took up his residence at
Castle Forbes Bay, but subsequently
moved to Franklin. Together with Mr.
Barnett, Mr. Tinning held services at
Huonville and Franklin, and paid fort-
nightly visits to Lightwood Bottom,
which afterwards was renamed Geeves-
ton. Mr. Giles succeeded Mr. Tinning
as missionary at the Huon at the be-
ginning of the ’sixties, and though he
remained only for a short time he was
instrumental in having a stone church
erected at Franklin. With his departure
Mr. Barnett carried on the work with
the help of Mr. Osborne Geeves.
A weatherboard church was opened
at Geeveston on February 16th, 1863,
the preacher on this occasion being the
Rev. W. C. Robinson, who was assisted
in the service by the Rev. George Clarke,
of the Davey Street Church at Hobart,
and Messrs. Henry Hopkins and R. E.
Dear. With the completion of the build-
ing a church was formed at Geeveston
independent to that of Franklin. For
the next three months services were
conducted in the Huon by Mr. Kennedy,
a theological student. Mr. R. E. Dear
then took up the work and visited the
Huon once every three months, and
from the Congregational records it will
bo seen that Franklin, Huonville,
Geeveston, and Shipwright’s Point, were
visited, twice a year. By this time
chapels had been erected at Honeywood
and Shipwright’s Point, and for the next
ten or fifteen years services were held
infrequently by missionaries sent from
Hobart. Mr. William Hawkins and Mr.
Thomas Inches for many years were
largely instrumental in maintaining the
activity of the Church at Shipwright’s
Point.
In 1870 Mr. George Whiting, who had
for many months been working and
preaching in the district, took charge of
the Franklin, Geeveston, and Huonville
churches, and during his administration
residents generally in the district have
proved of considerable benefit and con-
venience in transacting their business.
They obtain the advantages of the full
service of modern banking in exactly the
same manner as is conducted in the
large city business centres.
That the people have used the
facilities provided for them to the fullest
extent is borne out by the growth of
business of the banks represented in the
district.
Mr. Osborne Geeves visited Hastings
and with the help of Mr. John Hay, a
prominent resident of that place, was
able to hold the first service there. At
first Mr. Whiting held monthly services,
but as the work developed a new church
was built and another came into exist-
ence at Port Esperance.
Mr. Whiting was succeeded in 1874
by the Rev. J. M. Bayley, ' who had
charge of the area which lay between
the Upper Huon and Recherche. In the
12 years he had charge of the district
a church was opened at Port Cygnet,
and services were begun at Garden Is-
land Creek. Mr. Thwaites was ap-
pointed Mr. Bayley’s assistant minister
at Port Esperance. The latter was after-
wards succeeded by the Rev. D. Morris,
who was instrumental in having a small
chapel built at Southport. His suc-
cessor was the Rev. A. Rivett, who had
charge of the district for a number of
years.
In 1885 Mr. Bayley decided that the
time had come for a new church to be
erected at Geeveston. Sufficient money
being available to warrant a start being
made on a new building 1 , he instructed
Mr. Henry Hunter, a Hobart architect,
to draw up the plans for a new church.
On June 28, 1885, in the presence of a
representative gathering of the princi-
pal inhabitants of Geeveston and sur-
rounding parts, Mr. B. S. Bird, M.H.A.
for Franklin, laid the foundation stone
of the building. The church was com-
pleted in March, 1886, and was opened
on the 17th of that month, having been
built at a cost of more than £l,OOO.
Following Mr. Bayley’s resignation in
1886 the work of the church was devel-
oped by the appointment of several
new ministers. Prior to 1885, the Rev.
J. M. Bayley held regular services at
Franklin, Geeveston, Port Cygnet,
Shipwright’s Point, and Victoria (now
Huonville), and the Rev. A. Rivett was
responsible for the holding of services
at Hastings, Port Esperance, Southport,
and Strathblane. In 1885, however,
Port Cygnet, Wattle Grove, Irish Town,
and Garden Island Creek were created
into a separate district under the Rev.
C. B. Fairey, and with Mr. Bayley’s re-
tirement Geeveston was made a separate
charge under the Rev. R. W. Morley.
Hastings, Port Esperance, Southport,
and Strathblane were under the charge
of: Rev. J. Ebery, 1897-1907; Mr. C.
Phillips, 1905-06; Rev. J. Casley, 1908-10;
Mr. E. Davies, Home Missionary, 1910-
12; Rev. D. McNaughton, 1913-14; Mr.
T. W. Greenwood, 1914-16; Pastor H.
Wallbank, 1918-21; Rev. R. F. D. Crock-
er, 1921-25; Pastor E. W. Smith, 1926-
27; Pastor G. A. Hughes, M.A., 1927-29;
Rev. D. Milne, 1930-32; Pastor R. A.
Pretty, 1933-34.
Geeveston and Shipwright’s Point;
Rev. F. A. Woods, 1896-1905; Rev. J.
Bongers, 1905-09; Rev. R. Felstead,
1909-14; Rev. F. Menzies, 1915-21; Pas-
tor W. Dawson, 1921-23; Rev. H. G.
Nelson, 1923-30; Rev. J. F. Dickinson,
1931-35; Rev. H. W. R. Norwood, 1935-
36.
Upper Huon, Mountain River, and
Wattle Grove: Mr. V. Hall, Home Mis-
sionary, 1911-12.
Recherche was added to the Hastings
district in 1906, and in the same year
Surges Bay began to be worked from
Geeveston. In 1930 Camden was attach-
ed to the Hastings district.
In 1886, the Rev. U. Coombs was ap-
pointed to administer the churches at
Franklin and Victoria (Huonville), and
at this period there were four ministers
at work in the district. Mr. Morley was
at Geeveston, Mr. Fairey at Port Cyg-
net, and Mr. Rivett at Port Esperance.
Mr. Morley, however, died in March,
1887, and was succeeded by the Rev. A.
A. Munns; Mr. Rivett resigned the
charge of Port Esperance about the
same time, and Mr. Fairey resigned
from Port Cygnet. In 1888, the Port
Esperance church was administered by
Mr. Richard Watkins, but Port Cygnet
was still vacant. In 1890 Mr. Munns
resigned the charge of the Geeveston
church and was succeeded by the Rev.
W. J. Webster. In the same year the
Rev. F. A. Woods was appointed to the
Port Esperance district, and with the
resignation of the Rev. U. Coombs the
Franklin church became vacant, but the
post was taken over by the Rev. J. T.
Williams. During Mr. Coombs’ adminis-
tration the church at Port Cygnet was
taken over by the Wesleyans. Further
details regarding this will be found in
the sectioin devoted to the Methodist
Church. In 1895 Mr. Williams retired,
and in 1897 the Rev. S. Bennett was ap-
pointed as his successor at Franklin.
Past Ministers.
Successive ministers of the various
districts in the Huon since 1897 have
been:—■
Franklin and Huonville: Rev. S. Ben-
nett, 1897-1910; Rev. T. S. Williams,
1910-1914.
Franklin: Rev. Geoffrey Brown, 1914-
15; Rev. D. Milne, 1916-20; Rev. F.
Menzies, 1921-24; Rev. S. Roberts, 1925-
27; Rev. G. M. Scandrett, 1928-29; Rev.
T. D. Webb, 1930; Rev. R. R. Basham,
1931-33.
Huonville: Mr. H. F. Taylor, 1914-17-
Rev. G. W. Sharp, 1917-20; Pastor w’.
E. Simmonds, 1921-24; Rev. V. Woolley,
1924-29; Rev. R. F. Woods, 1929-34;
Pastor E. W. Smith, 1934.
ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH.
Outstanding Pioneering Achievements.
The Roman Catholic Church has
played an outstanding part in the de-
velopment of the Huon. For more than
80 years it has cared for the spiritual
needs of the settlers. As far as it is
known, the first Roman Catholic priest
to be appointed to the Huon district
was the Rev. John Murphy, who com-
menced his duties in 1855, administering
to a scattered congregation with
Franklin and Port Cygnet as the main
centres. Not only was the Rev. Murphy
responsible for the erection of a church
at Franklin during the ’fifties, but he
also brought about the creation of the
Parish of Cygnet in 1863, to which
charge the Rev. James Holehan was
appointed. The Church of St. James
was erected at Port Cygnet in 1867, and
a convent was subsequently established
in connection with the parish. From
1855 until his death on August 27,
1898, the Rev. John Murphy administer-
ed the Franklin district. He served the
Huon for more than 43 years, and of
him, it may be said, he was indeed a
pioneer. He was succeeded at Franklin
by the Rev. (later Dean) Hennesey.
Dean Hennesey, as he is perhaps better
known, rendered faithful service, and
did much towards the development and
extension of the church at Geeveston,
Port Esperance and Southport. His
successor was the Rev. J. Ryan, who
gave place in 1928 to the Rev. P. Adlum.
In 1930, however, the Rev. J. Ryan again
took charge of Franklin and remained
until 1932, when the Rev. W. A. Fitz-
patrick succeeded, and is still in charge
of the parish.
Cygnet.
At Port Cygnet the Rev. James Hole-
han administered the church from 1863
until 1867, when he was succeeded by
the Rev. T. McKennan, but the latter’s
ministry was short, his place being
taken in 1869 by the Rev. T. Kelsh.
From 1869 to 1894 the following ad-
ministered. the parish; Rev. T. Kelsh
(1869-72); Rev. Michael O’Regan (1872-
79); Rev. P. O’Reilly (1879-1888); Rev.
J. Holehan (1888-94). - In the latter year
the Rev. P. O’Flynn succeeded to the
chai’ge and he administered the church
until his death on December 18, 1926. The
next priest was the Rev. A. Cullen, un-
der whom the work at Port Cygnet has
been developed greatly. Churches have
been established at Pelverata, Bruny,
and Middleton. The Lymington School
and Convent were opened in 1931. This
year the members of St. James’ Church,
at Cygnet, by a special effort entirely
liquidated an old standing debt of over
£5OO. A sum of about £2,000 is also in
hand towards the building of a new
church.
METHODISM.
Eighty Years of Faithful Work.
Methodism has played an important
part in the development of the Huon,
the first minister of this denomination
to visit the district being the Rev. S.
Smith, who journeyed from Hobart
Town in 1856. The first Methodist
worker in the district, however, was Mr.
Stebbens, a layman from England, who
commenced services at Franklin in 1843,
and was actively associated with the
work of the church for a number of
years. According to what information
is available, it appears that he held
services in the Huon up to about 1851,
when, accompanied by other members
of the church, he left for Victoria. One
of these, Mr. Lloyd, later returned with
his family, but Mr. Stebbens remained.
In 1856, the same year as the Rev S.
Smith came to Franklin from Hobart
Town, the late Mr. Reeve, father of
Mr. Clement Reeve, of Franklin, arrived
from England, and as he had been a
Methodist preacher there he commenced
holding services in his house on the
Rokeby Estate, between Huonville and
Judbury. In 1859 he moved to Franklin
and. there identified himself with the
work of the church. Another noted
pioneer of the Huon, who rendered val-
uable services as a lay preacher, was
John Asprey, who shared the honour of
laying the foundation of Methodism in
the southern districts. Largely as a re-
sult of the devoted work of the lay
preachers the Rev. R. S. Caseley was
December, 1938. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.
EARLY TRADING METHODS
(Continued).


ROYAL
EXCHANGE ASSURAK
Incorporated in England with Limited Liability
A.D. 1720
TRANSACTS
FIRE, ACCIDENT, ANI
MARINE INSURANCES
AT
Lowest Current Rotes
LIBERAL AND PROMPT
SETTLEMENTS
Chief Representatives—Southern Tasmania:
W. H. BEAUCHAMP & CO. PTY, LTD.
129 Macquarie Street, Hobart
w~ i
appointed to Franklin in 1858, and in
18G0 the present Methodist church at
that centre was erected. The Rev. R.
Cook followed him, and held regular
services at Franklin and Castle Forbes
Bay, and services were held infrequently
at Wattle Grove, Mountain River, Glen
Huon, Hope Hill, and other outlying
centres. The Rev. R. Brown succeeded
him in 1865, and in 1866 he gave place
to the Rev. A. Miller. The Rev. A. J.
Webb was at Franklin from 1867 until
1869, and for a time the work was car-
ried on by a catechist, Mr. W. B. Nather,
and the Rev. C. A. Ogilvie. Until 1876
the churches were administered from
Hobart, but in the latter year Mr.
Thomason took up duties in the
district at Franklin and remained there
until 1880. Mr. W. Blackett was then
appointed as Home Missionary. In 1883
he gave place to the Rev. John Harle,
who at the end of about twelve months
was succeeded by the Rev. S. Harris,
who shortly afterwards was followed by
the Rev. Carl Johnston, and following
him came the Revs. F. W. Briggs
(1886-87), J. Jones (1887-89), C. Tre-
gear (1889-90).
In 1890 the Cygnet Church was estab-
lished under the Rev. T. S. B. Woodfull,
father of Mr. W. M. Woodfull, the well-
known Australian cricketer. The first
church at Cygnet was erected during
the seventies of the last century, but
in 1885, when the present church was
purchased from the Congregationalists,
the old building became the Sunday
School. Up to 1885 little is known of
the history of the Cygnet Methodist
Church, but in this year the Methodist
Conference made Cygnet a separate dis-
trict from Franklin, the Rev. C. Millard
being appointed as the first minister.
In 1885 the Methodist Church also pur-
chased from the Congregationalists the
church building, adjoining the land be-
longing to the Methodist Church at
Cygnet. This building had been erected
by the Congregationalists in 1878. As
an existing debt still remained on it
the Methodist Church secured it for
about £3OO. Although it was made a
separate district in 1885, the Cygnet
Church was not actually separated from
Franklin until 1890, when the Rev.
T. S. B. Woodfull took over the charge
and remained there until 1893.
Mr. Tregear was succeeded as min-
ister at Franklin by the Rev. E. Tonkin
in 1890, giving place in 1891 to the Rev.
A. E. Gifford. Successive ministers at
Franklin have been: The Revs. E. H.
Chappie, 1892-93; W. Beckett, 1893-95;
C. O. Lelean, 1895-96; G. R. Godbehear,
1896-98; E. Brockhouse, 1898-99; T.
Saunders, 1899-1901; J. A. Atkinson,
1901-02; F. Delbridge, 1902-05; W. H.
Taylor, 1905-08; L. Bennett, M.A., 1908-
11; C. Mason, 1911-14; T. Riding, 1914-
17; S. Albon, 1917-20; E. J. Hateley,
1920-23; G. H. Shepherd, 1923-28; H. A.
Michell, 1928-32; L. B. Eldridge, L.Th.,
1932-34; F. A. Plumb, L.Th., 1934-36.
Rev. T. Woodfull was succeeded as
minister at Cygnet in 1893 by the Rev.
A. T. Holden, who died last year. During
Mr. Holden’s ministry the work of the
church was extended and churches were
built at Irish Town (now Nicholls
Rivulet) and Gardner’s Bay, and the
present parsonage was erected. In
1896 Mr. Holden, who later became the
President-General of the Methodist
Church of Australia and Tasmania, re-
signed, and was succeeded by the Rev.
A. E. Wellard, who had charge of the
church until 1899. In 1900 the Rev. W.
Beckett was appointed to Cygnet, and in
February of the following year the
Methodist Church at Lymington was
built. About the beginning of 1902 the
Rev. C. W. Atkinson succeeded Mr.
Beckett, and he in turn in 1904 gave
place to the Rev. T. Roberts. The suc-
ceeding ministers have been: The Revs.
W. H. Youlton, 1908-09; L. Williams,
1909-11; Messrs. N. Goldsworthy, 1911-
14; G. N. Wheaton, 1915-17; T. Dazeley,
1917-18; Rev. J. W. Strickland, 1918-20;
Rev. J. S. Fletcher, 1920-23; Rev. W. O.
D. Warnock, 1923-25; Mr. J. Harwood,
1926-27; Mr. F. Morris, 1927-28; and Mr.
R. Geard, 1929-31. In 1925 the minister
was withdrawn, but one was appointed
to Cygnet again in 1931. In this year
the Rev. W. F. Hambly, 8.A., was ap-
pointed and he had charge of the church
until 1933, when the Rev. Leigh Cook
succeeded him. In 1935, Mr. L. G. Dar-
ling was appointed to the charge of the
Cygnet district as Home Missionary, the
minister having again been withdrawn
from the district:
In reviewing the past 70 years associat-
ed with the Cygnet Church we find the
names of three ministers who after-
wards became Presidents of the
Methodist Conference, viz., the Revs. A.
T. Holden, C.8.E., 8.A., V.D., 1915; the
Rev. T. S. B. Woodfull, in 1931; and the
Rev. C. W. Atkinson, M.A., in 1932.
Ranelagh.
Ranelagh became a Home Mission
station in 1905, the first to hold this posi-
tion being Mr. W. Fitzgerald. The sta-
tion has since been administered by: Mr.
J. Drough, 1906-07; Mr. E. J. Mitchell,
1907-09; Mr. Brown, 1909-10; Mr. Har-
ris, 1910-11; Mr. W. Cowie, 1911-12; Mr.
L. Benslev, 1912-13; Mr. H. R. Thacker,
1913-14; Mr. H. Wallbank, 1914-16; Mr.
N. Goldsworthy, 1916-21; Mr. Dennison,
1921-24; Mr. L. Stephens, 1924-26; Mr.
W. Hawkey, 1926-28; Mr. R. \V. Denny,
1928-31; Mr. R. Trebilco, 1931-35; Mr.
Bowden, 1935.
THE SALVATION ARMY.
The Salvation Army figured promi-
nently in the Huon district almost since
its establishment in Tasmania. This
organisation commenced its work at
Franklin in 1893, extended its opera-
tions to Huonville in 1897, and the Up-
per Huon in 1899. In 1908 Ranelagh
became the centre of the Army’s work
in the Huon, but two years later another
large corps was established at Crab-
tree. From these two centres the Army
now conducts its activities throughout
the southern district.
EARLY CHURCH ATTENDANCE.
Giving his recollections of the early
church services, Mr. R. W. Leitch, of
Cradoc, said he could remember when
the first Congregational Church at
Franklin was used (the stone building
there at present is the third); it was a
small wooden structure, very free from
ornamentation inside or outside, and the
wooden seats used for seats had no
backs to them. Church attendance was
looked upon more as a duty then than
it is now, and also the people made it
the opportunity for a social chat before
or after service. Men attended dressed
in white moleskin trousers and “blueys,”
and the women wore shawls with hoods.
The church was supported entirely by
voluntary gifts. Such efforts as dances
or fairs for the raising of money for
church purposes was unthought of.
CHURCH OF ENGLAND.
Many instances of loyal service are
associated with the establishment of the
Church of England in various parts of
the Huon district. The earliest record
of an official visit by representatives of
the Church is that of the Archdeacon
of Hobart Town (the Venerable F. A.
Marriott), who conducted a service at
Port Cygnet in 1845. It is possible,
however, that services had also been
held either at the same time or even
previously at Franklin, for a church had
been built there in 1846, known as St.
Mary’s Church of England, the church
records showing that in that year Rev.
J. Andrewartha, the rector of Franklin,
conducted the first baptismal service.
The church building stood on the flat
below St. John’s Cemetery, but in 1863
a contract was let to Mr. J. Rait for
the erection of the present stone build-
ing, the cost being £6OO, and this was
opened for Divine Service on May 17,
1864, by Archdeacon Davies. The
second rector was Rev. Robt. Crooke,
and he was succeeded by Rev. T. Stans-
field, 1859-1879; Rev. E. H. Thompson,
1879-1908; Rev. F. P. Bethune, 1909-
1915; Rev. A. G. Cutts, 1915-21; Rev.
W. F. Henslowe, 1921-25; Rev. W. S.
Williams, 1925-29; Rev. lan J. B. Mac-
donald, 1929-35; Rev. E. N. Gidley, 1935.
The Victoria Church, Victoria Settle-
ment (now Ranelagh), was established
in 1855, the church records showing
that a marriage was solemnised there
in that year. It was a bark building
and was erected at the hack of the site
of St. James’ Cemetery. A second
building was constructed of brick and
this did service till 1880, when a larger
weatherboard building on the site of the
present St. James’ Church was erected.
This was burnt by a bush fire in 1896.
A peculiar feature of this incident is
that a church entry records that “no
service was held this day on account of
wet weather.” The next day a bush
fire devastated everything in the vicin-
ity of the church, the only property sal-
vaged being the organ and a few seats.
The insurance company paid £423 com-
pensation for loss of the building. The
present church was built shortly after
the fire and was opened on November 7,
1896.
The Cradoc Church was opened by
Bishop Hay in 1921, this being included
in the Franklin-Ranelagh parish.
St. Mark’s Church, Cygnet, was es-
tablished in 1906. The building was
erected in 1876, but the parish was in-
cluded in that of Franklin for 20 years.
Rev. Chas. Vaughan was the first rector
of Cvgnet, and he was followed by Rev.
G. W. Ratten, 1911-13; Rev. W. Hooker,
1913-16; Rev. C. S. Cox, 1916-22; Rev.
C. Allen, 1922; Rev. J. A. Cloudsdale,
1923-25; Rev. J. W. Davison, 1926-29;
Rev. V. H. Gill, 1929-31; Rev. C. C.
Robertson, 1931-34; Rev. S. C. Bram-
mall, 1934.
St. Peter’s Church of England,
Geeveston, was established in 1906. the
first rector being Rev. G. A. Chambers,
and following him came Rev. R. Mac-
donald, 1907 (in which year the vicarage
was built); Rev. R. O’Breznan Ball, 1909;
Rev. C. Lumsden, Archdeacon Whiting-
ton. and Rev. E. C. Tanner, 1910; Rev.
G. M. Watson, 1911 (in this year the
church building was dedicated by Bishon
Mercer): Rev. H. J. Gauntlett. 1912:
Rev. John H. S. Littel, 1914; Rev. E.
Fisher-Johnson, 1914: Rev. H. A. Sargi-
son, 1916; Rev. W. W. Gregson, 1917;
Rev. J. H. Wills, 1919: Rev. J. Tweedie.
1920: Rev. F. L. Ha drill, 1921: Rev. W.
Blanchard, 1925; Rev. A. Thompson,
1928; Rev. J. D. S. Daish, 1932; Rev. G. |
J. Baxter, 1934.
A Sunday School has been run since
the opening of the Church building. Mr.
R. Lincoln was the first head teacher.
He was succeeded in a few years by
Mr. Robert Burgess, who has ever since
graves in this cemetery were afterwards
used as hearthstones as builders required
them. (One, the headstone on a Dr.
Spong’s grave, rests face downwards in a
hotel kitchen in Cygnet.)
A number of the early settlers chose
'land on the surrounding hillside where
potato growing was carred on. Most of
the inhabitants, however, were sawyers
and splitters. Much timber was sent to
the newly settled Melbourne and to Bal-
larat, after the gold rush in the ’50’s;
also to New Zealand and to Scotland.
Slab Road was first known as Pension-
ers’ Run, for there resided retired Im-
perial soldiers, among whom was Ser-
geant-Major Henry. He lived there with
his wife and family till his death. His
daughter, Mary Henry, married John
Huxtable, of Hobart, who carried on busi-
ness in Cygnet for some years. Both
were very musical, and interested them-
selves in philanthropic work for all sec-
tions of the community. Their daugh-
ters, Mrs. J. Stanton and Mrs. Charles
Wills, are still well known in musical
circles in Cygnet.
The site of the home of the Henrys in
Slab Road is still marked by hawthorn
hedges near the residence of the late
Mrs. O’Brien.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF ROWING
An old-time rower writes: As the
whaling industry began to diminish after
the ’60’s of the previous century, a num-
ber of whaling boats were sold to resi-
dents in the Huon, along the Channel,
and in Hobart. These boats were freely
used for travelling, as the roads were
almost impassable. They carried crews
of five, the coxswain backing up the
stroke oar. It was strenuous work, but
racing in them became very popular.
Later, lighter whale boats were built
with only four rowers, and then came
the “short fours,” which still required a
great deal of stamina, as the races
were mostly three miles, and involved a
turn round each end of the course,
which frequently caused a capsize. At
one time or other crews competed in
the regattas in these boats from Frank-
lin, Shipwright’s Point, Huonville, Castle
Forbes Bay, Geeveston, Cradoc, Glazier’s
Bay, Wattle Grove, Cygnet, Woodbridge,
and Wedge Bay. Next came the pair-
oared dinghy race, which was a popular
event. One of the fastest boats on the
Huon was the one built by the late
Joseph Lomas. Then there was the 16ft.
skiff. All the races carried money
prizes which were divided up among
the crews. The sport boomed in these
days, but when the trophies were in-
troduced interest went out of rowing
in all country places.
that time, about ’B3, been actively
concerned in the management of the
Sunday School. Among those who have
given much time to the work of the
school have been Mrs. W. Killingback,
the late Mrs. T. Fillings, and Mrs. N.
H. Geeves.
CHURCH OF CHRIST, GEEVESTON.
The Church of Christ Chapel, Geeves-
ton, was opened on 17th June, 1906. The
builder was Mr. E. Diers. The organ-
isers of the Church were Pastor W. J.
Way and Mr. George Kyme. Among
the first members were Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Geeves, Mr. and Mrs. W. Ash-
lin, the late Mrs. R. Thompson, and
Mr. and Mrs. James Thompson, Mr. and
Mrs. George Rowe, Mr. John Harwood,
Mr. F. Sharp, the late Mr. J. Russell,
and others.
The following is a list of the pastors
of the Church:—Mr. W. J. Way, Mr. G.
Kyme, Mr. G. Woolnough, Mr. P. J. By-
ard, Mr. J. D. Byard, Mr. D. Stewart,
Mr. Chas. Hale, Mr. W. J. Campbell,
Mr. J. Warren, Mr. Ira Durdin, Mr. J.
K. Martin, and Mr. A. H. Stamford. The
church has from the beginning main-
tained a strong Sunday School, the
superintendents being Mr. John Har-
wood, Mr. F. Ashlin (who held the posi-
tion for many years), Mr. Trevor
Geeves, and Mr. S. Bellette.
ested himself in all public affairs and
church activities. He was a man of ex-
ceptional enterprise and business capa-
city. At a very young age he decided to
commence business on his own account,
and went from one success to another
until he controlled the largest general
store south of Hobart. In addition he
engaged in orcharding, sawmilling, min-
ing, and land speculation, and later took
up the processing of apples and vege-
tables and the manufacture of wood-wool.
His evaporating factory was the largest
in the Commonwealth, employing at the
height of the season over 100 hands. He
married Eliza, the eldest daughter of the
late Osborne Geeves, and had a family of
two sons and two daughters, two of whom,
Mr. Jack Harvey and Mrs. F. Wills, pre-
deceased him, the former being killed at
the Great War. The eldest son, Mr. A.
J. Harvey, is carrying on the orchard and
apple-exporting business commenced by
his father.
LINKS WITH THE PAST.
The oldest cemetery in which the first
settler was buried ceased to be used about
1843. It was situated behind the present
Town Hall where there is now an orchard.
It is said that the headstones on the old
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.
THE CHURCHES (Continued).
SOME OF THE PIONEERS (Continued).


AS NATURE MADE IT
First Settlers' Impressions of the Huon
Among the few records preserved of
the impression made on the first settlers
who sailed up the Huon River are those
of the late Henry Judd, who, in a des-
cription of the early settlement of
Franklin, wrote:—
“The township of Franklin was laid
out by I>ady Franklin in its wild state.
In the year 1842 we came to this colony,
and my father, not having decided where
to go, inquired of Lady Franklin, who ad-
vised him to go to the Huon River, which
was a newly settled place at the time, and
which she intended to be settled by a
population of immigrants. So in the
year 1843 we came down in a craft known
as the ‘Huon Pine,’ built to the order of
Lady Franklin, the only vessel trading at
that time in Huon waters. Well do I
remember when rounding One Tree Point
at the mouth of the river the wild view
that presented itself, with the evergreen
trees and scrub reaching from the water’s
edge to the mountain top, and no appear-
ance of human life. Even the wild fowl
gave a note of alarm to one another, and
flew away as we stole into their quiet
waters. The only sound was that of the
occasional axe or two in the forest that
bordered both sides of the river—the be-
ginning of the war that was to be waged
by man to carve a home for himself and
his family in this wonderful district. On
and on we went, until we came to what
was known as Franklin, just a hut or two
and a small church built of boards, which
might hold twenty people—another in-
stance of Lady Franklin’s well wishes
for the people’s good. This little build-
ing had a small bell, which tolled every
Sabbath to welcome all to the house of
prayer; and now and then a solitary
knell would be heard dying through the
mountain glen, telling a tale of another
axe laid down, and an earthly home for-
saken. Some of the settlers in the Huon
in these early days were Messrs. Parsons,
Walton, Kellaway, Clark, Hay, Thorp,
Ballantyne, and Geeves. The last named
settled in Geeveston, the township being
named after him.
“There was not even a track through
the bush between the settlers’ dwellings
at this time. A strange-looking boat
was used when the settlers desired to visit
one another. This boat was afterwards
called the ‘Coffin,’ owing to a person be-
ing drowned off it. The track from Ho-
bart to the Huon was only to be found by
following various marks and cuts on th(
trees, and was known as ‘The Way to the
Huon.’ In these early times the bush-
rangers were a continual dread to travel-
lers, also the few pioneers scattered
through the district.
“Many were the disappointments and
privations to be endured for want of shops
to obtain necessities, for when provisions
ran short there were no means to gel
them locally, and we had to wait for the
return of a slow sailing craft, which was
often delayed a fortnight through bad
weather.
LAST OF THE ABORIGINES.
“In the year 1853 my brother went up
the Huon to open a place in the so-called
township of Hull. Not a living soul was
there, and the undertaking was a hard
one. I went with him. The creek or
river on the north side of the Huon in
Hull was named after my brother—Judd’s
Creek. This part of the bush appeared to
be a favourite hunting ground of the few
blacks that were left in the colony. At
this time there were between 20 and 30
men and women. I believe the last cor-
roboree that the blacks danced was there.
We had a great deal of trouble to get them
to dance their wild dance. They appeared
to be ashamed of their old customs, buf
after giving them some tobacco, bread,
tea, and sugar they made a large fire by
night and danced around it.
“The last I saw of this race was some
years afterwards. Three of them came,
according to custom, once a year to our
home. My father began to question them
about their habits. ‘What did they dc
when they were bitten by a snake? ’ They
said they cut all round the part and sucked
the wound. They also said they dug the
ground for native bread, but we could
not get them to explain how they knew
where to dig.
“That the aborigines were not void of
reasoning was shown by the manner in
which they would discover fresh water
near the sea shore. They would walk in-
to the salt water with naked feet, feeling
.for a change in the temperature of the
sand, as the cold spring water would rise
up through the sand. They then went
opposite to where the cold water was felt
and digged down, and so got a spring of
fresh water.”
Mr. Judd also relates that on one oc-
<■ asion a settler had his arm broken, and
ihe aborigines happening to come along
set the limb by enclosing it in a tube of
bark taken from a gum tree. The tube
was cut in halves length-wise, and after
placing the arm in one half it was packed
around with clay free from grit. The
other half, filled with soft wet clay, was
then bound on top. The patient was in-
structed to pour water into the tube when
the clay began to dry. The man recovered
the use of his arm.
THE LODGES
SOME INTERESTING RECORDS
The following is a brief summary of
the work of the lodges established in
the Huon, and the names of the prin-
cipal officers:
MASONIC LODGE
The Huon Lodge, No. 36, was establish-
ed on April 5, 1919, when the petition
for the Charter of a Lodge to be es-
tablished at Franklin was granted by the
Most Worshipful Grand Master, Bro.
C. E. Davies, to Andrew Currie, W.M.;
Robert Thorn, S.W.; G. P. Whight,
J.W. The first meeting to form the
lodge was held in St. John’s Sunday
School hall, Franklin, and in addition to
those already named the foundation
members were Messrs. Edward Geeves,
Herbert Grueber, Lionel Lambert Steer,
and Benjamin Andrew Watson. The
lodge was consecrated on April 23, 1919,
and the oration was delivered by the
V. Wor. Grand Chaplain (Bro. Rev. H.
B. Atkinson). In 1926 a special meeting
of the Grand Lodge was held at the
lodge room, Franklin, for the purpose of
laying the foundation stone for a new
temple for the Huon Lodge. This cere-
mony took place on Saturday, Novem-
ber 27, and the building was dedicated
as a Masonic Temple on April 9, 1927,
by the M. Wor. the Grand Master, Bro.
C. E. W. James, M.H.A. Since then the
principal officers have been:
Worshipful Masters.—Andrew Currie,
1919-20; Robert S. Thorn, 1920-1; Geo.
O. Whight, 1921-2; Edward Geeves, 1922-
3; Frank M. Richards, 1923-4; Gilbert
B. Murphy, 1924-5; Eli Baldwin, 1925-6;
Fred W. Harrison, 1926-7; Dr. N. M.
Simpson, 1927-8; Dr. N. G. Abbott, 1928-
9; Frederick G. Norris, 1929-30; Thomas
H. Moran, 1930-1; Harry A. Brimble,
1931-2; E. Cracknell, 1932-3; William G.
Albury, 1933-4; Cyril W. Flood, 1934-5;
Harry N. Gellie, 1935-6.
Secretaries.—L. L. Steer, 1919-20;
Arthur C. Davis, 1920-2; John G. Leask,
1922-4; John J. Freeman, 1924-6; Fred-
erick G. Norris, 1926-8; Alfred W. How-
ard, 1928-32; Colin C. Murdoch, 1932-3;
Norman P. Louden, 1933-5; E. Crack-
nell, 1935.
MANCHESTER UNITY
LOYAL FRANKLIN LODGE.
The Loyal Franklin Lodge was opened
at the Kent Hotel, Franklin, on May 22,
1856. The District officers present were
Provincial Grand Master Meech, P.P.G.M.
Hood, Prov. Corresponding Secretary
Strutt, and the first officers of the new
lodge were: Noble Grand, Bro. Tun- j
ncrcliffe; Vice-Grand, Bro. F. Newham;
secretary, Bro. A. George Pogue;
guardian, Bro. Jolly; treasurer, Bro.
Chesterman.
The secretaries of the lodge since its
formation have been: Bros. A. G. Pogue,
1856; H. Chesterman, 1857; F. Horton,
1858; J. S. Chambers, 1860; D. Rafton,
1863; P. G. Helmer, 1865; J. C. McDon-
nell, 1866; M. O’Beirne, 1866; W. J.
Thomas, 1883; G. Mansfield, 1927.
During Bro. W. J. Thomas’ term of
office (44 years), he only missed one
district meeting out of 85.
Bro. R. W. Leitch, of Cradoc, filled
the office of treasurer for over 40 years.
The following members of the lodge
reached the office of Provincial Grand
Master: Bros. Jas. O’Beirne, D. E. Ryan,
G. Mansfield, W. J. Thomas, C. V. Griggs.
Twenty-four members took part in the
Great War, namely Bros. Denis Darcy,
V. M. Gallagher, W. T. Minahan, P.
Donohoe, *W. H. Fulton, *L. H. Reeve,
J. B. O’Beirne, W. D. Reynolds, John
THE FIRST SHIPBUILDERS
The first shipbuilders to commence in
the industry in a large way in the Huon
were T. Inches, A. Harley, and J. Mc-
Laren, who, as young men, arrived at
Hobart from Sydney in 1842 in a small
brig. Their skill in all branches of ship
architecture soon became known, and
hearing about the opportunity there was
for getting ample supplies of the best
of timber “right on the job” on the
banks of the Huon they journeyed
thither, and set up in business in the
little bay on the north side of Mr. E.
Geeves’ shop, and which afterwards be-
came known as Shipwright’s Point.
Among the vessels built by these men
were the Aeolus, Caledonia, Thistle, Rose,
Rebecca and the Triad (afterwards re-
named the Beacon). The keels of the
Caledonia and the Triad were laid down
at Desolation Bay. These three pioneers
suffered many privations and hardships
in their search for timber, particularly
in the upper reaches of the river, where
they obtained Huon pine logs, which had
to be rafted to the Point and cut into
planks by the pit saw method. Mr.
Harley later moved to Hobart and was
joined by Mr. Ross. They laid down
what is now known as Kennedy’s Slip,
at Battery Point. Messrs. Inches and
McLaren remained at the Point till the
end of their lives. The former took an
active interest in local affairs. He be-
came a member of the Honeywood Road
Trust, and on May 1, 1866, was appointed
a delegate to wait on the Colonial
Treasurer to urge that an amount of
money be placed on the Estimates to
continue the Main Southern Road to the
Huon. Mr. Inches died in July, 1908.
J. Breaden.
SHIPBUILDING (Continued).
Channel, and Peninsula was formed with
Huon, Hopetoun, and other units of the
fleet catering for the trade.
This incursion of steam is well within
the scope of memory of most Huon
riversiders, and belongs to the present,
rather than to the past, which this
article has skirted. It is therefore not
necessary to traverse its progress be-
yond this stage.
One may, perhaps, be pardoned in ex-
pressing regret that even steam is suf-
fering an eclipse—which appears to be
more than a partial one. Transport
has to a great extent turned its back to
the river, and taken the high road. It
is a matter of utility, of course, but the
river-borne traffic is—one must say
it—infinitely more picturesque and, to
a water-fronting community, the nat-
ural way out along an historic marine
thoroughfare, dotted with sails of the
past.
OLD BUILDING DEMOLISHED.
The old police residence at Franklin,
which has just been demolished prepara-
tory to the widening of the main street,
was built 82 years ago by John Lloyd.
Many of the timbers are as sound as
the day they were put into position.
The joists were Sin. by Sin. thick! The
walls of the two cells, which were part
of the building, were three bricks thick
and also had a hardwood covering.
the sick and funeral fund. A great
misfortune happened to the lodge on
November 21 last, when, through the
destruction of the Geeveston Town Hall
by fire, it lost regalia, rituals, some of
its books and other valuable property,
one of the rooms in the Town Hall
having been used as lodge room.
Smith, Eric D. Cummings, Jas. Good,
J. E. Linnell, *G. V. Crosby, *W. E.
Pitt, D. A. Brown, A. J. Fulton, J. P.
Mansfield, F. G. Norris, J. H. Turner,
*C. T. Phillips, *C. Weldon, J, Hannan,
Arthur Heriot, S. P. Moran.
in action.
U.A.O. DRUIDS
HUONVILLE LODGE.
The Huonville branch of U.A.O.D.
was formed on October 26, 1901, the
foundation members beings Bros. F. C.
Roberts, A. E. Crisp, S. G. Page, W. C.
Page, John Talbot, Leo Oates, Reg Page,
W. J. Nichols, A. J. Ayers, Geo. Stanley,
V. Mitchel, F. Bailey, A. Sheppard, Wm.
Sheppard.
The secretaries have been Bros. Goo.
Stanley, 1901; J. Burgess, 1914; C. V.
Davey, 1919; D. Harris, 1929.
Two members of the lodge have reach-
ed the office of Grand President—A. E.
Crisp, 1908; William Albury, 1921; while
the present secretary, D. Harris, is Vice-
Grand President.
On the night of the formation of the
lodge, Bro. W. J. Nichols was appointed
Bard and has held the office ever since,
and during that time (35 years) has
only missed four attendances at lodge
meetings. He has been elected a Past
Arch in recognition of this exceptional
record.
SOUTHERN STAR, GEEVESTON.
The Southern Star Lodge, U.A.0.D.,
Geeveston, was formed on September
24, 1907. The first secretary was the
late Bro. Jas. H. Geeves, and he was
succeeded by George Roberts, in 1911;
C. L. Geeves, 1914; the last-named still
holding the office.
JUDBURY BRIDGE.
The late Bro. E. E. Millhouse held the
office of treasurer from 1910 until he
died a few months ago.
The lodge has a membership of over
100, three of whom have been on the
roll since its inception.
FRANKLIN PRIDE LODGE.
The Franklin Pride Lodge, U.A.0.D.,
was formed on July 11, 1910. The
foundation members were Bros. W.
Weidenhofer, R. J. Filby, E. C. Rippon,
G. R. Macdonald, R. Drake, J. H.
Latham, J. E. Hinchey, W. T. Darcy,
F. Latham, A. Griggs, R. J. Barker,
W. E. Wicks, A. Phillips, D. Bruce, C.
Soderberg, A. Medbury, C. L. Drake,
S. Murrell, E. Wicks, T. Mansfield, G.
Crosby, E. R. Riseley, G. Hill, H. C.
Pratt, D. Barnes, W. Albury, Geo. Stan-
ley, W. Collins, J. Latham, jun.
The secretaries have been R. J. Filby,
E. C. Rippon, E. E. Scott, W. Riggs,
E. C. Freeman, F. H. Freeman.
Bro. W. T. Darcy, a foundation
member, still attends the meetings
regularly. The lodge has made con-
tinued progress since its foundation,
both numerically and financially, being
at the present time one of the most
financial of the Druids’ lodges in the
State.
COURT PRIDE OF KERMANDIE
The Court Pride of Kermandie Branch
of the Ancient Order of Foresters was
founded on September G, 1890, among
the foundation members being Bros. F.
B. Hill, Robt. Burgess, Geo. Walker, J.
M. Wardrop, and Patrick Riley. The
secretaries included Bros. P. B. Hill, Jas.
H. Geeves, and E. Cracknell, the last
named being the present holder of the
office. Members who have held the high
office of Chairman of the Tasmanian
District were Bros. F. B. Hill, Walter
Burgess, and E. Cracknell. The lodge
has a present membership of 116, and
has paid out large sums of money from
Continued in next column.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.
THE LODGES (Continued).


o
f-
is
RENDEZVOUS
Any hour of the day—any
afternoon for tea or cocktails—
you'll find the lounges, the
smoking rooms, cheerful with
life and social intercourse.
There is none of the confusion,
nor studied cordiality of hotels
that are merely "big"—you
"live" at "Hadley's," for there
—go your friends.
On Holiday Bent
f
OBART—with its blue, dancing waters
its white, sunny beaches and
timbered mountain ranges .. . with its stately
English homes and quaint, old-world cottages,
offers you limitless days of happy forgetful-
ness ... It offers you too, should you stay, the
quiet distinction that is "Hadley's." In the
many friends that you meet there—in the
experienced service of the well-trained staff
—in the tempting variety that awaits every
visit to the Dining Room, you will find that
quiet efficiency that makes a stay at
"Hadley's" mean so much more.
SERVICE
Service is a much used word
. . . with v/hich many liberties
are taken. It is not so with
Hadley's, whose interpretation
of it, is the quiet efficiency
that makes your half-formed
wishes accomplished facts . . .
the service that anticipates . . .
that, once experienced, remains
alone in your mind, as
HADLEY'S service pre-
eminent.
MODERNITY
—with restraint
is the keynote of the altera-
tions and additions that have
just been completed. Suites
and Bedrooms have been re-
modelled, offering superb
rooms with telephones, hot or
cold showers, or with private
bathrooms. The Foyer, Lounges,
Smoking Rooms, and Ballroom
have all been re-designed to a
composite sense of modernity
and good taste.
Tariff Inclusive—
or Bed and Breakfast.
Terms on Application.
HOTEL
HADLEY'S
TELEPHONE 4066
Telegraphic Address:
HADLEY'S, HOBART
HOBART
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon anti Derwent Times” December, 1936


AUSTRALIAN FOOTBALL
Naturally there was neither time nor
opportunity for the early Huonites to en-
gage in athletic land sports, as all the
cleared land was required for cultivation.
Excepting for picnic sports, when some
short distance pedestrian races were held,
and other games of exercise, like high and
long jumps, hop, step, and jump, putting
the caber, etc., there were no organised
sports until the late 80’s of the previous
century. In the last week of March, 1887,
Mr. W. H. Kennedy, who had just return-
ed to Franklin after an absence of
five years in Hobart, at school and busi-
ness, founded the first Australian Rules
Football Club. A few weeks afterwards,
the Liverpool (now Kermandie) Club was
formed, with Mr. Harry Geeves as its
leader, and immediately afterwards, the
Victoria Club, led toy the late T. A.
Frankcomb, and the Picnic Club, with Mt.
Geo. Nicholson (now of Ouse) as leader,
were founded.
The first match played in the Huon
took place at Woodstock, on May 24,
1887, between Franklin and Kermandie.
For many years Woodstock was the
Franklin home ground. One of the play-
ers in this match was the present Warden
of Esperance (Cr. E. Burgess). There
was not much known of the science of the
game at this time, as hardly any of the
players had had more than half a dozen
lessons, but they were all keen, and
anxious to win. Kermandie had a
considerable advantage in weight
and height, and this helped con-
siderably to carry them through to
victory. Throughout the Huon and in
Hclbart at this time Wednesday afternoon
was observed as the weekly half-holiday.
It did not altogether prove satisfactory
to the business people, and later Thurs-
day afternoons were tried, but with no
better results. When the Saturday after-
noon became the compulsory weekly half-
holiday, conditions were more satisfac-
tory all round, especially for the foot-
ballers, who were too stiff or sore to
much more than hobble about the day
after a match.
As the players became more expert
in the different centres, challenge matches
were more frequent. No regular roster
was attempted, but each season a fairly
long list of matches would be arranged,
and all were greatly enjoyed by both the
players and spectators. Travelling to
and from the matches was a very differ-
ent problem then from what it is now. The
players would mostly go by spring drays,
horseback, or even walk from one town
to another, and the grounds were any-
thing but bowling greens. On one occa-
sion it is related that after a very long
and heavy rainfall the ground at Ker-
mandie was so bad that more of it was
under water than not. The players got
so tired of dashing through the puddles
of water to get the ball, that once,
when it landed in the middle of an extra
big pool, neither side would venture
in after it, and the players insisted on the
umpire rescuing it, and throwing it in
the air to enable play to be resumed!
Both Harry Geeves and W. H. Ken-
nedy continued to coach Liverpool and
Franklin for a number of years, and
largely on account of the enthusiasm they
'inspired into the teams, the popularity
of the game rapidly increased. When
the latter retired owing to pressure of
business duties, he was succeeded by Wm.
Leitch, who proved a player of exception-
al skill. Under his leadership, Franklin
became a very formidable combination,
their chief characteristics being speed
and accurate kicking. Mr. Leitch after-
wards moved to Hobart, and became one
of the most prominent figures in the
administration of football in Tasmania.
One of the most notable events in the
early days of the game was the visit of
the famous Fitzroy Club, of Victoria, to
the Huon. There were 37 visitors in
the party, including W. H. Harrison, of
Melbourne, the founder of the Australian
game, and Who was responsible for the
drawing up of the first code of rules.
Incidentally, it might here be recalled
that the first list of rules occupied only
two pages of a small leaflet—about one-
twentieth of the volume now necessary.
The match against the Huon was played
at Woodstock, and while the visitors won,
they were agreeably surprised at the high
standard of play shown by the local team,
and more than surprised at the amount
of hard bumping which they could give
and take. There was a tremendous crowd
present on the occasion, practically all
the residents for miles around being on
the ground, and in the evening a mem-
orable banquet was held at Franklin.
This custom of having a dinner at the con-
clusion of a match was customary at
almost all the early matches, and old-
timers regret that it is now discontinued,
as the social re-union after a hard-fought
game always removed the sting of defeat.
SPORT.
HUON SPORTSMEN
Doughty Deeds of the Past
Upheld by Later Generations
Among the most notable players of
the early days was T. A. Frankcomb,
who had earned a great reputation with
the City Club (Hobart), for his elusive-
ness and ability to run with the ball. He
was also a clever leader, as he could
always get the most out of his team by
noticing their capacity to take certain
positions on the field. Possibly the two
greatest players of the early days were
Lou Stanley of Huonville, and Syd. Gane,
of Geeveston. Both were of exceptional
physical strength, but notwithstanding
this, were never known to use it unfairly.
Their ability to mark and kick was re-
markable, and both remained in the game
till long past the period when others
retired owing to the exigencies of age.
Syd. Gane played in several matches at
the same time as his son, and even then,
was included in the best four or five of
the team.
In the second season of Huon foot-
ball, the City Club (Hobart) paid a visit
to the Huon, and again the match was
played at Woodstock. The Huon team
fully extended the visitors, but were
defeated by a narrow margin.
Among the early coaches in the Huon
were Arthur Whitbourne and A. C. Cea-
brook. They concentrated on teaching
the beginners drop kicking and place
kicking. Punts were rarely resorted to,
possibly because this kind of kicking was
the sole method employed at other
branches of football, and the Australian
code players did not want to be regarded
as copyists of any other game. The place
kick was nearly always employed when
kicking for goal, but it has gone right out
of vogue now, and the punt is decidedly
popular.
One of the features of the early game
was the short pass. By this means, all
a player had to do was to touch the ball
with his foot and pass to a team mate
only two yards distant. It was, of
course, greatly abused, because unless the
umpire was particularly alert the play-
er would only pretend to touch the ball
with his foot, and a quick flick of the
ball would put his mate in safe possession
of it. Now, of course, the minimum dis-
tance for a pass is 10 yards, and it is
practically impossible to get away with
throwing the ball that distance.
At an early stage of the game in the
Huon, George Vautin, one of the City
players, and who afterwards became
the most famous rover in Melbourne,
visited the Huon. He had been a school-
mate of W. H. Kennedy, and frequently
attended the practices of the Franklin
players, instructing them in the art of
kicking, marking, and running with the
ball. Vautin was a contemporary of
those other stalwarts of the game,
'i'hurgood, McGuinness, McNamara, and
ethers.
Besides the Huon players already men-
tioned, among those wno have long since
retired from the game, or “crossed the
bar,” were Franklin: Harry Leitch, Thos.
Walton, I. H. Chopping, W. Leitch, W.
Smith, V. Griggs, W. H. Pitt, Eli,
Henry, and Ernest Stanton, C. Watson,
R. W. Leitch, G. Goodrich, D. and E.
Jolly, J. Leitch, Jas. McMullen, Rob-
ert and Sam. Watson, Thos Stanfield
(one of the most efficient captains Frank-
lin ever had), B. and W. Brennan, W. and
Bert Fitzpatrick, Bernie and M. McGar-
ry, P. Gallagher, P. Donnelly, W. J.
Thomas, M. Spelman Andrews, J. Fulton,
Horace, Henry, Les., Emerson, and J. M.
Hay, C. Bratt, J. Rutter, J. Vincent.
Kermandie’s prominent players in-
cluded Dave Robertson, H. Studley, J.
O’Halloran, P. Ford, H. Hopkins, W.
Regan, D. G. Bennett, the three Reilly
Bros., Hankin, D. Geeves, John Geeves,
the three Thiessen Bros., three Burgess
Bros., four Drake Bros., Harry Beech.
A FAMILIAR SCENE AT THE HUON REGATTA.
Huonville had excellent representatives
in J. Dowling (great rover and wing
player), Thos. and Geo. Walton, Geo.
Harris, the Page Bros., L. Perry, Arm-
strong, Lou and Geo. Stanley.
Since 1910 football in the Huon has
been controlled by an association
comprised of representatives of Cygnet,
Kcrmandie, Franklin, and Huonville
Clubs, and affiliated with the Tasmanian
Australian National Football League.
With the exception of a break during the
Great War years, 1914-1919, the com-
petition has been fairly regularly par-
ticipated in by all the clubs, especially
in the last ten years. The standard
of play has invariably been good, and
sines each district has been provided
with an up-to-date recreation ground,
the interest of the public in the games
has been greatly stimulated. The prem-
ierships have been mostly won by Ker-
mandie and Cygnet, the records since
1910 being:—
Kermandie:--1910, 1911, 1920, 1921,
1924, 1927, 1929, 1930, 1934, 1936.
Cygnet:—l9l2. 1913, 1922, 1923, 1925,
1926, 1928, 1931, 1935.
Franklinl932.
Huonville:—l933.
The game in the Huon probably reach-
ed its zenith in 1932. In that season,
Franklin won the Country premiership,
and played a draw against Campbell
Town; Huonville defeated a represen-
tative West Coast team, and Cygnet de-
feated another powerful team at Both-
well. A representative Huon team de-
feated the Hobart League by the big
margin of 19.20 to 14.9.
CRICKET
None of the outdoor sports has claimed
so many players in the Huon as cricket.
This may seem strange in view of the
great interest that is taken in football,
and the enormous attendances present
at the matches held for the district
premierships, tout the fact is that while
there are at the present time four football
teams in the Huon municipality, five in
Esperance, and two in Cygnet, the
number of cricket teams in the districts
respectively is 18, 3, and 10. It is said
that the Englishman takes his cricket
bat with him wherever he goes, and it is
not surprising, therefore, that as soon as
the Huon settlers had the time and faci-
lities to engage in outdoor recreation,
cricket was uppermost in their minds.
In 1870, the first meeting called to form a
cricket club in the Huon was held at
Franklin, and very soon afterwards,
similar efforts were made at Huonville
and Geeveston. Later, clubs were also
formed at Cygnet, Glen Huon, Esperance,
Hastings, Castle Forbes Bay, and Hope
Hill (near Franklin). The pioneers of
the game in the Huon were Charles Cole-
man, Henry Watson, Geo. Goodrich, W.
J. McWilliams, and James Price. Of
these, only the last named survives. He
is now living at Taranna, but comes back
every year for the Old Timers’ matches,
played alternately at Franklin and
Huonville, on January 2. Of those
who were prominent players in the 70’s
and 80’s, survivors include Rev F. A.
Woods, I. H. Chopping, and Thos. Kildea.
Huonville and Geeveston had strong
cricket teams in the early days of the
Huon’s settlement Among those who
were leading exponents of the game in
the Huonville club were Fred. Bell, Wm.
Walton, Ed. Page, Courtney Frankcomb,
Syd. Page, Thos. Walton, Geo. Harris,
Geo. Walton, John Dowling. The last
named played his first game in represen-
tative cricket at the age of 16. That
was just 60 years ago, and he has not
missed seeing many of the games played
at Huonville since then.
Of the Geeveston players, the most
notable in the early days of the club’s
history were John Geeves, Prank Hill,
Thos. Hammond, Geo. Geeves, “Lad’'
Geeves, John Drake, “Dick” Geeves,
“Sunny” Geeves, and “Ted” Geeves.
In later days, the game was taken
up with zest in Esperance, and some
splendid players were “discovered” in
Thomas and Wm. Stubbs, Joe Francis,.
Bob Hay (one of the star performers in
the district, owing to his daring as a
point fieldsman, and a stubborn bats-
man) , Peter Facy, and Charles Hay.
Cygnet, for some unaccountable reason,
never appears to have taken up cricket
as enthusiastically as other parts of the
Huon, but in the Mooney Bros., M. Fitz-
patrick, W. Calder, and J. Garth, this
club had players of more than average
ability, and who were most enthusiastic
in trying to promote an interest in the
game in their centre.
Of the original Hope Hill team, the
only survivors are Messrs. Clem Reeve
and Philip Schnell.
Glen Huon took up cricket later than
other parts of the Huon, but when they
did, they made up for the loss of time by
the energy and enthusiasm they put into
their play. The founders of the first
club were Sam. and Philip Woolley, J.
Watson, and the Dean Bros. With the
Bester family coming in still later, a
team was formed which at times could
more than hold its own with the best
club in the Huon, and they even went
further afield and won some excellent
challenge trophies in competition with
Channel and other district clubs.
As with football, the cricket matches
were not drawn up originally as they are
now, according to regular roster, but com-
prised challenge matches, which mostly
lasted all day. At the conclusion, the
two teams lined up facing each other,
and the captain of the losing team pre-
sented the winners with a “Duke” cricket
ball, and after some congratulatory
remarks, would intimate that the win-
ners could expect in the course of a few
days another challenge, when it was
hoped “the tables would be turned.”
One of these balls which had been used
in a memorable match between Huonville
and Franklin, played over 50 years ago,
is still the proud possession of the Walton
family.
Interesting annual matches that used
to be played in the 80’s were two that
were arranged between the Huon and the
leading Hclbart clulb by Sir George
Davies. The Huon match used to be
played at Huonville, and was so largely
attended that it was second only in im-
portance to the Huon Regatta, at Ship-
wrights’ Point. Sir George Davies was
a keen follower of cricket, and frequently
visited country centres in search of
promising players. Among his “finds”
was Kenny Burn, of Richmond, who
subsequently was included in an Aus-
tralian XI. Sir George was also a player
of high standing. He was a captain of
the calculating type, an excellent wicket-
keeper and batsman. He played on a
number of occasions against visiting
English teams. These matches between
the Huon and Hobart arranged by Sir
George Davies, may be regarded as the
forerunner of the annual matches that
are now played in the city during “Coun-
try Week,” and in which the Huon has
had a most creditable record. It is
something of a coincidence too, that the
trophy for which the teams play, the
“Chapman Shield,” was also the gift of
a member of the “Mercury” staff, Mr.
Chapman.
In recent years, cricket has made
remarkable strides in the Huon. At
the present time, there are 18 teams en-
gaged in the Huon Association roster, 10
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


SLAZENGERS FAMOUS SPORTING EQUIPMENT
“77ie Choice of Champions 99
SLAZENGERS FAMOUS RACKET
THE WIMBLEDON ALL-WHITE
WORLD'S CHAMPION MODEL
Chosen by champions everywhere, the Slazenger All-White
Racket has played and won many championships, including
both World's Singles Titles. The World's Championship has
been won at Wimbledon for three successive years with the
Slazenger All-White Racket.
The No. 1 Ball of the
World
SLAZENGERS TENNIS BALL
Here is proof positive of the world-
wide fame of Slazenger Tennis Balls
—they have been selected in all
parts of the world for National
Championships. Under the hardest
conditions of score, drive, smash, or volley, Slazenger Tennis Balls
outlast all others and remain perfectly symmetrical to the last
bounce. Follow the world's choice ADOPTED EXCLUSIVELY
FOR; N.S.W. State Championship, 1936, West Australia State
Championships, 1936, Queensland State Championships, 1936, South
Australian Centenary Championships, 1936, the Three World
Classics—Wimbledon, Wightman Cup, Davis Cup Challenge Round,
1936. Obtainable in plain or grooved style.
The Sensational Steel Shaft
CRICKET BAT
Introduced by Slazengers, this bat is one of the greatest advances
for many years in the science of Cricket Bat manufacture. The
Steel Shaft Bat has met with instantaneous success, and is being
generally adopted by cricketers, and will be used by members of the
Australian and English Test Teams.
NO BROKEN HANDLES—TORQUE and SIDESPRING REDUCED—
INCREASED DRIVING POWER—GREATER SPEED OFF THE BAT.
T. M. BENNETT
MURRAY STREET, HOBART
Sole Agent and Tasmanian Distributor for
SLAZENGERS (Aust.) LIMITED
(Of
THE WORLD-FAMOUS
RfcCO. TRADE MARK
GOLF BALL
Wherever g.olf is played, SILVER KING is
the reigning favourite from tee to green.
You, too, will appreciate the finer qualities
of SILVER KING . . . unusual truth in
flight . . . their unfailing accuracy on
the green . . . their consistent all-round
performance.
H
silv: 31 f
rr * j
tm
SILVER KING "PLUS" 3/- SILVER KING "TOUGH" 2/6
SILVER PRINCE 2/- SILVER KING "LYNX" 1/6
All available in Mesh and Recess Marking.
SLAZENGERS PERSONAL MODEL GOLF
CLUBS
Designed by GENE SARAZEN—HELEN HICKS
incorporating the features of world champions, the range
of Gene Sarazen Clubs for men and Helen Hicks Clubs
for lady players have given to Australian players a range
of clubs not to be bettered in any part of the world.
BADMINTON RACKETS and SHUTTLECOCKS
by SLAZENGERS
Owing to the increasing popularity of Badminton,
Slazengers have opened a section in their factory speci-
fically for the production of Badminton Rackets.
Slazengers contacted the leading British Badminton
player, Mr. J. F. Devlin, and have incorporated features
according to his specifications in their Badminton
Racket. The Slazenger Shuttlecock available in different
grades gives true flight for every volley.
in the Cygnet Association, and 3 in the
Esperance Association. Geeveston ap-
pears to have abandoned the game al-
together in recent years, the young men
of that district devoting their time to ten-
nis and angling.
The Huon Association has a roll of
nearly 300 memlbers, this being the
largest of any cricket association in Tas-
mania. This year, the association will
conclude a 12-years’ competition for the
Edward Lewis Shield (London), which
has been won by Huonville, as that club
is now in an unbeatable position. Two
seasons ago, however, it was possible for
any one of four clubs (Huonville, Glen
Huon, Franklin, and Lymington) to win
the trophy.
BADMINTON
During the past few years badminton
has made considerable progress in the
Huon. Clubs are now established at
Huonville, Cygnet, Glen Huon, Franklin,
Geeveston and Braeside. An association
has been formed and a roster of matches
is arranged annually that creates much
interest. Some of the players are show-
ing promise of reaching a very high
standard.
TENNIS
Tennis was introduced into the Huon
by Dr. G. M. Anderson, who, in 1893,
with the assistance of Mr. E. L. Hall,
police magistrate at Franklin, but now
of Launceston, had a court built on a
flat piece of land on the bank of Price’s
Creek, near the residence of Mrs. N. B.
Barnett. The court was made of clay,
and played remarkably well for a few
years. Dr. Anderson then had an asphalt
court constructed behind his residence
near the Lady Franklin Hotel. The
next court that was built was at Ship-
wright’s Point by the Inches family, and
then another was made at Franklin on
the property of St. John’s Church. After
this a great impetus was given the
game when courts were built at Clifton,
Ranelagh, Geeveston, Huonville, Dover,
Cygnet, Cradoc, Castle Forbes, and Glen
Huon. The game was taken up so en-
thusiastically at Geeveston that cricket
has been almost abandoned in that
centre.
Associations were formed in which the
clubs of Geeveston and southwards com-
prised the Esperance Association, and
all those to the north formed the Huon
Associatioin. All the clubs have at one
time or another enjoyed leading posi-
tions in their respective associations,
and this has greatly tended to keep up
interest in the game. Geeveston has
more courts than any other centre, but
at Huonville the number of members
offering for one of the clubs was so
great that membership had to be re-
stricted, in spite of the fact that night
playing was possible.
GOLF
Golf was taken up in the Huon in 1932,
and has made very rapid progress since
then. The first links were laid down by
the Huonville Club on Mr. R. Walton’s
property, at Huonville, but this site was
not considered entirely suitable. An
offer was then made to allow a 9-hole
course to be laid down on the Grove Es-
tate, the property of Messrs. Cyril and
Frank Parsons. Here the terrain was
particularly favourable, and the club
transferred to the new site on July 26,
1932. After some experience the players
■!elt that an improvement in the first lay-
out of the course could be designed, and
Messrs. Robt. and Len. Nettlefold were
consulted, who recommended several im-
portant alterations, which were effected,
with the result that this course is now
considered equal to any in the Southern
portion of the State.
The first President was Mr. G. C.
Frankcomb, Warden of the Huon, and
the first secretary, Mr. T. A. Crump.
The present holders of these offices are
Messrs. Alex. C. Parsons and Gordon
Smith, respectively. The Club’s repre-
sentatives have done well in open com-
petitions, one of them, Mr. D. F. Cal-
vert, formerly one of the Huon’s most
prominent cricketers, has this year won
the Southern Country Championship.
Soon after the formation of the Huon-
ville Club another was formed at Geeves-
ton. Here the members had a very
heavy task in clearing the land of timber
to lay down a 6-holes course. The situa-
tion is all that could be desired, and when
circumstances permit the necessary three
more holes to be added to the course,
Geeveston should have a links that will
attract golfers from all parts of the
State.
A third Club has been formed at Cyg-
net, and very gratifying progress has
been made at this centre also. The Club
was started largely on the initiative of
Dr. C. C. Marshall, who has since re-
turned to Melbourne. The present
President is Mr. C. W. Flood, and the
secretary, Mr. R. A. Coupe. A suitable
site for the links was secured, and the
members have made commendable pro-
gress in bringing the putting greens up
to a first-class standard for play.
BOWLING
The latest outdoor sporting activity to
be taken up in the Huon was bowling.
The first meeting to inaugurate a club
was held at Franklin on December 13,
1933, and the proposal was taken up so
enthusiastically that in the following
year a green was established on the re-
serve at the south side of the Franklin
Recreation Ground. The contractor for
the work was Mr. W. Coleman, a former
resident of Franklin, who unfortunately
died just before the green was ready to
be opened. The young club received gen-
erous support from the Hobart clubs,
and has made gratifying progress. A
ladies’ club was formed to participate in
the game, and much interest has been
taken by them in the practices and
matches. The first and present Presi-
dent has been Mr. D. E. Ryan, and the
secretary Mr. W. R. Yeates. Inter-club
matches have been played both at Frank-
lin and Hobart, and the Huon Club has
acquitted itself creditably. The cost of
the green and the club house has been a
little over £4OO.
ROWING
While the early sportsmen were
handicapped through the absence of
suitable grounds for the holding of
athletic contests on land, no such disa-
bility hindered the holding of rowing
races. The Huon course was acknow-
ledged from the time the first settlers
arrived in the district, as one of
the best that could be got anywhere
for rowing; and it was not long before
boats were built and crews formed. The
ideal conditions which almost always
prevailed for training enabled the oars-
men to reach a very high standard of
proficiency, and Huon crews gained so
many successes that they established a
State-wide reputation.
The late Mr. Henry Judd, many years
ago, wrote in his diary a reference to
this sport, which is not without its
humorous side. He wrote: “In these
early times the sports of the district
began with boat racing, the chief ex-
citement being that of a teetotal crew,
who defied the colony for the champion-
ship. They went to Hobart and beat
all their opponents; also to New Norfolk,
taking away the best prizes. Great
was the determination of the drinking
party to have us beaten. Upon one
occasion they got the best men they
could as a crew, and so sure were they
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


PERSONALITIES
HON. A. G. OGILVIE, K.C., LL.B., M.A.
Hon. A. G. Ogilvie has a record of 17
consecutive years as a representative of
the Division of Franklin in the State
HON. A. G.
OGILVIE.
State elections of 1922, 1925, 1928, 1931,
.and 1934, and has always been recognised
as one of the most forceful and capable
debaters in the State legislature. To-day
he is undoubtedly one of the most promi-
nent figures in the Australian Labour j
Party. In the Lyons’ Ministry, from [
1923 to 1927, Mr. Ogilvie was Attorney-
General and Minister for Education, and
from 1924 was Minister for Mines and
Minister in control of the Forestry De-
partment. During this, his first ex-
perience in Ministerial office, he achieved
a good deal, more particularly in respect
to education, in which he took a very
keen interest. Since he took over the
leadership of the Labour Party in Tas-
mania in 1929, Mr. Ogilvie has occupied
a prominent position in State politics.
When the Labour Government succeeded
to office in 1934, he was appointed
Premier without portfolio, and since then
he has carried on the administration of
the State with a great deal of credit to
himself and the Labour Party.- Many
new and desirable works have been insti-
tuted since the Government took office.
The Premier has had the utmost co-
operation from all Ministers, and the
goodwill of all members of his Party.
Mr. Ogilvie is the head of the legal firm
of Ogilvie, McKenna, and Morris. He
■was appointed a King’s Counsel in 1925,
and is a Magistrate for the Territory.
He is also a Commissioner of Affidavits
and a Justice of the Peace for Aus-
tralian States.
HON. H. S. BAKER, M.H.A.
The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. H.
S. Baker, commenced life as a pressman
on the staff of “The Daily Post” in
HON. H. S.
BAKER, M.H.A.
enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force
and served abroad until his return to
Australia in March, 1919. He first saw
service in the 4th Field Ambulance,
which unit he left for the Infantry at
the end of 1916. In the Infantry he
served with the 13th Battalion, was
awarded the Distinguished Service Order
and mentioned in despatches. After
return to Australia, he resumed his
studies in the chambers of a Melbourne
Barrister for 12 months, and then, re-
turning to Tasmania, practised his pro-
fession in Hobart. At the election held
in May, 1928, he first contested a seat
for the electoral division of Franklin, for
which he was returned. After this
•election, Mr. Lyons’ Government resigned
and in the new Government formed by
Mr. (now Sir John) McPhee, he was
appointed Attorney-General and Minister
for Education. He held these portfolios
during the 6 years that the McPhee
Government remained in office. After
the election of May, 1934, when Mr.
Ogilvie’s Government came into office, he
was appointed Deputy Leader of the Op-
position, which office he retained until
about 6 months ago, when, on the retire-
ment of Sir Walter Lee from the leader-
ship, he was appointed Leader of the
Opposition.
HON. W. H. CALVERT, M.L.C.
No apple grower in the Commonwealth
has a wider reputation for the production
•of high grade apples than Hon. W. H.
HON. W. H.
CALVERT, M.L.C.
Parliament, during
which time he has
done much good work
in the interests of the
district he represents
and the State as a
whole. Mr. Ogilvie
was a young man
when he was first
elected to the House
of Assembly on May
31, 1919, and he has
held his seat con-
tinuously since that
date. He has success-
fully contested the
Hobart, and later
graduated in the legal
profession. He ob-
tained the degree of
Bachelor of Laws in
the University of Tas-
mania in 1912, being
awarded the “Back-
house Walker Scholar-
ship” for the most
successful course of
study. Continuing his
studies at the Uni-
versity, he graduated
Master of Laws at the
end of 1914. In
February, 1915, he
Calvert, M.L.C., who
is in partnership with
his son, Mr. D. F.
Calvert, in the owner-
ship of “Forest
Home,” formerly the
residence of Madame
Amy Sherwin, Tas-
mania’s famous sing-
er. When Mr. Calvert
purchased the proper-
ty from Mrs. J.
Nicholson, in 1895, it
comprised 19 acres of
orchard, producing
3,000 bushels of
apples, and there were 60 acres of grass
for fattening sheep and cattle. The
present production is in the vicinity of
30,000 bushels, and the “Forest Home”
pack has both an interstate and overseas
reputation that “Sells it on the Label.”
In his desire to establish a reputation
for his own fruit, Mr. Calvert realised
that it would be to his advantage, as
well as that of his fellow growers, if
Tasmania were “put on. the map” as an
apple producing country, and with that
object in view he became a competitor
at all the big shows in the State and won
so many prizes that his method of pack
and the quality of his fruit were every-
where made the standard of other
growers and packers. He then went
further afield and began winning prizes
at the Royal Shows in Melbourne, Syd-
ney, and Brisbane, finally carrying off
the highest honours in London, where he
repeatedly won the great Orient Shield
for the best export apples suitable to
tho United Kingdom markets. These
remarkable successes did an infinite
amount of good to the fruit trade of
Tasmania, as they indisputably proved
that the island State was capable of
producing the highest quality of apples
grown anywhere, and a big uplift to the
trade followed. In 1924, Mr. Calvert
went to England to make personal in-
quiries into the conditions of marketing
the fruit in London and to ascertain if
there were any directions in which the
growers could assist the brokers to get
better prices by altering the get-up of
the fruit. As the result, some valuable
suggestions were made which were
adopted by many growers to their ad-
vantage. Besides having been elected a
member of the Legislative Council on
three occasions, Mr. Calvert has been
a prominent member of the State Fruit
Advisory Board and the present State
Fruit Board. He was a leading cricketer
of the Huon for over 40 years, putting
up some records with the bat which still
stand.
»
SIR JOHN EVANS, K. 8., C.M.G.,
M.H.A.
SIR JOHN EVANS,
K. B., C.M.G.,
M.H.A.
The first effort had proved a financial
failure, possibly owing to lack of con-
tact between the owners of the vessels
and their prospective clients. No such
omission occurred on the second oc-
casion. Captain (as he then was)
Evans was deputed to spend a fortnight
making personal calls on the fruit-
growers, business people, and timber
cutters, to impress on them all the
great advantage it would be to have a
steamer service available instead of the
irregular and unreliable barges. He
covered the Channel, Cygnet, Franklin,
and Huonville districts, and subse-
quently declared that everywhere he
was received most cordially, as the
proposition appealed strongly to those
who had been greatly inconvenienced by
having at times to wait a fortnight for
their supplies or to get delivery of
produce. The position of Captain of the
little steamer, however, was no sinecure,
as he did his share of the manual
work with the crew. The Huon left
Hobart as a rule about 9 a.m., and
calling at Channel ports, Huon Island,
Garden Island Creek, Lymington, Gard-
ner’s Bay, Crooked Tree Point, Cygnet, J
Wattle Grove, Shipwrights’ Point, Castle
Forlbes Bay, and Franklin, reached
Huonville in the evening, and next
morning commenced the return journey
at 6 a.m., travelling down the east side
of the river. Owing to the absence of
jetties it was necessary to land or pick
up cargo direct from the banks of the
river. This sometimes involved the men
carrying bags of swedes, potatoes, etc.,
on their shoulders and walking through
the water up to their waists from the
boat to the shore.
Referring to his association with the
fruit industry in his dual capacity as
shipping manager and member of
Parliament, Sir John said when he first
entered the trade the production of
apples in the Huon only amounted to a
few thousand cases, but he saw the
industry rapidly advance until it became
the most prolific apple-producing centre
in the world. For many years prac-
tically the whole of the production was
sold on the interstate markets, but with
improved methods of transport, hand-
ling, and refrigeration the overseas
trade gradually increased until it
equalled that of the interstate ship-
ments. Peak periods of the interstate
trade were in 1918, when the Riverina
carried over 80,000 cases in one ship-
ment to Sydney, the total that week
from Tasmania for the New South
From 1887 until
the present year,
few men have been
so closely identified
with the industrial
and political affairs
of the Huon as Sir
John Evans. His
introduction to the
district was as the
master of the
trading steamer
Huon, which was
owned by the late
Captain W. Fisher.
This was the second
attempt to establish
a steamboat service
between Hobart and
the Southern ports
as far as Huonville.
Wales capital being just over 100,000
cases. So great was the demand at that
time for Tasmanian apples that the
whole of the vast quantity was sold at
an average price of about 7/-. In 1932,
another large consignment was lifted
by the Yarra from Hobart and the
Huon, amounting to over 60,000 cases.
In later years, the shipments of fruit
to Sydney have fallen off, the highest
weekly quantities being not more than
40,000 cases, while this year the ship-
ments to the same markets have not
been more than 30,000 cases, and then
on only one or two occasions.
For several years Sir John was in
command of the steamer Tasman,
running from Hobart to Sydney, so that
he not only had the experience of
supervising the handling of fruit from
Huon ports, but also from Hobart to
Sydney, and frequently effected im-
provements in the methods of handling
the fruit so as to prevent bruising.
Sir John has had a distinguished
career as a parliamentary representa-
tive, first of Kingborough (1897), and
when this electorate was combined with
the Huon he became one of the repre-
sentatives of the new electorate, and
has continuously held office ever since.
He has occupied the positions of
Premier and Treasurer of the State, and
was four times elected Speaker, his
occupancy of this office being the record
for Tasmania, over 15 years. In 1906
he was appointed by King George V.,
Commander of St. Michael and St.
George, and this was followed in 1925
by a Knighthood (K. 8.), in recognition
of his many public services.
Referring to the completion of 100
years of settlement in the Huon, Sir
John said he would not like to let the
opportunity go by without some refer-
ence to the Huon Regatta, which was
)the most important annual event in
the district, and has now reached its
86th year. “For nearly 50 years,” said
Sir John, “I have been present at this
regatta. How it has developed during
that period! In the early days I con-
veyed in the steamer Huon hundreds
of passengers to this function, princi-
pally from Huonville and Franklin.
Then, later, I had control of Huddart
Parker’s steamers running excursions
to the Huon regatta from Hobart. On
one occasion I witnessed the berthing of
the steamers Tasman, Oonah, and
Flora at the small jetty opposite Mr.
Ed. Geeves’s store at Shipwrights’
Point, having conveyed close on 4,000
excursionists from Hobart.
MR. W. D. PEACOCK
Among the pioneers of the Tas-
manian fruit and jam industry, no one
has done greater service than the late
William Davidson Peacock, who built
up the jam-making and apple exporting
company which still bears his name.
His life’s work was largely associated
with the development of the Huon
district.
On the death of his father, Mr. W. D.
Peacock left his home in Gloucester-
shire, England, and came to Tasmania.
He landed from the ship “Percy,” at
Hobart, in December, 1861, and joined
the staff of the jam manufacturing
establishment on the old wharf, which
was then owned and supervised by his
I uncle, the late Mr. George Peacock.
MR. W. D. PEACOCK.
Although only 13 years of age, the
young colonist set to work to study the
business in all its phases, bringing
about many improvements, and ulti-
mately becoming foreman.
Later, his uncle appointed him to the
management of his jam and pulp factory
at Franklin, which was commenced in the
early seventies of last century. Mr. Pea-
cock married a daughter of Mr. Woods,
of Oatlands, and the young couple com-
menced their married life at Franklin,
where for nine years, from 1876, they
took a responsible part in the com-
munity life of the Huon district. Mr.
Peacock, amongst many other activities,
was the superintendent of the Congre-
gational Sunday School.
Among interesting reminiscences of
the work of the early pioneers, he
recorded that on his first visit to the
Huon he had to walk on a bush track
from Hobart. Before the jam factory
was started at Franklin, the fruit was
taken to Hobart frequently by long
boats which were rowed to the mouth
of the Huon and then advantage taken
of sea breezes to sail and row the re-
mainder of the journey to Hobart.
After leaving Franklin, Mr. Peacock
commenced a jam factory on his own
account at Prince’s Wharf, Hobart,
associating with it the export of apples
to Great Britain and to the other
colonies. He established packing sheds
at Broadmarsh, New Norfolk, Franklin,
and Cradoc, purchasing fruit and having
it packed at these centres for sale over-
seas. In connection with the sale of it,
he made eleven trips to England, and it
can safely be said, that he was respon-
sible more than any other man for the
successful organisation of the valuable
fruit exporting industry of Australia.
While in England, jie fought many
actions against shipping companies for
faulty carriage of fruit, and was respon-
sible for large sums being paid by way
of compensation to fruitgrowers.
Commenting upon the conditions
which prevailed in the seventies, Mr.
W. D. Peacock, in 1894, said: “Fifteen
to twenty years ago, the apple export
trade was very different to what it is
at the present day; the fruit mostly sold
in Hobart, and very few growers had
any idea of consigning to distant ports
on their own account, thus saving inter-
mediate profits.”
Mr. Peacock was a life-long advocate
of temperance principles. His decision
to start on his own account in Hobart
was due to a request by his uncle to
take charge of some sections of his
brewing interests, which he refused, and
on insistence by his employer, he decid-
ed to leave him and make the venture
on his own. Starting in a small way,
by hard work and perseverance, and
with the able assistance of his wife, he
succeeded in building a fine business.
He retired in 1918, and it may be said
that he brought to a close a period of
pioneering activities in the interests of
the man on the land. His sudden death
in November, 1921, came as a great
shock to the people amongst whom he
had worked for so many years.
MR. D. E. RYAN
An outstanding personality in public
life in the Huon municipality has been
Mr. D. E. Ryan. At the early age of
25 years he became a member of the
Franklin Roads Trust,
and continued to hold
this position until the
inception of local
government, when he
was elected a repre-
sentative of the
Franklin ward and
continued to hold
office, with one short
break, until two years
ago, when a grateful
community made him
and his wife a public
presentation in recog-
nition of the many
MR. D. E. RYAN.
services he had rendered as a municipal
councillor and leader in the fruit industry
of Tasmania. Mr. Ryan’s public work
extended over 40 years. During that
time he was 11 times warden of the Huon
municipality, and it was largely on his
initiative that many important under-
takings were carried out. Among these
were the Franklin Town Hall, the
Franklin lighting and water schemes,
the Castle Forbes Hall. He was also
warden when the Huonville Town Hall
was built and took a prominent part in
securing the very favourable terms under
which this building was financed. It was
probably as one of the founders of the
Huon Municipal Association and the Tas-
manian Municipal Association that he
was most prominent as a municipal
leader. He was chairman of the former
organisation for many years after its
inauguration and was second president
of the State body, and in both of them
did outstanding work. As a member of
the first State Fruit Advisory Board,
Mr. Ryan was foremost in initiating or
discussing the reforms that this body
was successful in bringing about, and
when the Federal Government or other
authorities had to be appealed to for
concessions he was invariably one of the
delegates sent on behalf of Tasmania.
For a brief period, about 18 years ago,
Mr. Ryan was a parliamentary repre-
sentative of the Huon electorate, but he
was not ambitious in this sphere and
did not re-nominate when the period of
his election expired.
MR. EDGAR NORRIS
Mr. Edgar Norris, Warden of Cygnet,
was born at Franklin, in 1870, and
followed the occupation of orchardist.
About 20 years ago,
he purchased a prop-
erty at Glaziers’ Bay,
which he devoted to
orcharding and gener-
al-farming. Hfe has
been a most success-
ful orchardist, having
quite a reputation for
the colour and quality
of the apples which
he produces. He pos-
sesses a most un-
selfish character and
has a keen sense of
public duty. He has
MR. EDGAR
NORRIS.
taken a leading part in all matters
tending to promote the welfare of the
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


HOTEL DOVER
-*i
& i':jl|';i mi
*&<£&
» -4
Gloriously situated on the Sandy Shores of Port
Esperance.
Within easy reach of Adamson's Peak, the famous
Hartz Mountains, and the Hastings Caves and
Hot Springs.
'Phone: Dover 10.
Fishing, Rowing, Motor Launch Trips available.
Declared by the Licensing Bench to be one of the
best Country Hotels in Tasmania.
First-Class Accommodation and Cuisine at
Moderate Rates.
J. J. DALTON, Proprietor.
Don't Fail to Visit RUNDLE'S and Inspect their Huge Stocks
SB
mm
Si
11
WtllmM,
m
iiii
■
m
■
m
m
•r ' ,
mm
m
wm
wm
m
m
m
ms
iiilii
M
W
M
m
m
m
E
i
m
m
m
S
fern
m
■ -
8!
€
i
n
*
mi
m
m
sw
m
m
m
m
M
mm
in
m
ex
ENGAGEMENT RINGS
WEDDING RINGS
WE OFFER YOU
Better Value
Better Selection
Better Service
Newer Goods in
Chiming Clocks
Striking Clocks
Rolex Watches
Cyma Watches
Crystal and Silver-
ware
Cutlery Cabinets
Dinner Services
Tea Sets, Silver
and China
Royal Doulton
Ware
Toilet Sets
Dressing Sets
Shaving Outfits
Water Sets
Fireside Sets
DIAMOND SET WATCHES
WATCH REPAIRERS, MANUFACTURERS, ENGRAVERS, AND SUPPLIERS OF TROPHIES
RUNDLE'S, Corner Liverpool b Elizabeth Streets, Hobart
district. In 1917, Mr. Norris was elected
a member of the Cygnet Municipal
Council, and, excepting for a short break,
has held the position ever since. On May
1, 1924, he was elected Warden of the
Municipality, holding office for one year.
He was re-appointed Warden on Septem-
ber 27,1935, when the office became vacant
on account of the death of Mr. Arthur
Davies, and was again re-elected at the
annual meeting of the Council on May
7, 1936. Among other positions held
with credit by Mr. Norris is that of
member of the State Fruit Advisory
Board and also of the State Fruit Board,
being a member of the latter body at
the present time. He was appointed a
Justice of the Peace for the district on
April 14, 1920, and for the past two
years has been the Council representative
on the Licensing Bench.
MR. E. BURGESS
Mr. Edward Burgess, Warden of
Esperance, was born at Geeveston in
1870, and commenced work as a timber
MR. E. BURGESS.
occupation, until now he is one of the
largest producers of apples in the
Geeveston district. For the past 25
MR. G. C.
FRANKCOMB.
worker. In 1891, he
purchased the proper-
ty he now lives on,
“Fernleigh,” and for a
number of years con-
fined his attention
chiefly to dairying.
In his “spare” time
the young farmer
cleared land for an
orchard, and as the
trees came into bear-
ing he gradually drop-
ped out of the dairy-
ing and made fruit-
growing his chief
years, Mr. Burgess has represented the
Liverpool ward in the Esperance Muni-
cipal Council, and has only had to contest
one election—2l years ago—in that
period. During that time he has occupied
the offices of Treasurer, Deputy Warden,
and, for the last eight years, Warden.
He has also been chairman of the Geeves-
ton Hall Committee for 23 years. Be-
sides taking a very keen interest in all
his municipal duties, Mr. Burgess has
found time to assist other public bodies
in the district, having filled the positions
of President of the Kermandie Football
Club, the Geeveston Cadet Association,
the Southport Regatta Association, the
Esperance Cricket Association, the
Parents and Friends’ Association of the
Geeveston School, and for many years
was Chairman of the Huon Fruit Board,
a member of the Port Huon Shipping
Committee, and a Director of the Huon
Deep Water Cool Stores.
MR. G. C. FRANKCOMB
Mr. G. C. Frankcomb, second son of
the late Courtney and Mrs. Frankcomb,
of Amesbury, Ranelagh, after leaving
school worked in his father’s orchard for
some years. He vol-
unteered for service
in the Great War and
on returning engaged
in commercial activi-
ties. He was for some
years associated with
the Tasmanian Orch-
ardists and Producers’
Co-operative Associa-
tion, and then resign-
ed to accept an ap-
pointment as Huon
representative of
Messrs. A. G. Webster
and Sons Ltd., of Hobart. Mr. Frankcomb
has taken a very active part in the pub-
lic life of the Huon. In 1921 he be-
came a member of the Huon Municipal
Council as a representative of the Vic-
toria ward, and the following year was
appointed Warden, and was re-elected
to this position in the next two years.
Business activities precluded his taking
such an active interest in municipal
affairs for the next few years, but in
1931 he was again induced to offer him-
self as a candidate for the wardenship,
and has been re-elected (mostly with-
out opposition) every year since then.
He therefore holds the record of over
10 years of occupancy of this important
office. As a member of the Huon Sub-
branch of the R.5.5.1.L.A., Mr. Frank-
comb also holds the unique record of
15i years as President, this being the
longest record of any sub-branch Presi-
dent in the Commonwealth. Other
positions he has filled are Chairman of
the Huon Football Association, Presi-
dent Huonville Golf Club, Patron Huon-
ville Football Club, and representative
of the southern municipalities on the
executive of the Tasmanian Municipal
Association. Mr. Frankcomb was
largely responsible for the successful
flotation of the Huon Deep Water Cool
Store Company.
MR. RICHARD GEEVES
Mr. Richard Geeves belongs to the now
small band of patriots who formed the
first municipal councils in Tasmania in
1907, but his association with public
duties dated 20 years further back than
that, as he was elected a member of the
Geeveston Road Trust when a very young
man, and succeeded his father, O. Geeves,
two years later as chairman of the trust,
which position he occupied for 18 years.
After the Esperance Municipal Council
had been functioning for a year or so,
Mr. Geeves was appointed warden, and
held that office for 14 years. During
that time Esperance had to face many
difficulties, owing to having long lines
of roads and very small revenues, but the
best value possible was got for the
money spent through the careful hus-
bandry of the municipality’s resources
by the warden and his fellow councillors
and officers. He retired from the council
eight years ago, and his long and dis-
tinguished public services were acknow-
ledged by the ratepayers making him
and his wife very handsome presentations
prior to their holiday trip to England,
when Mr. Geeves visited the birthplace of
his father in Cambridgeshire. Mr.
Geeves has been a Justice of the Peace
since 1900; has been a member of the
Licensing Court from about the same
time; and has held the important office
of District Coroner for the past 18 years.
He was a member of the Huon Regatta
Association for 38 years, for 30 of which
he was treasurer, and saw the receipts
for the regatta rise from £3B to £l4o—
second year after permission was
given by the then owner of the property,
Mr. R. A. Robertson, to fence off the
reserve and make a charge for admission.
He has been an ardent churchman all
his life, having been an officer of the
Geeveston Congregational Church “as
long as he can remember.”
THE LATE T. A. FRANKCOMB
When the fruit industry of Tasmania
began to assume such proportions that
it was an important factor in the State’s
exports, progressive growers realised
that the time had come when production
would have to be increased and costs
reduced if markets were to be won and
retained. It was at this time—about
40 years ago—that the late T. A. Frank-
comb became a prominent figure in the
industry. His father, the late T. J. A.
Frankcomb, settled at “Clifton,” on the
Mountain River, in 1851. The property
was managed subsequently by the late
C. G. Frankcomb, and later divided into
“Clifton” and “Amesbury,” T. A. Frank-
comb taking the former and his brother,
C. G. Frankcomb, the latter. In 1893,
the “Glen Farm” was purchased from
the estate of the late Sami. Page and
added to “Clifton.” It comprised 30 acres
orchard, and some paddocks and bush.
Hops were planted in 1911, and did re-
markably well. Between 1900 and 1924,
a further 30 acres were planted with
orchard, including the “Dorothy Orch-
ard.” This was Mr. Frankcomb’s special
pride, as the pruning of the trees and
other features were a departure from the
recognised practices of the time. Its
success has caused it to be frequently
referred to as the “Model Orchard,”
many subsequent plantings being along
the same lines. Since the death of this
progressive orchardist in 1924, a further
area has been planted and many of the
varieties in the older orchards have given
place to more profitable ones. The prop-
erty now consists of 120 acres of or-
chard, about half of which is under five
years, while there are 18 acres of hops
and 50 acres of paddocks. The late T.
A. Frankcomb was a brilliant footballer
in his young days, being regarded by
many good judges of the game as one
of the cleverest rovers the district has
seen, and this in spite of his lack of
weight and height. He was also a
talented musician, and generously assist-
ed all public bodies whenever the
opportunity came his way.
THE LATE ARTHUR DAVIES
No reference to the history of Port
Cygnet could be written without mention
being made of the great services rendered
by the late Arthur Davies. Commencing
his public career as a member of the
Port Cygnet Road Trust, he became a
municipal councillor in 1907, and had the
unique distinction of being warden of
the council for 17 years, on nearly every
occasion being elected unopposed. As
a far-seeing, public spirited man, Mr.
Davies had few equals. Most of
the public utilities that have made Cyg-
net such an up-to-date township have,
been the outcome of his advocacy, and
their satisfactory financial position due
to his wise administration. Improved
roads, public halls, a town water scheme,
electric light and power, and improved
sanitation are only some of the benefits
which the district enjoys that he took a
leading part in bringing to a successful
conclusion. Among other positions which
he held were the representative of the
Tasmanian fruitgrowers in Sydney in
1918 and 1919, during which he adjusted
many of the misunderstandings that
prevailed between the fruit brokers and
the growers. He was appointed a
Coroner of the State in 1917, and held
the position until his death. The extent
of his interests is shown by the fact
that he was Secretary of the Cygnet
Regatta Association for 15 years and
remained an active member of that body
for an even longer period; Chairman of
the Cygnet Football Club; Chairman of
the Cygnet Athletic Club; member of the
Licensing Bench. As a recognition of
his splendid services as chairman of the
local court, the Government, in 1933,
appointed Mr. Davies Justice of the
Peace for the State. He was Chairman
of the State Fruit _ Advisory Board and
re-elected several times until he desired
to be relieved of the office. On three
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


occasions the public at Cygnet gave ex-
pression to the gratitude they felt for
Mr. Davies’ great services to the district
by making him presentations, and on
each occasion there were remarkable
demonstrations of goodwill and appre-
ciation. Mr. Davies died on September
24, 1935, from a heart affection, when
still carrying on most of the activities
in which he had for many years been
associated.
MR. ROBT. NETTLEFOLD
The Huon district, in common with
most other communities, owes much of
its development to the men, who, while
not residents, have, through their busi-
ness interests, had an important indirect
effect on its development. Outstanding
among these is Mr. Robert Nettlefold,
general merchant and pioneer of the
motor industry in Tasmania.
Commencing business on his own ac-
count 35 years ago in a single room in
an old-fashioned building in Elizabeth
Street, Hobart, with practically no
capital, but with
MR. ROBERT
NETTLEFOLD.
chardists, fertilisers,
and the purchase of apples, hops, wool,
and skins. These have brought him into
contact with all sections of primary pro-
ducers. Salesmen and representatives
of his firm, in all types of motor vehicles,
from the ancient auto-buggy of the In-
ternational Harvester Company, with
a chain drive, to the latest product of
General Motors Corporation, of both of
which companies he is the Tasmanian
representative, have been familiar
figures on the roads of the Huon and
throughout Tasmania for the past thirty
years.
From the small beginnings of the
single room in Elizabeth Street, the busi-
ness expansion over the intervening
years has brought about the acquisition
of the commodious premises in Mac-
quarie Street with garage and service
shops, with other buildings for body
works, service stations, machinery, and
fertiliser stores. The companies now
associated with Robert Nettlefold Pty.
Ltd. comprise Motors Pty. Ltd., Tas-
manian Motor Services Pty. Ltd., Yellow
Cabs (Tas.) Ltd., Tasmanian Woollen
Mills, etc. Premises have also been ac-
quired for the company’s purposes at
Launceston, Burnie, Ulverstone, and
Huonville.
Mr. Nettlefold has lived a very full
life. Apart from his many business in-
terests, he is an outstanding personality
in the world of golf, and was responsible
for the establishment of the beautiful
and up-to-date Kingston Beach links.
When the idea of forming golf links in
the Huon was mooted his advice was
sought and given freely on the layout of
the Huonville Club’s course. As presi-
dent of the Lawn Tennis Association he
still retains a keen interest in the game
which he played so well in earlier years
as a representative “A” grade player.
He has been treasurer of the Red Cross
Society of Tasmania since its inception,
and for his services was awarded the
honour of 0.8. E. in 1920.
While on a trip overseas last year,
Mr. Nettlefold spent a considerable
amount of time investigating methods
of marketing Tasmanian fruit in Great
Britain and on the Continent, and the
knowledge so gained has been of use to
the firm in connection with the purchas-
ing of fruit from orchardists.
While Mr. Robert Nettlefold is Chair-
man of Directors, the management of
this extensive organisation has now
passed into the hands of Mr. Len Nettle-
fold, who has been appointed Managing
Director. Mr. Len Nettlefold has also
established a fine reputation in the golf-
ing world, having won some years ago
the amateur championship of Australia,
and he has brought into his manage-
ment of the business that keenness and
enthusiasm which have been responsible
for his success in his sporting activi-
ties.
SETTLERS" DIFFICULTIES
Speaking’ of the difficulties that the
settlers had to contend with in those early
days, Mrs. Linnell said in addition to
household duties, her mother found time
to give her children their first lessons
in reading and writing. At the age of
9 years, she commenced school at the
Congregational Chapel, Huonville. In
spite of the absence of transport facilities,
however, the family never were in actual
want of any necessity. Almost all the
chief essentials were grown on the farm.
There was abundance of milk, eggs, pota-
toes, and flour, and as the children grew
up, they did their share of the work to
cope with the growing needs. The few
families that were settled in the district
made periodical visits to one another, and
occasionally dances and picnics were held,
which were about the only forms of
superabundant cour-
age and energy, Mr.
Nettletold has built
up one of Tasmania’s
leading business or-
ganisations, with
branches in all parts
of the State. His
commercial activities
have been many-sided,
including the sale of
agricultural machin-
ery of all kinds,
motor-trucks and cars,
tractors, and spraying
machinery for or-
amusement possible. In the absence of
vehicles, the people all walked from one
place to another. The roads were terrible,
and could not be traversed at night except
with the aid of a hurricane lantern lignt.
The music for the dances was supplied
iby violins and a concertina, 'ihe "tid-
dlers,” as they were called, came from
Hobart for the big dances. The picnics
were usually held at “The Tongue,” now
known as the “Inlet,” near the Huonville
bridge. On Sundays most of the families
attended church. They took their dinners
with them, and after partaking the meal,
the members of the choir held a practice
for the next Sunday’s hymns, 'ihe first
Church of England at Kanelagh was a
brick building near the cemetery, and
there was a gallery in it for the choir.
Later, a second church was built which
was destroyed by a bush fire about
twenty years after it was erected. Kev.
Crook was the first preacher, and Miss
Linnell played the harmonium.
Mrs. Linnell said she well remembered
the time when the bushrangers were at-
tacking settlers in lonely parts, and the
fear that most people had of them.
“Rocky” Whelan worked in the district
for some years, and she used to think he
was a wonderful man. He was sometimes
left in charge of her father’s house, and
none of the family was afraid of him.
That, of course, was (before he went “on
the road,” but knowing him as she did,
Mrs. Linnell said she could never under-
stand how he came to perpetrate the
deeds ihe did. Another well-known char-
acter whom she met was John Price, of
Port Arthur fame, who often visited her
father’s place, and though he had the
reputation of being very hard and cruel,
he always appeared a thorough gentleman
when visiting the Grove. He was a tall
man, of impressive appearance. On one
occasion he offered Mrs. Linnell a ride on
his horse to save her a walk from the
Glen homestead. She accepted the offer
gladly, and was taken safely home. It
appeared that Price was in charge of a
gang of ticket-of-leave men who were
splitting palings near the Grove, and he
used to ride occasionally from Franklin,
where he was then stationed, to check up
the work, and make arrangements for the
transport of the timber to the river,
whence they were carried by barges to
Hobart.
Mrs. Linnell’s worst experience was
being bitten by a pig when two years of
age. She was sitting down near the
house one morning, eating a piece of bread
and butter, when the animal came up
and, in attempting to take the bread
from her, bit three fingers of her left
hand, cutting the flesh into the bone.
Fortunately, Mr. J. W. Kellaway was
neaflby at the time, and beat the animal
off. The marks still remain where the
wound was made.
Fires were the most terrifying exper-
iences that the early settlers had to con-
tend with. On one occasion a fire seemed
to sweep through the whole of the Huon
valley, and Mrs. Linnell could remember
one man who had come from Franklin,
who was suffering most acutely, both his
hands having (been burnt while he was
escaping from the flames.
An interesting relic in Mrs. Linnell’s
possession is a piece of wood about 12
inches by 10 inches, with the inscription
cut deeply in splendidly formed letters
“I. Riddel, December 25, 1819.” This
notice was discovered by her husband
one day cut into the trunk of a stringy
bark tree on the bank of the Huon near
Mr. J. M. Wallis’ property, Ranelagh.
From inquiries made subsequently, it
appears that Riddel was a surveyor, and
that he had been sent by the Govern-
ment to obtain certain information re-
garding that portion of the country.
Apparently he spent Christmas Day in
the vicinity of the tree, and left his
mark. It was fortunate that Mr. Lin-
nell cut the inscription from the tree
when he did, for a few months after-
wards a bush fire went through that
part of the country, and the tree was
burnt down.
In spite of the fact that she is a nona-
genarian, Mrs. Linnell still enjoys a fair
measure of good health. Gardening is
her hobby, and at every season of the
year, she has a wealth of blooms in her
garden. Her family circle is a large
one, including 12 grandchildren, and
13 great-grandchildren, and she de-
lights in the company of all .of them.
Mrs. Linnell expressed pleasure at the
intention of the Huon Newspaper Co.
Pty Ltd. to make permanent record of
some of the deeds of the early settlers
of the Huon, adding that such a publi-
cation might impress on the present
generation how much they have to be
thankful for in the posession of such
advantages as good roads,
telephones, wireless communication,
electric appliances, and the many other
modern conveniences.
FEATS OF STRENGTH.
Among the feats of strength perform-
ed out of ’necessity by some of the early
settlers is that of “Sailor” Clark, a
bushman, who carried a bag of flour
(2001b.) on his back from Franklin to
his home at Castle Forbes Bay, a dis-
tance of over four miles. James Reeve
is credited with a similar feat, but he
carried the bag of flour from the Frank-
lin wharf to his home up Hope Hill, one
of the steepest roads in the district.
It is interesting to read the story of
educational development in Tasmania
and to find that Sir John Franklin was
so intimately connected with its founda-
tion. It is significant that many of his
far-reaching and far-sighted schemes for
higher education are only now being
fully developed. In the early years of
the colony the education of the children
was in the hands of the various religious
bodies, who carried on a few primary
schools receiving a certain amount of
State aid. These were admittedly in-
efficient, but still were doing useful
work. Secondary education received no
Government help at all. There were no
public grammar schools, but a few
private schools were conducted by
various persons, some of which, con-
sidering the educational facilities avail-
able to them, reached a satisfactory
standard, whilst others certainly could
not claim to even this distinction.
i In 1839 Sir John Franklin originated
the first State education scheme in
Tasmania. This included a Board of
Education nominated by the Govern-
ment, and State aid was only given to
schools directly -under the Board. In
1840 there were 24 schools under the
Board with 785 pupils. These schools
were undenominational, though some
religious instruction was given by
visiting clergymen. The religious
bodies were greatly opposed to these
schools, and by their efforts a system of
subsidised denominational schools was
formed side by side with the Board
schools. These proved too strong for
the latter, and eventually the Board of
Education ceased to function.
EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
ESTABLISHED.
In 1853 a system of grants-in-aid to
undenominational schools was adopted,
and the schools were once more placed
under a board nominated by the Govern-
ment. In 1885 an Education Act estab-
lished a State Department of Educa-
tion, and this method of control has con-
tinued to the present day. In 1912 its
scope was extended by the establishment
of the State High Schools, and further
in 1918, when Technical Education came
directly under its control. In 1906 a
Training College for teachers, a scheme
first mooted in the early ’forties, was
at last established.
In the early days there was no ade-
quate provision for Secondary Educa-
tion, although there were a few private
schools. These schools, however, suf-
fered from the fatal defect from the
point of view of the community; they
were each and all dependent entirely on
the ability of the gentleman conducting
them, and lacked stability in the event of
his ill-health or death. For still higher
education no provision whatever was
available, and colonial students were
forced to travel to the Old Country for
this purpose. In addition to the expense
thus involved, it must be remembered
that a voyage to and from Europe in
those days occupied a considerable por-
tion of a year, and these two disadvant-
ages closed this avenue to all but the
rich. Those with moderate incomes
were forced to see their sons growing
up with educational advantages much
inferior to their own, and this at a time
when the value of education to the com-
munity as a whole was beginning to be
fully recognised.
An attempt was made in 1826 in the
North to form a Collegiate Institution
resembling a University College for the
education of youths and the advance-
ment of science. It was too ambitious,
and the scheme fell through.
The Government determined in 1828
to establish the King’s Grammar
School at New Norfolk, and in 1833
the project was revived by Governor
Arthur. He seems to have desired
to commence a Collegiate Institu-
tion, and in March of that year
took advantage of the visit to the colony
jof the Venerable Archdeacon Brough-
ton (afterwards the first Bishop of Aus-
tralia) to confer with him as to the es-
tablishment of such an institution. He
went so far as to propose that money
should be voted for the purpose, condi-
tional on a like sum being subscribed
by the public.
The Archdeacon was of the opinion
that it would be necessary first to have
a Grammar School before the higher
work of a College could be entered upon.
The latter scheme did not mature, and
nothing further was done for the time
being.
SUPERIOR SCHOOL ESTABLISHED.
In 1837 Sir John Franklin arrived to
take up the position of Governor. He
at once tackled the problem of secondary,
as well as primary education. His first
step was to get in touch with the famous
Dr. Arnold, of Rugby, and it was really
Arnold’s influence that shaped the
scheme which was afterwards formu-
lated. After a series of letters had
passed between Sir John and the Sec-
retary of State, a superior school was
opened in 1840 under the headmaster-
PROGRESS OF EDUCATION
HINDERED BY EARLY DIFFICULTIES
SIR JOHN FRANKLIN'S IDEALS BEING
FULFILLED
ship of John Phillip Cell, M.A., in Mac-
quarie Street; but Franklin’s scheme in-
cluded, besides a school, a college—an
institution for higher education—with a
charter giving legal stability and inde-
pendence.
“The institution is meant to keep at
the Head of Scholastic Establishments
of the Colony, and to draw them up to
the standard of English schools, while
growing itself into a college.” New
Norfolk was fixed upon as the site, and
on November 6, 1840, the first stone was
laid of Christ’s College. The building
was never proceeded with, although
Franklin continued his efforts to obtain
a charter and an endowment, but a
Grammar School, called the Queen’s
School, was established. Later on he
gave £5OO towards the scheme and Lady
Franklin gave over 400 acres of land in
Lenah Valley and the small museum
erected on it, into the hands of trustees
for the benefit of the future college. In-
to the subsequent history of Christ’s
College it is not possible to go, but now
—nearly 100 years after Franklin put
forward his scheme and after several
abortive attempts—something like his
suggestions has come into existence.
GRAMMAR SCHOOLS.
There were movements at this time on
foot to establish Grammar Schools in
Launceston and Hobart connected by a
College situated in the interior of the
island. Both schools were established
in 1846, the Church Grammar School in
May and the Hutchins School in August.
Other Secondary Schools were from time
to time established either by religious
bodies or by private initiative, and some
of these still survive. Among those de-
funct, the most interesting was Horton
College, a purely boarding school for
about 80 boys, which flourished for 40
years from its foundation in 1855. The
High School may also be mentioned,
which, in the building now occupied by
the University, was for 40 years the
only serious rival to the Hutchins
School among the boys’ schools of
Hobart.
COUNCIL OF EDUCATION.
In 1859 the Council of Education was
formed by Act of Parliament to mould
the standards of secondary education
through the medium of examinations
backed by scholarships and prizes of
considerable value. The educational
ladder was added to by the provision of
scholarships from the State primary to
the non-State Secondary Schools.
Tasmanian scholarships were also estab-
lished, which were similar to the Rhodes
scholarships of to-day, in that they pro-
vided for a full university course in
England.
FOUNDING OF THE UNIVERSITY.
The University of Tasmania was
founded in 1890, and took over the work
formerly done by the Council of Educa-
tion. At the present time about 300
students are taking various courses in
the five faculties of Arts, Science, En-
gineering, Law, and Commerce. The
University is taking its place, not only
as the leading educational force in Tas-
mania, but also among the Universities
of the mainland. The research work of
several members of the staff has gained
international reputation. Besides the
ordinary work of the University a num-
ber of Tutorial and Extension Classes
are arranged in co-operation with the
Workers’ Educational Association.
Lectures are given in a number of sub-
jects in Hobart, Launceston, and various
country centres throughout the State.
At last, after many years, the schemes
that were first brought forward by Sir
John Franklin are at last coining into
fruition, and it is fitting that, as we ap-
proach his Centenary celebrations, we
should remind ourselves of the aspira-
tions he had for the advancement of
education in this State.
THE ROYAL SOCIETY.
In addition to the schemes outlined
above, Sir John Franklin also founded
the Royal Society in 1843, which has con-
tinued to function ever since. Every
Governor of Tasmania from his time has
been President of this Society. In the
first place it had under its control not
only the Museum and the Botanical
Gardens, when established, but also car-
ried on the work which is now done by
such institutions as the Forestry
Department, Agricultural Department,
Mines Department, the Fisheries Boards,
and the Fauna Board. It publishes each
year valuable papers on scientific, his-
torical, and economical topics relating to
Tasmania. By means of exchanges,
gifts, and purchases it has built up one
of the finest scientific libraries in the
Southern Hemisphere. It claims to be
the oldest Royal Society outside Great
Britain, and this distinction is due to the
foresight of Sir John Franklin.
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


HOBART’S NEW LICENSED HOTEL
THE
HOTEL
AL
COLLINS STREET
HOBART
Service and Comfort Jhssured
A. E. BOYES, Manager
82 COLLINS STREET, HOBART.
miiiiiiMiiimiiiiiimiiiiiiiimimiimiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimmiiimiiiiiiiimiimimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiimiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
73
>
p
o
O
o
H
W
-V !
CD
CO
cd
CD
cn
CD
3
l/l
TO O >
C "i
=■ S- ET
Q- -i
5* "
IQ
>
O
a.
on J> "
2L = Ho
P ® O fl)
3 5 O
ro n>
3 y> -r
CO
fil
•HK "3
s s.
Li
“T
3
3"
CD
CD
Ol
Q_
5'
ID
O
X)
CD
to
■a
CD
n
Si*
So’
in
(U
in
3
U
5,
5'
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiMiiMiiiiiiii
THE FRANKLIN SCHOLARSHIP
An instance of the thoughtfulness and
foresight of Lady Franklin was her gift
of a block of land in the township of
Franklin, the rental of which should be
applied in perpetuity as a scholarship
for a boy living in the district. The
land is the block next to that belonging
to Miss Cuthbert. The rental is paid
to the trustees of Christ’s College, Ho-
bart. The scholarship is for a term of
three years, and the winner is entitled
to education at a secondary school in
Hobart. The first winner was Alfred
Herring, who won the honour in 1887,
and received it publicly in the Town
Hall, Franklin. Herring was a cousin of
Mr. D. E. Ryan, and left the Huon with
his parents to live in New Zealand in
1898.
BARBED WIRE.
Titan Barbed Wire is so constructed
that it gives maximum length to the
cwt. coil.
In the “Iowa” pattern the spacing of
barbs is 3iin., giving greater stability
to the fence. “Waukegan” pattern
barbs are spaced Sin. apart. Different-
ly constructed from Iowa patterns,
greater length of wire is obtained to
the cwt. reel. “Waukegan” pattern
is supplied on either wooden or wire
reels.
All Titan Barbed Wire is made from
Crapo Process Galvanised Wire, which
guarantees it double the life of ordinary
barbed wire.
STAPLES.
Titan Staples are made in standard
sizes with a slice cut from both Bright
and Galvanised Wire. They vary in
length and gauge from Jin. x 15 gauge
to 2in. x 8 gauge.
Dropped Staples are kept in stock of
2in., 2|in., and 2Jin. x 10 gauge. Other
sizes supplied by special arrangement.
WALL TIES.
Titan Wall Ties are 9in. long and
made from 8 gauge Galvanised Wire.
They are made in Plain and Drip Type.
The latter is designed so as to prevent
any water being carried from the outer
to the inner wall of a hollow brick wall.
The water falls from the bottom of the
drip.
All “Titan” products are made from
Australian Wire drawn by Messrs.
Rylands Bros. (Australia) Ltd., at New-
castle. The raw materials are obtained
from the Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd., to
which the Titan Nail and Wire Pty. Ltd.
is allied.
OUR ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In the compilation of this
issue much research has been
necessary, and the further the
old records and traditions were
inquired into the more interest-
ing did the work become. We can-
not claim that the publication
gives a complete reflex of all the
trials and difficulties that the
early settlers had to contend
with, or the manner in which the
changes and progress were
accomplished; but we offer it as
at least a partial tribute to the
men and women who gave their
lives to the conversion of the
great Huon forest into pros-
perous orchards and farms, and
in the hope that the present
generation will receive inspira-
tion from the success of their
forefathers and will exercise the
same grim determination and
honesty of purpose towards the
problems that beset them, what-
ever the future may have in
store.
In collecting information and
data we received much valuable
assistance from the following:—
“The Mercury.”
Dr. A. N. Lewis.
Mr. Basil W. Rait.
Mrs. A. McMullen.
Mr. W. H. Kennedy.
Mr. L. K. Geeves.
Mrs. C. M. Johnstone.
Mr. J. E. Philp.
Mrs. Olive M. Calvert.
Mr. W. H. Clemes.
Mr. C. Campbell Johnstone.
Mr. C. V. Davey.
Mr. W. Hudspeth.
Department of Education.
A large number of the
illustrations in this issue have
kindly been loaned by “The
Mercury.”
The illustration “Castle
Forbes Bay” was from a photo
by J. C. Breaden, not J. J.
Barnett.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936'.
TITAN NAIL AND WIRE (Continued).


TASMANIA'S LARGEST
HARDWARE STORE
NINETY YEARS OF PROGRESS
THE name of Charles Davis has been associated with Hardware since
the founder started business in Hobart, in 1847. In the early
days the workshop played the most important part in the activities
of the then very small business, and whilst to-day many of the same
lines are manufactured with the assistance of modern machinery, the
workshop is only one of twenty-six separate departments which cater
for the Wholesale and Retail Building Trade.
THE PRESENT WELL-KNOWN STORE.
Chief among these agencies was the
Massey-Harris Company’s lines of or-
charding and farming machinery, and
the excellent quality and wide range of
these implements, coupled with the effi-
cient service rendered by the agents,
made this particular line a household
word on practically every farm and or-
chard in the territory controlled by them.
Some three or four years ago an amal-
gamation between Massey-Harris Co.
and the H. V. McKay Harvester Co.,
Sunshine, was entered into, and later
Roberts and Co. Ltd. were appointed
sole agents in Southern Tasmania for
H. V. McKay, Massey-Harris Pty. Ltd.
This amalgamation enabled the agents
to offer to the public a still wider range
of implements, and to more efficiently
cater for the wants of their clients.
A more comprehensive range of imple-
ments of every description would be very
hard to find, and it would pay a
prospective purchaser to inspect this
line of machinery before going else-
where.
FRUITGROWERS’ INTERESTS.
Of special interest to those engaged in
the apple-growing industry is the fact
that in addition to all the necessary
machinery required to work the orchard
Roberts and Co. Ltd. handle all other
orchard requisites. They are distri-
butors for the Electrolytic Zinc Com-
pany’s “Lightning” Fertilisers, and also
have always in stock sulphate of am-
monia, potash, nitrate of soda, blood and
bone, etc., etc. Their line of spraying
materials is unbeatable, and comprises
the well-known brand of “Harola” lime
sulphur and “Harbas” prepared red
spray oil. Every line of spraying
material is procurable at this firm’s
stores. Apple-wrapping paper, straw-
boards, case nails, case material, fencing
material, including barb and plain wire,
are always available.
The “Lightning” fruit grader is
another of the excellent agencies which
this firm handles. The “Lightning” Fruit
Grader Co. is recognised as being ahead
of the times, and their product is gener-
ally the standard by which growers
judge the qualities of competitive
machines. The latest grader, which is
ROBERTS AND COMPANY LIMITED
Auctioneers & Stock Agents, Hobart
Established 1865.
MESSRS. Roberts and Co. Ltd. came into existence in the year 1865,
and at first confined their activities to the business of stock and
station agents and auctioneers. At a later date, they added certain
agencies to their business, so that they could cater for the whole
requirements of their numerous clients.
now available at Roberts and Co. Ltd.,
is one for grading by counts, and it is
believed that the introduction of this
method will be instrumental in obtain-
ing better prices on both interstate and
overseas markets,
GRAZING AND AGRICULTURE,
The other agencies which Roberts and
Co . Ltd . hold, including the Wolseley
sheep shearing Machinery Co., “Billa-
bong” windmills and pumps, etc., are too
numerous to particularise in this article,
b u t as mentioned earlier, the very wide
ran ge of requisites handled, enables the
fi rm to deal very efficiently and prompt-
jy with any inquiry or order received
f ro m farmers or graziers,
AUCTION SALES,
~,„ , ’ .
sa L e ? descriptions are
conducted, and in certain centres sales of
st °ck, etc., are held at regular intervals,
s \ lc h as monthly at Huonville, fort-
nightly at Sorell and Bridgewater,
every six weeks at Rosegarland, etc.
Again, sales of fat stock are held every
Wednesday, and carcase pork every
Thursday, at the Derwent Park abat-
toirs, and of pigs, milch cows, farm and
da iry produce of every description, at
their commodious and hygienic mart,
situated in the basement of their
machinery department, Lower Murray
Street.
At the produce and wool stores, Lower
Macquarie Street, grass and clover seeds,
rape , and in fact practically any seeds
for agricultural purposes, can be oh-
tained. From this department daily
sales of chaff and wood are held at the
ra ii wa y. Here also can be Obtained
chaff, wheat, oats, etc., chaff bags, wool
bales, sewing twine, sheep dip, etc.
The registered office of the Company
is situated at the corner of Murray and
Collins Streets, and it was practically
on this site that the firm commenced
operations.
During the 71 vears that the firm has
been trading i t has made steady progress,
and from a beginning catering for just
a few wants of the man on the land, it
can now supply practically the whole of
his requirements.
The first premises were in Bathurst
Street, and were occupied until 1862 by
Charles Davis and his partner, Joseph
Semple, when a move was made into a
small ironmonger’s shop on the corner of
Elizabeth Street and Elizabeth Lane (then
called Cat and Fiddle Alley). A build-
ing up this lane was used for the work-
shop, and this site is still occupied by the
firm. The same year Charles Davis
bought out his partner’s interest.
From the time the move was made to
these premises, the history of the business
has been one of steady progress, proper-
ties being purchased on both sides of the
lane as more premises became necessary,
until today all properties through to Mur-
ray Street are owned by the Company.
COMPANY FORMED.
In 1911, at the request of many of his
friends and customers the business was
floated into a Limited Company. In 1914
Charles Davis passed away in his 90th
year. He was a man of indomitable cour-
age and determination, a great philanthro-
pist, and a man who was respected by
everyone.
In 1920, Charles Davis, son of the
founder, retired from the management,
but continued to occupy the position of
BUILDING OCCUPIED BY CHARLES DAVIS FROM 1862.
Chairman, in which capacity he was still
able to give the Company the benefit of his
forty years’ experience in the busi-
ness. After his retirement, Alfred Davis,
as Managing Director, took control of
the whole business.
The same year the present retail store
was erected on the site of Beattie’s, the
photographer, and later —when the build-
ing was completed—all departments were
moved into the new premises. This meant
vacating the Murray Street shop. No. 2
shop, and the old shop, where 58 years
before goods were first retailed.
HUON PIONEER’S TRIBUTE.
It is interesting to note that in Novem-
ber, 1922, when the firm celebrated its
seventy-fifth anniversary, the following
letter was received from one of the Huon
pioneers:—
Dear Sirs,
I have been a customer of your firm
from the time Mr. Charles Davis first
started the business in Hobart. I left my
business to my two sons some years ago,
and they, in their turn, still deal with your
firm.
My relations with Charles Davis
Limited have always been of the most
pleasant nature, and highly satisfactory
to myself.
sc.
Wishing you another 75 years of suc-
cessful business,
I remain,
Yours truly,
(Sgfo.) OSBORNE GEEVES,
Huonville.
Charles Davis, son of the founder, died
in 1930, in his 65th year. He was a man
of many parts; few men in Australia were
better informed on hardware matters than
he, and he was equally proficient in many
branches of sport.
REBUILDING SCHEME.
Last year, a rebuilding scheme was en-
tered upon, and the manufacturing
departments modernised so that to-day
Charles Davis Limited can claim to have
the most extensive and finely equipped
workshops in Tasmania, as well as a
Retail Store that gives service unsur-
passed by any other hardware store in
the Commonwealth of Australia.
Electricity has been brought into every
possible avenue of industry, and the thou-
sands of pounds spent in modern
machinery will cause the business to forge
ever further ahead. For few indeed are
the engineering feats beyond the power
of this modernised factory, or the highly
trained men, who are proud to control the
huge power presses, guillotines, iron
curving machines, spouting making and
oxy-welding plants for the manufacture
of tinware, steel, and galvanised iron-
work, for which Charles Davis Limited
has always been famous. For 89 years
this firm has been famous for the manu-
facture of water tanks, and through the
country districts these tanks are to be seen
giving faithful service on every hand.
A feature of the recent reorganisation
was the building of the spacious new show-
rooms and store for the Plumbers’, En-
gineers’, and Blacksmiths’ supplies, while
special attention was paid to the Whole-
sale Department.
The floor space of the whole establish-
ment now covers two acres, and a staff
of 160 is enrolled.
The firm of Charles Davis Limited ranks
as one of the leading Hardware Houses in
the Commonwealth, and the progress
made shows that the business methods and
policy laid down by the founder enabled
it to merit the support of many valued
customers. It is the earnest endeavour
of the present management to continue to
give the same service and satisfaction to-
day that has always_ been given, and so
maintain the popularity that the firm has
always enjoyed.
MANUFACTURE OF BISCUITS
Hobart now boasts of the attraction of
antiquity in regard to several of its
industries. Most of these old establish-
ments had very small beginnings, but
hard work, honesty of purpose, and sus-
tained ideal have built up several busi-
nesses and established many reputations.
One of our oldest established and still
flourishing industries is that of Messrs.
C. D. Haywood Pty. Ltd., the well-known
biscuit manufacturers. Commencing in
a very small way in 1854, this business
now gives employment to over 100 work-
ers, and the modern factory premises
cover a floor space of over 30,000 square
feet. Up-to-date machinery, hydro-
electric power, large, airy and well-ven-
tilated rooms, all conduce to products
well turned out by satisfied workers,
many of whom have been on the pay roll
for over 40 years.
Within the last few weeks, modern
electric machinery for the sterilisation
of all tins has been installed. This is
done by electricity and steam, and en-
sures the biscuits reaching the house-
holder in a most hygienic state.
Another recent installation is that of
large conveyers, encircling most of the
factory. All this means the biscuits
come direct from the cutting machines
through the ovens, etc., and are packed
straight into the tin, ready for despatch
to the shops, with only one handling.
The machinery for manufacturing
Wafers is always of interest, particularly
to ladies, who find that these dainties,
either sandwiched with cream, or just
plain, are almost indispensable these
days. The baking of Wafers is done by
gas, and the cutting by miniature saws
electrically driven at very high speeds.
Increasing business necessities, ad-
ditional space requirements, and at the
present time, further structural alter-
ations, together with the installation of
more plant, are being carried out.
Few people have a knowledge of the
extent and importance of the factory,
for the average Tasmanian does not
enthuse over his own foundations. They
are accepted in a casual kind of way.
Sometimes the story of human effort and
creation behind them touches the fringes
of romance and when told arrests atten-
tion. But if Tasmanians would cultivate
a more vivid colour-sense in relation to
what may be figuratively termed the can-
vas of effort and achievement, it would be
better for the State, because it would then
be characterised by that quality of indi-
viduality which would serve as a driving
force of progress.
In the beginning, the encouragement
of local industry was made one of the
trade ideals of the Haywood Factory. It
has been retained ever since. Every
possible purchase for the production of
its output is made- in Tasmania. All Tas-
manian flour is used, also all Tasmanian
butter and milk, and in every way local
industry is aided and supported.
In addition to biscuits, icing and castor
sugar, plum puddings, cakes, and self-
laising flour are manufactured. During
the past few years, Tasmanians appear
to have taken a keener interest in their
own industries. This is decidedly a step
in the right direction, as one only has
to pause for a moment to realise that in
an industry such as biscuit making, there
are many ramifications, which directly or
indirectly give employment to many Tas-
manians, and every penny spent on im-
ported biscuits must mean less employ-
ment for Tasmanians.
SUPPORT LOCAL INDUSTRY.
When one realises the large range of
biscuits made by Messrs. C. D. Haywood
Pty. Ltd., it is apparent that there is no
need to purchase biscuits made outside
the State, and we feel that if we did not
draw the attention of our readers to this
point we should be doing a dis-service to
Tasmania.
WELFARE OF EMPLOYEES.
The employees at the factory are,
indeed, one of the happiest of happy
families engaged in Tasmanian industry.
There is a splendid recognition of the
human factor in industry here. It
strengthens, it encourages, it sustains.
The effects produced are various and
cheering. For one thing, the spirit of
the factory has developed a high sense
of duty. Responsibilities are recog-
nised in a splendid manner, and the
management does everything reasonably
possible to serve the highest interests
of the factory hands. The Management
of the Company is purely Tasmanian; the
Directors being: Mr. C. E. H. Ferguson,
Chairman; Mr. M. G. Butcher, Managing
Director; Mr. Percy Ash; and Mr. F.
Cripps, Factory Manager.
In conclusion, we would recommend to
our readers two of Messrs. Haywood’s
slogans. They are, “Haywood’s For
Happiness,” and “Don’t Say Biscuits, Say
Snax.”
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


SOME REMINISCENCES
BUSHRANGERS AND BAD ROADS
When "Jimmy the Postman" Carried the
Mails
(BY W. H. KENNEDY.)
Few of the present generation of
Huonites were aware that the late Wil-
liam Latham, who died at Franklin early
this year, at the age of 87 years, was
the last of the gang of roadmen who con-
structed the main road from Hobart to
the Huon. Of a kindly, unassuming dis-
position, it was very rarely that Mr.
Latham could be induced to speak of the
days of trials and difficulties that he and
those of his day and generation had to
contend with, when the great Huon val-
ley was roadless and almost unin-
habited; but to his immediate friends he
would sometimes become reminiscent,
and having a wonderful memory, would
recount events with surprising accur-
acy of detail that made such conversa-
tions intensely interesting. My one re-
gret is that the opportunity was not
taken during the last few years of his
life, when he lived in retirement in his
home at Franklin, to secure full accounts
of his descriptions of the life of the dis-
trict in his boyhood days. I have much
pleasure, however, in acceding to the
request of the management of the
“Huon and Derwent Times” to give the
readers of this journal, as well as
memory will permit, some of the ac-
counts of the early days of the Huon as
told me by Mr. Latham in recent years,
FRANKLIN (1906, BEFORE FORESHORE WAS RECLAIMED). J. Breaden.
Mr. Latham was born at Swamp Road,
Franklin, in 1849, and at the age of 19
he started with a gang of about 50 other
men to build the section of the Huon
Road from Grove to Hollow Tree (now
known as Longley). The overseer was
the late John Hay No. 2, a man of ex-
ceptional bodily strength and a born
leader of men. The contractors were
Messrs. Chesterman and Cheverton, and
the main camp was situated at Camp
Hill, exactly half way between Hobart
and the Huon River. The country at
the time was densely covered with
stringy bark trees, many of enormous
girth, and the difficulty of penetrating
the forest was increased by the men
having to hack their way through a
thick scrub. The gullies were pre-
cipitous in places and dropped at times
a couple of hundred feet. To negotiate
them big detours had to be made, and
tracks hewn out of the hills, which were
composed of almost solid bluestone. It
was a stupendous task, and only the
“very fit” were able to stand up to the
demands that were made for physical
endurance. The conditions were bad
enough in Summer, but in Winter, when
snow would be on the ground for days
at a time, owing to the sheltered condi-
tions of the forest, work on the road
was of a most trying nature.
After the road was completed, Mr.
Latham, now a hardened bushman,
moved southwards, and engaged in saw-
milling at Hastings and Southport.
These centres were thriving at this
time, owing to the demand for big tim-
ber for the mines of Victoria. After a
few years in the south, Mr. Latham re-
turned to Franklin and worked on his
father’s farm. He had a very clear
recollection of the time when the bush-
rangers were active in Southern Tas-
mania, and of the fear which the
settlers all had of one or other of the
desperadoes turning up at an unexpected
moment. He well remembered the shoot-
ing of Mr. Dunn, the young English
storekeeper, of Franklin, by “Rocky”
Whelan, when the unfortunate young
man was on the track to Hobart to ne-
gotiate for provisions -for his store.
Another character well remembered
was “Jimmy the Postman.” His cor-
rect name, and which was said to be
known only to a few of his acquaintances,
was James McGivern. He used to carry
the mails from Hobart to Franklin, on
his back, making the journey twice a
week. His terminus was the Lady Frank-
lin Hotel, then conducted by Mr. Tabor,
where he would spend a great deal of
his time between trips reciting the
experiences and hair-breadth escapes
which he alleged he had had from the
bushrangers. Jimmy’s descriptive powers
were second only to his imagination, and
he would hold crowds of timber splitters
spellbound at the graphic accounts he
would give of his skill and daring in
evading the bushrangers, who would
have been only too pleased to capture
“Her Majesty’s mails,” if they could.
On one occasion he took the breath of
his listeners away by proudly exhibiting
his hat, which had unmistakably been
penetrated by gun shot, and explained
that “Rocky” nearly got him as he was
peeping from behind a tree to see in
which direction the bushranger was
making! His fleetness of foot and skill
in bushcraft, he said, got him safely
out of danger on the occasion. Some
time afterwards, the late Mr. ffm.
Cuthbert explained the holes in the hat
in quite a different way. “Jimmy the
Postman” had a hut on Mr. Cuthbert’s
property, and hearing a shot flred one
night he investigated the matter, and
found that “Jimmy” had wilfully
punctured his hat with a few pellets
from a shotgun, but he never told Mr.
Cuthbert the story of the encounter with
“Rocky.”
“Jimmy” always believed in making
a dramatic return to Franklin with the
mails, and long before he reached the
township he would, at short intervals,
blow a bugle, which could be heard a
great distance away. The settlers wel-
comed the sound, for they realised that
another budget of letters and papers
would soon be available to tell what the
outside world was doing.
Speaking of the resourcefulness and
kindheartedness of the early settlers,
Mr. Latham mentioned that when he was
working at Southport he was engaged
in felling a tree, when a limb rebounded
and pinned him to the ground. His
mates lost no time in extricating him
from the painful position. He was un-
conscious when released, and was car-
ried to Southport on an improvised
stretcher of poles and men’s clothes.
It was 6 p.m. when the party arrived
back at their camp, and as the patient
was in need of medical attention a call
was made for a whaleboat crew —the only
possible means by which Hobart could
be reached. There was an immediate
response by five men, and they rowed
right through the night for 12 hours,
reaching their destination without any
untoward incident. It was some months
before Mr. Latham sufficiently recovered
health and strength to return to work,
and when he did he made the return
journey to bush work by sailing boat.
With all the excitement caused by the
doings—real and imaginary—of the
bushrangers in Tasmania and Australia,
people living in such sparsely settled
country as the Huon more or less suf-
fered from nerves, and those who could
be made the victims of practical jokes
had rather a bad time. Mr. Latham
said it was related that on one occasion
a settler not many miles on the Hobart
side of Huonville “held up” another
settler. It was a very dark night and
the “bushranger,” knowing that his vic-
tim would be passing along the road at
a certain time, waited for him at a suit-
able place, and suddenly jumped from
his hiding place, and presenting what
looked like a deadly firearm, but which
was actually nothing more harmful than
a brass candlestick, demanded and col-
lected all the valuables that the unfor-
tunate settler at the time had with him.
The joke, however, was not carried too
far, and for years afterwards relatives
of the settlers would smile when refer-
ence was made to it.
Another character that Mr. Latham
recalled was the noted Colonel Ross, who
occasionally galloped along the main
road through Franklin at breakneck
speed with a pack of dogs behind him
and wearing a brace of pistols which
he would draw at intervals and fire at
imaginary objects to the great danger
of those living in the vicinity. These
wild gallops were likely to be ..under-
taken at any time—day or night. No
one wilfully got in the way when the
Colonel was known to be out on one of
his jaunts.
After “Jimmy the Postman” gave up
his contract for carrying the mails,
Andrew Crawford took over the work.
The new contractor employed a chaise
cart. He lived at Lower Longley with
his wife and several daughters, and the
family conducted a refreshment house,
which was noted for the hospitality and
splendid catering of the hostesses.
Crawford’s Hill was named after the
mailman. It is the first rise on the Ho-
bart side of Bullock Hill. The old
family homestead was destroyed by fire
some years ago.
FIRST OVERSEAS SHIPMENT OF
APPLES.
Several claims to having made the
first shipment of apples from the Huon
to the overseas markets have been put
forward, but an authentic one appears
to be that of the late Wm. Baily, of
Huonville, who, according to a report
published on August 20, 1929, shipped
20 cases of French Crabs in the barque
Ethel. These apples were packed by
Mr. Thos. Dowling, in the year 1876.
They left Huonville at 4.30 a.m. on the
day of despatch to catch a sailing vessel
at Franklin, but missed it. The cart
containing the fruit was then driven to
Shipwright’s Point, where the fruit was
put on board. Some of the apples were
wrapped in newspaper and some in
brown paper, and after a journey of 100
days they arrived in England in good
condition. The report adds, however,
that what was considered “good condi-
tion” in those days would probably not
be as well spoken of nowadays.
APPLE-EATING “KING/’
To eat 366 apples In two hours six
minutes was the feat accomplished by
Tony de Laurentis, a barber, of Hat-
boro, Pennsylvania. Nearly 400 spec-
tators watched Tony, who performed In
his shop window. He had just had »
“light’’' breakfast of six eggs, ham,
cereals, and coffee.
A LINK WITH
EARLY DAYS
Wm. Crosby & Co.
A great deal of interest and respect
centres around the old House of Wm.
Crosby & Co., which was established in
1853 by Captain Wm. Crosby, in partner-
ship with his son William.
Captain Crosby, prior to settling in
Hobart, was “master” of the well-known
barque Wellington, which vessel, as well
as other sailing vessels, including the
Ethel, for many years called regularly
at Hobart to the Agency of Wm. Crosby
& Co., whose offices were then situated
in Salamanca Place, New Wharf.
INTERSTATE GROWTH.
In 1859, William Crosby, Jun., opened
a branch in Melbourne, and in 1875
visited England, leaving his brother,
Charles Crosby, in charge of the Mel-
bourne branch. William Crosby, Jun.,
after visiting England, returned to
Hobart to take charge of his father’s
business, Captain Crosby dying in 1885..
Both businesses prospered, and in 1885
William Crosby and his brother Charles
in Melbourne dissolved partnership,
although each still continued trading
under the same name.
Many years later, the Melbourne firm
was registered as a proprietary com-
pany, whilst Hobart carried on as a
partnership, the partners being Messrs.
Richmond P. Crosby (Captain Crosby’s
grandson, his father having become the
Hon. William Crosby, M.L.C.) and A. C.
Walch. In 1934, the Hobart and Mel-
bourne businesses linked up again,
under the name of Wm. Crosby & Co.
Pty. Ltd., and branches now exist in
practically every State of the Common-
wealth.
INSURANCE.
One of the oldest agencies held is that
of Lloyds, London, and also associated
with the INSURANCE DEPARTMENT
is the Commercial Union Assurance
Company Ltd., which conducts a Fire,
Marine, and Accident business.
SHIPPING.
The SHIPPING DEPARTMENT
caters very extensively for the fruit
industry, and amongst the many ship-
ping agencies held, it may be mentioned
steamers of the Royal Packet Steam
Nayigation Co. have carried Tasmanian
fruit to the East, while vessels of the
Aberdeen and Commonwealth Line
(“Bay” Liners), and White Star-Aber-
deen Line call regularly every year at
Hobart, loading Apples and Pears for
English and Continental ports, some
ships of the latter Line having lifted
fruit at Port Huon, which growers have
very much appreciated. Vessels of the
Port Line also load fruit at Hobart, and
alternate vessels outward bound from
the United Kingdom are to the Agency
of Wm. Crosby & Co. Pty. Ltd. This
Company, in addition, handles vessels
of the Ellerman, Bucknall Line Ltd.,
British Phosphate Commission, and
Andrew Weir Ltd., which are well-known
in Tasmanian waters. The PASSAGE
DEPARTMENT caters for passenger
trips to any part of the world, and a
trained staff is always ready to make
available such tourist information. As
Agents for the Australian and Overseas
Travel Service Pty. Ltd., “Personally
Conducted Tours” can be arranged
through England and the Continent,
the latter including visits to the battle-
fields.
MERCHANDISE.
Practically since the inception of the
business in 1853, a large country clien-
tele has been built up, and before local
auction sales commenced, many large
Tasmanian wool clips were handled and
shipped for sale on the English market.
A big range of farmers’ and pastoralists’
supplies are still carried in the MER-
CHANDISE DEPARTMENT, for ex-
ample, Woolpacks, Sheep Dips, Branding
Oils, Block Licks, Rabbit Poisons, etc.
Amongst the many agencies held is
that of Messrs. Lysaght Bros. & Co.
Ltd., Sydney, which caters for Fencing
materials, such as Barb and Fencing
Wires, Staples, Nails, Steel Posts, etc.,
all of which are constantly in demand.
Many builders’ supplies are also stocked,
including “Goliath” Cement, “Sisal-
kraft,” Tanks, etc.
Of recent years, a WHOLESALE
SECTION has been developed, which
caters exclusively for the storekeeper,
and many grocery and hardware agen-
cies are held, including “Sunshine” Bis-
cuits, Champion’s Vinegar, “Holly”
Pickles, “C.A.C.” Cartridges, and Kenny
Charlesworth Rubber Products.
From the foregoing it will be seen
that Wm. Crosby & Co. Pty. Ltd., whose
address is 119 Collins Street, Hobart,
trading as General Merchants, Shipping
and Insurance Agents, is an establish-
ment of very long standing, and com-
mands the respect of the community and
business circles generally.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


The development of the wireless industry in Australu
is the history of Amalgamated Wireless—designing am
manufacturing wireless equipment; breaking down tin
isolation of travellers at sea; pioneering broadcasting:
annihilating by means of Beam Wireless, Beam Picture
gram and W ircless Telephony the vast distances that
separate Australia from Europe and America, and pro
viding wireless communication facilities in the British
possessions in the Southern Pacific.
On the incorporation of Amalgamated Wireless
(A/asia) Ltd. in 1913, the Company set out to achieve
the following important objectives;——
The manufacture of all types of wireless apparatus
in Australia;
The building up of a highly efficient organisation
to develop in Australia every phase of wireless
communication;
The establishment of a direct wireless service be-
tween Australia and the heart of the Empire,
and between Australia and other overseas
countries;
To make Australia the Wireless Centre of the
Southern Pacific.
To-day these objectives have been achieved and are be-
ing developed to a still higher degree by A.W.A.
WIRELESS (A'SIA) LIMITED
HUON POSTAL FACILITIES IN
THE EARLY DAYS.
It is interesting that the centenary
year of the Huon District, 1936, should
also have marked such an important
milestone in the history of the Post-
master-General’s Department, namely,
the completion of the Bass Straits tele-
phone cable, -which now links every Tas-
manian telephone subscriber, including
those in the Huon district, with 93 per
cent, of the telephone subscribers of the
world. A subscriber, for example, at
Shipwrights’ Point can now speak to any
other subscriber in upwards of 50 coun-
tries and on many ships.
Prior to 1836, when the Huon was first
settled, Tasmania had little in the way
of postal facilities, and, of course, tele-
graphs, telephones, and wireless were
not even thought of.
It will be recalled that Tasmania was
first settled by Lieutenant Bowen at
Eisdon in 1803, and in subsequent years
letters and mails were despatched by
any ship capable of taking them. In
some instances, they were entrusted to
whalers or even American sealers. On
one occasion Governor King desired
Governor Collins to pay for the
despatches sent to him by a sealing
sloop by giving the skipper 30 empty
salt meat casks. This is surely as odd
a postage as was ever paid. Mails for
England and the other States were, of
course, extremely infrequent.
In 1832, four years before the Huon
was settled, it was announced that a
“cheap and expeditious conveyance to
and from Launceston” was arranged.
The owner, Mr. J. E. Cox, drove tandem
at the rate of 40 miles a day, carry-
ing one passenger at a fare of £5. The
practicability of the journey was then
the subject of considerable betting.
In 1834 the 2d. post was first estab-
lished in Hobart Town, with three
deliveries daily. In 1839 it was evidently
the custom to use convict messengers,
and the Postmaster at Sorell, writing to
the Postmaster, Hobart, said, “I have
three messengers at this station, neither
of whom can read or write. I have
repeatedly applied for messengers to be
sent here that can read the addresses
upon letters, etc.”
In 1836, when the Huon was first
settled, the G.P.0., Hobart, was moved
from the miserable premises in Murray
Street to a site at the comer of Collins
and Elizabeth Streets. At this time
there were only 33 post offices in the
whole of the State. There are now 507.
Postal notes were first issued in this
State in 1889, and in 1894 the Post
and Telegraph Departments, hitherto
separate, were amalgamated.
EARLY HUON MAILMEN AND
POSTMASTERS.
The first mail contractor between Ho-
bart and the Huon district was Silas
Parsons, who commenced the service in
1849, and was paid at the rate of £lO
per annum. In 1851 he was succeeded
by James McGivern, who was paid £3O
per annum, and five years later the ser-
vice was transferred to James Bell.
The first two mailmen carried the letters
on foot.
The first post office, established in
1850, was called “Huon.” The name was
changed to “Franklin” in 1869. The
first Postmaster (George Lloyd) received
£5 per annum.
The office was held successively by
George G. Sherwin (1853), Thos. S. Kel-
laway (1853), Thos. F. Merry (1855),
A. N. Spong (I 860), and A. H. Kennedy
(1868), since when numerous changes
have, of course, taken place.
The second post office opened in the
Huon district was that at Port Cygnet,
where G. W. Edwards undertook to
carry out the duties for an allowance of
£lO per annum. A few months later,
H. G. Quodling was in charge. Other
early postmasters at Port Cygnet were
F. R. Fitch (1857), E. Hedditch (1858),
F. Glover (1860), Ann Lindsay (1865),
Theo. Cane (1866), and Matthew Fitz-
patrick (1876). For some years the
township was known as Lovett, but its
name is now Cygnet.
The development of the Huon district
below Franklin was marked by the open-
ing of a post office at Shipwrights’
Point in 1860 with William Hawkins in
charge. Two years later (1862) Charles
Pulfer was appointed to the newly
created office of Postmaster at Port
THIS CHANGING WORLD
Revolutionised by Modern Science
important Part Played by the Telephone
THE world is ever changing—science is ever giving us some fresh
marvel to wonder at. How the hardy pioneers of the last century
would rub their eyes if they could only see—and hear—the wonders
that have now become a matter of course to this modem age. In those
far off days, the early settler must have spent many lonely hours,
isolated as he was in the dense forests which were slowly being cleared,
while his entertainment was very limited. Now, in the course of a very
few years, science has changed all that. The telephone, wireless, and
talking picture now play important parts in our daily life, and have
become commonplace mediums of communication and entertainment.
Esperance (now Dover). In 1873 Rosny
Spurr took charge, and he was succeeded
by Mrs. E. Owens in the same year.
In 1870 Huonville got a post office, but
it was then known as “Victoria.” Its
present designation dates from 1890,
the change coinciding with the appoint-
ment of M. L. Short, who succeeded the
first Postmaster (J. R. Baily). An
office was opened at Surges Bay in 1871
with J. S. White in charge.
P. Hill was the first Postmaster at
Honeywood, where an office was opened
in 1870. The locality is now known as
Hospital Bay, with a recently opened
post office opposite Port Huon wharf.
The growth of the Geeveston settlement,
a mile further south, and the establish-
ment of a post office there seems to have
removed the necessity for an office at
Honeywood.
miles of telegraph line altogether. The
Huon line was completed as far as
Geeveston in 1878, while Dover and
Southport were connected in 1879 and
Hastings in 1880. It is also reported
that in 1880 Government House was con-
nected by telephone as part of the State
Telegraphic System.
At this time the telephone was still in
the experimental stage, and it was re-
ported that “the telephones in Hobart
continued to work well and give satis-
faction,” and the Government was
strongly urged in 1882 to establish an
exchange and erect private lines. In
1883 telephonic communication was re-
ported to have become fairly estab-
lished, and exchanges had been opened
in Hobart in August 6, and in Laun-
ceston on December 12. In 1884 there
were 35 subscribers to the Hobart ex-
change and 52 at Launceston.
The following offices in the Huon were
added to the telegraph system on the
dates shown:—lBBs, Lymington; 1889,
Lady Bay (closed 1893); 1890, Strath-
blane; 1891, Ida Bay; 1900, Kingston
Beach and Ranelagh Junction.
About the year 1885 telephones began
to be used at some of the offices, and it
was reported “that they work as satis-
factorily over lines of 25 miles in length
as on shorter distances of one or two
miles.” The rapid strides since this
date will be evident to all, when a sub-
scriber in England can now be spoken
to without any difficulty.
In 1901 the whole of the Post Office
activities were transferred from the
State to the Commonwealth, and steady
progress has been made in all
branches. All important centres are now
served with telegraph and telephone
facilities, and the tremendous advances
in science have made possible the won-
derful achievements of to-day.
THE TELEGRAPH ESTABLISHED.
Mails had hitherto been the only
means of communication, but with the
march of science, telegraphs became pos-
sible and were applied to the Public
Service in this State in quite early
days. The first telegraph line in Tas-
mania was completed in 1857 between
Hobart Town and Launceston. Up to
that time the semaphore had been used
at Mt. Nelson, Pearson’s Point, Mt.
Arthur, Mt. Communication, and other
places, principally in connection with the
penal settlements on Tasman’s Penin-
sula. In 1858 the land line was ex-
tended from Launceston to George
Town. Mt. Nelson was also connected
the same year, after some delay arising
from objections by Lieutenant Corbett,
who could not spare a room for the
instrument in his quarters.
Striking evidence that boys, even the
“sons of gentlemen,” were still boys in
those days was revealed in 1858, when it
was reported that no less than 63 in-
sulators op the Hobart—Launceston
line were found broken in the vicinity
of Horton College, Ross, and special
steps had to be taken to overcome this
trouble. It is interesting to note that
the present £5 penalty for breaking in-
sulators existed at that time.
The linking of Hobart to Launceston
and George Town naturally turned the
thoughts of the Telegraph Department
towards a cable to the Mainland, and
following extensive negotiations the first
telegraph cable was completed in August,
1859, but never worked well, and broke
down finally in 1861. The Eastern Ex-
tension Company, however, laid two suc-
cessful cables, the first in 1869 and the
second in 1885.
Land telegraphs were gradually ex-
tended to other offices in Tasmania, al-
though in 1872 there were still only 291
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


XU
4
i
~«?
.■n
'ffl
,-|- ! te|
p 5 *?**!' |£:|
if\, s^
w
s
l-J
yf
m
W**&L
&
tlr
%
■WA
We shall be pleased to explain
an easy deferred payment system,
whereby you may purchase your
Radiola.
Better
Radio Reception
If you wish to enjoy first-class reception, choose
a Radiola.
The Fisk Radiola is Australia's finest broadcast receiver. It
combines quality with price economy, beauty with service.
Prices range from 15 guineas, A.C.
operation (Australian reception), and
19 guineas. World Range and battery
operated models.
THE FISK
RADIOLA
AUTHORISED CO-DISTRIBUTORS:
FINDLAYS PTY.LTD.
Branches at HOBART and LAUNCESTON
NOYES BROS. (Melb.) LTD., Hobart
Dewary
Imperial
VTj& Scotch. c WMshy
of Great Jigs
Agents:
FERGUSON b CO. PTY. LTD.
10 MURRAY STREET, HOBART.
'Phone 5127.
11 Ilf
13
f
nj.&NE &g>
UMirn
choose only the
best of everything ■
therefore our Customers
may depend that every
cuticle purchased al~
t?AN£S
pviim
lIIWMRC
if Amos
FIM§T
tvirum
will give satisfactory
results j- .
\ J arming Requisites and
\ J/ausehold JieeoLs of every descrip-
C lion, are here fit your inspection
/ and are shown in are most pleasing and
1 up-to-date manner, So when. in. the City be
sure io visit our modern; store, where you,
find everything so very reasonably priced^
Ks
/Iking (warn 1
STOMPS
■osttois
I L m mms k
"AERICm
I 'ts
TURaI
£rc - M PA,NTS ' VARNISH£S M^
tools Bm FENCING WIRE
TfrCSttt
,CS«STW*
[T.J.CANE JV L 1 „
inUKlia HOBART. '
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


SPACE ANNIHILATION
OU ARE ON THE 'PHONE to 35,000,000. # You beam wirelessed
13,500,000 words last year. <$> You can chat to your friend on a
mid-atlantic liner. <$> You can talk across 12 # 000 miles on machines
at the rate of 1,400 letters a minute.
The history of wireless in Australia is more than a
recital of technical development and progress. It is the
story of a company enlarging the scope and application
of wireless science, and developing and making
available to the Australian public comprehensive
national communication services.
While geographical frontiers
have shrunk with the annihilation
of distance, the boundaries of wire-
less science are now wider than
ever. Each discovery but opens the
gateway to greater attainments.
DURING the last twenty-five years
the progress of wireless has 'been
truly marvellous, out-distancing all
other sciences.
To no country in the world are com-
munications more important than to
Australia.
Our immense distances, our widely
separated centres of population, our
widespread commercial activities, and
our isolation from the Western World
all intensify the significance to us of
efficient communications.
Of particular interest is the fact that
the people of Australia transmit and
receive over twenty million words per
annum per medium of the A.W.A. Com-
munication Services.
Commercial wireless in Australia dates
back to 1910, when the first overseas
ships equipped with wireless arrived in
Australia.
At that time but little was known in
Australia of the new science. Such
wireless work as had been carried out
was of a spasmodic and experimental
nature only.
With the formation of Amalgamated
Wireless in 1913, commercial wireless
development proceeded apace, many Aus-
tralian and New Zealand ships being
equipped with wireless. With the war
came the equipping of wireless on trans-
ports, not only in Australia, but on
British ships built in Japan, China, and
other countries.
* * #
MR. E. T. FISK, chairman of A.W.A.,
early foresaw the day when
Australia and England would be
linked by a direct wireless service and,
backed by an unlimited faith, worked
unceasingly for its accomplishment.
On September 22, 1918, after several
years’ experiments, he was successful
in receiving the first direct wireless
messages transmitted from England to
Australia. Over eight years elapsed,
however, before he had the satisfaction
of opening such a service to the public.
The Beam wireless service between
Australia and Great Britain was opened
on April 8, 1927.
Three years later the wireless tele-
phony services between Australia and
Great Britain, the Continent of Europe,
and North and South America, became
an accomplished fact, enabling an Aus-
tralian telephone subscriber to ring up
any one of 35,000,000 telephone sub-
scribers in other parts of the world.
Broadcasting is undoubtedly the most
familiar phase of wireless in the public
mind to-day. It touches the lives of all
of us in a far more intimate manner than
any other branch of wireless.
It was pioneered in Australia by
A.W.A., the first public demonstration
being given at the Royal Society of New
South Wales on July 21, 1920, by Mr.
E. T. Fisk. Two months later a complete
public broadcast concert was arranged at
the Queen’s Hall, Melbourne.
In 1927 the first short-wave world-
wide broadcasts were commenced by
A.W.A. from its stations, VK2ME,
Sydney, and VK3ME, Melbourne, with
the object of making Australia and her
resources and attractions better known
abroad.
The Beam Wireless Picturegram
Service, opened in October, 1934, enables
the interchange of pictures, photographs,
designs, and drawings (between Aus-
tralia and Great Britain.
A WIRELESS telegram can be sent
from Australia to any part of the
world, to ships at sea, and to
aeroplanes in flight. This is effected by
a number of allied services which may be
divided into the following principal
categories:—
1. Overseas radio services to Europe
and America.
2. Services to the Mandated Ter-
ritories of New Guinea, Papua, and
the Pacific Islands.
3. Service to Ships.
4. Service to aircraft.
The most important of Australia’s
overseas radio communications is the
Beam Wireless Service, opened in 1927,
between Australia and Great Britain,
the Contihent of Europe, and North
and South America.
It is the longest direct wireless tele-
graph service in the world, and is owned
and operated by Amalgamated Wireless.
* * *
TO state that 93,528,016 words have
been handled by Beam Wireless in
Australia since the inauguration of
the Beam system in 1927, and that
13,500,000 paid words were handled by
the service in Australia in 1935, is an
indication of the magnitude of the
service in relation to the business and
social life of the community.
The high-speed short-wave trans-
mitters are situated at Piskville in
Victoria. These transmitters are ar-
ranged to send highly concentrated
waves to Grimsby, in England, and to
Montreal, in Canada, from which two
points the messages are distributed
throughout Europe and America
respectively.
Similarly, messages are gathered from
various places to these two centres, and
thence transmitted to Australia, where
they are received at the Beam Wireless
receiving station at Rockbank, also in
Victoria.
The transmitting apparatus used in
the overseas telegraph service is capable
of sending up to 1,400 letters a minute,
and in actual practice during rush
periods has often handled 1,000 letters
a minute for sustained periods.
The A.W.A. trans-ocean wireless tele-
phone service between Australia and
England is the world’s longest telephone
service. It represents the first wireless
telephone between Great Britain and a
Dominion.
i
* * *
TO-DAY, from the telephone in a
subscriber’s home or office in Aus-
tralia he can speak to a telephone
subscriber in Great Britain, the Conti-
nent of Europe, North and South
America, the East Indies, Java, New
Zealand, and many other parts of the
world.
It is even possible to speak from Aus-
tralia to anyone on board the great
trans-Atlantic liners on their voyages
between America and Europe. The
transmitting and receiving equipment in
Australia for this service is operated by
Amalgamated Wireless, and is linked
to the internal telephone networks of
the Commonwealth.
Of the long distance calls effected, the
record is probably that made through
Valparaiso, via London, to Sydney, a
distance of 18,000 miles.
* * *
AROUND the coast of Australia
there is a chain of nineteen coastal
radio stations, nine of which
operate continuously day and night
throughout the year for communication
with ships at sea over distances up to
10.000 miles.
These stations are owned and operated
by A.W.A., and some are also used; to
form the only telegraphic route to many
important points in the Pacific, including
Papua and the Mandated Territory of
New Guinea.
The stations handle approximately two
and a half million words per annum with
ships at sea.
The coastal radio stations are also
extensively used for broadcasting official
time signals, meteorological bulletins,
weather reports, storm warnings, and
warnings of any wreckage or other
navigational dangers to ships at sea.
The company’s coastal radio stations
are located at every capital city in
Australia, and at Broome, Cooktown,
Darwin, Flinders Island, Lord Howe
Island, Esperance, Geraldton, King
Island, Rockhampton, Thursday Island,
Townsville, Willis Island, and Wyndham.
An extensive wireless communication
service is operated in the Pacific, afford-
ing direct communication services
between Australia and Fiji, Papua and
New Guinea. About three-quarters of a
million words a year are handled by
this service, by means of which it is
possible to reach the most outlying parts
of these islands.
The chief A.W.A. radio centres are at
Eabaul, in the Mandated Territory of
New Guinea, Port Moresby, in Papua,
and Suva, Fiji. There are many stations
at smaller island centres, and these
communicate with the nearest of the
above-mentioned centres, which, in turn,
oommunicatae with Sydney.
Thus communication can be effected
from any of the Pacific Island centres
to Sydney for Australia and New
Zealand, and any town in Great Britain,
the Continent of Europe, and North and
South America, by means of the Aus-
tralian Beam Wireless Service.
* * *
THE chief radio station in the Ter-
ritory of New Guinea is at Rabaul,
on the island of New Britain.
Rabaul is in direct communication with
Sydney, as well as with stations at
Aitape, Madang, Bulolo, Wau, Salamaua,
Manus, Kavieng, and Kieta in New
Guinea, and Truk in the Caroline
Islands.
Sydney radio is in daily communication
hy wireless with Noumea and Suva.
Suva station collects and distributes
wireless traffic to and from almost all
the Pacific Islands provided with radio.
The first application of wireless in
Australia was for communication be-
tween shore and ships' at sea. This
phase has steadily developed until to-day
practically every ship of the Australian
Mercantile Marine is equipped with wire-
less, not only for the safety of passengers
and crew, but also for the interchange
of business and private telegrams.
Every wireless-equipped ship is a
floating telegraph office, and forms part
of the world’s telegraphic system. Wire-
less messages can be handed in on board
for delivery to an addressee in any part
of the world. Likewise a message can be
handed in to the A.W.A. Central Radio
Offices in Sydney or Melbourne, or to
any telegraph office in Australia, for
transmission to a ship at sea.
During recent years extensive develop-
ments in marine wireless equipment have
greatly extended its utility. Many ships
in the Australasian mercantile marine
are equipped with all of the new wire-
less appliances.
In addition to long and short wave
valve transmitters and receivers for the
interchange of traffic, there are the
automatic distress signal receivers for
service when the operator is not in his
office, modem direction finding equip-
ment enabling the captain to locate the
ship’s position at any time, echometers
for determining the depth of water under
the ship’s keel, wireless telephony trans-
mitting and receiving apparatus, en-
enabling the captain to speak to coast
stations, and also wireless equipment in
lifeboats so that, should passengers and
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT,


m
R*
i
m
m
m
»
a
mm
m
m
IS
m
a -f.
/z* ■•?:&-<&-a
&&
am
ifi§ :
m
wM
m
m
m
1
trit* *J>
*•
»
Mil
m
«R
i
»
BjsS
i
«s
r-«
iii
H
m.
m
m
m
m.
I
sg
M
H
m
f 2
sat
m
a
Set
a«
i
/.<•-♦ ***
m.
G
•f.<%sfijjj! Qj.wa
Glamorously beautiful English star, who
makes her first American screen appear-
ance in Paramount's 'THE CASE
AGAINST MRS. AMES." She is but
one of the many great Stars who appear
exclusively in Paramount Pictures.
Watch for—
THE CASE AGAINST MRS.
AMES."
Starring MADELEINE CARROLL and
GEORGE BRENT, with Arthur Treacher,
Alan Baxter, and Alan Mowbray.
"POPPY."
Starring W. C. FIELDS, with Rochelle
Hudson, Richard Cromwell, Lynne
Overman.
"13 HOURS BY AIR"
With Fred. Mac Murray, Joan Bennett,
Zasu Pitts, John Howard, and Bennie
Bartlett.
IF IT'S A PARAMOUNT PICTURE, IT'S THE BEST SHOW IN TOWN
Cadbury’s Model Factory “By Mountain and Sea”
One has but to see
the beautiful setting of
Cadbury’s factory at
Claremont, Tasmania, to
appreciate the ideal con-
ditions under which their
products are made. Here
in the modern buildings
is amplitude of light and
fresh air for the diligent
workers engaged in the
manufacturing of Cad-
bury’s delectable choco-
lates, Bournville Cocoa,
and Bourn-vita.
Where you find a rigid
standard of manufactur-
ing processes there you
also find a rigid standard
of quality. In the realm
of food manufacture
the name of Cadbury
bears an unassailable
reputation for excel-
lence, purity, and whole-
someness. Only the
purest ingredients are
used, and unceasing
The factory viewed from the Derwent.
vigilance is exercised in
the selection of all raw
materials, which are
subjected to rigorous
analytical tests before
being used in the
manufacture of Cadbury-
products.
Set in a garden, supported with abundant
pure clean air.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


crew be adrift on the ocean, they can
make their position known to people on
land or in other ships.
In cases of disaster, the automatic
transmitter, started by the mere pressing
of a switch (and having been previously
set with the ship’s position), sends out
the distress signals and name and
position of the vessel calling, thus re-
leasing the operator for other duties.
For the entertainment of passengers,
gigantaforte loud-speaker equipment is
installed in many ships.
Press news is transmitted nightly from
Sydney Radio to ships at sea for publi-
cation in the Ocean News newspaper,
printed on board. Navigation and
weather reports, also, are transmitted
nightly.
By means of the short-wave stations
at A.W.A. Radio Centre, Sydney, com-
munication is maintained with ships
equipped with short-wave apparatus in
the Pacific and Indian Oceans, with
liners crossing the Atlantic Ocean, with
whalers in the Antarctic, and with short-
wave stations in other countries.
WIRELESS IN THE HUON.
In common with the rest of the State
the Huon district has shared in the
benefits of Broadcasting. Unlike the
older services of the Post, Telegraph,
and Telephone, this new facility has
grown to its present remarkably effi-
cient state only in the last twelve years
or so. The remotest listener in Tas-
mania’s South-West, for the most
modest of licence fees, now has brought
into his home events as they occur, not
only in his own State, but in the Com-
monwealth and in other parts of the
world. In the area within 50 miles of
Hobart, which includes the whole of the
Huon, no less than 57 out of every 100
dwellings possess a wireless receiver,
and the day is not far distant when a
house without a wireless receiver will be
an exception.
AUSTRALIA is almost self-support-
ing in the manufacture of all types
of wireless equipment, with
probably one exception, that of large
transmitting valves. Extensive additions
have to be made almost every year to
the many manufacturing plants.
Every type of wireless equipment for
use on coast stations, ship stations,
broadcasting stations, and aircraft is
manufactured at the A.W.A. works,
while over 1,100 Australians are engaged
in the manufacturing activities.
Since the inception of broadcasting,
A.W.A. has designed and manufactured
over forty transmitters. The first in-
stallation was that for Station 2FC, in
1923, followed by stations for 3LO, Mel-
bourne; 4QG, Brisbane; 5CL, Adelaide;
and 6WF, Perth. In addition, A.W.A.
broadcast transmitters have been manu-
factured and installed in the principal
provincial cities and towns in the
Commonwealth.
HUON PINE.
Its Wonderful Durability.
It is interesting to note that the ex-
ceptional durability of Huon pine was
noticed by one of the earliest visitors to
Tasmania. Writing in June, 1804, Sur-
veyor-General G. P. Harris says: “It is
to be lamented that the upper parts of
the country about this river have not
been accurately explored by the settlers
at Hobart Town, there being every rea-
son to believe that there are forests of a
valuable wood. This wood has obtained
the local name of Huon pine, and the
knowledge of its place of growth could
not fail to be of infinite importance to
the settlement. Vast trees of this
curious wood have been discovered on
the shores of an island at the entrance
to the river, and from their situation
must have been brought down in some
violent flood. They have apparently
lain there for years, being perfectly dry
and much worn by the beating of the
sea against the rocky shores of the is-
land. These trees are also found on
the projecting points of the lower part
of the river in a similar state, which
renders it totally impossible to fix the
class and genus to which it belongs, as
none have ever been found growing,
though I suspect it would attain so val-
uable a knowledge. This wood is of a
fine light yellow, close grained, ex-
tremely light, and of a strong Aromatic
smell, and, when bit, conveys a hot
pungent taste not unlike clover. This
hot quality of the wood preserves it
free from worms and all other insects.
Drift trees of the blue gum and stringy
bark lying close to this wood have been
found entirely perforated by worms,
whilst the pine, which has apparently
lain in the same spot much longer, re-
mained perfectly untouched. I have
seen dead trees of this wood seven feet
in diameter, 10 feet from the root.
And it is not unreasonable to conclude
that the forest where they grow con-
tains many even of a superior size.”
ENTERTAINMENT FOR THE MASSES
Amazing Growth of Motion Pictures
To sit in a comfortable chair in a
theatre and watch moving scenes which
happened perhaps thousands of miles
away, and to hear, at the same time, the
actual sounds which accompanied those
distant happenings, is certainly one of
the greatest of modern marvels. Yet, had
we been told ten years ago that we would
be able to “hear” the screen shadows
within three years, we would have prob-
ably thought those prophets bereft of their
senses. Today, the motion picture plays
the greatest part in our entertainment,
and offers relaxation to young and old
for a very modest sum.
THE BEGINNING.
It is only 25 years since the “flickers”
first made their appearance, but in the
years that followed, amazing changes
were seen.
The cinematograph is the product of
many inventions, and men of many
nations have done their part to bring it
to its present perfection. A fair pro-
portion of these pioneers were British.
Muybridge, an Englishman, in America,
in 1872 set up twenty-four cameras at
close intervals, and took snapshot photos
of a horse as it galloped past.
Friese-Green, another Britisher, took
moving picture photos in 1889. Edison
invented a moving picture peep show in
1893. A flexible film for photography
was invented by Eastman in 1885, and this
made further progress possible; while
R. W. Paul, though at first he took ad-
vantage of Edison’s discovery, later de-
signed a motion picture camera of his
own. Talking pictures were made in
London so long ago as 1912 by Eugene
Lauste. Yel despite this near approach
to the “pictures” of to-day, it was an-
other seventeen years before sound pic-
tures ousted the silent film.
Standing: Tom Kennedy, Pat O’Malley, Jack Mlower, Freeman Wood, Roy D’Arcy,
Mae Marsh, Albert Conti.
Middle row; Ethel Clayton, Maurice Costello, Harry Meyers, Creighton Hale,
Charles Morton, Jack Mulhall, Oscar Apfel, Edmund Burns, Betty Gomp-
son, and Charles Ray.
Seated; Ruth Clifford, Bryant Washburn, Jane Novak, Francis X. Bushman,
Esther Ralston, William Desmond, Mabel Forrest, Herbert Rawlinson, and
Rosemary Theby.
BIRTH OF AN INDUSTRY.
It was in U.S.A. that the greatest
strides were made in the development of
an industry which in a short space of time
was to become a world-wide institution.
In 1910, a young Hungarian by the name
of Adolph Zukor was persuaded to go into
motion pictures, which at that time were
flickering, distorted efforts, and which
were despised by all. This man is now
Chairman of the Board of Directors of
the Paramount Pictures Incorporated,
and has been a propelling force in motion
pictures through the twenty-five years.
At that time, the best pictures came
from Europe, and Zukor secured a film of
three reels, “The Passion Play.” This
he showed with success, and after this
venture he went to Europe, where he
learned that the great actress, Sarah
Bernhardt was to make a four-reel picture
in France.
The showing of this picture made
history in the United States. Posters
were made for it, and it was the first film
to have newspaper advertisements. It
was a test of ideas which proved success-
ful. This was in 1912, and, convinced that
he was right, Zukor decided to produce
for himself, under the name of Famous
Players Corporation. He engaged James
K. Hackett as the star, and made the
stage success, “The Prisoner of Zenda,”
as the first long picture.
A little girl had by now attracted at-
tention. It was Mary Pickford, and when
the trade heard that Zukor had offered
her £5O a week they were positive “that
he was crazy.” But Mary Pickford be-
came the world’s best-known star.
HOLLYWOOD.
Others also turned to motion pictures,
including Jesse L. Lasky, Cecil B. De-
Mille and Samuel Goldwyn. In 1913
they formed the Lasky Feature Film
Company, and decided that Dustin Far-
num in “The Squaw Man” would be the
first production. Farnum and DeMille
set out to look for suitable locations, and
finally, in their tour westward, they set-
tled on the little suburb of Los Angeles,
which was destined to become one of the
world’s most well-known spots, Holly-
wood.
From then onwards the industry grew
by leaps and bounds. Other famous
directors were D. W. Griffith, who pro-
duced “The Birth of a Nation,” and Rex
Ingram.
SOUND PICTURES.
In 1928 the industry received a rude
shock. Long had experiments been
carried on in sound for motion pictures,
but as a commercial possibility it was not
considered. This was a real revolution.
Paramount production was then in the
hands of Jesse L. Lasky and his aides,
and Adolph Zukor suddenly arrived in
Hollywood and took charge. Like others,
he did not know much about the new
problem, one far more complex than
silent production. Both the Hollywood
and Long Island studios were equipped
with sound-recording devices, and so the
breathless days of the introduction of
sound were bridged fearlessly. Music
and songs added to the complexity of the
new era. With the advent of sound, the
“international voice” of the silent film
was gone, and so in 1929 foreign language
production was commenced.
Since then the sound film has reached
perfection with “noiseless recording.”
Colour, too, has been perfected, as was
demonstrated by the production of “The
Trail of the Lonesome Pine,” seen in Tas-
mania a few months ago.
SILVER JUBILEE.
What may we expect next? It is in-
teresting to record that this year marks
the Silver Jubilee of the Paramount
Company, who, during the past 25 years,
have passed through varying fortunes.
But they have pioneered a great industry,
guided by an astute leader in Adolph
Zukor. The company has the largest
theatre circuit in the world, with 1,092
theatres, and the outstanding “star-
power”' makes possible an exceptional
group of productions for the new show
season. Among these, to name a few,
are: “The Big Broadcast of ’37,” with
Jack Benny, Burns and Allen, Randolph
Scott, and specialties of screen, radio, and
stage; “Chinese Gold,” with Gary Cooper,
and Madeleine Carroll; a Frank Lloyd
production, “Maid of Salem,” starring
Claudette Colbert; “The Count of Lux-
embourg,” starring Irene Dunne, John
Boles, and W. C. Fields; and “The Angel,”
starring Marlene Dietrich, and directed
by Ernst Lubitsch.
EMPIRE PRODUCTION.
Until recent years the heart of the
motion picture industry has been in the
United States, but the industry has
steadily grown in Great Britain and the
standard of production greatly improved,
until now the Empire product is gener-
ally equal to that from Hollywood. This
has been particularly noticeable during
the past twelve months, due to the big
amalgamation of eighteen production
companies under the title of Associated
Distributors—British Empire Films.
A feature of the productions is the
international star strength, and above
all, at the head of this great enterprise, is
Mr. Stuart F. Doyle, who is associated
with Mr. C. M. Woolf in the Australian
angle of the international activity.
One has only to glance through this
list of forthcoming attractions to gain
an idea of the rapid advancement in the
standard of British pictures. “The
Further Adventures of the Scarlet Pim-
pernel,” adapted from the writings by
Baroness Orczy, with the popular Jack
Buchanan as Sir Percy Blakeney. “Land
without Music,” an ambitiously produced
musical romance starring Richard
Tauber, Diana Napier, Jimmy (Schnoz-
zle) Durante, and Eugene Palette, with
music by Oscar Strauss. “The Three
Maxims,” a thrill-tingling romantic cir-
cus drama of famous trapeze trio, with
Anna Neagle, Tullio Carminati, and Les-
lie Banks, and “This’ll Make you Whis-
tle,” a picturisation of Jack Buchanan’s
latest stage musical comedy, with the
popular star in the starring role, with
Elsie Randolph. There are also “Our-
selves Alone,” set in the same atmosphere
as “The Informer,” the prize picture of
1936—in the days of “The Trouble” in
Ireland, when death lurked behind every
tree, and you trusted no man. “Glamor-
ous Night,” adapted from Ivor Novello’s
sensational Drury Lane success which
smashed the “Cavalcade” records. The
lavish screen adaptation of W. J. Locke’s
delightfully human romance, “The Belov-
ed Vagabond,” with Maurice Chevalier
again in a similar role to his well-re-
membered and ever popular “Innocents
of Paris.”
AUSTRALIA’S NEW INDUSTRY.
During the past three years, a new
industry has sprung up in Australia, and
now Cinesound Productions have an
honoured name in the film world to-day,
after producing such splendid pictures
as “On Our Selection,” “The Squatter’s
Daughter,” “The Silence of Dean Mait-
land,” and “Thoroughbred.” The latter
was the first of Cinesound’s “world”
productions and no expense was spared
to ensure a really fine production, with
the result that the services of the talented
Hollywood star, Helen Twelvetrees, were
secured. Too little praise cannot be
given to Mr. Ken G. Hall, the director
of these early pictures, for much of their
success is due to him who has nursed
these Australian productions in their
infancy.
A recent visit to U.S.A. has no doubt
given him considerable experience and
knowledge in the most modern technical
and direction methods, and this will be
borne out in future pictures. He has
just completed “Orphan of the Wilder-
ness,” a typical outdoor action romance,
starring an all-Australian cast.
Cinesound are now well into production
with “It Isn’t Done,” a smart modern
comedy, from a story by Cecil Kellaway,
who will portray the leading role.
Mr. Stuart Doyle
announces that Cine-
sound will now foe in
constant production.
Future plans include
a picture for world
release, made in con-
junction with United
Artists. This should
prove a great stim-
ulant to the Austral-
ian industry, as a unit
consisting of a direc-
tor, stars and technic-
ians will be sent from
America to make a
Mr. Stuart F. Doyle,
Australia’s Great
Showman.
story they consider will have a tremen-
dous appeal to American as well as Aus-
tralian and English audiences. There
will be two separate units at Cinesound
Productions Ltd. during the making of
this film, as Mr. Ken G. Hall will continue
with his own staff on another production.
Zane Grey, the famous author, who
recently visited our shores, was also as-
sociated with the producing of a film.
This was entitled “White Death,” a
romantic comedy drama in the glorious
settings of the Great Barrier Reef.
The popular Cinesound review or
“Voice of Australia” is issued weekly,
and is distributed here and overseas.
Thus it will be seen that the Empire, and
Australia in particular, is giving the
world the very best of this popular form
of modern entertainment.
The changes in the last decade have
been remarkable, but even so, technicians
and scientists are ever experimenting,
and before very long we may learn of a
further wonderful discovery that is to
revolutionise modern communication and
entertainment. What will come next, we
wonder?
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.
SPACE ANNIHILATION (Continued).


Coming Soon to Captivate Tasmania
r A
K
*«*#?
■PR
yi!(CwKv>
Is
SMI
kßft33&%
SS&
I/*
s>
*
Mm:o
I
I
£
I
ID
i
A
»
?®74®#W
fk»?»
*
\
'tfiw W '
m* ' r4* '* , .
w ■****& *&. x.
€
r
Ik
T^JSTI)
•x*
*
}j' 4 iM * *
V 'if* *2s*
„ - -s'*
,*::* 'J,
'* V *'
zr.s&
A:&H v ,
' t'l ■ : '
*■' „ . ** %
*'**'''-s*'!>* ?'f , , i U'<'*'" t% MM
**" F v- f
, vw?*.
DEVELOPMENT OF FAMOUS BREWERY
The Oldest in Australia
A MONGST the captains of enterprise and industry, who in the early
’twenties of the nineteenth century left their English homes to
seek fortune, wealth, and comfort in these Southern lands, the name of
Peter Degraves should for ever occupy a prominent place. Bom in
1778, the late Mr. Peter Degraves passed his boyhood and early youth
in the town of Dover, where his father carried on a lucrative practice
as a physician and surgeon.
Before leaving England he was re-
garded as an authority on boring for
water, and had successfully carried out
schemes of this nature for the Duchess
of Buccleuch and for the Marquis of
Stafford. Yet, notwithstanding his suc-
cesses and prospects of advancement in
England, Mr. Degraves in 1820 resolved
to emigrate. His brother-in-law, Major
Hugh Mclntosh, decided to accompany
him, and it was arranged that they should
enter into a partnership as sawmillers,
and take out to Van Diemen’s Land an
extensive plant with the most up-to-
date machinery then obtainable.
Mr. Peter Degraves, on arrival in Tas-
mania, was 46 years of age, and therefore
well advanced in life. He was accom-
panied by his wife and eight children—
four sons and four daughters—also by
his brother-in-law and partner, Major
Mclntosh.
The Hope landed her passengers on the
Old Wharf at Hunter’s Island, and dis-
charged her cargo, and Messrs. Mclntosh
and Degraves lost no time in waiting
upon the Lieutenant-Governor and pre-
senting him with their credentials.
They were at once promised every
facility for selecting the location and re-
ferred to the Surveyor-General, Mr. G.
W. Evans.
1868, however, plans for entirely new
breweries were prepared, and the present
brewery was then erected on the right-
hand side of the entrance gate. As soon
as this was completed, the old brewery
on the left-hand side was demolished
with the exception of the cellars, and the
present brewery erected on this site. A
new malthouse was also added later on.
The original flourmill was close to the
second sawmill, that is the mill with the
forty-foot wheel, which was constructed
after the original sawmill was destroyed.
The second flourmill was built of stone,
and stood on the left-hand side of the
road, this mill being worked by water
direct from the Mountain Lake.
Other breweries operating in Van
Diemen’s Land and New South Wales at
that time have long since gone out of
existence, leaving the Cascade Brewery
with the proud and undisputed record as
the oldest brewing establishment in Aus-
tralia, if not in the Southern Hemisphere.
The Cascade Brewery, working for
one hundred and four years without inter-
ruption, enlarged and modernised from
time to time, has met a growing demand
for a product whose all-round excellence
places it in the foremost rank among its
competitors.
They were eventually authorised to
take possession of the country lying at
the foot of Mount Wellington or Table
Mountain, then known as the Cascade.
It is uncertain when this name was first
given to the locality or the reason which
induced it or the person by whom it was
conferred, but a more likely explanation
of the term is that in the early days of
last century the Hobart Town Rivulet
was a much larger and more important
stream than it is to-day.
■ln 1825 the sawmill was an active
operation, the “Gazette” published on
August 13 of that year containing the
following paragraph:—“We are happy
to observe that the sawmill erected near
the cascade on the town rivulet by
Messrs. Mclntosh and Degraves is now in
full and active operation. It is one of
the most complete machines of the kind
in any country, and timber is cut by it
with astonishing nicety and rapidity.
The public are called upon to patronise
such patriotic and beneficial under-
takings.”
Early in the year 1832 Mr. Peter De-
graves commenced the erection of a
brewery, and during that year the neces-
sary building was constructed and all
machinery installed. At the beginning
of 1833, in fact, probably a little
earlier, the brewery was at work, and
regular supplies of Cascade beer, ale,
and porter were available to customers.
Mrs. Degraves had passed away in
1842, and ten years later, Mr. Degraves,
who had then attained the age of 74, was
in failing health. Towards the close of
the year he became rapidly worse, and
died on December 31, 1852.
The brewery of 1832 had been con-
structed on the left-hand side of the
present entrance gates into the establish-
ment, and almost on the site of the brew-
ery of to-day. This building, which was
constructed partly of stone and partly of
wood, answered, with slight alterations
and additions, for many years. About
DICTATES OF PUBLIC TASTE.
Even with the developments of modern
science, beer is a product of the utmost
delicacy to manufacture, for there are so
many things which may still go wrong,
and so many factors which influence the
flavour and brilliancy. In addition, the
consuming public has become exceedingly
critical and exacting in its requirements;
its taste to-day demands ale and beer
with a decided character. It should be
clear and brilliant, well carborated, and
carry a rich, creamy head. In the manu-
facture of Cascade products only the
finest of brewing materials are chosen,
one may say, regardless of cost, to main-
tain their high quality, while the lager
yeast was specially imported from
Europe. To those with any knowledge
of the refined and delicate art of brew-
ing, to those who have inspected such a
brewery as that at the Cascades, it is
obvious that beer, as well as being a de-
licious drink, is thoroughly wholesome
and nutritive.
BREWERY RECONSTRUCTION.
To meet the exacting requirements of
the public taste the rebuilding of the
present artistic brewery was undertaken
in 1927, and the most modern ale, beer,
and lager plant available in the world
of scientific progress, known as the
Nathan process, was installed at the
Cascade Brewery.
Ale and beer, are very liable to in-
fection from outside sources, atmospheric
and otherwise, and until the Nathan pro-
cess was invented there was no known
method by which this outside infection
could be wholly prevented. This plant
is manufactured in Switzerland, and the
Cascade Brewery has acquired the sole
Tasmanian rights. Similar plants are
being installed all over the world. One
of the most striking impressions formed
by a visitor to the brewery is that the
spotlessly white process rooms resemble
a modern hospital in their cleanliness,
freshness, and absence of dust. It is
noticeable that during the manufacturing
process the wort (malt extract) and beer
are carefully guarded against foreign
contamination, the strictest precautions
being taken to ensure that there shall
not be the slightest chance of infection
from the air by wild yeast or other
organisms.
Tasmanian products are used ex-
clusively at every stage of the process,
so that all the money expended on manu-
facture is spent in Tasmania. The casks
are of blackwood from the North-East
Coast, the barley is grown on the North-
West Coast, and the hops in the Derwent
Valley. Operating in conjunction with
the brewery is a separate industry—the
Cascade Cordial Factory—which has
won a very high reputation. Evidence of
this is the increasing demand for its
products, which are built up from pure
natural fruit ingredients where possible.
No visitor to Hobart should miss the
opportunity of inspecting such an ad-
mirable establishment as the Cascade
Brewery, and sampling its famous pro-
ducts. Visitors are always welcomed,
and a skilled guide is available to ensure
that no detail lacks its scientific explana-
tion.
FEW ABORIGINES IN THE HUON-
Early settlers in the Huon were sur-
prised at the almost total absence of
aborigines or any traces that they ever
lived in the district. In a report made
by Deputy Surveyor-General G. P. Har-
ris, of a trip which he made to the Huon
in June, 1804, he states:
“The Huon appears to be but seldom
visited by the natives. We saw not a
single fire whilst we were there nor any
recent marks of them. Not a single
kangaroo was seen, and animals of every
description (black swans and ducks ex-
cepted) appeared unusually scarce.”
A PIONEER SAWMILLER.
Official records show that Lady Frank-
lin in 1840 was the owner of a saw-
milling plant in the district, so she was
really the pioneer of the timber indus-
try. In the same year it is stated that
men were also at work at Southport cut-
ting stone for use in the construction
of the new Government House, and al-
though the building was never finished,
the stone was used in the construction
of the present Vice-Regal residence.
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.


/is fresh
/fs J/ealih'Cfmnq-
/is Delicious
Its Tasmanian
CAFETERIA
Hot Meals at all Hours.
A-la-carte Service at Hobart's
Premier Dining Rooms.
OUR MOTTO:
CIVILITY AND
SERVICE.
i
I
I
k
jP*
&
CATERING
Hanton's Catering Service
unrivalled for
WEDDING BREAKFASTS
BIRTHDAY PARTIES
and all functions in Private Homes
or Halls
j F. & F. S. HANTON PTY. LTD. |
| 61 LIVERPOOL STREET, HOBARTPHONE 4423 =
miiiimiiiiii
R
ipiimmimimmmimmimimmmmiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii mu iiiiiiiiiiniii|
I THE TOURISTS’ RENDEZVOUS ... I
KERMANDIE HOTEL
Situated at the head s
of PORT HUON =
'
Wi/, MUiU
-J*'
X *
One of the Finest Harbours
in the Commonwealth.
Elaborately Furnished
Throughout.
THE KERMANDIE makes
Excellent Headquarters for
tourists desiring to visit
the Hartz Mountains, the
Hastings Caves, Kermandie
Falls, Hastings Hot Springs,
Roaring Beach, and other
Favourite Resorts.
sri
FISHING EXCURSIONS and MOTOR TRIPS to any of the numerous Beauty Spots of the Huon
'Phone : Geeveston 10. S. J. EAVES, Proprietor
December, 1936. “Huon and Derwent Times” HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT.


I
1848-1936
Eighty-Eight Years
Of Outstanding Service to the Building Comm
IS THE SPLENDID RECORD OF
CRISP & GUNN
cc
L
Whose Reputation Has Always Been Unchallenged
FOR SUPPLYING ONLY
The Very Best of Fittings and Joinery
"A
< i
r »
wm
OR£C
&
BR/SBAtUST.
P/N£jrOß£
BRICKWORKS
KNOCKLOFTY
TT\
V.
nwa
OAL Trr
**/SBAHe ST.
CRISPiCUHN
-CRISP <. GUNN
B
.■
B
E
rn
rr
[ft
CUMN
El
-
r
L
YAAP
m
r
*OMI
”£lv/ LL£
street
SO//VE* Y
YOU WILL APPRECIATE OUR ADDITIONAL ATTE
To all matters of detail when supplying you with the
VERY BEST MATERIALS
TIMBER
JOINERY
BRICKS
CONCRETE
BLOCKS
1
bricks are specially prepared,
and they are manufactured in a
wide range of attractive colours. Our
timber is carefully selected and well
seasoned. We specialise in supplying
all materials for building and making
additions to Cool Stores, Factories,
Packing Sheds, Churches, Schools,
Modern Homes, etc.
|
5
BUILI
IRONMC
CE
z
PAII
HUON CENTENARY SETTLEMENT. “Huon and Derwent Times” December, 1936.
