

! Si
i
f.i!


Ifcf )yi>
~"'- :^~::~ z: - i ,^' : '




CENTRAL
AUSTRALIA


' •••'■
|
■.
! J, ** ‘, v v
>
■I Ik - 1 - ' -
3 ' .
mt m IP W! " * n ’ v -
.■ • • rsf- * ■■ t ~ — ~ ;|
■Jp ? ™\x C S ' s - ,s *
MMIfi
i , - '** H *'^****„*.„„
- -«^j|
kvvc |' „ | -.., - \ < ;v\ W - &ll S3 t f 1
Split-Rock Waterhole, Lander River.


CENTRAL
AUSTRALIA
C. T. MADIGAN
M.A., D.Sc. (Oxon.), B.E. (Adelaide), F.G.S.
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LEIGHTON HOUSE, MELBOURNE.
LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD.


Registered at the General Post Office, Melbourne,
for transmission through the post as a book.
NEW REVISED EDITION
1914.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia
by Ramsay, Ware Publishing Pty. Ltd.
129 King Street, Melbourne, C.l, 1944.


453 4 4
10 FEB 194 i
((The Old Timers


Preface to Second Edition
The first edition of Central Australia was published in
1936, and included accounts of journeys made up to 1932.
The present edition brings the story up to the outbreak
of war, by the addition of four more chapters. The whole
has been revised; the introduction has been re-ivritten,
some of the more technical geological information has been
omitted, some stories of more human interest have been
added, and the maps have been re-dratvn. All the illustra-
tions are new, and their number has been greatly in-
creased.
Some reference has been made to the changes brought
about by military occupation, but this affects mainly the old
telegraph route and the “Top End”, leaving most of the
counting dealt with in these stories untouched.
The most regrettable error was one that escaped comment,
the naming of Central Mt. Stuart. Although aware of the
controversy on this subject, I had not mentioned it, relying
on quotations from “The Journals of John McDouall Stuart”
by William Hardman, in which the entry for 22nd April,
1860, contains the tvords, “on it to-morrow I will raise a
cone of stones and plant the flag there, and name it Central
Mount Stuart.” Alfred Giles’ insistence in “Exploring in
the Seventies” later led me to refer to Stuart’s original
journals in the Mitchell Library, Sydney, which showed
that Hardman’s copy is not a true one, but contains altera-
tions and omissions. The original entry reads “and will
name it Mt. Sturt after my excellent and esteemed com-
mander of the Expedition in 1844 & 45, Captn. Sturt, as a
mark of gratitude for the great kindness I received from
him during that journey.”
The name was afterwards altered to Central Mt. Stuart
by the South Australian Government, in honour of Stuart
himself, but the printed copies of the journal should not
be altered, as such alteration makes Stuart guilty of break-
ing one of the rules of etiquette in exploration by naming
a prominent feature, or indeed any feature, after himself,
a thing that had seemed most improbable in Stuart.
—C.T.M.


Contents
I. Introduction i
Heroic days of exploration over. Know your own country. Jour-
neys in Central Australia. Entry of troops. Tourists. Problems
of the Interior. Population. No untapped resources.
11. The Northern Territory 4
Geographical boundaries. Transfer from South Australia to Com-
monwealth. Difficulties of development. South Australian efforts.
Invitation to Japan. Federal Government administration and de-
velopment. North and Central Australia. The Transcontinental
Railway agreement in Acceptance Act. Railway construction.
The White Elephant. The ‘Top End.’ Legislation and the people.
111. The Siege of Central Australia 11
The Old Timers. Early efforts to reach the Centre. Eyre. Sturt.
Goyder. Freeling. Hack. McDouall Stuart. Babbage. Warbur-
ton. McDouall Stuart crosses the continent. Burke and Wills.
McKinlay.
IV. The Last Wave of Exploration 28
The Overland Telegraph Line. Giles. Gosse. Warburton first to
cross to Western Australia. Forrest crosses in middle latitudes.
Giles crosses twice. Death of Tietkens and James Andrews. Alec
Ross. Winnecke. Chewings. Tietkens. Barclay. Brown. Horn
Expedition.
V. The Old Order Changeth 43
New methods of exploration. Railway, motor-car, and aeroplane.
A first railway journey to Oodnadatta. Quorn. The people of
the north. The Commonwealth Railway train to Oodnadatta.
Flinders Ranges. Marree. The Great Australian Artesian Basin.
Hergott Springs. Mound springs. Afghans and camels. Galahs.
Geology of Flinders Ranges and Artesian Basin. Inland seas and
lakes of the past. Lake Eyre from the train.
VI. Oodnadatta to Alice Springs by Motor-car 57
Oodnadatta, the old railhead. Local value of the telegraph. Harry
Wolffe, the outback motorist. ‘Flat-tops.’ Opals. Gibbers.
Gypsum. Artesian water-supply. Hamilton Bore. Past glacia-
tion. The quart pot. The Finke River. Horseshoe Bend. Depot
Sand-hills. Chambers’ Pillar. Deep Well. Dying cattle. Emily
Plain. First sight of MacDonnell Ranges. The railway from
Oodnadatta to Alice Springs. Parakelia.


VII. The Alice 68
Whites and blacks. Old Alice Springs. The pub. The bathroom.
Mosquitoes. Goat meat. The Bungalow. Half-caste girls. Ser-
geant Stott. Mrs. Standly and the school. Charlie Myers.< Ben
Waukington. Charlie Maynard. Wallis Fogarty’s. The ranges
and transverse streams. The gaps. The Heavitree Range.
Physiography. A soak in the Todd. Water-divining. Native
prisoners. Charlie Sadaddin. Goats.
VIII. The Nitrate Deposit 80
Simon Rieff. Route to nitrates. Chewings Range. Anticlinal
fold. Alice Valley. Heavitree Range. Jay Creek. Motoring in
heart of the MacDonnells. Mulga. Horn Valley. Algal lime-
stones. Glen Helen Station. Duck-shooting. Glen Helen Valley.
The nitrate and its origin. Camping. Snakes. Setting fire to
the mine. Damper. Punctures.
IX. To Barrow Creek and back to Oodnadatta 95
The Burt Plain. Spinifex. Wells. Barrow Creek. Hospitality at
the telegraph station. Attack by natives. Central Mount Stuart,
Radiator trouble. The camel and the motor-car. Home of Bullion
Mine. Finches. Hayes’ homestead. Lightning. The Australian
Inland Mission. The man with the broken back. Rain-water.
The ‘rattler jumpers’.
X. The Aeroplane comes in 107
Unknown and unexplored area north of Lake Eyre. Problem of
the inland lakes. Royal Australian Air Force planes. Flying from
Laverton to Broken Hill. Broken Hill to Marree, over Lakes
Frome, Callabonna, Blanche, and Gregory. Marree to Birdsville.
Sand-ridges. Goyder’s Lagoon.
XI. Birdsville 115
Isolation. Arrival of planes. Position of pastoralists. Town
water-supply. A dance. The musician’s wife. Pandi Pandi
Station.


XII. The Simpson Desert and the Western MacDonnells
from the Air 121
The south-western corner of Queensland. Sand-ridge desert. The
first ranges. Flitting round Mount Gillen. Eastward into the
Simpson Desert. Lake Caroline. Hale River. Fifty miles out in
position. Forced landing in the MacDonnells. Safe arrival at
aerodrome. Mosaic photography of Heavitree Range westward
from Heavitree Gap. Physiography of Western MacDonnells.
Alice Springs to Oodnadatta, over the Simpson Desert. The
fate of Leichhardt.
XIII. Lake Eyre from the Air 136
The Lake Eyre Basin. Delta of Cooper and Diamantina. Stm*t.
A. C. Gregory. McKinlay. J. W. Gregory. Fossil remains of
extinct mammals. Geological history. Earlier reports on Lake
Eyre. Babbage. Warburton. Lewis. Gregory. Halligan. First
flight over Lake Eyre. Dropping spears. Tracks of animals.
Mound springs. Second flight. More spears and tin of sand
dropped. Taxi-ing over centre of lake. ‘Bull-dust.’ Tessellated
surface. Birdsville track from the ground. Lake Harry. Clayton
Bore. Cattle on the track. Lake Torrens. Arrival at Parafield.
XIV. Lake Eyre from the Ground 157
Possible alkali deposits. Government support. Lake Letty Bore.
Muloorina Station. Negotiating sand. Camping in the Dead
Heart. The Kuddimukra. Boring in the lake. The motor-lorry
enters the lake. The salt-crust. Travelling round the margin.
Unable to get lorry on to salt-crust. A twelve-mile walk into the
lake. Dead rabbits. Surface features. The connection between
the lakes. Animal life. Ants and lizards. Analyses of salts and
brines. Cyclic salt. Discussion on possibility of water ever cover-
ing Lake Eyre.
XV. By Camel through the Western MacDonnell Ranges
178
Water in Lake Eyre South. Better season. Salt-bush. Indian and
Arab camel saddles. Camels in Australia. Record dry stages
with camels. Experience with Australian riding-camels. Jay
Creek Mission Station. River Hugh and MacDouall Stuart’s
route. Winter weather. Algal limestone. Ellery Creek Water-
hole. Rattler and widgetties. Climbing the Heavitree Range.


XVI. The Headwaters of the Finke 195
Camp in the Ormiston. Glen Helen Station. The silent heeler.
Making nose-strings. Gunpowder Gap. Rockbar Gap. Ascent
of Mount Bonder. Carrying guns. A night at Glen Helen. Camel
management. Abundant fossils. The Horn Valley located. Cattle
musterers’ camp.
XVII. The James and Waterhouse Ranges 211
Camels play up. The Missionary Plain. The Hermannsburg
Mission Station. Bush tucker. The work of missions. Low tem-
peratures. Todd Glen. Boggy Hole. Physiography of James
Ranges. More fossils. Waterhouse Range. MacDouall Stuart’s
, route again. Physiography of Waterhouse Range. Petrified trees.
The wild Irishman. A dance at Alice Springs.
XVIII. The Eastern MacDonnells 222
Return of animals and birds after drought. Physiography of
Eastern MacDonnells. Love’s Creek Station. Cambrian fossils.
Wet weather. Natives at Love’s Creek. Goggle-eye Jim and
Mick. Arltunga goldfields. Fossil plants. Claraville Station.
Outback hospitality. Larry Rosenbaum. Harts Ranges. Austra-
lian rubies. The mica mines. Italians. Stuart’s Bean Tree. Rivet-
Plenty. Food on the trek. The end of the day.
XIX. A Gold Rush 232
The Granites gold boom. Excitement on the train. Alice Springs
flooded. A champagne supper. Chapman Gold Expedition. A
strike and its collapse. The journey out. Coniston Station.
Murder of Brooks. Desert of scrub. Death of aviators. Thom-
son’s Rockhole. The race in. The spinifex farms. Sickness due
to water. No gold. Preliminary report. Tanami. Collapse of
boom. Russian songs. Melancholy return journey by train.
XX. Eastward into Queensland 245
Hiring a car. Bill Kelly as companion. Compass troubles. Shear-
blade booby traps. Mt. Swan station. Chalmers’ pioneering at
Mac Donald Downs. Aboriginal battles. Oorobbra Rockholes and
aboriginal art. Tom Hanlon and his mine. Adventure with a
snake. Physiography of the region. The Arthur crossing. The
Tarlton Range. A rainstorm. Tobermorey station. Ending in the
police court.


XXL Into the Far West 260
Wolfram. Coniston station again. Ben Nicker and ‘Woodie.’
Billy Braitling and Mt. Doreen. Grass seeds and fires. Primitive
mining of wolfram. Heat and flies. Lassiter’s Reef. Bob Buck.
Travelling companions. Accident to Cameron. Snake yarns.
XXII. The Western Road to Alice Springs 269
Alunite and Goyder’s Pillars. Physiography of the route. Goober
Pedy opal fields. Lambina station. Alberga River and flood.
Death on the track. Dangers of inexperience. Henbury on the
Finke. Meteorite craters. Doctor’s Stones. Changes in the Alice.
The death of ‘Woodie.’
XXIII. Craters and Meteorites 281
Mt. Riddock station past and present. News of a meteorite crater.
Joe Webb and Boxhole station. An evening party. The Boxhole
crater. Meteoric iron. Huckitta station and Billy Madrill. An-
other meteorite story. Blacks help at the Arthur crossing. Vain
search for alunite deposits. Rogers’ camp. Rosie and cats. Re-
discovery of Goyder’s Pillars with Fred Rogers. The Huckitta
meteorite. A mystery explained. Australites. The versatile Alice.
The end of a long journey.
XXIV. Conclusion 295
Exploration and adventures. The aborigines. Eyre’s remarks on
the natives. The settler’s point of view. Christian missions. The
inevitable end. Australian atmosphere in art and literature. The
tragedy of the ‘driest season.’ The breaking of the drought.
Index 303


Illustrations
Split-Rock Waterhole, Lander River Frontispiece
The Author and Bejah Dervish at Marree Facing page 18
The Blanche Cup, an Artesian Spring at the top of a hill „ „ 19
Central Mt. Stuart, from the old Overland Telegx^aph
Road ~ „ 24
The Devil’s Marbles, on the Road north of Barrow Ck.
(Dept, of Information Photo) ~ „25
The Old Overland Telegraph Road, 1937, in the Buid
Plain, Noi'th of Alice Springs ~ „28
The New Overland Telegraph Road, 1942, Noi’th of
Alice Springs. This road connects the ends of the
railway at Alice Springs and Birdum (Dept, of
Information Photo) „,, 29
Gibber Country in Di’ought Times „ „ 68
Gibber Country after Rains ~ ~ 59
The Finke Crossing at Crown Point „ ~ 64
Camp in front of the Heavitree Range, East of
Undoolya Gap ~ ~ 65
The Old Alice, 1927. Main Street and Stuart Arms
Hotel „ „ 70
Alice Springs in 1929 „ ~ 71
Simpson’s Gap in the Chewings Range near Alice
Springs ~ „ 80
The Heavitree Range at Ellery Ci'eek „ „ 81
Spinifex Wurlies at Glen Helen „ „ 88
Teatree Welk A Windmill Replaces the Old Horse-
woi’ks (Dept, of Information Photo) „,, 89
Barrow Creek Telegraph Station „ „ 100
Spinifex in seed near Barrow Creek ~ „ 101
Straggling Sand-ridges on the Birdsville Track near
Lake Eyre „ „ 112
A big Sand-ridge west of Birdsville ’ „ ~ 113
Parallel Sand-ridges of the Simpson Desert ~ ~ 120
The End of the Sand-ridges, north-west mai'gin of the
Simpson Desei't „,, 121
The Finke Gorge, MacDonnell Ranges „ „ 130


Lake Letty Bore (Left to right, Charlie Kunoth, a
Pastoralist, young Charlie, and Prof. Prescott) Facing page 131
The South End of Lake Eyre North. The Lake is dry.
Note two figures on the left ~ „ 164
The buckled Salt Crust on Lake Eyre ~ ~ 165
Rattler ~ ~ 186
Ellery Creek Gap and Water Hole ~ „ 187
A Camp in Ellery Creek „ „ 210
Borrowed Police Patrol Camels ~ ~ 211
Mulga on the Mission Road „ ~ 220
Huckitta Station from the Dulcie Range ~ ~ 221
Dryblowers at The Granites ~ „ 234
Natives on The Granites Track ~ ~ 235
Simon Rieff and a big Ant Hill on the Granites Track „ ~ 244
Bill Kelly and Natives at Hanlon’s Camp ~ ~ 245
The Arthur Crossing „ „ 254
Country near the Queensland Border „ ~ 255
The Northern Territory-Queensland Border at Tober-
morey ~ „ 258
Mt. Doreen Station Homestead ~ ~ 259
Native Children at Mt. Doreen „ „ 264
A Soak in Cockatoo Creek ~ ~ 265
Alice Springs in 1935, with the Heavitree Gap in the
background ~ „ 274
Alice Springs in 1942 (Dept, of Information Photo) * ~ „ 275
The Boxhole Crater ~ ~ 282
The Head of the Hay River at the Junction of the
Thring and Arthur Creeks ~ ~ 283
The Simpson Desert from the Tarlton Range ~ „ 286
Goyder’s Pillaxs „ „ 287
Soil Sampling in Simpson Desert Spinifex (R. L.
Crocker and Fred Rogers) „ „ 290
The Huckitta Meteorite (R. L. Crocker and Billy
Madrid) „ „ 291


CHAPTER I
Introduction
unexplored regions of the earth are now few and far
between. There are new areas for the geologist,
botanist, biologist, surveyor, but the discoverer’s field has
almost vanished. The heroic days of exploration are prac-
tically over. The adventurer must turn to the grim and
frozen wastes behind the coastal barriers of the Antarctic,
or to the smaller areas in the solitudes of the Arctic, or to
the depths of the ocean floors, before he can tell of new
conditions and new things; but an end must come, and the
explorer will have to turn back on his tracks. Let us not
despair, however, at the vanishing of the unknown places;
for after all what does one know of the known world? In
Search of England was read with great interest in Aus-
tralia. Many of us knew nothing of lonely moors, of grass
grown Roman roads and ruined walls. We thought that
the only open spaces were the village greens. If our
history and geography books have left us so ignorant of
the “Old Country,” what can we know of our own home, of
which so little has been written; and what does the rest
of the world know about Australia?
I thought I knew my own country. I spent two years in
the Antarctic; travelled Europe; geologised in Africa; and
then returned home to settle down in commonplace Aus-
tralia and to “see Australia last.” My interest was drawn
to Central Australia, the desert heart of the continent, as
being remote and little known and likely to yield interest-
ing results to the geologist, and also as sharing the
fascination that belongs to all desert places; and I soon
realized that a lifetime could still be spent in exploring
and revealing Australia.
The stories I propose to tell you are the results of many
excursions into Central Australia over a period of ten
years, from 1927 to 1937, and of much reading. That


period begins with the old pre-railway days of the centre,
and carries on through the gradual change brought about
by closer connection with civilization, and ends just before
the Second World War brought the great influx of troops
along the old historic routes. Today, in place of one train
a week to Alice Springs, there are three trains a day; the
Alice is full of road transport units and their vehicles; a
busy highway runs on north in place of the old dirt track
with its creek crossings, and another from Mt. Isa to
Tennant Creek; there are great military camps in the
lonely places. I have not seen these things as military
duties in other fields have kept me away from my old hunt-
ing grounds, but I would like to tell to the thousands who so
suddenly and unexpectedly find themselves thrust into those
little known regions something of the interest and romance
of places that might otherwise seem inhospitable and even
repulsive to them.
The coming of the railway to Alice Springs attracted
tourists, in small numbers owing to the cost, who were
thrilled with their journey, but disappointed at not being
able to find out more about the country. Now that large
bodies of troops, our own and our Allies, have invaded the
solitudes, much more attention has been called to this
strange land. To all whose interest has been aroused, I offer
this story of my travels and researches, in the hope that I
can convey to them something of the colour and glamour of
this vast, lonely, inland region and its people, that I have
learnt to know and love so well.
The newcomer, after a first visit to Central Australia or
the Northern Territory, is tempted to set up as an authority
on the country; to say how this great heritage is being
wasted, to show how it should be administered and how
simply the problems of the aboriginal and the half-caste
could be solved; but the more one comes to know the
country, the more one feels that these problems solve them-
selves in the best way. The supposed wonderful resources
of the far inland will be made use of only when life is less
easy in our more genial coastal areas, and when economic
pressure and the will to live force people inwards towards
the more arid centre of the continent, where life is much
harder now. I have discussed the economic possibilities of


the arid regions elsewhere, and will not introduce that
controversy here. My story is of things and people as they
are, and the reader can draw his own conclusions. Every
brave effort has been made at development; the resources
have been laid bare; normal agriculture is impossible, and
more than half of our land will never be anything but very
sparsely settled grazing country. There is plenty of ‘lebens-
raum’ but very little to live on.
When the war is over and the troops withdraw, Central
Australia will go back to much as it was when my story
ended. The sixty million white people that must live in
Australia will live in the already settled areas, where there
is room enough for them, and will make greater use of the
already known but not yet fully developed resources, for
there is no unknown or untapped wealth.
Come, then, into Central Australia, first with the old
explorers and then with me, and see for yourself; and I
would be such a guide that at the end you will say with
Sterne, T pity the man who can travel from Dan to
Beersheba, and cry, ’Tis all barren.’


CHAPTER II
The Northern Territory
JTIRST of all, what is meant by Central Australia ? Unfor-
tunately, the term has not the exact geographical sig-
nificance to-day that it had in the brief period between 1926
and 1931. Originally, the colony of South Australia was a
central strip running through the continent from north to
south, from sea to sea. The portion north of the twenty-
sixth parallel was called the Northern Territory of South
Australia, and the remainder South Australia. The latter
name was a curious one, as the coast of Victoria is farther
south than any of that of South Australia, and the whole
of Tasmania lies farther to the south; but it has now
become definitely associated with the state and its people.
South Australia, since 1836, has progressed slowly and
happily, but the history of the Northern Territory has been
a very chequered one. From time to time much attention
and energy have been concentrated on the Territory, both
by South Australia and by the Federal Government, and
much money expended in fruitless efforts to develop it. All
these efforts have proved ineffectual under the restrictions
of the White Australia Policy and other social and economic
conditions; but, above all, owing to the fundamental fact—
the poorness of the country itself. There is something
almost heroic in the long refusal to accept that fact, the
tenacious adherence to the myths of the vast untapped
resources in these inland areas, mostly endless dry and
scrubby wastes, which resent any attempt to disturb their
two hundred million years of repose.
The early explorers and pioneers could not remain in the
pleasant coastal regions; they must penetrate and conquer
those waterless wastes that defied them; and this hardy
spirit has survived unrecognized, and has prompted the
repeated efforts to do something with the Territory, against
all the evidence of experience—the spirit to tackle the


difficult task and neglect the easy. Our failures in the
Territory, though dismal enough, have this redeeming
feature: they show that the spirit of our fathers is not yet
dead.
The Northern Territory was annexed to South Australia
in 1862, and this vigorous young state at once began to
develop it. The original policy of slow pastoral penetration
from the south was abandoned for a rapid exploitation of
the northern coastal regions. The central part of the area
was merely used as a corridor, a tragically long and hopeless
line of communication. The Overland Telegraph Line was
completed in 1872. Port Darwin was surveyed and settled
as the capital, and a railway built south to Pine Creek.
Agriculture was given a thorough and unsuccessful trial.
Sugar, rubber, and coffee were all planted, and abandoned.
The only successful crops ever grown in the Northern Terri-
tory area were peanuts, and the industry still survives. A
mining boom gave hopes, but the potentialities of the fields
had been exaggerated, and interest soon faded. Mining is
practically at a standstill to-day.
It may come as a surprise to many to learn that in 1877
offers of free transport to Japanese immigrants were made
by South Australia, and refused by Japan.
Twenty years of effort by South Australia ended in
nothing; and finally, in 1911, the Commonwealth was
induced to take over the Territory on the payment of some
six million pounds. Further heroic efforts to get blood out
of a stone were made by the Federal Government, Again
the chief effort was made in the coastal regions of the north,
and agriculture and mining were encouraged and assisted,
again all to no purpose. At long last it began to be accepted
that cattle-raising was the only possible profitable industry
in the Territory; and hopes rose when Vesteys started a
great meat-works at Darwin in 1914. The history of the
next few years does little credit to Australian adminis-
trative ability, or to the character of the polyglot population
that had collected in that remote and unhappy region.
Labour made impossible demands; law and order broke
down completely, and finally the Administrator and the
Chief of Police were assaulted and troops had to be sent up.


Vesteys closed in 1919; and that was the end of another
three-quarters of a million pounds, sunk without trace in
the Northern Territory, though it is assuredly only along
those lines that any success can come to the country, when
world markets are more stabilized, when our administration
is improved, and when a better class of people, willing to
work for a fair return for their labours, is compelled by the
force of circumstances to seek its fortunes in less favoured
places.
After a period of quiet, in which some of the trouble-
makers sought fresh fields, the year 1926 saw another burst
of activity on the part of the Federal authorities. This time
the centre was to receive some consideration. Agriculture
was dropped and the cattle industry and mining throughout
the whole territory received attention. It was virtually a
return to the original methods of South Australia—develop-
ment along pastoral lines from the south and bordering
states. Inland communications were improved; air mails
were started, wireless stations erected, and railway con-
struction was revived.
The Territory was divided into two parts for administra-
tive purposes—North Australia, extending from the north
coast down to the twentieth parallel, and Central Australia,
from the twentieth to the twenty-sixth parallel, which latter
is the South Australian border, about the latitude of Char-
lotte Waters. This made a rather satisfactory subdivision
of the central strip of the continent into North, Central, and
South Australia.
A Government Resident and an administration were set
up at Darwin for North Australia, and the same at Alice
Springs for Central Australia. Advisory Councils were
appointed at both places, consisting of local people, and, in
addition, a Development Commission of three was appointed
with headquarters at Darwin.
Railway construction was carried on northward from
Oodnadatta, the old South Australian terminus, 688 miles
from Adelaide, and by 1928 the 293 miles to Alice Springs
were completed. By 1929 the northern railway had been
dragged down from the old terminus at Pine Creek to
Birdum, 316 miles from Darwin, leaving a gap of 603 miles


in the proposed transcontinental railway, between Birdum
and Alice Springs.
In the Northern Territory Acceptance Act, the construc-
tion by the Commonwealth of a transcontinental line from
South Australia is provided for, without any stipulation as
to when it should be completed. The total distance from
Adelaide to Darwin is 1,900 miles, and at the time of hand-
ing over to the Commonwealth, South Australia had com-
pleted 834 miles of the projected railway—6BB miles from
Adelaide to Oodnadatta at the south end, and 146 miles
from Darwin to Pine Creek in the north. This long-
cherished objective was almost attained by South Australia
in 1904, when tenders were called for the construction of
the railway on a land-grant system, and a contract was
brought almost to signing-point; but negotiations finally
broke down owing mainly to difficulties over Federal restric-
tions on the employment of coloured labour. The Common-
wealth has added another 463 miles, and now the 603-mile
gap remains. From time to time railways are suggested
from Queensland to tap the northern end of the route, the
existing piece of the line from Darwin to Birdum, and there
are strong arguments in favour of this project; but South
Australia would then be permanently short-circuited, and
the brave project started so long ago would end in great
disappointment to its originators, not to mention the breach
of agreement. However, it is quite possible that this dis-
appointment will have to be borne.
In 1929 railway construction was in hand, Advisory
Councils were advising, Government Residents were resid-
ing, the Development Commissioners were drawing big
salaries, money was plentiful, and the borrowing and spend-
ing craze was at its zenith; but this effort was only a flash
in the pan which subsided almost as rapidly as it had
kindled, for the world-wide financial crises were at hand,
and the good old reckless post-war times were drawing to a
close.
In 1931 the flow of money ceased; and the Federal
enterprises collapsed. The two States were done away with,
the Advisory Councils were cancelled, the Development
Commission was abolished; Darwin became once more the


administrative centre, with a Resident at Alice Springs;
and everything returned to the status quo ante, even to the
old name of Northern Territory; with nothing to show for
all the advice given or the development supposed to have
been recommended, except some more miles of railway
returning proportionally higher deficits, and an increased
national debt.
This, then, is a brief outline of the political history of the
Northern Territory, which has often been called Australia’s
‘White Elephant.’ It was originally the Northern Territory
of South Australia, later North and Central Australia, and
now again the Northern Territory; and through all the
changes it has consistently remained the ‘White Elephant,’
this great area of 524,000 square miles, five times the size
of Great Britain and three times the size of Germany, bor-
dered by the sea to the north, bounded by the meridians of
138° and 129° east and west, and by the twenty-sixth
parallel of latitude to the south.
As I have said, it is in the northern coastal areas that
most of the experiments have been tried and the money has
been spent; it is there that the population and the dis-
content were concentrated round the seat of the adminis-
tration. Of the total non-aboriginal population of 4,850, of
whom 744 are full-blooded non-European and 800 are half-
castes, all but 400 whites, and all the Chinese, inhabit the
‘Top End’. But that is not my country. The Top End, the
coastal region of the north, is a different country altogether,
with its rivers that always contain water, its alligators, its
cattle-tick, its attempts at agriculture, its strikes and dis-
orders. All these things are unkown in Central Australia.
Though Central Australia has no political boundaries now,
the term will persist. The Centre and the Top End have
little in common; Alice Springs does not want infected cattle
from the north, nor its union agitators. It remains the
centre of the continent, the capital of the Centre, in splendid
isolation; still, in spite of the railway, three days’ journey
from anywhere worth mentioning. The tumult and the
shouting over the Territory have left the Centre almost
undisturbed. The people there read of those things in news-
papers a week old; but no one felt that they had much
bearing on himself or his interests. The strikes and the


riots might have been in Moscow, and the failure of the
sugar and the coffee in Brazil. Of course, the railway was
another thing. That certainly was of interest, and has
changed Alice Springs entirely—made it too civilized for the
Old Timers. Central Australia is only a cattle country,
with a few sheep now coming in. The railway, and more
wells, are all it wants; even the railway is not always
wanted, when the seasons are good and the stock can be
travelled down much more cheaply and safely, as in the old
days. The varying legislation, too, was only of passing
interest. From the beginning the country has lived accord-
ing to its own codes, and still does so, in a slightly less
degree. The police were there to apprehend any passing
wanted man, and to fill in returns, spending their spare time
in long and interesting camel patrols, to see how the black
brother was getting along, and to inquire into the goanna-
hunting, with occasionally a murder to look into, or a Hst
wanderer to find. The settlers were not their concern. Once
at Birdsville an Old Timer was telling me all about the local
people. The policeman, he said, was a very nice chap, a
returned soldier (as we term our ex-service men in Aus-
tralia) in rather poor health; he was a good carpenter, too,
and had made some white rosewood furniture 1 for the
Sisters, who were just settling into the newly established
Australian Inland Mission Hostel; and, as an afterthought,
he added; ‘Of course, none of the chaps around here’d be
arrested’—meaning, they just naturally wouldn’t stand it.
Central Australia is still the land of the free, where men
know and trust each other; and there is no room for the
crook. I have known a prospector to take men into his
camp, produce a tin, and show several ounces of gold, put it
back under the bunk, and return to his work; and lam sure
he did not look to see if it was still there when he came in
again. Those are the refreshing ways of the genunie pros-
pectors, cattle-men, and drovers, among their peers. Men
leave their camps for weeks, knowing that everything will
be in order when they return; the rations left behind can be
counted on. Of course, one meets others—riff-raff joining
1 White rosewood is the material of the deal cases of a well-known
brand of kerosene, and the only available sawn timber in the ‘Never
Never.’


in a gold rush and so on; but they are not the men of the
country.
Most of what is known, and almost all that has been
written, about the Northern Territory refers to the ‘Top
End.’ The name itself at once suggests Darwin. There
are pearling luggers there, and trepang fishers, and buffa-
loes; but that is only the distant fringe of my country, the
great silent centre of the continent. It is to the centre
I would take you, to climb its lonely, red, and rugged ranges:
To see the vision splendid
Of the sunlit plains extended,
And at night the wondrous glory of the everlasting stars.


CHAPTER 111
The Siege of Central Australia
'pHIS book is dedicated to the unknown men —the pro-
spectors, the drovers, the cattlemen, who have travelled
the land on camel, horse and foot; who know the country, but
have not written of it. Many have passed away, most of
them buried in the lonely places where they spent their lives,
too poor ever to have retired, too long in the country to face
the artificial life of cities at the end. Their dreams never
came true, but they always travelled hopefully, and now they
have arrived. Their graves lie scattered far and wide; little
heaps of stone to keep the dingoes away, rough wooden
crosses, standing awry, eaten by white ants, drifted over by
sand.
But the Old Timers are not all silent and retiring men.
Some of them have written to the papers to attack or defend
me, but I have never joined issue with them. I know them
better than they know me—these Old Timers living in the
memory of the past—and I hope we are good friends. I know
them from men of their type who are still facing life in the
bush, men who have carried on where they left off. Some of
them become embittered and jealous of the present genera-
tion, for their own great journeys and long struggles are
often not recognized. The railway, the motor-car, and the
aeroplane have changed everything; and exploring is not
"what it was. The motor truck can go anywhere in Central
Australia, regardless of tracks, and a few hours in an aero-
plane, after a little practice with an aerial camera, enable a
man to see and record hundreds of miles of country, a task
which would require months of toil on a camel; but these
advantages only enhance the value of the work of the
pioneers in our eyes.
What little I have been able to add to the geographical
knowledge of Central Australia has been almost entirely due
to the advance in mechanical transport, though my camel


journeys there and elsewhere have covered thousands of
miles.
It is to the unhonoured travellers of the great interior, the
men who ‘hang it out a bit longer,’ that I humbly make my
dedication; but even the official explorers, the leaders of
organized parties, and their journeys, are not as well known
as they might be, and I propose to recount the more out-
standing of their great deeds.
Central Australia was first penetrated from South Aus-
tralia, and its exploration is an extension of the story of the
exploration of northern South Australia. Valuable though
the work of the unknown men is, in the main they have fol-
lowed up the real pioneers. All the first great journeys were
made by organized expeditions, and it is impossible to tell a
story of Central Australia without recalling some of the
great adventures of the men who went north when all before
them was unknown.
Adelaide was founded in 1836, and as early as 1839 the
conquest of Central Australia from the south was begun by
Edward John Eyre. Eyre’s was one of the first three parties
to bring cattle overland to Adelaide from Sydney during
1837-8, arriving third, though he was the first to set out. On
his journey from Sydney, with his usual enterprise he left
the Murray, pioneered by Sturt, to attempt a short cut; but
the inhospitable mallee country forced him back on his
tracks to the river, and lost him the honour of first place. In
1839, at his own expense, he made a journey to explore the
country north of Spencer’s Gulf, of which only Flinders’s
reports of the coast then existed. Flinders had reported a
valley running inland from the head of the gulf, and it was
thought that this valley might lead to fertile highlands.
Eyre’s first objective was the exploration of this gulf. He
traversed the southern Flinders Ranges, and from their
western falls he obtained the white man’s first view of Lake
Torrens, which he named, and which he described in these
words;
'To the north-west, and extending to the west as far as the eye
could reach, was to be seen a very broad glittering stripe of what
seemed to be water, but which I am inclined to think was not water,
but only the dry and glazed bed of where water had lodged—and of
very great extent. Nowhere could be seen the least sign of grass or
water; the hills before me were high, barren, and rocky, and there


were no gum trees or other indications of water emanating froni
them to be seen anywhere—the whole was barren and arid looking in
the extreme, and as I gazed on the dismal scene before me I felt
assured I had approached the vast and dreary desert of the interior,
or, it might be, was verging on the confines of some inland water,
whose sterile and desolate shores seem to forbid the traveller’s
approach.’
He returned across the ranges to the Murray, and followed
that river down to the lakes and thence to Adelaide, pro-
ceeding at once to Port Lincoln. He was the first to travel
extensively through Eyre’s Peninsula, discovering and nam-
ing the Gawler Ranges in honour of the Governor, and again
returning to Adelaide round the head of Spencer’s Gulf.
Determined to pursue his object of reaching the centre of
the continent, he sought support for an expedition, and was
readily assisted by the Governor, Government, and enter-
prising colonists. Then commenced his wonderful journeys
of 1840-1. The colonists formed a ‘Committee for promoting
the Northern Expedition,’ and Eyre’s friend, Captain Sturt,
gave him every support. The cost of the whole expedition,
to the north and then to King George’s Sound (Albany),
was only £1,391 Os. 7d., of which the Government supplied
£lOO, the colonists £582 4s. 9d., £2B was raised by the sub-
sequent sale of equipment, and Eyre himself bore the
remaining expense of £6BO 15s. lOd. For nine horses he
paid £682 10s. in Adelaide in 1840! The price of sheep in
Eyre’s time was correspondingly low, as he bought twelve
sheep for his expedition in Port Lincoln for £2.
Eyre went up the east side of Lake Torrens, and examined
it near its centre in detail. He wrote:
‘I found the bed of the lake completely coated over with a crust
of salt, forming an unbroken sheet of pure white, and glittering
brilliantly in the sun. Upon stepping upon this I found that it
yielded to the foot, and that below the surface the bed of the lake
consisted of soft mud, and the further we advanced to the westward,
the more boggy it got, so that at last it became impossible to proceed,
and I was obliged to return to the eastern margin of the lake without
ascertaining whether there was water on the surface of its bed
further west or not. The extraordinary deception caused by mirage
• • • makes it impossible to believe the evidence of one’s own eyesight,
but as far as I could judge under the circumstances, it appeared to me
that there was water in the bed of the lake at a distance of four or
five miles from where I was. Foiled in the hope of reaching the
water, I stood gazing on the dismal prospect before me with feel-
mgs of chagrin and gloom. . . . The vast area of the lake was before
me interminable as far as the eye could see to the northward, and
the country upon its shores was desolate and forbidding.’


He had ridden six miles out on the lake till the horses were
bogged to their bellies. He then proceeded northwards
along the foothills of the ranges, farther from the lake and
out of sight of it for the most part, till the hills gave way to
plains destitute of water, grass, or timber. He was then in
the Lake Eyre basin, the driest and most desert area in
Australia. He pushed on, and met a salt creek running
northward, which he followed, till from a ridge known now
as Eyre’s Lookout, he saw a lake before him again. The
view was the same as what he had seen at Lake Torrens, a
saline waste extending to the horizon. No water was visible
in the Jake, but the creek contained pools of brine. The lake
was an impassable barrier, and he returned to his depot,
and crossed the northern Flinders Ranges in a south-
easterly direction to his Mt. Serle. From this vantage-point
he saw between gaps in the hills yet another lake surface,
forty miles away. This was Lake Frome, whose eastern
shores were visited next by Sturt in 1845. Foiled again, he
made a third attempt in a north-easterly direction and
arrived at Mt. Hopeless, and for the third time impassable
lakes confronted him to the east and north, at about twenty
miles distance. The same desert and saline bogs appeared
to hem him in on every side, and his name of Mt. Hopeless
indeed seemed justified. He naturally assumed, from their
wide extent and similarity of appearance, that all the lakes
he had seen were connected in one great horseshoe sur-
rounding the northern end of the Flinders Ranges, west,
north, and east. He had stood on the shores of Lake Tor-
rens and Lake Eyre, and seen Lakes Frome, Callabonna,
and Blanche from the distance —a great achievement in so
short a time, in entirely unknown and in part waterless
country. He had traversed and explored the Flinders
Ranges from end to end and had definitely established their
limits and proved the existence of a northern periphery of
extremely barren, waterless, and low-lying country, which,
though not one continuous lake, approximates very closely
to it. He was unfortunate in striking Lake Eyre on his
northward attempt, when he might with luck have passed
to east or west of it, where the largest gaps in the horseshoe
lie.


From Mt. Hopeless, instead of returning to Adelaide, this
remarkable man passed round the head of Spencer’s Gulf,
and went back to Port Lincoln, where he arrived on a Sun-
day, and walked straight into a church, ‘where the congre-
gation was small but respectable and apparently devout’.
Before leaving the Flinders, he had decided that in order
to penetrate into the interior he must either go up the
Darling and thence north-west, which Sturt subsequently
did, or go along the southern coast to the west ‘until he met
a tract of country practicable to the north’. He chose the
latter course, because Sturt and Mitchell had already
reforted unfavourably on the country west of the Darling,
and because he was strongly attracted to that alternative
by the fact that the Great Australian Bight was unknown
country, apart from Flinders’ work from the sea. He started
life in Australia as a pastoralist, and his explorations were
all based on the search for good pastoral country.
The Committee for promoting the northern expedition
agreed to his plans; and the thrilling journey that followed,
one thousand miles from Fowler’s Bay to Albany in five
months, was the result of Eyre’s search for a passage inland
to the centre of the continent. This fact is often lost sight
of. In his last dispatch from Fowler’s Bay he says: ‘When
we have once rounded the Bight . . . the country may per-
haps alter in character so far as to enable me to prosecute
the main object of the expedition—the examining of the
Northern Interior,’ This journey round the Bight is one of
the most dramatic and best known of the stories of Aus-
tralian exploration. Eyre’s one white companion, Baxter,
was shot by an aboriginal of their own party, and the
remainder of the aborigines, with the exception of one,
deserted with most of the stores. Eyre, with his faithful
native and very little equipment or food, went on, until at
last, in desperate straits, but just having reached better
country, they came upon a French whaler close in to shore,
under an English skipper, Captain Rossiter, who fed them
up for a fortnight and sent them on their way rejoicing,
with food and clothing, and horses refreshed by good feed
and rest.
Thus ended Eyre’s attempts to penetrate into the interior.
He found the south coast even more waterless and hopeless


than the northern Flinders. The natives along the coast had
all assured him that there was no water inland. Eyre was
subsequently appointed Lieutenant-Governor of New
Zealand, and was successively Governor of St. Vincent,
Antigua, and Jamaica. The public career of this great-
hearted man ended after his suppression of the negro
rebellion in Jamaica in 1865, when he was maliciously
attacked at home; and although all the indictments against
him ended in failure, he was retired on pension, after
having been suspended for two years. His journals, and
particularly his Manners and customs of the Aborigines of
Australia, written after long experience of duties as a
magistrate and Protector of Aborigines in the most trouble-
some times, show him to have been a champion of the
cause of the weak, and a strong sympathizer with the
aborigines.
The next attack on the interior was led by Sturt. He
pursued Eyre’s second alternative, that of going up the
Darling and thence north-west, thus skirting to the east the
supposed barrier of lakes at the top of the Flinders Ranges.
Sturt was then Surveyor-General of South Australia, and
able to equip a strong party. His journeys were made in
the years 1844-6, and occupied seventeen months; he had
McDouall Stuart with him as draughtsman. Sturt fol-
lowed up the Murray and then the Darling to what is now
Menindee, where he left the river and proceeded north
through quite unknown country. He discovered and named
the Barrier Range, and called one of the rises Broken Hill,
camping unwittingly on what has since proved to be one of
the world’s big mineral fields.
Sturt rounded Eyre’s horseshoe of lakes, going in to
examine it at Lake Frome and Lake Blanche, and still saw
no reason to suspect that it was not a continuous lacustrine
belt. He discovered and named the Strzelecki, Cooper, and
Eyre Creeks, without realising that they flowed into
separate lakes, and beyond Eyre Creek he entered
the Simpson Desert, that dreadful sea of spinifex and sand
ridges. He reached latitude 24° 25' S. on the present
Queensland-Central Australian border, and was forced to
return by lack of water. He had been within 150 miles of
the latitude of the centre of the continent, and under 400


miles in a direct line from Central Mt. Stuart, being to the
east of the longitude of the centre. He was there in a dry
season, and brought back very unfavourable reports,
though they hold good for perhaps nine out of every ten
years for the country he traversed. He crossed the Dia-
mantina where it breaks up into channels at Goyder’s
Lagoon, to reunite lower down, but did not realize the size
and importance of this stream, nor name it. He first saw
the gibber plains, which are known as Sturt’s Stony Desert,
in the neighbourhood of the lower Diamantina. Sturt
returned from this, his last journey of exploration, almost
blind, and his eyesight never properly recovered. Later on
Sturt was appointed Chief Secretary, and held that post till
responsible government was established in 1856, when he
retired to England on a pension. There he died in 1869,
just before the honour of knighthood could be conferred
upon him.
In spite of Sturt’s adverse reports and terrible experi-
ences, the determination of the government and people of
South Australia thoroughly to explore the interior remained
unshaken. During the years 1857 to 1862 exploring parties
were continually in the field. In 1857 Goyder, Assistant
Surveyor-General, visited the northern Flinders Ranges, in
which by now several pastoralists were settled. He went to
Eyre’s Mt. Hopeless, and thence down to Lake Blanche,
which he supposed to be Lake Torrens. He reported the
lake to be full of fresh water.
Later in the year the Surveyor-General, Freeling, jour-
neyed to the same spot, taking a boat and setting out
®Quipped to explore the north-west by water, but did not
nd enough water to float his boat, and made some uncom-
plimentary remarks about Goyder on his return.
.* n same y ear > 1857, Stephen Hack was sent out by
, 8 9 0vernmen t 1° the north-west of Port Augusta, where
th *“ scovere d Lake Gairdner. He recorded his conviction
at the best route to the interior was between Lake Gaird-
ner and Lake Torrens, and Stuart and Babbage acted on
this advice.
In the following year, 1858, John MacDouall Stuart was
*gain on the warpath. This determined man was almost


continually in the field till 1862, by which time he had
conquered the Centre and crossed the continent. In 1858
he made his first journey under his own command, an
expedition financed by his friend Mr. William Finke. He
was the first to pass up the western side of Lake Torrens;
he discovered Stuart’s Creek, but did not follow it down
into Lake Eyre. From Stuart’s Creek he went WNW. and
thence back to Streaky Bay and Port Augusta, his starting-
point. This journey formed a periphery to Hack’s work
round Lake Gairdner on Eyre Peninsula.
At this time also the Government had listened to the
suggestions of Mr. B. H. Babbage, then a member of Par-
liament, for the exploration of the interior, and put him in
charge of an expedition. He was instructed to explore the
country between the western shore of Lake Torrens and the
eastern shore of Lake Gairdner, and then go northwards.
He followed MacDouall Stuart up the west side of Lake
Torrens, and named Stuart’s Creek, visited by Stuart a
few months before. He followed down Stuart’s Creek to its
entry into Lake Eyre South, and then explored the western
side of that lake, which he named Lake Gregory. The name
was not adopted, and the lake was called Lake Eyre, a name
first suggested in an article in the Adelaide Register of 27
January, 1860. Babbage was the first to realize the prob-
ability that Lake Eyre was separated from Lake Torrens.
While Babbage was steadily carrying out this work and
sending down reports at intervals, dissatisfaction with him
appeared to be growing in Adelaide, and an impatience for
more rapid results and greater distances led to his dismissal
from the command of the expedition—a very severe treat-
ment for which there seems to have been little excuse.
Major P. Egerton-Warburton retired from the Bombay
army, and came to South Australia in 1853, and was almost
immediately appointed Commissioner of Police. Early in
1858 he had made a tour of inspection out from Streaky
Bay to the west side of Lake Gairdner, but could not at that
time have been considered a bushman. This man was sent
out to relieve Babbage, whom he found on the western side
of Lake Eyre South on 5 November, 1858. Warburton
immediately sent Babbage back the way he had come, down


2%
%
■- *
The Author and Bejah Dervish at Marree.


awFi' vp • ■ ft
I in , ■ !
■■ ', # ’ m
m't WBm 4 f 4 ;
j. mm


the west side of Lake Torrens, and returned himself by way
of the Flinders, passing between Lake Torrens and Lake
Eyre, and thus robbing Babbage of the honour of being the
first to break through the supposed great horseshoe lake.
Warburton, who was sent out to put more life into the
expedition, showed much less enterprise than Babbage, and
was so impressed with the dangers of the country in sum-
mer that he not only sent Babbage back at once, but imme-
diately retreated himself to the settled areas, and thus the
whole expedition came to a close.
Warburton resigned from the Police Commissionership in
1867, and became the colonel commanding the volunteer
forces of South Australia. He carried out another long
journey in 1872, and died in Adelaide in 1889.
Babbage, Warburton, and Stuart were the discoverers of
most of the mound springs round the western margin of
the Great Artesian Basin, that is, south and west of Lake
Eyre.
From 1859 to 1862 the stage was entirely occupied by
MacDouall Stuart. The persistence of this man, his tenacity
of purpose, his journey after journey into the interior, with
intervals of only the barest time to refit, his hardships and
privations, ending in his crowning success in 1862, mark
the greatest achievement of Australian exploration. The
grim interior was conquered by one man in five years of
continuous assault, but it inflicted mortal wounds upon its
conqueror. He died four years later. Stuart had attacked
1,500 miles of unknown and almost waterless country, a dis-
tance equal to that from London to Constantinople, or from
Berlin to Gibraltar. Dry up all the streams of Europe, and
you have some picture of the task that lay before him. The
length of the railway survey from Adelaide to Darwin is
1,900 miles, and of the telegraph line 2,230 miles.
Stuart’s journals are matter of fact and somewhat pro-
saic. He never wrote a popular account of his travels, and
lacked the dramatic instinct of Eyre and Giles, and also,
happily, the harshness of Warburton; he appears to have
been a gentle, God-fearing man.
The first expedition in 1858 to the west of Lake Torrens
and in Eyre’s Peninsula has been mentioned. For this jour-


ney he was entirely financed by Mr. William Finke. In
1859 he made two further journeys, supported by Messrs.
William Finke and James Chambers. On the first he went
north to the present site of Marree, where his assistant
Hergott discovered the springs which bear his name, and
thence westward round the south side of Lake Eyre, and
northward into new country, discovering more mound
springs, and reaching the Neales River in lattitude 27°.
After refitting, he returned and carried out some survey
work in the new country west of Lake Eyre, but went no
farther north. In March 1860 the fourth expedition started,
still financed by Finke and Chambers, and consisting of only
two other men besides Stuart, and thirteen horses. This
small party met with astonishing success, reaching the
heart of the continent, and far beyond. The reason for
this success was that the Lake Eyre Basin is the most
desert part of Australia, and once this obstacle had been
safely passed Stuart found that the central regions were
much more hospitable. He pushed north along what became
the telegraph line, discovering and naming the Stevenson,
Mt. Daniel, Chambers Pillar, the Finke, the Hugh, the
James and Waterhouse Ranges, the MacDonnell, Davenport
and Murchison Ranges, and Tennant Creek. He followed
the Hugh up through the MacDonnell Ranges; and on Sun-
day, 22 April, 1860, he wrote in his diary: ‘To-day I find
from my observation of the O.LLIIO 0 00' 30" that lam now
camped in the centre of Australia I have marked a tree
and planted the British Flag in the centre, there is a high
mount about two miles to the N.N.E. which I hoped would
be in the centre but on it to-morrow I will raise a cone of
stone & plant the flag there and will name it Mt. Sturt after
my excellent and esteemed commander of the Expedition in
1844 & 1845 Captn. Sturt, as a mark of gratitude for the
great kindness I received from him during that journey/
Next day, with one of his party, Kekwick, he ascended the
mount, and ‘built a large cone of stones, in the centre
of which I placed a pole with the British flag nailed to
it. Near the top of the cone I placed a small bottle, in
which there is a slip of paper, with our signatures
to it, stating by whom it was raised. We then gave three
cheers for the flag, the emblem of civil and religious liberty,


and may it be a sign to the natives that the dawn of liberty,
civilization, and Christianity is about to break upon them/
And so the siege was raised and the centre of the Con-
tinent was reached at last by these three men, Stuart, Kek-
wick and Heed. Their feat was one of the highlights in the
history of exploration, though, through no fault of Stuart,
or of any man, that day marked not the dawn but the end
of the liberty and the beginning of the extinction of the
aboriginal inhabitants of the land.
The name of the hill was afterwards altered from Mt.
Sturt to Central Mount Stuart by the South Australian
Government, as a fitting tribute to Stuart, for Sturt’s name
was already honoured and perpetuated by numerous place
names. The extract quoted from Stuart’s diary for 22
April is an exact copy of his original manuscript housed
in the Mitchell Library, Sydney. In some printed copies of
his journals the wording has been altered, making it appear
that Stuart named the hill after himself, which is quite
wrong.
It is clear that Stuart had some exact point in mind when
he spoke of the centre of Australia, and Hardman (in The
Journals of John McDouall Stuart) refers to “fixing” the
centre. Let us digress here for a moment and look into
this interesting point of how the centre of a continent could
or should be defined. Stuart himself gives no definition,
and does not explain on what grounds he considered his
camp of 22 April to be in the centre of Australia. The only
clue lies in the first line of the diary extract, the meaning
of which was first suggested to me by my old friend Mr.
G. F. Dodwell, Government Astronomer of South Australia,
and finally proved to be correct to the entire satisfaction of
us both. The line should be read: ‘To-day I find from my
observation of the sun’s lower limb, 111° 00' 30", that I am
now camped in the centre of Australia.’ The angle had
puzzled me till Mr. Dodwell suggested that it was the double
altitude of the sun’s lower limb or edge taken at meridian
transit with a sextant and artificial horizon, the simplest
way of determining latitudes. This would mean that the
observed altitude of the lower edge of the sun was half that
nngle, namely 55° 30' 15", at noon on that day. On working
nis out, with the only unknown quantity the index error


of the instrument which would be small, the latitude is
found to be 21° 59' 41", or within a hundred yards or so of
22°. For navigators who would like to check this, the de-
clination was 12° 22' 07" at apparent noon at Greenwich,
difference for one hour, 50". Hardman’s map shows the
camp to be on the 22nd parallel. Thus it is clear that
Stuart determined his centre on latitude, and that the 22nd
parallel was his objective. He does not mention longitude,
for which his methods of determination would be very
rough, but the map position of his camp gives longitude ap-
proximately 133° 27'. Now the west and east borders of
the Northern Territory are the meridians of 129° and 138°,
giving a central longitude of 133° 30'. The west coast of
the Continent is in longitude 114° to the nearest degree
(Shark’s Bay) and the east coast in longitude 153° (Bris-
bane), giving again a central longitude of 133° 30'. This
meridian meets the sea along the north coast in Arnhem
Land at King River, in about latitude 11° 53', and along the
south coast in the Great Australian Bight at Denial Bay
in latitude 32° 07', giving a latitude of 22° for the point
half way along the line between seas. These approximate
latitudes have been chosen with the 22° result in view, par-
ticularly the King River one, which is that of a point well
up the estuary and not on the coast, and it is doubtful
whether this estuary was mapped in Stuart’s time, as it is
not shown on Hardman’s map. However, latitude 22° is
very close to half way from shore to shore along. the
meridian of 133° 30'. Whether Stuart used exact or ap-
proximate round figures for his margins, the latter more
probable, such as 12° for the north coast and 32° for the
Bight, and 114° and 153° for the longitude of the west and
east coasts of the Continent, does not affect the most ob-
vious conclusion that he regarded the centre as the point
half way from sea to sea along the central meridian, that is
at lat. 22° S., long. 133° 30' E. Central Mount Stuart is
now mapped as at lat. 21° 54', long. 133° 28', a few miles
further north than Stuart put it.
This method of arriving at a central point was a de-
finite and reasonable one for Australia, and gives a point
that looks like a centre, which would not always be the
case for other shapes of continent. Another way of ap-


preaching the problem would be to find the point most
remote from any part of the coast. My solution of this
problem gives lat. 23° 10', long. 132° 25', a point in the
plain on the north side of the western MacDonnell’s where
the Dashwood Creek floods out. It is only 108 miles south-
west of Central Mount Stuart, and is equidistant about
580 miles from the mouth of Victoria River, the Gulf of
Carpentaria and the head of the Bight. A third method is
to find the centre of gravity of the area, which has its
merits, but could result in a point in the sea for some
shapes. All three methods give the true centre of a circular
area. The centre of gravity of the surface area of Aus-
tralia, found by cutting out a map and suspending it from
several points together with a plumb bob, is about in lat.
25° 35', long. 134° 10', a point about 60 miles north-
west of Charlotte Waters, near Crown Point on the Finke
River, and 257 miles south of Central Mount Stuart. The
term centre of Australia has no exact meaning without
further explanation, but Stuart’s point half way along the
central longitude happens to be quite near the point most
remote from any part of the sea shore.
To return to Stuart’s journey, not content with this
great achievement of reaching the centre, he pushed on
north as far as Tennant Creek, and reached latitude
18° 47' S., a point under 400 miles from the estuary of the
Victoria River, and under 600 miles from Van Diemen’s
Gulf. Here they were attacked by natives at Attack Creek,
and with horses knocked up, rations very low, and only
three in the party, they were in great difficulties, and
decided to retreat and refit.
Stuart’s reports on his return created a great sensation;
the centre of the continent was neither an inhospitable
desert nor an inland sea. A fifth expedition was rapidly
arranged, this time with a government grant of £2,500,
together with the help of Messrs. Finke and Chambers. It
is remarkable all through how private citizens supported
exploration in the early days. It may have been partly
from hope of gain, but the fact remains that in these days
of comparative wealth and ease governments are expected
to pay for all scientific exploration, though private money


is eagerly and recklessly poured out on the most patently
unsound reports of gold discoveries.
With only two months spent in refitting, Stuart left on
his fifth attempt on New Year’s Day, 1861, with twelve
men and forty-nine horses, determined to cross the con-
tinent from shore to shore. It was 1,400 miles to Attack
Creek, where he had been turned back. Fortune did not
smile so kindly on them this time, for they only made
another hundred miles of northing, to Newcastle Waters.
Beyond this point they could not find waters to which to
move their main camp, after repeated reconnaissances. Of
their store of thirty weeks’ flour, twenty-six weeks had
been expended, and it was at least a ten weeks’ journey
back. Men and horses were failing, so again the retreat
had to be sounded; it is to be noted that Stuart in all his
years of exploring never lost a man. No further trouble
with natives at Attack Creek was experienced. Adelaide
was reached on 23 September 1861; and in less than a
month, on 21 October, Stuart had started back on the 1,500-
mile trek to Newcastle Waters, which he had just traversed.
It was the sixth, and last, expedition; nine men accom-
panied him this time. For the third time he crossed the
centre of the continent, and by April 1862 had again
reached Newcastle Waters, and began once more recon-
noitring forward for water, this time with more success.
A succession of ponds was found to the north, including
Daly Waters; and at last a stream-bed was followed running
north. This was named the Strangways, and led the party
to its confluence with the Roper River. They were then
on known ground; Leichhardt had discovered the Roper,
and A. C. Gregory had run the Victoria River up to its
source and crossed the divide, and followed the Roper
down to its mouth, though the country to the north of
Stuart was still untraversed, except for Leichhardt’s single
journey more to the east. Stuart followed up the Roper,
crossed and named the Katherine, and was soon on the
head-waters of the Adelaide River, which had been entered
for some distance by Lieut. Helpman in a boat. The end
was now in sight; the party followed the Adelaide down on
its eastern side to the sea. On 24 July Stuart wrote in
his journal:


.. Y
• , . ■ , ■ - • ; - . . ‘ -i
S: • '"
«''-v : i 1 1 1 1 k wn
tti mmlm m .
Central Mt. Stuart.


'o
o
■C
o.
a
o
a
£
o
v-t
C
l-i
VI
O
a
<v
Q
3
I
09
?>
09
Q
09


T did not inform any of the party, except Thring and Auld, that
I was so near the sea, as I wished to give them a surprise on reach-
ing it. , . . At eight miles and a half came upon a broad valley of
black alluvial soil, covered with long grass; from this I can hear
the wash of the sea. . . . Crossed the valley and entered the scrub,
which was a complete network of vines. Stopped the horses to
clear a way, whilst I advanced a few yards to the beach, and was
gratified and delighted to behold the water of the Indian Ocean in
Van Diemen Gulf, before the party with the horses knew anything
of its proximity. Thring, who rode in advance of me, called out
“The Sea!”, which so took them all by surprise, and they were so
astonished, that he had to repeat the call before they fully understood
what was meant. Then they immediately gave three long and hearty
cheers. ... I dipped my feet and washed my face and hands in the
sea, as I promised the late Governor Sir Richard MacDonnell I would
do if I reached it. . . . Thus have I, through the instrumentality of
Divine Providence, been led to accomplish the great • object of the
expedition, and take the whole party safely as witnesses to the
fact, and through one of the finest countries man could wish to behold
—good to the coast and with a stream of running water within half
a mile of the sea. From Newcastle Waters to the sea beach the main
body of horses have been only one night without water, and then got
it within the next day. If this country is settled, it will be one
of the finest colonies under the Crown, suitable for the growth of
any and everything—what a splendid country for producing cotton.’
The happy man in the hour of his success was sadly out
in his optimistic view of the agricultural possibilities of
the country.
The next day, 25 July, they abandoned the idea of tra-
versing the coast to the mouth of the Adelaide, owing to
the boggy nature of the ground, and decided to begin the
return at once.
T now had an open space cleared, and selecting one of the tallest
trees, stripped it of its lower branches, and on its highest branch
fixed my flag, the Union Jack, with my name sewn in the centre of
it. When this was completed, the party gave three cheers, and Mr.
Kekwick then addressed me, congratulating me on having completed
this great and important undertaking, to which I replied. Mr,
Waterhouse also spoke a few words on the same subject, and con-
cluded with three cheers for the Queen and three for the Prince of
Wales.’
This little bit of ceremonial carried out with dignity by the
travel-weary and tattered men on the sea-shore 2,000 miles
from their homes across the desert is a picture to dwell
upon.
They had taken nine months to cross the continent, and
then began to retrace their steps. The return journey took
five months, and was one of almost continuous suffering
for Stuart, who was attacked by scurvy. On 28 October,
when just north of the MacDonnells, he wrote:


'Started in the cool of the morning, and in two hours reached
where the party was camped, so much exhausted and so completely
done up that I could not speak a word —the power of speech had
completely left me. I was lifted from the saddle and placed under
the shade of a mulga bush. In about ten minutes I recovered my
speech. I find I can no longer sit on horseback. ... At sundown had
the horse shot; fresh meat to the party is now a great treat. lam
denied participating in that pleasure, from the dreadful state in which
my mouth still is. I can chew nothing, and all that I have been
living on is a little beef tea, and a little boiled flour, which I am
obliged to swallow. To-night I feel very ill, and very low indeed.’
On 31 October he was obliged to take to a stretcher slung
between two horses, on which he was carried until 7 Decem-
ber, over a distance of nearly 600 miles. On 31 October:
'My right hand nearly useless to me by the accident to the horse;
total blindness after sunset . . . and nearly blind during the day; my
limbs so weak and painful that I am obliged to be carried about; my
body reduced to that of a living skeleton and my strength to that
of infantine weakness—a sad, sad wreck of former days. Wind
variable.’
On 7 December he had to take to the saddle again, as the
ambulance horses were done, but in another three days he
was at Moolooloo in the settled districts. Thus Stuart’s
great work ended, and thus was the centre of the continent
not only reached, but crossed six times by its discoverer
in what were .practically six crossings of the continent on
horseback—six times 2,000 miles in three years.
Stuart received a grant of £2,000, and some land rent free
for seven years in the interior, but his great spirit departed
before another four years had passed. It was mainly owing
to Stuart that South Australia was successful in her claim
for the annexation of the Northern Territory in 1863.
From the successful journeys of Stuart we turn for a
moment to the tragedy of Burke and Wills a story of
incompetence and inefficiency which holds an altogether
undeserved place in Australian history. Victoria at this
time had become a rich colony, with its gold discoveries,
and for the first time this state turned its attention to
exploration. In August 1860 the Victorian Exploring Ex-
pedition left Melbourne under the command of Burke, a
police officer, with eighteen men, twenty camels specially
imported from India, horses and drays, and twenty-one
tons of provisions. The orders were to proceed to Cooper’s
Creek, establish a depot there, and then explore northward
to the Gulf of Carpentaria. Burke arrived at the Cooper


ahead of the main party, and proceeded to make a dash
for the gulf with three men, six camels, a horse, and three
months’ provisions, abandoning the whole of the remainder
of the party, stores, and transport. They reached the gulf,
but Burke, Wills, and Gray perished during the return,
only King surviving. Burke was no bushman, and quarrels
and mismanagement marked the whole course of the expedi-
tion. Their journey was well to the east of Stuart’s route,
and mainly outside the area of South Australia and the
Northern Territory, and has little bearing on Central
Australia, except that it is claimed that Burke first crossed
the continent in a north and south direction; which is true,
but it was not through the centre of the continent, and the
expediion itself served little useful purpose. Stuart heard
of their achievement and deaths before leaving on his last
successful expedition in 1861.
In 1861-2, while Stuart was still at work, McKinlay led
a Burke and Wills Relief Expedition from Adelaide, sent
out by the South Australian Government. He went to the
Cooper from the northern Flinders, and found the grave of
Gray. He exhumed the body, and stated that there were
two sabre cuts on the face—a sinister observation, con-
sidering that the party carried sabres. Obtaining news
from Adelaide that the graves of Burke and Wills had been
found, and King rescued by Howitt, he visited the other
graves, and then went on to the Gulf of Carpentaria, and
thence eastward to the Pacific coast of Queensland at Port
Denison—a long and successful journey of which little has
been heard; a much better effort, in fact, than that of Burke
and Wills themselves. He droved, along with camels, horses,
bullocks, and sheep, getting the sheep right across to the
Gulf of Carpentaria, where the last of them was killed at
the coast on 19 May 1862.
The Survey Department in 1860 was carrying out a
triangulation of the northern Flinders and the mound-
spring belt round the west side of Lake Eyre.
For the next ten years there were no more important
expeditions. The pastoralists were steadily following up
the work of Stuart, and before long there were cattle in
the MacDonnell Ranges.


CHAPTER IV
The Last Wave of Exploration
'JTIE immediate outcome of Stuart’s crossing of the con-
tinent was the construction of the Overland Telegraph
Line, which was completed in 1872, ten years after Stuart
returned to Adelaide for the last time. The work of the
construction parties is worthy of a place in the history of
the exploration of Australia, for from the Lake Eyre
region to Port Darwin, a thousand miles, the country was
just as Stuart had left it, and these parties went through
many dangers and difficulties. The transport problems at
the ‘Top End’ were very formidable, and the Government
in the end had to take over the uncompleted work of the
contractors. The survey opened up many new waters and
the completion of the line in two years was a great achieve-
ment, for the task of penetrating the country was little
easier than it had been for Stuart. .A party called the
Adelaide Overland Telegraph Exploring Expedition went
ahead finding waters and timber for the poles. They re-
located Stuart’s route, and were’ actually the first to follow
Stuart. The party was led by John Ross, and Alfred Giles,
a member, described their adventures in Exploring in the
Seventies. They were the next to visit Central Mount
Stuart, in January, 1871, over ten years after Stuart had
built his cairn. They recovered the bottle and sent it un-
opened to the Postmaster-General, Mr. Charles Todd, who
presented it to the Public Library, and its message is now
in the South Australian Archives Department. The mes-
sage reads: “John MacDouall Stuart and party, consisting
of two men and himself, arrived from Adelaide in the
Centre of Australia on Saturday evening, the 21st day of
April, 1860, and have built this cairn of stones and raised
this flag, to commemorate the event, on the top of Mt.
Sturt. The centre is about two miles south-south-west,
at a small gum creek, where there is a tree marked, facing


*
■p t W- ., . . . (
■ w -“ i * - v m n*£,
$* $im? f i * , *‘
mgm 1 1 JSI H
44* ■ >.
K , wv
;*&&& v,|‘: v 5
jggp—
ii ' ;■, S j ' i >M%i
T/ie OZd Overland Telegraph Road, 1937.


ff r ; ■
■-*JL . v '" y
f
y r
® J i fT
njL
■- - r f i
; BCrl* 4
— ■ if*!?!
.■
J|
U
■
The New Road North of Alice Springs, 1942. (Dept
" '• ' s >' ' <•■• 'JSPs&&
of Information photo


the south. John MacDouall Stuart (leader), William
Darton Kekwick, Benjamin Heed.”
Originally the telegraph line followed Stuart’s track. It
Avent up the Hugh and through the Waterhouse Ranges to
the MacDonnells and thence eastward to Alice Springs,
crossing the range up the course of the River Todd, which
had been discovered later, instead of by Stuart’s more diffi-
cult pass at Brinkley’s Bluff. Later the line was straight-
ened south of Alice Springs and the diversion through the
Waterhouse Ranges cut out. North of the MacDonnells,
Stuart’s old waters became the well-known telegraph
stations between Alice Springs and Darwin, such as Barrow
Creek, Tennant Creek, Powell Creek, Daly Waters, and
Katherine, at approximately 200-mile intervals.
Most of these telegraph stations were the first settle-
ments in their area in the interior, important posts, where
linesmen and telegraphists lived and raised their own stock,
oases to the traveller in the desert, where food and water
and good company never failed; and the old romance and
tradition still remain about those places north of the Alice,
out of reach of the railway. The telegraphists at the relay
stations gained great reputations for skill and speed at
their work, but now the tedious business of relaying is done
away with. The telegraph stations are still the home of
all news, whether it be the happenings in China and Geneva,
or how far down the mob of cattle is, or who is on the road
to Tanami; and if the operator does not know he very soon
finds out.
The telegraph line has remained the chief thoroughfare
through the territory. It now has government wells or
bores all along it, at about twenty-five-mile intervals, and is
a stock route. Prospectors, stockmen, travellers all make
for the telegraph line in due course, and follow it up or
down; and many a bloodshot eye has been gladdened by the
sight of the thin little iron poles with their two wires a
sign of civilization, safety, known roads, journeys’ ends.
The original wooden poles soon yielded to the attack of
white ants and bush fires, and now the poles are iron
throughout. They snap off quite easily if struck fairly, but
you have to be careful about your radiator, as it might be
a long walk for water if you are not carrying much.


For long years the poles carried only the one government
wire of iron, but later the Eastern Extension Telegraph
Company was allowed to add a second copper wire. For
years all the world's news came to Australia and New Zea-
land over these two wires; but now other cables are laid,
and the wireless, with its disdain of land and sea, has
robbed the old O.T. of its proud position. It cost South
Australia just half a million pounds to construct its 2,230
miles.
The work on the overland telegraph drew attention once
again to the Northern Territory; and the years 1872-6 saw
another burst of expeditionary enterprise, which ended the
heroic days of Australian exploration on a top note.
Stuart and the telegraph parties and the settlements at
the telegraph stations had opened up the central route; and
Sturt, Leichhardt, Burke and Wills, A. C. Gregory, McKin-
lay, Howitt, and others had completed the preliminary ex-
ploration of Australia east of the line. Between the telegraph
line and the settled coastal districts of Western Australia,
however, there still remained a thousand miles of unknown
country; and the last great task for the explorer was to
cross from the telegraph line somewhere near the centre of
the continent to the Western Australian coast. Giles and
Forrest are the two outstanding names connected with this
undertaking. Forrest made one crossing, and Giles two.
Ernest Giles, one of the greatest of Australian explorers,
was first in the field. Unhappily, his work was in useless
country; it is even more deserted to-day than when Giles
toiled in it, as the aborigines have dwindled somewhat,
though they still roam in small groups in that desolate and
almost waterless tract. As settlement has never followed up
Giles’s tracks he is almost forgotten; but the inhospitable
nature of the country should make his deeds the greater.
Giles resembled Stuart in his tenacity and determination,
attacking his problem unceasingly for five years till he suc-
ceeded. He had a strong sense of the dramatic, and a flair
for writing. Some of his feats of endurance were unrivalled,
for in spite of his poetical temperament he was a man of
iron, cast in a rougher mould than Stuart. He himself al-
ways undertook the most difficult and dangerous tasks in the
way of scouting. He was not only the leader and inspiration


of his parties, but the strong man as well, whom his sub-
ordinates, the toughest of bushmen, were hard put to it to
follow. Of all the books on Australian exploration I place
first Giles’s Australia Twice Traversed. As he himself said,
these books suffer from being true. Were they fiction,
every English and Australian schoolboy would read them,
and Australian explorers would take their place among
the foremost novelists.
Giles’s undertakings were the result of Victorian enter-
prise. Baron von Muller, the great botanist and himself
an explorer, was his first patron; he sent him out in 1872
with one white man and horses to attempt the journey from
the telegraph line to the Swan River settlements on about
latitude 25° S. On this' first expedition Giles followed the
Finke up to the MacDonnell Ranges, and was the pioneer
of the Finke and the Western MacDonnell Ranges. He first
saw the Glen of Palms, where the Livistona Mariae, a tall
palm, flourishes in splendid and striking isolation, a sur-
vival of the flora of bygone ages preserved in this little
patch in Central Australia. He did not enter the MacDon-
nells, but followed them westerly to their end in the plains,
discovering and naming Rudall Creek, Gosse Rang‘e, Mt.
Solitary, Mt. Peculiar, Mt. Liebig, the Carmichael and
Peering Creeks, Mt. Udor, and the Ehrenburg Ranges, Glen
Edith, Haast’s Bluff, George Gill Range, Petermann and
Palmer Creeks, and Lake Amadeus. Baron von Mueller
named Mt. Sonder, Mt. Zeil, and Mt. Heuglin, on Giles’s
map; the Baron’s influence explains the German names on
the maps of the Western MacDonnells.
Inability to find water west of Lake Amadeus forced
Giles to retreat. Incidentally, he named Lake Amadeus in
honour of the King of Spain for no apparent reason. A
quaint man. On reaching Charlotte Waters Telegraph
Station on his return, he met Colonel Warburton on his
way north, with a strong party and camels, supported by
private enterprise, aiming at the same objective as himself
—the passage west. He also learnt that Gosse, the Deputy
Surveyor-General, with camels, was just in advance of
Warburton, on the same mission. Interstate jealousy was
strong in those days, and Giles was representing Victoria.
He was much upset to find South Australia trying to get


in before him, as he was still determined to succeed, and
had done much valuable pioneering. Baron von Muller
was rightly pleased with Giles’s results, and soon obtained
further support for him from other Victorian gentlemen.
£250 was provided by the South Australian Government,
to which Giles ungraciously refers as ‘this munificent sub-
sidy of £250. . . . My poverty, and not my will, consented
to accept so mean a gift.’ Giles never minced matters.
On his second journey, in 1873-4, Giles had with him
Tietkens, an English schoolmate, as second in command.
Again he had horses only; his party consisted of four men
and twenty-four horses. He first attempted to penetrate
the western desert in a latitude south of Lake Amadeus.
He was the first to enter the Musgrave Ranges, seen by
Gosse from the north a few months before. He visited Mt.
Olga, and saw Gosse’s tracks going west, two months ahead
of him; this was a bitter disappointment, as he had
pioneered the route. However, he continued along Gosse’s
Tomkinson Range, on the 26th parallel, to 125° 40' E.,
where he turned, defeated, on 10 November 1873, at a point
about fifty miles west of the Warburton Ranges. He could
get no farther west owing to the complete absence of water
within his range. Gosse had turned at about 126° 40' E.,
and a little farther south, on 7 September.
But Giles did not come back or give up. He went north
to the Rawlinson Range, which he discovered and named,
lying to the west of Lake Amadeus, and made another
desperate attempt to go west along a parallel about two
degrees north of his former position. His last permanent
camp was at Fort McKellar in the Rawlinson, an encamp-
ment where they were attacked by natives, and had to
fortify. When he had failed to find waters to which he
could move camp, he decided to make a dash as far west as
possible, as far as the horses could carry them, and then
return. The story of this dash is an epic and must be
retold. His companion was Gibson, a young man who
joined the expedition at Mt. Peake Station. On appointing
him, Giles had asked: ‘Can you shoot? Can you ride? Can
you starve? Can you go without water? And how would


you like to be speared by the blacks outside? He said he
could do everything I had mentioned, and he wasn’t afraid
of blacks.’ He specially asked to be taken on the last dash,
and as he had had more than his share of remaining in
camp, Giles reluctantly took him in place of Tietkens.
These two men and four horses started out from Fort
Mackellar to go west. At twenty miles west they left
Circus Water, the last known water. At sixty miles from
Circus Water, and on the second day out from it, they
cached most of the water they were carrying, two five-
gallon kegs, turned two of the horses back on the tracks to
make their way to Circus Water, gave their two mounts
most of the water in the large waterbags, and kept the
remaining few pints in a small bag for themselves. After
a rest they made another twenty miles west by night of the
same day, in spinifex and sandhill desert. When they
camped one of the horses took the waterbag in her teeth
and squirted out almost all the contents, leaving them only
a pint or two. After eighteen miles next morning, at
ninety-eight miles from Circus Water, Gibson’s horse
knocked up. They had come upon some stony ground, with
a range some twenty-five miles farther on, country which
looked possible for water, but they could not reach it.
Much disappointed, Giles turned; but in a few miles Gib-
son’s horse lay down and died. They went on a few miles,
walking and riding in turns, till, at thirty miles from The
Kegs (the cached water) and ninety miles from Circus
Water, Giles saw that they could never get back at the
rate they were making; there was only a pint of water
left, and both were already suffering from thirst. The
position was desperate. He halted; and when they had
drunk the last of the water, Giles directed Gibson to ride
on, taking Giles’s Fair Maid of Perth, his own special
horse on which the safety of their retreat now depended,
the horse on which he had hoped to make his triumphant
entry into Perth at the journey’s end. Gibson was to give
the horse a good drink at The Kegs, leave some water for
Giles, and then hasten on over the remaining eighty miles
to the camp and bring back help. He had only to follow


the tracks, due east, with the Rawlinson Range soon rising
up ahead. At the last moment he asked Giles for his com-
pass, which Giles was at first unwilling to give him, as he
knew he did not understand it, but he finally consented. The
compass was probably Gibson’s undoing. On 23 April,
1874, they parted; and Giles began his 110-mile walk back
to the camp. By the afternoon of the next day he had
made the thirty miles to The Kegs without food or water.
Here he found a keg containing two gallons of water, and
also one pound of dried horse meat. Gibson had not left
any waterbag, and there was no small vessel, so he had
to carry the keg, weighing fifteen pounds, with two gallons
of water, a very awkward burden, under which he stag-
gered on. Then a whole week passed, during which he
lost count of the days, and walked in semi-consciousness,
or lay down, at one time for perhaps forty-eight hours.
At fifteen miles from The Kegs he saw where the tracks of
the two loose horses turned back from The Kegs had left
the main track in an east-south-east direction, and to his
horror he saw that the tracks of the Fair Maid of Perth
had followed them. Giles followed the tracks for a mile,
but then returned to the main track, watching anxiously for
the return tracks of Gibson or the loose horses; but they
never came. The man and three horses had been swallowed
up by the remorseless desert, never to be seen again. The
pound of meat was soon gone; the two gallons of water
lasted five days, till 29 April, when he was twenty miles
from the Circus Water. Only an iron will could have
enabled him to conserve his water so long. At dawn next
day, 30 April, he reached the Circus Water, and drank;
Gibson had not been there. A startled wallaby had dis-
carded its young, and he heard the creature’s cry. He
found it; it only weighed a few ounces. He ate it living,
raw, fur, skin, bones, skull, and all. ‘The delicious taste
of that creature,’ he says, T shall never forget.’
By daylight of 1 May he had walked the remaining
twenty miles to the camp at Fort MacKellar, where he
arrived ill, exhausted, and starving, after an eight days’
experience which few could have survived. Yet within
twenty-four hours he was helped on to a horse, and with
Tietkens he started back to search for Gibson. They went


back to The Kegs and recovered Gibson’s saddle and bags,
and then followed his tracks for two days. He had left
the tracks of the loose horses, and turned due south instead
of continuing east. He had burnt a patch of spinifex where
he left their tracks, a common signal in the country, evi-
dently thinking the other horses were going north. After five
days out it was impossible for Giles to follow Gibson’s
tracks farther owing to lack of water. The remains of
Gibson and the three horses have never been found to this
day. Giles named the area Gibson’s Desert.
Giles, at the end of his resources, low in supplies and
horses (which formed his main food-supply), then returned
to Adelaide again defeated by the desert. On his retreat
he crossed the eastern end of Lake Amadeus, and remarked,
Tt was evident that Mr. Gosse must have crossed, and as
he had a waggon I thought I would be so far beholden to
him as to make use of his crossing place.’
Giles had covered about half the distance between the
telegraph line and Perth.
Gosse and Giles were in the field at the same time in
1873. Gosse went north from Alice Springs to Reynolds
Range and the Lander, then south-west to Stuart’s Bluff
Range and the Mt. Liebig of Giles, Haast’s Bluff and Hal-
comb Creek at the western end of the MacDonnell Ranges,
and thence southerly to Lake Amadeus. Most of this
country had been pioneered by Giles just before. Gosse
first visited and named Ayers Rock, one of the most remark-
able and interesting features in Central Australia, a great
smooth-sided monolith of conglomerate rock rising so
abruptly out of the plains that on most sides it is quite im-
possible of ascent. It is two miles long and rises to a
height of over a thousand feet above the plains. Gosse also
visited Mt. Olga, but both these mountains had been seen
from the north side of Lake Amadeus the year before by
Giles, who was disappointed when he arrived at them later
to find that Gosse had just left. Gosse discovered, visited,
and named the Mann and Tomkinson Ranges two months
ahead of Giles, and also named the Musgrave Ranges, first
visited by Giles soon after. Gosse gave up the attempt to
go farther west, and retreated, quite near Giles’s farthest
west point.


Warburton was the third member of the trio who were
all attacking the same problem at this time—the crossing of
Australia from the telegraph line to the settled districts of
Western Australia. It must be remembered that there was
no communication then between Western Australia and the
remainder of the continent except by sea, and only two
overland journeys had been made, both along the south
coast, by Eyre in 1841 and by Forrest in 1870, twenty-
nine years later. No permanent route except by sea was
opened till the transcontinental railway began running in
1917, so difficult was the desert found to be. Since then
and up to the Second World War, thanks to the internal
combustion engine, the desert was often crossed along the
railway line by motorists for pleasure with a touch of thrill
in it; and during the war a good motor road has been made;
but there has never been any stock route, except in the far
north, from the ‘Top End’ via Wave Hill and into the Kim-
berley district of Western Australia, just to the north of
Warburton’s original route.
Warburton met with better success than Giles had so far
done in that he reached Perth, not along a central parallel
but far to the north-west. Warburton was financed by
Messrs. Elder and Hughes, those great citizens of early
days, afterwards Sir Thomas Elder and Sir Walter Watson
Hughes, the chief benefactors in the foundation of the
University of Adelaide. Warburton was accompanied by
his son and J. W. Lewis, who afterwards surveyed Lake
Eyre, another white man, and two Afghans, with seventeen
camels. They left Adelaide in September, 1872, and Alice
Springs in April, 1873. Warburton was the first to traverse
the northern margin of the MacDonnells west of the tele-
graph line. He had expected to find the Finke and the
Hugh on the north side of the ranges, but discovered that
these streams rose in the ranges, and that the fall on the
north side of the ranges was northerly. He saw Haast’s
Bluff from the north—not Giles’s original Haast’s Bluff,
which was farther south, but a bluff which he mistook for
Giles’s Haast’s Bluff, and to which the name has now
become permanently attached—also Mt. Wedge and the
Reynolds Range, thus, with Giles, stealing most of Gosse’s
thunder.


Warburton’s attempts to go west from the centre of the
continent were frustrated by lack of water. He was con-
tinually forced northwards into the regions of higher rain-
fall. He was the first to enter Western Australia from
South Australia, except along the south coast, where Eyre
had pioneered the route. Warburton’s route lay between
lattitude 20° and 22° S., and ran from the MacDonnell’s
via Lady Edith Lagoon to the Oakover River and thence
to Roebourne on the north-west coast of Western Aus-
tralia, where he arrived on 26 January, 1874, after eight
months of great hardship and privations, during which no
lives were lost, though the party were lucky to get through
at all. They were within an ace of perishing on several
occasions, and got help at the end from the settled districts
when in the last stages of exhaustion. Of their seventeen
camels, only two survived; seven were eaten, four lost,
three abandoned, and one died of poisoning. The expedi-
tion’s reports on the country were disappointing. War-
burton seems to have been a hard taskmaster, and to have
given little credit to Lewis, who did most of the scouting for
water while Warburton remained in camp. This was
Warburton’s last expedition.
A couple of months after Warburton had arrived at
Roebourne, and while Giles was still making his desperate
efforts west of Lake Amadeus, John Forrest, a young sur-
veyor in the Western Australian Government employ,
started out from Perth to attempt the crossing in the oppo-
site direction. Forrest, afterwards Premier of Western
Australia, and eventually raised to the peerage—the only
Australian ever to receive that honour—had already dis-
tinguished himself, both on a Leichhardt search expedi-
tion and also by following the coast round into South
Australia along Eyre’s route, with divergences farther
inland from the coast, but always in touch with it. For
this expedition he had government and private support,
and started with his brother as second in command, two
other white men, two natives, and twenty horses, and he
succeeded where Giles and Gosse had failed. After all the
efforts of Melbourne and Adelaide, the men from the little
Swan River settlement got in first. The expedition was
remarkable for good organization, harmony, lack of trouble


with the blacks, and steady, sound methods. Success was
due to these features, coupled with good fortune, for rain
fell at the most critical time. The greatness of the achieve-
ment was enhanced by the fact that the party had no
camels, but depended entirely on horses, although at this
time the camel was just coming into general use.
Forrest left Geraldton, on the coast, on 18 March, 1874,
and proceeded north-east to the headwaters of the Mur-
chison, and thence due east over unknown country along
the 26th parallel, finally reaching the telegraph line on 27
September, at about the position of Oodnadatta. He came
across on to Giles’s track, the more southerly of Giles’s two
westerly routes, west of the Warburton Ranges, where Giles
had turned back nine months before. His greatest troubles
were met at this point. Giles’s last permanent water was
at his Shoeing Camp, which Forrest named Barlee Springs,
and Forrest, approaching from the west, arrived at a
temporary waterhole 120 miles west of this water, beyond
which it seemed he would be quite unable to proceed. He
camped for seventeen days at this waterhole, while scouting
ahead for water was carried out. Just when the position
became desperate, owing to the waterhole giving out, the
next behind being sixty miles away, showers of rain filled
rockholes, and the party was able to move forward by the
act of Providence. Giles, scouting out from his last water,
had come within thirty-five miles of the water Forrest was
camped on, but the intermediate temporary waters were
not there for him.
This rain and advance were the most dramatic incidents
of Forrest’s expedition. He soon found Giles’s tracks, and
followed them to Giles’s Shoeing Camp, where he saw
Giles’s little stockyard and garden. He was then safe.
The first signs of civilization after months of toil and
strain and anxiety in the trackless desert provide the most
sweet moments in the life of the explorer. No others may
know them nor share them. It is not the railway or the city
that stirs him so, but the axe mark on the tree, the
hoof print, or the cart track. The party that first found
Giles’s tracks brought back horse dung to the camp to
show the others, that they might see with their own eyes,
and believe, and rejoice.


Thus the first crossing was made along middle latitudes
from Western Australia to the telegraph line, and the last
spectacular undertaking of the Australian explorers suc-
cessfully accomplished.
But this was still not the end of Giles. If he could not
be first, he would be second. Baron von Mueller introduced
him to Sir Thomas Elder, who henceforth became his
patron, and supplied him with camels and equipment to
pursue his explorations. In the early part of 1875, he
carried out some pastoral examinations for Sir Thomas
Elder from Fowler’s Bay westward to the Western Aus-
tralian Border, and then eastward to Lake Torrens and
Beltana, Elder’s station and camel depot. From Beltana,
in May, 1875, he started out via Port Augusta for his last
attempt to reach Perth, with Tietkens again as second in
command, also Alec Ross, two other white men, an Afghan
camel driver, and twenty-two camels. He succeeded in
going straight through, and arrived at Perth in November,
having followed approximately the 30th parallel, 250 miles
south of Forrest’s route, and almost in a straight line from
Port Augusta to Perth, about the position of the track of
the present transcontinental railway.
I chanced to meet one of Giles’s men under tragic cir-
cumstances. A notice in the press announced that James
Andrews, who was with Giles in 1874, was lying ill in the
Adelaide Hospital. Andrews had been a sailor, and was
engaged by Giles in Adelaide. Jimmy was a very sturdy
lad of eighteen years, and Giles gave him great praise for
his defence, single-handed, of their depot, Fort MacKellar,
for two days against a horde of hostile natives, while the
rest of the party were away searching for Gibson. I deter-
mined to go and see him at the hospital. When I had
introduced myself, he said several visitors had been in to
see him, and his hard grey eyes, set in a rugged and hairy
face, regarded me coldly. After a pause, I suggested that
he had had a hard time with Giles. He replied, in a deep
harsh voice, that he had lived hard, and would die hard,
and would go to Hell hard. He said that he collected the
plants for Baron von Muller and got £SB at the end of the
expedition, of which he was still very proud. I had hoped
to get some sidelights on my hero Giles, but all the old man


volunteered was that he liked Tietkens better than Giles.
As I rose to go I mentioned my name again and this time
he noted it and to my surprise asked if I came from Ren-
mark. He then said he remembered my sister there, and
the Greenland dog, a husky which Amundsen presented to
the Australasian Antarctic Expedition and which I had
eventually sent home. Some warmth came into his eyes as
I shook his hand in farewell, but the grim old battler wished
to be left in peace, and in less than a fortnight I read that
he was at rest.
There still remained one man of this decade of explora-
tion: Alec Ross, who accompanied Giles in his successful
crossing from Port Augusta to Perth in 1875, and returned
with him via Gibson’s Desert in 1876 as second in com-
mand. Ross lived latterly with George Hayes at Barrow
Creek. I saw him there in 1937, but the occasion was un-
suitable for reminiscences. He, too, died soon after.
Giles had a wonderful reception in Western Australia,
and his camels, the first seen by the people of that state,
caused quite a stir. With his love of the spectacular, Giles
rode his camels in full desert marching order right through
Perth and to the sea at Fremantle in a triumphal pro-
cession, slightly marred by his camel playing up in the
streets and his having to lead it. The people mistook Tiet-
kens for the leader, and showered bouquets on him, which
Giles seems to have taken in good part.
Adelaide had given Forrest a rousing welcome, and Perth
reciprocated to Giles. The efforts of the citizens were not
wasted; these gallant explorers thoroughly enjoyed every
moment, and wrote accounts of their receptions, which
showed their appreciation of all that was done for them,
in a simple and honest way, rather delightful to read.
Forrest records the speeches verbatim, and puts in all the
applause and cheers. ‘Mr. John Forrest, on rising, was
received with applause, which rose to ringing cheers.’ Giles
said: ‘The fountains of champagne seemed loosened
throughout the city during my stay, and the wine mer-
chants became nervous lest the supply of what then became
known as Elder’s Wine should get exhausted.’ Western
Australian welcomes have lost none of their heartiness to
this day. On a recent journey to Perth the delegates to a


science conference were entertained by the citizens of Kal-
goorlie. Round each guest’s plate there was a semi-circle of
bottles, with a little food somewhere in the offing. The
President Elect of the Congress, a quiet old gentleman, not
at all of the hearty and bibulous type, could scarcely be
seen behind his array.
Giles might well have returned by sea, covered with
glory; but he insisted on trekking back, and in less than
two months he had left Perth to try to return to the tele-
graph line and complete the route he had had to abandon
on his horse expedition when Gibson was lost. This he
succeeded in doing. He crossed Gibson’s Desert and came
right in on his old tracks. In the desert he did one dry
stage of 230 miles in ten days, a feat impossible with horses.
After reaching Fort MacKellar he turned back and carried
out another three days’ fruitless search for the remains of
Gibson.
Thus Giles had made two crossings between the tele-
graph line and Perth, along the 24th and 30th parallels.
Gibson had a brother who lost his life in Franklin’s
Arctic Expedition. In what different deserts these two
brothers perished.
With Giles’s crossing in 1876, the great expeditions
ended, and the heroic days were over. The general physio-
graphical features of the continent were known, its barren
wastes had been crossed, most of its scattered ranges had
been seen, but the whole wide field of Central Australia
still remained virgin country for the surveyor, the geologist,
the prospector, and those lesser folk, the botanist, biologist,
and anthropologist.
Charles Winnecke, surveyor in the South Australian
Government service, spent much of his time between 1877
and 1894 sketching and making route traverses in the Mac-
Donnells. There are no records of his having done any
triangulation, though he built numerous cairns on notable
points. Dr. Charles Chewings described the sources of the
Finke River in 1886, when Tempe Downs Station in the
James Ranges was a going concern, but before there was
any occupation of the Western MacDonnells. Dr. Chewings
spent fifty years in the MacDonnells as pastoralist, miner,
and camel-transport owner, and made many notable contri-


butions to the geology and physiography of Central Aus-
tralia. He was the oldest surviving pioneer of the Finke,
and my esteemed friend, but he too has now passed on.
Tietkens in 1889 led an expedition into the Western
MacDonnells, and thence westward to the Western Austra-
lian border, crossing much country not seen before. He
discovered Lake Mac Donald, and on his return correctly
delineated Lake Amadeus, which was much smaller than
Giles had anticipated and sketched.
With the surveyor Barclay, who worked on the northern
margin of the Eastern MacDonnells, and H. Y. L. Brown,
Government Geologist of South Australia, all the explorers
of note who have left their mark in Central Australia have
been mentioned. The Horn Scientific Exploring Expedition
of 1894, which travelled up the Finke into the Western
MacDonnells, and thence to Alice Springs, had for its
scentific staff Sir Edward Stirling, Prof. R. Tate, Sir Bald-
win Spencer, J. A. Watt, F. W. Belt, and G. A. Heartland.
Of all these pioneers of exploration and science in Central
Australia not one now remains.


CHAPTER V
The Old Order Changeth
J HAVE attempted to give a concise account of the con-
quest of Central Australia by the early explorers, for I
feel strongly that these men and their deeds should never
be forgotten. They travelled when everything before them
was unknown, and no man could tell what the morrow
would bring forth.
As so much of the country is still as the pioneers left it,
it is impossible to journey through it without, in a sense,
sharing in their adventures; and their stories are con-
stantly brought before the traveller of to-day, who must
refer to their journals and use their sketch maps.
The chief change since the days of Stuart and Giles is in
means of transport. The country is the same, many of the
hardships are the same; but the motor vehicle and the aero-
plane tend to annihilate distance, though when they fail
the traveller is in a far worse plight than the man with
camels. A hundred-mile dry stage in hot weather is a very
serious obstacle to horses, and approaching the margin for
camels, but is no problem at all to the motor truck. The
centre of the continent can now be reached by rail, and
weeks of travel to reach the starting-point are eliminated.
The motor truck can go anywhere, especially if the camel
has dumped the petrol in advance. Aeroplane bases can
be arranged, with the camel as the first link in the chain.
The old order has changed; the problems are different, but
the adventure is still there.
In the following chapters I shall traverse again my routes
through the great dead heart of Australia, endeavouring to
show my reader the wonders of this strange land, and to
introduce him to some Old Timers, prospectors and bush-
men, and a few aborigines.
My first journey into the interior came about in this way.
An old acquaintance, a well-borer, came in to see me and


show me some specimens he had obtained from the Mac-
Donnell Ranges, a substance that the blacks had brought in,
which, when thrown on the fire, blazed up strongly. It was
a white, soft, crystalline substance, and it was thought that
it had some connexion with oil, on account of its ready
burning. The devotees of oil discovery in Australia, though
far outnumbered by the gold seekers, exceed them in
enthusiasm and optimism. Many and varied substances are
brought in to the geologists in the hope that they are con-
nected with oil. In this case it did not take long to deter-
mine that the substance was saltpetre. It was interesting
that the blacks had discovered its effects on a fire, though
their interpretation of the effect was incorrect. The salt-
petre makes the fire blaze up by supplying oxygen, but
it will not burn of itself. Though the saltpetre could have
no connexion with oil deposits, yet its occurrence was a
very unusual thing, worthy of investigation, both from
an economic and a purely scientific standpoint.
During his visit my acquaintance met Sir Douglas Maw-
son, who soon became interested; and it was not long before
the affair was placed in his hands, and an expedition
arranged to visit and report on the occurrence, with myself
as off-sider. This was in October, 1927, when the Com-
monwealth was pushing on with the railway line from
Oodnadatta to Alice Springs. We found that by motoring
up to Quorn we could catch a construction train to Oodna-
datta, which was still the railhead, instead of waiting for
the weekly train.
The rail or road journey from Adelaide to Quorn takes
you through the best agricultural land in South Australia,
gently rolling country, rising to 2,000 feet near Peter-
borough, and falling again as the routes bear westward
towards Quorn and the Great Rift Valley of Spencer Gulf
and Lake Torrens, avoiding the rugged country of the
Flinders Ranges north of Peterborough. The first half
of this part of the journey is through the wonderful wheat
lands, where forty bushels to the acre is a common harvest ;
but aridity rapidly sets in as one goes northwards and the
rainfall drops from twenty to five inches towards the Lake
Eyre Basin. At Quorn, 235 miles from Adelaide, wheat-
growing is a precarious occupation, and north of that it is


an almost hopeless one. In this part of the country the
wheat farmer first drove back the pastoralists of earlier
days, but now he is retiring after long and bitter struggles,
and the sheep are reoccupying the deserted wheatfields.
As Quorn is approached a high rugged range is seen, the
narrow southern extremity of the Flinders, separating
Quorn from Port Augusta, and stretching far to the north,
only crossed by a few passes in the neighbourhood. These
ranges are at once seen to be something different from the
friendly hills of the south. They are red, rugged, barren-
looking—with no green grass, and but a few stunted trees.
No roads traverse them, no houses are dotted on their steep
slopes. They give the first hint of the arid wastes and
burning ridges of the interior, of which they are the out-
posts.
Quorn is a railway junction of 3 ft. 6 in. gauge lines, one
to the south via Peterborough, one to the west to Port
Augusta, whence the 4 ft. 8| in. transcontinental railway
runs west to Kalgoorlie and on by the older narrow gauge
to Perth, and one north to Central Australia. Quorn is an
interesting little place, and in its spacious station yard
you can see some very interesting people—your first sight
of the people of the distant places, for every one here is on
a long journey. You will see men in elastic-sided boots—
all Australian horsemen wear them—and broad hats, and
here and there a red handkerchief round the neck, an occa-
sional stockwhip and bridle; and all the luggage is in the
form of swags, everything rolled in a canvas sheet and
bound with straps, and no one feels apologetic if he carries
his own swag into a first-class carriage; and then there will
be a few white turbans of the Afghans, a few half-castes,
and an occasional aboriginal. But you will not see any
riding breeches, leggings, hunting crops, spurs, or
revolvers. Some of the people you have travelled up with
on your first day in the train are ordinary city people, on
their way by transcontinental to Perth; but some are the
people of the north going home. You may not have recog-
nized them till now, if this is your first trip, unless you
noticed the brown, hard hands, the new boots perhaps a
little tight, the suit not fitting very well, the tie a little
striking, and possibly a tie-pin, the hat perhaps an old


friend, not replaced, the suitcase battered by journeys in
trucks and on pack-horses; and perhaps you didn’t notice
that when all of you except that rather dirty-looking fellow
you hoped wouldn’t sit next to you got out to have lunch at
the restaurant at Eurelia one of them went back and
brought him in; it was done so that no one should notice.
Probably you did not realize that you were the only one who
felt any resentment when a women got in with a baby.
While you were wondering whether you would help her
to change trains, one of them had already said, ‘Can I help
you with your things, Missus?’ When you tried some of
your usual sophisticated travelling conversation on one of
the young women, her candid friendliness gave you a slight
feeling of shame.
Now at Quorn they are on familiar ground again, near-
ing home, gaining confidence, perhaps have already changed
into the elastic-sides; while you are not quite so sure of
yourself, but you are already beginning to feel the fascina-
tion of the lonely places and the different life, as you wander
about the station trying to find out when the train leaves
for the north. This is always a difficulty; no one seems to
know, or care. Beyond Peterborough the railways are run
by the Commonwealth, or so it is said, but they appear to
run themselves in spite of the Commonwealth; Canberra
is a long way off. Farther up the line things are different;
the train men and station officials know every one who is
travelling, and they won’t start without you, and you don’t
have to worry; but Quorn is too big, and the railway people
are neither friendly nor officious—just irritatingly indif-
ferent and casual. You have first to find the train; it might
be scattered about anywhere in the yard. Then you get
your luggage into it, and search for your berth; this means
deciphering dim figures and letters; it’s no good asking any
one. When you have found the berth, it is probable that
someone else is already in it, or, if not, someone will turn
up later with the same berth booked. The best thing to do
is to get into your bunk, if it is that sort of train, or else
unroll your swag on a seat, and go to sleep. In due course
the mixed train will be made up, and you will be awakened
by a few frightful jolts as it starts away. After a while
the jolts will not awaken you. You get used to them; they


are almost continuous. For my own part, the noise of the
train as it bangs its dusty way northward is a lullaby. I
only wake when it stops, to see a few upturned faces in the
light from the carriage windows as the departing pas-
sengers wave a farewell and turn away into the darkness
with their and baggage and the little parcels for the
children, glad to get home to the hopeless farm or debt-
encumbered station. Often there are no lights and no
station. The train just stops at the nearest point to the
homestead.
When once you get over your annoyance with the rail-
waymen at Quorn, you begin to enjoy the train. Every one
is so good-natured and friendly, and every one knows every
one else, and there are cheery greetings everywhere. You
have left the city behind, and are getting a glimpse of the
sort of people that the wide open spaces and the hard life
make. You begin to have a comfortable friendly feeling
yourself; it is easy to go to sleep again.
To be able to slide gently into sleep when weary but con-
tent is to me one of the most delightful gifts of Nature. I
have lain down over crevasses, and in wet shell-holes, and
on the plains near the Abyssinian border where the prowl-
ing lion is heard, but have always been able to enjoy those
last moments when:
To Mary Queen the praise be given!
She sent the gentle sleep from Heaven,
That slid into my soul.
A swag on a seat, or the floor of the ‘Chan’, is all a man
could desire. The ‘Last Post’ is music to me, but my re-
action to ‘Reveille’ is the reverse, a lifelong sorrow and
difficulty.
Before the line to Alice Springs was completed, a weekly
train ran to Oodnadatta, which was called the ‘Ghan,’ the
local abbreviation for Afghan, as it brought an assortment
of supplies like an Afghan hawker. When the through line
was opened, every fortnight a train went on to Alice Springs,
with sleeping and dining-car. This was called the ‘Flash
Ghan’, and the other the ‘Dirty Ghan’.
But on this, our first trip north, we are on a construction
train carrying material for the extension of the line. We


get a box-like compartment in the curious vehicle always
attached to ‘Chans’, which combines the offices of brake-
van, passenger accommodation, cook-house, and sleeping
quarters for the train crew, who work in reliefs; narrow,
hard seats, but one each, on which we can spread our swags.
You carry your own food on the ‘Chan’, and get some hot
water to make tea in your quart pot from the galley.
The trains always leave Quorn after dark, following
down the Willochra Valley, with the range on the left. The
Willochra Creek eventually passes westward through it and
wastes its waters in the giant evaporating pan called Lake
Torrens. The railway keeps to the east of the range as the
country rises, till the range appears to flatten out and is
crossed at about 1,100 feet near Hawker. On your return
in daylight you will see, between Quorn and Hawker, fenced
fields drifted over by red sand, out of which a few dry
cornstalks may protrude. In some places the fences may
be drifted over; this is where agriculture has failed. After
ploughing, the fallow has been known to blow off the pad-
docks. After a wet season you may see dense tall grasses
and giant marshmallows four feet high, and be led to be-
lieve the place is a land flowing with milk and honey. I
have seen sand five times, and luxurious grasses once, in six
journeys in six successive years. Beyond Hawker, 276
miles from Adelaide, the country has never been anything
but pastoral.
Unfortunately, unless it is moonlight, you will miss the
Flinders Ranges on your right, north of Hawker; this is
the finest view of its kind in Australia. A long line of red,
jagged, and barren peaks, rising abruptly to heights of over
2,000 feet above the plain, runs north and south as far as
the eye can see. The MacDonnells, 650 miles farther north,
cannot surpass them in rugged desolation, for the Mac-
Donnells are better wooded. The scene reminds one of the
Red Sea littoral on the Sudanese side, but there the hills
are less rugged, though even more barren. It is the colour,
reds and yellows, the stark, steeply piled rock masses, the
yellow and brown of the plains, the barrenness, and the
stillness that make the unique appeal of these ranges. Hans
Heysen has seen that he need not go beyond the Flinders


to find all his brush could wish of this type of Australian
scenery.
The best view from the railway is near Parachilna Pass.
The line follows close along the scarp of the ranges on the
right. To the left the plain slopes gently down to Lake
Torrens, twenty miles away, but invisible. You are travel-
ling just inside the western limit of the horseshoe of lakes,
which encircles the northern end of the Flinders. Seventy
miles away across the ranges to the right is Lake Frome,
the end of the other limb of the horseshoe, which Eyre
thought shut him in.
Most of the journey from Hawker to Marree is passed
in the night both ways, unless you catch a cattle special
from Alice Springs on your return, and the Flinders scenery
makes this worth while, even though you must forgo a
sleeping berth on the ‘Flash Chan’.
The bold scarp of the ranges to the east fades away as
the railway continues north and rises into rough foot-hills
of the Flinders at Beltana and Copley, which stand at
nearly 800 feet. From there the country falls again as the
northern limits of the Flinders are approached through
Farina, named in the old optimistic days when it was
thought that that part of the country would prove a
granary. Another theory is that when the surveyors were
laying out the town, there were wildflowers in bloom, and
they named it with their Latin word for flower. Copley
is the railway station for the half-dozen stations in the
Northern Flinders. Roads lead eastward to Lake Frome,
and connect up the homesteads. A hitherto unsuccessful
radium mine lies out there, and also deposits of guano in
limestone caves. A spur of the Flinders, known as the
Willouran Ranges, runs out north-west towards the gap
between Lake Torrens and Lake Eyre as the railway
descends gently into the Lake Eyre Basin at Marree. Eyre’s
Mount North-west, and Termination Hill, lie over in that
direction.
If you thought you had been travelling through barren
country, you will change your mind when you see Marree at
breakfast time. A little group of houses is clustered to-
gether in a red stony plain; any vegetation that might have
existed there has long ago been eaten out by the camels


and goats, within walking distance of the town. There is
not even a fence to break the endless expanse of gravel and
clay, for the region of fences has already been left behind.
The uninitiated may wonder why the cattle, horses, and
camels do not wander off to Queensland or Western Aus-
tralia. The fact is, stock will not leave the country they
are bred in, just as the aborigines keep to their own dis-
tricts. They may go rather far afield during the rains, but
in the dry season, which is most of the time, they
are always to be found near the permanent waters that
they know. It is nothing if they wander fifty miles; the
half-caste or the aboriginal will track them up in a couple
of days.
Do not take one glance out of the window and then waste
your time at breakfast in the dining-car (though if you are
on the ‘Dirty Ghan’ the temptation is not very great), for
Marree is a most interesting place and is the best little town
between Quorn and Alice Springs. It used to be called
Hergott Springs, so named by its discoverer, MacDouall
Stuart, after one of his men. The name was altered dur-
ing the last war hysteria, when all place-names in South
Australia with a German flavour were changed, often for
the worse. Hergott Springs became Marree, its original
native name; but one feels sympathetic with the shade of
poor old Hergott, whose faithful service in this new coun-
try was forgotten in a temporary wave of racial prejudice.
Marree lies on the outwash plains from the invisible
Flinders Ranges to the south, and particularly from the
Willouran Ranges dimly seen to the south-west. To the
north of it stretch the barren plains of the Lake Eyre Basin,
the driest region in Australia, with a five-inch rainfall when
it is lucky. It is on the southern edge of the Great Aus-
tralian Artesian Basin, whose apparently inexhaustible
waters underlie the country from Marree to the Gulf of
Carpentaria, 900 miles to the northward, and supply the
northern portion of New South Wales and half of Queens-
land. This is the most extensive and productive artesian
basin in the world. At this south-western rim of the basin,
the water-bearing beds come to the surface, and give rise
to springs, those interesting ‘mound springs’ first discovered
by Babbage, Warburton, and Stuart, who could not guess


at their origin. Herein lies a part of the fascination" trf the
Lake Eyre Basin. As you make your camp on its burning,
waterless wastes, you know that beneath you lies untold
fresh water, ready to give forth a million gallons a day if
a bore is stabbed down.
Here at Marree you get your first sight of this wonderful
work of nature. The Hergott Springs are a mile or so
away to the north-east; there is time to run over in a car,
and Scobie would take you. You would find him at the store
opposite the station; he used to drive the mail to Birdsville,
and knew everything about the country. The last time
I saw him he was sitting on the ground under the verandah
of his store, leaning against the wall. The ground was full
of holes and I noticed a heap of flags nearby that had
obviously lain there for some time. He said he was going
to pave the verandah when he got time. These springs
have receded somewhat, and water no longer flows away
from them; there is no greenery to mark their presence,
only some slightly elevated mounds rising some six feet
above the general level. The mounds arise partly from
the deposition of the contained, salts as the water has
evaporated through the ages, and partly from the accumu-
lation of drift sand round the moister area, till finally the
mounds have become too high for the water to overflow
them, and a pool is seen like a little crater-lake on the
top of an extinct volcano. Some mound springs rise to a
hundred feet, but the Hergott Springs have never built such
mounds, and their true nature is not obvious. Only one of
them contains water at present.
In the station yard you can see the water always flowing
out of a bore at ground-level into a small reservoir, from
which it overflows and runs away along a natural ditch to
lose itself in the dry soil in a few hundred yards. Formerly
the water rose under its own pressure into the elevated iron
railway tank, but now it has to be pumped up. The pres-
sure has dropped and the flow of bores has decreased since
the basin was so extensively tapped, not to any alarming
extent, but sufficiently to receive attention from all the
states concerned.
The bore water here tastes all right at first, but the saline
content is high, and it has a laxative effect. The quality of


the water varies very much throughout the basin. The
water is not used in the locomotives unless the dams to
catch surface water are empty. From Marree the railway
runs westward along Warburton’s and Stuart’s routes
among mound springs, skirting Lake Eyre, and breaking
through the horseshoe of lakes. This gives Marree import-
ance, as it feeds the country to the east. Many long trails
end here: from the northern extremity of the Flinders
Ranges, from Innamincka up the Cooper where Burke and
Wills perished, and from down the Diamantina from Birds-
ville and Queensland, the great cattle track. These routes
make Marree a place of Afghans and camel strings. The
Afghans live in their tin town on the east side of the rail-
way line; you may walk across and see them, tall brown
men from the north-west frontier of India. They, or their
fathers, brought the first camels to Australia, sixty years
ago. They are Mohammedans, and speak Hindustani.
There may not be any camels in, but you will see great
stacks of camel saddles in yards. The camels not away
with loading are out grazing, although you will be puzzled
to know what they graze on; there is no feed in sight of the
town, nothing standing above the ground.
There are a few Afghan women, but white women have
also married Afghans. You will not see them; once they
have taken that step they are lost to their white relations,
and‘tterhaps it is better so. The Afghans are a peaceable
people in this country; they keep to themselves, their reli-
gion, and their customs. I have never heard of any trouble
between them and the police, and they are never seen near
hotels. The advent of the motor truck dealt their trade
a heavy blow, but their rates are lower, and they still get
the heavy loading for which there is no great hurry. Flour,
sugar, groceries, petrol, timber, iron, still wind slowly out
over the plains on the camel strings radiating from Marree,
and on the return the wool bales, later to be rushed all
over the civilized world by steam, oil, and electricity, begin
their long journeys in these primitive caravans. If you live
at Birdsville you will wait three weeks for your stores, but
they are all the more appreciated when they do arrive.
An Afghan at Marree once showed me a number of
brightly coloured picture postcards from his relations in


India. They were written in English, and called God’s
blessing on their rich and generous father, and asked for
a small gift to assist them in their utter wretchedness, in
the same breath accusing him of the lowest meanness for
not having responded suitably to previous requests. I
asked him if he ever sent them any money, but he only
laughed and said they did not need it, and always wrote
like that. Apparently it is the conventional style, the
Afghan equivalent of T hope this finds you in the pink, as
it leaves me at present’. During the last post-war depres-
sion, as the motor trucks petered out one by one and could
not be replaced, the camel temporarily came in to his own
again.
The grand old man of Marree is Bejah Dervish, who ac-
companied Larry Wells on all his desert expeditions, and
notably the tragic journey of the Calvert Expedition from
Willuna to the Fitzroy in Western Australia in 1896-7. He
will show you a compass from that expedition and tell you
Larry Wells called him his friend.
On the western side of the railway line at Marree is the
white part of the town. The main street runs parallel to
the railway line, with buildings on one side only, facing the
station. There are the pub, a couple of stores, the post office,
and a house or two, and behind them the police station,
school, hall, and private houses; there is a bore there too,
but it has ceased to flow. Farther back still is the race-
course, and at the rubbish tip, where old iron, broken cases,
and odd pieces of sacking can be found, stand the houses
of a few aboriginals. All around are gravelly plains, while
overhead fly the flocks of town galahs with their harsh
cries, those slate-grey cockatoos with their bright pink
breasts and underwing feathers, the most characteristic
bird of the upper north of South Australia, almost domes-
ticated at Marree, like house sparrows. Charlie Kunoth
may tell you that they fly backwards to keep the dust out
of their eyes, but you need to be careful of Charlie if you
are a new-comer.
There are the remains of a date plantation, once carefully
irrigated with bore water, and a few gums and pepper trees
round the houses. Dates have not proved successful in the
north; the palms grow well at first, and bear fruit, but do


not seem to stand the salinity of the bore water, and cease
bearing in time.
In the gravel may be found many large pebbles of rock
crystal, or clear quartz, which is often called desert topaz.
When cut and polished they make very attractive stones;
they are plentiful round the racecourse.
So much for Marree. We will visit it again later. The
train only gives us an hour or so.
The railway line runs westward from Marree to skirt
closely the south-western end of Lake Eyre South. The train
stops after a few miles to take in water from one of the
surface-water storage tanks, yellow-looking stuff through
the suspended clay, not half as attractive as the clear bore
water, but preferable in every way, as one soon learns after
a day or two on bore water.
In the Flinders Ranges there are some small mineralized
areas, which have never proved of great commercial im-
portance. The rocks are all of the greatest antiquity, and
have been folded and thrust about by earth movements
throughout more than half the life-history of the earth.
When we left the Flinders we left these ancient rocks
behind, and with them the rugged scenery. In the Lake
Eyre Basin, and until we cross the River Finke, we are on
the Great Artesian Basin, an area filled to depths up to
5,000 feet with lake and sea deposits of Jurassic and
Cretaceous age, formed at a time when the eastern central
portions of the continent sagged and gave rise at first to
great lake areas, but later allowed the sea to flow in
from the Gulf of Carpentaria. The sea was eventually
drained off again by re-elevation, another lake period fol-
lowed, and finally the lakes dried up and the present con-
ditions of comparative aridity set in. The waters of the
Artesian Basin are imprisoned in the first freshwater sands
by the overlying marine clays. The more ancient rocks lie
deeply buried beneath these Mesozoic formations. Denuda-
tion has gradually lowered the level of the Mesozoic and Ter-
tiary plains, leaving small remnants scattered about, the
familiar flat-topped hills of this region, really small mesas
and buttes. The beds of sandstone and shale appear to be
quite flat. This great change in topography from the
Flinders to the Artesian Basin with its plains and ‘flat tops’


cannot but strike the most unobservant. The ‘flat tops’
do not rise more than a hundred feet above the plains.
Marree is 155 feet above sea-level, but as the shores of
Lake Eyre South are approached, the country falls until it
reaches thirty-nine feet below sea-level at the margin of the
lake. This is ascribed to a sagging of the earth’s crust at
the time the Flinders Ranges were elevated, but is partly
due to ‘deflation,’ the process by which material is removed
from arid regions by the wind. Parts of the northern
Sahara have similarly been reduced below sea-level.
Along the southern side of the lake numerous water-
courses are crossed, running northward towards the lake
from the Willouran Ranges and hills to the south. These
streams run at some period almost every year, and carry a
good deal of water into the south lake. At Stuart’s Creek
the water often backs up to the railway line from the lake.
A little beyond Stuart’s Creek, for a distance of a few
miles, the lake can be seen from the train, its margin, hard
to define, lying about half a mile from the line. Usually all
that can be seen is a smooth, pinkish, level plain extending
a few miles, and, beyond, what seems a shimmering blue
expanse of water. The new-comer will invariably take this
to be water; one could almost swear to the waves; but it is
merely the tremulous effect of mirage. Occasionally, after
heavy rains, water is actually seen, yellow and dull, and
the appearance is quite different. Mirage ‘water’ is too
good to be true; it is merely a portion of the sky seen in the
direction of the ground, at a grazing angle, owing to the
bending of the rays of light from the sky as they pass
through the thinner air near the heated land surface. The
difference is soon learnt.
When the lake is left, the railway curves in a north-
westerly direction and passes through sandy plains, with
here and there a flat claypan among the sandhills, and little
‘flat-tops’, their surfaces indicating former levels of the
lake country. Saltbush, shrubs, and grasses grow in the
lower patches where water lies after rains, but often there
is no herbage to be seen. The area is quite treeless. Grazing
camels are a frequent feature near the lake.
As it curves round the lake the railway follows the mar-
gin of the Artesian Basin and traverses the mound-spring


region. At Coward Springs the train stops. Close to the
line there is a flowing bore, which looks like a spring, as the
top of the bore has all caved in, making a pool about thirty
feet across, from which runs a ditch. The waters lose them-
selves in the sand in a short distance. Bubbles of gas are
continually rising through the clear blue water from the
sandy bottom; 1,200,000 gallons of water run to waste here
daily. It is only needed when cattle are being moved. There
is a springboard, and one could have a dive into the warm
waters at one time, but too many people travel nowadays,
and a bathing costume is necessary. A few date palms
stand along the bore stream, and there is a pub, a cattle
yard, and a store. At the store they have a very nicely kept
collection of parrots as well as post and telegraph facilities,
and a wine licence. A track runs across country from
Coward Springs to Tarcoola, on the east-west railway line,
200 miles away. The low rises of several mound springs,
including the Blanche Cup, can be seen near here.
The streams all run eastward to the lake along this
western side. At Algebuckina there is the only large steel
bridge on the line, and a permanent pool of water. Between
here and Mt. Dutton the ancient basement rocks project
again, like an island, through the cover of Cretaceous for-
mations, but soon give way to the stony plains once more.
Night has fallen before the train gets away from the
latitude of Lake Eyre. In the small hours of the morning
Oodnadatta is reached.


CHAPTER VI
Oodnadatta to Alice Springs
by Motor-car
'J’HE old railhead, Oodnadatta, 688 miles from Adelaide,
tends to get confused in the mind with Marree. In both
there is north-south strip of railway line, a row of build-
ings facing the railway across a wide unmade track on the
west side, where most of the white residents live, a few
nondescript iron huts on the east side, some trees in the
little enclosures round the houses, a flock of galahs, and all
around a vast, brown, stony plain. When we awoke in the
grey dawn of a day in 1927 to find all still and quiet, it gave
us something of a thrill to read the name, for this was as
far as railways had penetrated into the continent. Since
then, the railway has been carried on another 300 miles to
Alice Springs, and Oodnadatta has lost its old-time glamour;
but then it was the outpost of civilization, and only the
camel and the horse, with a very occasional motor-car, car-
ried forward necessaries, and kept touch with what was
very much an outer world.
We carried our kit over to the pub, and were placed in a
little wooden sleeping annexe, which is all that now remains
of it, the main building having been burnt down and not
replaced.
There was no sign of our motor-car and its driver, Harry
Wolffe, from Alice Springs. After making some inquiries,
we went over to the telegraph station to send some messages
home. Having handed them in, we asked the operator, who
was tapping away in a detached manner, if he had heard
anything of the movements of Harry Wolffe. He replied,
still tapping away, that he hadn’t; and a few moments
afterwards, he said Wolffe had left Alice Springs on the
previous afternoon, and was due at any time now. It was
not till I had thought the conversation over, and asked on


the next day to confirm it, that I realized that he had got the
information from Alice Springs while I was speaking to
him. He got no thanks, and expected none. I left him look-
ing out of the window across the desert, still tapping away.
That was our first experience of the Overland Telegraph.
Wolffe arrived late in the afternoon, having in tow a car
that had broken down, containing two well-known Adelaide
business men, who had been looking at the country with
an eye to the possible general rise in values as the railway
pushed ahead. One of them was very fat, and in a state of
extreme dirt, heat, and exhaustion. Owing to the shortness
of the tow rope, they had endured several hundred miles of
the dust behind the front car, and were quite unrecog-
nizable. Wolffe was a wonderful motor driver, holding the
record of ten and a half hours from ‘the Alice’ to ‘the Oodna’,
360 miles by the unmade track, over stones and ruts, sand
patches and ‘corduroy’, through stream and river beds—an
almost incredible time for the journey in a 1926 model car.
He had recently made a record overland trip from Sydney
to Adelaide, averaging over forty miles an hour, and this
sort of travelling had become a habit with him. He was
still using the same car as on that journey, a car that served
him well. He was what is known as a ‘day and night’
traveller; once on the road, he would not stop. A sort of
irresistible urge seemed to drive him on, indifferent to
hunger or fatigue, even when there was no urgency; a
young adventurer who was looking for opportunities in this
vast waste region. He had secured boring contracts for
water, and was now in the nitrate syndicate. His best effort,
later on, was to raffle the car for £2BO, and immediately buy
it back from the winner, who had no use for it, for £BO, thus
retaining the car and £2OO. The unlucky would-be pas-
toralists could not have made a more unfortunate selection
of a man to tow them in.
Oodnadatta is in the Artesian Basin, in true gibber
country. An older level of the plains has been gradually
cut away by the streams and the wind, so that only rem-
nants of the old plains are left as the typical ‘flat-tops’, or,
as they were frequently called by the explorers, tent hills,
whose level surfaces mark the old general level. Excellent
examples of the flat-tops are seen to the north-east of Ood-


■ ,k
I
•'-'**' • * * * f > : ,■*,’*' ", _ * •■,,
■;. - -. ' ■ -■ - ‘ ■ .
- -SiT-v - • *. •* . i
'-■ ■*--*-:-■■■. ■■■ ' v; ... . - ••■•■■■•.•
v .: ■- * ■••.*■',.■ *■:*«»; *
f«* .» •* *. *> *****- ■ * *• .* . * ■ . . * > *• -
r .r .• -• > . ■ -•--■•
-• •••- ■ . -V/V .- . .. ■■ *
*1'-' -tr - -■: • . . t ,>. • *.■:■'• : ,i,
Gibber Country in Drought Times.


if
* ... .
llll 1 ll III x * 1 1
■ . ■■ " ■■
;| : ,, : . . • | jj. •:| . :g: | = ;■
f
" ' H .
1
Gibber Country after Rains.


nadatta. The whole region is shown on the map as a network
of streams. These stream beds are broad and shallow
and often hard to define on the ground; they only run a
few times a year. In many of the semi-arid areas of the
centre the stream beds are well defined, as they are lined
with gum trees, and are then easy to locate from the air;
but in the Oodnadatta region this is not so.
The surfaces of the flat-tops right through the Artesian
basin are usually strongly silicified or porcelainized no
matter what beds compose them, be it sands, clays, shales
or limestones. The porcelainization comes from the deposi-
tion of silica from solution under arid conditions at the
surface, and it changes the material to a flinty gasper,
very resistant to weathering. Only the hardest portions
of this old surface now remain, capping the flat-topped
hills. Where the flinty surface has broken down, are found
wide areas covered with boulders and pebbles, smoothed
by the sand blast, and often showing a high polish due to
'desert varnish’, an additional coating of colloidal oxide of
iron, or silica. These stones are called gibbers. They are
smooth, flattish, and of red or yellow colour, and vary in
size from that of a saucer, downwards. The origin of the
name is unknown; it may be an aboriginal term. The ‘g’
is hard. Sturt’s Stony Desert, on the Lower Diamantina, is
a gibber plain. The Australian deposits of precious opal
are due to this same silicification, the opal mines being
scattered throughout the Artesian basin. A new find has
recently been made west of Oodnadatta, and the very prolific
Coober Pedy field lies about 100 miles to the south-west of
that place.
In the Oodnadatta region, and throughout the Lake Eyre
Basin, gypsum of the clear variety known as selenite is very
plentiful. Some of the low hills and mounds are half
gypsum, and contain horizontal beds of selenite several
inches thick, from which pieces can be broken out quite
suitable for window panes in a country where glass is
dear. Great glistening sheets lie all around the mounds.
The native name for gypsum, by which it is locally known,
is copi; the natives make great white plaster bowls from it,
which are worn on the head by widows in mourning.


There is a small fresh-water reservoir or tank near the
town of Oodnadatta. A bathe in its somewhat yellow water
fills in an otherwise hot hour quite pleasantly.
The water supply is unique; hot water is laid on to every
house. If you look for the source of this water you will find
simply a six-inch pipe rising vertically out of the barren
ground for a couple of feet, and connected by a bend with
the reticulation pipes; the artesian water here is hot and
under a good pressure. In some places the temperature
of the bore water is as high as 210° F., but at Oodnadatta
it is just a comfortable bathing temperature. In some
houses, as at the hotel, there is a storage tank on the pre-
mises which allows the water to cool, so that you can have
either a cool shower from the tank, or a hot one direct from
the mains.
The big camel teams that used to take the loading on from
Oodnadatta are now things of the past.
The following afternoon we started off with Wolffe on
the motor journey to Alice Springs. One track leads
through the well-known Macumba Station, but we took
another miore* to the westward, over gibber plains for
seventy miles to the Hamilton Bore. It is most impressive
to arrive suddenly at this bore; all around is burning gibber
plains, when suddenly green trees, tall bulrushes, and a
wonderful sheet of glistening water gladden the eyes. It
is the lagoon formed by the bore stream. Such a sight is
welcome after a few hours in a motor-car, but much more
so after three days on camels over the same track.
Another sixty miles through the same class of country—
gibber plains, intersected by watercourses with some tim-
ber, and occasional grassy patches with shrubs where water
lies in the rains—and one comes to the Central Australian
Border, after passing the little store at Blood’s Creek, where
Dan used to make some tea for you and could probably
produce other drinks if requested. A few miles beyond the
border is Charlotte Waters, one of the well-known stations
on the Overland Telegraph, with solid stone buildings, as
they all have. It was occupied as a police station then. Now
it is empty and deserted. We are now on the far side of
the Artesian Basin, which trends away north-east into
Queensland from here. Charlotte Waters bore is the last


on the route; the water does not rise to the surface here.
It was from about this latitude that Giles made his journeys
west, and near here Forrest came in from Western Aus-
tralia.
Some miles beyond Charlotte Waters the Finke River is
met at Yellow Cliff. The Finke here flows east, soon to turn
south and lose itself, or ‘flood out’, in the plains north of
Lake Eyre, towards which it drains. The Finke rises in the
Western MacDonnells, 300 miles away to the north-west.
At Yellow Cliff there are good exposures of glacial for-
mations, sandstone beds containing polished and striated
boulders. These are of Permo-carboniferous age, a period
of widespread glaciation throughout Australia. It was
probably mainly land ice in Central Australia, extending in
glaciers from the neighbourhood of the present MacDonnell
Ranges. The outwash streams deposited the sand and
gravel beds known as the Finke River Series, which are
found along the Finke and the Hugh for a hundred miles
up stream from Yellow Cliff. It is fascinating to look round
in this hot and arid region, and to picture the scene two
hundred million years ago, when glaciers crept down the
mountain valleys and all around were streams and ice-cold
lakes. The glacial sands and gravels underlie the Great
Artesian Basin in this region, and must supply a consider-
ably intake of water from the Finke and other streams.
We were anxious to see the formations, but we did not
arrive at the river till 10 p.m. To our surprise we then
found that Wolffe had intended to travel all night, and
seemed somewhat put out at our demanding a halt. Our
idea was a ‘boil up’ and a good sleep in the sandy bed of
the river. He consented to camp, but refused to eat any-
thing, and made rude remarks about the wood I had col-
lected to boil the quart pots. This was my first experience
of boiling the billy in Central Australia. One stick, or per-
haps two, are all that is necessary; the dead timber is so
dry that it burns furiously. The quart pots are stood in a
row along the leeward side of the billet of wood, which is
easily ignited with the help of a handful of dry grass or
leaves, and the flames curl round the quarts and in a few
minutes the water boils. My armful of wood made a bon-
fire that was unapproachable.


The quart pot is the universal vessel of the man outback.
It is a tall tin pot with a lid in the form of a pannikin. The
two wire parts of the handle fold back against the sides
when not in use. To be able to lift the pot away from the
Are by the side handle with a single stick is a test of experi-
ence always silently looked for by the bushman; that skill
I had yet to learn. One effect of the universality of the
quart pot is that no one ever drinks less than a quart of
tea at a time; it is remarkable how soon one gets into this
habit. In the hot weather the quart is not enough.
The sandy beds of the Central Australian rivers make
splendid camping grounds, clean, and good to lie on; the
chances of being flooded out in the night are very remote.
The creeks are ideal for camels, too; I have often noticed the
grunt of satisfaction made by the heavily laden beast as his
knees settle into the soft sand.
The Finke bed is up to 200 yards wide, and was crossed
seven times by the old track as it followed up the river for
sixty miles to Horseshoe Bend, running now on one side
and now on the other. These Finke crossings were the bug-
bear of the motor journey, as cars were frequently stuck in
the sands. Mats and wire netting were carried, and the
crossings corduroyed with branches again and again. In
spite of our heavy load, Wolffe flew across every time with-
out a single check; the secret lies in balloon tyres, partially
deflated before one attempts to cross, and full speed ahead.
The Finke is heavily timbered with eucalypts on both
banks. It runs perhaps once or twice a year, and water
can be obtained almost anywhere by sinking a ‘soak’ in the
sand. The scenery along it is a welcome change; there are
‘flat-tops’ up to a couple of hundred feet high, here com-
posed of glacial sandstones. The most famous is Crown
Point, a conical hill rising to a small flat top; the station of
that name is near it. The track and telegraph line leave
the Finke at Crown Point and cut across a bend in the
river to meet it again at Horseshoe Bend. There the tele-
graph line leaves the Finke for the last time and goes on
north for thirteen miles through the Depot Sandhills to
the River Hugh, which it strikes a few miles above the
Hugh-Finke confluence, and follows the Hugh up to Frances


Well, where it leaves the Hugh and makes an almost
straight line for Alice Springs, ninety miles away.
The old track from Horseshoe Bend followed the tele-
graph line across the Depot Sandhills, where there are some
ten miles of very heavy going—the only sand on the track
between Adelaide and Darwin—but just before our arrival
old Sergeant Stott, with his squad of native prisoners from
Alice Springs, had opened up a track to the west of the
sandhills, along which there was only one mile of sand,
known as ‘the tragic mile’. This track ran to the west of the
Finke from Horseshoe Bend, and crossed it twenty miles
away, above the Hugh junction, and met the Hugh and the
old track and telegraph line again at Frances Well. Near
the Finke, Stott’s deviation lay along stony valleys between
flat-topped hills; Chambers’ Pillar, named by Stuart, a for-
mation similar to Crown Point, could be seen away to the
west.
At Horseshoe Bend there is one of the old stations, named
Engoordina, but never known as anything but Horseshoe
Bend. The homestead is also a rest house with a liquor
licence, the only such place in the 360 miles from Oodna-
datta to Alice Springs.
At Frances Well the ‘flat-tops’ are left behind, the last
outliers of Artesian Basin country, and the MacDonnell and
James Ranges formations are entered, at first only occa-
sional low ridges of folded limestone or quartzite running
east and west, which is the dominant grain of the country
to far beyond the MacDonnells. At Deep Well a more
pronounced ridge of sandstone crosses the track, the narrow
extremity of the wide James Ranges to the west. Twenty-
five miles from Alice Springs the western end of the higher
Ooraminna Range is passed and the mulga-covered Emily
Plain, which lies before the southern front of the Mac-
Donnells, is entered.
This first journey, in 1927, was made during a bad
drought, which was not to break for over two years more.
No stock of any kind had been seen since leaving the farm-
ing country till after Deep Well was passed. Beyond Deep
Well, however, we saw some sights that lingered long in the
memory. A few odd bullocks were standing here and there
on or near the track, the wild red and white Herefords that


are favoured in Central Australia. These beasts had prob-
ably never seen a motor-car. Later on we were to find a few
in better condition, that rushed madly around when dis-
turbed by our car. These, however, stood perfectly still,
even when we had to swerve to avoid them; it seemed
uncanny, and we stopped to examine them. To our horror,
we found they were standing in a kind of trance, staring
ahead with glazed eyes, neither hearing nor seeing, dead
on their feet. They would fall down in time, and never rise
again. We wanted to shoot them; but Wolffe said it would
be wrong, and dead against the custom of the country; it
might rain next day, and perhaps they would be saved. They
have to take their chance, like the wild birds and beasts.
They can apparently stand like for some days, after they
become unable to move; but once they fall all is over, for
they are too weak ever to rise again. Even the smell of
rain might revive them sufficiently to stagger to a pool and
drink. Remarkable to relate, it did rain at Alice Springs
next day, and I wondered whether the shower fell where
those poor beasts stood. One becomes hardened to such
sights in time, but I shall never forget that first experi-
ence.
The cattle had probably been left behind by a mob on the
move. Their owners would do that rather than destroy
them, the point of view being that it would give them a
chance, and if they could be asked, they would probably
prefer to take it. The man is treating the beast the way he
would be treated himself.
The ranges of Central Australia are not majestic in their
height; any comparison with the Himalayas or Andes would
be ridiculous. Among those stupendous piles, the Mac-
Donnells would be completely lost; yet in their own setting
they are impressive. After a thousand miles of plains, and
particularly the last twenty miles of the Emily Plain, the
MacDonnells rise as an imposing rampart, a 1,400-foot
barrier across the trail. There are many interesting
features about them, distinguishing them from other
ranges; but the first impression is of a high and unscalable
wall running east and west as far as the eye can see, with
no sign of a passage through. A smaller ridge lies a mile
in front of the main ridge and runs westward from the


*Jfc .ifefr
- yHsr<
■jig
I
w
i
V ' ( | fa
. v 5 $mk' ‘ " :r '’'- >. &^MWb
ImIWIIIiHWi IV
■ ,t- iW *aaw
J jfj
|h rlfikBl tfm
Kk -■>■ i*lmSSP* , Mm* 1 H * * * > ffr
> .#■ -Jr' *
j *
jj522lS§j i
M|i ~w
~ * ** tg||| ** * mH
BS*t- •■•'■■•-•*.-. ■ &l
' s i MpPSWI
• r : ' ■ " „ : ■" ■ v -■ : : ■ '^v' ■ * 5 IlHiii
The Finke Crossing
at Crown Point.


:, '
f
v
— < »|
:•-. *
. ■
- > » i><' ? ■ r i ~ ’ 1 »' »tt
* * I - h
TO i i ■ I 11 V. * J \ "
s ■
■ ' , !
Camp in Front of the Heavitree Range .


track; this is not separately distinguishable from a dis-
tance. The end of this range is unexpectedly rounded,
the track passing between it and a small conical outlier
called Mt. Blatherskite, and there is disclosed the Heavitree
Gap, the one break in the main Heavitree Range in this
neighbourhood, a sharp cleft in the high quartzite range,
through which track, telegraph line, and railway pass, and
out of which runs the broad sandy bed of the Todd, extend-
ing from wall to wall. A shelf had to be cut for the rail-
way in the side of the gap.
Just on the left, before you enter the Gap, stands the old
Police Station, with windmill and troughs, and a great bean-
tree, the best example of this interesting tree to be found
near Alice Springs. At this time the house was occupied
by the Stock Inspector, but now it is empty. Once through
the Gap, two miles of flat, along the banks of the Todd,
take you to Alice Springs, among low hills.
The old journey up was full of interest, which is largely
lost in travelling by train. On the train journey, Oodna-
datta is left in the small hours of the morning. The track
runs to the west of Charlotte Waters, and makes a single
crossing of the Finke in the forenoon. The Finke crossing
is merely a low sand embankment, with a few trestles in the
centre portion between which a small stream could pass.
When the Finke runs a flood, the whole affair is carried
aw r ay, and the train waits till the flood subsides, when the
embankment is soon thrown up again. It only means a
week’s delay, and happily there are few things in Central
Australia that cannot afford to wait a week. It is not long
since it took mail and loading three weeks to come up from
Oodnadatta to Alice Springs by camel. The original bridge
was a more ambitious steel structure, but the first floods
carried the abutments away, and completely destroyed it.
A new bridge able to withstand the floods would have
been very costly, so the present satisfactory and cheap
crossing was put in, a few hundred yards down stream
from the old site. Traffic is not held up more than once a
year, if as often.
Beyond the Finke the railway passes through north-
and-south-trending sandhills for some fifty miles, the Depot
Sandhills, but well to the east of the telegraph line. These


bright red sand dunes rise to perhaps fifty feet, and run
parallel to the railway. Desert oak grows here, a species of
casuarina, with long seed-cones, and plentiful spinifex is
seen for the first time, a grass with jointed stems growing
in hemispherical masses up to a couple of feet high, the
long thin leaves curled into what appear to be solid spikes.
It is the typical plant of the country from Birdsville to the
north-west coast of Western Australia.
After rain the sandhills are covered with parakelia, a
lowly plant of the ‘pig-face’ family, with thick juicy leaves,,
holding their moisture for months; cattle can live on it
without water while it lasts. It sends up tall stems sur-
mounted by bright purple flowers, making a wonderful
show when in bloom. Although I had looked for it for five
years I never saw it till 1932, when I brought some home,
flowers and all, and planted it a week later, near a garden
tap, and it went on flowering for six months.
The train journey is usually very hot and dusty. Windows,
and doors must be kept open on account of the heat, and
dust and sand blow in day and night. Little sand dunes
form on the floors of the carriages, quite interesting to
watch. The old hands take off their coats and waistcoats
and wrap them in newspaper and put them permanently
on the racks. The hair gets full of dust, while the water-
bag bangs and splashes to and fro on the little platforms
between the carriages, where the passengers stand for
hours, waiting for the next meal, if it is the Flash Ghan,
or otherwise just waiting. The trains are very long, and
the passenger accommodation is at the tail end. The car-
riages open out as they creep over a rise, and then rush
joyously together as they charge into the trough between
the sandhills, to be jerked apart again as the engine starts
down the next incline. I have often stood and watched the
couplings, and wondered how they stood it. As a matter
of fact a part of the train is sometimes found missing in the
night, and it is necessary to go back to recover it. I asked a
travelling inspector once why they did not put the pas-
senger coaches behind the engine to lessen the awful jolts
and increase the comfort of passengers. He seemed to
think it a reasonable suggestion, but said it was contrary to
railway practice. One is quite safe from collisions on the


line, though not from derailments, which are very rare,
in spite of washaways, the results of sudden torrential rains
in barren country, being so common.
Since the opening of the railway there has been a track
alongside it from Alice Springs to the Finke, passing
through the sandhills. It was a frequent practice to take
motor-cars along the line, the drivers preferring to bump
along over the sleepers rather than face the sand; the police
have almost succeeded in stopping this. The railway, fifty
miles after it leaves the Finke, comes in to the telegraph
line again near Alice Well, on the Hugh, beyond the worst
of the sandhills, and from there, for the remaining ninety
miles to Alice Springs, it keeps close to the telegraph line
and track, on their eastern side.
At about sixty miles from Alice Springs the sand-hills
are left behind, and stony country is entered, the eastward
extension of the James and Ooraminna Ranges, after which
comes the Emily Plain, and at last, at sundown, the Heavi-
tree Gap, and finally the dimly lit little station, where the
whole town is waiting to meet its friends, get its parcels,
and see the newcomers. The mail will be ready for distri-
bution in about an hour at the post office.
But this is looking ahead. We are still in pre-railway
days, and have just arrived by motor-car at Alice Springs.


CHAPTER VII
The Alice
SPRINGS is a fascinating little town, in the heart
of the MacDonnell Ranges, and very nearly in the centre
of the continent of Australia.
On this first visit to the interior in 1927 we were just in
time to see the last of the old Alice Springs, for the railway
was coming. Alice Springs proper was really the Telegraph
Station, four miles up the Todd from the Heavitree Gap,
built in the bank of the river by the “springs,” which are
a pool or soakage of permanent water in the sandy bed
of the river, kept scoured out by the floods swirling round
a rock. Here there are several substantial stone office
buildings and houses. It was a cattle station, too, at a time
when the large staff, including the relay operators and
linesmen, had to provide their own meat. They were a
happy little community, and many can remember pleasant
evenings, with song and music, under the Allchurch roof.
Ernie AUchurch was in charge for twenty years or so, one
of the most popular characters of the country. He died
suddenly while on leave, just after the railway arrived.
Distances used to mean nothing in the old days. The rest
of the town was two miles nearer the Gap, and here were
the pub, school, police station, stores, boarding houses,
mission hostel, Australian Aborigines’ Friends Association
premises, and a few private houses. The police station was
originally another two miles away, outside the Gap, but had
been moved up. This settlement was officially called Stuart,
after the explorer, and the railway station, which is now
there, was first called Stuart, too, but now the whole place is
officially Alice Springs, as it has always been in practice.
It is a pity that the great explorer’s name is not attached
to some better known feature; only Central Mt. Stuart,
dimly seen from the telegraph line north of the Mac-
Donnells, bears lonely witness to his great adventures. The


name Alice Springs was given in honour of the wife of Sir
Charles Todd, the South Australian Postmaster-General,
who was responsible for the line; the Todd River and Mt.
Sir Charles commemorate the Postmaster-General himself.
We were soon received into the pub by Mr. and Mrs.
Kilgariff, who had just arrived to take over from the last
owners and for many years after showed remarkable
activity in the most diverse directions. We were housed
in a little wooden annex, a recent addition to the old stone
building, and at that time used for the supposed better-class
visitors; it later sank very considerably in the social scale.
In those days there was a bathroom under the pepper trees
where you could have a shower, stepping carefully between
the old boots and trousers left behind by travellers coming
in, who had bathed and changed there. Mosquitoes throve
in the moisture from the bath overflow, and in the pepper
trees. There were no mosquito nets, and one lay outside
and tried to forget the mosquitoes till a half-caste girl
brought a cup of tea at dawn, and one went inside to escape
the sun.
Goat was the only meat at that time of drought; it was
quite good and accepted as mutton by almost every one.
Central Australia had just been declared a separate state
by the Commonwealth, and the new Administrator and his
secretary, V. G. Carrington, with his young bride, had
recently arrived, the latter pair from Darwin.
Before darkness set in we walked across to the small hill
a few hundred yards to the north of the hotel (‘pub’ is the
only word ever used, and we will follow the custom of the
country) to see the nature of the rock. On our way back we
heard female voices from under the pepper trees behind the
hotel, calling ‘Come ’ere’. Next day we discovered this
extraordinary blot on the history of Alice Springs. The
government took charge of the half-castes, fed, cared for,
and taught them, and kept them nominally in a tin shed
behind the hotel. In actual fact they slept out under the
trees. Here they grew up till they could get employment
on the stations; and here the girls returned when it was
time to add to the population of the ‘bung,’ as this ‘bunga-
low’ was called. This irregular state of things had evolved
in that isolated community till it was accepted. There was


no attempt to disguise the facts. Men came round openly
and spoke to children, and gave them sweets, children bear-
ing well-known names in the district, for old Sergeant Stott,
the Protector of Aborigines, enforced the rule that half-
castes should be given their father’s name, and for this he
was dependent on the mother’s story. It may be added that
the new-comer’s first shock became modified by further
experience and sympathy. lam writing of Alice Springs
before the railway. All these things' are changed now.
Another character of the old Alice was Mrs. Standly, the
schoolmistress, appointed by the South Australian Educa-
tion Department. South Australia still takes care of
education at the one school in Central Australia at Alice
Springs. Mrs. Standly lived at the hotel, and had the care
of the children of the Bung, as well as the school; she taught
them, and issued them their rations and clothing. She
showed us round one day, through the cookhouse, where
the older girls did all the cooking, and the sleeping-quarters,
where no one slept unless it was raining. These little half-
wild things lived under the trees, and spent some of their
time getting bush tucker in the form of grubs and insects.
Mrs. Standly was a good and kindly soul, with no thoughts
of any reform; she considered everything quite satis-
factory. She was fond of the children, and they of her, and
she was proud of the results of her teaching, which went
beyond reading, writing, and arithmetic, and included sew-
ing and cooking at the Hung. She showed us a letter from
one of the girls who had left, quite well written, and includ-
ing the question whether Maggie had a baby yet. That was
what they all looked forward to, the strongest instinct in
them; marriage had no meaning for them. They were just
natural little animals.
Some of the Bung girls used to be taken away to service
in the south, even as far as Adelaide, but they got into
worse trouble there than they would have done in their
own environment, and amongst worse vice. At the first
opportunity they would escape and return to the only home
they knew. It was pathetic, but natural.
At this time there were only about forty white people in
Alice Springs. About a dozen white children attended
school in the morning, and the half-castes went for an hour




• sv
■ ■ ,r , ' v *
;.
■■ r - *•■■ ■ • *• : ' - -■
.
■*
I:T.
-*♦*** ~ ”" ' —nm
«- "'; -
. flu ...y ”?if'-
WPWP,( " **' *gj|, * «■ n nf ■ y .» >
.
': - -- . -..
Jfnc > ‘
**
■mmm & - *
■" 4 “ ■
■*..m « J
JA.jfe g:t.V * * lyl
*.,,, “s*— '-i. • « £«.>' s t .... ."H^
, ..afcitr. .... i ifMTTr t - ■■•- s ? l iii8, tf» .« .
- . ’
.... ‘..'it
Aiice Springs in 1929.


and a half in the afternoon. The afternoon squad had to
scrub the desks every day before leaving, and I have never
seen whiter school furniture. Mrs. Standly is now gone,
like most of the old institutions.
The outstanding figure was Sergeant Stott of the Police.
He was elderly, short, burly, and he ruled Alice Springs
with a rod of iron. He represented administration in all
its branches, except post and telegraph. He was head of
the police, mining warden, lands department, stock in-
spector, protector of aborigines, everything. He was a
month’s journey from his immediate superiors, the king of
the district. He had his own codes, but what he said was
law. When one of the State Governors made a journey up,
the school was paraded for his benefit. He asked the
children what country they lived in, and they said Aus-
tralia. He asked them who ruled Australia, and they an-
swered, the King. Then he asked who ruled the King. This
was a poser. At last one of the brightest chirped out—
‘Sergeant Stott!’
Sergeant Stott had one of the first motor-cars in the dis-
trict ; he never attained great efficiency at driving it. When
in difficulties he used to haul back on the wheel and shout
‘Whoa!’ On one journey out to Jay Creek with a tracker, he
charged a tree, and was thrown out and knocked uncon-
scious. The tracker returned and reported that he had
left Stott ‘close up finish’; but when the relief was starting
out he said, ‘Might bring whisky; he might be little bit all
right.’ It was even as he said. He knew his master well.
When the railway came and a Government Resident was
appointed, the old Sergeant’s position became impossible.
He enjoyed a brief and glorious period of Mr. Commis-
sioner Stott, and then retired to Adelaide. Two weeks after
he left Alice Springs he was run over and killed by a rail-
way train at a level crossing. So passed a great old figure,
whose name will long be remembered in Central Australia.
In all the stories about him I never heard him adversely
criticized, except in matters if minor importance.
Some light is thrown on earlier conditions by the history
of Sergeant Stott’s daughter. She was chiefly brought up
among aborigines and half-caste children. She spoke their
language perfectly, and was a member of their tribe. At


13| years she believed all their myths, and had all the
native’s reluctance to speak of the more sacred things. She
often wept alone into natives’ camps, and came and went
where she liked. It was said that she could only swim under
water as the natives do. She told me there was a stone
in a cave for her and a particular tree into which her spirit
would go when she died; but she would give no further
details, nor tell where these things were. At that time she
was in Mrs. Standly’s school, a pretty, attractive, and shy
little girl. She went to Adelaide to school almost imme-
diately afterwards.
Then there was Charlie Myers, in his picturesque little
saddler’s shop, with thatched roof and whitewashed walls,
in the main street. He has been there since the year one,
and still remains. His wife, while quite neighbourly, carries
on a separate establishment, a boarding-house with the
best ; table in Alice Springs. Charlie used to recite ‘The
Drover’s Horse’ on all public occasions, with tears in his
eyes; he was always encored. His head is bowed as he
begins in a rhythmic monotone, ‘Only a pound for the
drover’s horse’.
Ben Waukington was another Old Timer. He lived alone
in his little cottage under the pepper trees near Wallis
Fogarty’s store. Ben did not look exactly tidy when you
called on him, but you could depend on help and advice. Ben
was a Stipendiary Magistrate; his boast was that he was
the cheapest S.M. in Australia, at fifteen shillings a week.
Bep had some book learning, and did a lot of unpaid work
for those who could not read and write.
Then there was Charlie Maynard—tall, heavy, loosely
built, and slow. He had a nice little log cabin among the
acacias, with pet kangaroos, and a good collection of in-
teresting local minerals, some of them handsome and com-
paratively rare specimens. Unfortunately he has sold the
house, and given away most of the specimens to tourists.
He can tell some good stories about when he was ‘doin’ a
perish’ at different times, the local term for having to travel
without water. On one occasion, when his horse gave in,
he placed the saddle up a tree and wandered on until he
reached the stage of discarding his clothing, and finally fell
unconscious. He awoke to find naked, armed blacks looking


down on him. He could not speak; they gave him water,
and put him on his track. Charlie does not murder blacks,
nor does any bushman, unless with some strong reason,
however ill-conceived. Charlie was a great student of the
ways of insects, and could tell you all about ants, spiders,
caterpillars, moths, and beetles, whose ways are strange in
that strange land. For years he seemed to form a per-
manent part of the front of Wallis Fogarty’s store; there
he is, on the bench on the right just as you go in.
Wallis Fogarty’s store shared with the pub the distinction
of being the hub of the life of Alice Springs. No one seems to
know who Wallis or Fogarty were; they are lost in the ob-
scurity of the past. Their headquarters used to be at Oodna-
datta, but it moved on to Alice Springs long ago. George Wil-
kinson and Norman Jones ran and owned the business. You
could buy anything from them, and if you didn’t know what
you wanted, they would tell you—and they knew. If it was
stores for three men for two months, you only had to say
so, and it would all be packed in suitable boxes or ration
bags, ready for use. They would provide you with trans-
port, too—camels, or trucks, or horses. Fly nets, gold
dishes, camels’ nose-pegs, everything was there. Letters
could be posted and telegrams phoned in the days when it
was another two miles to the post office. They carried big
loads, and did a lot for the country in the past. Later they
had several competitors, who could do things more cheaply
on a cash basis, without the burden of the drought debts.
These included Mona’s shop, with an attractive window
display of feminine apparel that seemed almost indecent.
Wallis Fogarty’s had no windows and remained dark and
cool inside. The original store still stood, a little tin shed
opposite the pub, once carried on by Fred Raggatt, whom
we shall meet later at Glen Helen, ninety miles away. Alice
Springs got too civilized for him many years ago. For
many years Wallis-Fogarty’s was the last building on the
left on the road going north, but to-day it is re-built on
the original site on the corner next the pub, a modern em-
porium and no longer a store. A recent photograph shows
it looking like a city shop, with the big gum trees in the
road no longer there. Must we have progress? Dear old
Alice, where art thou?


Alice Springs stands on the right bank of the Todd, on
part of the river flat, below one of the rocky hills. The flat
is only a few feet above the level of the broad sandy bed of
the river, which is lined all along with big shady gum trees.
Many a man coming in to ‘The Alice’ does not trouble to find
lodgings; he merely drops his swag in the river bed, and
camps as he has probably been doing for the last few weeks.
A remarkable thing about the Todd, and all the Central
Australian rivers, is that they look as though they never
run, yet they are usually torrents at least once every sum-
mer. The wet season is from December to March, when
Northern Australia is under monsoon conditions. It was
not till my fifth visit to Alice Springs that I saw any water
in the Todd, and then it was a swirling brown torrent, 200
yards across. Three days later the water had vanished, the
sand was dry, and it looked as though it were a complete
stranger to running water. It rises in many small tribu-
taries in the Ranges, which are only twelve miles wide at
Alice Springs.
The most striking physiographical feature in the
MacDonnells is that all the streams cut straight across the
ranges from north to south, through deep clefts or gaps,
some a thousand feet deep and with almost vertical sides, in
the series of east and west ridges that form the ranges.
These gaps are up to fifty miles apart, and the ranges often
cannot be crossed between the gaps, even on foot, though
the longitudinal valleys between them are easily traversed.
The Heavitree Gap, through which the railway passes, is
one of the less spectacular of the gaps.
If you follow the telegraph line north through the ranges,
you pass through low hills which give way to the Burt
Plain in some twelve miles. This is the narrowest part
of the ranges, and there is only one well-defined ridge, the
Heavitree Range, forming here the southern boundary of
the ranges, and the dominant feature of the whole. It is
a narrow ridge of quartzite, overlying the old crystalline
rocks on which Alice Springs stands, and dipping off them
to the south. The Heavitree Gap is 280 yards through,
which is the width of the ridge at that place. Where the
dip is steeper, the width is less. This range runs across


the country like a gigantic wall rising out of flat plains on
each side. It stands only about 500 feet above the general
level at the gap, but it rises gradually to Mt. Gillen, four
miles along westward from the gap, to 1,400 feet above the
plains. The northern side of the range is everywhere
abrupt, in places vertical, and it is mostly quite uncrossable,
except for the gaps. The ridge rises in a few places to as
much as 3,000 feet above the plains, but the main part of it
is not over a thousand feet. Even this height, in comparison
with the general flatness of the country, gives a grandeur to
these red forbidding cliffs of quartzite.
How, it may be asked, did these streams, so seldom run-
ing, ever cut down through a thousand feet of such hard
rock, and how could they begin their work at the top ? The
answer is that they are what is called ‘antecedent’ streams.
They existed before the ranges stood out as such, when the
country had a gentle slope southwards. As erosion has pro-
ceeded the streams have cut down their beds through hard
and soft formations alike, but meanwhile, between the hard
formations, the softer rock has been eroded by lateral
streams, so that the hard formations, in this case the
quartzite, have been left standing as ranges, with the main
streams crossing them instead of flowing parallel to them.
The immense quantity of material, once filling the great
valleys between the various walls of rock, of which there
are several to the west of Alice Springs, has all been washed
out through the narrow gaps, material which once filled
up the valley in which Alice Springs lies to the level of
the highest point in the Heavitree Range. It is wonderful
to stand in Alice Springs and look towards the gap and to
realize the countless millions of tons of rock waste that
the Todd has carried through it, but it seems less surpris-
ing if one sees the Todd in flood, when a raging torrent fills
the gap from side to side.
One evening I had walked down with Don Campbell, the
Stock Inspector, to his house, the old police station outside
the gap. Just before we reached the gap he asked me if I
would like a drink/ When I said ‘yes’, he walked in to the
middle of the dry, sandy river bed, and there on the surface
was the iron lid of an old camp oven, apparently lying on
the sand. He lifted this, and under it was an eight-gallon


petrol drum, let down into the sand. It was half full of
water, with a pannikin hanging inside, attached to the side
by a wire, and we drank the cool, clear water. This was a
soakage. One would never imagine that so much water was
available so near the surface. Every bushman carries a
shovel for digging soaks in the stream beds. Horses will
dig out a soak for themselves with their hoofs, but cattle
have never been known to attempt this; they would perish
where a horse would live. The kangaroos and wallabies
can dig a soak as well as a man, and better than a man
without tools.
Under the flat on which the town stands are river gravels
saturated with water, and wells twenty feet deep give an
excellent supply. It was a water-diviner’s paradise, for,
as is now known, the water underlies the whole area, in
the gravel. All the government houses have their well in the
back yard. Charlie Maynard was one of the first to see this
and to make fun of the diviner’s ju ju. When his man had
located the exact spot in Charlie’s yard he proceeded to
estimate the depth by backing away and testing the re-
action, till he backed into a thorny acacia. But for this,
Charlie says, his well would have been deeper.
A native camp used to be situated on the left bank of the
river towards the gap. Spears and boomerangs were made
there in large numbers, and a fair trade was done. A pair
of boots would buy the whole camp. Boots are the most
prized possession of the native living in touch with civiliza-
tion. They need not be worn; it is sufficient to carry them
hung around the neck to show that you own boots.
The prisoners were another of Alice Springs’ interesting
sights. They were frequently seen wandering around in a
little group, with their benevolent warder, an Old Timer,
and his Winchester rifle, somewhere in the offing, or draw-
ing water, watering gardens, and chopping wood round the
official houses—all very, very slowly. They were mostly
‘in’ for cattle spearing. They are fed and clothed (usually
a new experience) and housed, and often fail to understand
what it all means, particularly all the free tucker. To a
race who spend their whole time in the search of food, this
sudden feeding cannot be reconciled with punishment. The


absence of freedom and the separation from their people
may be considered in the light of punishment, but in every
other way they lead a life superior to anything they have
known before. Sometimes they are hard to get rid of when
their sentence is up. One party, who hung about after their
release, when pressed to depart, said they wanted to thank
Mrs. Stott for all she had done for them before they went.
From time to time good young men step straight from the
blue cotton prison garb into tracker’s uniform, and become
members of the police force. The problem of any deterrent
punishment, other than death, is a difficult one in a people
so far removed from the codes and customs of civilization.
Before leaving Alice Springs we had to go and see Charlie
Sadaddin and his garden. In spite of abundant under-
ground water, gardening was greatly neglected in the past.
Plentiful fresh vegetables should always have been avail-
able, and there is still room for improvement in this
respect; it is curious that an Afghan should have had the
best vegetable garden in the place. Sadaddin came to Aus-
tralia with camels over fifty years ago. He was a very
old man, a good Mohammedan, and a handsome old fellow,
with quite the grand manner. He was a camel-man in Lord
Roberts’s new transport corps on the famous march to
Kandahar in 1880, and still had the bearing of a soldier. He
had seen wild times on the north-west frontier of India, and
now he grew onions and beans and grapes and cabbages in his
well-fenced block on the river bank. He had two wind-
mills, of which he was immensely proud, and he boasted that
they cost ninety pounds each. He told me with sorrow that
when he died the Government would take them, so I ex-
plained how a will was made, and later he went to the
Resident and arranged the disposal of his beloved property.
He had nothing to do with camels then, but several younger
Afghans owned them. He refused to be photographed, and
gave as a reason to some visitors I once took to see him that
he did not want his photograph used in the same way as he
treated the pictures in the illustrated papers. A plain-
speaking old man, and a very picturesque one.
The little town is scattered along the road that follows
the river up from the gap, with one row of blocks between
the road and the river, and the remainder of the town on


the other side. Before the railway came the houses
were few and far between, but now they made a cluster.
There were some fine big gum trees in the main road
near the hotel and along the side road which now runs to
the railway station, and all the enclosed blocks are full of
vegetation, much of it now cultivated, but before the blocks
were fenced the town became very barren, owing to the
flocks of goats. The goat is a great standby in all the arid
parts; herds of a hundred are quite common. Their ability
to live on empty jam tins is well known, and aboriginal goat-
herds are cheap. Sergeant Stott had a huge herd, a feature
of the place. Their yards, or the places where their yards
have been, are to be recognized by rectangular black areas
standing up to three feet above ground-level, scattered about
the country. The soil is splendid material to use on gar-
dens.
For long periods during drought goats’ flesh is the only
meat available throughout the north, and a gallon or two of
milk is usually obtainable from a large herd. The Alice
Springs goats made the surroundings very barren of
smaller growth, but as soon as a block was fenced, the
acacias sprang up everywhere. In two years the Mission
Hostel grounds had pretty trees six feet high. The greenery
has greatly increased since most of the blocks have been
enclosed.
Sergeant Stott’s order that trees should not be cut down
within a certain radius was just in time to save the remains
of the larger timber, so that now there are plenty of fine
trees to shield one from the burning rays of the sun, which
shines there fiercely nearly all the year round. It is a fas-
cinating place, this isolated little town in the wild ranges
in the centre of a continent, the Mecca of the wanderers in
the thousand miles of plains that surround it, the start-
ing-point for many an adventurous journey in the past, and
many yet to come.
Nineteen thirty-three took a heavy toll of the Old Timers.
Since these sketches were written George Wilkinson has
passed away, and Charlie Sadaddin has said for the last
time, ‘There is no God but God, and Mohammed is his
Prophet’, and his garden is already a barren waste.


Ben Waukington too is gone. Norman Jones soon fol-
lowed George Wilkinson. He could not change or keep up
with the march of time. The old store dropped back and
Norman Jones came to a sad end. A monument to George
Wilkinson, raised by public subscription, stands at the head
of the main street near the site of the old store. The simple
epitaph is a stroke of genius. It reads: Tn Memory of
Henry George Wilkinson, Resident and Friend of Central
Australia.’


CHAPTER VIII
The Nitrate Deposit
'J'WO days after our arrival at Alice Springs we were
ready to start out west to inspect the deposit of nitrate.
There were four of us—Sir Douglas Mawson, Wolffe, my-
self, and Simon, a member of the nitrate syndicate, who
joined us at Alice Springs. I was destined to see much of
Simon in later years, but acquaintance with him grew
slowly. His exact position in the party at that time was not
clear to us, but that was no affair of ours. He was of
medium height, swarthy in complexion, very alert and
powerful, quiet, and spoke with a strong foreign accent
unfamiliar to us, but one does not ask questions of unusual
people in the outback. I was to find in due course that he
had lived a most remarkable life of adventure. I took him
at first to be a labourer employed to help in the heavy work.
He seemed to accept this position, and nothing was said to
the contrary, but it was not long before his expert work-
manship, his energy, his quiet determination, and confident
ability began to reveal him as a man of no ordinary type.
Wolffe said he had been mining in the country for some
years, and was a Tartar.
The four of us, with petrol for 200 miles, rations for
several days, blankets, cooking utensils, picks and shovels,
explosives, guns, and geological gear, all crowded on to
Wolffe’s touring car and started out to break a trail for
motor vehicles due west through the ranges for some ninety
miles. At the outset this seemed a perfectly hopeless task,
through the rough ranges, timber, and creeks, where no
wheeled vehicle had ever been before. The nitrate deposit
was situated in the heart of the ranges ten miles or so
beyond the Finke River where it crosses the ranges. There
is only one station in the whole of the MacDonnell Ranges
west of the telegraph line, namely Raggatt’s Glen Helen
Station, on the Finke, at the entrance to the Finke Gorge,


"''vW’ * ” gpK^
§Bl^'.
s i| , JjpMig
i f , , |p«i “ , ' ,.; -v
6s * *!
Simpson’s Gap


I - i i m ■
w
»
6
s»
Ho
s
e
ft?
HO
$»
e
«>
fcj
<^>
8s


where the Finke goes through the southern half of the Mac-
Donnells. Twenty miles farther down the Finke, and across
the Missionary Plain south of the MacDonnells, lies the
Lutheran Aboriginal Mission Station of Hermannsburg,
and another sixty miles still farther down is Henbury
Station, on the Finke. West of the Finke there are no per-
manent stations for a thousand miles, till the settled dis-
tricts of Western Australia are reached, and at times there
would be no white man in that thousand miles.
A track leads from Alice Springs to Hermannsburg, but
it runs in the Missionary Plain south of the ranges, and
there is no way into the ranges up the Finke by vehicle; in
fact, it is impossible to get through the ridges into the
longitudinal valleys of the ranges anywhere west of the
Hugh with a motor-car, and only at a few passes with pack
animals. By going on to the end of the ranges, a hundred
miles west of Hermannsburg, you may enter the valleys at
their open ends. The western ranges are thus only known
to a few stockmen, who muster their cattle in there from
time to time. They are wild and untrodden, and
to suggest taking a motor vehicle through them was
enough to make the most experienced motorist quail.
There is also a track along the north side of the ranges to
their end, but it is quite impossible to enter the ranges from
this track till almost at their westward extremity, at Dash-
wood Creek. Thus it was necessary, if we were to go by
motor, to start in the ranges, and keep in them for the
whole way, a thing never hitherto attempted. Alice Springs
lies in a wide valley between the high Heavitree Range on
the south side, and its counterpart on the north side, the
Chewings Range. These two ranges are the limbs of a
fold in the Heavitree quartzite. The top of the fold has all
been weathered away, leaving the two ranges standing like
the abutments of an arched bridge after the arch has fallen
in. The removal of the hard quartzite covering has exposed
the soft rocks below, and the decay of these has lowered
the level between the ranges, to form the Alice Valley. The
northern wall of the valley has been removed in the longi-
tude of Alice Springs, but looking westward from the town
it may be seen towards Simpson’s Gap, rising as high as
the Heavitree Range itself. The more abrupt and almost


vertical sides of the ranges face inwards towards the valley,
the sides away from the valley sloping more gently with the
dip of the quartzite, so that in this view from the town the
impression of a fallen arch is clearly conveyed. These two
ranges continue westward, separate and unbroken, and
never more than seven miles apart, for seventy miles, when
they converge and fuse at the Ormiston, near Glen Helen,
from which point a single range continues for another
twenty miles westward, then becoming broken up and
finally disappearing in the western plains.
In general, the MacDonnells west of the telegraph line
consist of a series of parallel ridges extending for 150
miles westward and nowhere exceeding twenty miles
across from the northern to the southern plains. The
Heavitree and the Chewings Ranges are the dominant
features. The Alice Valley between them is wide and
irregular, containing many rough hills of gneiss and granite,
and a network of stream beds. To the south of the Heavi-
tree Range there are several parallel ranges with com-
paratively level narrow valleys between them, but this
expedition was confined to the Alice Valley.
Starting out westward in the Alice Valley we followed
the track to the Jay Creek, twenty-five miles out. The track
runs close in beneath the Heavitree Range, which is a fine
sight at Mt. Gillen, four miles from the town. At ten miles
the Roe is crossed, which stream makes the first break in
the Heavitree Range west of the Heavitree Gap—the
Temple Bar Gap. The same stream cuts through the Chew-
ings Range at Simpson Gap four miles to the north, one of
the narrowest and most imposing and accessible of the gaps
in the ranges. From Temple Bar Gap the Heavitree Range
rises to great heights again, particularly in Burt’s Bluff,
falls to Fenn’s Gap, and then is again unbroken till the Jay
is reached. Here the Heavitree Range is faulted, or dis-
placed laterally, more than at any other point in the ranges,
in fact only at Undoolya Gap to the east of the telegraph
line is there any noticeable break in the continuity of the
ridge across the gaps. At the Jay there is a displacement
of a mile, the two ends of the ridge overlapping for some
distance. There we found the cement floor of a proposed
building to replace the Bung at Alice Springs; work was


temporarily abandoned, as the well sunk near by in the
crystalline rock, though water was struck, was not sup-
posed to be successful enough to carry the stock it was pro-
posed to run. At that time well-boring in other selected
sites was in progress. The Government intended to move
the half-castes to the Jay, under suitable management, and
to employ sufficient staff to run a cattle station as well, in
order to make the place self-supporting. The necessity of
moving the Bung had at last been recognised, owing to the
steady approach of the railway construction gangs, which
were about to invade the quiet of Alice Springs.
A track runs down the Jay to join the Missionary Road
out on the plain, but westward from the Jay Gap there is
only a bridle path to Glen Helen Station, made by Raggatt’s
donkeys and horses. We continued along the north side of
the Heavitree Range, in rough country, crossing innumer-
able stream beds. It was then that we began to appreciate
Wolffe’s skill and quickness; again and again we would
come to a stream crossing our front, and one of us would
make an attempt to get out and pick a crossing, but Wolffe
would have none of it. He chose his own place while still
on the move, and down the bank we would go, into the sand,
and up the other side, the front wheels first gently lowered
till the bed was reached, and then a rush. He would go
down anything that did not leave the front wheels sus-
pended in the air. The banks were all of clay. Only once
were we brought to a standstill in all the journey out and
back, and that was in a gutter too narrow to take the car,
when the front wheels jammed in the bottom. Simon in
five minutes had sufficient excavation made to go ahead. We
never moved backwards an inch on the whole journey.
The valleys in the ranges are thickly wooded with mulga,
hakea, and ironwood, mulga predominating. There are a
few scattered gum-trees, but these are mainly confined to
the watercourses, which are thickly lined with splendid
eucalypts, mainly a white gum, Eucalyptus papuana, locally
called whitewash gum, as the limbs are smooth and white,
as if they had been whitewashed. Varieties of acacia are
the dominating trees of Central Australia, the mulga being
the commonest, and of it there are several kinds. Most of
the valleys in the ranges and the plains round the ranges


are densely covered with mulga scrub of the common
species, Acacia aneura, a tree with a single straight stem
rising perhaps to twenty feet, with irregular lateral
branches all the way up from the ground. The leaves
are narrow and greenish-grey, and at any given time three-
quarters of the trees are dead, killed off periodically by
drought. The dead trunks seem to stand for a very long
time; the colour of the living trees and the presence of the
dead ones give to the plains country a desolate and mourn-
ful aspect. Mulga is the characteristic tree of Central
Australia. The hakea, or cork-barks, are gnarled-trunked
trees, with ribs of cork up the black stems, and long thin
cylindrical foliage. They are even less umbrageous than
the mulga, which does afford some shade. The most attrac-
tive tree in the country, apart from the splendid gums in
the creeks, is the iron wood —Acacia salicina, or desert
willow. This tree has long and narrow leaves which hang
vertically, giving the appearance of a weeping willow in the
distance. The leaves are silvery, and the trees of pleasing
shape. The timber is extremely hard, and the trunks are
much stouter than mulga, running up to eighteen inches in
diameter, and thirty or forty feet high in good specimens.
Mulga is rarely up to six inches in diameter, so the timber
is of little use, though very hard and strong. Mulga sticks
come in for many uses, such as for handles, camel-saddle
bars, and boomerangs. The outer layers of the wood are
yellow and the centre dark red. It has lately been exten-
sively used for turning wooden ornaments, such as goblets,
where the outer yellow band can be very effectively
exploited.
This journey was made in November, and the weather
was very hot. We had no thermometer, but we did not need
any reminders of the temperature, which was in the neigh-
bourhood of a hundred every day. On the journey up from
Oodnadatta we had been able to lie back on the back seat in
comparative comfort, with one hand on the bars of the hood
above to help to keep us down on the seat, and our boots
hanging over the side in the wind to keep our feet cool.
After striking our heads a few times on those bars we found
it better to keep an arm up all the time. But on this part
of the journey we were tightly wedged in with the gear,


and getting out was very difficult. Occasionally we had to
do a little axe-work in the mulga, but conditions were com-
paratively mild for the first half-day. At fifty miles from
Alice Springs we came to the Eight Mile Gap. This is the
last gap through the Heavitree Range before the Chewings
and Heavitree Ranges converge, thirty-five miles farther on;
and as the nitrate deposit was not in the Alice Valley, but
in the one to the south of it, we had to go through the gap.
Some work on boulders with crowbars, and a little explo-
sive, cleared the way sufficiently for Wolffe to bounce
through over the smaller boulders. The range is there low
and the gap unimpressive.
On the south side of the gap we found ourselves in quite
different country from that on the north, with ridges of
limestone running parallel to the main ranges, instead of
rounded hills of gneiss. This was the beginning of the
southern portion of the MacDonnells, the parallel ridges and
valleys, which are almost absent at the telegraph line but
rapidly develop to the west. These ridges have been
described at several places by geologists, notably those of
the Horn Expedition in 1894; and uncertainly existed about
the identification of the ridges at different places, and
especially the correlation of the ridges at the Finke with
those near Alice Springs. The Horn Valley, one of the
longitudinal valleys between ridges, was named by the Horn
Expedition, and was important because of the discovery
there of Ordovician fossils by the Horn geologists, to the
west of the Finke. One party in that expedition traversed
the valley for seventeen miles from Stokes Pass eastward
to the Finke, and in that portion they found the fossils.
Other parties crossed valleys, as at Ellery Creek and the
Hugh, and thought they recognised the same valley at those
crossings, which led them wrongly to extend their Horn
Valley for a hundred miles eastward to Alice Springs, to
the great confusion of subsequent geologists. Valleys do
run the whole distance, but not the Horn Valley. The Horn
Expedition also considered that the Alice Valley, in which
Alice Springs lies, was the same valley as that at Glen Helen
Station at the entrance to the Finke Gorge. This was even
thought to be so when we set out, for no geologists had
made a journey from end to end of any of the valleys.


We did a little walking among the ridges of limestone
after passing through the Eight Mile Gap, and it was there
that we made an important discovery. Among the lime-
stones were found thick beds containing very well-
developed fossil-like forms of several varieties, the com-
monest similar to some found fifty miles east of Alice
Springs fifteen years before by Dr. Chewings, and de-
scribed by him as ‘cryptozoon’, being supposed to
be similar to certain forms found in Cambrian limestone
in America. The whole assemblage of forms was very
suggestive of those described by the late Dr. Walcott from
pre-Cambrian rocks in Montana, and Walcott had assigned
them to lowly lime-secreting plants, algae. The view was
growing that many ancient limestones were due to the
action of these algae in taking and fixing lime from the
oceans. The forms were obviously in great profusion, but
there was only time for a cursory examination and the col-
lection of a few samples, which were cached, to be picked
up on the return journey.
When Wolffe at last succeeded in dragging us away from
this interesting spot we went on westward in a broad flat
between the Heavitree Range on our right, and an-
other quartzite range on our left. The going was
comparatively good until we crossed Ellery Creek,
without visiting its magnificent gap through the Heavi-
tree Range. The next transverse stream was the
Finke, thirty miles farther on, with no way out of our
valley in that thirty miles. The valley floor rose gently to-
wards the meeting of the watersheds of the Ellery Creek
and the Finke, and the country became very rough, with
the mulga much denser. We were soon unable to follow
the pads that we knew would lead to Glen Helen, for they
followed rough streams and led through mulga thickets
where the car could not follow. All Wolffe’s previous per-
formances were now far surpassed. He tore along creek
beds, up banks, and through bushes; the car must often
have been within a few degrees of the overturning angle. We
were alternately scrambling up the steep slope to one side
of the car, a difficult process among the falling boxes and
swags, and then making a dash for the other side, expect-
ing every moment to turn over. Simon sat in front without


moving or speaking, and Wolffe drove grimly on. I still
think that there was an element of luck in that driving, for
he could hardly have judged the margin of safety to such a
nicety. At last sundown came and we made camp in rough
country among the dead mulga, still apparently between
the higher walls of quartzite, which were hidden from view,
but geologically we were completely bushed. We boiled the
quarts this time in the approved style, ranged alongside a
dry mulga stick, and unrolled the swags and were asleep.
Simon displayed a brightly coloured blanket which seemed
in keeping with his supposed Tartar origin.
The next day we found the worst was behind us. We were
on the fall towards the Finke, and soon the valley became
flatter and the Heavitree Range rose up again on our right,
and then another high range on our left. We turned to-
wards this range when the minor ridges sank down to form
a wide open space as the Finke was approached. Then a
gap appeared in the range to the left, and we made towards
it. This was the entrance to the Finke Gorge, where the
Finke passes through the southern ridges of the ranges and
out on to the Missionary Plains. On the bank of the river
and close under the range stood the Glen Helen Station, a
little log cabin with iron roof, some green acacias and
creepers inside the enclosure, and a windmill on the river
bank. We went to the house and saw a black women water-
ing the garden with a bucket; she disappeared on our
approach, and we found the house locked up. Evidently
Raggatt was away. We filled up with water from the wind-
mill and then went on to look at the gap, half a mile away.
A quartzite range here ran east and west as far as the
eye could see, rising to not more than 400 feet above the
plain. The Finke passed through it by a gap some fifty
yards wide and a hundred yards long, which, like many
other gaps, was occupied by a large pool of water. When
the streams run the narrowing of their beds at the gaps
causes a great swirl of water which scoops out a deeper
hole and leaves a pool which is often permanent water. This
pool made the gap impassable except by swimming, and
shut Raggatt off from the outer world. The mail comes up
the Finke from Horseshoe Bend to Hermannsburg, but any
loading for Raggatt, after reaching the gap, must go seven-


teen miles west, to Goyder’s Pass and back again, before
the last hundred yards is made, a journey of two days for
camels. The Mission people have recently cleared a motor
track up the Finke from the Mission to this gap, and it
makes a very popular run for tourists, who come perhaps
once a month in the season. It is possible to shout through,
but it is unlikely that Raggatt will answer; he says the
place is becoming too civilized, and he must move farther
west.
There were hundreds of ducks on the water when we
arrived, and we proceeded to shoot a few for the pot.
It is a difficult climb over the range, but not impossible.
Wolffe climbed over on the west side of the gap,
and lon the east. I walked half a mile down the gorge,
but failed to discover any definite fossils in it, probably not
going quite far enough.
Neither Wolffe nor I fancied the climb back, preferring
to try the water. On my return I found him half-way
through the gap, clinging half surmerged to the steep
rocky sides at water level, and working his way along,
greatly handicapped by his gun and bundle of clothes. I
followed him, and had such a wretched time of it that I
realized that it would have been better to let the clothes get
wet than scratch myself on the rough rock and endure the
constant fear of slipping in.
The ducks were still floating about on the water, and it
fell to my lot to act as retriever, trailing the ducks by wing
feathers held in the teeth. It was a delightful bathe.
Before leaving the station we made another attempt to
get news of Raggatt by going to some native wurlies at
some distance from the house. The wurlies were made of
spinifex, the thorniest dwellings I have ever seen. There
we found two very old and totally blind aborigines, a man
and a woman, sitting on the ground. All we could learn
was that Raggatt was ‘gone long time’, so we went on our
way.
It was probably lucky that Raggatt did not turn up, for
we discovered afterwards that he regarded the ducks as
pets, and would not allow them to be shot. Later on two
black swans that lived there, though we did not see them,


“/ *"- -V ? -^.,- ■."•=’' r ... *'
M ~;r *- Z * ’ * ~ - -*'* *"’*■ ■. > *, ' \fK .
- V ~**. -■■ •-• - • •• ” :: <fa. - ■ ■ - . •"■=-* -*“
' -i- <■■->■; -—«-■■ ;>,.
•*■*••• '36? f - - v * «&. ..
Spinifex Wurlies at Glen Helen .


c
4 3
I m
&Jl& -H IJHR1’ W
JBU\, Wsm ||
c
o
a


were shot by tourists from the other side, and Raggatt let
it be known that if he heard any shooting in future he
would fire back; and he meant it, too. We shall meet this
interesting old man later on.
The Glen Helen Valley is four miles wide at the Finke, a
broad flat, well timbered with mulga and other trees,
bounded on the south by the straight quartzite ridge, and
on the north by a high rugged range, with several very high
points in it, notably Mt. Sender, named by Giles, and Mt.
Razorback. Down the valley from the east comes the
Pioneer Creek, and from the west the Davenport; while
from the north, through a very difficult pass in the range,
which has been traversed by very few, winds the Ormiston.
All meet near Glen Helen Station to form the Finke, which
flows through the Finke Gorge on its 500-mile course south-
eastward to the Lake Eyre Basin.
Having made the first tracks of mechanical transport at
Glen Helen Station we went on westward over red clay flats
among the mulga. We soon came upon some cattle,
the only ones we saw in the ranges. Several were
lying about dead, and the living were standing in
the same dreadful rigidity as those we had seen be-
tween Oodnadatta and Alice Springs. In drought times
the cattle are limited to a certain radius from the per-
manent water; the feed becomes completely eaten out near
the water, and they have to graze out farther and farther,
gradually weakening, until they can no longer return to the
water.
In about fifteen miles we came to the nitrate deposit. It
was in the ancient limestone, which formed a low rise in
the valley at that spot, the top being seventy-five feet above
the level of a stream bed close by. The nitrate was in a
small cave system in the top of the rise, a network of holes
covered over by a few feet of hard porcelainized limestone,
in an area about forty-five yards by thirty yards. Wallabies,
bats, lizards, marsupial rats, dingoes, and aborigines have
occupied these caves for ages; there were little heaps of
sticks in remote corners, where some of these creatures
had nested. The limestone was yellow and earthy, and the
sides of the cave were seamed with little veinlets filled


with the white crystalline saltpetre. A sample from one side
of the main cave, over four feet from roof to floor, was sub-
sequently found on analysis to contain 18 per cent, of nitrate
of potash, and a sample from the opposite wall 5 per cent.
The floor was covered with yellow earthy material, and
Simon next day sunk a shaft in this dusty ground to a
depth of eight feet, and a bar was easily pushed down an-
other four feet. The material in the hole showed less than
1 per cent, of saltpetre. It had probably been leached out
by percolating water. The deposit was of considerable
interest, but not extensive enough to be of any commercial
value. The poorness of the floor deposits was unexpected.
Potash minerals are known to occur naturally in several
parts of the world, mainly associated with saline deposits
from ancient lakes and inland seas, notably at Stassfurt;
but it is usually in the form of chlorides, and associated
with common salt. The nitrate is rare; it occurs in certain
shales in the Cape Province, but all other occurrences of any
note appear to be associated with organic remains. In the
Cape Province and Orange Free State the nitrate is
obtained from the ash after ignition of sheep dung, which
contains 10 per cent, of saltpetre. In India there is a big
industry in the preparation of saltpetre from the treatment
of the surface soil at old village sites, which is also done
in Mexico and Peru. The saltpetre is obviously derived
from nitrified organic remains on these sites, and the same
process must have been at work on the animal droppings in
these caves. The caves have fallen in and re-formed time
and again through the ages, till the seams of saltpetre
ramify the brecciated ground. The saltpetre is brought
up near the surface by capillarity and deposited by evapora-
tion; it could not be present to any depth, as the samples
from the hole in the floor showed, owing to its ready solu-
bility in the ground water.
A curious, black, nitrogenous, pitch-like substance was
also found exuding from cracks, and in patches on the floor.
This is known in many caves in the Flinders Ranges, in
some of which valuable guano deposits occur, formed from
the droppings and remains of generations of bats. This
substance must also be the result of bacterial action on


organic material. It is frequently thought to have some
connexion with oil seepages.
By the time the first examination of the deposits was
over darkness was upon us, and, as we had no lights, the
ducks had to be prepared by the firelight. Owing to the
state of the country and consequently the lack of beef we
had only tinned foods with us, and we had not exactly
relished the goat at Alice Springs, so we had been looking
forward to this roast duck. Simon declared he would roast
them on a spit, so he proceeded to skewer them on a mulga
stick, and to arrange the stick over the coals. He turned
them over for what appeared to me to be far too short a
time, but they gave forth a pleasant smell, and were soon
burning on the outside, so he handed them round. This is
the only time I have known Simon to fail. The ducks were
raw and we soon laid them furtively aside, and began on
the bread and jam.
That night I made myself the first of many comfortable
beds in Central Australia. After a little experience the
ground no longer seems hard, and one can go to sleep on a
couple of blankets without even digging a hip-hole, but for
perfect luxury with little effort it is only necessary to break
down a few armfuls of mulga boughs and spread a ground
sheet on them. This is like a spring mattress, with con-
siderably more fragrance about it; in wet weather, when
the ground is damp, it is essential to do something of the
kind.
As Simon stood with legs apart by the fire he suddenly
stooped and picked up a stick, and next moment had killed
a poisonous snake which appeared to have come from under
my ‘bed’ and passed straight between his legs. Snakes are
very common in the coastal regions, but rare in the drier
parts; they are a distinct menace in Australia, and cause
a few deaths every year.
Next morning we had another look at the ducks, which
were red and moist. We put them all into a petrol tin, with
water and some onions, and soon made several gallons of
stew, which lasted till the following day, and in quality
even exceeded our original expectations.


During the morning, while Simon was digging his shaft
in the floor of the cave, I was examining some of the
smaller recesses with a candle. In a low passage into
which I had crawled there was what appeared to be an old
nest of sticks on the floor, partly stuck together by a mass
of the black pitch-like substance. While I was obtaining
some samples the candle fell over and ignited one of the
sticks; it burned rapidly with a spluttering action like a
fuse, without flame. It was obviously saturated with
nitrate; several other sticks took fire, and I had a busy few
minutes beating them out. I left the place apparently quiet,
and we went to lunch. On our return smoke was issuing
from the cave, and it appeared that I had set fire to the
nitrate mine. The acrid fumes made it almost impossible
to go into the caves. I had to crawl in with water, of
which we had no great abundance, and throw it on the
spot. I found a patch of the floor against the side of the
cave, a couple of feet long, had become a red, glowing mass,
and the heat inside was intense. After an unpleasant quar-
ter of an hour I quenched the fire and the fumes cleared,
but left their smell in my clothes and hat for many days.
On returning to the caves in the evening, I found the fire
had broken out again, but this time it was easily quenched.
That night Simon made a big damper, as bread was get-
ting low. Australians are generally supposed to live largely
on damper. At a farewell speech to one of the Bushmen’s
contingents on its departure for the South African War,
a State Governor addressed them as ‘Men of the billycan
and damper’, but up to this time I had never made
damper or seen it made, nor have one in a thousand of the
Australian people. Damper is merely bread made without
yeast at a camp fire; originally, it was just a mixture of
flour and water, but now baking powder is invariably used,
so that it is soda bread. It is much more difficult to make
an edible mass without the baking powder, but even with
it considerable experience is necessary in order to produce
a light, well-cooked and nicely shaped loaf, and all bushmen
take a pride in turning out a good one. Yeast bread is
made at all stations in the outback, so that even there dam-
per is only necessary on journeys of over a week away from
the stations. Anyone making damper when yeast bread is


available is new to damper. I once lived for a year on soda
bread, and one of the most memorable events that closed
that first year in the Antarctic was the return to yeast
bread, even the mediocre ship’s galley variety. Though I
have never since seen any romance in damper as a food
I have enjoyed the making of it, and in later camel treks
I made a thorough study of the subject and am now pre-
pared to make damper in the most select company.
Damper country is a long way outback now; the motor-
car has pushed it even farther beyond the limits of per-
manent dwellings. Only the drovers, camel men, cattle
musterers, prospectors, and explorers know the damper,
the men who carry their flour in fifty-pound bags, with the
tin of baking powder inside so that you can always find it,
even in the dark, and if the lid comes off, no harm is
done. That is another little point, like the quart pot stick. If
your baking powder is not in the flour bag, you are classed
as a beginner, and it is no use hoping that it has escaped
notice, for no comment would have been made in any case.
Simon was anxious to show us his skill at the damper. It
is usual to carry a small pressed-steel camp oven, the ‘Bid-
ourie’, but as we were without one Simon had to use the old
hole in the ground, burying the dough under hot ashes. He
made the damper a little too large; it is best to work to
standard dimensions in order to get the heat and time just
right. When finished the cake was coated with about half
an inch of charcoal, and was rather damp inside; I stuck to
the stale yeast bread. Next morning I went over the dam-
per with a rasp from the tool kit, rather to Simon’s dis-
pleasure; but I produced a beautiful brown surface.
We now began the return, and I was relieved to notice no
smoke issuing from the caves as we passed them. This
time we picked a better track through the more difficult
parts of the Glen Helen Valley. What we gained in the
matter of fewer hill slopes and creeks, however, we lost in
punctures, of which we had been singularly free on the
outward journey. It was a very hot day, and that after-
noon we had nine punctures in rapid succession. Each
time the tyre and tube had to be removed, and there was
no ‘free air’ hose handy; the balloon tyres had to be blown
up by hand. This was very exhausting, and trying to the


temper. Simon was content to look on, regarding the
removal of obstacles as his special province, while Sir
Douglas Mawson spent the time in investigating the
geology.
The punctures were due to the short remains of dead
mulga sticks, broken off close to the ground, the curse of
motoring off the tracks throughout the whole country. The
sticks are very sharp and hard and break off in the tyres,
so that it is difficult to force them out. They have to be
knocked out from the inside with a hammer and chisel.
On the way out one of these strong sticks flew up and
pierced the radiator clean through, and drained it. We
plugged the hole with deal and soap, and then Wolffe made
his one mistake. He put a handful or two of dry camel dung
in at the top of the radiator, thinking that it would go to
the leaks and block them. We got through all right, but the
camel dung was biding its time, and got back on us with
interest later on.
We made the Eight Mile Gap in the Heavitree Range that
night and camped there, completing the journey back in
the Alice Valley next morning. The radiator and tyres had
suffered heavily and some springs were broken, yet it was a
wonderful motoring achievement, this 200 miles of travel-
ling through trackless ranges; and I venture to say that
not one driver in a hundred could have brought a car out
of it.
The nitrate deposit had been thoroughly investigated, but
there had been little time or opportunity to acquire more
knowledge of the general geology of the ranges. We had
collected considerable new information, but the correlation
of the different ranges and valleys was still obscure, par-
ticularly the position of the important Horn Valley.
The MacDonnell Ranges had cast their spell upon me,
and I determined to make every effort to revisit them and
learn all their secrets; for the key to the geology of Central
Australia was obviously in those western ranges, where the
formations ran straight for hundreds of miles in regular
succession, and the exposures of rock were so good.


CHAPTER IX
To Barrow Creek and Back
to Oodnadatta
had an interest in a copper mine near Barrow
Creek, and had just received an exemption from ful-
filling working conditions, so that he was in a hurry to go
up and post the exemption and put off the man who was
supposed to be doing the work. This, we found, partly
explained his constant hurry, which had not allowed us the
time we had expected for general geological work. It was
agreed that we should go up with him, as we should other-
wise have had to await his return to take us back to Oodna-
datta. It was a good opportunity to get a flying glimpse of
more of the country, and the journey was not without
interest.
We left Alice Springs at 4 p.m. on the 180-mile journey
north along the telegraph line to Barrow Creek, the next
of the old relay stations. The first ten miles of the way is
through the rough hills of the MacDonnells. The old track
led through the telegraph station, but the new one goes
round the station, which was later a prohibited area while
it was a new home for the half-caste girls. At ten miles the
track enters the Burt Plain, a red loam plain well timbered
with mulga, and with abundant spinifex. The spinifex sends
up long flowering stalks like oats, and the dry stems persist,
so that this area, and in fact the whole of the flat country to
Barrow Creek, looked like a field of yellow, waving corn.
These stems are good cattle-fodder, much depended upon
here and in the cattle country in the north-west of Western
Australia. The spinifex grows up between the wheel tracks
in all places off the cleared telegraph route, and at night in
the glare of the motor headlights the yellow stalks seem
much more densely packed, and one gets the impression of
driving through a wheatfield.
The vegetation shows marked improvement on the north
side of the MacDonnells as compared with the south. The


rainfall steadily increases as one goes north, from 10 inches
at Alice Springs to 12 inches at Teatree Well, 13 inches at
Barrow Creek, 15 inches at Tennant’s Creek, and 20 inches
at Powell Creek. At Darwin it is 60 inches.
The Burt Plain is seventy miles wide along the telegraph
line, and runs east and west for hundreds of miles. It is a
featureless portion of the great plateau or steppe of which
the MacDonnell Ranges form part of the south-eastern
boundary, and which extends from about the 135 th meri-
dian, a little east of the telegraph line, westward, to include
most of the state of Western Australia. This great dreary
plateau is some 2,000 feet above sea-level, its only features a
few scattered ranges, with here and there some defined
water-courses ending in saline flats, or so-called lakes.
It is the perfect example of the geologist’s peneplain,
where drainage has almost disappeared, and deflation, or
wind action, is the only eroding agent. It is known to
physiographers as the Great Australian Peneplain.
From the telegraph line, the northern front of the Mac-
Donnells runs away almost due west on the western side, but
to the east there is a northerly bulge, the Strangaways
Range, and for the first forty miles along the telegraph
track these high ranges can be seen, gradually receding to
the east.
The telegraph line is the main stock route, with wells at
regular intervals. The Artesian Basin is now far to the
east, away over in Queensland. These wells are not bores,
but dug wells a hundred or so feet deep', with water usually
of better quality than bore water, but with very much
smaller supply. An advance party has to precede the cattle,
to draw water and fill the tanks before the stock arrive; this
is done by horse- or camel-power. Two great iron buckets,
of about fifty gallons capacity each, are attached to the ends
of a wire rope, which passes from each bucket over a
separate pulley in the head gear. From one pulley the rope
runs down to pass round a pulley fixed to the ground close
to the well, and then runs along the ground to another
pulley on the ground at a distance from the well equal to
the depth of the well. Passing round this pulley the rope
returns direct to the other pulley over the well, and thence
to the second bucket. When one bucket is at the top, the


other is at the bottom. The camel is harnessed to an
attachment to the wire on the ground, and walks backwards
and forwards between the well and the distant pulley, rais-
ing a bucket at each journey, which is tipped by a man at
the well. This is what the miner calls a double whip. Many
small prospecting shafts have been sunk by horse-power in
this way, including the first shaft at Broken Hill.
The northern side of the Burt Plain is reached at seventy
miles from Alice Springs, where a narrow quartzite range
is crossed. Burt’s Well and Connor’s Well both lie in the
plain. The quartzite ridge, which is known as Hann’s Ridge,
runs westward for 110 miles from the telegraph line, which
is at its eastern end, and terminates in Central Mount
Wedge. The Burt Plain lies between this range and the nor-
thern front of the MacDonnells. Eleven miles beyond Hann’s
Range is Ryan’s Well. From here northward the country
becomes rougher. Westward of the telegraph line at Ryan’s
Well the Reynolds Range runs WNW. towards Coniston
Station on the route to the Granites and Tanami Goldfields,
making a hilly area extending fifty miles westward and
some twenty miles wide. Some high peaks of these ranges
lie close to the telegraph line. The ranges are composed
mainly of granite gneiss, with some quartzite, the gneiss
hills showing great, red, rounded cupolas. The telegraph
line follows the Woodforde Creek, which runs in a northerly
direction from the eastern end of the ranges for twenty
miles to the Teatree Well. There is a little post and tele-
graph office and store at both Ryan’s and Teatree Well. At
Teatree Well the Woodforde floods out, instead of joining
the Hanson, which it looks as if it might do. The Hanson
also rises in the hills to the westward, and the track con-
verges on and follows it for twenty-five miles, when this
stream turns north-west and floods out in the plains, the
fate of all the streams on the northern side of the Mac-
Donnells. Another twenty-five miles brings one to Barrow
Creek, the old relay station, with its solid stone buildings.
Only one telegraphist and a linesman then lived at Barrow
Creek, but open house was kept for the passer-by.
We reached the telegraph station in the late afternoon of
a blazing day, and got under the shade of the verandah for
a little respite from the heat and a stretch out on the cool


stone. One or two linesmen, the trooper, and a couple of
unknown travellers on that long road were lying about the
place as well. After about an hour, a man came out and said
dinner was ready, and we all went in and sat in semi-
darkness round a long deal table, on which roast beef and
bread were set out, and tea was being.poured. The interiors
are always dark in the north; in order to keep the heat out,
light is almost excluded too. We had not so far spoken to
any of the staff, and nothing had been said about food.
We felt ignorant and apologetic when we sat down to it.
Tennant’s Creek is the next of the old relay stations
another 150 miles north; and forty miles beyond Tennant’s
Creek is Attack Creek, where Stuart was once repulsed.
The natives in this region and to the north have always
been more numerous, and have therefore been a bigger
obstacle to the whites than in the more central areas. It is
probably wrong to say that they are more hostile, or
‘treacherous,’ another name for showing some opposition, in
their own way, to the encroachment of the white man.
Barrow Creek is famous for an apparently organized attack
on the telegraph station in 1874. Two members of the staff
were killed, and their grave lies close to the station. The
inscription on the tombstone reads: Tn memoriam of James
L. Stapelton, stationmaster, and John Franks, lineman,
killed by natives, Barrow Creek, 28rd February, 1874.’ At
the time of our visit, the only other resident of Barrow
Creek, besides the telegraph staff, was the police trooper,
Murray, who later came into prominence, as we shall see, in
the affair with the natives after the slaying of Brooks out
on Coniston,
At 140 miles from Alice Springs, and twenty miles beyond
Teatree Well, is seen a little group of low rounded hills,
lying five miles westward from the telegraph line, across the
course of the Hanson. One of these is Central Mt. Stuart,
where Stuart planted his flag in 1860. The surrounding
country is all similar to the Burt Plain, red soil plains, with
spinifex, mulga, and scattered ant-hills. At thirty miles
beyond Central Mt. Stuart, however, the country changes,
becoming rougher, with low granite rises capped with a thin
sandstone. This continues to Barrow Creek, another ten
miles on. Our destination was eighteen miles east of


Barrow Creek, and there we found ourselves still in the
same type of country—a partly dissected table-land, with
low, flat-topped hills, and red sandy loam plains, and no
prominent landmarks, the whole clothed in a thick, grey-
green covering of low scrub.
All the way from Alice Springs we had been having
trouble with the radiator. Wolffe was supposed to have
repaired the leak made by the mulga stick, but it soon
opened up again with the travelling. Every hour or so there
was a halt while we cut small pegs of deal from a petrol case
and drove them into the honeycomb of the radiator. The
wood was bone dry, and the theory was that it would swell
with the moisture when in place, and do the necessary
stopping. It certainly swelled, and always succeeded in
opening up adjacent passages; the patch of wood grew from
the size of a crown to that of a man’s hand, and bid fair
to spread over the whole radiator. At the Stirling Well, my
knife, a sheath-knife which I valued for its long association
and faithful service, and which was used for cutting the
pegs, was left behind on the ground. On the return I
examined the exact spot, but there were tracks of natives
near by. They miss nothing.
By the time we had entered the flat-topped country, the
water-cooling system had ceased functioning, and it was
presently decided to dismantle the radiator. It was early
afternoon, very hot, and shadeless, and the process under
these conditions of heat and fatigue was a horrible business.
Such an afternoon as that is never spent when one is using
the natural form of desert transport, the camel, and there
was a grim humour in the fact that the cause of all our
trial was the camel dung that Wolffe had placed in the
radiator at Glen Helen, and which by now had completely
blocked the radiator passages. At last the remnants of the
brambles and assorted hardwoods that are the camel’s
favourite diet were washed out, and then caulking was
continued, the pegs still being used, but cut with more care,
and our long practice had made us so expert that when
finally the defective part of the radiator was replugged and
the whole thing reassembled and filled, it held water splen-
didly for the remainder of the journey. It was after this
exhausting afternoon that we so unexpectedly and suddenly


found ourselves guests at dinner in the Barrow Creek
telegraph station.
Seated at the table was the miner whom we had come to
relieve. He said that he had run out of rations, and so had
been forced to come in. However, no one was likely to have
been able to go out to the mine without his knowing, owing
to his strategic position, and to the reliability of the ‘bush
telegraph,’ by which news seems to travel in the bush with-
out human aid. The man was satisfactorily paid off on
the spot.
We left Barrow Creek as the moon rose, and continued
our journey to the mine, which went by the grandiose name
of the Home of Bullion. The track was hard to follow
through the standing crop of spinifex stems, and we spent
most of the time craning out, watching the ground. A single
wheel-track which I had noticed from time to time proved
to be the track of a wheelbarrow; the lonely miner
had been wheeling his stores out in this homely fashion.
Twenty miles of rough country struck me as a fairly long
push for a barrow, but I believe wheelbarrows were pushed
for 300 miles to Coolgardie in the early days.
At the mine a mineral lode about a hundred yards long
and ten feet wide, containing a lot of carbonate and silicate
of copper in addition to iron ore, outcropped across a small
gully. Lead carbonate was also showing at one end; the
exposed part of the lode was small, but rich. We went down
two shallow shafts and examined the lode. A third shaft,
over one hundred feet deep, held water at ninety feet, and
there was a bucket and windlass. Flocks of the most typical
bird of Central Australia, the pretty little zebra finch, with
its husky chirp, were around this shaft, attracted by the vap-
our from the water they were unable to reach; we filled a
log trough for them. This little bird does not fly far, and its
presence is a sure sign of water near by; many a life has
been saved by the zebra finch. Their untidy straw nests
can be seen everywhere in the shrubs near water.
There is quite a business in the capture and sale of the
various finches from the Northern Territory, many of them
being of wonderful plumage, notably the painted finch,
which looks as if it had been brushed with broad splashes
of bright paint. The method of catching them is to enclose


, ... ...aMiiP 5
■ 1 j
* . ' *
If ! %s/
■
1 ig
1|||| | (|||j||
: l|K'v ; v « 'p_
H WmSt
, •'v,
r
jtf-n -
-■ ■■*
i f:
' for ■....
Barrow Creek Telegraph Station.


.
n, I, .mi. mu.
V' ‘
| ® | 4»f
’ ' ’ " _ V ; :
: ' % x: . ' V*
Ivy ' ' ■:
' < x v '|?
Spinifex in Seed, near Barrow Creek


a soak or water-hole with wire netting with small conical
entrances to the cage. The zebra is the commonest and the
cheapest, and the friendliest; he is sold in the cities at 3s.
6d. a pair, against perhaps 7s. 6d. for a painted finch. It is
hateful to see them in the shops, but they are easily kept,
and make themselves at home anywhere.
We were back at Barrow Creek the following afternoon,
and left there at 5 p.m., reaching Alice Springs at 1 a.m.
We covered the last 180 miles in eight hours in the dark
over a bush track that had never known pick or shovel, and
the time included mending a puncture and halting for a
boil up and food.
On the way in to Barrow Creek from the mine we called
at the home of George Hayes, a typical cattle station of the
region—a few galvanized iron buildings in a bare plain, with
some natives here and there in the offing. The feed near
the homestead is usually completely eaten out, and the trees
have been used for firewood. The scene was relieved by a
windmill and vegetable garden enclosed by a slab fence; in
this garden were splendid cabbages and a good crop of
onions with grape vines in shady leaf, and a few date palms.
Like all arid country soils, that of Central Australia is rich
in plant food, and anything suitable to the climate will grow
luxuriantly if given sufficient water, especially with the
addition of goat manure.
We saw no cattle on this journey to Barrow Creek and
back, though, in spite of the drought, there were still some
left in the country. A few kangaroos were seen on the
plains, but no emus. Rock wallabies can always be found in
the hills near permanent water, as at the Finke Gorge,
where I had disturbed some in my climb over the range. In
better seasons the emus seem to appear again from
nowhere.
Rabbits had been entirely killed out by the drought. We
saw a few at the Finke near Charlotte Waters on our way
out, but never another on the whole journey; deserted war-
rens were noticed here and there.
Three more days were pleasantly spent in Alice Springs
before we began the return to Oodnadatta.
A violent thunderstorm with a short burst of heavy rain
struck the town during that time, a common experience in


the summer. We were sitting in the verandah of the old
front of Wallis Fogarty’s store, which faced north, when
lightning struck a hakea tree about a hundred yards in front
of us with the crash of a high-explosive shell. There was
a scatter of dust like shrapnel round the tree, and when we
went over to examine it, we found the bark had been blown
off down one sidq, and pieces had been thrown fifty yards
from the tree, which otherwise suffered no apparent
damage. It appears that the heat vaporizes the sap under
the bark, and thus blows the bark off.
In those days the social centre of Alice Springs was the
Australian Inland Mission Hostel, and it was usual for all
passers-by to pay a call on the two nurses. These hostels
have been built at many of the outback places, through the
initiative of the Presbyterian Church. They are in charge of
a qualified nurse and an assistant, and in many places they
brought the first medical comforts into the back of beyond,
besides doing another equally great service in introducing
the restraining and civilizing influence of good women. They
changed the whole outlook on life for other women in the
remote places, and brought new interests and help to the
men, particularly where there were no white women. The
movement started in a small way, but has grown, and now
there are flying doctors stationed at several centres, in
wireless communication with the hostels and also with
many of the homesteads where transmitters were installed.
Flynn of the Inland, the founder, is still the guid-
ing spirit. There was a wireless receiver even then at Alice
Springs, and nice furniture, not of white rosewood, and a
piano, and dainty tea things, and a young policeman who
always seemed to be doing some job about the place. They
are married now. It was going into another world to have a
cup of tea at the hostel.
Alice Springs has developed since those days. There is a
hospital, and the position of the A.I.M. Hostel is not what
it was. Comparative refinement can be found in private
houses, and the social responsibilities of the Sisters have
dwindled. The place is now too civilized for the A.1.M., and
it will have to move farther out. At one time the hostel
was the only place where any sort of religious service
was held, apart from the work of the Aboriginals’ Friends


Association amongst the natives. Travelling ministers of all
denominations could be heard at various times in the little
wooden club building, and when the population was small,
most of the inhabitants would turn up to any service, partly
from a sense of hospitality to the preacher. On one occasion
the congregation was at sea in regard to the proper times to
stand or kneel. At one point in the service there was an
awkward pause, when it was proper to kneel, but the con-
gregation remained standing. At last a hoarse voice from
the back whispered, ‘Huishta’, and they all sank to their
knees like one man. It is the Afghan signal to the camel
to go down.
At another place two ministers of different churches
were visiting at the same time and had stayed together at
the hotel, where they had become very friendly. At the
time of parting one said generously that he had enjoyed the
other’s company very much and hoped they would meet
again, as ‘after all, we are both doing God’s work.’ The
other, not to be outdone, agreed that they had had a
pleasant time together, ‘and as you rightly say, we are
both doing God’s work, you in your way, and I in His.’
For the best effect, this story requires a strong Scottish
accent for the second speaker.
We found on our return to Alice Springs that one of the
Old Timers had had a fall while well-sinking, and broken his
back. His mate had a terrible time getting him out of the
well, and then there was the long ride into Alice Springs in
a cart, after which he was taken by mail motor truck, with
the A.I.M. Sister in charge, on the 360-mile ride to Oodna-
datta, to catch the train to Adelaide.
We arrived at Horseshoe Bend on the Finke, half-way to
Oodnadatta, late one night, to find the mail ear there, and
the house occupied by the invalid, nurse, and other travel-
lers. The old man was lying on a bunk, able to talk calmly
to the awed inquirers.
It was one of the worst nights I have ever spent. It was
very hot, and we were too tired to move away from the
station, and it was too dark to look round for a better place,
so we unrolled our swags where we stopped, and lay down
without food. A hot wind blew all night, and the station
dust, composed largely of goat manure, blew over us. It was


too hot to use a blanket, so we just let the dust form little
dunes round our heads.
I thought that Horseshoe Bend would be the last resting-
place of the old man, but he stuck it out all the way to
Adelaide.
Horseshoe Bend saw the last hours of Pastor Strehlow,
the grand old man of the Hermannsburg Mission Station.
He made the 160-mile journey down the Finke from the
Mission in the old Mission cart, a dying man; but beyond
Horseshoe Bend he could not go. They buried that devoted
follower of his Master on the Finke, in the country to which
he gave his life, in a coffin made of the only timber avail-
able, that of old whisky cases. He said in his will that cer-
tain of his bushmen friends should each receive a bottle
of whisky, as a last mark of his affection and friendship—
an understanding gesture that will never be forgotten in
that country.
We got away from Horseshoe Bend before the invalid’s
party, and not far beyond the Finke we came upon Ted
Hayes on his month’s journey, at ten to fifteen miles a day,
from his station at Mt. Undoolya, near Alice Springs, to
Oodnadatta, with cattle; he had his wife and children with
him, moving slowly and leisurely with the stock. I was to
meet him later, again and again, in the most unexpected
places; this time it was only a greeting, and on in the motor-
car, to finish that day the distance it would take him an-
other fortnight to make.
We filled up with the clear, mineralized water at the Char-
lotte Bore, and soon afterwards met a rider with cattle. He
asked us if we would care for a drink of rain water, in order
to show us a little hospitality; and we did not like to refuse
it. He dashed off, and came back with a water bag, from
which he poured us a pint mug each of brown liquid, beyond
our capacity or inclination to drink. One by one we found
an opportunity to let the desert sand swallow it up. There
had recently been rain showers, and the clay-pans contained
water, muddy but fresh. In our ignorance we had imagined
the rain water to be the sort of stuff we were used to, caught
on iron roofs, and like distilled water. The claypan water
is really far superior to bore water for all uses, but it was
not till later than I learnt to appreciate this, yet I felt


mean to pour it steathily away, and would have preferred to
have been able to gulp it down. That brown man, with
his fine horse and his eager kindness on the hot gibber
plain, remains a clear-cut picture.
There was a three days’ wait at Oodnadatta before a
cattle train started for the south. The man with the broken
back came in, and was at last on the train in a wheeled
stretcher, in a large goods van, the best vehicle available.
Half the side of the van was open, and at every stop men
came in to see him—inarticulate men, who wrung his hand
and then just stood about till the train pulled out. The
Sister accompanied him for the whole journey to the hos-
pital, finishing with that 688-mile train journey, the first
day and night of which were spent in the van, jolting the
dusty way to Quorn. Everything that the bush could do
was done for him, the most by the Sister and the mail
driver. He reached Adelaide still bravely ‘hanging it out,’
cheerful to the last, grateful and apologetic to his friends,
only to die in the end in those strange surroundings.
On the way down we had the usual little box with the
narrow, hard seats on the cattle train, but not to ourselves
this time. Two old derelicts from the back country joined
us at Oodnadatta, both slightly the worse for drink. One of
them was short and sturdy and elderly, with a sunburnt,
weathered face, and the slightly bloodshot, reddened eyes
that told of sandy blight and much dust and sun, but with
a bright and kindly twinkle in them. The bushman is not
a drunkard, owing in part to lack of opportunity, but there
are times when, funds and opportunity coinciding, he goes
on the drink, and does it thoroughly. Our friend of the
railway carriage was no dashing cavalier of the wide open
spaces, but just an old battler who went from place to place
to earn a living. He had possibly just failed to get employ-
ment on the railway construction, and was seeking fresh
woods and pastures new. He was rather boisterous at first,
but after things had settled down, conversation became
bright and interesting, and he told the best Australian out-
back story I have ever heard, and told it well. A good story
is the salt of life to the bushman. He has long days of
loneliness, with plenty of time to ponder, and the good story
to him is one that can be dwelt upon for hours, so that the


humour of the situation can be viewed from all possible
angles. The telling of it must take time, so that the stage
is prepared, and all the scene can be vividly imagined by the
hearers. The good bush story will probably be received in
silence, but will dwell in the minds of the listeners for
years, to be passed on to equally appreciative but equally
undemonstrative hearers.
We were talking of the barrenness of the country, and I
said that in the Red Sea Province of the Sudan you got off
your camel and collected a piece of wood if you saw it, in
the hopes of getting enough to boil the billy at camping time,
but I had seen no place in Australia where you could not find
enough timber to make a camp fire wherever you happened
to halt. ‘That isn’t the case in some of the Queensland grass
country,’ said the old man, slowly; T have been in places in
Queensland where there wasn’t a stick for miles. You have
to boil the billy on the dry gtass; I have often had to run
with the billy to keep it on the fire’ (suitable action here,
and time to picture the situation). ‘One time I ran about
three miles with it before I got it boiling. Then, when I did
get it boiling— ’ (long pause, pockets felt in vain, expres-
sion of slowly dawning realization, then, very slowly and
quietly) ‘l’d left—the—bloody—tea—behind!’
Later in the night they both left us, saying that they had
only been able to buy tickets for a limited portion of the
journey to Quorn, and had then to take to the trucks. We
saw them from time to time on the following day, very
black from having slept in a high-sided empty truck that
had taken coal up to the construction works. They had
made a dignified exit from Oodnadatta, and it now appeared
that as long as they maintained a suitably humble bearing,
and kept out of sight, the train crew would not officially
notice them. Early on the following morning, in the Quorn
railway yard, I saw for the last time the teller of the billy
story, and bade him farewell. He said he was feeling good
again now he could walk about openly and look anybody
in the face.


CHAPTER X
The Aeroplane Comes In
'JTBIS first journey into Central Australia had shown that
it was still a rich field for investigation. The geology of
the country exposed itself in a wonderfully orderly succes-
sion of rugged outcrops. Inquiries among the people had
disclosed that there was still one unknown and unexplored
area, which I have since named the Simpson Desert, lying
between the Oodnadatta-Alice Springs section of the tele-
graph line and the Queensland border, west and east, and
between the latitudes of Alice Springs and the South Aus-
tralian border, north and south. A kernel of some 28,000
square miles lay within these limits, through which I could
find no evidence among the Old Timers of any one ever
having succeeded in passing. Its borders were known to
be sand and spinifex wastes, but what lay behind them no
one knew. Were there unknown hills of ancient rock like
the Barrier Ranges inside those forbidding borders? Could
another Broken Hill be hidden there? Or perhaps the
Artesian Basin country extended far in, and opal fields
might await the prospector.
The area was bounded by the work of four explorers;
first, there was the work of Barclay along the Marshall in
1878, the northern boundary of the area, in latitude 23 ° S.
Then Winnecke traversed most of the course of the Hay in
1883, and later the Northern Territory—Queensland border
was surveyed by Poeppel. The work of these latter two
expeditions formed the eastern boundaries of the unknown
area. To the west, Day in 1916 had followed up the Hay and
the Todd, starting from Anacoora Bore, and to the south-
ward there was the work of Lindsay in 1885. Lindsay
started out with the object of exploring this very area, be-
tween the telegraph line and the Queensland border. From
Dalhousie Springs he went eastward in about latitude 26°


25' S., and with a native guide he crossed the southern end
of the area, between Lake Eyre and the South Australian
border, by means of a string of native water-holes, and
reached the Queensland border. He was obliged to return
the way he went, being unable to penetrate the sandy,
waterless country to the north of him. This journey marked
the southern boundary of the unknown area. Lindsay then
tried to go north-east from the Finke River near Anacoora
Bore, but only succeeded in reaching longitude 136° E., in
very bad country. He almost reached the point on Day’s
subsequent route where the Hale floods out. His camels
began to knock up, and he was forced back to the telegraph
line.
The Northern Territory-South Australian border' between
Charlotte Waters and Poeppel’s Corner had never been sur-
veyed or traversed.
Since those days, Jim O’Neil, the well-known opal miner
and discoverer of Coober Pedy, had tried to penetrate the
area from the Hale on the western side, and Simon Rieff
had perished half a dozen camels in the northen end. O’Neil
said he turned back in a sea of spinifex and sand.
Here, then, was an interesting nut to crack.
Further, there were the great lakes, particularly Lake
Eyre, whose shores had all been surveyed, but about which
nothing was known except the contour of their margins.
Was there deep water in them, islands, animal life ?
Sixty years of exploration with horse, camel, and, lastly,
motor truck had not settled these problems, in that country
of great distances and little water. It seemed that here was
the opportunity for the aeroplane, and I determined to use
it for the first time in Australia for geological and physio-
graphical investigations. And then those 150-mile long
ranges in the MacDonnells, with their scattered and uncon-
nected patches of geological work, and the uncertainty as to
which range was which at different points, could all be
easily put in their places by a few hours in the air.
A programme which I drew up received enthusiastic sup-
port from the President, Mr. A. A. Simpson, C.M.G., and
members of the committee of the Royal Geographical Society
of Australasia, South Australian Branch; and through the
Federal Government it was arranged that two aeroplanes of


the Royal Australian Air Force, with personnel, should be
put at my disposal by the Defence Department, in August
1929.
The expedition lasted nineteen days from leaving Mel-
bourne, and 4,300 miles were flown by the two Westland
Wapiti machines.
I had hardly any previous experience of flying, and none
of aerial photography, so that I had much to learn in the
day at my disposal before we left the aerodromes at Laver-
ton. On my first flight in a Wapiti, the pilot gave me a
giddy time, and I came down looking and feeling green. I
made six exposures with the camera, broke five plates
changing them, and got a poor result with the sixth. The
next morning we left Laverton, in drizzling rain, with three
men in each plane, and all tightly wedged in. In addition
to the pilot in each plane, an aircraftsman photographer
was to travel in my plane, so that both of us could take
photographs, and I could supervise the photography, while
the chief mechanic, who was a sergeant, and the wireless
operator travelled in the other machine. We had two hand
cameras, and the aircraftsman used his camera from a
prone position through the floor, taking pictures in a nearly
vertical direction, while I used mine over the side from
the observer’s cockpit, for obliques, w T hich always included
the horizon. I thus had the cockpit practically to myself,
as the other man was lying in the fuselage.
On the first day we flew to Broken Hill. Before we reached
the Murray at Mildura, the wet, cold country of the coastal
areas had been left behind, and the reds and browns of sand
and dry grass lay below us. At Mildura the pilots did a
few turns over the town for the benefit of the inhabitants,
which made me feel very uncomfortable.
From Mildura, we followed up the Darling to Menindie,
and thence along the railway line to Broken Hill, flying over
Sturt’s first route into the interior, travelled by him eighty-
five years before when he reached the south-eastern corner
of the Simpson Desert, which we had now set out to explore.
The meanders of the Darling through its flat soil plains
showed very plainly from the air. On the last stage of the
flight we were in the arid country, and came down low over


some clay-pans, and other types of surface, so that I could
get some experience of observing in the mapped areas.
Before landing we flew over the mines of Broken Hill.
This proved my undoing, and I was at last thoroughly sick
over the mines where I had worked underground as a
student twenty years before. I landed with a bad headache,
and went to bed early.
The real work began the next day, on the flight from
Broken Hill to Marree. The main object was to go over the
eastern half of Eyre’s horseshoe of lakes—Lakes Frome,
Callabonna, Blanche, and Gregory—as a first step towards
the investigation of the lakes.
Between Broken Hill and Lake Frome the country is flat,
red, and monotonous, with scattered mulga and other trees,
bushes, and small grey clay-pans. Definite lines of drainage
are rare, and there are no sand-hills. The country is mostly
held under lease for grazing purposes. The story No Roads
Go By was written of this area. Though sparse the vege-
tation here was denser than that seen on any of the later
flights, with the exception of the MacDonnell Ranges them-
selves. The Boolcoomata Hills were seen to the south as we
proceeded.
At last we recognized beneath us the shores of the
southern end of Lake Frome. The margins of this lake were
quite definite, as dark vegetation approached them closely,
but in the case of all the other lakes we flew over it was
often very difficult to determine just where the shores
were. We flew over the whole length of Lake Frome from
its southern end; there was a complete absence of water in
it. The surface was of pink clay, with white salty patches
opposite the mouths of the watercourses. There were some
long islands with a meridional trend, towards the eastern
side, which appeared to be of solid formation, and also some
long straight sand ridges, like the thousands we were to
see later.
We continued northward round the chain of lakes. They
plainly formed the margin of the Flinders Ranges, which
looked high and rugged to our left by comparison with the
pink desolation below and to the right. The lakes were a
series of dry flats, grey to pink in colour, and there was


an almost complete lack of vegetation; it was at times
difficult to say whether we were over a lake or not, as the
surface below was uniformly flat, barren, and pink. Sand
had encroached on the lakes and obliterated the margins,
with the exception of Lake Frome. The Strzelecki Creek
was clearly seen entering Lake Blanche, and also the Lake
Crossing Bore, with its pool, green reeds, and short stream.
The track to Innamincka crosses the lakes here.
At the Strzelecki, sand-hills were seen to be showing up
more plainly on the north-eastern side of the lakes, and
from there to the Cooper the country to the north was a
desolation of sand-hills trending a little west of north.
We had then covered Lake‘Frome, Callabonha, Blanche,
and Gregory, and there was not a drop of water in them, nor
was any found later in Lake Eyre or Lake Torrens. We
were convinced that they were dry, as we came down to
within fifty feet of the surfaces, and even brushed the
ground with our landing wheels. Another investigator,
Some years before, when he flew over the margin of Lake
Eyre at an altitude of 8,000 feet, had reported the lake to
be half full of water; at that time the pilots did not think
it safe to come down lower in wild country. My excellent
pilots would do all, and on occasions more than, what I
asked, for they were complete strangers to fear.
From greater heights the lake surfaces are deceptive. A
variation in the salinity of the soil, or in its texture, from
fine clay to sand, makes the surface patchy, with some areas
lighter than others, and produces the appearance of sheets
of water. This is more marked in photographs than to the
naked eye. The white areas look like water, but in fact
shallow water or damp ground or mud look dark to black
from the air. There are no complications due to mirage in
an aerial survey; but the fact that an Air Force pilot who
flew over Lake Torrens a few months before our visit had
declared it full of water, with waves visible, shows that
mistakes can be made.
There is no permanent water in these lakes; after rains
there is temporary water opposite the river mouths.
August, 1929, was near the end of a seven years’ drought,
which broke at the end of the year, so we were seeing the


country at its absolute worst. The great pity is that the
good seasons are so few and far between, occurring as they
do at something like ten-year intervals.
The broad lines of gum-trees marking the course of the
Cooper was a welcome change in the view when we met that
watercourse at Lake Killamperpunna. We saw the Kop-
peramanna bore there, and stampeded some horses round it,
and then turned south-west for Marree over a hundred miles
of almost completely barren country. For the first fifty
miles from the Cooper there were sand-hills a quarter of
a mile apart, with a meridional trend, and of remarkable
regularity and straightness.
We made, a little too much northing on our course to
Marree, and so met the railway line forty miles to the west
of the bend where Marree lies. We were able to read the
name of Bopeechee Station in bold letters on a board; there
was nothing but the name there.
We had skirted the southern margin of Lake Eyre, and
seen the little streams, up to several miles long, of some of
the bores in that region, the only features to break the
monotony of the pink expanse below.
We landed on the gravelly race-course at Marree after
five hours and ten minutes in the air. The sergeant was
found to be ill, and scarcely able to walk when helped out of
his plane, and we all had more or less of a headache. The
machines were not well adapted for long observation flights;
the exhaust rings were regarded as unsuitable, and were not
attached, so that the six cylinders were discharging gases
and oil into our faces the whole time. Goggles became dirty,
and my oily hands made maps and note-book black. The
fumes were the chief trouble; their effect was worse on the
photographer and the sergeant, who lay in the fuselage.
After this flight these two always took care to get more
fresh air.
I came to earth happy that day, for I knew my troubles
were over. I never knew another moment’s sickness, and
felt that I had mastered the camera, with which I had had
some practice on the ground with dummy plates since my
first disastrous effort.
This was the first day of photography. It is no easy mat-
ter to stand in a hundred-mile wind and hold a camera


,
4 ' % ' : v 4
f V 5 \';.
| V: -V
Straggling Sand-ridges on the Birdsville Track, near Lake Eyre.


1 t ,'"


steady, as well as direct it to obtain just the view required.
My original mistake had been in not getting well down
under cover to change the plates. Our flights were so
long, many up to the full safe range of 500 miles, that we
had to keep on our course, and there was no time to stop and
think, or go back for another shot. I found I had to go at
full pressure the whole time. To make an exposure with the
camera, change the plate, stow the camera, make a note of
the time, height, and direction of camera axis, in addition
to a note on the view taken and country generally, without
losing pencil, note-book, or map, took several minutes, by
which time another five miles had flitted past, and possibly
the scene was already changed. After the second day I
realized that there was no time to give instructions to the
other photographer without my own work suffering, so
from then onwards he made routine exposures at five-
minute intervals through the floor of the machine, at a
forward angle of about 45°, thus ensuring some continuity
of record, while I looked after all the points of special
interest.
The next flight was north-easterly from Marree to Birds-
ville, as Birdsville was to be the starting-point for the first
investigation of the Simpson Desert in a flight across it to
Alice Springs.
The flight to Birdsville was over the famous stock route,
the Birdsville track, down which the Queensland cattle
come for the South Australian market. The country along
this track was then in a terrible condition, quite destitute of
feed, and chiefly a series of dunes and drifting sand. Be-
tween the track and Lake Eyre there is nothing but north-
and-south-trending sand-ridges, in fact everywhere to the
north-western side of the track there is nothing but a
desolation of sand, while to the east lies the better
country of the Cooper and Diamantina flood-plains, where
the sand is swept up into fewer and larger ridges on the
gibber plains, and there are lakes and meadows in times
of rain. The succession of bores along the track, which lies
entirely on the Great Artesian Basin, was clearly seen.
From Goyder’s Lagoon bore, on the Diamantina, the
course turns more easterly, and from here to Birdsville the
sand-ridges are continuous to the north of the river, trend-


ing west of north. We were then travelling along the south-
eastern margin of the Simpson Desert. These sand-ridges
were later found to run from Goyder’s Lagoon for nearly
400 miles to the Marshall River.
We could see the dark area of Goyder’s Lagoon and the
sand-ridges straggling away from it into the desert, at the
very place where Sturt made his final efforts to reach
the centre of the continent in 1845. The ridges here on
the margin of the Simpson Desert are comparatively ir-
regular, but they develop a perfect parallelism farther in.
Goyder’s Lagoon presented a remarkable appearance
from the air, a maze of watercourses running in all direc-
tions in a black setting of polygonum. This great swamp,
150 miles from Lake Eyre, absorbs much of the
annual floods of the Diamantina. Above it, the Diamantina
runs in defined channels, and below it there are two distinct
channels running into Lake Eyre, called the Kallakoopah
and the Warburton.
The border fence between Queensland and South Aus-
tralia, undulating across the endless sand-hills, and drifted
up with sand, was clearly seen as we crossed it. It was
intended as a vermin-proof fence, but for a long time the
rabbits have had no trouble in walking over it.


CHAPTER XI
Birdsville
gIRDSVILLE is the most isolated town in Australia; it
has not even a telegraph line. It is over 200 miles from
Windorah in Queensland, the nearest town, where there is
a telephone, and it is 300 miles from Marree in South Aus-
tralia, where it gets its mails and supplies. In the early
days of the cattle boom, when all the surrounding country
was first taken up, Birdsville was an important little place,
with several hotels. Droughts have brought it low, and
only one hotel remains, a store or two, half a dozen homes,
the police station, and latterly the A.I.M. Hostel, which then
occupied a large and half-ruined hotel, but now has new
premises of its own. The Queensland cattle still come
down through Birdsville, but the mobs are fewer. The
mound of empty bottles, once the pride of the place, has
become drifted over with sand, and now looks no more than
a low sand-hill.
Birdsville had been expecting us for weeks. They had
read in the papers that we were coming, but had not heard
that we had started. A landing ground had been prepared
long ago for the Defence Department, but had never been
used. An areoplane was still a novelty, and people had come
in from fifty miles away to see it.
Before we landed, we saw a couple of motor-cars rushing
about. They ran out to the landing ground, a hard place to
find on that uniform gibber plain, though one place would
have been just as good as another to land on, for here the
tree-lined Diamantina flows through a desert destitute of
anything but gibbers, except sand-hills, which approach
within a half mile of the town. We were soon the centre of
a small crowd, and found ourselves regarded as heroes.
The next move was into the dark interior of the hotel,
where South Australian beer at five shillings a bottle hos-
pitably flowed. I asked one of the Old Timers what the


tariff at the hotel was, and he replied that he had no notion,
as he had never paid anything in his life. Apparently the
practice of most boarders was to spend all they had at the
bar, so that the question of paying for board and lodging
never really arose.
What tickled the fancy of the people most was that it
had only taken us two and a half hours to come from
Marree, a journey on which most of them had often spent
three iveeks with cattle or on camels, and never less than
three days by motor-car or mail-truck.
We were shown round the town by Leo Reese, a man of
many parts, who, in addition to running two cattle stations,
Minnie Downs and Miranda, found time to collect botanical
specimens and aboriginal implements. He had a great know-
ledge of aborigines, possessing what is rare in this country,
the intelligence to take an interest in them; he has been
very helpful to botanists and anthropologists. His sense of
humour made him a not unhappy man, in spite of being
condemned, so he said, to a life sentence at Birdsville. His
stations had failed, like all except those owned by the big
companies, which can close here and open there, as the
drought districts vary, and he was on an allowance from
his agents, to whom he was hopelessly indebted. They had
just written off £9,000 of his indebtedness, but he said that
made no real difference, and he regarded it rather as a joke.
The agents encourage the owners to stay on as managers,
for if they give up, the agents would probably lose all. I
have never heard any complaints against the South Aus-
tralian stock and station agents, who seem to treat the
unfortunate victims of optimism very generously. The
interests of owners, agents, and banks are one.
The pilots were soon riding camels down the main street,
a wide stretch of gibber plain with tracks each side of it,
along which are strung the few buildings.
We were shown the town water-supply, a fine tank and
reticulation system, with a windmill at a billabong near the
river, and every house connected up. It had been com-
pleted five years before, but so far the river had not risen
sufficiently to fill the billabong, and the scheme was still
waiting for water.


The Diamantina runs every year, but the size of the floods
varies. Above Goyder’s Lagoon the channel has banks up
to forty feet high, steep clay banks in the vast alluvial
plain. In the dry times, the river consists of a string of
water-holes up to twenty feet deep, many of them well
supplied with fish, so that there is always water available;
but stock cannot live on water alone. In a good flood the
river overflows its banks and floods the country for many
miles on each side; this is what the water-supply system
was waiting for. The particular depression from which the
water was to be pumped apparently would last from one
flood to the next in normal years.
The town was also proud of its new punt. In flood times
the mail from Marree does not follow the route over which
we flew, but keeps to the south of Goyder’s Lagoon, and
crosses the Diamantina at Birdsville, when the punt comes
into its own. There is a dead tree on the far side where
you hang your coat as a signal when you want the punt.
It looked very nice, with a new coat of tar, at the time of
our visit, but one could walk across dryshod.
That night there was a dance in our honour in the little
council chamber. There were about a dozen women and twice
as many men. We danced from 8 p.m. till 2 a.m., mostly the
old-style dances, danced with tireless vigour in spite of the
hot night. Everybody remained inside the building between
dances, and there was no strong drink, but a hearty meal
was served at about midnight by the ladies. Drinking
and love-making in Birdsville are serious affairs, not to be
confused with the lighter amusements.
The music was supplied by an accordion played by a man
who had come up from down the track, we were told, and
had brought his wife to the hospital, as the A.I.M. Hostel
was called. He was the only man not sober; he played the
accordion for six hours without stopping, whether the
people were dancing or not.
Every one stayed the night, and began their long jour-
neys home next morning, some by camel, for there was
scarcely a horse left alive in the district, and some in the
hotel manager’s motor-car. I heard one women say, as she
made her farewells: ‘Well, that was good-oh; it will do me
for another year.’


Next day I made a call at the A.I.M. Hostel and met the
two Sisters, and saw the handiwork of the policeman men-
tioned before. I was taken in to see the only patient they
had at the time, a middle-aged aboriginal woman of con-
siderable girth, with an ailing and almost white baby. So
this was the wife of the accordion-player! The man had
brought her up the track, instead of taking her down, that
she might be among people who would understand She
was only a gin, but she was the devoted slave of that man,
and he was ‘white/
I was anxious to have a good clear day for crossing the
Simpson Desert to Alice Springs, a day free from wind and
dust. The Commonwealth weather reports were of little use
to us in that area, owing to lack of observing stations, the
nearest being along the overland telegraph line. So each
morning, at 5 o’clock, I consulted local opinion, headed by
the hotel manager. Twice they said that days like that
usually brought up dust, but as the dust did not come I
began to suspect a conspiracy to keep us there, and decided
to start on the third morning if the weather showed no
signs of changing.
On the second day at Birdsville we put a machine up
in order to communicate with Air Force Head-quarters in
Melbourne, for our wireless equipment was inadequate as a
transmitting unit from the ground. We took that oppor-
tunity of giving a few of our kind friends a little joy-ride;
wherever else we went the people were quite blase about
aeroplanes.
Birdsville lies only a few miles inside the Queensland
border, so I made a motor trip to Pandi Pandi Station,
twelve miles away down the Diamantina, in South Aus-
tralia. This afforded a good opportunity of studying the
sand-ridges, and their formation and movement. It was
clear in this district that the long, straight sand-ridges
move in the direction of their length. They were seen
encroaching on the river flats, which are normally kept clear
of sand by the floods, from the southern side of the river,
and to be clearing away on the northern side of the river,
leaving behind at their southern ends tufts of canegrass,
that once grew on the ridges but now stood on long columns
of sand held together by the roots. The sand is moving


to the north-west. This fact is well recognized by the pas-
toralists; those in South Australia, in that corner of the
State, often say that if they can wait long enough all the
sand in South Australia will pass off into Queensland.
My further researches have proved that all the sand-
ridges in the interior of Australia lie in a direction parallel
to the prevailing winds, and move along their length in
the direction of the wind. This is quite contrary to the
usual type of moving dunes or creeping sand-hills, which
are waves transverse to the wind direction, like water
waves.
The trip to Pandi was a sad one. The station was held
by a young returned soldier; of his 2,000 head of cattle,
only 400 remained. When the party arrived home from the
dance they found that a pet pony, the last of the horses,
was dead. There was plenty of water in the river, but no
feed, owing to the long drought. These people cannot afford
to bring fodder 500 miles, even to keep pet animals alive.
I saw on the station some of the finest camels I had ever
seen, big, and in excellent condition. They were in their
natural environment, and could eat shrubs and trees quite
indigestible by other stock; grass had no particular interest
for them.
There was a big water-hole at Pandi, and a nice little
vegetable garden was flourishing under the water raised by
a windmill.
On most stations, the cook-house and dining-room are a
separate building from the living quarters, and at Pandi
this was so. But a long, narrow sand-dune had crept up
from the south and thrust itself like a snake between the
two buildings, so that to get to meals one had to climb this
dune. They had laid a track over it of wire-netting to make
the going easier.
I am happy to say that this drought broke four months
later, and the Birdsville area became again a country of
lakes and meadows and splendid grass.
These stations just inside the border of South Australia,
although so near Birdsville, are far from any administrative
centre of their own. The nearest is Innamincka, cm the
Cooper, where there is a police station. Official returns are


sent there from Pandi, down to Marree first, from Marree
by rail to Copley, and thence up the Strzelecki to Inna-
mincka, a journey of some two weeks, so that an answer
may be received in perhaps a month’s time, although Inna-
mincka is only 150 miles away as the crow flies. If any
little matter requires discussion, it can easily be spread over
a year, especially if floods intervene.
I was glad to find that Mr. Reese and other local men had
long been interested in the country to the west of the
border, but could get no information about it, for no white
man was known to have penetrated it for any distance.
Reese had questioned many aborigines, but all said that the
natives did not go in there, for there was no water.


'.,> r - &
.< *
■■■ii
•..■*- #
WBmSSr**'‘- **:. v-
:?■ . ■ 3’ ; M
■ ■ $S&& -j0m-.
■ r,. - JP""' 1#
i *■.■•■, # . •*:
H. i | ■■■ HHHj
• ■ ' - # ■■
.-• # * ;* • ' /
-/•' Jt: • &' .■ - J
i J ■ * B1M1
-. ■
#* •
' > .
- JBBBip # » &■■>
i—
;' j
A M m
J $:■ ■ •» •■ ■/r^
*
, ; ■ t : /
; V- ‘ ; >“/
“# 1 mmP’--- V ' vdr * ' . frjp;,,-
? . * n * ■: .^Mk
.'J J ii»
;;... p ii| i ■ mKm 1 : ■ 11
/. - / -
'V' ' -' :
' jp- ;•
S
f •
>' *
y • - ;■ ./ '
■*p r , . x« *»
& ‘ ■/* :
** *
i
pBB
/ ' £
&£* -■ P%& & p#
' .
. . - . •
■
|||i|:;;| : s;i;:|p
Parallel Sand-ridges of the Simpson Desert.


IWzimi'4 'M ' 5 Ml
M * ' $111
MS' fckf sM ; .'.. ;r - £
» Ii; & i | - *' WmWiw co
l%^' v J<' /iS S ?
r'A£C*lr- /*.' < II co
|« £fW» A
*o*
|"
||<A'V x ■■- 5 |||? \ So
co
IHHIi - > -- A ...\«*S *ili' s>
$ ' ar I «H$
. ■ ' |i||> Jr- j*; *£>»
V % ' T
K , * ;. '* 1
SSJ-- \ ',* «>
* ' » -«J
fjjj£ • - I -, f '** -’ "S
-si
, ||
IIP: AIJ ■ ' ::J:;:;||:j-: : ‘>' ' I":
|^;|A-:/ : i: : - ; l:|AI^:^- : : ; l'l:-;>® " t; \ ;.: J JjJ ;■


CHAPTER XII
The Simpson Desert and Western
M acDonnells from the Air
'pHREE flights were made over the Simpson Desert; the
first diagonally through the centre from Birdsville to
Alice Springs, the second across the northern end to Lake
Caroline and the Hay, and the third down the whole length
of the desert near its western side.
The first ninety miles of the first flight, from Birdsville to
the Queensland border, was in the south-western corner of
Queensland, over country all held under pastoral lease. The
country there is all the same, sand-ridges fifty feet high,
running N. 30° W., with clay flats between them. These
sand-ridges are all precipitous on the north-eastern side and
gently sloping on the south-western. They rise to heights
of up to a hundred feet, and average about a quarter of a
mile apart. The strips between them are stony
gibber flats, with occasional clay-pans, but very few
lines of drainage. The commonest vegetation is
the cane-grass bush, which favours the sand-hills.
Spinifex is at first rare, but gidgee, mulga, and
other acacias are scattered about the, clay-pans and
watercourses; eucalypts are absent, except for the lines of
box gum along all the major watercourses. The course of
the Mulligan is very well defined, running parallel to the
sandridges, a white strip of sand between two dark lines of
box gums; the Hay was not recognizable on this course; it
may have been represented by a series of clay-pans, but
there was no defined channel; that must have lain to the
north of us.
After the Northern Territory border was crossed, the
country became worse, and at thirty-five miles into the
Territory, there were no longer any loam flats or clay-pans


between the sand-ridges, but only drift sand. These condi-
tions prevailed for the next hundred miles, which were
nothing but a dreary waste of sand-ridges, spinifex, and
gidgee. The spinifex increased greatly after the border was
crossed; it was easily recognized from the air by its hollow
rings, outward-growing masses from which the central por-
tion has decayed away.
In the better country the ground between the sand-ridges
is grey, denoting clay and loam, but here it was pink, with
sand between the red sand-ridges. The ridges themselves
became more continuous, straight, and strictly parallel; each
ridge could be traced for the full range of vision, some fifty
miles. Occasionally two would converge and continue as
one, the single stem of the Y thus formed always being to
the north-west. From the air the earth appeared as a flat,
pink disk, ribbed in a giant grid from horizon to horizon by
the red sand-ridges, and streaked by the darker lines be-
tween the sand-ridges where the acacias and spinifex grew
closer. There were no watercourses or clay-pans. The pre-
cipitation, such as it is, sinks straight into the sand, where
it is absorbed by the roots of the hardy plants whose scant
foliage braves the scorching air above.
The miles flitted by. Every now and again we swooped
down to within a hundred feet of the ground, and felt its
hot breath, escaping gladly again to the cooler air above.
From a very low altitude the country looked less desolate,
less uniform; the acacias offered some shade, the strips
between the sand-ridges looked less uninviting, and the sky-
line was broken by the high ridges.
After two hours’ flying, our hopes of undiscovered ranges,
wooded watercourses from the Macdonnells, better country
than that of the Queensland border, began to fade. The men
who had started in on camels had been wise to turn back.
At 140 miles from the border, clay-pans began to appear
again as we reached the point where the River Hale floods
out. Some low hills were noticed along the course of one
defined channel of the Hale, the first elevations seen on this
flight all the way from Birdsville. We were then crossing
Day’s route.
Soon afterwards the scattered clay-pans of the end of the
Todd were observed, with some more low mounds of a bluish


colour; we were a little to the south of the course of the
Todd and running parallel to it.
At 280 miles from Birdsville, and ninety miles from
Alice Springs, the first range was crossed, a long narrow
ridge, extending far to the westward. The sand-ridges
are bounded on that side of the desert by this range; they
could be seen literally lapping up against the dark rock. The
Todd flows round the eastern end of the range.
Twenty miles farther on, a second range was crossed, a
chain of hills trending in the same direction as the first,
namely, north-east and Then followed a series
of low ranges and tableland edges, the easterly continuation
of the James and Ooraminna Ranges. This last ninety miles
was all over occupied country; nominally, it is held under
grazing lease, but there is not a dwelling in it east of the
telegraph line. Watercourses are frequent, and the vege-
tation, mainly mulga and spinifex, is comparatively dense.
The Todd skirts round this rough and broken area, which
is bordered to the north by the Emily Plain, across which
the MacDonnells showed up nobly. The Heavitree Gap was
soon picked out in the front of the ranges, the first definite
landmark seen since leaving Birdsville, 360 miles away.
The landing ground was in the Alice Valley, just inside the
gap.
The next flight was eastward from Alice Springs, across
the northern end of the Simpson Desert. My intention was
to fly 150 miles east, then fifty miles south, and return
direct. The plan miscarried to some extent, owing to a
miscalculation of ground speed, and led to the nearest
approach to an ‘adventure’ which has fallen to my lot in my
travels in Central Australia.
The engines of my machine had started rather quickly
that morning, and the pilot took off at once without waiting
for the other. Against my better judgment he spent some
time and petrol in verifying the height of Mount Gillen,
which had been the subject of a bet, and, having lost the
bet by a big margin, he filled in time by skimming the ridge
and diving into the abyss on the abrupt side of the range
several times, till the other machine was off the ground,
when we both began our journey by following the Heavitree
Range eastwards.


The Heavitree Range turns north-east at twenty-two
miles from the Heavitree Gap, and the high ranges recede
to the north, but lower ranges continue eastward as far as
fourteen miles east of the Hale River, maintaining an east-
and-west trend. The country is well mapped as far as the
Hale River, and the main streams running out of the ranges
were all recognized.
Forty miles east of the Hale, in the latitude of Alice
Springs, the sand-ridges of the Simpson Desert begin, five
miles beyond another well-defined watercourse coming out
of the eastern ranges. Between the Hale and the
sand-ridge margin the country was dark with vegeta-
tion, mainly spinifex and mulga, and clay-pans were
frequent. This north end of the Simpson Desert
had much the same general appearance as the
central portions passed over on the flight from Birds-
ville, except that clay-pans and watercourses were more fre-
quent, and the sand-ridges somewhat less regular. The
vegetation, too, was more patchy. Instead of dark, parallel
streaks between the sand-ridges, there were large pink
patches of sand almost bare of vegetation, and darker areas
of spinifex and mulga, giving a mottled effect like cloud
shadows.
Just as it was thought that our 150 miles was run, and it
was time to turn south, a large, dry lake was seen to the
south of us. We investigated this, and found that a wide
watercourse, made up of a number of braided channels, ran
past it on the east side and disappeared to the south-east.
These I thought were new features, until the flights were
plotted and the distances calculated and adjusted, when it
was found that we had really been at Lake Caroline and the
River Hay, explored by Winnecke in 1883 and scarcely
visited since. We were some fifty miles farther east than
we knew at the time. We photographed the dry lake and
the river bed, and turned south. The Hay bore away east
of south, and we soon lost sight of it, and were once more
in the sand-ridge desert.
Another larger group of clay-pans was noted, forty miles
south-south-west of Lake Caroline. This must be where one
of the large unnamed streams from the north floods out.


At fifty miles south of Lake Caroline, we turned west-
north-west for Alice Springs again. At the turning-point
nothing was visible to the horizon in all directions but sand-
ridge desert. On the 120-mile run from our turning-point to
the Hale we saw three more groups of clay-pans, ai!d‘ a small
group of low, rounded hills, the only objects to break the
monotony of the pink sand-ridges and low scrub.
The sand-ridges gave out just before the Hale was
reached, at a point some miles above a densely timbered
patch in the river, probably a box-gum swamp. Across the
Hale a low, rocky tableland country was entered, with
several distinct ranges trending south-westerly. We fol-
lowed up the stream, thinking it was the Todd, but we soon
recognized the scenes of our outward journey, and turned
due west, crossing the Giles and seeing its junction with the
Todd to the south of us. I then realized that it was the
Hale and not the Todd we had followed up, and that we
were fifty miles short of our supposed position. However,
we had only been four and half hours out, and there was
no need for alarm. Another twenty-five miles, and we were
over the Heavitree Range, at the point where it turns north-
east. We went on westward over the ranges for a few
minutes, at 5,000 feet, and I stood up to take a photograph,
when the engine stopped just as I was about to touch the
pilot, who was in front of me, on the shoulder, our signal
to steady down for a photograph. I thought it curious that
he should have seen me, and stopped without the signal,
for it had never happened before. I made the exposure,
and was stowing the camera, when he asked me to fire some
signals with the Very pistol, as he was going to land; I then
realized that the engines had stopped permanently. After
I had fired some of the smoking pellets, I noticed that there
appeared to be a clear patch immediately below us.
We were over the heart of the ranges, near Undoolya
Gap. To the left was the Heavitree Range, a wall of red
quartzite rising abruptly for a thousand feet, and to the
right a maze of low hills, covered with timber. Below was
a comparatively level strip, the eastern end of the Alice
Valley, but heavily timbered with large trees and with many
watercourses making for the Undoolya Gap. The clear
space I had seen below us was about the size of a football-


field. It appeared clear from 5,000 feet; it was not covered
with timber, but what rocks and stumps and logs might not
be scattered about in it?
The descent began. In my ignorance of flying I did not
know to what extent a descending plane could be manoeuvred
when the engine had cut out. We were soon heading
straight for the red wall of the Heavitree Range, and it
looked as if we should strike it at about a hundred feet
from the top. As the wall rushed towards us I had a few
seconds of panic, such as I had never known before. I
thought a crash was certain, and if I had had a parachute
I might have jumped out, but a moment later I had con-
trolled myself, and had seized firmly some of the tubes of
of the fuselage, as I had been told that the thing to do in a
crash was to hang on hard, and make yourself part of the
machine. I looked, fascinated, at the red cliffs of quartzite
rock, and when we seemed about to crash we suddenly
banked up for a beautiful turn, right under the great rock
masses, and were headed for the bare patch. I felt ashamed
at my ignorance.
It was a steep descent to the chosen spot, and there was
no turning back this time. The ground rushed up to us.
There were stumps and logs, but they were scarcly seen
before we had hit the ground, heavily, of necessity. I was
looking over the side, forgetful this time of the advice to
hold on, and my chin came down on the framework and
drove my teeth through my lips. A short run, and we were
safely at rest on the ground. I suppose there are still people
in the world who do not realize how nice it is to stand on
the solid earth.
The moment we landed I congratulated the pilot on his
landing, but he did not reply. Our landing was a combina-
tion of good luck and good management. We had run
between the stumps and fallen trees and pulled up right on
the edge of the clearing. Any traveller in the MacDonnells
would say a safe landing in an aeroplane in the ranges was
impossible.
There was no sign of the other machine. It had been
ahead of us when we started to come down and had now


disappeared. I knew our map position exactly, about eight
miles from Undoolya Station, and eighteen miles from Alice
Springs, only nine minutes from home when the petrol gave
out! I decided to walk to the station, where I hoped there
would be a telephone, so that I could let them know in Alice
Springs that all was well with my party, and also make sure
that the other plane had got in safely, as otherwise a search
for them would have to start at once.
It was then after 2 p.m., the hottest time of the day, I
had no compass, but the sun was sufficient guide. Unluckily
my course was a little to the right of a track of which I
did not know, the road from Alice Springs to Arltunga,
which goes through Undoolya and out through the Undoolya
Gap, so I just missed a direct road to the station.
About half-way to the station I came across a cattle track,
which I rightly supposed led to water, but wrongly supposed
that the water would be at the station. The track bore
away farther to the right than I liked, but I went on, hoping
for the best. Soon I was in rough, stony hills, and event-
ually came on a dry water-hole with a few mournful-looking
cattle standing round it; the water had only just given out,
for the mud was still wet. I started off again more to the
left, to cut my original course, and after scrambling over
some more stony hills, came at last within sight of the
white station roofs a mile away. People complain about
Australian houses all being roofed with tin, but those white
corrugated iron roofs can be seen from miles away, glisten-
ing through the distance, and are a very welcome sight in
times of stress.
I arrived at Undoolya at about half-past five, thoroughly
tired after the ten-mile walk, not to mention the heat, ex-
citement, and lack of lunch, only to find that there was no
telephone at the station. However, I had just seen the
other plane flying back, and I knew that communication
would soon be established.
To my surprise, I found that Undoolya was the home of
Ted Hayes, whom we had met on the road to Oodnadatta
two years before with cattle. He was just patching


tires, preparatory to motoring into Alice Springs, but
presently offered to take me back to the plane in the car,
and I gladly accepted.
We soon ran down the track to Undoolya Gap, and nearby
found the plane, its wings shining through the trees. Hayes
seemed surprised that I could find it again; he never would
allow that a city man could do anything like that. Some-
what unexpectedly I found the other plane standing beside
mine; they were equally surprised to see me turn up in a
motor-car. Refuelling was already completed; my party
had cleared and marked a runway, and the other plane,
returning with fuel, had landed successfully. The occu-
pants of the other machine had not seen us come down, and
when they missed us had rightly become very much
alarmed. They sent wireless messages to Melbourne that
our machine was down in the ranges, and that they were
going on to Alice Springs for fuel, which naturally caused
some concern at head-quarters, but nothing to what they
themselves felt, particularly as they did not know where
to look for us. However, we were easily found, and all
ended happily. The other pilot could not remember any
of the ground signals in his excitement, so had invented a
new set which he had written out, and intended to drop on
the expected wreckage when he found it, so that the sur-
vivors, if any, could inform him of the extent of the
casualties, and what help was needed.
I thought Hayes and his two boys would show some
interest in the planes. The boys had probably never seen
one before, and in any case these Wapitis, then new to
Australia, would have interested any ordinary person,
especially in such unusual surroundings. To my astonish-
ment, however, they did not even get out of the car, much
less wait to see us take off. Hayes said, ‘Well, I suppose
you’ll be all right now?’ and when we said we were, he
drove away without another word. It seems to be against
bush etiquette to show any undue interest or excitement.
We all landed safely at the aerodrome at half-past six.
This was the only hitch in our forty-four hours of flying.
The second aeroplane had just managed to reach the aero-
drome with empty tanks. The distance flown was only 504


miles, but we had had a tail-wind on the way out, taking ua
farther than we intended to go, and a head-wind all the way
home. The bit of fooling about in the morning had just
made the difference between reaching the landing-ground
and coming down at great risk in the ranges.
Before leaving Alice Springs on the last flight over the
Simpson Desert, which was to end up at Oodnadatta, an
aerial reconnaissance of the Western Macdonnell Ranges
was made. It was most important from a geological point
of view to identify the ridges at the various points where
geological sections across the ranges had been attempted,
and in this the aerial work was wonderfully successful. In
two and a half hours more of the topography was seen and
recorded than had been possible to Giles, Chewings, Win-
necke, or the Horn Expedition in weeks of toil. The results
of this part of the work exceeded all expectations. The iden-
tity of all the ranges and ridges was established, and some
most interesting and unique photographs were obtained.
An Eagle vertical camera for continuous strip mosaic
photography had been included in our equipment, but as
it could not be carried with our full personnel it had been
sent on by rail to Alice Springs. This was now fitted up in
my plane, to be operated by the photographer aircraftsman.
This left no room for me, and I used the other plane on that
day, with a hand camera. There were only two magazines
available for the automatic camera, each capable of photo-
graphing a strip eighty miles long by a mile wide from a
height of 10,000 feet, so it was arranged for this to be used
in making a strip mosaic westward from the Heavitree Gap
along the Heavitree Range, with three sections across the
ranges, one at the Finke Gorge, one at Ellery Creek, and one
at the Hugh. The pilot was to follow the Heavitree Range,
and not to lose it. This he succeeded in doing, so that a
complete strip map of this range was obtained, from the
Heavitree Gap to a little beyond Mount Razorback, where it
peters out, a distance of 110 miles. He made the sections in
the correct places, but in each case took a little too much of
the Burt Plain to the north, and stopped short of what
afterwards proved to be the most interesting part of the
ranges, the southern margin. He used all the film and made


an excellent job of it; there was not a gap in the whole
160 miles.
I had a wonderful time in the other plane, flying much
lower. I followed the Heavitree Range, and saw how the
Chewings Range, the other limb of an anticlinal fold in the
quartzite, met the Heavitree Range at the Ormiston River,
where the outcrops closed, from whence a single quartzite
range ran on through Mount Sender and Mount Razorback.
Haast’s Bluff and Mount Liebig, still farther west, were
seen to be isolated outliers of this range. The second
quartzite range, beginning at Mount Blatherskite, opposite
the Heavitree Gap, though imposing at that end, died down
in a few miles and was never afterwards conspicuous.
The third and fouth quartzite ridges were seen to run to
the Jay Creek, but became low and inconspicuous from the
air between the Jay and the Hugh, Beyond the Hugh the
number of parallel ridges greatly increased, and it was im-
possible to say which actually represented the original third
and fourth ridges. The Finke Gorge ridge was seen to run
eastward right to the Hugh, and it was wrongly thought
that it might be the No. 2 Ridge. It was clearly seen that
all the ridges of the ranges ran in parallel curves through-
out.
There are only a few watercourses westward of the tele-
graph line to carry the present-day run-off through the
ranges, all well-known and named streams, the Todd, Roe,
Hugh, Ellery Creek, and Finke, and it is only up these
streams that the ranges may be crossed, by means of the
gaps. Subsequent streams running down the narrow val-
leys between the ridges carry the water to these main
transverse streams; but the quartzite ridges are serrated
by hundreds of small notches, where streams have crossed in
past ages, little gullies far above the present valley levels.
The erosion of the soft material, slates and limestones, be-
tween the ridges, has been too rapid for these little streams
to keep pace, so that they have united into a few big streams,
which have been able to cut down through a thousand feet
of quartzite, the hardest of rock formations, as the ranges
have gradually been laid bare. These serrations are well
shown in the aerial photographs. In some cases, parti-
cularly that of the Finke Gorge quartzite, this serration was


" ’ > i
,
‘ :i : II ' "-...,■
v . __ . h
liBIMh
' - ... . - -.#?
■ -? jk?v y'' tT. !!*?&*' s 'i
H|il||
BgiililiiEiiMiiiBM i8MMB:iBBMlMi
pH ■
- ■
. : ; ' s
: <V, • ■ ■ >■.. • ,
■•■ ■■' •** ; **'•*
' ■ ' *^' V ’*' . M
. '-, ■■ . ', , , . ■
.>..•■■■ ■
, : r- tia r ,j ! • j
. .... V ' -.■■••■ ,y^ s -#^
vyfry - - *» _
• '
t 14,-y ' • -.»
<
}M s'" d'M. ;-ml
■ ••••;••• ■.•••.••••. • ■■■.•, •.-. . •
jj|| •* 'V^^v^^StpMw«p^B8H
'*■ « i'” ’ _$. * ' £ 5
■ .;/
The Finke Gorge, MacDonnell
Ranges.


j I
’ . V } <£• J
* j
, | ,1
‘ , 141
'■'■■■ 'a ■
■- Vi -Wi'
: ■■■’ ■■■■.>:•■■ ,;Mfi
> V ft v . r . .
-$ .
' • 5 |
* 'mil 1
r % '* *'iWl
*. m i W / ; 1PI
00 '^rLTrjr:-rvr% jb'JL »


distinctive wherever the formation occurred. The serra-
tions in it are rounded, giving the impression of a row of
gravestones as seen from the air, or in a distant view from
the ground; the gravestones are 400 feet high.
The view over Ellery Creek shows well the main struc-
ture of the Western MacDonnell Ranges, with their parallel
ridges and long narrow valleys, but there is also an alto-
gether different type of structure to be seen in the ranges,
namely that of the festoons of hills that occur along the
southern margin of the MacDonnells from the Hugh to the
western extremity of the ranges. These hills are composed
of an immensely thick and uniform conglomerate, ancient
debris from pre-existing ranges, and they have weathered
into a maze of rounded hills, with no linear structure. They
looked quite white from the air, in strong contrast to the
dark red of the remainder of the ranges, to which they form
a white apron. The highest country in the ranges is in
these hills near Stokes’ Pass, at the western end of the
ranges. The hills themselves are not of spectacular height,
and quite unlike the peaks in the Heavitree Range.
We saw the only two buildings in the MacDonnells west
of the telegraph line, the new bungalow for the half-castes
at the Jay Gap, built and occupied since the motor journey,
and Raggatt’s Glen Helen Station. There was only one
dislocation in the Heavitree Range, which occurred at the
Jay. I saw where we had gone in between the two displaced
portions of the range in our motor-car on the last trip, and
passed out through the little gap, plainly visible, in the
northern portion.
It was finally established that Glen Helen is not in the
Alice Valley, which is north of the Heavitree Range, but lies
to the south of that range.
On this flight I had intended to keep an eye on the other
plane, which was far above us, but we lost it almost imme-
diately. It was the most fruitful and most enjoyable of
all our flights.
Our next journey was to fly to Oodnadatta, making a
wide detour to the east of the telegraph line and railway—
the railway had been completed to Alice Springs that year


—in order to make a final examination of the Simpson
Desert down its western side.
The first 180 miles of this flight was practically over our
course from Birdsville to Alice Springs. We made a chord
to the arc of the Todd River, crossing again the low table-
lands and ranges around which the Todd flows, and coming
in close to that stream where it floods out, in the neigh-
bourhood of the end of the Hale. The same south-easterly
course was continued past the last clay-pans of the Hale
and on into very barren sand-ridge country. At 180 miles
we turned due south, towards the South Australian border,
over a monotonous desert of pink spinifex-dotted sand-
ridges, with no signs of clay-pans.
As we converged on the course of the Finke River, other
vegetation besides spinifex began to show up, and within a
few miles of the flood flats of the Finke, the spinifex dis-
appeared, and mulga and needlebush took its place, with
numerous clay-pans. At last, after 119 miles on the
southerly course, we were out of the sand-ridges and over
the flood plains of the Finke where it flows southerly along
the edge of the tablelands of Oodnadatta. We turned
south-westerly into the angle in the front of the tableland
out of which the Macumba flows, crossed the Macumba, and
were over the gibber-covered tableland itself in another
twenty-seven miles. This tableland, as I have said, is
carved up into flat-topped hills by the streams, whose
courses appeared as yellow waving bands between the dark
red mesas. Another thirty-eight miles over the tableland
brought us to Oodnadatta.
The Finke loses itself in flood plains long before Lake
Eyre is reached; the only defined channel we crossed was
that of the Macumba. If any of the Finke waters ever
reach Lake Eyre it must be by way of the Macumba, which
crosses the flood plains of the Finke that skirt the table-
land.
This flight completed the investigations of the Simpson
Desert. There had been little to record but the direction
and relative closeness of the monotonous ribbing of sand-
ridges, variations in the sparseness of the spinifex and
acacias, and the presence or absence of clay-pans.


All the streams from the MacDonnells, which run parallel
to the sand-ridges in a general south-south-east direction,
peter out in the northern part of the desert, even the Hay
failing to connect with the Mulligan or Goyder’s Lagoon.
The only notable features in the area were those already
mapped round its margins. The sand-ridges everywhere
bordering the area are continuous right through it. With its
sand-ridges hundreds of miles long and strictly parallel it
is topographically one of the most remarkable and uniform
areas in the world, but there appears to be nothing to war-
rant any further attempts by prospectors or pastoralists
to penetrate it. Most of it is underlain by the Great Ar-
tesian Basin, as indicated by the nature of the surface, and
the known bores near Charlotte Waters and on the Queens-
land border, but it is otherwise a waterless waste of sand-
ridges and spinifex. It is no longer terra incognita, but fur-
ther acquaintance with it seems undesirable.
Most of the vast quantities of sand comes from the break-
ing down of the old porcelainized surface of the desert it-
self, but some has obviously been carried into the basin by
the rivers from the north and west. There is another large
source of sand on the south-east side of the desert, in the
great delta deposits of the Cooper and Diamantina and the
gibber plains through which these rivers run. This area
supplies the sand for its own ridges, and the ridges grow
and extend towards the desert under the influence of the
dominant south-east winds, but to what extent they have
migrated right into the desert is a matter of doubt. Desert
conditions may extend, but it does not seem likely that
desert sands would migrate bodily for hundreds of miles
from their place of origin.
There is still one secret which I believe this desert holds.
The fate of the Leichhardt expedition has never been dis-
covered. Dr. Leichhardt started out from Fitzroy Downs in
southern Queensland, close to the site of the present town
of Roma, to attempt the task of crossing the continent from
east to west, from coast to coast, at a time when Queens-
land itself was practically unknown, and before it was pro-
claimed a separate colony from New South Wales. His last
dispatch was from Cogoon in Queensland, dated 3 April
1848, and he was last heard of at Mount Abundance Station,


both places in the settled districts not far from his starting-
point. His intention was to travel west along the southern
side of the watershed which feeds the rivers flowing north
into the Gulf of Carpentaria, the coastal rivers which he
himself had previously explored. He had mentioned Eyre
Creek (now the Mulligan, west of Birdsville) as a desirable
point to include in his route, and he had intended to make
first for the Barcoo River (headwaters of Cooper’s Creek,
discovered by Mitchell only a year before) and follow it
down to its most northerly point, where it is joined by the
Alice River and thence flows southward to Lake Eyre. The
Simpson Desert lay right across his apparently intended
route westward from that point, with Eyre Creek in the
centre of the eastern side of the desert. Three courses
were open to him. He must either pass round the southern
end of the desert by going down the Cooper or the Dia-
mantina, or go north up Eyre Creek and the Mulligan,
through the very bad country afterwards explored by Win-
necke, in order to circumvent the Simpson Desert round its
northern end, or continue on westward through the Simp-
son Desert itself.
His party consisted of eight white men, with twenty bul-
locks used as pack-animals, two horses, half a dozen mules,
and some hundred goats. The least perishable part of the
gear was the cumbersome pack-saddles of the bullocks. It
seems impossible for a party of this size to have dis-
appeared without a trace, except in the Simpson Desert,
where their bones might have been bleaching for the past
hundred years with no chance of discovery by black man
or white.
The theory that he was overwhelmed by a flood in the
Cooper or Diamantina has had much support, but such
a catastrophe would not obliterate the whole expedition, as
the floodwaters soon recede to a few permanent pools. In
addition, the country was well populated with aboriginals
at the time, from whom some story, some relic of equip-
ment, must surely have come to light in due course. This
would have been the case even if the party had been mur-
dered by aboriginals, for the natives have never shown
much anxiety to conceal such deeds, but, on the contrary,
have often been known to tell quite freely of them.


Several search expeditions were sent out to try to trace
Leichhardt. The farthest sign of him was discovered by
A. C. Gregory in 1858, a tree marked with an L, and the
stumps of some small trees which had been cut with a sharp
axe, and a sloping tree notched as for a tent ridge-pole. This
was in latitude 24° 35' S., longitude 146° 6' E., on the
headwaters of the Barcoo, above its junction with the Alice,
which was one of his known objectives. This solitary dis-
covery was too near the starting-point to be of any value
in solving the problem of the complete disappearance of this
large party.
If the Simpson Desert holds the secret of Leichhardt it
will probably hold it for ever.


CHAPTER XIII-
Lake Eyre from the Air
'J’HE next problem to tackle with the aeroplanes was Lake
Eyre, around which so much discussion and uncertainty
had centred since its discovery.
The Lake Eyre Basin is an area of great physiographical
and geological interest. It is the focus of the great Aus-
tralian inland drainage system bounded by the Macdonnell
Ranges to the north-west, and by the Queensland coastal
ranges to the north-east, a watershed of nearly half a mil-
lion square miles. The vicinity of the lake is the driest and
most desert area in Australia, ringed by a five-inch rainfall
line. Though mighty rivers begin their long journeys to
Lake Eyre from 600 miles away, yet their courses are
indefinite in South Australia for hundreds of miles, and
they have countless swamps and minor lakes to fill before
their waters can reach Lake Eyre. The country north-
eastward from Lake Eyre for 250 miles, to the Queensland
and New South Wales borders, is a great alluvial plain,
really the deltas of the Diamantina and Cooper, through
which those streams meander in innumerable branches and
channels. Large areas are subject to inundation. The
whole district is traversed by sand-ridges, trending north
near the lake, to west of north in the northern part, and
east of north in the southern part; ridges like those of the
Simpson Desert, but in most part more widely spaced. The
whole area has been carefully surveyed, and the field maps
show sand-ridges up to eighty miles long and fifty feet
high, varying from a quarter of a mile to a mile apart.
Between these ridges lie stony or clay flats, which may be
flooded in wet seasons, when grasses grow there luxuriantly
and the stock feed is good.
The first reports of the area, by Sturt and, later, A. C.
Gregory, stated distinctly that the Lake Eyre Basin was a
barren and dangerous desert, but McKinlay, after his Burke


and Wills Relief Expedition in 1861, gave the impression
that part of the country was a series of lakes and meadows,
as no doubt it was at the time, though of most of it he
wrote, ‘a more dreary country you could not well imagine.’
The optimism of the times, encouraged by the prevailing
spirit of adventure, led people to make more of the ex-
plorers’ reports than they were probably meant to convey.
On his map of the Cooper and Diamantina country,
McKinlay wrote: ‘The sand-hills surrounding waters for the
most part fair country, only requiring rain to exhibit
richness.’
At any rate, after McKinlay’s journey the country was
occupied for cattle raising; those were the first good old
days of the Birdsville Track. The history of the area since
then has been one of a series of periods of promise and
hope, followed by bitter failure and ruin. It is a fascinating,
tantalizing region. In its good seasons, its miles of waving
grasses lure men to their destruction. Once they have come
under the spell of its vast spaces, they cannot leave it. The
grassy plains change to a burning stony desert, the stock
gradually die out, the sand drifts over the pitiful fences
and stockyards, its glaring ridges slowly approach and
engulf the homestead, and yet men hang on. Month after
month the brazen sky is watched; heavy clouds form, to
clear away again; years pass; but some day the cooling
torrents will fall, the dry watercourses .will become swirling
yellow maelstroms, and the country will wave with grass
again.
The late Professor J. W. Gregory visited the area in 1901,
after which he wrote that interesting book, The Dead Heart
of Australia. Gregory found only one cattle station oc-
cupied in his circuit round the east side of Lake Eyre from
Marree. The Kilalpaninna Mission Station, on the Cooper,
founded by the Lutherans in 1866, was still going, with 200
natives and a thousand square miles of country, but the
natives have now vanished and the mission has long been
closed.
Gregory wrote of the area: ‘We were lost in admiration
at the pluck of the South Australian people in settling here,
and at the enterprise of the Government in opening a prac-
ticable route across such a desert; it seemed incredible that


stock-raising could ever have been successful in such a
country.’ It made the same impression on me in 1929, for
the country was then practically uninhabited, the only
cattle being on the Diamantina near Birdsville.
Lake Eyre is on the south-western corner of the
Great Artesian Basin. After the retreat of the Cretaceous
seas, a lacustrine period followed, when the basin was a
series of great lakes, rainfall was higher, and vegetation
luxuriant. Silicified stems of palms and cycads and many
higher varieties of trees are found scattered about on the
surface of the disintegrated gravel-beds of that period, but
a still more interesting proof of past pluvial times is in the
remains of extinct marsupials, mainly herbivorous. Many
of them were giant forms of types still surviving, but some
are now extinct. The best known is the Diprotodon, a giant
wombat the size of a small elephant, whose remains have
been found complete. The tusk-like teeth are common fossils
all over lower South Australia, even being found in the
clays in the excavations for the River Murray locks; a
giant kangaroo, and turtles and crocodiles are also found.
A regular ossuary was discovered on the surface at Lake
Callabonna, but the remains are also common in the banks
of the Diamantina, and in many localities in the Lake Eyre
Basin. The groups of bones near the existing lakes, like
Lake Callabonna, indicate that the animals perished round
the last of the receding waters, when aridity was far
advanced.
These animals are considered to have flourished in Pleis-
tocene times, so that the gradual desiccation of Central
Australia has gone on throughout the whole of the Tertiary
and Quaternary Periods. At the close of the Tertiary there
were extensive earth-movements in Australia, when the
plateaux, now dissected, of the eastern coastal regions, in-
cluding the Kosciusko block, were uplifted, and glaciation
set in in the elevated regions. In South Australia the gulfs
were formed by down-faulting, the Mount Lofty and
Flinders Ranges were elevated, and there was also an up-
buckling of the crust east and west across the Flinders
Ranges from Broken Hill to Port Augusta. This latter
movement effectually cut off the drainage in a southerly
direction of all the rivers from the north. The rivers which


now drain into the Lake Eyre Basin formerly reached the
sea along the coast of South Australia, but the elevation of
the barrier across their paths instituted a system of inland
drainage. Pari passu with the elevation there was probably
a down-warping to the north of the Flinders Ranges, and
thus originated the great area of saline flats, Eyre’s horse-
shoe of lakes; there is little doubt that in earlier times this
was one continuous lake round the northern end of the
Flinders Ranges.
The cycle of erosion which began after these last earth
movements, when inland drainage became established, has
cut into the gravels, sands, and clays that accumulated in
Tertiary times, and has dissected them till only the flat-
topped remnants remain. The hills round Oodnadatta are
of this nature, and also the more scattered ones to the south
and east of Lake Eyre, all characterized by containing
gypsum beds in the vicinity of the lake. These deposits, in
which are found the plant remains and marsupial bones,
are known as the Eyrian beds. Their age probably extends
right through Tertiary times, and patches of them are
found far up in the broad valleys of the MacDonnell Ranges.
Not all the flat-topped hills are formed of Eyrian beds.
Some of them are of much older formations, but all were
levelled down during the planation of Tertiary times. It
was formerly thought that they were all of the same age,
and they were referred to as the desert sandstone hills.
They have all undergone the same silicification of the
surface.
Lake Eyre is divided into two parts, Lake Eyre North
and Lake Eyre South. The north lake has a maximum
length of 110 miles, and a maximum width of 40 miles, and
it extends in a more or less meridional direction, while the
south lake has maximum dimensions of 40 miles by 18
miles, and lies east and west. They are connected by a
narrow neck only 150 yards across, at the eastern end of
the south lake. The north lake covers 3,000 square miles
and the south lake 460. They lie between latitude 28° and
29° 80' S., and the meridian of 137° E. passes through them.
Previous accounts of the lake, by explorers and stockmen,
differed widely. It has been described as a genuine lake,


with deep waters and waves, and, on the other hand, as a
dreary, burning plain. The fish found after floods in the
water-holes hundreds of miles up the usually dry courses
of the rivers have no connexion with the lake, but are pre-
served in the permanent water-holes. The reason for these
remarkable differences of opinion is that the observers have
seen its shores at points far apart, near rivers in flood or
far from them, in wet seasons or in drought, and probably
not more than once in any year, perhaps only once in their
lives. The distances are so great, travel so slow owing to
the nature of the sand-hill country, which makes the camel
the only means of transport, and the inducements for the
scattered stockmen in the area to visit the lakes are so few,
that the distribution of water after floods, and its depths
and the time the water lasts, were still only matters of
debate. The region of the lake remained one of the few
areas still unconquered by the motor-car. There are no
roads, or even tracks, to the north lake. Owing to the al-
most continuous presence of mirage one can never see more
than a couple of miles out on to these lakes, though the
apparent distance is much greater. Only the inexperienced
would mistake the mirage for water, though the appearance
is invariably that of a vast sheet of glistening water, be-
ginning a mile or two from the shore.
Babbage was the first to visit to western side of the lake.
Warburton in 1866 explored the northern end. J. W. Lewis,
the surveyor, in 1874-75 traversed the whole of the shores of
the lake except the south-western portion, and made a de-
tailed examination of much of the flood plains to the east.
Warburton, in his gloomy and fearful account, reported
that no water was to be seen, and spoke of the cracked and
rotten nature of the northern shores.
Lewis reported that his party went out on to the lake for
two or three miles in several places, and used powerful
glasses from the top of the highest sand-hills, but never saw
a drop of water. Referring to the lake he said: T sincerely
hope I may never see it again.’ He described in detail a ven-
ture of his own for a distance of 200 yards out on to the
lake from the middle of the western side. He came upon a
salt-crust three inches thick, and broke through this with


a stick, disclosing a stinking mud below, and causing the
salt-crust to crack all round. He escaped by lying down and
rolling himself towards the shore. He is the only writer or
observer who had so far mentioned a salt-crust on Lake
Eyre. He writes: ‘I did not feel inclined to try again, so
quietly walked back to my camp, leaving the nature and
depth of the bottom at this point of the lake a mystery/
One of his parties, in his absence, walked seven miles out
on the lake at the northern end, and ran a line of levels,
finding that there was a fall of 2i feet in the seven miles.
They tried to sink a hole at the end of the walk, ‘but found
it too soft.’ There was no description of the lake surface
there, nor any explanation of how it was that the surface
was firm enough to walk on, yet a hole could not be sunk.
No mention of a salt-crust was made. The north end of the
lake is occupied by the combined deltas of the Rivers Neales,
Macumba, Kallakoopah, and Warburton, so probably there
is no salt there within ten miles of the shore.
By the time Professor Gregory visited the lake a trigono-
metrical survey had been run all round it except the
northern end, which is the southern extremity of the
Simpson Desert, a barren, sandy, and featureless waste,
and so far rejected by the surveyors. The survey was car-
ried up to the Central Australian boundary on the western
side of the lake in the neighbourhood of the telegraph line,
and now of the railway, and also north-eastward to the
corner of Queensland. Gregory’s interest was chiefly in the
study of Australian desert conditions, and the search for
fossil remains, and he paid little attention to the lake itself,
but travelled mainly in the flood plains to the east of it. The
party only sighted the lake surface once, and found nothing
to interest them there, or perhaps one should rather say
that there was so much to interest them away from the
shores of the lake that they paid little attention to its sur-
face. They made a ‘short cruise’ out on to the lake on its
eastern side, just south of the mouth of the Cooper, and
‘could have gone much farther.’ There was no description
of the surface, and no mention of salt or of bog of any kind.
The first real attempt to find out what lay within the
borders of the lake was made in 1922 by Mr. G. H. Halligan.


By that time the shores of the lake had been mapped in as
great detail as will probably ever be necessary, the animal
and plant life in the area had been collected and discussed,
probably not yet completely, the geology had received con-
siderable attention from the South Australian Government
geologists, and the pastoral possibilities and impossibilities
were well understood by the big pastoral companies and the
private lessees. The only remaining major problems were
concerned with the lake itself. It was not even known what
proportion, if any, of the lake was covered with water, or
how the water varied with the seasons and rainfall. It was
generally considered that there was always some water in
parts of the lake, from accounts by aborigines of the col-
lecting of water-birds’ eggs.
The world interest in the alkalis had also directed atten-
tion to these giant salt-pans of South Australia. Several of
the nearer lakes had been investigated from this point of
view, but so far the greatest of them all remained a
mystery. The common salt and gypsum industries, carried
on in lower South Australia, were already of considerable
and growing importance.
There were also legends of islands within the lake, pos-
sibly inhabited, and there were possibilities of the presence
of fauna on the islands unknown on the mainland, de-
scendants of the great Pleistocene mammalia whose remains
are so plentiful in the vicinity.
Mr. Halligan had formulated a scheme for a hydrographic
survey of the lake. He flew down the margin of the lake at
8,000 feet, and reported that the lake was about one-third
full of water, which he estimated from its colour to be from
four to six fathoms deep. In this, I believe, he was quite
mistaken. He had had no previous experience of aerial
observing. As a result of this flight, Halligan returned four
months later with a specially designed boat to carry out his
hydrographic work. This was the third and last transport-
ing of boats to the lakes in order to navigate their supposed
waters. The first attempt was by Freeling, the Surveyor-
General, to Lake Blanche, and the second by Lewis, who
had been instructed over fifty years ago by the Govern-
ment to get a boat out on to the lake. Like his two pre-


decessors, Halligan found no water in the lake to float his
boat on, and the vision of a great adventure came to a dis-
appointing end. So the problems of Lake Eyre were still
unsolved in 1929, when we started our aerial investigations
with the best machines and most capable pilots in the Royal
Australian Air Force.
I had asked the Air Force to supply some bombs to be
dropped in Lake Eyre, to test the nature of the surface,
whether mud, clay, or salt, if no water was found, as the
aeroplanes were fitted for bombing, but there were dif-
ficulties, and I withdrew my request. As an alternative, I
designed some spears to let fall. The first two were made
for me by the railways workshop at Alice Springs, two-
foot lengths of two-inch iron piping, cut and hammered to
a point, with six-foot wooden shafts let into them. Two
standard coloured message bags were attached to them as
streamers.
The first flight over the lake was made on the journey
from Oodnadatta to Marree. The north end of the lake lies
about a hundred miles east-south-east of Oodnadatta. This
part of the flight was over the low mesas and dissected,
barren Oodnadatta country described before. There had
been some showers of rain, and pools of water were seen in
two of the creeks near their entrances to the lake. On the
previous day, on the last stage of the flight from Alice
Springs to Oodnadatta, when over this same type of coun-
try, I thought I saw innumerable small pools of water, but
discovered that they were large, glistening sheets of gypsum
weathered out of the ‘table tops/ I had, unhappily, not had
much experience of the appearance of water from the air,
for there was none to be seen after leaving the Murray and
Darling, except in the bore streams; but I had seen enough
to know that its appearance is dark rather than shining,
for it is most exceptional to get the sun, water, and aero-
plane in the correct positions for a bright reflection off the
water. In the case of shallow water below the observer,
nothing is seen but the bottom of the pool or stream, which
is usually dark mud. From a long water-pool in the
Koorakarina Creek near the lake we turned south-east,
thinking we were over the margin of the lake. Whether or
not we were over the lake was very difficult to determine


with certainty. The northern and western sides are very
low-lying, the deltas of a dozen streams, with islands and
braided channels. The relief all round the lake is so low as
to disappear entirely when the country is viewed front the
air, and there was no vegetation at that time to guide us,
except the gums along the watercourses. The surface of
the lake appeared of the same pink colour as that of the
sandy wastes around it. We saw occasional dead bushes
on a level sandy flat which we at first took to be the lake
floor, but after twenty miles of it we came upon the real
lake margin, with a white strip of salt along it at that
point. Inside the lake shores the surface was completely
barren of any signs of vegetation. Some white patches of
salt had been seen at the creek mouths, but these were
really in the deltas of the creeks and not on the lake proper,
and we were not, till then, really over the lake, but had been
travelling over the deltas and converging on the lake margin
at a low angle. The identations of the lake shores were soon
identified on the map, and it was not difficult to pick out the
little cape in the middle of the western side of the north lake
which was my objective. At that point we turned due east
for the centre of the lake, twenty miles away, passing over
what appeared from 2,000 feet to be a pink and featureless
plain; but as we came down lower some of the surface
appeared to be cracked, with markings resembling those on
the surface of a baked apple. Close to the western shore, and
reaching down from the north to within a mile or so of our
position, there was a darker area, which appeared to be a
depression in the lake-bed, and, I believe, marked the course
of the waters from the Macumba at the north-western end
of the lake towards the centre or south-western portions.
Photographs taken of the lake surface on this flight showed
nothing, unless the shadow of the plane came into the field.
When I judged we were at the centre of the lake, I
dropped the two spears, one after the other, from a height
of about a thousand feet, through the floor of the fuselage.
It was difficult to follow their flight, and they both seemed
suddenly to disappear. We were unable to pick them out on
the surface; I thought they had sunk out of sight, but later
had good reason to doubt this. We were still somewhat in


awe of the lake, and did not risk coming down very low.
After dropping the spears we returned to the western shore,
and proceeded south, travelling over the lake and a few
miles in from its margin.
A little to the north of the Douglas Creek entrance, and
about five miles from the shore, we saw below us what at
first appeared to be two post-and-rail fences, perfectly
straight lines half a mile or so long, and crossing each other,
a most puzzling sight. They each had a small loop at the
shoreward end. There were the two lines of rails, with
blobs like posts at regular intervals. We dived down on
them, and found them to be the tracks of animals, probably
camels, the footprints sunk about a foot into mud that ap-
peared to be dry. The dragging of the feet over the surface
between the footprints had left the marks that had looked
like rails, while the pairs of footprints themselves had
merged into one and made the posts. The effect was exactly
that of a post-and-rail fence looked at obliquely from above.
I was sure we should see a dead animal at the end of the
tracks, but another dive showed that the loops were where
the animals had lain down when they could go no farther,
and then got up and retraced their steps exactly. The
tracks came in from the eastward, not from the shore. The
fact that animals could wander about on the surface was
our first intimation that the surface of the lake was com-
paratively solid. The tracks also indicated that water had
lain last, in this part, along the western side of the lake, as
the tracks had come from towards the centre.
Continuing on southerly, we soon discovered the reason
for the direction that the animals had tried to take. Below
us appeared a group of mound springs, eight distinct large
white patches in the pink surface, each with a dark pool of
water in the centre. These had been reported by Halligan,
but doubt had been expressed whether they were real
mound springs bringing up water from the Artesian Basin.
Sections by the South Australian Geological Survey based
on bore logs indicate that the depth of the water-bearing
sands on the western margin of the lake should be about
1,500 feet. Piarooka Bore, fourteen miles from the lake,
struck water at 1,200 feet, and Cooinchina, five miles from
the lake, at 1,250 feet. The mound springs are mostly right


at the margin of the Great Basin, where the depth to water
is only a few hundred feet. This margin is about at the
railway line on the south side of the lakes, where there is
a regular succession of springs, but from there it bears
away to the westward, far from the railway, and mound-
springs do not appear to approach within thirty miles of
the western side of the north lake. The recognized mound
springs of Lake Callabonna, however, occupy a precisely
similar position with regard to the edge of the basin. There
the bores are 2,000 feet deep, and cracks or faults in the
beds are supposed to provide a means of egress for the
artesian water. The mound springs of Lake Eyre may be
accounted for by a fault line running up the western side
of the lake. The Great Basin is an area of subsidence in
this south-western corner, and cracks, without any exten-
sive amount of actual displacement, may well have de-
veloped round the margin, and particularly near the lakes,
which are in the lowest areas.
There was no doubt in our minds that the pools of water
were mound springs. We flew low over them and found
them to consist of low mounds, rising only some six to ten
feet above the general level of the lake floor, very like the
Hergott Springs near Marree. There was a narrow lip
standing up about a foot round the margin of the clear blue
water of the pools, which were up to twenty feet across.
The mounds themselves were upwards of a hundred feet
across, with rough and crusted sides.
There were eight separate white areas, but closer inspec-
tion showed some of these areas to contain many small
springs, and not a single one. The lake surface round the
springs had a tessellated appearance, indicating again that
this western side of the lake had recently contained water.
The springs were probably in a slight depression. The
camel tracks were boggy only in the immediate neighbour-
hood of the springs; there was nothing to indicate whether
the ground was still boggy.
Twelve miles farther south, and a few miles off the
shore, four more mound springs were noted, but not
examined in detail. In the south-western corner of the lake
small sand-dunes were observed on its surface. The actual
margin of the lake was there difficult to determine.


Our course took us over the centre of the south lake. The
twenty miles between the lakes showed very barren, sandy
country, with low, scattered sand-hills trending east of
north. The south lake presented the same pink, featureless
appearance as the north lake. A bore stream three miles
long was seen running to the edge of it.
We soon picked up the railway after crossing Lake Eyre
South, and followed it to Marree.
I was not content to leave the area without a further
exploration of Lake Eyre. I wanted to look all over it. I was
still dissatisfied about the spears; and we had only seen the
centre and western side of the north lake. A telegram to
the Air Board resulted in petrol being supplied for another
flight, so that eventually we spent four hours in all over
the lake.
I had four more spears made in Marree, at the Govern-
ment boring-equipment stores. This time I used pieces of
three-inch water-piping a foot long, brought to a blunt
point, with six-foot wooden shafts, but instead of using
message bags, whose colour was not satisfactory, I bought
some sheeting for streamers, and attached a twenty-four-
foot strip of this white calico, six inches wide, to each spear.
The streamers were of such length, in order to give them a
chance of showing on the surface, even if the spears them-
selves sank out of sight. On two of the spears I screwed
seven-inch flanges, the flanges being at the top of the foot
length of iron piping; one carried a six-inch flange; and one
was left without a flange. They were rather awkward to
stow and handle, but I had a little practice in the plane on
the ground to find the best way of getting them away clear.
The other machine took a petrol tin full of sand to be
dropped in or on the lake.
The second flight over the lake started from Marree. We
made for Eyre’s Lookout, a cape in the middle of the
southern shore of Lake Eyre South, and were soon over the
point where, exactly eighty-nine years before, Eyre had
stood and viewed to the horizon the saline desolation that
turned him back.
From Eyre’s Lookout we took a northerly course across
the centre of the south lake and up the narrow peninsula in
the south end of the north lake, and on into its centre.


The south lake presented the same pink, featureless, and
waterless appearance as on the previous more westerly
crossing. The country between the lakes was barren, with
a few sand-hills trending east of north, and some scattered
acacias.
As we followed up the peninsula into the north lake, and
began to get more confidence and to fly lower, we saw that
the lake bed was marked with what appeared to be little
crescent-shaped mounds, thirty or forty feet long in places,
and then it became tessellated with small ridges. These
ridges were what we had taken for cracks when we saw
them on the first flight over the lake. They divided up the
surface just like mud cracks in a drying bog; but seen from
lower altitudes I found to my surprise that they were little
ridges and not cracks. Their true nature remained a
mystery till the ground expedition was made. The surface
of the lake was in part tessellated with these ridges, and in
part an even, pink, and smooth surface.
As we passed over the end of the peninsula, the surface
became even again. Ten miles off the end, two camel tracks
coming from the north-east were seen below. The footprints
were clear, as on a dry soil surface, not deeply sunken as in
mud. Little ridges on the surface stood out clearly again.
More camel tracks were seen to the west of our course.
After we left the camel tracks, the surface became pink and
featureless, without even the tessellation, and this was its
nature right to the centre, and in fact everywhere but round
the margins. It appeared to have surface drift sand on it,
and faint east-west lines were visible, resembling thin
patches of drift sand.
At the centre of the lake I dropped the first spear, with
flange, from a height of 900 feet. Its flight was easily fol-
lowed, and it stood with almost its full length out of the
ground and its mass of calico beside it. The flange did not
seem to have penetrated at all. The petrol tin of sand was
then thrown overboard. It burst on striking the surface,
making a small hole, from which radiated splashes of sand.
The appearance was just that of the burst of a small, non-
penetrating aerial bomb.
The petrol tin, the spear, and the camel pads supplied
ample evidence that near the centre, at any rate, the lake


had a very solid surface. We were tempted to try a landing;
but this would have been against my agreement with the
Air Force not to attempt any landings other than on pre-
pared landing grounds, except, of course, in an emergency.
We did the next best thing. Each plane dived down and
taxied along the surface for a short distance at high speed.
Dust was thrown up, and a well-defined track was made by
the landing-wheels. This surface was undoubtedly what is
known locally as ‘bull-dust’, a crumbly, dusty soil, under a
saline crust, ideal for a bull when he feels like throwing up
dust. It might have been difficult to take off again if we
had landed there.
Before leaving the centre I dropped the spear without
flange from 1,100 feet, and it stood out a good three feet
above the surface. We got photographs of one of the spears,
and the tracks of the landing-wheels.
Half an hour had been spent over the centre of the lake.
As the shores were invisible, and there were no reference
points on the pink expanse below, it was difficult to maintain
any exact position, and subsequent plotting showed that we
had drifted north-west during our manoeuvres. Just as we
were about to resume our journey northward, we saw a
group of mound springs below. These were ten miles from
the western shore and north of the middle of the lake. This
made the third group of mound springs noted. The third
spear was dropped from 700 feet, just north of the mound-
springs, and left standing in the lake.
From the mound springs we took a north-easterly course
for the top end of the lake. On the way, at about twelve
miles north of the centre of the lake, I let go the last spear
from 800 feet, and it, too, stood up, with its streamer beside
it, the shaft throwing a long shadow on the lake surface.
When close to the north end of the lake we turned south
and followed down the eastern shore, keeping a few miles in
from the margin. One of the branches of the Warburton
(lower Diamantina) was clearly seen entering the lake, and
then the delta of the Cooper. There were many wide bays
on the eastern side. The shores were lined with north-south
trending sand-hills almost destitute of vegetation. The
floors of the bays to which the streams had access were ol


dark clay, in contrast to which the sandy shores and capes
looked white. A photograph of the mouth of the Cooper
gave the impression of ice-floes in a dark sea. Streaks of
drift sand were again noted on the surface of the lake in
this region.
At about the middle of the eastern side, and south of the
mouth of the Cooper, the lake surface became tessellated
again; a good photograph was obtained at 200 feet. The
tessellation continued right to the south-eastern corner of
the lake, where the Frome enters.
The Frome River, with its well-wooded banks, was very
conspicuous, coming in from the northern Flinders to the
south.
This completed the flying over the lake. We had passed
right down the centre, and also followed the eastern and
western shores. We had found that there was no water in
the lake except for the groups of mound springs near the
western side; that the surface was quite flat, and there were
no islands; and that the surface of the southern half of the
lake was rather different from that of the northern, being
tessellated, or divided up by what appeared to be cracks,
making polygonal shapes with sides several feet long, but
instead of being cracks, the lines were little ridges, giving
the surface the appearance of a mass of great water-lily
leaves crowded together with upturned edges, or of small
and closely packed ice-floes. The whole surface was pinkish,
but that of the northern half seemed quite uniform, with-
out the ridges, and was shown to be dry and dusty. The
tessellation suggested some action of water and evaporation,
and the impression was conveyed that water lay last or
more frequently in the southern half of the lake, and away
from all the main stream entrances except that of the
Frome. This seemed reasonable, as the streams would form
deltas, and the deeper parts of the lake would be farthest
from them.
All the visions of deep waters, wildfowl, fishes, wooded
islands inhabited by strange creatures, were gone. There
was nothing but thousands of square miles of smooth, burn-
ing plain.


While the mechanics overhaul the aeroplanes at Marree,
we will take a motor trip out along the Birdsville Track, or
Queensland Road, to see some cattle that are coming in to
the railway from Queensland.
It is 360 miles from Marree to Birdsville, and at this time
of drought there was no feed on the track, only water at the
bores, which are distributed at about twenty-five-mile inter-
vals along the track. It is a three weeks’ journey the cattle
have to face, walking about fifteen miles a day in the heat
and sand, without food. It would seem to be a physical
impossibility. Yet these cattle arrive in Adelaide, in a
marketable condition, after finishing up their journey with
two days in the train. They are sold and slaughtered im-
mediately on arrival at the abattoirs, and often bring the
highest prices in the market. They may have come from a
hundred miles beyond Birdsville. They begin their journey
in the very top of condition, and apparently can hold it to
some extent for a month. This mob we are going to see
passed through Birdsville not long before we arrived there
on our way out. I thought I had never tasted such beef as
we had at the Birdsville Hotel. This was Queensland beef
at its best. It goes off somewhat before it reaches Adelaide,
but can still compete with the local supplies. The cattle that
we are setting out to see on the road were reported to be
about to arrive at the Clayton Bore, forty-five miles from
Marree, and three days from the end of their long walk.
The Birdsville Track goes over gibber flats, and between
low remnants of the dissected tableland, all the way to the
Cooper at the old Mission Station and the Kopperamanna
Bore. The first hundred miles of the track skirts the high
ground of the most northerly extension of the Flinders
Ranges. This peninsula of higher country runs to a point at
Kopperamanna, with Lake Eyre on its western side, and the
string of lakes, Gregory, Blanche, Callabonna, and Frome,
on the eastern. Sand-hills and sand-ridges surround it as it
extends northward into the Lake Eyre basin. Our flight
from Broken Hill had taken us right round it.
The track as far as the Cooper thus avoids the sand-hills
to the west. From the Cooper the track runs almost due
north for over a hundred miles, to Goyder’s Lagoon Bore,
through the delta country of stony flats and clay-pans and


watercourses, with some low, residual hills. The sand-ridges
lie both east and west of the track, which is almost parallel
to their trend. From Goyder’s Lagoon Bore the last hundred
miles to Birdsville is along the Diamantina; there are two
tracks, one on the north and one on the south side of the
river, going one way or the other round Goyder’s Lagoon
and through Sturt’s Stony Desert.
But we are only concerned at the moment with the first
forty-five miles of the track, to the Clayton.
The remnants of the older plain level are there only up to
fifty feet high, and quite flat on top, with a surface extent of
perhaps only a few acres. Layers of clear gypsum may be
seen in their sides, interbedded with the clay; these gypsum
beds probably represent former lake surfaces that existed
during the building up of the plain, and were buried by sub-
sequent sediments being washed in over them. They have
become exposed again in section by the present cycle of
erosion; great sheets of gypsum like panes of glass lie about
the sides of the hills.
About twenty miles out from Marree one comes upon the
Lake Harry Bore, standing in a waste of sand and gravel.
The water here rises into a big iron container, the purpose
of which was not obvious. All the other bores I have seen
merely have a pipe rising a few feet from the ground, with
a bend at the end, from which the water flows in its never
ceasing stream. At Lake Harry some piping leads away to
the remains of the old date-plantation, which proved a
failure under irrigation with bore water. The flow of this
bore is comparatively small, a paltry 120,000 gallons a day,
at a temperature of 116° F.
A little beyond the bore is Lake Harry, a flat some seven
miles long, surrounded by low, sandy banks. Water drains
into it during rains, but now it had the melancholy appear-
ance of a lake which, like most of the lakes in this country,
was not serving its purpose. There is a sense of something
lacking, and after a little consideration one realizes it is
water. You can run your car out on to Lake Harry, if you
want the experience of motoring on a lake. It interested me
very much at the time, as I wanted to examine the condition
of its surface, for I already had ideas about a motor excur-


sion on to Lake Eyre. The surface was of ‘bull dust,’ dry
and soft and crusty, rather heavy going for a car, but
apparently quite safe.
Eight miles beyond Lake Harry, the trees lining the Clay-
ton are seen crossing the track. A sand-hill has to be crossed
before the stream is reached; this will probably require
matting to be laid down. The driver will have a couple of
rolls in the car; if not, there is likely to be some hot work
scooping away sand when the car comes to a standstill.
The sand-hill crossed, the bore stream lies before us. The
bed of the river is occupied by a considerable stream, widen-
ing in places to fifty yards across, bordered with box-gums,
and with bulrushes and water-reeds standing green and
fresh in the water. It seems an Eden in the desert. On
following the river-bed upstream for a few hundred yards,
the bore is seen on the bank, a bent pipe discharging 800,000
gallons of hot water a day into the desert. In the winter
time, I am told, the bores along the Birdsville track can be
located from miles away by the white haze of fog above
them. The temperature of the water is 128° F. at the Clay-
ton Bore. The depth down to water is 1,704 feet, and the
water carries a quarter of an ounce of solid salts to the
gallon.
There, to the right of the track, is the drover’s plant. The
plant is his moving home, pack-horses or camels or motor-
vehicles with all the spare equipment, food, cooking utensils,
blankets, and so on, and often his wife and family. The plant
moves on each morning ahead of the slowly stringing stock
and makes camp at the evening halting-place.
In this case there are a couple of motor-trucks: It is
evening, and fires are burning, and a savoury smell,of cook-
ing meat is wafted around. A white woman; and several
black gins and a boy or two are moving about. A great
variety of clothing is hanging on ropes between the trees,
newly washed in the bore stream. They must be getting
ready for Marree. We are not genuine travellers, only
sightseers, so we do not go and make ourselves known; it
would probably embarrass them. The men have not arrived
yet, but they are close up.


Half a mile the other side of the stream we meet the
cattle, preceded by a man on a horse, and followed by several
mounted men. They move along as if in a dream, silently
and steadily, at an even, slow pace, the beasts in little
groups strung out in single file. They are weary, and seem
to have lost all interest in their surroundings. Not even
the smell, and then the sight, of the water and the greenery
appear to waken any response. They do not quicken their
pace, but walk slowly on into the broad sheet of water,
where they drink and then stand. There are five hundred of
them, but not a sound is heard. It is rather a depressing
sight, the arrival of these weary and far-travelled cattle at
the Clayton Bore, They might even have known it was their
last long journey. One had expected some animation and
excitement.
The stockmen, however, are in good heart. Though weary,
they are happy in the knowledge that their task is nearly
over and successfully accomplished. They say the cattle’s
feet are sore, but they have lost only three out of five
hundred in a month’s travel, three that became too footsore
to keep up with the mob. This, then, was the cause of their
moving so slowly and deliberately. In another three days the
cattle will be fed with hay at Marree, and rested till they can
be trucked. There is no feed at this bore; the cattle know
it; and do not even look round for feed. The plants growing
in the water are useless; but their long fast is nearly over.
These cattle may fetch anything up to £2O each in the
Adelaide market. The mob was worth perhaps £B,OOO.
Some of the bigger companies send hay out by motor-
truck or camel from Marree, to give the cattle a feed half-
way down the track, one feed in three weeks; but this is a
very expensive process. The hay would have to be brought
up by rail from at least as far south as Quom.
After this glimpse of the problems and hardships of the
cattle industry in the ‘Dead Heart of Australia,’ we get back
into our car, and in less than two hours are in the pub at
Marree, which the drovers will not see for another three
days, except in their dreams.
The aerial investigations ended with a flight down over
Lake Torrens, and thence to Quorn. The remainder of the


journey was over the settled areas to Adelaide, where I
landed, and the machines then returned to Melbourne.
Lake Torrens, the most southerly of the great horseshoe
of lakes, is a long narrow lake, 120 miles from north to
south, but only averaging about twenty miles wide. On the
map it looks like a northerly extension of Spencer Gulf, only
separated from the sea by a narrow strip of low-lying land.
The whole feature, the gulf and the lake, is regarded as a
good example of a rift valley, a narrow sunken area mar-
ginal to the Flinders and Mount Lofty Ranges to the east.
Only fifty miles separate Lake Eyre South and Lake Tor-
rens, and we were particularly anxious to have a look at the
country between them, the first break in the supposed great
horseshoe lake, discovered by Babbage and Warburton. We
found that a wide, barren, and almost imperceptible valley
connected the lakes, with a patch of clay-pans half-way
between them, from which watercourses ran in opposite
directions.
The general features of Take Torrens were the same as
those of all the other lakes. There was no water in it.
The surface of this lake was more patchy than that of
most of the others, in this respect resembling Lake Frome,
but there were no sand dunes oh Lake Torrens. The patchy
appearance is due to scattered areas of white salt. All the
lakes had this in common, that there were no defined water-
channels within their margins. This confirms the state-
ments of many local observers, that when there is any
water in the lakes it shifts about with the winds in very
shallow sheets, so that on one day there is water along the
shores, and the next day no water can be seen at all. I had
a reliable account of this wind effect from the manager of
a little copper mine, who lived for six years on the shores of
Pernatty Lagoon, one of the great system of salt lakes to
the west of Port Augusta, through which the Trans-Aus-
tralian Railway runs. The movement of the water under
the influence of the wind explains these white patches on
the lakes. The salts are deposited wherever the final
evaporation takes place. Lakes Frome and Torrens showed
this best, as they receive water more frequently than any
of the other lakes visited. The others had received prac-


tically no inflows during the past five years of drought,
and drift sand and dust had obscured this effect. The lake
surfaces are so vast that the flood of any particular stream
will not put an even layer of water on the lake, but make a
lake within a lake, a shifting patch of water wandering
about at the will of the winds.
A few small, sandy islands were seen at the north end of
Lake Torrens, towards the west side. At this end the white
patches showed the same tessellated appearance as was
seen so much on Lake Eyre,
Tracks of animals were noticed as far in as forty miles
from the north end of the lake, and one track crossed the
lake at the south end, near two springs in the lake.
After leaving the chain of little lakes at the south end of
Lake Torrens, we crossed the high, narrow ranges which
form the most southerly extension of the Flinders, and
landed at Quorn, which had suffered heavily from drought
during the past few years, and was all sand and heat.
The next day we left the ‘Never Never’ behind us on our
flight to Adelaide. We passed through low clouds and rain,
felt a keen, cold air, and saw green earth below us for the
first time in a fortnight’s flying. The red, parched, and
sandy wastes of the north seemed like a memory of another
land as we taxied over the green turf of Parafield and saw
our friends standing in a cool and blessed rain.


CHAPTER XIV
Lake Eyre from the Qround
'J'HE aerial investigation of Lake Eyre had shown that the
motor-car was likely to prove a better means of trans-
port over its surface than the boat. The more romantic
conceptions of the great lake had been definitely negatived,
but there still remained the question of the possible value
of any alkali or gypsum deposits that the lake might con-
tain, The hope was that there might be a concentration of
potash salts, similar to the great potash deposits of Stass-
furt in Germany. There was an inland sea in the region of
Stassfurt in past geological times, and the potash salts of
its waters had been buried and preserved. The past history
of Lake Eyre seemed comparable with that of parts of
Europe in Permian times, so might not Lake Eyre prove
another Stassfurt ?
A good case could be made out for an examination of the
surface of the lake from the ground, now that this seemed
practicable, and the South Australian Government, through
the support of the Mines Department and Geological Sur-
vey, agreed to assist my project of taking a motor-car up to
the lake.
The boring plants and equipment, though unused for
many years, were still stored at Marree, and the Engineer-
in-Chief’s Department arranged to lend me an old motor-
truck, still in good mechanical order, and two men, the
storeman, Charlie Kunoth, and his son Charlie. Marree is
only fifty miles from the lake, and in view of this, and in
order to minimize the expense, I made the modest estimate
of one week for the time required away from Marree. I was
well satisfied with what we accomplished in that week of
going from daylight to dark, in long summer days of cloud-
less skies and parching heat, and our success was largely
due to the wonderful energy of Charlie Kunoth, You could


not knock that man up by work, heat, and flies, while there
was still food and water; you could not even shake his
cheerful spirits and good humour. He had lived his life in
the country, and its discomforts were his natural environ-
ment.
Professor J. A. Prescott, of the Waite Agricultural
Research Institute, also came with us. His special study
was soils, and he was anxious to see the country, and to
obtain soil samples from the arid interior. We were a happy
little party.
The expedition was made in December 1929. When the
venture became known, I was inundated with warnings that
the surface of the lake was most treacherous; than a thin
crust covered a slurry that would engulf man or beast; that
we should sink without trace; that the sand-hills made it
impossible to approach the lake with a motor-car. This last
was a true difficulty, already anticipated. To meet it, I
proposed going north down the Frome River from Marree,
which is in the least sandy area, and as that direction would
be parallel to the trend of the sand-ridges, it would reduce
their powers of obstruction to a minimum.
The old Muloorina Station, on the Frome and only twenty
miles from Lake Eyre North, was chosen as the jumping-off
place. This station had long been a Government camel depot,
in charge of Charlie Kunoth, who had brought up his family
there. He had only just moved into Marree after the clos-
ing of the station and the shooting of the last of the
starving camels. The state of the country at that time
may be judged from the fact that, though there was plenty
of water, the camels had to be destroyed.
The first thirty miles along the Frome is through stony,
barren ground, with occasional ‘flat-tops.’ At some points
limestone of the Cretaceous beds is exposed, often crowded
with fossils of large bivalved shells' near the lake, but
none were found on the Muloorina track. Ammonites,
which are characteristic of the Cretaceous beds of the Great
Basin, do not occur near the lake, but west of Oodnadatta
they are found as large as cartwheels. The police have sent
some wonderful examples down to the South Australian
Museum.


The Lake Letty Bore delivers its stream into the channel
of the Frome. This keeps some large water-holes going in
the Frome, and at Muloorina there is an appreciable lake,
which survives the severest droughts, though evaporation
increases the natural salinity of the bore water, making it
scarcely drinkable. The water supports considerable vegeta-
tion on the banks, and provides a wonderful swimming pool;
with windmill and garden, the old station home looked quite
attractive, and it seemed a thousand pities that it was unoc-
cupied. A well supplied splendid drinking water, and we
filled our petrol drums with a hundred gallons.
A little of the old furniture still remained in the house,
including some brightly-coloured pictures of religious sub-
jects. One was a scene in the Holy Land, with some Israel-
ites of high station and fine apparel. Charlie Kunoth said
their native servants could never get over this; they could
not understand ‘why boss sit down longa bloody Afghan.’
We repacked our week’s supply of rations, had some lunch
in the old homestead, and were ready to move on in two
hours. There was no track, and no motors had ventured
beyond the station before. We decided to take only about
half our load at first, till we knew more of what the going
was to be like. We were most fortunate to have the
Kunoths, for in their wanderings after camels and stock
they knew every inch of the surrounding country and also,
to my surprise, I found that it was Kunoth who had taken
Halligan out to the lake in a camel buggy. We decided to
make for the same part of the lake, between the Frome
entrance and the neck connecting the north and south lakes,
where Halligan had had to abandon his boat project in 1922.
This spot was also the nearest point on the north lake to
Muloorina Station.
We crossed the Frome at the station to the west side, and
immediately our troubles began. The soft, pinkish-yellow
sand seemed to be everywhere. The only living vegetation
was a few scattered needle-bushes (a hakea). There had
been no grasses for years, and all the salt-bush was dead,
with the sand piled in mounds round the brambly butts.
The local people had developed a technique for travelling
in the sand, or perhaps it was Kunoth’s own patent. Strips


of coco-nut matting have their use, and even wire-netting,
but after a few times down wire-netting becomes quite use-
less; and when once the driving-wheels have burrowed
down into the sand, the matting cannot be placed under
them. Kunoth’s method consists in providing oneself with
two six-foot lengths of stout sheet iron, about a foot wide,
cut out of a length of iron troughing. When the motor
comes to a stop, the sand is dug away from in front of the
rear wheels in a sloping ditch backwards from the front
wheels, and the pieces of iron are pushed in and caught
under the rear tyres. The irons must be shorter than the
wheel-base of the vehicle in order to get them in between
the wheels. The engine is then started, the clutch put in,
and the wheels tear along the irons. The momentum may
carry the vehicle five, ten, fifty yards, when the process
starts all over again; progress is made in a series of jumps.
In a shadeless area, with a clear sky and burning sun, and
temperature well over a hundred, this is a very tough job.
When the vehicle hops off, the two watchers pick up the
heavy irons, often too hot to hold except with a cloth, owing
to the sun, and trudge wearily after. The irons sometimes
have a way of shooting backwards as the wheels leave
them, which is dangerous if you are shoving behind. There
are various types of motor-vehicles designed for travelling
over sand, efficient and expensive, but this is how the out-
back Australian, with his meagre means, meets his dif-
ficulties. It is hard work, but it can be done.
At one time the truck got off to a good start and went
bounding away over the saltbush mounds, bouncing and
crashing in a most alarming way, till I expected to see it go
to pieces at any moment and leave us stranded; but Charlie
Kunoth merely said, ‘lt’s a good job the makers can’t see
their truck now or they would want another £5OO for it!’
We had coco-nut matting with us too, and sometimes laid
it down ahead. There were two fifty-foot rolls, specially
sent down for us, by a Government department, from Ood-
nadatta. They had to be rolled up each time after use, and
were heavier than the irons to carry after the truck. These
mats were beautifully finished off with leather and had seen
better days. When we first unrolled them a carpet studded


with coloured confetti and rice-grains lay before our
astonished eyes; their last use had been at a wedding.
After twelve miles of sand and dead salt-bush we came to
a narrow lake, about two miles long by three hundred yards
wide, lying across our track. I decided to try the lorry on
this, after examining it on foot. The surface was typical
‘bull-dust/ loose sand with a pie-crust surface, due to the
cementing of the sand-grains by deposition of salts from the
evaporation of the water at the surface. The bull-dust is
rather like neve in snowfields, but not so cold; the sand was
three to six inches deep on the lake, and below was damp
clay full of gypsum crystals. The surface was decorated
with lines and rosettes of gypsum crystals, with some sheets
of gypsum several feet across and an inch or so thick. The
motor-truck made heavy going over this surface. It sank
down an inch or so in spite of loosely inflated balloon tyres,
but only reached the damp clay once or twice; when it did it
soon bored holes, and the irons had to be brought into use to
get it moving again. This surface proved later to be typical
of the marginal areas of Lake Eyre. The successful crossing
of this small lake we looked on as a good augury for the
future.
We made another few miles after crossing the lake and
camped at seven o’clock, having done seventeen miles in
four hours.
The sand-hills on this south-eastern side of the lake are
very old and quite fixed. They are composed largely of fine
gypsum, or gypseous sand, with only a veneer of loose sand
covering them; the sand is blown away in patches up to
fifty yards across.
We chose one of these patches to camp on, and got a little
firewood from some needle-bush a few hundred yards away,
the only thing standing above ground within sight. It was
a most desolate spot. Not a living thing had been seen all
day, and as night settled down the silence could be felt. In
the frozen wastes of the Antarctic silence seemed natural;
but here on this warm earth it was uncanny. When the
meal was finished, Charlie Kunoth said, ‘You don’t hear no
livin’ creature chirrupin’, do you?’ It was just what I had
been thinking. His remark was straight from the heart, for


the bushman is used to a hundred little voices in the night
in what the city dweller would call silence.
There is a thrill and fascination in all the deserts of the
world, but there is something more in the Lake Eyre basin,
an element of depression and fear. There is lifelessness in
all deserts, but not the vast deadness of this great extinct
lake.
All travellers in the Lake Eyre basin have felt this haunt-
ing sense of something more than the loneliness of the
desert; it has been a tradition among the aboriginals from
the most remote times. The last of the blacks are fast
dying out, but their legends live; the whole region, in-
cluding Lake Eyre and the Simpson Desert to the north of
it, is under the evil influence of the Kuddimukra. The views
on the exact nature of the Kuddimukra probably vary
among different tribes, but it is usually associated with
the fossil bones of the Diprotodon and other animals found
in the region. It is a djinn-like spirit which may appear in
the form of a giant snake with the head of a kangaroo,
likely to do much harm to the unwary traveller. The natives
have always shunned the lake, and they say that all who
have gone into the Simpson Desert have been claimed by
the Kuddimukra. It is highly probable that natives have
perished in the Simpson Desert, where I believe Leichhardt
rests, and this ban on the area would help to explain why no
remains of Leichhardt have ever been found by the natives.
The white man’s fear of Lake Eyre probably had its
foundation in the native legends. Animals were said to
have sunk out of sight in it, and the natives would say that
the Kuddimukra had drawn them down. All this made a
gloomy background for our venture. The myths seemed to
put on reality on that first night in this dark and silent
desolation.
We joked about the Kuddimukra, but I think it was a
little more than a joke with young Charlie, who had spent
the eighteen years of his life at Muloorina, and had been
brought up in an atmosphere of native legends. He told
how he had been riding a horse in the sand-hills looking for
camels, when the creature had shied away, and he caught a


glimpse of a great snake in the bushes; he let the horse bolt,
and camped far from the spot.
As the drums of petrol and water cooled during the night,
and the vapour in them condensed, their bulging ends closed
in with loud reports, breaking the silence in a startling way.
We said this was the Kuddimukra stealing our water, which
was life to us, but in spite of our jesting I believe we all
took a furtive look at the drums in the morning.
One of the large notice-boards which constitute a railway
station, close to Lake Eyre South, bears the name Curdi-
murka. Its significance will be lost in time, and some new
meaning given to it, probably connected with water, as is
the case with most of the native names in lower South
Australia. This is my Kuddimukra, according to the pro-
nunciation I have heard; Gregory spelt it Kadimakara.
We had brought out half of the petrol and water to this
camp; next morning we returned to Muloorina for the re-
mainder of the stores, and were back at the camp soon after
noon. The track was becoming beaten down and progress
was easier. We left some water and petrol at the camp site,
and pushed on northward to cover the last five miles to the
lake.
In due course we topped the last sand, or gypsum, ridge,
and the lake lay before us, fifty feet below, a grey, dry flat
extending northwards to the horizon.
We had brought our lorry to the lake; the next thing was
to find out whether it would be possible to run it on the
surface. It was late evening by then, and there was only
time to walk out and make a preliminary examination.
The surface near the shore was of fine, dry sand up to a
foot deep, with a salty, pink crust which the feet sank
through; below the sand there was damp gypseous clay. As
we advanced the sand became thinner, and the surface
firmer. This bull-dust margin was afterwards found to be
general, as far as we saw, round the lake. At a mile and a
half out, we saw before us what we took to be a long sand-
ridge dotted with bushes, in the nature of an island. This
was unexpected, but indicated that there were some
features on the lake not noticed from the air, and we did
not discover the deception till next day. The sand-ridge


suggested dry conditions, and we returned to the shore in
high hopes; it looked as though the lorry should travel on
the surface. We got the lorry down the bank and made
camp on the lake-side.
Before turning in we sank a hole 9 ft. 6 in. deep 200 yards
from the shore; it was in damp gypseous clay all the way
below the top foot of dry sand. Water-level rose in the hole
to 3 ft. 5 in. below the surface; the water was saturated
brine. The hole did not cave in, but a bar could be driven
down by hand for a full six feet anywhere within a mile of
the shore.
My hand-boring kit consisted of a four-inch post-hole
borer of a very efficient pattern, with rods of one-inch iron
piping to give a length of thirty feet. I also had a two-inch
wood auger prepared for use with the rods, but I found the
post-hole borer much quicker, and more efficient. The
twelve-inch barrel could bring up a good sample.
The surface looked rather heavier going than that of the
little lake we had crossed on the way, but it seemed that
the truck should do it, so we started off next morning with
the full load, straight ahead into the lake; we could just
keep moving in bottom gear. After the first hundred yards
we gave a cheer, and thought that success was assured, but
at a quarter of a mile the vehicle gradually came to a stop,
and the rear wheels dug themselves in. We had to unload,
and use the irons to get out. We left a dump of water and
petrol there, and went on with a lighter load.
I walked ahead with a thin six-foot bar, testing the sur-
face, and the truck followed in a series of short runs. When
the wheels got through the sand into the clay there was
difficulty, but this only happened a few times.
At a mile from the shore, the surface became very saline,
damp, and firmer, and at a mile and a half a halt was called,
while I went ahead to examine the sand-hill and bushes.
Another half-mile, and the main problems were settled once
and for all. The sand-ridge flattened down to a plain as I
approached, and a crust of salt was disclosed, stretching to
the horizon. We had been tricked again by our old friend
the mirage. The salt-crust was only an inch thick at its
margin, covering damp clay full of gypsum crystals. This


'\^S'r^}S^' r X< : - 1 I i T'' 1 il' ■ 1, H "T'
'
• . ■ - mw *%
§pi||P . <“ - ■ ■■■■ , ’* W" ’■i v •■ - ■"Sj
SUMHK t. t l 1
The South End of Lake Eyre North.


--'
pil
The buckled Salt Crust on Lake Eyre.


crust is buckled up along lines several feet in length,
dividing the surface up into polygons. The lines look like
large sun cracks in clay, but the cracks are actually ridges
made up of slabs of salt facing each other like roofing slates
propped up together in pairs. Within the area enclosed by
these lines of tilted slabs the crust is quite smooth; the
slabs rise to nine inches or so above the surface. Most of
them do not actually lean against each other, but project
rigidly towards each other, with a space between, their
ends being cemented to the rest of the crust by the crystal-
lization of salt in the cracks and angles formed. The slabs
are difficult to stamp down with the foot. Where the crust
of salt was found to be a foot or more thick, it was still
only the top inch or so that was buckled up, with solid salt
in the cracks beneath the slabs. I have since found that a
buckling of the salt-crust is known on other salt lakes in
South Australia, and has been observed in Egypt. The
explanation seems to lie in the attempted lateral extension
of the surface by further crystallization.
Drift sand and dust had coloured the surface pink, though
the salt was white underneath the surface.
This buckling of a salt-crust, then, was the explanation of
the tessellated surfaces seen on all the lakes from the air.
The pink colour of the salt had made the lake surface ex-
tremely hard to differentiate from the surrounding sandy
country, a difficulty increased by the absence of vegetation
on both at the time of the aerial reconnaissance, but the
shores of the lake were found to be very distinctly defined
on the ground. At this southern end there were banks of
seed gypsum and sand from fifty to seventy feet high along
the margins, and the rolling sand-hills behind them were in
sharp contrast with the smooth, flat lake surface.
The appearance of sand-hills or islands in the lake, seen
from the shore, is due to the miraging up of the salt-crust.
The bushes are the dark shadows under the upturned slabs,
enlarged and distorted by the mirage effect.
The truck was now a mile and a half from the shore, at
the end of the crusty sand and the beginning of the salt-
crust, from which it was separated by a hundred yards of
damp clay. There was too much risk in trying to run the


truck on the damp surface, so we turned, keeping the salt-
crust close on the right. At first it was thought that this
crust might be only a salty delta from the Frome River
entering to the eastward, and that we might skirt round it
and continue our way in towards the centre of the lake, but
we soon found that the salt followed the smoothed-out
contours of the shore to a distance varying from half a mile
to four miles from it.
The next plan was to go round the shore to the thirty-
mile long peninsula that extends into the lake from the
south end, over which I had flown on the way to the centre,
and to follow along its eastern side, keeping on the margin
of the damp area, which experience soon showed was the
best zone for travel. Movement outside the lake bed was im-
possible, owing to the sand-hills running at right angles
to the shore.
We passed the channel connecting the north lake with the
south, and were then forced in close to the shore at a small
peninsula on the west side of the bay containing this
channel.
We had by now only made four miles, but had learnt a lot
about the lake. It had been necessary to proceed with ex-
treme caution, as there was a considerable risk of bogging
the truck.
This was a very hot day and there was no shade, but we
had plenty of water and were able to indulge ourselves. The
temperature was just over 100, but there were southerly
breezes, which was very fortunate, for if it had been calm
weather conditions would have become almost unbearable
on the lake, with the glare, salt, and absence of shade.
At noon we rigged up some shade with a large tent fly,
and had a meal. After the exertions of the past two days,
added to walking since sunrise in the heat, digging, loading,
and unloading, together with a certain amount of mental
anxiety, to lie down in the grateful shade was too great a
temptation. Charlie Kunoth and young Charlie offered to go
back on the tracks and relay the stores left at the first bog
at the lakeside, and I let them do it, and lay down and went
to sleep, thinking, with some remorse, ‘You're a better man
than I am, Gunga Din.’


A rest put things right again, and before the lorry re-
turned, Prescott and I had put down a hole 13 ft. 6 in., half
a mile from the shore. The salt-crust was there one and a
half inches thick, and the remainder of the hole was in
gypseous clay, alternating in colour from blue to pink every
few feet.
Immediately below the salt-crust everywhere we found a
thin layer, a quarter of an inch thick at most, of slime,
resembling black paint, which rapidly became brown on
exposure to the air, and soon turned to a mass of gypsum
and salt crystals on drying. The black colour was shown
to be due to sulphide of iron.
The under-side of the salt-crust was usually a dirty green
colour, from minute forms of organic life. The reduction
of iron salts is probably due to anaerobic bacteria liberating
sulphuretted hydrogen. There were also, more rarely,
patches of bright pink on the under-side of the salt-crust,
due to minute organisms.
After standing all night the water in the bore rose to
within a few inches of the surface. Like all the holes we
bored in the lake this one stood without caving, but the clay
was very wet.
The shore at this camp consisted of abrupt cliffs of
gypsum, fifty feet high. Gypsum dunes are common round
many lakes in South Australia; the small crystals, called
seed gypsum, are blown off the lakes and collect into dunes,
like sand-grains along a sea-shore.
In holes in the small cliffs I found martens living. They
were twenty miles from water, but I have since learnt that
these birds are known to exist without it.
By noon we had established the zones of the shore, a
sandy, gypseous foreshore varying in width from half a
mile up to several miles, a narrow strip of damp clay, and
then the salt-crust extending almost to the far shore a
hundred miles away, as the aerial observations had shown.
There is probably a slight fall from the shore to the salt-
crust, which explains why the salt does not come right in,
but we had no means of taking precise levels.
In spite of the comparative coolness, the atmosphere was
so dry that evaporation was going on at the rate of one and


a half inches a day, according- to our measurements on a
jam-tin left at this camp.
We slept on the lake that night, and next morning started
with the full load on a definite plan, which was to keep close
to the salt-crust and work northwards. At times we got too
far into the damp clay and had to use the irons, sometimes
we sank in the gypseous sand and had to lay the mats.
Efforts to make any northing proved futile. The damp clay
strip everywhere prevented us from getting- on to the salt-
crust, and the latter refused to recede from the shore.
At one cape we were forced close in to the shore, and
tried a run on the land surface, but it was altogether too
‘bull-dusty,’ and heavier than the lake surface. We saw the
skeletons of three horses near the shore at the point; they
had walked across from an island in the next bay. There
was some samphire, and other green bushes, along the
banks here; evidently some rain had recently fallen.
We tried to go round the east side of the island, but found
it too damp, and were compelled to cut across the bay to the
south side of the island, which we reached at noon, having
made eleven miles during the morning. The island was a
mile long and rose to a height of seventy feet. It was en-
tirely composed of seed gypsum, blown up from the lake
bed in dune formation; there were some green shrubs on
it, too.
We camped just off the island, and then had a run with
the empty truck up the west side of it, and partly on it, and
finally ran for a mile to the north of it, when we again came
to the edge of the bull-dust and the damp saline clay. We
left the truck and proceeded on foot. The clay belt was here
three-quarters of a mile wide; at the far side of it there
were scattered pancakes of salt, probably patches left after
the partial solution of the salt-crust during the recent rains
in those parts, and subsequent shifting of the water by
wind. The patches of salt were like ice-floes in polar seas.
Soon the solid salt-crust was come upon; we walked another
mile out on it and found it thickened from one to two and
a half inches, with wet clay and flour gypsum below.
On return to the truck we sank a 4 ft. 6 in. hole. The clay
was full of gypsum crystals of the type common in the clay


of all the South Australian salt lakes, about the size of a
penny, and comparatively flat, with broad crystal faces
meeting in thin edges, which cut the hands when scooping
in the mud, and give trouble to horses’ feet in the bogs.
At 4 ft. 6 in. the borer struck a hard impenetrable sur-
face, probably a bed of dolomite.
At the island camp we put down a six-foot bore-hole, at a
hundred yards off the island. The sand was there two feet
deep, with very stiff clay below. The southerly wind became
quite cold at night, and we were glad to crawl under the
tarpaulins.
I now decided that no useful purpose would be served by
pushing on, for we had to get back to Marree within the
week. I had hoped to motor at a reasonable speed over the
fifty miles of lake to the centre and recover my spears.
Now all hope of reaching the centre of the lake by truck
had to be abandoned; I would not risk putting the truck on
the damp clay guarding the salt-crust. This clay
could be walked over practically dry-shod, and the truck
would not have sunk in it, but it might well have become
immovable, and we had no other power available to help
to extricate it, such as a second vehicle or horses. If we had
reached the end of the peninsula it is certain that the same
difficulty would have confronted us, and there was every
reason to believe that the coast of the lake would every-
where be the same as it had been for the past eighteen
miles. A walk into the lake on foot would be the most
profitable way to spend the time, and the cape at the last
camp was the best point from which to start.
The next morning we soon reached the first lake camp
site again, travelling in our old tracks in top gear, and be-
fore noon young Charlie and I had started out into the lake.
The walk was a remarkable experience. As we left the
camp near the shore the truck gradually rose on stilts, our
companions stretched skywards as they moved about, and
soon all was lost, even the shore line and the cliffs of
gypsum, in waving mirage. We were in the centre of a pink
disk; in places the scene was exactly like the frozen sea of
the polar regions when it is in the form of pancake ice. The
irregular polygons of salt, bounded by their buckled edges,


resembled closely packed ice-floes with their rims turned up
by contact and movement.
We walked rapidly over the smooth, hard surface, halting
at regular half-hour intervals to rest, and make a hole in the
crust. At two miles the salt was seven inches thick; at three
miles the salt-crust disappeared, and we entered a damp,
sandy belt a mile wide running north-east-south-west. This
was of the nature of a channel in the lake, though there was
no obvious depression. It was probably a distributary of the
Frome, and possibly at a higher level than most ,of the lake
floor; the sand in it was comparatively coarse.
In this strip we saw a solitary dead needle-bush lying, a
small tree-stem about nine feet long, with a few limbs, and
round it were the skeletons of fifteen rabbits, which had
obviously come out on to the lake in search of water, and
congregated to die around the only visible object on the
surface. The rabbits, usually so general in any part of Aus-
tralia, had died out completely in the region of the lake;
their warrens, partly obscured by drift sand, were a great
menace to our motor truck.
We made a two-foot hole in this sandy belt, at the tree
stump; it was in coarse sand, and soon filled with brine.
There was no mud, and the bar could not be pushed down;
the stump had obviously been carried out by a flood.
At four miles the salt-crust thickened again to three and
a half inches. At six miles it was eight inches, with damp
seed gypsum and white gypsum slush below, no sand or
clay; the bar was pushed down four feet. At eight miles the
crust measured twelve inches through, with loose salt
crystals below in brine, followed by seed gypsum like coarse
sand. The brine filled up the hole to three inches from the
surface. The bar could only be forced down three feet; a
foetid odour rose from the hole.
We made our final halt at twelve miles, and sank the last
hole. The salt was seventeen inches thick, and would have
carried a locomotive; salt is a most tough and difficult
material to dig through, much more so than one would ex-
pect. At the last hole gypsum in a loose aggregate of small
crystals underlay the salt.


In our twelve-mile walk the appearance of the salt-crust
had varied. Sometimes it was tessellated, with cracks and
upturned slabs, in other places it was quite smooth. Else-
where it would show small areas of disturbance in an other-
wise smooth surface; the end of our walk was such a place.
Here the lines making the tessellation were only a few feet
long, and were merely light-coloured marks on a level sur-
face; but scattered about were patches of dark red, dirty
salt up to thirty feet across and fifty to a hundred yards
apart, all corrugated with concentric rings of upturned
edges. The darker colour was due to the projecting slabs
catching the red dust. These areas seemed to be slight de-
pressions; water had flowed into them from all sides, over
the surface, as was shown by the dry froth left behind by
recent water, probably rainfall driven about by the south-
west wind. Where the surface was level the tilted slabs had
been brought down by partial solution. There can never be
enough water to dissolve the whole of the salt; as it takes
six inches of water to dissolve one inch of salt, a depth of
8 ft. 6 in. would be required to dissolve this seventeen-inch
crust.
A curious phenomenon was noted on the way out. The
surface ahead of us as we walked had all the time looked
darker than that behind, but this darker area continually
receded before us. This was found to be due to the countless
little pimples on the surface of the salt, which collected dust
on the windward and southern side. They were reddish on
that side, and much lighter coloured on the other, so that at
a few yards from the observer the whole surface had a
different hue in the two directions. The prevailing wind at
the south end of the lake is south-south-west, which is the
direction of the sand-hills on the shores there. At the turn-
ing-point the salt-crust still extended to the horizon, and
probably stretched another eighty miles to the north.
Darkness descended on us during the return. I had
dragged the bar on the way out, to leave a trail and make
the return easier, but this was very faint on the hard sur-
face, and was lost before dark. We had to use the compass
constantly on the way out to keep good direction, and a
trail would have saved some time on the return. As the


compass was non-luminous, and matches were scarce, we
were in some difficulty for a while during twilight, but when
once the stars came out these troubles disappeared.
At last we saw a beacon fire on the sand-hills behind the
camp, dead ahead, lighted by our mates to guide us in. I
had omitted to give any indication as to when we should be
back, and I fancy Charlie Kunoth did not even at that stage
think we would be able to go very far.
While we were away they had put a bore down 18 ft. 7 in.
near the camp; at that depth a hard bed was met which the
tool refused to bore. It was dolomite, a magnesian lime-
stone. Beneath the salt-crust there were alternate beds of
red and blue clay, blue for the first 2 ft. 6 in., then red for
a foot, followed by a foot of blue, then 7 ft. 6 in. of red, and
6 ft. 6 in. of blue. At thirteen feet gas rose up in the hole;
it could be heard bubbling up, but would not ignite at the
surface. The colour of the clay depends on the degree of
oxidation of the iron salts, and is related to the conditions
at the time of deposition. There were no large gypsum
crystals in this clay. The hole filled with brine to within
five inches of the surface.
That night we unrolled our swags for the last time to lie
down on Lake Eyre, and I could not have wished for a better
bed. Next morning we returned to the starting-point, and
were soon off the lake. We had travelled just forty miles on
its surface in the truck.
On the way back to Muloorina we visited the narrow neck
connecting the north and south lakes. It was only about
150 yards across at its narrowest part, and in it lay the
skeletons of seven dead camels. The bed of the channel
was similar to the coastal zone of the main lake, a bull-dust
surface, quite dry; low sand-hills border the neck on both
sides. An animal might get bogged there after rains, but at
that time we could have taken the truck across. It did not
appear that these camels had been bogged, unless they had
been so weak at the time of their death as to be scarcely
able to walk.
This neck must be used considerably by stock in the
country, when there is any stock, for to reach the land on
the other side of it, 150 yards away, without walking across


would mean a journey of 120 miles round the south lake, or
270 miles round the north lake. As far as can be ascertained
no one has ever seen water in the channel.
There are many stories of the countless bullocks and
sheep that have been engulfed in the bogs of the neck. It
is more probable that the neck and the lakes have been
blamed for the loss of many of the stock that have merely
perished from the drought. There is a story that a man was
seen wildly flogging the mud of the channel with a bullock
whip. When they asked him what he was doing he only
flogged the more, and exhorted his hearers to ‘hit where you
see bubbles.’ In due course a bullock team emerged on the
other side.
We bored a hole in the middle of the crossing. There
were four inches of dry sand on top, then 2 ft. 6 in. of blue
pug, followed by coarse water-bearing sand. Further boring
was impossible owing to the caving of the saturated sand;
this was the only hole that did not stand without caving.
The bar was pushed down five feet, at which depth it
entered blue clay again. Water-level stood at three feet
below the surface. The water, as in all the holes, was
saturated brine. A little spilt on the clothing soon became
a white splash like whitewash, and the sample bottles, after
they were filled, became coated with shiny crystals as soon
as they dried on the outside. When there is any water in
any part of the lake it can never be potable, owing to the
salt that it must dissolve at once.
We had a last meal on our first camping-ground on the
bare patch in the sand-hills. These bare patches are tessel-
lated with markings just like parts of the salt-crust of the
lake. The markings are not cracks, but no doubt were at
one time. They are lines of lighter colour than the rest
of the brown surface, and indicate where cracks have be-
come filled in, partly with recrystallized salts from the sur-
rounding gypseous clay.
We sank a twenty-foot hole at the camp site, in fine
yellow gypseous sand all the way. The first three feet was
quite dry, but below that the material was slightly damp;
no water was struck. This place was some fifty feet above
lake-level.


We made a last hole in the narrow lake first crossed on
the way out, where three inches of bull-dust overlay yellow
and blue clay down to six feet, when water-bearing gravel
was entered. The water rose a couple of feet.
A night spent at Muloorina Station ended the motor
venture to Lake Eyre.
Had we been able to get the truck on to the salt-crust,
the centre of the lake could easily have been reached. An
attempt to run across the damp clay patch on to the salt
might have been successful with the empty truck; there was
no bog, and boots were not even muddied. A lighter vehicle
would have been better, but might not have stood up to the
journey out. Motor-cycles or pedal bicycles would have
solved the difficulty, and the latter could easily have been
taken, but it is unlikely that any further information of im-
portance would have been obtained. The examination of
the shores, and the twelve-milk walk out, together with the
aerial photographs and observations, which could now be
better interpreted, provide complete data on the condition
of the lake after dry seasons.
The animal life round the lake in times of drought is
worthy of remark. The larger animals had all migrated or
died out at the time of my visit, and only those remained
that could live without water. Horse, camel, emu, and kan-
garoo tracks were seen on the lake surface, and some of
their skeletons, but no signs of the living animals. On the
shore we saw some comparatively recent wild dog and fox
tracks; these scavengers had probably survived on the re-
mains of their superiors. The rabbits were entirely gone.
One magpie and one hawk at the first camp, and the mar-
tens at one place on the lake shore, made up the complete
tale of bird life.
By an interesting paradox, life was most abundant on the
surface of the lake itself. In the marginal area there were
numerous colonies of small black ants; they were mainly
on the bull-dust surface, but some were found living round
the slabs on the salt-crust, up to four miles from the shore.
They built small crater-like hills, wider at the top than at
the centre, like cotton reels stood on end. A cream-coloured
lizard, up to nine inches long, was also quite common; its


protective colouring was so perfect that it would never have
been discovered if it had not moved. This lizard burrowed
into the drier sand, and under the tilted salty crust. The
lizards’ stomachs were full of ants, but what the ants lived
on was not clear; they were identified as a harvesting
species, but the harvests on Lake Eyre appeared likely to be
very meagre. Seed might blow on to the lake from the
shores, but this would seem too precarious a means of live-
lihood for such large numbers. Possibly the green and red
microorganisms occurring in the salt provided their means
of subsistence. The presence of ants so far out on the lake
indicated the absence of water for a long time.
The analysis of the salt and the brine from the bores
gave very disappointing results from the point of view of
the quest for potash. The salt-crust proved to be made up
of 95 per cent, of common salt, with a notable amount of
gypsum and very small amounts of chloride of lime, mag-
nesia, and potash. The deficiency, and not the quantity, of
potash provided the most interesting problem. The richest
salt specimen only contained 0.18 per cent, of potassium.
The salt from the evaporation of sea-water contains 1 per
cent, of potassium, or six times as much as the Lake Eyre
salt. In other respects, the Lake Eyre salts, like those of
most inland saline lakes, bear a close resemblance to sea-
water salt. This resemblance has led to the theory known
as the cyclic salt theory, to explain the great accumulations
of salt in such lakes. According to this theory the origin of
the salt is in the small drops of spray blown up on the sur-
face of the seas. When this spray evaporates minute par-
ticles of salt are left in the air, which, like fine dust, may
be carried for unlimited distances by the winds, finally
either falling again into the sea or being deposited on the
land. A system of inland drainage will gradually con-
centrate this salt in the lakes of the system, and, when
evaporation is high, deposits of salt will occur. But what,
then, becomes of the potash? I would suggest that this is
largely adsorbed by the soil, which shows a much greater
affinity for potash than soda, and particularly so in arid
regions. The plants, too, help to fix the potash, while the
salt and gypsum go on to the lakes.


The brines from the lake contained up to fifty-three
ounces of salt to the gallon, of which from 0.1 to 0.5 per
cent, was potassium.
We were able to examine only the top eighteen feet of the
lake deposits. It would still be of interest to put down a
bore on the lake for hundreds of feet, to get the full depth
of the deposits, and to discover if there are any other inter-
bedded layers of salts, where possibly potash might have
been preserved under conditions different from those of
to-day.
A final word on the possibility of any considerable quan-
tity of water ever lying in the lake. The catchment area is
some 450,000 square miles, over which there is an average
rainfall of about ten inches. Assuming a run-off of 5 per
cent., a very high figure considering the aridity and sandy
nature of the catchment, the water received by the lakes
annually would cover their 4,000 square miles to a depth
of fifty-six inches. The run-off is more likely to be 1 per
cent.; many of the big rivers,'particularly the Cooper and
Daimantina, do not reach the lake for years on end; and,
finally, the evaporation is a hundred inches a year. Thus it
is obvious that the lakes cannot carry any permanent water,
a conclusion that could have been arrived at without ever
going near them, except for the possibility of their being
very far below sea-level towards the centre, and fed by the
great artesian sources from below, an idea which had never
been put forward.
What actually happens is, that when a flood does reach
the lake down one of the rivers, the waters spread out in the
immediate vicinity to a depth of a few inches, and in a
matter of weeks at most they are evaporated. The whole of
the lake floor could never be covered at one time, for one
reason because the rivers never run all at the same time,
and then their floods only last for periods measured in days.
The drought broke a few weeks after our return from the
lake, and the Diamantina ran a record flood, and the Frome
a moderate one. In March of the following year young
Charlie went out to the scene of our adventures, and found
that the Frome had wetted the surface for about a mile
from its mouth, but the water had all gone; our motor


tracks were still as we left them. There was no indication
of the Diamantina water, though that river was said to
have been running into the lake for weeks. No water had
passed through the neck connecting the lakes. At that time
water could be seen in Lake Eyre South, from the railway
line, extending to the horizon, and this is not an uncommon
sight. I saw it in June 1930 and again in June 1931; but I
am still inclined to think that the same arguments apply to
the south lake as to the north, in a modified form. The
south lake receives inflows only from the south, the Wil-
louran Ranges, by short creeks that probably run almost
every year, so that the southern side of. this lake must
often be covered, though it is unlikely that the waters ex-
tend right across it.
Exactly ten years later I revisited this part of the Lake,
on the return from the Simpson Desert Expedition, and
there on the surface were our motor tracks, still plainly
visible and so clear that they could be photographed.


CHAPTER XV
By Camel through the Western
MacDonnell Ranges
'J'HE journey now to be described was made in May and
June of 1930. The drought had broken at the end of
1929, and the country was as its best.
Water could be seen from the railway in Lake Eyre
South, a brown sheet beginning about a mile from the shore,
and stretching to the horizon. The western part of the
visible portion of the lake was dry, and the water looked
very shallow. On the return journey, exactly one month
later, no water was to be seen.
There was already a wonderful change from the condi-
tions of six months before, when the ground expedition to
Lake Eyre North was made. Now considerable green her-
bage was to be seen, mainly in the small clay-pans, flat clay-
floored areas lying at a slightly lower level and scattered
about on the stony plains. The water drains to these
patches to form miniature shallow lakes, carrying the seeds
with it, and there the herbage springs up as if by magic.
The most conspicuous and most useful plant is the annual
salt-bush. This is an excellent fodder; it springs up in the
rains, but only grows to about a foot or so in height, and
dies with the season.
The ‘buck’ salt-bush, the principal sheep fodder of nor-
thern South Australia, has been destroyed in the Lake Eyre
region by drought and oyer-stocking. It appears to be quite
dead and it is doubtful whether it will ever regenerate. In
the Flinders Ranges and upper north (as distinct from the
far north) of South Australia there are large areas where
the same thing has happened, mainly through over-stock-
ing, Droughts cannot be the sole cause, for conditions over
periods of years are uniform, and the salt-bush would never


have become established if drought were its only enemy. At
present the regeneration of pastoral areas which have ‘gone
back’ so far under human settlement that vegetation has
almost disappeared is the subject of considerable research
in South Australia.
Oodnadatta is about the northern limit of salt-bush.
Beyond that it only occurs in a few patches in valleys in
the Macdonnell Ranges, and not at all north of the ranges.
The perennial types of salt-bush grow to six feet in height,
in dense bushes up to ten feet thick. Its foliage consists of
small, flatfish, blue-grey succulent leaves. Its taste is
slightly salty, but sheep do splendidly on it, and salt-bush
mutton is thought to be of the best. It is typical of the
southern arid regions to the south of the centre of the
continent, but does not grow in the regions of summer rains
and more tropical conditions. It belongs to the sheep
country and not to the cattle country.
The rains had not affected the Oodnadatta country, which
still looked as dry as ever. The gibber plains were still a
desolation, up to the Finke, and the Depot Sandhills beyond
the river were in their usual state of barren redness; but
there had been rain in the centre, and from Deep Well
onwards there were signs of its effects in patches of grass
where water had lain. This, I found, was what was usually
meant by the grass being everywhere knee-deep; at no time
are there continuous meadows of grass as seen in countries
of good rainfall. In this country, where the usual carrying
capacity is one beast to the square mile, the country is
said to be ‘in good heart’ when patches of grasses may be
found at hundred-yard or half-mile intervals in lower areas
or along the banks of rivers. One has entirely to readjust
one’s ideas as to what ‘good country’ looks like; the
standards are low.
This journey was to be my first experience of Australian
camels. I soon found that my past experience of Arab
camels in the Sudan was of very little use, for the equip-
ment and methods in Australia were entirely different. A
visit to Charlie Sadaddin showed me the limits of my
knowledge, and my Arabic was of no use for an Afghan who
spoke Hindustani. However, Sadaddin accepted me as a


sahib, and I was flattered by his manner. He ended each
sentence of his broken English with the word gentleman.
When I asked him about the camel saddles he said the pat-
tern was brought from India. When I said I thought the
Arab saddle more comfortable than the Indian he said, with
the utmost disgust, ‘Arab fashion no bloody good, gentle-
man.’
With an Arab saddle, or ‘maklufa,’ the rider sits in front
of the hump, in a small basin-shaped depression in the
framework. The legs hang down over the edge of this; they
may be crossed, with one foot on each side of the camel’s
neck, which is just within reach, thus giving a little support
to the feet, which otherwise merely dangle. There is no
stirrup, and the position is most insecure. If the camel bolts
or plays up, the rider can only hang on to the saddle by
gripping it with both hands. A small post rises up in front
of the seat, between the legs, but this always seemed to
me more of a menace than a help.
The Arab reins consist of a single piece of line connected
to a halter on the animal’s head. The animal is trained to go
to right or left as the hand is moved out one way or the
other, but it is impossible to exercise any real control with
this head-line. The whole management of the camel de-
pends on its training and its temper, which is usually docile,
for the average Arab camel lives on the border-line of star-
vation and is quite devoid of spirit. Two hundred pounds is
regarded as a fair load for the hired Arab camel, and is the
regulation Government load. The descendants of the Indian
camels brought to Australia are very much stronger and
sturdier; they are better fed and cared for, and sore backs
are almost unknown. Occasional chafing of camels’ backs is
always liable to occur, but is soon cured with care. I have
often rejected a dozen camels in succession offered for hire
in the Sudan on account of the state of their backs, but
among the few camels I have used in Australia I have never
seen any sores.
The Australian camel’s normal load is 500 lb., and loads
up to half a ton are not infrequent. I have heard of four
bales of wool, of over 360 lb. weight each, being carried by
one camel, but this must be exceptional.


The main structure of the riding-saddle is the same as
for all camel saddles, that is, a pair of forks over the back,
one in front and one behind the hump, connected by hori-
zontal bars, but in the Indian and Australian form there is
a further extension behind the rearmost fork, resting on the
animal’s back, and with a turned-up end, forming a rather
deep and narrow gully between it and the rear fork. The
forks themselves have a fairly high U-shaped iron bar
across their tops. The rider sits in this depression astride
the camel, with his feet in ordinary stirrups. Instead of
being at the front end of the camel, he is sitting right over
its tail. Personal gear or other baggage is laid across the
animal’s back, between the forks, so that the additional
load is in front of the rider. The knees go under the ends
of the baggage, and as the rider has the help of the stirrups,
the iron framework behind, and the load in front, the camel
cannot unseat him without lying down and rolling.
Then the control is much greater. All the animals are
fitted with nose-pegs, short hardwood pegs with a wide base
the size of a penny, and a sharp conical point with a shoulder
at the other end. The nostril is pierced at one side through
the loose flesh and the peg pushed through from the inside,
so that the shaft projects, and a string can be tied to it. This
string consists of a doubled piece of light twine twisted up
to a single cord about a foot long, and is attached to the
nose-peg by a slip-knot through the loop of the doubled
strands. A light line is attached to the string, but instead
of the single line of the Arab it is a doubled line like a
horse’s reins, one end passing each side of the neck. A
single line would serve the same purpose, as both are at-
tached to the same peg, and guiding the beast is still a
matter of moving the hand to right or left.
The great advantage of the nose-peg is that the camel’s
nose is very sensitive, and he will not pull away if the nose-
line is held. He can thus be led about easily, and pulled up
if he bolts, unless he is so frightened that he is indifferent
to the nose-peg. The idea of the string is that, if a stouter
line were used, the nose-peg would frequently be pulled out,
and the animal’s nose tom. Each camel in a ‘string’ (as a
line of pack animals is called in Australia) is connected by


the nose-peg to the tail of the animal in front, and in case
of mishap the nose-string is easily broken and no harm is
done. One has to see that the native boys do not replace a
broken nose-string with something too strong. I have had
camels whose noses were pulled to strips, and there was no
room for a new nose-peg; but an old camel will go with a
halter in the ‘Arab fashion.’
The interior of Australia is a natural environment for the
camel; he is at home in it. The early settlers soon saw this,
and the camel has ever since been a mainstay in the settle-
ment and development of the country.
The first attempt to bring camels into Australia was made
by Mr. Henry Phillips and his brothers in 1846. They
shipped nine camels from the Canary Islands, but only one
arrived alive. In 1860 the Victorian Government imported
twenty-four camels for the Burke and Wills Expedition. In
1866 that great pioneer, Sir Thomas Elder, brought in 120
camels, which were landed at Port Augusta in South Aus-
tralia. They were used by the construction parties on the
Overland Telegraph Line, and by Giles, Warburton, Gosse,
and other explorers of the time. N. E. Phillipson in 1884
imported a further 259. Elder’s and Phillipson’s mobs were
the main foundation of the Australian camel herds, and
their origin was the North-West Province of India, or
neighbouring parts of Afghanistan.
The camel in Australia is mainly used as a pack animal,
but camel teams attached to waggons are not unknown.
Camel buggies, with a pair of camels, have been used by the
Government, but are not in much favour with station
people.
The early explorers, who knew the horse so well, took
some time to realize the wonderful possibilities of the camel.
Giles’s first use of them was in 1875, when he travelled from
Fowler’s Bay to Lake Torrens, via Ooldea (originally spelt
Youldeh). He had with him three horses and two camels,
with a calf. The three horses all perished, and Giles re-
marks, ‘Now that the horses were dead they [the camels]
seemed more agreeable and companionable than ever the
horses had been.’ That expresses every one’s experience;
at first they are queer, awkward, slow, hard to understand,


stupid, smelly, unapproachable and unfriendly, horribly
noisy with their awful groans at loading-time, generally
repulsive, and trying to the nerves of any one in a hurry.
Their pack-saddles always seem to be wretched affairs,
continually coming to pieces, and the whole process of
travelling by camel seems antiquated and exasperating.
But when the thermometer begins to pass 100° day after
day, when the feed disapears, and only dry brambles can
be found, and, finally, when water and the possibility of
water become nothing but a wild hope, then the camel
comes into his own. There he kneels, uncomplaining and
unconcerned, a tower of strength and comfort, living on
the fat of his hump, and good for another 200 miles.
On the journey mentioned, Giles’s camels carried water
they could not drink for horses they could not save. At 168
miles from the last water all Giles’s horses were dead, but
‘these patient and enduring creatures’ were ready to go on
with undiminished powers. In this, his first experience of
camels, Giles covered a dry stage of 220 miles in eight days,
and ‘could not sufficiently admire and praise the wonderful
powers of these extraordinary and to me entirely new
animals.’ Later, on his first crossing to Perth, he covered
325 miles, between Boundary Dam and Queen Victoria
Springs, in seventeen days, the camels receiving one bucket-
ful each on the twelfth day. Lindsay and Wells, on the Elder
Exploration of 1891, in travelling across the Great Victoria
Desert, between Mount Squires in the Warburton Ranges
and Queen Victoria Springs, covered 375 miles in twenty-
three days, during which each camel had one drink of a
bucketful from the supplies carried. At Queen Victoria
Springs they only obtained two and a half gallons each, and
then continued for another 135 miles in eleven days before
they came upon plentiful water, so that they covered 510
miles in thirty-four days on about four gallons of water.
Warburton had no idea of the value and endurance of
camels. He lost fifteen of his seventeen camels, and the
whole party nearly perished, whereas, had he pushed boldly
ahead instead of spending so much time searching for
waters, he would have got through in a fraction of the time
without loss.


The camel makes no response to friendly treatment. He
would resent the actions that follow the military command,
‘Make much of your horses/ He is in the untouchable class,
and appears to regard his rider with distance and contempt.
I have only seen one example of a camel showing any
reasoning powers, and that case was rather remarkable.
It was the young riding-camel the native was riding during
the journey I am about to describe. He had a sore nose, and
was very sensitive about his nose-peg. We had trouble soon
after the start one morning, one of the pack-camels having
broken out of the string and shaken his load off. While we
were fixing this up we had tied the rest of the camels to a
bush. They got restive, and one big animal swung his hind-
quarters over close to the nose-line of this little camel,
whose line was firmly tied to the bush. Another plunge, and
it would have been very unpleasant for the little camel. Just
as I saw this, the little camel saw it too, and let out a roar
of anticipation, and actually dropped to his knees, and put
his head flat on the ground, and the next moment the old
camel was over the nose-line. There was no reflex action
about this; the nose-line had not been touched. It was ab-
solute anticipation of danger and the probable course of
events to a degree I have never seen in any animal before,
not even a dog.
In earlier days one use to hear all sorts of tales of adven-
tures with camels, but this was probably because bulls were
frequently used instead of bullocks and cows as at present.
The camel is a nervous and timid animal, and the know-
ledge of this is the secret of camel management. It will do
its proper work day after day, without giving the slightest
trouble, and will suffer hunger and thirst with apparent
indifference, till in the end it will drop in its tracks and die
without complaint; but if it objects to doing anything, it is
always through fear, and the cause must be sought. It is the
greatest mistake to beat a camel; that only increases its
panic, and leads to further trouble. Beating will not even
increase its pace, which is a regular and natural gait, which
the camel never varies. One can reckon on two and three-
quarter miles an hour in Australia, and will not be a mile
out in a hundred. This does not apply to a trotting camel,


which can be urged to greater pace, but it is the pack-camel
that determines the rate of advance.
With this introduction to camels, let me continue the
journey with them into the Western Macdonnells.
I had arranged with the Minister for the Interior at
Canberra to have the loan of six camels and equipment from
the police at Alice Springs, and a ‘black tracker,’ or police
boy. The party consisted of Mr. E. A. Rudd, who was then
a student in geology, and myself, with the tracker as general
assistant. Before starting, I thought I had better try the
riding-camels, of which there were to be three, as the
saddles and equipment were new to me, and Rudd had never
been on a camel before. Accordingly we had the camels
saddled and started out on a ride from the police station
down through the gap and out to the race-course five miles
away. The trooper whose camels we were to take was
Constable McColl, a very pleasant young man who had re-
cently joined the Northern Territory Police from Victoria.
Three years later he was speared by natives and killed at
Caledon Bay, an event which aroused great public interest
over the question of punitive expeditions.
The camel allotted to me was Rudolph, a tractable old-
timer formerly belonging to the Stock Inspector, Campbell.
The other two riding-camels were very young, and I could
see that McColl was a little uncommunicative about them.
We started on our trial ride to the race-course. Our first
attempt at a trot ended in Rudd being thrown by his young
camel. I exchanged camels with him, and we went on at a
walk to the race-course, where we examined the quartzite
ridges. On starting back my beast bolted with me and did
not stop till we reached the gap, where he went down in
the sand and refused to stir. In about an hour Rudd arrived
and announced that Willie, the black boy, had disappeared
into the bush on his mount. Rudd and I returned to the
station in the dark, and during the night Willie turned up
saying his arm was broken by the camel knocking him off
against a tree. The camel was rounded up in the morning
and Willie proved to be far more scared than hurt. It was
obvious that he did not want to come with us.


I decided to put the young camel I had been riding in
the string. This was the camel that later showed so much
intelligence with his nose-line. Rudd kept Rudolph, and in
place of the other young one I got a good riding-camel for
myself from a half-caste camel-owner. As it was clear that
Willie was useless with camels, the Sergeant found me an-
other black boy called Rattler, who proved a very good lad.
It was very lucky that I had discovered these weaknesses
before starting on our expedition.
The general lie of the Western Macdonnells had been
definitely determined from the air. Our present object was
to ascertain the true nature of the rocks forming the ridges
and valleys, and to find out where the known fossiliferous
horizons lay in the series of formations.
Leaving Alice Springs, we passed out of the Alice Valley
through the Heavitree Gap in the Heavitree Range, and
turned westward along the southern side of that range, in
the flat between the range and the steep Mount Blatherskite
Range on the left. This flat has been fenced across to form
the police paddock. At the far end of the police paddock,
five miles from the Heavitree Gap, we passed south through
a gap in the Mount Blatherskite quartzite range, and con-
tinued westward along the south side of that range. The gap
is known as Pine-Tree Gap. A bore was being put down
there by the Government in a further attempt to find water
for the Half-caste Mission Station; it proved unsuccessful.
We then had No. 2 Range on our right, and No. 3 Range
on our left, I determined to follow the narrow flat or valley
between these two ranges for the hundred odd miles to the
Finke River. The No. 2 Range had seemed from the air to
disappear near the Jay, which left the order of the ranges
still indefinite beyond that point. The Heavitree Range,
which had been definitely fixed from the air, was the datum
line, and it was easy to keep in touch with it. At the Heavi-
tree Gap four definite ranges were known, No. 1 being the
Heavitree Range. The main point to settle was whether the
range at the Finke Gorge was No. 3 or No. 4, and to relocate
the valley known to contain Ordovician fossils, the Horn
Valley, and to place it in its correct position between the
ranges. To do this, I intended to follow No. 2 and No. 3


£
n~ »»
a
fti


Ellery Creek Gay and Water Hole.


Ranges all the way, with occasional traverses across all the
ranges wherever there should be convenient gaps made by
transverse streams. There was no track to follow along
the ranges, and it remained to be seen whether this valley
was sufficiently continuous for us to be able to keep in it.
I believe my party was the first to break a trail along the
valley.
At nine miles from its beginning at Mount Blatherskite,
at the telegraph line, the No. 2 Range sank down to a ridge
only some twenty feet high, but did not disappear entirely.
We eventually traced it all the way to the Finke, but from
nine miles onwards it never made a conspicuous range again,
and we found ourselves in a broader valley enclosed between
the Heavitree Range and the No. 3 Range, the latter con-
tinuing as a dark red wall about 200 feet high for the whole
distance. The No. 3 Range, next to the Heavitree Range, is
the most distinctive and regular of all the ranges; it runs
east and west for over 200 miles.
The second day out brought us to the Jay Creek, where
we camped. Our valley was here just three-quarters of a
mile wide, with the Heavitree quartzite to the north and the
No. 3 Range to the south. We ran a section from the north
side of the Heavitree Range out on to the Missionary Plain
to the south. The No. 4 quartzite, so low as to be scarcely
noticeable near the telegraph line, had here become an im-
portant ridge, and was later found to increase in width and
height as we went west. Nos. 3 and 4 Ranges were here
separated by about a mile.
Rudd and I went up-stream to pay a visit to the Jay
Mission Station for half-caste girls, and were shown round
by the manager and his wife, Mr. and Mrs. Freeman. They
were living in tents under bough shelters, and the girls were
in galvanized iron buildings, where they could be locked in
at nights. This was a tremendous improvement on the old
bungalow; the place is twenty-five miles from Alice Springs.
We saw a batch of yeast-bread that had just been prepared
for the oven, and several girls were busy sewing.
We examined the break in the Heavitree Range, and saw
the little gap I had motored through three years before.
Two wells had been sunk, and the supply was quite suf-


ficient for domestic purposes, but of no value for stock
water. It had been the intention of the Government to make
the place self-supporting by starting a cattle station, if
enough water could be found, but the whole project was
later abandoned, and the home moved in to the old telegraph
station.
Next day, while we were running our section, we sent
Rattler up to water the camels and fill the canteens, with a
note and money to buy some bread, and most of our supply
of chocolate for the Freemans’ little daughter. He came
back with a good supply of bread, which was excellent stuff,
and also the money, as Mr. Freeman said there were no
recognized channels for receiving cash.
We pushed on west from the Jay Creek, and soon met a
tributary of the Hugh. We followed this up a short distance
to examine its gap through the Heavitree Range, and then
attempted to continue west, keeping close in to the range.
The limestone hills were here too rugged, however, and we
were compelled to turn back and seek a passage a little
farther south. In a few miles we came upon the Hugh itself,
and followed it up to camp at the gap in the Heavitree
Range. We were then on historic ground; it was up this
stream that McDouall Stuart first came to cross and con-
quer the MacDonnells. The scene was as silent and deserted
as when that little cavalcade first clattered through the gap;
the place has scarcely been disturbed since.
We camped on a flat near the gap, among beautiful willow-
like ironwoods and green hakeas. The course of the stream
was lined with big gum-trees.
I have written of the summer heat of the Lake Eyre
basin, the dust and flies and sweat; conditions are the same
throughout Central Australia in the summer. Travelling is
a labour, and physical and mental energy are at a low level.
But the winter is an altogether different thing. The climate
is simply perfect for travelling and life in the open. The air
is dry and clear, the skies cloudless, and the temperature
rises to a maximum of about 70° F. The nights are a little
cold and frosts are common, but a good camp fire adds to
the attractiveness of the camp. It is necessary to carry a
good supply of blankets. The mornings are a delight. You


wake, feeling chilly in the grey dawn, you drink some hot
coffee, and begin to break camp. The sun comes up, the
mists in the valleys fade away, and a beautiful warmth
diffuses through your whole body. The succession of cold
nights and glorious sunny days is most stimulating and
invigorating. The geologist can do more in one week in
the winter than in a whole month in the summer. In this
May of 1930 we had a little rain on our first two days, but
for the remainder of the time conditions were ideal. Winter
in a good season and summer in a drought make Central
Australia appear to the traveller either an Eden or a desert.
It is a region of extremes; either perfect or terrible.
We walked through the gap and followed the Hugh up to
its source, only a few miles from the gap, through another
gap in the Chewings Range. Beyond this there is a jumble
of high mountain masses, through which McDouall Stuart
threaded his way. The present main crossing of the ranges
up the Todd, the telegraph route, is a much easier passage.
There were water-holes in the Hugh north of the Heavi-
tree Range gap, and we had a bathe in the clear and icy
water. The temperatures at night were down to freezing-
point, and these shady pools did not seem to warm up during
the day. In midsummer, on the other hand, the water is
usually so tepid as not to be refreshing.
We did not make a geological section down the Hugh, as
the sequence was obviously exactly similar to that at the
Jay Creek, with the addition that the rounded hills seen
from the air began on the west bank of the Hugh to con-
tinue westward as a southern flank of the MacDonnells. We
were now in a region where the thick limestones which back
up the Heavitree Range form rugged hills themselves, and
are not eroded down to a level plain as at the telegraph line.
The second quartzite ridge was inconspicuous, the third as
high as ever, but the fourth appeared here to be covered
and swamped by the formations of the rounded hills to
the south. The easiest travelling was close in to the red
ridge of No. 3 quartzite.
A small hill of limestone near the camp had a porcelain-
ized capping similar to the formations in the Great Artesian
Basin country. This hill-top had been a workshop of the


natives; chips and flakes and half-made stone implements
lay about everywhere.
From the Hugh we continued westward towards Ellery
Creek, the next transverse stream, twenty miles away. The
limestone hills became more prominent in our valley, and
the supposed fossil forms, about which there is at present
so much controversy, became very obvious and plentiful.
A great deal of collecting and photographing of these in-
teresting forms was done throughout the remainder of the
expedition.
As these narrow valleys are traversed from one trans-
verse stream to the next, their floors gradually rise, and the
enclosing ridges appear to sink. At the watershed half-way
between the streams the country becomes rougher, and is
intersected by many small watercourses, and the mulga,
which is characteristic on all the flat loam areas, becomes
denser and difficult to get through with a string of camels.
We had a very nasty couple of hours between the Hugh and
Ellery Creek, with nose-lines continually breaking as the
string wound in and out among the brambly trees.
At fourteen miles from the Hugh we came to the Eight
Mile Gap in the Heavitree Range on our right. This is where
we had come into this valley in the motor-car three years
before from the track that runs along the north side of the
Heavitree Range. This track lies in the valley we were
traversing from the eight-mile gap to Glen Helen Station,
and for this reason I named it the Glen Helen Valley, when
I had confirmed my view that it was not the Horn Valley.
We had then proved that the Glen Helen Valley does run
continuously from the telegraph line (not from Alice
Springs, but from the south side of the Heavitree Range)
direct to Glen Helen, without a break. This was claimed for
the Horn Valley, but that error was discovered in the next
few days. The Glen Helen Valley runs not only for the
ninety odd miles to Glen Helen, but continues for another
fifty miles westward, gradually widening till it loses its
identity in a wide plain.
Old Raggatt of Glen Helen had been in Alice Springs the
day we arrived there, but we had not seen him, and he had
started back to his station the next day. Owing to the


drought he had been compelled to give up pack-horses, only
keeping a few hacks, and had taken to a little herd of
donkeys, preferring them to camels. We saw the tracks of
these little creatures, and followed them towards Ellery
Creek along our old motor track.
A good pad leads to Ellery Creek, which is an important
stream. Arrived at the creek, we turned up it to the water-
hole in its gap in the Heavitree Range and pitched camp
there.
This was one of our best and most interesting camps. The
Ellery Creek water-hole is recognized by the few who know
the ranges as the finest of all the gaps; the walls of quart-
zite rise an almost sheer 900 feet from the long and narrow
pool of water that fills the gap. The cleft in the range is so
narrow that the slight irregularity of it makes it impossible
to see through it to the other side; it is only about fifty feet
wide at the bottom, and not more than double that at the
top. Owing to the water it was impossible to get through
the gap, but, as we afterwards found, it would be just pos-
sible to climb over the range.
As the usual approach is from the south side up Ellery
Creek, it is seen always in the heavy shade of the thousand-
foot range, seeming all the more dark after the usual glare
of the sun. This relative gloom throws into splendid relief
the great, red, rugged strip of one side of the gorge, glow-
ing in the brilliant sunshine, against which the other shaded
side is silhouetted. The dark pool below is fringed with
bright green gum-trees.
Ducks were swimming in the pool when we arrived, and
we shot two and had them for tea, but they were in
wretched condition. Shags, too, were very plentiful, and
stayed about even after the discharge of the gun. The
reason for this we soon discovered, when we attempted to
climb through the gap near water-level, a feat we found to
be quite impossible; we ran considerable risks in our at-
tempt. I was somewhat in advance of Rudd and out of
sight of him; peering over a mass of rock I saw on a ledge
below me a number of shags’ nests with young. I so startled
them that several fell off the ledge into the water, which
apparently did them no harm, but the loud splash made


Rudd think I had fallen in, and he appeared a moment later
looking surprisingly anxious.
We decided to camp in this delightful spot for a couple of
days, and begin a section down the Ellery. My aerial strip
mosaics provided photographic cross-sections across the
ranges at the Hugh, Ellery Creek, and the Finke, and it was
particularly desirable to study these transverse streams on
the ground.
On the first day after our arrival at Ellery Creek we
walked down the stream for three miles, making geological
notes, and then paced the distance back to camp. The
general features of this section were the same as at the
Jay Creek, but it was decided to make this a type-section of
the series, as it lay at about the centre of the outcrops, and
the stream ran north and south at right angles to the out-
crops, with good exposures across the whole series. Further,
the Ellery continued on south into the James Ranges, there
joining the more sinuous Finke, so that as soon as it was
seen how suitable the upper portion of the Ellery Creek was
for a section, I determined to follow it right down to its
confluence with the Finke, first going on to Glen Helen and
the Upper Finke for what of interest there might prove to
be there, and then returning to the Ellery to complete the
section.
At the Ellery, the creek impinges direct against the
quartzite wall of the No. 4 Ridge, which diverts the stream
along its front for half a mile before the gap is reached.
This gap is the entrance to a gorge over a mile long, which
cuts transversely across all the beds following the first
quartzite of the No. 4 Ridge, after which the stream enters
the rounded hills, and finally the plains.
The gap is impressive, and is comparable with the gaps
in the Heavitree Range, but it is wider, and the stream bed
broad and gravelly. What lay inside the gap was all new to
us when we first entered it, and we little dreamed on this
first visit how important the section was going to prove to
be in establishing exactly the lowest horizon for Ordovician
fossils.
We found the mile of gorge to be made up almost entirely
of quartzites, which formed the northern end, where the


sides were higher and the quartzite very massive. A little
south of the middle of the gorge we noted a narrow bed of
limy shale, and at a mile from the entrance the stream
impinged upon a wall of bright red sandstone, which became
known to us as the Red Wall. This ridge or wall was 200
feet high, and it, too, diverted the stream along its front,
this time easterly for a few hundred yards, before letting
it through a low gap. The green tree-tops against the red
walls of sandstone made a very brilliant contrast in colour.
This part of the Ellery Gap was our first introduction to
this type of scenery, which we afterwards found to be
typical of the James Ranges.
The Red Wall marked the termination of this walk, and
from it we paced back to the camp at the Ellery Water-hole,
but not before we had had a bathe in some pools that we
found against the Red Wall; another icy experience.
The quartzites in the gorge were ramified in places with
fossil worm-burrows, often up to a foot long; this was found
to be characteristic of the quartzite of No. 4 Ridge; we
referred to it conveniently as the worm-eaten quartzite.
When we arrived back at camp in the dark, we found an
unexpected feast awaiting us. There, set out before the fire
on one of his leggings, Rattler had a row of beautifully
browned ‘widgetty’ grubs, all ready to be devoured. These
grubs are a great delicacy among the aborigines; they are
borers, and inhabit the gum-trees and also the roots of the
mulga. They are three to four inches long and about half
an inch in diameter, a white, fat body attached to a short,
hard, brown head carrying the boring apparatus. The blacks
usually eat them alive, holding them by the head and biting
them off close up to the head, which is then thrown away;
but when time and opportunity offer, they roast them in
the ashes, when they have exactly the appearance and smell
of a strip of the ‘crackling’ off a piece of roast pork. The
body is composed almost entirely of fat. During our
marches we had questioned Rattler on the subject of
widgetties and how they were to be found, and he had
pointed out as we rode along the bulges on the white limbs
of the gum-trees, where he said a grub would be found.
These were often high up out of reach, and difficult for us


to see, but on some lower trees he showed us some gummy
borings exuding from a small hole in the bark, and about a
foot above was always to be seen the bulge in the tree.
Rattler, indicating the gum and the bulge, said, ‘Him bin
here. Him bin sit-down here.’ The bulge is opened
up with an axe, disclosing a tubular passage. A stick or
stiff stem of grass is then pushed up the hole and with-
drawn, the tumed-back end acting as a hook and invariably
bringing down the big white grub. I myself am a little
squeamish about eating such things, but Rudd, in his youth-
ful enthusiasm, bravely ate a widgettie and declared it was
splendid, but dM not show any reluctance to allow Rattler
to polish off the remainder. The aboriginal is a born
imitator, copying the white man’s every action in camp, and
he has no courage of his own convictions. Rattler ate the
widgetties in a shamefaced way, and without apparent re-
lish, simply because Rudd had only eaten one and I had
refused them.
Rattler proved a very good and useful boy. The black is
not without a sense of humour, and he dearly loves a simple
joke. The first night out Rattler surprised us by saying,
‘Willie might be little bit all right now.’ He knew as well as
I did that Willie did not want to come, and was grossly
exaggerating his injuries.
The following day we climbed the Heavitree Range at the
water-hole. It was 900 feet high by aneroid, and the range
is only 1,440 feet thick at the base at this point, so that its
wall-like appearance can be realized. From the narrow top
we looked north over a rough mulga plain below us extend-
ing to the Chewings Range, six miles away. Rugged hills
lay behind the Chewings Range, shutting out the view of
the Burt Plain beyond. The northern side of the range was
very precipitous, and a descent looked almost impossible
to any one but mountain climbers looking for trouble,
which we were not, so after a round of photographs we
descended again to camp.
Some further detailed investigation among the algal lime-
stones and some close-up photographs of the formations
completed a good day’s work. That evening preparations
were made for an early start on the morrow for Glen Helen
Station on the Finke.


CHAPTER XVI
The Headwaters of the Finke
'J'HE upper portion of the Ellery Creek had never been
mapped, and its course through the MacDonnells was
not shown on the official maps. It was not till after this
camel trek that I produced a more detailed map of the
Western MacDonnells, combining the aerial mosaic photo-
graphy with the ground work. At the time of which I write
we thought it only twenty-five miles from the Ellery Creek
Waterhole to Glen Helen, and I expected to make the dis-
tance in a day. It is really twenty-eight miles in a direct
line, and about thirty by track.
From Ellery Creek we continued westward in the Glen
Helen Valley, keeping close to the low ridge of No. 2 quartz-
ite, which was very pebbly in this region, with many lime-
stone fragments. The way was easy for the first twelve
miles, over clay flats with mulga, but beyond that point the
valley floor became irregular at the divide between the
watersheds of the Ellery and the Finke. There we followed
up a little stony creek in very rough country, but after an
hour of rough going we were over the divide and following
the Pioneer, which flows westward down the valley to the
Finke. I failed to pick out the track we took with the motor-
car three years before through this part of the valley, which
is not surprising, as I spent most of the time then hanging
on to the car, and got completely bushed.
Darkness fell while we were still following down the
Pioneer; we halted for a meal in the bed of the stream.
There was still no sight nor sound to indicate that the
station was near, and the cattle-pads could no longer be
seen. We decided to give it another hour, and continued on
our way, winding in and out of the trees, crossing and re-
crossing the stream as the camels thought fit; I always
found it best to give the camel his head in the dark. The
camels timidity and constant guard against danger prevent


him from ever attempting a place he knows is unsafe, and
his judgment is quick and instinctive.
At the end of an hour we came to a high cliff on the left
bank of the stream, and still no signs of the station. We had
then done a good twenty-five miles, and were dog-tired. We
had been out for ten days, and on the move from daylight
to dark and after without a break. We off-loaded the camels
in the sandy bed of the stream, which proved later to be
the Ormiston, as we had passed the junction of the Pioneer
with the Ormiston in the dark, and lay down on our swags
and slept.
At the beginning of the journey rain had threatened, and
we had pitched the tent every night, but now the crisp and
typical winter weather had reasserted itself, and we only
used the tent once again in the whole trek.
In the morning we found ourselves against a short wall of
quartzite about 200 feet high, a remnant of the No. 2 Ridge.
The view from the top of it showed the red No. 3 Ridge just
to the south of us, and behind it again the No. 4 Ridge, with
the Glen Helen Gap plainly visible about three miles away.
I made a note that ‘the Finke Gorge is absolutely No. 4
quartzite/ to me a very important conclusion, arrived at by
following the ridges from the telegraph line. On the north
side of our track for the whole distance of over eighty miles
the Heavitree Range had persisted.
An hour on the camels brought us to the Glen Helen
Station, beside the gorge and water-hole, through which
the Finke passes.
We put the camels down near the station house, and were
met outside by George Tucker, who was living with Fred
Raggatt and assisting him on the station, together with
several half-castes and a few aborigines. We had hardly
introduced ourselves to Tucker when I was surprised by a
bite from a nasty-looking white dog, which had sneaked up
behind. He had bitten clean through a very solid leather
legging which had almost defied a German bullet at Loos.
Just then Raggatt came out. I was rather ruffled by my
reception and told him I took a poor view of a dog that bit
you while you were shaking hands with the family, but
he was quite pleased and said the dog was a ‘silent heeler/


only young, but proving itself true to breed. The time of
which I write was not long after the murder of Brooks far-
ther north, and the blacks were getting troublesome. This,
and the fact that Raggatt had had his house broken into
and the stores all scattered, perhaps explained his attitude.
Raggatt’s house and mode of life were quaint and in-
teresting. The house consisted of one long, narrow room,
without windows; the light came from the door when it
was open, but was mostly absorbed by the smoke-blackened
Walls and roof, so that after the glare outside it appeared
to be almost dark inside. At one end was a huge stone fire-
place, and at the other end what seemed in the dark to be
a pile of stores and gear. At night the hurricane lamp on
the table only increased the gloom and mystery. The floor
was covered with flagstones, the timber was local round
stuff for the most part, and the roof of corrugated iron.
The place, hedged in by the great ridges, was a stranger to
wheeled vehicles; everything about the station had come
up by camel from Oodnadatta, nearly 400 miles away. A
few lengths of sawn timber, or a window-frame, were marks
of ostentation in the MacDonnells before the railway came.
Old Raggatt was in good form, in spite of his forty years
in this place; he had just come in from Alice Springs with
his first cheque for five years, having sold some cattle. They
gave us some morning tea, great pint mugs of black liquid
which I found almost undrinkable. I had some difficulty in
disposing of mine between the flags, but the darkness as-
sisted in this. George Tucker said some people thought that
their water was not too good, but all were agreed that it
made splendid tea. The great formations of magnesian
limestone in the MacDonnells are responsible for the highly
mineralized well water. The spring at Raggatt’s is a beau-
tiful sight, but its waters take a lot of getting used to; two
days later Rudd and I were almost laid up with diarrhoea.
We sat about and had a yarn. I decided to have a look at
Mount Sender, and to climb it if possible, for there were no
records of the highest point ever having been ascended, and
Raggatt declared it had never been climbed, to his know-
ledge. We learnt that there were two passes through the
Heavitree Range in the neighbourhood, the nearer, Gun-


powder Gap, about five miles away to the north, and the
second, Rockbar Gap, about five miles to the west of the
first, and close up to Mount Sonder. Between Mount Sonder
and Mount Razorback lies the wonderful Redbank Gorge,
and narrowest and most precipitous of all the gaps, always
carrying water, and never yet passed through. All travellers
who have been there have written of it in terms of the
greatest wonder. I reluctantly gave up the temptation to
visit it, and decided to go through the Heavitree Range by
Gunpowder Gap, have a look at the other side, and approach
Mount Sonder from the north, returning by Rockbar Gap.
Thinking to make some further use of the time while we
were talking, I got out some sewing-twine to make up a few
spare nose-strings for the camels. But I had no sooner
started than old Raggatt said, ‘Here, let George do it. He
will make you a dozen while you are looking at it.’ To my
mortification I found this was not far from the truth.
George doubled a piece of twine, laid it across his knees,
the two strands apart, and alternately rolled the two strands
with one hand, thus twisting them, and then laid them up
together by rolling on the other leg with the other hand,
thus attaining the desired result in a few seconds, a single
strand twisted so that it would not come unlaid. The pro-
cess was aided by a generous moistening obtained by run-
ning the rough twine through his mouth in a manner fit to
put false teeth on edge. A knot at the loose end completed
the job. I might say I practised this later in private, but for
real success you need the right kind of trousers, and I think
it would need some years in the bush to get them just right.
After lunch we started on the Mount Sonder excursion.
George, whose pent up flood of conversation had so far done
little more than burst its banks, insisted on coming with
us for about four miles to show us the way. This meant I
had to walk too, and I was feeling weary, but he left us near
Gunpowder Gap, and we went on and camped at the gap,
where we found the range was low and unimposing, and the
gap not striking. There had been a brush with aborigines
here in earlier days, which had given the name to the gap.
The temperature at 7.30 next morning was 34° F., and
the water in the water-bag was frozen. We passed through


Gunpowder Gap and found ourselves in rough granite
country, quite different from the ridges and valleys to the
south of the Heavitree Range, which everywhere divides
the topography of the ranges into two distinct halves, rough
and irregular, of granite and gneiss to the north, and
parallel ranges of quartzite and long narrow valleys to the
south. The rounded hills of conglomerate backing up the
ridge country on its southern flank form a third type of
topography west of the Hugh. We followed creek courses
in a wide half-circle into the granite country, returning to
the Heavitree Range again at Rockbar Gap, after thirteen
miles. The string went ahead towards the end, leaving
Rudd and me to collect some specimens, and when we
mounted again our camels, in their hurry to catch up, made
alarming pace over the rough ground, which we had pre-
viously hesitated to take them over, showing that they
could manage it quite easily and at twice the pace.
We passed through Rockbar Gap and off-loaded and had
lunch, and then walked back through the gap to tackle
Mount Sonder. This mountain is generally regarded as the
most spectacular and impressive in the MacDonnells, though
it is not quite the highest. My aneroid determination gave
its height as 4,480 feet. Winnecke computed the height of
Mount Zeil, a peak on the northern extremity of the ranges
twenty miles north-west of Mount Sonder, as 4,756 feet, and
considered it the highest point in the ranges. It is not in
the Heavitree Range, in which Mount Sonder is undoubtedly
the highest mountain. Mount Sonder is the most majestic
in appearance, and the best known, as it can be seen from
almost anywhere in the Missionary Plain to the south, and
is a prominent landmark in the ranges.
From Rockbar Gap the Heavitree Range runs north-west,
gradually rising, for two miles, at which point the quartzite
forming the range takes a curve to the north-east for about
a mile. It is this northerly-extending spur that forms Mount
Sonder. From the southerly end of the spur the main ridge
continues on westward without apparent interruption for
eight miles to Mount Razorback, which is only about 400
feet lower than Mount Sonder itself. Mount Razorback
marks the end of the Heavitree Range as an unbroken unit;
beyond it there are only scattered hills.


From the Rockbar Gap Rudd and I walked over the rough
granite country in the angle between the Heavitree Range
and the eastern side of Mount Sender, where Rudd re-
luctantly left me to return to camp with the specimens we
had collected. He was already feeling the effects of Rag-
gatt’s water; my own turn came later.
From the east there are seen to be two main peaks at the
north end of Mount Sender, with a saddle between them,
and some lesser peaks towards its junction with the main,
range. The highest point was to the left of the saddle, so I
decided to climb to the saddle, and thence to that point.
It was a long, rough ascent to the saddle, 1,400 feet above
the camp, and then a steep climb, mostly on hands and.
knees, up a ridge of quartzite for another 700 feet to the
summit. The mountain was almost entirely composed of
granite, with a capping of quartzite above the saddle. The
climb had taken three hours, and it was nearly six o’clock
when I reached the top. The sun was almost setting, and
the view, with golden light and shadow effects, was wonder-
ful, but unhappily the light was next to impossible for
photography. To the east the shadow of the mountain ex-
tended for miles, and beyond it lay the Pound, a great
enclosure formed where the Heavitree and Chewings Ranges,
meet, open only to the east. To the north lay the low and
rugged granite country, with some high peaks towards the
horizon. Westward stretched the Heavitree Range to Mount
Razorback and the setting sun, while southward the long
Glen Helen Valley, below the Heavitree Range, crossed the
view, with beyond it the line of the Finke Gorge Range, and
then the level monotony of the Missionary Plain. The white
gravelly courses of the rivers stood out plainly from the
mulga-covered and scrubby plains, which looked quite flat
from that altitude, the Davenport in the Glen Helen Valley
sweeping close in to the base of Mount Sender and then
crossing the valley to the Finke Gorge and winding far out
on to the plain as the Finke.
By the time the views had been photographed, bearings
taken, and some sketches and notes made, darkness had
fallen. The central peak had only a small flat area at the
summit, on which I built a little cairn, and then I lighted


the spinifex. This grows all over the ranges, and on Mount
Sender it was specially prolific, in huge hemispherical
masses up to ten feet across. It took fire readily and blazed
up well. This bright beacon burned till after 9 p.m. and
was seen by Raggatt and at tlffe Mission Station thirty miles
away. Two parties of cattle musterers saw it too, and it
became a subject of interest far and wide. Some thought
lightning might have started it. I realized later the local
value of this proof of conquering the summit in a land where
picturesque exaggeration is allowed.
Fortunately there was a moon, otherwise my descent
would have been too dangerous to attempt. As it was, I had
a difficult time, with many minor falls, often into prickly
spinifex, the spikes of which I was removing from my arms
at odd moments for the whole of the rest of the trek. While
I was following down the creek in the lower ground I heard
calls, and met Rudd and Rattler setting out as a search
party.
In 1889 Tietkens made an ascent of Mount Sender,
approaching it from the south. He said it appeared to have
three separate peaks, of which the most easterly looked to
be almost inaccessible. He climbed the nearest and most
southerly, and left a cairn upon it. It took him three hours
to reach this summit, and he remarked that the return was
made in much better time, but he got a severe shaking,
finally reaching camp in the dark. On the next day he en-
tered in his diary: ‘Was too much done up to-day to do
anything but camp duties.’
Another attempt at the ascent was made in 1894 by the
Horn Expedition. In Winnecke’s account of the expedition
he writes: ‘Dr. Stirling, Mr. Belt, and Mr. Cowle essayed
the ascent of Mount Sender, but after climbing over rough
ranges for many hours they were compelled to return to
camp without having visited the highest point of the moun-
tain.’ Thus I have every reason to believe that I am the
only person to have reached the real summit, and my com-
paratively easy success was largely due to the fact that I
began from the east instead of the south, and thus had an
easier approach, with difficulties only in the last few hun-
dred feet.


In Tietkens’ time Glen Helen Station was close to Mount
Razorback, and Old Glen Helen was at the cliff on the Ortnis-
ton where we camped the night before our arrival at the
present station at the gorge. Stations of this kind are very
easily moved, and migrate considerably. Raggatt told us the
story of a man giving directions to some one coming to his
station. He said: ‘You come to the Ellery Creek; you will
know it by the big water- hole. Then you go up the creek
for a few miles till you come to a tree with a couple of
hitching chains fixed to it. Well, that’s the station.’
Next morning we left Rockbar Gap and returned to Glen
Helen. We found Raggatt preparing to start away for a
cattle muster. The Owen Springs Station in the Waterhouse
Ranges to the south had changed hands, and the cattle in
the whole region were to be mustered for the first time for
five years. The musters in this country are always im-
portant occasions, and regarded as a time of festivity. Any
one about to muster notifies all his neighbours, and there
is a great gathering of men and horses. The neighbours
are there as guests, to see the cattle and take away any of
their own, for there are no fences, and herds may become
completely mixed.
The meeting-place was to he at the Ellery Creek, and
Raggatt, the Hermannsburg Mission Station, and Ted Hayes
were interested. Raggatt said he was sorry not to stay the
night with us, but he would leave us to the hospitality of
George. He himself must get away, or he would not be at
the meeting-place a day before the date arranged. This
anxiety to be a day early, which the old man made a point
of honour, was something new in the way of keeping ap-
pointments, even in a land where a day one way or the
other does not matter.
Raggatt had his men and his horses all ready, and the
little herd of pack-donkeys with their loads. The donkeys
are droved along in front of the party, always keeping in a
close group, half of them loaded and half running free till
their turn comes.
I noticed a revolver in a holster on Raggatt’s saddle, and
made some remark on it. He said: Tf you have it you never
need it.’ The appearance of the buckles indicated that the


holster was part and parcel of the saddle, and it did not
appear to have been opened for many a long day. It was the
only gun I have ever seen conspicuously carried in Aus-
tralia; even our police do not parade guns.
Rudd and I took another icy bath in the big pool in the
lake below Raggatt’s house, full now that rains had fallen,
but dry at the time of my earlier visit.
As Rattler had no pipe, and had shown a desire to smoke,
George, at my request, fished a box full of pipes out of the
dark end of the room. I found they bought everything on
that scale, sugar by the ton, matches by the case, pipes by
the dozen. The pipes were meant specially for aborigines.
Later on I found that Rattler had never smoked, and did
not like it; he had only wanted to imitate us.
George prepared a large meal for us, and also showed
solicitude for Rattler’s welfare. The evening was a remark-
able one. After the meal was over, George made damper
with the same dash and efficiency as he had previously
made the nose-strings, and when it was in the camp oven
and under the ashes, we sat round and talked, or rather
George talked and we listened. It appeared that Raggatt
could not have been a very communicative companion, for
George seemed to be trying to get off a year’s conversation
in one evening. We drank black coffee with liberal additions
from a bottle of whisky which Raggatt had hospitably
placed on the table before his departure. A haze of smoke,
which the light from the hurricane lamp dimly penetrated,
filled the room, for the chimney did not draw well, and to
this was added the fragrant fumes from our pipes. The
great fire-place filled with wood coals gave out a pleasant
warmth, for the nights were very cold. The shelter, the
warmth, and the whisky, together with the comfort of the
chair, after our fortnight’s ceaseless activity in the open,
finishing with the climb of Mount Sonder, produced in me
the most exquisite sense of comfort and well-being, but
unfortunately also so intense a sleepiness that the effort to
listen to George became positively painful. At last bed was
suggested. There was a good stretcher in the room, which
George begged one of us to use, saying he always slept on
the floor and could not sleep well anywhere else. As the


floor was of flagstones, this seemed hardly credible. We both
had camp-stretchers, which we only used when the tent was
pitched, and they had lately become a useless burden to us ;
in fact, I never carried them again after this journey. How-
ever, on this occasion we brought them in and unfolded
them near the fire. At last I was stretched out in perfect
blissful comfort. I remember remarking to Rudd that ‘I
would not call the Queen my aunt,’ an expression that
seemed new to him but took George’s fancy at once. George
brought out a couple of blankets and lay on the flags before
the fire, leaving the bed unoccupied; he was obviously quite
comfortable. He had, indeed, reached the stage when he
positively disliked a bed.
George was now at his best. I found myself saying ‘Yes’
and ‘No’ between long intervals of oblivion; it was useless
to struggle further. Suddenly I woke to hear George say r
ing, in pained tones: ‘You aren’t going to sleep, are you?’
I said, ‘No, oh, no,’ and the next thing I knew it was morn-
ing.
We got away early and began the return to Ellery Creek,
camping on the way a few miles beyond the divide in the
Glen Helen Valley between the Finke and Ellery Creek.
The little camel that Rattler was riding had developed a
sore nose through Rattler having to hold it back all the
time. It was in the lead of the string, and walked faster
than the rest, thus keeping up a good pace for the whole
party. Behind the leader came Grandmother, a big old
camel with a very benign expression earning him this name
in spite of his sex. His nose-line was continually breaking
owing to the strain the little camel kept on it, so I did away
with his nose-peg and used a halter, which worked quite
well and enabled us to use a strong line. The little camel
was literally towing the whole string. In order to cure the
little camel’s sore nose we bound his legs with ropes, and
secured his head, amidst great roaring, so as to have a
good look at it. We then treated it with olive oil, which we
carried with us. The peg is liberally oiled and then twisted
round to free it from the flesh. After several oilings, which
greatly frightened the camel, the nose soon became quite
sound again.


By noon of the next day we arrived at Ellery Creek.
Raggatt was camped in the creek; he was shoeing horses
when we arrived. He saw us coming, but did not look up,
and just continued his shoeing, as if it were quite a usual
thing for people to turn up at any moment in a busy place
like the Ellery Creek.
He had dug a soak in the sand of the creek bed near his
camp. The old hand will always dig a soak in preference to
using open water. We emptied our cans of the Glauber’s-
salt solution from Glen Helen, and filled up with this beau-
tiful liquid, and had a boil-up and good tea for the first time
in the last few days.
The party was expected to assemble next day and start
the search for cattle. The first objective was to be the valley
we had traversed from the Hugh. I told Raggatt there
were no cattle in it, and no fresh tracks, but I could see he
placed no confidence in my report. They searched the nearer
parts later and found no cattle.
We wished him good hunting and went on down the
Ellery, into the gorge and down to the Red Wall. Im-
mediately beyond the Red Wall we found ourselves in con-
glomerate country, the formation which composes the
rounded hills to the south of the ridges of the MacDonnells.
The stream took a south-westerly course, and we followed
it for two miles and camped near some old stockyards,
among beautiful gums in the creek near some water-holes.
As we intended to continue our section down the Ellery
Greek, this meant at least two days’ work up and down the
stream. This was a critical point geologically, the junction
of two distinct types of country. So we pitched the tent,
for the last time on the journey, and made a good camp.
The next day proved to be one of the most successful of
the whole expedition. We began to follow up a small water-
course due north, back into the ranges. At first it was run-
ning through an alluvial flat near the banks of the Ellery.
Here Rudd picked up what he thought was a weathered-out
fossil. I was sceptical about its genuineness, but we both
then walked down in the watercourse and kept a sharp look-
out. Soon more were found; they were coiled, lenticular
shells, known as Raphistoma, with sharp rims, up to two


inches across, or rather solid casts in limestone of the
original shells. This was a very welcome discovery, for it
meant that somewhere up in the ranges lay the fossiliferous
horizon in the Ordovician rocks from which the fossils had
been weathered and washed down the creek. We followed
up the creek, through a narrow gorge in the Red Wall,
where climbing was necessary, and then over a second
ridge. At last, after following the scent for a mile and a
half, with the fossils ever becoming more numerous, we
found their source in narrow beds of limestone on the side
of a small east-and-west gully high in the ranges. The beds
themselves were mainly obscured by a talus of debris from
the quartzite above, but beautifully preserved separate fos-
sils were lying about everywhere in great profusion, to-
gether with slabs of limestone crowded with fossils. In
addition to the Raphistoma, there were a handsome ribbed
bivalve, Orthis, great cylindrical Orthoceras up to a foot
long, and crowds of the extinct crustacean Trilobites, some
of them complete specimens, all separated from their matrix
and lying about loose. The only fossil locality to compare
with it that I have seen is Hatton’s Corner in New South
Wales.
We followed the gully eastward down into the Ellery
Creek, and found that the fossil locality was the zone of the
calcareous shale in the middle of the gorge, which we had
already passed three times. There was nothing but alluvial
in one bank of the Ellery where the stream crossed the fos-
sil horizon, and the exposure was poor and mainly obscured
by alluvial in the other low bank. It was necessary to. climb
up out of the creek bed to find fossils, which were here more
poorly preserved. There were no signs of fossils in the
creek bed itself.
So this little gully was here the Horn Valley! Near the
Ellery Creek it was merely a depression in the quartzite,
scarcely traversable on foot, and it must die away com-
pletely between the Hugh and the Ellery, for at the Hugh
the conglomerate hills almost completely cover the Ordo-
vician rocks. The conjecture of the Horn Expedition that
the Horn Valley ran from the Finke to Alice Springs was
quite wrong; no valley does this. The Alice Valley, in which
Alice Springs lies, comes to an end in the Pound at the


Ormiston; the Glen Helen Valley runs from the race-course
near the telegraph line to Glen Helen and fifty miles beyond,
and the Horn Valley, beginning at the western extremity
of the ranges, crosses the Finke, and has disappeared as a
traversable valley before the Ellery Creek is reached.
This day of discovery was intended to have been a day of
rest in camp. The fossils were found on a morning stroll,
and we were lured away for a day in the hills without any
lunch.
We were both in rather a bad way with diarrhoea by this
time, caused by Raggatt’s water. In addition, I was suffering
from a complaint very common among bushmen who spend
a lot of time in the saddle, and it seemed likely to hold me
up altogether before long, for riding was becoming some-
thing to be dreaded, but I kept Rudd ignorant of this. We
should have taken a rest, but the weather was so glorious,
and there was so much of interest to do, that we could not
think of it. I always have the same experience when I am
out on trek. I decide that I will have a day's rest every
week, but it never comes off. One does not want to rest
when the day comes, and it is put off and put off, till at last
the journey comes to an end. I often wish that I could feel
the same energy in the daily routine of city life.
The following morning Rudd brought me a cup of coffee
and some toast in bed! In a way I did not like allowing him
to do it, and it seemed very incongruous in this remote
place, but I don't think I ever enjoyed a ‘morning tea' more
in my life, and I highly appreciated the spirit that prompted
him. He was a Rover in the Boy Scouts' Association.
We got the riding-camels in, and started away early to
ride up the Ellery Gorge to the Horn Valley, there to study
the fossil horizon in more detail, and then to continue our
section southward to the camp.
While we were lunching in the creek bed, there was a
sudden crashing of timber and rush of hoofs. Our camels
jumped up and made off, and I did not wonder at it. The
next moment loose horses, pack-horses, and donkeys came
charging past, almost in a stampede, followed by riders,
filling the quiet, narrow gorge with sound and fury. This
was the mustering party. There were Raggatt and Ted


Hayes and half a dozen half-castes and aborigines, all
splendidly mounted. Raggatt had not told me it was Ted
Hayes he was to meet, so our surprise was mutual. The last
time I had seen him was when we made our forced landing
at Undoolya.
They had had no luck, as we had anticipated, in the Glen
Helen Valley, and were now going down the Ellery. We were
able to tell them, from the tracks and other indications,
that cattle had been at the water-hole near our camp two
days before. They helped to recover our camels, and then
clattered off again down the gorge over stones and fallen
logs in a headlong rush.
We sent Rattler back with our camels, and then paced the
distance to camp, climbing the Red Wall on the way.
When we arrived in camp in the evening we found the
muster camp established on the flat above the creek bed,
quite near us. They had collected about twenty cattle, wild
things that had never known anything but the freedom of
the ranges in their whole lives, for there had been no muster
for five years. There had been more in the mob, but the rest
had escaped for the time. From the stories of these men it
appeared that the mustering of these wild beasts in the
rocky ranges was a man’s work, to say the least of it; falls
were so common that they discussed their ways of falling
so as to suffer the least injury. The cattle bolt at full gallop,
in their fear, with the men after them at a breakneck pace.
This is reasonable on the plains, but in the ranges it sounds
almost too dangerous, and is certainly impossible for all but
the most expert horsemen. I felt a great desire to see this
work at closer quarters, but Raggatt treated my suggestion
with scorn. He was probably thinking more of his horses
than of me.
The horses in Central Australia show very good breeding;
in fact, horse-breeding is one of the chief industries of the
country, and large numbers are sold annually to the Indian
Army buyers. The cattle men have found that it pays to use
the best horses, so that at musterings one sees aborigines
mounted on horses that would look more at home on a race-
course.
The camp of the cattle men was interesting. They had the
cattle cornered on the flat above the stream, in a little bay


in the hill-side, open only in one direction. The white faces
and long horns could be seen peering out between the trees
close to the camp. A man sat on a horse facing them. Both
man and horse appeared to be asleep, the man’s head droop-
ing and the horse’s nearly touching the ground. Three or
four saddled horses were tied to the trees close to the men
at the fire, ready to be mounted instantly if the cattle
stirred. The camp itself consisted merely of the fire with
the swags lying round it. The men were at their evening
meal, all in the typical attitude of the bushman, eating the
universal food of the country. The table manners and
customs of the drover are unique. He faces the fire, kneel-
ing on one knee and sitting on the heel of that leg, with one
arm on the other knee in front of him. One hand holds his
knife, and the other large lumps of damper and beef, from
which he carves pieces as required. The quart pot with its
strong tea is within easy reach at the side. It is a striking
sight to see the ring of men round the fire, all in the same
attitude, their lean, brown faces lighted up here and there
as the fire flickers, and to hear the talk roll on and on, the
flood-gates of conversation opened after perhaps months of
solitary silence. At last the swags are unrolled near the
fire, each man lies down between his blankets, and silence
reigns. The whites, the half-castes, and the aborigines each
have their separate fire.
The same kneeling position is maintained for hours. I
prefer to lie full lepgth by a fire, raised on one elbow, but I
admit that eating in this position is not easy.
As I left the camp I took a walk round towards the
bullocks, which made a little movement. Instantly the
horse’s head went up and the man was on the alert. I crept
silently away.
These men travel with the very minimum of equipment,
and cut food down to the limits of bare necessity. Meat,
flour, salt, tea, and sugar make up the commissariat. Many
of them could afford to travel in luxury, and there is no
dearth of pack animals for transport. A man might take a
tin or two of jam or preserved fruits, one would think,
without the risk of being considered effeminate, but it is
not done.


One point I have never understood is the refusal of the
bushman to camp in the creek beds under any circum-
stances. It is a rule that allows of no variation, based on
the danger of being washed away by floods in the night.
This could happen far down long watercourses where there
might be no indication of rain higher up, but near the head-
waters such a danger should be foreseen. However, there it
is: to camp in the creek is the sign of the new chum. At
this place in Ellery Creek the cattle men were on the bare
flat, lying on the hard, dusty ground and subject to a chill
wind, while I was on the soft, clean sand and out of the
wind, but I was in the wrong place. I knew what Raggatt
meant when he said, T saw your camp in the creek.’ I did
not reply, ‘And in the best place, too.’ I never argue with
an Old Timer. For one reason, it is a waste of time, for it
is impossible to convince him, and, secondly, it is the one
thing, above all others, that makes the traveller unpopular.
If it is something about which the Old Timer could not be
expected to have any knowledge, then he is often interested
and eager to learn, if it is told in the right way, but he must
be allowed to be the expert in his own way of life. Then you
are both on an equal footing.


'4^ / WWi JIT JjP JJ, t
JH 3Er II V/# . <
■■"■ '’ f -%iJ9 %
-ii
«)
o
Si
<»
s
a,
si


X I
v %
'df
m m
¥
%
■i I
r
r im - - *, f -.L--- * '
I IB •«*** * *
' Wii.
'
III , - . ■ ;: : :. , . : : ■ . . ;" : , ; ■ ; • ; ■ :
1 . . 1 1
MBntfHK?
M
r
Borrowed Police Patrol Camels.


CHAPTER XVII
The James and Waterhouse Ranges
last we broke camp and, following down the Ellery and
then leaving its bed, cut across a bend to meet it again
far out on the Missionary Plain. The conglomerate hills
were four miles through where we crossed them, forming a
fringe along the southern flank of the MacDonnells.
Before we left the bed of the creek, Rudd and I stopped
to examine and photograph a good outcrop, sending Rattler
on with the string. When we mounted again my camel gave
me some trouble. Half an hour later I missed my prized
camel whip, a long rhinoceros-hide affair known as a ‘kor-
bag,’ with leather-work on the handle, given to me by an
Omda in the Sudan. When I told Rudd I would have to go
back, it came to light that old Rudolph had played up too,
at the same time, and we had each been wondering why
the other had not shown some sympathy. We returned and
found the whip, which my camel had shaken off.
On the Missionary Plain, a red-loam expanse of mulga
thickets, rock outcrops ceased. Ten miles away to the south
the bold front of the James Ranges could be seen. In order
to visit the Mission Station at Hermannsburg, on the Finke
near its entrance into the James Ranges, we took a course
south-west as soon as we reached the plain.
In due course we met the mission road from Alice
Springs, followed this across the Ellery Creek, and then took
a camel pad which obviously was a more direct route than
the road. The distance proved to be more than we expected;
darkness came on, and with it the cold, increased by a bitter
wind, which gradually froze us stiff. We were wearing only
our shirts and trousers, the day costume, as we expected
every minute to see the Mission lights, but we were soon
forced by cold and hunger to halt the camels, light a fire,
and make some tea.


We then mounted again, still without coats, and dragged
on through the dark.
At last a dim light showed close at hand, and we pulled
up at a stockyard near the Mission buildings. We were
soon inside the house of Mr. Heinrich, the teacher of the
Mission, and sitting before a fire sipping port wine from
Tanunda, Mr. Heinrich’s home town in South Australia, a
German settlement, where wine-growing is an important
industry. We slept in beds that night, and a simple bush-
man’s remedy from my host relieved me of my riding
troubles.
Most of the next day was spent at the Mission Station,
and we wished that the time could have been longer.
The Mission was founded some seventy years ago by the
Lutheran Church, and its beginning was associated with the
earlier efforts by the Lutherans on the Cooper at Killal-
paninna. The Australian Synod founded the station, but
the pastors have always been sent out from Germany. A
new man, Pastor Albrecht, and his wife, had just arrived
from Germany to take the place of Pastor Strehlow, who
had recently died after long service. He had not had time
to learn the native languages, and knew little English, so
Mr. Heinrich was our chief guide. The staff consisted of
the Pastor and Mr. Heinrich, and several white station
hands who were away at the cattle muster. The Mission
holds a big lease of country and is run as a cattle station;
the waters are rather inadequate, and the station not self-
supporting to the extent that was hoped.
There were a few adult natives about the place, and per-
haps a hundred children. Some of the adults are permanent
residents, who do the work of the place, and have given up
the wild life and become civilized and nominally Christian.
Then there is the floating population, the little groups of
wild people that come in from time to time; the Mission
keeps in touch with these, and often sends its civilized per-
manent people out to them. A letter from one of these men
was shown to me, written on paper in ink in the Arunta
language. It referred mainly to the efforts of the writer to
tell the people about God, and he seemed pleased with his
success. These men can write and read the Scriptures and


some prayers in the Arunta language, as a result' of the
patient work of the missionaries. The wild people, naked
heathens, do not stay more than a day or two at the station
when they come in, but they often leave their children be-
hind, particularly in times of drought; when the seasons
improve they take their children away. There was no sign
of coercion anywhere.
The Mission issues food to the limit of its ability when
necessary, but with caution, for if fed regularly the native
would simply sit down and do nothing, becoming completely
dependent on the white man and giving up his hunting for
ever. The Missionaries do everything possible to prevent
this. On the other hand they have saved many lives in
times of drought.
Once a week the children are taken out into the scrub to
collect ‘bush tucker,’ and this happened on the day of our
visit. Mr. Heinrich conducted the excursion. A crowd of
children from toddlers up to perhaps twelve years of age
collected round us, all eager for the hunt. In accordance
with the Mission practice they wore clothing, consisting of
one little cotton garment hung from the shoulders. The
children are not taught to wash, and one felt that if wash-
ing is excluded, clothing should be also; both are equally
innovations to the native. Among the adult permanent
people clothing is one of the chief causes of mortality. When
they ‘go bush’ in clothing, they keep it on as long as it lasts,
and may lie down to sleep in soaking garments; they are
very susceptible to pneumonia.
Shouting and running, the little swarm set out for a few
miles’ walk, with a couple of donkeys, without bridles or
saddles, on which the smallest took it in turns to ride. The
children at once attacked the little creatures of the bush—
birds, lizards, grubs, and insects. Many of them carried
pointed sticks with which to search for their victims or dig
them out. The only vegetable sought was the little nut-like
bulbs of a certain grass which grows in sandy soil. They
find them with great dexterity and speed, digging with the
sticks and sifting the soil through the fingers; they are not
unpleasant to eat raw, and when roasted and the husks
removed they are not unlike peanuts.


A few little fires were lighted and some lizards roasted,
but most of the catch was eaten as soon as captured. One
item of diet consisted of little white wafers about the size
of a sixpenny piece, to be found on the leaves of gum-trees,.
They are a protective covering built by a grub over the part
of the leaf on which it leaves. Mr. Heinrich and his wife
and little son ate them regularly with sugar and .milk for
breakfast.
When the hunt was over the swarm returned to the
Mission like ants on the march.
One could not but be impressed by the methods and
achievements of the Mission. If the fundamental principle
is allowed, that Christianity, with the minimum of civiliza-
tion which must go with it, is to the benefit of the Aus-
tralian aboriginal—a question which cannot be discussed
here—then the Hermannsburg Mission is doing its work in
the best possible way, as the result of the experience of the
able and earnest men who have given their lives for their
Master’s work in this remote and lonely place. Everybody
about the Mission was obviously very happy, and the per-
manent adults were the most intelligent aborigines I have
seen, and those I came in contact with had a definite idea of
service to others.
I obtained some useful information about the James
Ranges from Mr. Heinrich; it was his custom to take long
rides with pack horses, and spend days at a time away from
the station, when opportunity offered, and he had a great
love and enthusiasm for the country. He had a good col-
lection of Larapintine fossils, which the blacks brought in
from time to time.
After calling on Pastor Albrecht and his wife and looking
over the Mission buildings, we got away late in the after-
noon. After consulting Mr. Heinrich I had decided to go
down Ellery Greek to its junction with the Finke, and then
to follow the Finke to a large permanent pool known as
Boggy Hole, where there had been a police camp in earlier
days. From there a series of ridges and valleys runs east-
ward to the Hugh, at the eastern end of the James Ranges.
I proposed to cross to the Hugh, follow that stream up
through the Waterhouse Ranges on to the Missionary Plain,


and then take the mission road back to Alice Springs. The
route, about a hundred miles, would cover country never
visited by a geologist before.
The first stage, about eight miles, led us to the Ellery
Creek Old Station, We were in excellent marching order by
this time, and did not need to make the orthodox afternoon
start. It is the custom to begin camel journeys in the after-
noon, and make the first camp near the starting-point, so
that it is easy to send back for anything essential that is
left behind. The camel man thus has half the day to ensure
that all is well, and then starts off with a quiet mind. The
next day he moves off before sunrise, still serene, all the
loads now properly adjusted. It is without doubt the best
way to start a long journey.
The Ellery Creek Old Station, our immediate destination,
is at the point where the Ellery Creek enters its gorge in the
James Ranges, known as Todd Glen. The way lay through
the mulga scrub of the Missionary Plain; darkness fell, and
even the range on our right faded away. I was leading, and
the track was invisible; I gave the camel his head and we
began crossing branch channels of a stream, up and down
banks, and through tea-tree thickets. I was quite bushed,
when suddenly my camel stopped at the gate of a stockyard,
a more solid indication of Ellery Creek Old Station than I
had expected, and all there was of it, as we saw next morn-
ing. Rudd and Rattler were surprised at the way I found it
in the dark, but not so surprised as I was.
The temperature at 7 a.m. next morning was 24° F.;
our sleeping-bags showed the rime of our breathing round
the openings, and a half-mug of tea was frozen solid. I
warmed the mug over the fire and shook out the cylinder of
tea, which Rattler chewed up, to his great delight. The sun
appeared over the ridges, and we experienced that delight-
ful feeling of warmth suffusing everything.
The Todd Glen, carrying the Ellery Creek, runs due south
in the James Ranges for six miles, when it enters the Finke.
The Finke pursues a tortuous course from the Mission
Station to this point through a gorge in the red Ordovician
sandstone very like Todd Glen, Both streams flow between
almost perpendicular red walls a hundred feet or so high,


and it is impossible to travel except in the stream bed. The
Todd Glen is the better going, and is used by the camel mail
from Horseshoe Bend. The Glen of Palms is a tributary of
the Finke just below the Mission Station, where those in-
teresting and isolated palms, Livistona Mariae, are found;
we did not visit it. The bright green gum-trees in the level,
pebbly stream bed stand out against the red walls of sand-
stone in fine contrast. The meanders shown on maps of the
Finke are exaggerated; it is very difficult to keep direction
in the narrow gorges, and curves tend to be over-estimated,
for one is fully occupied trying to keep one’s animals on
their feet. Neither the Ellery nor the Finke can be trav-
ersed by wheeled vehicles in the northern part of the James
Ranges.
The Todd Glen opens out before the junction with the
Finke is reached, and below the junction the Finke flows
in a much more open valley.
Six miles below the junction we came upon Boggy Hole,
which consisted of two long, narrow stretches of permanent
water, the first nearly half a mile long and the second
several hundred yards. Both had margins of bulrushes and
green reeds, with a big flock of ducks, of which we shot
half a dozen, and had a couple of good meals off them.
The geology here was very interesting. Two miles below
the Boggy Hole the Finke, which is running south, takes
an almost semicircular sweep, up against a steep wall of
quartzite rising over 500 feet, before continuing its south-
erly course. Mount Merrick is the high point on the west
side, and there is a wonderful view from its summit, re-
vealing the geological structure of the James Ranges. The
rock formations are in a broad fold, with Mount Merrick a
point on the axis. The fold pitches to the west, so that
the outcrops of the formations form ridges running easterly
from Mount Merrick and gradually diverging; these ridges
are of quartzite and sandstone, and the long, narrow
valleys between them are in shales and limestones. The ar-
rangement of ridges and valleys is similar to that of the
MacDonnell Ranges south of the Heavitree quartzite, but
there is no folding in the latter. Two ridges of quartzite
meet at Mount Merrick, and two valleys curve round the


mountain to meet behind it, forming what is known as
Circle Gully.
The central valley running eastward from Mount Merrick
is known as Merrick Gully, and either side of it run
Tietkens Vale and Boggy Hole Creek Valley.
It seemed probable that the Cambrian limestones would
outcrop somewhere along the central valley, and they are
known to do so at the telegraph line, while the valleys each
side should show the Ordovician fossiliferous limestone
which would be a new locality for these fossils.
There was supposed to be some sort of track to Alice
Springs from the old police camp, which we recognized by
the ruins of a stone hut at Boggy Creek; the track is sup-
posed to go up the Boggy Creek Gully in the James Ranges,
and thence across to the Hugh, where it crosses the Water-
house Ranges. We decided to take that route, but saw no
signs of a track; this, however, was not necessary, for it
was impossible to get out of the valley for the first twenty
miles, after which the direction was obvious.
We soon discovered that the Boggy Hole Creek valley
marked the Ordovician fossiliferous horizon. Numerous
limestone outcrops were found in the valley floor, crowded
with fragments of fossils, but good specimens were more
difficult to obtain there than in the Horn Valley. Pieces
of shale were found in the sides of the valley, showing
little cubes of hard rock, with hollowed sides, the shapes
of salt crystals preserved in stone. The water in which
these beds were laid down was shallow and saline. Salt-
bush was seen growing in this valley. It is rare in Central
Australia.
At fifteen miles up Boggy Hole Valley we ran the creek
out and were at the divide in the valley between the Finke
and Hugh watersheds, and were soon following down the
watercourses feeding the Hugh. In six miles the valley
opened out, and escape was possible; the main creek took
a turn to the north-east, and in three miles we had passed
out of the James Ranges on to the sandy mulga plains
again. The Hugh crosses the James Ranges only five miles
east of that point, and our creek entered another flowing
along the northern front of the ranges and continuing east-


ward to the Hugh; but we took a straight course for the
pass through the Waterhouse Range to the north-east,
known as Lawrence’s Gap, thus cutting off a bend of the
Hugh.
The Waterhouse Range is an isolated mass of ridges,
thirty miles long by five miles wide, and rising to perhaps
400 feet above the plains. The Missionary Plain separates
it from the MacDonnells to the north. Like the James
Ranges, it is a smaller anticlinal formation with an east-
west axis, pitching west. The same type of ridges of
Ordovician quartzite are seen as in the Boggy Hole Valley,
and the underlying Cambrian limestone is exposed in the
narrow plain along the axis of the fold in the centre of the
ranges. We camped one night in the mulga near the Hugh,
and next morning were soon on that stream and entering
the gorge through which it traverses the Waterhouse
Range. The river cuts at right angles through the centre
of the range, a splendid example of an antecedent stream
which owes its origin to a former topography in ages before
the elevation of the ranges.
Along the Hugh in the Waterhouse Range we were on
historic ground, for here passed MacDouall Stuart, the first
white man to reach the centre of the continent, seventy
years before. He had followed up the Hugh to its source
in the MacDonnells, through Stuart’s Pass, where we had
camped on the way out. The Heavitree Gap and Alice
Springs lie thirty-two miles to the east of this pass.
There was a thrill about the next six miles, as we passed
the selfsame way as that great explorer, particularly as the
scene is to-day exactly as it was when he entered the pass,
for no trace remains of the overland telegraph which was
brought up the Hugh. It has been moved farther east, and
we had not realized that the telegraph ever came that way
till we found an old insulator on the ground.
Lawrence’s Pass, the southern end of the course of the
Hugh across the Waterhouse Range, is exactly like the
gorge of Ellery Creek in the Southern MacDonnells; they
are both in the same Ordovician quartzite. The fossil
horizon was not located.


On the north side of the central plain, and close to the
track, there stands out a little flat-topped bluff about a
hundred feet high, with limestone ridges behind it. The top
of this bluff was covered with a twenty-foot thickness of
ancient river gravels, of a type found later in several
localities in the broad valleys of the streams in the Mac-
Donnell Ranges and named by me the Arltungan Formation.
These remnants of older flood plains, now occurring as river
terraces, are of great interest; they contain silicified plant
remains, and in some places freshwater shells of Pleistocene
age. This little hilltop in the Waterhouse Ranges was
covered with petrified tree trunks and limbs up to a foot
in diameter, lying about in such a natural way as to suggest
a recently felled wood. ‘Botch’ opal also occurred there.
While I was standing on this vantage point I heard a
clattering sound coming across the plain, and soon a caval-
cade of pack-horses swept up in a cloud of dust, at full trot,
scaring my camels, which jumped up and made off. At the
tail of the procession rode a man in a very wide hat, with a
beautiful long new stock-whip. He saw me and rode across,
pulling up below me with a flourish, and shouting, ‘My
name’s O’Brien. Who are you ?’ I had never met a man like
this in the outback. I found he had recently come from
Queensland to manage Henbury Station down the Finke.
He was on his way, apparently, to lay out the Administra-
tion at Alice Springs, which had perpetrated some further
injustice to Ireland, and he was in a hurry to get there to
redress his wrongs. He was a picturesque figure, but gave
the impression of continually trailing his coat in an aggres-
sive manner. When I told him there was mustering going
on in the country, he was furious that he hadn’t been in-
formed, and dashed off again as abruptly as he had arrived.
We followed on slowly through the northern gorge, and
came out at the Owen Springs Station, then abandoned,
but since reoccupied.
A mile or two beyond the station, on the Hugh close up
against the ranges, to our surprise we saw a camp, and
found it was the muster party, with Hayes and Raggatt.
There, too, stood O’Brien, still with hat on and whip in hand
and the same swagger.


I inquired about the shortest route to Alice Springs, and
was told that a pad ran north-east to cut the mission road
in the plain. O’Brien said he would camp there for the
night and overtake us early in the morning; it was thirty-
three miles to Alice Springs, and, as I wanted to arrive the
following evening, I decided to push on and do a little night
marching.
It soon became dark, and the pad hard to follow: we
halted for a boil-up. It was another very cold night, and we
wore our heaviest coats; Rudd had a pair of woollen mitts,
and dropped one soon after we restarted, and we spent some
time searching for it, in vain, with matches.
I wanted to camp on the mission road, and although I
went ahead myself, as Rattler seemed very sleepy, I crossed
it in the dark without seeing it.
We made our last camp on the well-grassed Missionary
Plain, in thick mulga, and next morning went on almost to
the front of the MacDonnells, which we followed along till
we met the mission road near where it enters a gap in the
first ridge of the MacDonnells. We were soon at the Pine-
Tree Gap, and then across the police paddock to the Heavi-
tree Gap, and thence into the police yard at Alice Springs
at nightfall.
As soon as we got into the pub I looked into the little
sitting-room, and there was O’Brien in close conversation
with my old friend Father Long, who has done much for
the people of his fold since he came up with the railway.
I first met Father Long having a gin and water with some
Old Timers in that dark passage behind the bar. O’Brien
said he saw where we had had our tea, and then crossed the
mission road, and he put his hand in his pocket and fished
out Rudd’s mitt.
There was a large party of tourists who had just come up
by train, and that night saw one of the last of the ‘old-style’
dances at Alice Springs. There are now two dance halls.
The dances were held in a tree-surrounded block next
to the old original store that used to be Raggatt’s.
In the middle of the area tarpaulins were laid on
the ground, and a piano stood to one side. All around
the tarpaulin dancing-floor there were lines of braziers,


il
j’ j J
i jH
VSt I
[
m* 1 ** t ' >
:
/ :
fill i *
v ;! ... *
. ■£■
iil
v f : 1 . Jf
jjjjfal
- w ■? ' Zih,
ISP "" '* <v 1WHK
fs#* 1
ppp , - •
ImhHI •**&? .
■ WKKUM
.
lw> .
Mulga on the
Mission Road.


- ‘ , ■ ‘RMM JMBp i -3H
4X f£'t f : v i# \*
r; .'*$. . |H|$T 5i '?V* |
V'V :' ||f
;* ' •' i J tapm,'
' '■ . ■■■:—**>.■- ■ <4,& .« ' *
*• *• .. .;? • •,>■., '* ■ JfogfeV '■■
. ..,,M ■*■■•• " -....-• ■ ■ •■■ . ' •• :.v : v:.:; ?••■
Huckitta Station, from the Dulcie Range.


iron drums in which wood fires were burning mer-
rily, and above, a square of sky with cold blue stars
framed by the black tree-tops. Anything more utterly dif-
ferent from modern night-club dancing could not be
imagined.
When I went in, there stood O’Brien, with wide hat still
on, but without the whip, and surrounded by a group of
tourists. He was in his element; I heard him promising to
muster some cattle in the morning, in full war-paint, so
that they could get a cinematograph film of it. He had no
cattle within reach, and could not make good his promise,
.but that did not seem to worry him.
Rudd got himself into a rather awkward position. One of
the tourists asked him if he was Steele Rudd, the Aus-
tralian author, and Rudd, thinking it was a joke, said he
was. This exciting piece of news went round like wildfire,
and Rudd soon found himself almost a rival to O’Brien as
an object of interest.


CHAPTER XVIII
The Eastern MacDonnells
'J’HE MacDonnell Ranges extend eastward for a hun-
dred miles from the telegraph line, where they give
way to the Simpson Desert.
Very little has been written about the eastern ranges,
though they have just as much scenic beauty as the
western, and geologically are even more interesting, par-
ticularly with regard to fossils and minerals. They are a
great field for the mineralogist, with their gold occurrences,
‘ruby’ fields, and mica mines. The Hermannsburg Mission
Station has drawn the tourist and the traveller to the west,
and the east has been neglected.
In the winter of 1931 I made a 400-mile camel trek from
Alice Springs into the area to the east of the telegraph line,
my farthest point being the Jervois Range, 150 miles to the
north-east. This time I had with me Mr. S. J. O’Grady, one
time manager of the Arltunga Battery, and Mick, a young
police boy. Mick had recently finished a term of imprison-
ment for cattle stealing, and had been made a tracker on his
release; he was quite uncivilized, and had practically no
English. He was quiet and moody, and I found it almost
impossible to get any response out of him. Possibly he
thought he was still a prisoner, if indeed he had ever
realized it.
The country was in better heart than I had ever seen it
before. There was grass everywhere in the MacDonnells,
and water was lying about near Marree and Oodnadatta—a
rare sight. The stations were re-stocking with cattle, and
mobs were moving down from the ‘top end.’ Every one was
busy and happy. Fat cattle were being entrained for the
south; three cattle trains left Alice Springs on the day I
started for Adelaide.
The rabbit was appearing again; it is astonishing how
they breed and spread when a drought breaks. They were


busily digging out the old sand-filled warrens and putting
their houses in order again. On the last journey, in the
Western MacDonnells, we had not seen a single rabbit, and
would not have noticed their burrows if my camel had not
refused to advance on several occasions.
The birds, too, had increased a hundredfold; whereas in
the previous year I had only seen the little finches round the
water, the galahs, and a few black cockatoos, there were
now plenty of parrots and little budgerigars (love-birds),
black and white cockatoos, mopokes, and even curlews. The
crows and eagle-hawks were much more numerous, and I
saw emus and plains kangaroos for the first time in Central
Australia. Rock wallabies are always to be found round
the permanent water in the ranges. Brush turkeys had
not returned, and no ducks were seen to the east, where
there are no permanent waters of any size. Water was
again present in Lake Eyre South, seen from the railway
line on the way up.
The main line of communication to the east was a track
called the Queensland Road, which ran to the old Arltunga
Goldfields, then across the Hale River, round the eastern
end of the Harts Ranges (the north-eastern extremity of
the MacDonnells) and then north-eastward across the Plenty
River to the Jervois Range, beyond which a stretch of 200
miles of monotonous scrub brought one to civilization again
at Lake Nash Station on the River Georgina on the Queens-
land border. Another hundred miles to the east lie the
Mount Isa Mines and the railways of Queensland. The
Georgina flows, when it does flow, southerly into Eyre Creek
and the Mulligan, and finally reaches the Diamantina, over
400 miles below Lake Nash.
The Eastern MacDonnells include the Fergusson, Strang-
ways, and Harts Ranges, and they extend from Alice
Springs in a north-easterly direction for a hundred miles.
At the telegraph line the ranges are only fourteen miles
across, but the width increases to fifty miles at forty miles
to the eastward. The great Heavitree Range, which forms
the southern front of the MacDonnells at the telegraph line
and dominates the ranges to the westward, is also one of
the chief features to the east.


The Strangways Ranges form a north-west bulge to the
highlands; they are a westerly extension of the Harts
Ranges. The Hale River rises in the Strangways Ranges,
and, flowing eastward, divides the Eastern MacDonnells by
its broad valley into two distinct units connected to the
west by the Strangways Ranges. To the north of the Hale
there is a marked absence of the parallel ridges so char-
acteristic of the Southern MacDonnells. Here lie the Harts
Ranges, formed of gneisses and schists, with much intruded
granite. The country rises gradually from the Hale through
rough hills to the northern margin of the Harts Ranges,
where an east-west line of peaks—including Mounts Camp-
bell, Mabelle, Brassey, and Palmer—faces the Plenty Plain
to the north. These peaks are the highest in the eastern
ranges, Mount Palmer reaching 3,700 feet. Mount Brassey
is possibly a little higher; I only ascended the former.
All the southerly-flowing streams from the Eastern Mac-
Donnells—the Todd, Ross, Giles, Hale, Illogwa, and other
unnamed ones—flood out into the Simpson Desert and are
lost. The Plenty takes all the run-off from the north side
of the Harts Ranges, and flows eastward into the Marshall,
which in turn joins the Hay, and finally almost reaches
Birdsville, down the east side of the Simpson Desert. The
Sandover takes the run-off from the Strangways Ranges
and floods out a hundred miles to the north-east in plains.
There is no definite termination to any of these streams;
they gradually fade away.
The Plenty Plain, some twenty miles wide, separates the
Harts Ranges from the Mopunga and Jervois Ranges to
the north. These ranges form another east-west line. In
the Mopunga Range there is a complete repetition of the
rock formations of the Southern MacDonnells. Beyond the
line of these ranges comes the edge of a tableland with a
front of forty miles, but not more than twenty miles wide,
the Dulcie Range. This range is of red Ordovician quartz-
ite, lying almost flat, with precipitous scarps up to 300 feet
high; Huckitta Station lies at the foot of it. North again
come the vast plains of the Sandover, in which the Lake
Nash road lies.


During my excursion into this country we had several
days of rain, and the bitterly cold south-east trade winds
were blowing almost continuously over the plains.
As we passed Undoolya, we were entertained by Ted
Hayes and his family to a good dinner. We passed close to
the scene of my forced aeroplane landing, and then found
ourselves outside the Undoolya Gap, and in a region rich in
algal fossils. We visited the site of Chewings’ first dis-
covery of algae at Acacia Well.
At Love’s Creek Station the creek turns south and cuts
across all the formations exactly as Ellery Creek does. We
camped at Love’s Creek, and ran a section through the
Fergusson Ranges to the Todd Plain to the south; Love’s
Creek becomes the Ross River when it turns south. In
this section I had the great good fortune to discover the
fossils known as Archaeocyathinae in great profusion. This
definitely established the Cambrian age of the beds in
which they occurred, and was the first definite determina-
tion of any age other than Ordovician in the MacDonnells.
Love’s Creek Station is owned by Louis Bloomfield, a
well-known character and Old Timer of the MacDonnells.
His wife is a sister of Charlie Kunoth, my companion on
the Lake Eyre expedition.
Bloomfield is the best-known breeder of horses in the
MacDonnells, and has been a very successful rider in local
races. His house is full of racing trophies, including brace-
lets made of Arltunga gold and studded with local ‘rubies/
I never knew before that there really was a bracelet con-
nected with the race known as the Lady’s Bracelet.
We were kept in camp for a couple of days by rain at
Love’s Creek. My stay was unpleasant, as I had started
off with too much of a rush, and was very stiff and sore,
and had developed a bad cold. The magnesian waters of
Love’s Creek Well, and a damp tent, added to the dis-
comforts. We would have been glad to leave our tent for
the comfort of the station house, but such a thing never
occurred to Mrs. Bloomfield, whose husband was out on
the run with no tent at all.
A permanent camp of natives is established at Love’s
Creek, and I regard the method of dealing with aboriginals


on that station as ideal. There is no check on them, and
they come and go at will. Some men are always available
for station work, and the women tend a large herd of goats,
bringing the milk up to the station daily.
The natives are very contented there. They were specially
delighted that a recent influenza epidemic, which had played
havoc with the native population, had not visited Love’s
Creek, and an old woman said, T bin see ’em that pfeller go
past this place,’ giving a wave across the sky with her arm.
She had probably noticed some clouds pass over. They had
been much scared at the ‘big pfeller eagle-hawks’ when we
flew over Love’s Creek in the planes, and had run for cover.
An old man calling himself ‘Goggle-eye Jim’ came into
our camp, and said he remembered O’Grady at Arltunga
twenty years before. He and Mick stood by our fire in the
rain for long periods. I like to make a huge fire to try to
cheer things up, but the blackfellow likes to crowd over a
few coals. Goggle-eye Jim said: ‘White pfeller make ’em
too big fire. Can’t get near enough.’ I made a shelter for
Mick, with a spare sheet of canvas and the camel boxes, but
every now and then he would come out and stand by the
fire till he was soaking wet, and then creep into his shelter
again.
After our first walk down the Ross, when we returned,
tired and cold, we found Mick had the quart pots on and had
made a good bough break-wind round the fire, which was
very welcome, and a very unexpected bit of forethought on
the part of our wild companion. It is not the custom to
allow the blacks to handle the food at all. The white man
cooks for the black, and hands him his ration.
The Arltunga Goldfields lie in the hills just south of the
Hale, and about seventy miles from Alice Springs. The
battery is at the foot of Mount Gordon, in the centre
of the old mining district. An ancient miner, a new-comer,
was cyaniding a dump of fine slimes with the assistance of
natives, and another, the last of the thousand men who were
there twenty years ago, was merely existing at the Cross
Roads, some two miles away, and awaiting, he said, the fate
of all who had stayed there more than a couple of years—


death from swallowing quartz-dust. The policeman, the
third inhabitant of the deserted field, was away on leave.
The battery buildings, the police station, the last miner’s
hut, and the neglected graves were all that remained of the
men and their houses, the pubs and the stores, the race-
courses and the sports meetings of happier times. The
countryside had returned to its former state of virgin bush.
A little alluvial gold was found in the gullies, but most of
it came from the quartz veins and reefs which are scattered
over a wide area. The most extensive workings were at
White Range, eight miles from the battery, where the
-quartz reefs occurred in the Heavitree quartzite.
Gold is found all along the range from Mount Gordon
westward to Bald Hill. The best-known locality there is
Winnecke Mines, some twenty-five miles from Arltunga,
where little success was achieved.
Years before, O’Grady, while in charge of the battery, had
found on the surface on Paddy’s Hole Plain, south of the
battery, a number of silicified stems of an osmundaceous
fern, some of which had found their way to the Adelaide
University. We could not find the spot, but I recognized the
Arltunga Pleistocene deposits in the plain from which the
stems undoubtedly came.
We visited Claraville Station, on the Hale, owned by
Larry Rosenbaum, an Old Timer with a small station in
some of the best country. He often obtains top prices for
his beasts in the Adelaide markets, and is very proud of
himself and his station and his beef. We arrived after dark
and were guided to the house from far away by the oc-
casional striking of matches by smokers; dinner was over,
and the men were already lying on the stretchers outside,
for Larry was going to make an early start to bring in
cattle for branding next morning, but, though we were
complete strangers, he gave us dinner and a very hearty
welcome in his one-roomed hut, half home, half store. He
cleared room for us at the table by sweeping to one side
the miscellaneous collection of objects on it, some of which
fell to the floor.
We had a splendid dinner of his excellent beef, with
buckets of tea and good bread, and next morning we were


loaded up with about fifty pounds of beef to see us on our
way. We slept on the ground outside, as usual.
We were awakened by Larry roaring in the yards where
he and his natives were branding a colt. He was soon off
and away, leaving us to the store and everything in it. We
moved on ourselves that day.
The object of the store is to supply the mica miners in
the Harts Ranges to the north of Claraville. There were
piles of mica about the place, bartered for stores. The
general opinion is that Larry’s store is not a financial
success.
The gneisses and schists of the Harts Ranges are very
rich in garnets; and so are the sands and gravels in the
streams running out of the ranges—the Florence, the Tug,
the Lizzie, which all join the Hale, and the Hale itself below
their confluences. One sample I took showed 52 per cent,
of garnet and 25 per cent, of black tourmaline, with much
epidote and diopside. The sands are a very pretty red, and
look most attractive in the clear pools of water. These
garnets were discovered some sixty years ago, and were
mistaken for rubies. Some of them are of exactly the ruby
shade, and in the absence of crystal form more than a mere
glance is required to distinguish them from rubies. There
was a great rush at the time, and camel-loads of rubies
started for Adelaide, where many are still stored; they are
now known as Australian rubies and make a pretty stone.
Pegmatite veins, from the granites exposed in the lower
ground, occur all along and through the Harts Ranges.
These contain a great amount of commercial mica of the
highest grade, pieces up to twelve inches by twelve inches
being not uncommon. The claims have been worked off and
on for many years. The high costs of mining in so remote a
region leave only a small margin of profit. The white lines
of the pegmatite veins may be seen in the red ranges almost
all along the front of the Harts Ranges, and the thin sheets
of mica, carried by the wind from the places where miners
have been trimming and sorting it, catch the sun and glitter
here and there in the grass and scrub.
Great black tourmaline crystals, six inches thick and
several feet long, occur plentifully in the mica veins, and


smaller beryls are common. I obtained one beryl a foot
long by one inch thick.
After lying idle for some years, the mines were then
being reopened by Italians. They were working on Mount
Palmer, 700 feet above their camp; only one of them had
any knowledge of mining. They wanted to sink a shaft
to enter the far end of some workings and I ran a little
traverse by compass and tape into the workings, and
marked the spot on the surface for them. I told them my
fee was £5O, which threw them into deep gloom. I tried to
convince them that it was only a joke, but even if I suc-
ceeded they obviously thought it a poor one. They gave
me some very good kangaroo soup, and later a large mail
for Italy for me to post in Alice Springs. They were
removing pillars left in the old workings which contained
good mica, and I told them this was dangerous; later I
heard that there had been a fall of rock and two had been
killed. They were working very hard, and deserved suc-
cess; they had a ton or two of mica neatly stacked at their
camp.
In the Harts Ranges, and particularly in the stream beds
running north out of them, Stuart’s Bean Tree, Erythrina
vespertine, is very common. This is a beautiful tree, grow-
ing to forty feet in height, with a stem up to two feet in
diameter. It bears long pods, which shed bright scarlet
beans that lie about in profusion round its base. They are
bored and made into long necklaces by the natives, being
extremely hard and durable. One cannot bite through the
beans, their taste is bitter, and even when ground they are of
no use for food, but they look so attractive that one cannot
pass them by without collecting a handful. The wood of
the tree is very pithy and extremely light, which allows one
to have a quiet joke with the new-comer by picking up a
log the size of the end of a ship’s mast and casually throw-
ing it on the fire. Another strong man act can be done with
mulga. I impressed Rudd with this one. The dead mulga,
and 75 per cent, of the mulga is always dead, is white-ant
eaten below ground, and almost every tree is ready to fall.
One only has to walk up to a tree, go through a few bracing
movements, and hurl it to the ground.


The Plenty River was so called by Barclay because water
could be found it it in plenty. Its broad, sandy bed, a
quarter of a mile wide in some places, is a veritable under-
ground river. The surface is usually bone dry, and glisten-
ing white and hot in the sun; but dig a few shovelfuls of
the sand out and abundant clear water at once fills the
hole. The river bed is shallow, with a rock bottom. The
people from Huckitta Station scoop out large holes with
horses in the dry season; we saw a party of natives and
half-castes doing this. The horses were already wading in
a couple of feet of water to drag the scoop through. This
is what is called a ‘soak.’ A ‘rockhole’ is a natural hole,
usually in granite, a basin in the solid rock, scooped out
generally by running water, and left full after rains. At
the western end of the Jervois Ranges there is a wonderful
line of rock-holes, known as the Oorobbra Rockholes. These
and the Plenty soaks were the only water we found north
of the Harts Ranges.
Happy, indeed, is the geologist who can travel by camel in
these regions in winter. There are large areas where no
detailed work has yet been done. Something new and inter-
esting turns up every day, and one never knows what
the morrow will bring forth, or where the next
night camp will be. The wonderful weather and the open-
air life and the freedom from the cares of civilization pro-
duce that splendid state of physical fitness when no task
seems burdensome, no day too hard.
One soon settles down to the same food as the stockmen.
The meat is carried in large pieces, half salted, and for the
first few days is put out every night on some boughs on the
ground, or hung on the mulga trees if dingoes are about.
It then becomes dry and free from the danger of flies, and
can be left in its bags. It is boiled in pieces at intervals,
and mostly eaten cold, with damper and large quantities of
tea. I always supplement this with onions, usually eaten
raw: some of them are so hot that they almost paralyse
the mouth, but the Afghans eat them like apples. An oc-
casional stew, with onions and potatoes, makes a good
variation. I have enjoyed few meals more than some of
those corned beef and onion repasts. I always carry jam,


but it is not much used, and biscuits and cheese have been
on long treks with me and returned to Alice Springs. On
this journey O’Grady or I made a small damper almost
every night, and became very expert at it.
The meal is over, the damper is made, and the little
‘bidouri’ is under the ashes; the specimens are labelled and
packed, the notes for the day have been written in the fire-
light. It has been a good day. The fire now burns low, and
all is dark and quiet; the bells of the browsing camels
tinkle faintly. The tobacco smoke is fragrant as one lies
on the unrolled swag in dreamy contentment; it is the end
of a perfect day.


CHAPTER XIX
A Qold Rush
M Y next journey into Central Australia was in October
and November 1932, to report on what was thought
to be a wonderful new goldfield about 400 miles north-west
from Alice Springs—the Granites. This boom started at
the most opportune moment, when all Australia was looking
to a new Kalgoorlie to put the country on its feet again.
The field had all the attraction of mystery and inacces-
sibility. It caught the public imagination; it was just what
everyone had expected, that untold wealth still lay in the
unexplored areas. The field boomed itself, and the wildest
tales of chance drill-holes boring into almost solid gold were
readily accepted.
A group of Sydney newspapers commissioned me to go
up and learn the truth, and make a report to be published
throughout the Commonwealth for the benefit of the public.
Sydney never rose to the heights of enthusiasm of Mel-
bourne and Adelaide.
I found that Simon Rieff was in Adelaide. He had been
one of the first to rush out and peg leases, and was busily
selling options over them. I arranged for him to return with
me, and to take me out to the Granites with his motor-car
and truck. Simon had become an owner of mechanical
transport since our last meeting.
The journey up by train to Alice Springs was quite un-
like any I had experienced before. The train was crowded
with newly appointed managers going up to take charge of
leases, parties of men already promised work and under
contract, miners looking for work, prospectors, adventurers,
all under the lure of the gold. Excitement ran high, and
liquor flowed; the whole train talked of ‘Granites.’
Besides Simon, I had with me E. R. Baume, the journalist,
who afterwards wrote a vivid account of the adventure un-


der the title of Tragedy Track , and also a ‘mining expert’
and a young man from Sydney, who were unexpectedly
tacked on to me at the last moment, I soon found that
these two were regarded with suspicion by the mining men
on the train, at a time when jealous competition ran high.
Confidence in my mission became shaken, and it looked as if
access to the leases might be denied me. I discovered that
the mining man had been there before and reported on
a ‘show’ not a mile from the Granites, and also, what very
few knew at the time, that the Granites was no new find at
all, but the place discovered by Allan Davidson thirty years
before, and called by him Granite No. 1. After some
stormy meetings, the two withdrew from the party, and
did not go beyond Alice Springs.
In all this whirl of excitement it was a great relief to find
my old friend Ted Hayes a passenger on the train. He
was just returning from seeing some of his cattle safely to
market. An Old Timer, who had seen gold booms come and
go before, he represented the only stable industry in the
country.
Heavy rain had fallen in the Centre, and sheets of water
lay all over the plain between the Heavitree Gap and Alice
Springs, a most novel sight to me. The Todd was running
a banker for the first time I had ever seen any water in it.
Alice Springs was crowded. All communication with the
Granites was cut off by the floods. It was known that
parties were on the way in, but must be held up by the
boggy state of the plains. There were a few ‘mining ex-
perts’ who had just come in from the field, and more wait-
ing to go out, as well as a new warden from Darwin, police,
the administrator, and a postal officer who intended to open
a post office, in addition to the crowd that had just come up
on the train. Fortunately, the expense of the train journey
prevented a much greater number of unemployed from con-
gregating there.
It was even more fortunate that every one soon saw the
hopelessness of starting out on foot on the 400 miles from
Alice Springs to the Granites. The men to be employed
had advances of pay, and this delay allowed them to spend
it. The pub seemed to be open all night, and ‘two-up’ was


played in the roads. Hop-beer shops were opened, selling'
pints of a very potable beveridge with considerably more
kick in it than standard beer, at a considerably lower price.
The wife of one of the brokers had sent up a case of
champagne, and the mining experts and leading citizens,
including the administrator, the police sergeant, the postal
officials, the member for the Northern Territory, and my-
self, all spent a very merry evening, at which everyone
made a speech. It was clear that not one at that meeting
had much faith in the discovery. I told them I would say
nothing till I had seen for myself.
After a few days I learnt the complete story of the
Granites. The Chapman Gold Expedition had set out from
Brisbane to discover gold. They had reached Tanami, sixty
miles beyond the granites, and more than half-way across
the continent, a little mine that had been worked off and on
for many years. They had an option over this, but after
inspecting it they turned it down; they were then at the
end of their resources. On their way to Tanami they had
passed the Granites, where three prospectors were working;
they now returned there, and offered the three men £5,000
for their mine. That sort of thing does not often happen
to prospectors. At the time of my arrival two of them had
already gone south for a ‘jamboree/ and the third was
having his at Alice Springs; he never got beyond the pub
there. He finished up his cash by buying an old aeroplane
that crashed on its first landing at Alice Springs, so that
he never even had the pleasure of a ride in it. The Granites
field had been prospected from time to time, and a little
alluvial gold had been won. The three men there at the
time of Chapman’s arrival were working a claim called the
Burdekin Duck, which is the bushman’s name for salt beef
rolled in flour and fried; they had been for about a year on
their claim, just making tucker. About 400 ounces of gold
had come from the field.
Only one reliable mining man had visited the field since
the boom started, and he was in Alice Springs waiting for
the train to take him back. His job was to report on certain
leases only; he was very reticent.


*JSL m
. ;:| M Ik w>
M
& fp f ■*
>/J\
_ - ir ill
* j I Ssh
I |#f ! \
:•
: : ■'■■■■•" ■ •• 1
Mpl
IP Sss ■
■Hi
i a I 4 | I ■; I 1
* H; I 1- Tig ,,#
r. ' '■ i*m - ‘ ‘ -**
\ '•a*-*''-.'
#1
•
■
w J § I ■ i ;• ' i
. A. .!%&& >.
Cr ■$"*■■'
% dfrft
Dryblowers at The
Granites.


fe,
i jm.
Jpl^
jjr ■-
i® v .*i - ? -
SB M||l <


To what extent Chapman had really believed in his own
optimism I was never able to decide; he was then in Mel-
bourne watching the field boom itself. He was a well-borer,
with no previous mining experience or qualifications as far
as I know. The only experienced miner in his party had
came in from Tanami to the Alice Springs hospital before
the idea of the Granites occurred to them.
Ernestine Hill, then a free-lance journalist, was in the
country when the boom started, and she very pluckily went
out with a party, and spent a night at the Granites. Only
one other woman went to the Granites, to open a boarding-
house; she arrived just before I left, and probably soon fol-
lowed me back.
The farther I left Adelaide behind, the less hopeful did
the prospects seem. Kilgariff, who had been supplying pro-
visions for the prospectors and taking their gold, obviously
had no faith in the field at all.
While we were all waiting in Alice Springs for the coun-
try to dry up, some of the trouble-makers who have made
Darwin an impossible place arrived. In a short time they
had worked up a strike, and there was the extraordinary
position created of a strike for higher wages before any
work had been started, and while the prospect of it was
still nebulous. It was an object lesson in the absurdities
into which men can be led from fear of being accused of
disloyalty to their mates, when their only disloyalty was to
the men who had employed them and already given them
something for nothing. But the agitators found that Alice
Springs was not Darwin; local opinion gradually rose
against the strikers; it seemed that the chance awaited by
Central Australia for years was to be thrown away without
a trial. A meeting was called to oppose the strike; every
one went expecting to see something of a riot. In great
silence Musty Miller, a young.station hand and cattle man,
brown and lean and fearless, stood up to speak. He was
known to be the leader of the strike-breakers but moved
easily about among the bad element, with a smile on his
hard face. He made a short, reasonable, and conciliatory
speech, pointing out what this might mean to Central Aus-
tralia, and then he put the motion himself that the strike


should be called off. Not a word was spoken against the
motion, which was declared carried on the voices, and the
meeting dispersed in good order. It was a triumph for that
young man and his type.
Six days after my arrival parties began to come in from
the Granites, exhausted and covered with mud after a week
on the track. I decided to start two days later, with Simon
driving his light buckboard, George Underdown taking
another truck, and Baume and myself as passengers. We
had to carry petrol for a thousand miles for two vehicles,
and water for ourselves, for there was talk of the few soaks
on the track giving out. In spite of the floods, we knew
that in a few days the water would all be absorbed and
evaporated, and the country would look as if there had been
no rain for years, one of the remarkable peculiarities
of that great level area. The other parties delayed
their departure, reckoning to make faster time with a later
start, but I felt I would rather be held up in the desert,
where one might do a little scientific -\*ork, than hang
about Alice Springs doing nothing. Kilgariff had started
a few days before to take a lorry-load of goods up to his
new store at Barrow Creek, along the telegraph line, but
the vehicle had skidded in the mud, overturned, and caught
fire.
The first seventy-eight miles of our journey was along
the telegraph line to Ryan’s Well. We passed the small
heap of iron that had been Kilgariff’s truck and load, but
conditions had already so much improved that we had no
trouble there.
From Ryan’s Well the Granites track runs north-west for
the remaining 295 miles. The telegraph line skirts the east-
ern end of the Reynolds Range, and the track for the first
eighty miles after leaving the line passes along a broad and
pleasant valley between the two long ridges that mainly
compose that range. We were bogged twice in this valley,
where the ground was still wet in the low-lying areas. The
lorry sank to the axles in one bog in a little watercourse
containing a few inches of water. We laboured one whole
afternoon there. We rolled the 40-gallon petrol drums off on
skids cut from the gum-trees, but even when empty the


lorry would not move till gravel and timber had been sunk
deep in the mud beneath the wheels.
The arduous trail began to tell on poor Baume, whose
build and way of life had not fitted him for it. He suffered
heavily before it was all over, when the heat and flies and
bad water began to have their effect, but he stuck to it
gamely and never made a single complaint, even when the
cigarettes, which were his only comfort, gave out through
my under-estimate of the requirements.
At the far end of the valley in the Reynolds Range lies
Coniston Station, the'western limit of civilization in that
direction. Here, among his native retainers, lives old Ran-
dal Stafford, breeding horses and cattle.
From Coniston onwards the hills rapidly die out. At
fifteen miles there is Brooks’ Soak, where Stafford’s last
white companion was dismembered by aborigines, appar-
ently for his tucker, in 1928. Inside a wooden railing stands
a good marble monument, with lettering in lead, bearing
these words:
In memory of Frederick Brooks
Murdered on 7th August 1928
Old Man, in the early days of Coniston
Those days when our troubles were great
In the years you and I worked together
I found you a true and staunch mate.
His old mate
Randal Stafford
This stone commemorates more than one tragedy. It
represents the tragedy of the life of Stafford himself, who
expects to go the self-same way as his old mate, sooner or
later; the tragedy of the extermination of local aborigines
which followed, for at the inquiry demanded by the public,
Constable Murray and the punitive party admitted the kill-
ing of seventeen; and the tragedy of the gradual extinc-
tion of the whole of the native inhabitants of the country.
Scattered hills and ridges give some relief + o the plain
for the next twenty-five miles from Brooks’ Soak to Cock-
atoo Creek, which is the last defined watercourse for the


next 200 miles in any direction between north and west.
After leaving Cockatoo Creek one enters a red loam plain,
densely covered with low, grey-green vegetation, with an
occasional hill of granite or schist rising perhaps to a
hundred feet, little red islands in the sea of scrub, lying at
least fifty miles apart. For long periods of the journey
no islands at all break the level circle of the horizon. This
is the perfect peneplain of the geologist; there are no in-
dications of any drainage lines, though the rainfall averages
about fifteen inches. Water was still plentiful in the sands
of Cockatoo Creek, to be got by digging soaks, but
not a sign of surface water was seen after we left the bog
near Coniston, though but a few days before the half-
drowned parties had been struggling through a quagmire.
We passed long stretches of ‘corduroy’ tracks over the
softer patches made of tree stems and branches, the work
of these parties, and had to avoid the deep ruts and hard
ridges of dried mud left behind by the vehicles that had
just passed that way.
There are no sand-hills in this area; the great sandy
deserts lie farther to the west. The commonest tree is the
‘cork-bark,’ a hakea with narrow, flat leaves and cork-like
bark, an almost shadeless tree growing to about ten feet
high; and next comes a low scrub mallee (cosmophyllum).
There are fairly frequent and scattered ‘whitewash’ gums,
their white limbs visible for long distances, affording the
only real shade in the country. The spinifex is dense and
universal; mulga is almost left behind with the ranges, only
a few clumps remaining in low-lying areas.
Another feature here is the absence of dead timber,
whereas in the mulga country farther south dead mulga lies
about in profusion. The rainfall is regular, without the
droughts which periodically kill off the trees in the drier
regions; one often had to search about for enough dry
sticks to make a fire.
It is indeed a curious type of desert, if that term can
be applied. From a hill-top not a vestige of bare ground
can be seen; the observer is surrounded by a grey-green
ocean. Yet the country is waterless. Two aviators, who had
set out to search for Kingsford Smith, who was lost on the


north-west coast, came down in this area. They spent
their energy in trying to clear a run-way to take off again;
they carried no water, and in two days they had perished,
after drinking the spirit in their compass. They were only
eighty miles from Wave Hill Station to the north; but even
a man like Giles would have been hard put to it to reach
that haven; they would have needed to set out at once, and
to travel only at night. When their plane was finally
located from the air, one dead body was seen under
one of the wings of the stranded machine. It was weeks
before a party from Wave Hill Station reached the tragic
scene.
We continued our journey to the Granites. All signs of
rain were now gone, and burning sunshine took its place.
The weather became extremely simplified; there was no
wind, no clouds, nothing but clear, still skies with the sun
beating down all day, unhindered, from sunrise to sunset,
and then a respite till next sunrise. The whole country
seemed saturated with heat and light. The temperatures
were not very high, only a few degrees over the hundred
at most, but it was the lack of shade that made the sunshine
so obtrusive. It was difficult to swallow luncheon in that
blaze; we often crawled under the truck to escape the hot
and blinding flood.
The track was execrable; the spinifex tops had been
beaten down by the traffic, but its tufts of roots most stub-
bornly remained. They stood out in even greater relief
through the sandy soil between them becoming worn and
blown away. The whole journey was one continuous series
of frightful jolts, and 10 miles an hour was about the maxi-
mum safe speed. This continual bumping was most ex-
hausting, and few could bear it; some of the mining experts
who followed arrived almost in a state of collapse.
At about fifty-mile intervals along the Granites track
there are native soaks, little wells in low-lying areas which
the natives have scraped out. A few gallons of water at a
time is all that can be obtained from them. They mean sal-
vation to the prospector, but would have been quite useless
if heavy traffic had started along the road. Little notice
boards, showing the direction and distance of the water,


were stuck up along the track at Lewis’s, Archibald’s, and
Footner’s Soaks.
Thomson’s Rockhole is only forty-three miles from the
Granites. This rockhole, in granite, contained several hun-
dred gallons of water when we arrived, but was completely
emptied when we returned less than a fortnight later. We
arrived there late one morning and filled our water-drums,
and made some tea. We had passed some men on the track
making for the Granites, notably the Australian XI, a rough
lot, all in one unreliable-looking lorry, and so far we were
ahead of the other parties we knew were following. Before
we got away from the rock-hole, we heard a humming down
the track, and up came Carrington, the administrator, in
his big car, all fresh and perky, with Dix, the postal in-
spector, who was going to open a post office, and Tony
Lynch, police trooper. They were not interested in our
suggestion that they might like a boil-up with the good
water of the rock-hole, and we only just managed to get on
the track first. Simon drove at a reckless pace, with the
stimulus of Carrington’s horn heard behind us, until finally
our pursuers gave up the chase, and we arrived first at the
Granites after a four days’ journey. The truck containing
Underdown and Baume was left far behind.
At the Granites we found a low mass of rounded granite
tors, from which a narrow ridge of schist ran in a northerly
curve for a mile. All around was the eternal spinifex scrub.
A few little shafts were scattered along the ridge, and tents
and bough shelters were dotted about. A store built of
corrugated iron, Kilgariff’s store, was the hub of the place.
We pulled up near the store, and pitched our two tents;
I was pleased to hear afterwards that it was said on the
field that they had never seen a camp go up so quickly.
The afternoon passed, and still no signs of Carrington
or our truck; we began to think that we might have been
the undoing of both parties. At last, about five o’clock, the
truck came over the ridge; George Underdown and Baume
sagged off it as we ran up to tell our story, but their eyes
were glassy and their faces purple, and poor Baume gave
vent to his feelings for the first and only time. He had never
expected it of me, he said, leaving them like that; anything


might have happened. We were amazed. It was only forty
miles, and they had most of the food and water. They told
us they had tried to keep up with us and had suffered
several punctures, and repairing them had completely
exhausted poor old George, who was not really fit for the
journey. They had both worked themselves into an un-
necessary panic; and that although George was an old
bushman. The first night in camp at the Granites was not
altogether a success. Carrington had not been far behind
us, but camped at the well, and we did not see him till the
next day.
The next six days were spent examining, sampling, dolly-
ing, and panning. The results were most disappointing.
Most of the alluvial gold had come from a strip of ground
about seventy yards long. Working this uphill, the pro-
spectors had come on a rich little quartz vein, and had sunk
two shafts on it about twenty-five feet deep. Free gold was
showing in this quartz, but the vein had already given out
at that depth. This was the Burdekin Duck. Paying £5OOO
for it had been a bold and masterly stroke. There was
nothing else of any value to be seen on the field; the
leases were very aptly called ‘spinifex farms.’ The whole
country for miles around had been pegged.
The young men in Chapman’s party were rather subdued;
they had done practically nothing in the weeks they had
been there. They were not miners, and it was not obvious
where they could start with any prospects of doing any
good. One man described their position exactly when he
said they had roped a tiger and did not know what to do
with it.
Two new managers arrived in due course, and more
‘mining experts’ to report on various leases, and men were
coming in small batches by every vehicle; there was nothing
for them to do. The well two miles away was the only water
supply, a well sunk some time previously by the Govern-
ment to help prospecting in the district. This well, a hun-
dred feet deep, gave a good supply of highly mineralized
water which affected every one except the hardened pro-
spectors ; most of the new arrivals were soon prostrated by
diarrhoea, and unable to do anything. It was pitiful to see


men come up to Chapman’s camp and ask for a drop of dis-
tilled water from the little still that Chapman’s men had
rigged up; they got it while there was any there.
A few trenches were started, and shaft-sinking began on
one lease; about 150 men was the greatest number that
were on the field at any one time. A drift back to Alice
Springs soon started.
There were numerous quartz reefs in the schist ridge, but
almost all were barren. They had been sampled over and
over again by prospectors. After a few days I decided to
send a preliminary message to strike a note of warning. I
said that the Granites field was just as Allan Davidson had
left it thirty years before. There was nothing to be seen
to justify optimism, and the whole thing appeared to me to
be an unwarranted boom, although my investigations were
not yet complete. I strongly warned people against setting
out for the field in search of work, unless I could send a
more favourable report later.
Baume had seen all that he wanted to see, and having
nothing to do he felt the conditions much more than I did.
He was willing to return, so took my message back to Alice
Springs in one of the returning motor-trucks. The Chap-
man party had a wireless plant, but I did not care to ask
them to transmit so doleful a tale to their own disadvantage.
Baume’s job had been journalism and he had run off on
his little typewriter many stories of our adventures among
the hostile natives. One of the reptile contemporaries of
his paper later published some drawings illustrating these
adventures, including one of a native demanding ’baccy
of Baume ‘or else I get plurry hostile.’
A couple of days later Simon and I left the Granites for
Tanami, some sixty miles farther on. Our water had given
out the day before, and the well-water was beginning to tell
on us. When we returned we found George quite laid up
after three days on that liquid. We got good water in
the Conglomerate Creek, near Tanami.
On the way to Tanami there are large areas called the
Salt Marshes, where water lies in the rains; they were quite
dry at that time. To the north of Tanami the country again


becomes more broken, with low ranges and well-defined
water-courses and creeks.
The rickety little five-head stamp battery was pounding
away at Tanami, treating the dumps left behind by dry-
blowers, for about fifteen pennyweights of gold to the ton.
A blackfellow was feeding the battery. I found that geo-
logically the Tanami field was precisely similar to the
Granites. The usual approach to Tanami is from Hall’s
Greek in Western Australia.
A few miles west of Tanami a party with cattle had
pitched camp. They were going to be the butchers for the
Granites; they said they would kill one evening, and deliver
the meat the following morning at the Granites, seventy
miles away. These were stockmen of the country, and that
was the nearest place to the Granites where they could keep
their stock. In all that sea of scrub there is no cattle feed.
When I got back to the Granites, I found that the echoes
of my preliminary report had come back by wireless. It
seemed that the bottom had dropped out of the market, and
the boom collapsed as rapidly as it had blazed up. I heard
afterwards that Granites gold shares fell from £B5 to four-
pence in a few days.
By this time there were a dozen mining experts on the
field, some of them old friends of my student days. I wished
them a happy issue out of all their afflictions and started
the long journey back to Alice Springs.
Simon was in great form during the return. He had
apparently done well out of the ‘spinifex farms’ he had
pegged. He sang a song with unintelligible words and
plaintive cadences and asked me what I thought it was.
When I truly said it sounded like a black’s corroboree song
to me, Simon was disgusted; it was a Russian song. He
sang several others, on the most tragic and doleful subjects
for one in such good spirits.
One of his favourite English songs was ‘Z’old rusty
bridge by z’mill.’ We often sang it together to while away
the time; I said ‘rusty’ too, as it tickled my fancy so. Simon
neither reads nor writes English.
We shot a dingo when we got inside the occupied areas,
and must have frightened a good many more with ‘Uncle


Tom Cobley’ and other songs. Being weak in the words,
we put a lot of new blood into Uncle Tom’s party, including
Peter Dawson.
Simon told me some very interesting tales of his youth in
Georgia, and his short service with the Cossacks; he said
that he had seen wonderful trick-riding among the Cos-
sacks, but thought the Australian stockmen were far their
superiors as all-round horsemen.
George was very much done up, and I wanted to drive
his truck; but this stirred his wounded pride. He said I
could take over when I found him dead at the wheel.
I saw my first big ant-hills on the Granites journey. They
are much more common at the ‘top end’. There was one
patch about half a mile wide in which the ant-hills stood
about like great monuments, up to fifteen feet high.
The journey back on the train was the exact antithesis
of the journey up. It was again a full train, with mining
experts and men, but every one was quiet and sober. The
word ‘Granites’, which had been on every one’s lips, was
now no longer heard; it was the end of a great hope.
These violent delights have violent ends,
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Which, as they kiss, consume.
The most successful gold-digger was Mona, who took
the Alice by storm at this time in true Klondyke style and
remained the toast of the Centre for many years after.
It was over a fortnight before my final report was pub-
lished, giving the assay returns and a description of the
country; but the Granites was already dead. The Common-
wealth Government gave relief and free rail transport to
Quom to many men who were stranded in Alice Springs.


hK M pP^.
i ' *. f
*t%r ' j£? WBr
Simon Rieff and a big Ant-hill on The Granites Track.




CHAPTER XX
Eastward into Queensland
The geological structure of the MacDonnell Ranges now
having been elucidated, I was anxious to extend the field
and apply my knowledge to the geologically unexplored
surroundings, working from the known to the unknown.
The next journey was in 1935 to the hills to the north east
of the MacDonnells, across the Plenty River, and thence
eastward to the Queensland Border.
The motor car was by this time well established in the
Centre, and vehicles could be hired in the Alice. The days
of camel treks were over. However, the best I could do was
a little old four cylinder utility owned and driven by Lou
Bailey, a horsey young man who had only recently taken
to mechanical transport. He agreed to go anywhere, but
his solicitude for his “new” possession and his reluctance to
leave the tracks seemed steadily to increase as we pro-
ceeded.
I had with me Bill Kelly, of Tarlee, a lad of 19, not long
left school and about to start on the adventure of life.
Bill's pose was to be tough. He joined the train straight
from the farm, hatless, with blood on his boots and straw
in his hair. I thought he overdid it for train travelling;
but Bill really was strong and tough. He positively looked
for discomfort and revelled in it. He was both Sunday-
school teacher and chucker-out at church functions at home.
I had in mind to take the Lake Nash track and go north-
east to that station, but found in Alice Springs that the
track was disused and probably obliterated, but that the
Hart’s Range mica miners were taking their mica into
Queensland and had opened up a new track to Urandangie,
though there was no exact information about it. The only
thing to do was to go out east and find out for oneself.
Our load was about all that the little utility could take,
and there was only room for two on the seat, but Bill offered


to ride on the load. It was either that or stay behind. He
chose riding on the pile at the back, where he hung on
through choking dust for the whole journey of just over
a thousand miles.
We went north along the telegraph line to Burt’s Well
in the Burt Plain and then eastward round the MacDonnells
into the plains that lie to the north of the ranges. These
plains are dotted with hills and occasional low tablelands.
We visited all the homesteads in this area, as the tracks
go through them.
Bird at Bushy Park was having compass trouble. This
journey was notable for compass trouble. My own became
very sluggish, and I eventually borrowed one not much
better at Tobermorey. Bird’s compass would give good
readings on a north-south line but developed a large error
in east and west directions, yet it was swinging very well.
I took it back to an instrument maker who was equally
puzzled till he found that one of the little brass screws that
hold the prism to the case had been lost and replaced by an
iron one.
It had only recently been realized that sheep would do
well in Central Australia, and flocks were rapidly building
up, particularly in this area. We had heard that Kerr of
Delny was “queer”, and objected to anyone passing through
his country, an unheard of thing in the outback, also that
he was setting booby-traps in the way of shear blades
buried in the sandy tracks to cut tyres. We saw him
watering sheep on his one well, a soakage in the creek, on
which he was carrying 2,000 sheep. I gave him some ad-
vice on water finding and we parted amicably. Five miles
from the station, beyond the gate in his fence, we found a
tire flat, cut cleanly and deeply. We searched a mile of the
track but failed to find the shear blade. Later at Mt. Swan
they showed us several that had been discovered and
brought in by different people, blades cunningly fixed in
pieces of wood and buried in the sand. We were shown
some in Alice Springs as well. The man was living alone,
which is not good. On our way back weeks later we called
on him again, with vengeance in our minds. He seemed
delighted that we had sprung the trap, and even more so


that we had not been able to find the blade. There was a
gun handy outside the shack. We told him what we thought
of him but it was obviously wasted words. We heard his
shouts of laughter behind us as we drove away. Such be-
haviour is not unknown on the small holdings in closely
settled areas but it is quite foreign to the spirit of the wide
horizons and will not survive there.
Petrick’s home at Mt. Swan was graced by a fine garden
of flowers, fruit and vegetables. We woke there to the
merry chatter of the galahs as they swung upside down
on the wires. Petrick was a sheep man too. He had not
been able to fence his holding like Kerr, so had to yard the
sheep every night. This is necessary on account of the
dingoes. Fencing on the scale required on these great
holdings, where the carrying capacity is perhaps one sheep
to the hundred acres, instead of two sheep to the acre in
good coastal regions, is an almost prohibitive expense.
Petrick said that one well or waterhole would supply a
twenty mile by twenty mile paddock. This would mean that
sheep would graze out ten miles from water and drink every
other day. Cattle should have a drink every day in dry times.
While we were at this homestead one of the mica men
turned up in a truck and told us all about the new track
through the Jervois Range and on to Tobermorey Station
on the Queensland border. We were then near the mica
mines. This man had a collection of Kerr’s booby traps and
serious trouble seemed to be brewing.
Chalmers’ Mac Donald Downs Station is on the border
of the spinifex plains to the north, and 170 miles from
Alice Springs. This man’s story is one of the most in-
teresting and gallant in the whole of the Centre. He arrived
and selected his country on the fringe of the occupied arqas,
in 1923, having made a six months trek from the Nevr
South Wales-Queensland border with his wife and four
young children, and three hundred sheep, fifty goats, a
dozen cattle and thirteen horses. He was a pioneer of the
sheep industry in Central Australia, and now runs four
thousand sheep and a thousand cattle, and lives in an
attractive stone house built by themselves. Their motor
vehicles make Alice Springs no longer seem remote. The


children have grown up on the place, which has been worked
entirely by the family, with no other help than the natives. I
saw them at shearing time, the two boys, now young men,
handling the two-stand machine, a girl sorting and three
aboriginals bagging. The sheeps’ backs were solid with
sand, giving much trouble with the shear blades. They
were making an attempt to rug the whole of the flock to
keep out the sand.
The boys were in very close touch with the natives, who
were treated on this station on what are considered as un-
conventional lines. One of the old bough shelters of the
original homestead was a veritable armoury of native
weapons, shields, boomerangs and spears, and the boys
seemed to have organized the local fighting forces. There
were periodical battles with the Mt. Swan natives, and
Petrick was rather sore about this, as the Chalmers boys
used to lead their parties. It seemed scarcely credible, but
Petrick showed me a photograph taken on his place show-
ing two lines of aboriginals, about a dozen in each line,
facing each other about a hundred feet apart and obviously
going at it hammer and tongs, with the boomerangs flying
in the air. He used to leave them to it, but the Chalmers
boys aided and abetted their side, collecting the discharged
weapons and generally controlling the tactics.
Apparently the battles were not really very serious, but
more of a display of skill at arms, the native being extra-
ordinarily able at deflecting the spear or boomerang with
his shield. The fights ended by the time several were
seriously wounded. The aboriginal has amazing powers of
recovery from wounds. Arms and thighs and legs may be
slashed open to the bone, yet the man is about again in a
few weeks. Petrick said that after this particular battle
he brought in the wounded and dressed them, but as soon
as his back was turned the bandages were removed and the
patients taken away for the standard treatment of mud
packs and gum leaves. There were no deaths and every-
thing ended happily.
The success or failure of many of these stations depends
on native help, and all sorts of devices are resorted, to in-
duce the natives to stay on the place. Petrick had collected


quantities of the native tobacco plant, pituri, and had it
stored in boxes. It is a curious thing that even with the
white man’s example, the native has never had any concep-
tion of storing or husbanding his resources. When food
is plentiful he gorges it as rapidly as possible, when it is
scarce he goes without.
Our journey was now along the belt of hilly country bn
the north side of the Plenty River, between it and the plains
to the north. We were soon on Huckitta Station, the last
holding to the east before the Queensland border one hun-
dred and fifty miles away. We came across Billy Madrill,
the manager, with his cattle plant, out on the run. It was
evening, and Billy was camped in the sandy bed of a creek!
I was told afterwards, in explanation, that Billy had only
been in the country for ten years.
We were near the Oorobbra Rock Holes, a rocky glen with
a series of permanent water holes, a most attractive place.
Peter, a Huckitta blackboy, took us to a cave in the glen
where there were some good examples of aboriginal draw-
ings. They were on the wall at the back of the cave, made
with white clay on the red rock. There were conventional
human figures, and quite good fish and lizards, with a few
boomerangs, and many emu tracks, the latter a universal
marking, closely resembling our own broad arrow. In
addition there were a lot of human hands, another uni-
versal practice. They are like finger prints to the native.
They are made by holding the hand against the rock with
the fingers spread out, and splashing red ochre over it,
leaving the trace of the hand in the red patch, just the
reverse of a stencil. Later he took us to a waterhole in
the Grant’s Bluff ridge a couple of miles away and showed
us more works of art. These were in a vertical rock face,
not a cave, and were chipped out, possibly with sharp
stones. They showed the influence of civilization, as they
included cattle brands, mostly circles, as well as emu tracks
and lizards.
This strip of more rugged country in which all the
stations mentioned are situated, extends another forty
miles eastward from the Oorobbra Rockholes. It is. made
up of scattered hills and peaks of older rock rising to a


few hundred feet, and some sandstone mesas or large table-
tops. The principle table-top is the Dulcie Range. Huckitta
Station homestead lies at a spring on the south side of this
range. The hills at the eastern end of the area are known
collectively as the Jervois Range. They begin at Grant’s
Bluff near the Rockholes. In front of the Grant’s Bluff ridge
there is a plain crossed by a series of white walls of quartz
rock, six of them, running straight and parallel for several
miles. These are up to twenty feet high and ten feet
across, and are about half a mile apart. They are a con-
spicuous and interesting feature, known as the Oorobbra
Reefs. Travels in this area were described by a former
South Australian Government Geologist, H. Y. L. Brown,
in various Parliamentary Papers at the end of the last
century. He named most of the features, including Mistake
Greek in the Dulcie Range, where He got bushed in the
gorges of that range.
At the eastern end of the Jervois Range a bold scarp
four hundred feet high faces the plains to the east. At
the foot of the scarp lies Tom Hanlon’s mine: Tom Hanlon,
prospector, cattle man (some would call him cattle duffer),
miner, adventurer. Tom had made big money in the past
out of wolfram. He had gone through several small for-
tunes. In his palmy days he had done all the things that
reckless miners do in story books, like lighting pipes with
pound notes and throwing money from hotel balconies in
Brisbane. He had prospected the mineral deposits at Jer-
vois Range and there had been a minor sensation in 1929.
I believe he was offered £30,000 for the mine, but this was
small stuff to Tom. He was convinced it was another
Broken Hill, and on the surface it certainly looked like it;
a low ridge showing copper and lead for several miles. Rich
pockets of copper were excavated and several shafts had
been sunk. Some copper was carted in by camel to Alice
Springs, three hundred miles away, but the pockets were
soon cleaned out, and the shafts disclosed only narrow
veins. Tom is an old man now fallen on hard times but he
still lives on the leases with his blacks, dreaming of the
wealth below if only he had the capital to develop it.
There was no one at the shack, but a note on the table
saying Tom was at his camp on a waterhole four miles away


down the Unkah Creek. Water had given out at the mine.
We went on down the creek, and left the car to search for
the camp. I was puzzled by little squeaks and screams
coming from among the trees and bushes along the course
of the creek, always in front of us and never getting any
nearer, and never a sign of bird or beast. At last we
realized it must be aboriginal children, running before us
in fear but never letting us catch a glimpse of them, and
this indeed it eventually proved to have been, though we
never saw the children.
Lou Bailey was out on the flat and at last saw Tom’s
camp under a bean-tree off the creek. He waited for me
and we approached the camp together. Tom was sitting
on a log alone by the embers of a fire, and did not rise.
Afterwards I realized there was something sinister about
our approach, but the reasons for it were obscure. The
best of relations were soon established and I had many a
fascinating yarn with Tom then and on later visits.
On our return we found Tom back in the mine building,
where he had a great collection of native possessions, in-
cluding the rare kadaitcha boots, mocassins made of emu
feathers and worn by men on missions of murder. He gave
us the best of them. He would give away anything, in-
cluding money when he had it.
One cold night before the fire in the mine hut I got Tom
talking about a long journey he made with his mate from
Western Australia into this territory with a mob of cattle,
a journey that ended disastrously for the mate, but
strangely not for Tom, There are many versions of the
complicated sequel, too serious to be repeated on hearsay,
but possibly not unconnected with Tom’s present isolated
mode of existence. I asked him to explain the broad
principles and practice of cattle duffing. I wondered
if a dozen clean-skins was regarded as a good bag,
but he said that would only be pick-pocketing. Tom was
a man of big ideas. He was very jealous of his mine. I
referred to a rival show, and he told me to tell anyone that
asked about it that if they had any money they should put
it into booze and that would give them a headache; if they
put it into that mine they would only get a heartache


which was worse. He was obviously an authority on both
evils.
He had a flock of seven hundred goats which he moved
about to different waters with the seasons, with the help
of his dusky camp followers. The goats were his mainstay,
with the vegetables at the garden camp; they kept the
aboriginals too.
The shafts were up to a hundred feet deep. Tom lowered
me down them by the windlass, telling me to beware of
snakes. He had the shafts all named with picturesque
native words for different birds, but to my astonishment
I discovered he had never been down any of them
himself, through some curious inhibition. In one shaft
I saw a wicked reptile’s head projecting from a borehole,
and with great care and trepidation managed to crush it
by jabbing a steel drill into the hole, only to find it was
a large and harmless lizard. I stepped out of the iron
bucket at the bottom of another shaft on to a heap
of fallen rock and started to enter a short drive. I
tried to examine the rock but it was too dark. I stepped
back on to the stones in the shaft and lighted a hurricane
lamp and waited a few minutes to accustom my eyes to the
light. I soon saw that the drive only extended about six
feet, and there appeared to be a long stick lying on the
floor. A second look and I saw it was a five foot snake!
This gave me a nasty turn. I had been standing right
alongside it, and had it cornered in a dead end. Nothing
more could be done till the snake was despatched. I hopped
back into the bucket and shouted to them on top to raise
me a few feet, while I thought it out. There was no room
to swing a stick. The bottom of the shaft was roughly
timbered and loose stones were packed in behind the timber.
I decided to try to kill it with stones. The difficulty was to
manage the lamp and make a good aim in the swinging
bucket. The first large flat stone seemed to take effect.
This was followed by more, till the stones partly hid the
snake, and it became impossible to get a proper view of it
from the bucket, I got out of the bucket and straddled across
the timbers of the shaft. After more bombardment from this
insecure and tiring position I got very hot, exhausted and


desperate and decided I must go in to close quarters. I
sent the bucket up for a stick, and then jumped down with
this and the lantern, to find the snake still alive among the
stones, but disabled, and a few blows soon finished it. They
had not realized my difficulties on top, and were getting
impatient as the whole thing had taken nearly half an hour.
At the sound of the blows Tom called down “that sounds
better” so I sent the snake up in the bucket with some
specimens, for them to discover as they fished the things
out. Later Tom in his turn planted the snake in different
places about the shack to trick the natives, who finally ate
it.
From Hanlon’s mine we had one hundred and seventy
miles to go across the desert to Tobermorey station on the
Queensland border. The country is very flat plains of red
sandy soil covered with an open scrub of gidgee (an acacia)
which is the most common tree, and stunted eucalyptus in
the lower places, with hakeas, cassia, blue bush and the
universal spinifex. There is little fodder grass and the
area is waterless except for a few isolated waterholes in
rainy seasons. It is the northern margin of the Simpson
Desert where sandridges and spinifex make up the entire
scenery. The monotony of the plains is broken only by the
Tarlton Range about half way across, and a few island hills
scattered round the wide horizon. At this time ther§ were
plenty of plains kangaroos about as there had been rain,
hut only one emu was seen. There were a few rabbits, and
almost as many cats, mostly black, that were frequently
seen near rabbit burrows. These are domestic cats gone
wild. Then there were the usual desert birds of prey, the
wedge-tailed eagle, kites and crows, and always the prowl-
ing and mournful dingo, all of them living mainly on mice,
rabbits and lizards. Actually, bird life is very scarce; there
were some wild turkeys in the occupied country behind us,
and curlews round the Oorobbra Rockholes, but besides
these we saw nothing but some ring-necked parrots in the
Tarlton Range, and some brolgas or native companions
dancing near Tobermorey. The absence of finches was re-
markable.
Gidgee is rare in Central Australia but increases rapidly
towards the Queensland border, where it is the dominant


tree, often in dense groves. It is a low, spreading and
much branched tree, never more than twenty feet high,
with very crooked limbs covered with black bark, and dark
green leaves in contrast to the usual grey of the desert
flora. The timber is of little use except for firewood. The
yellow flowers, that make a gay show when the trees are
in bloom, give off a very unpleasant smell, which is accen-
tuated by rain. Even when not in flower the trees smell
offensively in the rains.
Thirty miles from Hanlon’s mine, the Arthur has to be
crossed. This stream rises on Huckitta Station and sweeps
round the Jervois range and thence south-east into the
Simpson Desert where it is called the Hay after joining the
Thring.
The Arthur at the crossing is a sandy bed a hundred
yards wide with an island half way across, and a steep bank
on the far side. It is a difficult crossing and requires mat-
ting or much boughs from the gum trees that line the creek.
The island gives the toilers a respite in the middle. We
had short mats and got over in a series of bursts, not with-
out some shovelling and laying down of timber corduroy.
Near the far bank, half buried in the sand, was standing
what had been a beautiful English touring car. Poor old
Tom Hanlon! That was as far as this symbol of his faith
in the Jervois mines had got on its long journey in from
Brisbane, and there it stopped, only twenty-five miles from
his bean-tree home. I saw it again two years later. Floods
had washed the sand away from round it, but it still stood
on its wheels in a basin in the sand.
The Tarlton Range was examined on the return journey.
The track passes round the north end of it. The two lines of
wheel marks that constitute this road were quite easy to
follow all the way. This part of the country was sketched
by the South Australian surveyor, Charles Winnecke, in
two journeys in 1881 and 1883, when he came up the Hay
River from the Queensland border. Winnecke’s plans have
been overlooked, and the present maps show the Arthur
crossing the middle of the range, whereas the range lies
entirely on the east side of the creek, but it does run be-
tween two small but conspicuous ridges, marked as Goy-


p; . .^#7^
■1 : .
* Jr 1
PL
f*# ■ " **
'J -M
-4|^ 1
V zi
lpl%
fih ' t '***
W
1 1
llpP^
fflK
' , . , > ■'
-
Ik.
■k , .. .—x .:.
..,■ ■ , „
.yk&v
<V^-
■ * . ‘ ■- .
Vv.
■
■-■■
•■■■■■■■■■
TTie Arthur Crossing.


WMMSW W
~'" : T' : ...
Country Near the Queensland Border,


der’s Pillars on the maps, that lie clear of the range on its
west side. I had read Winnecke’s account of his journeys
but did not have it with me. It did not seem that these
ridges were his Pillars, which he had described as white
cones visible from twenty miles away and named in honour
of the Surveyor-General, Goyder. There was nothing white
or conical anywhere to be seen, and the problem intrigued
me. It was settled two years later.
The range is a long narrow tableland of Ordovician sand-
stone in which we found fossils. It is exactly similar geo-
logically to the Dulcie Range and to the Toko Range south
of Tobermorey. It rises two hundred and fifty feet above
the plains. Near each of two small knolls on the top I
picked up white boulders which appeared to be alunite, a
mineral containing aluminium, potash, and sulphuric acid,
which might have some value if found in large quantities,
particularly in times of war when supplies of aluminium
and potash are always restricted. I packed these specimens
for future testing and identification.
The waterholes in the Tarlton were dry, and in their beds
were numerous small carapaces of dead fresh-water crabs,
bleached white. I have never found these anywhere else
in Central Australia.
At thirteen miles to the east of the Tarlton we passed
the burnt-out remains of a lorry that had been laden with
petrol, another lonely monument to Tom Hanlon’s faith and
enterprise.
Cockroach Lagoon, which rarely contains water, lies in
lower country another thirteen miles along the track, and
then Alkeah Waterhole, where the first signs of occupation
are seen, tracks of the Tobermorey cattle, and perhaps even
the cattle themselves if the season is good. Then comes
Ulluricka waterhole, and finally a windmill eight miles from
the station.
All that afternoon we had been followed by a great black
bank of cloud that was continually criss-crossed with light-
ning, It gained on us, the thunder grew, and it looked as if a
Queensland tropical flood would catch us before we reached
the station. We made all speed possible, but darkness


came on prematurely as the cloud covered the sky, and it
became difficult to keep to the track. The danger was that if
we were caught in the rain we might be bogged down for
several days in a sea of mud, or cut off by running
streams. We were then in country that would flood, the
branches of the Pituri Creek on which Tobermorey stands,
and the ground near the track was all soft and cut up by
the cattle’s hoofs. At last it was pitch dark, and after a
few more miles, when we were only ten miles from the
station, the rain suddenly hit us in a solid crashing down-
pour. Bill Kelly tried to stick it out on the load behind
but eventually came into the cabin and wedged his steaming
body in between Bailey and me. In a quarter of an hour water
a foot deep was rushing under the car. We sat and smoked
and waited. In an hour the rain had stopped, but we were
marooned. About midnight the flow of water ceased and
we stepped out into the mud to take stock of our surround-
ings. There was a stony rise nearby, free from mud. I
found a dead stump there and managed to cut off some dry
wood and make a fire, to give us light, for it is not the cus-
tom to carry any means of illumination for the night in
this primitive cattle country. We had the car headlights,
but they only lit up the sea of mud in front. With horse
or camel transport, kerosene is hopeless, as it is almost im-
possible to keep it away from the food; but with motor
trucks the difficulties are less. Most travellers find that
the camp fire provides sufficient light for their needs,
and the night is used mainly for sleeping. Petrol
lamps are the best thing but I have found little need for
them. The fire or the moon is sufficient for everything but
reading, and even that can be done by the firelight.
We unrolled our swags on this dry mound and slept
soundly till dawn after all, for there was no more rain.
In the morning we found the position better than an-
ticipated, and we made off with all haste, for every hour
counts before the water has soaked down to deepen the
mud. It is an accepted principle to travel in shallow water
rather than where the water has already disappeared. We
splashed and slithered along, in one place nearly filling
a small creek with boughs before we could cross.


At last the station house appeared across an open space
half a mile wide. This was the worst place of all. It was
a stiff clay surface, with a lubricating layer of mud over
ground that was still firm beneath. Later it would be im-
passable. They saw us from the house and stood on the
verandah watching the fun. Our heavily-laden little utility
darted about with the erratic course of an ant, now slewing
round to face the wrong way, now running sideways. At
last we brought it to rest, covered with mud, on a dry patch
behind the house.
Tobermorey Station stretches along the Queensland bor-
der fence on the Northern Territory side. It is bounded by
Lake Nash Station to the north, but hundreds of miles of
no-mans-land lie in every other direction. It is quite cut
off from any administrative connection with the Northern
Territory. The nearest town is Urandangi (‘the Dangi’) in
Queensland, sixty miles away. The nearest place of any
importance is ‘the Curry’ (Cloncurry), while ‘the Brissie’
(Brisbane) is the mecca of those regions. Tom Hanlon once
battled across from his mine to ‘the Brissie’ for a longed-for
change, and found his relatives just about to start out
for a camping trip on the day of his arrival. They took
him along and said how lucky it was that Tom came just
then, as he would be such a help.
Tobermorey is a far better house than anything else
I have seen in Central Australia. It is in two storeys, with
balcony and wide and ornamental outside staircase. The
main rooms are on the top floor. The ground floor really
consists of the posts supporting the top enclosed and sub-
divided with flywire, on a concrete base. Floods some-
times surround the house and come as much as two feet
up the posts, flooding the ground floor and marooning the
occupants. The place is designed to meet these conditions.
We found only a Chinese cook at home, and dark people
of various hues who all disappeared on our arrival. The
cook gave us the run of the ground floor where we slept
two nights on the concrete. We were held up there for
three days till the country dried up.
On the second day one of the three young brothers who
owned the place waded in through the mud. He had been


running a pump at a well out on the property. He left
us to the concrete. On the third day a second brother ar-
rived and we all set off for a two-day trip to examine the
Toko Range along the border to the south. There we found
a limestone formation rich in fossils underlying the sand-
stone of the tableland remnant. There was good grass and
a lot of kangaroos on the top of the range.
When we returned to the station someone suggested we
should go upstairs. There we found at least a dozen empty
beds with spring mattresses!
The Andersons were wild young men. They entertained
us with stories of their descents on ‘the Curry’ and ‘the
Dangi,’ which usually ended in a fracas, and the tearing
off of motor doors against the trees in their flight. They
went through motor cars at a reckless rate, and there was
a veritable dump of wrecked cars at the station. A party
on their way to the Arltunga goldfield in a derelict car al-
most rebuilt it from the dump while we were there, includ-
ing putting spokes in their wheels. There were no white
women in the place.
The border fence was only a mile from the house. It is
a rabbit-proof fence, kept in repair at least at the northern
end. It runs down the whole western side of Queensland,
some seven hundred miles, but just south of the Toko
Ranges it leaves the border and moves into the Mulligan
River, which it follows down to the South Australian bor-
der.
From the Arthur Creek to the border the thin soils of
the plains cover a dense limestone formation which is ex-
posed in patches every here and there. The hills are sand-
stone remnants standing on the limestone.
On the morning that we left, the Anderson boys dashed
out to Cockroach Lagoon by car to see if there was any
water in it. They passed us on their way back. The Lagoon
was still dry.
On the return journey we paid another visit to Huckitta.
There I gave some beautiful table raisins on the stems to the
children of the half-caste cook, Alice. One of them said
they were very dry.
There was a disturbance in the Alice on the night of
our return, not altogether unconnected with my cheque for


SS " W m
P /'♦ ' •* m 1
■ -■%$
wi \t > rw
i pi i
. - -Vi
> it l
I 5
r * • • w
S '’"‘ W ■■■*■-' , * ■ jjjBKWjyafe. ft . *
■&$. :::: . Wm.
• 1
- ir ,J S *■
mu
" ' . . % ■ • ... .... - • :'M
%■ "t ■■■ -v " " "*■ - **$&
■''■‘'a- -1
,'«i.V*., 1 ,.,:. m . ..., >fi . '"' - ’'"‘•'■If
■ ; *. # |L
*' . ... . , \
- ■ ' '
The Northern Territory —Queensland Border at Tobermorey.


IV I |
|||' ' - '|?: tf.f !
I 1 -.< m i
I ■ ■ 'Jr 11 ~
1 f' ~
I s -
I , H
l*PipSP^I Immlimi ■*-
i#|iipipilllj|* jg


the motor car hire, and some shots were fired. Next morn-
ing I went to the police court to hear the proceedings and
found the court crowded. The only space seemed to be by
a man sitting by himself, so I went and sat next to him.
When the court opened I found I had placed myself with
the prisoner.


CHAPTER XXI
Into the Far West
Most of the journeys so far described were made in the
winter, with its cold nights and glorious days. This one to
Mt. Doreen was in February, 1937, as hot a time as one
could choose. The object was to report on the wolfram
and other mineral deposits on Billy Braitling’s Mt. Doreen
station, two hundred and fifty miles north-west of Alice
Springs. A representative of capital, Cameron, financed
the trip, and we went out in an old two ton truck provided
by Wallis Fogarty’s for the dual purpose of transporting
us and bringing in a load of wolfram, and driven by the
half-caste Stormy, Wolfram is the chief mineral for tung-
sten, a metal in great demand in war time for certain
grades of steel.
The season in Central Australia had been good in general.
There had been heavy rain in the lower north in South
Australia, and also north of the MacDonnells. There had
been a derailment near Quorn due to subsidence of the track
and the train was late in starting, waiting for a deviation to
be made round the overturned locomotive. We slept in
the train in the station yard, being told at intervals over a
period of fifteen hours that it would start any minute now.
The ways of the north add new interest to life. I thought
of Fred Raggatt’s custom of always being a day early for
his appointments.
At Coniston Station we found Randal Stafford, with Ben
Nicker and “Woodie”. Ben Nicker was a fine lad, born in
the Centre, full of life and the spirit of adventure. I had
often seen him before. Now he was on a newly-discovered tin
field on Anningie nearby, but he was in bad company at Con-
iston, for Woodie was there, an ex-telegraphist from the
Overland Telegraph, a wild and dangerous man when he
could get drink, which was too often. We could not know
that day, as the one glared at us from gaunt and spectral


eyes and the other laughed and joked, that a terrible death
was very near for Woodie, and a glorious one a few years
on for Ben. Poor Ben, one at least has shed a tear for him.
He came to see me two years later in his new uniform, on
draft for the A.I.F. in Egypt. What a man for a re-
connaissance or a night raid! He took his one chance to
get away from his narrow life in Central Australia, and
journeyed off into the Great Beyond without looking back.
Some wild blacks helped us to get across the wide sandy
creek at Coniston. I wondered how we were going to man-
age with a load of wolfram, but Stormy proved a most able,
resourceful and indomitable driver throughout a very dif-
ficult journey. I know no white man who could have done
better. I formed the highest opinion of his character.
Mt. Doreen is about eighty-five miles west from Coniston.
For long years Stafford’s station was the fringe of civiliza-
tion, but Billy Braitling boldly pushed it much further out.
From the ranges of the Coniston country a belt of granitic
hills projects into the desert plain, and at the end of it
Braitling had taken up his isolated holding, seventeen
hundred square miles of registered leases, but actually an
unlimited area, like Tobermorey. There is no one to say
him nay for hundreds of miles north, south or west. He
is only bound in by the restrictions of distance, feed and,
most exacting, water. The wolfram mine was formerly
known as Mt. Hardy. He named another hill and his
station Mt. Doreen after his wife.
The good season had brought up a wonderful growth of
grasses that were now in seed. The track was covered with
tall grass like ripe corn, making it difficult to follow. The
seeds introduced a problem new to me. The front of the
truck shook the heads off like a reaping machine, and they
flew back, to cover everything and to catch in every corner.
A wire gauze screen is essential in these times, to protect
the radiator, which would otherwise become completely
choked. We had a screen, but it became blocked every half-
hour or so with grass seeds. The seeds stuck in vertically
and made the screen look like a solid yellow mat with a
pile two inches thick. As the carpet thickened, the radiator
came to the boil, in fact was boiling practically all the


time, so that the water soon gave out, and we were con-
tinually looking for waterholes and digging soaks in sandy
creeks. Clearing the seeds from the screen was an awful
job until Stormy hit on the bright idea of burning them
out, which solved the problem. But the greatest menace
was the danger of fire. The fibrous hairs from the seeds
piled up under the bonnet, where they eventually
came in contact with the red-hot exhaust and
caught fire. At the first blaze it looked as if every-
thing was lost. The engine and carburetter were
enveloped in flame, and even the floorboards were alight.
Stormy seized a shovel, threw up the bonnet and covered
the whole works with sand while we were thinking about
it. It was a marvellous old engine. It coughed up the sand
and went on again. We removed the bonnet covers alto-
gether in order to see what was going on, and to help the
fluff to blow away, but still we caught fire three times. Put-
ting right a defect in the vacuum tank gave me a chance of
reducing slightly my sense of inferiority to Stormy.
The burden of this day of excitement and travail was not
lightened by the temperature being well over one hundred
degrees. It was only fifty-three miles to Braitling’s from
Cockatoo Creek where we had camped for the night, but it
took us eleven hours to make it.
We found Mt. Doreen station a little homestead by some
shallow wells in a plain with nearby hills. The wells sup-
plied the homestead and the goats, but left little over for
stock. Developing waters was Braitling’s main problem.
He had only just begun his stocking up, and the wolfram
was still the main asset of the place. Mrs. Braitling and her
little son were there, and a tribe of blacks. She had not been
into Alice Springs for two years, but was to go in with us,
and take the little boy to school. This was done, but it led to
a much longer holiday for her, for the son had contracted
an eye complaint and had soon to be taken on to Adelaide
and finally to a hospital for tropical diseases in Queensland,
where treatment was finally successful.
The wolfram mine was a few miles from the homestead.
The source of the wolfram was a reef of quartz running
along the side of a low ridge, but not much was to be ob-


tained by mining the reef. Most of it was coming
from the alluvium below the reef, which was being
worked by the aboriginals. It was remarkable that
Braitling had taught these wild men to do this
work, and even more remarkable that they con-
sented to go on doing it. The method of recovery would
be regarded as highly un-economical with white labour, but
was just suited to the blacks, with their deft hands and
wonderful eye-sight, not to mention rate of pay, which
would only be rations and perhaps a little clothing or
blankets. The loose earth was dug up and sieved dry in a
shaker to remove the soil. The stones and gravel were
then hand sorted, and all that contained the black wolfram
were crushed up by hand in dolly pots (mortar and pestle)
to pass through a fine screen. The fine material was then
concentrated in a sluice box, a long sloping trough with
slats across the bottom down which the fines were washed
with water, the heavier wolfram being caught behind the
slats. This was dried and bagged and produced a high-
grade concentrate ready for the market. The difficulty was
the shortage of water, which was conserved by a small dam
in a creek. There was also a home-made jig, which was
out of action at the time of my visit. In this the gravel
from the shaker was treated, separating the pure wolfram
from the composite pieces, so that only the composite pieces
had to be dollied and sluiced.
There was only a bough shelter at the mine. By lunch
time the heat was terrible, the flies in clouds. I suddenly
developed a most painful eye. I believe it was due to a
scratch on the eyeball from a sharp grain of sand when I
was sluicing my face the day before at one of our soaks
in a sandy creek bed, although there was no proof of this.
It worried me greatly and bid fair to hold up my whole
activities. I had to keep the eye closed, and it wept copi-
ously. Lunch consisted of cold goat meat, bread, and tea.
The flies floated dead on the tea, and swarmed on the bread
and meat, the heat beat down, and the eye ached intoler-
ably. I could not face up to that meal. With shame I lay
down on the ground in the shade and covered my face, to
keep the light and flies away. But this was everyday life
to Billy Braitling; he had an enormous fire in an enclosure


close by, a mass of glowing coals, and he said the best place
to have lunch was by the fire, where the flies could not
stand it, so he squatted out in the sun by this fire and con-
sumed an amazing amount of meat and bread with the
utmost relish. He was certainly free from flies, but must
have had the qualities of a salamander.
Then he said he would cure my eye, and produced a beer
bottle he kept there, .full of liquid, that he said was very
effective with the blacks; one dose was usually enough, he
said, and after treatment I believed him. I lay on the
ground and he poured a libation into my eye from the bottle.
He said it contained some zinc compound, but I think it was
strong sulphuric acid. It felt like it. When the effects had
somewhat abated I went to sleep, and awoke feeling better,
but still had to wear a bandage over the eye.
I was very glad to get back to the homestead that night,
and have some junket and canned fruit prepared by Mrs.
Braitling, We slept as usual outside on the ground, but
were provided with mosquito nets supported on sticks. The
mosquitoes were bad, and the flies unendurable as dawn
approached. Next day the eye was quite all right again,
which was consistent with the scratch theory.
We motored to a more distant locality to see some copper
shows, and at the camping place found horses waiting for
us, sent on ahead by Braitling. Next day we rode round
inspecting the copper deposits, which did not seem to
me to hold much promise, but I gave advice as to how to
go about some further development to test them.
Mt. Doreen is to the north of the Lasseter’s Reef country,
and I must digress here to say a little about this remark-
able racket. All stories of gold discoveries in the country
towards the Western Australian border grew out of one
single myth, the myth of Earle’s Reef. Earle is supposed
to have been a prospector who found rich gold in that area
and died before he could exploit his discovery. Several
plans are in existence purporting to show the locality, some
even supposed to have been found on the body, and various
people have seen the specimens from the reef. Actually,
Earle was not a prospector at all, but a bank official in New
South Wales who took up a one fifth share in a syndicate


■ ' . ■
BfcX,' | It v * '< * ' > 4
>- v "'"" S
I
%
liF
*y'--v. .&,... * f *yw. s|
■> ' {
!i £ J - ’
-
Native Children at Mt. Doreen.


MM
1 f jpi# *#> fl|
wm
fcate. ~ *
, ■ J&y/\ -U ■ ■ >/ : i
.. -a fy 4w : j;- " x '•■«>-., ...s.. J|p||r
fr XWeW msm
i*" . ■ n
# <-.k» '"Vr i* KW “*■
& . J gjsL
i %fW J : ' ••■' >;
J **"“ „.'P» #
WBf § '
tr
lii» r* *
«p f |^§
- -’f ; « ' *
’■
., »!-£%. *■" .--
k ■ ,-.f + , o ;; . j v
* >* - . * V
'
it v t s -t ' ~ : ’ V ; 4
A
ttgL ¥^m^9t
■ % \
Wi
lifc g Ajfe-.i.]' v ; 5 *'
|||||k J ;g*Sy|£
%
JM
k ' , * ;
M
IBK'. .,- .
-1
: j^jp
v. . r> tf
i'- 'p ; w%> i
f ,s ' *■ ..>■> >-«mMSf , " ' <v %
E$w**ar %\ '-F
L , ■ ■$■'■&*'
?/*/ *
;
*. . * * J . * -
A Soa/c in Cockatoo Creek.


of three, the other two being Dunn, father and son, to
finance Dunn junior to join the gold rush to Coolgardie.
Dunn pegged various claims, including the Brilliant and
the Wealth of Nations, which he sold, and was soon in big
money. He repudiated the partnership, and in 1894 Earle
went to Perth and Coolgardie, to claim his share. The case
Earle v Dunn was tried in Perth and is a goldfields classic.
The verdict went to Earle, and the newspapers reporting
the case said the fifth share was then worth £30,000. By
the time a settlement was made, Dunn had disposed of all
his assets and Earle got nothing at all. He did no prospect-
ing as his health and eyesight were failing, but returned to
New South Wales with nothing to show for his journey but
a handful of beautiful gold-quartz specimens which he
brought home as curios. They were plentiful at the time
and much in demand for company-promoting purposes.
Earle died a natural death many years later. On the foun-
dation of Earle’s visit to Western Australia and his return
with specimen gold, the whole fabric of the stories of
Earle’s Reef and Lasseter’s Reef have been gradually built
up. Idriess says at the end of Lasseter’s Last Ride, ‘Per-
haps coming expeditions will unearth yet other fragments
of the story.’ There is nothing surer than this.
Bob Buck, cattle man of the west country, is the present
authority on Lasseter’s Reef, which is only a newer version
of Earle’s Reef. He found the last traces of Lasseter, and
later acted as guide to the reef and to recover Lasseter’s
remains, both fruitless quests. Bob will guide anyone to
anywhere. His employers are not usually very insistent on
results. I have had several yarns with Bob Buck, a most
entertaining talker, but we avoid professional subjects. I
have also seen several of these Lasseter’s Reef expeditions
in action. They always have most elaborate and expensive
equipment and rush about in motor transport till supplies
give out. When you find them they are usually returning
to Alice Springs for something. I have been amazed at the
gullibility of the Sydney people who finance them.
How do I know these things? They come direct from
Earle’s son, Athel Earle, who is in the New South Wales
Civil Service to-day, and a friend of mine. I have read his
father’s diaries, and the newspaper cuttings of the case,


and seen a piece of ‘the bottle green quartz, richly studded
with gold’ referred to by Basedow in the foreword to
Lasseter’s Last Ride. It has been made into a watch-
chain pendant. As well to try to stake the rainbow’s end
as Lasseter’s Reef; or, better still, take Tom Hanlon’s ad-
vice and put your money into booze!
I spent another day at the wolfram, and we loaded the
truck with the bags of ore. We left Mt. Doreen with three
and a half tons of wolfram on our two ton truck—it was
bringing £lOO a ton then—plus Mrs. Braitling and her son
and luggage, Stormy, Cameron and myself, a little black
boy who was the son’s playmate, an old blackfellow, and a
fine young native buck who was quite naked. The old man
was said to have a spear-head broken off in his stomach
and was being taken in to the hospital. He was very much
afraid and apprehensive of what was going to happen to
him, and groaned loudly all the time, but no one took any
notice of him. The young man left us at Conistpn which
was his destination. The little boy was apparently to have
got off there too, but he was eventually taken on into Alice
Springs. All the whites or near whites, four of us and a
child, crowded into the seat, and the blacks rode on the
load behind. A vehicle could not possibly have been more
overloaded or crowded.
The rest of the station blacks gave a surprising demon-
station as we started off. They ran alongside and in front
of the vehicle for two or three miles, shouting and waving.
I believe it was meant as a tribute to Mrs. Braitling.
It was an extraordinary journey. We left one afternoon
and arrived in Alice Springs in the small hours of the
fourth day. The two little boys chatted away all day in
blackfellow language. The old man groaned, and kept me
awake most of the first night, till I got used to it. Mrs.
Braitling was quiet and efficient. This was everyday life
for her; she fitted in unobtrusively and perfectly. Stormy,
capable and alert, drove and worked tirelessly and cheer-
fully. The young warrior, whose only luggage was his
spears and boomerangs, and only raiment the remains of
some red ochre markings on his muscular body, seemed
not out of place. Mrs. Braitling fed us all.


Some of the party were perfectly bilingual, though they
did not know a noun from a verb, and had never heard
of the past tense; some only spoke their own language;
one would eat raw lizard as soon as look at it, and always
put half a pint of cold water in his tea, another did not
relish the cold roast goat meat, and took his tea boiling
hot; yet we seemed like a family that had been together
for years. Who is really superior in this world, and who
can afford to look down on his neighbour? I could speak no
foreign language half as well as the little white boy could
speak the difficult aboriginal tongue. They were quite as
contented as I, perhaps even more so. I was partly de-
pendent on them, and happy in their goodwill.
There was much looking for water and digging of soaks
by day, and pushing the truck through the sandy creek
beds, mending of punctures, straightening of wheels, boil-
ing the billy, and at night the camp fires, the cooking and
the main meal, then the mosquito nets, and finally peace-
ful sleep on the cooling, friendly earth.
At one time a tyre was wrenched right off. The front
springs came adrift on their axle, and the front wheels were
continually getting knocked back and slewed. It was mar-
vellous that the vehicle ever got back. I examined it later
in Alice Springs when it had been unloaded and found that
both main members of the chassis were cracked almost
through and the frame sagged very appreciably in the
middle. Fortunately we had not noticed that. Another few
miles and the chassis must surely have broken in two.
Early on the return journey a strange thing happened to
Cameron. I was on the outside and he was sitting between
me and Mrs. Braitling. Suddenly he gave a cry and leant
forward, burying his face in his hands. Soon blood oozed
from, between his fingers. He was in great pain, and could
not say what had happened, nor would he remove his hands.
When at last he was persuaded to do this, one eye was seen
to be full of blood and it seemed as if he had lost it. We
had no medical aids, only cold water and some material
Mrs. Braitling produced. I bathed the face and found the
eye all right, but the side of the nose was cut to the bone.
He said he had been struck a blow. We dressed the wound


with a cold compress, and then looked for the cause. The
track was clear at that point. We had not brushed past any
trees, nor could we find any sticks lying about. The curious
thing was that he was not on the outside. Any stick flying
up must have passed either me, or Stormy and Mrs. Bratt-
ling. There was nothing to be found in the cabin either.
What could have struck him remained a complete mystery,
deepened by our having aboriginals to help in the search.
The possibility presents itself at this distance that one of
the natives might have given him a poke with a spear from
behind, but such a thing was quite unthinkable at the time
and would not have occurred to anyone.
Cameron had a bad time for the rest of the journey. We
had to bathe the eye frequently. The wonder was that it did
not turn septic, but it healed remarkably quickly and a
couple of weeks later was little more than a mark.
We had a meal at Aileron station on the telegraph line.
Mrs. Colson told us how bad the snakes were. She was
alone with a young girl. One night she was awakened by a
noise, and found a large snake in her sleep-out. It could
not get out through the wire. She screamed, and a black-
fellow came running up from the camp with his boomerangs.
He thought there was a human assailant. It was a gallant
and unexpected act by this simple man with his poor
weapons, and Mrs. Colson had been much touched by it. Of
course killing the snake was just child’s play to him.
They told us there was a big snake in the cellar, that had
got in through a window. We were shown the track in the
sandy ground. We spent a long time in the dimly lit cellar
gingerly moving all the conglomeration of articles. A move-
ment on a shelf startled us, but it proved to be only a bottle-
covering rolling over. At last we had moved everything
and found nothing, and had to give it up. When we came
up a blackfellow pointed out that the snake’s track was
going away from the cellar, not towards it! One had not
thought that the direction of a snake track was obvious.


CHAPTER XXII
The Western Road to Alice Springs
The mineral brought back from the Tarlton Range proved
to be alunite. On re-reading the account of Winnecke’s
explorations, and examining his sketch maps, to settle the
rather intriguing question of what exactly his Goyder’s
Pillars were, I found that he first saw the ‘pillars’ from
twenty miles away, and described them as ‘two remarkable
white conical hills’, and named them in honour of the Sur-
veyor General. On a subsequent journey he actually visited
them, but said little more about them, except that they
were ‘two very peculiar white hills, peaks or pillars which
are situated at the top of a spur in the range. These hills
when viewed from a distance have the appearance of white
pillars; they are crowned by perpendicular Kaoline rocks’.
The map placed them five miles from the Arthur. This
showed at once that the two ridges on the Arthur itself,
marked on maps as Goyder’s Pillars, were not the original
pillars at all. I had only visited the northern half of the
Tarlton Range and had not seen the real pillars, and now
it seemed quite possible that the pillars were two hills of
alunite, for the locality was near where I had found the
alunite specimens, and alunite and kaolin are very similar.
This might prove a very valuable discovery. Thus my next
expedition in 1937 had as its main object the investigation
of Goyder’s Pillars and their neighbourhood in a search for
deposits of alunite.
This expedition was my last in Central Australia, apart
from the Simpson Desert Expedition of 1939, which is a
separate story covering quite different ground. It was
the longest, most interesting and most successful of all my
journeys, and a fitting culmination. The University of Ade-
laide provided me with a new utility truck, which I had
fitted with wireless for this journey, and I took a chrono-
meter and theodolite for astronomical observations. I
wanted particularly to establish some longitudes, as I felt


sure that there were considerable errors in longitude in the
sketch maps available of the Jervois and Tarlton Range
areas. My companion was R. L. Crocker, a graduate
in Science, a geologist and soil surveyor, who was then on
the staff of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Re-
search at the Waite Institute. I have never enjoyed a
happier association on any trip.
Just before leaving I was commissioned by the Anglo-
Iranian Oil Company to carry out some investigations for
them to amplify my previous geological reports, particu-
larly in the region of the James Ranges and country to the
south of the MacDonnells.
We motored all the way from Adelaide, taking the
western road to Alice Springs, not the one following the
railway line. It is questionable which is the better track.
There is very little sand on either, but considerably more
stony going to the west and more, creeks to cross. The
Shell Company have arranged petrol refilling points at
stations all the way along the western track, and have been
chiefly responsible for opening up this route.
The track follows the east-west Transcontinental Railway
from Pt. Augusta to East Well and then runs almost due
north through Goober Pedy to Henbury and on to Alice
Springs.
The country is very flat right through the South Aus-
tralian portion of the route, with scarcely a hill and nothing
that could be called a range, till the Northern Territory
border is reached, where there are hills around Tieyon sta-
tion, and granite masses on Kulgara across the border. Then
follow seventy miles of plains on Erldunda station, ending
with low ranges and ridges at the Palmer River. Fifteen
miles beyond the Palmer the Finke is crossed at Henbury
station, where there are more low ranges. Another twenty
miles of plains brings us to the Hugh River at Doctor’s
Stones, where the eastern end of the James Range makes a
conspicuous feature. Only the narrow Waterhouse Range
breaks the seventy miles of plains between Doctor’s Stones
and Alice Springs.
The vegetation gradually changes from myall scrub and
salt bush assemblage in South Australia to mulga, desert


oak, bloodwood gum and spinifex in Central Australia, as
the sheep country is left behind and the cattle cbuntry en-
tered. There are no sheep north of the border on this
route. There is considerably more high timber and shady
trees in the Northern Territory than in that portion of
South Australia, where some of the plains are almost tree-
less.
An interesting story could be written of the journey
along this western track alone, but bur subject is Central
Australia. One must, however, mention the opal fields at
Coober Pedy. They lie about a hundred miles to the west
of William Creek on the Alice Springs railway, in what is
called Stuart Range. The range is really not a range at all,
but the edges of a low tableland facing broad and shallow
wash-outs. Approaching from the west, nothing but per-
fectly level plains is seen till one is on the edge of a descent,
at the bottom of which the few buildings of Coober Pedy
suddenly appear. Opal mining is still going on here in a
small way. There is a little store and a big concrete tank
provided by the Government and filled by surface run-off.
The miners live underground in the opal workings in the
sides of the low cliffs. Seams of potch opal can often be
seen in the walls of the homes. Many other
workings are away from the cliffs and entered by shal-
low shafts. Coober Pedy produced large quantities
of beautiful white opal, and took the place of the original
home of the white opal, White Cliffs in New South Wales,
which was long ago worked out. Individual specimens were
larger and of higher quality than most of the White Cliffs
stone, but unfortunately it was found that most of the opal
developed cracks and flaws within a year or so of being
taken from the ground, and great quantities bought at high
prices from the miners became valueless to the merchants.
The stone is unreliable, but what survives the test of time
is of matchless beauty.
The crossing of the Alberga Creek at Lambina station is
a wide and difficult one. They usually kept some camels
at the station to help the cars over, so frequent were the
calls for help. Here we got some aboriginal spears of the
best workmanship and finish I have ever seen. The
Pages had a separate guest house where we were most


happily entertained by Mrs. Page on our return. On the
way back’we took the track from Lambina to Oodnadatta
and finished up on the railway route, visiting the Blanche
Cup at Coward Springs, the finest of all mound springs.
Two years after our visit a very heavy flood came down
the Alberga, and the Pages, husband, wife and children, were
marooned up a gum tree for nearly two days and nights.
The homestead and other buildings were completely washed
away and the station obliterated. The Pages had an awful
experience and were lucky to escape with their lives.
Between the Alberga and the Hamilton creek there is a
patch of sandhills, about sixteen of them in five miles, the
only sand on this road to Alice Springs. They are low, but
the sand is very fine and red, like hour-glass sand, and it is
easy to be caught. We only came to a standstill once, but a
stop in soft sand always means a long delay. The one thing
to avoid is making a hole round the rear wheels, yet it is
most difficult to prevent. At this stage, we were not carry-
ing any mats, but were to pick them up at Alice Springs.
Soon after our passing there was a tragedy here. A
family travelling north by car had a breakdown. Water was
short, the weather was very hot, and they sent a little boy
of twelve back on the track towards Lambina to get help.
Motorists coming the other way eventually gave all the
assistance that was needed, but the little boy never reached
Lambina. He was found dead near the track.
It seems simple and safe enough to motor about on the
known tracks in Central Australia to-day, but there is still
danger when things go wrong, dangers not realized by the
novice, who is often foolishly wise. When the unexpected
happens, panic sets in where anyone with a little experience
and knowledge of the country would see no danger at all.
Airmen who have made forced landings have left their
planes and wandered aimlessly, drunk the compass spirit,
travelled in the heat of the day instead of at night, thrown
away their food and then gone back for it. A young school-
master from New South Wales set out for Ayers Rock from
Alice Springs on his motor cycle, and never returned. He
was found dead. Someone was to blame there for allowing
him to start on such a journey. Ayers Rock is still a safe
trip only for camels.


THE WESTERN ROAD TO ALICE SPRINGS &73
Henbury Station on the Finke River is the largest and
one of the oldest stations in Central Australia. It has had
its great days and its lean times. In 1937 things were at
rather low ebb. Harold Hyde was manager and Allan
Breadon, a former owner and grand old-timer, was living
there in retirement as a guest. A bronze tablet had been
put up on a post in the yard bearing the names of all the
‘Pioneers of the Finke’. Tradition has grown up around
Henbury.
There are a number of buildings at the station, all well
made of local desert oak and kept in repair. There were
the usual natives about the place, but no white women,
-Crocker and I unrolled our swags on a comfortable double
bed in a disused room.
Careful geological sections were made at Henbury, where
rock exposures are good. Christopher’s Pinnacles is a
high and precipitous hill in front of Chandler’s Range, oto.
the north side of the Finke and about eight miles down
stream. There we discovered a very rich exposure of
Ordovician fossiliferous limestone, with many well-pre-
served mulluscan and crustacean remains, a valuable find
to the geologist.
But Henbury is best known to-day for its meteorite
craters, which are now of world-wide fame. I had not
seen them, though I had been given pieces of meteoric iron
from Henbury years before by prospectors and halfcastes.
At last the South Australian Museum sent Dr. A. R. Alder-
man to investigate the site in 1931, and the craters were
properly described for the first time. The study of meteor-
ites were then receiving great attention, and it had only re-
cently been established that certain craters in the ground
were due to the fall of meteorites. The most notable and
first studied of these craters was the Coon Butte in Arizona.
The puzzle had been that no meteorite was found in the
crater even after extensive boring and tunnelling. The
theory was then advanced, and is now accepted, that a large
meteorite may strike the earth with such force and energy
that the meteorite itself is broken up and disintegrated
with explosive violence, and nothing obvious remains but a
hole in the ground surrounded by a raised lip. Careful


search soon proved that in all cases fragments of the
meteorites can be found in the vicinity though there is
practically nothing in the crater itself.
The Henbury craters are ten miles west of the station,
on flat ground south of the Finke and just in front of a
ridge known as Bacon’s Range. There is a group of thirteen
craters. The largest is oval in shape, measuring about two
hundred yards long by a hundred yards wide. Several tons
of meteoric iron have been taken away from Henbury and
sold and distributed among the collectors and museums of
the world, and there is still more to be found. It occurs in
pieces of all sizes from gravel to masses of a hundred-
weight, and has been picked up as much as four miles from
the craters. The iron is rusted dark red on the outside and
is exactly the same colour as the earth and all the stones
and pebbles on the surface. It is' distinguished by the
characteristic ‘thumb marks’ or shallow indentations on the
surface, often meeting in sharp edges, and of course by its
weight immediately it is picked up, but as the surface of
the ground is covered with stones, it is very difficult to find
the iron among them. The beginner picks up countless
stones and will probably find nothing in the first few
hours, and may even give it up in disgust, particu-
larly if an old hand is finding iron all the time. Once a
few pieces have been discovered it becomes easier. The
aboriginals are of course wonderful at it, and all the big
quantities have been collected by natives. The wind and
weather are continually uncovering more fragments.
Doctor’s Stones, now called Renner’s Rock, is a small
station on the Hugh, too small to be a success. The old
name has often puzzled new-comers. It comes from overland
telegraph construction days when the place was a camp, and
Dr. Renner was stationed there. It is not obvious what par-
ticular stones or rock are referred to. At this time the sta-
tion was held by a couple new to the country, an author and
his wife and small son. They had just had a misunderstand-
ing with the blacks over their hunting ‘walkabouts’, through
trying to persuade them to stay in camp and not disturb
the cattle, and all the blacks had decamped, leaving no one
to do the jobs about the place.


| g p iiiliiii || 1||| i||||| v ||p|||| | ... ■ |||ipiii
. ...
ilPS^lfiS
i - .
.jMBMijii- ~ ■■■<«■■ :,.. r »
. — m yga
“« ■ _ — - mi
J - - --«■
* , ,, *m M
r «g? , ii&f
■dm*
« #' * *i|r ?
ZSST M- 4 *«■
- -S-f »1
S’
•' > ?■'*•■ •. - - ■ ‘
A lice Springs in 1935.




There was a wonderful collection of birds and animals
around the home. A young kangaroo came in during
the evening as we were sitting round the fire, for it
was midwinter, and pushed its way between us and
flopped down and sprawled in front of us before the fire,
in the most high-handed manner, as if it owned the place.
Another feature was their success in training black cocka-
toos, a thing often said to be impossible. These are fierce
birds with very powerful beaks and a devastating screech.
One of them consented to walk on my arm, but its attitude
became so hostile that I was much relieved when it was
persuaded to walk off again. Its domestication did not seem
to me to be quite one hundred per cent. The scarlet mark-
ings on the black tail feathers make them very showy. The
feathers are in great demand by the aboriginals for adorn-
ment and corroboree ceremonies, and can be very decorative
even in the white man’s home. In spite of their interest in
natural history, we felt that the people at Doctor’s Stones
had embarked on a losing venture.
The track from Doctor’s Stones follows the old telegraph
route up the Hugh River. We were soon on my old tracks
of the homeward journey from Hermannsburg years be-
fore.
I ran a section across the James Range at Doctor’s
Stones. There was nothing there but sandstone ridges,
with no signs of the fossils found further west on the
former journey. On the south side of the ridges, near the
station, there were limestone outcrops below the sandstone.
All the ranges south of the MacDonnells run east and west,
and the rivers, where they are running parallel to the
ranges, lie along what are known as the axes of anticlinal
folds.
We camped for some days in the Waterhouse Range and
made a thorough geological examination. This time the
rich fossiliferous Ordovician horizon was found a mile up
the gorge from the south side of the range. It had been
missed on my previous visit. There were plentiful trilo-
bites, nautiloids and molluscs.
Owen Springs was inhabited and flourishing again. At
last the grand wall of the MacDonnell ranges rose up across
the Missionary Plain, and with the speedometer reading


1160 miles from Adelaide, I was once more in the Stuart
Arms in the dear old Alice.
It was just ten years since I first saw Alice Springs.
Change was going on at an ever-increasing rate. The hotel
was improved, and under new management. The old Kil-
gariff days were at an end. A certain amount of super-
vision over guests and their activities had been instituted.
There were garages, and plenty of motor cars. The police
station yard had a new gate. Its posts used to be twelve
feet high with a log across the top, so that you could ride
under on a camel. The camel patrols were probably at an
end. The peaceful days of Sergeant Lovegrove were also
over. He had been replaced by Sergeant Koop and there
was no peace. Aboriginals were to be paid wages, there was
a £lOO fine for having relations with aboriginal women,
men must marry their housekeepers, all sorts of regulations
were to be enforced that had hitherto been regarded only
as ‘paper-yabber’. Sergeant Koop was going to straighten
things up. He even went as far as demanding to see motor
oar registrations and driving licenses, as if a man did not
have all his time cut out to keep his vehicle on the road.
Electric-light was being reticulated and would be avail-
able in a few weeks. A hospital was being built, and roads
paved, in fact the twelve miles of road across the ranges
was already made up, with culverts and road signs. A start
had been made on the ‘streets’, and some beautiful gum
trees were cut down that the traffic used to go round. On
my previous trip I had made the usual call at the Hostel,
but found it was no longer usual. A new sister had only
half opened the door and asked me what I wanted, and I
was put to it to find a lame excuse for calling at all.
The population was rapidly increasing too. One old-timer
told me that a man could once lie in the gutter all night
with a pocket full of money, but now he was not safe for
a moment. This man only came in periodically and for a
specific purpose.
The days of dancing under the trees on a tarpaulin were
over. There was a dance hall now at the top of the street,
raised high on stilts for no very obvious reason. All the
same we spent a very happy evening it in.


1 was told that Woodie was in the A.I.M. hospital and
wanted to see me. I went there and found him in bed. He
was in a terrible state. His eyes were even more ghastly
in an ashen face, his hands were cold and his body terribly
swollen. I knew at a glance that the hand of death was
on him.
A nurse took me in, the doctor was there, the police came
and went. Bob Buck came and sat with him for a while.
It was obvious that they were waiting for him to die and
save further trouble. There was talk of an operation that
was never carried out. The case was beyond treatment.
Woodie made some remark about being cold and Bob
Buck said he would not want any blankets where he was
going. This brutal jest was possibly nearer the truth than
Bob Buck knew. He left soon after but his remark rankled
and Woodie referred to it bitterly.
Woodie had been shot through the spine out on Coniston.
He said he wanted to make a statement and no one would
listen to him. He thought the police suspected him; that
was why he wanted to see me, and this is the story he
told;—
Randal Stafford was away with cattle and had left him
in charge, with one other white man, Baker. Baker was
generally considered to be wrong in the head. Woodie re-
mained in the homestead and Baker was looking after cattle
at Brooks’ Soak. Baker came in several times, and talked
strangely. He had an obsession that they were to be
attacked by the blacks and said hundreds had gathered.
He told other fantastic stories too and Woodie had a task
to persuade him to return. At last one day he rushed in,
in a highly excited state and said the blacks were upon
them. He barricaded the doors and windows and got all
the firearms ready, putting the building into a state of
siege. This went on for several days. Soon Baker became
suspicious of Woodie himself and would not let him out
of his sight. Woodie managed to communicate with Mary,
Stafford’s aboriginal cook, who lived in a separate out-
building, and arranged for Mary to get horses saddled for
his escape. In what Woodie regarded as a supernatural
way Baker sensed this plot and taxed him with it. After


that Baker watched him day and night, and made threats.
It was impossible to put the escape plan into effect. Woodie
got no sleep and the strain became intolerable. Baker kept
control of all the firearms. They had been shut in together
for some days like this when at last the crisis came through
Woodie picking up a knife to cut some tobacco. Baker said
he was going to be attacked and at once shot Woodie
through the body with a revolver. Woodie found he could
not walk. He dragged himself out into the bough shelter
lean-to. He asked Baker to give him water, but Baker
refused, telling him he could die without it. The water
bag was hung to a post and Woodie tried to drag himself
up by the post to reach the water but could not manage it.
Baker laughed at his efforts. Baker said he was going to
write a letter saying he had shot Woodie and killed him-
self. He went inside and wrote a note which was after-
wards found on the table. He then came out and walked
into the meat house, a bough-covered structure a few yards
away. Woodie heard a shot, and soon after the meat house
burst into flames. Then he saw Baker ‘frizzle up before his
eyes’. The fire was still smoking when Randal Stafford
arrived back at his home an hour too late. Thus the tale
ended.
There were various theories as to what could or might
have happened, and a good deal of suspicion rested on
Woodie. I did not find out what had been written by Baker.
However, that was Woodie’s story on his death bed arid T
believed it. He died that night. The death of both parties
to the tragedy was regarded as the best solution to the
problem, if not a benefit to the country. There seemed no
good could come of my telling Woodie’s story and I was
not asked for it. I have kept it till now.
Next morning Crocker and I were very busy buying
stores and packing the truck. Bob Buck came round and
asked us to come to Woodie’s funeral. He was seeing every-
one and trying to raise a procession to go out to the ceme-
tery. He was specially anxious to get vehicles. We had
the truck almost loaded and I said we could not go. Later
I repented of this and we dashed out to find the party
already gathered round the grave. There had been a delay


•owing to the grave-digger taking some bottles out with him
-and being found lying helpless in the half-completed grave.
Bob Buck said they had put Woodie too near to another
kindred spirit in that gravelly ground, another who had
just been buried, and they would argue and give one an-
other no peace.
Funerals are at all times sad and moving ceremonies.
The strangeness and the circumstances and the crudity of
this one, far from lessening the solemnity of the occasion,
actually increased its simple dignity and impressiveness.
We went out partly from curiosity, partly because Bob
Buck wanted to make sure someone was there to take part
in the last scene in the life of his old acquaintance. We
•expected to see a few indifferent spectators and a hasty
burial, but we misjudged the occasion. There round the
.grave in that sad patch of sun and dust were gathered what
were left and what were available of the Old Timers, for
Woodie could be considered an Old Timer. For many years
he had been in charge of the Tennant Creek telegraph
station and was known from end to end of the territory.
Bob Buck and Adamson the postmaster and two others
were the pall-bearers. Muldoon, himself an Old Timer, and
Kennett of the police were there with Sergeant Koop the
newcomer. Two withered little bunches of flowers such as
children might gather in more favoured lands lay on the
Jong box. A woman came forward and added a third.
A young Anglican priest, recently arrived, read the
burial service, and then began an address. It was a brave
thing to do. Could he appreciate this occasion and rise
to it? Would he bring ridicule on himself and the ceremony
with platitudes on the virtues of the departed, and comfort
for the mourners? I need not have feared. This young
man’s address was short and perfect. It showed a deep
understanding and sympathy; it put into words the
thoughts of all and led them from the mortal to immor-
tality. His theme was that all men had done some good
deeds in their lives that would be remembered on earth
and would surely be credited to them by the merciful
Father of us all. Dust was then committed to dust. Every-
one was deeply moved. Tears ran down hardened cheeks.


280 THE WESTERN ROAD TO ALICE SPRINGS
The gathering silently melted away, trying desperately to
disguise the emotion betrayed by eye and voice. The spirit
of the old Alice had momentarily shown itself, perhaps for
the last time. Its unwitting guardians were soon dispersed
in the unheeding town.


CHAPTER XXIII
Craters and Meteorites
'J’HE journey in search of alunite continued. We took the
old track through Burt Well and into the Plenty Plain,
where we called at Ben Webb’s Mt. Riddock station. It
was six years since I first came to Mt. Riddock with
O’Grady, when we camped after dark in the sandy creek
with our camels. When I went up to the house there had
been a scatter of wild children followed by silence, and it
took some time before we made any contact. We asked
for meat and were told we would be brought some in the
morning. At the first light next day a boy appeared with
fresh goat meat. He said dingoes had got the beef during
the night, where it had been hanging up in a tree, so they
had had to kill a goat. There was no question of payment.
At that time the family had little contact with the outside
world, even with Alice Springs. Now better days had come
for us all. I had arrived in comfort in my new car in a day,
instead of the six tedious days on the camels, and found the
station a different place, with sheep and shearing sheds and
new buildings and a welcome for the passer-by. One of the
boys was fitting a bath into a bathroom. He told us that
his uncle Joe was out on a new holding along the Plenty
with the two girls, a place they called Boxhole. He also
mentioned that Joe said there was a meteorite crater there,
but Joe had always been known for his unorthodox ideas.
However, this was worth following up, so I decided to go
and see Joe some sixty miles away.
Boxhole was just starting. There was a shearing shed
and substantial yards, but only tents to live in. Joe was
there with a nephew and the two nieces now grown up, but
still very shy. They were just about to start shearing.
The girls were expert sorters and Joe boasted of his prow-
ess with the hand shears. In fact, Joe talked and boasted
without ceasing. Besides being in the front rank of


shearers, he was a water diviner who could not go wrong,
a boxer and wrestler, even if a little past his prime, and
could tell the sex of anything, even eggs, at a touch. He
entertained us with many stories of his adventures,
punctuated with ‘Do you twig, do you twig? Ah, you twig
all right’. He never waited for an answer. He would take
us to the meteorite crater in the morning.
We camped down near the creek, and decided to give a
party, with wireless concert and supper. Our small set in
the middle of the continent could get every Australian
station all round the coast with equal clarity at night,
Perth, Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney and Queensland
stations. Our guests did not seem interested in any of the
programmes we tried. The news meant nothing to them,
the music did not attract them. At last we came to wrest-
ling. This was a great success with Joe. He followed
every hold, twisting himself about and gasping and groan-
ing in sympathy. The rest of us endured this for an hour
or more. The sweets we had were meant for aboriginals,
but we hoped they would be acceptable in the darkness.
Joe said, ‘Ah, commonies, they’re the best!’
The supper was coffee and bush biscuits and raisins.
I think the coffee was good, but by this time an impenetrable
gloom had settled on the company, even Joe subsiding when
the wrestling finished. We could not break through the
reserve of the girls, and our little party was not a success.
I spent the next evening on astronomical observations. I
got on better with the stars.
The next day was a Sunday, a day of rest for Joe’s party,
so we all went to inspect the crater, three quarters of a
mile to the north of the camp. And sure enough it was a
meteorite crater, a beautiful circular crater nearly two
hundred yards across and forty feet deep from lip to floor.
It had exactly the appearance of an old military mine
crater. The floor was level, from the washing in of
material from the sides, and the rim was low but quite
continuous, rising about ten feet above the surrounding
ground. It was in flat country, but one side came up
against a low stony ridge. At the lowest point in the floor,
near one side, there was a little soak dug out by natives


|
■■mfc 1
Mb;: .■’ JJ*
P>» Iw'll
Li W. r‘ %«s
e
O
<s
o
-si
8
o
cq
<£>
-Si


BHWl
1 ’IrWB ..*
mJteiv 1 :'i
f ■ jff
*•>■■■ ■■ ... • _•_ - ■ Jiiiiir if : > •
** \' f5fe
Ig- 1, ' Sfe^ v y «
""■■ j ; H SSSl ■ B
■ ' ■ ' ■■ ■<.•'•■•- • • „«>■, . . . ■<&*.„. /“L. ♦ ■ •■•»•
‘ ■ '" ’ .M. •:.■ •.••• S •■ '
!T/ie Head of the Hay River, at the Junction of the Thring and Arthur Creeks.


"with a tall gumtree beside it. There was another dead
gumtree, but the floor was mostly bare and half occupied
by a claypan that would hold water in rains, fed by a gutter
.from the ridge. The inner slopes were covered with mulga
and gidgee. The lip was composed of the gravelly alluvium
of the plain, full of quartz pebbles which made it white and
very conspicuous. This was a great find, although we
could not claim the credit of discovery, only of identifica-
tion. These craters are easy to recognise if one is on the
lookout for them, but can otherwise escape notice, as this
one had till the observant Joe Webb came along. Shallow
circular depressions are not uncommon features in surface
erosion. They always have an outlet for water, but the
craters are completely enclosed. This is the feature that
would puzzle the keen observer unfamiliar with their true
origin. Such craters coijld be volcanic, but in that case
there would be volcanic rock visible, not merely the soil
and country rock common to the region. In this case the
•country rock was schists and gneisses, with no signs of any
igneous activity of a volcanic nature. There are no vol-
canoes anywhere in Central Australia. It is a common
popular error to suppose that all rugged hills have been
thrown up by volcanic activity. Most hills are hard re-
siduals left standing after the weathering away of softer
material.
In time the agents of weathering, rain and wind, will
obliterate the Boxhole Crater. The sides will be washed
away and the crater filled, but this will take a very long
time. The lips are now gently rounded with small slopes,
and the rainfall is low. The crater is probably thousands
of years old. The dead trees indicate a hundred years or
so. The. aboriginals saw nothing unusual in the place and
had no stories about it.
While Crocker and I were measuring and making sections
across the crater the rest of the party were searching for
iron fragments. The search was not very successful. Only
shale balls were found, pieces of iron that had rusted com-
pletely through and were now masses of oxide of iron with
rough surfaces broken up by deep and characteristic cracks.
I got Joe to search further after we had gone, and he
found a few pieces of iron and sent them down. Later,


when the news had spread, other collectors found much
more, to a total of a hundredweight or so. The meteorite
that made the crater was found to be the commonest type,,
composed of nickeliferous iron, iron with a small percentage
of nickel. Like most meteoric iron, it showed interlacing
triangular figures on polished and etched surfaces, known
as Widmannstatten figures. These are due to the crystal
lization into octohedrons of alloys of iron with different
proportions of nickel within the mass. The lines show dif-
ferent degrees of brightness on the polished surface. They
are a characteristic determining property of meteoric
iron. The length of the lines and the size of the patterns
they make vary in different irons. The lines may be several
inches long. The Boxhole meteoric iron is classified as a
medium octohedrite and is practically identical with the
Henbury iron. Some pieces of iros have a torn and twisted
appearance. By no means all meteorites are of iron. Many
are stony, others half iron and half stone, and some are
glassy.
The next stop was Huckitta station. Billy Madrill and
Alice were there, with a half-caste, Mick Laughton, and
Fred Rogers. We tried another wireless concert in the
evening but only Alice showed the slightest interest, and'
that was not long sustained.
Fred Rogers it seemed was living alone right out by the-
Tarlton Range, at the junction of the Thring and Arthur
creeks, in no-man’s-land. His chief occupation was dog-
ging, and Billy Madrill was his agent. The government
puts a price on the dingo’s scalp. He did odd jobs on
Huckitta at mustering times, when he could be persuaded
to, and was an expert with horses and cattle. This was
right into our hands. He knew the country thoroughly
and would welcome us at his camp whither he was return-
ing in a few days.
Later in the evening Billy said Mick Laughton had a
stone he wanted to show me, and Mick produced this with
all the diffidence of the aboriginal. It was a flat rusty mass,
very heavy for its size, weighing actually about nine pounds.
A few knocks with a hammer showed it to be mostly malle-
able iron. It was said to have come off a big stone standing


several feet out of the ground. It looked like a piece of
meteoric iron, but this seemed too good to be true. The
place was on the other side of the Dulcie Range about
twenty-seven miles away. It was impossible to get a
vehicle through the range, and a long and difficult way
round, with no tracks, so it was arranged that Billy Madrill
should go out and peg the site as a mineral claim, and be
ready with camels to take us out on our return. A wonder-
ful find was waiting there for us.
And so on to the Tarlton Range. A short cut along the
Dulcie Range took us to Jinka Spring, where we found
George Smith, alias Ushan Khan, camped complete with
lady and camels. It was his camels we were to use later.
Tom Hanlon was not at his mine or camp. The waterhole
was dry so he must have been on his Thring waterhole.
I had discovered by this time that the Marshall from
Huckitta joins the Plenty and floods out in the Simpson
Desert. The Thring rises in the Jervois Ranges and runs
oast to join the Arthur Creek, so that it is the Thring and
not the Marshall that joins the Arthur. Barclay’s and
Winnecke’s maps are wrong here, though there are so many
channels in the plains that the mistake was easily made.
There were ripe tomatoes in Tom’s garden, so we helped
ourselves, and some marrows in a safe hanging up in the
bean-tree, which we left alone.
The Arthur crossing held us up again. There was a
blacks’ camp nearby and we went over to it. The men were
sitting round in a circle and did not move at first. There
was something hostile in the atmosphere. Perhaps we had
disturbed a ceremony. However, the party later broke up
and several men came over. Soon they thawed completely
and were very helpful in breaking down branches and
corduroying the remainder of the crossing which made the
rest of the passage quite easy with several pushing behind.
I gave them some tobacco and sweets.
We camped near Mt. Guide at the northern end of the
Tarlton Range and observed for position that night. Sir
John Close was once asked by an Indian prince why he
bothered to halt at noon every day and take a latitude. Sir
John replied, ‘lt’s so nice to know one’s latitude’, and there


is a satisfaction in it hard to explain to anyone who does
not feel that way. The bushman is satisfied to know where
he is on the ground. The navigator wants to pin-point his
position on a map.
Next day we ran down the side of the Tarlton Range,
between it and the Arthur Creek. We climbed up on the
range at the point where Bill Kelly and I had found the
alunite specimens, and re-located the spot. There were two
little knolls on the level top. The alunite was in scattered
spherical concretions up to two feet across, in a shaly band
in the knolls. There was no continuous bed of it, and these
knolls were dark red, nothing like Winnecke’s description
of white pillars. The sandstone here was very gravelly
in places, but it was red on the exposed surfaces. A little
further south we examined the steep face of the range
carefully over its full height of two hundred and fifteen
feet. Fifty feet below the top there was a shale band with
sporadic masses of alunite running round one spur. Frag-
ments of alunite were found below the cliffs for half a mile
along the front of the range, but the quantity was of no
commercial importance. There were no hills of alunite, no
white hills.
Below the cliffs the weathered-out pebbles were of white
quartz, giving in places an almost beach-like appearance.
The red colour of rocks in arid regions is usually only on
the outside, due to a deposition of oxides of iron, or rust.
If the outside is chipped the rock may be found to be any
colour inside. These gravels were probably white below the
surface, and this was later found to be the case. The
alunite had proved a disappointment. The problem of
Goyder's Pillars still remained to be solved.
We followed the Arthur down looking for Roger's camp
and found it a mile below the junction of the Arthur and
the Thring, at the end of the Range. We first saw a well
and garden on the river bank, with a young aboriginal
woman in riding breeches and shirt drawing water for the
trough. She spoke very good English and her name was
Rosie. Rogers had brought her from Queensland. She
said Rogers had not returned yet. She was expecting him
next day. She hurried off to the camp out on the flat above


v... -.-- - -v ".r i ?-"••■ '•■’ 1 • • ■
. r*,^0
*:: •: V %} ' •••■ -V ! .! ■ : .■:•:• N.-. s ' W- ' ' -- - : -' : '< < • . >.''^
; ' ■ v ' •
*£ l
• *
' mr*
' r\. '.
;,w w y\^.
. **. *1 .. m** ..
.jp4- H»
>> r, ■ -
v 'V?vNSfJS |y, f 3s w / -f*
% i “ i
><*, ■*■■■'.. — _ **»*£ ,#i* ;
* t
'
CJi * %- K- j fW
gl- rf**<--:;.: '
> w % "Ir.” t' <** . *
\ % * * / '* * ft ..
The Simpson Desert from the Tarlton Range.


1 - 1 , 1 1 jl ■ ' - 1 -» , ' ■ ' s
Goyder’s Pillars.


the river. We followed more leisurely and on the way were
attacked by a pack of fearsome looking dogs that proved
to be ‘yellow’ mongrels, for a charge with sticks drove
them yelling away.
When we got to the camp, a small square dark room sur-
rounded by a verandah on all sides and built of gumtree
boughs, we found Rosie had changed into a bright print
dress which was actually less becoming. We sat under the
verandah near an extremely savage dog chained to a post.
I was very glad this one had not been loose. It was the
pride of Roger’s eye, and guaranteed to chew pieces out
of anything.
Rosie made us some tea. As we sat there, I noticed a
cat’s face peering out from the dead branches overhead.
It reminded me very much of the Cheshire cat. It did not
seem to have any body. As we looked round, more and
more faces appeared, and soon cats began to climb down
the posts and gather round, five, ten, twenty, and still they
came, cautiously at first, rubbing against posts and table
legs, and gaining confidence, till we were entirely sur-
rounded by cats. I counted thirty-three. They were a hobby
with Rogers. When I referred to them later he said I had
only seen a few. Most of them were out hunting. He had
eighty-seven, and killed two goats every week to feed
them. There were also a paltry ten dogs, countless goats,
a lonely bullock, and several horses, though most of the
‘plant’ was with Rogers. There were tomatoes, melons and
onions in the garden.
Rosie said she was alone except for two ladies down
along the creek. For a time we thought this must be two
adventurous lady motorists we had met at Alice Springs
and felt rather disgusted that they had found their way
out here, but discovered later that Rosie’s ‘ladies’ were
two very old aboriginal women.
We went on to the end of the Tarlton Range that day,
and returned the following evening to find Rogers back
home. That night he told us a lot of useful and interesting
things about the country, in our camp across the river. We
tried him with the wireless, again without success. He
wanted to talk, and that suited us.


He understood the Goyder’s Pillars were the two ridges
on the Arthur, as did Tom Hanlon. They had never heard
of any white hills, but Rogers said there were two white
‘cuts’ as he called them on a hill at the edge of the range
that were conspicuous from a long distance to the west,
and quite a landmark. The natives called them Alitcha.
The ridges on the Arthur were called Keepera Keepera. He
gave us the native names of all the local features.
We decided to have a look at these white ‘cuts’, and so
next day went back to the middle of the range, which is
only about twenty-five miles long and two to four miles
wide. There Rogers said he would show us a track across
the range, and we would be the first to take a motor vehicle
over it.
The Keepera ridges are half way along the range and a
spur projects from the range towards them. Just north
of this spur there is a bay in the range leading up to a low
divide, and at the head of the bay and on the north side
of the divide, where the cliffs were about eighty feet high,
there were two places where there had been recent falls
of stone, clearing away the red front of the range and
exposing the white rock behind. The white gravel had
fallen in a fan below, making a triangular shape. These
were Alitcha, and without doubt they were Goyder’s Pillars.
Viewed from a distance they would appear as triangles,
and might appear to stand out from the range as solid
cones. They were not pillars at all, but merely splashes on
the front of the cliff. We had not noticed them particularly
coming down. There was a good deal of white gravel along
that part of the range, and the best view of them would
have been behind us after we passed them. In any case
there was nothing striking about them at close quarters.
It was distance that had lent enchantment to Winnecke.
Their position was exactly as he had marked on his sketch
map, at a narrow part of the range, in the middle, and five
miles from the Arthur Creek. It seems a pity to expose
this error on the part of an old explorer and surveyor, but
one was surprised that he did not explain it himself when
he visited the ‘pillars’, instead of again referring to them
as white hills, peaks or pillars, at the same time adding


that from the distance they had the appearance of pillars.
They had first been described as conical hills. They are
still an interesting feature, visible and puzzling from so far
away, and not unworthy to bear a name famous in South
Australian history. There was a satisfaction in clearing up
this small geographical mystery, a satisfaction somewhat
like that of knowing one’s latitude.
The top twenty-five feet of the tableland edge of The
Pillars was a vertical face of hard grit, with below it beds
of fine white sandstone, almost incoherent, with abundant
kaolin, and very coarse pebble beds at the base. The quartz
pebbles and particularly the kaolin or pipe-clay, made the
whole rock-falls a glaring white. There was no alunite at
the Pillars.
It was only a little over a mile from the top of the divide
at Goyder’s Pillars to the plains on the far side of the range,
and we crossed without difficulty in the utility and were
thus the first to take mechanical transport across the
Tarlton Range, under Fred Rogers’ guidance. The occasion
gave Fred a lot of pleasure.
From the top of the south end of the range there was
nothing to be seen but the level expanse of the Simpson
Desert extending to the horizon east, west and south, a
sea of grey vegetation, spinifex, low mallee and shrubs, cut
across diagonally by the straight black line of the Hay
River with its borders of gumtrees. The high sandridges
begin twenty miles to the south and can not be seen from
this point.
Next day Rogers provided horses and we took a ride for
seven miles south into the Desert. There was nothing but
red sandy soil, spinifex and mallee. Crocker took soil
samples. We also visited the junction of the Thring and
Arthur Creeks, near Rogers’ camp, where the streams com-
bine to form the Hay River, a spot known to very few since
Winnecke first saw it some sixty years ago.
The dreams of finding hills of alunite having faded, the
next thing was to investigate Madrid's meteorite. We said
goodbye to Rogers with regret. He had been a good and
interesting companion. Soon afterwards he stole Alice
away from Huckitta, and Rosie was killed by a fall from
a horse.


We found everything ready at Huckitta, and started off
through the Dulcie Range with our six camels. There was
only one riding camel, so Madrid, Crocker and I took turns
to ride it. It was possible to perch oneself on top of the load
on a packsaddle, but so uncomfortable that walking was pre-
ferable. We followed the Ooratippera Creek through the
range and out on to the plain to the north, where there
was a shallow waterhole. Madrid had a muster camp here,
with Mick Laughton and two other half-castes, George
Smith the camel owner, and two aboriginals, mustering the
cattle. The site of the meteorite was seven miles away
on the Turkey Creek, and about four miles down
the creek from the front of the range. It had long
been a mustering camp site, a bare gravelly area at the
side of the creek, trodden by cattle. There, to one side of
the cattle camping place stood out a big black stone on the
flat ground. We hurried over to it. It was realized in a
moment that here was a splendid meteorite of a rare kind.
In general appearance it looked like a mass of black con-
glomerate rock, a dark matrix enclosing clearer pebbles
up to two inches across, but a blow with the hammer
showed the matrix to be iron, white below the rusted sur-
face, and malleable, while the pebbles were greenish-brown
and glassy, the mineral olivene or peridot, often used as a
precious stone. This type of meteorite, the iron-olivene
type, is known as a padasite. It proved to be twice the
size of the largest hitherto known, the original Medvedeva
padasite found in Siberia in 1749. The mass exposed above
ground was resting on a narrow base and we found it could
be rocked with a bar. This portion was later found to
weigh nearly one and a half tons. It was four feet five
inches long and up to three feet deep. It was resting on
iron shale.
The next morning we found the camels had cleared out
and Madrid had to go after them. In spite of hobbles,
camels can go a long way in a night if they make up their
minds to it. Crocker and I set to work to remove the main
mass of the meteorite from the shadow depression in which
it lay, caused by wind action on the soil. We cut timber
slides and levers, but it was a very long and difficult job
in the soft dry crusty ground, owing to the shape and den-


* “ ' » . -j**
- - i
, rf |1*
-*
■
;;
. *! f A*
|r
1 •;••’•■ ~ &fr48j»!8l
*:* * -; r -: ? ■ " ? 5 ■:; | • ' ** .
S* '• * r '-'~4
,
. ..
%* » . ■" ■ ' * *
•*» - *f . ■ •-.
-• «&.«• -
" “■■ ■ J
■ _ ■- , . 9U
•
" ' ' v ss J:£ >, |
- *% : C Jf
Soii Sampling ;
in Simpson Desert Spinifex.
&
*
I


i»%i i ■- ■, v • i ® : ■ ' 1 . . p
1#?! 4 ■ B • • - gs-
v* ■■ i ’ '£& m : ■ 1 * @, 52 i I'
The Huckitta Meteorite.


sity of the mass. There was no place to get a good hold on
it. Incidentally, it was impossible to smash any further
specimens off it with two-pound hammers; as well try to
break a piece off an anvil. The piece Mick Laughton had
brought in had scaled off naturally. Our object was to find
out what lay below, so the first thing was to get the movable
portion aside. When this was done we dug down and soon
found that there was a very extensive mass of iron shale un-
derneath, which had been part of the meteorite. The iron in
the portion below ground had completely oxidised, and the
olivenes were cracked and rusty but still glassy, the whole
easily breaking up under the pick. The shale mass below
was three feet deep and up to eight feet across. The piece
we had rolled aside was merely the hard kernel of a much
larger mass that had weathered away.
We decided that Madrill and Laughton should consider
themselves the owners of the meteorite, which was worth
money, I to make arrangements for its removal and dis-
posal, with rights of description, and the proceeds of its
eventual sale to go to them. The University of Adelaide
advanced funds, and a contractor brought the meteorite in
to the railway at Alice Springs, with a ton of shale in pieces
up to three hundred pounds in weight. Slicing and polish-
ing sections of the meteorite proved a very difficult task.
Eventually the South Australian Railways workshops made
a diamond saw four feet six inches in diameter and sliced a
slab off the whole of one side. When polished, this was a
beautiful and unique exhibit, the green and brown olivenes
studding their white iron setting.
Then came the problem of selling it for Madrill and
Laughton. It was a difficult thing to price. The cutting and
polishing had cost £IOO for time alone, and the transport
£SO. The British Museum, the Natural History Museum
of New York, and Wards of Rochester all kindly gave esti-
mates, when the position was explained to them, of the
value of the meteorite in the raw, and they were in remark-
able agreement. The figure of £250 was decided on, and a
benefactor was asked for over the wireless to buy the
meteorite at this price for 'the South Australian Museum.
Mr. W. Burdett, of Basket Range, responded. Fifty pounds
had to be returned to the University, so Billy Madrill and


Mick Laughton got a hundred pounds each. There was a
popular belief that the meteorite was worth thousands, and
I always felt that my friends were disappointed. How-
ever, it was a nice ‘wind-fall’ for them for very little effort.
They very nearly lost it to a prowling stealer of meteorites
who turned up with a truck, as had been anticipated. He
could not find it and was eventually ordered off the
property.
Madrid was much interested to find that the stone really
was a meteorite, for it explained something that had always
puzzled him. He had camped beside this stone at least once
a year for the past ten years. It was at the side of the area
on which the cattle were held. There are no yards in this
country and stockmen ride round the cattle all night. It
was the custom for two men to ride, each taking half the
circle, and Madrid always took the side away from the
camp, leaving the side next to the camp to the aboriginal.
In this place he always found that the aboriginal chose to
ride on the far side, away from the camp and stone, but he
had never questioned this as the blacks have many taboos
that they are unwilling to discuss or explain, and he had not
connected it with the stone. Now it was plain. They were
afraid of the stone. They knew it was something different
and mysterious, unlike £ny other stones. It certainly did
look black and forbidding, alone in the wide soil plains. The
observant black man knew the stone was queer; the white
man took no notice of it at ad; but the half-caste, Mick,
had the black man’s knowledge and the white man’s
reason. He brought a piece in to the station to find out ad
about it, and won his reward.
At Mac Donald Downs the Chalmers told us of another
supposed meteorite crater somewhere in the vicinity. This
was entirely an aboriginals’ story, obtained by the Chalmers
boys. The crater was said to be a hole in a sandstone
range, and old men were supposed to have seen the
meteorite fad. We made an attempt to reach the spot with
aboriginal guides in the truck, but got into execrable coun-
try, covered with mounds of spinifex, too rough for the
utility, and we turned back. The story and location were
too indefinite. As usual, it was impossible to get any
estimate of the distance from the natives. However, it is


a story to be followed up, with a more suitable vehicle, or
horses in a good season.
It was now time to draw our long and varied expedition
to a close. The alunite search had been a failure, but this
was compensated for by the very satisfactory and extensive
geological results, and especially by the discovery of the
Boxhole crater and the Huckitta meteorite.
I have not in this account of Central Australia so far
mentioned another form of meteorite which has raised
world-wide interest, the little Australites or obsidianites.
They are not found in the centre but more to the south,
actually in a broad band stretching right across Australia
in about the latitude of the Transcontinental Railway, in
bare and stony country. It is possible that their extent is
much greater than this, and that their abundant discovery
in this particular belt is due to the area being more fre-
quented, more search being carried out, and also to the
country being specially suited to their exposure and find-
ing, for it is arid and windy, and surface stones do not tend
to become buried in stream deposits, or hidden in vegeta-
tion, but on the other hand more and more stones become
exposed by the blowing away of the soil. Similar specimens
are being found all over Australia, and in many other parts
of the world, but nowhere so abundantly as in these arid
regions. Constable Kennett got his natives to collect many
thousands near Charlotte Waters when he was stationed
there, and another collection of over eight thousand was
made in Western Australia along the railway line. I have
found a few myself by searching in the gibber plains at
railway halts between Oodnadatta and the Finke. They are
little black glassy things, rarely exceeding an inch in
greatest dimension, and often button-shaped, but some-
times dumb-bell or boat-shaped. The buttons sometimes
have a thin rim around them. They are jet black on the
pitted surfaces, but when broken are seen to be dark green
like bottle glass. They have the composition of volcanic
glass. Their origin has been the subject of much dis-
cussion, but it is now generally accepted that they are of
meteoric origin, visitors from outer space like other
meteorites. It seems probable that those found in this
area are the results of a single shower.


Back at Huckitta we found Alice shearing a sheep with
a pair of scissors. She had a few sheep, given to her as
lambs by neighbours, for Huckitta was still a cattle
station only. From the wool she had spun thread
and knitted scarves and garments that could have
been worn anywhere. She had many carpentering
jobs to her credit too, including the framing of various
coloured prints from illustrated papers that decorated the
walls. Billy said she could shoot hawks on the wing with
a rifle. The goats spent their nights on the rocks behind
the house, and when in the morning hawks came to worry
the kids, Alice would just walk to the back door and pick
them off with the rifle.
There was a pair of shears at the station and Crocker
finished off the shearing in no time, thereby acquiring great
merit. That one lesson would have been enough for Alice.
And so goodbye to Huckitta, and on with the thousand-
mile journey to Adelaide, from the centre of the continent
to the coast, a thousand miles of red and yellow plains, of
occasional ranges, of wide sandy river courses, and never
a sign of surface waters; across the MacDonnell Ranges,
through Henbury and Todmorden, on to Oodnadatta and the
desert of the Lake Eyre Basin, past the lake, through
Marree and the Flinders Ranges to Hawker and on to
Quorn, where we say goodbye to the spacious north and
finish up among the narrow farms, thus ending a journey of
three thousand miles, and every hour worth living.


CHAPTER XXIV
Conclusion
J HAVE given an outline of the early exploration of
Central Australia, and its political history, followed by
some account of my own journeys in the regions of the
centre of the great island continent. I have tried to picture
its atmosphere and scenery, and the life of its pioneers, as
they appear and appeal to me. I have had no great adven-
tures myself in this country, and I have invented none.
Adventures belong to the heroic days of exploration, when
ways and means were undeveloped. They should not hap-
pen to-day. The Arctic explorer Stefannson very truly
says, ‘Adventures are a mark of incompetence.’
Adventures with the blacks were a real feature of the
hardships of the early explorers, and it is still possible to
have such adventures, but only in very few localities. In
Arnhem Land, the eastern coastal portion of the Northern
Territory, Constable McColl, two prospectors, and five
Japanese trepang fishers were murdered during the year
1933. It is to be noted that the whites are always mur-
dered and the blacks just killed. Now lam sure that it is
possible to travel indefinitely in Arnhem Land without
being murdered, though periodically it may become more
dangerous. In most cases of murder, to seek the cause one
must chercher la femme. The aborigines have not been my
special study. I have never sought them, being too much
occupied with other things, and I have only introduced them
into this story so far as they have intruded themselves, and
my story has shown that they do not intrude; they only
ask to be left alone. It is when the white man forces con-
tact on them that trouble may ensue, trouble which may
cause the death of a few whites, and will certainly lead to
the extinction of all the blacks.


The Aborigines’ Friends Association estimates that there
are at present 80,000 aborigines in the Commonwealth,
with 20,000 of mixed blood among them. The great
majority of these are in the northern and north-eastern
coastal regions. The habit of the blacks is to wander about
in small groups, and such little parties are to be found scat-
tered about in all the desert regions of the interior. The
ordinary traveller will never see them, though he may
occasionally notice their fires and smoke signals. The
pastoralists, if given sufficient notice, can round up a hun-
dred or so for an anthropological expedition. If a pros-
pector camps on one of their scattered and precious
soaks in the desert, he may see them; they will in
time make a hostile demonstration. The wise and solitary
prospector fills up with water and moves on, and is un-
molested. I have only twice seen wild bush natives, though
often they have been near my camps, and I have crossed
their tracks. On the Granites track, at Archibald’s Soak,
two men and four boys ran out to the motor-car. These
people had received gifts from other travellers; we gave the
boys sweets, which they held in their hands, without the
slightest idea that they were eatable till we showed them,
Simon then rather cruelly gave one of them a piece of
tobacco, which he bravely tried to eat till we stopped him.
On the way back, near Brooks’ Soak, two other men, with
ochre and feathers from a corroboree still sticking to them,
and two more boys, stopped us for what they could get.
They all showed timidity and curiosity, but the white man’s
food, and the priceless empty tins he leaves behind, were
already luring them away from their age-long habits of
life to their inevitable end on impact with a civilization
which they are too far behind ever to absorb.
There are blacks on all the inland stations of the Nor-
thern Territory and North-western Australia, living in
camps, partly employed by the stations, and semi-civilized,
perhaps half a dozen, perhaps a score. Their numbers
steadily dwindle. Once so numerous in the Cooper and
Diamantina country, they are now already extinct there,
though the stations, which brought about their downfall,
are themselves abandoned. It is only in quite unsettled and


apparently useless Arnhem Land that they still thrive and
show some little independence and unwillingness to go
under before the white man. They are called bad blacks;
a good black is one whose spirit is quite broken.
The ordinary visitors to Australia will not see any blacks
at all; there are hundreds of thousands of Australians who
have never seen one. A station manager once said to his
aboriginal stockman, T want you to ride that colt for me
this morning, Jacky.’ This colt was an outlaw, and Jacky
did not relish the idea. After a little thought, he said,
‘Mine tinkit you better ride ’im, boss. Blackfellow gettin’
very scarce now.’ On the other hand, Goggle-eye Jim was
an optimist. When I said he seemed very old, and ‘little bit
close up finish,’ he said, ‘Me never bin finish. Me no bin
finish before.’
The State Protectors of Aborigines really do effective
work only in the settled and civilized areas. There are
several Government mission stations in the south, where a
few half-castes are kept together on farms; in the unsettled
areas practically nothing is done at all, nor has ever been
done.
The explorer Eyre, himself a magistrate in the very
earliest days of the colony, wrote very fairly about the
natives, and I make a few quotations from his Journals of
Expeditions of Discovery into Central Australia and Over-
land from Adelaide to King George’s Sound in the years
1840-41.
‘I shall be borne out, I think, by facts when I state that the
aborigines of this country have seldom been guilty of wanton or un-
provoked outrages, or committed acts of rapine or bloodshed, without
some strongly exciting cause, or under the influence of feelings that
would have weighed in some degree with Europeans in similar cir-
cumstances ....
‘As we ourselves have laws, customs, or prejudices, to which we
attach considerable importance, and the infringement of which we
consider either criminal or offensive, so have the natives theirs,
equally, perhaps, dear to them, but which, from our ignorance or
heedlessness, we may be continually violating, and can we wonder
that they should sometimes exact the penalty of infraction? do we
not do the same? or is ignorance a more valid excuse for the civilized
man than the savage?
‘Where is the civilized nation, that thus situated and finding them-
selves, as is the case with the natives, numerically and physically
stronger than their oppressors, would be guilty of so little retaliation,
of so few excesses?’


Right up to the present day, blacks have been killed in
large numbers, periodically, by the roused settlers.
Now let us look for a moment at the other side of the
shield, for there is another and totally different point of
view. Any one who lived for a few months on Coniston
Station, for instance, would see it, and nine out of ten
people who had that experience would completely alter any
preconceived ideas they may have held.
The good people of the south from time to time cry out
about the terrible treatment of the natives in the north, the
harshness, the killings, the uncared-for half-caste children.
The great majority of these people know nothing at all at
first hand about the subject; they are unconsciously
depending wholly in their own imaginations. It is galling to
the people of the north, who justly say, ‘Who are these to
cry complaints, when they and their fathers have completely
wiped out a much denser native population in the south, and
now, smug and safe, criticize the far more considerate
treatment of to-day?
The whole question can be brought down to this simple
alternative: either the settler occupies the country and the
native, even if treated with the utmost humanity, vanishes
before the advance of a civilization that is utterly beyond
him, or else the country is left untouched, in which alone
lies the salvation of the native. The European and the Aus-
tralian aboriginal cannot exist together.
Consider the case of a settler taking up new country,
encouraged by the Government, praised as a pioneer open-
ing up our untapped resources, held up as an example to
the parasites of the cities.- He must camp on permanent
water, he must dispossess the natives. There, right at the
beginning, the death warrant of the local aborigines is
signed. Even if the settler is speared some one else will
follow him. Two courses are open to him—either to treat
the natives firmly, to make it clear to them that they must
keep away, and not touch his stock or come near the water,
as that keeps the stock away from it, or else to fraternize
with them and make himself one with them. The former
is the only possible course. I could quote cases of the latter,
where the natives have come in and treated everything as


their own, according to native custom, distributing the flour
and stores, and making life impossible, till the misguided
settler has sent for police protection, and in the end the
natives, thoroughly mystified, have suffered more than if
firmness had been used at the outset.
The settler finds it hard. There are years of drought; he
has no money and no comforts. He would not ask a white
woman to come and share his life with him, and few
women, knowing the conditions, would consent to come. He
employs the blacks, he feeds them, and teaches them to do
the station work. They offer him their women; it is the
native custom, but if he accepts a woman he accepts
her tribe as well. Who would not accept, after ten
years of solitude? And so the settler’s standards fall;
it is inevitable. He becomes involved in native laws
and customs, and soon his life is in danger, for it
is true that, while not a savage killer, the native has
a very light regard for human life, and death is
the only punishment he knows. Some day the settler is
speared, and swift retribution follows. In what other
way can his neighbours impress on the natives the gravity
of what they have done, how else safeguard their own
lives? I would say, without hesitation, in no other way.
The wrong was done when the country was first occupied.
The natives have been a wonderful asset to the settlers.
Without them progress would have been impossible. They
carry out nine-tenths of the station work; the half-castes
and natives do most of the mustering and droving. The
half-caste girls too are equally an asset; they do the house-
work, and bring a little comfort into many rough home-
steads. Often they are married, and even if not they fre-
quently occupy an equally permanent and trusted position.
Among the things that have most impressed me in the
north are examples of the lifelong devotion of a white man
to an aboriginal or half-caste woman. But civilization is
spreading, and the Old Timers are now ashamed of these
things, and try to keep them hidden from prying eyes that
would not understand.
The only hope for the aboriginal is complete isolation, and
that is practically impossible without posting guards, for


the aboriginal must be protected from himself. Even as
Kipling’s dogs were drawn into man’s camps by the smell
of the cooking meat, so the black man must creep in to
watch and steal from the white.
Christianity is of little avail. The Christian missions are
making the best efforts possible to ease the passing of the
black man and save the face of the white, though that is not
generally the missions’ point of view. It is sad to find that
the station people are so much against the missions, but
so it is. It is said that they do no good, but spoil the blacks
for station work. The latter may be true, but I am sure
that the missions do good in their way. They give back a
little for all the black man has been robbed of. Ethically,
the missions are in an impregnable position; practically,
their religious teaching can bring little to the first genera-
tion that hears it. One native told me that a missioner told
him that Jesus would give him all he prayed for, and he
‘bin pray all night and pray all day for bread, and Jesus
no bin fetch ’em’.
In my opinion, all that can be done is being done. The
efforts of the missionaries, and the Government with their
rations and blankets, merely postpone the inevitable end.
The remnants of this people after the first hundred years
of our occupation will have been absorbed by their dispos-
sesses in another hundred years.
With this note on the aborigines, I will bring my tale to a
close. My object has been not only to give accurate infor-
mation about Central Australia, but also to convey some of
the glamour that this great region has for me. Our Aus-
tralian art and literature, it has been said, show too much
European influence. We must have English trees in our
gardens, the nightingale must sing when all else is still, so
great is the power of tradition; thus the mulga and the
galah have been neglected. To picture Australian atmo-
sphere, it is not even necessary to bring in sheep and abori-
gines. The dominant characteristics of natural Australian
scenery are greyness, age, loneliness, stillness, and, above
all, peace. Rome, Greece, Egypt, Bablyon, are of yesterday
compared with the age-long sameness of our great silent
continent. The deserts of Arabia have seen the passing
of Aryan hosts, the wildernesses of Central America were


trampled down by the armoured Spaniards, but the lonely
plains of Australia had known only the little wandering
tribes of blacks and the gentle kangaroo, till the barbarous
yellow man’s bombs began to fall on our northern coasts;
the turmoil of history has passed this land by. Before ever
the mushroom growth of the human race had sprung up,
countless millions of suns had arisen, shone upon the great
desert disk of the interior, just as it is to-day, and sunk in
a blaze of red.
A newspaper reporter goes up the telegraph line, and one
reads the same old pathetic story, that it is one of the
driest seasons they have ever known. In that expression
lies the whole tragedy and the whole spirit of The brave
people of the north, of the men who slowly say, ‘I think
I’ll hang it out a bit longer.’ It is never the wettest
season they have ever known. One good rain, and
the seven lean years are forgotten. Therein lies the
lure and the fascination of the country. The droughts
last for long series of years in those vast areas, when
the traveller is oppressed with the hopelessness of it
all, and there is nothing so welcome as the shadow of a
great rock in a weary land. The waters dry up, the stock
are dying, the wild birds and animals are gone, the sand
is piling up round the useless stockyards, when suddenly
the rain comes, and the cycle ends. Who so poor in spirit
that he would call it the beginning of a new 7 cycle of drought,
and not the end of the old ? The whole face of the country
is magically transformed, the grass springs up, the remain-
ing cattle revive, the birds return, and the voice of the
turtle is heard in our land.




Index
Aborigines, 295-300,
and meteorite, 292.
battles, 248.
drawings, 249.
killing, 237.
missions, 300.
workshop, 189.
at Aileron Station, 268.
at Barrow Creek, 98.
at Coniston Station, 261.
at Hanlon’s Camp, 251.
at Hermannsburg, 212-214.
at Love’s Creek, 225.
at Mac Donald Downs, 248.
at Mt. Doreen, 263-266.
at Renner’s Rock, 274.
in Arnhem Land, 295.
Aborigines’ Friends Associa-
tion, 296.
Aborigines, State Protectors of,
297. '
Acacia aneura (mulga), 84.
Acacia salicina (desert willow),
84.
Acacia Well, 225.
Accordeon player, 117.
Adamson (postmaster), 279.
Adelaide, 12. 13. 15. 18.
Adelaide Overland Telegraph
Exploring Expedition, 28.
Adelaide River, 24. 25.
Advisory Councils (Northern
Territory), 6. 7.
Afghans, 52.
Aileron Station, 268.
Albany, 18. 15.
Alberga Creek, crossing, 271.
flood, 272.
Albrecht, Pastor, 212.
Alderman, Dr. A. R., 273.
Algebuckina, 56.
Alice (half-caste), 258. 284. 289.
294.
Alice River, 134.
Alice Springs, description of
old, 68.
changes, 276.
in gold boom, 233-6.
once called Stuart, 68.
railway, see Railway,
school, 70.
telegraph station, 68.
water supply, 76.
Alice Well, 67.
Alice Valley, 82. 94. 123. 125.
131. 186. 206.
Alkeah Water Hole, 255.
Allchurch, Ernie, 68.
Alunite, 255. 269. 286.
Amadeus, Lake, 31. 32. 35. 42.
Ammonites, 158.
Amundsen, Raoul, 40.
Anderson brothers, 258.
Andrews, James, death, 39.
Anglo-Iranian Oil Coy., 270.
Ants on Lake Eyre, 174.
Anthills, 244.
Archaeocyathinae, 225.
Archibald’s Soak, 296.
Arltunga goldfield, 226.
Arnhem Land, 296. 297.
Artesian Bore,
Anacoora, 107. 108.
Birdsville Track, 113.
Charlotte Waters, 61. 113.
Clayton, 151. 153. 154.
Cooinchina, 145.
Coward Springs, 56.
Goyder’s Lagoon, 113. 151.
Hamilton, 60.
Kopperamanna, 112. 151.


Artesian Bore,
Lake Crossing, 111.
Lake Harry, 152.
Lake Letty, 159.
Marree, 51.
Oodnadatta, 60.
Piarooka, 145.
Arthur Creek, 254. 284. 285.
289.
crossing, 285.
Attack Creek, 23. 24. 98.
Australia Twice Traversed, 31.
Australian Inland Mission.
Alice Springs, 102. 276.
Birdsville, 9. 115. 117. 118.
Divine Service, 103.
Australites, 293.
Augusta, Port, 17. 18. 39. 45.
138. 155. 182. 270.
Ayers Rock, 35. 272.
Babbage, B. H., 17. 18. 50.
Baker (stockman), 277. 278.
Bailey, Lou, 245.
Bald Hill, 227.
Barclay, H. Vere, 42. 107. 230.
285.
Barcoo River, 134.
Barlee Springs, 38.
Barrier Ranges, 16.
Barrow Creek, 29. 40. 95. 97.
236.
dinner at Telegraph Station,
98.
murder of staff, 98.
Basedow, Dr. H., 266.
Baume, E. R., 232. 237. 240.
242.
Baxter (Eyre’s companion), 15.
Bean Tree, Stuart’s, 65. 229.
251.
Bejah Dervish, 53.
Belt, F. W., 42. 201.
Beltana, 39. 49.
Beryl, 229.
Bight, Great Australian, 15.
Bird (pastoralist), 246.
Birds, in Eastern MacDonnells,
223.
east of Jervois Range, 253.
Birdsville, 113. 151.
dance, 117.
description, 115.
punt, 117.
water supply, 116.
Birdsville Track, 113, 137. 151.
Birdum, 6.
Blanche Cup, 56. 272,
Blanche, Lake, 14. 16. 17. 111.
142. 151.
Blood’s Creek, 60,
Bloodwood, 271.
Bloomfield, L., 225.
Boggy Creek, 217.
Boggy Hole, 216.
Bogs, vehicle, 236.
Boiling the billy, 240.
story, 106.
Booby traps, 246. 247.
Boolcoomatta Hills, 110.
Bopeechee, 112.
Border,
Queensland - Northern Ter-
ritory, 107. 108. 121. 258.
Queensland - South Australia,
114. 118. 258.
Northern Territory - South
Australia, 108.
Bores, see Artesian bores.
Boundary Dam, 183.
Boxhole Station, 281.
Braitling, Billy, 260. 261.
Braitling, Mrs., 262. 264. 266.
267.


Breadon, Allen, 273.
Brinkley’s Bluff, 29.
Broken back, man with, 103.
105. 210.
Broken Hill, 16. 109. 110. 138.
Brooks, Frederick, 98. 197.
grave, 237.
Brooks’ Soak, 237. 277. 296.
Brown, H. Y. L., 42. 250.
Buck, Bob, 265. 277. 278.
Bull-dust, 161. 163. 172. 174.
Bungalow (half-caste home) 69.
Burdett, W., 291.
Burdekin Duck (mine), 234. 241.
Burke and Wills, 26. 27. 30.
Burt’s Bluff, 82.
Burt Plain, 74. 95. 96. 97. 194.
246.
Burt’s Well, 97. 246. 281.
Bush tucker, 213.
Bushy Park Station, 246.
Caledon Bay, 185.
Callabonna, Lake, 14. 111. 138.
151.
Calvert Expedition, 53.
Cambrian formations, 217. 218.
225.
Camels,
Burke and Wills, 26.
dry stages, 41. 183.
first entry into Australia, 182,
in Australia, 179-184.
loads, 180.
management, 181.
reasoning, 184.
saddles, 180.
Warburton loses, 37.
Cameron (financier), 260.
accident, 267.
Campbell, Don, 75. 185.
Canary Islands, 182.
Carmichael Creek, 31,
Caroline, Lake, 124. 125.
Carrington, V. G., 69. 240.
Cats,
wild, 253,
at Rogers’ Gamp, 287.
Cattle, 222.
brought to Adelaide by Eyre,
12.
droving, 104.
dying, 64. 89.
in Lake Eyre Country, 139.
mustering, 202. 208. 209. 219.
on Birdsville Track, 151. 153.
154.
water required, 247.
Cattle men, habits, 209.
Cave deposits, 90.
Central Australia, 4.
definition, 6, 8.
Central Mt. Stuart, 17. 98.
discovery and naming, 20. 21.
Stuart’s message in cairn, 28.
Central Mt. Wedge, 97.
Centre of a Continent, 22. 23.
Centre of Australia, 20-23.
Chalmers (pastoralist), 247,
292.
Chambers, James, 20. 23.
Chamber’s Pillar, 63.
Chandler’s Range, 273.
Chapman (prospector), 235.
Chapman Gold Expedition, 234.
Charlotte Waters, 31. 101. 104.
108. 293.
Chewings, Dr. Charles, 86.
Chewings Range, 81. 82. 85.
130. 189. 194. 200.
Christopher’s Pinnacles, 273.
Circle Gully, 217.


Circus Water, 33. 34. 60.
Claraville Station, 227.
Clayton River, 152. 153.
Close, Sir John, 285.
Cockatoo Creek, 137. 138. 262.
Cockatoos, black, 275.
Cockroach Lagoon, 255. 258.
Cogoon, 133.
Colson, Mrs. Ted, 268.
Committee for Promoting the
Northern Expedition, 13.
15.
Conglomerate Creek, 242.
Coniston Station, 97. 237. 277.
Connor’s Well, 97.
Coober Pedy, 108. 270.
description, 271.
Cooner’s Creek, 16. 111. 112.
133. 134. 149. 150.
Burke and Wills, 26.
Copi (gypsum), 59.
Conley, 49. 120.
Copper deposits,
Barrow Creek, 100.
Mt. Doreen, 264.
Cork-bark, 238.
Court proceedings, 259.
Coward Springs, 56.
Cowle (Horn Expedition), 201.
Crabs (freshwater), 255.
Creek beds, sleeping in, 62. 210.
249.
Crocker, R. L., 270. 278. 283.
289. 290. 294.
Crown Point, 62.
Cryptozoon, 86. 114. 225.
Curdimurka, 163.
Dalhousie Springs, 107.
Daly Waters, 24. 29.
Damper, 92. 93. 231.
Dancing, Alice Springs, 220.
276.
Dangers of travel in Interior,
272.
Darling River, 15, 16, 109.
Dashwood Creek, 81.
Date palms, 53.
Davenport Creek, 200.
Davenport Range, 89.
Davidson, Allen, 233. 242.
Day, T. E., 107. 108. 122.
Dead Heart of Australia, The ,
137.
Deep Well, 63. 179.
Deering Creek, 31.
Delny Station, 246.
Depot sandhills, 62. 63. 65. 179.
Desert oak, 66. 271.
Desert topaz, 54.
Desert vegetation, 238.
Desiccation of Central Aus-
tralia, 138.
Development Commission, Dar-
win, 67.
Diamantina River, 17. 114. 115.
118, 133. 138.
description, 117.
Dingos, 284.
Diprotodon, 138.
Dix (postal inspector), 240.
Doctor’s Stones Station, 270.
Douglas Creek, 145.
Drovers camp, 153, 154.
Dulcie Range, 224. 250. 255. 290.
Dunn (prospector), 265.
Earle, Athel, 265.
Earle’s Reef, 264.
East Well Station, 270.
Eastern Extension Telegraph
Coy., 30.


Eastern MacDonnell Ranges,
description, 223. 224.
Ehrenburg Range, 31.
Eight Mile Gap, 86. 94.
Elder, Sir Thomas, 36. 39. 182.
Elder’s wine, 40.
Ellery Creek, 86. 130. 131. 190.
192.
Ellery Creek Old Station, 215.
Ellery Creek Waterhole, 191.
193.
Emily Plain, 63. 64. 67. 123.
Emus, 101. 174. 223. 253.
Engoordina Station, 63.
Erldunda Station, 270.
Erythrina vespertilio, 229.
Eucalyptus papuana, 83.
Eurelia, 46.
Exploring in the Seventies, 28.
Eyre Creek, 16. 134.
Eyre, E. T., 12-15. 36. 297.
later history, 16.
Eyre, Lake, 108. 111. 112. 132.
136. 139.
connecting channel between
lakes, 172. 173.
description, 139-142.
discovery, 14.
from the air, 143-150.
levels, 55.
life round, 174.
naming, 18.
separate from Lake Torrens,
18. 19.
surface, 163-165. 167. 171.
test holes, 164. 167. 169. 170.
173.
from the ground, 163-172.
walk out on, 169-172.
water in, 176. 177. 178.
Eyre, Lake, Basin, 14. 50.
description and geology, 136-
139.
Eyre, Lake, South, 147. 155.
exploration, 18.
water in, 55, 178. 223.
Eyre’s Lookout, 14. 147. 148.
Eyre’s Peninsula, 13. 18.
Eye trouble, 263.
Eyrian beds, 139.
Fair Maid of Perth, 33.
Farina, 49.
Fenn’s Gap, 82.
Finches, 100. 253.
Finke Gorge, 80. 87. 88. 89.
Finke River, 41. 130. 186. 200.
216. 293.
from the air, 132.
pioneered by Giles, 31.
railway crossing, 65.
road crossing, 62.
Finke River Series, 61.
Finke, William, 18. 20. 23.
Fitzroy Downs, 133.
Fitzroy River, 53.
Flat-tops, 54. 58. 59. 62. 63. 99.
132. 139. 143. 152. 158. 250.
Flinders, Capt. Matthew, 12, 15.
Flinders Ranges, 12. 14-17. 110.
138. 151. 155. 156.
Florence River, 228.
Flynn of the Inland, 102.
Food on trek, 230.
Forced landing, 125. 126.
Forrest, John, 36. 61.
transcontinental journey, 37.
38.
reception in Adelaide, 40.
Fort McKellar, 32. 34. 39.
Fossils,
algal, 86. 114. 225.
Archaeocyathinae, 225.


Fossils,
Lake Eyre Basin, 138. 139.
Ordovician, 85. 186. 192. 205.
206. 217. 255. 258. 273. 275.
Fowler’s Bay, 15. 39. 182.
Frances Well, 63.
Freeling (Surveyor-General),
17. 142.
Freeman, Mr. and Mrs., 186.
187.
Fremantle, arrival of Giles, 40.
Frome, Lake, 14. 16. 49. 151.
155.
description, 45, 48.
flight over, 110. 111.
Frome River, 150. 158. 176.
Gairdner, Lake, 17. 18.
Galahs, 53.
Gaps, MacDonnell Ranges, 75.
87. 130.
Garnets, 228.
Gawler Ranges, 13.
George Gill Range, 31.
Geology,
Chandler’s Range, 273.
Eastern MacDonnell Ranges,
223. 225. 228.
Flinders Ranges, 54.
Great Artesian Basin, 54.
Granites, The, 240. 242.
Heavitree Range, 74.
James Ranges, 215-217. 275.
Jervois Range, 249. 250.
Tanami, 243.
Tarlton Range, 255.
Toko Range, 258.
Waterhouse Range, 218. 219.
275.
Western MacDonnell Ranges,
81. 82. 85. 86. 87. 130. 131.
186-194. 199. 200. 205. 206.
Yellow Cliff, 61.
Geraldton, 38.
‘Ghan’, Flash and Dirty, 47.
Gibbers, origin, 59,
plains, 60.
Gibson (assistant to Giles), 32.
39. 41.
his loss, 33. 34.
Gibson’s Desert, 35. 41.
Gidgee, 253.
Giles, Alfred, 28.
Giles, Ernest, 36-38. 61.
explorations, 30-35. 39.
reception in Perth, 40.
use of camels, 182. 183.
Giles, River, 125. 224.
Glaciation, 61.
Glen Edith, 31.
Glen Helen Station, 80. 85. 87.
89. 131.
description, 196. 197.
night at, 203.
position, 202,
Glen Helen Valley, 93. 190. 195.
200. 207.
Glen of Palms, 31. 216.
Goats, 78. 252.
Goggle-eye Jim, 226. 297.
Gosse Range, 31.
Gosse, W. C., 31. 32.
explorations, 35-37.
Goyder, G. W., 17.
Goyder’s Lagoon, 17. 117. 133.
from the air, 113.
Goyder’s Pass, 88.
Goyder’s Pillars, 255. 269. 286.
288. 289.
Granites Gold Field, 232.
description, 240-242.
collapse, 243-244.
Grant’s Blutf, 249. 250.
Grass seeds, 261.
Gray (Burke and Wills Ex-
pedition), 27.


Great Artesian Basin, 50. 61. 63.
96. 133. 145.
geology, 54.
Great Rift Valley, 44.
Great Victoria Desert, 183.
Greenland dog, 40.
Gregory, A. C., 24. 30. 136.
Gregory, Lake, 111. 151.
Gregory, Prof. J. W., 137. 141.
163.
Gunpowder Gap, 198,
Gulf of Carpentaria, 26. 27. 134,
Gypsum, 59. 139. 143. 152. 163.
167.
Haast’s Bluff, 31. 35. 36. 130.
Hack, Stephen, 17.
Halcomb Creek, 35.
Hale River, 108. 122. 124. 125.
132. 224. 228.
Half-castes, Alice Springs. 69.
70.
Halligan, G. H., 141-3. 159.
Hall’s Creek, 243.
Hamilton Creek, 272.
Hanlon, Tom, 250. 251. 266.
285.
Hanlon’s Mine, 250. 252.
Hann’s Range, 97.
Hanson River, 97.
Harry, Lake, 152. 153.
Hart’s Range, 224. 228.
Hawker, 48.
Hay River, 107. 121. 124. 133.
224. 254. 289.
Hayes, George, 40. 101.
Hayes, Ted, 104. 127. 202. 207.
219. 225. 233.
Heavitree Gap, 65. 67. 74. 75,
123. 129. 186.
Heavitree Range, 65. 74. 82. 85.
123. 124. 125. 194. 196.
description, 75.
geology, 74.
strip photography, 129. 130,
Heed, Benjamin, 21.
Heights of mountains, 199, 224.
Heinrich (teacher at Hermanns-
burg) 212.
Helpman, Lieut., 24.
Henbury Station, 81. 219. 270.
description, 273.
Hergott Springs, 50. 51.
Hermannsburg Mission Station,
81. 87. 202.
visit to, 212-214.
Heysen, Hans, 48.
Hill, Ernestine, 235.
Home of Bullion Mine, 100.
Horn Expedition of 1890, 42. 85.
201.
Horn Valley, 85. 186. 190. 206.
Horses, price in 1840, 13.
Horseshoe Bend, 62. 63. 103.
Horseshoe of Lakes, 14. 16. 49.
52. 110. 139. 155.
Howitt, A. W., 28. 31.
Huckitta Station, 224. 230. 249.
258. 284. 294.
Hugh River, 62. 81. 130. 131.
188. 189. 217. 218. 270. 275.
Hughes, Sir Walter Watson, 36.
Hyde, Harold, 273.
Illogwa Creek, 224.
Innamincka, 111. 119.
Ironwood {Acacia salicina) , 84.
James Ranges, 63. 67. 123. 211.
geology, 216. 217.
journey in 215-217.
Japanese, offer to immigrate, 5.


Jav Creek, 82. 83. 130. 131. 186.
187.
Jay Creek Mission, 83. 131. 187.
Jervois Ranges, 224. 250. 270.
Jinka Spring, 285.
Jones, Norman, 73. 79.
Journals of Expeditions of Dis-
covery (by E. J. Eyre), 297.
Journals of John McDouall
Stuart, 21.
Kalgoorlie, welcomes, 41.
Kallakoopah River, 114. 141.
Kangaroos, 174. 223. 253. 258.
275.
Katherine River, 24. 29.
Keartland, G. A., 42.
Kegs, The, 33-35.
Kekwick, W. D., 21.
Kennett, Constable, 279. 293.
Kerr (pastoralist), 246.
Kilalpaninna Mission Station,
137.
Kilgariff, Joe, 69. 235. 236. 240.
276.
Killamperpunna, Lake, 112.
King (Burke and Wills Expedi-
tion) 27.
King George’s Sound, 13.
Koop, Sergeant, 275. 279.
Koorakarina Creek, 143.
Kuddimukra, 162-3.
Kulgara Station, 270.
Kunoth, Charlie, 53. 157. 166.
172. 225.
Kunoth, Charlie, Junior, 157.
166. 169, 176.
Lady Edith Lagoon, 37.
Lambina Station, 271.
tragedy near, 272.
Lander River, 35.
Lasseter’s Last Ride, 265.
Lasseter’s Reef, 264. 265.
Laughton, Mick, 284. 290. 292.
Laverton, 109.
Lawrence’s Pass, 218.
Leichhardt, Ludwig, 24. 30.
possible fate, 133-135.
Lewis, J. W., 36. 140. 142.
Lightning, 102.
Lincoln, Port, 13. 15.
Lindsay, David, 107. 183.
Livistona Mariae (palm), 216.
Lizzie, River, 228.
Long, Father, 220.
Longitudes, errors in, 269.
Love’s Creek, 225.
Love’s Creek Station, 225.
Lovegrove, Sergeant, 276.
Lutheran Missions,
Kilalpaninna, 137.
Hermannsburg, 212.
Lynch, Tony, 240.
McColl, Constable, 185. 295.
Mac Donald Downs Station, 247-
292.
Mac Donald, Lake, 42.
MacDonnell Ranges,
first view, 64.
physiography, 74.
from the air, 129-131.
journey in bv car, 81-89. 93
94.
journey in by camel, 186-210
223-231.
structure, 131. 186. 187.
McKinlay, John, 27. 30. 136,
137.
Macumba River, 132. 141. 144.
Madrill, Billy, 249. 284. 285
290. 291.


Mallee, 238.
Mann Range, 35.
Manners and Customs of the
Aboriginals of Australia,
16.
Marree, 110. 112. 157.
description, 49-54.
Marshall, River, 224. 285.
Martens, 167.
Mary (aboriginal), 277. 278.
Mawson, Sir Douglas, 44. 94.
Maynard, Charlie, 72. 76.
Menindie, 16. 109.
Meteoric iron, 284.
Meteorite craters,
Boxhole, 282-284.
Coon Butte, 273.
Henbury, 273. 274.
Mac Donald Downs, 292.
Meteorite, Huckitta, 284, 290-
292.
Obsidianites (Australites) 293
value, 291.
Mica, 228.
workings, 229.
Mick (police boy), 222. 226.
Mildura, 109.
Miller, Musty (stockman), 235.
Minnie Downs, 116.
Miranda Station, 116.
Missionary Plain, 81. 187. 199.
200. 211. 220.
Missions to natives, 137. 212.
Mistake Creek, 250.
Mitchell, Major, 15. 134.
Mona, 73. 244.
Moolooloo, 26.
Mopunga Range, 224.
Mound Springs,
discovery, 19.
description, 51.
in Lake Eyre, 145. 146.
mapping, 27.
Mt. Abundance Station, 133.
Mt. Doreen Station, 260-262.
Mt. Lofty Ranges, 138. 155.
Mt. Peak Station, 32.
Mt. Riddock Station, 246.
Mt. Swan Station, 246.
Mt. Blatherskite, 65. 130. 186.
Mt. Brassey, 224.
Mt. Campbell, 224.
Mt. Doreen, 261.
Mt. Dutton, 56.
Mt. Gillen, 82. 123.
Mt. Gordon, 226. 227.
Mt. Guide, 285.
Mt. Hardy, 261.
Mt. Heuglin, 31.
Mt. Hopeless, 14. 15, 17.
Mt. Liebig, 31. 35. 130.
Mt. Mabelle, 225.
Mt. Merrick, 216.
Mt. North West, 49.
Mt. Olga, 32. 35.
Mt. Palmer, 224. 229.
Mt. Peculiar, 31.
Mt. Razorback, 89. 129. 130.
199.
Mt. Serle, 14.
Mt. Solitary, 31.
Mt. Sender, 31. 89. 130. 197.
climbing, 199-201.
Mt. Squires, 183.
Mt. Sturt, 20. 21. 28.
Mt. Udor, 31.
Mt. Undoolya, 104.
Mt. Wedge, 36.
Mt. Zeil, 31. 199.
Muldoon, Sergeant, 279.
Mulga {Acacia anexira) . 84. 89.
211. 218. 238. 270.


Muller, Baron von, 31. 32. 39.
Mulligan, River, 121, 133.
Muloorina Station, 158.
Murchison River, 38.
Murray, Constable, 98. 237.
Murray River, 12. 13, 16, 109.
Musgrave Ranges, 32. 35.
Myall, 270.
Myers, Charlie, 72.
Natives, see Aboriginals.
Neales River, 141.
Needlebush, 161.
New Zealand, 16,
Newcastle Waters, 24.
Nicker, Ben, 260.
Nitrate, report of discovery, 44.
description of deposit, 89. 90.
occurrence, 90.
No Roads Go By, 110.
North Australia, 6.
Northern Territory,
annexation to South Aus-
tralia, 5.
agriculture, 5.
definition, 4. 8,
mining, 5.
pastoral industry, 5. 6.
population, 8.
transfer to the Common-
wealth, 5,
Northern Territory Acceptance
Act, 7.
Nose-peg, camel, 204.
Nose-strings, camel, 198.
Oakover River, 37.
O’Brien (wild Irishman), 219.
220. 221.
Obsidianites, 293.
O’Grady, S. J., 222.
Old Timers, 9. 11. 115. 210. 225,
227. 233. 276. 279. 299.
O’Neil, Jim (opal miner), 108.
Oodnadatta, 38. 44. 57-60. 131
132. 139. 143. 158. 197. 293,
Ooldea, 182.
Ooraminna Range, 63. 67. 123,
Ooratippera Creek, 290.
Oorobbra Reefs, 250.
Rockholes, 230. 249. 253.
Opal, 271.
Ordovician fossils, see fossils.
Ormiston River, 82. 89. 130.
Overland Telegraph, 5. 58. 182,
218. 275.
construction, 28-30.
Owen Springs Station, 202. 275.
Paddy’s Hole Plain, 227.
Page, Mrs., 271.
Palmer River, 31. 270.
Pandi Pandi Station, 118. 119.
Parachilna Pass, 49.
Parakelia, 66.
Party at Boxhole, 282.
Peanuts, cultivation, 5.
Peneplains, 96.
Pernatty Lagoon, 155.
Perth, 33. 35. 39. 40.
Peter (black boy), 249.
Peterborough, 44.
Petermann Creek, 31.
Petrick, W., 247. 248.
Petrified wood, 219.
Phillips, Henry, 182.
Phillipson, N. E., 182.
Photography, aerial, 109. 112.
129.
Pine Creek, 5.
Pine Tree Gap, 186.


Pioneer Creek, 89. 195.
Pituri, 249.
Pleistocene deposits, 219. 227.
Plenty Plain, 224.
Plenty River, 230. 285.
Poeppel (surveyor), 107.
PoeppeTs Corner, 108.
Potash,
in Lake Eyre salts and brines,
175.
minerals, occurrence, 90.
possibility of in Lake Eyre,
157.
Powell Creek, 29.
Pound, MacDonnell Ranges, 200.
Prescott, Prof. J. A., 158.
Prisoners, native, 76. 77.
•Quart pots, 61. 62.
Queen Victoria Springs, 183.
Queensland Road, 223. 245. 247.
Quorn, 44-46. 106. 154. 156.
Rabbit-proof fence, 114. 258.
Rabbits, 101. 114. 222. 253.
Radiator troubles, 94. 99. 281.
Raggatt, Fred., 73. 83. 87. 88.
190. 196. 197. 202. 205. 207.
219. 260.
Rain storm, 255.
Rainfall, 44. 50. 233.
Lake Eyre, 50. 136.
north of Alice Springs, 96.
Railway, Northern Territory
in Acceptance Act, 7.
progress of construction, 6.
44.
travelling to Alice Springs,
46-49. 54-56. 65-67.
Railway, Transcontinental,
East-west, 36. 270. 293.
Raphistoma, 205.
Rattler (police tracker), 186.
188. 193. 194. 203. 204. 208.
211. 215.
Rawlinson Range, 32.
Red Wall, 193. 205. 206. 208.
Redbank Gorge, 198.
Reese, Leo., 116. 120.
Register, Adelaide, 18.
Renmark, 40.
Renner’s Rock, 274.
Rieff, Simon, 80. 83. 87. 108.
232. 240. 243.
Rockbar Gap, 198. 199.
Rock holes, 230.
Roe Creek, 82.
Roebourne, 37.
Rogers, Fred., 284. 286. 288.
289.
camp, 287.
Roma, 133.
Roper River, 24.
Rosenbaum, Larry, 227. 228.
Rosie (aboriginal woman), 286.
289.
Ross, Alec, 39. 40.
Ross, John, 28.
Ross River, 224. 225.
Rossiter, Capt., 15.
Royal Australian Air Force,
109.
Royal Geographical Society of
Australia, South Australian
Branch, 108.
Rudall Creek, 31.
Rudd, E. A., 185. 187. 199. 200.
205. 207. 211. 215. 220. 221.
229.
Rudd, Steele, 221.
Rudolph (camel), 185. 186.
Ryan’s Well, 97. 236.
Sadaddin, Charlie, 77. 78. 179.


Salt analyses, 175.
Saltbush, 178. 179. 270.
Saltpetre, see Nitrate
Sand, gem, 228.
sources, 133.
Sandover River, 224.
Sand-ridges, 151. 161. 238. 253.
289.
Birdsville, 118. 121.
Birdsville Track, 113. 152.
Hamilton Creek, 272.
method of crossing, 159. 160.
Simpson Desert, 121-124. 133.
Strzelecki Creek, 111.
Scobie (storekeeper), 51.
Sheep, price in 1840, 13.
in Central Australia, 206. 247.
271.
watering, 247.
Shell Oil Company, 270.
Shoeing Camp, 38.
Silent-heeler, 196.
Simpson, A. A., 108.
Simpson Desert, 16. 109. 114.
141. 224. 285. 289.
definition, 107.
description, 133.
first flight across, 121-123.
second flight across, 123-126.
third flight across, 132.
Simpson Desert Expedition, 269.
Simpson’s Gap, 81.
Smith, George, 285. 290.
Snakes, 91. 252. 268.
Soakage, explanation, 76.
Ellery Creek, 205.
Granites Track, 238. 239.
Plenty River, 230.
Todd River, 76.
Soil erosion, 48.
South Australian Museum, 291.
Spears in Lake Eyre, 143. 144.
147. 148. 149.
Spencer, Sir Baldwin, 42.
Spencer’s Gulf, 12. 13. 15. 44.
155.
Spinifex, 201. 238. 239. 253. 271.
293.
description, 66.
Stafford, Randal, 237. 260. 277.
Standley, Mrs. (school teacher),
70.
Stefannson (Arctic explorer),
295.
Stirling, Sir Edward, 42. 201.
Stirling Well, 99.
Stokes Pass, 85, 131.
Stormy (half-caste), 260. 261.
Stott, Sergeant, 63. 70. 71. 78.
daughter, 71. 72.
Strangways Range, 96. 224.
Strangways, River, 24.
Streaky Bay, 18.
Strehlow, Pastor, 104.
Strike at Alice Springs, 235.
Strzelecki Creek, 16. 111. 120.
Stuart Creek, 18. 55,
Stuart, John McDouall, 16-20.
23-26. 50. 188. 189. 218.
reaches the Centre, 20.
reaches the North Coast, 24.
25.
message on Central Mt.
Stuart, 28.
Stuart Range, 271.
Stuart’s Bluff Range, 35.
Sturt, Captain, 12. 13. 15. 30.
109. 114. 136.
attempt to reach Centre, 16. 17.
Sturt’s Stony Desert, 17. 59.
152.
Swan River Settlement, 31. 37.
“Table-tops” see Flat tops.
Tanami, 234. 242.
gold mines, 243.


Tarlton Range, 253. 254. 269.
270. 285. 286. 289.
Tate, Prof. R., 42.
Tea, frozen, 215.
Teatree Well, 97.
Tempe Downs, 41.
Temperatures, 188. 189. 198.
215. 239. 262.
Temple Bar Gap, 82.
Tennant Creek, 23. 29. 98. 279.
Tent hills, 58.
Termination Hill, 49.
Thomson’s Rockhole, 240.
Thring River, 254. 285. 289.
Tietkens (assistant to Giles),
32-35. 39. 40.
leader, 42. 201.
Tieyon Station, 270.
Tobermorey Station, 247. 253.
255. 257.
Todd Glen, 215.
Todd River, 29. 65. 74. 107. 122.
123. 130. 132. 224.
running, 233.
Todd, Sir Charles, 28. 69.
Toko Range (Cairns Range),
255. 258. 284.
Tomkinson Range, 32. 35.
“Top End”, 10.
Torrens, Lake, 14. 17. 18. 39.
49. 111. 182.
Eyre’s description, 12. 13.
from the air, 154. 155. 156.
Tourmaline, 228.
Tragedy near Lambina, 272.
near Ayers Rock, 272.
Tragedy Track, 233.
Travellers on the north train,
45.
Tucker, George, 196. 198. 203.
Tug, River, 228.
Turkey Creek, 290.
Underdown, George, 286. 240.
244.
Undoolya Gap, 82. 125.
Station, 127. 225.
University of Adelaide, 36. 227.
269. 291.
Unkah Creek, 251.
Urandangie, 245.
Ushan Khan, 285.
Vegetation, east of Jervois
Range, 253.
near Tanami, 238.
Vestey’s Meatworks, 5.
Victoria River, 24.
Wallabies, 101. 223.
Wallis Fogarty’s (store), 78.
260.
Wapiti aeroplanes, 109. 112.
Warburton, Maj. P. Egerton, 18.
50. 140.
meets Giles, 31.
journey to Western Australia,
36. 37.
Warburton Range, 32. 38.
Water, at the granites, 241.
at Glen Helen, 197.
claypan, 104.
divining, 76.
in, dry lakes, 111.
in Lake Eyre, 176. 177. 178.
Waterhouse Range, 29.
visited, 218. 275.
Watt, J. A., 42.
Waukington, Ben, 72. 79.
Wave Hill Station, 36. 239.
Webb, Ben, 281.
Webb, Joe, 281. 282.
Wells, along Overland Tele-
graph, 96.
Wells, L. A., 53. 183.


Western road to Alice Springs,
270.
Wheat lands, 44.
White Australia Policy, 4.
White Cliffs, 271.
Whitewash gums {Eucalyptus
papuana) , 83, 238.
Widgetty grubs, 193. 194.
Wilkinson, George, 73. 78.
monument, 79.
Willie (black tracker), 185. 186.
Willochra Valley, 48.
Willouran Ranges, 49. 50. 55.
Willuna, 53.
Winnecke, Charles, 41. 107. 124,
199. 201. 254. 285.
Winnecke Mines, 227.
Wolffe, Harry, 57. 58. 80. 83,
88.
Wolfram, 262. 263. 266.
Woodforde Creek, 97.
“Woodie”, 260.
death and funeral, 277-280.
Yellow Cliff, 61.
Zebra finches, 100.
Ramsay, Ware Publishing Pty. Ltd., 117-129 King St., Melbourne, C.l.


CENTRAL
AUSTRALIA
C. T. M ADI GAN
M.A., D.Sc.(Oxon.), B.E.(Adelaide), F.G.R.
Central Australia is a land of
mystery and romance even to Aus-
tralians. It has been alternatively
described as a desert and a land of
vast untapped resources, a white
elephant and an El Dorado, ever
since it was first crossed by
McDouall Stuart over eighty years
ago.
Now a railway reaches the
centre and a road carries on to the
coast; many soldiers know this
route, but still of the vast spaces
and the scattered inhabitants little
is generally known.
Dr. Madigan, at intervals over a
period of twelve years, has travel-
led through the Centre —on the
ground and in the air, by camel,
car and plane—examining the rug-
ged ranges and the endless plains,
the gold and the wolfram, the mica
and the rubies and the meteorite
craters, the myths of the Great
Salt Lakes, the ways of the abori-
ginals, the stations and the cattle
camps; and he tells the stories of
his travels as the greatest living
authority on the area.


THF 120 125 130 , I
GULF OF j'S j
A,I ]t 4— —~
£ / L- w - Hii1 %ir i
o rtfg?N i / I I ; IV
—rr^xFS:—
>* r o r*°'o-o-«a&5L terrij ,,^,k eN ash # —' \ \k r —■ — »
‘•' ff- EN?M ■ D ri
..Vx ikB! ~~T7 7) \j
"J r . / X R Y 25
M«r« // I J±*“4
6i^;-^ , p"~VAusTRALi^.'~y , AtT/ ry \-T I /
Y TTpft/Jt jVp" —-/ /
30 \ j ' S ’ 44^°T 8 pM U / /
lL>^/\^ ustmuan B!GHr \ w)
AUSTRALIA * )( J —-~J J5
35 " \ SHOWING ROUTES OF FIRST EXPLORERS TO CROSS CONTINENT \L J VICTORIA V / I
\ (Shaded area enlarged in separate map.) I MELBQURn^^VJ
\ Scale —J£L---ii 0 Miles I \ / l‘r*°*.
H5 120 125 130 135 140 145 150 155


\ v -0-.
/% '■■-oi* - j ■- J y
// . Tom son's RH. I
(/ Unites x -\ Solitaire 11
{ \ % " WYCLir.. V % )
Vv '«Ml. Bennett * !1 L$- ™J' 1
j sft v- -< T v
V V - \ fi \I| Y I \V
Mt.TW yf \ 'Av\ 1
Mt. Patricia f j 'X
Mt. Campbell
i —J r
5 ‘ Hardv e» 5 ( J TEATREE WELl
**i¥flr|ri ' \rYANS WELL
ZaAc BU5’
j Sat to™** Mt Wedge ' CONNORS WELIJt
/ N burt-swelV
1 • Em iy \
1 l — -I SKj&X&f* 1 * TP'drarninnatRaTt^^V^'-'—•' / ** ~ V
1 • \ Q '■•%.wATERHduk R* V 1 I* x
WELl " **
1 i *v Wv, S X. ;
— WELL # \
T *v *«
/ il,ar^jiALICE WELL
i j — ~~j 1 “ r + * VUepot Sandhill* '
f I T
,. ,. ,. r .. ..., x '^LJ0an^^^ I
4 '
ry I
VflL '♦
—\ — «% — J
130 ~~ 151 132 133 134 135 136 137 138
TENNANT CK.il 3 [
N 0 R T Hi E R N% 1
'''x _ TAUAUI a *\ V / |
20 " f ImURCHISON AVON OOWhTs?! l/~*—2Q
\ '* 1 I *R* \ Y
\ * GILBERT WEU/ ► V V VI!
' " SA* / X"| S \ t
\// xlarsh - W I I V \/ Ay *£\ \ f
.V v -1 II BONNY \ !
V" TomsonsßH. ’ ' \Pf* f \ CV
// ■ The Granites " " M t. Solitaire " X Jk W,
' « *v. V, \ //
l\ \ " /T DAVEN^QRT £>r V \k +
\\ \«Mt. Bennett )1 H **—^ FR J'~- IVIE * S ■ LAKE NASH S”L (
21 r : ' / ,«•” V x y%V-Vfe=
Mt K' /f \ E / im ma t%
ML / W 1 CK. f<J
\ 'v|V, / /W \ SV* _, _ T
Mt. Campbell/ J/i /A is // I Vs|
J ML Stuart Of ♦
22 ■ * e ' li !#i ’ “ r~K 22
>. " V *Jmsr
/ £SSSn J v. j {<*
~>~ T _,,._/ *rpV / \ y=f7 VsMt&ulde '< I
V, 1 V” EIL
ZaAc BUSHV Plllars ’, lu*
Bennett\h „ nfSa^^ arshes Mt. Wedge > CONNORS WELUB ..^ ThrW MWU .
#ML Russell ! , V BURT'S ... \ & V-l
__ A .Jb.mn.bk W.. n ) ~„, \ \ 1/ M
VxiNTORF R* '*Mt. lyell Brown • \ y :■ ARLTUNGAVVi \ V, \ < *-.•
/KINTORE R. » 0 | SoVdVi- v u V\ \ \A \S ’!«:
'■• i\ \
i"% ; * n. ;n s '^-I ' °0 o V V
“gfSiACS h \ ■■■, 'I rib-
-24 I—^^T^SriSiwS'\ F-*
ABORIGINAL j / ?3()S % f V -' : /j\ \ J
sW< 1 '' *\£\ SI M p!s'6\n|
r V Y \ lor
I .. 1 | •■; f Sandhills Andado Bore I V— \\'.l
25
1 ’ TER R.ERLDINDA S™ \ jfeV T 0 R |Y
.. o. . Jl; , ■ ' S VLVRUMBALARA
L-Ayers |Rock J
1 1 / / i °Afe<? p DESERT ♦ \
S»/e4v//« I ; AMtP - e ' eWes I '1
1 m s 010 1030 wso6o TO ft) 90 mg j JdLJQan ieWc I Native Nells \\
1 J “ ■ i |\ - . m „ ,1 . °o I \
I tfc , ' V \ X dCO $C a A. Mt 'E tm qambra + Poeppels
t MANN R* + _ + _l + + _ + __ + _ + + + + + —— ♦ ♦■) ♦^-^^-s+—+ S— + __i + + + __ . (Coutarinna Hill a 0 A LCornert „
a lU7ff.Vr" 0i H T H A U , S T 1r A it 1 A|* * r - H a
129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138


3 NOV
k\
ISlP*
£.5 JUL
tZ S£r
V W I
14 1^‘
0 2 604 03108347


_ : ,
‘1
<- .
3 1508 02074099 4


r* '?■' 1 ■ / ■••. ‘ *"■“ "j-
1
Mm ■■ si,
£*§vr* v^! 1‘ ? v
v; iimSSSl&9i!Smi. • rT 4 -;j/|R.V4*T * J&££* J& - ■ >SaS^£-'f : *V ! V V&r~^-^.^X;-.'
’ rn M : 3wl»*
■ ■ 1 ,,.
'At •.*&• •r.n*Ji'tt'if«»•*•?*„•<■•.. m'JL/.U- } H^J^rr^^4*Hl ?{ i22£v ••.- * • &11S,' ." } '... ;-r; j< «^»jH; ! -» VWj.••£*& !?1C '< X3 I'- ,
% ||| I Hf & MM! "f| s I I I V I 'I fr $i* r j J | MBB .Is H l| - “
wjrffe S Sg^-Ii-
I ■
,\ ■
\ : ■■
