

-rrfiF
61 o
i o*
Ihlst
diocese of (3oulbutn
3rd February to 12th March, 1945
Centenaries
of the
Consecration
OLD SAINT SAVIOUR’S CHURCH, GOULBURN,
THE FIRST CHRIST CHURCH, QUEANBEYAN,
THE CHURCH OF S. JOHN BAPTIST, CANBERRA.
and of
®tber Episcopal Hcts
performed by
The Right Reverend WILLIAM GRANT BROUGHTON, D.D.,
Bishop of Australia,
in the parishes of BOOROWA, BUNGONIA, COOMA, GUNNING,
BRAIDWOOD, LAKE BATHURST and YASS,
ONE HUNDRED YEARS AGO.
Handbook and Programme of the Commemoration
DIOCESAN CHURCH HOUSE.
GOULBURN.
Price 6d.




' '
' ' -. ~ • 1
f '
J
.
*
.
t"
|j;; t/l
' ■
•
:
' ■ \
i*
V* y
[.
IB 1if
|
,
3
1
\
i
|
\ s
lll|
|
1
||| Jg
;S
K : “‘’ ■••■•••••
j/j| Wr
V* .jf .
j
i
, .
r, : r.
1
-
''
-
. J
THE RIGHT REVEREND
WILLIAM GRANT BROUGHTON, D.D.,
Bishop of Australia, 1836-1853.
From the portrait in the Diocesan Church House, Sydney.
Block by the courtesy of the Rev. Frank Cash, D.D., Christ Church,
Lavender Bay.


Foreword
BY
The Bishop of Goulbueh
One hundred years is not a long time in the history of
a nation, but when that nation is very young a lot of important
things can happen in a century. White men had only been
settled in Australia for fifty-seven years when Bishop
Broughton made the historic journeys which this booklet
commemorates. The “ forties ” of last century were
interesting and decisive in the history of the colony. They
saw the end of convictism and the rise of self-government.
In the struggles between the Council and the Governor
right and justice might not always have been on the side
of the Council, but in the Council an instrument of govern-
ment was being fashioned that was to grow eventually into
full parliamentary rule. In the turbulence of some of the
political leaders of the time we hear an authentic note of
Australian politics, roughly honest, not entirely unselfish,
genuinely patriotic, seeking to do the country service and
at the same time keeping both eyes wide open for any
opportunity of personal advancement that may appear.
Australia was a rough place one hundred years ago and for
the most part it was rough and capable men who came
to the front. These men would not tolerate control from
distant Britain however British they may have been in their
own fundamental loyalties. It was because they were so
characteristically British that they were determined to run
their own show, and in due time they did it. But out of
that British heritage they were beginning to fashion a new
thing, the Australian nation. Australian soil and sunshine
and all that goes to the making of the Australian continent
were beginning to have their effect on the original British
immigrant. In subtle ways they were influencing the
citizens of this new land and giving them fresh points of
view and new ways of looking at things. Many children
had now been born in Australia and some were of the second
generation. These knew Australia only, no matter how much
of tradition had come to them from the homeland of their
parents. In a very real way the Australian nation showed
its first signs of independent national growth in the forties.
It could not claim to be Australian in any distinctive way
in the first half-century of white occupation. The first
distinctively Australian act was to end the chapter of
convictism in the Eastern States. The emergence of Australia
proper has been roughly since then, within the past century.


In the fashioning of the Australian character the Church
has played a part. We cannot read Bishop Broughton’s
journal without being strongly impressed by the determina-
tion with which this man of God set about planting the
church amongst the most distant settlers. His concern for
the children of the bush and the out-back marks him out
as one who knew where the destiny of a nation lies. He is
aware of the importance of visible and material witness for
the influence of religion. He wants a church building in
every centre of population, “ I have always felt,” he writes,
“ that, while the greater portion of his (Mr Bryce’s) time
must necessarily be spent in itinerating among the scattered
inhabitants, it would yet be proper that there should be
in the district (Cooma) (and indeed in every such district)
one centre of visible religion; one place provided and
set apart for the decent and orderly administration
of its ordinances, that is, a church.” By building
churches and establishing the institutional work of the
Church the Bishop was providing for the future. Now,
one hundred years later, we rejoice in his foresight and share
in the fruits of his labours. It is our part to carry on the
work. Australia is again at a turning point in her history.
What the next century will be for this country depends very
largely on what we do in the “ forties ” and “ fifties ” of
this century. New times and new inventions change the
outward forms of national life, but the faith which inspired
Bishop Broughton to build so confidently and well one
hundred years ago is the same faith which today can guide
our hearts and hands aright. It is the faith by which we
seek to know the mind and will of the Eternal God of truth
and righteousness. Nothing that is lasting and fruitful of
good can be built on any other foundation.


A
o
u
111 I
vT c 8.2 o
8 -2 j|.a o
£ .Sn ?
0 m° P 5 X
m a> _ £
0 'bC • g 1 g
&3 12 d ? H r-C
a hoso o
« O -S -43 a -g
& ofl £ d .2
'*’ <B T 3 J 3
S)° .2 g .3 O
1 "g JS MM 2
-B * £ 2 £ o
«2 bp p 0 a _
'd* S Jjq J j®
C& ft 000 H
tH
ai ■ .
w § a £ » §
hH , g $ 0) w • •
Crt s .2 P . 9 *3 _S -ScecdcsceceSS
55 § a ® p *S ®S fl a s
<lj °2 ,5 -a 2 2 9 m m g'S 'C'B - BE£ fi
j; pi d 22 ,11 ~4 u u S<D <D© o «D r zj *73
C fl § H a 2 g ,® §.S i« t« a > > > » 2 o
W g| O Jo ° o« «« P3PSO O
S gl o jja'B |j|| i i s** o'Sgo'S'S o
2 £ p, -s -i |g a &
C? ” A 5 1c o o oo®ooo O
j 'O 043 . *g 'g ‘SV) 2 a 3 bc*fl .fl -g *g
S ® 2 ® "S "S V £ £ 0.2 .2 .2.2 <u .2 .2.2 .3
5 pq pfifiM OOft <J <1 ftfift pq PQ P 3 pq pq pq ft
_ gj
525 1
03 ft
6 « £ *s ,
g :s jg §|
P IS I $ II ii |a
o a Sc .§<§§§!»
rK 02 "C » . . fl X> r < KT3 A'A ®
° J2f> *3 £ a
£ P 3 fflft ft ft WPt'WoWo
o
m a a a a
S a a a a a a* a a^a^sa
pt] pL, ft ace eo 03
O co 00 00 i-h p—4 i> 00 co oi>m> h co
O 1-1 1-1
HH
O
® Is fl a
H A cSfl 5 §do"«-o
1 “ I I 111 2 . |ll|
a- ? i i i I nil
j M W M O oSOQO
>h >J
<c m *C uo >< *2
~ QMS t* >< 5. OS. <
” «5. < S. < CM « CSJ ON
C PJ«M O £J P~r P >■ Zjj
° <«
CO CO to to


SUNDAY
25/2 /45
Braidwood
Major’s Creek
11 a.m.
2.30 p.m.
Confirmation.
Confirmation.
Bishop of Goulburn.
Bishop of Goulburn.
SUNDAY
4/3/45
Bronte
Windellama
11 a.m.
3 p.m.
H.C.
Confirmation.
Bishop of Goulburn.
Bishop of Goulburn.
SATURDAY
10/3/45
Queanbeyan
8 p.m.
Rally.
Archdeacon of Monaro.
Bishop of Goulburn.
Archbishop of Melbourne.
Registrar.
The future of the Parish.
The future of the Diocese.
The future of the Church.
Diocesan Appeal.
SUNDAY
11/3/45
Queanbeyan
Canberra
Ductroon
Yasa
7.30 a.m.
10 a.m.
7.30 p.m.
8 a.m.
11 a.m.
M.
E.
H.C.
Confirmation.
Evensong
H.C.
H.C.
Parade.
Pageant
Bishop of Goulburn.
Bishop of Goulburn.
Archbishop of Melbourne.
Archbishop of Melbourne.
Archbishop of Melbourne.
Bishop of Goulburn.
MONDAY
12/3/45
Canberra
8 p.m.
Rally.
Archdeacon of Monaro.
Bishop of Goulburn.
Archbishop of Melbourne.
The future of the Parish.
The future of the Diocese.
The future of the Church.
It is possible that Canberra may follow this with a Life and Liberty Week and also that a pageant may be arranged during that week.


SOME HISTORICAL NOTES ON THE EVENTS
TO BE COMMEMORATED.
The Right Reverend William Grant Broughton, first
and only Bishop of Australia, visited this southernmost
part of his diocese several times, in 1836, 1839, 1845, 1847
and 1851. Of these tours the Diocese of Goulburn published
an account at the time of the Broughton Centenary in 1936.
The Southern Visitations of Bishop Broughton.
That account was necessarily brief. Now, in 1945, the
diocese is commemorating the most important of those
tours, that of 1845, when the Bishop consecrated three
churches, laid the foundation stones of two others and
performed other episcopal acts the centenaries of which
are to be observed from the 3rd of February to the 12th of
March, 1945.
In that observance the Archbishops of Sydney and
Melbourne, the Bishop of Riverina and the Bishop of the
diocese will join, reproducing as far as possible the actual
visitation of Bishop Broughton one hundred years ago.
When the Diocese of Goulburn joined in the All Australian
commemoration of the Centenary of the consecration of
Bishop Broughton in 1936 it placed on record—
“ its grateful remembrance of all that Bishop Broughton
did for that southern portion of his huge diocese, which
is now comprised in the Diocese of Goulburn. When
the sketchy nature of the roads south of Goulburn is
recalled, and the total absence of bridges, the regular
episcopal visits which he made seem almost incredible.
The immediate and phenomenal success of Bishop
Thomas in the organisation of his new diocese in 1864
was due in no small part to the faithful foundations
laid more than twenty years earlier by William
Grant Broughton, first and only Bishop of Australia. ’
Of what he did in the early months of 1845 his own
visitation journal shall tell the tale. The Bishop’s own
spelling of place-names (which are easily recognisable) has
been retained throughout.


EXTRACTS FROM THE BISHOP OF AUSTRALIA’S
VISITATION JOURNAL, 1845.
“ The next day, 29th January, proceeded forty-five miles
in a southerly direction. The road was generally excellent.
In the evening, arrived at a solitary station called Meringa ;
the house much dilapidated and nearly deserted. The
person in charge was civil and hospitable, as far as his means
went; and this I have found to be, without even a single
exception, the disposition of residents in the bush of
Australia. There was no bed in the house ; but a couch
was made on which I could lie down without undressing ;
and we had milk and damper, and such other things as the
country afforded. My inquiries here as to the existence of
any collective population within a reasonable distance, led
me to conclude that there was none. There were shepherds
and stockmen, I heard, scattered here and there ; but so
situated as to render hopeless any effort which I could make
for supplying them with the means of grace, or of education
for children, if any there should be. I considered, therefore,
that it would be a waste of time and labour to proceed farther
in this direction, even if the nature of the country itself
would permit it; and, accordingly, on the following morning,
took the route to Burrowa, where there is a small decent inn.
To rest my horses, I remained there the 31st January, in
the course of which I was visited by the Rev. R. Cartwright,
the oldest clergyman in the diocese, who, at an age exceeding
eighty, is yet able to travel over an extensive district, and to
officiate at a great number of stations.
During my stay I made, as usual, every possible inquiry
respecting the number and distribution of the people on all
sides, and especially of the children. From a very careful
summary and comparison of the various accounts which
were given me, my conclusion was, that the average distance
between family and family, is eight miles ; and this circum-
stance creates an extreme perplexity as to how they can be
collected for united instruction ; if it ought not rather to
be said that it presents an insurmountable obstacle to every
such attempt; excepting so far as the services of itinerating
schoolmasters might be employed. It may, however, I trust,
be practicable to bring the ministrations of our Church more
within the reach of her members, by placing a resident
clergyman in this neighbourhood, which is now dependent
for the only religious services it enjoys, upon the occasional
visits of the Rev. Mr. Cartwright, and the Rev. C. F. Brig-
stocke from Yass.


On the Ist of February, I proceeded, in company with
W. P. Trevelyan, and W. R. Broughton, Esqrs., both of
them magistrates of the territory, to inspect a spot of ground,
on which many interments had taken place, and where it
was recommended that a church should be erected. Several
neighbouring residents who took much interest in the question
were in attendance, and it was determined, after mature
consideration, to apply to the government for a grant of
land in that situation for a burial ground, which should
include the graves already existing, and for an adjoining
portion of ground as the site of a church. Assuming that
these very reasonable requests would be complied with on
the part of government, I made agreement, before quitting
this neighbourhood, for fencing the burial-ground ; and for
the erection of a wooden church, the materials for which
Mr. Broughton engaged to provide. Afterwards I proceeded
to the residence of Captain Trevelyan, with whom I remained
resident on this and the following day.
Sunday, 2nd February :—Officiated at Benindine, Captain
Trevelyan’s station ; having very good congregations.
On the next day, February 3rd, proceeded to Yass ;
and on the day following, held a confirmation, at which from
twenty- to thirty persons attended.
In this town is a very good parsonage, but no church :
at least, there is none belonging to the Church of England.
Since my last visit, the Roman Catholics have built a very
respectable church for themselves ; but the only place set
apart for the celebration of our worship, is a small building
designed for a library, which has been hired year by year,
at the sole expense of the Society for Propagating the Gospel.
These circumstances I could not regard as creditable to our
communion. The place, I believe, has never been entirely
without a school; but there is much deadness and indifference
here upon all that appertains to religion.
On the sth of February, being the first day of Lent, I
proceeded to Gunning, the residence of Mr. Cartwright. In
the afternoon, accompanied by that gentleman and others
of the inhabitants, went to inspect and lay down the bound-
aries of the proposed site of a church. The situation is very
appropriate, and it was determined to proceed immediately
with the erection of a church, according to a plan which I
furnished, and which has since been much enlarged, as also
to enclose a burial-ground.
4th February : —Proceeded to Rossiville, the residence
of F. N. Rossi, Esq., J.P., near Goulburn, to be prepared
for the consecration of St. Saviour’s church, in that township,
next Sunday,


On that day accordingly, 9th February, the solemnity
took place. The only clergymen present were the Rev. W.
Sowerby, minister of the place, and the Rev. G. N. Woodd,
from Burgonia, who acted as chancellor on the occasion ;
but the attendance of the congregation was very numerous
and satisfactory. I preached both in the morning and
afternoon : in the former instance, on the ceremonial of
the day ; in the latter, on the duties of the holy season on
which we are now entering.
On the following day, 10th February, proceeded to a
small inn, on the border of Lake George ; and in the evening,
soon after my arrival, read the evening service and preached
to a rather numerous congregation (considering the place
we were in), which had assembled from the neighbourhood
at a very short summons, and filled the little room in which
I was lodged, as well as the adjoining verandah. Afterwards
some conversation passed concerning the expediency and
probability of erecting a small church in the neighbourhood.
It was agreed that on my return to this place, which was
fixed for the 21st instant, I should have an opportunity of
seeing some of the parties who would be disposed to promote
this object, and others who might probably contract for the
erection of a building of slabs.
February 11th.—Crossed Lake George, but on dry
land ; the water having wholly subsided from the northern
extremity, leaving a fine level road on the green turf for
many miles, affording fine pasturage for large herds of cattle.
Some of these seemed at first disposed to dispute our passage,
but not ferociously, as it terminated in a mere demonstration
of opposition without anything of the reality. There were
large flocks of bustards or wild turkeys feeding on all sides.
The egress from the lake is by a very steep ascent up the
side of the mountain, called “ The Gap,” and the road then
leads to the district of Gundaroo. Here I halted for an
hour, having heard that there were persons there well dis-
posed to assist in the erection of a church, which is greatly
needed. But as those parties unfortunately happened to be
absent, I arranged to stop here again in returning on the
21st instant, in hope of meeting them. In the afternoon I
proceeded to Duntroon, the country residence of Robert
Campbell, Esq., merchant, of Campbell’s Wharf, Sydney.
It is a fine extensive estate, and an excellent house ; and the
truly respectable owner has here afforded an additional
proof of his good will and liberality towards the cause of
religion by having erected at his own expense, aided only
by the government, a handsome and massive stone church,
fitted up internally with all things orderly and becoming


and which is prepared for consecration on my return, when
there is reason to hope Mr. Campbell may himself be present
with his family to take part in that impressive ceremony.
February 12.—-Continued my journey towards Maneroo.
The road is over a very rude country, and in the course of
the day no object was fallen in with except one deserted hut,
where there was a small pool of water to refresh the horses.
At an early hour in the evening we were in the neighbourhood
of the Tindery mountains, the height of which is not incon-
siderable, and the outline of them upon the clear sky has a
grand and striking appearance. There is a pleasing patch of
country leading to a humble public house at Micalago, near
a river of the same name, which forms the boundary between
the county of Murray, in the located portion of the colony,
and Maneroo, which is one of the districts beyond the
boundaries. Here we halted for the night. I visited a sick
man and prayed with him, and was gratified at finding how
much comfort he derived from this unexpected participation
in the office for the Visitation of the Sick.
February 13th. —Proceeded onward to Maneroo, stop-
ping for a time to rest at a station occupied by Mr. Bradley,
Member of Council for the County of Argyle. Here I was
joined by the Rev. E. G. Pryce, the Society’s missionary in
this district, who, as I was afterwards delighted to find, is
as highly esteemed by the inhabitants, as his indefatigable
and zealous exertions for their welfare and improvement
well entitle him to be.
Proceeded to Kirwan’s Inn at Coomer, shortly before
reaching which I was received, and most kindly welcomed by
John Lambie, Esq., the Commissioner of Crown Lands in
this fertile district. The scenery on all sides is extremely
pleasing. There are hills almost worthy to be called mount-
ains ; undulating plains covered with herbage of the richest
green ; and several fine running streams. The inn at which
we concluded our day’s journey is a large, well-built brick
house, furnished with such accommodations as there could
have been little expectation of meeting with in this remote
situation, and as none but a fastidious traveller would,
after a long journey, regard with dissatisfaction. Being now
in one of those districts beyond the boundaries, respecting the
destitute condition of which, as to all the means of spiritual
instruction, I have made so many representations in the
colony, and to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel
in Foreign Parts, I was anxious not to lose time in devising
and commencing such measures as I might have power to
accomplish towards the gradual removal of these impediments
to the progress of religious improvement among the people.


Having the co-operation of so limited a body of clergymen,
I have always felt it a duty not to project schemes of such
magnitude as could not be accomplished with the resources
in my possession ; and which, on that account, if undertaken,
might deservedly be termed visionary. But having here, in
Mr. Pryce, one zealous assistant, I have always felt that,
while the greater portion of his time must necessarily be
spent in itinerating among the scattered inhabitants, it would
yet be proper that there should be in the district (and indeed
in every such district) one centre of visible religion ; one place
provided and set apart for the decent and orderly administra-
tion of its ordinances that is, a church. Herein the rich and
poor, gathered from a very extensive circuit, might occasion-
ally at least meet together, to make profession of their com-
mon faith, and to unite in the prescribed forms of adoration
and thanksgiving to Him who is the God and Father of them
all. Here might they behold some manifestation, however
humble of the beauty of holiness, which, by the impression
produced upon their minds and feelings from without, might
by God’s attendant blessing convey to their hearts some
sense of the greatness of that salvation which is commemorated
in the ordinances of Christian worship. Here, I argued, if a
church were erected, it would afford to believers an oppor-
tunity of bringing their children to the baptismal font, under
circumstances of propriety and order, such as they are now,
from necessity, wholly unaccustomed to. Such continued
absence of all outward regularity tends gradually to under-
mine the general sense of the importance of the ordinance
itself; and experience every day confirms me more fully in
the persuasion that holy observances are wisely appointed
and required by the Church, as a security that sacred things
shall not be exposed to contempt.
The same observation may extend, in proportion to
their several degrees of importance, to the solemnization of
matrimony, and of confirmation ; and, above all, to that of
the most Holy Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ.
All these, in the absence of a church, are either necessarily
omitted, or are administered under such circumstances of
indignity as, I sorrowfully feel, must often detract very much
from their spiritual efficacy and impressiveness, upon the
feelings of those who partake of them. However thankful,
therefore, I might be that the presence of a clergyman in this
district secured to the people an opportunity of attending,
occasionally at least, on the preaching of the Gospel, and of
participating in the appointed ordinances, it was yet my
deliberate conviction that these benefits would be enhanced
here, and in every district similarly circumstanced, by


providing at least one church as a centre of visible union,
and as a depository of these holy observances.
Accordingly, on the following morning, 15th February,
I proceeded, in company with the Rev. E. G. Pryce, Mr.
Commissioner Lambie, and Mr. M’Cabe, the government
surveyor of the district, to make a selection of a suitable site,
for the conveyance of which application might afterwards
be made to government. After some hours of research and
consultation, a spot was fixed upon, apparently very eligible.
Returning to the inn, I drew out a rough sketch of a small
church, in the Early English style of architecture, which,
although a mere plagiarism and compilation from other
examples, would have sufficient character about it to form a
striking and respectable object in the wild and little-frequented
neighbourhood where its erection was to be undertaken.
Having completed this, I entered into an engagement with a
stone-mason to build the walls of rubble-work, with the
granite which abounds on every side, and on a bed of which
the foundation of the proposed church is to be laid.
Having completed these things I retired to rest, after
a busy day, with a pleasing consciousness of having used
every effort which the case admitted of, to make a com-
mencement of the first house of prayer dedicated to the glory
of God in this extensive district; and it is my very earnest
supplication, that the dew of his blessing may descend upon
the undertaking, and prosper it with the desired success.
Sunday, February 16. —Divine service was performed
this morning in a room in the house of the commissioner,
by whom it was most kindly lent for that purpose. After
morning prayer, read by Mr. Pryce, I read the Communion
service, and preached. The congregation was more numerous
than the room would hold. At the conclusion, Mr. Pryce
and myself proceeded twenty miles to afternoon service at
Jejereric, the station of Mr. Brooks. Here I preached again
to a still more numerous congregation than in the earlier
part of the day. We passed the night at Mr. Brooks’s :
and this being one of the stations at which Mr. Pryce statedly
officiated, an arrangement was proposed by Mr. Brooks, and
agreed to by me, for the erection of a small chapel (to be
built of wood) at a short distance from his residence. On
the following morning we started very early on our way to
Coomer ; it having been arranged that the foundation stone
of the church should be laid on this, the last day of my remain-
ing here. The ceremony took place accordingly, in the
presence of so large an assemblage that it appeared incredible


so many persons could have been collected in a country which,
in proportion to its vast extent, is so thinly inhabited. The
spectacle, however, afforded grounds for thankfulness, as it
testified the interest (and the approval) with which the
undertaking was generally regarded. One circumstance
which appears worthy of record occurred, A gentleman of,
the Presbyterian persuasion came to witness the ceremony,
having been brought up, as he afterwards mentioned, in the
belief that all the observances of the Church of England were
flagrant relics of popery. Convinced by what he had seen
and heard on this occasion of the utter injustice of the charge,
he had the manly uprightness to express his change of senti-
ment, requesting that I would allow the address which I
had just delivered to be printed ; in order that by circulating
it among his friends in Scotland, he might satisfy them,
as he was himself persuaded, how far we were from any
approach to the errors with which we are so commonly
charged, by those who, it is charitable to suppose, are quite
unacquainted with our principles. I thought it impossible
that any injury could arise from a compliance with this
unexpected application, and have since sent some copies to
the gentleman in question, who is a highly intelligent and
respectable individual.
The next morning I set off on my return by the same
route to Micalago, and on reaching the inn, was glad to find
the sick man much recovered.
On the following day, 19th February, pursued the
journey back to Duntroon, and slept there.
On the 20th, continued my journey : again halting at
Gandaroo, as previously arranged, in hope of meeting some
of the parties whose exertions might contribute towards
providing a church, however small and humble, for this
comparatively populous district. But I was again dis-
appointed of my purpose. As the only remaining resource
I fixed upon and inspected what appeared to me a proper
site, promising to render every contribution in my power
towards the expense of the building : and fixing an arrange-
ment according to which this place will be regularly visited,
and divine service solemnized on one Sunday in every
month, by the Rev. E. Smith from Queanbeyan, and the
Rev. C. F. Brigstocke from Yass. This is a very insufficient
and inconvenient arrangement; but for the present there
appears to be no other resource.* In the afternoon, I pro-
* Since then I have received a gift of the site from the proprietor,
J. R. Styles, Esq., of Revesdale, Bungonia, with a promise of assistance
towards the erection of a small church, which will be promptly proceeded
with. W.G.A., 13th Feb., 1846.


ceeded to the inn at Lake George, to which I had engaged
to return this day, and found the people in expectation of
me. After evening service, the question was resumed as to
the erection of a church ; and the final determination was,
that it would be best to leave the matter to the judgment of
myself and Mr. Edenborough, a neighbouring magistrate,
who took an interest in it, and purposed calling on me early
next morning.
21st February.—Mr. Edenborough paid his promised
visit, and we proceeded to fix on the site for the church ;
after which we continued our route to Mr. Edenborough’s
residence, where I spent the remainder of the day. In the
evening we were employed in maturing plans and calcula-
tions for the erection of a slab-church, and completed them
to our mutual satisfaction.
22nd February.—Journey through Goulburn to Bun
gonia, the station of the Rev. G. N. Woodd.
On the following day, Sunday, 23rd February, I held
a confirmation in the morning, and preached, both on that
occasion, and also at the afternoon service. The church
is a poor temporary structure ; completely filled in the
morning, and tolerably attended in the afternoon. The
foundation of a large stone church was laid several years
ago, and some courses of the walls were raised upon it. This
church would have been, if completed, a very handsome
object; but in its present unfinished state (in which, owing
to the altered circumstances of the colony, it seems likely
to remain) it suggests none but distressing reflections. As the
only means in my power of giving more stability to the
present building in which divine service is celebrated, I took
upon myself the cost of adding a porch and vestry, to be
substantially built of brick ; and will add a chancel also,
as soon as there are funds at my disposal to meet the expense.
At Jacqua and Marnlan (five and twelve miles respectively
from Bungonia) chapels named St. Mary’s and St. Jude’s
have been erected, in which Mr. Woodd occasionally officiates,
as he does at stations yet more distant. There are still
other points at which similar chapels require to be provided,
that the people might have, occasionally at least, the advant-
age of meeting together, to offer up their prayers and thanks-
giving to the Father of all mercies. In the examination of
these and other matters connected with the improvement of
the district, I remained here until Wednesday, 26th February,
and on that day proceeded to Bronte, the residence of Captain
Baker, an earnest promoter, so far as he is able, of every


undertaking which appears likely to save the cause of religion,
by extending the resources and ability of the Church. Near
Windeloma in the neighbourhood, I am convinced a small
church should be built.
27th February.—From Bronte to Arnprior, Mr, Stewart
Ryrie’s.
28th February.—To Braidwood, the station of the Rev.
James Allan, formerly a licentiate of the Church of Scotland ;
who, upon a change of opinion, founded on careful inquiry j
and most entire conviction, was admitted by me to Holy
Orders, and is now employed satisfactorily to himself, and
beneficially, I trust, to others, as a presbyter of the Church
of England. There is no other place than the court-house
in which Divine Service can be celebrated ; and there, on
Sunday, 2nd of March, although deeply feeling the unsuit-
ableness of the place, I held a confirmation in the morning,
and preached both in the morning and afternoon; the
prayers being read by Mr. Allan. The parsonage-house is a
substantial and sufficiently extensive and convenient building ;
and adjoining it are allotments granted by government as
the sites of a church and school. The completion of the
former of these would appear at present to be quite hopeless,
as there are no funds in hand, and apparently none obtain-
able. But my inquiries led me to suppose that the erection
of a school-house might be within reach of our resources.
To this proposal, therefore, I gave encouragement; especially
as the accomplishment of it would furnish the inhabitants
at the same time with a more becoming place at least than
any to which they now have access, to assemble in for public
worship.
March 3rd. —To Mr. Hugh Gordon’s at Manar : and
thence on the day following to Bungandon, a small township
in a rather populous neighbourhood, where the Rev. Edw.
Smith officiates at stated intervals. The inhabitants have
commenced the erection of a moderate sized church ; but it
stands unfinished, and the funds are totally exhausted. This,
therefore, I felt to be one of those cases in which the resources
at my disposal might be properly applied, and I undertook
to make such additions as should render the church at least
available for the use of the congregation.
On the sth of March, proceeded again to Duntroon,
where I had the satisfaction of finding that my venerable
friend Mr. Campbell had arrived, without any serious
inconvenience from so long a journey; and that Christ
Church, at Queanbeyan, and St. John’s, at Canberry Plains,
were both prepared for consecration. This ceremony was


proceeded with at the former place on Saturday, the Bth
March, and at St. John’s on Monday, the 10th March. At
Queanbeyan I held a confirmation, and preached the con-
secration sermon on both occasions. The Clergy attending
were the Rev. E. Smith (licensed minister of both parishes)
and Revs. C. E. Brigstocke, G. N. Woodd, and James Allan.
Immediately after the conclusion of the consecration of
St. John’s Church, I was compelled to depart, the time not
being sufficient to admit of my fulfilling my various engage-
ments unless I should reach Bungandon that night.” 0)
February sth. —Yesterday, about 4 p.m., we were visited
by a tempest of lightning, wind and hail, the like of which,
we believe is not on record in the annals of this colony. To
give any real idea of the desolation it has made would require
the pencil of a Hogarth The number of panes broken
in the township with those of the Mill, is 3253 ; but this
does not include the damage done to the Episcopal Church,
the eastern window of which is completely destroyed ; being
of gothic design it has lead lights ; the lead is bent and
burst in many places, and one of the iron stays is riven from
the frame ; all the windows on the S.E. side are greatly
shattered < 2 >.
GOULBURN.
February 10th. —On Friday, the 7th instant, the Lord
Bishop of Australia arrived in the township about twelve
o’clock, and, according to public notice, proceeded to con-
secrate the church. The weather during the early part of
the day was not very promising ; but not withstanding there
was a very good attendance. The church has been fitted
up according to the appointed order, having pews, communion
table, pulpit, reading desk, Bibles and Book of Common
Prayer. His Lordship was received at the north-west door
by the Rev. W. Sowerby (minister) ; Rev. G. N. Woodd,
Bungonia ; the Wardens, Trustees and others, viz., William
Bradley, Esq, M.C. ; E. B. Kitson, Dr. Gerrard, —. Atkinson,
Esq., J.P. ; Thomas Worne, Esq., J.P. ; etc., etc.
(1) “ The Church in the Colonies,” Vol. 111., 1848. Part 111, pp. 9-25.
Some further details of the services at Goulburn and Canberra are
to be found in the files of the Sydney Morning Herald. Who the local
correspondent at Canberra was it is impossible to say but it seems likely
that “ our own correspondent ” at Goulburn was the kindly but eccentric
Robert Waugh, surgeon, of the Medical Hall, a stalwart Presbyterian.
If so, it explains the unfamiliarity with Anglican forms and ceremonies
of the reporter, who nevertheless gives a full and sympathetic account.
(2) S.M.H., 10/2/1845.


The petition, praying that the Church might be con-
secrated, was presented to his Lordship by W. Bradley,
Esq., M.C., when his Lordship put the question, “ Is this
your desire ? ” Mr. Bradley answered in the affirmative,
when he proceeded up the aisle to the communion table,
followed by the above gentlemen repeating alternately the
verses of the 24th Psalm ; his Lordship took his place (a
chair being provided for him), at the north side of the com-
munion table, within the rails : the Rev. G. N. Woodd, on
the same side within the rails ; the minister being in the
desk.
His Lordship then proceeded with the order appointed
for consecrating a church, and having concluded reading the
prayers for a divine blessing on the dispensation of the
various ordinances which would thenceforth be dispensed in
the Church, the Acting-Chancellor, Rev. G. N. Woodd, read
in a clear and distinct voice, the Sentence of Consecration,
which is as follows :
“In the Name of God. Amen ! ”
“ Whereas, we did lately receive the petition of the
Rev. William Sowerby, licensed minister of Goulburn, in
the County of Argyle, within our diocese and jurisdiction,
and of the several residents and inhabitants in and about
the same place, whose names are thereunto subscribed,
praying that we would be pleased to consecrate the new
Church or edifice, at Goulburn aforesaid, to be called the
Church of Saint Saviour ; and whereas we have taken the
said petition into our most serious consideration, and have,
at the special request of the said inhabitants, complied with
the same. We, William Grant, by divine permission Bishop
of Australia, do therefore by virtue of our ordinary and
episcopal authority now separate and set apart the said
edifice, or structure, containing in length, from east to west,
eighty-two feet and one and a half-inch, and in breadth,
from north to south, fifty-three feet four inches (inclusive
of tower, porches and all outer walls) from all profane and
common purposes ; and do hereby dedicate the same as
the Church of Saint Saviour, in the parish or district of
Goulburn aforesaid, to God and divine worship, and do
consecrate it for the celebration of divine service therein,
according to the United Church of England and Ireland :
and we do openly and publicly pronounce and declare, that
it shall so continue for ever hereafter separated, dedicated
and consecrated by this our definitive or finale decree which
we make, pronounce, and promulge, in these writings,
saving and reserving unto us and our successors, Bishops
of Australia, all ordinary and episcopal jurisdiction, rights
and privileges.


“ In testimony whereof we have caused our Episcopal
seal to be hereunto affixed, and have subscribed the
same, this seventh day of February, in the year of
our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and forty-five,
and of our consecration the ninth.
“ Wm. G. Australia.”
Which, being read, his Lordship signed, and said he
would cause it to be registered : he then read the prayer,
and was followed by the Rev. William Sowerby, reading part
of the service of the day ; the Psalms selected for the occasion
were the 84th, 122nd, 132nd ; the first lesson from Ist Kings,
Bth chapter, from 22nd to 62nd verse : second lesson, Hebrews,
10th chapter, from 19th to 28th verse ; he also read the
collect for the first day of Lent, when he stopped till his
Lordship read a prayer : Mr. S. then proceeded in the service
of the day to the end of the general thanksgiving. When his
Lordship again read another prayer, appointed to be read
at the consecration of churches built under the late acts of
the Governor and Council: the minister then read the
prayer of St. Chrysostom, when the Ist, sth, 6th, 7th and
Bth verses of the 84th Psalm were sung : his Lordship then
read the communion service and after reading the Collect
for the Queen, continued to read another prayer in the
consecration service, when the minister read the Epistle
Ist Cor. 12th Chapter, from 12th to 31st verse, followed by
his Lordship reading the Gospel from John, 2nd Chapter,
from 11th to 17th verse : he also read the Apostle’s creed,
when the hundredth Psalm was sung.
His Lordship having taken his place in the pulpit, read
the collect for the day, and preached an appropriate sermon
for the occasion, from the words contained in the 19th chapter
of Leviticus, and 30th verse, “ Reverence my Sanctuary, I
am the Lord,” in the course of which, he showed by allegorical
application that the sanctuary of the Mosaic dispensation,
with its sacrifices and its furniture, were emblematical or
shadows of good things to come, and the sacrifice of Christ
was represented in that dispensation ; but that in the
Sanctuary which belongs to the Christian dispensation
those shadows are all withdrawn for Jesus Christ himself is
exhibited unto us. In his sanctuary, he is also made known
as the only way by which sinners can be accepted in the
sight of God. He also shewed that this spiritual light was to
be obtained as well as help to bear up against all the ills of
life : he also observed that justification by faith alone was
the grand foundation of a sinner’s hope, and not by any works
of man, and that all the hopes of man for salvation from any


other source were vain : he also said that it was necessary
that those principles should be proclaimed : and to do so
it was necessary to have such temples as this spread over
the earth, and he hoped that others would be stimulated
by the example of those present. He said that reverence for
the sanctuary was shown by various ways, such as by regular
attendance —by propriety of conduct, by a humble spirit of
devotion, and that the purpose for which we met in his
sanctuary called for this : and that we were not only to do
so when in his sanctuary, but to carry a Christian spirit into
every undertaking of our life. As our time will not allow
us to enter particularly into his discussion, we must just
observe, in conclusion, that he said, that when the Lord
appeared to Moses, he told him to put off his shoes from his
feet, etc. : and, we, in passing through this world contracted
sin in our ordinary avocations ; we must, therefore, cleanse
ourselves, and never enter his sanctuary with our bodily
presence, when our hands were engaged in buying and selling
and getting gain other transactions are not to be spoken
of here : this is the place where we hear of the price of our
redemption being paid on Calvary! therefore, having heard
of Jesus and his salvation, let us retire from his temple with
hearts filled with reverence, for we have been listening to
the voice of him who said, “ Reverence my sanctuary, I am
the Lord ”.
On Sunday, before going to church, his Lordship examined
the children connected with the Episcopal school: and held
a confirmation after the morning service, on which occasion
he preached from Matthew, Chap. XVI., verse 28, “ Then
said Jesus unto his Disciples, if any man will come after
me let him deny himself,” wherein he showed the duty of
following the example of Christ, by living a holy life, and
denying ourselves the pleasures of the world, which men in
general followed after. There were about forty confirmed,
to whom his Lordship gave a very suitable exhortation.
His Lordship preached in the afternoon, from Ist Peter,
1 chap, and 10 verse, “of which salvation the Prophets
have enquired and searched diligently, when they prophesied
of the grace that should come unto you,” The Rev. Mr.
Sowerby read the prayers. His Lordship left Rossiville on
Monday morning for Maneroo, by Lake George : his journey
will be more than one thousand miles, and he will not be
in Sydney before the end of March O).
(1) 14/2/1845.


The Canberra account is very similar, it reads:—
“ Your readers will be glad to hear this, His Lordiship
(the Bishop of Australia) was again called upon in this reimote
portion of his diocese, to discharge what, under the circum-
stances of the Colony, must be to him the most gratifying
duty of the episcopalian office. On Wednesday, the 12th
instant, at the appointed hour, many of the neighbouiring
gentry, farmers and peasantry, in vehicles, on horse-back
and on foot, might be seen repairing to the Church of St. .John
the Baptist, which has been erected by Robert Camjpbell,
Esq., with the assistance of Government, at Canbury Plain,
about seven miles from Queanbeyan. The edifice, buiilt of
stone, to which its tower and buttresses, and the manmer in
which the interior is fitted up, impart the appearance cnf an
old English Village Church, is capable of holding a congrega-
tion of nearly two hundred persons, and it was liteually
crowded with men, women and children, respectably dmssed.
“ The Bishop, having been received at the west door
by Mr. Campbell, some of the members of his family, and
other of the principal inhabitants of the district, proceeded
up the middle aisle to the Communion Table, attended by
his Chancellor, the Rev. G. N. Woodd, 8.A., his Chaplains,
the Rev. Messrs. Allan and Pryce, and the officiating Minister,
the Rev. E. Smith, 8.A., repeating the 24th Psalm alter-
nately. After the solemn service (of consecration), His
Lordship delivered an eloquent discourse in reference to the
occasion, selecting for his text the 13th and 14th verses of
the Ist chapter of Haggai ( £ Then spake Haggai the Lord’s
messenger in the Lord’s message unto the people, saying,
I am with you, saith the Lord. And the Lord stirred up
the spirit of ... . the governor of Judah, and of ... . the
high priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people ;
and they came and did work in the house of the Lord of
hosts, their God! ’) He then proceeded to consecrate the
Churchyard, and afterwards administered the Holy Com-
munion.
“ Upon leaving the Church, His Lordship, who appears
determined not to spare himself, set out for Bungadore,
where, with his aid, a small church will soon be completed.
We understand .... that the Bishop, whose visit to the
Southern Districts has been productive of very great advant-
ages, amongst which may be noticed a better and more
active feeling amongst Churchmen, has made arrange-
ments for the erection of a Parsonage at Canbury Plain,
preparatory to the appointment of another clergyman, to
minister to the spiritual wants of our scattered population.” tb
(I) 21/3/1845.


“In the service, the Bishop used the following
SENTENCE OF CONSECRATION OF ST. JOHN’S
CHURCH.
IN THE NAME OP GOD, AMEN!
WHEREAS We did lately receive the petition of the
Reverend Edward Smith, 8.A., Licensed Minister of
Queanbeyan in the County of Murray within Our
Diocese and Jurisdiction, and of the several Residents
and Inhabitants in and about Limestone Plains whose
names are thereunto subscribed G), praying that
We would be pleased to consecrate the new Church of
SAINT JOHN THE BAPTIST. AND WHEREAS
We have taken the said Petition into our most gracious
consideration and have at the request of the said
Inhabitants complied with the same, WE, WILLIAM
GRANT, by Divine Permission BISHOP OF AUS-
TRALIA, do therefore by Virtue of Our Ordinary
and Episcopal Authority now separate or set apart
the said Edifice of Structure containing in length
from East to West fifty-six feet, and in breadth from
North to South forty-four feet six inches, inclusive of
the exterior walls, from all profane and common uses,
and do hereby DEDICATE the same as the Church
of SAINT JOHN THE BAPTIST at CANBERRY
aforesaid TO GOD and DIVINE WORSHIP, and do
consecrate it for the celebration of Divine Service
therein according to the United Church of England
and Ireland. And We do openly and publicly pro-
nounce and declare that it shall so continue for ever
hereafter, separated, dedicated, and consecrated, by
this Our Definitive Sentence or final Decree which We
make, pronounce and promulge in these writings,
saving and reserving unto Us and Our Successors,
Bishops of Australia, all Ordinary and Episcopal
Jurisdiction, rights and privileges. In TESTIMONY
whereof, etc , this 12th March, 1845.
WILL: G: AUSTRALIA.
(1) To wit: Robert Campbell, Charles Campbell, G. T. Palmer, Jun.,
Neil Kennedy (brother of the Superintendent of Duntroon), John C.
Raworth (horse-breaker at Duntroon) and Thomas Shaw (later the cele-
brated sheepbreeder of Wooriwyrite (Victoria).


SENTENCE OF CONSECRATION OF THE BURIAL
GROUND
had a similar preamble and conclusion ; the part of par-
ticular interest to us in it is as follows :
We .... do decree this Piece of Gound —containing
by admeasurement Two acres (as the same is now
enclosed) —to be separate from all ancient common
and profane Uses AND do by Our Ordinary and
Episcopal Authority assign, dedicate and consecrate
it as the Church Yard, Cemetery or Burial Place for
the dead bodies of the Christian Residents and
Inhabitants in and about the District aforesaid. &
(2) “ Canberra’s First Hundred Years and After.” 1927. Professor
F. W. Robinson. P. 26.
W. E. Smith Ltd., 310 George Street, Sydney.
