

Centenary
of
St peter Church,
Campbelltown, N.S.W.
June 29th, 1923.




Rev. Thos. Reddall,
1821-1838.
Rev. Robt. Forrest, M.A.,
1839-1843.
Rev. Canon Vidal, B.A.,
1843-1845.
Rev. W.B.Clarke, M.A.
1845-1846.
Rev. Canon Stack, M.A.,
1846-1855.
Rev. E. Smith, BA..,
1857-1869.
MOST REV J. C. WRIGHT, D.D.,
PRIMATE,
Archbishop of Sydney, 1909-
Rev. Thos Reddall, M.A.,
1855-1857.
Rev. R S.Willis, M.A.,
1869-1876.
Rev. T. V. Alkin, M.A.,
1876-1904.
Rev G. E. Gibbes,
1904-1912.
Rev. J. R. Hunter,
1912-1919.
Rev. I. D. Armitage,
1919.-
Present Rector.




St. peter's Church
1823
1923
In a young country like Australia, the centenary of a historic
building is an event which reminds us that we have passed an im-
portant milestone in our lives. The history of St.
Peter’s Church is interwoven with that of the Town-
ship founded by Lieut.-Colonel Lachlan Macquarie,
the King’s Representative in Australia, 1810-1821,
and called Campbelltown, after
the maiden name of Mrs. Mac-
quarie (Elizabeth Campbell). In
1920 the town completed the
centenary of its foundations,
when the Parishioners of St. Peter’s Church took
advantage of the opportunity to present an Ad-
dress to the State Governor, Sir W. E, Davidson,
K.C.M.G., who was a visitor on the occasion,
and in which the action of his distinguished pre-
decessor in founding the township, and providing
for the building of the Church was recalled.
Standing as it does in a prominent position, with a park on the
northern side, the building was at once an object of interest to the
traveller by the coach traversing the old main road, and to-day, with
its historic clock, which rings out the hours, it is a monument to the
past, which excites the admiration and interest of those who make use
of the motor car as a modern means of travel.
The Church has received many benefactions, but perhaps if a
few of the most enthusiastic workers might be selected, they would be
the Reddalls, father and son, the Misses Reddall, and the Rev. T. V.
Alkin, M.A., who was Rector for the period of 28 years. The Church
was built in 1822, but was actually opened for public worship on St.
Peter’s Day, 29th June, 1823. It was originally fitted with plain glass
windows, frosted, and had the usual high-backed pews of the period
and also a three-decker pulpit and gallery. From an article published
in the Bell and Parish Register of St. Peter’s Church on 6th October,
1881, it is stated that the original building has undergone many altera


tions, internally and externally. The clock was placed in its present
position in 1838. The chancel was built at the expense of the Rev.
Thomas Reddall, M A., son of the first Rector. The old ceiled roof
was removed; a new roof put on, and the tower increased in height
during the incumbency of the Rev. R. S. Willis, M.A. The faculty,
dated sth August, 1871, authorising these additions and alterations
has been preserved. A number of memorial windows were given in
the years 1876 and 1877, and in the latter year the Misses Reddall gave
a new Prayer Desk and Pulpit in memory of their sister, Mrs. M. B.
Brown. The same ladies also provided a Bible, Prayer Book and office
books for use in public worship. In the same year also an east window
of stained glass was erected to the memory of the Rev. Thomas Reddall,
and of his son, the Rev. Thomas Reddall, M.A. This window was
erected by the parishioners and friends of the Reddall family.
A new font was given by Mr. Booth, stonemason,
the carving and fixing of which were paid for by
subscriptions from those who had been baptised in the
old font. From a photograph in the possession of the
Alkin family it appears that the font stood under the
chancel arch. In this year also the old and dilapidated
seats were removed, the wainscoting from the walls
was taken down, the whole flooring and joists removed,
new seats, flooring and joists being provided. New
western doors were procured with a subscription from the then Governor,
His Excellency Sir Hercules Robinson. In the same year a donation
from the Hon. J. Campbell was applied to the erecting of a new Commun-
ion railing, in memory of the Rev. Canon Yidal, B.A. Two handsomely
carved chairs were also procured, one with a donation from the Hon. J.
Campbell, and the other by some friends of the Misses Reddall. The
doorway on the north side of the Church, which had been bricked up
for many years, was opened, and a porch built, also in 1877. In 1878
Miss Betts, of The Glebe, Sydney, gave the Church a set of silver plate
for the celebration of Holy Communion. This gift was in memory of
the Rev. Canon Vidal, and was first used on Sunday, January sth, 1879.
In this year the Church was cleaned and painted throughout. On
March 7th, 1880, a lectern in memory of the late Miss M- C. Croker was
first used. The money for this lectern was collected from personal
friends of the Reddall family. In the same year the chancel and a few
feet of the nave were paved with encaustic tiles; these were procured
with money left to the Church by Miss Croker, supplemented by her
aunts, the Misses Reddall. On Christmas Day, 1880, J. Bray, Esq., of
Denfield, presented to the Church a valuable set of silver vessels, for


the celebration of Holy Communion, and Mrs. Bray gave a silver alms
dish. Two carved offertory plates were given as a churching offering
by Mrs. Alkin. A note to the foregoing tells us that by a fall of one
of the clock weights these two plates were smashed to pieces. In the
same record the hope is expressed that a vestry would soon be built, as
the existing arrangements were very inconvenient. A great many
improvements had been made during the preceding years at the
parsonage; a new roof had been put on during the incumbency of the
Rev. R. S. Willis. Since that time a large underground tank had
been supplied, additional rooms built, and many minor improvements
made. The cost of all these had been defrayed either by donation or by
the proceeds of bazaars. The only debt that had been incurred was on
the new rooms at the parsonage; otherwise money had always been in
hand before any works were authorised. Portion of these additions
still stand, and have been converted into a garage-
The seventieth anniversary of the Church was celebrated on
St. Peter’s Day, June 29th, 1893. In the morning Divine Service was
held in the Church and a celebration of the Holy Communion, with a
sermon by the Venerable Archdeacon Gunther, MA. The record tells
us that there was a large attendance and 45 Communicants. The offer-
tory amounted to over £62. Special appeals had been sent to the
parishioners, present and late, to mark the anniversary by their
presence and help. Many willing and loving helpers joined Mrs. Alkin
in providing afternoon tea for parishioners, visitors, friends and
Sunday school children. A very pleasant afternoon was spent in the
grounds about the parsonage; old parishioners were there who had
not met for many years; reminiscences of youthful days were ex-
changed between octogenarians who remembered the building of the
Church. In the evening a largely attended meeting was held in the
Town Hall for prayer, praise, exhortation and encouragement. The
services were continued on the Sunday following, July 2nd
The vestry was completed in 1882. The old parsonage was built
about 1840, but on February 25th, 1887, the
corner stone of the present Rectory was
laid by the then Primate,
the Most Reverend Saum-
arez Smith, D.D. The
building cost £l,lOO, and
on August 12th of the same i
year the Rector and his
family moved in. The old Rectory building was
sold for £45 on condition that it should be removed.


The clock, which lias given trouble at intervals, appears to have
been stopped for a considerable time. The necessary repairs were
effected as the result of the efforts of a Committee of townspeople
presided over by a Mr. Power. The ceremony of restarting the clock
took place after the 11 o’clock service on 27th January, 1897. The
Rector, Mr. Alkin, having offered a prayer, delivered a short address,
in which he referred to the interesting facts that the clock bore the
date of the year in which he was born —the year in which the first
Incumbent, the Reverend Thomas Reddall, had died, and that the last
thing the late Mr. Reddall had done was to place the clock in the tower
and contribute £5O towards its purchase. Mr. Alkin then invited Mr.
C. W. Parley to set the clock in motion, which he did at 12.31 p.m.
On June 29th, 1899, the seventy-sixth anniversary was cele-
brated. The proceedings commenced with a public meeting in the
Town Hall, at which ministers of other Protestant denominations were
present. The following resolution was carried:—
“That this meeting, on the seventy-sixth anniversary
of St. Peter’s Church, recalls with thankfulness a full and
general recognition of the long and lovingly sustained
services rendered to the Church by the Misses Reddall ”
In 1903 a public meeting was held to consider the desirability
of erecting a memorial hall to commemorate 80 years’ witness of the
Reddall family, but no action has so far been taken, although it is confi-
dently hoped that someone will come forward with an offer to supply
this long-felt want in the parish.
In 1904 the long incumbency by Mr. Alkin of St. Peter’s came to
an end by an exchange of parishes with the Rev George E. Gibbes,
of Kiama.
Strange as it may seem, it was not until April 19th, 1911, that
the Church was consecrated, the service on the occasion being per-
formed by The Primate, the Most Reverend J. C. Wright, D.D.
The Reverend J. Ralph Hunter succeeded Mr. Gibbes in 1912.
By this time the Church seriously needed repairs and renovations.
Mr. Hunter was a man of frail body but indomitable spirit. A sale of
work was organised and a fair sum of money raised for the purpose
of putting the old building in order, but the matter of renovations was
most generously taken in hand by Mr. J. V. Bartlett, and as the
result of his lavish expenditure, added to the efforts of the parishioners,
the Church was handed back to the congregation in the splendid
condition in which it stands to-day.


In 1913 the ninetieth anniversary was celebrated by an evening
service, at which the special feature was the music rendered by a
section of St- Andrew’s Cathedral Choir.
It having become apparent to the Church officers that the Church
was holding too much land in the centre of the town, in 1918 an
ordinance was obtained from Synod and power granted for the sale of
about nine acres of the Church lands.
The sale was conducted early the following year, and the whole
of the allotments contained in one moiety of the subdivision were
disposed of without difficulty at satisfactory prices. The money
realised from this sale was invested, and the interest derived therefrom
has formed a most valuable endowment for the parish. In the same
year the late Mr- Charles Burcher generously provided the necessary
funds to put the clock, which had again stopped for some time, into
going order, certain parts having become badly worn.
From an article published in the Diocesan
Magazine of June Ist, 1919, by Capt. J. H. Wat-
son, we learn that the present school room was
built in 1837, and when it was erected the
original school, built in 1822, was made into
a residence for the school teachers, Mr. T. L.
Robinson and his wife, Mary Robinson. An article published in the
‘‘Sydney Morning Herald” of July 14th, 1917, states that this school
house was a building about 35 x 16, divided into three rooms, where the
magistrates met to discharge their official duties. This school house
was therefore built before the completion of the Church. What
remained of this old building, as altered for a residence, having become
unsafe, was pulled down in 1913.
In 1919 Mr. Hunter fell a victim to pneumonic influenza, and
was succeeded by the Rev. I. D. Armitage, who has thus the honour of
holding the position of Rector during the important occasion when the
fourth Church of England in point of age when first opened, the second
of those now existent, and seventh of those built in Australia will
celebrate its centenary. His efforts, combined with those of the Church
officers and with the assistance of the parishioners, present and late, is
now directed to the crowning effort of providing the Church with a
memorial pipe organ, on which to enrol in panels the names of the
Rectors during the hundred years, and of those who offered themselves
as a supreme sacrifice in the wars of 1899-1901 and 1914-1918.
Laus Deo.
St. Peter’s Rectory, Campbelltown. June 29th, 1923.




Wholly set up and Printed at
The “Gampbelltown News” Printing Works,
Patrick Street, Gampbelltown, N.S.W.


