

Centennary of Buckland Parish
1846 -- 1946
BUCKLAND PARISH CHURCH.


SHORT HISTORY OF THE
BUCKLAND PARISH
By REV. L. B. BROWNING, Th.L.
In March, 1846, soon after the founding of the Chap-
laincy of “Prosser’s Plains," the Rev. F. H. Cox, better
known in later years as Dean Cox, the first Dean of St.
David’s Cathedral, Hobart, arrived at Buckland to take up
duties as the first Rector of that Parish. He was only a
young man, but recently ordained, and serving a Curacy in
a Sussex Parish in the Old Country, when a visiting Arch-
deacon (Marriott), from the far-distant Diocese of Tasmania,
inspired him, together with a number of other young Clergy,
to offer themselves, with true Missionary zeal, for the work
of the Master, in the far-distant Island in the Southern
seas.
REV. FREDERICK HOLDSHIP COX
First Rector Buckland Parish
We can well imagine
how that zeal must have
been tested when, on
arriving in his Parish, he
looked round to take
stock of his surroundings.
No Church, no Sunday
School Room, no Rectory.
Hard work was to supply
the first two needs, and
romance the third, for
upon his marriage to a
Miss Cruttendon, the
sister of a landowner in
Buckland, a Rectory was
built for the bridal pair
by Mr. Thomas Crutten-
don, the bride’s brother.
Many years later, in 1893,
the Rectory became
Church property, a gift
from Mr. Cox, then living
in retirement in England.


On 22nd March, 1846, Mr. Cox conducted the first
Service in the Buckland Parish, and the only place in which
it could be held was the local Police Station. This state of
affairs was not long to be tolerated by a man of Mr. Cox’s
ability and zeal, so that, by 11th October, in that same
year, this energetic man was conducting his Services in a
solid little stone Sunday School, and as if this were not
enough, the foundation stone had been laid of a Church,
which was in later years to be known far and wide for its
beauty of design and solidity of construction, completeness
of furnishings, and its ancient East-end Window. Great
care was taken over its construction, because only the best
was going to be good enough in the building of a Church
in this new land. So it was that the Church was not opened
under the Bishop’s Licence for Public Worship until 18th
June (Trinity Sunday), 1848. The Church was Consecrated
on 15th January, 1850.
Concerning its furnishings and appointments, the fol-
lowing extract from a report of the Consecration from the
“Hobart Town Courier,” 23rd January, 1850, is of interest;—
“The stained glass, encaustic tiles, altar cloth, linen, and
service books, alms chest, etc., all of which deserve a more
minute descripiton than the scanty notice which has been
attempted, were the joint contribution of the late chaplain
and architect of the Church, various members of his family
in England, and by some of his personal friends. The com-
munion plate was sent out as an offering from his former
parishioners in Sussex.”
The Reverend F. H. Cox was succeeded in 1848 by the
Reverend Charles Dobson, who, it would, appear, had been
the Chaplain at the Penal Settlement on Maria Island.
DEVELOPMENT OF PARISH.
Besides those held at Buckland,-'Services were con-
ducted upon occasion at Triabunna/ Rheban, Orford, the
quarries at Okehampton, and at Runnymede, where the
Services were held (and are still) at Runnymede House.
At Triabunna, the main part of the work was carried on for
many years by a lay-catechist, f Mr. S. B. Fooks, who was
later ordained to the Ministry. The population at Tria


bunna, though only small, was considerably augmented by
the stationing of a Company of soldiers there to guard the
settlers in the event of an outbreak by convicts from the
Penal Settlement at Maria Island, some few miles distant.
It was many years later before it was found possible to
build a Church. This, a beautiful stone building, was com-
menced during the Incumbency of the Rev. Clifford Power,
on four acres of land given by Mrs. Aubin. The builder,
a Mr. Richards, a local tradesman, received high praise in
newspaper reports, at the time of the opening, for his ex-
cellent workmanship. The opening ceremony took place
on the 2nd February, 1883, and was performed by the Very
Reverend H. B, Bromby, Dean of Hobart, as the Diocese
was without a Bishop at the time. The Church has an
unusual Altar, of solid stone, and finely carved. This was
the cause of a great deal of controversy, as the Administrator
of the Diocese, Archdeacon Hales, took strong exception to
it upon doctrinal grounds, and ordered its removal, which
the local church wardens refused to do. The arrival of the
new Bishop apparently saved the Altar from removal,
though it was 27th February, 1887, before the Church was
Consecrated by Bishop D. F. Sandford, the third Bishop of
Tasmania.
The present Church of St. Michael and All Angels,
Orford, erected in 1929, during the Incumbency of the Rev.
A. S. Drewett. It replaced an earlier Church, which was
only a converted building from the local quarries.
The Church of St. Chad’s, Levendale, was erected in
the time of the Rev. T. Pitt, in the year 1907. It is of par-
ticularly pleasing design, and one of the finest wooden
Church buildings to be found in the Island.
St. Matthias’ Church, Woodsdale, is also a fine build-
ing, and reflects great credit on the community. It was
Consecrated in the year 1911, the Rev. Wilfred Earle being
the Incumbent at the time.
No record, however brief, would be complete without
the mention of thirty years' devoted service to the Parish
given by the Rev. Thomas Pitt, both as lay reader and
Priest. Even now, after 25 years, he is remembered by many
with deep thankfulness for his Christian conduct and
example.


History of the Window
By REV. H. M. MADDOCK, Th.L.
Considerable controversy has arisen with reference to
the age and origin of the very beautiful East Window of
St. John’s, Buckland. The only authentic reference to the
origin of the window is the report in the “Hobart Town
Courier” of Wednesday, 15th January, 1850, which claims
they are “the work of Mr. O’Connor, a London artist.” The
East Window is of such outstanding quality that several
legendary stories are current with regard to its origin, the
salient points of which are that it was buried for safety dur-
ing the Cromwellian Rebellion, that it was connected with
a Church built by William the Conqueror, and that it was
sent out to Tasmania by the Marquis of Salisbury. There
is indisputable evidence that the window come to Tasmania
through the agency of the first Rector of Buckland, Rev.
F. H. Cox; unfortunately the one person who could have
solved the riddle of its origin chose to maintain a strict
silence with regard to it. In some respects this was typical
of Mr. Cox, whose reticent nature led him to maintain a
similar secrecy with regard to the origin of the many
valuable gifts for which he was personally responsible.
An examination of the window itself makes it possible
to determine its approximate date as between 1350 and 1400.
To commence with, we know for certain that the
window was “in situ” at Buckland between 1848 and 1850,
which disposes of the possibility of its being ,a modern re-
production of an antique, because the art of reproducing
antiques did not come into practice until a much later date.
A superficial examination discloses that the window has been
extensively restored at some period, many quarries (indi-
vidual panes of glass) being obviously different in colour
to the original, and where the restored quarries bear hand-
work in enamel, the workmanship is markedly inferior to
that of the original.
The style of the window is known technically as “White
Grisaille,” which was a style of treatment peculiar to the
English School of Glass Painters, and reached its greatest
development in the 14th century. The white background




of the English Grisaille contrasts markedly with the Con-
tinental work of the same period, where the background was
mainly done in reds and blues, producing the purple effect
peculiar to Continental Churches.
The earliest date which can be attributed to the window
is the middle of the 14th century, because it contains a
quantity of “Silver-yellow Stain,” no known examples of
which occur before 1350. Similarly, the latest reasonable
date is early in the 15th century, by reason of the fact that
this century was marked by the introduction and develop-
ment of the achitectural canopy treatment, which is so
familiar a feature of modern painted glass. This archi-
tectural canopy is absent from the Buckland window, though
the central light has a canopy treatment which may suggest
the trend towards the development of the architectural motif.
Finally, “English Stained Glass,” by Herbert Read, a
standard work on the subject, gives (fig. 3, page 31), as a
typical example of English White Grisaille, an illustration
of a window in Merton College, Oxford, definitely dated as
“Early 14th century.” The similarity between the treatment
of the grisaille of the Oxford window and that of Buckland
is arresting.
From internal evidence then we may reasonably con-
clude that the Buckland window belongs to the latter half
of the 14th century, 1350-1400, and that it is of English
workmanship.
Legend links the window with William the • Conqueror.
William I. was responsible for the building of but one
Church in England, Battle Abbey, the site of the Battle of
Hastings, in Sussex. This Church was particularly selected
by Cromwell’s soldiers for destruction, its ruins being an
English National Monument to-day. The Cecil family was
closely connected with this district. Lord Robert Cecil,
Third Marquis of Salisbury, Secretary for State for the
Colonies, was a personal friend of Dean Cox, and is credited
with having sent the window to his friend at Buckland. It
should also be noted that Dean Cox himself came from
Sussex.
We may reasonably assume then that the window was
one connected with the Cecil family, placed in Battle Abbey,
that it was removed for safety, and buried during the Crom


LIST OF RECTORS OF THE
BUCKLAND PARISH
Reverend F. H. Cox .. ..
.. .. 1846—1848
Reverend C. Dobson .. ..
. . . . 1848—1878
Reverend C. Power
.. . . 1878—1882
Reverend H. C. Hancock .
. . . 1882—1883
Reverend H. T. Tranmar .
. . . 1884—1888
Mr. T. Pitt, Lay Reader ..
.. .. 1888—1890
Reverend H. W. Root .. ,
. . . . 1890—1895
Reverend C. F. Seymour .
. . . 1895—1896
Reverend E. G. Barry .. .
. .. 1896—1898
Reverend T. Pitt
. . . . 1898—1910
Reverend W. Earle
... 1910—1914
Reverend J. W. Devenish .
. .. 1914—1921
Reverend J. Wills
.. .. 1921—1921
Reverend E. W. Juden ..
.. .. 1921—1923
Reverend W. P. Langmaid
. . . . 1923—1924
Reverend W. Hooker ....
.. .. 1924—1926
Reverend A. S. D^essetcss^.
_ .. 1926—1938
Reverend H.ylrffvMSdfcSdTcllA
1938—1944
Reverend 1944—
wellian Rebellion. Battle Abbey was never restored, and
some 200 years after its removal from its original setting, the
glass was sent to Tasmania. If this reconstruction is correct
it would supply sufficient reason for the otherwise myster-
ious secrecy with regard to-Its origin.
Against this we have the statement of the reporter of
the “Hobart Town Courier” of January, 1850, who states
that the windows, “A large eastern window of three lights,
and a smaller one of two lights on the north side .... are
the work of Mr. O’Connor, a London artist.” A closer com-
parison of the two windows reveals that “the smaller one of
two lights” is of distinctly inferior workmanship to that of
the East window, and a careful comparison reveals a marked
similarity of workmanship between this window and the
restored portions of the east window, which suggests the
explanation that the east window was entrusted to Mr.
O’Connor for restoration, and that he was commissioned to
execute the smaller window in the same style, and to
despatch both windows to Euckland. This may easily have
led to the association of his name with both windows in the
newspaper report.
48/2206 Mercury Press
