

CENTENNIAL
Thanksgiving Service
Rational |[)appiness:
I
SERMON
Preached in All Souls’ Church,
Leichhardt,
On x Sunday, x * ©January, x ISSS.
BY THE
Rev. T. HOLME, Incumbent.
Published by
GIBBS. SHALLARD, & CO.. PRINTERS, 8 4 a PITT STREET. SYDNEY.
PRICE, TWOPENCE.




Rational Happiness.
Psalm cxliv., 15. —“ Happy is that people , that is in such a case;
yea , happy is that people whose God is the LORDP
On an occasion like the present —an occasion in a lifetime,
and, indeed, an occasion that only occurs in the lifetime of a
single generation —one feels perplexed as to the course which one
should pursue. I have never been placed in such a position
before, I shall never be placed in such a position again ; therefore
you can understand the peculiar solemnity and importance of it.
It has given me much thought as to the particular Bible truth that
I should present to your notice, and I feel thankful that I have
been guided to one, which, taken as it is from a Psalm appointed
for the day, cannot be out of place.
In Israel, the Church and the nation were regarded as one ;
and so the Psalmist, after glorifying God for victory over his
enemies, speaks in beautiful language of the blessing of peace,
and its effect upon the people. He says, in the 12th verse,
“ That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth : That
our daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude
of a palace : That our garners may be full, affording all manner
of store : That our sheep may bring forth thousands and tens of
thousands in our streets : That our oxen may be strong to labour:
That there be no breaking in nor going out: That there be no
complaining in our streets. Happy is that people, that is in such
a case: yea, happy is that people, whose God is the LORD.”
The simple meaning of all this is, that the people or nation
alone is happy which is in covenant relationship with God; for
the LORD, or Jehovah, is God’s covenant name, the name by
which He was known to Israel.
We are asked to approach God on this great occasion with
the sacrifice of thanksgiving and prayer, and also with some
practical expression of our acknowledgment of His benefits to us.
It is right that we should do this, and all over the land God’s
praises will be sung, and words will be uttered laudatory of the
wonderful blessings which He has bestowed upon us. I am
anxious that we should join heartily in this, and yet, at the same
Sir- ic^c~)


time, that we should not forget the actual condition of things, and
the solemn warning which the hour gives expression to. I am
afraid that too much colour will be given to the prosperity, and
too little to the dark side of our prospects ; therefore, as a faithful
minister of Christ, I mean to combine both.
I. —ln the first place , we must not forget our origin. There
is nothing brilliant about that. The five ships that entered the
Heads one hundred years ago can hardly be said to have contained
a happy company, and yet this inauspicious beginning was over-
ruled by God for great and wise purposes. We can trace His
hand in many ways. It was not the custom in those days, as it
is at present, to disconnect religion from acts of state, and so one
of those five ships carried its chaplain, who was to be the minister
of religion and the man of God to the new community ; therefore
we may say, although it seems somewhat paradoxical, of that
strange assemblage landed for the first time upon the shores of
our harbour, “ Happy is that people that is in such a case : yea,
happy is that people whose God is the LORD for in the
presence of their chaplain, the Reverend Richard Johnson,
England distinctly acknowledged, even for her unhappy and
wayward children, that they were in covenant relationship with
God.
The early history of the colony is a painful one. Profanity,
immorality, and contempt of God’s authority prevailed, even in
the highest quarters; but with all this the eye of God was still
watching over the infant settlement, and His hand was guiding
the destinies of what should hereafter prove a great country.
In the early days, no one played a more important part for
good than the Rev. Samuel Marsden, the senior, and for many
years the only, Government chaplain. He succeeded the Rev.
Richard Johnson, and came out to this country in 1794. If any
man was chosen of God, he was ; not simply in the sense of being
a minister of religion, but in being so exactly suited to the
circumstances of the early days ; and then he threw his whole
soul into the difficult task—the energy of his body and mind was
devoted with great singleness of purpose to the spiritual, social,
political, and material advancement of the country, for the space
of five-and-forty years. Dr. Mason Good, a London physician,
and a man of wonderful learning, made Mr. Marsden’s acquaint-
ance during one of his visits to England, and they continued firm
friends until death. Dr. Good thus writes of Mr. Marsden in
1809: “In humility he is a child, in vigour of mind and
benevolence an angel, full of enterprise for the good of mankind,
and especially of his native country, and full of faith and reliance
on the divine promises. Already has he sown the good seed, on


the best principles of heavenly husbandry, and half the eastern
hemisphere, perhaps, may form its harvest. Unborn empires are
dependent upon his exertions ; and his name will be the theme
of the new world as long as there is a heart to feel reverence, or a
tongue to utter praise.” This is what was said of Mr. Marsden
by one well able to form an opinion, after he had been labouring
in this country about fifteen years. When you consider that God
provided such a man to watch over and care for his erring children
in the dark days of the early settlement, may we not without any
hesitation exclaim, especially in view of after results, “ Happy is
that people, that is in such a case : yea, happy is that people,
whose God is the LORD.”
It would take too long to trace the successive stages of God’s
guiding hand, but in it all you see what an important part our own
Church has played. The first Bishop was appointed in 1836, and
here again we see the guiding and loving hand of a covenant God
and Father. Dr. Broughton was a man singularly adapted to
those critical times. He came out first as Archdeacon of Aus-
tralia, in 1829, and seems at once to have grasped the capabilities
and resources of this new land. His whole soul was in his work.
He was a scholar, a gentleman, a wise and fearless administrator,
devotedly attached to the Church of England, and an humble-
minded Christian. For five-and-twenty years he expended his
energies and his means in doing good, and extending the borders
of the Church. When he died, his one diocese had multiplied
into six, and the clergy increased in proportion.
All the first Bishops were remarkable men, who stuck to their
posts, and who laid wide and deep the foundation of the Christian
faith, with unselfish and unsparing energy. Surely in all this we
must recognise the hand of God, and the same may be said down
to the present moment, so that we are constrained to utter the
language of the text, “ Happy is that people, that is in such a
case ; yea, happy is that people, whose God is the LORD.”
I have not mentioned the work of the other denominations,
because this is especially a Church of England thanksgiving
service, but put them all together, including the great Roman
Catholic Church, their labours and progress, are at least equal to
our own, and it all sprang out of that little seed, so unpromising
in its beginning, planted one hundred years ago. Can it be
doubted that the LORD was among that motley crew on board
those five convict ships, in January, 1788. If He had not been
there, where should we have been to-day ?
And, if we turn from the directly spiritual to the material
side of the picture, the evidence is equally great of the favour and
blessings of our covenant God. We may almost take the text


literally, and apply it to ourselves: “That our sons may be as
plants grown up in their youth. That our daughters may be as
corner stones, polished after the similitude of a palace. That our
garners may be full, affording all manner of store. That our
sheep may bring forth thousands and tens of thousands in our
streets. That our oxen may be strong to labour, That there be
no breaking in nor going out. That there be no complaining in
our streets.” Compare the present state of things —or what might
be the present state of things —with that gathering of ten or twelve
hundred souls under the gum trees in Sydney Cove one hundred
years ago, and almost involuntarily you will exclaim, “ Happy is
that people, that is in such a case; yea, happy is that people,
whose God is the LORD.”
What is the condition of things to-day, as regards material
progress ? In education and refinement we can compare favour-
ably with the mother country. Our cities and public buildings
can vie with theirs. Railways and telegraphs bring the most
distant places within reach. And the progress has been so rapid.
When I was born, Melbourne had not even come into existence;
whereas, now, it is the finest and most flourishing city of the
Southern Hemisphere, with a population of at least 300,000 souls ;
and Sydney, with all her natural advantages and great wealth, sits
as a queen upon her beautiful harbour.
Can we deny that these material blessings are tokens of God’s
favour and goodness? I am sure that your hearts must be moved
with gratitude, when you remember all that God has done for us,
an unworthy people.
11. But it would not do to stop here. I told you that 1 was not
going to dwell altogether on the bright side of the picture; com-
mon faithfulness demands that I should speak words of warning,
and there are not wanting signs of warning. It is not all gold in
these our Centennial celebrations; there is a skeleton in our cup-
board, a worm rankling at the core. Ominous words are spoken,
and threats are uttered, to which it would be folly to turn a deaf
ear. The country which has developed our Marsdens and Brough-
tons, our Macquarries and Wentworths, can, at this present
moment, hardly produce a man. We have no one really capable
of taking the lead. Our Parliament passes laws and cannot
execute them. We do things that the world laugh at. Even in
the Church—the Church of such a noble history—things are little
better. Our universities and schools can produce nothing beyond
specimens of intellectual cram. The community, generally, thinks
more of a boat race, a cricket match, the latest excitement of a
sensation novel, or a tragedy at the theatre, than of the moral
development, and healthy spiritual tone, of what ought to be a


great people. Carlyle said of the English people, in answer to
the question, “What are they?” ‘‘ Thirty millions, mostly fools.”
And I am afraid the withering sarcasm may not be unfitly applied
to us here.
The secret of this sad condition of things lies in the fact that,
as a nation, we are forgetting God ; and though He loads us with
benefits, we cannot make a wise use of them. It may seem hard
to speak thus, in the face of all our thanksgiving services, but the
truth roust be told — the State , as a State, has forgotten her covenant
God —the God who manifested His presence, and was even
acknowledged, on board those transport ships one hundred years
ago. Now, as you know, our Legislature is powerless in the
presence of gigantic evils, and there is no man who dare speak of
returning to God, in the way of penitence and reform; he would
be laughed at, and scorned as a fool, behind the times.
How true are those words spoken three thousand years ago :
“He increaseth the nations and destroyeth them. He enlargeth
the nations and straiteneth them again. He taketh away the
heart of the chief of the people of the earth, and causeth them to
wander in a wilderness where there is no way. They grope in the
dark without light, and He maketh them to stagger like a drunken
man.”
I see no remedy for the present sad condition of things,
short of a National and State return to God. People cry out
“ that cannot be.” Then, all that I can say is, God help the
country.
I have done my duty, and it is from love to my adopted
country that I speak thus. I long to see her prosper in all good
things, just as the Psalm before me so beautifully expresses it ;
“ That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth. That
our daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the simili-
tude of a palace. That our garners may be full, affording all
manner of store. That our sheep may bring forth thousands and
tens of thousands in our streets. That our oxen may be strong
to labour. That there be no breaking in nor going out. That
there be no complaining in our streets.” Then, indeed, it may
be said, “ Happy is that people, that is in such a case. Yea,
happy is that people, whose God is the LORD !”
Gibbs, Shat,lard & Co,, Printers, 84A Pitt Street, Sydney.


y\f f
BULK)
F 10507
