

Address ... ... “Britain and her Colonies.” ... Rev. ANDREW HARME,
Prayer ... ... Rev. R. E. CRADDOCK.
HYMN 5.
OD save our Gracious Queen, 2 Thy choicest gifts in store,
Long live our noble Queen, On her be pleased to pour,
God save our Queen. Long may she reign.
Send her victorious, May she defend our laws,
Happy and glorious ; And ever give us cause
Long to reign over us, To sing with heart and voice,
God save the Queen. God save the Queen.
BENEDICTION
p||||t Organist Choir Leader,
lii Thank Offerings to defray expenses and help the Centennial Mission. ||||||jl
Bennett, Printer, 227 Bridge road, Richmond.
■P*
2 <4.1
Ml®
CENTENNIAL THANKSGIVING SERVICE,
TOWN HALL, RICHMOND,
Oij Thursday, 26tl| January, 1888,10 o’clock a.n|.
By Permission of His Worship the Mayor and Councillors ,
ll® Swlmtai Hlmisttfi’ Association will conduct
A SHORT MORNING SERVICE,
In wliicli, it is hoped, the Citizens of every Name and Denomination will
join in giving God Thanks and Praise for the countless Mercies of
the past 100 years to British Colonists—especially in Australia.
Rev. C. T. PERKS, Chairman.
HYMN 1.
"tpOR all Thy countless bounties The hundred years behind us
Through varied chance and chang3 ; Have told their wondrous tale
For old familiar blessings. The hundred years before us
For mercies new and strange : Lie yet within the veil ;
For laws that widen slowly, Grant, Lord, that all our future
For ordered life and free ; May work out good begun ;
We thank Thee, Lord, and welcome That, in the tasks that wait us,
Our year Centenary. The goal at last be won !
Prayer
Reading of Scriptures,
HYMN 2
Through all Thy saints and servants,
Send forth Thy Light and Truth ;
Renew our nation’s greatness,
As ’twere an eagle’s youth ;
So, with full hearts of gladness,
We lift our souls to Thee,
And keep in hope and courage,
Our year Centenary.
Rev. ALFRED RIGG.
Psalm 103.
“ Pray unto the Lord for it.” —Jer. xxix. 7.
1 T ORD, while for all mankind we pray, 3 O guard our shores from every foe, 5 Here may religion pure and mild,
1J Of every clime and coast, With peace our borders bless : Upon our Sabbaths smile ;
0 hear us for our own dear land, — With prosperous times our cities crown And piety and virtue reign,
The land we love the most. Our fields with plenteousness.
2 Here Providence has cast our lot, 4 Unite us in the sacred love
And here our kindred dwell : Of knowledge, tfuth. and Thee ;
Our children too; —how should we lov3 And let our hills and valleys shout
Another land so well ! The songs of liberty.
Address ... ... “Australia’s Past Century.
Prayer
HYMN 3.
And bless our native isle.
6 Lord of nations, thus to Thee
Our country we commend.
Be Thou her refuge, and her trust,
Her everlasting Friend.
Rev. F. H. BROWNE.
Rev. J. DAWBORN.
“ Blessed is the nation ivhose God is the Lord.”— Psalm xxxiii. 12.
I WELL the anthem, raise the song :
Praises to our God belong.
Saints and angels join to sing
Praises to the heavenly King.
2 Blessings from His liberal hand
Flow around this happy land ;
Kept by him, no foes annoy
Peace and freedom we enjoy.
3 Here, beneath a virtuous sway,
May we cheerfully obey ;
Never feel oppression’s rod,
Ever own and worship God.
4 Hark I the voice of nature sings
Praises to the King of kings !
Let us join the choral song,
And the grateful notes prolong.
Address ... “ Australia’s Present and Future.” ... Rev Mr. SERPELL.
HYMN 4.
iL All nations shall call you blessed, for ye shall he a delightsome land , saith the Lord of hosts.”
Thanksgiving for Great Britain and her Colonies.
J 3 RAISE to. our God, whose bounteous hand 3 Praise to our God I the vine He set 5 Praise to our God, who still forbears
Prepared of old our glorious land ; Within our coasts is fruitful yet ; Who still this guilty nation spares ;
A garden fenced with silver sea; On many a shore her seedling? grow W r ho calls us still to seek His face,
A people prosperous, strong, and free ! ’Neath many a sun her clusters glow. And lengthens out our day of grace !
2 Praise to our God ! through all our past 4 Praise to our God ! His power alone 6 Praise to our God! though chastenings stern
His mighty arm hath held us fast ; Can keep unmoved our ancient throne ; Our evil dross should throughly burn 1
I ill wars and perils, toils and tears, Sustained by counsels wise and just, His rod and staff, from age to age,
Have brought the rich and peaceful years. And guarded by a people’s trust. Shall rule and guide His heritage.


