

©entenarj) Capets.
A PLEA
t FOR
r*
. v
A NATIONAL —NOT A STATE—CHURCH *
‘ This people have I formed for Myself;
they shall shew forth My praise .”
—ls. xliii. 21.
“ Happy is the people that is in such a case :
yea, happy is the people whose God is the
Lord." —Ps, cxliv. 15.
Mr. Chairman,-
My Christian Friends, —
It is a great pleasure to me to be here to-night. And I
beg to express my obligations to the Committee of arrangement, for
giving me the opportunity of addressing you upon an occasion of so
much interest and importance. I may take an exaggerated view of
its importance ; and you may not be able to sympathise entirely witlu.-
me. Nevertheless, —although it has never been an object with me to
press my opinions on the acceptance of other rapn, that,
on this occasion, I have a very sincere desire to carry your convic-
tions along with me ; and therefore you must not be surprised if I
urge the matter which I am to discuss with considerable earnestness ;
with as much earnestness, in fafl|f as if it were a matter of Life
and Death. For indeed it does seem to me to be such a matter ;
a matter of Life and Death for usdfs a people,—as an Australian
Nation. * ' ■/
* From a 1 ,leech by A. J. ‘Campbell, D.D.the Centennial Thanksgiving
Meeting, held In Geelong, 26th January, 1888. G. M. Hitchcock, Esq., in the
Chair.
N.B. —The Numerals refer to the Notes in the Appendix,


This is not a Church-Meeting. You are not here to-night as
Members,—l am not here as a Minister,—of any Christian Church.
We are here as Inhabitants of this Australian Continent, and as
Citizens of Geelong, under the presidency of one of our most honored
fellow-citizens ; here, for the purpose of making humble and joyful
acknowledgment of God’s great goodness to our Country during the
past century. lam going 'to ask your earnest attention to the
character and significance of such a meeting.
Four years ago, at a large gathering of the Australian Natives’
Association, a declaration was made by a Minister of the Crown, to
the effect that the people of Australia had now passed through their
period of adolescence, and were no longer to consider themselves a
mere colonial appendage to Great Britain. They were to assume
the Toga Virilis. And, while they cherished all imaginable
to the British Throne, they were to announce themselves to*the
world as The Australian Nation. This Declaration—not of Inde-
pendence, but of Nationality—was received with immense enthusiasm.
And the events which have followed have proved that it was no
empty boast. The Horn of Australia’s power which was planted
upon her forehead that night—since that night has made very con-
spicuous growth.
In the first place, We have procured from the Imperial Parlia-
ment an Act which virtually allows us to unite the separate Provinces
of Australia in One Dominion, and to bind its scattered Populations
in One Nation. Which, with God’s help, we will do. And He will
help us. For it is not the will of God that people of one Pace and
of one Religion—fellow-countrymen and fellow-Christians—should
live apart, forgetful of the brotherly covenant, unhelpful, envious of
each other’s good, and out of all kindly sympathy with each
other. l
In the second place, We have recognised our obligation, and
our intention to share with Great Britain in the defence of the
Empire, both by land and sea. Our Australian Soldiers have gone
from N.S. Wales to the Soudan, and have taken their place beside the
Imperial troops on the field of war. And although some men have
condemned that action as a piece of vain Quixotism, I can conceive
no other act of statesmanship that would have sent a deeper thrill of
joy through the heart of Britain, in the dark hour of her distress, and
have bound Australia in closer love to the mother country. And I
thank Sir, William Dalley'for the patriotic act.
And finally, and still more recently, we have met face to face.


and on equal footing, the Statesmen of Great Britain in the Imperial
Conference ; and have received as large and cordial a recognition of
our Colonial and Constitutional Eights as we could desire.
But now—inasmuch as we have assumed the position, and begun
to exercise the powers and prerogatives of a Nation, it ig time that
we were considering the extent and the height of our National
responsibilities. It is time that we were asking ourselves, “ What is
this Australian Nation going to be ? What is it going to do ? In what
mould —after what model—is it to be formed ? What are to be its
attributes, its aspirations, its aims? In short, What is to be its
* chief end ’? ” I need not tell you that the Destiny of Australia
will be determined by its character—and that there will be a fatal
flaw in its character—if it does not put at the very heart of it, the
glory of God as its highest end, and His Will as the Supreme Law of
its existence and actions.
Edmund Burke affirmed that “ the noblest prerogative of man is
that he is a religious creature.” If that is true, then the noblest
prerogative of a Nation must be that it is a religious nation. And
yet some persons seem to think that there is an absolute incom-
patibility between Religion and Nationality. A Nation they regard
as an aggregate of men who bind themselves into one Body for
purposes of a purely material kind—of internal order and external
defence. But such a Body r , they think, cannot stand in any practical
relation with the God of Heaven. To them, a National Conscience
is an unimaginable thing ; a National Religion is an impossibility.
And yet God addresses Men as Nations. He demands a recogni-
tion of His Authority from all the Nations of the Earth. And He
declares that the Nations that will not serve Him shall perish.
Do you say that these demands belonged to ancient times —that we
in this Christian era are released from them ?
As if Christ came into this world, —not to be a Mediator
between God and Man—to re-unite Barth, which is God’s foot-
stool, with Heaven, which is His Throne—but came to put them
finally asunder, — came to put an end to God’s sovereignty over the
Nations, and to discharge them from their allegiance to Him.
So far from that, was it not said of old that Christ was to be the
Desire of all Nations; —that to Him should the gathering of the
Nations be; —and that upon His shoulders should the Government of
the Nations be laid ? 2
But I need not argue the matter. As a matter of fact,


the British Nation is a Christian and Protestant Nation. She
acknowledges God in her National Acts. And she disowns the
Pope. Her Statute Book is founded upon the Word of God. In the
time of her trouble, she invokes His aid—in the time of her joy, she
gives Him thanks. And the grave question which the people of
Australia have to consider at this juncture of their history, when
they are claiming the rank of a Nation, is just this, —whether, while
they acknowledge God individually, and in their families, and churches,
they are going to acknowledge Him as a Nation.
I think that we ought to take that question into very serious con-
sideration, and endeavour to come to some clear and unanimous
judgment as to our duty and'the course which we ought to pursue.
Never were truer words spoken, than those which fell from the
lips of our venerable friend Mr. Wells the other night, in regard to
the duty of Christian men in the exercise of the political franchise—
their duty to send to the Legislature, men of character—men who
fear God and hate covetousness, and (I may add) men who will con-
duct the business of the House with the dignity which becomes the
Parliament of Victoria, and the courtesy which belongs to the G entle-
men of Victoria. No Christian Elector, I hope, denies that
that is his duty. But that is a simply personal duty. 3 I think that
we are bound to go further—l think that we are bound to claim
the character, and exercise the functions, of a Christian Nation.
Do you ask in what way, and for what purpose, we are to set up
that claim ? I shall explain what I mean, by reminding you of a
statement which was made by Bishop Moorhouse, shortly after his
settlement in Manchester. 4 Speaking of the ecclesiastical state of
matters here, he is reported to have said, that in Victoria no
religious service, bearing a National character, could be held—
because on the one hand there was no State Church here—and on
the other, because there were so many different denominations.
Now you are aware that at home all celebrations of a National kind
are hallowed—and all public Exhibitions are opened—at least when
they are opened by the Queen —with a religious service. And
as a matter of course, these services are in the hands of the clergy of
the Established Churches of England and Scotland. I say as a
matter of course. For wherever a Nation sets up a State Church,
that Church becomes, naturally, the organ by which it gives ex-
pression to its religious sentiments. Now, the Bishop spoke truly
when he said that we have no State Church here, and that we have


many denominations. But was the which he drew from
these two facts an absolutely necessary conclusion ? Is it true that
we can have no religious service here of a National kind ? —that, for
example, we cannot have our approaching Centennial Exhibition
opened with a Dedicatory Prayer ? We have no State Church here—
and it is not likely that we ever shall have one. But are we, on that
ground alone, to be for ever precluded from any public and National
rocognitionof God ? Is the State Church the only possible way in which
the Christian people can approach the Throne of Grace, as a people,
and offer their supplications and thanksgivings to the God of Heaven ?
Surely, in default of such an Organ, it is worth our while to enquire
whether we cannot find a Substitute. Suppose that the people of
Victoria —putting aside, for the occasion, all sectional divisions—
were now to agree to hold the 26th of January—not only as a
perpetual National Holiday, which the State has decreed it to be,
but as a perpetual National Thanksgiving Day, after the manner of
America; —I believe that their right to come to such arrangement
would not be questioned ; but I question whether that act of theirs
would receive the consideration and carry the weight which an act
of the State carries. If you think that the State and the Nation are
identical, you mast hold that certainly it would not. But lam
anxious to impress upon you that they are not identical. The
National Life has two sides —the Secular and the Keligious—as
distinct from each other, and yet as necessary to each other, as your
right side, with its functions, is to your left. The Nation lives, and
thinks, and acts in these two spheres. The Organ of the one is the
State. The Organ of the other is the Church. Each is independent
in its own province—and cannot interfere with, or intrude upon,
the jurisdiction of the other. But inasmuch as both have their
origin and authority from God, they are bound to be mutually help-
ful, and to co-operate in securing that God’s will shall be done on
Earth as it is done in Heaven ; especially they are bound to this
mutual helpfulness and co-operation in those greatest of all matters
of legislation, which are neither wholly secular nor wholly spiritual,
but which lie between them: —such as the Sabbath law, the
Marriage law, and the Education of the people.
But, now, observe what a prodigious advantage the State possesses
over the Church in these matters. The State is One —the Churches,
Many. Just fancy that this commonwealth of Victoria were broken
up into half-a-dozen States—with Home Rule for each of them—


the English-born being governed by their own Parliament—the
Irish, Scotch, and Welshmen by theirs, —I don’t ask you what kind
of chaos would ensue ; but don’t you feel that from that moment
National Life would become impossible to Victoria ? Every power
would be paralysed, and her whole strength would go out of her.
But is not that the condition of the Churches just now quoad the
State ? —ln those matters on which they have a right to speak,
and do speak, does Parliament listen to them ? Do their
petitions and remonstrances carry their legitimate weight ? Do
they alter, ordn any[appreciable way affect, the course of legislation ?
And no one wonders at their powerlessness. No one expects any-
thing else, who looks at the feeble and fragmentary way, in which
their opinions are, for the most part, presented to the governing
bodies.
Now, how are we to cure this evil state of things ? We cannot
make a summary end of our divisions. If I could sweep them all
away to-morrow I would not do it. They have not grown up in a
night, nor without a cause ; and until these causes disappear, they
will not disappear. Still, the evil is not incurable. Our Queen has
but one army. That army has more divisions in it, and far more
regiments, than we have Churches. And yet these regiments would
not listen —the 42nd and the 9Brd would not listen—to a proposal
to merge them and their traditional glories in one great mass of
men. But march them into the field ; range them in the line of
battle —won’t they fight as one man ? —fight under one leader ?
fight or die for the one dear cause, —their Country,—their Kindred, —
and their Queen ?
Now, Sir, when shall we awaken to the fact that whatever unity
belongs to the British army,—whatever unity belongs to the Victorian
State—an infinitely stronger, closer, and more indestructible unity
belongs to the Christian Church ? When shall we realise the ground
and reason of that most perfect unity,—this, namely,—that Christ is
not the Builder of Many Churches, but of One ? And that One
Church which Christ is building, is not your Church, Sir—nor is it
mine—uor is it the Church of any other denomination, —it is them all
together—all that are built upon the Rock, and not upon the sand.
And so I believe that the way, and the only way, in which we can
overcome the evil of our divisions is by recognising and acting upon
our Unity. We all profess to believe in One Holy Catholic Church.
But we make no such profession in regard to our denominations.


You, Sir, do not believe in the Methodist Church, —I do not believe
in the Presbyterian Church, in the same way that we both believe
in the Church of Christ. And if we would Set the Unity
of the Church above the Divisions of the Church ; —if we
would regard it as infinitely a higher and holier thing, and make it
in a very practical and palpable way visible to the world ; —then, Sir,
I believe that we would find ourselves in a position to give the State
that assistance in the disposal of matters of moral and religious
concern, which we are bound to render to it, and might come to ex-
ercise a salutary and benign influence upon the future development
of this Nation.
Why should we not have an Alliance of the Churches —and a
Standing Council; which should attempt no interference with the
State in secular matters ; and should assume no control over the
Churches in spiritual matters ; but should charge itself with the care
of those matters which belong to both; —a Council which, —although
not legislative, but consultative —would supply the place of a State
Church to the effect, that it would be accessible to the Government
when they wished information, or would approach them when cir-
cumstances required them to do so P It would lie with such a
Council to make arrangements for religious services on all public and
National occasions.
I believe, Sir, that if, by the grace of God, we could rise out of our
littleness and unlovingness, and could get up among the heights
of Charity—and could exhibit our unity in such a Body as would
truly represent the mind, —and act as the mouthpiece, of the
Christian people of the land,—we would be able to hold in check
the secular spirit of the day ; and we would secure for the desires
and judgments of good men the consideration, to which they are
entitled, but of which they are presently deprived.
For I believe that, in such great questions as that of the
people’s Right to the Sabbath Rest, the people would carry it that
every man, who did six days’ honest work, should have a seventh
day’s whole and perfect rest —not any seventh day (as bianconi
used to give his horsess), but the Lord’s Day; so that they who
work for us during the week-days, may worship with us on that Day
of God.
And 1 believe that in that other great matter—of Education, in
which the people’s wishes are so broadly acknowledged and so flatly
refused—l believe the people would carry their will there too. The


banished Bible would be recalled at last; and, on the walls of every
State School, would be inscribed the Words which angels
brought to earth—and which our beloved Queen wrote, with her own
hand, upon our Children’s Testaments ; —“ Glory to God in the
highest, Peace on Earth, and Goodwill to Men.”
APPENDIX.
I.—National Unity, the Work and Will of God,
Some of the most delightful of those forecasts with which the old
Prophets’ burdens of woe were relieved, foreshowed the Unification of
the Tribes of Israel.
Here is one from Ezekiel. The Scene is the Land of Judah—
now lying desolate and without inhabitant; a Land of Silence and
the Shadow of Death —on which no sound of life breaks, except the
cries of the bittern and of the screech-owl. The emptiness of these
once-joyous places and their utter lifelessness displeases God. “It
grieves Him to the heart.” And so—before the Word of Eecal is
sent to His banished children—the mourning hills and valleys are
addressed, and are cheered with the promise that they shall yet
blossom and bear fruit again ; and shall become the seat of a happy
population, whom God shall gather back to their fatherland ; and
shall reinstate them in such honor and felicity as shall eclipse their
former glory, and wipe away their recent shame. And the basis
upon which their National prosperity is to rest, and the guarantee of
its perpetuity, shall be a gift which God declares it is His purpose to
bestow upon them ; a gift of a singularly powerful—although im-
palpable, and altogether imponderable—kind; even the gift of a new
heart—the newness of which is to consist in its oneness. From
which we are to conclude that the quarrels between Israel and Judah
did not originate in external causes—but in the divided state of their
heart. Hence the cure, —a whole, instead of a divided, heart. And,
after so long a time of enmity, that would be indeed a New Heart.
This unification of these two kingdoms is then set forth in the
symbolism of the two sticks —which, although manifestly two—when
brought together in the Prophet’s hand, become one. And this junc-
tion is accomplished by no power or pressure of his. He neither nails
nor glues them together. It is a Divine act. The kingdoms of Judah
and Israel had been rent asunder by an act of Divine Judgment—
they are to be reunited by an act of Divine Mercy. And the power
which is to bring them together and keep them together is not a
political—not even a moral—power. It is the power which lies in
the heart of man when it is wholly one—one with the God above
him, and with his fellow-men beside him.
We miss the point of that great promise of a new heart, when we
direct it to individuals —as we almost always do. Doubtless, every
one may ask, and will get, the precious gift. But originally the


promise was not an individual —but a National—promise. And that
is a much greater thing—with larger and grander issues.
And now that we are seeking to grow up into a strong nation,
and to merge our provincial divisions in a large Dominion, we
ought to he thankful to know that such a movement is not a matter
of indifference to Him, Who holds the nations in His Kands ; and
that we may count upon His help at that very point where our main
difficulty lies, —His help to deliver us from our pride, and selfishness,
and mutual jealousies; and to make us—not many-hearted, but one-
hearted—whole-hearted. This is very plain. That if the Australian
Colonies are going to consult, each its own interests alone, —and
carry out its own will, however it may run counter to the will and
to the interests of its neighbours,—we shall never grow into a great
people. Just fancy that each member of your body was endowed
with a separate will, and that the right hand were habitually set-
ting itself to work against the left ! I suppose we are very thankful
that, while God has given us many members, He has given us only
one will. And would it not be a blesssd thing if He were to fulfil
His promise to us, and were to give one consenting, harmonious,
and mutually respecting will to all the peoples of this land.
And, further, it ought to be a matter of deep satisfaction to us
to believe —as, on the strength of that single example, I think we are
entitled to believe —that God looks with complacency on the homes
of a busy and well-doing people; and that He has no more pleasure,
than we have, in blighted harvests and burned-up pastures. We are,
in His providence, occupying this good land—building towns and
villages—cultivating its soil —developing its resources, and supplying
the world with its wool and its gold. All this, we are bound to
believe, is agreeable to the will of God. And we are entitled, there-
fore, to put ourselves, as a people, under His protection and
guidance, and to enter into covenant with Him, saying, with Israel of
old—not in pride, but in humble self-surrender—“ Are not we Thy
people, and art not Thou our God ? ”
2. —Christ’s Dominion over the Nations.
Along with the promise of National Unity, God promised the
House of Israel another, and even a nobler, gift. Quarrels among
nations are mainly quarrels among kings. And so with the promise
of the One Heart, God promised His people One King;— “l will
make them one nation, and one king shall be king to them all.—My
servant David shall be their king, and they shall walk in My judg-
ments, and observe My statutes and do them.” (Ezek. xxxvii. 22,21.)
This twofold promise has passed over from the Jewish to the
Christian Church, and is fulfilled wherever Christ is acknowledged to
be its supreme Head and only King, But His mediatorial authority
extends beyond the pale of the Church. “ His kingdom ruleth over
all.” A few Biblical references will show that it includes Civil
Governments.
(a). In the Psalms—which we have brought with us into the
Christian Church, and employ in our daily worship—kings and
judges are commanded to kiss the Son, and to serve Him with fear; —
and all the nations are summoned to do Him homage. That rulers


are addressed, in these Passages, in their official —not their personal
capacity, is obvious. Peter evidently thought so, when he applied
the second Psalm to Herod and Pontius Pilate.
(6). The descriptions of Christ’s kingdom given by the Prophets,
include secular, as well as spiritual, dominion. Kings of the earth
are represented as acknowledging His Lordship. They bring Him
presents—they fall down before Him—and all nations call Him
blessed. He, who is the legitimate object of such acts, must possess
a rightful dominion over all rulers and all nations.
(r). In the Apocalypse of Daniel, and still more in the Apocalypse
of John, royal titles are appropriated to Christ, and all nations and
kings are placed under His feet. He is k styled the King of Nations,
and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth. The name written upon
His vesture and His thigh, when He goeth to make war, is, “ King of
Kings and Lord of Lords.” Now, these are not mere empty names;
and whether civil rulers accept or refuse the fact that they are under
His control—that makes no difference to the fact.
(<f). Our Lord’s own words claim universal dominion :— -< All
things are delivered to Me of My Father.” “ All power is given
unto Me in Heaven and in Earth.” From this universal delivery,—
this All-Power—One thing only is excepted ; that is, God the
Father.
(r). And Paul explains the object for which He has been invested
with this universal authority:—“ He hath put all things under His
feet, and gave Him [Who was already Head of the Churchj to be
Head over all things for the Church, which is His Body, the fulness
of Him that filleth all in all.” (Eph. ii. 22, 23).
It is sometimes contended that these powers and royal titles
will not accrue to Christ till He comes to reign upon the earth. But
that is not the fact. That the present Mediatorial Power of Christ
is different from His Millennial Power, I admit. But that He possesses
such power, and exercises it, from His Father’s Throne, not His
own—by the unseen agency of the Holy Ghost —is certain. The
Power which He claimed after His resurrection was not His own
Divine Power; it was given Him—therefore it was Mediatorial
Power. When He ascended on high, He was made a Prince as well
as a Saviour; and a sceptre of righteousness was put into His hand —
not for mere show —as is seen in His epistle to the Church of
Thyatiaa, in which He threatens temporal death. And although,
after that judicial threat, He appears as the Lamb that was slain,
He has not lost the symbols of His Power, or of His exercise of it
through the Spirit. For He has seven horns on His head and seven
eyes, which are the seven spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth.
“ The seven eyes symbolize Christ’s watchful and wise providence
for the Church and against her foes.” But how could he protect her
and make all things work together for her good, unless He were
King over the children of men ? Let us bless God that His Head-
ship over all things for the Church is as solid as His Headship of the
Church.
It has been objected, that inasmuch as Civil Authority has its
origin in God as the God of Nature, it cannot be included in Christ’s
Mediatorial Kingdom. The answer to that objection is, that all


tilings, natural and supernatural—in Heaven and Earth, and below
the Earth, have been swept into His Kingdom, and been made
available for its uses. Hence we count Marriage, which is founded
in Nature, among Christian Institutions, and rejoice that we arc
commanded to marry in the Lord. And so with (he Family.
Children are to obey their parents in the Lord, and parents are to
bring them up in the nurture of the Lord. [Note. —In the New
Testament, “ the Lord ” almost invariably designates “ the Lord
Jesus Christ.”] Servants, too, are to be obedient to their masters,
as unto Christ. We rob the domestic relations of their highest
power to bless us when we shut Christ out of them ; Who—though
a Man of Sorrows—once, at least, entered the House of Mirth, that
He might set His seal upon pure wedded love, and give his benedic-
tion to a married pair.
And equally so do Civil Rulers deprive themselves ot their most
powerful support, when they forget that it is “ by Him [Who is the
wisdom of God] that kings reign and princes decree justice.” Why do
they decline such gracious assistance ? Do they imagine that they de*
grade themselves or their office, when they avow that they do not con-
sider themselves the mere servants of men—creatures of popular choice
—to obey the popular will—but the Ministers of God and the Repre-
sentatives of the exalted Saviour, in that sphere which; although
secular, is not therefore ignoble ? Nay—rather, does not their claim
to the Servants of Christ “ give them a peculiar official elevation
and dignity ? It throws a moral grandeur round their characters;
and while it lays them under special obligations to attend to their
moral qualifications and conduct, it entitles them to be treated by
the people with profound esteem, veneration, and honour,”—( Dr .
Symington').
And just let anyone sit down and consider what the consequence
Avould be to the nations of the world, if their Rulers were to submit
themselves to the righteous sceptre of Christ, and were to substitute
Christian principle and practice for political diplomacy and the
sword. Would there not come down upon them a wonderful sense
of relief, and of blessed rest from the terrors of war; —and by-and-by a
universal disarmament, when nine million disbanded soldiers would
be enlisted in industrial corps, and launched upon the vast Wastes
and vacancies of the earth. The artizans, who are working day and
u iglß just now in the production of lethal weapons, would not per-
haps be set adrift, but would be kept, at least, until all the swords
had been beaten into ploughshares, and all the spears into pruning-
hooks. And if the old men could not unmake themselves, young
men, at all events, would not learn war any more. That is what
shall happen when Christ comes to judge among the nations, and to
rebuke many peoples. But it would happen now, if nations and their
rulers would acknowledge His authority and walk in His paths.
(Isaiah ii. 3,4). And yet—although such a consequence would as
certainly come to us as the daylight comes with the sun, we are told that
Christianity has been a curse to the world. Would that consequence
be a curse to trade—to industry—to stock-holders—to social and
family life ?
And here, in Australia—if vve were to place ourselves under that
11
APPENDIX,


blessed rule—would we not enter upon a career such as the world
has never seen; and enjoy the happiness of which the Psalmist
spoke—but which I am afraid he never saw, —the happiness of the
people whose God is the Lord ?
I do not see how, in any other way, we are to rise out of our
present selfish and mutually repellent moods. And if our Avhole
National Life is to be comprised in our political action—if it is to
have no outgoing and no articulate and effective utterance on its
religious side; and if we are to be governed by no higher principles
than our mere human and material interests, I do not see how we can
escape from the worship of the world’s sordid trinity—the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life. Certainly, we shall
never grow up into any nobleness —but shall sink down into the im-
becility or the recklessness of an ease-loving, mammon-serving,
and very corrupt community.
Upon the other hand, if we choose God for our God—God in
Christ—and give Him a willing-hearted and true obedience —these
national blessings will be secured to us :
1. We shall dwell in quiet habitations. God will be round us as
a wall of fire. He will keep our foes away from us; or, if they are
allowed to come, He will enable us to beat them back.
2. He will make our land a delightsome land, and will lay no
famine upon us, but will give us the labour of our hands and the
plentiful fruits of the earth.
3. And, finally, we shall be pervaded, in every class and order of
society, by a spirit of true brotherhood and genuine self-forgetting
benevolence. The scorn which men bear their fellow-men —the
pleasure they have in each other’s downfall—the malice, the strife,
the low debates, the whispering away each other’s character, and
the secret plotting and stabbing in the dark:—all these miserable
fruits of the evil heart we shall put away; and we shall put on, as
children of God, and fellow-citizens of this Christian commonwealth,
bowels of mercies, kindness, lowliness of mind, meekness, and long-
suffering,—forbearing one another and forgiving one another —even
as God, for Christ’s sake, hath forgiven us.
0 fair, delicious prospect I—Would1 —Would to God it could be made real
to us ! And why not ? The promise of the One Heart and the One
King—even to Israel—was not, however, unconditional. God must
be enquired of by them, to do that great thing for them. We must
look up. We must appeal to Him who is at God’s right hand. —Who
knows but that, even now, our Lord is lording for the opportunity
of making some great display of His Saving Power in this new land ?
Who can tell but that, while we are seeking to spread abroad the
glory of His Name in this Centennial year, He is not, even now,
praying the Father to send the Holy Ghost upon us, —Who will give
us the One Heart, and enable us to walk in His ways and to work all
the good pleasure of His will.
O Christ 1 Eternal Brother,
Do Thou—to one another
Our hearts incline :
And send us from above
The spirit of Thy Love,
To make us Thine.
12
APPENDIX.


3.—Religion in relation to Politics.
Here are Mr. Wells’ words :
“ The truth is we have begun to learn a little more than we
once had learned —that where politics touch religion, religion must
touch politics. No Christian man does all his duty if he does not
vigorously exercise his rights and privileges and powers as a citizen.
The happiness, the welfare, the character, the morals of a people
are mightily affected by the laws under which they live. And
Christian men must see that the representatives they send to Par-
liament are men who will make laws that shall elevate a people, and
not degrade them. Let men call us in reproach religious politicians,
but let us do our duty with unflinching firmness and constancy'.
Never let us cast a vote in the ballot box for a man we cannot trust.
Never let us vote for a man of known immoral life, whatever
opinions he agrees to advocate. We, with other Christians, have
made ourselves felt thisyear on the Sabbath question, the Education
question, and the Divorce question. Let us never relax our en-
deavours. Temperance, marriage and the divorce question, religion
and the Sabbath, are among the palladiums of a people’s liberties
and the foundations of a people’s greatness. Let us never falter in
their advocacy and support —
Wheferxiaty calls, or danger,
Be never wlfcrting there.
Let us stand shoulder to shoulder with each other, and with our
brethren of other denominations, and see to it that the Jtk
legislature recognise our power.” •
In case Mr. Wells’ last words should be misinterpreted, I shaWjf
reproduce the larger utterances of the Rev. Henry Bath, at
Conference the previous year. They are well worthy of * *
preserved. They ought to be repeated every year, till all men know
them by heart. For Mr. Bath speaks, not as a Methodist alone,
but as the intrepid Spokesman of the Evangelical Churches and
of the living Christianity of Victoria ;
“ I should like to say a little in regard to politics. It is very well
known that the policy which has been observed by our church in
England has been that of n^k-intervention —of non-interference.
In England our church has carefully avoided recognising political
parties, and we accept and carry out the same policy in this colony.
We have no political ambition. We do not grasp at political
power. We have no political interest that is not the ordinary
interest of men who are still members of a civil community: none
that is not identified with the moral and religious interests that
we are bound to conserve and promote. Yet while we do not as a
body interfere with politics, of course, individually we are at liberty
to hold any political opinions we like—and some of us have political
opinions, and a notion that if our opinions were only adopted there
would be great improvement. But though individually we are at
liberty to air our political views, here as a Conference we have no
political opinions,—-we do not distinguish between one political
party and another. But when politics interfere with us, we
have our opinions. We have our principles that we are determined


to maintain ; and we have our interests that we are determined to
protect. We do not seek to dominate politics in this country.
There may be other churches that would like to get hold of the
political power of the country, and if there be such, we shall of
course, keep our eyes wide awake. But we do not aspire to that;
and if every member of Parliament, if every member of the Govern-
ment, were a member of our church, we would not presume to use
the influence we might have with them to the detriment of other
churches, or to the detriment of the civil liberties of this community.
Yet, let it be understood that-we are not in this colony on suffer-
ance. Methodism is not here on sufferance. Protestantism is not
here on sufferance. Christianity is not here on sufferance. We
are here by the right of men ; we are here by the rights of our
history as a Protestant people; and if the government of the
country is to be conducted by the people for the people, then the
government of this country must be conducted according to
Christian principles, and in a Christian manner. Unsectarianism
has come to be interpreted as secularism, secularism has come to
be interpreted as atheism, and atheism resolves itself very swiftly,
and by an irrepressible and determined instinct, into unchristianism.
Now, I ask, is this country to be governed by an anti-Christian
policy, or ruled or administered with an anti-Christian feeling ? Is
unsectarianism to be interpreted as a cold, conscienceless, godless
secularism ? Is secularism to be resolved from a negative into a
.positive atheism ? And is that atheism to arm itself against all that
and positively Christian ? If the government of this
gauntry is to be administered on such principles, and on such
[feelings, let it be so said, let us be challenged, and we accept the
ldo not speak for myself alone. I know that I speak
man in this Conference—and for every member of our
Church, and adherents, throughout the colony; and I say that, so
far as we are concerned—so far as we have any moral influence—
so far as we have any political influence, we are determined that
the government of this country shall not be administered in an
unchristian feeling.”
4.—Alleged Impossibility of a National Religious
Service in Victoria.
In an address delivered at Manchester, Bishop Moorhouse is
reported to have said :—“ When I was in Victoria, I found that no
politician dare invite any Christian minister to ask God’s blessing
on so simple an occasion as the opening of an Exhibition. Very
few were present at that ceremony who would not have been pleased
to join in some public recognition of the Divine goodness which had
blessed the labours and products of the colony. Many told me
that they went away, not only with a chill at the heart, but also
with a boding fear that so conspicuous an ignoring of the Divine
goodness would give to the young the unconscious impression that
things might go on very well in this world without any reference to
its Maker. Now, why was this impression produced ?—why was
this neglect suffered ? Just because there was no church connected
with the State, and because the State dare not give the preference
to any sect not connected with it.”


I have already shown that there was no insurmountable difficulty
in the way of including a religious service in the opening ceremony
of the last Exhibition. If the Governor for the time being had
asked his own clergyman to conduct snch a service, all good men
would have rejoiced. Or if the Government had asked the heads of
the denominations to arrange such a service, the thing would have
been done with perfect ease. If the late Bishop had mingled more
freely with his brethren when he was here, he would have dis-
covered that, even if the Government had applied to him—as the
chief dignitary in Melbourne of ihe largest denomination—to take
that service in hand, they would not have resented the act;
although they might have said that, inasmuch as all denominations
stood on the level ground of perfect equality here, it ought to be
understood that all such services should, in future, be conducted, un-
der arrangement, by the heads of the churches.
In that same address, the Bishop put forward a remarkable argu-
ment for a Church establishment. If the Church of England were
released from State control her freedom would become a peril to
the State. He said :—“ It is important for the State to have its
hand upon the laws and administration of the most powerful body
of Christians within it, because, if it has not, it may suffer serious
abridgment of its legitimate authority. If the State may not touch
the church of the great mass of the nation at any one point, it may
soon find itseTrin opposition to a body too powerful to be controlled,
I have just come from a colony where the Roman Catholics
number quite a fourth of the population, and yet I have seen
the Roman Catholic vote, brought down solidly like a sledge ha.-nfl
shatter to pieces one of the strongest Governments ever
in the colony. If the Church of England were once clean
the national organization, you would have to deal with a
influential body, legislating freely in directions which
dangerous, and acting with a unanimity which in times of crisis
might shatter the most powerful Governments again and again ;
and, therefore, statesmen ought not to let go their hold upon the
laws and administration of such a church.”
Surely the Bishop had not considered the appearance which this
argument would have, or the accusatory position in which it seemed
to place him. It makes him look as if he had no confidence in the
patriotism or piety of the rulers and members of his church—in their
loyalty to their country —or their allegiance to their Lord. He be-
lieved that they would lend themselves to political intrigues, and, re-
fusing to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, would seek to
abridge the legitimate authority of the State ; and that they might
seize the opportunity of working these mischiefs at some national
crisis—when the State had lost its hands, and the great mass of the
nation (which compose the church) had become uncontrollable.
If I thought that the Christian Chnrches of Victoria were capable
of falling into such base uses of their power, I would not ask the
State to lay hold upon their laws and put fetters on their actions.
I would ask the Lord and Head of the Church to sweep them from
the face of the earth.
That the Church of Rome should do such things is neither


wohderful nor is it (in the same way) blamable. She has'never ab-
dicated her temporal dominion. She claims the right of the Sword,
as well as of the Keys—and does not scruple to use both in the
interests of the Papacy. But that fact is an argument—not for, but
against the assertion (at leaet if it is extended beyond the Church of
England) that the freedom of the Protestant Churches carries
in gremio a menace and a danger to the State.
Here, at least in Victoria, the State is of a different mind—
otherwise it would not have been so anxious to break the slender
hold which it possessed over the churches through State-aid. And
if I am reminded here of my own argument, and am told that the
State has no apprehension of evil from our churches—because of
their weakness through manifold divisions—but that if the proposal
of a United Council were adopted, they might fancy that they saw
the germ of a powerful political engine in'it, —I cannot help that.
But I think that I am entitled to refer to the now established
character of the churches of Victoria, as a sufficient safeguard
against such a danger. And the possible abuse of unacknowledged
good is never accepted now as a sufficient reason-' for its entire
rejection. *
5 Rtampomt . .JL *1
5. —BfANCONI.
Though not an Irishman, few names were
~r Ireland some years ago than that of Bianconi.
mails over 2000 miles. He began life by run
|||Ai Cork to Killarney. Almost nobody travelled
wiOn
:d'^Fhe
-y . •** - - - «***« n,
it to be extinguished, when, fortunately, an opposition car
led on the same road and at the same timje. Then the Irish spirit
■tizanship took fire, and were filled—and both paid
BBy-and-by, it leaked ouf that Bianconi was the owner of
W Competition is not always a bad thing.
lianconi had to run the mails every day of the week. His
horses got no weekly rest. But he found that all work and no rest
ruined them. So he knocked off each horse every tenth day ; then,
by way of experiment, every ninth ; then every eighth; and when
be reached every seventh, he found that was the most economical
interval. He calculated that it effected a saving of fully ten per
cent, npon the value of his horses. I heard that story from Sir
Andrew Agnew—who was acquainted with him.
And I was informed by Mr. Lamb—the Superintendent of the
P. & O. fleet at Southampton—that his iron steamers which sailed
on weekdays and rested on Sundays, ’asted much better, propor-
tionately, than those which made long voyages without rest.
If neither of these instances afford an argument for the Lord’s-
Day rest—they do furnish a proof that all organized matter and
all machinerj', living or lifeless, which is kept in motion and at work,
require a periodical cessation and rest, that they may resume
their normal state.
Goo. Mercer, Stationer, Printer, <fec., Geelong.
16
FlSt,/
APPENDIX.
