

FACTS
ABOUT ODESELVES AND THE
LAND WE LIVE IN.
Historical! Illustrated!! Descriptive!!!
THE “010 HE ;? OUR
GUIDE to SORRENTO
THE FIRST SETTLEMENT IN VICTORIA.
SIXPENCE.


PERMANENT
Building $ Association
(FOUNDED 1874.)
OFFICE: 54 COLLINS STREET EAST.
TOTAL INCOME LAST YEAR, 1887 £801,570.
■ I ■) oQc In
Fixed Shares
In order to give perfect stability to this Association, the creation of a Fixed Capital by
the issue of Fixed Shares of £5 each, fully paid up, was in June of 1885 commenced. 35,000
of these Shares have already been taken up, and they are still procurable at a Premium
of £3 pen Share.
Investing Shares —£25 each.
These Shares can be taken up at any time, and the contribution upon them is One
Shilling per Share per fortnight.
The holders of the First Issue of these Shares received, in October, 1885, £26 Is. 9d. in
cash, towards which sum they had contributed only £l4 65,, at the rate of One Shilling a
fortnight for eleven years.
SAVINGS BANK BBANCH
To persons who desire to put by small sums of uncertain amount, and who wish to
secure Interest upon such Sums at a Fair Rate and for every day that their
Deposits remain in the Bank, this Branch offers the very best opportunity.
Depositors in this Branch receive Five per Cent, per Annum upon their Daily
Balance.
Hon. JOHN NIMMO, M.P., J.P., Chairman,
JAMES MIR AMS, Secretary.
SUBSCRIBED CAPITAL - £444,750.
PAID-UP CAPITAL ----- £206,685.


FACTS ( continued). page
Governors of Australian Colonies -6
Agents-General 47
Gold . 60
Centennial Exhibition 62
The Genius of Exploration 61
The Pacific Ocean ... ... 42
The World’s Area and Population 42
Area of the Australian Colonies ... 43
43
Statis ics 45
Aborigines ... 46
ILLUSTRATIONS.
PAGE
Steamer Ozone Title.
The Pile Light 9
View of Sorrento Pier 10
Netting by Moonlight 13
The Sphinx Rock Itj
Buckley's Cave 21
Old Graves 22
John Darby shire 22
The Heads and QueenscliS 26
The Omeo Running Down the Pile Light... 33
Sto> m at the Oce«n Beach 36
Fishing 52
DESCRIPTIVE.
The Ozone ... 7
Sorrento 10
The Ocean Amphitheatre 35
The Queen's Walk to Jubilee Point 17
The Wild White Man 21
John Darbyshire .. 22
FACTS.
District of Port Philip 28
Almai ao for 1888 35
HISTORICAL.
Discovery of Australia ■■ ■ 48
Name of Australia 49
New Holla> d 49
New South Wales 49
Victoria 38
Sou'h Australia 53
Tasmania 50
Queensland .. .. 53
Western Australia ... 54
New Zeala d 51
Captain Cook’s Voyages 55
Bans and Flmaers 53
Story of Fliaders .. 58
La Peronse 59
Governors of Victoria 33
ADVERTISEMENTS,
ONSDALE HOUSE,
SORRENTO.
SUPERIOR BOARD AND RESIDENCE.
Beautiful Sea View. Three Minutes’ Walk from Baths and Pier.
Visitors will find the Best Accommodation, and receive Every Attention.
Communications by post or wire promptly attended to. Waggonette meets Steamers.
D. COUSINS, Proprietor.
Franklin House,
NEAR THE BEACH.
Board & Residence, 30s. per Week.
Trap attends all Steamers. Luggage Free
JOHN WATSON, Proprietor l .
TO LET,
STONE COTTAGE, 6 Rooms. Furnished, £4 per week. Apply JOHN WATSON.


KNIFE’S ROYAL EXCHANGE AUCTION MART.
Mr. J. H. Knife’s judg-
ment, ability, and experience
as an Estate Auctioneer and
Manager for Freehold Proper-
ties excels that of any other
man in Victoria.
One source of his success is
from the fact that he declines
to undertake the Sale of any
Freehold Property where the
seller desires to fix a price above
its legitimate market value.
Every Estate he has sold,
each of the purchasers could
realise treble profit upon their
outlay.
Established January, 1854.
Millions sterling profit have
been realised by transactions in
Freehold Properties that have
taken place in this the oldest
and premier Auction Mart in
Australia.
The position of the Royal
Exchange Auction Mart, and
superior accommodation of the
premises, commands the attend-
ance of at least two hundred
enterprising gentlemen whenever
a Freehold Property is submitted
to public competition by auction.
1 on ma r
io;' shs'#.1!2
mmWM ipnptP 1
50 COLLINS STREET, Corner Queen Street, MELBOURNE.
J
ADVERTISEMENTS


ADVERTISEMENTS.
IMPORTANT NOTICE.
Drapery, Woollens & Clothing,
CARPETS, LINOLEUMS, FURNITURE, 4c.,
AT ACTUAL WHOLESALE PRICES!
From the Importers and Manufacturers,
Craig, Williamson 4 Thomas,
6, 14 & 16 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.
C. W. & T. are the only Importing, Manufacturing, and Wholesale Firm in the
colony supplying the public with large or small quantities, or a single garment, at
Wholesale Rates, or, in other words, at a saving of the retail profit—fully 30 per cent.
By the arrival of the P. and 0. and Orient mails weekly C. W. & T. are placed in
possession of the Latest Fashions, as they receive shipments by each steamer.
The Goods Comprise
Millinery, Mantles, Ulsters, Costumes, Jackets, Dolmans, Laces, Embroi-
deries, Ribbons, Hosiery, Gloves, Dress Material, Cashmeres, Merinos,
Silks, Satins, Umbrellas, Parasols, Fancy Goods, Blankets, Flannels,
Sheetings, Table Cloths, Napkins, Cretonnes, Towels, Shirtings, &c., &c.,
Gent’s, Youths,’ and Boys’ Clothing, Hats, Shirts, Collars, Scarfs, Woollens
and Tweeds, Portmanteaus, Trunks, Gladstone Bags, Railway Rugs,
Waterproof Clothing, &c.
The Carpet Stock embraces all the best makes in Brussels, Tapestry, Wilton,
Kidder, &c., and the stock of Linoleums is the largest in the city.
The Furniture Department Includes
Drawing, Dining, and Bedroom Furniture, Hall, Library, and Office Fur-
niture, Kitchen Furniture, Bedsteads and Bedding, Wire Mattresses,
Perambulators, Toilet Sets, Brackets, Ornaments, Cornices, Overmantels,
and every requisite for House Furnishing.
The Public are requested to inspect the Stock at the Warehouses.
Patterns and Quotations will be forwarded on application.
The hours of business are 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Saturdays, 9 a.m. to 1 p.m.
Clire, WILUAMSQH & 11011$,
Importers & Jfitrmtee (*(tl:mbo«sfinm,
6,14 &16 Elizabeth St., Melbourne, 17 AlB Basinghull St, London.




BAY EXCURSION TRIPS.
The Magnificent New and Fast Steel Paddle Steamer
“OZONE,”
F. W. STRICKLAND, Commander,
Will run as under (weather permitting):—
TO QUEENSCLIFF & SORRENTO.
Leaving
Return.
From the Port Melbourne Railway Pier to
Sorrento, via Queenscliff.
Sorrento.
Queenscliff.
Every Saturday
Every Sunday ...
Every Monday ...
Every Tuesday ...
Every Wednesday
Every Thursday
2 p.m.
11.10 a.m.
10.30 a.m.
10.30 a.m.
10.30 a.m.
10.30 a.m.
4.80 p.m.
4 p.m.
4 p.m.
4 p.m.
4 p.m.
4 p.m.
4 p.m.
4.40 p.m.
4.40 p m.
4.40 p.m.
4.40 p.m.
4.40 p.m.
FARES.
Ordinary Days -Single, 2s. 6d.
Day Return, 4s.
Monthly Tickets, £1 XOs.
Season Tickets, £5 ss.
The last trains in connection with the Ozone leave Flinders-street Station
at 1.45 p.m. on Saturdays, 11 a.m. on Sundays, 10.15 a.m. other days.
The Bay Excursion Co., Limited
123 COLLINS STREET WEST.


l Bros. As
LIMITED.
£S?9
P 0
•( CUTLERY
SPOONS.FORKS )
KiLJJ; 7 1 h£ w^rnymwm
Ills 'Jltpfffl
u rSiO/ ,i,
Hllb
T "
VI
12
fMz
f\^' C .-
i >|ir ™ - 1 v
1 M U
gj
1 i^sS^
■ . - - ?
|
HALL & UMBRELLA STANDS ||
SaW J:^j,s<fm
69
ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.


FACTS
COLLECTED FOR CENTENNIAL INFORMATION,
That the general public should know so little of “ the land we live in”
is very much to be regretted, and suggests the following extracts from
Blair’s “ Cyclopaedia of Australasia,” Bonwick’s and J. W. Rusden’a
“Discovery of Port Phillip,” “Lessons for State Schools,” and “The
Victorian Year Book,” by H. H. Hayter, C.M.G. The illustrations have
been obtained from the Sketcher and the Illustrated Australian News.
SORRENTO.
Labouring art can never ransom Nature
From her inadable estate.
— Shakespear,
This Guide will direct the reader to the site of the first settlement
established in Victoria, 1803. The subject also suggests a summarised
account of the discoverers of Australia, with other historical items that will
be found interesting and instructive. We are indebted to Mr. Ooppin,
M.L.A., for originating cheap recreation trips down the Bay by forming a
company to purchase the New Zealand steamer Golden Crown in 187 G. At
that time the fare by the tug boat Williams was 20s. for a return ticket to
Sorrento, and 15s. to Queenscliff. The Golden Crown commenced running
at 7s. 6d. return, extending over three days, and ss. excursions. The
magnificent new and fast steel paddle steamer Ozone has made a further
reduction, to the advantage of the public, and, by her superior speed and
accommodation,
A TRIP DOWN THE BAY
has now developed into an absolute necessity. A human being may live
long on a scanty diet; he may neglect exercise, bathing, and other means of
vigorous health with more or less impunity; but without wholesome air or
lung food he will sicken as surely as the herb without moisture and light.
To fulfil the purpose of respiration the human chest expands and contracts
upwards of 20,000 times in the twenty-four hours. Upon an average
about 40 hogsheads of air are taken into the lungs every twenty-four hours,
and the same amount is thrown out again. The lungs and skin of a human
being render three and a half cubic feet of air impure every minute, or two
hundred and ten every hour, so that the air contained in an unventilated
room eight feet by ten and eight feet high is vitiated and rendered unfit for
respiration by one person in about three hours.
THE “OZONE”
was built on the Clyde, and was brought out by the late Captain John
M'Lean in ninety-two days, including stoppages at Gibraltar, Malta, Port
Said, Aden, Columbo, Batavia, Thursday Island, and Townsville. She is
260 feet in length, 28 feet in breadth, and 11 feet in depth, and the accom-
modation on her three well-proportioned decks is such that she could carry
2000 passengers. The internal arrangements for the comfort and convenience
of all who may travel by this steamer are of the most complete and elaborate


description. The dining saloon, in which 100 could sit down to dine
with the utmost comfort, is fitted up in a luxurious style in polished
Hungarian ash, with heavily-gilded mouldings and capitals, and with hand-
painted panels, representing different designs in flowers and birds. The
ceiling is a marvel of carved woodwork. The dining tables are so arranged
as to meet the requirements of either large or small parties, and at the
entrance of the saloon, on the left-hand side, is fitted up a handsome bar,
with all the latest improvements. Immediately above the dining apart-
ments is a ladies’ saloon, which is furnished and upholstered in a most
elegant manner. Forward are other commodious saloons, ladies’ and
gentlemen’s dressing-rooms (the floors of which are all tiled), smoking
rooms, and bar. The promenade deck occupies almost the entire length of
the vessel. The Ozone has been fitted throughout (including side and head
lights) with the electric light of Messrs. Anderson and Munro, of Glasgow,
there being 70 lamps in all, and the dynamo is driven by one of Chandler’s
patent high-speed engines. The machinery of the Ozone has been made by
Messrs. Rankin and Blackmore, of the Eagle Foundry, Greenock. It
consists of a pair of compound diagonal engines, of 314 nominal horse-
power, which developed the extraordinary indicated horse-power of 2680,
with 47 revolutions per minute, equal to a piston speed of 517 feet (the
highest yet obtained in any paddle steamer), and drove the vessel at the
trial at the unprecedented average rate of twenty-one miles per hour on
four consecutive runs. Her addition to the list of excursion steamers
cannot fail to add largely to the growing traffic between the watering places
of the harbour and the city.
Commodore John M'Lean has passed away. All honour to his memory.
It was a rash trip, old friend, at your age, in failing health, to undertake the
charge of a frail bay steamer for 15,000 miles, in rough seas and unhealthy
climes, with only bunker room for forty tons of coal—less than three days’
supply. But who shall control a will and heart like yours—resolved to
benefit his wife and bairns I
One that cares for thee,
And for thy maintenance, commits his body
To painful labour, both by sea and land,
To watch the night in storms.
You did your work bravely, honest tar, and lost your life in the service.
It was very sad, last season, for old friends to look upon the fever-stricken
wreck of an active man, with shaken nerves, upon the bridge of the Ozone,
and call to mind the days of the Victoria and Duncan Hoyle, when the
reckless H.F. Jack used to make the Yarra boatmen clear the way before
him. Honest, skilful, popular, and kind ; a devoted husband, loving father,
sincere friend, and model specimen of a British sailor. Dear old Mac., you
will long live in the memory of those who knew you best.
The King is dead I Long live the King!
Captain Strickland, you are welcome, although we mourn the loss of
your predecessor. You know the ropes, you are familiar with the Bay
excursion trade, and we feel perfectly safe under your command. May you
occupy the bridge with credit to yourself, satisfaction to the public, and
advantage to your owners.
If the writer were to describe, even in the most moderate terms, the marvellous
effect Sorrento has had upon the health and constitution of his large small
family he would be accused of “ blowing.” He has, therefore, compiled the
opinions of others for the information of the public. The fact of the temperature
being twenty degrees below Melbourne and the Queenscliff side of the bay upon a
scorching north wind day is accounted for by the great space of water over which
the air must travel before it can arrive at Sorrento. The wonderful cures effected
by a short residence at Sorrento—the rapid progress of Sorrento—the favourable
impression Sorrento has made in public opinion—-the excellent hotel accommoda-


NINETY DEGREES IN THE SHADE.
Melbourne on a hot wind day is one of the show places of the Southern
Hemisphere. Standing at any of the intersections of Collins, Bourke, or
Flinders streets one gets a magnificent view of a huge volume of dust,
which fills the street as well as the eyes, nose, and ears. Little mud pies
collect in the corners of the eyes without adding to one’s beauty. The
thermometer stands at 90deg. in the shade—goodness knows how much in
the sun. As one by one they pass, listless and inert, you are struck with
the total absence of anything like life or activity, which is the attribute of
our Melbourne business man; the hot wind and dust have conquered, for
the time being, at all events. Let us see if the suburbs present any
difference. Visiting them all in turn, from aristocratic Toorak to plebeian
Collingwood, the same parched and thoroughly done-up look is apparent.
The dust fiend is in possession everywhere. Inside the houses wives and
families are in a state of utter collapse. Scanty attire and cool drinks bring
no relief. A stranger seeing them now would scarcely recognise the
animated and vigorous walkers of the block. Can nothing be done ?la
there no place where one can escape the fiery blast ?
It really seems absurd that people should, and do, suffer in this way
when, for the sum of 3d., they are conveyed in a special train to the pier at
Port Melbourne, and, for an additional 45., a return ticket can be purchased
to Sorrento by the magnificent s.s. Ozone
After getting well
clear of the harbour,
and taking our adieu
of H.M.S. Nelson,
the Cerberus, torpedo
boats, and other
naval objects of in-
terest, a perceptible
THE PILE LIGHT
change takes place
in respiration; your
spirits begin to rise,
your limbs become
elastic, and mutual
congratulations are
exchanged that we
are clear of the dust.
is a guide to the channel we have to follow. After a delightful trip,
lasting only two hours, to Queenscliff, during which period passengers
can regale themselves with choice refreshments of every descrip-
tion, we make another start for Sorrento, and experience a practical
illustration that the temperature at this favoured spot upon a hot wind day
is always 20deg. lower than Melbourne, Queenscliff, or any other place upon
that side of the Bay. The reason is not hard to find. The wind from the
north blows straight from Port Melbourne to the Heads ; it has no heated
land to pass over on its way to Sorrento, and arrives there cool and bracing
from its contact with the sea water. No other locality is so surrounded by
water for its protection from heat in summer and cold in winter. On one
side we have the Bay, and on the other the Southern Ocean, only a narrow
mile of land dividing them. No wonder Sorrento is preferred by all who
wish to enjoy the pure ozone. Once landed, the cabs convey you to the
Ocean Beach in ten minutes, where the day seems far too short. In vain
tion to be obtained at Sorrento —and the substantial increase in the value of
property—has thoroughly established this healthy and popular seaside resort as
the nucleus of a large and important city.


one now searches for the listless look and hot, tired appearance so apparent
at starting; it has vanished, and, in its stead, .smiles, beaming eyes, and
vigorous exertion attest the power of the bracing atmosphere. This
has been accomplished at a cost of 55., and all return to Melbourne
o
h
2
W
Pi
Pi
O
w
delighted with themselves, the steamer, and the beauties of Sorrento. The
Pile Light was run down by the Omeo (see illustration , page 33). There is
now a round ship in its place.


Upon landing from the steamer, public works in progress will be noticed
that ought to have been completed months ago —the inevitable result of
being governed by a Council thirteen miles distant without a resident repre-
sentative.
THE IMPROVEMENTS AT THE PIER
will be a great comfort to visitors, relieving them from the annoyance of
lime and coal dust.
THE NEW ESPLANADE,
when planted with grass, trees, and shrubs, fenced in, and with comfortable
seats erected, will be a great convenience.
THE PUBLIC BATH
is, beyond all doubt, superior to any in the colony. It contains upwards of
a million gallons of water, and, as the picket enclosure extends into the Bay
900 feet, a constant change of pure water takes place through the rise and
fall of the tide, which runs from one to three miles an hour; the depth
ranges from two to twelve feet. A clean sandy bottom, strong briny water,
transparent as crystal, secured by a fence to exclude large fish; convenient
dressing-rooms, and thorough cleanliness. (For particulars see Advertise-
ment on back of cover.)
THE FIRST WELL—SUNK IN 1803.
The many historical facts associated with Sorrento renders it the most
interesting spot (as it is the most charming) in the colony of Victoria.
Traces of the old settlement are distinct in the vicinity of The Sisters.
One of the original wells—believed to be the first ever sunk—has been
restored for the free use of the public, and the shade of the scrub gives
special advantages to picnic parties. The water is perfectly fresh, and yet
it rises and falls with the tide. A drink from “ the first well,” with an open-
air repast in the shades of the ti-tree upon the settlement ground of 1808, is an
event which the lovers of history with a taste for the romantic must
thoroughly enjoy.
When you land at the pier, follow the new Esplanade and beach to the
left until you come to the well. The distance is about half a mile.
The Path to the Right
takes you Ip
THE SORRENTO PARK.
It is a Government reserve, planted with English trees, adjoining the
marine residences of His Honour Judge Kerferd, H. W. Danby, Esq., J.P.;
W. Peacock, and J. B. Wilson, Esq., J.P. Beds and walks have been laid
out with great taste, and provide a most charming promenade upon a
summer’s evening, and a delightful spot for picnic parties.
From Edward Barker, M.D., F.R.C.S., Eng.
I have known Sorrento since 1840, having lived several years in its vicinity. I
can confidently state that I consider it one of the most healthy and restoring
residences in the colony of Victoria, and in confirmation of this opinion, that,
after receiving a poisoned wound last year, I went there and derived great advan-
tage to my health.
53 Latrobe-street East. Edward Barker, M.D., F.RC.S., Eng.


THE PROTESTANT CHURCH
is a substantial stone building, erected by public subscription. Church
service is conducted by the Rev. A. P. Chase, 8.A., every Sunday evening
at 7.30, and in the morning when practicable. The building is, unfortunately,
too small for the requirements of Sorrento during the summer season.
Assistance is solicited to make necessary additions. Rev. A. P. Chase,
Incumbent.
THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH
is situated upon Constitution Hill. The allotment of ground presented by
the Nuns occupies an elevated site adjoining the proposed
Nunnery and Sanatorium.
A COURT OF PETTY SESSIONS
is held in the Mechanics’ Institution on the first Thursday in January,
March, May, July, September, and November, at 11 o’clock. Francis Hare,
Esq., Police Magistrate. Local Magistrates—G. S. Coppin, M.L.A.; Robert
Anderson, John Cain, Dr. Browning, and H. W. Danby. J. Hiskens, Clerk
of Petty Sessions. Constable Nolan is in charge of the district.
STATE SCHOOL, No. 1090,
wap erected partly by local contributions and partly by Government aid.
It is an architectural ornament to the place, and the results are very satis-
factory—under new programme, 87-161, The school is most ably con-
ducted by Mr. and Mrs. Hiskens, who command the attention and affection
of the children. Number on roll, 97.
AMUSEMENTS.
Excellent fishing can always be obtained in the Bay. The charge for
boating is very moderate, including hand lines and bait. At low water, in
the Ocean, rods can be used with advantage, the variety and size of the fish
giving very exciting sport.
From John Blair, M.D., F.R.C.S., Eng.
Sorrento. —This favourite watering-place offers peculiar advantages to the
invalid and to the man seeking healthful repose from overwork. The air is pure
and invigorating, and, on account of topographical advantages, the hot winds of
summer, with their enervating effects, are scarcely felt, the temperature at
Sorrento being at such times some 20deg. below that of Melbourne. The climate is
delightfully equable, much resembling that of Tasmania. I have been much
struck with the rapid improvement in the general condition of valetudinarians
after a few weeks’ residence at that favoured locality. The bathing-ground at
Sorrento, on account of the beautiful sandy bottom and the purity of the water, is
all that could be desired. For those having piscatorial proclivities there are fish
in abundance in the land-locked bay ; and, while enjoying the exhilarating
influence of the highly-ozonised atmosphere of the leach, refreshingly diffused by
the ceaseless roll of the ocean, the pleasure-seeker may amuse himself by catching
crayfish, which are here very plentiful. I am satisfied that Sorrento, from its
great natural advantages, is destined to become par excellence the watering-place
of Victoria.
John Blair, M. 1),, F.R.C.S., Eng.


Netting by Moonlight.
A lovely scene and interesting sport.
How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank!
Here will we sit, and let the sounds of music creep on our ears.
Guns will find constant employment, as thousands of rabbits, with
occasional hares, wallaby, and kangaroos, can easily be bagged. Cabs,
waggonettes, and saddle horses for hire at the hotels. Concerts, balls,
horse and boat racing, swimming matches, and croquet tournaments take
place during the season. Books can be obtained by subscribers to the Free
Public Library.
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION.
The Sorrento Hotel
is a fine, large building, capable of accommodating one hundred visitors. It
is only two hundred yards from the pier, and directly opposite. Beautiful
grounds surround the hotel, which give it a quiet and private appearance ;
attached to the hotel, for the amusement of its visitors, are pleasure grounds,
dancing pavilion, bowling alley, and gymnasium. The tariff is moderate,
being 50s. per week for adults, and half price for children. Mr. and Mrs.
Bensilum, so long and favourably known in connection with this hotel, still
continue to look after the comfort of their patrons. (For Advertisement , see
coloured page in centre of hook.)
From The Hon. James Geo. Beaney, M.D., P.R.C.S.
To the convalescent who requires a decided change of air and scene, without
going far from home, I would say go to Sorrento.
There he will soon recover the vis vitae which disease has stolen from him;
there he will speedily attain a mens sana in corpore sano.
James Geo. Beaney, F.R.C.S.


The Continental Hotel.
This extensive establishment was designed and erected, at a cost of
.£12,000, upon the most modern plans. Large entrance hall, wide passages,
noble staircases, grand dining saloon, ladies’ drawing-room, with piano;
comfortable sitting rooms for families, spacious bedrooms, under the
direction of Mrs. Spearing; excellent billiard-room, convenient writing-
room. The ventilation throughout the house is perfect in every room.
Extensive verandahs, concert hall, available for balls; magnificent view
from the tower, excellent stables, saddle and harness horses, cabs, wag-
gonettes, and buggies. This “ Palace Hotel” has been thoroughly repaired and
decorated, at a cost of .£lOOO, for the present season, and has been leased
for a period of five years by Mr, C. Brougham Spearing, late general
manager of the Deniliquin Royal Hotel Freehold Company, Limited, whose
long experience in connection with large hotels and well-known popularity
will ensure him a liberal share of public patronage. Mr. Spearing
announces a Bottle Department at Melbourne grocers' prices. This will, no
doubt, be found a great convenience to picnic parties.
The Two Hotels
are unsurpassed in the Australian colonies for accommodation, comfort, and
moderate charges.
Lonsdale House
is a private boarding establishment, next to the Continental Hotel, and
opposite to the residence of the Hon. James Service, Constitution Hill. It
contains well-ventilated rooms and good beds. Mr. D. Cousens, the lessee,
gave great satisfaction last season by an excellent table, moderate charges,
unremitting attention, with all the comforts of a home.
Other Boarding Houses,
more particularly those of Mr. J. T. Holmes and Mr. John Watson, will be
found very comfortable.
Provisions
of every description can be obtained at the well-stocked stores of Messrs.
Hurley, Holmes, and Sullivan.
Four Cottages
are advertised for sale, with furniture, for ,£1350. With money at 6 per
cent., .£2O a year would provide a furnished cottage with 5 rooms—a
comfort that is within the reach of every well-to-do family.
Sorrento possesses a mean annual temperature of between 59deg. and 60deg.
This is higher than that of any health resort I have yet heard of. The diurnal
variation is exceedingly small, and there is only one instance of frost having
occurred on record. The rainfall is less than that of Melbourne. The heat is
always from 10-14 degrees less than in Melbourne. It is protected in every
quarter from wind except on the N. and K.E., whence blow the hot winds, but
these lose their terrors here, for they are cooled and moistened by crossing the
bay, and laden with ozone, iodine, and bromine from the salt water, instead of
dust and other impurities. These winds, therefore, are rather advantageous than
otherwise. Sorrento is better than Algiers, which it resembles in this respect.
The mean temperature of Ventnor is 41-80 deg. in winter, and 49'&2deg. in spring,
whilst the rainfall is 29in. Melbourne occupies about the same position south of
the equator that Madeira does north of the line; therefore Sorrento may well be


THE POST AND TELEGRAPH OFFICE
is opposite to the Continental Hotel. Mails by every steamer; overland
daily.
MECHANICS’ INSTITUTION AND FREE PUBLIC
LIBRARY
is open daily. A good supply of books. (For Advertisement, see page 64.)
THE OCEAN AMPHITHEATRE
(From Hiscock and Co.'s Map of Victoria )
is a most charming retreat, facing Bass’s Straits, between Point Nepean
and Cape Schanck. At low water, nature’s aquariums, plentifully supplied
with fish and sea vegetation of great variety, are most interesting and
curious.
Free accommodation has been provided for picnic parties by the erection
of tables and seats. It is backed by the Ocean Park, an extensive Govern-
ment reserve, abounding with rabbits. A good road connects it with the
Sorrento pier, a distance of one mile.
The direct way upon leaving the pier is to follow the Bay to the left
until you arrive at the Amphitheatre-road ; it is then a straight line.
THE ROTUNDA
is an extensive bower, in which the Government picnic was given in 1875,
This most enjoyable entertainment was substituted for the established
whitebait dinner, and enabled ladies to participate in the political festival of
the Kerferd Government —a novel event which will long be remembered
with great satisfaction.
A well of pure, fresh water has been provided for the free use of the
public. Attention is directed to the Government Regulations.
AQUARIUM POINT
is attractive to the sportsman and naturalist. A great variety of fish can be
taken by the angler, whilst the difference in beauty and character of the
marine vegetation supplies a very interesting The shells, anemones,
and other deposits will liberally reward the seeker of curiosities for an
aquarium.
said to rival that popular old health resort. The temperature of the sea is more
equable than that of the land, owing to the action of currents and to the circula-
tion of its waters under the influence of heat; its superficial temperature is
warmer in winter and cooler in summer—more equable—than that of the land.
It thus has a tendency to warm in winter and cool in summer the land which it
encompasses. Maritime climates—which Sorrento will represent—participate in
these influences, and for this reason most of the winter sanatoriums have been
chosen in islands or on the coasts of oceans and seas. Continental climates
exhibit reverse conditions, unless you gee up very high. Dry, sandy elevations
are always comparatively warm. The Melaleuca, or ti-tree £crub, which exists on
the heights of Sorrento, is sard to have therapeutic properties similar to the
eucalyptus.
Feed. W. Elsnek.


THE SPHINX ROCK
is an enigma in this locality,
from its very peculiar for-
mation. Unlike its monster
namesake, who destroyed
herself because OH dipus
solved her riddle, this rock
was formed, and is also
being destroyed, by the rage
and fury of the sea.
ST. DAVID’S CHAIR
is a curious rock some fifty feet above the level of the sea, approachable by
naturally-shaped steps. Its form is that of a large chair, surrounded by
smaller chairs. In 1875 a congregation of Welshmen assembled upon the
spot, and resolved to christen this natural seat St. David’s Chair.
The Invalid’s Walk to
COPPIN MOUNT
takes you half round the Amphitheatre, and will be found an easy grade,
with a plentiful supply of seats. Any fatigue that may be experienced in
ascending the mount will be amply repaid by the exquisite view, the
invigorating breeze, and the comfortable rotunda.
THE REFRESHMENT STALL
will supply tea, coffee, temperance drinks, cakes, fruit, etc., etc., of first-class
quality, at moderate prices.
AN ADDITIONAL SHED,
with table and seats, has been erected this season. At no other seaside
resort in the colonies are there to be found such facilities for obtaining so
many lovely views with such a small amount of fatigue. Great care has
been taken to make the gradients easy ; the metal is well set, and has the
appearance of asphalt. Taken altogether, there are few walks so well
suited to the robust and infirm alike ; one can enjoy the lovely views as
they open out, together with the pleasure of walking on a hard, clean, and
well-kept road, to say nothing of the ozone from the great Southern Ocean
right at their feet. As a guide to visitors we give a few of the most
prominent features along
From T. Naghten Fitzgerald, R.C.S.
It is now 14 years ago since I first visited Sorrento. Being then so struckjjjby
the many natural advantages of the retreat, I determined to recommend all
patients requiring pure sea air to that now recognised and justly favourite
watering-place.
Having sent a large number of invalids there, I feel now called upon to say, in
justice to the “ pictftresque little peninsula,” that every case was benefited more
or less by the change, my own family included.
Lonsdale-street West. T, Naghten Fitzgerald.


THE QUEEN’S WALK TO JUBILEE POINT.
(One mile in length.) , : , ;l
From this elevation can be seen on the one side Cape Schanck, and all the
magnificent panorama of rocky indentations; on the right, Points Lonsdale
and Nepean, with the Barwon Heads and Cape Otway in the .distance.
The immediate rocks beneath this point are extremely beatrtifhl and
fantastic ; two, standing together, through which, the ocean ebbs and flows,
have been called
THE BROTHERS.
Visitors will at once recognise them from their resemblance to Aach other.
In their immediate vicinity a long, low wall of rocks, even as though built
by masons, seems specially left there to protect The Brothers from the fury
of the sea. This wall is very aptly termed
THE BREAKWATER.
The action of the waves in leaving this natural breakwater is curious; hr-
extends on the right side of Jubilee Point, and'half way round'thn Point
itself. Near The Brothers, and to the left, two large rocks stand boldly out,
surrounded by numerous smaller rocks ; the whole form a beautiful picture,
and are called
II xili : Job oJ Ifrw ?.!■'
FORT ROCKS, OR BAY OF ISLANDS. 0 J
■ J
The shelving sides of these two rocks are composed of sandstone and rock
of many different colours. They are stained and. weather-beaten, which gives
them a dark and forbidding appearance. Prom the Point they have all the
appearance of impregnable forts ; one can fancy heavy cannon peeping here
and there. They seem to be the watch-dogs for the many.small roclesi
surrounding them. ! * n ew
Having now described the scenery from Jubilee Point, we will retrace our
steps and commence at the beginning of the Queen’s Walk from the
Amphitheatre, and will enumerate the different points as we proceed.
After turning off the main road and rounding the first, cliff, We come upon
' fl i sin! JJn. : ; ; :9&
THE CAMPING GROUND,
so called from its being the favourite camping Aground of the blacks.
The look-out seaward is good. The ground hefe being table-land,, and
protected from strong winds, is suitable for camping, and before the
present road was formed picnicers were content to rest here after toiling
through the heavy sand. Rounding this point, we come upon
THE MIA MIA BOWER.
This is a natural bower of living ti-tree, the tops of which have been ent
as even as a carpet by the action of the wind. At one side a hole is formed,
through which the blacks entered. Its shape and size must have enabled
the blacks to congregate in large numbers beneath its leafy walls. Seats
are now provided underneath ; the temperature is always mhch lower here
1 d ■ V 'I
From E. T. West Pone, M.E.C.S.
I have much pleasure in l testifying to the salubrity of Sorrento. I consider
it perhaps the best seaside sanatorium that we havev dJI-sod -.1 •;•••> ni
108 Collins-etjrQet ; east. i F* I* Wfisr Poßny


than at any other part. It forms a delightful retreat, and will become the
favourite resort of warm and tired pedestrians. A few hundred yards
further we open out on
FISHING POINT STEPS,
commanding an excellent look-out, and close to the water. This was a
very dangerous point at one time. At low water there was no difficulty in
getting round, but with a rising tide and a rough sea it was impossible to
escape peril. To avoid this risk a flight of limestone steps has been built,
and a zig-zag cut, so that fishermen can now enjoy themselves without
anxiety. Rounding this point, we arrive at
PULPIT ROCK BAY,
reaching well back and presenting a fine stretch of beach at low tide.
Standing out in relief against the horizon is a large rock, most
remarkable in shape, having the appearance of a pulpit, with spiral staircase
attached. A dark mass on the top edge makes an excellent cushion, and it
would only require a giant minister to make the resemblance complete. A
sharp bend brings us to
VIEW POINT.
Artists will be delighted with the beauty of the numerous views visible
from this point. For the next two hundred yards the walk leaves the front
to escape a steep gradient, and brings us to
THE DESERT.
This is verily a miniature desert, nothing but sand and dead timber
being visible. Although a complete change, it has a saddening effect, and
we quickly pass again to the beach side, and look down with delight upon
ARCH ROCK.
It lies close under the cliff upon which we stand; the waves dash right
through the arch, and are hurled in foamy spray on to the golden beach.
Reluctantly we leave this enchanting spot, and pass on to
NATURE’S GARDEN.
In the centre of a small bay stands Garden Rock, and, after passing the
desert, the beauty of this spot presents a very delightful contrast. It is a
huge rock, covered on top with a curious vegetation, and has all the appear-
ance of a garden. How anything can live there is a mystery; no soil is
You ask me to give my opinion as to the salubrity of Sorrento. Of this I can
speak from personal experience, as I have frequently visited it, and always derived
an immense amount of benefit and pleasure from so doing. I have also sent down
many invalids to recruit, and in almost every case they have returned greatly
improved in health, and delighted with the place. Indeed, there are few places
that have its advantages as a sanitary resort. It has a soil free from impurities,
a temperature in hot weather greatly below that of Melbourne, and, I believe,
even that of Queenscliff; every facility for sea-bathing, and the enjoyment of the
surrounding scenery. In fact, Sorrento is a place I can safely recommend to those
in search of health or recreation.
113 Collins-street, 24th January, 1876. W. Gillbee, Surgeon.


visible on top, and the shape of the rock would prevent any moisture
remaining. From this spot a side view is obtained of Jubilee Point and the
Breakwater, previously mentioned. A peculiar opening in the side of
Jubilee Point has been called
THE SMUGGLERS’ SEAT.
The action of the wind has hollowed out part of the rock, composed of
rotten sandstone, which forms a natural seat. The surrounding cliffs and
bay suggest this significant name.
Our last bend brings us to Jubilee Point and the end of the present
Queen’s Walk. Here is erected a pretty rotunda, with seats and table for
the hungry picnicers. The whole walk of a mile has been accomplished
with ease and pleasure, the eyes alone being called upon for any exertion.
There is no doubt that, as soon as the beauty of this scenery is known,
artists and photographers will be at work, and by their pictures will
show that the Victorian public and all lovers of the beautiful and grand
need travel no further than to
The Sorrento Ocean Beach.
MR. JOHN WATTS,
the obliging and communicative Ocean Park Banger, planned and directed
the attractive improvements that have been carried out with such excellent
taste and judgment in the Ocean Park. He takes a pride in his work, and
hopes the well-disposed section of the public will assist to prevent destruc-
tion. If you can induce Watts to communicate some of his reminiscences
they would be found interesting and amusing. The best way to do this is
by giving him a subscription to extend the present works. The Banger was
in great force at the opening of the season. “ That mount to the right,”
said he, “ is named after the Hon. George Coppin, M.L.A., because he has
done so much to improve this Amphitheatre. The summer-house on the
top was very much patronised last summer, but the Queen’s Walk to Jubilee
Point is going to take the lead this year. The road—one mile long—is as
smooth and hard as Collins-street, and the beautiful views will not easily be
forgotten. There is one job that the fishermen will be thankful for—that is
called Fisherman’s Point, on account of the good sport that can be got there
at low water, but, when flood tide began to make, people could not pass
that large hole that runs into the rocks, so we have made a path, and
wooden stairs, on the other side of the cliff, and they can now pass hours on
that beach with safety. The grand place for a look-out is Jubilee Point,
and hard work Mr. Coppin had to raise money enough to get here. You
can see Cape Schanck and the coast all along. That mountain is called St.
From George Graham, M.D., K.Q.C.P.
I have pleasure in stating that my family have resided periodically during
the past 17 years on the Back Beach at Sorrento, and have experienced the
greatest amount of benefit by their sojourn there in the summer months. As the
temperature is much lower than Melbourne, the effects of the north wind are not
felt to be oppressive. As a residence for invalids, particulaaly children of a
strumous or delicate constitution, I know of no other place in Victoria to equal it,
more particularly on account of the water holding lime in solution in such
quantities as renders it most beneficial to children whose bones are soft. One
my little ones was cured during the first month’s stay at Sorrento.
Church-street, Richmond. George Graham, M.D.


Paul’s, named after the London Cathedral because the shape is like it. I'
hope some day to carry this path up to the top—shan’t we have a good look-
out there ! You ean get down on the beach round this point by the path t
made ; it leads you to what is called Little Bay, or the Bay of Islands.
Those two points you see facing the Bay are called The Sisters, Captain
Collins landed therein 1803; it is called the old settlement. There is one old
lady living who came here in 1888, and has lived here ever since. There are
old formations, of wells all about the flat, and three mounds'like fortifications
fbr protection against natives. I remember a place dug out of the hill—sup-
posed to be the magazine. One very hot day I sat down there for shelter, and,
scratching the sand, I turned up a tin of shot, or bullets, about the size of a
two-pound coffee tin. There were figures on it, but very rusty. I did not
know its value then or I would have taken care of it. When I first came
down here, in 1856, those hills, and the whole country, were covered with
grass, with she-oaks, and other beautiful trees, just like a gentleman’s park,
but the lime burners cut them down for firewood, and in their place we now
have this ti-tree scrub. I don’t know where it came from, but am sure it
ife a great drawback to the place, as gentlemen cannot see the beautiful
building sites there are all about. You have no trouble with drainage
here; no matter how it rains, directly it stops the ground is quite
dry; no stagnant water to breed fever and sickness—Nature provides for
that. You can get good water anywhere by sinking below the sea level.
Lots of people come to the Amphitheatre well for the water. It tastes of
lime, like all other well wafer at Sorrento. The doctors recommend it.
Strange to say, it ebbs and flows with the tide. I suppose the salt water,
being the heaviest, backs up the fresh. But I must go and look after the
youngsters; lam greatly afraid of fire.. Although the Government Regula-
tions provide against it, I can’t be everywhere, so I hope, if you see anyone
making a fire, or throwing a lighted match carelessly away after lighting
their pipe, that you will caution them, as it would be an injury to the whole
public if these coverings of ti-tree, that have been fixed at so much trouble
and expense to protect the sand, were to be destroyed.”
In my humble opinion the Sorrento of Victoria is to be highly commended as a
resort for the public requiring change of air.
Its position is such that it must be extremely healthy. The township is
protected from the cold southerly gales by the Hummocks, which form a natural
sea boundary, and its northern aspect, extending over forty miles of Port Phillip
Bay, secures for this watering-place a perfect immunity from the enervating and
disagreeable hot winds, as they become eight or ten degrees cooler in passing over
this expansive sheet of water.
The soil, with its marl formation, imparting to the water for domestic purposes
a quantity of lime, so useful and essential to the animal economy, mote particular
to growing children, supp’ying the osseous system with phosphate of lime, a
desideratum not to be overlooked. No more rickets or bandy-legged children so
long as our Sorrento is in existence.
I may add that the climate, from its very even temperature and its superabun-
dance of iodine thrown oft by Bass’s Straits on the one side and the bay on the
other, is particularly favourable for the arrest, if not the cure, of pulmonary and
glandular affections. It, therefore, must be considered as one of the chief
sanatoriums of the Australias.
C. LempUiere, A.K.C., M.R.C.S., Eng.


WILLIAM BUCKLEY, THE WILD WHITE MAN,
was born in Macclesfield, Cheshire, in 1780. He was a bricklayer by
trade. Ten guineas bounty brought him into the Cheshire militia, from
which he was draughted into the 4th or King’s Own Regiment. Through
■ some misconduct he was transported, and arrived a prisoner with Col.
Collins’ party in 1808, He made his escape from the settlement (now
'Sorrento), with others, who left him to return to the camp. Alone in this
wild country, William Buckley wandered round the bay to Indented Head,
Where-he found a cavern near the beach, in which he subsisted for months
upon shellfish. He unhappily lost his fire-stick, and was deprived of the
means of cooking. At length he was discovered by some with
whom he lived for. 88 years. He soon acquired a perfect knowledge of their
language, adopted 'the native habits, and became quite as one of the
community. When restored to civilisation he described the natives as
cannibals-, rude amt barbarous in their customs, but well disposed towards
the white man. Mr. Sutherland refers to two very handsome youn£
women who were his. daughters—others speak of two sons. He was known
to have two lubras in 1835. On two or three occasions he saw ships enter
the bay, but was unable to make himself known. At last another vessel
came with Batman’s party. He approached the boat, but could not find
words to use. One, suspecting him to be a white man, offered him bread,
galling it by name. After several efforts he pronounced the word, “ bread,”
It gives me much pleasure in bearing testimony to the renovating effects of that
salubrious marine retreat, Sorrento, having frequently, both for myself and
patients, tried its efficacy, with most beneficial results, for either pleasure or
health I do not know of a more enjoyable retreat, which only requires one visit to
be frequently patronised,
Charles Henri Harpy, M.D.
111 Collins-street East, Melbourne, 25th January, 1876.


then he showed W.B, on his arm, by which they began readily to
sympathise, and, looking upon him as a castaway seaman, gave him cooked
food, shelter and raiment. Word by word he began to comprehend what
they said, and soon understood that it was their intention to remain in the
country. Learning that he might be arrested as an outlaw, he was very
solicitous to obtain a free pardon, which, through the good offices of Messrs.
Batman and Wedge, reached him from Governor Arthur on 25th August,
1835. He was appointed interpreter at a salary of £5O a year, and
accompanied Sir Richard Bourke and others in tours about the country;
but, when the difficulties arose with the blacks, he left the place and went to
Hobart Town, where he resided for 20 years. For a time employed as a
constable, he became assistant storekeeper at the Immigrants’ Home, and
then gatekeeper at the Female Nursery. He married the widow of an
immigrant in March, 1840, received a pension of £l2 a year in 1850, and
then an additional £4O from the Legislature of Victoria. In January, 1855,
he was thrown from a vehicle and dangerously wounded. On 2nd
February, 1856, he was carried to his last home. The funeral was
attended by his son-in-law, and Mr. Morgan, the editor of his life, as chief
mourners.
Darby’s Monument
JOHN DARBYSHIRE.
is a conspicuous rock facing the Ocean Amphitheatre, and the short
history attached to it will be read with additional interest if given in a
conversation the writer had with the old man who is the origin of its name
upon the 4th of January, 1876.
“ Mr. Darby, I wish to publish a few facts about Sorrento, and I don’t
think they would be complete without giving your own account of what
they call ‘ Darby’s Monument.’ Will you kindly tell me your Christian
name, when you were born, your age, how long you have been in the
colony, and any events coming within your own knowledge about
Sorrento.”


“ Well, sir, you see, my name is John Darbyshire, but they calls me
Darby, for short. I was born in 1803, whereby I makes myself out to be
73 year old. Cheshire is my country, sir, and I know’d Buckley’s people
there. I arrived in this colony in 1835 with Gellibrand’s party,
before old Johnny Fawkner did, although he blow’d so much
about his being the founder on it. There was only seventeen on us
here then. I forgets the name o’ the craft as I come in. Captain
M‘Lellan was the skipper.”
“ Where did you come from, Mr. Darbyshire ?”
“ Well, sir, I corn’d from Yan Diemen’s Land, like all the rest on us as
was here in them days, and glad I was to get away. Why, would you
believe it that Governor Arthur hanged upwards of 1700 people during his
time, and few on ’em did more than would give ’em six months now.”
“ What did you do when you first came out here ?”
“ Well, sir, you see, I was a teamster, and pretty rough times I had on it
in them days. I was the one as took Governor Bourke the rounds when he
come in 1837, and I was the one as felt the earthquake when I was laying
under my dray, and the Governor’s orderly was asleep and know’d nothing
about it, and the Governor calls me to him and says, ‘ Darby, you know all
about this ’ere earthquake,’ and I up and tells him, and he gives me a glass
o’ grog for myself.”
“ Will you take something to drink now, Mr. Darbyshire?”
“ Well, sir, thank’ee, I don’t mind if I do.”
“ What shall it be—wine, spirits, or beer?”
“ Well, sir, I think spirits agrees with me best—just a drop o’ brandy.
Thank’ee, sir—no water —I never mixes my liquor—l think it spiles it.”
“ Had 3 7 0 u any trouble with the natives in those days ?”
“ Trouble—not me, poor things—why, sir, they was as harmless as babies.
I’ve seen upwards of a thousand on ’em at a corroboree on the Merri
Creek; that was their camping ground then. Dear, dear, poor things—
they’re gone now, sir, gone —most on ’em shot off or put out of the way
somehow else. If there is any questions asked when we are dead and gone,
some of our big squatting swells ull have some awful posers to answer.
“ Did you ever see any of them shot ?”
“ See um—did I—dear, dear, poor things ! Well, sir, I’ll just tell you
one of the most cruelest things as I ever did see. There was some gent
come out from Scotland full o’ learning to collect blacks’ skulls and other
things o’ science. Well, I was with him on his rounds up the country, and
there was one poor black hanging about the camp quite friendly and
harmless, but very shy—seemed alus to feel as something was going to
happen—didn’t like this gent a bit, although he tried to ’tice him —told him
he should have plenty tucker and sich like; so he says to me, ‘Darby, see
if the sheep is all right.’ Well, I know’d the sheep was all right, so away l
goes, but I gets behind a tree to see what his game was. Well, sir, this
gent—l suppose he was a gent—goes on ’ticing this black—holding out his
From W. Gunst, M.D.
I gladly give my testimonial as to the healthy, re-invigorating, and salubrious
air of Borrento. My family, after a few weeks’ stay, have stored up health and
vigour for the next twelve months; when feeling broken down in health from
overwork, a few days at Sorrento gives me strength. Besides, it is certainly the
residence for scrofulous persons and children, as the lime formation and the
water there, being slightly impregnated with phosphate of lime, has a decided
salutary effect upon scrofula and long-standing diseases of the glands and bones.
N.B. —I may state that a number of my patients, after a few days’ stay, have
found it valuable in restoring to them their usual health after a long illness.
W. Gunst, M.D.


'Tiand friendly like; so the black plucks up courage and shakes hands in
friendship, when the gent pulls out his pistol and shoots him dead, cuts off
his head, hangs it on a tree for the maggots to clean all the flesh from the
bones, and throws the body into a swamp. By and by up comes Major
Singin (St. John), the blacks’ protector. Says he, ‘ I wish to get the skull
of a black to send to England, if you find one.’ "Well, what does this gent
do but gives him the skull of the poor fellow he put out of the way himself.
Dear, dear ! I’ve seen the women and children of the blacks taken away by
the whites —abused, and shot afterwards —and then they wonders at the
poor blacks turning round on ’em. Take my word for it, sir, the blacks was
a harmless, good-natured lot, till the cruelty of the whites made ’em bad and
revengeful—poor things ! and who can blame ’em ?”
“But didn’t they steal your sheep and flour ?”
“ Well, sir, they know’d no better. S’pose you never tasted mutton but
once or twice in yonr life, wouldn’t you try to have another cut at it ?
S’pose you had a feed o’ damper and took a liking to it, wouldn’t you help
yourself if you had a chance of sneaking some from people as was driving
you from your own natural home, and what’s the law o’ the thing ? If any
white man steals a loaf o’ bread now he would get a week, or, say, a month,
with good grub to live upon all the time. When these poor blacks took
some flour to make a dproper it cooked ’em, because it was mixed with
arsenic. Dear, dearl seen scores poisoned in this way—the punish-
ment was rather too strong. We took their land, we took what they lived
on, and then we took their lives.”
y What brought you to Sorrento?”’
‘ Well, sir, you see, Melbourne was getting too fast for me, and it’s no
good saying I didn’t, for I used to take my nobblers, so, thinks I, I’ll just go
down to the Heads and be quiet like, and here I’ve been ever since 1845,
and here I expect my bones ull remain.”
“ Very few people down here then, I suppose, Mr. Darbyshire ?”
“ Few indeed I Why, sir, there was seventeen kilns all in full work then,
and each kiln would employ from ten to twenty hands getting stone, wood,
and burning. Ah! it was a nice-looking place then, all covered with she-oak
and beautiful grass. The lime burners cut down all the oaks, and then up
springs the ti-tree, and where the scrub corn’d from I don’t know.”
“ What’s the meaning of Darby’s Monument ?”
“ Well, sir, I’ll tell you —I was fond of fishing in the early days, and used
to go over to the ocean to catch crayfish. Well, sir, you know the rock as
they calls Darby’s Monument. I used to get on that at low water and fish
over a tide, and then land the next ebb; but once when I was on it the
wind changed and came on to blow, and the sea got up and the tide didn’t
go down again, and it was that rough that no one could live in it, the waves
breaking against the rocks, so I was forced to stop upon that identical rock
for four days and three nights without anything to eat or drink.”
“ You don’t mean to say that you were for four days and three nights
without food ?”
From Louis Hknby, Esq., M. 8., L.R.C.P,
The position of Sorrento is characterised by its equable temperature, by its
being sheltered from the north winds, by its preponderance of bright and sunny
days, and particularly by its sea climate, which is warm in winter and cool in
summer. It resembles Ban Remo, in the Mediterranean Sea, more than any other
place in the world, and I frequently recommend this climatic resort to patients
suffering from affections of the lungs, heart disease, and that large class of invalids
whose impoverished blood-supply produces the distressing symptoms of indiges-
tion, debility, and paleness.
Brunswick, 17th April, 1887. Louis Hbnby, M.D.


“ Not a bit or drop want into my mouth for that time, os sure as we’re
sitting here. Weil, to -occupy my time, I gathers up the loose stones, and
builds ’em up in the shape of a cross, and that’s why they calls it Darby’s
Monument. I was pretty weak at the end o’ the time, I can tell you. I
somehow like the place, and have passed many a day and night there since,
but I knows the winds better now than I did then, sir.”
“Do you know where the first encampment was in 1803 ?”
“Do I know ? Why, I may say there ain’t a blade o’ grass about the
place as I don’t know. Just between them hills they calls the Two Sisters
is where Governor Collins and them as was sent out with him pitched their
tents. You can see where the trenches was; want of water, they says,
frightened them away, so they packs up their traps and off they goes to Van
Diemen’s Land. I think there was To 00 hanging to it for the Governor,
which was a good bit of money in them days. There was a iron plate stuck
on one of the trees where the magazine was. I could show you some of the
old wells they sunk, which is filled up now,”
“ It seems a very healthy place, Mr. Darbyshire.”
“ Healthy ! why, I’ve never know’d a day’s sickness all the time I’ve been
down here. We never had no measles or scarlet fever till the swells brought
’em down to us ; however they can’t live very long here, as the fresh wind
blows’ em away. I never took but one dose of physic since I’ve been in the
colony, and that was a mistake.”
“What do you mean by a mistake ?”
“ Well, sir, I’ll tell you, I had a heavy night on it in Melbourne, and
the next morning I feels uncommon seedy—l think the grog you could get
in them days at the Heads was better than what you got at the regular pubs
in town'—there was four or five sly-grog shops here then. Well, I goes into
a doctor’s shop next morning, and sees a chap taking a glass o’ summut.
The man behind the bar asks me what I wants. So says I, ‘ Give me the
same as what he’s a-drinking on,’ and he does-—charges me -eighteenpen.ee
for it —uncommon nasty stuff it was, too. Well, when .1 gets out of the
shop I says to the man as took the physio, * What’s the matter with you
that that stuff’s a-going to cure ?’ ‘ Well,’ says he, ‘ I’ve got a pain across the
chest here, so they’ve given me an emetic to bring it up.’ So, you see, sir,
I took a emetic by mistake, and uncommon sick it made me-—I don’t want
no more physic.”
Darby’s reminiscences and knowledge of the old identities are really very
interesting, and it is to be regretted that want of space prevents their
publication in this pamphlet.
Poor -old Darby died Ist June, 1886.
I have always been impressed by the great natural advantages of Sorrento as a
future watering-place. There is not a more equable climate in the whole colonies;
being sandy, it is never damp even in wet weather, and the hot winds never reach
Sorrento. For invalids of every description it is most suitable, and it is equally
beneficial summer and winter. What it requires is good hotel accommodation
and a first-class table. Nobody knows better than yourself that plenty of amuse-
ment must be provided for the public, as they are too stupid to amuse themselves.
In the event of a probable European disturbance a railway along the coast to
Point Nepean will be absolutely necessary, and it is contemplated by the military
authorities.
Qneenscliff does not possess the same advantages as Sorrento; it is hot in
summer, cold in winter, and it is very difficult to kill time there. Land is cheap
around Sorrento, and money is easy to get in Melbourne for a suitable scheme.
As I know the country well, I am spcaking from my own observation.
J. Dunbar Tweeddale.
126 Nichohon-street, Fitzroy, 17th October, 1887.


THE HEADS AND QUEENSCLIFF.
A visit to this popular watering-place is very agreeable. The two lighthouses, when seen from seaward in one line,
form a leading mark for vessels entering the harbour. The width of Port Phillip Heads between Point Nepean on the
east and Point Lonsdale on the west is about 4000 yards, but the navigable channel called the Rip, through which the
tide rushes with great velocity, is only about 1600 yards wide. Baillieu’s Ozone Hotel will be found very comfortable.
It has lately been enlarged, which adds greatly to its convenience. (See Advertisement , page 27.)
Next to the hotel is an institution that deserves notice. It is a building for the special use of clergymen.
Mr. Latham erected the houses and furnished them at a total cost of about .£15,000, and handed the property, practically
unconditionally, to the Church of England for clergymen to occupy. They are a great boon to those whom
it was intended to benefit, and do honour to the liberal donor.


BAILLIEU’S
ESPLANADE, QUEENSCLIFF.
MRS. BAILLIEU has pleasure in announcing that the above
Hotel has been greatly enlarged and improved by the addition of
an Extensive Dining Hall, over which there are suites of Sitting
and Bed Rooms overlooking the Bay and Esplanade; also Public
and Private Bar, Commercial and Billiard Room. Special attention
has been devoted to the erection of Lavatories and Bath Rooms,
both having an inexhaustible supply of hot and cold water.
The position of the Hotel is unequalled on Queenscliff, and
cannot be surpassed, commanding a view of the whole of the
Bay, the Heads, and the Southern Ocean, and within only two
minutes’ walk of the Baths and Beach.
Mrs. Baillieu would specially desire to assure her friends
that the strictest supervision will prevail throughout the Hotel,
and intending visitors will find it replete with every convenience
for their comfort and pleasure.
First-class Table d’Hote, and the very best Wines, Spirits, and Ales
TRAPS SENT FROM HOTEL TO MEET STEAMERS & TRAINS.


DISTRICT OF PORT PHILLIP.
The discovery of the fine harbour of Port Phillip was made by Lieutenant
John Murray on the 10th of January, 1802. On the report reaching Sydney
of this discovery of a harbour of even greater extent than Port Jackson,
Governor King named it after his friend Captain Arthur Phillip, the first
Governor of New South Wales. In March, 1802, Flinders sailed in the
Investigator into Port Phillip, sounded the channels leading up to Hobson’s
and Corio Bays, and ascended Station Peak, which he named, and whence
he had a splendid view of the country for 40 miles round.
The chart of Port Phillip, sent to England by Flinders, gave the British
Government the impression that the place would be suitable for a penal
■settlement. Accordingly, in 1803, David Collins, Esq., Colonel of Marines,
was appointed leader of the expedition and Governor of the future colony.
The Ocean , transport, 500 tons, Captain Mathews, and the Calcutta, man-
of-war, having 18 guns upon the upper deck, rigged as a 56-gun ship, with a
complement of 170 men, under the command of Captain Daniel Woodriff,
landed the expedition on the eastern shore of Port Phillip Bay, about eight
miles from the Heads, on the 16th of October, 1803. The place indicated on
the map is between the hills called the Two Sisters, at Sorrento. Great
difficulty was experienced in discovering fresh water, but the surgeon found
that water fit for use might be obtained by sinking in the sand near the sea.
Holes were made and staked to receive the drainage.
The expedition consisted of—The Military Party : —Lieutenant-Governor,
in command; two first lieutenants, one second lieutenant, three sergeants,
three corporals, one drummer, one fifer, and thirty-nine ranjk and file
seven soldiers had their wives. The Civil Establishment: —The Governor,
•Colonel Collins ; chaplain, deputy-commissary general, surgeon-superinten-
dent, colonial surgeon, two assistant surgeons, surveyor, two superintendents
of convicts, mineralogist, and 367 male convicts. Seventeen wives of the
most respectable amongst them were allowed to accompany their partners,
but the voyage was considered too perilous, the, transportation too full of
horrors, to permit children to share their fate ; only seven little ones followed
itheir fathers; one of these children is more particularly named hereafter.
The Governor was to receive .£4BO a year, the chaplain and surgeon 10s.
a day; the commissary, the surveyor, and the mineralogist, 7s. 6d. a day;
the superintendents had £5O a year, and two overseers £25 each.
Eight convicts were missing within a month of their arrival, their belief
being that they could escape to the Botany Bay quarter, or the land of
China. Four were brought back and punished, one was shot by a constable,
and the three others—oppressed by hunger and the sense of loneliness, after
wandering round the westward shore of Port Phillip—made fires to attract
the notice of the camp without success. The two prisoners left their
companion, William Buckley, to walk back and surrender themselves, but
were never seen again. It has been declared that a>s Governor Collins had
full powers to establish himself where he thought proper, and was allowed
the sum of £5OO compensation for his personal outlay in case he chose to
Frovx James Jamieson, Esq., M.D.
I have visited Sorrento three times, and made a short stay on two occasions.
It certainly has many advantages as a health resort, and I have been in the habit
■of recommending it chiefly on two grounds. First, the soil is everywhere light
and sandy, and so is dry underfoot even after heavy rains. Second, the visitor has
the choice of what are practically two climates. The weather may be mild and
almost calm on the bay shore, when it is bracing or even boisterous on the ocean


move his establishment, that he resolved to abandon the country for the
sake of the money. "The arid, infertile nature of the soil, with a
distressing scarcity of water, made the abandonment inevitable.” Prepara-
tions were made for departure for the Derwent River, and on the 25th
of January, 1804, Port Phillip was abandoned. The Governor and his
officers embarked on the Lrcuiy Nelson for Hobart Town, in the beautiful
island of Tasmania. The expedition arrived in Port Phillip on the 16th of
October, 1803, remained until the 25th of January, 1804, abandoned it on
account of scarcity of fresh water, although David Gibson, one of the
runaway convicts, reported a fresh water river—the Yarra Yarra—at the
head of the Bay to the officers.
Mr. J. W. Itusden, in his very interesting account of " The Discovery,
Survey, and Settlement of Port Phillip,” states that Collins committed a
serious error in his selection of a site—-an error which appears inexcusable,
when one knows that the careful survey of Port Phillip by Mr. Grimes, by
direction of Governor King, had shown where the Yarra Yarra and other
fresh waters near the Bay were to be found.
There is extant a short narrative by Lieutenant Tuckey, who sailed with
the expedition, contemplating future possibilities, and’ urging the necessity
of removing the colony to a more eligible situation. If anyone could
have told Mr. Tuckey that the settlement would be abandoned in a
few weeks—that in process of time- various other settlements would be
formed upon the coast (notably one by Mr, Henty, in 1834)—that after an
organised plan for occupying Port Phillip itself by John Batman, in 1835,
which was carried out in May, 1835, that same ragged urchin whom he
saw scrambling in the sand in 1803 would cross from Tasmania in
October, in 1835, go to that river of which Tuckey had the description in
his hand (as supplied by Governor King from Mr. Grimes’ survey), and
claim to have discovered it, although immediately warned off by Batman’s
agent—even Mr. Tuckey’s credulity might have been severely taxed. Had
he been further told that, in consequence of the importance ascribed by the
Government of New South Wales to Batman’s movements, it was deter-
mined to found a settlement a* Port Phillip—that accordingly it was
founded by Governor Bourke—that in process of time there would be a
local Parliament, into which the ragged urchin would find his way; that
in the year 1869 he would die; that a public funeral would be determined
on, concerning which there would be a Government Gazette Extraordinary
on the previous day; that shops would be shut and traffic closed in a city
numbering, with its immediate suburbs, some 160,000 inhabitants; that
between two and three hundred vehicles would move in the funeral proces-
cession—he would, indeed, have reflected most gravely on “ future possi-
bilities.”
On the 23rd of October, 1803, the first divine service was held in the
colony. On the 14th of November the first kangaroo (weighing GBib.), was
killed. The first burial—the cook of the Calcutta —took place on the 16th ;
the first birth on the 25th; and the first christening on Christmas Day.
Great suspicion is thrown upon the Governor’s report by the following letter,
written by Mrs. Hopley, wife'of one of the officers, to her sister in England :
—“ We arrived in October, 1803 ; my pen is not able to describe half the
beauties of that delightful spot. We were four months there. Much to my
beach, only about a mile off. Pot the young and active there are cliffs to climb,
and rock pools to explore ; while, for the older and more sedate, there are easy
walks and fine outlooks over land, and sea. I wish the place could, somehow, be
made more easily and certainly accessible at all seasons.
James Jamieson, M.D,
149 Coding-street East, Melbourne, 21st October, 1887.


mortification, as well as loss, we were obliged to abandon the settlement,
through the whim and caprice of the Lieutenant-Governor. Additional
expense to the Government, and loss to individuals, \yere incurred by
removing to Van Diemen’s Land. Port Phillip is my favourite, and has
my warmest wishes. During the time we were there (Sorrento) I never felt
one ache or pain, and I parted with it with more regret than I did my
native land.”
The first pioneer of the Australian wilderness, who penetrated to the
shores of Port Phillip, was Hamilton Hume, a native-born colonist of New
South Wales. Being a good bushman, he found pleasure in exploring new
tracts of country, and offered his services to the Governor at Sydney to aid
him in his efforts at opening up the colony. Captain Hovell, hearing that
Hume was in want of means, joined him, and equipped three men and
horses, with two carts and horses, for an expedition to the south of the
Murrumbidgee River, the furthest point explored in that direction.
On the 17th of October, 1824, Hume and his party started from his station
near Yass, and after much toil reached a large river, now called the Murray,
but which the colonists in early days named the Hume. From thence he
continued in a south-westerly direction, and travelled for two months
through a finely watered region. In his narrative he says : —“ On the 17th
of December we reached the shores of Port Phillip, and camped on the spot
where the town of Geelong now stands.”
In commemoration of his journey a tablet was erected by his fellow-
colonists at the spot where Hume crossed the Murray into Victoria.
Subsequently, Captain Sturt and Major Mitchell followed on the track of
this enterprising bushman, and many settlers pushed on with their flocks
towards the banks of the Murray River.
In 1884 three gentlemen, named Henty, established a whaling station at
Portland Bay in connection with their business as merchants at Launceston,
in Tasmania. This was the first settlement in the colony of Victoria, and
the site of the town of Portland.
The accounts of the whaling crews who had visited the harbours dispelled
the impression that Port Phillip was without fresh water or pasture land.
Consequently the graziers and sheep farmers in Tasmania, whose flocks
and herds had increased beyond their grazing lands, resolved on making an
exploration of the surrounding country. For this purpose an association
was got up at Launceston by an active colonist named John Pascoe
Fawkner.
Meanwhile a bold adventurer and native-born colonist, John Batman,
sailed from Hobart Town, arrived in Port Phillip harbour in May, 1835,
and landed on the western shore. Here he entered into a contract with the
natives to cede 1000 square miles of territory for a few blankets to be given
to them every year. With this aboriginal conveyance of land he returned
to Hobart Town, where he was joined in the enterprise by fifteen others,
From Baron Von Mueller, M.D.
I regard the position of Sorrento as one of the most salubrious on the large bay
of Port Phillip. While this place enjoys all the invigorating freshness of the air
of the great Southern Ocean, it is comparatively protected against the occasional
severity of the antarctic storms. With increasing plantations of maritime pines
and other adapted trees, the natural shelter, as well as the landscape beauty of the
scenery, will become still further augmented ; and it may well be anticipated that
this litoral locality is destined to assume, for hygienic and recreative purposes, the
same importance as its prototype on the Tyrrhenic sea.
Baron Von Mueller, M. and Ph.D., F.R.S.


EXCURSION STEAMER
MR. P. BARBETA
Has the honour to announce that BAY EXCURSIONISTS
can obtain EVERY DESCRIPTION OF REFRESHMENT
in the Saloon of this splendid Boat of the Very Best
Quality, served in a manner that is quite equal to the
first hotels in Melbourne.
Many congratulations and expressions of satisfaction
have been received from leading colonists and fastidious
epicures.
EXCELLENT COLD LUNCH, 2s. 6d.
HOT TEA, as.
The BARS are well stocked with WINES, SPIRITS
ALE, and PORTER of the finest quality.
CHOICE FRUITS IN SEASON.
Moderate Charges.
ADVICE TO PASSENGERS.
Take Lunch on Board before Landing, for the sake of obtaining more
time on shore to enjoy the beautiful scenery of the Ocean Beach.
PETER BARBETA.
No connection with any other Firm.


ROBERTSON | MOFFAT,
HOUSE FURNISHERS.
Furniture Showrooms
16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32, & 34
POST OFFICE PLACE.




THE OLDEST ESTABLISHED FAMILY HOTEL IN SORRENTO
I. E
BENSILUM, Proprietor.
I. E. Bensilum, in thanking his patrons for past favours, takes this
opportunity to respectfully inform them that he, together with Mrs.
Bensilum, will continue to conduct the business as heretofore. They do not
entrust the comfort of their Visitors and Patrons to subordinates.
TARIFF.
Adults ... ... ... £2 10s. per Week.
Children (under 12) ... £1 ss. . ~
The Hotel is supplied by a Powerful Pump, worked by horse-power,
with pure Lime Water from a Spring near the Beach, belonging to the
Hotel. This Spring has the best water in the district, and is recommended
by Medical Men for Adults, and as a great bone producer for Children.
Hot Lime Spring Baths provided in the Hotel for Ladies. They are
more beneficial and invigorating than hot sea baths.
Picnics Catered For,
The PLEASURE GROUNDS & DANCING PAVILION OPEN to VISITORS.
Letters and Telegrams will Eeceive Prompt Attention.
DINNER PROVIDED ON ARRIVAL OF STEAMER.


CALENDAR
FOR
1888
m
January
February.
March.
April.
May.
June.
Last Quart., 6th, 9.22 p.m.
New Moon, 18th, 6.19 p.m.
First Quart., 21st, 2.29 p.m.
Full Moon, 29th. 8.59 a.m.
Last Quart., 5th, 5.5 a.m.
New Moon, 12th, 9.32 a.m.
First Quar., 20th, 11.39a.m.
Full Moon, 27th, 9.38 p.m.
Last Quart., 5th, 1.26 p.m.
New Moon, 13th, 2.1 a.m.
First Quart., 21st, 6.23 a.m.
Full Moon, 28th, 7.47 a.m.
Last Quart., 3rd,. 10.21 p.m.
New Moon, 11th, 6.48 p.m.
First Quart., 19th, 9.32 p.m.
Full Moon, 26th, 4.2 p m.
Last Quart., 3rd, 9.27 a.m.
New Moon, 11th, 11.3 a.m.
First Quart., 19th, 8.45 a.m.
Full Moon, 25th, 11.20 p.m.
Last Quart., 1st, 10.88 p.m.
New Moon, 10th, 2.14 a.m.
First Quart., 17th, 4.30 p.m.
Pull Moon, 24th, 6.47 a.m.
SUN,
1
8
15
22
29
5
12
19
26
... 4 11 18
25
1
8
15
22
29
6
13
20 27
... 3 10
17 24
MON.
2
9
16
23
30
6
13
20
27
... 5 12 19
26
2
9
16
23
30
7
14
21 28
... 4 11
18 25
TUBS.
3
10
17
24
31
7
14
21
28
... 6 13 20
27
3
10
17
24
1
8
15
22 29
... 5 12
19 26
WED.
4
11
18
25
1
8
15
22
29
... 7 14 21
28
4
11
18
25
2
9
16
23 30
... 6 13
20 27
THUR.
5
12
19
26
2
9
16
23
1 8 15 22
29
5
12
19
26
3
10
17
24 31
... 7 14
21 28
FRI.
6
13
20
27
3
10
17
24
2 9 16 23
30
6
13
20
27
4
11
18
25 ...
1 8 15
22 29
SAT.
7
14
21
28
4
11
18
25
3 10 17 24
31
7
14
21
28
5
12
19
26 ...
2 9 16
23 30
July.
August.
September.
October
November.
December.
New Moon, 9th, 5.27 p.m.
First Quart., 16th, 9.53 p.m.
Full Moon, 23rd, 3.25 p.m.
Last Quart., 31st, 6.10 a.m.
New Moon, 8th, 4.21 a.m.
First Quart., 15th, 2.24 a.m.
Full Moon, 22nd, 2 a.m.
Last Quart., 29th, 11.58p.m.
New Moon, 6th, 2.36 p.m.
First Quart., 13th, 7.40 a.m.
Full Moon, 20th, 3.4 p.m.
Last Quart., 28th, 5.10 p.m.
New Moon, 6th, 12.14 a.m.
First Quart., 12th, 3.9 p.m.
Pull Moon, 20th, 6.49 a.m.
Last Quart., 28th, 11.36 a.m.
New Moon, 4th, 9.42 a.m.
First Quart., 11th, 1.16 a.m.
Full Moon, 19th, 12.56 a.m.
Last Quart., 27th, 3 a.m.
New Moon, 3rd, 7.46 p.m.
First Quart., 10th, 5.26 p.m.
Full Moon, 18th, 8.21 p.m.
Last Quart., 26th, 3.40 p.m.
SUN.
1
8
15
22
29
5
12
19
26
... 2 9 16 23
30
7
14
21
28
4
11
18 25
... 2 9 16
23 30
MON.
2
9
16
23
30
6
13
20
27
... 3 10 17 24
1
8
15
22
29
5
12
19 26
... 3 10 17
24 31
TUBS.
3
10
17
24
31
7
14
21
28
... 4 11 18 25
2
9
16
23
30
6
13
20 27
... 4 11 18
25 ...
WED.
4
11
18
25
1
8
15
22
29
... 5 12 19 26
3
10
17
24
31
7
14
21 28
... 5 12 19
26 ...
THUR.
5
12
19
26
2
9
16
23
30
... 6 13 20 27
4
11
18
25
1
8
15
22 29
... 6 13 20
27 ...
FRI.
6
13
20
27
3
10
17
24
31
... 7 14 21 28
5
12
19
26
2
9
16
23 30
... 7 14 21
28 ...
SAT.
7
14
21
28
4
11
18
25
1 8 15 22 29
6
13
20
27
3
10
17
24 ...
1 8 15 22
29 ...
ECLIPSES.
A Total Eclipse of the Moon on the morning of 29th January, invisible in Victoria. A Partial Eclipse of the Suh on the morning of 12th
in Australia. A Partial Eclipse of the Sun on the afternoon of 9th July, invisible in Australia. A Total Eclipse of the Moon on the aften
partially visible in the eastern portion of Australia. At Melbourne the last contact with the Shadow takes place at 5h. 14m., nine minute
moonrise. The last contact with the Penumbra takes place at 6h. 12m. A Partial Eclipse of the Sun on the morning of 8th August, invisible
February, invisible
mon of 23rd July,
is after the time of
in Australia.
PUBLIC HOLIDAYS.
1st January, New Year’s Day; 26th January, Federation Day; 30th March, Good Friday; 31st March, Easter Eve; 2nd April, Easter Monday; 3rd April,
Easter Tuesday; 21st April, Commemoration Eight-hours System; 24th May, Her Majesty’s Birthday; 6th November, Melbourne Cup Day; 9th November,
Prince of Wales’ Birthday ; 25th December, Christmas Day; 26th December, Boxing Day.


THE OCEAN BEACH ON A STORMY DAY, STRONG SOUTH-WESTER BLOWING.


SORRENTO TRAMWAY COMPANY, LIMITED.
To be Registered under the Companies’ Statute 1864.
MR. COPPIN, having entered into an arrangement for the delegated
powers of the Shire Council to Construct a TRAMWAY
From the SORRENTO PIER to the OCEAN AMPHITHEATRE,
Now Proposes to Form a Company to carry out the work.
CAPITAL, £3,500, IN 700 SHARES OP £5 EACH.
Payable—£l upon Application, £1 upon Allotment, a portion of
the Balance, as required, in Galls of 10s. a Share
at one month’s notice.
NO PROMOTERS’ SHARES or any OTHER BENEFICIAL INTEREST.
The Holder of 20 Shares will have a FREE PASS over the Tramway.
A Lease has been obtained for 30 Years. Negotiations are pending for
AN ELECTRIC MOTOR.
Application for Shares to be made to GEO. COPPIN.
ELECTRIC MOTOR.—A Practical Success.
Electric Propulsion has been adopted by the North Metropolitan Tramway Co.
in London. Some of the New Cars are on their way out to Sydney, and, if thoroughly
successful, will run next season between the Pier and the Ocean Amphitheatre at
Sorrento.
TRIAL TRIPS IN THE PRESENCE OF THE AGENTS-GENERAL OF AUSTRALASIA.
The advantages claimed for the car are that it is self-contained that is, each car carries its
own power stored in accumulators which are conveniently disposed under the seats; this renders
the car independent of cables or any electrical communication, as it leaves the depot capable
of running from 80 to 85 miles, the power being manipulated more easily than steam, and being
utilised to the uttermost fraction. There was nothing in the appearance of the car to distinguish
it from any of the others that were running on the road from Hove to Shoreham, one of the
ordinary tramway cars having been altered into an electrical car by the accumulators being
placed under the seats, from which the current was conducted to the motor fixed under the
floor, and communicating directly with the axles. Duplicate driving apparatuses fitted at each
end of the car, so that there is no necessity for turning the car at the end of the journey. By
touching a small handle the current from a certain number of cells is admitted to the motor,
which immediately revolves and propels the car at the rate of about 7 miles an hour. There is
but little noise, no vibration except that caused by the inequalities of the track, and the move-
ment is equal in steadiness to that of a cable tramcar working at its best, and is free from the
spasmodic jerking so objectionably apparent on both cable and horse roads. When fairly on the
way greater power was applied, and the car rattled along with 23 passengers at the rate of 32
miles an hour. A gradient of 1 in 30 was easily ascended at this pace, and a subsequent incline
of nearly lin 20 was negotiated without any apparent difficulty. On arriving at Southwick the
car was run into the depot for the purpose of illustrating the facility with which exhausted
accumulators could be replaced by charged ones, the operation taking less time than would b<*
occupied by changing horses, say three or four minutes. The visitors were then shown the
mechanism for charging the accumulators, which is of the most simple description, consisting of
a2O horee-power steam engine and a dynamo. The ascertained cost of running is within a
fraction of 4d. per car mile, which is nearly 2d. less than that of horse or steam traction on any
of the London tramways, and, as before stated, the initial cost will not exceed that of horse
tramways, while it will be much loss than that of steam motors, a considerable saving in main-
tenance being confidently anticipated over all other systems. The loss of electric power by
storage in the accumulators is seldom more than 10 per cent., and the precautions against leak-
age are so complete that a car which had been charged nearly six weeks was run out of the shed
with equal facility to that into which the newly-filled accumulators had just been placed. On
the return journey from Shoreham to Hove the full pow t of the cunent was exhibited, and the
car dashed along at the rate of 20 miles an hour. The inspector of the Board of Trade has
ridden on the electric car, and was so much impressed with the ease with which it can bo
driven that he has reported strongly in its favour, so that the restrictions which have been
placed by the authorities upon the employment of electricity on the London tramways are about
to be relaxed to allow of this invention being utilised.


who sent over with him live stock and farming implements to take
possession of this noble estate. The Government refused to confirm
Batman’s territorial claim, but compensated him with a grant of town and
country lots, and a sum of money. Fawkner, who followed Batman in
November of the same year, entered into a similar contract with the
natives for a concession of their land, which the Government did not
recognise, but allowed a claim for compensation in land and money, as in
Batman’s case.
The account of the rich lands for culture and pasture in the vicinity of
Port Phillip soon spread throughout New South Wales, as well as Tasmania,
so that there were new settlers arriving overland to get their share of the
country. There was abundance of good land for all comers, and the
nearest sites occupied by those who came overland were fifty miles apart
from those who came by sea. Sir Richard Bourke, the Governor of New
South Wales, lost no time in issuing a proclamation, defining the boundaries
and designating the territory as the “ District of Port Phillip,” subject to
the laws, and a dependency of, New South Wales. This was carried out by
the arrival of Captain Lonsdale, with a military detachment from Sydney,
who assumed the position of chief magistrate of the district. Shortly
afterwards Governor Bourke visited the place with a surveyor, and fixed
upon the sites of the chief towns, Melbourne on the Yarra, named after the
British Premier of that day ; and Williamstown, in honour of His Majesty
King William the IV.
As the population increased, the Sydney Government deemed it necessary
to appoint a representative with more extended powers, and a larger official
staff than a police magistrate and a few clerks. Accordingly, Charles
Joseph La Trobe, a gentleman of Canadian descent, and known as an
author of books of travel, arrived in 1838 as Superintendent of the district.
The colony still continued to advance rapidly, and the demand arose for
the separation of the district from New South Wales, and its erection into
an independent province of Great Britain, with a Lieutenant-Governor,
Executive Council, and Legislative Chambers. This event took place on
the first day of July, 1851, to the great joy of the colonists. And the
District of Port Phillip became the independent colony of
VICTORIA,
with its own Governor and Council, and its growth into a nation was greatly
accelerated by the discovery of its goldfields. The new Constitution Act
was received by the Shcdimar on the 16th of October, 1855. It was
officially proclaimed on the 28rd of November by His Excellency, who had
recommended a general holiday to celebrate the establishment of Responsible
Government.
The following are the dates of some of the principal events connected with
the discovery and history of Victoria :
April 19th, 1770. —Victorian land first discovered by Captain James Cook,
R.N. —(“ Point Hicks,” believed to be the present Cape Everard in Gipps-
land).
From Charles Ager Atkin, Esq.
I cannot leave Sorrento without recording in some way the great good my wife
has derived from the short visit of only a fortnight.
For some months previously she had been suffering from paralysis of the left
side, was only able to walk very short distances, and could scarcely get up or
down stairs without assistance. After three days’ residence there she walked to


June 4th, 1798.—Western Port discovered and entered by Surgeon George
Bass, R.N.
November and December, 1798.—The existence of a strait between Aus-
tralia and Tasmania proved by Flinders and Bass, who sailed round the latter
island in the sloop Norfolk.
December 4th to 9th, 1800.—Bass’s Straits first sailed through from the
westward by Lieutenant James Grant, R.N., in H.M.S. Lady Nelson, of
sixty tons burthen, bound from England to Port Jackson. On this occasion
Grant discovered and gave the present names to Capes Bridgewater, Nelson,
and Sir William Grant, Portland Bay, the Lawrence and Lady Julia Percy
Islands, Capes Otway, Patton, Liptrap, etc.
January sth, 1802. —Port Phillip Bay discovered by Acting-Lieutenant
John Murray, E.N., in the Lady Nelson. Heads entered by the launch on
2nd February, and by the vessel on 15th February.
April 26th, 1802.—Port Phillip Bay entered and examined by Commander
Matthew Flinders, R.N., who was not aware it had been previously dis-
covered by Murray.
January and February, 1803. —Port Phillip Bay surveyed and the Yarra
and Saltwater Rivers discovered by Charles Grimes, Surveyor-General of
New South Wales, and party.
October 7th, 1803. —Attempt to colonise Port Phillip by Colonel David
Collins, in charge of a party of convicts.
January 27th, 1804.—Port Phillip abandoned by Collins as unfit for settle-
ment.
December 16th, 1824. —Hume and Hovell arrived at Corio Bay, having
travelled overland from Sydney.
1826.—Attempt made early in the year to colonise Western Port, on its
eastern side, near the site of rhe present township of Corinella, by Captain
S. Wright, of H.M, 3rd Regiment, the Buffs, in charge of a party of
convicts. This expedition was sent from New South Wales in consequence
of a report that the French contemplated a settlement on the south coast of
Australia. This apprehension having been found to be groundless, and the
locality being sterile and scrubby, the establishment was withdrawn early in
1828.
November 19th, 1834. —Permanent settlement founded at Portland Bay
by Edward Henty.
May 29th, 1835.—John Batman arrived in Port Phillip and made a treaty
with the natives for a grant of 600,000 acres of land. This treaty was after-
wards disallowed by the Imperial Government.
August 28th, 1835.—John Pascoe Fawkner’s party sailed up the Yarra in
the Enterprise, and founded Melbourne. (Fawkner followed shortly after,
and landed on the 18th October.)
April to October, 1836. —Major (afterwards Lieutenant-Colonel Sir)
Thomas Livingstone Mitchell made extensive explorations in the Port
Phillip district, the western portion of which he named Australia Felix.
that lovely spot, the Amphitheatre, and, after enjoying the invigorating and bracing
air which comes up from the Great Southern Ocean, again walked back, and
subsequently was enabled to go, some days, as much as eight miles, and I may say
that she appears comparatively well. Under such favourable circumstances we
both anticipate the pleasure of taking our family in future summers to this salu-
brious spot.
48 Errol-street, Hotham. Charles Ager Atkik.


September 29th, 1836.—Regular Government established under Captain
William Lonsdale, who was sent from Sydney to act as Resident Magis-
trate,
March 2nd, 1837.—Governor Sir Richard Bourke arrived from Sydney
and gave the name of Melbourne to the metropolis of the new settlement.
June Ist, 1837.—First sale of Crown lands took place in Melbourne-
Average price of half-acre town lots, £35.
September 30th, 1839.—Mr. Charles Joseph La Trobe arrived from
Sydney, and took charge of the Port Phillip district under the title of
Superintendent. The territory over which he exercised jurisdiction was
much smaller than the present colony of Victoria, being bounded on the
east and west by the 146th and 141st meridians, and on the north by the
86th parallel.
August 12th, 1842.—Melbourne incorporated as a Town by Act of the
Legislature of New South Wales 6 Viet. No. 7.
June 26th, 1847. —Royal Letters Patent erecting the Town of Melbourne
into a city signed at this date; gazetted in Sydney on the sth February,
1848.
October 12th, 1849.—Geelong incorporated as a Town by Act of the
Legislature of New South Wales 13 Viet. No. 40.
July Ist, 1851.—Port Phillip separated from New South Wales and erected
into an independant colony under the name of Victoria.
July and August, 1851. —Discovery of gold in Victoria.
February Bth, 1853.—Road districts (the origin of the present shires)
established by Act 16 Viet. No. 40.
November and December, 1854. —Riots on Ballarat goldfield. (Eureka
Stockade taken on the 3rd December.)
December 29th, 1854. —Municipal institutions (the origin of the present
cities, towns and boroughs) established by Act 18 Viet. No. 15.
November 23rd, 1855.—Constitution proclaimed in Victoria.
March 19th, 1856.—The ballot as a means of electing members of both
Houses of Parliament prescribed by Act 19 Viet. No. 12.
August 27th, 1857. —Property qualification of members of the Legislative
Assembly abolished by Act 21 Viet. No. 12.
November 24th, 1857. —Universal suffrage for electors of the Legislative
Assembly made law by Act 21 Viet. No. 33.
January Ist, 1869.—Property qualification of members and electors of the
Legislative Council reduced by Act 32 Viet. No. 334.
February 6th, 1880. —Fortnightly mail service between Victoria and
England commenced.
October Ist, 1880.—First Victorian International Exhibition opened. It
was closed on the 30th April, 1881.
From The Hon. L. L, Smith, L.S.A.
I have frequently recommended my convalescent patients to try the invigorating
breezes and the picturesque views of Sorrento and Back Beach, and always with
the best results. When I am asked why I prefer Sorrento to Queenseliff I
invariably answer that the former is more retired, and my patients get more
repose, and consequently have a greater chance of recovery in the former than in
the latter place.
Collins-street East, Melbourne, 17th October, 1887. Louis L. Smith.


November 28th, 1881.—Property qualification of members and electors of
the Legislative Council further reduced, number of provinces and members
increased, and tenure of seats shortened by Act 45 Viet. No. 702.
February Ist, 1884.—Victorian Eailways placed under the control and
management of three Commissioners under Act 47 Viet. No. 767.
December 31st, 1884.—Patronage in the Public Service abolished with
respect to appointments and promotions, and “ a just and equitable system
in lieu thereof, which will enable all persons who have qualified them-
selves in that behalf to enter the Public Service without favour or
recommendation other than their own merits and fitness for the position ”
«stabhshed under Act 47 Viet. No. 773, which Statute also provided for the
appointment of a Public Service Board, consisting of three members to
administer its provisions.
December 9th, 1885.—Imperial Act constituting a Federal Council of
Australasia brought into operation in respect to Victoria by Act 49 Viet. No.
First meeting of Federal Council opened in Tasmania, 25th January,
1886. J
GOVERNORS OF VICTORIA.
From J. T. Hakcodrt, Esq.
Charles Joseph La Trobe
Major-General Edward Macarthur (acting)..
Sir Henry Darkly, K.C.B.
Sir Charles Henry Darling, K.C.B.
Brigadier-General George Jackson Carey,
C.B. (acting)
The Eight Honourable John Henry Thomas,
Viscount Canterbury, K.C.B.
Sir William Foster Stawell, Kt. (acting)
Sir George Ferguson Bowen, G.C.M.G.
Sir Eedmond Barry, Kt, (acting) ..
Sir William Foster Stawell, Kt. (acting)
The Most Honourable George Augustus
Constantine, Marquis of Normanby,
G.C.M.G., P.C.
Sir William Foster Stawell, Kt. (acting)
Sir Henry Brougham Loch, K.C.B.
Since Victoria has been an independent colony, the average time during
which the Governors of Victoria, prior to Sir Henry Loch, not including the
Acting-Governors, have held office has been about four years and six months.
Soebento.— Of all the places visited by Victorians for pleasure, or as a resort
to recruit from the exhaustion of town life, or of the confirmed invalid, none, in
my opinion, equals Sorrento. Situate on a peninsula extending to the Heads! in
some places less than a mile across from the bay to the open sea, affording a
bathing ground on both sides unequalled by any other watering-place, the
scenery is undulating and picturesque, the sea breezes are most refreshing, while
the natural spring water, impregnated more or less with lime, is a most valuable
alterative medicine. J. T . Haecourt.
Cremorne Private Eetreat for the Insane and Inebriate, January, 1876.


Continents.
Area in English
Square Miles.
Estimated
Population.
Persons
to the
Square Mile.
Europe..
Asia .. .. ..
Africa ..
America
Australasia and Polynesia
Polarland
3,756,002
17,208,208
11,511,776
14,850,631
3,455,802
1,728,585
327.743.400
795,591,000
205,823,200
100.415.400
4,232,000
82,500
87-3
46-2
17-9
6-8
1-2
•05
Total ..
52,511,004
1,433,887,500
27-3
The scanty population of Australasia and Polynesia will be at once
noticed. It will also be observed that by far the greater proportion, or about
four-sevenths, of the total population of the earth is distributed throughout
Asia, but that the density of population there is little more than half that of
Europe.
THE PACIFIC OCEAN.
All the salt water on the surface of the globe we live on is divided into-
five great oceans. Of these, one is named the Pacific, or Tranquil Ocean,
and its southern portion is sometimes called the South Sea, or the Southern
Ocean, because it stretches away towards the South Pole. In this part of
the Pacific Ocean lies Australia, the land we live in.
The Pacific Ocean was so called by a Portuguese voyager, named
Magellan, because of the delightful weather he enjoyed on its waters. He
was the first to discover, and to sail through, the narrow passage into it
from the Atlantic Ocean. Magellan’s Straits divide the mainland of
America from an island lying south of it, called Tierra del Fuego, or the
Land of Fire. The discovery of this passage was made in the year 1520.
It is a very strange fact that the Pacific Ocean was not known at all to
the people of Europe until about four hundred years ago. In ancient times
people believed that the whole of the earth was flat, in shape a circle, and
surrounded by a vast ocean, with all the land in the centre. This belief
was proved to be quite wrong when Columbus discovered America in the
year 1492.
The first voyager from Europe who saw the Pacific Ocean was a
Spaniard, named Balboa, on the 26th of September, in the year 1518.
THE WORLD.—AREA AND POPULATION.
From John I. Bleasdale, D.D.
Accidental circumstances of a painful and dangerous nature, involving much
acute suffering and derangement of my general health, induced me, backed as they
were by the advice of both medical and other friends, to make acquaintance with
Sorrento. I have real pleasure in stating that my general health has been very
much improved.
For invalids who need long rest and quiet, its climate, protected by the high
land from the cold south and west winds in winter, and the comparatively cool
summer weather, and, above all, its dry limestone and sandy soil, render it, with
other circumstances just enumerated, the natural sanatorium of the colony.
John I. Bleasdale, D.D.
Public Library, &0., Melbourne, 29th January, 1876.


AREAS OF AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES.
Square Miles.
Victoria ... ... ... ... ... 87,884
New South Wales ... ... ... ... 809,175
Queensland ... ... ... ... ... 668,224
South Australia ... ... ... ... 903,425
Western Australia ... ... ... ... 975,920
Total Australia ... ... ... 2,944,628
Tasmania ... ... ... ... ... 26,375
New Zealand ... ... ... ... 104,027
Total Australasia ... ... ... 3,075,030
Victoria occupies about a thirty-fourth part of the whole continent of
Australia, and is slightly smaller than Great Britain.
The Australasian colonies occupy three-eighths, and Victoria nearly a
ninetieth, of the whole area of the British dominions. The Australasian
colonies contain over an eightieth, and Victoria contains nearly a two
hundred and sixtieth, of the population of the whole British Empire. The
area of Australasia is somewhat smaller than that of Canada, which is the
The population of Victoria is
largest British possession; and the population of Canada exceeds that of
Australasia by about a million and a quarter. The population of Victoria is
exceeded by that of no British dependency except India, Canada, Ceylon,
and the Cape of Good Hope. Nearly two-fifths of the inhabitants of
Australia, and about one-third of the inhabitants of the Australasian group,
are living in Victoria.
Estimated
Population
on the 31st
December,
1886.
Colony.
Births.
Deaths.
Marriages.
Victoria
1,003,043
30,824
14,952
7,737
New South Wales
Queensland
1,001,966
342,614
36,284
14,587
7,811
12,582
5,575
2,785
South Australia
Western Australia
312,758
39,584
11,177
4,234
1,466
Total Australia
2,699,965
92,333
40,154
20,606
Tasmania
137,211
589,386
4,627
19,299
1,976
6,135
985
3,489
New Zealand
Total Australasia ..
3,426,562
116,259
48,265
25,080
There is nothing extreme in the forecast which predicts that within half
a century we shall number 20,000,000 of people,
It may be interesting to compare the areas of the various Australasian
colonies with those of European countries. Victoria is slightly smaller than
Great Britain, the actual difference being only 122 square miles. The area
of Great Britain is made up as follows : —
Square Miles.
England and Wales .. .. .. .. 58,186
Scotland .. .. .. .. .. •. 29,820
Total .. .. .. .. .. 88,006


The area of New South Wales (309,175) square miles is larger by 162
square miles than the combined areas of France, Continental Italy, and
Sicily:—
Square Miles.
France .. .. .. .. •• 204,031
Italy (Continental portion) .. .. .. 94,426
Island of Sicily .. .. .. .. .. 10,556
Total
309,013
Queensland (668,224 square miles) is only smaller by
than the following countries taken in combination :—
Sweden and Norway
Austria-Hungary ..
Italy (Continental portion) and Sicily
736 square miles
Square Miles.
299,535
264,443
104,982
Total
668,960
South Australia (903,425 square miles) is larger by 2675 square miles
than the following:—
Square Miles.
Spain .. .. .. .. .. .. 196,114
France .. .. .. .. .. .. 204,081
Germany.. .. .. .. .. .. 208,640
Austria-Hungary .. .. .. .. .. 264,443
Denmark.. .. .. .. .. .. 14,784
Holland .. .. .. .. .. .. 12,738
Total
900,750
The area of Western Australia (975,920 square miles) exceeds by 4235
square miles the combined areas of the last-named countries, with the
addition of three others. Thus :—
Square Miles.
Spain, France, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Denmark,
and Holland, as above .. .. .. .. 900,750
Portugal .. . • .. .. .. .. 34,595
Greece ..
Belgium ..
24,970
11,370
Total
971,685
Total
.. 104,982
The area of the Continent of Australia (2,944,628
square miles) exceeds
by 2786 square miles the areas of the following countries taken in combina-
tion : —
Square Miles.
Eussia and Europe, including Poland and Finland
2,080,395
Sweden and Norway
299,535
Germany
208,640
Austria-Hungary ..
264,443
Turkey in Europe
63,859
Greece ..
24,970
Total
2,941,842
Tasmania (26,375 square miles) is larger by 1405 square miles than
Greece, which contains 24,970 square miles.
New Zealand (104,027 square miles) is smaller by only 955 square miles
than Continental Italy and Sicily combined, the area of which is as
follows :
Square Miles.
Italy (Continental portion) .. .. .. .. 94,426
Island of Sicily .. .. .. .. .. 10,556
10,556


And the area of the Australian continent, combined with the areas of
Tasmania and New Zealand (3,075,030 square miles), exceeds by 2830 square
miles the sum of the areas of the last-named countries, with the addition of
the areas of Switzerland and Italy. Thus: —
Square Miles.
Russia in Europe, Sweden and Norway, Germany, 1
Austria-Hungary, Turkey in Europe, and Greece, as !-
above.. ~ .. .. .. .. ) 2,941,842
Switzerland .. .. ~ .. .. 15,977
Italy (including Sicily and Island of Sardinia) .. 114,381
Total .. .. .. .. .. 3,072,200
It may be mentioned that the area of Australia, Tasmania, and New
Zealand is less by 680,972 square miles than the area of the Continent of
Europe (3,756,002 square miles), but exceeds by 47,439 square miles the
area of the United States, exclusive of the Alaska territory (8,027,591 square
miles).
Australasia, at the present moment, has a population of close upon
■3,500,000, a number which exceeds that of independent kingdoms like
Denmark and Greece, and which very narrowly approaches that of countries
like Holland and Portugal, which have played a grand part in the world’s
history. The United States had no more when they won their freedom at
the point of the sword.
In material wealth Australasia, with illimitable resources yet virgin and
undeveloped, can be described without exaggeration as among the richest
countries on the face of the globe. A people of three millions and a half
has a public revenue of ,£23,500,000, of which .£9,500,000 is raised by taxa-
tion, and its annual public expenditure amounts to £,'26,500,000. Its revenue
is thrice as large as that of Belgium, with a two-thirds bigger population,
and of Brazil, with three tim.es the number. The ratio per head of gross
revenue is twice or three times as great as that of any European country,
and is higher than most, even if we take only the amount raised by taxation,
the percentage of which of the total revenue is, nevertheless, very much
smaller than elsewhere. The public debt of Australasia has now reached
£153,000,000—a total which brings us amongst the most heavy borrowing
powers; and in the ratio per head we are tar ahead of any other nation.
Even Spain, with £3O 9s. 2d. per head, is nowhere against an average for
Australasia of £44 12s. 10d., and such extreme amounts as £5B for New
Zealand and South Australia, and £6O 15s. sd. for Queensland. It must be
borne in mind, however, that, as far as the great bulk of Australasian debt is
concerned, it has been expended on reproductive works, and is, therefore,
rather an investment of capital than a heavy burden of unproductive debt.
With imports of nearly £60,000,000 and exports of over £45,000,000, Austral-
asia takes her place beside Austria and Italy, and before Spain and Sweden.
The average value per head is higher than any countries except Belgium and
Holland. The shipping inwards and outwards is larger than that ol Russia,
Italy, or Austria. Australasia has nearly nine thousand miles of railway
open, and two thousand in course of construction, 37,000 miles of telegraph
lines in operation, and over twice as many miles ol wire, lire area ol land
under cultivation is over eight million acres. Our wheat crop yields forty
million bushels, and we have achieved a position as one of the recognised
fields of food supply for the mother country in corn, wine, and frozen meat.
There are eighty-six millions of sheep in Australasia, oyer eight million
cattle, and one million and a quarter horses. These statistics show what we
are now, and everywhere growth is rapid, continuous, and sustained.
The general view is one which may well excite feelings of pride and
gratulation.


ABORIGINES IN THE AUSTRALASIAN
COLONIES, 1881.
Colony.
Males.
Females.
Total.
Victoria
New South Wales *
Queensland f ..
South Australia J
Western Australia §
1,643
10,719
9,866
2,868
20,585
6,846
Total
17,235
14,465
31,700
The last male of the Tasmanian Aboriginals died on the 3rd March, 1869, and the last of the
race (Trucaninni, a female) died at Hobart on the Bth May, 1876.
* Returns were obtained of the “civilized” Aborigines only.
t In the northern parts of the colony the Aborigines are comparatively numerous, and some
persons resident in the Cook and Palmer districts have supposed there may be 70,000 in Queensland.
This, however, is a very crude estimate, and may be far wide of the truth.
t The Aborgines in the Northern Territory of South Australia are not included. In the whole
colony there are probably quite as many Aborigines as in Queensland.
5 Large portions of that immense territory have not yet been explored, and in some places
Aborigines are very numerous.
GOVERNORS OF
AUSTRALASIAN
COLONIES.
Colony.
Name.
Date of Assump-
tion of Office.
Salaries.
Victoria
New South Wales
Sir Henry Brougham Loch, K.C.B.
The Eight Hon. Charles Kobert,
Baron Carrington, G.C.M.G.
Sir Anthony Musgrave, K.C.M.G.
Sir William Cleaver Francis
July 15, 1884
Dec. 11, 1885
10,000
7,000
Queensland
South Australia
Nov. 6, 1883
Feb. 19, 1883
5,000
5,000
Western Australia
Eobinson, K.C.M.G.
Sir Frederick Napier Broome.
K.C.M.G.
June 5, 1883
2,500
Tasmania
Major Sir George Cumine Strahan
K.C.M.G.
Dec. 7, 1881
3,500
New Zealand
Lieutenant-General Sir William
Francis Drummond Jervois,
G.C.M.G., C.B.
Jan. 20, 1883
5,000
John Bates Thurston, C.M.G,
(Acting)
4,000
New Guinea (British)
John Douglas, C.M.G. (Acting)
From Ernest Carter, Esq.
tion that I should give you r
and others from a residence at
In response to a suggestion
likely to arise to children and
ly opinion of the benefit
Sorrento, and the use of
water impregnated with lime, such as you get there, I beg to state that it is quite
clearly understood by dentists and medical men, who have taken the trouble to
investigate the matter, that the decay of the teeth in the young people of this
colony is mainly attributable to the want of sufficient lime in the food, more
particularly in the water,
This want is particularly supplied at Sorrento, where you have a limestone
formation; and the water from the springs, which can be had anywhere for
sinking, is charged with lime, and must, therefore, prove highly beneficial to all
young children and delicate persons.
50 Eussell-street. Ernest Carter.


AGENTS-GENERAL FOR THE AUSTRALIAN
COLONIES.
New South Wales.
3 Westminster Chambers, Yictoria-street, Westminster.
Agent-General—Sir Saul Samuel, C.M.G. Secretary—S. Yardley.
Victoria.
8 Victoria Chambers, Victoria-street, Westminster.
Agent-General—Sir Graham Berry, K.C.M.G. Board of Advice—L
Inglis, 115 Cannon-street; A, T. Thomson, 49 Gloucester-terrace; J.
Badcock, Bank of Australasia; A. C. Corbett; Howard Spensley. Secre-
tary—J. Cashel Hoey.
South Australia.
8 Victoria Chambers, Victoria-street, Westminster.
Agent-General—Sir Arthur Blyth, K.0.M.G.. Assistant Agent-General—
S. Deering.
Queensland.
Agent-General—F. L. Garrick, 32 Charing Cross, S.W. Secretary—C.
S. Dickens.
New Zealand
7 Westminster Chambers, Victoria-street, Westminster.
Agent-General—Sir Francis Dillon Bell. Secretary—Walter Kennaway.
Western Australia.
Crown Agents—Downing-street, for financial business. Emigration—
Messrs. W. Felgate and Co., 27 Clements-lane, E.C.
Tasmania.
Agent-General—Hon. Adye Douglas. Secretary—C. Dugald Buckler.
Crown Agents for the Colonies.
Crown Agents—Downing-street. W. C. Sargeaunt, C.M.G.; M. Pi.
Ommaney.
Frovi W. Greenlaw, Esq.
As you desire a letter from me as to my experience of Sorrento, I have muck
pleasure in stating that I have spent on several occasions, last year and this one,
a few days each visit. The salubrity of the climate, the marked difference of the
temperature during hot winds existing there, as compared with Melbourne and the
various watering-places in Port Phillip Bay ; the varied and pleasing scenery of
the beach in the bay ; the natural grandeur of the ocean beach, with its aquariums
and continuous roll of breakers coming in shore —all unite to render it a most
healthful and enjoyable watering-place. Safe and excellent sea bathing exists at
the baths, in close proximity to the hotels ; various drives are to be had, and really
good hotels provide all that can be desired at reasonable rates. The trip by the
steamer is also enjoyable and cheap. Indeed, I consider Sorrento in every way a,
place where anyone cannot fail to derive great benefit to health, and to return
from it with increased ability and zest for the duties of business and life.
Villa Alba, Studley Park, Kew, 31st January, 1876. W. Greenlaw.


DISCOVERY OF AUSTRALIA.
It is not known which of the early Dutch voyagers discovered Australia.
But the new country was first mentioned in a book printed in Holland in
the year 1598. It mentions that the country is so large that, if it were
fully explored, it would be counted a fifth part of the world.
In the year 1606 a Portuguese voyager, named Quiros, first saw what he
believed to be some part of Australia, but this is now known to have been
one of the islands of the New Hebrides. A Spanish seaman, named Torres,
who was second officer on board of the ship commanded by Quiros, sailed
the same year through the straits dividing New Guinea from the continent.
These straits are called after him—Torres Straits.
At that time the Dutch held possession of Java and the Spice Islands.
And at the same time that the Portuguese voyagers were in the Australian
waters, a Dutch ship, named the Dove , found its way from Java into the
great gulf on the northern shores of this continent. Some of the crew were
so rash as to land, and were killed by the natives.
Ten years after this another Dutch sailor, named Dirk Hartog, sailed
along the north-west portion of the continent, and named it the Land of
Concord.
Other Dutch voyagers visited Australia, and further explored the west
coast. Amongst them was General Carpenter, who, in the year 1628, sailed
into the great gulf on the northern coast, and called it after his own name.
Another Dutch voyager was Abel Tasman, who, in the year 1642, first dis-
covered Tasmania, to which he gave the name of Van Diemen’s Land, in
honour of the Dutch Governor of the Spice Islands. Tasman also dis-
covered New Zealand, and named it after his native place in Holland, called
Zealand.
The Dutch gave the name of New Holland to the new continent in honour
of their own country. But they did not care to take possession of it, and
make a settlement, because they thought that it would not yield them gold,
precious stones, or spices ; and the natives were of too wild and warlike a
character to be easily subdued.
William Dampier, a famous English seaman, and a daring voyager, visited
and explored the north-west coast of Australia in the year 1688, and a second
time eleven years afterwards. He wrote an account of his voyages, which
contained the first description of the natives that had ever been printed in
the English language. The land is described as being “of a dry, sandy soil,
and destitute of water; there are divers sorts of trees, but the woods are not
thick nor the trees large.”
It was not till nearly a hundred years after Dampier sailed away from
Australia that any further discoveries of importance were made in regard to
this continent, but in the year 1770 the famous seaman, Captain Cook,
visited the Australian coast, and made discoveries.
From Hugh M. C. Gemmell and Samuel K. Walter.
One day in January last year we, the undersigned, took a trip down the Bay on board
the steamer Golden Crown, On arrival at Queenscliff we found the heat as great as
we had experienced in town the day previous, and out of curiosity walked to the
lifeboat-house, where the thermometer registered 104 degrees. As we neared the
other side of the bay the atmosphere was considerably cooler, and on landing at
Sorrento we examined the thermometer there, and, to our surprise, found a
register of only 80 degrees. Thinking there must be some mistake, we referred to
other instruments, all of which registered 80 degrees. After about three hours’
stay, and just before leaving, we examined them again; finding no alteration, we


THE NAME OF AUSTRALIA
was first given to the continent on which we live by the English voyager,
Matthew Flinders. Before his time it had been known as New Holland,
New South Wales, and the Great Southern Land. Flinders named it Aus-
tralia, which means the “ Southern Land,” as being more pleasant to the
ear, and answering to the names of other great divisions of the earth, Asia,
Africa, and America.
Australia is the largest island, and the smallest continent, on the surface
of the globe. It is about 2400 miles long from east to west, and 2000 miles
broad from north to south. Australia is so large that it is about twenty-
five times the size of Great Britain and Ireland taken together, and is only
about one-fifth part smaller than the continent of Europe, which lies at the
other side of the globe from it.
To the north of Australia lies the large island of New Guinea, which is
separated from it by Torres Straits. On the south, it is divided from the
island of Tasmania by Bass’s Straits. On the east, it is bounded by the
South Pacific Ocean; and on the west and north-west, by the Indian Ocean^
Australia is divided into five colonies ;—Victoria, New South Wales, South
Australia, Queensland, and Western Australia. Victoria is the smallest of
the five, and lies at the south-east corner of the continent.
NEW HOLLAND.
The name given to the Australian continent by the early Dutch navigators.
NEW SOUTH WALES,
the mother colony of the Australian group, was so called by Captain
Cook, who, when first exploring its rugged coast in 1770, thought some of
its general outlines were not unlike those of South Wales.
Cook took possession of the whole eastern coast from latitude 38 to 10’30
south, in right of His Majesty King George 111., with all its bays, harbours,
rivers, and islands.
After Cook’s visit no voyage was undertaken to the coast of Australia,
excepting that of La Perouse.
The first fleet of ships that ever visited the Australian waters sailed from
England in May, 1787 ; and, after a voyage of eight months, cast anchor in
Botany Bay on the 20th of January, 1788. The expedition was under the
command of Captain Arthur Phillip, of the Royal Navy, who had instruc-
tions from the British Government to found a colony, of which he was to be
the first Governor. The vessels of the fleet were commanded by Captain
Hunter.
determined to look at the instrument at the boat-house at the Cliff. On our
arrival we did so, and found it registered 109 degrees. One of Her Majesty’s
judges, who had been staying at Sorrento, crossed over with us, and as we neared
the Cliff the great difference in temperature was remarked, and when our experi-
ence of the morning was related, other parties concurred as to the facts above
stated ; several ladies who were sitting at the after-part of the boat removed to the
fore-part, thinking the intense heat proceeded from the funnels of the steamer, but
speedily discovered their error, and resumed their old seats.
Hugh M. C. Gemmell and Samuel R. Walxeb.


Almost as soon as he landed, Governor Phillip found that Botany Bay
was not a suitable place for the settlement. Without disembarking the
settlers, therefore, he set out, with a party of three boats, to explore the
coast to the northward. As he sailed along the barrier of cliffs, he decided
to examine the narrow inlet which Captain Cook had named Port Jackson.
The expedition sailed along the coast near enough to see the astonished
natives running along, and to hear their wild cries.
The first tack carried the boats out of the long heavy swell of the Pacific
Ocean into the smooth water of a channel protected by two lofty cliffs,
which form the entrance. Soon they came within sight of a vast land-locked
lake, stretching as far as the eye could reach. Black swans, and other rare
water-birds, fluttered up as the white strangers sailed on, charmed with a
scene in which every feature was so beautiful and yet so strange. They
soon found that they had discovered one of the finest harbours in the world.
On the 26th January the English fleet, having been brought round, anchored
in deep w r ater, close along the shore of Sydney Cove, so called after Lord
Sydney, one of the Lords of the Admiralty. The whole party landed
amounted to 1080 souls, who encamped under tents, and under and within
hollow trees.
The Governor was Captain-General and Vice-Admiral, with authority to
hold general court marshal to confirm and set aside sentences. Powers
equal to the first Governor of New South Wales, if held, have never been
exercised by any other official in the British dominions. Up to the year
1822 he could sentence to five hundred lashes ; fine five hundred pounds;
regulate customs and trade ; fix prices and wages; remit capital as well as
other sentences; bestow grants of land, and create a monopoly of any
article of necessity. All the labour in the colony was at his disposal, all the
land, all the stores, all the places of honour and profit, and„ virtually, all
the justice. The first Legislative Council was established in 1829. The
first act of the Council was to establish trial by jury in civil cases.
The new Constitution Act came into force on the 2nd of May, 1852.
TASMANIA.
In the year 1642 Captain Abel Jansen Tasman, sailing on a voyage of
discovery from Batavia, rounded the coast of what he thought was part of
the southern continent, and named it Yan Diemen’s Land, in honour of his
master, the Governor-General of the Dutch East Indies, Anthony Van
Diemen.
Mr. Bass, the surgeon of H.M.S. Eeliance, discovered, in 1798, that it
was an island, divided from the mainland by a strait 180 miles wide, which
Governor King named after him. On that occasion he was accompanied by
Flinders, who afterwards made a correct survey of the coast. The first
British settlers in the island gave it the name of Tasmania, in recognition
•of the eminent services which Tasman, its discoverer, rendered to maritime
discovery. But this name was not officially adopted until the year 1852,
when Tasmania was raised to the position of an independent colony.
From E. Stewart, Esq.
I have great pleasure in testifying to the beneficial effects of the air of Sorrento.
Last season my daughter Eleanor was suffering from great debility, loss of
appetite, and want of blood, but a two months’ residence at Sorrento thoroughly
restored her health, and she is now stronger than ever.
Kosedale, Inkerman-street, St. Kilda. E. Stewart.


The first settlement was made in 1803, when the British Government
despatched Captain John Bowen, of H.M.S. Salsette, with a small detach-
ment of marines, and a sufficient number of men to clear land and erect
houses. This pioneer band arrived at the Derwent River in June, after a
boisterous voyage. They fixed on what was deemed an eligible spot on the
left bank of the river.
Colonel David Collins was appointed Governor of the colony in 1804.
When he arrived with his fleet at the Derwent he did not approve of the
site fixed on by his predecessor. He chose the opposite side of the river as
a more eligible spot. This was at the foot of a mountain 4320 feet high,
now called Mount Wellington, where a perpetual stream of limpid water
flows down from its highest springs. Here, in April, 1804, he laid the
foundation of Hobart Town, which was named in honour of Lord Hobart,
at that time a member of the British Ministry.
In July, 1823, the Imperial Parliament enacted a “ law for the better
administration of justice in New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land, and
for the better government thereof,” which provided that the King might
erect Van Diemen’s Land into a separate colony. A new charter of the
Supreme Court, granting trial by jury, was proclaimed in the market-place
on the 7th of May, 1824. In December, 1825, Governor Darling visited the
island from New South Wales, and proclaimed the independence of the
colony, and Colonel George Arthur became Governor-in-Chief, and respon-
sible only to the Home Office. Responsible Government was established in
January, 1855.
NEW ZEALAND.
These islands were sighted and named after the island of Zealand, in
Holland, by the Dutch navigator, Tasman, in 1642; but they were not fully
discovered till 1769, when Captain Cook visited them and surveyed a large
portion of the coasts. Cook formed a high opinion of their fitness for
European colonization ; he held friendly intercourse with the natives, and
introduced the pig, the potato, and many useful seeds and plants.
Gradually adventurers were attracted from Sydney, and along the coast
little communities of petty traders, sawyers, sailors, sealers, &c., were
formed, and occasionally marriages took place between Europeans and
native women. During all this time the native tribes, steeped in
barbarism, were carrying on fierce wars with each other, as if their object
had been mutual extermination. In 1814 the Reverend Samuel Marsden, of
New South Wales, visited the islands, and established a mission at the Bay
of Islands. Gradually the missionaries acquired influence with the natives,
taught them the art of cultivation ; introduced fruits and vegetables suited
to the climate; and through their influence the natives began to possess
cattle, sheep, horses, and domestic fowl. A better state of things began to
spring up, and some of the native tribes expressed a desire to place them-
selves under the protection of England. This led the English Government
to take formal possession of the islands with a view to colonization ; and in
1840 Captain Hobson planted the first colony at Auckland, on the shores of
the harbour of Waitemata,
The New Zealand Company was formed in London in 1839, and the first
batch of immigrants arrived under Colonel William Wakefield, who had
authority to purchase land and select the site of the first settlement. He
fixed upon Port Nicholson, on the northern shores of Cook Strait, and
founded the settlement of Wellington; and 1200 emigrants arrived from
Great Britain before the end of the year. Other settlements were soon
made at Auckland, New Plymouth, Nelson, Otago, and Canterbury, the
land being bought by various associations.


FISHING.
ill!
1
m
mm
■|ij
Hi
■I
m
Mil/I 111
I I
HIM]


The prosperity of the new settlements was, however, unfortunately
retarded by quarrels with the natives, who assumed a hostile attitude,
repudiated the bargains they had made with the company, and finally
broke out into open rebellion. Troops were brought from Australia, who,
supported by friendly natives, had some smart encounters with the rebels.
The effect of these hostilities was to render life and property insecure in
many places, drive many settlers from the islands, and for a time to check
trade', immigration, and enterprise. At length the British Government
sent out Sir George Grey as Governor; more troops were brought over, and
the rebels were finally reduced to submission. At intervals since then the
wars with the natives have been renewed; but since 1865 the country has
had peace,
At first New Zealand was a dependency of New South Wales, and was
erected into a seperate and independent colony in November, 1840. A new
constitution was granted in 1852, which was enlarged in 1857 upon the
principles of Eesponsible Government.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
About the same time that the Tasmanian settlers were engaged in
colonising Port Phillip, and the pioneer associations were bargaining with
the aborigines for possession of their land, a body of gentlemen were
bargaining with the British Government for the colonization of South
Australia. They formed themselves into an association, and obtained a
charter from the Government, empowering them to establish a settlement on
the southern shores of the Australian continent. These shores had been
surveyed by Flinders in 1802. He may therefore be considered as the
discoverer of South Australia.
The early days of the colony were attended with much adversity, and the
colonists had to suffer great hardships. The first Governor was Sir John
Hindmarsh, who was appointed in 1886. He arrived in Adelaide, in H.M.S.
Buffalo, on 28th December, and took possession of Glenelg, where he issued
a proclamation, establishing the government of the province, in the presence
of the assembled colonists —about 200 in number. The total population at
the time was about 546. The first sale of town allotments in Adelaide took
place in March, 183?', the city being named after Queen Adelaide, wife of
King William IV.
Although called South Australia, the colony does not occupy the
southernmost part of the continent, as nearly the whole of Victoria lies more
to the south.
The Northern Territory forms now a part of South Australia. It extends
through the centre of the continent to the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria
and the Arafura Sea, having Port Darwin as its seaport. The distance from
Adelaide to Port Darwin is 1973 miles. An electric telegraph line connects
the two places. For 1300 miles the line was carried through country which
had never been before traversed by any white man but Stuart’s party.
Charles Todd, who originated the line, completed his work with wonderful
skill, and on the 2nd of October, 1872, the Lord Mayor of London, standing
at one end of the line, sent his hearty congratulations through 12,500 miles
of wire to the Mayor of Adelaide, who conversed with him at the other
extremity. The whole work was undertaken and accomplished within two
years.
The proclamation of the new Constitution establishing Eesponsible Govern-
ment was made on the 24th October, 1856.


QUEENSLAND.
The youngest of the Australian colonies, having been established in 1859,
prior to which date it formed the Moreton Bay district of New South Wales,
the name having been conferred on it by Captain Cook, who discovered it in
May, 1770. Flinders, in 1799, made a more complete examination of the
coast, starting from Sydney, but in 1801 he started from England, and sailed
all round the coast line of Queensland to the shores of the Gulf of Carpen-
taria, and, after a lengthened journey, fraught with many perils, reached
Sydney in June, 1803. In a despatch to Governor King he first made
known that the navigation of Torres Straits was both practicable and easily
made.
In 1817 Lieutenant King examined and charted the eastern shores of
Queensland, and considerably added to the knowledge of North-Eastern
Australia.
In 1823 the Mermaid, the vessel employed by Lieutenant King, left
Sydney, having on board the Surveyor-General of New South Wales, Lieu-
tenant Oxley, for the purposes of exploration, and particularly for ascer-
taining the fitness or otherwise of the new land for settlement. After
examining the coast line north of Cape Moreton, the expedition returned to
Moreton Bay, and on 2nd December the River Brisbane was discovered,
which received its name from the then Governor of New South Wales, Sir
Thomas Brisbane.
On the 3rd of June, 1859, Queensland separated from New South Wales?
and was proclaimed an independent colony under Responsible Government?
the name being chosen by Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
When Captain Fremantle hoisted the British flag at the mouth of the
Swan River, he took possession formally of all the land in the great island
continent now known as Australia not included in the colony of New South
Wales. Subsequently the colony had its eastern limit defined by the 129th
meridian of longitude east from Greenwich, which now constitutes the
western boundary of South Australia. Western Australia is, therefore, the
largest of the colonies of Australia, and more than eighty times as large as
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
Captain James Stirling, who landed with his wife and family on the Ist
of June, 1829, acted at first as Lieutenant-Governor, under instructions, but
with almost unlimited authority. On his return to England in 1831,
however, a commission under the Great Seal was issued, appointing him
Governor and Commander-in-Chief of Her Majesty’s settlements on the west
coast of Australia, or New Holland. The Governor is advised by an
Executive Council. There is also a Legislative Council, composed of
nominee and elected members. It still remains a Crown colony.
CAPTAIN COOK’S VOYAGES.
The line of famous English voyagers contains no greater name than that
of Captain James Cook. He was one of the world’s greatest men. He was
a born leader, and possessed every quality for command. A fitting title for
him would be the “ Columbus of the Southern Ocean.” What the immortal
Genoese voyager won for Spain and Europe, Cook won for England and the
world.


James Cook was born in the village of Marton, in Yorkshire, England.
The date of his birth is the 27th of October, 1728. His father, who was
also named James, was first a day labourer, and afterwards a bailiff, or
under-steward, on a farm. Both the parents of James Cook were noted for
their industry, thrift, and good conduct.
At the dame school of his native village James Cook learned his letters.
As he grew up, in order that he might assist in earning bread for the house-
hold, he was obliged to work with his father on his master’s farm ; so that
it was only at leisure times he could snatch an hour to learn reading,
writing, and ciphering. Afterwards, when he became a seaman, Cook taught
himself drawing, the art of sailing, and of making charts.
A great change in Cook’s life took place when he was thirteen years old.
His father then bound him apprentice to a draper in Whitby, a town on the
coast of Yorkshire. But, standing behind a counter, selling pins, and tapes,
and needles, was not an employment that suited the lad’s temper. The blue
ocean had a strange attraction for his boyish spirit.
James Cook was too good a boy to run away from his master, but he
confessed his love for a sailor’s life, and his dislike for the business of a
draper. His master, noting the bent of the boy’s mind, agreed to give him
up his indentures.
There lived then in Whitby two brothers, named John and Henry Walker,
who owned two vessels in the coal trade. To them Cook offered his services,
and he was bound apprentice as a sailor for seven years. At this point the
training of the great seaman began. His masters noted the good conduct of
the lad, his genius for a sailor’s life, and his eagerness to acquire skill in
his profession. In storm and calm, by night and day, through the sharp
blasts of winter and the balmy breezes of summer, he was always found at
his post. Thus were nursed in the youthful sailor those grand qualities of
steady attention, firmness, and strong resolve, which marked this great
voyager in his after life, and by which he became a great discoverer.
On the 26th of August, 1768, Captain Cook set sail from Plymouth, a
seaport on the south coast of England, in the Endeavour, a ship of 370 tons
burthen. His purpose was to observe the transit of the planet Venus over
the sun’s face at some station in the South Pacific Ocean. The ship arrived
safely at the Island of Tahiti in the following April; and here Cook care-
fully observed and made notes of the transit. The date was the 3rd of
June, 1769.
Cook then sailed to New Zealand, which no voyager from Europe had
visited before for a hundred and twenty years. Here he spent six months
in exploring the coasts of the islands. He next steered his course for the
continent of New Holland, as Australia had been named by the Dutch
voyagers.
On the 11th of April, 1770, Cook first sighted land, and sixteen days
afterwards he came to the entrance to a roadstead, which he supposed to be
a good harbour, and where he cast anchor. The next morning he landed,
with Sir Joseph Banks, Dr. Solander, and a party of seamen. They were so
charmed with the bright verdure of the scene and the loveliness of the wild
flowers, the evergreen shrubs, and the trees, that they gave the place the
.name of Botany Bay.
The voyagers were astonished and delighted at the strange and beautiful
■objects they saw. The kangaroos bounding through the open forest glades,
the flocks of parrots and other birds of brilliant plumage flitting through the
woods, and the numberless plants of every description, were all unlike
anything they had ever seen before in the whole cotirse of their voyage.


After exploring the country around Botany Bay for several days, and
trying in vain to form friendly relations with the native tribes, Cook sailed
away to the northward. On the 17th of May he anchored in a harbour to
which he gave the name of Moreton Bay; here Brisbane, the capital of the
colony of Queensland, is now built.
Leaving Moreton Bay, Cook steered northwards to the farthest point of
the continent, which he named Cape York. Wherever he landed he took
possession of the country in the name of the King of England.
On the 21st of August, 1770, Cook landed on an island near Cape York,
and, ascending a hill, whence he had a clear view over forty miles, he saw
that there was an open passage to the Indian Sea. This passage, lying
between Australia and the island of New Guinea, is called Torres Straits,
from the Spanish seaman who discovered it. Cook then addressed the
following words to his companions:—“ As I am now about to quit the
eastern coast of New Holland, which I am confident no European has ever
seen before, I once more hoist English colours; and though I have already
taken possession of several parts, I now take possession of the whole of the
eastern coast, by the name of New South Wales (from its great resemblance
to that part of Great Britain), in the right of my sovereign, George the
Third, King of Great Britain.” His men then fired three volleys, which
were answered by the same number from the guns of the ship, and by three
cheers from the sailors in the main shrouds. Thus was founded the province
which has since grown into the three great and flourishing colonies of New
South Wales, Victoria, and Queensland.
Cook returned to England on the 12th June, 1771. His arrival was hailed
with delight by the nation, and great honours were paid by the Government
to the founder of the new British dominion in the South.
The following year a second fleet of ships, under the command of Cook,
was sent out from England to explore further the Southern Ocean. In the
course of this voyage Cook touched twice at New Zealand, and gained much
knowledge of the country and of the native races. He also discovered and
named Norfolk Island.
A third fleet was sent from England in the year 1776, and Cook once more
touched at New Zealand and Van Diemen’s Land. Early in 1779 the
vessels put in at the Sandwich Islands. At Owhyhee (or Hawaii) an alarm
arose amongst the natives, and Cook was murdered by them on the 14th
February, 1779.
Thus ended the career of the immortal founder of the Australian colonies.
His age was only fifty-one. The British nation, and the whole civilised
world, mourned the loss of the famous voyager, one of the greatest and best
of men. A monument to his memory stands in Hyde Park, Sydney.
THE ADVENTURES OF BASS AND FLINDERS.
When Captain Hunter, who commanded the first fleet which brought
colonists from England to Australia, was sent out, in 1795, to succeed
Governor Phillip at Sydney, there were under his command two remarkable
men. These were Matthew Flinders, midshipman, and George Bass,
surgeon. Whilst on the voyage Flinders and Bass planned an expedition,
and a month after the arrival of the Beliance in Sydney harbour prepara-
tions were made for carrying it out. They bought
A Small Boat, Eight Feet Long,
named it the Tom Thumb , and, with a crew consisting of one small boy,
embarked in it to make discoveries on the Australian coast. A sail was


hoisted, which Flinders managed, while Bass steered, and the boy was kept
to bale. They tacked to and fro about the harbour to test their sailing
ability, and then stood boldly out of the Heads into the ocean. The Tom
Thumb danced about like a feather on the waves, but she succeeded in
reaching Botany Bay. The first exploration was ascending the George
River. The adventurous voyagers then returned to sea, and got back safely
to Sydney.
In March, 1796, the Tom Thumb was again launched. Bass and
Flinders sailed from Port Jackson, and drifted about till a spot called the
Red Point was reached. Here some natives were seen. The passage back
was very dangerous, but the Tom Thumb, with its two intrepid adventurers,
arrived safely in Sydney.
After their return, Flinders was sent on a surveying expedition. Bass,
too energetic to continue idle, started off to explore the Blue Mountains.
Here his courage and daring were signally displayed. Arming his feet and
hands with iron hooks, he made repeated efforts to climb the craggy cliffs
and cross the yawning caverns which opposed his passage, but after
fifteen days of great exertion and fatigue he was compelled to return.
When he came back to Sydney he drew up a memorial to the Governor,
asking for the means for another expedition along the coast. His request
was granted. He only needed a whale boat, a crew of eight men, and
provisions for six weeks. With this slender equipment he started from
Sydney in December, 1797. Clearing the Heads of Port Jackson, the crew
found themselves in the broad Pacific Ocean.
After sailing south for some days, and exploring the harbour and river of
Shoalhaven, as well as Jervis and Twofold Bays, Cape Howe was sighted.
The coast seemed to trend to the south-west, and Bass was burning to decide
the question whether or not Tasmania was united to Australia. The
weather, however, was rough, and there was not a chance of shelter upon
that shore; but there was an open sea before them, and every heavy roller
which came from the west sent a thrill of pleasure through Bass; for he
believed that the straits which now bear his name were discovered. Pro-
ceeding westward, he found the fine harbour of Western Port; but time and
the provisions at his disposal did not enable him to examine it. He returned
to Sydney without fully settling the question whether Tasmania was sepa-
rated from the continent, or was but a part of it.
When Bass brought back to Sydney his report of the supposed strait
existing between the continent and Yan Diemen’s Land, a small vessel, the
Norfolk, was put under the command of Flinders and himself, with instruc-
tions to complete the survey of the southern coast. They weighed anchor
on the 7th of October, 1798, and on the 4th of November tlje northern side
of Van Diemen’s Land was sighted, a part of the island which had never
been seen before. The fine harbour on this coast, and the river in which it
was found to end, were named respectively Port Dalrymple and the Tamar.
The Norfolk sailed round the island from this point, and thus solved the
problem that had baffled so many navigators.
Bass shortly after left Sydney in a vessel bound for England, but never
arrived there. It is uncertain what was his fate. According to one story,
his ship was taken by the Spaniards, and he was sent to work in the silver
mines of Peru. When and where this brave Englishman died are entirely
unknown.


THE STORY OF FLINDERS.
Matthew Flinders, a lieutenant in the Royal Navy, who accompanied
Bass in his voyage round Tasmania in 1798, was a navigator and explorer
of the highest class. In 1802 he was promoted to he captain of his
Majesty’s ship Investigator, specially fitted out to make accurate surveys of
the Australian coast.
He sailed from Sydney on the 22nd of July, taking with him as a tender
the Lady Nelson, surveying ship. The object of the expedition was to
examine the Gulf of Carpentaria. Pert Curtis, on the East Coast, was
surveyed and named.
After sailing westward, a large opening presented itself to view, but the
water was too shallow to allow of the ship entering it. This opening was
the Gulf of Carpentaria. On the 6th of September a breeze sprang up and
carried the Investigator along the low coast of the gulf. Here Flinders
was in the track of the early Dutch navigators.
On the sth of March, 1808, Flinders left the inhospitable shores of the
gulf. The south-east monsoons had set in; his ship was leaky and rotten,
and the crew were suffering so severely from scurvy that a return to
Sydney without fresh provisions was impossible. Reaching Timor,
provisions in abundance were procured; but, unhappily, dysentery began to
scoiirge the crew. All haste was made to reach Port Jackson, but many of
the sailors were stricken down before the Investigator reached its desired
haven.
The spirit of the heroic Flinders never flagged. Notwithstanding the
dangers of the voyage to Torres Straits, he made application for another
vessel to complete his explorations in the North, but the Governor had no
vessel to give him, and the Investigator was quite worn out. There was
nothing for it but to return to England, and ask for another ship from the
Admiralty. Accordingly, Flinders embarked in the Porpoise, and sailed
from Sydney, accompanied by two trading vessels, the Cato and the Bridge-
water.
In passing through Torres Straits, on the night of the 17th of August, the
Porpoise struck on a coral reef and took a fearful heel over. The Bridge-
water was also on the point of striking, but the Cato giving way, the former,
grazing the reef, escaped, while the latter struck and went over. The
captain of the Bridgewater, one Palmer, having escaped, sailed away, in spite
of the remonstrances of his mate, without making an effort to aid his
companions.
When the Porpoise and Cato were thus abandoned by their consort,
Flinders took the command, safely landed the crews of the two vessels on a
sandbank, of which a narrow space was clear at high water, collected stores,
erected tents, formed an encampment, and established a disciplined order of
proceedings. The reef was a mere patch of sand, about three hundred yards
long and one hundred broad, on which not a blade of vegetation was
growing.
It was determined that two decked boats, capable of conveying all but one
boat’s crew, should be built from the materials of the wreck, and that the
largest cutter should be repaired and despatched, under the command of
Flinders, to Port Jackson, a voyage of 750 miles. On the 26th of August the
cutter was launched, and named the Hope; and on the 6th of September
Flinders safely reached Sydney.
It was a daring voyage, and bravely conducted. The only vessel that
Flinders could procure in place of the wrecked Porpoise was a leaky schooner
of only twenty-nine tons burthen, named the Cumberland. He set sail,


accompanied by two trading vessels, and reached the shipwrecked crew in
safety, by whom he was received with frantic cheers of joy. Then he set
out with all his old companions to make the voyage to England in his
miserable craft.
When Mauritius was sighted the leaky state of the vessel compelled him
to put in there for repairs. War was then raging between France and
England. Although he held a passport from the English Admiralty,
Flinders was detained a prisoner by the Governor of the island, which was
then a French colony, and the journals and charts of his Australian dis-
coveries were seized. During Flindei's’ detention, Baudin, a French
navigator who had previously met Flinders, and been hospitably entertained
by him, called at Mauritius. Instead, however, of procuring the release of
his former friend, he persuaded the Governor to confine Flinders more
rigorously. Then, having taken copies of his charts, he sailed for France,
where he published a book, and received great applause from the French
nation, while Flinders —the real discoverer —was languishing in prison.
For six long years the great Australian navigator and explorer was kept in
captivity at Mauritius, the French Government refusing to order his release
At last, in 1810, he was allowed to return to England, where he com*
menced to write his great book. After four years of incessant labour, his
work was ready for publication, but the hardships he had endured, both
during his voyages and imprisonment, had so seriously injured his health
that he died just as his book was published. The name and fame of Flinders
stand next to those of Cook on the illustrious roll of the founders of Aus-
tralia. Flinders’ work was one of love ; he sought no reward and obtained
none. He lived laboriously and did honourable service to mankind, yet died
comparatively unknown, but leaving a name which the world is every year
more and more disposed to honour.
LA PEROUSE.
When Governor Phillip arrived in New South Wales on the morning of
the 25th of January, 1788, as the ships were leaving Botany Bay, the
officers were astonished at the sight of two strange ships of war sailing into
the roadstead. These ships, they found, belonged to the French nation,
having been sent out by the Government to make discoveries in the Pacific
Ocean.
The commander of the French ships was Admiral La Perouse, a bold
seaman, and a man of great knowledge and skill in his profession. The
ships had left France in 1785, and had been nearly three years sailing when
they reached New South Wales. During that time the voyagers had met
with many adventures, and had discovered many new islands.
The French admiral reported that he had heard of the intention of the
English to found a colony at Botany Bay, and had expected to find a town
built and a market established. He had been able to steer his course
straight into the harbour by the aid of one of Captain Cook’s charts. Had
the French ships arrived only a few days earlier, it is probable that the
honour of being the first to discover Port Jackson would have fallen to that
nation instead of to the English.
The French ships remained until the 10th of March to refresh and refit,
and then they departed on their voyage. From that time no tidings of La
Perouse were received for nearly forty years. The French Government
offered a large reward for any relics of the ships, and sent out a fleet in
1791 to search for La Perouse, but in vain. Many years afterwards, in
1826, Captain Dillon, the commander of an English vessel, found, at a


small island lying to the north of the New Hebrides, a number of articles
which had belonged to La Perouse’s ships, and which had been obtained
from the inhabitants of an island close by, named Mallicolo. A. strict
inquiry being made amongst these islanders, some eye-witnesses were
found who had seen the two French ships wrecked on a coral reef
surrounding the island. All on board had perished. Five French cannon
and other remains of the wreck were recovered by Captain Dillon, and
brought to Sydney.
Thus the mystery of the fate of this brave French voyager was cleared
up. A monument was raised to the memory of La Perouse and his
gallant seamen, by the French Government, on the shores of Botany Bay.
Like Captain Cook and Sir John'Franklin, La Perouse was not only a great
explorer and a skilful seaman, but also a kind officer and a just and humane
man.
GOLD
was first discovered in Australia by prisoners employed for making a road
across the Blue Mountains in the early days of New South Wales. In 1823
’M‘Brian, a surveyor, reported finding gold in the sand of the Fish River,
near Bathurst. In 1839 Count Strzelecki, the explorer, reported the
discovery of gold in Gippsland. In 1848 Mr. Smith, near Berrima, produced
a lump of gold embedded in quartz, and offered, on receipt of .£BOO, to
discover the locality. The Government, suspecting that it came from
California, declined, but offered to act in a liberal manner if the locality was
disclosed. On the 3rd of April, 1851, Edward Hammond Hargraves offered
to point out where gold would be found for .£5OO. The Government
made the same reply, with which Hargraves was satisfied, and on the Bth
of May, Green, a Crown Commissioner, wrote in alarm from Bathurst:—
“ A Mr. Hargraves has been employing people to dig for gold on the
Summerhill Creek, who have found several ounces. A piece of gold, valued
at £3O, has been brought in. Many persons with only a tin dish have
obtained one or two ounces a day, etc., etc.” Encouraged by the discoveries
in New South Wales, it was considered possible that gold might be discovered
in Victoria. William Campbell discovered gold in March, 1850, at Clunes,
and concealed the fact. Thomas Hiscock found gold at Buninyong on the
Bth of August, which he reported to the Geelong Advertiser on the 10th of
the same month. This discovery led to that of the Ballarat goldfields, etc.
The quantity of gold raised in all the Australasian colonies, from the period
that deposits of that metal were first discovered in 1851 to the end of 1884,
is estimated to have amounted to over 78 million ounces, valued at over
306 J million pounds sterling.
From Martin Evans.
It affords me very great pleasure to testify to the excellence of the climate of
Sorrento and its curative properties.
In December last year I had a very serious attack of gastric fever, which left me
completely prostrate, and so weak that I could only with great difficulty walk a
few yards without resting. Dr. Beaney recommended me to try Sorrento, which I
did, and in a few days I felt so much better that I could walk a mile. I remained
ten days only, but even that short stay completely restored my health, strength,
and appetite. I attribute my cure entirely to the salubrity of the climate of
Sorrento. I can strongly recommend invalids a trial of a short stay there.
Huntly Lodge, Caulfield. Martin Evans.


THE GENIUS OF EXPLORATION.
Angel of life ! thy glittering wings explore
Earth’s loneliest bounds, and Ocean’s wildest shore.
Lo ! to the wintry winds the pilot yields
His bark careering o’er unfathomed fields ;
Now on Atlantic waves he rides afar,
Where Andes, giant of the western star,
With meteor-standard to the winds unfurled,
Looks from his throne of clouds o’er half the world.
Now far he sweeps, where scarce a summer smiles
On Behring’s rocks, or Greenland’s naked isles,
Cold on his midnight watch the breezes blow,
From wastes that slumber in eternal snow ;
And waft, across the waves’ tumultuous roar,
The wolfs long howl from Onalaska’s shore.
Poor child of danger, nursling of the storm,
Sad are the woes that wreck thy manly form !
Rocks, waves, and winds, the shattered bark delay ;
Thy heart is sad, thy home is far away.
But hope can here her moonlight vigils keep,
And sing to charm the spirit of the deep:
Swift as yon streamer lights the starry pole,
Her visions warm the watchman’s pensive soul.
His native hills that rise in happier climes,
The grot that heard his song of other times,
His cottage-home, his bark of slender sail,
His glassy lake, and broomwood-blossomed vale,
Rush on his thought; he sweeps before the wind,
Treads the loved shore he sighed to leave behind;
Meets at each step a friend’s familiar face,
And flies at last to Helen's long embrace;
Wipes from her cheek the rapture-speaking tear,
And clasps, with many a sigh, his children dear !
While, long-neglected, but at length caressed,
His faithful dog salutes the smiling guest,
Points to the master’s eyes (where’er they roam)
His wistful face, and whines a welcome home.
And such thy strength-inspiring aid that bore
The hardy Byron* to his native shore—
In horrid climes, where Chiloe’s tempests sweep
Tumultuous murmurs o’er the troubled deep,
’Twas his to mourn misfortune’s rudest shock,
Scourged by the winds, and cradled on the rock,
To wake each joyless morn, and search again
The famished haunts of solitary men :
Whose race, unyielding as their native storm,
Knows not a trace of Nature but the form;
Yet, at thy call, the hardy tar pursued,
Pale, but intrepid; sad, but unsubdued,
Pierced the deep woods, and hailing from afar,
The moon’s pale planet and the northern star;
Paused at each dreary cry, unheard before,
Hyaenas in the wild, and mermaids on the shore ;
Till, led by thee o’er many a cliff sublime,
He found a warmer world, a milder clime,
A home to rest, a shelter to defend,
Peace and repose, a Briton and a friend! f — Campbell.
* Commodore Byron, who, in 1741, suffered great hardships from the shipwreck of the Wager,
nQ f Il Don Patrick Gedd, a Scotch physician in one of the Spanish settlements, hospitably relieved
Byron and his associates.


MELBOURNE CENTENNIAL EXHIBITION.
EXECUTIVE COMMISSIONS ES.
Mr, G. Higinbotham, Chief Justice, president.
Sir James Macßain, President of the Legislative Council; Mr. P. Lalor, Speaker
of the Legislative Assembly; Sir W. J. Clarke, M.L.C.; and Mr. F. T. Sargood,
M.L.G., vice-presidents.
Messrs. J. Munro, M.L.A.; W. M. K. Vale; J. Bosisto, M.L.A.; E. Murray
Smith, C.M.G.; W. Cain, Mayor of Melbourne; J. H. Thompson, J.P., Mayor of
Ballarat; P. Hayes, J.P., Mayor of Sandhurst; L. L. B. Mount, President Vic-
torian Chamber of Manufactures ; W. Trenwith, President Trades’ Hall Council;
J. Blyth, J.P., Chairman of the Chamber of Commerce ; and H. Byron Moore.
Mr, G. T. A. Lavater, Accountant of the Victorian Eailways, Secretary to the
Commission, at a salary of £1250 a year.
CAMPBELL & YULE,
Lime and Cement Merchants,
47 WILLIAM STREET, MELBOURNE,
Have always on hand full supplies of all the best kinds of LIME.
Importers of the Leading Brands of
Portland Cement, Plaster of Paris, Laths, and all Plasterers’ Requisites.
Telephone No. 336.
SORRENTO HOTEL
LIIIIY k MIT ST ABIES.
E. DARK, Proprietor.
Traps convey Picnicers every Morning from the Sorrento Hotel to
different parts of the Coast.
Letters or Telegrams receive prompt attention. Ladies’ & Gentlemen’s Saddle Horses.
JOHN MILLS,
Ijcmse, Witriti, an& InsMrmtJCfc Agent.
AGENT FOR THE ROYAL INSURANCE COMPANY
Electoral Registrar for Carlton.
60 LYGON STREET, CARLTON,
AND AT
“ Mon sal-Dale,” Latrobe Road, Sorrento.


FLETCHER, CHESTER & CO.,
43 ELIZABETH ST., MELBOURNE,
Grocers, fine & Spirit Merchants, & Importers
Of all Continental and English Delicacies
Our Own Importation of TEA a Speciality.
COFFEE Fresh Roasted and Ground Daily
c
o
+j
Q.
'£
rf O
0)
u. -o
? £
- 5
'3
£.
u_
T 3
0)
's.
O
■D
C
aJ
T 3
0
C
C
H
_CJ
JO
d
4-*
0)
■OX)
<D
>
T 3
C
Cu
(/)
+-*
cS
<U
o
if)
<
Families Waited on in all Suburbs, four times weekly, for Orders.
Country and Station Orders receive special attention, and quick despatch.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
OCEAN AMPHITHEATRE ROAD, SORRENTO.
W. HURLEY& CO.’S C ASH STORE,
Bakers and General Storekeepers,
NEWS COMMISSION AGENTS.
Crockeryware and General Ironmongery. Drapery. Boots and Shoes. Tobacco and
Cigars. Fruits and Confectionery. Fishing Tackle. Stationery.
Cordials and Summer Drinks. Dairy Produce.
ESTABLISHED 1875.
SS!d3LiilME]lE.Siy
AMPHITHEATRE ROAD, SORRENTO,
]] iiotruauil) and (Giifettioiicr,
WINE AND SPIRIT MERCHANT,
Family Grocer and General Draper.
ALES AND SPIRITS OF THE BEST BRANDS.
REFRESHMENT JFtOOJVIS
FIRST-CLASS ACCOMMODATION FOR BOARDERS.
Agent for all the Daily and Weekly Papers.
LICENSED TO SELL STAMPS
T. SULLIVAN,
GENERAL & PRODUCE STORE,
PORTSEA ROAD, SORRENTO.
FRESH BUTTER
%xxxxx.
and EGGS.
STATIONERY. FANCY GOODS. BOOTS AND SHOES.


Pi;
El * 1]
LIS * AN
D3ST
D * ST01
m.
▼ W 'V tt'tV
Melbi
EDWA
T
LEADING HOTELS
3 BE HAD AT ALL THE
IN CITY AND SUBURBS.
tturne Brewing and Malting Company, Limited,
CARLTON BREWERY, MELBOURNE.
RD LATHAM, Manager.


RESIDENTS of SORRENTO and surrounding Districts,
when visiting Melbourne, are respectfully invited
to call and see the Famous and Popular
“EQUITABLE STORES,”
89 COLLINS STREET EAST,
NEAR THE TOWN HALL,
Where they can get everything from “ A Needle to art
Anchor.”
If you cannot call, send your Order to the Secretary, who will give it
his immediate attention.
The Immense Building contains
GROCERIES of the finest qualities. WINES and
SPIRITS, the best in the Market. IRON-
MONGERY. ELECTROPLATED WARE.
PATENT MEDICINES, at prices below all other
houses. CONFECTIONERY. TOBACCO.
CIGARS. HATS. SCARFS. TIES. SHIRTS.
SUMMER COATS. SUITS, to order, from 3s.
Our CHINA DEPARTMENT contains the best
assortment of China, Glass, and Earthenware in the
Colony. BOOTS, Colonial and Imported, for quality
and price we are un-xl-d. CARPETS, LINO-
LEUMS, and a great variety of HOUSEHOLD
FURNITURE always in stock. DRAPERY—
The largest and best selected Stock in the city.
■We are regularly opening NEW GOOES, per P. and 0. and Orient
. Steamships, our London and Continental Buyers being
particularly active.
Orders sent by Post receive prompt attention. All Cheques and Post-office Orders
please make payable to Secretary. Special Quotations for Large Orders, such as Public
Institutions, Squatters, Hotelkeepers, &c. Samples and Patterns sent on application.
“THE FAMOUS EQUITABLE STORES,”
09 COLLINS STREET EAST.
A. B. SUTHERLAND, Secretary.
“THE READY MONEY HOUSE” OF THE COLONY.
Save 40 per Cent.


W. H. GLEN & CO.,
21 and 23
COLLINS STREET EAST.
A AAA A A4..A A AAA A JL. JL. M. -A. .A. a .A.-A..A.
THE
PIANOS
EXCEL, ALL OTHER CHEAP PIANOS
Size, Tone, Touch, and Durability.
THE BEST VALUE IN THE WORLD.
Price
ON EASY TERMS , at 7/6 PER WEEK.
£4O AND UPWARDS.
pxa m o m
ON EASY TERMS.


THE INDEMNITY
Fire & Marine Insurance Company of Australasia,
LIMITED.
CAPITAL
£250,000.
Head Offices:
125 COLLINS STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.
Directors :
Hon. C. J. Jenner, Chairman.
James Craig, W. G. Sprigg, Robert Dickens, James M‘Culloch.
Sydney Branch, Commercial Chambers, Bond-st
Directors —Wm. Clark (Chairman), John Henderson, James Murphy.
Jas. M. Johnston, Secretary.
Special Rates—“ , Wool from Sheep’s Back to London-”
ROBERT C. ANDERSON, Manager.
Sorrento Baths’Company
LIMITED.
Registered under the Companies’ Statute 1864.
CAPITAL, £BOO, IN 800 SHARES OF£l EACH.
Ten per Cent. Dividends guaranteed for Four Years.
The holder of 25 Shares is entitled to a Free Pass to the Daths.
The original cost of the Baths exceeded £lOOO. They have been extended 40 feet this
Season, thoroughly repaired, improved, and painted at a cost of £4OO.
The Baths have been purchased as they stand by the Company for £7OO, subject to the
Government License and a Private Box.
BATH, Sixpence. TICKETS, per dozen—Adults, 4/6; Children, under 12 years of age, 2/-
GENTLEMEN, Red Flag, from 6 to 8 a.m., 12 to 3 and 5 to 6 p.m,
LADIES, White Flag, 8 to 12 a.m., 3 to 5 p.m.
Shares can be obtained of
G. COPPIN, Managing Director.
