

CEREMONIAL STONES USED BY THE AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS.
« (Read January i, /pop.)
The following is a short description of some remarkable stones
used by the aborigines in certain areas scattered over the north-
western portion of New South Wales, which may be approximated
roughly as lying north of 34 degrees south latitude and west of 148
degrees east longitude. The objects referred to have been observed
by squatters and other residents of the bush in different places for
many years past, but like most other matters connected with the
aborigines, very little attention has been paid to them. They are
occasionally found lying on the surface of the. ground, or only
partially exposed, on the flanks of sand-ridges, which may have-
been either old camps of the natives or places of their ceremonial
gatherings. They have also been discovered below the surface,
having probably been overlaid by drifting sand or soil, or were per-
haps purposely hidden when not in use.
The scattered remnants of the tribes in the region indicated are
all more or less civilized at the present time and have ceased to use
these stones in their ceremonies, owing to the occupation of the
district by Europeans for upwards of half a century. For this
reason it is especially important that all available information should
Reprinted from Proceedings American Philosophical Society, Vol. xlviii., iqog.


be recorded and published as widely as possible, in order to bring
these relics under the notice of every person who may have oppor-
tunities of obtaining further particulars regarding this interesting
subj ect.
The stones in question vary in length from about six inches up
to as much as two feet, but the more common lengths range from
eight to fifteen inches. They are widest at the base, gradually de-
creasing in dimension towards the other end and terminating in a
blunt point. They consist of different material, including sandstone,
quartzite, clayslate, kaolin and such other kinds of stone as might
be available.
For the present I shall describe only four of the specimens in my
possession. One is a fine-grained piece of clayslate, which when
found by the maker was probably very close to the requisite
form and needed only a little trimming or grinding to bring it to its
present shape. It is just a trifle under one foot in length by a
maximum width at the base of two and four-fifth inches, by a
thickness of one and a quarter inches. The weight is two pounds
six ounces. It was found in the bush by Mr. E. J. Suttor, owner of
Tankarooka Station, on the Darling River, near Tilpa, New South
Wales.
I have prepared two diagrams exhibiting the two wide faces and
the edge of the implement, together with a view of the extremity of
the base and have numbered the figures from I to 12. One face of
the stone is practically flat throughout its length, being rounded off
towards the edges on either side. The opposite face is slightly
convex.
’ Fig. 1 delineates the flat face of the stone, which contains a large
number of marks cut or scratched into the surface with some sharp
instrument, such as a mussel shell, a sharp flake of hard stone, or a
marsupial’s tooth. Some of them are merely well-defined scratches,
whilst others are cut into the stone about one-sixteenth of an inch.
The marking extends from the base to the apex.
Fig. 2 shows one of the edges of the implement, the marks upon
which are not reproduced, because they are continuations of those
given on the two faces. I have, however, shown the position of three
2
MATHEWS—CEREMONIAL STONES [January I,


principal incisions, which will be again referred to in dealing with
Fig. 4.
Fig. 3 is the convex face of the stone, which contains about eighty
marks similar in character to those of Fig. 1.
4 has been introduced to exhibit the position of an irregular
spiral incision which extends quite around the implement in a little
over three folds. The firm black line on the diagram represents the
cuts facing the observer; the dotted lines indicate their position on
the other side, if the stone were transparent. The position of the
spiral on one of the edges of the stone is shown in Fig. 2. The com-
mencement and end of the spiral appears on Fig. 1. It begins at
three and seven-eighths of an inch from the apex and terminates at
five and one-eighth inches.
Figs. 1-5. Views of a Ceremonial Stone used by the Australian Aborigines.
3
1909.] USED BY AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.


A spiral of this kind has not been observed by me before and
consequently adds to the value of the present specimen. In a few
other cases, however, I have seen a single, continuous incised line
girdling the upper half or pointed end of the stone. In most of the
specimens in my possession, as well as in those which have come
under my notice elsewhere, a girdling incision of any sort is absent.
It is on this account that I have drawn attention to the peculiar
marking of the stone now described.
Fig. 5 is a view of the basal end of the stone. A characteristic
of all the stones of this class which I have seen consists in their
having a saucer- or dish-shaped depression chipped or ground into
the larger end. In our example there are three such depressions
ground into the end of it. (See Fig. 5.) The two smaller ones are
very shallow, although easily discernible, but the larger has a depth
of nearly one-tenth of an inch in the center. The present is the only
instance in which I have observed three of these depressions—one
only being the general rule.
Another point to which attention may be invited is the very
much elongated oval form of a section through the shaft. This is
prominently seen in Fig. 5, where the diameter is more than twice as
great in one direction as in the other. Most of the stones of this
kind are nearly circular in section, whilst an elongated oval section
is rarely met with. Again, very few of these stones are so profusely
inscribed as the present example.
Fig. 6 is a long, thin, cylindrical spindle of a very hard clayslate,
eighteen and a quarter inches long. At four inches from the base
the greatest diameter is two inches, and at ten inches from the base
(Fig. 7) the smallest diameter is one and eleven-twentieth inches.
Fig. 7 represents the implement turned a quarter round.
A large amount of chipping and grinding has been done by the
native artificer to bring this specimen into its present shape, especially
at the pointed end and near the base. About the middle of the shaft
the original surface of the stone is seen in a few patches some inches
in length.
Commencing a little over an inch and a half from the base there
are numerous incised marks, both horizontal and slightly oblique,
all the way to the apex. About half an inch from the extreme point,
4
MATHEWS—CEREMONIAL STONES [January x.


one of these incisions reaches all around the stone. At the middle
of the shaft another line encircles it, but the two ends of the line,
instead of meeting, overlap each other some two inches, and are
from one-quarter to one-half inch apart. This encircling line is
very faintly marked. There are about one hundred and forty well-
Figs. 6-12. Three Ceremonial Stones used by the Australian Aborigines.
defined incisions on the entire surface of this stone, one hundred
and twenty of which are accurately reproduced in Figs. 6 and 7.
5
x 9°9-] USED BY AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.


In addition to this number there are many other marks which,
although distinguishable, are mere scratches and have evidently never
been anything more. They are of the same character as the well-
defined cuts, but much shorter.
Fig. 8 gives a view of the base of the stone, in which there is a
saucer-like depression, the average diameter of which is nearly an
inch and a quarter. This concavity has been made by picking the
surface with some sharp instrument, such as a pointed flake of hard
stone, the punctures being still plainly discernible. After the picking
out was done the surface was rubbed or ground fairly smooth. The
depth of the hollow formed in this way is a little more than one-
twentieth of an inch. The specimen was found on Buckanbee Run,
Darling River, and its weight is three pounds twelve ounces.
Fig. 9 is a soft sandstone, sixteen and one-half inches long, with
a practically circular shaft, the greatest diameter of which is two
and sixteen-twentieth inches, from which it evenly diminishes to a
well-defined point. At four and one-quarter inches from the point
there are two slightly curved parallel lines cut well into the stone.
On the opposite side of the specimen are two similar incisions, which
are not of course visible in my drawing. These comprise all the
marks on this stone.
From the thickest part of the shaft to the base the diameter
slightly decreases, until it averages a little over an inch and three
quarters (Fig. 10). The diameter of the depression in the base
averages nearly two inches and its depth is one-eighth of an inch.
The stone was found on Kallara Station, Darling River, and weighs
three pounds fourteen ounces.
Fig. ii is another specimen of decomposed sandstone, sixteen
and five-eighth inches in length. At the thickest part the diameter
measures two and eighteen-twentieth inches, and a section through
any part of the shaft would give an almost circular outline. On
the face selected for illustration there are twenty-one incised lines,
comprising triplets, pairs and single marks.
Fig. 12 represents the base, whose diameter varies from one and
three-quarter inches to two and a quarter inches. The usual saucer-
shaped concavity has a mean diameter of nearly an inch and a half
6
[January i.
MATHEWS—CEREMONIAL STONES


and its depth is one-twentieth of an inch. This specimen was dis-
covered on a sand ridge on Maira Plain Station, about fifty miles
southeast of Wilcannia, and weighs four pounds and a half.
A few remarks will now be made respecting the uses of these
stones, information on this point being now difficult to obtain for
the reasons stated in the beginning of this brochure. “ Harry
Perry,” an old aboriginal of the Darling River, who died at Bourke
about a year and a half ago, informed me that although he had never
seen the stones in actual use himself, his father and other old men
of the tribe had told him that they were employed in ceremonial
observances connected with assembling of the tribe at the time the
nardoo seed was ripe. The people would be invited to meet at a
place adjacent to some low-lying ground which had been moistened
by showers during the early spring months, or over which water had
flowed in flood time, and which was consequently expected to produce
large quantities of the nardoo plant. When the natives from the hin-
terland, in whose country there was little or no nardoo, came to the
gathering at the appointed time they brought with them articles as
presents or for barter with the people who had allowed them the
privilege of feasting on the nardoo seed. My native informant be-
lieved that the stones in question were used in incantations for pro-
ducing an abundant supply of nardoo and other seed bearing plants,
as well as for an increase in game and fish. He also said that the
messengers who were sent to gather the different portions of the
tribe for these festivals, generally carried one of the incised stones
to show the purpose of his mission.
As soon as other duties will permit I shall take pleasure in sub-
mitting to this Society a further article for publication, describing
the various forms and materials of the interesting aboriginal relics
briefly touched upon in the foregoing pages,
Parramatta,
New South Wales, October 31, 1908.
7
USED BY AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
1909.]


