

■
* *
No. 287. Book. 8. j
No. 237. Book. 8. ;
*»
• .1
Qiven under my hand and .seal |
of the Supreme Court of Queens- j
land-, this eighteenth day of May,
1897.
I
WILLIAM BELL,
Kegistrar of Joint Stock Companies.
w
*
r
S> .■ **7 • jA
rs
Lt* Cf e \
J w Jv »
& SS\ ff M •
• Cp *L ,
Certificate of Vticor^oratioti.
I, William Bell, of Brisbane, in the Colony
of Queensland, Registrar of Joint Stock
Companies do hereby certify that the Darling
Downs Brewery Limited was registered
and incorporated under the “
Acts 1863 to 1896.” as a limited Company
on the eighteenth day of May, one thousand,
eight hundred and ninety-seven.


I
I
I
I • i
'i
■
s lit
\
* ;j
*
I


Memorandum of Association.
Darling Downs Brewery Limited
1. The name of the Company is the Name of Coin*
pany.
Darling Downs Brewery Limited.
2. The Registered Office of the Company g^ tered
will be situate in Toowoomba in the Colony of
Queensland.
3. The objects for which the Company is
established are :
(1.) To carry on all or any of the following
businesses, namely:-Brewers, malsters, etc '
hop merchants, distillers, wine and
spirit merchants, licensed victuallers,
licensed publicans, manufacturers of
and dealers in aerated and mineral
waters, hotel-keepers, ice manufactur-
ers and dealers in ice, and any other
business or businesses which can be
conveniently carried on by the Com-
pany in connection with the above
or any of them.


To deal and
trade in wines,
beers, etc.
To purchase
business of
other Compan-
ies, etc.
To promote
other Compan-
ies, etc.
To enter into
partnership
with other per-
sons.
(2.) To buy, sell, deal and trade in tobacco
cigars, tea, coffee, wines, spirits,
cordials, ale, porter, beer, and other
goods, articles, chatties and effects
of all kinds, and in particular in
such commodities as are commonly
used or sold by licensed publicans
or which may be required by persons
dealing with the Company.
(3.) To purchase or otherwise acquire and
undertake all or any part of the
business, property, and liabilities of
any person, co-partnership or com-
pany carrying on the business which
this company is authorised to carry
on, or possessed of property suitable
for the purposes of this Company.
(4.) To promote any other Company for
the purpose of acquring all or any of
the property and liabilities of this
Company, or of advancing, directly or
indirectly,- the objects or interests
thereof, and to take or otherwise
acquire, and hold shares in any such
Company, and to guarantee the pay-
ment of any debentures or other
securities issued by any such
Company.
1 5.) To enter into partnership or into any
arrangements for sharing profits,


union of interests or co-operation
with any person or persons, or Com-
pany, carrying on, or about to carry on,
any business which this Company is
authorised to carry on, or any busin-
ess or transaction capable of being
conducted so as, directly or indirectly,
* tj • j
to benefit this Company, and to take
or otherwise acquire, and hold shares
or stock in any such Company.
(6.)
To take or otherwise acquire and bold^yp^ her
i * 11 / a i companies.
shares in any other Company having
objects, altogether or in part, similar
to those of this Company, or carrying
on any business capable of being con-
ducted so as to directly or indirectly
benefit this Company.
(7.)
To purchase, take on lease, or inp«°J r ais s e er
t . i • gonal property
exchange, hire, or otherwise acquire,
any real and personal property, and
any rights, concessions, or priviliges
which the Company may think neces-
sary or convenient for the purposes
of its business.
<B.)
To purchase or otherwise acquire leL^SSent.
• etc
letters of registration, patents, patent
rights and priviliges, inventions un-
proved, or secret processes, and to
grant licenses for the use of, and sell


To sell the bus-
iness of Com-
pany
To amalgamate
with other Com-
pany
To distribute
property of
Company
To make, accept
etc., bills of ex-
change or prom-
issory notes
To construct
buildings for
the Company
or otherwise deal with any letters of
registration, patents, patent rights or
priviliges, inventions unproved, or
secret processes acquired by the
Company.
(9.) To sell the business or undertaking of
the Company, or any part thereof, for
such consideration as the Company
may think fit, and in particular for
shares, debentures, or securities of
any other Company having objects,
altogether or in part, similar to those
of this Company.
(10 ) To amalgamate with any other Com-
pany having objects, altogether or in
part, similar to those of this Company.
(11.) To distribute any of the property of
the Company among the members in
specie, but so that no distribution
amounting to a reduction of capital
be made without the sanction of the
Company, if requisite.
(12.) To make, accept, endorse, and execute
promissory notes, bills of exchange,
and other negotiable instruments.
(13.) To construct, maintain, and alter any
buildings or works necessary or con-
venient for the purpose of the
Company.


(14.) To lend money to such persons and To lend money
" J- on security
upon such terms, and upon such se-
curity as the Company shall think tit,
and in particular to customers and
tenants of the Company, and to
guarantee the performance of any
contracts entered into by customers
or tenants of, or other persons having
dealings with the Company.
(15.) To borrow and raise money in such To borrow and
raise money on
manner as the Company shall think company’s
i * property
tit, and in particular upon the s eurity
of any mortgage or mortgages or
upon or by debentures charged upon
all or any of the Company’s property
(both present and future) including
its uncalled capital.
(16.) To buy and sell all kinds of property, ■ robu y and se!l
r j i lease, mortgage,
real and personal, movable and im-
movable, and to improve, manage,
develop, lease, mortgage, dispose of,
or otherwise deal with all or any part
of the property of the Company.
(17.) To invest the moneys of the Company Power to invest
J monies of Com-
not immediately required, upon such pany
securities as may from time to time
be determined.
(18.) To do or accomplish the foregoing General powers
6
objects, or any of them, or any part


8
Liability limi-
ted
Capital
*
4
1
-
thereof, with or without any other or
others of them, and either alone or
Jointly, with any other person or body
corporate, and either as principal or
agent for, or by means of the agency
of others, and either in the Colony of
Queensland or elsewhere
(19.) To do all such things as are incidental
or conducive to the attainment of the
above objects.
4. The liability of the members is limited.
Incidental
5. The capital of the Company is <£25,000
divided into ‘25,000 shares of Tl each, with
power to increase.
*
*
- i
\


We, the several persons whose names and
addresses are subscribed, are desirous of being formed
into a Company in pursuance of this Memorandum of
Association, and we respectively agree to take the
number of Shares in the Capital of the Company set
opposite our respective names.
No. of
Shares
taken
Names, Addresses and Description of Subscribers.
by each
Sub-
scriber
Alphonso Henry Redwood, Toowoomba, Malster -
Francis Archibald Primrose, Toowoomba, Gentleman
B. J. Beirne, Toowoomba, Gentleman -
one
one
one
Frederick Wilson, Toowoomba, Insurance Agent -
William Ward, Toowoomba, Gentleman
Michael Joseph O’Sullivan, Toowoomba, Solicitor -
Wm. Stevens, Toowoomba, Accountant
one
one
one
one
Dated this seventeenth day of May, 1897.
Witness to the above Signatures.
J. H. ROGERS,
Clerk t<» M. J. O’Sullivan,
Solicitor, Toowoomba.
Registered in the office of the Registrar of the Supreme
Court of Queensland, at Brisbane, this eighteenth
day of May 1897. No. 287. Book. 8.
WILLIAM BELL,
Registrar of Joint Stock Companies


' ~ ■ ’ -=»^~--H I I III ll^^^HI ' ■
\ " ■
'
*
.
,.* .
. tt •>
\ i
• : 3
i >
i j
1 r
I A?
I t
J\
m -*
B
v
BT ?'■< , W
*.*«• ■. • ««
I I
‘
. * -
V
r ' ■' * ‘
, '- '•■■-■
.
:% ■ *
■''■■'* * * m
■■ * V- r ' ; (\'\ ■'■;'■■■■;■ • . , '* . ,
'
“'■' . «»*.'• r •»•* ,\ , L. i *'*<■,■
I'
L


ARTICLES of ASSOCIATION
Darling Downs Brewery Limited
The following shall be the regulations of the Company,
subject to repeals, additions or alterations as provided
by the “Companies Acts 1868 to 1896.” and
these presents :
1. The regulations for the ihanagement of a Com- Regulation in
pany in Table A in the first schedule to “The Companies Spart t0 apply
Act 1868 ” shall apply to the Company, except clauses
14, 15, 28, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 80, 87, 40, 44, 48, 62,
58, 54, and 5 1 , widen shall not apply, and the following
clauses shall be in substitution for those which do not
apply, or in addition thereto.
Transfer of Shares.
2, The directors may decline to register any transfer Directors may
of shares where they shall consider the proposed transfereeteTte
to be an irresponsible person, or that, the transfer will not irrespoMiWe
be conducive to the interest of the Company. person
8. The Directors may decline to register any transfer 1 ” what case
of shares upon which the Company has a lien, and in the decifneto rel-
ease of shares not fully paid up. may refuse to register a stertransfers
transfer without assigning any reason therefor.


Debts mw be 4. The Directors may retain any dividends on which
deducted the Company has a lien, and may apply the same in or
towards satisfaction of the debts, liabilities or engagemen s
in respect of which the lien exists.
5 The Com pan v shall have a just and paramount
?n°S£ 8 Uen lien upon all the shares registered in the name of each
member (whether solely or jointly with others) for his
debts, liabilities, and engagements, solely or jointly with
any other person to or with the Company whet or one
period for the payment, fulfillment or discharge fcheieot
shall have actually arrived or not. And such hen shall
extend to all dividends from time to time declared in
respect of such shares.
As to enforcing 6. For the purpose of enforcing such lien, the
hen by sale Directors may sell the shares subject thereto in such
manner as they think fit; but no sale shall be made unti
such period as aforesaid shall have arrived, and until notice
in writing of the intention to sell shall have been served
on such member, his executors or administrators, and de-
fault shall have been made by him or t lem in the payment,
fulfillment, or discharge of such debts, liabilities, or en-
gagements, for seven days after such notice.
O O 7
7 The nett proceeds of any such sale shall be
SSSSTtJI applied in or towards satisfaction of the debts, liabilities,
or engagements and the residue (if any) paid to such mem-
bers. his executors, administrators and assigns.
7
8. Upon any sale after forfeiture or for enforcing a
of ali forfefte S (i les i ie n, the Directors may cause the purchaser’s name to be
?!' a rX f r en 'entered in the , register in respect of the shares sold and
the purchaser shall not be bound to see to the regularity
of the proceedings, or to the application of the purchase
money ; and after his name has been entered in the
register, the validity of the sale shall not be impeached by
" any person, and the remedy of any person aggiie\e y
the sale shall be in damages only and against the Com-
pany exclusively.
Increase of Capital.
9. The Company may from time to time increase the
increase Capital bv the creation of new shares of such amount
may be deemed expedient, and the power and authority
conferred by this Article may be exercised by the Direc-


tors, provided that the Capital shall not be increased to a
greater extent than £60,000 without the sanction of the
Company in General Meeting.
10. The new shares shall be issued upon such terms issue of shares
and conditions and with such rights and privileges annexed
thereto as the Directors shall determine, and in particular
such shares may be issued as fully paid-up and with a
preferential or qualified right to dividends and in the
distribution of assets of the Company and with a special
or without any right of voting.
11. All new shares shall be offered to the members o^ e r *° f t £ e ™
in proportion to the existing shares held by them, anding sharehoia-
such offer shall be made by notice specifying the number ers *
of shares to which the member is entitled, and limiting a
time within which the offer, if not accepted, will be deemed
to be declined, and after the expiration of such time or on
the receipt of an intimation from the member to whom
such notice is given that he declines the shares offered,
the Directors may dispose of the same in such manner as
they think most beneficial to the Company.
12. Except so far as otherwise provided by the con- capital raised
ditions of issue, or the regulations of the Company, an} rby new shares
Capital raised by the creation of new shares shall be sub-
ject to the provisions herein contained with reference to
the payment of calls and instalments, transfer and trans-
mission, forfeiture, lien, surrender and otherwise.
18. The Company may from time to time by special of
Resolution reduce its capital by paying off capital or can-
celling capital which has been lost or is unrepresented by
available assets, or reducing the liability on the shares or
otherwise as may seem expedient, and capital may be paid
off upon the footing that it may be called up again or
otherwise, and the Company may also sub-divide or con-
solidate its shares or any of them.
yiectinys.
14. An ordinary general meeting of the Company General meet-
shail be held once at least in every six months after the months very
incorporation of the Company, at such time and place as
shall from time to time be prescribed by the Directors.


No business to 15. No business shall be transacted at any general
be done meeting except the election of a chairman, appointment
present lum of Directors and declaration of a dividend, unless a quorum
of members be present at the time the meeting proceeds to
business. Five members present in person or by attorney
or proxy, shall constitute a quorum.
Vo tiny at Meetings.
16. Every member shall have one vote for each share
Number of votes pgld py him.
Votes person- 17. Votes may be given either personally or by proxy
ally or by proxy or py attorney.
18. Clause 50 of Tab [e A to 1 ite ./I ct
ported'twenty- 1 £6'#- shall be read as if the words “ twenty-four hours ”
four hours be- were inserted therein, in place of the words “seventy-two
meeting
Directors.
19. The number, qualification, and remuneration of
the Directors may from time to time be altered and fixed
by a resolution of a general meeting, but until otherwise
fixed, the number of Directors shall be ihr&p, and none but
a member of the Company, shall be eligible as a Director.
Directors
20. The office of Director shall be vacated by any
Disquaiiflcat-*. Director who shall become insolvent, or has his affairs
DirecUl4 ieCto#ull der liquidation by arrangement with his creditors, who
shall become of unsound mind, or who shall resign his
office.
i■, _ >
21. A Director stall not be inelegible for holding
ibi r e ec S pS'any paid office under the directors, and the Directors shall
c?iEany der have the same discretion in providing for the remuneration
J of a Director acting in such capacity as if he were not a
Director.
' 22. The fact that a Director or any firm of which a
act though per y - Director is a member, shall be interested in any contract
sonaiiyinterest- or ot p er matter on which the Directors may have to de-
liberate, shall not disqualify a Director from taking part
in the deliberation, or affect the validity of the contract or
act which may be determined on.


28. Any Director may be represented at meetings of
the Directors, and otherwise act in the duties of his office, by
another Director or Directors duly authorised in that
behalf by power of attorney, but such power of attorney
shall be deposited at the registered office of the Company,
together with such evidence as to the execution thereof as
the Directors may require.
24. Upon any vacancy occurring in the said offices, vacancy—how
the Directors may either fill up the office by the appoint-
ment of some one of their body thereto, or may at their
discretion discontinue the same.
4
25. The Directors may from time to time entrust to Directors may
iii i •
and confer upon any Managing Director such of the powers to man-
powers exercisable under these presents by the Directors aging Director.
as they may think fit.
Common Seal.
26. Subject to the provisions of The Companies Act Beai of the
Amendment Act of 1889. “ relating to duplicate seals ’’Company
The common seal of the Company shall not be affixed to
any document, except by order of at least two Directors.
The affixing of the seal of the Company to any document
shall be made in the presence of a Director who shall sign
every instrument to which the seal shall be so affixed.
27. The Company may have and use an Official
Seal in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and register
Ireland or in any other place in which it transacts
business, and may cause a Branch Register or
Registers of Members to be kept in the said United
Kingdom or in such other ■ place , jas the case may
be ; and the Directors may provisions as
they may think fit respecting the keepvng, of such
Branch Register or Registers.
Poveer of l.Hr&rtors*
. • t >
28. The management of the business and the control General powers
of the Company shall be vested in the Directors, who, in « { est^°^f/ec .
addition to the powers and authorities by these presents tors,
expressly conferred upon them, may exercise all such
powers, and do ail such acts and things as may be exercised
or done by the Company, and are not hereby or by the
Statutes expressly directed or required to or
done by the Company in general meeting, but subject
nevertheless to any regulations from time to time made by
the Company in general meeting.


29. In furtherance and not in limitation of and
without prejudice to the general powers conferred by the
55th and 66th clauses of the regulations in Table Ato
“ The Companies Act of 1863.” and by the last preceding
clause,, and of the other powers conferred by these presents,
it is hereby expressly declared that the Directors) shall ave
the following powers;; —
Specific powers
(1.) They may pay the costs, charges and expenses
preliminary and incidental to tne promotion,
formation, establishment and registration of the
Company.
To pay prelim-
inary expenses
(2.) They may issue, sign, accept, make and endorse
any bill of exchange or promissory note.
To issue, sign
bills, etc.
(8,) They may borrow money, and secure the money
borrowed and future advances over ah or an}
part of the Company’s property real and personal,
including future calls, by mortgage, lien, debent-
ure, or other security in any form they may
To borrow
think fit.
(4.) They may give any such security as aforesaid for
the purpose of securing the unpaid purchase
money of any property or business bought b} the
Company.
To give security
5 ) They may appoint any person or persons to ac-
' cept and hold in trust for the Company, any
property belonging to the Company, or in which
it is interested, and may execute and do all ;uich
deeds and things as may be requisite to vest the
same in such person or persons.
To appoint
trustees
(6.) They may institute, conduct, defend, compound
or abandon any legal proceedings by and against
the Company or its officers, or otherwise concern-
ing the affairs of the Company, and also may
compound and allow time for payment or satis-
faction of any debts due, and of any claims or
demands by or against the Company.
To bring and de-
fend actions.
(7.) They may refer any claims or demands by or
against the Company to arbitration, and observe
and perform the awards.
To refer to arbi-
tration.


(8.) They may act on behalf of the Company in all To act for Com
matters relating to bankrupts and insolvents
may petition for the winding up of any Company. uidation -
19.) They may from time to time provide tor the To appoint att-
management of the affairs of the Company abroad orneys-
in such manner as they may think fit and in
particular may appoint any persons to be
attorneys or agents of the Company, with such
powers and upon such terms as may be thought
fit.
(10.) They may delegate under the Seal of the Com-To delegate
pany, or by writing not under seal, to any com- poweib
mittee, local directors, secretaries, managers,
agents, clerks, and other officers respectively,
any of the powers of the Directors which in their
discretion may be deemed expedient for the due
conduct, management and regulation of the
business or affairs of the Company.
(11.) They may appoint, suspend, or remove any To a . oint offi
such coramitte, local directors, secretary, man-cers appom °
agers, agents, clerks, and servants of the
Company, and may determine their several
duties, labour and remuneration.
(12.) They may from time to time establish anyTo establish
branch offices or agencies at such place or places branches and
Qi -i i t ,i „ agencies.
ueensland or elsewhere as they ma_y'from
time to time determine, and may from time
appoint such local committee, local directors, or
agents with such offices, clerks or servants as
the Directors may think fit for carrying on the
business of any such branch office or agency, and
all branch offices and agencies, local committees,
local directors, agents, officers, clerks and servants
shall at all times be under the control and
government of the Directors.
(IB.) They may invest any of the moneys of the to invest mon-
Company not immediately required for the ies *
purposes thereof, upon such securities and in
such manner as they may think fit, and they
may from time to tune vary or realize such
investments.


To give security
by way of in-
demnity
To give percen-
tageto Directors
To establish re-
serve fund
To make bye-
laws.
To make con-
tracts-
(14.) They may execute in the name and on behalf of
the Company in favour of any Director or other
person who may incur, or be about to incur, any
personal liability, whether as principal or surety,
for the benefit of the Company, such mortgages
of the Company’s property, present and future,
including its uncalled capital for the time being,
as they think fit, and any such mortgage may
contain a power of sale and such other powers,
covenants and provisions as shall be agreed on.
(15.) They may give to any Director, Officer, Solicitor
or other person employed by the Company, a
commission on the profits of any particular bus-
iness or transaction or a share in the geneial
profits of the Company, and sucn commission or
share of profits shall be treated as part of tne
working expenses of the Company.
(16 ) They may, before recommending any dividend,
sen aside, out of the profits of the Company, such
sum as they think proper as a reserve _ fund,
to meet contingencies, or for equalizing dividends
or for repairing, improving, and maintaining any.
of the property of the Company, and for such
other purposes as the Directors shall, in their
absolute discretion, think conducive to the in-
terest of the Company, and they invest the
several sums so set aside upon such investments
as they may think fi', and may from time to time
deal with and vary such investments and dispose
of all, or any part thereof, for the benefit of the
Company and they may divide the reserve fund
in such special funds as they may think fit.
(17.) They may from time to time make, vary, and
repeal bye-laws for the regulation of the business
of the Company, its officers and servants, or the
members of the Company, or any section thereof.
(18.) They may enter into all such negotiations and
contracts, and rescind and vary all such contracts
and execute and do all such acts, deeds, and
things in the name and on behalf of the
Company, as they may consider expedient for, or
m relation to any oi tne matters atotesaid, oi
otherwise, for the purposes ol the Company.


(19.) They may purchase or otherwise acquire for the T f acquire
Company any property, rights or priviliges which piopeity-
the Company is authorised to acquire, at such
price, and generally on such terms and conditions
as they may think fit.
(20.) They may at their discretion pay for any rights to pay for same
or property acquired by, or services rendered to by debentures.
the Company, either wholly or partially in cash,
or in shares, bonds debentures, or other securities
of the Company, and any such shares may be
issued either as fully paid up or with such amount
credited as paid up thereon as may be agreed
upon, and any such bonds, debentures, or other
securities may be either specifically charged upon
all or any part of the property of the Company
and its uncalled Capital, or not so charged.
(21.) They may secure the fulfillment of any contracts to secure fui-
or engagements entered into by the Company, by® r lb fi® nt of con '
mortgage or charge of all or any of the property
of the Company and its unpaid Capital for the
time being and in such manner as they may
think fit.
(22.) They may attach to any shares to be issued as To restrict right
the consideration, or part of the consideration, for ar gg ansfer
any contract with, or property acquired by the
Company or in payment for services rendered to
the Company, such conditions as to the transfer
thereof as they shall think fit.
»i., • . .
|T t\ a C' y i CI» A 11 h* *1
(23.) They may insure any property in which the To insure
Company shall have an insurable interest.
Dividends,
f*
80. The Directors may, with the sanction of the Divide * ds or
members in general meeting, from time to time declare a bonus with con
dividend or bonus. The dividend so declared shall be meeting geneial
payable on all shares, in proportion to the amount of
capital for the time being paid up in respect of such shares'
We, the undersigned persons, being subscribers to the
Memorandum of Association, hereby agree to and sub-
scribe these Articles of Association.


SR'? o
<
20
■ - ■ ..-n
Subscribers
Alphonso Henry Redwood
Francis Archibald Primrose
B. J. Beirne
Frederick Wilson
William Ward
Michael Joseph O'Sullivan
W m Stevens
•
Dated this seventeenth day of May, 1897.
Witness to the above signatures—
H. ROGERS,
Clerk to M. J. O’Sullivan.
Solicitor, Toowoomba.
- >
Registered in the office of the Registrar of the
Supreme Court of Queensland at Brisbane, this eighteenth
day of May, 1897, No. 267, Book 8
WILLIAM BELL,
*» ,* i
Registrar of Joint Stock Companies.
4kt% *
•*
*
* t
♦
*
•
\ *
* *
%
-r
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
* V #
. > x
“ - * • •«* ' V .* ■
