

CEYLON




COMPILED FOR THE
AUSTRALASIAN-CEYLON BUREAU
Director :—\V. E G. Bell
Copyright 1923


H. E. Sir Wm. Henry Manning, G.C.MG., K.B.E. C.B.


CEYLON
THE PEARL OF THE ORIENT
"There is no island in the world. Great Britain itself not excepted, that has attracted
the attention of authors in so many different countries as Ceylon. There is no nation in
ancient or modern times possessed of a language and a literature the writers of which
have not at some time made it their theme. Its aspect, its religion, its antiquities and
productions have been described as well by the classic Greeks as by those of the Lower
Empire ; by the Romans ; by the writers of China, Burma, India and Kashmir ; by the
geographers of Arabia and Persia ; by the mediaeval voyagers of Italy and France ; by
the annalists of Portugal and Spain ; by the merchant adventurers of Holland ; and by
the travellers and topographers of Great Britain".
SIR EMERSON TENNENT, at one time
Colonial Secretary of Ceylon.
THE Premier Colony of the Crown, Ceylon has well de-
served the attention it has in recent years attracted
by its strategic position as an important outpost of
the Empire ; its unrivalled situation as a coaling-
station and shipping junction on the highways of commerce
between Europe, on the one side, and Australia and the Far
East, on the other ; the almost inexhaustible supply of
treasure in mountain and mine, field and stream, with which
Nature has bountifully endowed the island ; and last, but
not the least of its charms, its'gorgeous scenery and tempered
climate which make it an ideal holiday resort for residents
of Europe, America, and the lands of the Southern Cross.
The palm-fringed shores, the smiling valleys, the verdure-
clad hills, the ancient towns with their storied past, and the
whole atmosphere breathing of the subtle mystery of the
East, in spite of a century’s impact with the civilisation and
progress of the West, render it a land of dreamy beauty and
fadeless interest. Alike for the artist and the antiquary, the
sportsman and the scientist, the pleasure-seeker and the
capitalist, the island offers an untrammelled field for study,
research, amusement, investigation, adventure, enterprise,
and investment. No land is so typical of the Orient at its
best, and infinite is the grandeur and variety of the pageant
which Nature unfolds to the eye of the visitor to this
beautiful isle of sunshine and content.


COMMUNICATIONS
Colombo, the capital city of the island, is a favourite
port of call on the great ocean routes of travel, and steamers
of all nationalities may be seen in its splendid artificial
harbour. The following are among the better known lines
which maintain a regular Homeward service with Colombo,
and the addresses given are those of the local Agents who will
be glad to furnish any information regarding special tourist
rates, return tickets, fares, sailings, and the like, on request:—
The Bibby Line, between England and Rangoon via
Colombo, and vice versa. Only saloon passengers carried.
Steamers sail from Liverpool and call at Marseilles and
Port Said. Particulars from Messrs Carson & Co., Ltd..
Australia Buildings, Colombo.
Queen Street and Clock Tower
The City Line, between Calcutta, Bombay and London.
Particulars from Messrs Aitken Spence & Co., Lloyd’s
Buildings. Colombo.
The Commonwealth Line of Steamers, between Australia
and Europe. A more regular service with Ceylon is
likely to be maintained in accordance with the growth of
traffic. Particulars from Messrs Mackinnon, Mackenzie
& Co., Victoria Arcade, Colombo.


The Messageries Maritimes Service, between Europe and
the Far East. Particulars from the Compagnie Des
Messageries Maritimes, Prince Street, Colombo.
The Nippon Yusen Kaisha (Japan Mail Steamship Company),
between the Far East and Europe. Particulars from
Messrs Carson & Co., Australia Buildings. Colombo.
The Orient Line of Royal Mail Steamers, between Europe
and Australia. Particulars from Messrs Whittall & Co.,
Ltd., Queen Street, Colombo.
The P. & O. and B. I. S. N. Company, between England and
Australia, China and Japan. The passage tickets of
these Companies are interchangeable. Particulars from
Messrs Mackinnon, Mackenzie & Co., Victoria Arcade,
Colombo.
The Fort, Colombo
CURRENCY
One Rupee=loo cents=ls. 4d., a Pound sterling being
Fifteen Rupees at the Official Par of Exchange.
Gold is legal tender in Ceylon.
The silver coins are the 50-cent piece(=Bd.); the 25-cent
piece(=4d.); and the 10-cent piece(=l|d.) Thes-centpiece is


a nickel coin worth a fraction under a penny. The one-cent
and half-cent pieces are copper coins.
The Ceylon Government issues small notes of the value
of One Rupee and Two Rupees. One Rupee notes may be
obtained singly or in booklets of twenty-five. Other notes
are of the denominations of 5, 10, 50, 100, 500, and
1,000 rupees.
The Indian rupee circulates in Ceylon, but other Indian
coins and currency notes are subject to a small discount for
exchange. It may be mentioned that the Indian rupee is
Mount Lavinia
not divided into cents like the Ceylon rupee, but into annas
and pies. Sixteen annas make a rupee, and twelve pies
make an anna; so that a penny is the equivalent of an Indian
anna.
PASSPORTS AND CONSULS
The regulations relating to Passports specify that a
Passport should have been issued or renewed not more than
two years previously by or on behalf of the Government of
the country of which the person to whom it refers is a
subject or citizen ; that, if issued for a particular journey,.


it must be used in respect of that journey only ; and that, in
the case of a person coming to the island from any country
■other than the United Kingdom or India or a British
Possession, it should have been issued or vise by the British
Ambassador or British Consul or British Resident in that
country.
The Passport Office in Colombo is located in the
Secretariat Buildings, Queen Street, where at all hours of the
day Passports may be vise or renewed on the usual terms and
conditions governing their issue in British Colonies.
Elephants Bathing at Mount Lavinia
Further information respecting the regulations in force
in various countries to which passengers may be proceeding
may be obtained from the Consular Offices in Colombo.
The following countries are represented by Consular Agents
in Ceylon :
The United States of America ; Brazil ; Cuba ; Panama ;
Turkey; Austria-Hungary; Belgium; Bolivia; Chile;
Denmark ; France ; Germany ; Japan ; Italy ; Mexico;
Netherlands ; Norway ; Persia ; Peru ; Portugal ; Siam ;
Spain ; Sweden ; Switzerland ; and Venezuela.


GUSTOiMS REGULATIONS
Firearms, intoxicants, tobacco and cigars, and other articles
are dutiable, the rate being Rs. 10/- on double-barrelled
magazine guns ; Rs. 5/- on single barrelled-guns ; Rs. 4/50'
on automatic pistols and revolvers ; 20 per cent, ad valorem
on cartridges ; 10 per cent, ad valorem on motor-cars, furni-
ture, and the like ; and 30 per cent, or Rs. 30/- per gallon on
perfumed spirits. There is no duty on passengers’ wearing
apparel,used bicycles and sewing-machines, books, jewellery,
and scientific or surgical instruments.
Kelani Buddhist Temple Entrance
BOAT AND CONVEYANCE RATES
The hire for public motor boats from the steamer to
the landing jetty or vice versa is 50 cents for each adult
during the hours from 6 a.m. to 7 p.m., and 75 cents from 7
p.m. to 6 a.m. Baggage charge is 15 and 25 cents per article
according to weight and the quantity of baggage.
The rates for jolly or row boats are slightly less than
for motor-craft. Most steamship companies have their own
tenders to bring passengers ashore and return them to their
steamers free of charge, and shipping agents specify hours-


of arrival and departure of both launches and steamers on
the notice board on the Landing Pier.
’Rickshaws, or jinrikishas, cost 15 cents for journeys
not exceeding ten minutes within the Fort of Colombo :
35 cents for the first half-hour : 50 cents for the first hour ;
and ten cents for every additional half-hour or portion
thereof. The night fares are 10 cents extra per hour.
Kandy, Ceylon
Carriage hire within Municipal limits is 75 cents for
every half hour or portion thereof, or Rs. 7/50 for every
six hours between 6 a.m. and midnight. Carriages without
rubber tyres cost 50 cents and Rs. 5/- respectively for the
same periods of hire. For carriages drawn by two horses
the rate is increased by one-half.
Taxi-cab fares are recovered under three tariffs :
Tariff 1, 50 cents for the first 1405 yards, and ten cents
for each subsequent 281 yards, within Municipal limits ;
Tariff 2, 50 cents for the first 1175 yards, and 5 cents for
each subsequent 235 yards, outside the Municipal limits ;


Tariff 3, between 9 p.m. and 6‘30 a.m. 50 cents up to
and including the first 1175 yards, and 10 cents for each
subsequent 235 yards.
Detention is charged for at the rate of Re. 1/80 per hour.
The meter indicates the rates payable. For a third passen-
ger, an additional 50 cents, and for a fourth passenger, an
additional 25 cents is payable, irrespective of distance.
A baggage charge of 10 cents per article is usually demanded.
The fleet of cars run by the Ceylon Tourist Bureau is
recommended both for town use and for excursion purposes,
and a list of suggested tours is given elsewhere in this
booklet.
The Temple of the Tooth, Kandy
POSTAL AND TELEGRAPH RATES
The inland and Indian rates are 6 cents for a letter not
exceeding 4 oz., and 6 cents for every additional 4 oz. or
part thereof. Printed matter, not exceeding 2 oz. in weight,
3 cents ; postcards, 3 cents each ; other packets, exceeding
2 oz. in weight, not registered newspapers, the same postage
as for letters or parcels according to weight.
The overland rates to British Possessions and to foreign
countries are, respectively, 12 cents and 20 cents for the first


oz. for letters, and a uniform rate of 10 cents for every
additional oz. or part thereof. Printed papers are charged
for at 4 cents for every 2 oz ; commercial papers at 20 cents
for the first oz. or part thereof, and 4 cents for every addi-
tional 2 oz ; patterns or samples, at 8 cents for the first 4 oz.
and 4 cents for every additional 2 oz.
Registration to all countries beyond Ceylon (except
India) is 20 cents per article ; and inland and to India,
15 cents.
The rate for parcels to the United Kingdom is Rs. l/50
for the first 3 lbs. Rs. 2/25 for parcels over 3 lbs. and under
Queen’s Hotel, Kandy
7 lbs. ; and Rs. 4/- for parcels over 7 lbs. and under 11 lbs,
(maximum). The rates to other countries are detailed in
the Ceylon Post Office Guide.
Mails for Europe usually close on Tuesday afternoons,
and for Australia and the Far East on Saturdays. The
telegraph rates are as follows: —Inland, 40 cents per
minimum of ten words including address, and 5 cents for
every additional two words ; India and Burma, ordinary
service, Rs. l/- for the first twelve words and 10 cents for


each additional word, and Express service Rs. 2/- for the
first twelve words and 15 cents for each additional word ;
Europe, Rs. l/35 per word ; New York. Rs. 2/15 ; Australia,
Rs. 2/05; South Africa, Rs. l/80 ; and the Straits Settle-
ments, Rs. 1/10. The deferred rate to the United Kingdom
is 65 cents. The charge per word for urgent telegrams is
three times the charge for ordinary private telegrams. The
Colombo wireless installation has an effective range of
three to four hundred miles, and marconigrams cost
40 cents per word.
Victoria Commemoration Hall, Kandy
BANKS
The following are the principal Exchange Banks in
Ceylon :
The Chartered Bank of India, Australia and China,
Queen Street, Colombo ;
The Eastern Bank, Chatham Street, Colombo ;
The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation,
Queen Street, Colombo ;
The Mercantile Bank of India, Queen Street, Colombo ;
Branches at Kandy and Galle ;
The National Bank of India, York Street, Colombo ;
Branches at Kandy and Nuwara Eliya ;


The P & O Banking Corporation, Victoria Arcade
Colombo.
The Imperial Bank of India, at Baillie Street, Colombo,
has numerous agencies and branches in India and Burma,
but does not usually transact foreign exchange.
Messrs. George Stenart & Co., Queen Street, Colombo,
are the local Agents for the Bank of Montreal; Coutts & Co.;
London County and Westminster Bank ; and Martins Bank.
Old Palace. Kandy
NEWSPAPERS
The leading European journal is The Times of Ceylon .
published every week-day evening. A weekly overland
edition is prepared for readers abroad, while an illustrated
weekly, which aims at being the finest in the East has just
been projected.
The Ceylon Observer is the only other evening newspaper,
and publishes a special Sunday morning edition.
The principal morning papers are The Ceylon Independent,
The Ceylon Daily News, and The Ceylon Morning Leader.
Newspapers are also published in Sinhalese and in
Tamil, the principal local languages.


The Australasian Bureau in Ceylon undertakes the
preparation, direction, and distribution of any advertising
intended for the Ceylon Press and public.
CLUBS
The social attractions of life in Ceylon tend to add to
the proverbial lure of the East the powerful appeal which
Wealth and Fashion conspire to produce by decreeing their
choice of the island as a favourite holiday rendezvous and
winter resort. Opportunities for big game shooting and for
other forms of sport are abundant, and the intriguing
pleasures of caravan in the wooded heights and valleys of
Peradeniya Botanical Gardens
the interior, and of carnival in the picturesque places border-
ing the sea, invite the visitor to every form of pastime and
recreation to which he may be devoted. Clubland is re-
presented by the following well known institutions :
The Colombo Club : A residential club for men,
situated on the Galle Face promenade facing the
sea ;
Prince’s Club ; Opposite the Race Course. Although
its membership is limited to men, the lady friends
and relations of members are welcomed ;


CEYLON: THE PEARL OF THE ORIENT
Garden Club : Grounds and fine pavilion in Victoria
Park. Outdoor club for Tennis and Croquet ;
Colombo Sailing Club : Club-house on the Harbour ;
Rowing Club : Club-house on the Colombo Lake ;
Turf Club : The Colombo Race Course is one of the finest
in the East, and the Ceylon Turf Club in connec-
tion therewith is a most enterprising and popular
institution. The new grand stand is one of the
architectural features of the metropolis.
Nuwara Eliyaalso has a splendid Course where some
well organised meetings are held under the control
Boa-Tree, Peradenia Gardens
of the Ceylon Turf Club ; while in Galle, Kandy
and Radella, also, meets are from time to time
organised;
Polo Club : In connection with the Ceylon Turf Club, there
is a Polo Club both in Colombo and Nuwara
Eliya ;
Colombo Hockey and Football Club : Colombo ;
Cricket Club : Colombo ;
Sports Club : Colombo ;
Golf Clubs : Colombo has two Links : an 18-hole course


for men, and a 9-hole course (shortly to be enlarged)
for ladies ;
At Nuvvara Eliya there is an 18-hole course, over
which ladies can play on certain days, which is
regarded as the best in the East ;
At Kandy a new 9-hole course has been opened near
the Royal Botanical Gardens at Peradeniya ;
Tebuwana Club ; (Kalutara C. &S. C.) ;
Talduwa Club ; (Kelani Valley C. &S. C.) ;
Banyan Trees, Peradeniya
Automobile Club of Ceylon ; Headquarters are in Kandy,
and the Club is affiliated to the Royal Automobile
Club.
TRAIN SERVICES
The Ceylon Government Railway route is generally
favoured by passengers journeying to India, as it breaks the
monotony of a long sea trip. An overland train service
carries a passener from Colombo to the Indian terminus
connecting with the railway system on the mainland in
about twelve hours, and the route enables the traveller to
visit manv of the world-famed shrines and sacred cities of


South India which the steamship naturally shuts out of his
programme. Most companies give travellers the option of
going by steamer or train to Bombay from Colombo, and
vice versa ; and, needless to say, tourists desiring to crowd
as much of the panorama of the mid-East, as possible into
their itinerary, invariably prefer to disembark at Colombo or
at Bombay, as the case may be, and travel overland on this
lap of their homeward or outward journey.
Starting from Colombo there are trains which take
a passenger in about four hours to Kandy, the hill capital of
Giant Palms, Peradeniya
Ceylon, or to Galle, on the coast, the former Port of call for
the Island; in about nine hours to Nuwara Eliya, the chief
sanitorium ; in some six hours to Katnapura, the famous
city of gems ; and in practically the same time, in another
direction, to Anuradhapura, one of the buried cities of
Ceylon, with a history dating back more than two thousand
five hundred years. Shorter journeys are possible to other
points of interest; and the tourist with command of leisure
is apt to be embarrassed, not by the paucity of pleasant places
to visit, but by the almost limitless range of natural wonders
and ancient monuments which provide an enticing field for
■exploration.


To
Single
Return
Rs.
Cts.
Rs.
Cts.
Mount Lavinia
86
1
17
Galle
7
58
15
15
Nuwara Eliya
17
25
34
49
Bandarawela
21
34
42
67
Anuradhapura
13
66
27
31
From Colombo to
Miles
Kandy
72
Nuwara Eliya (via Kandy)
116
Anuradhapura (via Puttalam)
130
Jaffna (via Anuradhapura)
253
Jaffna (via Kandy and Anuradhapura)
270
Trincomalee (via Kandy)
180
Hatton (for Adam’s Peak)
73
Kalutara
28
Galle
72
Negombo
22
There can be little doubt that travellers by railway have
opportunities of viewing the magnificent scenery of the
island in a way which no other form of transport equals.
Particularly on the upcountry lines there are views which
are not likely to be forgotten, as the railway runs along the
edge of steep precipices for many miles, giving extensive
view's of forest and patana, tea and the famous paddy (rice)
cultivation, rivers and jungle.
The first class fares from Colombo (Fort) are as
follows :
(These fares are subject to alteration).
Intending passengers can obtain full information from
the Traffic Manager, Maradana Station, or from the principal
stations, of facilities for break of journey, reserved accommo-
dation, sleeping cars, refreshment cars, cheap week-end
tickets, free luggage, or other requirements. Combined rail
and motor tours can also be arranged in Colombo.
TABLE OF APPROXIMATE DISTANCES


From
Kandy to
Nuwara Eliya
Dam bulla
Anuradhapura
Polonnaruwa
Trincomalee
Matale
From Nuwara Eliya to
Bandarawella
Hakgala Flower Gardens
Diyatalawa
HOTELS
Colombo, the capital city, is ideally situated for those
who wish to break their journey for the attractions of a stay
in the island itself or for the purpose of proceeding to
India by the overland route. Both in respect of hotel ac-
commodation and means of locomotion Ceylon is very ade-
quately provided, and with Colombo as a base, one may
explore every part of the island at leisure.
Sigiri


Galle Face Hotel
The illustration above depicts a view of the Galle Face
Hotel which in point of equipment and cuisine may justly
be described as one of the finest in the East. Its position
in Ceylon is unchallenged by any other establishments, as
regards delightful situation or enterprising management.
Its luxuriously appointed apartments have times without
number accommodated Royalty and distinguished Visitors
wintering in Ceylon or en route elsewhere, and the Direc-
tors, who are naturally proud of their charge and jealous of
its reputation spare no effort or expense to give their
patrons the very best value in comfort and service. Recent
large extensions have more than doubled the accommoda-
tion and because of the many attractions of this Great Modern
hostelry set by a shimmering eastern sea in a land of
natural beauty and romantic interest, it is difficult upon
occasion to secure rooms and visitors are advised to make
timely application for reservations by cable or wireless.
The management offers visitors special inducement by
undertaking to deduct the cost of the wireless telegraphic
requisition from their bill on presentation of the ship
receipt.


The other hotels in Colombo are the Grand Oriental
Hotel, Bristol Hotel and the Grand Hotel, Mount Lavinia,
seven miles from the Fort of Colombo.
The Ceylon Government maintains, at distances of
approximately fifteen miles, establishments known as Rest
Houses which offer good fare and excellent accommodation,
and visitors who wish to explore the country will find that
these hostelries provide the sojourner in the tropics with every
reasonable comfort and convenience. The charge is roughly
about Rs. 6/- a day for bed, bedding, and substantial fare.
The Ceylon Rest Houses must be distinguished from the
Dak Bungalows in India which furnish shelter, but leave
the traveller to fend for himself in the matter of food, bed-
ding, and equipment.
At the more important provincial towns, however,
private enterprise has vied with Government in providing
modern hotels, and the following is a select list of those
which cater specially for tourists’ requirements :
Anuradhapura Hotel
Bandarawella Hotel
New Oriental Hotel
Adam’s Peak Hotel
Queen’s Hotel
Hotel Suisse
Grand Hotel
Carlton Hotel
St. Andrews
Anuradhapura
Bandarawella
Galle
Hatton
Kandy
Kandy
Nuwara Eliya
Nuwara Eliya
Nuwara Eliya
Representatives of the hotels usually await passengers at
the landing pier and on railway platforms, and present cards
giving full particulars of the inclusive rates of their esta-
blishments, for individuals and parties, and undertake to
assist passengers with the clearance of their baggage and
transport.
TRADE REGISTER
From time immemorial Ceylon has been the great
emporium for the productions of India, Burma the Straits
Settlements, China and Japan, in addition to its own wares
and manufactures ; but, unfortunately for its commercial re-
putation, traffickers in reconstructed gems, Brummagen
jewellery, and faked antiques, have made many visitors


leave the shores of the island with somewhat mingled re-
flections on the artfulness of human nature in general and
that of the Oriental variety in particular. Bishop Heber,
who, according to legend, made a rather unfortunate invest-
ment in gems under the impression that he was letting a
simple-minded hawker ruin himself, has left us a confession of
his feelings inspired by a closer examination of his purchase,
in the well-known missionary hymn :
“ What though the spicy breezes
Blow soft o’er Ceylon’s isle ;
Though every prospect pleases,
And only man is vile! ”
With the view of sparing the unsuspecting visitor the
experience of Bishop Heber, the Australasian Bureau in
Ceylon, under whose direction this booklet has been pre-
pared and is issued, has arrived at an arrangement with the
establishments mentioned in the following list by which the
management of any Eastern shop will co-operate with the
Bureau in investigating any case of complaint and remedying
any legitimate grievance, so that constituents may confidently
extend their patronage to the firms under the guarantee of
fair treatment and due protection. Any firm found guilty
of sharp practice or misrepresentation will be struck oft the
Register, and a list of such stores will be regularly posted to
the agencies connected with the Australasian Bureau in
Ceylon, for the information of those whom it may concern,
and for suitable cautionary action.
SPORT
Vast stretches of the interior of the Island are virgin
forest ; and in these, and in the mountain fastnesses beyond,
may be encountered by those who dare, nil kinds of furred
and feathered denizens, ranging from the type that may be
tackled, without great hazard, with shot gun and hound, to
that which calls for the use of big game rifles of '375 and
’450 bore.
The Bureau is in a position to cater for shooting parties
anxious to follow the slot of the sambhur, track the elephant
to its haunt, or pursue the crocodile to its slimy swamp.


Transport Facilities. Camp equipment and experi-
enced Shikharis may be arranged for, under expert European
direction at an inclusive charge for any number of days’
sport which visitors may desire to enjoy, and those interested
are advised to make timely inquiry of the Australasian-
Ceylon Bureau, with particulars of their requirements.
Besides the elephant and the sarnbhur, the leopard, the bear,
the wild boar and buffalo, and spotted deer are to be found
A Lagoon Near Galle
in great numbers, and the smaller game met with includes
pea-fowl, partridge, quail, jungle fowl, teal, and snipe. The
tanks and rivers swarm with fish of every tropical kind, while
the visitor who is less of a Nimrod than a naturalist will find
much to fascinate him in the chase of an infinite variety of
winged, horned, and scaled creatures in and around the
gardens of any rural bungalow, and in the scrub and marsh
and lagoon which may often be found hard by.


This illustration shows a tea plucker at work. If left
to nature the tea plant grows to the height of about 20 feet
but the art of the planter by a system of pruning keeps it
within the limits of a three foot bush more or less. After
eighteen months to two years of plucking at periods of
from eight to ten days intervals, the bush naturally loses
Plucking Tea
the vitality requisite to send forth an abundance of young
and tender shoots —it is then subjected to whatever system
of pruning is considered most suitable to its particular field,
and after this operation it appears to the uninitiated to be
utterly ruined. But it bursts forth with renewed vigour,
and in a very few months is again yielding as before.


Rubber is second in importance only to tea among the
staple products of the Island. An estate comes into being
by acquiring and clearing blocks of jungle land, reading,
draining, lining, holing and planting either with seed and/or
2 year old stumps grown from seed in nurseries. Tapping
commences generally after the sixth year. A half spiral
incision is made on the tree, two or three feet from the
base. The latex then commences to flow down a channel
lapping Rubber
cut for the purpose to a spout fixed on the bark of the tree
at base of channel, the cup being clipped underneath
and the latex is thus directed into the receptacle.
The latex or rubber milk is collected by the tapping
coolies, transported to the factory—coagulated, and subse-
quently manufactured by machiney into crepe rubber, or
cured by a smoking process, and is packed and despatched
to Colombo for shipment.




SUGGESTED TOURS
Representatives of hotels board all steamers on their
arrival at Colombo, and, in association with representatives
of the Ceylon Tourist Bureau and the Australasian-Ceylon
Bureau will gladly assist visitors in making the most of
the time at their disposal. Mail steamers on the Outward
voyage usually stay from 10 to 12 hours at Colombo, and on
the Homeward voyage, from a day to a day and a half.
The best way to see the island is undoubtedly by
motor-car, and a choice of pleasant excursions is offered
both visitors who lack nothing in the way of wealth and
leisure, as well as those who have very definite limits set
upon their resources in the directions indicated, in the
following selection of journeys suggested by the Ceylon
Tourist Bureau which recommends them for the economy
in time and expense they represent, and the range of local
life and colour and panorama of typical natural sceneiy
they provide.
TOUR No. 1
From the Fort through the Cinnamon Gardens to
Mount Lavinia and back.
This can be done comfortably in three hours, allowing
nearly two hours’ stay at Mount Lavinia.
TOUR No. 2
From the Fort to Heneratgoda (or Gampaha) by the
Kandy road, and back to Colombo via Jaela on the Negombo
road.
At Henaratgoda the Botanical Gardens form the chief
attraction, and one may see there the finest Para rubber trees
in Ceylon, many being over thirty years old.
On the way to Henaratgoda the Buddhist temple at
Kelaniya may be visited. The shrine is full of interest,
dating, it is believed, from the thirteenth century.
Ample time for visiting the Botanical Gardens and the
Temple is allowed in the four hours alloted to this trip.


TOUR No. 3
From the Fort to Negombo, a pretty coastal village of
considerable importance, situated on a lagoon twenty miles
north of Colombo.
The route passes through beautiful scenery, and is a
desirable run where but a few hours are available. The
journey to Negombo and back is only about 45 miles, and
can be made with ease in hours.
The finest rest-house in the island is to be found in this
town, close to the lagoon, where an excellent meal may be
obtained at a few minutes’ notice.
TOUR No. 4
Colombo to Kalutara, called the Richmond of Ceylon,
situated about 27 miles south of Colombo. The scenery
along this route is exceedingly beautiful and varied, Kalutara
is an important tea and rubber centre, and possesses a
splendid two-storied rest-house facing the sea, forming one
of the most popular resorts of holiday makers. In order to
secure proper attention on arrival it is well to send a
telegram before starting. If time permits, a visit to one of
the rubber and tea estates should be made which ought to
prove both interesting and instructive. The return journey
may be accomplished comfortably in under four hours, allow-
ing at least, for an hour’s stay.
TOUR No. 5
Colombo to Galle, about 72 miles south of the metropolis
and past Kalutara and Bentota. The drive is by the sea-
coast until Bentota is reached, which is beautifully located
with its rest-house bordering the sea and river, and makes
a delightful halting place, being about half-way on the
Colombo-Galle road. Bentota is noted for its oysters.
Galle, the capital of the southern province, is sometimes
identified with larshish of the Bible, from whence King
Solomon imported his gold and ivory, and apes and peacocks.
It was. before the construction of the harbour at Colombo,
the principal port of call for mail and other steamers.


A Fort built by the Dutch, and still in a good state of
preservation, surrounds the town, and adds considerably to
the picturesqueness of this ancient Dutch settlement. The
hotel accommodation is good, and to see the town and
surroundings leisurely it is necessary to stay here over-night.
Galle is famous for its hand-made pillow lace, which is most
exquisite in design and texture, and fetches high prices
abroad.
TOUR No. 6
This tour would be from the Fort of Colombo via
Kegalle and the Kadugannawa Pass to Kandy, the hill
capital, which is about 72 miles away. Kandy or to give it
its Sinhalese name “ Mahanuwara ” which means “The
Great City” —is an ancient capital of unsurpassing beauty,
surrounded by majestic hills and with a uniform temperature.
It is one of the beauty spots of Ceylon, and no visitor to the
island should miss seeing all there is to be seen in this old
world town.
If it is not possible to spend more than a day in Kandy
it will be necessary to make a sufficiently early start so as to
see the important sights of this historical town within the
time at one’s disposal. Provided the arrival in Kandy is
fairly early, it should not be difficult to see leisurely the Tem-
ple of the Holy Tooth (The Dalada Maligawa), the Oriental
Library, the Kandyan Art Museum, and the famous Royal
Botanical Gardens at Peradeniya, justly regarded as one of
the most magnificent gardens in the world. The return
journey to Colombo will give the visitor a second welcome
opportunity to enjoy the luxuriance of typical mountain
scenery, beautiful vistas through rich tropical wild and
cultivated vegetation.
TOUR No. 7
This tour is sketched out for those who can afford to
spend at least ten to twelve days in the island, and are
desirous of visiting the outstations and seeing all the places
of importance and interest.


Start early from Colombo to Chilaw via Negombo
where there is a very fine rest-house and good meals can be
obtained at short notice. Negombo is noted for its many
excellent fish luncheons, dear to the heart of the most
exacting epicure and is fast becoming a popular resort of
Colombo residents for week-ends. Stay the night at Chilaw
rest-house, which is a good one. Both Negombo and
Chilaw arc quaint fishing villages, and gives one an insight
into the primitive modes of fish-fraaling, crab-trapping,
turtle-catching and the like.
The following day, which will be the second day of the
tour, leave Chilaw early for Puttalam, which is a fishing
town of some importance, with a good rest-house. From
here proceed to Anuradhapura, one of the best known
Buried Cities, which was in the zenith of its civilisation
during the time of Nebuchadnezzar, the Babylonian king
mentioned in the Bible. Stay the night over at the Hotel
here, which provides good accommodation and meals ; but
in order to ensure comfortable rooms and attention it would
be well to send a telegram before starting on the tour.
The next day, the third day of the tour, should be
ample to see all there is to be seen of the famous archaeo-
logical excavations, provided the services of a guide
thoroughly conversant with the history of the ancient ruins
is secured.
For the fourth day of the tour, the chief item in the
programme should be to visit Mihintale, which is about
eight miles from Anuradhapura, and is a place held in great
veneration by the Buddhists as being the spot where the
doctrine of the Buddha was first preached by his royal
Apostle and missionary, Mahindo, who was later followed
by his sister the Princess Sanghamitta, the children of King
Asoka the Great. Mihintale is located on a rocky hill
surrounded by flat land, and contains many relics sacred to
the memory of Mahindo and Sanghamitta. To reach the
summit there is a stairway of some 2000 granite slabs, and
the ascent is rather a stiff one to the inexperienced.
From Mihintale the journey should be continued to
Trincomalie, which was until recently the naval station of
the East Indies Squadron and is likely to be made a naval
base again in the near future. As a commercial port Trinco,
as it is popularly known, has made very little progress, if at


all, but with the opening of the railway, which is now being
constructed, great trade development is anticipated. Apart
from the magnificent natural harbour it possesses, which is
said to be the finest in the world, there are many interesting
spots to see. The entrance to the harbour faces south-west
and is guarded by two huge projecting headlands, like
sentinels, which protect the harbour entirely from the
monsoon. Trincomalie possesses a very good rest-house,
and an extra day spent here is well worth while.
In the event of Trincomalie being left out of the tour,
the journey should be continued to Kandy, stopping at
Dambulla, where the celebrated rock-temples are located.
These temples are only about three quarters of a mile away.
After a night spent in the Dambulla rest-house, which is a
good one, the motor should start early next morning to
Sigiri Rock if the place is to be seen thoroughly. The
carvings are unique, and the road up to this is fairly good,
and there is no difficulty in taking the car right up to the
base of the rock. There is a small rest-house here under
the supervision of the Dambulla rest-house keeper.
From Dambulla proceed to Polonnaruwa, where a new
rest-house erected on Minneria Tank provided good accom-
modation.
The Minneria Tank is one ot the most beautiful tanks
in Ceylon, and is often likened by visitors to Killarney
and other well-known lakes. These colossal tanks were
built during the time of the old Sinhalese Kings for irrigating
temple lands as well as for agricultural purposes, and their
construction displays marvellous engineering skill unsur-
passed in modern times. In the time of the Kings of Ceylon
Polonaruwa was a royal residence, and with a history as
old as that of the Jews. There are many interesting ruins
to be seen in this place, but the most important is a lock
temple with three huge figures and a shrine carved out of
the rock. One of the figures represents Buddha in a
recumbent position and measures about 46 feet in length,
and this alone is worth coming a long way to see.
On the Sixth day leave Dambulla via Matale which is a
town of some importance, and is the centre of a laige and
flourishing planting district, cocoa and tea being the chief
products. In the next station from here, Ukuwella, is to be
found Barber’s Cocoa factory, which, with the factoi\ at


Peracleniya under other management, specialises in all cocoa
products, and lessens the import of chocolates.
An uphill climb from Ukuwella leading through Katu-
gastota, a pretty suburb of Kandy, brings the visitor to the
Hill Capital. A well-known Kandyan Chief has a splendid
herd of elephants, and these huge animals bathing in the
river at Katugastota is a sight which visitors enjoy very
much.
An hour’s drive takes the visitor to Kandy, the ancient
capital of Ceylon. This town is noted the world over for
its matchless beauty. It may be remarked here that Sir
Gregory, at one time Governor of Ceylon, in a speech referred
to Kandy as “ the loveliest town in the loveliest island in the
world,” and to attempt to describe its beauties here, there-
fore, would be to attempt the impossible. One must see
Kandy to understand its exquisite charm and beauty, and
once seen it is not. possible easily to forget it.
There are several good hotels in Kandy, but Queen’s
and Suisse are the best known, both of which are close to
the lovely lake and the Temple. If more than a day can be
spent here, there should be ample time to see the many
places of interest and study the dress, customs, and habits
of the Kandyans who, until recently had very little in
common with the low country Sinhalese except in respect
of language and religion.
The journey from Colombo to Kandy is exceedingly
picturesque and there is nothing to equal it in the world,
especially at the “sensation rock” near Kadugannawa.
The tourist may now go either to Nuwara Eliya, the
sanatorium of Ceylon, or direct to Colombo via Kurunegalle
or Kegalle (an afternoon’s run). The journey both ways is
very pleasant and is through rubber, tea and coconut planta
tions, but the latter is the more picturesque and impressive
of the two. If the tour is continued from Kandy to Nuwara
Eliya the route would be through tea planting districts, past
the Gardens and the new bridge across the
Mahaweliganga, through Gampola and Pussellawa up the
winding Ramboda Pass, over the heights of Nuwara Eliya
into the town. Nuwara Eliya is a pretty little town in a
mountain valley about 6240 feet above sea level, and surroun-
ded by steep mountain ridges, the highest of which,


Pidurutalagalla is 8,300 feet. The season is from January to
May, but the rest of the year is by no means unpleasant,
although the weather is of a more varying character.
The Grand Hotel which is under the control of the
Nuwara Eliya Hotels Co., Ltd., has been extended and
renovated to meet the ever increasing demand of the public.
There are other hotels as well as a number of boarding
establishments where visitors may have home comforts, in
the event of a prolonged stay. Owing to the place being
full up during the season it would be always well to wire or
telephone from Kandy to ensure good rooms.
The eighth day of the tour may be spent in a visit to the
Horton Plains, another beautiful spot in the island and 7,500
feet high, the Hakgalla Gardens, and other interesting places
about Nuwara Eliya, as well as in a visit to a tea Estate.
From Nuwara Eliya continue the tour to Badulla
through Welimade which is also a pretty little town, After
luncheon at the rest-house here, proceed towards Bandara-
wella. The road is a very stiff one until Bandarawella
is reached. There is a very comfortable hotel here where
good meals may be obtained. Bandarawella is considered
second in importance to Nuwara Eliya as a sanatorium, and
the air here is most bracing and invigorating. People
suffering from various bronchial ailments are generally sent
here for rest and cure. The military and naval camps are
situated at Diyatalawa which may also be inspected when
troops are not in training and occupation.
The tenth and last day of the tour which will be the
next day is a long journey, and it would be well therefore
to make as early a start as possible, the first lap of twelve
miles to Haputale is through tea estates and affords a splen-
did view of the majestic mountains surrounding it. On a
hue day the sea, some forty miles beyond may be plainly
seen from here. The road then descends rapidly to Haldu-
mulla and Ratnapura, the City of Gems, and if time permits
the mining district and lapidaries are well worth a visit.
Very good precious stones are obtainable at model ate pi ices
at the bazaars here. Ratnapura is connected to Colombo by
a narrow gauge railway, passing through Avisawella, an
ancient town, and tea can be obtained at the lest-house in
the latter place. Colombo is reached in about an hour s
time from Avisawella, bringing the visitoi back again to the
Capital for the Ocean journey Homewards or Outwards.


Light summer clothes, with Dark Suit, Dinner jacket
can be brought, but not obligatory. No bedding required.
Warm vests and rain coat or dust coat for motoring.
Excellent sport may be obtained, guns can be rented at
a nominal figure in Ceylon, or
tained.
brought in and license ob-
Rate for 3 £4O per head
~ 4 £35 „
„ 5 £3O „
„ „ 6 £3O „
for two weeks inclusive.
3 HOURS TRIP, MOUNT LAVINIA, Etc.
Inclusive Rates : —Car driver and guide, visit to
Cinnamon Gardens, native quarters, bazaars, Buddhist
temples, native industries, and all places of interest.
Luncheon at Mt. Lavinia Grand Hotel, overlooking the sea,
8 miles from Colombo, No Extras charged on the return
trip. This is a convenient and enjoyable run for visitors
who have not the time to visit Kandy ; and these tours are
recommended to strangers who know exactly what they
have to pay before they start. Rate per head
Gar Seating With Lunch Without Lunch
4 Passengers 16 shillings 12 shillings
5 12/6 „ 8/6
6 „ 10/6 ~ 6/6 „
5 Hours’ Trip to Negombo via Heneratgoda
Passing through, the finest cinnamon growing district
in Ceylon. Visit Heneratgoda Gardens, Dutch ruins, inland
lagoon, sea bathing and fishing. To see real low-country
Ceylon village life this trip is recommended, 70 miles.
Lunch at New Government Rest House, and return sea
coast road. Rate per head
Gar Seating With Lunch Without Lunch
4 Passengers 21/- shillings 17/- shillings
5 „ 20/- „ 16/-
6 „ 19/- „ 15


DAY TRIP TO KANDY
The Hill Capital of the Kandyan Kings
For Passengers whose vessel leaves after 6 pan. there
is ample time to visit Kandy. It takes hours to go and
3to return. The points of interest in Kandy are very central,
and Peradeniya Gardens are passed en route and can be
motored through. The trip to Kandy is considered one of
the finest in Ceylon, and passes through some of the most
beautiful scenery in the world. Lunch may be had at the
Queen’s or Suisse Hotel the latter noted for French cooking.
Rate per head.
Gar Seating With Lunch Without Lunch
4 Passengers £2-10-0 £2-6-0
5 „ £2-7-7 £2-4-0
6 ~ £2-0-0 £l-16-0
NOTICE ™ WIRELESS
Parties should be arranged before arrival of boat, and
a Wireless sent with number of passengers. Cars will be
found waiting on arrival at jetty, and no delay caused.
Cars hold 4 and 6 Passengers and it is cheaper per head to
complete a Car. A wireless to BELTON, Colombo, 10
Kandy,” with name of sender, means one 4 passenger car
and one 6 passenger car to Kandy. Our representative will
meet clients on board, hand them licensed number of cars
and attend to any personal luggage. Cost of wireless will
be refunded. Should boat arrive late and no time be
available for journey to Kandy, a short trip may be under-
taken.
APPROXIMATE RATES
RATES FOR CAR AND DRIVER ONLY
Colombo to Mt. Lavinia and return S Seater Car Rs. 15-00
7 ~ 17-50
Kandv and return 5 ~ .. 105-00
7 .. ~ 140-00
Colombo to Negombo and Return ... > 35-00
~ Nuwara Eliya via Kandy and Return .. 180-00
~ Kalutara and Return ... , 40-00
~ Galle and Return ... •. 100-00
~ Rathapura ••• " 90-00
~ Bentota ••• 60-00
Shooting trips, and inclusive tours to all parts of Ceylon
arranged.


The Bristol Hotel, Colombo
St. Andrews Hotel. Nuwara Eliya


Anuradhapura Hotel. Anuradhapura
GOLDEN TIPS
No. 12, CHATHAM STREET IS THE SHOP
TO SHOP
We Deal in the Following:
The Best Silks, Chinese Emb: Shawls, Silk Kimonos, Ivory
Neck-laces, Old Carvings, Tortoise-shell Ware, etc., etc.
Also Large Selections in Old Satsuma and Closoney Ware, Dutch Chests
Almirahs also Carpets.
W. LALCHAMD & Co.


CEYLON SOUVENIRS
SHIPS SPORTS PRIZES
IN
SILVER AND ELECTROPLATE, Etc.
Genuine Tortoiseshell
CEYLON SOUVENIR SPOONS
The Most Reliable House in Ceylon for above
COLOMBO STORES, LTD.
BOX 197, COLOMBO.
WALKER SONS & Go., Ltd.,
COLOMBO
The Oldest Established Engineering Firm in Ceylon.
CARS FOR II IR F.
TOURS ARRANGED
information Concerning Tours, Rates, Etc.
Telephone: 606 On Application
Telegrams: WV LKERH, COLOMBO.


* THE ,
c&'
GOVERNMENT R A/L^
PROVIDES
THE BEST MEANS OF VISITING THE CHIEF
PLACES OF INTEREST IN THE ISLAND.
TO
WHICH THERE IS A FREQUENT SERVICE OF TRAINS
PROVIDED WITH REFRESHMENT CARS.
Sleeping Cars are Run on Principal Night Trains
For Full Particulars of Fares Apply T. E. DUTTON,
Traffic Manager Colombo or to any Station. General Manager.


THE ,
Australasian-Ceylon Bureau
A Service Agency for Promoting Australasian
Commerce and interests in the Mid-East and for
Reciprocal Advancement of Mid-Eastern Interests
and Trade in the Commonwealth and New Zealand.
The Bureau has arrangements with the leading
Hotels and with Shipping, Railway, and Motor
Transit Companies in all territories included in the
Sphere of its operations and is in a position to offer
an unrivalled travel service to Homeward and
Outward Visitors who touch, or desire to tour in,
any part of the Orient, for purposes of business
or Pleasure.
An Experienced and Expert Staff is always at
the disposal of the Bureau to offer advice and as-
sistance to Sportsmen, Investors, Holiday makers,
and Commercial Travellers desiring to avail them-
selves of the services of the Bureau.
A special Department furnishes Reports on
Trade Opportunities, recommends business con-
nections of acknowledged stability and solvency,
and undertakes and directs Publicity Campaigns
in any Oriental language.
Inquiries of any kind promptly answered.
Cables: Australasian-Ceylon Bureau codes
BELTON, BENTLEY’S
_ , , 13 Baillie Street, Colombo,
Colombo A.B.C. (sth Ed.)
Ceylon.
P. O. Box 123
Telephone: 1968.


NMAMulCafloor
LARGEST STOCK OF GEMS,
PEARLS and JEWELLERY
in CEYLON
GaffooCs Buildings, Main St.,
Colombo


/ Sz/X at zo
s/2. , nf*sr/ 3




