

Price: 3d. Each
(4/- per 100, £2 per 1,000)
CHALLENGE !
A SPEECH
By
Lieut.-Col. Graham Seton Hutchison, D.S.O., M.C.
AT THE SAVOY THEATRE, BRADFORD
12th JANUARY, 1936
Under the auspices of the Bradford Branch, British Legion
WORLD UPHEAVALS AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE
WITHIN the space of an hour, it is not possible to do more than indicate, as it were by signposts of thought, the main
avenues which the mind must explore in coming to its conclusions concerning events which seem to shake the very
foundations of what we call our civilization. Much must be left unsaid, while qualifications which the intellect would
sometimes desire to interpolate most unfortunately go by default. I must remind you that the merest nuance of expression
may entirely alter the complexion of a true statement of fact, This pomt is one of considerable importance, especially where
statements are taken from their context, or for varied reasons may be slightly altered and even twisted in reporting either
in the Press or from one person to another. I state the truth from experience and knowledge, guided by instinct and as I
sincerely believe it. Those who hear can alone perhaps truly judge of the matter, for instinct appeals to instinct, or else
it discovers irreconcilable principles which no reasoning can bring together : and, for my part, I will not compromise with
principles. If I have anything harsh to say, I shall support it by written evidence contributed from the source criticized.
There are, I have no doubt, a large number who will understand, appreciate and be sympathetic with the views expressed,
I am conscious that there may be some to whom such views are anathema, perhaps from ignorance, by reason of selfish-
ness, perhaps by reason of life in circumstances very various from the common ; and, again, perhaps, because their racial
instincts are wholly different from my own.
Those who call themselves Conservatives, Liberals or Socialists, presumably take their stand upon a principle, though
in these days it would appear that the word National, if indeed it does not serve to cover many sins, is something of a com-
promise of principles. And, again, we may perhaps wonder how far the game of substitution of names, so common in the
field of patent medicines, is to be carried, for it so often appears that Governmental policies seem scarcely to represent National
thought at all, or to assimilate the instinctive sentiments of the nation. Adhering to none of these Parties, I take my stand
upon a set of principles. And these I state as being those of the Christ philosophy. As a man who has’led a very active
and varied life in many affairs, I have come to the definite conclusion that these philosophies are capable of practical applica-
tion in every field of human endeavour, political, economic and social. All that follows hereafter will be a sincere attempt
to apply this teaching to the practical needs of men. I can only say that those who differ must be the enemies, deliberate
or unconscious, of this philosophy.
One of the realities of our present immediate life is the desire which former soldiers are showing to seek again the com-
panionship of their old comrades of the Great War. The men who were willing then to give everything they owned, to
make every sacrifice in the cause of defence, are enlisting again now in ever increasing numbers to lend our weight in pushing
in some of the galling salients that have faced us ever since our return to our home front. We laid aside our flags and medals
without any attempt to dramatize them, or to interpretate them to anyone. We were tired and worn with wounds and hard
campaigning. Exhaustion lay on us, and apathy—that blight of War—lay on our minds and on our souls while other hands
seized on our victory, and marred it with a vicious vindictiveness that has sowed dragon’s teeth anew in those fields that we had


freshly sprinkled with our sweat and blood. Our national insularity, which for centuries was our pride, is crushed. Many
of our avenues of mental relaxation are tainted by foreign interests of the cheapest sort, and syndicated purilities of a stupidity
incredible occupy the minds of many of our sons, to the utter exclusion of real heroes like ‘ Boy ’ Cornwell. And while
British inspiration languishes to utter extinction, our whole nation has become a fat honey aphis for specious cheap-jack titil-
lations. These results proceed from propaganda, carried on remorselessly everywhere and under almost every conceivable
disguise. The people have become mesmerised by debased showmanship : while the returned soldiers were drugged
quiescent by specious promises. Meanwhile the Disciples of Hate breathe a blighting poison on to our ideal of world unity
based upon national culture and tradition. But those who served in the Front Lines discovered something —an intangible —
Comradeship. That close comradeship is nothing more or less than human love —the love of man for his fellow.
A new international order will not supersede nations. Quite the contrary :it will build upon them. A great part of
the propaganda to which I have referred is intent upon suggesting that there is no such thing as racial culture, where it is
evident to every cultivator of a garden or breeder of horses, and no less to every student of human nature, that this is the
veriest nonsense. But, more than all, this anti-natural conception is repugnant to those who truly value Christ’s teachings.
A very great authority, Doctor James Mozley, Regius Professor of Divinity at Oxford, confirms this view, when he wrote
“ Christianity gave room for national feeling, for patriotism, for that common bond which a common history creates, for
loyalty, for pride in the grandeur of the nation’s traditions, for joy in its success. There is indeed a jealousy in some schools
of thought of this national sentiment, as if it were a sentiment of nature which grace had obliterated, and it were a mark
of a relapse into Heathenism to express any practical interest in your own country. .. . The effacement of the national
sentiment is an artificial and violent erasion of a fact of nature. We see all the difference in such a case between the vision
of an angel and a pedantic theory. Nature punishes with dryness the spirits that reject her ; even their spiritual citizenship
issues forth stamped with utter insipidity, a piece of the most technical, barren and jejune mechanism. . . . Christianity is
not a flame which burns in a pure vacuum and a void. The soul has natural feelings and affections for it to feed upon ;
as the rich unguents of the wood feed the flame. So with respect to the national sentiment, it is part of the great inheritance
of Nature.” Such an authoritative view is diametrically opposed to the idea, in these days trumpeted by propaganda, that
nations, which after all only express the family with its component parts, must have crushed out of them the national senti-
ment to make room for something which man in his arrogance seems to imagine to be better than the Divine plan.
CHRIST AND ANTI-CHRIST
From this short statement, two concepts of human organisation seem to appear, the one, Christian; National; proud of
race, institutions and ideals : the other, anti-Christian, international, with its theories and plans to superimpose a mechanistic
system upon what Divine sanction has authorised as the laws of Nature. After all, the invisible and imponderable is the sole
fact. Or, as wrote Oliver Wendell Holmes, “it is the imponderable that moves the world —heat, electricity, love.” The
upheavals which rend the world seem to be moving men towards two opposed camps, those who accept Christ’s philosophy
and those who reject His teaching, as I shall attempt to show from a brief examination of current events.
Certain propositions of modern thought in human organisation seem to offer themselves for consideration, systems
which are called Democracy, Fascism, Bolshevism or political Communism, National Socialism. lam quite certain that
Democracy, as it is practised, does not contribute to the people all the benefits hoped from it. Political democracy relies upon poli-
tical machinery, slogans, mass propaganda for the doping or delusion of the mass mind. The election cries are to the lowest
instincts of man. The appeal is to sordid acquisitiveness, a form of mass bribery and corruption as astonishing as it is hideous.
That is not true democracy at all. At the best it is oligarchic or olutocractic government: at the worst it is sheer tyranny.
DEMOCRACY
To demonstrate the absurdity of the working of Parliamentary democracy I will give two recent examples. In 1931,
a National Government was formed to keep the nation on the Gold Standard : within a month that Government decided to
jettison the Gold Standard, but, for five years, it did a great many other things for which it had no mandate from the people
whatsoever. In 1935, a General Election was sprung upon the country, with the object of obtaining the nation’s support
for the governmental policy of “ Sanctions.” The public was placed in a position of hopeless dilemma. It had no real choice
of policies. Yet, within a month the newly-elected Government had again thrown overboard the main policy on which it
had been elected to office ; and we have yet to see in how far expression will be given to the free-will of the people, if indeed
that will can be said to have been properly expressed at the polls. Moreover, it is evident that the Parliamentary system is
incredibly slow and tortuous, its methods exasperating. In the electoral process a clear issue upon any subject is seldom
presented. No man, understanding the British public, in touch with it in every strata of society, can fail to realise that the
modern Parliament gives expression neither to its ideals nor to its needs. The people must be served or the people will
discover for themselves a new form for the interpretation of their will. You cannot eternally side-track questions of bread
and butter, of injustices which gnaw at the vitals of human life, by chattering of “Planning,” of higher education, of a League
of Nations or of fustian economics.
It is Government which disposes social organisation, is responsible for a people’s welfare, and by legislation may control
its activitv for a decade or an age. Similiarily, by inactivity, by inattention to the desperate needs and spiritual urge of a
people, the Government may cast a Nation into depression, may deprive it of vitality, may sap its national genius. A succes-
sion of such Governments will reduce even the most virile of peoples to the position of a slave race.
But one thing is certain. The British Empire, our civilisation, with all its imperfections and yet immense possibilities
for perfection, will last just so long as its spiritual basis remains a living and effective force —and no longer.
The demogogues “ Home for Heroes ” has declined to a drab tenement for the mass. The British people, under the
pressure of Big Business, economic monopoly, and the mass hypnotism of publicity, has had stolen from it the freedom, the
power of decision, the willing will which but 20 years ago had, in all the history of mankind never more fully been spirit-
ually possessed. It is nobody’s business to make an effort, with the cessation of the canon’s roar spiritual impulse has ceased
to beat. Between the “ Old Men ” and ourselves —I refer to the War generation and the younger —there is a gap not, say,
of 20 years, but of a hundred years. Both the phychological outlook and the material facts of the post-war years establish


this contention wholly beyond dispute. The prejudices, beliefs, systems, conventions, organisations, fears, of the old gang
for ourselves mean little or nothing. We have faith in ourselves and in our race.
Do we want this system of Parliamentary democracy to continue ? Before replying to that question, let us briefly
examine those other systems which I have mentioned, Fascism, Bolshevism, National Socialism.
FASCISM
I have no time here to be concerned with Italian Fascism except to remark that it has been truly said, “ By men’s
acts ye shall know them. But, Fascism has appeared also in this country. Leaving aside what is merely theatrical or the
exuberance of disillusioned youth ; discounting the ambitions of a rich man and those of his paid organisers ; omitting men-
tion of the shrill diatribe ormore unworthy whisperings of Sir Oswald Mosley and his henchmen, we observe that the British
public is offered the Greater Britain ”if only we will concede to this self-appointed leader the Dictatorship and allow him
to erect the Corporations of his imagination. Now, it is almost self-evident that there are many reforms which can be in-
stituted literally by a stroke of the pen. To these I will come. But before I, for one, will accept any kind of political direction
I require hrst to know what is the philosophy which inspires its policies.
In the Fascist Quarterly Mosley summarises “ Christian Thought.” He writes, “ This is the religion of the slave
and of the weakling. This is the faith of the people who are in flight from life, who will not face reality, who look for salvation
in some dreamy hereafter the salvation which they have not the vitality to seize for themselves here on earth. It is derived
from a spirit of weakness and surrender . . . the Religion which has enchained and enfeebled mankind.”
. ChnsC challenging the materialistic concept, asserted that the first element of law was “to love the Lord ihy God
with all thy heart, and secondly to love thy neighbour as thyself.” Christ, in His age, challenged the gross materialism
as evidenced especially and historically by the Jewish Qabalah. There was nothing of the slave and the weakling, nor of
flight from life, nor unreal, nor lacking vitality and manhood, nor of weakness, nor of surrender in what Christ preached.
Quite the contrary. It was a philosophy, a working philosophy for all the affairs of life, to which, if men would be obedient,
there is an answer to every political, financial, economic and social problem. To change what is wrong for what is right,
without compromise of principle or of conscience, is the condition necessary in our national life and in Imperial affairs.
1 his is a perfectly simple philosophy, once shorn of the quite unnecessary complications of Theology, dogma, false piety and
Churchiamty. It requires courage, imagination, realism, leadership, knowledge, strength, sacrifice and service. It re-
quires something further, namely, a spiritual foundation on which to build. It requires faith, the vital spark which inflames
the whole. Either the Christ philosophy is for us the most important thing in the World, or it is nonsense. There can be
no compromise in principle, none whatever. We either accept Christ’s teaching, as given, or we must experiment with some
ocher Ja>,v. Christ was either informed by and was the mouthpiece of the Omnipotent, or He was not. He drew everv
lesson from Nature, using the symbols of Nature over and over again for the exposition of His philosophy.
, , under the shadow of a great tradition. For centuries it has been slowly forming. Lives without number
have been built into it. The years have crowned it with power and with beauty. It marks the rise and dominance of the
human spirit. I hroughout the ages, the institutions of this country have been slowly formed, developed from the knowledge,
sacrifice, frugality, and genius of our forefathers. Christ asserted, “ I came not to destroy the law, but to fulfil it.” It was
not His conception to overthrow traditional institutions and to impose some temporarily attractive novelty in their place.
e emance o t e governing authority of the Jews, in statements which are as important as they are profoundly wise and
practical, that they should remove the obstacles which they themselves had set up between man and his God-given inheritance.
e s ar * . 1S * f or s > an d the fullness thereof. It does not belong to Fascism, nor to World Judea, nor to monopolists,
nor to financiers, but to the people. And Christ said, “When ye pray, say .... Thy will be done on earth . . . /’which
in no wav suggests te reamy hereafter which Mosley asserts. The “ Blackshirt ” philosophy is summed up in Moslev’s
own expression : Every Blackshirt is an individual cell of a collective Caesarism.” If the British people, and those'of
the mam races which comprise the British Empire desire such a concept, from their own free will and choice they can become
such cells with Mosley as their Caesar. They can reject Christ, and supplant Him with Mosley as the new Messiah.
It is quite true, of course, that the Christian Church, divided between warring factions, torn with schisms, and grasping
or empora power, as in many respects failed to deliver the message which Christ preached. It is onlv mortal to err.
TjUt’ even as political civilisation is at the crossroads, so, also, philosophic error is being recognised throughout the World.
ows f lta sire *° re assert spiritual values ; and I contend that this urge is the direct legacy of the trenches of the
es ern ront,o the beaches of Gallipoli and of the Comradeship which so strangely manifested itself wherever men were
-Cr m servic e to an ideal, willing and ready to make every sacrifice. The Churches of all denominatons
an ere I gi°s ls ° a creeds are themselves at the cross-roads. It may be sometimes that an oily unctuousness, a false pietv,
c arac enze V ' wea mess, has crept into the Churches, where the Author of the supreme Philosophy was demonstrablv a
man of unquenchable courage, of extraordinary virility, determined at all costs to deliver His message to mankind. I give
■?1 tf re °* *° ° S if y S * n re S ar d to the Christian philosophy. It is stupid, ill-informed and misleading. “ Thy
will be done on earth . These words do not suggest economic slavery on starvation wages in this life that people
may ave eir ca e m Heaven. Will implies action. The will to do a thing necessitates action, nothing else.
« TJ ™P lte Mosley s condemnaton of Communism, there is nothing to choose between his Fascism and Bolshevism.
t " °i- 1S no £ Wlt elB a g ains t Me. There can be no compromise of principles. Yet, lam sure that everyone who
thinks realises that we cannot go on as at present. J
BOLSHEVISM OR POLITICAL COMMUNISM
Many intelligent people discussing this subject, ask : “ What is going to happen ? Is it Russia we must copy ?”
,? re + . ecms ' tl e . °V lt: now -that the Soviet system if worked to advantage has economic possibilities that must be fatal
? " % orm o capita ism we have known hitherto. The revolution in Russia was accomplished by Jewish financiers; and
the affairs of the Russian people are everywhere ordered by Jewish Commissars. The Soviet is not a Russian concept, but
A llTrl i he ?f W w h C hr °™ le of , t \ e /r 6th J anuai 7> 1933. writes “ Over J of the Jews in Russia have become officials.”
7 Worl the 15th March, 1923, asserts “ Fundamentally, Judaism is Anti-Christian,” but, so early as
BX3 this same organ of Jewish opinion had asserted “the great ideal of Judaism is that the whole World shall be imbued


with Jewish teachings—all the separate races and religions shall disappear.” I have already contributed the authority of the
Regius Professor of Divinity at Oxford University. But, if there is something anti-social and anti-Christian in pride of
race and tradition, I may ask the pertinent questions, “ What is the sense of being united or organised as a State ? What
is the meaning of ‘ citizen ?’ Why love the family, or honour the father and the mother ?
In order to achieve the Soviet system, the Dictators found it necessary to destroy hundreds of thousands of the finest
intellects and of the most cultured in Russia. The massacres by Tamerlane, by Ghengiz Khan, and by Baba at Delhi or by
the Mahdi at Omdurman present no kind of parallel to the mass murders by the Bolshevik Comintern. In result, a slavery
and tyranny has been imposed upon the Russian people, while an economic mechanism, ruthless, perhaps efficient, seeks to
destroy World Trade and the whole basis of our culture. Our present standard of life is threatened by the Russian Five Year
Plan. It means goods produced by unpaid labour competing with our goods produced by highly paid labour. The Russians
are being rationed for an ideal of a kind. In England to-day we seem incapable of obtaining a national ideal on any subject.
On January 7th, 1936, at a conference of members of the Soviet Government, Kosareff, Secretary of the Union of Young
Communists said, “ The older generation decided the question who should destroy whom within our country. We, led
by our Party, led by the great Stalin, commanded by Marshal Voroshiloff, have an extraordinarily arduous and important
historic task —to decide who shall destroy whom in the whole World.”
The momentum of the Soviet system is that of capitalism. Communism cannot develop its own power. Without
individual and family interest the people will eventually refuse all toil. Without toil no system can maintain itself. But
why look to Bolshevism and to Karl Marx ? Why do not people suggest that we should look to Christ and real Christianity ?
It has never even yet been tried.
NATIONAL SOCIALISM
We come then to that other system of National Socialism, which has first appeared in Germany, but which is also
attracting large numbers of adherents throughout Europe and America. Let it be plain at the outset that National Socialism
is not Fascism. Its idealology, philosophy and policy are very different. There are many men, a growing number of men,
who will not take it as an axiom that what they read and often hear is necessarily true. They are growing distrustful of the
over-emphasis of a certain section of the Press. People, who happen to be averagely decent men, with wives and children,
who do not cheat their neighbours and tradesmen, have been the instruments by which false impressions have been spread.
They absorb the propaganda, but are becoming distrustful.
The spirit which now finds political expression in Germany is that of the Jugendbewegung (Youth Movement), itself
originating in the Wandervogel, a quasi-religious movement which began in Germany about a decade before the war. The
phenomena which have been hurried to the surface in Germany by a series of crises, social, political and economic, since the
war, are possessed of continuity. The punitive Treaty of Versailles, together with the Inflation, wholesale bankruptcy and poli-
tical chaos, have perhaps obscured from observers the profound significance of the ideals upon which National Socialism was
founded. The Wandervogel rediscovered Man at one with Nature. It was from the romantic fanaticism of this spirit that
in 1913 they threw this message to the World—“We are determined to fashion our lives in obedience to our own conscience,
accepting the burden of our own responsibilities.” Following the war, the whole of German youth was organised in Bunde
(Groups) working in harmony with and often led by returned soldiers. A battle cry became the spiritual urge of the entire
Movement —“ Volk gegen Kaste und Geld !” In other words, “ The People will overthrow class-rule and the thraldum of
Money Power.” The National Socialist Party embodies the root idea of the Aristocratic conception of Society whereby
men group themselves together and are quickened by a living person, for they cannot be united by an ideal except as embodied
in a man. Great Personalities become concepts ; and great Personalities make great Nations. In the quest of a natural and
organic life, young people fled from the big cities and spent their weekends in the country. In its last analysis, this movement
is directed towards a renaissance of social relationships, of the whole social body. It is based upon time-honoured principles
which are officially adopted by the new State : the principles of blood and soil. The deepest significance of the new venture
in German politics lies in the fact that it is the Man, which stands in the centre of things, not the machine or its product,
not the profitableness of acompanynor the market prices, not the law of supply and demand,nor any other concept of the
capitalistic period, but Man —Man is part of the soil on which he grows. The Bolshevik mind, intent upon capturing
the whole of the material resources of the earth as the preserve for a few parasitic invaders of its own choice, directs its propa-
ganda tirelessly to suggest that race and soil have no significance. The Nation, proscribed by climatic and geographic
boundaries, is Nature’s entity ; and Socialism, not that of regimented souls, expresses a Comradeship—“ to love thy neighbour
as thyself.” But such Socialism does not imply that men are equal in capacity, in knowledge, in genius ; but that they
are equal in comradeship, in service and before the law. If the argument of race and soil is false, let us imagine that all inhabi-
tants of Britain would depart with all their moveable goods and chattels, their King and their flag in front, and settle under
another sky—Britain we could not take with us ; behind us wold lie dead the British state.
It may take people a long time to recognise these fundamental elements of a people’s well-being. But while the old
knowledge, asserted by every great Seer, such as Buddha, Confucius, Mahomet, Socrates, Nanak and in the Bhagavad Gita
ofthe Hindus, and taught by Christ, is being rediscovered, it has seemed necessary in what we call civilisation to burn corn in
locomotives, to feed the ocean with coffee, to slaughter milch cows, to destroy fruit-bearing orchards, to what-is-called
rationalize production, while men are starving. National Socialism is a living faith.
In the Party Programme, “ declared to be unalterable,” issued in 1920, it is stated “ the Party as such, stands for
positive Christianity, but does not bind itself in the matter of creed to any particular confession. It combats the Jewish-
materialist spirit within us and without us.” That is the answer to those false prophets and informers who suggest that
Germany is what they call “ Pagan.”
As I have observed the concept fashioning itself from many visits to Germany, leaving aside the more violent exuber-
ance of the Revolution, much advertised outside Germany itself, I am convinced that National Socialism approaches more
closely to the Christ ideal, than any system which has preceeded it. If people would really take the trouble to examine for
themselves the published Programme of the National Socialist Party, and would visit Germany to observe how this step by step is
being fulfilled, lam quite sure that they would be as astonished as gratified. But, it is of course true that National Socialism


v\
t
$
k
$
$
|
d
j>
t
k
X
as a concept, threatens the Bolshevik idea of International Power gathered into the hands of one race who, while all the evi-
dence is against them, are arrogant enough to assert that they are “God’s chosen people.” Let it be remembered that, even
under His human manifestation, Jesus appeared as a Galilean, and the word Galilee, in Hebrew, means the land of the Gentiles.
Furthermore, it is the Jew’s proud boast that “ they gave us our God ” as they boldly sang in the streets of Moscow after
the 1917 revolution. But our very sense of humour prevents us from believing that God was created by the Jews.
ALLIANCE BETWEEN INTERNATIONAL FINANCE AND REVOLUTION
The alliance between the Jewish International Finance and Revolutionary Movements was no mystery to Disraeli
(Lord Beaconsfield) ; for, just after the Revolutionary European upheaval of 1848 he wrote “ An insurrection takes places
against tradition and aristocracy, against religion and property. The natural equality of man and the abrogation of property
are proclaimed by the secret societies who form provisional governments, and men of Jewish race are found at the head of
everyone of them. The most skilful accumulators of property ally themselves with Communists; the peculiar and chosen
race touch the hand of all the scum and low castes of Europe ; and all this because they wish to destroy that ungrateful
Christendom which owes to them even its name.”
But we have much later evidence. In 1919 the British Government published a White Paper containing a report
from M. Oudendyk, the Netherland Minister at St. Petersburg, who was watching British interests during the Bolshevik
revolution. This report, dated 6th September, 1918, was forwarded by Sir M. Findlay from Christiania to Mr. Balfour. M.
Oudendyk stated “ I consider that the immediate suppression of Bolshevism is the greatest issue now before the World,
not even excluding the war which is still raging, and, unless, as above stated, Bolshevism is nipped in the bud immediately,
it is bound to spread, in one form or another, over Europe and the whole World, as it is organised and worked by Jews,
who have no nationality, and whose one object is to destroy for their own ends the existing order of things.” And again,
Jewish Chronicle of 4th April, 1919, wrote “There is much in the fact of Bolshevism itself, in the fact that so many Jews
are Bolshevists, in the fact that the ideals of Bolshevism at many points are consonant with the finest ideals of Judaism.”
I would make it clear that I recognise that within the British Empire we are responsible for the welfare of Minorities, some-
times racial and sometimes political. Among these races are the Jews. But we cannot permit any race, especially one
organised internationally, holding through finance, political power, secret societies, the key positions within our social structure
to impose the Bolshevik concept upon us or to seize our lawful inheritance and that of our children for themselves. We have
been taught to fight evil. Unless we will accept defeat, we must use weapons of the enemy’s choice, or indeed find better.
Following the war, everywhere in Europe, but especially in Germany, suffering from disillusion and defeat, anarchy
stepped abroad, fomented from Moscow, directed by Jews, and financed by Jews. It is quite clear that the objective was world-
domination for Jewish Money Power. International Finance is not altruistic, it ever seeks its own power. Bolshevism has
opened the way to Jewish industrialization of Russia and Siberia. It is on its way to deliver India and the Far East, as-well
as Africa, into the hands of International Finance. Bolshevism is the anti-Christ. It is against this evil that Adolf Hitler
has made his fight. The German people have a sovereign right to determine who shall lead them, and what philosophy
shall inspire their government. The new Germany has been purged of brothels and filthy literature: profiteers, perverters
of the public mind, parasites, have been removed from power.
Bribery and corruption in public life have been uprooted. National regeneration has been accomplished by former
Front-Line Soldiers in co-operation with Youth. And if anyone questions that the German people as a whole have gained
immeasureably in happiness, in individual status, in their standard of life, in moral values, I can only suggest that they should
visit Germany and see, for example, the work of the Arbeitslager (Work’s camps), of the Hitler Jugend (Hitler Youth) or what
is being accomplished in land settlement and in the arts. We are told that Germany is “ Pagan.” But a far more truthful
Informer said “God is a Spirit.” In no country in the world have I observed more of the fulfilment of Christ’s teaching
than in Germany. And, lam sure it is time we began to reflect more upon “Christ risen,” a living Spirit, than upon the
Crucifixion. National Socialism is, therefore, what its title suggests : ‘ National ’in the sense that it makes the most of the
institutions, traditions and culture which have been formed by the slow development of race through the centuries; and Socialis-
tic in the sense that a class-less community serves the State, the embodiment of family life; with equality before the law,
with equal opportunity for all, under the leadership of a man chosen by the people. As to Adolf Hitler, personally, in such
contrast with the politicians whose names are tainted with such scandals as the sale of Honours and Maundy Gregory, or
that of “ Pepper ;” with Marconi Shares or Stavisky, he is incorruptible, a man of marked simplicity of life, courageous and
absolutely frank. Those are virtues which cannot be discounted. Germany stands aloof from the League of Nations
because the League is not truly one of nations at all.
Its ideals have been jettisoned to make room for a sordid conspiracy for power, the dominant personality of which
is Meyer Moisevitch Wallach, alias Litvinov. Much might be said concerning the career of this creature ; but it may be
sufficient to remind you that during the war he was in England actively engaged in the circulation of seditious literature.
In 1917, he appeared as “ the Bolshevist Ambassador ”to Great Britain. But, as Lord Curzon said “ his intrigues were so
desperate that he was finally turned out of the country.” In its 1933 report, the British and Foreign Bible Society states
“ Once again we must report the impossibility of any circulation of the Scriptures in Russia. Asstated last year it is illegal
either to print or circulate the Bible or indeed any religious book in the Soviet Union.” Yet, at Geneva, it is Litvinov who
now dictates what the World shall do and how Christian men shall behave themselves.
A PRACTICAL PROGRAMME. WHAT CAN BE DONE.
I have earlier asked whether we are satisfied with the present state of affairs ; and, all too briefly, I have shown some
facets of varying Governmental systems to which men are asked to look for example and guidance. We must recognise that
our present competitive system is outworn ; while everywhere we witness in this country disillusion and doubt. The evils
of unemployment, slum-dwelling, crime, disease, looseness of living and general degradation are everywhere apparent.
The voices of the spirit are stilled. lam convinced that in the near future our leaders will be those who have passed through
the fires of affliction and have learned the worthlessness of material riches, and so are content to accept the full responsibility
of leadership under Christ’s spiritual guidance without material reward. Then, let us consider, in the application of Christ’s
philosophy, what reforms can be accomplished immediately and absolutely for the benefit of mankind.


First, we can secure that the financial system shall be so changed in its technique that the fulness of the earth which
belongs to the Lord shall be available to His people. Our financial system is the only me#is we have developed for distribut-
ing our wealth which is to-day superabundant. It has failed to do this and our wealth perishes unused, while the people
suffer for utter want of these things. The means of distribution must therefore be changed to meet our needs and the full
power of our production. I visualize the end of the present world-wide profit-making commercial and political system.
The system of modern business and Christianity are incompatible. In 1930, the late Lord Melchett (Alfred Mond) said
that in 15 years it would not “pay” anyone to grow food, because the yield would be so great, the supply of nitrogenous
manures being now so cheap and abundant. But it does not now “ pay ”to grow most of our articles of food. So great
is the supply of capital and so well advanced the science of manufacturing, that soon it will not pay to produce any of our
manufactured articles. The evidence is that there is no trade in which the output could not be easily developed to satisfy
the utmost consumptive demand, if the nations’credit were mobilised for the necessary developments and the resulting plant
allowed to operate at a 100 per cent, efficiency. This has never yet been done. Our present system of economics, conducted
on a profit-making basis, will have to be changed. Either we must “ rationalize ”in every trade (stop new producers coming
into each trade) and limit production and so keep up prices, or we must run industry and commerce simply as a service.
I cannot believe that the people are going to tolerate great monopolies in every trade (which appears to be the proposal both
of the National Government, advised by the Political Economic Planning, and of Fascism) —which limit their output and create
an artificial scarcity in order to make a profit. This is to refuse the abundance and prosperity that the Omnipotent through
Science is heaping upon humanity. We avail ourselves of Science and capital to improve the technique of our production
of all wealth, and then we combine and use all our human ingenuity to limit or destroy the production. This is only criminal.
Time does not permit me to expound the system by which the distribution of wealth, goods and services can be changed for
the benefit of man. But I will assert that poverty and taxation are wholly unnecessary. And I must remind you that ignorance,
disease and crime are the concommitants of poverty. The subversive activities of International Finance, throughout the
economic and cultural system, can be curbed by legislation which will make it illegal for the national currency to be bought
and sold or to be exported abroad.
It is necessary for national health that we should accomplish our own Regeneration, which can onlvbe attained on a
spiritual basis. It is self-evident, therefore, that government must be conducted exclusively by men of British race and origin
whose first interest will be the preservation of the British character and the satisfaction of the needs of the British people.
We must secure that the great agencies of public opinion, the Press, the Cinema, Broadcasting, National Education, Liter-
ature, Art, shall be cleansed of subversive propaganda and be directed to the elevation of the character of the British people.
We must recognise that men of alien race, in every sphere of public activity, on boths ends of the scale, are concerned in an
attack upon the idealistic and material heritage of the British race in the interests of their own International organisation.
We must expose and crush those alien forces which have divided the British people by class-warfare. The principle
that the citizen is responsible for the State, and the State for the citizen, without class distinction of any kind, must be estab-
lished.
The House of Commons must be reformed in such a way that it will become truly representative, through Personality,
of the national life, of its industry and of its culture. It must be enacted that honours wdiich flow from the Throne shall not
be bestowed on account of gifts of money contributed to political movements and parties, this being onlv a gross form of
bribery and corruption.
Litigants must be enabled to obtain Justice before the Courts, where, at present, a poor man, owing to immense costs,
can seek no redress for injustice against mighty corporations and the rich.
It must be enacted that Councillors and Officials entrusted with Public funds be held guilty of treason against the
people for corrupt practices or bribery. The suborning of Officials and subordinates must be held equally treasonable.
It must be illegal for alien persons and Corporations to possess either directly or indirectly control over British national
wealth, the Press, education, the cinema and other cultural instruments. No alien should be permitted to own British land.
Such modifications in the Electoral system should be made that the people shall be enabled to record their opinion
upon each national issue as it presents itself; and separately upon matters of sectional interest which affect their own trade
and lives.
The policy of Insurance must be developed so that every man is secured in his own home.
Through the Educational system, pride of body and of race must be taught to the young, which, as medical opinion
will agree, is the soundest training for good morality and for the protection of family life. A worthy policy of National
Physical Training must be instituted.
The vested interest of Corporations and of Classes must be removed from the field of politics. This interest should
be reserved absolutely to the British National interest as a whole.
It must be remembered that in a crisis, a small and determined minority can impose itself upon the majority. It is not
a question of numbers but of the key positions held. The British people must make sure that no such minority has any
facilities forthe imposition of a dictatorship in the interests of a financial oligarchy, or themselves.
All Movements and Associations on both ends of the social scale, whose objectives are directed towards class-warfare,
and which foment war, must be destroyed.
The nation must be so armed and defended that it can make its voice effective in International affairs. Force can only
be met by force. But it is clear also that, should war be thrust upon us, the first line of defence is to be able to feed ourselves,
which the highest agricultural authorities have long asserted we can do. If war occurred to-day, Britain would be starved
after a few short weeks : yet there are thousands of idle acres and idle men that could accomplish this first line of defence.
Due to the danger from aerial attack, the “convoy system” of the late war is now useless. We are obliged to grow our own
food, or perish. Moreover, Great Britain is responsible for the defence of millions of unarmed coloured peoples all the
world over. So long as we have not abdicated from this high responsibility, it remains our duty to protect their lives and
homes and culture.
No State can be regarded as healthy while beggars are on its streets and women must sell themselves to obtain a liveli-
hood. Producers of degraded nonsense and fals'fied news must be punished and prohibited from practice.


It is our duty to raise th~ standard of life and culture of all peoples within the British Empire and to meet them in a
spirit of mutual confidence and resect. While recognising the sovereign rights of every race, an Imperial policy should be
declared which will continue to fulfil the duties which those who founded the British Empire have imposed upon posterity.
The Treaty of Versailles and its subsiduary Treaties must be revised in accordance with the ideals for which British
men undertook arms and in pursuance of the traditional British policy of “ Fair Play.”
The salaries of those servants entrusted with the mission of National Leadership should be administered by a public
National Trust instituted permanently for the purpose. The acceptance of service in the Ministry (Cabinet) should per-
manently debar such Ministers from activity in the commercial and financial field for profit.
By means of a changed financial technique and through public control of the Bank of England and of the issue of cur-
rency, the object should be to raise the standard of life of the whole community, possessing for the people the fruits of the earth
and the results of their own labour.
Individual initiative, as the most prized characteristic of the British Race, must be fostered. v
The objective of a4oor 30 hours, or alternatively a 5-day week, must be achieved. The object first is that invention
and scientific discovery shall be used to relieve man from mere toil. As it is, labour-saving machinery produces only unem-
ployment and higher profits for financiers. Second, in a mechanised age the population shall have the relief necessary for
physical and mental well-being and for the development of cultural pursuits. Third, that a great number more men shall
be re-absorbed into industry as an immediate relief of unemployment. There is any amount of work which men would
like to do for the advantage of the nation and their own cultural enablement, which is not mere toil. The sound policy is
systematically to reduce the number of working hours throughout industry, as Science yields of her marvels.
The only test of citizenship is that of honourable labour. Parasitic agencies must be removed ; and the power of
Trusts, Rings and middle-men curtailed.
Aliens must be excluded from employment in the economic sphere, except as employees of foreign firms with whom
we have trading relations, until the needs of British citizens are fully satisfied.
The producer must have secured for him the rewards of his labour, by the elimination of parasites who extract im-
mense profits between producer and consumer. The honest trader must be safeguarded.
A Ministry of National Defence must be set up, both for efficiency and economy.
It is necessary for the health of the country that there should be a vigorous yeoman and peasant class. Thousands
of acres lie waste ; while both the farmer and agricultural worker are beggared by governmental policies affecting the import
of food-stuffs. We can grow almost the whole of our own food consumption. Tens of thousands of men with their families
are kept in idleness where they might be employed on the land, and this is in order that International Finance shall secure
its pound of flesh. From the immense resources of this country, I visualize re-establishment of village life, and the rebuilding
of rural communities, with good wages, pleasant amenities, and the real opportunity to make something of life as well as a
living, for themselves and their families.
I consider it no ideal that any British boy should be forced to obtain his bread and bare subsistance, by having to work
six days a week on his knees for eight hours, hewing coal for a mere pittance as I know my young friends in Mansfield, whom
I saw yesterday, are obliged to work. There is no necessity for this. It is a criminal system. I visualize an Educational
system wherein class divisions are eliminated; so that the State, industry and the professions will have available to them the
highest character and the best brains nurtured through the process of Education in its various forms and stages.
I would eliminate from industry such oppressive and anti-social factors as Mining Royalities, Way Leaves, Rising Rents,
based upon a rising value of Urban land, occasioned by the natural development of population and industry. But I recog-
nise the rights of inheritance, the rewards of a father’s frugality, hard work and genius, which is to say that the right of private
property, where such property is being used for the cultural or material benefit of the nation as a whole, are held to be valid
within the ideal state. And this is contrary to the concept of Karl Marx, under whose authority, the people become serfs,
regimented and ordered by dictators, and, as in Russia, almost exclusively Jewish.
It is no dream of an unpractical idealist that the nation can be united in comradeship each contributing to the Common-
wealth in accordance with his ability and experience, each a member of the nation, secured in his home, and drawing from the
Commonwealth the basic necessities to honourable existence for himself and his family, resulting from the labour of his
hands and brain. It is my purpose to do what can be done to nurture and extend the true spirit of Christian Ethics in the
affairs of life, wherever British influence is to be found.
We are told “ Seek first the kingdom of God and all these things —food, clothing, entertainment —shall be added unto
you.” God does not stint His gifts. Nature always over-produces, as witness the blackberries on the hedge. There are
to-day multitudes in the valley of decision between the Powers of Light and Darkness. How can there be any doubt on this
matter ? We have Christ’s teaching “ Love one another.” We have His example. The crime of the whole world is in
fact, as Ruskin said, that of Judas, not that we disbelieve Christ but that we continue to sell Him. All usury must be pro-
hibited. The monopoly of the creation of Credit must be wrested from the Banking System; and issued as Producer’s
Credits to those best fitted to lead, for the benefit of all, and as Consumer’s credits in a National dividend for all.
THE DESTINY OF BRITAIN. THE CHOICE LIES WITH YOU.
These are some of the things which can be accomplished almost by a stroke of the pen. And it remains for the British
people to see whether they will accept the domination of the materialist concept of life, no matter by what name it may be
called; or whether they will have the courage and common sense to assert the spiritual urge indwelling within them; and
insist, in and out of season, that Right shall be the only arbiter of British public policy. We have been told, “ except ye
become as little children,” which means to say that unless we throw out from our minds the false teaching of propaganda
and false reasoning based upon false premises, we cannot begin to comprehend the simple truths of life which more than all
else are revealed by Nature. So many things, easy to comprehend, have become clogged with Cabbalistic mumbo-jumbo
and ridiculous verbiage, that people often say —“Ah, that is a matter for experts.” This is especially true of Money, which
most cunningly has been made one of the ‘higher mysteries,’ wrapped up in a ridiculous vocabularly; where, of course, money
is merely a convenient means of distribution, a token of exchange between labour, goods and services. The only currency


which really matters is paper, and it is just as easy to print ten on a piece of paper as it is to print one. The annual productive
wealth of this or any other country is readily ascertainable ; and it is perfectly easy to issue sufficient currency to equate with
this wealth, the monopoly of creating such Credit being reserved exclusively to the Monarchy and the Government. Were
this done, there would no longer be any poverty. And, as it happens, if only people would take the trouble to read into
the great Philosophies, they would discover that this is precisely the system which has been advocated always by the great
Seers. Throughout all his wanderings, during the thousands of years of history, man, has, as it were, set up land-marks of
Personality to guide him ; and these were the Divinely inspired Philosophers, of whom I may name Plato, Socrates, Buddha,
Confucius, Nanak, Mahomet, and the most ancient writings of the Hindu Maharabata, especially the Bhagava Gita (The Song
Celestial). Such a system of Form and Order and of Pighteousness was the teaching of Christ. The British people are pre-
sumably among the most intelligent in the World. Not only is agriculture the basic industry of every nation, because from
the soil alone do we support human life; but there can be no question that contact with the soil, from which we came, of
which we are, and to which we return, provides lessons of profound spiritual significance. Even modern anthropo-geography
supports the mystic belief in speaking of the human body as “ a piece of highly developed earth.”
I would insist that every youth be compelled to give some months of his young life to working upon the soil of his
native land ; or, at least, through some organisation to gain contact with the elements of Nature in the comradeship of camps
and such like. Have you smelt the honeysuckle on a warm summer evening ? Have you seen the yellow primrose by the
river bank ? Have you seen a glade in the forest covered with the shimmer of the bluebells ? Have you heard the black
bird in the early morn and at dewy eve ? Have you observed the blossom in the apple orchards ? Have you seen the country-
side bathed in sunlight or the purple hue of distant hills? Have you smelt the newly-turned loam after rain or tasted Mid
berries from the hedge ? Have you felt one of those mornings in Spring when the Presence of the Omnipotent is overwhelming ?
Have you felt the satisfaction of turning the clod with honest sweat, and tended the young green shoots as they begin to
appear from that labour ? Have you recognised that in the sheer beauty of flowers there is an element non-essential to their
natural economy,something which the eye perceives and the spirit realises—their beauty? Have you understood that these
things of which I speak denote the Presence of a phenomenon beyond the comprehension, as yet, of mortal man ? Do you
not know that all these priceless gifts are not only freely distributed, but serve as a pattern for man’s imitation, and that they
belong to the Sublime ? ’ J
Those who are associated with me in the fight which I have fought, consistently and without compromise of principle,
accept absolutely the views which I have expressed. They include men of every station in life; and we are pledged, no matter
what sacrifice may be demanded of us, to spread these ideas until they lay hold of the heart of the nation. We want Men !
Men of proven experience, capacity, energy, understanding of industrial problems; sympathetic with the aspirations, hopes,
fears, anxieties, and life of the people : Men, well educated, with a knowledge and sense of Geography, History, International
relationship : men, up-to-date, progressive, neither the victims of taboos, nor the slaves of worn-our dogmas: men physically
fit, Spartan in habit, who will not destroy the body and brain with an excess of food, tobacco, and alcohol. Men who possess
in their blood and bones the matchless tradition of the English, Scottish and Welsh country side. Men of courage; capable
of sacrifice, willing to incur disfavour, social ostracism, loss of position, for a faith, for a belief, for a conviction: men to whom
property, possessions, profits, material gain, means nothing in the realm of achievement, men who are not ashamed to testify
that they believe in something bigger than life. The activities which we who accept such a political creed are about
to focuss will endeavour to bring all good men of good will, women and children too, within the folds of an organistion,
determined at all costs to carry our Programme into every department of the national life. It has been truly said “No man
can serve two masters,” and this is the issue.
In this New Year we are faced with a new struggle, in which the first round has gone against us. For years we have
sat at table with leaders who eulogised murder and glorified crime. For years the rotting poison of calumny has been allowed
to circulate in our life stream of British sentiment. And now the whirlwind ! The blood that soaked those Flanders fields
must cry to us in warning. . . . The spirits of those who have died slowly of their wounds must echo it again. We must
mass our massed ranks, all men and women of good will and not the least younger generation, if we are to regain the initiative
that has been lost through lassitude and indifference. We must act Faith, lest our Ideals prove cold and sapless. There is
but one prophetic message for Youth to-day “ Christ is risen . . . Thy will be done on earth !”
Finally, a British government dares not be false in the end to the great traditions of the British race. Great Britain
has witnessed the decline and fall of kingdoms, the discovery of continents and new lands, and one revolution after another
in the intellectual, social and political life of man. The responsibility of the British people was never so heavy as it is to-day
Great Britain has only to remain true to its high tradition, only to hold fast to inflexible purpose, only to continue to nourish
a discphned liberty, to make it certain that the British Empire will remain to serve mankind when all the gross structure
of materialism will have crumbled and rusted into dust. One effect of much recent teaching of what once was Ethics
is to weaken all sense of obligation of every kind except to one’s own appetites and desire for instant advantage. Yet little
more than 18 years ago men had come to believe that shed blood was better than a bank balance. Men of mature years
who have achieved reputation enough to be invited to occupy a post of responsibility in Government ought not to have to
be reminded that there is such a thing as traditional National obligation and that they fall short of it.
The time will not come when rational persons can contemplate with satisfaction the rule of literary and political
Bolsheviks or permit them to seize responsibility for the cultural and governmental life of the British nation, even less for
so do we recognise our high responsibility, for that of the British Empire. It is noteworthv that instances of the lack of a sense
of national obligation rarely arise in the case of those men whose intellectual occupations bring them in touch with real
things and the inspiring humaness of ordinary men.
The responsibility of Great Britain and of the Empire, singlv and jointly, is doubly great because of their resources
because of their equipment, because of their opportunity, because the World has a right to expect that greatness and not mean-
ness will come from those whose past declares greatness, and because now may be the last opportunity for men of the same
racial origins and culture to give formal expression of system and method in the inspired Leadership of their fellow men.
“ Who lives, if England dies ?”
Prints fay H. F Lucas & Co 151 North Road Southend-on-Sea and published by THE NATIONAL SOCIALIST WORKERS PARTY OF GREAT BRITAIN
40 Great Ormond Street. London, W.C. A full exposition of Policy is published in " Challenge ” (.Hutchinson & Co.), 3/6. Obtainable above and of publishers’.
