

CHANG WOO GOW
THE TALL MAN OF FYCHOW.
HIS LIFE AND HISTORY OF HIS TRAVELS.
Under the Especial Patronage of
H. M. QUEEN OF ENGLAND, & [?]
Dedicated to
THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALASIA.
JONES AND CO., PRINTERS, WELLESLEY STREET, AUCKLAND.




CHANG’S ADDRESS.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I shall not attempt to express in words my gratitude for
the reception you have given me here in this city. That you
V
approach me with kindliness, and I am told speak with a kind
of admiration of the more than ordinary development of my body,
my language can scarcely furnish words sincere enough to
thank you.
The fish dwells in the depth of watei’S,
And the eagles in the heaven!
The one, though high, may be reached with an arrow,
%
And the other, though deep, with a hook ;
But the heart of man, at foot distance,
Cannot be known.
Yet I trust my heart is known to you. It is full of thank-
fulness for your kindness, and kindness is more binding than a
loan.


THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF CHANG.
[TRANSLATED FROM THE CHINESE.]
Chang Woo Gow is about 24 years of age, a native of Fychow,
a city in the Au-Hwy province of the Celestial Chinese Empire.
The Changs have all been tall men, but our friend Chang Woo
Gow is supposed to be the tallest man in. the world. Chang
says ; —“ My father, Chang Tzing, a scholar and disciple of Con-
fucius ; my grandfather, a sage, and famous for his wisdom ;
my great grandfather, Chang, the man of war, of whose, great
deeds our poets love to sing ; all were great men—great men of
* whom I am the least—the poor and humble representative.
Beyond this, searching back into the past, we hear of all our
lineage making war, but always, to our thinking, on the better
side, avenging wrong and battling with injustice. Of late
years we have tided to live at peace, and stand aloof; yet in my
elder brother, Chang Sou Gow, the desire for strife, it would
seem, has been re-born ; he is a soldier in the Imperial Army
at Foo Chow Foo. He is in height six inches under me, but in
width, strength, and massiveness I cannot compare with him.
He weighs 400 pounds, and is known as The Strong Man of
the East, the terror of the Tartar, before the wind of whose
hand the rebel flies. Already the Footow of Foo Chow Foo
has conferred upon him the honorary title of ‘ Cheen Chung,’
leader in battle of ten thousand men, and wearer of the Man-
darin’s Blue Button. He is the favorite of our Supreme Head,
the Heaven-conferred one, whose youth lives as the bamboo,
green ten thousand years-—our Emperor.
“ I have only one sister living ; she is wed and well. When
I left home she was only six feet high.
“ My mother lives (she who claims my first duties, with my
prince ; for who can serve his luler well who has been negligent
in his duty to his parent 1). She is of ordinary size, and thus
her family stands—Chang Sou Gow, the Brave; myself, the
Tall, and Mtzoo, my sister, the Domestic Jewel.
“Asa boy I resembled the young bamboo tree, shooting up
tall and slim. At the age of nine years I went to school, and


since the age of twelve the classic aphorisms of the founders of
our literature — Confucius and Mencius — have been the guide
of my life. From them I have learned that ‘ the more talents
are put in force the more they will be developed,’ and ‘if
some tiling be not added to our knowledge every time a book is
opened, we read in vain.’ That ‘to strive is man’s part, but to
accomplish is Heaven’s / for although by nature we are all
alike, by education we are widely different. That ‘ one word to
a 'wise man should be as one lash to a good horse / but ‘it is a
waste of water to pour it upon a duck’s back/ . ,
“ The voices of our sages, who lived in the never-forgotten
past, ever speak to us. Their words are as the light and heat
of the sun, penetrating alike into the darkness of heathen
countries and the coldness of worldly hearts. He of the good
mother (Mencius), and he, the music of whose voice calmed the
evil passions of our race two thousand four hundred years ago
(Confucius), ever teach, us to be filial, and to treat others accord-
ing to the treatment which toe ourselves would desire at their
hands.
“ Ten years ago the good Chang Tzing, my father, died.
He had reached his sixty-fifth year when Joss (God) called him
to be numbered with his forefathers. Of late years he used to
feebly say, ‘ I know my life is as a candle flickering in the
wind j and alas! old age and faded flowers no remedies can
revive.’ With his last blessing he spoke to me thus : ‘ Oh, son,
live not as I have lived. It seems as if my life has passed
away all in one street. True, I have lived in books, and the
ignorant have bowed submission to my wisdom ; but I have
lived a life of laziness—and learn boy, that Joss helps not those
who let opportunities slip by ; besides, to stop the hand is to
stop the mouth. ’Tis strange we Changs have all been different
to other men—in height more near the heavens. But what, boy,
signifieth the greatness of our bodies if o\ir hearts and heads
be empty of all knowledge of the vastness of great Joss’ world.
We all have done a little in our time, yet none of us have
travelled beyond our celestial kingdom-—the garden of the earth
Go, let your mission be, when I am gone, to travel up and
down throughout the world, and write a book of the strange
sights you see in other lands ; and when you come to your old
home again the spirit of your father will be glad.’ And bless-
ing me again, and telling me never to stain the spotless name of
Chang, and doing likewise to my brothers and sisters in their
turn, he died. * * * * * * *
“ Then did the fountains of my grief o’erflow, and ponder-
ing often over what he who has gone had said, the time flew by
—as the twinkling of an eye, each day ; and scarce had the
season for feasting and praying at my father’s tomb gone out
when another judgment came upon our house. My favorite
sister, of whom I have not spoken until now—the fairest of ou?


province, the tallest of our race, towering ten inches over me,
the consolation of our home—took also sick and died, and we
laid her down beside her father’s tomb. The tomb—where all
are equal, where distinction ceases, where the dust confounds
the poor man with the king, the idiot with the sage. Her name
was Chang Yo Tzu.
“ Then did I call forth my self-government, and taking
farewell of my mother (put no trust in a man who has not done
his duty to his mother), and counsel of Wang Tze Foo, my
prince, I set forth on my journey, mourning for my sister as I
went. Here and there throughout the celestial land I wandered
for a season, resting at the temples by night, and taking such
conveyance as I could find by day—the palankin, the foot-horse,
and the junk, for in my country the ‘ fire-horse ’ (the railway)
is unknown.
“ For a time I rested at Soo Chow, and while there I looked
with pity on my fellow-man. War was the watch-word in
in every citizen’s mouth ; the rebel flag was floating from every
tower, and the thirst for blood was in every rebel’s heart. (I
was a teacher, so they passed me by.) The prisons were shut
night and day, yet they were always full ; the temples were
ever open, yet I found no one in them. The Imperial army
came, headed by an English general (the military officer known
in China as General Gordon). The struggle was short but
keen, and blood flowed like water in every street. The rebels,
however, were eventually driven out.
“ I visited Shanghai, and there saw the palaces which your
* merchant princes ’ had built, and when I. found that their
hearts were good and their hands open I determined to see a
country which could produce such men.”


CHANG ON HIS TRAVELS.
9
On April Bth, 1865, we took our last look at the Chinese shores,
and in August of the same year we arrived in London. Think
of Chang’s wonder on first seeing the Thames, lined on either side
with warehouses containing produce from every clime, I must
tell you that he was accompanied by Kin Too, Lady Chang,
Chang Moo, Alook, A’Yang, and an interpreter and agent,
who was to travel so many thousand miles with us; we had
besides great quantities of silks, wearing apparel, rice, tea, and
even cofiins, all these things their family stipulated should be
brought for them. Chang’s coffin was some time after left in.
Birmingham, as people said he was long enough for this world.
After resting some few days we were introduced to the various
members of the Press, to whom I had afterwards reason to feel
much indebted, particularly the Illustrated London News, who
published the best portrait of my party, and also to the pro-
prietor of Punch, who dedicated the volume for 1865 to your
obedient servant Chang.
We were soon taken to many of the pi-incipal Theatres to
witness the performances. To the Tower of London, the Royal
Exchange, the Bank of England, St. Paul’s, and most of the
principal places of note. It was suggested that we should be
put upon exhibition, so we rented- the Egyptian Hall, where we
were visited by most of the families who were then in town.
It puzzled Chang at first when they told him that the people
all left London in September, and returned again in the
Spring, thus spending the hottest part of the year in a crowded
city. The Crystal Palace excited Chang’s admiration, and he
attempted an ode which we give in another place. On Sep-
tember 12th my party had the honor of attending, by command,
at Marlborough House. .It was most amusing to see the Duke of
Cambridge, one of the most noble looking men I ever saw, stand-
ing by the side of Chang, and endeavouring to see if he could
reach Chang’s signature, which he had at the request of the
Prince written at about the height of 10 feet on the wall of the
drawing-room. H.R.H. the Princess of Wales received a letter
of compliment in the Chinese from Chang, of which the follow-
ing is a translation :
“ Most gracious Prince and Princess, —I offer you my devo-
tion for the noble honour you have done me by permitting me
to come into your great presence, and I pray that your heaven


conferred country may, in all future time, continue at peace
with mine. King Foo also joins her admiration with
mine of your great good-heartedness.”
Having "been most graciously received and hospitably enter-
tained Chang and suite took their leave of the Royal party, carry-
ing away with them substantial souvenirs of their visit to Marl-
borough House. After a very successful season at the Egyptian
Hall we opened at Saint George’s Hall, Liverpool ; visited
Birmingham, Sheffield, and Leeds, then having a magnificent
offer to appear at the Crystal Palace, it was accepted, and we
returned to London for a few months, and then went to fulfil
our engagements at the Grand Exposition of Paris. Paris has
so often been described that we will not attempt it, feeling, too,
that we could not do justice to such a fairy-like city. During
our stay Chang was commanded and feted by Napoleon 111.
Chang expresses his regret at recent events in France
and. uses his favorite quotation : “ Force may aid sub-
mission, but that submission will never be sincere, for he who
rules by force is a tyrant, while he who subdues by philanthropy
is indeed a king!” Finisliing our engagement at the Grand
Exposition our party had another of those most delightful trips
across the Channel, and then made a tour round the Coast of
England over to Dublin, back to the North of England, going
down lead mines in Cumberland, coal pits in Northumberland,
salt mines in Warwickshire, iron works in Yorkshire, shipyards
on the Clyde, over the high bridge at “ canny Newcastle,” visit-
ing Edinburgh, Dundee, the beautiful city of Perth, and the grand
city of Aberdeen, everywhere meeting with the greatest success.
An amusing incident happened to us when in Aberdeen. One
Sunday Chang desired to see the Cathedral at old Aberdeen, of
which he had heard so much. So the carriage was ordered, and
down we drove. Now in many of the large doors in old
churches, which are closed when the sermon commences, there is
a very small one, scarcely large enough to admit of an ordinary
person getting through. Our party were standing in the porch,
and the church officer hearing footsteps came and opened the
small door, the top of which just reached to the lowest button
on Chang’s waistcoat, and seeing a man’s body and apparently
no head, the officer was nearly frightened out of his wits, and
uttering a fearful yell rushed back into the church, disturbing
the congregation, but giving us such an advertisement as we
did not expect.—See Aberdeen Free Press, December 25th, 1861.
Christmas Day in Aberdeen is truly an event. The inhabi-
tants may nearly all be found in the street at midnight on the
24th December, and as soon as the bells chime forth the hour
of twelve a thousand tongues exchange “A merry Christ-
mas !” and from that time until New Year’s Day the people
give themselves up to festivity. We all enjoyed ourselves
extremely, and left no country with more regret than we did
Scotland.


Chang had so often heard speak of that great country
America that he conceived the idea of spending a year or so
there. On the 14th June we sailed for New York, and after a
pleasant voyage of twelve days arrived at our destination. It
was a beautiful day on which we left Liverpool, and although
we endeavoured to keep the date of our sailing quiet so as to
avoid a crowd it soon got wind and a very large concourse of
people assembled to bid Chang good-bye, and it was pleasing to
notice the general desire there appeared to be for the success of
of our great traveller. *
It was a delightful evening when we sighted Saiidy Hook,
and anchored in the Narrows until the morning, when, after we
had been passed by the ‘ Doctor,’ we steamed up the river and
were taken off by the tender and landed on the wharf. After
we and our baggage had been examined we were allowed—this
being a free country—to go where we liked.
A gentleman one day soon after our arrival asked Chang
what he thought of America. He replied that from what he
saw he thought the people always seemed to be in a hurry, for
said he, “ They get up very quick, eat their food ■ very quick,
do business very quick, get married very quick, and die very
quick.” We met with the greatest attention in New York, and
wish to express our many obligations to the Hew York Herald,
Frank Leslie of the illustrated paper, and in fact to the press
generally. Chang stayed at Statern Island, a most delightful
place, the only drawback being the immense number of
mosquitoes, which where exceedingly troublesome. ; .
New York is certainly a wonderful city. Broadway is the
principal business street, running about three miles from the
Battery up to the Central Park, the most beautiful public
-grounds in the world, or will be when finished. The Fifth
Avenue is a magnificent street with many splendid residences
belonging to the aristocracy of New York. The trees planted on
either side of the street give a pleasing and cool appearance. One
of the grandest places of business in New York is the store of
Stewart, diy goods merchant. There are also several fine
theatres, the largest being the Opera House, the property of the
celebrated James Fesk, who kindly placed his private box at
the service of Chang during our stay at New York, in which;
city Chang fulfilled an engagement of twelve weeks at the
Museum, formerly “ Barnum’s.” Great inducements were
offered Chang to visit a few of the principal towns. At Cincin-
nati, St. Louis, Detroit, Indianna, Boston, Philadelphia,
and Chicago thousands crowded to see our tall friend.
The minor towns have been so well described by the late
Mr. Dickens, in “ Martin Chuzzlewit,” that it is impossible to
improve upon it; but the idea is that if one were to pass over
them in a balloon they are so much alike that it would be almost
impossible to tell one from another. Many of the principal
public buildings-~the Court-house, the Theatre, the Lecture


Hall, <tc., are at present only visible on tbe map of the towns,
but which will no doubt be fine places when finished. Some of
the hotels are most magnificently appointed : the Clarendon
in New York, the Galt House in Louisville, the Russell House
in Detroit, the Burnet House in Cincinnati,. and the Sherman
House in Chicago being among the best in the States.
The greatest institutions in America are the Fire Com-
panies. An alarm of fire can be immediately telegraphed to all
the engine-houses, where the horses stand all ready harnessed,
and in a few moments they are at the scene of the disaster,
where their efforts to extinguish the fire are invariably success-
ful. ■ ■ '
Our trip through the States was a success financially, but
my advice to intending emigrants is—stay where you are, for
everything is exorbitantly expensive and trade extremely slack
in California.
Travelling is very comfortable, and in the Eastern States
very cheap. The railway cars are magnificently
fitted up, and for a small amount extra you can have a
room entirely to yourself, with comfortable lounges, arm-chairs,
tables, &c. Some trains have also an hotel car attached, where
one can dine as well as in an hotel itself. Our journey from New
York to San Francisco was long enough to satisfy any one, the
only difficulty being that of providing sleeping accommodation
for our tall companion.
Leaving San Francisco on the 12th September we arrived
at Honolulu, which is situated on the island of Oahu, one of the
Sandwich Island group, the largest of which are Hawaii, Maui,
Molokai, Ranai, Tahoorae, Oahu and Kauai. The King’s palace
is at Honolulu, as is also the residence of Queen Emma, who
sent an invitation to Chang and party to go up to her place,
where they were most kindly received, and Chang was presented
by Her Majesty with a valuable snuff box, and Kin Foo with a
beautiful set of jewelry. Queen Emma is a most lady-like
personage. She was dressed in black silk, trimmed with crape,
and wore her widow’s cap; she also wore some magnificent
diamonds. Her mother, too, was a most affable woman, al-
though immensely stout, weighing, I should think, about 1G
stone. The party were received in the grand reception room,
which was furnished in European fashion, and dui’ing the
interview the dependants of the Queen came squatting in by
twos and threes until at last the corridors and rooms were
crowded with their sable faces. One is struck by the remark-
ably clean appearance of the women, who nearly all wear a dress
made of some bright coloured calico in the form of a dressing-
gown. They are famous horse-women, but they adopt the mas-
culine position when on the saddle. The present King is un- -
married, and spends most of his time at his country seat, about
three miles from Honolulu. His residence, which is built in


the native fashion, is situated on the shore, and is surrounded
by twenty or thirty smaller huts, in which reside his attendants.
The cocoa-nut trees surrounding these residences offer a relief
to the eye from the vast plain in the distance. The island pro-
duces coffee, sugar, oranges, hides, and a variety cf other fruits.
Having seen all objects of interest on the Islands, we sailed
from Honolulu, and after a good voyage, made very pleasant
through having so much good company, we arrived in Auckland
and purpose visiting the Coloiiies,
CHANG’S INTERVIEW WITH PUNCH.
Chang stood in the Presence. Toby evinced continued ill-
feeling. . ■ .
“ Now, Big’un, what’s up ?” asked Mr. Punch. Observe,
that with his usual independence he selected the smallest words
for the largest auditor. Had the latter been a dwarf, Mr,
Punch would probably have requested jar intimation of the cir-
cumstances which had induced the requisition of that interview.
“ Cousin of the Stars,” said Chang, “ your intolerably
unworthy servant tenders you his worthless acknowledgments
of the priceless boon of admission to your unparalleled presence.
He reverentially thanks you for the extraordinary countenance
you have been pleased to show him.”*
“ I don’t know that my countenance is so extraordinay,
Gigas. Fascinating, intellectual, impressive, perhaps.”
“ Your slave’s slave’s abominable vocabulary is atrociously
inadequate to the occasion,” said Chang ; “ but he intended to
refer to the patronage which Your Eminence has been pleased
to extend to him.”
“ I always foster rising genius,” said Mr, Punch, u even
when it rises to the height of eight feet, or whatever you call
yourself. I have immortalised you in my pages. Well, what
is next ?”
“ The unpardonable ambition of your slave astounds him-
self ”
“ Nothing astounds me—go it.”
“ His abased and obnoxious soul lives in one hope only, if
he might venture to utter it.”
“ Utter away then, can’t you, Gigas ? Don’t waste time.
December days are not so long as you are.”
“Your graciousness transports your slave into a region of
bliss and flowers. Might he, then, dare to beg that, all un-
worthy as he is, he may be enrolled among the Sacred Band of
Notables—the Band of your Contributors


Toby signified Ins decided objection to the proposed addition
to the staff.
“By Koong-Foo-Tse, whom the J esuits called Confucius—
you believe in Confucius, I trust, by the way ?” said Mr. Punch.
“ I hope, my dear Chang, you are not a proselyte of Fan-Shin,
the unbeliever, 499, A.D. ?”
“ Never heard of him,” said Chang.
“Nor did I,” said Mr. Punch, aside, “until I looked into
the ‘ Dictionary of Dates.' I could not have entertained over-
tures from an atheistic giant. It is only the dwarfs whom I
permit to be. profane. -* I was going to say, Chang, that you have
asked a big thing.”
“ Your slave is a big thing.”
“He is. But do you know what qualities are required in
a contributor to Punch ¥'
“ All the virtues, [all the gi’aces, all the arts, and all the
sciences.”
“ Yes, that is all very well for a beginning,” said Mr.
Punch smiling indulgently. “ But there must be much more.
He must have an Ample Fortune, that he may be removed
from all sordid influences; an Impressionable Heart, that he
may be enabled to touch the heart of woman; Inspiration of
the highest order, that he may write Poetry; and a Profound
Conviction that he is the only person in the world who under-
stands anything about anything whatsoever. Do you possess
all this, Chang, my son T
“ Your unapproachable Eminence has taught me a golden
lesson,” said the giant, bending humbly over the Great Teacher.
“ You have taught me how great you are, and how small I
am.
4
“Then,” said Mr. Punch, gently, “I have placed you on
the first step of the ladder which you would ascend. Go—and
study. It may be that when next we meet 1 may grant your
prayer. In the meantime make this book your Ly-ldng—your
manual of all the relations of life.”
So saying, Mr. Punch gratified the Giant with his
Forty-ninth Yolume. — Yide Punch, Dec. 30, 1865.


THE VIXEN QUEEN OF PEKIN.
(FROM THE CHINESE.)
Old King Tung Ty, a vixen of a wife he had :
She was a scold so very bad
That she was like to drive him mad.
A quiet life sought Tung;
So her railings he heeded not,
No more than would the philosopher Chang.
But, oh ! this young vixen,
The demon seemed to cling to her ;
The more he coolly bore with her,
The unhappier grew her life.
She haunted him, she taunted him, ,
She nicknamed him 41 Old Woman King,”
And people said, “ How can he rule
A realm and not a wife ?” ,
*
Chorus —Oh ! Clung Chang Chow, the vixen of Pekin, was
As fair as any lily ; yet her tongue, the people vow,
Was the real perpetual motion —it went clatter morn, noon,
and night—
Oh, ladies take a warning from the fate of Ching Chang Chow,
•At length his indifference it stung her to the very heart,
She vow’d from him at once she’d part — only
She’d rather stay and make him smart,
She’d conquer him, she'd rule the realm ;
Her sex should claim supremacy, and
No longer be the slaves of man.
She flew upon him hands and feet,
She kicked, and scratched, and cuffed him ;
This naughty Queen, this woman bold,
She could not cease the strife ;
She called him fool and coward,
And a thousand such unmanly names.
Still, people said, “(How can he rule
His realm and not his wife ?’’
Chorus— Oh ! Ching Chang Chow, &c.
And then uprose the king, called his councillors around him,
And spoke, “I do command you to write down this new law :
• In future let no woman stand
Against her lord in anger ;
Cramp her feet, bind them, crush them,
So that by our touch she fall”
Oh ! woman of the west, I pray,
A lesson take from my poor song,
Lest, like the vixen queen, you lead
A most unhappy life.
For from that day the Emperor Tung
Renowned has been o’er all the land
So well he ruled the nation ,
And so well he ruled his wife ,
Chorus —Oh! Ching Chang Chow, &c.


Opinions of the Press
He possesses the air of dignity so remarkable in his coun-
trymen, if placed in anything like favourable circumstances. He
wears the handsomely embroidered dress of a mandarin, of we
forget what rank. He “ chin-chined ” his visitors like a king,
and constantly fanned,himself like a Chinaman.— Times , Sept.
1865.
He is the incarnation of that mild Oriental wisdom wfjich
finds its literary expression both in the Koran and in the works
of Confucius, and shows us how, by years of profound study
and abstraction, with perhaps a little fasting, an Asiatic sage
may arrive at profound ethical truths, corresponding to our
“ Honesty is the best policy,” or “Evil communications corrupt
good manners.”— Times, November 3, 1865.
He is incomparably the best looking and most intelligent
giant ever seen in our time. Chang looked like nothing so
much as a gigantic heathen idol which had been suddenly en-
dowed with life ; and to see him towering above, and making
pigmies of stalwart men of six feet, was to realize Gulliver and
Brobdignagious more clearly than ever. He is what grandilo-
quent orators call “ a great fact.” —Daily News.
It is not so much that Chang is one of the hugest men of
modern times, as that the effect of his extraordinary stature is
somewhat very strongly brought out, making him really appear
as belonging to a distinct race of beings. Part of this effect
may be due to his well-proportioned figure, part to his quaintly
gorgeous dress, part to his very sedate manners, part to his
large, bare, juvenile Mongol face, and part to his silence of one
who does not undertand, and who is not understood by those
among whom he sits towering like a more than usually good-
looking image out 'of a Josshouse. He fairly represents the
class of Chinese gentlemen, and holds a certain rank as a
scholar. —Daily Telegraph. ~
He is well-proportioned, and presents, from the mere lofti-
ness of his figure, a very remarkable object. But there is other-
wise in his appearance nothing in any way formidable, and still
less anything repulsive.— Standard.


A mighty presence! Great, stupendous, wonderful, like
a Hindo god ! Chang is indeed the greatest man China has
produced.— Morning Star.
*
He is a person of respectable family, of refined maimers,
and of considerable accomplishments.— Morning Post.
Chang should be especially interesting to physicians and
theologians.— Pall Mall Gazette.
He writes his “ chop ” on a pillar the height of ten feet.—
News of the World.
*He is highly polished in manners, and does his chin-chin-
ing to his numerous audiences with all the grace * and elegance
of an educated Englishman. — Bell's Life.
A gentleman withal, with whom princes delight to con-
verse. — The News.
A most splendid specimen of a man. — Nonconformist.
Chang, in walk, speech, and appearance, at once strikes
the visitor as being a man of intellect and superior attainments.
West End News.
4
4
This famous Chinese giant is a most gentleman-like person-
age.—London Mirror.
4
• *
A most remarkable specimen of humanity ; a finely-made
man; a gentleman and a scholar, occupying himself constantly
in literary pursuits.— Lancet.
A perfect gentleman, both in appearance and manners.—
Islington Gazette.
•
Seldom has there been seen a more perfect representation
of the giant—everything about him suggest, largeness. He
moves in a stately manner, and there is also a certain magnified
refinement, quite in accordance with his size, which commands
more respect than is usually accorded te similar physical
phenomena. His deportment, too, smacks of the gentleman,
and there is an unconscious and pleasing politeness, even in his
gestures, which rapidly win for him a favorable impression with
his visitoi-s.— Weekly Times.
His dignity and serenity is wonderful, and he can smile,
especially upon ladies, with wonderful grace.— Lloyd's Weekly
London Newspaper.


A complete and animated picture, introducing us at once
into Celestial society.— Tablet.
He is so youthful, so well-proportioned, so handsome in’
figure, that he rather strikes you as supplying the natural
standard of the human form than as embodying any great
deviation from that standard. We seem to see again the
majesty and calm tranquility of those idols in the Assyrian
Court of the Crystal Palace.— Spectator.
Beyond all dispute the greatest personage in the three
kingdoms. —lllustrated Times.
✓
The biggest, if not the greatest man of our acquaintance.
His autobiography expresses a vein of cheerful moral sentiment,
which does equal credit to the head and heart of its author,—
Illustrated London News.
Of finely-proportioned figure, rich costume, and thoroughly
gentlemanly bearing, Chang conveys to the mind the idea of
some colossal Eastern idol suddenly endowed with life, but with
a benignantly majestic presence, such as those heathen deities
rarely possess, either in sculpture or painting. Chang is incom-
parably the best and most intelligent giant ever exhibited in
our time. —Morning Advertiser.
He is most undeniably a mighty man—as perfect a repre-
sentation of man on a gigantic scale as the anatomist could wish.
—The Age we Live in.
*
0 -
An immense being. I should imagine he is by far the
tallest man on the face of the earth at the present time. He
looked like some gigantic Chinese Joss or idol. His presence
filled the room and overpowered the spectators. Unlike over-
grown men in general, he is obviously well-proportioned—his
chest is four feet in circumference, his shoulders broad, his walk
erect and stately. —Field
0
\ I HMMBWWamw
Although standing nearly eight feet in height, a more
polite and gentlemanly personage one does not often meet with.
— St. Janies' Chronicle. 1
Chang, although so tall, is not in the least ungainly in gait
or manners. —Court Journal.
In manners, look, and speech, quite the gentleman;
whilst his stately walk and deportment at once made the visitor
at home with “his highness.”-- John Bull.


A mighty host, but at the same time a most gentlemanly
personage, chin-chining his patrons with the polished grace of a
nabob. —The Sun.
• •
Chang was riding last Monday in the close carnage which
conveys him to and from the Egyptian Hall, when, as the
vehicle neared Westminster Abbey, the weight of Chang Woo
Cow proved too much for all the springs, the planks, and
the straps of Long Acre. In a word, the bottom of the carriage
fell out, and Chang and Kin Foo “of the golden lillies” were
precipitated into the mud of Parliament street. Nobody seems
to have suffered, however, from the disaster. —Daily Telegraph ,
October 30, 1865.
%
Chang at the Cathedral.— This celebrated personage,
who is seemingly possessed with a strong desire to see every
place of note in such towns as he may honor with a visit, went
the other day, along with his agent, Mr. Parlett—for modern
giants can have friends without seeking to e&t them—to see the
Cathedral in Old Aberdeen, which he admired very much.
During their walk round the building the party rather abrupt-
ly met the church officer as he was coming out at one of the
doors, -who, not being at all prepared for meeting the “ tallest
man in the world,” was nearly frightened “ out of his wits ” at
the figure before him. —Aberdeen Free Press, December 25,
1868.


LADY CHANG KING FOO:
A very pretty Chinese lady, with the merry, twinkling,
almond-shaped, oblique eyes, that we see so often in Chinese
pictures, but so seldom in real life.— Field.
« •
If Lady Chang were in the habit of singing Chinese trans-
lations of English love-songs to her lord, one of her ballads
might Ire “ Thou art so near, and yet so far.” —Daily Telegraph.
Looks most charming in her brocaded silk robes.— Bell’s
Life. 1
« _ •
A charming little wife.— News.
• •
Her grace adds materially to the success of the levees.—
Cosmopolitan.
Chang’s wife is*most affable. —London Mirror.
Chang’s wife attracts attention by her lady-like demeanor.
—West End News.
Chang’s marx-iage was a romantic one for his country—he
fell in love with his wife, and she—well, I suppose she climbed
to love him, whereas Chinese marriages are generally arranged
by the parents.— Fun.
A gem in the entertainment is Chang’s wife, whose celestial
beauty is at once manifest, and whose magnificent head of hair
must decome at once the envy as well as the admiration of all
lady visitoi’s, and we must not forget to mention his agent, Mr.
Parlett, who affords many amusing anecdotes of his tall friend
Chang.— Tablet.
' r H
The first small-footed Chinese lady ever prevailed on to
visit this country, and certainly a very agreeable, lady-like per-
sonage.—Morning Star.
Lady Chang, the small-fotted Golden “ Lily ” of the East,
though really a lady of ordinary middle-size, seemed quite a
dwarf as she took her seat to the right of her gigantic husband.
—Moiming Advertiser.
As a “ lily ” growing at the base of some majestic tree, so
is Chang’s wife—weakness and strength, fragility beside a form
like Jupiter Tonan’s. —Westminster Times.
Printed by Jones & Co., Wellesley street, Auckland.




GENERAL
Machine Printers
WELLESLEY STREET,
AUCKLAND
9
N.
<
HANDBILLS
OF ALL SIZES AND COLORS.
EXECUTED AT CHEAP RATES FOR
PROFESSIONALS.
