

m 1 ! m
v ,,-, •. |gp-
Bf w S
% -.. jjr > W^m
" | ■
i ■ £f ■ / %tal m '^H
SSfSWR


V. Jl 0
M-h-
7f


a/nd tirue
TOY SOLDIER
Wholly set up and published by the Offset Printing Coy. Pty. Limited, Sydney,
and printed by S. T. Leigh & Co. Pty. Ltd., Sydney.
(All Rights Reserved)


M|W!TOY SOLDIER
bq Qog Gordon
CHANG and the Toy Soldier stood on the top of the book-
* case in the nursery. They seldom spoke to each other. Both
were so deep in their own thoughts that one never noticed the
other. But this evening Chang was lonely and felt like speak-
ing to someone so he said to the little Toy Soldier, 41 Perhaps a
talk would cheer us u p.”
The Toy Soldier replied, “ Good evening, Chang. Yes.
that is a good idea. You tell me the story of your life.”
“Long, long ago I lived in China,” said Chang. “The Chinese
are great toy makers and have made all kinds of toys and games
for hundreds and hundreds of years. I was made by an old
Chinese who was a master of the art of toy-making. He made
all kinds of wooden toys. Most of these were carved by hand
and painted in gay and brilliant colours. After he had made the


toys, the old man sold them to the shops; some of the big shops
then sent them over the seas. I remember quite clearly when I
was first made. The old toy-maker carved me very carefully
and lovingly out of a piece of wood. He took a long time on
the work, and when I was finished he took his paints and
painted my clothes. They were a bright red and blue colour,
and my hat was a gay yellow. Then he placed me on a shelf
in his workroom to dry.
He stood and admired me from all angles for a long time,
then, "There you are my young friend ! You're the first Chinese
doll rve finished," said the old Chinese, "and I'm going to
name you ‘Chang/ Now you can stand there and watch me
make many others, because I've still one hundred and forty-
three more to make. When I have finished you will all be packed
in a box and sent to the warehouse, and will sail on a big ship
over the seas to another country.
*
" So I stood on the shelf day after day, and watched the toy-
maker at work, carefully carving and painting my hundred and
forty-three brothers. One by one they were placed on the
shelf beside me, until the whole hundred and forty-three were
finished.
"I was the hundred and forty-fourth, so twelve dozen were
completed. We looked very dashing indeed, in our brightly
painted coats and hats, and I think the toy-maker was proud
of us. Later we were packed in a big box and sent down to the
boat. I don't remember much about the voyage, as I slept all the
time and only wakened when our box was banged down on the
wharf in this country. Then came a trip in a motor-lorry and
afterwards we were unpacked. I remember being arranged on
a table, by a pretty girl, in the toy department of a huge store.
" It was quite dazzling in the shop after being in a box on the
ship for such a long time. I'd never been in a toy department


before, and looked around with delight. There seemed to be
every kind of toy to make a small child happy. The lovely
dolls in dresses of every colour of the rainbow stood on tables
and in glass cases. Teddy bears, golden brown and dark
brown ones were in all sizes from tiny baby ones up to giant
ones. The Bunny rabbits, pink, blue and white, looked very
saucy with bows around their necks.
“As I looked about I saw dolls’ prams, dinkies, scooters,
motor-cars and so many other toys it would take all night to
tell you about them.
“I was stretching my legs, which were still rather stiff and
sore after my long sea trip, when a lady came into the shop and
walked over to the shop-assistant after looking around at the
toys on the shelves.
“ ‘I want something for my little grand-daughter,’ she said,
‘something different in the way of toys. She has several dollies
and bears and bunnies and almost everything you can think of.
Could you suggest something different for her V
“The shop-assistant looked around, then said, ‘Why, yes,
Madam, we have just opened this lovely collection of wooden
toy dolls from China. They are quite a novelty, because they
aren’t really dolls, but quaint little carved figures, and when
you hold them up by the hand they move their feet and walk
along where you lead them.’
"The lady was very pleased with this, and when the shop-
assistant took me off the shelf, she picked me up, looked me all
over, remarked what pretty colours were in my clothes and said,
This is the very thing I want. Will you kindly wrap this one
up for me V Then she paid the shop-assistant some money for
me, put me in her bag and walked out of the shop. There was
a lovely big car waiting for her and she was driven here. When
she rang the front door bell there was a sudden scurry of feet.


“IT WAS QUITE DAZZLING IN THE TOY SHOP


and the front door was flung open.
“‘Why it's Granny/ said the small voice of Yvonne.
“Granny opened her bag, and I was handed to Yvonne who
pulled the wrappings off me and exclaimed, ‘lsn't he sweet!
Thank you, Granny. I've never had a Chinese doll before.'
“From that time I had great fun. Everywhere Yvonne went
I went too. When she went for a ride on her scooter, she'd place
me in a bag on the handles. I'd sail through the air at a great
speed. It was just like a ride in an aeroplane. At night she would
put me on the table beside her bed. But that was ages ago,"
Chang sighed. “I think I've fallen out of favour, as Yvonne
hasn't troubled to play with me for weeks. Not since the new
fairy doll arrived. Now, Toy Soldier, tell me your adventures."
“I don't think I'm very good at telling things, you know,"
said the Toy Soldier; but, after a few moments, he said, “I came
from England, where the best toy soldiers are made you know.
Like you, I can remember the day that I was made. I too was
carved by a toy-maker from a piece of wood, my uniform was
painted in bright colours and I was placed on a shelf to dry. The
toy-maker had made many others like me, all dressed alike in
a bright red and blue uniform. We stood there like a battalion
on parade. As soon as we were dry we were packed in boxes
made to hold twelve of us. We were then sent to a big ware-
house where these boxes were packed in another huge box and
taken to a wharf, where it was put on a big boat. We travelled
for days and days like this across the ocean just like you did.
“Eventually the ship arrived here and our big box was taken
off and we were put in a van and taken to a shop. When the
man in the shop unpacked us, I found that we were in a delight-
ful toy department. I liked living there very much; it was so
bright after the dull voyage on the boat, packed in our boxes.


“I’D SAIL THROUGH THE AIR AT A GREAT SPEED!”
We really had plenty of fun in that toy shop. Like the one you
came from Chang, it was filled with every kind of toy you could
possibly think of. Scooters, prams, ships, trains, dolls’ houses
and such lovely dolls were there too. During the daytime we
all stood very still and did not move an inch from our place.
But at night we slipped our heads under the string that tied us
into our box and wandered about the Toy Shop visiting the
other toys. Of course, all the toys wore price tickets and people
came in and out all day long and bought some of them and
carried them away. Then new toys would arrive to take their
place, so that there was always someone new to talk to! But
day after day my brothers and I stayed in our box, standing
side by side. Several times a little boy or girl would look at us,
then see something they liked better and pass on. We did not
really care that nobody seemed to want us, we were very happy
and would not have minded staying in that Toy Shop for ever.
We had been there a week when a big tall man, who seemed


— • — v v x
' »m ws. \
like a giant to us, came in and said to the girl who was in charge
of us all, Tm looking for some toy soldiers. I wonder if you
have any for sale? My little girl is always asking me to buy some
for her; she has every other kind of toy except toy soldiers! '
"When we heard him say this we grew very excited and the
toy soldier next to me whispered, 'Now we shall have a change
again. I wonder where we are going this time!' We told him to
keep quiet while we listened eagerly to the young girl, who
was saying to the man, 'We have a new line of very good toy
soldiers; they only arrived from England about a week ago!'
and turning round she walked towards our shelf.
"We watched her come nearer and nearer, until at last she
stopped beside us. Then she picked up the box that held the
twelve of us. We all became so excited that we almost jumped
out of the box. One little jerk would have sent us all on the
A BOX CONTAINING TWELVE OF US . . ”


floor, only that we were each tied down so well. The man
looked at us and then said, 'Are these the best toy soldiers you
can show to me?' and the girl answered, 'The very best!' For a
moment we thought that there might not be a change for us
after all. Then we heard the man say, 'Very well, ITI take this
box, thank you!' and we did not know whether to be pleased
or sorry. The girl found the lid of our box and wrapped up
the whole so quickly that we had hardly time to wave goodbye
to the dollies. Away we went; tucked under the man's arm. Of
course we did not know where we were going; but we heard
the man's big boots going,along street after street and turning
many corners. Suddenly we heard a great roar and then we had
a ride with the man in something that said, 'Puff-puff! Puff-
puff ! which we now know must have been a train. At last the
man opened the front door of this house and we heard him call,
'Yvonne, where are you? Come and see what I've brought for
you!' Then we heard a scamper of feet on the stairs and
Yvonne's voice saying, 'Hullo, Daddy! Aren't you home earlier
tonight?' Her Daddy answered, ‘You've wanted these for a long
time and here they are at last!' The box containing us was then
handed to Yvonne, who threw herself down on the floor-rug
and untied the string. She took us out one by one with little
cries of delight, stood us on the floor in a row before her and
said, You dear little toy soldiers. I shall always love you. Thank
you Daddy for bringing them home to me !"
“Yvonne's Daddy answered her. 'Now you have a body-
guard of soldiers you'll always be safe!'and we felt very proud
of ourselves. For many days afterwards Yvonne would not
look at any other toy but us. She loved to drill us every day:
and we liked being drilled too. She stood us in rows of four; or
sometimes in one long straight row. We were put on guard
round the Doll s House. She talked to us and told us how proud


she was of us. We did not feel as though we had done anything
to deserve so much attention; but we liked it.”
The Toy Soldier here drooped his head sadly, “That was a
long time ago. Presently Yvonne grew tired of us too, just as
she grew tired of you, Chang. I think my brothers are all lost,
for I have not seen them for ages. I believe that Fm the only
toy soldier left out of that brave company of twelve. Like you,
Chang, I stand on the top of the nursery bookcase, day after day,
forgotten.”
“It is very sad,” answered Chang.
At that moment a tiny voice said, “Cheer up you two! Don't
look so gloomy. Why worry about so little?”
The Toy Soldier and Chang jumped with surprise and peered
over the edge of the bookcase. They were more surprised to see
the beautiful Fairy Doll standing on a chair close to them.
“I have been listening to your stories,” she said to them, “and
did not miss a single word. Now just you wait a minute!”
There was a flutter of wings and the next moment the Fairy
Doll stood beside Chang and the Toy Soldier on the top of the
bookcase. They had to agree that she was very lovely and that
it was no wonder Yvonne now loved her better than all the toys
put together. “Let me tell you a secret,” she said to them, “but
please promise first not to tell anyone!” and of course Chang
and the Toy Soldier nodded their heads and promised that they
would not tell a single soul.
“In the daytime,” said the Fairy Doll, “Fm only just a doll.
But at night I become what I really am. A Fairy... a real Fairy.
As soon as the stars come out I go about, here and there, and
wave my magic wand and grant wishes. So now I shall wave
it over you and wish that Yvonne will play with you both and


“HAVING A TEA PARTY WITH THE OTHER NURSERY TOYS.”
care for you as much as she did once upon a time. Then you
won t be sad and lonely any more.”
All that night Chang and the Toy Soldier chatted away
together, wondering if the Fairy Doll's wish would come true
and if Yvonne would take them out and play with them again.
The next morning, while the sunbeams danced through the
nursery window, the door opened and Yvonne ran into the
room. Good morning Dollies and toys,” she cried merrily. “It
is a lovely morning and we are all going to have a party.”
Chang and the Toy Soldier were taken off the bookcase and
were seated at the nursery table with the other toys and dolls.
Yvonne had brought out her best dolls' tea-set and they all had
lots and lots of fun at the tea-party.
The Fairy Doll s wish had come true and Chang and the Toy
Soldier knew, somehow, that Yvonne would keep her promise,
and both felt very happy once again.


yHERE were once two roses that bloomed in a garden. One
was a red rose with petals as soft as velvet. The other was a
white rose.
The Red Rose was very proud and boastful, and she was
constantly repeating to the White Rose the remarks of passers-
by in praise of herself. To these remarks the White Rose listened
in silence; she did not want to argue with the Red Rose, and
she was content with life. But one day the Red Rose was boast-
ing more than usual. She swayed towards the White Rose and
said to her, “A pretty little girl comes dancing across our lawn
every morning to kiss my petals and admire me and tell me how
beautiful I am. Of course she does not notice you. I always feel
so sorry for white flowers. Poor things, they have no colour!


The White Rose was silent for a few moments, then she
answered, “Red Rose, why do you boast? Your petals, lovely
as they are, may be scattered over the garden by the Demon Wind
to-night or to-morrow or any time, and nothing be left of you
but your green stem.
All this while the garden fairies had been listening to the
two roses. Their laughter tumbled through the garden like tiny
golden bells, for they knew that the White Rose spoke the truth.
They knew that the Demon Wind would come that night in all
his fury and scatter the petals of the Red Rose all over the garden.
The gentle grey Dusk slowly gathered the Day in her arms
and tucked her gently away in cloudy blankets of grey and
gold. Then the Demon wind came in his roughest and most
boisterous mood.
THE FAIRIES LISTENED TO THE TWO ROSES


mWv
I k ~" | / 5^
I \ -w / \ / /^'
PE y u »/
i 11 -'•- ;. : - ’’ \ m /
/
WITH A PUFF OF HIS MIGHTY BREATH THE WIND BLEW THE
RED ROSE TO PIECES
He flew madly and wildly across the sea on wide black
wings and rippled the waves and churned them to great heights.
He tossed the sea foam in great clouds of spray upon the beaches.
He whipped dead leaves from the trees and scattered them
over the countryside, and little frightened leaves ran helter-
skelter before him, whirling and eddying over the garden paths,
trying to escape this monster who pursued them.
Then this Demon, with one puff of his mighty breath, blew
the Red Rose to pieces. All her loveliness was scattered and her
beautiful velvety petals blown far and wide, leaving her noth-
ing but a bare green stalk.


jjA v flHQH Ww JKyaw
J fl ft. 'ttp ■
The garden fairies hovered around and sheltered White Rose
from the Demon Wind, covering her with their wings while she
slept soundly.
In the morning, when White Rose awakened, she discovered
that her boastful companion no longer held her proud head
high, and she was sad to think that what had yesterday been a
proud and beautiful Red Rose was now but a memory.
Across the lawn on dancing feet came a pretty little girl. She
laughed joyously as she skipped about the garden, for there was
still a rose to love, and when the child ran over and kissed her
the sweet White Rose knew happiness.
THERE WAS STILL A ROSE TO LOVE !


I , ■
r - Sheila* Faae*~
16 \
j crlare at -
' roar.
j make me feel scared when
/ light at night,
And if I went closer I’m sure they would
lir (a ° n guard at the house ust over the way
Is a small China dog; and I do wish he’d
A' , yn For one day he winked and his T
S ' twirk,
"THERE are lions on the posts of the house
next door,
That glare at me fiercely and sometimes
They make me feel scared when their eyes
For one day he winked and his tail gave a
And when I waved back his face wore a
smirk


/ * 4 I I
v
* X


I THE HOUSE OF ;
QUALITY
EIO. PRINCESS WHO COULDN'T CRY.
El65. ADVENTURE STORIES FOR BOYS.
E!73. THE GOOSE GIRL.
El76. NOW THE KNAVE STOLE THE TARTS.
El78. CHUCKLES THE JESTER.
El80. NURSERY RHYME HOLIDAY.
E181. CHANG & THE TOY.SOLDIERS.
El90. HAPPY A.B.C. BOOK.
' f- - ‘V ’
9
: 150* 01H039' :
2
I
Oo
rO
Printed and P.b shed by OPset Printing Co- Pty. Ltd.. 169 PMi, D St.. Waterloo. Sydney. JAM R.ghts Reserved.)
