

Chaplain the Rev. John Kemp Bruce
(Late Minister of Wahroonga Presbyterian Church)
Who died at sea on board a Transport returning
to Australia on sth February, 1918
An Appreciation
Chaplain Rev. R. SCOTT WEST
ON THK OCCASION OF A
Memorial Service at Wahroonga Church
Sunday, 24th February, 1918




Chaplain the Rev. John Kemp Bruce
(Late Minister of Wahroonga Presbyterian Church)
Who died at sea on board a Transport returning
to Australia on sth February. 1918
An Appreciation
Chaplain Rev. R. SCOTT WEST
ON THE OCCASION OF A
Memorial Service at Wabroonga Cburcb
Sunday, 24tb February, 1918




THE LATE REV. JOHN KEMP BRUCE.
This photo was taken when Rev. John Kemp Bruce was Moderator of the
N.S.W. Presbyterian Assembly.




(Job 14, 14.—Rev. 14, 13.)
Under normal conditions, when we are privileged
to minister to the needs of a loved one. and have
time given us to bid him good-bye ere he passes to
his reward, it is no easy matter to say all that one
feels and knows. When the call comes suddenly
and unexpectedly, as it did to our friend—at least
so far as we are concerned, for he was prepared,
it is still more difficult. Time is needed to get ac-
customed to the altered circumstances, and for re-
adjustment. While we could have wished that we
had been permitted to stand by him, and to see him
well on his way towards Home, it may be that the
manner of his decease will enable us to hold him
in memory as the man we knew in life. He was
not allowed to grow old—he was the youngest
man of his years, I have ever known; he escaped
the invalidism which is so burdensome to the ac-
tive spirit, and he and we know nothing of the
“sadness of farewell.” He was not, for God took
him. He will ever stand before us as a man—
the work of God, with the silent unknown sea as
background.
Shortly after arriving in this State, your minis-
ter and I became closely associated with each other
in connection with various interests and from
the first meeting with him, until the last, I was
impressed with the evenness and purity of his
life, There is perhaps nothing more critical than
a true friendship, and he was a friend in the
best sense. He was a man of great natural wis-
dom ; bright and sanguine in disposition, and
possessed of that tact which understands and
smooths away difficulties. As a consequence his
counsel and advice, were much sought after and
valued, by all who knew him. He had in a
marked degree, what has been termed the saving


sense of humour, and time and again he used it
effectively to remove differences, and to bring
seemingly discordant elements together.
His power over men was all the greater because
he had nothing of that spirit of self-interest
which is so marked a feature, both in Church and
State, of the public life of to-day. A kindly soul,
with an attractive personality, and filled with the de-
sire to help, he did a great deal to lighten the bur-
den of those who were unfortunate. . iNo one
rendered more unobtrusive service for the chil-
dren of the Burnside Homes than he, and the time
spent by him in helpful work for the benefit of that
Institution, is known only to God and himself.
When the war broke out, and when the Chap-
lains found it to be impossible for them to over-
take the duties connected with ihe different camps,
your minister offered his services, and for many
months, acted as visiting Chaplain at Milson Is-
land. It was my privilege to accompany him on
one occasion, and it was an inspiration to see how he
handled men under most disadvantageous cir-
cumstances, and the power he had over them. It
was the same spirit of willingness “to do his bit”
which sent him overseas, and, as it happened, to
his death. His appointment was without remuner-
ation of any kind, save only that which gave
him the opportunity of doing something for the
“boys.” There was in his sacrifice, an expression
of loyalty to his Church. He felt that the Church
of his fathers should be represented in this partic-
ular class of appointments, and as he was beyond
the military age for Continuous and ordinary Troop-
ship service, he went at his own charges.
One sometimes wonders in these days, if the sense
of shame has died out altogether in certain sec-
tions of the community, when our old men and


school-boys are taking up the burden of Empire
and Humanity, while our streets are crowded with
the physically strong, who only lack the courage
needed to make them soldiers.
As a minister, John Kemp Bruce was faithful
to his Master, and to you- His piety was deep
and strong and manly. It was when you became
intimate with him, that you learned something of
his love for Jesus Christ. Religion was that
which counted for most in his life. He was proud
of being your minister, and in his passing you
have lost a friend, that will not be easy to replace.
In the providence of God his life was marvel-
lously rounded off and finished. He realised a
dream of years in visiting the Homeland, and
while at home, he preached at Peterhead, in his
first and only charge in Scotland. He renewed
acquaintance with some of his former people, and
we can imagine the joy to him and them at meet-
ing with each other after so many years of separa-
tion. We are glad that they met, as they will not
be strangers when they meet at Home.
And he saw his boy, and found him to be all that
his heart desired—a capable and brave Naval Sur-
geon, and, best of all, a follower of Jesus Christ- It
is not given to every man to know that his lads
—both of them—about whom he prayed, and with
whom he played, have given themselves unreserv-
edly to the Master.
Having joined the old congregation with the
new, and having preached the same Gospel to
both, he was called hence, his works following
with him ,
There is something very beautiful about the
thought of the father, carrying the love of mother
and brother to the boy at home, and having re-


u.o^9
newed the bond of affection that time and distance
could not destroy, midway between, ascending to
the presence of the Heavenly Father bearing with
him, the record of a life lived well, and of a family
made one in Jesus Christ.
It seems as if he could do no more, and God
called him to his rest. It is one of the great
privileges of life, to know a good man, and John
Kemp Bruce was a good man.
Our prayerful sympathy goes out to her, whose
privileges were greater than ours, but whose loss
is also greater. May the Everlasting Arms be
underneath her, and may the Divine Love sustain
her, and in God’s own time, may she and the boys
meet husband and father, where there is no sor-
row and no separation.
Reprinted from the Australian Christian World of March ist, 1918.
