

i' • $


•' - ,


V’ V *
•* b •.
CHARITY AND PHILANTHRO
A PRIZE ESS A
(HISTORICAL, STATISTICAL, AN© GE
ON THE
INSTITUTIONS IN SYDNEY
WHICH AIM AT THE DIMINUTION OF VICE, OR THE
ALLEVIATION OF
MISERY,
AND ARE
SUPPORTED WHOLLY, OR IN PART, BY THE GIFTS OF THE
CHARITABLE.
REV. S. W. BROOKS,
Principal of the “New School," Ashfield.
PUBLISHED GRATIS BY W. B. CAMPBELL.
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAME AND CO., GENERAL STEAM PRINTERS,
186 Pitt Street.




PREFACE-
——»000**»‘~
Some time before the appearance of Mr. Campbell’s advertisement
offering a prize for the best Essay on the Charitable Institutions
of Sydney, the writer of the following pages had resolved to
devote a large portion of his then approaching pedagogic vacation
to visiting some of the leading public Institutions of the city.
The advertisement was, therefore, as seed cast into prepared
ground.
It will be necessary for the reader to keep before his mind the
following limitations and objects of the work, or his criticism will
be in danger of being unfair —the projector desired a bare, simple
statement of the origin, objects, and work of the various Institu-
tions, without any attempt at embellishment; if this be borne in
mind, it will explain the apparent stiffness and abruptness of
treatment.
Apart altogether from any money-aim in the production of
these pages, the writer is well pleased with the labour which the
preparation entailed (albeit that labour was much greater than
he anticipated), for it brought him into very agreeable intercourse
with many very estimable persons.
He gladly acknowledges the unlimited kindness with which
his, perchance tiresome, questions were received in every instance.
If one name may be singled out from a long list of aiders and
abettors, it must be that of G. E. Wise, Esq., the long-time Hon.
Secretary of the Hand wick Asylum. This gentleman has shown a
readiness to go out of his way to help me, and I here repeat to him
the thanks I have frequently uttered. I may also be allowed to
name J. S. Harrison, Esq., Capt. F. Hixson, Ellis Robinson, Esq.,
Very Rev. Dean Cowper, Rev. G. F. Garnsey, Mrs. Parnell, Sir
Edward and Lady Deas Thomson, Mrs. Scott, Mr. Sheriff Cowper,
Mr. Russell, Secretary of the Infirmary, the Superioress of St.
Vincent’s Hospital, The Reverend Mother of the House of the
Good Samaritan, Dr. Roberts, Sir Alfred Stephen, D. Mcßeath,
Esq., Mrs, D. L. Levy, John Mills, G. L. Goodman, S. W. Mans-
field, Shepherd Smith, Esquires.
S. W. B.
Ashfield, 28th February, 1878.


HOW THIS BOOK CAME TO BE PUBLISHED.
The undersigned, perhaps by some considered a peculiar man, a
few years ago, conceived an idea, that he would raise a sum
of money for the principal charitable institutions of Sydney—
and succeeded by means of a Fancy Fair held at the Exhibition
Building in December, 1874, in raising nearly £6OO, which he
divided equally between nine of our charities. After this money
had been paid to the Societies it came to the knowledge of the
directors that a loss of about £lOO had been suffered by the
promoter, and to recoup him for his loss the Directors of each
Society liberally gave back the sum of £lO. This money
(altogether £9O) was proffered so kindly that it could not well
be refused, but the undersigned recipient expressed his intention
of taking some future opportunity to increase the sum three or
four fold and return it again. This led to the Golden Barrel
prize distribution at the Eoyal Furnishing Arcade, December, 1877,
through which £llO6 was raised and divided equally between
eleven of the most prominent Sydney Charitable Institutions.
A great reward in the shape of a beautiful testimonial stimulates
the undersigned to try and find some method by which he may
be able to increase the sum already raised by him, viz. : —£l7oo
to £5OOO.
With this important object in view, and to make known to the
people of Sydney and New South Wales generally, the great amount
of poverty and distress which is loudly calling for alleviation
through their generous aid “ this book is published.”
Few persons have even a remote idea of the number of
Charitable Institutions wholly or partly depending upon our
voluntary contributions. This essay will give valuable information
in this respect, and thus be of great assistance when some broad
benevolent scheme which shall benefit the whole of the within
described charities is brought before the public.
W. B. CAMPBELL.
N.B.—Suggestions tending towards the above desirable object
will be gladly received by
W. B. C.
Sydney, July Ist, 1878


Fellow Citizens,
The rigorous, and we will assume, necessary, limitation which Mr. W.
B. Campbell, the projector of this Essay has placed upon it, viz., that
it “ shall occupy 32 pages of demy Bvo., set in long primer,” renders
it inexpedient that any space shall be occupied by anything like
prefatory cogitations. We will, therefore, start at once on the imme-
diate object and purpose of our work, an “ Essay, or Descriptive Account
of the Philanthropic and Charitable Institutions of Sydney .”
These Institutions are so numerous, and cover such extensive and
various ground, it will be prudent for the sake of perspicuity to
attempt some classification. After several more elaborate attempts the
writer believes the following will be found satisfactory, not perhaps
upon the face of it, but he believes a little thought will justify it
as approximately correct: it is a modification of a system adopted by a
writer who deals with the London Charities.
For our present purpose then, the various institutions will be
considered in two sections :
Section I—Embracing in general , Agencies which aim at the diminu-
tion of Vice and Crime.
Section 2 —Embracing in general , Agencies which aim at the allevia-
tion op Want and Suffering.
Section I—Embracing in general , Agencies which aim at the
diminution of vice and crime, including in particular , agencies which
are Curative, Preventive, and Reformatory.
a. Curative or Radical agencies, based on the assumption that the
vice and crime which exists, owes its origin to the original
native badness or obliquity of man’s nature; and aim at the
diminution or extinction of the evil, by the entire and absolute
change of man’s will, the renovation of his nature.
b. Preventive , or those which aim at the removal of peculiar forms
of temptation or the abridgment of the power of special produc-
ing causes of vice, whatever in fact is efficacious in removing
hindrances to the development of virtue, and in fostering
principles of morality; agencies which conduce to the social and
moral improvement of the community, either by offering a
barrier to the progress, of crime, or by employing counteracting
agencies.
c. Reformative agencies, which are employed to effect an external
change of character, rendering those who are vicious and
depraved, honest and respectable members of society.
Of the agencies which fall under class a of this section, precedence
may be given to the
New South Wales Auxiliary op the British and Foreign Bible
Society.
This Society was founded 7th March, 1817, when the Parent
Society was thirteen years old. Its first meeting was held in a part of
the Hospital, called the “ Court House,” the President of the meeting


being Governor Macquarie: addresses were delivered by the Eev.
Samuel Marsden, the Eev. William Cowper, Colonial Chaplains,
Judge Advocate Wylde, E. Eiley, Esq., and others. At that meeting,
the Treasurer announced donations, £227 35.; annual subscriptions,
£73 3s. Since the foundation of the Auxiliary, there has been remitted
to the Parent Society, the sum of £13,326 Bs. Id., and 182,406 copies
of the Scriptures, in whole or in part, have been sold, and probably
10,000 copies gratuitously distributed. Total cash receipts to 1876 :
Donations and subscriptions, £16,865 13s. 9d. Sales, £13,866 7s. 9d.
Legacies, £3OO.
The first report contains this piece of interesting information —
“ The city was divided into four districts, named respectively, the Each,
Hospital, Garrison , and Brickfield Districts, and a few gentlemen can-
vassed these Districts in search of information as to the extent to which
Bibles were needed, &c., &c. This canvass produced this result —No.
of dwellings, 920. No. of persons, 3,734. Eeaders, 2,429. Possessed
of Bible, 926 ; of Testament, 365. Wish to buy Bibles, 174 ; Testa-
ments, 28. Wish to beg Bibles. 94 ; Testaments, 9. Eeaders of all
ages without either Bibles or Testaments, 1,138.”
The Depot of the Society is at present at 387 George-street, but
its friends hope soon to erect a suitable and permanent home in a
suitable position. The building account shows about £1,700 in hand.
This Auxiliary has rendered help in the printing of the Scriptures
in several of the Polynesian languages.
A kindred agency is the
Eeliguous Tract Society.
This Society does not appear to have been founded as an Auxiliary
of the London Society of the same name, but as an independent
Australian Society. The first meeting was held August 13th, 1823,
and was presided over by the Governor of the day, Sir Thomas Bris-
bane, the first anniversary on same date, 1824.
The object of the Society is the production or purchase and distri-
bution of Eeligious Tracts, seeking thereby to induce in the minds of
those who read them, that thought which it is hoped may lead to the
reformation of individual character, and public manners. Mr. W.
Crane, P.M., is the Secretary of this Society.
On Wednesday, 11th June, 1862, in response to a circular sub-
scribed by Eev. Thomas Smith, S. C. Kent, Dr. Fullerton, J. E. Yetch,
and Messrs. J. Caldwell and B. Short a meeting was held in the
Temperance Hall, for the purpose of considering the necessity of
establishing such an agency as the
City Mission,
the object of which should be to promote the extension of evangelical
religion, without reference to denominational distinctions.” Thirty
gentlemen were present, Mr. Short read a paper setting forth the
need for such a Mission, and speeches were delivered by Eevs.
Dr. Fullerton, A. Thomson, J. Eeid, 8. C. Kent, J. Eggleston, J.Dugall,
J. Yoller, and P. P. Agnew, and Messrs. Joy and Eobinson. This


was preliminary to a public meeting which was held July 11, 1862,
The Hon. J. Campbell, M.L.C. in the chair, when the Mission was
fairly started.
The work of the Mission was begun on Ist October, 1862, by tour
missionaries, viz., Stephen Eobens, Wm. Simpson, Mrs. Aspinall, and
Mrs. Thomson. By the rules of the Mission each missionary is required
to spend thirty hours a week in the special work of the Mission.
The city was divided into four Districts, to each of which a missionary
was appointed—he, or she, being required to begin at one end of the
district, f and visit every house until the other end was reached (it is
not very clear whether the word ‘ every ’ is to be taken literally, or
whether it simply means every house in which reside those who attend
no place of worship), and, if possible, read in each house a portion
of the Scriptures, make enquiries concerning the religious condition
of the inmates, give advice, and, where allowed, offer prayer before
leaVjg patriot gomo reg ident minister was appointed Local
Superintendent, to whom the missionary could look for advice, and to
whom he must every week show the “Journal” which the Kules
required him to keep. This Journal must be written up every night,
fairly recording the work done during the day, as “ number of families
read and prayed with,” “number of sick persons visited, sick visite
by missionary alone,” &c., &c., and giving details of any specially
interesting case met with —the 1877 Eeport contains about a score
specimens. The missionary acts as Bible agent and Tract distributor,
seeks to induce persons to take the total abstinence pledge and to
attend public worship, to urge abandoned women to enter the Epfuge,
&c. He is also to conduct simple religious services in rooms in his
District. ,
There are at present eight men doing this work, and there can be
no doubt that they reach and benefit a class to which ordinary Church
agencies never come, thereby rescuing many from deep wretchedness ;
and I can personally testify to the humble earnestness t)f one of the
late Missionaries with whom 1 was frequently brought into contact
thirteen or fourteen years ago in scenes of deepest misery.
The doctrinal basis of the Mission is thus declared in Clause IV.
of the Constitution :
“ IY. —No person shall be recognised as an Office-bearer, or
Member of Committee, or be employed as a salaried agent of the
Society, but such as furnish evidence of personal piety, believe in the
Divine authority of the Scriptures, and hold the doctrines of the Unity
of the Godhead, the Deity of Christ, the Deity and personality of the
Holy Spirit, the total depravity of man, salvation through the atone-
ment of Christ, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, the obligation
resting on all men to repent and believe the Gospel, and the necessity
of holiness as an evidence of union with the Saviour.”
According to the last report, the income from all sources was
£1,137, and the expenditure £1,211.
The various sources of income, according to the Eeport, are these
General Subscriptions and Donations, £561; ditto as collected by the
Ladies’ Auxiliary, £355, Special Donations for Annual Tea Meeting,


£129, in addition to contributions in kind. Collections in various
Churches and Sunday-schools, £IOB. Special from Mr. Campbell’s
Sacred Concert, £43. Mission Boxes, £5.
The summary of work done during the year ’76-77 contains this
item—“ Persons in great distress relieved, 669.” Some of these
received cash aid, while many received help in the shape of gifts of
clothing, and there can be no doubt such help is in many cases acceptable.
Could not very effective assistance be rendered by ladies in the suburbs
or small villages forming “ Working Parties,” the result of which
would be that the wretched and ill-clad of the city might speak of “the
coats and garments which,” not Dorcas, but these kind ladies “had
made.”
Mr. J. S. Harrison, is the Treasurer, and Eev. A. Burdett and C.
F. Garnsey, the Hon. Secretaries.
The following Eeport of the “ Flushcombe Dorcas Societyex-
tracted from the Cumberland Mercury , will give an idea of what may
be done in this good cause :
“ On Saturday, March 2nd, Mrs. W. B. Campbell, celebrated the
third anniversary of her Dorcas Society, by inviting the Members and
the eight Sydney City Missionaries to her house to tea. Her object in
so doing was twofold, viz. : Ist, because she wished the Missionaries
to meet the Members in order that they might tell them personally how
much good they do by devoting a few hours to making clothes for the
poor; and secondly, that each might say a few words to the people of
Blacktown about their work among the distressed of Sydney, in the
hope that a little band of workers would meet once a month for the
purpose of making clothing for the poor, as they do at Flushcombe ;
or, if they should prefer it, to become Members of the Society already
established, and so successfully carried on at Flushcombe.
After tea the Missionaries and Members went to the School Church
at Blacktown, where between 80 and 90 people were assembled.
At 6 30 the Eev, E. Smith took the chair and read the Eeport of the
Flushcombe Dorcas Society for the year 1877, from which it would
appear that about 200 articles of clothing have been made and sent to
the City Missionaries to be distributed among the indigent folk of
Sydney. There are 12 Members connected with this Society; but of
these only one-half are working members, the others merely contribute
towards the purchase of material. The money received from Members
and friends during 1877, amounts to £6 11s. This sum, however,
would be quite inadequate for the purpose were it not for the kind aid
rendered by some of the Sydney merchants who have from time to time
sent patterns of calicoes and prints, out of which many of the quilts and
children’s clothes have been made.
Having read the Eeport and addressed a few encouraging and
congratulating remarks to the Members, Mr. Smith introduced the
Missionaries as follows: Messrs. Gully, Bowmaker, Druce, Bosworth,
Freeland, Tilly, Hodgkinson, and Cr is ford ; after which each was
called upon to speak to the people, and it is to be hoped that their
accounts of the distress and misery of some of the poor in Sydney will
have the effect of inducing many more to take part in this good work.
A collection was made to aid the Missionaries in their work, and


the Meeting was brought to a close by the benediction at 8.15, in order
that they might return to Sydney by the 8.20 train.”
If a stock of useful clothing were accessible to the Missionaries
much good might be done.
There is one other curative agency which, although the sphere of
its operations is not the city, yet because it draws on the city largely
for support, and as its work may be said to influence the city indirectly,
deserves mention here : this is the
Bush Missionary Society,
which appears to have grown out of a movement amongst the youths
of a Bible Glass in connection with the Bathurst-street Baptist Church,
the teacher of the Class being Mr. G. R, Addison. These youths banded
themselves together into a juvenile missionary society, the leading
object being the distribution of religious tracts in city and suburbs,
Out of this grew the formation of Sabbath Schools in bush settlements
near Sydney—Willoughby and North Sydney being among the first.
A small weatherboard building was put up at the former place, and
several young men of Sydney went up every Sunday to conduct Sunday
School, and a simple religious service. Out of these efforts came the
employment of paid Missionaries, whose work it should be to travel
extensively into the interior, visiting stations and settlements to which
the regular ministers rarely came, and in such places to “ seek to spread
a Scriptural knowledge of Jesus Christ without reference to sectarian
peculiarities.”
At the present time four Missionaries are employed by the Society,
who are paid about £l5O a year each, besides travelling expenses.
An important part of the Missionaries’ work is the sale of religious
books, £1,070 19s. 3d. worth being sold in year ending 30th June, 1877,
and during that year the following work was accomplished Miles
travelled, 12,084; families visited, 5,797; services held, 368; Bibles
and testaments sold, 802; books sold, 8,333; tracts distributed,
about 17,000.
At the present time the Treasurer of the Society is John Mills, Esq.,
the Secretaries, Messrs. Joseph Palmer and Henry Baigent.
This Society is dependent on voluntary contributions for its support,
and deserves the aid of the liberal.
Only one Society now remains for notice in this division of the
first section —the
“Young Men’s Christian Association”
was established in 1824, and aims to secure the temporal and eternal
welfare of young men by means of Educational Classes, Lectures,
Devotional and other Meetings, a Library, and Reading Room;
seeking thus to take hold of young men, and by bringing them into
contact with other Christian young men, save them from wrong
modes of life. The Association has, however, a more direct claim to
“notice here.” Members of the Association conduct “Youths’
Missions, i.e., schools or meetings on Sunday Evenings, designed to
benefit the roughs of our streets. One of these is held in Bay-street,


Glebe, and an average attendance of 109 was reported for the year
1876. The writer has personal knowledge of the nature of this
part of the work of these young men, having for three months watched
an attempt to establish such a school in Woolloomooloo. Although he
believes it to have been hopeless work, he cannot withold praise for
the endeavour to lessen the wildness of the class there operated upon.
After ten years’ residence amongst so-called savages of Fiji, he has no
hesitation in saying that the genuine Woolloomooloo rough is far, far
the savagest savage he knows.
The Rooms of the Association are in Pitt-street, at the corner of
Park-street, where is a Reading Room fairly supplied with papers,
and a library containing a few volumes of the kind or class to be
expected. Lectures on various subjects are delivered under the
auspices of the Association.
The subscriptions and donations amount to about £750 a year.
One pound a year is the subscription for membership. It is in con-
templation to erect a grand building for the Association.
President, M. H. Stephen, Esq.; Hon. Treasureis, E. Vickery and
J. H. Goodlet, Esquires; General Secretary, Mr. David Walker.
Coming now to class B of Section 1, Agencies which aim at the
suppression or diminution of vice and crime , the foremost position may be
given to the Randwick Asylum or
“Society for the Relief of Destitute Children.”
This large and noble Institution dates its origin 23rd February,
1852, on which day a few gentlemen on charitable thoughts intent met
at the house of Dr. Douglass. At that meeting were present George
Allen (in the chair). Archdeacon McEncroe, Assistant-Commissary
General Owen, Mr. Cowlishaw, Captain McLerie, Dr. Douglass, and
Rev. A. H. Stephen (all now dead except A.C.G. Owen and Rev. A H.
Stephen) —and it was resolved :—(1.) 'lhat it is expedient to establish
an Asylum for the reception of abandoned or destitute children of
both sexes under the age of eight years, to be called “ The Asylum for
Destitute Children.” (2 ) That the undersigned form themselves into
a Committee for the purpose of carrying out the designs of such an
institution (names as above, with Mr. Comrie additional). (3.) That
Dr. Douglass and the Secretary, Rev. A. H. Stephen, be requested to
form a code of Rules.
The Committee thus formed secured the zealous co-operation of
the then Colonial Secretary, the Hon. E. Deas Thomson, and also issued
an “ Appeal” for aid, on the 25th of March. This “Appeal” evoked
such a liberal response that by Ist June, 1852, all necessary arrange-
ments had been completed, and the Asylum was opened at “ Ormond
House,” Paddington. This house, known to all passers through
Paddington, has a somewhat sombre exterior, but it acquires some
historical celebrity from the fact that it was the first home of this
Institution, and a few' years later the home of the Deaf and Dumb
Institution.
The Appeal we have no space to reproduce, and must refer all who
wish to see it to the Society’s Reports. It set forth the need for such


an Institution, the classes of children which it was proposed to benefit,
the training it proposed to give them, the intention to apply to the
Legislature for necessary enactments, the need for money to establish
it, &c., and bears at its foot the names above given, with Thomas
Barker, J. S. Dowling, Gilbert Elliott, G. K. Holden, Esquires, and
the Revs. W. B. Boyce, T. Druitt, and Dr. Ross.
Such was the manner of the foundation of the “ Society for the
Relief of Destitute Children,” and such was its progress that, with the
assistance of a legacy of £11,500 bequeathed by the late Dr Cuthill,
supplemented by liberal donations from the Government, the noble
building at Randwick was erected, and occupied 29th March, 1858.
The Society was incorporated February, 1857.
The aim of the Society is thus put in By-law No. 1 : “The pro-
tection, support, industrial training, and moral and religious instruction
of children not less than four nor more than ten years old, deserted or
left destitute by dissolute and abandoned parents, or from other causes
neglected or in a state of great privation and without adequate means
of support. To the end of 1877, 3,156 such children had been received,
of whom were 1749 boys and 1407 girls.
The general secular education of the children is now under the
care of the Council of Education, which appointed its first teacher
January Ist, 1877, while their industrial training, which formerly
embraced bootmaking, tailoring, and sericulture, has been abandoned,
and the whole of the children attend the schools for general education.
Some of the children have been apprenticed to the Institution—of boys,
one to carpentering, and two to baking;—of girls, twenty-three as
domestic servants.
The By-laws provide that “so soon as any child shall have
attained the age of twelve years the House Committee shall take the
necessary steps to have such child apprenticed according to law, or
otherwise suitably provided for, &c.” In accordance with this law
1,157 children have, to the end of 1877, been apprenticed under six years’
indentures. Every endeavour is used to secure the well-being of the
outgoers, —care in selection of employer, provision for wages, one-
third is given to the apprentice for pocket-money, and two-thirds is
remitted to the Savings Bank of the Institution, where, on 31st De-
cember, 1877, was £2458 4s 2d. to the credit of the apprentices. The
wages being £1 65., £2 125., £3 IBs., £5 45., £7 165., and £ll 14s.
per year for the six years respectively. The Society stands to each
child in loco parentis throughout the apprenticeship. A printed address
signed by the Rev. A. H. Stephen, Canon of the Church of England,
and the Very Rev. Dean Sheridan, Roman Catholic Clergyman, is
given to each apprenticed child ; it contains good advice as to conduct,
and information as to the relative duties of employer and apprentice.
The management of the Institution is in the hands of a Board
of Directors, consisting of a President, two Vice-Presidents, Treasurer,
twelve elected Members, and all Life Directors; and a House Com-
mittee of jive selected therefrom.
The income from all sources for 1877 was £10,592 Bs. 7d., derived
from ordinary subscriptions and donations, subscriptions collected by
the collector in the country, interest on invested legacies under “Per-
petual Subscribers’ Fund,” entertainments, apprentice fees, payments


frr maintenance from parents, ditto from Government, ditto from
Government on £ for £ principle ; the expenditure, £11,042 14s. lid.
The number of inmates at close of the year—Boys 348, girls 230 ; total
678. Protestants, 343; Roman Catholics, 235. The daily average
number for 1877 was 568, who were maintained, clothed, and educated
at an average cost of £l5 13s. 4d. per head.
The list of lady visitors, headed by the name of the Hon. Lady
Robinson, contains thirty names.
The “ Catherine Hayes” Hospital for the inmates deserves a word.
The famous singer, whose name the Hospital bears, in order to help
towards the foundation gave in 1855 a concert; the tickets were 21s.
each, and the sum of £BOO was the result. Prom various causes the
foundation stone was not laid until December 19, 1868. The hospital
was formally opened 11th March, 1870. To show its value it may be
stated that 54 of the 578 children were in it 31st December, 1877.
There hangs in the Board Room of the Asylum a full length portrait
of Catherine Hayes.
Mr. Geo. F. Wise was for upwards of ten years the Hon. and efficient
Treasurer, and afterwards the Hon. Secretary of the Society; and when
he at the beginning of 1877 retired from that position, the Board
rendered very graceful tribute of praise for his services, and presented
to him a costly silver inkstand.
Patron of the Society: His Excellency Sir Hercules Robinson.
President: Sir E. Deas Thomson. Vice-President: the Rev. Canon
Stephen. Hon. Treasurer: S. H. Pearce, Esq., J.P. Superintendent i
Mr. D. A. Thomas, Secretary: Mr. J. Coulter. Matron: Miss M. A.
Fairbairn,
Extract from the Report of the Directors of the Society for the
Relief of Destitute Children, for the year ending December 31, 1865:
“Your Directors cannot close their Report without paying a
tribute of respect to the memory of the late Dr Douglass, one of the
founders of the Society, at whose house all the meetings preliminar3 r
to its formation were held. They have a grateful sense, which they
are assured is entertained by the subscribers generally, of the valuable
services rendered by that gentleman to the Institution in the earlier
stage of its history; and in giving expression to their regret at his
removal from amongst them, they would indulge the hope that the
example which he set of active benevolence, and of kindly interest in
the welfare of the suffering and the distressed, will be followed by
many of our citizens, to the great benefit of all our public Institutions,
and more especially, as in duty bound to desire, to that of the Society
for the Relief of Destitute Children, so that its sphere of usefulness
may be most widely extended, and its reforming and elevating influences
upon the destinies of those for whose advantage it was founded, may
be exercised more largely and more beneficially, as year after year it
gains still more deservedly the confidence of the public, and experiences
its bounty.”
If there is one work which, beyond all others, society has a direct
interest in doing, it is to care for the wild brood of the streets, the
shoeless, shaggy-haired waifs of both sexes, met with in the city—in


all cities. Indeed society must deal with them in one of two ways.
They may be taken in hand at the beginning of their lives, with a view
to education in right ways of living, and thus saving them from wrong
ways—this will cost effort and money. Or they may be let alone, and
allowed to follow their own sweet will; in that case the probability ia
they will take a wrong turn and find their way to prison, and in some
cases to worse than prison—this method will cost less effort, but more
money. “ Sowing the wind and reaping the whirlwind.” There is a
desire in Sydney to adopt the former course —to take these young ones
to teach them the right; rather than allow them to grow up in wrong,
and then punish for that. This is the special work of
“ Ragged Schools.”
On Friday, 10th February, 1860, a meeting convened by circular
was held in School of Arts for the purpose of “ considering the condition
•of the neglected class of young persons in Sydney, and to make some
effort to benefit them.” There were present at that meeting Mr. E. Joy,
Chairman, Bishop Barker, the Dean of Sydney, Revs. John West,
S. C Kent, Messrs. A. Gordon, S. Hebblewhite, J. Caldwell, and
J. R. Houlding. An adjourned meeting was held a fortnight later,
and a provisional committee was appointed in order to arrange for the
establishment of a “ free school for the education of the neglected
classes of Sydney,” Mr. Houlding being appointed Treasurer and
Mr. Joy, Secretary. The succeeding steps toward the establishment of
the Ragged School were quickly stepped. A building was rented, a
manager, Mr. Lee, appointed at £2OO a year, and work was begun.
In the early years a little work was mixed with the education, but
this was given up, and the children are now simply instructed in
ordinary subjects.
Starting with one school, the Committee now has three under its
control —Bay-street, Glebe, a rented building, in which a Day School
is conducted; Harrington-street, in a building erected by the Committee
on leasehold land, at a cost of £483, ground-rent, £27 10s., in this a
Day School is conducted ; Kent-street, in a building erected by the
Committee on leasehold land (21 years) at a cost of £354, ground-rent,
£32 10s., in this building is conducted a Day School and a Week-night
School ; and in all of them a Sunday-night School is conducted by
voluntary teachers.
The Committee employs six paid Teachers at a cost of £415 a year.
There can be no doubt about the wisdom of this expenditure. Many
have been saved from a life of crime by the labours of these teachers,
who, by the way, do not confine themselves to work in the School-room,
but “in many cases visit the homes of the children.” A copy of the
Report for 1876-7 lies before me, and it contains much interesting
information respecting some who were formerly scholars, showing that
many of them received great benefit from their Ragged School instruc-
tion and education. The same Report also contains extracts from the
journals of the Teachers, which x-eveal in some cases the hard and
wretched life these children lead, and the sad surroundings of tempta-
tion to evil, against which they have to contend. I recently attended
the Sunday-night School in the Kent- street building, and found there


fifty or sixty boys and youths, who, though not models of order and
good behaviour, would, but for this provision, have been making the
night of peace hideous, Messrs. Bowmaker, C.M , and Page, assisted
by several voluntary teachers, chiefly ladies, were instructing them.
These Schools had on the roll at the close of the Society’s year, 1877,
323, while the average attendance was—Day School, 192; Eve-
ning, 38; and Sunday Schools, ‘245. Total, 475.
It costs about £7OO a year to carry on this work, while for the
year 1877 the ordinary subscriptions amounted to £sll Is. 8d , so
that, but for a legacy of Mr. Frost, and a special donation from
Mr. W. B. Campbell, there would have been a serious deficit.
Patron : His Excellency Sir Hercules Robinson, Treasurer:
Mr. J. R. Fairfax. Secretary : Mr. J. S. Harrison.
Next in natural order will come two schools, whose work is some-
what analagous to that undertaken by the Ragged Schools. The
f>romoters and conductors seeking to save from wretchedness and use-
essness a class, perhaps, a grade higher than that on which the
Ragged School operates.
James McArthur, in his work on New South Wales, says :—“ To
Lady Darling is owing the establishment of the
‘Female School of Industry,’
at Sydney, an Institution supported by voluntary contributions, the
objects of which are highly deserving of support.” The date of the
establishment of the school was 1825, and its object the training of
poor girls belonging to the Church of England, in cooking and general
household duties. Its first home was a house in the Domain, near the
“ Richmond Terrace,” nearly opposite the Free Public Library, but
the Government requiring the site, a new site was given and a large
house was built by the Government on the Darlinghurst Road, near
St. Vincent’s Hospital, and there the Institution now has its home.
The rules require that the number of children be limited to fifty
(there are at present fifty-six inmates) of whom thirty are on the founda-
tion, and twenty for whose training a sum, say £lO a-year, is paid by
parents or friends. These are admitted between the age of five and
eight, and on reaching the age of fourteen, are apprenticed to subscribers,
being members of the Church of England ; the committee standing in
loco parentis until thev reach the age of eighteen. They are fed and
clothed by the committee, and on appointment to service receive a
a Bible and Prayer Book, and a clothing outfit is furnished by the
person to whom the girl is apprenticed.
The management rests with a committee of twelve Ladies ; a
Treasurer, Miss E. J. Deas-Thomson ; and a Secretary, Lady Deas-
Thoroson. In the house are a Matron, a Sub-matron, and a Teacher.
No servants are kept, all the household work being done by the girls
themselves; a certain number of them being appointed every montp,
by the Secretary to manage the various departments of house duty, as
Monitors, House, Upper-Hall and Lower-Hall Maids, Laundress, Cook,
Baker, Gate, and Dairy Maids.
It would appear that this Institution, one of the oldest in the


colony, has done much good work, and has fully answered the expec-
tations of its founders. The income, from all sources, for the year
ending October, 1877, was about £650, comprising subscriptions,
donations, schooling, sale of needlework, ball, and lodging, and school-
ing receipts. Its committee is in the happy position of freedom from
the financial concern, which fetters the operations of too many of our
Institutions. The report for 1877, shows a credit balance of £9OO.
The subscriptions for 1877, amounted to £145; donations, £ 116;
while the annual ball realized “only” £l7O.
The present Patroness is the Hon. Lady Robinson ; Treasurer,
Miss E. J. Deas-Thomson ; and the energetic Secretary is Lady Deas-
Thomson, who is a most enthusiastic worker for the Institution.
One of the noblest, yet perhaps the most unobtrusive, of our
Institutions, is the
“Lisgae Training School,”
which may be found in Barcom Oden, Liverpool-street, E., under the
supervision of Mrs. D. C. F. Scott.
It owes its birth to the concern felt by Captain Scott, P M., for
the young girls brought before him at the Central Police Office. He
felt that something could, and should, be done to save these unfortu-
nates from wrong courses; it was thought this end would be secured
if they could be trained for domestic service. Meetings were held of
ladies and gentlemen favourable to that project, which resulted in a
beginning being made in October, 1870, at East View House, 71 Dow-
ling-street. Numbers increased, and necessitated the removal of the
School to Liverpool-street (near Forbes-street) and subsequently to
its present home on the property of Captain Scott, where a three-story
building has been erected at a cost ot £2OOO.
The School is open to girls of from 8 to 11 years of age, to the
number of 21, which number its financial resources will not permit to
be exceeded. In some cases these are orphans, in others widows’
or widowers’ children. In a few instances parents pay a few shillings
(one to five) weekly, towards the support of their girls. Those who
pay tlie smaller amounts agree that the children shall remain in the
School for two or three years, and be afterwards apprenticed as
domestic servants for a like term by the Committee. Since its
establishment about eighty girls have been received, trained, and most
of them apprenticed.
The training, under a Matron (Mrs. Byrne) and a Governess
(Miss Salier), comprises instruction in cooking, general household
work, needle-work, and the rudiments of ordinary education.
A Sabbath-school is also conducted at “Lisgar,” by the kindness
of Miss Horniman, and it is a pleasing feature of the Institution that
ex-pupils if apprenticed within easy distance, attend regularly; while
those who live at too great a distance to admit of attendance continue
to regard the “ School” as a Home.
The income lor the year 1877 was —public subscriptions, £96;
earnings of the girls, about £2OO. While the expenditure for the same
year was about £350, leaving a deficit of say £SO, in view of which


the writer ventures to bespeak the kindly sympathy of the charitable;
such sympathy may be manifested either by a cash subscription or by
gifts of say wearing apparel, boots, groceries, fuel, vegetables, medi-
cines, rice, books, &c.
A Committee of ladies, headed by Lady Robinson as Patroness,
assists Mrs. Scott in the management.
The writer will be guilty of no breach of confidence if he states
that Captain and Mrs. Scott have made all needful legal provision for
the carrying on of the School after their connection with it shall have
“ ceased by reason of death.”
It may here be stated that in both the “Female School of In-
dustry ” and the “ Lisgar School ” work is done for outside families—
in the former, needle-work, in the latter, needle-work and washing.
At the end of the neat little Report of the “ School of Industry,” may
be found a list of charges for making articles of apparel or household
uses, ranging from table napkins at Id. each, to babies’ robes at
3s. 6d. each.
Next in order may be named two Institutions of kindred aims,
“The Sydney Infants’ Home” and “The Sydney Female Mission
Home.”
The aim or object of both these Institutions is to endeavour to prevent
girls who have committed one blunder, from going any further in the
wrong way, seeking by timely help and kindly sympathy to make easy
the return to right. Or using a simple illustration, the aim of these Insti-
tutions may be thus put —“ Straight is the line of duty,” some, however,
are drawn or pushed off this line ; these Institutions were founded in a
desire so to deal with these, that, their departure shall not be a
permanent one, but only a short detour, kind hearts helping them
back again to the straight line.
The “ Sy’dney Infants’ Home,”
formerly known as the “ Foundling Hospital ,” was originated in July,
1873, the prime mover being Mrs. E. B. Parnell, and the immediate
cause of its origination the prevalence at that time of infanticide
and child desertion. The first step was a letter in the Herald of 21st
July, 1873, signed “Kind Words,” in which Mrs. Parnell drew attention
to the desertion of babies by their mothers, and the increase of young
girls on the streets, and asks—‘ Are there not a few ladies who will join
me in a trial to reform these poor girls ?’ Among the earliest respondents
to this appeal were Mrs. G. F. Wise and Mrs. Heron. On the sth of
August, thirty or forty ladies met at Clarke’s Assembly Room, and by
adjournment in same place on 12th, the scheme was set fairly afoot,
subscriptions were solicited, and by the special liberality of a few, and
the ordinary liberality of others, a house was rented in Victoria-street,
Darlinghurst, and the first baby received on Wednesday, 3rd June,
1874. On Friday, 17th July, 1874, an infant was found on the door-
step of the Institution, and during the year nine others were so found.
At first every child offered was admitted without question, after-
wards the following was laid by the Committee as bases of operations :
1. Each application must be dealt with on its own merits. 2. The age


of the infant shall not exceed three months. 3. Each mother must
produce satisfactory testimony as to previous respectability. 4. The
father shall have deserted his child and be beyond the reach of the
law to enforce him to support it. During the second year it was
further resolved to admit in special cases, children of married people,
“ one of the parents being dead or having deserted the other.”
The death-rate is apparently high, not really so : first year, 50
per cent.; second, per cent.; third, 52£ per cent.; in connection
with these figures, the following facts should be kept in mind.
Second year, 40 were admitted: of these —11 were healthy, 9 poor
and emaciated, 10 dying or hopeless, 9 scrofulous or syphilitic
constitution.
Third year, 42 were admitted: of these—lo were healthy, 12 poor
and emaciated, 7 dying or hopeless, 13 scrofulous or syphilitic
constitution.
“Gorton,” Ashfield, the present home of the Institution, is really
a fine property of 10 acres, abutting on the Parramatta road, purchased
by Dr. Fischer for the Institution at a cost of £3,100, Mr. Thomas
Walker, of Yaralla, who has from the beginning been a true friend
to this and to many other Institutions, lent £2,000 to complete the
purchase, at 6 per cent, interest. At the time of the purchase, the
Committee believed the Parliament would help them, but in this
hope they were at fault, for after a debate on the item, during which
some strange ideas got vent, it was negatived by a majority of one
vote. It is to be hoped that Parliament will at some future time
recognize the necessity of rendering some pecuniary assistance.
The “ Home” is under the care of a Lady Superintendent, Miss
Trollope, who seems well fitted for the position. The rooms and their
furniture are scrupulously clean, and the children appear to be happy
and well cared for.
Little ones are still occasionally left on or near the premises,
twins had been so left two or three days before the writer’s visit.
Dr. Jones, of Ashfield, is the Hon. Medical Attendant;'Lady Deas-
Thomson, President; Mrs. Windeyer, Treasurer; Mrs. J. Smith,
Secretary.
Income for year ending June, 1877 : £6BB ss, 9d. which with a
balance of £604 6s. Bd. from 1876, gave £1,292 as available for the
year. Expenditure : about £l,OBO. Inmates in January, 1878: over
thirty infants, ten of whom were nursed by their mothers. The income
was derived from subscriptions and donations, a bazaar, a bequest,
payments from parents, sale of produce, and deposits in money boxes.
The Institution must become more and more dependent on ordinary
subscriptions, these, therefore, must be largely increased if the work
is to be carried on. Effective help may be given in the shape of
gifts of clothing, and help of this kind might be with ease afforded
by many.
Note.— Since the above was in print application has been made to the Hon, the
Colonial Secretary that a sum of money be placed upon the Estimates for the relief
of the Home from the burden which rests upon it. But Mr. Fitzpatrick informed
the deputation that the Government “find themselves precluded from applying to
Parliament for the assistance asked for, in the face of its recent refusal after a some-


■what acrimonious debate to vote money in aid of the Institution.” Thereupon, the
ladies of the management issued a pressing appeal to the public for help, in order to
avert the closing of the Home. The appeal signed, Mary E. VVindeyer, Hon.
Treasurer, thus closes—“ Will the generous public of New South Wales allow our
Institution to close for want of means. The expense of fitting up the building for
the hand-fed infants exhausted our slender resources, and without more help we
shall be again compelled to close our doors. We ask the public to pay the debt and
discharge the duty which the State repudiates. I cannot think that those who have
always answered with ready and open hand any cry of distress from other countries
will let our own waifs perish for want of timely succour.” A fairly liberal response
is following this appeal.
The second Institution has its home in Elizabeth-street, the date
of its origination is synchronous with the origination of the Foundling
Hospital (July 1873), and the design of its founders precisely the same,
the mitigation of the crime of infanticide. The first report contains
the following —
“The Sydney Female Mission Home
owes its origin to the following circumstances. In the month of
August, 1873, a few Christian ladies moved by the statements which
had appeared in the public prints, of immoralities, which were
prevalent in the City of Sydney, in which so many young females were
involved ; met together to consider whether any steps could be taken
to rescue from temptation some at least of those who were exposed to
its influences, and to reclaim any who had fallen through its power.
Several courses were suggested, such as—lst. An agency for the rescue
of those who may have fallen from virtue through the wiles of the
seducer; by locating them in families to try to save them from going
lower; 2nd. An Institution which should be for the open sinner a vestible
to the Female Eefuge; 3rd. The appointment of a Committee of ladies in
connection with the Lying-in Department of the Benevolent Asylum,
to deal with the cases of young women in a pregnant state, seeking
admission there, and to exercise a kindly supervision over them after
their confinement, &c.”
The house now occupied in Elizabeth-street, was opened as a
Home, November 18th, 1873. Mrs. Woods, the present Matron, then
accepted that position without salary.
At first prostitutes were admitted, but they are now excluded, and
the Home is now occupied by those who have not so far departed from
the right, but there is some hope of their recovery. There is room for
about twelve mothers and their babies, and the Home is generally full.
The household work, washing, cooking, &c., being done by the
inmates, no servants are needed ; the Home is, therefore, conducted
very economically.
Cases of a peculiarly distressing character have been here dealt
with. In a few instances, the Committee have proceeded against the
fathers of the children, with a view of compelling them to bear a share
in the burden.
The subscriptions of the charitable are much needed, to enable the
Committee to do the work of the “ Home” more effectually.


In this connection it will be well to notice another Association,
which had its origin in what I think should be called the “ dark days”
of August, 1873, namely,
u The Association fob the Promotion of Morality.”
The prime mover in this scheme was Dean Cowper, who first
of all, by letters to the Herald , drew attention to the “ gross moral
evils existing in the city.” A meeting was held in the Church
Society’s House, Philip-street, on Tuesday, sth August, attended by
the Bishop of Sydney, the Dean, several Clergymen of Church of
England, ministers of other Churches, and several laymen; the late
Mr. Fairfax presided. An adjourned meeting was held a week later
when the rules of the proposed Association, which had been prepared
by a 1 rovisional Committee, were accepted, and the Officers and Com-
mittee elected.
On Monday, Ist September, a public meeting was held in the
Masonic Hall, the Bishop of Sydney presiding. A statement of the
origination and constitution of the Association was read, and addresses
were delivered by the Chairman, the Dean, W. J. Foster, Esq., Eevs.
W. Curnow and J. Greenwood, and by Dr. Neild, and E. G. Eeading,
Esq. By these means the Association was fairly set afoot.
During the four years of its existence the Association has not been
idle, although but little is heard of it. Its present position may be
likened to that of a watchman; doing no active work, but ready and
willing at any moment to strike any blow for the promotion of morality.
Ihe President of the Association is the Bishop of Sydney ; the
Vice-President, the Very Eev. Dean Cowper; while the Secretaries are
Eev. G. C. Bode, and W. Crane, Esq.
Twenty-five years ago, for a man to become “a teetotaler” was to
expose himself to the sneers of his fellows. The times have changed
and manners too. Total Abstinence is now no sign of aberration of
intellect. It has become a respectable thing. As an outsider I
express the opinion that, all who think of the huge evils produced by
intoxicating drink will rejoice at this change ; for verily, as a pro-
ducer of vice and crime and consequent misery, intoxicating drink has
no rival, and the
‘‘New South Wales Alliance for the Suppression of Intemperance”
aiming at the prevention of this misery amongst us by striking at
its root, deserves “honourable mention.”
As a centre of operations the Temperance Hall was built in 1858.
The foundation stone being laid by Miss Denison, daughter of
Governor Denison, on Wednesday, 14th July. Since that date an
addition has been made to the building in the shape of the New
Temperance Hall. Thus there are two large halls for lectures,
smaller rooms for meetings of various Societies, a dining-room, &c.
It is hoped that other adjoining property may in time be bought, * and
a fine Temperance Hotel erected on it.
While the Halls are let for general public uses, the main object
for which they were built is not forgotten, and a weekly Temperance


meeting is held or Lecture delivered, and every endeavour used to
induce the people to become pledged total abstainers. Indeed, any
person so desiring may “ sign the pledge” any day.
The “ Alliance ” came vigorously to the front when it was proposed
to grant a license to the lessee of the Refreshment Room at the
Redfern Terminus, and although £lOO were spent in the agitation
against it, the agitators were successful. Much has also been done by
the “Alliance” in the way of petitioning against the Sunday opening
of public-houses.
The funds of the Society are derived from public subscriptions,
from the fees of membership, and the proceeds of hire of the Halls.
The “Order of Good Templars,” the “Sons and Daughters of
Temperance,” and “ Bands of Hope,” may also be named as various
regiments in the one grand army, leagued against the one woeful foe.
Some there are, the writer amongst them, who think there is but
small hope that any appreciable diminution in the drink traffic will be
achieved by the advocacy of total abstinence (spite of the change in
public opinion stated above, the consumption of intoxicating drink
increases relatively faster than the increase of population') but who
nevertheless have hope that something may be done by a flank move-
ment. It may be assumed that the consumption of drink is increased
by the multiplication of facilities for drinking; and here, as well as at
home, there are two evils, by which this increase and its consequent
huge evil is increased. First, the benefit to the revenue of the country
by duties and licenses. Second, the recklessness which marks the
granting of licenses. A few gentlemen have lately started
A Liquor License Amendment Association,
and this Association has been, and is, working very energetically.
Let us hope that a result of this working something may be effected in
the way of putting license granting under rigid limitations, and thereby
minimizing the evils of our drinking customs. Is it too much to hope
that the Permissive principle aimed at by the United Kingdom Alliance
may be achieved ?
At any rate these Societies rightly claim a place in our statement
or Essay on the Institutions which aim at the suppression of vice
and crime.
Note. —From the first Annual Report of the Association, published since the
above was in type, we learn that —the date of establishment was January 2nd,
1877; two influential deputations have waited on the Governments, to urge the
principles of the Association. Two Lectures have been delivered under its auspices
—the sum of £92 has been received and £B7 expended ; that Mr. Holdsworth has
been appointed Secretary.
The aims of the Association are: 1. The immediate suspension of the power to
grant further licenses until amended legislation be effected ; 2. The Sunday sale of
intoxicants be prohibited except to travellers ; 3. Transfer of licensing power from
magistrates to people.
President, Sir Alfred Stephen, C. 8., K.C.M.G. ; Vice Presidents, Lord Bishop
of Sydney, Rev. G. Hurst and Dr. Neild; Treasurer, George Palmer.


How much of the comfort, and also of the discomfort, of our social
life, depends upon domestic servants, all who need their services can
best testify; and these will, beyond all others, regard with satisfaction
any attempt to elevate the principles of this class, which forms so
important a factor in our social problem.
There are in Sydney two institutions whose aim it is to do this,
and taking these in the order of their establishment we must first speak
of the
“Sydney Female Home,”
commonly called “The Home.”
On 20th March, 1858, a public meeting was held in the School of
Arts, at which the then Governor (Denison) presided; the object of this
meeting being to decide whether such a Home was needed—if needed,
whether the public would be likely to support it, and whether it would
be appreciated by the class for which it was intended. The result of
this and subsequent meetings was the establishment of the Home in a
house belonging to Mr. J. F. Josephson, that gentlemen allowing them
the use of it for £25 less than usual rental. The objects of the
establishment being to provide a temporary home for the reception of
governesses, young females employed in business and servants out of
employment, without regard to creed or country. The “Home” in
addition to these provisions is a Registry Office, by the help of which
situations are secured for those needing them. Many who are not in-
mates become members of the “ Home” by the payment of ss, a year,
and secure thereby prior claim to help in obtaining a situation when
needed. Every endeavour is used to secure this department of the
Institution from the evil of recommending worthless servants; according
to the first Report “ None are allowed to hire from this Institution until
a reply has been received from the last mistress in answer to a letter of
enquiry from the Society, which letter embraces the following
questions : When did enter your service ? When did she leave
your service? Was her conduct during that period strictly moral,
honest, and sober ? Was she well conducted ? It will be readily
supposed that if this plan is carried out faithfully there will be at any
rate ground for the assumption that a servant so hired is fairly eligible.
The extent to which this department is utilized may be gathered from
the fact that in the years 1873-4 there were “ 920 applications for
servants.”
The charge for residence is at the rate of 11s. 6d. a week to be
paid in advance, “ and money prepaid for any time not expired on
leaving shall be returned pro rata” The “Home,” situate in Cowper
Terrace, 23 Clarence-street, at the rear of St. Philip’s Church, contains
ten rooms, which are nearly always fully occupied. It is managed by
a matron and one servant. Some of the domestic work is dme by the
inmates.
Each Report contains the Rules of the “ Home.” They are few,
simple, and good. The matron reads family prayers daily at 7.30 am.
and 9 p.m. Another excellent feature is that, through the kindness
of the Rev. Canon O’Reilly, the library of St. Philip’s is open to the
inmates, the matron may select suitable books for perusal. Inmates


have the further privilege of obtaining medical advice during residence
from the Hon. Medical Officer, Mr. A. Roberts.
The Hon. Lady Robinson is Patroness, Mrs. Allen, President,
Mrs. J. H. Baillie, Treasurer, Miss Mackie the Secretary, and Lady
Hay, Mrs. Henry Moore, Mrs. O’Reilly, Mrs. Wright, and Miss Hassall
leading members of the management,
It is nearly self-supporting; the income derived from board, &c.,
of inmates being supplemented by say £IOO in subscriptions per annum,
the subscribers obtaining servants without fees.
In fine, “The Home ” is a needed institution, is well managed,
and realizes fully the objects of its foundation.
The second Institution of this kind has its home in Elizabeth-
street, between King and Market-streets, and is called the
“ Catholic Female Home and Registry Office, ”
It is of recent foundation, the “Prospectus ” bearing the date “ Aug.
30, 1877,” although strictly speaking, it is a revival of a similar home
established about 1859 or 1860, on what is now “Green Park,”
Darlinghurst, afterwards removed to Belgrave Terrace. From various
causes the original scheme lapsed, but at the above date steps were
taken by the Rev. Yicar-General, J. F. Sheridan to revive the Insti-
tution.
The objects of the promoters are declared to be—(lst) a training
house for young and inexperienced women out of service, or who may
desire to qualify themselves to become good servants; (2nd) a tempor-
ary home; (3rd) a registry office.
While the Home is under the immediate direction of Miss Carton,
the Matron, it is “under the general supervision of the Sisters of
Mercy of St. Patrick’s Church, who will devote their best efforts to
carry out the objects which the promoters have in view; they are so
anxious to realize the prime objects of this good work—namely, the
protection, training, and assisting female servants, that they will permit
nothing to mar or prejudice the attainment of so desirable a result.”
Those who have the management of this “Home” aim at this
result—“ that a girl coming from the Catholic Female Home, holding
a certificate of good character will be a sufficient guarantee to employers
that she is all that she should be—honest, industrious, intelligent,
modest, and obliging.”
The domestic work of the “Home” is done by one paid servant and
the inmates. The charge for board and residence is lls. a week,
payable in advance, there being a provision for re-payment for unex-
pired time in the event of an engagement, as in the sister Home.
The Registry Office fee is Is. for inmates, and 2s. 6d. for others.
Of these two Institutions it may be said that, although they make
no loud claim for pecuniary aid (being to a large extent self-supporting)
they have a strong claim on the sympathies of all who employ domestic
servants.
It is assuredly a wise thing by providing these temporary homes
for servants “out of place,” to seek to keep them from such boarding-
houses as those they might enter, and thereby, to some extent at least,


secure them from strong temptations to error, and moreover, tend to
the cultivation of those principles which lessen materially the friction
of our domestic life.
The duty of providing for the comfort of the class to which the city
owes so much, appears to have been recognised nearly 40 years ago, for
in a paper for the year 1839 it is recorded “ steps were taken to estab-
lish a
Sailors’ Home”;
but no effective steps were taken until 7th April, 1859, when a meeting
was called, a provisional committee formed, and arrangements made to
hold a Public Meeting on the subject. On that committee were Messrs.
H. Mort, Alex. Bonar, E. W. Cameron, Alex. Stuart, S. North, W.P.M.,
Capt. Coutts, Sewell, Lieut. Sadlier, and Rev. Mr. Threlkeld. The
Public Meeting was under the presidency of Sir Daniel Cooper (Governor
Denison being unable to attend), and the scheme was fairly floated.
Application was speedily made to the Government for the grant
of a suitable site, the result of the application being that the land on
which stood the old Water Police Court and Shipping Office, adjoining
the Mariners’ Church, was promised, on condition that the committee
should first secure £2,000. Sir D. Cooper gave the guarantee, and by
7th May, 1860, tbesum of £2,129 3s. 9d. had been collected.
The committee endeavoured at first to rent a suitable house, but
being unable to do so, it was resolved to build at once. Messrs. Weaver
and Kemp prepared plans. The tender of Mr, Lavers was accepted for
the north wing (the present erection), and by the close of 1864 the
place was ready for the reception of sailors. Several times during
the erection was the exchequer exhausted, and more than once the
Directors made themselves responsible for a bank overdraft, and once
when the Institution was £4OO in debt, two of the Directors offered
£lOO each if three other gentlemen would give a like amount. Messrs.
Towns, Holt, and Fitzgerald did so. The financial tightness of the
Home may be said to have ceased on the day of the memorable
pic-nicto Clontarf, during the visit of H.R.H. Prince Alfred, 25th Feb-
ruary, 1869, by which the sum of £628 7s. Bd. was received; H.R.H.
also contributed £5O, which was applied to the purchase of a special
library.
The “ Home ” is governed by a Patron, a President, six Directors,
a Treasurer, and a Secretary; and while there is no need to clamour
for subscriptions to carry on the ordinary work of the Home, the
Directorate hope by public assistance to complete the building.
The Home, with adjoining cottage, affords berthing for about
seventy inmates, and it is occasionally full. There are large dining
and sitting halls, the tables of which are supplied with papers, while the
dietary is liberal and good. The charge is 17s. 6d. a week, and, but
that some forget to pay, the Home would be self-supporting. The
bad debts have averaged about £2OO a year. That those who frequent
the Home have confidence in the officers is shown by the freedom with
which they deposit their wages with the Superintendent, feeling un-
doubtedly, that their money is much safer there than in their own
pockets.


One decided indirect benefit which, the Home has wrought is to
be found in the vast improvement in the quarters offered to the sailors
by boarding-house keepers.
Captain Robinson was the first Superintendent, and he held that
office from the opening of the Home, in December, 1864, to his deatli
in 1877. He was succeeded by Captain Chatfield, who now holds the
appointment.
Mr. North, W.P M., was the first Secretary ; he was succeeded by
Captain I Hixson, who now fills that office. The first President was
Sir Daniel Cooper ; the next and present President, Sir W. M. Manning.
Benjamin Buchanan, Esq., is the Hon. Treasurer.
While the interests of the mercantile marine are thus provided for,
those of the more popular naval seamen have also been remembered.
The late lamented Commodore Coodenough, who had ever at heart the
welfare of his men, felt that a place was needed to which seamen and
marines might resort when ashore, and, but for the sad breaking off of
his purposes, by the fell spear of those who knew not what they did,
there is no doubt he would have been the founder of the house which
bears his honoured name. His successor, Commodore Hoskins, how-
ever, carried out the idea, and the
“Goodenougii Naval Seamen’s House”
became an accomplished fact. The building is situated in Princes-
street N., over the Argyle Cutting, and is cosy enough.
Every provision is made for the comfort of those who use the house,
and these have not been few, for according to an account of the House
which appeared in the Sydney Mail for January 26, 1878 (furnished, I
believe, by Mrs. Hoskins, perhaps the best friend the Institution has),
during the first 18 months of its existence 8,147 beds and about 14,000
meals bad been supplied—l4so meals in one month. There are 35
beds, while 50 or 60 are sometimes in request, surely pointing to tfie
necessity for a larger building. The men may have baths and a
hot breakfast in time to be on board by 7 a.m., dinner, tea and supper.
There is a library, a good supply of magazines and newspapers, indoor
and outdoor games, &e., &c.—indeed there seems nothing wanting
which the men can reasonably desire, the charge for all being 17s. 6d.
a week, as at the “Sailors’ Home.” Captain Hixon (the energetic
Secretary of the sister institution), Mr. John Alger, Sir Ceo. L. Innes,
and Mr. H. E. A. Allan constitute the Committee.
The “Sailors’ Home” and the “Coodenough Naval Seamen’s
House” have a strong claim on the sympathies of the Sydney folk.
This is the most fitting connection in which to introduce the
“ Bethel Union,”
which was established in 1822, to afford an opportunity for Protestant
Christians of all denominations to unite and co-operate with each other
in the endeavour to afford religious instruction to seamen of all nations
visiting the port of Sydney.


r lhe Union employs a minister (Eev. T. G-ainford), whose duty it
is to conduct services in the Mariner’s Church which overlooks the
Circular Quay near the Sailors’ Home, and to visit all the ships in port
in order to reach more effectually the sailors who may be found there.
He also interests himself largely in promoting temperance among
seamen, indeed in every way seeking to benefit this large, and too much
neglected, class.
On the Committee list is to be found the names of many of our
leading merchants, who thus manifest a laudable interest in the well-
being of those who so largely minister to the prosperity of our city.
The income ranges from £l6O to £2OO, the expenditure being
about the same. It is to be regretted that the funds of the Union are
at the present inadequate to its needs. Energetic measures are being
adopted by the Committee to increase the income, that the work of the
Union may be more effectively carried on.
Very praiseworthy is the aim of the
Discharged Prisoners’ aid Society,
which was originated in August, 1874, at a public meeting held in the
School of Arts. Its basis is unsectarian; and its management is in the
hands of laymen.
The foundation-fact of this and like Societies may be thus stated—
the punishment which Society metes to those who have paid to the
uttermost farthing, the punishment laid upon them by the laws of the
country for law breaking, is often the hardest punishment they have to
face. So heavy indeed, that it drives many a poor fellow to despera-
tion and pushes him back to a life of crime.
Por the hardened, perhaps no relief from this is possible; but
there are many who are not “ old offenders,” and whose first acquaint-
ance with prison is enough for them, many who, when they turn their
backs on the cells, resolve never again to turn their faces thither-
ward. But how hard it is to keep this resolve, when the hard merciless
visage of Society is set as it were a flint against them, but few know.
With money sufficient for but a few days, few friends amongst the
honest to shelter him, or say a kind word to him, a man marked by the
police, he likely enough soon begins to feel that all the world is against
him, that —*
The world is all up-hill when we would do
All down-hill when we suffer.
It needs but little thought to enable us to feel that the straight path
of right-doing, is a path difficult for such a man to reach. Macmillan’s
Magazine for December, 1873, contains an article by Lord De Mauley,
on “ Crime, Criminals, and Punishment,” from which we may here quote
a few words bearing upon the subject in hand. “We could not well
adopt a better expedient than our present one for replenishing our
prisons. We open the door, tell a man to walk out, and take care of
himself; he returns to society, which without the passport of character
refuses to readmit him, he falls back, from inability to sustain himself,
upon the pursuits of his former life. The circle of events finds him
again in durance, probably under a different name, to swell the


numbers of our criminal statistics. England requires a great national
training ground—a half-way house between the prison and the indus-
trial world—a refuge for those unable to procure a livelihood for
themselves. The spasmodic philanthropy of Prisoners’ aid Societies
may do much, but the question is a national one. We are bound to
care for the future of the freed man, to remove temptation from him”
(or him from temptation), “to guide him, help him, and point out the
road to honest employment.” This Society proposes to meet these
unhardened ones at the gaol gates as they come out —take them by
the hand, and by a little human kindness and trifling aid—help them
up again.
During its first year, this Society received £74 10s. 6d., and
expended £57 2s. 3d. and was instrumental in obtaining employment
for thirty prisoners, mostly from Darlinghurst. The report of the
Society for 1877, shows that during that year, of 83 applicants, 74 had
received assistance from the funds, in the following shape—“ Supplied
with tools, 6 ; with blankets, boots, clothing and food, free passes to
country, &c., 52 ; shipped as seamen, 5 ; employment found, 7 ; money
loans, 4. While assistance was refused to cases unworthy of relief as
habitual drunkards, &c., 2 ; failed to return after making application,
6 ; not coming within the scope of the Society, 1.
The balance sheet shows that for 1877, the receipts from public
contributions and from Government, together with small balance from
1876, amounted to £139 Os. 3d., about £IOO of which has been
expended.
The general method is to get the men out of Sydney, away from
the strongest temptation ; to find them employment on public works,
procure a free railway pass, giving them it may be a blanket, and a few
shillings when they are seated in the railway carriage. In many cases
the money advanced, has been repaid, this point indeed is pressed
upon all.
The President of the Society is W. C. Windeyer, Esq., M.L.A. ;
the Hon. Treasurer and Secretary, Charles Oowper, Esq., Sheriff.
We now come to Class C. of the first section of our task—
Reformative agencies. This class comprises two kindred Institutions,
known, not by the misnomer Magdalen Hospital or the like, but
“ The Sydney Female Refuge ,” and the “ House of the Good Samaritan ,”
the aim of both being to lessen the evil designated “ social,” by
gathering from the streets the females yclept “ unfortunate.”
The
“ Female Refuge ”
is to be found in Pitt-street, near the Benevolent Asylum. The
site was formerly occupied by a a “ House of Correction ” ; the Minute
Book to which the Committee, at the request of J. S. Harrison, Esq.,
Treasurer, gave me free access, shows that at one of the earliest
meetings arrangements were made for the removal of the “treadmill.”
The prison buildings have, however, been removed, and the present
building, which is of plainest exterior, erected thereon by the Com-
mittee, at a cost of over £4OOO.


The first meeting was held August 21, 1848, under the presidency
of Sir Alfred Stephen, there being also present the Revs. Archdeacon
Cowper, Ralph Mansfield, Thomas W. Bodenham, J. Beazley,
W. B. Boyce, Cape, P. P. Agnew, Dr. Ross, and J. B. Laughton,
with A. C. G. Owen. Having resolved upon the establishment of such
an Institution, the next step was to secure premises for its housing.
A deputation waited upon the Colonial Secretary of the day and asked
for the building known as Carter’s Barracks. After a delay of two or
three months, however, the result was —Carter’s Barracks to Archbishop
Polding, and House of Correction adjoining, to Refuge Committee.
In the negotiations concerning this matter there seems to have been a
want of openness and fair dealing on the part of the Government, but
space will not allow a full statement here. In the course of these
negotiations, the Colonial Secretary suggested what, to those who
look at it from a common sense stand-point, appears a good plan, viz.,
an amalgamation of the Protestant and Roman Catholic Institutions.
The Protestant party to whom the suggestion was first made, wrote to
the Rev Dr. Gregory; that gentleman replied, and enclosed a copy
of the rules of the proposed Roman Catholic Refuge. The Protestants
replied and sent a copy of their rules, and also suggested that the
Committee and Officers of the United Society should be elected at a
public meeting, President and Secretary to be laymen, Sisters of Charity
to be eligible as members of the Ladies’ Committee ; but the result
was, as all who knew anything of theological animosities knew it would
be. There must be two Houses of Refuge.
The Protestant party then said to the Colonial Secretary, “ We
have done our part to effect the amalgamation you suggested, but
have failed; give us now the promised premises that without further
delay we may begin our work.” The “House of Correction” was
handed over to them, and after some needed alteration, carried out
chiefly under the energetic oversight of the late Mr. Thomas Cowlishaw,
the building was prepared for the reception of those for whose weal it
was intended.
The general management is in the hands of a Committee of not
more than fifteen. Sir Alfred Stephen, Knight, K.C.M G., is its Presi-
dent ; Mr. J. S. Harrison, Treasurer; and Mr. W. Crane, Secretary ;
Dr. Roberts, Medical Adviser. The general supervision of the internal
economy of the Refuge, admission of inmates, &c., rests with a Visiting
Committee of Ladies, of which Committee Lady E. Deas Thomson is
President; Mrs. J. H. Goodlet, Secretary.
Those who desire to become inmates of the Refuge may do so upon
recommendation of a magistrate, keeper of a gaol, any member of the
institution, or any minister of religion, whether member or not. While
the moral reformation of the inmates is the prime object of the Refuge,
they are not allowed to live idle lives, but habits of industry are sought
to be formed bv employment which is provided for them—washing and
needlework. A large sum is earned every year by the inmates ; during
the eleven years ending 31st December, 1877, the average annual
receipts from this source was £520. In 1877 the amount was
£751 10s. Id. It was a part of the original design that a portion
of the money so earned by an inmate should be given to her when she


left the “Eefuge” This, however, is not now the case, but inmates
leaving for situations, having been twelve months in Eefuge, are
provided with an entire outfit of about £4 in value.
As the list is a short one, the scale of charges may here be given :
“ Families’ washing—Mangling clothes, Is. 3d. a doz.; ironing, Is. 9d.;
starched, 2s. 3d. Petticoats, 4d. each ; dresses, Bd. to Is.; blankets, Is.
a pair; counterpanes, 6d. to Is.; mosquito curtains, 6d. to Is.; drawing-
room curtains, 6d. to Is. Occasional parcels, bed, table, and body linen,
2s. 3d. per doz.; shirts, 3d. each; dresses, 6d. to Is. 6d.; petticoats, 4d.
to Bd. ; towels and pillow slips, Is. 3d. per doz.
The inmates, numbering forty, appeared happy enough—indeed
every provision seems to be made for their comfort. As might be
expected, when the free and unrestrained character of their previous
life is remembered, a variable proportion of those who enter cannot
endure the restraints necessary, and at their own request leave the
Eefuge. On the other hand, many have remained, and after faithfully
serving their term, have been restored to their friends, or have entered
service, some of them eventually being married. The Institution labours
under no financial burden. Mr. Harrison kindly gave me a statement
of receipts and expenditure for the last eleven years, and in nearly every
year there was a “ balance in hand.”
A female missionary Mrs. Gregory is employed at a salary of £75
a year, whose work it is to “ go about doing good” by seeking to induce
unfortunates to enter the Eefuge.
“ The House of the Good Samaritan,”
popularly known as the “ House of the Good Shepherd,” was founded
in the year 1848, chiefly through the exertions of the late Archbishop
Folding, and theEev. Father Farrelly ; the operations of the Institution
being originally carried on in the building known as Carter’s Barracks,
formerly used as a debtors’ prison. In course of time, the necessities
of the work led to the erection of the present noble building at a cost
of £lO,OOO. The whole having been met, the building is free from
debt, as is also the convent building adjoining (in which twenty-five
sisters are in residence) mainly through the exertions of the Very Eev.
Dean Sheridan, who, in various ways collected the sum of near £B,OOO.
The “House” is under the management of the Sisters of the Order
of the “Good Samaritan.”
They whom the Institution is designed to benefit may obtain
admission on the recommendation of a clergyman, or by personal
application, while some have been taken by the friends. The probation
term has hitherto been twelve months, but it has been found neces-
sary to extend it to two years.
The present number of inmates is sixty-two, and, as in the adjoining
sister institution, they are not allowed to live lives of idleness. The
whole of the domestic work of the house is done by them. They also
contribute towards their own maintenance by washing and sewing for
the public. The washing tariff at present is washing starched articles
3s. a dozen; mangled ditto, Is. 6d.; small pieces, Is.; dresses, Bd.
each; blankets, counterpanes, &c., 6d. to Is. each.


This labour of the penitents is the source of a respectable amount
towards the expenses of the House, and is supplemented by annual
collections in the Roman Catholic Churches of the diocese. No help
is, or has been, given by the Government.
We proceed now to deal with
SECTION 11. of our work, which will comprise agencies which
aim at the alleviation op want and suffering; and working on the
same lines as those on which we wrought in the first Section, those
agencies may be thus classified —
1. Curative Health Society.
2. Alleviative Infirmary and Dispensary, &c., &c.
In generations back of the present it was the general practice of
the mass of mankind to ascribe all suffering to the dispensation of
Providence, i.e., to the design and hand of God. Thoughtful observers
now however see that by far the larger proportion, say nine tenths
of humanity’s woes, arise from humanity’s folly, and they feel, and
tell out, that to ascribe this to God is sheer blasphemy.
The Health Society of New South Wales
is based upon this opinion. It owes its origin to its indefatigable
Secretary, Mr. H. Burton Bradley, who, by letters and speeches, has
sought to stir up his fellow-citizens to the recognition of the claims
which man’s body has upon man’s care. The first public meeting, at
which the Society was floated, was held in the Masonic Hall. The
first President was Sir W. M. Manning; Treasurer, C. Lester, Esq.;
Secretary, H. Burton Bradley, Esq.; and the declared objects of the
Society are—“ 1, To diffuse among all classes plain information on the
subjects of Health and Disease, particularly as these are connected with
cleanliness, ventilation, and infection; 2. To prevent the adulteration
of food and liquors; 3. To induce and assist people by personal
influence, example, and encouragement, to live in accordance with
recognised laws whereby health is maintained and disease prevented ;
4. To seek the removal of all noxious influences by means of legislation
and by a legitimate pressure upon the executive authorities.”
Since its inauguration the Society has not been idle. Two
excellent lectures have been delivered. Two or three leaflets on health
topics have been printed and largely circulated. Several deputations
have waited on Ministers in order to urge the necessity of sanitary
legislation. This Society will encourage, and to some extent guide,
the increased public attention to sanitary subjects now being manifested.
Since the foregoing was written the Society has put forth a project for
a Model Lodging House Company, which is now successfully floated.
In dealing with those Institutions which aim at the alleviation of
want and suffering, the first place may well be given to the


Sydney Infirmary and Dispensary—the oldest of them all.
Very soon after the arrival of the “first fleet” in “ Sydney Cove,”
it became necessary to make provision for the housing of the sick, and
we read in the early records “ the Governor’s tent was erected on the
eastern, and the sick tents on the western side of the Cove.” The
population of the settlement increasing, canvas gave place to timber,
and timber to stone, until at length the erection of the existing
buildings was resolved upon by the building Governor, Lachlan Mac-
quarie ; and this was the method employed. Plans were prepared by
the Colonial Architect; and Messrs. D’arcy Wentworth, Blaxcell, and
Eiley agreed to build the Hospital “ according to plans and specifica-
tions” on these terms : they must receive from the King’s stores a
given quantity of spirits, and, for four years, the sole right to purchase,
import, and retail 15,000 gallons of spirits a year. The terms were
agreed to, and the “ Eum Hospital ” was built. The foundation stone
was laid with some ceremony by Mrs. Macquarie on Wednesday,
30th October, 1811. The scheme comprised “ a central building and
two detached wings,” that is to say, the Infirmary of to-day, the Mint
building, and the centre portion of the House of Assembly.
The Hospital received its first sick in 1815. “ Government General
Orders, Sydney, 20th July, 1815. —The new Military Hospital being
now completed and ready for the accommodation of the sick, Colonel
Molle, commanding the 46th Regiment, will be pleased to direct the
sick of the corps to be removed to the new Hospital on Monday next,
24th instant. —By command of His Excellencv the Governor. —
H. C. Antill, Major.”
Por some years (to 1820) a part of the central building was occupied,
not only for hospital uses, but as a court of justice also, and many a
man heard his death-doom in the building erected to save life.
In 1828 a society called the Dispensary was established, which
administered medicine and gave advice to out-door patients, and was
extensively and increasingly useful, until the year 1845, when, after
some correspondence, the Hospital buildings were handed over to the
Dispensary authorities; and from that time it has been the “ Sydney
Infirmary and Dispensary'"; the main condition of the transfer being
that the Institution should receive at a charge to the Government not
exceeding hare cost of maintenance (at present 2s. 3d. per diem), the
persons for whom the buildings were erected—soldiers, sailors, and
the indigent sick. For these, in 1875-6, the Government paid
£5,864 13s. 3d., yielding, of course, no profit to the Institution.
It is somewhat strange that, although at the time of the transfer
(1845) it was ordered that a free grant of the land and buildings should
issue, such grant lias not yet been given. A Select Committee was
appointed Ist March, 1870, to consider the expediency of giving the
grant; and its Report, which, for five reasons recommended the issue,
was adopted in September same year. In April, 1873, a Royal Com-
mission was appointed to investigate public Institutions, and the
medical evidence went for pulling down, not renovating the building,
a renovation having been suggested by the architect, to cost
about £lB,OOO.


Owing to an emphatic public outcry against the old buildings,
a temporary wooden hospital has been erected at a cost of about £5,000,
and paid for by the Government; the necessity for such erection arising
out of the diseased state of the old buildings rendering surgical opera-
tions dangerous. These old buildings were vacated in January, 1877.
Energetic steps are now being taken towards the demolition of
the old buildings and the erection upon the same site of a 200-hed
Hospital for acute cases. The sum of £16,000 towards this object is
now in the Treasurers hands ; and a deputation waited on the Colonial
Secretary (The Hon, M. Fitzpatrick) February 12, 1878, in order to
secure, if possible, an issue of the grant, and the placing on the Esti-
mates of a sum of money to supplement the money in hand. Judging
from the tone of the Colonial Secretary’s reply, there is some prospect
of something definite being done, assuming, of course, the continuance
in office of the present Ministry.
Up to March, 1868, male patients had been nursed by male
nurses, but in that month there arrived a Lady Superintendent and
five Aurse-training Sisters, chosen by the Queen of Nurses, Florence
Nightingale ; their passage was defrayed by a grant of Parliament,
Mr. Parkes being Premier. Miss Osborne remains, but the five Sisters
are all away, one of them having become Matron of the Prince Alfred
Hospital, Melbourne, another Matron of the Benevolent Asylum,
Sydney. Their places, however, are filled by nurses trained in the
Hospital.
The Infirmary can accommodate 196 patients, —at the close of
1877, there were 167 inmates. During the year 1877, the number
admitted was 2,232. Accident and urgent cases attended to by the
staff but not admitted, 1,411. Number treated by the District Surgeons,
6,415 —801 of these being visited at their own homes. Making a total
of over 10,000 patients, who have received help from this charity
during the year. The total receipts for 1877 was £14,241 12s. 4d., of
which amount £5,479 2s. was paid by the Government for support of
pauper patients, and £482 subsidy for Training Staff. Total expendi-
ture for the year was £13,352 18s. 9d.
This Institution is doing a great, grand, good work in Sydney,
and has strong claims on the aid of the charitable.
Without adhering to a chronological method, we will now deal
with an Institution which will supplement, not supplant, the Sydney
Infirmary and Dispensary.
In the account of the “Sailors’ Home,” reference was made to the
“memorable pic-nic to Clontarf, 25th February, 1869.” Readers
would at once recognize the reference as to the attempted assassination
of H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, which then and there took place.
The attempt failed, the would-be assassin paid the uttermost penalty,
the Prince recovered, and the people were glad. It is fit matter for
thankfulness that this gladness did not find vent in the absurdly stupid
and senseless British fashion of firing of squibs, the mounting of
rockets, and general explosion of gunpowder. A happy thing it was
that New South Wales had in it such a man as Mr. Alfred Roberts,


who could turn this gratitude universal, into a channel of universal
and permanent good—the founding of the
“Prince Alfred Memorial Hospital.”
Mr. Poberts, as one of the Infirmary Surgeons, had for some time
insisted most strongly on the unhealthy condition of the old buildings,
and the, for many reasons, necessity of a renovation of the establishment,
and his agitation had been so far successful as to induce the Hon.
Henry Parkes, to promise to put upon the Estimates, a sum sufficient
for the purpose. Before anything could come of this promise, came the
event of Clontarf, and the consequent thank-offering of the colonists. As
soon as the recovery of H.E.H. was assured, a public meeting was
summoned, and a working committee formed, the result being that over
£21,000 was raised within six months; and the sum was offered to the
Directorate of the Infirmary, to enable them to erect a Memorial Hospital
on the site of the present main front building of the Sydney Infirmary.
The Board at first accepted, but subsequently declined the offer. The
money being thus thrown back upon the Memorial Fund Committee,
steps were taken to “ ascertain in what manner it could be otherwise
utilized to the greatest advantage and in accordance with the true
spirit if not with the letter of the original resolutions.” The informa-
tion collected showed that public opinion strongly favoured the erection
of a General Hospital. A site was found in the University Dom ain, and
with the concurrence of the Senate, the Crown in April, 1873, made by
Act of Parliament, a grant of eleven acres of land, situated on the
western slopes of the University Domain, adjoining the Missenden road;
the grant containing several provisions, which we have not here space
to reproduce. An “ Act of Incorporation” was passed April 3rd, 1873,
and a Board appointed. During the interval between the incorpora-
tion and the actual beginning of building operations, the Directors
were anxiously occupied in the preparation of a design for a complete
Hospital which should embrace all the improvements and appliances
which the progress of medical science could suggest; although only
a portion of such an Hospital could be presently built. The
enthusiastic Secretary, Mr. A. Poberts, having occasion to visit Europe
gave much labour to the inspection of Hospitals, and to the investiga-
tion of the most approved hospital methods there. The information
thus obtained was largely utilized by the Board in the preparation of
the design for what, when complete, will be one of the foremost
Hospitals in the world. During Mr. Eoberts’s visit to England, he
took steps to secure for the “ Prince Alfred” the sympathy (other than
pecuniary) of their E.H.H. the Prince and Princess of Wales. This
was promptly and gracefully acceded, the Prince and Princess signify-
ing their desire to be the Patrons of the Hospital, and the Princess
that the children’s ward should bear her name. The Hospital also bears
the Arms of H.E.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, by his special consent.
At length the design being matured, plans prepared, contracts
entered into, operations towards the erection were begun, and the
foundation stone was laid by his Excellency Sir Hercules Eobinson.
The works in progress, or to be at once tendered for, will cost
£60,000, and provide about 160 beds.


Through the kindness of Mr. Roberts, I have before me the
Architects’ (Messrs. Mansfield Brothers) description of the proposed
complete Hospital, with plans, &c.. It is impossible here to reproduce
that description. It must suffice to say that it contemplates ultimate
provision for 350 beds, is upon the principle of detached pavilions and
administrative buildings, with open corridor communication.
“ A definite scheme for a University Medical School, in connec-
tion with the Hospital, has been laid down and formally approved of
by the Royal College of Surgeons of England and many of the leading
teachers, and can be established as soon as the University and
Hospital are ready.” It is not easy to overrate the importance of this
part of the scheme.
For support this Hospital will be dependent on the charity of the
people, supplemented by the usual subsidy from the general revenue.
In Victoria-street, Darlinghurst, stands
“St. Vincent’s Hospital.”
This Hospital is “under the care of the Sisters of Charity,” and
therefore, although open to the sick of all creeds, is primarily a
Roman Catholic Institution.
The “ Sisters of Charity ” came to the colony in 1838, and accord-
ing to their universal usage, sought out the suffering in order to aid
them. For many years they could only visit the sick in their own
homos, but in 1857, they purchased a property at the northern end of
Victoria-street, and there opened a school and an hospital, devoting at
first one ward to hospital uses, but eventually the whole of the lower
part of the building. The demands upon their help increasing, they
in 1870 built the present Hospital. The land had been theirs for
many years, having been granted to them for hospital uses by
Governor Fitzroy, just before he left the colony in 1855. The erection
entailed a debt of £12,000, towards which £l,OOO was granted from
the revenue. This debt has been a heavy burden on the Sisters, but
year after year has seen the gradual extinction until it'is now, I
believe, extinguished; this being accomplished it is to be supposed
that steps will be taken to complete the original design, that the
Institution may be more widely useful. Application for aid in some
shape has been repeatedly made (the latest March, 1878) to the
Government, but excepting the £l,OOO named above, without avail;
the probable reason being that it is regarded as a sectarian Hospital.
That it is so the Sisters deny, and point to the fact that it is largely
used by Protestant sick. Of 347 admitted in 1876, 117 were pro-
fessed Protestants. On the occasion of my visit to the Hospital the
Superioress assured me that in connection with admission no question
was asked as to religion, “indeed,” she added, “a young woman was
admitted yesterday and I do not know now what her religion is.”
The Hospital, which contains two wards, is under excellent manage-
ment, and receives abundant honorary medical help. In December,
1877, there were twenty-five male and twenty female inmates, while
during the year about 350 in-patients had been treated.
There are a few private apartments for ladies or gentlemen who


being able to pay for them, may desire the nursing, quiet, and atten-
tion to he had in an hospital. The charge for each apartment, with
attendance, food, and medicine is three guineas a week, each patient
to make his own medical arrangements.
The receipts for 1876, derived from public subscriptions, annual
ball, fees, &c., amounted to about £1,400, the expenditure to about £7O
less. There can be no doubt, that in a quiet way, these ladies are to a
large extent lessening the amount of the sufferings of their fellows.
Next to the institutions which aim at the alleviation of the actual
sufferings of men, those which seek to alleviate the bitterness of
deprivation naturally, claim notice, and of these
The admirable Institution for the
Deaf, and Dumb, and the Blind,
which has its home on the Newtown Road, opposite the University,
deserves a prominent place, for surely the deprivation of the senses of
hearing, speech, and sight is suffering deep enough.
This Institution originally contemplated provision for deaf-mutes
only, and had its beginning about the year 1860 in this manner. In
the year 1859 or 1860 there arrived in Sydney a man named Thomas
Patterson whose occupation was that of a coach painter : he was a deaf
mute, and had been, in Edinburgh, an instructor of deaf mutes. Soon
after his arrival he met with some young people who suffered the same
deprivations as himself, and desiring to help them he began to teach
them. In a short time this action came under the notice of the Rev. G.
King, then the minister in charge of St. Andrew’s, Church of England.
This gentleman at once interested himself in the benevolent experiment,
and he also brought the matter before his churchwardens, Messrs,
F. R. Robinson, Selby, and Lentz; the result being that Mr. Patterson
gave up coach-painting, and devoted himself to the work of deaf-mute
instruction in a h use in Castlereagh-street. At this time it might be
called a private work, but on the Ist of October, 1861, it was con-
stituted a public institution, the Rev. Dr. Lang, Messrs. Love and
Caldwell being placed upon the Committee, arid it became necessary
to remove to a larger house. No. 461 Pitt-street, near Liverpool-street.
In this house for some time the work was carried on, until the
increase of numbers compelled the removal to more extensive premises,
and Ormond House, Paddington, became the home of the Institution
in July, 1868.
The Institution growing in popularity, and increasing in usefulness
with the increase of population, could not long be carried on in Ormond
House. Steps were taken, on the suggestion of the Earl of Belmore,
to secure a site on which to erect a special building. The Government
granted five acres on the Newtown-road; a design and plans by
Mr. B. Backhouse being approved, the foundation-stone of the new
building was laid by Earl Belmore April 3, 1871, and the building
was completed and entered in January, 1872.
The benefits of this admirable Institution are available to all who
need them, the only condition being the physical one. Children are
received from the sister colonies, but in their case a very stringent


bond is entered into by the parents that, when the child’s education is
finished, it shall be taken to the colony from whence it came.
A tabular statement at the end of the very complete Report com-
piled by the Hon. Secretary, shows that of the 144 children who have
been received since the formation of the Institution, 115 are of New
South Wales, 21 from Queensland, 2 from New Zealand, and 6 from
Tasmania and South Australia. While 117 were Protestants, 26 Roman
Catholics, and 1 Hebrew.
In those cases where the parents are able to pay for the education
of their unfortunate children the charge is £25 a year for board
and education, being about half the sum charged in the Melbourne
Institution. The friends of the inmates are expected to provide or pay
for clothing. The system of education, which by the way does not
embrace any trade instruction, is thoroughly good, and all who have
been present at the annual examination of the pupils must have
felt that in Mr. Watson the instructor the Institution has a thoroughly
efficient servant. He is now visiting Europe, and the Committee have
requested him to visit various institutions of the same character in
Europe and America, being desirous to keep their own abreast of the
foremost.
Although, in common with all charitable institutions, this institution
has had trying years, its course has on the whole been a prosperous
one. and yet the help it receives from the Government is but small,
about £450 a year. Fortunately for the success of the institution, it
has ever been free from the sectarian bickerings which have retarded
the progress of some of our colonial charities. Harmony of feeling, and
continuous concerted concern for its progress and usefulness, seems to
have been a characteristic of all its friends.
The Rev. George King has been President from the formation,
and Mr. Ellis Robinson Secretary since the second year of its existence,
while each Governor of the colony has shown a deep interest in the
welfare of the Institution.
For its support the Institution depends upon subscriptions and
donations, fees for education and clothing from parents who can afford
to pay them, legacies, &c., and a small grant from the Government
(£450 in 1877). It is gratifying to find that the Governments of
Tasmania and Queensland contributed £74 each in 1877. The expen-
diture for 1877 was at the rate of about £23 per head, the average
number during the year being 73.
The income from all sources during year ending September, 1877,
was about £2,850, and a perusal of the most interesting Report will
prove that the Institution is very widely popular, receiving help from
all parts of New South Wales and from Queensland and Tasmania too.
A very comprehensive “Historical Statement” concerning each
candidate for admission is secured by twenty-four questions for each
class, deaf-mutes and blind. The replies to these questions, which
are carefully preserved, will one day furnish valuable data to some
investigator of the subject.
In natural order we must now briefly deal with an institution in
course of formation, the


“ Industrial Blind Institution.”
The late Mr. John William Woods, of the Glebe, amongst
other charitable bequests, bequeathed the sum of £5,000 in aid of an
asylum of this nature, provided such a building was commenced within
a certain period. This fact becoming known, several influential gen-
tlemen formed themselves into a provisional committee, and secured
from the Government a site for a building at the corner of William
and Boomerang-streets, and commenced building operations within
the prescribed time. The above-named bequest has been supplemented
by other moneys, and the Trustees have been able to erect the shell of
the Asylum. A large amount is still needed before the building will
be ready for the reception of those for whose benefit it is being erected.
The Government has been asked to help, but without success, and an
appeal for aid is soon to be made to the public.
The object of the institution is to take in hand blind adults , such
sightless ones as meet our sight in the streets of Sydney asking alms,
and by teaching them some handicraft, enable them to earn a livelihood
in a better way than they at present do ; or at any rate by placing this
within their reach to leave them without excuse for begging either
direct or indirect.
Similar Institutions have in various parts of the world accom-
plished great good, and it is to be hoped that this Institution will
accomplish all the good its promoters can desire.
The Trustees are Sir Alfred Stephen, Knight, K.O.M G., Shepherd
Smith, Robert Tooth, Benjamin Palmer, and John Dawson, Esquires.
For its support it will at the outset be dependent on public sub-
scriptions, and its friends hope to have these supplemented by a grant
from Government; but it is believed that when once fairly started, the
Institution will be very nearly self-supporting.
One of the oldest of our Charitable Institutions is the
“Benevolent Society,”
whose home is the large building, near the Redfern Railway Terminus.
This Society dates its origin 4th June, 1818. At a meeting of the
New South Wales Auxiliary of the British and Foreign Bible Society,
held 6th May, 1818, “after the proceedings and business of the Bible
Society was concluded. His Honor the Judge Advocate Wylde, called
the attention of the gentlemen present to the state of the indigent poor
throughout the colony. He adverted to the exertions of a small society
instituted for benevolent purposes in Sydney, in the year 1813” (the
‘ Society for Christian Benevolence’), and “ took occasion in a singularly
eloquent and pathetic appeal to the feelings and benevolence of the
meeting, to impress the necessity of immediately adopting some
effectual and liberal measures towards establishing a Benevolent Insti-
tution, that would secure permanent relief to the distressed poor of
every description in a manner worthy the generous and liberal character
of the colony. His Excellency the Governor (Macquarie) was pleased
to express his most cordial approbation of such a measure and declared
that individually as well as the representative of the Crown, he should
give his warmest patronage and support thereto.” A pledge he amply
redeemed. “ Several gentlemen addressed the meeting, suggesting
what should be the plan and object of such an Institution, when a


subscription list was opened, and 216 guineas immediately subscribed.”
A public meeting was held on sth June, 1818, Governor Macquarie
presided. Rules and regulations adopted ; Committee appointed, &c.;
and the Benevolent Society of New South Wales was fully started.
The first report signed by Richard Hill, Secretary, shows that in forty-
seven weeks, 123 cases had been relieved, and a list of thirteen of the
most interesting is given. The relief afforded was usually in the shape
of weekly issues of food or clothing to the needy. The subscriptions
amounted to £348 17s. 6d.; the expenditure to the same amount; one
item of expenditure being “ debt paid to old Society £l6l 15s. 2d.”
The administration of the relief before the erection of the Asylum
was effected by visitors to the homes of the recipients, but in a short
time it became necessary to secure a building for the Society. A
deputation waited on Governor Macquarie, to ask his help in this
matter, and they were agreeably surprised by His Excellency’s proposal
to erect at the public expense, a suitable plain building, for fifty or
sixty persons, near the new turnpike house, and by 1821, the building
was erected “at the entrance of Sydney.”
In the early reports may be found eight questions which the
visitors were required to ask of each applicant for relief; these
questions aimed at the prevention of imposition.
“In August, 1820, the following ladies having united as a Com-
mittee for the relief of poor married women during their confinement,
sought special subscriptions for this purpose. Mesdames Antill, Brooks,
Cowper, Drennan, Irvine, Lawry, Norton, Walsh, Mrs. Hill, Secre-
tary.” This was the germ of the Lying-in Department.
The present operations of the Society are twofold —Indoor and
Outdoor. There are at present 241 inmates of the asylum. Admission
is upon the recommendation of a minister or a subscriber, subject to
the approval of the committee. The children are, almost without
exception, sent thither by the magistrates from the Police Courts. In
addition to these there are always a few poor women in the asylum
admitted for accouchement. The whole of the cost of Ibis indoor
relief is borne by the Government. Mrs. Elric is the Matron, whose
fitness for the position may be assumed from the fact that she came to
the colony as one of the five nurse-training Sisters referred to in the
account of the Sydney Infirmary. The outdoor relief is so conducted
as to minimize the possibility of imposition. No case is relieved
except on the permission of the committee, based upon the report of
the visitor (Mr. Jentsch), who is required to visit the home of each
applicant and make fitting enquiry into the circumstances of each case.
Relief is afforded not in the shape of money as a rule, but in food, &c.
The public subscriptions go to this branch of the __ Society’s work,
supplemented by £SOO from the Government.
For information as to the gross income (£6,824 6s. 8d for 1877),
and expenditure (£5,846 6s. 9d. for 1877), together with number in
asylum and outdoor cases relieved during any year, since 1852 and for
all the years, the reader is referred to the Society’s report.
Brief reference may here be fittingly made to the late Hon.
George Allen, who for many years was Secretary to the Society, and
whose name and energies were so long and so fully at the service of
our leading charitable institutions.


At present the Protestant inmates exceed in number the Pom an
Catholic. Religious services are regularly conducted by the Priests
and Sisters of Charity, for the benefit of the latter ; but since the death
of the Rev. Canon Vidal, who took deep interest in the Society, no one
regulary attends to the former.
“ The Caledonian Society,”
which was one of the beneficiary Institutions of the “ Golden Barrel,”
does not now exist under that designation. Itself the outgrowth of
the “ St. Andrew’s Society,” it has now been amalgamated with the
“ Gaelic Society, the two forming the
“ Highland Society,”
A name considered by some as too limited in its meaning as the
Society embraces in its design Scotchmen not Highlanders only.
However, change of name has wrought no change in aims and
method. The Society is primarily a Benefit Society, doing the same
work under the same conditions as other Benefit Societies, in
addition to this (and it is this secondary object which entitles it to
mention here as it entitled it to a share of the “Golden Barrel” fund)
it embraces what is called a relief branch, towards the funds of which
the members of the Society subscribe one guinea a year. Out of the
money thus raised immediate relief may be given to any Scotchman in
need, and spite of the general reputation of the Scotch for shrewdness,
&c., many are found, who, by sheer thriftlessness, are brought to
bitter need.
Any such, appealing to the officials of this Society, is met by
the question “ What Can you do ?” and steps are at once taken to
find employment for him; meantime a few shillings are put into his
hand to enable him to procure bed and meals until his own earned cash
comes into his hands. He is thus saved from utter destitution, and all
that can be done to save him from mere pauperism is done by pro-
curing employment for him.
In this way three or four hundreds of pounds are distributed
yearly. In several cases the Society has paid the passage money of
destitute Scotch to their friends in Scotland or the adjoining colonies.
The President is the Hon. Sir John Hay, President of Legislative
Council; Vice-Presidents, Hons. Alexander Campbell, M.L.G., Pro-
fessor Smith, M.L.C., S. I). Gordon, M L. 0., John Sutherland, M.L.A.,
Alexander Stuart, M.L.A., John Rae and George Alexander Murray,
Esquires ; Treasurer, I). Mcßeath, Esq., J.P ; Secretary, Mr. John
Macdonald, junior.
The bitterness of poverty is relative, ever bitterest to those of
more refined minds, keenest to those who cannot obtrusively display
their necessities ; indeed we may accept it as a rule that the need which
is most poignant is not the need which meets our eyes at the corners
of the streets. It is satisfactory to find in our city a Society which
aims at and designs the relief of the poor of the educated classes. Such
is the aim of the


Home Visiting and Relief Society,
As to the origin of this excellent Society, Sir W. M. Manning, at
one of the Annual Meetings said, “ I was present at the formation of
the Society in the Chief Justice’s Chambers. The proposal to form
such a Society was made by Dr. Henry Grattan Douglass ; he stated
that he took the idea from a Society of the kind which had existed for
some time in Ireland (the ‘Poor Room-Keepers’Society’); so that they
owed the origin of the Society to Ireland and to an Irishman.
Dr. Douglass persuaded Mr. W. 0. Wentworth to give his first month’s
salary (£100) as President of the Legislative Council, to form the
nucleus of a fund.” The ‘Poor Room-Keepers’ Society’ of Dublin
•was founded in 1790, and in thirty years had given relief to the extent
of £48,000.
The Home Visiting Society proposes to aid the needy of the
educated classes by gifts or loans of money, or by helping applicants
to obtain suitable situations. The method of operations is simple
enough : application for help is made to the Secretary or to a Member
of the Committee, either personally or in writing; one of these at
once visits the applicant at his own home, enquires kindly into parti-
eulars, receives such information as the applicant may be willing to
give, then brings the case before the Committee, which decides upon
the eligibility or otherwise of the applicant, and if eligible gives such
relief, pecuniary or otherwise, as may be considered most advanta-
geous lor their future benefit. In case of a loan, the recipient is given
time and opportunity for repayment, while there is no compulsion,
and the strictest privacy is exercised.
Two things are prominent in the management. 1. The money is
made to do work again and again, its life of usefulness is a long
one. 2. Indiscriminate almsgiving is avoided and the chance of
imposition is minimized.
Mr. G. F. Wise, who is connected so closely with several of our
Charitable Institutions, is the Hon. Secretary of the Society. He
furnished me with the very concise report for 1876-77. This report
shows that in the fifteen years of the Society’s existence, 1,322 appli-
cants have been relieved by donations amounting to £722 Bs. 6d , and
loans £7,010 4s. 5d., while of this loan amount £2,883 19s. 4d. has at
present been repaid, being 41 per cent. The income of the years 1876-77
is thus stated in the report. Balance from previous year, £35 2s. sd.
Donations and subscriptions, £256 16s. 6d. Repayments of loans,
£ 174 ss. lOd. Interest on Investment of Perpetual Subscribers’ Fund,
£55. Interest on Savings Bank Deposit, £B.
A word parenthetically about Dr. Douglass. We found him
prominent in the establishment of the “ Destitute Children’s Society,”
we found him at the first anniversary of the “ Female Refuge,” now
we find him the originator of “Home Visiting and Relief Society.”
He had been a surgeon on the convict establishment in old time;
acquired a reputation for cruelty, and had as many enemies as most
men. One at least of his plans brought great obloquy upon him,
albeit it was most successful, accomplishing the end he had in view.
He was a man whose heart was ever prompting, his head ever planning,


his time and purse ever aiding projects for the mitigation of the woes
of his kind. He died in Sydney in 1865, and was buried in his family
vault at Camden.
A destitute Hebrew is certainly a rarity ; who ever saw one ? There-
are, nevertheless, a few such, chiefly sufferers from some infirmity,
these, however, are not suffered to be a burden on the charity of
Christians; those of their own persuasion who are better off, help
their helpless fellows, and keep them above actual want. The agency
by which this is effected, is the
“ Hebrew Philantropic and Orphan Society.”
The Philanthropic Society was founded (by whom or in what
manner I cannot discover), in 1833, when there were not more
than one or two poor Hebrews who required charitable relief and
for forty years continued its operations under that name. In 1873,
in order to secure the more efficient carrying out of the objects of each
Institution, an amalgamation was effected with the Jewish Orphan
Society (I cannot learn when this Society was established), and from
that date, we have the “Hebrew Philanthropic and Orphan Society.”
The declared object of the Society is “to relieve distressed
members of the Hebrew Faith by donations, pensions, and loans ; and
to support Jewish orphans.” The rules and regulations show :— (a).
Two Directors visit all persons receiving relief from the Society, (h).
Application for relief must be in writing, (c). Persons receiving loans
enter into a bond with two or more approved securities to repay; if
loan of £2, one shilling a-week; if £lO, four shillings a-week; if
repayments fall six weekly payments iu arrears, the person shall be
liable to be sued for balance. ( d ). No help to any person married out
of the Jewish Faith, (<?). Persons receiving pensions must if possible,
attend Synagogue at all times of prayer; if found street begging or
guilty of drunken or immoral conduct, liable to suspension or stoppage
of pensions.
Funds are raised by subscriptions ; a collector waits every week
upon those who prefer to give their help weekly. Donations, legacies,
and offerings in the Synagogue from those who are called to the read-
ing of the “Torah” (agreeing with the reading of the lessons by a
layman in the Church of England), from this source £9B was received
ini 874, £47 in 1877. At a time when the Society’s Funds were low,
a Lecture by Eev. A. B. Davis, brought £llO. A “benefit” by Mr.
Bennett, £217, Madame Eistori, nearly £l6. Two houses were
bequeathed to the Society by Mr. Simon Leah ; possession of one only
has been secured, and this being done forcibly led to a law suit. It
would appear that the occupants having long occupied without rent
having been demanded, claim ownership. The cottage in the posses-
sion of the Society is let to a pensioner for 2s. a-week. Since 1873,
the Society has been in a flourishing condition. The sum received in
1877 was £556 10s.
Help is given only after careful investigation, such help may be
in the shape of gifts or pensions of 10s. to 255. a-week (of these there
were in 1877, twelve receiving a total of £5 14s. 6d. a-week), or loans


of from £2 to £lO, subject to conditions as to repayment. In 1877,
the sum of £3B 19s. was received as “repayment of loans.” It will
thus be seen there is some similarity between this and the “Home
Visiting Society.” It is on record that one Mordecai Abrahams, who
for many years was bedridden, received from this Society pensions
amounting in all to over £I,OOO, besides gifts of clothing and bedding.
There is now an annually increasing balance to the credit of the
fund ; this balance is invested, and the Directors and friends have in
contemplation the erection of almshouses in which the decrepit poor of
the Hebrew faith may find shelter.
The present President, Treasurer, and Secretary are George Myers,
Esq., the Hon. H. E. Cohen, M.L.A., and G. L. Goodman, Esq.
In this connection may be named another Society designed to
benefit the poorer members of the Hebrew faith, the
“ Hebrew Ladies’ Dorcas Society,”
This Society, formed about twenty-five years ago, renders help
to poor Jewish women at the time of their accouchement, and at that
time only. The assistance given is very liberal, embracing £2 2s. for
a doctor, £l I Os. for a nurse, £1 in cash, 2 weeks’ groceries, 2 suits of
clothing for the baby, under and bed-linen for the mother.
The Society has for its President Mrs. Montagu Levy ; Treasurer,
Mrs. E. Alexander; Hon. Secretary, Mrs. D. L. Levy, who are aided
by a Ladies’ Committee of six members.
Every precaution is taken to prevent imposition (to which it is
easy to imagine the liberal gifts would prove a strong temptation), two
ladies of the Committee visiting every application for help in order to
enquire into the eligibility of the case, the six ladies taking this duty
in relays for four months.
Funds are raised by subscriptions from the better-off Jews, in town
and country. Some of the town subscriptions are collected monthly.
The amount raised and expended annually is about £7O, the number of
cases relieved averaging about eight a year.
Passing now to the provision made to meet the needs of other
classes, we find in Kent-street, between Liverpool and Bathurst-streets,
the “ Soup Kitchen and Night Refuge,” and in Francis-street, Hyde
Park, the “ Sydney Night Refuge and Reformatory ”; the latter,
being the elder of the two, claims first notice. Its origin may be said
to be a bifurcated one. First —Mr. George Lucas occupied a small,
neat property in Francis-street; a total abstainer himself, he desired
to do something to save the young from growing up with a love for
strong drink ; he therefore built a weatherboard building about 35 x 20,
called it the “Juvenile Temperance Hall,” and in this Hall once a week
he gathered as many of the young folk of the neighbourhood as possible.
Second —At a monthly breakfast held in the Temperance Hall, Pitt-
street, on Sunday, 31st March, 1862, one of the young men referred
to the number of poor, wandering, and drunken outcasts seen by him
that morning on his way to the place of meeting, and he asked, “ Can
nothing be done for those wretched ones ? ” Hereupon one rose
{probably the late A. B. Armstrong), and said that he had long been


thinking of these poor creatures, and had been at a loss to know how
to benefit them ; he then offered to provide breakfast for forty the fol-
lowing Sunday morning, if some of the young men present would meet
him the next Saturday evening to make arrangements. They did so,
and at daybreak next morning they met again at the Temperance Hall,
and started thence in companies through the lanes and streets, through
the Domain and Hyde Park (the two large bed-rooms of the homeless)
and mustered about twenty for breakfast. From that time to the present
these Sunday morning breakfasts for the homeless have been continued,
the average attendance may be put at 90 or 100 ; Mrs. A. B. Armstrong
and her son being most earnest in their helping, while upon Mr. Druce
falls the heaviest of the fag attending preparation.
These then were the two factors which went for the origination of
the
Sydney Night Eefuge and Reformatory,
Francis-street, for in a special report on the breakfasts we find, “As
many of the poor present are homeless and without shelter, some
means must be devised to obtain a Night Eefuge, and friend GK L.
(Lucas) has generously allowed them to sleep in the Juvenile Temper-
ance Hall, Francis-street.”
The only condition for admission to bed and breakfast is the need
of it and a state of soberness. The bed is a blanket and a pillow on the
cleanest possible holystoned floor. The breakfast, bread and coffee.
Mr. Druce, the Resident Master, a City Missionary, gives religious
instruction, and exercises a general oversight of the place, which, with
its surroundings, is inimitable for its neatness.
The Annual Reports contain many instances of the special benefits
of the Refuge, and at the same time of the strange vicissitudes of col-
onial life.
Amount of subscriptions for year ending June, 1877, £157 25.;
expenditure a little less. Mr. Henry Prince is the Treasurer;
Mr. John Mills, the Secretary.
The origin and formation of the
City Night Refuge and Soup Kitchen,
dates from July 5, 1867. The actual opening in Dixon-street, 22nd
July, when four persons received soup. During the first year 30,000
meals were given.
In May, 1868, Capt. Scott, P.M., suggested the establishment of a
Night Eefuge, This led to the suggestion of the amalgamation of the
existing Soup Kitchen and the proposed Night Eefuge. This was
effected, and on Ist July the premises in Kent-street were opened as a
Soup Kitchen and Night Eefuge, under the management of Mr. Lee
of the Soup Kitchen, Since that time about 650,000 meals have been
given, shelter afforded in about 200,000 instances to say 10,000 separate
persons, and about 500 tons of provisions have been collected and
distributed.
The premises in Kent-street, which have been occupied now for
ten years, are not the most suitable; and it is to be hoped, from the
reception which the Colonial Secretary (Hon. M. Fitzpatrick) gave to


a deputation the other day, seeking help towards a better building,
that before long the old dilapidated buildings will give place to erections
more suitable ; perhaps the present site is as suit able as any which
could be obtained.
Each applicant who is furnished with a ticket (such ticket being
obtainable from any subscriber) gets a bowl of good soup ; and all who
seek refuge sleep in a room much cleaner than many for which a charge
is made in lodging-houses. Every man who comes to sleep at the
Eefuge is expected to doff his own clothing (these are fumigated with
sulphur), take a warm bath, and don for the night a clean shirt and
pants —these being exchanged for his own in the morning.
In proof of the extent to which the Institution has come to be
recognized as a useful Institution and deserving of help. The follow-
ing summary of “Contributions in kind” for year ending June 30th,
1877, may be given:— Meat, from 11 persons or firms; Clothing, bed-
ding, Sfc , from 33 ditto ; Bread, from 51 ditto; Potatoes, hay , corn, Sfc.,
from 47 ditto; Groceries, Sfc., from 55 ditto; Ironmongery, from 20
ditto; Wood, coal, Sfc., from 17 ditto; Sundry provisions, from 4 ditto;
Flour meal, Sfc , from 7 ditto ; Medicines, Sfc., from 6 ditto ; Timber, Sfc.,
from 7 ditto ; Printing, stationery, Sfc., from 26 ditto ; Materials, painting,
Sfc., from 7 ditto ; Morse, harness, shoeing, Sfc., from 10 ditto; Lessees of
Toll Gates, from 3 ditto; Empty cases, from 9 ditto.
Two other features deserve mention. Every effort is used to
induce the refugees to become abstainers from intoxicating drink, and
also to induce them to earn a living for themselves, and situations are
obtained for many.
The Institution is under the energetic management of Mr. Lee,
aided by a scarcely less energetic assistant, Mr. Murren.
The cash receipts for year ending 30th June, 1877, were about
£5OO ; expenditure, a little more ; while the fund for a new building
stands at £7OO.
“The National Shipwreck Relief Society op New South Wales”
established about twelve months ago, demands notice here, since it has
made an appeal to the charity of the colonists, which appeal has met
with a very liberal response.
Such a Society had been talked about for some time, but when
the “ Yarra Yarra ” was wrecked, causing so much misery, it was felt
that reliance should not any longer be placed on the spasmodic offerings
of the community, to meet the miseries consequent on such a disaster.
In such a case as that of the “ Dandenong” the liberality of the public
left nothing to be desired; but how many cases are there, small cases
which receive no public notice beyond a few lines in the newspaper
which entail relatively as much misery, but to relieve which no public
appeal is made.
This Society proposes to “ afford pecuniary help to the widows and
orphans of shipwrecked seamen who have lost their lives in or near
N.B.W. waters ; and to grant the Society’s medal or a money reward
as a recognition of, and a stimulus to acts of bravery in the saving of
human life ”
“ Special inducements are offered to seamen to become members


Roman Catholic „ „
4,600
0
0 ,
.. 331
Those falling under Section H.—
Asylum for Infirm and Destitute,
Hyde Park .,
3,832
5
7 .
261
,, „ Parramatta
4,135
15
0 ,
.. 233
,, „ Liverpool ..
10,033
7
9 .
715
by the payment of an annual subscription of 125., for which sum the
Society binds itself to pay them a liberal sum if wrecked, or to their
widows and orphans if killed or drowned; and it is believed that as
the advantages of membership are more thoroughly understood, many
seamen will become members.”
The Society has now a fund of £6200, of which amount the
Government has given £3082, and has notified that the Society will
receive £l for every £1 subscribed. Up to the end of 1877, over £550
had been paid by the Society.
Patron : His Excellency the Governor. President: F. H. Dangar,
Esq. Trustees: Messrs. T. Buckland, W. 0. Gilchrist, and W. Laidley.
Committee: The Mayor of Sydney, Messrs. J. Alger, T. Buzacott,
C. H. Hayes, B. Palmer, J. Paxton, J. Grafton Boss, M. H. Stephen,
J. H. Storey, A. Stuart, M.L.A., Captains Banks, Fairclongh, Hixson,
and Shorter. Treasurer: Capt. Bloomfield. Secretaries: Messrs. A.
T. Wilshire and J. G. Catley.
There is also in existence a
“ Benevolent Society op Blues,”
but concerning which, I have not been able to acquire any information.
According to an account of the Sydney Charities which appeared in the
Herald a few days ago. It is “an institution similar in its character to
that of the same name in London, founded for the relief of ex-scholars
of Christ’s Hospital, London, their widows or orphans. The Society
is managed by a Committee, and relief extended to those who prove to
its satisfaction that they are worthy of such. Mr. W. T. Pinhey, J.P.,
has been President for about twenty-five years, and the funds are in a
flourishing condition.”
Such, so far as the writer has been able to discover, is a complete
statement of the various Institutions in our city and its neighbourhood
designed to secure the diminution of vice, and crime ; and the alleviation
of want, and suffering ; supported wholly or in part by the contributions of
the charitable.
In order, however, to show in a more complete degree the provision
made in this country for the wants and woes of the needy, the following
mere indication is added, of the various Institutions entirely supported
by grants from the general revenue :
Those falling under Section I.—
Expenditure Inmates,
in 1877. 31st Dec., 1877.
Biloela Female Industrial School lB 7 .. 86
Nautical Ship “ Yernon . .. 3,691 7 .. 91
Protestant Orphanage, Parramatta 4,300 0 0 .. 250


Erysipelas Hospital, &c. .. .. 2,667 10 0 70
Asylum for the Ins me, Parramatta 20,019 0 0 \
~ ~ ~ Q-ladesville 19,989 0 0 /
„ „ „ Garryowen 1 ISjss2 „ „ . ’
99 99 irnvato «• ) J
Lunatic Receiving House, Darling-
hurst .. .. «. 1,082 0 0
When to these we add the numerous Societies in connection with
the various Churches, which deal more particularly with the poor
members of those Churches, and the extensive private charity of the
well-to-do, we have an aggregate provision for the needy which none
can say is inadequate to our population.
As a sort of gathering up of the thoughts which have been
suggested by the research which has found its result in the foregoing
pages —
1. That vice and crime prevail to a sorrowful extent, it needs no
word of mine to prove; we may accept this as a fact; we may
go a step farther and state that, so far as ordinary observation goes,
vice and crime are not self-corrective to any appreciable extent; correc-
tion is from without.
The Almighty so far as we can see, works no miracle to stay the
vice-torrent; this work, or rather the attempt, lies with man, and
surely, every man who feels his own humanness will feel he ought to
do all he is able to keep his brother right, or to endeavour to bring
him back when he has wandered ; and verily herein lies the holiest, the
noblest work to which humanity can aspire, for “ the highest expression
of our worship of Ood, is the faithful service of our fellow man ”
2. None may charge us with the lack of provision for the sufferings
of our kind ; we are rather liable to be taunted on account of the
extent of this provision—that we too effectually step between a man
and the consequences of his doings, that by pampering the thriftless we
manifest an unwarrantable interference with the law of natural selection,
a persistent resolve that the not-fittest shall survive. We certainly are
left without excuse for indiscriminate almsgiving, since, with the
varied miseries of man, here are Societies offering to deal on our behalf.
3. It will be well for us to hold fast to this principle—the bestow-
ment of charity may become, nay, is in great danger of becoming, a
premium for improvidence, the means of destroying self-respect, under-
mining self-reliance and fostering mendicity.
4. A central organization, like the Charity Organization Society
of London, would help the various Societies to do effective, not abortive
work.
5. The consideration of the subscription lists contained in the
stack of Reports which this investigation placed before me, leads
to the conclusion that as a community we are selfish. There are a few
scores of people whose names might be kept in type by the printers,
for they appear in so many lists; the names of the rest would not
require much room.
6. Assuming the rightness of charity, the great need of our place
and time seems to be, that those who have enough and to spare should
bestow a certain portion of their “ to spare ” to aid those who have not


enough ; that this amount should he paid to Societies established to do
the work of an almoner. The first place being given to those which
seek to prevent the growth of vice and want; next, to those which
deal with vice and want existent by helping the victims thereof to help
themselves. Such help alone is merciful.
7. Some of our deserving charities are fettered in their operations
through want of funds. This should not be. A huge crying calamity
touches the heart of the community, and, as if by magic, the “ Lanca-
shire Relief Fund” and the “ Indian Famine Fund,” draw many
thousands of pounds from the pockets of the wealthy. This is right;
but it will be better for our honesty when we come to heed the claims
of the duty which lies near, as fully as the voice which comes from far
—when we do our best to ease the burdens of those who cross our
path every day with the readiness and zest we manifest as we rush to
relieve the miseries of those who are far off.
8. Comparing the number of Institutions which deal with human
misery, with the population of our city, the conviction is forced upon
us that many seek and obtain gratuitous help from those Institutions
who are well able to pay for that help.
9. To those who desire that their gifts should be of continuous
and not merely of ephemeral value the “ Perpetual Subscribers’ Fund ”
of several Societies, offers a ready method by which this can be
accomplished. A man by an investment of £l,OOO may become the
wellspring of comfort to many, when he has passed on to join the
majority.
Since the foregoing was in type the following Prospectus anent
the proposed establishment of a “ Children’s Hospital ” has been
received: —
“ The Children’s Hospital.
Committee —Mrs. Mary Roberts, Mrs. Bailey, Mrs. W. B. B. Christie,
Miss Wilkinson, Mrs. Antrobus, Lady Allen, Mrs. Wilkinson, Mrs.
W. M. White, Mrs. J. Watson, Miss Mackie.
The “Children’s Hospital” being about to be opened in Sydney,
the above-named ladies have formed themselves into a Committee to
ensure its successful establishment; the object being to give proper
medical advice and attendance, with nursing and sick comforts, to the
very many unfortunate sick or maimed children of New South Wales,
and as much as is possible the comforts of a home. The Hospital is
intended to be in time, as far as is practicable, self supporting, but
in the meanwhile subscriptions will be thankfully received and
acknowledged by Mrs. Browne, Secretary pro tern, 181 Macquarie-
street North.”
Similar Institutions have in England been highly beneficial,
providing as they do for the special nursing and treatment of sick
young folks more effectually than can be done in General Hospitals,
and as there are in Sydney many stricken children who need help
they cannot obtain in their own homes, it is hoped that in subsequent
impressions of this “Essay” the fact of the complete establishment
and successful operation of the “ Children’s Hospital ” may be
recorded.


Association for Promotion of Morality .
19
£
£
£
Alliance for Suppression of Intemperance
19
• • • •
• • • •
• • • •
Alfred Hospital
32
• • • •
. . •
....
Benevolent Society ..
36
900
6,824
5,846
Benevolent Society of the Blues ,
44
....
British and .Foreign Bible Society..
5
• • •
• • • •
....
Bush Mission .,
9
....
580
....
Bethel Union .. ..
24
• • .
City Mission ..
4
1,137
1,211
City Night Refuge and Soup Kitchen
42
67,000
• • • •
559
Catholic Female Home
22
, t ..
Children’s Hospital ..
46
• • • •
• • • •
• • I
Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Society
25
• • • •
....
....
Deaf, and Dumb, and the Biinddnstitution
34
73
2,823
1,681
Female Refuge
26
40
....
850
Female Mission Home .. .. ..
18
r ..
Female School of Industry .. ..
14
650
800
Goodenough Naval Seaman’s House
24
• • • •
• * • •
• • • •
Government Institutions ,. .. ..
44
Home, The Sydney Female.. .. ..
21
156
463
484
House of the Good Samaritan
28
70
....
• • • •
Health Society
29
• • • •
....
• • • •
Home V isiting and Relief Society
39
64
....
474
Hebrew Philanthropic and Orphan Society
40
• • •
556
• • • •
Hebrew Ladies Dorcas Society
41
• • • •
....
Highland Society .. ., .. ,,
Infants’ Home or Foundling Hospital ..
38
• • • •
• • • •
. . . .
16
• • . .
688
1,000
Infirmary and Dispensary ..
30
10,051
14,241
13,240
Industrial Blind Institution
36
....
• • • •
Lisgar Training Institution..
15
21
300
350
Liquor License Amendment Association ..
20
• • • •
• • ■ *
....
National Shipwreck Society ., .,
43
• • • •
....
550
Ragged Schools .. .. .. .
Religious Tract Society
13
520
720
700
6
• • • •
....
....
Randwick Asylum
10
568
10,592
11,043
Sydney Night Refuge and Reformatory ..
St. Vincent’s Hospital
42
9,009
157
142
33
350
....
....
Sailors’ Home..
23
1,256
1,595
1,877
Young Mens’Christian Association
9
600
INDEX AND SUMMARY.
Annual
Page. Pencil-
dares.
Institutions.
Expendi-
ture.
Income.


