

V3> V m w ,/v/
CHA3W y 1
$
TIVOLI GA^
UP-TO-DATE VA(j
JOKE, PARODY
AND
Monologue
ALBUM No. 1
COMPILED BY
CHAS. VAUDE
EDITED BY
A. M. Dinsdale
DINSDALES' fRICE
Pty. Ltd. I>
Publishers.
269 Swanston St.,
Melbourne. NETT
COPYRIGHT


CONTENTS.
Introduction .. .. • • • • • • • • 1
" Will They Never Come "—Patriotic Recitation 2-3
General Gags .. .. • • • • • • • • 4 - 5
Comic Interview with Charles Vaude .. . . 6
Comic Interview —Tom Dawson 7
" Playing on my Old Trombone " —Song .. . . 8-9
War Gags .. • • • 10-14
Ballad on Zeppelin Raid (Comic) .. .. • • 12
Acrostic on the Kaiser .. •. • • L 3
Parodies on Well-known Songs .. 15-28-29-30
Comic Interview —Fred Bluett .. . • .. 16
" I Knew that there was Something I Forgot" .. 17
" He's a Jolly Good Fellow " —Comic Song .. 18
"My Little Lubra " —Aboriginal Song .. .. 19
Gags on Songs . . . .. • • • • 20
Pathetic Recitation (Comic) .. .. • • .. 20
" There's a Welcome Waiting for Me " (Comic Song) 21
Comic Interview —Will Whitburn .. .. .. 22
Tongue Twisting Trifle 23
The Death of the Old Gag—Songs and Singers .. 24
A Melbourne Boy's Letter (Comic Song) .. .. 25
" What do You think of the Kaiser " (with Patter) 26-27
"My Heart is Over in Ireland " —Ballad .. . . 29
" Daddy's in the Dardanelles " (Pathetic Song) .. 31
"If England Wants a Hand, Well Here it is " .. 3 2


kZ'JoIQ
INTRODUCTION
[i IJUN
IN introducing this little book to the Public,
I take the opportunity of thanking you for
your appreciation of our past efforts. We have
had many enquiries for copies of parodies, local
patter, etc., and so, with the kind permission of
Hugh D. Macintosh, Esq., this little book can be
obtained at all Tivoli Theatres, music and book-
sellers, throughout the Commonwealth. It is
my intention to issue a series of these books, and
artists continually arriving from England and
America will contribute to them. Of course the
performing rights of all the numbers contained
herein, are withheld by the performers, from
whom permission to work them in public may be
■obtained by writing to me, care of the Green
Room Ciu'b, Melbourne. Information regarding
purchase of make-up, grease paints, sketches, songs
and patters, where to look for engagements, etc.,
■can be had in the same way. It is quite apparent
that this applies to amateurs, as professionals have
ways and means of obtaining their own ends.
I would be pleased to consider any suggestion
that may prove helpful to amateurs, and to give
what practical advice is possible in future numbers
of this series. It is understood that nothing
personal is intended as regards names of people or
places mentioned, same simply being used for
satirical burlesque.
Trusting to renew my acquaintance with you
very shortly,
Faithfullv vours
( HAS. VAUDJ
OF VALUE & VEKNF.
Jan. 20; iqib.


Charles Vaude's Recitation on that Well-known
Recruiting Poster,
"WILL THEY NEVER COME."
There's a little tkind of whisper, coming sobbing o'er the breeze,
Tt's tired and nearly worn out, for it's come o'er distant seas,
Where hell in all its fury's let loose upon the land,
And a little' bunch of heroes to stop it make a stand.
The odds are all against them, but they only smile and say:
"There's help a' coming shortly from our pals across the way."
But the odds are growing longer as a million bullets hum,
And the little bunch of heroes murmur: "Will they never
come?"
There's Ginger Jones of Collingwood a-laying on the ground,
The pain is something awful, but he never makes a sound
To Billo Brown of Sydney, who is standing by his side
A-grumblin' and a-growlin', for he isn't satisfied.
"There's something wrong here somewhere," he says "to
Ginger Jones,
For when I left the 'Loo, the sbeiler wot I owns
Says, 'Bill, the mob will follow on, I've had a talk to some.'
And Ginger only mutters: "Why the devil don't they come?"
There's a chap from Sunny Queensland has done his little bit*
And no doubt he'd be with them still, but one day he got hit
With just a little tiny bit of some explosive shell—
He promised if they'd let him live, he'd give the blighters hell-
But he's gone where there's no coming back. Before he went
he cried
"My pals will make this even when they know I'm laid aside,"
And his spirit must be hovering where the bullets hum,
Saying "Where's my pals from Queensland, will they never
come?"


There's little Bert from Adelaide, and Jack from Broken Hill,
Both in the fighting from the first; but are they in it still?
No! forty Turks are just a little too much work for two,
Though twenty went with Jack to where there's nothing else
to do.
But Rest in Peace, at least that's what we're told just to
believe,
And Bert is lying growling for he's got an empty sleeve.
He wants a hand to take the place of the one that's cold and
numb.
"There's hands across the sea," he cries, "but won't they ever
come?"
There's Smithie there from Tassy, and Murphy from the West,
A-doing all that man can do, and giving of their best
To try and keep a million back and force a passage through,
And no doubt they will do it, but it's very hard, it's true.
But we could make it easy if we gave a helping hand;
Maybe they expect it, for they're just a tiny band
Compared to all the millions of the dirty foreign scum.
Can't you hear them calling, "Won't you ever come?"
And no doubt in their dreams at night around the Dardanelles,
They can see us at the races, and hear the shouts and yells:
"The favorite wins" and such like cries, at football matches,
Perhaps they'd iike to be there, but there's something else to do.
There's dear old pals to be avenged; they want you don't you
know?'
They reckon 110 Australian will ever answer No,
So don't forget the moment when you hear the rolling drum,
There's someone shouting hoarsely: "Won't you ever come?"
The right to perform this number in public, except at
Recruiting or Patriotic Meetings, is strictly reserved. For per-
mission, apply Publishers.


GENERAL GAGS.
Verne: —All gags are original.
Vaude: —Well, it's a wise gag that knows its own father
Vaurie: —I was looking at the town clock this morning. Whilst
looking at the clock I thought to myself it was not a
great employer of labor.
Verne: —How do you make that out?
Vaude:—Well, it only keeps two hands going. Of course,
there are some clocks that keep three, but they don't
keep the other one for long—only for a second. I
noticed a lot of bald-headed men standing watching the
clock yesterday.
Verne:—What were they doing?
Vaude:—They wanted to see what made the (h)air spring.
You would naturally think that our clock, being a public
one, would be British or Australian.
Verne:—Well, isn't it?
Vaude:—No, it's an Italian-Greek clock.
Verne:—How do you make that out?
Vaude:—You stand and look at it for twenty-four hours, and
you will see a day go (Dago).
Verne: —Flies are very prevalent now in Melbourne.
Vaude:—Yes, .1 was sitting in a restaurant the other day. A
chap walked in and asked for a meal for nothing. The
proprietor said he could not afford it —it took him all
his time to feed the flies without giving a meal away.
The fellow then said: "If you give me a feed I'll kill
every fly- yon have in the shop." The proprietor said
"sit down." So the fellow sat down and had a good
tuck in. He was walking out when the proprietor said:
"J thought you were going to kill all the flies as you
said." The fellow stood at the door, took off his coat
and said, "Chuck them out one at a time, I'll knock
their blooming heads off."
1 nearly got a letter this morning.
How's that?
1 got a postcard. Last night I nearly had bread and meat,
had bread and dripping.
They think of closing the hotels at six o'clock in Vic-
toria:—"As I gazed in "Life's Shop Window' I said to myself
that if they close the pubs for 'Five Nights' in 'One Week' it
will make 'Victoria Cross.' "
1 wished I were a Wowser and knew the way to Heaven,
I'd close the pubs at six o'clock and open them at seven.


The doctor told me I must give up smoking,
keeping late hours, give up eating suppers.
What did you do?
Oh, I went for a sea trip and gave up everything.
give up
I had very had luck the other night. T missed my last
train home.
But there's one tram after the last
What is that?
The first in the morning.
Well, I walked home, and to make a short cut of it, _ T
walked through the temetary, just to liven things up- a bit,
and having a few in, and not looking where I was going, I
fell slap bang into an empty grave. Being tired and worn out I
went to sleep, and when I woke up in the morning and had a
look round at the tombstones, I got an awful shock.
What did vou think?
I thought it was resurrection day, and 1 was the first one
T see everything's American now, since we've had rag-
time. We wear American boots. American suits, and T smoke
American cigarettes, six a penny. They call them the U.S.A.
brand.
What is that?
"You suffer afterwards."
You should not talk about America. I don't believe you
know where America is.
Oh, yes I do. America is on the left-hand side going into
England. America is a piece of land that thev have built
round Charley Chaplin. They tell me that America will soon
he coming into the war, but T don't think that's necessary, as
Stewart Island will be in soon.
If a baby is crying, the mother always rushes and puts it
on a Melbourne tramcar.
Why is that?
Because it carries a good dummy.
"Mary had a little calf, and Mary knew she had it.
But Mary's calf's not little now, for Mary's learned to pad it.'
Sacred to the memory of Archibald Tate
Who dodged an express—a little too late.


Interview with Charley Vaude.
Our leading Interviewer, wearing glasses and an anxious look,
called on Mr. Vaude.
Scene.—The gentleman is found in summer attire (shirt open
at. neck and no collar), sitting in the Green Room Club's
best arm chair, with his feet on the table, smoking one
of the club's cigars (bought for him by an admirer.)
Interviewer: '"How long have you been on the stage, Mr.
Vaude?"
Mr. Vaude: "Oh, twenty minutes at one time. I had to
stay twenty minutes whilst they were setting a scene at the
back."
"How did you first come on the stage?"
"I was carried on."
"What! Were you intoxicated?"
"Oh, dear, no. It was at a baby show. I played the baby
brigand."
"How was that?"
"Well, I was a baby in arms."
"Were you successful?"
"Oh, yes; I was a howling success."
"Did the audience cry out for more?"
"No, but I did; but mother had left the bottle at home."
"Have you any hobbies?"
"Two—keeping warm in winter and cool in summer."
"Do you believe in astrology?"
"No; I have nothing to fear of the future."
"How is that?"
"It cannot be worse than my past."
"Do you get your topics from the newspapers?"
"Excuse me, I try to keep up-to-date."
"Which gag do you like the best?"
"The one the audience laughs at most."
"Is it hard to get topical gags?"
"Not half so hard as trying to keep them."
"Which town in Australia do you like the best?"
"Where are we now?—that's the best."
"Have, you any mascots?"
"Yes, one—the last shilling of this week's salary."
"Are you _ superstitious? Do you believe in luck?"
"The luckiest man I know of is a man who lives in Foot-
scrav, and has a chronic cold in the head."
"Are you lucky at all yourself?"
"No, I'm sick of trying my luck. I have come to the
conclusion _that_ there is something wrong with Tattersall's.
I'm not going into it any more. I've been in it twice, and
haven't won it once."
"Have you any pets?"
"Two, hut half-past nine early closing sends them home
before I'm finished at the theatre."
"Are you married, and how many children have you? Do
you like being married, and if so, why? Are you fond of
your wife? Do you drink or smoke?"—
Vaude: "Stop, stop, stop! Understand I'm just human.
I'm feeling dry. It's nearly 9.30. You ought to do all right;
you always have your glasses with you, and as you make the
"Table Talk" you ought to be a good spirit wrapper. Good-
night."
(Curtain falls with Vaude vanishing in night air and
tobacco smoke.)


Vaude's Comic Interviews —I.
TOM DAWSON.
Tom Dawson, the weight lifter —I mean, comedian—is
often mistaken for Peter Dawson, the eminent baritone. A
couple of hayseeds in the audience one night were heard to
say, "By gum, Garge, he don't sing half so well as he does in
the phonograph." Tom, at this time, was knocking all pre-
vious records with "I'd Rather Have a Hard Boiled Egg."
This song was eggstra. When you tell this gag you want
to be quick and duck, because if you don't make a hit the
audience might, and they very seldom cook their eggs before
throwing.
For the inquisitive ladies:—
Tom Dawson is 5 feet 7 inches high, dark hair, beseeching
eyes, bushy eyebrows, drooping lashes, takes 5 in boots, 16
in collars, wears up-to-date clothes and a despondent look on,
and the happy family man look off. Bias three important
things in his favor—good temper, keen sense of humor, and
was born in Adelaide. Tom's age—well, Tom is evergreen, so,
therefore, in the springtime of life.
Tom Dawson once sang "Queen of the Earth." I heard
him—still, we're friends.
A NEW CONUNDRUM
Why did the chicken cross the road?
Because the rooster on the other side said, "You're the
One."
(Dedicated to Tom Dawson.)
Here is a simple alphabetical chorus:—
A B C D E F G,
If you're not C D
It's E C.
If you want to spell it backwards,
All you have to say
Is G F E D C B A.
FRED POPLAR'S " GREEN ROOM CLUB " MATINEE,
PATHETIC BABY BALLAD.
Don't let those cart wheels run over that little child's face,
Remember you have faces of your own;
And the bright stars above you
Will look down and love you,
If you don't let those cart wheels run over that little girl's
face.


Comic Song—Original.
"PLAYING ON MY OLD TROMBONE."
Fred Bluett's Great Success, written by Chas Vaude.
1 found this little instrument a month or two ago,
I'll tell you all about it, and I'll let you in the know;
You pull it in and push it out, it is a funny way,
But you have to do it every time you want the thing to play
I practise on it every day sitting on a chair;
I've learned the "Gypsy's Warning," "Cherry Ripe" and
"Maiden's Prayer"; '
If you heard me play it, you'd swear I blew my nose,
It makes a funny noise, I'll tell you how it goes:—
Chorus.
Pom tiddley om, when you pull and when you push it,
Pom tiddley om when you play;
They reckon I'm a jay, when I try to play
"See the Conquering Hero Conies," "Ta ra ra boom de aye,"
The family's full of irritation,
They're clearing out to leave me on my own,
They reckon I'm a fool, 'cause I push and then I pull,
I make a funny noise like a bullock or a bull,
When I'm blowing on my own trombone.
2nd Verse.
They held a little wedding down our way the other day,
Your humbo and his trombo were invited there to play;
Everybody's hair stood up as stiff as sticky starch,
When I started blowing up the windy "Wedding March."
The best man was talking all about the honeymoon,
It put me in mind of mine, so I blew another tune.
With my pulling in and pushing out I filled a girl with pride,
I did not know till afterwards that I had mashed the bride.


Chorus.
With my pom tiddley om, I was just a new beginner
Pom tiddley om so gay;
They reckoned I'd a rat, 'cause I played like that,
The bride she was happy though, the giddy little cat,
The bridegroom was full of indignation,
And said I ought to leave his wife alone,
But she whispered soft and low, I like to hear you blow,
You set my little loving heart all upon the go,
When you're playing on your old trombone.
3rd Verse.
It's a very handy article, it's all that you desire,
'Tis handy in the winter time for puffing up the fire;
Then again in summer time, it comes in quite a treat,
Keep a-puffing and a-blowing keeps the blow-flies off the
meat.
If you want to make a show the funnel part alone,
Stick it out your window, kid you've got a gramophone;
Then there is another thing before we pass it by,
In the middle of the night, if the baby starts to cry:—
Chorus.
You pom tiddley om, till the baby's had his dinner,
Then you start to play a nursery lay,
You give a loud blast, then you do a march past,
Every blow you give you'd swear it was your last;
Baby's full of irritation, wakes up the lodger with its tone,
So you take it out of bed, up and down the floor you tread,
When the wife she's not a-looking you smash it on the head,
With the fat end of your old trombone.
NOTE.—The above song is not yet published, but pro-
fessionals can obtain a written piano copy, with special per-
mission to feature it, for 3/6, post free, from the Publishers,
Dinsdales' Pty. Ltd.


VAUDE AND VERNE'S ORIGINAL PATTER ON THE
WAR.
A little poetry regarding the Great War
They were playing cards in Europe inside a mansion grand.
Every country thought it held at least a winning hand;
"I'll go one," said Russia; "I'll go two," said France,
"I'll go three," said Austria, "and lead them all a dance;"
"Then I'll go four," said Germany, "and wipe them off the
map,"
"You force my hand," said Old John Bull, "so darn you I'll
go nap."
Then said poor old Austria, with a face all haggard with care,
"I wish I could recall my hand, I would have gone mozare. '
(This was originally given by Vaude and Verne.)
I was at a smoke night the other night, and the Kaiser
sang a medley. You know what a medley is—names of all
songs fitting into one another. The Kaiser sang as follows: —
"Just Before the Battle, Mother," things looked bright for me.
"Where is My Wandering Boy To-night," far, far from
Germany;
"Yes. Let Me Like a Soldier Fall," somewhere by the Rhine,
I only had to mine the sea, and I thought the sea was mine.
"When Other Lips and Other Hearts" their tales of this war
"Everybody will be Doin' It," and wishing me in—Spain.
"It's a Long Way to Tipperary," they sang o'er hill and valley,
It's a longer way by far for me to Paree or Calais.
There are wiser heads, dear, in this world, with better brains
than me,
My brains were not the best, my dear, they were "Made in
Germany."
My head was far too big to hold the hat Napoleon wore,
If to think of me t'would give you pain, "Remember Me No
More." '
So now I'll stay in "My Own Back Yard," John Bull, take
charge of the sea,
And I'll "Have to Get Out and Get Under'" to fix up my
poor Germany.


PATTER —Continued.
I don't know why the police don't arrest all the farmers
and squatters in North Queensland. They're all raising Cain
(cane). They don't mind, though, as they're on a "sweet"
thing, and they're making tons of "sugar."
When Jack Wren volunteered to go to the front, you
would naturally think a practical man like Wren would take
all the weapons he could with him. Yet they tell me he was
leaving a lot of guns on his racecourses. But they're very safe
guns—they never go off without being told, and very seldom
report themselves.
They're sending a contingent of horse cab drivers to the
front, on account of their experience. They've been in the
ranks a long time, and know how to charge.
In New Zealand they're sending the doctors to the front,
as the}' make good lancers. Even the babies are in arms,
and babies ought to be good for the infantry.
Australia was not prepared for the war. She had a.
terrible lot of drawbacks, but she got rid of two of them, as
now there are only eight in a packet.
I was reading where the censor is interfering with the
cables. I was wondering what the devil was wrong with the
Melbourne trams. Now T know it.
The Kaiser held a grand march past of all his troops the
other day. After the troops passed the Kaiser, they were
arrested.
What for?
For passing a bad Sovereign


PATTER —Continued.
Pathetic ballad written on the last Zeppelin raid on
London: —
See a little urchin standing in a London street,
Pie gazes to the sky and sees the Kaiser's Zeppelin fleet,
He knorvs the danger lurking in those airships up above,
And strives to think how he can save the ones he's learned
to love;
And as he sees the searchlights flashing through the skies,
He gazes at the Zeppelins, and tearfully he cries:—
Chorus.
Don't let those Zeppelins drop shells down our drain,
For father has just cleaned the drain out again,
Mother she swears by the old Union Jack,
If you drop your shells you won't get them back.
Baby just loves the fireworks, we don't want to cause you
much pain,
Our dog's dead because he's swallowed iron crosses,
So don't let those Zeppelins drop shells down our drain.
The Germans must be shortsighted. They seem to be
taking all the towns on the coast to be green peas. Every
chance they get they start shelling them.
Saw a lovely picture the other day of the Germans march-
ing through the main streets of a town in Belgium. I notice
they stuck to the main streets —they were afraid of the alleys
(Allies).
Nobody buys the Kaiser a drink since he got a sore throat
How's that?
Because he can't shout.


PATTER —Continued.
The Kaiser still thinks he can perform miracles, and his.
officers think likewise. One day an officer told him that 5000
soldiers in outlying- trenches were practically starving. The
Kaiser said: "What can I do?" The officer asked him if it
was any use fetching him five loaves and five fishes.
ACROSTIC ON THE KAISER
K stands for Kharki and Kitchener, too,
A stands for Allies, who together stand true;
I spells invasion of Germany in sight,
S stands for Servia, who said serves you right.
E Stands for England, with Navy so fine,
R stands for Russia, who'll rush down the Rhine.
The letters of KAISER together complete
Spell nothing for William but utter defeat.
The Kaiser after the war will be out of work. He cabled
me and asked me could I get him a job out here. I told him
I could get him a job working by the day or by the hour, as
I'm certain he would be no good at piece (peace) work.
They can't get a drink in Russia since the war started.
That's what makes the Russian bitter.
The Kaiser sank another merchantman, and killed a thou-
sand women and children. President Wilson stuck his head
out of the door and says, "Come into the Office."


PATTER —Continued.
I saw that Kitchener, when he went to the Near East,
had barrels of benzine with him. They said it was good tor
moving grease (Greece).
from North Queensland they're sending a contingent of
goats to Gallipoli, just to make things hum a bit.
How do you spell Townsville?
TOWNSV I L L E.
Fancy only two "L's" in Townsville. When I was up
there it was hot enough for half a dozen.
Talking about spies. It's hard to tell a German from an
Englishman or a Frenchman.
I don't know that I could tell one if I saw one.
Well, I'll try you. Suppose an Irishman went up in a
balloon, and the balloon capsized, what would the Irishman
come down?
He would come down an Irishman
Oh, no; he'd come down a rushin' (Russian). Well, sup-
pose an Englishman went up in a balloon, and the balloon
capsized, what would the Englishman come down?
Well, of course he would come down an Englishman.
Oh, no ; he would come down a rushin', too. Now, then,
supposing that a Scotchman came down, and fell on a tele-
graph post, what would the Scotchman come down?
A Rushin'.
No, he would come, down a pole.


PARODY ON WELL-KNOWN SONG,
The Kaiser and the Crown Prince, after the Battle of the
Marne, were rushing back to Berlin. The Kaiser being old
and feeble, fell down exhausted by the wayside, so the Crown
Prince, his son, sat beside the Kaiser, and sang to him as
follows:
Lay your head on my shoulder, Daddy
Take this iron cross off my chest,
The Bull-dog's been chasing us all day, Daddy,
I think that we'll give him best.
We used to hear him growl, Daddy,
He'd growl and he'd say "bow-wow,'
But that was before the war, Daddy
Look at the difference now.
He'll bite me and he'll bite you,
Now that he has to light;
And we'll show the flag of truce, Daddy,
If the back of our pants he can bite.
Why do those big tears fall, Daddy?
London's not far away;
You said you would take
my army there,
your way.
1 think that you've lost
1 know that you've made
a bloomer, Daddy,
Put your foot in it in the North Sea,
For you've lost a Blucher, and now, Daddy,
It just appears to me-
That they'll take you, and they'll take me,
And the world will think it's right;
They'll leave us on St. Helena, Daddy,
They'll leave us, and say "Good-night
Dear Daddy, 'twill serve you right.


Charles Vaude's Comic Interviews — 11.
FRED BLUETT.
Fred has gone to England to take charge of the Terri-
torials. He gained his experience with the Boy Scouts. Fred,
in my humble opinion, is very versatile. He is married and
happy, has two children and a good voice, is a comic singer
and good looking. .He scales 12 stone 8 pounds, and is a
teetotaller. Was born in London, and is an Australian come-
dian. Takes pains with his work, and a good hand at poker
Had a benefit and made money out of it. Says his name is
Fred Bluett, and it is.
ITed Bluett is different somewhat to champion boxers.
He is going to England, and Mr. Macintosh says he can
"come back."
The following incident really occurred at the Tivoli
Theatre. Recently a very popular performer was pattering,
asking the audience to sing the chorus. It was the said
artist's third song, and the next item was the interval. Three
Johnnies seated in the front stalls, got up to go and have a
drink. The artist said, as they were walking out, "I am sorry
you can't stay." One of the Johnnies immediately turned,
and said, "Oh, not half as sorry as I am for stopping."
A singer and dancer one night after the show said to me
that the manager was sitting in the front to-night. I said,
"How do you know?" He said, "That was him that clapped
me."
A man I knew threw up his job as he had too much to
do. He has. now got a job as bricklayer on a sailing ship.
Verne:—l suppose Charley, you would not like working in the
open air, like those Pierrots, Dandies, etc.
Vaude:—Why not?
Verne:—Well, look at the time they lose through the rain.
Vaude:—lt would not affect us, rain or no rain.
Verne: — Why?
Vaude: —Well, don't we work under macintosh (Macintosh).


"I KNEW THAT THERE WAS SOMETHING I
FORGOT."
Written, composed and sung by Fred Bluett with great success.
You talk about your absent-minded beggar,
Or the chap that is forgetful, on my life;
I cannot think of anything, I can't, upon my word,
I forgot that I was married to my wife.
Not long ago the place where I'm a-lodging
Caught a-lire, and it gave me such a fright,
I collared all my clobber and my little dickey shirt,
And down the stairs I ran with all my might.
Chorus.
I knew that there was something I forgot,
1 was sure that there was something 1 forgot,
• 'Cause I seem'd to feel a draught, all around my fore and aft,
And it made me. mad the way the people look'd at me
and laughed.
The firemen quickly turn'd the hose upon me,
I felt so cold, I bolted like a shot;
I had on my coat and waistcoat, but I hadn't got my pants,
I knew that there was something I forgot.
I shan't forget the day that I was married,
It was the happiest day of all riiy life;
We had a lovely wedding, and we had a lot of beer,
And we had a drop of gin to please the wife;
We got so boozed we didn't know each other,
And upon my word my senses left me quite,
I couldn't think of anything that happen'd at the wedding,
And I don't remember what occurred at night.
Chorus.
I think that there was something I forgot,
I was sure that there was something I forgot,
I remember getting married, and I paid the parson, too;
I remember being arrested by a gentleman in blue.
I don't know if I thought to pay the cabman,
All that happened seem'd to get me in a knot,
But when I woke next morn and found I hadn't got ray
missus.
I knew that there was something I forgot.
Some time ago I went to see a doctor,
Because I wasn't feeling very well;
He made me put my tongue out and he said "Oh, deary me, '
You've got trouble in your little Darby Kell."
He gave to me some physic and a plaster,
And he touched me for a guinea for advice;
But the medicine he gave me didn't seem to do me good,
And the plaster didn't taste so very nice.
Chorus.
I fancy there was something I forgot
I am sure that there was something I forgot;
I rush'd off to the doctor, and I said to him, look here
I don't feel any better, sir, I'm very very queer,
I said I took the physic as you told me,
And I swallowed all the plaster nice and hot,
But he said, you silly sausage, that's to put upon your tummy,
Then I knew that there was something I forgot.
Music, Price 6d. per copy; Post Free 7d.
17


"HE'S A JOLLY GOOD FELLOW."
Written and composed by Chas. Vaude. Sung by Fred. Bluett
To my Uncle Jonathan, 1 am his next of kin
That means to say that when he dies, I'll get all his tin;
Just to give the girls a treat, last Sunday afternoon,
Uncle thought he'd take a trip, go up in a balloon
When the balloon was in the clouds, the earth look'd like a
speck,
Poor old Uncle took a leap, and fell and broke his neck
Chorus
For he's a jolly good fellow.
For he's a jolly good fellow.
For he's a jolly good fellow,
For he left me all his tin.
Tommy Jones, my tailor, Oh he's a silly kid,
He went and let me owe him close on fifty quid
Only Monday afternoon, now what do you suppose?
Jones he tried to summons me, for twenty suits of clothes.
A motor car this morning hit poor Jonesie on the head,
Jones he could not stand the blow, so now poor Jones is
dead.
Chorus
For he's a jolly good fellow.
F'or lie's a jolly good fellow
F"or he's a jolly good fellow.
He saved ine fifty quid.
Jimmy Jinks, my neighbor, he has a pretty wife,
And she is fairly mashed on me, she is upon me life.
She'd daily throw a kiss to me across the garden fence,
Jinks, he's found it out, and he's been jealous ever since.
Suddenly this morning, the news was brought to me,
Jinks has left his missus and gone sailing on the sea.
Chorus.
For he's a jolly good tellow,
For he's a jolly good fellow
For he's a jolly good fellow
I look after all, bis fowls..
Music, Price 6d. pen-copy;' Post Free. 7d


" MY LITTLE LUBRA,"
Written and composed by Charles Vaude. Sung- by Mark
Ericksen.
An old black tracker and a way out-backer,
In a W arrigal camp one day;
Saw Old King Billy, looking mighty silly,
As he 'neath a blue gum lay.
Said Billy to the tracker, have you got a bit o' 'bacca,
But the tracker just shook his head;
And said, if 'bacca you'll chew, a Lubra I'll woo,
And then to a Lubra said:—
Chorus.
My little Lubra, won't you be my Gin,
And in this wild bush new life begin;
I'll go catch you plenty 'possum, dress you up in wattle
blossom,
Lubra, won't you be my Gin.
The old black tracker, with his little bit o' 'bacca,
The Lubra shortly woo'd;
But old King Billy turned like a willy nilly,
As soon as the 'bacca was chew'd.
Said he, "Old tracker, have you any more 'bacca.
If not, you'll say adieu;
No Lubra you'll take, with no wedding 'bacca cake,
You can't choose your wife for a chew."
Chorus.
My little Lubra, won't you be my Gin,
And in this wild bush new life begin;
J'll go catch you plenty 'possum, dress you up in wattle
blossom,
Lubra, -won't you be my Gin.
Now the old black tracker just as cute.as a Kanaka,
Wanted Lubra for his Gin;
While Billy's 'possum mooning, the tracker was a-spooning,
To fly they thought no sin.
Now the story of the tracker, and his little bit o' 'bacca
Tn the bush is told to-day;
In his little camp of six, including Gin and Pic's,
The tracker would often sa} r :—
Chorus.
My little Lubra, won't you be my Gin,
And in this wild bush new life begin;
I'll go catch you plenty 'possum, dress you up in wattle
blossom.
Lubra, won't you be rhy Gin
Music in Dinsdale's No. 1 Song : Alburn. Price, 1/- per copy:
Post Free, 1/2.


GAGS ON SONGS.
"There's Something in the Seaside Air"—Mosquitoes.
"There's Someone in Australia"—Did they think it was
uninhabited ?
"Don't Run the Poor Working Man Down"—Certainly
not drive slower.
I said to my wife, "Love Me and the World is Mine."
She said, "Charley, don't be greedy, you've got enough pro-
perty."
"He had to get under, get out and get under" to fix up
his automobile"—He does it as often as he can afford (a Ford)
"All the nice girls love the Sailor.'-' There was no one
else worth loving on the boat—l was anything but lovesick
myself.
A girl was singing a song, entitled, "Whj r do the Boys
run after the Girls, and why do the Girls love Boys." Every-
one in the room knew, but nobody gave her the information.
A little girl was singing, "Take Me Back to Heaven,.
Daddy." Her father said, "If I did, I'd have to leave you at
the gate."
A PATHETIC RECITATION.
I've come here to tell you a story,
A story that's old but true;
And a story that's good, be it understood
That story will always be new.
It was told to the babe in, the cradle,
And later when at mother's knee,
This story of strife is taken from life
Just listen and hear it from me: —
'Tis an old, old story, telling of grief and pain,
And I'm sure when you've heard it you'll shout for it again;
'Tis an old, sad story, telling of wrongs set right,
Takes you back to the days when women wore stays—
I'll tell you to-morrow night.
UP-TO-DATE SONG MEDLEY.
"All the Girls loved Bertie and his Motor Car," and after
he "Had had to get out and get under," they sat down "Under
the Chestnut Trees," and "Mister Cupid"_ whispered "Hearts,
were Trumps." He said "This is the Life for Me," "We'll
have a game of sweethearts for old time's sake." I feel as
though I were "On my Honeymoon." She said, "Stop Short,"
"Have you ever loved any other little girl?" He said, "You
can't judge a woman by her clothes," but "There's something
in the seaside air." "Do you remember the last waltz" I had
with you, when "I lost my heart when I saw your eyes?" She
said, "You mean somebody, but you don't mean me." He
said, "I'll sing you a ballad in ragtime." She said "My Boy,"
"Ragtime must be put aside, it's war time." "Put on your
military uniform," for "Daddy's in the Dardanelles." Tell
me "What do you think of the Kaiser," and if you
"Sing us a song of Australia." "Be a man, enlist to-day," and
prove "You're a credit to the Austral Flag." "If England
wants a hand, say, here it is." Show them "Australia will be
there."


" THERE'S A WELCOME WAITING FOR ME." !
Written and composed by Charles Vaude and Fred Poplar.
Far, far away in the land of my birth,
There's somebody waiting for me;
My parents are waiting for their wandering son,
And wondering where he can be.
It is ten years or more since I left the old home,
And for fortune and fame sailed away;
But hard times have struck the old folks at home.
And I'm leaving for England to-day.
Chorus.
There's a welcome waiting for me,
From the old folks who are far o'er the sea,
They stand at the workhouse door,
As there's room inside for more,
There's a welcome waiting for me.
Years, years ago when I was a boy,
I courted a girl seventeen;
I was her hero, her prince and her King,
She was my heart's only Queen.
But quarrels they came, as quarrels they will,
We parted through one angry word;
She's been silent though married, through all these long
But I'll meet her to-day, and I've heard:—
vears ;
Chorus.
There's a welcome waiting for me,
From the girl I knew in 1833;
I've a postcard sent to-day,
Says her husband's gone away,
So there's a welcome waiting for me.
(NOTE—Extra verse to come.)


Charles Vaude's Comic Interviews —111.
WILL WHITBURN.
Will Whitburn started on the stage as a beginner, and
as a black-face comedian. He has been working in a black face
ever since, but I don't mean by that that he has never washed
it since he first went on the stage. Will Whitburn is very
fond of anything he likes, especially Trotters, and specially
trained Trotters at that. Oh, no, he won't have anything to
do with any old Trotters. Bill, when he is not acting, gene-
rally has a trotter in front of him, but he is not ravenous —he
keeps it there in front of him. Of course, he eats other
things, but there you are, Bill is very fond of trotters.
Although people say pork gives you indigestion, some people
like different kind of trotters. Some, for instance, like sheep's
trotters, others pig's trotters; here is where Bill is original
again, he likes horse trotters, and as much as he likes them
he refrains from eating them. Whitburn is an Australian
native hence the color he uses when showing.
1 read in a paper where they said Jeffreys couldn't come
back. It is doubtful whether Tommy Burns could come back,
but Whitburn did, and I should shay so. He came back all
right, and after he came back in Melbourne Opera House he
got a great reception. Then he went off, and had to come
back again, and having to come back again and again shows
you how well he went. Only last week, at the Tivoli, he
had to come back again; yes, they were not ready at the back
for the next turn, so back went Whitburn. I'll back him to
come back and go back whenever he likes. He's no foot-
baller, well, not a half-back, as he's all bach—back as good as
when he left the stage for his favorite hobby, trotters.
SHORT PUN POEM
Will Whitburn is a funny man
He is an old barn stormer;
The question is: Why did Whit burn?
To make Miss Cassie Walmer (warmer).


Tongue Twisting Trif e
"WHEN THE SEA CEASETH."
Sung- by Vaude and Verne, written and composed by Chas.
Vaude.
There was an old Quaker, who went out to sea
To see all the sea in the sea;
But all he could see was the sea in the sea,
For there's nothing but sea in the sea (spoken—do you see?)
When seas are in season they have their ups and downs,
And they cease when they think they will cease;
The old Quaker's brow it was worried with frowns,
And he prayed, Seas cease please in peace.
Chorus.
When the sea ceaseth it sufficeth us,
When the sea ceaseth it sufficeth us,
But when the sea's a seething sea then we make a fuss,
But when the sea ceaseth it sufficeth us.
The old Quaker's name you see it was Shaw,
He was sure that his name it was Shaw;
Though miles out at sea, he was sure don't you see,
Though at sea he was still quite a Shaw (ashore)
The Captain said, "Shaw, I must ask you once more.
Are you sure that you're sure you are Shaw,"
"I'm not certain," said Shaw, "But of one thing I'm sure,
Though not certain, sir, I am still Shaw" that—
Chorus.
When the sea ceaseth it sufficeth us,
When the sea ceaseth it sufficeth us,
But when the sea's a seething sea then we make a fuss,
But when the sea ceaseth it sufficeth us.
Notice to the Public.—lf you hear professionals—other
than the names attached to these songs, etc.—using this matter,
you will know you are listening to pirates.


THE DEATH OF THE OLD GAG.
Two patter comedians enter the dressing room of a Theatre,
supporting between them a poor grey haired he-whiskered joke.
" Aye," it said, " I'm here again after all these years. Maybe
this will be my last time ; but never disappoint your public,
boys." He gasped, and his eyes closed, then he lay very still.
They called in the manager, who bent over him and shook his head.
The figure just breathed and moved slowly. Hastily they applied
restoratives, chafed his hands and used artificial respiration.
" I am better now," the old gag murmured, as he gazed feebly
round the room. A sound got his ear. " What is that —my cue —
I am going on. Let me pass. I say—never disappoint you r
public." He hobbled away and took his turn in the wings, and
awaited his cue. Slowly the old one crept on with a few others,
and clinging to the comedian, awaited his turn. Slowly the
laughs are coming from the auditorium, and after a very weak
laugh, the old one's turn came. Straight from the comedian's
mouth he sprang, with all the agility of youth, and these sounds
are heard. ''We have a goat at our house. It has no nose."
The comedian's partner says " How does it smell ? " Again up
spoke the old gag. "It smells awful.", Shrieks of laughter
greeted the old gag, but a mist came over his eyes and they carried
him off. He staggered in the wings and fell. Sobbing conun-
drums, poverty stricken parodies, gasping gags and tearful topics
flocked round him and implored him to open his eyes and speak
just once more. The sound of laughter is still in the distance—
a smile of ineffable sweetness lights up the face of the old gag.
then faded away for ever. The old gag was dead, and let us
hope it rests in peace.
SONGS AND SINGERS.
The Kaiser —" Every little bit added to what you've got
makes just a little bit more."
"It's not the clothes that makes the man " —Sung by Chi die y
(Sydney papers, please copy.)
We're here because we're here, because we're here "—Ger-
mans in Australia.
" I'll be there love at half past nine " —The barmaid's
husband (?).
Recitation—" The pen is mightier than the sword"—Wood-
row Wilson.


A MELBOURNE BOY'S LETTER.
Written by Chas. Vaude. Composed and sung by Harry
Linden
In a far distant land sat a young Melbourne lad.
Thinking of home far away;
He said to himself, a letter I'll write
To the old folks in Melbourne some day.
As the mail boat was leaving the first thing at dawn,
He pencilled a short little note
To his dear Dad in Melbourne far far away
And these were the sad words he wrote —
Chorus
Have you still got the same old cable trams
Running on their weary way?
Does the old gripman still shout out ''Mind the curve'"
Conductors mash the girls every day.
Does the pub. con the corner still supply counter lunch?
The newsboy his papers yell?
Goodness only knows, tell me ere I close,
Has the Yarra got the same old smell?
The letter arrived in Australia at last,
To cheer up the Mother and Dad;
For years they had waited for money and news.
From their bright-eyed but bald-headed lad.
They thought of their home with only six girls,
A cat and an old Union Jack,
So father worked overtime, then bought a stamp.
And this loving note he sent back—
Chorus.
The Dago keeps the steak and oyster shop,
Australians haven't got a chance;
The tailor still sells his thirty shilling suits,
Shoddy, with an extra pair of pants.
Mother still brings breakfast up to bed
She can still make a little bit of toast;
But it's hard to say, whether it's Footscray
Or the Yarra. that smells the most.
(Not published in sheet music forir
25


Charles Vaude's Enormous Success.
" WHAT DO YOU THINK OF THE KAISER ? "
I've been lately thinking over Bill the Kaiser,
The man that want's to rule the land and sea
And when I think of Balmy Bill the Kaiser,
I wonder do you think the same as me?
I've often heard you sing in praise of heroes,
In chorus you would let your voices go,
Now here's a man with fame as bad as Nero's,
What do you think of him I'd like to know?
Chorus.
What do you think of the Kaiser? "800-hoo-oo,"
What do you think of the Kaiser? "800-hoo-oo,"
Poor old Bill, the world was going to flog,
I think the Kaiser's a dirty, dirty dog,
Now then, altogether, please, I'm making you the referees.
Keep on counting up to nine, There is 110 watch upon the
Rhine,
1, 2. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. "OUT."
That's what we think of Bill the Kaiser.
Now all you have to do is "Boo" and "Hoo," boys,
When I ask you what you think of Balmy Bill,
In fact, well you can call him what you like, boys,
And when you're "on your own" I know you will.
When fighting he is very fond of fouling,
John Bull will find his "point" without a doubt,
Before he has a chance to throw the towel in,
Count up to nine and put the blighter out.
Chorus.
What do you think of the Kaiser? "800-hoo-oo,"
What do you think of the Kaiser? "800-hoo-oo,"
Poor old Bill, the world was going to flog,
I think the Kaiser's a dirty dirty dog,
Now then, altogether, please, I'm making you the referees.
Keep 011 counting up to nine, There is no watch upon the
Rhine,
1, 2. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, "OUT."
That's what we think of Bill the Kaiser
Price, 6d. per copy; Post Free, 7d.


Original Patter that may be use in connection with the song,
•'WHAT DO YOU THINK OF THE KAISER?
Introduction to Song:—
I have often been asked what I think of the Kaiser. The
Kaiser puts me in mind of a bird of prey. He's absolutely
akin to the feathered tribe. In the first place, his national
emblem is an eagle; he's been crowing all over Europe like
a rooster strutting around as proud as a peacock, introducing
the goose step, and leaving poor old Turkey to be cut up
among the Australians. In addition, he's been responsible for
nothing but foul deeds. Now, I've got a song here and I
want you to tell me what you think of the Kaiser. I'd give
the Kaiser the bird. For instance, I'd 800-hoo-oo him. In
fact, all you have to do is to put plenty of Boo's into it, that
is, provided you sing it before half-past nine.
(Sing first verse and chorus, then first two lines of
the repeat chorus. Then business of stopping
orchestra.)
I want to talk to that lady in the third seat. I'll guarantee
Boo's never passed her lips. (Talking to lady in stalls.) Of
course, Madam, if you don't like the Boo's you can say
"Ginger Beer" if you like, although, mind you, I'd like you
to put some spirit into it. Sings—What do you think of the
Kaiser? Now, then, altogether the chorus over again, and
don't be afraid to count out the Kaiser.
(Sings Chorus right through.)
Chas. Vaude's Special War Gags for Two when singing,
"WHAT DO YOU THINK OF THE KAISER?"
The Kaiser at present can only walk on one foot
How do you make that out?
Well, he's lost a Blucher.
We can go and sit down in our best restaurants and eat
off the finest dinner service in the world; but the Kaiser at
has to use enamelled plates.
Why?
He's lost his Dresden.
They held a picnic party, in Europe so they say,
England France and Russia, went out for the day.
Belgium and Italy joined the throng, made it one concern,
John Bull booked the tickets to Berlin and return.
When Kaiser Bill rushed up and cried, my wife, boys, have you
seen her?
They said, she's booked your ticket, Bill, one single, Saint
Helena.
The Kaiser can't send a telegram in Germany. The tele-
graph system is in a state of chaos.
How is that?
The Russians have got all the poles.
That settles me, then, because I was just going to send a
wire to Germany to ask them what they thought of the Kaiser.
Never mind, we'll ask the audience.
(Sings Chorus again and retires.)


Parody—" ITS A LONG WAY TO PAREE."
When Kaiser William's father died he left a funny will
With instructions to his son, the balmy blighter Bill,
The way to get to Paris, just as Bismarck did before.
Kaiser Bill he tried it. but now you hear him roar—
It's a long way into Paree, it's a long way somehow,
It's a long way into Paree, since that bull clog went "Bow
Wow":
Bull dogs, said silly Bill, bite hard I declare,
Don't let him fix into my trousers, for my heart's right there.
Parody—" IF WE LOST YOU."
The Germans were beat and on the retreat, back to Berlin
they fled,
A letter they wrote, to Kaiser Bill Goat,
And this was the way that it read:—
We've lost the battles in Belgium, we've lost in France we:
assure,
We've lost a lovely New Guinea, 110 doubt we'll lose some
more (Samoa);
You were a modern Napoleon, but you've met your Waterloo.
And now Mr. Kaiser, we all would be wiser, if we lost you
Vaude:—The Federal Government will now be able to look
ahead.
Verne: —Why will they?
Vaude:—Well, they've now got their Federal Site (sight).
Verne: —My word, Charley, that is good.
Vaude:—Good, why it's capital. And I always thought Labor
and Capital were opposed to each other.
Verne: —Well so they are.
Vaude:—This Government is Labor
Verne:—Well?
Vaude:—lsn't Labor looking after the Capital?


Parody-" LITTLE IRON CROSS ON HIS CHEST."
The Kaiser once made a request, said my soldiers will play at
their best,
To rape, kill and burn, and when they return, they can all
help to feather my nest.
So the Clown Prince immediately leaves, at the head of his
forty fat thieves,
And each robber there, when they Belgium laid bare, had a
little iron cross on his chest.
The Kaiser one night went to rest, when a devil came up to
suggest,
"William," said he, "my partner you'll be, for to follow me
you've done your best";
So the Kaiser he went down below, soon he is boss of the
show,
And the Devil himself. Bill put on the shelf, with a little
iron cross on his chest.
"MY HEART IS OVER IN IRELAND."
Written and composed by Chas._ Vaude.
I'm leaving you, Ireland, dear Emerald Isle :
As thousands have left you before;
But I'll face the world always wearing a smile,
No matter what Fate holds in store.
Good-bye, dear Mother, and Kathleen, my own,
Be brave, for you know I must go;
Though far from home, where'er I. roam,
'Twill gladden your hearts just to know, that—
Chorus.
My heart is over in Ireland,
Every St. Patrick's Day;
In all my dreams, friendship seems
Thousands of miles away.
Should Fortune be smiling or frowning.
My hair be brown or grey,
My heart is over in Ireland,
"Every St. Patrick's Day.
Once a year. Mother, when I'm far away,
Promise, my dear, that you will
Visit the places where I used to play,
And fancy I'm playing there still.
Then in the evening sit down by the door,
With Kathleen, my colleen, so fair,
Your two arms entwine and fancy they're mine,
Sure! You know I'd love to be there, for—
Chorus.
My heart is over in Ireland,
Every St. Patrick's Day;
In all my dreams, friendship seems
Thousands of miles away.
Should Fortune be smiling or frowning.
My hair be brown or grey,
My heart is over in Ireland,
Every St. Patrick's Day.
Music, Price 6d. per copy- Post Free, 7d.
29


PARODY.
No angel at all or saint is she,
This woman of whom I am singing;
She takes me for an MUG
Since our wedding bells ceased ringing.
She dresses her tresses with all kinds of fads.
Her fine shape it is made up of pads;
She's followed me for years and for years,
For her change of dress I've gone short of beers,
But she's bought a hobble,
That will cause her to wobble.
Chorus.
She'd walk fast, but she won't have the powei,
She'd like to run, but the skirt won't allow her;
Every night if it is light or it is dark,
She likes to roam on her own through the park,
But in her hobble skirt, she can't over-step the mark.
PARODY.
My Wife she got stage struck, one night she said to me,
Now if upon the stage I went, soon famous I should be.
I've got a lovely figure, all I want is your consent.
And then round to a music hall my poor Matilda went.
Chorus.
Then the man said to her what can you do
To earn your screw, what can you do?
Then she said when clothes I only wear a tew,
I'm just like Venus looked in Rome,
When she appeared she looked just like a cannibal,
Like a Cannibal, No clothes at all,
Then a man in the Pit he fell in a fit.
And said "I'd like to see more of you.


Pathetic Story Ballad —
" DADDY'S IN THE DARDANELLES."
Written by Charles Vaude. Composed by Roger Cameron.
Little Billy's playing with other little boys,
Little Billy's using soldiers for his toys;
Billy's playing war games, chest filled out with pride,
Billy's just killed forty, and, twenty's laid aside,
Got 110 time for marbles, unless they're cannon balls.
A whistle for a trumpet, to practise bugle calls,
When people ask young Billy why at war he likes to play
Billy's at "attention" to very proudly say:
Chorus.
Daddy's in the Dardanelles,
F"ar away over the sea;
Daddy's in the Dardanelles,
Fighting for you and for mc.
I'm writing a letter to Daddy,
Over the Water's blue,
To fight all he can, and when I'm a man,
I'll be a soldier too.
Billy has the Kaiser imprisoned in the yard,
When Billy's feeling cross he kicks the Kaiser very hard.
Mother's sore with Billy, he smashed her soup tureen,
Through being 'neath the table a-playing "submarine,"
Grandad's feeling cross; too, he's gone and barked his shin,
For Billy dug a trench which poor Grandad tumbled in.
Mother is his "Red Cross Nurse," and so is Sister May,
At school they knock off cricket when they hear young
Billy say:
Chorus.
Daddy's in the Dardanelles,
Far away over the sea;
Daddy's in the Dardanelles,
Fighting for you and for me.
I'm writing a letter to Daddy,
Over the Waters blue,
To fight all he_ can but when I'm a man,
I'll be a soldier too.
Price, 6d. per copy; Post Free, 7d.


Charles Vaude and Joe Slater's Great Patriotic Song—
" IF ENGLAND WANTS A HAND, WELL HERE IT IS."
The Name and Fame of old England,
Is threatened by foes to-day;
Our Liberty, Our Destiny,
Is in danger, so they say.
Comes a message o'er the Ocean,
A message to our Sunny land,
England calls Australia's Soldiers
We must answer her command
Chorus.
If England wants a hand, Well! here it is,
If England wants a hand, Well! Ihere it is,
They'll show the enemy they're as hard as nails;
The boys of Victoria and New South Wales,
South Australia and the West, my lads,
Queensland and Tassy know their biz.
So! By the dear old Motherland, they will proudly
their
stand,
If England wants a hand. Well! here it is
The bugles are loudly calling,
The drums they are rolling too
So rally round The Flag, my lads,
Show the world we're Britons true.
Down with tyrants now f<?r ever
Keep our dear old Flag unfurl'd,
Show our foes the British Empire
Is a big thing in is this world.
Chorus.
If England wants a hand, Well! here it is,
If England wants a hand, Well! here it is,
They'll show the enemy they're as hard as nails;
The boys of Victoria .and New South Wales,
South Australia and the West, my lads,
Queensland and Tassy know their biz.
So! By the dear old Motherland, they will proudly
their
stand,
If England wants a hand Well! here it is
Price, 6d. per copy; Post Free, 7d. "Regal" Disc Record, 2/-.


\ A \ [J\
0 1 lot
I7\ M *\
M M M
.M 2.1 01 1 j I
.O. f
f
If Emolamd wants
A HfldD-- Here it is.'l
If England Wants
a Hand-
Here it is !
A Copy of above Silk Badge will be presented gratis to all sending
7d. for a copy of this song, to be posted by the publishers of
this book.
DINSDALES' PTY. LTD.,
Swanston Street, Melbourne.
/"P THE ATLAS PRESS.
MELBOURNE. _£/


CHARLES VAUDE'S POPULAR
COMPOSITIONS.
THERE'S SOMEONE IN AUSTRALIA .. 1/9
Violet Lorraine's Great Panto, success.
KOSCIUSKO 1/9
Nella Webb's biggest Tivoli Triumph.
WHAT DO YOU THINK OF THE KAISER ? 6d.
A big " hit " in Australia and England.
MY LITTLE LUBRA . . . . .... 1/-
The most original Australian aboriginal
song.
HE'S A JOLLY GOOD FELLOW .. .. 6d.
Fred Bluett's Australian and English
success.
THAT FUNNY LITTLE TIE 6d.
Also sung by Fred Bluett.
LET ME HOLD YOUR HAND TILL THE
TRAM GOES BY 6d.
A Humorous Chorus Song
I KNEW THAT THERE WAS SOMETHING
I FORGOT 6d.
Clever lyrics and music, screamingly funny.
IF ENGLAND WANTS A HAND, WELL
HERE IT IS . . . . . . . . • • 6d.
Charles Vaude's and Joe Slater's big
Patriotic song.
WE'LL HAVE A GAME OF SWEETHEARTS
FOR OLD TIME'S SAKE 6d.
A dainty pretty waltz ballad, always popu-
lar.
BABY'S EYES <>d.
A tremendously popular song on records
and music.
DADDY'S IN THE DARDANELLES . .. 6d.
Destinedyto be the most popular "pathetic
story-ballad in Australia.
(To-be published shortly.)
SING US A SONG OF AUSTRALIA .. 6d.
(" Cooee —r" s twill remind us of home sweet
home ")
One of his very best efforts.. Will exceed
in popularity " The Miner's Dream of
Home." v .
MY MAORI QUEEN . . ...... 6d.
An original fascinating Maori Love Song.
MY HEART IS OVER IN IRELAND .. 6d.
One of the very best of Pathetic Irish
Ballads.
Copies of the above can be obtained from all Music-
sellers in Australasia, or direct from the Publishers,
postage Id. each extra.
DINSDALES' PTY. LTD.,
269 Swanston Street, Melbourne.
