

CHASTITY AND HEALTH.
S chastity conducive to health or otherwise? This
Sis a Question which thousands of youths and
young men have asked themselves, and have
been ruined body and soul, ruined for time and
for eternity, by giving it a wrong answer.
God, who designed the human body, knows what is good
for it. His Book condemns unchastity in the strongest
terms. It not only declares that “whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge/ 1 but it speaks of the physical
evils of unchastity in such words as these: “He that com-
mitteth fornication sinneth against his own body,” and,
“he that soweth to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap cor-
ruption.”
God, in making the human body, ordained that the moral
and the physical laws relating to it should be in unison,
and that what is morally wrong should never, by any pos-
sibility, he physically beneficial. It is true in a physical
as well as in a spiritual sense that Tools, because of their
transgression and because of their iniquities, are afflicted.”
It is not generally known what a long train of diseases
result from unchastity, which are frequently attributed to
other causes, even in death certificates, sometimes, doubt-
less, in order not to cause additional grief to the relatives
of the deceased. Heart disease, consumption, epileptic
fits, fever, brain disease, and insanity, are produced in
many instances by unchastity, including unchastity of
thought. Other maladies need not be named. Let -those
who abuse their imagination take warning, and those
who in any way defile the human body.
Chastity is favourable * alike to physical, mental, and
moral vigour. Divine Revelation, enlightened science, and
individual experience, agree in emphasising this fact.


Marriage is ordained by God for the continuation of the
human race, but not least for the promotion of human
happiness by means of the innocent enjoyments of family
life. It should never be thought of as a mere means of
gratifying animal indulgence. Grave evils flow from re-
garding it in that light. Within the marriage relationship,
God demands by His law in our nature that we should
practice self-restraint as the equivalent of continence be-
fore marriage. By observing that law, many physical
calamities may be escaped, and much weakness and
indecision of will.
But perhaps some reader is saying—“ What am I to do?
I know by the state of my body and my brain that all that
has been said is true. But I am no longer master of my
passions. They are master of me.”
There is one thing that can be done in such a sad and
pitiable condition. You can come to Him who is able to
cast out unclean spirits, and to save you from them day
by day. '**
Carefully mark this great truth—That the Lord Jesus
Christ is able to save to the uttermost all who come unto
God through Him, not only from the just punishment of
their sins in the next world, but also from the dominion
of sin in this present life.
“Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise
of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.” To
be thoroughly saved, is to be saved bodily, mentally,
spiritually. Who will have such a salvation from sin?
That is the salvation which God in His goodness, long
suffering, and mercy is offering free and now to every
reader of these lines, A. S. D.
—
[For booklets dealing with the choice between Purity and Impurity
and True Manliness write to the Hon, Sec. Australasian White Cross
League, 56 Elizabeth Street, or Box 1280, G.P.0., Sydney, enclosing
2d. in stamps.]
