

IT ©l©t abo^t
h|I OugtroH®.
MB — - =-
KERCERT MATTHEWS.
%
USEFUL HINTS FOR
CAPITALISTS, WOULD-BE COLONISTS,
AND OTHERS.
Just the kind of information which is so
often difficult to obtain.
Price Sixpence,
rv?
\J / BOSCOMBE:
A. Sutton & Co., i, Boscombe Chambers,. _
w


%
I


CHAT ABOUT
AUSTRALIA.
■
HERBERT MATTHEWS.
USEFUL HINTS FOR
usuruL fiiiNis run
CAPITALISTS, WOULD-BE COLONISTS,
AMD OTHT7PC
AND OTHERS.
Just the kind of information which is so often difficult
to obtain.
Price Sixpence
BOSCOMBE:
A. SUTTON & Co., i. BOSCOMBE CHAMBERS.
BOURNEMOUTH.


PREFACE.
When a writer summons up courage enough to launch another book—
however small—upon the ocean of literature, through which the civilized
world is now sailing, he must first of all be careful to ascertain whether
his production is really needed. He is bound to ask himself, is there any
writing already published which conveys to the public precisely the same
information, or idea which he wishes to impart ? It seems to me that this
“ Chat about Australia ” supplies a need, and it therefore affords me pleasure
to recommend it for perusal. Of course when a man chats about what he
knows and believes, in a familiar manner, to some friend by the fire-side,
he does not labour to express himself according to the “ Art of Rhetoric,”
neither does he study his “ periods ” after the manner of the perfed orator.
We must not therefore exped in this “ Chat those literary excellencies
which sometimes charm us like pleasant musical sounds, eveji though we
may fail to understand their meaning. But what this “ Chat ” gives us,
though plain and unadorned, is just what many persons want. Thefailier
seeking openings for his sons; the mother for her daughters ; the capitalist
wishing to employ his gold ; the agriculturalist desirous of transplanting
his energy and industry ; the young man with a few pounds, and no home-
ties, as well as the pleasure or health seeker ; in short “ the man in the
street who wants to know ” will find in this little book fads for information
and guidance, in regard to the land of the Southern Cross, most useful
and helpful.
I commend its pages therefore with pleasure, believing that they will be
profitable to many, and I heartily wish tor the writer that measure of suc-
cess which I believe this " Chat about Australia ” deserves.
(Rev.) FRANCIS SLOPER.
Boscomhe.


INDEX.
CHAP.
1. —Sydney: New South Wales
2. —Melbourne; Vidloria
3. —Adelaide : South Australia
4. —Village Settlements : South Australia
5. Brisbane; Queensland
6 - Perth : Western Australia
7.-Hobart: Tasmania
g.—Mildura : Vidloria ; Renmark ; South Australia..
9. — Broken Hill; New South Wales .. .. .. ;
10. —General Remarks on Australia .. .. .. ;
xi,—General Advice on Sundry Topics ..
12. —Various Items of Information .. .. .. ;
13. —Philip Island : Vidloria .. .. •• •• i
14. —Bulwarra; New South Wales .. .. •• <
15. —Ballarat : Vidloria .. .. •• •• ‘
16. Conclusion .. •• •• • *


■
I
'


AUSTRALIA
Chapter I.
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
One of the most enjoyable places to live in, to be found
throughout the wide world, is undoubtedly the famous city of
Sydney, in the Australian colony of New South Wales.
At least this is the verdicft of one, who has spent fourteen years
travelling about the globe, sometimes of necessity and
occasionally by choice, and who will endeavour in this short
sketch, to furnish some understandable reasons for such an
assertion, to those who have not had the advantage, or dis-
advantage whichever it is, of being as rolling stones, but
who no doubt take an interest in such a well known city as
Sydney now is, with close upon half-a-million of inhabitants.
To a new arrival the names of the places and roads
in Sydney sound familiar, for instance there is Oxford
Street, Paddington, Waterloo, Surrey Hills, Hyde Park
and numerous other designations which always sound
home-like to those of us who have duties to perform, that
keep us in our native isle.
Of course the greatest attraction to Sydney is its magnifi-
cent harbour, and even that expressive adjedtive fails to
adequately convey its merits.
To enter Jackson’s Bay for the first time, is a sight never
to be forgotten in this world, and worth going many thousand
miles to see.
At its entrance are two large rocks, which form as it were,
the gate posts to the harbour. They are now converted into
strong forts, with all modern improvements of a war-like
nature, but passing through these, on either side are to be
observed little bays and inlets, called by such names as Rose


Bay, and Lavender Bay, so lavishly decorated by nature with
the varied beautiful tints of native green—amongst which the
weeping willow trees, seeming as it were to kiss the surface
of the water when rustled by the gentle breeze —are to be
especially noticed.
The view of the seven miles, traversed before arriving
at the Port of Sydney, is varied with beauty, and quite
unsurpassed in scenic effecft, being like a living panorama.
Having arrived at Sydney, the attractions of the bay
seem to increase, instead of diminish, for if oysters are
required they can be taken off the rocks ad libitum, that is, if
you know the spots to make for. If boating is in request, it is
to be had with the assistance of sails or without; if a picnic is
on the boards, there is no place in the world where so many
tempting nooks are to be found; should the desire be to only
look on at the shipping in the harbour, passing backwards
and forwards, the spectator finds provided for his con-
venience and comfort a plentiful supply of seats arranged
most advantageously under shady trees; should the taste be
in the direction of a swim in the “ briny,” excellent baths are
provided which can be patronised free of charge; in faCt the
bay is an inexhaustible source of healthful amusement and
recreation.
And again, Sydney is so plentifully supplied with sea
side resorts away from the harbour, as well as on it, a few
miles out of town, just a nice ride by the tram, such as
“Bondi” where there is a nice Aquarium; “Botany Bay”
in days gone by the destination of conviCts, but now noted for
its pleasure gardens; “Cogee” where first-class fishing can
be had, and “ Manly Beach ” six miles by steamboat which run
frequently throughout the day, and many other places too
numerous to mention. There is an abundance of theatres
and music halls, for the benefit of the amusement-loving
public; whilst on the other hand, theologians and philan-
thropists, have no cause to grumble at the scarcity of places
of worship, from Episcopalian and Roman Catholic Cathedrals
to the more modest Mission Halls.
Pidlure Galleries, Museums and Public Libraries of course
are to be found both in and around the city.
Military affairs are well looked after, as evidenced by the
spacious barracks at Paddington whilst the public buildings,
such as the Post Office, Town Hall —reckoned one of the finest


in the world, —and Government and Custom House Offices are
worthy the reputation of the city.
There is also a “ Paddy’s Market ” where, on Saturday
nights, all the fun imaginable is to be found on a much larger
scale than in an ordinary “ Fair.”
As to living expenses, where can they be had cheaper ?
Meat from id. per lb.; bread 2d. a 2-lb. loaf; fruit,
vegetables, and fish correspondingly reasonable. Cloth
goods such as coats, trousers, etc., almost, if not quite,
the same as at home, for Sydney is a free trade port.
As to the climate, it is simply perfection nine months out
of the twelve —if you like it warm —but dry and healthy.
There is an excellent system of drainage, and a good supply
of water laid on to each house.
Board and residence, too, with three meals a day and
meat at each meal can be had from 12/- a week and upwards.
Of course the flies and mosqitoes are rather troublesome,
especially at first, as they are partial to “ new chums,” but
after a time they are not noticed much.
The people are very sociable and friendly, there is nothing
stiff or “stuck-up” about them, and they have a happy way of
making a stranger feel at home in a very short time. Truly
it would be difficult in the whole world to find a place with so
many advantages and so few disadvantages.
Of course, the labour market there—as everywhere—is
glutted, and any place would be miserable with no employ-
ment if you have to depend upon it for support; but for
a man with, say a pound a week, to live on, nowhere else
could so much be obtained under such favourable circum-
stances with the money. Or for any retired lady or gentleman
fond of out-door exercise and sport, of riding, driving, walking,
boating, swimming, or fishing. Sydney, with its charming
surroundings, not forgetting the prolific Orange Groves of
the Paramatta River, is head and shoulders above any other
earthly paradise.
The extent of the whole colony of New South Wales—of
which Sydney is the capital—is 309,175 square miles, and the
population is 1,223,370 which includes 14,156 Chinese, and
8,280 Aborigines.
It was discovered and taken possession of by Captain Cook
in the year 1770.
Sydney being such an exceptionally fine city, both in


situation and in construction naturally causes it to take a
very prominent position in any description of New South
Wales. The other chief towns are : Newcastle, famous for
coal, 100 miles north of Sydney on the Hunter River;
Paramatta, an orange district ; Goulbourne, and Broken
Hill, celebrated for silver (but of which more later on);
Bathurst and Maitland.
The climate may be described as that of Southern Italy, it
is so exceptionally dry and pure. Wool and metals form the
staple exports, and there is a vast and growing trade in frozen
meat. Wine is also largely exported as the colony is suitable
for the cultivation of grape vines, and indeed for all kinds of
fruit. The pastoral and mining industries are, however, pre-
eminent.
Nearly 250,000 square miles of land—exclusive of mines—
are held under lease from Government, some of the pastoral
runs amounting to 300,000 acres. Gold was first discovered
in 1839, and the auriferous area extends about 70,000 square
miles.
There are immense tracfts in the Northern, Western, and
Southern districts, entirely unexplored at present and the
colony is exceedingly rich in silver, tin, lead, copper, iron, coal,
and other minerals.
The Government owns 2,263 miles of railway which are
connected with the systems of both Victoria and Queensland.
The revenue according to the census of 1894 was /9>851,000,
and the expenditure the exports amounted to
and the imports the chief products
being wool, tallow, gold, copper, tin, silver, leather, oranges
and frozen meat.


Chapter 11.
MELBOURNE, VICTORIA.
Perhaps there is no place in the world that can rival the
famed city of Melbourne, the capital of the Australian colony
of Victoria. In age it is only between fifty and sixty years,
and yet it possesses a population of over 500,000. The par-
liament houses are on such a stupendous scale, one would think
they were built for the world’s legislation. The Law Courts
with their Italian Dome will contrast favourably with
any in the world. The Hotels and Coffee palaces, some of
them containing 500 bedrooms, are magnificent American-
like structures. The shops in Burke and Collin Streets
equal any of those in the most fashionable cities of
Europe. The Theatres and Music Halls are fitted with all
the latest novelties for the convenience and comfort of those
by whom they are patronised. The Railway stations and also
Cable trams are thoroughly up to date. The Churches and
Chapels are monuments of ecclesiastical beauty, such as sacred
edifices often fail to attain to. In fact, the whole appearance
of the place is that of 200 or 300 years’ growth.
As to the people, they may be described in the first place, as
“ Melbourne proud.” Pity the poor creature who is not of the
same opinion, and w T ho ventures to say as much. In the
second place they undoubtedly are, as a rule, smart, business-
like men, but in their pride of place, they forget that they are
indebted to some other part of the world for the education
they have received in business matters. One would think, to
hear them talk, that everything they knew they had learnt in
Melbourne, but that cannot be, as some of them are older than
the city. And especially does this feeling manifest itself when
the city of Sydney is mentioned. Talk about holding a red
rag to a bull, why it’s nothing to it. The feeling of jealousy in
that quarter is so strong that they are even tempted some-
times to deny the beauty of Jackson’s Bay, or if admitting it,
they console themselves with the thought that although not


possessing such beauties of nature, they more than make up for
the deficiency in Melbourne by artificial beauty, but where
to find it would be a puzzle to a new arrival, for in order to
admire :he beauties of Melbourne, or to have a high opinion
of the place you must undoubtedly live there.
The surroundings, however, are very enjoyable. If you feel
inclined to bask in the sun on the sea shore, at a distance of
about four miles is the St. Kilda beach, with a thoroughly
fashionable parade, pier, and esplanade with all the usual
accessories that go to make up a stylish watering place, besides
which there are other resorts of less notoriety.
The whole of the suburbs such as Windsor, Kew, Prahran,
South Yarra, Emerald Hill, Albert Park and others are very
pretty with houses consisting chiefly of the ground floor only,
surrounded by verandahs and gardens of the gayest.
The Museum, Reading Room, Zoological Park and Botanic
Gardens are certainly well worth a visit, whilst a more extend-
ed day’s trip is by steamboat to Geelong and back, a distance
of about ninety miles, at the moderate expense of only one
shilling.
Melbourne, as a commercial city, is noted for its factories,
it being the chief manufacturing centre in Australia with a
customs tariff, out and out Protectionist. It received its great
impetus to prosperity at the time of the great gold discoveries
in the fifties, and with various changes, some of which have
checked its onward career, has continued on the whole to
make phenomenal progress.
The agricultural industry is exceedingly flourishing, as
Victoria has a rainfall above the Australian average, and
cultivators of wheat and fruit are not subject very often to
the inconvenience of a water famine, whilst the dairying
industry, largely assisted by government bonuses has made
enormous advancement in recent years.
It must be conceded by their most jealous rivals that
Victorians in general, and Melbournites in particular, have a
great deal of “go” in them, which have been proved time
after time by the rapid way they have recovered themselves
after a land boom or a bank reconstruction crisis.
The people of Melbourne take the palm from all Australians
for their partiality to holidays and sports of various kinds, but
more especially to cricket and horse races, they possess a
splendid oval and race course at Flemington, that is reckoned


the finest in the world, and certainly the most incredulous
visitor must admit after personal inspection that the situation
seems undoubtedly a natural race-course, supplemented by
all that art and skill can add to make it in every way perfect.
Who that has visited the city now under discussion has not
heard of Cup Day ? It is the event of the year, when
thousands and tens of thousands of people flock thousands of
miles from all quarters of the continent, as well as from even
New Zealand and Tasmania.
To speak generally of Melbourne. It is a well built handsome
city, laid out upon a scientific plan with streets running at
right angles to each other, and the buildings of a commercial
nature are on an extensive scale. The river on which it
stands, the Yarra, is but a narrow stream naturally, but by the
expenditure ofmillions of pounds it is so improved, that it is now
navigable for large steamships. Of course the gold diggings
at Ballarat, Bendigo and other places, form the principal
facftor in the prosperity of the great city, next to which, sheep-
raising must be reckoned as forming an important part.
The population of the whole of the colony of Victoria is
1,173,469 of whom there are 200 Aborigines according to the
census of 1894. It is the southernmost colony of the continent
of Australasia, and contains 87,884 square miles out of which
there is an area under cultivation of close upon 3,000,000 acres.
Vine culture is successfully pursued, and over 2,000,000
gallons of wine are exported annually. There are some 1,500,000
acres under wheat cultivation, and fruit of all kinds as well as
vegetables which are grown in abundance. The climate is
similar to that of southern Europe, with hot winds in
the summer months and occasional droughts.
The Government is similar to that of New South
Wales, and consists of a Governor appointed by
the Crown, an upper and a lower House, the members
of the latter receiving remuneration at the rate of
a year. There are 3,000 miles of railway the property
of the State, and these are continually being added to. In 1894
the imports were £10,000,000 and the exports
The estimated revenue 1894-5 was and the expen-
diture
Living expenses as in all parts of Australia are
exceedingly reasonable, board and lodging being obtain-
able, from 10/- a week and upwards, including three meals


a day and meat at each. The hot winds are the most trying
climatic condition experienced by new arrivals, the sensation
being something similar to standing in front of a large oven,
with the door open and a small boy throwing sand in your face
and over your clothes, if it is possible to stretch the imagination
as far as that in order to realise the dust storm that always
accompanies a hot wind. The passage in Holy Writ “ the
wind passeth over it, and it is gone ” is literally experienced
during the time of a hot wind, as fields green with nature’s
beauty are often transformed as by the change of a magic
lantern slide, into bare plains destitute of vegetation. There
are enormous multitudes of flies all over the colony, and in
various places mosquitoes abound in millions. Snakes and
poisonous reptiles are to be found in the scrub, and especially
in wet marsh ground, but on the whole there are many worse
countries to live in than the colony of Victoria, as with all its
drawbacks it has many charms, for although not possessing
quite perpetual summer, nine months out of the twelve as a
rule, leave nothing to be desired. Undoubtedly with its rich
deposits of gold, its waving fields of corn, its luxurious vine-
yards, and many scientifically constructed creameries, adding
to all this the industry of its inhabitants, it does not require
an inspired prophet to predict a most successful future for the
colony of Victoria.


Chapter 111.
ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Adelaide has been described by some one, as the Queen
City of the South, and certainly in some respedts it merits the
appellation.
Amongst many favourable features may be mentioned the
exquisite cleanliness that prevails, the wide well-kept roads,
the broad pavements, some of real marble, the almost perfedl
system of drainage, the plentiful supply of never failing clear
sparkling water, and the absence of rowdyism (or as it is called
in the colonies larrikanism). Besides which must be added,
the almost perfedl site chosen for the city, surrounded on all
sides, but that of the port, by picturesque hills, forming a last-
ing monument to the keen foresight and excellent judgment
of Colonel Light, its founder.
Adelaide has also been called the City of Churches and from
the number of spires and steeples to be seen from any high
ground, it would appear as if the father of that title was guided
in its adoption by common-sense, however that may be, the
fadl remains, that besides sacred edifices, the handsome Post
Office, at the corner of King William Street and Victoria
Square, with the spacious Town Hall almost opposite, and
the many well-built Goverment offices near and in the square,
together with the elaborate Insurance and Banking premises,
private chambers, newspaper buildings, and the Houses of
Parliament one wing of which is completed with a white marble
front, standing on the opposite corner to Government House
in North Terrace from which may be seen the Museum,
Public Library and Reading Rooms, the University, the hand-
some Hospital and the Exhibition Building, the whole making
Adelaide undoubtedly one of the best built cities in the
Southern Hemisphere.


The inhabitants number 120,000, and therefore it will be
seen at once, that it is not of such commercial importance as
either Sydney or Melbourne which are each four times as
populous, but in a different way Adelaide holds a unique
position, as it is the last port of call, and the first on
arrival, of the Royal Mail Steamers, with the exception of
Albany which is more of a telegraph station than a port, and it
is also the centre of the telegraphic system from one side of
the continent to the other.
There are many places ot interest in and around the city,
such for instance as the view to be obtained from mount Lofty,
a lovely drive, with excellent scenic effeCt, the whole distance
of twelve miles.
There are several sea-side resorts such as Glenely, Largs
Bay, The Semaphore, Henly Beach, or the Grange, all of
them possessing well-kept piers and varying in distance five
to ten miles from the Post Office,
There are well laid out gardens and park lands all round as
lungs to the city, and the Botanic Gardens are considered, by
the most qualified judges to be the best in Australia, whilst
the Zoological collection is certainly displayed to the utmost
advantage.
The climate may be described as similar to that of the South
of Spain, and is most enjoyable, a hot wind seldom blowing
in South Australia. The Colony as can be seen by a reference
to the map, should be called Central not South Australia, runs
from North to South, and contains an area of 903,690 square
miles,with a population of 336,413 (according to the last census)
who are proud of the faCt, that it has never been a convict
colony.
In the Southern portion there are vast traCts of agricultural
land, wooded mountain ranges and waterless plains, with re-
puted rich metalliferous deposits. There is very little known
of the far North, and although there are large areas capable
of supporting an enormous population, a good deal of the
interior is valueless to agriculturalists, whatever it may in
time prove to the mineralogist.
But speaking generally of the colony it is safe to say that
the productiveness of the soil depends upon the rainfall which
is subject to remarkable variations. The coldest months are
June, July and August, and the warmest December, January,


and February, the thermometer registering in the shade on
exceptional occasions between no and 120 degrees.
The Government consists of a Governor appointed by the
Crown, and an Upper and a Lower House, the members of
both Chambers receiving a year.
The Colony was proclaimed a Province in 1836, and it may
be described as essentially wheat-growing, as the Murray
region produces the finest wheat that is grown in the world.
Vine culture has lately commanded increased attention, and
the yearly export of wine is rapidly increasing.
There is a large trade done in export fruits, and gold is
widely distributed over the Colony. Copper however ranks
first, but there are other minerals in abundance. There are
1,610 miles of railway owned by the Government.
The revenue in 1895 was /"2,424,51s and the expenditure
Exports /”8,463,936, Imports
South Australia is noted for being the most democratic of
the group, and in the next chapter will be found an account
in brief of their village settlements which certainly are an
interesting and instructive study.


Chapter IV.
VILLAGE SETTLEMENTS, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
In these days of wars, or at any rate rumours of wars, when
the world seems to be travelling at such a pace, that it almost
puts you in mind of a little child learning to walk, and im-
mediately commencing to run, thus being in imminent danger
of tumbling over; when the word socialism is in everyones’
mouth ; when the masses are receiving education up to a
standard never before heard of; when the Anglo-Saxon race
is increasing so rapidly, not only at home, but in the colonies
and throughout the world; the labour market seems to suffer
from a chronic disease of overflow, and anything that will
tend to settle the unemployed problem, must be worthy the
serious consideration of all right thinking people.
That a new experiment should emanate from the Province
of South Australia, is not to be altogether wondered at, when
the reputation it has long since held of being the most demo-
cratic community in the whole of Australasia, is taken into
account, and also when we consider that it is the only colony
that has not only passed a bill for female suffrage, but has
coupled with it an equal right with men to sit as represent-
atives in parliament, although at the time of writing they
have not had a general eletffion since.
The members of the ministry responsible for the experiment
now under notice are: Messrs. Kingston, Premier ;
Cockburn, an ex-Premier ; Holder, an ex-Premier ; Playford,
an ex-Premier (since made Agent General, and whose place in
the government has been taken by Mr. Jenkins), Gillen and
Gordon.
Mr. Kingston, Premier, was returned as a labour representa-
tive. He is a lawyer of some repute, a Queen’s Counsel, and
his father made most of his money out of the Burra Burra
copper mines.
Mr. Holder, Treasurer, was formerly a school-master,
afterwards proprietor of the “ Burra Record ” newspaper
which he has since disposed of.


Dr. Cockburn formerly practised his profession at a place
called Jamestown in South Australia, but has since retired
although only a young man.
Mr. Gillen a storekeeper at Clare in the same Province.
Mr. Jenkins, an American, formerly a book-agent, who took
the place of the present Agent General, Hon. Thos. Playford
a market gardener, with a re-arrangement of portfolios.
Mr. Gordon, a solicitor and the government representative
in the Upper House, son of a Bible Christian minister of
Gawler, South Australia, and whose brother has been ap-
pointed police magistrate.
Such is the ministry, who recognising that something had
to be done with the unemployed question, during the recess
of parliament, formulated a scheme which bids fair to prove a
success.
They first of all granted about 1,000 acres of government
land on perpetual lease, subject to necessary stipulations,
situated on the banks of the river Murray, after it had been
inspected by two or three pra(stical men appointed by a com-
mittee of the unemployed, and the government undertook to
take the unemployed there free of charge.
The distance from Adelaide is 120 miles by rail, and then
by steam boat, and the government further undertook to
advance each settlement in cash 50 per cent, of their improve-
ments, on the certificate of a government inspeiftor, by way
of loan, which would appear to be very liberal terms, but the
difficulty arose, how were the pioneers to live to start with ?
Of course they had to rough it in tents, and they were able to
obtain rabbits, and fish in abundance, but even that would
hardly be sufficient to maintain life without bread, so a Mr.
Thomas Smeaton, a Town Councillor of Adelaide, with the
assistance of benevolent friends, organised a “ Village Settle-
ment Aid Society,” and the funds thus collected, being
supplemented by government aid in advance of the improve-
-ments as arranged, supplied them with all the necessaries
of life, whilst they were getting settled at their future home,
and afterwards the funds were devoted to the purchase of
sheep, cattle, horses, farm implements, machinery for pump-
ing the water from the river for irrigation purposes, and
generally to assist them in their endeavour to make a living
out of the land.
Each settlement is managed by a committee appointed by


the workers, the rules being very strict as to abstinence
from intoxicating beverages, and they also include one to the
effeCt, that every member has to devote eight hours work a
day to the general good, after which he can employ his spare
time in the garden of his own house.
The members of the settlement stipulate to help each other,
to build a four-roomed house, on half an acre of land for each
family, which is considered private property. All the
other monies or earnings, all provisions and everything else
to be in common ; the rations being served out so strictly, that
if any member should receive a present of a few luxuries
from outside friends they would all have to be merged in the
common stock.
Each settlement is composed of from 100 to 200 able-bodied
adults, besides the usual number of children and there are
now some 8 to 10 of these settlements on the banks of the
river Murray, separated from each other by some two or
three miles.
The Articles of Association, although differing m some
matters of detail are very similar.
They have been established two years, or a little more,
at the time of writing, and therefore the most difficult part of
their undertaking, viz: —to get a fair start, seems to have been
overcome.
A great deal of the land is cleared, fenced, and under crop,
and each year sees more under cultivation.
Flourishing industries have been established in brick-
making and wood-sawing, besides in some cases the erection
of plant for irrigation purposes including steam power, and
also a goodly number of houses, which are now rapidly
replacing the temporary tents.
Although at the first the settlers had a great deal of wet,
rough, unpleasant weather to put up with, and nothing
but canvas tents to shelter them, their tempers have been
good, and their hardships have been borne almost with cheer-
fulness especially by the women and children, who have no
fear of drunken husbands now, although many of the pioneers
had been subject to that curse. In faCt so marked is their
progress, and so industriously do they work, that upon
members of parliament accepting the invitation of the govern-
ment to pay a visit of inspection, many who had voted against


the measure and pooh-poohed the idea, came away not only
converted but enthusiastic in the cause.
Of course each community has had to weed out the “duffers”
as their motto is “ no work, no food,” but even that operation
has gone on quietly with no open rupture, the ne’er do wells
being unable or unwilling to live so far away from the drink,
having mostly left of their own accord ; still the 1,500 or so
contented settlers to-day, were all, or nearly all members of
the unemployed, who used to assemble in the public square,
and cheer the ignorant agitators who usually addressed their
gatherings, and they one and all seem to have fresh life and
ambition instilled into their natures, and are never tired of
eulogising the six gentlemen previously mentioned, after
whom most of the settlements are named.
Surely we at home can learn some lessons from our brothers
and sisters, living in that part of Greater Britain known as
the democratic province of South Australia, where education
is free and compulsory ; where the franchise is on the “one
man, one vote ” principle ; where ladies are eligible, not only
as electors, but as legislators ; where members of parliament
are paid ; where labour is so well represented, that it may be
said to hold the balance of power ; and where there are so
many ex-premiers in the ministry led by the working man’s
candidate as Premier ; for the fadl remains that something
like 1,500 people, who formerly belonged to the unemployed,
and therefore dissatisfied class, are now happy and contented,
with plenty to eat, clothes to wear, and healthful fresh air to
breathe.
Besides, nearly every settlement now has a school-room,
which constantly is available as a concert hall. Most of
them have a piano and boast of a town band. The different
settlements invite each other to special entertainments and
sports, and they try to surpass one another, not only in
amusements but in material progress.
The credit of this South Australian undertaking belongs
first of all to the Kingston ministry, supplemented so ably by
Mr. Smeaton’s Village Aid Association, without which it
undoubtedly would have spe’t failure, but which was the
means of directing benevolence into a profitable channel.


Chapter V.
BRISBANE, QUEENSLAND.
The approach to Brisbane by water is somewhat remark-
able, as regards the last 17 or 18 miles of the journey up the
Brisbane River, a narrow stream —running into Morton Bay
—with high cliffs on each side, the channels following very
close indeed, banks of the river sometimes giving it the
appearance and reality of great danger. There are so many
twists and turns that large steamers are only managed by
the most experienced navigators, and as there is often a great
fog, or mist, over the water, their departure is at times very
uncertain.
The city is built right up the steep banks of the river, the
residential dwellings being frequently built upon wooden piles,
so that you can walk underneath them, for the double objeCl
of being cool and protection from earthquake shocks, which,
by the bye, the people in Australia think very little of.
The general appearance of Brisbane is extremely new,
straggling, ugly and dirty, and with the exception of a few of
the business streets, seem to have no pretence to uniformity ;
but the Colony is one of great possibilities, possessing coal,
gold and other mines.
The land in the southern portion is capable of producing
all the necessaries of a farming and cattle rearing district,
whilst that in the northern part is extremely fertile in tropical
productions. The climate is exceedingly hot, and the air is
alive with mosquitoes.
The Colony is sometimes liable to severe floods, by which,
from time to time, many lives have been lost.
No doubt Queensland has a great future before it,
especially if the alien labour question can be solved, as white
people do not seem suitable for sugar and other plantations,
which form the mainstay of tropical countries.
It comprises the north-east seClion of Australia, with an
area of 668,497 square miles, and a white population of 432,720.
Originall forming part of New South Wales, it was made an
independent colony 1859. The rainfall is very unequally


distributed. There is a great chain of hills connecting it with
Victoria and New South Wales, and it has a seaboard of 2,600
miles, and is characterised by vast treeless downs, and broad
stretches of heavily timbered land. There are 250,000 acres
under cultivation, and the country has illimitable resources
for emigrants with capital. The Government is composed of
a Governor appointed by the Crown, and two Houses of Par-
liament—an upper and a lower, the members of the latter
receiving a year. There are 2,000 miles of railway
owned by the Government. The chief trade is in exports of
gold, silver, copper, wool, sugar, hides and skins, tallow, timber,
and frozen and preserved meat. The exports amount to nearly
and the imports to about half as much.
The pastoral industry—of which the Darling Downs’ district
is the centre —produces in the form of wool, tallow, hides,
frozen meat and live stock about 60 per cent, of the exports.
The herds amount to about 7,000,000, and the flocks to
25,000,000.
By artesian boring, water has been obtained in many places,
and the success of the system, it is to be hoped, will render the
colony independent of drought. The sugar crop is about
100,000 tons. Wheat is grown in the western districts. The
yield of gold in one year was 615,558 ozs. The population of
Brisbane, the capital, is 95,567, the town next in importance
being Rockhampton with 11,269 inhabitants. The revenue
for 1894-5 was and the expenditure


Chapter VI.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA. CAPITAL—PERTH.
Western Australia was until recently a Crown Colony,
previous to which it was a Convicfi Settlement, but by the
indomitable perseverance of Sir John Forrest, —its first,
present, and only Prime Minister, —and those associated with
him, it has now attained to the dignity of an Independent
Colony.
There are many pails which have never been explored.
Quite recently enormous rich deposits of gold have been
discovered in the Southern Cross, Kimberley, Coolgaidie, and
other districts ; and the young Government is doing its
utmost to open up means of communication by construefling
roads, railways, etc., making it just now about the only busy
part of the whole continent. It is progressing with rapid
strides and doubtless in a very short time its population,
which now stands at 80,000, will be doubled.
It contains 1,060,000 square miles of territory, being the
western half of the continent. Large areas of fertile land are
to be found in the north and north-west regions. The great
need of the colony is capital and population. The railway
system comprises about 1,200 miles.
The chief city, Perth, is finely situated on the estuary
of the Swan river, and a railway runs between it and
Albany (King George’s Sound), which is the principal port of
call. In this Sound there is a coaling-station, strongly
fortified at the joint expense of the Home Government and
the Australian Colonies. Perth has a population of 15,000.
A large and increasing pearl-fishery is carried on in the
north-west, but wool is the most important export of the
colony. Gold-mining, especially in the last few years, has
attained to a position of great importance. A good many
horses are exported to India and the far east. There are


also wide areas in which wheat-growing and vine culture are
pursued. The colony is so vast, and its resources so unde-
veloped, that great progress is looked for when the tide of
emigrants flows strongly in this direction.
The Government is similar to those of the other colonies,
with an Upper and Lower House and a Governor appointed
by the Crown. The revenue for 1894-5 was /"i,125,940, and
the expenditure, ,£”656,356. Exports, 147, with imports


Chapter VII.
HOBART, TASMANIA.
Tasmania is a small island in the shape of a heart, containing
26,215 square miles. It is situated at the south-eastern ex-
tremity of the continent of Australasia and is about two days’
sail from Melbourne, occupying a similar position to Australia,
that the island of Ceylon does to India. It is a very pretty
island, with wide open plains, tiers of mountains, forest ranges,
and noble rivers and lakes. The climate is very healthy, free
from extremes of heat and cold, and is much patronised as a
health resort by Victorians. The capital is Hobart, with a
population of 35,905, the next city in size being Launceston on
the river Tamar, with 22,208 the whole island containing
154,000 people.
The Government is by two Houses of Parliament and a
Governor appointed by the Crown. The principal exports are
wool, gold, silver, tin, with an almost inexhaustible supply of
timber, fruits, hops, grain, hides and skins, &c. The fruit
industry is of the utmost importance, and is rapidly growing to
large proportions, the apples and pears being especially worthy
of note, a great quantity being sent to England.
The Government offer very liberal terms to induce people to
take up land as the colony is capable of supporting a much
larger popluation than at present. The general depression of
the Australian colonies is also felt in Tasmania, but the natural
resources of the island are so immense, that doubtless there is
a fine future before it, both in agriculture and mining. The
general ambition of Tasmanians is that the Hobart harbour
should become the centre of the maritime system of the south.
The revenue is and expenditure, £ 775,000, the ex-
ports and imports
The capital Hobart is situated in a splendid strategical
position on the river Derwent, a magnificent harbour reaching
about 40 miles from a curious shaped piece of land called the
“ Iron-Pot ” right up to the city, and capable of giving anchorage
to all the navies in the world at the same time.


The city is built right up from the water’s edge, and covers
the surrounding hills, and is noted for fruit and fish. It has
much more the appearance of age than any of the other cities
previously mentioned, without any pretensions whatever to
architectural beauty. Sad to say it swarms with public
houses and beer-shops, drink being much cheaper than in most
other places, in one street three public houses join each other,
and out of nearly 200 hotels about three-fourths of them are
tied to one brewery firm, chiefly owned by a pawnbroker in
Melbourne.
It is a very nice place for residence for persons with settled
occupation or of independent means, but to go there in
quest of work would probably turn out disastrous, as the labour
market is fully supplied. The colony is rich in pasturage, which
is principally used in raising prize rams, these realise some-
times as much or £5OO each. The mutton for con-
sumption is chiefly imported from New South Wales and
Victoria. Hobart has the reputation of being noted for the
beauty of the fair sex, but a visit there with that idea would
probably prove somewhat disappointing, as most of the best
looking girls make their way to Melbourne where there is more
attraction and gayer life.


Chapter VIII.
MILDI/RA, VICTORIA; RENMARK, SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
Mildura and Renmark the irrigation colonies of Chaffy
Bros., Limited, although situated in different colonies viz. :
Victoria and South Australia respectively may be considered
as the same undertaking. There is only one river of any
importance, or at all suitable for navigation in the whole of
Australia, it is called “ The Murray,” on the banks of
which are the settlements now under discussion.
The Chaffy Bros, who had previous experience in a similar
undertaking in California, obtained a concession of land from
the respective Governments, on certain conditions which
included the expenditure of a large amount of money, in the
erection of pumping and other machinery for irrigation purposes
and their operations may be said to have turned out a complete
success, as besides transforming the sandy banks of the river
into two flourishing townships—which, by the by, are separated
some miles from each other—the Chaffys have no doubt
secured for themselves a good paying concern, as their
operations are causing the land to produce such abundant
crops, of luscious fruit for drying purposes, that the
ground has become very valuable, and realises about £2O
per acre now, whereas formerly it could not be sold for 5/-.
The means of communication is by steam-boats, and as
water carriage is the cheapest kind it is an advantage
in placing goods on the market.
There is no doubt these irrigation colonies have a great
future before them, especially when their produce becomes
better known in the trade.
The sale of spirituous liquors is strictly forbidden in both
settlements, but it is only necessary to glance at the cargo of
any of the numerous trading boats to be made acquainted with
the fadt that the law is more honoured in the breach than in
the observance, notwithstanding that the fines are heavy on
conviction of drunkenness.


Chapter IX.
BROKEN HILL, NEW SOUTH WALES.
There are many instances on record during the 19th
century of towns and cities having a phenomenal growth, but
it is to be doubted, whether any greater instance has ever
occurred, or it might almost be said, ever will occur, as that
of the town and district now under consideration. Some ten
or a little more years ago, Broken Hill was known only by a
few shepherds, as an exceedingly dry, outlandish stretch of the
most barren, and uninteresting country it is possible to imagine
in the comparatively well known, and on the whole prosperous
and fertile colony of New South Wales in Australia, and was
at that time used only occasionally as a stock run for sheep,
anything in the way of large cattle would have gone there to
starve. To-day it is one of the most flourishing and busy
centres of industry in the whole of Australasia, and well known
throughout the length and breadth of the civilised world, as
the Great Broken Hill Silver Mining District, rivalling almost
any other mining district in the world for its vast extent and
productiveness.
And how has all this come about ? Well in the first place
an old shepherd—probably a Scotchman—made the discovery
whilst tending his flock, of a peculiar black looking rock,
standing as it were, right out of the ground, which upon
examination proved to be —like a tombstone to mark the spot —
the outcrop of a large mineral deposit of silver buried under-
neath and hidden from view.
This discovery was made, at a place some forty miles nearer
to the South Australian colonial border, then the subsequently
discovered Broken Hill of to-day, and was christened Silverton
or Silver town, which in the course of a very short space of
time, became an adlive scene of industry.
Up to that time silver mining in Australia had been almost
unknown, but after receiving such an impetus, it suddenly
became the rage, more or less, of the whole of the colonials,
who were, so to speak, smitten with silver fever.


Some prospectors of course proved unsuccessful, and others
such as those who waded their footsteps toward the then name-
less waste, but afterwards called Broken Hill district, met with
fortune far in advance of their most sanguine expectations,
finding the huge hill we are now considering, which turned out
to be a mass of silver deposit destined speedily to eclipse the
first-named Silverton, and thus the town and neighbourhood of
Broken Hill was established, and came to the front with leaps
and bounds, being in itself one of the greatest wonders of the
day. Broken Hill is distanced from Sydney, in the colony of
New South Wales, about 700 miles, and is situated within the
borders of that colony, but being only about 350 miles from
Adelaide the capital of the adjoining colony of South Australia,
it practically, and geographically, and for all purposes of
commerce, may be considered as part of that province, especially
as 75 per cent of its inhabitants, hail from there, and also for
the reason, that the South Australians, proved their wisdom,
and forethought by constructing a line of railway, thus putting
the Broken Hill people in direCt communication with their
capital, which has tended in no small degree to enhance their
own and Broken Hill prosperity.
However, such is the rush after success in this life, that in
two or three years after the arrival of the “ iron horse ” the
town had sprung up like a mushroom, so to speak, with a
population counted by thousands, and, sad to say, with all the
deteriorating and demoralising surroundings of a mining
community, composed of gambling, drinking, swearing,
cursing, fighting, thieving, swindling, bullying and of all the
worst attributes of mankind—or of devilkind, perhaps would
be more correCt to say —let loose.
The majority of the people were then living in canvas
tents, with no sanitary system whatever, and with water
thick as mud, and at an almost prohibitive price.
It was not long before the usual visitor—fever, so plainly
and cordially invited, made his appearance, slaying during
its somewhat lengthened sojourn in their midst hundreds and
hundreds every week, who had rushed there to meet with
silver, but had met with death instead.
The commencement of any new mining district in
Australia, and, doubtless, in other parts of the world as well,
is invariably attended with the most dire and terrible
results.


4 ‘
But tend your footsteps further, and leave all that
miserable grasping mad concourse of people for a time and
return in eight years, that is at the present time, and what is
the appearance of the place to-day ? Rows upon rows of
stylish plate-glass shop windows, rivaling those in the most
fashionable cities of the world; huge hotels and drinking
saloons, let at fabulous rentals, the chief curse of the mining
as of the more refined world ; a spacious Town Hall with its
Mayor in regalia, surrounded by the most respectable shop-
keepers and notorieties as Aldermen and Councillors ; streets
all curbed and paved,and lighted throughout with eleCtric light;
a magnificent hospital, fitted with all the most modern
improvements for the comfort and restoration of the sick.
Theatres and music-halls providing ample accommodation for
the amusement-seeking public. A regular supply of beautiful
sparkling water laid on in place of the old-fashioned mud ;
then last, but not least, ample provision provided for
church and chapel goers. Add to all this, substantial modern
family residences, public parks and playgrounds, with the
absence of the old familiar canvas tents, also the progress of
the ever developing mines, all illuminated by electricity
and surrounded now by a population of 20,000 and you will
get some idea of the Broken Hill of to-day which has proved
the means of fortune to some, of a good living to others, of
ruin to many in pocket and soul, of death to numbers, cut
off in the prime of life in a few hours, leaving mothers
mourning sons, wives mourning husbands, children mourning
fathers, sisters mourning brothers, and maidens mourning
sweethearts. Such is Broken Hill of to-day, with all its
faults and favours, ever to remain the most unique instance of
a town’s expansion in the nineteenth century.


Chapter X.
GENERAL REMARKS ON AUSTRALIA.
In the foregoing pages the chief cities have claimed most
attention, therefore a few general remarks here will not be
altogether out of place.
The continent of Australasia then is divided into five
colonies viz.:—New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia,
Queensland and Western Australia.
Its size is three quarters that of the whole of Europe,
including Great Britain, France, Germany, Russia, Italy,
Austria, Hungary and all the rest of the Continent.
The climate of such a large extent of territory is of course
vastly different in various parts, but speaking broadly the
thermometer in the summer ranges from 80 to no or 120 in
the shade, and in the most frequented parts the atmosphere is
so beautifully dry that its effect after a time is rather enjoyable
than otherwise, especially if you are fond of warm weather, at
any rate there is none of that moist heat that is always so
dangerous in tropical countries. In the winter season there
is frost but no snow.
The population of Australia is about 3,250,000, of course
this does not include New Zealand, and other Polynesian
islands or Tasmania. The chief political characteristic may
undoubtedly be described as that of Democracy, one man, in
whatever sphere of life, reckoned as good as another, whether
rich or poor. Of course, the god of gold has tremendous sway
and is much worshipped, but “ man for man ” is their motto ;
hence in most of the colonies they have universal suffrage,
that is one man, one vote, and in those colonies where they
are not so advanced, it is only a matter of time.
The much talked of Federation will never become an
accomplished fadT except on that basis. Several conferences
have been held on the subject but hitherto that has proved the
chief stumbling-block, and it may be remarked in passing that
it seems very absurd that the various colonies, all forming
part of agreat whole, should be so hampered and inconvenienced


by such a complicated system of border duties, which
neccessitates the maintenance of expensive machinery in the
form of Custom House Officers, so that in travelling from one
colony to another luggage is just as much subject to overhaul
as it would be in going from here to Russia.
It amounts to very much the same thing at if the peop'e in
London wishing to go for a visit to Cambridge or Oxford, or
any other place in a different county to where they reside, had
to open all tbeir luggage for the inspection of Government
Officers. The idea is ridiculous, and the only remedy is
federation, which is merely a matter of time. The people as
a whole are nothing if not patriotic, and although they are
fond of indulging in the boast that some day they will be a
great nation, yet after many years residence amongst them by
those most qualified to judge, it would appear that a very
small minority advocate such a step as “ cutting the painter.”
The chief cities are, as a rule, well protected by military
fortifications, mounted with guns of modern construction,
whilst their coastline, taking into consideration the size of the
continent is very extensive, is fairly well looked after by the
institution in recent years of the “ International Fleet.”
These ships were built at the expense of the Imperial
Government, and are manned by blue jackets from Her
Majesty’s Navy, but the interest on the cost of construction,
and the pay of the mariners, are borne by the Colonial Govern-
ments in proportion to population. But the greatest protection
for Australia is, and must always be, that the coaling stations
on the way out, are in the hands of the mother country. It
would be impossible for the purpose of an invasion, to construct
vessels of a suitable type, capable of carrying enough men
and coal as well for such a long journey. Australia therefore
has not much to fear from foreigners, and it may be worth re-
collecting that of all the Colonial possessions of the British
Crown of any size or importance, this is the only one where
the terrible consequences of war have not been experienced.
The people of Australia are very advanced in the matters
of religion and education.
Of course there is not, and never was, any state church, the
question never arising, “Is he a churchman or dissenter ” ?
They are all on an equality, and seem to get on very well, as
one form of religion is not more fashionable than another.


The system of education is free, secular, and compulsory,
but whether it will prove eventually the best, is a matter of
grave doubt to thoughtful, earnest, Christian men ; un-
doubtedly the children, as they grow into manhood and
womanhood (a great many of them) seem not to have the fear
of God before their eyes, and although it might be thought
that the instruction received in Sabbath Schools, and in their
own homes, should give them religious impressions, yet it
must be borne in mind, that in a climate such as prevails in
Australia, the children are very seldom indoors at all, with
the exception of eating and sleeping times, and not only does
this affeCt their spiritual welfare, but it has the tendency
to lessen the respeCh that they should feel towards their
parents. Such remarks as “shall” and “shan’t” being
frequently heard uttered by chiidren to those in authority, it
goes without saying that the ordinary youth at home would
not dare to use such expressions. In the Colonies un-
fortunately they are the rule, and not the exception.
Of course, the mineral wealth of Australia is very great, and
agriculture as a rule prosperous, when cereals are fetching a
fair price, but with wheat at the low figure it has been in
recent years, it is absolutely impossible to grow it at a profit
by itself, and therefore the farmers, or cockneys—as they are
called there —are learning that they must combine, by es-
tablishing co-operative creameries, and cultivating vines,
and various fruits, suitable for wine-making, and fruit-
drying purposes, to increase the variety of exportable pro-
ductions.
Many of the banks having been recently constructed, has
had the effeCt of locking up, for the time being, millions of
money, so that it is not to be wondered at, that in a comparatively
young conntry, with a scattered population, the want of avail-
able funds is severely felt by many, as although land is so
easily acquired, the source of income derived from it is ma-
terially lessened for the want of money to fully stock it.
The principle of re-construCtion adopted as the least of
many evils was this. The banks obtained the right to keep
the depositors’ money for so many years at a very small per-
centage, whilst if he is in urgent need they will grant him a
loan at a much higher rate of interest, for example, say he had
£ 5,000 that they are giving him 3 per cent, interest for, and
he wanted for business purposes, they would grant it


to him as a loan at say 8 or 10 per cent., it seems rather hard
does it not ? but it was the only way to prevent a general
smash. Property had been unduly inflated in value, and in
order to prevent the market being flooded all at once, when
people had not money to invest, the banks pleaded for time,
and got it. However, Australian investors have no need for
undue anxiety, as the elasticity of the resources of the con-
tinent is simply wonderful, possessing enormous latent wealth.
The general practice adopted by most of the Colonial Gov-
ernments of sending Letflurers to this country, and offering
special inducements in the form of land grants, and in other
ways to encourage emigration —but which is happily stopped
now—was no doubt a huge mistake, causing what they are
experiencing today—a glutted labour market, as manifested
in the unemployed trouble. Sometimes there have been three
ship loads arrive all about the same time, and as that had been
going on for years, is it any wonder that Australia to-day is
not the poor man’s paradise it used to be ?
The system of farming in Australia is somewhat different
to that customary in the Mother Country, for instance in reap-
ing they use a “ stripper,” and in ploughing a “ stump jumper,”
The “ stripper ” is a very useful machine for the colonial
farmer, as without it wheat could not be grown at a profit.
In appearance it is something like a large coal scuttle turned
upside down, and when the grain is quite dry and ripe, so that
the straw is crisp, it is drawn along so that the comb catches
the corn heads only, leaving the straw standing, which is after-
wards burnt. When the machine becomes full it is emptied
in different parts of the paddock, thus forming heaps of corn,
which are afterwards put through a winnowing machine and
bagged ready for the market.
In days gone by, wheat cleaning was looked forward to as
a chance of making a few pounds to put on one side, but since
the price of cereals has been so low most of the farmers have
to economise, and do that work themselves, with the assist-
ance of their wives and families.
The “ stump jumping ” plough, another useful produdf of
the Australian inventor’s genius,is a most necessary implement
to the Colonial cultivator, as most of the ground, when it is
first taken up from the Government is thickly timbered, either
with scrub or bigger wood, which is sometimes rolled down
by a team of bullocks dragging a large log of wood, and then


burnt, but when too heavy for that way it has to be grubbed,
a much more expensive operation ; in either case there are sure
to be plenty of stumps left in the ground, so that the plough
above mentioned comes in handy, it being so constructed as
to be able to pull up most of the roots, but if unable to do
that it jumps over them, thus earning for itself the name of
“ stump jumper.”
The Rabbit pest must also be mentioned.
Years ago, some man or men no doubt willing to serve their
adopted country well, imported some rabbits and sparrows.
Now notwithstanding the tens of thousands of pounds that
have been spent in the attempt, it seems utterly impossible to
get rid of them, and “Bunny” perambulates the country as
the conquering hero, whilst the common sparrow reigns sup-
reme in a more exalted sphere.
Australia is a famous place for horses, which may be pur-
chased at a very cheap rate, from £1 for an unbroken foal
upwards.
Speaking generally the greatest drawback to Australia is
the uncertain and deficient rainfall, but in course of time, by
bringing the scientific modes of irrigation into use, probably
large stretches of land at present comparatively useless for
cereal production, will be transformed into waving fields of
corn.
Another great want is men with money to help to
develope this grand country containing so many possibilities.
The impecunious worker abounds, there are far too many of
them already, with nothing but their labour to sell. The market
is completely glutted with unskilled labour, but for men with
a little money at the back of them, there is always room and
a welcome.
The wild dog, or “ Dingo,” is rather a troublesome customer,
very fond of young lambs, or even old sheep for the matter
of that.
They will generally run away if approached by a man, un-
less cornered with no way of escape, when they will show fight.
They do not bark like an ordinary dog, but get up on the
hills of a night, and howl with a most piteous sound.
In former days the various Governments offered so much
per hundred for the scalps, but now the obligation to destroy
all vermin is contained in a clause of nearly all the Govern-
ment leases.


Chapter XI.
GENERAL ADVICE ON SUNDRY TOPICS.
Anyone wishing to go to try their fortune in the sunny
south, may always bear in mind that there is no need
to starve in that country, as meat being so cheap any-
body will give you something to eat, and besides that at n
o’clock every day, except Sunday, all the Hotels in the prin-
cipal cities and towns, provide a free lunch, all you have to do
is go and eat it, pleasing yourself if you choose to indulge in
liquid refreshment, which would be at your own expense.
Supposing you cannot find any work in the towns, you must
turn your attention to “up the country,” as they call it, and
first of all purchase a “ swag,” that is a pair of blankets, with
a change of clothes, needle and cotton, brush and comb, and
other sundries, rolled up into a bundle, that you fasten with
straps and sling over your back, then you are ready to com-
mence your journey to look for employment, and you may
have to go sometimes as far as 500 miles, before you find it,
but the only way is “ to take up your bed and walk,” as farm
houses and sheep stations are seldom situated near the rail-
way line, even supposing that there is a train at all. You
must not forget to carry a “ billy-can,” a little tea and sugar
with a canvas water bag, so that you can make a cup of tea
when you are tired and thirsty, and having the other neces-
saries, you are independent of house rent and other city ex-
penses, always being able to unroll your blanket and sleep,
with the canopy of Heaven for your roof, and if you use or-
dinary precautions you have no need to fear that you will be
disturbed by snakes or such reptiles.
Thus you travel calling at any house or hut you may see,
until you find somebody to give you some work, and then if
you prove capable, with perseverance and civility, you may
consider yourself fairly launched on a colonial career, with a
prospecft of success, but don’t think it is only to ask and to
have, as there are hundreds looking out for something to do


as well as you. Having once made a start, you will gain
your experience soon enough, but bear in mind it is essentially
a migrating country, farmers only employing labour to any
extent at certain seasons of the year.
Farm labourers soon get used to working the “stripper,”
and “ stump jumping” plough previously mentioned, and the
wages would be from 10/- a week and keep.
if you went out as a mechanic, there are plenty of every
description already; if you wanted a clerkship, you might just
as well save yourself the trouble of looking for one ; if you
thought of taking a little shop, the probabilities are that you
would do better at home ; if you intended following any of the
learned professions, they are overdone already ; but if you pos-
sess enough money to stock a piece of land, if a farm, with
the usual implements, or if a market garden, which would re-
quire less money, then your chances would be golden, as no
doubt you could make a moderate living, and possibly be able
to save money, which largely would depend upon your natural
aptitude for the work. Whilst considering the pros and. cons
of work it may be as well to mention, that Australia always
holds out many advantages to members of the fair sex, as
whilst at home females largely predominate in point of num-
oers, in the country under discussion the tables are turned,
and there are far more men than women, thus causing the
ladies to be at a premium.
However, the chances of a happy marriage are very good,
and if that should not meet with the idea of the girls, employ-
ment for them is always to hand at remunerative rates, of
which the following may be taken as specimens :—young
general servants, 10/-; more experienced, 12/- to 16/-; parlour
maids, and nurse-maids, 10/- ; shop girls and waitresses, 15/-
to £1 ; dressmakers, from 15/- upwards ; good cooks, 20/-
to 30/- per week ; and various other occupations in proportion.


Chapter XII.
VARIOUS ITEMS OF INFORMATION.
The Australian kangaroo furnishes much sport in the hunt,
but numbers of them are trapped, shot, and caught in various
ways, for the sake of their skins, oppossum skins are also
much in request for rugs, and other wraps.
There are plenty of hares and wild fowl, the native
turkey being a splendid bird, sometimes 20 or 3olbs. in weight,
and much appreciated as an article of diet.
Australia is occasionally subiecfl to a plague of grasshoppers
which travel the country eating everything in their way, com-
pletely clearing the districts they pass over.
Flies are to be found in enormous quantities all over the
continent, and are exceedingly annoying. Sometimes a bite
from them on the eye lid, will cause it to swell so rapidly that
in a few minutes it is impossible to see, which is called, hav-
ing a “ bunged ” eye. It may be mentioned that there is no
grass cut for hay, as is customary at home, but the wheat is
mown before it is quite ripe, to make that fodder.
Most of the monetary transactions are conducted through
the medium of the one pound note, and it may be interesting
to the reader to describe a “Sundowner,” a “Damper,” and an
“ Underground residence.”
A “ Sundowner ” is a man who spends the whole of his
life travelling about the country with his swag, previously
explained. He is too lazy to work, but knowing the
national hospitality, he imposes upon it, and will sit under
a tree, and wait for the sun to go down (hence the name “Sun-
downer,”) a convenient distance from some farm house, or
sheep station, when he will call and ask for food and shelter,
until he can continue his journey on the morrow, of course
relating to his host some “ cock and bull ” story about looking
for work, his true idea being to get what he can, and then
stroll on a few more miles the next day, to play the same trick
on someone else.


A “ Damper ” is flour and water made into bread, and baked
on the ashes of an impromptu fire, and is very acceptable
when seasoned by hunger.
An “ Underground residence ” in opening up new districts
is very convenient, as it is simply constructed by digging out
a hole in the ground, roofing it over, and the result is a warm,
cosy place.
There is one marked characteristic of the “ Young Aus-
tralian ” worth mentioning, and that is they most of them see
the evil of drink, and avoid intoxicating beverages. This
remark is not meant to convey the idea that their abstinence
is caused by conscientous motives, but simply as a matter of
worldly wisdom.


Chapter XIII.
PHILIP ISLAND, VICTORIA.
Who ever heard of such a place ? Not many people perhaps,
therefore any information of that small island, helping to
make up the world we are in the habit of calling ours, will not
come under the category of stale.
Well, having heard that there was such a place, a party of
us being in Melbourne, in the colony of Victoria, chartered
the good S.S. Nelson, and hearing that the distance was
100 miles, determined to pay it a visit, and see what there
was to be seen ; so after a not unusual experience of getting
stuck in the mud, whilst navigating the river “Yarra,” the
first part of our journey, we arrived about 9 o’clock the next
morning opposite to the usual landing place of the island,
which upon enquiry we learned was 28 miles long, and 7 miles
broad. It has one church, one school, one clergyman, one
Justice of the Peace, one hotel, in facft, so much one every-
thing, that if ever any place was entitled to be called “ a one
horse place,” Philip Island would certainly answer to that
designation, it has not even got a policeman, or a blacksmith,
for the horses do not require shoeing as the roads are not
made thoroughfares, but beaten tracks on the ground, in its
natural condition.
The hotel is a very large, pretentious building for an island
with only 120 inhabitants, and is owned by a company com
posed of speculative Vitflorians, who endeavour to obtain for
it a good reputation as a comfortable place to spend a holiday.
The success of their enterprise is much to be doubted, as to
begin with, landing is such an awkward affair, the steamer
has to anchor about half a mile out, and the only way is to
get into little boats and row ashore, without even the accom-
modation of a pier or jetty, and to anyone unused to the ways
of seamanship, climbing up and down a large steamer by the
aid of a rope ladder is by no means easy.
On the day of our visit the thermometer was 120° in the
shade, and one poor fellow who had joined us with the hope


of having a happy time, suffered sunstroke, thus making bis
visit one to be remembered, and much to be regretted,
but those of us whose constitutions proved strong enough to
withstand the heat, enjoyed our sojourn of about a day im-
mensely ; the sensation of driving right across the island
thus having a view of the mighty ocean on each side, was
very fine and novel, besides various other things, customs,
and ways, struck us as most peculiar.
Just imagine the strange part of it, that 120 of our fellow
countrymen should adtually be satisfied and contented as they
evidently were, to live such a Robinson Crusoe life, without
even a “ Friday ” to break the monotony, and with so limited
a scope for ambition.
We heard that shortly before our flying visit a steamer with
passengers on pleasure bent, as ourselves, had foundered near
where we had anchored, and some hundreds of lives were
lost.
Our party consisted of about 250 people, so for the day we
were there we may be said to have taken the islanders
by storm, and as some of our number were by no means back-
ward in sending a few “ yellow canaries ’ flying, no doubt the
residents of that quiet and fertile spot will remember our visit
almost as well as we ourselves. It may be mentioned that
although Philip Island is about 100 miles from Melbourneby the
way we went, it is much nearer to the part of the coast of the
colony of Vi(sloria in Australia called Gippsland, which is the
usual channel of all their commercial transactions. However
the island is very fertile, very snug, and from all reports very
healthy, and the people on it very contented.
We left them verv much pleased with our visit, which feeling
no doubt was mutual, and we returned to Melbourne safe and
sound after having had an enjoyable and pleasant outing.


Chapter XIV.
BULWARRA, NEW SOUTH WALES.
Probably out of all the thousands of the readers of this,
there are none, or a very few, who have been to, or even
heard of the name above mentioned, and therefore a true
account of an extraordinary experience in that district, may
prove both interesting and instructive.
Bulwarra is a very fertile area, occupied by farmers, or—as
the colonials call them—cockles, of the well-to-do class.
It is eight miles or thereabouts from East Maitland, which
in its turn is a few miles only by train from Newcastle, in the
colony of New South Wales, that town being celebrated for
coal as much as the same name at home implies black
diamonds.
Newcastle is 80 to 100 miles by boat from Sydney, the
capital of the mother colony of Australia.
Starting from Sydney at n p.m., one night, the writer
arrived at the port of Newcastle about g o’clock the following
morning, after a most tempestuous journey, the wind and
waves playing sad havoc with the small paddle box steamer.
About 8 o’clock, an American barque was passed which had
been driven right up on the rocks, under the high cliffs,
the life-boat had just arrived on the scene, and arrived—for-
tunately —in the nick of time to save the captain, his wife, and
infant child, with all the rest on board the ill fated craft.
However, the city of colonial coal was safely reached
as before mentioned, the rain meanwhile descending in torrents,
notwithstanding which, after having attended to the wants of
the inner man, the rest of the journey was commenced by
train to East Maitland, and then a walk of eight miles to the
farm house of one of the hospitable cockies of Bulwarra,


After walking until within sight of the house, it proved
to be impossible to get there, at any rate that way. The
water was running across the road, with a swift current about
40 feet deep, which sadly disappointed the anticipated idea of
a warm and dry at the fire, so the only alternative was to
walk all the way back again—it was pouring with rain
—and to take the train to West Maitland, waiting there
until a messenger on horseback had been dispatched some 18
miles round, to apprise the generous host, that his guest
was rained up and patiently waiting to be released. This
brave and hearty son of Erin’s Isle, disdaining the elements
and the inevitable wet jacket, out of consideration for his
friend, duly appeared with his horses and trap. After a drive
by the circuitous route of some 18 miles, the welcome sign
of homestead was apparent, and changing our soaking
garments, we began to feel a little warm again—with the aid
of a cup of hot tea —some of the mysteries of Bulwarra
unfolded around the welcome fire. We soon learnt that
Bulwarra was peopled and cultivated by about a dozen
farmers.
Their holdings being subject to very heavy floods, an
embankment about 20 feet thick at the base, tapering to two
feet at the top, had been constructed of earth right round the
farms, by permission of the Government.
At the time of our visit, the rain had been falling for weeks
without an interval, and the floods correspondingly rising
until the water reached to within about 6 inches of the top.
The situation to say the least was somewhat alarming. On
one side millions of tons of flood-waters higher than the roof
of the house of our worthy host, were washing down relentlessly
struggling horses, cattle, sheep, and pigs, besides trees and
anything and everything else that came in the way.
On the side of the Bulwarra residents and their one visitor,
there was anxiety lest a break should occur in their wall of
defence, which however small, if it had taken place, and
had been neglecfled, would have meant ruin and probably
watery grave.
However just as we were warming ourselves before bedtime
on the second night of our visit—which possibly would not


have been so far extended if it had been an easy matter to get
away—the report came in that the residents of the flooded side
intended to drain the waters off their own land, by cutting the
embankment under the cover of darkness. Without delay
sentries were organised for night duty to walk like policemen
on beat all round on the top of it, and soon after that, a slight
breach was discovered, so another gang had to be formed who
turned out with horses and drays, stuffing up the gap with
bags of turf, stones, and anything else that came handy, some
of them standing in water up to their necks.
That night will never be forgotten by any who, like myself,
had to take a turn on duty. We all, men, women, and
children felt on our metal, as it was a question of life or death.
Work seemed nothing, anxiety pervaded us all, but by in-
domitable perseverance and pluck, the breach was prevented
from widening, and by the system of patrol established, the
dreaded attempt of the envious flooded neighbours was frus-
trated. During the greater part of the week the rain never
ceased, so that it was with feelings certainly not full of
regret that Bulwarra was left minus its visitor.


Chapter XV.
BALLARAT, VICTORIA.
In the early days of the colony of Vicftoria, when it was
separated from the mother Australian settlement of New
South Wales, no one had the slightest idea that its chief city
to-day would be Melbourne, situated as it is on the banks of
the narrow, muddy, and by no means pleasant-smelling river,
the Yarra, which, coupled with a very faulty system of drain-
age, has often caused that wonderful city to be called
“ Smellbourne.”
When Victoria obtained its independent position, Geelong,
situated about 40 miles closer to the entrance of Bass Straits,
was laid out, and was intended to be its capital city, but for
some reason or other not very easily discerned, that original
purpose was frustrated, and it would appear especially strange
that such was the case when we consider that all the rich
gold productive districts so soon discovered after the forma-
tion of the colony, were so many miles in each case nearer to
the site of their first choice. The great city of Ballarat is
twice as far from Melbourne as it is from Geelong, which now
forms the half-way town between the two first mentioned
cities.
Ballarat is the cause of much vanity on the part of many
Vicfforians. The width of its main street has given rise to
numerous arguments and appeals to newspapers, which have
unanimously decided that it is the broadest street of any city
in the world.
But it may be as well to inform the reader that a no incon-
siderable portion of its width is taken up by an avenue of trees
in the centre, under which are placed a liberal supply of seats
which give it a very pretty, and what is more important in a
hot climate, a very shady and comfortable appearance to
the “ Globe Trotter.”


Ballarat is often described by its natives as the finest city in
the world, formed as it was during the great gold rush to
the fields which surround the city. It was born and bred
with not only a silver but a gold spoon in its mouth, and the
result of its wealth in former days is seen now in its massive
buildings, and amongst other things its Botanic Gardens which
are exceedingly pretty and unique, a special feature of interest
being the small flat bottom steamers which for a small sum
take you all round the lake. Passing along splendid statues
are to be seen, with a luxurious back-ground of the various
beautiful shades of green, the effect being very striking.
Ballarat is famed for its museum, public buildings and
municipal offices, and is also the chief centre of the colony for
dealings in mining scrip. It is surrounded by shafts long left
idle, but which in former days, adled the part of pigeon holes
through which an enormous amount of gold used to pass out
on its way from the bowels of the earth, but although the
scenes of activity usual in a gold-bearing district have long since
disappeared the city still maintains its prestige with a wonderful
amount of solid prosperity. Perhaps this may be accounted
for partly by the fad! that it stands in the same relation to the
Great Bendigo gold fields and Melbourne that Geelong does to
Ballarat and Melbourne.
Sandhurst used to be the name of the town on the Bendigo
diggings, but it has lately been re-named Bendigo thus taking
the name of those wonderful gold fields of world-wide renown.
Ballarat is surrounded by excellent fertile farming country,
and being blessed with a good average rainfall, cereals are
cultivated successfully.
Its population is large and it may be said to be somewhat
exceptional in maintaining its status, as in most cases mining
towns prosper only whilst the mines are paying, but in this
case the majority of the mines ceased working years ago and
yet the city maintains its position, and is the second largest in
the colony of Victoria, one of the most healthy, and by many
considered the most beautiful in the southern hemisphere,
although on that point the difference of opinion need never
alter friendship.
’ V


Chapter XVI.
CONCLUSION,
The foregoing chapters are intended to be read by those who
are contemplating a visit to the “ Sunny South.”
They have been written by one who has lived in various
parts of the continent of Australasia for upwards of 14 years
in the hope that the information contained in them may prove
instructive.
In a small pamphlet, such as this, it is impossible to mention
more than a few of the most prominent points connected with
such a vast subieCt, but enough has been said to furnish the
reader with a general idea of the colonies and colonial life
The statistics quoted are for the last year that the writer
spent in Australia, and the reader will please understand that
as a rule each year witnesses a great advance, especially is this
so in Westralia.
Speaking generally, although great difficulties have to be
faced, there are many things in the world worse than a colonial
career, it is free and healthy, and if entered upon in a right
spirit may be the means of making a man more manly, a
delicate constitution strong, and by the ever changing situa-
tion and scenes enlarges experience which cannot fail in after
life to prove of advantage, not only to the recipient, but to those
around him.
The writer desires to apologise for all discrepancies that
the critical eye may deteCt, and trusts that he may be
excused, as his one objeCt has been to speak the plain truth for
the benefit of those who may do him the honour to peruse the
foregoing pages, and he desires in conclusion to echo the
national motto in all sincerity “ Advance Australia ”
A. SUTTON AND CO., PRINTERS, BOSCOMBE.


\


