

CHAUCER’S DEBT
TO ITALY
By
SIR MUNGO MacCALLUM,
K.C.M.G., M.A., LITT.D., LL.D.
Professor Emeritus of Modern Literature
and Honorary Professor of English in the
University of Sydney




CHAUCER’S DEBT
TO ITALY
By
SIR MUNGO MACCALLUM,
K.C.M.G., M.A., LITT.D., LL.D.
Professor Emeritus of Modern Literature and Honorary
Professor of English in the University of Sydney.
AUSTRALIA
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LIMITED
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET. SYDNEY
IQ3I


WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED
IN AUSTRALIA BY
HALSTEAD PRINTING COMPANY
LTD., ARNOLD PLACE, SYDNEY
1931
REGISTERED AT THE GENERAL
POST OFFICE. SYDNEY, FOR TRAN S -
MISSION THROUGH THE POST AS
A BOOK


This lecture was delivered at the invitation of the
Extension Board of the University of Sydney and the
Societa Nazionale Dante Alighieri of New South Wales on
the 28th October, 1931. In its printed form the notes and
appendix have been added.




CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY
The year 1373 was a turning-point in the career of Geoffrey
Chaucer. Though past his first youth he was still a young
man, not much over or under thirty, but already his experi-
ences had been many and manifold. The son of a well-to-do
London merchant, whose business and position had brought
him into some contact with the court, the lad had been
attached first as page, next as yeoman, latterly as esquire to
the household now of one, then possibly of another Prince
of the Blood, and finally of the King himself. At least twice
he had seen military service abroad, and once had been made
prisoner: and on these occasions he would have the oppor-
tunity of acquainting himself with the language of the
Isle de France, which had begun to supersede the other dia-
lects, including the Norman, that with trifling variations was
still spoken by the higher ranks in England, and was still
employed for translation from and into Latin when Chaucer
was at school. The acquisition of Parisian French would be
useful as well as ornamental, and along with business apti-
tudes that would come more readily to a youth of his mer-
cantile origin than to one of the feudal nobility, and that
were perhaps further developed by study in the Inner
Temple, where the instruction was not confined to Law,
may have contributed to his appointment, no doubt in a
subordinate capacity, on at least one diplomatic mission to
the Continent before the end of 1370. But probably his
familiarity with the French culture of the day commended


him to his patrons of the Royal Family on other grounds,
that would make him a persona grata in the pleasure-loving
court of Edward Ill’s declining years. He was qualified to
interpret and imitate the literary fashions now in vogue
across the Channel, and this he seems to have done with
great acceptance. The contemporary poet, Eustace Des-
champs, even at a much later date, pays him especial com-
pliments as “grant translateur,” and he himself speaks of
his “roundels and virelays,” of which no previous specimens
in English are known. They were successful at the time,
for Gower says that the land was everywhere “fulfill’d’’ of
such love songs of Geoffrey’s composing. But despite their
wide circulation they have practically been lost from his
record, and this too has been the fate either as a whole or
for the greater part, or at least in its original form, of a
rendering he made of the Roman de la Rose. These refer-
ences however show us how he began. His first attempts
were in the manner of the dainty and graceful but fragile
and artificial French lyrics that gave expression to the
amour courtois, and of the allegories that, after glorifying
its most extravagant affectations, proceeded in inevitable re-
coil to expose them in cynical satire.
Such was the poetical fare that current taste and practice
provided for the youthful Chaucer. The native products of
England were too crude or too provincial to suit his palate;
and even in French, though from many points of view a
typical child of the Middle Ages, he had no relish for the
older and greater romances that Dante could still appreciate.
Thus he talks of
the book of Launcelot de Lake,
That wommen holde in ful gret reverence;
implying that men like himself have done with it; while
Dante pays tribute to its fascination in that wonderful epi


sode of Paolo and Francesca: and Chaucer ridicules more
explicitly the popular versions of the Roman d’aventures in
his burlesque Tale of Sir Thopas. It was the clever but
rather decadent, or at least modish verse of the 14th century
France that alone was within his ken and understanding.
Yet he was not altogether satisfied with it. His chief poem
that has survived from this period, The Book of the
Duchesse, an allegorical lament on the death of John of
Gaunt’s first wife, shows, though the conception and
machinery are borrowed, an obvious effort to avoid the
superfluous, a straightforward and natural simplicity, a note
of real feeling, that we may rather wish than expect to find
in his foreign masters.
No doubt he might have had recourse to the classics for
better models, since his knowledge of Latin was quite com-
petent. But as yet he seems hardly to have felt their attrac-
tion. Most of his early allusions to them are taken on trust
from the stores of French writers; and except for the loan
from Ovid for part of the parenthesis on Ceyx and Hal-
cyone in The Book of the Duchesse, he shows little acquaint-
ance with the ancient literature of Rome to which he after-
wards owed so much. He occupied himself indeed with
Latin authors, but of another date and kind. He was always
honestly if not profoundly religious, and as a young man,
perhaps in reaction from the lack of depth and serious-
ness in his pursuits literary and social at the frivolous
court, he was drawn to the study of medieval theological
works austere and even ascetic in their tone. One of his
very few juvenilia that have survived, is a self-upbraiding
hymn to the Virgin, adapted from De Guileville’s Pelerinage
de la Vie Humaine; but he also sought guidance from
writers of greater authority, and, as he himself tells us, made
translations, which however have been lost, of two Latin
3
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


treatises that in those days were held in the highest esteem.
The first was an ecstatic homily, falsely attributed to Origen,
on St Mary Magdalene’s visit to the Sepulchre. The other
was, possibly not the whole but only the earlier part, of
Pope Innocent Ill’s De Contemptu Mundi, a relentless in-
dictment of human life.* It is worth noting that Chaucer,
despite his vein of piety the cheeriest and least morbid of
poets, passed through this phase of world-weariness and
gloom.
Such then were his antecedents in miscellaneous activity,
in literary equipment, in spiritual experience, when in De-
cember 1372 he was appointed one of a commission to deal
with a matter of considerable importance, which took him
to Italy in the beginning of the next year. It has recently
been surmised that he had already learned some Italian, and
that this was one reason for his selection. It may be so, but
no evidence is forthcoming beyond very doubtful inference
from very insufficient premises. At any rate he would be
much less familiar with that language, not only than with
his mother-tongue, but than with French, which in one dia-
lect or other he must constantly have been hearing and speak-
ing, or with Latin, which was obligatory in his school course,
and, if his legal training be a fact, for his subsequent studies
at the Temple. Moreover French and Latin would serve
his present purpose and carry him anywhere; for the for-
mer was current throughout Italy, especially in the North,
and the latter was indispensable in international negotia-
tions, for which Italian was not required. All this should
be borne in mind, though there remains the possibility, but
* Skeat says in reference to the passages from Innocent imbedded
in the Man of Law's Tale: “If Chaucer, as is probable, has preserved
extracts from this juvenile work . . . without much alteration, it
must have been composed in seven-line stanzas.” But there is no
reason to suppose it was not in prose, like his Boethius, which
Chaucer also quotes in seven-line stanzas, e.g. in Tr. d Cr. 111,
813-836.


only the possibility, that he may have picked up a smatter-
ing of their language—it can hardly have been more —from
the merchants and financiers, generally known as Lombards,
who had done business in London since the last years of the
13th century. Except for them, and, during the French
Wars, the Genoese mercenaries whose cross-bows were
matched against the long bows of the English yeomen, there
was scarcely any contact between the two nationalities, and
Italy itself had hardly come within the horizon of English-
men save in matters academic and ecclesiastical, as the
mother of universities and, till the temporary exile of the
Pope in Avignon, the centre of Christendom. But latterly
the enormous opulence of her cities was arousing wonder
and regard, and enabling them to become creditors of foreign
governments. The public revenue of Florence alone much
exceeded that of all England, and the great Florentine Bank-
ing Houses of the Bardi and the Peruzzi had lent Edward
111 about a million and a half golden crowns. Galeazzo
Visconti, Lord of Milan, had been able in virtue of his
‘wealth, though the power of his house was of comparatively
recent date, to arrange royal marriages for his children—
one of these, five years before Chaucer’s mission, of his
daughter, Violante, with Prince Lionel, Duke of Clarence,
ancestor of our Yorkist Kings; when the bride s dowry is
stated to have been two hundred thousand golden florins, and
the English nobles in attendance were astonished at the fabu-
lous splendour of the banquets and the magnificence of the
presents they received. And of late, Genoa, which was under
the control of Milan, and because of friction with Venice
in the Adriatic, was developing her trade with the West,
seemed likely to become a profitable customer of England.
It was primarily to discuss the selection of an English port,
where the Genoese might have a commercial establishment,


that Chaucer was sent to what for a much larger majority of
his countrymen then than in after-times, was virtually an un-
known world; and we may imagine how he would be struck
by his first sight of the great maritime city, and others, its
rivals and compeers. By and by he was to apostrophise Ber-
nabo, brother, colleague and successor of Galeazzo, as “God
of delyt,” as we should say “of luxury,” and Bernabo was
less inclined that way than his senior. To the observant
stranger, who knew only the rough civilisation of England
and the war-stricken towns of France, it must have been, in
Shakespeare’s phrase, “the view of earthly glory,” and to
earthly glory Chaucer, like Shakespeare himself and all sen-
sible men, was very susceptible. Perhaps from this experi-
ence he may have got hints for some of the spectacular de-
scriptions in his later poems, but he was not dazzled by the
pomp and circumstance, which were the accompaniment and
in part the result of oppression and extortion. Even Boc-
caccio, usually so deferential to Petrarch, plucks up courage
to remonstrate with him for accepting the patronage of the
Visconti. No wonder that Chaucer, fresh from the com-
parative freedom of England with her Charters and Par-
liaments, should be repelled by what he saw in the back-
ground of the brilliant display, and should afterwards ad-
monish his allegorical King;
This shulde a rightwys lord han in his thoght,
And nat be lyk tiraunts of Lumbardye
That usen wilfulhed and tirannye:
For he that King or lord is naturel,
Him oghte nat be tiraunt ne cruel,
As is a fermour,* to doon the harm he can:
He moste thinke hit is his lige man,
And that him oweth of verray duetee
Shewen his peple pleyn benignitee.
At the time however Chaucer was probably more taken up
with the literature to which he was now introduced than with
• Parmer of the taxes.
6
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


the grandeurs or vices of the Visconti. He was above all a
reader and a writer. Books were the things nearest to his
heart, and now he would find both opportunity and incentive
to increase his knowledge of them. He could not fail to hear
of the famous Bishop, Jacobus de Voragine, who three-
quarters of a century before had tried so hard to compose
the dissensions of Genoa, and who in his love for the city
had written the history of it from its mythical foundation by
Janus to his own day, but whose great achievement was a
Legendary of the Saints, which popular admiration speedily
dubbed the Aurea Legenda, the Golden Legend , and which
in the next century was to be translated from the Latin into
all the vernaculars of the West and even the Czech of
Bohemia, spreading his name throughout the whole of
Europe. Chaucer borrows his Life of St Cecilia mainly
from this hook, which he may well have got to know during
his sojourn in the city so bound to the author by pious grati-
tude and pride. He was likely to hear also about another of
that city’s well-wishers, who a few years previously, when
Venice was pushing her advantages with a high hand, had
been chosen for his eloquence to plead for more favourable
terms. To quote Chaucer’s words:
Fraunceys Petrak, the laureat poete
Highte this clerk, whos rethoryke sweete
Enlumined al Itaille of poetrye.
What with Petrarch’s efforts on behalf of Genoa, what with
his reputation through the entire peninsula, he must surely
have been mentioned to the young commissioner, interested
and inquisitive in literary matters, and it has been argued
fhat they became acquainted. For Chaucer makes his Ox-
ford scholar say, in preface to the above tribute, where he
specifies his informant by name, that he learned the story of
Griseldis,
at Padwe of a worthy clerk
As preved by his wordes and his werk.
7
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


This statement used to be understood as a personal reminis-
cence on the part of Chaucer, who was supposed to have
taken the imaginary scholar merely as his own mouthpiece;
and though it has recently been objected with much cogency
that there is no proof of his journeyings having extended to
Padua, that the brevity of his stay in Italy allowed little
time for such an expedition, and that in point of fact many
English students resorted to the Paduan University, there
is still something to be said for the older theory. In this same
year, 1373, Petrarch was living at Acqua, fourteen miles
from Padua, which he had found too noisy but which he
still frequented. In 1373 he first saw Boccaccio’s version of
the Griseldis story and was so pleased with it that, as he tells
us in one of his own epistles, he forthwith learned it by
heart that he might repeat it to friends and others with
whom he conversed; and he turned it into Latin that it
might be enjoyed by those ignorant of Italian. All these
circumstances lend colour to the surmise that Chaucer’s clerk
may be representing Chaucer himself: and with his enthusi-
asm for letters, it would not be surprising that he should
seize an opportunity to pay his respects to the chief literary
luminary of the day. This, of course, is only a plausible
speculation, but if for a moment it be entertained, we can see
how he may have learned more from Petrarch than this single
tale. Not indeed the Sonnets of immortal fame; with which
his acquaintance was slight and unfruitful even when he was
further advanced in Italian than we suppose him as yet to
have been. The only trace of them to be found in his
works is the paraphrase which he made of one, as some
think, without knowing who wrote it, and which he at-
♦The recent expedients for the evasion of this difficulty seem to
me far-fetched, and it should be noticed that Petrarch’s other
Italian poetry has furnished Chaucer with only one quotation and two
possible suggestions.


tributes to that mysterious Lollius of his,* the prototype of
Sairey Gamp’s Mrs Harris, of whom Betsy Prig declared:
“I don’t believe there is no sech a person.” But however we
account for or restrict the description “high style” that the
clerk uses in connection with the Griseldis, Petrarch had
“endited” his rendering in a Latin much more elegant and
correct than Chaucer was accustomed to in the medieval dis-
quisitions he had been translating, a Latin modelled on the
great classics, which Petrarch consciously set himself to imi-
tate, and the study of which he never ceased in letter and
conversation, in season and out of season, to recommend or
rather prescribe. Did Chaucer listen to some of these ex-
hortations and profit by them? We do not know. We can
only say that before his Italian journey he shows scant ac-
quaintance at first hand with the literature of ancient Rome,
and afterwards he draws on it over and over again.
But if the question of his visit to Padua admits of no
conclusive answer in the affirmative, there can be no doubt
about his visit to Florence, which, as attested by official docu-
ments, was on confidential affairs of the King, and may have
been due to the English Government’s transactions with the
local Banking Houses. But whatever the cause that drew
him thither, it is most unlikely that while he was there, no
mention was made to him of two other literary magnates,
one dead yet still speaking, the other alive and at the height
of his fame; of whom both were attracting considerable
public notice at the time, and both were powerfully to influ-
ence him in later years. The first was Dante, for the elucida-
tion of whose Commedia a lectureship had just been estab-
lished in tardy expiation of the city’s step-motherly be-
haviour to her greatest son. The second was Boccaccio, who
in recognition not only of his literary gifts but of that life-
long veneration for Dante, which is one of his most pleasing
9
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


characteristics, was appointed first lecturer. Chaucer at this
date was probably too little versed in Italian to read either
with thorough appreciation, and he may never have met
Boccaccio, who was living a good deal at Certaldo, and did
not begin his course till the end of October, some months
after Chaucer’s departure. But both names were much in
people’s mouths, the one as unsurpassed in poetry, the other
as surpassed in scholarship only by Petrarch. Observe, in
scholarship: not in original composition. If at that hypo-
thetical meeting between them, Petrarch, when reading or
reciting his Griseldis to the English traveller, said anything
in praise of his close friend, her previous historian, it would
be on account of their common interest in classical lore, not
on account of Boccaccio’s Italian works. These, in the
opinion of the Literati, were of minor importance. Filippo
Villani and other Florentine contemporaries never refer to
them, while lauding to the skies their townsman’s Latin com-
pilations, which, though now forgotten save by specialists,
would be sure at the outset to claim more of Chaucer’s at-
tention than the poems, that have still a relative, and the
tales that have still an absolute value. Yet remembering
how similar the position was in his own country with his own
language, Chaucer’s interest would probably be roused in this
new vernacular literature which was just emerging or had
just emerged. The Intellectuals of Florence would certainly
recommend Dante’s masterpiece. If any of Boccaccio’s works
in his native tongue were cited at all, it would be the two
classicising epics, the Teseide and the Filostrato, with per-
haps the Filocolo which overloads with classical ornament the
“silly sooth” that “dallies with the innocence of love” in the
charming old story of Floire et Blancheflor, and at most the
Amorosa Visione, which is an attempt to follow in Dante’s
footsteps, though at a very different pace with a very differ


ent aim. It may well be that the Decameron was not thought
worth mentioning, though it is now his chief title to fame;
but in his own day it brought him into disrepute. Petrarch
tells us that it “was attacked with the teeth of dogs,” and
in this very year says slightingly of it that he has only
glanced through it, as it is written in vulgar prose, and he
has more important things to do. He admits that some of
the contents are “pia et gravia,” among them the Introduc-
tion and the story of Griseldis, which latter, as we saw, he
admired greatly and rendered into Latin. But he excuses the
general levity of the tone only on the ground that it was a
youthful production, adapted to the character of those for
whom it was intended. Clearly it was not the sort of book
that the high-browed circles of Florence would thrust on the
notice of an inquiring foreigner, as a favourable specimen
of their eminence in letters. And indeed Boccaccio himself
was now rather ashamed of it, and had been advising people
not to read it.
What then were the spoils that Chaucer may be supposed
to have carried back from his first recorded visit to Italy,
before which I assume that he knew little or no Italian?
To begin with, as he was a very fair Latin scholar, he
would have no difficulty with Jacobo’s Golden Legend, Pet-
rarch’s Griseldis, and Boccaccio’s collections of historical and
mythical biography, the Falls of Princes (as Lydgate sub-
sequently translated the title of the De Casibus Illustrium
Virorum), Famous Women, and the Genealogy of the Gods.
These would supply him with much that interested him, as
the ordinary chivalrous romances had not done, and that he
could and did adopt. The mere reproduction of them was
in a sense a new departure; for till now he does not seem
to have told a story of professedly real persons by itself, but


only as a subordinate item in some allegory or vision, to give
the main theme appropriate embellishment.
In the second place, though for several years he did not,
in my opinion, borrow from the matter of works in Italian,
he presently begins to use a new metre for narrative. Hither-
to it had been the octosyllabic couplet, with its “fatal facil-
ity now he employs stanzas. He might not yet be able fully
to master the Teseide or the Filostrato, but it is reasonable
to suppose that he would notice this peculiarity in them at a
glance, and recognise its possibilities. He did not indeed
accept unmodified the ottave rime, which were long in be-
coming naturalised in England and do not occur in any
English masterpiece, unless we make exception of the single
stanza at the end of Lycidas, till the days of Byron and
Keats. But in the miscellany of tragic anecdotes, which
Chaucer was afterwards to enlarge and include in the Can-
terbury Tales, as the contribution of the Monk, and the
earlier portions of which are mostly taken from the De
Casibus, he uses a very similar eight-line scheme, common
in France for lyric purposes; while both in the St Cecilia,
taken from the Golden Legend, and afterwards re-christened
the Second Nun’s Tale, and in the Griseldis, taken from
Petrarch and afterwards re-christened the Clerk’s Tale, he
uses his characteristic seven-line stanza, also originally a
French lyric measure, which, though wanting a line, is in
some ways near akin to Boccaccio’s favourite verse-form.
There seems to me little doubt that all these three poems
come after Chaucer’s visit to Italy in 1373, and no doubt
whatever that as originally composed they came compara-
tively early in his career. And if we remember the phase he
was passing through, when he translated theological admoni-
tions to repentance and invectives against the world, we can
see how the subjects of all would appeal to him. For the De
12
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


Casibus tells of the wretched ending to earthly prosperity,
and the St Cecilia of the bliss purchased by renunciation;
and the patience of Griseldis, as Petrarch himself explains,
is not to be understood in the literal sense, but as a lesson
that men should endure without a murmur for God, what
this poor woman endured for her mortal husband. All of
them, as I have said, Chaucer eventually inserted in the Can-
terbury Tales, but by that time his outlook had changed in
many ways, as is shown by his later additions and comments.
He cannot have altered the St Cecilia much, but he may have
felt that to sympathise with so extreme an example of self-
dedication and voluntary martyrdom, the mind must be at-
tuned to a high pitch of devotional fervour, and in the inter-
vening years he prefixed his paraphrase of Dante s famous
Invocation of the Virgin, “Vergine Madre, Figlia del tuo
Figlio
Thou mayde and mooder, doghter of thy sone,
Thou welle of mercy, sinful soules cure
In whom that God for bountee chees to wone;
Thou humble and heigh over every creature,
Thou nobledest so ferforth our nature
That no disdeyn the makere had of kinde
His sone in blode and flesh to clothe and winde
Withinne the cloistre blisful of thy sides
Took mannes shap the eternel love and pees
That of the tryne compas lord and gyde is^
Whom erthe and see and heven out of relees
Ay herien :f and Thou, virgin wemmelees,§
Bar of thy body, and dwellest mayden pure,
The creatour of every creature.
And so through the rest.
Chaucer prepares us for the saintly legend with this
devout prologue. When he returned to the story of Griseldis
he appended an epilogue of a very different character. He
had not omitted to repeat and enforce Petrarch’s allegoric
moral, and he felt to the full the pathos, which he further
* Without ceasing. t Glorify. § Stainless.
13
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


emphasises, of the heroine’s sufferings; but he had come to
see the unnatural or, rather, repulsive excess of her submis-
sive acquiescence, and in his conclusion turns it off with
mischievous realism:
O noble wyves, ful of heigh prudence,
Lat noon humilitee your tonge naille.
Ne lat no clerk have cause or diligence
To wryte of yow a storie of swich mervaille.
On the contrary, answer back like Echo; if strong, stand on
your defence; if weak, be eager as a tiger: trust to the arrows
of your crabbed eloquence: and if you are good-looking,
make your husband jealous: if you are not, spend extrava-
gantly: always be light as a linden leaf, and leave him to
weep and wail and wring his hands.
In the recast of the extracts from the De Casibus,
Chaucer even more definitely bids good-bye to his former
tendencies. He adds indeed much to what he found in Boc-
caccio, especially a free version of the episode of Ugolino
and the Hunger Tower, which he had meanwhile read in
Dante and which he repeats with a sympathy equal to
Dante’s; but he is no longer in the mood for a melancholic
view of life, and after the Monk has illustrated in eighteen
such instances the deceitfulness of worldly bliss, the Knight
and the Landlord interrupt him, the latter exclaiming;
It is a peyne to here of hevinesse:
Sir Monk, no-more of this, so God yow blesse!
Your tale anoyeth al this companye:
Swich talking is nat worth a boterflye.
But before reverting with a more matter-of-fact estimate
of their purport to these themes of inhuman outrage, and
superhuman saintliness, and subterhuman meekness, Chaucer
had begun to smooth his wrinkled front and discard his sack-
cloth and recover his natural poise. We see this already in
the story of Constance, in which again the seven-line stanza
is employed, and which also he incorporated in the Canter-
14
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


bury Tales, assigning it to the Man of Law. It, too, has a
strong ecclesiastical flavour, for the version used by Chaucer
came to him from a Dominican Friar, who had seasoned it to
his own liking; and moreover Pope Innocent is quoted at
length on the wretchedness of the human lot; but it contains
as well several passages tinged with Chaucer’s sly humour,
and, besides, in its main drift it cannot belie its origin, which
was in the lay world of the common people. For it is merely
the variant of a wide-spread folk’s tale, and retains a good
deal of the artless popular appeal that is found in that
species. It also retains in full measure their straggling dis-
connected character and their tendency to repetition, faults in
it which Chaucer did not correct, and to which in youth he
himself was prone; so despite its many beauties, it is not one
of his best productions.
But it shows him in a more cheerful mood, with a greater
inclination towards secular interests; and having now mas-
tered Italian, he could read with thorough comprehension
and enjoyment Boccaccio’s pair of romantic epics or epical
romances, and enter into their spirit, which further liberated
his own. He seems first to have occupied himself with the
Teseide, of which the incipient humanism, the mundane gal-
lantry, the florid descriptions all attracted him; and appar-
ently he translated in his seven-line stanza some passages
from it, for which he found place in his later works. In his
final period he came back to it, and employing the ten-
syllable couplet, now his ordinary metre, wrote an abridg-
ment of it, which he inserted in the Canterbury Tales and
assigned to the Knight. It is all the better for being con-
densed, as the slenderness of the main theme—the knightly
rivalry of the “Two Noble Kinsmen,” Palamon and Arcite,
for the love of the peerless and unsuspecting Emilia—de-
mands brief rather than expansive treatment. But the point


to note is, that direct quotations as well as vaguer refrac-
tions from the Teseide in the Anelida and elsewhere prove
Chaucer’s previous knowledge of it, and thus imply that he
had already been busy with Boccaccio, whose example and
influence were to free him from his besetting sins of dis-
jointedness, untidiness, lack of definite plan. Boccaccio
showed him the importance of construction, of lucidity in
plot, of an orderly procedure resulting in the unity of the
whole. In short as the late W. P. Ker truly says: “Boccac-
cio taught Chaucer how to build a story on the right lines.”
If such was the lesson of the Teseide, much clearer is it in
the Filostrato, which, when Chaucer turned to it, for that
and other reasons fascinated and inspired him in a far greater
degree. It is more compact than its precursor, better riv-
etted, better designed, and in addition more intrinsically in-
teresting; and it lent itself to a further and fuller develop-
ment of the interest. It is significant that while Chaucer
drastically curtails the Teseide, he enlarges the Filostrato
from his own stores, supplemented with a few trifling hints
from the Filocolo, to about half again its original size,
though on the other hand he has omitted about half of Boc-
caccio’s material. And he does this to enhance its excellence
in many ways. Of course he could not improve its structure,
which is as good as it could be. But though, to borrow a
simile from architecture, he copies on his larger scale the
ground plan and frontage of the edifice, all the rest, includ-
ing the dignity, beauty and artistry of the internal arrange-
ments and equipment, are quite his own. This at all events
one may say, that while no one would call the Filostrato an
outstanding masterpiece of Italian Literature, its reproduc-
tion in Troilus and Cressida is one of the greatest specimens
of its kind, if not the very greatest, in English Literature.
And it is this, on account partly of its wealth of pure poetry,


but chiefly of its portrayal of men and women. Boccaccio’s
persons are comparatively abstract and conventional; the two
young friends, Troilo and Pandaro, mere representatives of
the gilded youth; Griseida, little more than an example of
the varium et mutabile semper foemina ; and the others scarce
call for remark. But Chaucer’s persons are all alive, even the
subordinate ones like Helen, who has been declared
not unworthy to stand beside the Helen of the Odyssey;
and how much richer is the vitality of the principals!
Every one of them has “a heart, within blood-tinc-
tured, of a veined humanity.” Troilus becomes an ardent
stripling, his soul aflame for honour and arms, till his whole
being is consumed in a devouring passion of first love that
all but puts out the lesser fire: Pandarus becomes an elderly,
easy-going, worldly-wise philosopher, whose cynicism is in
part redeemed by his homely shrewdness and his genuine af-
fection for his valorous young friend: untouched by scruples
of conscience, but by no means one of the despicable class
to which his name has since been applied. Above all, Cressid
is no longer the unstable minion of chance and mood, but a
gentle, gracious and lovable woman, who fails not so much
because she is weak, as because she mistakes her weakness
for strength. To find her congener in this respect, we have
to wait, at least in English literature, for George Mere-
dith’s Clotilde, and Chaucer in subtlety of conception never
again rises to such a height.
It is all so unexpected, so utterly unlike anything, not only
in Boccaccio but in Chaucer himself before, that we in-
stinctively ask: How did he come to this new and mar-
vellous power of characterisation ? With a mixture of diffi-
dence and confidence I venture the theory that Dante pointed
the way. The Comedy is harder to read than Boccaccio’s
epics, but Chaucer must have progressed in Italian after the
1 7
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


1373 journey, and his intimacy with it would be increased
by a second mission to treat of military matters with Bernabo
Visconti, when he remained in Italy for several months in
the latter half of 1378. His occupation with Dante was cer-
tainly asserted at the time on the authority of his own alleged
avowal, for according to the statement of his immediate
successor Lydgate, he wrote: “Dant in English, him-self
doth so expresse.” This statement must not be unduly
strained. It is not at all likely that he translated or claimed
to have translated the whole Vision. But the most probable
of the many attempts to solve the enigma is that Lydgate was
thinking of the House of Fame, which he does not other-
wise mention in his list of Chaucer’s works; and it strikes
us as a sort of half-serious, half-sportive pendant to the
Commedia. At any rate the Commedia has inspired it
throughout, and along with some touches from Boccaccio’s
imitation in the Amorosa Visione, has furnished it with many
of the details: so Chaucer may well have acknowledged its
indebtedness to Dante, while a listener ignorant of Italian—
and for a century after Chaucer’s death no English writer
seems to have known that language—may have exaggerated
or misunderstood the relation between them. But Chaucer’s
levies on the “grete poete of Itaille,” “the wyse poet of Flor-
ence,” as he calls him, were not confined to this poem. We
have seen that as an afterthought he prefaced his St Cecilia
with Dante’s Invocation of the Virgin and among his ex-
tracts from the De Casihus he inserted Dante’s story of Ugo-
lino: and these are the longest continuous passages he an-
nexes from the Comedy. He had also tried his hand at the
terse rime, the measure in which it is composed, but he was
not very successful and did not repeat the experiment: nor
indeed does it re-appear in any English poem of the first rank
before Shelley’s Triumph of Life. Unlike Boccaccio, Dante


hardly affected Chaucer at all in subject, metre or plot. His
influence is more pervasive and dispersed. In all Chaucer’s
maturer works, especially in those that followed the second
Italian journey, in Troilus, the Parlement of Foules, the
House of Fame, the Legend of Good Women, the Canterbury
Tales, the recurrent reminiscences show that he must have
lived with the Commedia in all its three parts: for they ex-
tend from the second canto of the opening Vision to the final
canto of the last, the references to the Purgatorio and the
Paradiso being together about as many as to the Inferno.
Sometimes we have similes appropriated almost word for
word, as of the Orient “laughing” in the new light, the exul-
tation of the released falcon, the crowding of motes in the
sunbeams; of ineffectual desire as “flying without wings
so, in the sixth cornice of Purgatory the eye-sockets of the
expiating spirits are compared to “rings without the gems,”
which Troilus applies to Cressid’s house when she has left
O ring, fro which the ruby is out-falle.
Sometimes Dante passes on the impression made by some
aspect of nature, as when he says of the evening-tide: “The
day was departing and the dusky air freed all creatures on
earth from their toils:” which re-emerges in his follower’s
lines *
The day gan fallen, and the derke night
Thet reveth bestes from hir besinesse.
Or Dante’s lovely description of the sacred trees in the
Earthly Paradise, with their boughs scarce stirred by the
breeze, rustling an accompaniment to the birds on their
crests, is thus abridged:
Therwith a wind, unnethe hit might be lesse,
Made in the leves grene a noise softe
Accordant to the foules songe on-lofte.
Sometimes the truth of an utterance arrests him, like Fran-
cesca’s lament: “No greater sorrow is there than to remem-
19
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


ber in misery the time of happinessand he lingers over it:
For of Fortune’s sharp adversitee
The worste kind of infortune is this,
A man to have ben in prosperitee,
And it remembren whan it passed is.*
Or of the transmission of virtue by heredity, Dante says:
Rarely unto the branches of the tree
Doth human worth mount up: and so ordains
He who bestows it, that as His free gift
It may be called.
Chaucer quotes directly:
Lo in swich maner rym is Dante’s tale;
Ful selde up ryseth by his branches smale
Prowesse of man, for God of his goodnesse
Wol that of him we clayme our gentillesse.
Or, Dante describes Envy as “the harlot, common bane and
vice of courts, that never turns her venal eyes from Caesar’s
household.” Chaucer can only agree;
Envye is lavender of the court alway,
For she ne parteth neither night ne day
Out of the hous of Cesar; thus seith Dante.
Or again when the transcendental theology of the Church is
the theme and the luminous spirits of the fourdi heaven sing
m praise of the Deity as “that one and two and three, ever
living and ever reigning in three and two and one,” Chaucer
echoes them to the very syllables;
Thou oon and two and three, eterne on-lyve,
That regnest ay in three and two and oon,
Uncircumscript, and al mayst circumscryve.
But it is needless to multiply examples, and in the time at
our disposal it would be impossible to cite them all. Yet
though they are so plentiful, we cannot say of Chaucer’s
most essential obligations: “Lo here! or lo there!” Ten
Brink clinches the matter in a sentence; “After all, what is
of chief importance cannot be demonstrated; it must be di-
vined.” He is thinking more particularly of the ideal of
* But for this Chaucer, in common with Dante, may have found the
direct suggestion in Boethius.
20
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


style and the general strengthening and sharpening of the
treatment; and he is quite right. Nevertheless, to my mind,
the radical connection between the two lies in the charac-
terisation. Of course in this as in so many other respects
they are as different as possible. Though their genius and
equipment, in graphic power, in book-learning, in variety
of interest, overlap, each has his peculiar sphere, in which
they are not so much dissimilar as opposite. Dante is mas-
ter of the Sublime, Chaucer of the Humorous. Let me give
one example. The great passage in the Purgatorio where the
mystic eagle as the heavenly presence is figured to the
dreamer’s mind, bears him to the sacred entrance door, vi-
brates with reverence and awe. In the House of Fame,
Chaucer requisitions the incident and situation, even the
allusion to Ganymede, in the longest and most literal in-
stance of reproduction that his poem contains; but from
his adaptation the solemnity has vanished and is replaced by
a playful touch: for remembering classical precedent, he
fears that he may be promoted beyond his wish and turned
into a star; as he puts it, that “Joves wol me stellifye.”
Chaucer indeed is compact of humour, while, though there
is much that is grimly grotesque in the Inferno, there is only
one humorous episode in the Comedy from beginning to end,
and that one perhaps seems more so to us than it did to its
author.* Chaucer does not shun even a coarse or indecent
joke that the other would reject with lofty scorn. True, he
is never prurient or libidinous, and we may say of him as
Don Pedro says of Benedict; “The man doth fear God,
howsoever it seems not in him by some large jests he will
make;’’ but being brought by this trait nearer to the level of
common life, he can, when he is not poetical, be vulgar or
even dull: as Dante never is. If for a moment Dante’s in-
• I refer to Malacoda’s method of giving the signal to his band.
21
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


spiration flag, it leaves him at worst only abstruse and
supersubtie.
Or again Dante is master of Horror: and there are few
more notable examples of it than the picture of Ugolino,
himself, for his treachery, plunged in the ninth circle of
Hell, fixing his ravenous fangs in the brain of Ruggieri, who
has starved him and his children to death. Chaucer repeats
the story of the Hunger Tower in full, dwelling with sym-
pathetic pathos on the sufferings and filial piety of the little
victims: but he omits the dreadful setting and says no word
of Ugolino’s guilt, punishment or vengeance. In him the only
emotion roused is compassion, with which he always over-
flows, whatever the occasion that calls it forth. Dante
is compassionate too, but apart from a general feeling of
distress at the scenes he has to witness, he reserves his com-
passion for those who earn it by some quality that entitles
them to respect or love,* and even them he will inexorably
consign to eternal woe. For baser delinquents he has no
pity. He refuses to unclose the ice-locked eyes of Alberigo
despite his virtual promise to do so: he hurls curses at the
wretched Argenti, and prays that he may see an aggravation
of his loathsome plight, behaviour that he evidently considers
just what it ought to be, for it has the warm approval of
Virgil. We cannot imagine Chaucer so inflexibly stern: he is
tolerant of all and has an ironical liking for the veriest
scamps and tricksters, if there is some grain of humanity in
them, or perhaps only some cleverness in their knavery. His
is often a questionable benevolence akin to what is blamed
* The case of Ciacco, at whose misery Dante weeps, is no exception
to this statement, for though we learn nothing more of him from the
text than that he sinned in gluttony, Boccaccio tells us that he was
a well-known Florentine, whose courtesy, culture and good-feeling
made him the welcome guest of gentlemen: and Dante, who had
reached manhood before Ciacco’s death, might well assume that these
commendable characteristics were still remembered, as apparently
they were some half a century later when Boccaccio reported them,
and that It was therefore unnecessary to specify them.
22
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


as indiscriminate charity, and his complaisance often wants
the salt of Dante’s righteous indignation. George Meredith
describes him as “childlike and manly and motherly.” None
of these epithets would occur to us as quite appropriate to
Dante. Certainly not “childlikefor he is ever serious with
the responsibilities and sorrows of mature years: but Chau-
cer has the espieglerie, the spontaneous gaiety and mobility
of a child, and is as easily stirred to tears or laughter. Some
overpowering emotion, on the other hand, is needed to
moisten Dante’s eyes, and but once, at the drowsy exhorta-
tion of Belacqua does he laugh, and then so quietly that only
his lips are moved; but twice, I think, does he so much as
smile—to wit, at the homage paid to Virgil by the uncon-
scious Statius, and at the insignificance of this globe as he
looks down on it from the sphere of the fixed stars. Nor,
for all that he is of unflawed manhood, do his claims strike
us as those we should expect from a mere man: he makes
his revelations as though he himself were one of the Higher
Intelligences whom he represents as granting him guidance
and enlightenment. It is typical that his profoundest study,
which yielded him the very texture of his thought, was in the
Summa of St Thomas Acquinas, surnamed the Angelic Doc-
tor : while Chaucer conned and translated Boethius, who pro-
vided the Middle Ages with as much of the manly wisdom of
antiquity as was compatible with ecclesiastical doctrine. And
no one would call Dante motherly, but it is the right word
for Chaucer. He often reminds us of a fond mother, who,
when her children are in trouble, takes them to her breast,
and cannot quite hide her amusement at her naughty boys’
reprehensible pranks, or at least her forgiveness of them,
even when she administers an official scolding or perhaps
some perfunctory slaps. Dante could not show such indulg-
ence ; he is rigorous, because he pierces to the inmost nerve
23
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


of his persons, to the centre that gives unity to the character,
and is comparatively unconcerned about the circumference.
He judges them sub specie eterrutatis, as though the verdict
were delivered by Heaven, and does not hesitate to place them
among the lost or the penitent or the blessed. Chaucer on the
contrary gives the view of the world, according to the various
aspects in which people show themselves in the motley
changes of their mundane relations. But Dante sees at a glance
the mainspring, that, wrought by a man’s passions and habits,
moves and determines his career. That one glimpse suffices
him as he hastens from each to each, and he registers his in-
tuition in indelible line. Thus he reveals in a flash Farinata’s
absorbing and magnificent party spirit, as with brow and
breast erect, he raises himself in his fiery tomb for news
of his faction, and when he hears of its ruin, remains mo-
tionless, lost to all around him and his own burning lair,
heedless even of the elder Cavalcanti’s piteous anxiety for
his son, till slowly recovering from his stupor, he resumes
where he left off, as though nothing had happened between.
Here we have a concentrated perception, tense and instan-
taneous beyond anything in Chaucer: so too in Francesca’s
sob: “Questi, che mai da me non fia diviso,” “This man
here who ne’er from me shall be divided;” or in Dante’s
own shrinking remorse, when as yet the sword of Beatrice’s
rebuke has struck him only “flatwise” at that meeting with
her, for which he has yearned so long. There are no such
swift, sudden elucidations of the heart in Chaucer’s leisurely
observation of men and their manners, as he describes their
significant traits, moods, habits, features —their mere peculi-
arities of gait and dress, if only they help us to realize what
sort of people they were: thus inaugurating the later national
method of Fielding, Smollett, Scott, Dickens, Thackeray, in
some respects of Shakespeare himsdf, witness his FalstafT,
24
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


his Malvolio, Phebe, Prince Hal, and many more. There
are only two detailed portraits in Dante, of himself and of
Virgil, and they are mainly for the mind’s eye. Chaucer, on
the other hand, gives us a gallery of full-length figures, and
the more he has elaborated them, the more excellent they
are. There is for the most part the difference in the repre-
sentations of the two poets that there is between the clean-
cut profile of a medallion and a wood engraving that owes
its effect to a multitude of lines.
Where then there are such great and obvious contrasts
m their outlook, processes and results, how justify the sug-
gestion that the Italian quickened in the Englishman his
innate but hitherto inert aptitude for character painting?
I answer that with all their dissimilarities, they are alike in
the essential point of delineating real individuals, each one
unmistakable, each one recognisable as true to life, each one
himself, none of them identical with any other mortal. Now
in the Christian poetry accessible to Chaucer, or at least as-
similated by him, there was no example of this save in the
Commedia. As De Sanctis finely and truly expresses it: “Nel
regno de’ morti, si senta per la prima volta la vita nel
mondo moderno.” So far as portraiture is concerned, this no
doubt is truer of the Inferno than of the Purgatorio, of
the Purgatorio than of the Paradiso. As the pilgrim pro-
ceeds, the spirits he meets become, perhaps of necessity, more
visionary and symbolical, so that often they seem little more
than dramatically suitable exponents of Dante’s own convic-
tions, political, philosophical and religious. But when he
likes, he leads the way in depicting definite, distinctive, single
personalities, not mere types, not mere members of a class,
but every one of them a separate unit, with his own palpitating
life, with his own proper soul. Let us remember that of this
realistic presentation of men and women, there is no trace in
25


Chaucer before his acquaintance with Dante, and thereafter
he has that consummate command of it which constitutes one
of his chief glories. Surely it is no very extravagant conjec-
ture that, however much they diverge in practice, his great
and revered predecessor’s discovery gave the clue, and awoke
the dormant power in him; that Chaucer learned the secret
from the Commedia, but applied it in his own very different
way as his own very different genius dictated.
At any rate he goes on to exploit his new found mastery in
the most and on the whole the best of his subsequent work.
Now and then, to be sure, he turns back to his early traffic
with allegory and dream; for in composition he disregarded
the old counsel, so wise in another connection: “ ’Tis well
to be off with the old love before you are on with the new.”
But even in these reversions there is a pregnancy of utter-
ance, a poetic vis, a kind of solidity, justly ascribed by Ten
Brink to Dante’s influence, that distinguish them from his
prentice efforts. In the House of Fame moreover there is
the interest of a personal confession, as in Dante’s more
spiritual journey from the present world: in the Legend of
Good Women a gleaming from the classical studies that Pet-
rarch so esteemed and that Dante had in some sort antici-
pated. Characterisation, however, and characterisation which
recent investigations indicate in some cases, as with Dante,
to have given the likeness of actual contemporaries, is again
the conspicuous feature in Chaucer’s most famous, if not
his greatest achievement, the containing story of the Canter-
bury Tales and some of the tales themselves that may have
been specially written for that collection. As to whether the
first suggestion for this, his final though not his supreme
triumph, came to him from the Decameron, I can form no
opinion. As I have said that was not a book much in favour
with the Intelligenzia; its analogues in Chaucer are not very
26
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


close, but connect rather with certain French fabliaux ; and
if he did make use of it, one is inclined to object, “Why not a
great deal more ?” for it offered much else that was quite in
his vein. Further, the idea of a series of narratives within
the frame-work of a main narrative was a common one in the
Middle Ages. Doubtless the setting as a rule was allegorical,
but not always: in one at least, the Seven Wise Masters, it
deals wholly with the doings of human agents. Yet even in
this, the subordinate anecdotes are introduced to illustrate and
advance the action of the including romance. Boccaccio was
the first to invent a gathering of people who told stories
merely for their mutual entertainment. If Chaucer was
indebted to him, it was only in this: unless indeed we see a
conscious antithesis between the assorted party of congenial
associates, who have fled, though with complete justification,
from the horrors of the pestilence, and the casual conflux of
such miscellaneous pilgrims as after recovery might be
bound for the shrine of the Saint “that hem hath holpen
whan that they were seke.” But Chaucer’s particular con-
ception and treatment have little in common with Boccaccio’s.
They do not always show superiority: Boccaccio’s scheme is
by far the more deft and workmanlike. We have the ten
participants, young ladies and gentlemen, meeting in a gar-
den and telling each other during each of the ten days of
their sojourn in the adjoining villa, ten stories in turn, one
hundred in all. In Chaucer we have, besides the Host,
twenty-nine pilgrims at least, possibly thirty-one, for the
data disagree, to whom one more is afterwards added; and
they are all to tell four stories each, two on the way to
Canterbury and two on the way back, which makes a total
of, say, one hundred and twenty. The work is unfinished,
and apparently the author’s final intention was to cut down
that number by half; but even so, on the present scale of
27
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


the extant tales, it would be impossible to cram as many as
sixty within the prescribed limits of time. Then, think of the
difficulty of making oneself heard by some thirty other trav-
ellers on horseback. It might be all very well for the Ship-
man used to outbellowing the storm, but what about the
gentle Prioress whose voice was in demand chiefly for the
singing of the “service divine” “entuned in her nose ful
semely?” Decidedly, Boccaccio’s arrangements are more
comfortable and considerate. But, to set against that, in
Chaucer’s heterogeneous throng there are representatives of
every class, except the very highest and the very lowest, and
all, of whom there is more than passing mention, are por-
trayed with convincing truth. We have an immortal com-
pany of the most diverse personages, and their diversity
gives their creator further opportunity for dramatic effect,
of which he almost always avails himself, in fitting the
sharply contrasted narratives to the sharply con-
trasted narrators. These excellences more than com-
pensate for any mechanical flaws in the imitation, if
imitation there be. But if Chaucer did borrow hints for his
scaffolding, it was more probably, as Professor Karl Young
has pointed out in detail, from Sercambi, another Italian
contemporary, whose collection of novelle may be dated
shortly after 1374. In it the stories, with other diversions,
are represented, after the manner of the Decameron, as in-
tended for the entertainment of a band of men and women
who are escaping from the plague, but who, otherwise than
in the Decameron, are not all of one class or condition, who
are travelling from place to place, and who have elected one
of their number to direct and control their proceedings.
These coincidences with the general plan of the Canterbury
Tales cannot be overlooked, but if Chaucer has appropri-
ated the outlines, he improves them, especially by assigning
28
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


the stories to different speakers, while in Sercambi they are
all told by the same individual; and the filling-in illustrates
the vital distinction between talent and genius.
To sum up, I think that, just as Chaucer was hardly influ-
enced by Petrarch’s Canzoniere, so he was hardly if at all
influenced by Boccaccio’s Decameron. The day for the
masterpieces of the two illustrious friends would come, but
it was not yet. In the early half of the sixteenth century
Petrarch was to inspire our first sonneteers, who have had so
large and notable a progeny. In the last quarter of that
century Boccaccio and the later Italian novelists were to fur-
nish the Elizabethan dramatists with the plots for some of
their most memorable plays. Meanwhile it was Boccaccio’s
Epics and Dante’s Vision that gave the great poet of our
modern England’s dawn the inestimable boon of their sug-
gestions ; the Epics, in verse, subject and construction: the
Vision, in portraiture and style.
29
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY


APPENDIX
In this lecture the traditional opinion has been followed
that Chaucer’s works show no trace of Italian influence be-
fore his first recorded visit to Italy in 1373- Recently, how-
ever, it has been suggested that he “did not learn Italian be-
cause he was sent to Italy, but was sent to Italy because he
knew Italian.” As French and Latin would suffice for the
purposes of his mission in that year, this new theory needs
the support of external evidence and that is considered to be
furnished in two interesting notices of him, for the discovery
of which we have to thank American research.
The first occurs in the warrant dated 17 July, 1368,
for a letter of protection to him on his travelling from
Dover “ouesqez deux hakeneys vint soldz et dis liuvres en
eschange.” The £lO in exchange, it is said, would carry him
far, and Italy may well have been his destination, as his
former patron, Lionel, Duke of Clarence, remained there
after his marriage in May till his death in October. This is
not an unlikely hypothesis, but it is no more than an hypo-
thesis. Have we not as good a right, for example, to suppose
that Chaucer was despatched as messenger to Gascony, where
the Black Prince was meeting with difficulties and pursuing a
policy criticised at the English court, and where he had im-
posed the unpopular hearth-tax that in the next year would
lead to the war in which Chaucer served abroad for the sec-
ond time. This explanation of his journey seems quite as
probable as the other. He was now in the household, no


longer of Lionel, but of the King, and is described in the
warrant as “nostre ame vallet.”
But it is argued that even if Chaucer did not visit Italy
before 1373, he must have learned Italian in London. The
alleged proof is contained in the second notice, dated
20 August, 1374, which instructs him to release the St
Mary and St George, a Genoese tarita, with its cargo, then
under arrest at Dartmouth. “Surely,” comments Professor
Rickert, to whom we owe this new information, “only one
who knew Italian well” . . . “would have been sent on such
an errand”: “It is not likely that the captain of a Genoese
tarit in the 14th century was much more familiar with Eng-
lish than such a man to-day;” and “the month or so” of
Chaucer’s stay in Italy in 1373 “would not have given him
much command of Italian.”
But would any Italian be necessary in what was after all a
very simple proceeding? Before the regular institution of
the Court of Admiralty such maritime matters came before
the King, or the King in Council, whose decision was final
and had only to be carried into effect. The release of a ship
from arrest was thus a rather formal affair and would
not involve much acquaintance with the language of the
country to which the ship belonged. If Italian were in
any way indispensable, it would be at an earlier stage,
when the case was being considered by the King; but
even then it would probably be superfluous, as Latin
was ordinarily used in official transactions when different
nationalities were involved, and if the petitioner was
“au bout de son latin,” he might have recourse to the gener-
ally current French. We have to remember this, too, should
it still be maintained that the release of the ship was a more
complicated business than I suggest it to have been. Is it not
an assumption that the captain was ignorant not only of


English but of French? Supposing that he was, can we also
assume that there was no supercargo or agent or interpreter
who had the requisite equipment? The references in Du
Cange show that the tarita was almost invariably a merchant
ship; would there be no one aboard or ashore connected with
the St Mary and St George who was able to advocate its
interests, if not in English, at least in the international Latin
or the nearly international French?
But even if all these objections be set aside, and it be
proved that the English Government’s emissary must have
known Italian, supporters of the older theory would be
ready to admit or rather maintain that Chaucer had not
mastered it in his 1373 visit and had to improve his know-
ledge later. They would heartily agree that he needed to give
it further study, but they would add that this he gave it.
And in the fifteen months, more or less, that had elapsed
since his return to England, he would have time to make
considerable progress. Whether or not he had acquired some
rudiments of the language at an earlier date is a question
that hardly concerns them. All they are committed to is, that
after the 1373 journey he was at first indebted chiefly to the
Latin works of Italian writers, and that Italian Literature,
properly so called, did not till a subsequent date vitally in-
fluence his own authorship.
Halstead Printing Company Ltd.,
Arnold Place, Sydney
32
CHAUCER’S DEBT TO ITALY




