

COUNTRY DISTRICTS.
SOME ACCOUNT OF A SYSTEM OF CONSTRUCTING AND MANAGING
LOCAL AND BRANCH LINES.
WITH A DESCRIPTION OF THE
GUI PSKOV BRANCH LINE IN DENMARK.
W. R. ROWAN, C.E.
TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL DANISH ,
WITH NOTES AND ADDENDA,
F. C. ROWAN.
UJ I I boitr n t :
WALKER, MAY & CO, 9 MACKILLOP STREET.
1881.




CHEAP RAILWAYS
(for
COUNTRY DISTRICTS
SOME ACCOUNT OF A SYSTEM OF CONSTRUCTING AND MANAGING
LOCAL AND BRANCH LINES.
WITH A DESCRIPTION OF THE
GRIBSKOY BRANCH LINE IN DENMARK.
W. R. ROWAN, C.E.
TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL DANISH,
WITH NOTES AND ADDENDA,
F. C. ROWAN.
gUlbflunu:
WALKER, MAY & CO., 9 MACKILLOP STREET,
1881.




PREFACE.
The question of constructing and working light railways and
tramways, either as distinct systems or in connection with
existing or projected lines of railway, is one which is exciting
the attention of many engineers of various countries at the
present time. It is a question of much moment to many country
districts, and it is with the view of placing before those
interested the possibility of arriving at a satisfactory method
of constructing and working such lines as referred to above, with
efficiency and economy, that I have collated some of the evidence
obtainable on this point. It will, of course, always be open to
companies or to individuals to build and work either railways or
tramways prudently or the reverse. We hope to be able to show
that the tramway system advocated is of so elastic a nature, that,
while it is the most economical when the traffic is very light, it is
capable of developing carrying capacity for a very considerable
traffic —more, in fact, than any secondary or branch line is likely,
with very rare exceptions, to have to carry. It may be taken for
granted that individuals or companies embarking in any enterprise
having in view the transport of passengers only, or of passengers
and goods either separately or together, are desirous of combining
such efficiency of transport as may create popularity for their line
with a minimum of expenditure. If this be true, we may also take
it for granted that such individuals or companies will give due


consideration to the main points of a system which is the outcome
of many years’ patient study and experiment upon the part of a
practical civil engineer and contractor of over twenty years’
standing. This gentleman, Mr. W. R. Rowan, C.E., besides having
constructed various railways under many different conditions, has
deeply studied the question of tramways, and has been for many
years, and is still, the managing director of a large railway carriage
and waggon factory. He has thus had special facilities for studying
the various aspects of the question referred to. I shall endeavour,
as far as possible, to translate literally from his own words in
describing his views and inventions, and I have added a few
footnotes from other authorities on the same subject.
In a paper* upon the subject of the employment of mechanical
motors on tramways, written in 1877, for the information of a
Royal Commission appointed by the Danish Government, Mr.
W. R. Rowan says :
“ The introduction of a cheap and efficient means of commu-
nication is a question of much importance, and one of which the
solution has occupied extensively the consideration of our leading
experts. While the beneficial influence that railways have exer-
cised on the districts with which they are connected, by leading to
the expansion of commerce, manufactures and agriculture, has
largely contributed to the material progress of the country in
general, outlying towns and neighbourhoods, too far distant from
the main routes of thoroughfare to partake of any direct advantage
from their development, are naturally anxious to reap an increased
share of the benefits accruing from a closer connection with the
exterior world. Many and various efforts have already been made
to comply with these requirements, but the greater number of the
projects have been failures, or where they have been carried out,
the result from a financial point of view has been anything but
* See Appendix I.


satisfactory. These failures have for the most part arisen from
the comparatively heavy cost of construction of even the lightest
class of railways, combined with the expenses attendant on their
working, and the parties interested have therefore given their
attention to the question of producing a means of communication
which, while capable of being more cheaply executed and worked,
will not essentially alter the mode of transport.
u The solution of a problem of such importance has, as may well
be supposed, given rise to many different schemes ; and the ten-
dency of more recent investigations has been in the direction of
substituting for horses an efficient mechanical motor, as soon as
such can be shown to be obtainable.
“ When this has been done, the question of ‘ secondary rail-
ways ’ for the country may be looked upon as settled, because the
construction of light tramways upon the principal country roads
as they now exist really supplies an inexpensive railway, inasmuch
as the entire cost of land, earthworks, culverts, and fences, and
the greater part of the outlay usually required for bridges, ballast,
stations, and gate-houses will be avoided ; and in regard to
working expenses, the greater part of the official staff can very
well be spared, while the important reduction in the proportion
of dead to paying weight will materially reduce the cost of
haulage.”
Mr. R. C. Rapier, M.1.C.E., in his little work, “ Remunera-
tive Railways for new Countries,” says, upon the same subject:—
“ During the last few years much has been done towards facilitating the introduction
of railways in the colonies, and other distant countries, at greatly reduced cost as
compared with the earlier railways. Not only has experience brought about the natural
result of improved production, but a new departure altogether has been taken in
constructing railways of a lighter calibre than was formerly deemed practicable. Mere
alteration of gauge will not make much difference ; reduction, to be of real use, must be
made throughout, especially in the weight of moving loads and in speed. It is often
argued that a little railway may be all very well for light traffic, but what is to be done
when traffic increases 1 To this it may be replied that one of the greatest blunders has
been making railways with too great a regard for the future, and not sufficient considera-


tion of the immediate present. No business can stand against a capital outlay which is
out of proportion to the business to be done. It is familiar to all that the successful
manufactories and trading enterprises of the country have been the result of small first
outlay and gradual development of business. In those instances where a new business
has been commenced with a large capital and huge buildings, failure and disaster have
been only too familiar, even in cases which had all the advantages of modern machinery,
a skilled staff, and good business connections. The man of business who begins in a
small way keeps his premises and capital fully occupied, and success is the outcome of
the demand exceeding the supply. To build a railway many times too big in all its
belongings is simply to postpone the day of its becoming remunerative a postponement
which is for ever adding all sorts of burdens to the capital account.
“In some of our colonies full-sized railways have been made, with the effect that the
beginning of dividend paying is still distant; in others, railways have been made on a
reduced scale of 3-feet 6-inch gauge and rails 45 lbs. per yard ; and in many of these the
reports are to the effect that railways do not pay in themselves, but they contribute to
the prosperity of the country, and the public revenue is able to pay the guaranteed
interest. Of course, where the country is able to bear it, this is all very well, and no
very great harm may result in a growing country from making railways too expensive to
be self-supporting. But in the majority of cases it is a first necessity that the railways
should pay as such. Here it may be proper to remark that care must be taken to guard
against the error of making small railways and then expecting them to do the duty of
heavy ones. For example, to make a railway 3-feet gauge with 10-ton engines, and then
attempt to travel at 25 miles an hour, or to work a goods traffic with trucks which weigh
three tons empty, is to mistake the whole nature of the subject.
“ Gauge, weight of engine, diameter of driving-wheels, and weight of rails must be all
duly proportioned to the weights to be conveyed, and to the speed at which they are to
be drawn ; and, having fixed the dimensions of the means, the duty originally marked
out should be rigidly adhered to.
“In thus advocating light and cheap railways, the author does not propose to
sacrifice anything in quality. Real economy is only to be had in being content with
smaller size and less speed, and consequently lighter works and plant. The precise
scale for any particular line must be determined by the local considerations, but in all
cases the smallest well-constructed railway is certain to pay the earliest and the best.
Nor should the fact be lost sight of that a little railway, being as free as possible from
the incubus of heavy expenditure and accumulated arrears of interest, will the sooner
be able to afford to become a double line, and a double line will accommodate from four
to six times as much traffic as a single line. Again, if, in course of time, a double line
should be insufficient for the traffic, additional lines of rail could be laid, and thus
facilities would be afforded for separating the fast from the slow traffic, a desideratum
now fully recognized by our English railway companies. (See ‘ Transactions Institute
Civil Engineers,’ vol. xxxviii., page 179.) Seeing that this has become a pressing
necessity after only thirty years of work, it should certainly be kept well in view in
laying out main lines of railway in other countries. ”
The question now arises, if light railways are to be made use
of, how and within what limits as to cost and working power are


they to be constructed, and on what system are they to be
managed? The idea of bringing the motive power to be employed
into the vehicle itself has materially aided in solving this question,
and it is hoped that the following translation of a treatise on light
lines worked by steam-cars may prove of as much value to these
colonies as the original, by the inventor, has proved in the north
of Europe.
F. C. R.
Melbourne, 25 th January , 1881.




CHEAP RAILWAYS.
In tlie year 1877 I wrote a short treatise on the utilization of
mechanical motive power on tramways,* in which I contended (and,
I think, proved) that if such power, no matter of what nature, was
to be employed in moving a car, it should be—in order to get the
full benefit of it—contained in the car itself, and not attached
separately in front of the car, as occurs in the case of railway
trains. I also demonstrated in what manner the motive power
could be best brought in to the car, and that, of the existing motive
powers at our disposal, steam was the only one at that time worth
considering. The idea which prevailed throughout this treatise
was that, instead of striving to produce reduced railways, we
should extend the sphere of tramways so as to serve as local lines,
and that this object could best be attained by the employment of
steam in such a manner as to obtain a large reduction in the dead
weight to be moved, and also by not tying ourselves down to
laying tramways on country roads, but to lay them, where
advisable, across fields, &c., as “cross-country” tramways.
The years which have passed since the publication of the
treatise alluded to have been very bad ones in a commercial
way, and to this may principally be attributed the reason that
so little has yet been done towards employing steam on tramways.
Attempts have, on the whole, not advanced us much in this
direction during that period—certainly not as regards town
tramways, because, although the introduction of steam is here
an accomplished fact, the attempts hitherto made in Europe have
* See Appendices I, and 11,


been more or less unsuccessful, owing to unfortunate defects in
most of the systems which have been employed.
With regard to the use of steam upon cross-country
tramways, the case is rather otherwise, as the experience which
has been gained in these last years has established the correctness
of the theories advanced in the abovementioned treatise, and has
also placed me in a position to adduce proofs in support of them,
as well as allowed me to advance a definite system for the laying
and stocking of cross-country tramways. If we consider the
various local railways in Northern Europe, it is very remarkable
how slightly the system which is adopted for their construction
materials, and rolling-stock—whether they be short lines or long,
broad gauge or narrow—differs from the railway system which,
originally brought to perfection in England, as suited to English
conditions, spread thence over the whole Continent. We find
everywhere the same rail and sleeper system, the same locomotive
and train system, and, as a rule, the same class of plant as is
employed on the great main lines.
It is true that in some places they have employed a reduction
in gauge, in others they have made the superstructure lighter and
employed lighter engines and other rolling-stock; but, as a rule,
the result has not been a success, as these lines frequently do not
pay interest on capital—in some cases, even, barely pay working
expenses. It is, therefore, appropriate to inquire whether, without
unconditionally following the beaten tracks of custom, we cannot
find some other way of attaining a satisfactory result, and arrive
at a cheap and fairly paying means of communication which will
place the lesser towns and country districts, lying off the main
lines of railway, in connection with commercial centres. Before
we attempt this it will first be necessary to determine what kind
of traffic has to be provided for, what amount of it, and how much
revenue from it may be expected, and then to devise for this traffic
suitable rolling-stock, which can be used on whatever road is


cheapest to construct and to maintain, and will allow us to
employ the cheapest management. The result at which I have
arrived by employing this method of procedure is that, for this
class of lines, the system of locomotives, rails, and sleepers now
used for railways is unsuitable ; that watchmen, fencing, and
telegraphs are superfluous ; that stationmasters are not required
at the intermediate stations, as it is not necessary there either to
sell tickets or to book goods, and this I shall a little further on show
more clearly to be the case. The problem which is before us, and
the solution of which is attempted in this article, is, as has been
already indicated, to find a system suitable for local lines in agricul-
tural countries, where traffic is proportionately small in quantity, as
in Denmark, South Sweden, and North Germany; and as it is
evident that this is a system for a defined class of lines, we must
commence by defining precisely what lines belong to the class in
question. To be able to do this we must start systematically ;
and first of all we must decide within what limits these lines will,
as a rule, fall. These will be:—
1. A limit of length , beyond which a line can no longer be
regarded as a local line, since it will be of sufficient length to
serve as a main line, with branch lines of its own, or will form an
integral portion of a network of main lines.
2. A maximum traffic limit , beyond which a line would pay
interest, even if from the first constructed as a portion of the
general main network ; and
3. A minimum traffic limit , under which it will not pay directly
to construct even a local line.
The limit of length , inside which it may be said that a line
should lie, to be regarded as a local line, is from 10 to 30 miles.
(In Denmark all the local lines now being constructed come within
these limits.)
The maximum traffic limit can be easily arrived at in each
country by a comparison with existing lines.


The minimum traffic limit , which is a point of great
importance, is not so easily determined, partly because the
amount of traffic receipts per mile which will make a line from 25
to 30 miles long payable, will often not suffice on a line from 10
to 15 miles long, partly because local conditions often exercise a
powerful influence; hut, taking a length of 18 miles as an average,
then a gross annual income of £2OO per mile may be taken as the
minimum traffic limit for the system here advocated.
The problem is thus distinctly and plainly defined as far
as concerns its consideration in this article; hut, before going
further, and to avoid misunderstanding, we shall explain more
precisel} 7 the meanings that we attach to certain terms which
are frequently employed without any very clearly defined
signification.
The term “ railway ” refers to the kind of railways generally
in use in Northern Europe, without reference to gauge. Con-
sequently a “ railway ” means a road made with “ Vignolles ”
rails laid upon wooden or iron cross sleepers, resting upon ballast,
and placed on a specially acquired strip of land, which is fenced,
watched, and closed to the public. The trains running on such a
road consist of a number of cars or waggons attached to a
locomotive.
By “ locomotive ” is always meant the kind of locomotive
generally employed on railways, with locomotive boiler and direct-
acting cylinders.
By a “ tramway ” (ordinary) is meant a rail-track laid in a
street or on a country road—generally with sunk rails, so that
ordinary vehicles can drive, without hindrance, in any direction.
Such a line is worked by tram-cars, drawn by horses or moved by
mechanical power. Hedges or fences are not employed, as the
cars —by the Government regulations—are provided with such
powerful brake apparatus that they can be stopped quite as
quickly as an ordinary vehicle. A tramway owns neither the


land nor the strip of road on which the track is laid—it has only
running rights over them.
By a “ cross-country tramway ” or a “ steam road ” is under-
stood a rail-track laid wholly or in part upon a strip of land rented
or purchased expressly, where the rails are not, as a rule, sunk,
and where the traffic is worked with steam-cars. Hedges and
fences are not more required than on an ordinary tramway,
because the power of stopping is fully as efficient in a steam-car
as in a tram-car drawn by horses.
Now, in rationally constructed and worked “ cross-country
tramways ” —or, as I would prefer to call them, so as not to confuse
them with tramways proper, “ steam roads ” —we shall find the
solution of the problem set before us.
In the following pages the best form of “ steam roads ” will be
described in detail; hut to insure a better comprehension of the
initiatory remarks which we have made, we will recapitulate the
main points which were laid down in the short treatise previously
alluded to.
For a normal line I propose that the
“ Breadth of formation be . . . . 9 feet
“ Slopes, under ordinary circumstances 1 to 1 and 1 to
“ Ditches, in depth . . . . .12 inches
“ Ditches, breadth at bottom ... 9 inches
“ Ballast, in depth . . . . .12 inches
“ Curve, ruling ..... 100 feet rad.
“ Gradient, ruling on roads. . . . I in 20
“ Gradient, ruling across country . . 1 in 30
“ Bridges, material ..... timber
“ Culverts, can be, for the most part, avoided, by using glazed
pipes, or by leading the water along the side ditches.
“ Fences, would not be required.
“ Telegraph, would not be required.
“ Signals, only required in special cases.


“ Stations, to be only at the two termini; they can he built of
timber or brick-nogging, and should embrace workshops, carriage
stables, office, two waiting-rooms for different classes, goods-shed,
and a residence for a married caretaker.
“ Stopping-places, to be placed at the more important road-
crossings or other suitable localities, and to consist of small wooden
or brick-nog buildings, containing waiting-room and goods-shed,
with residence for a married man, who would work upon the line,
while his wife looked after the buildings.
“ The Kolling-stock, would consist of steam-cars built to
accommodate from 50 to 100 passengers, or to carry from 5 to 15
tons of goods, according to the requirements of the expected
traffic and to the gradients on the line.
“ The engines should all be entirely steam and smoke-consum-
ing, and without noise, and must be so arranged that they can he
used either on roads or streets without danger to the public.
“ Wherever the local conditions admit of the adoption of
gradients not greater than 1 in 60, and of curves of not less than
400 feet rad., one or more additional cars for passengers or for
goods can be drawn behind the steam-car, as the engine will have
ample power for the purpose. It would be best, as a rule, that
these cars should be specially constructed for the purpose; but, at
the same time, where the steam road is in connection with an
existing railway, there can be no difficulty in arranging for the
attachment of a railway carriage or truck.”
The experience which has been gained in the years since the
above was written has not given any ground to alter the
arguments then adduced; on the contrary, the experiments which
have been made in Denmark with the Vemb-Lemvig and with the
Gribskov lines have only contributed to strengthen them. The
traffic with which we have to deal is, as the experience gained on
the existing local or branch lines in these countries testifies, in
itself small, and of such a nature that, if a maximum of 500 to 600


persons, or of 75 to 100 tons daily of goods, in each direction, can
be obtained, that will be about as much as will, as a rule, be
required; that is, assuming, of course, that the passenger traffic is
worked at a reasonable speed and a reasonable freight charged on
goods. For such a traffic a railway is not necessary, and certainly
not long trains drawn by a locomotive —“ steam roads ” will suffice.
It is just the organization of and working with long trains that
causes difficulty. If it can be shown that the traffic can be met,
and, possibly, best met, by short trains, then the day of railways
will be over for that class of lines which we have to deal with,
because, disposing of a given traffic by short trains means frequent
trains, by which means not only are the demands of the passenger
traffic best satisfied, but traffic of all kinds is at once encouraged,
and thence becomes greater and greater, at the same time that
lighter motors can be employed. On the other hand, carrying the
same traffic with long trains means few trains and proportionately
heavier motors, so as to give sufficient adhesion to the driving-
wheels to overcome the resistance of the train. #
* Note hy Translator. —ln working out the idea of ‘‘Rowan’s steam-car,” it is impos-
sible to avoid being struck with the possibility of doing away with the heavy locomotives
now so destructive to lightly-constructed lines. If it prove possible to get rid of the
present weight of engines, it follows that iron roads may be laid down of a cheaper and
lighter construction than has hitherto been considered necessary for railroads.
Again, if lines can be constmcted cheaply, and furnished with a cheap rolling-stock,
many places at present isolated could afford to connect themselves with existing trunk
lines. If the Legislature will but sanction the construction of such lines on existing high
roads, all the large expenses of railway making, such as earthworks, land purchase,
fencing, and bridges, will fall away, and we shall soon see all country towns connected
by an organized system of steam omnibuses and goods trucks.
In comparing such steam tram-roads with railroads, where it is an object to economize
in construction, and to use rails only adapted for a very light traffic, it must be admitted
that the rate of speed would be much slower, probably not more than half the speed of a
railroad, but the public must be prepared to give up some personal comfort, if they can
obtain regular and frequent communication at a low outlay in comparison with a railroad.
The capital required would probably not be more than one-third, and the working expenses
would be about one-half, if as much.
The rolling-stock and equipment of the line would cost very much less, though it


In long trains, cars and waggons must be proportionately
stronger to withstand the heavier buffing and pulling, so that
they must be built heavier, with heavier coupling and buffing
apparatus, etc. This, of course, increases the dead weight. Working
with long trains has an influence upon the construction of the
line, inasmuch as they necessitate easier gradients and larger
curves, which increases the amount of earthwork, lengthens
cuttings, and augments the quantity of land to be acquired. The
importance of these latter considerations is so great that it will be
best to elucidate them by an actual example, and to this end we
may take a portion of the profile of the railway between Aarhus
and Odder, which was projected in the year 1875, and which was
laid out, constructed, and worked in a similar manner to the
Aarhus-Ryom line. Any railway which may be laid between
these two points must, starting from Aarhus harbour, be carried
would give exactly the same accommodation to passengers. Another advantage on a
steam tram would be that the train can be stopped in a few yards. This fact, and the
comparatively low speed, would render accidents impossible. Besides this, passengers
can be picked up at any point on the line, and the wear and tear of the road is reduced
to a minimum.
There is no doubt, also, that such road rails will be a great saving to parish authori-
ties, as all the heavy traffic which now destroys their macadamized roads would be
diverted on to the iron tracks, and thus the macadamized portion of the road would be
spared. Mr. Ewing Matheson, M.1.C.E., in his book lately published, “Aid to Engi-
neering Enterprise,” has given great attention to the subject, and he says :
“Although tramways for the conveyance of minerals and merchandise were in
operation long antecedent to railroads, a new stimulus has been given to this branch of
enterprise by the rapid extension of town lines for passengers. Rail-tracks upon high-
ways, for vehicles with flanged wheels, will probably become more common ; while, if
steam-cars become fully established in towns, their adoption for longer distances on
country roads will follow in many districts where the roadways are suitable. Traction
by horse-power, or by fixed engines, or by something other than locomotives, has been
generally accepted as that which distinguishes tramways from railroads, but if the use
of steam on highways becomes general, the classification, if it be retained, may also
depend on the speed, and may so include in the category of tramways those lines on
which the loads are carried by steam-cars. A rail-track affords —after canals and
navigable rivers—the cheapest means of transport, and the use of steam overcomes the
greatest obstacle which has hitherto prevented an extended use of tramways. For
while on level roads even horse traction allows on a rail-track an enormous saving in
the cost of haulage over that incurred on an ordinary highway, occasional hills almost


over the table land at Holme, which is about 200 feet above the
harbour. In the accompanying drawing, A shows the profile of the
easiest line procurable, while B is the profile of a proposed steam-
road which would go, equally with A, from Aarhus harbour, and
be carried over the table land at Holme.
In construction, following A, we have :
Earthwork, about . . . 135,118 cubic yards
Land to be acquired, about . .107 acres
Length of cuttings, about . . 600 feet.
In following profile B we have :—
Earthwork, about . . . 13,080 cubic yards
Land to be acquired, about . 25 acres
Length of cuttings, about . . 500 feet.
entirely neutralize the apparent benefits. But though a ruling gradient of even two per
cent, may thus effectually hinder the success of a horse tramway, the latent or reserve
force in a steam-engine overcomes the difficulty. ”
The grooved rails used on town tramways are generally unsuitable for service on
country roads, and raised rails which cannot conveniently be crossed by ordinary vehicles
are advisable ; but as in many countries the highways are, or can at small cost be made,
wide enough to allow a rail-track on one side without diminishing too much the space for
ordinary vehicles, it might prove advantageous in a colony needing development and
where new roads are being made, to lay out such roads so that a tramway for steam-cars
might be added at a future time. If a line can be laid in this way, many of the expenses
incurred in a railway project for land and works can be avoided ; and, as the maximum
speed need not exceed ten miles per hour, and as the cars can at such a speed be stopped
within half their own length, no fencing of the track nor signal apparatus is necessary.
A tramway of this sort might be of great convenience in wide, sparsely-peopled districts,
as—instead of stations few and far between —passengers and light goods could be taken
up on the route, or, at any rate, at all cross roads ; platforms or cranes for heavier
merchandise being only provided at special places. In districts with only a small traffic
a more frequent, and therefore a more convenient, service could be maintained than the
same expenditure on a railway, even of narrow gauge, would allow. For instance, on a
road ten or thirty miles long from a seaport or railway station, where a traffic of only
one hundred passengers and twenty tons of goods, each way, per day had to be carried,
one mixed train, for goods and passengers, would suffice, and, if the load were divided
over two or more trains, the mileage would be proportionately and unprofitably increased,
as the train even for the diminished load must still have a certain number of vehicles.
But if, instead of one railway train, four steam-cars, two for passengers and two for
goods, were running each way at suitable intervals daily, the service would be more
convenient and probably cheaper.


Put these items into money , we get —
For A, about
For B, about
£9,250
1,950
Which gives a saving for line B of
£7,300
Many will, however, be inclined to imagine that the expenses
of transporting goods by the steep inclines of line B are greater
than those of line A, but this is not the case. The cost of trans-
porting 1 cwt. of goods from the harbour on to the Holme plateau
is represented by the fuel consumed in raising I cwt. 200 feet, and is
not affected proportionately by inclines, but is practically the same
whichever line we select. It would be, however, otherwise, if it
were laid down as a condition that the traffic must be w r orked with
long trains, because, in that case, we should be obliged to use easy
gradients, otherwise the resistance of the train would quickly
overcome the adhesive power of the locomotive.* On the other
side, if the amount of traffic were not too great for the whole
transport to be carried on exclusively with steam-cars, one could,
without raising the cost of transport, use any gradient whatsoever
* Mr. Rapier says; —“ The laws of gravitation are inexorable and unalterable, and no
invention of any particular kind of engine can alter the fact that the duty to be done is
to move the given load through a given height and distance, although some inventions
may facilitate the performance of the duty in a slight degree. The necessary weight of a
locomotive increases rapidly with the gradients, heavy and expensive engines being
necessary for steep inclines ; the weight of the engine and trucks giving a non-paying
load great in proportion to the paying load, ”




until it became so steep that the car would slide on it with skidded
wheels. Another weighty consideration is that the costly arrange-
ments for watchmen, fencing, &c., cannot be dispensed with on
lines worked with long trains, unless these are provided with
continuous brakes, which can be worked by the engine-driver
himself; for the train’s capacity for stopping—which is the measure
of safety for wayfarers at road crossings—should not be dependent
on the quickness with which a brakesman at the rear of the train
acts, at the critical moment, in response to the engine-driver’s signal.
Without continuous brakes, which are a costly and complicated
apparatus to introduce on a local line, the care for the public safety
on unfenced lines worked with ordinary trains will generally
prove illusory, and, on that ground alone, the employment of the
train system on such lines should be considered impossible.
In the foregoing we have placed some of the more essential
advantages of the steam-car system in juxtaposition with the train
system, and we have shown some of the latter’s weak points, but
it can be demonstrated that these advantages go through the whole
construction and working. This I propose to do later on, after
first describing in greater detail the “ steam road ” system which
is proposed. The “ steam road ” can be built light or heavy,
according as it is, or as it is not, required to carry a through-going
goods traffic in conjunction with the main line ; but, as our expe-
rience, from those places where narrow-gauge lines join in with
broad-gauge ones, shows that the cost of transfer of goods is pro-
portionately small—while on the other hand the inconvenience is
serious of having to construct one’s line so as to take over it such
waggons or carriages, for instance, as are generally used in Denmark,
Sweden, or Germany, and entails entirely disproportionate expenses
for sidings—we shall here, at first, only treat of the lighter
“ steam roads,’’ assuming the re-loading if necessary; while
the heavier “ steam roads ,” for a through-going goods traffic, will
be treated of later on.


The first step to take, in order that the construction of plant,
&c., may be decided on, will he to try and determine approximately
the nature and magnitude of the traffic. If we then consider the
traffic upon all existing local lines in the north, we may base our
calculation on an average, as a maximum per road mile, of having
to transport 30 to 50 persons and 10 to 20 tons of goods in each
direction daily, and on market and fete days (or other special
occasions), of having to transport 300 to 400 persons in each
direction, while if large lots of corn, &c., have to be transported,
there may be from 75 to 100 tons of goods to be forwarded in one
direction. In the construction of plant we must also, beside the
quantity and the nature of the traffic, take note of the mode
of working the lines ; but, if we start from the quantity of
persons and goods indicated above, 3 to 4 trains in each direc-
tion will suffice for the average daily working, while, on market or
f6te days, 6 to 8 trains will have to be sent off in each direction, as
well as extra trains for goods as often as becomes necessary. In
the following pages we shall start with a traffic of this nature. If,
now that the quantity of the traffic and the number of trains are
thus determined, we calculate the maximum capacity required for
trains, as well as whether it will be advisable for vehicles to be
provided with 4,6, or 8 driving-wheels, and, as concerns the con-
struction of the road, whether it will be necessary for the sake of
economy to employ very steep gradients and very sharp curves—
which it will not be, as a rule—we may start with a gradient of
1 in 40, and a curve of 100 feet radius, as there is no disadvantage
whatever connected with employing these as normals. From the
foregoing, we get as a starting point for constructing plant:—
A—AS CONCERNS THE WORKING,
1. Length of road , 10 to 30 miles.
2. Traffic amount , which will, as a rule, not be greater than,
say, 40 passengers and 20 tons of goods in each direction daily,


but which, on certain clays, may increase up to 500 or 600 persons,
or to 75 or 100 tons of goods.
3. Speed , 10 to 12 miles per hour for passenger trains, and
somewhat slower for goods.
4. Number of trains , as a rule, say 3 daily in each direction,
but with 6 or 8 in each direction on market and fete days.
B—AS CONCERNS CONSTRUCTION.
1, As more than 4 driving-wheels are not required for the
given traffic upon gradients of 1 in 40, if we lay down a maximum
wheel-pressure of 2 tons per wheel, we can (with due regard to
economy in design) set down 2 tons as a maximum pressure per
wheel, which the rolling-stock, when loaded, should exert on the
rails.
2. Curves , 100 feet radius to be the minimum.
3. Gauge , as a rule, the same as upon the existing railways
of the country.
4. Width of rolling-stock , the same as the ordinary
railway rolling-stock of the country. The plant is, of course,
to be constructed with the motive power in the cars them-
selves, which, according to the amount of traffic calculated,
need be only 6-wheeled instead of 8 or 10-wheeled, as on the
heavier steam roads (for instance, the 8-wheeled steam-cars of the
Gribskov line). As the engine itself is not essentially a part of
the system, it will not now be described in greater detail. Any
kind of engine may be employed that fulfils the conditions laid
down, and those are that it must be small, light, and sufficiently
strong, and that, in the event of repairs, &c., being required, it can
easily be taken out of the car. The best machines now obtainable,
with a power of about 30 horses, weigh about 1J tons with boiler
empty, and, until a better one can be found, we employ these.
Passenger cars may be built on either of two principles, viz., with
entrance at the sides, or with entrance at the ends ; the former


The weight is —
tons.
cwt.
The car itself, with the under-carriage .
5
0
Steam-engine, with boiler, &c.
2
5
Fuel and water .....
0
12
40 passengers, say ....
3
. 0
Baggage and goods ....
1
0
Total weight
. 11
17
kind gives tlie greatest convenience, while the latter gives greater
lightness and strength to the car, as the sides—their continuity
being unbroken by doors—form girders which sustain the whole
weight of car and load. For this reason we have adopted this
method of construction.
Fig. 2.
The Passenger" Steam-car is 28 feet long, can work round
curves of 100 feet radius, and has places for 40 passengers (say
10 first and 30 second-class), and space for one ton of goods or
baggage, besides the engine compartment.
This weight is so distributed that 8 tons fall upon the four
leading and 3 tons 17 cwt. upon the two trailing wheels. The
engine works on the four leading wheels, which thus form driving-
wheels,


The hauling power of this car is sufficient to enable it to
draw with ease, when attached to it, another car, which may be
either a goods or passenger car, as desired.
Fig. 3. Goods Waggon.
The Goods Waggons are 16 feet long ; weigh, empty, 3 tons ;
and take a load of 7| tons. Like the passenger cars, they can
go round curves of 100 feet radius. A train formed of a steam-
car and a goods car has a dead train weight of 10 tons 17 cwt.,
and has a carrying capacity for 40 passengers and 8| tons of
goods.
Fig. 4, —Passenger Car ( supplementary).
The Passenger Cars are 26 feet long in the body, weigh 4\
tons, and give places for 60 persons. A train made up of a steam-
car, with such a passenger car attached, has a dead weight of 12
tons 2 cwt., with room for 100 passengers and baggage, or a train
weight of less than 2\ cwt. per passenger place. When the system
is consistently carried out, and keeping in mind the importance of


the brake power question, a train should never, where gradients of
1 in 40 are employed, consist of more than the steam-car with one
supplementary car attached; and where gradients of lin 20 are used,
the steam-car alone should he employed. If a time should come
on a “ steam road ” when the goods traffic increases to such an extent
that difficulty is found in meeting it with the help of the steam
passenger cars, one or more steam goods-cars will have to be pro-
cured, which are the same in principle as the passenger ones,
only constructed to carry goods instead of passengers. If it is
desirable, the engine may be more powerful, and the number
of driving-wheels brought up to six or eight, by which means the
quantity of goods transported may be much increased without any
corresponding strengthening of the line being necessary. All the
steam-cars are provided with powerful brakes, which work upon
all driving-wheels, and are so arranged that they are under the
driver’s control, and so that he can, at any moment, without
assistance, stop the car in the course of a few seconds. The steam-
cars are also provided with loud-sounding bells, so that wayfarers
may be warned in time at the road crossings ; and, furthermore, in
cold countries, they are so constructed that in winter, without
extra expense, they can be warmed by means of the exhaust steam
from the engine. For such a traffic as we have started our cal-
culation with, a “steam road” say of 19 miles long, would require
as rolling-stock: —
fig. 2
2 steam passenger cars
2 steam goods cars, but engine for one only
2 supplementary passenger cars .
fig. 4
fig. 3
10 to 15 goods waggons
Among the advantages of this rolling-stock, it may be pointed
out that the engine itself is so light, and so easily removed from
the car, that it can, without difficulty, when periodical repairs
become necessary, be sent to a factory or a workshop, so that


there is no necessity for creating expensive workshops, or to keep
any mechanics at the steam road stations over and above the
4 personnel ’ of the line itself; and, furthermore, expenses for
repairs will, as a rule, be very light.*
Having now described the rolling-stock and its construction,
we proceed to describe the construction of the line itself. We
start with the proposition that every railway should yield interest
—either directly—by, after paying legitimate expenses of working,
&c., giving a sufficient interest on the capital sunk, or —indirectly—
in that the district concerned may be taken to get such advantages
from the proposed line as will pay it to guarantee the possible
deficiency. It is self-evident that the smaller the required
for efficient construction, the greater prospect there is of a return
on that capital. We must, therefore, strive after a method of
construction which shall be cheap, and that will yet not entail a
heavy annual outlay for maintenance and repairs. We determine,
therefore, that the line must be solid and durable.
Supporters of the narrow gauge set forth the cheapness in
construction obtained by its adoption, but this is only really valid
in mountainous districts—for instance, in Norway; while in flat
countries, as a rule, the saving only amounts to about £7O or £BO
per mile.f If it sometimes happens that in the construction of
narrow-gauge lines in level countries a really notable saving is
effected as compared with a line of the ordinary gauge, the reason
must not be sought in the gauge itself, but much more, as
a rule, in the circumstance that in relinquishing the existing
* Note by Translator. —This, of course, depends on the construction of the engine.
The importance of first-class material and workmanship is more than ever paramount in
these light and small engines, and none but first-class makers should be employed (see
Appendix III.)
t The late Mr. Thomas Higinbotham, M.1.C.E., in giving evidence before the
Public Works Commission in South Australia, said :—“ Over very much the greater
portion of lines in this colony, the difference between the 5-feet 3-inch gauge and the
3-feet 6-inch would not exceed £lBO per mile. ”


gauge one is often able to relinquish also a number of other
disadvantages which hampered the older line, and to con-
struct a line altogether more suitable for the traffic to be
carried on.
The same reason generally applies to the cheap working ot
narrow-gauge lines and, most certainly, of narrow-gauge branch
lines. Because reloading becomes necessary, these lines have
found themselves able to employ a class of rolling-stock exactly
suitable to their needs, instead of being obliged to provide for a
through-going traffic with the broad-gauge main lines—in other
words, they have not been forced to employ, in working their own
line, a class of rolling-stock unsuitable to its requirements. Those
endeavours which have met with success upon narrow-gauge lines,
to escape from inherited disadvantages, should be carried still
further in the case of “ steam roads." As now, in flat country,
as we have stated, the saving in employing the narrow gauge is
only trifling, the normal gauge of the main lines of a country
should, as a rule, be maintained for u steam roads" as in those
cases where the traffic assumes large proportions the lighter
“ steam road" may be converted into a heavier, suitable for
through-going traffic; and it is with this possibility before our
eyes that most of the lighter tramways should be designed. If
regard is had to economy, both in construction and maintenance,
the line will be best laid with steel rails upon longitudinal wooden
sleepers, and as in the rolling-stock a maximum wheel-pressure
of 2 tons per wheel was assumed, a rail of 20 pounds per yard
will suffice.
The ballast should preferably be of broken stone, employed
as shown in fig. 5, as both persons and animals have unlimited
access to the unfenced line, and, if ballast were laid in
the ordinary way, it would soon be trodden down or scattered
about. With this method of laying the ballast, too, we have this
advantage, that, the width of formation being less, earthwork is


thereby saved. With the exception of the ballast, the whole earth-
work may be sown with grass.
Fig. 5.
Fencing and watchmen's houses are not needed, and it is an
absolute condition of cheap working that the fencing and watching
of the line be dispensed with. This also is a gain as regards the
purchase of the land, as compensation for damage will be in a
great measure done away with when every landowner is free to
cross the road where he will; and, in reality, it will not cause him
more damage than any ordinary road with ditches crossing his
field. The omission of fencing, when the road crosses many
sections, will not, however, be a very great saving, as provision
must be made in some other manner to prevent animals going
along the road from one man’s land on to another’s, which can be
done by employing an open cross-ditch at each boundary (Fig. 6).
These cross-ditches are tolerably costly, certainly, but as water-
courses are often taken as boundaries, these cross-ditches will
frequently merely take the place of stone culverts or pipes. As an


alternative, the road can be protected by open boundary-ditches
on both sides of the road.
Telegraph is not required.
Bridges , culverts , and drain-pipes are managed the same as on
other light lines. Bridges may be built of wood, and pipes should
be employed as much as possible.
Stations. —These should, as a rule, only be at the termini of
a line, and as this will generally start from one of the main line
stations, only at the one terminus. Here there should be office
and waiting-room, shed for passenger and goods cars, a goods
shed, and a little smithy for minor repairs. All these things should
be under one roof, partly to make overlooking the whole easier for
the stationmaster, partly to counteract the generally existing
system in use on railways of dividing the work into machine
department, waggon department, &c., each of which requires a
manager of its own. On a “ steam road ” a man is wanted as
stationmaster who is capable himself of managing every depart-
ment. Intermediate stations, in so far as such are required, are


only small country stations, or stopping-places, generally built of
brick-nogging or of wood, and consist of waiting-room and dwelling
for a married workman, as it is part of the design that this latter’s
wife should attend to the station while he is employed in repairing
or looking after the line. Fig. 7 shows a plan of a stopping-
place. Ais a covered, raised goods platform, on which goods are
delivered by the consigners, and from which they are removed by
jtm. =s»m- c& .vssto
Fig. 7.
the consignees; B is the station building, with platform; C is
the siding for loading or discharging goods in full waggon-loads.
Besides the regular station there may be also stopping-places,
which, as occasion requires, may or may not be provided with
covered accommodation. At these places the steam-car is only
just stopped to take up or set down passengers. Finally, sidings
may be connected with the line, if desired by landowners, so that
whole waggon-loads may be taken away or left for discharge. It
is intended only to grant such sidings where a certain number of
waggon-loads yearly are guaranteed to the management. The
points are locked, and the conductor alone will have a key.


Working of the line. —ln this we find the principal points of
difference between “ steam roads ” and railways. These com-
prise :
1. No gatekeepers or watchmen being required for the line, as
the precautions for the public safety do not consist in the watching,
hut in the great brake power of the steam-car, which permits it, if
occasion requires, to be pulled up quite as quickly as an ordinary
vehicle drawn by horses.
2. The pulling-up to take up and set down passengers at
stopping-places over and above the regular intermediate stations,
and in delivering or picking up goods waggons at sidings.
3. The whole staff at intermediate stations consisting of one
woman, whose husband works on the line.
4. All payment for despatch of goods being made by stamps,
to be affixed by the consigner, at his own risk for the correct
amount, as with letters sent by post. In the event of goods being
understamped, the deficiency must be made good by the consignee.
5. The line being divided into stages in length, and passengers’
tickets being sold in the train.
6. The conductor must have sufficient mechanical training
to be able to assist the engine-driver if required; he is in
command of the train from its departure from the head station
until its return and does not take orders at the intermediate
stations.
7. There being, as a rule, no telegraph. It is not required,
because the working should be so managed that every member of
the staff of the line has his daily work laid out for him at least one
day beforehand, and, on account of the smallness of the staff,
sudden changes in this should be carefully avoided.
Extra trains at short notice, alterations in the meeting and
crossing of trains, &c., will rarely be required on “ steam roads."
The crossing of trains can be managed without a telegraph just


as well as on a town tramway, and the danger of collision is not
greater in the one case than in the other. To meet the event of
an accident happening to the steam-car in transitu there
should he at each intermediate station a light hand-car, with which
the conductor, or one of the road men, can hurry to the terminus
and get another steam car; and, as only one-third of the time is
required to get up steam that an ordinary locomotive requires, the
assistance needed would still arrive upon the “ steam road ” almost
as quickly as if called for by wire upon an ordinary railway.
It would be absurd to go to the expense of telegraph con-
struction and the necessary statf, just to meet a case which might
possibly happen once in a year, of a train being delayed an hour
or two by an accident happening to the engine. However, as there
is no rule without exception, it naturally follows that where local
conditions render it desirable to have a telegraph, it will be
employed. Further details of working will be found later on in the
description of the “ Gribskov” line. Now that we have described
the leading traits of a “ steam road ” we shall set forth in a tabu-
lated form the essential heads for determining the capacity of a
line, and work it out for a 19-mile “ steam road” and for those lines
in Denmark which fall within the given limit of length, and which,
therefore, may be regarded as genuine local lines. We can thus
not only compare these with the “ steam road” but also compare
them among themselves, and follow the progress which has been
made since the first local line—that from Bandholm to Maribo—
was, some ten years ago, throw open for passenger traffic. Places
will, naturally, occasionally be found where local conditions permit,
both in construction and working, of extremely cheap railways,
but the results obtained therefrom will never give a basis for a
general system which can compare favourably, under all circum-
stances, with the “ steam-road” system here laid down ; and, as an
instance in this direction, we may adduce the narrow-gauge (about
2 ft. 8J in.) line between Ocholt and Westerstede, in Oldenburg,




which is certainly one of the cheapest lines in existence, and
regarding which further details may he found in the very inter-
esting account of it published by the constructing engineer, Mr.
Buresch. This line, which fulfils the local requirements in a most
excellent manner, could not, however, be used with advantage as a
type for a uniform system of secondary lines in such a country as
Germany; and, as regards Denmark, exactly the same may be said
of the Yemb-Lemvig or of the Bandholm-Maribo line, although
each of these answers very well in its own place. After thus
having described the “ steam road ” system, we will return to the
assertion made at page 20 as to its advantages, and compare it
with the railway system, under the various heads into which the
construction and working of a line can be divided, without taking
into consideration the question of gauge at all, because a steam
road may be built to a narrow gauge just as easily as a railway.
All expenses may be comprehended under the 15 following heads,
which we will now consider one by one: — ...
1. Acquisition of land , and compensation for damages. —The
narrow formation and the employment of remarkably steep
gradients and of sharp curves which permit, to a certain extent,
of the line following the undulations of the country, and by which
we escape heavy cutting and embankments, combine to lessen the
area of land to be acquired. Compensation for damages will also
be less, because, as a rule, owing to the absence of fencing and of
large cuttings or banks, the landowners concerned will be able to
move freely to and fro.
2. Earthworks. —These will be less on the “ steam roadf for
the same reasons as above.
3. Crossings and drainage. —Outlay on these will be less with
the “ steam roadf because the lessening of cuttings, embankments,
and the narrow formation, lessen the length of crossings ; and
where bridges are needed, they can be made lighter, because of the
lighter rolling-stock employed.


4. Permanent way, laying and ballasting. —The employment
of longitudinal sleepers allows of using lighter rails, with a
smaller cubic amount of sleeper, and less ballast.
5. Gatekeepers’ houses and fencing. —These are, as a rule
dispensed with on “ steam roads.’ 1
6. Telegraph and signals likewise.
7. Stations. —On account of the simplified management, the
wants of a “ steam road” can be satisfied with fewer buildings ;
neither turn-tables* nor water-cranes are employed ; the station
grounds will also take less space, because of the short trains and
the sharp curves that can be employed.
8. Rolling-stock. —Under this head we can only claim saving
in the working, not in construction.
9. Expenses for engineering, &c. —These will be somewhat
less, because, as a rule, owing to the lighter earthworks, &c., the
time consumed in construction will be less.
10, Miscellaneous and unforeseen expenses. —These will be less,
for the same reason as in No. 9.
11. Maintenance and renewals of line. —As, in working with
steam-cars, the weight per individual train is less than in working
with the ordinary locomotive, as the number of wheels is also less,
and, finally, as the driving speed is less than upon fenced and
watched lines, it naturally follows that the wear and tear, and also
the expenses of maintenance and renewal, are less per train mile
than if the line w r ere worked with locomotives. The objection
may be raised with regard to this heading, as well as to the items
maintenance of stock and the consumption of fuel, that, with the
* The cars can, of course, move equally well with either end foremost, but as it
is desirable that the engineman should, like the driver of a horse-car, be able to see the
track before him, the end in which the engine is placed should always, in practice, be
ahead. This necessarily involves frequent turning of the car, to which there can be no
objection, as there are several different ways in which this turning can be effected
conveniently without the use of a turn-table. Perhaps a loop, or a triangular turn-out or
siding, is about the simplest plan.


ordinary railway system, fewer trains would be wanted daily; for
instance, two trains daily instead of four, as was proposed, which
would result in a corresponding saving. But this reasoning does
not hold good, because the demands of traffic on short local lines
cannot he satisfied in the fullest manner by means of a few long
trains. One may get a clear idea of this if one imagines the
manager of a town tramway attempting to run six cars once an
hour instead of one car six times in the hour. The running
expenses would certainly be diminished, but the receipts would
also be diminished in a far greater degree, and we are therefore
entitled to reject any assumption of economy which is based on a
faulty principle of working.
12. Maintenance of building and plant. —As the buildings
belonging to a “ steam road ” are fewer and smaller, their maintenance
will also give rise to fewer expenses. These will also be less with
the rolling-stock, partly on account of the flexible wheel base, and
partly because there is not the same amount of buffing and pulling
as when there are several cars in a train.
13. Fuel and oil. —The quantity used per train mile is less
on the steam road, partly on account of the improved pattern of
boiler,* which gives less proportionate dead weight to carry, partly
because the number of axles and of lamps required is smaller.
14. Wages of staff. —These are, of course, less, because the
number of men employed is smaller and because women are
employed at the intermediate stations.
15. Offices, printing expenses, and insurance. —These are,
naturally, lighter with a “ steam roadf because the staff is smaller,
accounts are simplified, and there is less to insure.
It thus appears evident that in every point there is an advantage
on the side of the “ steam road” These advantages are often small
—sometimes even almost only theoretical, when it is a question of
construction in a flat and poor country —but they increase when
* See Appendix Y.


the country becomes more productive, or more broken, and as the
population increases. On a railway in such a district as the west
coast of Jutland, where all lies open, and which is only thinly
populated, fences can very well be dispensed with, and the same
advantages secured as by a “ steam road” without any risk of
endangering public safety; but such will not be the case on a
railway across fertile country. From the foregoing it follows that
what is proposed as a system to be adopted for our secondary
lines is something between a railway and a road tramway , and
that the name “ steam road ” is selected as best indicating that it
differs from both these, inasmuch as, on the one side, one is not
obliged, as with a regular tramway, to limit oneself to follow a
road or a street; while, upon the other side, the whole arrangement
and working of the “ steam road ” is so simple and so without
danger to the public that it would be simply ridiculous to employ
all the precautions, regulations, &c., &c., which hem in a railway,
or to treat it altogether as a railway.
It will depend principally upon how far this last fact is
recognized by the government and the legislature of a country,
whether this exposition will be fortunate enough to help in
introducing a transit system which will meet the requirements
of our country districts at the same time that it will pay
interest on the capital to be invested. If people will only
recognize that, between railways and town tramways, both
of which have their own laws and regulations, there lies a
third category of lines which, equally with the others, demands
separate legislation ; and if our lawgivers will only be content
to allow legislation to take this direction, viz., that the country
districts, without having to incur the expense and waste of time
necessary for procuring an act in each individual case, be em-
powered to build their own lines —of course on a system which
assures to the main lines the benefit of these branches, and under the
control of the State as regards precautions for public safety—we


shall soon see local lines start forth in a form which will meet all
wants —a state of things which is as good as impossible at this
moment, on account of the expenses and requirements exacted by
law.
“ Steam roads” as here described, entail neither more trouble
nor more danger than an ordinary country road ; they are just as
beneficial, if not more so, than country roads, and should be just
as easily constructed. Steam has become, in the hands of experts,
so manageable a power that there is much less danger in its
employ, as here described, than in driving horses, and much fewer
accidents are likely to happen in driving on a “ steam road ” than
in driving on a country road, and we are entitled both to demand
a recognition of the truth of this fact, and to strive to have our
principles extended in practice.
A long stride in this direction was made by the law of 20th
February, 1875,* which permits the employment of steam on
country'road tramways without being compelled to observe the
legal regulations applying to the construction and working
of railways ; but here comes in the remarkable fact that, while
the local authorities can now lay a steam tramway just where
there is most danger of running over wayfarers—that is to
say, on the country road itself—the same authorities cannot
even dream of laying the same steam tramway on the field,
at the side of the country road, without preparing themselves
for the delays associated with what it is often a year-long fight to
obtain, viz., a railway act. They must also be prepared to find
their design, which, if laid on the country road itself, would
be considered as a tramway, re-christened as a railway, and to
see it weighted with all the commissions, control regulations,
and the whole literature of ordinances and bye-laws which,
under the existing state of things, pertains to even the smallest
railway.
* See Appendix VI.


We must hope that the legislature will know how to settle
this question, which is of all the greater interest to those countries
where the main lines are in the State’s hands, and where it is
manifestly to its advantage to have traffic brought to its main
lines. It is not, however, our intention to go into this question
more deeply here, hut merely to point out clearly, from a pro-
fessional point of view, that it is quite possible for “ steam roads ”
to he worked in conjunction with the main lines, so that goods
waggons may run through on both lines. This will be arrived at
by determining on the adoption of a system such as we have
described for all branch lines , and it should be made a strict
condition that each of these branch lines shall provide itself with a
certain number of goods waggons of a certain type, and also that
the main lines introduce that type into their rolling-stock, so that
there can be free interchange of cars with the branch lines. The
solution of the whole of this side of the question lies in the choice
of the type of waggon. That there is no difficulty in constructing
waggons which can round the sharp curves of the u steam road”
on its light rails, and which at the same time can be advantageously
used in the trains of the main lines, has been practically demon-
strated in the goods waggons with radial axles built for and now
running on the Gribskov line. On the other hand, if the existing
waggon type of the States lines is to be employed on the branch
lines, it may be taken as a fact (except in a few special instances)
that it is impossible to build branch lines so lightly and so cheaply
as it would otherwise be possible, where we want a traffic-receipt
of £2OO per mile yearly to pay interest on the capital invested.
Neither the Danish, the Swedish, nor the German States lines will
suffer in any way from introducing the Gribskov goods-waggon
type into their rolling-stock ; on the contrary, they will be gainers
thereby, for this reason, that they render it impossible to carry on
a through-going goods traffic with all branch lines, even if there
be only the lightest form of “ steam road,” viz., a track laid on the


edge of an ordinary road. It is only by introducing a type
of waggon with flexible wheel base, in some form or
that we can avoid transhipment of goods without injury
to the branch lines. If the principle of through-going goods
traffic is an advantage, it can be obtained as has been
pointed out. If it is not thought desirable —or considered
possible that it may be desirable to introduce it in a year
or two —then we may just as well adopt a narrow gauge for our
branch lines, and, although the saving in this may only amount to
a few pounds per mile, take advantage of the saving thereby to be
effected. However, as there ought always to be a possibility of
the branch-line traffic developing in such a way that a through-
going goods traffic sooner or later becomes desirable, any system,
as we have before remarked, that is proposed as universal for the
future local lines of a country must be such that it will permit of
the adoption of the through-going traffic without greater outlay.
Now the light “steam roads" here described can, by employing
slightly heavier rails, by, if necessary, using more powerful
engines, and by altering the coupling arrangements, be converted
into a heavier “ steam road" and thus become thoroughly available
for a through-going traffic.
As the Gribskov line, constructed in 1879, is just one that is
worked as a heavy “ steam road" with a through-going goods traffic
* Note hy Translator. —See Appendix IY. Mr. Rapier also says : —“Sharp curves
afford facilities for cheapness of construction, but they greatly increase the cost of haulage
of trains when the vehicles are of ordinary construction. Considerable mitigation of the
resistance of vehicles on curves is obtained by the use of ordinary bogies, but this is
gained by an increase in the weight of vehicles, as well by the addition of the bogies
themselves as by the extra strength of framing required. In Mr. Cleminson’s system,
on the contrary, the carriage body and the underframe continue precisely as at present.
The features which particularly commend it in connection with the subject of light
railways are its lightness, cheapness, and perfection of its action. It adds scarcely
anything to the cost of a vehicle of ordinary dimensions, and it enables vehicles to be
made of greater length at a considerable reduction in proportion of cost and of dead
weight to paying load.”


in conjunction with the Zealand railway to Copenhagen, we will—
as an example of such a line—give a short description of this line,
of its plant, and of its working.
THE GRIBSKOY BRANCH LINE #
Is about 12J miles long. The steepest incline is only 1 in 70,
and the sharpest curve on the open line is 1,000 feet; but at
the stations curves of 100 feet are made use of. As regards the
line itself, we need only remark that it is unfenced, and that it is
the first line in Scandinavia that has been laid on the longitudinal
sleeper system —viz., on Livesey’s “ pot ” system, with 33 lb. rails
laid upon wrought iron “ pot” longitudinal sleepers; also, that the
width of formation is only 10 feet, which has been found in
practice to be amply sufficient. Fig. 8 shows a cross section of
the line.
Fig. 8.
It has two terminal stations, three intermediate stations with
store and dwelling house, and two stopping places without
* Note hy Translator. —This line connects a place called Graested with the main
Zealand railway at the Hillerdd junction.


buildings, besides five sidings for taking away goods in whole
waggon-loads. The rolling-stock consists of—
1 12-ton locomotive
2 steam-cars (passenger)
2 supplementary passenger cars
5 light 4-wheeled goods-waggons for local use
15 heavier 6-wheeled goods-waggons for the through traffic
over the Zealand railway.
The locomotive was procured for the snow-clearing, or to use
for extra trains carrying firewood, in case the two steam-cars were
found unable to cope with the traffic, which, so far, seems little
likely. A third steam-car would have been better; but, as the
Gribskov line was the first one to be worked with steam-cars, it
was considered safer to have a locomotive in reserve. The steam-
car’s appearance is shown in fig. 9, and provides places inside for
Fig. 9.
40 passengers (8 second-class and 32 third-class), post-office, and
two tons of goods in a baggage-compartment between the passen-
gers and the engine. It also carries baggage and parcels in the
compartment under the car body between the bogies. The weight
of this steam-car, in working order, is between 13 and 14 tons.
When not required for passengers, the roof can also be used for
carrying goods on. During the summer temporary seats are pro-
vided on the roof for 60 passengers, with a light canopy overhead;


and, with the help of benches, the baggage-compartment can be
utilized for passengers, in which case the car will accommodate 110
people. If that is not sufficient, we attach behind the steam-car
a reserve passenger-car for 60 people (fig. 10).
Fig. 10.
This car weighs about 5| tons, and we have thus a dead
train weight of about 20 tons, with room for 170 passengers and
baggage. The supplementary passenger-car has one compartment
for 40 third-class passengers and one for 20 second-class, but so
contrived that the latter can be used as either second or third-
class compartment.
The leading portion of the steam-car, or engine-bogie, can be
run out from the car in a few minutes, and then appears as in fig. 11.
It weighs, empty, about 6 tons. The boiler is vertical, with
square fire-box and 190 water tubes, as in these boilers the water
is in the tubes, and not about them, as in a locomotive boiler. It
is so constructed that it can be easily opened and examined
internally, and, if necessary, cleaned —a great advantage for such
small boilers, especially if they have to make use of bad water.
There are 185 square feet of heating surface, and as it is very
effective, and the water is kept in violent circulation through the
tubes, more steam is generated than is required by the engine.




The boiler is calculated for a pressure of 200 lbs. per square
inch, but, as a rule, only works up to 150 lbs. The cylinders are
8-in. diameter, with a 13-in. stroke, and the water-tank, which
is ring-shaped and goes round the boiler, carries sufficient water
for 1| hours’ working. The fuel used is coke, and the consump-
tion is about lbs. per mile. This class of engine is remarkable
for its great power in proportion to its weight, and for its easy
motion, in both of which particulars it is superior to the ordinary
locomotive type, and both of which effect a saving in wear and
tear, as well in the engine itself as in the cars, and on the track
also. The light goods-waggons are of the usual 4-wheeled type.
The heavier goods-waggons, on the other hand (see fig. 3), have 6
wheels on three bogies on Cleminson’s system. They weigh 4| tons,
and carry Bor 9 tons. The dead weight here is rather heavier
in proportion to the paying load than in the waggon depicted in fig.
3 ; but this is because these waggons, having to be employed in the
trains on the Zealand Railway, had to be built to withstand greater
buffing and pulling, while the wheels, axles, couplings, etc., all
had to be according to the regulated specifications of the Zealand
line. They are also not at all heavier than the Zealand Railway’s
own waggons of similar carrying power, while their manner of
construction causes less wear and tear on the track, and they
demand less hauling power in rounding curves.
The daily service is performed with eight through-going
trains (four in each direction), but in the summer months, when
the woods are much visited by tourists, the number of trains on
Sunday is increased to ten. On ordinary days the trains consist
of a steam-car, with one, or, at the most, two goods-waggons
attached, according as goods require transport. On Sundays each
train has places for 160 passengers, and only express goods are
carried. Up till the present time the working of the line has been
carried on without any telegraph, and, although one is now to be
established for the public convenience, it is superfluous as far as


the working of the line is concerned; and, if a skilful management
continues, it will remain superfluous even if the traffic doubles or
trebles itself. The steam-cars are sufficiently powerful to draw
several goods-waggons if wanted; but, remembering the capacity
for quick stopping which ought to be insisted on on an unfenced
line, ordinary trains are forbidden to take more than two goods-
waggons at one time. The road is subdivided into five stages,
both for passenger and for goods traffic, and the payment for each
stage is the same.
Tickets are issued in the cars by the conductor, who is
provided with long ruled slips of paper, printed, as a check, with
consecutive numbers, and he tears off as many numbers as the
passenger requires to travel stages. These numbers, or tickets,
should, as a check, be retained by the traveller, so that he may at
any time until he leaves show that he has paid his way. Further,
“ coupon” tickets, at reduced rates, each equal to ten stage tickets,
season tickets, and school children’s tickets, are issued. All goods
(with the exception of goods in whole waggon-loads, which are
dealt with as on the main line) are divided into two classes, of
which one is calculated according to weight and the other
according to cubic contents, so that one cubic foot pays the same
as 20 lbs. in weight. For express goods, which are subdivided as
ordinary goods are, a double rate is charged, and the sender is
entitled to insist upon their being sent by the first train leaving.
Ordinary goods are sent off by the first train in which there is room
for them, but still always within twenty-four hours. At each
stopping-place, or station, there are raised goods platforms, on
which are placed measures and weighing-machines. The sender
of goods is bound to deliver them upon the platform, and to
measure or weigh them himself. If he desires to prepay carriage
he must do it himself with adhesive stamps, as for goods no other
payment is acknowledged by the management than its own
stamps. If the goods are understamped they are still despatched


to their destination—just as insufficiently stamped letters are sent
through the post —and the receiver must make good the deficiency
before the goods are delivered.
All goods delivered on the platform, which are provided with
addresses, even if neither measured, weighed, nor stamped, will
still be forwarded to the address, and delivered as soon as the
proper charges are paid. All goods for the main line, or coming
from the main line, are attended to at the junction, with the
exception of whole waggon-loads, which go through direct. For
goods received and not removed after a certain delay, storage
charges are made. To prevent their re-employment, all stamps
are defaced at the receiving station. These stamps are sold at
certain places in the towns or villages near the line, at the
stations, and by the women at the stopping places. These last
are trusted with a supply of stamps up to £lO. Each evening
they forward to the head station the cash received for stamps
during the day, and a corresponding number of stamps is forwarded
to them next morning, so that each morning their stock amounts
to just £lO. In this way a sufficient check and a very simple
method of keeping accounts is attained. At the halting places
there is no other attendance than the woman in charge, as her
husband is generally occupied the whole day with work on the
line; still, on special occasions, he may be called on to give
assistance at the station. The woman’s business is to see that the
place is kept clean and is warmed and lighted in accordance with
the regulations in force; but she has nothing to do with the train
arrangements.
From the arrival of the train at a halting place until its
departure the conductor is in command, and the woman has only
to give him what assistance he requires in loading or unloading
goods. At the junction at Hillerod the service is performed by
the staff of the Zealand railway. At the Graested terminus the
service is looked after by a stationm aster, who is also inspector


for the whole line; and here lives also, with the exception of the
station women and their husbands, the whole of the remainder of
the staff of the line. This consists of one porter and assistant
stationmaster, one man-of-all-work, one cleaner, two engine
drivers, and two conductors. The conductors have sufficient
mechanical knowledge to be able to take the driver’s place at
need, while the porter and man-of-all-work are instructed as
conductors, so as to be able to take the latters’ places.
The traffic on the line is not great, but, on account of the
situation of the line, very fluctuating. While the number of
tickets sold is often not over 100 in the day, upon some fete days
it has reached 4,000 —a good proof of the elasticity of the
system. The daily goods traffic represents, as a rule, one to three
waggon loads, and has never exceeded six or eight loads. As the
line, at the time of writing, had only been working about six
months, it may seem somewhat premature to lay down any definite
conclusion. This we may say—that, so far, nothing but satisfaction
has resulted from the system employed, whether it be in the
simplicity of working the line, the employment of goods-waggons
with radial axles, the dispensing with fencing and telegraph, or
the plan of issuing tickets and stamps.
The act under which this line has been brought about is a
railway act, and we have had, of course, in our design, to follow
its behests, whereby our line has developed into something between
a railway and a “ steam road,” and ought, therefore, not to be
taken as the type of a genuine “steam road;” still the line has, on
the whole, done good service to the question, inasmuch as it makes
a first step towards a breaking down of the old railway traditions.
It has shown that it is possible to manage a tolerably important
and a very fluctuating traffic with engines weighing only 6 tons,
that boilers with water tubes can be advantageously employed,
and that, by the help of the simplified form of engine and other
stock, the expenses of working and maintenance can be greatly


reduced ; that a 10-foot formation is wide enough for a 4 ft. 8J in.
gauge line, and that as good a road may be had with longitudinal as
with cross sleepers. It is true that the line is built with curves of
1,000 feet radius, and has no gradients steeper than 1 in 70, but any
one who understands rolling-stock will at once see that the traffic
could be worked without a farthing of extra outlay if the curves
were of only 200 feet radius and the gradients were 1 in 40.
Now, although such curves and grades were not necessary in
the construction of the Gribskov line, this fact is of great
importance if we have to deal with uneven ground and a limited
capital for construction. That the stations were more expen-
sively constructed than there was occasion for, and that a
telegraph is now demanded, simply because it is an accustomed
addition, are matters, with others of less note, that we may expect
to see altered in new designs. The line is laid over such a country —
viz., through a large wood —that one can hardly expect sufficient
traffic to do more than partly pay the interest on the capital
expended; but the results attained are fully sufficient to demon-
strate that an improved road of this nature would pay well if laid
through a better district. If it has been made clear to the people
of the district that they—(so soon as the legislature is altered in
such a way that such designs as this may be carried out in a con-
sistent manner)—can both obtain the benefit resulting from the
vicinity of a railway and get a good interest for their money
invested in it, then I believe that little difficulty should be found
in raising the capital needed for construction. And, as this last
contingency is the first condition of our seeing our plans carried
out satisfactorily, I beg everyone who criticises the professional
views here set forth to bear this fact in mind, and to remember
also that I have always had to take this circumstance into
consideration.
The question of local trains upon existing or future railways
is so nearly connected with the foregoing as almost to form a


portion of it. I will, therefore, add a few words upon this subject.
On many long railway lines there are stretches where there is a
distinct “local” traffic, which can be best and most satisfactorily
met by short and frequent trains. For this purpose nothing equals
steam-cars. This has been, moreover, recognized both in Belgium
—where the “Belpair” steam-cars, though far inferior to the
Gribskov type, are in use on short lengths of the States lines—
and in Germany, where the management of the Neiderschlesisch
Markisch railway has introduced steam-cars on the writer’s system
for the so-called “omnibus trains,” while the Gdrlitz line makes
trial of “omnibus trains” with a car drawn by a small locomotive.
The introduction of omnibus trains has, besides, in some
places, a far deeper meaning than mere satisfaction of local wants
and increased receipt, inasmuch as their introduction upon many
of our too expensively constructed Danish and Swedish lines
would assist in a great measure to stave off the collapse of these
lines. If managers will only separate passenger from goods traffic y
and carry the former hy means of frequent and cheap “ omnibus
trainswhich woidd increase the receipts, ivhile the goods traffic is
met hy a slow train every day or every other day , expenses might he
reduced in such a degree as to render it possible to pay at all
events a portion of the required interest on capital outlay.


POSTSCRIPT.
I have more than once hinted at the necessity that exists for
the laws under which we now work to be materially altered, if
such road construction is to have any future, and my readers are,
therefore, justified in asking some explanation of how I propose
that my suggestion should be put into practice. As far as
Denmark is concerned, nothing can he simpler. If, to the act of
20th Feb., 1875,* authorizing the use of steam on road tramways,
we add a clause such as this :
“ If, on account of the direction of the road, or of the
“ nature of the ground, it is found desirable not to keep to the road
“ itself, the district road board shall have the right to acquire such
a strip of land as is necessary for laying a tramway in the same
“ way that they acquire land for a road.”
The whole question is solved, and no one with a knowledge
of the subject will be able to point to one single item, as to which
help is now prayed for, that will not have been remedied by this
simple means. Country roads on which it might he permitted to
lay down “ steam-roads ” are frequently not just where “ steam-
roads ” are desired, and for this reason an act is wanted which will
give power to lay them down elsewhere than on the roads. More
than this is not asked for. All that can reasonably be desired
would be thereby assured, and all that the Government is entitled to
demand, as far as it is concerned, is also assured by the clauses in
the present act. If this suggestion is realized, it will result from it
that the number of local lines will be augmented without much
* See Appendix VI.


further action on the side of the State. In any case, the question
of State aid should be kept quite independent from all legislation
regarding the construction and working of “ steam roads” If the
State, as the possessor of the main network of railways, desires to
encourage steam roads as feeding-lines to its main system, it might,
for instance, be notified that: —
“All “ steam roads” which shall be so constructed that the
“new goods-waggons, with flexible wheel base, of the pattern now
“ adopted by the Government, can be run over them, and whose
“ own goods-waggons shall be built to the same pattern, so that
“they may be interchangeable with the Government ones, will be
“entitled to a grant-in-aid (a fondsperdu) of £ per mile.”
By such a procedure the State would actually assist the
minor lines while benefiting its own railways.


APPENDICES.
APPENDIX I.
The treatise alluded to was published—
In Danish by C. A, Reitzel - - - Copenhagen.
In German by Carl Beilitz - - - Berlin.
In English by Norman and Son - - London,
And also printed in the English Blue Book for 1877, regarding steam on
tramways.
APPENDIX 11.
(Extract from above treatise.)
The mechanical motor may either be in the form of a separate engine
coupled to a tram-car, thus resembling a locomotive and railway train, or it
may be placed inside the car itself, and act directly upon the car wheels.
Each of these modes of construction has its advocates, but it may be looked
upon as established (as I propose hereafter to demonstrate) that the placing
of the engine inside the car is to be preferred, as conducing to economy of
working.
If we suppose the mechanical motor under both conditions to be in the
form of a small locomotive, weighing two tons, and having a power equal
to 15 horses, attached to an ordinary tram-car weighing about tons, and
carrying GO passengers, weighing say 4| tons, or a load altogether of 7 tons,
then such an engine would xiot, at any rate upon a perceptible gradient, be
able to start its load, because the adhesion of the driving-wheels, with only
10 cwt. upon each wheel, would not be sufficient to overcome the vis
inertice. The engine wheels in such a case would revolve upon the rails
without producing forward motion. On the other hand, if the engine were
placed inside the car, so that the car wheels themselves would be used as


driving-wheels, then the weight, or at all events a portion of the weight of
the car and passengers, in addition to that of the engine itself, or in all 11-
tons per wheel, instead of half a ton, would rest upon these, and be available
for the establishment of sufficient adhesion to enable the resistance to be
overcome. It is quite true that there would be no great difficulty in loading
the engine, say with 4 tons of lead, so as to obtain in that way a sufficient
amount of wheel-pressure to meet the requirements of the case, but there
would then be an addition to the dead load of 4 tons, which would require
so much additional haulage, and entail- an increased expenditure for fuel
and wear and tear of the roadway.
The ready stopping of the car is also effected more advantageously
when the engine is placed within the car than when it is separate, because
when the brake action takes place in the lighter engine, the heavier car
behind will strike it with a certain force, and the concussion will drive the
engine forward for some distance before a complete stoppage is obtained,
whereas, when the engine is in the car, the brakes act directly upon the car
wheels with instantaneous effect.
These considerations will, I think, show satisfactorily that whatever
may be the special form of mechanical motor selected, it should in all cases
be placed in, and form an integral part of the car itself.
I now propose to describe the kind of car which I would use for the
purpose, calling attention to the fact that thoroughly exhaustive trials,
made in the presence of experienced judges, have confirmed the correctness
of my views.
The principle on which the car is constructed is the same as that
employed in America for ordinary railway carriages, the body resting upon
two “ bogies ” or under-carriages.
Between the bogie and the carriage body, springs and bearing-plates
are so placed as to secure the light and equable motion of the car. This
kind of vehicle is common in America, and is remarkable for the ease with
which, unaffected by its length of body, it moves round exceedingly sharp
curves, the bogies turning freely under the car, and it is only the distance
of the wheel centres in each individual bogie, and not the length of the
carriage, which limits the radius of practicable curves. Such a long car,
supported at each end on flexible springs, is easy for the passengers, and in
consequence of the weight being distributed on eight wheels, instead of, as is
usually the case, on four, the wear and tear of the rails is proportionately
slight, an advantage which is further increased by the diminished amount
of friction due to the short distance of centres of the bogie wheels. With a
view of affording a suitable place in which the engine may stand, the pin of


one of the bogies is made hollow, and enlarged to several feet in diameter,
and in this hollow pin is fixed the engine,* which acts directly upon the
bogie wheels underneath, and thus sets the whole carnage in motion. It
is evident that the enlargement of the bogie pin will not affect the revolving
movement of the carriage body upon it, nor will the engine in this position
interfere with the arrangements for ascending and descending to or from
the upper seats of the car at either end.
To allow the engine to be attached or detached with facility, the end of
the car is made to open on hinges, and a crutch is arranged under the body
to be let down when required, so as to rest upon the solid ground, and by
means of screws take the weight off the bogie, while the latter, with the
engine resting upon it, is removed and replaced or exchanged for another
when so required.
Springs are placed between the bogie plate and the carriage body, so as
wholly to prevent any vibration caused by the engine from being communi-
cated to the body of the car itself, the passengers thus being quite
unconscious of the working of the machinery, the whole of which is
separated from them by a double partition. While every annoyance of this
description is thus provided against, the engineman can at all times have
access to any portion of the engine and give it requisite attention.
It will be seen that, in accordance with this arrangement, the half of
the weight of the carriage body and a considerable portion of the passenger
load will rest upon the driving-wheels, and by this means furnish sufficient
adhesion to enable the engine to work with its full power, whatever that
may be.
The force of adhesion being thus to a great extent independent of the
weight of the engine, this weight can be reduced to a minimum, and the
dead load decreased while the wear and tear of the roadway is diminished
accordingly.
APPENDIX 111.
In the last three years about a couple of hundred tramway engines, some
of which are still in use, have been constructed in Europe. The greater
number of these have been turned out of the manufactories of Merry-
weather and Hughes, in England, and of Brown, at Winterthur, in
* Note by Translator. —This was the earlier method—very many improvements in
the engines and their mode of attachment have since been applied.


Switzerland, while Krauss, Schwartzkopf and Henschell, in Germany,
Franc, with his locomotive ‘sans foyer,' in France, Kitson and Co., of Leeds—
whose new tramway locomotive is, up to date, undoubtedly the best—and
half a score others—have constructed, for utilizing steam on tramways, small
locomotives, which, as a rule, are of 6 to 8 tons weight, and in which the
machinery is more or less satisfactorily protected from the dirt and dust of
the roads. Of some lines it can only be said that working with these
locomotives has not yet been a failure; of a few, that they may possibly pay ;
but the writer has no hesitation in asserting that the general use of steam on
town tramways will never be attained by means of small locomotives only.
Other professional experts, such as Perritt, Samuelson, Apsey, and one or two
others, have now recognized the wisdom of placing the motive power in the
car itself, and have constructed steam-cars, some of which have now been
tested. These gentlemen are upon the right track, for if steam is to become
a regular adjunct of a town tramway, it will be through employing well-
designed and constructed steam-cars. It will not, we think, be easy to find
a simpler principle for these than that here recommended, and, as far as size
and appearance are concerned, such a type as is shown in Fig. 12 will very
well answer. We should not let ourselves be tempted to build these steam-
cars too large, as street traffic is, almost without exception, best served
and most encouraged by comparatively small cars following one another at
short intervals, in preference to larger cars at longer intervals. One
principle must be insisted on, and that is, that the engine, in case of
accident, can be easily taken out of the car and replaced by another,
while the injured one is sent either to the manufacturers or to a workshop
for repairs.
Fig. 12.


Details of Fig. 12.
Gauge
. 4 ft. 8£ in.
Passenger capacity
30.
Horse power
20.
Speed per hour
. 9 miles.
Constructed to work up grades of
1 in 18.
Do. do, round curves of rad. .
40 ft.
Length of body
21 ft.
Breadth do
6 ft. 6 in.
Weight of car itself (with undercarriage) .
. 4£ tons.
Do. engine, with boiler, &c.
1J tons.
Do. machinery alone
7 cwt.
Weight on driving-wheels with car full
. 6 tons.
Greatest weight per wheel do.
1£ tons.
Consumption of coke per mile .
. lbs.
Fresh water supply required only every
9 miles.
Do. fuel as fire do. do. do.
. 3 miles.
Attendance required
. 1 man.
APPENDIX IV.*
There is, of course, more than one system of radial axles for railway cars;
but the simplest and the best is, without doubt, Cleminson’s, which is
employed on the Gribskov line. It is only some two or three years since
the system was made known; but there are now over sixty different rail-
ways that have introduced it in a greater or less degree, and that not oh
the ground that we put forward—viz., of helping to establish a through-
going traffic with light branch lines—but because, in itself and of itself, it
is a good and economical system. Among others, it has been employed in
building the latest Italian and English royal carriages, and in the cars that
are used in the express trains between London and Brighton, which run at
a rate of sixty miles per hour.
APPENDIX V.
' - < i >.. .
With regard to the boilers with water-tubes, it should be observed
that much depends on observing the right proportions. It has been com-
plained that the two first steam-cars, on my system, delivered for the
Prussian State Railways, did not come up to expectations. The ground for
this lies wholly in that ray instructions were not followed, and the con-
struction of the engines was entrusted to a manufacturer who had no
practical knowledge of such boilers.*?*
* See also footnote, page 40.
f Note by Translator —. See also Mr. Schwabe’s Report, in Appendix VIII,


APPENDIX VI.
LAW RELATING TO THE EMPLOYMENT OF LOCOMOTIVES ON TRAMWAYS.
We, Christian the Ninth, by the Grace of God, King of Denmark, of the
Wends and Goths; Duke of Schleswig-Holstein, Ditrnarsch, Lauenburg and
Oldenburg; make known by these presents : that the Reichstag has passed,
and that we have confirmed with our approval, the following law :
The Minister of the Interior is hereby empowered to grant concessions
for laying down tracks on streets and public roads, and also for the
running, on these tracks, of locomotives which show neither steam nor
smoke, or which are judiciously constructed so as to get rid of steam
and smoke, and with general regard to safety in driving, subject
always to such conditions for laying down such tracks as the minister,
with the approval of the district boards concerned, shall prescribe in
each particular case. He is also empowered to grant, simultaneously
with the concession, the exclusive right of using the track, or tracks, in
question, with suitable vehicles, for a period not to exceed 40 years. At
the expiration of this exclusive right of use, it shall be lawful for the town,
district, or county board (or council) upon whose ground the track is laid,
either to require the concessionaires to remove the track and to put the
street or public road into good order at their own expense, or to demand
that the track, with all its plant and appurtenances, be handed over to them
for a sum to be determined from a valuation to be made by duly qualified
and appointed valuators. On the recommendation of the local boards or
councils, the minister is empowered to prolong the duration of the sole
right of use. If differences of opinion arise between the communes or
districts upon whose land the track is laid, as to how the responsibility is
to be apportioned at the expiration of the concession, the question shall be
decided by the minister, after due consideration of the views of the parties
concerned.
Further, the Minister of the Interior may grant leave for locomotives,
constructed as above provided, to be employed instead of horse-power upon
tramways which are or may be laid Sown in accordance with clause 1 of
the law of January 23rd, 1862. And the minister is also empowered, in
future concessions which may be granted for laying down tramways which
it is proposed to work with horse-power, to introduce the above laid down
resolution relating to the proportionate liability of municipalities or
districts.
Given at Amalienborg, the 20th February, 1875, under our royal hand
and seal.
Christian R.
Note hy Translator. —This completes the translation of Mr. W. R. Rowan’s treatise,
but I have added some little further information on steam-cars.


Length
29 ft. 6 in.
Breadth
...
7 „ 6 „
Height
...
.. ... 13 ,, 9 ,,
Passenger Capacity
...
62
Weight of Car and Engine, empty
...
. ... 8j tons about
Weight per wheel, loaded
...
.. ••• 1£ )) }}
APPENDIX YII.
One of Rowan’s patent steam-cars of a light type was imported for
the Glenelg and South Coast Railway Co., in South Australia.* The Parlia-
mentary Commission appointed to report on the public works of the
colony of South Australia inspected this car, saw it at work, and travelled
several miles in it, with Mr. Thow, the locomotive engineer to the colony.
In their progress report, relating to railways (P.P. No. 25, 1880), they
* Rowan’s Combined Car and Motor. —A formal trial of the steam-car imported by
Captain Rowan for the Glenelg and South Coast Railway Company took place on
Thursday, at the request and in the presence of Mr. Clerke, the manager of the line.
There were also present Mr. G. E. Farrar and Mr. G. Chamier, C.E., who watched the
proceedings on behalf of Captain Rowan. The following were the tests to which the
Company’s manager required that the motor should be put : —(1.) To run a distance of
six miles without stoking or replenishing the fire with fresh fuel. (2.) To run eight
miles without replenishing water-tank. (3.) Tractive power on a straight and level piece
of line, to be tested by attaching four passenger carriages and two trucks laden with stone
—total actual dead weight, 78 tons 19 cwt. (4.) To run for a spurt at the rate of twenty
miles an hour. On the first test being applied, the motor accomplished the six-mile journey
with ease in 31 minutes 15 seconds, and without stoking or the application of fresh fuel.
The second test resulted in a run of 8i miles without replenishment of tank, six inches of
water still remaining at the termination of the journey, the engine condensing her steam
the whole way, no smoke or steam being visible. The quantity of fuel put on board at the
commencement of the trial was 97 lb. Queensland coke, supplied by the Company, the
amount consumed being 57 lb. for the 8| miles run, or 6.7 lb. per mile, or 3.3 lb. per
mile less than the contract limit for consumption. The third test was applied by removing
the motor from the car and attaching it to a train made up as required and above stated.
To give an idea of the severity of this test it may be stated that one of the Company’s
13-ton locomotives had to make two trips to bring the train together, in the course
of which some of the couplings gave way under the strain in passing round a curve. To the
evident astonishment of the spectators the motor when harnessed started off at once with
her load of eighty tons, which she proceeded to haul along at a very fair pace indeed.
The fourth trial, relative to maximum speed, was equally successfully accomplished, and
the required speed of twenty miles an hour obtained. All present expressed themselves
highly satisfied with the manner in which each of the tests was complied with.— S. A.
Register , May 7, 1880. This car cost, f.0.b., London, £1,150.
General Description of the Car used in these trials.


Diameter of Cylinder
inches
Stroke
12 „
Diameter of Wheels
27 „
Heating Surface of Boiler
80 square feet
Water Capacity
80 gallons
wrote as follows (see also proceedings of April 19, 1880, Appendix
WW., &c.) ; — “Rowan's Combined Gar and Motor. —We inspected one of the
“ motors on the Brighton railway, and were struck with the simplicity of its
“ design and construction. The evidence shows that they are well adapted
“ to lines with light goods and large passenger traffic.”
APPENDIX VIII.
Information respecting Steam-cars built by the “ Scandia ” Company,
of Copenhagen, for the Prussian and Danish Governments.
As representative of the “ Scandia” Company, I beg to draw attention
to the appended extracts from official reports of the actual working of
steam-cars now running on the Prussian State Railways, and to particulars
of still further improved steam-cars now running on the Gribskov line, in
Denmark.
The first steam-car constructed by the above Company, after having
been experimented with and reported on by a Royal Commission appointed
for that purpose by the Danish Government, was taken to Prussia by the
inventor, Mr. W. R. Rowan, C.E., in conjunction with Mr. Weissenborn, of
Berlin.
The satisfactory results of the trials which were made with this car by
the Royal Railway Regiment, upon a line specially constructed for the
purpose, with sharp curves and steep gradients, induced the heads of the
Outline Specification of Engine in Adelaide Steam-Car.
Outline Specification of Car.
Underframing—Combined yellow Georgia Pine, Steel, and Charcoal Iron
Framing—American Ash
Roof—Michigan Pine
Panelling—Teak
Seats—Perforated Primavera
Inside Fittings—Teak and Ash
Wheels—Wrought Iron with Steel Tyres
Axles—Steel
Axleboxes —“ Scandia” pattern, Gun-metal Bearings.


Niederschlesisch-Markisch States line to take the matter up, and to arrange
for further trials with a larger car.
The appended extract from the report of Mr. Schwabe, Consulting
Engineer to the Prussian Government, certifies to the results obtained.
From these results, as well as from the appended extract from an
official report, comparing the working of a line with steam-cars as against
separate engines and cars, one may easily perceive the advantages gained by
employing steam-cars in place of local trains.
The inventor, Mr. W. R. Rowan, is one of the directors of the Company,
and, as their steam-cars are all constructed under his personal supervision,
they are in a position to offer the best workmanship, combined with the very
latest improvements by the inventor.
The engines for the Prussian cars were built by Gruson, of Buckau.
Rowan's Steam-car for 45 Passengers and 2 tons Goods, as supplied to the Prussian
State Railways.
Those for the Gribskov line have been built by Messrs. Kitson and Co.,
the well-known locomotive manufacturers, of the Airedale Foundry, and of
the Monkbridge Iron Works, Leeds.
DETAILS OF CARS,
PRUSSIAN STATES.
GRIBSKOV (2,641).
Gauge ...
Construction and Weight
Length
Passenger Capacity ...
Goods do
Diameter of Driving-wheels
Maximum Steam Pressure
Heating Surface
Diameter of Cylinders
4' sr
Iron-sheeted, 18 tons
47 feet
2 tons
180 lbs.
99 square feet
6j x 12'
4' sr
Teak, 12\ tons
38 feet
3 tons
200 lbs.
182 square feet
8"x 13'


Extract from the Report of Mr. Schwabe, Consulting Engineer to the
Prussian Government, on Official Trial Trips with the above Steam-car
on sections of the Prussian State Railways.
The trial trips took place partly on a 51-mile length of the Berlin and
Frankfort a. 0. line, and partly on a 26-mile length of the Berlin Circular
Railway.
Speed and Power.— On these lines, with grades varying up to 1 in 150,
and on the Dresden-Berlin line to even 1 in 95, and with only five minutes’
stoppage for water on a length of 26 miles, the average speed of the steam-
car running alone was proved to be 22 miles per hour. At two of the last
trial trips a saloon-car on three axles, weighing 12 J tons, was coupled to
the steam-car and drawn up a grade of 1 in 67, from the Dresden Rail-
way Station to Wilmersdor, with an average speed of 19 miles per hour.
From Kopenick to Berlin, a length of 7J miles, two loaded coal waggons,
with a carrying capacity of 12| tons each, were attached (the gross weight
of the steam-car and the coal waggons thus amounting to 55 J tons on eight
axles) and drawn by the steam-car with a speed of 17 J miles per hour.
Fuel.— During the last-mentioned trial trip, the consumption of fuel was
about 11 lbs. per mile, and during the other trips it averaged from 5f lbs. to
6| lbs. per mile, and on one particular trip was only 4|- lbs. per mile; thus
proving that on the whole the consumption may be considered excessively
small, this good result being principally obtained by the successful construc-
tion of the boiler. The coke used was well burned, of average hardness,
and about two inches cube. The proportion of evaporation averaged
lin 7.
The Working of the Engine. —As lengths of 12 miles can be run
without firing, and as, generally speaking, the fire does not require to be
touched while the engine is running, one engine-man is sufficient to work
the engine; but in order that the engine-driver can have professional
assistance in case of any breakdown in the machinery, it is advisable to
select practical mechanics as guards, and to have easy access from the
engine-room to the adjoining luggage compartment, in which the guard
remains when not employed in the passenger compartments.
June, 1879.


Extract from an Official Report as to Working of two Steam-cars
(Rowan's System) on the Prussian State Lines.
The steam-cars on Rowan’s system having now been employed in
regular traffic on the Berlin Circular Railway since the Ist of July this
year, with five daily trips in each direction between the Dresden and the
Lehrter stations; and, in addition, since the Ist of September, with one
trip daily in each direction, between the Dresden station and the Ostbahnhof,
the experience gained during this period affords the necessary details for
estimating the results of the working of the steam-cars.
In spite of the very unfavourable curves (the smallest radius being
820 feet), the broken and unfavourable grades (the steepest being 1 in 67), and
on account of the difficulties resulting from the great number of extensive
station grounds to be traversed —for instance, out of the town length of 21 f
miles of road, nearly seven miles is taken up by the station grounds of the
Ostbahnhof, Niederschlesisch-Msirkisch railway station, Stralau, Treptau,
Rixdorf, Tempelhof, Dresden, Wilmersdorf, Griinewald, Charlottenburg,
Moabit, and Lehrter stations —and in spite of the fact that the line traversed
belongs to four different railway companies—viz., the Ostbahn, the
Niederschlesisch-Markisch railway, the Berlin-Dresden railway, and the
Magdeburg-Halberstadter railway; and notwithstanding that the steam-
car daily (with the exception of Sundays) during the first two months ran
118 miles, and, since September Ist, daily 137 miles; and that it has to he
turned jive times each day on the Lehrter railway station , and on the
Dresden station six times; and, finally, considering that the men employed
had to gain experience—and that thus this first working has had to compete
with difficulties in every respect —still the steam-car has, in every way,
satisfied the claims of the public, and has performed its work at a speed of
nineteen miles an hour (generally without any car coupled on to it), and
with the same regularity as ordinary rolling-stock.
The repairs which have occurred must chiefly be attributed to the
novelty of the construction, and to the fact that the Gruson works have not
before undertaken the building of locomotives.* They were chiefly owing
to the bending and breaking of several parts of the machinery, which, as
well as the bolts and pins, had been constructed too light; and, furthermore,
the cover of the regulator had to be fitted on more firmly, fans had to be
made, and large openings made in the bottom of the ash-pan, so as to admit
more air to the grate.
The working itself of the steam-car has, however, in no way caused
* See Appendix Y.


any difficulty, and has, notwithstanding the small engines, and the
unfavourable circumstances above enumerated, shown the good result of
being able to run 137 miles per day. Nor has the use of a vertical boiler
as yet shown any disadvantages; on the contrary, the engine-drivers report
the great facility of generating steam.
Whatever may be said of the vertical boiler for this purpose, at any
rate it has the advantages of occupying an exceedingly small area, and of
allowing an easy access all round it; also of rendering the engine compart-
ment very comfortable, even during hot summer time.
The water-tank being large enough to enable the engine to run the
whole length of 24 miles between the Dresden and the Lehrter station and
O
back again before requiring a fresh supply of water, and the consumption
of coke only amounting to 6| lbs. per mile, consequently the supply of
water and fuel gives very little work, and the fireman, therefore, is seldom
used as such, but has been able to act as guard, without in any way
affecting the safety of the working, or giving the engine-driver any extra
work, even when daily running 137 miles and passing 40 station grounds.
October, 1879.
In comparing the running of two steam-cars on the Berlin Circular
Railway with that of trains consisting each of one small engine on two
axles and one passenger car on two axles running on the Berlin-Gdrlitz
Railway, the items compared comprised:—Wages, lodging-money, water,
fuel, oil, waste, repairs, cleaning, and lighting. Also 5 per cent, interest,
and 3 per cent, amortisation on, in the one case, the cost of two steam-cars;
and, in the other, on the cost of two engines by Krauss, and of two two-
storied passenger-cars.
The result obtained gives:—
STEAM-CAR ENGINE WITH CAR.
5,13 d. per mile run. 9.19 c?. per mile run.
The “ Rowan ” steam-car is a car containing its own motive power
resting on two bogies, the short wheel-base enabling it to pass with ease
very sharp curves. As one of the bogies constitutes the engine, a portion
of the weight of car and load is borne by the driving-wheels, thus increasing
adhesion, and rendering possible great economy of dead weight.
The engine is separable from the car at will, and the system is equally
applicable for passengers or goods.


The Scandia Company, whose works are at Handers, in Jutland, and in
Hamburg, are manufacturers of railway carriages of all kinds, sleeping and
saloon-cars, steam-cars for secondary and road-railways, or “ steam-roads, ’
tramway-cars with and without top seats, and all sorts of rolling-stock for
light railways or tramways.
Their work has a deservedly high reputation for strength, lightness,
and durability; and cars, &c., are most carefully packed and shipped from
either Hamburg or London. Prices and further information may be
obtained on application at the
AUSTRALASIAN TRAMWAY AGENCY,
29 Queen-street, Melbourne,
Or to
MESSRS. BRACKET & DAYEY,
119 Bathurst-street, Sydney, N. S. W.
MESSRS. HARRY, FARRAR & CO.,
Penn Chambers, King William-street, Adelaide, S.A.
MESSRS. J. & A. ANDERSON,
Cashel-street, Christchurch, N.Z.
Walker, May and Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop Street, Melbourne.


•K . .




V
i A
11 ■
