

Cheero
Australians
With Xmas Greetings
1916
[?]




CHEERO!
AUSTRALIANS
BEING CHRISTMAS
AND NEW YEAR
GREETINGS TO
THE OFFICERS AND
MEN OF THE A.I.F.
WITH SOME VIEWS OF
THE HOMELAND
1 9 1 6
Presented by the National Committee (Army and Navy Department)
of the Young Men’s Christian Association of Australasia, Elizabeth
House, Elizabeth Street, Melbourne, for use in the Y.M.C.A. Huts
in the Camp and at the Front




CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!
INTRODUCTION
Parade ! Shun !
Cheero! Australians! Be sure, lads, that this Christmas-
tide there is no home throughout our broad continent in the
southern seas from which are not winging their way prayers
and thoughts of good hope for our own brave lads in the
fighting line. So your loved ones in the home nooks, the
drover camped in the outback spaces, the miner underground,
the swagman on the track, the stockman on the plains, the
driver on his engine, the workers in the cities, Australians
all join in one short wireless greeting—Cheero! Australians!
The Young Men’s Christian Association is known to you
all. It has long ere this been judged by you, and by your
judgment it must stand or fall. Still on all the fighting
fronts of this great war the Y.M.C.A. has tried to be a
fighting factor in your lives. Association men have during
the past two years come closely into touch with your sternly
won achievements of daily duty done, and with the
alternating joy and sadness—the sickening grasp of rou-
tine, studded with grave hourly temptations, that crowd
and elbow the splendid gleams of your brave self


sacrifice and moral victories won. You want no “hero
worship,” lads, and we know it; but you cannot
prevent our Association men, who know your work and who
have been as near to you day by day as the exigencies of
the war machine will allow, from conveying to you at this
time an expression of what your own Australian folk at
home are thinking of and wishing for you to-day—ayel
this Christmas Day in the year of grace 1916. Therefore
to you comes through the medium of the Y.M.C.A. a
genuine message of cheer and goodwill from your own
home land, which, perchance, will bring you a whiff of
the wattle blossom, the scent of the flowering gums, and
memories of the gracious mistletoe, with its pearl-like berries
laden, emphasising their heartfelt love and pride, and which
message, too, Australians all, we would have you pass to
your brave comrades along the whole of the far flung
Allied line. Advance Australia! Rule Britannia! God
Save the King!
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


OUR SOLDIERS’ CHRISTMAS HYMN.
By W. H. M.
Tune—“ Pilgrims ” (H. Smart).
Far, far away, those Christmas bells are ringing
For Jesu’s day in our dear Austral land;
Our prayerful hearts in faith are humbly singing,
And join, dear Lord, with Thine own angel band.
Soldiers of Jesus, soldiers battle-worn,
Fighting to herald the coming of the dawn.
Rest, rest, our souls, while heavenly choirs are telling
His message clear for weary soldiers’ hearts;
Our rugged way is brighter, more compelling,
And new-born hope his glory still imparts.
Soldiers of Jesus, soldiers battle-worn,
Fighting to herald the coming of the dawn.
Onward we’ll fight till Peace shall have its dawning,
'Till God’s “ goodwill ” shall fill the souls of men;
When, weary nations yearning for the morning.
Shall glimpse the meaning of the sweet “Amen.”
Soldiers of Jesus, soldiers battle-wom,
Fighting to herald the coming of the dawn.
Peace, peace for all, God grant to soldiers weary:
Give strength to fight ’till darkening clouds are passed;
Faith's message thrills, through battle rack so dreary:
Tis God’s own glory we will win at last.
Soldiers of Jesus, soldiers battle-worn,
Fighting to herald the coming of the dawn.
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


THE “WORD” FOR THE DAY.
Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings
of great joy, which shall be to all people.
Peace I leave with you; my peace I give
unto you, not as the World giveth, give I unto
you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let
it be afraid!
Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or per-
secution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword? Nay, in all these things we are more
than conquerors through him that loved us. For
I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor
depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


Views from Home


While the billy boils


A Cool Corner


The Tall Tree Ferns


The veteran at ease


Near the Southern Ocean


A veteran Rifleman (three sons at the front) and champion Ayrshire cow


A Fern Glade


A Public School Crew


Young Australia


Public School Football


In the Forest


WE WANT YOU BACK.
By W. H. M.
Oh! lads, dear lads, we can’t forget
The boys we knew, the men we gave;
We know you want no vain regret,
No selfish claim, no senseless rave.
Be yours the pride of duty done.
Be ours the care to smooth the track
To keep the home for each loved one:
But, oh! dear lads, we want you back!
The lump that chokes, the heart that’s sad.
The tear that blinds, the sense of pain,
Are with us still, yet we are glad
You keep the faith—an Empire's gain.
For comrades fallen by your side
We mourn, with you, the War fiend’s rack
You play the game for which they died:
Be sure, dear lads, we want you back.
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


CHEERO!
A STORY BY SERGEANT JACK.
“Squad! Shun!”
“You remember, boys!” said Sergeant Jack, one evening
in the Sergeants’ Mess, as he carefully filled his pipe, “that
lime I got a fortnight’s leave, when you all made out you’d
miss me? So you did—do you say? All right, keep it
up, lads—it all helps to make an old chap like me move
along, and may be its not all bluff on your part. Well, I
wasn’t feeling too good, but that wasn’t the whole true
and particular reason for my trying to get leave just then.
I had been doing double shifts, drilling several lots of rein-
forcements, and was really due a spell, but I’d have still
kept going, when one day one of my old pals, now a hard-
working Y.M.C.A. secretary, in our Camps, got hold of
me, and said, ‘Look here. Jack, old man! Y.M.C.A.
head-quarters want a yarn or two from you to send over to
the boys at the Front to cheer them up on Christmas Day!’
Now, boys, I know you like getting a hold of me at the end
of the day, and when the pipes are all drawing good, and
plenty, you coax some sort of a rigmarole yarn out of the
bowl of my pipe, so to speak. That’s right enough, and I
enjoy it quite as much as you do, but I’m no literary man.
so I pooh-poohed the idea of the thing for all I was worth.
But what I thought was a joke turned out sober earnest, and
my Y.M.C.A. friend said Headquarters had put the pro-
position up to me, and for the sake of a cheery Christmas
message to the lads in the trenches they hoped I wasn’t go-
ing to turn the Army down. ‘Who’s going to turn the
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


Army down?’ said I, a bit peppery. ‘You!’ said he, sharp
as a Sergeant-Major on parade, ‘if you don’t do a little thing
like that for your old Anzac pals! And what’s more, old
man,’ he added, ‘don’t say no! Get a bit of leave, and go
off to old Will Cheerful’s place, get among the old gum
trees, help him with the shearing, think things over, and if
you don’t come back with something cheery to tell the boys,
well, then I miss my guess.’ ‘lts good of you to say so,
Tom,’ said I, ‘so I’ll have a shot at it, even if I don’t worry
through.’ I got my leave, and twenty-four hours later
found me, with an early luncheon duly negotiated, comfort-
ably at home in my old school chum’s smoke-room. Over
a pipe. Will Cheerful explained the situation. ‘The wife’s
away for the day, at Red Cross work,* he said, ‘and I have
just come in from the wool shed, where, on account of the
rain the day before yesterday, we have nearly fifty shearers
and rouscabouts idle. Now, Jack, old pal, you’ve not
forgotten “Cheero” have you, the little lad we
named after you, and whom you yourself chris-
tened “Cheero,” and God knows you were right.
Jack, for the dear lad has been the light of life to his mother,
while to his father he has been “Cheero” all along the line.
You’ve been such a stranger. Jack, all these later years, that
your namesake is almost a man now, just twenty-one, and
keen as keen to do his bit for the Empire, and to get Uncle
Jack, as he calls you. to put the final polish on him, and
fit him for Australia’s fighting line. But it is hard to
think of him, little better than a school-boy, being in the
firing line, when I, a grown man, have to stand aside on ac-
count of age. I know he’ll have to go. Jack, but I have
persuaded him to give his mother just a bit of breathing time
to get used to the idea of his enlisting, and so for the time
being the heartache in our home is out of mind. But what
I wanted to tell you. Jack,’ said Will, ‘was that old Dan,
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


the cook at the shearers’ hut, this morning tipped me the
wink that Cheero had called a meeting of all hands at the
shed this afternoon. I am not supposed to know anything about
it, but Dan reckoned there’d be something doing “at that
there meeting,” and if you and I came along quietly he’d
smuggle us in where we could see and hear “unbcknowns” to
the others. The men almost to a man have all known
Cheero for years, and I don’t believe there’s one amongst
them that would not go through fire and water for the lad’s
sake; still, there are some rough diamonds and hard-doers
among the crowd, and I am rather curious to see how they
will take to the proposition which I think the lad is going to
put them up against. Anyway, old friend, I want you
to see him with a bit of a contract on his hands, and also
the way he handles it, before he actually meets you again,
especially as I rely on you to advise me, and help the lad
later on.’ ‘I am with you, Will, every time,’ I said, ‘and,
what’s more. I’ll be more than pleased to get in touch with
my pal “Cheero.” ’ A very few minutes saw us leisurely
riding from the homestead towards the wool-shed, the track
winding along the river bank. Will had somehow fallen into
silence, and. as for me, the fragrant call of the Australian
wild seemed never so near and so witchingly senseful as on
that soft early summer afternoon. My thoughts took in the
zestful satisfying of the bush, the call of the birds, the,
ripple of the running water, the hum and murmur of the
mostly unseen life among the leaves, and yet those thoughts
•f mine wandered within this setting to the old days in the
Anzac trenches, when we would, almost have bartered our
very souls for just one such whiff of this our own weird
Australian bush. Will’s hand on my arm brought me back
to earth, just as we were nearing a li-tree bend of the
river, that I now remembered to be behind the shearers’
hut. ‘We’ll have to get off here. Jack,’ said Will, ‘and
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


hide our horses in the scrub. 1 hen we 11 have to do a bit
of our old school-toy scouting to get to the hut, and then
on to the shed without “Cheero’s” sharp eyes spotting us.
Fixing our horses up securely, the rush for the hut was
easily negotiated, and here we found Old Dan, the cook,
waiting for us. ’Day, Boss! Day, Uncle Jack! You 11
have to hurry up or we’ll miss the show, and I 11 have
“Cheero” chasing me. Boss, you take Uncle Jack round
by the store, but first put on these old oilers, and pitch up
these dummy swags. “Cheero” thinks I’ve stopped be-
hind to chivey two swaggies off the premises. I’ll go off
up to the shed,’ said Dan, ‘after you leave the store, and
you two just strike off towards the main road, but whip into
the drafting yards, when you come opposite them; creep
up the branding race, through the outside pens, and sneak
into the wool-room on the other side of the wool-shed. I’ve
left the door ajar. You know the way. Boss; but be sharp
and wary, or “Cheero” will catch you. If he does,’ added
Old Dan (with a wink to me), ‘it ’ll be you and me that
’ll catch the carpeting, and. Boss, don’t forget how the boys
enjoyed the last lime we fell in.’ Right, Dan,’ said my
friend, ‘we’ll be good boys and obey orders, for I wouldn’t
miss this corroboree of “Chcero’s” for anything.’ Dan
quickly fixed us up, and the store was duly reached; and
with a parting warning Old Dan marched off to the shed,
now and again stopping to watch the two ‘hatters’ of the
track making off to the main road. Opposite the yards
we doubled in, dropped the oilers and the faked swags, and
five minutes later, after careful crawling, found ourselves
in the darkness of the wool-room. Quietly closing, and
then snibbing, the outer door. Will whispered to me to
follow quietly, and we elbowed our way to the top of some
wool bales, and over them to a couple of small ventilators,
right over the main floor of the shed, where, by lying full
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


1—The Last Load. 2—A Quiet Spot.
3—The Bridge. 4 — Under the Red Gurns
5—The Girls you’ve left behind
6—A rejected Volunteer




length on the bales, we could easily see and hear all that
took place down below. It was a strange scene that met
our eyes. The wool table had been cleared, and a couple
of pressed wool bales rolled up to the table, as seats for
the chairman and secretary of the meeting. The men and
boys were grouped around in a sort of semi-circle, in all
attitudes, and the variety of their rough and ready ‘togs’
made an eerie study in themselves. We were hardly settled
down when a lad stood up. tall and straight, clean-limbed,
clear-eyed, ruggedly manful—yes, a lad to trust —my little
lad of former days—‘Cheero’ himself. ‘Boys,’ and his
clear ringing voice rang through the rafters, ‘Boys, I move
that we have Bill Brady, our old friend “Bill the Ringer’’
—the best shearer this side of the horizon—for our chair-
man to-day. Any one second;’ and as quite a dozen
seconders rose on an instinct the motion was carried unani-
mously, before long Bill Brady had time to uncoil himself
and protest. ‘Mr. Brady, will you kindly take the chair,’
said ‘Cheero.’ ‘Right-o! “Cheero,” ’ said Bill, ‘but no
more “misters” from you or any other son of a gun, or
there’ll be trouble.’ Bill crossed the floor, and got astride a
wool bale at the table. ‘Now, Boys, you’ve put me here re-
gardless of what’s going to happen, so it’s your trouble, not
mine. Guess we want a “man over the board,” a scratche-
tary, as Dan says, so move “Cheero” for the post. All in
favour! Carried! Now, Mr. Secretary, what’s this mus-
ter for?’ Jack Cheerful rose to his feet, and faced the
men, and it was then I realised to the full, that here was
a lad for all time, nay, a ‘man in the making,’ for all his
short twenty-one years of life. He made a brave figure, as
he stood up to his work before grown men, many twice
his age—a rare example of Australia’s coming chivalry.
‘Men,’ said Cheero, ‘you’ve known me mostly all my
life. Bar my mother and father and Sergeant Jack, you
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


arc the dearest friends I have, so you won’t take what I
have to say amiss, even if you do turn my proposition down.
Now, will you, Boys?’ ‘Never fear, Cheero, blaze
away ’ came like a running fire along the line, while big
Mick Ryan shouted, ‘Sure, Cheero, I am a maggority
man, I am, and you’ll have a maggority every time.’ A
laugh rang round the shed, and the tension seemed relieved.
‘Thanks,’ said Jack, ‘Now, Boys, the proposition I want
to put up to you is this: that we form ourselves into a drill
corps and have two hours’ drill every day. Cheero
paused, and the men’s faces were a study—'blank amaze-
ment was nothing to it; so, fearing interruption, and with
Bill Brady’s critical eye on him, Cheero hurried on.
‘We’ve had two days of idleness, owing to the rain, and
what have you fellows done with your time? A “poker
school,” with Bill here as Boss; “two-up school, with Mick
over there as conductor; a “yarn school,” over in that warm
corner of the hut, with only about one decent yarn to about
three of the other kind. I am not naming any horses of
this last bunch,’ said Cheero hastily, as one or two of the men
began to move uneasily. ‘Then,’ he continued, ‘this
morning, what about those “grousing and swearing
matches” that came off, and mostly at my old friend Dan
here—the best cook from the Murray to the sea—and Jim,
his mate, the only two who have been doing a decent
bit of work for the past two days, and you, the crowd of
you, had got so hard set up for occupation that you must
needs pick on them like a crowd of turkeys after a
couple of roosters in the back-yard. Fact is, lads, we
have been on the wrong track. These are no times for
card-playing, gambling, loose talk, and loafing in our time
off. What’s that? Doing good work in the shed. Yes,
I know you are; you are good fellows, and do good work—
you wouldn’t be in the best shed under the best boss in
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


the district if you didn’t. Australia wants workers like
you every time; but she wants more from us all in these
days of war and battle, and I don’t think any of us have
really got up against the hard facts yet. You’ll be up
against them good and plenty soon, and if I am only a
boy compared with you fellows, I am going to have a
shot at getting you to do a bit of clean thinking and real
training before you strike it hard. Hang on to your “pel
props,” if you like; dear old Bill here to his “ringing”—
he’s a dandy “ringer” I’ll admit, and to his “poker school,”
if he’s set on it; Mick there can stick to his last in the
“two-up” line, and the rest of you, each to his own par-
ticular craze; but if you turn down the proposition of the
lad you helped to grow up, you are at least going to turn it
down with your eyes open, and don’t you forget it. So,
Mr. Chairman, I make my play, reserve my right of reply,
and place my motion on the table; and as a sporting proposi-
tion, I look to my old friend Dan there to second me
in the ring.’ There was no applause as Jack Cheerful
sat down—the men were flung back on themselves, but they
realised that he was serious, and they hadn’t really had
time to think. Then they looked at Dan, in lime to find
that old Dan was pulling himself together, and was slip-
ping down from the top of the sheep-pen that he had been
sitting on. ‘Bill,’ I see Cheero’s ‘call,’ said he, and
seconds accordingly, but I don’t ‘raise’ him, not just al
present, as I heard a city politician once say. I’m doing what
one of those fighting chaps does—‘Prof. Forma’ he called
him.
A burst of laughter met him as he sat down, while Mick
Ryan yelled ‘‘Come off that rail, Dan! Come off that rail!"
“Rail yourself, you thick-brained Irishman,” cried Dan,
highly indignant, as he jumped to his feet once more.
“Order! Order!” called the chairman. “Cheero’s propo-
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


sition is up to you, boys, Cheero having the right to play in
the Grand Final, with Dan lying handy on the ‘side lines,’ if
he wants to come into the game. The proposition before
all hands is: ‘‘Do we drill, or don’t we?”
“Next speaker, please.”
In response to various audible hints, Mick Ryan slowly
rose to his feet.
“Misther Chairman! I’m a Maggority man, I am! I
believe in Caucasus ever since thim Rooshians got through
thim Caucauses after those Turcos. I says to mesilf, thim
Rooshians have some sinse—they’ve gone and jined the
‘Union’ forces, and if so be they can foight through thim
Caucauses they’ll have a maggority for sure, and they’ll
jine the ‘Labour Party,’ and sure we’ll put Ould Dan over
there on the other soide of the fince and whin the ‘drill.’
Masther Cheero has tould ye’s about is put down through
the ground, sure, ’twill be foine exercoise entirely for ye’s
all, and we’ll sure stroike water for the Boss, so I am for
the Maggority, and the Rooshians, and the Caucauses, and
if it’s to be ‘drill’ or ‘no drill,’ I am for Cheero’s boring may-
chane in our play toime, every toime, yis every toime, bhoys.”
As Mick sat down amidst great laughter, and applause, he
scowled at Dan, and shook his fist at his pet aversions, the
bunch of grinning rouseabouts.
“Silence there,” said Bill sternly, rapping the wool table
sharply as he rose to his feet. “It’s about time for me to
chip in to this talk. Mr. Michael Ryan, who is, as you
know, of a political turn, has given you time to think, and,
better still, has made you laugh. We looks towards to you,
Mick, for that same, and, as Cheero’s already counting on
your vote. I’m barring any cutting up of Mick’s speech,
either now or back yonder in the Hut. It was his own
sheep he shore, and its no darned business of any of you
wise-acres how he shore it. It’s in his pen, and it’s going to
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


count when the tallies are taken. Now, as Ringer of this
shed, I ain t got any delusions as to whether my say-so goes
in a jamboree of this kind. I don’t think you free and in-
dependent workers are going to kow-tow to anything I say
to you outside of and off the ‘shearing board’—there lam
on top, and lam going to keep there. On general lines, I
guess you all reckon you know quite as much, if not a bit
more, than old Bill the Ringer.’ More than one of you,
I know, think my ‘card playing’ poor stuff, but I do collect a
pay up occasionally, and I admit I’m not in the same street
with Jim. ‘the professor,’ over there. Dan and Mick, too,
get more ‘quotes’ in all your arguments than I do. That’s
as it should be, one championship’ is good enough for yours
truly. But there’s one thing, lads, I can hang on to and
beat you all out on, and that is that I am Cheero’s oldest
friend in this shed. I’ve been chums with him all his born
days, and if he 11 have me, and I deserve it, I am going to
remain his chum until I pass in my checks. As an ordinary
man, I am like yourselves, ‘not much to brag about,’ just one
of those ordinary cusses, sound in the main, but fairly rough
when you run the rule over them. Ido stick tight to this,
though, that whatever has been and gone in other ‘wool-
sheds,’ we men of Billimbigie have never gone back on ‘the
Boss,” our chum Cheero’s father, and the reason we haven’t
is that the two of them, father and son, God bless them!
are straight, real straight, just two honest Australian men, the
whitest men I’ve ever met. So that’s why, boys! I for one
always think a time and a half before I turn any of Cheero’s
‘props’ down. He hasn’t given us much to go on so far,
except that we’ve been slacking in our ‘off time,’ when our
mates over at the front are cheerfully handling the biggest
and stoniest job the world has ever seen. I guess he’s trying
us out a bit, just to see if we have got the
pluck, to turn up or turn down our rotten notions
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


of spare time work, and whether we’re game to take on some
clean training for what I once heard a ‘Parson Chap’ call
the ‘Prize of life.’ I didn’t give his talk much thought,
but I’m thinking now, that those Anzac lads and their com-
rades are beating us out all along the running track for that
there prize,’ and it’s up to us to get good and ready every
time. Mick’s ‘drill’ and my ‘drill” ain’t the same thing,
but all the same. I’m after Mick and backing Cheero on the
blind. What’ s more,” said Bill, ‘‘l can’t see much use of
any more speechifying, so I ask all in favour of drill under
Jack Cheerful to signify in the usual way, and do it lively,
lads!” Immediately every hand went up, and Bill re-
marked “Carried unanimous.” “One of Mick’s Maggori-
ties.”
Jack Cheerful was up in an instant with a flush in his face,
and a smile on his lips. “Thanks, men, for taking me on
trust, but you know and remember that I have had four years’
military training, and I am young and strong, so it’s up to me
to get into the game, and do my bit to help the lads in the
firing line just as soon as the best mater in all the wide world
and the dear old Dad will let me go. Anyway, Ido know
something of the work ahead, and you know I can shoot,
but the trouble is you fellows may have to get into the ranks
some of these days, and I hate to think of my old pals—aye,
and you have been good pals, too —I hate to think of any of
you wasting a chance of doing a bit of training and getting
fit for the work. Now, right now, you have the chance of
a life-time during the next ten days or so—a chance in a
thousand for us all. You remember ‘Uncle Jack,’ anyway
most of you do. Well, he’s an Anzac man, and is Sergeant
Jack these days—up here to-day on leave. How does if
strike you to get a couple of hours’ training every evening
after work from a man that’s been in the fighting lines and
knows his business? So it’s you that are going to be Ser-
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


geant Jack’s ’Platoon,’ for I don’t think he’d turn us down
when I ask him this evening. Now, lads! let’s come to
business! ‘Fall in! Fall into line! Tallest to the right,
shortest to the left—what’s that, Dan? “ ‘lt’s only Mick
here. Master Jack,’ ” said Dan; “ ‘he says he’s after being
used to falling in every time.” ’ He’ll ‘fall out’ soon
enough,’ said Jack, ‘if he doesn’t fall in quick and smart.
Now, lads, jump! That’s better! No pushing and shoving!
Up you go. Professor, you’re near the head of the class;
down you come, Dan. Mick’s got the best of you by a
couple of inches. Gel together, lads. Right dress!’ or-
dered Jack. Mick’s voice was heard. “Roighl dress, is
it? Sure we’ve a mighty quare lot of dress soots entirely!
A laugh went round, and Oheero smiled as the men dressed
up into line, quite smartly enough for a first attempt. Well,
you all know, you comrades of mine, the blue monotony of
squad drill, but I found myself perched up, as I was, on
those wool bales, getting real downright interested in it all.
Just then. Will Cheerful gave me a dig in the ribs! ‘We’ll
have to make a quick getaway. Jack,’ he whispered;
‘Cheero will have the whole squad out in the open in a
minute or two. See Old Dan there gazing anxiously at the
ventilators. He reckons we’ll get caught, I know! So
we’d best make a dart for it, old chap.’ We crept away
quietly, and the last thing I heard was Cheero’s sharp order.
Eyes front, Dan! What’s wrong with the roof? Once
out of the shed we slipped through the yards, picked up the
old oilers and swags, got to the store, then to the shelter of
the shearers’ hut, and were astride our horses in the ti-tree
scrub before Cheero and his squad had got into the open.
He had them marching in file, as we turned our horses on
their homeward track, and the setting sun lighted up a pic-
ture that one does not forget in a lifetime. The wool shed,
the hut, the store, the yards, were all there, and the faint
CHEEROI AUSTRALIANS!


whiff of wool, that aroma that clings at shearing time, came
down on the evening breeze, the whole picture set like a
masterpiece in a background of glorious old gum trees. ‘Yes,
lads, I am going to carry that there bit of Australia with me
to cheer me in the firing line, in the dark and strenuous days
to come, but the gleam, the star-ray of all athwart the can-
vas was then, and ever will be for me, that dear Australian
lad and his stalwart “Platoon”—Australia’s Anzacs in the
making, marching back there in the gloaming of the eventide.
Old hand as I felt myself to be, it was borne on my mind
that I had just glimpsed in the clear vision and brave appeal
of the boy, my Cheero of the long ago, a bit of good work
begun for the dear old British Empire. God bless and
keep Jack Cheerful in all the days ahead, was my unspoken
prayer as I pushed my horse along the track. Will Cheer-
ful’s strong, thoughtful face was strained and drawn, but
there was a look of pride and thankfulness such as strong,
straight men have in days like these, and I instinctively bared
my head in reverence, as I rode by the side of a brave man.
facing fearlessly the supreme and eternal sacrifice of an only
son. The sight of the homestead roused Will, and his face
relaxed as he turned to me with a smile. “Well, Jack,
he’s a brave lad, and a good lad, and you, old Pal, must help
him, as I know you will help him, not for my sake only,
but for the sake of one of the sweetest, bravest, and most
gracious women that ever held the loyal hearts of a husband
and son. See, she is back from her Red Cross work in the
township, and is coming down the steps, so slip down from
your horse here, Jack, and make good to meet her while I
take the nags off to the stable.” Now, lads, you will un-
derstand things better, because you know I’ve always been a
bit of a rolling stone in the old days. You’ll understand
things better when I tell you I can’t ever think of my old
home, or any of its far-off memories, without thinking, too.
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


of Agnes Cheerful. The real friendship of a true-hearted
and loyal woman is one of those things that we men should
hang on to with all our strength for all our lives, and as I
stood before her, in her simple presence, a wave of grateful-
ness thrilled me that, thanks to the trial of the trenches, the
storm of battle rack, and the test of the fiery blast of the
battle line, there had been that which had made me a better
man, and more meet to take the hand of Cheero’s mother.
‘Oh, Uncle Jack, it is good to see you once again,’ said
Agnes, as we met. ‘Never in all our lives have Will and
I wanted you so much, and as usual, Jack, you are here
standing by to lend a hand, as you always did in the old, old
days. Come in! Come in! Cheero will soon be home, and
the old place, with the three dear ones I love most, husband,
son, and life-long friend, will be oncfi more the one place of
all places in the wide world for me.’ As we passed on to
the broad verandah, a cheery shout from the gate made us
pause, and we caught a wave of the hand and a view halloo
from Jack Cheerful, as he rode round to the stables, where
we could hear him talking to his father. ‘Sit down for a
moment. Sergeant,’ said Agnes, ‘and we’ll wait for them
here. Ido want, old friend,’ she went on, ‘I do want your
holiday-time to be a real good time, for you’ve earned it.
Jack, and we’re all so proud of our Anzac boys. But oh.
old friend, and I must say it quickly, I want, I do want
my boy for just four months longer, till after the New Year
is over. Will and you can tell the lad that then, if he feels
he must go as duty calls him —tell him then that his mother’s
heart will go with him. We won’t speak of this again, but
promise me, by all your recollections of our old home ties,
by all you’ve ever hoped and prayed for, by all your sol-
dier’s steadfastness, that you. Sergeant Jack, will, as you can
and when you can, help and guide and guard my boy.’
Comrades! I tell you as she spoke that I rose instinctively to
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


my feet, came to ‘attention,’ as one registering a silent vow—
a vow I’ve tried and mean to keep, and with a smothered
sob of thanks and murmuring “wait for the others,” Cheero’s
mother slipped away. Just then Cheero and his father
came down the garden path, and the lad and I met once
more. lam not going to dwell on the time I had during
the next fortnight; they were glorious days. The drill was
great, and the shed hands were no slouchers, when they got
going, so that Cheero’s ‘recruits’ formed a ‘Platoon’ of
‘sorts,’ and those sorts mighty good sorts. Then, how those
boys could shoot! You should have seen them! My
old friend. Will Cheerful, and Bill Brady, being crack rifle-
men, soon saw to it that musketry practice on the station rifle-
range was a regular thing, and the rifle practices were the
real potato, every ounce of theory being rubbed in with
a pound of actual practice. I well remember Bill Brady
saying, when the question of rifle shooting came up, By gum,
yes! There’ll be no drill or such frills for me, unless you
fellows are taught how to use a rifle as well as carry one.
Those darned military bigwigs who think men can load and
shoot a rifle by instinct, or by perching them on sand-bags,
and squinting along the sights, ought to have their heads read.
You darned lot of gumsuckers, you’ve got to shoot, and shoot
well, or the Boss and Bill Brady will know the reason why.
And so it was that ill and old Bill never let up until the
Platoon singly and collectively were fair terrors as marks-
men at any range up to six' hundred yards, so that on the
last day of shearing, at the last practice on the range, Mick
Ryan, who had just got the possible at the 300 yards’ range,
and made an artistic finish, for the coaches shouted, ‘Lads,
sure the Maggority of us is good shots. We’ve all had our
pound of practice that Mr. Will Brady talks about, and.
ye’s all plase the Masther and Bill there, if so be’s as ye
gits into camp, ye gossoons, that ye’ll jist make sure and
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


gobble up all thim thayories, them there military blokes can
till ye’s of.’ Yes! it was good to lie out under the gum
trees and smoke, watching the boys at practice on the range to
take one’s turn on the mounds or in the marking pits, it was
good to do a day’s work in the paddocks mustering, or in the
yards branding and drafting, to smoke with those that
smoked—to yarn with those that yarned, to scoff huge junks
of Dan’s renowned ‘Brownie,’ and quaff great draughts of
‘Billy tea,’ it was good to rise with the sun and breathe
‘God’s glorious oxygen’ in ‘God’s own country,’ and it was
good at eventide to jog homeward wearily content with
‘pipes’ drawing sweetly, sitting loosely in the saddle all the
while.’ Yes, lads, it was good—all good—a man’s time
and a man’s holiday, and now that my work in camp is done,
and I am to be soon off back to the ‘old Battalion,’ and the
fighting line, I tell you I am storing up the memories of those
days to tell the boys, who for so many weary months have
faced the foe and kept the line, and through all the battle
work and battle murk have only seen Australia in their
dreams.
“Form Fours!!”
“I wasn’t much in the next picture, except just at the
finish,” said the Sergeant, as he refilled his pipe, “but as I
know the setting so well, it is easy for me to give you a
pretty good idea of what happened. You remember the
big recruiting effort that began in Australia last January.
Well, things had begun to move, and the camps were filling
up, when I received word from Will Cheerful that Jack, our
old friend Cheero, was leaving for camp the following Mon-
day, and bidding me take hold of preliminaries and help the
lad.
“However, I’d better give you the story of what happened
as I heard it. Punctually that Monday morning the motor
car drove up the drive to the front door at Billimbigie Sta-
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


lion, and Jack Cheerful, with his mother and father, got in.
After cranking up, Charlie, the chauffeur, touching his cap
to Mrs. Cheerful, said, ‘May I take the Hill-road, Ma’am,
as we pass in sight of most of the farms, and the folk wish to
wave good-luck and good-bye to Master Jack.’ ‘Yes, do,
Charlie,’ said Mrs. Cheerful, ‘the people are real good and
full of kindly thoughts for us.’ The car wound its way
swiftly along one of the prettiest stretches of hilly road to be
found anywhere, and along all the vantage points Jack was
kept busy waving farewells to grown ups, and children, some
of whom were near enough to the roadside to send out cheery
shouts of greeting. ‘lt is just great,’ said Jack; ‘don’t you
think so. Dad? I didn’t think half these folk would remem-
ber that I was off to-day.’ ‘You’ve been a straight and
kindly lad to them all. Jack,’ said his father, ‘and it’s a
heartening business to be amongst friends like these.’ ‘But
what’s this ahead. Jack?’ he continued, as the car ran
rapidly down the long incline stretching nearly into the town-
ship, ‘looks like your old “Platoon” drawn up to say good-
bye.’ ‘So it is, Father, and to think not one of them, not
even Mick Ryan, let on when I went round to say good-bye
to them all last week. Yes! there they all are, not a man
missing, and Bill Brady in command. Mother, it’s just
awfully decent of them,’ said Jack, greatly excited. ‘Pull
up, Charlie, when we reach them.’ The car slowed down
opposite the men, and sure enough, boys, the ‘Platoon’ of
our ‘shearing days’ was there to the very last file, standing
to attention, like trained troops. As the car pulled up. Bill
Brady advanced, and saluted. ‘Mrs. Cheerful, Ma’am,
and you. Sir, and you. Master Jack,’ he said, ‘I am no hand
at speechifying, but I am a proud man amongst proud men
this day. We’ve always been a bit swelled-headed about
Cheero, Ma’am, just as we have been proud to live
near and love and respect vou and the Boss. So, we
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


just got together, talked things over, and we couldn’t
stay away. We’re hoping. Ma’am, and you. Sir, that
our coming along will not worry you to-day, as we’ve
come to say good-bye to you and the Boss, but not to Master
Jack. No! not to Cheero! He says he sees his duty
clear, and ever since the shearing, we chaps have been
thinking things over, and Cheero’s ‘call’ is our ‘call,’ so
we’re going along with Cheero to do our little bit in
the Empire’s firing line. And it’s all Cheero’s doing!
Yes, Master Jack, it’s so,’ said Bill hurriedly, as Jack was
inclined to interrupt. ‘lts all Cheero’s doing, that we’ve
been able to see the right track, and do our duty as honest
Britishers should. So, Ma’am, as Cheero’s going, he’s not
going to go alone, and I’m here to say for the lads that,
rough and ready though we be, we’ll follow Cheero through
thick and thin for all the days to come. We know you
and the Boss won’t forget us, nor our wives, and girls
and kiddies, and we hope and believe that you’ll get some
sort of comfort, that the men of Billimbigie are going with
your own dear lad, to fight with him, to work with him,
and, if needs be, die with him. The lad—our lad, who has
showed us the track, the only track, that all strong men should
tread. So where Cheero goes we go, and we’re off
with him to-day,’ and Bill came to the salute once more.
M rs. Cheerful’s eyes filled with tears, as she leant forward
and grasped Bill’s hand. ‘God bless you. Bill, and all
the men, for this. If you only knew, if you only knew,
the joy you have brought to a mother’s heart this day! To
think that my boy is to have his best friends with him every
day. Oh, Bill, I can’t thank you all as you should be thanked,
but the Boss, as you call him, and I can, and will, make
your folk our ain folk in all the dark days that are to come.
Jack, I am just going to say good-bye to you and Father
here, and to you. Bill, and the men, and then I’ll slip across


to your place. Bill, and stay with your good wife till the car
comes back.’ 1 he men formed up in single file, and marched
past the car, each in turn shaking hands with Mrs. Cheer-
ful; then Jack said farewell, and his mother quietly slipped
away along the track leading to the Brady’s home. ‘Now,
Jack,’ said his father, ‘get your “Platoon” together, and
march to the railway station. I’ll see you fairly started,
and Charlie and I will be there to see you off.’ Jack got
down, and the Platoon formed up. Bill Brady falling into
place as a section commander. ‘Platoon! Attention!’ came
Jack’s voice clear and strong. ‘By sections number.’ ‘As
you were.’ ‘By sections, number. Form fours! Right.
By the right—Quick march!’ The men answered the
orders smartly, and swung along the road, in a fashion that
showed that in some mysterious way the drill of shearing time
had been kept up, and so it had, I found out afterwards from
Bill Brady. Well, I met the lot in Melbourne, and gave
them a few hints before they went into camp about not being
too fresh about the drill they’d done, and the things they
knew. Told them just to go steadily through the usual
grind all recruits go through, and that I’d see that the right
man would know the ‘Platoon’s’ own story at the right time.
And, by jove, the beggars followed my instructions to the
letter, and the quiet fun they got out of it would have made
you smile. You remember, owing to the big rush of re-
cruits in all the camps there wasn’t much ‘musketry practice’
going, but stacks of theory—learning the parts of the rifle
and blackboard work, and such like, till Cheero’s men, like
many others, were getting sick up of it all, and longing for a
bit of the real thing, yearning for some target practice out in
the open, on a real range. In fact, the boys were getting
‘nasty’ at times, especially about ‘having a gun and not get-
ting a chance to use it.’ ‘Bill,’ said Cheero to big Bill
Brady one day. ‘you and Mick will have to side track the
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


boys on this "shooting practice" business or there’ll be
trouble.’ ‘Mow’d it be, Cheero,’ said Bill, ‘if Mick and I
put up a man or two in each “Platoon” to ask the Sergeant-
Majors some "Tomfool” question on this rifle business.
You know! quite serious-like, no fooling at all, but something
that’ll make them think of the bit of target practice, and
rapid fire that all the boys are craking for.’ ‘All right.
Bill,’ said Cheero, ‘fix it your own way so long as you save
a mix up for the boys, and keep their record clean.’ Bill
and Mick got to work in their own way, among all the Com-
panies in the camp, and soon the Sergeant-Majors began to
be surprised with the most innocent-like questions on what
Mick called the ‘tfiayory’ of rifle shooting. Mick himself
was chosen to let her go for his own Company. ‘And, sure,
Sergeant-Major,’ said he one day, and the Company was
all ears right on the jump, ‘sure, Sergeant-Major, if we’s
masther of the thayory of shooting, thin we don’t nade to fire
our guns till we gits into a foight?’ ‘Eh!” said the Ser-
geant-Major, ‘Eh! who told you that, Mick?’ ‘Not a soul,
Sergeant-Major, but I’ve got those little divils of "thayory,”
the hilivations and the trajechtories, and them zones of foirc
so trained up in my moind, that I wanted to make sure that
the beggars were all I wanted, whin I got the orders for ‘tin
rounds rapid’ when thim Huns were out fdrninst us.’ The
Sergeant-Major scowled as he said, ‘Look here, Mick,
what’s the game? I guess you are talking for the crowd!
Come on, out with it,’ ‘Well, Sergeant-Major, some of
these idjuts here, are so cock-a-hoop over their rifle thayories
that they’re wondering when you are going to introduce them
to a ‘target.” ’ ‘Targets, is it?’ said the Sergeant-Major,
‘good heavens, babes of recruits like you, why, you haven’t
got past the feeding bottles yet; why, you’d shoot yourselves,’
and he marched away. But he must have done some think-
ing, because soon after the ‘Platoon’ turned out chuckling
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


like schoolboys with their tongues in their cheeks, for their
first and only—‘the one and only,’ as Dan called it—mus-
ketry practice. As soon as the range was reached, and the
‘stand easy’ order given, a whisper went giggling down the
line, and soon after the first firing party were down. ‘Now,
we’ll see all about your “thayories,” Mick,’ said the Sergeant-
Major, as Mick Ryan and Bill Brady went down on ad-
joining mounds with a separate target each. ‘Hist! Ser-
geant-Major,’ said Mick, ‘hould you’re whist, man. I’m
thinking of thim little divils I was telling ye about,’ and with
that Bill and Mick got in their five rounds each. No. 1
marker signals all misses to Mick. ‘I thought so,’ said the
Sergeant-Major, with a grin. ‘Hello! what’s this!’ said
the astonished officer, as No. 2 marker signals eight bulPs
eyes and two centres on number two target. So off he goes
to the telephone: ‘Hullo! Hullo! what d’ye mean by marking
two lots on number two target? Mark number one shots on
number one and number two shots on number two! Con-
found it, you ought to know how to mark by this time! So
you do, did you say? What! Number one a clear tar-
get, and ten shots on number two! Allright, cut it out,’
and the Sergeant-Major furiously stamped back to the firing
point, only to be met with a fusilade from the other ‘non-
coms’ in charge. ‘They’re only marking on every second
target, Sergeant-Major! We want the scores for Nos. 3 and
5 targets.’ Back went the Sergeant-Major to the ’phone,
only to find ten shots on the targets with the even numbers,
the shots averaging close on centres and a half, and that
Nos. 3 and 5 targets were as clean as when they started.
‘Sergeant Cheerful,’ snapped the Sergeant-Major, ‘tell the
men at numbers one, three and five mounds to fall out,
double them up the range for fatigue duties as markers at
numbers one, three and five targets! Relieve the men on
those targets for their musketry practice, and report;’ ‘Files
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


on numbers one, three and five mounds fall out for
fatigue duty,’ came the order, and three crestfallen units in
our old friends, Mick Ryan, Dan, and the Professor, fell
out, and with Sergeant Cheerful sadly doubled up the range.
‘l’ll teach them,’ muttered the Sergeant-Major, ‘l’ll teach the
beggars,’ but, by jove, I believe I’ve got a daisy lot of
shooters in this crowd, and to think of me not tumbling to it.*
The practice went on smoothly after this, with no more fool-
ing, and in due course Sergeant Cheerful returned with the
three relieved men, and reported. ‘Just a moment,’ Cheer-
ful,’ said the Sergeant-Major, ‘tell me what the'game was.’
‘I don’t think the boys meant anything to annoy you, Ser-
geant-Major. They think you have been awful good to
tfiem; but they are a clinking lot of marksmen, and were
spoiling for a real rifleman’s day on the range, instead of that
“eternal darnation thayory,” as Mick Ryan calls it. And,
Sergeant-Major, if you can let them blow off steam with a
bit of free and easy competition after the musketry, you’ll
see a bit of fun, and a bit of shooting to be proud of.’ ‘All
right. Jack, I’ll see,’ said the Sergeant-Major. When the
musketry was finished, including that of the three men on
‘fatigue,’ the cards showed no misses for the whole Platoon,
and an average of well over centres for the whole crowd.
The Sergeant-Major’s eyes brightened as he totted up the
totals, and thought it was good business to be able to hand
in a record score for the camp records. After the men
formed up he read out the scores, and said, ‘Men, your
scores have been a bit of an eye-opener for me, and I owe
you one for keeping me in the dark. I noticed, however,
you all followed my “thayory” more than a bit, so I guess
what you know, and what I told you has mixed pretty well
Now, we’ve just got time for a ten-shot shoot at 500 yards,
and I want to see who is the best man among you. I’ll
referee myself, and Sergeant Cheerful, Corporal Brady, and
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


Private Ryan will take charge. Fall out, men, “Smoke
O! Jack Cheerful told me afterwards the boys had a
great time, and when Jack, Bill Brady and Mick Ryan all
got the possible, and divided the sweepstakes, they cheered
and cheered again. Then they cheered the Sergeant-Major,
the Battalion, and the Camp and the Army, and at last
reached camp tired and happy and full of song. Mick
Ryan was, however, heard to say, Thim bull’s eyes
in your first foive musketry shots. Bill Brady, were moine,
were moine, I tell ye. Anyways the Maggority of thim.
Bill, the maggority of thim.’ The Sergeant-Major, re-
porting the results for the day’s practice, ‘lt was a sur-
prise for me. Sir, and shows the old Rifle Club men are
right when they say that they could train all our volunteers
before they came into camp, and then we could put the polish
on them for service shooting one time,’ ”
About turn! I have only one or two other pictures of
Cheero in my mind, chaps,” said Sergeant Jack, “and then
I m done. One was on the day Jack Cheerful and I went
out to see the races, for Jack had never seen a big jumping
race. We had a good day, for a while, at any rate, and
enjoyed it, though neither the lad or I were racing men at all.
As the day went on, and we wandered through the crowd, I
noticed Jack getting quieter and quieter, until at last he said,
‘Don’t bother about this race. Uncle Jack; let’s stay on the
lawn here and sit down, and have a rest.’ ‘Anything up,
lad? I said. ‘Yes!’ said he, ‘and it’s all about a dream I
had. I didn’t worry over it at the time, but this crowd here
has brought it all back, and I’d like to tell you about it.
Uncle Jack. You know what a great splash of recruits
came in to canp just before, and for some time after, I
joined, but haven’t you noticed how everything’s slackened
off terribly, and before long every man in camp will be off. *
Well, I got wondering and wondering one night in camp
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


whether we were going to be among the last lads from Aus-
tralia to fill up the gallant Anzac lines. The thought got
me down a bit, and I turned in early, and before long in
my dreams I seemed to be with our Battalion in firing lines,
battling for all we were worth—in the thick of shell and
shrapnel, and machine gun fire. Men were going down
in all directions, but the rest of us staggered doggedly on.
and the funny thing was I didn’t seem to mind the ghastly
business a bit. What seemed to worry me most was an
unearthly monotone whisper that seemed to pass along our
front, ‘You are the last line of Anzacs; you
are the last line of Anzacs; pass the word
along!’ In my dream, as we made our rushes, the grizzly
whisper would reach me. and every time I’d look at my
nearest comrade on the left, with a start to see him looking
at me with blanched face, and I’d feel my lips move and
myself turning to my right hand file, whose horror-stricken
look was awful. Still, we kept on going, and the clash
with the enemy came, and as we fought and fought, an
clinched and gasped, pushing and driving forward
yet still that ghastly whisper seemed to come, the last ot
Anzacs —pass the word along!” and I woke in all the agony
that comes with the lonely desolation of facing the death
fight with no one at your back. It was awful! Just
awful!’ said Jack, ‘and somehow to-day. as we have been
wandering round among all this crowd of men—men
said—Australian men! aye. Uncle Jack, and not in khaki,
(only a handful of us soldiers here and there), I could hear
that whisper of my dreams. “The last of Anzacs, the last of
the Anzacs!” till I wondered why these racing men around
us didn’t hear the call, and didn’t heed the need There s
hundreds here to-day. Uncle Jack who should fill the gaps
—aren’t they going to come? What are they going o
do? The men beyond out there, fighting somewhere on
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


the battle front, want to know, and want to feel, that if they
go down there’s another, and still another, and another after
that, trained and true and ready to take their place. God
help our comrades and ourselves—God help Australia! if
they never hear the whisper—not as I heard it—but the
one clear call of manhood for the men we must stand behind.
I know you are going to follow us soon. Sergeant, and the
best news you can bring with you to the boys we are going
to, is that for every man that goes there’s another Australian
to follow on.’ ‘Well, mates, what could I say?” said the
Sergeant, ‘‘Jack was right. I’d seen the slump coming for
weeks, but I was hoping the most of the trained men would
have got away without noticing it. As I looked that racing
crowd over, I felt sick of all things, and most of all at this
battle craze, so I said, ‘Cheero, this is no place for soldier
men! About turn, lad! Quick march!’ and the long walk
into camp, for we made a bee-line march for it, and the
healthy swing of the marching step—left! right! left!
soon brought us to saner and happier things. Cheero did
not speak of his dream again, and during his last days in
camp was never cheerier. I think he was quite content
when he had told it to me, and his troubles always seemed to
vanish when he’d passed them on to Bill Brady or myself.
Yet I have felt more times than I like to think of, the eeriness
and awfulness of that dream whisper of his. Cheero’s
‘going away’ was a brave one, and the men —his own men
Bill and Mick and Dan, and the rest of them, aye, and all
the Company he went with, too, made my old friend Will
Cheerful and myself feel in a hundred quiet ways that
Cheero was theirs and they were Cheero’s until the end of
all things.”
‘‘How those men had changed, too, good fellows and all
as I knew them to be during those old shearing days at Bil-
limbigie. Discipline and training had done a lot for them,"
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


but behind all that there was something else—a something
that began for them all, the day they lined up determined
to follow Cheero through thick and thin. And, mates! I
knew a good deal of each man’s life in and out of camp,
and I can say that while they were no saints, they’d dropped
the rotten, useless habits of the old days, and were clean
men, clean in thought, and word, and deed—clean in all the
real essentials that make men—men, real men, and fit to
fight for their country and for the great Commander of all.
It was good to think of what Jack Cheerful had done for
them, and it was good to know that they and he would see
it out together, even unto the end.”
“Will Cheerful left for home the day after their going
away. ‘We may not meet again, old pal,’ said he, with
his hand on my shoulder, ‘as I know you’ll be following Jack
soon, but I want you to know, and Cheero’s mother wants
you to know, that you and our lad’s mates have eased the
heartache in our lonely home, and a mother’s blessing and a
father’s trust and fealty to your and their loved ones left be-
hind, are going to follow and cheer you in all your battle
work. Tell the boys I told you this, and tell them, too,
that just so soon as the powers that be can see the sense of
letting every fit man —every fit man, I say. Jack, of any age
—into this business, there’ll be a crowd, aye, and a big
one, too, that have been side-tracked far too long, who’ll
be in this war business for keeps, and to do any old thing to
keep and hold the Anzacs’ fighting line.’ ”
Dismiss!!
“And now, pals, my story’s done,” said Sergeant Jack,
as he knocked the ashes out of his pipe. “I am off to-
morrow with the last reinforcements, at any rate the last that
are ready, for our Battalion—off to join Cheero and all our
comrades over there. So it’s good-bye in earnest, lads, till
we meet, maybe or maybe not, out yonder on the battle
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


front.” “ But what about your message for the boys that
your Y.M.C.A. friend wanted. Sergeant?’ ” said a voice.
“That’s the queerest thing of all,” said the Sergeant; “you
know how I believe in the Y.M.C.A. Well, I happened
to spend an evening with my friend Tom a while back, and
as he hadn’t said anything about that same old message,
you bet, I just laid low, thinking they’d forgotten all about it,
and had let me off, especially as the way things were slump-
ing in the volunteering line, I couldn’t think of any very
cheerful message for the boys. However, Fom said to me,
‘Jack, I never really quite heard how you spent your holi-
day up there at Billimbigie Station. Tell me all about it!’
So I just told him, boys, what I told you. 1 noticed as I
was yarning away, that he was doing a bit of scribbling, but
then Tom always had a trick of pencilling things when
anyone was telling him a yarn, so I didn’t take much notice.
But I remember now when I think of it, that Tom did a
lot of shorthand before he went into the Y.M.C.A. field
service. As I said good-bye to him that night, Tom said
‘Good man, Jack! good business! a good yarn! and a good
holiday!’ He rang me up just a bit ago to wish me ‘good
luck,’ as he knows I’m off to-morrow, and he said, ‘Don’t
worry about that Y.M.C.A. message to the boys. Jack!
“Cheero’s Story” is good enough for us. Billy Hughes
and Australia will do the rest’ He rang off then, so there
you are; you’ll have to find out about that there message
from him. All I know, chums, is, that lam off to do my
duty with Cheero and all his and our comrades, and
whether we come through, or fall, we’ll do our best, and we
look to Australia to fill our fighting lines. I don’t know
what it is, lads, whether it is that ghastly dream of Cheero’s
about the ‘last line of Anzacs,’ or what, but I’ve been think-
ing a good deal of what Will Cheerful said right at the be-
ginning of the War; ‘This is going to be a big business, and’
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!


an awful business. Jack,’ he said, ‘and there’s only one way
to meet it, and that is to start training and keep on training,
if only for a couple of hours a week, every fit man that can
be got at in Australia; they may be all needed later on.
Well, it is not for us Army men to talk, boys, but it does
seem a haphazard system that during two years of war, we
have only been training the lads that have casual-like volun-
teered and come into our camps. I know this, though, that
more than likely I’ll be with them all out there in France
when the Christmas massage comes, and I do hope it will
be the right one, the real article, the only one for them.
We’ve heard enough talk of ‘the last man and the last
shilling,’ quite enough. What the men want to know, in
all the ‘trenches’ out there beyond, and what, and what
only, will hearten them up, is to know for sure and certain
that Australia will be there—-there, with men every time,
and that never, nor ever are our people going to let up until
the right sort of victory comes.”
Wholly Set Up and Printed in Australia by Peacock Bros. Pty. Ltd.
214-16 Queen Street, Melbourne.
CHEERO! AUSTRALIANS!
