

CHE MO HE BLAcfsWAN
1
wSk
JAMES POLLARD


.r& v'
b C


CHENO —a
TALE OF THE BLACK SWAN


\


CHENO-a
Tale of the Black Swan
JAMES POLLARD
ILLUSTRATED BY JOHN LUNGHI
/sbs
Printed and Published by :
PATERSONS PRINTING PRESS LTD.,
65 Murray Street, Perth, W.A.




C 187"6
17 DEC 1945
the Same Author :
NOVELS:
The Bushland Man
Rose of the Bushland
Bushland Vagabonds
FOR CHILDREN;
Ofo
Nature’s Story Book
(A School Reader.)
MISCELLANEOUS
Out of the West
(An anthology of stories
and verse by W A. writers.)


CONTENTS
Chapter
1 The Secret of the Reeds 7
2 Cheno Comes to the River 15
3 Pictures by the River 22
4 Adventures in Flying 29
5 Star Trails and Huntsmen 3G
6 The Finding of Tewil 44
7 Cheno Comes Home .. 52


Chapter 1
THE SECRET OF THE REEDS
Cheno was born in the twilight.
Only his father knew. And he did not tell anyone.
When he first heard the chip-chip-chipping beneath
him, he did not shout or jump but remained quiet and
close. And when there was movement light as fluff down
under his breast, he tried to sit a little closer.
That was in the twilight time. And in that time the
Poet came to call on Cheno s parents. He came quietly,
listening to the whispering dusk and watching the shad-
ows that, to him, seemed waking all drowsy before a rising
moon.
The Poet was a learned man. He had learnt by heart
lots of lovely lines written by the best poets. He liked to
think on such lines and to tell them over and over again
in his heart. They made richer his thoughts and feelings.
They were teachings that he loved. There was a fragment
written by Alexander Gordon Steven which he treasured
and practised because he knew it to be true: —
“By pools of peace and singing brooks,
by silent ways and cool,
Near shining steeps and star-lit deeps
he puts his soul to school.”
Because the Poet was a learned man, he was also a
busybody. Learned people have to be busybodies; that is


how they grew learned. Just now the Poet was busying
himself about the ways of swans, and especially of black
swans. He wanted to learn all he could about their life
story. He wanted to know the birds so that he might write
poems about them.
He had watched the building of the nest in which
Cheno was born. He had seen a clutch of seven pale green,
brown-stained eggs in that nest. He had observed that
both father and mother bird took turns at brooding, the
male bird most often by night, the female usually by day.
He had kept count of the days and nights during which
the birds had brooded. And now, when the birds had sat
for a month, this night he fancied that the keeper of the
nest might have news for him.
Cheno’s father, however, was not making any an-
nouncement yet. The Poet looked down on his dark form,
where he kept very still, couched in the reed-surrounded
nest, and he imagined that if the bird could have spoken
it would have said: “I have a secret to-night.” And imagin-
ing that, he felt pleased with himself, and nodded in a
knowing kind of way; and then he moved quietly back
through the shadows and the low moonmist and so into
the night.
The father bird told his secret in the light of break
o day. He told it to his mate as she came to the nest in
the time when the setting moon was turning pale. The
morn was waking cool and drowsy and had not yet
opened its eyes. There were no shadows. The water and


Only his father knew. [I


■p
.
/
'
.
y
- — * - -
f


the reeds were still. In the treetops birds were singing,
among them magpies caroling most melodiously of all.
“Cheno is born,” said the bird, not in words but in
the sign language of swans. ‘‘And I do believe that his
brothers and sisters will be born to-day. There’s a lot of
chip-chip-chipping going on beneath me.”
The Poet had returned in this piccaninny dawnlight,
and he witnessed the meeting and read the signs. He saw
that both birds were joyful and proud. The male bird, he
thought, looked extra proud of himself for having sat out
the night so closely, keeping his secret through the long
dark hours The Poet thought there was something lovely
about this. He would like to have given the bird a friendly
pat. Then it seemed that somebody or something nudged
him and whispered into his ear, saying: ‘‘You’ve had a
pretty lesson on what to do with a secret. Make a verse
about it!” And on the spot the Poet murmured:—
“Whilst I with joy can keep it fair,
My secret I will hold ;
And when my heart doth bid me share,
My joy I’ll then unfold!” .
He nodded his head and thought that his little verse was
good, and that everybody could learn it by heart. Then he
stepped back and moved away among the day-lighting
reeds.
Kani-the-Frog, who had to jump out of the Poet’s way,
squatted on a log jutting into the river, and he said loudly:
’’P’plunk-alunk! What a lot of fuss they’re going to make
about one small swan. No one ever made a song about my
thousand tadpoles. P’plunk-alung-along!”


Rani’s musical voice boomed far and wide through the
reedbeds and over the water, and before the echoes were
gone he was being answered from all sides:—
“Beloved frog,” said a score of voices
All about the lake,
“We’ll pay no heed to the best of voices
For tadpoles’ sake.
We’ll be pleased, oh really charmed, to
have you feel
That your tadpoles will be welcome to
our meal!”
Rani-the-Frog did not like that song at all. “P’plunk-
alung! They sound like a hungry lot of monsters,” he rum-
bled, and dived into the water. It was pleasanter there, for
the water closed his ears to the voices of heron and egret/ and
ibis and bittern and crow, and lots of other birds that liked
tadpoles all-alive-o!
Cheno was born in the green-ringed City of the
South where the River Torrens forms a lake beside a park.
You must know the place. If you don’t; then you should.
There are shady trees and sloping lawns on one side, and
a low stone wall along a bank, and a little jetty where
sometimes a river steamboat comes to take people for a


trip. On the other side is some bush country, some woods
and a little house. From the jetty you can look along to
the reedbanks where Cheno was born. You can see flowers
and butterflies, and sometimes you can hear singing birds.
A lovely bridge crosses the river, and there are lovely
places on the other side of the bridge. On the sloping lawns
people like to sit, to have lunches or to do knitting, to
read or to talk. It is a restful place. Folk go there when
they want to go away from the things they have to do
but don t want to do. Children play there. It is a happy
place, a little world of green loveliness and lapping water
where insects dance and Ashes splash, and where silver
gulls sail and walk and hold meetings unafraid among
men.
I expect you know a place like it. The City of the
South is not the only city in the world with a park like
that.
One sunny September Saturday the Boatboy was
heard calling from the jetty, where his father’s steamboat
was tied up. All aboard! A shilling round the river, cal-
ling at the Swannery. Children sixpence! All aboard!”
It sounded like an invitation to a happy adventure.
People began to respond at once, moving toward the boat.
Several mothers and fathers went on board the steamboat,
taking their children with them. Some other children went
on without their parents. A pair of lovers were clearly
going by themeslves. And the Poet (for of course he was


|
there) was one of an important party. He had with him
a news reporter, a press photographer and an ornitholo-
gist (whom the Boatboy called the Bird Man).
The river boat filled up with passengers. It puffed a
plume of white steam from beside its little funnel and, at
the same time, it hooted, which was a curious thing to do.
1 he Boatboy on the jetty cast off the lines and jumped on
board. Then the boat steamed away along the lake of the
river, leaving its wake behind it as a good and proper
steamboat should. It puffed by the willow trees, it chugged
under the bridges, it surged past the geranium beds, and
it began to swing and sway where the river bent.


So he came to the river. [Page 17]




That boat travelled quite the longest way round to
get to the reedbeds and the swannery where Cheno was
born, but it arrived at last with its load of mothers and
fathers bringing their children, and the other children, and
the lovers, and the Poet, the news reporter, the press
photographer and the ornithologist (the Boatboy’s Bird
Man).
A lot of other folks were already there. They had
taken all the best positions, of course, having come early.
And naturally they were easily seen, though not many of
the people on the boat did see them. Do you wonder who
these other folks were?
Well, there was a wagtail, for one, a restless black
and white creature chattering loudly “Rikki-tikki-tikki!”
in a paper-bark tree on the river bank. There was a robin
shining on a bare branch above the wagtail. There were
two turtle doves cooing in another tree. There were seven
sparrows squabbling in a bush below the doves. And a
magpie and a crow sat watchful in another tree. Orax and
five of his fellow cormorants occupied posts in the water.
Podi and Ceps, the dabchicks, bobbed about on the river.
A reed-warbler warbled in the reeds. Ten blue coots stood
in line beside the reeds, flirting their white tails and paint-
ing the water with pictures of their own red bills and blue
raiment. Ofo the blue heron lifted his white face above the
rushes. Rani-the-Frog squatted on the log that jutted into
the river. And in and on the water were more water-
skaters and whirligigs and water-boatmen than there were
swallows in the sky.


The Boatboy glancing round looked on all these folk
as his friends. He had expected them all to be there. The
ornithologist observed one after another and told over in
his mind the long names by which he knew them. The
Poet noticed them all, and was charmed. He was especi-
ally fascinated by the antics of all the whirligigs and other
acquatic insects in and on the water. What a dancing life
they led! Then Peta the dragonfly arrived and hovered
low to admire his reflection in the water, and the sight of
the glittering insect made the Poet remember how another
poet named Gray once chanted of insects:—
“Some lightly o’er the current skim,
Some show their gaily-gilded trim,
Quick-glancing to the sun.”
Peta the dragonfly saw everybody at once (he could
look all ways together, you know) and he exclaimed : “What’s
it all about?”
He darted here and he darted there;
A silver trail he left in the air.
(The Poet was dazzled quite.)
He hovered over the nest in the reeds, and what he saw
there pleased him. And on returning to his station near the
boat, he remarked to another dragonfly as they met head to
head: Stay near me and watch the procession go bv. It’s
exciting!”


Chapter 2
CHENO COMES TO THE RIVER
The Boatboy tied the steamboat to a post in the river.
This was some distance from the nesting ground, and the
Poet and his party wanted to get much nearer. So the
Boatboy dived overboard and swam to the shallows,
splashed in among the reeds and came out poling a small
flat-bottomed boat. The Poet got into this boat, followed
by the news reporter, the press photographer and the orni-
thologist (called the Bird Man).
The Boatboy poled his party to the bank near the
nests. The men and the boy got ashore on a patch of mud
near where Cheno’s mother and father, who had watched
the approach, were making away through the reeds, they
having decided it was time to take Cheno to the river. And
as they waddled through the reeds and shallows towards
open water, the mother-bird led and the male bird fol-
lowed more slowly, oft turning toward the crowding men
as much as to say: “Keep your distance or I’ll get am
noyed.’’ The men kept their distance. They knew that the
bird was not afraid of them, and they knew that a fighting
swan could hit very hard with its wings! Nevertheless,
they saw enough and took photos enough, and made notes
enough, as they followed respectfully the slow-moving
procession.


Cheno had a place in the middle of the procession.
So did his four brothers and sisters, Che and Chen and
vTenop and Chenopis. They were five small downy grey
cygnets, and what a struggle it was for them to push a way
through the reedy water! But before they had gone far
the mother-bird reached water deep enough for her to
float, and there Cheno led the way scrambling up on to
her back. And so he came to the river riding between her
wings.
When the swans came in sight of the people on the
boat, and the young tumbled off on to the water, there was
excitement laughter and gay cheers and waving and
clapping of hands. The parent birds came like two stately
black and white, red-prowed boats out of an olden tale,
breasting the quiet water gently so that Cheno and his
brother and sister babes could keep pace with them.
It seemed that all the other spectators, the early com-
ers, cheered and clapped, too, after their own fashion.
Willy Wagtail ceased to chatter and whistled a lively lilt-
tune. The robin sang his love song. The magpie carol-
led foi joy. The blue coots gobbled loud. The whirligigs
and water-skaters danced right merrily. And dragonflies
flashing were merry in the sun.
On the little mudbank the men and the boy stood and
talked awhile—the Poet dreamily, the Bird Man gravely,
the news reporter persistently, the press photographer
smilingly, and the Boatboy without having much to say


because all of what he knew about birds was not on his
tongue but in his heart. And how can a boy talk when his
heart is full?
The story of Cheno’s coming to the river was told
next day in the newspapers. The Poet and his men friends
filled a page with the story. The Bird Man wrote a proper
kind of article on the history and the geography and the
biography of swans. The news reporter reported some of
the Bird Man’s opinions together with some of his own.
He wrote about the river and the steamboat and the pole-
boat, and the reedbanks and the nest and the procession.
He mentioned the Boatboy. He remarked on the crowd
and the waving and the cheers. He described the dresses
of the best people present. “The nicest girl on the boat,’’
he declared, “was Redgold—and that was the colour of
her hair. She wore a scarlet blazer; and her shoes didn’t
match, but she had the prettiest face ever!” That news
reporter did not miss much of what went on. He even gave
a line or two to the wagtail, which whistled, he said, like
a piccalo. Much of what he reported was illustrated by
the press photographer, who filled three-quarters of the
page with pictures, including one of Redgold feeding the
swans.
0 ROYAL SWAN
0 much-molested bird of olden time,
Methinks no bird today is honoured more.
0 royal swan, of grace and form divine,
Display thou what in nature I adore.
An artless and yet stately air you bring,
Beauty that is and beauty that must be,
On lake or stream, where’er the sirens sing,
For all mankind a joy and pleasantry.


Till not so long ago, the ages prove,
Your blood was shed to make a wanton feast;
Yet all those ages witnessed of your love
For peace and ways not harmful in the least.
Goodness may be in teaching goodly ways:
Goodness shall be where’er the swan displays.
So Cheno came to the waterway. He began to grow
up and to have adventures. Adventuring, he soon learnt,
was to be his way of life. Sometimes his adventures were
frightening. One day a goshawk visited the lake and
swooped several times close above the swans; but the gos-
hawk was a land bird and dared not swoop too near the
water. So the swans were safe from him; but his swiftly
passing shadow frightened Cheno, making the young bird
jump in the water and swim as fast as it could for safety’s
sake between its father and mother.
Another day a water-rat was seen swimming near
the reedbank. Cheno s mother called harshly and she was
answered at once by many swans about the lake. Then,


before the startled cries died down, a dozen birds half-
lifted themselves and drove towards the rat, splashing and
churning water and making a pretty show with their
snowy underwings.
Cheno must have wondered why this sudden hulla-
baloo was raised —after he had recovered from his panic
and come out from the reeds, whither he had fled with
Che and Chen and Chenop and Chenopis hard upon his
tail.
The Boatboy was poling his little boat by the reed-
bank. He had risen early that morning to count the swans
on the river for the Bird Man. He had counted more than
a hundred when he saw the water-rat dive under his boat.
Then the party of hunting swans came up to his craft, and
they quickly forgot the rat, which ran among the roots of
a tree which was growing on the bank..
The quick eyes of the Boatboy marked where the
rat disappeared. The boy turned and spoke aloud to the
swans, saying: “Take it easy. I will set a trap to-night just
where I think that stealer of eggs will be caught.” Then
he threw overboard some scraps of lettuce and lucerne
and some mealy bran mash, and the birds had breakfast.
Cheno hurried to get his share, swimming out of the reeds
followed by Che, Chen, Chenop and Chenopsis all in a
row behind him.
Beta the dragonfly came, too. He never missed much
of what happened within range of his great round eyes.


He hovered near the boat, around which some thirty
black swans of all ages and sizes swam and mingled.
Some tried to put their red bills into the boat. The Boat-
boy gently played with the heads of one and another.
Peta quivered with disappointment. “It’s only grass he’s
throwing out,” he muttered. “That’s not to my taste at all.”
A mosquito then coming nigh,
Paused and, in mind of its skin,
Said, “Dragonfly, O dragonfly,
Why don’t you, please, join in ?
If you would learn to live on grass,
No more you’d need on wings to pass,
And I’d go safely by.”
The dragonfly, insulted, then
Looked for that cunning pest,
Remarking, “Come within my ken!
For me, I know what’s best!”
Then sped so swift that, (yes, quite so),
No more passed by that mosquito,
Nor ever whined again!
Cheno also had happy adventures. The swans fed
on water weeds, and to reach those which were under
water the birds had sometimes to dip their beaks and long
necks and up-end their tails to dip as far as possible. At
first Cheno fed on scraps of the weed which his parents
cast on the surface of the water. Then as he grew and
learned to dip the river himself, he oft had fun trying to
reach some special bit of water-weed that would lie along
under water just out of his reach. The Boatboy laughed
sometimes to see the young bird up-end himself and pad-
dle hard, and he guessed that Cheno was stretching his
neck to the utmost and being tantalised by a bit of weed.
He would count up to fifteen seconds before Cheno


liS
“W hat a cheek!” [Pasre 22]


.
. Y j | r •
\ ' ' ? I
• :
/
■
/
, •
■ ' * ;
/
■
* . r-
.. "
i ’ •
. j.
' ■
!
' r - / / ’
/ '
1 1 - , ;


righted himself and brought up his beak, dripping jewels
of water, and raised and flapped his wings, and swam a
little way before dipping again.
One day Orax the cormorant swam beneath Cheno,
passing under his reaching beak like a racing black shad-
ow which faded quickly into the dark water. Cheno with-
drew his head and seemed pondering when Orax popped
up two yards away with a fish in his mouth. Cheno pad-
died curiously toward Orax. Orax swallowed the fish and
dived again; and again when he appeared on the surface
Cheno swam toward him. So began a game of hide and
seek which he enjoyed for many a day.
The Boatboy often watched them play, and counted
the seconds during which the cormorant stayed under
water, and tried to guess where the bird would emerge.
“It’s a mug’s game, really,” declared the blue kingfisher,
when he watched from a limb of a tree. (It was a rude
remark, really; but then, perhaps he was jealous of the luck
which Orax had, fishing.)


Chapter 3.
PICTURES BY THE RIVER.
Once an aeroplane zoomed low over the water. Cheno
splashed and skittered toward the reeds, but the plane
was soon gone. The young bird decided that he would not
let himself again be scared like that. He was used to the
noise of trams on the bridge, and to the rumble of trains
which he never saw, and to other city noises. He would
get used to the zooming noise of an aeroplane.
But though he might get used to the noise, never was
he to get used to an aeroplane s shadow. \Vhenever the
shadow of a plane passed over him, though the machine
were ten thousand feet in the air, he would start, and he
would feel his heart jump, and would look warily all
around, paddling uneasily for a moment or two.
So likewise did he start and know a sudden unease
whenever a hawk s wings cast their shadow across him.
“Which is being a bit soft, if you ask me,” said Peta the
diagonfly. No shadow ever frightened me—phrit!” And
with that last sound he vanished like a flash as the goshawk
swooped toward him.
He came twinkling back a few moments later, remarked
to Cheno: “What a cheek! I mean the goshawk, you know.”
Then he flew merrily away on the trail of a midge.
When Cheno was half-grown he was still a grey-
brown cygnet, not much like the handsome bird he was
going to be. Indeed, some queer-looking quills that were


sprouting about his wings and tail made him look only
part dressed.
It was then about Christmas time; and for Christmas
two persons gave him presents. One was the Boatboy,
with whom Cheno was now so friendly as to take food
from his hands. On Christmas Eve the Boatboy gathered
him up from beside his boat. For a minute or so Cheno did
not like thus being handled. He was shocked. But the
hands of the boy were firm though gentle, and the voice
he knew so well kept saying quiet, friendly things, and
the bird’s parents floating near were not alarmed; so
Cheno soon ceased to struggle. And when the Boatboy
held one of his legs at an awkward angle and clipped an
aluminium ring on that leg, he did not protest. Then, sur-
prisingly, he was put back on the water. He paddled a
stroke or two away, then turned back and shovelled with
his beak into a handful of green which the Boatboy held
low over the side of the boat for him.
The other present came from Redgold, she who was
the nicest girl on the steamboat on the day when he came
to the river. Redgold he had got to know nearly as well as
the Boatboy, for she came often to the lawns and the bank
by the jetty to feed the swans. All the birds had grown to
recognise her by the scarlet blazer which she wore.
The Poet usually accompanied the girl. On Christ-
mas Day he sat beside her on the lawn and watched her
peel an apple. Many of the swans watched her, too. They
had gathered in the water before her. Others were ap-


proaching from all parts of the lake —young and old birds
swimming afloat on the still water, the old birds with their
red bills and black and white coats looking handsome and
proud as they breasted the stream.
The Poet surveyed the birds adorning the stream, all
lit by the warm sun; and he felt grateful to see such a
sight and was moved to make a couplet—
Blessed is he who sees
Such beauty at his ease.
Cheno’s father climbed on the bank, and the mother-
bird followed. The pair ambled near the girl, who laughed
to see their pink eyes and solemn faces as they watched
her peel the apple, and she, laughing, said: “I think they
would pray for a piece, if they could speak.”
The Poet replied: ‘‘l pray you give them a piece.”


Redgold shook her pretty hair. “No! It’s all for Cheno
this time. Shoo! You can’t have any.’’ And she waved
at the two great birds, so that they backed a step and then
waddled one each way around the girl and the Poet and,
coming behind them, squatted on the grass so close to the
girl in the scarlet blazer that she could have touched them
with her hands.
The girl peeled the apple whole and dangled the
long juicy strip before Cheno as he paddled to and fro at
the water’s edge. The bird heard her say: “Come along,’’
He had heard the music often before, and it was always
friendly. “Come and get it, Cheno.’’
Two or three other swans scrambled on to the bank.
Cheno heaved himself out of the water, beating his wings
to help him. The girl waved the other birds away. Cheno
flapped and paddled and pushed—and lo! before he knew
it the apple peel was his. And with it he dashed back to
the river.
“What is the ring for?’’ asked Redgold, who had
noticed the aluminium ring around Cheno’s leg.
“To identify Cheno,’’ answered the Poet. “It is
stamped with the date of the year and the place where he
was born. The Bird Man wants to know, as time goes on,
where Cheno’s wanderings will take him —how far he and
other swans will migrate and to what places.’’
How will he get to know?’’ queried the girl.


We must wait and see,” the man replied.
The girl looked thoughtful. She thought she would
miss Cheno when he went away. Then she observed that
on the water Cheno was being pestered by four other
young swans, all of whom wanted his apple peel, and she
laughed to see that in the end Cheno got only a piece of it.
So Che, Chen, Chenop and Chenopis had their share
of Christmas gifts, too.
Meantime the Poet looking about filled his eyes and
his heart with pictures, Here beside him were two lovely
birds and the girl in the red blazer sitting together in the
green shade of a tree beside the water. There, a little
way along, a mother and two children fed a mother-swan
and three cygnets, and all were sunbathed on the lawn.
By the jetty a number of men in blazers and flannels and
coloured shirts, in a variety of summer suitings, in fact,
leaned on a rail and watched the swans that crowded on
the water near them. Beyond them, a young man and a
girl sat talking close together, and seemed all careless of
the nearness of two resting swans that seemed listening to
all they had to say. And where two white-haired old
ladies lunches on a seat by the river, the gulls were gather-
ed, crowding the lawn and the air about with silver wings.
Over the river dragonflies glittered, and swallows
dipped and circled twittering. Swans and trees had reflec-
tions in the water. The air was still. The Poet thought:
The park is in a green peace. There is only quiet, living


beauty.’ ’ And he marvelled knowing that all the birds, in-
cluding the swans, were wild creatures free to come and
go. Many did come and go, he knew; for often he had
listened to the low mellow music made by the black
swans as they flew over the city by night.
Sometimes he awakened from sleep and lay listening
to the low honk! honk! of migrating flocks. Then in fancy
he would see the shapely companies of swans flying
shadow-like through the starry space, and his mind would
be troubled with music-words until he remembered a line
or two suited to the imaginings, like those out of a song
by Margaret L. Woods—
“Your fantasy possesses
The airy wilderness.”
And then he would sleep again.


In time, Cheno became aware of the comings and
goings of his people. Always the movements were made
at night, and the sound of wings and water and bird voices
sometimes wakened him. And of a morning he would
miss some of his friends, or find new birds come to the
river.
He began to grow wing feathers. These were black
on the top part of his wings, white on the lower part.
And in these days the Boatboy many times saw him beat-
ing and running on the water, splashing a ribbon-like cas-
cade and making quite a show with his black and white
wings.
The summer grew old, and one night Cheno’s parents
and several other older birds started a beating and splash-
ing together. The city was quiet, sleeping, and so there
were few to see that dark crowded movement of the
swans on the water. But the Boatboy, waking in the little
house on the hill, came down to the water’s edge to see;
and he and the stars watched together.
Cheno joined in this midnight game and so did all the
youthful swans of his age. He beat and paddled as strenu-
ously as any, and he got quite excited as he splashed and
drove and felt wind and water rushing by him. Then of
a sudden, and he did not quite know how, he was off the
water and Hying!


.BteM--.-■••■.■M v«JSo.*- .'Haa' Bit - ’-- t^^BBl^^^R9a i^^HS^R
Swayed ir


'
. ' .
-
n . ; .
• .
< •
' »
.
.
-
.
• *-
-
* ,


Chapter 4.
ADVENTURES IN FLYING.
What a thrill had Cheno as he felt the water slip
away below him and knew himself riding the wind! For
a moment or two he shook, and he swayed in the air. But
he flew harder. And he found that he could depend on his
wings. He steadied himself and began to enjoy the swift
movement through the air, lifting away from earth into
sky. The river and the trees and the city glided beneath
him as a world of shadow and twinkling lights. The stars
came down to him, it seemed, for he saw many on all
sides below him. As he circled and slanted and weaved
among the other birds, the stars swung all ways around
and the twinkling dark earth below seemed to dance.
How wonderful! Why ever had he not come up here be-
fore? Now he would like to go on flying and flying and —
But the elder folk thought differently. Well they
knew that young folk must be given hard exercises in
little lessons at first. They swung back toward the earth,
and Cheno flew within them, and presently he splashed
down on to the water, breasted a wave or two, puffed a
breath or two, and then sat making a picture of himself
on the dark water. The Boatboy saw him dimly and the
stars looked down in silence. But perhaps Cheno cared not
who watched; for it satisfied himself to ride elegantly
with his neck arched and his wings half-lifted. He was


proud of himself —as you and I would be had we just
learnt to fly!
After a little while he remembered how the wind had
swept through his coat. He felt that he must tidy himself,
and so he began to preen his feathers, drifting there on
the water.
After breakfast next morning, the Boatboy talked
with the Bird Man and the Poet, standing beside the lake.
Peta was early out on his aerial hunt this morning, and he
overhead the boy tell the news of Cheno’s first flight; and
the dragonfly was amazed.
“Believe it or not,” he cried aloud,
“But they say it’s news to fly!
Why, I’ll loop a loop inside a cloud
And a tangled knot untie!
Yet nobody ever will say of me:
‘The dragonfly flew today,'
’Cept only the midges and folk who see
111-luck in my sunlit way.”
The P oet, who heard Peta quite clearly, was touched.
You do sound peeved,” he remarked. “Be not so. I have
seen you. I will give news of you. I will sing of you like
this”:—
THE GLANCING DRAGONFLY
Mark how the glancing dragonfly,
Haunting the sunlit stream,
Scatters a glinting jewelry
Out of the glowing beam.
Cometh he airily, wary.
Nimble on wings agleam;
Twinkleth away like a fairy,
Swift as a vanishing dream!


Peta, who had hovered to listen, was so joyously startled
that he dropped an inch. Then “Thank you!” he said and
tried to raise his hat. Not having a hat, he became a little
confused and performed a victory roll, then blushed and sped
away at sixty miles an hour along the wind.
That was to be the dragonfly’s last exit. But perhaps
it be truer to say that the story departs, leaving Peta to
go on twinkling and glancing over the river. For the time
is come to follow Cheno on long journeys; and when and
if the story returns, Peta will be gone with his summer,
faded into a memory drifting like a dream among the
shadows and the sunbeams, and under the willows and the
paper-barks, and over the water and the reedbeds.
Cheno enjoyed flying excursions night after night
for several weeks, and his wings grew strong and he flew
with ease. And as thus he exercised and strengthened
muscle and sinew, he came to feel that he was born to fly
sometimes long distances by moon and starlight. Away
from the lake and the river and the little world of the
park there was a larger world to live in, and this larger
world began to call him. It called silently, as a mysterious
voice reaching to him from beyond the star-dusted rim
of the world which was his nightly horizon.
The summer died; the days turned grey; the nights
chill; and there was a day when rain beat down from
morn till night. The lawn banks of the park were desert-
ed. Cheno observed the landscape misty and dull, and his
world was filled with the sound of rain in the air, and on
the water. He tucked his head under his wing and drifted.


When at times he looked out, his only human companion
was the faithful Boatboy, who, dressed in an oilcoat and
a sou’-wester hat, poled his boat slowly by the reedbanks
and out among the idle swans. Cheno looked gravely up
at him when he passed close by, but soon covered his head
again from the beating rain.
Rain fell throughout the night and no birds flew.
Cheno watched the lamplights glitter and sparkle and
stream in the rain; and he heard many frogs make music
all the night.
Morning lit under broken cloud, and by mid-day the
sky was clear. The swans performed their toilet in the
warm sun. The Boatboy observed that many, including
Cheno, spent more time on preening their feathers than
they usually did. Time and again he watched Cheno run
the long black and white feathers of his wings through his


red bill. And the Boatboy knew that a time was come
for parting.
That night the stars glittered brightly in the rain-
washed atmosphere. That night Cheno and his people
rose high among the stars, circled twice around the city
and fell into two V-shaped formations, and then flew
away.
The Boatboy heard their low musical honking fade
away into the northern light.
Northward flew Cheno, not knowing where but con-
tent because he was answering the mysterious call of the
larger world. The city lights became a fading cluster far
below and behind and at last dissolved in the distant dark.
The country passed dim below him. The stars swam
around and slowly by. And the night told its hours.
Just before the dawn, he dropped down with his
fellows to a moonpath on Lolo Lake. He had flown
through the night and now he welcomed the feel of water
under him. He splashed with forty other swans along the
moonpath, bathing and cooling himself; and when he had
done he rode bearing himself like a bird who was proud
of having made the first great aerial voyage of his life.
This was only the first of many long flights which
Cheno was to make; but before we follow him farther,
there is a story of danger to tell. For here on Lolo Lake
he learned how man, whom he had known only as a
friend, was also to be known as an enemy.


The lake was one of a chain of lakes, some of salt
water and some of fresh, scattered across several hundred
miles of country to the north. They were winter lakes
only, and most of them dried up soon after the winter
rains ended and the summer sun began to warm.
Here on Lolo Lake, Cheno found new water-reeds to
his taste. Here he saw fellow nomads like the dabchicks
and the cormorants and herons and egrets; and here he
made the acquaintance of stranger-folk like the stilts and
the avocets, pretty black and white birds that dwelt al-
ways by the lakeside, where they sought for worms and
water-animals in the shallows and the mudbanks. Here,
too, were swans that he had not seen before, come from
other parts of the continent. And here were black duck
and mountain duck, and a small band of black and white
magpie geese.
These many wildfowl were observed from a far rise
of the land by men with field glasses. And the men, hav-
ing observed, gathered together to talk about guns and
ammunition, and sport and game.
On this lake the birds were seldom scattered or
mingled. Each herded with its kind. The avocets waded
together. Ducks swam or flew in company. The swans
were always close to one another whether feeding or
idling.
Early one morning, while the light was yet grey,
Cheno s father called a warning and splashed water. In a


moment all the swans on the lake were beating and tread-
ing water together. Then they rose like a cloud into the air.
At one point along the shore, dense scrub grew down
to the water’s edge. The crackling of a stick in this scrub
had betrayed the presence of Man to the birds.
The swans circled in flight and intended to come
down on the farther side of the lake. But as they passed
near the scrub-grown area, a puff of smoke appeared
there, and about Cheno for a moment or two there was
the wind and whine of pellets. The sound of a gunshot
reached up to him. One of the flock ceased to fly and
fell tumbling and twisting to float without life on the lake
below.
Other shots were heard in quick succession, but
these were aimed at rising ducks and the swans flew on
unharmed. The leader now took them high away, know-
ing that Lolo Lake was no longer a haven. There were
other waters farther north where perhaps peace dwelt.
He would lead them to one of these.


Chapter 5.
STAR TRAILS AND HUNTSMEN.
The flock flew for thirty miles through the morning
high in the light of the rising sun, high over farmland and
plain and hill; and as they flew they formed thin dark
lines on a rosy sky. The sun cast their shadows far across
the land, and the shadows swept momentarily upon a
falcon which was perched in a bare tree on a hilltop. The
bird of prey turning saw the thin dark lines streak across
the sun, and he at once took wing.
By the speed of the falcon a bird may be timed. For
this be the bird used for hawking from times far-off and
long ago, through all the ages down to our own. This is
the aerialist, the speedster, the master-flyer which can fly
at a hundred miles an hour and perhaps more. This is the
aerial hunter, rapacious and bold, that is and has been
through all time the terror of all day-flying wild fowl.
The swans were flying fast and high many miles
from the tree whence the falcon observed them, yet in a
matter of minutes the bird of prey drew upon them.
Cheno was aware of an arrowlike form racing up
from behind. All the swans were aware of the hunter’s
approach; but they kept tight their formation and they
strained together to fly at their utmost speed.


The master-flyer. [Page 36]


-


The falcon fell upon a swan at the tail of a flight,
dealing a wing blow to its head. Time and again was
the blow repeated. The swan dropped out of line, slanting
dizzy away. The falcon harried it, closing ever and again
to cuff and strike. One last stunning blow sent the bird
weary and broken down from the skies.
The flock streamed on through the morning.
Mewin Lake gave the swans rest and food and shel-
ter for a week, then again they flew into the northern
night. In this way they spent the winter months as nomads
of the island, wandering from one waterway to another,
for the most part in peace, but occasionally in unrest. And
to avoid the falcon and preying birds of his ilk, they
travelled through the dark.
Great flights were these over the dim earth, over
scrubs of mallee and acacia and over forests of gumtrees,
over settlements and sheep and cattle stations and over
desert sands and stony wastes. Cool clean flights through
starlight and moonlight, flights joyous and thrilling, so
that often the birds sang melodiously to the singing winds,
and to one another, and to other migrating bird flocks that
called as they passed unseen away off in the night. They
sang, too, mayhap, to the sky and the moon and the stars
that spangled the darkness above and about them, the stars
that twinkled to them and rode with them lighting the
long skyways. Had the Poet heard them honking now, he
would surely have known the swans happy in the com-


pany of the stars; and surely those lovely lines of the
poet Thomson would have floated into his mind—
“All the beautiful stars of the sky,
The silver doves of the forest of night,
Over the dull earth swarm and fly,
Companions of our flight.”
The life of the swans was rich with joy and peace,
by day as well as by night. Only on occasional days did
danger approach, and sometimes then it could be kept at a
distance. Eagle and fox and dingo were among their
enemies, but the eagle dared not stoop to the water and
fox and wild dog could be avoided by keeping to open
water on the wide lakes. Man was their worst foe. With
him stalked Terror. His presence was Threat.
On Singing Lake Man drifted among the swans on
a reed-piled, camouflaged boat, and he could have killed
and taken with ease. He chanced, however, to be a lover
and a student of birds, armed only with field glasses and


a notebook. His only offence was to snare a bird from the
water and examine and release it —when it rose splashing
at once in wake of its fellows, who were already on the
wing, startled into flight by this unlooked-for piece of
interference with their quiet.
At Idle Water, Man came again with guns; but the
birds were now gunshy, and when instinct warned them
of his presence, and this was before he used his guns, they
flew to farther waters.
At Winter Billabong, Man defeated them with his
cunning. Here was a lovely sheet of water adorned in parts
with red and white lotus lilies. Several small islets of reeds
dotted the lake. Around the shores were white paper-
barks with drooping silver-green foliage, and sturdy river-
gums and friendly coolibah trees. The country surround-
ing was wild and lonely. There lived the Blackfellow, the
Man of the wild, born a hunter and a hunter by nature like
his fathers for generations before him. He stole in the
night to the lake and swam silently out pushing a bunch
of scrub and reeds before him. Under cover of this
material, which he kept bunched about his head, he
reached in the dark to the neck of a bird as it paddled
slowly near him—and a short beat of wings and a stifled
swan’s cry and a turmoil of water, soon stilling, told of his
success.
Swift panic sent the remaining birds into the sky,
there to circle and, not understanding, to slant down again


to the water. 1 hey alighted far from the strange bunch of
floating weed by which they had been betrayed; yet other
bunches floated where they now swam.
The swans were at the limit of their range inland, on
Winter Billabong, and the time approached when they
must turn southward. The sun by day was warming.
There was a hint of dryness in the air. The rains were done
and the country lakes beginning to dry. Along the far-
away southern coasts were permanent waters, wide
lagoons and wide rivers, salt water and cool winds. Out
of the south came mysterious voices silently calling the
birds back. The far north called them never; for black
swans inhabit only the southern half of Australia.
The birds began to grow restless, to beat about on
the water and to fly more often under the stars. Not only
must they soon depart because the lakes were drying up,
but also because soon they must moult. Moulting, they
would lose for a time their flight feathers and be water
bound. In that time they needed safe waters where they
would be safe from harm, waters like the lonely coastal
lagoons and inlets, and like the rivers and lakes of parks
and gardens where men were at all times friendly.
In that place of friendship where Cheno was born,
on a cool sunny day the Poet sat with Redgold on the
green beside the lake. Swans were gathered near him,
many on the water and a few on the lawns. It was August,
and the Poet was recalling Kendall’s pretty tribute to the
month which marks the southern spring


WW^
“She is the fair-haired August, Ere she leaves,
She brings the woodbine blossom round the eaves,
And where the bitter barbs of frost have been
She makes a beauty with her gold and green.”
Redgold said: “That is nice. I can see golden wattle
bloom across the lawns.” She watched the swans in
silence for a minute or two, then said: “I wonder where
Cheno is and if he will ever come back.”
The Poet did not answer for a moment. He looked
gravely over the water. Presently he observed: “When
swans migrate they go to live dangerously. Some of the
birds which went away with Cheno will never return.”
“How should you know that?” asked the girl
“The Bird Man told me so. Cheno and his people
visited Lolo Lake and one bird was shot there. A ring
was recovered from its leg and passed to a farmer friend


of the Bird Man’s, and he sent it down to the Bird Man.
They went on to Singing Lake, where another bird-
watcher saw them and made report to the Bird Man. Then
they reached Winter Billabong. A blackfellow killed two
birds there and a ring from one reached a station-owner
who was another of the Bird Man’s friends.”
Redgold was silent, stifling the fear she had that
Cheno might never return from the far wild places. She
scarce heard the Poet remarking on the romance of the
gipsy-like wanderings of the black swans.
Along the farther bank the Boatboy appeared, pol-
ing his little boat. He had just come from beyond the
reedbeds. Redgold smiled as she noticed him. The Boat-
boy had always said “Cheno will come back.”
The girl saw that a company of swans was following
the boat. The boy was throwing small handfuls of green
food and of meal to the birds as he poled along.
A fresh breeze rippled the lake and the trees rustled
lightly laughing. Gulls tilted into the breeze and turned
and floated wide-winged down to the lawn. The robin
sang his pretty love song. Redgold watched a swan part
from the company following the little boat and begin
to swim towards her.
How lovely it looked, she thought, when the bird
was half-way across and alone on the wide water, sailing
forward and making two thin waves ripple and widen


away behind it. As it drew nearer she thought there was
something familiar about this swan. Then with interest
suddenly alive she saw that the bird was swimming dir-
ectly to her like a bird that knows and recognises a friend.
She held her breath for a moment when the swan
ceased to swim and posed there with wings half-lifted and
neck high-arched, his red bill gleaming as he bowed and
held it close to his neck. Then her face lit and she clapped
her hands, crying: “Why it is Cheno, Cheno come home.”
The Poet clapped his hands, too. If he had had a
hat upon his head, he would have raised it in greeting.
And there and then he began to make up another poem.
Redgold stood up and waved to the Boatboy who, on
the farther side of the lake, lifted and waved his pole, as
much as to say: “I told you so!” Then she called to Cheno
to come ashore.


Chapter 6.
THE FINDING OF TEWIL.
This was the Poet’s new poem:
THE GIPSY SWAN
Hail to thee, gipsy swan!
Welcome home again!
Ventures brave, gallant bird,
Have you left behind:
Peace is here, ’tis my wmrd,
Word of all my kind.
Vagabond of all the wasteland,
Nomad of the starry sky,
Charmer of the lonely inland,
Pools where lotus lilies sigh;
Voyager beyond the mountains,
Rider on the long skyways,
Gifts you brought to far-laid fountains
Lit by sun and moonshine rays.
Wanderer by dusk and moonlight,
Child of driven mood and wing,
Sight of you warms like a noonbright
Glow, so that I glowing sing!
Cheno stayed on the river and the lake through the
spring and on into summer months. During that time the
Boatboy watched over him; the Poet sang often to him;
and Redgold grew to love him more and more. Also dur-
ing this time, his parents nested again and brought off a
family of six young.
When the new cygnets were brought to the lake,
Cheno decided that he was now grown-up and could seek
his own adventures. Che and Chenop were of the same
mind.


Here for your leisure
Living’s a pleasure. [Page 50]


"
-
-
■
■ r ' v j" ■ : '
_


Just before Christmas most of the birds began to
moult. Cheno was one of them; and whilst he lost his
flight feathers and waited for new ones to grow, he did
not leave the water except occasionally to visit the reed-
beds. He became shy of people on the lawns and would
not climb out among them, though when the Boatboy
took Redgold on the water in his little boat he readily took
food from her hand.
The summer lengthened. Cheno donned his new coat
and became as handsome a bird as was on the river. Now
well-grown and strong, he was ready to make his own
way in the world and he began to look forward to new
adventures. Regularly he flew by night to exercise his


wings and to keep his body At, for he knew that he would
need good health and strength when he set out on the long
night trails.
A number of the birds gathered together to migrate
early this season. Cheno joined them, waiting not for his
parents or for Che and Chenop.
This flock flew north by west over long, long miles,
and then due west. In the northern inland there would be
drought this year and the lakes there would remain drv.
The swans knew this before the winter season dawned.
How they knew, none can tell. Perhaps the dry blowing
winds of autumn carried word. Perhaps the mysterious
Mother Nature, who is the mother of us all, filled the
winds with silent messages that only wild creatures could
understand, telling them where in the world this coming
winter there would be food and water.
All through the night flew Cheno and his fellow
travellers, high over the coast, high under the stars. To
marsh and swamp and river estuary they passed by night;
and by day they foraged in these places and mingled with
kinsfolk come down from other skyways.
Cheno’s flight this year was recorded, as it was last
year, by a number of people. But not by the same people
and not by any like them. Only the wildfolk gathered
news of his movements and the Bird Man did not hear
from them. But the Poet did (so he said) and he turned
what he heard into song.


At Kreening Lake, which was four hundred miles
from Cheno’s starting point, Pintail, who was a pretty
little snipe, heard the swans honking in the grey of day-
break, and he watched them splash down in line to the
water. He flew low in the dawnlight over that waste of
salt wave, and he was concerned to see Cheno looking
blown and tired.
“Cheno,” he scolded, “you shouldn’t try to do so much
at once. Whatever are you thinking of? Why did your mother
let you out so soon?” And to himself he murmured:
“I wonder that so big a bird
Should fly so long and far.
He’d surely get hysteria
If I asked him to Siberia!”
Pintail flew west a couple of hundred miles that
night and flicked down to Twinkling Lagoon. There he


advised a darter to expect Cheno in a week or two, then
caught an easterly wind back to where he had come from.
The darter welcomed Cheno from a deep seat in the
lagoon. He sat so low, in fact, that only his snake-like
head and neck showed above water. Because of the way
he sat in the water twisting and craning his neck, he was
sometimes called “snake-bird.” What an odd name! But
then, what an odd bird!
“I don’t mind if you come and go,
So long as you leave me be,”
The Darter said, and slid below,
To swim underneath, you see.
At Meeting Rivers, seven hundred miles along to the
west, a royal white spoonbill gave the swan a gay wel-
come —
“So glad you are here,” he said with his spoon,
Let’s talk of dresses now.
To the tune which the winds and waters croon
We’ll make display, and how!”
A pretty sight they made, too, when this big and
beautiful white bird waded beside the black swans on the
sunny edge of the water. Only wild creatures were there
to see; but to be sure that had an eye for beauty, being
themselves beautiful, and so they enjoyed the display.
After resting and feeding and making themselves
strong again, up went the swans for a farther flight and
sang away through the stars to the west. And by Spark-
ling Pool the plover of the night raised his voice as Cheno
skimmed the water—


“Wee-ee-le-o-10-ho-10-ho!
I cry my heart will break.
Out of the night you come and lo!
I cry my heart awake!”
At Nornalup Inlet, twelve hundred miles along, and
the westernmost point of the flight, it was Tewil who
greeted Cheno. And Tewil was a lady swan beautiful no
less and no more than Cheno, and she gave him good
meeting not with words of song but with a singing heart.
It was April when Cheno reached this loveliest inlet
of the south-western coast. Time of sunshine and showers
of cold winds and waving water. Here Cheno stayed
awhile to rest and feed. And here, gliding over green and
golden reflections of great grand timber trees that tow-
ered by the water’s edge, here Cheno and Tewil fell in
love.
Mateship with them was for all time. They worked
northward together, following starbeam and moonpath to
bay and swamp and to the quieter reaches of the Vasse
and the Serpentine rivers, and in early June dipped down
one waking day to circle and twine over the long wide
reaches of the Swan River.
THE SWAN RIVER
‘‘Was ever a lovelier place in the world?”
Asked a pelican in the dawn.
“Why, beauty was never as nicely unfurled,
Nor ever as prettily worn,
As here where the Mother of all of us planned
Heart’s ease for heart’s demand.


Here’s sunshine and rain,
Hill, land and plain,
Blue water as wide as a sea.
Here for your leisure
Living’s a pleasure.
Do linger awhile then with me!”
That sounded very nice, coming from old Leca the
pelican. But he was getting on in years and not so fond
of roaming as in his younger days. Also, he lived on fish,
and there was plenty of food for him in the river. The
swans, however, were vegetarians and their food was not
plentiful in the river—though it used to be, in the times
before Man built his jetties and his walls and houses along
the riverside, and before he began to bridge the river and
dredge channels, and before he began to use it for his
yacht races, and for boating and swimming and crabbing
and prawning—which, after all, is what a nice river like
the Swan River is meant for, just as much as it is meant
to be a home for swans and pelicans, and gulls and cormo-
rants, and porpoises, and mermaids and mariners and
ships and all the other people and things that go down to
the sea.
Moreover, June brought frosty nights as well as
sunny days and Cheno was a lusty } r outh who must be rest-
less and energetic during the cool season.
For a week or more he lived and played with Tewil
along the narrower, quieter reaches of the river up above
the Causeway, and around by the power house and the
racecourse. There he found food; and there he saw green


banks and trees and occasional boatmen, and heard trains
and trams and aeroplanes, and saw lights by night glow-
ing brightly golden against the sky. And perhaps he was
reminded of home and thought that one day before long
he must settle down to building a home, and that it would
be nice to introduce Tewil to the Boatboy and to Redgold
and the Poet.
One night as the moon rose he lifted with Tewil from
the water and, circling, dipped farewell to the city of the
Swan. Then making lover’s music, they flew into the
moonmist over the hills and far into the south-east.


Chapter 7.
CHENO COMES HOME.
By the lake of the swans the Boatboy and the Poet
and Redgold watched for the coming of Cheno. During
July and August they heard not a word of the young
swan, but the Poet counted him well lost. “I expect he has
fallen in love,” said he when the girl questioned him as to
Cheno’s likely whereabouts. ‘‘He’ll be wandering in
lovers’ lane with his lady.”
‘‘Oh, I hope so!” laughed Redgold. “Perhaps he will
bring his love to the river.”
July blew itself away with raw wind and rain and
August smiled again with green and gold. And toward
the end of this month the Poet heard a swallow twitter-
ing—
“A wind from the west bloweth music to me,
Singing a song of love.
It tells of a lovelight which always will be
Bright as the sun above;
Like mine, and like thine (for it should be so),
No light of a seasonal whim:
But kindled to glow, and for life to glow,
A lovelight no cloud may dim.”
The Poet listened carefully to the singing swallow,
and he believed he was being told that Cheno was not
far away. So in the morning early he brought Redgold to
the lawns to wait for the swan. They watched the Boat-


'i
X^AVv"
A Wedding of the Swans. [Page 53]


'
' ' ‘ ■ : ; V f - • j, :
- ' . 3 i ' I ■ /■ ' I |
. I
.
■i
V ■■■
■ \
■
■
♦


boy go along to the reedbeds and come back poling his
little boat, with a company of black swans trailing after
him.
“There’s Cheno!’’ whispered Redgold as she watched
one bird break away from the flock and begin to swim
toward her.
After a moment or two the Poet murmured: “And
if I mistake me not, there’s his love.’’ For another swan
left the company to follow Cheno. It was Tewil.
Cheno had come far through nights that were
sometimes windy and starless, and he was tired and tat-
tered and worn. But he posed at his best there on the
still bright water, lifting his white wings and arching his
neck and catching the sunlight with his red bill, and pad-
dling to and fro. But he would not come ashore this morn-
ing; and his human friends understood that he made his
bow simply to greet them and to present his mate. So the
girl and the Poet did not press him to come to land, but
talked softly to him where he swam.
Redgold looked upon Tewil and then back to Cheno
and whispered: “She’s lovely, Cheno! She will make a
good mate. Invite me to the wedding!’’ And she laughed.
The Poet smiled. “What an imagination you have!’’
he exclaimed. “Come to think of it, a wedding of the
swans would make a pretty pantpmine. Perhaps we shall
see one some day. You shall have one of the best seats.’’


“And wear my party frock!” Redgold turned a
pirouette on the lawn.
“And sing a love song!” cried the Poet. “For Cheno!
For me!”
Redgold caught her breath; then “No,” she laughed.
“For the Boatboy!”
Trilled a cricket in the grass: “Cheno can sing quite
well for himself. Listen —
SWAN SONG
“Charmed you should be with my lover and me;
Certainly charmed by ourselves we shall be!
We have discovered, ’tis sure, in each other
Something that’s lacking in sister and brother,
Hence we perform in the way that you see—
Pridefully swimming,
Gracefully trimming
Our manners so they’ll with good circles agree !”
Said Redgold, ignoring the cricket. “They are a
pair of ragamuffins at the moment! Not really present-
able.”
The cricket sniffed. “When next you come,” chirped he,
“Cheno will have a good brush down and Tewil wave her
hair!”
Sure enough, a few days later the Poet and the girl
found both birds well groomed adornments of the lake;
and as they swayed gently on water rippled by wind they
were lovely to see, afloat on reflections of themselves,
each oval dark body, curving neck and red beak a waver-
ing shadow in the water.


As day succeeded day Cheno and Tewil began to
stay away more often from the lawn banks. Redgold
missed them some days and asked the Boatboy where
they might be; and so she learned that they were nesting.
Cheno knew a little sanctuary along the reedbanks,
a shallow opening giving on to a strip of soft earth. He
led Tewil ashore there one day and into the higher reeds.
There they made an inspection; and there they trod down
a patch of reeds to form a building site. And then, over a
week or more, they busied themselves, gathering sticks
and reeds and pieces of scrub and vegetation from the
river, and all this material they built into the shape of a
nest on the site they had chosen. When they were satisfied
with this, they collected small leaves and wisps of bark
and grass roots, and these they spread inside the nest for
a lining. Lastly they plucked a few of their feathers and
some down from their breasts, with which they turned
the nest into a cosy couch.
All this was done in-between-times as they fed and
played. It was done when the sun was shining, when the
winds and the leaves danced, when birds sang and when
gardens charmed with what the poet Shelley wrote about
so brightly—
“The light and smell divine
Of all flowers that breathe and shine.”
Soon after the nest was finished, it chanced that Red-
gold declared that she wanted to pay a call on Cheno. The
Poet said at once that what she wanted she must have;


and he called for the Boatboy; and the Boatboy poled
them down the river in his little boat, and into the little
sanctuary, and led them to the nest.
Redgold gave a little cry of delight when she looked
down on four greeny-white eggs, stained with brown, that
were nestled there. She knelt beside them. The man and
the boy looked in silence. The girl became aware that
there was quiet all around. She looked up and about,
wondering. A magpie in a treetop had ceased his carol,
and now seemed sharply eyeing the girl. A crow standing
still in another tree looked darkly down. A reed-warbler
flitted up to a reed-stem overlooking the nest and gave
Redgold a startled look, and flitted away. A kingfisher
stared solemnly from a tree-branch swung over the water.
Cheno and Tewil paddled slowly and unhappily in the
sanctuary. And the wind seemed holding its breath.
Redgold stood up, whispering. “I don’t think we
should have come. We don’t belong here. Let us go!”


They went quietly away. And the magpie sang, and
the kingfisher opened his blue wings, and the wind breath-
ed again!
Cheno and Tewil were not disturbed again, and when
the clutch of eggs had been increased to five they settled
down to brooding. For a month and a day they shared
this task, Tewil taking her turn most often by day, Cheno
most often by night.
Cheno then was able in his time of feeding to pay
visits to the lawnbanks. So he kept up his friendship with
the Poet and with Redgold, from whom he received tit-
bits of food and gifts of talk and laughter which, though
he did not understand them, he liked all the same. Per-
haps this talk and laughter helped to make him feel that
when in good time he should bring his first family to the
river, there would be friends waiting there to receive
them.
The Boatboy kept watch on the nest; and he alone
Cheno saw occasionally whilst brooding but was never
troubled by him. The Boatboy came like a shadow among
the shadows and as quietly, went away. Sometimes he
left food nearby. Night by night he made a round of the
traps which he set along the reedbanks, lest any water-
rats should come that way. To Cheno the Boatboy was as
much a part of the river as the steamboat and the bridges.
Like Orax and the dabchicks, and Ofo and the night
heron, and like himself the Boatboy belonged to the river.


All through this month and a day of brooding the
Poet kept count of the days and nights. And in due time,
and it was in the twilight time, he went to pay a private
call on Cheno. He crossed the river in the Boatboy’s boat
and went quietly and alone to the nest. The pale moon
was just rising and there were whispers in the dusk, and
the shadows were drowsy.
In that hour Cheno was listening to a chip-chip-chip-
ping beneath his breast, and he was sitting very quiet and
close. He did not move when he saw the Poet loom close
by above the tops of the reeds, where the sky was rosy
in the fading light.
The Poet looked down on the dark form sitting so
close in the nest, which was shadowy in the ground
shadows, and as he looked he began to imagine that if
Cheno could have spoken the bird would have said: “I
have a secret tonight!”
After a moment or two more, the Poet nodded his
head in a knowing way; and then he moved quietly back
into the moonmist and the half-light and whispered joy-
ous thoughts to the slow-beating wings of the night.
‘‘Mateship is happiness!
‘‘lt is joy!
It is life!”


And it seemed that the wings of the night recalled
him the words of an old Chinese poet, answering with —
“only the far-drawn sigh
Of wary voices whispering farewell.”
Whispering . . . Farewell!




CHENO — I1IH I
\-"l 1 3 1508 02085133 8
What the Story is About
Cheno the Black Swan began his
life chip-chip-chipping at an egg.
In his childhood he made friends
with the Boatboy, who gave him
food; with the Poet, who sang him
songs; and with Redgold, who loved
~him.
Peta the Dragonfly liked him too.
Said Peta when Cheno was coming:
“Stay near me and watch the pro-
cession go by. It’s exciting!”
Cheno grew up to wander far and
wide by starway and moonpath,
from lake to lagoon and inlet and
river. He had many adventures. And
he met Tewil and his life became
a love story.
This is a story of birds and the
charm of outdoor places, written for
children of all ages.


)
