

CHEVROLET
MAPLE LEAF
TRUCKS
Owner Wanual


Chevrolet
“Light Duty”
Series 1420
Chevrolet
Series 1100
Maple Leaf
Series 1600
WHEELBASE— Inches
125,1 in.
137 in. and 161 in.
161 in., 179 in. & 197 in.
ENGINE—
Number of Cylinders
6
6
6
Bore
3i in.
31 in.
3i'k in.
Stroke
33 in.
33 in.
3IS in.
Piston Displacement ...
216.5 cu, in.
216.5 cu, in.
235.5 cu. in.
Compression Ratio
6.6 to 1
6.6 to 1
6.7 to 1
Horsepower (R.A.C. or S.A.E. Rating)
29.4
29.4
30.4
Horsepower (Actual)
90
90
92
Torque in Foot Pounds (Maximum) ...
174 at 1200-2000 R.P.M.
174 at 1200-2000 R.P.M.
192 at 1000-1900 R.P.M.
CAPACITIES—
Fuel Tank
13-1/3 Gallons
141 Gallons
141 Gallons
Cooling System
12 1 Quarts
121 Quarts
141 Quarts
Gear Box
5 Pints
5 Pints
43 Pints
, Rear Axle
5 Pints
9 Pints
7i Pts. (2 Speed 103 Pts.)
Engine Oil Capacity —Refill
41 Quarts
4.1 Quarts
41 Quarts
GEAR BOX RATIOS—
First (Low)
7.06 to 1
7.06 to 1
7.06 to 1
Second
3.58 to 1
3.58 to 1
3.58 to 1
Third
1.71 to 1
1.71 to 1
1.71 to 1
Fourth
Direct
Direct
Direct
Reverse
6.78 to 1
6.78 to 1
6.78 to 1
REAR AXLE— Ratio
4.57 to 1
5.43 to 1 (30 Cwt.)
6.17 to 1 (2 and 3 Ton)
7.16 to 1
2 Speed Axle
6.33 to 1 High
8.81 to 1 Low
IDENTIFICATION NUMBERS
The engine number is stamped on a boss located on the right hand side of the engine, just to the rear of the ignition distributor,
and also on plate on dash panel.
The vehicle chassis number is stamped on the side member behind the left front wheel and also on plate on dash panel.
The electrical identification numbers are found on each respective unit.
SPECIFICATIONS AND LICENCE DATA


Jruck Owner's manual
CHEVROLET
AND
MAPLE LEAF
In producing this Owner Manual it has been our aim to
give, in a simple and readable manner, the information
necessary for operation, care and general maintenance.
Repairs and overhauls are dealt with in the Chevrolet Work-
shop Manual, copies of which may be purchased through
your Chevrolet Dealer.
It is obviously wise, however, to entrust overhauls and
repairs to authorized Chevrolet Dealers, who not only pos-
sess the specialised equipment and technical knowledge
necessary to ensure skilled and efficient workmanship, but
are always ready to assist Chevrolet owners in every pos-
sible way.
Providing that conscientious attention is given to the
routine and general maintenance described in the following
pages, the parts will be protected from unnecessary wear,
the vehicle will function efficiently for longer periods and
fewer repairs and replacements will be necessary.
First Edition
ISSUED BY SERVICE DIVISION
July, 1949
GENERAL MOTORS-HOLDEN’S LTD.
Part No. 7376291


GENERAL INFORMATION
1. Pre-Delivery Conditioning
Before delivery the Dealer makes a final inspection of the vehicle
in accordance with forms supplied by General Motors-Holden’s Ltd. He
will see that the vehicle is properly adjusted and lubricated, that the
standard tools and equipment are with the vehicle and that the vehicle
as delivered to the Owner is prepared to give satisfactory performance
from the start.
2. Preventive Service
Contingent upon the owner making his vehicle available to the
Dealer from whom it was purchased, at about the specified mileages and
within the warranty period, the Dealer will perform without charge for
labour, the "1000 Mile” and "2000 Mile” inspections and adjustments
listed on Page 70 of this Manual.
3. Warranty Protection
The Owner enjoys the full protection of the Standard Warranty, a
statement of which appears on Page 71. There will be no charge to the
Owner for labour or material when parts are required because of defective
material or workmanship during the warranty period. This warranty pro-
tection shall not apply to any vehicle which has been subject to misuse,
negligence or accident.
4 . Technical Advice
At regular intervals of 1000 miles after the 2000 mile inspection, or
at any time he feels the vehicle is not performing properly, the Owner
should deliver his vehicle to the Dealer for inspection and expert advice.
Although these inspections are free of cost to the Owner, a charge will
be made for any work performed as a result of them at the prevailing rates.
You will find this
folder attached to
the Lighting Switch
of your new truck.
Be sure to read it
for your own
protection.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
SPECIFICATIONS AND LICENCE DATA ... Inside Front Cover
GENERAL INFORMATION ... ... 2
DRIVER'S OPERATING INFORMATION
Breaking-in Period 4
, Instruments and Controls ... ... 5-13
Gear Shifting ... ... . 10
Pre-starting Inspection ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Starting the Engine ... 14-15
Plot Weather Operation ... ... ... ... ... ... 15
Tyre Wear 20-22
Tyre Inflation '23
PERFORMANCE AND ECONOMY
Preventive Maintenance ... ... ... ... ... ... 16
Fuel Consumption 17
Oil Consumption 17-18
Overloading 18
BODY
Body Design and Overloading ... ... ... ... ... 19
LUBRICATION
Engine ... 24-27
Rear Axle and Gear Box ... 28
Universal Joints ... ... 28-29
Front Wheel Bearings 29-30
Rear Wheel Bearings ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
Chassis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
Body Lubrication 31
Lubrication Charts ... ... ... ... ... ... 32-37
CARE AND MAINTENANCE
Engine ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38-42
Ignition System ... ... ... 42-44
Engine Tune-up ... ... ... ... ... ... 44-45
Cooling System 45-46
Clutch 47
Rear Wheels ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 48
Front Axle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 48-49
Fronf Wheels and Bearings (Refer Front Axle) 49
Steering Gear 49
Brake System ... ... ... 50-52
Springs and Shackles 53-54
Electrical System ... ... ... ... 54-59
Tyre Changing ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 60-63
HINTS FOR LOCATING ROAD TROUBLES
Engine ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 64-68
Lights ... ... 68-69
General ... 69
1000 AND 2000 MILE INSPECTION AND ADJUSTMENT 70
MANUFACTURERS’ WARRANTY 71


Driver ’s Operating Information
BREAKING-IN PERIOD
It is best to limit the driving speeds during the early operation
of the truck to give the closely fitted parts time to break in
smoothly and acquire the necessary highly polished surfaces essen-
tial for satisfactory performance and long life.
It is suggested that you do not drive faster than the speeds
shown below, during the first 1000 miles.
Up to 500 miles, 30 500-1000 miles, 40 M.P.H.
Warm the engine at slower speeds as this allows all parts to
expand uniformly to operating clearances.
If the above precautions are observed for the first 1000 miles,
faster driving can then usually be resorted to for short distances.
However, continuous high speed driving should not be attempted
until the truck has covered 2000 miles.
The prudent owner who will exercise care during the initial
breaking-in period will be amply repaid in lower operating costs
and freedom from trouble. See Page 24 regarding the changing of
engine oil.
To be made properly, many of the adjustments on your truck
require the use of tools and equipment not readily available to
the truck owner. However, there may be occasions when the truck
will require some attention while out of reach of an authorised
Chevrolet service station. The adjustment suggestions in the latter
part of this manual are given to help the owner in these circum-
stances and the instructions should be considered only as emerg-
ency measures. After they are made, such adjustments should be
checked by an authorised Chevrolet service station at the first op-
portunity. If the truck has received the regular inspections and
adjustments which are recommended in the section titled "Pre-
ventive Maintenance,” Page 16, it is unlikely that the owner or
driver will ever he called upon to make emergency adjustments
himself.


INSTRUMENTS AND CONTROLS
The location of the instruments and controls of the Chevrolet
truck are illustrated below. Their use and functions are described
on the following pages.
1. Glove Compartment Lock.
2. Windscreen Wiper Control.
3. Ash Tray.
4. Choke Knob.
5. Speedometer.
7. Instrument Group.
7. Lighting Switch.
8. Horn Button.
9. Door Inside Handle.
10. Window Regulator Handle.
11. Starter Button.
12. Side Cowl Ventilator Knob.
13. Throttle Knob.
14. Ignition Switch.
15. Brake Pedal.
16. Accelerator Pedal.
17. Dimmer Switch.
18. Hand Brake.
19. Gear Shift Lever.
20. Clutch Pedal.
21. Cowl Ventilator Knob.
22. Glove Compartment Door.


Instrument Group
The type, location and operation of instruments vary on dif-
ferent models and makes of vehicle; therefore, regardless of the
experience an owner or driver may have had it is advisable to
familiarize one’s self with the instruments and their use before
driving this new truck.
Fuel Gauge —The electrically operated fuel gauge is at the
upper left side of the instrument group. It is wired through the
ignition switch; therefore, it indicates the amount of fuel in the
tank only when the ignition
switch is turned on.
Temperature Indicator
—The water temperature indica-
tor is at the lower left side of the
instrument group. It is, in effect,
a thermometer with the operating
bulb located in the water jacket
at the left rear corner of the
cylinder head. Normally this
thermometer will register be-
tween 140 and 180 degrees F.
when the engine is thoroughly
warmed up. The driver should
Instrument Group
watch this instrument closely as a quick rise in temperature usually
indicates trouble. Should the temperature rise above 200 degrees
F. the engine should be stopped and a check made for cause of
overheating (see "Engine Overheats,” Page 67).
NOTE: Do not remove the radiator cap when engine is excessively hot,
do not put water in a hot engine and do not run engine when indicator
is above 212°F.
Battery Charge Indicator —The indicator is the right upper
instrument in the group. This instrument indicates the flow of
current to and from the battery, except the current taken by the
starting motor. When the engine is turned off or idling and any
of the electrical equipment is in use, it is natural for the indicator
to show discharge ( —D). When the engine is running at medium
speed and most of the electrical equipment is turned off the
indicator should show a slight charge (+C), depending on the
state of charge of the battery. Should the indicator show discharge


( —D) when the truck is being driven at medium speed, trouble is
indicated in the charging system and the battery will soon become
discharged.
Oil Pressure Gauge —This instrument is in the lower right
side of the instrument group (see Page 6) . The oil pressure gauge
indicates whether or not the oil pump is working, but does not
indicate the amount of oil in the crankcase.
The pressure gauge reading is controlled by the engine speed
and the oil being used. A low reading is normal at idling speeds
with a warm engine and light oil; however, as the engine speed
is increased the hand should move over near the "15” mark. In
cold weather the hand may move over to the "30” mark at com-
paratively low engine speeds.
NOTE: Do not accelerate the
engine excessively until the oil
is sufficiently warm to permit a
lower pressure. If the gauge
does not show any pressure,
stop the engine immediately
and determine the cause.
Speedometer —The speedo-
meter is located to the left of
the instrument group. As the
vehicle is driven, the hand
moves around the dial indicat-
ing the speed of the vehicle.
The figures visible through the
Speedometer
opening near the centre of the speedometer indicate the total
mileage the truck has been driven. This part of the speedometer
is known as the odometer.
Switches
Ignition Switch —The ignition switch is the two position on-off
type and must have the key in the lock to turn the switch "on.”
The key cannot be removed if the switch is in the "on” position.
The ignition switch is illuminated by a light behind the instrument
panel for greater convenience in night driving.


Lighting Switch —The light-
ing switch, located to the right
of the instrument group, con-
trols the instrument lamps,
headlamps, parking lamps and
tail lamp.* When this switch is
pulled out to the first "on” posi-
tion the parking lamps, clear-
ance lamps and tail lamp are
lighted.* When the switch is
pulled out to the last position
the headlamps, clearance lamps
and tail lamp are lighted.* Cur-
Lighting Switch
rent for the lighting circuits passes through a thermal circuit
breaker located on the lighting switch behind the instrument
panel. In case all lights fail to operate check for trouble at the
thermal circuit breaker. The instrument lights can be dimmed or
turned off by turning the light switch button clockwise.
Dimmer Switch —The dimmer switch located on the floorboard
is used to switch the headlamp beam from "high” to "low” or
"low” to "high.” Each time the switch is depressed the light beam
is reversed. A headlamp beam indicator is located between the
0 and 80 at the bottom of speedometer. When the lights are on
upper beam a red light is visible through the indicator opening.
Avoid use of upper beam when meeting other vehicles on the
highway or in city traffic.
Horn Button —The horn button is conveniently located at the
centre of the steering wheel.
Controls
Hand Throttle Control —The throttle control knob is located
on the instrument panel directly above the ignition switch. Pulling
out on the control knob sets the carburettor to provide a uniform
engine speed above the idle setting. It is generally advisable to
pull the hand throttle control out slightly when starting the
engine, especially if the engine has a tendency to stall immediately
after starting.
* Applies to New South Wales and South Australia only. A separate tail
light switch is provided in all other States.


Choke Control —The carburettor choke control knob is located
directly above the hand throttle control knob. The purpose of this
control is to close (or partly close) the carburettor choke valve
restricting the air intake and producing a richer fuel mixture for
starting.
When the engine is warm it should not be necessary to use
the choke when starting. When it is necessary to use the choke for
starting, it should be pushed part way in as soon as the engine
starts and all the way in as soon as the engine will run smoothly
without its use.
CAUTION: Excessive use of the choke will provide a fuel mixture too
rich to burn. Some of this unburned fuel will leak past the pistons and
dilute the engine oil and result in improper lubrication, excessive engine
wear and poor performance.
Starter Button —The starter button is located on the instru-
ment panel convenient to the driver. The starting motor draws
considerable current from the battery; therefore, it should not be
operated for more than 15 seconds at a time. If the engine does
not start, locate the cause and correct it before the battery is run
down (Page 64).
CAUTION: The starter button must be released as soon as the engine
starts and should never be depressed when the engine is running or
serious damage may result.
Accelerator Pedal —The accelerator pedal, located to the right
of the brake pedal, is used to open and close the carburettor
throttle valve. The driver rests his right foot on this pedal and, by
varying the pressure applied, opens the carburettor throttle valve
the correct amount to obtain the desired engine or vehicle speed.
Clutch Pedal —The clutch pedal is conveniently located for
use by the driver’s left foot. It is used to engage and disengage
the clutch, thereby connecting the engine to or disconnecting it
from the gear box and drive line to rear wheels.
The clutch pedal should
have | to 1 in. free travel; if less
than in. adjust free travel (see
"Clutch Pedal Adjustment’’).
NOTE: Never drive with the foot
resting on the clutch pedal as this
produces undue wear on the throw-
out bearing and other parts.
Clutch and Brake Pedals


Brake Pedal —The brake pedal is located to the right of clutch
pedal. Depressing this pedal applies the hydraulic service brakes
at all four wheels in proportion to pressure applied on pedal.
Hand Brake Lever —The hand brake lever extends up through
the floor from the right hand side of the gear box with the grip just
below the instrument panel. Pulling this lever back applies the rear
wheel brakes by means of mech-
anical linkage entirely indepen-
dent of the hydraulic system. To
release brakes, grip the two sec-
tions of the handle and pull
lever back slightly, then move
it forward.
Gear Shift Lever — By use
of the gear shift lever the trans-
mission gears are correctly
meshed to transmit power to the
rear wheels in proper ratio to
the work necessary under vari-
, . . ~ .
OUS driving conditions.
Four-Speed Gear Box Shifting
Diagram
The lever positions corresponding to the different gear ratios
for the 4-speed transmission are shown in diagram.
To shift into reverse, disen-
gage the clutch, move the lever
to the left against the spring
tension as far as it will go and
pull it back into reverse posi-
tion.
Side Cowl Ventilator Con-
trol Knob This knob ex-
tends through each side cowl
trim pad just below the instru-
ment panel. Pushing the knob
forward opens the ventilator
and pulling the knob back
closes the ventilator.
Cowl Side Ventilator Control Knob


Ash Tray —A convenient ash
tray is located in the instrument
panel to the right of the pack-
age compartment. The tray is
opened or closed by pulling
back or pushing forward on the
handle.
Instrument Panel Com-
partment Lock —The door
to the convenient package com-
partment at the left end of in-
strument panel is controlled by
a lock above the compartment.
When this is unlocked, depress-
ing the lock cylinder releases
the latch and the door opens.
When the door is locked the
cylinder cannot be depressed.
The key used for the ignition
switch is used to lock and un-
lock the package compartment.
Ash Tray
Package Compartment Lock
Keys —Two separate keys are furnished with each truck. One
which is fitted with a special Tenite cover, is used for locking and
unlocking the Ignition and the Package compartment. The other
is used for the outside door lock.
Door Locks —Your Chevrolet truck is equipped with theft-resist-
ing door locks which provide a means of locking the cab when
the truck is to be left unattended and a means of locking it from
the inside.
The left door lock cylinder is located in the door below the
door handle. To lock the left door, insert key in lock and turn key
clockwise as far as it will go and back to vertical position to re-
move key. To unlock the door, insert key in lock and turn key
counterclockwise as far as it will go and back to vertical position
to remove key.


To lock the doors
from the inside, push
down the small control
button on the window
moulding of each door.
This disconnects the out-
side door handles so that
they cannot be used to
open the doors.
Without the use of a
key, all doors can be lock-
Control Button
ed from the outside by pushing the control button down after the
door has been opened. Then close the door while holding the
outside door handle all the way down. Unless the outside door
handle is held in this position, the inside lock control button will
return to its unlocked position.
CAUTION: Be careful not to leave the key inside the truck when using
this method of locking, as the only means of unlocking the door from
the outside is with a key.
Window Regulators —The door windows are opened and
closed by turning the window regulator handles located near the
front upper corner of each door inner panel.
Windscreen Wiper —The windscreen wiper motors are
mounted under the instrument panel and are vacuum operated
from the engine. The control levers protrude through the top of
the instrument panel and are used to turn the wiper "on” or
"off.” Moving the lever to the right turns the wiper on and moving
it to the left decreases wiper speed or turns it off completely.
Rear View Mirror —An adjustable rear view mirror is mounted
on the right hand side of the cowl top panel.
Adjustable Seat —The seat may be adjusted to any one of.
three fixed positions.
Engine Hood Lock and Safety Catch— The Engine Hood
is of the "alligator jaw” type and is held closed by a lock at the
front. This lock can be released by reaching in below the upper
grille bar in line with the left end of name plate and pulling the
lever forward.


Engine Hood Lock Release
The safety catch can then be
released by reaching under the
nose of engine hood and pulling
forward and up on the catch
release.
The engine hood can then
be pushed up to the open posi-
tion.. The spring loaded engine
hood support will assist in rais-
ing the engine hood and hold it
open.
Engine Hood Safety Catch Release
To close the engine hood, lower it to the safety latch position
and then push down on the nose of engine hood to lock it.
PRE-STARTING INSPECTION
The following inspections are not necessary each time a vehicle
is started providing driver has recently driven the vehicle and is
certain that attention is not required.
1. Raise the engine hood, remove the oil dipper stick from
right side of crankcase just back of distributor, wipe oil from rod
with clean cloth and replace. Remove dipper stick and note level


of oil. If down to the "add oil” mark, oil should be added. See
"Maintaining Oil Level” (Page 25). Install dipper stick.
2. Remove radiator cap and
check the level of coolant. If
coolant is down a quart or more,
water should be added.
3. Check to make sure the
tyres are properly inflated.
Under-inflated tyres wear rapid-
ly and are subject to road
damage.
4. Rear window, windscreen
and headlights should be clean-
ed to provide clear vision and
good lights.
Oil Dipper Stick
STARTING THE ENGINE
1. Place ignition key in switch and turn key clockwise to turn
on ignition.
2. Pull hand throttle out about | in. to provide an engine speed
just above "idle.” This is not always necessary in warm weather
or with a warm engine, especially if the carburettor is adjusted for
a fast idle.
3. Pull choke button out part or all the way depending on
climatic conditions. If the engine is warm or in summer weather
it is not generally necessary to use the choke at all. In extremely
cold weather the choke should be pulled all the way out.
4. Make sure the gear box shift lever is in neutral. Depress
the clutch pedal to relieve the load in the gear box.
5. Press starter button firmly and release when the engine
starts. If engine does not start in 15 seconds, release button and
check to see that the above operations have been completed.
6. As soon as engine starts, push choke button in part way and
adjust throttle for smooth idle.
7. Note oil gauge and battery indicator readings. The indicator
should show some charge unless engine is idling slowly. Oil gauge


WARNING!
Never start or run the engine in a closed garage. The
exhaust gases are highly dangerous. They contain
carbon-monoxide gas,, which is colourless, tasteless
and odourless —but nevertheless is a DEADLY
POISON! Keep cab ventilated at all times while
engine is running.
should show some pressure. In unusually cold weather the oil
gauge needle may go over nearly to 30. If so, run the engine just
above idling speed until the pressure drops to around 15 before
driving vehicle. The choke and throttle should be pushed in all
the way as soon as the engine is sufficiently warmed up.
HOT WEATHER OPERATION
Hot weather operation does not present many problems but
a little attention to the following items will pay dividends in
economy and convenience.
1. Check the radiator frequently as the rate of evaporation is
higher in hot weather.
2. Make sure the fan belt is in good condition and properly
adjusted.
3. Keep the radiator area free of insects and other things that
restrict air circulation.
4. Check the battery water level at seven day intervals.
5. Starting a cool engine in hot weather does not present a
problem but a hot engine in hot weather may easily be flooded.
If the carburettor becomes flooded proceed as follows: —
1. Turn on the ignition.
2. Pull the hand throttle all the way out.
3. Do not use choke or step on the accelerator.
4. Depress the starter pedal without depressing the accelerator.
5. When the engine starts release the starter but do not accelerate
the engine.
6. Regulate the hand throttle for the desired engine speed. If the
engine still does not start, look for trouble in the fuel pump
or the ignition system.


Mileage
Lubri-
cate
Chassis
•
Clean
Air
Cleaner
Change
Oil
t
Clean
Spark
Plugs
Cross
Change
Tires
Check
Shock
Ab-
sorbers
Tune
Engine
Complete
Inspec-
tion by
Dealer
Pack
Front
Wheel
Bearings
300
★
1000
★
*
2000
*
★
★
3000
★
*
★
★
4000
★
★
★
5000
★
★
★
★
★
6000
★
★
★
★
★
7000
★
Ar
8000
★
★
★
9000
★
*
★
★
10000
★
★
★
★
★
★
★
11000
★
★
12000
★
★
★
★
★
13000
★
*
14000
★
it
★
15000
★
*
★
★
★
★
★
PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE
The following table will indicate some of the things which
should be done at regular mileage intervals to ensure that you
receive the maximum, not only in performance, but in economy.
*For complete instructions, see Charts on Pages 32 to 37.
fFor complete recommendations on changing oil and proper grade of oil
to use, see Pages 24 to 27
sAlso crankcase ventilator and hydrovac air cleaners when used.


PERFORMANCE — ECONOMY
Fuel Consumption —Tests made on a number of trucks under
average driving conditions to determine the influence of speed
and driving habits on fuel consumption show some interesting
results.
The following data indicates how the normal economy of a
light truck giving 16.8 miles per Imperial gallon at 20 miles per
hour with a given load, will decrease with increased truck speeds.
The figures do not necessarily apply to your truck and are simply
used to exemplify the relationship between truck speeds and fuel
consumption.
The above results were obtained from tests run at constant
driving speeds without stops. The chief factors influencing fuel
consumption are: high speed, rapid acceleration, accelerating or
driving too long in low or intermediate gears when getting under
way, and too frequent changes of speed.
Oil Consumption —Oil consumption is another important item
in operating economy, which can be controlled to a considerable
extent by the truck driver.
Just as there is a definite relationship between truck speed and
fuel consumption, high speed driving will result in increased
consumption of engine oil.
The right grade of lubricating oil should always be used in the
engine. Remember that the trend is toward lighter oils rather than
the heavy-bodied oils formerly acceptable, because they are equally


High Speed Driving means increased oil consumption
efficient at average operating temperatures and more so when cold,
and for other reasons previously stated under "Engine Lub-
rication.”
Do not overfill the crankcase. Overfilling not only contributes
to excessive oil consumption, but it may cause air bubbles to be
formed in the oil, which may tend to prevent the lubricant from
reaching the bearings in sufficient quantities.
Overloading —Aside from the risks involved in this practice,
and its effect of shortening the life of all parts of the truck when
carried to extreme, overloading has an unfavourable effect on
both fuel and oil economy as well as on tyre life.


BODY
Body Design and Overloading —When the truck chassis
and body are purchased as a complete unit produced by General
Motors-Holden’s Ltd., the owner is assured of correct body design.
One of the most important factors in designing a body for any
truck chassis is that of correct weight distribution. This has an
important influence on the performance and long life of every part
of the truck.
Almost all unusual failures or instances of excessive and pre-
mature wear of truck parts are traceable to improper weight dis-
tribution or overloading.
Your truck is built to carry a specified load, with which you
are familiar, and it will do that job well. Chevrolet trucks are
available over a wide range of capacities. The various wheelbases,
rear axle gear ratios, the dual rear axle option, the wide range of
tyre equipment from which to choose, make it possible more than
ever before —with the assistance and advice of your Chevrolet
dealer —to select a truck particularly suited to any special type
of service you may require. Regardless of the model truck you
have chosen and regardless of the equipment you have selected,
it has a very definite maximum capacity. This capacity should be
borne in mind by owner and operator throughout the life of the
vehicle. Do not expect it to do the work of a higher capacity truck
Diagram showing the effect of overloading which may temporarily stress
certain of the truck parts beyond the safety factor


and also expect it to perform properly and operate economically
over the long service period which is designed and built into it.
Overloading increases tyre wear, fuel consumption, oil consump-
tion, wear on all moving parts, causes engine overheating, loss of
power and inefficient operation in general.
Overloading carried to the extreme will result in costly engine
repairs, rapid tyre failures, breakage of such parts as springs, axle
housings, steering parts and other chassis assemblies, and general
rapid deterioration of the truck at low mileage.
It is a mistake to assume that an overload placed in the body
so that it falls principally on the rear springs and rear axle is
overloading these units only, as an overload, regardless of weight
distribution, affects every unit in the truck.
Load truck to capacity only —never overload. Overloading not
only voids your warranty, but may cause fractures in the metal
of some vital part, which may not result in immediate failure, but
may break at a later date.
Each unit of the truck is designed to carry a certain load and
obviously they will last longer and give better service if they are
not overloaded or abused.
When, therefore, the truck chassis only is purchased from
General Motors-Holden’s Ltd., and the body is supplied from an
outside source, the same careful attention should be given to the
element of body design that the manufacturers took into consider-
ation in building the chassis.
The proper distribution of the load through correct body
design is as important as keeping within the rated capacity of the
chassis.
TYRE WEAR
Chevrolet trucks are equipped with natural rubber tyres and
tubes. It is important that these tyres be properly inflated to assure
normal tyre life. See "Tyre Inflation Table.’’


It is important to have your truck equipped with tyres having
a rated capacity to handle the anticipated loads as overloading
tyres seriously affects their life.
Care. —Incorrect installation of tyres or wheels, or wheels and
tyre assemblies out of balance, and misalignment in the front end
of the truck, also reduce tyre life. Many of these factors are under
the control of the driver.
Irregular Tyre Wear. —A slight amount of irregular wear at
the outer segments of tyre treads is a normal condition and is
due to the difference in circumference between the centre of the
tyre tread and the outer edges. This causes the outer segments
to become slightly "saw-toothed” in appearance and should not
be confused with rapid wear at the outer edges caused by under-
inflation.
Under-inflation
Over-inflation
Improper Use of Brakes
This illustration shows the characteristic types of tyre tread wear associated
with three of the more common causes of excessive wear. Under-inflation causes
wear on the sides of the tread as shown by the arrows on the drawing at the
left, often accompanied by cupping and uneven wear. Over-inflation (centre)
tends to cause the rubber to wear off the centre of the tread. Improper use of
the brakes is generally shown when the tread is worn through to the carcass in
spots, or when there are well-defined flat spots on the tread caused by locked
wheels and sliding stops.
SPARE
Either under-inflation or im-
proper toe-in, or both,' will
exaggerate this "saw-toothed”
wear. If irregular wear extends
well toward the centre of the
tread, it may be due to other
conditions which should be cor-
rected. The rear tyres will nor-
mally wear faster than the front.


For single wheel trucks, with rear tyres the same size as the
front, normal tyre wear may be reduced to a minimum by "switch-
ing” wheels (without dismounting tyres) including "spare,” as
indicated in the accompanying illustration,- approximately every
3000 miles. This will prevent undue wear on any particular tyre
since each of them is used at each location equally. When the
"spare” tyre is not used until the other tyres are. worn badly, it
may appear to be new, but it will actually have deteriorated
through disuse.
When it comes time to make the fifth change, all of the tyres
will have run the same distance on each wheel. If tyres were
switched every 3000 miles, the truck will have gone 15,000 miles,
but mileage on each tyre will be only 12,000.
For trucks with rear tyres of a different size from the front,
the tyres should be switched from right front to left front and
right rear to left rear.
Under-Inflated dual tyres causing side
wall damage
The suggested method
of interchanging tyres on
trucks with dual rear
wheels is shown in illus-
tration. If the inside duals
show the most wear,
change wheels according
to solid lines. If the out-
side duals show most wear,
change according to the
broken lines. New tyres
should be installed on the
front wheels.
The value of dual rear tyres
is largely lost if through impro-
per inflation one is allowed to
carry more than its share of the
load.
Sudden application of brakes
and jerky “get-aways” cause ex-
cessive tyre wear. It is best to
make gradual stops and starts.
Tyre and Tube Balance. —Rubber balancing pads are often
used on factory-installed tubes to provide balance of tyre and rube


7.00—17 x 6 Ply ...
... Front, 40 lbs.
Rear, 45 lbs.
7.50—17 x 8 Ply
„ 45
lbs.
„ 55 lbs.
6.50—20 x 6 Ply
„ 45
lbs.
„ 50 lbs.
7.00—20 x 8 Ply
„ 45
lbs.
„ 55 lbs.
7.50—20 x 8 Ply
„ 45
lbs.
„ 60 lbs.
7.00—20 x 10 Ply
„ 55 lbs.
„ 70 lbs.
7.50—20 x 10 Ply
„ 55 lbs.
„ 75 lbs.
8.25—20 x 10 Ply
„ 45
lbs.
,, 65 lbs.
assembly. These pads, while similar in appearance, should not be
confused with the ordinary puncture patch.
To maintain the original tyre and tube balance, it is necessary
to re-install tubes in the same casings with the valve stem in line
with the balancing mark on the casing. Unbalanced front wheel
and tyre assemblies will cause a "whip” in the steering.
TYRE INFLATION
Tyre pressures should be checked at least once a week and
inflated according to the following table: —
Avoid underinflation to prevent pinched tubes, rim bruises,
excessive heat, and irregular or rapid wear.
Avoid overinflation to prevent tyre ruptures, hard riding,
irregular or rapid wear and reduction of skid resistance.
INFLATION TABLE
Tyre Rotation. —Proper inflation is the prime factor in satis-
factory tyre life; however, even better tyre service can be obtained
by rotating the tyres every 3000 to 5000 miles.
For Wheel and Tyre Changing, see Page 60.


LUBRICATION
Your Chevrolet dealer is equipped to render complete lubrica-
tion service. It is recommended that you take advantage of his
modern equipment and trained men.
Lubricants are much cheaper than repair bills, and should
be applied regularly if you are to secure a maximum of useful
service from your truck. It is, consequently, important that the
proper grade of lubricants be used in accordance with a definite
schedule.
In your selection of the proper brand of oil, it is desirable to
consider the reputation of the refiner or marketer. He is respon-
sible for the quality of his product and his reputation is the truck
owner’s best indication of quality.
ENGINE
Your use of the proper engine oil is of great importance
in obtaining maximum performance and satisfaction from your
truck.
It is imperative that the recommended light oils be used in
the engine during the "breaking-in” period.
Light oils assure a better "breaking-in” of the engine, as they
assure ease of starting; prompt flow of a sufficient quantity of
oil to the bearings and less friction between the moving parts.
The erroneous impression still exists in some localities that the
heavier the engine oil, the better it will lubricate. Exhaustive
research over a period of years has proved conclusively that the
use of a heavier grade of lubricating oil than recommended by
the manufacturer is definitely harmful to the engine for the fol-
lowing reasons:—
A. Heavier oils do not reach the working parts as quickly
when the engine is first started, and this may cause pre-
mature and rapid wear.
B. After starting, heavier oils do not lubricate closely fitted
parts as well as the light oils recommended, which also is
a factor in engine wear.
C. Heavier oils increase internal engine friction, thereby result-
ing in higher fuel consumption and Joss of power.


D. Heavier oils often contribute to hard starting during cold
weather.
E. The lighter oils now recommended aid the engine in run-
ning cooler during warm weather operation.
It is advisable to protect the engine in your truck by using at
all times the exact grade of specified lubricating oil.
S.A.E. Viscosity Numbers. —The viscosity of a lubricant is
simply a measure of its body or fluidity.
The S.A.E. viscosity numbers constitute a classification of lub-
ricants in terms of viscosity or fluidity, but with no reference to
any other characteristics or properties.
The S.A.E. viscosity numbers have been adopted by practically
all oil companies, and no difficulty should be experienced in
obtaining the proper viscosity grade in the different types of
motor oils to meet seasonal requirements.
The oils with lower 'S.A.E. numbers are lighter and flow more
readily than do the oils with the high numbers.
Lubrication First 300 Miles —The crankcase of your en-
gine, as delivered to you, is filled with the proper grade of oil.
Use this oil during the first 300 miles.
At the end of the first 300 miles, drain the crankcase —when
hot —and refill to the proper level with the recommended oil.
Lubrication After 300 Miles —The engine oil should be
changed at the end of the first 300 miles and again at 1000 and
2000 miles when the free inspections and adjustments are made.
Thereafter, changes should be made at intervals of not more than
2000 miles. "Break-in” oils or special compounds are entirely
unnecessary. Likewise it is unnecessary to add any lubricant to
the petrol.
S.A.E. 20 oil will provide satisfactory "year around” service
and will permit better all round performance than will the heavier
bodied oils. Therefore, when refilling or topping up, use a good
quality S.A.E. 20 oil.
Maintaining Oil Level. —The Oil Dipper Stick is marked
"Full” and "Add Oil.” These notations have broad arrows point-
ing to the level lines.


The oil level should be main-
tained between the two lines; neither
going above the "Full” line nor
under the "Add Oil” line.
Check the oil level frequently
and add oil when necessary. Always
be sure the crankcase is full before
starting on a long drive.
Oil Gauge. —When starting a cold
engine, it will be noted that the oil
gauge on the instrument panel will
register a high oil pressure. As the
engine warms up, the pressure will
Dipper Stick
drop until it reaches a point where changes to higher speeds will
raise the pressure very little, if at all.
If the oil pressure registers abnormally high after the engine
is thoroughly warmed up, an inspection should be made to ascer-
tain if the oil lines and passages are "plugged” up.
When to Change Crankcase Oil.— Oils have been greatly im-
proved, driving conditions have changed, and improvements in
engines, such as the crankcase ventilating system, have greatly
lengthened the life of good lubricating oils. However, to insure
continuation of best performance, low maintenance cost and long
engine life, it is necessary to change the crankcase oil whenever
it becomes contaminated with harmful foreign materials. Under
normal driving conditions draining the crankcase and replacing
with fresh oil every 2000 miles is recommended.
Under the driving conditions described in the following para-
graphs, it may become necessary to drain the crankcase oil more
frequently.
Frequent long runs at high speed, or continuous driving with
heavy loads, with the resultant high engine operating temper-
atures, may oxidize the oil and may result in the formation of
sludge and varnish. While no definite drain periods can be recom-
mended under these conditions, they should be more frequent
than under normal driving conditions.
Driving over dusty roads or through dust storms introduces
abrasive material into the engine. Carburettor air cleaners decrease
the amount of dust that may enter the crankcase. The frequency


of draining depends upon severity of dust conditions and no
definite draining periods can be recommended, but it should be
more frequent than under normal driving conditions.
It is always advisable to let the engine reach normal operating
temperature before draining the crankcase. The benefit of drain-
ing is, to a large extent, lost if the crankcase is drained when the
engine is cold as some of the suspended foreign material will
cling to the sides of the oil pan and will not drain out readily
with the slower moving oil.
Oil Consumption. —In the process of engine lubrication, a
very small portion of the oil works past the piston rings into the
cylinders where it is burned with the fuel mixture. This con-
sumption of oil is a normal condition and is necessary for efficient
lubrication of the pistons and cylinder walls. A slightly greater
amount of oil is used during the initial period of running, due
to the fact that perfect seating of the piston rings against the
cylinder walls is not obtained until the truck has been run about
1000 miles or more. After the break-in period the amount of oil
used depends to a large extent on the speed at which the truck is
driven. High speed driving increases oil consumption.
Water Pump —The permanently sealed ball bearing water
pump does not require lubrication by the truck owner,
Starting Motor —Lubricate the starting motor with a few
drops of light engine oil in the oil cup every 1000 miles.
Carburettor Accelerating Pump —Every 3000 miles remove
the dust cover and saturate the felt ring on the carburettor pump
lever shaft with light oil, or engine oil.
Generator —Every 1000 miles put a few drops of a light oil,
or engine oil, in the two oil cups. Do not "over-oil” as excessive
oil will flow into the commutator causing it to become "gummed
up” or sticky.
Distributor —The distributor is equipped with a lubricant cup.
Fill this cup with chassis lubricant, or equivalent soft, smooth
lubricant and turn down every 1000 miles.


REAR AXLE AND GEAR BOX
Recommended Lubricants. —Rear Axles, S.A.E. 90 all purpose
E.P. Gear Lubricant; Gear Boxes, S.A.E. 90 all purpose E.P. Gear
Lubricant.
CAUTION: Straight Mineral Oil Gear Lubricants must not be used in
Hypoid Rear Axles.
The S.A.E. 90 viscosity grade is recommended for "year
around” service.
All purpose Gear Lubricants. —Gear Lubricants that will satis-
factorily lubricate both passenger car and truck hypoid rear axles
have been developed. These lubricants are extreme pressure type
and known as all purpose Gear Lubricants.
They may also be used in passenger car and truck gear boxes,
steering gears, and in universal joints requiring a fluid lubricant.
All purpose E.P. gear lubricants must be manufactured under
carefully controlled conditions and the lubricant manufacturer is
responsible for the satisfactory performance of his product. His
reputation is your best indication of quality.
Lubricant Additions. —The lubricant level in the housing
should be checked periodically.
It is recommended that any additions required to bring up the
lubricant level be made, using the same type lubricant as in the
housing.
Lubricant Changes. —It is recommended that you have the
housing drained and refilled with the recommended lubricant
every 8,000 to 10,000 miles.
It may be necessary and desirable to drain rear axles and gear
boxes in trucks subject to severe service more frequently than re-
commended above.
CAUTION: Use a light flushing oil to flush out the housings when drain-
ing. Do not use water, steam, kerosene, gasoline, alcohol, etc.
UNIVERSAL JOINTS
Under no consideration should any of the soap type of lub-
ricants, such as chassis lubricant, fibrous universal joint lubricant,
etc., be used in the universal joints.


Series 1420
The front universal joint (at the rear of the transmission) on
the above series, is a trunnion bearing type and is packed with
lubricant when assembled. Further lubrication is supplied auto-
matically from the gear box.
The intermediate and rear universal joints are the needle bear-
ing type, equipped with lubrication fittings, and must be lubricated
with the same kind of lubricant that is used in the gear box every
1000 miles. The propeller shaft slip joint, located at the rear of
the intermediate universal joint, is also equipped with a fitting and
should be lubricated with chassis lubricant every 1000 miles.
All Other Models
The front, intermediate and rear universal joints are the
needle bearing type equipped with lubrication fittings and must
be lubricated with the same kind of lubricant that is used in the
gear box every 1000 miles. The propeller shaft slip joint at the
rear of the intermediate universal joint also has a fitting and
should be lubricated with chassis lubricant at the same time.
CENTRE HANGER BEARING
The propeller shaft centre hanger bearing is pre-lubricated and
needs no attention. It is packed at assembly with a water-resistant
grease to exclude dirt and water.
FRONT WHEEL BEARINGS
All Except 1600 Series. —Front wheels are equipped with ball
bearings and should be packed with a high melting point front
wheel bearing lubricant.
Series 1600. —Front wheels are equipped with roller bearings
and should be packed with a soft, smooth lubricant. Fibrous or
viscous types of lubricants must not be used.
It is necessary to remove the front wheels to lubricate the
bearings. The bearings should be thoroughly cleaned before re-
packing with lubricant. Do not pack the hub between the inner
and outer bearing assemblies, or the hub cap, as this excessive
lubrication results in the lubricant working out into the brake
drum and linings.


In mounting the front wheels, great care must be taken to
properly adjust the bearings, see Page 49, "Wheel Bearing
Adjustment.’’
REAR WHEEL BEARINGS
Except on Series 1600. —The rear wheel bearings receive their
lubrication from the rear axle.
Series 1600. —The rear wheel bearings on these trucks do not
receive their lubrication from the rear axle and should be lub-
ricated every 10,000 miles. This should be done by removing the
hubs, cleaning the bearings and re-packing. Do not use a pressure
gun for lubricating full floating axle hub bearings.
CHASSIS
For chassis lubrication, consult the lubrication chart, which
shows the points to be lubricated and how often the lubricant
should be applied.
Spring Shackles —The spring shackles are equipped with pres-
sure gun lubrication fittings, and should be lubricated with lub-
ricant recommended under "Chassis Lubrication.”
Clutch and Brake Pedals —The brake pedal on all vehicles is
equipped with a pressure gun fitting. Use "Chassis Lubricant” at
this point. The lubricant so applied lubricates both the brake and
clutch pedal.
Brakes —Keep the hydraulic brake master cylinder filled with
hydraulic brake fluid. Damage to cylinder parts will result by using
inferior brake fluid. The hand or parking brake cables at each rear
wheel should be lubricated with Graphite Grease every 5000
miles.
Steering Gear Lubrication —The steering gear is filled at the
factory with an all-season gear lubricant. Seasonal change of this
lubricant is unnecessary and the housing should not be drained.
Whenever required, additions should be made using steering gear
lubricants marketed by the major oil companies. Extreme pressure
gear lubricants or chassis lubricants may also be used.


Lubrication Charts showing the location of lub-
rication points and also the kind of lubricant to
use will be found on the following pages.
The pipe plug is installed at this point to prevent over-
lubrication, generally occasioned by the use of a pressure gun.
Over-lubrication of this unit might result in forcing lubricant
up the steering gear tube to the horn button and steering wheel.
Shock Absorbers' —Series 1420. —The shock absorbers should
be kept filled with a low viscosity (light body) shock absorber fluid
that has a pour test not higher than 30° below zero. The same
fluid is used both summer and winter and is obtainable from your
Chevrolet Dealer.
NOTE; Do not, under any circumstances, use a shock insulation fluid
heavier in viscosity, or body, than that recommended above. Heavy body
fluids are detrimental to the proper functioning of the unit.
Hydrovac Air Cleaner —The air cleaner should be removed
and cleaned at 1000 mile intervals.
BODY LUBRICATION
Normal use of a truck causes metal-to-metal movement at
certain points in the cab or panel body. Noise, wear and improper
operation at these points will result when a protective film of
lubricant is not provided.
Many service stations do not consider body lubrication a part
of a normal lubrication job; therefore, body lubrication is often
neglected.
The following points should be lubricated occasionally; —
Door Hinges (oil hole) Engine Oil
Door Hold Open Spring Graphite Grease
Door Latch Engine Oil
Cowl Ventilator Linkage and Hinges Engine Oil
Hood Hinge and Support Engine Oil


LUBRICATION POINTS (Series 1420)
Use with chart on following page
1. Front Spring Shackles (2 fittings each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
2. Generator (2 oil cups) —Light Engine Oil, 2 to 3 drops.
3. King Pins (2 fittings each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
4. Front Wheel Bearings—Wheel Bearing Grease.
5- Carburettor Accelerating Pump Lever —Light Engine Oil.
6. Tie Rod (1 each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
7. Steering Connecting Rod (1 each end) —Chassis Lubricant.
8. Front Spring Bolt (1 each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
9. Distributor—Cam, Petroleum Jelly; Shaft Grease Cup, Soft Cup
Grease; Wick, Light Engine Oil, 2 to 3 drops.
10. Steering Gear —Steering Gear Lubricant (see Page 30) .
12. Carburettor Air Cleaner—S.A.E. 50 Oil.
13. Throttle Bell Crank—Engine Oil.
14. Clutch and Brake Pedals—Chassis Lubricant.
15. Brake Master Cylinder—Genuine NASCO No. 5 Hydraulic Brake
Fluid.
16. Gear Box (see Page 28).
17. Universal Joints (Intermediate and Rear) —Gear Lubricant.
18. Propeller Shaft Slip Joint —Chassis Lubricant.
19. Rear Spring Bolts (1 each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
20. Hand Brake Cables—Graphite Grease.
21. Rear Axle (see Page 28).
22. Rear Spring Shackles (2 each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
Battery Terminals (to prevent corrosion) —Petroleum Jelly.


Series 1420 Lubrication Chart


LUBRICATION POINTS (Series 1100)
Use with chart on following page
1. Front Spring Shackles (2 fittings each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
2. Generator (2 oil cups) —Light Engine Oil, 2 to 3 drops.
3. Crankcase Ventilation Air Cleaner (2 ton only) —Light Engine Oil.
4. Front Wheel Bearings —Wheel Bearing Lubricant.
5. King Pins (2 fittings each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
6. Carburettor Accelerating Pump Lever —Light Engine Oil.
7. Tie Rod (1 each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
8. Steering Connecting Rod (1 each end) —Chassis Lubricant.
9. Front Spring Bolts (1 each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
10. Distributor—Cam, Petroleum Jelly; Shaft Grease Cup, Soft Cup
Grease; Wick, Light Engine Oil, 2 to 3 drops.
11. Steering Gear—Steering Gear Lubricant (see Page 30) .
13- Carburettor Air Cleaner —S.A.E. 50 Oil.
14. Throttle Bell Crank —Light Engine Oil.
15. Clutch and Brake Pedals—Chassis Lubricant.
16. Brake Master Cylinder—Genuine NASCO No. 5 Hydraulic Brake
Fluid.
17. Gear Box (see Page 28).
18. Universal Joints (Front, Intermediate and Rear) —Gear Lubricant.
19 Centre Hanger Bearing —Chassis Lubricant.
20. Propeller Shaft Slip Joint —Chassis Lubricant.
21. Rear Spring Bolts (1 each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
22. Hand Brake Cables—Graphite Grease.
23. Rear Axle (see Page 28).
24. Rear Spring Shackles (2 each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
Hydrovac Power Cylinder Air Cleaner (3 ton only) —Light Engine Oil
(every 1,000 miles).
Battery Terminals (to prevent corrosion) —Petroleum Jelly.


Series 1100 Lubrication Chart


LUBRICATION POINTS (Series 1600)
Use with chart on following page
1. Front Spring Shackles (2 fittings each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
2. Generator (2 oil cups)-—Light Engine Oil, 2 to 3 drops.
3- Crankcase Ventilation Air Cleaner—Engine Oil.
4. Front Wheel Bearings —Wheel Bearing Lubricant.
5. King Pins (2 fittings each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
6. Carburettor Accelerating Pump Lever—Light Engine Oil.
7. Tie Rod (1 each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
8. Steering Connecting Rod (1 each end) —Chassis Lubricant.
9. Front Spring Bolts (1 each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
10. Distributor —Cam, Petroleum Jelly; Shaft Grease Cup, Soft Cup
Grease; Wick, Light Engine Oil, 2 to 3 drops.
11. Steering Gear—Steering Gear Lubricant (see Page 30).
13- Carburettor Air Cleaner—S.A.E. 50 Oil.
14. Throttle Bell Crank —Light Engine Oil.
15. Clutch and Brake Pedals—Chassis Lubricant.
16. Brake Master Cylinder—Genuine NASCO No. 5 Hydraulic Brake
Fluid.
17. Gear Box (see Page 28).
18. Speedometer Adapter—Chassis Lubricant.
19. Universal Joints (Front, Intermediate and Rear) —Gear Lubricant.
20. Hand Brake Linkage—Chassis Lubricant.
21. Propeller Shaft Slip Joint —Chassis Lubricant.
22. Rear Spring Bolts (1 each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
23. Hand Brake Cables —Graphite Grease.
24. Rear Wheel Bearings—No. 2% Cup Grease.
25. Rear Axle (see Page 28).
26. Rear Spring Shackles (2 each side) —Chassis Lubricant.
Hydrovac Power Cylinder Air Cleaner—Light Engine Oil every 1,000
miles.
Battery Terminals (to prevent corrosion) —Petroleum Jelly.


Series 1600 Lubrication Chart


Care and Maintenance
ENGINE
The engine oil level should be checked each time fuel is pur-
chased and oil added when necessary. (See Lubrication Section.)
The engine should be inspected occasionally for oil and water leaks
and the necessary repairs made. Keep the engine clean externally.
Maintenance. —The maintenance of individual units is covered
on the following pages.
Valves
Valve Tappet Adjustment. —Valve tappet adjustment should
be checked when the engine is thoroughly warmed up, preferably
when the truck comes in from a run or after the engine has been
run at a fast idle for 30 minutes.
1. Remove rocker arm cover attaching nuts and rocker arm
cover.
2. Lubricate the valve stems with engine oil to insure free
movement of the valves in their guides.
3. Check the clearance between the rocker arms and the valve
stem with a feeler gauge (engine running). The clearance should
be as follows: —
INTAKE VALVES
Normal Operation:
.008 in.
Heavy-Duty
Operation:
.010 in.
EXHAUST
VALVES
Normal Operation:
.015 in.
Heavy-Duty
Operation:
.020 in.
Valve Tappet Adjustment


4. When adjustment is necessary loosen the rocker arm adjust-
ing screw lock nut and turn the screw clockwise slightly to decrease
clearance and counterclockwise to increase clearance. Tighten lock
nut and recheck clearance.
5. Adjust remaining valve clearances in the same manner.
6. Install the rocker arm cover using a new gasket. Make sure
cover seats properly on gasket and tighten retaining nuts. Check
for oil leaks.
Maintenanc e —-
There are but two ad-
justments on the car-
burettor, one for idling
mixture and the other
for idling speed. These
adjustments should be
made together as chang-
ing the adjustment on
one affects the other.
Run engine a few
minutes to warm it up.
Push choke button in all
the way. Turn idling
mixture adjusting screw
"A” in (clockwise) as
far as it will go and
Carburettor
Downdraft Carburettor Adjustment
then back it off If turns. Let engioe idle at 450 to 500* revolutions
per minute and turn idling mixture adjusting screw "A” "in” or
"out” as necessary to obtain a smooth idle.
NOTE: If necessary to turn screw “A” more than i turn in either
direction from the original l'i turns open, internal carburettor trouble
is indicated.
Before adjusting the idling speed make sure the hand throttle
is pushed in all the way and that the accelerator and throttle
linkage is free so that throttle lever stop screw "B” is against the
stop. Turn screw "B” in or out to obtain an idling speed of 450
to 500 revolutions per minute. If necessary readjust idling mixture
screw "A” as explained above to obtain a smooth idle.
*Road speed equivalent is 6 to 8 miles per hour.


Air Cleaner
The air cleaner is a heavy duty oil bath type. This cleaner is
suitable for any kind of truck service where these units are oper-
ating in very dusty conditions and localities.
The high position of the air
inlet makes it impossible to
throw any oil out of the cleaner
due to sudden stopping, sharp
turns, or rough roads. Oil of not
less than S.A.E. 50 viscosity
MUST be used and the level
must be maintained. One pint
of this oil will fill the cleaner
to its proper level.
Servicing of this cleaner is
an important operation and
Servicing Heavy Duty Air Cleaner
must be performed as follows: Remove the air cleaner from the
carburettor. Remove the wing nut from the top and remove the
cover. Remove the filter element assembly. Caution: Do not pry
this part loose if it sticks. It must be removed by hand because you
will damage the filter element flange, which must lie flat against
the body to insure a tight seat at this point to prevent air leaks
when the cover is assembled.
Empty the oil out of the cleaner and clean out all oil and
'accumulated dirt. Wash body with clean petrol and wipe dry.
Wash filter element by slushing up and down in clean petrol. Dry
thoroughly, either with an air hose or Jetting it stand until dty.
Fill the body of the cleaner with one pint of oil of not less than
S.A.E. 50 viscosity. Dip the filter element in new S.A.E. 50 oil —
allow it to drain until it stops dripping.
Reassemble the filter element to the body of the cleaner, being
sure that the flange sets flat against the top flange of the body.
Reassemble the cover, making sure that the gasket is clean and in
good condition over its entire surface so that a tight seat is
obtained at this joint. Put on wing nut.
The periods at which this procedure must be followed will
vary greatly according to the particular conditions under which
the truck is operating. Experience only will tell what this period


may be. However, under average conditions, cleaning the air
cleaner every 2000 miles should be sufficient.
Fuel Pump
Care. —-The fuel pufnp to engine
attaching bolts should be kept pro-
perly tightened to prevent oil leaks.
The fuel pump glass bowl retaining
nut should be kept properly tight-
ened. When water or dirt is visible
in the bowl it should be removed and
cleaned as instructed below.
Maintenance. —Loosen glass bowl
retaining nut and remove glass bowl.
Clean all water and dirt from bowl
and pump. Remove the gasket and
clean the gasket seat. Inspect and if
Fuel Pump
necessary remove and clean filter screen. Install new gasket and
the bowl. Tighten retaining nut
securely. Start engine and run
until fuel pump bowl fills. In-
spect for leaks.
If the fuel pump does not
function properly when the
bowl and gasket are known to
be seating properly, it is advis-
able to replace the fuel pump
or have it serviced by an author-
ised dealer.
Replacement.' — Hold the
fuel line fittings in the pump
with a wrench and remove the
pipe connector nuts. Remove the
fuel pump to engine cap screws
Fuel Pump Cleaning
and remove fuel pump. Remove pipe fittings from pump. Obtain
new pump and pump to engine gasket. Install pipe fittings in new
pump and install pump on engine using new gasket. Connect fuel
lines, start engine and check for pump operation and possible leaks.


Governor (Series 1600)
The governor is installed
between the carburettor and the
intake manifold and automati-
cally governs the speed at which
the engine and truck may be
operated. The adjusting cap is
locked with a seal which should
be left in place or a new seal
installed when adjusting the en-
gine speed as this is the only
Governor (in place)
protection against tampering by unauthorised persons.
Care and Maintenance. —The attaching bolts should be kept
tight and the governor should be kept clean externally. If the
governor requires any service attention, the truck should be taken
to your Chevrolet dealer.
IGNITION SYSTEM
Care. —The battery and generating system must be kept in
good operating condition in order to obtain satisfactory operation
of the ignition system. All wiring connections in the ignition circuit
should be kept tight and free from dirt and corrosion. Keep the
high tension wires free from grease and tight in the distributor
cap and coil.
Maintenance
Distributor Points. —Correct distributor point gap is very
important. The distributor points are cleaned and adjusted as part
of a good engine tune-up. If their condition is questioned, release
the distributor cap clamps, remove cap and lift off rotor. Separate
points and inspect them for being pitted or badly burned. Clean
the points with a breaker point file. If the points do not clean up
with a few strokes of the file they should be replaced.
DISTRIBUTOR
1. Condenser
2. Distributor Cam
3. Breaker Arm
4. Breaker Points
5. Breaker Point Adjusting
Screw
6. Breaker Point Lock Screw


Point Adjustment. —Crank the engine or place gear box in
high gear and rock the truck forward enough to place the movable
point cam follower on the peak of cam and check the point open-
ing, using a feeler gauge. Correct adjustment is .018 in. If neces-
sary to adjust the points, loosen the breaker point lock screw and
turn the adjusting screw as necessary. Tighten lock screw and
recheck point opening. Install rotor, place cap on distributor and
turn it until it drops into locking position. Clamp the cap in
position.
Point Replacement. —In case the points should be replaced,
loosen the inside terminal nut at the movable point spring and
lift the point out. Remove the breaker point lock screw and re-
move point and arm. Place the new point and arm in position
and install the lock screw. Place the movable point on its shaft
and position the spring on the terminal behind lockwasher and
tighten nut securely.
Adjust points and as-
semble distributor as ex-
plained above.
Ignition Timing. —
Make sure that all ter-
minals of the primary
wire at the ignition coil
and distributor are clean
and tight. Set the oc-
tane selector at "0” on
the scale, and attach a
Timing Light to No. 1
spark plug. Start the
engine and run it at
idling speed. Loosen
distributor clamp and
Octane Selector Adjustment
rotate the distributor body clockwise or counter-clockwise until
the steel ball in the flywheel lines up with the pointer on the fly-
wheel housing. Tighten the distributor clamp screw.
Octane Selector —When changing to a grade of fuel with a
higher or lower octane rating it may be advisable to advance or
retard the spark slightly. Advance the spark to take advan


tage of higher octane fuel and retard it to prevent excessive
detonation with lower octane rated fuels. Note the position of
the octane selector scale, loosen the clamp bolt and move the dis-
tributor assembly toward advance or retard as desired and tighten
the clamp securely. By adjusting the' spark in this manner it can
be readjusted to the original setting when desired without special
ignition timing equipment.
Spark Plugs —Clean the spark plugs thoroughly, using an
abrasive type cleaner. If the porcelains are badly glazed or blis-
tered, the spark plugs should be replaced. All spark plugs must
be of the same make and number or heat range.
Adjust the spark gaps to .033 in. to .038 in., using a round
feeler gauge.
CAUTION: In adjusting the spark plug gap never hend the centre
electrode which extends through the porcelain centre; always make
adjustment hy bending the side electrode.
Install the spark plugs in the engine, using new gaskets.
Care should be used when installing the 14 millimetre spark
plug or the setting of the gap may be upset. If a tension wrench
is used when installing the plugs, the proper tension is 15 foot
pounds maximum. If a tension wrench is not available, screw each
plug in "finger tight” and then with a wrench tighten each plug
\ to f turn beyond this.
ENGINE TUNE-UP
In order to enjoy the performance and economy which are
built into your truck engine, it must be kept properly tuned.
Normally this service should be performed every 5000 miles. A
thorough engine tune-up requires the use of special equipment
not generally in the hands of truck owners. For this reason it is
advisable to have this service*performed by your Chevrolet dealer.
However, for the benefit of those owners who perform many of
their maintenance repair operations, we will outline the operations
which should be given attention when tuning an engine.
Compression. —Compression tests should be made before per-
forming tune-up operations to determine the necessity for internal
repairs—an engine with poor or uneven compression cannot be
successfully tuned.


Spark Plugs. —Remove, clean and adjust.
Battery. —Check state of charge by testing specific gravity.
Battery Cables. —Clean and tighten cable terminals.
Distributor. —Clean and adjust distributor points. Inspect cap
and rotor.
Ignition Timing. —Check and adjust ignition timing.
Fuel Pump.- —-Clean fuel pump filter bowl and screen.
Air Cleaner. —Clean air cleaner.
‘Manifolds. —Tighten manifold bolts to guard against intake
and exhaust leaks.
Valve Clearance. —Check and adjust valve lash to proper
clearance.
Carburettor. —Adjust idling speed and mixture.
Cooling System. —Tighten all hose connections. Check fan belt
adjustment and the cooling system for coolant leaks.
Road Test. —After the engine is tuned the truck should be road
tested for performance. During this test the octane selector should
be adjusted for the grade of fuel being used. For best performance
and economy the octane selector should be set to produce a slight
"ping” upon acceleration at wide open throttle.
COOLING SYSTEM
Care. —The cooling sys-
tem must be kept in good
condition if it is to properly
cool the engine under all
operating conditions. The
radiator cap should be re-
moved and the coolant level
checked frequently. If the
coolant level is low, water
should be added.
The fan belt tension
should be checked occasion-
ally and, if necessary, ad-
justed to, provide | in. up
or down movement from
normal position at a point
midway between fan and
generator pulleys.
Fan Belt Adjustment


The system should be thoroughly checked for leaks and all
hose connection clamps tightened occasionally.
It is advisable to drain and flush the cooling system twice a
year; To drain the cooling system, open both drain cocks provided
for this purpose. One is located in the lower radiator outlet and
the other in the lower left side of the cylinder block. To flush, use
an ordinary water hose inserted in the radiator filler neck and
allow water to run through system until water runs clear. Then
close drain cocks and refill cooling system.
The front of the radiator core should be checked occasionally
for insects, leaves, etc., which would restrict air circulation. These
can be flushed out from the back side of radiator with an ordinary
water hose.
Maintenance
Flushing. —Scale and deposits in the cooling system which
will not flush out can generally be removed by using a good cool-
ing system cleaning compound. When using a cleaning compound
in the cooling system, it is advisable to follow the instructions
furnished with the particular brand of compound.
If cooling system cleaning compound will not thoroughly
clean the system it is advisable to reverse-flush the system, refer
workshop manual instructions.
Thermostat —A faulty thermostat may cause abnormally high
or abnormally low engine temperature. If the condition of the
thermostat is questioned it should be removed and tested by your
authorised Chevrolet Dealer.
Fan Belt— When the fan belt becomes damaged it can be re-
placed as follows: —■
1. Loosen generator to engine brace clamp bolt at the gener-
ator end and push generator assembly toward engine as far as
it will go.
2. Work the belt off generator and crankshaft pulleys, push
belt toward radiator and turn the fan so that the fan blades will
turn through the belt. When the fan blades have all been turned
through the loop of belt, the belt can be pulled through between
fan hub and radiator core.
3. Thread the new belt over the fan and on to the crankshaft,
generator and fan pulleys.


4. Pull the generator away from engine to tighten the belt.
Tighten the brace to generator clamp bolt and check for | in.
total up or down movement of belt at a point midway between
water pump and generator pulleys. If necessary, loosen clamp bolt
and move generator slightly to obtain desired belt tension.
CLUTCH
Care. —The Chevrolet clutch requires very little care or atten-
tion; however, proper use of the clutch will contribute materially
to the carefree service it will render.
Never drive with the foot
resting on the clutch pedal as
this causes constant wear on the
clutch throwout bearing and
may cause slight clutch slippage
which will cause premature
failure of rhe parts.
The clutch pedal free travel
should be checked at regular
intervals by pushing the clutch
pedal down with the fingers to
determine the distance it moves
before the throwout bearing en-
Clutch Pedal Free Travel
gages the clutch diaphragm spring. This free travel should be | in.
to 1 in. If adjustment is necessary, follow instructions below.
Maintenance
Clutch Pedal Adjustment. —Push the clutch pedal down with
the fingers and note the amount of pedal free travel. If this free
travel is more than 1 in. or less
than f in. adjustment should be
made.
Loosen the lock nut "A” on
clutch release rod and back off
the adjusting nut "B” to in-
crease the pedal free travel, or
tighten the adjusting nut "B”
to decrease the pedal free
travel. When correct travel is
obtained, tighten the lock nut
"A” and recheck the pedal free
travel.
Clutch Pedal Free Travel Adjustment


REAR WHEELS
Bearing Adjustment. —Roller bearings are used at the rear
wheels and are adjusted as follows: —
Tighten the inner nut until
the wheel binds, using a "T”
wrench with a handle 24 in.
long overall (12 in. each
side), turning the wheel to
make sure that all surfaces are
in proper contact. Back off the
nut 45° (i turn), to align the
nearest spot in the nut with a
tang on the lockwasher. Make
sure that the wheel turns
freely. Bend the tang on the
lock into the slot in the adjust-
ing nut. Then install the lock
Tightening Wheel Nuts
nut and tighten securely. Recheck the adjustment to be sure that
the wheel still turns freely then bend a tang on the lock into a slot
in the lock nut.
Keep the wheel to hub or axle flange bolt nut securely tight-
ened at all times. If the flange hub or wheel disc becomes coated
with oil or grease the wheel should be removed and all grease or
oil removed with cleaning solvent. Reinstall wheel and tighten
bolts securely.
FRONT AXLE
Care. —The front axle and its connections should be checked
regularly for wear or looseness, especially for loose spring to
axle "U” bolts, loose steering tie rod and drag link joints and
for bent tie rod, drag link or steering arms.
Alignment . —To provide easy steering, normal tyre life and
road stability and to prevent such troubles as shimmy, wander,
tramp and tendency to lead to right or left, it is necessary to main-
tain correct front end alignment.


It is advisable to have the steering mechanism and the align-
ment of wheels inspected and adjusted at least once a year —■
oftener if the truck is regularly used on very bad roads. The
accuracy which was originally built into the truck will withstand
considerable abuse, but the motor truck of to-day operates under
unusually severe conditions. This suggested inspection is, there-
fore, a safeguard against the effects of long continued road shocks.
Steering and wheel alignment adjustments require the use of
special gauges and tools and this work should be performed by
your authorised Chevrolet dealer.
Care. —Keep the wheel to hub mounting bolt nuts tight and
the wheel bearings properly adjusted as instructed below.
Wheel Bearing Adjustment. —1. Jack up front end of vehicle
and remove the hub cap and dust cap or the plate from end of
hub. Remove cotter pin from end of spindle.
2. Using an 8 in. wrench (never larger) and applying a steady
force with one hand, pull the adjusting nut up tight while rotating
the wheel to make sure all parts are correctly seated.
3. Back off the adjusting nut one-half castellation or one-
twelfth turn.
4. If the cotter pin will enter the horizontal or vertical hole
in the spindle, install it; however, if a castellation in the nut does
not line up with either hole, back the nut off slightly until the
nearest castellation lines up with a hole in the spindle.
5. Spin the wheel to make sure that it rolls freely. Install and
properly lock the cotter pin by spreading the end and bending
it around. Install the hub plate or dust cap and hub cap. Remove
jack.
STEERING GEAR
The steering gear should be adjusted when necessary, by your
dealer’s trained technicians. There should not be any up and down
movement of the steering wheel when it is turned right and left.
With the wheels in the straight ahead position, the amount of
movement the wheel can be turned should not exceed 3 ins.
measured at the steering wheel rim and with no play in the steer-
ing connecting rod or the tie rod ends.


BRAKE SYSTEM
Care. —The Chevrolet braking system requires very little care;
however, the system should be checked occasionally for indications
of fluid leak. If leaks are found the necessary repairs should be
made at once.
The main cylinder inspection plug in the right side of floor-
board should be removed and the top of main cylinder cleaned
carefully. The filler cap should be removed and if the fluid is low
in the reservoir, it should be filled to a point about \ in. from
the top of reservoir with Genuine NASCO No. 5 Hydraulic Brake
Fluid. Check the filler cap to see that the vent holes are open.
Install filler cap and inspection plug.
Maintenance
Service Brake Adjustment, Series 1420. —When the brake
pedal can be pushed nearly to the toe-board, brake adjustment is
needed.
1. Raise the truck and place stand jacks front and rear so that
all four wheels rotate freely.
2. Disconnect the hand brake cables at the cross shaft lever.
This precaution should be taken to eliminate the possibility of
the brake shoes dragging the drum due to misadjustment of the
hand brakes.
3. Remove the adjusting
hole covers and insert a screw-
driver through the adjusting
hole and engage the teeth on
the adjusting cover of the wheel
cylinder. Turn the adjusting
cover in a clockwise direction
looking at the end of the cylin-
der until the shoes cause a slight
drag on the brake drum.
Adjusting Brahes
4. When the "drag” condition is reached, turn the adjusting
cover in the opposite direction four (4) notches. Repeat this
operation on each shoe in each brake.


NOTE: The backing-off of the adjusting cover the specified number of
notches will be indicated by a faint click of the cover lock spring as the
cover is turned. This backing-off of the adjusting cover moves the brake
shoe away from the drum to ensure proper running clearance of the
shoes in the drum.
5. Connect hand brake cables and adjust. (See "Hand Brake
Adjustment.’’’) Remove jacks.
Service Brake Adjustment, Series 1100 and 1600. —The adjust-
ment of the front brakes is the same as that for the 1420 Series.
Adjusting Heavy Duty Truck
Rear Brakes
To adjust the rear brakes
on these trucks use a | in.
open end wrench to turn
the adjusting pinion.
1. Turn the adjusting
pinion in a clockwise direc-
tion until the shoe causes a
slight drag on the brake
drum.
2. Turn the adjusting
pinion back in the opposite
direction f of a turn to pro-
vide running clearance. Repeat this operation on each shoe in
each brake.
Hand Brake Adjustment.- —The hand brake adjustment should
be checked after each service brake adjustment.
1. Jack up rear wheels and set the hand brake lever in the
fully released position.
2. Loosen the check nuts at the cable ends, or remove the
adjusting clevis to pull r'od clevis pins and loosen lock nut,
depending on truck model.
3. Pull the cables out of the conduits by hand until a positive
stop is felt. Hold the cable in this position and turn the check
nuts to remove all slack from cable or turn the clevis until it is
the correct length for the pin to pass through clevis and cable
end.
4. Apply the hand brake enough to produce a drag at the
wheels and check for equal drag at each wheel. If one wheel has
more drag than the other, loosen the hand brake adjustment of


the tight wheel until they are equal. Release brake lever and check
to see that the brakes do not drag.
5- Tighten the adjusting nuts to maintain correct adjustment
or install clevis pin cotter pins and tighten lock nuts on models
using this type connection. Remove jack.
Hydrovac Power Brakes
1140 (3-Ton) and 1600 Series
The Hydrovac consists of three operating units built into one
assembly; namely, the control valve assembly, the vacuum power
cylinder and the brake hydraulic cylinder.
With this system the engine vacuum is used to greatly increase
the hydraulic pressure to the brake wheel cylinders. This pro-
vides unusual braking efficiency with comparatively light pedal
pressure.
Care. —This unit does not have any external moving parts or
linkage and is properly sealed against dust and water; therefore,
it will give unusual service with very little care or maintenance.
Hydrovac
The vacuum connections between the engine and the hydrovac
should be checked for damage and the connections tightened occa-
sionally. The hydrovac air cleaner should be removed, dis-
assembled, cleaned and oiled every 1000 miles or oftener under
extremely dusty conditions.


Servicing the Hydrovac Air Cleaner
1. Loosen the hose clamp which at-
taches the hose to the air cleaner stem.
Remove the retaining nut from the air
cleaner stem and lift off the air cleaner.
2. Remove the cover retaining screw
"K” and lockwasher. Remove the air
cleaner as an assembly from the stem
"O.” Remove the cover from the air
cleaner shell then lift out the outer
screen "L,” hair element "M” and inner
screen "N.” Note the flat washer on
the upper end of the stem.
3. Wash all parts including the
screens in cleaning fluid and wipe or
blow dry. Wash the hair element in
cleaning fluid and allow to drip dry,
then dip the element in engine oil and
permit the unit to drain off.
4. Reassemble the unit and reinstall.
Hydrovac Air Cleaner
SPRINGS AND SHACKLES
Front Springs and Shackles
All trucks use leaf type front springs with a threaded bushing
and pin type shackle at the front and a plain bushing and eye bolt
at the rear hanger.
Care. —The spring to "I” beam U-bolts should be checked
occasionally to make sure they are tight. The shackles and hanger
bolts should be checked for proper tightness. The shackles and
hanger bushings should be lubricated as instructed in the Lubrica-
tion Section.
Rear Springs and Shackles
All models have leaf type rear springs with the shackle at the
rear end of spring; however, the length, width and thickness of
the springs vary depending on model and capacity of the truck.
A clevis type shackle is used with heavy shackle pins to attach the
spring to shackle and hanger.


Some models use a two-stage type rear spring to provide
better riding qualities when lightly loaded and proper support
for heavy loads. Some models that are to be subjected to heavy
loads are equipped with auxiliary springs which mount above the
regular springs and contact brackets on the frame member when
handling heavy loads.
Care. —Keep the spring to axle "U” bolts and the shackle bolts
properly tightened. Lubricate the shackles and hangers according
to instructions in the Lubrication Section.
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
The electrical system consists of the following units —gener-
ator, combined voltage and current regulator, starting motor,
storage battery, distributor, ignition lock, ignition coil, battery
charge indicator, fuel gauge, horn, lamps, switches, wiring and
miscellaneous parts.
The ignition switch, coil, distributor and other miscellaneous
parts making up the "Ignition System’’ were previously covered.
Battery
Care. —To assure long care-
free battery service it is sug-
gested that the following ser-
vices be performed at least once
every two weeks.
1. Turn the right rear corner
of the floor mat up out of the
way, turn the battery inspection
Removing Battery Inspection Plate
plate handle counterclockwise and remove inspection plate.
2. Remove filler caps from all three cells and add distilled
water to bring the solution \ in. above the plates in each cell.
Most batteries* are equipped with a non-overfill sleeve at the cap
location which prevents filling the battery above the correct level.
NOTE: Avoid getting battery acid on clothing or other fabrics.
3. Reinstall and tighten filler caps, place battery inspection
plate in position and turn the handle to lock it securely. Place
floor mat in position.
In freezing weather the vehicle must be driven after adding
water to properly mix it with the electrolyte and prevent freezing.


It is also important to keep the battery in a fully charged con-
dition in cold weather as a discharged battery will freeze at a
little below the freezing point of water (32 degrees F.).
The state of charge in the battery should be checked regularly.
Your Chevrolet dealer will gladly perform this service; how-
ever, if it is inconvenient to take the truck to the dealer the
state of charge in the battery can be checked by using a battery
hydrometer.
Specific gravity of acid at various stages of charge and
discharge: —
In New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania —
When Battery is Specific Gravity
Fully charged 1.250 (1.240 to 1.260)
Half charged or half discharged 1.180 (1.170 to 1.190)
Fully discharged 1.120 (1.110 to 1.130)
In Queensland, Western Australia and Northern Territory—
When Battery is Specific Gravity
Fully charged 1.220 (1.210 to 1.230)
Half charged or half discharged 1.150 (1.140 to 1.160)
Fully discharged 1.090 (1.080 to 1.100)
Example of Use of Tables. —The specific gravity of the acid
in a battery is found to be 1.140. From the above table it will be
found that the battery is almost fully discharged.
Batteries over half discharged should be used sparingly until,
by charging the specific gravity is brought up to at least 1.180
in New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania,
and 1.150 in Queensland, West Australia and Northern Territory.
If the truck is to be laid up for the winter, take the battery
to an authorised battery station for proper storage.
It is not necessary to add acid to the battery. Except in cases
of broken jar or deterioration of the sealing compound, loss of
acid does not occur. It is inadvisable for truck owners to experi-
ment with so-called quick electrolytes, for the purpose of keeping
the battery fully charged.
Battery Cables
Care. —The battery cable terminals must be kept clean and
tight. Loose or corroded terminals cause hard starting and dis-
charged batteries. When corrosion appears on the terminals they


should be cleaned with a solution of baking soda and water or
ammonia and water. After cleaning, the top of the battery should
be flushed off with clear water. To reduce the tendency of the
terminals to corrode coat them with petrolatum.
Starter
Care. —Starters use a pre-lubricated bearing that does not
require additional lubrication.
Maintenance. —Keep the terminal nut tight on the starting
switch. Check the switch mounting screws and starting motor
bolts periodically to make sure they remain tight. Remove the
commutator cover band every 5000 miles and blow out any dust.
If the commutator is dirty it may be cleaned with a strip of No. 00
sandpaper. Do not use emery cloth.
Generating System
The generating system consists of the generator, voltage and
current regulator, battery charge indicator and necessary wiring.
The battery charge indicator shows whether current is being
supplied to or removed from the battery.
The generator used on all Chevrolet trucks has sufficient
capacity to supply all regularly used accessories and keep the
battery fully charged provided the system is in good condition.
Care. —The connections in the entire generating circuit must
be kept tight and free from corrosion or anything that will cause
high resistance in the circuit. The generator should be lubricated
according to instructions in the Lubrication Section.
Maintenance. —The maintenance services on the generating
system, especially the voltage and current regulator, require the
use of special equipment not generally available to the vehicle
owner.
NOTE: Never tamper with the voltage and current regulator unless you
have special testing equipment and are trained to do this kind of work.
Remove the commutator cover band every 5000 miles and
blow out any dust. If the commutator is dirty it may be cleaned
with a strip of No. 00 sandpaper. Do not use emery cloth.
If the brushes are badly worn or the generator does not
respond to commutator cleaning it is best to bave your Chevrolet
dealer make the necessary tests and repairs.


LAMPS
Sealed Beam Headlamps— l 949 Chevrolet trucks are equip-
ped with "Sealed Beam” headlight units in which the light source,
the reflector, lens and gasket are all assembled in a securely sealed
unit. Illustration shows the component parts of the light. With
this sealed unit dirt or moisture cannot enter the assembly; there-
fore, they retain their light reflecting ability indefinitely.
1. A country (upper) beam is designed to illuminate the road
evenly for considerable distance ahead of the car. This beam
is for use on the open highway when no other vehicles are
approaching.
2. A traffic (lower) beam is also provided and is low enough
on the right side to avoid glare in the eyes of the oncoming
drivers. Ir is intended for use on heavily travelled highways
and should, always, be used when meeting other vehicles. This
beam is designed so that it does not throw any dazzling light
into the eyes of the approaching driver under any condition of
car loading. At the same time the distribution of light is such
that the left side of the road is illuminated as far ahead as is
practicable without causing glare on curves.
Chevrolet’s "Sealed Beam” headlamps have been designed to
insure the motorist of maximum safety and comfort for night
driving, but to obtain this safety for himself and for others the
motorist must be willing and anxious to use his head-lighting
equipment in the manner intended. Good drivers are always
courteous.
Replacement
Sealed beam units can be replaced as follows; —
1. Loosen clamp screw and remove headlamp door rim by
pulling it out at bottom and unhooking
the top.
2. Remove the three screws holding
the sealed beam retainer ring.
NOTE: Do not disturb the headlamp
adjusting screws on the top and left side
of unit.
3. Pull the sealed beam and retainer
ring away from lamp body and remove
retainer ring.
Removing Headlamp Rim


Removing Sealed Beam
Retaining Ring Screws
Removing Sealed Beam
Retaining Ring
Disconnecting Sealed Beam
Plug Connector
4. Disconnect wiring plug from
sealed beam unit.
5. Connect wiring plug to new
sealed beam unit, place the retaining
ring around unit, push the assembly into
place and install the three attaching
screws.
6. Hook the headlamp rim at the
top and pull it down into place. Install
and tighten the clamp screw.
Proper aiming of these powerful
lights is most important to assure suf-
ficient illumination of the highway with-
out blinding other motorists. When
light aiming is necessary it is advisable
to contact your Chevrolet Dealer who
has special equipment for this purpose.
The parking, stop and tail lamp
bulbs may be reached by removing the
rim clamp screws, rim and lens. Push
the bulb in slightly and turn it counter-
clockwise as far as possible and pull it
out of socket. Push new bulb into place
and turn it clockwise to lock it. Install
rim and lens.
Lighting Switch —The lighting switch is mounted pear the
right end of instrument panel. All current entering the lighting
switch passes through a 30 ampere thermal circuit breaker. If all
lights fail to operate, look for trouble at this circuit breaker, the
light switch or the wiring between the battery and light switch.
Each individual circuit except the instrument light circuit is pro-
tected by fuses located in a fuse box.
Fuse Box
The fuse box is mounted on the right side of cowl. Separate
fuses are used for the upper headlight beam, lower headlight
beam, parking lights, tail light and stop light circuits.


Lamp Bulbs
Qty. Used Candlepower
Headlamps
... 2
50-32
Parking Lamps
... 2
3
Instrument Lights
... 4
2
Tail and Number Plate Lamp 1
3
Stop Lamp
1
21
Ignition Lock Light ...
1
2
Beam Indicator
1
1
This fuse box also acts as a junction block between the chassis
wiring harness and the body, wiring harness.
The fuse box cover is held in place by a spring clip at each
end. A spare fuse clip containing one fuse is located inside the
cover.
Fuse Replacement. —In case all lights in any one circuit should
fail to operate it is advisable to check the fuse in that circuit.
Fuse Box
Release the cover clips and remove the cover. Pull the fuse
straight out of the fuse clips and replace it with a fuse known to
be in good condition. Place the cover in position and hook the
cover clips. In case the new fuse burns out as soon as the circuit
is tested, the circuit is likely to be shorted in which case it is
advisable to contact your Chevrolet dealer.
NOTE: Always carry spare fuse in the clip in fuse box cover.


CHANGING WHEELS AND TYRES
Changing tyres is not an easy task to one inexperienced in this
operation, and it is ordinarily done at your service station. How-
ever, on those rare occasions when a tyre must be changed on the
road, the following instructions will help to simplify the process.
Removing WheeSs —To remove wheels proceed as follows: —■
1. Jack up truck.
2. Pry off the hub cap with a screw driver.
3. Remove wheel nuts with the demountable wheel wrench
and the wheel can be removed from the hub.
Tyre Changing, Series 1420 —Dismounting
1. Completely deflate tyre by removing valve core.
2. Support wheel disc (retaining ring side up) on three or
four wood blocks (2 in. x 4 in. block, 3 in. x 4 in. long) to keep
tyre off the ground.
3. Loosen the tyre bead from its seat in the rim by driving
the flat end of the tyre iron between the bead and the rim. Hold
the iron down on the side wall to avoid cutting the bead, and
make sure the iron is driven in until it strikes the rim. Apply
downward pressure on the tyre iron to force the bead away from
the retaining ring. Continue around the tyre until it is loosened
all the way around and the retaining ring can be moved from its
support on the gutter diameter and into the gutter well.
4. Insert curved end of tyre iron in
the square notch in the retaining ring
"B” and pry out and up while holding
the ring down into the gutter at the
opposite side. Continue this operation
until the cutaway portion of the re-
taining ring nearest the tyre iron spans
the outside diameter of the rim gutter.
5. Continue to pry the remainder
of this half of the retaining ring from
the gutter by removing progressively
toward the other cutaway portion in the
ring.
Dismounting


6. The remainder of the retaining ring can now be pried out
of the gutter and the ring removed.
7. Turn the wheel over and place it on the blocks with the
ring side down; then force tyre from wheel rim. Remove tyre flap
and tube from tyre.
Tyre Changing, Series 1420 —Mounting
1. Remove all rust scale from the rim and retainer ring.
2. Insert tube in tyre and inflate until tube is nearly rounded
out.
3. Lubricate tyre beads, rim side of tube and both sides of
flap with a solution of neutral vegetable oil or soft soap and
water. Insert flap in tyre.
4. Place the wheel (rim flange down) on three or four small
blocks.
5. Place tyre on rim with the valve
in line with the valve hole in the rim.
Insert valve through hole, then work
the tyre on to the rim until the outer
bead clears the rim gutter.
6. Place the retainer ring on the
wheel rim and start the side of the ring
opposite the square notch into the rim
gutter, at "C” making sure the two cut-
away portions of the ring rest on the
sides of the wheel at "A.” Hold the
Mounting
first portion of the ring in the rim gutter and pry the remaining
portion over the wheel rim. To pry the last portion into place,
insert the tyre iron in the notch "B” thus putting tension on the
ring, and tap the ring with a hammer until it drops into place.
7. Inflate slowly to not more than 10 pounds pressure. See
that the retainer ring is properly seated bn its support in the rim
gutter (tapping lightly with a hammer will help seat it firmly),
and make sure that the tyre bead rests evenly against the rim.
8. Turn the tyre and wheel over with the ring down, or lean
it against a wall with the ring side in. Completely deflate tyre
by removing valve core and then reinflate to recommended
pressure.


Tyre Changing, Series 1100 and 1600 —Dismounting
1. Completely deflate tyre by remov-
ing the valve core.
2. Using a hammer, tap around the
side ring progressively to move it in
toward the centre of the rim until it
clears the clamp ring (Fig. 1).
3. Starting at the split in the clamp
ring, raise its end out of the rim gutter
using a screwdriver and the tyre iron
(Fig. 2). Then remove the clamp ring
by prying it out of the gutter with the
tyre iron, moving progressively around
the rim (Fig. 3).
4. Drive the curved end of the tyre
iron in between the side ring and the
tyre bead (Fig. 4). Then pry down on
the opposite end of tyre iron to move
the tyre bead away from the side ring
flange (Fig. 5). Continue the foregoing
operation progressively around the tyre
until the side ring is removed. In some
cases it may be necessary to work
around the tyre a couple of times.
NOTE: The tyre bead seat on the side
ring is slightly tapered; this design
makes removal of the ring much easier.
Fig. 4. Starting Side Ring Removal
Fig. 1. Releasing Clamp
Ring
Fig. 2. Raising End of
Clamp Ring
Fig. 3. Removing Clamp
Ring
Fig. 5. Removing Side Ring


5. Push the valve stem up inside the tyre to prevent damage
while removing the tyre. The tyre may be removed from the rim
by following tbe procedure described in Item 4.
Tyre Changing, Series 1100 and 1600 —Mounting
1. Remove all rust scale from the rim, side ring and clamp
ring.
2. Insert tube in tyre and inflate until tube is nearly rounded
out.
3. Lubricate tyre beads, rim side of tube and both sides of
flap with a solution of neutral vegetable oil or soft soap and
water. Insert flap in tyre.
4. Place tyre on rim with valve in
line with the valve hole in rim. Insert
valve through hole; then work tyre on
to rim.
5. Place side ring into position on
tyre and rim; then press the side ring
into tyre and on to the rim, using the
tapered end of tyre iron until the clamp
ring gutter is exposed. Insert end of
clamp ring in gutter and work progres-
sively around the tyre until the clamp
Installing Clamp Ring
ring is seated in the gutter.
6. Inflate tyre slowly while checking to see that the side ring
moves out over the clamp ring, locking it into the gutter. Com-
pletely deflate the tyre and then reinflate to recommended pressure.


HINTS FOR LOCATING ROAD TROUBLES
This chapter is published with the thought that it might be of
value to truck owners in case of minor road troubles. Only items
that the average owner might check and correct, thereby avoiding
inconvenience, expense and delay, are covered.
ENGINE
Starting Motor Fails to Crank Engine or Cranks It
Very Slowly
1. Turn on the headlamps and note if they light normally. If
the headlamps do not light and the starting motor fails to operate,
the difficulty is probably due to poor battery connections or a
weak battery:
(a) Tighten the battery connections, the ground connection and
the connections at the starter switch. If the battery terminals
are corroded, they must be cleaned.
(b) If the starter still fails to operate, the cause is probably a dis-
charged battery. See information on the care of the battery on
Page 54.
2. If the headlamps light normally, press the pedal and if the
starter does not operate, note the intensity of the headlamps. If
they become dimmed or if they go out, proceed as follows, trying
the starter after each operation:
(a) Tighten the battery connections and those at the starter
switch. If the battery terminals are corroded, they must be
cleaned.
(b) See that the ground wire is tight where it fastens to the frame
of the truck.
(c) Check the battery. See instructions for the care of the battery
on Page 54.
(d) Shift the gear box into neutral and, with the ignftion turned
off, turn the engine over with the hand crank, to determine
if there is any mechanical condition that would prevent the
engine being cranked by the starter.


3. If, when pressing the pedal with the headlamps on, the
starter does not operate and there is no reduction in the intensity
of the headlamps, there is probably a loose connection at the
starter switch.
4. If the starter cranks the engine very slowly, it is probably
due to one of the following causes:
(a) Partially discharged battery.
(b) Engine oil too heavy. This is a definite cold weather pos-
sibility, if incorrect grade of oil has been used.
When the engine cannot be started due to battery or starter
difficulty or to heavy engine oil, time is often saved by having the
truck pushed by another truck to start it. Have the stalled truck
in high gear and the ignition on. Then, when the engine is started,
the truck can be driven to a Chevrolet dealer to have the trouble
corrected.
Engine Fails to Start When Cranked at Proper Speed
1. Be sure ignition switch is turned on all the way to assure
proper contact.
2. If the starter has been operated for some time without
results, it is possible that the cylinders are flooded. To correct this,
crank the engine by means of the starter, with the ignition on,
choke button returned to its normal position, and the throttle held
wide open. When the excess fuel has been expelled from the
cylinders, ignition should occur, starting the engine. Not more
than 15 to 20 seconds should be required to clear the cylinders.
3. If the engine does not start, it should be determined whether
fuel is reaching the carburettor.
(a) Make sure first that there is sufficient fuel in the tank.
(b) See that the fuel pipe connections at the fuel pump and car-
burettor are tight.
(c) If these connections are tight and no loss of fuel is noted at
these points, disconnect the fuel pipe at the carburettor. Crank
the engine with the starter. If fuel flows from this pipe, it
may be assumed that the difficulty is not due to lack of fuel.


(d) If fuel does not flow from the pipe when the engine is
cranked and there is sufficient fuel in the tank, remove the
fuel tank cap and crank the engine again. If about 15 seconds
of cranking causes fuel to flow out of the pipe, look for a
clogged vent hole in the fuel tank cap. This should be cleaned
out thoroughly before replacing the cap.
4. If the engine still does not start, remove the distributor cap
and crank the engine to ensure that the points are opening. If the
point gap is satisfactory, crank the engine until points are closed.
Then, with the ignition switch turned on, open the breaker points
by hand. If no sparking whatever is observed at the points when
they are snapped open, there is probably a loose connection or an
open circuit.
(a) Tighten all terminals at the ignition switch, battery charge
indicator and ignition coil.
(b) If current still does not flow, inspect breaker points. If neces-
sary, clean and adjust.
(c) Clean the distributor cap inside and outside by carefully wip-
ing off all accumulated oil and dirt.
5. If current is shown by sparking when points are separated
by hand and yet the engine will not start, check intensity of the
ignition spark as follows;
(a) Remove the cable from one of the spark plugs and hold it
i in. from some clean point of the cylinder head while some-
one operates the starter with the ignition turned on. A good
spark at least \ in. long should appear.
(b) If not, clean and adjust the breaker points, if this has not
already been done.
(c) If a good spark still is not obtained, see that the spark plug
wires are pushed firmly into the top of the distributor cap.
Wipe off the cap carefully inside and outside.
6. If a good spark is obtained when the engine is cranked
while holding a spark plug cable \ in. from the cylinder and yet
the engine does not start, remove the spark plugs and clean them
as well as possible. Reset the gaps and see that none of the plugs
are cracked or broken. See Page 44 for instructions on cleaning
and regapping spark plugs.


Engine Stops on Road — Make tests Number 3,4, 5 and 6
under "Engine Fails to Start When Cranked at Proper Speed.”
Engine Misfires Regularly in One or More Cylinders
—The most probable cause of regular misfiring in a cylinder is
a dirty or cracked spark plug. To determine which plug is mis-
firing, close the throttle so the engine will idle slowly. Hold a
wooden-handled screwdriver so it touches both the cylinder head
and a spark plug terminal, thus short-circuiting the plug.
If the plug is good, there will be a noticeable slowing of the
speed of the engine. If the plug is not firing there will be no dif-
ference in the operation of the engine. Repeat the process on each
spark plug in the engine.
After the inoperative plug has been located, it should be
cleaned and adjusted, or replaced if necessary. See instructions,
Page 44.
Engine Misses Irregularly —If the engine misfires irregu-
larly, apparently in all cylinders, proceed as follows:
(a) Remove the valve cover and lubricate the valve stems with
kerosene to free up any that may be sticking from gummy oil.
Then adjust all valves as instructed on Page 38.
(b) Clean and adjust the breaker points as instructed on Page 42.
(c) Remove the distributor cap. Push the spark plug wires firmly
into the cap. Be careful to remove all moisture from cap.
(d) Remove, clean and adjust the spark plugs.
(e) Examine spark plug wires for cracked insulation.
Engine Overheats —In hot weather, the engine temperature
may increase soon after the engine has stopped. This condition is
normal and should not be considered as overheating.
Also, on a long, hard pull in hot weather, the temperature may
rise above normal. This should be only temporary and the engine
should cool as'soon as its load is reduced.
If there is some abnormal condition causing overheating, it
will usually cause a more pronounced and prolonged temperature
increase.
If the temperature increases to approximately 200°F. (the red
zone on the indicator) the cause should be investigated. There
is no real danger until the cooling solution begins to boil. This


may occur below 212°F. depending on the nature of the cooling
system’s contents, and the altitude. The truck should never be
driven any distance with the cooling solution boiling, as this causes
immediate and heavy loss of fluid. Under such conditions the level
can drop very quickly below that of the water pump, stopping all
circulation and leaving vital engine parts such as the valve mech-
anism completely unprotected by the cooling fluid.
When definite overheating is encountered:
1. See that the radiator is filled with the proper cooling
solution.
CAUTION: In cases of overheating, do not remove the radiator cap until
the engine has been stopped for a few minutes, as there is danger of
steam and boiling water escaping and causing a painful burn. Do not
pour cold water into the radiator if the engine is overheated, as this
may crack the cylinder head or block. Let the engine cool off thoroughly
and then add water slowly until the cooling system is filled.
2. Check the fan belt adjustment. See instructions on Page 46.
3. See that there is sufficient oil of the proper grade in the
crankcase and that the oil pressure gauge shows the correct
pressure.
4. Remove the radiator cap and with the engine running at
a good speed see if there is any evidence of the water being in
circulation. If not, the thermostat at the front of the cylinder head
may not be operating.
5. See that the radiator grille and cellular spaces of the radiator
core are clean and have not become clogged with insects or dirt
to such an extent as to interfere with the passage of air.
LIGHTS
All Lights Go Out —This could be caused by dust or oxidiza-
tion at the thermal circuit breaker points at the light switch. The
circuit breaker is designed to protect the lighing circuits in case of
a short circuit which would cause excessive current flow.
Lights in One Circuit Go Out —This is likely to be caused
by a burned out fuse in the individual circuit.


Raise Engine Hood, release fuse box cover clips and remove
cover. Inspect the five fuses carefully and replace burned out or
damaged fuse (use 20 amp. Fuses). Test circuit.
If the new fuse burns out, the circuit is probably shorted. If
tracing the wires and checking for short circuits does not reveal
the trouble the services of your Chevrolet dealer should be
solicited.
One Light Goes Out —This would indicate a burned out fila-
ment in the individual light or possibly a loose connection in the
wiring. The simplest way to check this is to install a new bulb.
If this does not correct the trouble the light circuit must be
checked.
One Headlamp Burns Dim —This condition is usually caused
by loose connections in the individual light circuit or poor ground
connection between the light and the chassis frame. Make sure all
light connections are clean and tight. Make sure the ground con-
nections are not corroded or rusted and that they are all tight.
GENERAL
Hydrovac Fails to Operate —Hydrovac failure does not pre-
vent the normal use of the hydraulic brakes unless the brake fluid
leaks out of the system. Should the,hydrovac fail to operate, check
for air leaks between the manifold and the hydrovac unit. If there
are no vacuum leaks you should contact your Chevrolet dealer.
Engine Runs but Vehicle Will Not Move —This may be
caused by broken axle shaft, stripped ring or pinion gear, broken
universal joint, broken propeller shaft, gear box trouble or clutch
trouble.
Place the gear box in gear, run the engine and inspect the drive
line for location of trouble. If the drive shaft does not turn the
trouble is in the gear box or clutch, while if the shaft turns back
to the differential carrier the trouble is either axle gears or axle
shafts.


1000 AND 2000 MILE INSPECTION AND ADJUSTMENT
When the new vehicle has been driven 1000 miles, and again at 2000 miles,
the Owner should deliver it to the Selling Dealer who will inspect the vehicle, and
perform the following adjustments:
® Fill Radiator
® C.&A. Operation of all Instruments
® C.&A. Operation of Horn
• Change Engine Oil
• Check Steering Box Oil Level
® Check Transmission Oil Level
• Check Differential Oil Level
® Lubricate Door Locks
(NASCO Solidoil)
® Lubricate Striker Plates and Striker
(NASCO Solidoil)
• Lubricate Dovetail Shoes
(NASCO Solidoil)
® Lubricate Outside Door Handle Locks
® Lubricate Chassis (Refer to Chart)
Check Front Wheel Bearings for
Lubrication, and Adjust
® Check Oil Level Ft. Suspension Units
• Inflate Tyres to Recommended
Pressures
• Inspect Tyres for cuts, bruises, etc.
• C.&A. Valve Clearance
• C.&A. Water Connections
• C.&A. Spark Plug Gaps
® C.&A. Distributor Point Gaps
C.&A. Ignition Timing with
Synchroscope
• C.&A. Choke and Throttle Linkage
C.&A. Carburettor for wide open
throttle and fuel leaks
C.&A. Carburettor Float or Fuel
Level
C.&A. Oil Pressure Line for clearance
• C.&A. Fan Belt Tension, and fan
clearance from radiator
Check and tighten Generator
Attaching Bolts
Check and tighten Cylinder Head
and Manifold Bolts
• C.&A. Engine Mountings
• Tune Motor and clean Engine
• Test Battery Gravity and Connections,
add Distilled Water to proper
level
Tighten Battery in Support
Check and Tighten Electrical
Connections
® C.&A. Generator Charging Rate and
Voltage Regulator
• C.&A. Operation of all lights includ-
ing Interior and Instrument
Lights
C.&A. Headlamps and tighten
terminals
• C.&A. Clutch Pedal for correct
clearance
9 C.&A. Brake Pedal Clearance
• C.&A. Brakes
• Check and fill Master Cylinder
Check and tighten all Brake Line
Connections
Check and tighten Steering Box to
Frame Bolts
C.&A. Steering Gear
Check and tighten Pitman Arm Nut
9 C.&A. Steering Toe-in and Geometry
® C.&A. Steering Connections and
Cotter Pins
® C.&A. Gear Shift Linkage
® Check and tighten all bolts
Check and tighten Axle Shaft Nuts
® Check and tighten Wheel Nuts
Check Petrol Line from tank to fuel
pump for clearance
Check Clearance of Exhaust Pipe and
Muffler
Check Clearance of Tailpipe
C.&A. Spring Clips and Shackles
O C.&A. Body Bolts
® C.&A. Engine Hood Alignment
C.&A. Operation of movable body
parts
® C.&A. Door Alignment
C.&A. Operation all Windows
® C.&A. Operation, of Windshield
Wiper Motor, Linkage & Blades
C.&A. Operation of Locks and Keys
® Final Road Test vehicle with Owner
(C.&A. means "Check and Adjust”)
It is understood that although this labour of inspection and adjustment is
without cost to owner, a charge will be made for oil or grease used.
Items checked at 1000 Mile Inspection and Adjustment are marked with a
dot (•).
At 2000 Mile Inspection and Adjustment, ALL items on the above list are
checked.


MANUFACTURER’S WARRANTY
"Fine materials, scientific research and design and painstaking work-
manship go into every General Motors Product to ensure the maximum
satisfaction in the user’s hands. Conscious of this inherent quality in its
products, and confident of the service that they render, and as tangible
evidence thereof, General Motors covers each vehicle which it manufac-
tures, with this Warranty.”
"Should any deject'in material or workmanship develop in any part
within the period of this Warranty, said part will be repaired or replaced
without cost to you for labour or material at our nearest authorised
dealer’s establishment.”
This Warranty is valid for 90 days from the date of delivery of the
vehicle to the owner, or for the first 4000 miles of operation of such
vehicle, whichever termination is first reached. This Warranty does not
cover tyres, inasmuch as they are usually guaranteed by their respective
makers.
It is understood that this Warranty is null and void on any vehicle
where parts not made or sold by us are used in any replacements or
otherwise.
Chevrolet Dealers everywhere stand ready to provide you with the best
possible service at all times. It is their responsibility to assure your con-
tinued satisfaction with your truck. But you, too, have a responsibility to
yourself as an owner —the responsibility of giving your Chevrolet truck the
reasonable care and attention that any mechanical thing deserves. You can
obtain greater operating satisfaction and longer truck life by following the
maintenance and operation suggestions found in this Handbook.


Authorized Distributors
Genuine G.M.-H. Parts
and Nasco Accessories
QUEENSLAND
Brisbane Automotive Service Company, Ann Street, Brisbane
E. G. Eager & Son Pty. Ltd., Breakfast Creek Road, Newstead, Brisbane
Motor Supplies (Pty.) Ltd-, Perry Street, Brisbane
NEW SOUTH WALES
Bennett & Barkell Limited, Meagher and Chippen Streets, Sydney
Bennett & Wood Pty. Limited, Pitt and Bathurst Streets, Sydney
Boyded Pty. Ltd., 150-166 Forbes Street, Sydney,
W. T- Coggins Pty. Ltd., 117 Parramatta Road, Camperdown
Brooklands Accessories Ltd., Liverpool and Crown Streets, Sydney
W. H. Lober & Company Ltd., 151-153 William Street, Sydney
McLeod, Kelso & Lee Pty. Ltd., 23-33 Hunter Street West, Newcastle
Preston Motors Pty. Ltd., Townsend Street, Albury
Reo Motors Pty. Ltd., 171-175 William Street, Sydney
Stack & Company Pty. Ltd., 182 William Street, Sydney
Westcott, Hazell & Company Limited, 225-227 Castlereagh St., Sydney
Young & Green Pty. Limited, 673-675 Hunter Street West, Newcastle
VICTORIA
Brooklands Accessories Limited, 68-78 Sturt Street, South Melbourne
S. A. Cheney Pty. Ltd., 22 Flinders Street, Melbourne
E. A. Machin & Company Pty. Ltd., 535 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne
Preston Equipment Parts & Accessories Company,
413-417 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne
Preston Motors Pty. Ltd., 104 Russell St., Melb. (8 suburbs and 1 Albury)
Queensbridge Motor & Engineering Co., Pty. Ltd.,
35-43 Queen’s Bridge Street, South Melbourne
Rhodes Motor Company Pty. Ltd., 401 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne
Southern Motors Pty. Ltd,, 80-88 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne
Stuart & Harrison Pty. Ltd., Deakin Avenue, Mildura
Winter & Taylor Pty. Ltd., 15 Malop Street, Geelong
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Battery & Electrical Service Company, Pulteney & Flinders Sts., Adelaide
Freeman Motors Limited, 221 Grenfell Street, Adelaide
Duncan & Company Limited, 107-109 Pirie Street,' Adelaide
Motor Parts and Service Limited, 161 Pirie Street, Adelaide
Motor Traders (S.A.) Limited, 83-89 Flinders Street, Adelaide
United Motors Limited, 252 Pirie Street, Adelaide
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Atkins (W.A.) Limited, 894 Hay Street, Perth
Attwood Motors Pty. Limited, 22-32 Stirling Street, Perth
Sydney Atkinson Motors Limited, Temple Court, Perth
TASMANIA
Motors Pty. Ltd., 165-171 Brisbane Street, Launceston
Robert Nettlefold Pty. Ltd., 115 Macquarie Street, Hobart
Tasmanian Automotive Service Company, 130 Murray Street, Hobart


Jk>ook for the
> oMig nof
Authorised
(fDealer
G. W. GREEN a SONS PTY. LTD., MELBOURNE
