

jhmhmmhhmbirhnmbbbhmhbsmhohbhbbmhmhbmmihhib^mhi^^^^^^^^^^^^^b
L Y* COv MUC~ 1 \ %;W3
! 1 V /! ■''
mB[ |V X I - " —
■•• “ ■ ' "j I' I I


.
.
/ ■
.
■
• •


\P*I ; " 1,
■




CHILLAGOE CHARLIE






*» / r ’ A TUMfr y I A
r Tf ]
fer " v': ..-.t .v- ;.: • j gfg&sh.
• jgfc - mr r™* • ’
nij$, - jljS |cyyKy / \
Hi ~w j| HrH^s
<** wm
“ HE NEVER SAID A WORD, BI T HIS HANDS WERE CRAMMED
LL RK\ OL\ ERS. {See P&ge 112.)
Front isp


CHILLAGOE CHARLIE
ROBERT M. MACDONALD
LONDON : T, FISHER UNWIN
ADELPHI TERRACE. MCMIX


{All rights reserved,)


PAGE
. 9
30
• 52
AND
75
. 100
120
. I46
167
CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I. The Fighting Parson 9
11. The Men of Caledonia Camp ... 30
111. Chillagoe Charlie 52
IV. The Rush at Crocodile Crossing, and
After 75
V. The Midnight Riders 100
VI. Who is Chillagoe Charlie ? . . .120
VII. Out into the Unknown . . . .146
VIII. The Capture 167
IX. The Camp at the Mitchell River . . 188
X. Through the Fiery Circle . . .210
XI. The City without a Name . . . .231
XII. The Chinese of the Hollow Mountain 254
XIII. The Camp among the Ranges . . . 274
XIV. White, Black, and Yellow . . . 296
XV. Chillagoe Charlie reveals Himself . .321




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
(By ARCHIBALD WEBB)
“HE NEVER SAID A WORD, BUT HIS HANDS WERE CRAMMED FULL
of revolvers” (p. H2) . . . Frontispiece
TO FACE PAGE
“IT WAS A GOVERNMENT PROCLAMATION ” . .12
“THE LEFT-HANDER MADE HIM REEL BACK AND THE RIGHT
KNOCKED HIM OVER ” . . . . . .30
“ ‘ IT’S CHILLAGOE CHARLIE ! ’ TOM MUTTERED ” 54
“MIKE KICKED OUT AT THE MAN VICIOUSLY” . . . QO
“A MASKED MAN WAS STANDING BEHIND THE TRUNK WATCHING
HIM” ........ 120
“ A TERRIFIC REPORT RANG OUT, AND THE REVOLVER FLEW
FROM THE OFFICER’S HAND” . . . . . 162
“ ‘ THIS WILL BE CHILLAGOE CHARLIE AS HE APPEARS THROUGH
THE DAY,’ TOM SAID TO HIMSELF ” . . . . 168
“SAM PAUSED AND RAKED THE FIRE” . . . .178
“HE WAS CLAD IN WHAT HAD ONCE BEEN A STIFF WHITE
SHIRT, AND A HELMET, BUT NOTHING MORE” . , 192


TO FACE PAGE
“HE WAS CAUGHT BY THE THROAT FROM BEHIND AND THROWN
HEAVILY TO THE GROUND” ..... 228
“ THE REST RUSHED FOR THE DOOR, TERROR-STRICKEN ” . 250
“ THAT MAN WAS VERY NEAR HIS END AT THAT MOMENT ” . 264
“LEADING THEIR STEEDS, THEY BEGAN TO DESCEND TO THE
PLAINS ON THE OTHER SIDE” .... 284
“BILL FLUNG HIMSELF UPON HIM AND BORE HIM TO THE
ground” ... ..... 306
“AT THE SAME MOMENT A CLOSELY PACKED MOB OF HUMANITY
RUSHED ROUND A CORNER” ..... 316
“ ‘ CHILLAGOE CHARLIE IS HERE. WHAT HAVE YOU AGAINST
HIM ?”’ . . . . . . . • 330


CHILLAGOE CHARLIE
CHAPTER I
THE FIGHTING PARSON
u T T'S a bit hot, Nigger, isn’t it ? ”
1 Nigger made no audible reply—his throat was
too dry—but he wagged his tail cheerily. He was a
dog of no particular family whose entire interest in life
was centred in his master’s doings, and in chasing,
catching, and killing all the iguanas and snakes which
crossed the blistering path in front of them. And it
was hot. A tropical sun straight overhead poured
down its merciless rays, turning the soft soil of the
country into what more closely resembled hot ash
from a furnace. The shimmering lime bluffs, too,
which, rising to a height of about four hundred feet,
dotted the land like mighty sentinels, flung back the
heat from their roasted sides like the walls of a great
oven, or the concave faces of a series of gigantic
burning mirrors. The country was baked, and burnt,
and actually cracking with the heat; it was parching for
water which would not come until the annual thunder-
storms worked their way over the ranges from the
coast about Christmas-time. And it was yet but


October. One might have thought that surely this
was no place wherein man might dwell, but the whistle
of a railway train, the roar of smelting furnaces, the
thud of stamping batteries, and the whir of machinery
would have dispelled that illusion.
And Tom Willoughby could still hear all these
sounds, for the mining township of Murgoona lay
only a short distance behind him, and from there a
railway connected with the coast. In desolate, grimly
guarded lands Nature, in sarcastic mood, has hidden
most of her mineral treasures, and to wrench them
from her iron grasp man will dare and suffer any-
thing, giving but little heed to his environment, and
caring less for the ravages of fevers and noxious pests.
The Anglo-Saxon race, or, rather, those people gene-
rally, although perhaps not altogether correctly, com-
prised under that title, are the chief pioneers of those
lands on which Heaven has forgotten to smile.
Murgoona, a flourishing, sulphury-smelling settle-
ment, was one of those places. It lay in the heart of
York Peninsula in Northern Queensland.
But Tom and Nigger were walking away from
Murgoona, and painfully they struggled forward, sink-
ing deep into the hot sand every step, and feeling that
nothing on earth could be more acceptable to them
than a drink of water. They did not hope for cold
water because Tom knew that when they reached a
mud puddle the semi-fluid could not be anything else
than hot, and Nigger had never tasted anything cold
in his life. They were following what was evidently a
much used track, for the deep ruts made by ore teams
and traction engines coming up laden with ore from
the outlying camps and mines to the smelters in
Murgoona extended in many straight lines in the
direction in which they were travelling.


Suddenly, on rounding a lime bluff, the ground
became harder, and raising his eyes for the first time
since leaving the township, Tom saw a timber clump
about half a mile ahead.
“This must be a water-hole in front, Nigger,” said
Tom. “We’ll get a drink soon now.”
Nigger seemed to think so too, for he barked as
joyously as the state of his throat would allow, and to
show that even although he was very thirsty he had
not lost a sense of his duty, he darted after a small
whip-snake that wriggled across the sand, near, and
seized it by the back of its neck.
“Come, Nigger, leave the poor thing alone,” spoke
Tom. “ It is not harming us in the slightest, and must
feel about as miserable as we are.”
Nigger, on hearing his master’s voice, dropped the
reptile and ran back to see what Tom wanted, and
when he returned to where he had left it, having
received no further commands, the creature had dis-
appeared into a crack, and Nigger was too hot and
tired to dig it out. Quickening their pace, the young
man and the dog soon reached the welcome shade of
a clump of pandanus palm-trees, and with unerring
instinct Nigger made straight for a tiny pool of water
which seemed to ooze from the ground.
“Why, it’s a spring, Nigger,” Tom exclaimed in
delight. “We’ll take a good rest here.” Nigger was
too much engaged to reply, and his master was also
too busy to notice the dog’s neglect. The water was
warm, and charged with lime, and many other mineral
substances, and reptiles, animals, birds, and insects
were fighting in a hopeless confusion in and around
the pool. But all that was a mere detail in the
Peninsula. It was water, and that was everything.
Nigger soon chased the menagerie away, and incident-


pany . . Chillagoe Charlie . .
. . paid .... information .
. . these men
. . One hundred pounds
. . . whereabouts if alive
ally dined, and Tom kindled a fire and baked a large
Johnny cake in its ashes with some flour he had carried
from Murgoona.
“ Who would have thought that a spot like this
existed so near Murgoona?" he said aloud. “This
water must come from that lime bluff, of course ; it is
the rain it absorbed last rainy season, and, fortunately
for all teams and teamsters passing this way, retained
until the dry weather. Hullo! What’s this?" A
tattered brown-stained paper nailed to a tree near
by caught his eye.
“ It can’t be a trespass notice,” he said, going over to
examine it; “the people in this part of the world don’t
believe in them. Why ! It’s a Government Procla-
mation. I see the Royal Arms.”
In a sense it was a Government Proclamation, and
this is what it proclaimed so far as the discoloured
printing and dilapidated condition of the notice would
allow Tom to read :
£l,OOO Reward.
er. One Thousand Pounds Reward will be
paid by the Queensland Government to any one not
an accessory who will give information which
lead to . . arrest of the man known throughout North
Queensland as Chillagoe Charlie . . wanted by the
police for seven specified charges concerned
in the disappearance of George Smith, miner, Joseph
Miller, storekeeper, Thomas Deighton, miner, Roderick
Mactavish, prospector, Albert Dettington, hotel keeper,
and Peter Murphy, teamster . . last seen in . com-


. <1 4 k
*• '’ ■ 9
3 S jgm^^f
*^"
~ - ■'
■ - ,. " wt&i .
* •■ •» — ■- u m
IT WAS A GOVERNMENT PROCLAMATION.
To face page 12.




The paper was torn away here, but the purport of
the notice was quite clear to Tom, although some of
the missing words must have been of considerable
importance, as it was evident that they had been cut
out with a knife.
“So I am in the domain of the notorious bush-
ranger," muttered Tom ; “ I have heard a great deal
about him of late. I wonder why the person who cut
out these words did not pull down the entire notice,
though Ah, well, I don’t envy Chillagoe Charlie,
whoever he is. He can’t long evade the troopers, and
hunted as he must be from one water-hole to another,
he can’t find much pleasure in holding on to life, I'm
sure "
Here Nigger plainly voiced the fact that some one
was approaching, and looking down the track they
had just come over Tom saw a buggy drawn by a pair
of very fine horses turning aside towards the water.
To his surprise he noticed that the only occupant was
a man in clerical attire, although he had discarded his
coat, and wore a large pith helmet in lieu of the more
orthodox headgear. The horses walked up to the
water and began to drink, and the man jumped out
and saw Nigger, who had gone forward to investigate.
“ Hullo, little dog, where do you stay when at
home ?" exclaimed he.
“Wherever I am, sir," spoke Tom. “Nigger is my
dog "
“ I didn't notice you before. Good-day. Are you
camped here ? " said the newcomer.
“ I think we will camp until the sun slides down a
bit, sir. It will be easier to make headway then."
“ You are a new chum ? Your face is not yet like
leather. What are you doing in this country, and
what camp are you making for now ? " The speaker’s


voice was kindly, and as he had patted Nigger instead
of kicking him, which was Nigger’s usual fate with
strangers, Tom felt his pride melt away, and he
answered—
u I am not really a new chum, sir ; I have been in
Australia for nearly two years. I came up here from
Sydney to look for work, as I heard this was the
coming mineral country. I am not making for any
particular camp just now, but they told me in Mur-
goona that there were several large groups of mines on
this track.”
“ Yes, there are some fairly large camps out this
way. I am going to one now. But you are not
a miner. You are not much more than a boy. Tell
me, have you run away from home ? or are you in
hiding ? Don't be afraid, I’ll be your friend.”
“ I am not hiding from any one, sir, nor have I run
away from home. I haven't got one anywhere. lam
quite strong enough for a miner, but I have no ex-
perience, and all the big companies down the line are
afraid to employ me, because Government Inspectors
would make trouble if I were killed. That’s why lam
going out to the camps. They are not so particular
about a man, west of Murgoona.”
“ Sometimes the Government exercises a parental
influence even out this way, my lad. Look at that
notice behind you. The Powers that Be seem very
anxious to punish Chillagoe Charlie for his misdeeds.
Why not go upon his tracks and earn that thousand
pounds ? ”
“ I think I would rather help him, sir. Of course I
know it is wrong to sympathise with such a man as he
must be, but I have an uncle somewhere in the world
who was wrongly blamed for something when he was
young, and I can't help thinking that this bushranger


may have been driven to his mode of life by similar
circumstances."
“ M y lad, there are not many people in these parts
charitably disposed towards Chillagoe Charlie. But
I'll just boil a billy of tea on your fire, while the
horses are having a spell, and we'll have dinner. I
have some cold meat in the buggy. What is your
name ? ”
“Tom Willoughby, and this is Nigger. I was born
in England, but he is a Queenslander What is the
matter ? "
The clergyman had turned his head away and
appeared to be choking.
“ Oh, it is nothing. I nearly swallowed one of
those flies. I am all right now. So your name is
Tom Willoughby, and you are an Englishman?"
“ Yes J I come from Kent. The uncle I told you of
was an explorer and prospector, so I studied miner-
alogy so as to be able to take advantage of any dis-
coveries I might make when I set out to look for him.
When my mother died there was nothing to keep me
at home, and I came out to Australia. For two years
I worked in an assayer's office down in Sydney, and
when, about a month ago, I heard of the great'finds
being made up here, I made up my mind to come and
see the place, especially as an old miner down for a
holiday had told me that he had known a man who
answered to the description of my uncle, up here,
years ago, and so here I am."
“And here you will stay, Tom, I think. It so
happens that the manager of the Caledonia Copper
Mines, about ten miles west from here, is a great
friend of mine, and I know he'll find work for you
as an assayer until you can obtain a better position.
Meanwhile, my lad, count me as your friend. I am


known everywhere in the Gulf country as the Fighting
Parson, I don’t know why ; but, known only by that
name, I have access to all the mining camps, whereas
many of my zealous brethren who do not understand
the Gulf men get a bad time if they intrude. Parsons,
as a rule, you know, are not welcomed in these parts,
and as for Sunday, it never comes up the line further
than Chillagoe But the billy is boiling, we’ll
dine Whats the matter, Nigger?
Nigger was again noisily advertising the approach of
some one, and on Tom looking through the trees he
saw two riders canter into the timber clump.
“ It’s two troopers,” he said, “and they are coming
in here to water their horses.”
“ Troopers ! ” exclaimed the parson, springing up.
“ What are they wanting out this way, I wonder ?
He walked over to the buggy and stood there until the
men dismounted.
“ Good-day,” they cried affably ; “ we’ve struck you
in good time, it seems.” _ f
u Couldn’t improve on the time by a minute,
answered the parson. “ Hitch up your quadrupeds
and sail right in to the best we have—cold goat’s
flesh, pickles, damper, and tea. I suppose you are
out after the gentleman mentioned on this notice-
board ? ” ....
“ Chillagoe Charlie ? Oh, we can put the hobbles
on him any time we want,” laughed one ; “ but we
would be real green hands to do that now. ou see,
sir, we are special duty men, and while we are running
him down we get extra pay.”
11 1 understand,” said the parson, laughing; “ and if
you killed the goose with the golden eggs, or, in other
words, captured Chillagoe Charlie, that extra pay
attached to your special duty would stop.'


“ Right on the nail, boss ; so we are not in any
special hurry to catch Charlie. We’re going out to
the camps just now to see if all the income-tax
papers have been filled in correctly. Those miners
are making cartloads of money and it is only fair
that they should be made to pay something towards
Government expenses."
“ Surely; but when will you take up the chase of
Chillagoe Charlie in earnest ? "
“We’re on his track now. If he can’t keep out of
our hands we’ll have to collar him, and I expect to
hear from Brisbane at any time that if we don't pro-
duce him in Cairns within so many hours, we’ll be
side-tracked. Of course until then Charlie is safe
from us, if he doesn’t play the fool. By the way, I
wonder who has been cutting out the words in this
proclamation about him ? I didn't know he had any
friends."
“ Oh, I think he has a good number. But sit down
on that log and let us sample this tea. They say that
these lime springs make excellent tea."
“ Thanks. If you ever strike any of our fellows on
the trail, don tbe slow in chiming in. We all know
the Fighting Parson, and there will always be a billy
of tea ready for him. Have you heard anything about
the new rush out Crocodile Crossing way ? "
“ A little. I passed that way recently, and saw the
prospectors working, but all the information I have
was gleaned in Murgoona to-day. There was copper
found, I believe ? "
“ Yes > over 20 per cent, stuff too. Micky Keegan
struck it, and every man between here and the coast
who can raise the price of flour for a damper is on the
move for the place."
“ * think we might put in a week there, sergeant,"
2


spoke the second trooper; “ Charlie is almost sure to
come down when he hears of the rush."
“ No, that means we should keep away. We might
catch him," replied the sergeant. “ We'll camp here
until to-morrow, it’s getting on in the afternoon any-
way, and then go on to Caledonia Camp ; they keep
good tucker there, and we’ll hear all the latest news
from the boys."
“Very well, gentlemen,” said the parson; “we are
going to Caledonia Camp now; I shall tell the boys
you are coming along to-morrow. We’ll say goodbye
here though, for I may not be there when you come ; I
am going round all the camps just now, and my time
is limited.”
“ Aren’t you afraid of falling in with Chillagoe
Charlie ? " asked the younger trooper. “ People say
he doesn’t pull with parsons at all."
“ I am not afraid of him,” responded the parson ; “ I
am sure he is not so black as he is painted."
“ Have you ever met him, sir ?" asked the ser-
geant, as they finished tea and began to pack up the
utensils.
“No, I can’t say that I have ever actually met him,"
answered the parson, “ but I happen to know him,
nevertheless.”
“ Then tell him to clear out farther west, or north,
when you do meet him, or, rather, tell his friends
to give him the tip, when you meet them. We must
do our duty, you know, however unpleasant ’’
“ I understand," interrupted the parson. “ When the
special pay ceases you must remember you are paid
by the Government to do certain work, and you’ll
do it, no matter what happens. If what I have
heard of Chillagoe Charlie is right though, 1 do not
think you need fear that he will fall into your hands.


They say he is wonderfully clever at disguising
himself.”
“ And that’s a fact. Why, the man actually camped
with the local police one night in Murgoona. He
passed himself off as a stranded actor whose company
had bursted up in Chillagoe, and kept the boys
splitting their sides with his yarns. In the morning,
too, they called on some of the leading miners and
made a kind of collection for him, to finance him
until he struck better days, and the sergeant in charge
gave him a pass down the line to Cairns.”
“ But how did the police discover who their guest
was?” asked Tom, feeding Nigger with the remnants
of their lunch.
u They didn't, until he wrote a letter from some-
where thanking them for their hospitality, and stuck
his handle at the bottom of it.”
“ Might not that have been done by some one else
as a joke?” continued Tom.
“No fear; I don’t reckon there is a man in North
Queensland who would risk signing himself Chillagoe
Charlie for all the copper between here and the Palmer
River.”
“Well, it is time we were moving, gentlemen,"
observed the parson ; “ I wonder what you would
say if I told you I was Chillagoe Charlie ? Come,
Tom, you are coming with me "
“We should say you were intending to stand for
Parliament next election and were practising,” laughed
the sergeant.
“ Sort of changing from a minister of the Church
into one of the State,” added the junior; “George
Washington and Ananias couldn't hold a candle to
our M.P.'s. Give our love to Charlie all the same
and say we hope to meet him some time soon—that is,
if you happen to come across him.”


“ I'll deliver your message by some means," laughed
the parson ; “ but what if he thinks you mean what
you say, and comes to see you ? ”
“ I reckon he’ll find us at home when he calls,” said
the sergeant; “ but that can’t be soon, for a message
came only this morning from O. K. township saying he
was seen up there; that’s why we are coming out this
way instead of going north that way.”
“Ah, well, boys, we’ll get on the track again. We
want to get into Caledonia Camp before the afternoon
shift goes out to work. Goodbye.”
“ Goodbye, sir ; goodbye, lad,” cried the men.
“We’ll come along to-morrow and listen to your
sermon if you’re there.”
The parson climbed into the buggy. “ Come on,
Tom,” he said, “you’re coming with me. Lift Nigger
inside, he’ll burn his paws running alongside on the
hot sand.”
“ I am very grateful to you, sir, for your offer to
drive me to the camp, but it would be taking too
great advantage of your kindness were I to accept,”
answered Tom; “Nigger and I will walk on slowly
ourselves.”
“ Hear the kid,” muttered the troopers ; “he thinks
he is still down South.”
“ Get up beside me,” said the parson ; “ there is not
a man in North Queensland but who would do all
that I am doing for you, and why, therefore, should
not I do any little thing I can to make things easier for
you ? ”
“ Get on board, boy,” said the sergeant; “ even
Chillagoe Charlie would give you a lift if he were
going in your direction.”
Tom made no further objection. He climbed up
beside the parson, and Nigger found a cool spot


behind some boxes in the body of the buggy, and
soon they were out in the broiling sun again.
But the horses were fresh, and well used to pulling
through the sands in the North Queensland back-
blocks. A dwarfed form of scrub now flanked the
track, and noisy members of the parrot family flitted
among the shadeless branches. An occasional kan-
garoo, too, hopped along the roadway beside them,
and in the far distance a mob of horses could be seen
endeavouring to find something to eat amidst the
sparse vegetation that existed in the scrub.
“ This is surely a better country we are coming
into,” Tom ventured, after they had travelled a mile
in silence ; “ the scrub seems getting larger, and the
bird life is more plentiful.”
“Yes; we’ve left the limestone belt behind us now,
and are in settled country. That line of bluffs we
crossed back at the spring extends in a line as straight
as could be laid out with a theodolite for hundreds of
miles north-west and south-east. Has that fact any
significance to you ? ”
“I am afraid not, sir; I am not very strong on
geology.”
“ Then I will tell you something which I hope you
will keep in mind should you ever go out prospecting
for minerals on your own account. That line of
bluffs marks the point of contact between two different
countries, and where any change in country occurs
near limestone there you may look for minerals.—Am
I boring you ? ”
“Oh, no, sir; I want all the knowledge I can get;
please go on.”
“Well, you know all North Queensland was once
volcanic, and the crust of the earth is broken up by
innumerable cracks and fissures. Now, without say-


ing anything about either of the two theories which
different schools advance to account for the existence
of fissure lodes—one set says they were filled with their
mineral contents from the surface, and the other asserts
that they could only be filled from below—it is fairly
well proved that these cracks filled with water some-
how, which carried away in solution the various
minerals which were solvent that it encountered.
These waters carried their copper, silver, lead, and
other minerals until they met limestone formations,
and there chemical action was set up by the action of
carbonic acid gas on the solutions, resulting in the
throwing down of the mineral contents. Now, do you
see what I mean when I tell you to always examine
the country carefully near limestone formations ? ”
“ I do, sir ; and the knowledge, slight as it is, which
I have of chemistry makes me understand fully what
you have said about the ore-deposition of minerals by
the action of carbonic acid gas. I shall remember
your words if ever I go prospecting, and I thank you
for the hint.”
“You are going prospecting, my lad, and that soon ;
it is in your blood, and you can no more resist the
call of the silent untrodden bush than could your
uncle ”
“My uncle? Did you know him?” Tom almost
jumped from his seat in his excitement.
“ I was speaking of a type, my lad ; you told me
your uncle was an explorer. It so happens, how-
ever” —the parson’s voice had changed suddenly—
“that I did know a man bearing the same name as
you. That was long ago. He belonged to that
famous Legion that never was listed. You will find
his name treasured among those hardy pioneers
who first pushed through to the great land of the


West. He was one of them; but do you remember
him ?"
“ No, sir; I was too young when he left home ; but
I have often heard my mother say that he was one of
the best men who ever lived, and, despite all that
people have said of him, I want to find him and tell
him that I don't believe he ever did what they
said ”
“He didn’t, boy. Whatever your uncle may be
now—if he is alive—he lived a straight life as long
But dear me, I am perhaps talking of another person
altogether. We’ll change the subject, Tom; for his
name I am going to take you in charge, whether he
was your uncle or not. I have great influence in this
country, and I will put you in a way to carve out your
fortune, honestly, and as a true Briton.”
“Thank you, sir ; but I am afraid that I cannot put
my mind to fortune-making now. You have fired me
with the idea of finding my uncle, and I will go on
wandering until I have left my footprints all over this
great land. You said he went out West, sir ? Did
you mean the Gulf?”
“No, I referred to Western Australia. He crossed
to the northern goldfields of that territory by an over-
land route—the first to do so.”
“Then I will do the same. Nigger and I will just
keep going until we get there ”
“ It’s thousands of miles. Nature is not kind to
those who dare her solitudes. Fierce native tribes bar
the way. Death from fever, and horrible wasting
diseases, lurks all along the track, and it is now well
marked with the bleached bones of many who have
tried the journey.”
“ I don’t care ; it doesn’t matter to any one whether
I die or not, and I am going "


“ Boy, you are not. There have been enough
victims of that overland track. Life is full of promise
for you. Those who cross that desolate waste never
return—at least ” He stopped abruptly, and then
continued in an altered voice, " Tom, life is very
strenuous up here. Men dare death every day and
think little of it. Men, too, for many reasons often
drop their name, or assume another —no one knows
my name, for instance, and yet I preach the gospel
wherever I go. Perhaps your uncle came back to this
side ; perhaps, under some other name, he is still
pioneering in this, the great, the fascinating Gulf
country.”
“ You talk strangely, sir. How can a sand waste
like this be fascinating?”
“ The Gulf country is not all like this. This part is
the bed of an ancient sea, or lake ; but out beyond the
Walsh River stretches a mountain chain that belched
forth fire from its towering peaks before Babylon saw
light. My boy, Australia is both the oldest and the
newest land tract on the surface of old Mother Earth.
It is more than probable that the fleets of an ancient
Oriental civilisation sailed over what is now the great
continent of the South, but while they did so the
flaming summits of many islands lit their course.
The sea has now drained off, because of the gradual
upheaval of its bed, and the island mountains have
long since lost their internal fires. They are now a
series of more or less connected ridges in a sea of
sand which in places has been silted up by the fierce
desert tornadoes until it has become difficult to tell
where the original country once existed. What I
have said applies to the desolate heart of Australia ;
but up here we are on the fringe of the ancient Austral
sea, in a land that, with New Guinea, Borneo, and the


islands of the Malaysian Archipelago, formed a conti-
nent larger by far than Europe. Here was the scene
of Nature’s wildest convulsions. When the land now
forming Central Australia rose from the waste of
tumultuous waters, it cast back the sea to the north and
to the south in monstrous waves that must have over-
topped the highest points of the previously existing
land. These floods poured down the craters of the
great volcanic chain which forms the backbone of
this peninsula, and then ensued a battle such as the
mind of man cannot conceive. Fiercely strove the
fire and water for the possession of the earth’s heart,
but Providence is all wise, and in the Great Architect’s
plan of things this present land of the South had to be
born and shaped out of the battle. Thus, the internal
fires turned the water into steam, which, ever expand-
ing, and finding no egress because of the tremendous
volumes of water which filled the flue, grew terrific in
its pent-up force, and finally burst asunder the walls
which contained it, and shattered the ranges into
fragments. Then were formed all the ground cracks
and fissure lodes ; then were thrown high those grim
ironstone peaks you can see scattered around on every
hand ; and then was this country wrenched apart from
its parent, and a new home for Britannia’s sons formed.
Australia had risen, and the waters which it had rolled
back filled the great gulfs blown out of the earlier
land, separating it into thousands of islands, of which
the chief are New Guinea, Borneo, Java, Sumatra,
Calebes, and the Moluccas. Thus you can understand
that we are now entering a country which, although
an integral part of Australia, has more in common with
the islands mentioned. It is a land in which Nature
has laid her treasures on top, and where copper, silver,
gold, and many other minerals exist side by side, and


sometimes even form part of the same lode. Soon
you will know this land as an open book, and perhaps
be able to clear away a little more of the mist which
enshrouds its past —as your uncle tried to do.”
The parson ceased talking and gave his attention to
the horses, and Tom remained deep in thought. At
last he spoke : “ Was my uncle really a man like—like
—I mean could he talk as you do ? ”
“The Tom Willoughby I knew was considered the
greatest authority on the geological formations of these
parts in Australia. It is his words, so far as my
memory carries me, that I have been giving to you.”
“ And you think there is a chance of his still being
somewhere in North Queensland.”
“ I do ; he loved it, and if he is ever found, it will be
somewhere between here and Cape York, at the north
end of the Peninsula.”
“ Oh, if my uncle was a man anything like you, I
would give half my life to be with him.”
“He is like me—in fact, at times people have
thought But ‘there is Caledonia Camp over on
the right. We’ve been travelling faster than I was
aware. We'll get off and brush ourselves free of sand
and dust so as to be as presentable as possible.”
The parson dropped the reins and the horses at once
stopped, and the two jumped down on the track,
where Nigger promptly joined them. Half hidden
among some pandanas palm-trees were dotted a
number of tents which in the afternoon sun shone out
dazzlingly white. There seemed to be about a score of
them of various sizes all covered with a shade made of
branches, and a large dump of mullock glittering in
the intense sunlight indicated the presence of one of
the mines.
The parson put on his coat and substituted a more


orthodox hat for his helmet, and then intimated that he
was ready to proceed. “ The manager here is a great
friend of mine," he said, “ as are also most of the men.
It so happens, however, that there is one shift of
miners I have never met —there are three shifts of
eight hours each, you know, on the mines—and we
may perhaps strike them.”
“ And if we do ? " inquired Tom, wondering vaguely
what sort of position he should take up among the
miners into whose midst he was to be thus so abruptly
brought.
“Oh, I suppose we’ll just have to introduce our-
selves. As a rule the men don’t like parsons, because
those appointed by the society for whom I work are
not always suited for work in mining camps ; but
don’t you mind, I can handle them all right."
They resumed their journey, and followed a bush
track, which left the main one, until they broke out
into the clearing in the middle of which stood the
camp. No signs of life were visible, but as they drew
up a couple of dogs awoke from a pleasant sleep in the
shade of one of the tents and came out to investigate.
Then Nigger saw them, and the silence of the camp
was rudely broken by the sounds of warfare. Tom
sprang to pull Nigger clear of the fray, and as he did
so men suddenly appeared at the doors of several tents
and blinked lazily at the intruders.
“ Say there," cried one, “ what does ye mean kick-
ing up such a racket at this time of day ? We’ve got
to go on duty at four o’clock, an' it aint fair kicking us
up at three."
It's a parson, mates," cried another. “ Maybe he’s
come to tell us how we won’t feel the heat if we are
good an’ go to Sunday School ’’
“ Where is the manager, boys ? ” called out the


object of their remarks cheerily, after greeting all with
the usual greeting of the bush, “ Good-day, mates."
“ He’s up at the No. 3 shaft an’ won't be back
until he sees our shift started at four o’clock,"
answered one of the men.
“ Ah, well, we can wait till becomes," continued the
parson, beginning to unharness the horses. “ Can any
of you boys tell us where we can get water for our
animals ? ”
“ Hold hard, parson," shouted a man ; “ ye needn’t
get ready to camp here; you'll find water in the
vertical shaft of that mine over there, if ye like to haul
it for yourself, but anyhow I reckon ye’d better git on
the move again, for we aint soft soap on parsons in
this camp. Are we, mates ?" The man turned to his
comrades, who had now gathered round.
“Not much," they responded as one man.
“ Parsons aint no good except among women folk.
They tell them ghost stories of lands where there
aren’t anything to do but squat in the shade beside a
water-bag all day, and twang at a golden harp,”
supplemented another, a rough-looking fellow of most
powerful build.
“ Best get started on the track again, parson," said
some one ; “ there is a camp of Sunday-school people
at Moldiva Creek."
“ I see you men don’t know me," observed the
parson, coolly, setting the horses free. “I am not
anxious to meet Sunday-school people; it is the
untamed sons of the wild I wish to see, and although
I did not intend holding services until Sunday, I now
perceive that it is my duty to address you right here,
for never a set of men more needing a civilising
influence among them have I met.—Hold these horses
Tom."


“ Blow ye for a psalm-singin’ monkey-faced parrot,”
cried the powerfully built man. “ Has ye the blamed
cheek to tell us to our faces that we is uncivilised ? ”
“ You certainly are, or you would attend to the first
laws of bush hospitality ”
“ Which doesn't count with fat, sleeky parsons,
who ”
“And as I am neither fat nor sleeky your remarks
are out of place, Jim Smith ; I know you by reputa-
tion ; you are the bully of this camp, as you have been
of every camp in which you were employed ”
“What does ye say?” gasped the astonished man.
“ 111 hammer the life outen ye, ye glory-prospector,
ye —ye ”
“ That will do, Smith ; don't use language which
those cockatoos in that tree up there might carry into
respectable camps. You are full of surplus energy
I see, and as I suppose you will soon be picking a
quarrel with some of your comrades to get rid of it, I
here invite you to step out and hammer me to your
heart’s content.”
“Boys, the parson is game,” cried a man. “Let’s
be decent to him.”
“Ye can be what ye like to him when I have
done with him,” growled Jim Smith savagely ; “an’ I
reckon a stretcher is about the best thing you could
get for him.”
He advanced towards the parson threateningly, and
the others gathered round.


CHAPTER II
THE MEN OF CALEDONIA CAMP
TOM was not yet accustomed to the impetuous
manner in which matters moved in the Gulf
country, and he had been picturing to himself the
ideal life of a camp such as the one he now stood
in until he suddenly became aware that trouble was
at hand, and that his friend was actually preparing
to fight. The thought staggered him. How could
the parson, he who had proved himself to be a
true seeker after knowledge, and such a sympathetic
student of humanity, stand up against this great,
hulking person who was coming forward to do him
bodily harm ? And, what was more to the point,
how could he help him ?
But he was given little time to think, for Smith
had swung out his enormous fist in the parson’s
face, muttering a ribald joke at the same time, and
a murmur of disapproval arose from the onlookers,
who had scaicely expected that their comrade would
really attack the poor harmless parson. But the
poor harmless parson did not seem to be in the
least put about, and when Smith’s swinging blow
came round, and the crowd roared in anticipation
of the result, he simply ducked and allowed


K JV 4t
W'yjKL M 4 \ \ J4
F 'A B «
K7# ■ >J JA ffe W ■ M
< ,^ r "!; ** ' - •" w ** *
| '>■..- I
THE LEFT-HANDER MADE HIM REEL BACK AND THE RIGHT
KNOCKED HIM OVER
(i




the man’s arm to pass over his head. Then,
before Smith realised that he had missed his
mark, his left hand shot out and upwards, quickly
followed by his right, which went straight forward
from the shoulder ; the left-hander met Smith under
the chin and made him reel back, and the right
knocked him over.
“ First round to the parson," shouted the men.
“ Come on, Smith. Stand to time.”
Smith got up sullenly and made a vicious rush at
the parson, but somehow Nigger got between his legs,
and he tripped and fell heavily to the ground before
he got within reach of his smiling opponent.
“Second round to the parson," cried the men,
seemingly well pleased. “Get up, Smith."
Again Smith rose to his feet and rushed at the
parson, and this time the two men closed together,
but only for a moment, then Smith dropped, a limp
mass on the sand, and lay still.
“Third round to the parson," shrieked the men,
almost joyfully.
“And last, I think," added that individual. “Smith
will not want any more. I got home with my own
special trick that time, and no one ever wants a second
instalment.”
Nor did Smith ; he lay where he had fallen until
some of the men lifted him and carried him over to a
water-tank. There, they emptied a bucket of the semi-
cold fluid over him and left him to recover at his own
sweet will.
“ Would any other man like to provide entertain-
ment for the rest ? " asked the parson invitingly. “ I
usually have to knock out at least two in every camp
before I get its freedom."
“ I don’t reckon I want to quarrel with a man who


spiflicated Smith,” laughed one man. “You have the
run of this camp for me, boss.”
“ And for me, too,” echoed several.
“ Here’s the day shift coming home, boys, we’re
late,” cried one. “ Smash into them too, parson, an’
ye’ll have us all Sunday-school scholars afore we know
where we is.”
“ I have already had the pleasure of meeting these
gentlemen coming from the mine,” spoke the parson.
“ They are all my friends, as is also the manager of
this camp. Kindly take Smith away with you, if you
really must go ; but remember you have got to listen
to a few words to-morrow.”
“ Hullo, parson ! ” shouted one of the approaching
men. “ I is mighty glad to get my blinkers on ye;
when did ye strike the camp ? ”
“My horses have not yet been watered, Dave,”
returned the parson; “ I’ve been giving my creden-
tials to your mates of the afternoon shift.”
“An' he knocked out Jim Smith in three rounds,”
sang out the men; “ he’s a bosker fighting parson all
right.”
“ Of course he is,” returned Dave ; and his comrades
of the shift coming off work laughed. Their intro-
duction to the parson had been effected in a manner
similar to that of the second shift a year before.
“ We’ll attend to your nags, parson,” sang out the
newcomers, as their comrades walked over to the
mine to take up the work where the former men
had left off.
“ Hullo, boys, what is wrong now ? Who is causing
trouble this time ? The speaker was a slimly built
young man, who in addition to the ordinary garments
of the Gulf country wore a collar and tie, and sported
an eyeglass and top-boots. He had ridden up behind


the men unperceived. His horse was a noble-looking
animal which, even in that country, where the horse is
man's chief friend, would have attracted attention, and
his saddle and bridle were of the best English leather
and pattern.
“ It’s the boss," exclaimed the men in chorus, evi-
dently surprised somewhat at seeing him. “ There
aint no trouble this time, boss," added Dave, who
seemed to be a sort of foreman in the party; “ the
parson struck the camp afore we came off work and
Jim Smith got to business with him, and there he is
lying over beside the water-tank."
“ Good afternoon, Mr. Hornsby," the parson called
out; “ I hope everything is going well on the deep
levels ? ”
“Now, why didn’t you send out word with any of
the teamsters that you were coming our way ? ” said
Mr. Hornsby, dismounting and throwing his reins to
one of the men ; “ I might have missed you, for I was
over at some shows on the Tate River and did not
intend to come back for a day or two." He shook
hands with the parson, then giving some orders to
Dave, led the way to the manager's house—a long,
low, bungalow-like structure which stood on a rise
about a hundred yards distant from the camp.
“ Dave,” said the parson, as he followed, “ this
young man is a friend of mine. Look after him in
the meantime, and bring him over to the house when
I send fpr him."
“ I’ll be kinder to him, parson, than a card-sharper
down South is to a new chum with whips o’ money."
“Then, Tom, I'll send for you after I have talked
over some things with Mr. Hornsby. I think we'll
get you fixed here for a time until you gain some
experience."


“ Come on, youngster,” said Dave ; “ I’ll interduce
ye to the boys. Can ye do anything?”
“ I have had very little mining experience as yet,”
Tom replied, “ but I am not afraid of work.”
“ Work. Only fools work, an’ the less ye know of
mining the luckier ye’ll be prospecting.”
“But do not the men of this camp work ?” asked
Tom in surprise.
“ Not much, you bet. A man here is only supposed
to go down the shaft with his shift mates, jump a
round of holes with his drills into the lode, plug them
full of gelagnite, fire them, an' scoot for the top.
When the gas clears away he goes back an’ shovels
the ore into buckets, which his mate hauls up, then he
starts all over again, an’ goes on until his eight hours
are up, or the hanging wall falls in on him.”
“ But isn’t that work ? ”
“ No, bless you, no, that's exercise. If we didn’t do
that we’d get soft and flabby like a policeman, an’ be
no use when a new rush broke out anywhere Oh, I
don't suppose ye didn’t happen to hear nothing about
that new strike at Crocodile Crossing, did ye ? ”
“ I heard two troopers mention that name back at
that spring under the last lime bluff.”
“Troopers. What are they doin’ out this way, I
would like to know ? ”
“They said they were trying to evade catching
Chillagoe Charlie.”
“ And by my water-bag. They’ve sense. They know
that if they did collar him he’d burn their fingers so
much that they wouldn’t be able to pull a trigger for
months after. But you’ll find water for a wash in
that bucket, an after you ve done we ll see about
tucker.”
Tom indulged in the luxury of a wash, and then


Dave brought him into the circle of men standing
round the camp fire watching the preparation the
Japanese cook was making for their evening meal.
“ Boys, stand out, or show yourselves somehow
when your handle is called,” spoke Dave; “I reckon
this youngster has got to know ye all ”
“Cut it, Dave, and get ahead with the ceremony,”
interrupted one of the men, a pleasant-faced person of
most untidy appearance otherwise.
“The gentleman who spoke is Dirty Sam,” pro-
ceeded Dave; “he can’t mine worth three old postage
stamps, but he’s a bosker on the shoot; isn't he a
dandy ? ”
Dirty Sam bowed in approved fashion, and Dave
went on—
“ That fellow next him is Peter the Poet. He could
give fits to Kipling.”
Peter the Poet acknowledged his title with a depre-
cating smile.
“Ginger Bob, Tommy the Kangaroo, Bullocky Bill,
Mike O’Flannigan, and Hungry Ted—that’s them as
they are standing ; my own full ticket is Psalm-singing
Dave, 'cos I has to sing a hymn or something now,
since the Fighting Parson went for me, every time I
feel like swearing.”
“And he is always singing,” laughed Dirty Sam.
“Well, aint I a man of my word ? The parson told
me that if I didn’t stop swearing he’d wallop me, an’
I told him that if he could wallop me I would stop.”
“ Yes, but finish the yarn, Dave,” cried Ginger Bob.
“ Why, he went for me as easy as a skeeter goes for
a new chum ”
“But that’s not all. Out with the rest,” persisted
the gingery one.
“You’re gettin’ mighty particular, Ginger,” said


Dave. “ You all know that I kept from swearin’for
nearly three-quarters of a day, although it was power-
fully hard; but when Tommy the Kangaroo went an'
fell down the Number One shaft an’ burst the pair of
pants I had given him a day of, what man could keep
from swearing ? I tell ye, it wasn't natural; so I
hunted up the parson an’ told him I would peg out
if he wouldn't let me out of my bargain. He said
it was impossible; but he gave me the tip to sing a
hymn when I felt the desire cornin’ on, an' I’ve done
that ever since."
Just then the cook announced that everything was
ready, and the men took their places round a table
built with the boards of discarded packing-cases.
“So now ye know us all, youngster,” continued
Dave, as the meal proceeded; “we are the day-shift
men of Caledonia Camp, but we are also the boss’s
own men. It’s him we work for, not the great million-
aires away in England who own the mines.”
“Are the men of the other two shifts not the same as
you ?” Tom asked, feeling quite at home among the
quaint, picturesquely named miners.
“ Not much,” snorted Bullocky Bill; “ they're only a
scratch lot put on to help us to get the mines down
into the sulphides as soon as possible. You have
nothing to do with them, they are a bad lot.”
“I’ll bet any one of them could give points to
Chillagoe Charlie for downright cussedness,” said
Peter the Poet. “That fellow Smith, for instance,
looks as if hanging would do him good.”
“ But say, boy, how did you come to fall in with the
parson ? ” suddenly inquired Dirty Sam. “ You can't
have known him long, for your face shows you are a
stranger in the Gulf country.”
“He overtook me back at that spring to-day. I was


coming out this way looking for work of some kind,
and he took me with him,” answered Tom. “ I can do
assay work fairly well, and he thought I might be
useful here.”
“Then you’ll be stayin’with us?” observed Dave,
refilling his enamelled cup with hot tea from the billy.
“ Lad, we make you welcome ; it’s a mighty long time
since we saw a face that hadn’t got Gulf written all
over it.”
“ I do hope I may be allowed to stay among you,”
Tom said. “Until to-day I had no friends anywhere,
and now that I have met so many I will feel very
queerly if Nigger and I have to wander on again
ourselves.”
“There aint no fear of that, my boy,” said Dave,
“We ” He paused abruptly and next moment
began singing lustily “ There is a happy land.”
“ Shut up ! ” roared the men ; “ you've swore all
day with that tune.”
The singer again stopped and glared round the table.
“Oh ” he began, but recollecting himself in time
the expletive died on his lips, and instead he warbled
“ Way down upon the Swanee River.”
“ That's not a hymn, Dave,” corrected Dirty Sam.
“ But what's the matter, anyhow ?"
“ A tarantula has just taken enough outen my leg in
one bite to last it for a week Oh ! that will be
joyful ! ”
“ I’m jiggered if ye look it,” put in Tommy the
Kangaroo.
But Dave was now dancing round the table. He
had killed the creature when first he had felt the
intense burning sensation in his limb, but the pain was
now almost more than he could bear, and the perspi-
ration streamed from his rugged face. “ Glory, Glory


Hallelujah !" he next tried but with no soothing
results; then crying out, “ Boys, I must swear or I'll
burst,” he rushed from the table and began racing
round the camp. While engaged in this form of
exercise, and receiving much strange advice from his
comrades who stood watching, the sun went down
behind the western scrub, and the stars shone out
above.
At length Dave threw himself down exhausted and
Tom, who had meanwhile been foraging in a case of
assaying chemicals which had only arrived that day,
and had not yet been placed under cover, rolled up
the leg of Dave's trousers and applied some fluid from
a bottle he had found. The treatment seemed to
relieve the sufferer greatly, and he sat up and watched
Tom interestedly. Peter the Poet had lit a candle, and
although the microscopic prick of the wound itself
was barely discernible, the swelling around it was
ample guide as to its whereabouts.
“ Kick me, boys, if I thought on that,” Dave ex-
claimed, as the pungent smell of the lotion revealed
its identity. “Ammonia is good for all sorts of
poisonous bites or stings. Are ye a bit of a doctor,
youngster ? "
“Not much,” replied Tom; “but I am sure that is
much less painful now.”
“ It's almost away—and, boys, I didn't swear after all.
My word's not broken.”
The men moved over to the camp fire, and squatted
round the cheerful blaze of some cedar logs, not by
any means for warmth, for the temperature at the
moment throughout the camp was io6° and would not
fall two points during the entire night. But the innu-
merable pests which come forth after dark in North
Queensland do not like the smoke of a camp fire, and


therefore man has so adapted himself that he feels
there is something wrong if a blinding smoke-cloud
does not hang about him.
Sitting thus the men in turn told some of their many
strange experiences in the Gulf country and elsewhere.
Mike O'Flannigan, a quiet, undemonstrative man,
whose speech had in it hardly any trace of the brogue
his name —if it were his real name—would have led
one to expect, told how he had taken part in the
Mount Scratchley gold rush over in New Guinea, and
Ginger Bob gave his experiences while on a prospect-
ing trip right up to Cape York.
“ But how did you get along with the Chinkies, Bob ? ”
Dave asked ; “we had whips of trouble with the yellow
beggars on the Palmer River.”
“ We rubbed along somehow,” Ginger Bob answered,
“ but we kept as far away from the Palmer as we could.
Have you ever heard of their hidden city somewhere
up there ? ”
“ Haven't I? ” said Dave. “ Don't I know over a
dozen prospectors who got their last call while hunting
round for it ? I would like to be one of a party to go
an’ wipe them out, city and all.”
“ I took part in that wolfram rush over on the
Mitchell,” began Tommy the Kangaroo. “We were
chased away by the yellowskins, who came over from
the Palmer like droves of cattle. They fell in after all,
though, for the wolfram was too poor to get a fair
price.”
“That reminds me, boys,” interrupted Dirty Sam.
“ What about this new rush at Crocodile Crossing ?
It seems to be a big thing. A couple of swaggies
came over to the mine to-day, while I was at the wind-
lass, for a drink of water, and they told me that the
whole population of the Peninsula were making for it.”


“ But what is the rush on ? ” asked Peter the Poet.
“ Is it g° ld » or copper, or diamonds, or has tin been
struck out there ? The country near the Crossing
looks as if it could carry tin, and it commands a boncer
price just now."
No one seems to know exactly what has been
found,” answered Dirty Sam. “It is just a rush, and
maybe it s for false teeth. Old Cowley, the Govern-
ment Mine Inspector, lost his out that way, he told the
boss, and maybe some one has found them and thinks
there are reefs of them somewhere around."
At this point Nigger, who had that night enjoyed
the best meal that had ever come his way, roused him-
self from his master’s feet and began barking, and the
men looked round to see the reason.
“ It<s the boss and the parson,” said Dave ; “ I hear
their voices."
I don t think it can be them Nigger is barking
for," said Tom ; “ Nigger knows them, and that is not
the bark he has for friends."
The men laughed at the idea of the dog's language
being understood by Tom, and Peter the Poet said,
Well, reckon he s cheated you this time, for here
they are, and as he spoke the mine manager and the
parson stepped into the fire-lit circle.
Nigger, however, still continued to bark until Tom
ordered him to desist, and then he went out into the
darkness growling.
“ Well, boys, telling yarns as usual,” the youthful
manager called out; “ I’ve come over to get this young
gentleman to sign on with us. Tell him, parson."
“ You are now the official assayer of the Caledonia
group of mines, Tom," said the parson.
“ And 1 have brought some work for you to do now,
my lad that is, if you can work out any analysis in


candle light.” He produced a piece of something that
looked like a stone picked from the ground and handed
it to Tom. “ Can you do anything with that,” he
asked, “without daylight ? It is rather important that
I should know. It’s copper, of course.”
Tom’s heart had fallen when he realised that he was
asked to assay a piece of ore without the aid of day-
light. The volumetric process, which was the system
he had specially studied, depended for its accuracy
upon the correct reading of the tints the dissolved
metal assumed when cyanide of potassium of known
strength was added, and in artificial light it was almost
impossible to read the colours correctly. But when
he saw the ore a feeling of relief came over him, and
he said, “I don’t require to assay that piece of ore,
sir, to tell you its contents. It goes twenty-four, point
five, per cent, copper, fourteen ounces of silver, and
four pennyweights of gold to the ton.”
“ Howling dingoes !” yelled the men in amazement.
“ I'll be baked into a damper if I ever heard of any
fellow who could tell ye the copper, silver, and gold in
an ore by just looking at it,” supplemented Dave. “ Has
it got a ticket on its back tellin' ye ? ”
Plainly the men were incredulous, but the parson
and the manager looked at each other curiously. Tom
had told them the copper percentage exactly that which
a hurried assay made by the parson before sundown
had showed the specimen to contain.
“ Boys, Tom is right,” said the manager ; “ but how
he knows is a mystery to me. It takes me all my time
to assay a piece of ore with all my appliances, and even
then, it would take me half a day to tell the gold, silver,
and copper.”
The parson was greatly astonished. “ How did you
know, Tom ? You did not guess, I'm sure.”


That s a sample from Crocodile Crossing anyway,
boys. I rode out there to-day,” said the manager.
When I picked that up I came back in a hurry to get
it assayed, and it looks as if we had better make a try
to peg out some ground there now. Ore like that,
carrying gold and silver, doesn't exist everywhere. But
are you sure, Tom ? ”
I am, sir; but let me explain how I happen to
know, and then you’ll know what to think about the
matter. I walked up from the coast all the way until
to-day, looking for work. Down the railway line no
one would employ me for fear of the new labour laws,
although at every camp I struck the manager was
always willing to give me what he called an odd job,
and pay me well for it. Thus I got out here ; but
during the last week I have seen pieces of that ore,
bits all broken from the same original specimen, I
should say, in every camp I entered. At first I assayed
the stuff, as requested, for few of the small camps have
any one who can do that work, and the men were
afraid to send the specimen away to the professional
assayers, thinking the specimen might be traced by
them to where it came from and the ground jumped.
My first assay gave me the results I have given you*
and six times since then I have gone carefully through
the same process, with the same results, at different
camps. My last attempt was to-day in Murgoona.
Some one had told a saloon keeper there that I
was an assayer, and he called me in and gave me all
the materials to work with. But I knew the ore by
this time, and therefore was not surprised to get once
more the same result. The hotel keeper offered to
employ me as an odd man and pay me full labour
wages if I would stay with him and do any assaying
work he might require done ; he seemed to be gamb-


ing a great deal in mining properties, but I didn’t
come to the Gulf country to accept charity from a
saloon keeper, so I came on here.”
“And that is another piece of the same ore, Tom ? ”
the parson asked.
“ I am positively sure, sir.”
“ What game is on, parson, and who is working
it ? ” The speaker was Mr. Hornsby.
“ I can’t imagine, but it is a deep one at any rate.
You found the specimen yourself ? ”
“ I did ; but then I went about the reef as any pros-
pector would have done, and it is possible that that
piece of ore was placed by a clever man just where a
practised prospector would look for it,”
“ Snakes, boys 1 ” gasped Peter the Poet. “ It's
somebody trying to make a rush. Crocodile Cross-
ing is a fake.”
“That are a fact,” agreed Tommy the Kangaroo ;
“ but what’s the idea in the thing, and who is behind it ? ”
“ Most likely a gang of the hotel and shanty keepers
between here an' down the line somewhere,” said
Bullocky Bill, “ They'll raise the rush an’ sell out
their claims to green new chums before it bursts.”
“At anyrate, Tom,” said the parson, who had been
talking in an undertone to Mr. Hornsby, “the labour
conditions of Queensland need not trouble you any
longer. You are now among men who will stick to
you; but have as little dealings as possible with the
other two shifts; they are not the sort of men Mr.
Hornsby and I have had with us on our trips, as
your present comrades are. They are merely em-
ployed by the Caledonia Company, and may, or may
not, be decent fellows. But goodbye just now, Tom.
I may not see you in the morning, but I'll look you
up soon.”


“ Are you going away, sir ? " cried Tom in surprise,
not unmixed with sorrow.
“ I have an important engagement which I had
almost forgotten, my boy, but all arrangements are
made for you. Dave, I put Tom in your hands.
Good-night all."
And take a look round the camp, men,” said
Mr. Hornsby. “ I am sure, from the way that dog is
behaving, that there is some one about. Good-night.”
" Go od-night, boss ; good-night, parson,” responded
the men, and the two walked out into the night.
“ 1 wouldn't mind going nap on the fact that there
really is some one hanging about the camp,” ventured
Hungry Ted, who had been unusually silent all
e\ening. “That dog out there is nearly bursting to
bark, but daren’t 'cos his boss told him not to.”
Ask him what is the reason of his antics,” said
Dirty Sam to Tom.
“ 111 bet be>s llke me,” grinned Dave ; “he was told
not to bark, an he doesn’t know any hymn to sing
instead. Do ye know, I reckon a dog thinks he is
kicking up blazes when he's barking.”
Come here, Nigger, Tom called out, and immedi-
ately his little four-footed friend was by his side,
trembling with excitement.
“ Wha * is it ? ” asked Tom. “ Any one coming ? ”
Then Nigger voiced his thoughts, and so plain & were
they to all, that Dave said, “ Great Gulf of Carpentaria 1
that quadruped has an onusually powerful command
of language. Hear him, mates. He says as plain as
that mosquito on Ginger’s nose that we’re too late to
see people coming—that they’re here now.”
Nigger ran out growling ferociously, and the men
followed.
It will be some of the other shift over for tools or


a bucket of drinking water/’ spoke Ginger Bob as
they got out into the surrounding bush.
“No fear ; here’s a couple of saddled horses hitched
to this tree,” sang out Tommy the Kangaroo.
“An' they’re Government horses,” cried Dave, ex-
amining their bridles intently. “ There’s troopers
skulking about the tents. My 1 we’ll all be robbed.”
“ Keep off, you brute ! ” a voice sounded quite near,
then Nigger’s angry tones showed he had received a
kick and was contemplating revenge.
“ Close round, boys,” cried Dirty Sam; “ this isn't
Russia, and we'll be mighty soft fools if we allow
policemen to come into a camp, like this.”
“ It will be bad for the man I get my feelers on,”
muttered Ginger Bob ; “ I don’t like their breed.”
“ Here, boys, call off this fiery untamed dingo of
yours,” came a voice from the darkness. “ This isn’t
the kind of welcome we counted on getting at Cale-
donia Camp.”
“ Then why didn’t ye enter at the front door an'
ring the bell ? ” demanded Dave indignantly. “We
don’t allow no one, even the King of Russia and China,
to creep in by the back ”
“ We beg pardon, boys, but we got bushed, and when
we saw your camp light we just made straight for it,”
answered the same voice. And its owner and a com-
panion coming forward, Tom recognised the sergeant
and his comrade with whom he had parted at the
springs that day.
“Ye’ve been a mighty long time bushed,” grumbled
Dave. “This dog has had its mind on ye for at
least half an hour—but come an’ get some tucker ; the
cook has turned in, but I reckon we can boil a billy
without him. What are ye after out here ? ”
“Chillagoe Charlie. We didn’t mean to come on


this length until to-morrow, but a rider came out to
us back at the springs, with a message from the boss
who came off the ore train at Murgoona last night,
which made us saddle up quick and lively. Ah,
thanks, boys, this cold beef is all right, and your
pickles are prime.” They had regained the dining
apartment—a tent fly surmounted by a shade of
branches—while speaking, and the men had at once
placed food before the troopers.
‘'But Chillagoe Charlie won't risk coming in so
near to a township,” said Dirty Sam. “He could
gain nothing, and he couldn’t hope to escape being
actually seen, as he seems to have done so far.”
“ It is easily seen you don’t know Charlie,” laughed
the sergeant, helping himself to a chunk of damper.
His comrade was too hungry to find time to speak.
" No, I don’t, that’s a fact; but does any one know
him ? Has he ever been seen in broad daylight by
men in their sober senses ? ” Dirty Sam was greatly
interested.
" Well, yes, he was seen by one man anyway who
never tasted anything in his life stronger than crude
lime-juice, and that man is our boss. I don’t know
whether it was in broad daylight or not, but it was
sometime between the time the ore train got in last
night and noon to-day.”
“Do you mean that Chillagoe Charlie was in
Murgoona so recently as that ? ” persisted Dirty Sam.
" I do. My ! I wish I had seen him. I would give
ray horse—and it's my own, bridle and all—to clap
eyes on him. Oh, by the way, my lad, did the parson
stop here with you ? ”
" Ye can’t see the parson to-night,” growled Dave,
before Tom could speak, "He’s turned in 'cos he
has to make an early start in the morning.”


“Oh, I’ll see him before he starts, then. You see,
he must have left Murgoona about the same time as
Charlie, and we know our man came this way —at
least if he didn't he’s trapped by this time, for the
tracks going north, south, and east are all watched—
and we thought the parson might have seen his tracks
as he came along in his buggy.”
“Great Scott 1 ” exclaimed Peter the Poet, “do you
expect to find Charlie anywhere where a track leads ?
He wouldn’t worry about tracks, he’d take the bush.”
“ No, I don’t think so ; he doesn’t worry about us
fellows enough to go off the road for us. I expect
we’ll run him down at some water-hole, or among the
men at some new rush. He can’t keep away from
any sensational rush, they say.”
“ But give us the yarn about how the chief of your
fellows came to see Charlie, and didn’t catch him,”
said Mike O’Flannigan.
“ Oh, it’s a great yarn—the tracker who came out to
us to-day told me ; but I don't know that I’ve any
right to give the story away on the boss.”
“ If it is as good as all that, why keep it among
yourselves ? ” said Dirty Sam.
“ Tell us, an' I'll get the big spare tent fixed up for
ye to-night,” added Dave as an inducement. “Tom
here is gettin' the small one beside it.”
“We thought of going on to Moldiva Camp to-
night,” began the sergeant tentatively ; but the roar
of laughter which greeted his announcement showed
him that his listeners were well accustomed to the
easy-going ways of the troopers in the Gulf country,
and after trying to look as if he did not understand
where the joke came in, for a minute, he laughed too,
and his satellite joined him.
“ All right, boys, if you can fix us up comfortably for


the night without too much trouble, and raise a feed for
our horses, we’ll stay with you. But see that my horse
gets some corn; it's a real blood, and carries no Govern-
ment brand, and bar none is the best gee-gee that ever
put foot north of the Darling Downs. It will be that
horse which will be the means of putting an end to
Chillagoe Charlie's career if I ever get on his track.
But there’s some one about; look at that dog, how it is
listening. Why the mischief doesn’t it bark ? ”
“ There ain’t no one near or it would bark,’’ grunted
Dave. “Go on with your yarn 'bout your boss. See,
the dog is lying down now.”
“ There really isn't much to tell, boys. Our boss
came up on the ore train last night, and came down to
the barracks to see the local fellows and us. But my
word, he was crusty ; he told us all Australia was laugh-
ing at us for not putting the hobbles on Charlie, and
said, before a mob of the miners too, that if Brisbane
would give him the chance to go out tracking again, he
would sink the promotion he got for that affair down
at Charieyville, and save the Gov. its thousand pounds
—we are not allowed any reward, you know—by going
out after Charlie himself.”
“ But what has this man done that the whole country
should be roused against him ? ” asked Tom.
“ I’m jiggered if I know. I never read the charges,”
answered the sergeant. “ But the whole country isn’t
up against him ; the people don’t know him, he has
never been seen at close quarters by any one, and
we only know that he has been at work because he
always very politely leaves his card behind with his
compliments ”
“ But may not lots of men be taking advantage of
Chillagoe Charlie’s reputation and thus getting him
blamed for what he knows nothing of ? ”


“ I have thought something like that myself once or
twice,” put in the younger trooper. “It seems very
strange to me how he could be at the O. K. one night,
at Chillagoe the next, and maybe away near Cloncurry
a couple of nights after, and no one see him travelling.”
“ I reckon he must have one of these new-fangled
machines that fly through the air,” ventured Hungry
Ted. “ I read of a fellow in last week's Sydney
Bulletin who reckoned he could do that, only the
blamed machine he rode always got the bit between
its teeth somehow and bolted in the wrong direction.”
“ That was a story you read, Ted,” said Dirty Sam.
“ You haven't told us about your boss and his ad-
venture yet, sergeant ? ”
“No, I lost hang of the yarn somehow. Where
was I ?”
“He had been givin' ye beans for not catchin'
Charlie,” reminded Sam.
“ Oh, yes ; he fairly walked into us; of course, we
didn't mind a bit, special duty pay doesn't come along
every day; and after giving us a bundle of new notices
about Charlie to post up at the big rush out at Croco-
dile Crossing, he went up to the hotel. We walked
about the town after that for a bit and heard that
travelling parson give a boncer speech or sermon to
a crowd of miners, then we went back to the barracks.
About breakfast-time to-day, when we were saddled up
ready for the road, an aboriginal came into the barracks
with a note, written on the back of one of the new
notices, which said, ‘Go to big bloodwood-tree near
abandoned shaft on the Unicorn Mine.' Well, that
job w T as not in our line, nor did any of us lay any
stress on it, but the local troopers said they would
attend to it later, and we came away. We camped at
the springs where we met the parson and that youngster,


and intended to come on here to-morrow, but just as
we had built a sun shade and were getting ready for a
good sleep a local trooper came up at a hard gallop and
gave us orders from the boss which made us get on the
track again at once, to catch up the parson "
“ What 1" shouted the men 1 “ ye'll never leave this
camp with life in ye if ye say a word against the
parson.”
“ Who is going to say a word against him ? ” said
the sergeant, surprised at the sudden outburst. 11 The
tracks of his buggy and his two horses and those of
that youngster there are all that left Murgoona leading
this way since Black Bill went out yesterday afternoon
—barring our own, of course.”
“ But what has that got to do with your story ? ”
demanded Dirty Sam, a trifle aggressively.
“ Well, we thought he might have seen Charlie, and
perhaps given him a lift without knowing who he was.
Anyhow, the trooper told me that the black trackers
had drawn mile circles round the town but had cut no
tracks bar those I told you of. The train was stopped
down the line, but to no good, and Charlie is not
in Murgoona; so where the mischief is he, unless he
has melted ? ”
“ Did you expect him to come in to pay his respects
to your boss ? ” asked Peter the Poet sarcastically.
“ Otherwise, how did you so suddenly take offence
at his lack of manners ? ”
“ And by all the wonders of the Gulf country, that
is just what Charlie did do,” said the sergeant. “ I
forgot to say that the rider told us that when they
went out to the bloodwood-tree they found the boss
tied to it, with a ticket on his back on which was
written, ‘ With Chillagoe Charlie’s compliments.'
Now, do you understand why we had to hustle ?


1 tell you the worries of a trooper’s life out in this
part of the world are more than you mining fellows
can imagine.”
“So it would appear,” laughed Dirty Sam. “ But
it's late, let’s get to bed. Whose turn is it to go out for
the horses to-morrow ? ”
“Mine,” said Mike O’Flannigan carelessly.
All the men partook of a cup of tea, and soon after
the camp was wrapped in slumber.


CHAPTER 111
CHILLAGOE CHARLIE
TOM awoke with a start, and lay still, trying to
remember where he was. Then he raised his
eyes to the stars to see what time it was, as had been
his custom when he awoke during the night while
coming up from Cairns on the coast. But he could
see no stars, and when he stretched his hands out,
instead of feeling the hard ground they came in
contact with a mosquito net which completely sur-
rounded him. Then he realised that he was lying
on a bed made of canvas stretched between long
runners of wood and mounted about eighteen inches
off the ground. “ I must be dreaming,” he muttered,
turning over to go to sleep again. “ Where are you,
Nigger ?”
For answer Nigger placed his paws against the
mosquito net and tried to lift it, growling sullenly
at the same time. Suddenly Tom remembered every-
thing and he sat upright. “Of course,” he said to
himself, u I am in a tent; how silly of me to forget!
And this is the net Dave placed over me, and Nigger
got a kangaroo skin to lie on underneath the bunk.
But why did I awake just now ? Oh, yes, it must
have been the third shift going out at midnight to
relieve the afternoon men. Why, what’s the matter,


Nigger ?” He got up, and stepping carefully on the
ant-bed floor, in case he might tread on some prowling
snake or other dangerous visitor, he walked to the open
flap of the tent and looked out. It was long past mid-
night, he saw at once, for already some of the stars he
had grown to know heralded the coming of morning
were appearing.
The camp was silent, and the waning half-moon
shed an eerie light over all. Tom bent down and
patted Nigger. “ It's a false alarm this time,” he
said. “We’ll go back and sleep. We’re going to
be anchored here for a time, Nigger, for I have got
a job now, and you must get acquainted with all the
men and everything else about the place as soon as you
can, so that you won’t be hauling me out of bed at
every sound you hear. We're not on the march now,
you know/’
Whether Nigger understood his master’s words or
not, he made no comment, and soon Tom had turned
in again. But he did not sleep now. He knew Nigger
had heard something which he thought his master ought
to know about, but the fact that he had not barked told
Tom that he himself knew the cause and did not appre-
hend danger. And Nigger was still very much per-
turbed, behaving in the same manner as he had done
while the trooper was telling his story.
“ By your four legs, Nigger !” said Tom, suddenly
remembering the incident. “There was some one
about that time, although no one knew but you and
I, and it is just as clear that there is some one prowling
around now.”
He sat up again and, lifting the flap of the tent
beside his pillow, peered through. His vision ex-
tended from the camp right down past the chief
mine of the group until lost in the bush beyond.


He could make out the great heaps of ore lying
around the mine shaft, and hear the creaking of the
steel ropes as they wound and rewound themselves on
the barrel of the hoisting apparatus. “ Nigger must
have heard a dingo howling," he muttered. “ There
is nothing in sight—but what's that?" His heart
jumped ; but, fascinated, his eyes became fixed on
something only a hundred yards from the back of
his tent. At first, in the dim moonlight, he had thought
he was looking at two trees and their shadows, but
trees did not move over the ground even in North
Queensland, and it was a movement that had arrested
his eyes. Nearer and near the something came, and
soon Tom saw that it w'as a man leading a horse. He
crossed a patch of hard sand barren of scrub, and the
watcher saw that the man’s entire dress consisted of
riding breeches, top-boots, a soft shirt, belt, and a large-
brimmed soft felt hat. He also saw that the horse
carried a rifle across its saddle, and that it was a
thoroughbred. Next moment the man turned his face
towards him, and Tom almost cried out in his sur-
prise. The upper part of the man's face w r as masked,
and he carried a revolver in his free hand.
It 3 Chillagoe Charlie," Tom muttered to himself,
holding Nigger's nose to prevent him barking. “ I
never dreamt that such a character could exist even up
here, in this age.”
The man halted and threw his bridle over a limb of
a tree on the edge of the sand patch ; then, silent and
motionless, he stood for a moment surveying the sleep-
ing camp.
u I wonder what I should do," Tom asked himself.
I move to raise an alarm he could shoot me
through the tent, and if I don’t he’ll perhaps rob the
camp of everything valuable it contains. Ah ! he’ll


at '• - W
■ f |[ I
' • 'mj .
$k .jgw mk. jE/jJBfyl
“‘its CHILLAGOE CHARLIE,’ TOM MUTTERED.”
[To face page 54.




bring about his own downfall. Poor beggar ; I feel I
would like to warn him.”
The visitor had left his horse alone, and was walking
over to the tent in which slept the two troopers. He
walked boldly and without any signs of hesitation, and
a minute later disappeared inside the troopers’ tent.
At that moment the moon shone out brighter and
Tom recognised the waiting horse as the one in which
the sergeant took so much pride.
“Why, what a fool I ami” he laughed! “My nerves
must be unstrung. That man must be the sergeant
himself. He couldn't have gone so boldly into that
tent without being challenged were he not. He has
some suspicion about something, that is why he and
his comrade hid around the camp before announcing
themselves, and he has taken his horse from the yard
and got it ready for a surprise ride somewhere. He’s
probably gone in for his coat now, and to leave some
final instructions with the trooper. I wonder if I
should let him know lam not sleeping ? No, I’ll keep
my own counsel, he might not like to know that he was
watched, and Dave or some of the boys can explain
the whole thing most likely at sunrise.”
Apparently Tom had reasoned correctly, for just
then the man came out of the troopers’ tent with his
full uniform on. He strode quickly to his horse and
lightly vaulting into the saddle cantered silently away
into the bush in a direction that would cut the main
track about a mile from the camp. “ It’s all over now,
Nigger,” said Tom, setting the dog free. “Go to sleep
and call me at sunrise.”
He turned over himself, and wondering why the
sergeant wore a mask, fell asleep without reaching any
solution of the mystery.
And the stars faded in the sky, the black cockatoos


in the tops of some cedar-trees began chattering, and
the sun shot up from behind the line of lime bluffs.
Another day of scorching heat had begun. But it had
not long begun when a series of angry shouts arose
from the troopers’ tent which at once roused the entire
camp, and to a man they turned out.
“Blow your old bones, Tommy Kuropatkin,”
grumbled hungry Ted sleepily, thinking it was the
cook who was the cause of the disturbance, “you’re
givin’ us shorter measure every day. It's only half-past
six, an' we don't start work till the night boys come off
at eight."
“ It no me kick up row," responded the Japanese
cook, who had been attending to his duties over the
camp fire for some time previously ; “it them blamed
police-fellows."
“ Hallo there, boys,” sang out a voice from the
noisy tent, “ who has played this trick ? May I never
draw the price of a drink, of special duty pay again, if
I don't knock him into next week in one round "
“ It's a row between the two troopers," cried Dave
gleefully; “ come over an' see fair play, boys."
Every one at once rushed to the tent, where they
were confronted by the sergeant in his night attire.
The trooper was turning the tent inside out looking for
something.
“ Who has done it ? " roared the sergeant in a great
temper. “By thunder 1 I'll fight the whole camp
before I am done with this.”
“ One will be quite enough to accommodate you
perhaps,” said Dirty Sam quietly ; “ tell us what you
are suffering from and we'll see "
“An'git into your togs afore ye come out. Ye’re
not respectable as ye are," added Dave.
“Get into my togs!"roared the man. “How in


Gulf thunder can I do that until you bring them to me ?
They have been taken away by some of you stupid
beggars."
“ Best go slow with your talk, sergeant," spoke Dirty
Sam ; “some of us don't like it, and you may swallow
a few teeth over it.”
“ Swallow teeth ! I’ll swallow the camp
“Oh, blow ye for a skiting policeman ! Stand out an’
I’ll do the parson trick with ye myself," cried Dave,
who could not understand what the sergeant was
driving at.
Tom preserved a discreet silence. He intended to
watch developments before he said anything.
“ Are you fellows going to bring me my clothes or
are you not ? ” asked the sergeant, with a forced calm-
ness. “ Remember a joke can go too far, and this means
interfering with an officer of the Crown in discharge of
his duties.’’
“ No one here knows anything about your clothes,”
answered Peter the Poet; “ you should have kept them
glued on to your carcase if you walk in your sleep and
hide things. We have no Chillagoe Charlie here ”
“ It looks as if you had,” interrupted the young
trooper suddenly, picking up a card from the floor and
glancing at it; “ he’s been here, and he’s taken the
boss’s togs away with him.”
“ What! ” yelled the men ; “ Chillagoe Charlie here ! ”
“ Let’s see the card,” demanded the sergeant gruffly ;
“ and here, boys, I apologise for my language to you.
Charlie has been here. Some of you get Lightning,
my horse, saddled for me and I’ll track him down
before sunset.”
“ Read the card,” cried Tommy the Kangaroo.
“ 4 Sorry to put you to iany inconvenience, sergeant,’ ”
read the officer with flushed face, “ 4 but I require your


uniform for a time. Will return it to-morrow. —
C. C.’”
“ Well, I’ll be —be —God save our gracious King ”
began Dave. “ Charlie has taken the breeches from a
policeman.”
“ Get my horse, quick 1 ” shouted the discomfited
man ; “ I’ll catch him without clothes. Saddle up,
Storey. No stop until we catch the beggar. His
tracks will be fresh ”
“Your horse aint in the yard," cried Ginger Bob ;
“ but here's another card for ye."
The men crowded around Ginger, who had just
returned from the horse yard, and the sergeant seized
the card from his hand. There was an oblong piece
of paper pinned to it, which was written out in the
form of a cheque with the amount not filled in,
but the signature Chillagoe Charlie in the proper
place.
“ Read the ticket," roared the men. “ Maybe he’s
tellin’ ye where he’ll be waitin’ for ye."
“‘ Dear Sergeant, — l have urgent need of the fastest
animal in the Gulf country,"' he read, “‘so have taken
yours. Kindly fill in the amount at which you value
it on the attached form, and nail it on the tree at the
springs under the notice regarding me, and you will be
paid in cash as soon after as will be convenient for
me.— Chillagoe Charlie.' ”
“Ha 1 ha 1 " roared the men, “ how about your
shouting last night ? "
“ I'll shoot him on sight," spluttered the officer of
the law, “ I’ll—l'll tear his life from him. I'll
Oh, my Lightning, I would rather he had put a bullet
in my hide than taken that horse." Here the sergeant
seemed as if he would break down, and his assistant
grinned with delight at the thought of the figure his


superior would cut at headquarters when the story
became known.
“ I don’t see that you have any call to feel so bad
about the thing,” put in Peter the Poet sympathetically,
for now that the sergeant's pride was humbled the
rough but kind-hearted back-blockers were very sorry
for him.
“ Come an' have breakfast, an' the boss will give ye
a rig-out, an' a good horse after,” said Dave. “His
riding togs are the same stuff as yours, an’ I reckon
he's got some nags that wouldn't be far behind your
Lightning if it came to a desperate push.”
“ Here’s the men who knocked off at midnight
coming up,” said Dirty Sam ; “ perhaps some of them
who were on top can tell you something which may
help you, sergeant.”
“ Boys, do me a favour for any sake,” implored the
sergeant; “ don't tell any of them. I know you fellows
are all square, but I don't like the push that works the
other shifts here.”
“We are not great shakes on them ourselves,”
said Hungry Ted; “but let us get to tucker, I am
hungry.”
“Say, mates,” called out Jim Smith, as the second
shift men, who had been rudely aroused from their
slumbers with the noise, drew near, “ what's gone
wrong in Caledonia Camp when troopers go flying
past the mines at night like they were hot on Chillagoe
Charlie's trail ? ”
“ Did you see any troopers ? ” asked the junior
trooper in astonishment.
“You bet I did. I couldn't sleep after cornin’ off
duty last night at midnight, this eye the blamed parson
gave me was so sore, and sometime afore mornin',
when I came out of bunk to get some water for it, I


saw a trooper scoot like a willy-willy over the rise
between here and the mine.”
“ Oh, that was the sergeant of the special duty men
trying a new horse, said Dirty Sam airily. “ A couple
of them got in here last night, but the boss made an
early start, it seems.”
“ Yes, and hasn’t left any orders for me,” added the
trooper, taking his cue from Sam’s words. His superior
meanwhile was getting inside some of Peter the Poet's
garments.
“ Hurry, boys, we’re late,” cried Dirty Sam ; “ it’s
nearly eight o’clock now.”
“ Here’s the boss cornin’,” said Ginger Bob ; “ we’ll
catch it for not being ready.”
But they didn’t. “ Boys,” Mr. Hornsby announced
as he came near, “ I want the day shift to come with
me to open up the big reef on the Walsh River. I
have a letter from home in the mail the parson brought
out telling me that an expert is coming to examine all
the properties, and I would like to see what is under the
cap of that reef before he arrives. Smith, you may
get up a scratch shift from the other two lots to keep
the water down where you are working just now.
You needn’t do any work but that, and of course
the boys will draw double pay for doing the extra
shift.”
“All right, boss,” answered Smith, pleased to have
been given charge of the other two gangs; “I’ll
manage easily.” He departed to pick his men, and
the day men looked at each other wonderingly ; they
knew that something underlay their chief’s words.
“We had a couple o' troopers stayin’ with us last
night, boss,” began Dave. “They dropped in just
after you an' the parson left us ”
“Ah, good morning. I hope you were treated


well ?” The manager had just perceived the trooper.
“You have a comrade, I believe ?”
“ I have, sir," replied the trooper, “ but he’s had a
piece of bad luck. Chillagoe Charlie has cleared out
with his clothes and his horse, and only left him his
compliments and a blank cheque not drawn on any
bank."
“Chillagoe Charlie! Do you mean to say that he
was here ? "
“There are the evidences, sir, and you can judge
for yourself," spoke the sergeant, coming from the
tent.
Mr. Hornsby adjusted his monocle and stared at the
last speaker.
“What are you doing in these clothes?" he said.
“You are not Peter the Poet."
“ No, sir ; I am the sergeant of the special duty men,
and, thanks to Chillagoe Charlie, I've had to borrow
the togs I'm wearing. But read the cards, sir, and
advise me; you are a Justice of the Peace.”
“ Well, sergeant," the manager remarked after perus-
ing the messages, “ I don’t see that you need complain.
You are told that your uniform will be returned to
you and that you have merely to write down your own
price for your horse. Make that price big enough to
pay for your inconvenience.”
“ But no bank would cash that cheque, sir."
“ You are told very plainly how to get it cashed, and
I believe the gentleman known—or rather, I should
say, unknown —as Chillagoe Charlie has a reputation
for keeping his word. It is rather a unique document,
this cheque, however, and I shall be pleased if you will
allow me to cash it. Some day I may have an oppor-
tunity of collecting its value from the owner of the
signature."


“Do you mean it, sir ? ” The sergeant was plainly
astonished to find his cheque of value.
“ Certainly, or I should not say it. Fill in the
amount and I shall give you my own cheque in
exchange, and I venture to think you'll find no trouble
in cashing it.”
“ But I would not have sold Lightning, unless forced
to, for any money, sir.”
“ Perhaps the purchaser may return it if he gets to
know that. Meanwhile make him pay its value to you.”
“ But will you be able to get the money from him ? "
The sergeant eyed Mr. Hornsby closely.
“ Perhaps not. It’s a gamble on my part. Still, I
believe he’ll meet his liabilities.”
Taking his subordinate’s fountain-pen, the sergeant
filled in the cheque for one hundred guineas and
handed it to Mr. Hornsby, upon which that gentleman
without a word took the same pen and drew out one
of his own for the same amount and gave it to the
officer.
“ I can buy a dozen horses with this, sir, I know,”
the latter said, “ but Lightning was a thoroughbred.”
“ I know the feeling,” sympathised Mr. Hornsby,
“ but go with the boys and have some breakfast. I
can give you some khaki garments very like those
you’ve lost, and I can also let you have a horse of no
mean calibre.”
“ Can I buy them from you, sir ? I have no means
of squaring up otherwise, for I cannot get a good
horse nor clothes without going back to Murgoona,
and that —well, if the people there knew that I had
been caught so nicely so soon after our boss had been
tricked, it would mean that Chillagoe Charlie would
become a sort of god among them and he would
never be caught.”


“Yes, the miners have no love for the police and
would make a hero of him as the up-to-date bush-
ranger, although why he deserves that title I do not
know. Oh, about the clothes —you needn’t worry
over them ; return them when Charlie of Chillagoe
returns yours."
“ Here are the night shift boys coming off, boss,"
interrupted Dirty Sam. “Give us our orders and we’ll
get to work to earn our wages."
“There is no immediate hurry, Sam. The Caledonia
Company can stand the loss of an hour without going
bankrupt."
“ If you would let me have the horse you spoke of,
sir,” put in the sergeant, “ I would like to get away
after Chillagoe Charlie while his tracks are fresh.”
“ Nonsense, man 1 Take a good breakfast and think
over the matter carefully. Do you for a moment
imagine that you and your assistant could take the
gentleman you mention even if you did come up
with him ? "
“We'd have a try, anyhow, and either Charlie or I
would have no further need, for Lightning ’’
“Hullo, boys 1" exclaimed Bullocky Bill; “here’s
the parson cornin’ over. I thought he was goin’ out
at sunrise.”
A thrill of pleasure ran through Tom. The man
whom he had somehow grown to like had not, after
all, departed. He could tell him of his experiences
during the night.
“Good morning, boys," the parson cried as he
approached the shaded erection in which the men
were about to have breakfast. “ I hope you can give
me something to eat, for I am as hungry as three men.
I took a long walk down the track this morning; I
felt I required some exercise."


“ Breakfast is not yet over at the house,” said Mr.
Hornsby. “ I have been waiting for yon. And, Tom,
come with us, too. I have some special work for you ;
you can get something to eat with us.”
“ Did you see any tracks, sir, when you were out ? ”
asked the sergeant irrelevantly as the parson went up
to the water-tank and took a long drink.
“ Dear me, sergeant, I didn't recognise you. Are
you still working for special duty pay ? ” The parson's
voice expressed mild surprise at seeing the troopers.
“Yes, but I'm going to earn it now,” answered the
sergeant grimly. “Charlie has made it a personal
matter since I last saw you.”
“Well, I am surprised. How did he make that
mistake ? ”
“Come up to the house and I'll tell you all about it,”
said Mr. Hornsby. “ Come along, Tom. And, by the
way, sergeant, that shift just come off duty in those
tents down there may be able to tell you something.
Some of them must have seen your man passing.
Come up to the house afterwards and get a rig-out.”
“Well, Tom, my lad,” spoke the parson after they
had left the men, “you are bursting to tell me some-
thing. What is it ? Have you seen Chillagoe Charlie,
or a bunyip, or done anything dreadful ? ”
“ Charlie is going in for big advertising just now,”
laughed Mr. Hornsby.
“ I am inclined to think that if he is not credited
with other people’s misdeeds we’ve about heard the
last of him,” the parson observed. “Heis a victim of
circumstances ”
“ I saw him last night,” blurted out Tom. “ That’s
what I’ve been keeping back.”
“You saw him?” said Mr. Hornsby. “Then why
didn’t you shoot him and earn that thousand pounds ? ”


“ What, sir ! Shoot the man whose cheque you
have honoured and "
“ I have also offered the second fastest horse I
possess to run him down, young man."
“Tell your story, Tom,” put in the parson. “ How
did you happen to see him and how do you know it
was he ? "
“Nigger awoke me and I looked through the back
of the tent and saw a masked man leading the
sergeant's horse. He tied the horse to a tree and
then went into the tent in which the troopers were,
and shortly after came out dressed in the sergeant’s
clothes over his own and rode away past the mine.
I thought at first it was the sergeant himself, but when
morning came I knew differently."
“Why didn't you speak then, Tom?" asked the
parson. “You could have described the man."
“ I thought, sir, that it was no business of mine, and
I also thought the sergeant had been well served after
his boasting last night. But you didn’t hear him, of
course.”
“No,” spoke the parson thoughtfully ; “we had left
before they arrived."
“Ah, well," said Mr. Hornsby, “here's the house
and the cook has breakfast laid out for us. Do you
know, parson, I had the mad idea that it was you who
had played the trick on the policeman, and I actually
prevented the day shift from starting work so as to
keep the sergeant from getting after you at once.
You were up very early, and I suppose that fact,
coupled with the knowledge of your fighting abilities,
made me imagine you had impersonated our notorious
friend from Chillagoe."
“ Ha, ha! ” the parson laughed, sitting down at
the table, “ I’ll have to take my exercise in the heat


of the day after this, I can’t afford to lose my
reputation.”
“ Well, breakfast is our chief business at present, so
wishing Charlie good luck—l'll send you in to cash
his cheque to-morrow, I think, Tom —we’ll leave him
and the troopers to fight out their differences and
proceed with what is on hand. Can you ride,
Tom ? ”
“ Yes, sir.”
“ And shoot ? ”
“1 have never handled a regulation rifle, sir, but I
was the best shot in our miniature rifle club before
I left home.”
“ That’s all right, then, a good shot is always a good
shot. Do you see that tree straight in line with you
and the verandah post, about a couple of hundred
yards distant ? ”
“ Yes, there are some bottles hanging from its lower
branches.”
“Well, take that rifle lying on that box there and
break the second bottle. That is my private range,
and I keep in form by smashing a bottle every
morning.”
He took the rifle from Tom’s hands. “This is a
Winchester,” he went on, “ but one must get accus-
tomed to any kind.” Still sitting at table he raised
the weapon carelessly and fired through the open
window.
“ That’s the first one out of your way,” he laughed,
as one of the bottles fell to the ground in innumerable
pieces. “ Let me see you account for the next
one now.”
Tom took the rifle, and ejecting the spent cartridge,
and at the same time automatically placing another
one in the breech, took careful aim. “ I am afraid 1


can't do it sitting as you did, sir," he said ; “ I don t
know how you held the rifle so steady.
“ Stand up, then, Tom ; fire any way you like."
Instantly Tom arose, and, glancing along the sights
for a moment, pulled the trigger. The bottle fell, as
did the first one, and Mr. Hornsby laughed.
“ You'll do, Tom,” he said ; “ I wanted to try you.
Do you want a shot, parson ?'
The parson took the smoking weapon gingerly.
“ Which end do you put to your shoulder ? ” he asked.
“ Does it hurt when it goes off ? ”
“ Oh, come, parson, you have handled a rifle before,"
cried Mr. Hornsby. “ Don’t hold it that way, place
the butt against your shoulder."
“ Thanks ; what do you do now ? "
“ Aim and pull the trigger, of course."
“ Oh, is that all." The parson pointed the rifle in
the direction of the hanging bottle, and, while Mr.
Hornsby was laughing at his apparent clumsiness,
fired.
“Well, your bullet will hit something when it
reaches the ground at any rate," said the mine
manager, looking up. “ Why 1 you’ve struck the
bottle."
“ Of course, wasn’t I meant to do that ? ’’
“ You are an old fraud, parson ; only a crack shot
could do that. Why, man, I question very much if
the greatly sought after Chillagoe Charlie could equal
that shot."
The parson smiled. “ They say he can do wonders
with the revolver,” he said ; “ but, dear me, I must be
getting on my way. I am going out to see how the
men are doing at the new rush."
“ I had forgotten all about that. In view of Tom’s
strange assay last night, things may be expected to


develop there shortly. I'll ride out with you, and you,
Tom, can come too. We'll pack some assaying
materials in the parson’s buggy and see what really
is in the rush, and whether the shareholders in the
Caledonia Company will be benefited by our
securing some ground for them.”
“ I see the sergeant coming up,” observed the
parson ; “ doubtless he is anxious to get away.
“ Well, sergeant, have you made any discoveries ? ”
cried Mr. Hornsby, as the man came near. “ I have
told my man to look out some stuff for you, and you
can have that bay horse in the yard down there.”
“ Thank you, sir; I’ll get away at once. Quite a
number of your men who went on at midnight saw
Chillagoe Charlie. He galloped past the main shaft,
and even shouted out something to the men on top at
the time. They, of course, thought it was me. My
assistant has already picked up his tracks, and with
luck we’ll not be far away from him by night.”
“ He’s maybe not very far away now,” said the
parson. “Which way did he go ? I don’t want to
meet him, although I don’t suppose he can have any
interest in travelling parsons.”
“ His tracks lead south, sir. We’ll have no trouble
in following them, for I would know old Lightning’s
hoof marks anywhere.”
“Ah, well, good luck to you,” said Mr. Hornsby;
“ we’re going out to Crocodile Crossing. Can we do
anything for you ? ”
“ If you could tell the couple of troopers there that
I am hot after Charlie and that he has gone south, I
would be obliged. They may be able to get away to
help to round him up, and there’s a relief going out
anyway the day after to-morrow.”
“ I'll do that, but I don’t expect your men will act


without orders from yourself. You needn’t hurry
though we're going. Ask the cook for anything you
require.”
Mr. Hornsby, the parson, and Tom walked down to
the camp again, and soon after the parson’s buggy
was ready for the road, a box of assaying materials
being safely packed on board for transit to Crocodile
Crossing.
“ I think we had better ride ahead, parson,” said
Mr. Hornsby. “ I’ll get Mike O’Flannigan’s horse for
Tom, it's another flier, and we’ll get out to the Crossing
in quick time ”
“ You can’t get Mike's horse, boss,” grunted Dave,
saddling Mr. Hornsby's own steed ; “he went out
some time afore daylight to gather in the camp horses
an’ hasn't got back yet.”
“ Oh, I suppose they will have gone over to the big
water-hole, or else the wind is blowing the sound of
their bells away from him. Was he riding ? ”
“ I reckon he was, boss ; at least his own horse was
in the yard last night, by some piece o’ luck for him,
an’ it aint there now.”
“ You are surely not anxious about Mike ? ” the
parson said; “he is a good bushman, and couldn’t get
bushed anywhere in the Gulf country.”
“1 am not anxious,” spoke Mr. Hornsby thought-
fully ; “ I am merely wondering in which direction
Mike went, and if I have done right in giving that
trooper a horse after all.”
“ Mike would go south, boss,” said Peter the Poet ;
“he knew the horses were in that line, for we all
heard their bells last night.”
“When did he leave camp ?”
“No one knows. He was away before we got up,
that’s all we know.”


“ It's mighty like as though a new rush was startin
down south," Dave muttered; “ the population is
gettin' thick that way anyhow. Maybe Mike an'
Chillagoe Charlie will run into one another
Howling—l mean —Where, tell me where, is my
Highland laddie gone ?”
“ Shut up, Dave,” growled Dirty Sam, looking up
from his work of cleaning his rifle ; “ Mike is not a
Highland laddie."
“ I know that, ye—ye —By Killarney's lakes and
streams. Can't ye see that I was swearing that
time ? That was a hymn.”
“ You should always sing them, Dave,” the parson
advised ; “ the boys couldn't make any mistake then,
and you would have a splendid revenge.”
“ What brilliant idea called for emphatic language
in any case, Dave ?" asked Mr. Hornsby. “ Let us
hear it, quick, for we must get away.”
“ It's mighty hard to tell it without a few swears,
boss, answered Dave. “ Say, parson, let me have only
one minute's backslidin' an’ I’ll sing a whole book
of hymns ? "
“Not a second, Dave,” the parson said; “but if it is
so difficult for you to tell what you think, I'll do it
for you and you can simply correct my mistakes. It
has suddenly struck you as strange that all the fast
horses should be away, including the trooper's; that
Chillagoe Charlie went south on the sergeant’s flier,
that Mike went in the same direction with his own,
and that now the troopers are themselves following
on the next best ”
“Go on, parson, ye're a mighty good thought-
reader,” cried Dave. “ Them’s my ideas exactly.”
“ I see,” said Mr. Hornsby ; “in fact, it might have
been Mike the men at work saw riding past ”


“ And Mike who took the sergeant’s togs ? ” cried
Ginger Bob in delight with the idea.
“ I don’t think that, though. The man who did
that left a message behind, and it is not Mikes
writing. Besides, he had his own horse.”
«I'll bet my saddle that it is Mike s tracks the
troopers are following now,” said Peter the Poet.
‘•No,” Mr. Hornsby mused aloud; “the sergeant
knows his own horse too well for that.
“Snakes I boys,” exclaimed Tommy the Kangaroo,
who had been tempering some drills at the forge, “if
we keep on talking well make out that Mike is
Chillagoe Charlie.”
« He might be,” admitted Hungry Ted, who had
been assisting him ; “Mike never told anyone much of
his thoughts.”
“All that is rot,” said Dirty Sam. « Mike and I have
slept in the same tent for many months and he’s as
straight a man as could be.”
“ But Chillagoe Charlie, from all accounts, acts on
the square,” the parson observed.
“There's nothing in the affair at all,” said Mr.
Hornsby. “Get on board with the parson, Tom, and
we’ll clear out. The troopers won’t follow Mike very
far.”
“ I am inclined to think they will,” said the parson,
taking his seat and picking up the reins ; “ I do not
think Charlie would ride openly past the mines, and
leave tracks which any one could follow, unless he had
some reason for so doing.”
“ But the troopers will follow the tracks and get
him,” cried Peter the Poet. « And you said they would
follow Mike.”
“ And I venture to think I am right. The sergeant
knows the tracks of his own horse and will run it


down. You may be assured that Charlie knows that
much also, and deliberately rode through sand patches
to leave traces.
“ But where does Mike come in, parson ? " asked
Dave. “ How will they follow Mike if they know the
horse so well ? They will soon see they’re on the
wrong trail."
“ I don’t think so," said the parson quietly. “ You
see, in my opinion, Mike and Charlie changed horses.”
“There is a happy land ! ” ejaculated Dave. “That’s
what I was trying to work out all along.”
“ You should have been a detective, parson,” laughed
Mr. Hornsby, as they prepared to depart. “ You are at
least equal to Sherlock Holmes."
The men were silent; the points of the case were
slowly dawning upon them, and they were piecing
together other little matters which had received no
attention at the time of their occurrence, but which
now were of significance.
Mr. Hornsby lingered behind after the buggy had
left to give instructions to the men, and then rode after
it. “You are being rushed into big things pretty sud-
denly, Tom," he said, as he came alongside. “ Chillagoe
Charlie your first night, and the mystery of this rush
the next day."
“ And a good bit more to follow," added the parson,
“ before he’s done with the Gulf country.”
Tom made no reply. He was thinking a little too.
Early in the afternoon they reached the crossing
where the rush was in full swing.
“Where are the troopers stationed here just now ? ”
asked Mr. Hornsby of two miners who knew him and
had come forward to take charge of his horse.
“They left this morning, boss, to go west after
Chillagoe Charlie,” one replied.


“What! is he in the west now?" mused Mr.
Hornsby. “He is certainly a remarkable traveller.
« Yes, their boss came out at sunrise this mornin an
sent them off. He told them to ride like a cyclone,
for Chillagoe Charlie had been seen at White Downs
station."
“ Come, parson, unravel this for us now," said Mr.
Hornsby, as they walked along the line of leef, having
left their belongings in charge of the two miners. “ The
only boss the troopers here could have is the sergeant
who lost his clothes and his horse in our camp. How
on earth could he be here at sunrise to-day ? "
“He wasn't. The man who borrowed his garments
impersonated him so that he could send the troopers
west."
“ I see ; but won't that game be stopped when the
sergeant comes up with Mike ? "
“ He won’t come up with Mike ; he’ll likely find his
horse all the same, but by that time you may be certain
that he’ll be informed that a trooper is galloping
furiously past White Downs cattle station. He 11
naturally think that that trooper is the man who stole
his clothes "
“ But there were two troopers, parson ? ’
“Well, do you think that the man who arranged
the whole affair didn’t know that ? I expect if you lode
out on the west track just now you’d find one with a
lame horse or something else that would prevent him
from having any further interest in the chase.
“ Therefore you say the sergeant and all his satellites
will soon be chasing one of their own fellows thinking
it is Chillagoe Charlie."
“ I am of that opinion.”
“ And Charlie, meanwhile ? Where do you think
he is?"


“ I don't think he is very far away; and while the
road is blocked east, and they are hunting him south
and west, he will leisurely ride north. Of course, all
this is only my opinion.”
“Of course,” said Mr. Hornsby; “but it is not a
parson you were cut out for.”
“ Perhaps not,” agreed the parson. “ But let us
banish Charlie now. Here is where Tom should shine.
What do you make of that, Tom ? That apparently is
the great reef which occasioned this rush.”


CHAPTER IV
THE RUSH AT CROCODILE CROSSING, AND AFTER
THE main reef stretched east and west in a gigantic
outcropping mass, from which detached boulders
had been thrown, or had rolled, many feet away on
either side. The material of which the reef was
formed was dark grey in appearance with specks ot
oreen spread over its surface. And there certainly
was plenty of it, for it extended down into the river
and up the slope on the other side. But there was no
chance of being able to peg out a claim anywhere
along the main line, all the ground was held already,
and it was in land pegged in by one of the miners
whom Mr. Hornsby knew, that the party had begun
their investigations. . , ~ ,
“You don't seem enthusiastic, Tom, said that
gentleman, as Tom chipped off a piece of the stu
and examined it closely. “ What metal is the thing
made of ? ■, n rp
“I can't tell you exactly until I assay it, lorn
answered slowly. “ But—but this is not the same as
the samples 1 have assayed so often ; it looks to me he
a compound of arsenic and iron, and if it is, it can
have no commercial value so far away from the coast
as this.” . ,
“ No ; arsenical iron, or, for that part, any ore carry-
-75


ing arsenic, is not worth looking at," said Mr. Hornsby.
“ I* can't be smelted efficiently, and the cost of treat-
ment out here would be enormous."
“ What will ye give us for our claims, boss ? " one
of the miners who owned the ground on which they
stood, asked. “ I reckon Bill an’ me have as good a
show here as is on the field.”
“ Yes," agreed the parson, “ the reef is big enough in
your claims. I should say that if it goes down at all
you have thousands of tons of that stuff within your
pegs. What is it ? ”
“ Wh Y> copper, of course. Haven’t you heard the
reports of the assays ? ”
“ Yes," said Mr. Hornsby ; 11 but that stuff is not the
same as the samples sent for assay. I rode along here
yesterday and got a piece of the real thing where the
reef had been shot away, but I am beginning to be
afraid that I was meant to find it."
Centipedes ! boss, exclaimed the two miners, << if
it weren’t that we know ye is straight clean through
we would think ye war’ tryin' to skeer us off our
ground so that you could jump it."
My men, I hope for your sakes that I am wrong,
but here is an assayer getting his plant ready; bring
along what you call a fair sample of that stuff and we’ll
see it run through. If it turns out to be copper or any-
thing of value, I’ll buy your claims."
All the men in the adjoining claims had now
gathered round, for Mr. Hornsby and the parson were
known and respected by most of those present, and
they all knew that no advantage would be taken of
their ignorance as to the ore their claims held.
Tom crushed the specimen brought to him and
passed the resultant powder through a fine sieve.
Then he carefully weighed out ten grains with the


nerfect little glass-cased balance which the parson had
already mounted and levelled for him. Several times
he weighed out the same amount, putting each sample
into a little porcelain vessel, which, after adding some
nitric acid to its contents, he placed among the hot
ashes of the fire upon which the two miners had
previously boiled their midday billy of tea. In each
case pungent red fumes arose instantly and continued
to come off the combination for about ten minutes,
when the now almost boiling fluid settled down into a
seething green liquid. Tom then added some water
from one of the miners’ water-bags and soon after
lifted the first crucible from the fire and poured its
contents into a wide-mouthed pickle-bottle which he
had found lying near. “ This test is to determine the
copper percentage,” he said, and the great crowd of
men who had by this time gathered waited anxiously
and silently. He added more water, until the fluid
was of a very faint green colour, and then measured
off some ammonia from a bottle and poured it in also.
A cry of dismay went up from all the watchers; t e
fluid had undergone little change, only becoming a
deeper green in colour, whereas if copper had been
present at all, as every man knew, it would have
become deep blue. Tom shook the bottle and waited
a minute “I am afraid there is no copper here at all,
sir,” he then said to Mr. Hornsby. “ That seems to be
a precipitate of iron coming down now in that reddish
feathery mass.” He pulled his knife from his pocket
and dipped the blade into the solution for a moment.
“ No, there is no copper in that stuff,” he said as he
withdrew his knife and examined the shining steel. It
hasn't even left a trace on my knife-blade, so I need
not go on to apply cyanide of potassium from my
burette.”


“ No » you needn’t, Tom,” said Mr. Hornsby; “there's
not enough copper in a mile of that reef to make a
halfpenny.”
“ Then what is the confounded thing made of, boss ?
It must be something good or it wouldn’t be rushed ?”
cried a man from the crowd.
“ Here, try this piece,” spoke an evil-eyed person
pushing up to Tom. "I’ll bet free drinks you’ll get
copper in that.”
“ 1 have no doubt he would, Mr. O’Brian,” said Mr.
Hornsby. “That is a piece of the stuff that was placed
convenient for me to find, and bits of which were sent
all down the line.
“ Well, aint it copper ? What more do you want ?
If that stuff is here our ground is worth
That is all right; but you know very well that all
that is here of that stuff was brought here. Why, I
recognise it now. That is a piece of Tate River ore
I know it well.”
“Boys, he's one of them blamed company men.
He’s a mine manager an’ wants to sicken ye off the
ground so that he can jump it for his bloated money-
grabbers in London,” roared Mr. O’Brian. “This is a
labour country,” he continued, working himself into a
passion ; “ are we to be swindled out of our rights by
an eye-glassed, top-booted, collar an' cuff swell like
him ?”
“You just shut up, O’Brian, or I'll tell the boys
something I happen to know of you and your
swindling ways. You did well to use that word,
you're pretty familiar with the practice No, don’t
come nearer or you’ll regret it. Kick him out/ boys,
until we see if there is any other metal in this ore.”
The men had no love for Mr. O’Brian, and cheer-
fully carried out Mr. Hornsby’s orders. O'Brian was


one of a number of saloon owners who somehow held
all the valuable land in every rush and who practically
controlled the chief working mines in the country by
reason of their holding the bulk of the shares. There
were quite a crowd of this kind among the men of the
Crocodile Crossing rush, and in all cases they had
pegged out leases along the line of reef and posted
application notices on their number one peg. O’Brian
went off to consult with them, for, strangely enough,
they did not seem eager to know the result of an assay
on the spot, and had kept away from the honest miners
who had gathered round Tom.
And now Tom was testing for silver. Taking up
another of the porcelain beakers, he poured the hot
nitric acid solution into his cleansed pickle-bottle, and
after diluting and cooling with water, he added, drop
by drop, some hydrochloric acid. A white precipi-
tate at once began to fall and the onlookers shouted
with delight.
“ It’s silver ! ” they yelled, “ an’ rich I ”
“Or lead, or cinnabar,” a tall, black-whiskered
prospector corrected; “ wait till we see if it turns
black when it sees the sunlight.”
Well the men present, all experienced prospectors,
knew what his words meant; for although few, if any,
of them could have put an assay through themselves,
they all knew that all silver precipitates turn black on
exposure to sunlight.
But this one did not. Tom held the bottle up and
there was at least no doubt of the sunlight.
“Shake it,” advised some one; “maybe the silver
doesn't like cornin’ out in the cold.”
“Here, mates,” cried a little man excitedly, “some
of ye say it’s turnin' black. Don’t let the rush be a
duffer.”


“But it aint turnin’ black, Jack,” said a miner
standing beside Tom; “an' I'll bet the time I've
lost cornin’ here that this rush is another of those
frauds the shanty keepers have engineered.”
Tom decanted the fluid and poured boiling water
from a billy on to the white precipitate. Instantly
it was dissolved, leaving not a trace behind. “It
is lead,” he announced; “lead salts are soluble in
hot water.”
“ But lead won’t pay working expenses out here,”
the tall, black-whiskered prospector said. “Can you
try the stuff for gold, lad ? maybe ye’ll get that.”
Tom looked at Mr. Hornsby for instructions, but
that gentleman said, “It’s a long test, Tom, and I
hardly think you need trouble. Gold has never been
found in such a combination as that. Tell the men
the metals of which you think the reef is composed.
I’m going to interview Messrs. O’Brian and com-
pany.”
He walked away, and most of the men also left.
They had no further interest in anything. Crocodile
Crossing was only another of those mysteriously
organised rushes which could never prove of any
good to the honest, hard-working miner. Tom told
those remaining that the formation consisted of iron,
lead, arsenic, and silica, with traces perhaps of silver
and other metals. This was a hopeless combination,
and every one was aware of that fact; they had by
their frantic rushing to the spot helped to boom
the rush ; they guessed some people would gain
thereby, but not them, and sadly they prepared to
pack up their belongings and depart to seek employ-
ment at some of the working mines nearer Murgoona.
“ If I knew the man who started this rush, I'd see
that he wasn’t able to start any more for some time,”


growled one big miner ; “ I left a good billet down the
line for this scramble, an’ I’ve spent all the money I've
been saving in buying horses an' tools for it.”
“We’re all in the same position,” chorussed the
men; “we’ve been fooled again.”
“ No more rushes for me,” said the black-whiskered
man ; “ but who in thunder is working to gain out of
this one ? Boys, let us wait and see. We'll then know
who we have to thank for booming a copper show
that only carries the copper they brought to it.”
“Men,” cried O’Brian at this stage, “gather round
here while I tell you something. This new chum
mine manager of Caledonia Camp is bluffing you
all.”
“ Roll up, boys,” cried another of O'Brian’s fra-
ternity ; “we are Ostralyans, and we won't have white-
faced Johnnies like him bossing us. We’ll send him
home to his mother along with the kid he's got to fake
the assays.”
“There aint no fake about them,” responded a
miner gruffly; “ an’ it strikes me we now know who
we’ve to pay for this rush ”
“ Men,” roared yet another of the men with O’Brian,
a well-known publican in Murgoona, “ we won’t see
you beat, we'll stand by you. Don't believe a word of
what the new chum dude says. What does he know
about copper, and how could he run Caledonia Mines
if it weren't for Jim Smith who acts as boss for him ?”
A murmur expressive of doubt ran through the
crowd, and the men congregated around the band
of shanty keepers. Mr. Hornsby, meanwhile, had
lit a cigarette, and Tom, left alone, had gone on
testing for the presence of other minerals.
“ Let there be no quarrelling, boys,” spoke the
parson ; “ whatever the results of this rush may be,


remember that we are all British, whether born in
the home islands, or under the Southern Cross. A
Briton does not complain when he loses, any more
than he shouts when he wins. There are better things
to be striven for than copper, too ”
“No preaching here, parson," roared a miner;
“ we’re not in a mood to stand it."
“We all know about the better treasures upstairs,”
laughed O’Brian ; “but we can’t get any advance on
that security, and anyhow a mine in the present is
worth a round dozen when we are dead "
“ I had no intention of preaching to you, boys,"
interrupted the parson ; “ I was about to remark that
as copper was so low-priced in the market just
now ”
“That you had all better go home and pray for
the price to rise, like good little Sunday-school boys,
laughed O’Brian sarcastically. “Go away at once now
or the parson will bring a whale to swallow you
“If you interrupt me again, O’Brian, 111 punch your
head. As I was saying, men ’’
“ You’ll punch my head !" broke in the astonished
O’Brian. “You sleeky, overfed sky-pilot, do you know
that there’s not a man in Queensland could do that ?
Snakes I centipedes ! and tarantulas ! What is free
Ostralya coming to when ?" He stopped and
walked over to the parson threateningly.
“ You lie, in addition to your other sins, remarked
the parson coolly ; “ and as I don’t, see how you like
that—and that." His left fist first shot out, then his
right, and both came in violent contact with ©’Brian's
face. That person promptly fell to the ground, and a
cheer arose from the men. The parson had kept his
word.
“ Here, parson, I’ll take your place,’’ spoke the tall


prospector, pushing forward ; “ I know you can easily
look after yourself, but we miners haven't come down
so far as to stand by and see a parson having to fight
for himself."
“ Good old parson 1" shouted the men ; “ we’ll all
take his place."
“ There is no need, my men. O'Brian has got all he
wants for some time. Now, will you listen to what I
have to say ? "
“No don’t, boys," cried one of the group of
publicans; “listen to me first. I am going to talk
down on bed-rock ”
“I really shouldn’t like to soil my hands upon
that caricature of a face you possess," interrupted
Mr. Hornsby; “ but I’ll use the whip in the par-
son’s buggy on your carcase if you break in on my
friend again.”
“I am quite willing to allow him to speak first,”
the parson said ; “ say what you have to say, Duns-
more ; I'll talk to the men afterwards.”
“ Boys, go back to your claims," cried Dunsmore,
“ and sit tight on them. We’ll guarantee each claim
holder will be glad he hasn't chucked his ground
before night. And don't believe what the kid says
about there being no copper here. What can he
know about copper ? And anyhow, just look what
three plugs of gelagnite blew out of the reef in our
ground. No man can say that isn’t copper ore
of the very highest grade, or he shows himself an
idiot. Now, if it is in our ground "
“ That certainly is high-grade carbonate of copper,"
observed Mr. Hornsby, examining a heap of ore lying
beside a hole that had been blown out of the reef.
“It must have cost you a lot to bring it here,
Dunsmore ; that stuff is peculiar to the Tate River


district. I know it well —in fact, I am almost sure
I could tell you the exact spot in the Lady Mary
mines outcrop it came from "
“There aint any stuff like that in our shows
anyhow,” said a man. “ I’ll sell my claim to any
fool that thinks differently for a fiver,”
His words seemed to express the thoughts of most
of his comrades.
“ Then, boys, listen,” continued Dunsmore. “ We,
my friends Smith, O’Brian, Robertson, Milson,
Hetherington, and some others, are ready to make
you a sporting offer. We’ll give every man of you
a ten-pound note for his ground ”
“You will?” shouted all.
“Yes, on condition that he holds it for us until
to-night and doesn’t tell any one that he has sold.
Come now, men, if you are satisfied there is no
copper in your shows, now is your chance.”
“What is the idea now, parson?” asked Mr.
Hornsby. “That deal will cost them two or three
hundred pounds. They must have something up
their sleeve.”
“ Oh, they simply wish to keep up the appearance
of a booming rush until they can sell their shows
to some speculative ignoramus whom they expect
to arrive shortly. The train connecting with the
boat from Sydney and Brisbane and all ports north
thereof got in to Murgoona last night, you know ”
“ What game have ye on anyhow ? ” demanded
a man. “We know you too well, Dunsmore, to think
ye have turned so blamed fond of throwing away
money for nothing ”
“ Then, confound you for a blooming fool ; hang
on to your ground yourself and do what you like
with it. Get off our leases now, all who are not


selling. We have no time for people who don't
know their own minds.”
“ You bet I know my mind,” cried one man;
“give me that tenner. That’s my ground second
from here.”
“ Hold hard, men,” cried the parson, who had been
engaged in conversation with Tom while Dunsmore
had been speaking. Tom had apparently grown dis-
gusted with his tests and had joined the crowd.
“ What’s the racket now, parson ? ” cried some of
the miners ; “ aren’t we right in sellin' what aint of
any good to us ? ”
“But don't you see that these people want your
ground for some purpose of their own, but wish it to
appear that you are all manning your own properties.
Now, I haven’t the money with me, but I'll promise to
give every man who holds his ground for himself until
to-night a ten-pound note if he desires to sell it then.”
“Who is taking our money now ?” sang out Duns-
more, jumping on an upturned box.
“And who wants to see me murder that fraud of
a parson ?” cried O’Brian, who had just recovered.
“ I reckon we’ll stick to our claims, boys,” cried the
tall prospector. “ There is more in this business than
is on top.”
“ Howling dingoes ! ” ejaculated a man ; “ see what’s
• ) I }}
comm !
“ It's another rush ! ” exclaimed another. “ An’,
great centipedes ! they’re all new chums. Just look
at their togs ! They must have come up with the
train last night.”
“ They’re cornin' here,” yelled a miner. “ I’ll bet it
is new chum speculators wantin' to buy property.”
On came the cavalcade. There were over a dozen
in front, riding horses which every one recognised as


belonging to the hotel keepers in Murgoona. Behind
came sulkies and buggies, laden with people, mostly
in garments which denoted a civilisation further south
than the tropics. One man was perched upon the
back of a camel, and not a few rode bicycles. A
crowd of men running on foot came last; these were
miners and prospectors who had left their work,
wherever it was, on seeing the others pass, and joined
in the rush. As for the troopers, who ought to have
been very much in evidence, there were none.
“ Where is the reef ?" cried the first rider as he
came within shouting distance. “ I am Clayson, of
Charters Towers, and I'll buy up any show ”
“Give me a chance, too, boys,” shouted several
others; “ well pay cash down for good things.”
“Come, Tom,” said Mr. Hornsby ; “we can't afford
to be mixed up in this. The story will be all over
Queensland to-morrow, and I don't want it said that
the manager of Caledonia Camp had anything to do
with either buying or selling worthless claims.”
“Just look at this, sir, first,” said Tom, showing a
bottle of a purple fluid. “ That is what I got when
I dissolved the ore in combined nitric and hydro-
chloric acids, and precipitated it with chloride of
tin.”
“ Jupiter, Tom, that is ”
“ Hush I ” said the parson ; “ let us boil a billy of
tea over here and watch developments. I know some
of these new people, and quite a number of them are
as sharp as Messrs. O’Brian and Co.”
And so it seemed. Claims showing the unmistak-
able copper ore were bought up at once by the excited
newcomers. But they hung back when it came to
dealing with the miners' claims ; there was nothing
showing in them but the huge walls of the arsenical


iron outcrop, and even a new chum from down south
hesitated to give more than a sporting offer for such
a prospect.
The publicans’ leases soon changed hands. These
were proved shows, for was not a fine green ore,
which any schoolboy could see was copper, lying in
heaps beside all the holes they had blown into the
great reef. No one asked why they were selling such
promising properties. No one ever asks reasons for
anything in a big rush.
By sundown the men who had sold their claims had
all departed for Murgoona, to hold high revelry in the
saloons of that evil-smelling, stifling place. No saloon
would close its doors that night. Those who had not
been able to secure any ground had also left the field,
some in disgust, but most to carry on ways that are
dark and strange among the lucky miners in the
township.
Mr. Hornsby was just thinking of departing also
when a horseman galloped down the track and
turned along the line of reef. He was leading a
spare horse, and seemed in a great hurry.
“Why, that is Mike O’Flannigan,” exclaimed the
parson, apparently greatly surprised. “He must be
looking for you.”
“ He hasn't lost much time on the road, at any rate,”
said Mr. Hornsby. “ Look at the state his horse is in.
What can be the matter ? ”
Just then Mike perceived his chief, and rode over.
« Dirty Sam sent me to tell you that a mob of police
troopers have stuck up our camp, sir,” he said as he
approached, “and he wants instructions. It’s all
Smith’s doings. He tried to raise a strike among
the men, and brought out the other two shifts so as
to allow the mine to be flooded. Your own boys are


manning all the deep workings just now, but Dave
fears they can't hold out all night without relief "
“ But to leave a mine without notice like that is
criminal ! Saddle my horse, Mike. What is Smith
doing just now ? ”
“ Living, but that is about all. Dirty Sam sailed
into him, and there's not enough of him to make a
funeral."
“ Dear me I And the rest of the strikers ?" Mr.
Hornsby leaped into his saddle.
“ Oh, we went for them, excepting one or two who
took our side ; they'll not be fit for work for a week.
But hadn’t you better keep away, boss ? Give me
your orders, and I'll gallop back on my fresh horse
in half an hour.”
“ How can I stay away, man, with only one short-
handed shift of men to keep the water down in the
shaft, and troopers waiting to take them away as soon
as they get the chance ? Parson, excuse me ; bring
Tom along "
“ 1 beg your pardon, sir. The troopers are waiting
on Chillagoe Charlie ; they’re all planted round the
camp. We wouldn't have known but for that lad’s
dog, who nosed one fellow out. A couple of them
chased me, expecting I was coming to warn you, and
Sam and I'both thought that—that ”
“ But what on earth have I got to do with Chillagoe
Charlie ? It's the mines I am concerned about. Come
on.” He gave his horse the rein, and darted down
upon the track. A cloud of dust rose around him as
his noble animal broke into its full stride, but soon
the fast-falling darkness enveloped everything in its
folds. Mike still remained with the parson and Tom.
“Mike,” said the parson, “leave me your horse;
saddle one of my buggy horses for Tom—you’ll find


a saddle in the buggy—and ride back to camp as fast
as you can. Tell Mr. Hornsby I'm remaining here for
the night."
Without a word Mike flung a saddle on one of the
parson's buggy horses, which had been hobbled near,
and in a remarkably short space of time Tom and he
were mounted.
“ Can you ride ? " Mike asked.
“Yes," replied Tom.
“Then ride like—like as if Chillagoe Charlie were
after you.” He drove his spurs into his still perspiring
horse's flanks, and Tom followed him blindly, vaguely
conscious that the animal he was astride was one that
would not be far behind when the race was over.
Through the close, sultry air of night they rushed,
the dust kicked up by Mr. Hornsby's steed, now far
ahead, filling their nostrils.
“Fall in behind me,” suddenly shouted Mike to
Tom. “ Give your horse free rein, and lie down on
its back. We’re going to take a short cut through the
bush, and your horse knows the way.”
Tom obeyed, and next moment Mike swerved off to
the left and entered the scrub. How he could see
Tom did not know. He had no time himself to look
where his horse was taking him, even although there
had been light enough for that purpose. The ride was
a terrific one. Under the branches of trees which
would have caught him if sitting up, over dry water-
courses, down steep embankments, leaping fallen
trunks and boulders, he was carried along literally
on the wings of the wind, for the speed created a
gentle breeze. At last they broke into a clearing, and
thundering over an ironstone-shot plain, which drew
sparks from the horses’ hoofs in showers, they suddenly
came in sight of the camp lights.


“ Halt !" a voice shouted. “ Halt, or I’ll drop
you ! ”
Tom looked up, and saw a trooper standing by his
horse’s head close beside them.
“ Drop away, you sneaking skunk," shouted Mike in
reply, and a minute after they were in the middle of
the camp square.
Nigger and two other dogs ran out and greeted
them effusively, but they had no time to respond.
“ The boss has been here,” Mike cried. “ I see his
tracks ; he gone over to the mine. Come on ’’
“ Just wait a bit," put in a voice. “ I have orders to
allow no one to leave this camp." A trooper’s face
loomed up at Mike’s bridle-rein.
Mike swung his horse round with a jerk, and with-
drawing his foot from his stirrup at the same time, he
kicked out at the man viciously.
“You have orders!” he roared. “You can have
Queensland if you like ; but I’ll knock blazes out of
the man who puts a hand on my horse."
He rode furiously down the track leading to the
mine, and once more Tom followed, Nigger also
running behind.
“Here we are, boss. What can we do?" Mike
sang out, as they came up and saw Mr. Hornsby,
still in the saddle, directing some operations. They
dismounted at once.
“Nothing, Mike," the manager said sadly. “The
pumps won’t work, and the boys can’t keep on bail-
ing with buckets and a windlass."
Mike and Tom sprang to the windlass, which had
been hastily erected over the shaft mouth, and relieved
Bullocky Bill and Dirty Sam, who had been toiling at
its creaking handles for hours past in an attempt to
keep the rising water from flooding the workings until


t mm ii TSII
' *■'$■*. -a*
T. '•. | » I
■ K| L-‘‘ I
J f I f / ;Wj
J 'ill Rlk V ij
‘*. < 1 '* ?§|
r m*I*wW
i|9HS
flC JP A | \.i
)h >■ fwBr li '9r^
K : i § *
1 '~' Iffjn
fif .. • jSn■ /*■■ * ''ter •* .* •3
■
" MIKE
KICKED OUT AT THE MAN VICIOUSLY.
[To face page 90.




their comrades had timbered the drives underneath so
that they would not fall in when the water reached
them. The two men drew their grimy hands across
their steaming faces the moment they were relieved.
They were blinded with perspiration, but had not
been able to let go the handles to clear their eyes.
li My word, boss/’ smiled Bullocky Bill, “ this is a
fine country for keeping warm in.” He stuck a fresh
candle in the bottle which served as a candlestick, and
placed it in a better position for giving light.
“ Get below, Bullocky,” cried Dirty Sam. “We
can give a hand there.” The two men clambered
over the edge of the shaft, and feeling with their
feet for the ladders, went below to help their com-
rades in the airless, poisonous regions underneath.
Suddenly Tom called out, “ I know what is wrong
with the engines and pumps, sir ; I see by the water
we’re hauling up.”
“ I doubt they’ve taken care that we can't repair
anything that is wrong, Tom. They have committed
a crime in leaving the mine, and wouldn t stop short
of another such an easy one as wrecking the engines.”
“ No, sir; the engines and pumps are all right, I am
sure,” persisted Tom eagerly. “It is the boiler that
requires attention. I saw the same thing done at a
strike in Sydney.”
“ But the pumps only make a lather, and don t draw
water at all.”
“ I know, sir ; they have put soft soap in the boiler,
and the steam from that only condenses and chokes
the plungers.”
Mr. Hornsby jumped off his horse and took Tom's
place at the windlass. “Go on Tom,” he said; “see
if you can do anything.”
Tom ran to the boiler which supplied steam to the


winding and ventilating engines, and also to the
pumps. It was now cold, for the men had ceased
using it hours ago. Uncoupling some pipes, he
caused the water to drain out, then he unscrewed
the manhole door, and, lighting a candle, looked in.
It was as he had thought; the lower part of the steam-
drum was filled with a spongy mass of foam-like stuff,
and all the pipes leading to and from the boiler were
clogged with the same substance. Everywhere a
greasy coat of slime had been spread by the action
of the steam dissolving the soap and casting it over
all contact surfaces, and Tom could imagine what the
working parts of the pump deep down in the shaft
would be like. He hastily procured an old discarded
billy and lifted out the bulk of the slimy mass, then
with a mop made of a bundle of ore-bags he cleansed
the sides and the internal pipes as well as he could
see to do.
“ I think everything will work now, sir,” he called
out to Mr. Hornsby at the windlass. “Shall I re-
kindle the fire?” He closed the manhole door and
began connecting up all the pipes as he spoke.
“ Yes, if you can. Throw some tins of kerosene on
the wood you use to hasten it, and fill the boiler from
that gravitation tank.”
“ I know, sir,” Tom answered, allowing the boiler to
be charged with water by means of a pipe connected
with a large tank mounted on a high wooden frame-
work. He then set the fires going, shut off the gravi-
tation water, and saw that everything else was in order.
Tom was not an engineer, but his father had been one
of the most famous mechanicians of his time, and
perhaps Tom inherited some knowledge of the science
instinctively. And the needle on the face of the steam
gauge began to move.


“ Steam will be ready in another twenty minutes,”
Tom called out, when everything was working right.
“Will you please tell the men below to open the
exhausts of the pump so as to allow the steam to
clean out the cylinders?”
“Can’t do that, my lad. The men are suffering
enough down there without turning the steam on
them. I am not sure, either, if any of know
where the exhaust-valve is, nor what it is -
A sound as of a number of horses galloping broke
in on Mr. Hornsby’s words. “That will be those
confounded trooper fellows,” he muttered, listening.
“ I knew I rode over one or two to-night, and they 11
be coming for my blood now.”
But it was not the troopers. It was a number of
the miners from Crocodile Crossing, and among them
was the tall, black-whiskered prospector. “ Where is
the boss of the camp ? ” this man said, as the riders
drew up beside Tom. It was dark, and they could
not distinguish the forms of the two men at the
windlass.
“ I am here,” called out Mr. Hornsby ; “ but if you
have anything to say to me you 11 have to come up and
say it here. lam busy.”
“ And I am right sorry to see that,” cried the tall
prospector, sliding from his horse and running up the
dump to the mouth of the shaft. “We heard of the
dirty trick that skunk Smith played on you—he never
was anything more than a publican’s agent, any-
how —and we’ve come along to see if we can pull
you through.”
“ What! ” gasped the mine manager in amazement.
“ Do you mean to tell me that you fellows are willing
to work for the Caledonia Company ? ”
“ No, boss, we don't care a shandygaff for the


Caledonia Company, but we’re straight men, and
we’re here to help a straight boss. Give me that
handle ”
“ But your claims at the rush ? You will have
abandoned them ? ”
“Well, that won't make much difference. The
parson told us that if we came here in time to man
the mines before the damage was done that he would
put us on to something better, and here we are. Spit
out your orders, and let us get to work. Our horses
can be hobbled until morning."
“ Men," cried Mr. Hornby, much moved, “you have
come in time to save this mine. If it had been flooded
my name and reputation would have gone for ever, for
people in the Old Country don't know anything about
the joys of a mine manager’s life in happy Queensland.
lam grateful to you, boys, and I shall not forget "
“Hallo, below! Dirty Sam and Bullocky Bill!"
A man shouted down the shaft. All had now come
up, having removed the saddles and bridles from their
steeds and hobbled their fore-feet.
“ Hallo !” floated faintly from the depths.
“ Come up ; we’re the relieving shift, we're ready to
go on now "
“ And the man of you who shows a face down here
will never show it on top again," came like a whisper
on a gentle breeze, although Dirty Sam had bellowed
the words forth with all his lung power.
“They think you are some of the other shift,” Mike
intimated, and one of the men lay over the shaft
and roared, “You cranky ole drill jumper, doesn’t
ye know who is speakin’ to ye ? We is not your old
mates, we is Long Tom an’ Little Billy an’ Sailor
George an’ Scottie an' me, an' Harry the Hustler, an
—oh, blame ye —a lot more. Come up at once."


But Mike had gone down in the last bucket and
explained, and a shout of welcome below cut short
the miner’s speech.
Next minute the tired, grimy, hungry, and thirsty
toilers began to emerge from the shaft s mouth, each
following the other up the long ladder way. “ Mates,
I am mighty glad to see ye,” were Psalm Singing
Dave’s first words. He walked to the edge of the
dump and picking up his shirt (no man wears such an
article of dress down a North Queensland copper
mine) he wiped the salt sweat from his eyes. He then
seized a water-bag hanging on a peg sunk into the
dump, and gave it his best attention until Hungry Ted
pulled it from him. Dirty Sam meanwhile gave some
instructions to the tall prospector, whom evidently he
knew very well, and the relief party stripped and
prepared to go below.
Just then a slim stripped figure rushed up the dump.
“ There is now enough steam to work the pumps,”
it cried, addressing Mr. Hornsby; “I'll go down
and open the exhausts to allow the steam to cleanse
everything.”
“ Git away over to the camp an' help the cook,”
laughed some one. “This aint no forlorn hope busi-
ness that needs a boy hero to show men their duty.”
Mr. Hornsby looked at the youthful volunteer for a
moment. “All right, Tom,” he said. “ We’ll both go
down. Lower away, lads, and see that Tom is put
safely into the bucket when it comes up again.
He swung himself clear of the shaft walls, one
foot in the bucket, and the other free for steering
purposes, and strong arms kept the windlass in
check as its barrel paid out with his weight. Soon
the signal was given that he had reached bottom,
and the bucket was hauled up speedily for Tom.


“ Here, kid, was you ever down a shaft before ?” a
miner asked.
“ No," answered Tom, getting into the bucket as he
had seen Mr. Hornsby do ; “ but I must learn how
to go down sometime."
“ I reckon there will be a funeral here to-morrow,"
the miner continued. “ Why can't some of us do ?
I don't like standing by an’ seeing work being made
for an inquest."
“ Shut up 1" ordered Dirty Sam. “ The lad is full
of grit, and could go down hand over hand if it
came to the point. The engineer went on strike
to-day with the others, and it is his dirty work that
the lad is putting right. None of us know anything
about the job, or we would all go."
Before Sam had finished explaining Tom was
standing beside the mine manager on a platform
near the bottom. Mr. Hornsby had a lighted candle
in his hand, and as its flickering light lit up his
surroundings Tom saw that he was standing on
some planks built into the walls of the shaft, at a
point where two dark tunnels were driven into the
black glistening ore of the lode. The pump was fixed
in a corner of the platform, and from it a long suction-
pipe dropped into a dark flood of bubbling water
fast rising beneath them. The temperature in that
airless hole was as that of an oven, and already Tom
was blinded with perspiration. Groping for the pump
exhausts he opened them, noting meanwhile that the
water was literally rushing up to them.
“ I am going to turn on the steam, sir," he cried.
“ Hadn’t you better climb up the ladder a bit ? It will
be hot here.”
“Yes, I believe it will, Tom," Mr. Hornsby re-
sponded, “ but I am going to stay here with you."


A hissing cloud of steam poured through the open
exhausts into the shaft, completely blinding the two
men, and raising the temperature to what most people
would call unbearable heat.
“How long will this last, Tom?" Mr. Hornsby's
voice cried through the swirling vapour cloud.
“ I am groping for the valve to shut it off now, sir,"
Tom cried in return.
“ Hallo !" came from above. “ Have ye broke through
into Jimmy Squarefoot’s dining-room ? The steam is
gushing out like as if ye had lifted the lid off his billy
can ”
“Whew ! This makes a fool of a Turkish bath,”
said Mr. Hornsby. “ I hope you can find that valve
soon, Tom."
“ Here’s a mob of troopers come up round the shaft,
boss," a voice came down again. “ What will we do ? "
“ Pitch them down the shaft," roared Mr. Hornsby
savagely.
“ All right; Dirty Sam has hauled one off his horse.
Look out, below, he’ll be there in a second ! ’’
“ No, no, keep him on top until we get up," yelled
the worried manager, and at that moment the steam
was shut off.
“ Do you think the pump will work now, Tom ? "
“ I think so, sir. There must have been a lot of
soap blown out, for my eyes are dropping out with
the lather that is in them."
By Jupiter ! I’ll take it out of these policemen on
top for this, Tom.”
“But it is not their fault, sir; they didn't bring about
the strike."
“ No, but their confounded presence here at this
time is enough to drive me mad. They and their
Chillagoe Charlies "


“ I am going to start the pump, sir Hallo ! the
steam is clearing away, and it is getting quite cool."
“ Some one has got the ventilating engine and fan
started. I wasn't aware the Caledonia Company
possessed a man of such foresight."
“ The pumps are working. I hear the plungers
forcing the water up."
“ I hope so, Tom. If not, this mine is as good
as abandoned, for man power can never overtake that
flood now. The Walsh River must have broken in on
us "
“Yes, they’re working,” persisted Tom ; “ I can feel
the throb in the pipes."
A cheer was wafted down from above, then a
powerful voice cried, “The water is coming out here
more than a mile a minute, boss."
“ Get into the bucket, Tom, you’ve saved the mine,"
said Mr. Hornby, with a sigh of relief. “ And now I’m
ready for troopers, Chillagoe Charlies, or anything."
“Won’t you go first, sir ?
“No, I won't; your future is in my hands hence-
forth, and if harm comes your way it will have to pass
me first. Heave away, boys. Man on board.”
Two minutes later the two half-parboiled human
beings were being rubbed down by ready hands.
“ My ! boss, your togs are ruined now,” cried Ginger
Bob.
“ Yes, Ginger, you can have them ; I really forgot
I had any clothes on. But where are these pests, the
troopers ? ”
“ Helping to lower timber into No. 2 shaft,” said Dirty
Sam, “ and their boss is working that ventilating plant.”
Mr. Hornsby walked down to where the engine was
running, and beheld a man in the dress of police
superintendent working around it with an oil can.


“ Sir, I thank you," began the mine manager. 11 You
started that just in time.”
“No thanks are necessary, sir ; I was a Tyneside
engineer before I came out here and turned police-
man, and when I heard that you were down that shaft
fooling about with steam exhausts, of course I had to
do something to save you, and I blew the steam
through the engine and started it."
“ Well, lam grateful "
“ I don’t know that you should be. I wanted you
alive so as to show you that I am not always such a
fool as you found me the day I landed at Murgoona.”
“ I hardly understand you. Come over to the house,
and after I change my clothes we’ll have dinner."
“ Afterwards, perhaps, but in the meantime, Chil-
lagoe Charlie, I arrest you in the name of the law, and
as is the custom I warn you not to give yourself away
by saying anything.”
The officer laid a hand on Mr. Hornsby’s shoulder
and with his other held out a document. “ Here
is the warrant,” he said. “So we are square now,
Charlie.”
“ How very melodramatic ! ” Mr. Hornsby yawned.
“ Come over and have dinner."


CHAPTER V
THE MIDNIGHT RIDERS
“ W T ELL, Mr. Superintendent, are you not afraid
V V to dine with such a notorious personage as I
am supposed to be ? Why haven’t you your revolver
on the table beside you ? And why didn't you order
your men to surround the house ? Let me help you
to some of this wild turkey ; I shot it myself down on
the river yesterday.”
“ Thanks ; I feel a square meal would do me good.
I am not afraid to dine with you, because in the
warrant murder has not been laid to your charge ; and
although you tricked me so neatly the other night, I
consider that if I were not able to hold my own, man
to man, I have no right to wear this uniform—but
I heard a knock at the door.”
“ Come in, Tom ; take that chair over there ; but
first permit me to introduce you to the police
superintendent of the north country. He has just
done me the honour of telling me that I am Chillagoe
Charlie. This lad is Tom Willoughby, sir; in a way
he is my protege ; and now that we all know each
other let us proceed with the mercies the Gulf country
provides. I am sorry that my friend the parson is
not here, he is a good entertainer, which I fear I
am not. But Tom is too amazed to speak, I see.


He wasn’t aware of the double identity with which
you credit me, although he saw Charlie at pistol
range last night. You might tell him some of my
supposed exploits.”
“ I only know them second-hand, Charlie —I beg
pardon, I mean ”
“Charlie is my name. We’ll waive the familiarity.
Go on.”
“ Well, you know I really belong to the Southern
Division, and it was only recently that I was sent
up here to organise the pursuit of the clever gentleman
who was sticking up banks everywhere, stealing the
gold from the batteries of the leading mines, robbing
hotels, and in fact doing anything and everything
short of murder, although I believe there are ugly
rumours afloat concerning his connection with the
disappearance of a number of men. i must say I
thought the stories about you—l mean the gentle-
man’s prowess greatly exaggerated until I came up
to Murgoona. There I changed my mind. You
did it very neatly, and I must say considerately,
sir.”
“ I am glad you think so. Let us have your
version of the story. I heard from my men to-day
the trooper sergeant’s yarn.”
“Why, you know all about it. When I retired
to my room in that den of an hotel I found a note
pinned to my pillow informing me that the person
I had expressed a desire to meet was sleeping
behind the dump of an abandoned shaft of a
certain mine. I, of course, saw that my weapons
were in working order and set out for the place
mentioned, having received full directions from the
hotel-keeper. Well, I found the abandoned shaft,
and sure enough a man was lying beside it asleep,


a mask hiding his face. I could hardly believe my
luck. Here was the great Charlie, helpless, proba-
bly poisoned by some firewater he had been foolish
enough to drink. Great would be the fame of my
name. I bent over the man, and just then a pair
of arms, which I must say were a good deal
stronger than yours look, caught me round the
waist and threw me. *lf you make a sound it will
be your last,’ the owner of the arms said. ‘You
have been tricked, for that is Goggle Eyed Hawk
lying there, and I am the man you wanted to
meet.’
“ ‘ I would much rather postpone the interview,'
I managed to say, at which he laughed. I could
not see his face because of the mask, and the voice
was evidently disguised. ‘ I’ll not harm you,' the
man said, ‘ nor will I tell any one of this, but it is
essential that I should have all these papers you are
carrying.’
“ ‘ But they're in my room,' ” I explained before he
gagged me.
“ ‘ Oh, that doesn’t matter in the slightest, I’ll get
them there. I’ll tie you now so that you can’t get
into town, unless you roll in, before morning ; and I
should not advise rolling because of snakes, and holes
in the ground, and other things. I’ll see that you
are relieved as soon as is safe for me, so try and sleep
the night away.' He was quite gentlemanly about
the way he worked, and wished me good-night when
he left. I need not say I didn’t sleep, but I realised
the hopelessness of rolling or jumping into town, and
passed the time in evolving a scheme for his capture.
I was found and released about breakfast-time
yesterday. I put my plan in action, and it has been
successful even sooner than I expected. Your mind


doesn’t take elementary things into account, sir,
a common fault with our cleverest law-break —ahem 1
—people.”
“ Very interesting. You have only made one
trifling mistake, Mr. Superintendent.”
“ I am not aware of it. What is it ? ”
“Oh, nothing much. Only you have caught the
wrong man.”
The officer smiled. “ I don’t think so,” he said.
“ I did not see Charlie's face, as I have already said,
but I am old enough to know how to make use of my
powers of observation.”
“ Indeed ? Won't you give us the benefit of them ?
Try some of this pigeon-pie. My cook is an expert
in pigeon-pies ; I would not part with him for any-
thing.”
“No?” said the officer thoughtfully. “But I am
afraid he can’t very well accompany you ”
“Quite easily, my dear fellow; those Japanese can
go wherever we go. But you haven t explained how
you ran your man down ? ”
The officer looked curiously at his host before
speaking. “You seem to be greatly amused, he said
at length, “ but I tell you, it is always the small ignored
trifles that trip up a man of genius. Have you ever
taken any particular notice of this before ? ” He care-
fully unfolded a crumpled page of a newspaper and
handed it to Mr. Hornsby. “ I must ask you to
promise on your honour not to destroy anything,”
he said.
«What 1 Would you trust to the honour of
Chillagoe Charlie ? ”
“Well, I find the gentleman a very decent fellow,
and I don’t see why I shouldn't.”
“ All right, I won't damage your evidence in any way


This appears to be a page from the Cairns Argus.
Can't say I have seen that paper for over a week now.
What has Sherlock Holmes discovered in this ? ”
“ That was the gag left in my mouth.”
“ Indeed ? I would never have dreamt that your
mouth was large enough to hold all that.”
“ And there lying on that chair is its companion
page. If you will examine it 1 have no doubt you will
see that you were slightly thoughtless—Ah ! you
appreciate my words now ? ”
Mr. Hornsby's face had suddenly changed. “Get
that paper, Tom,” he said. “Yes, your powers of
observation are wonderfully accurate,” he said to the
officer. “This is undoubtedly a piece of the same
paper, one can see that by the way the two pages join
where they were torn across, but I fail to grasp
that you can call that evidence for or against any-
thing. Any one could tear a paper in two, stuff one
part into a man’s mouth, and accidentally or with
design leave the other part here ” He paused
abruptly. He had caught Tom’s eye, and read the
meaning the look implied.
“Just so,” the Superintendent said. “Here is a
piece of the cord with which I was bound.” He handed
over a length of cord, and again Mr. Hornsby’s face
expressed dismay.
“Well,” he asked, “what does the cord tell? It
looks a very ordinary thing.”
“ Your face shows you know differently. This is a
cord not known in Queensland —I happen to be an
expert in cords —it is a special tough variety manu-
factured in Greenock in Scotland, and on inquiry
by telegraph to Cairns this morning I find you paid
duty on a consignment imported from Greenock last
week.”


“ I don't deny that. It is a waterproof cord that
we use for signalling purposes in the mines, and
the Company sent it out at my request. But you
surely cannot think that that means anything. Any
chance passer-by could pick up yards of it anywhere
round the mines.”
“ Possibly, but I don't think your argument is
convincing. Here's another link. He produced a
piece of stiff paper. “ This is a pattern of the imprint
my friend’s foot left in the sand,” he said. “You
will observe, I have no doubt, from the shape that
it was an English-make boot he was wearing, such as
you have on your foot at this moment. You would
object, I suppose, to my trying this pattern on your
boot soles just now—don’t trouble to excuse yourself.
You see, I have already compared it with the tracks
leading from this house to your horse yard and find
that the man who borrowed the sergeant’s horse this
morning wore the same boots ”
“ But all English boots are more or less alike, and
they are doubtless worn by every mine manager, or
whoever can afford them, all along the line.”
“Now, strangely enough, my friends, the Customs'
authorities at Cairns inform me that such is not the
case. There have been no importations of English-
made boots at that port for a longer time than any boot
could last. The stores in Murgoona and all the town-
ships around have none, and I have not been able to
find any one but yourself who wears them.”
“ But the very fact that I wear them is proof that the
Customs people do not know what comes into the
country.” Mr. Hornsby seemed to be getting angry.
“ Oh, no ; you could have taken them in as personal
property.”
“ But so could any one else.”


“ Perhaps, but extremely improbable. Most people
up here prefer Colonial or American footwear. But
let that go too in the meantime. With a strange sense
of old-time romance which seems to be associated
with Chillagoe Charlie, you left a cheque in payment
for the stolen horse, and then, actuated by the same
feeling, or feeling annoyed that the sergeant didn’t
appear to think the cheque of any value, you honoured
it yourself. Now, no one who knew nothing of Charlie
would do that, for how could he cash it ? ”
“I am really too tired to argue further. There have
been facts in all you have said, yet they all miss the
mark because I am not the man. I never to my
knowledge saw the gentleman you think you have got
in me, and, to cut it short, I can prove that at the time
you say Charlie tied you up I was in camp, here.
Now, I am about tired of all this business ; you have
shown yourself very observant, but if I told my men
what you have said, there would be the usual trouble
with the insurance companies on your behalf as soon
as your friends missed you.”
“ I am sorry you threaten me. If I told my own
men —they're the pick of Queensland, and were sent
up through the night by special train —I venture to
think Caledonia Camp would cease to exist as a
mining community.”
“ Do you mean to say that your men do not know
of the charges you have brought against me ? ”
“ They certainly do not, and I have no intention of
telling them at present.”
“Then what are you going to do ? Whatever warrant
you may have to arrest Chillagoe Charlie, you can
have none against Charles Hornsby, mine manager of
the Caledonia Company ? ”
“ I am not going to do anything just yet, for two


reasons. The first one is that, though I am a police-
man, I have a sort of liking for the person known as
Chillagoe Charlie, whoever he is, and do not believe
he is guilty of most of the charges brought against
him ; I would therefore like him to escape if he could,
but I must do my utmost to run him down, and I shall
do so. The second reason is that as you took the
warrant for his arrest from my room I am powerless —
that paper I showed you was an income-tax form —I
merely wanted to draw you to-night. I thank you for
this dinner, and if you could see that my men get a
decent feed, we would go back to Murgoona until new
papers were made out—you took them all, you know.
You understand me ?"
“ I do ; you mean to suggest for my benefit that a
fleet horse under me and the Never Never in front of
me would be a good thing."
“ It looks that way."
" Then, my dear sir, until the Caledonia Company
dispenses with my services, which I have reason to
believe they mean to do, I may say my address will be
Caledonia Camp. You will find me here at any time.
Now that we’ve finished the unpleasant business, try
one of these cigars, and make yourself comfortable.
I gave orders when we came in to prepare a meal for
your men. In fact, they have finished dining now, I
hear Dirty Sam's banjo. The new boys the parson
sent must be working the shift themselves."
“ Then I’ll wish you good evening, and I hope that
we won’t meet again."
“ But I hope we shall; you're the finest sample of a
policeman I ever met, and I should like to continue
our acquaintance. And where are you going, anyway,
at this time of night ? Stay here with me, the men
will attend to your fellows."


“Stay here? I'd rather not, thank you. We’ll get
back to Murgoona ”
“ Oh, I see, you are afraid of me ? ”
“No, I’ll be shot if I am; but I’m afraid of what
my confounded eyes might see, or my senses of
deduction make clear. Why, man, don’t you see lam
giving you every chance I can ? but even now I see
more evidence against you, and the lad’s tell-tale face
shows that he also knows what he would not tell for
thousands.”
“You are ” “Right” was the word that Tom
meant to add, but he stopped in time and substituted
“ in error.”
“ Dear me, Sherlock, you are a most remarkable
man. I believe you could easily by some of your
deductive reasoning prove Tom Willoughby to be
your man, even although he is but a boy.”
“ Tom Willoughby,” exclaimed the officer. “ Is that
your name ? I did not catch it to-night.”
“Yes, you seem surprised to hear it,” said Tom.
“Do you know any one of that name?”
“No; but I knew a man named John Willoughby,
and you’re very like him. He and I were both
engineers on the Tyne together, and were like brothers
until I left for Australia. He became manager of the
yard afterwards, and once wrote to me about his
brother who was supposed to be somewhere out
here.”
“Your friend was my father,” said Tom. “ He died
four years ago, and his brother, if alive, is the only
relative 1 have in the world.”
“You have a couple of friends at any rate, Tom,”
said Mr. Hornsby, “notwithstanding that one of them
is supposed to be the notorious Chillagoe Charlie.”
He turned his head away as he spoke, and Tom


knew that his words had a double meaning, one of
which was intended for him alone. Yes, Tom knew
he had two friends, and one was supposed to be
Chillagoe Charlie.
“My boy,” broke in the officer kindly, “if your
uncle is on top of the ground in Australia I'll find
him for you.”
“Let us go down to the camp and see if the boys can
provide any entertainment,” suggested Mr. Hornsby,
“ I feel so relieved with the knowledge that I am not
going to be brought captive home to Rome —or,
rather, Brisbane —that I fancy I could almost sing a
song myself.” His voice was sarcastic.
“ Don’t sing too soon,” spoke the superintendent,
grimly, as they passed out.
“ Ah, excuse me a moment while I give the cook
some orders,” suddenly cried Mr. Hornsby, catching
Tom by the arm. “Walk down and I will follow
immediately.” Then turning to Tom he said, “You
heard all that passed to-night, and know as much as I
do. There is no time to talk just now, and it were
better perhaps that we should keep our own thoughts
to ourselves in any case. I want you to go and cash
this cheque to-night. Saddle my horse yourself and
ride back on the Murgoona track to the springs. The
moon will be up before you get there, and if you are
followed you can easily outdistance any horse but
Mike O’Flannigan's, and the parson has got his just
now. Stick this cheque up on the tree under the
notice that is there, and then hide near and wait.
Should any one come and take it down, tell them you
want payment for it; if the right man does so he will
at once respond ; and if any man touches it who does
not see the force of your request, compel him to put
the cheque back under the muzzle of this revolver.


When you meet the right man act as you think fit,
you know my feelings, and if no one comes wait
there until morning and bring the cheque back. Do
you follow me ? ”
“ Perfectly, sir, and you may depend on me acting
as you would yourself. Go down among the men and
the troopers now, and I will slip away without any
one knowing.”
“ All right, Tom ; but remember, don't run any risks.
If the man should prove nasty take to your horse and
clear out. We might be mistaken as well as the police-
man, you know.”
Mr. Hornsby stretched out his hand as he spoke,
and a little surprised at this token of friendship from
such a cold, emotionless man as he had previously
appeared to be, Tom took it, and found his own
grasped in a grip that no one would suspect could be
given by the slender mine manager. They then
parted, Mr. Hornsby going down to the camp, where
a concert was in full swing, and Tom to the horse
yard, carrying Mr. Hornsby’s saddle and bridle on
his arm.
“ Well, boys, I hope you have had a good meal,”
cried Mr. Hornsby, as he approached the camp fire.
“ We had, sir,” answered one of the troopers, “ and
we’re having a jolly good concert now.”
“ Long Tom and his mates are working the mine
themselves,” volunteered Dirty Sam. “We will re-
lieve them at midnight, and by to-morrow we can
form the three shifts again.”
“We don’t mind giving a hand if required, sir,”
spoke a big trooper. “ Most of us know something
about mining.”
“At least we’ve all lost money at the game,” laughed
another. “ But, by hokey ! I would like to know


which of you fellows it was who gave me that kick
to-night. I thought at first it was the horse that
did it.”
“It might have been a bunyip,” suggested Mike
O’Flannigan innocently. “ I heard a fellow say the
other day that there were some of them about in an
old shaft over on that ironstone patch.”
“ No, there were two of them ; they came into camp
like cyclones,” returned the trooper, “ and went off
again so quick that I thought I saw blue light flashing
around them. I shouldn't be surprised if, when you
look at their tracks to-morrow, you'll find their horses’
hoofs were cloven.”
“ Let’s get on with the concert,” cried another
trooper. “ Here you, Sam, give us that song you were
about to start ”
“Hallelujah ! Hallelujah I” yelled Dave.
“Here, it's not you who is singing just now,”
spoke one of the men reprovingly. “ And anyhow, we
want something more lively than that.”
“He isn't singing,” grinned Dirty Sam, “ he's
swearing just now. What is it, Dave ? have ye been
bitten again ? "
“No, but I know by the way that dog is listening
that there’s some more blamed fools coming here —I
don't mean to say that you trooper fellows are fools,
for you are all decent mates, but this camp has been
fairly rushed of late by all sorts of people passing on
to the rush at Crocodile's Crossing, an’ our tucker
can’t hold out much longer if we have to feed half
Queensland ”
“ Shut up, Dave ! ” roared the miners as one man,
“we grudge no man his tucker.”
“ I didn’t mean that we did, but —Britannia rules the
waves, we—oh, I forget what I meant.”


“ The dog is right in any case,” remarked the trooper
superintendent, as Nigger began barking. “ I hear
hoof-beats myself now. That is a fine little mongrel
you’ve got, boys.”
“ Yes,” agreed Peter the Poet; “it is Tom’s dog ; he
and it can speak to each other.”
“ It seems there is a number of horsemen coming
here in any case,” Mr. Hornsby said. “They have
seen the camp lights and are turning off the track now.
They have come from the west too.”
Whoever the riders were they were in a hurry, that
much was easily evident, and the camp waited ex-
pectantly until they came up.
“What place is this ? ” some one shouted while the
visitors were yet some distance away. “ Are there any
policemen anywhere nearer than Murgoona ? ”
«What in blazes do ye want with policemen ? ”
roared back Dave. “ Aint ye able to fight out your
own trouble ? ”
« Yes,” answered a rider, as half a dozen men rode
up to the fire, “ but we can’t get our men to fight
with. Crocodile Crossing rush is a swindle ; there
isn’t enough copper in the whole place to make a man
blind if he put it in his eye, and we've bought up
nearly all the properties.”
“More fool you,” Dirty Sam laughed; “hitch up
your horses and have a drink of tea.”
“ No, thanks, we can’t wait,” cried one of the others ;
“ we want to get into Murgoona to share the reward
offered ; that will just about pay us for what we have
lost.”
“What reward ?” asked the superintendent quickly.
The troopers had all discarded their tunics be-
cause of the heat, and were not recognised as being
such by the strangers.


“Chillagoe Charlie’s reward. He is there now,"
spoke all the newcomers at once.
“ What ? " yelled all.
“ Here, you fellows,” said the superintendent, “one
of you tell the story and we’ll understand. You say
Chillagoe Charlie is at Crocodile Crossing just now ? ”
“He was when we left, at any rate,” answered one
of the men. “We had just found out by one or two
rough assays that we had been done in our specula-
tions in buying up the claims, and as all the profes-
sional miners around us had left their claims to go
and man some mines near, we could see that the
whole thing was a fraud. Well, just as we were
wondering whether we would keep the boom up long
enough to float the shows into limited companies in
Melbourne and Sydney, a man in a mask came out of
the darkness and rode up to our fire. He never said
a word, but his hands were crammed full of revolvers
and his belt bristled with them, and I don’t know how
many rifles were slung across his saddle. We knew
who he was at once, of course, and every man who
had a horse near made a rush for it, and here we are.
Don't you fellows think you are in this, however;
the reward is ours by right, and we're off now to
Murgoona.”
“You’ll get the reward all right when the man you
all ran from is caught,” spoke the superintendent; his
men were too well trained to betray themselves.
“ But how, by all the wonders in this country, didn't
you catch him yourselves and make sure of the
reward? He couldn’t have much chance against
such a mob of you.”
“We are not policemen,” spoke the leader of the
reward claimers coldly ; “we are doing our duty to
the State by reporting the case. Men, give us a
8


drink of water and we’ll get on to the township. We
thought at first this was it. _
“ No, it’s about a couple of hours’ fast riding yet,
Dirty Sam informed them ; “ but you can water your
horses at the springs half way."
“ Thanks for the information. North Queensland
isn’t a country for civilised people in my opinion.
Let's away again, boys, and keep together -for fear
that masked beggar may come in among us." Hastily
drinking the ipannikins of water given them, the hot
and excited men from the south of the tropic of
Capricorn went off again.
“ Come, lads, saddle up," then exclaimed the super-
intendent ; “ our work lies ahead.”
“What are you going to do ? demanded Mr.
Hornsby, taking the superintendent aside as the
troopers went off for their horses.
“ Go out after Charlie, of course."
“ But 1 thought you were of opinion that you were
beside him just now ?
“ And I still think so, but I'm giving you the benefit
of the doubt, and ”
“ But you have no warrant for his arrest ?"
«No ; but I find that Charles Hornsby is a J.P. in
Queensland. Perhaps he will sign this paper for me
and thus give me one."
“ Well, that is good. Sign a warrant for my own
arrest!"
“No ; for the arrest of Chillagoe Charlie if we
catch him." _ ,
“Oh, all right. Give me your paper. But don’t
you think the whole thing is a farce ? fou must be
convinced by this time that Chillagoe Charlie is im-
personated by lots of people, and that he is getting
credit for many deeds he knows nothing of. That is,


if there is such a person at all, which I am beginning
to doubt very much.”
“ Then, Mr. Hornsby, it is lucky for—for somebody
that I was sent up here, for if I can get on to the
track of any one using that title who hasn’t the copy-
right, don’t you see that all the charges fall flat ? One
man can’t be held responsible for the doings of other
people. But you came in from Crocodile Crossing
to-night on a very fast horse. These people wdio have
just passed had nothing special in the way of horse-
flesh —they were all borrowed mounts —and with
perhaps an exception they did not appear to be men
used to record-breaking rides, as you are. Now, it is
just possible that our friend Charlie has done a very
smart piece of work, and I should like to settle that
point.”
“ You mean that he appeared at Crocodile Crossing
purposely to be seen, and then by means of a pheno-
menal horse and a knowledge of bush short-cuts got
here before the people who saw him, and in fact
dined with the police superintendent before they
arrived ? ”
“You are a thought-reader, Mr. Hornsby —unless, of
course, you knew ”
“ I didn't; I came in here from the Crossing very
fast, I’ll admit, but it was to see the mines, and almost
any man could have walked the distance since my
arrival here. But what are you driving at ? You are
not telling me your thoughts for nothing.”
“ I was going to propose that I leave a couple of
men here to —well—gather flowers if they like ; but
also to see that you do not undertake another des-
perate ride. Are you agreeable ? ”
“ Quite. I know you would station your men some-
where near in any case to watch me, and they


may as well be comfortable. But I don't think
Charlie will wait out there until you come. He
seems to be a very active sort of person, and doubtless
he is now making an effort to keep an engagement at
some place not within ordinary riding distance from
the Crossing.”
“ We'll see. Here are my boys all ready ; we've got
some good horses and some good men among us, and
Charlie will have to travel fast to keep in front of us.”
“Yes, but watch that he doesn't get hold of your
clothes and repeat the trick he played on that sergeant
of yours. You know, I suppose, that already you have
men chasing Charlie in all directions. He was
dressed as a sergeant trooper the last I heard of him,
and your sergeant in my clothes and on my horse
was riding towards the Indian Ocean on the other
side of Australia after him "
“Not on your horse. He left yours tied up to the
same tree his own was tied to, and sent his man to me
to report. You can send a man for it any time. He
tore up your cheque, of course.”
“ Then I think that sergeant sadly needs a lesson in
manners. What right had he to tie my horse up any-
where ? No matter whether he found his own or not,
his first duty should have been to return mine, as he
promised to do.” Mr. Hornsby was certainly angry.
“ But, dear me, why all this display of temper over
a horse when you showed none over serious matters ?
The horse was taken away as a decoy, and you know
where to send for it ”
“ I know nothing whatever about it, sir, and I tell
you plainly that I look upon your man as a common
horse thief; he got the animal from me on condition
that he would return it. I allow none of my horses to
be tied up, nor do I call that returning it. By Jupiter !


I will now give you some real work to do. In my
capacity as a J.P. I have certain powers over the
police, and I shall send you after that man ; he is
chasing Chillagoe Charlie, or thinks he is, and I
shouldn't be surprised if that person circles round
and hunts you ”
“ A sort of circle arrangement, in which case, per-
haps, I should just stay where I am and wait till
Charlie comes up; by your own reasoning the sergeant
will be at hand soon after, and so all will be pleased
without any of the leaders moving from this camp."
The officer's tone was significant.
“Leave or stay, just as you choose," snapped Mr.
Hornsby. “ Your troopers would be more at home
hunting rabbits. I believe you’ll have every man out
prospecting just now arrested in time for being Chil-
lagoe Charlie, because he wears boots, because he
breathes air, eats, drinks, and sleeps, and reads a news-
paper when he gets one. All of which is sure proof
that he is the man you want, for does not he also do
all those things ? "
“ I just hope we can get the hobbles on one or two
Chillagoe Charlies for the sake of the original one,"
put in the officer, “ and I have just tumbled to the fact
that you are keeping me here, wasting time, for a pur-
pose, so I will wish you good-night. Come on, lads,
Crocodile Crossing first stop."
“ Right O!" the waiting troopers answered, vaulting
into their saddles, and next moment they were canter-
ing over the clearing between the camp and the main
track. Mr. Hornsby listened until the hoof-beats could
no longer be heard, then, turning to join the camp-fire
circle, he found Mike O’Flannigan at his side. Mike's
face was expressionless. It always was when he was
thinking.


“I be g pardon, sir,” he began, “but I heard you
walking into the policeman about that bay horse of
yours. It's in the yard now, feeding, and has been
there since midday. I found it when out for the camp
horses this morning, and brought it in with the
others.”
“ Yes, Mike, I saw it in the yard myself; but if that
superintendent had known it, he would have deduced
some more unpleasant facts. Oh, I forgot ; you don’t
know. I want to talk to you about your experiences
of this morning, Mike, but I haven’t time just now.
Are you ready for another ride ? Bring Dirty Sam
over here and I’ll tell you both what I want done.”
Mike walked carelessly up to the fire and touched
his comrade on the shoulder, and, yawning sleepily,
Sam arose and followed him into the shadows where
Mr. Hornsby stood.
“ Boys,” spoke the manager, “ I want something
done that has nothing to do with mining.”
“ Well, we'll tackle anything, from cutting out that
boss trooper from his mates to catching Chillagoe
Charlie,” said Dirty Sam with a shrug of his broad
shoulders. “ Has it to be kept from the boys ? ”
“Yes ; in the meantime I want you to pick out a
couple of horses and ride after that mob of returning
rushers that passed, going into Murgoona. Tom is
carrying out an order which may get him into trouble
with them. He will be at the springs, or on the way
back, when they will meet. Now, do you under-
stand ? "
“ Perfectly ; we're to keep out of sight of the new
chums, and chime in if the lad gets into trouble,” said
Sam. “ Let's away, Mike, I smell some fun before
morning ; but I say, sir, what about relieving those
fellows who are working just now, at midnight ?”


“There is enough of us in camp to do that. I'll
tell them I needed you for some special work, and
now that the pump is working they can manage to
keep things going, and that is all we can hope to do
until we get more men. Lead your horses out, and
go through the bush until out of hearing distance of
the camp ; there are some troopers hanging about
watching us, and I don't want them to know on any
account."
“We understand," said Sam ; “no one will know
we’ve ever left the camp unless you tell yourself."
The two men walked over to the horse yard, and
Mr. Hornsby went up to the camp fire among the
men, who were all listening intently to a weird and
wonderful tale which Ginger Bob was narrating with
great dramatic effect.
Meanwhile the troopers were rapidly galloping west-
wards, and Tom, followed by the swindle claim-pur-
chasers, was making good time towards the east. Soon
these slower-moving people were shadowed by Mike and
Sam. But yet another man was also travelling east;
he never came near the track, but, keeping in the bush,
he flew along at terrific pace, crashing through light
timber patches, leaping large obstacles, and bending
under the heavier projecting tree-limbs. And the
waning moon shone coldly in the cloudless sky,
lighting the tracks of all alike.


CHAPTER VI
WHO IS CHILLAGOE CHARLIE ?
ABOUT midnight Tom saw the lime bluffs loom
through the semi-darkness, and he knew he was
near the springs. He had only been over the track
once before, but now it was impossible to miss it, as
the rush had gone over it since he passed, and the
troopers. And his horse knew every little sandy creek
and gully on the way, and Tom knew enough of Gulf
country methods to allow the noble animal to pick its
own course through soft patches and over the hard
ironstone surfaces. Suddenly it turned off to the left
and halted, and Tom saw that he was in the middle of
the pandanus clump in which Nigger had located the
pool of water. He slid from the saddle and led his
steed to the water, and after it and he had drunk more
than was good for them of the precious but evil smell-
ing and strangely tasting fluid, he threw the bridle over
a convenient projecting branch and turned to the tree
on which the dilapidated notice was posted. Then he
stopped abruptly, and his heart jumped violently. A
masked man was standing behind the trunk watching
him, and a little way off a steaming horse was hitched
to a quinine-tree. For a moment he hesitated; he had
not calculated upon being met so suddenly by the
120


j S \** .jHr JMW -' | 1
BhL a>
*8 5
m ip %■ •
I
| U| - ' :y
[ | |SS ■. _ ■■,> ■: ' *"
I • -
* * *' . 'K- n
“ A MASKED MAX WAS STANDING BEHIND THE TRUNK
WATCHING HIM.
lo face page i




gentleman of such evil reputation, and from whom
most men would have run as if from a bunyip. But
Tom was one to whom fear of bodily harm was un-
known, and quickly recovering from the state of
nervous excitement into which the sight of the
notorious bushranger had thrown him, he marched
boldly to the tree, and pretending not to see the man
on the other side, hung up the cheque on one of the
nails which fixed the larger notice. The man mean-
while had stepped out from behind the tree and was
quietly looking on. Tom finished his work and
turned round. “Good evening,” he said, with an
effort to speak as calmly as if it were an everyday
occurrence with him to run up against such as his
present companion.
The man made no answer, but continued to stare at
Tom, his eyes shining through the mask like pieces of
burning coal.
“This is intended for your notice, I believe,” Tom
went on; “I have come here to collect the amount and
get back to camp as soon as possible.”
“Which amount ? The reward or the figure on
that cheque ? ” The voice was gruff and quite evi-
dently disguised.
“Payment of the cheque is all that concerns me;
but I did not expect that you would put in an appear-
ance quite so promptly.”
“You are sure I am the man whose signature foots
that paper ? ”
“No, I have doubts about that, but if you pay the
money that will settle them.”
“You don’t appear to be afraid of me ? Most people
are ”
“ Oh, I’m not, I have nothing you could take from
me ;my mission to you is friendly, and if you showed


any inclination to harm me in any way I would shoot
you."
“What!” exclaimed the man, “you would shoot
me ? That is comforting knowledge, but as I hope
you see I have no evil intention regarding you, you
might tell me how you could do that. lam a pretty
powerful man, and how could you shoot before I
could take you by the throat ?"
“ Easily enough ; the revolver is in my hand now,
ready cocked, in my pocket.”
“ Ha, ha 1 That is an old trick ; but why don’t you
use it now, and earn that thousand pounds ? ”
“ I don’t want a thousand pounds, and if I did I'd
earn it some other way than that. But I saw you this
morning, too ; I was looking under my tent when you
borrowed the sergeant’s clothes. Is that his horse you
have still ? It must be a flier, for you were reported
as being out past White Downs station.”
“Yes, people give me credit for being at several
places at the same time. No, that is not the trooper’s
horse, but it is a fast one all the same. I suppose I
needn’t ask how you came into possession of the
cheque ; you didn’t steal it, I hope ? ”
“ What is the good of all this masquerading, sir,”
cried Tom impatiently, ignoring the man's last words.
“You must know that I know you, and am ready to
help you in any way.”
“No, I did not know that you knew me, and I
don't think you do, young man. Who am I? ”
“You are either Mr. Hornsby or Mike O’Flannigan,
although how you got here ahead of me I don't know,
seeing that you gave me your fastest horse.”
“Ah, I note you use the singular now; you have
decided between the two gentlemen you named. Tell
me who.”


“ I am telling you ; you gave me your horse to-night
to come here and warn our mutual friend that he was
being closely tracked, and that several things had given
him away. It certainly looked as if he were the man,
but I see now that it was yourself all the time. Tell
me what you wish me to do, sir."
“ Why, my lad, I don't want you to do anything,
unless I might ask you to believe that I have never done
anything of which I need feel ashamed, despite what
people say about me. But who is the person you call
our mutual friend ? Is it possible that I know him ?
I assure you that I am neither Mr. Hornsby, the mine
manager and J.P., although I am indebted to that
gentleman for more than he knows, nor am I Mike
O’Flannigan, one of the pioneers and prospectors of
the Palmer Ranges. So you see you don't know who
I am."
“ And lam glad. I thought you were the parson at
first, and so Mr. Hornsby led me to believe he thought.
But since seeing you I am quite convinced we were
both mistaken ; he is a much stouter man than you,
and I parted from him to-night at Crocodile Crossing.
I then thought from what I know that you might be
Mike, and that you and Mr. Hornsby doubled each
other, for the policeman was very sure of himself to-
night. And you should change your style of boots,
never have anything to do with a newspaper, and
don’t on any account borrow ropes or cords for
binding purposes from any camp. That officer you
tricked in Murgoona —he told us the whole story —is
as sharp as nails, and he will track you if you make
the slightest slip. Mr. Hornsby told me to act as
I thought best, but I am sure he would approve of my
telling you what I have told, even although you are
not the parson."


“ Do you mean, boy, that you would be the friend
of Chillagoe Charlie-? "
“ 1 do > and so would the parson and Mr. Hornsby.
But say, how about Mike ? He and you must know
each other well, for you changed horses this morning.”
“ Boy, you shouldn’t ask me to say anything which
might get a very decent fellow into trouble, if you
were put upon your oath in a court of law. You said
you were friendly disposed towards me; for that lam
grateful, for you are the only friend Chillagoe Charlie
has in these parts, and you are the first to talk to him
as one man should to another. Now I will put myself
in your hands by telling you something. Chillagoe
Charlie meant to put in some time down around
Murgoona, but the arrival of the superintendent and
special duty men from Brisbane makes that impossible,
so he will disappear. He will go north and assume
another name; but, my boy, he is very wealthy, and
if you wish funds for any purpose a line dropped to
Charles Christmas at Laura Post Office will get you any
amount you like to ask. Now, I have another thing
to say before we part, and that is, don’t try to find out
who Chillagoe Charlie is. You might succeed, and
then you would be sorry. Will you shake hands ?”
They gripped each other's hands and moved to
their respective horses.
“ one thing more, my boy,” cried the bushranger.
“ 1 kn ow who you are, although you haven’t placed
me, and I might just mention that your uncle was
working a wonderfully rich gold claim up on one
of the Palmer headwaters about a fortnight ago. Oh,
by the way, here’s the money for that cheque, I nearly
forgot. Tell Mr. Hornsby "
“ Here is a crowd of horsemen,” interrupted Tom,
“and they see us. Run, or they’ll catch you.”


“Oh, it's those people—they’re harmless enough.
Come, I’ll take you through them. They seem to be
half mad, judging from their apparent excitement.”
“They recognise you, that is what has excited
them,” cried Tom. “Get away at once.”
“ No, we’ll chase them away. Follow me.” Chillagoe
Charlie rode out from the timber, followed by Tom,
and yells of terror arose from the advancing horse-
men.
“ It’s his ghost,” one of them cried. “ Ride faster.”
“He must be the devil,” cried another. “We left
him at Crocodile Crossing.”
“ He’s coming for us, anyway,” wailed a third rider.
“ Scatter, boys, scatter, or we'll all be murdered ! ”
Instantly the group broke into the bush on either
hand, and Chillagoe Charlie and Tom galloped down
the track past them. The yells of the surprised reward-
claimers might have been heard miles away, and they
were, and, wondering what had happened to frighten
the valiant Crocodile Crossing claim owners, Dirty
Sam and Mike came up to see. They kept in the
bush, however, for they did not wish to be seen, and
while they were speculating as to whether Chillagoe
Charlie had met the people in front or if they were
fighting among themselves, two riders tore past,
going west.
Just then the new chum rushers had unanimously
arrived at the idea of catching their man themselves.
They reasoned that he was only one man, or, with
his companion, two, while they numbered sixteen.
This latter fact was very comforting to them, and they
turned and rode after the couple who had split them
up so easily, shouting and yelling as if they were
Chinamen trying to frighten their opponents in
battle.


About this time Tom suddenly realised that he was
alone. He had not noticed what his companion had
done j but, suspecting that he had turned into the bush
to avoid being seen with any one whom his presence
might incriminate, Tom drew rein and rode easier,
thinking he might be joined later on by the gentleman
with the mask, whom he had somehow grown to like.
But he was not; instead a howling mob of mad-
men appeared at his heels, and he turned to look at
them, knowing that his own horse could outdistance
anything that his pursuers possessed.
u There's only one, boys—after him I” shouted one
of the following horsemen ; and the men from down
south came on as fast as their tired and thirsty steeds
could take them.
“ Be t a fiver you’re a liar," shouted Dirty Sam,
riding on to the track in front of them. “There's
enough of us to give you beggars all you want."
Mike now appeared by his side, and, recognising
them, Tom rode back. But the new chums weren’t
having any, as Sam said, and resumed their eastward
course without delay. What they thought of their
chances of obtaining the reward now was known only
to themselves.
“ Hallo, kid ! " Sam cried as Tom rode up ; “ you're
a long way from home."
“ And this is a funny time to take exercise," added
Mike.
“Just what I thought when I recognised you boys,”
laughed Tom, who at once guessed that they had
been sent to look after him if occasion required. “ I
was in at the bank getting a cheque cashed."
“ That won’t do," said Sam. « Banks are not open
during the night, unless Chillagoe Charlie or some of
his kind opens them."


“Well, he opened one for me—at least he took the
cheque and gave me gold for it. See, I have it here.
I suppose those fellows would have tried to rob me if
you two hadn’t appeared.”
“ I don't know,” spoke Sam thoughtfully. “ I fancy
it wasn't any money you had they were after. You
had a mate when we saw you first. Where has he
gone ?"
“ I don’t know, but he is a real decent fellow and
might have been one of yourselves but for his mask.”
“ You mean Chillagoe Charlie was your mate ? ”
Mike said quietly. “ I would like to know where he
is heading.”
“He's heading north, boys, to the old place,” a
voice called out on their right, and a rider flashed
past tnem. “ Bring the lad with you when you
come.”
“Hold hard, Chillagoe,” roared Sam; “come and
introduce yourself.” But he got no answer, and only
the ringing of hoof beats on the ironstone patch ahead
gave any indication that the vision which had flitted
past was real and mounted on a superb horse.
“ Well, boys,” said Mike after a period of silence, “ we
can take it easier now ; there is no use pushing our
horses, seeing we have all managed what we came
out for.”
“ Not a bit,” agreed Sam, drawing rein ; “ we’ll let
the animals cool down a bit.”
Tom likewise slackened pace, and laughing and
talking cheerfully on all subjects, the trio rode slowly
along. It was now almost cool, and there was a slight
breeze in motion that made the early morning air
very pleasant.
Thus it was nearly four o’clock in the morning when
they clattered into camp. To their surprise they found


two men sitting by the camp fire, which was burning
brightly, and a moment later they recognised in those
two Mr. Hornsby and the parson.
“ Ah, boys/’ said Mr. Hornsby, 11 1 am glad to see
you back all right.” He looked meaningly at Tom as
he spoke, and came forward to assist him in unsaddling
his steed. . ,
“ I saw him, sir,” whispered Tom ; “ he’s not a bad
fellow. Here is the money, but we've been mistaken
even more than the superintendent was.
“That is fairly evident,” answered Mr. Hornsby,
glancing at the fire where the parson sat lost in thought 5
“he rode in here an hour ago. I was waiting for your
return by the fire there ; when he came up he said
he got so lonely out at the Crossing by himself
after every one left that lie thought he would ride along
this length. So the troopers will find the place
deserted.”
“ It is all very strange, and I can only think that there
are more than one Chillagoe Charlie. Sam told me he
was seen at the Crossing by a lot of people as late as
ten o’clock, and then I found him waiting for me at
the springs again a full hour before those who were
running away from him got there.”
“The whole matter is beyond me,” said Mr. Hornsby
wearily, “ and I am going to give it a rest. I shall
actually come to believe that I am the man myself and
that I ride all over the country in my sleep, if 1 hear
much more about the gentleman of Chillagoe.
“ How about the mine, sir ? ” asked Sam. “ Shall we
go and give a hand now or relieve at next shift ?
“Go and get a sleep if you can. Soon after daylight
there will be enough men here from Murgoona to man
ten mines. The parson says so, anyhow, and he is
always right.”


“ Bu t how can he know ? " persisted Sam. “No one
has been in at the township, and even if you had sent
in, men wouldn't come out to take the place of
strikers.”
“ Ask him for particulars yourself, Sam; lam too
sleepy.”
Sam placed the bell on his horse's neck and then
allowed it to go free. “ I’ll ask him now,” he said,
walking up to the parson. But the parson had fallen
asleep.
Just then Nigger came running out of a tent, and
barked his gladness at seeing his master again.
Yes, take him to bed, Nigger,” said Mr. Hornsby,
yawning, “and constitute yourself camp guard until
sunrise. That is a wonderful dog of yours, Tom ; he
nosed out a couple of troopers half an hour ago ”
“ Troopers ! ” cried the parson, starting up; “ where ? ”
“Oh, round about the camp. They’re watching it
you know. But come along and turn in ; you know
where you stay.”
“ I do feel very tired,” said the parson, rising and
stretching himself; “ I must have been running about
too much.”
Mr. Hornsby and he walked off towards the manager's
house, and shortly after Dirty Sam, Mike, and Tom
were m their bunks. The men from the Crossing who
had worked the mines until midnight were sleeping in
some spare tents further down the creek.
And the stars faded in the sky, a flush of red spread
over the eastern horizon, the sun shot up behind the
istant lime bluffs, and the camp was awake again.
Sure enough at breakfast-time men began to arrive
the camp from Murgoona and other parts, and
mamger 7 empI °y ment b y mine


“ I don't know how you managed this, parson,”
he said to that gentleman, “ but you must have
developed most wonderful powers of mind concen-
tration if you brought those men here since yesterday.
I know you were at Crocodile Crossing all day, and
you came here last night, so it must have been by will-
power that you charmed them.”
The parson laughed. “ There is no mystery about
how they came here,” he said. “ I knew one of the
disappointed rushers, and before they left for Murgoona
I gave him a letter to deliver for me. That letter
brought you your men.”
“ But God save the King, boss, you’ve taken on far
more men than ye can get into the shaft in three shifts,
an’ ye’ve got two shifts already, countin us and the
Crossing boys.”
“ They are going back to Crocodile Crossing, Dave,
and I want you boys for special work.”
“ Are ye sacking us, boss ? ” asked one of the volun-
teers from the Crossing ; u we don’t want to go back to
an ironstone reef. The parson knows of something
better, when ye are done with us.”
i( I know of nothing better than that same reef,
boys,” spoke the parson, who had been talking earnestly
with the tall, black-whiskered prospector ; “ the rush is
not a duffer after all, although its promoters are not
aware of that fact. I wanted to tell you at the time of
my little episode with O’Brian, but I changed my mind
just then. Boys, you can go and peg in the entire reef
now. It seems Chillagoe Charlie frightened all the
others away.”
“ But there is no copper except what the O’Brian
push carted there,” spoke a miner in surprise.
“ No, there isn’t any copper,” answered Long Tom,
as the tall prospector was called, “ but there is some-


thing else. Boys, the rush is all right, only we rushed
the wrong thing. The lad who was assaying got gold
in his last try, and the parson tells me there's two and
a half ounces of it to the ton. Gather in our horses,
some of you, and the rest will pack up some stores
which the manager here has promised to give us."
For a full minute the men were silent, but as the
significance of Long Tom's words dawned upon them,
they broke into a wild cheer. “ Good old parson ! " they
shouted; then some one added, “ Don’t forget Chillagoe
Charlie, boys ; he's given us all the ground."
“ Good old Charlie ! ” roared the men.
"And a cheer for the young assayer and Mr.
Hornsby,” cried Long Tom, and again the miners
shouted out their approval.
“ Here, boys, where do we come in ? " asked Hungry
Ted dismally; “I reckon we ought to have been in
this affair."
“ There is a Happy Land, Ted," roared Dave ; “ can’t
ye see that there’s more cornin’ ? We’re not going on
duty to-day 'cos we’re wanted for special work."
“ Yes,” said the parson ; “you boys are wanted for
special work by Mr. Hornsby, but you must all
volunteer."
“ Well, we all do that now,” said Dirty Sam : “ what
is it ? "
“Wait till the Crocodile Crossing men clear out,
Sam, advised Peter the Poet; “you can’t expect to be
told m presence of half Queensland."
“See here, parson,” broke in Long Tom, “if that
special work you talk of that Mr. Hornsby wants
requires men who don’t give a hang for anything,
count us boys in too. Crocodile Crossing gold may
be a good thing, but I don’t think there is a man here
who cares as much for gold or copper, for that part, so


much as he would care for a hand in a game with Mr.
Hornsby or the parson ; speak for yourselves, boys.”
“You’re right, Long Tom,” cried the men. “We
don’t live for what shekels we can make.”
“ It therefore becomes my duty to say,” continued
Long Tom, “that if there is anything on hand that
needs men who don’t care a flicker of an eyelid what
danger there is, or what they have got to do, you
can make your pick of us for the job as well as from
your own men.”
“ Thanks, Mr. ” began Mr. Hornsby.
“ Long Tom is my handle, sir.”
“Then I thank you, Mr. Long Tom, for your offer,
and it is just possible that I may call on you to make
it good. At the present moment, however, it is best
for you boys that you secure the ground at Crocodile
Crossing ; when you prove it a little bit I will advance
the funds for machinery, if you will allow me, and
after the place is developed, perhaps I will call upon
you all to oblige me. Meanwhile, it is the parson who is
evolving some scheme, not I. I am the manager of
the Caledonia Company’s mines, and as such cannot
tackle anything not in their interests. I may add,
though, that if you develop the Crocodile Crossing
shows sufficiently, my company will most likely make
an offer to purchase them from you.”
Then the sooner we get out to the Crossing the better
for us,” cried a miner. “ Come on, boys ; we’ll peg all
the ground, pool all the gold, and divide equally.
“Right, Scottie,” cried the men ; “let’s clear. Here
are our horses coming in.”
“Very well sir,” said Long Tom, addressing Mr.
Hornsby. “When you want men for anything send
for us ; the parson knows us already, and I don’t need
to tell him that Crocodile Crossing Camp, that is


to be, will stand by him against Governments or
anything.”
“Tut tut, Tom,” the parson laughed ; “you are too
extravagant in your statements. Why should I require
any one to stand by me against the admirable Queens-
land Government ? ”
“ I don’t know, sir ; but call on us if occasion arises,”
answered Long Tom, leaping on his horse. “We'll
stick by Crocodile Crossing now until it fizzles out or
we hear from you or Mr. Hornsby.”
With a greeting to the men remaining behind, the
future Crossing claim holders rode off and soon were
lost to sight; then the parson turned to Mr. Hornsby
and said, “ Perhaps we’d better tell the boys now.”
“Yes,” agreed Mr. Hornsby. “ Listen, boys; you
know both the parson and myself, you have been more
than one successful trip with us. It was the parson
who taught me anything I know, and but for him I
could never have taken over the managership of the
Caledonia Company’s mines. But everything is now
going all right here, thanks to you fellows who stood
by me in every little trouble, and the time has come
when the mines can do without us —at least without
me—for I have received a cablegram from Britain this
morning informing me that a new man is on the road
to take my place. Ido not know why lam displaced ;
I suppose it is because of some paltry shareholders
whom I have unintentionally run against; but it doesn't
matter; I have appointed all you fellows shift bosses,
and when the new man comes you’ll be able to keep
him from bungling the mines. The parson and I are
then going out prospecting on our own account, for
we know of some likely country on the Palmer water-
shed ”
“ And does ye mean to leave us here ? ” demanded


Dave reproachfully. “ Does ye think for one Glory,
glory hallelujah shake o’ a cat’s tail that we'd stick here
without ye ? If ye does ye is wrong, for we won't.”
“ But the mines, Dave, they will require your services.
Other people can’t take your place in them ”
“Hang the mines !” broke out Peter the Poet, in
very unpoetical language. “ What do we care for the
Caledonia Company's mines ? It's their manager we
work for, not for the white-faced money-grabbers in
the Old Country who own them.”
“ I tell you straight, boss,” said Ginger Bob de-
cidedly, “ when you leave this camp we all leave; an'
if ye think the parson an’ you are to get away pros-
pectin’ up among the Chinkies without us—the boys
that have been all over the country with one or the
other of ye—ye is mighty far off the track. We're
goin’ with you wherever ye go, even if it is to find that
funny old pole stuck away down further south than
anybody has ridden. Ye can't shake us off, an' ye
needn’t try.”
Bullocky Bill, Hungry Ted, and Tommy the Kan-
garoo intimated in terse language that Ginger Bob's
words expressed their sentiments on the subject, but
the others didn’t speak. They were quite determined
on the matter nevertheless.
“ Boys, I never intended to go without you,” spoke
Mr. Hornsby; “but I had, as manager of these mines,
to do what I could to ensure their continued successful
development, hence my putting on so many men
to-day. By the time the new manager arrives these
men, under your directions, can have obtained a
thorough knowledge of the mines’ peculiarities, and
then we’ll clear out for the north. In justice to the
Caledonia Company I couldn’t ask you to leave their
properties to the tender mercies of strangers, but as


you have decided for yourselves to risk your fortune
with the parson’s and mine, I am certainly not going
to refuse you the chance. Boys, we'll make a try to
find that hidden Chinese camp we’ve heard such a lot
about ”
“ An' come back with gold josses an’ pigtails an' "
“Shut up, Ginger; we won’t worry about their josses
if we can find out where they get their gold,” spoke
Dirty Sam. “We’ll likely run up against Chillagoe
Charlie up that way too. I believe it is up among the
Chinese he hides when he is off duty.”
“ Ah, well, Sam ; we'll see what old Mother Earth will
yield of her treasures anyway,” remarked the parson,
hopefully ; “ and with Tom as our assayer-in-chief there
is no telling what we may find.”
“Am I included in the party, sir ?” asked Tom, a
thrill of pleasure running through him. He wanted to
go north more than anything else, but had feared that
he was to be left behind at the mines ; and although he
now held a good position there, he knew he would
only remain until he had saved money sufficient to
enable him to purchase a horse and go and look for
his uncle in the north.
“ Of course you are included,” the parson answered ;
“you are one of us now. And Nigger is coming too.
He will be very useful—but I had almost forgotten.
Mr. Hornsby, will you allow one of the boys to ride to
the Crossing for my buggy ? He can lead the horse Tom
rode in on last night, and the other one is hobbled
somewhere there ? ”
“ I’ll go,” said Dirty Sam, before any one could
speak. “ I want to see Long Tom about a little matter
anyway.”
“ Bonnie Mary of Argyle, Sam, you're in a mighty
hurry,” growled Dave. “The boss hasn't said you


could go, an’ maybe more than you would like to see
the new goldfields at the Crossing.”
But Dirty Sam seemed to have suddenly become
very anxious to see Long Tom, and receiving a nod
of assent from Mr. Hornsby, he had rushed to the yard
for a fast riding horse and the one Tom had ridden
from the Crossing. The parson went up and helped
Sam to get ready, talking to him meanwhile in a low
voice, then Sam leaped astride his steed and catching
the bridle of the buggy horse galloped out into the
bush. “ Goodbye, boys,” he shouted as he passed his
comrades ; “ see you up north.”
“ What in thunder does Sam mean, mates ? ” cried
Peter the Poet; “he said goodbye, and he’d see us up
north ? And he's riding as if he meant to cross
Australia in record time.”
“Jumpin' beans! I see a mob of troopers cornin'
along the track from the Crossin’,” exclaimed Ginger
Bob. “ I wonder if they have anything to do with
Sam's hurry ? Maybe he saw them cornin' near the
rise. It’s the same lot as were here last night ”
“ How can they have anything to do with Sam,
Ginger?” Peter the Poet laughed. “It’s Chilligoe
Charlie they’re after, and they haven’t got him yet, I
can see. I’ll bet he left a card to tell them he was sorry
he couldn't stay at Crocodile Crossing until they came,
as he was due somewhere else.”
The men waited expectantly until the troopers
drew near.
“A life on the ocean wave, boys,” growled Dave.
“This place is getting mighty crushed with troopers.
I reckon they must just grow up here like mosquitoes ;
they're both pests anyhow ”
“ Did you get your man, Superintendent ? ” Mr.
Hornsby called out, a touch of sarcasm in his voice.


“ No; but we’ll soon have him now,” the officer
replied sternly, as his men formed a cordon round the
miners. “Just stand where you are, men,” he said
addressing them; “ I have given orders to shoot the
man who moves.”
“ You be fried in some of your own fat, you frizzle-
faced old fool!” retorted Mike O’Flannigan. “Aus-
tralia is still a free country, and I've yet to meet the
man who can prevent me moving about as I please.”
He walked towards his tent defiantly, but a couple of
troopers rode in front of him and barred his passage.
“ Sorry, old man,” one of them said, with a good-
natured laugh ; “ we’ve got to pick out Chillagoe
Charlie from among you before we allow you to
scatter.”
“Come off and I’ll fight the pair of you,” was Mike’s
somewhat irrelevant answer.
“ My love has got a red, red nose,” bawled out Dave.
“Are we to stand this insult, boys ? Let’s go for the
policemen—There is a happy land ! We're free Aus-
tralyans an’ have paid our poll-tax, an' I reckon I can
just about swipe that trooper with the hooked nose—
Oh, Jeremiah ! The Scottish blue bells ! God save the
King ! For he’s a jolly good fellow 1 I—l Tell
us some hymns, mates, quick, or I'll burst.” The
cause of Dave’s sudden eloquence was the trooper he
had singled out. That person had reached down and
caught Dave by the belt; he was now holding him in
a horizontal position alongside his horse, and paying
absolutely no attention to Dave's struggles. Dave had
made a mistake that time ; for Moses Macleod was the
strongest man in all North Queensland, and he was
well accustomed to Dave’s type.
Mike, however, had hauled one of his men off his
horse and was about to repeat the performance with


the other, when the parson and Mr. Hornsby simul-
taneously called upon him to desist. All the others,
troopers and men alike, were laughing at Dave’s wild
endeavours to free himself, and had not noticed Mike's
work, or there might have been serious trouble. Mike
walked back to his comrades, and in passing pulled
Dave from the trooper's grip and set him on his feet,
and while Dave poured out in a tempestuous torrent of
words what he thought were the first lines of hymns,
he folded his arms and assumed the listless expression
common to him.
“ Sir,” began Mr. Hornsby, addressing the superin-
tendent, “this is going a little bit too far. You had
better explain, and quickly too, or I’ll take steps to
make the authorities in Brisbane agree that North
Queensland is a bit too hot for your health.”
“You may take any steps you choose, sir,” replied
the officer in dignified tones; “but I am in this country
to do my duty—whatever other people are here for—
and I request you, as a Justice of the Peace who has a
personal knowledge of the man, to point out he who
bears the name Mike O’Flannigan.”
Dave stopped his singing and looked round at Mike,
and his other comrades also gazed at him in silent
wonder. Mike was, as a rule, the quietest man in
camp, and what could he have done ?
“That is the name I use at present,” spoke Mike,
before Mr. Hornsby had found words to answer.
“ Oh, I thought it would be you—l arrest you
as being the person known as Chillagoe Charlie,”
cried the officer, “and I warn you that anything you
say ”
“Oh, shut up, you concentrated essence of idiocy ! ”
roared Mike, and all his comrades rolled on the ground
in paroxysms of laughter.


“ Oh, Hallelujah, boys, I haven't a hymn left,”
moaned Dave, as he kicked up the sand. “ I’ll peg
out, I know, if none o' ye can give me some.”
“ Oh, centipedes ! an' snakes ! an' iguanas 1 an’
troopers I an' Chillagoe Charlies ! ” gasped Ginger
Bob, in an attempt to restrain himself from swallow-
ing more of the surface of Queensland than would be
good for his digestive organs. “ Aren't the troopers
clever ? Oh, my sore sides, boys 1 To think that
Mike has been Chillagoe Charlie all the time, an'
we never know’d it. Oh, my jaws has got a kink
and I can’t get it out ”
“ Mike, you fat-headed drill jumper, can’t ye make
a speech ? ” Peter the Poet called out in dolorous
tones. Peter always spoke mournfully when his
sense of humour was tickled.
“I can't, boys,” Mike responded feebly; “ my sins,
and the troopers, have found me out. Divide my
clothes among you. The parson gets my horse, the
boss the stockwhip I won from Bullocky Bill, and, I
entreat you, boys, let the boss trooper have the biscuit
I was keeping for Nigger.”
The troopers, still in their saddles, had looked on
with stolid faces while the miners had been rolling in
the sand. They were tired of riding night and day after
a person who seemed to be able to vanish and appear
like a figure on a magic-lantern screen, and if their
superintendent, who undoubtedly possessed a wonder-
ful sense of tracking, was right in saying Mike O’Flan-
nigan was the man they sought, then they would be
able to have a good long spell at some shady water-
hole while their horses recuperated. Their pay, of
course, would run on all the time.
“ When you have finished your contortions perhaps
you will stand up,” said the officer suddenly, address-


ing Mike; “I would like to see the man who has earned
such a reputation as Chillagoe Charlie.”
“ Speak to him, boss,” cried Mike, “ I can’t.”
“ I perceive you are a humorist of the first degree,”
said the parson to the officer; “that man has worked a
shift in these mines for the past six months."
“Quite possible, sir; but he'll have to explain one or
two things before that fact will save him.”
“ This arresting of people seems to be a habit with
you,” said Mr. Hornsby. “ Last night, you remember,
you also found one Chillagoe Charlie. Have you
found more string, or another piece of a newspaper ?
Or perhaps you have found a button belonging to
Chillagoe's coat and have noticed that Mike has nails
where buttons should be ? ”
“ I have proof which justifies me in taking that
man "
“ Well, I assure you, you won’t. I happen to know
that you have no warrant for doing any such thing.”
“ 1 have the papers you signed last night
“ My dear fellow, I see the Gulf country sun is too
severe for you. I signed a paper empowering you to
deal with Chillagoe Charlie, and this man is not he, as
can easily be proved.”
“ But I have collected some proof that he is, or, at
least, that he is associated with him ”
“ Mike, your credit is goin' away from ye,” spluttered
Hungry Ted. “He says now that he has only got
proof of who ye are ; he isn't sure yet.”
“You are coming down a bit, officer,” Mr. Hornsby
remarked with a smile, “ and I propose, as the sun is
now approaching the meridian, that you had better
tell your men to give their horses a spell. While
waiting on lunch you can tell the parson and me
your story. We’ll be sympathetic listeners.”


The officer hesitated, looked at his tired men, then
saw the state of the horses, and lastly discovered that
he was hungry. That settled it; he knew from ex-
perience that the people of Caledonia Camp dined
well, and signing to his men to dismount for the
time, he followed the parson and Mr. Hornsby into
the shade of the men's dining erection, keeping his
eye on Mike's movements nevertheless.
“ Come now, Mr. Superintendent," said Mr. Hornsby,
proffering his cigar-case, “ let us have your latest
discoveries. You tracked me down because of my
boots—by the way I see the parson wears boots
almost identical with mine. How did you weave
your mesh around Mike ? ”
“ Simply enough ; the two men who had been sent
out White Downs way by the sham sergeant returned
to Crocodile Crossing at daylight this morning. They,
in answer to my question, told me that the horse the
supposed sergeant rode was one which had won the
double down at Cairns last week, and that it belonged
to one named Mike O’Flannigan. They assumed that
the sergeant, being a man very fond of anything special
in the way of horseflesh—his own horse, it seems,
carried everything before it at Townsville races —had
bought it. Very well ; of course, we know now that
the man whom they took for their superior officer was
Chillagoe Charlie, and I wanted to find out how he
came to be riding Mike O’Flannigan’s horse. And that
information was at hand. I had barely finished with
the men—of course, Chillagoe Charlie had played his
vanishing trick again ; he wasn’t at Crocodile Crossing,
nor could we find any tracks that might be his —when
a despatch rider came through from Murgoona. He
had ridden in the night with a message from the local
constable to me, and from which it transpired that in


some mysterious manner—an extremely fast horse and
knowledge of bush tracks might account for it—
Chillagoe Charlie had appeared at the springs near
Murgoona and held up the same people he had
chased away from the Crossing. He had a com-
panion with him, it seems, and when the crowd
realised that he had no gang behind him, they turned
to chase them and were confronted by two men, one
of them on a horse that all had seen at the Crossing
just at sundown, and ridden by a man all had seen
ride up then, and whom one or two recognised as Mike
O’Flannigan. Some of them also recognised the horse
that had won the double at Cairns, hence it follows
that Mike O'Flannigan was riding his own horse, and
as the sergeant who had been impersonated sent me
word that Mike had left this camp during the night
and had not returned up to the time of his departure,
the rest was fairly clear.”
“Not to me,” said the parson. "Give us your
deductions.”
"This is better than any story, boys,” said Peter
the Poet. All the men and some of the troopers
had gathered round unnoticed while the superinten-
dent had been explaining.
"From all these facts,” went on the officer, "I
deduce the following : First, that Mike O’Flannigan
or his companion took away the sergeant’s horse
and stole his clothes—they have not been returned ;
the companion then made tracks specially for the
benefit of followers and finally left the sergeant’s
horse tied up somewhere away to the south, and
Mike rode on to the Crossing on his own horse and
impersonated the sergeant. Secondly, he had the
borrowed clothes and rested himself and horse all
day, appearing as himself at sundown, which was


where he was foolish ; and just at that time when
the country takes on its most ghostly aspect, and the
owls come out, and the dingoes begin to howl —a
time when people not used to back-block life would
be inclined to be nervous —he comes on the scene
as Chillagoe Charlie, with the result we all know.
Thirdly, that after getting these off the ground, he
made use of his famous horse, now well rested, and
riding by tracks known only to himself and his friends,
got into the springs before them. Fourthly, that, find-
ing himself and his comrade holly pursued, he took
off his mask and appeared as the greatly surprised
miner, Mike O’Flannigan, doubtless out riding for
exercise. That is all; the men I left here last night
report that two or more riders came in here before
daylight; and what more evidence would any sane
man want that I have at last run to earth the notorious
Chillagoe Charlie ? "
“Your deductions are very good,” laughed Mr.
Hornsby. “ But they have one fault, and that is,
they are all wrong. I know nothing of the imper-
sonation performance nor what led to it; but I know
that Mike, when he appeared at the Crossing at sun-
down, came out for me, and I rode his horse back to
camp. He followed later and was here, as your men
should be able to tell you, when you were here last
night. As for Mike and a comrade appearing to a
band of frightened new chums, you surely can’t make
anything out of that. I had occasion to send him out
last night; but what on earth could he hope to gain
by posing himself off as Charlie, and then showing
himself? As for being hotly pursued, how could a
mob of men, who could scarcely even ride, chase a
man like Mike on a comparatively fresh horse of
known speed, when theirs had been driven frantic-


ally all the way from the Crossing? No, my friend ;
you’ll have to fix on some other man now and look
for proof against him.”
The officer was worried. All his elaborate planning
had come to nothing, and his men and horses were
played out. Acting on Mr. Hornsby’s advice, he took
a sleep in one of the tents, and his men did likewise
wherever they could find a shady spot.
But Tom was thinking now, and his thoughts were
shaping themselves to the belief that Dirty Sam might
not be able to clear himself if his name were substi-
tuted for Mike’s. He remembered how both had
appeared to him after Charlie had left him, but he also
distinctly remembered that he had heard Chillagoe
Charlie’s voice wishing them good-night, and also
heard him riding away. “ Ah, well,” he muttered
to himself, “the troopers have got their work cut
out for them. They’ll have all the country arrested
on suspicion if they go on as they are doing. I
wonder why Sam went off this morning in such a
hurry ? ”
Evidently the superintendent was thinking, or had
been dreaming something the same as Tom’s thoughts
were, for the first thing he did when he awoke and
came out among the men was to ask who was out
riding with Mike last night.
“ Didn't know any one was out,” Peter the Poet
answered, and before the officer could apply to Mike
himself, a trooper who had been left at Crocodile
Crossing galloped into camp.
“ He’s there again,” he shouted, as Mr. Hornsby,
the parson, and all the others appeared. “ We’ve got
proof this time.”
“ Never mind the proof. Have you got the man ? ”
demanded the chief of the troopers.


“ No, sir. He was gone before we knew he was the
party, but my mate is hot on his trail.”
“Then how do you know he was the man ? ” asked
the parson, while all the camp laughed.
“ He came up with horses, and harnessed up a
buggy lying there. He then boiled a billy, as we
thought, and cleared out, and it was two hours later
that, on passing his old fire, we saw this.” The
trooper held up to view a remnant of a trooper ser-
geant's uniform which had not been entirely burnt.
“ Thunder I ” gasped Mike. “ Dirty ”he paused.
“Clothes are best burned,” continued the parson
cheerfully.
“ Saddle up, men,” cried the chief. “We can easily
track him with a buggy.”
All was now commotion, and in a few minutes the
troopers were off again back the way they had come.
“ Poor troopers 1 ” chuckled Ginger Bob. “ They
think they'll catch Dirty Sam.”
“He was foolish to take the parson's buggy,” said
Peter the Poet. “ They can easily track it here.”
“But he won't come here,” laughed Mike. “And he
has got my horse.”


CHAPTER VII
OUT INTO THE UNKNOWN
THE troopers did not get much sympathy in Cale-
donia Camp, and the superintendent came in for
a good share of ridicule, Dave giving it as his opinion
that it was a “ shame that good horses should have to
go where a fool like the superintendent wanted them.”
“ You’re right there,” Peter the Poet put in. “If
that new-fashioned Sherlock Holmes fellow would
only let his horse take him where it wanted to go,
he might find Charlie, but he’ll never set eyes on him
while he holds the reins.”
“ Could you run Charlie down, Ginger ? ” Mr.
Hornsby asked quietly. “ You can't expect a trooper
officer to know too much of catching people ”
“ I reckon I could be havin’ a billy of tea with Dirty
Sam inside an hour, boss,” Ginger Bob hastened to
answer. “ But I’ll go nap the troopers won’t see him
this side of next Christmas.”
“ Then you think that Dirty Sam is the man ? ”
remarked the parson.
“ Well, aint he been found burnin' the sergeant's
clothes ? ” demanded Ginger. “ How did he get them
if he wasn't the fellow who took them from the
sergeant ? ”


“ He might have found them/’ suggested Hungry
Ted.
“ He might not be the man who burnt them at all/'
said Tommy the Kangaroo.
“He might have taken them from the parson's
buggy," was Bullocky Bill's comment.
“It might not have been the sergeant trooper’s
clothes at all,” spoke Tom. “All the man found was
a half-burnt piece of khaki which might have come
from anywhere.”
“And you have struck the bull's eye first shot,
Tom,” laughed Mr. Hornsby. “ I am inclined to
believe that it was a piece of what were once my
garments that was picked up, but as it is rather
amusing to see how many men the superintendent
will get his eagle eye fixed upon, I didn’t say any-
thing. He’ll have you all arrested before he’s done,
boys.”
“ I believe he is the man himself,” muttered Mike.
“He might as well have said it was Tom there, as me.
Come here, Tom, I am going to arrest you for being
Chillagoe Charlie.”
“ If this goes on much longer,” laughed Tom, “ I
may come to believe I am, myself.”
“Good luck to him anyway, boys, whoever he is,”
cried Peter the Poet. “ I will write a poem in his
honour the first time I feel silly.”
“ Ah, well, boys,” said the parson, “ I am going out
to get my buggy. I expect Dirty Sam will have driven
it somewhere near here and hitched up the horses—
that is, if he is not coming right into camp with it; for,
boys, you may take it from me Sam is no more
Chillagoe than any of you are.”
“ 111 go and hunt round for buggy tracks,”
volunteered Mike.


“No, you won’t,” grinned Dave. “Ye would join
Sam, an’ then all our Chillagoe Charlies would be
lost.”
“ No, boys, I’ll go myself if any of you will lend me
a horse. I want some exercise in any case, and I'll
ride along through the bush to cut off Sam on the
other side of the big sand patch. I may camp out
somewhere to-night, too, for I have a lot of think-
ing to do in connection with our prospecting trip up
north.”
“Oh, nonsense, parson,” said Mr. Hornsby; “the
mosquitoes will eat you up if you sleep outside to-
night. Come back to camp whether you can cut
Sam’s tracks or not. I expect myself that he’ll drive
in shortly. He has not yet had more than bare time.”
“ I’ll see how I feel; you know I have been neglect-
ing my duties of late, and I thought I might ride out
and say a word in season to the boys at the Crossing.
You can store my buggy here until I come back, and
of course you all know that when you are ready for
the trip, I will be also.”
“Ye needn’t try to make the parson change his
mind, boss,” cried Dave ; “he can't do it 'cos he hasn't
got any mind but the one he’s using, just like me an’
my pants.”
“If you feel you want to go, of course you can
have your pick of the fresh horses in the yard,” said
Mr. Hornsby ; “ but all the same I think you should
come back here to-night.”
“ Oh, very likely I shall,” the parson answered ; “ but
I have the feeling just now that I must be in motion.
A ride through the bush may settle my nerves a
bit ”
“ Parson, you and Chillagoe Charlie must often feel
the same way,” said Peter the Poet. “He is always


in motion, and yet his nerves don’t seem to need
settling, they're always all right."
“Yes, I believe there is a lot in common between
us," the parson answered, with a smile, jumping upon
the horse which Mike had just brought for him, ready
saddled. “We are both children of the bush and have
more said about us than we deserve. In his case bad
is said, but with me every one says nice things. None
of us deserve what we get in this world, and I am sure
Charlie and I could change places and you wouldn't
know it.”
He rode off as he finished speaking and soon dis-
appeared into the bush, not even looking at the well-
defined track which ran nearly parallel with his course.
An hour after he had become lost to view the sun
went down and the cook announced that tea was ready.
Speculating on what was keeping Sam; if he really were
Charlie and had cleared out; or if the returning troopers
had met him driving the parson’s buggy home, and de-
tained him, the men dined, and just as they finished
the sound of buggy wheels was heard.
“There’s Sam now,” exclaimed Mike. “I knew he
couldn't be Chillagoe Charlie."
“ How do you know, Mike ?" asked Peter the Poet.
“ Is it because you know who has a better claim to the
honour ? "
“ No ; it’s because Sam has my horse, and if he had
anything to do with Charlie, he wouldn’t waste time
driving a buggy back here when he could be measuring
the Gulf country towards the north faster than ever
was done before.”
“ But the man with the buggy must be the fellow who
took the sergeant’s togs," said Tommy the Kangaroo,
forgetting the arguments already expounded for and
against this statement.


“ Then, Oh, that will be joyful! an’ we won’t go home
till mornin’ ! ” roared Dave. “ This isn’t Dirty Sam at
all; it's Long Tom, the whitest prospector that ever
stuck in his four pegs.”
At that moment Long Tom drove into the camp square
and halted. It was the parson’s buggy, every one could
see, and with curiosity strained to the utmost as to how
Long Tom came to be driving it, the men gathered
round and helped to unharness the horses.
“Am I too late for tucker?” asked Long Tom
anxiously. “ I came along as fast as I could.
“ Long Tom can never be too late for tucker in this
camp,” answered Mike O’Flannigan. “ But how did
you come to get those horses and who told you about
bringing in the buggy ? ”
“ Dirty Sam told me the parson wanted it, and asked
me if 1 would oblige him by taking it along. He
brought me the horses, but wouldn’t wait for tea or
anything, said he was going north as fast as he could
to the Palmer River to stake out claims for you boys
on some reef he knows, and which was in danger of
being found by the Chinese of that mysterious camp
up there ”
“There are some people coming over the buggy
tracks,” remarked the youthful Tom. “Nigger hears
them, and he doesn’t seem to think they are friends.”
“ I’ll bet my whiskers it is the troopers back again,”
said Ginger Bob. “ They have nothin’ to do but kill
good horses ridin’ up and down the track between
here an’ Crocodile Crossing.”
“ An' Should auld acquaintance be forgot ! you is
right ! ” cried Dave. “ They'll be cornin' for me this
time.”
“ Troopers, repeated Long Tom. “ That is funny ;
there must be a lot of them in this part of the world.


When we were givin’ our horses a spell this forenoon
and having a drink of tea a bit off the track, a crowd of
them rode past, coming this way, and when I was
driving in here with the buggy—l came through the
bush so as to miss the sand the traffic has loosened on
the track—l heard a mob of them riding out the other
way. I think they must have been sent up here to be
out of the road, for lam sure there is no need for them
in the Gulf country unless they went north and helped
the prospectors to wipe out the Chinese den.
“ Go in and have something to eat and we 11 attend
to whoever it is,” said Mike O’Flannigan. “Ifit is the
troopers, they ought to get kicked for ill-using their
horses, riding up and down that sandy track
“ Hallo, boss ! Who is it this time ? ” Ginger Bob
sang out as it became plain that the visitors were their
friends of the forenoon. “ We've got a new man
here now. Maybe ye can prove that he is the Governor-
General of Australia in disguise if ye try yer best.”
“We have him this time,” the superintendent
answered. “We cut the buggy tracks and have
followed them through the bush right into this
camp. Ah ! that is the buggy. Where is the man
who drove it ? ”
“Good old trooper boss!” yelled Hungry Ted, as
his comrades prepared to have another fit of laughter.
“ Come over to the shaft with me an’ I'll show ye nine
men hidin’ down its drives, an’ maybe they're all
Charlies. And”—he lowered his voice confiden-
tially—“ there's another two batches of nine men each
down the creek in some tents ; they’re the other shifts,
but maybe ”
But the officer was exasperated, and did not seem to
appreciate Ginger’s offer of help in finding more likely
men.


“ Where is the man who drove this buggy ?" he
demanded. “ That is the man we want.”
“ I drove the buggy. What do you want with me ? ”
spoke Long Tom, coming out into the square and con-
fronting the tired, hungry, and thirsty representative of
Queensland law.
“ You burnt a trooper sergeant’s uniform to-day.
How did ”
“ You are a jumped-up liar 1 I ”
“ No cheek, Long Tom, or he’ll think ye’re a member
of Parliament,” grinned Peter the Poet.
“ I am not accustomed to being told I am a liar, my
man.”
“Arrest him, boss. Arrest him for being Chillagoe
Charlie an' callin’ ye a skiter when ye told him who he
was,” cried Ginger Bob.
“Nor am I accustomed to stand any untrue state-
ment being forced down my throat,” Long Tom re-
torted angrily. “ I have prospected in every part of
Queensland and New Guinea, and my record is clean
all through, and you can bet your thief-catcher's job
I m not going to be bullied by a policeman now.”
“Hear, hear 1 Tom,” shouted the men in delight
at the prospect of trouble arising, and just then Mr.
Hornsby appeared.
“ When is this foolish business of yours going to
cease ? ” he demanded, trying not to display the temper
he felt within him. “ This is a mining camp, and we
have no time for dramatic entertainments such as you
have been providing.”
“ I am very sorry, sir, that this camp has become
a frequent visiting-place of mine, but I can’t help it.
I am certain that the—no, I won't say criminal, for
that has yet to be proved—man I want is harboured
here, and you, sir, as a Justice of the Peace in the State


of Queensland ought to help me instead of encouraging
your men to throw obstacles in my way."
“ All right, then,” Mr. Hornsby cried, mollified ; “ I’ll
help you all I can, for I have a great desire to know
who Chillagoe Charlie really is. He is a gentleman, of
that I feel sure."
“ Then, sir, don’t you see the force of my following up
the man who took the buggy from the Crossing ? He
was seen burning the uniform, or rather a remnant was
found after he had left."
“A big difference, officer. This man, although he
brought the buggy here, may not have been the man
your men saw. Can they make you sure on that
point ? Long Tom is well known all over the country,
and I don't see how he could find time after a hard
day's work to go about at night playing the part of
Chillagoe Charlie. But let me question him and
perhaps we'll get some information. Do you know
anything about the burning of some garments, Tom ?
You can speak to me freely, as you know.”
“I know that —that " began Long Tom, and
stopped. He did not wish to incriminate any one.
“ Yes, Dirty Sam you mean. Go on," said Mr.
Hornsby. “What did he do ?"
“He burned something he found in the buggy
before he asked me to take it here."
“ There you are then, officer; you see that Dirty
Sam, the man you went out after when you left here
this afternoon ”
“ Is my man; but I don't know the difference between
Dirty Sam and this gentleman."
“You are away off the track again. I was going to
say that as Dirty Sam took the articles of dress he
burned from the buggy, it follows that it is the owner
of the buggy you should apply to for particulars "


“ And who is he ? Where is he ? ” The superin-
tendent was again greatly excited.
“ Come here, boss," said Dave. “Do you see this
horse’s tracks ? You do ? Well, that is his. He
went out that way some hours ago. If ye carry
a candle in front of ye ye’ll be able to track him
back to camp again. He is the parson.”
“Is that so ?" the superintendent asked Mr. Hornsby.
“ Have I been following out clues which led only to
those tracks, and if so, were they made by the gentle-
man known all over the north as the parson ? ”
“ I believe so. Hadn't you better set out after him
now?”
“ No, I am sick of the whole thing, and our horses
are done up now for some days. I don’t believe there
is such a person as Chillagoe Charlie, and I am going
to return south to-morrow. My health won’t stand
this eternal riding after a will-o’-the-wisp. I am farther
away now from knowing who Chillagoe Charlie is
than when I started, and I wish I had never heard of
him."
“And so say all of us, sir," a trooper put in. “We’ll
never catch him because he doesn't exist.”
“ What would be done to him if ye did get him ? ”
asked Ginger Bob thoughtfully. An idea had just
occurred to him.
“ I don’t think anything could be done to him,” the
officer answered wearily. “No one can give any one
evidence against him, and no one will identify him,
and all the investigations I have caused to be made do
not bring out that he has done anything wrong. He
rides about the country in a mask, but that in itself is
no crime, and I have no doubt he could easily clear
himself.”
“An would you pay the thousand pound reward


just the same ?” asked Ginger, still thinking deeply.
“ 'Cos if you would I have a good mind to go out after
him myself.”
“There will be a dead Ginger Bob found around
these parts if ye does,” said Hungry Ted.
“ No, there won’t, Hungry,” answered Ginger. “ I
have a boncer idea, and you are in it. Come out of
the crowd till I tell you about it.”
“ And as Caledonia Camp cannot refuse its
hospitality even to troopers who have tried to fix a
serious charge upon most of its members from the
manager down,” laughed Mr. Hornsby, “the men and
I invite you to let your horses go, and come and have
something to eat and drink yourselves. After that, if
you will take my advice, you will camp here for the
night, and if you really want Charlie and believe he
exists at all, you will scatter yourselves to-morrow and
depend more upon trapping him than upon running
him down.”
“ I am too tired to put forth any more ideas of my
own,” said the superintendent, “ and my boys must
feel as bad. I thank you for your offer of hospitality,
which on behalf of them and myself I gratefully
accept. Dismount, boys, and hobble out your
animals.”
“ Yes,” said Bullocky Bill, “and I’ll show you where
you can get water for them.” Bullocky was too
anxious in his manner for any one to think he had
the welfare of the troopers’ horses at heart, but Mr.
Hornsby spoiled his little scheme by saying, “All
right, Bill, you can take the horses to the water, but
remember if they stampede you are responsible, and
will have to gather them in yourself in the morning.”
“ I reckon it is blamed hard lines on a well-meanin’
fellow,” Bullocky Bill grumbled as he realised that his


scheme was ruined, and most of his comrades agreed
with him in sympathetic tones.
And thus once more did the troopers find a resting-
place in Caledonia Camp, and after an entertainment,
at which Peter the Poet recited a poem of his own
making, and at which Mike, Long Tom, and young
Tom sang, and Nigger performed tricks, they retired
to snatch some sleep in any odd corner they could
find. Their horses fed peacefully near, the tinkling of
their bells being as sweet music in the ears of the good-
natured but worn-out troopers.
The darkness became more intense and soon mid-
night was at hand. Tom and Nigger were both very
tired, and had fallen asleep at once on their turning in,
Tom into his bunk in the tent, and Nigger under it.
Suddenly Tom opened his eyes, Nigger was stand-
ing up and wagging his tail, but looking past Tom.
Tom turned his head slightly, and there, behind his
pillow, stood Chillagoe Charlie. He made a spring
from his bunk, but a hand was laid on his arm and a
voice said, “ Don't utter a sound, I won’t harm you.
I have come here to tell you something about your
uncle."
“ Is he alive?" Tom began, but the masked man
held up his hand warningly.
“ Don’t speak at all," he said in a very low voice.
“ This place is swarming with sleeping troopers, and it
is very silly of me to be here. Your uncle is the leader
of a company of prospectors up on the Palmer River.
They found the secret Chinese camp, and are working
the same gold formation. If you really desire to meet
him you must be prepared to run many risks and suffer
a lot of inconvenience ”
I don t care, whispered Tom, u I am going up
north no matter what I have to suffer. But what is the


use of your wearing a mask here ? We all know you
are Dirty Sam, and "
“ are making another mistake. Dirty Sam has
a game of his own on hand. He will help you to find
your uncle, and is now riding north to the Palmer.
You must also start to-night. I will put you on Sam s
tracks, and you must then ride them down until you
make up on him. He expects you, and will not travel
too fast. Are you ready to come now ? ”
“Yes, but I must tell Mr. Hornsby first. He has
been very good to me, and I can’t leave the camp like
a thief without getting his consent.”
“ All right; come along and we’ll call on him and
get it. Dress quietly and join me at his house. I
must go round outside the camp.”
“ But aren’t you in great danger just now ? The
troopers might shoot you if they saw you.”
“ I’ll have to risk that, they can’t catch me in any
other way. My two fast horses are waiting down the
creek, and I have already taken the hobbles off theirs
and driven them a couple of miles away.”
“ That's what Bullocky Bill was going to do to-night,
but Mr. Hornsby stopped him. He will be blamed for
doing it, in the morning, just the same.”
“ Oh, I'll leave a note in his tent telling him where
to get them, and he’ll not mind bringing them in with-
out complaining when he knows who he is working
for. Are you sure you know your own mind about
going north ? Don't say you want to go because of
me. I never harmed a fly in my life, and I have no
intention of using my notorious title to influence
people now ”
“ I am not afraid of you in the slightest, as I told
you last night at the springs, and I am going north to
the Palmer River to find my uncle, although there


were a hundred of you on the way, and although all
the Chinamen in China and all the aborigines in
Australia were leagued to prevent me."
“ That’s a plain enough statement, so we’ll not waste
any more time. Make your way cautiously to the
mine manager’s house, and I will join you there, and
when he gives you the permission you desire, we’ll
clear out. I am going over to Mike’s tent now to leave
a message.”
Chillagoe Charlie walked quietly from the tent, and
after pausing at the door a moment to listen if any one
gave signs of being outside, he crossed over to Mike's
tent and entered it. Next moment he had crossed the
dry creek behind the camp and was walking towards
the mine manager’s house as carelessly as though he
owned the entire Caledonia Company's properties.
Tom followed at once and made up on his strange
friend at the house. The windows were wide open as
were also the doors, air being the chief consideration
in all erections in the Gulf country. Chillagoe Charlie
stepped quietly on to the verandah, and signed to Tom
to do likewise. But he had no time to do anything
further, for just then Mr. Hornsby’s voice called out,
“ Who is there ? Answer, or I will blow a hole in you."
“ Chillagoe Charlie,” answered the masked visitor.
“ I have come to ask leave of absence for one of your
men."
“Oh, Chillagoe Charlie," exclaimed Mr. Hornsby,
jumping out of bed. “ I have been hoping to see you
for some time past. Won’t you step inside ? Excuse
my holding a revolver in your face until we become
better acquainted. You know, I suppose, you have a
strange reputation ? "
“ Oh, yes ; I can’t help hearing the stories about me.
But you may put down your weapon. 1 don’t think


any one had ever said that Chillagoe Charlie did any
harm to any one who did not go out of their way to
interfere with him.”
“ Oh, I don’t know, you may give it another name if
you like ; but if all is true that is said of you, you are
little short of an ordinary bushranger. But never
mind, come inside and have a cigar. I suppose you
have come to explain away Dirty Sam's disappearance
—if you are not that gentleman in person ? ”
“ No ; Dirty Sam is well able to explain for himself if
he wants. I dropped in to ask you if you would allow
my young friend of the springs to leave your service.
He has an uncle whom he has never seen, somewhere
among the Chinese up on the Palmer, and as I happen
to know the person very well, I can put the boy on his
track. I also happen to know you are going up that
way in force very soon, but unfortunately I can't wait
down here. These poor troopers might be too much
played out to move some day, and I might blunder
into their hands.”
“By the way, I might as well mention that the
trooper superintendent from Brisbane is sleeping in
the next room, and as the partition is open at the top,
it might be as well if you spoke in a lower voice. But
to the point. How do I know that you are speaking
the truth when you talk about knowing my young
assayer's uncle ? I tell you frankly I don't care about
letting him set out alone, or in your company, on the
north track.”
“ He'll not be in my company ; Dirty Sam will look
after him. No, please do not light your lamp. That
officer might study the lower part of my face and
charge some poor boy for my doings because both
our chins were innocent of hirsute adornment.
Thanks for this cigar; it is an excellent one. You


might really keep the muzzle of your revolver a little
to the left or right of my head. lam worth a thousand
pounds, you know, and if you get nervous with the
thought that I might have base designs upon the gold
you have in that safe for paying the men’s wages to-
morrow, there is no saying what the result might be.”
Mr. Hornsby laughed. “ I am not one of the
nervous kind,” he said. “ But how do you know
there is a safe in this room ? It is too dark to see.”
“ Professional instinct, I suppose. What is the good
of having a name like mine if you can't smell a safe ? ”
“Get out, Charlie,” laughed Mr. Hornsby. “You
are no more a safe robber than I am. See, here are
the keys of that one; open it if you like while I go
and talk to Tom. There is my revolver to you also ;
you might need it if the superintendent awakes.”
Mr. Hornsby flung down his revolver and walked
out on to the verandah where Tom was sitting.
“Tom,” he said quickly, “you have my full consent
to go north. I know who Chillagoe Charlie is, and
you are safe in his hands. Take some assays on your
way up so that we can peg out any good ground when
we follow you. You can write me from the Mitchell
River, and then from Smith's cattle station on the
Palmer, telling me the results, with a rough map. I
will send Mike after you as soon as I can get a
portable assaying plant stowed away on our best
pack-horse. You will find your uncle, I am sure,
and I will follow you up as soon as the new manager
relieves me.”
“Then you approve of my leaving you just now,
sir ? And will you explain to the parson ”
“ Oh, you'll likely fall in with him somewhere on
the track yourself, Tom. But go in and tell Charlie
you are ready. I’ll go down and rouse Mike and he’ll


follow you. Fill your pockets with the cigars in the
box on the second shelf, too; you'll find that’s
Charlie's favourite brand.”
Mr. Hornsby, sublimely indifferent to the fact that
the notorious bushranger was in his house, walked
down to the camp, and, greatly surprised at the turn
things had taken, Tom made to enter the room.
But he did not go in ; at the door he stood abruptly
and his heart beat fast. The thin crescent moon had
just appeared above the distant ranges, and its feeble
light shining in at the open window fell on a gleaming
revolver of Government pattern. The weapon was in
a man’s hand and was pushed over the top of the
partition between the room in which Mr. Hornsby
and the superintendent slept. Tom could not see
what the revolver was aimed at, but it required no
brilliant effort to guess. He dropped on his knees
and crawled past the door and along the verandah
until he reached the window through which he had
participated in rifle practice with Mr. Hornsby and
the parson. He knew what he was going to do if luck
favoured him—and this time it did. Reaching his
hand through the window, he felt for the Winchester
rifle which he knew should be resting on a shelf
underneath, and to his intense satisfaction found it
and lifted it outside. He saw that the magazine held
some cartridges, and slipping one into the breech, he
rested the barrel of the weapon on the window ledge
and took careful aim at the glistening revolver and
waited for the proper time to fire.
“ So I have run you down by accident after all, my
notorious friend,” the man who held the revolver was
saying. “ I hate shooting a man who has given me
hospitality, but you’ll remember you are the first man
I suspected, and you should not have been so foolish


as to allow me to sleep in this room if you intended to
engage in professional work to-night. Move a step
and of course you know I’ll fire. I am a dead shot,
too, so ”
“So am I, but isn't it a pity to make a mess of Mr.
Hornsby’s room by shooting in here ?”
“ I don’t want to shoot you, I assure you, but I don’t
yet see how I am to secure you ”
“You couldn’t come from behind that partition and
do it in the ordinary way, I suppose ? ”
“Well, no; there's little romance in a policeman’s
life, and I know you are my master if I throw away
my advantage. I remember the Murgoona episode,
you see, Chillagoe Charlie or Mr. Hornsby, or ”
“ Mr. Hornsby ? lam not Mr. Hornsby
“Take off your mask and let us see who you are,
then.”
“ I'd catch cold if I did that. Shall I come into
your room and allow you to do it ? ”
“No, stay where you are. I’ll shoot if you move.
I am taking no chances.”
“Well, shoot. You don’t expect that lam going to
stand here all night ? I'll make a sporting bet that
you don't hit me in a vital part ”
A terrific report rang through the house and the
revolver flew from the officer’s hand.
“ Run now,” cried Tom, throwing down his smoking
rifle ; “ the whole camp will be out to see what the
shot meant.”
“And a very fine shot it was,” cried his masked
friend as he leaped through the window. “ I was
never so nearly fixed in my life. I have a couple of
horses all ready at the big bend down the creek; cut
over this way and we’ll get round the camp.”
“But my dog?” cried Tom as they ran through a


i , : I
I r ■ I
I 1 I
ynn /v- I
m ” -1
i V > ■ j 1 |,
s» t
’ i * " w > d| f I
* v
H -X
“a terrific report rang out, and the revolver flew from
THE OFFICER’S HAND.”
Jo face pi




patch of spear-grass and plunged into the dense bush.
“ Nigger has stuck to me all along and I am not going
to leave him now.”
“ You couldn’t leave him if you wished ; I hear him
panting at our heels now. He must have been with
us all the time. What a noise that police officer is
making ! He’ll be heard in Murgoona. Look ! there’s
the camp now; one would think it was a big city
from the number of lights."
“They’ve found out that their horses have been
driven away,” said Tom. “ Hear how they are shout-
ing ! Poor Bullocky Bill will get blamed for every-
thing.”
“ Oh, he won’t mind ; he’ll drive the horses back
over our tracks and obliterate them. But turn more
to the left now; we’re getting too far away from the
creek, and we may as well save our strength now, too ;
they can’t follow us without horses ”
“ I hear a horse galloping along the flat on the other
side of the creek,” interrupted Tom. “The troopers
may have taken the camp horses and be trying to head
us off.”
“ No fear ; there was only one horse in the yard and
that was Mr. Hornsby’s bay mare. That must be the
horse we hear now, and either Mr. Hornsby himself
or Mike O’Flannigan is the rider. But here is the
bend in the creek, and I heard the tinkle of my horse's
bell over there. Watch where you put your feet about
here; the bend seems to be the headquarters of almost
every variety of snake.”
“ Nigger will lead us to the horses,” said Tom.
“ He can see in the dark better than we can and he
knows we are looking for them.”
1 They would come themselves in answer to my
whistle, but I hitched them to a tree when I left them


for fear they would take a fancy to roll in the water-
hole there and spoil the saddles and wallets."
“ Here they are," Tom cried, running in the direc-
tion whence Nigger's voice was calling loudly.
“And 1 hear the bells of the troopers' horses about
half a mile farther down the creek, so the sooner we
are making tracks northward the better it will be for
all concerned," responded his strange companion.
“I’ll take Nigger up with me until we put the Walsh
River between us and any who may come after us.
Lie low on your horse’s back and let it do the steering ;
our animals know the country better than we do, but
you must take care that overhanging branches do not
brush you off."
Tom remembered his ride with Mike. It seemed as
if a year had passed since then instead of only little
more than a couple of rounds of the clock. “ I think
I can stick on,” he laughed. “ I have had some
experience of night bush riding already. But can you
carry Nigger ? ”
“ Easily. Mount and let us be off. We must be far
from here at sunrise.”
Tom at once got into the saddle and fell in behind
his leader, and then in silence, save for the noise of
breaking branches and falling timber, the cries of dis-
turbed night birds, and the ringing of hoofs upon
occasional ironstone patches, they rode blindly, keep-
ing the stars of the north straight ahead. After an
hour’s riding they broke through into a clearing and
saw underneath them, winding its erratic course west-
ward, the Walsh River. It was not much of a river at
this time, consisting only of a series of stagnant water-
holes, in which undersized crocodiles and other
amphibious creatures endeavoured to keep cool. A
stream, shallow and narrow, connected these holes,


showing that there was still a flow in the river, but
the many giant cedar-trees which littered the great
sandy channel gave silent testimony to the might of
the Walsh River when the rains came on ; these trees
had been carried on its flood for over a hundred miles.
But Tom had no time to study the Walsh, nor did
he even see how the long lines of wild fig-trees on its
banks were bent in the direction of its flow, and that
high up among their branches were entangled masses
of driftage, marking the level to which the river could
rise.
They cantered across the wide sandy water-course,
and up over the northern bank, then went off at a
gallop again. The first flashes of dawn found them
still riding to the north, but now they were travelling
slowly ; they had got beyond the reach of possible
pursuit, and were saving their horses as much as
possible.
“Well, Tom,” said his companion to him abruptly;
“ there are Dirty Sam's tracks now, you can easily
follow them yourself. He can’t be much ahead, for
that spear-grass broken down so near the roots shows
that his horse was played out, it was dragging its
steps ”
He pointed to where the broken and crushed grass
showed signs that a horse had passed along recently.
“ We have been following these tracks for an hour or
more, although I didn't know it,” continued the man in
the mask ; “ but our horses knew it, and kept us right,
and now as it is just on sunrise I will say good-
morning and leave you ”
“ Why, where are you going ?" cried Tom ; “ your
safety lies north.”
“ Chillagoe Charlie has never yet been seen in day-
light, Tom, and it would be a pity if I gave myself


away to you now. Ride on yourself, you'll find Sam
camped somewhere near. I won’t be far away from
you at any time, but not as Chillagoe Charlie. That
person will fade out of existence with the coming of
day, probably never to appear again until he is on trial.
Keep the horse in remembrance of him, and do not try
to find out anything about him. You can run along-
side now, Nigger." He allowed Nigger to jump from
his seat, and calling out, “Good morning, Tom," he
turned and rode behind a bluff before Tom fully
realised that he meant to leave him.
“Wait one moment,” cried Tom, riding after him;
“ I know who you are already."
His words were echoed by the bluff which con-
fronted him. The sun shot up ; he was alone, and no
tracks were visible but his own.


CHAPTER VIII
THE CAPTURE
TOM gazed around him like one who had just
awoke from a dream. It was broad daylight,
and it took him some minutes to come to any decision
as to whether his adventures of the night were real or
imaginary.
11 It must have been a dream,” he muttered, at length ;
“ he told me himself he would fade away at the coming
of daylight—at least I dreamt he said that. It must
have been that suggestion that woke me up. Of
course he would fade away with daylight; creatures
of imagination always do. But what a real dream it
was ! And how tired lam ! I feel just as if I had been
riding all night. Where am I anyway ? I don’t
recognise this place at all; and what am I doing
standing in front of a big rock ? Why, I am on
horseback, too. And there's Nigger looking as
hungry as if he had not had anything to eat
for a week. My horse, wherever I got it, is hungry
too, or it wouldn’t nibble that rank grass. No, it is
no dream, it is all real. I have been riding all night
with Chillagoe Charlie, and he has just left me for
reasons of his own. He must have gone into that
rock though, for he disappeared like a shadow. Well,
I am on the hunt for my uncle, whom I now


know to be alive and somewhere up in the country
which lies ahead ; so come on, Nigger, we'll move on
and trust to our luck. I suppose Chillagoe Charlie is
really Mike O’Flannigan, unless he is Dirty Sam. In
any case, I know I'll find him, whoever he is, waiting
for me a little farther on, and I feel certain he'll have
breakfast ready. I don't know how he manages his
appearing and disappearing, but as he told me not to
try to find out, and has shown himself to be my
friend, I’ll not inquire further into the matter, but take
things as they come as a matter of course. Jupiter !
though, one can’t blame that superintendent trooper for
his mistake. I felt quite sure at first that Mr. Hornsby
was the man, then it seemed as if it must be the
parson, then Mike, and Dirty Sam, and that tall,
black-whiskered prospector. Jove! it might finish
with Peter the Poet, or me, unless it is the superin-
tendent himself, or the sergeant, or O’Brian."
Tom was now riding down the tracks supposed to
be those of Dirty Sam, with Nigger running in front
looking for something upon which he might make a
breakfast. But suddenly Nigger’s attention was taken
up by events in the rear, and he turned and barked
loudly, plainly warning his master that some one was
approaching. Tom looked over his shoulder, and sure
enough a rider was coming up at rapid pace, his jaded
steed showing clearly that it had been ridden more
than was good for it during the night. “ This will be
Chillagoe Charlie as he appears through the day," Tom
said to himself. “ I wonder if he really thinks I can’t
see through his little dodge. He simply hid himself
and took off his mask, and trusting that the darkness
of night would prevent me or any one else from
noticing his horse particularly, or his dress, he is
coming on now in another character. I had fancied


j|||
y* .
“ ‘ THIS WILL BE CHILLAGOE CHARLIE AS HE APPEARS THROUGH
THE DAY,’ TOM SAID TO HIMSELF.”
[To face page 16S.




he would have ridden fast and allowed me to find him
in front though, that's what he usually does, and I had
hoped to find breakfast ready when I came up with
Dirty Sam.”
Tom had quite made up his mind as to how
Chillagoe Charlie mystified every one, and he had
now also reduced the possible candidates for the
honour of being that gentleman to two people—Dirty
Sam and Mike O’Flannigan. There were some little
things he called to mind which did not exactly fit in
with that theory, but he reasoned that he had been
cheated purposely in each case to prevent him coming
to any conclusion. “Ah, well,” he said to himself,
drawing rein and waiting for the approaching rider to
come up. “ It's either Sam or Mike, or both, who act
the part of Chillagoe Charlie, and both are decent
fellows, and I'd better not let them see I have any
suspicion. Hallo 1 it's Mike, after all. Good morning,
Mike. You seem to be in a hurry.”
“That may be,” said Mike, with a laugh ; “but you
haven't lost much time yourself. I left camp when
the racket broke out and have been going ever since.
The boss told me to take a pack-horse with some
stores and tools, but I didn’t get time, the troopers
collared everything in horseflesh they could get their
hands on, and I had to have a little argument with
them before I got away with this one, the boss’s bay
flier. Ive got one or two things in the wallet, however,
and likely Dirty Sam has something too.”
“Do you think Sam is ahead?” Tom was non-
plussed. Mike's voice was entirely different from that
of Chillagoe Charlie's.
“Oh yes; he told me before he cleared out from
camp that he had an important engagement up on the
Palmer, and that after saying goodbye at the Crossing


his first stop would be somewhere about here. I was
coming after him on my own account whether the boss
had sent me or not. But ride on slowly, we'll come
upon him soon.”
“Do you know, Mike, that superintendent has
imparted some of his strange ideas to me. I thought
when I saw you coming behind that you were Chilla-
goe Charlie, and I wondered why you had not ridden
ahead so as to make that seem quite improbable. He
and I were companions all night, you know, and he has
just left me.”
“ Boy, for a time I almost got to believe I was
Charlie myself, it looked so like it; but I tell you,
seeing Charlie and you and I are all friends, that I
deliberately tried to make things look that way because
I guessed who he really was and saw that if I couldn't
draw his hunters off the scent that he was in great
danger of being caught. It now seems as if others had
thought the same, for all our mates down in camp and
some of the Crocodile Crossing boys have also been
trying to play a game with the troopers, although I am
not sure that they all think it is the same man.”
“You think he is Dirty Sam,” said Tom ; “ but after
all the surprises and suspicions and mistakes I have
experienced, lam inclined to doubt it; in fact, lam
beginning to think that there never really was any
Chillagoe Charlie, and that each of our friends, seeing
trouble likely to come to another friend —not always
the same one, as you have said —took upon himself the
role of the supposed bushranger.”
“By your dog's tail! there's a Chillagoe Charlie all
right, and I expect we’ll have breakfast with him
shortly. We're on his tracks now.”
“ But how can that be when he and I rode together
through the night ?”


“ Oh, that was easy enough for Sam. There are
two tracks there, don’t you see, one horse following
another. Sam and you rode along here in the dark,
making the tracks, then he doubled, and when he
struck them again he left you knowing you could run
them down easily to where he had first doubled, and
where we will find he has circled back to again, and
getting breakfast ready in the shape of Dirty Sam. All
the same, lad, we needn't make too much of our
knowledge."
“No; he doesn't want any one to know, or he would
have confided in those whom he knew to be his
friends before this. We'll say nothing which might
lead him to suspect. But what is your object up here,
then ? lam trying to find my uncle."
“ And I am here to prospect the country around the
Palmer and incidentally to help you to do your work,
and you'll find Sam is on the same racket. The
parson told us both something about that business,
and we’ll see it through for his sake, as well as for
your own, my boy Hallo ! your dog scents some-
thing. Of course, it is Sam's fire; see the smoke rising
ahead ? He'll make out that he has only got up from
sleep, but he’ll be as tired as any of us, and his horse
will be of little use to-day."
Increasing their pace, they quickly bore down upon
the spot where the columns of smoke betrayed the
presence of a camp fire. It was as they had suspected.
Dirty Sam was the originator of the fire; he was squat-
ting before it, carelessly, cooking some pigeons he had
shot, among the ashes. He looked up when he heard
the riders approaching and smiled a welcome.
u You couldn't have hit things neater, boys," he
said. “ There's a decent meal here for three and it is
just ready. Fill that billy from the water-hole on your
left, Tom ; we’ll boil it in no time."


“ You don't look surprised at seeing us,” spoke
Mike, dismounting. “ Are you long here ? "
“ I expected you would roll up some time, but I've
only been here since an hour before sunrise. That is
a good mare of yours, Mike.”
“ I see it made double tracks,” said Mike signifi-
cantly.
“ Oh, no ; I had a pack-horse with me. I borrowed
it at Crocodile Crossing.”
“ What ? ” cried Mike and Tom simultaneously.
“A pack-horse with me, I said—isn't that natural
enough ? A fellow needs to carry some stores in a
country like this ; if he didn't he would not go very
far ”
" Dirty Sam,” said Mike, “ where is your pack-
horse ?"
“ Feeding on anything it can find over that rise
on your right. But what on earth are you driving at,
Mike ? And what has my pack-horse done to deserve
such attention ? Any one hearing you might think
I was Chillagoe Charlie.”
“ Ha, ha ! ” Mike laughed. “ Who could imagine
Dirty Sam and that person to be the same ? ”
“ Not you, of course, Mike,” put in Sam, with a
meaning look at him. “ You know better.”
“ We’ll let that matter slide anyhow, although I am
beat to know about that third horse. I suppose you
are making for that hidden Chinese city on the
Palmer ? ”
“ Look here, Mike, I can’t make you out at all.
What do you mean by‘that third horse'? I rode
north from Crocodile Crossing yesterday to oblige
a friend who is not very far away from me just now.
I hadn't three horses, I had only two, and it strikes
me that that friend has made most of my work useless


by coming over my tracks. You shouldn't have done
that, Mike; I knew you would come, but I expected
you would ride in from another direction."
Mike was now surprised beyond measure. “ What
do you mean ? " he cried. “ They won’t follow my
tracks ; they know the lad was with you, and "
" Great Southern Cross ! Mike, you've got a touch of
the sun. Sit down and drink this tea at once."
“ 1 think I could explain most things," put in Tom.
“ I see what has happened."
“Fire away then, lad," said Dirty Sam. “There
seems to be a deal of explanations wanted."
“Mike thinks you are Chillagoe Charlie, and has
been trying to draw the troopers after him ever since
they struck Caledonia Camp "
“ Great Snakes ? I’ve been trying to do the same for
Mike."
“ And," continued Tom, “ I rode with that gentle-
man through the night, and if he is not really one
of you two, which with all due respect I still think he
must be, he is near here now, for he just left me at
daylight.' -
Dirty Sam suddenly perceived the humour of the
situation, and rolled back on the ground in a fit of
laughter, but Mike was still in doubt. He unsaddled
his horse and let it go, and then turned to his com-
rade. “ Dirty Sam," he said, “we have been com-
rades for a good long time now, and have stood by
each other through a fair amount of trouble "
“True, Mike," responded Sara. “And we're both
men over whose past a curtain has been dropped.
I have no name, and yours is assumed."
That is so. Now, remembering all these little
things, tell me in one word, are you Chillagoe Charlie
or not ?”


“ No." Sam’s answer was certainly to the point,
and as Mike realised this, he was startled by the ques-
tion : “Now, old comrade, answer me in the same
way, and remember it makes no difference to me.
Are you Chillagoe Charlie ? ”
“ No,” promptly came Mike’s response, and all three
looked at each other.
“ I say,” Sam said, after a moment’s pause, “ there’s
a lot of funny things about this Chillagoe Charlie
business. Now you, Tom, you struck Caledonia
Camp just about the time it began to be a personal
matter there, and you’ve been pretty well mixed up
with him ever since. Do you mind stating if you are,
or are not, the gentleman in question ? ”
“ I am not,” Tom answered. “ But, as I have
already said, he is not far away from here just now.
Who can he be and what interest can he have in
Caledonia Camp or in myself ? ”
“ Well, boys,” remarked Dirty Sam, “ seeing that he
has dissolved into the air, and that our well-meant
efforts in each other's behalf were not required, we’ll
wish the gentleman the best of luck and think no
more about him. We’ll begin prospecting now, and
work our way north into the land of the transplanted
Chinamen.”
“But what about stores?” asked Tom. “We
haven’t any.”
“ I’ll ride into O. K. township to-morrow —it can’t
be more than fifteen miles east from here —and buy a
couple of pack-horses and some flour and tinned
dog,” said Mike, as he made short work of one of the
roasted pigeons. “You two can camp here and give
the other horses a spell. My own nag —the one you
rode, Sam —is easily good for that journey, and it has
had an hour or two of a rest already, anyway.”


“All right, Mike,” Sam agreed. “You might be
doing a good turn to Chillagoe by doing that. If the
troopers come up this length they'll recognise the
single track and follow it, especially if we can make it
clear what horse it is that has turned off. Every one
knows your horse leaves that peculiar fore-hoof
impression in soft sand, and they will think, of
course, that if you are not Chillagoe Charlie, that that
person got hold of the horse in his usual way, and
is making for O. K. While you are away we'll move
north to Dillon's Creek, and it will be as near for you
to strike us there as to come back here. Have some
more tea, Tom.”
When breakfast was over the three men erected
a shade with some branches, and, stretching them-
selves beneath it, fell asleep. Meanwhile the horses
fed near and recuperated. Early in the afternoon
1 -e got up and, catching his own horse, rode off
o the east, and some time after Sam and Tom were
roused by Nigger, who had grown tired of chasing
lizards and wished something different to eat. Nig.-er
was always hungry, and for his rather diminutive size
got through a remarkable amount of food. He
received his share of cold pigeon ; then the horses
wmd re? 8 H n Kv d Sadd ' ed ’ 3nd the J° urne y "Orth-
ward resumed, Nigger running in front and Sam's
fct buTco t H d '* THey did not attem P f t0 tra vel
ast, but contrived to reach the creek, which Sam and
i like knew well, at sundown. They had gone along
Ipex at e the h ““ ‘ W ° S ‘ deS ° f which - with ‘he
Mike I* to tav U e S rse! PPer “’“"S ° f °' K "
comS.| their h ° g °’ they made ‘hemselves as
comfortable as possible, and kindled their camp fire
and Sam was just about to prepare a mysterious stew


for supper compounded of almost all the edible sub-
stances in the packs, when Nigger staggered into
camp with a scrub turkey a good deal larger than him-
self. He laid the bird at his master’s feet proudly,
and then waited for his praise. But Tom was at
a loss this time; he could not understand how the dog
managed to catch such a powerful bird, and he looked
inquiringly at Sam for an explanation,
“ Oh, it is real enough,” laughed that gentleman,
throwing aside his materials for the stew and making
sundry preparations for cooking the turkey in the
ashes instead. “Those birds are so heavy that they
can’t get on the wing without a long run first. They
feed on the ground, you know, and Nigger scented
this fellow and caught him before he could bring his
flying powers into working order. You have done
well, Nigger; we can all have a decent supper now,
and enough left to carry us through to-morrow.
While that supper was being prepared, Tom walked
down to the edge of the creek, and by the aid of a
fire-brand examined its sands. Sam had told him
they were now inside the great northern gold belt, and
he was burning to find some gold. The creek was
trickling slowly over a rocky bed in corners of which
patches of black sand glistened. He lifted some of
this sand in his hands, and then cried out in delight;
the weight suggested that he had come on pockets of
stream tin, which, after all, might prove more lucrative
to work than alluvial gold.
“ What’s the matter ? ” asked Sam, when he heard
Tom's shout. “ Has a crocodile got hold of you, or
have you seen a bunyip ? ”
“ No,” replied Tom, rushing into the firelight; “but
I’ve found stream tin or something else ”
“ You’re right, my lad,” laughed Sam. “It is—some-


thing else, but what it is no prospector whom I know
has ever discovered ”
u Then you knew this stuff was here ? "
Every man who has-crossed the Peninsula knows
that stuff is there, but it is of no value to any one.
There are some creeks in the Palmer shed the beds of
which are covered with that to a depth of at least
six inches."
“ But do you know it isn't tin ? "
Oh yes; it has been tried for tin by every prospector
who came across it; it's some kind of iron, I suppose."
“ N °? !t lsn,t iron of any kind," persisted Tom
scratching a small grain with the point of his knife •
it is too soft—and heavy."
a Don't get excited, lad ; whatever it is, we’re going
fnto the country where there’s any amount of it. In
fact, there's not much of anything else except China-
men on the other side of the Mitchell River, which
we 11 cross to-morrow night if we make good head-
way."
But I am certain this is some mineral of value "
broke m Tom. "It isn't iron, it isn't antimony, it isn't
wolfram, and if it isn't tin it must be either platinum
or some of the rarer metals."
“ 1 am surprised you haven’t said it was a new com-
pound of gold, Tom," laughed Sam. “ The parson
insisted that it was gold and arsenic and sulphur
combined, but who ever heard of such a combin-
ation ?
“The parson. Did he say that ? Was it the parson
we both know ? "
~ “ there 18 onl y one man called The Parson in
the Gulf country. He makes it his business to get out
among the mining camps where the only form of
religion known is that which a man may remember
12


from his childhood, and where Sunday, as a day of
rest is entirely unknown. I met him first, about a
year ago, in such a camp. Peter the Poet and Mike,
and some of the other boys you know, were also there
We were mining wolfram at the time, for it was well
over a hundred pounds a ton in price, and we were
making little fortunes.” Sam paused and raked the
fire and Tom waited for him to continue. But Sam
evidently thought he had said all that was interesting
on the subject, and after a bit Tom broke in upon his
musings with, “ And did you make your fortunes with
the wolfram ? ”
“ No,” answered Sam ; “ the price fell—at least the
buyers told us it had fallen—until we couldn’t scratch
a living out of the business. That camp is now a
home for dingoes, every man left it and went off to
try his luck hunting for some other metals.” Again
Sam stopped and became lost in reflection, but Tom
was eager to hear all he could about the parson, so he
broke in once more. “ But what part does this stuff
take in all that, and where does the parson come in,
in what you have told me ? ”
“ Didn’t I tell you ? Oh, I forgot, I was dreaming.
The parson had been working among us for quite a
time, and when we resolved to give the wolfram camp
best, he proposed we should all join in a prospecting
trip up north. He said he knew where the mysterious
Chinese city was, and he believed the beggars were
working a marvellously rich gold formation.
“ But is there really a settlement of Chinese up
here ? ” interrupted Tom. “ I thought the Chinese
were prohibited from entering Australia unless under
very severe restrictions ? ”
“ That is true ; but all the laws that Queensland
made, and latterly the Commonwealth, can't keep out


I
Jr f Jm BW|Br
Jhl -
' 0% - 4HM ' : - 1
' ■ —' ' ' . - n ■ -■■ — ■„, , - I ■ ■■
'“SAM PAUSED AXD RAKED THE FIRE.”
lo face page 178.




the pigtail. If he landed at Cocktown, or Cairns, or
any of the northern ports, of course he could be
watched, and made to pay his poll-tax for getting leave
to grow fruit and vegetables for his white-skinned
brother, who couldn’t do that for himself ; but the
Chinaman who is content to be a white man’s servant
isn’t the kind we have to deal with. Quite another
type is known to the prospector of the Peninsula —a
kind who have never paid poll-tax or any other tax,
and who did not land at any port in the country, and
who are equal nearly, in strength, to the white man,
and more than his equal in ingenuity, and as bad as is
possible for anything in the shape of humanity to be.
They found their way down the Gulf country during
the great Palmer River gold rush, and landed from their
junks in the shelter of any of the many mangrove
swamps which lie at the mouth of nearly all the rivers
which empty into the Gulf of Carpentaria. Thence,
they went up these rivers, and being able to live on
rice alone, they very soon found out what the white
prospector knew, but couldn’t act upon because of his
inability to live in the country without sufficient food.
The history of the Palmer River rush is a sad record
of man's lust for gold, but the world does not know
that of the thousands who left their bones there, more
were killed by the yellowmen than died of starvation,
as is believed, or at the hands of the aborigines, which
some more enlightened people think. However, that
is past long ago, but the Chinese still work the great
gold deposits, and in spite of the efforts of our Custom
collectors, fine fellows though they be, and the might
of the British squadron in Sydney Harbour, their
junks still come down from China with men, rice,
opium, and other things, all of which are disem-
barked in the swamps along the Gulf’s shores, and


all of which eventually get into the heart of the land
we are about to enter. I have gone right up to Cape
York before though and never even seen a Chinaman,
and the overland telegraph line to Thursday Island
runs through the Peninsula all the way."
“ But what about the prospecting trip the parson
proposed?" Tom asked. “I have some reasons for
believing that I have an uncle somewhere up among
the ranges which flank the Palmer River, that’s why I
am so interested.”
“ What is his name ? "
“The same as mine. Tom Willoughby."
“ No, I don't know him." Sam mused. “The parson
is the likeliest man to know about him. He told me
to come up here and help you to look for him.”
“The parson knows him well. It was he and
Chillagoe Charlie who told me about him.”
“A strange couple to be associated, Tom. Our
turkey is nearly ready now."
“ But you haven’t told me about the prospecting
trip yet ? "
“I seem horribly forgetful to-night. I wish Mike
would turn up. Oh, about the trip ? We started off
all right and passed up over this creek just about here.
We got up the Palmer country, and there some of the
boys brought in some of that black stuff you found
down in that creek, and wanted to know what it was.
Most of us had seen it before and laughed at him, but
the parson, after working with it all day and all night,
said it was what I told you, and although few of us
believed him—we thought he was mistaken, I mean —
we ran the stuff down from where it came from, and
while doing so fell in with a mob of Chinese. They
were as mad as though we had dropped into one of
the forbidden cities of China, and, by Jupiter! it looked


as if we had from the number of them, and they came
at us like a swarm of wild cats. Well, to cut the yarn
short, we had to clear out and leave the field to them.
About this time Mr. Hornsby was in charge of an
expedition prospecting for copper, and after being
bested by the Chinese we met his party. We all
wanted to go back and see what the Chinese had found
worth fighting for, but, strangely enough, it was the
parson who objected. He put Mr. Hornsby on the
track of what are now the Caledonia Mines, and as
many of our fellows who cared to take work were
employed by him to develop the various properties he
took up for that company. The parson danced about
as usual; sometimes he would drop into Caledonia
Camp and thrash Dave for swearing, or take a turn
down the big shaft, but before we got up in the morn-
ing he most likely would have cleared out for some
other camp, and we wouldn't hear of him again for a
month or so. He always had the idea of going back
to the Palmer River for that confounded black stuff,
but wouldn’t hear of our going in force and fighting
the Chinese. I know Mr. Hornsby and he have made
arrangements to come up as soon as the new mine
manager arrives, but if they hope to prospect peace-
ably and thus avoid trouble with the yellowmen they
will be disappointed ; I know the pigtails too well, and
I also know they have found something good or they
wouldn’t have risked a fight with such a party as we
were."
“ But we are going in among them now ? ”
“ Yes ; but we’ll take the plan Mike and some mates
of his adopted. They went up as niggers, and the
Chinkies ignored them. It would be a bit awkward,
though, if we fell in with the genuine aborigines while
they were holding a big corroborree. I expect that


uncle you talk about must have been a sham nigger
too, if he really was working up in the Palmer Ranges.”
“ I don't know; but the parson knew him, and
Chillagoe Charlie says he is still there.”
“ All right, Tom ; before long we’ll be there too and
we’ll best the yellowskins someway.”
“ Do you think it is this stuff they are working ? ”
“ No ; catch them wasting labour on anything that
has no value ”
“ But they may have discovered that it has a value.
The Chinese are very ingenious.”
« Perhaps ; and after you discovering gold in that
reef down at Crocodile Crossing I am quite ready to
believe there may be some valuable mineral hidden
away under that black surface. —But look at your dog.
What’s wrong with him ? ”
“ He hears something and doesn't know yet whether
he should bark or not. He is used to judging for him-
self, and would never wake me by barking when we
were on the track together, unless there were; good
reasons for it.” Tom patted Nigger affectionately.
“ What is it, Nigger ? ” he said. “ Surely not Chinamen
already ? ”
Nigger still stood with ears alert, but suddenly he
gave vent to what was meant for a reassuring bark and
lay down before the fire. He had no other troubles
at that moment.
“By Jupiter I that dog has wonderful hearing
powers,” exclaimed Dirty Sam, as the sound of
horses coming along at a trot began to strike his ears.
“ He heard them long before we did ; but why is he
lying down now ? "
“He knows we have nothing to fear,” answered
Tom. “It must be Mike."
“ It is j I can make out the ring of his own animal’s


hoofs, apart from the others. The horse he rides treads
as though it knew it had few equals. It ,was it that
first led me to suspect Mike was Charlie, for with it a
man might well be in Murgoona to see the train come
in, and appear at, say, Crocodile Crossing a couple of
hours after, as Charlie seems to have done.”
“But I understand that that gentleman has been
seen at different places at the same time —at least, that
is commonly believed.”
“Which goes to show that there are two people
playing the Chillagoe Charlie game—but this is Mike
all right, and he's got a couple of heavily laden pack
horses with him.”
Dirty Sam had thrown some light scrub on the fire
so as to make a blaze for the benefit of whoever was
approaching, and the shout with which Mike signified
that he saw the camp told who he was, and presently
he rode up to the fire and dismounted.
“ I am sorry you waited supper for me, boys,” he
said, eyeing the turkey which Sam now hauled from
the ashes and prepared to dissect with his sheath-
knife. “ I waited in O. K. township after I was ready
to start to hear if Chillagoe Charlie escaped. He was
caught to-day But, my word, boys, that's a supper
fit for two kings, three kaisers, four emperors, and a
prospector, and I'm so hungry ”
“Chillagoe Charlie caught ! ” cried Tom in amaze-
ment. “That is impossible. He only left me this
morning, and ”
“ Where was he caught ?” asked Sam. “ I’ll bet my
supper they’ll not hold him long, and I’ll bet my next
meal too that it isn’t him they've got. It will be some
beggar the superintendent never saw before ; maybe
the new mine manager of the Caledonia Company’s
mines ”


“ Like enough,” agreed Mike. “Anyhow, it was at
Caledonia Camp it happened. You’ll find some tin
pannikins in 'that off-pack, Tom ; I bought some in
O. K. for holding our tea ”
“But it can’t be Chillagoe Charlie,” persisted Tom,
not heeding Mike’s remark. “Is there a telegraph or
telephone system to O. K. from Murgoona ? "
“ Not yet, but the O. K. mine owners are busy
fitting up a connection now,” answered Mike. “What
did you want to do ? Wire to Charlie ?”
“No; I wanted to prove to myself that it can’t be
that person who is caught. How far is O. K. from
Murgoona or from Caledonia Camp?”
“About sixty miles. But say, boys, when is supper
to begin ? I’m ready any time.”
“Fire away then, Mike,” rejoined Sam, passing him
a leg of the turkey. “ Excuse the absence of plates
and use your own knife. Sit down to what fare your
dog has provided, Tom.”
“ Youngster, you are taking Charlie’s fate too much
to heart,” said Mike, as he proceeded to attack his
supper. Tom was standing by the fire apparently
indifferent to supper.
“It can’t be Charlie,” he suddenly broke out.
“ How could he get back to camp after leaving me
this morning a good fifty miles away ? ”
“ A good horse could do it, lad,” Sam said, “and in
all probability Charlie has a few of them feeding
about parts he knows best himself. He could—as we
discussed to-night already—have reached Caledonia
Camp about ten o’clock this morning, although he
must be a wonder to sit in a saddle night and day.”
“ But if there is no telegraph between O. K. and the
south, how could news travel up there since then ? ”
Oh, the black fellows can send news in some


mysterious manner faster a good bit than a North
Queensland train could carry it "
“You needn't go into that point," interrupted Mike ;
“ Charlie himself can do better than that. He must
have discovered the secret of transmitting himself
through the air, or something like that. I don’t know
anything about the time when he fell into the hands
of that smart superintendent, but the story is all over
O. K. that he was seen galloping out of Murgoona in
the midst of a cloud of dust which travelled like a
cyclone, and ten minutes later was found in the horse
yard of Caledonia Camp twenty miles away. He was
as fresh and cool as a crocodile under the Barron
Falls, and the troopers couldn’t find any horse, sweat-
ing or otherwise, anywhere near ’’
“Oh, get out, Mike. He couldn’t cover the distance
in ten minutes, even although he had a relay of
Melbourne Cup winners waiting all along the track."
“ Well, you or I couldn’t do it, Sam, but he is
Chillagoe Charlie. Of course, I don’t believe that all
the troopers in the country could hold him long, and
I waited in O. K. expecting to hear that he had slipped
from them again, but no news came through.”
“Sit down and take your supper, Tom,” Dirty Sam
said kindly. “We’re all disposed to be friendly
towards Charlie, and he’ll likely have escaped by this
time. If not, they cannot harm him, for no person,
so far as I can gather, can lay any specific charge
against him. His reputation has been made for him
by a people who crave for the romance of the early
days. There is none of that at present in life in the
great Gulf country, so they attempt to create some by
investing the man known as Chillagoe Charlie with all
sorts of miraculous powers, and without meaning any
harm, get him into trouble with the law of the country,


the breaking of which, with Australians —I am an
Australian, born and bred, myself—has ever exercised
a sort of rudimentary fascination ”
“ Dry up, Sam, and attend to business,” growled
Mike. “ Come on, boy, fill up your pannikin of tea
and drink to the health of Charlie of Chillagoe, and
the confusion of his enemies, if he really has any ”
“ I don’t believe he has been caught at all,” said
Tom, sitting down to supper. “It is impossible that
any man could ride hundreds of miles in a few
hours ”
“ There's that dog's ears up again, Tom,” interrupted
Dirty Sam. “This part of the world seems to be
getting as crowded as the part we have left.”
“ I wouldn't be surprised if it were Chillagoe Charlie
himself,” said Mike. “He always drops down un-
expectedly wherever he goes.”
Nigger gave a joyous bark and went on with his
supper.
“ It is some one Nigger knows, at anyrate,” said
Tom, “ so we may conclude that we know him too.”
And they did. Just then the sound of hoofs rang
out, and shortly after the parson rode up and dis-
mounted with a cheery “ Good-night.”
“ Great Australia ! ” exclaimed Sam. “ Did you drop
from a balloon, parson ? ”
“No; I happened to be riding along when I cut
tracks which when I examined them by the light of a
match I knew to be made by Mike’s horse. I was
hungry, and preferring to dine with whoever was
riding the horse to going in to O. K., I followed
them, and here I am. Hullo I Tom ; you've got north
very soon, after all.”
“ Yes ; 1 have started to look for my uncle ; but you
never said you were coming this way ? ”


“He never says where he is going/’ spoke Mike.
“ But let your horse go, parson, it looks tired, and
join in on this attack upon Turkey. “ We'll get all the
news, and give all we have later."
“ But not to-night, boys ; I've been in the saddle all
day, and feel very tired."
“ We've been riding all last night ourselves," said
Dirty Sam.
“ And we'll turn in and sleep without saying a word
after we've dined," proposed Mike ; and his words
seemed to give expression to the desires of all.
Soon after, the four men and the dog were stretched
upon the ground round the camp fire fast asleep.


CHAPTER IX
THE CAMP AT THE MITCHELL RIVER
ALL through the sultry night they slept, but when
the sun's first rays shone over the eastern ranges
they awoke and went for a swim in a large water-hole
in the creek. Then Dirty Sam set about preparing
breakfast, and Mike, Tom, and Nigger went out to
look for the horses. About eight o’clock in the morn-
ing they were on the move again, Nigger leading, the
riders following, and the three pack-horses bringing
up the rear. The pack animals needed no attention,
being well trained to follow a rider on their own
account.
The parson fell in with the party as naturally as
if it were an organised expedition of which he was
a duly appointed member. He asked no questions,
and appeared to forget that his presence in the com-
pany had not yet been properly explained. At length
Dirty Sam thought it was time some explanations
were given on both sides, and, riding alongside the
parson, he began—
“ Dld you ever see four better-matched horses than
those we are riding just now, parson ? I don’t think
another four like them could be easily found in North
Queensland.”


“ Perhaps not," agreed the parson. “ That is Mr.
Hornsby's bay mare you are riding ? ”
“ Yes ; and Mike is on his own. But you have an
animal I never saw before, and which I am sure
wouldn't be last in a rush race.”
“ It is a fairly good piece of horseflesh ; I have had
it for some time now. But where did Tom get his
mount ?"
“ You wouldn't guess in a year, parson ; he got it in
a present from Chillagoe Charlie "
“Dear me, is that so? It is certainly a noble
animal, too."
“ You haven't asked what we’re doing up here,
parson, and how the best horseflesh in the country
comes to be under us ? ”
“No; I concluded you had your own reasons,
which you would tell me if you thought it advisable.
I am going up north on a visit to some prospectors'
camps near the Chinese headquarters. I have been
there before, you know, and have some influence over
the men. I hope to be able to help Tom, too, but
I daren't raise his hopes. His uncle, Tom Willoughby,
worked among the Palmer River camps for a long
time, and I knew him very intimately."
“ Well, that's a bit strange; Mike and I are on the
same business. I must say, of course, that when I
left Caledonia Camp to bring along your buggy from
Crocodile Crossing I had little intention of doing any
such thing. Matters looked so bad against Mike that
my one idea was to draw the troopers after me so as
to give him a chance "
“ Draw the troopers after you ? What do you mean,
Sam ? Why should you draw the troopers after your-
self ?"
“ I thought Mike was Chillagoe Charlie."


“Oh ! " The parson was very much surprised.
“Yes, and the best of the joke is he thought the
honour was mine."
“ Mike did ?” The parson seemed to be even more
surprised.
“He did; and Mr. Hornsby thought it rested between
the two of us, so he gave Mike his best horse to come
up after me and keep Tom and I company.”
“ Tom ? Where does he come in in this story !”
“ Oh, it would make me too thirsty if I tried to get
through the whole story, parson ; you'll have to fill
in the blanks for yourself. Anyway, I sent Long
Tom back with your buggy, and cut up north from
the Crossing, making good tracks for any one to
follow ”
“Yes, I cut your tracks, and also saw that you had
sent the buggy to camp. I had some business to
attend to in Murgoona, however, and it was not until
next morning I was able to follow you up.”
“ You came mighty quick, then, parson.”
“Yes; I enjoy rapid travelling. There is an exhila-
ration in flying through the air on the back of a
creature full of life.”
“ By Jupiter ! there must have been a lot of people
having exhilaration about that time, then, for Chilla-
goe Charlie—the genuine article—struck the camp
and hauled Tom away with him on that horse he is
riding now. The best of it, too, is that he held up
Mr. Hornsby and got him to allow Tom to go. The
camp was full of troopers at the time ; they were all
half mad, Tom says, and had been seeing Chillagoe
Charlies everywhere they went all day. Anyhow,
Charlie and he and his dog cleared out, and Mr.
Hornsby, thinking, I suppose, that I was Charlie, sent
Mike up after them with orders to tell me when he saw


me—without the mask, of course—to go up north
prospecting until the excitement died down "
“ But you are not Chillagoe Charlie ? ”
“No more than you are, parson. Why, what are
you laughing at ? "
“ The idea. But where is Charlie now ? ”
“Don’t know; he left Tom at daylight saying he
wouldn't likely appear again, and Mike heard in O. K.
last night that he had been caught ”
“ Nonsense. Chillagoe Charlie has not been caught.
I—l—well, I know, or at least I suspect, that the
excited superintendent has accused Psalm-singing
Dave, or Peter the Poet, of being the man ; he had
already been round most of the others. No, no, they'll
never catch Chillagoe Charlie ; but I have a notion,
somehow, that he may give himself up after the excite-
ment has died down.”
“Why should he do that ? He would be a mighty
fool ”
“ I don't know. He has done nothing, so far as
I can gather, and only by that means can that fact be
proved. The law is just, you know ; it is British.”
“ Well, every one in this party wishes him luck, any-
how ; and none of us would mind going out of our
way to help him. I don’t mean to include you, par-
son ; you couldn't be expected to countenance such a
thing, although you are more of the man than the
parson ”
“Nevertheless, Chillagoe Charlie has no better friend
than this same poor parson, Sam, and he will certainly
go out of his way more than you can imagine to help
him. But let us change the subject. Mr. Hornsby
and some of the boys are coming up here afterwards,
I believe. We arranged that matter, I think, before
I left Caledonia Camp.”


“ Why did you leave Caledonia Camp, parson ? It
is the finest camp in the Gulf country."
“ I left it in the interests of the gentleman we have
been talking of, much the same as you did."
“ Then you know him personally ? ” Sam was now
surprised.
“ I do, Sam ; but you must excuse my not giving
him away, even to you ; he is certainly a friend of
yours, but more than that I will not say just now.
You will probably know all, and be very much sur-
prised very soon. Look at that dog. What is the
cause of its excitement ? ”
“ Tom will know ; it seems to be a bit suspicious of
something. Come here, Tom ; what is Nigger think-
ing about now ? ”
Nigger was sniffing the ground and running up and
down with a reckless disregard of the distance he was
adding to the probable day’s journey.
“ He has got on to the scent of something he wishes
us to look into,” Tom answered, riding alongside.
“ He doesn't care about tackling the job himself.”
“ It will be a big snake, most likely,” said Mike, also
coming up, “ I once killed one over twenty feet in
length not far from here.”
“ No, it isn’t a snake," the parson said. “We would
see its trail where it crossed the sand, and also the
wavy line it would make through that spear-grass.”
“Go on, Nigger,” cried Tom; “nose him out,
we’re with you."
“With a bark, plainly expressive of delight, the dog
bounded into the tall grass which flanked the cattle
pad along which they were riding, and, running with
a series of leaps, so as to avoid treading on hidden
reptiles, led the way to a clump of palms which grew
near.


% M / i
, — f“ ’ W // jr / 'f Arch
v :,Z ■ i wesa it
> yy. / 7 ' ; »t g
“ HE WAS CLAD IX WHAT HAD OXCE BEEX A STIFF WHITE SHIRT,
AND A HELMET, BUT NOTHING MORE.”
[To face page 192.


*


“His a man," cried Mike, u I saw him move; he is
hiding behind a tree.”
“ Maybe it is Chillagoe Charlie," said Tom, following
hard on Nigger’s tracks.
“A native!" ejaculated Dirty Sam. “What on
earth is he hiding from us for ? "
A lean, wiry aboriginal had broken from the timber
and was racing through the long grass towards a
distant creek. He was clad in what had once been
a stiff white shirt, and a helmet, but nothing more, and
the men laughed to see the figure he cut, running
through the sharp, bristly grass with Nigger in hot
pursuit.
“ sto P> you over-dressed ace of spades," Sam roared ;
“ we won’t eat you.”
But the native ran on unheedingly.
“Poor beggar ! let him go," said Mike. “His experi-
ences of the white man have not been happy.”
“No, boys," the parson put in; “we must round
him up. There is something suspicious in an aborigi-
nal of these parts running away from white pros-
pectors. They have always been very friendly towards
each other.”
Before he had finished speaking Mike had almost
reached the runner, his steed, in response to a word
from its master, having darted from the others with
a show of its well-known speed.
But the aboriginal doubled and twisted and made off
on a fresh track, and before Mike’s horse could check
its impetuous course he had gained a considerable
distance. It was energy uselessly expended, however,
on his part, for now Tom, Sam, and the parson, not to
mention Nigger, were galloping to surround him, and
seeing this the man suddenly sat down on the ground
and called out, “Goo’ morn."


« Good morning," responded Tom, who was nearest
to him. “ Why did you run away ?
“What fellow boss in this c rowd ? “l* 1 ™
demanded, ignoring Tom’s question This black
fellow got no use for any fellow no boss
Tom fell back amazed at the fluency and the nature
° f gSfh'ty big amount of cheek anyway,
old black-and-white,” spoke Mike. “We re all bosses
here, so spit out your story quick an lively. Why did
y °“ WhitTfellow bosses no’ give black fellow away if
him tell ?” The native certainly did not seem to be
in the slightest manner worried about his present
“ No, we’re square men. What is your special
trouble?’' Sam asked encouragingly.
“Have a drink, old White Shirt, said Mike,
indicating a water-bag hanging round his horses
"'•‘Huns name not White Shirt," spoke the native
with great dignity. “Hims name «te Etshop.
Hims big chief too, an' hims got good edicate at
Mission Reserve for niggers-—’ „ ,
"Oh you are a Mission School man, then . t
parson’said. “ I suppose you are out on the walk-
; Bishop no such big fool. What hims
want to go on the walkabout for ? Plenty other fool
white fellow for that. Old chief die, an turns the
Bishop come out to tell h.s tribe they blame silly
fools to stay here when Queensland Government
give plenty tucker an’ baccy for do nothing down in
Opcpryp
“ And what did your people say ? ” asked the parson.


“They no say nothing. Want to make hims hold
big corroborree ; make hims walk the fires. Hims no
like that, no care hang for corroborree. Then they
want to kill hims, hims no like that too, an' hims
scoot, you bet, quick an' lively. God save the
King "
“ Thenigger reminds me of some one," Mike mused.
“Oh, yes, Psalm-singing Dave "
Were you scooting now?" the parson asked a
trifle anxiously.
You bet, hims do big scoot. Got any tucker for
Bishop ? "
Here you are, said Dirty Sam, handing him a
piece of cold turkey from his saddle-bag. “ You’ll get
some tobacco when you tell your yarn."
“ What more you give if hims tell hims yarn ? ”
I 11 give hims a thrashing hims will not forget for
some time, said the parson, who knew the nature of
the aboriginal well. “ I know you are keeping back
something, and I’ll see that there is no more tucker
nor baccy at the Reserve for Bishop if you don’t hurry
up with your story." J
“ You no' play the game. Why you no trade like
other white fellows ? Bishop hims got something
to sell, hims story worth whips o’ baccy an' some
two-three bob." The Bishop had up to this point
remained seated upon the ground, but he now arose
and drew his solitary garment around him with the
gesture of a Roman emperor.
“ We’ll trade for your story if it is worth it after you
have told it ” said the parson. “ 1 give you white
fellows word for it.”
“ V ou could n’t raise couple o’ bob first ?’’ asked the
Bishop doubtfully. “ White fellows’ word all right
but it am very blamed hard for hims to know


who is white fellow square, an who is white fellow
half with eyes in wrong place an hims tail on hims
head."
“Great Scott!" exclaimed Mike; “he says he
can’t tell the difference between us and Chinamen.
Look here, you —you son of the Great Austral Land,
I have no tail at the back of my head ; I am a white
fellow through and through, and it won t wash off.
He removed his hat as he spoke, and a seraphic smile
lit up the Bishop’s face.
“You all the same?" he inquired. “All dead
straight white fellows ?"
“All dead straight white fellows," repeated the
parson. “So you can safely tell us anything, and
if what you say is worth anything to us we’ll pay
you."
“ Then listen. Hims, the Bishop, comes out to hims
own people from Reserve, soon
« He means recently,” put in Dirty Sam for Tom’s
benefit.
“ Here you," cried the Bishop angrily. “ What
you mean stop hims speak ? My word ! God save
the King ! hims goo’ mind to say another word
not ’’
“ I beg your pardon, Bishop," said Sam contritely ;
“ I'll not interrupt again.”
“ Hims people no’ want him, an' no' believe what
he tell of plenty tucker for do nothing in Reserve.
They want make hims go through big corroborree,
but hims no like to walk through fires. Black fellows
no like him to say hims no like do that. They get
ready to kill hims. But hims no wait. Hims scoot.
Byambye hims meets a lot o' fellows with tails in their
heads. Hims no know if they white fellows or not.
They no’ talk straight, an’ eat too much rice, an’


no' live as other white fellows live. Hims no under-
stan’ them, an' them faces like colour o' too old
bananas. They give hims plenty baccy an' whips
o' fire-water to drink, an' hims get big friends.
Hims tell them hims big chief o’ black fellows, an'
they tell hims if he makes hims black fellows come
kill all blamed white fellows dig up creek near —not
the same fellows as them —they give plenty more baccy
an’ plenty more fire-water ”
“Great Melbourne 1" gasped Mike. “The Chinese
tried to get the natives to wipe out the prospectors.
Go on, Bishop, what did you do ? ”
“ Oh, hims no like to go back to hims own people.
Hims no like get killed, hims think very good plan
to cut for big white fellows’ township, an' tell Mr.
Government man what men with tails on them
head say. lon way to do that now. How much you
give me for wat hims tell ? White fellows give word
he give something.”
“ Oh, yes, we’ll give you something,” said the
parson. “Your story is well worth paying for. Here
are two half-crowns for you, and you can buy tobacco
in the first township you strike ”
“ Hims only git two,” wailed the Bishop. “ Make it
three bob, boss ”
“You are too greedy,” laughed Dirty Sam. “But
seeing you are a big chief and talk remarkably plain
English, here is a handful of pennies to you. Don't
spend them recklessly, and don't take too much fire
water.”
“My word I God save the King, boss, you must
be plenty big boss,” said the native, surprised at the
amount of money he was getting. Like all aborigines,
no matter how long they have been trained in station
or elsewhere, he had no knowledge of numbers


that could not be expressed by the fingers of one
hand. Dirty Sam had given him eight pennies and
two halfpennies; where or how they came into his
possession would probably be beyond his powers
to tell, for copper coins are never seen in the Gulf
country interior, and only seldom in the ports of
Cairns and Cooktown. But the Bishop was greatly
delighted, they were the same to him as sovereigns,
and would probably be of as much service to him.
If he entered a store or saloon with the golden coin it
would be taken from him with scant ceremony, and
no change given, the assumption being that he had
stolen it, whereas when he placed down his penny
in payment for a cheap looking-glass or piece of
red ribbon the storeman would only smile and
tell him to bank his money as the glass or ribbon
was a present. Of course he could always get food
whenever he asked for it in camp or in settlement.
“ You did quite right, Bishop,” said the parson,
after the packs had been ransacked for some tobacco
for him. “ These men you met were not white fellows.
They very bad fellows. You go and tell your story to
the first Mr. Government man you meet and he
will give you more two-three bobs and plenty of
bacca.”
“You no want to wait hims longer?” inquired
the Bishop, gazing at the sun to see how much time
he had to reach where he intended to camp that
night.
“No ; you may go now. Follow our tracks and
you will get into O. K, this afternoon.”
“No blamed fear, no O. K. for Bishop. Hims been
there before. Big bunyip hole there.” •
“ Well, if you cut over to the sun when he falls down
you will find tracks that will lead you down to a


big camp where plenty good white fellows work.
If you run fast you will get there by to-morrow's
sundown.”
“ Oh, hims run like a nigger. Hims know black
fellows behind hims an' no want stop. God save the
King! Hims off ” He darted away with the
peculiar ji§*jo§ trot common to natives and others
whose lives are cast in the land of distances, and after
watching him until he became lost in the belt of scrub
through which they had passed that morning, they
resumed their journey.
“ What do you make of his story, parson ? ” Mike
asked as they entered upon an ironstone plain, which
allowed them all to ride abreast. “ Don t you think
the beggar was lying ? ”
(( No, I am sure he told the truth. I know the
natives of these parts well. They are not yet civilised
enough to know how to lie outright, although they
can prevaricate without any trouble, and convey
wrong impressions.”
“ Isn’t that rather a fine distinction, sir ? ” said Tom,
u and didn’t he lie to the Chinese ? ”
<• I don't think so. The native mind is not quick
enough to invent a lie, but it can twist facts consider-
ably. Again, his brain does not always catch the drift
of what you say —either he really doesn’t comprehend
the language used, or doesn't believe in hurting him-
self thinking, —but as it requires no effort to concur in
anything said or suggested, he will, by agreeing to
everything you say, often mislead you. But our friend
the Bishop got no help from us in telling his story,
therefore it must be true. Of course, he pretended
not to know who the Chinese were, whereas if he
is a Reserve native he must be quite familiar with
them. Doubtless he had some reason for that, but it


didn't cheat us, and now we know there is danger
ahead ”
“ But surely, sir, the Chinese won’t ”
“ J wasn’t thinking of the Chinese just now, Tom.
It is the aborigines the Bishop is running from whom
I expect will first cause us trouble. You know, this
land, although an integral part of White Australia, and
peopled by citizens of the Commonwealth more or
less, is really beyond the reach of the law, and at
present there is a three-cornered fight going on to
determine who shall ultimately be masters of the
country. It is a war between white, black, and
yellow, and I am inclined to think, with some of
our best statesmen, that the whole Gulf country will
in time be a blot of yellowskins. However, that
question does not concern us in the meantime, and
there is no use anticipating trouble. All the same,
I wish I had thought of asking the Bishop where
he had left his own people.”
I reckon we 11 find that out in good time,” Dirty
Sam remarked. “It is a pity that only Mike has a
rifle. We ve all got revolvers, however, and plenty
of ammunition.”
I a rifle too—in fact, I have a couple of
them,” remarked the parson, gazing straight ahead.
“Great Scott! Where?” cried Mike and Sam
simultaneously, looking in vain for signs of such a
weapon in the parson's outfit, which he carried in a
wallet in front of him.
“ In that wallet,” answered the parson. “They are
a new type of Winchester, and the barrel unscrews
from the stock very simply, so as to make them
portable.”
Jupiter ! parson. I never knew you were a
portable arsenal,” laughed Dirty Sam.


“ Have you got anything else in that wallet,
parson ? " asked Mike curiously.
“ Not very much, but I fancy its contents would
surprise you all greatly, nevertheless.”
“Boys, I am hungry,” observed Mike irrelevantly.
“ Shouldn't we halt for a spell until the sun stops
getting at the top of our heads, and boil the billy ? ”
“A good idea,” the parson agreed. “We’ll dis-
mount in that cedar-wood patch half a mile ahead,
and give the animals a spell. We can make the
Mitchell River before dark.”
“ Let’s race the distance, then,” cried Dirty Sam.
“ I’ll back my own nag ”
In a second the four riders were flying towards the
camping-ground with the pack-horses and Nigger
following as well as they could. But Sam would
have lost had any one taken up his challenge, for
Tom reached the place first, the others arriving in
a bunch together.
“ My word, kid ! but you've got a horse that money
wouldn't buy if it were mine,” cried Mike. “My nag
was supposed to be the fastest goer up north, but
yours My ! It was a sight to see her.”
“ I can easily see how Chillagoe Charlie could run
rings round the troopers,” commented Dirty Sam
admiringly. “If that is a horse he could afford to
give away, what must the one he rides himself be
like ? All the same, parson, I don’t think you gave
your animal a chance. I saw you hauling him
in ”
“ Only for a moment, Sam; I thought we were
going to collide with you."
Just then the pack-horses came up, Nigger imagin-
ing he was in charge of them, and soon their packs
were removed, and hobbles placed on their feet. The


saddle horses were not hobbled, they would not leave
the others, and their riders wished to give them as
much liberty as possible. Soon the billy, filled with
water from the water-bags carried round each horse's
neck, was boiled, and the men sat down in the shade
until the sun was well down towards the west, and
then, gathering in the horses, they saddled up and
went off again, as fresh as though they had not
ridden a mile that day.
The country was now changing rapidly, and the
dwarfed scrub and spear-grass of the plains began to
give place to large iron-bark and bloodwood-trees,
while great ranges closed in from east and north. At
sundown they were still picking their way over coun-
try very difficult to negotiate, but as they had no water
they could not afford to stop, and it was two hours
later when they descended a long slope which seemed
to extend to the base of the mighty range shutting
off the north, and came to a large, swiftly flowing
waterway.
“The Mitchell River, Tom," cried the parson.
“To-morrow we cross that range on the other side,
and then our first water is the Palmer, or its
tributary creeks."
“And as we have nothing but tinned dog in our
larder I am going to fish for our supper," put in Dirty
Sam. “ You might look after my horse, Tom, while I
set about it."
“ But you have no means of catching fish," cried
Tom, wondering how Sam intended to provide the
supper.
“ Oh, yes, I have, but it is a bit low down on the
fish and everything else in the pool I try, and I
wouldn't do it if we could manage any other way."
Sam produced a detonator from his pocket, and closed


it on a piece of fuse by means of his teeth. “ I owe
Caledonia Company the price of this shot," he re-
marked casually. “ I happen to have had the stuff in
my pocket when I left camp, and it will be useless if I
keep it until I can return it.” He sunk the cap in a
plug of gelignite, likewise hauled from some recess in
his dilapidated garments —Sam was very careless —and
lighting the fuse he flung the whole into the water.
One minute after there was a dull report and a shower
of warm spray fell over the party, and next moment
Sam and Nigger were in the pool catching all sorts of
fish which floated to the surface, along with baby
crocodiles of sizes ranging from that of a man’s
hand to the length of an arm. The larger creatures
were not killed, however, and quickly recovering, dis-
appeared in the depths again, but between the efforts
of Sam and Nigger, both of whom seemed to be
amphibious, a plentiful supply of nice fish of a kind
Tom had never before seen were thrown out upon the
bank, and the parson lost no time in transferring them
to the ashes of the fire he had kindled while Mike and
Tom attended to the horses.
Half an hour later all sat down to supper, and
Tom, always eager for knowledge, inquired how the
explosion of a plug of gelignite thrown into the water
could kill so many fish.
“ Don’t know,” answered Sam. “ I expect it is the
concussion. I hate to kill them that way, but they
would all have gone to feed the crocs sooner or later
anyway, and we're just as deserving as them, I
reckon.”
“ Hadn't we better keep a watch to-night ? ” sug-
gested Mike, who had a wonderful knack of changing
subjects. “If niggers are about they’ll cut out our
horses.”


“This Nigger will let us know if any one comes
near,” said Tom. “ He'll bark if there is anything he
doesn’t understand, and he can see further in the dark
than we can."
“All right, we’ll leave it to Nigger,” agreed the
parson. “ I am sure he is worthy of the trust.”
“ Say, you fellows, this riding all day business is a
long way harder work than jumping steel drills down
a mine, and I’ve been wondering what sort of a man
Chillagoe Charlie must be to stand it.”
“ He will be very much like other men, Mike,” the
parson said. “ You know, it is wonderful how one gets
used to anything. Probably he doesn’t think it hard
work at all.”
“ He’ll be like you then, parson,” Dirty Sam
laughed. “ You are the freshest man in this crowd
to-night, and yet you can't have ridden nearly so
much as Mike and myself these last few years.”
“ Possibly not, Sam ; but I wouldn't swear to that
fact. However, we can turn in and sleep till sunrise,
and then we'll be as fresh as Chillagoe Charlie ever
was ”
And soon the stars shone down on four sleeping
men and a dog; the dog was also sleeping, but his
eyes were open and his ears were twitching as if even
in his sleep he was listening. Near by the seven
horses nibbled the tops of the coarse grass, their
musical bells sounding clearly on the warm night
air.
Suddenly Nigger cocked his ears and next moment
the camp was awake, roused by his warning bark.
Something was coming, they all knew, but it was
some minutes before any one could detect any sounds.
The parson was the first to hear anything, “Itis a
horseman,” he exclaimed, “and he has a pack-horse


with him. Draw back from the fire until we see who
he is ”
The party drew into the shadows and soon a man
galloped up, followed by a pack-horse. Both horses
were steaming and the man looked very much ex-
hausted. But he also seemed familiar to every one,
although his features could not be plainly made out.
He halted at the fire, and seeing the billy standing
near, he dismounted and drained it of its semi-warm
contents.
“ Home, sweet home I but this is a poor camp I’ve
struck,” he muttered aloud, looking round for some-
thing to eat, holding his horse by the bridle mean-
while. With a jerk, however, the animal broke away
from him ; Nigger had nipped its heels, and as the
frightened steed ran towards the place where it heard
the other horse bells, the air was filled with vehement
and eloquent exclamations of : “ We won’t go home
till morning ! Coming thro' the rye ! All people
that in Queensland dwell! Onward, Christian soldiers! ”
A roar of laughter interrupted his poetical flow of
language, and he turned angrily and drew a couple
of revolvers.
“ Come out, ye bush whackers !” he cried. “ Come
out an’ get shot. Chillagoe Charlie has got the drop
on ye ”
“ Please don’t shoot,” wailed Dirty Sam in a dis-
guised voice ; “ we're only poor prospectors.”
“And we haven't got any fathers or mothers,” Mike
cried.
“ Then come out an’ show yourselves, an' get a feed
ready for me. I’m in a hurry an' I’d just as soon eat a
man as anything else when I can't wait. Chillagoe
Charlie must be thousands of miles from here by
sunrise.”


“ Stop that nonsense, Dave, and put away those
revolvers,” ordered the parson, stepping up to him.
“ What do you mean by your conduct ? ”
“ Snakes ! an’ Britannia rules the waves ! boss, is
it you ? ”
“Of course it is, and some of your other comrades
too. What are you doing up here, and riding through
the night ?” The parson’s tones were severe.
“ Scots who haven’t, boss ! Doesn’t ye know I am
Chillagoe Charlie an’ I ’spect there's a couple o’ million
troopers after me ? ”
“ Poor Psalm-singing Dave has gone mad, boys,”
cried Mike, honestly believing that his old comrade
had become insane.
“By the last rose of summer ! I’ll make you mad
in a second,” roared Dave. “No man can give cheek
to Chillagoe Charlie an’ live ”
“ Sit down and we’ll have the billy boiling in a
minute or two,” went on the parson soothingly.
“We are all friends here. When did you leave camp ?”
“ When the circus started. As soon as I saw that
the troopers knew Charlie was in our camp I sneaked
out and collared the first two horses I could find, and
Hungry Ted made up a pack for me and saw me off.
Then shouting, ‘ Those who want Chillagoe Charlie will
have to ride to —’ you know the place I mean, boys,
its somewhere in North Queensland —‘for him,’ I
cleared, and scooted down the creek and over the
Walsh like a willy-willy. I don’t know how many
troopers came after me, but I didn’t care if there were
millions and hundreds of them. I turned and shot at
a lot of them, and by and by they fell behind and
Chillagoe Charlie is himself again. Ain’t ye afraid of
me, boy ? ”
“Not a bit, Dave,” Tom laughed. “I’ve met you


before, you know. Don't you remember we rode
together ? But I can’t recollect the shooting part of
the business.”
“ What have you been reading of late, Dave ? ”
asked the parson, as Mike handed Dave a pannikin
of boiling tea.
“ I've got it with me,” answered Dave, producing an
old copy of the Sydney Bulletin. “ It’s a mighty power-
ful story of how a fellow up in the Gulf country got so
ill with everything that he was just about to throw
himself down the shaft so as his mates could get the
compensation money, when he read somewhere that
a box of somebody’s red and green pellets, at only half-
a-crown a box too, would cure him even although he
was so bad that his mates had already cut out his name
on a tree "
“That will do, Dave,” interrupted the parson. “We
don’t want to hear any more about the advertisement
you have been reading ; who told you you were
Chillagoe Charlie?”
“ Why, parson, no man told me. Didn’t ye guess it
all along ? I was the foreman of the Caledonia Mines,
and the only man who had any time for playing any
games. An’ didn’t I pull the blinkers over your eyes
nicely when I pretended I had no eddication, an’ was
only good-hearted Psalm-singing Dave ? But, boys,
there’s a reward offered for me, an' I don’t mind if you
get it among you.”
“ Do you mean to say, Dave, that you are Chillagoe
Charlie ? ” demanded Dirty Sam, not knowing what to
think of Dave’s statement.
“Of course I is. I won the toss fair an’ square,
although Hungry Ted didn't seem to think so.”
“ What are you talking about ?" the parson asked
sternly. “You must be a fool, Dave "


“ What ! Call Chillagoe Charlie a fool. Parson, if
ye wasn’t who ye are I’d—l’d, God save the King !
I'd—l’d Here, boys, help me. What would I do ? ”
“ Fight him, maybe,” suggested Mike, still in doubt
as to how Dave’s words should be taken.
“ Sing a hymn to him ? " was Sam’s comment.
“ Tell the whole story, seeing you are among friends,”
Tom said. He was fast assuming an air of responsi-
bility, and the spirit of self-reliance was strong within
him.
“ Yes, Dave, out with the yarn and let us get to sleep
again,” said the parson. “When did you become
Chillagoe Charlie ? And what did you mean by
saying you won the toss ? ”
“Just what I said, parson; the troopers had gone
nap on their man being in our camp, and they had
already gone round every man excepting Peter the
Poet, Ginger Bob, Hungry Ted, an' myself. Bullocky
Bill was the last man suspected, an' after that we knew
our turn must come soon, so the rest of us tossed a
coin to see who he really was, an’ 1 won. They were
to claim the reward when I got clear away, but some
fool spoiled our game by a revolver-shot somewhere
which made the troopers git up like a cloud of
mosquitoes when a new chum comes along, an’ I
hadn’t even time to say goodbye ”
“ Well, lie down and sleep now,” said the parson.
“ I will go over and unsaddle your horse. To-morrow
we’ll decide upon what to do with the notorious
Chillagoe Charlie ; meanwhile, you are to us only
Psalm-singing Dave.” The parson walked over to
catch Dave’s horses, and Dirty Sam said curiously,
“ I suppose you know you've been captured, Dave ? ”
“ What ! It's not true. They never got near
me ”


I don t know if that alters the fact, Dave. I was
referring to the other Chillagoe Charlie. He was
collared, despite your escape, at Caledonia Camp,
and the news is all over the country."
“ Who is he, Sam ; who is he ? "
“ Why, I thought you said ?”
“ God save the King I Never mind what you thought
I said. Who have they caught ?" S
anyhow— •■ knOW ' “ iS S ° me ° ne in the cam P.
"Glory Hallelujah! It must be Peter the Poet.
reward Th agr m d B 8111 share the
he the —Auld Lang Syne, Sam, but it is
ard tor me to keep from saying what I think."
Here d ° Wn and get a rest now -
Here is the parson coming back."
the nlcks° b Th d b0t M y , OUr horses ’ Dave ’ and removed
unrfse Cet ? Cy , Where the y are “til
sunrise. Let to sleep now."
Five minutes after Nigger was again the only guard
but he was a safe one. He showed this ’
e camp again about half an hour after the men had
be hi hT' He bark6d viciousl y. but nothing could
visitors any ° ne ’ n ° r ‘ here 4s of
‘ he P—
knowif him to make* W " 1 have
went° r ou h t a for h th “’ll 1 “““'u A ‘ SUnrise > when the ““
sTraos l.n th l° rseS ’ y f ° Und S6Veral cut hobble
disappeared Wh ‘ Ch had WOrn the ” had


CHAPTER X
THROUGH THE FIERY CIRCLE
DONE, and as brown as a new chum’s
Dirty Sam exclaimed, “and by niggers too
“Yes,” admitted Mike, with a laugh which to Tom
seemed incongruous. “The natives have bested us
this time. I wonder what their game is ? ”
“ How do you know it was natives who stole the
horses ? ” Tom asked. “ Could it not have been ■? ”
“ No, it couldn’t have been any other people,” Mike
broke in. “White men would have unbuckled the
hobbles rather than cut through those solid leather
straps, and Chinese would not have left so much
evidence behind. Besides, no people but those with
cast-iron soles to their feet would go barefooted over
the blistering sand and through that grass which will
even pierce leggings. We know the native doesn’t
mind these trifles, and look, there are imprints of
naked feet
“Dry up, Mike,” said Dirty Sam. “We haven't
time to play at being trooper superintendents. We’ve
got to get back our horses, without any loss of time.
“ God save the King I an’ the Bonnie Banks o’ Loch
Lomond ”
« Shut up, Dave,” the parson spoke, “ and go back
and get some breakfast ready. I’ll get the horses.
210


“ I know I can get my own one/' said Mike, “ but it
beats me to know how you can be so sure of
finding any of them. No man could ride mine bare-
back "
“ Exactly, Mike. Nor can any man ride mine. I
know, therefore, that my horse can't be very far away,
and as I have trained it to come at my whistle, I hope
by its aid to be able very soon to round up all the
others. The natives wouldn’t attempt to ride them
without saddles or bridles, and I expect they've simply
been driven away.” He put his fingers to his mouth
and whistled shrilly, and almost before the echoes died
away his own horse, followed by Tom’s, came gallop-
ing towards him from the other side of a bluff which
ran down into the river.
“By Killarney’s lakes an' streams, parson, your
whistle has brought two of the nags ; you might
whistle again for mine "
“Jove! Those two horses must have been mates
at one time, parson ; it is funny that a horse that
belonged to Chillagoe Charlie should hang in so well
to your nag.” Dirty Sam was slightly amused at the
idea; but the parson did not seem to notice his
words.
“Come on, Chillagoe,” said Mike to Dave; “let us
get back and pack up. You don’t seem to recognise
your own horse, though ; how’s that ? "
“ My horses aint there.”
“ I know that; but the one you—l mean Chillagoe
Charlie—gave to Tom is. It has taken a fancy for the
parson's "
“ Come along, Tom,” the parson broke in. “ Saddle
up, and we’ll go out after the other horses at once.
They can’t be very far off.”
“And I’ll go up the river a bit and look for a good


breakfast of duck," said Dirty Sam. “ Mike and Chil-
lagoe Charlie can pack up and boil the billy.”
Dave gave vent to sundry exclamations ; but no one
was listening, and when he enlarged further on his
grievances to Mike, the latter said, “ Well, I can’t help
Dirty Sam laughing at you. Just imagine Chillagoe
Charlie without a horse. Why, Dave, you old fraud,
you can't act the role of Charlie enough even to scare
off some niggers ’’
“ Mike O’Flannigan, if ye had any sense in that big
head of yours ye would have tumbled long ago to
the fact that I've a boncer of a scheme. Listen to
this "
The two were now alone, Sam having gone up the
river with his gun, and the parson and Tom having
just disappeared over a rise in the opposite direction.
“Fire away," said Mike, kindling the fire; “but
don’t be too long-winded.”
“Well, supposing you didn’t know me from the
Kaiser of Japan an’ I held ye up, tellin’ ye I was
Chillagoe Charlie, what would ye do ? ”
“ Hit out at you and generally smash you up for
being such an idiot as to try to make any one, not
a new chum magistrate or a trooper superintendent,
believe you ’’
“ Oh, maybe old Psalm-singing Dave would give ye
as much as he would get; but never mind that. Sup-
posin’ you were the new chum magistrate or J.P., or
whatever you calls them ? ”
“ I might tell you to go and get a shave and wear a
decent shirt, that your style of get-up was out of date
for a modern bushranger, and that your photo would
spoil the books that so many people would write about
your doings. No, no, Dave; to give the name of
Chillagoe Charlie a chance to go down to fame with


that of Dan Kelly and those two brothers in South
Queensland who kept the special-duty troopers after
Ihem for a couple of years, the owner of it must be
good-looking and have black hair. In fact, he must
be a man like Mr. Hornsby—without the eyeglass, of
course—or the parson. Either of these would do for
Charlie ; and if Dirty Sam were dressed decently he
might also pass, and so would Long Tom of Crocodile
Crossing.”
“ An’ so would Mike O’Flannigan, an’ Peter the
Poet, the trooper superintendent, and the special-
duty sergeant,” added Dave; “ but as all those people
have got other things to do, it comes down to poor
old Dave to play the game. Now, here is my plan.
We’ll be within ridin' distance of Laura township
when we git up among the Palmer ranges; now,
the boss magistrate there can't know what Charlie is
like, 'cos no one has ever seen him. Well, you’ll tie
me up to my horse, an’ march me in there with your
gun at my head, saying that I tried to hold you up,
and that I said I was Chillagoe Charlie. When they
ask me, of course I'll swear I am, an' you’ll git the
reward an' can divide it among the boys ”
“ But you, Dave; where do you come in ? It
might go badly with you ? ”
“No fear; Mr. Hornsby can say that I've never
been away from him for years, when the time comes,
and that I've had a touch of the sun afore.”
“ But the real man may upset your plans by getting
caught. In fact, as we told you last night, he is caught
now.”
“ Not much ; it has been that silly boss trooper
makin a fool of himself again, or else Hungry Ted
or some of the boys trying to git that reward by saying
it is Peter the Poet. The troopers themselves know


better, an’ Mr. Hornsby will soon put his foot on that,
anyhow. No, Mike ; it looks a dead cert that Charlie
is one of us fellows, maybe you, for all I know; but
you can bet your whiskers that all the troopers think
I’m the man, an’ I’ll go nap that they're on my trail
now."
“ But if they've got one Chillagoe Charlie, or think
they have, they won’t want another ? "
“Just what I am tryin' to pump into ye. The man
they have has only to deny everything an’ the troopers
can do nothing. Then if the report goes round that
the man they chased over the Walsh has been captured
up north and admits that he is Charlie, they’ll have to
let the other fellow go."
“ But perhaps he is the genuine article ? ”
“Well, does that matter? He can lie low, an' by
the time it is found that I am not him either, the
troopers will be out of the country an’ all the excite-
ment died away.”
“ But supposing he is not one of our mates, Dave ?
Why should you trouble on his behalf ?”
“ Mike, ye know as well as I do that the fellow who
has the handle of Chillagoe Charlie is one of us. The
troopers told me myself that O’Brian an' some o’ the
other shanty-keepers in Murgoona told the superin-
tendent that they had chased him to our camp often ;
an’ that fellow Smith that the parson knocked out, an’
who caused the strike in the mines, told him that he
knew who it was, for he had seen him ride into camp
with his mask on at all hours of the night when he
was on night duty at the mines. He wouldn’t give
the name then, however; of course, he was only
bluffin' an’ didn’t know who it was, although he may
have seen him often enough."
“ Then who do you think is the man, Dave ? ”


“The boss, Mike, or I wouldn't be so mighty
anxious to have anything to do with the business.
“I am beat, Dave. Do you know, I came away
thinking I could draw the troopers after me, to save
Sam, and he left camp for the same reason, only he
thought he was doing me a good turn. It seems a
hopeless case, Dave, to find out who he really is.
Why, he rode up here himself with Tom ; so that
proves he can't be Mr. Hornsby, if he was there
when you left."
“ Oh, he was in camp then ; I saw him myself, an’
he shouted to me to give him my horse. I knew
better though, an' I charged through the sleepy
troopers as if Jimmy Squarefoot was after me. Now,
will ye fall in with my idea ? lam Chillagoe Charlie,
an' ye can do the rest.”
“I don't know, Dave. If I thought it was Mr.
Hornsby I would give myself up. A good case could
be made out against me, and I would do anything for
him. Let's ask the parson’s advice."
“Ye Banks and Braes ! no. He wouldn’t hear of
us doing anything, an’ would preach to ye for a week
about your sins if ye mentioned anything. We can talk
the thing over with Dirty Sam the first chance we git.”
“ Then here he comes now with a lot of ducks and
pigeons."
“An’ I hear the horses cornin’, too. Look, there
they are, cornin' over the rise, with that little dog
biting at their heels,"
“ But where are the others ? I don’t see the parson
nor Tom,” Mike cried.
“ I saw them," said Dirty Sam, coming up. “ They
circled round about after something, and crossed the
river about a mile above where I was. I expect they
lost the horses.”


But Sam was hardly correct in his opinion ; they
hadn't looked for the horses. They had cut other
tracks which at once caused the parson to leap from
his horse to examine them. “We’ll get the horses
later, Tom," he then cried; “it looks as if we are
being surrounded. We’ll ride along those tracks for
a bit and investigate."
They did not notice that Nigger left them when
they turned along the suspicious tracks, and soon
their attention was so fully taken up with the signs
they saw that they did not even notice they were
circling back to the river again, until they suddenly
cut their own tracks of the previous day. the parson
had long ere this surprised Tom with his wonderful
knowledge of bushcraft, and when they struck the
river again on the eastern side of their camp he had
imparted much information to his companion. They
crossed the waterway and rode up and down the
opposite bank for a mile each way, but no signs
indicating that any people had been on that side
could be found.
“Well, Tom, can you read w’hat you have seen ?"
the parson asked as they turned to ride back to camp.
He was now certainly about the last man whom one
would take to be a parson, and Tom could not help
comparing him with his companion of his great night
ride.
It seems, sir, that a number of natives came
dowui the river last night, and perceiving the light of
our camp fire, made a detour round us. What their
intentions were I can’t imagine, but I take it that they
were driving our horses away when Nigger aw’oke us
the second time."
“You are right so far as you have gone, Tom. I
will supplement your information by telling you that


at the present moment a full tribe, or perhaps several
tribes, have cut us off from the south. They are now
throwing out right and left wings with the intention of
surrounding us, as without our horses we can't get
north fast enough to get beyond the closing circle. It
is probably the people the Bishop told us of who are
doing this, and if they have gathered to hold a full
corroborree we are intended to play a part in that
ceremony with which will finish our interest in North
Queensland and all things mundane. lam surprised,
I must admit, because hitherto the aborigines have not
been troublesome, and they usually sent round and
asked prospectors to clear out when they were about
to hold an important corroborree."
“ Then, sir, it must be as the Bishop said ; the
Chinese are instigating the affair ?"
“ I don't see how that can be either, for we are still
about a hundred miles from the Chinese workings.
We’ll get back and warn the others at once, and then
track up the horses, if possible. If we get them soon
we will make a dash north, but if they have been
driven far away we’ll just have to build a fort and pre-
pare for certain trouble at the most convenient spot
we can find before late in the day. The natives are
always maddened with drugs when they are about to
celebrate any event, and then they are more savage
than any animal."
“ There’s our camp, sir ; and see, our horses are all
in. Sam must have found them.”
“ No, Sam didn’t," spoke that gentleman, hearing
Tom’s words. “ The dog rounded them up ; their bells
were removed, but we have found them-—and breakfast
is ready."
“ Bolt it as fast as you can, then," said the parson,
“ and let us get over that river and in among the


ranges. We are being cut off by the natives and only
the north is open to us.”
“ But Sing me to Sleep ! parson, ye is not goin’ to
run away from niggers, is ye ? ”
“ You don’t want to be a chief mourner in a corro-
borree, do you, Dave ? "
“No ; but can’t we ride through them ; niggers are
almost harmless ? "
“ But their poisoned spears are not, and we don’t
want to get mixed up in any affair with them in any
case. If some of these very good people down in
Brisbane heard of it, they would publish to the world
how the prospector is murdering natives wherever he
goes, and soon the Gulf country—the richest mineral
storehouse known on earth—would be almost barred
to us, and left entirely in the hands of the filthy yellow-
skins.”
“ Parson,” broke in Dirty Sam, “ I never saw you
excited before. What do we need to care for either
niggers or Chinese ? We can hold our own, and by
to-morrow night we can be among some white men's
camps.”
“ I am afraid we won't find many white prospectors'
camps on the Palmer headwaters, Sam. They have
nearly all been deserted, and the Chinaman is lord of
the ranges.”
“ But I thought you said that you were going up to
visit some camps you knew ?”
“ I am, a fairly big camp. Do you remember the
trip we had together up here ? '*
“ I should think so. We were rushed by the yellow
pigtails and just escaped with our lives. I mean, some
of us did, the other poor fellows went under. And yet
the stay-at-homes in the big towns on the coast say
the prospector is a man who is never happy unless he


is slaughtering natives. What did the Government do
over that affair, parson ? "
“ Nothing ; they were never asked to do anything.
The massacre wasn't exactly so complete as it at first
appeared. The men who were cut off from the main
party got into the mountains and hid there. I found
them afterwards while running down a promising reef;
they were working that reef in a spot absolutely im-
pregnable. It is they lam going to see now. They
are all old comrades of yours and Mike’s."
“Well, we are ready for the road again, parson,”
said Mike, who, with Tom and Dave, had been sad-
dling up. “ I don't care a cent for all the Chinese that
ever came in to Australia by the back door, and if they
run against us it will be their own fault.”
“ Chillagoe Charlie told me my uncle was a member
of a secret camp, up where we are going,” Tom said
to the parson, as they crossed the river at a shallow
part. “Do you think it can be the same camp ? ”
“I believe it is, Tom; I only know of one white
camp, and Tom Willoughby was well known to most
of its members at one time.”
“ Isn't it strange that Chillagoe Charlie should know
him ?"
“Why no, Tom; Chillagoe Charlie may have been
an honest, upright man in all his dealings up
here ”
“And everywhere else, sir, lam sure. Just imagine
me riding through the night with such a man, and not
knowing his true nature. Why, he even told me, when
I met him first, that if I ever wanted money for any-
thing, to write to him at Laura. I like Chillagoe
Charlie, sir ; I did from the first.”
“ Can you account for that feeling, Tom ? ”
“ Yes ; I was firmly persuaded that night when Mr.


Hornsby sent me to meet him, and he was too, I know,
that you were he, and I felt no fear whatever."
“ And what made you change your mind, Tom ?"
Dirty Sam, Mike, and Dave had dropped behind and
were talking excitedly among themselves.
“ I don’t know, sir, I just saw it couldn't be. He
always kept his face in the shadow, I noticed, however,
and I knew his voice was disguised, and from these
facts I concluded that he thought I might know him."
“ Then who do you think he is now, Tom ? "
“ I have no idea, sir. I thought, with the superin-
tendent, that he was Mr. Hornsby, then Dirty Sam,
Long Tom, Mike, and after that I began to think that
he might be the superintendent himself. Of course, I
know he isn’t Dave."
“No, he isn't Dave, that is certain, although what
idea is in the back of Dave's head when he says he is
the man, I don’t know. It will all be cleared up very
soon, however, I feel sure. I think you told me that
Charlie told you he would not likely appear again ? "
“Yes, he said that when he left me; but I don't
remember having told you.”
“ Ah, well, it doesn’t matter. Our own troubles will
be quite sufficient very soon without us taking on his
worries—that is, if he does worry over anything, which
I very much doubt."
“ How about crossing this range higher up, parson ? "
cried Dirty Sam, from the rear. “We may get a lower
pass up the river, and an easier road down to the
Palmer."
“You are right, Sam," the parson responded. “All
the headwaters of the Walsh, Mitchell, and Palmer rise
in those eastern ranges and possibly we may strike a
Palmer tributary as soon as we get over this divide."
They altered their course, and turned more eastward,


soon getting into a change of country through which
travelling was not so arduous, although more broken
up by volcanic agencies. All forenoon they journeyed
on, halting for lunch underneath a huge ironstone
blow that reared itself over two hundred feet above
their heads. This gigantic formation at once took up
Tom's attention, and while the others prepared the
meal he broke off pieces here and there and examined
them carefully.
“ Well, lad," said Dirty Sam, when the billy was
boiling, “ have you made any discoveries ? ”
“ I don’t know whether it is a discovery or not,”
replied Tom, “but this formation carries over three
per cent, of copper and more silver than I can deter-
mine without a careful assay.”
“Is there more than twenty ounces to the ton,
Tom ? " asked Mike. “If there is it is worth some-
thing.”
“ Oh yes ; I am certain that the silver contents are at
least forty ounces to the ton, and I can see that there
are two or three pennyweights of gold in the stuff
also ”
“ Which makes that blow worth a little fortune,”
commented the parson. “ Calculate copper at the
present market price of £7O per ton, and the silver at
half-a-crown an ounce. Then, say, three dwts. of gold
at P er ounce, and what have we got ? ”
“About £7 10s. a ton," said Dirty Sam; “and I
reckon this blow is 200 feet high, about 600 feet long,
and, say, an average width of 50 feet. There is a ton
to every feet of the stuff, and a ton is worth £7 10s.
The whole blow must be worth ? ”
“Two hundred multiplied by six hundred multiplied
by fifty equals six millions,” Tom figured rapidly to
himself. “ Divide that by twelve and a half to get the


tonnage and we have four hundred and eighty thou-
sand tons of ore in sight, which, at the value of £y ios.
a ton, means that what we can see of that blow is
worth three millions six hundred thousand pounds.”
“Which you may safely multiply again by three,”
said the parson ; “it is bound to extend into the
ground as a fissure lode, so your blow is worth at
least ten millions, Tom.”
“ But we won’t take it with us just now,” laughed
Mike.
“ By the side of the cider-tree I but eddication is a
great thing,” Dave muttered; “ I suppose we have all
shares in this gold mine ? ”
“Of course, Dave,” said Mike; “ we'll all share
alike ”
“Then you couldn't see your way to give me a
five-pound note for mine, I suppose ? ” continued
Dave insinuatingly; “ I aint no scholar, but I reckon
that by the time you get up a smelter, an' build a
railway to the coast, an' pay men wages to blow the
stuff out, there won’t be much more than a fiver for
me—that is, if I aint turned into a chunk of copper
carbonate myself by that time,”
“ In any case five pounds is too much to ask, Dave,”
the parson said ; “if a fifth share in this blow was
worth five pounds before any work was done, then
some of the outcrops I have seen over the next divide
must be worth over a million to look at, for there are
some three miles in length and all rich in gold ”
“ But as we are not going to sell this blow to a
syndicate, nor float a company to work it ourselves,”
said Dirty Sam, “ we’d better hurry up with our tucker
and get on the move again. Like enough the niggers
are moving fast enough now to cut us off before we
strike the next water.”


Sam's words were in agreement with the opinions
of all, and shortly after they were once more threading
their way through the scrub and outflung boulders.
Before sundown they had passed many most pro-
mising outcrops which Tom at once saw were highly
mineralised, but they did not stay to examine them,
and finally camped by a water-hole in a small creek
which they knew led to the Palmer. Strangely enough,
they were not tired that night, and for a long time they
sat round the fire and talked about anything and every-
thing, Chillagoe Charlie coming in for more than a fair
share of the conversation.
The Southern Cross was high in the heavens when
they stretched themselves out round the fire and went
to sleep, again leaving Nigger sole guard of the camp.
But he did not sleep, and about midnight Tom was
roused by the dog pulling at his shirt-sleeves.
“What is it, Nigger?” he said, sitting up; “you
should let me sleep some time, you know. I have to
keep up with the others during the day ”
Nigger's low growl interrupted him and told him
that it was no false alarm, and while he sat and vainly
tried to find a cause for his dog's conduct, the parson
awoke, and then Dirty Sam and Mike, and finally
Dave. They all sat up and gazed into the night.
“ \\ hat is it ? ” at length Mike asked ; “ I cannot see
nor hear anything.”
“Nor I,” said Dirty Sam; “except that I never
noticed those stars in the north before; they are very
low down on the horizon ”
“ Those are not stars,” the parson remarked quietly;
“ those lights are torches in the hands of the natives,
and we are surrounded. We are in for a corroborree
after all. Smother that fire, Dave, and pack up our
belongings quietly, and quickly.”


“ What is the idea, parson ? ” Sam asked ; “ hadn’t
we better just sit tight where we are?”
“ Or go round by the back of this ridge behind us
and cheat them that way ? ” suggested Mike.
“That wouldn’t cheat them, Mike ; they’ve formed a
circle around us; even now those who have been follow-
ing us all day are close behind us with their flanks
thrown round that ridge. Another large body evi-
dently has been camped up here, or else has been
moving in front of us all day so as to join with those
behind in cornering us at night, We are the centre
of their great circle, and we’ll know all about their
intentions presently.”
“Couldn’t we charge through them?” Tom sug-
gested ; “if they have formed a circle round us of
such a size—it must be a mile in diameter —the men
forming it cannot be very close to each other and
would probably miss us with their spears.”
“An’ by the howlin’ —I mean, parson, Kick me to
sleep ! ”
“ Sing me to sleep, Dave,” corrected Mike.
“You’ve got mighty particular about a word, my
man, but I expect you’ll most likely be sent to sleep
with a spear. Look up there ”
The men turned their gaze to the top of the ridge
which lay behind them. A moment before the summit
was lost in the darkness, but now innumerable points
of twinkling lights showed it up against the skyline
right along its entire length.
“Cycling cyclones!” ejaculated Sam; “we are in
for it this time and no mistake. Every nigger in the
country must be taking part in this performance.
Look down by the flats too. I see the torches
closing in through the trees.”
“And up the creek too,” cried Tom; “we are
completely surrounded.”


“There is something in all this that I can’t under-
stand,” the parson muttered as the horses were
saddled; “ I did not know there were so many
aborigines in these parts, and even then I know
all the chiefs personally.”
“Oh, the Chinkies are at the bottom of it all,”
said Sam; “the Bishop spoke the truth. They will
be corroborree mad too, and mean to do their ghost-
dancing business round us.” Sam examined his
revolvers, and the others did likewise.
“ If we are all ready, boys, here is my plan,” said
the parson, who strangely enough seemed to take
command, and be allowed to do so, as a matter of
course; “ let us lead our horses into the sandy bed
of the creek and move towards the advancing line of
lights as quickly and as silently as possible. We must
go fast, because as that circle converges the natives
come closer together ”
“We understand,” spoke Mike and Sam; “we are
to get close up and then break through at their
weakest point ?”
“Hardly, boys. That would have been the plan
if we knew we were dealing only with poorly armed
aborigines. This time, I fear, we have more cunning
brains to deal with, and most probably there are some
rifles among the party. No, we can't risk getting a
bullet through us, even although it may be of Chinese
manufacture ; we’ll try strategy, and the first thing is to
get away from the deadly centre of this human ring.”
“All right, parson,” spoke Sam; “give your
orders.”
“ Then some of you get away up the creek bed with
the horses, place the bells on their necks, as you go,
but tie up the clapper. When you get near the ring
set the clappers free and hide among the animals as


best you can. The natives will probably not be walk-
ing in the creek itself, and on hearing the bells will
think it is our horses feeding along the banks. They’ll
not likely notice the animals are saddled, and that
some have got packs, and in their hurry to get their
supposed sleeping victims will not trouble about
them, knowing they can catch them later if they
want them. When you get through the ring wait
on Tom and me, if we haven’t joined you before.
Now get away.”
« But Hallelujah ! parson. What are you an’ Tom
goin’ to do ? ”
“ Make some dummy figures and kindle up our fire
again. We’ll come after you in no time.”
“ But these beggars coming down the slope may
rush you at any moment,” said Sam ; “ shouldn’t we
better stick to each other while we can ? ”
“ The natives are too fond of a theatrical display to
rush the fire before the ring has contracted so that all
may take part in the last part of the game. Go away
now, or everything will be spoiled.”
Without a word Sam, Mike, and Dave led the horses
into the dry sandy creek, and Tom, under the parson's
advice, threw some light timber on to the fire and
fanned it into a blaze. The parson himself mean-
while was placing some logs in position round the
fire so that at a distance of a few yards they might look
like sleeping men. But their work took some time,
and when all was ready the lights coming down the
hill were almost upon them, while the great circle
itself had contracted to a much smaller size than it was
when they had last seen it.”
“Now Tom, run for it,” whispered the parson;
“ Nigger is with us.”
“He can look after himself easily,” replied Tom,


fringing into the darkness with the parson ; “ I hear
the horses' bells ringing now, the boys must be nearly
through the lines.”
“ Listen for yells, then ; if you don't hear an uproar in
a minute they will have got through undetected.”
They ran on, keeping on the hard bank of the creek
so as to make the best progress possible until nearer
the fiery line. Suddenly the parson stopped. “The
boys are through,” he gasped breathlessly; “but the
natives are now crowded into the creek too. Climb
up this tree, Tom, and don’t make a sound.”
“ But you, sir, what are you going to do ? ”
“I am going to follow you, of course. Up you get
and crawl out on that overhanging branch. Nigger,
run away and look after yourself.”
Tom easily climbed the tree and pulled himself out
among the branches, and immediately behind him the
parson followed. And they were none too soon, for
now the line of torches were close upon them. The
parson drew both his revolvers and smiled grimly, and
Tom thought that if it came to the bit he could do
some shooting himself, for his weapons were also
ready and he knew how to use them.
“ I hope Nigger is not sitting at the foot of the tree,”
he whispered to the parson.
“ Not he; the dog knows we are hiding, and is
probably trying to create a diversion for our benefit
in a way that appeals to a dog’s mind. Listen ! ”
The line of natives were now only a few yards off,
and their faces were now plainly discernible in the
flickering torch-light. There seemed to be hundreds
of them, all naked, and all painted fantastically to
represent skeletons. That they were under the
influence of the great drug pidcherie was at once
apparent, and the smell of the rancid fat, or other


preparation with which their bodies were smeared,
almost took Tom’s breath away.
“ Yumburu white fellow kurdigurdu kummung-
gurra,” one big native with a heavy brass chain round
his neck said to these nearest him. “ King Billy nur-
runggyunya, buriri kanggul white fellow ”
“White fellow burliddyera kirriri bumbo buriri,”
laughed another, and the men in the tree-top held
their breath. The natives were passing under.
“ The first speaker is a chief supposed to be civilised,”
the parson muttered, “yet his words mean that ‘the
sleeping white fellows will be ghosts before they know
what killed them.’ And the other native said in effect,
1 Won’t the white fellows jump about when their heads
are chopped off ? ’ ”
“ They are standing underneath our tree,” whispered
Tom. “ They must have seen us.”
«No, they are awaiting the signal to rush the old
camp. And, Tom, the language of those two who
spoke shows that they are southern natives. This
must be a general rising. Ah ! poor Nigger; that’s
his bark, and it will be all over with him.”
“ I see him ! ” cried Tom excitedly, forgetting where
he was. “That hideously painted man on the op-
posite side of the creek has caught him. I'll shoot
him ”
“No you won’t, Tom. It is Nigger who has caught
him. Listen to his yells.”
And such was the case. Nigger, doubtless reasoning
in his own way, having concluded that his presence
was hurtful to his master, and that he had to get
through the line of torch-bearing humanity on his
own account, had crossed the creek and deliberately
attacked the man whom he thought would be most
susceptible to dog bites. He had made no mistake, and


IF
f , - ' ;>t j
j ■- zWi&jfcf w
JfBB Hr? .V ' v '
fl| NCT!j!^S&iJ^NLj^ ~ .; X‘:
r v* '
By?- r j*
I
f* .; ' ; l^sBEl
HE WAS CAIGHT BY THE THROAT FROM BEHIND AND THROWN
HEAVILY TO THE GROUND.”
[To face page 228.




in response to the yells of the man the flaming cordon
broke and ran to his assistance, and Nigger, barking
joyfully, ran over the creek again, safely through.
“ Quick, Tom, now is our chance,” the parson cried.
Let us get down and run for it. They’ll never notice
us in the confusion ; they'll think we’re part of them-
selves ”
Before he had finished speaking both were on the
ground and running up the creek, among the other
warriors who were chasing Nigger. Only one man
had remained on the same side as they had taken
refuge on, near enough to take part in the chase. The
rest were running up the opposite bank, not knowing
that the black little “Nigger” had recrossed the creek.
But the one man had observed the dog’s little scheme,
and he was hard upon the unsuspecting dog, who was
now wondering where his master was. An instant
more and the warrior would have pounced upon
er , but before that instant had transpired he was
caught by the throat from behind and thrown heavily
to the ground.
“Keep going, Tom,” the parson cried, springing to
his feet after examining the man he had half killed.
“ I know all about this business now. That man is
a Chinaman disguised as a native ”
“ Run, Nigger,” Tom cried, “and don't bark.”
And run they did, until suddenly a voice beside
them spoke. “A starry night for a ramble, boys, but
it s them,” it said. “ Hallelujah 1 ”
“ We thought it was all up with you, mates,” Dirty
Sam said, jumping up from the long grass beside
them, ‘and were just about to go back to share the
funeral with you.”
“ There goes the signal for the rush now,” cried
Mike. “ Look at the beggars.”


A ghingi-ghingi 1 had suddenly wailed out a blood-
curdling note, and in response the line of torches
formed up again and closed swiftly in on the blazing
camp fire. Another wail broke on the sultry night air,
and then, with shrieks and yells, the mob broke and
rushed headlong on the supposed sleeping camp.
For a minute the white men listened to the
of the long spears as they broke off in the dummy
forms, for another half-minute they laughed over the
frenzied yells of the warriors, and then they sprang
into their saddles and galloped off, the parson taking
Nigger up beside him as Chillagoe Charlie had done.
1 A fluted piece of wood which, when swung round the
head, gives out a weird, wailing sound.


CHAPTER XI
THE CITY WITHOUT A NAME
" QOME people say that the Australian interior is
monotonous,” remarked Dirty Sam, as they
clattered through a patch of big detached boulders
shed from a reef near. “But what with aborigines,
Chinese, Chillagoe Charlies, troopers, and secret cities,
I think the old Austral land can hold its own, in the
way of providing excitement, with any other country.”
“ You’ve forgotten the bunyip, and the corroborree,
and such remarkable creatures as the Brisbane spider,
and the red-cross ant,” said the parson.
“ Down among the red men 1 ” cried Dave, “ but
I reckon the excitement of a good sleep would do
none of us no harm, an' the next time I has to get up
an' clear out in the middle of the night I just reckon
I’ll lie where I am an' chance bein' speared.”
“ 1 think all danger of that is past for a time,” the
parson said. “We have left all the natives to the
south, and it is not likely that they will come north
again. But by daylight we should be among the
headwaters of the Palmer River, and our troubles after
that will be chiefly with Chinamen ”
“ I suppose we'll start prospecting to-morrow in
earnest ? ” asked Mike. “We are going through likely
231 J


country now, for I can see big blows of copper or
something else everywhere around.”
“ I think we should camp to-morrow and rest,” the
parson suggested. “ Our horses will be useless if we
don't give them a spell.”
“We should be pretty near that place where we
were cut up before, by sunrise, parson,” ventured Sam.
“ I vote we should camp as you say, and see if we can
pick up that funny black stuff again ; I know Tom is
eager to assay it.”
“ We’ll have to camp for a time anyway,” said the
parson, “ unless we want to ride into a Chinese camp.
We are near one now, I know, but I can't tell where
it lies until I can see our surroundings.”
“ If you fellows wouldn’t talk so loud I could get a
sleep on my horse,” sang out Dave. “ What do we
need to care for some Chinkies anyhow ? ”
“We don’t care for them, Dave,” Sam answered.
“ That is just the trouble. They may not heed the
fact that we do not care for their society Hallo !
My horse was nearly down that time ”
“We’ve got into some bad country, boys,” cried
Mike, peering ahead anxiously. “ The ground seems
all broken up like an abandoned mining camp. By
Jupiter ! there are holes big enough ”
“ Stop, boys,” suddenly cried the parson, “ I know
where we are now. We can’t go any farther in the
dark. Get off and lead your horses after me, and keep
an eye on the pack ones too. We’re within a mile of
a Chinese camp.”
“ From Greenland’s icy fountains ! ” exclaimed Dave.
“I was nearly not needin' any tucker to-morrow just
now.” He dismounted at the edge of a deep cutting
and went over every song and hymn he could call to
mind with a fervency which denoted much feeling.


But the parson was now leading his horse up a
hill, and, falling into line behind, the others followed
carefully. For about an hour they struggled upwards
among the mullock heaps of the old workings, but
finally the parson stopped and said, “ We're all right
now, boys, and had better camp here until sunrise
whether we intend remaining afterwards or not.
Don’t let the horses go until morning."
Ten minutes later the men were asleep, their horses,
tired and dejected-looking, standing near them. It
was just on sunrise when Tom opened his eyes, and
he turned to his comrades with an exclamation of
wonder. But some one was missing ; he saw only
three men lying beside him—Dirty Sam, Mike, and
Dave. Why I where was the parson ? He sprang to
his feet and gazed around, but the parson was not in
sight. At that moment Sam awoke, and stared down
at the scene which had occasioned Tom's surprise.
He was looking at a settlement or township which
certainly was not Australian in style. On the plains
beyond the abandoned workings into which they had
stumbled a few hours before was a collection of
galvanised-iron and bark erections, but all fancifully
adorned with crude Chinese symbols. No signs of
life were visible, but it was only six o'clock, and
probably the inhabitants were still asleep.
“ Well, if I weren't well used to the speed at which
the yellow beggars can work when they want, I would
think I was dreaming just now," Sam muttered ; “ for
I'm open to bet every cent I possess that that place
wasn’t there the last time I was up this way." He
turned and saw Tom. “Good morning," he said.
u What is the matter with you ? You seem as though
the prospect of exploring China in the heart of
Australia held no attractions for you."


“ Where is the parson ? ” was all Tom could answer,
and, jumping up, Sam saw the reason for Tom’s words.
“ Gone out to see if he can shoot anything, I
suppose,” said Sam. “ Our larder is not too well
stocked.”
“ But there is his horse,” exclaimed Tom. “He
would have taken it if he had been going out to
shoot, and here is his rifle too, and he has no
gun ?"
“ Whew 1 that looks strange. But what are we
thinking about ? The parson will have gone up the
hill a bit to take his bearings. He will have been
as much surprised as I was to see that settlement
down there. We'll get breakfast ready and await
developments.”
Which was a very wise proceeding, as during the pre-
parations, and just as Mike and Dave arose and shook
themselves, the parson suddenly appeared in camp
with his hat full of eggs and his pockets filled with
bacon.
“ Jeremiah, Jonah, an' Julius Caesar ! ,r Dave ex-
claimed ; “ where did you shoot that stuff ? ”
“These are hens' eggs,” cried Tom. “How did
you come to find them?”
“ I found them, nevertheless, and with this bacon
they will provide a very good breakfast. Have you
ever seen a Chinese town before, Tom?”
“ Only the Chinese quarters in Sydney, sir.”
“ Then after breakfast we'll explore this one on the
flats beneath us.”
“ I thought,” said Sam tentatively, “ that our first
order would be to saddle up and get over the divide ?
But, of course, I don't mind paying the beggars a
friendly call, seeing we are passing this way; all the
same ” Sam looked at his revolvers significantly.


“Sam, Sam/’ spoke the parson reprovingly, “why
are you always a man of war ? I am sure you know
that our yellow brethren are the most peace-loving
people on earth, and that we are quite safe in visiting
them ?”
“ That depends on whether they’re sleeping or not
when we call,” laughed Sam.
“And on whether the population have paid their
poll-taxes or not, I should think,” Mike added.
“ But, God Save the King I boys, ain't we in Ostralya
yet ? Can't a white man do what he likes in this
country so long as he doesn’t break no laws ? ”
“ He can, if he is strong enough ; but up here the
yellowman holds most power,” answered the parson ;
“still, the law of the land is behind us ”
“Yes, but over a hundred miles too far behind,”
Sam said gloomily. “The full strength of the law
is chasing shadows and killing good horses down near
Murgoona. If the troopers would come up here and
either wipe out the murderous yellow vermin or keep
them in their proper place, instead of hunting for
Chillagoe Charlie, honest prospectors might have a
chance ”
“Well, breakfast is ready,” Mike said, “and I for
one won't ask where the parson got it.”
“ He got it from his friends the Chinese, of course,”
Sam said, with a laugh. “ You can’t go out and shoot
bacon ready cured like this in the heart of the
Peninsula.”
“ Which shows that the Chinese must be friendly
disposed,” Tom put in, “otherwise how could the
parson get the fresh eggs and bacon from them ?"
“ Oh, he might have threatened to preach to them if
they didn't give freely,” said Sam; “ Chinese will do
anything to get rid of parsons.”


“ In which case, Sam, they would have poisoned
the food," the parson suggested.
“Jumping Jackeroos!" roared Sam, springing to
his feet, and spitting out a mouthful of bacon ; “ I
never thought of that, and that is a famous old game
of theirs."
“You've got mighty particular all of a sudden,
Sam," commented Mike, lifting another piece of bacon
from the ashes; “ I reckon the parson knows better
than to take with thanks what the Chinkies give."
Dave and Nigger did not seem to care whether
their breakfasts were poisoned or not. Dave was
lifting eggs from the billy and eating them with a
dexterity found only among sons of the bush, who
frequently have neither knife nor spoon to assist them
in their gastronomical performances, and Nigger ran
round all, receiving something from each in turn.
Tom was paying great attention to the parson's words.
He noted a new expression on his face, and wondered
what it meant.
“You may go ahead safely, Sam,” the parson said
quietly ; “your food is not poisoned, nor did Chinese
hands touch it.”
“ Then where did you get it ? ” Sam asked, greatly
puzzled.
“ Sam, you first-class gold medal idiot, sit down and
plug ahead," roared Mike. “ The parson is running
this show just now, and what he doesn’t want to tell
us is none of our business. Dave, go slow a bit and
let Tom and Sam get a chance.”
“Men, I have some startling information to give
you, but you must be content to wait some time
before I can impart it ; it is not altogether in my
power to say anything yet, but, briefly, there's a camp
of white men not far off and they are working a


wonderfully rich deposit of alluvial gold. When we
have finished breakfast I want to go round and inspect
that Chinese settlement down there, after which we
will ride on a bit, or let our horses go, as seems
best to us all."
“ There is a happy land, parson," spoke Dave,
looking up for the first time since they started break-
fast. "We will help you to haul down the joss when
we find his house, and while you are leaving tracts I'll
break him up for ye with a couple o’ plugs o' gelignite.
We’ll make the beggars good Christians if we've got to
use all the dynamite we have "
“ No, we won’t, Dave ; and you’ll leave their joss
alone. lam not up here on a mission to the Chinese,
I prefer to confine my work to the white heathen like
you "
11 An' Mike an' Tom an' Nigger an’ Sam," said
Dave, who understood the parson well. “But ye
banks an’ five-pound notes ! Wouldn’t it be great
if ye could get a pair o' hobbles round Chillagoe
Charlie s feet an make him listen to yc. I reckon
ye could do good business with him, an’ we would
all help to hold him while you punched it into
him ”
The parson did not answer ; he didn’t appear to
have been listening to Dave; and soon after the men
were ready for their tour of exploration in the Chinese
city. Nigger, of course, was also ready. They led
the horses into a gully which split the main range
near where they had camped, and hobbled them
closely, so that they could not go far away, and then
began to pick a way down through the old mullock
dumps, open cuts, and pot-holes towards the settle-
ment. As yet there had been no signs of life in the
place, although they had watched for the rising smoke


which would indicate the preparation of breakast in
some house.
“ They must be a very lazy set of people,” said
Dirty Sam, as they came near the first house, a white
painted galvanised iron structure, with yellow stripes
bordering the top, and a flat roof; “ I should have
thought that not even a nigger could be in bed in this
terrific heat.”
“Yet the Chinese are not lazy, Sam,” the parson
said ; “ they are always up with the sun. Ah 1 that is
a store. Look at the wonderful inscription above
the door.”
They came to a halt in front of the first building.
It had no windows, in the real sense of the word,
and looked more like a block-house than anything
else. Large squares had been cut out of the metal
sides, however, and the pieces thus removed had been
hinged back into position over the holes in a way that
allowed them to be opened to any extent, according
to the angle of the sun's rays. An inscription in
Chinese characters was artistically painted above the
door, and the owner's name, “Quong Tart,” was
scrawled in English letters underneath, with the
additional information that the proprietor was a
“ general storekeeper.” But the place was quiet and
the flaps all down, and the party walked on to the
next house. It also was a store, but more pretentious
than the first in appearance, although it had flaps
instead of windows like the others. All along the top
of the walls, on a flaring yellow surface, were painted a
series of inscriptions, which the parson said were adver-
tising the fact that the owner had his own tea estate in
Formosa, from which he received regular shipments.
“They pay no duty,” I’ll bet,” commented Mike;
“ but what on earth is this place ? ”


He stood in front of a long erection, of which
canvas sacking and bamboo seemed to form the walls.
These were in sections that could roll up like Venetian
blinds, and a cleverly-painted dragon worked its
sinuous length from end to end of the movable side.
There was no inscription here, but a carved piece of
wood, embellished by paper ornamentations to illus-
trate a “ wheel of fortune," showed that this was a
gaming saloon, in which weird and wonderful games
of chance were played for stakes ranging from a
sixpence up to perhaps a hundred ounces of gold.
u This place is evidently a well-known settlement,"
the parson said. “ The presence of this saloon proves
that there are many white men who come here to
gamble regularly, for the happy Celestials are too
cunning to play the games that go on in here among
themselves. We'll have a look inside later "
“ Here is a place called ‘A Cigar Divan,’" cried
Tom.
“ Another proof of the white man's presence,"
laughed Dirty Sam. “ Pass on, Tom."
“Then what is this ?" cried Tom, running up some
wooden steps that led to a verandah, on which stood
the most imposing erection in the township.
“ Th e joss house ! " yelled Dave in delight. “ See
if the joss is at home.”
The men joined Tom in a moment, and paused
before a heavily curtained doorway. This building
was entirely of cedar-wood, and every part of it was
carved and painted exquisitely to represent flowers,
dragons, and other fanciful figures dear to the Celestial
mind.
“Ah I " said the parson, “the joss will tell us some-
thing, I feel sure."
He fumbled among the curtains, and a central part


rolled up disclosing a hideous carved and pamte
idol, on whom gold ornamentations had been freely
lavished. But his body was covered with pins. Ihe
loss was, apparently, the sole occupant of the room,
but there were a number of curtained recesses in the
stuffy apartment behind him that doubtless containe
secondary josses, or those used for special purposes.
“ I know everything now, boys,” said the parson,
after a brief investigation. “ Come and see if we
can awake any of the population. Let us try that
store across the road. ...
“Ah Sing!” shouted Mike a moment later, rattling
the flaps of an erection which described itself in
English as a tea, coffee, and tobacco store, “wake
up and attend to us.
But Ah Sing did not answer, nor did any one,
although they tried every prominent house m the city.
“ The place must be abandoned,” hazarded Sam at
length. “ A plague must have struck it. And by
Jupiter ! there is enough gold about that pin-stuck
loss to make a fortune.”
“Yes, the place is abandoned,” agreed the parson,
“but only for a few hours. We’ll have them all at
home very soon now, and then the trouble will start.
There are no people here just now, because they are
all out hunting us disguised as aborigines.”
“Great —1 mean—oh ! whyisnt Peter the Poet here
to help me ? I don’t know another Ah ! we’ll
soon be dead, parson ; but you are a boncer for
finding out things. How do you know ?”
“ I guessed it from the first, and I have been making
sure all morning. Do you think I would have asked
you to come to a notorious Chinese den had I not
suspected that we would find its empty of its in-
habitants ? But where is Tom ?”


“ He went round to the back of that house a minute
ago," said Mike. “ But tell us what you know, parson.
Were not used to dealing at close quarters with the
yellow beggars.”
“ I remember the only dealings I had with them,"
put in Sam ; “ I thought they would be like the crowd
one meets in Little Burke Street, Melbourne, or maybe
like the Charters Towers, or Cairns mob, and that a
man could handle a dozen of them himself. But
centipedes ! it is a different animal altogether that
swarms over the Gulf country, and they were too
much for us."
“ 1 remember some of the stories of the early days
on the Palmer," said Dave reminiscently.
He would probably have gone on to repeat them
but Mike suddenly said, “Why, that must be the
Palmer River in that flat over on our right ? It was
just about here that a party I was with some years
§ot into trouble with the yellowmen."
And what did you do, Mike ?" asked Dave
“ Clear out ? "
Yes; but we came back again made up as
niggers. But you know the story, boys ; I've often
told it round the fire at Caledonia Camp. We had
struck a rich patch of gold, and we worked it out
naked and painted as aborigines. There must have
been other big deposits near, for there were hundreds
of Chinese working all round about, although we
cou d never find out where they were camped, but
they never troubled us. We held some fearful and
wonderful corroborrees at times when we suspected
we were being watched, and if the Chinese found us
out they didn't show it."
“ Did you find any traces of other deposits, Mike ? "
the parson asked.


“Only that heavy black stuff which broke the
hearts of so many of our best We
couldn't make out what it was. but we knew that
it always led us on to gold."
“And how came you to leave the place, Mike
Again it was the parson who asked the question.
They were wandering round the place, stopping er
and there to lift any unfastened window-gutter which
allowed them to look into the interior. In most cases
however, the rooms were quite dark, and as the par
wouldn’t hear of Sam’s going inside with a light, they
thought I had a little girl waiting for me down
Sydney side, and having made a fair amount o
gold, 1 went down to see her. To cut the story
short, boys-for it can’t have any interest for you-
she had either died or forgotten me and gone aw y
somewhere. Anyway, I could find no trace of hen
I knew she had a brother up in the Gulf country, and
on the off-chance of falling in with him I came back
again. I lost all my money in a silver mine I took up
down near Crinkle Creek, and then Mr. crns y
came along and offered me work with him. I have
been with him ever since ; and now, boys, you know
all the story I’ve got.” .
tt Except your name,” said Sam eagerly.
Mike O’Flannigan ? ”
“ No • I gave Mr. Hornsby the first name that came
into my head. But, excuse me, boys, I’d rather not
give my real name. I want to cut my past entirely,
with all its memories."
“ But you can't, Mike,” spoke the parson. The
past will come up in spite of yourself. I, too, can
tell a story, but we’ll reserve that just now


“ The initials of your name wasn't by any chance
the same as those of the one you adopted, Mike ? "
Dirty Sam was evidently exercising all his will-power
to subdue some excitement.
“ My real initials are the same—M, O, F," answered
Mike. “ What made you think so ?"
“ Your story, old fellow," cried Sam, grasping Mike's
hand, and showing more emotion than any one would
have expected from such a reckless, dare-devil charac-
ter as he was. “ Your little girl heard you had been
killed in a fight with the blacks, and nearly lost her
reason over it. Her people, hoping that the study of
music—of which, as you know, she was passionately
fond—would divert her mind, took her home to the
Old Country. There her voice was made the most of,
and it speedily attracted attention. Now I believe all
London is at her feet ”
u But you ! ' gasped Mike. “Who are you ? " He
looked searchingly into Sam's face, a sudden fear
overmastering his other feelings for the moment.
“Oh, I am just Dirty Sam ; but I happen to be her
brother."
“And she is alive and well ?" Mike's face lit up
with an expression that changed his cold, rugged, and
tanned countenance almost beyond recognition
“ She is."
God save the King ! an' We won't go home till
mornin ! an Auld Lang Syne ! an’—an’ darn it!
Parson, I can t help it; it had to come out. Can I
not get somebody to find me ? Ah, here's Tom !
Tom, ye inconsiderate youngster, can’t ye see in me
a long-lost uncle or aunt or something ? " Dave was
certainly excited too, and he pranced about in great
style.
Tom did not understand him—indeed, he did not


hear his words; but the parson turned his head
away for a moment as the boy and his faithful dog
approached, running.
“ We’ve found the Chinese,” Tom cried, “and we’d
better get away at once unless we mean to fight.
Nigger led me to them in that big building at the
end of the road. Why, what is the matter ?"
He paused, and looked at the faces of his comrades
in surprise.
“ Mike and Sam have just discovered each other,”
the parson said. “ This world is very small, after all.
So small, Tom, that I feel certain you will find your
uncle before you are much older. But let us get
back. Mike, allow me to say how glad I am that
you have now the unspeakable joy of hope. I have
known who you were for some considerable time ; in
fact—but no, I must not speak yet. Sam, you never
told me you had a sister. Oh, I know who you are,
too ! I read the papers when I have an opportunity,
and I know who the lady is who is at present capti-
vating all London. But even although we have only
become acquainted with each other in the midst of a
Chinese settlement in the heart of the Gulf country,
the past has not been wasted. It was a period in
which we were all trained to the uses of adversity,
and in which each man found in his comrade
the highest attribute that the Almighty allows to
humanity.”
“ But what are we to do, sir ? ” cried Tom, who did
not understand what had transpired while he and
Nigger had been exploring the village.
“ Hang the Chinese ! ” growled Dirty Sam. " We’ll
tie their pigtails together and ”
“ Sam ! ” spoke the parson reprovingly.
« Oh, I forgot you were a parson, and not a fighting-


man,” Sam said. “ But Mike and I will tackle them
ourselves. We don’t care for Chinkies now, Mike,
do we ? ”
“ Not much, Sam ; but neither does the parson.
I know him now too. He had a big black beard,
the same as I had, when we were together before,
and I have seen him fight like ten men.”
“ Howlin' I mean the green grass grew all
round ! What all-fired idiot said the parson couldn’t
fight ? ” cried Dave. “ Look at me. Here I am, just
burstin’ to get in a word to express what I think an’—
Glory Hallelujah ! I daren't, 'cos the parson bested
me in a stand-up affair which ye all seem to have
forgotten ”
“We’ll likely have all the fighting the most pug-
nacious of us will want presently. Here come the
Chinese,” the parson remarked quietly. “ Now, boys,
be advised by me, and don't start the quarrel, whatever
you do. Remember, I know these people, and a good
lot more than they dream any one knows.”
“You are the boss, parson,” spoke Sam, “and I
apologise if I said anything out of place to you.
Jupiter ! Where are the pigtails coming from ?"
“ From that big shanty at the far end,” answered
Tom. “Nigger and I watched them coming out of
the ground into it.”
“ Out of the ground into it, Tom ?” asked the parson.
“Yes, sir; they seemed to come out of a cellar or
some place underneath the floor.”
“ Ah, I understand. I know the whole story now,
boys, and will explain afterwards. Now for a deal
with the most cunning people in the world.”
The Chinese had now come up. There were about
a dozen of them, and they seemed very much surprised
at seeing their visitors.


“ Goo' moln. Wha' fo’ you come hele ?" spoke
one in not unfriendly tones.
“ We are prospectors,” answered the parson, “ and
thought we might be able to purchase some stores
from you. What town is this ? ”
“ Town no’ got any name yet. We build it hele
to tlade with white plospectols. Come along a me,
an’ see what you want to buy.”
“There's some game on already,” Sam whispered
to Tom, as the party followed the Chinese to one
of the stores. “If they were honest traders they
would already be fighting among themselves for
our custom instead of allowing one to get all the
plunder.”
“ You likee gamee pokel ? ” suddenly asked one of
the Celestials, as they passed the gambling saloon.
“We likee do something to killee time.” He spoke
to Sam.
“We’ll see about that game of poker afterwards,”
Sam answered evasively. “Is time all you kill in this
town without a name ? ” He laughed as he spoke,
and the Chinaman grinned also.
“ Oh, we sometime killee men too,” he said. “We
wolk mine an’ when plospectol come along an’ sticky
nose in whele no’ wanted we sticky knife into him.
He no likee that, he keepy away, allee samee us.”
“ I suppose you intend to sticky knife into us when
you get the chance ? ” said Mike, accepting a cigarette
from the talkative man.
“ Hope no; you plenty money,'me lathel play you
fol it ” Here the Chinaman who had first spoken
called out something in Chinese and the man became
silent, and would only grin in answer to any further
efforts made to induce him to talk.
But the parson and the leader conversed all the


time, and soon they reached the largest store, which,
after unlocking an ingenious system of bars, they
entered. The flaps were then opened and light and
air streamed in to the strange apartment. It had a
wooden floor, which fact occasioned much surprise
among the visitors, a floor made of ant beds being
that most commonly used in the Gulf country
interior, and which is also preferable, being vermin
proof and cool. There was no counter in the shop,
but round the edge of the flooring and on a shelf
which ran round three sides were ranged curiously
embellished boxes of tea, hideous masks of unique
construction, boxes of cigarettes, piles of packs of
playing-cards, dice-boxes, lanterns, cases of tinned
jam and fruit which Tom noted bore a Singapore
label, several bottles of “ pain killer,” and some cases
of a celebrated English sauce. Some dozens of jars
of various sizes also found a place, and a brief
inspection told Tom that they purported to contain
a certain liquid shipped direct from Scotland via
Singapore. Tom walked around greatly interested in
the many Chinese idols and masks, and while he was
standing behind a huge hollow joss, entrance into
which was hidden only by a curtain, he heard his
comrades and the Chinese laughing together at some
joke as if they were the greatest of friends.
“ The parson must have been mistaken in these
people after all,” he muttered to himself, pulling aside
the curtain and stepping inside the great disused god,
“ They seem very simple-minded and not all so blood-
thirsty as I understood they were ”
At that moment a shout from Sam made him look
through the holes serving as eyes in the joss's head,
and he saw a sight that for the time paralysed him.
The floor had parted in two and his comrades were


falling into a dark abyss which yawned beneath.
All the Chinamen were standing close into the wall
and laughing with childish delight at their victims.
While Tom watched some of them pulled a rope and
the floor came back into place again, and the Chinese
came out and performed a weird dance over it.
Tom’s mind became absolutely blank for a moment,
then in a tempestuous flood everything rushed upon
him. His comrades had been murdered before his
eyes, and he was alone with the murderers. No, not
alone, a pull at his trousers told him Nigger was with
him. He drew his two revolvers. There were twelve
Chinamen. Could he shoot them all before he
could be rushed ? He placed a weapon through
each eye and waited till he who had been the leader
came into range. Incidentally, he also listened to the
conversation they carried on in a strange sort of
English. “My wold ! we got 'em all light. Plospectol
allee samee fools," spoke one man. “We catchy him
evely time."
“ Wha’ fo’ odel fellows no’ come along ? " demanded
another. “ Time they wele hele now.”
“ Odel fellows out help niggels ; faces painted black
so niggels get all blame if the Govelment evel heal of
it,” the leader said. “My wold! we'll have no fooly
white plospectol down hele. Killee 'em all an’ blame
niggels fol it. If tloopels come along they see us allee
samee wolking men ; no' know this town only hele to
dlaw 'em, an’ that all fellows live in seclet place an'
wolk gleat gold beds.”
“ Thele no' be white plospectol anywhele alound
hele now ? ” asked another man.
“ No, allee killee. Byambye, when fools down hele
get dlown or die flora snake we go down an’ git all
thel gold,” said the leader. “ Wha' say you fellows ?


Joss been good this moln ; I say we telly him that an’
stickee some mole pins in him fol next time.”
A shout of approval greeted the leader's words, and
the dance stopped.
“ I’ll sticky filst pin,” the leader cried, advancing to
the joss in which Tom was concealed, while the others
stood waiting for some sign of favour from the god,
and ready, if it were not forthcoming, to demolish
him, or at least punish him severely. These Chinese
were not followers of the great Confucius. Very few
are, out of China proper, and they had a new joss
every week. Joss was not held in much respect
among the people who made him.
The man pushed a pin into the god’s wooden body,
and was in the act of drawing back to admire his
handiwork when joss spoke, but not in the way he was
wont to speak when the spiritual leaders of his people
were inside. His right eye flashed fire, and the daring
man who had insulted him fell back with a scream of
pain, while a sound as of the beating of many drums
filled the air.
“Joss angly,” yelled one of the onlookers, running
to the door of the store. “We comee back an’ chopy
him upy.”
As if in answer to his insolent threat, the joss's left
eye flashed fire, and the man who was to come back
and chop him up subsided with a shriek.
For a moment the joss worshippers stood thunder-
struck. Only once before had they known their joss
to stand on his dignity and use the great powers con-
ferred upon him. That joss had long since gone the
way of most josses, for he had ordered them to leave
the white prospectors alone, and they had no use for
such a silly joss as could give such a command. But
he had emphasised his desires at the time by emitting


strange noises which they could not understand, and
so they fled from his awful presence until they had
armed themselves with axes and knives and other
wood-cutting weapons.
This joss was clearly exceeding his duty, too, and
when a third man fell and the tom-tom-like noise still
continued, the rest rushed for the door terror-stricken.
Before they got through a fourth man went down, and
then, yelling like the fiends they were, they tore along
the street to some safe place—and to the most con-
venient store where axes could be obtained.
Then Tom came out of the friendly joss, whose
hollow inside had helped him so much by echoing
and re-echoing his revolver shots, and prepared for
whatever was to follow. But first he bundled the four
wounded men in a heap and tied their pigtails to-
gether, pulling them so tight that the men could not
possibly rise without scalping each other. They
screamed frightfully while he did so, but Tom did not
mind in the slightest. And now he bethought himself
of his comrades. He had little hope that they were
alive, but suddenly noticing that Nigger was sniffing
around eagerly, he waited for a lull in the Celestials'
shrieking and shouted, “ Parson, are you alive ? "
The Chinamen paused to hear the reply, but when
promptly there floated back, “ God save the King ! but
that's Tom’s voice," they began afresh. But Tom had
heard, and lying flat on the floor, he put his mouth to
the parting line of the sections and shouted, “ Stand as
clear as you can, boys, there’s visitors coming."
The Chinamen yelled more than ever on hearing
this announcement. Well they knew who the visitors
were to be, yet they dare not move for fear of losing
their pigtails, and better in their minds to lose life than
suffer that everlasting disgrace.


" '”' i ” f ' '*' * ■ '*
UMM m j " a (> .- I
JrJM s&SsSSSBt* V •-- I
— — - - --
“ THE REST RUSHED FOR THE DOOR, TERROR-STRICKEN.”
[To face page 250.


* -


“ Hurry then, Tom, if you can do the trick," the
parson’s voice called back, “ The water is nearly up
to our necks, and still rising, and a ledge on which we
might prolong the agony is covered with the most
poisonous reptiles "
The parson probably said more, but Tom didn't
hear him if he did; he had run to where he knew
the floor-controlling device was hidden, and in a
second had lifted a lever from a notch and allowed it
to fly upwards. He did not know if he was setting
the proper mechanism in motion or not, but the black
hole which suddenly and silently appeared at his feet,
and into which the four Chinamen had been hurled,
satisfied him upon that point, and he peered into the
gloom beneath.
“ Where are you, boys ? ” he cried above the din
made by the new visitors ; “1 can’t see you."
“ But we can see you,” Dirty Sam answered. “ See if
you can find a rope anywhere, and lower one end of it.”
Tom ran round the ledge left of the flooring, kicking
over boxes and cases, most of which fell into the hole
below, and caused Dave to repeat the titles of every
song and hymn in his repertoire. At length Tom
found a coil of rope, and making one end fast round
the corner support of the building, he dropped the coil
into the depths. Next moment Dirty Sam came up
hand over hand, and while Mike remained below to
keep the rope taut, Dave and the parson followed.
Then the men hauled Mike aloft, and they all sat down
and looked at each other. They were soaking, but no
one seemed to mind that fact, and after a moment's
silence they all burst out laughing.
“Tom, my boy," the parson said, “I don't know
how you have done it, nor how you bested those
beggars floundering in their own trap, but "


“ Nigger says some one is coming," Tom interrupted,
running round the ledge to the open door. “ It’s the
same people coming back with axes and hammers," he
cried, looking out. “ What shall we do ? ”
“ Gather together just inside the doorway," advised
the parson, “ and trust to Providence."
On came the howling mob of joss smashers. They
reached the doorway, and the first two men, pushed
inside by the crowd behind, straightway fell through
the open floor. The next two uttered a yell of horrified
amazement, and endeavoured to turn along the ledge,
but Sam and Mike assisted them in their first course,
and they, too, went below. But all were now inside,
blinking stupidly at the gulf which opened before
them. They did not see the white men yet, but too
late they heard them.
“ Come on, lads," shouted the parson, u there are
only four of them. Take one each."
“ Howling dingoes ! —I mean Great Britain and
Ireland !" cried Dave, “you just bet we will."
The Chinese turned to run, but strong hands gripped
each by the pigtail, and next moment the remaining
men, shrieking and cursing and crying on their joss in
turn, were hurled into the gulf. But joss heard them
not.
“ What can I do for you to-day, boys ?" Dave
asked, rubbing his hands together as he thought all
storekeepers did. “ I have a nice line in tea, and—
God save the King ! you yellow beggars down there
make less noise. Ain’t ye gettin' a much-needed
wash ? "
“ I see a lot of people approaching from the other
side of the town," cried Tom from the doorway; “ I
think they are natives."
“ No, they are only disguised as natives " said the


parson. “ Come on, boys, don’t wait to replenish
our stores. Probably all the stuff is poisoned, any
way ”
“ I don’t care a first rose of summer,” muttered
Dave, “ I’m going to have this hymn-book ”
“ That isn’t a hymn-book,” Tom laughed. “ That is
a list of cures effected by the use of—of a certain much-
advertised patent medicine.”
“ I’ll take it, anyhow,” said Dave, and next minute
they were hurrying out of the village. And none too
soon, for while they struggled up the hill over the
abandoned “ workings ” a crowd of pigtailed black
men came up to the scene of their adventures.


CHAPTER XII
THE CHINESE OF THE HOLLOW MOUNTAIN
WELL, boys, what is next on the programme?”
Dirty Sam asked as they entered the gully
where their horses were. “Is it saddle up and clear
out ? ”
“No," answered the parson, “it is . not. We’ll
remove our horses to the other end of the gully
which I happen to know is pretty high up in the
range There we will camp, and set about working
the gold deposits which are in all the creeks.”
“ All right, parson, you are boss,” responded Mike
as they caught their steeds and made everything ready
for moving up the gully; “but I reckon you should
explain what you know of this place we struck to-day
in which, but for Tom, we should have staked off our
last claims.”
Yes, will tell you, boys. Tom, you have heard
coming up of how Mike and Sam have discovered
that they are friends, and you have told us how you
were enabled to save us from a fate which is unplea-
sant to think of. Now I shall tell part of a story I
know. In the first place, boys, from what Tom has
told you, you know that the township down below us
is a decoy ; that is, it is intended to make the chance
prospector or Government Inspector, or any one
254 ’


believe that it is an honest Chinese trading centre,
existing chiefly to supply the wants of white prospec-
tors. But it supplies no white prospectors with any-
thing else than excitement, as you have experienced.
Yet it accounts for the presence of the Chinese.
These Chinese, however, do not live in their town
—at least, the majority do not, for there are many
hundreds of them round here—they have a secret city
or camp, and the place in which we were exists to
satisfy any one that the Chinese are a much-abused
race, and I have no doubt that those who do reside in
it pay their poll-taxes regularly. However, the people
who live and work in the secret camp are the same as
those who attacked several parties with which I was
associated, and whom, to evade, Mike’s comrades dis-
guised themselves as natives, just as these Chinese
have done recently to cover their attack upon us.
Well, to cut the story short, this district is enormously
rich in gold, and the Chinese are determined to have
it to themselves. The people down south will not
believe the prospectors’ stories, and the yellowmen
are careful never to give themselves away by attacking
a party they can't annihilate completely unless they
can get the aborigines blamed for the affair. But the
white prospector is not always a fool, and where gold
is, you may be certain, there he shall be also, whether
it is in ice-bound zones, in fever swamps, or on scorch-
ing deserts. Well, Tom saw our present enemies
apparently coming out of a cellar into one of the
larger buildings, from which fact it is clear to me that
there is a passage underground from the decoy or
show city to their ‘workings’ or hidden camp. It
was some of these workers we met to-day. Doubtless
they came in for stores, and were more surprised than
we were when we saw each other, having been of


opinion that every white man in the country had
fallen victims to the combined attacks of their com-
rades who could be spared and the aborigines whom
they persuaded to help them.
“But the prospector quickly suits himself to his
environment, and as the party Mike knew disguised
themselves as natives, so likely there are other parties
who have adopted other schemes to enable them to
work the rich formations. I know of at least one
such party, and as soon as I can make arrangements
I shall take you to their camp. It is near here and
in its members you will all find old friends. Mean-
while, here is an ideal spot for a camp. We can
hold this place against an army, for nature protects
us on three sides, and on the fourth we can erect a
barricade of timber. There is a spring of good water
over at the base of that lime bluff formation ”
“ ou seem to be mighty well acquainted up here,
parson,” said Mike ; “ I don’t remember a thing about
the place, but I am sure I was never here before.”
“No, you were on the other side of the range,
but I have gone over all the country around, and
know every foot of it.”
“By the black bloodwood-tree !” cried Dave, “but
you could give points to our old friend Chillagoe
Charlie, parson.”
“That is not a hymn, Dave,” said the parson, with
a laugh. “And I thought you said you were Chillagoe
Charlie?”
“ Three yards to the left! But I had forgotten all
about me being Charlie,” wailed Dave. “ Why didn't
ye keep me in mind, boys ?”
“Ah well, never mind just now, Dave,” Mike
advised. “It is about time we had something to eat,
and if you set a fire going, I'll bring some water.”


“And we’ll have a spell for the rest of the day/'
said Dave. “ What with gettin’ half drowned, an’
other things, I am a bit tired, an’ I reckon we can
hold out against the Chinkies here even if we are
sleepin’.’’
Shortly after the horses were given a drink, and set
free to graze upon some good grass at the head of the
gully, and by that time the billy was boiling and the
men sat down to a lunch of “tinned dog” and copious
draughts of boiling tea. When this was over, they
built a crude erection behind which they might shelter
if attacked, and when their labours were completed the
sun had almost reached the top of the distant sand
ridges over towards the Gulf. Another pannikin of tea
and some more tinned meat was then partaken of for
supper, and soon after, when the sun disappeared and
darkness fell over the land, they stretched themselves
out on the ground and went to sleep, careless alike of
the sounds which a gust of the night breeze occasion-
ally brought up from the Chinese city, and of the fact
that they were only five men and a dog in the midst of
hostile blacks and murderous yellowmen. And the
stars crept up the great dome overhead.
The excitement of the day had left Tom’s nerves
at high tension, and, unlike his hardened comrades
he could not sleep. First, he wondered if the Chinese
he had shot and tied together would be rescued
Then remembering that they had left the floor open*
and feeling assured that the returning population would
speedily notice that fact and inquire into the matter
he managed to dismiss that subject from his brain!
But then a flood of memories burst upon him, and his
mind mixed them up in hopeless confusion. What
were they doing in among secret cities and black-faced
Chinese ? And what had Chillagoe Charlie to do with
17


it all ? Then his thoughts underwent a kaleidoscopic
change, and he followed out the story of Mike and Sam
and wondered if he would suddenly discover that Dave
or the parson were his lost uncle. At last he fell into
a troubled sleep in which Dave’s last supposed song
titles assumed gigantic importance in his roving fancy.
ü ßy the black bloodwood-tree. Three yards to the
left,” he murmured, “at one shilling and threepence a
box.” He suddenly awoke and found himself repeating
these words. He saw by the stars that it was not yet
midnight, and then with a start he realised that more
than he could not sleep ; the parson was not where he
had lain down. “ He’ll have gone for a walk in the
cool night air,” Tom said to himself, u and I think 111
do the same.” His eyes fell on Dave's sleeping form,
and by his side he saw the patent medicine booklet he
had been carefully reading by firelight before falling
asleep. “ I must see where he got that black blood-
wood-tree quotation,” Tom muttered, lifting the book
and turning over the pages. But it was too dark to
read the words, so he arose and threw some light
branches on the fire, and in the light of the resulting
blaze he again examined the book. It seemed as if
nothing was to reward his search, however, for the
pages merely extolled the virtues of the “ cure all it
was advertising, although how it had come to be found
in a Chinese store —or trap —in the heart of the Penin-
sula was more than Tom could understand. He was
about to throw it down with a laugh at the idea that it
contained information valuable to him when his eye
caught the now familiar words, “ By the black blood-
wood-tree,” scrawled in pencil at the top of one of the
pages. “ That has been written by some prospector
whom likely the Chinese have murdered,” Tom remarked,
going to the beginning of the book again to look for


further writings. He soon found another inscription.
On a leaf near the beginning were the words: “At
head of parson's gully." He turned over quickly but
carefully, and next read, when halfway through the
book, the words of his first discovery. A few pages
further on he came to : “Three yards to the left," and
on the last page, « Keep close to right wall."
“Ah well," he soliloquised, “ that is a meaningless
jargon of words. I’ll try to go to sleep now." He
stretched himself out again, but, despite his utmost
efforts of will power to restrain them, the words he
had read danced through his brain, sinking them-
selves into his inner consciousness as if they were
made of fire.
“ Come on, Nigger, we’ll go for a walk," he said at
length, jumping up. “Perhaps this is parson’s gullv
we are in just now." & J
Nigger did not seem to care much whether it was
parson s gully or any other gully, but, as in duty bound,
e arose, shook himself, and followed his master. Very
soon Tom saw that this camp lay almost at the head of
the gorge, a fact he had not noticed particularly before
and he had not gone many steps when a strange thrill
ran through his being. The black glistening rocks rose
befoie him, and close beside him stood a large blood-
Hghfmng 6 ' U WaS bla ° k ’ f ° r had been struck b y
“ A ‘ of Person's gully, by black bloodwood-free ’’
repeated Tom. “ Well, Nigger, we’ll see what there
is three yards to the left. I presume the spot is in
hose rocks. Jupiter ! There is a hole in them, and
some one has been here lately, for the ground around
is padded hard.’ He struck a match and peered
into the hole; it was just large enough to admit a
man s body, but it might be the home of a family


of ferocious dingoes, so Tom was very careful. But
suddenly he uttered a shout. As his match was going
out he saw an ordinary trouser button lying just inside
the hole. Tom struck another match and pushed
himself through the entrance. “ Keep close to right
wall,” he repeated. “ Well, I fancy I will, but I may
have to go back to camp for a candle.” He paused
to light another match and again wriggled forward,
hoping any poisonous reptiles that might be in the
passage would have the good sense to get out of his
way. “We are very foolish in crawling into a hole
which might be the den of all sorts of creatures,
he went on, speaking to Nigger, who somehow had
got before him. “But I trust to you, Nigger, to
clear the way, and who knows but we may stumble
across this wonderful secret city the parson talks of.
Nigger answered with an encouraging bark, and sud-
denly Tom found he was at the end of the narrow
passage. Another match showed him he was in a large
cave which stretched forwards and downwards further
than his flickering light could penetrate. He rose to
his feet and looked behind him, and the first thing he
saw was a box of candles resting in a recess cut out
in the rocks. “We’re getting on, Nigger, he said.
“We are explorers worthy of the Royal Geographical
Society’s medal, and if I ever get that I’ll hang it
round your neck.”
But Nigger was not in a mood for compliments.
Clearly he thought they were on important business,
and he was sniffing about very suspiciously. When
Tom lit a candle, however, he barked and ran into the
gloom of the cavern and his master followed a little bit
more carefully, keeping the right wall in touch.
It w r as an eerie place they had entered ; the roof
was now high above them, and from it great glis-


tening stalactites hung in fairy-like clusters, while white
ivory-like ferns and mosses gleamed in the candle
light from every little recess in the rocks. Tom knew
at once that he was in one of the great limestone caverns
for which North Queensland was celebrated, but he
was puzzled to account for the presence of such a for-
mation in the heart of a range that certainly was not
limestone externally. Then he recalled the lecture the
parson had given him at their first meeting, and remem-
bered his words about the tremendous convulsions the
country of the north had undergone. 11 I needn’t
attempt to reason out things,” he said to himself, “ I
simply can t do it, and anyway my present business is
to see where this mysterious cavern leads to ”
A bark from his dog warned him to be careful and a
cool wave of air blew across his face. He stopped
instantly, and making a reflector of his hands cast his
candle light ahead. It was well he did so, or he might
have found out in a manner too abrupt to be pleasant
where the cavern led to—-vertically. He was on the
verge of a precipice, the depths to which it descended
being far beyond the zone of his feeble light. "By
Jove ! Nigger,” he ejaculated, “ I had forgotten all
about keeping close to the right wall, but I don't think I’l
forget after seeing this.” He gingerly made his way
over to the wall which had so suddenly receded from
him, and without giving a thought to the dangers of a
return journey, continued to follow Nigger along a
fairly well-defined pathway which flanked the great
abyss. At times he fancied he saw small points of light
dancing in the depths, but he concluded that these were
only reflections cast by some of the mirror-like carbon-
ate of lime formations, and turned his face to the wall
so that he might not see their strangely alluring flashes.
And now many varieties of winged creatures sought to


bar his passage, and he had to strike out blindly to ward
them off. He was greatly afraid that Nigger in an
excess of zeal might follow the bat-like things over the
ledge, but soon, to his surprise, he noticed that they
left Nigger severely alone, and that he did not concern
himself about them. The reason was made apparent, a
huge bat-winged monstrosity flapped past him singeing
its leathery wings in his candle flame. Next moment
it had struck the wall with terrific force, and tumbled
over the ledge into the unfathomable darkness. Tom
relit the candle, which had been extinguished by the
wind of the wings, and next instant the performance
was repeated by another creature, whose cries as it
fell backward into the gloom seemed half human.
It was now plain to Tom that it was the light which
attracted the denizens of the vast cave, and feeling
that he had no right to be the cause of their death,
he stood for a moment in the darkness to consider how
he could avoid being so. The easy answer would be
to go back, but Tom's love of adventure was too great
to allow of his thinking of that for a moment. He felt
that he was going to make some discovery, and he was
determined to follow out the instructions in Dave's
borrowed booklet to the end.
“Hallo, Nigger,'' he said, “what do you think?"
Nigger was sitting down waiting on his master to pro-
ceed, apparently wondering why he was hesitating.
He answered with a bark which as clearly as Nigger
could voice said, “ Come on,” and then with a start
Tom realised that if he could see Nigger there must also
be light enough to see the ledge. And there was;
where it came from Tom could not discover, but the
fact remained that a dim vapoury sort of light extended
in front of him. He started off again at once, and
Nigger ran ahead to clear away all snakes. The


pathway now began to lead downwards at a steeper
angle, and Tom felt he was also working round the
walls of the vast hollow mountain, as if he were de-
scending a spiral stairway. Soon the way became level
again, and, looking round, Tom saw that the abyss had
disappeared, that in fact he was standing at the bottom
of the precipice over which, at first, he had nearly
fallen. He gazed around with interest, a gurgling
stream flowed past in a narrow channel worn out of
the rocky floor. He stepped over to it, and the
sight of the clear crystal water—so unusual in the
Gulf country —made him thirsty at once. It was as
cold as ice, too, and Tom felt that by its banks, even
in the perpetual semi-gloom life, might be bearable
and even enjoyable. He was not yet seasoned to
the scorching sun and the burnt sand-wastes of the
north country. He drank deeply and laved his face
with the delightful water, Nigger, not content with
drinking his fill, having gone for a swim in it. Sud-
denly, however, Nigger sprang out on the rocky bank
and uttered a low growl. He even refrained from
shaking himself at the moment, and to Tom, who
knew every little habit of his dog so well, this neglect
told that Nigger had suddenly scented danger of a
kind that might be precipitated by even a movement
on their part. He stood for a long time trying to discover
the reason of the dog’s alarm, but he could see nothing
beyond a few yards radius, nor could he hear anything
suspicious. Nigger stood listening, too, with tail and
ears erect. Clearly he was not sure himself of the nature
of the impending i~ouble. At length he moved forward
cautiously, and Tom, following twenty yards or so,
found he had reached the opposite wall. But Nigger
evidently was now on the track of something, and
keeping close behind him Tom turned along the face




plains was solid, but consisted of limestone with a
cap of harder rock. Then the tropical rains, work-
ing through, gradually carried away all the soluble
carbonate of lime in solution, and as a result this
mountain is now a mere shell. But, as the parson told
me, it is invariably at the point of contact of limestone
and other rocks that the mineral deposits exist "
Nigger was not interested in Tom’s discourse, and
signified his disapproval by tugging at Tom’s shirt.
“ Don’t worry, Nigger," Tom remonstrated; “I am
not forgetting that we are intruders. But these men
must be the members of the camp the parson told us
he knew, and I have no doubt will not be displeased to
see us. Come, we’ll go and introduce ourselves, although
one o’clock in the morning is rather an odd time for
that ceremony." He rose to his feet, and began
walking towards the men, who were talking together
very animatedly. “ Hallo, boys ! " he called out;
“ I ’’ He did not complete his sentence, for as the
men all jumped up at the sound of his voice, he made
a startling discovery and dropped to the ground at
once. They had all pigtails !
Tom held his breath and lay still in the shadow of
the wall, and Nigger also made himself as invisible as
possible. “ I've done it this time," Tom muttered
helplessly. Nevertheless he drew his two revolvers and
waited. The men looked round in evident surprise,
and one walked up so close to where Tom lay that he
could have touched him. That man was very near his
end at that moment, but a merciful Providence made
him pause and turn even as Tom was in the act of
applying pressure to the trigger of the weapon in his
right hand.
“ ft’s nothing," the man said, going back to the fire
and lighting his pipe and sitting down among his


comrades. The men went on talking as if nothing
had happened to disturb them, and Tom began to
breathe again. He knew he could not understand
their conversation even although he might crawl near
enough to overhear, so, with wonderful prudence—at
least for him—he decided not to make a closer
acquaintance with the pig-tailed people.
But the spirit of adventure was strong within him,
and he had no intention of leaving the place until
he had found out as much as he could about it and
its strange inhabitants.
“ I can see picks and shovels and other mining
tools at the base of the rocks beyond the fire," he
whispered to Nigger. “Are you game to wriggle
round to see what mineral it is that those Chinese
are working ? "
Nigger did not express any objection, and they
started to work their way along the shadows at the
foot of the wall, hoping to be able to pass the fire
and those sitting around it without their knowledge.
Tom had already assimilated the characteristic traits
of the Gulf country pioneers, the chief of which were
a reckless—almost foolish—disregard of danger, and a
total absence of fear. His one idea now was to get
near enough to where the men had evidently recently
been working, and he smiled as he thought of how he
would surprise Mike and Sam with his story in the
morning, and of the lecture he was sure to receive
from the parson.
But getting past the camp fire was not such an easy
task as he had anticipated, as he soon discovered.
The fire was giving off a heat that made those sitting
round it extend their circle, and two men were
squatting on the ground with their backs only about
six feet from the wall along which he and Nigger


were to pass. Tom did not alter his plans, however,
and foot by foot crawled nearer. He had no eyes but
for that six-foot passage, and he hoped that the fire
flames would die down a bit before he reached it, as
they were giving off more light than was necessary
for him to see.
Nearer and nearer he approached. The sound of
the conversation rang in his ears, but he heeded not.
And now he was directly behind the man who sat
nearest the wall. He felt an almost irresistible impulse
to give his pigtail a pull—he would have received the
greatest surprise of the evening had he done so—but
he mastered his inclination and crept past safely into
the flickering shadows beyond.
“ I don't think much of the Chinese brain-box after
all," he remarked to Nigger sotto voce. “ They are
supposed to be so clever, and all that; but what other
people would have rested contentedly after having
distinctly heard the voice of an intruder ?"
“ Hallo, boys I " The salutation came from behind
the group around the fire, and caused Tom to feel as
if he had received a powerful electric shock. The
words were the same as those he had used, and came
from about the same place. The men sprang to their
feet and ran to meet the speaker with a cry which
might have been one of welcome or the reverse, and
taking advantage of the diversion Tom rose and ran
farther into the darkness. He knew now why the
Chinese had not been unduly disturbed when he had
called out to them ; they had been expecting a visitor,
and this time he had arrived.
“ It's good for us anyway, Nigger," he muttered.
“ They’ll probably be so much taken up with the new-
comer that they'll neither hear nor see us. I wonder
who he can be, though, and if he came in the same


way as I did ? Jupiter ! He must have passed our
camp if he did Hullo ! this is gold." Tom bent
down to examine some mineral substance lying in a
crudely constructed inclined plane he had stumbled
across at the base of the front of rock which barred his
farther progress, and promptly forgot all about the
Chinese and their night visitor. The walls of the
rock were tunnelled in every direction wherever one
of the black lodes appeared to pass in the vicinity,
and from the appliances used in the extraction and
separation of the material which were lying about,
Tom knew at once that gold was the mineral the
Chinese were working. A minute’s investigation
showed him also that the lodes were composed of the
same stuff he had shown to Dirty Sam. He could
not understand how gold came to exist in such
profuse quantities as the sizes of the parallel lodes
seemed to indicate it did, nor could he realise how
it existed in lode formation at all, having always
associated the precious metal with a more or less
undefined quartzy environment. He entered one of
the “ drives” or tunnels and walked along until a
sudden swerve in its course hid the light of the camp
fire, then lighting the candle he had carried in his
belt since extinguishing it, he examined his surround-
ings intently. The tunnels had been driven into the
lodes, and the black material of which they were
composed still formed the roof and floor.
“ By Jupiter I Nigger," he exclaimed, “if this really
carries gold we're in one of the richest mines in the
world. And to think that it is in the hands of the
Chinese !" Nigger did not seem to care whether it
were Chinese or Hottentots who owned the mine, and
catching sight of the end of the drive at that moment,
Tom lost interest in its ownership too, in his eagerness


to inspect the last point worked by the miners. The
air was very oppressive in the tunnel and his candle
would scarcely burn, yet his desire for knowledge or,
rather, love of adventure —inquisitiveness some people
might call it—made him advance to the end, and there
he found drills, hammers, and picks, lying as they had
been left when the miners last ceased working. He
seized a pick and dug out some pounds’ weight of the
ore material and tied it up in his handkerchief. “ I
suppose we’d better think about getting back now,
Nigger,” he remarked; “I can assay this stuff to-
morrow, or, rather, when daylight comes, and the
parson will know what to do then.”
He turned to retrace his steps, but had not got clear
of the drive when he became aware that the men were
approaching to show their last results to the newcomer.
“ Caught again,” he muttered, blowing out his light; “I
doubt it’s all up this time.” He had no time to think,
and even although that had been granted him he could
not have reasoned out any possible means of escape.
He was in a tunnel, five feet six inches in height, and
three and a half feet wide, and even then the tunnel
sloped with the lode at an angle of forty-five degrees.
“ Save yourself, Nigger,” he said in a low voice, but
the dog made no answer, and at that moment the
Chinese entered the drive. Instinctively he clung
close to the “underlie” wall. He had no hope, but
he did not intend to precipitate matters.
“Yes,” said one, evidently, from his English, the
visitor, “ I have had an active time since leaving you,
and we had quite an adventure in the village to-day.”
Tom started violently. It was surely the parson’s
voice he heard. The others laughed and talked
together as they advanced, but Tom’s wonder held
him spell-bound until the men were upon him, then,


unable to retain his bent position longer, he stood erect
and came into violent contact with one of the pigtailed
miners. The man uttered a series of unintelligible
sounds with great fervour, and Tom was reminded of
Dave's method of expressing his feelings. But an idea
had come to him. He stepped boldly out among the
people, somewhat surprised to find that most of them
had to stoop considerably to travel along the passage,
and walked with them. Of course it was absolutely
dark, for no one had as yet struck a light. He did not
intend to linger in their society, however, and gradually
allowed the unsuspecting men to leave him behind.
“ Strike a light, some of you," the voice he thought
he knew so well then cried ; “ we’ll risk the closeness
for a minute or two, and I can’t see this wonderful ore
chute in the dark."
A candle was lit immediately, but Tom was now
lying flat on the floor. He had thought for a moment
of calling out to the supposed parson, but the fear that
he might have been mistaken in the voice prevented
him, and next moment he laughed at the idea of the
parson being a member of a gang of Chinese. “My
imagination must be pretty powerful," he muttered,
“and my nerves must have gone wrong."
But his nerves were really in first-class condition,
and he was just preparing to follow the Chinese along
the drive to look for Nigger, when that wonderfully
gifted quadruped gave his trouser leg a pull, as was his
habit when he desired his master to know of his
presence. Tom thereupon rose to his feet and turned
to leave the drive, but before doing so he looked at the
people in front, now plainly discernible in the candle
light, to see if he could recognise any of the Chinese he
had seen in the village. But they were all strange to
him, and all dressed alike in blue silk smocks, most


aggre ss ive pigtails hanging down their backs. They
were certainly tall for Chinamen, but Tom thought the
angle at which they had to stand while in the drive
might account for that impression. He was now on
the safe side of them, and nothing separated him from
his comrades but the journey up the circling ledge,
which he knew would be but a small matter to him.
Then a chill ran through him—he was getting used to
them now. One of the men had turned round to
address the others, and Tom noticed he had no pigtail,
and was dressed as an ordinary white prospector. But
a mask concealed his face, and on seeing this the truth
dawned on him —it was Chillagoe Charlie ! A wild
suspicion rushed through Tom's brain. Could he and
the parson be one and the same, and was the parson
leading his comrades into a trap ? Could he really
be friendly with the people whom he had so often
expressed himself as being so bitterly against ? In any
case what was he doing here, and what would Sam,
Mike, and Dave say ?
“ Come on, Nigger ; I must be mad,” he said, running
out of the drive. “If I stay here any longer I’ll be
seeing Mr. Hornsby, and Mike, and Sam among the
Chinese.” He ran up to the fire, now deserted, and
threw a brief glance around. Some of the men had
been sitting on old packing-boxes, and he promptly
overturned these, finding in one a small mirror and a
comb, in another a piece of soap and a toothbrush.
A third, on being kicked over, disclosed an English
Bible, and a fourth a pack of playing-cards. Evidently
these jam and condensed milk cases were used by
those to whom they belonged as a containing medium
for their personal property, and Tom marvelled greatly
at the absence of Chinese trifles. Razors and shaving
brushes were there, and in one box reposed a blotting


pad, with pen and ink. He went round them all, and
was about to depart when he noticed Nigger’s actions
at the foot of the wall on the opposite side of the fire
from where he was. The dog had scented out a recess
in the rocks which had a wire gauze screen in front of
it. He had pulled the screen away by some means
and was now gorging himself with what had been
contained behind. Tom ran over and found that his
dog had discovered the camp larder, and of which,
doubtless knowing that it belonged to the enemy, he
was making sad havoc, not having had any food for
more hours than he could count. Tom pulled him
away and saw that the recess was well filled with most
things pleasing to the white man’s appetite, and he
now knew, or thought he knew, where the parson had
got his supplies the previous morning, for there was a
case almost filled with eggs in one corner and over a
dozen hams bearing a brand which Tom had reason
to believe marked only the best.
“ Well, Nigger,” he said, “ I don't know if it is steal-
ing to take things from the Chinese, but I am going to
provide breakfast for the camp this morning, as the
parson did before. I don’t know where the Chinese
keep the hens that laid those eggs or I’d have one of
them too, but this will do in the meantime.” He filled
his pockets with eggs and appropriated one of the
hams. “ We’ll go now, Nigger,” he continued ; “ I hear
the population coming back. By Jupiter ! though,
people needn’t tell me after this that the Chinese are
strict vegetarians.”
He ran round the bluff just as the Chinese returned
to their camp fire and turned for a last look at them.
They, apparently, had not noticed that their seats had
been knocked over, or, if they had, doubtless thought
it had been done by themselves. “ That is my idea


then, he heard the well-known voice say ; 11 and I
believe it will all come right in the end."
Tom s brain was in a whirl, but he knew it must be
getting near dawn, and that his place should be
with his comrades. Perhaps they could unravel the
mystery of Chillagoe Charlie's presence here. He
made his way quickly along the level bottom of the
cave, crossed the stream, and then began the spiral-
hke chmb to the top. Nothing interfered with his
progress, for his eyes were now accustomed to the
darkness, and soon he was crawling through the hole
that led to the outer world.
A few minutes later he rushed into the camp where
his comrades still slept. The stars showed it was still
an hour from sunrise. The first figure he saw was that
ot the parson; he was fast asleep.
“ 1 mus * have been dreaming, Nigger," he muttered,
throwing himself down.
" Go , d J s f e the Kin S I Get to sleep and make less
noise, kid, came a drowsy response from one of the
recumbent forms, and a minute or so after Tom was
sleeping.


CHAPTER XIII
THE CAMP AMONG THE RANGES
« t T ERE we suffer grief and pain 1 Are you pure
you didn’t dream all this yarn, Tom ?
“I am quite sure, Dave, and this stuff I have just
assayed is fairly good proof, I think. I dug it out from
the end of the Chinamen’s drive, as I told you, and
you can see now for yourself that it is some strange
ore which carries over three ounces of free gold to
the ton ” , , , „ ,
“ It’s that bit about Charlie I can t understand, put
in Dirty Sam. “ What is he doing among Chinamen ?
And how did he get up here before us ?”
« I can’t get the hang of that either,” said Mike, in
tones which showed his bewilderment. “If it weren t
that Tom brought back tangible proof in the shape of
that bacon and eggs—but wait ! The parson did that
too yesterday.” . , , .
All looked at the parson. He was intently watching
a second precipitate beginning to settle in the pickle-
bottle in which Tom had carried out his assay for
"Yes ” he remarked slowly ; “ 1 was exploring a bit
too. In fact, boys, Tom's story in the main is correct.
There is a secret camp in the heart of this mountain.
I didn’t tell you, for reasons which will be explained
274


v ®ry soon now - But, Tom, I must ask you not to go
ott by yourself during the night. It is risky in this
part of the world."
“ But you were away yourself, sir, when I left the
camp . ? "
Was I . Ah ! then that accounts for your asso-
ciating me with our masked friend. Your love of
romance and powerful imagination would easily build
up a chain of apparently circumstantial proof. But
VVO f et read Y and move away from this place. There
are white men on the other side of the ridge, and it is
IhTplainsT 6 farther 3Way fr ° m the viHa § e down on
Tnm o that , S * uff comin S down in the bottle,
‘r- Sa ™ “ked abruptly, noticing that a flaky
whhe deposit had accumulated at the bottom of the solu-
hon from which Tom had already extracted the gold.
_., T . ha ls , th f ™ neral of which the l°de is composed
hat black stuff which has cheated so many people.
■ Y Ch ‘ neSe , ound out, however, that although it
might be valueless in itself, it carried free gold
blackened with sulphur." 8
“More than the Chinese discovered that, Tom’’
the parson observed. “ There have never been any
assayers up here, but it did not take the prospectors
r b V' me t0 rea i lSe that the heav y black sand they
got by panning that ore was gold. They now burn
the sulphur before washing, and the camp of
which your uncle was a member gained a consfder-
able amount of gold that way. It seems to me
though, that you have made another discovery in
that mysterious formation."
Tom held the bottle to the sunlight, and all crowded
around eagerly. Slowly the white deposit took on a
tinge of purple, which grew darker and darker until


blue became the colour of the substance. A minute
later and this had changed to a dull black mass.
“ Why, Tom, that is silver ! ” exclaimed the parson,
-somewhat excitedly. “ We’ve tried it for silver scores
of times, but could find no trace.
Tom laid down the bottle. “Yes, it is silver,” he
said. “ And there must be about five hundred ounces
of it to the ton of ore.”
« But,” began Sam, “ I have been in parties which
tried it for silver too, and couldn’t get any. Jove ! if
you are right, Tom, this north country is made of that
stuff.” . ~,,
Tom felt important for the first time in his life. “It
is silver,” he said, “ but only a first-class analyst could
have discovered that fact ”
“ Britannia rules the sand-ridges !” cried Dave, “but
you are more than first-class, Tom.
“ No, Dave; I did not mean that. I meant what
I said, but I could not have told you had it not been
that my late employer in Sydney received an unknown
ore from the Broken Hill mines to assay. No one
knew what it was, and it had been left alone by the
mine managers for a long time, for seemingly it was
not silver nor anything of value. But my employei
was a first-class chemist and analyst, and after much
experiment, in which I assisted, he found that the
discarded ore was really a chloro-bromide of silver,
which of course explained why the ordinary assays
could not determine its nature. This ore is not the
same in appearance as the Broken Hill stuff, and it
occurs in much larger lodes apparently ; but I remem-
bered the tests, and half suspecting that it might be a
chloro-bromide, or something which would answer to
the same tests, I applied them, and you see the results.
“ And it means, Tom,” the parson said, “ more than


can be readily imagined—it means that the many
hundred tons already treated for its gold contents and
thrown away can be taken up again and made to yield
its silver spoil. It also means that in the working of
the numerous well-known lodes of that ore, hitherto
thought unprofitable to handle, the prospectors and
miners of the North will find employment that will
yield a handsome return for their labours.”
“Then let us go out and prospect for some good
shows now,” put in Dirty Sam. “When the news
leaks out, the country will be so overrun with pro-
spectors that our chances of finding anything good
will not amount to much.”
“ Home, sweet home ! ” yelled Dave. “ Aint we got
our claims already ? Hasn’t Tom found a Chinkies'
camp working the stuff ? They have no right to it.
They is not Australians. I vote we go and hunt them
outen their show and work it ourselves.”
“You would have your work cut out if you tried
that, Dave,” the parson said, with a laugh. “We’ll
leave the Chinese gentry alone and ”
“When Johnnie comes slinkin' home! We won't
get the chance,” interrupted Dave. “ See what’s
cornin’ up the gully. Out with your guns, boys, an’
git under cover ”
There was reason for Dave's words. A number of
Chinese had suddenly come into sight from the village
end of the gorge. They were brandishing clubs, and
knives mounted on long handles, and had evidently
come out on business that meant trouble for some
one. When they saw the white men they uttered
a yell of triumph and rushed towards them. A tall,
powerful-looking fellow ran in front of the others and
charged straight at the parson, who promptly advanced
to meet him.


“ Take that, you yellow barbarian I" were the
parson's first words as they met.
The yellow barbarian took it—it was a blow which
felled him as if it had been the kick of a horse. And
now the battle was joined. It did not last long. The
parson caught two of the Chinamen, and, after knock-
ing their heads together, threw them to the ground
and turned his attention to another couple, with whom
he did likewise. Dave had got his man down and was
going through his pockets, but what he hoped to find
therein probably he could not have told himself. Mike
and Sam had easily accounted for their opponents, and
were looking round for more ; but there were none.
The last man—the one Tom and Nigger had tackled
simultaneously—was flying down the gully, shrieking
wildly, carrying Nigger with him hanging on to his
pigtail.
“Come back, Nigger !" cried Tom, laughing at his
dog’s method of fighting Chinamen. “ Come back at
once !"
“That dog knows how to deal with Chows, any-
how,” laughed Dave, toying with his knife suggestively
over his terror-stricken victim's head. “ They say that
a Chinkie won’t get into heaven if he has lost his pig-
tail,” he mused. “Is that so, parson ? ”
The parson at the moment was engaged tying some
of the Chinamen together by their pigtails, but he
looked up sharply at Dave's words.
“ Dave, you cold-blooded reprobate I" he cried.
“You know yourself that you might as well kill the
man outright as cut off his pigtail. He would pro-
bably take his own life rather than endure such a
lasting disgrace ”
“No cuty pigtaily 1” wailed one of the Celestials,
noting with considerable alarm that such a proposition


was the subject of discussion. “Me givy muchy
gol', an' it allee samee to white plospectol. Me tellee
you gleat seclet too. Me know whele to gety muchy
gol'."
“An’ Chung Fu tellee too," cried another, as Mike
bound his appendage to the group already tied up by
the parson.
“ Wha’ fo’ you touchy me ? " demanded Sam's man,
working up a fit of virtuous indignation which afforded
Sam much amusement. “ I pay poll taxee. You no’
light muldel me. I tellee p’lice magistlate, an he
hangy you all upy. He know me an’ believe me, fol
Ah Sing speaky tluth allee samee him ”
“ What a talking-machine you are ! ” Sam laughed,
good-naturedly. “ When you speaky tluth will
you tell how you attacked us with knives and
clubs ? ”
“How muchy money to letee me flee?" broke in
one who had not yet spoken. “ I leady pay fo’ gettin’
bested. My wold 1 You bet ! Wun Lung no fool.
He know white plospectol want money."
“Yes,” said the parson, “ the poor white prospector
wants money, and he suffers a lot to get sufficient for
his needs, even to the extent of living in a sun-baked
country infested with you people. He doesn't in this
case want yours, though, so get up and clear out. If
you come within rifle range of us again I’ll not be
responsible for what happens. Go.”
“ We can't gety upy," screamed the entangled mass
of men as they struggled to regain their feet, almost
scalping each other in their vain attempts.
“ Here we suffer heat and pain !" roared Dave,
making a slight mistake in his quotation. “ It are a
fact, boys, the Chinkies can't git up, they’re hobbled
too close. We’ll have to cut them loose after all.”


He fingered his knife lovingly.
“No, no!" yelled the unfortunate men. “Weliky
lie hele."
“ But we don't liky you lying there," Dirty Sam said.
“ Lend a hand, boys, and we’ll lift them ; they can
then, with care, walk away at the rate of a mile in a
few hours, if they don't trip over each other."
“Which will be sufficient punishment for them,”
the parson added, as the Chinamen were carefully
raised together to a vertical position, they keeping
their bodies stiff while the operation was performed.
“Now," said the parson, “some of you will have
to walk backwards, and your hair will probably get
severe tugs when any of you stumble into holes. It
won't come out by the root, however, and I hope your
journey will be a lesson to you, and that in future you
will steer clear of white prospectors who have no desire
to interfere with you.”
The Chinamen went, and provided amusement for
Dave with their grotesque movements, stumblings, and
quarrels, until he suddenly discovered that his comrades
had gone up the gully to look for the best road over
the last ridge. He hurriedly rejoined them, an idea
having just occurred to him that there might be
Chinamen lurking behind the many boulders in the
gully large enough to conceal them.
“ That is the entrance to the cave, over by that half-
burnt tree,” Tom was saying. “I found complete
directions as to finding it in the patent medicine book
Dave took away from the village."
“ Suppose we go in and have a look at it ?" sug-
gested Dirty Sam. “ Surely if Tom could dodge among
the people we can "
“ Don’t be too sure that they wern’t aware of Tom's
presence," the parson said. “My opinion is that we


should saddle up and get over to the white miners'
camp without delay. I don't like the look of things,
and I feel certain that the Chinese are up to some game
just now."
“That's all very good for you, parson,” argued Sam.
“The boys of any camp will be glad to have you
among them, but we're prospectors ourselves, and it
would look as if we were wanting to share in any
good thing they may have found, if we force ourselves
upon them."
“ I'm with you there, Sam,” said Mike. “We don’t
want to share in anything other fellows may have
risked a lot to find. We can prospect for ourselves,
and with Tom's knowledge of ores we may ride over
a valuable reef of that chloro-bromide of silver any
moment.”
“Gentlemen,” spoke the parson, “you are slightly
mistaken in one or two things, and perhaps it will be
as well if I explain before matters become more com-
plicated. In the first place, lam not visiting this camp
I know, as a parson, I am going to it as its chief. I
have been expected there for over a week now, but I
delayed so as to bring Tom up with me. You men
are also expected there some time, because the men
know that Mr. Hornsby intended rejoining his old
comrades when relieved of the Caledonia Mines
management. He and I contributed the money
required to erect suitable plant for extracting the gold
from the strange ore, and the men of Caledonia Camp
—at least those who were with Mr. Hornsby or me
during our prospecting trips—have all shares in the
commune to which we are now going.”
“ God save Annie Laurie ! ” Dave broke in. “ Does
ye mean to say that the fellows we were with when the
Chinkies rushed us are in this camp ? "


“ Some of them, Dave; also some of those Sam
knows, and a good number of the men who took part
in that scheme of outwitting the yellowmen by dis-
guising themselves as natives "
“ But, parson," said Mike, “I understood from what
you and Mr. Hornsby told me down south that
although we were to prospect around, our real business
was to hunt up Tom's uncle ?”
“That is our real mission up here. He was a
member of the camp I have mentioned, and we are
to hear of him there,”
“ One other question then, parson," cried Dirty Sam.
“Why did you object so strongly, last year, to our
coming north to look for the secret city of the
Chinese ? ”
“ Because you might have found it.”
“Oh 1 would that have mattered ? "
“ Yes ; it would have upset the plans of a scheme
which will be the talk of Queensland, perhaps of the
world, shortly. Boys, I know that secret city, I was
not always a wandering parson, only.”
“ Then this isn’t it down this hole here ? ” Dave
asked. “We won't go home till morning, but I was
just telling myself a boncer of a story about us seizing
it in the middle of the night and getting whips o’ gold,
and Chinese josses made of diamonds an’ opals an' ”
“ Screw it off, Dave,” growled Dirty Sam ; “ I can
see the parson has a story of his own to spring upon
us which will make any other yarn of small account."
“ I have, boys, but it will do later. When Tom finds
his uncle the whole story will be known, and I have
hopes that that time is not more than two days distant.
But come, it is getting on in the afternoon; let us
gather in the horses and get over the ridge. We must
strike the camp before sundown.”


“ All right, parson,” said Mike. “ I think I have
understood part of your story for some time. Tom
Willoughby was a fairly tall man with a full black
beard, he was not unlike Long Tom down at Crocodile
Crossing ? ” He looked at the parson curiously as he
spoke.
“ Yes, the resemblance between them was remark-
able. They were comrades, and have undergone
many hardships together while pioneering in the great
North.”
“Ah well,” said Dirty Sam, “Long Tom has struck
it rich now, for with the Caledonia Company behind
the boys of Crocodile Crossing to buy their ore, they’ll
make a fair fortune very soon.”
“And that they owe to Tom here,” put in Mike. “I
reckon they owe him an interest in Crocodile Crossing
mines.”
“ Which they admit,” said the parson. “ The leases
are held in trust for the men who voluntarily gave
their services to Mr. Hornsby when he so much
needed help, in the names of Mr. Hornsby, Tom
Willoughby, Long Tom’s, and my own.”
“ I don’t think I was ever told your name, sir,”
Tom broke in. “ I would like to know it.”
The parson laughed. “ You ought to know by this
time, Tom, that names mean very little up here. You
know Mike’s story and Dirty Sam's. They have no
names other than those titles, nor have I other than
that by which I am generally addressed. Still, you
may know me by name very soon, but until you do
don't inquire further.”
The five men and the dog walked over to where
the horses were feeding, and led them in to where
the packs and saddles were lying. Half an hour after-
wards they climbed to the summit of the range, leading


their steeds, and began to descend to the plains on
the other side, through which a large tributary of the
Palmer River ran its somewhat erratic course. The
country on this side of the hill was highly mineralised.
Great blows of copper carbonate reared their green
crests above smaller outcrops of silver and lead.
Other reefs showed the presence of antimony, and
some of the highly coloured ores of bismuth.
“ This place must be where old Nature keeps her
stores,” Dave remarked, as his experienced eyes took
in the nature of the country. “And to think that the
worth-a-guinea-a-box Chows have even got into the
inside where the Home, sweet Home stuff grows.”
Dave spoke very feelingly, but no one made any
response. Each had his own thoughts on the subject,
and had mentally decided to visit the Chinese before
long.
After an hour’s travelling the country became more
settled, and by exercising extreme caution they were
able to ride. Half an hour later they reached the river,
and crossing it they rode up the opposite hillside, and
entered a gorge very similar in appearance to the one
in which they had last camped. This gorge split into
several smaller ones as the top of the hill was neared,
and finally, after rounding several bluffs in the course
of one of these feeders, the parson announced that
they had reached their destination.
“ But there is no camp here,” said Dirty Sam won-
deringly, “ and our horses can't go over that rock
ahead.”
“The camp is on the top of that bluff,” the parson
answered, “ and we go up by ladder.”
“But our horses?” asked Mike. “ How can they
go up ? ”
“ They can feed here. Along the top of that rock


\ jyk
ii* ■ JhK jEK
v • V,' t 1
“ LEADING THEIR STEEDS THEY BEGAN TO DESCEND TO THE
PLAINS ON THE OTHER SIDI
[T.




in front runs the Government track to the township of
Laura, the present terminus of the railway from Cook-
town, and the camp is situated right on the road. The
workings are scattered throughout the gullies around
us, and the men come down the ladder-way every
morning and return at sundown. The Chinese dare
not come here unless on legitimate business, as the
camp is now a Government surveyed site of a town-
ship in daily connection with Laura, and if they cause
trouble the attention of the Government would be
drawn upon them at once. Hitherto, they have
occasionally visited the camp to purchase any com-
modity of which they had run short, and at such times
they pretended to be very simple, harmless people.
But the men know better than to trust them, and take
care that they are never isolated from their comrades
while working in the more distant gullies. I expect
the yellowmen will cause trouble before long not-
withstanding."
The parson led the way to a cunningly contrived
ladder, which stretched from the base of the cliff to
the top, and the bottom of which was hidden in a
clump of fern-like vegetation. “ There is another
road," he remarked, “ but it leads round from the
Palmer River. No one is supposed to know this way
but the members of the camp." By the time he had
finished speaking the horses had been unsaddled and
the packs removed, and while the parson and Dirty
Sam made their goods safe for the night by covering
them with the saddle cloths, their comrades hobbled
the steeds and placed bells on their necks. Then,
following the parson, who carried Nigger, they began
to scale the ladder, reaching the top just as the sun
dropped behind the range in which was the wonderful
cave. A large camp burst upon their gaze at once.


There were one or two partly rough-hewn wood and
galvanised iron erections, several bark huts and bough
shades, and about a score of tents of various sizes.
Near one of the most imposing erections a cooking
galley had been built of ant beds, and round it, with
pipes in their mouths, were grouped about thirty men.
They were all typical north country prospectors. Some
had full beards, and some only sported moustaches, but
all had the sun-baked, wrinkled features so character-
istic of the people of the country, and which rendered
it almost impossible to guess their ages. Still, they
were all comparatively young men, health and strength
showing in every line of their figures.
Tom thought they looked very like the men of
Caledonia Camp, and wondered if his uncle were
among the group round the cooking-galley. But he
was allowed little time for conjecture. The men
suddenly perceived the visitors, and even in the fast-
falling light recognised them.
“ It’s the boss I” cried one, rushing forward; “ an’, by
the pigtail I haven't grown, O’Flannigan is with him.”
“And old Hard-swearing Dave,” cried another;
“and Dirty Sam.”
The newcomers were now surrounded, and during
the next ten minutes were forced to submit to a wel-
come more vigorous than many a rough-and-tumble
fight. In this period every one talked at once, com-
pletely indifferent to the fact that their words could
not be heard, and that a battle royal between two dogs
was being fought beside them.
At length the parson managed to make his voice
heard above the babel of sound. “We're hungry,
boys,” he cried.
“And tucker is just ready,” answered one. “But
say, boss, who is the youngster ? ”


“A friend of mine who has made a discovery by
which all you fellows will profit considerably. He is
looking for a lost uncle. Do any of you happen to
know anything about Tom Willoughby ? "
“ Every man in the Gulf country has heard of him,"
several men answered simultaneously, and one added,
“He was the fellow who led the big wolfram rush,
and dozens more."
“And who first struck the gold at Gamboola, the
silver-lead of Mount Athertoon, and the copper round
the Walsh country," another cried.
“And who told all his mates before he pegged out
an inch of ground for himself," put in the first speaker.
“Tom Willoughby was white right through, and I’ll
knock sparks out of any man who says he wasn’t."
But all had gone to help the cook. They wouldn't
have disagreed with Dick Ford in any case.
“Did you know him personally, Dick?” the parson
asked, in a peculiar voice.
“ I did, long ago, before he went out on the west
track. They old boys—of which he was one —are all
scattered now, and I never heard of him again until
Long Tom, who is now down somewhere near Mur-
goona, told me, the last time I saw him, that he was
certain that he had come back and had gone to live
with the Chinese."
“ My uncle among the Chinese ? ” gasped Tom.
“Yes; but Tom Willoughby was no fool, and I
wouldn't mind betting there is more lying behind
his living with them than any one knows—that is, if
Long Tom was right.”
“ Would you know him if you saw him, Dick ?"
Again Tom thought the parson's voice was strange.
“ You just bet I would,” replied Dick. “ You never
saw him, lad ? No ? Well, he was a man of about


the boss’s build and size, only he had a full, black
beard, and could talk Chinese, nigger, and every other
language. He was a marvel in other ways, too. I saw
him knock out three men once in a stand-up fight.
He was easily the best man with his fists I ever saw."
“ Tucker is waiting,” a man came forward and an-
nounced, and the question of tucker being more
important to hungry miners than anything else, the
conversation ceased abruptly.
That meal was prolonged far into the night. All
had so much to say, and all had to inquire about
so many friends. Some of the men had taken part
in expeditions and adventures in which Dirty Sam
had been a prominent figure ; some had been in the
party with which Mike had been associated; and all
knew Dave, and were greatly surprised at the change
in his style of language.
Tom was sorely disappointed at not finding his
uncle among the men ; but he listened with great
pleasure to tales of his exploits as related to him by
Dick Ford, who had devoted himself almost entirely
to Tom during the evening.
“ Boys," spoke the parson, after all stories had been
exchanged, “ I am going to have a look round the old
place. I know the way about, and I want some
exercise.”
“All right, boss," said Dick, who seemed to be a
sort of leader in the camp. “ But watch you don't get
in among the dumps of that black mullock we've
stacked."
“ Those dumps, Dick, carry about five hundred
ounces of silver to the ton, so you will have to cease
calling the stuff mullock. But it is Tom’s discovery ;
he can tell you all about it."
“ What ! ” roared the men. “ Silver in that stuff


" e ve thrown away ? " Their astonishment was great,
but they knew that their “ boss ” never said anything
without good reason for his words.
“Weve got about six or seven hundred tons of it
l>ing around now, said one man, “and none of the
shows we are working have any appearance of fizzling
out yet. \\ e can blow out ten tons a day easily.”
t nd if the Chinamen continue to leave us alone
we’H make our fortune soon,” the parson added. Then
going over to Tom he said in his ear; “ Don’t worry
about your uncle. I know where he is, and very soon
you will meet him.” Next moment he had gone, and
the men went on with their conversations, now greatly
excited with the knowledge that the refuse thrown
away, after the ore had been treated for gold, carried
such an amount of silver.
But finally the desire to know more about people
than to discuss prospects of wealth drove the matter
temporarily from their minds, and many were the
inquiries for Hungry Ted, Bullocky Bill, Tommy the
Kangaroo, Ginger Bob, and Peter the Poet. Suddenly
Tom became interested in the general conversation,
and for the moment he ceased questioning Dick about
his uncle.
es, we heard Chillagoe Charlie was collared,”
some one was saying. “ But we didn’t pay much heed
to the yarn. Charlie is too slippery for any one to
hold, and I’ll bet a plug of tobacco that he’ll be back
among the Closed Fist gang before long.”
« :; What iS the Closed Fist ? ” Dirty Sam asked.
‘ This part of the world seems to be crowded with
gangs, secret camps, Chinese, and other things equally
bad.”
“The Closed Fist gang is the name of a band of
Chinese who discovered a rich pocket of gold or
19


something else not very far from here," explained the
man who had commented on the amount of ore at the
camp’s disposal. “ Their leader is a fellow who got his
pigtail cut off somehow and he wears a mask. They
have never troubled us in the slightest, and we think
they are half decent fellows.'
« Do you mean that Chillagoe Charlie is a China-
man ? ” cried Mike in amazement. The very idea
seemed preposterous.
“ u looks like that, anyhow ; he is the boss of that
gang "
“ Three blind mice !" ejaculated Dave.
“ Where ?” cried the men, looking round.
il Not anywhere, you fools ! ’ answered Dave. Can t
ye see I’m relievin’ my feelings with a hymn ? I was
going to say to Tom that it was just as well he didn t
sing out to Charlie when he saw him last night.’’
“Who saw Charlie last night?" asked Dick Ford.
“I thought he had been captured?” Dick had not
been listening to the earlier conversation on the subject.
“Then he has escaped again,” said Tom; “for last
night I got into the heart of the mountain where
evidently the Closed Fist people have their home, and
I saw Chillagoe Charlie among them.
“You got in among the Closed Fists?” cried the
men incredulously.
“He did,” said Dirty Sam, “and brought back
enough stores to last our party a week, as well as
samples of the ore they were working.”
“ Great Australia ! ” gasped Dick. “ Boy, you have
been where none of us would dream of going even if
we knew where it was. You are just like your
uncle ”
“ Do none of you know where their place is ? ” asked
Tom.


“ No; one of our mates, Always 111 Joe, thought he
had found out, but we reckon the Chinese must have
heard of his yarn. Anyhow we got him down in the
big gully one morning with a piece of cotton twisted
round his neck. He was as dead as that tree over
there "
“ Had a booklet on patent medicines ? ” Tom
asked with a shudder.
“ Yes I how did you know ? " cried some of the men
in surprise.
He was always reading some kind of advertisement
about the value of somebody’s pills," said Dick sorrow-
fully. 'Poor Always 111 Joe. He's gone where he'll
not need medicines of any kind "
“ And d was the Chinese gave him his ticket," put in
one of the men.
“ Yes," said Tom, fumbling in his pocket and pro-
ducing the book Dave had appropriated. "And he
had found out where the place was, for it was this
book which gave me the directions ”
“ That is the book he always carried," cried a man.
"Where did you get it?"
Dave found it in the Chinese township over the
big dividing range."
“A life in an ocean grave ! I've been looking for
that book everywhere," interrupted Dave. "It had
some hymns I never knew before."
Tom silently passed the book over to Dave, and
the men clustered round to look at the relic of their
unfortunate comrade. Any doubt as to whether his
death was due to the Chinese or not was now removed
by the knowledge that his treasured book had been
ound in their village, and murmurs of indignation
against the yellow invaders arose from all.
"We’ll go to that camp of theirs hidden in the


mountain and wipe them out,” said a man known
among his comrades as Sailor Bill.
<< B u t the people of the village and those ot the
cave are two different lots,” reasoned one named
Carbonate Chris. “We have reason to believe the
Closed Fists are not bad fellows, and I don t think
they had any hand in the affair. Why, was it not
them who sent word to us about the big reef, and
where to find it ? , . , „
“We’ll leave the matter for the boss to decide,
said Dick. “ I wonder where he has gone ? ”
t( he is all right,” Carbonate Chris laughed.
“ I’ll back him against even Chillagoe Charlie if the
two met and had to fight it out.
« But they won’t fight if they meet,” put in Tom ;
“ the parson and he are friends.
« You seem to know a mighty lot about things
for a kid,” said a man known as The Wallaby.
« How do you happen to know anything about that
half-caste Chinaman people call Chillagoe Charlie ?
«j have met him several times, and I rode with
him through the bush from the Walsh River up to
near the Mitchell. He is a gentleman, and is no
more a half-caste Chinaman than I am.”^
« That was the night he was captured, Dirty Sam
explained. “Charlie stuck up the troopers in Cale-
donia Camp, and told Tom his uncle was up here,
and they both rode away together.”
“ But how could he be captured, then ? aske
“ Don’t know. Mike and I thought he had doubled
back on a fresh horse he had hidden somewhere
near where he left Tom, but as the troopers had
already proved that every man in camp was Charlie,
and every person they had met between camp and


Crocodile Crossing, we came round to believe with
the parson that they had seen a swagsman passing
by and had hobbled him."
“Mike,” interrupted Dave, “you're not forgetting
our little secret, are you ?”
“No, Dave; we’ll share that thousand pounds the
first chance we get.”
“What thousand pounds, Mike?” asked one of
the men. “ I didn't know you could raise that
amount ? ”
“Oh yes, Dave and I can raise that easily,” Mike
laughed strangely. “ But we'll need a lot more than
that before we can afford to leave the Gulf country
to the Chinamen.”
And so the talk went on, changing with delightful
abruptness from subject to subject; from the story
of how the parson had formed the present camp
from the remnants of several other disbanded parties
of prospectors, to tales of New Guinean gold rushes.
Then Chillagoe Charlie would get a share of attention,
and then some old comrades. After that the many
stories current about the great prospector, Tom
Willoughby, would be told, and then the Chinese
would form the subject of discussion. Tom heard the
narrative of how some of the men present, including
Mike, had worked a rich deposit right in among the
Chinese, disguised as aborigines. These natives were
still numerous in the Gulf country, it seemed, and
both white and yellow men strove to enlist them
as friends. Thus the disguised white men were
allowed to work out their ‘ find' in peace, the
hateful Chinamen apparently never suspecting that
their neighbours were other than a few harmless
natives, and were careful to leave them alone.
The men sat round a long table inside an erection


open on every side to the air. A couple of lanterns
swung from the bark roof, and lit up the scene
with peculiar effect. Outside, in the cooking galley,
Nigger and the camp dogs slept together as peace-
fully as though there never had been any trouble
between them. They knew who was master now,
and Nigger did not mind the price he had paid
in skin and hair in securing that position.
Meanwhile the hands on the dial of the little
American clock hanging on a nail inside the dining
shade crawled round to twelve ; but the parson was
still absent.
Dick rose to his feet and stretched himself. “ It's
getting late, boys," he said, “ and I think we’d better
turn in. You new fellows can have that place over by
the forge amongst you. That is the visitors' camp. I'll
wait up for the boss ; he has a place of his own here,
but maybe it needs something done to it.”
“This will be the first night's sleep we have had since
leaving Caledonia Camp,” said Dirty Sam, “ in which
we were not in danger from either aborigines or the
Chinese.”
“ I don’t think there is really any danger here,”
Dick responded. “But I can’t say I feel too happy over
the way things are looking. To put it straight, matters
are mighty suspicious-like. We haven't seen a nigger
for over a fortnight, and they used to come round
the camp for tucker every day. As for yellowskins,
we never see them at all now, and when a Chow
is quiet you may be sure his cunning brain is working
out some idea that doesn't mean good to any one
but himself.”
“ They tried a game on us when coming up,”
said Dirty Sam ; “ the biggest crowd of niggers I ever
saw tried to surround us, and the parson saw a lot


of Chinamen among them. We got through all right
though, but only to-day we had a kind of fight with
about a dozen Chinese Good-night, boys ”
A loud bark from Nigger startled all, and then the
other dogs joined in with the chorus. Next moment
the thunder of hoofs was heard coming down the
track, and while the men wondered among themselves
who could be travelling that way at midnight, a rider
drew up just outside the reach of the firelight. “ You
are being surrounded by aborigines from the south
and Chinese from the north,” he cried ; “ I have just
come through the Chinese lines, and overheard the
plot.”
“ Come in and have a drink of tea,” Dick cried,
flashing a lantern in the direction of the visitor. “We
are much obliged for your warning.”
“ No, thanks,” replied the stranger, setting spurs
to his steed. “ Some other time.” As he turned the
light fell upon his face ; it was masked.
“ Chillagoe Charlie ! ” exclaimed the men.
The sound of galloping hoof-beats receding down
the track was their only answer.
“ I wish the boss would turn up,” spoke Dick
anxiously, some time after, as the men held a council
of war. “He is the man to know what to do.”
“ What is the matter, boys ? I thought you would
all have turned in long ago,” a voice cried from
the darkness, and the parson walked up to the fire.


CHAPTER XIV
WHITE, BLACK, AND YELLOW
“VOU don't seem a bit surprised, boss?” The
X speaker was Dick Ford, and the parson had
just been told about their visitor, and his warning
concerning the intentions of both aborigines and
the Chinese.
“ No, Dick, I knew this was coming,” the parson
replied. “In fact, it was to find out their plans exactly
that I left you to-night. I understand Chinese, you
know ”
“ What ! Were you among the Chinese to-
night ? ” cried the men, as they realised the import
of his words.
“I was in a big Chinese encampment not much
more than a mile from here. It is completely hidden
at the head of one of the gullies which slopes to
the Palmer, and there are over two hundred men
in it.”
“ Great gum suckers!” ejaculated Dick Ford; “ I
never dreamt that their hidden city was so near.”
u And it isn’t,” said the parson. “ The encampment
is not their city. I have been in that place too,
but not to-night. It lies over among the lime bluffs at
the north end of the dividing range.”
“An’ what are they doin’ with so many cities an'


camps ? " Dave asked. “ Wouldn't they be better to be
all together in one place ? ”
“ I thought you knew the Chinese better than that,
Dave," put in Dirty Sam. “ They must spread over
the country as much as they can to draw attention
away from their secret city. They know that the
prospectors will not attack them in force, and feel
they are quite safe in small parties anywhere. The
might of the great Australian Commonwealth protects
them, for you may be sure every Chinaman you
see above ground has paid his poll-tax. In this city,
however, you may be equally sure that none have paid
anything to the Government exchequer."
“ You are right, Sam," the parson said. “ Their city
is underground, and is populated by men who never
show face above ground during the daytime. There
are some marvellously rich gold formations around
it, and the people work them on communistic
principles. It is the duty of every registered China-
man to do anything and everything to prevent that
city from being discovered, and all villages, encamp-
ments, or working parties in evidence anywhere are
but decoys.”
“Then why should we worry about this encamp-
ment you have seen near us?" asked Sailor Bill. “If
it is just another decoy we need not trouble "
“But it is not meant to be seen. It is too well
hidden, and that is what gives its nature away.
There is no use my telling you how I found it out
just now | sufficient to say that in that almost closed
gully lies every Chinaman that could be spared from
the city, and also as many as possible of those scattered
parties as could be taken without causing the chance
prospector to wonder why the gold-washing China-
man had grown so scarce. But this is their idea : The


white man must be exterminated up here. They could
easily bring about that end themselves, for, for every
white prospector there are a dozen Chinamen in the
country, and wherever they find one or two men
among the mountains alone, as we all know, they do
not hesitate to make away with them. But we are a big
party ; as a matter of fact, since the early Palmer rush,
when the Chinese flooded the land, and assisted nature
to drive out the white man, no party of anything like
our strength has been here. They, being extremely
prudent people, therefore wish to take precautions
against the consequences, should by any possibility
some of us escape. Whoever did get away, of course,
would tell of the massacre and raise the feeling against
the Chinese to such a point that the Government would
speedily send up an army of special duty troopers
to drive them down into the Gulf. So they have
arranged with the aborigines to attack us, and the
story that will go forth will bring down punishment on
these poor creatures, and doubtless many of the gold-
washing Chinese parties will tell how they witnessed
the fight, but could not help us.”
“ You talk like a mighty good story-book, boss,”
Dick Ford said; “but don’t you think that we
could give the aborigines more than we got from
them ? ”
“ Certainly, Dick ; but it won’t be aborigines who
will give us trouble ; it will be that encampment of
Chinamen, stripped, and painted to look like
aborigines.”
“ The same dodge as they already tried on us coming
up ? ” Mike asked.
“Exactly; only this time they know we are here,
and they intend to make sure work. As I said, I was
in among them to-night and heard their plans.”


“Oh, that will be joyful! Did you see Chillagoe
Charlie among them ? ” asked Dave.
“ No, I didn't see him," the parson responded.
“ are mighty curious how he should give his own
people away," muttered one of the men. “Of course,
them half-castes are never true to their own kind."
“Do you think that Chillagoe Charlie is a half-
caste ?" the parson asked curiously.
“ Well, the boys talked the thing over to-night, and
it seems as if there is nothing else he could be."
The parson laughed as if he had just heard the best
joke ever uttered.
“You've solved the problem of getting rid of the
Chinese," he said. “Just you write down to the
trooper superintendent at Murgoona and tell him that
Chillagoe Charlie is a Chinaman, and he’ll come up with
his men and arrest every Chinaman in the country."
“ The cottage was a hashed one !" roared Dave,
almost choking with laughter as the memory of the
superintendent's exploits came back to him; “ but
that’s the best idea struck to-night."
Mike, Sam, and Tom were also tickled immensely at
the parson's suggestion, and laughed so heartily that
the men of the camp who did not know the cause
of the merriment began to think they had taken leave
of their senses.
Finally Sailor Bill put a piece of rope into Dave's
palm, and that individual, thinking he had grasped a
snake, stopped so suddenly that it was some seconds
before he could give vent to his disgust in appropriate
language. While he was expressing himself the
others moved a little bit away, and began to discuss
their plan of action.
“You don’t mean to take this thing lying down,
boss, do you ?" Dick Ford asked.


“Not exactly ; but we’re not going to give them the
satisfaction of fighting them.”
“What else can we do, sir?” Tom inquired.
“ Surely we're not going to run away ? ”
“ No, Tom ; there are two reasons why we won't run
away. One is that we are surrounded now, and the
other is that our horses have been stolen.”
“What! The camp horses stolen?” gasped
Dick. “By smoke ! this is more serious than it
looked.”
“Have our horses been taken?” Mike asked
anxiously.
“ Well, I saw about fifty being driven into a yard
behind their camp, and I recognised my own, Tom's
—by the way, you didn't notice what kind of horse
your visitor was riding to-night, I suppose ? No ?
It doesn’t matter any way—a lot of this camp’s horses,
and some I didn't know.”
“ By Jupiter ! parson, I’m not going to sit down and
allow some dirty Chinamen to keep my horse,”
Mike exclaimed ; “ I’ll fight the beggars myself first.”
“ I'm with you, Mike,” said Sam quietly. “My
horse was Mr. Hornsby’s bay, and I could never look
him in the face again if I had lost it”
“And I’m going with you,” cried Tom. “Chillagoe
Charlie gave me mine, and I am going to keep it in
remembrance of him.”
“ I reckon we’re all going for those horses,” put in
Dick Ford very quietly. “ It's all very good lying low
when it's only danger to ourselves that's threatened,
but when it comes to allowing our horses to be stolen
by a mob of Chinamen I reckon we've got to take a
hand in the game right suddenly.”
“Hear! hear!” yelled all. “That's the ticket
exactly.”


“ Onward, Christian soldiers 1 ” roared Dave. “ Let’s
start now before they begin to go through our
packs."
“ They haven't got our packs, Dave," the parson
said ; “ but all the same we’re going to start now,
although not on such a hopeless and foolish mission
as to try to regain our horses. Even although we had
them we couldn’t use them unless we meant to break
through the lines somewhere, and leave all our
property to John Chinamen.”
“ Then what’s your plan, boss ?" Dick asked ;“ I
for one won't desert our camp alive."
“Nor me I Nor me I Nor me 1” shouted the men
one after the other, and Dave to clinch matters added,
“Nor will I, although I am killed deader than
ten Chinkies. God save the King!” The men
laughed at the fervour of Dave's language, and then
turned to the parson again.
u Your plan, boss ?" repeated Dick, testing the
sharpness of his sheath-knife with his finger.
“ My plan,” answered the parson, “ means neither to
fight nor to run away, but simply to upset their plans,"
“ Very good, boss ; how are we to do that ? " Dick
continued ; “ the Chinese are up to every game we
could play in stratagem.”
“ I don’t know about that ; and even although they
do see through our scheme, they may not be able to
help themselves."
“Tell us, parson, or I'll have to sing a whole hymn,"
entreated Dave, and to the relief of every one who
knew Dave’s vocal powers the parson began : “My
plan is not complete in detail, but I'll give you the
idea and then we can all elaborate it until it is perfect.
Briefly it is this. There are two distinct forces against
us, and my idea is to turn them against each other."


“ A hundred fathoms deep in a copper mine ! But
isn't the parson a powerful thinker ? " cried Dave in
great delight; “ I knew he would strike on a bosker
plan.”
“ How are we going to do it ? ” Dick asked thought-
fully. Already his mind and that of all the others
had seized on the idea.
“ Well, I overheard to-night that the Chinese don't
mean to force matters until the night of some corro-
borree the natives mean to hold. They will supply
them with opium for that ceremony, which, they
know, will drive the natives furiously mad. Then
mixing with them they’ll rush us and complete the
business. But as they won't give the opium until the
time appointed, for fear of the natives becoming
unreasonable too soon, and as the first corroborree
that is held among Gulf natives is the new moon cere-
mony, we need not fear an attack until very late
to-morrow night. Now, by starting at once, we can
precipitate matters, and that is what I purpose doing.
It is only one o’clock in the morning, so we have yet
five hours of darkness, and during that time we must
go to the aborigines’ camp and do some damage
there which we must make certain they will attribute
to the Chinese. Then we must visit the Chinese
quarters and cause them to think the aborigines have
broken faith, and raided them. Each party will then
proceed to take revenge upon the other, and probably
we will be quite able to deal with the victorious
remnant.”
il You mean,” said Dirty Sam, u the Chinese and
the aborigines will fight each other and we'll hold
the stakes.”
“ Exactly ; and now let us arrange the details, if the
scheme meets with general approval ? ”


“You bet it does, boss," cried the men.
“We understand," said Dick Ford. “We’ll creep
up in the dark and steal all the weapons we can get
our hands on from the aborigines, and perhaps carry
away their chief. We’ll tie bags round our feet there,
and leave very plain Chinese tracks right round the
bottom of the gullies to the Chinese. Then we’ll go
for the Chinese with the stolen spears and boomerangs,
and, if we can, steal their joss, and make naked foot
tracks round another way to the aborigines. It means
a lot of tramping, but the exercise will be good
for us.”
“ And the fun we'll get to-morrow will pay us well
for our work," laughed Carbonate Chris.
“ Long may it rain !’’ cried Dave. “ Let us turn
Chinese at once and have less talkee-talkee."
“ Shouldn’t we divide ourselves into two parties ? "
suggested Mike. “It would be much easier for a
smaller band to creep up undetected, and we’re not
going to fight in any case."
“Perhaps you are right, Mike,” the parson agreed.
“ We can do the business much faster if we form two
parties."
“ Then pick us out, boss,” cried Sailor Bob, “I am
all-fired to know whether I am to be a Chow or a
nigger."
“ You are to be in the party which will call on the
Chinese," the parson said. “We may be the better of
your skill in the handling of ropes. Men, some of
you know the ways of the aborigines well, and some
of you have had experience of the manners of the
Chinese. Sort yourselves out into two groups, there-
fore, and set about your tasks. I needn’t tell you how
best to aggravate your respective people, for some of
you fellows know as much about them as I do. Do


them no bodily harm, whatever happens, but act so as
to make them very angry."
“All right, parson," said Mike. “ Here are two bands
of raiders for you. Which are you leading yourself ? ”
“ The Chinese section. My knowledge of one or
two things about them may be useful. Dick, you
know the natives well, you know your work. You
will find them camped two miles south from here just
where the main gully opens on the big plain."
“ I know the place, boss,” answered Dick. “ Come
on, lads.”
“And you other fellows come with me,” continued
the parson, “ and bring all the ropes you can get your
hands on.”
The lights of the camp were left burning as a guide
for the men when returning, and the two parties, after
seeing that their revolvers were in working order, set
off on their missions, one going north, the other south.
Tom, Dirty Sam, Sailor Bill and a dozen others
were in the parson's party, to which Nigger, suddenly
waking, also attached himself. Half an hour’s careful
travelling over ridges and gullies brought them to a
spot where the ground fell away in front in a sheer
wall of rock. It was so dark that they might easily
have walked over the precipice, but the parson, ever
observant, stopped in time.
“ This is the edge of the crater of an extinct
volcano,” he said, “ and the encampment is down
below. The only passage out is on the other side, and
doubtless it is guarded. Make those ropes fast on top
and drop the free ends over. Loop the lower end so
that a man can put his foot in it for being hauled up.
“ Let me go down first, Cap.,” said Sailor Bill.
“ I can shin a rope better than a monkey, and I can
see how the land lies and report.”


“All right, Bill; but we’re not all going down in any
case. Most of us must stay on top to pull up what we
may appropriate.”
Sailor Bill grasped the rope and slid over the cliff
without a sound, and all on top waited anxiously for
developments. Soon the rope ceased shaking, and
Dirty Sam, taking it in his hand, felt that the strain
was off.
“He is down,” he whispered. “ Get ready to haul
him up, boys.”
“ I hope he is not behaving foolishly,” the parson
said. 11 He can do nothing down there alone ”
A tug at the rope while he spoke, and immediately
the men began to haul up.
“Jupiter! parson,” Sam exclaimed, “ I doubt Bill
has fainted, the rope is swinging as if there were some
dead body upon it.” The men pulled quickly. No
one spoke, a horrible fear had entered into their
minds. Well they knew the cunning of the yellow-
man, and that his ways were dark and strange. The
parson grasped the swaying body as it appeared, and
pulled it over the ledge. The loop of the rope had
been placed under the armpits, but the figure which
had come up lay as if dead.
“ Poor Bill 1 ” murmured one ; “ the beggars must
have been waiting and knifed him ”
“ Howling centipedes 1 ” gasped a man. “ This isn’t
Bill. It’s a Chinaman ! ”
And he s dead, said another, bending over the
man.
“No, only drugged,” the parson put in. “Lower the
rope again. lam going down. Where's Tom ? ”
But Tom was not among the men. As a matter of
fact he had been down at the bottom as soon as Sailor
Bill. Nigger had begun sniffing at the ground and
20




it upon his shoulders he made his way back to the
hanging rope. There he found Dirty Sam just
coming off. “Give me a hand, Sam,” he said; “I want
to send this fellow aloft.”
“ And you had better get up yourself at once,” Sam
replied. “ The parson is almost mad about you.”
“Tom, you reckless boy,” spoke the parson’s voice
at that moment, as he slid down the rope. “ Why will
you do these things ? ”
“ I couldn’t help it, sir, and I want to be of some
use.”
“ Very well; come with me to where this crater's
walls break into the gully. We must stampede the
horses to make these people think the aborigines did
that to cover up their tracks.
“ But won’t they find our tracks up on top ? ”
“ I don’t think so ; it is a great native dodge making
horses break away to cover tracks, and the men are
carrying everything round to the other side, to give
point to that suspicion. The Chinese will find little
things dropped here and there all down the gully
which will lead them to the camp of the aborigines.”
“ But the bed of the gully is so hard that no tracks
can be left.”
“None of a barefooted native, Tom, but plenty of a
steel-shod horse. That fact enables us to set them off
now, and walk along after them instead of ahead of
them Ah ! there are the sentries, asleep too, each
man dreaming probably of returning to China with
enough money to set up a joss of his own. If Dave
were here he could not resist the temptation to cut off
their pigtails, I am sure.”
“ What are they drugged with, sir ? ”
“ Opium. No Chinamen can resist that; Chillagoe
Charlie gave them a big supply to-night.”


“ I wonder what connection that person can have
with the Chinese ?"
“ Oh, we’ll know some day, I suppose ; but don’t
you feel a little bit afraid, Tom, standing among so
many people whom we have just robbed ?”
" Oh no ; I see our horses over there, and I know
we could get to them before the Chinamen, should
they awake.”
“ Well, we are going to use them now ; all the boys
should be down by this time. Ah, is that you, Bill ?
You seem to have a fair amount of general cargo on
board.”
“ Still room in the forward main hatch, Cap. What
are the orders ? ”
“ Gather your comrades and go off down this gully,
dropping things occasionally to show which way
you've gone. Catch one of the horses and mount the
joss upon it anyway you can. See that you keep clear
of the tracks the other party are making, and get over
to the aborigines' camp. Sam knows what to do
there. Now, Tom, for a piece of bareback riding ”
The parson emitted a low whistle and at once his
own horse and Tom’s came running up. “Knock
down these rails closing in the gully,” the parson then
said to some of the men, “ and we’ll drive the animals
off. Don’t depend on seeing us at the native camp,
for we are going to cut the tracks of Ford’s men now.”
“We know what to do,” Dirty Sam answered, and
next minute the parson and Tom rode off, driving the
other horses in front of them.
“ We’ll put them in a safe place, boys, so don’t try to
get your own just now or you will ruin everything,” he
cried, as they rode past and the men answered that
they understood.
Ten minutes later the two riders had driven the


horses into another gully, where the presence of good
grass would detain the horses better than a fence round
them, and then riding up one gully and down another
in a manner bewildering to Tom, who did not know
where he was, they suddenly climbed a ridge and
looked down on the Chinese from the point where
their rope was still hanging. The sleeping Chinaman
was still lying where he had been left.
“Oh, I forgot Nigger," cried Tom, as they lowered
him down again.
“ Oh, poor Nigger ! I forgot him too, we’ll have to go
back for him," said the parson, but when they had
hauled up the rope and were ready to depart Nigger
was beside them, his long tongue hanging out of his
mouth, and his eyes gazing reproachfully at his
master.
“It was a mistake, Nigger," the parson said; “but
I don't think I could have carried you bareback in any
case.”
They rode slowly to camp, whence, procuring
saddles, and ordering Nigger to stay behind, they
then set out to cut the tracks of those who had
been visiting the natives. They met them about a
mile away, circling round by the east. They were
carrying loads of spears, boomerangs, shields, waddies,
and an heterogeneous collection of other native gear.
They were also carrying a man.
“We had no trouble," Dick Ford said ; “ they were
all asleep and we took away every weapon we could
find, and also their chief. He must have been taking
pidcherie, though, for he hasn’t awoke yet."
“ I have reason to believe Chillagoe Charlie visited
them to-night, and gave them the opium the Chinese
promised them,” the parson answered ; “ but two of
you take him over to camp. Tom can lead you to the


Chinese. lam going after the other boys now. Don’t
wait any longer than is required to throw your spears
and other things among them. Be careful you don't
hurt any one, and break the points of the spears so that
they can’t be used again." He rode off, and under
Tom’s guidance the party proceeded.
An hour afterwards they were back in camp, and
shortly before sunrise the other division returned
safely also.
“Well, Sam,” said Mike, “if you boys have done
your work as well as we have done ours we needn’t care
whether the scheme works any further or not. We
have taken away all the weapons and their chief.”
“And we have left the Chinese joss in his place,”
Sam laughed.
“And you can keel haul me if there is a knife left
among the Chinese,” said Sailor Bill.
“We can now await developments with the know-
ledge that we have removed the stings from both
Chinese and aborigines,” the parson added.
“For which —God save the King I —l say Chillagoe
Charlie deserves us to stand up for his being a real
decent fellow,” Dave remarked. And all agreed.
The men did not go out to work that day. Instead
they took turns and slept, for they knew that all their
powers of endurance might be called upon when night
again fell. The parson, however, seemed to require no
rest; all day he moved about among the gullies and
ridges, and late in the afternoon he came into camp
and informed the men that their ruse had worked so
far, for he had seen Chinese spies in the vicinity of
the native camp, and had also caught sight of some


aborigines looking down over the rocks at the Chinese
encampment.
“They will let everything else go to avenge the
insult to their joss,” the parson said; “so we are
likely to be spectators to-night instead of victims.”
“And the aborigines will be blind to everything but
that their chief has been captured and the yellow-
man's idol left in his sacred place,” Dick Ford laughed.
“ I wouldn't miss seeing the circus for a good lot,”
Carbonate Chris said ; “ I wonder where it will come
off?”
“ I’ll bet Chillagoe Charlie could tell,” observed Dave
sagely; “he is a handy man for having about a
camp.”
“ I can tell you myself,” the parson said with a laugh ;
“ the fight, if we can call it such, will take place at the
bottom of the gully nearest us about nine o’clock
to-night.”
“Who told you, boss ? Were you asking them ? ”
inquired one of the men.
“No; but I have calculated the spot where two
armies would meet, marching towards each other by the
shortest route, allowing, of course, for the different
styles of travelling characteristic of our friends. The
natives will leave their camp after going through their
new moon ceremony, which will begin an hour after
sundown and last one hour. The next hour will see
them at the spot I have indicated. The Chinese will
be there at nine, because it will take them three hours
praying to an improvised joss, after sundown, to get
their feelings worked up to a frenzied point; then they
will come with a rush.”
“ You’ve got it all time-tabled nicely, parson,” Mike
said ; “ who is going to win ? ”
“ I’ll bet on the niggers,” cried Sailor Bill.


“And, Germany for ever I I’ll back the Chinkies,"
roared Dave.
“Ye couldn't fight it out now, I suppose, just to see ? ”
suggested a sportively inclined miner.
“Of course we could,” Dave replied ; “ what do you
say, Sailor ? ”
“I don't mind,” came the answer promptly; “and
Sailor assumed an aggressive attitude.
But the parson at once interfered. “None of this
nonsense, boys,” he said ; “it is more than possible
that you may get all the fighting you want before
morning, and the other side will be neither black
nor yellow.”
“Jupiter 1 parson,” exclaimed Dirty Sam; “what
do you mean ? ”
“ I mean that if certain things take a certain line of
development you may be called out to fight for Mr,
Hornsby. I have learned to-day, from the aborigines,
that he was recently arrested on suspicion of being
Chillagoe Charlie; he escaped soon after, and is now
on his way north here, pursued by a company of
troopers.”
“ Poor old Joe 1 Is that mad trooper boss coming
up here, parson ? ” Dave cried.
“ He is, I believe ; and if he remains obstinate in his
ideas regarding Mr. Hornsby after I have seen him, I
am afraid there will be serious trouble.”
“You bet there will,” murmured the men; but the
cook for that day announcing just then that tea was
ready, an end was put to the discussion, and during the
meal the sun went down.
The chief of the aborigines had now recovered from
the effects of his induced sleep, and seemingly was well
pleased to find himself in the hands of the white
people. “My word ! ” he remarked, as one of the


men handed him a tin of preserved meat and a
pannikin of tea; “you white fellows jolly lucky have
me here. Black fellows come along to-night an’ wipe
you out if King Billy with them.”
“ But they won't come now, King Billy,” said Dirty
Sam ; “ we would have to kill you if they did.”
King Billy's eyes rolled. “My word 1 ” he gasped ;
“ What you kill me for ? King Billy no’ want come
wipe you fellows out. Him friend with fellow with
black face who come off, name Chillagoe Charlie. He
say to King Billy if black fellows no’ come wipe out
white fellows, he give plenty of 'bacca and tucker.”
“ But you intended coming all the same, King Billy ?”
the parson said.
“Oh, King Bill don’t know 'bout that. Yellow
fellows who say muchy-muchy, an' eaty ricy, tell black
fellows they give plenty 'bacca too if black fellows go
for white fellows, but King Billy no sure 'bout them,
they plenty good liars. But black fellows no do
nothing King Billy no’ with them. Hims like some
plenty more tinned dog. Hims like it strong too.”
“All right, King; here's another tin for you. It's
gone bad anyhow and we can't use it ourselves,”
laughed the cook; “ watch that little black dog doesn’t
take it from you, though.” Nigger was sniffing around
the black king very suspiciously, but getting a whiff of
the contents of Billy's new tin he hurriedly ran out
into the fresh air.
“ Hurry up, boys,” cried the cook ; “ don’t be all
night at supper. I want to get a seat in the dress-circle
to-night, and the dishes have to be washed after you’re
done.”
“ We'll give you a hand washing up, Bob,” said
Dirty Sam; “give me some more tea just now.”
“ By smoke ! boys, I hear some one coming off the


ladder, cried Carbonate Chris ; “ maybe its Chillagoe
Charlie.” The men sprang to their feet and gazed
towards the top of their ladderway; a figure was
walking across the space intervening, and next moment
it came within the zone of the lamplight.
“ No, it's not Chillagoe Charlie,” a well-known voice
spoke; “although some friends of mine insist on thrust-
ing that honour upon me.”
“ It’s Mr. Hornsby! ” cried the men in chorus,
running to meet him.
“Yes, you’ve struck the mark first shot, boys; I
believe that is my name. I hope lam not too late
to get something to eat? I can assure you I have
travelled fast enough ”
He threw himself into the nearest seat; it was evident
he was very much exhausted.
«Rocked in the cradle of the Australian bight! ”
roared Dave ; “ what has ye done with the trooper
fellows, boss ? ”
“ Lost them somewhere about the Mitchell River,
Dave ; why do you ask ? ”
“Oh, we know the whole story, the parson got a
wireless message from somewhere telling him every-
thing,” Dave answered, making a place for his late
chief at the end of the table.
“Thanks, Dave,” said Mr. Hornsby, taking the seat
prepared for him ; “ oh, by the way, some of you
boys might see if you can rake up a feed for my mare.
She’s badly needing one; I left her at the bottom of the
ladder. You see, the new manager came, and I well—
I wanted to exercise my horse a bit, so I came up here.
If you happen to be on speaking terms with Chillagoe
Charlie you might give him the hint, all the same, that
some troopers started to come up after me ”
“ We will welcome them on their arrival,” the parson


said quietly. “ I have an impression that the real
Chillagoe Charlie is about tired of all the fuss he is
causing, and means to see what charges there really
are against him.”
“Can he refute them, parson ?” asked Mr. Hornsby
meaningly ; “ because if there is any difficulty about that
I’ll borrow a fresh horse and get on the move again,
and draw the troopers and their silly old chief right
out of Australia after me. I did not know when I
came away that Charlie was up this way, or I wouldn t
have come. I thought he would have doubled back
before reaching the Mitchell.”
“Charlie is up here,” said the parson, “and you
have done the best thing possible for all concerned
in bringing the troopers along ”
“ Yes,” put in one of the men, “’cos we can now kill
them all an' blame it on the Chinese and the niggers.”
“ A good idea, Joe,” several men cried in agreement;
“ we’ll play the Chinkies’ game.”
“ If it comes to a question of trouble between our
boss and the troopers,” Dick Ford said slowly, “ I
reckon the troopers will have to fight us ”
“Nonsense, Dick,” reproved the parson. “There is
no trouble. The troopers are very fine fellows ; they
have simply made a series of mistakes ”
“And ruined some good horses,” Mr. Hornsby
laughed. “ Hullo 1 I didn’t notice that Royalty was
present. How do you do, King Billy ? "
“ Um. Hims don’t do not too bad, but you fellows
too slow in bringing along ’bacca.”
“ A mistake, your majesty,” said Mike, handing him
a plug of a hard black substance, popularly known
throughout the Gulf country as “ kill at a hundred
yards.” The Royal one placed the plug in his mouth
and bit off a piece, which he forthwith proceeded to


chew, and paid no further attention to his surround-
ings.
“ There is a sort of entertainment on to-night, sir,"
Dirty Sam informed Mr. Hornsby; “it starts at nine,
but there may be a crush, therefore those who wish
seats should go early."
“Thanks, Sam, but I'm too tired," Mr. Hornsby
answered ; “ I've been in the saddle for a very long
time, and you know I am not like the parson "
“ Sam," said the parson, “ take the boys away to see
what happens. Mr. Hornsby needs a rest, and I will
stay with him.”
“ I reckon I will stay too,” spoke Mike quietly.
“And I," said Dick Ford ; “the boys can tell us
about the fight afterwards.”
“ Please put some other man in charge of the theatre-
goers, parson," Sam said ; “ you can't cheat me that
way ; if trouble is coming I am going to have a hand
in it ”
“ There is no trouble, Sam "
“ Neveretheless, I intend to stay here, sir, unless you
order me to go away."
“All right, Sam, as you please," said the parson.
Then turning to the others he warned them against
taking any part in the impending fight, and gave
directions how they could reach the best point for
seeing everything.
Shortly afterwards the men departed, leaving only
Mike, Sam, Dick, and Tom in the camp with the
parson and Mr. Hornsby.
“ Hullo ! Tom," said the latter, “ I didn’t see you
before. How did you get here ? You left without
saying goodbye, if I remember correctly. Have you
found your uncle ? and where did you part with
Charles the Great ? ”


■■ \ «2||iP-1
\ S W '"' JSfv I
j® i -f' ”
IV.„ # -. /; |j 1 jgf jH , -.
JKfcp*~ y *
AT THE SAME MOMENT A CLOSELY PACKED MOB OF HUMANITY
RUSHED ROUND A CORNER.” * *
[To face pag




Tom was about to answer, but the parson interposed
quickly. “Tom has had one or two strange adven-
tures,” he said ; “ but why are you not away with the
others, Tom ? lam surprised at your staying behind.”
“ I know that you expect something to happen here,
sir, and I’m not going to leave the comrades who have
been so good to me while there is any prospect of
danger coming to them.”
“ My dear boy,” the parson said kindly, “ believe me
there is absolutely no danger anticipated, and I want
you to go with the others. I have a reason for asking
you to go.”
“Very well, sir,” Tom answered ; “come, Nigger.”
The boy and the dog ran off after the others, and, in
due time, were lying with them among some scrub on
the hill-slope above the spot where the conflict was
expected to take place.
And they were not mistaken as to time or place.
“ Time’s up,” one of the men had just said when a
great number of skulking forms became discernible
through the darkness, approaching the mouth of the
gully from the open scrub-covered plains. At the
same moment a closely packed mob of humanity
rushed round a corner in the gully from the other
side. A minute later and both armies had seen each
other. Then each stopped its onward progress sud-
denly, and seemed to be considering the advisability
of flight. Each had expected to surprise the other,
and had hoped to finish the business in hand, effectu-
ally, without much risk to themselves. The aborigines
had armed themselves with hastily prepared clubs and
spears, and the Chinese carried cords with which, if
they had found the natives asleep, they intended
strangling them. They had also the broken spears
which had been left in their camp, and some portable


josses. What use the idols would be in a fight was
not apparent to the onlookers, but doubtless the
Chinese had great confidence in their mysterious
powers.
“They're mighty slow about starting,” one of the
spectators remarked ; “ I reckon we’ve paid our tickets
and are entitled to see something for our money.”
“ Howling ! I mean —I mean —give us a song,
boys,” yelled Dave suddenly.
“ What in thunder should any one sing for ? ” de-
manded Carbonate Chris, who did not understand the
nature of Dave’s request. Dave forgot to answer, for
the Chinese had now begun to make the hills resound
with wild, unearthly yells, calculated probably to strike
terror to the hearts of the simple natives. The natives,
however, could do something in that line too, and they
retaliated with even fiercer shouts.
“ This is the funniest way of fighting I ever saw,”
laughed Sailor Bill. “ I suppose they think they are
frightening each other ? ”
“ I’ll give them something more dangerous than
yells,” said the Wallaby, hurling a stone in among the
Chinese. The result was startling. With shrieks, now
plainly expressive of terror, the Chinese turned and
fled. They had not bargained on being attacked from
the air. Their new joss had deceived them, and his
days, his hours rather, were now numbered.
The white men laughed till the tears streamed down
their tanned faces. The valiant Chinese had not
proved very formidable antagonists after all. The
aborigines still continued to make night hideous with
their discordant shouts, but suddenly discovering that
their opponents had fled, they stopped and began to
sing a song of triumph. But this weird wail also
ceased abruptly, and picking up the weapons which


they had thrown down while singing they ran at head-
long speed back the way they had come.
“Hullo!” exclaimed some one, “that is surely a
new way of following up a retreating foe. When I
was in the South African picnic we always went after
the Boers like blazes when we got them on the
run ”
“ I hear riders coming from the south-west," cried
Tom; “the natives have heard them also, and that is
why they are running away."
“ From Ireland's soda fountains 1 " roared Dave;
“ if ye had given me a song when I asked ye I could
have told ye the troopers were coming then ; I know
the step of troopers' horses too well "
“ Troopers I" cried the men ; “ we'd better see what
they want here ! "
“ Boys, remember what the boss said," Carbonate
Chris warned ; “be civil to them until we see what the
trouble is. Hullo I where's the boy ? "
“ I expect he has gone to report to the skipper that
suspicious craft are coming up from the starboard,"
Sailor Bill gave as his opinion.
And he was right. Even then Tom and Nigger were
running towards the camp with the news of the latest
developments. Instinctively Tom felt that momentous
events were about to happen, and he wanted to be near
the parson and Mr. Hornsby. He did not slacken
speed until he rushed into the camp. Mr. Hornsby,
the parson, and the other three men were sitting at the
table deep in consultation, and King Billy was sleeping
in a corner. “ The troopers are coming !" Tom cried ;
“ they'll be here in a few minutes.”
“ Dear me, Tom, how excited you are !" the parson
said gently; “ honest men do not need to fear the
troopers. We’ll do our best to entertain them.” He


shot a meaning glance at Mr. Hornsby and walked out
into the darkness, and next moment Tom heard him
swinging out on to the ladders which led to the gully
beneath.
“Where is he going?” Tom cried, preparing to
follow.
“ Sit down where you are, Tom,” Mr. Hornsby com-
manded ; “ this little drama, or burlesque, has reached
the last act, and your presence is required on the
stage when the curtain falls.”
He had barely finished speaking when a clatter of
hoofs announced the arrival of the riders, while shouts
from behind betokened that the miners were following
closely on foot.
“ Good evening, Mr. Superintendent,” Mr. Hornsby
called out pleasantly. “We meet again, it seems.
May I compliment you on your skill in following a
track ?
“ If compliments are going,” the superintendent said,
with a laugh, as he came into the lamplight, “ may I say
that our old friend Dick Turpin on his famous Black
Bess would be slow alongside you and your horse ?
You are the fastest traveller I know.”
“ That is because you don’t know Chillagoe Charlie,”
laughed Mr. Hornsby.


CHAPTER XV
CHILLAGOE CHARLIE REVEALS HIMSELF
I HAVE hardly the nerve to ask for some tea for
my men," said the superintendent; “ but the
poor fellows are pretty well tired out, and if you would
kindly give us some water we would get away a bit
and make ourselves as comfortable as is possible in
this part of the world."
“ My dear Mr. Superintendent," replied Mr. Hornsby,
“tell your men to dismount where they are. Even
though you fully intend to take me away in irons and
other metallic fixtures to-morrow, I’ll use my influence
to get you and your men a square meal for to-night.
I wanted one badly myself an hour ago."
“ Here are the boys," cried Mike; “ the fight must
be over ”
“ Should auld acquaintance be forgot! Where is
the boss trooper ?" shouted Dave, rushing into the
camp at the head of the miners.
Here, Dave, responded the individual for whom
he asked ; “ a merry Christmas to you."
“Boys," said Mr. Hornsby, “you will oblige me
greatly if you will do your best to prepare a decent
meal for our visitors. They have come far, and can’t
help being policemen."
ou needn t rub it in so hard," remonstrated the
21 321


superintendent, as his men set their weary horses free
to feed on anything they could find, and came into the
camp ; “ even a much-abused policeman has been
known to be a half decent fellow ” „
“It doesn’t matter though you were Chinese, said
Dick Ford; “we are white men here, and the best m
our camp is free to any visitor. Fall in, boys, and
hustle a feed along ” .
«The sea is England's glory 1 superintendent,
«it is, Dave ; but latest reports seem to indicate that
Germany is also in the running "
“ Let Germany go to—to the Bay of Biscay ! roare
Dave ; “ I want to talk to you on a very serious matter.
He came over to where the superintendent had found
a seat on an upturned box.
“ Well, fire away, Dave; lam too tired to object to
anything you say.”
“Oh it aint much-come here, Mike ; I just wanted
to say that I am Chillagoe Charlie and you can pay the
reward to Mike.” T
“ The reward is withdrawn now, Dave. But l am
glad to meet the gentleman I have been hunting for
such a time.” .
“You couldn’t screw the reward on again, 1 sup-
pose ? ” asked Dave tentatively.
“lam afraid not; but tell us how you have come to
give yourself up.” , ~
“ He's stricken with sorrow for his evil deeds,
laughed Sailor Bill, “and he wants that thousand
“ That are a fact, boss,” said Dave contritely ; “ I am
tired of leadin’ a double life
“Dave, stop that nonsense,” Mr. Hornsby com-
manded ; “ what would the Caledonia Mines Company


do if their foreman, the only man who knows the
various peculiarities of the mines, were to make a
prolonged stay down in Brisbane ? ”
“ Howling !—I mean Mary had a little sheep, boss.
I wouldn’t stay after the reward was paid ”
“ Dave, you are a fool,” broke in Mike. “1 say, Mr.
Officer, I suppose your work up here is finished when
you have Chillagoe Charlie in your hands ? ”
“Not quite; but are you another candidate for that
honour ? I think I credited you with it before ? ”
“ You did, but things have changed since then. I
might as well be dead as hunted from camp to camp
like an outcast nigger ”
" Mike, old man,” Dirty Sam interrupted, “ it is very
good of you to try to save me from the consequences
of my own mad acts, but I can't allow it at all.
Superintendent, I am Chillagoe Charlie.”
A murmur of astonishment went round all the men
who heard Sam's words. He spoke in tones that
carried conviction, and seemed greatly distressed over
his position.
Mr. Hornsby was smoking a cigarette and gazing at
a point in the bark roof very intently. He lowered his
eyes on hearing Sam’s words, and said in a voice of
reproval, “Sam, you are a first-class liar. Give the
next man a chance ”
“ Oh, if it is Chillagoe Charlie you want,” said Dick
Ford, “I reckon I can fill the bill as good as any
man ”
“Any more Chillagoe Charlies?” inquired the
superintendent, and the troopers grinned as they
remembered that nearly all the present self-accusers
had already been suspected by their leader.
“Not just now,” Mr. Hornsby answered. “Tell
your men to gather round and help themselves. I


expect you’ll be rushed with Chillagoe Charlies
presently, for I see Dave is explaining matters to those
of our boys who do not as yet know the story. I
don't suppose you would be content now to hold me
as the gentleman who is in such popular demand ?”
“No, Mr. Hornsby," the officer replied with a rather
sickly smile; “ you have cheated me twice already, but
I’ll take care you won’t do it a third time. I would
like to know, however, why you deliberately led me to
believe you were the gentleman who seems to be so
much in evidence to-night ? ”
“ Then you are quite convinced now that I am
not ? " Mr. Hornsby seemed amused.
“ Quite ; but you haven’t told me why you took such
an interest in the man-hunting game."
“ I didn’t, until you began to prove I was Chillagoe
Charlie. At first I took you for a good-natured but
foolish sort of fellow who had earned a reputation by
sheer luck, or perhaps influence. When you began to
show your proofs I changed my mind, and although I
laughed at you, still I knew that you would ultimately
find your man ”
“ But why couldn’t you have told me who he was ?
It would have saved you much inconvenience, and as
a J.P. it was almost your duty to have done so.”
“ Pardon me. At the time I didn't know who he
was."
“ Then you know now ? ”
“ I knew the first night I met you ; you practically
told me who he was. The proofs which you so skil-
fully deduced against me fitted another person exactly ;
that person was my friend. Need I say more ? I at
once tried to detract suspicion from him by drawing it
upon myself ”
“ I suppose I need not ask now who that person is ? ”


“No; he will tell you himself when he is ready.
But you are not eating anything. We'll continue our
conversation when you have dined."
“Just one question first. Have I ever had the
honour of meeting the genuine Chillagoe Charlie ? "
“ Yes; so far as my memory goes, I believe you
have met him."
“Thank you. My men and the boys of this camp
seem to be getting on well together."
“ Oh, yes ; unlike yours and mine, their worries cease
with the finish of their day's work. Still, Dave is talk-
ing too much. I expect he is priming the boys with
some new idea. Sam and Mike, too, are up to some
game, but you needn t be alarmed, we're all white men
here."
lam not in the slightest. I've got a card up my
sleeve myself."
Mr. Hornsby laughed, and walked over among the
men, and the superintendent began to eat as if he had
not tasted food that day. Nor had he ; he had led his
men without a halt, except to give their jaded horses a
drink, since daylight. But now they were enjoying a
meal among white prospectors, such as had not come
their way since they had shared Caledonia Camp's
hospitality, and they were grateful. Laughing and
chatting gaily with the happy-go-lucky prospectors,
they spent an hour at the long table, and finally pipes
were produced and all rose to move outside. Sailor
Bill then told the story which led up to the strange
fight the troopers had unconsciously finished, and Dirty
Sam related how Tom had discovered the great value
of the ore which had hitherto been looked upon as
useless after its gold had been extracted.
“Oh, I forgot about that," the superintendent said
to Mr. Hornsby, when Tom's name was mentioned.


“ I presume this Tom is the young fellow I met
with you down in Caledonia Camp ? Is he here just
now ? "
“ Why, don’t you know me, superintendent ? ”
spoke Tom beside him ; “ I have been here all the
evening."
“What 1" exclaimed the officer in surprise. “You
are not the boy whose father I knew in the old
country ? You are as big as any of my men and your
face is different entirely.”
“ Still, I am the person you met in Caledonia Camp,
and you are the last man I saw in that camp. I
“Tom has grown into a man during his adventurous
ride north," said Dirty Sam. “He couldn't long
remain a boy with Chillagoe Charlie, the parson, Mike,
Dave, and me for companions, not to mention his own
adventures with the aborigines and Chinese.”
“ No, I suppose one of the lad’s age quickly shapes
his character from his environment. But I was going
to say, Tom, that I have been making inquiries about
your uncle, and I find that he was last seen some-
where up here. He was one of the best known
pioneers of the north, and is thought to have associ-
ated himself with the Chinese, whom he understood
very well. lam going to institute a special search for
him while up here, and if he is alive my boys will find
him.”
“ I think the parson is on his tracks now," said Mr.
Hornsby, “ and Chillagoe Charlie is also hunting round
for him.”
“ It is strange how that character crops up in every-
thing," laughed the officer. “What do you know of
Charlie, Tom?”
“ Only that he is a gentleman whom I would fight
for if he required my help ; I don’t know who he is,


but after Mr. Hornsby and the parson, and, of course,
Mike, Sam, and Dave, he is my best friend.”
“ Good old Chillagoe Charlie ! ” the men shouted ;
“we’ll all fight for him.”
“ I hope you’ll give us time to get out of the way
first,” the superintendent said good-naturedly. “ I
am most desirous—apart from business—to meet that
person myself. I believe I have something to say
which will materially affect him ”
“ Hullo, boys,” cried one of the men, “ that little
black dog with the long ears hears something coming.
Maybe it is the Chinese.”
Mr. Hornsby arose hurriedly. “No,” he said ; “it
is likely the parson coming back from his walk.”
But it was not; it was a band of riders, and a
few minutes later their horses’ hoofs rang out on
the hard ground near the camp, and next moment
a voice called out, “ Hullo ! mates; is this a white
man’s camp ?”
“ On the banks o' runnin’ water ! ” shouted Dave,
as usual misquoting his song title. “That’s Hungry
Ted’s foghorn, an' I’ll bet a kick at that fat trooper
that the rest of the boys are with him.”
A howl of delight went up from the riders as they
heard Dave's well-known voice, and sliding from their
saddles they rushed into camp. All the old boys were
there, and also Long Tom and another man from
Crocodile Crossing. It was some time before the
commotion attending their arrival abated sufficiently
to allow any one voice to be heard, but at last Mr.
Hornsby managed to secure comparative silence and
he said, “ What is the meaning of you boys coming
up here ? The mines will be ruined, left entirely to
strangers and a new chum manager.”
“ Can’t help it, boss,” replied Peter the Poet. “We


don’t feel that we are responsible for the mines since
you left, and we have all come up here because we
heard that the troopers were chasing Chillagoe Charlie
north this way, and ”
“ Don’t you see the troopers around you now ?"
cried Dirty Sam warningly.
“ Centipedes an’ flying ants !" ejaculated Ginger
Bob, “so they are. See here, Mr. boss trooper, we
have been hunting after ye these last couple o’ hundred
miles on a matter o’ important business.”
“Shut up, Ginger, an’ let Peter the Poet or Long
Tom talk,” said Tommy the Kangaroo.
“We have come after you, Mr. Policeman,” began
Long Tom, “in the interests of justice. We heard
that Mr. Hornsby had been arrested because it was
thought he was Chillagoe Charlie, and we have
followed you to tell you that Chillagoe Charlie is a
name we have all used—that, in fact, we are all
Chillagoe Charlies.”
A moment’s absolute silence marked the surprise
of all, then a wild shout of joy burst from the throats
of the other men.
“ That’s the ticket ” was, in effect, their general cry.
“ We are all Chillagoe Charlies.”
Mr. Hornsby looked very much astonished, as did
also the troopers.
“This is getting most interesting,” the superin-
tendent finally remarked. “ I can’t very well arrest
you all ”
“And you can't take one without taking us all,” put
in Long Tom significantly. “We’re all ready to take
our share of whatever the Government has in store for
us, but we’ll fight like dingoes against one being made
a scapegoat.”
“ You men have most vivid imaginations,” the


superintendent said in reply. “What proof have
you to offer to substantiate your statement ?”
“Well,” laughed Long Tom, “I remember when
you thought yourself you had proved that I was
Chillagoe Charlie. I don't know that we care to
give proof of anything. It is you who have to do
that. No one has ever seen Chillagoe Charlie through
the day, and I am telling you now that all we fellows
have at various times made use of that name. For
myself I don't believe that there ever really existed a
person bearing the title of Chillagoe Charlie. It was a
joint concern.”
“ Gentlemen, you make me smile. You are all fine
fellows and I am proud to know you. A week ago I
was turning the country upside down to lay my hands
on the clever Charlie. I got plenty of clues and I
believe I made it inconvenient for most of you fellows
in turn. Of course I was only the silly old trooper
boss, and fair game for you all, but you really overdo
the thing now by forcing yourselves upon me. Then,
I couldn't get into contact with Charlie no matter what
I did or how many miles my good fellows rode ; now I
can t get away from Charlies even although we thought
we were riding away from his haunts altogether when
we started up this way.”
“ What do you mean ? ” cried Mr. Hornsby. “ Did
you not come up here over my tracks ?"
“ We did ; and we rode hard to catch you up, but
not to take you prisoner. You see, I found out by
methods of my own that the person known as Chillagoe
Charlie was a Chinaman ”
“God save the King! Hallelujah! and we won't
go home till sundown ! I knew he would come round
to that,” roared Dave. “If there is any chance of being
able to do the wrong thing, be sure the troopers will


do it. Here we have given enough Chillagoe Charlies
to make an army, an' now the boss trooper wants to
make out that the fellow who can be in two places at
once, an' who can scare the life outen most people, is a
last rose of summer Chinkie.” Dave’s disgust was
great, and some of the men lay flat on the ground and
roared with laughter.
Tom was silent. He knew Mr. Hornsby had
some surprise ready to spring upon every one, and
he wondered what had become of the parson. It
was no business of his to say anything which might
help the troopers to discover the identity of the man
for whom he had shot the revolver out of the superin-
tendent’s hand.
“ Don't be foolish again, superintendent,” said Mr.
Hornsby. “ That last shot of yours must be very wide
of the mark.”
“ Not so wide as you think, sir,” responded the
officer.
“ By Jupiter 1 Mr. Trooper Boss, I believe there is
something in what you say,” spoke Dick Ford
earnestly. He winked at Mr. Hornsby as he spoke.
“ That blamed fellow who has caused such a lot of
trouble everywhere must be a Chinaman. I know
for a fact he was in their camp last night, for he came
here and told us something which set us moving
quick an’ lively "
“ Chillagoe Charlie here ! ” cried the troopers in
chorus.
“Of course,” replied Dick. “ He's always been
here. You go over to the Chinese with your men ;
we'll go too, for we want to find that hidden city of
theirs, and I'll go nap you'll get the one and only
genuine Chillagoe Charlie.”
Dick continued in this strain for some time, much


jSSf'-t ' V *S3L
CHILLAGOE CHARLIE IS HERE. WHAT HAVE YOU AGAINST HIM ?
T




to his comrades' amazement, for they could not under-
stand why Dick should wish to give Chillagoe Charlie
away, seeing he had done so much for them. But
when he finished addressing the cool, smiling super-
intendent he soon explained.
a They’ll go and kick up blazes among the yellow-
skins, w he explained in low tones, “ and, boys, I may
tell you some of us know who Charlie is. He is a
friend of ours, and may be saved if we can get the
troopers to believe he is a Chinaman.
“What do you think of the idea ?” Mr. Hornsby
asked with a laugh. “ I confess Dick has put a new
aspect on affairs." „ . A
it please don't be cynical, Mr. Hornsby, interposed
the officer ; “ you know who he is, and why should you
pretend that you think he might be a Chinaman ?
“ You said so yourself ?"
a yes, but I had something to add which would
have considerably altered the significance of my
words. But you tell me Charlie is here. In that
case if you are his friend, as you say, bring him to
me at once. I have something to say of special
interest to Chillagoe Charlie, and I want to see the
real one—not any of the sham ones—very much
“ Chillagoe Charlie is here. What have you against
him ?" came a voice from the darkness, and before
any one could reply that individual stepped into the
light. He was dressed as he always was, in top boots,
belted trousers, and blue soft shirt, while a mask con-
cealed his face. Revolvers and knives bristled in his
belt, while a broad-brimmed, soft felt hat, turned
rakishly up on the left side, graced his head.
An electrical thrill ran through all the men, and for
a space a silence deep and unbroken reigned in the
camp. Mr. Hornsby was the first to break it. “Come


in,” he said. “ There are some Government people
here very eager to meet you.”
“ It is a pleasure that has long been denied us,”
added the superintendent; “ I hope you are well.”
He signed to his men to resume their seats, and Mr.
Hornsby also signalled to the miners that they were
not to fall upon the troopers just yet.
Tom came over and grasped the masked man's hand.
“ Why have you come here ? ” he asked. “ These
troopers must do their duty, and of course we'll fight
them before we'll allow them to touch you.”
“ Hear the kid,” cried Sailor Bill. “ One would
think he was skipper of a Bolivian gun-boat ”
“ I have come to hear what crimes I have committed
against the laws of Queensland, Tom, and also to save
my friends from perjuring themselves on my behalf.”
“ By the man who broke the bank at that place with
the double name !'' cried Dave. “We don't mind
lying like an M.P. for ye, if it will do any good. Do
we, boys ? ”
“We'll lie like ten of them, and a Sydney lawyer
thrown in,” answered Carbonate Chris. “It costs us
nothing anyhow.”
“We'll fight for you, as the boy said,” cried Long
Tom. “We're not afraid of bullet holes.”
“ I back Long Tom's sentiments,” said Peter the
Poet aggressively. “ The troopers are no good, and it
is about time they got a hiding.”
“ Hear, hear,” chorused the men, making a general
movement as if to carry out their idea of fighting the
troopers at once.
“Sit down, men,” ordered Mr. Hornsby, and the
masked man also signified his wish that there should be
no trouble. Sam, Mike, and Dick had remained silent.
They knew more than the others.


“At least wait until we see that you have got the
right man to fight for,” the superintendent advised.
“This looks like the real thing, but I have met so
many to-night that I have my doubts. You say you
are Chillagoe Charlie ? ”
“ I am the person known in these parts by that
name.”
“ I note you lay the emphasis on the words ‘ these
parts,’ does that imply that some one else uses the name
in other parts ? ”
“ It does ; but you are a fully appointed officer of the
law, and with Mr. Hornsby, and a jury of your own
men, can constitute yourselves into a court to try
me ”
“ No, thanks, Mr. Chillagoe; it is past business hours.
Come back to-morrow.”
“Good old trooper boss!” shouted Hungry Ted.
“ He means you to clear out, Charlie, and forget to
leave your address.”
“Thanks, Mr. Superintendent, for the kindness
which prompted your hint, but I am not a prisoner
pleading for mercy, nor do I know of any reason why
I should desire to escape.”
“ You don’t ? Well, to tell the straight truth, I think
I only know of one serious charge of which I have not
already proved you innocent; but since other business
will take up my time to-morrow, we may as well put
you through an examination. Gentlemen, by virtue of
my position, of the fact that a J.P. of the State of
Queensland is present, and of the extraordinary nature
of the case in hand, I propose to constitute this camp
into a court of justice. Mr. Hornsby, will you kindly
call together a jury ?”
“ Snakes, boys, but this is great fun ! ” cried Tommy
the Kangaroo. “ We’ll hang the boss trooper, and


sentence all his men to work in the lower levels of our
mines for life.”
A grin stole over the superintendent’s features, but
he ignored Tommy’s words. “ You can have any one
you wish to advise you as to how you should answer,
Mr. Chillagoe Charlie I ” he said ; “ I can recommend
my sergeant here ; he is well versed in the law.”
“ Thanks, but I can answer for myself,” responded
the man in the mask.
“ I think you had better look upon this as an in-
formal affair,” suggested Mr. Hornsby, after speaking
a few words in an undertone to Chillagoe Charlie.
“ Let it be merely a court of inquiry. Possibly a few
words of explanation may turn the whole case for the
Crown —if there ever really were any case —into such a
burlesque that it would be better for all concerned if
you looked a little into the matter first, privately. I
will undertake that my friend Chillagoe Charlie will
afterwards accompany you to Brisbane if you so
desire.”
« Strange to say, Mr. Hornsby, I don’t think I shall
require that. I have full special duty powers, and I
have already used them to some extent, especially since
I was regretfully compelled to put you to the little in-
convenience from which you so cleverly escaped ”
“Come on with the funeral, boss,” interrupted Long
Tom ; “lam dying to see Charlie take off that mask j
I'll bet my claim at Crocodile Crossing I know his
chin.”
The figure standing so still and silent by Tom’s side
instinctively placed his hand to his chin, and noticing
the action Tom started violently. He felt sure he had
seen that hand only recently.
“Oh, I’ll finish my work quickly enough,” the
superintendent said ; “and I hope our friend will come


off with flying colours. Now, sir, did you or did you
not break into the bank at Gamboola, and after a
murderous attack on the manager who heard you
make off with a large sum of money ? ”
“ I did not; I have never been in Gamboola in my
life."
“ Did you garrote a half-drunken miner in Murgoona
and rob him of his month's wages on the 28th of last
month ? ”
“ Certainly not; I have only been three times in
Murgoona : the first time was when I met you, and
another was when I had to establish evidence as to
certain times "
“ Did you break into Higgins's store on the 14th
preceding ? "
“ No. Never heard of Higgins's store."
“ Did you steal three horses from White Downs
station on Sunday, the nth?"
“No; on Sunday, the nth, I was in Caledonia
Camp ” The speaker stopped. He knew he had
given himself away, and Dave was quick to see it.
“Well, I'll be—be —is jiggered swearing, boys?—
'cos if it isn't I know who was in our camp that
day "
“Shut up, you blundering idiot 1" roared Peter the
Poet, also remembering.
“It was a tailor's traveller from Brisbane wantin’
orders,” continued Dave innocently, “ and the parson
gave him an order for a couple of new rig outs.”
“ The parson ? " mused the officer. “ I’ve heard a lot
about the wonderful travelling parson who goes about
all the far-back camps, and can fight, ride, or play with
the best of the boys. He must know something about
you, Mr. Chillagoe Charlie ? If you could only get
him to say a good word for you ”


He won’t/’ snapped the masked one. “ He will say
nothing for Chillagoe Charlie.”
“Yes, he will,” cried Tom. “He told me himself
that you had no better friend than he.”
“ I have known the parson ever since he became
one, Tom, and I know that he will allow Chillagoe
Charlie to stand or fall without saying a word in his
favour.”
“Tom, come over here beside me,” cried Mr.
Hornsby ; “ there's just a chance that you might spoil
this show unintentionally if you are not kept in check.”
“ Oh no, the lad won't spoil anything,” the super-
intendent said ; “in fact, I may tell you all that I know
already that most of the deeds supposed to have been
committed by the person known as Chillagoe Charlie
were the work of a syndicate of saloon keepers around
Chillagoe and Murgoona. I know them all and will
yard them up at the proper moment. As I have said,
there is only one charge remaining against this person,
although I must say he himself is largely responsible
for all his troubles by his foolishly riding all over the
country in his present guise.”
“ Would it surprise you very much, superintendent,
if I told you that I have only appeared in character
about four times anywhere south of the Palmer River
water-shed, and each time I had a good reason ? ”
“ Oh, I think I could survive the shock. The Palmer
is the haunt of hordes of Chinese, I know, and from
information I have collected from various quarters this
last week, it appears that Chillagoe Charlie is—or shall
I say was'?—a Chinaman.”
“ But this man is not a Chinaman,” Mr. Hornsby
interrupted.
“ I don’t know, officially. He wears a mask. There
is no crime in doing so ; but as all the trouble seems to


hang on that fact, it is probable that if he explained his
reasons for hiding his face from his fellow-men every-
thing else might be explained at the same time."
“ Boys, I am beginning to think the trooper boss
isn't such a mighty fool as we thought," spoke Ginger
Bob; “ I'll bet a pigtail I’ve got the hang of what he is
driving at already "
“Dry up, Ginger!" ordered Hungry Ted; “Chillagoe
Charlie is going to speak.”
“ The reason why I at times wear a mask is this,"
began the central figure in the group of interested
men. “ Over a year ago, while riding through the bush
to visit a mining camp, I came up with a man, a China-
man, dying from sheer lack of desire to keep alive.
Eventually he passed away in my arms, but before he
did so he told me a strange story. He had been the
leader of a sect of better-class Chinese who lived in the
mysterious secret city on the Palmer River, but in a fight
with some white prospectors his pigtail had been cut
off. As you know, the loss of the pigtail, to the Chinese
mind, means eternal disgrace, and he was banished from
his fellows with the order never to show his face again.
“He went away; but as he was the only man among
the Chinese with any knowledge of mineralogy, they
were forced to recall him. But when once an edict
has gone forth among sons of the Celestial Empire, it
stands for all time and may not be repealed, therefore
they made the provision that he must hide his face
under a mask. He went back for a time, but the
disgrace preyed upon his mind, and although he was
treated well on account of his knowledge, he could
not suffer his position, and one day left the city to
wander over the face of Northern Australia until death
released him. I found him, as I have said, when the
end was near, and stayed with him to the last. Dur-


ing his last moments he told me that he had discovered
a wonderful cavern adjoining the caves in which the
city existed, and which was as yet unknown to any one.
Its walls were rich in a formation carrying gold, and
water was available in the cavern itself, for washing
it out. He directed me how to find the place and
also told me the position of the city. Some time after,
wearing his mask, I visited this city and was hailed
with joy, for the people had thought that their only
mineralogist had gone for ever. I understand the
Chinese language fairly well, and managed to act my
part so that they did not suspect 1 was not their dis-
graced comrade. I soon found out that my name
was Ching Ching Charlie, which white prospectors,
who had seen the masked Chinaman, turned into
Chillagoe Charlie, doubtless because most of them had
come north past that township. Seeing my chance
now to help my own comrades, I told them of the
wonderful formation in the cavern adjoining the
Chinese secret city, and we decided we should risk
working the place disguised as Chinese. This we
have done ever since, accounting for any little eccen-
tricities by giving out that we were members of a
secret sect —secret societies, as you probably are
aware, exercise a powerful fascination over the Celestial
mind —known by a name which, being translated,
means Brothers of the Closed Fist ”
“ Well, I’m ” began Dirty Sam, but Dave
finished his words reprovingly with “ A little pilgrim
and a stranger here.” And Sam said no more.
“ Mr. Hornsby and I had already founded this camp
here though, and I could not risk taking its members
into our confidence, they having suffered so much at
various times by the doings of the Chinese, that they
would not have been contented until they had wiped


oat the population of the hidden city. I had thus two
characters to keep up —my own and that of Ching
Ching, or Chillagoe Charlie. As myself I mixed with
the prospectors and miners everywhere, and took
great care that they never suspected I was the
mysterious Chinaman who flew about at midnight
visiting the aborigines and outlying Chinese settle-
ments. When Mr. Hornsby took up the Caledonia
Mines I extended my peregrinations further south
than usual to visit him and his men, all of whom I
knew intimately, and it was while down there last that
I heard of the evil name of Chillagoe Charlie. I
could not help playing tricks upon the police then,
but I did no harm, and I believe you will admit that
after having listened to your boastings of how you
would deal with Chillagoe Charlie, I treated you very
decently when I tricked you. The rest is soon told.
I mutilated the reward notices posted up about me
wherever I found them, for some of the words were
very objectionable, and one day I met this boy and
then a new interest came into my life. He was look-
ing for his uncle, and I resolved to bring that person
back from the dead past in which I knew him. That
is all, gentlemen. I appeared at Crocodile Crossing to
scare away the claim speculators, in the interests of
the honest miners, and I was at the springs the same
night to pay cash for the trooper sergeant’s horse I
had borrowed. Mike rode it away for me, partly
because he half suspected who I was, and partly
because it seemed to him an excellent joke. The
next night, I think it was, I again visited the camp,
and that time you would have caught me had not
Tom shot the revolver out of your hand ”
“ What! ” cried the superintendent. “ Was it Tom
who fired that shot ? ”


“It was," Tom said ; but at the time Chillagoe
Charlie and I were comrades, and it was my duty to
save him if I could "
“ Oh, I am not blaming you for that, it was the shot
I was thinking of."
“ Tom is a first-class shot,” put in Mr. Hornsby.
“He and the parson both amazed me with their
powers with the rifle.”
“Well, to finish,” continued the narrator, “I came
north to make arrangements for clearing my name,
to give the secret of the rich cave deposit to my
younger comrades, and then to live as myself,
openly."
“ Then who are you ?" asked the officer, and all
held their breath for the reply.
For answer the man bent down, and pulling his
trousers from the inside of his top-boots, he allowed
the legs to drop outside, thus hiding the tell-tale boots.
“ My coat is strapped to my saddle," he said, turning
his hat into a less aggressive shape; “ but you may
imagine it buttoned over my belt." He raised his
hands to his face, and when he took them away the
mask went with them and he stood revealed.
“ The parson ! ” shouted every one in incompre-
hending amazement.
“Snakes, boys, am I dreamin’ ?” asked Long Tom,
rubbing his eyes.
“ Keel haul me, but my port lights have got mixed
up with the starboard," Sailor Bill commented, and
while Dave recited a whole verse of a poem concern-
ing a young lady who owned a fleecy quadruped, and
the persistence with which the said quadruped followed
her to school and elsewhere, the rest of the men
crowded round the parson with howls of delight.
“ Kick me for an idiot or a trooper,” roared Hungry


Ted. “ How did I not know that only the parson
could have done the things Chillagoe Charlie did ? ”
“ Drop me down a shaft, somebody," Peter the Poet
implored. “ I am no longer of any use when I
couldn’t spot the parson."
“An’ God save the King ! To think that I once
fought with Chillagoe Charlie I" cried Dave.
It was a long time before the excitement died down,
but when it had in part subsided the superintendent
walked up to the parson and shook his hand. “I am
proud to know you," he said. “1 suspected you
nearly from the first, and that is why I worked so
hard to clear you of these common cut-throat charges."
“ I thank you," the parson answered. “1 never
expected to find friends among the troopers."
“ Puncture me with lead bullets, parson," roared
Long Tom, “you have friends everywhere."
“ Good old parson 1" cried Carbonate Chris.
“Good old Chillagoe Charlie !" added Ginger Bob,
and again the camp resounded with shouts that could
easily have rivalled that of the combined Chinese and
aborigines earlier in the evening.
“But,” said Tom, as Mr. Hornsby, the parson, Mike,
Sam, and he endeavoured to talk together amidst the
uproar, “ I saw you as Chillagoe Charlie among the
men in the cave. I ran all the way back to camp and
the parson was sleeping there ? "
“Yes, Tom, I saw you in the cave; that is why I
wore the mask there, for I don't usually wear it when
among my proved friends. When you left I merely
climbed the ladder which reaches to the top of the first
ledge and which you did not see, and so got home
before you."
“But your voice?" said Mr. Hornsby. “That is
what cheated me all along until you told me to-night


when the boys were out seeing the fight. How did
you manage to disguise it so well ? ”
“By means of this mask. It is made of copper, as
you see, and refracts the sound of the voice so much
that it is completely unrecognisable.”
“ But how did you manage to be at Murgoona and
Caledonia Camp at the same time ?” asked Tom, still
hardly able to believe that his two great friends were
one and the same.
“ I wasn’t, Tom. I have several very fast horses, as
you know, trained to come to me at my whistle, but
even flying machines could not annihilate time. I
merely made use of the fact that Murgoona, being a
railway terminus, uses standard time the same as Bris-
bane, Sydney, and Melbourne, while Caledonia Camp
was run by correct or sun time, which was some thirty
minutes later. That half-hour and my best horse
enabled me to do the seemingly impossible ”
“There's just one thing I would like to know before
asking you to explain away the only charge remaining
against you,” broke in the superintendent, joining the
group. “Do you know of any reason why Messrs.
Smith, O’Brian and company should have done so
much against you ? ”
“ I do. They were members of the party whom
Chillagoe Charlie led to the cavern, but he had to
dispense with them before doing so, as it was well
known that they were only card-sharpers and lived by
cheating their comrades out of their hard-earned
profits.”
“ Why did you not tell us sooner, parson ?" said
Dirty Sam. “We could have trumped up a charge
against them and got them put where they couldn't
trouble.”
“You forget, Sam, that lam a parson. At one time


I might have fallen in with your suggestion, but I do
my best to live a straight life now and be of some
good to my fellow-men."
“ Well, gentlemen," cried the superintendent, rapping
upon the table so as to draw the attention of every
one, “roll up for the last scene in the last act "
“ I’ll bet you my horse it isn’t anywhere near the
last act," broke in Mike. “The real play will only
commence when the parson is free to do as he
likes."
“Right, Mike!" cried Mr. Hornsby. “We’ve got
the hidden city to see and the great gold formations,
and Tom has to find his uncle."
“Just explain away the only real charge remaining
against you, sir, and I'll put myself and men at your
service for any purpose you like. You are supposed
to be responsible for the disappearance of a number
of men. I couldn't clear you of that, no matter what
I did, for the evidence was too strong. Give me your
word that you know nothing about them and I'll not
push the matter further "
“ But I do know about them. lam responsible for
their disappearance. Come in, boys."
“ Great centipedes 1 what is coming next ?" asked
Peter the Poet. “ I believe the parson has got the
very men waiting out there in the darkness."
And it seemed as if Peter were right, for as he
finished speaking a dozen men filed into the light and
stood still and expressionless.
A dumfoundered silence fell over all.
“ Chinese 1” gasped the troopers and miners together
a moment later.
“Not by ten miles and a quarter," one of the new-
comers answered in response to a sign from the parson.
“Only members of the Closed Fist gang and Austra-


lians to the buttons on our shirts.” With a deft move-
ment each man removed his pigtail, next he caused his
blue silk overall to drop, and in a second twelve typical
prospectors stood revealed.
“ There are the missing men,” said the parson
quietly. “They can answer to their own names.”
But there was little need for further inquiry ; the
men were instantly recognised by nearly all the others,
and again the uproar in camp made the parrots in the
trees wonder if a cyclone were coming.
“ Boys,” shouted the superintendent above the din,
“just give me one moment, please.”
“Hurry up, then,” cried Dirty Sam. “You have
nothing against Chillagoe Charlie now, so your journey
up here has been wasted.”
“Not by any means, my dear sir. Now that our
mutual friend has cleared himself of everything said
against him, allow me to say that we troopers did not
come up here after him at all. We came north
because a native named the Bishop brought me word
that a plot had been hatched to exterminate the white
men. We rode north night and day to put in a word
in that game, and here we intend to stay until you
fellows have got all the gold you want or we are
recalled. I may add, too, on behalf of my own brave
boys and myself, that it will give us great pleasure to
be of service to men who were ready to sacrifice them-
selves to save a comrade. But I must say that I was
not such a fool as I may have appeared to you. After
my first talk with Mr. Hornsby I saw there were more
Chillagoe Charlies than one, and I pretended to be
finding them among you fellows so as to disarm the
suspicions of the gentry now under lock and key.
Mr. Chillagoe Charlie, I would like to shake hands
with you again and to compliment you as the parson


on having so many friends who cared not what risks
they ran for you.”
“ I am thankful, sir, that I have such friends ; it
shows that my work has not entirely been without
result, although I did not mean that they should be
drawn more to the man than to his humble teaching.”
“ Three cheers for the parson ! ” roared Hungry Ted.
“And three for Chillagoe Charlie!” Long Tom
shouted.
“Another three for Mr. Hornsby 1” cried Dirty Sam.
“And the same for the boss trooper !” added Sailor
Bill.
“An’ what about the boy who has found out that
we've got a gold mine of silver around us ? ” demanded
Dave.
“Three for Tom also!” cried Mike, and by the
time the cheers for all had been given the morning
stars were beginning to appear in the heavens.
“We’ll go and work the cave formations first,”
said the parson, “ and we’ll hold so many shares for
the troopers for enabling us to work openly and
safely ”
“And afterwards will you help me to find my
uncle?” asked Tom eagerly.
“Ah, Tom, I had forgotten that. Have you not
guessed ? I could not tell you while a stain rested on
my name. lam your uncle.”
“God save the King !" cried Dave, and Tom flung
himself into the parson's arms.
“And three cheers for him ! " interrupted the
superintendent before Dave got further.
And for once Dave's preparatory remarks were taken
literally by all, even Nigger and the other dogs adding
their voices.


"Cbc Gcesbam press,
OHWIN BROTHERS, LIMITED,
WOKING AND LONDON.


John Chinaman at
the Rev. E. J. HARDY,
Author of “How to be Happy though Married”; lately Chaplain
to H.M. Forces in Hong Kong.
With 36 Illustrations. Large Crown Sz/o, cloth, 5/-.
CONTENTS.
Hong Kong; Tientsin and Peking; Canton; On the
West River; Swatow, Amoy, Foochow; Up the Yangtze;
Village Life ; Tops> -turvy ; Some Chinese Characteristics ;
Chinese Food ; Medicine and Surgery; Chinese Clothes ;
Houses and Gardens; Chinese Servants; Betrothal and
Marriage; Death and Burial; Mourning; Education in
China; Boys in China; Girls and Women; Chinese Manners;
Government in China; Punishments; Chinese Soldiers ; The
Religions of China; Outside and Inside a Temple; New
Year’s Day; Monks and Priests; Spirits; Feng shiu and
other Superstitions ; Missionaries ; as the Chinese See Us.
The reader will not be bored with politics or the “ future
of China,” for the book only treats of the common every-day
things of the Chinese which seem so peculiar to us. These
are described and, when possible, explained. Anecdotes are
freely used to illustrate.
LONDON: T. FISHER UNWIN.


“How To” Series of
Practical Handbooks.
Foolscap Bvo, cloth, Is. each.
Stops, or How to Punctuate ;
A Practical Handbook for Writers and Students.
Paul Allardyce.
“ Admirably adapted to remove all confusion.”— Publishers' Circular.
How to Become a Private Secretary.
By Arthur Shepherd, Private Secretary to the Archbishop
of Canterbury.
“ A most useful and entertaining volume.” —St James's Gazette.
How to Become a Commercial
Traveller.
Ed. B. Grieve.
“ Full of sound business advice.” — Yorkshire Post.
How to Arrange with your
Creditors.
R. Shuddick.
“A useful and instructive manual.” — Scotsman.
How to Become a Teacher.
By T. W. Berry, Director of Education, Withington, Lancs.
“ It gives the most authentic information in a most readable and handy
form.” —National Teacher.
T. FISHER UNWIN, Publisher,
i, Adslphi Terrace, London, W.C.


Standard Works.
COMPLETE POPULAR EDITIONS. ILLUSTRATED.
Large Crown Bvo , Cloth. Price 2/6 net.
Lord Beaconsfield; A Biography.
T. P. O’Connor.
“Clever and brilliant. . . . Worth reading by everybody who either
admires or hates his subject.” —Guardian _
A slashing and vastly interesting book.” —Pall Mall Gazette .
Rome and Pompeii. Archaeological
Rambles.
Gaston Boissier.
“M. Gaston Boissier is one of the few living archaeologists who can
make the dead bones of the past live again. While his researches show
the accuracy and thoroughness which we associate with German scholar-
ship, he has a gift of exposition which is wholly French. We can
imagine therefore, no better handbook for traveller or archaeologist than
this one. —Daily Mail.
Holyoake: Sixty Years of an Agitator's
Life.
George Jacob Holyoake.
“ A valuable contribution to the political, social, intellectual, and even
revolutionary history of our time. ” — Times.
“The book is full of interest; it produces a vivid, personal impression, it
contains contemporary notes on men and women of the century, it has
shrewd and vigorous sentences, and illustrates our own progress in
civilising thought. ” — Spectator.
Sir Walter Raleigh.
Major Martin A. S. Hume.
“An admirable book which ought to be read by every one who take j
any interest in things that ought to interest all—the building of the
Empire and the men who built it. There is not a dull page in it, and with
his skilful telling of it, the story of Raleigh’s life and ol his times reads
like a romance,” —Pall Mall Gazette,
T. FISHER UNWIN, Publisher,
i Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C.


Six Standard Works.
COMPLETE POPULAE EDITIONS. ILLUSTEATED.
Large Crown Svo, Cloth. Price 2/6 net.
The Life of Richard Cobden.
By John Morley.
One of the most important and interesting works of its class in the
English language. —Daily Chronicle.
The Life and Times of Savonarola.
By Professor Pasquale Villari.
timiJ'AWlWhW rd i gio , US bi °g ra P h y th at we know of in modern
Spectator d ffiCU Ito SpCak ° f ItS ments without seeming exaggeration.”
The Life and Times of Machiavelli.
By Professor Pasquale Villari.
is re P rese nted for all time in the pages of Villari.”
The Lives of Robert and Mary Moffat.
By John Smith Moffat.
all timeoTSfe °/ a n ° bl f W wh ' ieh has left the w °rld a lesson for
all time of the power of earnest labour and simple faith.”— Daily Chronicle.
The History of Florence.
By Professor Pasquale Villari.
“ This volume is indeed worthy of the reputation of its author. We
samJtl 7 f ul t0 bim for havm S g iven ns the most concise, and at the
“ tlI ? e Pf£ ha P s the most complete constitutional history that has yet
appeared of the first two centuries of the Florentine Repubfic.”-^^.
English Wayfaring Life in the
Middle Ages (XlVth Century).
B y J- J- Jusserand, French Ambassador at Washington
of wSnf t H° Se e " cbantin S volumes which only Frenchmen have the gift
ntmg Buy it if you are wise, and keep it as a joy for ever Dr
Augustus Jessopp in the Nineteenth Century. J 7 ‘ Dr
T. FISHER UNWIN, Publisher,
i, Adklphj Terrace, London, W.C.


WORKS BY JOSEPH CONRAD
AN OUTCAST OF THE
ISLANDS
Crown 8i'o„ doth , 6s»
“Subject to the qualifications thus disposed of {vide first part of noftce).
An Outcast of the Islands ’ is perhaps the finest piece of fiction that has been
published this year, as ‘ Aimaver’s Folly ’ was one off the finest that was pub-
lished in 1895 ... Surely this is real romance—the romance that is real.
Space forbids anything but the merest recapitulation of the other living
realities of Mr. Conrad’s invention —of Lingard, of the inimitable Almayer,
the one-eyed Babalatchi, the Naturalist, of the pious Abdulla—all novel, all
authentic. Enough has been written to show Mr. Conrads quality. He
imagines his scenes and their sequence like a master ; he knows his individu-
alities and their hearts ; he has a new and wonderful field in this East Indian
Novel of his. . . . Greatness is deliberately written ; the present writer baa
read and re-read his two books, and after putting this review aside for some
days to consider the discretion of it, the word still stands. —Saturday Jievuw.
ALMAYER’S FOLLY
Second Edition. Crown B vo. t cloth , 6s>
“This startling, unique, splendid book.”
Mr. T. P. O’Connor, M.P.
“ This is a decidely powerful story of an uncommon type, and breaks fresh
ground in fiction. ... All the leading characters in the book—Almayer, his
wife, his daughter, and Dain, the daughter’s native lover—are well drawn, and
the parting between father and daughter has a pathetic naturalness about it,
unspoiled by straining after effect. There are, too, some admirably graphic
passages in the book. The approach of a monsoon is most effectively
described. . . . The name of Mr. Joseph Conrad is new to us, but it appears
to us as if he might become the Kipling of the Malay Archipelago.” —Spectator
1, Adelphi Terrace, London. W.G.


RAIDERS
S. R. CROCKETT
Eighth Edition. Crovm Bw., cloth, 6S.
"A thoroughly enjoyable novel, full of fresh, original, and
accurate pictures of life long gone by.” —Daily News.
“ A strikingly realistic romance.” —Morning Post.
“ A stirring story. . . . Mr. Crockett’s style is charming. My
Baronite never knew how musical and picturesque is Scottish-
English till he read this book.”— Punch.
“ The youngsters have their Stevenson, their Barrie, and now
a third writer nas entered the circle, S. R. Crockett, with a lively
and jolly book of adventures, which the paterfamilias pretends
to buy for his eldest son, but reads greedily himself and won’t
let go till he has turned over the last page. . . . Out of such
historical elements and numberless local traditions the author
has put together an exciting tale of adventures on land and sea.”
Frankfuritt Zettung
SOME SCOTCH NOTICES.
“Galloway folk should be proud to rank ‘The Raiders’ among
the classics of the district.” — Scotsman.
“Mr. Crockett’s ‘The Raiders’ is one of the great literary
successes of the season.” —Dundee Advertiser.
“ Mr. Crockett has achieved the distinction ot having produced
the book of the season.” —Dumfries and Galloway Standard.
“The story told in it is, as a story, nearly perfect.”
Aberdeen Daily Free Press.
“‘The Raiders’ is one of the most brilliant efforts of receoi
iction.” —Kirkcudbrightshire A dverhser.
1, Adelphi Terrace. London, W.G.




.


Pd^' 2 -
K)\3S d
1 ft


