

CHILDREN
OF THE
DARK PEOPLE
FRANK DALBY DAVISON


yy




0pfw
ILxfivk vV
I
\f hi
Mi
if
GRANDFATHER GUM-TREE


CHILDREN
OF THE
DARK PEOPLE
AN AUSTRALIAN FOLK TALE
FRANK DALBY DAVISON
Author of Man-Shy. Forever Mominq, The Wells of
Berrsheba. Caribbean Interlude ; joint author of
Blue Coast Caravan
Illustrations by
PIXIE O’HARRIS
AUSTRALIA
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LIMITED
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY


Set up, printed and bound
in Australia by
Halstead Printing Company
Ltd., Nickson Street, Sydney
Registered at the General
Post Office, Sydney, for
transmission through the
post as a book


FOR
DORIS and PETER




Oh, tell them a tale of the fairies bright—
That only the bushmen know —
Who guide the feet of the lost aright,
Or carry them up through the starry night,
Where the bush-lost babies go.
—Henry Lawson.


*


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
W HAT 1 stand or fall by—l think —in this
simple tale of two aboriginal children who
became lost and found their way home again, is
an attempt to possess four worlds within one pair
of covers, Reality and Fantasy, and the Past
linked with the Present. Much of the lore of
bush and blackfellow is of my own gathering, but
also for much I am indebted to others. On
the creative side as well as on the informative
I am not without obligation. I admit making a
steal in plain daylight from Sidney Long, A.R.A.,
and I have filched a thought from May Gibbs,
too. My view is that I have taken from, and,
I humbly hope, added to, the common stock. I
wish especially to record my obligations to Mrs
Bruce Pratt who urged me, two or three years
ago, to write a story about children, who endorsed
the plan I presented, who named Jackadgery and
Nimmitybelle, who reminded me of the mist and
the roly-polys, and who drew the decorations for
the book.
F. D. D.




PROLOGUE
THIS story of two children of the dark people
who once roamed the Australian bush, who
were so few and who have now almost passed
away, is not about any special part of the bush;
it might have happened in any place where grass
still grows and gum-trees stand. And, although
the dark people have gone, the Spirits of the Bush
are still with us; the Spirits of the Billabong, of
the Mountain Gullies and of the Plains. Grand-
father Gumtree is still to be found, if you look
for him, by river, creek and mountain-side; and
Old Mr Bunyip, who looks after the wild crea-
tures of the bush and the beasts of the paddocks,
who shows the birds their green places of hiding,
and who draws the rain clouds to where the earth
lies thirsty, still passes through the land on his
many errands.


.


CHAPTER I
her mother and father, among a tribe
of aborigines, there once lived a little girl
named Nimmitybelle. Though different in ap-
pearance from white children she was very pretty;
with smooth dark skin, soft dark hair, and big
dark eyes in which sadness and laughter dwelt
by turns. It was not the habit of her people to
remain long in one place. Sometimes they set up
their little houses of bark and boughs, called mia-
mias, beside a lagoon; and there they would stay
a while, living on the fish that swam in its waters
and on the wild ducks and geese that had their
nests in the reeds around its edge. Then, tiring
of this, they would gather their few possessions


together and set off across country, catching game
for their needs as they went along.
After they had travelled many days they would
enter the jungle, build fresh mia-mias for them-
selves, and settle down for a short while, living
on the green heads of the cabbage palms, on fruits
that they found, and honey that they took from
the nests of the wild bees. Later they would jour-
ney on again until they came to the mountains
where the bugong moths, of which they were very
fond, were plentiful at a certain season. Here
they would meet other tribes, come from the
south or the north, to feast on the moths. It would
be a time of social pleasure, of talks with strangers
from distant hunting-grounds, and of great cor-
roboree dances. After that they would descend
again to the plains where the time would be spent
hunting kangaroos and emus for their red meat.
So they passed the year, moving from place to
place. When at last they returned to their first
camp by the lagoon the fish and birds on which
they had lived would be restored to their usual
number. Here was the reason for their travels
and what, through the passing of slow centuries,
had bred in them the love of a wandering life;
by going from place to place they obtained clean
changes of camp, healthful and pleasant changes


CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE 5
of food, and, while they were absent from each
place, the plants and animals they had used re-
newed themselves.
They were a free and happy people who under-
stood the simple laws by which they maintained
their place in the life about them, and who were
indeed a living part of all that we call the bush.
They were governed by a council of the elders,
the wise old men of the tribe, who came together
in time of danger or when other trouble threat-
ened and decided what was best to be done.
Best of all Nlmmitybelle liked it when the
tribe set up their little mia-mias by the banks of a
certain flowing river. Here was a pleasant place
in which to live. All day, birds called and whistled
in the bush around the camp; jacky winters, curra-
wongs and willy wagtails flitted among the bushes.
The cockatoo —Braak was his name —raised his
yellow crest and screeched among the branches
of the gums, or, with many of his brothers, floated
like a snowy cloud through the air. Kookaburras
hailed the sun at dawn and saluted his departure
at evening with brave mirth. Curlews —willaroo
—called softly from the river’s edge through the
starry dark. Fat fish plashed the surface of the
water, and sometimes, at broad noon, on the plain
beyond the river, the grey-and-pink native com-


panion—brolga—could be seen dancing with his
friends in the sunlight.
Nimmitybelle’s father was a hunter and a war-
rior in the tribe. Early every morning, when the
smoke of the breakfast fires was dying down, he
and all the other fathers of the tribe took their
spears and boomerangs and went off through the
bush, hunting. They would be gone all day, re-
turning at night with the wallabies and kangaroos
they had killed for meat. There was a great to-do
when they went away 3 with the dogs barking and
the hunters shouting to each other and the mothers
calling to them to be sure and not come back with-
out the meat for tea.
After they were gone, and the mia-mias had
been tidied up for the day, Nimmitybelle and her
mother, and all the mothers and children who
lived near by, and the very aged men who were
too old for hunting, took their dilly-bags and yam-
sticks and went off into the bush like a big picnic
party to dig for yams and to hunt for fat witchetty
grubs and to gather seeds and berries that were
good to eat.
Nimmitybelle liked this part of the day very
much. It was good fun with people calling to
each other through the bush, and the mothers
singing sometimes when they found a patch of


yams or a tree where lots of berries grew. Most
of the people were very friendly. There was
Dirranbandi who hobbled when she walked. She
was very old and very ugly, but she was also
kind of heart. She had no children of her own
now for they had long since grown up to be men
and women in the tribe, so she used to give all the
titbits she found to the young mothers’ piccanin-
nies. And how she would laugh when they rolled
their eyes and skipped with delight. Then there
was little old Cootamundra, one of the aged men
of the tribe. He was full of high spirits. When
someone started up a bandicoot from among the
bushes he would lead the chase, and he cut so
many comic capers until it was caught that every
one would be breathless with laughter. Coota-
mundra would imitate the way the bandicoot had
scampered for its life, how someone had fallen
over while chasing it, and how old Dirranbandi,
perhaps, had at last bailed it up in the hollow of a
tree hole. Even the other old men, who were too
stately to do as he did, would laugh at him.
Then, too, there were the one or two mothers
with whom Nimmitybelle’s mother was specially
friendly. Sometimes, when she and her mother
were digging out a patch of yams, or digging yab-
bies out of the earth of a creek-bank, they would


8 CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
be joined by one of these, all working together,
and sharing in what they caught, and talking as
they did so. Nimmitybelle would hear all the
little bits of news her mother and the other
mothers told each other about the people in the
tribe. She liked to hear this talk and feel that
she knew something of the grown-up world.
But, though it was often turned to fun, the
chief business of the day, the gathering of food,
was not forgotten. Nimmitybelle was clever at
finding things. She had her own little yam-stick
and dilly-bag that her mother had made for her.
She liked digging in the cool earth and coming
on the crisp yams. If there were no yams to be
found she would gather witchetty grubs, lifting
the bark of dead wood in search of them, or filling
her dilly-bag with the quandongs and date-plums
that grew in the thickest part of the bush.
Sometimes, in a sandy patch between the trees,
she and her mother would find a goanna’s burrow.
They liked this to happen, because Nimmity-
belle’s daddy was very fond of roasted goanna.
They would sit down at the mouth of the burrow
and Nimmitybelle would start to sing:
“Goanna, goanna, come out and let us catch
you. Goanna, goanna, my daddy would like you
for his tea.”


When the goanna put his head out of his bur-
row to see ■who was making such a noise Nimmity-
belle’s mother wmuld hit him on the head with
her yam-stick and pop him in the dilly-bag.
When evening came, and the sun was going
down, they would all start for home carrying the
things they had gathered during the day. Mostly,
Nimmitybelle, who was a really very busy and
helpful little girl, had her dilly-bag as full as
could be. She would trot along beside her mother
thinking how nice it would be to watch her daddy’s
face when they showed him the goanna.
When they got back to the mia-mias they would
light the fire, and then the warriors would come
marching in. Nimmitybelle’s daddy would throw
down the wallaby or kangaroo he had brought
home, beside the fire. He would then ask Nim-
mitybelle and her mother how they had got along
during the day. They 'would show him the dilly-
bags full of yams and berries and witchetty
grubs, and he would say that that was very good
indeed. If it was one of the days when they had
caught a goanna he would make Nimmitybelle
laugh by patting his tummy and shouting, “Yak-
kai!” Then he would go into the mia-mia to
put away his spears and boomerangs.
It would then be nearly dark, and time to cook


tea. Very pleasant this would be with a little fire
twinkling in front of each mia-mia, people sitting
around them, talking together and calling from
fire to fire, all very happy with the smell of roast-
ing meat and baking yams everywhere.
After tea Nimmitybelle and her mother and
father would spend the evening sitting beside the
fire. Her father would get out his boomerangs
and practise clicking them to the time of the feet
of the corroboree dancers. Or he would make
music on his didjendoo. With his lips to the end
of the long hollow stick he would make the music
ring out:
“Didj eridoo-o-o-o-o. Didj eridoo-o-o-o-o-o-o.
Didj eridoo-o-o-oh-o-o-o-oh-o-o-o-o-o-o-o! ”
It was a very sad sort of music and sometimes
the sound of it, and of the mopokes calling among
the trees, would make Nimmitybelle feel very
lonely. She would then snuggle up against her
mother and ask her to tell her the stories of when
she was a little girl.
Nimmitybelle would say: “Tell me the story
about the time the river overflowed.”
Her mother would then tell her about the big
flood, when the rain fell for many days and nights,
and the river rose and spread its waters all across
the country, and the people had to leave their


mia-mias and go and live in caverns up in the
hills until the rain ceased and the river went back
inside its banks.
Or Nimmitybelle would say: “Tell me about
the time the angry men came from across the
plains.”
And her mother would tell her how a quarrel
arose with a neighbouring tribe because a young
man of one tribe had stolen a girl whom he
wanted for his wife from the other tribes. How
the warriors of the tribes met on the plain with
their spears and shields and a great fight took
place.
There were many stories. How the big
bush-fire raged through the land and the people
had to run for their lives, with the crea-
tures of the bush, the emus and kangaroos, and
even the goannas and snakes racing beside them.
Then there were stories of the olden times, about
people so long dead that no one remembered hav-
ing seen them, but whose deeds were still acted
in the corroborees and told around the camp-fires.
While Nimmitybelle was listening to these
stories it seemed to her that everything happened
when her mother was a little girl, and that nothing
seemed to happen now that she herself was little.
So she said to her mother:


“Will things like that ever happen to me?”
“I expect they will if you live long enough,”
answered her mother.
When all the stories were told, and the fires
in front of the mia-mias were dying down, and
the big round moon was coming up over the hill,
it was time for Nimmitybelle to go to bed. A
very sleepy and yawny little girl she would be
by then.
Her bed w r as in a corner of the mia-mia, where
she had a soft furry possum-skin rug. She would
wrap herself up warm in this and lie for a while
looking out at the stars, thinking of the stories
she had heard. Then her thoughts would begin
to fade, and her eyes begin to blink, and she would
fall asleep.
The next thing she would know the sun would
be looking in at her through the open end of the
mia-mia, and the birds would be calling. It w T ould
be morning, with the breakfast fire to light and
another day to look forward to.


r • , v ' *■£& •* 4i:<s. L .
CHAPTER II
RTIMMITYBELLE’S friend and playmate was
a boy called Jackadgery, who lived with his
parents in a mia-mla near by. Jackadgery was a
little older than Nimmitybelle, a little taller, and,
because he was a boy, a great deal stronger.
Like all the other boys of the hills, he was
learning to be a warrior and a hunter. He had a
boy’s set of spears and boomerangs and a shield.
His father had taught him how to spear fish in
the river. He could stand in the shallows as still
as a young tree, with the water rippling about his
knees and his eyes fixed on the clear sandy bot-
tom, until a fish came swimming along. Then flash
would go his spear and next second it would be


up in the air with the fish flapping on the end
of it.
His father had also taught him how to track
by means of the marks men and creatures left on
the ground. If he saw a footmark in the dust he
knew who had gone that way, and if he followed
the footmarks for a little way he could tell where
the person who made them had sat down to rest,
where he had stopped to look up a tree in search
of bees’ nests, and where he had lingered at a
creek to drink. He knew the tracks left by the
birds and animals, the long tracks of the kangaroo,
the little round pad of the koala, and those of the
emu and the ibis.
When the tribe was on the move Jackadgery
and the other boys walked ahead with the hunters
and warriors, ready to kill game or to defend the
tribe against attack.
When they were in camp they spent a lot of
their time learning to use their weapons. The
grown-up members of the tribe, and the very little
children, would gather round to watch them. The
boys would see who could throw boomerangs the
farthest and fastest, or who would best make them
circle through the air and return to the thrower’s
feet. At other times they would throw blunt
spears at each other. One boy would throw a spear


at another who had to turn it aside with his shield.
Then he would throw the spear and the other boy
would have to turn it aside. When a boy turned a
very fast and well-thrown spear there were words
of praise from the tribe gathered round j but if he
failed and the spear hit him there would go up
shouts of laughter, and he would march off, his
mind made up to do better next time.
They played these games so that they would
grow up to be brave and clever men like their
fathers and fit to take their place in the tribe.
Jackadgery, because he was tall and strong for his
years, was one of the best players at the different
games.
This is how Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle came
to be friends:
Nimmitybelle had a pet possum that her daddy
had brought home for her one day when he had
been out hunting. He had found it playing all by
itself at the foot of a tree. It was a baby possum
that had fallen from its nest in a hollow among
the branches and didn’t know how to get back.
Nimmitybelle’s daddy thought the best thing
would be to take it home to his little girl who
would like to have it and would look after it.
Nimmitybelle was very fond of her possum.
She liked to stroke its soft fur and watch its tail


i 6 CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
curl up and its bright little eyes twinkle. It was
very clever with its tail. It would hang by it from
her finger while she was walking along. Some-
times, at night, it would wriggle out of the rug
in wdiich it slept with her. It would play about
the floor and then run up the wall and hang by
its tail, sound asleep.
It used to go with her everywhere. When she
went out with all the other people to gather
yams and berries it would travel in her dilly-bag,
looking out over the top with twinkly black eyes.
When she wanted to put things in the dilly-bag,
she would put the possum on top of her head.
There it would stay, quite comfortably, holding
on to her curly hair, and looking down sometimes
over her forehead to see if she were still there.
When all the people rested in the heat of the
day to cook and eat some of the food they had
gathered it would play around her and take little
bits of food from her fingers. In between times
it would curl up and sleep, for possums are crea-
tures of the night and like to spend the daylight
hours at rest.
One day, while it was still a very little possum
and didn’t know that Nimmitybelle was its friend,
it ran away from her. It suddenly jumped out of
her dilly-bag, ran across the ground and scamp-


cred up a tree. It stopped on the trunk of the
tree, just above her head.
When she reached up her hands to get it, it
ran up the tree a little farther and clung there
looking down at her, curling and uncurling its
tail. It was a silly little possum. Nimmitybelle
thought she might be able to push it off the tree
with a stick. She found a long stick, but as soon
as the possum saw it it ran up the tree a little
farther.
Nimmitybelle tried to coax the possum down.
“Come on,” she called. “Come on down, little
possum.”
But the possum only went higher. It kept
going a little way and then stopping to turn its
head and look down. Higher and higher it went.
Nimmitybelle was very fond of her possum.
Her heart had been beating quite hard at the
thought of losing it, although she had kept her
courage up by hoping that it would come down
to her again. But now that she saw it really
meant to run away she put her hand over her
mouth and tears came into her eyes. The possum
got right up among the branches and disappeared
from view.
Nimmitybelle stayed under the tree, looking
up, hoping she might catch another glimpse of it.


While she was standing there Jackadgery came
along.
“What has happened?” he asked.
Nimmitybelle told him, hoping he would be
able to do something about it.
They walked around the tree, looking up, but
the possum, like all the wild things of the bush,
was very good at hiding from view. It was up
there somewhere, but it was just as if it knew they
were looking for it.
“I’ll climb up and see if I can find it,” said
Jackadgery.
The tree was much too tall for ordinary climb-
ing. The trunk went up and up with never a
branch. Jackadgery went and got a small stone
axe that his father had shown him how to make,
and soon was busy cutting notches in the bark of
the tree. He passed a fibre rope round the tree
and round his body, then by the notches he
climbed, first one foot and then the other, hitching
the rope up with each step.
Other people coming by stopped to look, and
soon there was a great number gathered at the
foot of the tree. All the boys in the tribe had
to learn to climb trees, so that when they were
men they would be able to climb up and get honey
from the bees’ nests in the hollow limbs. But this


CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE 19
was such a tall straight tree that many of the
watchers thought Jackadgery might not be able
to get to the top of it. It was a dangerous climb
for a boy.
Jackadgery’s mother was among the people at
the foot of the tree, and Nimmitybelle was afraid
she might make Jackadgery come down. But she
didn’t. She knew he had to learn to do difficult
things, so she didn’t say anything to him —al-
though she felt she would be very glad when it
was all over.
Even Jackadgery, as the ground got farther and
farther away, wondered if he would have the
strength to hold himself to the upright trunk un-
til he reached the top. The muscles of his legs
ached from holding on, for he could only cut the
notches deep enough to put his toes in. “But,” he
thought, “I’ve started now, so I’ll have to go on!”
Higher and higher he went and smaller and
smaller he seemed to get to those who watched. It
was a long time before he reached the first branch.
He had to rest there a while, with his back against
the trunk of the tree. A hard part had been to
get on to the branch without letting the rope fall
and leaving himself without means of getting
down again. He managed it. The rope now lay
where he had placed it across the branch, while


he rested and looked about him at all the world
he could see from such a height.
“Can you see the possum?” called Nimmity-
belle.
“Not yet,” he called down to her after he had
had a look around.
Soon Jackadgery started to climb about among
the branches. Presently those down below heard
him call out: “I can see him!”
The possum had got right out on the tip of one
of the branches. He had to go out after him. This
was even worse than climbing up the trunk, for
the branch began to bend under his weight and the
farther he went out the more it gave way, until
he was afraid it would break and he and the pos-
sum would crash to the ground. He stopped and
looked about him. It was a long way to the
ground. The people away under him looked very
small. Perhaps he should turn back? But then
he thought of how he would feel if he returned to
the ground without the possum —and, after all,
the possum wasn’t far away, just a few feet, look-
ing at him and curling and uncurling its tail.
He had an idea. Just above his head there was
another branch. He stood up and took hold of it.
There were now two branches to support his
weight. Neither of them was very strong so far


out from the trunk, but he thought he could
manage. Inch by inch, with the branches giving
way all the time, he made his way until he was
able to reach down and take hold of the possum.
At the last moment it tried to leap away from him,
but Jackadgery was a boy of the dark people,
and, when he wished, much quicker in his move-
ments than any possum. It seemed to jump Into
his hand instead of awav from it.
j
Then began the climb back along the branches.
This was pleasanter than climbing out because they
straightened as he made his way towards the trunk.
Just when those waiting below had made up their
minds that he would be up the tree for ever they
saw him swing over the lowest branch and, after
putting the rope around himself, begin the de-
scent. He had put the possum where Nimmity-
belle sometimes carried it —on top of his head.
And the possum, as if it had been plaving a joke
in running away and had now had all the fun it
wanted, sat there as good as could be. This amused
every one very much.
There was a sigh of relief from the watchers as
Jackadgery made the descent safelv, and an extra
sigh from Nimmitybelle because she was getting
her possum back.
Lower and lower came Jackadgery and bigger


and bigger he seemed to get. When he was nearly
to the ground he jumped the rest of the way. He
handed the possum to Nimmitybelle, who smiled
up at him and was very pleased to have the furry
little thing in her arms again.
The others all said: “Yak-kai, that’s very
good!” They were pleased with Jackadgery for
climbing so tall a tree, for he had shown himself
able to do things of use in the tribe. They gave
him words of praise, for, although he was tall and
strong for his age, he was not really one of the
very big boys.
That evening the children of the tribe held a
corroboree of their own, and the story was told of
how Nimmitybelle’s possum ran away and how
Jackadgery climbed the tall tree and caught it.
Nimmitybelle was very grateful to Jackadgery.
Whenever she met him after that she always
spoke to him, and Jackadgery always asked after
the possum.


r
JgSjkms? r w P1 “ W 0^jr“','r’-'^~-J^‘ ' -. « -■ '. : 4'-' —
CHAPTER 111
day Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery were
playing together at the edge of the river,
where Jackadgery had a little bark canoe. They
were paddling in the shallow water and talking
to each other. It would soon be time for the tribe
to move again, and they were wondering where
they would go next —into the hills or across the
plains.
While they were chattering together, the witch-
doctor, who was supposed to keep evil spirits away
from the tribe, came along and sat down on the
river-bank just above them. He was not a very
nice witch-doctor; indeed, he was wicked and
crafty. He thought because he was the witch-doctor


and feared by the other people that he could do
as he wished. He didn’t like Nimmitybelle and
Jackadgery. He had watched Nimmitybelle at
work and play, and he saw that such a good and
pretty little girl was sure to grow up to be thought
a great deal of by the people in the tribe. And he
had watched Jackadgery tracking, and throwing
spears and boomerangs, and he saw that he w'as
sure to grow up to be a fine warrior and hunter.
He didn’t want either of these things to happen.
He had other plans in view.
For a long time it had been in his mind to take
them across the desert and leave them wfith a
distant tribe, far away, so that they could not make
their way back; but first he had to get them well
away from the camp, out of sight of the people,
who would protect them. While he was sitting
there watching Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle an
idea of how to do this came to him. It was a
wicked idea, and, like all wicked ideas, it was also
foolish. The witch-doctor didn’t think of this.
The foolishness was to be proved to him after
many days, but the wickedness had to come first.
“That’s a nice canoe you have there,” he said
to Jackadgery,
Jackadgery was very pleased to have his canoe
praised.


“Did you make it yourself?” the witch-doctor
asked.
“Yes,” said Jackadgery, “I watched my father
and another man make a big one, then I made this
little one for myself.”
“Why don’t you go for a paddle in it?” asked
the witch-doctor.
“I do,” answered Jackadgery. “I’ve been out
that far,” he said, throwing a stick towards the
centre of the river.
“Oh, that’s nothing!” said the witch-doctor. “A
girl could paddle a canoe that far! Why don’t you
go away down the river. When I was a boy I
used to go miles and miles down the river.”
“Did you?” asked Jackadgery. He had often
wondered what was to be seen away down the
river, but he had been cautioned by his father not
to go out of sight of the camp in his canoe.
“I think you’re afraid!” said the witch-doctor.
At hearing this word Jackadgery forgot about
his father’s caution.
Nimmitybelle spoke first. She had been listen-
ing, and she didn’t like hearing the witch-doctor
say Jackadgery was afraid. She remembered how
he had climbed the tall tree and caught her
possum.
“Jackadgery’s not afraid of anything!” she said.


She felt alarmed as soon as she had spoken, but
the words seemed to come out by themselves.
The witch-doctor laughed.
“Well, he’s afraid to go down the river in his
canoe!” he said.
“No, I’m not!” said Jackadgery.
“Well, go on, then!” said the witch-doctor.
“And take Nimmitybelle w r ith you.”
“All right,” said Jackadgery. He really was a
little bit afraid, but he didn’t like being told so
in front of Nimmitybelle—a warrior should
never be afraid.
Nimmitybelle was also scared, but she made up
her mind to go with her friend. She thought, “If
I go with him I will be less afraid than if I wait
here while he is gone. And, anyway, I can trust
Jackadgery to look after us both.”
So Jackadgery put his spears and boomerangs
into the canoe, and Nimmitybelle got in with her
dilly-bag and her pet possum. Jackadgery was
feeling better now that he had made a start, but
he was glad for Nimmitybelle’s company just the
same.
“I’ll wait here until you come back,” the witch-
doctor called after them as they paddled away.
This was not true, because as soon as the chil-
dren were out of sight he got up and went away


from the river-bank. He went to his mia-mia,
which stood at a little distance from the others.
There he painted his face and body in a design
known only to himself, and put on his secret hat
which made him look different to anything else
in the world. Then, squatting beside his fire, with
his medicine-bag beside him, he began muttering
to himself, making magic against Nimmitybelle
and Jackadgery.
This didn’t take him long. As soon as he had
finished, he left the camp, wearing his hat and
carrying his bag. He followed the course of the
river, on foot. In front of his mia-mia he left
a message-stick for the people of the tribe, to say
that the two children had been led away by evil
spirits and that he had gone to try to get them
back.
While this was going on the children had been
making their way down the river, floating with
the current. For a while they kept thinking of the
witch-doctor. There had been a strange look in
his eyes. But after a while their thoughts passed
to other things. The sun was shining brightly, the
birds were trilling and calling along the river-
side, and it was very pleasant gliding along the
shining water.
Every one likes going to places where they have


never been before —and so did Jackadgery and
Nimmitybelle. They paddled along and saw all
kinds of new things. There were trees and flowers
along the river-banks such as they had never seen
before, and different sorts of birds flew overhead.
Berries that were quite new to them were growing
on the bushes by the water’s edge, while beyond
the river they saw mobs of kangaroos and emus
much bigger than those to be found near the
camp.
Nimmitybelle thought how nice it would be
when she got home to tell her mother about the
new sorts of berries she had seen; and Jackadgery
thought of how he would be able to tell his father
and the other hunters where they could find game
for their spears. He remembered his father’s cau-
tion about not going far from the camp in his
canoe. “But,” he thought, “I haven’t gone far
enough to satisfy the witch-doctor, who will be
waiting by the river-bank and will be very amused
if I return too soon. Perhaps I had better go a
bit farther now I have started and then I can
explain afterwards to my father.” Jackadgery felt
that though his father might be angry with him he
would not want his son, who was to grow up to be
a warrior, to let it be seen that he was afraid.
They saw a platypus playing in the water near


the river-bank and paddled the canoe towards it to
see if they could catch it 3 but it saw them coming
and swam down into its burrow under the water.
However, as they were close to the bank, they
decided to land there and have a picnic.
After they had fastened the canoe Jackadgery
speared a fish, and Nimmitybelle gathered some
of the new sorts of berries. She got enough for
herself and Jackadgery and some more to take
home to her mother.
Jackadgery lit a fire by rubbing two sticks to-
gether—after the manner of the dark people when
they needed fire —and Nimmitybelle roasted the
fish over the coals.
After they had eaten they agreed to go a little
farther down the river and then turn back and
go home 3 not because they were any longer afraid,
but because they were anxious to tell all about
the new things they had seen.
“We’ll go as far as the next bend in the river
and have a look around,” they said to each other,
“and then we’ll turn back.”
When they reached the bend in the river they
saw along the bank a beach of smooth yellow sand
They landed there, and, after climbing up the
bank, stood looking around them. It was a pretty
country that met their eyes. The ground and the


bushes were bright with wild flowers j their scent
was like honey in the air 3 and many coloured birds
—parrots, galahs, and flnches —flew from tree to
tree. They wandered along, looking about them
and pointing out the beautiful things to each
other. Nimmitybelle had her dilly-bag with her,
and she was carrying her possum on her head so
that he, too, could see everything. Jackadgery was
carrying his spears so that if they met any one it
would be known that he was a member of the
tribe, and they would be allowed to pass.
They had almost forgotten about the witch-
doctor, although he had not forgotten about them.
When they had gone a little distance a strange
and terrifying thing happened. The air slowly
went dark. It became as black as night, and they
could hardly see each other. Then a noise like
thunder rolled round and round the sky. Round
and round rolled the thunder, and the earth
shook. The children clung to each other in fear.
Then the thunder ceased, the air slowly grew light
again, and the sun was shining. Greatly fright-
ened, the children turned to hurry back to the
river, but an even more terrible thing had hap-
pened. The river had disappeared as completely
as if it had never been and a range of dark moun-
tains, towering up into the sky, had taken its place.


Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle looked around
in amazement. The river was gone, the canoe was
gone, and the mountains barred their way. They
were lost.
How were they to get home? Nimmitybelle
looked at Jackadgery. Things such as they had
heard of only in stories had happened. Jackadgery
tried not to let himself be overcome.
“Perhaps I can find the way,” he said. “Come
on.”
The possum was so scared at what had taken
place that he was hiding in the bottom of the
dilly-bag.


CHAPTER IV
IT was late at night. The two children lay sleep-
ing side by side, beneath a high white moon, on
the ground near the waters of a billabong.
Not long after the river had changed into a
high mountain range something even more ter-
rifying had happened. They had fled from it and
hidden in the dense shadows of a clump of paper-
bark-trees. Later, when they thought it safe to
venture forth, they had wondered how they were
to get home. In running away they hadn’t
noticed the way they went, and so had not the
least idea which way to turn.
At first they had thought it would be best to
remain hidden until someone came to find them.
They knew that as soon as they were missed a


CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE 33
search would be made. Then they remembered
that they would not be missed until the evening
when the hunters came back to the camp and their
mothers returned from their day in the bush. It
would then be too late and too dark for any one
to set out to look for them.
They thought they had best see what they could
do for themselves. Nimmitybelle gathered some
of the gum-leaves and put them in the dilly-bag
so that the possum should not go hungry, and
then they set out to see if they could find their
way.
The country was still very beautiful j with wild
flowers and birds they had never seen before. As
well as the gum-trees there were coral-trees and
turpentines. Among the flowers there were
boronia, flannel-flowers and yellow everlasting.
They saw the jabiru, a bird like a large stork,
wild pigeons in a patch of scrub and pelicans fly-
ing above a swamp. Sometimes, in stopping to
look at these things, they forgot they were lost.
Then they would remember and hurry on again.
By and by they stopped taking any interest in the
things around them. They became very tired and
had often to sit down to rest. They wanted only
to get home. Nimmitybelle’s feet became sore
with so much walking. She limped a little with


the pain, but she walked behind Jackadgery so that
he should not see, and kept her troubles to herself
because she knew he was doing his best.
Jackadgery was indeed doing all he could. As
well as he was able he kept to ways where the
grass w r as soft underfoot, and, beside looking for
the way home, he kept his eyes open for game,
as a good hunter should. His alertness was re-
warded, for during the afternoon he speared a
bandicoot which he carried trussed up on top of
his head.
The sun sank lower and lower in the sky and
still they could not find their way. Evening came
and the birds went to their nests. A flight of wild
geese passed overhead, honking loudly as they
winged their way to their homes by the banks of
some distant lagoon. Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery
watched them go by, listening to their eerie call,
and wished that they could pass through the air
like these. How quickly, then, they would reach
their own homes. It seemed strange to be abroad,
with nowhere to turn, when quietness was settling
on the bush.
At nightfall they came to the billabong and,
as they were thirsty as well as tired they thought
they had better spend the night here. They put
down their belongings and had a drink from the


waters j then Jackadgery waded into the billabong
and gathered water-lily roots, which were good to
eat and would serve them as vegetables.
When he returned Nimmitybelle had lit a fire
and was roasting the bandicoot, for, although she
was very tired, she had made up her mind that
she was the little girl and the housekeeper and
that she was going to do her best.
While Nimmitybelle was roasting the bandicoot
and making the water-lily roots ready for eating,
Jackadgery gathered a lot of dry wood so that
they would have enough fuel to keep themselves
warm during the night. They had no mia-mia to
cover them, and no possum-skin rugs to wrap
themselves in.
After they had eaten they felt a great deal
better, but they were very lonely. They missed all
the mia-mias and the chatter of the people cooking
their evening meals over the little fires. They
thought of their homes, and wondered what was
happening at the camp now that night had come
and they had not returned.
“Do you think our fathers and mothers will be
very worried?” asked Nimmitybelle.
“I suppose they will,” answered Jackadgery.
“And I suppose they’ll also be cross,” he added,
remembering how he had disobeyed.


It was lonely sitting beside their little fire in
that strange country with darkness all around
them, so presently they decided that it would be
best to go to sleep. They were very glad to do
this, because you can’t be unhappy then.
Jackadgery drew the supply of wood up close
and then they lay down together. Nimmitybelle
thought of her mother, and two little tears crept
from under her eyelids, but she was really too
tired for weeping and soon fell asleep.
In the middle of the night, when the moon was
floating high, they were awakened by a soft touch.
They sat up, rubbing the sleep from their eyes, and
saw someone standing over them.
It was a being clad in a filmy garment decor-
ated with water-lily buds, while a fully open
bloom was bound to her forehead. She was very
lovely.
“Who are you?” they asked.
“I’m the Spirit of the Billabong,” the stranger
answered.
“We didn’t see you when we came here,” ex-
claimed Jackadgery.
The Spirit of the Billabong smiled and shook
her head.
“No one sees me in the daytime,” she said. “It
is only at night that I walk by the billabong. Dur-


ing the day I sleep in the waters, under the water-
lilies.”
The children had nothing to say to this. They
were lost in wonder.
“Who are you?” asked the Spirit of the Billa-
bong, looking from one to another.
“Pm Nimmitybelle,” answered the little girl.
“And Pm Jackadgery,” answered the boy.
“You are two little lost children, aren’t you?”
the Spirit asked.
“Yes,” they replied.
“I knew you were when I found you lying
here. And where are your homes?”
“On the bank of the big river,” they told her.
“Tell me about them,” said the Spirit of the
Billabong, sitting down on the grass beside them.
“I like to hear about human beings. And tell me
how you came to be here.”
So the two children told her about their homes
by the river. They told her how the hunters went
off each morning, and how the mothers and chil-
dren went gathering food in the bush, and about
the dogs and the fires in front of the mia-mias.
These things had been so much in their
thoughts that they enjoyed telling her. It was
nice telling someone who wanted to know.
The Spirit of the Billabong listened with great


interest. “And how do you come to be here, so
far from homer” she asked.
They told her how they had come down the
river and how, after they had landed, the river
had been changed into a mountain range. Then
they went on to tell her of the second strange
thing that had happened.
Just after the mountains had risen in place of
the river, they had set out, led by Jackadgery, to
see if they could find their way home. They had
been walking some time when they heard a voice:
“Yak-kai!”
They had stopped and looked about them,
wondering who could have called. Then, looking
at them from behind a tree, they saw a strange
figure such as they had never seen before.
“Who are you?” Jackadgery had asked, clutch-
ing one of his spears and making his voice sound
as brave as he could.
“Pm Old Mr Bunyip,” said the being, in a
voice that you could tell was intended to sound
quite friendly.
“What do you want?” asked Jackadgery.
“I want a word with you,” was the answer.
Then, stepping out from behind the tree, he came
slowly toward them.
The children waited for no more. They turned


and fled. They ran as hard as they could, leaping
over stones and bushes. The figure called to them
to come back, and when they kept running he took
after them, bounding along, shouting at every
stride as if their running away had annoyed him
greatly.
They ran until Nimmitybelle could run no
more; and the strange figure was hard at their
heels.
Jackadgery saw that something would have to
be done. He turned, and, bracing his feet, threw
one of his spears. It was not a very big spear, but
Jackadgery’s aim was true. The spear struck the
strange figure in the foot, and so fast was he
going that he fell over before he could stop him-
self. He jumped up and danced round on one
foot while he tried to pull the spear out of the
other.
Jackadgery shouted with triumph. Then he
seized Nimmitybelle by the hand and on they ran.
While the enemy was trying to get the spear out
of his foot they made good their escape.
It was then that they had come to the clump of
paperback-trees, dense and shady, and had hidden
among them. As they disappeared among the
shadows they had heard the strange being shouting
with pain and rage.


They told these happenings to the Spirit of the
Billabongj and after they had finished she shook
her head and smiled.
“Pm sure that wasn’t Old Mr Bunyip,” she
said. “I think it was the witch-doctor of your
tribe with his secret hat on.”
The two children looked at her in surprise.
“I know Old Mr Bunyip,” said the Spirit. He
sometimes comes down to the billabong for a
drink when he is passing on his errands. He’s a
very kind old man. Old Mr Bunyip,” she ex-
plained, “is the Guardian Spirit of the Bush. It’s
he who tells the bees where the honey flowers are
blooming. He shows the birds and the possums
where the woody hollows are in the trees, and he
leads the brumbies to where the grass is green.
He is kindness itself! He is not in the least like
the witch-doctor to look at, and I’m sure he d
never chase little children.”
Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery were now quite
sure it was the witch-doctor and not Old Mr
Bunyip who had run after them. They thought
of how he had sent them down the river and
they understood how evil he was.
“What do you do here?” asked Jackadgery,
who was very curious about the strange world in
which they found themselves.


“I look after the billabong,” the Spirit an-
swered, “and care for the fish that are in it; the
platypuses and the water-lilies and the birds that
fly down to drink the water. In the evening I walk
by the banks, sometimes alone and sometimes
with the flowers.”
“With the flowers!” exclaimed the children.
The Spirit laughed when she saw their surprise.
“Yes,” she said. “You see, the flowers are fixed
in their places by day, but at evening, at the same
hour that I rise from among the water-lilies, they
are free to meet and move about.”
“I’ll show you,” she said, and putting her hand
to her mouth she sent a “Cooee” floating through
the bush.
The children heard a soft rustling in the night,
and the flowers appeared, crowding all around,
shoulder to shoulder. They were all there:
Wattle with her fluffy golden hair, Waratah in
her dress of dark green and rich red, Flannel
Flower with the points of her dainty white dress
turned up all round, little Boronia in her brown
cloak with golden lining, Sarsaparilla with her
sweeping purple train, Gum Blossoms —there
were a host of these wide-eyed little folk —and
all the other flowers.
The Spirit of the Billabong told them about


Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery, and when she
came to the part about the witch-doctor they all
turned and looked at each other as if they were
surprised at such evil doings.
“And now,” said the Spirit, “I want you to
build a mia-mia for Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle
to sleep in.”
Instantly the flowers hurried away, glad to do
as they had been asked.
While the flowers were busy Nimmitybelle and
Jackadgery and the Spirit of the Billabong con-
tinued to talk.
“Can you tell us how to get home?” asked
Nimmitybelle.
“No,” replied the Spirit, “the country beyond
the billabong is unknown to me.” She looked
grieved for a moment as if it made her sad to
think she could do nothing for them. “But there
are others who will be able to help,” she added,
brightening. “There’s Grandfather Gumtree. He
grows so high that he may be able to point out
your way for you. If you come to where he
grows, stop and ask him. Pm sure he’ll do the
best he can for you.
“And Old Mr Bunyip,” asked Jackadgery,
“would he help us?”
“He’d be the best of all,” replied the Spirit.


“He may be hard to find, for his errands in the
bush take him so much from place to place. He
has to look after everything. But ask for him
wherever you go. He is sure to know where your
home lies, and he’ll be only too glad to lead you
there.”
The children asked how they would know him.
“You’ll know him easily enough!” the Spirit
of the Billabong answered, smiling as if it made
her happy to think about Old Mr Bunyip. “He
is very tall and stately, with thick white hair and
a huge white beard. He looks like one of the
elders of a very grand tribe. He carries a blue-
gum sapling, which he uses for a staff. He walks
very smartly, looking straight to his front, making
haste on his way. But he always has time for a
smile and word with those who want to speak to
him, and he looks at you with the kindest eyes in
the world. We are all very fond of him.”
Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery thought they
would know Old Mr Bunyip were they to meet
him.
“How about the witch-doctor?” asked Nim-
mitybelle. “Won’t he still be looking for us?”
“Most likely he will,” the Spirit answered.
“You may have trouble with him. But don’t be
too much afraid of him, my dears. Remember, he


is more foolish than wicked. Just be brave and do
your best. The good Spirits of the Bush will
help you, and Pm sure it will all come right in
the end.”
The children were very comforted to hear this j
though they wondered how far off the end would
be.
“And if we need to we can come back here to-
morrow night?” asked Nimmitybelle. She liked
the Spirit of the Billabong very much.
“Of course,” answered the Spirit, and smiled.
“Pd love to see you again. I am sometimes lonely,
here.”
By this time the flowers had finished making
the little mia-mia of bark and boughs. They had
built it right over the children, just where they
were sitting.
A sweet, long trilling call of a bird came from
the shadows of a tree near by.
The Spirit of the Billabong rose to her feet.
“It is time to part,” she said. “That was the
Singer of the Dawn;* and look, the moon grows
pale. It is time for the flowers to return to their
places in the bush and for me to go to my rest
below the water-lilies. Come back to-morrow
night, if you need me.”
* Eopsaltria Australis.


She waved her hands to the flowers; and there
was a soft rustling as they sped away to their
places.
While the flowers were disappearing a bright
silver star fluttered down from the sky and burned
above the head of the Spirit of the Billabong.
While the children were looking at it the Spirit
glided away, stepping from leaf to leaf across the
water-lilies. Then the star went out.


CHAPTER V
T A THEN Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle woke
’ ’ up they felt rested and refreshed, for they
had had a sound sleep. The mia-mia that the
flowers had built for them had disappeared when
daylight came, and of course the Spirit of the
Billabong was nowhere to be seen. But it was
comforting to remember her and what she had
told them, and to think that they now had a
friend.
The first thing to do was to have some break-
fast. Jackadgery made a snare and went down
among the reeds where he caught two ducks. Nim-
mitybelle gathered some more lily roots. Before
returning to the land they parted the water-lilies
and peered among them to see if they could catch


a glimpse of the Spirit of the Billabong. They
thought they could see her down in the dark
water, but they were not sure. Then Nimmity-
belle thought she might not like to be disturbed,
so they drew the water-lilies back into place and
returned to the land. Here they lit their fire and
cooked and ate their food.
While they were eating they talked. Nimmity-
belle said she was not stiff and sore like she had
been when they reached the billabong last night;
and Jackadgery said he thought they had got along
very well so far.
After their meal they gathered their things
together and started out once more to see if they
could find their way home. They hoped they
would meet Old Mr Bunyip, or that they would
find Grandfather Gumtree. At the same time
they kept a sharp look out for the witch-doctor.
Their way led across open country at the foot
of some hills. They marched along, hopeful and
content, feeling as they sometimes did when the
tribe was moving from place to place. Jackad-
gery walked a little in front, ready for anything
that might happen, and Nimmitybelle walked a
little behind with her eyes open for anything
that might be useful to them on their way.
It was not long before they met trouble.
After they had been walking some time they


48 CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
came to the foot of a high hill. Jackadgery
thought if they climbed to the top of it they might
be able to see where they lived. By this time
Nimmitybelle was feeling a little tired, so Jackad-
gery said that if she liked to wait at the foot of
the hill he would climb to the top and then would
come down and tell her what he had seen. So
Nimmitybelle sat herself down in the shade of a
big rock and Jackadgery set off by himself.
After he had gone Nimmitybelle felt rather
lonely. She wished she had gone with him, but
he was now out of sight. To comfort herself and
to pass the time she had a game with her possum,
and very good company he was. He sat on her
shoulder, then he jumped up on her head and
looked down at her over her forehead. She reached
him down and he had a swing by his tail from
her finger. Then she put him in the branches of
a sapling, and he scampered about through its
leaves, pretending it was a big tree and that he
was going to run away from her again. After that
he curled himself up in the dilly-bag and went
to sleep.
She gathered some fresh gum-tips and put them
in the bag with him so that he would have some-
thing to nibble when he woke up; then she sat
herself down again to wait for Jackadgery.
He seemed to be away a very long time. She


wondered if anything had happened to him. So
busy was she thinking about him that she didn’t
notice the witch-doctor creeping towards the rock
where she was sitting.
The witch-doctor had not expected any difficulty
in getting control of the children after he had
raised the magic ranges in place of the river. He
had thought they would be so frightened that they
would be glad to come to any one who spoke to
them. His surprise had been very great when
they ran away, and even greater when the boy had
dared to turn and throw a spear at him. He had
spent the night thinking of revenge, and had
started out to look for them at peep of day. Not
Only would he be carrying out his plan in taking
them to the tribe beyond the desert, but he would
now have pleasure in doing it.
He had come upon Nimmitybelle by accident
just after Jackadgery had left her and while she
was playing with her possum. For a while he had
hidden himself, watching her and wondering what
had happened to the boy. Then he thought to
himself: “I’ll make sure of this one and then get
Jackadgery afterwards.”
At last Nimmitybelle thought: “I can’t stay
here any longer by myself. I’ll walk up the hill
a little way and see if I can meet Jackadgery com-


ing down.” So she got to her feet and picked up
her dilly-bag.
Just as she was setting out to find Jackadgery
the witch-doctor leaped from behind the tree with
a loud shout and seized her. He tucked her
under one arm, and made off with her with fast
strides. Between the trees and over rocks he went.
Nimmitybelle remembered what the Spirit of the
Billabong had said, and although she could not
help being frightened she was also angry. She
struggled to get free, and called loudly for Jack-
adgery j but the witch-doctor’s arm was strong and
Jackadgery was too far away to hear. The witch-
doctor kept grimly on his way.
At last he came to the foot of a tall cliff. Up
this he climbed, higher and higher, until he came
to a little path running along a ledge of rock. He
made his way along it and at length came to the
opening of a large cave in the face of the cliff.
By this time he was chuckling with glee. He
carried Nimmitybelle into the back of the cave,
which was like a large gloomy room, with walls
of stone and without windows. He sat her down
at the back of the cave and then returned to the
opening.
“Now I’ll soon get Jackadgery,” he said; for
he knew very well what would happen next.


When Jackadgery came down the hill and could
not find Nimmitybelle he was very surprised. He
had not been able to see where they lived, but
far in the distance he had seen Grandfather Gum-
tree. This was good news, and he wished to tell
Nimmitybelle about it.
When he could not find her he began to look
around. This was where his skill in tracking came
in. He walked round the rock where he had left
Nimmitybelle, looking down at the earth.
Sometimes he looked standing up, and some-
times he got down on his knees so as to see better.
The marks were faint, for the ground was hard
and stony —which made it a severe test for a
tracker. But little by little he learned what had
happened.
He saw where Nimmitybelle had been sitting.
Then he saw where she had got up and walked
about. He saw where she had stood by the sap-
ling, and his quick eyes saw where she had broken
off the gum-tips for the possum, and he came
across the large tracks of the witch-doctor.
He knew at once what had happened, and taking
a tight hold of his spears he started to follow
the witch-doctor’s tracks where he had gone off
with Nimmitybelle under his arm.
Jackadgery came at length to the high cliff,
and looking up, he saw the mouth of the cave.


He guessed that the witch-doctor was close about,
and for a minute he was afraid. Then he over-
came his fear. He was a young man of the tribe
and he could never go home without Nimmity-
belle. He must go on and rescue her.
With a spear held ready in his right hand he
made his way up the little rocky path. As he
drew nearer and nearer to the mouth of the cave
his steps became slower and his eyes ever more
alert. He was a boy of the dark people, and he
knew that when he saw the enemy he had to act
first and quickest.
Just as he reached the mouth of the cave, and
was ready for anything that might happen, his
arms were gripped from behind.
The witch-doctor had known Jackadgery would
come. Looking down from the cave he had seen
him from far off, and had hidden behind a bush.
As soon as he felt his enemy’s hands on him
Jackadgery knew what had happened. He was
angry and disappointed as well as frightened. He
fought and struggled. He called out to Nimmity-
belle. He meant for her to run away while she
had the chance. But she was so glad to hear his
voice that though she came to the mouth of the
cave she could not run away.
She would have gone to Jackadgery’s help, but
there was not time; for Jackadgery, though he


was strong for his years, and struggled well, was
not a match for the witch-doctor. Soon both he
and Nimmitybelle were bundled into the back of
the cave and made to remain still.
The witch-doctor took Jackadgery’s spears and
boomerangs and broke them into little pieces. He
threw them over the edge of the cliff; then he
sat himself dow r n at the mouth of the cave and
fell into deep thought. He was making his plans
for taking his prisoners away to the tribe beyond
the desert.
The children sat for a long time without saying
anything to each other. They were almost too
scared to move. The minutes went by. It seemed
such a long time since they had left the billa-
bong. That had been in early morning. It must
now be midday.
“We haven’t even got anything to eat,” whis-
pered Jackadgery.
“Yes, we have,” whispered Nimmitybelle. “I
saved some pieces from our breakfast. I thought
they might come in useful.” She put her hand
into her dilly-bag and, pushing the possum aside,
drew out two pieces of duck and a few water-lily
roots.
Jackadgery was glad. This made Nimmitybelle
happy, for she felt that she was doing her part.
They ate the food and afterwards felt much


better. They were sitting looking about them when
Nimmitybelle suddenly pointed to a dark part o
the cave. From the shadows a being with a pretty
little face and merry brown eyes was looking at
them. She must have been wanting them to look
at her for a long time, because as soon as they did
so she put her finger to her lip and then she put
forth her hand and beckoned them.
After making sure that the witch-doctor still
had his back towards them they got up and stole
over to her. When they got near they saw that
she was peeping round a fold in the rock that
they had not noticed among the shadows. She put
out a hand and drew them after her. They had
to stoop down and crawl through a hole. As soon
as they were through she closed it up with a large
flat stone lying near by. There was only a small
crack left, through which they could see the witch-
doctor still sitting at the mouth of the cave.
The children wondered who their friend could
be, but they did not find out until she had taken
them by the hand and led them along a short
dark passage that opened into another ca\e. This
was much different to the one they had left. Its
walls were smooth and snow-white. Its roof was
hung with gleaming crystals, big and little. In the
centre of the floor was a pool of clear green water,
and into it drops fell from the crystal roof with a


noise like soft music. Light came from an opening
in the wall; an opening like a window, through
which they could see the tops of the gum-trees in
the outside world.
Before their friend spoke the children had time
to notice that she was not very tall. She was only
a very little bit bigger than Jackadgery; but she
was very pretty and dainty, and her dress was
hung with crystals, like those hanging from the
roof, but smaller. They tinkled and twinkled
whenever she moved, which she did very often,
for she was a very lively little being.
“I’m the Spirit of the Caves,” she said, “and
you’re Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery, aren’t you?”
“How do you know who we are?” they asked.
The Spirit of the Caves laughed with delight.
“Why, everybody knows who you are!” she cried.
“You told the Spirit of the Billabong, didn’t you?”
“Yes,” they answered.
“And she told the flowers that live by the billa-
bong?”
“Yes.”
“Well, when the flowers went back to their
places they told the other flowers —and so the news
spread. I heard about you when I was out walk-
ing through the bush last night; I heard the leaves
of the trees whispering together. Even the birds


know. It was the kookaburra who told me you
were coming here to the caves,”
“How did he know?” they asked.
“He was sitting up on top of a tree near by
when the witch-doctor seized Nimmitybelle and
started off with her. As soon as he saw what was
happening he came to tell me. I saw him coming.
He was flying so straight and so fast that I knew
something was wrong. He was quite breathless
when he got to my window-opening. He couldn’t
speak for a minute.”
It made the children happy to know they had
so many friends.
“I am sorry for all that has happened to you,”
said the Spirit of the Caves. “But if it had to
happen I am glad you have come this way, be-
cause I wanted to meet you. I have been watching
out for you from the moment the kookaburra told
me. That horrid person sitting at the mouth of
the cave must be the witch-doctor of your tribe.”
Just then they heard the witch-doctor shouting
and yelling in the next cave. He had looked round
and found that Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle were
gone. He couldn’t see the hole they had crept
through, because the Spirit of the Caves had
blocked it up with the stone j so he didn’t know
how the children had escaped, and he was terribly
angry.


They could hear him puffing and bellowing like
thunder. Such a noise did he make that they
turned pale with fright; they thought he might
find out where they were.
“Don’t be frightened,” said their friend. “He
can’t find his way in here. But we’ll go and have
a look at him.”
So they went back along the passage and peeped
through the crack.
The witch-doctor was biting his fingers and
stamping with rage.
“Isn’t he a wretch!” exclaimed the Spirit of the
Caves.
After hunting everywhere and not finding the
children, he made up his mind that they were in-
deed gone; so he sat down in a corner of the
cave with a sulky look on his face, and snarled.
“Did you see that?” asked the Spirit. “He
doesn’t even know how to behave himself!”
She led the way back to the white cave. “Now
we’re going to forget all about the witch-doctor,”
she said. “And when daylight fades I will help
you to escape. Come, I will show you.”
Taking the children by the hand she led them
along a passage, at the end of which they could
see a light. When they reached it they found that
it was daylight. They were standing on a rocky


opening in the hill-side, looking out among the
trees and sunshine.
“You see,” said their friend, “the witch-doctor
is sitting in the front door of the cave, but he
doesn’t know about the side door. When evening
comes you can go out this way. It wouldn tdo for
you to go now, because he might see you before
you had gone very far.”
While the Spirit was talking she had disap-
peared. The children could still hear her voice,
but they couldn’t see her. They were quite alarmed
until she explained that she could only be seen
while she was in the twilight of the cavesj and
that as soon as she stepped into the sunlight she
became invisible.
“And now we will go back to the white cave,”
she said. Her voice sounded behind them. They
turned round and found that she had stepped into
the shadows of the passage, and they could see
her once more.
“How will we put in the afternoon?” she asked
when they were once more indoors. “What would
you like to do, Jackadgery?”
Jackadgery said to her; “I think I’d like to draw
some pictures on your walls.”
“Can you draw?” asked the Spirit.
Jackadgery explained that in the tribe it was
expected that some of the boys would know how


to draw. They had to make designs on their
shields. And at the places where they camped
they had to draw pictures of emus and kangaroos
and dingoes on the rocks. Sometimes they even
cut them into the rocks.
“And have you anything to draw with?” asked
the Spirit.
Jackadgery showed her some pieces of soft red
and yellow stone he had picked up from the ground
near the side door.
“All right,” said the Spirit of the Caves. “Jack-
adgery’s going to draw me some tribal pictures and
you, Nimmitybelle, can come with me and I’ll
show you the rest of my house.”
So Jackadgery set to work and Nimmitybelle
and the Spirit of the Caves set off together.
“The cave where Jackadgery is drawing,” said
the Spirit to Nimmitybelle, “is where I live most
of the time; then I have a cave where I cook,
and a cave where I sleep, one where I go when
I want the morning sun, and another where I go
when I want to be quite by myself. But I won’t
take you to that one. Without a light it would
be too dark for humans; it extends far under the
hills.”
They went into the sleeping-room first and her
friend showed Nimmitybelle her different dresses.
They were all made of crystals. Some were faintly


6o CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
rosy like early dawn, some were faintly green like
still water, and others faintly blue like a windy
sky.
She allowed Nimmitybelle to try them on one
after another. There was a rosy one that was
too small for the Spirit of the Caves but it fitted
Nimmitybelle very well. The Spirit asked her if
she would like to wear it for the rest of the after-
noon. Nimmitybelle said she would, so she was
allowed to keep it on, and very nice she felt in a
dress of tinted crystals that tinkled and twinkled
about her knees.
“Pd like to let you keep it,” said her friend.
“But it belongs to the caves and I am not allowed
to give things away.”
Nimmitybelle said it didn’t matter; she was
glad to have it to wear just for the afternoon.
From the sleeping-cave they went to the one
where the Spirit of the Caves did her cooking over
a crackling little fire, and from there to the one
where she went for the morning sun. This was
different to the other caves; there were no crystals
hanging from the roof. It was of smooth honey-
coloured stone and so were the walls. There was a
large opening in one wall, and from it you could
see far and wide. You could see the way Jackad-
gery and Nimmitybelle had come. There, far off,
was the water where the Spirit of the Billabong


lived. “And there,” said the Spirit of the Caves,
“is Grandfather Gumtree. You can see his green
head above the top of that hill in the distance.”
The witch-doctor had started shouting again.
They could hear his voice coming through the
caves, rumbling and grumbling like a river in
flood.
“We won’t take any notice of him,” said the
Spirit.
They returned to the white cave to sec how
Jackadgery was getting along with his drawings,
and then they went back to the sleeping-room to
sit on the Spirit’s soft bed of furs and have a nice
long talk together.


CHAPTER VI
TVfEXT day had come and Jackadgery and
Nimmitybelle were again on their travels.
They trudged along, sometimes side by side, and
sometimes with Jackadgery leading where the
way was rough.
It was a cool and pleasant morning, with the
leaves of the bushes twinkling in the bright sun-
shine, dew on the long grass, the scent of earth and
green things in the air, and the birds fluting and
piping in the trees as if all went well with them.
The children were not unhappy. They were on
the look out for Old Mr Bunyip, the kind old
man-spirit of the bush. The Spirit of the Caves
had said that he was a friend of hers, and she had
agreed with what the Spirit of the Billabong had


said: that if they could find him he would be sure
to be able to show them their way home.
They had asked for news of him, and she had
told them that the last she had heard of him was
when he had called on her on his way to meet
the migrating geese and point their pathway
through the skies j but no doubt he had passed
from that to the care of other things, and per-
haps he was now nearer at hand.
Jackadgery was a little worried because he
missed the spears and boomerangs that the witch-
doctor had broken up. He had nothing to de-
fend himself and Nimmitybelle with, nor to spear
game and fish with. They would not be able to
have anything to eat until he had made new ones.
This he intended to do as soon as they came to a
place where good spear wood was growing.
The Spirit of the Caves had been very kind.
True to her word, when evening came, she led
them out the side door and down to the foot of
the hill. They had peeped through the crack be-
fore leaving and had seen the witch-doctor lying
sound asleep.
“He is waiting for you,” their friend explained.
“He knows you were spirited away, and he thinks
you will have to return the way you went.”
The children were surprised to hear this. They
remembered being led through a hole in the rock,


and to hear her say that they have been sfmted
away puzzled them. But they ha given t eir
trust to the Spirit of the Caves and asked no ques-
tions of her as she led them from the scene where
they had spent happy hours in her company.
At the foot of the hill was a place where the sott
grass grew tall, and where Nimmitybelle and Jack-
adgery would be able to spend the night very
fortably. Here the Spirit of the Caves said good-
bye and left them. .
They had stood watching her running back up
the hill through the moonlight and the shadows
of the trees, her dress of crystals tinkling and
twinkling as she ran; then they lay down, and,
drawing the long grass over them, fell fast asleep.
In the morning they washed themselves at the
creek. Then they ate a breakfast of some food the
Spirit had provided for them, and after that set
out again together.
As she trotted along beside Jackadgery, Nim-
mitybelle’s head was full of thoughts about the
Spirit of the Caves. If it were not that she wanted
to get home to her mother and father and her home
by the river, she would have liked to stay with her
and lived with her always. She would then have
been able to visit the Spirit of the Billabong some-
times, and get to know some of the other Spirits
of the Bush.


While they had sat talking together on the bed
she had asked the Spirit of the Caves if she were
ever lonely. Her friend had said: “Oh no, I often
have visitors. Sometimes at night a possum or two,
or a koala, will come in for a few minutes’ chat.
Then sometimes the Spirit of the Mountain Gul-
lies calls at night. She lives close by. She has
green slippers and a dress of maidenhair.”
Nimmitybelle had thought it would be nice to
meet her.
“Even if she happened to call before you left,”
the Spirit of the Caves explained, “you would
find her very shy with strangers. But perhaps
you will glimpse her for yourself some day. If
you are in a mountain gully and hear the lyre-
bird call, you will know she is very likely peeping
at you from among the green sprays of leaves.
“What do you have to eat?” Nimmitybelle had
asked.
“Oh, I get honey from the bees,” answered the
Spirit. “And I go out at night and gather grass-
seeds which I mix and bake into little cakes, and
for something to drink I shake the sweet dew
from the bush flowers.”
Nimmitybelle told Jackadgery of some of these
things as they walked along together. He was
very interested. He had greatly enjoyed the
breakfast of little cakes and honey-in-the-comb


that the Spirit of the Caves had provided for them.
They had found it beside them when they woke
up- SO she must have prepared it during the night
and slipped down and put it there while they were
asleep.
He told Nimmitybelle that the Spirit of the
Caves had praised his drawings. He had made a
picture of a mia-mia and a hunter throwing a
spear. The Spirit of the Caves had come to look
at them while Nimmitybelle was in the sleeping-
cave taking off the dress that had been lent her.
She had said that the drawings were very good.
She had thanked him for putting pictures on her
walls, and said that she would think of Nimmity-
belle and Jackadgery every time she looked at
them.
Thus, chattering happily together, the two
children made their way through the bush. From
time to time Jackadgery looked over his shoulder.
He was wondering what would happen when the
witch-doctor woke up. Nimmitybelle had for-
gotten about the witch-doctor ; she was thinking
about Old Mr Bunyip and hoping they would
meet him. Jackadgery had him in mind too; but
no warrior of the dark people ever moved from
camp without his shield and spears, and Jackad-
gery’s empty hands kept reminding him that he
was without means of defence.


They were passing along below a hill when
Jackadgery looked back and saw the witch-doctor
in the distance. He was walking slowly after them,
looking down at the ground. Jackadgery knew
what had happened. When he woke up in the
morning he must have gone prowling around out-
side the caves. He had found their footmarks on
the ground, and now he was tracking them, just
as Jackadgery had tracked him after he had picked
up Nimmitybelle and run off with her.
He didn’t tell Nimmitybelle that the witch-doc-
tor was following them, because he didn’t want
her to be frightened if he could help it, but he kept
a sharp look out behind. He was making his way
towards Grandfather Gumtree.
It was not long before Nimmitybelle noticed
that Jackadgery was choosing hard places to walk
on; then she noticed him glance behind and knew
what was wrong. She was frightened, but she had
faith in Jackadgery, and, as she could see he was
hurrying, she said nothing.
The witch-doctor was overtaking them, but
Jackadgery had a bright idea.
“Walk in my tracks, Nimmitybelle,” he said.
“Put your feet where I put mine.”
Nimmitybelle did this and for some time they
went along, one behind the other, leaving only
one pair of tracks behind them.


Then Jackadgery stopped and bent down. “Now
get on my back,” he said.
Nimmitybelle did as he asked her, and then
off he went, carrying her pick-a-back. The place
where he had stopped was on hard ground, and
from now on he chose the hardest ground he
could, so as to leave behind no tracks at all. This
was something that the dark people knew well
how to do, and it was a chance for Jackadgery to
put his skill into practice.
He passed through the bush with Nimmitybelle
on his back, leaving not a trace behind him. Not a
mark was made on the ground, not a twig bro en,
not a leaf disturbed. It was hard work, carrying
Nimmitybelle, but Jackadgery was content and
was glad he had thought to do this. He well knew
what would happen to the witch-doctor. First he
would come to the place where there was only one
track, then he would come to where there were
no tracks at all. Of course he would know what
had happened; but then he wouldn’t know which
way to turn. He wouldn’t know whether they
had gone to the right or the left or straight
ahead; and while he was wondering what to do
they would be gaining time.
Jackadgery did not put Nimmitybelle down un-
til he was too tired to carry her any more; then,


after a little rest for him to get his breath, they
went on again, making straight through the bush
for Grandfather Gumtree, whose head they could
see standing high above all the other trees. There
was still need to hurry, for the witch-doctor, with
his secret hat on, was almost too clever for any-
thing.
At last they came in full sight of Grandfather
Gumtree. And what a grand old tree he was! He
was quite the tallest tree they had ever seen. He
stood by himself at the edge of a grassy space near
a creek-bank and his lowest limb was higher than
the tops of the trees near by. His rough brown
bole was so thick that it would have taken a little
boy or girl a whole minute to run around it. How
straight and smooth was his trunk! It went up
and up. And what wide leafy arms he spread
through the air. You could have built a house
among his branches. And he was such a kind old
Grandfather Gumtree that as many of the bush
creatures as could find a place had their homes
with him. Two magpies sat carolling beside their
nest of sticks on one branch, a pair of willy wag-
tails lived lower down, and some cockatoos lived
on a branch on the opposite side of him. In the
knotty hollows of his upper trunk and branches
possums, koalas, and honey bees had their homes.


On the ground below a mob of kangaroos rested
in his pleasant shade; and among his leaves a flock
of red-and-green parrots were feeding. He was a
fine old Grandfather Gumtree!
Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery stood at the foot
of Grandfather Gumtree and patted his trunk with
their hands to attract his attention. Just then the
witch-doctor came in sight. He had been stopped
for a while at the place where the tracks ended,
but, after looking round and taking thought, he
had said to himself: “I know where they arc mak-
ing for.” Then he had started for Grandfather
Gumtree as hard as he could. He had been hoping
to get there before them; but in this he was dis-
appointed.
Grandfather Gumtree felt the children’s hands
patting him. “Is that Nimmitybelle and Jackad-
gery?” he asked. He had a very deep rumbly
voice that seemed to come from right inside him.
It was the sort of voice that makes you feel safe
and free from harm.
“Yes,” they answered.
“What can I do for you, children?” Grand-
father Gumtree rumbled.
“The witch-doctor is after us,” they replied.
“Will you protect us from him?”


“To be sure, I will!” said Grandfather Gum-
tree. “Where is he now?”
By this time the witch-doctor had seen the chil-
dren standing at the foot of Grandfather Gumtree
and was running towards them as fast as he could.
At sight of him, the kangaroos, who had remained
lying on the grass when the children approached,
leapt to their feet and went bounding away with
long leaps.
“He’s coming now,” Nimmitybelle and Jack-
adgery answered. “And he’s getting very close!”
“Well, I’ll tell you what to do, children,” said
Grandfather Gumtree —and here he laughed a
very deep rumbly laugh. “You go round to the
other side of me and there you’ll find a big hollow
in my trunk. Climb into it as quick as you can!”
The children did as they were told. It took
them a good while to run round, because he was
so big. But run around they did, and there was the
hollow; with crinkly edges, marking where he had
lost a branch when he was little. It was about as
high from the ground as Jackadgery’s head. Into
it they scrambled; Nimmitybelle first, with Jack-
adgery to give her a push up, and then Jackadgery
quickly after.
“And now, children,” said Grandfather Gum-
tree, “if you look up above your heads you’ll see


that I have a hole right up the middle of me;
climb up that and you’ll be well away from the
witch-doctor.”
They did as he said. It was a hard climb,
through the darkness, with nothing but knobby
lumps of wood to cling to with hand or foot; but
they weren’t children of the dark people for
nothing!
The witch-doctor had reached the foot of the
tree, puffing and grunting, for he had run very
fast. He had seen Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle
run around Grandfather Gumtree’s trunk, so he
dashed after them. He thought they were in front
of him, and he ran around the tree twice before
he noticed the hollow.
When he saw it he climbed into it and started
poking upwards with a long stick that he had
picked up; but the children had climbed too high
for him to reach them —and the hole was too small
for him to climb up after them. Spluttering with
rage he got out of the hollow and stood on the
ground, wondering what he would do next.
By this time Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle had
climbed higher and were looking down at him out
of a hollow in Grandfather Gumtree’s trunk, high
up among his branches. The possum was looking
down, too.


“You’re not Old Mr Bunyip,” called out Nim-
mitybelle.
The witch-doctor looked up. “Yes, I am!” he
shouted.
“No, you’re not,” cried Nimmitybelle. “You’re
our old witch-doctor!”
“No, I’m not!” he shouted again.
Just then a puff of wind came along and blew
his secret hat off. He grabbed it and popped it
on again, but in his haste he put it on back to front,
and there was his face as plain as plain could be.
The witch-doctor got angrier and angrier. He
knocked on Grandfather Gumtree’s trunk with the
stick he had picked up.
“What do you want?” asked Grandfather Gum-
tree.
“I want Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle!” said
the witch-doctor.
“Well you can’t have them,” answered Grand-
father Gumtree sternly.
c T’ll burn you down!” shouted the witch-
doctor. “I’ll light a fire inside you! ”
This was a wicked threat—to light a fire inside
good old Grandfather Gumtree and burn him
down. For a minute the children were frightened-
but Grandfather Gumtree, for all that he couldn’t
move from one place to another, or even reach a


branch down to wrestle with the witch-doctor,
didn’t seem to care.
“No you won’t,” he said, and his voice sounded
quite sure.
“Yes, I will!” shouted the witch-doctor.
“Well, w r e’ll see!” replied Grandfather Gum-
tree.
The witch-doctor was so angry that he would
stop at nothing. He gathered armsful of dry
wood to make a fire with, and threw them into the
hollow in Grandfather Gumtree’s side. Then he
gathered some dry grass to set the fire going.
He reached into Grandfather Gumtree’s side to
push the grass well under the wood. Grandfather
Gumtree, who had been waiting for this, closed
the hollow in his side very smartly and caught him
by the arm.
The witch-doctor tried to pull his arm out, but
Grandfather Gumtree held on.
“Let go of my arm!” shouted the witch-
doctor.
Grandfather Gumtree made no answer.
The witch-doctor danced and yelled and pulled,
but he couldn’t get his arm loose. “You’re hurt-
ing me,” he shouted.
“I hope I am,” rumbled Grandfather Gumtree.


“You deserve it. I could hurt you a great deal
more if I wanted to.”
For a while the witch-doctor contented himself
with useless attempts to wriggle his arm free.
“If I let you go will you promise to let Nina-
mitybelle and Jackadgery alone, and not to burn
me down?” Grandfather Gumtree asked him after
a while.
“No I won’t!” answered the witch-doctor
“All right,” said Grandfather Gumtree, “I’ll
hold on to your arm!”
He took no more notice of the witch-doctor;
but began talking to Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery
instead. He asked them a lot of questions about
their home life and their adventures. They told
him how they were hoping to find Old Mr Bun-
yip. They didn’t ask him could he see where
their home lay because, from their position in his
branches, they could look around for themselves.
Their home was nowhere to be seen. He was
very interested in all they had to say. When they
came to the bits about the witch-doctor they low-
ered their voices, because they knew he was lis-
tening at the foot of the tree; but Grandfather
Gumtree didn’t lower his voice. He said: “Dear
me!” And; “Disgraceful!” quite loudly, as if he
wanted the witch-doctor to hear.


70 CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
“What is the witch-doctor doing now?” He
asked Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle after they
had finished their story.
The two children peeped down at the witch-
doctor out of the hollow.
“He’s just standing there,” Jackadgery
answered.
“.Ire you sorry now that you tried to burn me
downr” Grandfather Gumtree asked him.
“1 es,” replied the witch-doctor, who had been
wondering if he was going to be held there for
ever.
“Are you sorry for what you tried to do, or
are you only sorry for yourself?”
“I’m sorry for what I tried to do.”
“And if I let you go will you promise not to
do it again?”
“Yes,” the witch-doctor answered.
“Say ‘Yes, Grandfather Gumtree,’ ”
‘A es, Grandfather Gumtree,” said the witch-
doctor, and hung his head.
So Grandfather Gumtree opened the hollow in
his side and let him go.
The witch-doctor was not a bit sorry. No sooner
was he free than all his wickedness came back
to him. He looked up at Grandfather Gumtree
and shouted angrily:
“I said I wouldn’t burn you down, but there’s


something worse I can do. I’ll chof you down!”
Off he went, and presently came running back
with an axe in his hands.
Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery thought he really
would chop Grandfather Gumtree down; but
Grandfather had a trick or two left.
As soon as the witch-doctor was busy chopping
he said to the bees that had their hives in his
hollows:
“Now then, bees!”
Instantly there was an angry buzzing, and the
bees swarmed out like a little dark cloud to defend
Grandfather Gumtree.
The witch-doctor was so busy that he didn’t
see them coming down towards him. When the
first bee stung him he jumped a little bit but
kept on chopping. When the second bee stung
him he jumped a lot and looked up. Then he
saw all the bees coming and, dropping the axe,
he ran for his life.
The bees chased him, and a kookaburra who
lived in Grandfather Gumtree’s branches started
to laugh, and kept on laughing until the witch-
doctor was out of sight, with the bees still in pur-
suit.
“He’s a thorough disgrace!” said Grandfather
Gumtree when the kookaburra’s laughter had died
down to a few throaty chortles.


By this time the sun was going down.
Grandfather Gumtree thought the witch-doc-
tor might come back after dark, so he told the
children to spend the night up among his branches.
At first this seemed a very strange idea; but Jack-
adgery knew how to go about things. He got
some of the dead logs that the witch-doctor had
gathered, and dragged them up the hollow that
ran up the centre of Grandfather Gumtree. He
laid these across two of his boughs, then with
Nimmitybelle’s help, he gathered armsful of
leaves and spread them over the dry logs. Grand-
father Gumtree told them they could have as
many leaves as they liked, so long as they didn’t
spoil his appearance by taking them all from one
place.
Soon they had a soft bed to lie on. Many of
the dark people, when a friend dies, lay him on a
bed of boughs in a tree, instead of laying him in
the ground. That is how Jackadgery knew how
to go about it—although this was a much hap-
pier use for the same idea.
While they were at work Grandfather Gumtree
asked them what were their plans for to-morrow.
“Well, Grandfather Gumtree,” explained Jack-
adgery, “I must make new spears and a boomerang
and shield before we can go on with our
search for Old Mr Bunyip. I thought we might


stay here with you to-morrow, while I make them;
if you wouldn’t mind having us.”
“A very good idea; and you’re welcome, I’m
sure!” replied Grandfather Gumtree. “It will
be a good idea for you to stay here another day,
in any case,” he added. “The witch-doctor’ll be
hovering somewhere about, if I’m not mistaken
in him.”
“Thank you,” Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle
answered together.
Evening had come, and after evening-song it
was time for the birds to go to bed. Before get-
ting into their nests and hollows they all wished
Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery “Good night,” and
so did Grandfather Gumtree.
“Good night everybody, and good night Grand-
father Gumtree,” answered the children.
After they were in bed they whispered together
a little. They had had nothing to eat since break-
fast, but they didn’t like to trouble Grandfather
Gumtree by speaking of it —he had already been
so good to them. Anyway, it didn’t matter a
great deal. In times of scarcity the dark people
were accustomed to managing on very little. Jack-
adgery and Nimmitybelle made up their minds
that they would be all right until morning.
It was now night-time, with the stars shining
down through Grandfather Gumtree’s leaves. The


8o CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
possums and koalas, who sleep through most of
the day and like to feed and play at night, came
out of their hollows. At first they were surprised
to see Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery, but a willy
wagtail, a singer of the night, was calling down
among Grandfather Gumtree’s lowest leaves:
“Sweet, pretty creature! Sweet, pretty creature!”
They interrupted his song to ask him about the
children, and he explained. After that they came
up close to have a look at the strange folk who
had made a home for themselves in the tree; so
close, that Nimmitybelle was able to put out her
hand and touch one of them; then they wandered
away up Grandfather Gumtree’s branches to nibble
his leaves and scamper about in play. Nimmity-
belle’s possum watched them for a little while,
then he wriggled out of the dilly-bag and went
up and joined them. He quite enjoyed having
a play with creatures of his own kind.


CHAPTER VII
JT was the morning of the second day and the
children had once again taken up their journey.
Jackadgery had his new weapons and shield, and
Nimmitybelle had a good supply of yams and
witchetty grubs in her dilly-bag. They were in
high hopes of meeting Old Mr Bunyip very soon,
for they had had a sign that he was not far away.
They both were walking with eyes and ears alert.
Grandfather Gumtree had thought that with good
fortune they might meet him some time towards
the middle of the day.
While they were getting ready to set out he
had remarked:
There s a white mist creeping up the valleys.


I can see it from my top branches. The Spirit
of the Mist must have heard of you. I dare say
she is coming up to hide you from the witch-
doctor while you go on your way.”
The children felt they would be glad when they
got into the cover of the mist, for the cockatoos,
returning to Grandfather Gumtree’s branches
after their early morning flight, had reported see-
ing the witch-doctor only two hills away, crouched
beside a little fire he had lighted.
In their haste to get within the mist they turned
a little from the way they had been going.
They had been quite sad at parting from Grand-
father Gumtree; for he had been so good to them.
Before leaving, they had looked up and thanked
him for his kindness. All the creatures who lived
with him had spoken up together and called
“Good-bye,” and the possums and koalas waved
their paws from the hollows.
Grandfather Gumtree said: “Good luck, child-
ren,” in his deep rumbly voice. “It’s been a
pleasure to have you. Come back if you need
me.” And that was the last they heard from him.
When they looked back before crossing over
the hill they could see him standing tall and green
on his patch of grass by the creek-side, and they
thought how like he was to many another grand


old tree they had seen in their journeys when the
tribe was moving from place to place.
The happenings of yesterday seemed a bit un-
real to remember, yet Jackadgery had his new
spears in his hand, and Nimmitybelle had her sup-
ply of food, and so pleasant had been those hap-
penings that their thoughts went back to them as
they trudged along.
Nimmitybelle was thinking of the friendly little
talk she had had with Grandfather Gumtree, sit-
ting on the grass in the shade of his branches,
while Grandfather Gumtree had talked to her
just as if she were grown up. He had seemed
quite satisfied with what she had to say; and she
had wondered if all the things that were big
and grand like Grandfather Gumtree had simple
thoughts.
She told him about the Spirits of the Billabong
and of the Caves; and how good they were.
“I’ve never had the pleasure of meeting the
Spirit of the Billabong, although she is my nearest
neighbour,” said Grandfather Gumtree, “I’ve
been growing here so many years that I can’t get
around at all. But I’ve heard the birds in my
branches talking about her, and about the Spirit
of the Caves, and the Spirit of the Mountain Gul-
lies, and the Spirit of the Plains; and from all I
hear of them they’re a credit.”


“I think they are too,” said Nimmitybelle.
Grandfather Gumtree had shown himself to
be not without high spirits. He had suddenly
cried: “Whoops! Did you see the budgerigars?”
Nimmitybelle had turned around and seen a
flock of budgerigars, hundreds of them, green and
yellow in the sun, fly twittering just above the tops
of the tall grass, and then dive into it.
“Now, there’s a sign!” Grandfather Gumtree
had said. “When the grass is tall and the seeds
fallen to the ground is the time when the bud-
gerigars pass through the land. Old Mr Bunyip
goes to shepherd them up from the south. Here
they are; so he can’t be far away!”
“Did you hear that, Jackadgery?” Grandfather
Gumtree had called out.
Jackadgery had heard. He had interrupted
the talk he was having with the two magpies who
had shown him where the good spear-wood grew.
They had been chattering to him as he hardened
the tips of the spears in a little fire not far from
where Nimmitybelle was sitting. He was listening
for what Grandfather Gumtree would say next.
“The best thing to do in the morning,” Grand-
father Gumtree had explained, “is to go in the
direction the budgerigars came from. You should
soon meet Old Mr Bunyip —tall old fellow with
a big white beard, and carries a stick.”


And Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle, as they
walked along through the morning, were taking
Grandfather Gumtree’s advice.
They reached the white mist that was creeping
up the valleys, and as soon as they entered it,
Jackadgery changed their course again to make
up for the first change, and then went straight
on. It was quite strange to be walking through the
mist. It was all glowing silvery above their heads,
where the sun was trying to shine through it, and
it drifted past them in wisps and wraiths. They
could taste it, damp and cool, as they breathed.
Soon the tree-trunks were darkened by the mois-
ture of it, and the leaves and grass blades beaded
with dewy drops. When they spoke to each other
their voices seemed to be muffled around them.
Sometimes their way led over little hills; then
they could see over the top of the mist. It stretched
like a sea of soft wool, snowy white under the
sun, with the tops of the hills and the tallest of
the trees rising out of it like green islands. Back
over the way they had come, they could see Grand-
father Gumtree’s green head. And beyond him
they could see the mist still spreading slowly over
the land.
As they went on their way they wondered if
they would meet the Spirit of the Mist, and what
she would be like. They did not know that they


86 CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
could pass quite close to her without her knowing
they were there; for she was the blind spirit of the
bush. Not that she was unhappy on this account,
because, for one reason, she had never known sight;
she had always been with closed eyes. For other
reasons: she had many happy experiences not
known to those who can see. She loved to feel
her way through the land, touching hills and
valleys and trees. In cool weather, when her jour-
ney was ended, she dissolved into dew on the
bush flowers and the grasses, and went back into
the quiet earth, in part to rest and in part to make
the flowers and grasses grow. In warm weather
she rose towards the sun and became a soft white
cloud drifting through the blue and dreaming of
the happy journey she had had. Things happened
to her that happened to no one else in the world.
The mist grew thicker and thicker. Presently,
when their way led over high places, the children
no longer climbed into the sun. It was getting
deeper, covering the hill-tops, and the sun could
no longer send any light through it. Not that
Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle minded this, for
they had been in mists before —and even in the
darkness of night, Jackadgery could walk in a
straight line from one place to another, far dis-
tant. It was part of his training. What was wor-


rying them was that they might pass Old Mr Bun-
yip and miss seeing him.
At length Jackadgery came to a halt. “It’s no
use going on,” he said. “We might just as well
wait and see if Old Mr Bunyip comes this way.”
“If the Spirit of the Mist wanted to help us
like Grandfather Gumtree said, I can’t make out
why she made it so thick,” was Nimmitybelle’s
remark.
It was a mystery to which they were soon to
have an answer. Just then they heard a loud flip-
flopping on the ground not far away.
“Who’s there?” called Jackadgery.
“Me,” said a voice, and there came towards
them through the mist a big kangaroo—a boomer.
He was as tall as a warrior.
He stopped in front of them and twitched his
ears in greeting.
“Hallo, Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery,” he
said.
“Hallo, kangaroo,” they replied.
“I’ve been looking for you everywhere,” said
the kangaroo. “Do you know whose doing this
is? It’s the witch-doctor’s!”
At first the children were surprised; then they
were not surprised at all.
“Do you know what he did?” asked the kanga-
roo, and then went on to explain. “He saw the
a


88 CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
budgerigars yesterday and he knew that you might
meet Old Mr Bunyip to-day, so he made magic
over his little fire. He took advantage of the
Spirit of the Mist because she can’t see. He didn’t
tell her about you, Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle;
he told her that he was being pursued by many
enemies and would she please help him. She be-
lieved him and was only too glad to help by
spreading her mist across the land.
“Grandfather Gumtree found out first,” the
kangaroo went on, “and he trembled with rage.
I had taken my family down to drink at the creek
near where he stands, and as soon as he saw me
he asked me had I seen Old Mr Bunyip, and
would I try to defeat the witch-doctor by bringing
you together.
“One of my family had seen Old Mr Bunyip
early this morning. She told me where; and here
I am, ready to try and lead you to the place where
she saw him. I nearly got lost myself, flip-flop-
ping about in the mist. If you hadn’t called out
I might easily have passed you by. I only hope
Old Mr Bunyip and the budgerigars have camped
until the mist passes over,”
“Couldn’t someone have gone to tell the Spirit
of the Mist?” asked Jackadgery.
“That’s already been done,” replied the kanga-
roo. “The Spirit is somewhere along the front


of the mist, spreading it on each side of her as
she feels her way along. All the birds that live
with Grandfather Gumtree have flown away over
the top of the mist to try and find her to tell
her. It may be difficult. We’ll just have to do our
best and hope for the best. Mist!” he exclaimed.
“I don’t like mist at all!” and he twitched his ears
to shake the dewdrops off.
The children were ready to start for the place
where Old Mr Bunyip had been seen.
“If you’ll just follow me . . .” said the kanga-
roo, and started off, hopping a few paces and then
glancing back to make sure they were keeping up
with him.
At first both Jackadgery and Nimmitybellc were
in great hope of being led to Old Mr Bunyip
and followed the kangaroo in perfect faith, but
after they had been travelling some time in a
straight line Jackadgery noticed the kangaroo turn
and go over the same ground twice j then he turned
and went over it again. Then he stopped and
looked about him, twitching his ears. Jackadgery
knew what had happened.
“I hope you won’t think I’m foolish,” said the
kangaroo. “But this is the place where the mem-
ber of my family saw Old Mr Bunyip and the
budgerigars. I knew it by the rocky outcrop on the
hill-side—but they are not here now!”


“They must have gone on before the mist
came,” said Jackadgery.
The kangaroo rubbed his nose thoughtfully with
his paw.
“That’s true,” he agreed.
“Where might they have gone,” asked Jack-
adgery. “Where, near here, does the grass grow
tallest and the seeds that the budgerigars live on
fall thickest? That would be the place to look for
them.”
“I think I know,” said the kangaroo brightly.
He seemed glad that Jackadgery was willing and
able to help. “Will I lead you there?” he asked.
“If you will,” said Jackadgery. “And that’s
if Nimmitybelle is not too tired to keep up.”
“I’m all right,” answered Nimmitybelle. The
possum was looking out over the top of the dilly-
bag. His head, though ever so much smaller,
looked not unlike the kangaroo’s.
Thev went on as before, the kangaroo leading
and Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery following a few
paces behind. They could see only a little way.
As they advanced the mist seemed to open in front
of them and then close in behind them. Jackad-
gery wondered what the witch-doctor was doing,
and' whether by the power of his magic he would
meet them in the mist. He kept one of his
boomerangs ready in his right hand.


They reached the spot where the kangaroo
thought Old Mr Bunyip might have shepherded
the budgerigars; but there was no sign of them
or of him. It was a tiny creek-flat between two
hills. Jackadgery looked around for tracks, wad-
ing through the tall wet grass with his eyes on
the ground; but he saw none.
“They haven’t been here,” he said.
“Are there any other places where they might
have gone?” asked Nimmitybelle. It was disap-
pointing to be so near Old Mr Bunyip, the only
being who could show them their way home, and
yet miss seeing him. She didn’t care how tired
she made herself so long as they succeeded in find-
ing him.
“Oh, yes,” said the kangaroo. “Several. There
is one on the other side of the hill.”
“Let us go there,” said Jackadgery; so they set
off, clambering upward among the trees and rocks
of the ridge.
They had just reached the top of the hill when
the kangaroo stopped so suddenly that the children
almost stepped on his tail. The kangaroo was
looking about him as if he smelt danger.
“Look! ” he said at last.
The mist had thinned a little on the top of the
ridge, and, looking in the same direction as the


92 CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
kangaroo, they saw the witch-doctor. He was
sitting on a big boulder looking about him as if
he felt someone near at hand and was waiting for
them to appear.
The children were for turning back, but the
kangaroo had another idea. He told them about
it as if he would be glad of a chance to redeem his
failure, up to now, to find Old Mr Bunyip.
“You wait here,” he whispered. “I’ll go up
there into the thick of the mist. I’ll call out quite
loudly, ‘Come on Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle!’
That will make the witch-doctor get up and follow
me. Then I’ll go flip-flopping along, keeping just
out of sight, and making up things to say to you,
just as if you were with me. While he is fol-
lowing me you go on over the hill. When I have
led him away I will stop pretending to talk to you.
After that I will lose him in the mist and then
I will rejoin you on the other side of the hill.”
Jackadgery was afraid the witch-doctor would
be too clever to be misled; but the kangaroo was
sure he wouldn’t.
“And it will help to repay him for deceiving
the blind Spirit of the Mist,” he said.
With their hearts pounding for fear something
should go wrong Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle
watched the kangaroo hop away. At the sound of
his thumps on the ground the witch-doctor looked


about him alertly. They heard the kangaroo call
out:
“Come along, Jackadgery and Nimmitybellc!”
Then they heard him slowly flopping away
through the mist. The witch-doctor got up and
followed. The kangaroo was going slowly j that
is, slowly for a kangaroo, but the witch-doctor had
to hurry as hard as he could to keep up with him.
The last the children heard was the kangaroo call-
ing out something he had made up as he went
along. “Come along, my dears,” he was saying.
“I’ll lead you away from that ugly villainous old
witch-doctor!”
Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery waited until the
sounds died away, then they went on over the
hill. The descent on the other side of the hill was
steep, and it took them some time to get down
it to the grasslands in the valley below. It was a
long time before the kangaroo rejoined them.
They were beginning to worry for fear harm had
befallen him when they heard him coming towards
them.
The kangaroo seemed very pleased with him-
self. He rubbed his nose and twitched his ears,
both at the same time.
“Well, I got rid of him!” he said, “But we’ll
have to be very careful. He was in a dreadful
rage when he learned that he had had a trick


played on him. He jumped and shouted with
anger. He tried to pursue me, but I was more than
a match for him. I lengthened my pace out into
long swift leaps and went as hard as I could
over a couple of hills, and soon left him behind.”
The children thought the kangaroo was very
clever, especially as he looked so simple. They
couldn’t help laughing, although they knew he
was right in saying that they must have a care
with the witch-doctor so near and so full of wrath.
“Is Old Mr Bunyip anywhere about?” asked
the kangaroo.
“No,” replied Jackadgery. “I’ve searched the
ground for his tracks, but he hasn’t been here.”
“Dear me,” said the kangaroo. “I don’t know
what we can do unless we go on to other likely
places.”
“I think it would be best to keep trying,” said
Jackadgery.
Nimmitybelle, who had been looking forward
to being shown the way back to the camp by the
river, with the little mia-mias and her mother and
father and all the people she knew, thought the
same as Jackadgery.
So on they went from one grassy place to an-
other, through the hills and valleys of the land,
with the white mist drifting past them all the


time as the Spirit of the Mist went on her way.
They were hoping all the time to suddenly come
upon the tall bearded figure of Old Mr Bunyip
camped with the budgerigars.
Time passed, but they were not successful in
their search; at each place they visited without
finding Old Mr Bunyip the kangaroo looked about
him more and more helplessly. About half the
day must have gone by, but it seemed to the
children as if years and years of time had passed
since first they had entered the mist and began
their almost blind way through it. They began
to notice that the kangaroo, in leading them from
one grassy place to another, sometimes stooped
an d looked about him as if he were in strange
country and wasn’t sure which way to go. Also,
he was beginning to look worried.
“Are we taking you too far from home, kanga-
roo?” asked Nimmitybelle. “I was wondering if
you were worried about your family.”
It s very nice of you to think that, Nimmity-
belle,” answered the kangaroo looking at her. “I
am a bit bothered about leaving my family by
themselves for so long. And another thing,” he
said looking about him, “this country seems rather
strange to me, though I thought I knew it very
well.” And he hopped first to one side and then
to the other, looking about him.


96 CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
“Perhaps you’d like to leave us and go back,’
suggested Jackadgery. He did not like the idea
of being left without the big kangaroo’s compan-
ionship, but also, he did not like to be a burden
to him.
“I wouldn’t dare go back to Grandfather Gum-
tree if I just abandoned you in the mist with the
witch-doctor wandering about,” the kangaroo an-
swered. “Shall we go on a little way?”
“Very well,” said the children, and followed
him while he hopped slowly in front of them,
pausing now and again to peer and listen, as if he
were trying to puzzle something out.
After a long while and many turns to right
and left he came to a halt.
“Pm afraid this is the best I can do for you,”
he said. “Can you hear anything?”
They had both been hearing something for some
time as they followed behind him. Now, standing
noiselessly still, they could hear it more plainly.
It came through the mist in front of them, and it
was like someone saying, “Hush,” and drawing
the word out very softly.
“Hush-sh-sh-sh-sh-sh-sh. Hush-sh-sh-sh-sh-
sh-sh-sh-sh. Hush-sh-sh-sh-sh-sh-sh-sh-sh-sh-sh,
went the noise. Before each word there v>as a
sound like tinkling laughter, and after each noise
a long pause.


“What is it?” they asked, their eyes widening.
“We are dose to the sea,” answered the kan-
garoo. “It is just over there through the tea-trees
and the pandanus-palms. That noise is made by
calm-weather waves breaking gently on the beach.
Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle glanced at each
other. They had heard stories about forgotten
members of the tribe, who had wandered far in the
olden time and had got to the shores of the great
water.
They stood looking at each other and at the
kangaroo, wondering what would come next.
“I think I will have to leave you here,” said the
kangaroo. “There is a tribe of your own people
living close by among the sand-dunes. I think
Grandfather Gumtree would be satisfied if I left
you where you could easily reach them.”
“A tribe of our own people!” exclaimed the
children.
“Well, dark humans, like yourselves, I mean,”
the kangaroo explained. “A camp, with dogs and
children and mothers and hunters. I know, be-
cause a few weeks back the hunters chased me and
my family with spears and boomerangs. We had
great difficulty in getting away from them.”
The kangaroo twitched his ears sadly, as if the
memory was not a very happy one. Indeed, he


98 CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
hardly seemed to like speaking of it after he and
the children had been such friends.
“You see,” said the kangaroo, “the witch-doc-
tor’s magic won’t be able to work against you once
you are among people who will protect you.
“No, I suppose that’s true,” said Jackadgery.
“We seem to have missed Old Mr Bunyip alto-
gether } so I thought you could stay with the other
dark people a while and rest, until you set out
again in search of him. In the meanwhile Grand-
father Gumtree and the Spirits of the Bush will
do all they can to get word to him wherever he has
gone. I’m sure when he learns how he has been
needed by you he will be quite annoyed with him-
self for having missed you.”
“I think you are all very good to us! ” exclaimed
Nimmitybelle, and Jackadgery agreed with her.
“That is our pleasure,” answered the kanga-
roo, not to be outdone in politeness. “The Spirits
of the Bush are friendly to humans, and the
animals are also,” he added, “if they get a little
encouragement! ”
“Well, we mustn’t keep you,” said Jackadgery.
He and Nimmitybelle joined in asking the kan-
garoo to remember them to Grandfather Gumtree
in case they didn’t see him again.
The kangaroo promised he would. “I will hop
away very slowly,” he said, “and keep a watch out


for the witch-doctor, so that if I meet him I can
lead him astray again.”
“Thank you,” answered the children. “And
thanks for doing your best.”
“You’re welcome,” answered the kangaroo.
They parted, the kangaroo disappearing with
long slow hops into the drifting mist, and the
children making their way side by side through
the sand-dunes towards the whispering sea.
It was now close to midday. Owing to the
warmth the mist lifted. The land was once again
exposed to view, and there was the vast blue plain
of the sea blinking under the sun. The mist had
become a long fleecy cloud high above the earth.
Before they gave any attention to the sea Jack-
adgery and Nimmitybelle climbed to the top of a
high sand-dune, and Jackadgery stood among the
bushes looking from his keen black eyes across the
country, a puzzled frown came to his brow. A
boy of the dark people should always be able to
turn if he wished and go back the way he had
come; but Jackadgery saw that he wouldn’t be able
to do so.
“I don’t understand it,” he said. He pointed
across country. “That is the way we came, but
that is not the sort of country we crossed; it was
more hilly than that.”


Nimmitybelle didn’t like seeing Jackadgery
worried.
“Never mind, Jackadgery,” she said to him.
“We’ll go on and find the other people. It will
be very nice to talk with humans after all this
time, and perhaps we’ll be free from the witch-
doctor for a little while.”
They went on together towards the sea. Jack-
adgery was thinking of a thin stream of smoke he
had seen rising into the sunlight far in the dis-
tance. It may have been the witch-doctor making
fresh magic over his little fire.
“But perhaps,” Jackadgery thought, “the kan-
garoo and Nimmitybelle are right; and we will be
free of him while we are with the other people.”


CHAPTER VIII
TACKADGERI; and Nimmitybelle spent some
J happy days with the sea-coast tribe.
The camp was among the dunes and the little
wind-blown trees, just a short distance from the
sea’s edge. The dwellings were small round places
built wholly of boughs—and called wurleys. As
the kangaroo had said, there were old people and
mothers and hunters and children and dogs; quite
a happy and noisy crowd. Jackadgery and Nim-
mitybelle, from the time when they met a party
of hunters among the dunes and were brought in-
to camp, were treated as visitors. A fresh wurley
was built for them, and they were given food until
such time as Jackadgery was able to go forth and
help with the hunting and fishing.


There had been a moment of fear on both sides
when they first met the hunters, each party sus-
pecting an enemy; but that was soon over,
especially when the hunters saw that the strangers
were two unattended children. Afterwards the
hunters did all they could to offer them kindness.
The people in the camp were very curious about
them and asked lots of questions. Nimmitybelle
had to sit among the mothers and children and tell
them all about how the days were spent among the
inland tribe to which she belonged. They were
both pleased and surprised at the strange things
she was able to tell, and took pleasure in telling
her of many things that w r ere different in their
lives. They exclaimed over her dilly-bag, which
was made of fine grass woven into a rope and coiled
round and round. They got out theirs, which were
made of the plaited fibres of jungle vines 5 and
they showed her the fish-hooks made of turtle-shell
and sharpened pearl-shell and asked how they
were made among her people.
Jackadgery had to stand with the hunters and
boys grouped around him and show his shield and
weapons. The warriors noticed that they were
made of different wood to their own. They ex-
claimed over this and passed them from one to
another after Jackadgery had given permission—
for a hunter’s shield and weapons were sacred to


him. The hunters of the sea-coast tribe tested the
strange weapons for straightness and strength, and
nodded their heads. They were very good, they
said. The marks burnt into the shield and the
boomerangs had to be explained by Jackadgery.
The marks on his shield and boomerangs were
straight lines and angles, where the sea-coast
people used curves and circles. He did not explain
fully, for these were the secret signs of his tribe,
known only to its hunters and the boys who were
being trained for manhood. The strangers did not
press their questions too hard about these things,
for they could see that he was thinking of his
tribal secrets and they understood.
Even the grave old elders had to know all about
Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery. On the night of
their arrival little fires were lighted in a circle.
Within the light and warmth gathered the tribe
with the elders in the centre, Illawarra, Coolan-
gatta, Warrnambool, Thevanara, Boolagoorda,
Tebrakanna, and several others. Before the elders
sat Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery, and they were
asked to tell their story. This they did, assisted
by many questions from one or other of the old
men. As they told their strange story there were
murmurs of surprise and sometimes of anger from
those gathered round outside the ring of elders.
These sounds were stilled when one of the elders
H


asked a question. When the answer was given the
elders exchanged understanding glances with each
other, and then the story went on while all list-
ened. When the story of their adventures was
told the elders had many questions to ask about
the customs of the inland tribe. Sometimes they
asked Jackadgery and sometimes Nimmitybelle,
according to whom they thought would best be
able to answer.
Jackadgery was very proud when Nimmitybelle
was able to speak up and tell about the lives of
the women and children in and around the mia-
mias. And Nimmitybelle thought that Jackad-
gery gave a very good account of the methods of
the warriors when they went out to hunt.
About one thing the sea-coast people were
especially curious. Illawarra explained that at
certain seasons tribes from beyond the mountains
came down to the sea to gather salt. In return
for being allowed to cross the hunting-grounds
of the coastal tribe they brought presents of
pituri—a plant whose leaves, mixed with wood
ashes, the hunters liked to chew to refresh them-
selves when they were tired. He asked what
Jackadgery’s tribe did about their supplies of pi-
turi and salt. Every one was very interested when
Jackadgery told him that his was one of the tribes
that gathered and prepared the pituri, and that


they exchanged it for salt with a tribe who had
a hunting-ground in some fertile country between
the deserts, and who got the salt from the salt
Jakes of the far inland.
The elders of the sea-coast tribe asked the
names of the elders of the inland tribe, and when
they were told they nodded their heads solemnly
as if these were people about whom they felt they
knew a great deal, although they had never met
them.
When the evening came to an end Illawarra,
who was the leading man of the elders, addressed
the children.
“We are very glad to have you with us, Jackad-
gery and Nimmitybelle,” he said, “two children
from an inland tribe. Nimmitybelle can stay with
the women among the wurleys and Jackadgery
can join in our hunting and fishing. Indeed,
thinking of the dangers of the way by which you
came, it might be best if you stayed with us
always.” And he looked around among the other
elders, who nodded, as if to say: “We will have
to think about that.”
Afterwards, when the children were alone in
their wurley, they whispered together. They
knew that Illawarra’s last words were kindly
meant, but the echo of them was like a threat.


They didn’t want to have to stay always with the
sea-coast tribe.
“They don’t understand that we want to find
our way back to our own homes, said Nimmity
belle.
“I think they do,” answered Jackadgery. “But
they want to do what is best. The grown-up
people in our own tribe are like that sometimes.
They sat and thought it over for a while, listen-
ing to the sea-wind among the trees and the water
breaking on the beach.
They were not sure but that if they tried to
leave so soon after arriving they would be pre-
vented. And then there was the witch-doctor to
think about. Jackadgery was remembering the
smoke he had seen ascending into the sky.
“I think we had better stay a little while,” he
said. “You will hear what is going on in the
camp, and I will hear among the boys and hun-
ters.”
With that they had to be content. They lay
down to rest. Sleep came to them, but not before
they had thought about the days that had just
gone by 5 about the Spirits of the Billabong and
of the Caves and about Grandfather Gumtree and
the kangaroo. These had been very good friends,
and it was comforting to turn their thoughts back
to them. About the days in front they were not


so sure; but they were glad they had each other
to depend on.
Next morning, with the sun shining, and the
voices of the people and all the noises of the camp
around them, Illawarra’s words did not sound so
full of meaning as they had last night. It was
nice to be among people after their wanderings,
so they settled down to take part in the life of
the coastal tribe.
They were both very careful to show themselves
eager in the hunt and the search for food; Jack-
adgery in the one and Nimmitybelle in the other.
For the dark people, as well they knew, lived on
what they could catch or find, and no matter how
kind they might want to be they had to expect
every one to share in their efforts.
The food of the sea-coast people was different
to that of the inland tribe. They ate a lot of mus-
sels and oysters and other shellfish that they gath-
ered from the rocks at low tide. Sometimes it was
the mothers and old people and the babies and
little girls who went gathering these. At such
times Nimmitybelle went with them, gathering the
shellfish into her woven-grass dilly-bag. At other
times the whole tribe would go out together.
When this happened the shellfish were not carried
back to the camp, but were eaten among the dunes.
They lit fires. On these the shellfish were placed


to heat until they opened, and then a great feast
was held.
At other times, when the men were away hunt-
ing or fishing, the wurley people went along the
mangrove creeks, gathering crabs. They watched
the mud for signs on the surface that a crab was
below and then dug him out. The other little
girls thought it very funny when Nimmitybelle,
at first, didn’t know where to dig for crabs ; but
she soon learned, and before long was able to find
as many as any one else. To make up for having
to be told how to hunt crabs she told them how the
inland people knew where to dig for yams. The
other little girls saw that if she didn’t know what
they knew she at least knew some things of her
own; and that made all things even. She soon
got to know all the little girls of the sea-coast
tribe, and there were one or two with whom she
became especially friendly. They used to hunt
crabs and gather shellfish together and share what
they found.
While they hunted for crabs they talked about
their tribes. Nimmitybelle told how, in the proper
season, her people journey to where the bugong
moths gathered; and other tribes came up from
the south and joined them. How it was a period
of peace when the warriors of the different tribes
laid down their arms. How nice it was, with


every one friendly, and what feasts and corro-
borees they had. Then the little girls of the
coastal tribe told how they, at the proper season,
journeyed to the mountains just back from the
coast, where the bunya pines grew. How tribes
came from the other side of the mountains to
join in the plentiful feasts, and how all was con-
tentment and merriment.
Of the little girls of the coastal tribe there was
one, Mareeba, with whom Nimmitybelle became
especially friendly.
Then there were the fruits and berries that were
gathered in the vine scrubs and jungle. Nim-
mitybelle had to be shown which ones were good
for eating and which were harmful. Some of the
brightest-looking were no good, and others that
you would have passed by if you did not know
were the best of all.
At the low tides of the sea they went down and
dug certain shellfish out of the sand. Great heaps
of them they gathered, scratching away the hard
wet sand until they came upon them clustered to-
gether like eggs in a nest. They carried them up
to the wurleys and, when the hunters came home,
fires were lit and they were roasted.
Then there were the men’s hunting and forag-
ing parties in which Jackadgery took a part. There
was the night they all went fishing when the


mullet shoals were coming up from the south.
With tow-row nets and with torches flaring in
the dark, the men and boys made a wide half-
circle in the sea, out to where it was shoulder high.
A warrior in the centre, who knew how to manage
things best, shouted his orders when all was
ready, and the nets and torches began to close in
around the fish. All sort of fish were in the half-
circle, darting around through the dark water,
lighting it up with blue-white phosphorous fire
as they went; thousands upon thousands of fish.
Some were good to eat and others not. The
hunters knew them by the fire they made, and
those that were of no use they let escape. The
others were gradually driven into a heap on the
beach, shining in the light of the torches.
Then they were carried up among the dunes
where it was warm and away from the wind.
Fires were lit, the fish roasted, and another feast
held in the light of the flames.
People of the coast, like those of the inland,
held many feasts. They had no means of keeping
food, so they ate when they could. When food
was short they got along on very little and without
complaint until better luck came their way.
Beside the sea-water fishing there was the
creek fishing. At high tide they entered the water
with their nets and made a barrier right across


the stream from bank to bank. When the tide
went out the fish came down-stream with it; and
what a scene of excitement there was among the
net-holders. They had to grasp the fish —if they
could —and throw them up on to the bank. Not
all were net-holders. Some stood in front of the
nets with spears, ready to drive them into the big
fish that were too heavy to be caught by hand.
Then there were the dangerous sting-rays that
came down with the tide. There was always a
scamper to get out of their way. Not that the
hunters were much afraid. They made a joke
out of a little danger, and shouted to each other
and laughed at whoever was nearest to the sting-
ray. Sometimes a shark that had cruised a little
way up-stream came down with the tide. Here
was real danger, and a great rush to kill the shark
if possible, for they were fond of its beef-like
flesh.
There was a short sea-voyage that Jackadgery
took part in. Off the coast were a number of
small islands which the sea-coast hunters visited
from time to time; little green hummocks, rising
out of the sea. On some of them were to be found
jungle fruits that did not grow on the mainland,
and there were certain fish in the reefs around them
that were not to be found along the mainland
shore. On one of them, a very small sandy one,


large numbers of birds came to nest at certain
seasons, and it was this one that Jackadgery
visited with the hunters and other boys.
They paddled across in large canoes that each
held six or seven people. When they arrived on
the tiny beach that encircled the island they found
the air thick with flying birds, calling together
with what seemed like one voice. The ground
below was as thick with nesting birds as was the
air above with birds in flight. As Jackadgery and
his friends walked among them these rose into
the air, leaving behind them hundreds of thou-
sands of their smooth spotted eggs.
These the dark people gathered, almost filling
the canoes with them. They had no thought of
cruelty in taking them. To gather the eggs was
part of their way of living. They knew that very
soon after they had gone the birds would lay more
eggs. For more years than any one could remem-
ber the different sorts of sea-birds had each come
in their season to lay and to rear up their young
ones and from each flight of visitors the dark
people had gathered what eggs they needed.
Most of the eggs they took home in the canoes,
but, as they were tired after their long paddle
across the sea, they made a meal of some, on the
beach, cooking them over little fires that they had


brought in the canoes, on flat stones, for just that
purpose.
On most of the hunting trips there were times
like this when they rested and ate some of what
they had killed or gathered. It was then that the
hunters told Jackadgery about things he had not
seen, and asked him about the inland tribe. Jack-
adgery had never seen canoes as big as those used
by the sea-coast tribe. The inland people had only
short journeys to make on water, just across a river
or along the reedy edges of a billabong, so their
canoes were just strips of bark joined together at
the ends, with two or three sticks to keep the top
edges apart in the centre.
The sea-coast hunters were very proud of their
big canoes when Jackadgery told them this. Then,
because he didn’t want it to seem as if his people
were not as good as the sea-coast people, he told
them how the inland people hunted the emus.
How they put the emu’s head on a stick, and,
holding it above their heads, crept through the
long grass until they were close enough to use
their boomerangs with effect. The sea-coast hun-
ters thought this was very clever. In fact they
thought it was very funny, and got Jackadgery to
show them how a hunter looked creeping along
with an emu head held above them.
Then they would start telling things.


Jackadgery learned that the sea-coast tribe, like
his own people, wandered from place to place.
Sometimes they journeyed along the coast. Among
the things they told him —one and another taking
part as if his stories of the inland had reminded
them that they had stories of their own —was how
they crossed the creeks where crocodiles lay in
wait for passing prey. How the hunters waded in
front with their spears held ready, and the tribe
followed with much splashing and shouting to
frighten the crocodiles from their path.
Sometimes they hunted the crocodiles, when
they discovered one in quiet water where they
could get at him. They built rafts and hunted
him with spears, and great struggles took place.
The crocodile was a good deal in their thoughts
when they talked of these northern journeys for
sometimes a member of the tribe fell a victim
to him. There was more than one of the tribes-
men who could show marks on his body which
had been given him in the course of the crocodile
hunts.
In the evening, when the hunters returned to
the camp and the wurley people had come back
from the day’s foraging, Nimmitybelle and Jack-
adgery talked over the day’s happenings. As they
cooked their food over the little fire in front of
their wurley Jackadgery repeated the hunters’


stories, and Nimmitybelle told of the talks she
had had with the other little girls and their
mothers. In this way they each came to know all
about the lives of their friends of the coastal tribe.
The evenings they enjoyed very much; when
all the little fires were going and people were call-
ing to each other and laughing. After they had
eaten there would often be games; cat’s cradle
played with string made from the fibre of vines,
or there would be wrestling games among the boys
and young men. There would be visits from one
camp-fire to another, and talks often lasting far
into the night, sometimes about serious things and
sometimes about merry ones. Often they talked
and laughed until they were hungry again; then
if there was anything left to eat, they would have
another meal before they separated and went to
their own wurleys.
Now and again it happened that in the quiet
of the evening camp would sound the corroboree-
maker’s drum. That would mean that he had
made a corroboree story. Fires would be lit in a
circle and the tribe would gather round. The
hunters would put on their secret hats* and take
their place in the centre, dancing the corroboree
story. It might be a story of how they had killed
* All the warriors of the dark people had secret hats, but
smaller, of course, and less terrifying than the witch-doctor’s—
his was large and had eyes in it, two in front and two behind


a crocodile on their last journey north, or it might
be one of their stories of days gone by. Nimmity-
belle and Jackadgery learned that the people of
the coastal tribe, like their own people of the in-
land, had many stories of the olden time, about
people who no longer lived, but whose deeds were
remembered.
Jackadgery had become specially friendly with
a boy of the coastal tribe named Panatana. One
evening Panatana came to Jackadgery where he
was sitting at the little fire by the wurley and
said to him:
“Jackadgery, I think you and Nimmitybelle
are to stay with the tribe.” He was very pleased
to be able to give this news, not knowing that
Jackadgery had been hoping it w r ould not come.
“I heard Illawarra and Warrnambool talking to-
gether coming back to camp from the fishing, and
they were saying that you and she must stay with
us and grow up to be a strength to the tribe, I
think they were both very pleased about the
shark.”
Jackadgery knew what Panatana meant. That
day they had been creek fishing. A shark had
been among the fish that came down against the
nets with the out-going tide. Jackadgery had
helped to kill it. It had charged him with a spear


sticking in it. He had stood his ground driving
his own spear in, so that it was turned in its course
and the grown hunters were able to finish it off.
These had given a shout of delight when he had
turned it from among the nets.
He also knew what Illawarra and Warrnam-
bool had meant when they had spoken of him
and Nimmitybelle growing up to be a strength
to the tribe. The tribes were always anxious to
have as many strong hunters and good women as
they could, for the getting of food, for the caring
of the old who could no longer care for them-
selves, and for defence in time of danger.
That night Jackadgery spoke to Nimmitybelle
in their wurley.
“It is time to go,” he said.
They were both sad and happy at the thought.
They were sad at the thought of leaving their
friends, among whom they had had such pleasant
times, and they were happy at the thought of once
again setting out in search of their own homes.
Also they were afraid, for there was the witch-
doctor to think about. No doubt he was lying in
wait for them somewhere on their way. Nimmity-
belle said she hoped the Spirits of the Bush were
still ready to help them. Jackadgery said he hoped
so too; he thought that he and Nimmitybelle


n8 CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
would manage somehow. WTen he said this they
were again very glad at having each other to look
to.
It would not do to let the people of the coastal
tribe know that they were leaving, or they would
be stopped. The elders would forbid them, and
among the dark people the elders were always
Obeyed.
“We will have to leave while everyone is
asleep,” said Jackadgery.
They had no thoughts of doing anything mean,
thus leaving the people who had been so kind to
them, for they had to think of their own tribe
who also needed women and warriors. They just
had to do the best they could. The elders and the
people of the coastal tribe would be disappointed
and a little angry at first, but soon they would
come to understand.
“I would like to say good-bye to Mareeba,”
said Nimmitybelle.
“And I would like to say good-bye to Pana-
tana,” said Jackadgery. “But, if we told them, it
would be their duty to tell the elders, and then
we would be forbidden to go.”
There was no more to be said after that; so
the children lay down to sleep, their thoughts al-


ready travelling along the road they hoped would
lead them home.
They rose in the early morning, when the fires
were no more than little patches of cinders in
front of the wurleys and the camp was still
sleeping.
For a token of farewell, Jackadgery left one
of his spears stuck upright in the ground in front
of Panatana’s wurley. Nimmitybelle had nothing
to leave, but she went to the wurley where
Mareeba was sleeping and peeped in. Jackadgery’s
spear standing before Panatana’s wurley would be
understood, and she made a mark on the ground
so that Mareeba would see her footprints and
would know that she had looked in at her before
leaving.
Then they turned their backs to the sea and set
off together, Jackadgery walking ahead with his
weapons and shield, and Nimmitybelle following
with her dilly-bag loaded with food for their
journey.


CHAPTER IX
rPHE children were several days’ travel from
the sea. They had crossed the ranges that
lay beside the coast and had seen the Spirit of the
Mountain Tops at her dawn dance when the sun
was lighting the tips of the hills from beyond
far horizons. Nimmitybelle had seen her first,
waking in the hollow of the burned-out tree-bole
where she and Jackadgery had rested for the
night. She had roused him, and together they had
watched her at her joyful dance. They had in-
tended speaking to her as soon as she finished.
“She might be able to help us?” Nimmitybelle
had said. “Or tell us where Old Mr Bunyip has
gone.”
As the sunlight descended the sides of the range


the dance had become slower and slower. Then,
when it flooded the level lands below, and broad
day was on the earth, the dancer vanished. Where
she had been there was nothing. They cooeed, but
there was no answer.
Nimmitybelle had been for waiting. She re-
membered the Spirit of the Billabong who slept
by day below the water-lilies.
“Perhaps she will come again at sundown,” she
had said. “She may have to rest somewhere dur-
ing the day.”
Jackadgery had agreed to wait until evening;
but later, going down into a nearby gully to drink,
they had seen the witch-doctor’s tracks in the
soft soil near the stream’s edge. While they were
looking at them they had smelt the burning of
wood and green leaves, and from among the hills
they had seen ascending a column of smoke. It
was the witch-doctor’s magic fire.
To go on or to wait?
Jackadgery had been for going on.
“It’s always best to try and do something for
yourself,” he had said.
Nimmitybelle, although she wished very much
that they had called out to the Spirit of the Moun-
tain Tops while she was dancing, had agreed with
him. So they had continued on their journey.


They would descend to the plains below the
ranges and seek the way to their homes. But a
strange thing happened to the world about them.
The ranges seemed to have turned themselves
round, and there was no end to them. When they
climbed the ridgy hill on the far side of the gully
where they had drunk, the plain they had seen
from the mountain-top had disappeared. All
around them were more hills and gullies and
ridges. They looked back the way they had come
to the mountain-top. But here they were puzzled
again, for the mountain-tops looked all alike. And
the smoke they had seen ascending had disap-
peared too.
Jackadgery was not beaten, for he was of the
dark people, and even in the strangest of country
he had always one thing to guide him. He looked
up at the morning sun and turned until it was
shining on his back.
“That is the direction,” he said, pointing
straight before him.
On they went, clambering down the rocky sides
of the ridges, pushing their way, one behind the
other, through thick bushes under the tall trees,
picking their way across the stones of the chatter-
ing creeks at the bottom, among tree-ferns and
musky undergrowth, and then, climbing up the


side of the ridges beyond. But always when they
reached the tops of the ridges the view was the
same; ridge after ridge in front of them.
Once they caught a glimpse of the distant plain,
but when they went towards it it disappeared.
They went down a gully and climbed a ridge, and
when they stood on the top of it there was no
sign of the plain—just more and more ridges.
They felt sure it was the witch-doctor’s doing,
and at every step they were in dread of meeting
him. Jackadgery went with a boomerang gripped
ready in his right hand, and Nimmitybelle, when
Jackadgery was looking which way to take among
the thick bushes, was looking around so that one
pair of eyes would always be on guard.
They met the witch-doctor. They had climbed
on to a little plateau, a small hill with a flat top
like a table. From it they had hoped to see their
way out of the ranges —and they thought they
could. Far away in the distance they thought they
could see low level land and the waters of the
billabong gleaming in the sun. In great hope they
set off towards it, but no sooner had they moved
than they heard a voice speaking. Where it came
from they could not tell, but it seemed to fill all
the bush around them.
“Do you know where you are?” it asked.


“It sounds like the witch-doctor’s voice,” whis-
pered Nimmitybelle.
“Where are we?” called out Jackadgery. He
was dreadfully afraid, but he tried not to let it
show.
“You’re in my magic mountains,” answered the
voice. “The mountains I made the day you went
down the river in your canoe. And here I mean
to keep you!”
It sounded very terrifying, but there was no
one in sight, so the children went forward. But
they did not go far, for there, at the edge of the
plateau, was the witch-doctor. He was wearing
his secret hat and, with his medicine-bag beside
him, was squatted before his little fire, looking
down at it.
The truth was that the witch-doctor had be-
come alarmed for himself. So long, with the help
of the Spirits of the Bush, had Jackadgery and
Nimmitybelle kept out of his hands, that he was
afraid they might succeed in finding their way
home. Then, with the stern elders for him to
face, he would be in a very unhappy position. As
his fear had grown so had his determination not
to be outdone.
The children had stepped behind a tree.
“Come on,” said Jackadgery. “I don’t think


he has seen us.” And he led a way across the
plateau to another part of its edge where they
could descend from it and go on their way. But
again the witch-doctor was waiting for them. How
he had got there they couldn’t tell. But there he
was, still crouched over his little fire. They turned
again, making their way as stealthily as they could
among the bushes and tree-trunks. Again they
ran into him.
Four times they tried to get off the plateau,
and each time he appeared, blocking their way.
At last, Jackadgery drew Nimmitybelle back
among the bushes and took thought. They could
hardly believe that what had happened was true.
About them the sun shone j the wind stirred the
branches of the trees, and down in the gullies that
lay below the plateau the birds were singing and
calling gaily.
“Something will have to be done,” said Jack-
adgery.
He changed the boomerang he was carrying in
his right hand for a spear and went slowly for-
ward, holding it ready to swing up over his shoul-
der and throw. Nimmitybelle, walking behind,
was frightened, but she also had feelings to spare
for Jackadgery. She was sorry for him, because
no matter how frightened he might be he was the


one that had to do something. She hoped his
spear would fly straight.
When he was within throwing distance of the
witch-doctor Jackadgery swung up his spear and
threw with all his might.
The spear went straight for most of the way,
but just before it reached the witch-doctor it
glided up into the air and passed over his head.
That was a strange thing for a spear to do.
“But perhaps,” thought Jackadgery, “there was
a crookedness in it that I hadn’t noticed.”
He took another spear, and threw it. It went
straight and fast, but just before it reached the
witch-doctor it turned downwards and stuck in
the ground.
There were only two spears left. Jackadgery
thought they had better have one more try to
find a way off the plateau. This they did, but
again they found the witch-doctor blocking their
way. He was still stooping over his little fire,
looking into it as if he didn’t know there was any
one near.
Jackadgery took another spear and threw with
all his strength and skill. It went wide of the
mark and, striking a rock behind the witch-doctor,
it was splintered. The witch-doctor hadn’t moved.
Jackadgery told Nimmitybelle to go back a


little way. At first she didn’t want to go, but
Jackadgery said to her:
“We may have to run for our lives, and I want
you to have a good start.”
So she did as she was told. Then Jackadgery
took his last spear in hand and, one step at a time,
went forward as close to the witch-doctor as he
dared. He threw it, but one of his feet slipped
at the moment of throwing. The spear went only
a short distance through the air, then it slithered
along the ground and came to rest in front of the
witch-doctor’s fire. The witch-doctor didn’t look
up, but he did what seemed worse, he reached for
the spear, cracked it in halves and put it on the
flames.
Jackadgery backed away. He knew what was
in the witch-doctor’s mind. There was only his
boomerang left—his last weapon. When that was
gone he would be a hunter without arms and the
witch-doctor would be free to work his will.
Jackadgery went back to Nimmitybelle.
“We’ll try to get away separately,” he said.
“You run for your life and I’ll stand here and
see what happens.”
Nimmitybelle didn’t want to go, but Jackadgery
showed her his left hand without spears, and said
it might be their only chance. So Nimmitybelle


went, clutching her dilly-bag and running as hard
as she could for the edge of the plateau.
The witch-doctor was taken by surprise. He
hadn’t thought of them separating. His magic
wasn’t ready for such a thing. He jumped to his
feet with a howl of rage and came racing towards
where Jackadgery stood.
Jackadgery held his boomerang before him and
said, “Bultharra punara pununga,” which were a
hunter’s words when everything depended on one
throw. Then he threw it with all his might.
It was not a playing boomerang, the kind that
are made to circle through the air and return to
the thrower’s feet, but a hunting boomerang, one
made to go swift and straight to its mark.
It sang through the air. The witch-doctor must
have known that a special effort had been made.
He stopped and fixed it with his eyes as it came
towards him. It rose in the air, but not too soon
to do some good. It missed his body but it knocked
his secret hat off and sent it skimming.
The witch-doctor let out a cry as if he had felt
a sudden toothache and ran after it. He recov-
ered it and put it on his head and then turned
after Jackadgery. But by that time Jackadgery
had disappeared from the plateau; he was flying


down the hill-side towards the gullies, in pursuit
of Nimmitybelle.
The children met in the thick undergrowth and
dropped to the ground panting. Nimmitybelle’s
heart had leaped for fright when she had heard
feet pounding after her, and she had stopped and
almost cried with relief when she saw that it was
Jackadgery. He had seized her hand and run on,
pulling her after him, until they were well hidden
among the dense scrub.
Now that it was all over Jackadgery was shak-
ing. At one moment he was proud that he had
stood up to the witch-doctor and had escaped from
him, but the next minute he was in a tremble
at the thought of it. He hoped nothing more
would happen. He felt he had done all that he
could manage for one day.
“I’ve only my shield left now,” he said. “And
we’re still in his mountains.”
It frightened Nimmitybelle to see him so
upset, so, to help her own courage, as well as
his, she tried to cheer him up.
“Never mind, Jackadgery,” she said. “We
got away from him and we might get help from
somewhere yet.”
The scrub where they lay was so dense, that
if the witch-doctor was searching for them he


would never find them unless he stumbled right
on the spot. They felt secure enough for the time
being, and they began to feel less frightened and
discouraged as they got their breath back and their
hearts stopped beating hard. They had had nothing
to eat since morning, so Nimmitybelle got out
some roast meat of a rock wallaby that Jackadgery
had caught the day before and they made a meal.
After that they crept down to the creek to drink.
While they were standing where the water
bubbled and glided among the stones of the creek-
bed they heard a bird calling down the gully.
With eyes turned towards the green thickets that
overhung the water, they listened. The bird’s call
rang out again above the clatter of the stream. It
was different to any call they had heard before. It
was like some of the calls the hunters used when
they wanted to signal each other without disturb-
ing the creatures of the bush by using their voices.
“You’d think it was someone calling us,” said
Jackadgery.
They stole back from the open way of the
watercourse until they were again among the thick
scrub. The bird called. Jackadgery answered it.
The bird called again, seeming to reply to him.
Jackadgery made up a call of his own and whistled
it. They listened with ears intent and, after a


moment’s pause, Jackadgery’s call was repeated
down the gully.
They looked at each other without speaking.
Perhaps it was the witch-doctor trying to trap
them. If this were so then he would now be
creeping towards where he had heard Jackadgery’s
call. He wished he had not been so hasty in reply-
ing. They looked around themselves for a
moment, picking out the way they would retreat
should be come, and then stood listening intently
and straining their eyes towards where they had
heard the bird. The minutes passed and no foot-
steps approached. Then the call rang out again
from the same place.
Without a word they set off towards it, keeping
to the thickest parts of the scrub, gliding carefully
between the stems so as not to set the tops wav-
ing. More and more cautiously they went as they
neared the place where the bird had called. They
still feared a trap. When they had almost reached
the place they thought they heard a faint whirring
of wings, but were not sure.
When they came at last to the spot there was
not a bird to be seen, or any other creature, but
Jackadgery found tracks where a bird —a large
one —had stood among the leaf mould in the
shadows of a dense bush. At that moment Jack-


adgery’s own call, sounded from farther down the
gully. He answered it, and, after a little wait,
received a reply. He and Nimmitybelle looked at
each other and then set off again.
This time they went more quickly; going slowly
and more cautiously only as they neared the place
from which the sound had come. Again they found
nothing, and again the call rang out farther down
the gully. They followed it on and on. As their
distance from the plateau got farther and farther,
and their place among the mountain-sides lower
and lower, they took less care. No longer did they
choose a slow way through the thickest scrub, but
kept to more open places. At times, for ease of
going, they followed the bed of the stream itself,
stooping under the mossy trunks of fallen trees
that bridged the gully, stepping from stone to
stone, clambering over huge boulders and wading
where the stream ran smooth under green arches.
Always, when Jackadgery whistled, the bird-call
rang out below them, echoing up through the trees
and leading them on.
They came at last to a little patch of flat grassy
ground that opened on to the level lands below
the range. They hurried forward, so eager were
they to escape from the mountains in which they
had been imprisoned. But they need not have


done so, for the steep hill-sides that had risen
close beside them for so long had vanished into
thin air. They looked behind them, and the
mountains were miles away, blue in the distance,
and all around them was the plain. This puzzled
them for a little while, but so many strange things
had happened to them that they soon stopped
thinking about it.
It was now late in the day. They were tired
and hungry, and although they had been travel-
ling all day along the course of a stream, and
had drunk as often as they wished, they were as
dry and thirsty as if they had been travelling all
day across dry plains. Not far away a coil of trees
showed where a river lay, so they made their way
towards it.
When they reached it they found it was a plains
river; a dry bed with waterholes strung along it.
They followed its course until they came to one
of these, and there they decided to camp for the
night. Flocks of birds were coming in for their
evening drink and to their nests among the river-
side trees; flocks of parrots and galahs, also mag-
pies, kookaburras and ibises. All this calling
and twittering and movement of wings made them
feel happy and at home. Jackadgery heard the
call of a plains turkey, and the answering call


of its mate. He went off and soon returned with
some eggs. Nimmitybelle had lit a fire of very
dry sticks that made no smoke, and had gathered
the roots of some plants that grew along the
river-bank. They cooked and ate their meal.
By now the sun had gone down. The plains
were in deepening shadow. The birds had quiet-
ened to rest, and the only light was the sun’s last
rays shining on the far mountain-tops. As they
ate Nimmitybelle’s and Jackadgery’s eyes turned
often towards the mountains. They thought of the
Spirit of the Mountain Tops and could almost
see her weaving her dance. They thought of the
witch-doctor, wondering what he would be doing
now and what his next move against them would
be. They wondered how it was that the moun-
tains had suddenly gone so far back into the
distance. Presently they found that they were
too tired to think about anything. To-day was
past and to-morrow would bring its own hap-
penings.
“Thank you for letting me go first, Jackad-
gery,” said Nimmitybelle. Now that the day was
behind them she could speak of what had hap-
pened on the plateau.
Jackadgery said nothing. He felt that he


hadn’t done that himself; it was just one of the
rules of the tribe that he had to obey.
They put out the fire so that it should not
betray them by gleaming through the darkness;
then they lay down in the night shadows under
the river-side trees. It was no hardship to lie
on the warm dry earth with a little dry grass
drawn over them, and soon they were fast asleep.


CHAPTER X
A LMOST the first thing they saw next morning
was a mob of brumbies coming in to water.
They came from among some bare brown hills on
the side of the river opposite to the mountain
range. The mares and the foals came first, in a
compact body, with the leader of the mob walking
behind to see that they all kept up and that no
harm came to them from the rear.
The children didn’t pay much attention to them.
Jackadgery was busy making a new spear and a
boomerang, and Nimmitybelle was sitting on the
ground beside him, ready to help if she could.
Jackadgery had found a very good piece of bent
wood from which to make a boomerang. The
spear was not so good, because spear-wood was not


to be found along river-banks, but only where
trees stood close and sticks grew straight. Still, it
would be better than nothing, he thought. He
couldn’t bear the idea of going on with his hands
empty except for his shield, for a hunter who did
that deserved whatever happened to him. To get
cutting tools he had cracked one or two of the
smaller river boulders in halves and was
their flinty edges to scrap the wood.
The brumbies had halted at a little distance
from the river, while the leader trotted forward
to see that all was safe. He halted on the river-
bank and looked around him with a whistling snort
as if he expected to see beasts of prey —and per-
haps this was a memory left over from the days
when flesh-eating animals really did lie in wait
by waterholes. He stood on top of the river-bank
while the rest of the mob went down to drink, and
not until they had come out of the river-bed
and were resting in the shade of the trees, did he
go down to slake his own thirst.
By the time he returned to the mob Jackadgerv
had finished sharpening his spear and was harden-
ing the point of it in ? little fire Nimmitybelle
had lighted for him.
“Yak-kai, there!” shouted a voice.
Startled, they looked up and saw seated on the


138 CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
back of the leader of the brumbies a boy of about
Jackadgery’s age, or perhaps a little older. He
sat very jauntily on the brumby, one arm akimbo j
and he seemed to be laughing at them with his
black eyes.
“Who are you?” asked Jackadgery.
“Pm Mickatharra, the Brumbies’ Boy,”
answered the other, in a manner that seemed to
say, “Now what do you think of that?”
“We didn’t see you,” exclaimed Nimmitybelle.
“No. And you wouldn’t see me now if I didn’t
want you to!” replied Mickatharra.
The two children looked at him for a little
while without saying anything, and he looked
back. Then, as he seemed to have the best of it
for the time being, they asked him how he had
come there.
“I came with the brumbies,” the other
answered. “I bring them down to water and I
take them back to the hills. I live with them.”
He leaned forward and patted the one he was
riding on the neck.
“What do you think of this fellow?” he asked.
“There’s a brumby for you!” And the brumby
leader threw up his head as if he knew he was
being praised.
Nimmitybelle saw that Mickatharra, the Brum-


bies’ Boy, was showing off a little j but there was
nothing yet to be done about it.
“Do you know who we are?” she asked.
“Of course I do,” Mickatharra answered.
“You’re Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery.” He
looked at them for a moment as if he was enjoy-
ing their bewilderment, and then he went on in
a different tone, explaining.
“The Spirit of the Caves told me to be on the
look out for you. She ”
“The Spirit of the Caves!” It was Nimmity-
belle who interrupted.
“Yes,” answered Mickatharra. “I see her once
in a while. I bring the brumbies down early some-
times on account of the hot days. The other day
we were coming down before the stars were pro-
perly gone. She heard us clattering along the side
of the hill and she was waiting for us at the foot
of the gully. She told me to watch out for you
and help you all I could.”
Nimmitybelle felt very happy at hearing about
the Spirit of the Caves, and in thinking that she
still remembered them.
“She’s nice, isn’t she?” she said.
“Yes, she’s not a bad sort,” agreed Mickatharra.
His indifferent words of approval were almost
missed by Nimmitybelle. Mention of the Spirit


of the Caves had made her thoughts fly to some-
thing else.
“Oh, Jackadgery!” she suddenly cried. “The
bird that called in the gully! It was the lyre-bird,
and the Spirit of the Mountain Gullies was near
by. It must have been she who led us out of the
mountains,” She thought a minute and then she
said: “Oh, I know it was!”
She had remembered that while they were
walking down the bed of the stream she had seen
some maidenhair growing among the bushes on
the earthy banks. She had clambered up to get
a piece of it and when she had arrived at the
place where she had seen it it was no longer there.
What the Spirit of the Caves had told her about
the shyness of the Spirit of the Gully came back
to her as she thought. And about the dress of
maidenhair, and about her always being near the
haunt of the lyre-bird.
Quickly she told Jackadgery of these things.
She had not thought to tell him before.
“And all the time we were in the range before
we met the witch-doctor I kept hearing that bird.
She must have been trying and trying to call us.”
A different look came over her face and she said,
“Oh, I’m so sorry, Jackadgery. I should have


remembered what the Spirit of the Caves said, and
told you while we were in the mountains.”
Mickatharra had listened, and when Nimmity-
belle finished he said to Jackadgery:
“Girls are duffers, aren’t they?”
“Nimmitybelle’s not,” said Jackadgery. “Any-
body would forget some things after all that’s
happened to us.” He, too, was glad to remember
the Spirit of the Caves, and to think that it was
the Spirit of the Mountain Gullies who had helped
them.
“And you can’t blame her for not knowing the
lyre-bird’s call. I didn’t know it. There aren’t
any of them near our tribal ground.”
That the lyre-bird should have repeated his call
did not surprise Jackadgery very much, for it was
not the only bird in the bush that had the gift of
mimicry.
Nimmitybelle saw that the Brumbies’ Boy
hadn’t really meant what he said about girls being
duffers. She thought he liked her, really, and
that talking like he did was just his way. But she
was glad that Jackadgery had stuck up for her.
She was sure that Mickatharra was really good
at heart when he slid off his brumby and began
admiring Jackadgery’s spear, saying that he had
done wonderfully well to get so good a spear


along the river-bank. Jackadgery’s standing up
to Mickatharra had been a good thing.
The children remembered that they had not had
any breakfast —Jackadgery had been so anxious to
provide himself with weapons. However, while
looking for spear-wood he had passed a small
waterhole in the river-bed and had seen a fish stir
the surface. They now made their way to this
hole and Mickatharra went with them, bringing
the brumbies.
The water in the hole was too muddy for spear-
ing, so the boys waded into it with long sticks in
their hands. They trampled about and stirred the
water up with the sticks. It got muddier and
muddier until the fish rose gasping to the surface.
Then they caught them with their hands and flung
them on to the banks. They got four, and with
Nimmitybelle’s help soon had them roasting on
a fire. This way of catching fish was common
among their people in dry times when the rivers
were not running.
While they ate, Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle
asked about Old Mr Bunyip. He had been in
their minds almost from the first moment they
had seen Mickatharra, but so often had they been
disappointed that they had been almost afraid to
ask.


“Yes, I can tell you where he’s gone,” answered
Mickatharra. “The honey-eater birds are com-
ing down from the north and he’s gone to lead
them through the parts where the gum-trees are
thickest with blossom.”
“Doesn’t he want us to find him?” asked Nim-
mitybelle. A feeling had come over her that per-
haps Old Mr Bunyip wasn’t as kind as the Spirits
and Grandfather Gumtree had thought j and that
perhaps he didn’t care what happened to them.
“He’s never even heard of you!” replied Mick-
atharra. “That was the last flock of budgerigars
that he was shepherding when he ran into the mist.
And as soon as the mist cleared off he hurried away
up north.”
“How do you know about the mist and the bud-
gerigars?” asked Jackadgery.
A mulga whisper went round,” answered
Mickatharra. “It doesn’t take long.”
What s a mulga whisper?” asked Jackadgery.
Oh, it’s just a mulga whisper,” answered the
Brumbies’ Boy, as if he didn’t quite want to re-
veal a secret of the bush to humans. Then he ex-
plained:
“It might start with the leaves. They’d tell
the gum-nuts and they would drop to the ground
and tell the grass. The grass would whisper it to


the roly-polys and they’d blow across the plains
and tell the mulga. The mulga would whisper it
to the wind; and so it would travel. The Spirit o£
the Caves knew you were coming, didn’t she?”
He asked as if the means by which she had known
should give them an idea of a mulga whisper.
“Are gum-nuts alive?” asked Nimmitybelle.
“Everything’s alive,” answered Mickatharra.
There was silence among them until Jackadgery
said:
“Old Mr Bunyip seems to be very busy.”
“He is,” said Mickatharra. “And he’s especi-
ally busy this year; what with the season running
a bit late.”
“We’d like to meet him,” said Jackadgery. “It
doesn’t seem as if we can do much good by our-
selves.”
“Well, that’s another place where a mulga
whisper’s gone,” Mickatharra told him. “We’re
trying to get through to him, to let him know
about you.”
“And will he come if he hears?” Nimmitybelle
and Jackadgery asked together.
“Of course he’ll come!” Mickatharra replied.
“As hard as he can lick.”
Nimmitybelle looked at Mickatharra and saw
that he was showing off again. He was being dis-


respectful. He wouldn’t have spoken of Old Mr
Bunyip going “as hard as he could lick” had he
been near at hand.
“He’s my boss,” explained Mickatharra. “When
the grass is giving out or the water’s getting low
he always comes along and shifts us on to a fresh
camp. He’s never let us down yet; I’ll say that
for him! ” And he looked around as if he thought
he had more than made up for his impudence.
By now they had finished their breakfast, and
Mickatharra asked if they would like to ride down
the river a little distance.
“I can’t go off my camp,” he explained, “but
I’ll give you a lift as far as I can.”
Neither of the children could ride, but Micka-
tharra said that that didn’t matter.
“Just hang on,” he told them. “And the faster
you go the harder it is to fall off.”
Nimmitybelle could have had a brumby to ride
by herself had she wanted to, but she thought she
would be safer hanging on behind Jackadgery.
Being a girl she didn’t feel that she had to know
how to ride brumbies by herself.
Mickatharra showed Jackadgery which brumby
to get on. He helped Nimmitybelle up behind
him, then he sprang on the leader’s back and soon


they were going along the river-bank at a walking
pace with the other brumbies all around them.
No sooner had they started than Mickatharra’s
brumby reared up and walked along on his hind
legs, so upright that his rider’s face was touching
his mane.
“Can you do that?” the Brumbies’ Boy asked
Jackadgery,
Jackadgery wasn’t sure. In the first place he
didn’t know how to make the brumby rear up and
in the second place he wasn’t certain that any one
who hadn’t ridden before would be able to hang
on as Mickatharra had done; for the Brumbies’
Boy hadn’t used his hands. He had kept his place
by balance and the grip of his legs.
“How do you make him stand up?” he asked.
“Tickle him under the ribs with your heels.”
He did this and the brumby rose up and walked
on his hind legs, Jackadgery leaned forward and
by gripping hard managed to keep his place.
Two voices spoke together. Mickatharra said:
“That’s pretty good.”
And Nimmitybelle exclaimed:
“Jackadgery! ”
She had not been able to take as strong a grip
as Jackadgery, with her shorter legs, and, though
she was glad that her companion had been able to


do as well as the Brumbies’ Boy, she had nearly
slipped off. Jackadgery let the brumby down on
to four legs and they went forward in this more
natural manner.
He asked Mickatharra if he had seen the witch-
doctor.
“Yes,” replied Mickatharra. “I saw him yes-
terday afternoon. It must have been soon after
you got out of the mountains. He was tearing
along looking for you. He was in a terrible state.
He’s afraid you’ll get back to your tribe; and then
he’ll be afraid to go back for fear of what the
elders will do to him.”
“Were you near him?” asked Nimmitybelle,
who thought it would be best, while they had the
chance, to find out the way he had gone.
“Yes,” said Mickatharra. “I let myself be seen
as soon as I saw him. He came over to me and
asked if I had seen you. He said you’d got lost
and he’d been sent out by the elders of the tribe
to look for you; the old jibber! I didn’t let on
what I knew. I told him I’d keep a look out for
you, and if I saw you I’d bring you along to him.
What else I’d do I didn’t tell him.”
They rode on in silence for some time, and then
Mickatharra said:
“Look who’s coming.”


He needn’t have spoken, because Jackadgery’s
own quick eyes had seen the witch-doctor as soon
as Mickatharra’s.
As they rode along they had turned a bend in
the river, and there, between two small hills that
stood back a little distance, was the witch-doctor
standing beside his fire.
As soon as he saw the children with Mickatharra
he came towards them. He came slowly, his secret
hat held behind him. He was trying to look as
if he was just strolling across for a little talk with
Mickatharra.
Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle wondered what
was going to happen, but Mickatharra had his
plans ready. He waited until the witch-doctor was
quite close, then he let out a yell that started the
brumbies into a gallop. He headed them straight
for the witch-doctor, and a very terrifying sight
they must have looked as they thundered towards
him. He took one look at them and then fled for
his life.
The brumbies galloped after him, and which-
ever way he ran they followed. When he tried to
get back to his camp they galloped round in front
of him and headed him off. And when he raced
as hard as his legs could carry him towards the
river they raced past him and wheeled around


CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE 149
with a snorting of nostrils and a rattle of hoofs.
All the while Mickatharra was letting out fierce
wild yells. Nor was Jackadgery behindhand. His
yells joined those of the Brumbies’ Boy. He was
thinking of all that he and Nimmitybelle had had
to put up with, and it pleased him without end to
see their enemy running for his life. What boy
of the dark people would not have felt the same?
Nimmitybelle, hanging on behind Jackadgery,
with her arms around his waist, was wishing they
would let the witch-doctor go. All this wild
scampering about, not knowing in what direction
they would be going next, was rather upsetting.
She was glad that they were having the best of
the witch-doctor, but her idea would have been to
chase him a little distance and then go on their
way.
The witch-doctor, with the brumbies thunder-
ing at his heels, ran and dodged until he was quite
breathless —then he remembered his secret hat.
He popped it on his head. As soon as they saw it
both boys and brumbies knew that the chase was
over. They divided and swept past him in two
bands at full gallop, while he stood between them
hanging on to his hat with both hands.
Away the brumbies raced along the river-bank,
bearing their riders on and leaving the witch-


doctor blinking in clouds of dust. The children
found that Mickatharra had told them the truth
when he had said that the faster you went the
harder it was to fall off. They swept along at a
splendid pace, the brumbies’ manes and tails
streaming in the wind, and the unridden ones
bucking and heel-flinging in high spirits.
“That’s nothing to what will happen to the
witch-doctor w T hen the older Spirits get hold of
him,” Mickatharra shouted to Jackadgery and
Nimmitybelle. “They heard about him deceiv-
ing the blind Spirit of the Mist. The Spirit of
the Rivers said it was the meanest thing that had
ever been done.” Mickatharra laughed. “He’ll
wish he was still being chased by brumbies when
they get hold of him.”
They came at last in sight of a place where the
bare brown hills came close to the river-bank, and
Mickatharra steadied the brumbies down to a walk
so that they might get their breath. Then, when
they came to the place where hills and river
nearly met he stopped them.
“This is as far as I can take you,” he told Jack-
adgery and Nimmitybelle. “This is the end of
the run Old Mr Bunyip marked out for me when
last he shifted the brumbies’ camp.”
The children dismounted, and thanked the


Brumbies’ Boy for the help he had given them.
They asked him to remember them to the Spirit
of the Caves. They wondered why he did not
offer to take them to her, seeing that he knew
where she lived.
Mickatharra spoke to them as if he knew what
was in their minds.
“Keep out of the witch-doctor’s hands until Old
Mr Bunyip comes to you,” he said, “and you’ll be
all right.”
No sooner had he spoken than the brumbies
leaped into a gallop and raced for the hills. The
children lost sight of the rider. He was no more
to be seen than when they had watched the brum-
bies come down to the waterhole in the river.
They thought they saw a brown arm waving as
the mob swept out of sight between the hills and
they thought they heard a faint “Yak-kai,” but
they could not be sure. All they could be certain
of was the sound of hoofs growing fainter and
fainter in the distance.
There was still a couple of hours of the after-
noon left, so the children, anxious to put as much
distance as they could between themselves and the
witch-doctor, continued on their way. Their
thoughts returned often to the Brumbies’ Boy.
Jackadgery would have liked more of his com-


pany. Nimmitybelle did not feel quite like that.
She had made up her mind that she liked Micka-
tharra, but with the two boys together she hadn’t
felt quite safe. She had had a feeling that she
didn’t know what they might be up to next. Even
if the witch-doctor was still in pursuit of them, she
was glad to have Jackadgery to herself again.


CHAPTER XI
JT was the following morning and the children,
a little thirsty from walking in the warmth,
were making their way towards where the waters
of a reedy lagoon shone blue between the trunks
of the trees that overhung it.
They had spent the night snug and safe among
one of the clumps of Cyprus pine that dotted the
plain; little grey-blue trees that stood close to-
gether and sighed whenever the breeze wandered
through their needle-like leaves. They had break-
fasted on a plains turkey that Jackadgery had
stalked and speared. Now they hoped to have
a drink and rest in the cool shade by the water
before going on their way.
They were wondering what had become of the


witch-doctor since they had left him blinking in
the brumbies’ dust-cloud, and how long they
would have to keep up their struggle with him
before Old Mr Bunyip came to their rescue.
When they were within a short distance of the
lagoon their hearts sank to see him by its waters.
He was sitting on the grass with his back to a
young tree.
The witch-doctor was really in a most unhappy
way. With each day that passed his fear of the
children getting back to the tribe became greater
and greater. He knew he had been guilty of a
grave crime against the tribe, who set a great
value on their young people. The more he
thought of it the more afraid he became.
He had been in great hope when he had seen
Mickatharra bringing the children towards him
on the brumbies. But his hopes had turned to
fear and wrath when the brumbies chased him.
He had been very angry with the Brumbies’ Boy
for deceiving him, for although he used deceit
willingly enough himself he hated it when it was
used by others. He thought it was very wicked
of them. While the brumbies were chasing him
he had thought of how Mickatharra had said, “If
I find Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery I’ll bring
them to you,” and of the w r ay he had kept his


promise—and a bit more besides. The thought of
it made him very, very angry. But the brumbies
thundering behind him and around him had left
him little time for anger. He had spent most of
the time being scared.
When they had departed he had stood looking
after them, thinking what a terrible plight he was
in. Then, stopping only to get his medicine-bag
from beside his fire, he had set out after them,
sometimes walking, and sometimes running until
he was breathless.
His pace, of course, was much slower than that
of the racing brumbies, so it was nearly night when
he came to the place where the children had said
good-bye to Mickatharra. He had seen by the
tracks what had happened, and that the children
had gone on. So he continued after them.
He had walked all night, saying to himself: “I
won’t be able to find where they are camped in
the dark, so I’ll go on and on, until I’m sure I have
passed them. Then I’ll stop and wait for them to
come along. They’ll be surprised when they run
into me, and perhaps that will be my chance to
keep them away from Bunyip.”
So all through the hours of darkness he had
travelled, cheering himself by thinking of how
triumphant he would be when Jackadgery and


Nimmitybelle ran into him next morning. It
would be hard for them to get away from him on
the wide and almost shelterless plain.
In the very early hours of morning, when the
Cross was low in the sky, he had come to the
lagoon. “Ah,” he had thought. “This is a good
place for me to wait. They are sure to come here
for a drink in passing.” So, after drinking him-
self, he had sat down to wait. The time had passed
very slowly.
As the eastern sky grew pale he heard the
Singer of the Dawn pouring forth his trills of
harp-like notes from among the trees on the other
side of the lagoon. Then, as the sun’s rays had
lit the horizon and sent long shadows of trees and
hills across the plain, the kookaburras had wakened
with a scuffling of wings, and pelicans had come
from their reedy nests into the waters of the
lagoon. The witch-doctor had been very glad to
see the sun coming, for the long journey had made
him tired, and sitting in chilly darkness had made
him stiff and cold.
The sun rose above the skyline and warmed his
body, and presently he fell asleep, not knowing
that he had done so. He dreamed that he could
see Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery coming towards
him. His chin was on his chest, and his rumbling


snores were so loud that the pelicans kept away
from near where he was sitting. His secret hat
was on the ground beside him.
Motioning Nimmitybelle to stay among the
clump of little bushes behind which they had
darted as soon as they had seen the witch-doctor,
Jackadgery crept forward to have a look at him.
They had heard the noise he was making, and at
first they thought that he had seen them and
was trying to frighten them before doing whatever
he had next in mind. Then, as nothing happened,
and their first fright died down a little, they
guessed what had taken place.
“Yes, he’s asleep,” Jackadgery said when he
stole back to Nimmitybelle.
Neither of them spoke again for a minute or
two. Their first thought was to run; to hurry on
their way. But the plains were wide, and with
very little cover. Soon he would waken. He would
look around for tracks, just to make sure that they
had not passed while he slept. And soon after
that he would be following them.
Jackadgery drew Nimmitybelle a little distance
back from the bushes, keeping them between
themselves and the witch-doctor, whom they could
see by peering between the stems.


“Make a grass rope,” he said, “and I’ll tie him
to the tree.”
There was no trouble about carrying out Jack-
adgery’s idea, for Nimmitybelle’s dilly-bag was
really a coiled grass rope. Her mother had taught
her how it was made. One of the first things she
could remember was seeing her mother plaiting
grass stems together.
Jackadgery plucked the most suitable grass
stalks he could find and Nimmitybelle’s fingers
quickly wove them into a strand. It was not as
good a rope as if they had been able to gather the
special grasses that the dark people used for their
dilly-bags, but it was good enough. While they
worked they kept stopping to peep through the
bushes, ready to throw themselves down and lie
perfectly still should the witch-doctor wake up.
At last the rope was finished. Now came the
hardest part of Jackadgery’s plan, and very hard
and dangerous it looked when the moment had
come to carry it out.
“You’ll have to come with me, Nimmitybelle,”
said Jackadgery, “and carry my spear and shield
and boomerang, because if I need them I’ll need
them quickly.”
“All right,” said Nimmitybelle. And she left
the dilly-bag among the bushes and went forward


with Jackadgery, both of them moving noise-
lessly.
They crept up behind the witch-doctor. His
snores seemed to become louder as they got closer.
They could hear the little bubbly noises that came
from his throat. His feet, sprawled out in front
of him, looked almost as big as shields.
Jackadgery passed the rope round the tree and
round the witch-doctor’s neck and tied a loose
knot in it. He thought to himself: “That will be
the best way to begin, because if he wakes up I can
pull the rope tightj and I’ll have a better
chance of holding him with it round his neck than
anywhere else.” His fingers were shaking a little
as he tied the knot, and he thought, further, to
himself: “I’m glad he hasn’t got his secret hat
on.”
When the knot was tied Jackadgery tiptoed
round the tree. He let the rope fall loosely across
the witch-doctor’s arms, which hung by his side.
He was afraid to draw the rope tight at first lest
he waken him. Four times had he passed round
the tree, and then the tickling of the rope roused
the witch-doctor.
He blinked his eyes and yawned. And what a
yawn it was! The children, though they were
smitten with fear, were reminded of the coastal


tribe’s stories about crocodiles. The witch-doctor
went to stretch his arms. At this moment, Jack-
adgery, behind the tree, drew all the turns of the
rope tight. The witch-doctor looked down in sur-
prise at his arms, then he turned his head and saw
Nimmitybelle. He let out a yell that shook the
ground and went to jump to his feet. Jackadgery
hung on to the rope. Both he and Nimmitybelle
would gladly have turned and run for their lives,
and indeed Nimmitybelle, when the witch-doctor
glared at her and shouted, did stumble back a pace
or two. But they had now to be courageous.
The witch-doctor struggled to rise and the rope
began to give way. Jackadgery saw that no time
was to be lost. Round and round the tree he ran,
pulling the rope tight as he went. The witch-
doctor struggled to get loose and yelled and
shouted in the hope that this would help him.
But Jackadgery kept going, jumping every time
he had to cross the witch-doctor’s legs. At length
he had the rope coiled around him from neck to
waist and he was unable to move his body from
the tree.
When this was done he picked up the secret hat.
It was a witch-doctor’s hat and he didn’t like to put
his hands on it. He gently pushed it over with a
stick and then put the stick into the crown and


lifted it up. Nimmitybelle was breathless for fear
of what would happen when Jackadgery did this.
“Come on Nimmitybelle,” said Jackadgery.
“Get your dilly-bag.”
She did as Jackadgery said, and away they went.
They followed the bank of the lagoon until they
came to a place where there was a thick clump of
bushes. Here they hid the secret hat, and then
went on their way. They were so glad to be gone
that they forgot to have the drink for which they
had visited the lagoon.
The noise the witch-doctor had made when
Jackadgery had pushed his hat over had been most
alarming, and when the boy had walked off with
it his shouts and screams had been so dreadful to
hear that Jackadgery had nearly dropped it. Nor
did he cease his uproar when the children disap-
peared from view.
His efforts to free himself now became tremen-
dous. He heaved and wrenched and tore at his
bonds, throwing himself about so violently that
the little tree creaked and groaned. When he
heard these noises he paused and looked about
him. “I wonder if I’m strong enough to tear this
tree up by the roots?” he thought. “I wish I had
my secret hat on.” Not knowing that the hat was
hidden near by, he thought of Jackadgery going


on and on with it, and the thought to him was a
terrible one. Again he tugged and pulled with
his body, trying to tear himself loose. The small
tree shivered in all its leaves as it bent and swayed.
The witch-doctor struggled until he was breath-
less and perspiring. The tree had given way a
little.
The witch-doctor thought things over. “I may
be able to pull the tree up,” he thought, “or I may
never get loose!” The last thought frightened him
so much that he was willing to accept help from
anywhere. He looked up at a kookaburra on a
branch of a large tree above him, and asked him
if he could do anything to help him. The kooka-
burra said nothing. He just put his head on one
side and looked down out of one eye at him, as
if he were looking down at a worm coming out
of the ground or at a goanna.
A flight of white herons descended to stalk
through the shallows of the lagoon. The witch-
doctor called to them, but as soon as they saw him
they rose again into the air and flew to the other
side of the water.
Seeing that he was quite alone in his trouble
the witch-doctor put forth another effort. He
drew his heels up and dug them into the ground
to give himself extra strength. Then he began


CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE 163
his struggles again. The little tree knew that if
he tore it up it would afterwards be left lying on
the ground to die. It didn’t want this to happen j
it had been looking forward to growing up and
spending many happy years beside the lagoon, so
it held on with every little root.
The witch-doctor was very strong in his fear,
and when next he was forced to stop struggling
he found that he had loosened the tree a little bit.
He remained quiet for a while. “If I rest between
struggles,” he thought, “I’ll win in the end.
While he rested his thoughts pursued Nimmity-
belle and Jackadgery.
These two had been hurrying on as fast as they
could. They were in great need now of the drink
they had missed getting at the lagoon, but here
again, as in past happenings, the training of the
tribe stood by them. Their people all knew how
to endure thirst when making long journeys away
from water. So, though the sun beat down on
them, and the heat of the ground rose in their
faces, they tramped steadily on.
They thought of the witch-doctor tied to the
tree. At the time it had seemed the only thing to
do, but now that it was done they wondered if
they had been right in doing it. Nimmitybelle
decided that if they met Old Mr Bunyip soon they


would explain to him about it. But then they
might not meet him for a long time.
“Do you think the witch-doctor will ever get
loose?” she asked Jackadgery.
“I didn’t tie the knot at the back of the tree as
tight as I could have,” he answered. He had been
thinking much the same as Nimmitybelle.
As they went on Nimmitybelle was glad to
think that the knot had not been tied as tight as
it might have been.


CHAPTER XII
TT was mid-afternoon and the children were still
making their way across the plains —two
specks moving across a wide rolling disk of brown.
At long intervals were clumps of shade trees, and
here and there patches of gidgee and mulga scrub.
On the skyline low ranges, pale blue, danced in
the shimmering light. It was quite still; not a
breath of wind moved, and the air was full of the
scent of earth and warm dry grass. The children
wondered if Old Mr Bunyip’s care for the things
of the bush ever brought him this way.
They passed close by a flock of native compan-
ions, tall, slender-legged birds, grey-blue of


plumage and each with a vivid band of crimson
across the top of its head. They were making
their way along in a company, pecking their food
from the earth, stretching their wings and looking
about them, each action like some movement in a
slow and graceful dance.
As the children went by they heard a soft voice
call to them:
“Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery!”
They stopped and turned to look; and there,
among the native companions, a figure was appear-
ing. As they watched she grew plainer and
plainer to see. She wore a thin billowy gown of
grey-blue, as soft as if it were made of the softest
feathers of birds, and over her hair was a loose
crimson hood of the same shade as the band over
the heads of the native companions. They thought
her face, with its delicate features framed between
straight dark hair, and eyes that looked as if they
saw things far off, the prettiest they had ever seen.
They had grown so used to meeting strange
beings that they did not ask who she was, though
she explained herself.
“I am the Spirit of the Plains,” she said.
“I had my back to you and didn’t see you com-
ing,” she went on, as if she was sorry that she
had had to keep them waiting while she brought


herself to their human sight. “I have been won-
dering what was happening to you, and whether
you would come my way.”
“We are trying to get away from the witch-
doctor and to find Old Mr Bunyip,” they told
her.
“1 know,” she answered. “I am sorry you have
had to look so far and wait so long for Mr Bunyip,
and he will be sorry too, when he hears. But don’t
worry, we have sent a mulga whisper out through
all the land. It will reach him, and he will hear
it and come. And you will be safe with me for a
little while. The witch-doctor is coming, but there
is a protector near at hand.”
At hearing this the children looked around, ex-
pecting to see someone, either the witch-doctor or
the protector of whom the Spirit had spoken.
There was no one in sight. However, this did
not puzzle them, for they had learned that they
could believe anything told them by the Spirits
of the Bush.
They asked if they had not better hurry on but
the Spirit of the Plains said no; that they would be
safe with her for a little while.
The birds had moved on a little way and the
Spirit asked them if they would walk along be-
side the flock and tell her of all that had happened


since they had left the coastal tribe. “I have to
move with my companions,” she explained, and as
she spoke she laid a slim hand on one of them, as
if they were very dear to her.
So the children walked beside the flock as they
moved slowly across the plain, and told their
story.
At each bit about the witch-doctor the Spirit of
the Plains listened very intently, as if what she
heard was helping her to make up her mind about
something.
“I think that was very brave of Jackadgery,”
she said when they told her what had happened
on the plateau in the coastal range.
When they came to the part about the Brum-
bies’ Boy she smiled.
“I have seen him many times,” she said. “I
like him very well, but I do wish he wasn’t so fond
of scaring things.”
Then she went on to tell them of some of his
doings. How one evening when she was taking
her companions down to drink at a waterhole in
the creek beyond the plains, the galahs had been
in just before them. They had settled on the
ground on the side of a small hill near by and
looked like pink-and-grey flowers close to the
earth. Along came Mickatharra and galloped his


brumbies straight at them. They rose screeching
and flew away, and it was several days before they
came back.
“Another time,” said the Spirit of the Plains,
“he galloped his brumbies past my companions so
close that they thought he was going right over
them. They were frightened and upset. It took
me so long to calm them!
“However,” she added, smiling, as another
thought came to her, “I notice that he looks after
the brumbies very well!”
The children were glad that she had found a
good word for their friend Mickatharra, and they
went on to tell her of what had happened after
they had left him.
They noticed that she looked back across the
plain when they told how they had left the witch-
doctor tied to a tree.
“The thing that we can’t forgive in him,” she
said, “is his deceiving the blind Spirit of the Mist.
She is so helpless and yet so lovely and good.
Of all the Spirits of the Bush she is the most loved.
When the Spirit of the Billabong heard of what
he had done she cried out as if someone had struck
her. Grandfather Gumtree said he wished he had
held on to the witch-doctor’s arm, and the Spirit


of the Rivers threatened all sorts of dire things if
only she could lay hands on him.
“Mickatharra was quite right in telling you
that the Spirits of the Bush were very upset about
it. We got in touch with each other. We don’t
like being angry with any one, but I’m afraid what
the witch-doctor has done can’t be overlooked.
We have arranged for his punishment.”
Having said this the Spirit of the Plains walked
on a little way among the native companions, look-
ing straight into the distance as if she had thoughts
that troubled her. The children, too, walked in
silence. They had not thought how grieved the
Spirits of the Bush would be; but now the Spirit
of the Plains had spoken about it they understood.
They could imagine how hurt the Spirit of the
Billabong must have been, and they could just
imagine Grandfather Gumtree saying in his stern-
est and rumbliest voice: “I wish I’d held on to his
arm!” They could also imagine the Spirit of the
Caves thinking about it as she went from cave to
cave of her dwelling.
When the Spirit of the Plains spoke again it was
of more pleasant things.
“I know you must be tired and thirsty,” she
said. “So lam taking you to where there is run-
ning water. There you will be able to camp and


CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE 171
get food. We might even stay together to-night.
Do you mind walking with me?”
“No!” answered both the children. “We love
it. Your companions are very pretty, aren t
they?”
“I think they are,” said the Spirit of the Plains.
“Sometimes we all dance together. I might show
you that later on. But tell me about the people
of the coastal tribe with whom you stayed. There
was a boy named Panatana and a little girl called
Mareeba, wasn’t there? I love to hear about those
whose homes are in distant places. And you can
tell me about your own people too.”
The children were only too glad to do as the
Spirit of the Plains suggested. Although they
were nervous about the witch-doctor it gave them
a happy feeling to talk of all the pleasant times
they had had, and of the people they loved to re-
member. So they walked along beside the flock
of native companions, talking to their keeper.
While this was going on events had been taking
place at the lagoon they had left that morning.
The witch-doctor had at last got himself free.
Hour after hour he had struggled. Sometimes
sitting panting from his efforts and then throwing
himself into the struggle again. The little tree
had hung on as best it could. It was bent all over


on one side and some of its lower branches had
been broken, but it wanted to live, and it had
held to the earth while it had a root to cling with.
It looked at last as if it was going to be saved,
because in the end the witch-doctor’s struggles had
stretched and loosened the rope by which he was
tied. He got an arm free, then, after his next
struggle, he found he could reach the knot which
Jackadgery had made. Soon he had it undone and
had unwound the rope from about his body. He
got to his feet.
The little tree, most of its roots loosened, was
leaning half over to the ground. It was not a very
happy position to be in, but it could have managed
to grow that way; many trees do. But the witch-
doctor had no intention of letting it do so. He
blamed it for holding him prisoner so long. With
the first shout he had uttered since the children
had disappeared, he seized it by the trunk with
both hands, pulled it up and flung it on the
ground.
The next thing he did was to climb a large tree
to find out if he could see Nimmitybelle and Jack-
adgery, and whether they had his secret hat. He
was greatly worried about his hat. To the very
top of the tree he climbed and from there he saw
them, away over where it was afternoon. They


were walking along side by side, and, he was
thankful to see, Jackadgery had only his shield
and spear and Nimmitybelle her dilly-bag.
The next thing to do was to find the hat. He
climbed down out of the tree and started follow-
ing the tracks the children had left along the mar-
gin of the lagoon. He reached the spot where
they had left the timber that grew beside the water
and had set off across the plain. “It will be hid-
den somewhere between here and where they tied
me up,” he said, and started back slowly, looking
for it. He had not gone many paces when another
thought came to him. “Perhaps they didn’t hide
it here,” he thought. “Perhaps they took it out
on the plain and threw it away.”
This thought upset him very much, because he
was looking for something and didn’t know
whether it was there to be found or not. How-
ever, there he must thoroughly search before go-
ing on. So angry was he and so well had Jack-
adgery hidden the secret hat that it was a long
while before he found it. When he at last came
upon it he gave a yell of joy and relief and popped
it on his head. Now he felt better. He lit a little
fire and sat down beside it with his medicine-bag
and made magic. It did not take him long; and


when he stood up he had a club, a nulla-nulla, in
his hand.
With this he set forth across the plain, follow-
ing the tracks of Jackadgery and Nimmitybellc.
There was going to be no mistake made this time!
And the pace he set himself was one that would
soon bring him up on the heels of the children.
These were still walking with the native com-
panions and the Spirit of the Plains. They had
had a very enjoyable time. After they had told
their story the Spirit had asked them if they would
like to see the dance that she and the birds made
together.
They had many times seen it from a distance
when they were on their travels, and Nimmity-
belle had sometimes seen it when looking across
the river from her home among the little mia
mias, but neither of them had seen it so closely,
that they seemed almost to be taking part in it.
The Spirit of the Plains gave her signal to the
native companions and there, in the golden light
of afternoon, the dance took place. The graceful
birds bowed to each other and to the Spirit and
then began to weave in stately measures. The
Spirit had answered their bow, and in their dance
she was the central figure. Her soft grey dress
billowed and fluttered with each movement. Not


a sound was uttered as the birds moved, sometimes
with heads lowered and sometimes with bills
raised towards the sky, sometimes with wings
closed and sometimes opened as if they were about
to fly. At times there was laughter in the eyes
of the Spirit of the Plains and at other times the
dreamy light of faraway thoughts.
The children thought it the most wonderful
dance they had ever seen.
When it was over and the native companions
had preened themselves they all went slowly on
their way again. They came within sight of dis-
tant trees and the Spirit pointed to them.
“That is the running water,” she said. “Do you
know how Pm sure it’s running?”
They saw that she had something she wanted
to tell them and, as they wanted to hear it, they
just shook their heads and waited for her to
speak.
“Well, Pll tell you,” she said. “Last night,
when my companions and I were camped in the
starlight, we heard the frogs croaking in the bed
of the creek. It was ever so long since we had
heard the frogs in that creek, for it had been dry
for months and months. But we heard first one
frog and then another and then another, and
soon there were hundreds and thousands of them


croaking all up and down the creek, as happily as
if they were sitting up to their necks in water.
“And do you know what happened:” she asked
the children.
Again they shook their heads.
“Well, I’ll tell you. The rain-clouds had gath-
ered away up north in the land of summer rains,
hundreds and hundreds of miles away. The wel-
come storms had broken over the thirsty earth.
The rivers and creeks were filling and the waters
were rushing along towards us here in the land of
summer dryness. The frogs knew what was hap-
pening although it was taking place so far away,
and they sent up their happy chorus as they
thought of the fun they would have next day,
when the water reached them. Don’t you think
that’s wonderful?”
Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery said they thought
it was.
“I think so, too,” said the Spirit of the Plains.
“It made my companions and I happy just to
listen to them.”
While they were going along the children had
noticed something out on the edge of the plain,
and now they asked the Spirit about it.
It looked like a column of smoke ascending into
the still air, but it was not that. Smoke would be


bluey-white or yellowy-white; this was browny-
red and it was more solid-looking than smoke, al-
though, like smoke, it rose into the air in a slender
spiral that swayed as if in a wind and fluffed away
into nothing at the top.
“That’s the Imp of the Willy-willy,” said the
Spirit of the Plains in reply to the children’s ques-
tion. “That is the protector whom I told you was
at hand, and is he who has been called upon to
punish the witch-doctor.”
“Where does he live?” they asked.
“In the ground,” the Spirit answered. “He is
made of dust and sand. He rises into the air and
rushes madly about and then sinks slowly back into
the earth. No one knows from where he will rise
next, but he is always most busy on still warm days
like this.”
While they watched, the distant willy-willy be-
gan to dissolve. His firm waving spiral began to
lose shape. He fluffed out from the sides as
well as from the top, and soon he was no more ;
there was just a thin film of reddish dust in the
sky, settling slowly back to the earth.
At that moment the children and the Spirit of
the Plains heard a shout behind them. They
looked back and there was the witch-doctor hurry-


ing after them. The children were alarmed and
looked at their friend to see what she would do.
“Don’t be afraid,” she said, and putting her
hand to her mouth, she sent a loud cooee ringing
across the plains.
“That is the signal,” she explained, and be-
gan watching to right and left. The children
could see that she was a little bit anxious, for the
witch-doctor was fast approaching and the protec-
tor was nowhere to be seen.
The witch-doctor was in high glee. He had
travelled from the lagoon at a breakneck pace,
wanting to overtake the children before they
reached cover on the other side of the plain. He
had found himself very tired after his all night
march, and having to struggle to free himself had
added to his weariness. Had he done as he wished
he would long ago have sat down and been sorry
for himself j but fear of what would happen
should the children reach home had prevented him
giving way. Sometimes, as he had stumbled, run-
ning and perspiring, across the plain his anger
against Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle and all who
had helped to thwart him had been very great.
Rage had boiled in his heart, and he had encour-
aged himself to endure his tiredness by telling


himself of all the dreadful things he would do as
soon as he laid hands on some of them.
Then mile succeeded mile and there was still
no sign of the children. So his spirits fell and he
began to think to himself as he trotted along. I
am really very sorry for Jackadgery and Nim-
mitybelle.” And then another thought came to
him: “Perhaps it would be a good idea if I made
friends with them. I could explain to them that
when they became lost I set out in search of them,
and that I have been thinking that they were being
kept against their will by the Spirits of the Bush.
The more he thought about this plan the better
it had seemed to him. “I could get Jackadgery
and Nimmitybelle to believe it and it would cer-
tainly save a lot of trouble,” he thought, as he
imagined himself appearing before the with
the children, and being thanked for all he had
done. “It was a good thing I left that message-
stick in front of my mia-mia to say that they had
been led away by evil spirits.”
However, by the time he came within sight of
the children he had got tired of thinking about his
wonderful plan. He was thinking again very
crossly about how tired he was and how every-
body had conspired to bring about his downfall,


1 8° CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
and of what he would do when he came to grips
with some of them.
When he saw the children ahead of him on the
bare shelterless plain, with no other company than
a flock of birds, his wonderful plan was as if it had
never been and the tiredness departed from his
limbs. Swinging his nulla-nulla and uttering bel-
lows that made the air quiver he came on at full
pace.
The children and the Spirit of the Plains had
been watching very anxiously for the Imp of the
Willy-willy to rise, and presently they saw him.
He was very little at first, just a pinch of dust
and a few leaves twirling among the tufts of grass.
Then he rapidly got bigger and bigger, rising into
the bright air in a scurrying cloud. As he rose
higher and higher they saw the face of the Imp
looking out from him. He had one eye shut and
a finger laid to the side of his nose. His dark
hair flew wild as he spun round and round in a
whirling dance to the time of the spinning dust-
cloud. Every time his swift twirling brought him
face to face with the Spirit and the children he
seemed to be laughing at them out of his open eye
as if to say: “Leave him to me!”
The witch-doctor saw the willy-willy and went
to pass by it, but the willy-willy moved over into


his path. He tried to dodge, but the willy-willy
dodged too —and then it pounced on him, filling
his eyes and smothering him in suffocating dust.
This was the witch-doctor’s punishment for deceiv-
ing the Spirit of the Mist; also it was the Spirits’
way of helping Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery.
The Spirit of the Plains was walking on with
her native companions as if she did not wish to
see the witch-doctor’s punishment; but the chil-
dren couldn’t help looking back.
The willy-willy had the witch-doctor thor-
oughly in its grip- It whirled around him in a
thick cloud. He blinked his eyes open for a sec-
ond but the dust got into his nose and he com-
menced sneezing so violently that his secret hat
fell off. The willy-willy seized it and flung it a
hundred yards away. When he ran after it the
willy-willy ran too. When he stooped to pick it
up the willy-willy pushed him over and whisked it
away again. It kept him running from place to
place stumbling after his hat, and when at last he
got it he had to hold it on his head with both hands
—which was very awkward on account of his also
having to hold his nulla-nulla. The willy-willy
took advantage of this to fill his beard with sand
and leaves and puffed it in his face. Then it
danced round and round him so fast that all he


could do was to stand still and hang on to his hat
and wonder when he would get his breath back
and be able to open his eyes to see something
again.
This treatment made him very sorry for him-
self, but it did not improve his temper. Behind
his closed eyes he had visions of Nimmitybelle and
Jackadgery taking to their heels and escaping him.
Fear became the mother of a new courage and he
began to fight his way forward despite the willy-
willy. He found that if he made a little run he
could get through the whirling cloud of dust and
gain a little distance before it caught him up
again.
The children, looking back, saw what was hap-
pening;. The witch-doctor, despite the punishment
the Imp had given him, was overtaking them.
The Spirit of the Plains noticed their anxious looks
and glanced behind. At once a look of alarm came
to her face. “Oh,” she cried, “the Imp is not
strong enough to master him.”
She looked right and left for a moment in dis-
may. “Perhaps I shouldn’t have kept you with
me,” she exclaimed, as if she was regretting some
selfish thought to which she had given way with-
out thinking. Neither she nor the other Spirits


of the Bush had realized how powerful was the
witch-doctor when he was wearing his secret hat.
By this time the willy-willy was beginning to
fluff out at the sides as well as the top. Soon it
must dissolve into a mere floating cloud of dust.
Already the witch-doctor was finding it possible to
force his way forward even with the willy-willy
dancing around him. Soon he would be free to do
what he wished without hindrance.
“Something will have to be done!” The Spirit
of the Plains thought for a moment and then
said:
“You must run and get across the flowing
creek.” She reached out her hand. “Give me
your spear, Jackadgery.”
He did as she asked. She then held it before
her at arm’s length and as solemnly as if she were
speaking to someone greater than herself, uttered
these words:
“Spear of Jackadgery, protect these children!”
She handed it back. “When you have crossed
the creek place the spear in the water behind you
and let it float away with the stream. The witch-
doctor won’t dare cross the water after the words
I have spoken. And now run!”
The children fled. The last they heard was
the Spirit of the Plains calling to them that the


Imp of the Willy-willy would rise again to delay
the witch-doctor.
This happened. Looking back the children saw
that the willy-willy had broken up in dust. The
witch-doctor was coming. He was racing through
the native companions, scattering the flock to right
and left 5 of their keeper there was now no sign.
With both fear and faith in their hearts Nim-
mitybelle and Jackadgery ran on. Then faith in-
creased for they saw the Imp of the Willy-willy
rising in front of them. As they passed him they
saw that he no longer looked as if he were engaged
in a joke. Both eyes were open and both arms
were outstretched as he whirled around, as if he
was gathering the strength of the winds to him.
There were to be no half-measures this time.
It was a great battle that he had with the witch-
doctor and when at last it was over the children
had safely crossed the creek.
The witch-doctor, puffing and panting, and
much disarranged both within and without, fol-
lowed them to the creek-bank. The children
watched him from among the bushes in which they
had hidden themselves. They had been afraid to
go on without waiting to make sure that the words
of the Spirit of the Plains had been effective.
While placing the spear on the surface of the


water Jackadgery had used the hunter’s words that
he had spoken on the plateau on the mountains,
“Bultharra, punara, pununga,” in the hope that
they might help.
The witch-doctor made as if to clamber down
the creek-bank.
“You can’t cross the creek!” Jackadgery called
out to him.
“Who said I can’t?” asked the witch-doctor,
peering towards the bushes. He had felt some
magic at work as he drew near the creek and he
knew he couldn’t cross it, but he wanted to find
out whose magic it was.
“The Spirit of the Plains,” answered Jack-
adgery.
“Another one of them!” thought the witch-
doctor. Again he felt rage boiling in his heart,
but he was now at his wit’s end, so he said as
sweetly as he could:
“Come over here to the creek-bank; Pd like to
have a talk with you.”
“No, we won’t,” both the children answered to-
gether.
“Well, if you don’t, Pll come over there!”
“No you won’t,” they answered promptly.
“Who says I won’t?” he asked while he gave


186 CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE
himself time to think what he really had better
do.
“The Spirit of the Plains!” It was Nimmity-
belle who answered. Her faith in the Spirits was
very great.
“All right, we’ll see!” replied the witch-doctor,
because he could think of nothing better to say.
And he did see, for at that moment the creek-
bank crumbled under him and he slithered into
the water with a loud splash.
The children waited and he did not reappear.
Then, because they feared to go on without learn-
ing just what had taken place, they crept forward
and peered down at him. They had half-expected
to see him making efforts to get up the bank on
which they stood, but instead they saw him sitting
in the water looking very crest-fallen and as if he
was hoping that they had gone away. When he
looked up and saw them he got up and climbed
out of the creek. He walked away trying to look
as if nothing had happened; but you could see
that it had, because there was mud all over his
back.
That was very nearly the last they saw of him.


CHAPTER XIII
A SIDE from occasional showers and downpours
there were two big Rain Corroborees in Old
Mr Bunyip’s year. One was when he led the
Southern Ocean storms through the Land of Win-
ter Rains and the other was when he went north
to relieve Dry Weather* from his half-year watch
in the Land of Summer Rains.
It was here that the mulga whisper about Nim-
mitybelle and Jackadgery reached him. He had
let loose the storms along the tropic coast and had
gone inland leading a monsoon —tall columns of
rain following him, treading the earth with myriad
little feet —and soon the dry creeks and rivers
* Dry Weather did not become Dragon Drought until a
late period when over-stocking produced times of shortage
and of acute suffering among the wild creatures and man’s
dependent animals, and wire fences prevented free movement
through the land from dearth to plenty.


were running bankers. The whisper came to him
in the sough of wet glistening leaves.
He turned southward at once and, as he
marched, two thoughts occupied him. One, the
special errand on which he was bent, the other, his
ever-present care for the domain over which he
ruled. He passed a recently burned-out bush-
fire, a sweep of country where the trees were
scorched and the ground was black and smoking.
He let the ibises know about it and they went
there in thousands, flight upon flight, to feed on
the toasted grubs among the ashes. It was sur-
prising how well one thing worked in with an-
other, Old Mr Bunyip thought to himself as he
strode along. \ ery fond of roasted grubs, were
the ibises. But he made a note of the locality. He
mustn’t let it lie too long in its present state. Be-
fore long he must draw a shower there, so that
the trees could have their leaves back and the
earth spring green again.
In the dry country he noticed that the crimson
desert-pea was in flower and that the purple para-
keelia bloom lay in swathes among the sand-hills.
These had blossomed following a shower he had
brought to the dry lands some weeks before. He
paused a moment to lift a spray of parakeelia
with his fingers. He was very fond of his flowers j
he had hundreds of kinds of them—and of trees,


too. As he pursued his way his eyes took pleasure
in them, for of all things that needed his care these
asked the least.
Soon he expected to meet Jackadgery and Nim-
mitybelle. He was glad to have learned that his
Spirits of the Bush had given them help, glad that
the game he tended had provided them with food,
that they had been able to slake their thirst from
the waterholes he filled, and especially glad to
think that it was his northern Rain Corroboree that
had set running through the dry plain the creek
on which Jackadgery’s protective spear had
floated. He would make short work of their pre-
sent difficulties —whatever they were —as soon as
he reached them.
While he made his way towards them Nimmity-
belle and Jackadgery were among the sand-hills
on the edge of the plain. It was mid-morning,
and, as they did not wish to overtire themselves,
they had stopped for a brief rest. They had
crossed a wide cotton-bush flat and were now be-
tween hills whose crowns were tufted with spini-
fex and whose sides were adorned with slender
gidgec and needle-bush and with patches of sul-
phur-coloured vetch.
They had found in their travels that to weary
themselves too much meant to loose heart. They
had least courage at night and most in the morn-


i n g* They were a little woeful just now because
it seemed as if their journey would never end.
They were speaking of the days they had spent
with the coastal tribe and were wondering if they
might not have done better to have stayed with
them. Nimmitybelle had spoken of Mareeba and
Jackadgery had said that he supposed Panatana
had had lots of journeys out to the bird island by
now. That seemed a lot better than toiling through
the sand-hills. But then, they were on their way
home, surely, and all that had happened since they
had left the coastal tribe was just that much put
behind them. They thought of this and were com-
forted.
They had not been troubled by the witch-doctor
since that day at the creek. Perhaps it had taken
him so long to go around the headwaters of the
creek that he had lost track of them and would
never overtake them again? This was a gladden-
ing possibility.
Their days of wandering had been uneventful,
except for one thing which they would be likely
always to remember. They had crossed a gibber
plain, where small round stones lay so close to-
gether that they could scarcely step between them,
and had found themselves in the desert. Mile
upon mile of shrubless winding red dunes with


CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE 191
nothing to be seen but low flat-topped hills in the
distance. It was a bewildering country to be in,
and soon, what with the heat of the sun and the
heaviness of the sand under their feet, they were
in sore need of water.
They had walked along with eyes half-shut
against the dazzling light, sometimes wishing that
they had not ventured here. It had been Jack-
adgery’s suggestion. He had said that they had
watched for Old Mr Bunyip in so many places
without finding him that it might be as well to try
in the desert. He had regretted as the day wore
on and they got thirstier and thirstier. He had
known that Nimmitybelle was near to crying,
though she had not complained.
Towards night they found themselves close be-
side one of the rocky, flat-topped hills they had
seen from a distance, and then, as if they had been
led to it, they had found a spring of water over-
hung by some shady trees and nestling among the
boulders at the foot of the hill.
Here they had made their camp, and later, as
they sat beside their fire, the Spirit of the Desert
had appeared to them out of the night. She had
sat down beside them at the fire and had spoken
to them, not strangely, but as if she had been with
them some time. Her eyes were deep and dark,


and the circlet that bound her hair was adorned
with a cluster of night’s brightest stars. Her voice
was scarcely louder than a murmur.
“Where do you come from:” she had asked.
They had told her and then, as if they had
feared they had no right to be where they were,
they had said:
“We came here this evening.”
“I know,” she answered. “I brought you here.
I found you wandering, more lost than you knew;
so I led you to the water among the rocks.”
“Tell me about yourselves,” she had asked.
They had done as she wished and she listened
intently to all they had to say. Sometimes she
asked a question about something that interested
her particularly, and, at one place, when they were
telling of their meeting with one of the Spirits,
she shook her head and sighed.
“I have never met any of them,” she said. “I
am the lonely one. Sometimes I have seen the
Spirit of the Mountain Tops at dawn, but we are
too far apart to speak.”
The children went on with their story. The
Spirit of the Desert was sitting beside Nimmity-
belle, playing with her hair; Jackadgery was on
the other side of the fire.
The hour grew late and the story ended. The


Spirit of the Desert spoke softly almost as if she
were speaking to herself.
“There are some who come to me who never re-
turn,” she said.
The children were a little alarmed; they
thought that she might mean to keep them. She
looked as if she washed she could, but a little later
she rose.
“I must leave you now,” she said. “I will come
in the morning and set you on your way.” Then
she left them and went into the night.
Next morning they woke by the embers where
they had fallen asleep and, after breakfasting,
they waited at their camp for her to come.
She did not reappear. They were anxious to get
out of the desert that, yesterday, had given them
nothing but distress to remember. So at length,
puzzled at what they thought was her forgetful-
ness, they set forth—as they thought—by them-
selves.
They had come, sooner than they had expected,
and by easier ways than they had hoped, to the
edge of the desert and the beginning of the plain.
It was not until they were seated resting, among
the sand-hills that they thought that perhaps the
Spirit of the Desert, unseen by them, had set
their feet on the right path.


“Well! Well! Well!” These words, uttered
in a loud, cheery tone brought Jackadgery to his
feet in one leap, spear in hand.
Wide-eyed they both stared at a being who was
coming towards them over the top of the nearest
sand-hill. And what a great and fine figure he was
as he came striding. Jackadgery thought of all
the elders of a tribe in one person. His hand
gripped a sapling staff, a twig and a leaf or two
still sticking on its top end. His beard lay on his
chest like a white cloud. Above it his skin looked
darker than ordinary. Under snowy brow his
black eyes glowed warmly. His white locks
floated in the wind.
“My name is Bunyip!” he said, halting before
them. “Old Mr Bunyip many people call me!
And I’ve no doubt that you’re Nimmitybellc and
Jackadgery.
“Am I right?” he asked when he saw that his
sudden appearance had startled them.
They nodded their heads. For so long had they
sought this being, and so unexpectedly had he
come upon them, that they were without words.
Looking up at him they saw that as well as having
great dignity of bearing there was kindness and
friendliness in his face. His eyes were smiling


CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE 195
and there was a twinkle of laughter away in then
depths.
“I’ve no doubt you’ve been wondering when I
was coming for you,” he said. “But I assure you
I came the minute I heard I was needed.”
“We’re sorry to trouble you,” said Jackadgery,
speaking for himself and Nimmitybelle.
A point of principle had been touched upon.
“I don’t as a rule interfere in the affairs of
people,” admitted Old Mr Bunyip. “I find it best
to do all I can for them in my own way and
leave the rest to them. But of course,” and here
he smiled at them, “in the case of children, I am
always happy to make a special effort!”
The children at first had not been able quite
to master their awe of Old Mr Bunyip, for al-
though he had the appearance of a man, even to
white scratches on his skin where he had brushed
against thorny bushes, he seemed greater than any
man they had ever seen. You couldn’t imagine
him ever being tired. It seemed as if some great
strength like that of the sun was in him.
But now that he had spoken like this, and had
smiled at them, looking from one to the other,
their timidity vanished. They smiled back at him.
Nimmitybelle felt as if she would like to take
hold of his hand and Jackadgery felt that here


was someone who would understand all the diffi-
culties he had had to face.
Mr Bunyip saw that a friendly understanding
had been arrived at, and he was very glad.
Soon they were following at his heels along the
homeward way, and as they went he talked to
them. Like Grandfather Gumtree he seemed to
have such grand and simple thoughts that he could
talk to any one about them—even to children.
They learned that he had travelled by day and
by night, and that he had been in touch with some
of the Spirits of the Bush. Grandfather Gumtree
had sent his love and the Spirit of the Billabong
had hoped that Nimmitybelle would never forget
her.
“I never will!” Nimmitybelle answered.
Jackadgery had a dingo-pup. Old Mr Bunyip
had found it wandering by the edge of the desert;
some misfortune had overtaken its mother, and he
had picked it up and brought it along, holding it
against his body with his free hand.
The children learned from Old Mr Bunyip
that as a rule he had to leave these waifs of the
bush to their fate, but that as soon as he saw this
pup he had thought of Jackadgery.
Jackadgery was very glad to have him.
“He’ll scare up many a bandicoot and wallaby


CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE 197
for you, Jackadgery,” said Old Mr Bunyip as he
strode along ahead of them; and the pup licked
Jackadgery’s hand as if he knew what Mr Bunyip
was saying.
He asked after the Spirits whom he had not
met on his way from the north: the Spirits of the
Caves and the Mountain Tops and the Plains —
and Mickatharra, was he still managing to find
plenty of feed and water for the brumbies?
Jackadgery and Nimmitybelle told him of all
their adventures.
At the bits about the witch-doctor they could
tell by his silence that Old Mr Bunyip was dis-
pleased. Presently he explained to them:
“I don’t approve of these things,” he said. “And
hearing of them tempts me to interfere, though I
really think it would be best if I don’t.”
He walked on in silence for a little while dur-
ing which the children did not speak, for some-
thing in the way his last words were spoken had
made them think he had not quite finished.
“However,” he said at last, “I am glad to hear
that he has not gone unpunished.”
To the bits about Grandfather Gumtree and the
Spirits he listened as if these portions of the story
pleased him greatly.
“They’re dear things, aren’t they?” he asked


when they had finished. “I’m very proud of
them! ”
He went on to tell them that there were many
Spirits whom they had not met; the Spirits of the
Gilgais, of the Jungle, of the Belahs, and of the
Inland Scrubs —even of the Sea-Coast, the Spirits
of the Long Beaches, of the Little Coves and of
the Wild Headlands. They must keep their eyes
open for these Spirits when they were moving
from place to place with their tribe; they revealed
themselves to all who waited upon them.
Old Mr Bunyip also had a word to say to the
children about themselves.
“I’ve had good reports of you, Jackadgery and
Nimmitybelle,” he said. “Grandfather Gumtree
said that beside what he saw for himself he had
heard indirectly from the other Spirits. He had
a very high opinion of you—and I might say that
I have a very high opinion of Grandfather Gum-
tree! ”
Although Old Mr Bunyip strode along at his
best pace, tapping his staff to the ground each
time his left foot came down, the children didn’t
find it a bit difficult to keep up with him. Even
Nimmitybelle, whose legs were quite short, trotted
along and didn’t get the least bit tired. And the
ground, the trees, and the hills seemed to glide


past ever so much quicker than when they were
walking by themselves. They were out of the
sand-hills before they noticed, then they had
crossed the plains, passed between mountains, and
now, after what seemed a very short time, they
had come to country they remembered. There
were the paperbark-trees among which they had
hidden from the witch-doctor, and there were the
turpentines and coral-trees, the boronia, the flan-
nel flowers and the everlasting flowers as brightly
yellow as when they first saw them. A top-knot
pigeon whistled past, the jabiru rose and flapped
slowly through the air, and there were the witch-
doctor’s magic mountains.
Jackadgery spoke up. Now that they were back
into country he remembered he felt that he would
like to go home without being led. It was part
of his pride as one of the members of the tribe.
So he said:
“If you would tell us which way to go, I think
I could find our way now.”
Old Mr Bunyip stopped and looked at him. He
saw how it was. “And you, Nimmitybelle,” he
asked. “Do you feel you can trust yourself to
Jackadgery, now?”
Nimmitybelle would much rather Old Mr
Bunyip went with them right to where the little


mia-mias stood among the trees by the river’s
edge, but she knew how Jackadgery would feel if
he had to be shown the way into camp, and, after
all he had done, she felt she should fall in with
what he wanted.
“Pm sure I can,” she answered.
“Very well,” said Old Mr Bunyip, “I’ll show
you the way.”
He sat down on one heel and, picking up a
twig, drew a little map on the ground.
His shoulders and thick white locks were below
the level of the children’s eyes and they looked
at each other across them, for now that they were
soon to part from him they felt how good and
strong a friend he was —like all the fathers of the
tribe in one.
Jackadgery stooped over the map.
“You see where that creek leads off?” asked Old
Mr Bunyip. “Well, you follow that up to where
it divides—there’s a clump of bangalow palms at
the junction. You take the right-hand divide and
follow it until it runs out into a dry gully at the
foot of a ridge. Cross the ridge, and right in front
of you across a narrow valley you’ll see a cleft in
the ranges. It’s a narrow cleft with steep rocky
sides •, go through it and you’ll see the river where
your tribe is camped. Can you follow that?”


Jackadgery studied the map a while. “Yes, I
can follow it,” he said.
“All right,” said Old Mr Bunyip.
At parting he put a hand on Jackadgery’s
shoulder. “You’ve done very well, my boy,” he
said. “When you get back give my respects to
the elders of your tribe.”
He picked Nimmitybelle up in his arms and
gave her a cuddle. “Good-bye, little maid!” he
said.
After thanking Old Mr Bunyip, the children
hurried on their way. The thought that they
would soon be home again filled them with ex-
citement. They had only one fear now, and that
was that the tribe might have gone on its travels.
It was past time for them to have moved, but
somehow they felt sure that their mothers and
fathers would have delayed the tribe, or that in
any event there would be something left, some
sign for them to follow. They had known a spear
or a yam-stick to be left pointing the direction of
departure for someone who had been left behind.
Jackadgery had no difficulty in following Old
Mr Bunyip’s map. They came to the clump of
bangalow palms at the junction of the two
creeks, then thev were on the crest of the ridge
and there was the cleft in the range beyond the


valley. They didn’t know how fast they
scrambled down the ridge and made their way
across the valley, but as they drew near they saw
that something was wrong with the cleft —it
didn’t seem to go right through the range. They
pushed on between the trees that grew on the
valley floor until they stood right in front of the
opening in the ranges j and then they saw what
had happened.
The cleft had been filled up with huge boul-
ders, and on the top of this pile of great rocks sat
the witch-doctor. He was nursing his nulla-nuila,
and had a heap of new spears beside him, ready
for throwing.
The children looked at each other, and then
Jackadgery turned to look again at their enemy.
After leaving the creek where the spear had
obeyed the command of the Spirit of the Plains,
Jackadgery had made himself new weapons. He
had them now, but his heart sank at the thought
of having to go against the witch-doctor on his
wall of stones.
“I thought something like this might happen,”
said a voice behind them.
They turned and there was Old Mr Bunyip.
“I knew you could find your way, Jackadgery,”
he explained. “But I had a feeling you might


meet with other difficulties, so I followed you at a
distance.”
He looked across at the witch-doctor.
“He said his name was Bunyip, did he!” he ex-
claimed, and his voice was very stern. “Well, the
good magic shall prevail.”
When Old Mr Bunyip wished to work magic
he didn’t need a secret hat and a little fire and a
medicine-bag. In a case like this he just thought
about what he wanted and it happened.
What took place was that a great light came
into the air as if the sun was shining from every
direction at once. So bright was it that Nimmity-
belle and Jackadgery had to shade their eyes and
look down at the ground. A noise like thunder
rolled round and round the skies and then the
bright light slowly ebbed until there was just
ordinary daylight again.
The children had to blink for a little while
before they could see properly and then they
found that strange things had happened. The
witch-doctor had disappeared. The tall range of
mountains had disappeared, too. There, in place
of them, was the shining river beside which lay
their homes, and there, on the little beach of
yellow sand, was Jackadgcry’s canoe, just as they
had left it so long ago.


They turned to thank Old Mr Bunyip for his
care of them, but he, too, was gone. Only in the
distance, and growing fainter and fainter, could
they hear his staff tapping the ground. The sound
of the taps fell close together, as if he were on
his way to attend to one of the many things that
awaited his care, and must make up for lost time.
How Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery ran towards
the canoe! The sound of their feet was as light
and swift as the patter of rain.
Soon they were aboard and headed up-stream,
Jackadgery wielding the paddle with strong
strokes. The new sorts of flowers and berries were
still to be seen and the big mobs of kangaroos and
emus. The birds were still trilling and fluting
in the trees and bushes along the river-banks.
The dingo-pup, whth his ears pricked, and look-
ing about him with great interest, sat between
Jackadgery’s feet as if to show that he would be
glad to be his dog for the rest of his life.
Nimmitybelle had lost the berries that she had
gathered to take home to her mother, they had
shrivelled up with keeping so long; but while in
the sand-hills she had gathered parakeelia blooms
and desert-pea, and had carried them in her dilly-
bag, a great burst of them spilling over the edges.
From among these flowers there now rose a


little head to peep around with beady black eyes.
It was her possum. He had been so frightened
that day on the plateau that ever since then he had
lived in the dilly-bag, not even coming out at
night. But he was now beginning to feel cheered
up.
As they progressed up the river the children
were looking forward, more and more eagerly, to
getting back to their homes. Each of them was
thinking how nice it would be to see their parents
again and be back once more in their own mia-
mias.
By the time the camp came in sight through the
trees they were straining their eyes for a glimpse
of their mothers and fathers.


CHAPTER XIV
story of Jackadgery’s and Nimmitybelle’s
travels was not quite finished.
They reached camp at midday, when most of
the warriors were away at their day’s hunting and
the food-gathering parties were abroad in the
bush. But there were a few people about the camp
and among these their arrival caused a great sur-
prise.
As they stepped ashore from Jackadgery’s
canoe a shout went up from those in the camp,
and then, because the children had been given up
for lost, they stood watching them as if they were
people returned from the dead. The children’s
parents were not in the camp, but very soon smoke


CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE 207
signals were sent up from the surrounding hills:
“Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery have come home.”
From the day when the children had disap-
peared their mothers and fathers had never ceased
to search for them. At first all the tribe had
helped, but one by one they had become discour-
aged —and there were other things demanding to
be done: hunting and food gathering. Only the
four parents kept on and on.
The people would have left the camp by the
river, for, although they were very sorry for the
children’s parents in their distress, and sorry, too,
to have lost Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery, whom
they were fond of and valued as members of the
tribe, they felt almost sure that they would never
be seen again.
The witch-doctor’s message-stick had been
found and for a while hope was built around this,
but as the time went by and he did not return
it was feared that he had been over-powered in
his efforts to recover the children. No one had
thought to disbelieve what the message-stick had
said.
The elders of the tribe had met in council and
had promised the children’s parents that the tribe
would not move until the coming of a new moon.
The parents were very grateful for this, but it


was not enough for them just to wait and hope
idly. Every day, all day, and often late into the
dark hours they continued their search, combing
the hills and plain for miles around for signs of
the lost ones. In this they were given great help
by two people of the camp. They had little time
to get food for themselves and it was lame old
Dirranbandi, and Cootamundra, the comic old man
of the tribe, who saw to it that food was ready
for them when they came back to the camp each
night and that there was something for them to
take with them when they set out each morning.
But for these two, who had no one else to look
after, the parents would have fared badly.
Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery learned of these
things while they waited in the camp for the
smoke signals to bring the searchers home.
Presently they heard voices calling and excited
shouts among the timber and then the searchers—
and many others who had returned to camp on
reading the glad news in the smoke signals—
burst into view.
Nimmitybelle was almost frightened by her
mother’s gladness at seeing her again. Her
mother called out: “Nimmitybelle!” as soon as
she caught sight of her and in a moment she had
raced through the camp and fallen on her knees


and gathered Nimmitybelle in her arms. She cried
as if she was so happy that it hurt her, and Nim-
mitybelle cried too.
Nor were Jackadgery’s mother and father any
less glad to see him. In fact, judging by the
amount of laughter and excited talking that went
on, it seemed as if every one had been made very
glad; as if something that all had secretly hoped
for had happened. But it was with Dirranbandi
and Cootamundra that the parents shared most of
their joy, for these two had been their friends all
through their trouble. Just when every one was
wondering what to do next Cootamundra cut some
comic capers and made every one laugh.
Shortly after this the witch-doctor was seen
coming into camp looking as if he hoped no one
had noticed his absence.
A council of the elders was called and Jack-
adgery had to go before them and give an account
of himself. He had been away from the tribe for
many days with some one younger than himself
—and a young woman of the tribe, at that. This
could not be overlooked. He had to tell his story
to those who would judge whether he had done
right or wrong, and who would treat the matter
as seemed best in the interests of the tribe.
The elders gathered in a half-circle. In the


centre was Murrumbidgee, who because of his age
and great wisdom, was their leader; and about him
were grouped Maranoa, Kimbcrlie, Wimmera,
Oodnadatta, Nullabor, Dandenong, Warrego,
Kalgoorlie, and some others. Jackadgery had to
lay his shield and weapons before them and then
stand up and tell his story. The other members
of the tribe were not allowed to be present but
they would be told later of all that took place.
Jackadgery’s story w r as a long one and the
elders listened to most of it in silence. Just here
and there they stopped him to ask questions, and
then told him to go on. They were very grave
men and he could not tell from the look on their
faces whether they were pleased or angry; or
whether, in the little bit he happened to be telling
them, he had done right or wrong. He noticed
that when he was telling them about the sea-coast
tribe they showed special interest, and asked him
questions. They asked the names of the elders of
the coastal tribe and when he told them, they
nodded as if they felt they knew something about
these men. When he told them that Old Mr
Bunyip had sent them his respects they looked
very pleased.
After he had told his story Jackadgery was told


to go to his mia-mia without speaking to any one
and to wait there until they sent for him.
The elders talked together for some time, then
they ordered Jackadgery to be brought before
them again, and Murrumbidgee spoke to him.
“We think you have done very well, Jackad-
gery,” said Murrumbidgee. “We feel that you
have behaved yourself like a man of the tribe and
have left a good name for your people among the
Spirits of the Bush and with the people of the
sea-coast. We think you did quite right in leaving
the sea-coast people when you learned that they
wished to keep you, and we are sure that when
they thought over it, they understood. We are
glad to have you back again. We feel that you did
wrong in going down the river in your canoe when
your father had cautioned you not to, although
the witch-doctor did tempt you to do so. But still
we have decided that you are not greatly to blame
on that account. We were boys once ourselves,
Jackadgery—a long time ago —and we know how
it is!”
So Jackadgery was allowed to go back to his
parents without a mark against him, and very
proud they were to have him. They were so glad
to have him back that his disobedience didn’t seem
to matter very much. Nimmitybelle’s case had


been considered by the mothers and grand-
mothers of the tribe, and they thought she had be-
haved herself as a young woman of the tribe
should do.
“And now,” said the elders sternly, “we’ll have
a talk with the witch-doctor!”
So the witch-doctor was brought before them.
“And what have you to say for yourself, Ada-
minaby?” they asked —for that was his name!
The witch-doctor had very little to say. He
knew that Jackadgery would have told the truth,
and he could see from the look on the elders’ faces
that they believed him. He started to say some-
thing that wasn’t true, but Murrumbidgee cut
him short.
“Don’t tell stories!” he commanded.
The "witch-doctor said no more. He tried to
feel sorry for what he had done; but he couldn’t
manage it; he could only feel sorry that he had
been found out.
“Is what Jackadgery has been telling us truer”
asked the elders.
“Yes,” answered the witch-doctor.
“Are you sorry for all that has happened?” they
asked.
“I’m as sorry as I can be,” he replied.
The elders looked at him as if they were not


CHILDREN OF THE DARK PEOPLE 213
quite sure what he meant j then they ordered him
to go to his mia-mia and wait until he was sent for.
After he had gone they had a long talk together
and then ordered him to be brought before them
again.
Murrumbidgee addressed him.
“We are very displeased with you,” said Mur-
rumbidgee. “We feel that you have brought dis-
credit on the elders of tribes as well as on witch-
doctors. However, Nimmitybelle and Jackadger'
have returned, and because of this we are glad in
our hearts and don’t wish to punish anybody. We
feel that you have already had some punishment.
The children, with the help of the Spirits, de-
feated you. The kangaroo lowered your pride,
Mickatharra held you up to contempt, the Imp
of the Willy-willy gave you a little of what you
deserved, and we feel that in a very real sense
you’ve been mocked by your own wickedness! We
don’t wish to add anything to that. Have you
anything to say?”
The witch-doctor was really touched for a
moment bv the way Murrumbidgee had put these
things. He hung his head.
“I’ll do better in the future,” he promised.
“I’ll turn over a new leaf.”


“Very well, Adaminaby,” said the elders. “And
we’ll see that you do!”
He was allowed to go.
As he was walking towards his mia-mia Mur-
rumbidgee called after him:
“And bring us your secret hat. We’ll take
charge of it!”
That night a great feast and corroboree was
held to show how happy the members of the tribe
were at Nimmitybelle’s and Jackadgery’s return.
Fires were lighted in a circle, kangaroos and wild
ducks and fish were roasted, and the warriors
painted themselves and put on their little secret
hats. They danced in the circle of the fires while
the mothers and grandmothers and children sat
around and slapped their legs to the time of the
warriors’ pounding feet. The corroboree-maker
made a story out of the children’s adventures and
while it was being acted Nimmitybelle’s daddy
played his didjeridoo better than he had ever
played it in his life before.
The elders had had a talk with the grand-
mothers—who knew all about the families of the
tribe and of the neighbouring tribes—and with
Jackadgery’s and Nimmitybelle’s parents, and
before the corroboree was ended the people were
told that Nimmitybelle and Jackadgery were


promised to each other j that they were to be to-
gether as man and wife when they grew up so
that they could be an honour and a strength to the
tribe.
Every one was very glad about this, including
the two children, for they now knew whom they
were going to get when they were grown up —
and that was the way the dark people liked it best.
When the corroboree was over and the fires
had died down and the camp was at rest, there
came a rustling among the leaves and bark at the
back of the mia-mia where Jackadgery was
asleep with his parents. It was some of the boys
from the other mia-mias who had stolen out to
have a talk with him. They had heard the elders’
report of his adventures but they wanted to know
some things of special interest to themselves.
“How old a boy was Mickatharra, and did he
live all the time with the brumbies or did he
have to go home at night? And the boys of the
coastal tribe —what sort of fellows were they?”
Jackadgery was glad to be back among his mates
of the tribe. He whispered to them through the
opening he made in the leaves until he and they
were sleepy, then he promised to tell them some
more in the morning.
In her mother’s and father’s mia-mia Nimmity-


belle, with her furry rug around her, lay watching
the late moon rising above the hill. It was very
nice to be back in the camp again. She was thinking
of the promise that had been made and what a
nice daddy Jackadgery would make when they
both grew up. And she was thinking of all the
wonderful stories she would have to tell her little
girl when she had one. Such wonderful stories
about when she and Jackadgery made their long
journey together.
While the corroboree was going on she had sat
among the other people whth her possum on her
head so that he could see all that was happening.
Afterwards she had taken him into the rug with
her; but he had wriggled out and now he was
hanging by his tail from the top of the mia-mia,
sound asleep, and very glad to be home again.


EPILOGUE
fpiME rolled on, the years uncounted. Still, the
Spirits of the Bush dwelt in their appointed
places, and still Old Mr Bunyip went to and fro,
leading the rains and the winds and caring for all
that made leaf or drew breath in his wide domain,
for he was the Guardian Spirit of the Land, age-
less and unwearying.
There came a day when, from the high ranges,
he saw for the first time, on the hunting-ground
of a tribe, the square green patches of the white
men’s crops, the slow sails of their gristing mills,
and their cattle, sheep and horses grazing north-
ward, southward, and westward across the coun-
try. For a long while, without moving, he watched
these things with deeply troubled eyes. Then, in
his nobility, he took them also into his care.
By that time the story of Jackadgery and Nim-
mltybelle had passed from tribe to tribe. It was


called “The Story of the Lost Children”; a story
about people whose deeds were remembered, told
by the mothers when the little fires burned in the
darkness between the mia-mias, the gunyahs, and
the wurleys—a story of the olden time.
Halstead Printing Company Limited.
Nickson Street, Sydney






3 1508 02063795 0


