

CHILDREN OF THE BISING SUN
With the Compliments of the Writer,
WILL J. SOWDEN,
Adelaide, South Australia
COMMERCIAL AID POLITICAL JAPAN
Reprinted from the South Australian Register, May, 1897.
Adelaide:
W. K. THOMAS & CO., PRINTERS, GRENFELL STREET
1897




The Children of the Rising Sun.
NO. I.—DECEITFUL JAPAN.
“A Man May Smile and Smile,” &o.—
Uncomplimentary Comparisons with the
Chinese—Boycotting Guilds and Trade
Societies—European Protests Against
Japanese Duplicity Japanese Ditto
Against European Arrogance.
As Australians are being brought into com-
mercial relations with the people of the
Extreme East it is important that they should
know the reputation of the folk with whom
they may have more and more to deal. The
knowledge unfortunately brings a disenchant-
ment represented by some travellers as being
well indicated in the scentless flowers and
fruitless blossoms of the Land of the Rising
Sun. The first publio gathering which I at-
tended in the country —the famous annual
semi - religious cherry - blossom dance at
Kyoto brought disillusionment with the
prominent display on the drop-scene of a
caution to “Beware of pickpockets.” After
that time I travelled through many parts of
populous and trading Japan, and mingled
freely with every class of residents and obser-
vant visitors, and one of the strongest im-
pressions left by my experiences is that the
foreigners in the Mikado’s Empire do not like
the Japanese any better than the ancient Jews
appreciated the old-time Samaritans. In
every commercial circle one is assured that
these Orientals are “deceitful and desperately
tricky.” The average English and American
trader may cry “Amen” to most of impression-
able Sir Edwin Arnold’s rapturous eulogies
of Japanese women, and they will be
justified in doing so. The feminine child-
ren of Nippon are surely the most unaffec-
tedly kindly and artless, gentle and irre-
sistibly engaging, of all Eve’s daughters.
But the amiable knight of the London
Telegraph is universally ridiculed, if not con-
demned, in the East for “absurdly over-
colouring” the virtues of the Japanese sons of
Adam. He ought say his critics —to
have been deterred from committing such an
error by the mere fact that —though recent
alterations in the law may produce change in
this respect—there are on an average nearly
one-third as many divorces as there are
marriages in Japan, and that the power ol
divorce is practioally a monopoly with the
husband. Anyhow, in clubs, hotels, and
warehouses, on merchant-ships, everywhere in
Japan, from Tokyo to Nagasaki, the native
trader is characterized in the mass as untrust-
worthy, unscrupulous, and conscienceless.
“ The psalmist must have had the Japanese
in view,” said one prominent Englishman at
Yokohama, “ when he assured the world that
‘all men are liars;’” and his auditors oried
“ Hear, hear.” They commented also with
wagging heads upon the fact that in the early
stages of the war the Japanese Government
offered to the Times with telegrams
from the battlefield on condition that the
messages were attributed to that great news-
paper’s own correspondents.
Japanese men of commerce naturally ohafe
under such irritating judgments by the
foreigner, but their bitterest exasperation
arises from the fact that the Chinese trader is
praised in every quarter for his sterling un-
swerving honesty. The contrast was well
epitomized by one of the most influential and
experienced merchants in the East.
“The average Chinaman's word is his bond ;
the word of the average Japanese must be
treated as the idle wind—disappointment, if
not disaster, will be the sure portion of those
who base their business arrangements upon a
Japanese promise. Bret Harte was a false
witness when he wrote as he did of the
Chinese. If he had known the Japs, and
if his judgment had been worth putting on
paper, he would have written
For ways that are dark and for tricks that are vain
The soft smiling Jap is peculiar.
Smiling' Yes, they’ll smile and cut your
throats in business all the time. I am sick of
their smirk.”
Of course I was familiar with the slightly
modernized Shakspoaroan aphorism to the
effect that a man may smile and smile and be
a politician still, and I was never charmed by
the peculiar reversed hiss which is in Japan
an invariable mark of courteous attention;
but I protested to this irate informant that he
was too severe upon the Japanese, though his


final verdict was only that of missionaries as
well as men of his own c.ass. Said he, de-
livering that ultimate finding with emphasis—
“ For two things the Japs should be praised.
They are not rude, and they wash, providing
that they are not expected to use cold
water; but, if cleanliness be next to godliness,
the fact only shows that two virtues may in
the East be very distant next-door neigh-
bours.”
As the possibility of the Japanese doing
much business with Australia is being dis-
cussed on both sides of the Eastern Hemi-
sphere, I deemed it expedient to probe this
question affecting the mutual good faith of
people who are to be brought into associations
of trust and confidence, and I must reluctantly
confess that on no other subject in the East
have I discovered such a striking con-
sensus of opinion. Emphatically the Euro-
pean traders, whether in Hongkong, or in
Shanghai, or in Japan itself, do not
admire the Japanese with whom they have to
do business, and they do rely implicitly upon
the Chinese, whom —striking anomaly!—they
employ to fill nearly all positions of secondary
responsibility in Japan. The foremen, the
sub-managers, the Oriental clerks, the head
waiters —all are Chinamen; and I have seen a
valorous Japanese ’rickshawman interrupted
in his boast that he could “fight ten pigtailed
brutes from China” by an order from a Chinese
to convey him to the railway station, and to
do it quickly. Japan has conquered China,
but in commercial Japan the Jap is often the
servant of the Chinaman. A white man,
whose overturn amounts to millions of dollars
yearly, said —
“The Jap, in politics and at home, is a
delightful man, and even Sir Edwin Arnold
could not praise him too highly, but the Jap
in his place of business would skin a skinflint
and outlie a lawyer. He has no idea of a
commercial obligation, though this rule, of
course, has noble exceptions. I have just been
looking over papers connected with two con-
tracts which I made some time ago—one with
a Chinaman, the other with a Japanese. In
each case articles were to be manufactured from
raw material whose price has advanced since
the contract was made. The Chinaman goes on
supplying the manufacture as he agreed todo, but
the Jap has come in to say that I will have to
pay him on the basis of the advanced price of
the raw material. Now this, though a common
experience, is extremely awkward for me,
because 1 have sold forward at a stated figure
to European and American buyers.”
“ Surely you can compel him to keep to his
contract?”
“No; to do so would be to ruin my pro-
spects of future business in Japan. My firm
would be boycotted. All the trading Japanese
are formed into guilds. These things
are as usual with commercial Japanese
as ‘palm oil,’ commissions, and bribery.
If a European morchant is ‘hard upon’ one Jap
in driving a bargain—or in enforcing a bargain
already driven—the fact is reported to the
other members of some Mutual Protection
Association, and the next time when the
offending foreign dealer tries to do business he
will find that nobody cares to have anything
to do with him.”
This idea of a retaliatory guild, by-the-by,
originated with the Chinese. Not long ago a
shipping line trading with China and Japan
employed an English steward who was re-
ported to be very exacting in his dealings with
the Chinese “boys,” and the steamship pro-
prietary was promptly cautioned by Hong-
kong and other Oriental merchants that if it
did not immediately dismiss the martinet
their carrying business would be entrusted to
another steamer. Yet the guild is becoming
an intolerable nuisance in Japan, particularly
since the guides have been included within its
membership. The Guides’ Association, which
has its head-quarters in Kobe, is ostensibly
designed for the protection of the foreigner
against dishonest impostors, and in this way
it is useful; but it is equally cer-
tain that in actual practice it is
a protective trade union for the guides
themselves, and a means of extra expense to
visitors. There can be no reasonable doubt
that a business arrangement exists between
many of these associated guides and many of
the manufacturers and curio dealers, if not
with the priests at the temples throughout
Japan. Wherever you go with a guide—and
some sort of a guide is absolutely necessary—
you have to pay more for every fee and every
article you buy than would have been de-
manded if you had gone to the place by
yourself, and it is always much easier to induce
your guide to take you to a shop or a temple
than to accompany you to some notable land-
scape. Landscapes do not pay percentages.
The conspiracy against the stranger extends
even to the rickshaw men, who divide commis-
sion with the theatre and tea-house pro-
prietors for every visitor whom they bring to
their establishments. Yes, the Japanese cer-
tainly do protect themselves against the
foreigner; but the latter plays guile against
guile.
“Though I cannot enforce contracts,” said
our complaining merchant, “I get even with
the contractors in the end by complicating the
calculations in settling up—a department in
which the Japs are singularly weak. I don’t
like resorting to such a manoeuvre, but I am
driven to it iq self-defence.”


Part of the reputation of the Japanese to
sinister smartness in business may be due t
his overmastering love of bargaining. Exas
perating and time-wasting chaffering wit
customers is as the very breath of his life. H
would rather take less than he demands for an
article than have his price paid without demur
and there is no conscience in him when th
bargaining passion is on him. As the steam
ship Airlie, on which I travelled, was prepar
ing to leave the anchorage at Kobe a curio toil
approached me with two ostrich feather fan
and one of sandalwood.
“These,”said he, “cost me $5 25c., anc
you may have them for $5 50c.”
I told him indifferently that I did no
require such articles, but would not mine
giving him $1 for them.
“Take them, master,” he said presently
and so I got them for about one-fifth of the
value he had fixed on them. But a far more
noteworthy example of the commercial acute
ness of the trading Japanese was recently sup
plied bytheexperienceofawell-known grandee
who had visited Japan before and had been
initiated into the artful devices of the Nippo
nese. In a shop he saw an article which
looked like old ivory carving, but which really
was much younger than the present Japanese
Constitution. The shopkeeper required SSO
for it; the visitor, after much negotiation,
offered $5. The seller would not go below
$7 50c., and the parleying ended in a dead-
lock. Next morning a fellow-traveller in
great excitement aroused the unsuccessful
bargainer from his slumbers.
“The early bird catches the worm,” he
exclaimed; “while you’ve been snoring here
I’ve been out buying the most wonderfully
cheap old ivory curio that I ever saw;” and he
produced the thing for which his friend had
refused to give $7 50c. the night before.
“What did you pay for this ‘wonderful
bargain?’ ”
“Only $70 —the Jap wanted SIOO, but I
was too smart for him, and beat him down. ”
He used bad words when he discovered
that the worm had caught the early bird.
Possibly after all the imitative Japanese has
acquired his dislike of the Europeans simply
through that mimicry which is the sincerest
flattery; but, undoubtedly, no man in this
universe is better acquainted than the
Japanese with the art of “putting the best
side towards London” in business matters.
One example is fairly indicative of the
national character in this respect, and it serves
to explain why exporters never dare to rely
upon samples supplied by most Japanese
manufacturers, but have to test and weigh and
measure everything. At Nara, the last con-
veniently accessible place opened to European
intercourse through railway communication,
and therefore the most arcadian, there are con 4
nected with the temples herds of sacred deer,
the horns of which are sold as precious
souvenirs if not potent charms. Among several
pairs offered to me by the vendors was one
of specially good appearance and the only
specimen graced with an ornamental disposi-
tion of paper where the animal’s skull had
been. This was highly recommended by the
affable dealer, but when I examined it I dis-
covered that the artistic finery disguised a
serious flaw in the antlers.
Summing up the whole matter of the
character of the Japanese as trader, my
impression is that the Europeans are
not too merciful in their criticisms of
him, but that, as the man has no
“ heart-religion,” so he lacks possession
of a conventional and serviceable conscience.
The former affirmation may be supported by
the fact that, after Japan’s great awakening,
emissaries were sent to western nations to
ascertain indifferently what would be the
best trade processes to adopt, and whether the
Christian religion could be advantageously
transplanted among the followers of Shintoism
and of Buddha in substitution for their
own. The Japanese—like the European—
considers that the essentially fair price
for his goods is simply the highest which
he can get. Of two things, therefore,
the Australian merchant may be certain in his
relations with Japan. One is that the
Japanese will make out of him the uttermost
which is possible, while recognising few if any
contract obligations, and the other is that he
will be dealing with a man who has no love
for him, and who views him with constant
suspicion. Even as a class the Japanese
are not well affected towards the English.
Friends who understand the native language
assure me that while the Jap with whom you
deal in the shop is smirking at you and
bowing towards you the crowd watching you
outside often reviles you with the strongest
epithets derivable from a language which
contains no equivalent for the terms that Sir
Joseph Porter so earnestly reprobated. And
if the Japs do dislike the English—what
wonder? The travelling Englishman is some
times an uncouth and selfish brute. Whilst
commerce with the West has in one sense
improved the position of the manual toiler of
the Orient, it has subjected him to grave
indignities and serious wrongs. I have seen
British Jack Tars Ashore, having engaged
a rickshawman for a whole day, pay him at
midnight with no other fare than foul oaths
and a cowardly and brutal kicking. I have
noticed other English sailors, after enjoying
for a whole night the delights of the teahouse
and the Yoshiwarra, with unlimited cham-
pagne, refuse to contribute a single cent to the


revenues of the place. While at Kobe I
called on the way to the Moon Temple at a
wayside refreshment stall, whose owner was
in vexed distress because on the preced-
ing day the crew of a French man-of-war
had eaten and drunk nearly all his poor little
stock of oranges and confections and sake, and
had with insolent curses refused to pay for
their entertainment. Personally I found this
rule to be always fairly effective —treat the
J apanese well and they will reciprocate. They
are at least grateful, as my attendant proved
in an affecting way by presenting me with a
souvenir of our association when the steamship
Syren sounded farewell to J apan. The talk
of having to knock down offensive jinrick-
shaw men—talk which is uttered by such men
as Mr. Dewar (valorous creature!) in his
“Ramble Round the Globe”—is simply
ludicrous nonsense. If the Japanese hate
the Europeans, they have some excuse for
their antipathy, and if their manufacturers do
not respect European patents and copyrights,
and lightly forge trade marks, they may plead
in extenuation that the European, though
living in their country, is not obliged to con-
form to the Mikado’s laws or be tried by the
Imperial Courts. Though there are in Japan
little more than as many hundreds of Euro-
peans as there are millions of Japs, not one of
the minority ever does any manual work. In
the fullest sense the native resident is the ser-
vant to the stranger within his gates. He
does all the fetching and carrying for
him. Even if a Japanese has a grievance
against an Englishman or any other
foreigner, he is obliged to appeal for re-
dress to a foreign tribunal. If the Japanese
Emperor should elect to bring the new treaties
into operation this anomaly will be re-
moved, but meanwhile it prevails, to the
great chagrin of the children of the Rising
Sun—“ children of the Rising Sun,” because
the ascending orb is the emblem on the
national flag, and typifies the national
guardian deity.
No. II.—EMIGRATING AND
AGGRESSIVE JAPAN.
A Crowded Country Money-making
People Moving Southward Will
British New Guinea be Japanned?—
Marquis Ito as Cecil Rhodes—Signifi-
cant Extracts from Japanese Native
Papers—“ Japan for the Japanese”—
Australia’s Vital Interest in the Great
Japanese Problem—Subsidized Japanese
Steamers for Australia—A Profitable
Market for Raw Material.
The question of Japanese emigration to
Australia was dealt with fully in the re-
port of an interview which your representative
had at Tokyo with Viscount Enomoto, Minister
of Agriculture and Commerce. The chief
position taken by that shrewd and affable
statesman was that, while Japan might not
protest against an Australian poll tax or
equivalent embargo upon Japanese
labourers going to the colonies “under
contract,” it would view with great dis-
favour any attempt to discriminate against
all Japanese workmen and other subjects.
Excluding Japanese likely to visit Australia
as travellers, as buyers of raw material, or as
vendors of their country’s manufactures, the dis-
tinction drawn by the noble Viscount amounts
to little or nothing in actual fact, because
there are not ten ordinary Japanese coolies in
10,000 who have money enough to enable them
to reach the colonies unless somebody else
should pay for their passage; and probably no
larger proportion would care to emigrate at all if
the old-time conditions of life in Japan could be
maintained. In the past home has been
the happiest place for the Japanese, and the
last which he would willingly leave. The
situation, however, is fast changing. Con-
tact with the outer world of commerce has
affected the old Arcadian ideals of the
toilers of the nation. These Japanese are not
so happy now as they were five years ago.
Another decade of competitive grind will
probably render them as miserable as
the average Christian mortal occupying a
similar position. The savour of money-making
has got upon their palates. While military
glory was—under feudalism—their one great
objective in life the young men worshipped
the soldiery and contemned the trader; but
now many of them outside the hereditary
monetary classes are captivated by the chink
of the dollar, and eager to emigrate in order to
escape the all-reaching conscription. More
and more the Japanese is becoming a money-
making animal. Erom this sordid point of
view there is great significance to him in such
statements as that made not long before the
resignation of the late Premier, the Marquis
Ito, by the Home Secretary of that day
in his yearly address to the Prefectural
Governors at Tokyo, when he reminded
his audience that conquest meant cop-
pers. The indemnity which China is paying
so promptly to Japan does not compensate for
the direct and indirect outlay of the Mikado’s
Government upon war. The suggestive point
of the Minister’s comments was that the
“defensive” —he ought have added" offensive”
—“needs of the country are so con-
stantly increasing as to involve an unremit-
ting strain on the resources of the nation
and a necessity for the people to work harder
and harder to find the sinews of war.” And,
according to the popular idea, the Ito Cabinet


Went to pieces on account of dissensions re-
garding the means to be adopted to attain this
financial end.
Leaving now all hypotheses out of considera-
tion, it is declared to be a simple fact that
many of the newly-educated Japanese youths
are realizing the possibilities suggested by such
statements and such facts. At one time it
was difficult to engage a native to go out of
his own country, but now it is easy. I might
have got fifty or 500 attendants for a three
years’ engagement on condition that I paid
their passage to Australia, and gave them ss.
a week and their board and lodging. But
even if I had had the wish to do so I should
have been deterred from the purpose by
the experience of friends in New South Wales
and elsewhere. These have brought Japanese
servants to the colonies for stated
periods, and under promise of fixed
salaries, but as soon as the men have acquired
a smattering of English, or have been offered
higher wages, they have lightly ignored their
covenant and absconded from their employers.
Whether there is danger of an influx of Japa-
nese to the southern parts of Australia, which
they have hitherto avoided, I cannot judge;
but there is no question that any number
might be obtained for Queensland and the
Northern Territory of South Australia. A
steamer of the Nippon Yusen Kaisha —the
P. & O. Company of Japan, and a semi-national
concern recently brought to the former
colony 600 Japanese, secured by an agent on
commission at Yokohama. Some of these men
were to take the places of others who had
been working on the plantations at Mackay
and elsewhere, and others were determined to
extend the Japanese representation in Aus-
tralia. Thursday Island is already supplied
with Japanese beyond the requirements of the
pearl-shelling industry, in which they were
for a long time engaged as employes, but
the comparatively recent appearance of
some of them as employers has been
well understood in Japan, and now any
reasonable amount of Japanese capital and
energy could be made instantly available for
the exploitation of the pearlshell beds of
Torres Straits and the Lower Arafura Sea.
While talking with Viscount Enomoto I noted
particularly the stress which he laid upon the
possibilities of Japanese settlement being
established in British New Guinea. That
colony, unlike those of Australasia, is bound
by the conditions of the Anglo-Japanese treaty.
Its administration is using special exertions
with the object of securing the occu-
pation of its fertile territories, and there is no
ban upon Japanese migration to this island,
though it is within only a few hours’ sailing
distance of the other colonies. For good
or for ill I should not be surprised to see a dis-
tinct movement of population in that direc-
tion, and this merely as part of a general and
ambitious national scheme. The Govern-
ment at Tokyo is systematically subsidizing
the Nippon Yusen Kaisha steamers which
are now regularly running on the Australian
route, and their subvention —a grant that
must entail a heavy loss —probably has a
relation to the accomplishment of that objeot,
as well as to the necessity that manufacturing
Japan should obtain cheap and ample sup-
plies of raw material.
Ex-State President Marquis Ito, the story
of whose life reads like a romance, is generally
regarded as the Cecil Rhodes of the Orient, as
well as the Bismarck of Japan. As the African
Colossus dreams of an English highway from
Cairo to the Cape, so the Japanese “Greater
than the Emperor” hopefully speculates upon
the possibility of Japan becoming ultimately
the dominant power from one end to the
other of the extensive and expansive chain of
productive islands stretching from the Philip-
pine Group to Polynesia. Even now the map
shows an extension of Japanese territory in
unbroken sequence to within 200 miles of the
island of Luzon, which the Spaniards hold,
under a dog-in-the-manger policy, to the dire
misfortune of its aboriginal inhabitants.
Already there are in the Sandwich Islands
sufficient Japanese to support four Japanese
newspapers, and to encroach so much on the
privileges of the natives as to induce the
Government of the baby Republic to subject
them to special disabilities and to prohibit
further immigration, to the unutterable
chagrin of the authorities at Tokyo. After
the Japan-China war the Spaniards, com-
prehending Japanese aspirations, were
seriously alarmed by the report that the con-
quering nation intended to seize Luzon, and
that rumour may only have been premature.
The extension of Japanese dominion south-
ward, like the possibilities of Japanese
colonization, is being constantly kept before
the people as a worthy object of national
ambition. Russia has shown that the
Japanese design of annexing Corea cannot be
accomplished ; other Great Powers have joined
with the Muscovite in discouraging any idea
which Japan might have had of absorb-
ing China; and one result of these
rebuffs has been to convince thought-
ful Japanese that a southerly advance
is the most promising enterprise. A
short time ago such representatively
national newspapers as the Jiji and the
Kokumin, with a simultaneity and unani-
mity which implied official inspiration,
strongly advocated “ the opening of the South
Seas regardless of whether the islands
belonged to other Powers, such as England,
Germany, and Spain.” Japan—according to


those advisers—before permitting “mixed”
residence in Formosa; that is, before allowing
Europeans rights of occupation and trading—
“must ask the Powers named to open up
all their southern possessions, so that the
Japanese may carry on commerce freely anc
unrestrictedly.” Then practical steps are
indicated. “By way of preliminary to closer
intimate relations with Japan and all the
countries in the South Seas a Consul-Genera
for the whole of the islands must be stationec
in Australia, and a Consul must be assignee
to the Philippines,” those rich anc
enormous but undeveloped areas, along
side which the Australian steamers
pass. The native papers—which circulate
by tens of thousands in Japan, where almost
everybody reads —have also pointed out that it
is an anomaly that Japan should be so
crowded while such islands as New Guinea
and the New Hebrides are becoming depopu
lated, and thus a definite design of immigration
is being kept before the people. According to
my own poor judgment the best stroke of busi
ness which could be done by the South Austra
lian Government on behalf of the Northern Ter-
ritory would be one resulting in the immediate
settlement, subject to reasonable conditions,
of 50,000 Japanese or Hindoos to cultivate
that unoccupied and distressful country; but
it is useless to speculate upon what might be
done if common sense and courage were more
robust than they are in colonial politics. It is
just conceivable that keeping the Japanese
out of Australia, where their wages would be
ruled by jealous Trades Union influence, and
where their living expenses would be com-
paratively high, may be a policy more inimical
to the Australian artisan than the encourage-
ment of their judicious immigration would be ;
but in pursuing this thought one opens a very
wide issue.
One thing certain among many things
doubtful is that, unless internecine or other
conflicts should keep down the population,
practically all the new generations of Japanese
will have to find living space outside their own
country. Reckoning its many rugged and
useless mountains, and its sea-fretted and
other uncultivable land, Japan—a northern
New Zealand—has less than 150,000 square
miles of territory; excluding them, its expanse
is little more than that of some old-time
Australian cattle stations. Yet on this
narrow space are nearly 43 million people,
and where can the regularly maintained
natural increase go? According to the
Japanese Minister to whom I spoke newly
acquired Formosa is already sufficiently popu-
lated in proportion to the present develop-
ment of its resources. There is hope in the
further exploitation of these as the country
becomes subjugated, but Japan itself h
been developed virtually to the last possi-
bility, speaking in a comprehensive and
general way. As no ounce of material is
wasted, so no inch of accessible ground is per
mitted to remain unutilized. From the edge
of the sea-water, which itself supplies
the edible seaweed forming so valuable
an article of diet in Japan, even to
the snowline on the mountains, the
tireless husbandman is constantly at
work. The land never rests. To it is applied
the intensest of intense culture with unceasing
rotation of crops. As soon as the wheat is
taken out the rice is planted in; and, while no
straw or fibre is thrown away, the cultivators
operations are assisted by one of the most
thorough systems of manuring, and probably
the most complete and effective if not the
most ancient plans of effective irrigation
by gravitation and otherwise. Another
most important fact to be remembered
in connection with the joint problems of
population and emigration is that nearly all
the work in Japan is at present handwork
and man work. Machinery introduced to the
factories and fields, carriages taking the place
of rickshaws, steam-lighters supplanting
sampans and junks, and the judicious con-
struction of wharfs and jetties would divert
thousands of people from their present occu-
pations and leave them no others to follow.
Such things will have to come if Japan is to
realize its aspirations as a commercial nation,
and when they do come the Japanese will
not be able to adjust the balance by [turning
Europeans out of positions in the service of
the nation. Already “Japan for the
Japanese” is a motto so well interpreted that
only a few scores of Europeans are employed
by the Government, and the total number of
white people in the Mikado’s dominions is not
very much larger than the proportion of
Orientals in Australasia. According to the
latest statistics which I could get at Tokyo,
there were records of 41,590 Japanese being
absent in foreign parts —22,000 of them in
Hawaii, 9,354 in Corea, 6,808 in the United
States, 1,679 in the British Colonies, 1,383 in
Russian Colonies, and odd scores and dozens
elsewhere. At the same time —December 31,
1894—there were in Japan 5,875 foreigners
—many of them missionaries—of whom 1,830
were British, 1,576 Chinese, and 931
“ Americans.” In this connection it is a strik-
ing anomaly that an Englishman should be
Professor of Japanese in the Japan Univer-
sity—fancy a Chinaman being Professor of
English at Oxford! —but then Basil Hall
Chamberlain is no ordinary man, and his
place is coveted, and will doubtless be taken
by some native pundit.
Australian interest in Japan is direct and
indirect, immediate and prospective, geo-


graphical and commercial. If a chain of
Japanese settlements should extend from the
North and China Seas to Polynesia the relations
between the Australians and the Japanese
must necessarily be intimate. If the Japa-
nese should come in large numbers to
the colonies the association of the two
races will naturally be equally close;
and if Australia should provoke inter-
national complication by actually enforcing a
discriminating law against Japanese the atti-
tude of the two countries will perhaps be more
interesting than in any other conjuncture.
[Since the original publication of this article I
have received from Japan copies of extracts
from the Japanese newspaper Nippon, in
which the inspired writer says, in March, 1897,
that, if the Queen should assent to the Aus-
tralian Japanese exclusion legislation, Japan
will not hesitate to expel Australians from its
country]. There can be no reasonable question
that Japan, in this time of its national exalta-
tion, is greatly exasperated at the idea, of
British colonies subjecting its people to a limi-
tation which is entirely contrary to the spirit
of the British treaty, and which places them
on the level of the despised and hated
Chinaman. But possibilities in this direction
may be discussed elsewhere. Commercially
Australia is concerned with Japan in a double
sense. The Japanese want to sell manufactures
to the colonies and to buy manufacturing raw
material from them. As a majority the
colonists are willing to sell the Japanese
everything that they will buy, but
they are not so ready to reciprocate
by purchasein the usual business fashion. They
object, at any rate, to interchange affecting
articles made in Japan by cheap labour in
competition with those made in Australia by
relatively dear labour. It is absurd, how-
ever, to expect steamships to carry cargoes
northward only. That would mean in ordi-
nary circumstances the imposition of freights
much higher than those now charged, and
merchants say that the cost of transit
between the East and Australia is
already so great as to render impos-
sible extensive trading with the colonies.
On their part the English shipping Com-
panies make very slight profits, and even the
sources of revenue which they do enjoy appear
now to be seriously threatened by the subsi-
dized Japanese line.
The Managing Directors of the Nippon
Yusen Kaisha have authorised the construc-
tion of six new steamers in addition to
half a dozen others then being built, chiefly
in England—and the starting of a regular
service to Australia and the United States
has been already signalised. Take this fact
in association with the growing demand in
Japan for the use of Japanese ships only
for the conveyance of raw material from
foreign shores, and you may readily com-
prehend the difficult position in which the
unsubsidised Anglo - Australian Companies,
such as the E. & A. and the China'Navigation,
are placed. They have ,to compete with a
Company able to charge greatly reduced
freight rates for the simple reason that its
profits on the service are practically supplied
by a paternal Government. From the stand-
point of the Australian artisan the competition
of the Yusen Kaisha'involves .the offering
of great encouragement to Japanese manufac-
turers of boots, hats, and numerous other
things to[do with the colonial market business
that has not usually been done on account of
the high freightage charges, which represented
in many cases one-fourth of the cost price of
the article. But the Australian producer of
natural staples, of course, may be benefited by
the very event which may disquiet and upset
the calculations of the Australian general
manufacturers unless some political wiseacre
should adopt an extremely fatuous course by
carrying a tariff discriminating against
Japanese goods. Shanghai will not be a
great rival in the production of wool and
meat, but as Canada and the United
States are within a fortnight’s steaming of
Yokohama they would in ordinary circum-
stances have the advantage as sellers of raw
material. Climatic and other conditions in
Australia, however, about equalize the
balance. With low freights the colonies will
get from Japan many orders for raw material
which is now obtained elsewhere. As it is the
Australian eastward export of hides —not
untanned skins —and wool is increasing every
month, and with favourable conditions in the
way of freight and other things it should grow
to enormous proportions. Nor will this
trade be merely transferred from London
and other western cities, for the prosperous
Japanese is already showing a strong disposi-
tion to use European goods, and the people
generally will be great consumers of them if
they should only be able to afford
them. The population of Japan is so
crowded that, with every inch of arable
land already cultivated, the food supply
is a pressing problem, and always must be so.
Japan certainly exports rice, but she also im-
ports it from China, and the reason for this inter-
change is characteristic of the people. For
the grain they send away the Japanese receive
a higher price than they have to pay for that
which they buy from the Chinese.
There are not in all Japan sufficient oxen
and horses for necessary purposes of convey-
ance. In the whole empire are only 1,105,000
cattle_and 1,561,373 horses —27 per 1,000
people for the former and 38 per 1,000 for the
latter, and nearly all these animals are in the


unsettled districts. The most noticeable
quadrupeds in Japan are the droves of deer,
but they are so sacred that —until quite
recently at any rate—an v man who should
kill one would be himself slain for sacrilege.
“We must import raw material,” was a
remark frequently repeated by the Minister of
Commerce, and even if he had not been so
emphatio substantial evidence of the need
would have been given in the fact that since
April 1, 1896, cotton and wool have been
exempted from duty at Japanese ports. With
frozen meat a good deal of business might be
done in Japan by the aid of cheap sea carriage.
There was a time when meat-eaters were
treated as pariahs—as a class apart —but that
period belongs to comparatively ancient
history. Buddhism is now in the Imperial
blackbooks; Shintoism’ has been definitely
proclaimed the national religion, and even the
Buddhist authorities are realizing the growing
popularity of meat-eating among the people,
and are encouraging the idea that animal flesh
need be taboo with the priests alone. It is
true that throughout Japan one can see very
few butchers’ shops, and that the few which
there are hide themselves in obscure corners.
It is also a fact that one frequently witnesses
suoh incidents as I saw. I was at Tokyo,
when a compassionate Buddhist bought a
goose that was exposed for sale in the
market, and liberated it on the ground that
animal life should be sacred; and when a
sportsman tried to shoot the bird after it had
flown to a neighbouring stream the people
would not permit him to do so. Still
animal food would be partaken of
by many thousands of the people
if it were not so dear. They do not eat it now
simply beoause they oannot afford it; but they
would be able to purchase it at a price which
would pay the Australian producer if the
freights were more favourable to him. Aus-
tralian butter is already constantly in use in
hotels and private houses, and is sold in Kobe
at about 18d. per lb. Jams from the colonies
are, however, rarely seen. The market has
been captured by the manufacturers of Canada
and the United States, as well as those of such
famous English firms as Crosse & Blackwell.
Those who have tasted the Australian pre-
serves prefer them owing to their retaining the
natural flavour of the fruit, but they are not
bought as they ought to be, because 2-lb.
tins are considered too large, and because
the labels are generally unattractive.
With Oriental customers gorgeous wrappings
are almost a necessity—a fact which is recog-
nized by the military authorities at places like
Shanghai, who retain scarlet with striking
facings as the uniform for the Volunteer
Forces, simply and solely owing to the impres-
sive effeot produced upon the Chinese by
dazzle and dash. The remarks made concern-
ing Australian jams apply to preserved fruits
and wine. Hardly any of the latter are seen in
the Japanese hotels, though, like Australian
brandy, some of the colonial vintages have
been admitted into the hospital at Hongkong,
where they are much appreciated. There is,
however, complaining that certain vignerons
are not careful to keep up the quality of their
products, and that they are in this way doing
the trade more injury than is being done to it
by the Oriental agents for Continental wine-
makers who are trying to sell Australian wines
in bottles bearing French and Spanish labels.
Japan should furnish an unlimited market for
Australian fruits. Excepting for a few apples
and some indifferent strawberries the Japanese
are as deficient in fruit production as they
are in that of live stock. Honey, bees-
wax, and other minor products ought to
yield good profit, but in poultry and eggs
the Chinese and Japanese can probably
supply their own wants. Certainly the
Oriental fowls have still much to learn con-
cerning the production of eggs, for those which
they now produce are ridiculously small; but
their number may be a compensation for their
minute dimensions. On one recent trip the
Airlie brought to Sydney the first instalment
of an order for 200,000 dozen eggs, which cost
only about 8 cents, or 2d. per dozen, free on
board at Hongkong. By the same vessel was
consigned to Australian ports, including even
farinaceous Adelaide, 400 or 500 tons of flour
brought by way of Japan and China from San
Francisco and Vancouver to millers who have
distributing agencies throughout the East. It
was packed in 50-lb. bags, forty to the ton,
was conveyed to Hongkong for 4s. sd. per ton,
and was sold there at from 3s. to 3s. 3d. per
bag. But this flour is not in any way com-
parable with that which is manufactured in
Australia.
No. III.— AWAKENING AND HARD-
WORKING JAPAN.
Superstition and Commonsense Curious
old Customs and Interesting new Methods
—Religion and Feasting—Much Work
and Little Pay—Some Surprising Prices
and Wages—Prison Labour in Competi-
tion with Free Work.
The latest official history of Japan begins by
superstitiously claiming for the Emperor direct
descent from the deities, and proceeds to dis-
cuss important social problems in a rational,
calculating manner worthy of a Scotch-
man or a Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer. This strange contrast is only
indicative of the sights and illustrations
which from every quarter impress the observer


in Japan. An otherwise up-to-date merchant
will occasionally in some parts of the country
subject himself, with the hope of thus securing
good luck, to long sustained immersion on the
stormiest winter day in the ice-cold water of a
certain temple’s sacred spring, and then go
to the priest’s stall to buy good-fortune charms,
or take a turn at the prayer-wheel, before
making up his ledgers or discounting a foreign
customer’s bill. One sees men and women
making delicate cloisonne ware according to the
primitive methods adopted hundreds of years
ago by their forefathers, whose imperfect and
slow-moving appliances they still employ.
These operators eat the same kind of food
which sustained their progenitors, live in
similar houses, provided with the same crude
and insanitary accommodation, and—supplied
also with the electric light! In one room a
gas-engine or an oil-engine will be working,
and in the adjoining chamber a Japanese
will be kindling a fire with the aid
of a fan or by blowing at the feeble
embers through a bamboo tube. Next door
you observe two men or women grinding wheat
between rough stones, and a man separating
rice from its husks by the dreary and weary-
ing old process of pounding it with a beam
worked on that miserable and slavish tread-
mill principle which is still applied in a few
cases in the more remote districts to irrigation
by pumping. In the fields yonder you look
as vainly for a modern plough or reaping-
machine or winnower as you search there for a
dividing fence or in a house for a chair. Here
on their poor little plot of land —too big for a
tennis-court, but not too large for a cricket
oval—may be seen a family winnowing wheat
by tossing it in the air, and as your ’rickshaw
passes between the innumerable chessboard
farms and gardens of Kyoto, for instance,
it grazes the sides of old ramshackle
drays drawn by queer little oxen shod
with straw sandals, and driven by practically
unclad men. Where a plough is employed at
all the implement is usually a wooden one,
similar to those depicted in the oldest of
ancient Bibles.
The cumbrous bullock-drawn vehicle stops
presently at the railway crossing to allow a
modern express train to rush by. Stored in
the adjacent station may be bags of patent
fertilizers blending their fragrant odours with
the pungent aroma which exhales from the
sunken cesspit casks provided by landowners
all along the road —receptacles to which
passers-by are expected in accordance with
custom to contribute. As the train stops you
see unmodernized Japanese—people who
taboo kissing as a disgusting habit, subversive
of all decency—performing with utter abandon
acts which render it trying to the nerves of a
bashful man to travel with a European lady.
Yet these hatless, bootless, almost clothesless
Arcadians are jostled by other hurrying
Japanese, canopied by black Paris or
“bowler” hats, which surmount tweeds of
elegant cut, set off by pince-nez , tight-fitting
gloves, patent-leather boots, a walking-cane,
and a costly Havana cigar. The like con-
trasting incongruities are everywhere observ-
able. Whilst English-speaking Japanese
merchants are smartly driving with
Europeans the best bargains obtainable for
the new season’s rice, two national and official
holidays are honoured in order to signalize the
ceremonial tasting by the Mikado of the crop
just garnered and the offering of the first
fruits of the grain to the Imperial ancestors
at the temples or in their tombs. On the day
after that on which I had had an inspiring
conversation with the head of the Technico-
logical School at Tokyo concerning Japan’s
rapid advance along the lines of modern
educational systems an angry controversy
arose because some too indiscriminate modern
reformer objected to the school children
bowing to the portrait of the Emperor, which
is kept in a niohe in the school buildings and
unveiled at certain times so that obeisance
may be performed to the earthly representa-
tive of the numerous gods whom the Japanese
worship.
In considering the commercial effect of the
old customs of the nation it is hard to
determine their influence upon outside com-
petition. The habit of working on every day
of the week from sunrise to midnight, of
earning little and of requiring less in order to
sustain life—-this has an obvious result; but
other observances Bupply some sort of an
economical counterpoise. The Japanese do not
always labour. They disregard Sunday, and
do not enjoy any regular holidays apart from
those in the New Year period, when all
accounts are closed even by the aid of
genuinely “alarming sacrifices” of stocks, but
those who are wage-earners devote to sport
and temple worship the first and fifteenth days
of each month, which immediately follow their
pay-days. Then on January 16, after the re-
sumption of work succeeding the semi-religious
orgies of the New Year, every apprentice and
servant may, in accordance with ancient
oustom, if not alwaysin conformity with modern
practice,claim a holiday. Why? The minis-
ters of the deities honoured in Nippon teach
that on that day even the damned in Hades
are granted surcease of their torments, and
that the roof of hell is lifted slightly
to allow the writhing wretches to
enjoy a breath of fresh air. Not
only may the Japanese employes demand
a holiday, but their masters are expected to


give each some money and a new suit of
clothing, and so the day’s business may be
wholly suspended while the workers frolic,
after having begun their diversion in the
characteristic Japanese fashion by repairing
to the shrine of the god of the holiday to
thank him for the festival. At other periods
apprentices may require indefinite leave of
absence to enable them to make pilgrimages to
temples associated with the worship of the
deity whose duty it is to keep an eye upon their
welfare as tradesmen.
Thus the time - sanctioned usages of the
Japanese have their advantage to the foreign
competitor. Some other customs, which have
been condemned as anachronisms, are retained
by the Japanese because they are more service-
able than modern substitutes. For instance,
the Japanese carpenter has been ridiculed for
drawing the plane towards him instead of
pushing it away from him, and undoubtedly if
he wrought in the same posture as Europeans
he would lose power by this method; but,
working in the characteristic attitude of the
Japanese mechanic, he really gains force by
continuinghis own plan. Recently an American
trade commissioner visiting the country
upbraided the native merchants because they
continued the use of their flag signals,
even across the telegraph wires, to communi-
cate from one part of the country to others
the fluctuations in the rice market. On an
eminence in a tea plantation on the road to
the Rapids near Kyoto you see a man
vigorously waving a large white flag, and the
signals thus made by him are communicated to
another flag-bearer on a hill some miles away.
That man in turn reproduces them from a
giddily steep and rickety pigeonloft-like perch
at the highest point among the rooftops of
Kobe, or Osaka, or elsewhere throughout the
island empire; and by these means the impor-
tant news is conveyed to all points of the com-
pass in less time than the telegraph wire
would require to impart it. It is the
wily, up-to-date Japanese—not the super-
stitious, antiquated Japanese—who retains the
flag signals for the regulation of the rice
market. This reflection reminds one of the
strange and equally significant spectacle pre-
sented at a shrine at Nara. There, m accor-
dance with custom dating from time im-
memorial, numerous papers inscribed with
prayers for relief are posted all over the
bamboo lattice, fronting the niche in which
reposes one of the gods of healing; but mixed
with these petitions are the seductive adver-
tisements of enterprising Japanese medicine-
vendors. Imagine leaflets advocating the use
of Blank’sFamous Vegetable Pills being placed
in the prayer-book, opposite to the supplica-
tion for the recovery of the sick! The waving
of the rice-flags and the scene at the Nara
shrine teach the lesson that the Japanese is
adapting himself to the spirit of the age as
exemplified outside the Mikado’s realm, and
that the Furthest Orientals have fairly entered
into competition with the people of the
Occident as money-makers.
The facts affecting industrial conditions in
Japan are remarkable and almost startling,
and the practical comment of most people
after having read a summary of them will be
that the Japanese operatives have still plenty
of occasion to strike, as they are doing, for
higher wages—if money and not happiness be
the true test of prosperity. In considering the
payments made to workmen in Japan it is,
however, necessary to remember that, except-
ing attendance on machinery, two Orientals
have, as a rule, to be employed where one
European would be sufficient, because they
apparently cannot understand the value of
time, and haste is a word unknown in their
business vocabulary. Particularly is this
remark applicable to the Japanese, who seem
physically unable to hurry. Associated with
this defect —if defect it be —are a capacity and
a determination to mind their own business,
and leave other people’s alone, which would
drive a socialistic agitator to distraction,
if he had not previously reached that goal.
In European countries it is a good rule when
one’s hat blows off to maintain an attitude
of reposeful dignity and wait in the absolute
certainty that somebody else will chase the
errant chapeau and bring it back to the owner;
but in Japan your hat might blow from
Nagasaki to Yokohama and in an ordinary
way no one would chevy it if you failed to do
so. The Japanese would consider that the
mishap was none of their affair. In his own
concerns, however, the energy and especially
the perseverance of the Japanese are most
impressive. Japan lacks bees to point morals
in assiduity, but its inhabitants are industrious
enough to be their own exemplars; and their
literature requires no Man of Uz to supply
them with inspiring illustrations of patience.
When ordinary work was slack I have seen a
man standing in his little wheat crop from
sunrise to gloaming clapping his hands to pre-
vent the small birds frjm dining off the
few ripening ears. By such illustrations are
explained the fact that what the Japanese
fail to possess in physical vigour is made up
for them in staying power. In the old fable
they might well be allotted the r6le of the
tortoise. A favourite narrative in their
schools is one of the class of “Bruce
and the spider.” It is to the effect
that a student was going home one day, de-
pressed and discouraged with the difficulty of
his tasks and the slowness of his progress,
when he saw an old woman rubbing upon a
stone the head of a huge axe.


“What are you doing: that for?” he asked.
“Oh,” was the cheerful reply, “I’m grind-
ing this down into a needle.”
One of the most common applications of this
parable is to be seen in the cloisonne —or
“ shippo”—making works at Kyoto and else
where. I have with me a tiny art matchbox
the construction of which occupied one man
almost exclusively during twenty-one days
First, a founder has to cast a copper vessel
then an artificer arranges upon this the wire
pattern which is to represent the design to be
worked out; next the artist has, with infinite
pains, to deposit infinitesimal specks of many
colours on the cemented surface of the article
and each stratum of colour is burnt in
before another is placed in position.
In many cases seven or eight burn-
ings are necessary, and finally the
utensil is polished with emery and other
stones —an operation requiring several days,
and attended with risks of spoiling the whole
thing after it has safely passed the ordeal oi
cracking through overheating in the kiln.
All this work is infinitely tedious. Watch-
making is as nothing compared with it. The
filling-in of the colours between the wires
renders it necessary for the operator to
maintain a crouching attitude for hours on
end, and to use double magnifiers which
utterly ruin the eyes lh a very few years.
Yet men and women toil at such tasks as
these twelve hours a day, and on the average
receive little more than a shilling for their
work. I saw sold for £4OO a superb pair of
vases, on which the workmen had been en-
gaged four years; and another pair of small
ones was being made for the Emperor, who
was to pay about £l3O for eighteen months’
work. It will thus be seen that the em-
ployer in Japan gets at least his fair share of
profit. For Bs. or 9s. a J apanese artist will
reproduce a photograph in an oil-painting 3
ft. in size, and will make good work of it too,
while for Bs. or 9s. more you may have the
example of art set in a beautiful and richly
embellished frame of lacquer. Similarly for
9s. you may get large mother-of-pearl shells
from Port Darwin engraved in exquisitely
artistic patterns.
In Kobe I was entertained in a spacious
nine-roomed house of two stories, which had
been built for £3OO before the war, andatpresent
rates would cost £4OO. It was ornately fur-
nished with articles whose price in Australia
would be at least thrice what was given for
them here. Among the fittings in another
was splendid embroidery of a kind which
rarely reaches the colonies, and which is made
at the rate of one square inch per worker
daily by people who consider themselves well
paid at 9d. or Is. a day. In the beautiful Club
garden at Kobe—which has probably the
homeliest and the pleasantest clubhouse in
the Orient —I saw women engaged from early
morning to dusk in weeding the lawns. One
of these female slaves had slung to her back an
infant, whom she occasionally turned round to
the front for purposes which may be roughly
indicated by the reminder that feeding bottles
are deemed an abomination in native Japan.
For such toilsome work as that such women as
these receive—at any rate when employed in
private gardens—from lgd. to 3Ad. a day, and
yet, in pure happiness, they sing as blithely as
the gayest of birds. Though the wages and
demands of the domestic servants have
increased materially since the con-
quest of China, insomuch even that
some of the exacting European
mistresses are threatened with a servant-
girl difficulty, the remuneration of these best
of helpers is still only about a quarter of what
an Australian domestic receives. At Moji
women and children, as well as men, slave at
coalheaving with their little baskets, loading
vessels at the rate of 100 tons a day, and the
wages range from about 2d. to 4d. a day for
the weaker workers. Latterly the men’s earn-
ings have been increased. The Japanese,
whose merry songs enliven the neighbourhood
of the tea-firing godowns (storehouses) at the
treaty ports keep up their mirth and their
industry on a few odd coppers. In some of
the English newspaper offices Japanese com-
positors set type —with very fair accurac3 T , too,
even when they are unacquainted with the
language, and though the manuscript may be
as illegible as they unkindly declared mine to
be —and the very best of them is paid less
than 10s. for a week’s labour, which some-
times includes Sunday. The rest get scarcely
more than half as much. The ordinary coolie
or drudge toils from ten to twelve hours for
from about 6d. to lOd. A ’rickshawman—
that hardest-working of all human horses—
rarely earns for himself more than 6d. or Bd. a
day if his vehicle be taken on hire, and even
when he is owner of his own jinrickshaw he
deems himself extremely fortunate if his
receipts amount to more than Is. a day, allow-
ing for the rainy weather in which he cannot
work. At one of the woollen factories I saw
numerous girls engaged in deftly manipulating
the fabrics in the weaving-machines, and their
payment for ten hours’ work was 10c.—that
is, less than 3d. In the upper room of a
paper-mill were women engaged, and merrily
happy, in handling filthy rags twelve hours a
day in a temperature which so nearly suffo-
cated me in two minutes that I had to rush
hastily to an open window to take breath ; and
if they earn 3d. in the twelve hours they take
the money with thanks and satisfaction. At
one of the less-frequented Japanese ports a
kind of cloth may be bought at prices varying


from £1 to £5 a piece. This material is
fabricated on the Loochoo Islands, and each
piece represents the constant casual work of
one woman during, at least, a year.
The official list of standard wages issued
recently by the Tokyo Chamber of Commerce
rather overstates the ordinary payments
throughout the Empire. It places about
Is. Id. a day to the credit of carpenters, Is. 6d.
to that of builders of various classes,
and 9d. to that of coolies; but even
this higher rate must be discounted
by the considerations that the day’s work
in Japan is much longer than it is in Aus-
tralia, that the weather interferes with the re-
gularity of the operations, and that the men
are paid only for what they do. Manufactur-
ing done at such prices as those I have indi-
cated necessarily means unequal competition
in the world’s market, and the importance of
this fact is accentuated by one other circum-
stance relating to the output from such State
institutions as the new prison at Tokyo. There
men slave under a rigorous “ silent” system
nine and a half hours daily and until noon on
Sundays, producing multifarious marketable
commodities in exchange for their board and
lodging. The prices realized by the Govern-
ment for this class of manufacture cannot be
taken as a standard of current values, because
—apart from such things as hollow steel
umbrella handles, straw hats, pottery, and the
like —the articles are not of the best. Take,
however, a few random examples of the
retail gauge of the value of free
labour. What do you think of patent
Russian leather dress boots, made to order,
at Bs. to 9s. a pair; of ordinary walking
measured boots, at 6s. to Bs.; patent-leather
shoes, at 65.; and a sac suit of best Scotch
tweed, at 365. ? At a table in front of me are
two specimens of the wonders in plant-train-
ing for which the Japanese are famous—little
dwarf shrubs, with the branches intertwined
among the handles of tiny sugarbasins and toy
sampans. They must have been assiduously
tended and trained for two or three years at
least, and yet both of them, pots included,
were bought at Kobe for 7 cents—about 2d.;
while in Kyoto the ship’s surgeon pur-
chased for ss. beautifully delicate surgi-
cal instruments, which would cost 50s.
in London; and they were perfect,
except that, like almost everything
in Japan, they were a trifle small for the
average heavy-fingered Britisher. At the
railway stations you may buy, for Id. per
dozen boxes, samples of the Japanese-
made lucifer matches, of which half
a millon’s worth sterling are exported
annually to Australia and elsewhere;
and outside hundreds of houses in nearly
every Japanese town may be seen heaps of the
matchboxes spread to dry. The making
of these boxes is chiefly woman’s work. A
particularly smart housewife whom I saw
employed with the paste and the paper com-
pleted with the aid of her little ones 2,500
boxes per day of thirteen or fourteen hours,
and was paid a trifle more than a farthing per
100, say 7d. or Bd. daily. The material is
supplied by the factory - owner. Similar
illustrations of the astonishing cheapness of
labour might be multiplied, but enough has
been said. This aspect of the industrial
problem may be left with the hardly necessary
intimation that the wretched wage of the
Japanese is still a living wage, and even a
saving wage. My ’rickshawman and atten-
dant, a man with a particularly good connec-
tion, in whose heart I shed great joy by
paying him 2s. 6d. a day, assured me that he
fed and clothed his wife and two children,
well educated the latter, treated the whole
family to plenty of amusement and temple
fetes, and put a trifle by against a rainy day—
all at an outlay of 6s. a week; yet he and his
wife were among the happiest people whom I
met even in Japan, “ the Pagan land,” where
is realized the nearest approximation to
universal national felicity which is pre-
sented on earth.
No. IV.—UNRULY JAPAN AND
PATERNAL JAPAN.
Advancing Prices and Increasing Wages.
—Labour Troubles Intensifying. A
People Without “Necessities” and a
Country Without Waste.—Students in
Revolt.— “ Too Many Clerks!”—Pater-
nal Political Economy.—Brotherhood
AS WELL AS GRANDMOTHERHOOD.— No POOR-
houses. —Nationalizing State Mines. —
Credit Foncier Advances to Producers.
—Ancient Henry Georges.
If, after the inevitable supplanting by
machinery of the hand labour which now
prevails nearly everywhere in Japan, the
Japanese should be contented with the same
wages as they now receive, the existing balance
of the old-world manufacturing industry
must, granting the maintenance of peace in
the East, be seriously disadjusted. Speaking
generally, the wages standard of the Japanese
is bound to be the basis on which the European
workman must be paid, notwithstanding the
fact that the latter has fostered artificial
wants and the former has reduced his necessi-
ties to the lowest limit. At present the com-
bined earnings of a Japanese family—practi-
cally every one of them, to the smallest chit of
a girl, at work—represent the living wage of
the household. Manufacturers labour and
eat and sleep in the same building,


and if only one member of the circle
be disabled for any length of time
the general earning power is affected,
and the rest suffer. One result of the in-
creased use of machinery will be to break up
these little domestic coteries, for at least five
times the work now accomplished in Japan
could be done under the new conditions of
labour-saving appliances with a smaller
number of hands than those engaged at
present. If the women and children be thrown
out of work the income of the head of the
house must be increased, since it is simply
impossible for the living expenses to be reduced
below their present level. A family of twelve
can dine at a cost of a farthing each, when all
that is eaten is a handful of rice with the
addition of a spray of seaweed or a bit of fish
or vegetable if the diners are minded ,to
indulge in luxuries. In Japan nothing what-
ever is wasted. What is thrown away by
many Australian labourers’ households in one
day would feed a whole Japanese family.
Economy in trifles is carried to such a degree
among the Japs that a special class of itinerant
hawkers make a livelihood by a house-to-house
collection of the little scraps of inferior tissue
paper used by the poorest people for the
purposes to which handkerchiefs are commonly
applied by Europeans. -
From the standpoint of the European me-
chanic, there is a hope in the growing dis-
content among the Japanese operatives.
Since attention has been called to the value
of the manufactures of the country, and par-
ticularly as a result of the war, the market
prices of Japanese articles have increased on
the average by 25 per cent. Wages have
risen in at least the same proportion, and
agitations for further advances are constant.
Strikes have already been acclimatized in
Japan. One reads of them every week. Two
hundred girls —and the female Japanese is the
least self-assertive creature on the globe’s sur-
face —walked out of a factory one day during
my visit, and would not return until their em-
ployer guaranteed to double their wages—
that is, to increase them from about 2d. or 3d.
to 4d. or sd. per day. A short time before
the silver miners at Hokkaido —men who
would have been amply satisfied three
or four years ago with Is. 3d. or Is.
6d. a day—struck work because “they
believed their employer would not carry out
his promise to pay them one dollar” —that is,
2s. 3d.—per day. In other directions, also,
a spirit of independence seems to have been
breathed into the people with the advent of
the new Constitution and the advanced
education systems. While I was in Japan
even the students in one of the great schools
left the establishment in a body, claiming,
inter alia, the right to nominate their chief
teacher, and complaining that the lessons
were too hard and the punishment too severe.
The whole revolution was in a
thoroughly organized fashion, and the senior
students even borrowed from Australian
Trades Unions the picket system. They
constituted themselves guards and sentries
to prevent the younger and more impression-
able lads from going back to their desks
until peace with honour had been re-established.
The reader must reflect that the Japanese
Government does not rest satisfied with
promoting technical instruction to its highest
point of development, though that is done.
Academical education is also encouraged to the
fullest extent, and those who chiefly avail
themselves of it are young fellows of the kind
who regard an artisan’s career as being beneath
them. These are they who throng the offices
of the European merchants, enquiring for
clerkships, of which there are very few com-
pared with the number of applicants for such
positions. Such incidents, like the recent
armed rising of several hundred youths in
Canton, suggest possibilities to which reference
will be made later. Just now it will be desir-
able to deal with other respects than that com-
prised in an elaborate educational system in
which the Japanese Government is applying
paternal methods to its administration subject
to the limits of a wise discretion.
Concurrently with a diligent promotion of
emigration, with due regard to nation al designs,
the Executive is adopting many measures in
order to secure the greatest possible use of its
own country, and some of the means to this
end should be peculiarly instructive to certain
members of the straitest sect of the Socialists
in Australia. For instance, whilst the very
essence of the theory of Japanese government
is paternal, if not grand-maternal, a most im-
portant step has been taken during the last
few months in what may be termed the un-
nationalizing of mines. For several centuries
the Imperial Government owned and worked
the mines of Saido and Ikuno, with smelting
works at Osaka, but now these properties have
been sold to private investors. The reasons
stated in justification of their transfer should
be interesting to politicians far beyond Japan.
“ They do not pay under State direction as
they would do under private supervision; the
working of mines by the Crown is incom-
patible with the true functions of govern-
ment, inasmuch as it involves competition with
private employers; and besides such enter-
prises are bound to cause embarrassing fluctua-
tions in the State revenues.” The first point
is very important. During the last decade
Government institutions in Japan have
rapidly increased, and men in the State
employment have little or no Sunday work,
receive higher wageß, and are engaged during


fewer hours than the great body of the
taxpayers who have to pay them with money
earned by toiling all day and every day.
Thus early there are signs of an outcry being
raised against this, and the protest may not
improbably end even in the leasing of the
State railways in Japan, just as the right to
work the State mines has been sold, and just
as certain other State monopolies will be
similarly disposed of. An incidental result of
the private operation of the mines will be a
greatly augmented production of silver and
copper, and consequently increased compe-
tition with Australia in the Eastern metal
markets. Even under the unfavourable con-
ditions hitherto prevailing the copper pro-
duction of Japan has increased ninefold
during the last twenty years.
While alienating mines from the Crown the
Japanese Government is encouraging private
enterprise by State subventions —a plan in
which it led many Governments who affect to
despise the Japanese as outer barbarians. In
the Parliamentary session of 1895 was passed
a scheme based, on credit-foncier principles.
Grants were authorized for the assistance of
(1) Central and (2) Local Industrial Banks-
ordinary Banks have long had to furnish
security to the Government on some such plan
i as the American—but careful precautions have
been adopted so as to prevent the State from
being burdened with bad debts. The Central
institution is to have a capital of $10,000,000
(£1,100,000), with power to issue bonds to the
extent of $100,000,000 (£11,100,000); and the
responsibility for this capital is practically
placed upon private subscribers specially con-
cerned in the enterprises to be undertaken.
The Local Banks are to be established in
various localities, each with a capital of
$200,000 (£22,000). The general object of
both institutions, which are allied, is
to “advance loans at low rates of
interest and for long periods on the
security of immovable property, and for the
development of agriculture and industry. ” The
Local Banks are merely to be subsidised with
Government advances to the extent of
$5,000,000 (£550,000) for five years, so that
those for whom the music is provided will
have to pay the piper. It may be well to add
here that the current rate of interest in Japan
in 1895 upon money applied to ordinary pro-
ductive enterprises ranged from 12 to 15 per
cent., and—with what significance may be con-
sidered justified—that the Japanese Govern-
ment would have neither hesitation nor diffi-
culty in evicting a defaulting State debtor.
The Mikado’s advisers have no mind to encou-
rage State pauperism or to sap individual self-
reliance. There is no really organized system
of State poorhouses in the whole country.
The indigent must depend upon their relatives
and other friends; the lazy must starve if
they will not work, unless, indeed, they happen
to be priests; and the unemployed must
themselves find something to do.
The same idea which is accountable fo
such results has run throughout Japanes
history—the idea that men should be generou
brothers to each other, though all be children
of the Mikado. Fraternal help has been
treated as the complement of paternal govern
ment; thus is recorded the suggestive decree
that if any farmer in any district suffered from
bad crops through no fault of his own hi
neighbours must assist him. If the failur
came through his own indolence he woulc
probably be removed with equal promptitude
and mystery to a region where irrigation is
not well represented. How many Australians
are aware that there was a sort of credi ;
foncier in Japan long before the grounding o: !
Captain Cook’s ship gave name to the
Endeavour River at Cooktown, and whils;
the Japanese still subjected their criminals to
hanging on the cross, mutilation, examination
by torture, and such Solomonic tests of inno
cence as the placing of the hands of accused
persons in boiling water, with the idea that if
the party were not guilty the scalding fluid
would not harm them? At one time the
operation of the land tax was suspended so
as to facilitate the accumulation of capita!
for agricultural enterprises. Then to genuine
cultivators was applied the principle of the
legitimate homestead system adopted centuries
later in America, and lately copied with
burlesque modifications in South Australia.
Hundreds of years ago industrious husband-
men in Japan were granced the indefeasible
possession of land on condition that they
worked it to the best advantage, and half a
thousand years before the proclamation of
the English Commonwealth Japanese pro-
ducers were assisted by the State to provide
irrigation works for the intense cultivation of
their holdings. As constant internecine wars
diverted large numbers of men from farming
pursuits, the food problem pressed; and, as
the path to social distinctions had to be
cleared with the sword, it was deemed desir-
able to issue a new order of precedence in
which the farmers were ranked higher than
almost any other class who earned their
livelihood through their own exertions. To the
same general end were tried at other times
some of those crude experiments in political
economy which were doomed to be adopted as
original expedients hundreds of years after-
wards in South Australia and New Zealand,
where the Japanese are regarded by ignorant
people as only a little higher than the Aus-
tralian blacks or the wretched humanity-aping
folk of Terra del Fuego. Thus in Japan
private sales of land were absolutely pro-


hibited, and privately owned areas were even
confiscated and registered as public property.
Both these illustrations of impracticable politi-
cal economy failed, and land was afterwards
allotted to private ownerson certain conditions,
one of which was that the holding should revert
to the State for redistribution every sixth year.
Then, as the love of individual posses-
sion produced in the shape of permanent
freehold the consequences which it almost
must produce while human nature is human
nature, the productive value of land was
declared to be the basis of taxation—this was
long before the genius of Henry George re-
vealed itself. But one must guard against
prolixity, though splendidly serviceable sug-
gestions may be derived from a careful perusal
of this phase in the history of political economy
in Japan—a phase in which artificial efforts
to break up large estates were baulked by
bogus transfers and the many other devices
which utterly frustrated the project of abolish-
ing private interest in the soil. In Japan at
the present moment even the foreigner has
under existing treaties acquired a tenure of
perpetual lease which differs from a freehold
in no really essential respect.
No. V.—NATIONAL LEDGER AND
NATIONAL OUTLOOK.
Imports and Exports—Rapidly Increas-
ing Trade Alert Manufacturers
Modern Improvements—Great National
Works—Splendid Technical Education
System Fettered Freedom Japanese
Troubles within and Perils without—
What will the Issue be?
The test of the national imports and
exports is imperfect, as the Japanese nation
has hardly begun to reap the firstfruits of its
commercial seed-sowing. The figures which
were supplied to me at Tokyo by Mr.
Hayakawa, the able Secretary of Agriculture
and Commerce, are very interesting, though
the value to Englishmen of the official
bluebooks is somewhat discounted by the fact
that, while English is universally used as the
alternative language to Japanese in the
Government notifications, all the statistical
reports are printed in Japanese, with the
exception of the summary of figures, and
that is in French as well as in the native
language. The statistical department, how-
ever, is very complete, and the annual volumes
of statistics presented to me swell into a
library of something less than half a hundred-
weight. Taking a few figures at random, one
notes that coincidently with an enormous
increase in Japanese manufactures the pro-
duction of coal has fully doubled during the
last eight years. While in 1885, when the
dollar or yen was worth Is. 3d. more than it
is to-day at 2s. 3d., the value of exported
staple products was only $36,147,701, in 1894
it had gone up to $112,234,086. At the earlier
period the imports of foreign products
amounted to $32,680,587, and at the later to
$121,057,788. The imports at the latest date
recorded thus exceeded the exports by
$8,368,266, a disparity—the first of the kind
since 1890 —accounted for by the influx of
machinery and raw material, as well as by
increases in the armament of the nation. Of
the exported articles Australia took only
$1,098,066 worth, and sent in exchange $534,763
worth. The United States was by far Japan’s
best foreign customer, but the value of
the imports to Japanese ports from
London was four times as much as
that recorded from any other foreign country,
except China, whence comes much cotton.
This fact is worthy of special remark, because
Vancouver and San Francisco are a great deal
nearer to Yokohama than England is, and if
there is one particularly popular foreign nation
with the Japanese it is the United States.
One constantly reads in the papers praise of
the liberal treatment of the Washington
Government in remitting the indemnity
imposed by the Great Powers for the Shimi-
noseki affair of 1863, when a semi-inde-
pendent ruler tried to close the Inland Sea
against foreign ships, upon four of which he
fired, and thus secured the distinction of a
bombardment from a united international
fleet. Unlike the States England and all the
other Governments concerned have insisted on
retaining their share of the booty.
In five years since 1891-2 the national revenue
and expenditure of Japan have increased by
nearly $6,000,000, for, of course, the more the
Chancellor of the Exchequer receives the
more he contrives to spend. All the statistical
returns of the country must be viewed dis-
tinctly in relation to the quarter-century’s
history of Japan since the inauguration of the
present period of the “ Meiji,” the era termed
by the Japanese that of “ enlightened govern-
ment.” The beginning of Japan’s industrial
awakening dates not even so far back
as the overthrow of the Shogun’s rule
and the Restoration. Two decades cover
it. Scarcely more than twenty years have
elapsed since the Mikado’s Government
began systematically to send emissaries and
agents all over the civilized world to study
trade processes —clandestinely, after the
fashion of Peter the Great, or in such other
ways as might best promote their object—and,
incidentally, they learnt at the same time the
wisdom of keeping their own information to
themselves. Only by the aid of influential
intervention was I permitted to inspect a
certain woollen factory, which is jealously


guarded from outside observation. While the
Japanese travelling agents were making
general investigations abroad leading manu
facturers were also assisted by the Govern
ment to go to foreign markets and study the
requirements of their specific trades in
relation to the prospects of competition with
the world’s factories. When they returnee
with their suggestions they were encouragec
by State subsidies to improve their works, anc
the Government even opened establishments
on their own account so as to introduce nove
industries. Since then the Crown and the
private manufacturers alike have been im-
porting machinery, until now they have
appliances as modern in their design anc
as effective in their operation as any others.
Whoever may doubt the accuracy of this
statement need only inspect that marvellous
hive of industry, the pantechnicon called the
Government Printing Office at Tokyo, or any
of the paper or woollen mills.
The number of the machines hitherto im-
ported is by no means sufficient to enable the
Japanese to be considerable competitors in
foreign manufactures, but it is significant
that a good deal of the Japanese imports is
represented by English machinery, and some of
these machines have been brought in to assist
the Japanese who have enormous iron
and coal deposits side by side—to fabricate
machinery in competition ultimately with
foreign makers of the same article. First,
however, they have to multiply the supply of
apparatus in order to overtake their own re-
quirements. There is not, for instance,
mechanical plant enough to enable them to ex-
port woollen or many cotton goods, though I saw
sufficient evidence to convince me that Japan
and Shanghai together—particularly if mixed
partnerships be allowed—will soon make a
distinct impression upon the manufacturing
statistics of the East, all in distinct and
serious competition with Great Britain and
America. While I was in Japan firms were
founding new industries in Kobe and the
northern China port on the Yangtsekiang,
and it was reported that a large and long-
established matting factory had just been closed
in Hartford, Connecticut, and its business re-
moved to the district bounded by Osaka and
Kobe, “ on account of the greater cheapness of
material and the lower price of labour.” In
paper the far-Eastern supply cannot be con-
siderable on account of the want of raw
material. At present the Japanese mills
charge twice as much as the Swedish for
their product, and the quality of the
latter is not generally so even or other-
wise so good. Thus far the Japanese have not
been very successful in imitating machinery—a
fact which was admitted by an authority
while I was inspecting a defective oil-engine
made by the advanced students at the Techni-
cological School at Tokyo, and the shortcom-
ings of the people as inventors are known to
all the world. But in the former case they
are improving every day, and in both respect
they are hampered in a very practical manne
by their religious superstitions and their tradi
tions. Though they sent representatives t
foreign countries in a matter of fact and
purely unsentimental way to ascertain whethe
the adoption of Christianity would be con
ducive to their substantial progress as
nation, they are not yet sufficiently advancec
to forget that unreasoning veneration for thei
ancestors which has fettered their progress
It has been deemed almost a sacrilege to
attempt to improve upon the general achieve
ments of their progenitors, and there is re
corded the case of an inventor who was in
earlier years ordered to commit hara-kiri as
punishment for his presumption in proposing
changes!
These conditions, however, are rapidly
being altered. Modern Japan will nol
reproduce such energy-wasting and ridicu-
lously unpractical works as are seen in
the staircases at Tokyo and elsewhere
—ninety steps being provided from the one
starting point to an eminence for the use oi
men, and one hundred of a more gradual
character for the easier ascent of women.
Like Sir Isaac Newton when he cut the large
hole for the passage of the cat and the small
for the ingress of the kitten, the Japanese
stairmakers do not recognise that the one
accommodation would be ample for both pur-
poses. People laugh at them for such mistakes
as this, and deride the native engineer who
made the permanent way for a double track on
one of the railways so as to serve the purpose
of increased traffic as the business grew, but
laid his single line of rails on the centre of the
fairway, and so had to remove the existing
sleepers when he wanted to duplicate the line.
They smile also while they tell you, as an
instance of the hopeless ineptitude and im-
practicality of the Japanese, of the instance
in which a European recommended a Japanese
bathowner to separate the sexes and not allow
them longer to bathe together, as had been their
habit from time unrecorded. “ I have fol-
lowed your advice,” said the Japanese the
next time he met his councillor, and showed
him a rope by which he had divided the bath
into separate spaces. But let the dead past
bury its dead. Against such fiascos and ab-
surdities may fairly be set a great undertaking
like the Lake Biwa Canal in the Kyoto
district—a work which was planned and
executed by Japanese engineers, which was
five years in progress, which includes among
other complications several difficult tunnels,
an inclined railway to compensate for dif-


ferences in level which locks could not over-
come, and an extensive electric plant and irri-
gation reticulations.
It is doubtful whether any other country in
the world possesses a more complete system of
technical instruction than was instituted in
Japan fifteen years ago—too recently to have
greatly affected the manufacturing processes
of the nation. By the offer of bursaries, exhi-
bitions, and other rewards, students are in-
structed in return for trifling fees in almost
every branch of science and of manufacture.
From the Kogyo-Gakko at Tokyo, teachers
are being sent out all over the country to im-
part tuition in branch schools; youths are
specially instructed, so that they may obtain
certificates of competency as factory foremen;
the State subsidises girls’ academies which
teach the pupils embroidering and similar
work; and one of the exclusively Government
branch institutions is devoted to “giving
training to the children of workers in wood
and metal, so as to make them first-class
craftsmen.” The chief of these establishments
—I have omitted reference to the University,
the Agricultural Colleges, the experimental
farms, and the numerous schools for theo-
retical instruction —is presided over by a
Director, with a staff of eleven Professors,
twelve assistant professors, and fourteen
assistants; and the curriculum embraces every
technical process, and compulsorily provides
one year or two years of practical work in a
factory to complete the course. Even in the
gaols the prisoners are instructed in mechanical
arts. In the new prison at Tokyo to which I
have previously referred apparently a
perfectly conducted establishment designed on
modern patterns—l saw 2,270 inmates, from
mere lads to old men, engaged in every
variety of manual and skilled craftsmanship,
doing everything, in fact, from breaking road
metal to making cloisonne, damascene,
satsuma, and other beautiful ware under the
direction of experts specially engaged by the
Government; and these products are bought
by merchants and enter into competition with
the outturn from free-labour shops.
In estimating the possible product of
Japanese labour it is important to remember
that hitherto manual work has been almost
the only thing wasted in the Land of the
Rising Sun. Merely in temple - building
an enormous amount has been dissipated
in consequence of the rule—now gradually
being ignored—that Shinto temples must be
destroyed and rebuilt every twentieth year.
With all the vigour of the nation directed to
manufacturing, and perfected to its highest
possible development by exact knowledge, the
most remarkable results must be realized, “ all
other things being equal.” At present certain
lines of goods may be imported from Germany
to Australia more cheaply than they may be
obtained in Osaka, but that is because the
advantage of low-priced Japanese labour has
been neutralized by imperfect mechanical ap-
paratus. Assuming that the national politics
present no surprises, internal or external, this
is a mere fleeting phase in the industrial his-
tory ot the nation; but serious complexities
enter just here into the further consideration
of the question.
Apart from the purely industrial points
which I have attempted to explain, the whole
problem of Japan’s competition with the old
centres of manufacture must be studied in the
light of the internal and external state of the
country. In the case of Australia the freight
question introduces a new complexity, as I
have tried to show. Politically regarded,
Japan is somewhat in the position of a man
who gains championship honours, the main-
taining of which is a perpetual worry. Unless
the best political observers be utterly wrong
the country is bound to have trouble with
Russia over Corean affairs, and this is her
principal external danger. In the present
self-sufficient and arrogant mood of the
Japanese soldiery there can be no safe con-
jecture whether the shrewder and sager in-
fluence in the dominant classes at Tokyo will
be able to keep the prevailing jingoism within
reasonable bounds. It is no secret that
even the China war was forced upon the
Government against its will, and partly
as a diversion from internal dangers.
There are now about one-third of a million
men under arms in both branches of the
defence force. If this number be maintained
its very existence will be a menace to the con-
tinuance of peace. The men will demand an
opportunity of winning more glory by war-
fare, especially under the stimulus of the irri-
tating and encroaching tactics of the Court of
St. Petersburg. What chance the Japanese
would have in warfare with a civilized nation
is a question which opens up interesting and
grave issues. In fighting the Chinese they
fought virtually nobody. Their opponents
had absolutely no heart in the conflict, no
weapons to carry it on, and neither spirit nor
food to sustain them. The principal achieve-
ment of the Japanese was to chase people who
ran away, but when one sees the funny little
Japanese soldiers trying to keep on their
comical horses at Nagoya and Tokyo one cannot
help wondering what would be their fate if
they fought against men of western stamina
aided by western science and prestige. Absit
omen. I saw an English boy of six years old
threatening with clenched fists half a dozen
older Japanese children, who ran from him
with undisguised alarm.
If the constant maintenance of a large army
be imposed on the J apanese a risk of serious


internal protest will have to be incurred, and,
looking at the matter from still another point
of view, if the troops be disbanded and the
vessels of war placed out of commission a large
number of men will have to be provided with
work in industrial pursuits at the very time
when the introduction of labour-saving machi-
nery is reducing the relative value of manual
exertion. In order that the difficulty which con-
fronts the administration may be still more
fully appreciated it is necessary to recall the
fact that men who have experienced the
delights of war do not willingly go back to the
drudgery of the shop or the factory, or to the
tasks of the rickshaw man or coolie. Besides,
onlv twenty-six years have passed since
feudalism was abolished in Japan, and the
influence of the old Samarai or military class
and the fealty of their retainers among the
common people have not died out in one gene-
ration. For centuries, practically until 1868,
the Emperor was only the nominal head of the
nation; the Shogun was its real master, and
its history was one of almost incessant bloody
conflict. In every direction are still to be
seen bullet-riddled castles and gates and walls
standing as landmarks of the turbulent past,
and as indications of a possibly disturbed
future. There is scarcely a river in Japan
which has not run red with the blood of
Japanese slain by their brothers in civil
war, and sagacious observers suggest
that what has been may be again.
At present loyalty to the Emperor is declared
to permeate the nation, but it is significant
that the most extensive precautions are
adopted to prevent any display of the opposite
sentiment, and that attempts have been made
against the lives of many of the Mikado’s
advisers who have been prominent in carry-
ing into effect the enlightened modern policy
which he sanctions in spite of the distractions
naturally besetting a man who conforms to
the ancient custom of keeping a number of
concubines as well as his Empress wife.
The whole country is constantly under the
observation of police spies, to the number
of about 30,000, who keep under surveillance
every visitor to the various towns and vil-
lages, and who watch the movements of all
the prominent residents suspected of radical
proclivities. Freedom of speech is not per-
mitted. One of the duties of the police is to
attend public meetings and check speakers
whenever they utter opinions even in the re-
motest degree savouring of censure upon
the dynasty if not upon the Govern-
ment. Indeed, in some cases the autho-
rities render it impossible for dis-
affected people to hire a meeting room.
The native Press is virtually prohibited from
discussing politics. The censorship main-
tained by the Government is as severe as that
enforced in Turkey. Suppression of the jour-
nalists’ plant, seizure of papers, and imprison-
ment of their apparent proprietors are common
events of which several instances were sup-
plied during my stay in the country. The
word “apparent” proprietors has been used
because it is the custom of most journals, for
prudential reasons, to pay a nominally re-
sponsible man simply and solely to go to gaol
when his paper outrages the censor’s idea of
cautious propriety. The conviction of these
official gentlemen, like that of certain Aus-
tralian Prime Ministers, is that the Press is a
noble institution and a palladium of liberty
only so long as it bespatters the ruling dynasty
with such fulsome adulation as most of the
native Japanese editors deem it expedient to
address to the Mikado. Under existing trea-
ties the English newspapers published in
Japan are free from censorship, but if the new
treaty should be brought into operation this
immunity will not continue; and this may be a
fact of ominous import to foreign journalists
in a nation which has the form without under-
standing the true spirit of modern constitu-
tionalism.
Meanwhile, however, an important question,
industrially as well as otherwise, is whether
the social seethe and simmer of Japanese
opinion and feeling will be succeeded by quiet
or by a dangerous ebullition. Some people
declare that the country is already well-nigh
ripe for revolution, but the wish may be the
father to the thought—it would be presump-
tuous for me to judge. In any case, compro-
mise may do much. This policy was tried
when good positions were found for some of
those who had been most prominent in fight-
ing against the restoration of the Emperor,
and it is still being pursued. The Marquis
Ito’s Government was Conservative, yet just
before it was reconstructed without its
Premier it took into its ranks Count Itagaki,
who had long been regarded as the chief hope
of the Radicals, and at the same time treated
with special consideration certain men like-
minded with the Count. And in the
case of Itagaki the spell soon worked its
effect. There is a lot of political human
nature in this undoubtedly able statesman.
In 1882 he was the chief figure at a great
Liberal gathering at which national reforms
were earnestly discussed. He was so pro-
nounced in his views as to be the victim of an
attempt at assassination. He was not seriously
injured, but with characteristic diplomacy he
got off an effective set of “ last words.”
“Itagaki,” he said, “may perish, but
liberty never will.”
Yet this was the patriot who suppressed a
liberally outspoken newspaper within a few
days of his advent as a Conservative Minister.
If men with political views like Itagaki should


eaven the Government —well. If not —ill!
Even an Administration backed by the sacred
influence of the heaven - descended
Mikado cannot continue for ever vetoing
independently progressive movements among
the people—no. not though it may as a
general rule be]'the highest service ot states-
manship to rule the Japanese by fear, and to
arrange that their national freedom shall
broaden slowly down from precedent to
precedent. Or, maybe, Count Okuma, the
Liberal statesman, one of whose legs was
blown off by an assassin’s bomb, more rightly
apprehended the feelings of the Japanese
people when he taunted them, as he did
while I was at Kobe, with allowing the
foreign settlements at the treaty ports to
surpass them in energy and in progress. Or,
perhaps, on the contrary, the Count, who
virtually dominates the new Cabinet, may
lose his head this time for holding up
as an object of emulation the distrusted
and feared foreigner. The whole problem of
Japan’s future is as perplexing and com-
plicated as it is interesting and important.
I give it up. Let the reader solve it in his
own way.
W. E. Thomas * Co., Printers, Adelaide




