

CHILDREN OF THE SUNLIGHT
STORES OF AUSTRALIAN CIRCUS LIFE
by J.D. FITZGERALD M.L.C.


K.S.W. BC-OESTALL CO. LTD., 476 George Street, Sydney.
SYDNEY ■ Descriptive & Illustrative
Including Country Scenes
In New South Wales.
100 Exquisite Photographs of the Queen City of the
South and of Beauty Spots in the Mother State of the
Commonwealth."
An Ideal Volume to send to friends abroad
and in other States.
Price 65.; Post free 6s. 6d.
PANORAMIC SYDNEY.
The Finest Collection -of Sydney Panoramas ever
published.
Twenty-three of the best view's of City and Environs
(21i n. x 6in.), printed on superior art paper.
Price 25.; Post free 2s. 2d.
A GUIDE TO SYDNEY.
A Comprehensive Guide for the Visitor and a handy
Volume of reference no citizen should be without.
Where to go. How to get there. Full particulars, illus-
trations, maps, etc.
Price Is. 6dL all Bookstalls; Post free Is. Bd.
PUBLISHED BV
N.S.‘w. BOOKSTALL CO. LTD., 476 George Street, Sydney.


CHILDREN OF THE SUNLIGHT


The girl was gazing intently at Larrabee. She no longer chewed
gum—her face was set and her eyes wide open.


Children of the Sunlight
STORIES OF AUSTRALIAN CIRCUS LIFE
By J.D. FITZGERALD
ILLUSTRATIONS by PERCY LINDSAY
All Rights Reserved,
N.S.VV. BOOKSTALL CO. LTD
SYDNEY.
1923.


To the Memory of
Dan and Tom Fitzgerald.
Wholly set up and printed in Australis by John Sands Limited, Sydney


CONTENTS.
Page
The Lion and the Mouse 7
[Join ’ a Perish 35
The Long 'Un 48
The Old Juggler 58
To His Long Home 74
Organisation 35
“Bill Us Big’’ 96
The Dock . . .. ‘ 119
Bniuglebong’s Big Band 123
“Bagoos!” 132
The Typhoon 165
Copyrighted, 1923, by the New South Wales Bookstall Co,,
478 George Street, Sydney, Australia.


ILLUSTRATIONS.
Page
The girl was gazing intently at Larrabee. She no
longer chewed gum —her face was set and her
eyes wide open Frontispiece
‘■You oiiglitta feel ashamed of yourself, Mrs. h'erris,”
she said, volubly, “bringing strange men into my
room ’ ’ of
All hands helped to get the horses out of the mud . . 64
“Dashed if he ain't lulled us like Barnum's” .. .. 103
He saw Minnie at the entrance-door suddenly draw her
whip and lash the Dook across the face 116
The clowns, armed with bladders on sticks, drummed
them thoroughly 130


THE LION AND THE MOUSE.
I.
IN this story Bill Larrabee appears in his laughable
role of the mouse. The lion of the occasion was the
proprietor of a certain huge American circus which
was transported to Australia at great expense, in the
year 18—.
Young Larrabee was travelling with a small bush
snap in the south-west of Queensland, when he read
the American circus “ad.” in the local “rag.”
Boss Bendolo’s small bush snap was in rest camp
for a few weeks near the banks of a partially dry river.
At night, around the camp fire, the advent of the Ameri-
can show was discussed in a mixed atmosphere scented
with cigarette and myall log smoke.
“It must be a big affair, to put in ads. all over the
country, in towns where they’ll never go,” said Tommy
Hobart. “Read it out, Bill!”
Young Larrabee read parts here and there, adver-
tising announcements containing picturesque and lurid
passages such as; “The Animal Giants of the Arena
Demonstrating their Remarkable Cleverness in Many
Wonderful Ways.” “Three Royal Riding Acts by Four
Famous Queens of the Arena.” "A Pot Pourri of Artis-
tic, Acrobatic, Gymnastic, and other Remarkable Dis-
plays, Equilibristic Acrobatism Delightfully Displayed
by the Swift, Supple. and Sinuous Somersault
Throwers.”
“Yez. I know th’ sorta stuff,” interjected Chilleno
Gonzalves, a.swarthy young Mexican tumbler, with
well-oiled hair, parted in the centre. “They keens special
blokes wot writes them programmes, big-salarv men.
1 wuz wid that show once.”


The others turned to him with admiration.
“You wuz!"
“Yez. Eet wuz in Mexico, afore 1 cum over heeyer.”
“Well,” said Larrabee, putting the paper aside, “Td
like tuh seeya big sheeow."
“Why don’t yuh gow deeown, Bill?” said Clara Chini-
zelli, lighting a fresh cigarette, and changing the baby
to the other knee.
“Why don’t I go deeown!” he retorted with scorn.
“How cun I git away? How’d the circus git on?”
“Oh, yuh fancy yerself,” interjected Boss Bendolo.
“Well, we’ll be camped ’ere three weeks, Bill. I’d like
yuh ter go down to Sydney. There’s a pole waggon
I want ter buy. Yuh cud look it over and bring it back.
Yuh cun look in at Walder’s too, about a new tent he’s
offerun.”
So it was arranged that young Larrabee sholud com-
bine business with pleasure, and the boss paid exes.
11.
THE announcements of the big American circus fairly
took Australia’s breath awa}’. Its advance printing,
and daily paper advertising, gave startling statistics of
the numbers of “Denizens of the Jungle,” which were
“to be seen in cages on the inside”; of the vast quanti-
ties of horses “superbly caparisoned,” of the riders,
jugglers, etc., all paid “the highest salaries in the
world,”
Soon the hoarding walls of Sydney were covered with
brilliant color printing. Larrabee, on arrival from
Queensland, stood fascinated before immense special
hoardings erected to fit the gigantic 12 and 16 sheet,
and even 20 sheet picture bills. Viewing the pictures
of handsome moustachioed male performers, with bright
rosy cheeks, and mops of curly hair, as thev appeared
;n the pictures, in immaculate tights and trunks, with
lace edges, Larrabee thought with a wry smile of his own


patched-up tights, and much-mended trunks. These
patchings, however, represented to him much kindliness
and goodwill in the circus women, always ready to come
to his rescue in return for his manly help and protection
in their journeyings on long bush tracks in hot and cold
seasons away outback. He resolved to paralyse his
colleagues and the backblocks public with the gorgeous
outfit he would take back with him; he would see, too,
if the barbers of Sydney could not copy the fashion
cut of the American pictures on his hair.
His showman’s instinct gloated over the bills, the
color, the display, the attractive wording, and he care-
fully copied to take back with him some of the most
striking heads:
“A Mighty Moving Panorama of the Opulent Splen-
dours of Old Earth’s Rarest Glories.”
"Three miles of Gorgeous Glittering Parade Glories!”
There was no trace of self-depreciation or undue mo-
desty in the American circus announcements. Every
one of the acts was described on the bills as either “in-
comparable,” “marvellous.” "perilous,” “sensational,”
"unique,” or “bewildering.” Every acrobat “shook dice
with death!” and there were realistic pictures of the
Fiend in red tights with a dice box, performing the
gambling operation referred to in the letterpress.
The salaries, which were featured on the bills, ap-
peared to Larrabee to constitute wealth beyond the
dreams of avarice. Could such salaries be! He longed,
like a country school-boy, for the opening night. He
specially wanted to see “Leon Spartelli, the thousand-
dollar-a-week jockey rider,” for young Bill was a jockey
rider of the first rank, though his secret was only known
then to bush back-block audiences.
111.
BILL LARRABEE strolled into Walder’s, the tent-
maker’s, as soon as he had visited a tailor and mercer,
and had made himself in some degree worthy of being


in the same profession, and the same line of business
as the 1000-doJlar “Leon Spartelli.” He was amazed
at the unexpected warmth of his reception.
“Why, Bill,” said the tentmaker, shaking hands cor-
dially, “you’re just the very man I want to see.”
“Well, here I am,” said Bill, pleased, “look at me.”
“You can be very useful just now, and can make a
good bit of money,” continued Walder. “You’ve just
dropped from the skies at the right time.”
“Well, tell us wot it is!”
“It’s this. You’ve heard of this big American show?”
“Heard of it? W’y, ’oo ’asn’t?”
“Well, Colonel Gaylander, the advance agent, is
here. He brought the tenting and a boss tentman to
put it up, with him from the States. The boss tentman
got on a scoot, and shot a man in a row. . The magis-
trate sent him up for three months’ without the option.
The Colonel’s been trying to get him loosed ever since—
just for one week—to put up the tent. There’s no one
here understands it. It’s a new three-centre-pole Ameri-
can-made tent, the big-top 175 feet, with four 50 foot
centre pieces. I’ve been making some canvas tenting
for the Colonel—small stuff—dressing-rooms, stables,
feed marquees, and dining tents. They’re going to feed
their own workmen. It’s quite a throw-in for me.”
“Well, what’s all this gotta do with me?”
“Don’t you see, the Colonel’s in an awful hole. He's
got to have the tent up and ready in Moore Park when
the ship comes in. She’s due in a week. He’s tearing
his hair, and his language—! He can’t get a boss tent-
man to take it on. There’s no man here that under-
stands a big tent. They’re all gallied. Won’t you have
a shot?”
If Bill Larrabee had been asked to put up a twenty-
storey building, or launch an ocean liner, he coirid not
have been more dazzled.
“Me!” he whispered. “Well, I’m d ! But hold
on,” he added rapidly. “I’ll have a try.”
The tentmaker laughed. He knew young Bill would


“have a try." In the bush shows, young Bill had a
reputation for being ready to “have a try” at anything—
and for succeeding in most.
IV.
COLONEL GAYLANDHR was a short, thick-set
American of about 50, with a “goatee” beard and mous-
tache, wearing a high silk hat, a striped grey sac suit,
and well-polished boots.
“Very pleased to meet you, Mr. Larrabee,” he saio
cordially. “So you think you’ll have a try at the tent?
We’ll start right now for Moore Park.”
“Have yuh got the tents there?” enquired Bill,
“Yes, all there, everything, tents, poles, guys, flags,
gear, seating, everything.”
“Well, hold on,” said Young Bill. “1 never laid out
anythun’ in me life bigger’un a 50 foot top in a bush
circus. Tell me thuh size and I’ll work out the lay-out.”
The information was soon given. The Colonel rolled
it out in a broad American dialect, specially scraping
the R sounds. The tent measured 375 feet long and
175 feet wide. Bill’s eyes began to start out of his head.
There were five large king poles, three sets of quarter
poles, and one set of side poles. A very leviathan!
Larrabee certainly thought he was in fairyland.
After much cogitation and questioning, he began to
realise that, after all, there seemed to be only a differ-
ence in size and not in principle between putting up a
bush tent and this whopper. He ventured diffidently
to say so.
The Colonel's eyes glittered with appreciation.
“Right you are, boy,” he said. “You’ll do. I’v&bin in
a little circus meself. It’s the same thing. It’s the size
that scares you at first. There’s more gear, but the
problem’s the same.”
“Where are yer men?” asked Bill.
“All out on the ground, smoking and looking hard
at the tent, at half a dollar an hour. The tents are


rolled up on the ground, just as they came out of the
ship.”
V.
THE tent pieces had been tumbled out of the vans on
to the ground, without any regard to the component
parts. The men were there, forty of them, sailor-looking
chaps, some smoking and lolling about on the heaps
of tents, some asleep in the sun. The van men and
horses still stood by—also on overtime.
The men were soon aroused and set to work.
“We’re going to put this tent up, men. This young
man’s boss here,” announced the Colonel. "What he
says goes. So don’t let there be any misunderstanding
or kick afterwards.”
Bill got out the large piece of paper which he had
borrowed at Walder’s, and began to rough out a plan,
with the aid of a pocket rule. It was a queer-looking
sketch when he had finished, but he seemed to be satis-
fied. He divided the men into six gangs, and instructed
them to lay out the sections of the tent flat on the
ground, each gang to lace up its section, and tie off.
While this was going forward he measured out the
dimensions of the big tent top on the ground, with a
reel tape, three men following him-with marking pegs,
driving in the stakes where directed. Some hours were
spent in this preliminary work, as Larrabee moved with
careful deliberation, and every step was well con-
sidered.
“Hi, there!” shouted Bill, when this was finished.
"All hands to place the king poles.”
Everyone knocked off their work, and ran to Bill.
The giant poles were laid in position, the necessary
gear ascertained and affixed, the guy ropes attached,
and then the horses, assisted by all hands, hauled them
—amid much swearing—to the perpendicular, and
guyed off; the ropes running shrieking through the
blocks to their places.


“We do this with elephants in God’s country,” ex-
plained the Colonel, who had, with keen appreciation,
watched Bill at work.
“Oh, well, we’ll train some kangaroos fur our sheeow,”
said Bill drily.
By this time a large and curious Australian crowd had
gathered. It seemed as if the whole juvenile population
of Sydney had been drawn together by some invisible
Pied Piper to impede the work.
The tent sections were laid out and laced, each section
having its complement of men. Side poles and quar-
ter poles were then set in place. Bill went from group
to group, with the Colonel, giving his instructions.
“Each of you groups must be ready when 1 give the
whistle and then up she goes. If any ov yuz is behind
theh rest we’ll ’ave to ’ave it all over again. Now,
are yuh ready?”
“Aye, aye, boss.”
Larrabee put his fingers in his mouth and gave a
long whistle. Slowly at first, but with quickening pace,
the master tent arose, each gang fastening off and hang-
ing their side, walls, so that within half an hour the
monster of canvas ballooned in the gentle breeze.
“There yuh are, Colonel, said young Bill trium-
phantly.
“Sir,” said the Colonel, “I am proud to have met
you. I take off my hat to you. What salary do you
get now, may I ask? Because there’s a job as boss tent-
man open any time you like to take it. Two thousand
dollars a year and all board and travelling exes paid.
What do you say?”
“Well,” said Larrabee modestly, "I’ve got a job
already. I’m a jockey rider, tumbler, trapeze, and a
bit of clowning thrown in, with Bendolo’s Great London
Circus, now in rest camp at Gilgantreebine. 1 must get
back soon. I’m onee on holidays.”
“Well, think it over,” said the Colonel.


VI.
THE liner from San Francisco hove in sight of the
great escarpments of Sydney Heads, entered, and
steamed up the Harbour on a perfect August day. The
smoke of the big city rose lazily as the big liner passed
cape after cape and bay after bay of the glorious inlet.
As they entered the Heads a majestic ,i,ion in the
menagerie cages in the orlop deck gave a resounding
challenge to the new land, and in a moment the denizens
of the other cages joined him. Elephants trumpeted
and saluted; a chorus of screams, yaps, yelps and cries
arose from the "108 huge cages, tanks, dens and lairs.”
Bill Larrabee always liked that odd eight on the
bills. Why that odd eight would have made the for-
tune of a bush show.
Always above this strange diapason rose from time
to time the thrilling roar of the King of Beasts, starting
the echoes in the forest-fringed bays of the Harbour.
Colonel Gaylander invited Bill to accompany him on
the launch which met the liner at the Heads. They
went on board, and Larrabee was introduced to the
proprietor of this mammoth enterprise. Bill used to
explain afterwards around camp fires Outback that he
got the “shock of his life” at the sight of James Hedley
—"Old man Hedley”—as he was affectionately called.
He expected the boss to be of a size commensurate with
his possessions.
“ ’Ee wuz a little, wizened chap, five foot nuthin’, with
a bald head, a big nose and a scrubby beard, very quiet
like, and alwuz thinkun’ with ’is head on one side. ’E
had a sac coat on and both pockets full of sovereigns,
which 'e kept jinglun' w’enever ’e wuz thinkun' hard.
He spoke to ’imself as e wuz thinkun’. 'E thought no
one ’eared him.”
It did seem strange to Bill at that dizzy moment in his
circus experience that the boss of a 375 foot top, with
five king poJes, and three sets of quarter poles, should
only be five foot nuthun’ himself.


The proprietor was told of the trouble about the tent,
and when he learned of Larrabee’s success in erecting
it on time, he looked him quietly over, but said nothing
on that.
“There’s more trouble, Colonel,” he explained.
“Shucks! I hope we get it over as quick as our young
friend did yours. At the last minute the working men
struck and wouldn’t leave San Francisco, and we had to
get a scratch crowd. We didn’t know' then that most
of this new mob were just back frum a filabustering ex-
pedition to Cuba. We know now. They’ve bin drink-
ing all the way over. The Captain stopped their
grog at Auckland, so as to sober ’um up for the end of
the voyage. Shucks! There’s twenty of ’um in irons
now. 1 don’t know how the people here’ll stand ’um.
We may have to send ’um back to the States.”
“Well, young man,” pursued the diminutive pro-
prietor of the mammoth organisation, looking Larrabee
over, with his head on one side, "I suppose we kin get
plenty working men and hustlers here?”
“Oh, plenty,” replied B,ill. “There wuz a willun’
crowd w'orkun’ on that tent.”
“Well, now,” continued the boss, “you seem to be
quite an observant young man. What are you?”
Bill told him his station in life.
“Bush circus, eh!” muttered the old man audibly.
“Resourceful—can deliver the goods. Look here,” he
said aloud, “do you think 1 could get any ring horses
in this country? We’ve had bad luck, Colonel, glanders
broke out on board, and most of the ring and trick
horses died. The rest’ll have to go into quarantine. So
our horse acts are done unless we kin get some here.
Shucks! What do you say, young man?”
Larrabee rapidly ran over in his mind the stocks
available.
"Let’s see! Bendolo’s got four good ring ’orses, fit
fur Olympians and principal acts. There’s Curio fur
me own Jockey act. and ten general ring ’orses fur


entrees. Yuh won’t git better ’orses in the world, in the
pink ov condition.”
“Where are they?”
“In Queensland, but we kin ’ave them ’ere fur yur
openun’. Wot’s it worth to you?”
Bill saw a glorious chance of a trip with the big show,
and of invaluable experience in his professional life.
The old man put his head on one side, and thought
aloud, jingling his pockets meanwhile. “I suppose,” he
soliloquised audibly, “they’ve got us by the wool and
kin ask wot they like. But I’ll make a fair offer.
(Aloud) What’s |SOO a week in their money, Colonel?”
"A hundred pounds.”
“Would that do you for the hire of your stock?”
Larrabee kept his countenance in the presence of
this astounding proposal. A hundred pounds a week!
Four hundred a month! He was calculating further,
but dared not. He could not bring his imagination
beyond a month.
This was a gold mine to old Bendolo. That reluc-
tant gentleman would be able to stump up back salaries.
Bill almost felt that he was jingling back-pay sovereigns
in his pocket, but woke up and realised that it was
Old Man Hedley’s money that was jingling.
“How long do yuh want them fur?”
"Oh, say six months. We’ll begin to train our own.
but we kin keep yours on till ours are ready.”
“We’ll wire straight away, and I’ll guarantee they’ll
be ’ere in three days.”
So that, too, was settled for the lion by the mouse.
VII.
We must not pause to relate the doings of the
American “filibusters from Cuba” on landing. How
the Sydney water police handled the difficult situation
created is now legendary. Led by Senior Sergeant Pring
Little, himself an American, they showed that Cuban


revolver bluff goes down before blue-coated authority,
armed with staff batons and courageous hearts.
The horses arrived from Queensland in charge of
Bendolo himself, two days before the opening. Practice
was begun at once.
It was soon apparent that Leon Spartelli, the 1000-
dollar star, did not take kindly to Larrabee’s jockey
horse, Curio. That treasure was a lean, swift, fiery,
narrow-backed ring paragon. Leon had been accus-
tomed to his own lately deceased horse, the victim of
glanders, slow-moving, broad-backed; with pltenty of
room on the broad, flat loins to stand and get an easy
balance and do things. Curio’s appearance had not been
Improved by three days on the roads, and two in a
horse-box on the railways.
The first Larrabee knew of trouble was when the
Old Man and the Colonel sent for him as he was watch-
ing and noting the American trapeze men, as they swung
in rooe slings in the tent dome, adjusting their gear. He
was learning every minute.
‘‘The Colonel tells me you’re a jockev rider,”
‘‘Oh ves, I do a bit in that line,” replied Bill modestly.
"Well, I want a jockey rider,” continued the boss.
"I thought you had one. What’s the matter with that
thousand-dollar bloke?”
“Oh, he’s resigned. He’s going back by the same boat
we kum in.” And then, sotto voce, the boss continued
abstractedly.
‘‘Shucks! He don’t like this young man’s horse. It’s
not good enough fur him.”
Bill Larrabee stood petrified at this blasphemy! Not
like Curio! Not good enough! His indignation
swelled as he thought of the crowds which surged around
Curio at the Dubbo Agricultural Show, when he won
the high jump with 6ft. 4in.. and carrying 12 stone. Not
good enough! Why—-
"He’s the best ring horse in Australia,” he burst out.
"He’s good enough for any rider in the world.”


“Oh, well, I didn’t think you heard me say what 1
did.”
Then, in a perfectly audible sotto voce:
“We must humour this young man. We want him.
We can’t do without him. We must have him.”
Then aloud he said, “Well, young man, you’ve helped
us tremenjus since we’ve bin in this country. Shucks! 1
like you. Suppose you show that thousand dollar jockey
that the horse is all right. Leon’s over there now, in the
tent, on the seats. He’ll be looking on. I suppose you
don’t mind that, do you?”
Sotto voce to the Colonel; “I think that’ll make the
young man fight, eh!”
Larrabee for a moment felt diffident. Here was a test
—virtually a duel'—in the presence of an alien audience,
friends and probably sympathisers of Leon Spartelli.
He paused. Then he thought, with rising anger of the
insult to Curio; and he there and then determined to
show' Mr. Leon a point. He would uphold the honour
of the battlers of the Australian circus road.
The Old Man, sotto voce to the Colonel, said; “He's
funking it, Colonel.”
“I’m not funking it,” said Bill indignantly, “I’m
game.”
“Oh, I didn’t think you’d hear my remark,” said
the Old Man, jingling his coins.
“No, I’m not funking. But I’ve got nuthun’ wdth me.
1 didn’t bring me tights.”
- “Oh, that’s all right,” said the resourceful old man.
“Eugene!” he called to a young man passing by,
"You’re about this young man’s size and build. Lend
him some practice tights and pumps.”
“Sure!” replied Eugene, moving off to the dressing
rooms.
VIII.
IN ten minutes Bill Larrabee was back at the ring-
side in a dressing gown. He found Curio ready br'dled
and saddled. Looking round he saw that the American


performers had gathered together, and were discussing
the matter. He learned afterwards that Old Man
Hedley had gone round telling everybody of the event.
The first to whom he communicated the news that the
bush boy was going to show that the horse, Curio, was
fit for the Jockey act was Leon Spartelli. He merely
shrugged his shoulders, and lit a fresh cigarette, and
went on conversing with the ladies. The band had been
rehearsing but had stopped and joined in the general
interest in the event.
Just as Bill was about to throw off his gown and
begin, a young girl, she could hardly have been tnore
than nineteen, strolled towards the ring, chewing gum as
she walked.
Her carriage was erect, and strikingly graceful. She
had a loose cloak thrown over her shoulders, but the
statuesque bust, small waist and narrow hips were re-
vealed as she stood and threw back the doak.
She appeared to be a personage in the circus, as
several groups strolled up and welcomed her, explaining
the situation. Among them was Leon Spartelli. On
what they told her, she stopped chewing and turned
her lustrous glance upon young Larrabee. Their eyes
met and fastened for ten seconds.
The result of this glance was a new spirit in the
boy, a dare-devil, show-off spirit, which in an instant
chased away all fears, all shyness. Yes, he would show
them what a bush boy could do. The country mouse
had helped the lion. Well, there is a bit of the lion in
every mouse.
The brilliant Australian sunshine flooded the white
fleecy dome of the tent, and threw broad shafts of light
across the ring between the lacing of the tent sections.
Glancing round slowly, he took in everything, as
men’s minds do on such occasions. He saw' every face,
noted every expression—and remembered all his life. He
saw Bendolo and the three grooms who had brought
down the horses, anxious-looking and tense, Thgir eyes
seeiped to stare like goblins’. There was the Old Man


and the Colonel near to Leon, both, it seemed, witli
sarcastic, goading smiles—but the sarcasm was not for
him—the performers in groups, their faces impressed
with surprise, some apparent!}' amused; and last there
was the giti, her wonderful eyes fixed intently upon
him, though she still chewed gum intermittently.
That was the last face that he saw. It braced him.
Thereafter his mind was buckled to his task. Me took
his whip in his teeth, and threw off the dressing gown.
IX.
IT was not alone the nature of voting Larrabee’s life
that had developed in him the physical beauty revealed
as he stood at pose, before entering the ring. His mode
of life had certainly brought out his even - muscle—his
riding, juggling, trapeze work, had given him an all-
round development, which had not exaggerated one
set of muscles at the expense of others. But he was also
“third generation ine th business,” and his 'Staturesque
perfection was inherited. He was sober and temperate.
He had not the common vices.
A sculptor might have sketched him thus for a statue
of “Youth Triumphant.” His wavy hair, cut short by
the Sydney barber, showed the curls struggling to as-
sert themselves over his ears and broad forehead. As
he did the conventional pirouette pose and bow, a smile
lit his black eyes and opened the firm mouth to let the
light in on the beautiful firm rows of teeth, which years
of damper and tough meat in the backblocks had not
been able to impair.
Old Man Medley walked close to the girl with the
chewing gum, and said to her: “1 say, Coralie, what do
you think of the bush boy?”
Then, continuing in an audible undertone soliloquy,
he said: “What a pair of Olympians, this youngster
and Coralie!”


The girl was gazing intently at Larrabee. She no
longer chewed gum. Her face was set and her eves wide
open.
“He’s sure a lovely boy in tights,’’ she said dreamily.
“I didn’t think much of him in his clothes.’’
By this time Larrabee had given his instructions to
the ring attendants. Curio was placed in the ring en-
trance awaiting him as he retreated to the entrance
curtain.
“Hold on,” called the Old Man. “Band, give him
some music. The horse'll run better. Play Leon’s
music.”
At this Leon started up hastily, but sat down again
and lit a cigarette. The Old Man smiled grimly.
Larrabee retired behind the entrance curtain. The
hand struck up, and throwing aside the curtain, he ran
at full speed to the ring kerb, and made a sensational
entry by a,clear leap over Curio’s saddle. With a hur-
ried bow, he was up on the galloping horse. The usual
tricks of the jockey rider followed, but with what a dif-
ference in speed! Bill ran his act like what the Ameri-
cans present described as "greased lightning.”
There were back somersaults, and the difficult front
somersaults on Curio’s narrow loins; tricks on the
horse’s neck and crupper; extraordinary balances “not
seen before on earth,” as one American authority said.
With a pause here and there to give Curio a moment’s
rest, and himself a renewal of breath, he went from
trick to trick. He improvised tricks. There were the
final running leaps from the arena up on the horse’s
back, first facing front then facing backwards, a jump
from behind while in pursuit, and after a long rest he
ended with a straight jump over the horse while it
galloped at full speed. In the ring, as the horse was
taken out, he ended his act with a row of flip-flaps,
rounded off by an amazing back and front somersault
“in a swing.”


X.
THE Americans were good sports. They applauded and
crowded round the young Australian, offering con-
gratulations.
“Got Jimmy Robinson beat to a frazzle!’’ “Takes the
shine out of Leon, eh!” were the exclamations from the
crowd of experienced showmen, who had been in every
large city in Europe and America, and had seen the best
in the fine.
The young girl called Coralie walked up and held out
her hand to Bill.
“Bagoos! Epatant!” she explained, being the strongest
expressions of praise Java and France can provide.
“The boss says we’re to ride Olympians. Can you
do it?”
Bill was still breathing hard. His flushed face went
rosier as he said; “I’ve done Olympians in thuh small
bush sheeows. 1 don’t know whether I cud do it with
a big sheeow like this, or with ymu. But I’ll have a shot
if you’ll be my partner.”
“Of course I will. We’ll rehearse this afternoon, if
you like.”
She was quite at ease, and chewjng gum again.
Leon Spartelji, smiling in a wry fashion, approached
to offer congratulations. He offered Bill! a cigarette out
of a gold case.
“Don’t smoke, thanks,” said Bill. Leon turned to
Coralie, and offered one, which was accepted, and he
struck a match to give her a light. As she puffed a.
cigarette he caught her eye, and in a tense whisper, said:
“Are you going to ride Olympians with this hobo?”
“Yes,” she said defiantly.
“You won’t. I’ll see to that,”
“Who’s going to stop me?” she said smilingly.
“I am,” he replied.
“Oh, you’re going back to the States by the next boat,
aren’t you? The Old Man won’t stand anyone that can’t
make good when he’s up against it.”


He turned away, and she rejoined the group round
Larrabee, As she came she heard the Old Man say:
“We kin get some streamers with your name on them,
and paste them over Leon’s on the bills. You can put
up the tents till the boss tentman comes out of gaol.
Shucks! What do you say?”
“All right,” said Larrabee, “I’m on.”
“Salary kin be arranged,” added the Old Man, and
so far matters were settled. BiH went back to the re-
joicing Bendolo and grooms. He told his old boss of
his decision, and discussed the policy of the “bush
snap,” as if he were to travel with it the same as ever.
Bendolo was keeping the camp going and out of his
newly acquired riches was having a general painting up
of waggons and brightening up of acts and costumes
for the next season.
“You’ll be with us again, Bill,” he said prophetically.
“Not likely,” Bill thought, but he said nothing.
XI.
THUS began Bill Larrabee’s first real love affair. Calf
love he had known, but it was a man’s love he gave to
Coralie Adair. His whole soul was in it. Australians
long remembered the two whirlwind acts in which
William Larrabee, “the Thousand Dollar Jockey
Rider,” joined Coralie Adair, “the World’s Most Bril-
liant Queen of the Arena.” It was a carnival of youth,
grace, daring, dexterity. Each seemed to allure the
other to higher flights of daring. Her face and figure, in
beauty and distinction matched his, and sex for sex
they were, in physical perfection, among the noblest spe-
cimens of humankind. Her beauty, grace and daring
inspired him. Some of their successful improvisations
are still talked of in the circus world.
That season, and the triumph of the young Australian
performer became a legend at the camp fires of every
Australian bush circus for generations. It was carried
to North and South America. Bendolo and the grooms
became the first evangelists of the Arabian Nights Story,


in which young Larrabee was the fairy prince and
Coralie the princess of the ring.
Leon Spartelli sailed by the outgoing mail boat for
America. He had had a whirling interview and farewell
with Coralie before his departure, at which he was
menacing and provocative; she cool and defiant.
But of this, young Larrabee knew nothing till after-
wards. He lived in a dream of happiness. To work
with her, to clasp her hands, even in the everyday use
and wont of the business, was, to him, heaven itself.
He saw nothing in her but the perfection of woman-
hood. Now and again he suffered in soul; at some
traits in her disposition towards animals. She was
impatient with horses; he, patience itself. It hurt him,
in their double jockey act to see her cut Curio with her
whip in moments of impatience; but he realised that
this was a form which her disposition took when she
was worked up for'the supreme trick. With him it
took another form—kindliness, sympathy, compassion.
But he forgave her, because he realised in himself the
tremendous tenseness of the concentration of mind and
body at the supreme moment of the trick. The sur-
roundings worked them up—the lights, the music, the
mad applause of the enormous audiences intoxicated
them, and raised them for the moment to a pitch of
supreme exaltation.
He watched her fondly in the ring. He knew that as
soon as the excitement abated in her, the moment she
left the ring, she had to throw herself on a sofa in the
dressing tent, pale with emotion, and striving for breath,
and spend an hour relaxing a tension as delicate as that
of a violin string when placed by a master, while her
maid rubbed her limbs, smoothed her forehead, and ap-
plied restoratives to her nostrils. In time Larrabee was
permitted to assist in this; and both found their most
delightful moments in the growing sense of rest and re-
cuperation. as, seated on a property chair, he watched
her as she smoked a soothing cigarette, which smoothed
away fatigue and prepared her for her next great ordeal.


XII.
This memorable partnership continued throughout
the great tour through the Australian Continent. But
the tour was nearing its end. Colonel Gaylander had
gone back to America in advance of a new season
United States. The boss tentman had been released
from prison, and had relieved Larrabee of his respon-
sible duty in putting up and taking down the “Levia-
than Caravan.”
The Colonel came specially from Sydney to Mel-
bourne to say farewell to Bill.
“You’ve done me a big service, Larrabee,” said the
Colonel. “No man likes to admit to his boss that he’s
beat. I was, if you hadn’t come along. A tew failures
like that and a man in my position gets the reputation
of being a ‘J ona h’> and that’s his finish in a circus.
They’re all superstitious. 1 want you to wear this as
a souvenir of the turn you did me.”
“This” was a solid gold watch, and a chain in the
shape of a horse’s bridle bit, life size. All Australia and
half the Far East now knows that bridle bit.
“You’re very good to me, Colonel,” said Bill, accept-
ing the gift.
“Not a bit. Well, we’ll meet next in the States.”
Larrabee looked down.
“Well, that’s not quite settled yet, Colonel.” •
“Oh,” said the Colonel. “I thought it was.”
“No!” answered Bill.
“Oh, well, I hope for the best. Good-bye.”
XIII.
The settling of the question of Larrabee’s going to
the States was not on the lap of the gods, but, as usual,
of a woman.
Coralie’s attitude towards Bill appeared to be that
so often described as “the best of pals,” that state of
affairs generally inconsistent with a real love affair.


One day, on the return visit to Sydney, and when
only a month was left in which to decide, Bill Larrabee
took his courage in both hands. Those hands had, in
fact, been forced. Bendolo had gone back to Queens-
land, taking with him a new tent (a 50ft. top), a new
pole jinker, harness, saddlery, and all sorts of apparatus
purchased out of the —to him—enormous rent paid by
the American show for the horses. Bendolo’s horses
too, except Curio, had been replaced by the released
quarantine stock, and by freshly trained Australian
horses.
Larrabee felt a pang of regret and home sickness as
he bade good-bye to Bendolo, the grooms, and the
horses. He saw, in his mind’s eye, the glories of the bush
track; he forgot its difficulties. Thus he visioned long
vistas of gum bordered roads, the eucalypts hung with
dark green mistletoe, the sombre uniformity of the red
gum, blue gum, and sugar gums, broken in places by
wilga or brigalow, belah and wild lemon, the thousand
flowering, lemon-scented shrubs, the towering waratah
blooms, the g,iant lilies, the gorgeous wattles—in the
west, ficolias, ablaze with every shade of red, from pink
to scarlet.
These beckoned him. It was hard to tear himselt
away, but the overmastering force of love compelled
him to follow the woman of all women in the world,
who had drawn him into the first great passion of his
life. It is easy, at 23. to enter the world of Romance,
and hard to leave it. And yet he had not been able to
secure from her an answer to his oft-repeated question.
He resolved to have a settlement of that supreme ques-
tion, while still on Australian soil. If so be it that his
hopes were doomed to be dashed on an alien strand, he
felt that the disappointment would have overpowered
him. Better have it out here.
XIV.
“Coralie," he said, in the dressing room after another
brilliant success in the ring, the applause still coming


faintly to their ears. “I saw the horses and the people
off to Queensland to-day. I felt a bit homesick. I
know what I’ll feel like if 1 go to America. 1 couldn’t
stand it a week unless I knew that I would always be
with you. Won’t you answer straight?”
Her eyes were starry, reflecting the excitement, the
appllause, and the success of the arena. Her mouth,
half open, showed lustrous teeth, as she breathed deeply
from the exercise. She was indeed a handsome creature
thus, as she sat with full, bosom heaving above! her
slender waist. The long oval shape of her face, the
straight round column of the neck, were beautiful; the
cheeks, slightly tinged with make-up, were rounded and
yoffthful; the yellow hair had been loosed from the
knots twined round her shapely head, as she wore it in
her work, and hung in long thick plaits below her waist.
The impression as he, the lover, gazed at her, was of her
wonderful eyes, her glorious mouth, her superb shape.
"I’ll tell you on the boat, Bill,” she said.
"That won’t do, Coralie. I must know now. Why
won’t yuh tell me? You like me, don’t you?”
"Of course 1 do. Would I work with you if I didn’t?”
“Lots of people work together as circus partners, ’oo
hate each other,” he replied.
"Oh, well. I’m different,” she said, smiling.
An experienced spectator—say one like Clara Chini-
zelli—would have diagnosed her condition as deep ad-
miration or keen friendship—but was it love? If so,
it was well repressed and under contrql.
She looked at him silently, yearningly, for a long
long while, as if she had something to impart and
dared not. But suddenly she seemed to come to a
decision.
"Bill,” she said, “1 mustn’t love you, I mustn’t. 1
want to be you partner. Can’t you let it rest at that?
We’re good pals—we can double our salaries in the
States. There’s no team in the world like us. We’re
stars. All the circus people say you’re the best jockey
in the world. Won’t you be satisfied?”


“No, Cora,” he said with deep feeling. “It’s too
much to expect to be so close to yuh, to have yuh in me
arms so often and not to be yuh husband. I'd sooner
call a finish here and go back to the bush. I know how
I’d suffer fur a while. I don’t think I cud ever ferget
yuh; but we’ve either got to be man and wife, or part.
The Old Man wants me to settle things to-morrow.
It’s in your hands whether I say yes or no. He’ll give
me any salary I like to name. I know all it means,
Coralie, but I’d sooner go back to thuh bush, if it can’t
be as I want it, Cora, answer me!”
Her face had softened, and tears welled into her eyes.
He saw that she had lost her colour; the make-up looked
strange against he white of the face. She drew her
dressing-gown around her as if she were cold. He could
see that she was deeply moved. As she spoke, slie
worked her hands, turning a ring round on her finger.
"Bill,” she said, her voice trembling, “I am just nine-
teen to-day. That’s not old, is it? But for three }'ears
—l’ve been married!”
“Married! My God! Not to Leon?” he exclaimed.
“No, Bill. But he knew, and he tried to use what he
knew to force me to be his partner and”—she covered
her face—"and his mistress. He keeps on writing to
me. I never was anything to him; but he pestered me,
and I was glad, oh, so glad, the day you took him down.
You didn’t know it; but I was praying for you that day,
and I was so joyful when you lowered his pride. The
whole show was with you that day, although you did
not know it.”
“But your husband!”
“Oh!—he’s a drunken hobo. 1 pay half my salary
to keep him in a treatment home. I never loved him,
Bill. 1 was an orphan, and he taught me the business,
and I married him because 1 thought that was the right
thing. We had good engagements, but he started drink-
ing. I left him within three months. Since then I’ve
been all over Europe, and right through the East —
Java, India, China—on my own—earning good money.


He’s drinking himself to death. Come with the show
to America. Bill.”
He struggled with himself silently for a long time.
The world seemed slipping from beneath him. His head
swam. He breathed hard, as in the ring.
“I couldn’t, Cora. 1 couldn’t. No, we’d better call
it off. To-morrow we ride together fur thuh last time.”
“Bill,” she said quietly, her eyes turned intently to her
tiny feet as she tapped her pumps on the carpet of the
dressing tent. “Bill, 1 refused Leon 1 refused
Leon—”
Her face was crimson. She looked shyly at him and
saw his tragic look.
"Oh, no, Cora, No, we’d better part. Someday yuh
might write tuh me—tellun’ me—tuh come over—”
And so they parted that night.
XV,
OLD MAN HLDLLY stood at the ring entrance on the
last night of the Australian season to waylay young
Larrabee. He had spent months in trying to brace the
young man to the signing of a contract, but without
result. That night was his last chance.
Larrabee, in his dressing gown, with ring costume
beneath, stood watching the grooms saddling Curio.
The Old Man approached him.
“Now, young man. You got to get over this foolish-
ness right now. Shucks! You’re cdming along with us,
ain’t you?”
“1 don’t think so,” said Bill, sadly.
“Aren’t you satisfied with the salary I’m offering you?
Why, you’ll be the biggest salaried rider in the great
American Continent.”
Bill stood doggedly silent. The Old Man continued
to himself, in audible sotto voce.
“This darned young fool. He’s gone crazy mad over
Coralie. 1 wanted him to, though, becuz 1 thought
that’ud fix him for the States. Shucks! Now things


are working wrong, somehow. That young devil
Coralie—”
“Don’t call her that,’’ expostulated Bill, mildly.
“Well, you were not supposed to hear me say that.
When’ll you let me know?”
“When I know myself. After to-night’s performance—
I’ll know' then; I don’t know now,” and he went to the
ring curtain, as Coralie stepped out of her dressing
gown to accompany him. The music blared out, and
into the ring they stepped, hand in hand. The Old Man
remembered afterwards what a glorious pair they were.
“I must have that team,” he exclaimed, and went off
jingling his sovereigns.
XVI.
WITHOUT doubt something unusual was happening
in the Olympians. The reader knows the act—the bearer
on two horses, and the mounter. The bearer, a man,
controls the horses, and with the mounter performs
various poses and balances.
Larrabee was nervous that night. He went cold and
hot in a moment. When a trick was concluded, and
the applause rang out, Coralie stood at ease on the
horse’s back with her arm around his neck. At each
spell, they sat on the horses as they promenaded round
the ring, while the clowns filled in the time with their
jokes. Comedy and tragedy are sometimes very near
neighbours.
"Bill,” she whispered, after the second section, as
the horses walked slowly round the ring and the clown’s
patter was amusing the crowds. “I’m nervous, and so
are you. Pull yourself together."
"I’ve been trying to all night,” he whispered tensely.
“I can’t. Whatever yuh do, don’t try the Merc trick.”
The trick called the Mercury was a special one, in-
vented by them. As she stood balanced on his head, with
one foot she made a signal, by pressing his head slightly
with her toe. Then, while with his left hand he held


one foot to his head, she raised the other foot, and posed,
leaning forward, with arms extended in the attitude
of the flying Mercury. The strain on them both was
tremendous. It was an extremely dangerous trick. The
least trip of the horses and she would fall. It was only
done when both were worked up, and the horses were
running unerringly.
“Oh, don’t leave that out, Bill. I’m not afraid. Don't
cut that out. It’s our best trick and this is our last
night.”
“I don’t like it, Cora. Don’t do it! I beg yuh not
to!”
The crowded audience was roaring with laughter at
the clown’s whimsicalities. No one would have dreamt
that the noble pair on the horses, smiling and whispering
tensely, were disputing upon the stuff of which tragedies
are made.
“I’m going to do it, Bill. Do you think I’m
frightened?”
She braced herself up, and looked proudly round at
this great audience, whose idol-she had been so long.
Was she going to fail them? No.
The Clown’s patter ceased. The band resumed.
Larrabee saw Old Man Medley standing at the ring cur-
tain with his hands in his coat pockets.
The act proceeded. They seemed to have shaken off
their nervousness. The tricks went better.
“All right, Bill?” she would enquire at each pose.
“Going fine,” he gasped, breathing heavily, as his
was the more strenuous task.
He had no fears or tremors when she prepared for
the final head balance. Taking his bent knee as a step,
and placing her hand on his head, she vaulted to his
shoulders, and posed. He caught her limb with his left
hand and held her rigid. With the other hand he held
the horses’ reins. She extended her hands, and threw
kisses to the applauding multitude.
Then, carefully, she put her left foot on his head,
wjrere he caught it with his hand. Then, watching for


a moment when the horses were running smoothly, she
quickly followed with the right foot, and stood rigid
of body and limbs, her hands extended, throwing kisses
to right and left, her lovely face radiating exaltation,
her head thrown back slightly, while she made ready for
the Merc. —their supreme trick.
They saw, as in a dream,; the tense, upturned faces
of the five thousand spectators. Away in the ring door
was a shadowy, blurred representation of Old i\ian
Hedley.
Both awaited the propitious moment —a moment se-
lected by intuition by the trained acrobat. Round and
round the horses galloped; the ring master cracking
his whip, the clown pretended to hold out his conical
hat to catch her if she fell.
Soon Larrabee felt the signal for the Merc.—a slight
pressure with her toe on his forehead. He braced him-
self, and felt her right foot leave his head. He knew
the pose was accomplished. He could not see, but he
knew how that glorious figure looked as she was carried
round the ring.
At that moment the horse next the timbered ring
floundered against the kerb and stumbled.
Larrabee realised the danger instantly, and sank
rapidly to his knees on the horses, so as to guide
Coralie’s fall and make the distance less. His heart was
cold with horror. Her foot slipped from his hand. He
tried to seize her, but missed. She fell outward and
struck the ground with thudding force. liTa moment
he had jumped down and lifted her in his arms, and
was taking her to the dressing tent. He saw the grooms
and ring attendants rush to assist him. He motioned
them away. She was breathing laboriously. Her face
had a deathly pallor. He hung over her as he carried
her through the entrance curtain to her tent.
Old Man Hedley came forward to the ring bank, and
shouted to the audience: “Keep your seats, all. If
there’s a doctor in the audience, will he kindly come
with me.”


A doctor had already started forward to offer assist-
ance—a white-bearded ascetic-looking man, who knelt
beside the bed they had made for her on the floor of the
dressing tent. After diagnosing, the doctor said:
“Shock! No bones broken. We must get her to my
private hospital. Get an ambulance.”
He went with the men to direct them where to get it.
But Coralie looked at Larrabee and said: “Bill, let
me stop here.”
Her breathing was terrible to witness, Larrabee,
with vision blurred by his tears, had loosed her cos-
tume, and was supporting her head with his arms. For
twenty minutes she struggled thus, ever brave. She
could whisper with difficulty. Her first whispered words
were;
“Bill, that’s the—first time—l missed that trick—l’ll
do it—next time.”
There was a long pause, while her heaving breast
showed her struggle to breathe. The breathing gradu-
ally got quieter. She was clearly conscious. The doc-
tor was back with the ambulance, but he only stood
by. He could do nothing. When nearly an hour had
gone she said faintly;
“Bill, you’re crying. What’s that for?”
“Oh, nothing, Coralie. I thought yuh wuz in pain.”
“Oh, no,” she said, and he had to strain to catch her
words. “1 was at first. I’m not now. There’s no pain
now.”
Then she became unconscious for a time. When she
woke the weeping spectators were conscious of a change.
She was able to move her arm, and it rested on Bill’s
breast. She turned slightly to him, and her fading
eyes sought his.
“Bill, Bill—l’m dying—l know it—l’m not afraid —
you know that —Bill—I always loved you—from the
first—from—the—first.”
And her head fell back on his arm.
8129


XVII.
A WEEK later the big American circus passed out
of Sydney Heads on the big ocean liner, and headed east
towards sunrise, into the bosom of the Pacific Ocean.
And at the same hour, Bendolo’s rehabilitated bush
show left the camp at Gilgantreebine, and headed west,
towards sunset. Young Bill Larrabee, subdued and
sad, drove the band waggon.


DOIN’ A PERISH.
I.
BARNES and Bendolos’ Colossal London Circus, “tra-
velling 12 waggons, 36 horses and 25 people," got out
of Sydney with some promptitude, not to say precipi-
tancy. They carried with them as a member of their
company a gentleman who did not perform. He
tumbled not, neither did he leap; but Solomon in all
his glory could not collect money at the door moie
actively than he. Ostensibly, he was a ticket-taker; ac-
tually, he was a man in possession—a bailiff. He had
been sent by the numerous and united creditors of the
showmen, after a disastrous metropolitan season, as a
condition upon which they allowed the horses, waggons
and properties, tents and gear to leave Sydney. A cir-
cus as a running concern, was likely, with careful super-
vision, to be a better investment than an auction sale
of chattels which were usdess when dispersed among
separate buyers.
Now, winter, as a time for travelling, is, as all the
battlers of the road know, “not what it’s cracked up *o
be.” Beginning a tour from Sydney meant that they
had to cross the Blue Mountains and get on the plains.
There was a drought on the Illawarra Coast district, and
floods on the North Coast. So, evading the Devil of
flood on the North, and the Deep Sea of drought on the
South, they struck West in a rainy season.
The fact was, the whole circus company, from the
proprietor to the apprentices, were each sobering up
from some kind of debauch or another, either of high
living, pleasure seeking, ostentation, or extrava


gance. An International Exhibition had lured those
seasoned battlers of the bush—Barnes and Bendolo—
into the metropolis. The initial success spoiled every-
one and they outstayed their welcome. Champagne
dinners, tall silk hats and frock coats, drag parties, a
little gambling and a lot of racing, led by imperceptible
grades to the slushy roads in winter, and the bailliff in
possession.
Bill Larrabee, then a handsome, perfectly-propor-
tioned youth of eighteen, was the sole individual who
kept his head during the thrilling months of their initial
success in the metropolis. He steadily pursued the up-
ward path. While other performers and proprietors
were spending their money or dissipating their energies,
Bill was perfecting the acts he knew, and learning the
others.
“I taught meself a Risley act in the first two months,
and copied Erica’s trapeze act in the second two. And
then the show busted, and the bosses had to clear out
with a bailiff at the front door. 1 asked a tenner a week
for these two acts, and got it—on paper.”
In addition to his own self-improvement, he also
spent some time in “breaking-in” Dick Barnes’ children.
Young Larrabee was loved by dogs and children, and
in later vears by elephants—all three intuitive animals
with a fine natural discrimination for the worthy and
unworthy among humans. Horses had for him the same
affection, tempered with respect, and a dash of fear,
with which a school boy regards a strict, but just and
kind master.
“All done by kindness,” was Bill’s motto in truth,
though generally it is a sarcastic gag in connection with
animal training in circuses.
11.
LARRABEE, youth as he was, was entrusted by the
crestfallen showmen to negotiate with the creditors; and
he it was who rescued the show. It was funny to watch


the two proprietors sitting disconsolate on the seating
boards in the galvanised iron building which they had
put up, amid the faded and tarnished decorations, with
their sad faces and bedraggled silk hats and frock coats,
while the keen-eyed circus youngster carried on the
fight to convince the angry creditors that a moving
circus was an asset, and a stationery one a liability.
So, when the circus was released, and Slodger the
bailiff, installed in possession, Larrabee remained be-
hind in Sydney as a kind of hostage while the show got
on the road, and joined a fortnight later when things
(small accounts and such like) were cleared up.
When he rejoined the show, that small and poverty-
stricken organisation had painfully climbed over the
Blue Mountain range, and had reached the Bathurst
Plains. Bill arrived in time to witness a serious quarrel
between Barnes and Bendolo, and a dissolution of
the partnership. Barnes had to get out. He had drunk
the most champagne, and had had the most riotous
time, and therefore was the heaviest in debt. He had
sobered up less on the road. The desolation of constant
rain and bad houses got on his nerves. Also the spectre
of the bailiff at the door, and the commandeering of
all the money depressed him.
The day Larrabee arrived back with the show, there
was a whirlwind debate between Dick Ban es, his part-
ner, Bendolo, and Slodger, the bailiff, which touched in
turn on business, social amenities, and ethics. The per-
sonal characters of each were subjected to deep inves-
tigation and discussion by the others in loud tones. Bill
assisted by two grooms, arrested a three-cornered com-
bat in its most interesting stage.
“I didn’t like them fightun’ while the women wuz
lookun’ on. The women wuz all so miserable, what with
the bad weather, and the poor hotels they had to stay
at, because Slodger wanted his creditors’ money back as
soon as possible so’s he cud git home to his sorrowun’
family.”


Barnes was sacked, that was plain. The company was
camped about twelve miles from the city of Bathurst.
Barnes had his wife (Sadie Stickney on the bills) —a
useful woman in the circus, a good rider and ballet
woman, ready to go in entrees, could do the Swiss milk-
maid and Otympians with her husband; and four young
children, one a baby in arms. She was still a pretty
woman—in her make-up.
Barnes claimed two horses as his own special pro-
perty, as necessary for his wife and himself in their
business as their tights and costumes, or their whips and
pumps. This was denied by the stern and anxious
bailiff.
On young Larrabee’s arrival from Sydney, Barnes, a
human wreck, in a battered, rain-soaked silk hat, ap-
pealed to him. Though a good performer. Barnes never
pleased Larrabee as a boss, as he was cruel with the
workmen and horses, and careless of the comfort of
women on the road. Still, he was in trouble.
“Bill,” he appealed mournfully, ‘‘they’ve took away
me ’orses, and me an’ the wife and kiddies’ll ’ave to
walk -to Bathurst,”
“Yes, Bill,” said Mrs. Barnes, holding up the baby.
“Gord knows ’ow we’re goin’ to carry the baby twelve
miles. Bill, you’ll stick to us, won’t yer? Get us thuh
’orses and one uv thuh waggons.”
Bill’s memory went back to Sadie’s devotion in nurs-
ing him, after a big row in which he was set upon by
the tentmen and grooms because he punched one of
the grooms for cruelty to her horse. Anyhow, she was
a kind woman to everyone, and this was a poor requital.
She was not responsible for the debacle in Sydney.
“Yes, I’ll stick to yuh, Sadie,” said Bill, resolutely.
“We’ll all stick to yuh. This is a bit over the odds.
Leave it to me.”
In a moment he had called Jack Graham, the boss
canvasman, and Tommy Lamps, two men indispensable
to the show, into council. If Slodger only knew it—
he didn’t just then—these men were the circus. The rest


didn’t count at all if they stayed behind.
To the logical minds of this trio, the bailiff and
Bendolo might just as well strip the Barnes family of
their clothes, as deprive them of their horses. AM their
business was done on horseback, or in connection with
horses. They knew no ground acts, except a little
tumbling in an entree by Barnes, and the little juggling
and contortion work taught the children by Larrabee'.
They had to face the implacable anger of Bendolo
against his late partner and the greed of the bailiff. But
the wise trio, inspired by young Larrabee’s fertile and
resourceful brain, made plans which we shall now see
in the process of working out.
111.
THE negotiation was begun by Larrabee in tones of
appeal.
“Look, Boss, and Mister Bailiff, we ain’t goun’ to let
these people walk twelve miles in the rain with their
kids. You must give us a waggon and horses to take
’em in to Bathurst.”
“Here,” exclaimed Slodger angrily, “don’t ffalk must
to me. You know you can’t go on much further with
this circus if I say no!”
“Well, it might be news to yuh, who’s a novice, to
know that if Jack won’t put up your tent, and Tommy
won’t light it, and I won’t perform in it, there won't be
no circus,” said youg Larrabee coolly.
“He’s right,” said Bendolo, sobering up sufficiently to
realise the gravity of the situation, and Winking his
heavy eyelids at the bailiff. “He’s right. Let 'urn ’ave
a waggon and some ’orses.
It was by a singular but propitious accident that
the two ring horses claimed by Barnes were harnessed
up to the waggon to take the departing ones to Bathurst.
Had Slodger known one horse from another, it might
not have happened, but he didn’t. He was a city man,
and could not be expected to know that horses had other
differences by which they can be distinguished, than the


color of their coats. All circus horses looked alike to
him. So Bally, the bay, and Polly, the piebald, were
harnessed up and put in a good sized waggon.
Then Barnes’ belongings were packed on the waggon,
and incidentally Tommy and Jack Graham, in a fit of
abstraction, threw in anything lying about which ap-
peared to them likely to be useful to a distressed family.
While this was being done, Larrabee, Tommy and jack
kept up an altercation with the bailiff and Bendolo, and
made rushes from time to time, with the apparent ob-
ject of punching the latter. These it required infinite ad-
dress on Siodger’s part to ward off. He saw the rest of
his creditors’ money going if anything happened to
Bendolo, who was his last remaining trump card.
IV.
Everything packed, Larrabee jumped into the driver’s
seat, Barnes and the family were comfortably bestowed,
Jack and Tommy jumped up behind and sat
with their legs dangling down, and the procession was
about to start, when Slodger called:
“Hold on!”
“What’s the matter?” said Bill.
“Oh, you’re not going without me,” said the bailiff,
with a cunning look. “I want to see that those horses
come back here. I’m coming too.”
“All right, come along. ’Go’s stoppun’ yer?” said
Tommy.
So they made room for him, and drove in to Bathurst.
It was by another singularly lucky accident, doubtless,
that the horses stopped before a particular hotel in
Bathurst.
“Why, it’s Copholder’s!” exclaimed Larrabee, sur-
prise. “Who’d ’a’ thought it.”
“Why, so it is!” said Graham.
"Well, this’ll do us,” said Barnes, and he took himself
and his family indoors, exchanging a wink with Larra-
bee on the way in.
“Well, Mister Slodger, now you’ve got rid of Barnes,


we’d better have a drink before we start back,” said Bill
Larrabee, “just to show there’s no ill-feeling.”
The bailiff, mollified by his success, became amiable
enough to accept. Barnes was called, and the others.
They all answered the call but Graham, who was
missing.
“Oh, he’ll be here in a second,” said Tommy Lamps.
Graham did return within five minutes; but for some
unaccountable reason appeared to be in a very bad
humour, and quarrelsome. This struck Slodger as singu-
lar, as his observant eye had, during the three weeks
of travel, noted that Graham’s temper w?, seraphic in
the face of every possible hardship on the i xkiv roads;
that his sweetness of disposition was unruttlt'd by bad
houses, the heavy rain-soaked tents, the low-class hotels,
and the general cussedness and ill-luck which had pur-
sued the show since leaving Sydney.
Slodger, too, would have “taken his Bible oath"—
a frequent expression of his to show confidence and
certainty in his power of observation—that Larrabee
and Graham were the firmest friends in the world.
Yet here was Graham, for no reason, clearly trying
to force a quarrel on }’oung Larrabee by ev ry means in
his power; and the provocation was obviously begin-
ning to exhaust Larrabee’s patience. It took all
Slodger’s time to keep them apart,
“Come along back,” he entreated. “If you fellows get
fighting and hurt yourselves, or get run in by the police,
who’s going to get me back with the waggon and
horses?”
Barnes, too, joined in these persuasions.
“ ’E’s right, boys. ’Go’s goun’ to get ’im back with th’
’orses? Make it up like good boys.” ,
But these interferences seemed only to cause further
exasperation in Graham. He offered to fight anyone in
the town, Larrabee for preference, for any sum he liked
to name. There being no acceptances in terms of the
offer, he himself named various sums—a hundred, fifty,
a tenner.


Slodger thought this a huge joke, realising that pro-
bably the whole circus company, at that time, could
not muster more than twenty pounds. He had made
certain of that, on behalf of the creditors. However,
he saw that Graham was getting dangerous, and that
Larrabee’s patience was nearly exhausted.
“Come on, come on. I’m not going to stay here all
day. If you don’t come I’ll leave you here and Lamps
can drive me.”
“I carn’t drive,” said Tommy, innocently.
“Well, then, I’ll drive myself—” He had got that far
when war broke out. Larrabee’s exasperation had
reached the limit. He burst out —
“Oh, well, Jack, if yuh will have it. I’ll fight yuh.
Lock the doors, boys, and let no one come m.
The door was locked with surprising alacrity, and this
had the effect, not only of keeping people from coming
in, but of preventing the bailiff from going out.
Thereupon Larrabee proceeded, with great delibera-
tion to divest himself of his clothing, while Graham did
the same. This occupied a good long time, and mean-
while the sun was declining and Slodger had to be on the
front door that night to collect the money, twelve miles
away. He tried to interpose between the two comba-
tants, but was swept away in the fury of co'mbat.
The most elaborate preparations having been made,
the fight started. Larrabee and Jack wrestled and
grunted, sparred and side-stepped, clinched and
struggled, while Slodger from time to time endeavoured
to separate them. But his appeals only seemed to fan
the flame; and he was several times in personal danger
himself.
It was curious to note how two splendid athletes, both
obvious masters of the art of boxing, did not seem to
do each other apparent injury, save getting out of
breath. Slodger learned afterwards that this was because
of their "science” and their cleverness in avoiding each
other’s awful straight lefts, hooks, and uppercuts, which


would have laid low anyone upon whom they had
landed.
While this heroic struggle was proceeding, Copholder,
the hotelkeeper, had slipped out of the bar several times,
apparently to see that the police were not in view, and
once, on returning, he approached the struggling show-
men and said something in a low voice. Instantly a
very light tap landed on Graham’s jaw, and he went
down and out, and the fight was ended.
“Is it all right?” Whispered Larrabee, breathing hard
to the hotelkeeper.
“Keep it goun’ another couple o’ minutes and it’ll be
all serene.”
On this, while Slodger was nursing Graham back to
life, and beseeching them to unlock the door, Bill Larra-
bee occupied several minutes before the door was un-
locked in issuing challenges to anyone in the district, nay
in the colony, to fight him for untold sums of money.
At length the door was unlocked, and they all
emerged into the declining daylight.
“We’ve wasted an hour here,” said Slodger impa-
tiently. Then suddenly he exclaimed, “Why, where’s the
horses?”
The waggon stood where they Had left it; but the
horses were gone. Consternation was clearly expressed
in every face.
Suddenly Copholder, his face expressive of derision,
said: “You don’t mean to say yuh left any ’orses out
’ere without anyone to look after ’urn? W’y there’s more
’orse thieves in this town than any in thuh West!”
“Good Lord!” exclaimed Slodger. “Then we’ve lost
the horses!”
“I won’t go s’far’s to say yuv lost ’um,” replied Cop-
holder. “If yuzza gotta be back to the show to-night yuh
better go, and I’ll see to it. I’ll put the police on their
track. But they’ve got an hour’s start uv yuh. Yuh
know,” he said turning confidentially to Slodger, “Bill
Dempsey’s bin roilnd ’ere lately. He alters thuh brands


“Well, what’ll we do?” said Slodger, turning to
Larrabee.
“I say we’d better borrow some ’orses frum the boss
’ere, and get away back in time to open thuh show,”
said Bill.
Everyone agreed to this, and by another strange and
luckv coincidence, the host had a pair of horses ready
harnessed, so they were soon on the road, a man from
the hotel with them, to ride the horses back.
On reaching the circus the horses were sent back im-
mediately to Copholder, and Slodger sought Bendolo
in his living tent, and related his mishaps. That gentle-
man was furious, and was inclined to seek an explana-
tion from his three employees, but the bailiff assured
him that they were blameless, indeed, that they
had been thrown into deep grief when they saw that
the horses had vanished.
He passed lightly over the quarrel and its conse-
quences, but nothing he could say was edicacious in
moving the sceptic scowl from Bendolo’s drink-soaked
countenance, or the look of suspicion from his blood-
shot eyes. He looked queerly at the bailiff, and then
turned away, muttering something about some blanky
men not knowin’ a blanky horse from a sanguineous
cow.
Graham, Larrabee, and the bailiff sat up all night
with loaded revolvers, guarding the remaining horses
from the threatened depredations of Bill Dempsey.
These precautions were efficacious, and when they went
on the road again only the two were missing which were
so useful to Barnes and his missus.
Barnes’ departure seemed to bring luck to the show.
The weather broke, the muddy roads hardened, business
improved, and the sun came out gloriously, and dried
the sodden main tents, and made the dressing tents less
cave-like and undesirable. The change in the situation,
too, hastened the departure of the bailiff, who, within
three weeks, was paid off, and able to give a clean


discharge to the show. Those who expected his instant
departure were disappointed, as he stayed round for
three days longer.
It was soon learned that his ardent desire before
his departure was to reconcile Larrabee and Graham,
whose quarrel he held himself partly accountable for.
iNothing had been heard of the horses; but that was
now Bendojo’s affair, not his, as he had been paid, and
he was surprised that the old showman troubled so
little about it.
But, in his view, as a conscientious man (though a
bailiff) it was not right to leave without seeing those
two fine fellows shake hands. He had acquired almost a
personal interest in the success of the circus. You can’t
chop off your interest in a matter which meant so much
to you and those you represented for three whole
months. He felt that the reconciliation of Larrabee
and Jack was necessary for the proper working of the
circus. Besides, he liked them for their own sakes.
They were two fine fellows, rough and ready, but still,
noble-hearted young men. So he approached them
separately, and after much persuasion, and with great
reluctance, they agreed to come down to the train, when
he was leaving, shake hands and promise to forgive and
forget in his presence.
It was subsequently found that, not only were the
two to be reconciled present to see the train off, but the
whole circus company came along, save and except the
morose Bendolo, who, when told of the arrangement,
smiled a wry smile and muttered to himself.
Slodger achieved his benevolent purpose, and saw
Bill Larrabee and Jack Graham shake hands, and vow
eternal friendship.
“But, yuh know, I didn’t start it,” sajid Bill de-
fensively.
“Who started it?” demanded Graham aggressively.
“You did. You picked on me,” retorted Bill.
“There, boys, don’t begin again. See, here’s a fiver.


You can all drink my health, and get some stout for
the ladies.”
The train began to move. Everyone shook hands
with the departing guest, and the company gave three
cheers as the train moved out. The smiling face and the
waving hand of Slodger were seen till the train went
round the bend in the hill.
Then Tommy Lamps burst into an uncontrollable
fit of laughter.
Young Larrabee turned fiercely upon him.
".What the blazes are yuh laughun’ at?” he said.
"I can’t help ut,” replied Tommy. “Why, 'e didn’t
know ’is own 'orses. We drove back with the same
'orses, with a bit ov blackun’ on the pieball, and ’e
didn’t know ’urn.”
"Well,” said Lanabee with great deliberation, “if
Jack Graham and me catches yuh laughun’ or tellun’
that story to anyone else, we’ll crack yer neck.”
And Tommy became suddenly solemn.
All that remains is for the author of this true story
to look over Bill Larrabee’s and Jack Graham’s shoul-
ders and read a letter they have just opened from
Sadie Stickney.
“Dear Friends, —You done us a real good turn,
and we’ll never forget it. The publican was a good
sort. He fixed us up with a small tent, and we
practised up a programme in the pub paddock.
Dick and me do four turns with the horses in the
ring, Swiss girl, Olympians, Dick’s jockey, and a
stirrup act for me; the kiddies are in three times—
acrobatic, bending, and a bit of tumbling; Dick
does a little trapeze act w'ith two of them. You
would laugh at him imitating Larrabee’s Erica act.
He fell off twice. He does a clown entree with me
as ring master, and Bailey and Polly do an entree.
The blacking ’as bin washed off Polly. Ten acts,
you see, we’re the whole circus. We got a con-
certina player and a cornet, and 1 beat the drum


for the overture, with a cloak over my tights, ready
for the ring. We went to Wattle Gully goldfields,
and coined money. The first night’s takings was
£8 13s. 6d. We’re made. I knew you’d like to
know we’re doing well. We owe it all to you. We
can never thank you enough. Good-bye. Dick and
the kiddies sends love to all. The kiddies sends
kisses to Bill,
“Yours,
“Sadie Stickney.”


I
THE LONG ’UN.
"IF we kin git the sheeow to Melbourne, we kun
strike thuh Caulfield, thuh Melbourne Cup, and good
weather fur six months,’’ said Bendolo, plaintively, as
as he gazed across the ring at the sudden incursion at
the front entrance of four obvious bailiffs, whom the
Tasmanian creditors had sent in pursuit of the circus.
“In this d d colony, the plugs is pulled out in thuh
clouds, and the sky leaks like an old tap.”
Young Bill Larrabee, jockey rider, Jack Graham, boss
tentmen, and Jimmy Lamps, listened with sympathy.
"I s’pose they’re bailiffs all right?” enquired Graham
tentatively.
“Bailiffs!” said Bendolo contemptuously. “Yuh know
I kun smell a bailiff a mile off.”
“ ’Pears tuh me we’ve got to do somethun' quick,” said
young Bill.
“Wot’s yur suggestion?” replied Graham.
"Well, if these blokes is let to seize thuh circus that’s
thuh end ov us. Now, I say, get Bendolo away out ov
thuh road, ’ide ’im fur awhile. There’s a steamer goun’ to
Melbourne to-morrow mornun’—sails at 9. We might
arrange with thuh Captain to get thuh stuff on board.
I see some boatmen ter-day wot said they cud pull us
ten or fifteen mile deeown thuh river, an’ thuh steamer
cud pick Bendolo up there. But thuh thing is ter get
thuh ’orses, animals, tentmen, an’ props aboard
ternight,”
"Yes, yes,” said Jack Graham. “But what’a we do,
it’s gotta be did quick.”
Larrabee explained his plan to the eager trio, whose


faces went from desperation to exaltation. Their
orders received from the young commander, they dis-
persed on their various errands. As Bill moved quickly
between the living tents at the back of the circus with
the lacrymose Bendolo, they met Mrs. Bendolo, just out
of the ring, rosy from her exertions. The routine smile
forced on her pretty face for the audience faded into a
look of anxiety as she met her husband and Larrabee.
“Kin yer git us outter this blasted country, Bill?”
she exclaimed, her white skin showing through the
rouge, her eyes pathetically imploring.
“We’ll ’ava try,” said Bill reassuringly, and he then
and there outlined to her the role she was to play in
Bill’s improvised rescue drama.
11.
BENDOLO, the circus boss, had no prophetic sense of
meteorology—at that time an unclassified science—and
knew not summer from winter in “making a route” for
his pretty little ten-waggon show, with a 50ft top tent,
and 30 real stars of trained ring horses and trick ponies.
Consequently, he frequently travelled north in sum-
mer and south in winter, instead of recognising that the
European seasons, to which he had been accustomed,
were reversed in the Antipodes. While he should have
been in Brisbane or Rockhampton in June, he was in
Hobart; and when he should have been in Hobart, he
was in Brisbane or Bourke. He went, like the winds,
“whither he listed,” never knowing, a week ahead, where
he was going—a perpetual source of worry to his ad-
vance agents. These sometimes took the bit in their
teeth and made their own routes, compelling the circus
and its nomads to follow the trail of the circus bills.
Often Bendolo had to ask the police, and even casual
strangers, what town he was in.
Bendolo had sacked several of these advance Pied
Pipers, asserted himself as boss, and resumed his chart-
less wanderings. Dickie Bendolo, his wife—capable


equestrienne and ballet woman, good at improvising
horse entrees, and concluding ballets—had a sister in
Tasmania, and she once, in a careless moment, expressed
a desire to see her. That diverted the course of the
circus south at a time when an adroit advance agent
had its head well pointed north.
They opened at Launceston, after the boat had dis-
gorged them, and played to “record business” for just
one week—while the fine weather lasted. Rain set in,
and then, as Bendolo plaintively remarked, “the blanky
plugs w'uz pulled outtuv thuh clouds,” for the rest of
the season.
After meandering “all over the shop,” they got back
to Launceston, and opening to fair business, might have
got over to the Australian mainland safely, had not the
creditors from the South sent bailiffian bloodhounds to
pursue them.
At the sight of the four strangers, momentarily ex-
pected, Bendolo’s thoughts were, “So, there you are
at last.” He knew they must be bailiffs. Every stranger
w 7 as a potential bailiff to him.
Bendolo always blamed untoward things upon bad
luck; he never admitted the equation of bad manage-
ment. And in trouble he invariably turned to young
Bill Larrabee, who, in his own words, always “had a
shot at devising a remedy.”
111.
JACK Graham sped round from the back of the circus
to the front door, moving quickly along the side walls
under the side pole ropes, calling the tenfmen on his way
to follow. Arriving at the front door he saw the four
bailiffs.
“Tickets, please,” he said peremptorily.
“Oh, don’t come that game on us,” said a long, skinny
bailiff, with bad teeth and Dundreary whiskers. “We
want to see the boss.”
“Well, yuh see ’im. I’m the boss,” replied Graham
sharply. “Wot d’yer want ter see me fur?”


“Oh, you’re Mr. Bendolo, are you?” continued the
long bailiff.
“Yes, I’m Mr. Bendolo.”
“Well, we’re—”
He got that far when Graham eagerly interrupted
him.
“Here, I don’t care ’oo yuh are. Yuh must ’ave
tickets or yuh can’t stand inside thuh tent. Put ’urn
out, bovs.”
The tentmen, who guessed the truth, began to push
the bailiffs out.
“But we’re the ”
“Don’t care a cusss 'oo yuh are. You shudda got yer
tickets at thuh ticket waggon. We get lots uv bluffers
like you in these bush towns.”
There was much argument as the men were hustled
outside.
Meanwhile Bendolo and Larrabee proceeded to the
wharf and saw the captain of the steamer. They found
him a good sport.
“If you get the stuff aboard before I leave at 9 to-
morrow, I’ll take you, and chance payment when we
get to Melbourne. I’m part owner of this ship. I’ll risk
it. I saw your show in Hobart. It’s a good show.”
When Larrabee had hidden Bendolo away with some
friends—how the world take sides against the tribe of
bailiffs!—he returned to the ground and helped Jack
Graham and Jimmy Lamps to guard the horses, tenting,
seating and animal cages.
The bailiffs had gone off to seek legal advice, vowing
law and vengeance on Graham.
IV.
WHEN they returned in an hour, not a stick or a rag
of the circus remained. Nothing but the hoof-trodden
ring, the sawdust, and a broken horse-shoe remained of
that white and glowing canvas caravanserai which had
stood so proudly an hour before. It was magic.


“We did thuh biggest hustle I ever see in me career,”
Larrabee used to say in later years, recalling with pride
this adventure of the old happy-go-lucky days. “Grooms,
tentmen, band performers, women, kids, proprietors,
and the good-hearted public all hustled to get the tent
down and on the waggons, an’ thuh seatun’ poles an’
props packed an’ loaded on thuh ship.
When the bailiffs returned their eyes nearly dropped
out of their heads.
“Where’s Bendolo?” they inquired.
“ ’E’s gorn to thuh hotel,” said Larrabee. “Him an’
thuh missu’s gorn to bed. ’E’s stayun’ ’ere to fight it
out.”
“Oh, that won’t do us!”
“Well,” said Bill, “ Kyum un see fur yurself.”
Larrabee led the way to the hotel, followed by the
bailiffs.
Now the natives of Tasmania in those far off days
were, it is said, divided into two great sections— a
small pro-bailiff party, which wanted to see debts paid;
and a huge anti-bailiff party, which had a natural an-
tipathy to the pursuer, and a profound sympathy for
the pursued.
It goes without argument, therefore, that the hotel-
keeper and his wife and daughter needed no persuasion
to induce them, to enter into Larrabee’s plot.
Mrs. Ferris was a motherly person, who sided with
the weak naturally. Besides, she had enjoyed a free
pass for self and friends during the two circus seasons;
while her daughter Julia had been made free of the
dressing rooms, and had even been permitted to attend
rehearsals. There were rumours, too, that young BilJ
Larrabee had found favour in Julia’s sight. They were
thus grappled to the souls of the circus folk with hooks
of steel.
As to his host, his attitude was that, whoever went
short, Bendolo had always paid him, and the attraction
of the show people was so great in his house that
the stay of the circus was as good as a carnival, so en-
hanced were the takings.


V.
IT was midnight now, and Larrabee accompanied Mrs.
Bendolo home, and she and the landlady’s daughter
hopped rapidly into bed, and simulated profound
slumber.
Downstairs a row was started by Larrabee with the
bailiff.
“I reckon yur a lot uv blanky fools, followun’ us
abeeout,” said Larrabee angrily to the official person
who was now and forever known to the circus folk as
“the Long-un.”
“Well we’ve got the police waiting to arrest yer
boss, when we find out where he is,” said Long-un,
doggedly. “You can’t get your stuff away on us, we’ve
got our warrant fur yur boss’s arrest.”
“Oh, if that’s all you want to know,” broke in the
hostess, “Mr. Bendolo has gone to his room with
his wife. They’re in bed. He’s been sick.”
“Yes,” added Larrabee, “and he’s goun’ to stay behind
and fight this out —about these ’ere debts. W’y we paid
every stiver we evei owed. Your po'ice bluff don't
frighten me.”
“I don’t believe he’s here,” persisted Long-un.
“Well, do you deny that seeun’s believin’?” queried
the hostess, argumentatively.
“No,” said Long-un. “Not if we seen ’im. If we seen
’im we’d put a guard on the doof so as we’d find ’ijn in
the mornin’. That’s all.”
In this his myrmidons acquiesced.
“Well, you’ll see ’im in thuh mornin’,” she persisted.
“No, we wants ter see ’im now.”
“Well, come quietly,” said the hostess,” yielding re-
luctantly, “I expect they’re asleep. He’s been sick.
Yuh don’t wanta cruelise a man acause ’e owes yer boss
a few quid,” she added.
“No. We’ll go quiet,” said Long-un.
"All right, come along.”
And they all tiptoed along to Mrs. Bendolo’s bed-


"You oughtta feel ashamed of yourself, Mrs. Ferris,” she said,
volubly, "bringing strange men into my room."


roam. There the bailiffs, in a dim, religious light saw
two people in bed, apparently plunged in the profound-
est slumber, as they both snored loudly.
But as one venturesome bailiff endeavoured to come
closer, Mrs. Bendolo awakened suddenly, and opened
a torrent of abuse upon the landlady.
“You oughta feel ashamed uv yurself, Mrs. Ferris,”
she said volubly, “bringun’ strange men into my room—
inter respectable people’s room. Is this a respectable
’ouse?”
“They’re on’y bailiffs, my dear,” replied Mrs.
Ferris, as if that secret when divulged would have a
soothin effect upon the wife of the hunted man.
“Oh, they’re bailiffs,” screamed Mrs. Bendolo.
“They’re bailiffs! Well, out of my room they go, and
don’t wake my poor husband out uv his sleep.”
She spoke loudly enough to awaken the dead. But
her companion miraculously slept and snored pro-
foundly through the whole altercation.
“Out yer go!” she cried, apparently making pre-
parations to jump out in her night robe, and put
Long-un to flight by means of physical violence. “Out
yer go!”
The bailiffs fled on tip-toe. They then and there es-
tablished an official vigil—one man on a chair outside
the bedroom door, with another guardian patrolling the
windows outside the hotel, walking round and round
the house on sentry go.
As the plot seemed to be working smoothly, Bill Lar-
rabee had a drink with the landlord; and after cordial
farewells, and many sly winks and nods, went off to the
boat.
VI.
MEANWHILE, through the night Bendolo and Graham
were being rowed by the leisurely boatmen down the
Esk River to keep their appointment with the Captain
of the good ship “Woronora.”
In the morning, the hotel folk resumed their normal


existence, careless of the presence of Long-un’s myr-
midons, one sleeping fitfully outside the door of Mrs.
Bendolo’s bedroom, and the other cursing his way round
the hotel in the dark.
The former was kicked to consciousness by an
exa perated maid at 6 a.m., while taking in morning
tea to the sleeping couple, and later on, the now wide-
awake vigilante saw two breakfasts and a newspaper
going into the room, while considerably later (an age
it seemed to him) two ladies in turn proceeded to the
bath-room in their dressing gowns, returned refreshed
and powdered, with serene faces smiling into his puzzled
visage, and bidding the flabbergasted guardian of the
threshold a cheery and impudent “good morning.”
“Had a good night?” enquired Dickie Bendo'io, with
feigned anxiety.
“I hope you were not uncomfortable,” the other said,
as she tripped by. “Poor old chap. I’d a’ sent yuh a
pillow if I’d a’ known.
He felt himself incapable of adequate reply. While
he was trying to account for the presence of the second
lady, Long-un arrived, and shortly after Mrs. Bendolo,
fully dressed, with a band-box in one hand and a kit
bag in the other, stepped out of the room, followed by
the hotelkeeper’s daughter, Julia.
“Where’s yur ’usband?” sternly demanded Long-un.
“What d’yuh want to know fur?” she asked trucu-
lently, “A lot you care if ’e’s alive ur dead. Huh!”
“Why duh I wanter know fur?” he gasped out. “Well,
of all thuh—Why that’s the blanky—l gotta warrant
fur ’is arrest.”
"Well, that fur you and yer warrant,” said Dickie,
flicking her fingers. "If yuh wanta know where he is, ’e’s
deeown the river about fifteen miles, and if yur a good
swimmer yuh kun use yer warrant on ’im; but not
unless.”
“Oh, well, yuh kun geeow in and see," and she con-
tinued her contemptuous course out of the hotel and


down to the boat, where Larrabee anxiously awaited
her.
Long-un and his satellites lost no time in entering
the room and searching high and low, and round about,
but could find no trace of Bendolo. They rushed out-
side and sought immediate conference with the outside
vigilante. A fierce altercation occurred, accusations
being hurled backwards and forwards, the man at the
door vowing that no man passed him in the night, and
the other swearing that not a mouse could have escaped
from the hotel without it being observed by him.
The obvious inference in both cases soon dawned on
each that the other man let Bendolo get away, and was
to blame it on him. Long-un had great diffi-
culty in keeping the men apart, and the fourth man
arriving with the news that the boat was leaving, they
incontinently rushed down to the wharf, and arrived
in time to find the Woronora well out in mid-stream, and
on her way safely, while their mortification was in-
creased by the sarcastic salutations from Larrabee and
the circus company generally, and the sight of Mrs.
Bendolo kissing her hand to the landlord’s wife and
daughter, who had accompanied her to the ship.
“Good-bye, bailiffs,” shouted Larrabee, elated that
his plot had succeeded. “See yer next year. We’re
comun’ back.”


THE OLD JUGGLER.
I.
IT was clear that the boss, Bendolo, of Bendolo’s Great
London Circus and Menagerie, had gone off. He had
tricked his creditors, and, taking all the cash he could
seize, had got out of Adelaide on a steamer by night,
leaving his property, tents, waggons, horses and ani-
mals in their hands.
The company' was stranded; the horses and the wild
animals were orphaned, bereft of their owner, and left
to the cold, official care of the Master in Bankruptcy,
In answer to the almost despairing cry of the Bank-
ruptcy officials and the creditors (for the animals
were unsaleable, and the horses, tents and waggons
would not recoup a tenth of Bendolo’s debts), a “com-
monwealth,” or partnership, was formed among the
performers to take the show on and run it as a going
concern, paying off the debts by instalments.
The legal formalities were arranged by Charlie
Kingston, a rising young Adelaide barrister; and after
sizing the various performers up, he recommended that
young Biil Larrabee, a performer, rider, juggler and
trainer of animals, should be made manager, and re-
sponsible to the creditors.
11.
WITH Bill Larrabee as manager, the question now had
to be settled as to which of the performers were to be
included in the “Commonwealth.” Jimmy Chiniselli,
of course, had to be taken in, for, with his wife and


three clever performing children (four good acts), he
was indispensable to the show, and therefore master of
the situation. Then, Tommy Hobart, who did two good
acts (a trapeze bar and a Risley act), was also a cer-
tainty. A consultation was held between Jimmy,
Tommy and Bill Larrabee in the tent at eleven o’clock
one morning.
Everything was going on as usual in the show that
morning. Bill Larrabee had just finished his practice
with a team of black Arab horses, and was seated, hot
and perspiring, on the seating boards. Mrs. Chiniselli
sat near the ring bank on a property chair, smoking a
cigarette, and suckling her last baby; while her husband,
Jimmy, and Tommy Hobart stood at the ring entrance
watching Sally Caro, a girl of sixteen, practising a
juggling act.
Sitting on a stool near the girl was a thin dark man,
with obviously dyed hair and moustache, dressed rather
foppishly, though his linen was frayed and his collar
had not seen a laundry for an appreciable interval. He
was watching the girl with ill-concealed impatience, and
when she missed her trick he would shrug his shoulders
and smile a superior smile.
Bill Larrabee, now thirty years of age, had fathered
and mothered Sally Caro for ten years—ever since her
father, a trapeze /rtist, had been killed by a fall from
the dome of the tent, and her mother, a star eques-
trienne, had killed herself with drink through grief at
her husband’s fate.
Bill was born to be the quickly adopted uncle of
many heroines of the Australian circus road. He tried
to save Sally's mother from herself, but no one coulu
turn aside Fate so far as Nellie Caro was concerned.
The inexorable law on the question was lajd down many
years before in an epigram by Clara Chiniselli, as she
sat (even then, smoking a cigarette and suckling a baby)
in the dressing tent of a small show.
“When a woman takes to drink —well, all bets are
off!”


The child turned from her mother’s grave to Bill,
and accepted his rough mothering. In the long routes
the scattered Australian towns of those railwayless days,
he kept her in his waggon, tucked her in his blanket at
night, taught her to read and write in odd hours, and
tried to teach her juggling.
“A pretty girl who can juggle a bit can always make
a jivun’,” he said. “ ’Cause ’er looks carries off ’er
mistakes ”
So Sally, to repay h:'s mothering, tried her best to
succeed, and even now her act was pronounced by
Jimmy Chiniselii to be “a pretty fair turn.”
When she had learned all Bill could teach her, Sam
Kyngdon, the old, rouged, dyed, juggler, had returned
to Australia from years of life in India, and finding
nothing to do in the big circuses or halls, had
perforce either to starve or go in Bendolo’s bush
caravanserai. He took the job with ill-concealed
loathing. He soon tired everyone of the battlers of
the circus road with his complaints of the present and
his memories of the past, of the great days of India
with "old man Wilson.”
“ ‘E makes yuh fair sick with his talk uv ’is syces
and ’is wallahs, ’is princes and sultans, and rajahs, and
’is elephants and viceroys. But if the show is in a bit uv
a hole he ain’t no damn good at all.”
This verdict, pronounced by Tommy Hobart, epito-
mised the unspoken opinion of the whole nomadic
community; and even the horses and menagerie animals
appeared to share the general contempt of old Sam, for
the former refused to be driven, and the latter to be
fed by him.
From his first appearance, however, Bill Larrabee bore
with him, and gave him a hand wherever possible.
The old juggler would have fared badly round the camp
fire had not Bill befriended him when food was scarce,
and the camp hungrier and more bad tempered than
usual.
This conduct of Bill’s contrasting with the general


treatment of the camp, predisposed Sam in his favour.
He regarded Bill as a young man of discrimination
and good judgment; and he constantly favored him
with stories of his greatness in India, of the number of
syces and servants he had had; of the rajahs he had
known in the Indian States; the Sultans in Java and
the Straits Settlements; and the pigtailed swells of
China. Then there were stories of his conquests with
the fair sex. This friendliness was not unwelcome to
Bill, who had secret ambitions—although in the back
of his brain—that some day, perhaps, he too would be
head of a big show, like “old man Wilson,” who had
made “six lakhs of rupees” and had retired to a life of
ease on the Continent of Europe. But Bill Larrabee had
a more obvious motive, and that was to secure some
tuition for Sally from the old juggler, who undoubtedly
knew his business.
“If a pretty girl like Sal could do half the jugglun’
tricks that old Sam can do she’d make a big hit. It
looks silly to see an old man caperun’ like that in the
ring in tights. It’s all right for a young un or a girl.
You want to be young for our business.” This was
Bill’s soliloquy.
But he found it impossible to placate Kyngdon, who
resented the girl’s act being on the programme at all;
and Bill never dared to approach him and discover to
him in his hostile mood, the wish of his heart, \iz., that
Sam should give lessons to Sally.
111.
“COME along,” said Bill Larrabee, “let’s settle this
business. We must be on the road to-morrow morning,
and there’s papers to be signed to-day. Let’s settle who’s
to be in the ‘ commonwealth.’ ”
The two other men gathered round, and Mrs. Chini-
selli threw away her cigarette and arranged her dress,
despite the baby’s strong protest.
“I say you three,” she said. “Hold quiet, Dajsy.” She


did all the talking for her family, and Jimmy mildly
acquiesced. “You three can run the show all right.’’
Tommy Hobart said; “I don’t mind. We can run
it with Larrabee as manager, and lookun’ after thuh
contracts and thuh front o’ thuh house. Ji'mmy can be
be boss of the ring, and I’ll took to the tents. But old
Kyngdon wants to be in the ‘commonwealth’ or he won't
travel.”
Mrs. Chiniselli gave a shrug of contempt. “Not on his
life,” she said. “He’s got no show. Let ’im go back to
the princes and rajahs."
“1 agree,” said her husband. “I don’t want ’im. Why,
the performers ’ud ’ave to wear collars and the grooms
and tentmen socks to come up to his ideas. Look at 'im
now. ’E ain’t proud, ’is ’e?”
They all looked round at the group in the ring. SalL,
was practising a trick of placing a glass fuhl of water
on a hoop and swinging it into balance until she whirled
it round her head. She missed twice. The old juggler
had abandoned his contemptuous attitude. The
interest of his profession triumphed over his contempt.
He took off his coat.
“Let me show you,” he sa,id to Sally.
< Then he took the hoop and glass, stepped back a
few paces, pirouetted and bowed to an imagmary audi-
ence, spilt a little of the water north, south, east, and
west, and placing the glass on the hoop deftly swung it
into balance and did the trick.
“Use your wrist, -so!” he said.
Sally took the “props.” and tried the new way.
The group in the seats watched with eager expec-
tancy. Bill Larrabee’s eyes were full of joy as Sally,
in the new way, imitating all the gestures, and even the
pirouette of the old juggler—but with what a contrast
of youth and beauty with age—at length succeeded.
“That’s very good, my girl,” said old Sam, putting on
his coat. “You’ll make a juggler. I’ll take you as a
pupil.”


IV.
THE four on the seats looked at each other.
“Well, what do you say, Larrabee?” enquired Dick.
“I say Sam comes into the ‘commonwealth’,’ said
Bill, without hesitation.
“All right,” said Tommy Hobart.
“It may be all right,” sneered Mrs. Chiniselli, “but
you’ll all be sorry. Mark my words, you’ll ail be
i sorry. He’,ll be a kicker from the word‘go’!”
“Well, I agree with the missus,” said Jimmy, “and
before we take ’im in for sure we ought to know whe-
ther he’ll take his share with the rest. We don’t want
any pretty pictures around the show. We’re goun'
through a hard bit of country, and everyone’ll ’ave
tub work.”
“1 got ’is promise to take ’is share,” said Bill. “Yuh
mustn’t forget ’e’s an old man now. But ’e says ’e’ll do
’is share, and we’ll keep ’im up to ut.”
V.
JIMMY CHINISELLI was right about the “hard bit of
country” the circus had to battle through. A two years’
drought had almost laid the territory waste. Cattle and
sheep were dying for want of food and water. Immense
mobs were being travelled, seeking better country; but
nowhere finding it, they lined the stock routes with
their carcases. The mere physical task of getting the
circus over the road was hard enough. The horses fell
into bad condition; feed was almost gone; rivers were
dried up. Still, the show worked north, the objective
being a new and rich gold-field which had opened up
in Queensland, the only one of the States which had had
a good rainfall. Superhuman exertions of men and
horses were required to overcome the desert which inter-
posed between them and the paradise of grass and water.
The settlers along the route were too disheartened by
drought to come to the circus, so the ragged tent was


All hands helped to get the horses out of the mud.


propped up night after night in vain; the tired-out
horses cantered wearily round the ring to empty seats;
the performers, unkempt and worn out, went through
their tasks without zest or hope.
The prognostications with regard to the old juggler
soon proved to be well-founded. He was a "kicker from
the word go!”
A few instances will show how he fanned the exas-
peration which finally overwhelmed him. Two of the
best horses had gone down a river bank in the night
under the fallacious equine idea that there was water
in the “river,” and had stuck in the mud. All hands
were requisitioned, including the lady performers.
There was no time for vain ceremonial. Even Clara
Chiniselli threw away her cigarette, put her baby down
in a waggon, and lent an encouraging voice, and occa-
sionally a helping hand. A block and tackle were ob-
tained from the "props” waggon, one end hitched round
a tree and the other round a horse, which, with the
united and combined efforts of the company, was ex-
tracted from the mud.
After one had been extracted, Kyngdon went on strike
and declared in effect that it was incompatible with the
dignity of a friend of the rajahs and Indian princes to
do coolie work. So worn out was the company that
his defection was sufficient to dishearten them, and the
second horse was put out of its misery.
“That there ’orse 'as ’ad five bags of chaff at £1 a bag
in three weeks,” said Larrabee mournfully, “and now
we ’ave to leave ’im.” But he stuck to the old juggler
and saved him from being summarily left to walk the
rest of the journey.
On another occasion the bandsmen struck in the
middle of the performance at a small outstation, where
a few rouseabouts had been gathered at five shillings
a head. Lured by the “high life” and glitter of a pub
six miles back they walked off, and had soaked
themselves in beer while discussing the terrible drought.
They stayed there three days. Matters became desperate.
0129


The company resolved to go back for them after the
show, and bring them along by force. This was done.
A waggon, with a sufficiency of rope was fitted, up, and
the last two horses which were able to move harnessed
to it. The male members of the company drove this
back the six miles, seized the bandsmen, tied them in
the waggon, and brought them “home” to the camp,
amid a fine display of bad language in German, Italian,
English and bush Australian. Kyngdon had plainly
showed his disapprobation of this proceeding, and made
observations from the height of a moral excellence
wffich had been perfected in the Sultanates of Java and
the rajahlics of India and Burmah during many thou-
sand years. These observations were resented by the
rough and ready circus crowd; who thought such moral
excellence premature in a new country.
Bill Larrabee was still firm, though much shaken.
Sally was making steady progress with the old juggler,
and Bill was delighted; but he saw that he could not
shield Kyngdon much longer from the just indignation
of the company. He resolved that the first rise the com-
pany made he would buy Sam out and dismiss him,
VI.
TWO hundred miles in six weeks reduced the com-
pany almost to a state of demoralisation; and it was
here that Bill Larrabee showed himself a born leader
of men, and began that career which made him the
greatest circus organiser of his time. He kept up the
company’s spirits; he prophesied of a promised land, a
Canaan in the north. At length they reached a better
region. Rain fell here and there. Food and water for
men and horses were again procurable. The China-
man’s Flat goldfield was reached when things were at
their best, and for a fortnight the circus did wdll—
coined money.
When the “commonwealth” had £3OO in the treasury
a meeting, which assumed something of the nature of a


drumhead court-martial, was held in the centre of the
ring. The four partners.were present, and the whole
of the dilapidated and unshaven tentmen, the same
number of grooms in the same or slightly worse condi-
tion, Billy Props and Jimmy Lamps, whose departments
are indicated by their nicknames, and the performers.
The whole company sat on the circus seats to watch the
drumming out process with ill-concealed satisfaction.
Bill Larrabee counted out £BO in bank notes and
pushed them across the face of the big drum, which
served as a table, towards Sam Kyngdon, who sat on a
property bucket looking pale through his paint.
“Sam,”‘said Bill, “the ‘commonwealth's’ decided that
you must git out. They reckon everybody’s had about
enough of yuh. You’ve bin a fly in the sugar right
through this trip. Most ov us, who’ve bin battlers on
the road from cradle up, knows ’ow to take the rough
with the smooth; but we reckon you’ve bin spoiled
with too much good livin’ in the islands on the north.”
“Syces and wallahs!” sniffed Clara Chinfselli, shift-
ing her baby to the other breast, and puffing cigarette
smoke scornfully through an uplifted nose.
“Shut up, Clara,” said Bill. “I’m boss of this ‘com-
monwealth.’ So you’ve got to get out. We ’ave £3OO
in the treasury. There’s your share. Sign this receipt
and we’ll call this ‘commonwealth’ dissolved as far as
you’re concerned. Personally, 1 thank yuh for wot
yer done fer Sally, and fer that ’ere’s a tenner from my
share.”
Bill pushed another £lO across the drumhead. Sam
picked up the £BO, counted and put it in his pocket.
Then he struck the drum a violent blow and said:
“I won’t take your money, Bill. What I‘have done
for the girl I have done because I wanted to, and I am
not one to be mean with the young uns when they have
the talent. You’re right when you say I’ve been spoiled.
Perhaps I have, and Tm sorry now. I tell you all, I’m
sorry. But I’m not —Tm not—as young as 1 used to
be, and perhaps not so good tempered. When you come


to my age, why, you’ll understand. 1 now say good-bye.
I’m going to Brisbane. Perhaps we’ll not meet again.”
The altered tone of the old juggler disarmed all ran-
cour, and brought a revulsion of p : ty in his favour. As
he passed out, hands which a few moments before, were
prepared to be clenched and shaken at him now clasped
his in farewell.
The coach was starting for Brisbane, and Sam’s pro-
perties were soon stowed upon it by willing hands,
which were a few hours before prepared to throw brick-
bats in farewell.
Sally burst into tears at parting.
“You bin so good ter me,” she said, “Nobuddy but
you and Bill’s ever bin good to me,” she sobbed.
“There .there, dear,” he said, soothingly. “You’ll
make a juggler all right. I’m proud of that anyhow.
Good-bye.”
VII.
SAM KYNGDON arrived in Brisbane with £7B in his
pocket. He began to spend it in a manner befitting
a showman with a pxturesque past like his. He first of
all spent £ls on a sapphire ring with a cluster of dia-
monds. His hands were unduly roughened, he thought,
by the unwilling months he spent in the bush. He got
a spec ; al lotion from the chemist to cure this.
“A juggler’s hands,” he said, “must be like a lady’s.
Now, in India, I never even handled anything heavier
than a wlv'skey glass. My servants did all that. But
with these bush circuses ”
He replenished his hair dye and cosmetics, and in a
week appeared in a new suit, consisting of a frock coat,
with a very shiny satin front, a silk high hat, a fancy
vest, ribbed material trousers, and a pair of tan boots.
Brisbane, unaccustomed, by reason of its tropical cli-
mate, to frock coats and top hats, except at funerals,
paid great attention to Sam and as it was a hospitable
place he was able to assuage his thirst oftener than
was good for him.


As he could not be outdone in generosity he spread
himself like a lucky digger in various bars, and
"shouted for all hands.” This made a hole in his capi-
tal. A diamond scarf pin and some elaborate socks,
shirts, and scarfs made further inroads. But he revelled
in the attention he was receiving in the hotels, and drank
in the applause with which his stories of rajahs and sul-
tans were received.
Meanwhile he got an engagement for seven nights
only, to appear at the local theatre with a variety com-
pany at £2O a week. The salary proved to be merely
theoretical, and did not materialise. He spent a couple
of pounds in the southern papers on advertisements
that he was “free” and would accept engagements. He
got no replies.
His mental attitude towards Bill Larrabee’s circus
changed imperceptibly.
The ilife with the bush show began to appear to him
in so clear an impression that it almost effaced the
memory of the glorious days of the rajahs and sultans.
He could remember many kind attentions received from
rough grooms and tentmen in the comradeship of the
bush, when the obsequious services of syces and wallahs
had faded from his memory. The fleshpots he hankered
for were those of the camp fireside, the rough, hearty
meal, the damper cooked in the ashes of the scented
eucalypt log, rather than the curries and the rice taffels,
the chota hazaris and the gin piets of the East. He
thought of the grandeur of the gums, not of the grace-
fulness of the palm, the tamarind or the paw-paw; and
the scent of the wattle was a sweeter memory to him
than the heavy odors of tropical magnolias.
As his money dwindled he pulled himself together.
The nostaglia of the nomadic life was upon him. He
longed for the rough life, sleeping under the canvas, or
under the hood of the living waggon; for the appetite,
for the zest of living, for the coarse food, for the rough
companionship, full of strange sympathy, sweetened
with the kindness of the battlers of the circus road. His


mind reverted with strange interest to his young pupil,
and he had a feeling of disappointment that he had
not had time to complete a task which had become a
pleasure. The master feeling of mankind was upon
him—to pass on knowledge to the new generation.
Obejdng an uncontrollable impulse he arose one
morning at five o’clock, made a bundle of his few be-
longings, and selecting sdme of his lighter “properties”
for the juggling act, he left the house and made for the
road; and with the homing instinct made for the
direction in which he believed the circus had gone. His
rings and jewellery were long since pawned. But his
costume remained. Bushmen on the route were struck
with wonder at the unaccustomed sight of a wayfarer
in a frock coat, a “billycock” hat, and tan shoes, carry-
ing a large bundle, “padding the hoof” out towards the
sunsets of Western Queensland.
VIII.
THE circus was camped on Murphy’s farm, at the
the North Bend, near Stanthorpe. Larrabee, having
made a cool £SOO at Chinaman’s Flat Rush, was deter-
mined to refit his show and gjve his horses, wild animals
and not over-tame human beings, a rest. So, in the rich
flats of Murphy’s farm the circus horses were wallow-
ing literally in clover, while the people rested and
gathered their strength for fresh adventures, A supply
of bright paints from the local store enabled him to
transform the waggons with gorgeous decorations; caged
animals w re renewing their youth with unaccustomed
meat meals; the bandsmen were practising a new reper-
toire for the coming conquests; and, as to the company,
there never was such a washing, mending, dyeing and
replenishing of seedy tights and dresses; such a sewing
on of spangles, such re-accommodation of decayed ring
harness, pads and trappings, such stitching of torn
tents, a mending of seating boards, a re-packing of
picture bills, a practising of new acts. It was Bill’s idea,


now that the treasury wass brimming and the drought
had broken, to take his company closer to the big urban
settlements, and, after strengthening it up to transport
it with a new tent to New Zealand, where prospects were
good, as there had been no circus in that country for a
long time.
The camp was just inside the fence dividing
Murphy’s farm from the main road. A cornet player
had tied his music to a gum tree and was making the
bush ring with roulades and trills. The members of
the “com!monwealth” were busily engaged. Tommy
Hobart sat on a rolling barrel splicing some ropes on a
trapeze bar; Jimmy Chiniselli, with Bill Props, was
decorating the ring hoops with red and white Turkey
twill; Clara Chiniselli was engaged as usual with her
cigarette and baby; Bill Larrabee was sitting on the
rail of the fence watching Sally Caro practising her
juggling act. Her skill had, he feared, deteriorated
since old Sam Kyngdon had waved his hand from the
front seat of the coach. Bill saw this, and sought to
stem the deterioration, but failed. The influence of the
old juggler was fading, and often Bilf wished that he
could have kept Sam on just a while longer to complete
the girTs education. He admitted, too, that the com-
pany missed Sam, with all his faults. The sultans
and rajahs were not bad fun, after all.
“When she’s got a livun’ in ’er ’ands I don’t care what
happens to me,” Bill said to himself.
Sally tried the hoop and glass trick and failed three
times.
“Have another go!” exhorted Bill.
“It’s no use, Unde! I’ve lost the trick of it. See
here”—and Sally tried and missed again. She was
plainly distressed, and began to cry softly.
"Try again and use your wrist the way 1 showed
you!”
The voice was Sam Kyngdon’s.
Bill nearly fell off the fence, so sharply did he turn


round. Sally’s tears were cut oft' at the tap, and she
burst out laughing.
“Why, it’s Sam,” she said joyfully.
Bill Larrabee, in telling the story afterwards, declared
that he had never seen such a scarecrow in his life as
Sam looked. That the favorite of sultans and rajahs;
that the object of shy glances from imperfectly veiled
zenana boxes; that the star performer, whose juggling
“props” were handed to him on silver trays by admiring
ring wallahs of various shades of colour, and whose
horses were brought for his morning gallop on the Cal-
cutta Maidan, the Shanghai Bubbling-Weil Road, or
the Singapore Orchard Drive by obsequious syces! A
scarecrow in a battered, dust-soiled “top-hat,” a frayed
and seedy frockcoat, a dirty waistcoat; who walked on
the uppers of all that was left of a pair of elegant
tan boots; a grey-haired man, sans dye; a bearded man
bereft of razors and cosmetic. The voice alone was
Kyngdon’s—the rest was new.
Bill Larrabee’s face lighted up. He jumped to the
ground.
“Come over the fence!” he cried.
Painfully Sam climbed the three rails. Sally and
Bill shook his dust-grimed hand.
“Were are yer goin’?” enquired Bill.
“I’m looking for a job. Bill,” replied Sam, rather
shamefacedly. “Can you place me?”
“Here, Tommy, Jimmy, Clara, come here.” And Bill
brought the “commonwealth” parliament together in
sudden session. They were soon in argument hammer
and tongs. Clara’s shrill voice occasionally interpolating
itself like a whip cracking over the diapason of
galloping horses.
Sally resumed her struggles with the hoop and glass
trick. Old Sam took off his battered hat and grotesque
coat, tucked up the bottoms of what were once his trou-
sers, and showed her the right way. Before the ’’com-
monwealth” session had gone far, all four were watching
the old man and the girl, as they had watched them on


that morning in Adelaide when the ’’commonwealth” —
now so successful—had been formed under Bill Larra-
bee’s leadership.
In five minutes Sally had mastered the trick.
Bill turned to |jis partners.
“Well, what do you say?”
"Have yer way, Bill,” said Jimmy Chiniselli.
“Of course, Bill, you’re the blanky show,” said
Tommy Hobart, “so if you want him on you kin ’ave
’im.”
“Well,” said Clara, shrilly, "he’s a kicker from the
word go—you know 1 always said so. He’ll kick again
—d'ye see.”
“Never mind, Gaia. Let ’im kick!” said Bill. "Times
is better row, and you know yuh can’t teach an old
dorg new tricks. It was rough on ’im when we started
out frum Adelaide; but it’ll be smoother travellin’
now.”
Then he called out—
" Sam, yer engaged. Five quid a week and yer board.”
Then he went up and shook hands with the old
juggler, and said in his ear —
“And another quid a week frum me fer teaching
Sally.”
The old juggler shook Bill by the hand, and in a voice
husky with emotion, said—
“ Thank God, Bill. I’ll be able to get my sapphire
ring out of pawn.”


TO HIS LONG HOME.
AFTER a terrible six weeks’ battle with drought, flood
succeeded with catastrophic suddenness, and Bendolo’s
Circus found itself marooned on a blue-gum covered
knoll fringed with casuarinas; while the landscape on
three sides seemed to swirl round with muddy, troubled
flood waters. Roads, emblems of civilisation, were ob-
literated. The tenebrous sky came down and met the
land with rough kisses. Encompassed by the swirling
floods, the Circus, a small, bush snap affair, entrenched
itself for the siege. Th thirty-foot-top tent was erected
for shelter of the people; a trench dug round it, and a
couple of shelter tents for the poor, rib-lined horses.
The leaky cages for the few starved, scraggy-looking
wild animals were covered with bagging and spare tar-
paulins. The women and children were housed snugly in
the tent-roofed waggons.
The director of all these siege preparations was young
Bill Larrabee, then twenty-one. He had taken charge
a fortnight before, when utter demoralisation of the
circus troupe appeared inevitable, a demoralisation
caused by the sudden and serious illness of the proprie-
tor, Old Man Bendolo, who had sought oblivion from
the strife of Nature in its arid and terrible moods in
brandy - bottle magic. So, when chaos was almost
reached, and everyone was his own boss, each giving,
but no one obeying orders, Bill Larrabee, at the request
of the distracted women, declared himself dictator. He
settled the insurgent grooms in three gory fights,
knocked down a recalcitrant tentman with an iron guy-
stake, threatened two of the weary, unshaven, unper-
fumed performers with a similar fate, and with two


black eyes as signs of authority on his wildl but hand-
some face, a limp which temporarily spoiled the beauti-
ful symmetry of his athletic form, Larrabee, the young
performer, assumed the role of chieftain. Thus dynasties
were founded of old.
Rumors had come to them from jaded, dust-covered
wayfaring horsemen, followed by thirsty, red-tongued
dogs, of a “good season” a hundred miles further west;
and Bill, his authority established, with instinctive
leadership, pointed the horses’ heads westward, and set
himself with head down to the task of getting over the
distance between the lean and the fat country. A week
of struggle for men and horses had gone. Then the
flood caught and marooned them on the hilly rise over
what had, a day before, been the dry bed of a river. The
rolling waters spread over the country, bringing relief
to the drought-stricken land. At the same firne a
stealthy messenger approached a hooded living waggon,
drawn a little apart from the others on the knoll and
lifting up the hood, summoned Old Man Bendolo on a
journey to a country from whose entrance-tent no pass-
out checks are given.
Larrabee, instinctively recognising that the great
change was approaching, sent mounted messengers back
to the nearest township for doctor and priest. They re-
turned with the news that the roads was impassable,
and the creeks running bankers.
“I see a bloke on the other side o’ th’ crick,” said
Tommy Hobart, the last of the unsuccessful messengers.
“The crick wuz runnun’ a banker, and I couldn’t get
across, so I shouts out to ’im ‘Send a doctor and a par-
son, a man’s dyun.’ He shouted ‘S’pose I carn’t git
um both, which ’ull I send?’ I sez ‘Send the parson.’ He
says, ‘Which religion?’ I didun’t know wot religion
Old Man Bendolo wuz, so I sez, 'Send along thuh fust
that ’ull come.’ And ’e waved 'ees ’and and rode away
as ’ard as ’e could scuttle.”
Bill left the anxious group which had met Tommy’s


steaming, panting steed, and returned to Bendodo. The
eyes of the whole company followed him. He climbed
in over the wheel. They waited. Frowsy-headed
women smoking cigarettes peered out from the hoods of
the waggons in anxious expectation. Instinctively all
felt that the Messenger was near. The sudden hoarse
roaring of an old lion in one of the cages, eachoing
through the bush and over the flooded waters, made
them start. The roaring died out, and silence followed,
save for the lapping waters, the soughing wind, and the
trickle of rain. An hour passed, and then Bill Larra-
bee came down slowly from Bendolo’s waggon, and ap-
proached the rain-drenched group. He took off his hat,
they hastily raised theirs. The women burst into loud
sobbing. They all knew without being told that Ben-
dolo was dead, and the circus, the horses, and the wild
beasts ownerless,
There is some instinct in even the most primitive
communities of the respect due to the “ashes” of poor
humanity; and even in the rough circus family mere
were women who did the kindly offices for the body.
The rain fell unceasingly. The plain still swam
round in the flood waters.
“No charnce uv takun’ ’im back to the township,”
said Larrabee, and this was acquiesced in by the others.
The desire to give him a townsman’s funeral was strong
in the hearts of these nomads. But the funeral had to
be improvised on the spot.
Billy “Props” was instructed to build a coffin. Seating
boards which could ill be spared were speedily hammer-
ed into an oblong box, an efficient, though unsymmet-
rical sephulchre. The women dyed black some red
Turkey twill, used for adorning the hoops for the eques-
trienne to jump through, and lined the coffin, inside
and outside. The body was wrapped in an old tent


flag, the arms folded on the breast, and placed in the
coffin, which was laid on two trestles in the thirty-foot-
top. The deceased's name was painted on the cover in
red clown’s paint. Reverently each member of the
company passed before the open coffin and took a mute
farewell—principal performers first, riders, jugglers,
tumblers, fill-up acts, clowns and bandsmen next, and
then in order of precedence, Billy “Props,” Jimmy
“Lamps,” the boss tentman, the boss groom, the ordi-
nary tentmen and grooms, and the camp cook, a negro,
who took tickets when the show opened.
Last of all came Bill Larrabee, with little fifteen-year-
old Tansy Saroni, an apprentice, old Bendolo’s favorite,
a dare-devil rider and tumbler, who disturbed the de-
corum of the procession by bursting into hystericaJ
screams. Still sobbing, she was brought by Bill to take
the long farewell.
Bill led Tansy away crying pitifully, pronouncing the
epitaph: “Oh, 'e wuz allers kind ter me! Alters kind
ter me!” And, as Props, with hammer and nails, made
fast the last resting house of the dead, the animals, as
the sound of the blows rang out, burst into cries, roars
and snarls, as if to add their encouragement to the
last journey of the old circus man.
The night was spent round a huge fire in the open,
talking of the departed. Stories of his good points were
brought forth from memories of years of association.
His weaknesses were forgotten. Plans were made for
the morrow.
“You’ll ’ave ter be thu parson, Bill,” said Charley,
the half-caste.
“What abeout a prucession?” said the band-master,
who had spent the afternoon with his bandsmen, under
the dripping trees of a copse remote from the camp,
trying to vamp the “Dead March in Saul,” the only part
audible to the camp being the damp and depressing
thud of the funeral drum.


"Oh, we must ’ave a prucession!” was the general
conclusion of men and women.
Bill Larrabee made a speech—that is to say, it had
all the forms of a set oration. While the debate up to
this point had been a chorus, all the men and women
speaking simultaneously while seated. Bill’s was
delivered standing, and with gestures tvhile the others
listened with decorum. A kerosene flare lamp threw a
limelight effect on his hard, handsome face, and as he
spoke his white, even teeth gleamed and flashed.
Around, the waggons were drawn up, the wild animals
were moving restlessly in their cages, and the sound of
the cheerful champing and stamping of the horses came
fitfully to them from the stable tents.
“It’s this way,” said Bill. “The flood ain’t likely to
go deeown fur a week, and we can’t git back ter thuh
teeown. I think the old man ’ud ’uv liked the purcession
idea. So we’ll put that coffin on thuh band-waggon and
start on; the band’ll foller, and then yuz can all fortri
twos and foller that. Performers first, grooms
leadin’ thuh 'orses next, and then the tentmen.
The women’ll ride on the waggons, cummun’ next ter
thuh band. We won’t bring the anermu'is into it. But
we’ll ’ave thuh ’orses. I seen pictures once uv a funeral
uv a boss soldier, and thuh corpse’s ’orse, with a saddle
and bridle on, follered after thuh 'erse. We kun put a
saddle and bridle on old Snip, and Jimmy Lamps kun
lead ’im after the band waggon. The old man allers used
to go ahead on Snip with bottle lamps to find thuh
teeowns, and fix thuh pitch fur thuh tent when we kum
in late. Yuz all remember that. Billy Props found a
high place over thuh flood waters ’arf a mile across frum
'ere. We’ll dig a grave there early in thuh mornun’.
Tentmen’s call to dig grave at seven in thuh mornun’.
I’ll be there. Funeral at eleven. Bandsmen’s call, ten
to eleven. Grooms to ’ave ’orses ready fur eleven, and
two waggons fur women. All thuh men collars on—•
those as ’ave ’urn. That’s all, I think.”


“What about the prayers?” said Johnny Sandford, the
principal rider, between sobs.
“I fergot abeout that,” said Bill. “Does anyone know
any prayers?”
Funny little Cowan, the down, muttered one of his
repertory gags about—
“ Ashes to ashes, dust to dust—
If the Lord won't take 'im, thuh Devil must,”
but this was regarded as irreverent.
“Oh, well, we'll 'ave tuh see wot turns up in the mor-
nun’,” said Bill, dismissing the meeting.
The morning broke brightly. The sun rose over the
sea of muddy flood waters, glistened on the wet casaurina
boughs and flashed on the wet trunks of the blue gums.
Bill Larrabee, with the boss groom, went over the
ground to make sure that it was safe for the processional
waggons. One dangerous hollow was rapidly culverted
with logs from a freshly felled tree and boulders. The
grooms had the horses’ coats shjning over their too
sharply apparent ribs, like satin. The women were
“dolling up,” as the process was described, and a,B the
men who had collars wore them for the occasion.
Bill Larrabee cast many anxious glances backward
towards the last township, scanning the horizon for a
hoped-for horseman in black. He vainly tried to re-
member some prayers of his childhood’s days, crooned
to him by his mother (a juggjer and rider who died
young), in the covered tent at the end of long and ar-
duous days with the battlers of the circus road. It was
their life, their world, travel and camp, travel and camp.
But no prayers came responsive to his wish. At last, as
by inspiration, Bill went to the bandmaster, Charlie, and
they conferred earnestly, Charlie shaking his head, and
together they wended their way to the living waggon
of Pierre Goblet, the star trapeze performer of the com


pany. The idea in their minds was that all foreigners
were Catholics, and therefore intensely religious. It
was also remembered that Pierre’s favourite expression
when he missed a trick in the ring was “Mere de Dieu!’’
which on being interrogated, he translated the meaning
of.
“No,” replied Pierre, when he heard the deputation
out, “I haf nutt said the prayers since childhood. Let me
see, I used to pray thus: ‘ Au nom du Pere, et du Fils,
et du Saint Esprit—ainsi soit-il.’ Zat wuz ze beginning
part. Then it wuz: ‘Dieu benisse papa, et mamman, et
oncle Fernand (’ee wuz my favorite), et tout le monde!’
Zat is all I can remember.”
When this was translated, Bill said he thought the
last clause would include Bendolo, and that it sounded
all right in French. So it was agreed that Pierre should
do the ceremonial part of the service, while Bill would
say a few words of farewell over the coffin before it was
lowered and covered.
It was wonderful how so many smart blouses and hats
for the women, and such a reserve of clean linen, in-
cludmg collars, among the men, could have been un-
trunked for the occasion.
Accustomed to the constant discipline of preparation,
everything was ready “to the tick,” as Bill put it. The
grooms had been hard at work from before sunrise,
polishing up bridle and saddle gear. The waggons were
washed clean of mud, and the canvas waggon hoods,
dried in the sun, shone white and fleecy aftet nature’s
laundry. Old Snip, Bendolo’s own favorite, had been
caparisoned in style by Jimmy Lamps, under Bid
Larrabee’s own supervision. The best saddle and bridle
in the show, with a tartan saddle cloth of amazing
newness and brightness, made Snip look almost like a
general’s war horse, and fit to follow the boss’s coffin
on his last ride. The stirrups and all buckle work were


burnished bright, and Bendolo’s gold-mounted ring
whip (presented him by the Committee of the Bulia-
naming Hospital for a benefit performance he had given
to help their funds) was tied across the saddle pommel.
“Crab,” the jumping dog, stuck close to the hind fet-
locks of Snip, as jn the master’s lifetime. The drivers
were on their waggons, the procession ranged up, and
when all was ready, Bill Larrabee gave the word to the
Bandmaster:—
'“Let ’er go, Charlie!”
The sodden drum gave three measured and ominous
thuds., the “Dead March” blared out to the sky, the
women sobbed, and the procession moved off in due
order, surely the most picturesque funeral procession
that ever gave the last march to the great departed.
Save for the occasional neighing of the horses,
unaccustomed to the slow and dignified processional
march, perfect silence was preserved. Tansy’s sobbing
might have been heard occasionally; but m ost of the
time her head was buried in Clara Chinizelli’s motherly
breast, sharing ’it with the baby Clara suckled, and the
sobs w’ere inaudible. The other women cried softlv, and
hushed the circus children into wide-eyed solemnity.
The improvised culvert was safely negotiated, and the
graveside reached. It was in a slight depression on the
summit of a hill, high above the flood waters. A straight
blue gum with a columnar trunk like a pillar of white
polished marble shot up from the head of the grave.
The mourners trooped on to the rising ground overlook-
ing the grave, and Bill stood at the head with Pierre
Goblet, who was obviously nervous. The time for the
last rites had arrived.
The band was silent, but sobs arose from the women
as the dreaded moment drew near when the mortal
remains of the “boss” were to be lowered into mother
earth. It was the great moment.


Bill stepped forward to Billy Props, who stood with
his gravedigger’s spade. He was about to speak, when
suddenly he stopped and listened.
The sound of horses at a gallop coming from the
tamp caused all to look around in surprise. Two riders
galloped up, a man and a boy. The man was obviously
a priest.
"Good morning, all,” the priest said.
“Yuh never see such a sight,” said Bill afterwards, in
reciting the story. “The legs uv ’e’s trousers wuz up
around 'is ears. Yuh cud see 'e’d ’ardly ever bin on a
Worse's back before. ’E ’ad on a long black coat, and
a billy ’at covered with black soil mud. He was as thin
as a whip lash, and had two bright coloured patches on
is cheeks, and the sweat run deeown throuh the mud
on 'is face. 1 never see such a guy outside thd circus
clowns. But yuh shudda’ seen him get to work on ’is
V>b!”
' ; Hastily saluting them with "I’m glad I’m in time,
.he roads were awful'!” the priest jumped from his
•torse; his attendant (also sadly mud-bespattered) did
the same. The grooms respectfully took the horses,
and the priest, from his saddle bags, with business-like
celerity, took out and assumed a series of vestments,
stuck a biretta sideways on his head, while the boy pro-
duced two candles, lighted them, and opening a prayer
book, waited.
A wave of satisfaction moved over the face of the
crowd. This was the height of good fortune. Here was
immemorial ceremony to their rescue. Bendolo would
go to his long home, not like a stray bullock, or an old
circus horse that had fallen out of the moh; but like a
Christian citizen—with as much ceremonial as one who
had sedulously stopped at home and had not travelled
with a "waggon show” in all his life.
The priest intoned the service in sonorous Latin, while
the boy gave the responses in a quavery treble. There
were impressive ceremonies, holy water sprinkling, the


throwing of a handful of earth on the coffin.
“Lower now,” said the priest.
The coffin was lowered by the grooms, and Billy
Props was proceeding to shovel the earth in, when the
priest said:
“Hold on a moment.”
And went on with the Latin. That finished, he turned
to them and gave the impressive service in English:—
“Man, who is born of woman, hath but a short time
to live,” and so on to the end. The fervour and
solemnity of the mud-bespattered, sweat-bedewed, cos-
tumed man of God impressed them profoundly. Here
was the priest, as in all the ages, inspiring the reverence
pf the primitive tribe and nation. Their hearts were
Sifted up, and for once this poor community of strollers
realised the greatness and solemnity of life and death.
The priest stopped and called sharply: “Now, fill up!”
and the clods fell upon the coffin. The boy blew out the
candies, the priest folded up his vestments, and nothing
was left but thg~ dull thudding of the mould as Props
and the grooms filled the grave.
Bill Larrabee stepped to the priest’s side and shook
hands.
“It’s very good uv you,” he said.
“Not at all,” said the priest, putting his vestments
back in the saddle bags in a business-like fashion.
“Will yuh stay and ’ave a bite and a cup o’ tea with
us?” said Bill anxiously. “Yuh must be tired.”
“Sorry I can’t,” said the Priest, smiling." I’ve got
to be at the bedside of a dying woman at three o’clock,
and to say Mass in two places after that. We’re in the
bush, you know. 1 was glad we got through to you.
We had'to swim three creeks. Come on, Patsy!”
The boy, who had been surrounded by the women of
the party, tore himself away and mounted his horse.
The priest shook hands with Bill, and mounted his.
"God bless you all!” he said, making a benisonal
gesture with his right hand in the air, and rode off
as Bill said later, “Hell for leather.”


They looked after him. Then Bill said;—
'‘l reckon ’e wuz a man and a brother. Let’s give him
three cheers.”
And the cheers which went after the priest and his
little acolyte took the place of the volley which the
soldiers fire over the grave of their dead general.
Slowly they walked back to face the routine of the road;
and by Bill’s side walked Tansy Saroni. These two
walked hand in hand in silent grief and sympathy.


ORGANISATION.
I.
NEITHER wild or even trained horses would drag from
the author the name of the island in which this adven-
ture occurred; nor would wild elephants or other wild
animals in the menagerie cages drag the name of the
town, nor the name of the President of the Shire Coun-
cil thereof, nor the year in which it all happened. All
that can be admitted is that it was a large island in the
Southern Ocean, but as most of the earth’s surface which
sticks up out of the water in the Southern Hemisphere is
broken up into islands, no possible clue can be got from
the meagre admissions extorted above from the writer.
This reticence, however, will not be observed with re-
gard to the name of the circus which was the protago-
nist of the adventure (if a travelling circus can be
described by so long a word). Publicity is the soul of
a circus, so no harm can be done in recording the name
of this great Australian organisation. Let us present
“Larrabee and Dantrys’ Huge Moving Caravan and
Equescurriculum,” mustering twenty-four brightly
painted waggons, sixty-two rolling fat horses and ponies,
six cages of well-fed assorted animals, from the lordly
lion to the lazy leopard.
The performers included the famous Farleigh Family,
riders, jugglers, acrobats, and Risley; Jules Fresno, the
universally admired strong man from Dubbo (N.S.W.);
pretty Minnie Merrivale, the “unparalleled eques-
trienne” (on the bills, and in her own opinion, too) ; and
the usual teams of performers —tumblers, riders,
leapers, clowns, trick ponies, Bill Larrabee s superb


team of six Trained Arabian Stallions (from Arabia,
via Bungendore); grooms, tentmen, Jimmy Lamps—a
host in himself; Clara Chinizelli—now in the sere and
yellow leaf—no longer starring in the ring, but wardrobe
women and philosopheress, with her clever team of
four daughters (whom she was bringing up in the pro-
fession of their mother, grandmother, and great-grand-
mother) ; and last but not least —in the opinion of those
changelessly loyal and keenly discriminating patrons of
the circus, the “Children-half-price” crowd—the
monkeys. ,
How this “Monster Aggregation of All Earth’s
Greatest Wonders” (see posters), got packed on the
deck and everywhere except on the funnel, the masts,
and the outside of the little steamer — (but again the
name will be suppressed, as likely to supply a clue to
the identity of the island, the town and Shire President),
no one can tell. But there the fact was, the “Huge
Moving Caravan” was safe, snug, and taut on the
steamer as it moved out of the harbour of (censored),
and plunged into the trough of a heavy sea somewhere
in the great Southern Ocean.
As all seas and storms are alike in the various oceans,
no inferences for identification can be drawn from the
descriptions of the weather in this chapter.
Of course, it is only hours from to ,
the place the show was going to; and under ordinary
circumstances, having left at 9 a.m., they should have
arrived at 5 p.m. (this necessary indiscretion in divulg-
ing the time must be overlooked). But they wallowed
all day long in the dreadful sea, men, animals, and
horses, tame and wild, overcome by sea-sickness, save
Larrabee himself, who stood by the horses, and looped
them up in their stalls with canvas slings, assisted by
the crew, and one hardy “immune” from the grooms.
They were in smooth water at 10 p.m., and at 11 were
safely moored to the wharf on a very dark night.
“No sheeow to-night, boys,” said Larrabee with de-
cision. “We’ll leave thuh stuff on board to-night, and


unload in thuh mornun’ early. Git ter yur hotels and
sleep.”
Murmurs of thankful relief greeted this compassion-
ate announcement, and trunks began to be packed with
alacrity.
It was at this moment that Larrabee and the circus
company became aware that the inhabitants of the cen-
sored town were enthusiastically assembling on the
wharf. Most of them bore hurricane lamps, as it is
a very scattered community.
As they assembled on the steamer, one of the lions
gave forth a roaring challenge: “Ru—augh! ru—augh!
ru—augh! ugh ugh ugh ugh!” and this
tremendous diapason died into an impressive silence.
This created an immense sensation among the towns-
people. If 1 say that this was the first time a circus
and menagerie had ever visited 1 hope I will not be
considered too indiscreet; but this statement is neces-
sary to give force and point to the extraordinary interest
taken in the proceedings by the townspeople. Otherwise
what followed would never be credited by sane fo’ks on
the mainland, who do not know how temperamental
island people are.
Suddenly a sharp voice was heard from the shore;
“Who’s the boss of this circus? Is he on board?”
Loud calls of “Bill! Bill! Yer wanted!” went round
the ship, and soon Bill Larrabee was in colloquy with a
bearded man with a panama hat, who stood out from
the crowd on the wharf, carrying a hurricane lamp.
“Are you the boss?” he called, as Bill’s handsome
face was projected over the side.
“Yes, I’m thuh boss. D’yuh want tuh see me?”
"Yes. I wanted to tell you that everything’s ready
on the ground. We have the vans here if they’re wanted.
You can have everything ashore in an hour, and open
straight away.”
“Open straight away!” said Bill. "Why, it's after
11 p.m.”
A decresending chorus of "Open straight away!” went


round the circus company in varied tones, from indig-
nant surprise to contemptuous derision.
“Well, there’s a big house here. You’ll lose ’um if
you don’t open.”
“Who are you?” demanded Bill, as the bearded man
'vith the panama seemed to be a person of some im-
portance.
“Who am I ? I’m the President of the Shire Council,”
he said, in deliberate tones, as befitting the importance
of his great office, and with an undercurrent of depre-
ciation of the questioner, as one wallowing in ignorance
of matters of world-wide knowledge. “My name is ”
“Doggy Doran!” shouted a shrill juvenile voice, and
the crowd laughed.
It is surprismg how irreverent the juvenile popula-
tions of these Southern islands are towarcfs their great
history-makers.
“My name is Mister Doran,” continued the PresMent,
with severe emphasis. "1 want to tell you that some of
the peopie here have come twenty-five miles to see
your show —some from right oyer the mountains. The
town’s full of visitors, and half of them can’t get accom-
modation for the night. You must open the show.
They’ve nowhere to go to cut out time. They stayed
for you, and can’t get home to-night."
Larrabee was impressed with this laying bare of the
situation. He conferred with the captain, the performers
and leading men on the deck. The captain strongly
advised that the wishes of the people should be met, if
possible. “It’ll pay you next time you come a'long.
They’re good sorts here, and they never forget a good
turn.”
This is a general characteristic of other island peoples.
Addressing President “Doggy” Doran, Larrabee said:
“We’d like to show. But all our people are very tired
and them and thuh horses got a big knockun’ about
cumun’ up here. Could we get any help, d’yuh think?”
Here a loud shout arose from the crowd.


“Help! We’ll all help! Hurrah!”
Loud as was this adult demonstration, it was almost
drowned in the shrill treble shout of the juvenile volun-
teers.
“We’ll all help! We’ll all help!”
There was no standing against t.his enthusiasm.
“All right,” said Bill. “We’ll open.”
“Hurrah!”
“Look at ’urn,” said Bill, the whole kid population's
cut, and the women with babies asleep in their arms.
We’ll run the sheeow same as we do in Sydney ur Mel-
bourne.”
Behind the crowd, in the misty darkness of the pub-
lic square, Larrabee became aware of the presence ot
numbers of vehicles, buggies, dog-carts, spring ditto,
covered vans; with champing horses tethered here and
there, awaiting the propitious hour to transport their
owners to the surrounding farms, and right over the
mountains to v the distant homes frcfti which they had
been liiftd by the gorgeous colour-printing-displayed
oh the walls, fences and trees by the energetic advance
agent.
The electric lights were soon flashing on the decks of
the steamer and on the wharf. Bill was in conference
with the Shire President.
“Don’t let your people do a single thing,” said Presi-
dent “Doggy,” his bearded face biasing with enthu-
siasm. “We’ll do everything. All you have to do is
to superintend. We have plenty of willing workers.
Leave it all to me. It’s all organised. You don’t know
what organisation will do. The Council are with me to
a man. It’s the first time the Council’s ever been unani-
mous. We’ve been working it all over ever since you
didn’t turn up at the right hour. I put the town clerk
and the inspector of nuisances straight on to have
everything organised. We dug the ring—”
“Dug the ring!” said Bill, in consternation. “’Ow
deep did yer dig it?” %
“Well, we did not make a really deep ring,” said the


President. “We thought a couple of feet would be
enough.”
‘‘Oh,’’replied Bill off-handedly, “we’ll soon fill it in.”
The President looked as if he had received a jolt. He
staggered, but recovered, and went on; “We were not
quite certain of the diameter. But as your circus was
reputed to be a very big one, we made it a diameter of
fifty feet. Would that be about right?”
“Gee-whiz!” said Bill, “we’ll ’ave ter see ter this at
once. W’y all circus ring’s thuh same size whether it's
Barnum’s Greatest-on-earth or Larrabee’s bush-snap.
The ring horses’lll be stumblun’ all over the blinded
place. They’ve been trained all their lives to a thirty-
four foot dymeter. You couldn’t tell them! They’d
soon know, and they’d pitch the riders off with
their stumbles. But never mind, we’ll git on ter it
straight away.”
This was another jolt for the President. He winced,
but his invincible optimism prevailed.
Meanwhile, the location had been illuminated by the
hurricane lamps of the townsfolk and visitors, and by
kerosene flares improvised by the property man of the
circus. The acetylene plant was on the ground, and was
being fitted; the tenting w ; as in place; willing hands
helped to pull up the centre pole, and to drive the stakes
for the side poles.
Small children worked like navvies at all sorts of
tasks, helping to put up feed stalls for the horses,
bringing buckets of w'ater, perpetually getting in
everyone’s road, and being ecstatically happy when
some performer gave them a w'crd of encouragement.
Others wandered about with the entrance money burn-
ing holes in their tightly closed fists, waiting breathless-
ly for the opening to reveal the glories depicted on the
bills.
“Only the side-rvalls up,” was Larrabee’s command,
“We don’t want the tops. walls of the big tent,
and menagerie tents, boys. But get up thuh dressing
tents as quick-as-yuh-can, and let the people start


dressun’. ’Ere, bandmaster, give us some music. We’ll
work better ter thuh music. Thuh ’orses works better.
W’y shuddn’t we? I think that’s a good idee. We’ll
try it in thuh next town."
This suggestion appeared to commend itse.lf to every-
one save and except the band.
At two o’clock in the morning everything was ready.
The deep ring, which the zealous inspector of nuisances
had caused to be dug was filled in, and the arena
reduced to proportions which met with the fastidious
approval of the circus horses. The “dymeter” was
restored.
Performers were busy dressing in their tents, while
eager citizens, ignorant of the geography of “the back”
of a circus, stumbled in to look for something, and
stumbled out again muttering apologies to circus ladies
in diaphanous attire, who murmured “Not at all!" in
gracious tones, and went on making up.
At 2 a.m. precisely, the tent and seats were packed
by an audience which, by now, felt it was part and
parcel of the circus company. Were they not participa-
tors in the preparations! As the band struck up the
overture, small children, who had slept calmly amid
the turmoil awakened to hitherto unexperienced de-
lights. What pen could ever adequately describe the
joys of a child’s first circus! Kipling, Weills, O. Henry,
R. L. Stevenson! No! It would require another
Dickens.
The local pressmen sharpened their pencils, the ring
attendants stood around with unkempt hair, as they
always do. Finally, to a breathless audience, Bill Lar-
rabee, in a handsome uniform, with gold braid, tight
riding pants of white buckskin, and long yellow ridings
boots, carrying two business-like gold-mounted ring
whips in his hand, his curly hair oiled and parted in
the middle, entered the ring, and bowed _ to Mr.
“Doggy" Doran and the members of the shire coun-
cil, the inspector of nuisances, the town clerk, and
their wives.


“Let ’r go!” exclaimed Bill Larrabee, and for the first
time the inhabitants of the island town had unfolded
to their gaze the delights of a circus—the beautiful,
high complexioned lady performers in tights or ballet
skirts, the handsome men, with such calves, too, the
glorious horses, and the cunning little ponies, and, in
due course, the CLOWNS!! Such laughter, such ap-
plause, had never been known in that important town.
One of the clowns, too, had an educated pig, which
jumped over miniature hurdles, and picked out num-
bers from the sawdust. Could such things be!
“What d’yuh know about that!” was the universal
exclamation.
And the children! They had come into the arena
tent almost glutted with the feast provided for them
in the menagerie, and yet were insatiable in their appe-
tite for the enjoyment of the arena. It did Bill Larra-
bee's heart good to hear their bursts of merry laughter
and applause. Many imaginative boys whose desire
was to become outlaws like Robin Hood .in “Ivanhoe,”
or to sail among pirates like Jim Hawkins in “Treasure
Island,” or to enact the role of Peterkin, in “Cora l
Island,” changed in a magic instant, and each and all
were converted to a fixed and unalterable determination
that their mission in life was to be a clown, save one,
who wavered for a moment between the noble lives of
clowns and jugglers.
Was there a properly constituted girl there that night
who did not mentally resolve to emulate Minnie Merri-
vale, and stand on one leg for the rest of her life on
Kitty, the ring mare, doing pirouettes, or jumping over
coloured banners or through variegated hoops!
At 4 a.m., the great audience surfeited with pleasure,
poured out into the square. An orange and pale red
dawn was beginning to peep in the (point of compass
excised, as giving a clue to the town, by fixing the “lo-
cation” of the sunrise), and clustered round the front
door, exchanging criticisms and reminiscences of the
various feats, laughing over the imperfectly remembered


clown's gags, slipping gradually back to the discussion
of everyday topics, which neighbours of twenty-miles-
and-over distance invariably discuss—the crops, the
weather, who’s married, born, or dead, etc.
In the midst of this, Larrabee, who had just finished
"washing off,” and had the night’s “takings” in a bag,
emerged from the tent, accompanied by the President
and members of the Shire Council, with their official
staff.
“Now, we’re sure to have a speech!” said one citizen,
pausing from the task of harnessing a grey mare to a
sulky.
“Rathurrr!” replied his neighbour.
“Doggy’s good at these kind of things. He allers says
the right word.”
“Fellow citizens!” cried the President. “I know you
all want to get to your homes as soon as possible.
You’ve come a long way, some of yuz. But I don’t
think it ’ud be right if we didn’t express how much we
appreciate the kindness uv Mr. Larrabee in opening his
show to-night (Hear, hear.) You know how tired they
all wuz; and yet, sooner’n disappoint you, they got
to work and opens the show, and gives us the perform-
ance you’ve just seen. (Applause.) Now, for the show,
itself. Now, I’ve seen a few shows. (Murmurs of in-
terest). Yuv all seen a few shows. (Fresh murmurs).
But I don’t suppose yuv ever seen a show as good as
this. (Loud applause, and faint noises of wheels, as
the vehicles on the outer circumference of the crowd
quietly moved outside the oratory belt). 1 venture to
say (Doggy repeated this phrase three times, in true
oratorical manner. He had copied it from the member
of Parliament for the district, who had caught it from
some higher up statesman, who in turn had read it in
Burke’s speeches.)—l venture to say that none of yuz
even in Rome ur Paris, ur New York, ur London, has
ever seen a better show than this.”
This statement was necessarily incontrovertible, _ as
none of those present had ever been in those great cities.


But it was immensely impressive, and from that
moment established beyond question the world position
occupied by Larrabee and Dantrys’ “Huge Moving
Caravan and Equescurriculum.”
“Some people talk about Shakespeare's plays, and
these here musical comedies,” he continued, with a ring
of challenge in his voice. “But I say—give me a good
circus!”
At this an overwhelming din of approval arose from
the assembled juveniles—such as were then awake—
whose matured opinion had been unerringly voiced by
President “Doggy” Doran. The shrill hurrahs from
children’s voices were incense to the orator.
“So, I say, let’s give the showmen and the ladies, and
Mister Larrabee three hearty cheers. Take yur time
from me. Now, let her go—Hip-hip-hip-hurrah! Hip-
hip-hip-hurrah! Hip-hip-hip-hurrah! Thank you
ladjes and gentlemen. Mr. Larrabee, I have much
pleasure in conveying to you the cordial appreciation
of this great meeting, for what you have done for this
town and its people.”
Bill’s gratification was expressed tersely,
“We’ve did our best, ladies and gentlemen,” he said
modestly. “We ’ave a few acts, though we sez it our-
selves, that you couldn’t beat in them there towns yuh
mentioned. It wuz a bit 'ard on thuh performers, but
yur applause bucked us all up. Thank yuh, Mister
President. We’re all off to bed now, an’ we needs it, I
kun tell yer. (Murmurs of sympathy). We’ll give a
matinee at 3 p.m. ter-day, and a performance at
night beginning at 7 p.m. (Loud cheers). Our prices
are three, two an’ one, children ’arf price, and special
rates fur large families. All poor children an’ orphans
admitted free. (Great and loud prolonged applause.)
We’ll ’ave thuh tent top up at both performances. We
only had time ter put up thuh side-walls ter-night. But
wen yuh see our big tent, 30ft. top, with a 20ft. middle
piece, yu’ll say yur President wuz right about Paris


and them other places. I’ll now say good-night to all.
But, we’ll be back here next year.”
And amid renewed cheers, Larrabee and councillors
and official hands went off to bed, all well contented
with the night’s work—and the latter also with the
"takings” in the bag.


I
“BILL US BIG.”
THAT Bill Larrabee had made but one speech in his
lifetime is well authenticated, as he has made a thou-
sand speeches telling how he made it. He loved to tell
it—when the lights were out in the “big top,” and only
a flare left to light up the interior of the whisky tent,”
where he usually sat after the show with a few friends,
some pressmen, and a couple of his favorite performers
—when the horses were well stabled and fed, and the
animals in their cages had settled down in some cases to
their nocturnal promenades, in others, to sleep.
The story of h,is only speech was a favorite one, be-
cause it recalled the days when his show was a little
country “snap” and marked the incident which divided
failure from success, which developed his starved little
road show of a few waggons moving slowly through the
“back blocks” to the big, “three-pole, 150 ft. top,” of
to-day, travelling over the whole of Australia, and parts
of the East in its special steamers, and on its special
trains, with their own sleeping cars.
He would wait till his partner, Jim Dantry, and dainty
Mrs, Dantry, had put their heads in the flap of the
whisky tent, and had bade him good-night, and little
Cuppy (Buttercup) Dantry had kissed him farewell.
Then he would begin by saying that “It was Dantry’s
last chance, and he made a scoop.” But the story must
be told with circumstantiality, and with some respect
for the unities.
Dantry, the advance agent for Bill Larrabee’s ‘‘Mas-
todon Circus, Menagerie and Hquescurriculum,” drove


his tired horses down the last hill, and along a straight
western road which looked now like a skittle alley along
which the lurid ball of the declining sun had been pro-
jected by giants among the huge skittles formed by the
trunks of monster eucalypts, and came to the small town
of Corrobortee.
He was tired and ill-tempered; for he had in his
pocket a letter with a large colored heading, which in-
formed him in, bad spelling, and with no grammar at
all, that his advance agency work had not been satisfac-
tory; that the towns were badly billed recently (at this
Dantry looked ruefully at the small baskets strapped
at the back of his buggy); that the forage and supply
contracts were badly made (here he thought of the
drought prices, and shuddered); that the hotels were
a “blanky take-down” (here he thought of skinny sheep
and starving cattle); and that things generally were
not stirred up enough”. Dantry was exhorted to re-
member carefully that he was “Agent ahead of a blanky
circus, not a blanky bush missionary.” It wound up
by warning him that it was his last chance. “Bjll us
big!” was the final exhortation. And the phrases, “Bill
us big!” repeated itself in his brain like a song.
He sighed as he perused the letter, but turning the
page he saw a hasty scrawl in the same hand:
“P.S.—Dear Jim, He means it this time. You better
buck up. Much love, —Your Fanny.”
Dantry kissed the postscript, and put the letter in
his pocket.
“A nice letter to write to a man,” mused Jim, when the
landlord of the Carriers’ Arms, Corrobortee, had shown
him to his room and departed, "after the battlun’ I’ve
done. He pays me no wages fur four months; I’m out o’
pocket fur exes; I’ve got the worst lot o’ printun’ I ever
seen since I been in businuz; all my,color printun’s gorm
there’s a bad drought, feed’s dear, money’s scarce. He
wants to lay the blame on me. Darned rough. 1 earn t
stay behind to drag the people in. How kin I fetch
D 129


’em with this darned printun’P He knows I’d leave,
owny fur Fan; and he keeps me far ahead, and one-
night stands, so’s I carn’t see her. But I’ll bi,ll this town
fur three nights, and then I’ll k}'um back and see her,
and be hanged to him.”
The horses in stable, he laid out his printing on the
bed in his room, and gazed ruefully at the plain black
letterpress, and the few dull-coloured picture prints,
which he intended to paste up that night. “Bill us big!”
he said scornfully. With a heavy heart he sat down
on a huge wicker trunk which occupied a corner of the
bedroom, and gave himself up to bitter thoughts. His
eye suddenly came from vacancy to alertness as it
fastened upon something sticking out of the wicker
trunk. He opened the trunk, looked, did a wild dance,
and then calling the landlord, asked him whose trunk
it was.
“It wuz left ’ere by a commercial traveller, ’oo said
his sample stuff got mixed up on a boat with the stuff
from one of them there big circuses. He got this, and
the circus gota lot of samples of soap. If it’s any good,
I’ll sell it to you.” A bargain was struck, and Dantry,
about half-past eleven o’clock that night, emerged from
the hotel in a dungaree suit, with a short ladder, a
bucket of paste, and a huge wallet full of the “big
circus” printing.
“This might save the situation,” mused Jim Dantry,
as he posted his new printing on the walls and fences
of Corrobortee.
11.
THAT town, innocent of the surprise in store for it,
slept. It awoke early, and soon its collective astonish-
ment was great. While it slept, a wonderful thing
had happened. The town had been turned into a vast
picture gallery. On every vacant wall and fence were


pictures of huge dimensions, and colors of vivid bright-
ness dealing with circus subjects. Here cages full of
lions looked with evil intensity at groups of small boys,
who, fascinated, glared back at them; there herds of
majestic elephants, with bright yellow tusks and blue'
black trunks, were depicted in noble forests; huge hip-
potami, with gaping mouths of crimson color, large
teeth, and small, foreshortened bodies, wallowed in
reedy Nilish-looking waters. There were giraffes that
were so tall that their legs could not be pasted on even
the highest walls, and had to be sacrificed in order to
give publicity to their necks and heads; and snarling
tigers, with gaudy, yellow stripes. In short, as the
letterpress declared, “all the denizens of the jungle, from
Nubia to Nizam,’’ were assembled—or their pictures
were exhibited—on the walls of the township of Corro-
bortee.
Then, there were pictures of beautiful horses, with
arched necks, galloping like mad, and on their backs,
or in strange attitudes in the air about them, beautiful
and high-complexioned ladies and gentlemen. Further,
on, a whole palanx of the youths of the village gazed
all day at the picture of a life-size group of clowns, with
very red noses and white cheeks, playing funny pranks
with, ponies, pigs, zebras, donkeys, monkeys and other
unfamiliar animals. There were also representations
of exterior views of enormous canvas tents, and interior
views of the same, showing apparently millions of
people assembled round hundreds of cages full of thou-
sands of wild beasts.
Followed by glances of admiration, Jim Dantry drove
away early in the forenoon of the next day, leaving the
town in a state of amazed anticipation. Before leaving
he took a savage satisfaction in writing to Larrabee to
the next town back.
“1 took notice of what you said. I billed you big
all right. I think you will like the billing here. I
managed to get hold of some good color stuff. Try


and look as like a big show as you can. See that the
drivers has a wash and shave, and puts on their coats
before you come into town. Them as has collars, too,
ought to wear ’em. Put up the 30ft top, and two 20ft
middle pieces. ( You’ll have big houses—sure. Good
iluck, —yours, J. Dantry.”
"P.S.—Tell Fan Paget not to smoke cigarettes when
the procession goes down the main street.”
“P.S.S.—I bet you won’t call me a bush missionary
after this.—J.D.”
111.
THE news spread throughout the district as if by magic.
It passed from the adjoining farms to the distant
squatters’ homesteads, to remote rabbiters’ camps, to
fossickers’ and miners’ huts. The residents of the
district were widely scattered; but Corrobortee was a
central rendezvous, and the farmers and squatters came
in about once a week to get their stores, newspapers,
letters, tobacco, and gossip. A settled determination
was come to throughout the community for a radius of
sixty miles to see the “big circus.”
The Editor of the "Corrobortee Independent” added
fuel to the excitement when his next weekly issue came
out smellling damp and inky, and with a special inset
containing a whole page “ad,” illustrated with thick-
line picture woodcuts and letterpress, which announced
that Larrabee’s had “All Earth’s most curious creatures
and rare marvels, with zoological raritjes not seen
elsewhere.” This was read with the wall picture an-
nouncements which declared that there were “Three
miles of goigeous, glittering parade glories,” and “One
hundred huge cages, tanks, dens and lairs, containing
three times the largest zoo in the world.” This inflamed
the fever, and the town was in a state of paralytic an-
ticipation. There were sceptics, of course, who dis


believed in the possibility of this feast ever coming to
pass, but they were not encouraged. Their own children
sat on them.
IV.
BILL LARRABEE, of Larrabee’s Circus, etc., was a
thick-set man, with sunburned face, black moustache,
and curly black hair. He wore a dark suit, a calk-skin
waistcoat with gold Burtnah tickal buttons. A watch
chain of solid gold, in the shape of a horse’s bit, and life
size, was spread across his vest. He had no collar, but
a handkerchief of many colors, was wrapped negligently
round his thick neck. His eyes were a bit blood-shot,
but, on the whole, there was “command” in his face;
and horses and wo'men always obeyed him. Men gene-
rally did, too, after they had been knocked down once
or twjce.
The waggon which he drove was a curiosity. It was
a boat, fitted upon a four-wheeled waggon carriage. The
seats were occupied by the band, and in the stern of the
boat a small but vigorous half-caste boy, when called
upon, smote the big drum with violence.
Looking down to the town of Corrobortee, as his cara-
van arrived on the overlooking hill, Larrabee soon per-
ceived that it was in an unwanted state of excitement,
and that, for that class of town, a rather large crowd
was assembled.
“1 thought this was one of them there corn, mutton,
and pumpkin towns,” he said, “but this looks like chops,
steak, and sausages, eh, boys?”
Lie mused awhile, after he had an assenting mur-
mur in reply.
“I don’t like the look of this, in one way. Now,
what trick’s that Jim Dantry been up to? Fan,” he
called, “read that letter to us again.”
A pretty girl, with touzled hair, and a cigarette in


her mouth, stuck her head out from under the cape
of a “living waggon” and read the 'letter again.
"Well, 1 think Jim’s played us some tiick,” said
Larrabee, with conviction. “There’s somethun unusual
goun’ on here.”
“Oh, you gotta deeown on Jim, Uncle,” replied Fan.
“You’re always blimin’ him fur things he didn’t ought
ter be blimecl fur. Yuh know he’s pulled the sheeow
outter lots of tight plices.”
“Yes, yes, so he has,” sa : d Larrabee, grudgingly. “I’ll
furgive him a lot for what he done at Appse’s Flat, that
time when the lion got on the kyge. I don’t want to
abuse him, Fan. P’raps he has done us good turns.
You’re right to stick up fur him. But there’s somethun’
funny about this place. Never mind. Masked All
coats on. Band, strike up. Off we go!” and he flicked
his leaders, and went off down into the town, the band
blaring out to the surrounding country.
“Stop!” said Larrabee, suddenly.
In a moment the truth burst upon him. He saw
the pictures, gave a gasp, and pulled up. The pro-
cession hajted and stared,
“Dashed if he ain’t billed us like Barnum’s,” he burst
out, when speech returned to him.
There was a silence, while Larrabee pondered over
the situation. The cheers of the children reached him
as they came to meet the procession. At length, Larra-
bee spoke.
“Oh, well, Masked It’s fetched the people. They’re
here, boys, all right, and it won’t be my fault if we
don’t get their money.
And he drove on to the vacant Fogarty’s paddock, a
hundred juvenile scouts pointing the way.
V.
THE spectators watched the sorry, bedraggled proces-
sions, with its three small cages of animals, its starved-
looking horses and ponies, its ragged performers, its


“Dashed if he ain’t billed us like Barnum’s. ”


general air of dilapidation, and its stale paint peeling
off the waggons, and amazed comments went round.
“Why, they ain't brought it all!”
“Where’s the animals?”
“I don’t see no giraffes.”
“Nur no elephants.”
The disappointment soon took tongue, and the people
trooped down to the allotment, talking excitedly as they
went.
“We ain’t fools, if we are country bumpkins,” said
more than one. “We won’t stand this.”
On the lot, the circus people were hard at it getting
ready. The horses had been unharnessed, and grooms
were feeding them at impromptu bagging mangers,
fitted in the waggon shafts. Tentmen were laying out
the “30ft top, with the two 20ft middle pieces.” The
uncritical youth of the town had volunteered for active
service. Small boys tried to wield huge picks or sledge
hammers, driving stakes as big as themselves for the
main guy ropes and side pole ropes, covering themselves
with sweat, and dust, and glory. Others toiled like
Egyptian slaves with buckets of water. Little fellows
carried seating boards large enough for whole families
to sit upon.
Performers were fixing gear on the centre poles, which
had gone up with magic celerity; property men were
putting up dressing tents for the performers; one was
binding hoops with gaudy red and white Turkey twill,
for ponies to jump through; a scrubby unshaven rouse-
about was fixing tissue paper screens on smaller hoops,
under Fan Paget’s supervision, for her own “principal”
act.
“Git outter th’ road,” said a performer to the crowd,
which had come near enough to hustle the workers.
“Where’s the elephants?” shouted a sarcastic voice
from the thick of the throng.
“Oh, ask the boss,” said the performer, as he went on
lashing a rope to the trapeze bar, with a supreme
contempt for the crowd.


Bill Larrabee stood round assisting the work by
advice and imprecations, and by occasional personal
interventions which seemed to get things working
smoothly.
“Bring that guy rope further this way. Hurry up
with them lacings. We want her up in a minnut. Haul
a bit on the bail ring. Hey, you! you swine! Don’t
you see what you’re doun’P You’ll have the blanky
tent deeown on toppa the people what pays their money.
Ha! You kick that horse again, you , and I’ll
let daylight into yuh! Props, bring the bottle lights
here. Eh! what’s that—where’s the elephants? Kyum
and see fur yurself to-night. Our prices of admission,
gentlemen, is three, two and one. Children half-price to
the two fust. Light a flare there. Props. Will we Be
ready at eight? Easy! How much fur a family uv six?
Oh, yuh kin carry one in yur arms, and the missus kin
carry another, and we won’t make no charge fur them.
Now, boys, all together. Up she goes. There’s a tent
fur yuh! Big enough fur Sydney. Ah-h-h-h! Hold up
there. Jack, Cobra’s bitun’ the Cissy colt. Neeow, I’m
gowun’ to have a feed. Cum along, Fan. Band at
seven, boys, sharp.”
He strolled off with Fanny, apparently unconscious of
the dissatisfaction of the crowd; but in reality sharply
watching it, and recognising the danger. The crowd
followed them, and merged into a larger crowd in front
of the Carriers’ Arms, all angrily discussing the mat-
ter. His own amazement at the gorgeous stands of
printing—he passed fresh ones every minute —was
mingled with a kind of half anger, and half admiration
for Dantry. The boldness of the stroke pleased him.
“If we kun sweetun’ um, we’ll make money here,
Fan,” he whispered as they came near to the hotel.
“Take back all I said about Jim.”
“Uncle, you’re a bosker,” said the girl from her
heart, and almost sobbing.
“1 on’y wash he wus with me neeow,” continued Far


rabee, "instead of some of them lazy, brainless cows we
got. I’d swop away a dozen fur him."
For answer Fanny hugged his arm.
He was recalled to earth by a voice exclaiming:
“Where’s that three miles of gorgeous, glittering parade
of glories, er, old boy?” and a scornful laugh followed.
Larrabee was a battler. Fie had fought his way along
the.hard road of life, and had never bowed to adversity.
“I’ve often bin up against it,” he would boast; “but 1
never backed.” 'faking Fan’s arm to encourage her, he
marched erect through the crowd, which divided before
his determined looks, and reached the top step of the
verandah, where he turned and facedthem. They be-
came silent at once.
“You go inside, Fan,” he said.
“I won’t,” she replied, and stood there.
“Gentlemen,” he said, in a quiet way, taking off his
hat. “My agent’s got hold ov a fine lot uv printun,’ as
fine a lot as ever I see—quite the best we ever had.
He’s put it up on these Ixre walls, where it looks very
well. But 1 admit it looks a bit too good fur a show
like ours. Neeow, it was a bit ov a trick fur the agent
to do both to you and to me, in one way; and then,
in another way, it’s a good thing. We’ve gotta make
our livun’ same as you have. We come a long way
to amuze yuz in places where yuz don’t git much amuse-
ment. Don’t we, neeow?”
There was a reluctant murmur of assent; and a slight
change was apparent in the attitude of the crowd.
“Well, neeow. We gotta good show, an’ thuh prices
ain’t high. We’ve got the best lady rider, and the best
lady trapeze artist in Australia—native born, too.”
Here he put his hand on Fanny’s shoulder; and she
looked up into his face and smiled. The crowd were
evidently impressed, especially by the Australian note
he struck. Fan had thrown back her hair from her
forehead. Her face was flushed with excitement. She
looked very brave, and very pretty.


"Why,” he continued, after watching the effect of his «
last shot on the crowd, “if yuh had a sheeow big enough
fur them pictures yuh couldn’t get in under a pound,
because it wouldn’t pay them to bring it up here and
play under that; and anyhow, it wouldn’t kyum here,
and yuh’d have to geeow to Bathurst, or Mudgee, or
Sydney to see it, and that’d cost yuh a few quid.”
They were now listening attentively and rather sym-
pathetically. The sounds of the children enthusiasti-
cally working to help this show to be ready came to
them. Some glanced towards the allotment. The tent
was erect, its lamps alight, its fleecy new canvas shone
brightly in the dusk, with the outline of the seating
showing through it, A few of the crowd looked rather
ashamed.
“Neeow, what’s happened appears to be this”—he
assumed quite a confidential tone. “My agent, who’s
a smart young feller, has got hold ov some printun’
outter one of them big sheeows. He puts it up. I don’t
much blame him. They’re good pictures, ain’t they?
You’ve had a lot ov fun out of ’em. haven’t yuh? .1
have meself. Yuh don’t see pictures like them every
day. Do yuh?” (Murmurs of assent.) “I’ve heard say
as they call these kind ov things the picture gallery uv
the poor.” (Sensation! any reference to the "poor” in
Australia, and it gets a good reception.) “Neeow they’re
up, we can’t help it. We ain’t got no elephants, nur no
giraffes. We ’ave a few lions and tigers, and lots o’
good horses. But, is anything in this v/orld wot it’s
cracked up to be on walls and outside? Is every man
of yuh what yuh wants other people to believe yuh are?
No. I don’t say it out o’ spite. But we all know we
ain’t. The tombstones is the biggest liars of the lot.
(Applause.) “Does the grocer give yuh pure mustard
when yuh buys mustard or sugar when yuh buys
sugar?” (Great laughter, and voice, “That’s at yuh,
Sanders!”)
“I’ve never seen a sheeow yet,” Larrabee continue !,
“wot wuz as good as the advert)semnts said it wuz. So


take it frum me. Them as thought kind o’ harsh ov me,
can’t go throwun' bowkets at themseiVes. We gives a
good, honest sheeow, and we expect to see yuh all there
and I’m sure, when yuh see it, yuh won’t be disappointed.
It ain’t Barnum’s, but it’s w'orth the money you’re
goun’ to pay to see it. So come.”
He turned round, put on his hat, and strolled into the
bar, with Fanny.
There was an awkward silence for a moment. Then,
‘‘By Gripes, boys,” said big Larry Macdonald, "I’m
goun’ to shout a drink for the circus man. Who’ll join
us?”
And an enthusiastic crowd joined the showmen at the
bar.
VI.
It was after the show, on the third night of the season
at Corrobortee that Larrabee sat dictating a letter to
Fanny.
"Put this,” he said.
“Dear Friend Jim,
“A nice trick you played me. But it come off.
We’ve had three of the biggest houses we’ve had fur
years. The show caught on pop, and we’ll do good
business for a week. We ought to come out of this
with three hundred quid. Now, this is what I’m
goun’ to do. I’d play along this line for a month.
Catch the agricultural shows down the line till we
get to Picton. We can get same paint there fur
to freshen up the waggons, and let the horses spell
fur a w'eek. I’ll send Banks down to take your
place ahead of the show. He thinks he’s a hell of
fellow', so we’ll see what he kin do—and you go on
to Sydney. I’m sending you £5O by this. Engage
the Farleigh family—four good acts, and their own
horses—get them as cheap as you can, and send ’em
up. Keep atl the picture printun’, and by the


Holy Smoke, we’ll open in Sydney. We’re goun’
to be a big show, now, and you done it. No more
starvin’ and battlin’ out here. WeMl do the big
towns. And now, listen here —frum this out, you’re
a partner. I’ve no more to say, but perhaps Fanny
has something to say fur herself.”
What Fanny said in her own behalf does not concern
the reader. He may guess it if he likes.


THE DOOK.
IT was understood among the Australian press boys,
that Bill Larrabee, in the days of his success, was always
good for a yarn in the whisky tent round the back of
circus, near the dressing-rooms, after the National
Anthem and lights-out in the big-top and menagerie
tents, if once you could press the apt reminiscence but-
ton. Clare, of the “Daily Courier,” knew this, and
touched the right button one night in Melbourne, in
asking innocently who was the original of the lady in
the jewel-mounted photo-frame, which invariably stood
on Larrabee’s table in his dressing tent.
“That’s Lady Ainley,” replied Larrabee, tilting up his
head a bit with obvious pride, and putting his ring
whips on their racks.
“Some titled amateur, crazy on circus life?” queried
Clare.
“No. Born and bred in th’ circus. Three generations in
th’ business. She was the best principal rider I ever
knew.”
Leaning back in his chair, his hair slightly streaked
with grey, brushing the canvas of the tent, dangling
his bridle-bit chain, and puffing smbke from his cigar,
Larrabee soliloquised aloud:
“Ah, she was a rider! She had the courage and the
spring of a man. She was a great loss to the profession.
Of course, she’s better off. Rich, and a handle to ’er
name. But Minnie never iergits th’ life. Every year
she sends me something. Last year it was that.”
He picked up the photo-frame, and gazed at the por-
trait of a lady in an elegant decollete evening dress, her
abundant hair aflame with gorgeous jewels, her shapely


neck adorned with diamonds and priceless pearls. The
smiling face showed a dazzling row of teeth. The
writing on the photo was:
“To dear Uncle Bill with love from Minnie.”
The Pressmen knew that Larrabee had been adopted
as an amateur uncle by many brilliant circus girls, who
owed their success to his kindness and care in the
rough life of a struggling bush show.
“Would y’ like t’ hear about Minnie?” said
Larrabee.
The company having expressed their acquiescence,
and a small black boy in tights and gauze wings having
replenished the glasses, the story set down in its sub-
edited form was narrated.
The partnership entered into between Bill Larrabee
and his smart young agent, Jim Dantry, after the epi-
sode described in “Bill Us Big!” brought the experienced
showman his first sustained success, and left him for the
rest of his show life a substantial margin cn the credit
side.
After the Melbourne season which followed this
success the new show, with Dantry’s business brain
augmenting the circus mastership which Larrabee had
acquired in his thirty years of show life, toured for six
months through bounteous seasons. The new organisa-
tion was still a waggon show. There were twenty-
four waggons for hauling tents, poles, circus gear, pro-
perties and apparatus (as the performers call their
fixings). Four new animal cages, the shutters bright
with new paint, contained a lioness, and a litter of four
cubs, a fine panther, two leopards which blinked their
eyes, and a popular “happy family” of assorted mon-
keys, which filled one cage and gave infinite satisfaction
to the rural juvenile population.
Larrabee still drove the band waggon—a boat on
wheels—a perfect wonder in riverless and lakeless dis-
tricts in Australia, where a boat is the most novel of


novelties; and in addition to the Farleigh family, which
Jim Dantry had been fortunate enough to secure, and
the old company, there were several new acts, including
a pretty “principal' act.”
Minnie Merrivale was the “boskerest principal
rider,” so Larrabee declared, that he had met in his
adventurous career.
. The partners noted with satisfaction that Minnie’s
hurricane feats, and fearless mastery of her horses were
an attraction in the back-blocks. Larrabee began to
take 3 personal interest in the girl, and, with his know-
ledge, soon built up a naturally clever turn into an
act that would have commanded a big salary in Europe
or America. Minnie’s ambition and desire for work
were insatiable. So as the show camped and rested on
Sundavs, Larrabee had the practice tent put up, and she
had the advantage of advice from a past master. She
herself was inspired by love of her work, and under his
nraise, tempered with criticism, she developed a fierce
desire for success.
“Well done, Minnie,” said Bill, one Sunday after-
noon, after a heavy practice. “You’ll make a world rider
all right. I can see you in Paris and London afore you’ve
done. But, look here, don’t kill the horses and grooms
trv’n t’ make ’em keep up with you.”
She laughed, blushed, and shook back her dishevelled
tresses.
As Larrabee went towards his partner, Minnie
caressed the horse, and turning to the groom who stood
meekly by, said:
“You give him a good feed and rub down, Duke,”
and walked, perspiring, hard-breathing, and happy to
her dressing-tent, while the groom led the horses off to
the temporary stables by the roadside.
.• •. ,• ,» •
The circus was in camp by the roadside, the waggons
drawn up ,in a convenient half-circle among the
gum trees. Nearby a clear stream, dancing over smooth


pebbles arid sand, and wandering through she-oak and
river gum, afforded a bathing place for horses and men,
and water for the snug camp. Smoke arose comfortably
from the cooking fires, round which men stood, watch-
ing the cooking with healthy interest.
Feed stalls, of rude bagging, stretched between
waggon poles; and the horses still shining from their
bath, revelled in a generous meal. The women sat on
property chairs or tubs, sewing or conversing, as the
sun declined behind the trees and glorified the bush.
Larrabee found his partner, Dantry, sorting great
crates of colour-printing. He turned over a property
tub striped with blue and white, sat down and joined in
checking the stuff.
“You check, and I’ll call,” said Dantry, consulting
a list headed, “Erie Penn’a, U.S.A.” “Here’s No. 456
1 sheet, Exalted Rulers of the Air; 1 sheet Trick Don-
keys and Clown; 9 sheet Bird and Monkey Bill; 9 sheet
Japs, Foot Juggling, Ladders, Pyramids.”
“Hullo! What’s this?” said Larrabee, picking up a
white sheet with black letterpress, headed by the royal
coat of arms.
“Let’s see! Oh, that!” replied Dantry, “that’s a pojice
proclamation that got mixed up with the printing some-
where down below Mudgee. Next, 2 sheet. Fun for the
Children—Giant Policeman chasing Dude, etc.; 6
Hippopot ”
“Hold on, Jim,” exclaimed Larrabee. “Read this!”
He held out the proclamation. Dantry read:
A reward of £2OO will be paid to any person giving
information which will lead to the discovery of James
Loughborough Ainley, who left his home in London
on September 16, 189-, and is supposed to have gone
to Australia. Description: Height, sft. lOin., eyes
dark, with heavy dark eyebrows, nose large, inclined
a little to the left, cars, large; good teeth, limps a little
on the left leg; ship in full sail tatooed on left arm.
“1 say,” said Dantry, “why that’s a description like
the groom the boys call ‘Dook,’ isn’t it?”


They looked towards the horse tents. The groom who
had taken Minnie’s horses was rubbing them down.
Clearly enough, his bare arm showed the tatoo mark of
a ship. He limped as he led the horses back to the feed
stall.
The crude police description libelled him. His nose
did not slant materially, nor did his ears appear out
of proportion. He was a well set-up, handsome and
gentlemanly lad, with bright eyes, eager face, and a
taking smile; age about 23.
"It’s the chap that’s gone looney on Minnie Merri-
vaje,” said Larrabee, laughing. “He came on as a groom,
I’ve sacked 'im a dozen times; but he only smiles, and
dogs th’ show round till he catches up. Then I take ’im
back again. ’E’s useless for any groomin’ work except
where Minnie’s horses is concerned, and there ’e’s a
perfect terror for work. Hey! Dook! Come ’ere!”
The groom stopped, looked up in surprise, and ap-
proached,
“Well,” said Larrabee, “wot ’ave you bin up to,
Dook? D’y’ see this?”
And he held up the proclamation.
“Oh, I knew that long ago,” replied the young man in
superior manner of speech. “It’s the police.”
“Oh, the police!” retorted Larrabee. “What do they
want you for? Murder, eh? Why don’t you go’n give
yurself up and get hanged!”
“I’m going to see the lawyers to-morrow. I let them
know my whereabouts a week ago. I had a letter from
some solicitors in Sydney. There’s no crime about it.
They want me over some money. My uncle in Eng-
land has just died, and I have inherited his money and
title.”
“His title, er!” exclaimed Larrabee. “What, are you
a real Dook?”
“No!” replied the Dook smiling. “It’s only a
baronetcy. Nothing at all to speak about. But there’s
a good bit of money.”
“Wot d’y’ call a good bit?” inquired Larrabee. He


remembered with satisfaction that the partners had
£SOO in bank notes in the treasury, which represented
their profits and savings since the new partnership was
formed. Larrabee called it a “good bit” at that time.
Of course, later, when after their great season in the
East—but of that in its place.
“I get a hundred thousand pounds now, and when
Uncle Charles dies I get the rest of grandfather’s estate
—altogether about £250,000,” said the Dook with a
calmness which the circus men thought simply uncanny.
They were speechless for a moment.
“Gosh!” said Larrabee, his eyes opening wide, as he
recovered his breath. “You’re quite a millionaire. Why
didn’t y’ rush the solicitors when y’ heard?”
“Oh!” stammered the Dook, “I just—l just wanted to
remain—until Minnie—until Miss Merrivale has her
new trick complete. You see, I understand her horses.
They’ll do things for me. If I left—if I left, why—
things mightn’t go on as well with her act.”
His embarrassment was quite evident, though he
seemed a cool, cheeky person ordinarily. The partners
laughed.
The Dook disappeared for a week. He returned clad
in garments of the most fashionable and up-to-the-
minute type. His diamond rings and pins aroused the
envy of Sam Kyngdon, the old juggler, and recalled to
that gentleman’s memory his gorgeous youth in India,
reminiscent of rajahs, syces, wallahs and mafoos. His
perfect hats and boots were the envy of the compara-
tively spick-and-span performers, and the despair of
grooms, tent men and property men. His art pyjamas
were the admiration of all. He was permitted by Larra-
bee to come along as a passenger on the pole waggon,
the least comfortable mode of transport in the whole
show. However, Minnje lent him some saddle dloths
and horse rugs and he managed to straddle "the centre
pole more comfortably on the joilty road. Thereafter his


He saw Minnie at the entrance-door suddenly draw her whip and
last the Dock across the face.


diurnal emergence in his gorgeous garments of the
night from the living tent, became a function which
drew all eyes. As Cora Chinizelli (suckling an entirely
fresh baby) said, through cigarette smoke wreaths, “He
was a circus in himself.”
Though the Dook no longer performed the function
of groom to Minnie’s horses, he hung around her,
bought her expensive chocolates, bangles and draperies,
and sat as a paying visitor in the best seats at night
leading the applause at her act. His attention relaxed
when she was absent from the ring, and he became
stolidly oblivious of the tumblers, horse and pony acts,
unconscious of the “Exalted Monarchs of the Air,” and
indifferent to the fascination of the clowns, or the other
wonders depicted on the expensive colour-printing.
Indeed, after her act he generally slipped round the
back and watched, with envious eyes, his successor
grooming Minnie’s horses.
There was no shaking him off—till Minnie herself
took a hand. He took to hanging round the ring en-
trance door when her act was going in. She usually al-
lowed him to place his hands as a step from which she
vaulted, light as gossamer, on to |he back of Curio, her
special horse. They would earnestly converse there,
heedless of the blare of the band, the applause or
laughter, the shouts of the ringmen, the cracking of
whips. The sounds of the circus did not appear to
concern them. There were long periods of silence,
and short bursts of conversation between them.
One night, as Bill Larrabee came out of the ring from
his own act, his four Arab stallions glistening with the
exercise, their harness ringing musically, he saw Minnie
at the entrance door, suddenly draw her whip and lash
the Dook across the face making a weal on those
lineaments so graphically described in the police notice.
Then, without looking, she flashed into the ring as the


band struck up her music, leaving the Dook rubbing his
wounds with one of his superfine handkerchiefs.
Larrabee, wondering, went to the ring entrance and
watched Minnie’s performance.
“I never saw her do anythin’ like it,” he declared
afterwards. “She rode as if the devil was after her;
She leaped higher, and somersaulted better, and pirouet-
ted with more spring than 1 ever saw a woman do. I
knew there was someth’n’ wrong.”
She came straight to Larrabee’s dressing-room after
her act, her bosom heaving, her eyes flashing from
excitement and anger.
“Why, dearie, wot’s the matter?” said Larrabee.
She burst out crying, and sobbed as if her heart would
break.
“Oh, Uncle Bill. The Dook.”
“Wot about 'im? Why did you slash ’im with your
whip?”
“I don’t like to tell you,” she sobbed.
“Come on, dearie. Of course you’ll tell your Uncle
Bill.”
She sobbed a while quietly, then dried her eyes. As
she became calmer her grief changed to indignation.
“He said he had plenty of money and a title, andUe
asked me to —to ”
“No, Uncle. To—to go away with him. He said
he’d give me a good time, and take me to Europe.”
“Oh,” said Larrabee, and his eyes flashed fire. "He
wants y’ without a wedding ring. Well, we’ll 'ave t’
explain t’ ’im that that’s not the circus way.”
He got up, picked up his big ring whip, and strode
towards the door of the dressing tent.
Minnie jumped up hastily and barred his way.
“Don’t, Uncle Bill,” she pleaded.
“Nonsense, I’ll teach him manners,” roared Larra-
bee. “I’ll show him wot circus people are. I’ll—let
me go, Minnie.”
But Minnie clung to' him till he stood still.


“Don’t forget I gave ’im a good hiding meself," she
whispered.
“So you did, Minnie. So you did. All right,” said
Bill, mollified. “You’re fond of ’im?”
“Well—l don’t—l don't—dislike ’im. But I’m a
good girl, Uncle Bill,” She bridled up. “If ’e thinks I
ain’t, I’ll show ’im.”
She switched her riding whip as if she were slashing
the Dock’s face again.
Cora Chinizelli, in her dressing-tent that night, as she
washed the make-up off her face, expressed to her hus-
band the general opinion of the circus company.
“That’s the end of Mr. Dook, with ’is scented
’andkachefs. That’ll settle ’im with ’is rings, an’ ’is
pins, an’ ’is cuffs an’ collars!”
But it wasn’t, and it didn’t.
True, he disappeared for a fortnight. Then one day
the circus caught up to a strange ragged object limping
along the road to Bathurst. It’s straw hat was a wreck,
it had tan boots worn to the uppers. It’s jewellery was
scarcely visible through the black and red soil which
caked its garments, and even smudged its face. It
looked ill-fed, tired, and done-up—in short, a perfect
scarecrow.
Bill Larrabee, in advance of the procession on the
band waggon, stopped as he got level with this scare-
crow. The whole procession halted behind, save the
loose horses, which ran along the road cropping the
scotch thistles on the roadside, and the red-tongued
barkii g dogs that followed. Heads were thrust from
living waggons to see the cause of the halt. Minnie,
looking touzle-headed from the tilt of the living wag-
gon fixed her eyes on the scarecrow.
One general exclamation ran down the twenty-four
waggons: "Why, it’s the Dook!”
It was at once recognised that a dramatic situation
had arisen.


After a colloquy lasting ten minutes between the boss
and the Dook, the comany were surprised to see the
Dook, apparently with Larrabee’s permission, given by
a pointed horse whip, scramble up on the band waggon
beside Bill, and the procession moved on.
The cause of this sudden change is explained in the
hurried consultation between Larrabee and the Dook.
Cutting into the former’s preliminary objurgations, the
Dook summed up the mattter in these words:
“It was all a mistage, Mr. Larrabee. I’ve written and
asked her since to be my wife. I really love her, and
want to marry her. She can be Lady Ainley any time
she likes.”
“I wasn’t dogging the circus, really. I didn’t know
you were coming along this road. 1 didn’t know what
road I was on. I’ve been lost. I’ve been tramping for
a fortnight, hardly eating anything. 1 was a fool. I’m
sorry—really—really sorry. Let me come back as her
groom. She said, last thing, that she’d sooner be the
wife of an honest circus groom than the mistress of a
prince. I want to be an honest circus groom, Mr. Lar-
rabee. Give me a job, and a chance to win her.”
Bill reflected for a moment. Then he gathered h' s
reins, and lifted the whip for a start.
“Maskee! Jump up,” said he, with a gesture of his
whip.
Only Cora Chinizelli saw, but pretended not to see,
Minnie’s face turn from fear to joy. She put her
head on Cora’s lap and cried softly, much to the dis-
comfort of the suckling baby, which was severely
squashed as the good-hearted Cora caught the girl to
her motherly bosom.
At the wedding breakfast Sir James Ainley’s hand-
some face gave the lie to all police descriptions as he
sat next to Bill Larrabee, with Minnje on the other


side; and Bill’s speech, though no press record was ever
made, must have been a remarkable example of post-
prandial eloquence, as it was punctuated continuously
with laughter and cheers.
“Fill ’em up again, boys. There yuh have the story
of a circus girl. Oh, yes, she writes to me regular,’’ said
Larrabee, with careless manner, in answer to Clare the
pressman, “and I’m godfather by proxy to the eldest
boy, who will be Sir James ’imself some day. The real
proxy on the spot was a Viss-count. If ever I
go to Europe, I’m to stay at their place. Yes, that’s her
picture. She ain’t changed a bit, as handsome as ever,
and looks quite at home in the character of a baronet’s
wife, don’t she? I suppose she knows the King and
Queen as well as you know me. Not bad for an Aus-
tralian circus girl, is it?”


BRUNGLEBONG’S BIG BAND.
Larrabee and Dantry’s monster circus jingled its way
merrily into the town of Brunglebong. Every strap and
buckle was bright and shiny; the harness new, spick
and span. The bright rugs of the ring horses and
performing ponies looked as if they had just been taken
down from the racks of Ben Edye’s store at Bathurst —
as, indeed, the>- had. The waggons and animal cages
almost sparkled with fresh paint. The band played
marches, in which the spirit of Spring sounded a tri-
umphant note, and a half-caste aboriginal boy smote
the big drum with a zest born of the four months
“winter camp” during which the circus had recoiled for
a better “spring.”
The winter camp had been pitched in a picturesque
spot on the banks of the Macquarie River, sufficiently
near to a town to enable stores to be replenished; but
just far enough to discourage visits to the hotels by
bandsmen, usually—by reason of their profession—the
thirstiest members of the company. And the band,
the new regime inaugurated by Dantry, was a feature
of the success of the show. It had, during the winter
months, practised assiduously, under the inspiration of
Van Senden, a bandmaster who had joined a year be-
fore. He was indeed a valuable adjunct to the new part-
nership.
In the letter sent from Sydney by Dantry to Larra-
bee a year before, he had stated Van Seitden’s quali-
fications in these terms: “He is a star clarionette player,
and a composer of band music. Nearly all the country
bands play his music, and they all know him. He tells
me that he can organise these bands to play with our


band outside the tent before the performance in every
town. That ought to be a big draw. The local bands-
men won’t want any pay, because it’s practice for them
with a good conductor; but Van Senden thinks we might
let them in free to the show, on production of their
instruments.”
This suggestion was adopted, and for a year had been
a complete success. Dantry. as advance agent, inter-
viewed the local band masters, and made arrangements.
Where there were no bands he talked of the advantages
of forming them, and pointed out that a good band
would put the most .insignificant town "on the map,”
to say nothing of the value of the band to the social life
of the district —for instance, dancing at balls, to play
the National Anthem at patriotic gatherings, and "He’s
a Jolly Good Fellow” at show dinners.
This leavep began to work. Bands sprang up like
mushrooms all over Australia. The social life of the
back-blocks was revolutionised. It was a poor sort of a
town, which did not make some effort to organise a
band. Concerts, euchre parties, race meetings, were
held to secure funds. Isolation, the curse of the bush,
disappeared. Society organised itself, young people
met, Cupid used his arrows, engagements and marriages
followed, and in short, the local band was a national
blessing. When the circus—the civilising influence in
this social change—came round, the local bandsmen
serenaded Van Senden, heard his criticism with bated
breath, carefully noted h'S hints, and, at night, assisted
the meagre circus band to play outside the tent be-
fore the performance.
Also, the fact must be noted, that the rule was scru-
pulously observed; “Local bandsmen admitted on pro-
duction of their instruments.”
All these musical alarums and incursions stirred up
the interest of the circus bandsmen themselves. They
practised more and drank less than was their wont.
Even old Ganz, the second clarionette, seemed to suffer
almost a religious revival of musical interest. He was


a typical circus bandsman, a German, very old, with
deeply lined face and red bulbous nose. He had been
a fine player, till drink (he said, hardship) had “spoiled
his lip,” as he put it.
"I haf played mit Vaagner, und Perlioz, und August
Manns, at the Crystal Balace,” he would say, “Vajt
till I get my lip back;” and he would tie his music to
the trunk of a eucalypt, and make the bush ring with
his scales and exerqises.
Well, as we have said, the circus jingled merrily into
Brunglebong, fresh and spick after its annual hiberna-
tion. As every schoolboy knows, Brunglebong is a
Western New South Wales town. It is not a very lively
place; its main business centre consisting of the general
store, the hotel, post and telegraph office, and black-
smith's shop, and stock and station agent’s. These
were not conterminous; but had large vacant spaces of
unpaved, unkerbed streets, grass-grown, between them.
Tracks were well worn from each of these, and from the
few residential buildings to and from the hotel. It was
easily seen that the Royal Hotel was the civic centre.
I here were few signs of prosperity; indeed, the only
times of bustle and excitement were either during a
general election or on the visit of a circus. But, there
was a big back country behind the town—that was the
secret of its survival.
The event of the year was the circus, and as Larrabee
and Dantry’s Monster Circus of 24 highly coloured
waggons and 30 lovely sleek horses and ponies drove
up the main and only street, to the blare of Van Senden’s
band, the thud of drum and the clash of cymbals, the
youth of Brunglebong realised that thqir annual car-
nival had begun, and followed, in joyous procession, the
band, to the vacant allotment on which the tents were
pitched, with an enthusiasm, prepared for any sacrifices.
Already the picture bills posted on the walls and fences
by the advance agents had made anticipation red hot.
Soon the waggons were placed in position, the ring


marked out, shaped with pick and shovel, and dressed
with sawdust, the tents laid out, and the sections laced
together, the guy ropes attached to the poles, the signal
given, and with a “hilley-hauley,” up goes the centre
pole. Then the youth of the town began their glorious
part, as pseons and slaves of the circus people, unloaders
of waggons, carriers of seating boards, jacks and
stringers, bearers of water buckets for the ponies and
horses, eager watchers of the fixing of the gear and
“apparatus.”
Youthful eyes strained themselves to observe the
man suspended by a sling from the ring bolt of the
centre-pole, who performed some mysterious rites,
coiling, splicing, and adjusting ornamented ropes, on
which trapeze bars were slung, or fastened with interest
upon the strange men and v/omen performers, standing
with upturned faces, hard and handsome, mostly young,
shouting occasional directions as to the adjustment of
gear, upon the staunchness of which their very lives de-
pended. These men and women, in their daily routine,
are perpetually “Shaking Dice with Death!” as the
flamboyant posters have it.
Gaudy Turkey twill was being wound round hoops
for the equestrians to jump through; property men drew
from the waggons mysterious tubs and barrels orna-
mented in strange colours. As soon as the tent top and
side walls were up, the lady performers disposed them-
selves on property chairs in the centre of the ring,
sewing and mending, while chatting amicably near by,
seated on a reversed tub painted in blue and white
stripes, was Bjll Larrabee, repairing his ring whip.
In the small menagerie tent the local youth, not being
permitted to see the sacred animals unveiled, stole sur-
reptitious glances through the interstices of the closed
shutters to see, or imagine they saw, ominous eyes of
forest denizens glaring at them menacingly from the
dark interiors.
A youth bolder than the rest destined for some high
political station ,in years to come, dared to question


Larrabee on a matter of vital importance to Brungle-
bong.
“Where’s the clowns, master?” said he.
“Where’s the clowns?” answered Larrabee. “Come
to-night and you’ll see ’urn. Come early. Overture
sharp at 8. General ongtray at five past; clowns ongtry
at a quarter past; we ’ave all sorts of funny clowns, a
knockabout, a dummy and a Shakespearean; also two
boxun’ clowns on stilts. They can be seen on the inside
to-night at 8. Roll up!” continued Larrabee, assuming
a side-showman’s drawl, and winking an expansive
wink at the lady performers: “Roll up, the prices are
three, two and one, children half-price—babies in arms
free—they must bring their mothers.”
That night, when the show opened, and the people
were pouring in, the partners stood together at the
entrance door of the main tent, and with knit brows
thrashed out the difficult task of “making a route.” This
is not so easy as it might seem. The old roving careless
circus days of Bendolo and Barnes, when the boss
simply enquired where the next town was, and followed
the direction, had gone. Dantry’s modern style had in-
troduced other ways. He had a business training as,
first, commercial traveller, then journalist, and by an
easy transition, advance agent and showman. To him,
therefore, such things as climate, seasons, and condition
of country, were factors in procuring results which
placed a solid wad of notes in the “Treasury.” The
partners often slapped the “Treasury”-—their trousers
pockets—with satisfaction these days. Bank accounts
were not yet, and the waggon show had not yet taken
to the railway, nor had the great future of Larrabee
and Dantry in the Golden Far East, at that time, been
mapped.
Thus, under Dantry’s auspices, their circus did not
meander north in summer, nor south in winter. Meteor-
ology was studied, as well as the prices of sawdust and
horsefeed, harness and saddlery. So the partners were


deeply absorbed that evening ,in the task of mapping out
their year’s itinerary, but with the precautionary half-
eye on the ticket-takers as they gathered the tickets,
and put them in the locked box.
“Take it from me,” Larrabee often said, en
philosophe, “circus fortunes are made or lost at the
front door. 1 know lots of ticket-takers who’s retired
and kept pubs when the circus proprietors went broke
and 'ad to go busking.”
Obviously the local bandsmen were taking full ad-
vantage of the “admission by instrumehts” rule. In one
of the pauses of their discussion Dantry casually re-
marked to Larrabee: “This is a good sized band for a
small town.”
“Yes,” abstractedly acquiesced Larrabee, without
looking up. He followed his thoughts, “Orange, Wel-
lington, Dubbo, all good towns. They’ve had good sea-
sons there lately, too—”
“Twelve trombones and eight cornets,” continued
Dantry. “Why this country band’s like a Sydney
Symphony orchestra. Look here, Bill. This is the
fourth side drum that’s gone through. They’re pretty
strong on kettle drums for a one-horse town like this.”
At this Larrabee switched suddenly off the question of
the route, and came back to earth. He addressed the
ticket-taker, big George Caspers, an American negro,
whose side-line was assistant tentman, and who had a
heavy hand with a sledge-hammer handle when ne-
cessary in rows.
“Yes, sir. Twenty clarionettes up to’now and still
cornin’. I’ll tell yuh wot’s funny, boss,” continued
George, his white teeth showing in an expansive grin,
“they’ve got ten boys in this small village playun’ the
triangle. They’ve all gone in,” he added.
Two trombones, a clarionette, a bass, and another
side drum and a small boy with cymbals. They were
admitted. Then came a boy with a sheet of music
clutched firmly in his tiny hand. Larrabee caught him
lightly by the shoulder.


“What instrument do you play in this band/’ he asked
kindly.
“1 dovvn’t ply no instrument,” said the boy. “ I ’old
thuh meeusic fur thuh cornet plyer.”
“All right, in you go.”
The partners looked at each other wiith a glance of
complete understanding. Then they burst out laughing
and continued till the tears rolled down their cheeks.
“That’s a new one on us, Jim. Ha-ha-ha!”
“Ha-ha! yes. Wait a minute. We’ll have a bit of
fun on this stunt. I’ll stick a postage stamp on the
next instrument.”
He did. It was a clarionette. The man passed in,
and sat with the local “bandsmen” in the 3/- seats. The
partners watched him place his clarionette at his feet on
the seating board. A hand reached up from beneath the
seats Clutched the clarionette and disappeared.
“They’re passun’ um out under the tent. Well, well,
well, it’s an absolute novelty. They’re smart boys in
this ’ere town, Jijn!”
“They are that!” replied Dantry, still mirthful. “But
wait on.”
Another reputed bandsman, with a clarionette pre-
sented himself.
“That’s a nice instrument you’ve got there,” said
Larrabee, interposing his athletic figure between the
bandsman and the entrance. “Can I have a look?”
The youth nervously handed it over.
“Why, here’s a postage stamp stuck on it,” he said.
“Is that yours?”
"Ye—ye—yes, sir,” said the youth dubiously.
“You belong to the local band?” queried Dantry.
“Ye—ye—yes, sir,” said the youth, now visibly em-
barrassed.
“Does it take a man long to learn?” queried Larra-
bee, innocently.
“Nu—nu—no!” replied the youth, turning pale, and
breathing hard.


By this time the partners had mamevured him away
from the door.
“Just play us a scale on it,” said Larrabee coaxinglv.
The youth gave one affrighted look, dropped the
darionette and fled.
“I think we’ll gather in all the band instruments of
this village, and enjoy our end of the joke.
“All right, Go ahead,” acquiesced Larrabee.
Each instrument bearer was rounded up as he ap-
proached the entrance, the instrument taken away, and
he was drafted into the menagerie tent in charge of
George. When they ceased to come, it was clear that
the whole of the Brunglebong Band’s instruments were
confiscated. The collection included one bombardon,
or bass, two cornets, two trombones, two clarionettes, a
bass drum, two side drums, cymbals, and a triangle.
That was all.
Then Larrabee made a short speech congratulating
the town on its band.
“It’s the biggest band 1 ever see for a place this size.
We’ve made a list of the instruments what went through
to-night. We’ve counted up thirty clarionettes, fourteen
trombones, eight basses, nine big drums, sixteen side
drums, six sets of cymbals, and twenty-one triangles.
Why London couldn’t do better, and you’ve got Sydney
and New York beat. I don’t know why you’ve bought
so many clarionettes, unless it’s because they’re easy
to carry, Of course, we’ve only got a few of these in-
struments ’ere, w'hich vou gentlemen wuz kind enough
to bring us. But we’ll let yuz all in to see the rest of
the sheeow for half price. You’ll be in time for my
act, the six Arab steeds. I’m just goin’ to dress now.
The clowns’ll take the instruments into the ring and
auction them. Now all youze that wants to join ,in the
fun like the rest of us, ante up half price and go in. 1
tell yuh it’ll be real funny. I can say, boys, that me
and me partner has enjoyed the joke. It’s a complete
novelty to us—something entirely new' and original,
which is what w'e circus folks is always lookun’ for.
K 139


The clowns. annul with bladders on sticks, drummed them
thoroughly.


Maskee! we’ve never had a pleasanter half-hour in our
career. In yuh go and we’ll begin. Jim, you go and
tell the clowns what to do.”
He collected the “cross” money, and passed the crowd
into the show, where they moved shamefacedly over
to the benches where their more successful accomplices
sat triumphant.
The clowns, well instructed, in due course explained
to the audience that a number of musical instruments
had been left at the circus door, and if not claimed,
would be sold by auction for the benefit of the neares!
hospital. Shrieks of laughter were caused by the funny-
attempts of the downs to play the various instruments:
the drums being their only success.
By 7 this time the audience had become aware of the
nature of the trick which had brought about these re-
prisals, and laughed consumedly as each owner, shame-
faced and unwilling stepped into the ring and claimed
his instrument. The clowns, armed with bladders on
sticks, drubbed them soundly, and the whole perform-
ance was proclaimed as the most successful ever seen in
Brunglebong.
That is how Brunglebong’s big band became a stand-
ing joke among the circus battlers in Australia. Bill
Larrabee tells it well at the expense of his partner. Jim
Dantry also tells it at the expense of Bill Larrabee.


"BAGOOS!”
Bill Larrabee was certainly pleased that his partner,
Dantry, had planned the Eastern tour, and had per-
suaded him to undertake it. It took some persuasion
to drag Bill out of Australia. It was his own territory,
he knew and loved its characteristics as he knew and
loved those of his horses and his people. He could
bend Australia’s smiling or frowning moods to his will,
as he could bend the wills, or cajole the tempers, of the
horses he trained, or the men and women he employed.
He was “racy of the soil,” he had travelled over more
of the surface of Australia probably, than any other
man living, and he loved it.
It was, then, a wrench for him to acquiesce in trans-
planting a great circus.of the dimensions to which Lar-
rabee and Dantry’s “Huge Moving Caravan” had grown
in 18 —, from one continent to another.
Finally he gave in; and .in the moment of decision
buckled his organising mind on to the task of trans-
portation, From the small waggon show was a far cry
to the big organisation travelling by special train and
boat, with its own time-table, its transport organisation,
its catering, its provisioning, its care of women and
children, horses, and wild animals. However, here they
were in Java, with a success beyond their wildest
dreams, and it was there that Larrabee met with the
adventure with Baron Lautrek Van Phalst.
Larrabee first met the man at the entrance to the
main tent of the Circus, at Batavia. It was an after-
noon show on a heavy, oppressive, average Java day.
The new tent, made by Walder, of Sydney, and put up
for the first time on the Koeningsplain in Weltevredcn,


looked dazzingly white, seen over the vivid green of
the plain. Within, the atmosphere was like a Turkish
bath, though outside a slight breeze blew, waving the
branches of the tamarinds which bordered the park, and
causing the palm fronds and papiah leave? to sway and
rustle in gardens which surrounded, and trees which
ornamented with brilliant foliage the porticoed white-
painted Dutch residences.
Adult visitors were few that day. The languors
which supervene on “rijstaffe!” (lunch), and half a
dozen or more “peits” (Hollands gin and peit bitters),
prolong the usual siesta of the Netherlands-Indjan, and
he and she tell off the “Baboo” (amma, ayah, nurse) to
perform the duty of taking the young ones to the circus
matinee. The children were flocking'into the tent, a few
of pure while Dutch or European stock, some of pure
Malayan, but the majority were of mixed Dutch and
Malay, or Chinese and Malay blood. Some gorgeously
attired and bejewelled Chinese women, with compressed
feet, were carried into the box seats on the backs of
their baboos. The monotonous “Senee!” “Sena!” of
Abdool, the Arab doorkeeper, as he directed the people
“this way!” “that way!” came to Larrabee as he sat in
the entrance to the big-top tent drowsily trying to get
what breeze blew' in under the open flaps of the tent
side walls.
Through the narrow throat of canvas connecting the
big top wdth the menagerie tent, Larrabee could see the
elephants restlessly swaying to and fro, after the man-
ner of their tribe, stretching their trunks languidly for
the plantains, sugarcane, or sar manillas offered by the
children, A lazy lion slept in an exhausted attitude on
his back, his legs appealing upwards against the heat.
Past the horses and ponies standing in their stalls with
gaudy coloured glazed leather trappings, were the deep
purple shadows made by the bamboo mat enclosure
fence, and beyond all, in the blazing sun, shone the rows
of milords and broughams, with their fine Australian
horses, the ash-liveried Malay syces sitting bolt up


right, and looking as dignified as the climate would
allow; and the long lines of sadows (dos-a-dos), with
their small, wiry Timor ponies and drivers, in gaudy
sarongs and light kabajas dozing on the seats, ,
The band came slowly from the front and took their
places; the white bandsmen wiping their faces, and
some their lips (they had passed the bar on their way
in), the Malayan musicians apparently impervious to
heat and—thirst. The huge tent was bellying slowly
like a balloon in process of inflation, as the lazy breeze
floated up through the side walls, which were looped
half-way up the side poles, to allow' the breeze any
chances it might care to avail itself of. The blue-
painted quarter poles slanted upwards, to hold the
vaulted sections of the canvas, and many airy sunbeams
and shadows made alternate play in the vast white
dome and on the sawdust of the ring.
The overture had just begun with a crash as brazen
as the sunshine outside, when Larrabee noticed a sound
of sw'ift wheels at the front entrance, and a harsh voice
called sharply "Burruntee!” (halt). A moment later
the attendants from the outer entrance came to him,
followed by two tall, military looking men in white. The
one who caught Larrabee’s attention first w'as a pale,
dark-bearded young Dutchman, with high, bald fore-
head, who looked like a dissipated Shakespeare in
white ducks.
Larrabee looked interrogatively at this remarkable
visitor, while he, with a gesture, turned to introduce his
superior. Larrabee’s astonishment at the sight of the
second visitor was ill-concealed. Me was a tall, dis-
tinguished looking, decidedly handsome young man.
His features were finely formed—a broad forehead, eyes
wide apart, a well-chiselled nose, a firm chin, moustache
twisted up in military fashion. The expression of his
face w'as haughty, proud, and self-confident. It was his
colour which attracted attention. He was perfectly
brown, or at any rate, he had the yellow-bronze which
proclaimed the half-caste. There he stood, a singular


product of the Dutch occupation of Java. In pose, in
demeanour, in carriage, in feature, in figure, in speech
he was a refined, cultured Dutchman. In the colour of
his skin, his eyes, his finger-nails, and his general ex-
pression, he was a half-caste Malay.
"He was the handsomest coloured man 1 ever saw,’’
said Larrabee afterwards.
Raising his white helmet, the visitor made a stately
bow, and handed his card. Larrabee read, “Le Baron
Lautrek van Pahlst,’’ This conveyed nothing to Larra-
bee, and his expression clearly indicated that. The
Baron stood in an attitude of polite indifference, gazing
fixedly at the roof of the tent; but behind him was his
white companion, making some sort of signals, which in-
formed Larrabee that his friend was no ordinary person.
"1 hope ’e speaks English,” said Larrabee to the white
companion.
Speak English!” interposed the Baron, with the
purest accent. "Yes, perfectly. I am a graduate of Cam-
bridge Universjty, as well as a Doctor of Laws of Ley-
den, and a barrister of the Middle Temple, London,”
Bill hadn’t met this exact type before, but he had an
extensive acquaintance with“relmittance men” in Aus-
tralia.
"Swank or smooge, or one after the other,” was Bill’s
summing-up of the type.
"The fact is,” the companion interposed, “the Baron
here represents a paper vich circulate much in the Sul-
tan’s States. We hear that you go to Solo and Jokja
later on. Zo? Then perhaps we can do business. The
Baron is the intimate vrent of th? Sultans of all the
native States—the dntimate vrent, and can do you
much goot.”
“Bluff!” thought Larrabee, but he reflected that he
had not yet got his bearings in these strange countries,
and had best be diplomatic. So he said: "Well, my ad-
vertising manager sees to all that. Will you go to
him? Mr. Yate, at the Hotel Nederlanden."


They both bowed, and Van Pahlst said, "May we
have the privilege of entrance?”
Larrabee replied dubiously, that if they really rep-
resented a newspaper, he would, of course, admit them;
but that they should show some proof. They bowed
again, and after a short conversation between them in
Dutch, the Shakespearean young man produced a broad-
sheet, printed in Malayan. It was illustrated by a few
photo blocks, rather inky and blurred, of Suitanic
groups, Mr. Sultan, one of the Mrs. Sultans, a few
of the little Sultans, to give it an air of European con-
ventionality and make the orthodox photo group. A
few saronged and jackelted nobles of the variegated um-
brella rank, were also therein. Bill initialled the card,
to admit the Baron and his friend to a, box.
He declined an offer of a drink with the gentlemen,
but that did not impede their own desires in that
direction.
After the couple had been gone to the bar some t,ime,
Larrabee found himself occupied in a dispute with
some Dutch soldiers, who having been granted the
concession of going into the one guilder seats on pay-
ment of 50 cents, wanted to bring their little Malay wives
(sanctioned, if not provided by Government) along
with them on 50 cent tickets. One of them was
especially obstreperous, and wanted to push his dark-
eyed partner and her four little half-castes through the
barriers, despite the menacing “Pigi, pigi lukkass!”
(“Go along, get out”) of Abdool. when Von Pahlst and
his friend appeared suddenly, and took a hand in the
altercation. After a moment’s excited colloquy, between
Van Pahlst and the soldier, the latter’s voice decrescen-
ing from confident defiance into apologetic deference,
the Malay wife and the half-caste family subsided into
the 50 cent seats, while the Dutch soldier swaggered over
to the dollar side.
Larrabee thanked the Baron for his opportune in-
tervention. He begged Lai rahee now to accompany him
to the bar, and he could not refuse. A temporary bar


of bamboo mat had been erected in the circus enclosure,
and Chinese waiters dispensed “Pass” beer and whisky,
or brandy and cold Arblander water. The baron save
his order in Malavan with military precision, which
showed that he had been a soldier.
“lounges, cassee tega whiskv arblander!” (“Boy.
fetch three whiskvs and sodas!”)
Larrabee sat for some time in conversation with the
pair, and as the Baron neither paid nor signed the
orthodox “chit” for the drinks, Bill signed. The Baron
overlooked the fact at first, though at the last moment
he made a faint pretence of expostulation. When he
rose to go, he said:
“Have you decided about the advertisement in my
paper?”
Larrabee cursed him inwardly. “I wish you’d see my
advertising agent,” he said.
“Yes. we will,” contmued the Shakesnerean Dutch-
man. “But I want you to realise the immense—im-
mense influence the Baron haf mit the Sultan and the
Princes here.”
“Oh. all right. Book me for what you think a fair
thing in your advertisement columns, and I’ll leave
your name on the door. Abdool, would you know these
gentlemen again?”
Abdool turned an inscrutable face on Larrabee, and
replied: “Yiss, sur, I will know them.” Larrabee signed
a card of admission, and presented it to the pair.
Abdool watched them out of sight, and turning to
Larrabee made two expressive gestures. Pointing a
finger at the retreating back of the white man, he tapped
his forehead: then pointing to the half-caste, he raised
his hand to his mouth as if lifting and emptying a glass,
“Right-oh, Abdool!” said Larrabee. "You speak very
good English.”
“Yiss!” said Abdool, flattered, and resumed his task
of ticket-taking with the monotonous “Seneel Sena!”


Dantry was in advance of the circus, and was appar-
ently making friendships of the highest in the land.
That shrewd and experienced observer, Clara Chini-
zelli, no longer in the performer’s ranks, but with three
of her children (weaned at last and grown up) in the
ring, expressed her opinion of Dantry.
“ ’E’s the smartest advance agent on the road, I tell
yuh. I picked ’im out, didn’t 1, Bill, right from theword
go!”
“You did that, Clara," replied Bill;' w'ho was never
happier than when he was able to bring along some of
the old battlers of the road, and allow them to share
in the luxurious circumstances of these days of suc-
cess. So, long after her family were trained and skil-
ful performers, and Jimmy Chiniselli, her husband, had
been laid to rest, Clara remained on as “wardrobe
woman,” and earned and deserved a good salary, and
the luxury of Eastern hotels and amenities of Eastern
fife. In letters to Australian friends she described her
happy state by saying that “she never did a darned
thing for herself.”
As a result of this popularity, engendered by the smart
young Australian agent, Myneer Van Bougenhagen, the
Dutch Resident at one of the Sultanates, came one night
and introduced himself to Larrabee, bringing with him
the favourite son of the Sultan. A fine, tall man was
the Resident, who spoke perfect English, and was the
most courteous of mortals. These Dutch Residents are
the real princes—the Mayors of the Palace. He pre-
sented Larrabee to the ymung heir-apparent, a stunted,
insignificant youth, with hair flattened down on his
forehead, and large diamonds in the hollow of his
yellow ears, and gold and diamond ornaments when-
ever they could be attached to his hands, hair, or dress.
While Larrabee and the Resident were in conversa-
tion, and the yellow Prince’s eyes were glued to the per-
formance in the ring, the sound of voices in altercation
rose in the outside tent, and a moment later the Baron


and Shakespeare came to the entrance, the latter,ex-
claiming: “We haf been insulted. Your fellow at the
outer door declined to let us pass.”
The outer doorkeeper (an Australian) had followed
them in.
“They wouldn’t sheeow their tickets,” he said, in self-
defence.
The Baron assumed a tone of offended haughtiness,
and speaking to no one in particular (unless he was ad-
dressing an elephant, which animal was just then, with
downcast eyes, contemplatively throwing straw and
dirt over her back), he let it be understood that he was
a man of some distinction, and could not with impunity
be treated disrespectfully, he being a graduate of Cam-
bridge and Leyden Universities, and a 'member of the
Middle Temple, his friend adding, whenever he got a
chance, “And fery influential mit the Sultans.” Larra-
bee endeavoured to propitiate him, but he talked on
through Bill, taking the elephant further into his con-
fidence, and the more Bill endeavoured to appease his
anger, the louder and more impersonal his harangue be-
came, Shakespeare contenting himself with muttering
the word “Fery influential,” as a sort of ground bass
to the Baron's cantata.
All in a moment Larrabee observed a change come
over the Baron. His eyes seemed to turn round in his
head, his figure to shrink from the upright, in another
moment he positively cringed. Turning round Larra-
bee beheld the Resident, who, with an amused smile,
was watching Van Pahlst. He addressed a few sharp
words in Dutch to the pair whose attitude had become
abjectly subservient, and they slunk away.
"Do not allow these men to give you trouble,” Van
Boughenhagen said.
“They have been worrying us a bit,” replied Larra-
bee. “Who are the} ? They are bits of mysteries to us.”
"Lautrek Van Pahlst bears one of the proudest of our
historic names,” replied the Resident. “He is of mixed
blood, as you see. That is nothing here, of course, and


makes little or no social distinction; hut he lias for some
time been doing what you call in English, ‘Sowing his
wild oats.’ The other is a distinguished military officer,
who, it is said, showed cowardice in the Acheen cam-
paign. Van Pahlst, to give him credit, has fought
bravely, but he is a curious mixture. He has a dual
nature —at times the spirit of a prince, and again the
soul of a coolie. When he drinks, the ccolje gains the
ascendant, and then he is a real low-class Malay, and
might do anything—even ‘run amok.’ But one of these
days, he will, by inheritance, come into immense wealth.
He is the sole surviving son of his father, a rich Dutch
merchant, who lived here years ago. There are ships
and warehouses in Holland, plantations, go-downs, and
tin mines out here. Nevertheless, be careful that you
do not lend him money.”
“Oh, that’s all right,” said Larrabee, “I never lend
money without consulting my partner.”
Ihe next time Larrabee saw the pair was on a
memorable occasion. It was in an atmosphere of war.
The Netherlands-! ndia authorities had fitted out a mili-
tary expedition to proceed to Boni, in Celebes, to punish
a recalcitrant native prince, who had run a dignified
“amok” in princely fashion, by rejecting Dutch rule,
refusing to pa)' “culture” imposts, and finally abscond-
ing inland with his wives and treasures. Larrabee
had invited the officers to an evening at the circus prior
to their embarkation.
It was an evening of evenings to Larrabee. He had
not yet become accustomed to the company of the great.
A Governor in democratic Australia could hardly be
comparer!, for “swish,” with a Dutch Governor-General,
one who presided over the destinies of thirty million
dark human beings, and had in fiis “stable,” as it
were, a swarm of tame Sultans and Princes, with .imme-
morial pedigrees and large allowances of wives, concu


bines and children. Here, too. lie was to see war almost
face to face. The commander-in-chief of the Boni Ex-
pedition and his staff were coming. The cheaper seats
were to be filled by the white and coloured troops of
the invading army. The better seats were reserved for
rich European and Chinese merchants.
To this performance all Batavia came. Australian
boys had fitted up a semi-circle of boxes around the
ring, for the officials and army officers, and had
decorated it with the Netherlands-lndia and Australian
Flags. In the ring, Billy “Props” (a Melbourne boy,
who had not yet fallen into the \vay of lounging round
in immaculate whiteducks and languidly directing
coolies to do his work) had worked out the two national
flags in coloured sawdust. The splendid regimental
band of the Weltevreden garrison had reinforced the
circus band for the evening, and ail performers wore
the Dutch colours.
Outside the circus enclosure the Koenigsplein w'as a
fairy scene. Thousands of dos-a-dos lamps shone amid
the tamarinds; innumerable bats flew in and out of the
light as it streamed from the great arc lamps over the
main entrance. An impromptu coolie market was set
up for sale of fruit, rice cakes, cold tamarind juice, and
citron drinks, cold fried eggs and chicken, and other
Malay delicacies and refreshments. Chinese, Indians,
and Malays swayed in crowds about the entrance,
watching the arrival of the military swells, and an
odour of cocoanut oil pervaded the whole atmosphere,
and struggled with the rank perfume of magnolias,
frangipanni, and other strange tropical flowers.
In the midst of the preparations to receive the dis-
tinguished guests, one of the Australian door-keepers
from the front door came to Larrabee,
“That there nigger Baron is at the door, and wants
to kee-yum in. What’ll I do, sir?”
“Let him in,” said Larrabee.
“But he wants to bring five or six jokers with him.”


“All right. Tell him as soon as the show is open he
can come along.”
He came with his five friends. Two were what are
cahed in Java “Fox-terrier Chinamen,” or Chinese who
had availed themselves of the Emperor of China’s edict,
and had cut off their pigtails. Two more were civilised
Malays, who had renounced the sarong for trousers, and
the last was the youthful Shakespeare. Larrabee avoided
them, but passed the word to show them to good seats
The Baron went to a seat with his party, and remained
for a while, but before the show began he came to Larra-
bee. He was on the high horse, and gave the full bene-
fit of his Cambridge, Leyden, and Middle Temple man-
ners. Would he have a drink with him? Bill was sorry,
he couldn’t. Why? Well, the Governor-General of
Java, and the Commander-in-Chief of the Boni expe-
dition were due at any moment, and he must receive
them, as they were his guests. Well, then, he would stay
and introduce him to them.
“I’m d d if you will," exclaimed Larrabee, roused
at last from his good-natured tolerance.
At this outburst Van Pahlst and Shakespeare slunk
away back to their “fox-terrier” friends.
The nervous moments of the ceremony of reception
being over, Larrabee felt easier in his mind. He
glanced at the crowded tent, at the Governor-General
and staff, and the brilliant array of military uniforms,
and then dressed and got himself in the frame of mind
to go in the ring with his “trained Arab steeds.” His
cup of happiness was full—well, there was one fly in
the cup, and, as he turned with a sigh of satisfaction
from the entrance, he saw' the Baron and his pale
friend approaching. With a muttered curse he strode
up to them.
"Well, what is it yuh want? Why do you not go in
and sit down?”


“The Baron hat' an important communicaton to make
to you,” said Shakespeare.
It turned out to be a request for the loan of 120
guilders. Larrabee had already lent him various small
sums in anticipation of the notices in h,is paper, which
were intended to stir up the native princes to rush in
hordes with their bloated households to the Australian
show.
“Lend you 120 guilders!” said Bill with exasperation,
"not a damned guilder will I lend you.”
“What sir!” said the Baron, after a stupified pause,
and in his grandest manner, “Do vou then refuse to
contribute to a fund for the brave fellows ,;ho are off
to do their duty, a,nd fight their country’s battles, and
perhaps to die, at Boni?”
“You never sa,id it was for such a fund,” Bill replied.
“Did you think I wanted it for myself?” he said with
tones of haughty and emphatic resentment.
“Of course 1 and so you do!”
The Baron then spent a few minutes addressing the
unconscious trapeze star, who was drawing ten thousand
eves to the dame of the great tent, the canvas of wh : ch
flapped over her in the wind like the wines of a gigantic
bird, as she swung from bar to bar. He informed the
beautiful and unconscious lady, ignoring Larrabee, that
people came to this country from unknown territories
(meaning thereby Australia) and fattened on the poor
inhabitants, dragged their surplus wealth from them,
and took it away, thereby impoverishing the already
down-trodden natives, injuring commerce and jeopar-
dising the interests of the ruling classes (at this he
slapped his own chest with a light cane, to indxate that
this was his own classification). Yet when these mono-
polists are asked to give a trifle—-a mere trifle of 120
guilders—to keep the poor soldiers from starvation
while on the nation’s duty they have nothing but a
callous refusal.
The trapezienne now descended from the dome of the
tent and was bowing to a salvo of “Brava!” from the


white Dutch, and “Bagoos!” from the coloured audience,
the Baron bottled up his indignation, and sought conso-
lation at the bar, Larrabee following him with his eyes,
in speechless anger.
Five minutes later Shakespeare returned to tell him
that his heartless conduct had cut the Baron “mit der
heart,” and that he was sitting disconsolate in the bam-
boo mat pavilion awaiting reconciliation.
Larrabee said he would see them both in the only,
hotter place he knew than Java before he would go near
the Baron. Then “would he advance the Baron 10
guilders?” No! “Five, then!” No! “Then would he
give them a drink and they would go away?”
Bill signed for two drinks, and looking back as he left
the shed he thought he had never seen two more de-
jected human beings than the handsome young Baron
and his dissipated friend.
For some weeks longer the season at Batavia was
urolonged. The Boni expedition had departed, con-
\ oyed bv Dutch war vessels. Then the Dutch and na-
tive population had settled down to the humdrum life
of the tropics. The circus people fell exactly into the
ways of the East, easy-going wavs, appropriate to the
tropic heat, the blazing dawns, blinding noons, steaming
nights.
Nothing had been seen of the baron for some time;
and Larrabee thought he had gone to the dogs—at any
rate, he was not concerned where he went. But one day,
in a Chinese store, he saw him again. Van Pahlst ap-
proached Larrabee in a most respectful attitude, raised
his helmet, and bade him “Good day!” He was well-
dressed, clean and presentable, a remarkable contrast to
the abject creature he had last seen in the bamboo mat
bar.
“Mar- 1 call on vou again at your hotel, Mr. Larra-
beer” he enquired. “An interview is necessary, if only


to enable me to apologise for my behaviour in some of
our meetings.”
“Oh, come along any time you like,” said Larrabee
amiably. “But don’t hang around the door of the
tent with your Dutch friend.”
“That 1 promise,” said the Baron, and the interview
ended.
Now, this story would never have been written, but
that Clara Chinizelli had persuaded the partners to en-
gage a team of young lady dancers before leaving Aus-
tralia for the Eastern tour. Clara was a scion of the
famous Chinizelli family whose circus name was known
in every capital of Europe. A woman of wise, kindly,
motherly ways, and experienced in the ways of life.
'Tve been in the East, Bill,” she exclaimed. “1 knows
’em. The decent men there goes mad over a white
woman. I’ve heard all this talk about the native jug-
glers and the native dancers, but if yuh want an attrac-
tion, you take a team of Australian dancers. The circus
acts is all right, but you want a special attraction. The
only trouble will be to keep ’urn from getting married.
Everyone wants to marry a white girl over there.”
She had her way, and six bright young Australian
dancers went along under Clara’s intelligent chaperon-
age. They made a sensation in Java, not only as dan-
cers, but, dressed in a charming costume, they were
employed as ushers to the box folk, who tipped them
liberally.
The youngest and prettiest of the six was Beattie Col-
lins. a Sydnienne, sole hope of a hardly burdened me-
chanic with a large family. Not long after the depar-
ture of the Roni expedition, a rumour reached Clara’s
attentive ears, that Beattie had been to rice-taffel
(‘iliunch) at the Hotel des Indes with the Baron and his
sallow friend. Beattie admitted it. and said with de-
cision that she saw no harm in it. The Baron had his
sister with him, Beattie explained—a huge, stout,


brown-skinned lady, charming and well educated, and
they had music in the drawing room of the hotel.
Beattie was a good musician herself, and played the
piano brilliantly.
“The Baron has a good baritone voice well-
trained, and his sister has a contralto. They’re splendid
musicians,” exclaimed Beattie with enthusiasm. “They
do duets from the operas.”
“Well, so I'ong as 'is sister is with you it’ll be all
right. But bring ’im and his sister along some time,
and let me and Mr. Larrabee look ’im over.”
So one afternoon, Larrabee met the “Handsomest
coloured man” in a new way—viz., in the social rela-
tion. Clara Chinizelli was the hostess and served tea
on the verandah of her bungalow at the Hotel Nede'r
landed. It was a picturesque place in the afternoon, after
siesta, and man and woman sat in neglige sarongs, slip-
pers, and kabayas. The rows of tall tamarinds and
palms, and stunted crotons of beautiful colours lined
the garden towards the road, while a superb bouaan-
villea, brilliant with magenta flowers, showed resplendent
in the declining sun. There had been a shower, and
a pungent odour of moist earth rose from ths tropical
soil mingled with scents of tropical flowers and cocoanut
oil, filled the air, and gave a strangeness to the whole
scene to the senses of the Australians.
Larrabee admitted afterwards, remembering Van
Bouganhagens’ description, that he saw the princely side
of the Baron that day, not the coolie. Clara Chinizelli,
too, was won over by the manners of her guests. The
sallow Shakespeare also showed to advantage, mainly
by an unexpected gift of silence, and an entire absence
of reference to the sultans.
"I never see a more perfect lady and gentleman than
the Baron and his sister,” said Clara afterwards, as
though she had been accustomed to preside all her life
at courts of gentility.
But circus women are shrewd, and Clara had tra


veiled, and seen life in many phases, from that mani-
fested in the small community of a starving road show,
to the great communities like New York, London, Paris,
and Petersburg.
Larrabee was greatly struck by the personality of
the Baton’s sister. Though showing facially and phy-
sically more of the characteristics of the Malayan half-
caste than her distinguished-looking brother, she had a
delicate refinement of manner and a fine courtesy which
showed her Dutch convent training. She drew Larrabee
from his first attitude of shyness. He was soon talking
freely of his Australian experiences, and even giving
shrewd judgments upon the new countries and environ-
ment in which he found himself. With Beattie at the
piano, the Baron and his sister sang entrancingly They
certainly had wonderful musical gifts, those two.
The meeting was a decided success, and Larrabee’s
attitude towards the Baron changed during the rest of
their stay in Batavia. He accepted invitations to their
charming home; and when the circus moved on, he bade
them farewell with real regret.
Three months later the ever-shifting caravan rested
on the open space of the Aloon-Aloon, in Sourabaya.
To the joy of Dantry the tour had been a dazzling suc-
cess. Throughout the glorious island of Java throngs
had flocked to the wonderful Australian “Komedie-
kooda” (circus). Enthusiastic multitudes had come,
paid, and seen—sultans, princes, coloured noblemen,
whole zenanas, whose inmates sat behind a special
screen, but whose laughter was as 'loud and unrestrained
in their exalted place as that of the humbler Javanese,
Soodanese, Madoorese, Arabs, or Chinese in the pit
seats. The circus kept to its triumphal way, to never-
ending plaudits of “Bagoos!”
Larrabee’s memory of the Baron and his friend had
almost faded into the past. If he thought of his late
guests, it was with a kindlier remembrance than he ever


dreamed he would have held. At the same time he felt
that he would lather he never saw them again. What
would be thought, he reflected, if the young Australian
girl, Beattie Collins, had made a mesalliance with the
‘handsome coloured man,” in spite of superior educa-
tion, social and persona! accomplishments in the Baron.
Bill felt that he could never return to Australia if such
a thing happened.
Clara Chinizelli, too, watched with apprehension, for
any tokens of regret on Beattje’s part.
“She was fascinated, all right,” said Clara to Larra-
bee. “Any woman might have been fascinated. But our
women have got the White Australia idea solid. A silly
thing, the colour bar,” she continued, “but what a lot it
means!”
What a lot it means, innumerable writers from
Shakespeare down to Conrad had endeavoured to de-
pict. Clara had no fixed idea that she was guarding a
potential Desdemona from the tragedy of a marriage
with a well-educated and more socially attractive
Othello, But she kept her watch silently and stubborn-
ly. To have warned Beattie was to have aroused her
interest.
Van Pahlst was not finally disposed of, however. One
fine morning,. after Larrabee had practised his Arab
steeds, and was sitting on a property chair in the
ring seeking the cool which came not in Java, and chat-
ting with his partner, who had returned from his ad-
vance w'ork, “Jimmy Lamps” came forward with an
obviously eager desire to impart news.
" ’Oo d’ye think’s at the door, boss.” he said, panting
with excitement, “that there nigger Baron, and in the
swishiest motor car y’ever see. 'E’s comun’ in ’ere with
that cadaverus Dutch cove with the beard.”
“Oh, Lord, Jim,” exclaimed Larrabee, “this cove pur-
sues me bke a shadow', I can’t escape him.”
“Who is he,” queried Dantry.


“Baron Van Pahlsl, 'e calls ’imself!”
“Why!” exclaimed Dantry, “that’s the chap who has
just come into a princely fortune. The son of a Dutch
merchant. It’s all in the papers this morning. The old
Dutchman has just died, and this man and his sister
have the property in Holland and Java divided between
them. There must be a million to split into two —
pounds, not guilders, 1 mean. Fancy your knowing
them!”
“I met them in Batavia,” said Larrabee, and gave a
short, but graphic sketch in vernacular Australian of his
experiences, not neglecting to explain that his opinion
had been somewhat altered by the home-life of the
half-caste and his sister.
“Why, Bill,” said Dantry, “what about the sister?
We’ll get you married yet. With half a million and a
nice brown wife you could run the circus for charity.
Ha-ha! I must tell the wife. She’s geen dead on to
get you married for years. It’s the dream of her
life.”
Bill Larrabee rose, flourished his long ring whip in the
air, and made passes at his partner, who slipped away,
laughing.
Then at the entrance to the tent appeared the Baron,
Clara Chinizelli, Beattie Collins, and the inevitable, but
much improved Shakespeare. Bill Larrabee, in his
practice shorts, heavy boots and light sweater, stood in
the ring, a picture of masculine vigour, while the
Baron approached.
“I’m delighted to meet you again, Mr. Larrabee, and
to express to you my gratitude for many kindnesses to
me and my friend Horne in the days of our adversity.”
“Don’t mention it, Baron,” Bill said kindly. “Don’t
mention jt.”
He was glad in his heart that his changed opinion of
the Baron had occurred before the latter’s accession to
his inheritance. If his dislike had not been disarmed
by the social qualities of the man and his sjster in their


home life, he would have snubbed him remorselessly,
rich or poor.
“My sister is at the hotel,’’ continued the Baron, after
Larrabee had shaken hands with Horne (which proved
to be Shakespeare’s real name, and introduced them to
his partner. “We will be pleased if you will have
lunch with us at noon.”
He said “lunch” and not “rice-taffel,” and Larrabee
noticed this. He noticed that his manner was more
subdued. This was in contrast to the flamboyant de-
meanour of his friend, Horne. While the Baron wore
only a plain watch seal on his white (military tunic
coat, and an inconspicuous ring on his finger, Horne
was decked with jewels and chains wherever possible.
Tropical costumes give little scope for sartorial display.
White clothes and boots, and broad cork-lined hats are
invariable. It was in the adjuncts to costume that
Horne was conspicuous. His white coat was buttoned
with solid gold tikal buttons. (The tikal is a Siamese
coin, like a shoe-button battered in the middle.) His
military tunic was buttoned at the neck with a diamond
of some size and of great value. Plain stiver buttons
satisfied the less flamboyant tastes of the Baron, and his
handkerchiefs, the partners noticed, were of white cam-
bric, while Shakespeare’s were of gaudy coloured silk,
and reeked of rank Eastern scents.
During the six weeks of the season of the “Komedie-
kooda” in Sourabaya, the Baron and his sister were
regular visitors to the circus. They had a set of boxes
reset ved for them, and brought many parties of dis-
tinguished Dutch officials and traders. Princes from
the native territories and the islands of the Netherlands-
India, merchants from distant Gilolo, Celebes, and as
far as Lomook and Timor, were of the parties. Van
Pahlst held a kind of Court, and dispensed favours and
hospitalities to people of all ranks. The partners were
forced to admit how gracefully the Baron’s sister, fat


and swarthy though she was, helped her brother in these
functions.
A reign of pleasure and excitement had set in. In
this the circus people were included. There were dinners
for the proprietors, picnics for the performers and
people, musical evenings after the show. Larrabee often
contrasted the life of luxury he was leading with his old
career as a battler on the Australian roads.
Meanwhile, ominous rumours had come of things not
going well with the Boni expedition. There was talk
of native ambushes and of serious losses in killed and
wounded.
One night as Larrabee rolled home with Dantrv in
the Baron’s luxurious car after supper at a bungalow
on the sea shore, he leant over to his partner, and said;
“Is this a dream?’’
“It may be,” replied Jim. “But 1 can assure you the
money we’re taking is no dream. It’s safe in the Bank,
Bill, and if it continues to roll in, you and I need never
run a waggon show' again on earth.”
“The night w'as warm, the moon up, and there was
a mingled scent of cocoanut oil and frangipanni. The
narrow forest road was fretted with lace work of moon-
light, made by the tracery of palm and yapiah, of
tamerind and bamboo. Bill Larrabee puffed his cigar
luxuriously.
“Are we the same men,” he asked, remembering the
Lucullan supper he had partaken of, “are we the" same
men, Jim, who camped and fed along bush roads on
fig jam and damper, and who lived in bush pubs where
they said at breakfast, ‘What’ll yuh have, there’s chops,
steak and sausages—chops and sausages are off?’ ”
Jim laughed.-“We are,” he said, “the same identical
men who opened i_n Corrobortee to the biggest billing
that Australia ever saw. I wish we had some of that
printing now,” he said sleepily.
“That rice-taffel is a great dish,” resumed Larrabee


reminiscently. “Do you remember the month we toured
in the Mudgee district, when we struck a whole patch of
country with nothing to eat but hot or cold corn mutton
and pumpkins, with pumpkin pie. Fancy, nothun’ but
corn mutton and pumpkins for a month, when we could
’ave been living like princes on rice taflfel, and mango-
steens, and young bamboo shoots in the salads. And
yet, Jim, now that we’ve been livun’ luxurious for three
months on rice taffel and tropical stuff, I am beginning
to feel that there was something in chops, steaks, and
sausages, when you’re hungry, after a 50 mile route over
bad roads. What with tea and bananas at 5, breakfast
at 6, rice taffel at 12, siesta til! 4, promenade in the park
till 6 30 or 7, gin and piets on the hotel stoep, with
bats flyun’ round in the electric lights, and funny bark-
ing lizards, crawling up white painted walls, dinner at
7,30, circus open at 8, overture at 9, circus over at mid-
night, home to bed at all hours—why it’s a new world.”
Jim was too sleepy to challenge the' statement, and
they soon arrived at their hotel.
The next morning at breakfast, a Malay "jounges”
handed the partners Van Pahlst’s card. He was waiting
for them in the manager’s parlour.
"I was desirous of consulting you gentlemen on a very
important matter.”
"Very pleased,” said Larrabee. "Go ahead.”
“I hope, Mr, Larrabee, that I have, during the last
two months, succeeded in effacing from your mind any
impression you may have formed from the first weeks
of our acquaintance.”
Bill saw anxiety and trouble depicted on the young
man’s handsome face. Again he admired the clear-cut.
dassically-beautiful features, the high forehead, and
clearly intelligent eyes.
1 wish 1 could forget he is a coloured man, thought
Bill, with compassion in his heart. Aloud he said he


had changed his opinion and frankly owned it.
“That reassures me,” proceeded the Baron. "If 1
have your confidence, i hope to secure your sympathy
in due course.”
He paused and gathered courage, but his agitation
was obvious.
“1 know, sir, you are in loco parentis, ,in a
parental position, with regard to the young ladies of
your company. Well, you know lam now rich. I can
furnish you with definite proof of that in due course.
I wish to marry one of your ladies. M,iss Collins. 1
have paid her much attention, as you may have ob-
served, but, without asking your sanction, 1 could nol
think of proceeding further. Have I your sanction to
pay my addresses to her.”
Larrabee and Dantry were silent for a moment, ex-
changing looks, neither finding help from the glances.
At last Dantry said: “As far as I am concerned, 1
would leave it to the girl herself. You shouldn’t rush
matters, for I think her parents should be consulted.
But you ought to know that there’s a prejudice in
Australia against marriages of our girls with men of—
men of—”
“Men of colour. I will complete the sentence, Mr,
Dantry,” said the'Baron, “you cannot offend me. Colour
is a matter of race and climate. You of the Aryan off-
shoots were once as swarthy as 1 am. It is a question
purely of zone, and has nothing to do with the deepest
things in life, the feelings and emotions. I love Miss
Collins, I am rich, and I can, 1 believe, make her happy;
she will have every luxury. Her condition in life will
be that of a princess. As you know, I am influen-
tial here with the Sultans,
Larrabee suppressed a smile with difficulty.
“One thing, Baron,” he said, "she could not live with
you in Australia.”
“She has Asia, she has Europe, she has North and
South America!” the Baron rejoined quickly. “If she
likes the pleasures of the world she can have them, in


all countries. In Holland there is no colour prejudice.
Some of our greatest families have mixed their blood
in the colonies they have conquered. Your own people
have done it in India. One of your greatest soldiers had
native blood in his veins. We have civilisation in
Java as venerable as yours. Our temple at Boerobad-
dour is of equal antiquity to your great cathedrals. I
am of good blood on both sides. If you had seen my
two dead brothers, you would know that they are de-
void of the slightest trace of colour. They were as white
as you are. My sister and 1 happen to have followed the
distaff.”
“But,” continued Larrabee, “how do you think a little
plain Australian girl is going to stand all this inter-
national fashion racket?”
“Oh, if she wants retirement she shall have jt.
Among the possessions I have inherited are villas in the
Riviera, a house in London, a chateau in Switzerland
1 am willing to live the simplest life, so long as she is
happy; I can be happy with her.”
“How old are you, Baron?” Larrabee asked.
“I am twenty seven.”
“And if you marry her, will you be satisfied with one?
Remember the Zenanas we’ve seen, Jim, in the Sultan-
ates? Why, Baron, one Prince had a Zenana box screened
off to hold 60, and another introduced me to about
twenty of his brothers, and told me he had a hundred
more in the Kraton.”
The Baron smiled. “In such matters, Mr. Larrabee,
1 am a European, not an Asiatic; though, as you
know, a great many Europeans—a vast number—preach
Europe and practise Asia. I could quote one of your
authors—‘The Englishman has rounded Seraglio point,
but has not yet passed Cape Turk.’ ”
“Who said that?” enquired Bill, suspiciously.
“Meredith,” was the reply. “In that he impugns the
honesty of the European.”


“Well, he didn’t know anything about circus fofK.
They’re different, anyhow,’’ said Bill dogmatically.
“Now, as far as I’m concerned, I won’t interfere. 1
leave it to the gjrl and the advice she gets from a good
friend, and a good woman, who has daughters of her
own with us. Have you spoken to Mrs. Chinizelli?
She’s mothering those Australian kids at present with
her own.”
“1 fear she is hostile.”
“Well, that don’t end it,” said Bill, and left it at that.
There was considerable excitement among the circus
community when Beattie’s engagement with the Baron
was announced. The Baron was certainly an ideal lover.
He danced attendance on her. He loaded the girl with
presents. Her simple Australian dresses and cheap
jewellery gave place to Paris fashions and diamonds.
The heirlooms in the jewel boxes sent from Holland by
the executors of the will of the late merchant millionaire
were enough to turn the head of any woman, and little
wonder Beattie was overwhelmed. Her heart sang all
day with the consciousness of her good fortune. If she
awakened in the night a throb of exultation followed
remembrance of her changed position.
One thing troubled her. She could not secure the
approbation of Clara. No tenders of expensive presents
could mollify Clara. She would accept nothing from
Beattie or the Baron. She was downright in her
disapproval. She declined to ride in high-power motor
cars, or to have expensive suppers at seaside bungalows?
She declined to allow her own daughters to share in
luxuries provided for Beattie.
The Baron, seeing Beattie’s distress, went to great
lengths to mollify Clara.
“What have you against me, Mrs. Chinizelli?”
“Nothing, personally. You’re a generous man—


you’re sober, and I think you’re decent, but I believe in
a white Australia,” said Clara doggedly.
And this was the dead wall against which all such
efforts came to a stop.
Back through the rich island of Java to Batavia, the
next jump for the circus was Singapore: and ,in due
course preparations were made for transportation from
Tandjong Priok to Tandjong Pagar. Larrabee was talk-
ing technical matters over with Clara Chinizelli on the
morning of embarkation, when a gentleman l v, English-
speaking shroff from the shipping company came in
to Larrabee’s salon at the hotel,
‘‘lt’s about Miss Collins,” he. said. “She’s booked
with the others as usual: but the ship’s crowded, and
if she’s not going we’ll be glad to have her berth.”
“She’s not going,” replied Larrabee.
“She is!” exclaimed Clara decidedly.
“But we left her at Sourabaya,” replied Bill.
“1 tell yuh to keep her berth, Bill, she will come.
That’s my firm belief.”
The partners conferred, and decided. “We’ll keep the
berth,” said Larrabee.
The Chinese shroff bowed and retired. Bill turned to
Clara.
“Well, did you try the thing you and me talked over,
Clara?”
“I did, Bill.”
"It was a great idea, Clara, of yours.”
“No, yours, Bill,”
"Well, one of us: it don’t matter which. How did
it work?”
“It’s workun’ now, I hope,” said Clara, and her face
was prayerful, and tears were in her eyes. “Poor child.
She must be havun’ a terrible battle with herself. We’ll
know how it worked before this ship leaves Tandjong
Priok. If it works right, she’ll be in her berth when we


sail. If it works wrong, she’ll be the richest woman in the
East, 1 hope she’ll be a happy one,”
“All right. Then to business. Now Jim, what about
gettun' the elephants down from Batavia?”
“Oh, they have to be walked. There's no rolling stock
on the local train’ll carry’m. It’s only nine miles and
they’re well on the road. 1 saw ’um start. All Java is
out following the elephantine procession.”
Now Clara Chinizelli was a big-hearted woman, and
the more she pondered over Beattie’s marriage the more
she hated the idea, and the more she determined to
prevent it.
Before they left Sourabaya she sought Beattie ,in her
bungalow. Her heart was sore as she saw the look of
happiness on the girl’s face. But that her varied life
with the circus in the bush and the cities had shown her
the misery of an awakening from dreams such as Beattie
was indulging in, she would never have interfered. She
began with persuasion, before she adopted the harsh and
desperate expedient which she had talked over with
Larrabee.
The girl w'as superb in dress and jewels. She was
living a story from the Arabian Nights. Two pretty
Javanese girls hung about her, adorning her, admiring
her, spreading out her jewels, her dresses, her shoes,
for her delight. Contrasted with them, and their race,
thought Clara, Beattie must appear as a goddess to her
admirer.
-But the old veteran of the bush roads did not flinch.
"Sit down, Clara, and have some tea,” said Beattie
affable. though her intuition warned her of trouble
ahead.
“I wanted to see you. Beattie, and talk straight for
the last time. Yuh know we’re leaving for Singapore
this day week, and 1 want you to come with us, dear.


Yuh know yer mother’s feelings, and how she would be
looked down upon in Australia if yuh married a
coloured man.”
Beattie’s pretty face lost its rapt expression, and
hardened.
“Pigi!” she said to the girls, who retired. ‘‘Now Clara,
I know you mean well. When you talk of mother and her
feelings, you hit me hard. Do you think I’d do any-
thing to hurt her or father. Why did I come out here?
You know. You saw them on the wharf. Poor father,
shabby and overworked; mother, a home drudge, my
sisters, ambitious and hard-working, and poverty-
stricken all of us. I learnt stage dancing so as I could
help them. I’ve sent them every penny I earned out
here. Bill Larrabee has been a brick. He paid me my
salary since I left the show, and that I’ve sent home
too.”
’‘You’ve taken no money from the Baron?”
“No, I refused. Of course, I’ve accepted presents and
dresses, and I’ve let his sister entertain me. Oh, Clara,
she is a good, sweet woman. What is colour when her
heart’s all right! It is only an accident, her colour.
It’s cruel on them, isn’t it? They didn’t ask to be born,
and out here colour don’t count at all.”
y
“Don’t you think it does?” replied Clara. “Well,
Beattie, I think it means a lot. 1 think it means every-
thing. Because you can’t stay out here for ever. If
you go to Australia you’re banned. It’s just the same
in Europe. I’ve been there. Won’t you see it? Are you
so much in love with this man, dear?”
“I am very fond of him. 1 don’t love him—not like
they talk of in novels.”
" Was there no man out in Australia?” asked Clara,
after a long pause. She was looking round for diplo-
matic weapons to aid her.
“Oh,” laughed Beattie, “every girl has a sweetheart.
I used to dance with a boy, and go to picnics, and he
used to say he loved me, and that I w'as a queen and


a princess, and all that kind of thing. But neither
of us was serious.”
‘‘Have you written to him since you’ve been over
here? Have you encouraged him?”
‘‘Well, I have written to him, 1 admit. He was quite
cut up about my going away.”
Clara thought this line of attack might lead to some-
thing helpful. She suddenly caught Beattie’s hands in
her own capable athletic grasp.
“Where’s the ring you used to wear?” she said sharply.
Beattie resented this, and drew herself up. “1 won’t
tell you. 1 won’t explain. You have no right to ask,
Clara.”
“I’m going to give myself the right,” exclaimed the
elder woman passionately. “I’m going to treat you as
1 would my own Cuppy. I’m going to make a fight with
you for that boy in Sydney who gave you the ring; for
your mother and father, for your sisters, for yourself.”
“But,” said Beattie, surprised, “I’m thinking of them
all the time in what I do. Don’t you see that. I’ll be a
rich woman. Lautrek is making me independent. I
signed a settlement deed yesterday. 1 can help them all
in Sydney. I can make them rich.”
Clara was breathing hard. She was angry, but it was
a cold and determined anger.
“Very well, Beattie, I’ve tried to appeal to you for
everybody’s sake; now I’m going to appeal for your own
good.” She stepped from the verandah of the bungalow
into the garden. A Malay baboo (nurse) stood outside
with a Malay baby. It’s little head was bound with a
gilded cap. and its c'othes were of gilded embroidery.
The baboo held i f str.addled across her hip.
“You see that child!” said Clara, holding Beattie’s
hand wuh a firm grip, and drawing her towards the
nurse.
“I don’t want to see it,” said Beattie. “Why do you
want me to see it?”
“Because it means your happiness. Face the thing


now, when yuh can avoid whal follows, and not wait till
it’s too late. Take that child in your arms.”
“I won’t. Why should 1!” Beattie’s eyes began to
show fear.
“Because yu’ll have to hold your own child in your
arms and yuh want teh see what it’ll look like. Take
it, 1 say.”
“Oh! oh!” cried the girl, covering her face with her
hands. Then, slowly, and with a shudder, she took the
baby from the baboo.
“Look at it!” said Clara. "It’s a pretty baby, so
soft, so pretty, so gentle. But look at its eyes. See the
squint, see the white and yellow mixture; look at its
finger nails, look at the colour of its lips. Here, give it
to me,”
She took the baby to her breast, and nursed it, and
fondled it.
“I love babies, Beattie, and so do you. Colour
doesn’t make an difference—but when it’s your own
baby, my girl—” she said with a sudden intensity,
"when it’s your own—it’s different. Would yuh like
to have that at yer side always when yuh woke? Would
yuh like to see it despised among all thuh people we
belong to all its life? You’d love it, wouldn’t yuh? 1
know' yuh would. And how' yuh would suffer when it
suffered.”
The girl burst into a passion of sobs. Clara, with a
hasty' kiss, gave the child back to the nurse, and took
Beattie to her bosom, rocked her and petted her, and
cried with her.
“Don’t do it, Beattie! Don’t do it!” she said appeal-
ingly, “It’s against nature.”
And, leading her to her room, she kissed her softly
and left her to fight it out alone.
Bill Larrabee had been engaged with interpreters in
a strenuous altercation over the infringement of the


coolie passengers upon the space set apart for the
horses and elephants on the lower deck. The Malay
crew in consequence had been hustling the coolie deck
passengers into corners amid an excited dialogue in
Chinese, Malayan and English. After much polygot
blasphemy things were straightened out, and Bill sought
his cabin to change a coat, once white, but now covered
with sweat and coal dust.
As he reached his cabin he saw Clara.
“Well, what news?’’
“She has come,’’ said Clara quietly; “she wants to
see you.”
“Bring her to me here,” said Larrabee.
Divested of her finery, her jewellery, her gay adorn-
ments, dressed in her old dresses, the girl looked pretty
and sad.
“Well, Beattie, so you’re comun’ with us!” said
Larrabee kindly.
“Yes, Mr. Larrabee. Will you have me with the
show?"
“Have you! Why, we’ve missed yuh so. Everyone’s
missed yuh. We kept your berth in the ship. Didn’t
we, Clara.”
“Then you expected me. Thank you. I’ll stay on.
I won’t go away again.”
Clara led her away, and Dantry, coming in unex-
pectedly to see his partner in his cabin, found him with
his head down. I’d swear he’d been crying,” said
Dantry afterwards.
But Bill roused himself, and said, “Well, Jim, that’s
that. Maskee! Now for the stern realities of life. Boy,
bring some bananas for the elephants!”
It was not till they were in their third week of the
season at Calcutta, three months later, that they heard-
of the Baron again. Larrabee had just driven down to
the Maidan to see if all was right with the tent after
a heavy rain storm. He found it sweating steam in the
fierce sun which had come out and was drying Walder’s
Fl!9


fleecy masterpiece. The steam hovered above the white
dome, like a cloud over a snow-covered mountain.
In the tent, a native boy was waiting with the mail.
Larrabee selected a letter with a mourning border which
bore the Java stamp.
It was signed “Letitia Van Pahlst,” and was from the
Baron’s sister.
“Dear Friend,” she wrote, “My brother is no more.
When Beatrice left us she gave me a note to give to
him. He was away for a day in Jockja. I tried to
persuade her to stay to see him before a final determina-
tion. I knew that my brother worshipped her, and that
his future happiness was bound up in her. She left us.
When he returned and read the note, he took the news
with apparent fortitude. But it was a terrible blow.
“ ‘Poor little Beattie,’ he said. ‘What have they done
to her that she should run away from me?’
“He was quiet for several days, but he took little food,
and I knew that he did not sleep, for 1 heard him pacing
his room till the early hours. In this crisis Horne was
a great support to him. The war news from Bali was
bad. At meal times they talked of the war, and dis-
cussed the chances of the campaign. Once Lautrek ran
up to Batavia, and I learned that he had an inter-
view with the Governor-General.
"One Saturday morning the post brought him an offi-
cial packet, which he opened eagerly. His face was, for
the first time since Beatrice left, filled with joy. He
sent for Horne, and they spent the day in his study,
having their meals sent in to them.
"At breakfast he told me that he and Horne had
volunteered for active service, and had been accepted.
In a week they would go. Both, as you know’, did their
military service in Holland, and Lautrek rose to a
lieutenancy. Both had served in Acheen.
“The rest of the time available he spent with his
yers, and in preparation for departure. He left a sealed
letter for Beattie, which 1 enclose. The night before


his departure 1 found him in his room, with all her
dresses and jewels spread out, scraps of letters, a fan,
some faded flower. He had been weeping, and when I
put my hand on his shoulder he said;
“ ‘Ah, Letitia, the poor little girl 1 What have they
done to her?’
"He was very bright and martial when he left. Was
he not a handsome man, my brother?
“They were gone two months when I received a mes-
sage from the Governor-General to say that Lautrek
had been killed in battle. I need not give the particu-
lars, but lam proud of his end. He died as a brave
Hollander should die.
“I shall return to Holland as soon as the affairs of the
estate are settled. Some day, perhaps, we may meet
at my home in Holland, and talk matters over when
my sorrow has faded into a sweet regret for what might
have been. My brother was a noble character, though
many misunderstood him. 1 wish to tell you that he
has left a legacy to Beatrice which makes her a very
rich woman also certain family heirlooms which
are being sent to her through the Hongkong and
Shanghai Bank.
“He remembered you in his will, and the bank in Cal-
cutta will hand over certain souvenirs, a wrist watch, a
gold-mounted whip, and a substantial sum of money,
which he bequeathes to you to distribute among the
circus company in a certain way described. There is also
a legacy of 45,000 guilders for yourself as a personal
gift. Good-bye, dear friend, may we meet again some
day, somewhere.”
“I dunno whether 1 done right or wrong, Bill,” said
Clara Chinizelli to Larrabee. “It’s not wot yuh do, it’s
wot toilers on wot yuh do. I can see that Beattie
blames the whole thing on me. If I’d ’a’ fired on ’im


from be’ind a palm tree, I couldn’t be worse. But I’ll
live it down. She’ll thank me some day. No, 1 won’t
take any of the money. Give it to the others. Wot I
did, I did, and I’m not soiry. I’d ’a’ been blamed worse
the other way."
Larrabee’s only remark was “Maskee!”


THE TYPHOON.
BILL LARRABEE was a master of the technique of the
circus business, and knew pretty well everything likely
to happen to horses, performers and forest animals in
cages. But on this day, as he sat jingling his sold bridle-
bit watch-chain while absently watching a Chinese jug-
gler doing a “trial” in the big-top tent, he was not quite
sure that he knew all there was to be known about tents
and their behaviour in typhonic conditions.
For, already, his quick ear had caught the sound of
crackers, which the sampan population of Hongkong
were exploding to appease the storm deities, as they (the
sampan folk) scudded for shelter into Causeway Bay,
on the shores of which the big Australian circus tent
was pitched. The day was hot and oppressive, sunless
and heavy. The typhoon signals were up on the flag-
staffs at Kowloon—big black squares and tricngles—ap-
prising all that one of these dread storms had formed in
their favourite hatching place, “East of Luzon,” and
was approaching the China coast.
Larrabee already felt the strange oppressiveness of the
atmospheric disturbance. Seated in one of the boxes
already decorated for the Governor of Hongkong’s visit
that very night, he took the measure of things. First
he looked anxiously up into the dome of the tent. Th:
battlers of the circus road have endowed the tent with
a sex, viz., “she.” She was a beauty, with “Hardie,
Sydney,” stencilled on every piece: new, spick and
span, her quarter and side poles freshly painted bright
blue, her fleecy side walls without a rent or scratch
her bellying dome as white as silk. Sydney was her
birth-place; but she first braved the breeze in Hong


kong that hot August week, having replaced a worn-out
tent that had done yeoman service in Java and Singa-
pore on this, the first tour of Larrabee and Dantry’s
“Huge Moving Caravan” in the East.
Having summed the situation up, Bill Larrabee called
out to nobody in particular, “Hi!”
An Australian groom stopped rubbing the shining
velvet skin of a lovely black Arab from the Windsor
district of New South Wales, and appro rched.
“Send the boss canvasman!” said Larrabee.
“Right-oh!” said the man, and in a few moments
“Curly” Capes, the boss canvasman, was deep in con-
sultation with Larrabee.
“We gotta man powsted at the hill be’ind,” was
Curly’s report. “He kun see thuh signals on Kowloon,
and kun tell us wen they ur charged.”
“I’m not too sure about this typhoon business,” said
Larrabee. “ I know the kind of winds we gets in Aus-
tralia and Maoriland. So do you, eh?”
"Yes, Boss, we’ve bin in a few together, and never ’ad
a blow down yet.”
“Well, I’m not feelin’ too confident about to-night if
the big wind comes up.”
“You’ve got to keep ’er up fur the Governor, boss, or
Jim Dantry ’ud take a fit."
“Oh, I know Jim’s dead nuts on rajahs and governors
and native princes and sultans. Java’s spoiled ’im. But
governor or no governor I’m gowun to lower the peak
if there’s a heavy blow.”
“I wouldn’t funk it too soon,” said Curly; “we’ve bin
in some beauties. Do yuh remember that blow at
Ekatahuna?”
“Yes,” said Larrabee, brightening up. “And the
willy-willy at Coolgardie, eh? But the tents then wuz
once little snaps. Look at this leviathan. That’s dif-
ferent. And again, them Australians and New Zea-
landers is so quick on lookun’ after themseives. These
chinks seem a silly, baby lot Do yuh hear?”
And again the sound of the sampan crackers came


faintly over Causeway Bay. But the storm gods refused
to be propitiated.
“Curly, we must buck up. Have ten coolies to help
each of our own men, and wen I give the word lower the
peak straight. Then get the people out and lay her flat.
If one of these here big blows fairly strikes up the
tent’ll be in the middle of Asia before we kun say knife.’’
He turned his glance backward to the ring and he
and the boss canvasman saw Billy “Props” letting him-
self go with the decorations. With a few pots of dis-
temper paint and a load or two of sawdust, he had
fashioned strange designs in the arena, to be trampled
out, of course, by the hoofs of the first horse that en-
tered the ring. In coloured sawdust he had com-
pounded strange mixtures of Chinese, British and Aus-
tralian flags and emblems a curious meeting of fabulous
and authentic anima’s—dragons and kangaroos, lions,
leopards and unicorns.
For the Governor and "soot” (as Larrabee used to
say) three of the best box compartments had been thrown
into one, the bamboo partitions covered with Austra-
lian, British, and Chinese flags. Electric fans were fitted
up in these to keep the stagnant air astir.
Larrabee, having dismissed Curly, sat down in the
Governor’s box again, fixed one eye on a unicorn and
the other on a dragon, and was musing upon the possi-
bility of one or both of these as a draw in Sydney or
Melbourne, when one of the Japanese performers in-
formed him confidentially that: “Lilly gal want see
Itchi-Ban.”
In a moment the Japanese acrobat showed in a lady
dressed in the height of fashion, who picked her way
daintily among the ropes and stakes, and approaching
Larrabee, said in a dulcet voice and perfect, but rather
swell English,
“How dee do, Mr. Larrabee. Ame so glad to see you.
You don’t remembah me. Aye met you in Coota-
mundra.”
She raised her veil, and Bill saw the face of a rather


pretty and good-featured half caste Chinese girl. “Coota-
mundra,” said Larrabee, surprised. “I can’t say that 1
quite place you.”
“Oh, I was quate tany then, you know. Aye thought
aye must kem to see the Australian show. Quate lake
old tames you know. I love everything Australian, be-
cause, ame Australian myself.”
She smiled, and Bill smiled responsively, and mo-
tioned her to a seat in one of the Govexnor’s bamboo
lounges.
“You must know may people in Sydney," she con-
tinued. “On Chow and Co., the head is may uncle. Aye
was educated in Sydney, and then in London and
France. I used to lev your circus when 1 was quate
tany in Cootamundra. Have you still got the lovely
little pieba’d ponay?”
“Oh, yes,” said Bill. "But how long have you been
in Hongkong?”
"Oh, aye live in Kenton—up the rivah. Aye speak
Kentonese. But to business. Ame here to arrange for
boxes for to-nate. Aye want to bring thirty Kentonese
ladays—real Chaynase ladays, with tanay feet, you
know.”
“That’s easily fixed,” said Larrabee. “Get the book-
ing shroffs to mark the seats off.”
“But,” she went on, "I want you to do something
more. I want you to protect them. Last tame a circus
come hvah, aye took some of may laday friends, and the
soldyahs called out ‘monkey’ when they were kerried in
to their seats on the backs of their ahmas. End may
Chavnase friends are so fond of the circus.”
"Did you say thirty?” said Larrabee, sticking to
business.
“Yes; and their ahmas.”
"Then you’ll want five boxes. Each holds six. And
the what-do-you-call-ems? Where will they sit?”
“Oh, the ahmas. Ah, ayle pay for them, and when
they’ve kerried the Chavnase ladays to their boxes they
ken cross ovah to the dollah places.”


“Right-oh!” said Bill, interested at last in the girl
apart from her business proposition, and examining her
with care. He noticed her sumptuous attire, her jewels,
the fan and the pince-nez. He saw that she was pretty,
a fine figure, and attractive, in spite of a slight slant in
the liquid dark eyes. Her Australian birthplace and
mother had done much for her.
While the propitiatory crackers failed to avert the
typhoon from the sampan population, the gods who
arrange things were not idle, for at this moment Fresno
came up. You all know Jules Fresno, the “juggling
strong man,” whose speciality is juggling ponderous
objects which no one else can lift. Jules is a beautifully
formed man, and walks with a spring and a grace which
only the circus athlete in the flower of his career can
show the world. He seemed like a Greek statue in
action.
A year before the Eastern tour Larrabee had picked
him out of a side-show at Dubbo, New South Wales,
gave him £5 a week salary, billed him with speciady
printed colour pictures, and mads him a “star” for the
nonce. In return Fresno was the first to pull off his loud
check coat to help the show in a pinch, regardless of
h,is immaculate linen; and the last to “kick” at any rea-
sonable or unreasonable requests from Larrabee in the
interests of the show.
He had two weaknesses: (1) A fixed, unalterable idea
that every woman he looked at was—or ought to be,
if she had any sense—in love with him; and (2) that
he was worth ten times the salary he got. But these are
attributes not limited to he battlers of f he circus road
“Women,” Larrabee used to remark sententiously,
in those moments when, the show finished, the lights out
the horses stabled, and the animals closed in the cages,
he would moralise or be reminiscent over the one whisky
and water he took every night, “women are queer. Some
of them make bosker fools of themselves over circus
men while the tent’s up, the band playun’, and the bills
fresh on the walls. But when the tent’s down, and the


band gone, they don’t know yuh from a bar o’ soap.”
The \oung lady put up her pince-nez as Jules ap-
proached, and looked at Fresno. He looked at her. The
ineffectual crackers still staccatoed in Causeway Bay,
but the gods were busy elsewhere. Larrabee looked
at both of them and smiled. He knew another strong
man on the road in New South Wales. A cable, he
reflected would have him in the East in a month—but
here he came to earth, and asked the good-natured
strong man to see to the booking of the seats.
“And you see the Serjeants of the West Kents, and
tell um with my compliments that the Chinese ladies
are friends of mine.”
“Right-oh, boss,” said Jules, and off he went with the
pretty half-caste, Miss Mary Ah Wong of Canton and
Cootamundra.
When, two hours later, Larrabee, in a special electric
tram, with pink and blue bulb lights (it was the vice-
regal car) specially decorated by Graves, the Scotch en-
gineer of the Hongkong Light Co., came down to open
the tent, he saw that the gloom of the day had deepened
into the blackness of the night. All along the harbor
front the sampans and junks were still scudding into the
sheltered bay, and the screaming and cackling of their
frightened crews added to the impressiveness of the
right.
His first care was the tent. She was brilliant with
electric light. Her white, balloon-like swell stood out
against the black hills and the sombre night. The
sight of her made his heart throb with pride and alarm.
Not a breath of air stirred the murky night. The
Hongkong peak towered away to the right, speckled
with a thousand lights which blinked from the windows
of the queer mansions clinging to the sides of that great
hillock.
The trams were discharging their crowds of Chinese,
all bound for the “sing-song” (as the circus was called
by Chinese). These spread themselves round the bam-
boo mat ticket sheds. Larrabee gave a long look at the


weather out towards Kowloon. Then, with decision
made, he pushed open the bamboo gates. The men
were waiting, the Chinese shroffs in them ticket boxes,
the Australian grooms at the horses, the menagerie men
near the cages.
“Sell!” cried Larrabee. The slides of the ticket slots
shot aside, the bamboo gates were opened wide, the
ticket shroffs got to work, and soon were testing silver
dollars with their long finger nails. The crowd, chat-
tering like monkeys, flocked in.
Satisfied, Larrabee went inside the tent. The early-
comers, after having looked at the sleek and ever-
moving lions, the surly tigers, easy-going pumas, and
snarling panthers, passed by the elephants swaying from
side to side in a clumsy dance, or avidly chewing
sugar-cane or bananas, entered the “big-top” or main
tent, and mounting the fifty-cent seats formed a pig-
tailed row all along the top like queer coloured fowls
roosting high.
As nine o’clock (the starting hour) approached, the
storm had come nearer, as could be measured by the in-
creasing pressure in the stagnant air. The side walls
of the big-top had been looped up to allow the entrance
of any stray breezes; and the sound of sledge-hammers
told of extra precautions to keep the tent snug and safe.
Rope-pegs were driven deeper, and the side poles
were double-guyed or roped, while a white man and
several sweating Chinese coolies stood by each rope.
“Rush the programme through,” was Larrabee’s
order to the ring-master. Turning away, he spoke a
timely word to the non-coms of the West Kent regiment
upon the respectful treatment he desired meted out to
the “Chaynese laydays.” His word was law to the
soldiers, as they, to a man, were in on a concession to
uniformed men; and, anyway, Bill Larrabee had a way
with him with men and horses.
Then came Fresno escorting Miss Ah Wong and her
ladies. She was superbly dressed in a decollete evening
robe of sheeny satin. Her bare throat, white as milk,


blazed with diamonds, and great golden daggers,
jewelled, were stuck in her splendid masses of hair.
Slant-eye and all, she was superbly handsome; and the
world’s opinion to this effect was reflected in Fresno’s
eyes.
She was followed by a queer procession of ahmas
carrying on their backs the delicate, trousered, small-
footed women, whose black, well-oiled hair, parted in
the centre, and flattened down beside their ears, was
adorned also with jewelled daggers of solid go'd, while
at their ears and breasts hung large clusters and pen-
dants of diamonds, which set off their delicately painted
cheeks and lips.
They were in their boxes in a moment, and the
ahmas bestowed on the dollar side of the house. Then
the Governor and his party entered to the National
Anthem, the overture was played, and in a few moments
four thousand Chinese had fastened their eyes on the
wonders of the ring.
Larrabee heaved a sigh of relief.
"The money’s in the house,’’ he said, as he passed
through the tent to the front. As he faced the open
air a slight squall struck the tent. She quivered percep-
tibly, the loose canvas strips fluttered for a second, the
ropes’ ends dangled and swayed, the dome of the big-
top creaked, a quarter-pole jumped a foot from the
ground, and then everything was at rest again. But the
quiver was a portent, and Larrabee was alert.
Curly was at his side in an instant.
The next hour was spent in 'looking to the guy-ropes
and stakes outside the tent. There were sounds of
sledge hammers, and the ropes screaming through
blocks, of pulley-hauling, and of men breathing with
strenuous labor. The unconscious crowd within knew
nothing but the wonders before their eyes.
At ten o’clock Larrabee, somewhat begrimed, looked
in at the performance in the big-top. A trapeze act was
drawing 4000 yellow faces upwards to the swinging form
of a girl on a bar. The Governor was chatting with


his friends, andn watching lazily in the decorated box;
beyond him were the “Chaynese laydays" and their
Cootamundra friend.
Before Bill turned away the trapeze act was over
and Fresno was in the ring. As Larrabbee came into
the menagerie tent the wind spurted in six or seven puffs,
the tent quivered again. As the current grew steadier
the canvas began to move along the side poles in long,
snaky wrinkles. The dome expanded within, the tent
ballooned again, and began to lift the long quarter poles
off the ground. Then the puffy gusts ceased; and the
typhoon grew into a long steady stream, with a great
crescendo of sound, and a sudden increase of force.
Larrabee saw that the time had come to act. Stroll-
ing quietly to the Governor’s box, he s?id-
“Get your party out quietly, sir. There’s no danger;
but we must lower the peak of the tent soon.”
In a few moments the Governor’s party, some young
Englishmen, and the aides-dc-camp lounged out non-
chalantly. Larrabee, standing at the ring bank gave a
meaning glance at Fresno. “Stand by,” it meant, and
Fresno understood. He too, had been with the show
that famous night at Ekatahune, New Zealand.
The Governor and Larrabee stood together at the
entrance to the big-top.
“1 think,” said the Governor, after a while, “that if
I stay here where the people can see me it mieht—what
do you think?—give them confidence in a pinch. Eh,
Mr. Larrabee?”
"That’s handsome of you, sir,” replied Bill. “It‘s
the right thing to do. Mind the ropes there, and that
pole, sir!”
“1 am a soldier, you know,” said the Governor, smil-
ing. “But you command here, and I’ll take my orders
from you.”
Bill often used to boast in the after years how he gave
orders to a famous fiehting general of the British army,
who was Governor of Hongkong.


“Oh, there’s no danger yet, sir,” said Bill. “She’ll
take a lot more than this.”
But as he afterwards remarked, he kept both eye-
lids “pinned back.”
Now the typhonic tempest was booming, and the
Chinese, alarmed at last, began to move out, at first
slowly, and then with accelerated speed, as the quarter
poles began jumping off the ground. Fresno was
still in the arena, showing not slightest sign of alarm,
though, as Curly said afterwards, “The quarter poles
wuz ’oppin’ round like a mob uv kangaroos.”
The soldiers took their cue from the Governor, and
kept their places while the tent slowly emptied.
“Are you ready, Curly?” Larrabee shouted through
the fanfare of wind in the ropes and canvas.
“All ready, boss,”
“Lower the peak!”
At the word down came the tent top convexly, the
bail rings singing down the main poles, and the can-
vas, like an immense saucer, was securely lashed by
men who struggled strenuously with the wind. The hint
was understood, and the crowd poured out under the
looped-up side walls. A great slit appeared in the
lowered peak, and at a heavy gust the canvas split right
along, the tattered fragments flapping wildly in the
storm.
Fresno rushed to the boxes. “Get out at once!” he
screamed at Miss'Ah Wong.
“Nevah maynd me. The women, the women!” she
cried. “They cannot walk.”
Fresno rushed to the tent doors, found a man un-
moved amid the turmoil, and called for his help. It was
the Governor.
“Help me to carry out the Canton women,” he
shouted.
“Certainly. This way, men,” and the Governor, with
his aides, the young Englishman, and soldiers, struggled
after Fresno through the falling seats, and the roaring


wind. They found Larrabee at work. He had already
removed three of the helpless cripples,
“Save them, save them!” shouted Miss Ah Wong,
as she held on to the seating for dear life.
For half an hour they struggled, toiled and sweated—
the Governor, Larrabee, Fresno and the soldiers, in a
democracy of human feeling. When, as they thought,
the last of the women had been carried to the protection
of a solid stake fence, a crash was heard.
The tent had bellied up from the force of the gale,
the thick rope laShings holding down the peak were torn
like cotton thread from the poles, the guy-ropes parted
in the front of the tent, and the monster literally rolled
over, the quarter poles crashing together and snapping
into matchwood as the tent went asunder. As it rolled
over balloonwise, the equilibrium of the seating boards
was disturbed, the jacks loosened in the ground, the
stringer boards supporting the seating broke, and a
whole section of the cheaper seats canted sideways and
fell.
Larrabee and the Governor forced their way to the
spot.
“Is anyone there?” shouted the former. There was
no reply: and indeed, it would have been difficult to
hear anything less than a fog-horn in the din of the
storm.
“They must be safe by now,” said the Governor.
They turned and made for the barrier fence where
they found. Miss Ah Wong.
“Where’s may hero?” she cried. “I thought he was
with you.”
“Isn’t he here?” said Larrabee in alarm.
“No.” Then she screamed out. '
“Oh, there’s one of may laydavs missing ovah hyah."
She struggled out in the wind. Two soldiers caught
her and helped her up till they reached the fallen
seating.
“Anyone there?” was bawled in several keys; but
there was no reply.


Mary Ah Wong was worming herself through the
shattered seating boards, her hair dishevelled, her dress
torn, her jewels all awry. The soldiers, Larrabee, and
the Governor fol'owed her.
“Here, here!” she screamed.
When they reached the spot they found her leaning
over a part of the seating where two of the jacks had
fortunately remained upright. Beneath these they found
Fresno, in his ring costume, on his hands and knees, and
beneath his body, which formed a protective bridge,
was the last of the Cantonese ladies. As he came out
of the boxes with the woman in his arms, the falling
seating had caught him, and was pressing upon him
and his burden beneath. The Cantonese lady was
squealing gently like a caught mouse.
“Take her out first,” said Fresno faintly
As soon as she was safe he collapsed, and the whole
pile of seating, which he had been supporting, fell upon
him. It took half an hour of frenzied rescue work,
shrilly directed by Miss Ah Wong, to get him loose
from the wreckage.
■ "Oh, the brave fellow; oh, the hero!” she repeated.
“One hundred pounds to the soldyah who saves him.”
Poor Fresno, when rescued, was almost crushed to
a pulp, while a leg and an arm were broken. He was
conveyed to the principal hotel by Miss Ah Wong, who
assured Larrabee that “her hero” was safe in her hands;
and B'll, drawing upon his deep well of experience, knew
that the strong man was quite safe. So he shook hands
with the Governor and went placidly to work to see
what could be saved from the wreck.
The meat tvnhoon of 19— was long a matter of
meteorological history; the hearty parting handshake
o f the Governor of Hongkong and Bi’l Larrabee, Aus-
tralian showman, was six weeks old; the soldiers had
sobered un from the drunk which supervened upon the
raiment of Miss Ah Wong’s reward for Fresno’s rescue:
th» circus tent had risen a<*ain from its shreds and
splinters, like the fabled Phoenix from its ashes, and


was now* glittering on the Bubbling Well Road, Shang-
hai, and Bill Larrabee and his partner, Jim Dantry, were
sitting on the verandah of the Astor House Hotel, when
a letter was delivered to Bill, who read it to his partner.
“From Fresno,” he said. It ran;
“Dear Govn’r—l know you’ll be sorry to hear ut,
as my turn was a big dror in your show, and a cheap
act, too, as I oflfun told yuh; but I’m goun’ to quit.
I’ll never be any good for show business again. My
right arm’s a passenger fur life, and me left leg’s a
Protestant. I ’ad enough saved up to buy a little
pub in Sydney. But things ’as changed. You’ve bin
a good boss, and thank you so much. Remember the
■lady we met the day of the big blow, what promussed
to take care o’ me? She owns piles of houses in Hong-
kong, and has stores in Sydney and Cootamundra.
She has a motor car, and ever so many diamonds,
and altogether she’s worth over £50,000. Anyhow, I
like her, and I’m goun to marry her. So, I’m quittun,
your show—Your friend, Jules Fresno.”
There was a postscript in a lady’s handwriting:
“My hero has had a visit of thanks from the Taotai
of Canton. He was taken to Canton last week as the
Taotai’s guest. The lady he saved was the Taotai’s
cousin. They treated him with the greatest distinction.
He had four dinners in one week, three lasting six
hours, and one eight hours. After this Jules and the
Taotai had some whisky in the European fashion,
and they became very friendly. The Taotai said he
would do anything in the world to show his gratr
tude to Jules. He offered there and then to have a
criminal executed by the thousand cuts. This is a
very singular honour. But Jules refused—you
know how modest he is. (“By crums, I didn’t,” inter-
polated Larrabee.) The Taotai said he would save up
the criminal, and have it done when Jules was quite
well. He had very distinguished treatment, and will
have a medal from the Empress herself later. I’m so


proud he’s an Australian, because I’m Australian
myself—Yours faithfully, Mary Ah Wong.”
Larrabee looked at his partner, and the latter looked
at Larrabee. Then Bill said:
“The fust time I see them two look at each other 1
guessed there’ud soon be a billet open in our sheeow
for a strong man. I cabled Doxo, and he’ll be here next
boat. Ah, well, Maskee; it’s all in the circus game!”
JThe End.]


N.S.W. BOOKSTALL CO. LTD., 476 George Street, Sydney-
The Poems of
ADAM LINDSAY GORDON.
The most carefully revised edition of the famous
poet’s works, including biographical and' other notes
by A. G. Stephens—“ The best criticism of Gordon
yet,” says “ The Tbiad.”
Cloth-bound, 3s. 6d., posted, 3s. lOd.
Paper-covers, Is., posted, Is. 2d.
THE BULLETIN RECITER.
THE BULLETIN BOOK OF HUMOR-
OUS VERSES & RECITATIONS.
Two volumes of the best of Australian verses suit-
able for recitation.
Is. each. Is. 2d. posted.
CANBERRA COOKERY BOOK.
of Good and Tried Recipes.
Including special section on jams, preserves, pickles,
sauces, etc.
Price Is. 6d., posted, Is. 8d
PUBLISHED BT
HJ.W, BOOKSTALL CO. WD. 476 George Street, Sydney.


