

Third Issue.
Price Id.
Child Conscription.
Our Country'S Shume.
“ Were the Commonwealth, instead of working
in the tell of European militarism, to break out into
a complete system of outdoor physical culture .of
its own,’and to devote to it the money, time and
energy at present pul into the cadet system, ! it
would produce, as the boys became young men.
thousands of good soldiers. in embryo—may,
rather, soldiers more than three-quarters made
—lacking merely the tags and- technicalities of
parade-ground drill, and the knowledge of the use
of specifically military weapons, such as the
bayonet. Even without a knowledge of these, the
lad skilled with his rifle and able to “ rough it,"
will be a thousand times more useful amid the pro-
bable conditions, of Australian warfare than one
who has been put through the cadet mangle and
flattened out.” (Pages 12 and 13.)


TO MY FELLOW-COUNTRYMEN:
. Twenty thousand lads (i.e., about '5O per
cent, of those who reach their fourteenth
birthday in 1912) failed to register by the
prescribed date in spite of the severe penalties
advertised; many thousands are still un-
registered, although prosecutions have been
frequent, and the threats of punishment in-
creasing in intensity. These facts are ail the
apology I need offer for drawing your attention
to this question, and for asking all citizens
seriously to reflect on the full meaning of this
dreadful leap in the dark, the blame for which
lies at the doors of the leaders of BOTH our
political parties.
JOHN F. HILLS, M.A.,
Sea Wall,
Glenelff, S.A.


CHILD CONSCRIPTION.
OUR COUNTRY’S SHAME.
DEFENDERS of militarism keep repeating the assertion
that military training, at any rate, ensures a spirit
of obedience and discipline. ~ But is this so? That
the training, if efficiently conducted, ensures a skin-
deep obedience, and disciplines the character in a superficial
way, few will deny. The real test, however, of the worth of
it all is this: Is there implanted in the boy’s mind a self-
supporting readiness to obey, and a genuine self-control, or
are obedience and self-control present only so long as the
trainee is a cog-wheel in the military machine? If the latter
be true, then all that those boasted acquisitons are “ good ”
for is the killing of men!
We have all heard of the Spartans of Ancient Greece.
Military men must not object to my referring to them, and
demur that their State had its day too many hundreds of years
ago. It is the world’s stock illustration of the perfectly
“ disciplined ” State —disciplined, that is, in the sense our
military folk apply to the term. If military training pro-
duces a real inward willingness to obey and a genuine self-
control, how did it come about, as readers of Grote’s history
must frequently notice, that the Spartan soldier, when he
broke loose from his officers’ control and got, out of hand,
painted things red ki a way which shocked even a cruel and
pagan age. A Spartan out of hand was a bye-word in old
Greece for carnage and lust. We have remembered Ther


mopylse; we conveniently forget the other side of the shield.
I respectfully commend to the militarising section of our
fellow-citizens the study of the Spartan State. We are not
yet asked to expose the bodies of our weaker new-born child-
ren, to perish that the race may be “fitter; ” we are asked,
nevertheless, to expose the souls of our lads at the beginning
of their teens to an influence more blasting than any wind
that ever swept Mt. Taygetus.
1
2. Forsooth, our present system imparts manliness.
More of that anon. At first let us take something closely
allied in thought. Many of my fellow-citizens believe it is a
part of a man’s duty, a part of manliness, to defend the coun-
try by killing its enemies, and by preparing himself to become
a high-grade killing machine. Granted, for argument sake,
that this view is true, that this ugly killing business is a
reality to be confronted —a “ stern necessity,” as its apolo-
gists would say—does it not strike you, my manly fellow-men,
that there is something particularly unmanly, nay, cowardly,
in familiarising the tender minds of the young with the idea
of knowing how to be a good slaughterer? You fine, strap-
ping area officer, looking into the eyes of that bright, tender
youth whom you are instructing in the way to thrust a bayonet
into a poor human body, does it ever occur to you what mental
anguish you inflict on the finest young souls, and how you
imperil weak ones by overwhelming them with that worst
atheism, a crushing disbelief in human nature? Mrs.
Browning’s factory children felt in their despair that the
world was, somehow, wrongly built. Will you have our boys,
as they are brought face to face with this killing-question,
while their characters are unformed, feel so, too? I appeal
to your manliness; pause and think how it strikes the boy.
Business life and life in general are full of hard, jagged
things that cut into the quick, even of the adults. As human
progress goes on, as the spirit of that Nazareth Working-
man soaks into the world, we do all we can to screen from the
eyes o'f the young and tender the hard, cruel things that
Providence mysteriously allows yet to exist in the framework
2


of the universe, the awful forms that pain and evil take. We
do not take the boy of twelve to the operating chamber that
he may be the better doctor when he grows up; the moral
shock were a greater loss than the extra morsel of “ ex-
perience ” were a gain. In rearing our young we temper the
wind to the shorn lamb. Our militarists, without realising
it, are driving the lamb out into a soul-blasting east wind ;
for at the most critical age, when his views of life are being
formed, they place the boy, parents willy-nilly, in surround-
ings where all energy and stir are upon preparation for kill-
ing, where slaughter is lightly spoken of, and where physical
bravery is regarded as the highest earthly virtue.
The specific military training of boys must brutalise
them ; for there is constantly present the thought, “I am
going through all this prodigious preparation for the purpose
Of being able to kill my fellows.” The training, too, presents
war in its most attractive light. All that the alluring glam-
our of marshalling in arms and rousing clamours of military
music can do to deck with a coat of sentimental whitewash
the sepulchre full of dead men’s bones—all this is, or will be,
done, and most impressively. War is set before the boy as
the crown of manhood ; he is led to think that there is no
glory like the glory of battle. Abstract right, justice, and
moral courage become “ poor mean trash,” with no influence
on the march of mankind. He gets the idea that might alone
settles things. He learns, too, to be boastful, vain-glorious,
and fond of display ; for “ show-off ” is the life-blood of
parade.
3. Reader, perhajps you pride yourself in being more
moved by reason and common sense than by any plea that
appeals to higher emotional or to religious things. If such
be the case with you, the writer is to you merely a harmless
fanatic, unworthy of hearing. Hear instead what a former
officer in the British Army has to say; he is one of your “ good,
hard citizens,” and no fanatic; he is known to the
boy world that loves him as “ 8.P.” Well, this man says
in his “Scouting for Boys” these words:—“ Drill makes
3


boys wooden.” He is referring, I take it, to the loss of
individuality and initiative that ordinary military training
■brings about. He infers that it makes boys dull and unre-
sourceful. If Gallic will not listen to the “ fanatic ” pro-
claiming the wickedness of boy-conscription, perhaps he will
listen to the distinguished defender of Mafeking maintaining
the folly and stupidity, perhaps not of military training, but
certainly of that wooden drill and worship of technicalities
over which it is built as a brick arch over its supporting frame.
4. It is persistently claimed that the training of our
cadets is of the kind to make them manly. I challenge any
upholder of the system to prove this, taking as his illustra-
tion the one thing available, namely, the training experienced
by our senior cadets during the past eleven months. There
is as yet an almost entire absence of strenuous manly things.
There are the stock occupations of the parade-ground in great
evidence; a few of them useful, the greater part picturesque
tomfooleries ; hut if there is real strenuous and useful train-
ing it is to come. It has not yet arrived.
5. Introducers of our present compulsory system spoke
loudly of the good effects it would have upon the physical
development of our youth. Loafing on football ovals and
racecourses was to die out. I understand, however, 19 H has
been a year of unprecedented “ gates.” When our militaris-
ing gentlemen bestir themselves to exclude all able-bodied
youths of cadet age from spectating at ovals, where they
graduate in gambling and swearing, and say to them: “ Either
come to our training op play a manly game,” then shall I be-
lieve in the earnestness of their talk about manliness and
physical development, even if the alternatives they offer be
not what I should regard as ideal.
6. Not the least of the wrongs that the Defence Act in-
flicts on the community will be the degradation of great
numbers, especially of the finer and more delicately nurtured
young minds, that inevitably results from enforced com-
panionship with the Worst elements of society. A decent
4


lad during the training must stand and listen to the blasphe-
mies and obscenities, not merely of the loose lads of the dis-
trict, but of the larrikin and criminally-inclined ones. Apolo-
gists for the system retort in the correspondence columns of
the press that a lad muat be a muff and a weakling to allow
himself to be so easily influenced by bad example. This
answer proves too much, if it proves anything at all. If it
were true we should do away with all the guarded upbringing
of our children, lest we make muffs of them. Thoughtful
parents and educationists would all be wrong, since they try
to screen the unformed character of the boy from that soul-
crushing moral shock that comes from the sudden dawning
upon him in the language of vicious companions of the
world’s worst evils, or the sapping influence of frequent inter-
course with the bad.
The truth of the matter is this. That to remain un-
affected and uninfluenced is not only impossible for the weak-
ling—who, by the way, has his claim for consideration —but
also for the person of ordinary “ grit ; ” nay, furthermore,
for the toughest and most fixed amongst us ; for herein it is
a case of being compelled to be regularly and frequently at
close quarters with a flow of dehumanising, ghoulish language
of the larrikin in his brazen, shameless moods. The drop
wears away even the stone by its perpetual dropping. Evil
communication corrupts, in time, all minds, except a few of
the saintliest. Let one be ever so determined, there is a
subtle blunting of the moral sense; the inertia of familiarity
with evil overwhelms.
Respectable fathers, cannot I get through your comfort-
able hides with the point of my argument? You pride your-
selves in being educated, decent men. Let me ask you :
How would you like to be shut up for a fortnight in an Eng-
lish workhouse in a ward with larrikin “ tramps ”? “ Not at
all,” you say. Well, do you realise that in sending your
young lad to a military camp you are making him liable to
undergo n mental torture equally great, and a moral risk a
thousand times greater?. Manly men! if you believe that


there must be soldiers, I beg you to go yourselves to these
camps and parade-grounds ; shoulder yourselves the burden,
not shove it on to the helpless boys. The Swiss training be-
gins at 20 years of age. Your South African brother, too,
has more manliness ; he knows something of camps and
war ; his Defence Act* begins at 17- years, and puts the bur-
den somewhat more fairly, for at 17 a lad is stronger and his
character is somewhat more fixed and grounded. But you?
Are you not ashamed of it? You shirk the burden and put it
on the mere child. You manly men! ! (* Since the first is-
sue of “ Child Conscription ” South Africa has taken a de-
cided step towards washing its hands entirely of boy-soldier-
ing; the Parliamentary Select Committee recommends that the
commencing age be raised from 17 to 21. This will exclude
all compulsory training of minors.)
Picture a minute, I beg you, the helplessness of that
modest lad called in his early teens to associate regularly
and frequently with (say) hulking youths nearing their twen-
ties, fellows who have spent their teens “ knocking about ”
the streets in “ pushes ” or lurking in purlieus of wickedness-,
graduating in vice, lawlessness, and, it may be, criminality,
till they have become walking cyclopaedias of iniquity. Our
civilisation is producing tens of thousands of such. Do
you not think, then, that they will be in good evidence in a
muster where all able-bodied men of a certain age must ap-
pear? Your boy, respectable father, cannot pick his mates,
as as school ; he must stand where ranked. Fortunately at
school the in-school influence of the bad is reduced to a mini-
mum, as discipline in its best sense is present, and very much
present, while in play-hours the better sort of boy can join
his own set and associate as little as possible with the bad.
But not so in this military machine for levelling down. Those
whose company your son has to share are chosen for him.
He is placed, generally speaking, where military requirements
require that he shall be. He may have to stand at every drill
between lads whose language reveals a familiarity with all
forms of vice and crime, and listen to their undertone excla-
mations during the actual drilling item in progress ; also
6


to their conversations during the frequent “ spells ” of rest,
or whenever else talking is allowed. He may be— nay, prob-
ably will be —tent-mate with at least one such ; chance may
decide with a number of such. The “ non-com.” having
control of the tent may himself be a larrikin that has hidden,
perhaps, his more repulsive traits, and whose domineering
and driving power has recommended him to the officers as a
useful man. International competition for the most efficient
battle-winning machine prevents even a conscientious com-
mander from giving much heed to character, except in a very
limited sense. Be he himself a General Gordon or a Hedley
\ioars, he cannot afford to refuse to make use of the services
of those who are best at drilling and commanding, but bad
morally. “An army’s business is to drill to win battles,”
the officer will say. “We must promote the most efficient :
we can only consider character in a very limited way, namely,
in its bearing on battle-winning.” So, considerate father,
your boy during camptime—and there must be plenty of
camps if our military system is to hold its own against others
—may be at the mercy of what an anti-militarist justly refers
to in the press as “ swanky young bullies ; ” he may even be
at the mercy of worse. Do you realise what this means?
Forsooth, the decent lads will influence and quieten the
larrikins. Foolish thought! The characteristic of that
genus is his utter disregard for others. He will not (to use
a schoolboy phrase) “ shut up ” when asked. If he sees he
pains, he increases the paining. He is thick-skinned and
callous, and, given the presence of a few of like nature, the
feelings and wishes of the majority go for little, those of the
one clean-minded lad for nothing.
Let me again repeat that if this military training is to
achieve Its aims, camps and countryside training must be
much more frequent than at present suggested by the authori-
ties. Greater still will then become the wrong of herding to-
gether innocence of fourteen with the bold, brazen bad. I
earnestly hope that our militarists are in the following crux.


If they prescribe no more field training than at present con-
templated their system, will be the laughing-stock of the
generals of the world ; if a normal amount of this necessity
is added, the degradation .that this system entails upon the
youth of the land will be so colossal and apparent that an
angry public will send the whole thing packing, and decide
that if it must have a fighting-machine, the latter shall be
composed of men and men alone.*
[* The existence of a proviso in the Act, which allows cer-
tain colleges to drill their own lads of senior cadet age at the school,
and make the training a part of the ordinary daily curriculum, does not
affect the arguments on pages 4-7, as the favoured lads —mainly of
the well-to-do classes—number less than 5 per cent, of the whole
number of senior cadets.]
7. Thoughtful folk may argue that our educational sys-
tems have broken down so far as they concern other lore than
book-learning, that our boys have no useful leisure occupa-
tions, that they are out of control, and must be brought under
by the short-cuts and rough methods of the military man.
Without spending space in discussing whether or no the dis-
ease is as bad as they say, I reply that their remedy is as bad
as the disease. If we must have a universal compulsory
training of any kind I would recommend, to the study of those
who urge it, one on the following lines as infinitely better than
a military one:—Let there be a universal obligation with re-
spect to physical training, (1) controlled, not by soldiers, but
by civil commissioners with the fullest powers, (2) conducted
by persons specially fitted for it by their personality, discip-
line, and specialised training. (3) Aiming at physical effi-
ciency and character development rather than battle-winning,
but including all that is, per se, useful in
training. (.4) Embracing but little parade work, but very much
training in camp under typical bush conditions.. (5) Having
among its details a plan for a series of graded segregation
camps for such as prove themselves radically insubordinate,
or whose larrikin instincts make them undesirable comrades
for the other boys. (Undesirables will thus train apart.)
(6) Giving promotion based on efficiency, but efficiency not to


count unless accompanied by good character.
The atmosphere of such camps would be educational, not
military. Ido not altogether subscribe to such a scheme,
which has its dangers, unless camps are very small ones and
the tents well superintended, but I place it before the atten-
tion of those who say our parents cannot control the rising
generation, and I tell them that the present solution—i.e.,
handing the boy over to the military man—shows a pitiful
bankruptcy of ideas in the field of education and civics.
8. Supposing that it be true that the State’s safety de-
pends on all its able-bodied men being taught the art of war,
how can our present system, which on its present showing is
one of boy-conscription and man-exemption, be justified?
It is quite untrue that the military training of boys in their
early teens is unavoidable if we are to “ protect our country
from its enemies.” How much cadet training, or anything
like it, did those heroic citizens possess who successfully de-
fended their native land of Holland from the hosts that Phillip
11. sent against it when his Empire was the mightiest in the
world, and his soldiers the best-trained men in an age of great
generals and monster military development? Or, to come
down to our own times : how much preparation of the sort
dear to our area officers’ souls had that handful of brave (if
misguided) Boer youths, men, and grey-beards received, who
for nearly three years withstood the combined might of
Britain and the Dominions? Those Boers had not as boys
been schooled in scientific slaughter ; but they had stout
hearts and tough bodies, and in following their life avocations
and in other ways had acquired great control of the rifle and
that best of all discipline—the control of one’s self.
If war comas to Australia it will probably be, after the
first few weeks, a war of the guerilla kind that the Boers
waged before the eyes of an astonished world. It will be a
war of gigantic size, and waged over colossal areas under
novel conditions, entirely in favour of the Australian, if he
has stamina and resource. In such warfare bushcraft, iron


constitution, and resourcefulness will count as determining
factors ; those wretched drill-ground technicalities—to teach
which we herd up our boys in droves on the Saturday after-
noons and in their evenings, larrikin and decent lad cheek by
jowl—will not weigh as dust in the balance. Should the
awful calamity of an invasion come upon our land, our gen-
erals will find of greatest use, not the sleek, wooden product
of the military-instructor’s art, but the unspoiled youth of
hardy habits, steady nerve, and ability to use to the full the
natural advantages of the Australian bush. Let us get the
young people to go bushwards (not town wards) in their
leisure. Our present system is centralising, where it should
be de-oentralising. , Our military training is soaking the boy
in the slime of Jingoism without even accomplishing the pur-
pose at which it is aiming. It is also unwittingly assisting
those degenerating forces that draw our youths together in
frenzied thousands to watch their “ fancy ” on the racecourse
or football oval, when they should be exercising their bodies
and building up their physique.
9. And now, before concluding, may Ibe allowed to offer
some constructive details on the burning question how the
Commonwealth might give its boys all the essential pre-re-
quisites to becoming able “ defenders of the country,” without
subjecting them to a distinctively military training. It sim-
ply amazes me that no one has called attention to the size of
THAT LARGE COMMON FACTOR shared (1) by a training
needful for laying the foundation of a hardy, self-reliant man-
hood, and (2) by a training needful for producing a fine
soldier. This common factor includes, I maintain, all great
essentials to produce future soldiers. For the teaching of the
more technical qualifications the military octopus could seize
the boy at the end of his teens (instead of at the beginning),
and inculcate them, doing it at that period with much
injury to human nature.
10. Now, with regard to this common factor, is it be-
yond the wit of man to embody it in a carefully thought-out


scheme of outdoor erudition, compulsory or otherwise, of
citizen physical training. The course should be one that
is instrinsically good for rearing the finest manhood viewed
from the out-doors’ standpoint, just as our class-room educa-
tion in the special sense aims at producing the best manhood
intellectually. Such a course of preparation would naturally
include such stock items as erect bearing, correct gait, and
proper deportment, but would give main heed to the develop-
ment of self-reliance, resolution, soundness, vigour of con-
stitution, resourcefulness, and, to sum up, an out-of-door
many-sidedness. Under such a system, by carefully graded
exercises and tentative steps, a boy should be taught as many
as possible of the following things ;—To walk long distances
without getting sore feet ; to sleep under canvas and even in
the open without contracting chills ; to bear cheerfully both
fatigue and physical pain that often accompanies it ; to live
on rough and unappetising food, preferably of his own cook-
ing ; to mend in a rough way his clothes And shoes ; to use a
rifle skilfully ; to shoe and ride a horse ; to understand how to
read a map and make a rough map for himself ; to find his
way in difficult country ; to know well the contour and other
peculiarities of the countryside round his home ; to swim,
dive, and rescue ; to use signalling-.oodes ; to climb branch-
less tree-stems ; to keep in touch while exploring over larger
or; smaller areas ; to do, in fact, a thousand things useful In
themselves, and not merely antecedents to a successful
slaughtering of one’s fellows.
11. Were the Commonwealth, instead of working in the
tail of European militarism, to break out into a complete sys-
tem of outdoor physical culture of its own, and to devote to it
the money, time and energy at present put into the cadet
system, it would produce, as the boys became young men,
thousands of good soldiers in embryo—nay, rather, soldiers
more than three-quarters made—lacking merely the tags and
technicalities of parade-ground drill, and the knowledge of
the use of specifically military weapons, such as the bayonet.
Even without a knowledge of these, the lad skilled with his
11


rifle and able lo “ rough it,” will be a thousand times more'
useful amid the probable conditions of Australian warfare
than one who has been put through the cadet mangle and
flattened out. Ido not see how any solid fault can be found
with a training on the lines roughly sketched above ; it would
give the military authorities all they have any right to claim
from boyhood and youth ; moreover, if made compulsory, it
would hurt no tender consciences.
12. In conclusion, I urge again, if our country must
train for war, cannot it train its men, and leave the boys to
be perfected in a broad, physical course. Let it ensure the
latter getting a solid foundation of all that spells manliness
and resourcefulness, but let it spare their susceptible souls
the apprenticeship in prospective slaughter, which given at
their age cannot fail to brutalise.
Had the men of our land been asked to undergo what is
now being put upon helpless boys, their votes would have long
ago driven the Government from office. Hence it is said :
“ Boy-compulsory military training must be ; we cannot
save our country without it.” The voteless boy bears the
brunt of the burden ; the politician peacefully remains in
office ; the manly man looks on!
It is a brave thing to face the world : but not if, in order
to be a little taller in battle, you are standing with your hob-
nail boots upon a helpless child. Alas, for our country!
“ How long, O cruel nation, will you stand
To face the world on a child's heart?” ■


An Afterword on Freedom of
Conscience.
IN penning this pamphlet it was the aim of the writer to at-
tack this iniquitous Defence Act in what he regards as its
weakest—because its most palpably wicked —spot, name-
ly, its pernicious effect on those who are not yet citizens,
but are still, in the eyes of the law, but “ infants.”
There are, however, not a few opponents of militarism
who whether as citizens of a free Commonwealth or as fol-
lowers of the Prince of Peace, by whom they believe all war-
like preparation to be forbidden, feel that the FORCING OF
CONSCIENCE involved in this universal obligation is-in itself
such a stain on the history of the British race, as to claim the
chief attention of anyone speaking or writing against the Act.
We have reached an acute crisis. A conscience-forcing
law of great magnitude has been enacted. Militarism has
driven its wedge into the living flesh of free institutions.
Opposed to the Act there is a body of opinion, at present
but little organised. This consists partly of those who think
it unfair that a man’s burden should be put upon the boys ;
partly of those who, like the early Christians, regard the
training as forbidden them ; partly of those who, on ethical
grounds, refuse to share in what is degrading ; partly of those
who as citizens of a free land demand that all consciences
shall be free.
In matters of conscience a majority, however large, has
no right to trample on a minority, however small. Tyranny
is none the less tyranny when it is exercised by the many than


by one ; it is a thousand times more dangerous, because,
since the many enforce the wrong, there is present in it an
appearance of right, but absent from it all sense of accounta-
bility, here or in the hereafter.
By a self-imposed restriction on the absoluteness of his
power and other attributes, the Almighty has left free the
human soul prayerfully to decide what is right for it to do in
the course of its earthly life. SHALL MAN STRIVE TO
SHACKLE WHAT THE MAKER HAS FORMED FREE?
TWELVE MONTHS OF BOY CONSCRIPTION—A
RETROSPECT.
When the politicians of both parties, without a direct
mandate from the people, were placing the compulsory
clauses of the Defence Act upon the Statute book, the sup-
porters of militarism spoke and wrote at length about the
splendid physical training that the boys would receive as
senior cadets. The Australian parent was bidden to think of
Tommy Atkins’s fine chest, and assured that if only the cadet
system were made obligatory every lad was on the way to be-
come a young Hercules. Those who have thought a little
about the manner in which Atkins’s corporal development is
brought about will agree with me that parade has probably
very little to do with it. The physical Atkins is the outcome
largely of the splendid system of bodily education laid down
in the eighteen-penny British Army ■“ Manual of Physical
Training ” (incorporating the best Swedish ideas) and vigor-
ously imparted by sergeants and others who are fully quali-
fied physical instructors as well as military men. A very
large part of Tommy is not made on parade at all but off
parade. When our boy-conscription was introduced, good
bodily development for the boy was a pleasing prospect.


Many a doubting parent, distressed at the thought of handing
over his fourteen-year-old son to the military machine, found
comfort in the reflection that the boy’s body at any rate would
be well looked after and developed on scientific lines. Our
militarists had been singing the glories of physical culture
for the space of many months. “ Our youths,” they had said,
“ shall no longer loaf on ovals of a Saturday afternoon, smok-
ing ‘ fags ’ and betting. We will take them in hand and make
fine strapping fellows of them.”
Physical drill was put forward as the great, undeniable
blessing in the senior cadets’ training. Yet now, practically
at the end of the training year, what do we find? That
the public has been the victim of a colossal imposture. Some
20,000 lads are about to pass out of the cadet ranks into the
citizen forces in a few days, and so far as I can ascertain—
military men, please correct a mere citizen if he is wrong
not one company in the whole Continent has devoted a single
day or a single hour to this most important part of the whole
course. Two excuses will probably be made. Firstly, there
are few gymnasiums available, and no money to build such.
There is much money, however, to spend on salaries and other
things,—but that aside. The point is this, the system of
training laid down in the manual above mentioned, or in any
good physical culture manual, does not in any way necessi-
tate the use of a gymnasium, but may involve the use of a very
few and very simple pieces of apparatus that a few shillings
could have purchased. Furthermore, as a glance at the
book’s illustrations will reveal, a very great deal in the course
requires no apparatus at all. All the more up-to-date
courses of physical training are relegating apparatus of all
sorts to a very subordinate position. The second excuse will
doubtless be that the 1894 class of senior cadets have only
one year to train as such, so that only a part of the course laid
down in the regulations could be taken. The entire flinging


overboard of the physical culture shows how little importance
is attached to it in the minds of our military experts.
Let us examine the Regulations for Universal Training
G 3993, p. 19, regulation 27 in particular. This says “ The
training of Senior Cadets shall include (1) Physical Drill, (2)
Infantry Drill, (3) Military Field Training, (4) Musketry. It
is .needless to state what the year has been spent upon—why,
of course, upon Infantry Drill, dear old Parade! How our
experts do swear by it—in the face of all South African ex-
perience! Is it because less adaptable brains are needed to
conduct it than to give the other parts of the course? Or.is
it because it “ best serves to work up the military spirit ”
which our jingoes think is the same thing as ability to defend
the country? When the bands do play, the Governor looks
on in state, and all the world'admires (?) the way we are
training the boys to develop—not fine physique—but a
" swelled head,” a contempt for civilian life, and the foolish
fancy that now he has been satisfactorily paraded he can in-
sult and “ lick ” creation.
Boy Conscription is a farce, a pitiful semi-tragic one.
Is it for this we are cursing our children with militarism —
namely, that they may strut and swagger well upon parade?
We have not gone forward one inch in training defenders of
our country. We are spoiling our children, its best asset.
It is well that a year’s work spent on parade should end in
parade and smoke. But the mischief done will soon be as
“ water spilled upon the ground, that cannot be gathered up.”
This wicked foolery of boy soldiering must cease.
Fellow Australians, let us use every lawful means speed-
ily to bring this about.
Dairy Bulletin Press Ltd., Printers, 448 Pitt Street, Sydney.


New South Wales Council of the Australian Freedom League for the Abolition
of the Compulsory Glauses of the Commonwealth- Defence Act.
32 ELIZABETH STREEET. Box 1178 G.P.0., Sydney.
Rules.
1. 'OBJECTS: The objects of the League are te secure the abolition
of the Compulsory Clauses of the Commonwealth Defence Act.
2. Non-Party.- Non-Sectarian.
3. MEMBERSHIP: Membership of the League shall consist of all
those who are'opposed to Compulsory Military .Training In Australia, and.
desire to work for the furtherance of the League’s objects.
4* METHODS: To secure Its. object the League shall publish and dis-
tribute literature, hold public and other, meetings, and otherwise secure pub-
lic support to urge upon the Federal Parliament the necessity of repealing
the Compulsory Clauses of the Commonwealth Defence Act.
6. BRANCHES: The League shall establish branches In any districts In
New South Wales, and encourage united - action with the othir State Bran-
ches of the. League. ■ ■ :-v.v
A PROTEST.
I OBJECT to Compulsory Military Training and will do all in my
power to assist the Australian Freedom League (as a member) to
repeal the Compulsory Glauses of the Commonwealth Defence Acts.
Signature- ,-••••-
Date--—.-- -U-..., ;
Wa shall be glad if you will give what you can to help the Cause of Freedom of Comcienec.
1 enclose herewith the sum of Pounds Shillings
and Pence.
d , : : ;
Signature
Address - -
