

CHIN GRAMMAR
BY
REV. H. JOORMAN.
RANGOON:
AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS.
F. D. PHINNEY. SUPT.
1906.








CHIN GRAMMAR.
§. I.—PRONUNCIATION. Ahsan nin.
The Chin language is monosyllabic. It is spoken by
the race known as Kyins scattered over Lower Burma
and parts of Upper Burma, but especially numerous on
and near the mountain range called Arakan Yoma run-
ning parallel with the West coast of Burma.
According to locality the language forms itself into
various dialects. This book is intended to teach the
d’alect spoken by the Chins dwelling in that potion of
Burma which is bounded on the North by a straight line
from Akyab to Yamethin, and on the East by a straight
line from Yamethin to Rangoon.
The language abounds in guttural and nasal sounds the
correct pronounciation of which may be best obtained
from the Chins of the hill-country. The alphabet consists
of vowel-and consonant sounds. The vowels, of course,
can be sounded alone, but the consonants, with one excep-
tion, can only be sounded by the aid of a vowel. In a
combination of two or more syllables the final vowel of
the first syllable is sometimes dropped, provided the
initial of the succeeding syllable is a consonant. The
elision is indicated by’; e. g. S’le, a writer from so, a
letter, character, and le, write.
The vowels in some instances differ in their pronuncia-
tion from the English, having their equivalents in some
German or French vowel-sounds. Most of the consonants
are sounded as in English words.
Instead of using the Burman characters interspersed
with symbolic signs borrowed from the Karen alphabets,
a method previously attempted, it seems more practicable
for the present purpose to represent the pronunciation
of the Chin language by means of the English alphabet.


§. II.—THE ALPHABET. Aloe-ălawn.
The alphabet consists of 17 vowels and 19 simple con-
sonants. Besides the simpleor primitive consonants there
are 12 aspirated and 17 compound consonants.
THE VOWELS. So-lilng.
1. Naturally long Vowels;—
1. ai pronounced as ai in aisle.
2. e „ „ a „ fame.
3. ie ~ „ ie „ thief.
4. oe „ ~ o& e smoothly glided together.
5. oi „ „ oi in boil.
6. ui „ ~ u& i smoothly glided together.
2. Vowels that may be either long or short;—
7. a has always the sound of a in far.
8. i „ „ „ „ „ i „ pin.
9* ® » t> » j> )> ® y>
10. u „ „ „ „ „ u „ rule.
11. ua „ „ „ „ „wa „ watch.
I 2 * a „ „ „ „ „ e „ sex
13. ai „ „ ~ „ „ a&i quickly glided to-
gether.
14. au „ „ „ „ „ou in noun.
15- aw „ „ „ „ „ aw „ raw-
-16. 6 is almost pronounced as iin firm or ea in learn.
Its true equivalent is the diphthong o in the
German words Gothe, Konig.
17. u is pronounced as the uin the German Siinde, or
as ue in the French rue.


Primitive.
Aspi rated.
Compound.
b ..
ba
hb ..
hba
bL.bla. by..bya. hbL.hbla.
ch ..
cha
hby.. hbya.
d ..
da
hd ..
hda
S -
h ..
ga
ha
gl-.gla. gy-.gya.
k ..
ka
hk ..
hka
kl._kla, ky__kya. hkL.hkla.
1 ..
la
hi ..
hla
m __
ma
hm
hma
mL.mla. my..mya. hmL.hmla.
n
na
hn _.
hna
hmy.. hmya.
ng ..
nga
hng.
hnga
ny ..
P --
nya
pa
hny..
h P ..
hnya
hpa
pL.pla. py__pya. hpL.hpla.
hpy.. hpya.
r
ra
s
sa
hs
hsa
sh ..
sha
t
ta
ht ..
hta
w
wa
hw ..
hwa
y --
ya
z
za
CONSONANTS.
Most of the simple consonants and the majority of the
compound consonants are pronounced as in English words,
but the following differ:—
hb .. hba is pronounced with a peculiar guttural intona-
tion.
hd hda do
gy .. not quite as sharp as “gy" in Gymnasium,
hk kha almost as ck in plucky.
ky ~ kya ~ „j „ jnst, but at the same time does
not lose its identity as a compound consonant.


hn hna no equivalent in English.
ng -- nga „ „ „ „ , always initial.
ny nga as “ni ”in onion, , „ ~
hp __ hpa almost as pp in support.
hs hsa ~ ~ ss ~ classify.
ht .. hta ~ ~ t ~ turn
The above sounds should be carefully learned from a
native as their approximate tonic value can only be given
in English. The “ compound ” consonants with“h” pre-
fixed to them are in Chin not treated as aspirates, but as
compound consonants.
§. III. —THE TONES. Ahsan nin Ka hdun.
There are five tones or inflexions of voice in Chin,
'viz :
1. The long Tone,
2. „ rising „
3. „ falling „
4. ~ checked ~ and
5. „ short „
These tones denote a differentiation in the sound of
syllables or words, many of which when thus pronounced
with a different inflexion in the pitch of the voice become
other words with new meanings.
The tones will easily be acquired through practice.
Throughout the following pages the mark ' over a vowel
indicates that that particular syllable is to be pronounced
in a low pitch of voice, and that the syllable following has
the rising inflexion.
Examples:—
Mie, ill ness.
Aso, a son.
Hmlui, a boat.
P 3. sho, how much?
Ga 10, foreigner.
T 6 hnu ka, to-day.
Chin words and syllables end either in a vowel-or a
nasal sound (n or ng, sounded as ng in thing).


Examples :
Me, light.
Hsaw, cattle.
A-lun, all.
Mlung, mind.
Hbaung, what ?
Consonants frequently modify their sounds in Chin
words on the principle that a sharp consonant sound can-
not retain its identity when preceded by a vowel or a
nasal which has a flat sound, e> g. hklaung ku, each man-
pron. hklaung-gu.
sai-sai, all; pron, sai-zai.
This change, however, occurs only when for the purpose
of forming a new word or to express one single idea a
word or syllable ending in a vowel-or nasal sound is
followed by an other word or syllable whose initial is a
sharp consonant.
The consonants affected by this rule are: —
k and hk pronounced g.
P „ h P „ b.
s „ hs „ z.
t „ ht „ d.
when preceded by a vowel with a checked or short tone
the consonant d is pronounced t, e. g. ha-di sharp-(pron.
ha-ti) law-di, free, (pron. law-ti).
§. IV. —SYLLABLES.
1. The combination of a vowel and one or more con-
sonants or vice versa is called a syllable, as : —ln, house.
Ahn-hpla-ho, to show. Aung, lake. Klii-hsun, midnight.
2. A large number of monosyllables have the “ A for-
mative" prefixed to them which, however, is generally
dropped in compound words; e. g. &mo, master, but in-
mo, land lord, i-e, food. S-chin, time; but e-chin, meal-
time.
3. Syllables ending in a nasal sound are called open ,
those ending in vowel sound closed syllables.


4. Open syllables are generally pronounced either with
the long or rising tone of voice; e. g . Klan-so, the
Bible; hbaung, what ? htien-yong, a tree; S-man, wrath;
saing, near.
5. Closed syllables may be either long or short, as nie,
this ; to, that; &so, a son; Ska, distance; ku, hand.
6. Verbal roots ending in a closed short syllable always
take the verbal termination kd; e, g. Skaw-ko, to shoot;
ka-kd, to cry; si-kd, to go; klii-kd, to disappear.
7. Verbal roots ending in a closed long syllable re-
quire the ending yd; e. g , hdii-yd, to die; mie-yd, to be ill;
htawn-ne-yd, to exist. When the final vowel is a, o, d, au
or aw (occasionally u and u) the verb termination “ hd"
is preferable; e. g . kla-hd, to be distant, remote; 10-hd, to
to come; mau-hd, to err; akaw-hd, to have fever. Verbal
roots ending in an open syllable generally take the end-
ing hd; e. g. plang-hd, to be cunning; awng-hd, to dwell.
8. The syllables kd, yd, and ho (sometimes no) denote
the Infinitive mood, or the Present tense of the Indicative
mood.
9. When pronounced with the long tone the syllables
kd, yd, and hd are instrumental noun affixes signifying
with, by.
10. The syllable no denoting the subject or agent in a
sentence must not be mistaken for the conjunction no,
and, with, or the verb-ending no; e. g. hlie-hboe-nd cha-e-
--nd awn-nd, the Lord God continues to love (lit. remains
and loves).
11. The syllable mo sometimes yd at the end of a word
or phrase represents the interrogation mark; e. g. Shbaung
nS-hau-yd-md?, what did you say? hpo-anie-yd?, who is he?
12. The syllables ka, ya, and ha have the force of our
English prepositions toward, into, unto; e. g. mlu-ya, int >
the town; ku-ka, into the hand. When pronounced with
the rising inflexion they signify to, for, in; as, td-hnu-ka,
today (lit for that day); kye-ya, to me; in-ha, in the house.
The Chin language consists of words derived from
original roots which are monosyllabic and express either
the notion of quality and property, or convey the idea of
condition or action. The former are adjectival, the latter


verbal roots. By means of certain auxiliary syllables,
called prefixes and affixes, these adjectival and verbal
roots are raised to the rank of Adjectives, Adverbs,
Nouns, and Verbs; e. g. hlan, great becomes an adjective
by having aT affixed to it, thus hlan-di, great. The syl-
lable di , the sign of the adjective, serves also as a con-
nective between the adjective and the noun qualified by iff
e. g. poi-di-hklaung, a good man. In the case of familiar
adjectives the connective di is omitted and the adjective
placed after its noun, thus in reality entering into the
Genitive relation to its noun; e. g. hklaung poi,a good man
(or lit. a man of goodness). The verbal root klu becomes
a verb by affixing ko to it, thus klu-ko, to disappear.
Many verbal roots require in addition to the ending ko
also the “ A formative ,” as akaw-ko, to shoot, from the
root kaw.
Without changing the form of nouns, pronouns, and
verbs the various relations and meanings of these words
are expressed by certain particles attached to them which,
standing alone, are void of an independent meaning; e. g.
git, the sign of the direct object has no power to stand by
itself, but affixed to a noun or its substitute consigns it to
the Accusative case, as nie-gii sai, do this, so-u-gii paw,
read the book; kye-gii, me.
The different parts of speech in Chin are: —
Nouns, Adjectives, Pronouns, Verbs, Adverbs, Post-
positions, Conjunctions and Interjections.
§. V.—NOUNS.
Nouns are words used to denominate things animate or
inanimate. They are of two kinds proper and common.
The term “common nouns” embraces abstract , concrete ,
and collective nouns.
A proper noun is the name of a particular individual,
person, place or thing,-as: wo, a Burman; hlie, God.
A qualifying common noun is generally added to a pro-
per noun when it is a city, country, or river,
1 hayetmyo (town) Ame-ri-kan-plai, America (country)
I-ya-wu-tie-mla, Irrawaddy (river).


Common nouns, as the name implies, are words denot-
ing- the individual of a common class or kind, as mla,
grass; hpS yo, bird; yong, tree; a, chicken; hsaw, cow, (hso
east of Irrawaddy river).
There are primitive, derivative, and compound common
nouns in Chin. While primitive nouns, such as hklie, air;
hklo, moon; mlung, mind; etc, are original terms, deriva-
tive nouns are traceable to some other source. Derivative
nouns are formed from adjectival and verbal roots by either
prefixing “ A formative,” or by affixing “ hdun” - the sign
of abstraction - , or by taking both prefix and affix ; e. g.
Sso, a son, from so, small; poi hdun, a blessing-from poi,
good; Shdaing hdun, a beating-from hdaing, chastize, The
noun formative “ hdun ” expresses some action, condition,
property or quality apart from any agent enacting the same.
Its literal meaning “ is ” what is for, e. g. sai-hdun, a per-
formance (lit, what is for to do).
Compound nouns are made up of two or more separate
words anyone of which may be a simple or compound
word. They are formed in different ways :
■ . By joining one noun to an other noun. In this case
the first noun performs the function of an adjective qualify-
ing the second noun, as; —
Shso , substance Sinai hso , meat,
pui , mate cha-pui , friend,
htai , fruit ting htai , coconut,
mie , ache, pain Sho-mie , tooth ache,
yoe , string hn-htie-yoe, wire,
yong, tree main-glaing yong, tamarind tree-
lawn, path pong-lawn, jungle-road.
Frequently the noun qualified expresses the agent or
subject, as htS la hsS mo, a preacher, htS-lai-hsS mo, a
doctor, etc.,
2. By adding a noun to one or more adjectives convert-
ed into nouns, e. g. in-mli, a cabin, Shklaung-mo-so, a ninny.
The majority of these adjectival nouns require the “ A for-
mative,” which however, is generally omitted in the com-
bination; e. g. Syun-nai, a sprout from Syun, a vine and
Snai, tenderness.,


3< By combining a noun and a verb, of which it is the
object, implying agency or instrumentality, as: so-e, study-
from so, a character and 5-e-yo, to consume, appropriate,
hklo-pya, an eclipse of the moon-from hklo, moon and 5-
pya-ko, to decay.,
4. By joining a qualifying verb to a noun; e. g. e-chin,
meal- time from 5-e-yo, to eat and 5-chin, time; o-kang,
vigor from o, strength and kang-ho, to be firm, sound.,
5. By adding a noun to an adjective or verb and a noun,
e. g. kyong-so-in, school house; shklaung-si-l awn, footpath.,
6. By unit! ng a verb with the nouns 5-chin, time 516,
usage, and nin, method, manner; c . g. ie-chin, bed time;
Asho-15, Chin custom; pau-nin; manner of speech.,
7. By joining a noun to certain words denoting place,
space, or time, as :—-
skaw, a lower part, in-kaw, the basement of a house
skliing, an upper ~ in-kliing, the roof ~ „
shawn, a topmost ~ ziing-hawn, the summit of a
mountain.
shsie, a rear ~ in-hsie, the rear of a house.
slan, a chief ~ s6-lan, a ledger (pr. s’lan)
shdu, an inner ~ in hks hdii, a room.,
8. Many compounds are formed by simply uniting two in-
dependent words, as: nO-bo, parents, so-sb-hnii, children,
or by joining two nouns together the first of which defines
the second, as: ngo-aung, a fish-pond; wo-hklang, a hog-
pen; tui-an, a water jar. The defining noun may also be a
compound noun itself, as alai-lu-hss mo, a farmer; so-u-
--ahn-zo-hmoi-zan, a title page.
The noun sso, a little one, offspring, is affixed to a
number of nouns reducing them to diminutives, e. g. psdo-
so, a boy; in-so, a hovel; hks nau so, a little while.
Abstract nouns are words expressing character and em-
brace all nouns that do not name concrete things, e. g . kye-
zu, kindness; hsau hse, testimony; h5-lai, misery. Many
of these nouns are formed from adjectival and verbal
roots with " A formative ” prefixed or “ hdun ” affixed to
them. While the prefix “a ” simply names the noun in
its abstraction, the affix “hdun” imparts to nouns from
2


adjectival roots condition, property, state or quality, to
nouns derived from verbal roots state, manner or act; as
Hlan, great.
Shlan, greatness; hlan-hdun, the condition of being
great. Hain, green.
ihain, greenness; hain-hdun, the property of being-
green. Long, wild.
along, wildness; long hdun, the state of being wild.
Hau, speak.
ahau, speech; hau hdun, the manner of speaking.
Htau, fat.
ahtau, fat; htau hdun, the quality of being fat.
Concrete nouns are words denoting substance, as htun,
lime; aliing, stone; yan, gun powder.
Collective nouns are words expressing under the
singular form a whole consisting of a plurality of in-
dividuals (persons or things), as taw, an army; saung, rice;
asii, a conofreo;ation.
' 00
1. THE GENDER OF NOUNS.
The gender of nouns is determined by the distinction
of the sexes. It is expressed :
(1) By the noun itself denoting a particular sex; e. g.
pado a man hn3-to, a woman
Spa, father au-ii, mother
3ta, brother anii-hbie, sister
in-goi, brother-in-law nau hnie, sister-in-law
song-byan, bachelor hawn-hnii, spinster
hp 6 wa, husband hp& ya, wife
(2) By different endings joined to a common root, as :
hsie hn-hsa, a stallion hsie-nu, a mare
wo-pa, boar wo-nii, sow
mui-po, elephant mui-nu female elephant
hne-po, widower hne-nii, widow
ba-hlui, drake ba-nii, duck
a-hlui, cock a-nii, hen
hpaw-han, snake hpaw-nii, female snake


ui-han, dog ui-nu, bitch
no hti, buffalo bull no-nii, buffalo cow
hsaw-han, bull \ , „ .. ■ . '■-
, * t n t r hsaw-nu, cow
hsaw-wun-taung, bullock J ’
(3) By the ending nu affixed to the masculine noun;
as: —
shan-ba-lan, king shan ba-lan-nCi, queen
hsjinio, master hs3mo-nu, mistress
so. son s 6 hnu, daughter
7 7 0
aboe, sir &boe-nu- lady
A number of nouns have a common gender for both
sexes. The following are some of this class: —
cha-pui, friend
ai hsai, guest
Spo, grand parent
Spa, great-grand-parent
ie-pui |
. r . >• , a spouse
in-pui ) r
a.tii, nephew or niece
plai hso, country man or woman
hsun-pui, enemy
2. DECLENSION OF NOUNS.
In the Chin language there is no change of form to
indicate the gender, case, or number of nouns. Certain
affixes are employed to express these relations.
1. The Nominative case is formed by affixing nie to a
noun or its substitute when it names or points out some
person or thing as acting ; as man-lan-nie Skaw-ho, the
commissioner has fever. The Nominative ending no is
affixed to nouns that express being, source or agency in
connection with verbs of saying or thinking (expressed
or implied); as: hlie-hboe-no Shau-zi-ko, the Lord God
said; hpo-no a hwie-hpaing-hnie-yo, he has called before.
I he distinction of these case endings is not generally
observed.
2. Ihe Genitive case is formed by placing the word
denoting possession after the possessor, as hsk mo-in, the
house of the master.


3. '1 he Dative case is indicated by ka , ya or ha added
to a noun or its equivalent; as 3hklaung ha, to the man.
Kye-ya, to me. Wo-ka, to the hog. These affixes are
often used as Locative case affixes see 5.
4. The Accusative case is expressed in two ways: — (a)
by affixing gii, {b) by adding ka , ya , or ha to a noun.
The former ending is always the sign of the direct object,
while the latter generally indicates the end or object to-
ward which some movement is directed; as nie-ha 10-he,
come here! mlii-ya si-hnie-yo, he has gone to the town;
3lu-ka 3hsaw-kai, he will go forth to (his) work.
5. The Locative case expresses permanence noting the
place where something remains or transpires. It is form-
ed by adding kd, yd, or hd to nouns or their equals; as
mong-pun-nie hlie-hboe-yo moe-yo, the word was with God.
The conjunction mo-ha before, in the presence of, may
be said to be a locative case affiix; e. g. shan-ba-lan mo-
ha au-ye-yo, he sang in the presence of the sovereign.
The affixes ka, ya, and ha frequently express the locative
case relation; as 3ku-ka moe-yo, it is in the hand; pong-ha
m 3 awng ho, we live in the jungle,
6. The Ablative case is indicated by j ya-gu, hto or htdng ,
from, out of, affixed to nouns or their substitutes; mlii-ya-
gii, out of the city; to Sladito, from that place; wo-plai-
htong, from Burma.
3. NUMBER OF NOUNS.
There is a threefold number of nouns in Chin, viz.
Singular, Plural, and Dual. To the Singular form des-
cribing nouns in their simple state the affixes do, hd, and
dohd are added to denote the Plural. The Dual endings
are “ p&hnie ” and “ hoe,” two of a kind.
Singular.
Nominative hklaung-nie )
~ , & .. - the man.
hklaung-no J
Genitive hklaung [railing] (the mind) of the
man.
Dative hklaung-ha, to the man.
Accusative hklaung-gu, the man.


hklaung-ha, unto, toward the man,
Locative hklaung-yo, with the man.
hklaung-ha, „
hklaung-mo-ha, for, before the man.
Ablative hklaung-ya-gu, out of the man.
hklaung-hto, from ~ ~
hklaung-htong, „
The Plural and Dual admit the above case affixes add-
ed to tke forms hklaung do, hklaung ha, or hklaung-doha,
of the Plural and hklaung-pShnie, or hklaung hoe, of the
Dual number.
The Chin language abounds in word-pairs or couplets,
i. e. compound words arising from the union of two or
more separate words for the purpose of expressing a com-
plete or definite idea; e. g. hti la hau hpla hdun, a sermon
(lit the law for to speak to show); ai hsai in hka hdu, a
guest room.
When referring to the same person or thing nouns are
frequently placed in apposition as:—
htien-yong, a tree from htien, wood and yong, tree,
unof-htai, coconut.
o’
awng-hu, curryleaves, from awng, curry ; hii, veg-
etables.
hn-htie-ai, rust from hn-htie, iron, ai, rust,
tui-hna hdun, immersion from tui, water hna hdun,
dipping,
hsd-daun-so newspaper from hs3 daun, report; so,
book, paper.
§. VI.—PRONOUNS.
A Pronoun is a word used in the place of a noun.
There are personal, demonstrative, interrogative, re-
flexive, and possessive pronouns in Chin.
i. Personal Pronouns \: The first personal pronoun is
kye, I; denoting the person who acts or speaks, as kye
I work. The second personal pronoun is naung,
you; indicating the person spoken to, as naung-nie sii-ha
si-ke, you go there! The third personal pronoun hpo,
he, she, it, denotes the person or thing spoken of, as hpo


10-hai, he (she, it) will come. The Chins of Aracan use
the form &ya, rather than hpo, thus iiya mie-yo, he (she it)
is ill.
The plural is formed by adding me to the singular
forms The third person plural of the personal pronoun
is frequently expressed by the demonstrative nie-ha (pron,
n’ha), these or they.
In the conjugation of verbs a reduplication of the first
and second persons singular, and of the three persons of
the plural takes place ; The reduplication of kye is ka )
of naung na , of kye me, naung me, hpo-ha (or nie-ha and
aya me) ma , thus;—kye ka sai yo, I do. naung n 3 sai yo,
you do. kye-me-mi-sai-yo, we do. naung me m 3 sai yo,
you do. hpo-ha-ma-sai-yo, they do. In many verbs the
“A formative" appears in the 3rd person as hpo or Aya
asai-yo, he does. In all cases the simple Infinitive form
is used with the third personal pronoun singular, as ; hpo
si-ko, he < r oes.
' o
2. Demonstrative pronouns are prefixed to their nouns
without connective; to , that, is opposed to me, this, to-
hklaung poi-yo, nie hklaung hsi yo, that man is good,
this man is bad. The word sii, there, is ferquently used
in the sense of a demonstrative pronoun ; e. g. sii-nan,
yonder village.
3. There are Jive interrogative pronouns in Chin, vis:
Snie, who?, Shbaung, what? apie, who or what? p&ku, how
much, and pTsho, how many? e. g. naung nie &nie-yo? who
are you ? Ahbaung n 3 lu-ye-mo ? what do you want ? han
pasho ? how much money ?
4. A reflexive idea is given to the personal and demon-
strative pronouns by postfixing to them the word pun hdong ,
self; 6. g. kye pun hdong I myself; naung me pun hdong,
you yourselves; nie pun hdong, this itself; to pun hdong,
that itself. Hpo pun hdong ahau-ho, he himself said so.
5. Personal pronouns placed before nouns or adjectives
have the force of possessive pronoun s , as kye-so, my son;
hpo hpa ya, his wife. The words ho , own and akii , self are
used as possessive pronouns, as, hpo-nie Skii-ho-ya 10-hb,
he came unto his own.


§. VII.—ADJECTIVES.
Adjectives are words used with nouns to specify or
narrow their application. With the exception of a few
underived adjectives there may be said to be no ad-
jectives proper in Chin. The majority of words serving
the purpose of adjectives are derived from verbal or ad-
jectival roots.
Adjectives are either perfixed to nouns with the connec-
tive di, or simply postfixed without any intervening con-
nective; e. g. hlan-di-in, a large house.
Adjectives may be classed in three main groupes ;
primitive, verbal, and numeral adjectives.
1. Primitive adjectives are such as: so, small; si, original;
chan mutual; dau, holy (honorific); e. g. a small
child, poi-dau, holy communion.
2. Verbal adjectives , as the name implies are derived
from verbal roots, c. g. from :
3-aw-ko, to be fragrant aw-di, fragrant
/ o ’ o
poi-yo, to be good poi-di, good
ko-10-ko, to curve ko-10-di, crooked
ka-ko, to separate ka-di, different
yau-ho, to expand yau-di, wide
yang-ho, to hasten yang-di, quick.
Many adjectives are formed by the reduplication of an
adjectival or verbal root; as: —
poi-poi, good hba-hba, quick
pyun-pyun, straight forward taung taung, sudden
chan-chan, mutual yang-yang, fast
nai-nai, little kla kla, distant
han-han, a little like sai-sai, all
sau-sau, early nu-nu, abundant
3. Numeral adjectives may be classified as (a) definite,
(b) indefinite, and (c) distributive
A Dejimte numeral adjectives express a definite number
or quantity. I hey are limited to the cardinal numbers,
haw , one hnga-p&haw , eleven
hnie , two hnga-p&hnie , twelve
htun , three hnga-ptin-htun , thirteen


hmlie , four hnga-pun-hmlie , fourteen
hngo , five hnga-piin-hngo , fifteen
hso , six hnga-pun-hso , sixteen
hsi , seven hnga-pun-hsi , seventeen
hsa , eight hnga-pun-hsa , eighteen
ko , nine hnga-pun-ko , nineteen
hnga, ten hn-go, twenty or hn-go.
hn-go pah aw, 21
hn-go pahnie, 22
hn-go-ptin-htun, 23
hn-go-pfln-hmlie, 24
hn-go-pun-hngo, 25 etc.
htun-gyi, 30
hmlie-gyi, 40
hau-gyi 50
hso-gyi, 60
hsi-gyi, 70
hsa-gyi 80
ko-gyi, 90
hpya-haw, 100
hpya-hnie,
hpya-htun, 300 etc.
htonor-haw, 1000
o /
hton<r-hnie, 2000
o /
htong-htun, 3000 etc.
saung-haw,or tasaung,or, htong-hnga, 10,000
saung haw ta htong, or, tasaung htong haw,
Or, htong hnga htong haw, 11,000 etc.
saung-hnie, or, ahtong hn-go, 20,000
saung-htun, or, ahtong htun-gyi, 30,000 etc.
sien-haw or, ahtong hpya-haw, 100,000
sien-hnie, or, ahtong pya-hnie, 200,000, etc.
san-haw, or, ahtong-pya-hnga, 1,000,000 etc.
kii-de, 10,000,000.
For the numbers from 1,000 to 6,000 Burmanized forms
are used by the Chins east of the Arakan Yoma. These
forms are; —
ta htongr, 1,000
o ’ '
hnie htong, 2,000


hsun htong, 3,000
le htong, 4,000
hnga htong, 5,000
cho htong 6,000
There are no ordinals proper in Chin. Inorder to ex-
press a serial idea the adverb hn-hklaw, times-is perfixed
to the numerals from 1 to 10 and their mutliples, in all
other cases it is placed between 10 or its multiples and
the succeeding number; e. g.
hn-hklaw-haw, once
hn-hklaw-hnie, twice etc.
hn-hklaw-hnga, ten times, but
hnofa-hn-hklaw-haw, eleventh
o '
hnga-hn-hklaw-hnie, twelfth
hn-hklaw-hn-go, twentieth
hn-go-hn-hklaw-htun, twenty third, etc.
The adverbs si, and ayan, first are often used in the
place ol hn-hklaw haw.
When Cardinal numeral adjectives in Chin are used
with nouns they are not simply joined to the nouns they
qualify or limit, but between the noun and its numeral a
generic affix is inserted to signify; —
(1) the class to which the noun belongs, (2) the func-
tion or use it is assumed to possess, (3) some characteristic
or attribute peculiar to the noun.
The numeral adjectives always follow their nouns.
The principal generic affixes of numeral adjectives are: —
1. u , denoting a collection of writings, as klan-so-
Jo O f
u-hsi, seven copies of the scriptures.
2. hbong , for long round things as posts; e. g. htien-
hbong hnie, two posts.
3. hbiing , denotes even or cultivated spots as mountain
fields, gardens; e. g. alo hbiing-hso, six moun-
tain fields. 1
4. hdaw , for long things, boats, knives, combs; as;
asin hda.w-hnie, two knives
5. kang ,is applied to anything straight or stiff, as
pencils, bones, teeth, needles, etc. e. g. aku-
kang-hngo, five fingers.
3


6. kyai ,an individual bulb or root, as: hk£w-hsawn
hnga-kyai-hnie, twelve onious.
7. hkong , a bunch of flowers, or fruit, as ting-hnga-
hksngf-hso. sixteen bunches of coconuts.
o f
3. law , for flat things mats, coins, cloth, birds, tor-
toises etc; e.g. hpafi-ie hso-gyi l&w-htun, sixty
three mats.
9. liing , for round hollow things, eggs, nuts, jars,
houses etc., as tui hn-zu-luno--htun, three
* o 7
water-jars, in-liin hsa, eight houses.
10. myiing, what is stretched out, extended, as shelves
or the fingers of the hand, e. g. aku-myiing ko
nine fingers.
11. ni , a single meal, e.g. hbti n& hmlie, four meals
of rice.
12. hn-biw, for creeping things, as crabs, frogs; e. g. a-
oi hmlie-gyi hn-bSw-hsa, fourty eight crabs.
13. hn-hdong, a shoot from the root of plants, as awng-hii
hn-hdong-ko, nine vegetables sprouts.
14. hn-go ,(1) what is uttered, as pau hn-go hn-go-hngo,
twenty five sayings, (2 ) what enters the
mouth, a mouthful, as bii-hn-go-htun, three
mouthfuls of rice,
1 5. hn-gwan, what is round, applied to coils of rope, rings,
etc. e. g. che-chan hn-gwan hsa, eight brace-
lets.
16. hn-zii , for hollowthings as jars, pots; e.g. tui-ang
hnga-hn-zu-haw, eleven water pots.
17. pa , one of a pair as ami-pS-aw, one eye. When
used as a numeral affix the vowel “a" is
apostrophized as along p’hnie, two things,
“ f " is used with the units one and two only,
11 pun" connects the numerals from three up-
wards with their nouns, as: —sa-hso pun-ko,
nine soldiers, Both affixes are used with
nouns which admit no other descriptive’
word.
18. pe , what is mixed together, as bread, e. g. hbSha
pe-hmlie, four loaves of bread.


19- pie , for fruit and flowers growing in clusters, as
plantains etc. ng po pie hsi, seven clusters of
plantains,
20. po , for long things bundled together, as firewood
etc. e. g. ahai-hnga-pd-hsa, eighteen bundles
of firewood.
21. poe , applied to flat and even stretches of land,
fields, meadows, etc., as, alai-poe-hmlie, four
rice-fields.
22. sa , for long fruit, beans, pepper, etc. e . g. h6-ma
saung-haw htong-hngo hpya-hso-ko-gyi sS-
hsi, fifteen thousand sixhundred and ninety
seven red peppers.
23. sang , what is extended, stretched out as shelves
or the fingers of the hand, aku-sang-hnga, ten
fingers.
24. song , a part, portion-applied to portions of books,
MSS. letters, as so-song htun, three letters.
25. hsu , for stiff, straight articles, as needles, thorns,
the young shoots of bamboo, etc., apyaing hsu
hnga, ten needles, atoe-htun-gyi-hsii-hsa,
thirty eight bamboo sprouts.
26. hsoi , what is strung together, as beads, pearls, etc.
e. g. oi-yawng hnga-hsoi-hnie, twelve neck-
laces.
27. shan , for vehicles, yoke of oxen, etc; as, hlai-shan-
hmlie, four carts; hsaw-shan-hsa, eight span
of oxen,
28. shaung,for what is long and slender, as bamboo,
canoes, etc. e. g. yo shaung hso, six bamboo
poles. • Hmlui hau gyi shaung htun, fifty
three canoes.
29. htai , for arrows, fish, teeth, etc., as: ngo-hnga-
htai-hngo, fiteen fishes. Ahtaw-htai-hmlie
four arrows.
.30. htaw , what is placed in layers, as bricks, boards,
etc., e.g. u-htun-gyi-htaw-hso, thirtysix bricks.
31. yong , for what is erect as trees, etc., e. g. pan-yong-
hnie, two flower-stems.


32. yun , for long flexible things, vines, snakes,
worms, squirels, ropes, etc; as: hpaw-htong-
aw-pya-hnie-hsi gyi yun hsa, one thousand
two hundred seventy eight snakes.
33. taung , for measured quantities of seeds, grain, sand,
etc; as : saung hn-go taung hsi, twenty seven
baskets of paddy.
Sometimes the noun itself becomes the auxiliary con-
nective in such words as akun, year, atong, mile, nan,
village, yong tree, and others ; t. g., akun hau-gyi-kun-
hmlie, fifty four years, nan hn-go-nan-hso, twenty six
villages, ahoi-yong hmlie-gyi-yong-hnie, fourty two mango
trees.
b. Indefinite numeral adjectives arc numerals denoting
quantity but lacking numerical limitation. To this class
belong:
1. awaw; some, few or many, e. g. Shklaung waw moe-mo-
ho, there are still some men.
2. awau, some, few; as Shklaung awau, a few men.
3. asSw-hlo, other; e. g. asSw-hlo hs3mie-so-ha-nie, other
children.
4. aliing-ho, other, different; as hsaw ha aliing-ho hsie-
. mo-ho, there are yet other cattle.
5. Anie-ba hsie-hse, anyone, whoever; as: anie-ba hsie-
hse 10-he, whoso ever (you are) come!
6. pS-haw-haw, some one, any one; e. g. pS-haw-haw si
na, if any one goes.
7. apoe-dawng, all, complete number; as: p& mun-dong-
apoe dawng, all the angles.
8. a-lun, all, altogether; e. g. in adun pya-ko, all the
houses were destroyed.
9. hkS hsa, whole, entire, used with periods of time,
hnu-haw hka hsa, one whole day.
10. hk3. zain, all, everything; e. g. hk& zain Slong, all
things.
11. sai-zai, all entire, htien-yong sai-zai, all the trees.
12. poe-poe,all, without exception; as Shklaung poe-poe,
all men.


13. akywang, a few, a remaining number, e. g. iing htai
ikywang moe mo ho, there are still a few
coconuts left.
14. nai nai, few, not many, a-hlui nai nai moe-mo-ho,
there are a few chickens only.
15. mli-mla, a few, samples of a larger quantity; e. g.
saung mli-mla pai-hsawng-he, give me a few
(grains of) rice, please.
16. hk& nau-so, some a little; as tui hka nau so pai-ke,
give (me) some water.
17. hk 3 nau much, many ; e. g. hpo-nie saung hkS nau
ahbun-hnie-yo, he has gotten much rice.
18. do, ha, doha, many are used as plural endings see
§5-3-
19. nii-nu, many, a large number; e. g. nie Sla-ta, aung-o
nii-nii moe-yo, in this place there are many
crows,
20. nu-dawng, many, manifold; as nii-dawng-di-htien
yong, many-fold trees,
c. Distributive numerals are adjectives specifying or
singling out nouns. To this class belong: —
1. tie-tie, every, each, used with periods of time; as
hklo tie-tie, every month.
2. pa-haw-sin, each, every; in pa-haw-sin, each house.
3. ku, each chiefly used with rational beings; hklaung-
ku, each man.
4. hdong, each, only; mong hsien hdong, each command-
ment.
5. kong tie, each, solitary-denoting wild animals living
a solitary existence apart from the herd; e. g.
mui kong tie, a solitary elephant.
6. pawn-baw, each, individual-generally used together
with ku or hdong; as: Shklaung ku apawn-
baw si-hko-ho, each and every man can go.
7. haw-plie-haw, each, one after the other; e. g. in-haw-
plie in haw, each house, one house after the
other.
The above are the most common distributive numeral
adjectives. There are a few adverbial forms occasionally


employed as numeral adjectives, but these will be con-
sidered under § 11. i,
4. Comparison 0/ Adjectives
In order to express different degress of quality or
amount attributed to nouns by their attending adjectives
the following modifying words are employed:—
For the comparative degree'. —
1. hsa no, better-from hsa-ho, to excel, and
2. hai-ko, above, more,-from hai-ko, to be over above.
For the Superlative degree'. —
1. a hsun, uttermost, final, and
2. a hai-gyi, uttermost, final.
The comparative degree is also expressed by htau-ka,
superior-(from htau, voluminous, fat),-affixed to the word
which is the standard of comparison; e. g. nie-lawn-htau-
ka poi-di-lawn, than this (road) a better road.
Independently of any standard of comparison a kind of
superlative degree is formed by prefixing to adjectives
the Adverbs ta,very; in-ma-tan, extra ordinary; Shmlawng,
exceedingly; thus conveying the idea of a superlative of
eminence. Examples: —
Positive degree.
lai-di, fierce.
Comparative degree.
lai-hai-ko, j
hsa-no lai-di, >
htau-ka lai-di, )
fiercer.
Superlative degree
a-lai-hai-gyi, I
a-lai-hsun, f
fiercest.
ta lai-di, very fierce.
in-ma-tan lai-di, extraordinarily fierce.
ahmlawng lai-di, exceedingly fierce.


§. VIII.—NOUN AND PRONOUN AFFIXES.
The relations in which a noun can stand are many.
These relations are expressed by means of certain words
or combinations of words which discharge the same func-
tions as prepositions, conjunctions, or adjectives do in
English. Nouns, Pronouns and Verbs in Chin employ
certain affixes by which they may be recognized as such.
The following are the most common noun and pronoun
affixes:—
1. Affixes denoting direction toward or into ,
ka, (affixed to nouns ending in a short closed
syllable) toward, to, into,
ya, (affixed to nouns ending in a long closed
syllable) toward, to, into,
ha, (affixed to nouns ending in an open syllable)
toward, to, into,
as: mla-ka, to the river, mlii-ya, to the town.
Shong-ha, into the brook.
2. Locative affixes denoting place or space ,
ka and ko, (with short vowels), in, at, with,
ya and ha, (with long closed or open syllables),
in, at, to.
mo ha, before, in the presence of.
hdu ka, in.within,
yo and ho, with, in at.
Examples:—
Sou ka, in the book. In ya, in the house.
Hlie Hboe yo, with the Lord God.
Kye mo ha, before me. Aung kyie hdu
ka, in the jacket.
3. Precatory Affixes', used in prayers , requests , adresses
and .
o, oh, )
yo and ho V
ko, ' j
oh!, e . g. o, apa ho, o father !


4- Instrumental Affixes signifying with , through , by :
kd, with, by.
yd, and ho, do.
aku kd, with the hand. Amliing yd, with the
mind.
5. Interrogative Affixes ,
mo and yd,?
e. g. Naung nie Ashd mo? are you Chin?
Hpo anie yd? who is he?
6. Causative Affixes , denoting agent or cause.
Nie,
No,
e. g. Naung nie ahbaung n 3 lu ye mo? What do you
want ?
Hs3mo no ahau ho, the master said.
7. Case Affixes , see Sect. 5, 2.
8. A number of adverbs , conjunctions , postpositions , and
auxiliary verbs are employed as noun and pronoun affixes ,
such as: —
1. on account of. Nie along; aklong, on ac-
count of this matter.
2. Ahtaw, instead of. Kye htaw, in my place.
3. Ahpla, concerning. To ahmu ahpla, concerning
that case.
4. Aid, according. Ashd Id, according to Chin usage,
5. Ahnii ha, after, behind. Hpo ha hnii ha, after
them.
6. Ba, without. Hbaung ba hn moe la, there is
nothing at all, (without) anything. P 3. haw ba, none (lit,
without one).
7. Ba,emphatic affix. Anie ba hsie hse si hnaiing he,
whoever it is, be gone! Ba is morover used as a euphonic
affix e. g. Naung nie nS kang he ba md? are you well ?
8. Baw ta, outside. Nan baw ta pong a moe yd, out-
side the village there are wild chickens.
o m
9. Chan, between. Kong-san chan tui moe yd, be-
tween the sand banks there is water.


io. De, where. Hpo de hbaung ha si kb mb? where
has he gone?
n. Dau, honorific affix. Tablai dau, a Christian (lit
a divine disciple). Poi dau, holy communion.
12. Hdbng, only. Nie ha hdong mlii ya si wai yb, they
only wish to go to the town.
13. Hmawng gawn ha, before, in front of. In hmawng
gawn ha ahklaung pun ko ngu no awng hb, in front of the
house there are nine men waiting.
14. Hkoha, when. Aye bai nmohalo di hko ha, when
(I) shall go to the deputy commissioner.
15. Hkaw or haw, also, too. Son byan hkaw mie yb,
the young man too is ill. Kye haw ka yun ne yb, I also
believe it.
16. Hka lu, like, as. Hpa yo hka lu pai no koi yb, he
flies like a bird.
17. Mo ha, before. Mlii umo ha, before the mayor.
18 Nin, according. Achin nin ka yie wai yb, I will
sell it according to weight.
19 Pun htaw, for, in the place of. Hss mo pun htaw
ka hau hb, for the teacher I do speak.
20. Pbng, self, own. Ahklaung pong, a man’s own.
21. Hpii, for, Hta la hsa mo hpu awng hu gu ma-hn
pai la yai, we must give vegetables for the preacher.
22. Si ka, first. Ahn zb si ka Hlie no moe yb, in the
beginning was God.
23. Hsie, rear, back. In hsie ya hko awng he, sit,
down in the rear of the house.
24. Hsie hse, whether, since. Ui hsie hse myin zan
hsie hse mhn (mi hn) kaw kai, whether dog or cat I will
shoot.
25. Hsie na, provided. Poi di hklaung hsie na hpo ha
ka hwie yai, provided he is a good man I shall call him.
26. Hsawn-preceded by hdun, in case, that; Naung si
hdun hsawn kye ka awng hai, in case that you go I will
stay.
27. Htau ka hai kb, more. Niesouhtauka
to so u poi hai kb, this book is better than that book.
4


28. Za, indeed. Hsa mui zin za tawn ne zi kb, it is
the holy Spirit indeed. *
For further noun affixes of. Sect, 11, 12, 13.
§. IX.—VERBS.
A verb is that part of speech in a sentence which tells
something concerning a person or thing. It is the func-
tion of verbs either to affirm or to deny (i) what persons
or things do, (2) what they are or in what state of acting
or being they are. The former are called transitive, the
letter intransitive verbs. All verbs in Chin expressing
actions that pass from the subject or agent to some object
are transitive, as : Hlie hboe no ahklaung ha gii cha e yb,
God loves men.
Intransitive verbs express some state of acting or being
which terminates with the doer, as: Kye ka yaw ho, I am
cold. Many intransitive verbs are converted into transi-
tives by prefixing to them the syllable ahn for the Infini-
tive Mood. e. g. :
Akb, to crack Ahn-akb, to break.
K3,ng he yb, to be well Ahn-kang he yo, to make well.
Ka kb, to differ Ahn-ka kb, to separate.
Hku kb, to turn Ahn-hku kb, to overthrow.
Plie yb, to be full Ahn-hplie yb, to fulfill.
Nai yb, to be small Ahn-hnai yb, to lessen.
Nan no, to be humble Ahn-hnan hb, to humiliate.
Wang hb, to be light Ahn-hwang hb, to enlighten.
Poi ye yb, to be good Ahn-hpoi ye yb, to make good etc.
Some verbs merely aspirate their initial letter, as:
Apya kb to decay Ahpya kb, to destroy.
Si kb, to go Hsi kb, to push (make go)
Law kb, to be free Ahlaw kb, to set free.
In the conjugation of verbs a redulication of the first
and second persons Singular, and of the three persons of
the Plural takes place. The reduplication of Kye is Ka,
Naung Na,
Kye me Ma,
Naung me Ma,
Nie ha-,Hpo ha-, or Aya me IVfa.


In the majority of verbs the “ A Formative” appears
in the third person Singular, as; Hpo asai yb, he does.
Whenever the reduplication of the personal pronoun
precedes a transitive verb of the “ ahn ” class the vowel
a of the personal pronoun is dropped; thus
ching ho, I think.
There are two classes of verbs in Chin viz.
(r) Verbs ending in a short vowel sound, %
(2) Verbs ending in a long vowel sound or in a nasal
sound.
All verbs of class (1) take the ending “kb” in the
Infinitive mood, and in the Present Tense of the Indica-
tive Mood.
Those of class(2) may take either “ yo” or “ho ” (some-
times “ no”) cf § 4, 7.
e. g. 1. Ahma kb, to know. Atau kb, to put.
2. Ayan yo, to reap. Aklaung ho, to redeem.
Ahkawn no, to find. AhsSw hdawn no, to hate.
In treating of the relation of verbs we have to con-
sider ;
the Voice, the Mood, the Tense, the Person, the Number.
1. All Chin verbs have but one voice, the Active
Voice, e. g. Hpo nie to alu gu asai yo, he does that work.
The Passive form as in “ I am beaten ” is to be render-
ed: Kye ya mhn-hdaing ho, (some) one beat me.
2. The Moods are five: Infinitive, Indicative, Condi-
tional, Imperative, and Gerund.
The Infinitive mood is recognized by the prefix “a ” and
the verb endings ko, yb,hb (no) respectively; e. g. Ahlaw ko,
to dispatch. Ashai yo, to roast. Asb hb, to dig. Apia
hmo hb, to commit sin.
Many verbs do not require the A formative, but simply
take the above verb-endings; as: Hka kb, to awake.
Sawn nb, to pursue. Nui yb, to laugh. Hda kb, to dare.
Lb yb, to take. Ha yb, to gape. Klun nb, to set (as the
sun).


The Indicative Mood is used in making an assertion and
is denoted by the following endings :
Present Tense Ko, Yo, Ho (No).
Past Tense Hnie yo.
Future Tense Kai, Yai, Hai (Nai).
The Conditional Mood is employed to express possibility ,
supposition, condition , or purpose. Its signs are the a ffixes'.
Na. Bai. Hsie bai.
The latter affix expresses uncertainty e.g. Kye k& lo hai,
hsie bai, perhaps I may come.
Yo o hai hsie bai, it may rain.
The Imperative Mood is strictly speaking not that oj
mere command, but frequently expresses desire or entreaty .
Its affixes are:
ist Person : — hsd, hnaung hsd, yai } hnie yai , la yai, mo hai
( pron . moi ).
271! Person ; — Hsawn, hboe, hnaung, hnaUng, he, ke,ye, he
(tie), and the simple root of the verb. These forms ex-
press command.
A verb root addressed to a second person is a strong
and imperative order or command; e. g. Si, go! Lo. come.
E, eat.
By adding to the forms of the second person the affixes
Ne, and Zii , the command is softened to an expression of
desire or entreaty, e.g. Pai hs&wn ne, please give. Lo
hb6e zii, do come.
The ending zii is the sign of the Imperative Plural
number, as: Shan ba lan mo ha hau hb6e zii, talk ye be-
fore the king.
The form Mai die, may, is properly speaking an Opta-
tive form, but is used as a mild Imperative, e. g. Si mai
die, go (you are at liberty to go).
jrd Person: —No Hse, Bai Hse, Hnaung Hse let,
be it.
The form Moe hnaung hsd hboe, grant, let it be so, is
used in benedictions, prayers. Kye zii dau nie naung me
moe hs& mya ha ya moe hnaung hs& hboe, grace be with
you, all.


The Gerund is formed by adding Hdun , what is for , to
the verb root.
Its function is to state simply an action or a condition as
such.
It is always an abstraction and generally speaking corres-
ponds with the Noun Infinitive , Verbal Noun , or Gerund
in English; as :
E hdun, what is for to eat eatables.. Poi hdun,
what is for good, hence a blessing.
The conjunctions ong, la ong, for in order to, impart to
a verb the force of a Gerund. Sai ong, for (the purpose
of) doing. Hma la ong, for (the sake of) knowing, in
order to know.
The conjunctions di , and yan , namely, as for,-added to
the Future Tense endings give to the verb the force of a
gerund. Hpo nie apoi lan na ahsaw mla kai di lo ho, he
came in order to inspect very throughly. Ayie yai yan
hsi, a horse for (to sell) sale.
The conjunction ya, while attached to a verb root and
followed by awng ho, to remain,- imparts to it the force
of a gerund. HkSwn hsu hie ye ya awng ho, for the sake
of praying.
The conjunction la, for to,- followed by di, denotes a
verb as being in the gerundial mood. Hkawn la di, for
finding.
The postposition Hpu , for, added to a verbal root trans-
forms it into a gerund. E hpu, for eating. It frequently
occurs in conjunction with Hdun; Hsaw hdun hpu, for see-
ing-
3. There are three principal Tenses in Chin, Past,
Present, and Future. By means of certain auxiliary
words the past and future tenses may be more definitely
expressed.
The particles E,He, Yt,Ne, and We - inserted between
the verb root and the tense endings may either be re-
flexive or euphonic, or may impart to the verb the idea of
intensity or reciprocity, e. g.
Cha e yd, to love. Ahla e yd, to wag. Ahmai ye yd,
to wash one’s face.


The accidents of the two conjugations of Cki?i verbs
name/v of\ —
(1) Those ending in a short vowel,
(2) Those ending in a long vowel—or a nasal sound are
illustrated in the following table.
ACTIVE VOICE.
A. Infinitive Mood.
(i) Akaw ko to shoot. (2) Asai yo, to do.
B. Indicative Mood.
(i) Kye k& kaw ko, I shoot. (2) Kye ka, sai yo, I do.
Naung n& kaw ko, you shoot, Naung n 5 sai yo, you do.
Hpo 3.kaw ko, he, she, it Hpo &sai yo, he, she, it does,
shoots.
Aya akaw ko, he, she, it Aya &sai yo, he, she, it does,
shoots.
Kye me m 2 kaw ko, we Kye me m 2 sai yo, we do.
shoot.
Naung me m 2 kaw ko, you Naung me m 2 sai yo,you do,
shoot.
Hpo ha m 3 kaw ko,"]
Nie ha m 3 kaw ko, y
Aya me m 3 sai yo,J
Hpo ha m 3 sai yo, ]
Nie ha m 3 sai yo, y
Aya me m 3 sai yo, J
they
shoot.
they do.
Past Tense.
Kye k& kaw hnie yo, I have Kye k& sai hnie yo, I have
shot. done.
Naung n 3. kaw hnie yo, you Naung n& sai hnie yo, you
have shot. have done.
Hpo ikaw hnie yo, Hpo 3sai hnie yo,
Aya skaw hnie yo he has Aya isai hnie yo, he has
shot. done.
Kye me mi kaw hnie yo, we Kye me mJ sai hnie yo, we
have shot. have done.
Naung me m 2 kaw hnie yo, Naung me m 2 sai hnie yo,
you have shot. you have done.


Hpo ha ma kaw hnie
Nie ha ma kaw hnie yd, they
have shot.
Aya me ma kaw hnie yd,
Hpo ha ma sai hnie yd, they
have done.
Nie ha ma sai hnie yd, they
have done.
Aya me ma sai hnie yd, they
have done.
The notion of completeness is imparted to this tense
by “haw’' (to stop) inserted between the verb and its'
past tense affix,
Kye ka kaw haw hnie yd, I Kye ka sai haw hnie yd, I
did shoot etc. did do.
The idea of priority is conveyed by inserting Hpaing,
and Hlau between the verb and its past tense affix.
Kye ka kaw hpaing hnie yo, Kye ka sai hpaing hnie yo,
I have now shot. I have just done
Kye ka kaw hlau hnie yo, I Kye ka sai hlau hnie yd, I
have already shot. have already done.
The definite past tense is denoted by the word Plie,
full, inserted between the verb and its tense ending. It
announces an action or state as finished before an other
one,
Kye ka kaw plie hnie yd, I Kye ka sai plie hnie yd, I
had shot. had done.
Fiiture Tense .
Kye ka kaw kai, I shall Kye ka sai yai, I shall do
shoot.
Naung na kaw kai, you will Naung na sai yai, you will
shoot. do.
Hpo akaw kai, he will shoot. Hpo asai yai, he will do.
Kye me ma kaw kai, we Kye me ma sai yai we will
will shoot, etc. do.
The performance of an action at a near future time is
expressed by hpaing, and hlau,-placed between the verb
and its tense ending-.
Kye ka kaw hpaing hai, I Kye ka sai hpaing hai, I
will shortly shoot, etc. will soon do.
Kye ka kaw hlau kai, I shall Kye ka sai hlau kai, I shall
shoot at once. etc. do immediately.


The auxiliary la, must, ought,-inserted before the tense
termination implies obligation or necessity. It denotes
an external present influence prompting a future action,
Kye k 3 kaw la yai, I shall Kye kef sai la yai, I shall
have to shoot, etc. have to do.
C, Conditional Mood.
Kye k 3 kaw na, if I shoot. Kye kef sai na, if I do.
Naung n 3 kaw na, if you Naung n 3 sai na, if you do.
shoot.
Hpo 3kaw na, if he shoot. Aya 3sai na, if he does.
Kye me m 3, kaw na, if we Kye me m 3, sai na, if we do.
shoot, etc.
The Conjunction bai expresses conditionality and indi-
cates that a subordinate action is preceded by the princi-
pal action; e. g.
Kye k 3 kaw bai, I might Kye k 3 sai bai, I might do.
shoot.
The Conjunction hsie bai, perhaps, it may be,-express-
es the possibility or probability of a future action. It is
confined to the speaker or actor.
Kye k 3 kaw kai hsie bai, I Kye k 3 sai yai hsie bai, I
may perhaps shoot. may do.
Kye k 3 kaw hnie yai hsie Kye k 3 sai hnie yai hsie bai,
bai, I might have shot. I might have done.
D. Imperative Mood,
ist person.
K3w hso, let me or us shoot. S3i hso, let me or us do.
Kaw hnaung hso, „ Sai hnating hso, „
M 3 kaw kai, ~ M 3 sai yai, „
M 3 kaw la yai, ~ M 3 sai la yai, „
M 3 kaw moi (fr. mo hai),, M 3 sai moi, ~
2nd person.
Kaw shoot. Sai, do.
K3w ke, „ S3i ye, „
Kaw hboe, „ Sai hboe, „


Kaw hnaung shoot. Sai hnaung do.
Kaw hsawn, „ Sai hsawn, ~
Kaw hnaung he, „ Sai hnating he, ~
Kaw hsawn he. ~ Sai hsawn he. ~
Plural.
Kaw hb6e zii, shoot. Sai hb6e zii, do.
Kaw hsawn hbbe zu, „ Sai hsawn hb6e zu, „
Kaw hnaung hboe zii, „ Sai hnaung hb6e zu, ~
Kaw hnaung hsawn hb6e zu „ Sai hnaung hsawn hb6e zii „
3rd person.
Hpo, 1
Aya,
Hpo ha, v r
Nie ha, j
Aya me, J
Kaw no hse,
Kaw bai hse,
Kaw hnating
hse. Let him
or them shoot.
Sai hb6e hse,
Sai no hse,
Sai bai hse, J
Sai hnaung hse,J
.. let him
or
them do.
E. Gerund.
Kaw hdun, for shooting. Sai hdun, fordoing.
Kaw ong, „ Sai ong,
Kaw la ong, „ Sai la ong, „
kai di, „ Sai hdun hpii, „
Kaw yan, „ Sai yan, „
Kaw ka awng ho, ~ Sai la di, ~
Kaw la di. „
Verbs ending in:— a. o.o.au.aw. (occasionally it and #),
and those ending in a nasal sound substitute the ending
o o
ho in the place of yd.
E. G. Kye ka lo ho, I come. Kye k’ahn ching ho, I think.
Naung na ma za hai, you will help. Hpo hdii hai,
he will die.
The word “ ma,” manifold, divers,-placed between the
verb and its tense affix conveys the idea of multitudinous-
ness or diversity. Kye ka pai ma ko, I give all. Naung
na sai ma hide yo, you have done it all. Nie hsa mie so
no alun a e ma hide yo, this child ate everything,
5


3. The Negative Voice of Verbs.
The negative voice of verbs is expressed by Hn prefixed,
and La affixed to the verb root. The Chins of Arakan use
the form Hn Hno.
Kye hn kaw la, I do not Kye hn sai la, Ido not do.
shoot.
Kye hn hma hno, Ido not Hpo hn hmu hno, he does
know. not see.
The past and future tenses may be negatived in the
same way, but are rarely used. The euphonic affix Ba is
used in polite language.
Aya hn kaw ba la, he does Kye hn sai ba la, Ido not
not shoot. do.
The negative porm of the conditional mood is expressed
by Hn prefixed and Ha inserted between the root and tin
conditional ending Na.
Kye nie hn kaw ha na, if I Kye hn sai ha naif I should
should not shoot. not do.
The form Hn boi has the same power as the above;
Kye nie hn kaw boi, if I shoot not
Hpo nie hn sai boi, If he does not
The temporal Conjunctions Bai and Hsie bai, when
used conditionally are negatived by adding Hn hsie la to
them.
Kye ka kaw kai hsie bai hn hsie la, I think I shall not
shoot.
These forms however are seldom used.
The Inperative has like the Indicative and Conditional
the negative voice. It is expressed : —
1. By Hn prefixed and Ha affixed to a verb root.
Hn kaw ha, shoot not. Hn sai ha, do not.
2. By Hn prefixed and hd ne affixed to the root.
Hn kaw ha ne, )
Hn k£w hnaung ha ne, I
Hn kiw hsawn ha ne, )
do not shoot.


3. By the forms Kai die , Yai die, Hai die:
KSw kai die, shoot not.
Sai yai die, do not.
L 6 hai die, come not.
4. By Hn and ne , making a strong prohibition.
Hn k&w ne, shoot not.
The negative affix Ne preceded by ha hsawn loses its
peremptoriness and becomes a form of courtesy ;
Hn kaw ha hs£wn ne, please do not shoot.
Hn sai ha hs&wn ne, please do not do.
The negative forms of the gerund are'. —
Hn hoi, without and A go , apart from. These
either denote the omission of an action or that one
action is substituted for another.
Hn kaw boi, without shooting.
A sai go, apart from doing.
e. g. Alu gu 5 sai go k 3 sie yai, rather than work I
shall go.-or I’ll go without doing (work.)
4. The Interrogative Form of Verbs.
This is indicated by the affix Mo, joined to the tense
affixes.
K 3. kaw ko mo?, did I shoot, K& sai yo mo?, did I work?
Na kaw ko mo?, did you NS sai yo mo?, did you do?
shoot?
Hpo ha nie m& kaw ko mo?, Naung me nie mS sai yo mo?,
did they shoot? etc. did ye do?
In the Chin language the Dual from of verbs, i. e. refer-
ence to an action or state pertaining to two individuals
only is of very frequent occurrance. It is expressed by
Mhn prefixed to the verb.
Hpo no kye ya mhn hdaing hai, he will beat me.
Naung ha nie so u gu mhn pai-ko, I give you this book.
A large nmuber of verbs are converted into nouns by
dropping their Infinitive ending, and having the A For-
mative prefixed to them :
A —a, a crack from ako, to crack.
A —awng, abode.. from awng ho, to dwell etc.


The verb with its mood and tense-accidents is often
used substantively; e. g. Kye no lo hai kyin zu n& hma ko
mo? do you know about my coming?.
5. Irregular Verbs.
In several Verb roots with short vowel sounds the vowel
i is lengthened to ie,
o, au, aw, to o, and short ii to long u in the following
forms: —
i ko, to sleep makes Kye me mS ie yo, we sleep
etc.
Kye kS ie yai, I will sleep etc.
Ma ie moi, let us sleep.
The verb si ko to £0 undergoes the same changes.
00 o
O ko, to drink changes to Kye ka o hai, I shall drink.
Naung nS o na, if you drink
Aklau ko, to drop becomes klo hai in the future klo|
na, in the conditional, Klo he in the Imperative.
Atau ko, to put... Anau ko, tothink... Ayau kb to hear.
Ahsaw ko to look. , change their vowels to O in the
Conditional and Imperative moods.
All the above verbs of the O class take the long O in
the Negative voice, as : —Kye hn o la, I drink not.
Hn klo la, it dropped not. Hpo hn to la, he put not.
Nie ha hn yo la, they heard not. etc.
The verb klii ko,to disappear becomes Klii na in the
conditional, and Hn klii la in the negative voice.
§, X.—VERB AFFIXES.
In addition to the tense and mode affixes mentioned in
the previous chapter there are a number of other affixes
used with verbs. They may have either modal or tempor-
al force, or may simply add their own meaning to the
meaning already expressed by the verb.
A. Temporal Affixes.
i. Mo first-from mo ho, to forestall,-when preced-
ed by Ayan conveys the notion of priority of action or
state; as Hpo nie ayan lo mo ho, he came first; l.e. before
someone else.


When followed by the Future Tense affixes it means
again, further. Naung nie n& hbaw mo hai mo? —will
you come back again?. Ka m& sie moi (fr. mo hai), let us
go further, or again.
The reduplicated form mo mo, has the force of still
again, once more. Hpo nie lo po mo mo hai, he will
arrive once more.
When preceded by the verb moe yo, to be, —it has the
force of yet, still. Ahklaung ptin hso moe mo ho, there
are still six men.
2. Hlau first, before, —refers to either past or
future. Kye k 3 si hlau ko, Igo first. Naung nS po hlau
kai, you will arrive before
3. Hboi (fr. Hbaw hai).... again, in return, —implies
compensation, or repetition. Kye ka pai hboi, I will give
back. Hpo no ahau hboi, he will repeat.
When followed by mo, first, —it has the force of yet
again,. Hpo ha nie mS lo hboi mo hai, they will yet come
again.
4. Kyai die, again,—is used in prohibitive sentences.
Sui oso ha hbu gu hn pai kyai die, do not give the baby
rice again.
B. Emphatic Affixes.
1. Na hkaw in spite of, —expresses emphatic con-
cession. Hpo kawn na hkaw kye hn kyie la, in spite of
him cominor down I am not afraid.
o
2. Ba denotes an action as already performed.
Kye k 5 hmii ba, I saw. Hpo nie hn lo ba la, he will not
come.
3. Hbaung indeed, —placed at the end of a sent-
ence or phrase expresses some emotion caused by regret,
admiration etc. Naung so mie hnie hbaung; your son is
ill indeed.
4. Hn hdun by turns, —affixed to two antithetical
verbs denotes that two actions are taking place alternate-
ly. Hpo no lo hn hdun si hn hdun awng ho, he comes
and goes by turns.
5. Hn hsa of course, has a persistive, sometimes
permissive force. Hbii e plie hn hsa, of course, he ate


rice. Hbu e awng hn hsa, he may, of course, stay to eat
rice.
C. Augmentative Affixes.
i Pu gives an explanatory force to its verb. Hpo
gii hn-hkHw haw ba kye hn hmu pu la, I have not even
seen him once.
Hsaung hpau hklung ha na, po pii hai mb?, will you
travel by steamer?
2. Hda....to do unfeelingly. Naung ha naung nu
no mhn hdaing hda kb, your mother punished you unfeel-
ingly.
3. Hlu hlti likely, probably,—simply adds its own
meaning to that expressed by the verb. Yoohai hlii hlu
moe yb, it is likely to rain.
4. Wau alas!, —expresses sympathy. Hpo nie
hdii wau hnie yb, alas, he died.
5. Za_. ..denotes the action described by the verb as
finished.
Nie ha m 3 hie za hb, they asked.
D. Honorific Affixes.
The words zi and law, when joined to a verb are re-
garded as honorific terms.
1. Zi from zi kb, to do at once, perform instantly, —
conveys the notion of omnipotent action or communication.
Hlie Hboe no ahn hsb zi kb, the Lord God created.
Ahboe Yeshii Hka ri ahau zi kb, the Lord Jesus said.
2. Law from law kb, to be at liberty to do, to have
an unquestionable right to say or do. Hlie Hboe no hpo
gu ahn do law kb, the Lord God sent him.
E. Complementary or Auxiliary A ffixes.
A large number of adjectival and verbal roots when
affixed to other verbal roots lose their individuality and
form a sort of compound verbs. Their function is to im-
part to the accompanying verb a new and wider mean-
ing. The following are the more common of this class:—
1. Awng to remain, —is used to form the Imper-
fect Tense, imparting continuity to an action or state.
Hbu e awng hb, to be eating rice. Hpo no ino awng hb,
he is sleeping


2. Hko-..-to be able, —denotes physical or moral
ability. Hpo asai hko ho, he can do. Na lo hko ho, you
may come.
3. Kawng at leisure, —is affixed to the tense end-
ings. Kasai yai ka kawng ho, lam at liberty to do.
4. Koi difficult, to be slow, tardy, —.Tua ban hbun
koi yo, it is hard to get money just now. Kye me m 3 si
koi yo, we are late going.
5. Kya to be accustomed to, —.Me ku shaw a o
kya ko, he is used to smoking cigars.
Kya e sie, to be accustomed to_.(fr. sie, each), to do
ones’ work at stated times. Alu asai kya e sie yo, to be
in the habit of doing one’s work regularly.
6. Sii begin. Mo ii su na ka sie yai, when it be-
gins to rain, I shall go'
7. Hsai accustomed, in the habit of, —Ahnu tie
tie tie sau sau hto hsai yo, he is in the habit of rising
early every day.
8. Pong possess, have a right or claim to —Kye ka
hau pong ho, I have a right to say.
9. Hte, understand, be skilled in ,Kasai hte ho,
I know how to do it. Hpo no hn hau hte la, he cannot
tell.
10. Da be able to, know. —Kyong hso ha nie so m 3
le da ko, the pupils are able to write.
11. Hda dare. Hsa mo ha ka hie hda ko, I dare
ask the teacher.
12. Hpa fit, suitable. —Aung o gii na e hpa mo?, do
you relish crows? Hn hsie hno —hn e hpa la, no they are
not fit to be eaten.
13. Hbaw no in return, again. Kye ya so u gii
hbaw no mhn pai ko, he gave me a book in return. Kye
ya so u gii mhn pai hbaw hnie yo, he returned the book
to me.
14. Mie happen, chance to. ...Shan ba lan nie ha
lo mie hnie yo the ruler happened to come here.
15. La must, ought.—Mhn cha e la yai, we must
love one another.


16. Lo enough. —Naung n 5 sai lo ko, you have done
enough.
17. Lii, wish, desire. —Kye k& si lii yo, I wish to go.
(rare)—.
18. Hlau to be or do wrong.—Apia gu ka, sai hlau
ko, I have committed sin.
19. Law free, at liberty. — Naung n& si law ko, you
are free to go.
20. Lawn ...overdo, goto excess. —Hpo ha mS i law
ha yo, they slept to excess.
21. Wai ... wish, want. —Ay 3, me m 3 hie wai yo, they
want to buy.
22. Hto ... ought, has a permissive force. —Nie gun 3
e hto ko di ahau ho, you ought to eat this he said.
23. Hmo to do wrong, commit fornication. —used
with the 3rd personal pron. only. Hpo no hbie hp 3 ya
apla hmo ho, he committed adultery,
§. XI.—ADVERBS.
The function of Adverbs is to limit or qualify the appli-
cation of adjectives, adverbs, or verbs. There are but
few primitive or underived adverbs in Chin, —such as;
hdong,only. Go, without. Hbaung, about. Hkaw, Haw,
also, and some others. The majority of words used ad-
verbially are words or word combinations belonging to
some other part of speech. Adverbs are of six kinds;
Quantitative, Qualitative, Temporal, Locative, Negative-
affirmative, and Distributive Adverbs,
1. QUANTITATIVE ADVERBS.
1. Ahmlawng... exceedingly, very, —Hpo ahmlawng
poi yo, he is very good.
2. HkS nau ...much. —Aya me hkS nau irH e yo, they
eat much.
3. Ta._ greatly, very. —To in ta hlan yo, that
house is very big.
4. Hkaw, or Haw, also, too. Naung hkaw n 3 si wai
mo?, will you too go,?


5. Htong ong even. Hta lai hsi mo htong ong
lo hai, even the doctor will come.
6. Hdong only, alone. Naung hdong nft hma ko
mo? do you alone know it,?
7. Nii nil much, many. Han nil nil ka lii ye yo, I
want much money.
8. Saw as much as. Amoe saw mhn pai hlau hnie
yo, I have given as much as I have.
9. Ahbaung about as much. Han law hngo hbaung,
about five rupees.
10 Ahmawn indeed, truly. Nie hklaung ahmawn
mie yo, this man is ill indeed.
11. In ma tan very. In ma tan hsi di hpo, a very
bad character.
2. QUALITATIVE ADVERBS.
Apoi hsun, excellently.
Blong blan, pall-mall.
Shii shii sha sha, confusedly.
A —hsong kan go, disrespectfully.
Anawng nawng, authoritatively.
Ala hn waung ha, uselessly.
A —hsun go, endlessly.
Alii lii, on one’s own account.
Hka lii, like.
Yan yan, quickly.
To lulu, slowly.
Hba hba, instantly.
Vie yie nawng nawng, gradually.
Poi poi, well.
Hn poi hn sai, badly.
Pyun pyo, directly.
Klu lii klti hpaw, totteringly.
Ka ztln gwan, incoherently.
Ka do ka 10, headlong.
Ka hpla ka la, broadcast.
Ka tau ka hsa, angrily.
Kla kla, tick-tack.
Klien klien, jinglingly.
Kla gla, remotely.


Kla kla, rattlingly.
Kyan kyan, strenuously.
K£n mlie kan mlan, misleadingly.
Kan lie kan lan, sprawlingly.
Ako ko, slantingly.
A —hkai go, never mind.
Ahkung hkiing, foolishly.
Ahkong hkong, toughly,
Ahkau hkau, restlessly.
Achai zai, vainly, in vain.
Chan chan, together, mutually.
Shau shau sha sha, loudly.
The adverbs of this class are very numerous owing to
the great variety of circumstances and ways in which ac-
tions are performed or conditions expressed.
3. TEMPORAL ADVERBS.
Most of this class are adverbial phrases and express
past, present, and future time. Two of them express a
given point of time; viz. —
1. Hn hklaw haw tai, at once; immediately (fr.
hn-hkliw haw, once and tai, precisely, to the point.)
Naung hn-hkl3,w haw tai si na poi yo, it were well if you
should go at once.
2. Hba hba, instantly. Kye ya pong di han kye ya
hba hba pai hsiwng he, give me the money which belongs
to me at once.
The following adverbs denote :~
A. General time.
1. Hn kla mo, before long.
2. Hnti chan, the same day.
3. T 6 hko hko, sometimes.
4. Poe boe dawn, simultaneously.
5. Ahsa hsa, successively.
6. Plie ya gii (pr. bla gu), thereupon.
7. Sa ka la hko ha, presently.
B. Duration.
1. S&n ne (fr. san yo, to be firm), always.
2. Asai, continually.


3- Ahbaw hbaw, repeatedly.
4. T 6 hko t 6 lan, often, now and again.
5. Hnii haw ta hnii haw, from day to day.
6. Hn hklaw haw ta hn hklaw haw, from time
to time.
7. Hn hklaw haw sin hn hklaw haw, time and
again.
8. Hn hklaw tie tie, again and again.
9. Hboi hboi, over again.
10. Hawn, yet, still.
11. Mo, still.
C. Order in Time.
1. Ayan, first, Hpo nie ayan ha ayan lo ho. he
came first at night.
2. Si si ka, from the first.
3, To plie ya gu, then, after that.
4, Ahnu hsun, finally, at last,
D. Present Time.
1. Tua, now.
2. To hnii ka, today.
3. Hnii chan, the selfsame day.
E. Past Time.
1. Yan ta yesterday.
2. Ui nie ya, or —Un nie ya(fr. unno, to be
overcast), day before yesterday,
3. Hn hklaw haw shun, once upon a time.
4. Hnii haw shan, a day ago.
5. Yo ya ka, formerly.
6. Hklaung ha, previously, before. Hpo asai
hklaung ha, ka lo hnie yo, I came before
he had finished.
F. Future Time.
1. Ho ta, tomorrow.
2. Kyi tu, day after tomorrow.
3. Kau tu, day following day after tomorrow.
4. Plie ya gu, hereafter.
5. Hnii ha, afterwards.
6. San ha, later.


7. Lo di hko ha, hereafter,
8. Hbaw no, again.
9. Nie ka la hko ha, then, presently.
10. Sa ka la hko ha, soon.
4. LOCATIVE ADVERBS.
These are pronouns and postpositions converted into
adverbs by the addition of certain other affixes: —
1. Kaw ha, under,
2. Hklung ha, above.
3. Sii ha, there.
4. Sii baw ta, yonder,
5. Hdii ka, within.
6. Nie htong, or —Nie hto, hence.
7. Nie ya, here, hither.
8. Nie ya gu, hence.
9. Plaung ha, outside.
10. Hbaung baw ta, where ?
11. Hbaung baw ba, nowhere,
12. Hbaung ha gu ba, from anywhere.
13. Hmawng gawn ha, before, ahead.
14. Mo hpaing ha, previously.
15. Mo ha, before.
16. Hawn ha, upon, above.
5. NEGATIVE AFFIRMATIVE ADVERBS.
This class comprises also those adverbs and adverbial
phrases which express certainty or uncertainty.
1. Hn hsie la.. I no, not.
Hn hsie hno, | „ „
2. Hn ha ong, not at all.
3. Hn moe la.. ] none.
Hn moe hno, 3 „
4. Hn hawn la, not yet. Hbu hn e hawn la, he
has not yet eaten rice.
5. Ahmawn, truly.
6. Ka goi, certainly.
7. Ahmawn ka goi, verily.
8. Hsie yo, yes, it is so.


9. 6, yes.
10. Hsie hmawn no, truly so.
11. A-mau go, without fail.
12. Hsie goi, certainly.
13. Hau goi, surely.
6. DISTRIBUTIVE ADVERBS.
The function of these is to single out individuals, they
occur in connexion with numerals,
1. PS haw ka, each. PS haw ka pS haw ka han law
hnie kS pai plie hnie yo, I had given each one two rupees.
2. PS haw sie, separately, each. Su lun ne plie na pS
haw sie pS haw sie hsaw no si ke, after the meeting
depart each one separately.
3. Sie, apiece, each, Hn-plai ya, hsS mo Hn-ha ha
law haw sie mhn pal ko, to Mr. Land and to teacher Mr,
Gold I gave one rupee each.
Besides the six different kinds of adverbs noted before
there is a considerable number of adverbs formed from
the interrogative pronouns by adding to them, when re-
quired, certain postpositions governing the Dative and
Accusative cases. These are termed;—
INTERROGATIVE PRONOMINAL ADVERBS.
They embrace pronominal adverbs of quantity, quality,
time, and place.
A. of Quantity.
1. Hbaung ku, how much ?
2. PS ku hbaung, about how much?
3. PS sho, or —PS yo, how many ?
B. Quality.
1. PS hka, how ?
2. Hbaung hka, in what manner ?
3. Hbaung lii, what like ?
4. PS hka hbaung, in about what manner ?
C. Time.
1. PS ta, when ? —PS ta hpo ha nS hmu pu
m 5 ?, when did you see him.


2. Hbaung hko ha, what time ?
3. Hbaung shim, how long since ?
4. Hbaung chin ha, when what date ?
D. Place and Direction .
1. Hbaung ha, where ?
2. Hbaung baw, which side ?
3. Hbaung baw ta, in what direction ?
4. Hbaung baw ta gu, whence, from what
place ?
Hbaung hto, or htong,
The following conjuctions are treated as adverbs of
cause or consequence when they form a connexion in
thought between two ideas, or refer back to a previous
statement.
1. Nie kyin zti, for this reason,
2. Nie hka lii kyin zii, on this account.
3. Nie aklong kyin zO, for the sake of.
4. Nie hka htawn ne na, this being so,
5. Nie hka lii no na, supposing.
6. Hka hsie na, if such be the case,
7. Asin sin, successively.
8. HkS tie mo ? why, what for ?
9. Hka, how, why. Hka na nau ko mo ? how
do you think ?
10. Hbaung, what for. Hbaung asun ne la
mo ? what is the use ?
11. Hbaung kyin zii, for what reason.
§. XII. —POSTPOSITIONS.
The office of postpositions is to point out the relation
of nouns or pronouns to other words in a sentence, which
in English is expressed by prepositions. These relations
in Chin are numerous and in order to represent them,
words belonging to some other parts of speech, such as
nouns and adverbs, from being habitually employed
with a postpositional signification, are looked upon as
true pospositonS.


POSTPOSITIONS expressing the relation of the :
Genitive.
Atdng, in accordance with. Hta la atdng, in accord-
once with the law.
Ld, according. Hpo pau Id, according to his word.
Dative.
Ahpii, for. Kye nie ahsad ho gii hso ha ahpii ka htong
ho, I lay down my life for the sheep.
Atua, for, Hklaung atua, for the man.
Hdiika,in. In hdu ka, in the house. With plural nouns
its force is among. Hklaung ha hdiika pa mun dong hn
hsie la, among men there are no angels.
Accusative.
Ong (fr. ong hd to succeed), in conjunction with tong
(fr. tong hd, to measure), —po (fr. po hd, to arrive), and
moe (fr, moe yd, to be): —
Tong ong, until. Nie ngo ha po di tong ong hpo mie
yd, until this morning he was ill.
Po ong, till, to. Ta bong hklo ha gQ Hn-gau po ong
hklo hmlie moe yd, from March to June are 4 months.
Moe ong, until. Hnga na yie hide moe ong kyong ha
ma awng la yai, until 12 o’clock we must stay in school.
Lun, —or Hka lun, throughout. So haw hka lun,
throughout the rainy season,
Hka hsa, during, while. Kun haw hka hsa kye lu hn
mie la, during the whole year I have had no headache.
Locative.
Baw ta, beyond. Pan lai baw ta, beyond the ocean.
Hawn ha, above. A hsie hawn ha, above the stars.
Hai kd, beyond, more. Poi hai kd, more than good.
Hklung ha, upon, above. Htien yong hklung ha, upon
the tree.
Saing ha, near by. Mlii saing ha, near the town.
Ablative.
Aplaung ha, outside. In plaung ha ka awng wai yd, I
want to stay out-doors.
Hta, or htau ka, above, beyond, followed by hai kd.
Hpo hta ka kang hai kd, I am stronger than he.


Kaw ha, under. Htien yong kaw ha ie la yai, let
us sleep under a tree.
Hn dawng ha ong, not up in value. Nie hpau ie to
hpad ie hn dawng ha ong poi ye yo, this mat is worth
more than that mat.
§. XIII.—CONJUNCTIONS.
The function of conjunctions is to connect words or
phrases. Besides conjunctions proper, such as Hkaw,
also. No, and. Na, if. etc. other parts of speech not-
ably adverbs, postpositions, and nouns are employed as
connectives fulfilling conjunctional functions.
As in English so here conjunctions may be regarded
as (i) co-ordinatives, and (2) sub-ordinatives.
While the former connect single words equally related
to other words of a sentence, the latter merely join a
subordinate or dependent clause to the main clause of
a sentence.
Apart from the aforesaid there is a third group of con-
junctions, viz. (3) temporals.
1 he following are the principal co-ordinatives\
1. No, and, —has a cumulative force adding one word
or statement to another. Hpo no kye sti nan ha m 3 ela
yai, he and I will eat in yonder village.
2. Yo, with, —followed by Atu, together has a conti-
nuative force,
Ahboe Yeshu Hka ri Hlie yo atu tua tong ong awng
zi ko, the Lord Jesus Christ is with God until this mo-
ment.
3. Hkaw, —or Haw, also, too, conveys the idea of
inclusion and connects single words only. Hs& mo no
kye hkaw to hnu ka m 3, sie ha yai, the teacher and I also
will go today.
4. Haw haw, and also, is repeated after each
of the words united; Kye haw hpo haw hn sai hko la, he
and I also can not do it.
5. Lun hn hsie hboi, or Hdong hn hsie hboi, not only,
but also.


This is a conjunctional phrase and gives the idea that
one action is performed in addition to another. Hpo no
kye ya mhn hdaing lun hn hsie hboi, m 3, lie yo, he not only
struck, but also kicked me.
6. Lawn ha, besides is a cumulative conjunction, de-
noting addition.
Awng gii lawn ha hb3 ha gu 3. e yo, besides curry he
ate bread,
7. Hka pa hsie y 3 hkaw, but, though has an adver-
sative force.
Hpo ha k 3, hba e y 5, hka pa hsie yS hkaw hn lo la, I
called him, but he came not.
8. Di, at the end of a sentence or phrase has the
force of yet. nevertheless. Hpo mo ha si hnaung hso di
pyun pyun ahau zi ko, nevertheless let us go into his
presence said he (the holy one.)
9. Hka hn hsie hboi, not so, not such, although a
subordinative conjunctive phrase it oftentimes denotes
an alternative, not but, or, Han law hngo hka hn hsie
hboi law ko n 3 lii ye mo ? do you want 5 or 9 rupees ?
ro. Hka hn hsie na, if not so.—like the former is real-
ly a subordinative conjucative phrase, but has also an
alternative force. So e hka hn hsie na naung ha mhn
hdaing hai, unless you study I shall punish you.
11. Ha na, except, unless, is the negative affix of the
conditional mood and means —if not —. It is regarded as
a co —ordinative conjunction with the underlying idea of
supposition, expressing an exclusion. Hpo ha no alu hn
sai ha na hbii hn e la la, unless they work they must not
eat.
12. Hsie hse, granted, let be, —is a conjunctive phrase
and signifies—granted that. —Hklaung hsi lo ho hsie hse
OO
kye hn hm3. hko la, granted the robber should come, I
cannot know it. When repeated after each of the words
with which it is united it discharges the function of an
alternative conjunction. Pa do hsie hse, hn3, to hsie hse,
hs3 mie so hsie hse, poe boe dawng mS hdti la yai,
whether man, woman or child all must die.
13. Hn ha ong, lest, —a combination of the conditional
negative and ong, to come up to, attain —literally means,
7


—not unto —; with this meaning it has developed into a
conjunction with the force of lest. Kye hbu gii, hn eha
ong hpo ha hau hs&wng he, tell him lest he should eat
my rice.
Subordinate es.
This class is made up of conjunctions proper (such as
ya, whilst—ha, as soon as —aid, in accordance with—etc.),
conjunctive adverbs, nouns, and postpositions transformed
into conjunctions by the sanction of frequent usage.
They denote according to the various modes of depend-
ance determined by them: instrumentality, purpose, cause,
supposition or concession, place and time. In this latter
relation —they will be considered under a special head: —
temporal conjunctions.
1. Kd, and Yd, —by means of; Ui gii listing hkaw yd
ahdaing ho, he beat the dog with a cane.
2. Kyin zti, on account of, indicates that the principal
action is dependant upon a secondary one. Nie hpau
kyin zti Yu da hklaung ha nie hn-hklSw haw ba kong k 3
ha hboi yo, on account of this saying the Jews were at
once divided again.
3. Lun so ba, by merely. Naung n 3 awang lun so ba,
by your merely staying.
4. La, or La ong, in order that, implies reason or
purpose.
Ahboe hso la ong nie ha m 3 si hnie yd, they went in
order that they might see the prince.
5. Aklong, to the intent, in order that, —implies
physical cause or moral purpose. Naung me nie m 3 yun
ne di aklong to ala ta si mai die, in order that ye may
believe you may go to that place.
6. Kyin zii, because. Hpo nie akaw kyin zti hn e
hko la, he cannot eat because he has fever.
7. Atdng, according,—expresses the notion of con-
formity to a standard. Ahie atdng ahbun yd he received
according as he requested.
8. Aid, in accordance with. Kye nii hpau aid m 3 sai
la yai, in accordance with my mothers order we must act.


9- Go a verbal noun affix performs the function of
a conjunction and has the force of—(unless, without,
instead of —).
It expresses the omission of an action e.g, Alu gii a—
j sai go nie ha hn awng hko la, he cannot stay here with-
out work; —
It expresses the substitution of one action for another
e.g . In ha 5-awng go pong ha si wai yo, he wants to go to
the jungle instead of staying at home. Frequently it
denotes a negative condition e.g. Naung nie 3. —hau go
kye no hn hau hda la, unless you speak I dare not speak.
10. Hn boi, without, unless, instead of. Hbii hn e boi
nie ha hsaw no si ko, they went away without eating rice.
11. Hka lii, like, as —. This together with Nie hk&
lii, like this, thus, —denotes similarity or analogy. Yet,
while hk3. lu merely shows the likeness between one ac-
tion and another, —nie hka lu has the force of —as if—.
Kye hau hka lii sai ye, do as I say; but nie hka lu hpo no
ahau di na yun ne yo, you believe it as if he had said so.
12. Saw, in the same manner, as; This is really an ad-
verbial connective and is the equivalent of our English
as, —. Hpo si saw kye ka si hko ho, I can go as he goes.
13. Htau ka, followed by hai ko is a postposition of
degree. It denotes inequality by comparing the standard
of action expressed in the subordinative clause with that
of the main clause. Hlie Hboe no ame htau ka cha e hai
zi ko, God loves more than we do.
14. Na, if, —implies contingency, supposition, condi-
tion and has also the force of—should.—Naung si wai na,
si, if you want to go, go! Yo o na kye aung kyie hlan gu
hbie p 6 he, should it rain, fetch my cloak.
15. Hn ha na, if not. In the sense of —whether or
not —this phrase expresses condition rather than an alter-
native, and in the capacity of a subordinative conjunction
implies a double case of conditionality. Naung me nie
hn si hlu ha na kye kS awng hai, whether you want to go
or not, I shall stay.
16. Hk3 pa hsie na hkaw, though, although, —is a
concessive conjunction. It is also used to denote con-
trast, and then has the force of —notwithstanding.—Kye


yan ta hkawn di hklaung ahmlawng plau ye yb, hk3 pa
hsie ya hkaw hpo no hbaung ba bn hmS la, the man I
met yesterday is very proud, although he knows nothing,
Hlie Hboe no ahklaung moe hs3 mya ha ya cha e zi kb,
hk3 pa hsie ya hkaw hpo ha ya apla nu nil moe yb, the
Lord God loves all men notwithstanding- their havino-
. o O
many sins.
17. Ya kb, although,—has the same force as the above.
Ta blai dau ha nie tua m 3 hdii ya ko ahsau haing gu mS
hbun ne la yai, not withstanding the believers die now
they shall obtain eternal life.
18. Di, that namely, which, —. The connective di
which joins a subordinate to the principal clause in a
sentence, though rendered that, or which, is itself not a
lelative pronoun. It is a conjunction modifying the verb
to which it is affixed and uniting it to the preceding
clause. Naung nie n 3 pun ho gii pa hka n 3 hau yb mb di
m 3 shie hboi ha yb, who do you yourself say that you are]
they asked again.
Temporal Conjunctions .
1. Ya, whilst, —denotes contemporaneous action.
Naung na cha e di hpo nie mie ya awng hb, whilstffie
whom you love is suffering.
2. Bie, while, —denotes correspondence in time with
the idea that the dependant action is continous. Hbii e
bie tui hn ola la, while you eat rice you must not drink
water.
3. Shiln, since, —describes the continuance of one
action or condition during another. Kyong baw ta si
shun, naung baw ta kye hn lo hko la, since I am going
to school I cannot come to you.
4. Hdun na, whilst, —during the same time that, —
denotes correspondence in point of time, and is limited
to verbs of motion. In mo si hdun na hsun bui lo hb,
whilst the master of the house was absent the enemy
came.
5. Ya shun, throughout, all the while, —. Kye me pau
ya m 3 awng shun, hpo nie angu kb, all the while we talk-
ed he watched.


6. Ha, as soon as, —signifies that without interval the
principal action immediately follows the dependent one.
The verbal root is generally reduplicated. Hpo lo io ha
k& sie yai, as soon as he comes I shall go.
7. Na, when, —used as a temporal conjunction sets
forth the correspondence in point of time of the main and
dependent actions. Nie gii yo na hpo n 5 ahmlting ta ho,
when he heard this he was glad.
8. Hko ha, when. This is a noun meaning season. It
is, however, habitually employed as a temporal conjunc-
tion having the force of at the time that, when. Hpo hdii
di hko ha ame nie mlii ya m& awng ha yo, at the time
that he died we were living in the city.
9. Hko di goe, since, denotes continuity of action or
state beginning at the time another was performed. It
literally means; from the time that. Nie ala ta po hko
di goe kye nie hn k&ng he la, from the time that I came
to this place I have not been well.
10. Tong ong, until, —is an Accusative postposition,
but through lone continued usage has come to be regard-
bOO t o
ed as a conjunction of time, limiting the action asserted
by the principal predicate. Kye po tong ong, lo ha ngti
ke, watch in the mountain field until I come.
11. Hn ha maung, before. Though negative in
o 1 00
form it is affirmative in meaning and presents the princi-
pal action as taking place before the subordinate one.
PS-Lun hn hsaw ha maung Hn-Toe lo po hnie yo, before
Miss Round had left Mr. Young arrived.
12. Hnu ha, after, —when used as a temporal conjunc-
tion denotes that irrespective of tense the subordinate
precedes the main action.
Kye bo si hnu ha hsi hdii hnie yo, after my father had
gone the horse died.
13. Plie ya gu, after, has the same force as hnu ha.
Nie ha no nu dawn mhn hpau plie ya gu alu nai nai so m 3,
sai wai yo, after they had talked a great deal they would
do but little work.
14. Ku, whenever. This is a distributive numeral
adjective,—each—. In the character of a conjunction of
time it states that each repetition of the principal is subse


quent to that of the subordinate action. To kyong hso
pa ku hpo mie yo, whenever that school boy jumps he is
sore.
15. Bai, and Di na, —two affixes of the Conditional
mood are used as temporal conjunctions denoting that a
subordinate action is preceded by the chief—action. Nie
baw lo hboi di na naung ha mhn hdaing hai, when you
come here again I shall strike you. Aku ho in ha awng
bai apoi hsun, it is best if one lives in his own house.
§. XIV.—INTERJECTIONS.
These are exclamations uttered under some emotion or
feeling and may express disgust, pain, uncertainty, ap-
proval, surprise, sympathy.
1. Aii u o,__o mother. —an exclamation of pain or
surprise.
2. Ahnaung chai su ka,..oh dear, —sympathy, pity.
3. Au au,..ah yes, —assent,
4. Aw, ah, eh, —surprise.
5. Aw mo,..stop, he, —warning.
6. Aw aw,,. very well, —satisfaction.
7. Ai,..or Au,..ah,—regret, surprise.
8. Inn,..hm, —annoyance, predicament.
9. o,..that is it, —approval.
10. o o,..yes, —assent.
n. o, or 0,..0h, —supplication.
The exclamation o or 0 is always followed by yo or ho
affixed to the noun. 6. Pa Hlie Hboe yo, oh Lord God our
father.
12. Hbai hbai, wait!—censure, threat.
13. Hbaung! why, what. —sudden surprise.
14. He, here !—disrespect, anger, warning.
15. Ha. here, come here is used when calling cattle.
16. Hin, hm. —uncertainty.
17. Kai,up! attention.
18. Hko hko, well done! acknowledgment.
19. N, yes. —assent.
20. Nn, no. —denial.


21. Ays we, —oh, eh! pain.
22. Sau u nie, oh poor! —sorrow, grief.
32. Hto, what now ? ! —predicament.
24. Sho, there now! —disdain, blame.
25. Htu Hsaw, halloh, he ! —used when calling pigs.
There are other Interjections which, however, cannot
be represented in writing being mere nasal or guttural
cr runts.
O
Names of the Months. Hklo mien .
1. Pya hsu January. 7. Hklo dun July.
2. Ta ba toe February. 8. Hklo nu, August.
3. Ta bong March. 9. Tau hsS lan,.. Septem-
ber.
4. Tan ku April. 10. Hsa daung October.
5. Hklo maw May. 11. Tan hsong myii, Nov-
ember.
6. Hklo hn-gau_. June. 12. Na tau December.
Names of the days of the Week. Ahn-ba hntc amien.
1. Ta nan ga noe_. Sunday.
2. Ta lan la hnu._Monday.
3. An ga hnu Tuesday,
4. Bu da hii hnu .. Wednes-
day.
5. Kya hsa ba de hnu,
Thursday.
6. Hso kya hnu .. Friday.
7. Sa ne hnu Saturday.
8. U bii hnu the Chris-
tian Sunday.
Division of Time. Achtn hka hdun.
Akun, a year.
Hklo, a month.
Hklo, htun, a quarter.
Hsie hko, the cold season.
Hka hko, the hot season.
So hko, the rainy season.
Ahn-ba, a week.
A hnu, a day.


Hko wa so sa, dawn, from; Hko, season—wa, lieht —•
7 7 f O
so sa, dirty.)
Ango, morning.
Ango htd, early morning.
Hko nie (pr; hkanie) a-hsun mo, forenoon. (hk6 nie,
sun; ahsun, end; mo, before.)
Hks nie hsun dai ma, noon, (dai, exactly; ma, firm. —)
Amti lai, afternoon, (lai yo, to turn.)
Hko nie kyaing, early part of the afternoon, (kyaing
ho, to upset).
Hk6 nie klun hta, sunset. (Klun yd, to set; hta hd, to
be new).
Amii yaw, evening. (Yaw hd to be cool).
Ayan, the space of 24 hours, it mostly stands for
night. Ayan ha, tonight. Amii, night.
Klii hsun, midnight.
Measures and Weights. Asu lawng hdun.
1. Measures of Distance. Ahlo su hdun.
1. Hbe haw one inch.
2. Hbe hmlie, four inches, —equals one hand breadth.
3. Md haw, —or Mai haw, six inches, —from the tip
of the thumb to the base of the little finger.
4. Myiing kaw haw, —or Yong kaw, seven inches
or one span, —from the tip of the thumb to the
end of the index finger.
5. Hbe hsa, eight inches, —two handbreadths.
6. Hn-kaw haw, nine inches, —1/2 cubit.
7. Hnga hbe hnie, 12 inches, —or one foot, —or 2md
haw.
8. Amu, 18 inches. —one cubit. From the elbow to
the extremity of the midde finger.
9. Hnga hbe hnie hn-kaw haw, 21 inches, —one foot
and 1/2 cubit.
10. Mu haw hkoe. —Mu haw hn-hkaw haw, 27 in-
ches, — 1 1/2 cubit.
11. Lawng haw, six feet, —4 cubits, or one fathom.
12. Atdng, one mile, —3520 cubit.








