

CHINA LANDFALL, 1513
JORGE ALVARES’ VOYAGE TO CHINA
A COMPILATION OF SOME RELEVANT MATERIAL
BY
J. M. BRAGA




INSTITVTO PORTVGVES DE HONGKONG
(SECCAO DE HISTORIA)
Jb
CHINA LANDFALL,
1513
JORGE ALVARES' VOYAGE
TO CHINA
A COMPILATION OF SOME
RELEVANT MATERIAL
BY
J. M. BRAGA




SEPARATA DO N.» 4 DO
BOLETIM DO INSTITVTO
DE HONGKONG




CHINA LANDFALL, 1513


AUGUSTA
FOR HER READY UNDERSTANDING AND
CONSTANT ENCOURAGEMENT




Jorge Alvares Monument at Macao


CHINA LANDFALL, 1513
JORGE ALVARES’ VOYAGE
TO CHINA
A Compilation of some
Relevant Material
BY
J. M. BRAGA




CONTENTS
List of Illustrations p. vii
Foreword ~ ix
,‘Land of the Chius” „ 3
The Most Distant Padrao „ 17
Journey’s End ~ 29
An Epitaph „ 51
The Isle of Trade „ 57
A Short Chronology „ 79
Appendix „ 83
Bibliography 119
Index ~ 121




ILLUSTRATIONS
Jorge Alvaros Monument at Macao Frontispiece
The Far East 111 1513 Facing p. xvi
Document in the Portuguese archives mentioning the padrdo erected
in China „ IS
Earliest map to show the Isle of Trade, by Diogo Ribeiro, 1527 .... „ „ 19
The Bocca Tigris M .. 34
A Padrdo n 35.
Sketch-map of the Pearl River ~ ~ s(>
“Presents for the Queen" M „ 51
Upper terrace, AMa Temple at Hau Ch’ing (Ho Keng Macao).., ~ 03
Festival of the Dragon Boat, sth day of sth Moon „ 07
Chinese High-seas Trading Junk ~ „ 82
View on River near Canton „ „ 83
Chinese Pagoda, between Whampoa and Canton ~ ~ 98
Kite Flying „ ~ 99




FOREWORD
T was a tantalizing picture that met the Portuguese
when they first reached the shores of India. Their
; Ajf experiences in Africa, during the halting advances
which they carried out during half a century, had
not prepared them for what they would find in
Asia. Suddenly they came face to face with civilizations that were
entirely foreign to them.
Of the new peoples mentioned by the Indians of Malabar there
was one in particular spoken of with great respect: the ‘Chins’. But
the Indians themselves seemed to know little of this race; and in
Portugal men soon began to mention, now a country “above the
Ganges”, now one “beyond the Golden Chersonese”, with fantastic
accounts of the people who lived there. For several years nothing
positive was known of this land. Nevertheless it was an important
country that had commercial links extending all over the south of
Asia.
At the peak of their influence, a century before the arrival of
the Portuguese, the Chinese travelled abroad exacting periodic tribute
from the rulers of nearly every country of the southern seaboard of
Asia. In their own land the Ming rulers having ousted the Mongols
(the dynasty immortalized by Kublai Khan) had brought about the
return of Chinese scholarship and art. They reinstated the civil ser-
vice based on the Confucian literary examinations, they promoted
interprovincial trade within the country and, for a time, encouraged
some trade with foreign lands. Suddenly a nationalist reaction de-
veloped, foreign trade was suspended, and Chinese nationals were
forbidden to go abroad. China entered upon a self-imposed isolation
which practically sealed off the country to intercourse with the world
outside. Proud of her own ancient and original civilization, China


added to the obstacles of her geographical isolation by imposing an
Imperial rescript which closed her boundaries and secluded her na-
tionals from the influences of the barbarians who were held to live in
the rest of the world.
Some Chinese did venture overseas without the permission of
their Government but these, we may be left to assume, were in most
cases people of classes at the bottom of the social scale: seafarers,
smugglers and vagabonds. Boxer points out very correctly that the
Confucian scholars would have scorned to chronicle the adventures
of such men.
In spite of China’s determination to seclude herself a number
of countries close to China were “benevolently” permitted to send
tribute to the Son of Heaven. The emissaries of these countries were
handsomely paid for the gifts which they presented. However, the
rules governing these tributary offerings were rigid and strict, admit-
ting of little variation. These were not much better than trading
expeditions which the rulers of a few Asian countries sent to China
at intervals, generally every three or five years, and there is little
likelihood that these contacts maintained by Malayan junks or Arab
dhows could contribute much, if anything, to the interpretation ot
civilizations.
By the time the Portuguese reached India nothing more than a
vague memory remained of the voyages which the Chinese had car-
ried out at one time. Nor did India pay tribute any more and when
the Portuguese erected settlements there, little of China and the Chi-
nese was remembered on the Malabar Coast. This is reflected in the
accounts of China in the Portuguese documents of the time.
Then, suddenly, after the voyage of Jorge Alvares to China the
picture became clear. Curiously enough, the best account of China
written after that event, compiled in 1514, was lost for over four
centuries. It was rediscovered and presented by Dr. Armando Cor-
tesao in a Hakluyt Society publication at London, as recently as
1944.
Similarly, for a long time, the voyage of Jorge Alvares to China
in 1513 was forgotten. We are indebted to Luis Keil for an excel-
lent little study in Portuguese, published in 1983, clarifying the cir-
cumstances and pointing the way to the existence of a great deal of
source material, which had to be suitably interpreted. The contents


of the present book are based, therefore, on particulars which are
neither original nor new but, so far as the compiler knows, these
particulars have not been put together in their present form before.
A decision made, not long ago, to erect a monument to Jorge
Alvares in Macao to commemorate in tangible form the noteworthy
and historically important achievement of the first voyage by a Eu-
ropean to China by sea —prompts this endeavour to compile some
of the references to the voyage of Alvares to China, with the reports
of China subsequently written and which were very possibly based on
the accounts brought back from China by that rcdoutable Portuguese
pioneer.
❖
* si:
Original material is not easy to come by for many of the preci-
ous documents dating from the XVlth century have not survived.
Numbers possibly disappeared in the earthquake which damaged Lis-
bon severely on the 26th January, 1531, and many others were
probably lost in the yet greater destruction which befell the same
city in the frightful earthquake of 1755. Fortunately for history,
some did survive. All the records of the India House and the papers
of the Portuguese “Cortes” (the Royal Palace), the great storehouses
in Lisbon of the reports and other documents relating to the overseas,
were engulfed in the earthquake of 1755 but, fortunately enough, some
of the early documents were not kept there, and came to light in
later years. The archives of the Portuguese land titles of the sub-
jects of the king together with quite a number of other documents
of national importance, stored in the Fortress of St. Jorge in Lisbon,
also escaped destruction. These parchments and papers happened
to be kept in one of the stone towers of the Fort in the Torre do
Tombo. (1)
In the restoration of the affairs of Government in Portugal after
the earthquake of 1755, provision was made for removal of the
records from the rubble of the Torre do Tombo to other premises. (2)
(1) The fortress and its dependencies were badly shaken and damaged, but
the conflagration in Lisbon which followed the earthquake did not touch the papers
stored in the citadel. Manuel da Maia, who had been in charge of these archives
since 1745, made an attempt to restore the library after the earthquake, and to
him therefore Portugal is indebted for salvaging so much of the old material.
(2) Thus it is that the original name of the old tower is still retained, for the
Portuguese national archives now to be found in the Parliament Building in Lisb on
are known to the present day as the Archives of the Torre do Tombo.


Other documents that could be found elsewhere were added from
time to time. Subsequently, as time passed, more finds were
made and the store of documents increased year after year. Conse-
quently the land records of Portugal which formed the principal nu-
cleus of the national archives are to-day only a small part of the
vast treasure-house of the documentary pieces assembled in the Por-
tuguese national archives in Lisbon.
Before the earthquake swept everything away, the official chro-
niclers of Portugal had access to the papers in the India House and
the old “Cortes” of the king. This may serve to explain how it is
that although the distant Far East was not generally attractive
enough for treatment in very great detail, nevertheless, in the works
of Joao de Barros, Diogo do Couto, and others, we find the story of
the Portuguese in India quite comprehensively treated of, with occa-
sional references to other parts of Asia and even China and the Far
East.
During the last two centuries scholars have been delving, all too
seldom, unfortunately, among the documents stored in the Portu-
guese national archives but the few who have studied the papers
that have survived there, and in other archives where old Portuguese
documents have been assembled, have found not a little interesting
information. Some of this material has already been published.
The papers kept in most of the Portuguese archives have still to
be properly catalogued, it is true, and the indexes have yet to be
compiled satisfactorily but much good work has already been done.
Properly pieced together the various fragments can be made to
clarify to some extent the comparatively obscure picture that is often
presented of the activities of the Portuguese in the Far East. (:J)
(3) As a matter of fact, considering the serious destruction caused by the
earthquakes of 1531 and 1755 it is surprising that so many documents did escape
loss. The archives at Goa are also sadly deficient in documents of the XVlth cen-
tury. The ravages of insects and the effects of the humid climate have told on the
old papers there, and Prof. Father A. Silva Rego and Professor C. R. Boxer who
have carried out exhaustive surveys of the Goa archives report that hardly any of
the XVlth century documents are left. We may assume, too, that the archives of
Malacca were completely destroyed by the Dutch when they captured the place in
1641.


From books that have been published, to begin with, it can be
seen that at least some of the Portuguese scholars, early in the XVlth
century, had come to realize that the story of Marco Polo was prob-
ably no figment of the imagination. The wits of Europe had during
two centuries scoffed at that book but no sooner had Vasco da Gama
returned to Portugal than the more thoughtful began to read Marco
Polo’s book with some interest. It became a popular work at once (+)
while the Portuguese became enthusiastic over the voyage of Vasco
da Gama and over the possibilities that might be expected to follow.
One of the problems facing the geographers was that of the iden-
tification of the names used by the Venetian traveller. Marco Polo’s
book came into its own, of a truth, but names like “Cathay” and
“Zipango” could not be linked with any recognizable country. Year
after year, as the expeditions that had set out from Portugal return-
ed, scholars in several places in Europe awaited with intense interest
the reports which were brought back by the Portuguese navigators
regarding the countries of Asia. These reports were not easy for
foreigners to get hold of, for the Portuguese court decided that all
such information should be strictly guarded. Nevertheless same ink-
ling of the facts gathered by the Portuguese did reach other peoples,
and the geographers of Europe tried to acquire copies of the maps
and charts drawn by the Portuguese cartographers.
*
* *
It is fitting that an attempt should be made to put together as
much of the old material as possible, and my only excuse for attempt-
ing the present compilation is because such a book may contribute
a little to spread abroad the story of an achievement which should
be more widely known and which the erection of the proposed mon-
ument at Macao would justify.
(4) The Portuguese hold that Prince Henry “the Navigator” was influenced
by accounts given by his brother Prince Peter, one of Portugal’s intellectuals in the
XVth century, who actually visited parts of the Near East and who, returning to
Portugal, gave Prince Henry a copy of Marco Polo’s book in manuscript. Printing
had not yet been invented : the earliest printed edition of Polo’s book is in German,
dated at Nuremberg, 1477. The first Portuguese edition of Marco Polo’s book
appeared in 1502, printed by Valentira Fernandes at Lisbon.


The early Portuguese chronicles contain references to the elforts
of Portugal to explore Asia thoroughly and that splendid work As
Cartas de Afonso de Albuquerque contains transcriptions of documents
written contemporaneously with the events which led to the first
voyage by a Portuguese to China. These were drawn upon by Do-
nald Ferguson who also gathered together material from other
sources in his masterly study the Letters from Portuguese Captives in
Canton. (5) The next to pay attention to the subject and point out
new material long forgotten in the Portuguese archives or published in
little read old books was Luis Keil, whose Jorge Alva res, o Primeiro
Portugues que foi a China (1513), Lisbon, 1933, though unpreten-
tious and not very generally known, is exceedingly useful. Finally
Dr. Armando Cortesao translated and edited The Puma Oriental of
Tome Pires which appeared at London (2 volumes) in 1944, under
the auspices of the Hakluyt Society.
These and other books have been drawn upon here with due
acknowledgments and thanks to the authors and their publishers for
the material borrowed.
It has been thought expedient to include a number of Chinese
references mainly as regards the localities visited by the first Portu-
guese who arrived in China. To come into line, however, with authors
who write on China, the Mandarin rendering is generally given when
romanization of Chinese names is attempted. The reason for this
will be apparent.
From the pages which follow it will be seen that the immediate
consequences of Jorge Alvares’ voyage were much greater than seems
to have been generally realized. It is quite obvious that the Puma
Oriental, written by Tome Pires for King Manoel of Portugal and
from which that king must have obtained an exceedingly good idea
of the countries of Asia, contains information regarding China that
was possibly obtained at first hand from Jorge Alvares himself. More
(5) Donald Ferguson published this in the Indian Antiquary at Bombay in
1901-1902. Ferguson based his studies on a manuscript transcription in the Bi-
hliotheque Nationale de Paris. Subsequently, in 1929, Dr. E. A. Voretzsch, Minister
for Germany in Portugal, published fragments of a copy of one of the original
letters in the Torre do Tombo Archives in Lisbon (Fraymentos — Mayo N.° 24),
confirming Donald Ferguson’s study.


Section of Diego Ribeiro’s World Map. dated 1529, the first portulan to show the
"Ilha de Vinyaga” (Isle of Trade) at the China Coast.




important still was the identification by the Portuguese of China
with Cathay, as the Suma Oriental indicates. This seems to have
been successfully hidden from the rest of Europe for nearly a century.
*
* *
The compilation of this sketch was prompted by His Excellency
Hear-Admiral J. Marques Esparteiro, when it was decided that a
monument to Jorge Alvares should be erected at Macao. The present
study is the result, although it cannot he said to be adequate, but
with the material available here in the Far East I have not been
able to do better.
To Mr. Loh Tsoh-tseung, late Principal of the Lingnam College,
I record my thanks and indebtedness for quotations and translations
of Chinese references. I also thank my friends Mr. Peter E. Wong
and Mr. Austin Coates for reading the manuscript and for several
suggestions, but for mistakes and many imperfections I alone am
responsible. I express my appreciation as well to Mr. Luiz Agostinho
da Luz for the maps and drawings so courteously and painstakingly
prepared by him for this book.
Hong Kong, June, 1953.
J. M. BRAGA




“LAND OF THE CHINS”?
E dt Aindo ve a incognita enseada:
Aqui o soberbo imperio, que se afama
Com terras , e riqueza ndo cuidada,
Da China corre, e occupa o senhorio
Desd’o Tropico ardente ao Cinto frio.
Camoes
All unfrequented, too, see 'Hainan's hay:
Here the proud empire, which renown doth claim
In lands and wealth it never thought to sway.
Of China runs, and doth the lordship own
From the bright Tropic to the Arctic zone.
(Aubertin’s translation)
ORGE Alvares lias a secure place in history as the trail-
blazer for the Portuguese in China for it is recorded
[ - | that he was the first of his nationals to reach the
China coast. Yet history has not done justice to
the services of this man to his country. Only one
of the early Portuguese historians mentioned him and for hundreds
of years his name was forgotten. Some acknowledgment has been
made of his services in recent years although foreign writers have
generally overlooked him entirely. Nevertheless, he was the earliest
of those many thousands of Portuguese who have had friendly
dealings with the Chinese.
Only fifteen years elapsed between the epoch-making voyage of
Vasco da Gama to India in 1498 and that of Jorge Alvares from Ma-
lacca to China in 1513. But into those fifteen years the Portuguese
explorers packed a great wealth of bold, successful exploration and
nautical enterprise.
Within that short period of time Portugal's pioneers discovered
not one route and one continent but opened up, for the West, the
1 principal ports and countries of Asia. They established themselves


on the Malabar coast of India repelling every attempt to dislodge
them. They founded the great Portuguese metropolis of Goa and
strengthened the links connecting that port with other Asian centres
of trade. They made their way to Ormuz and set up their flag there.
They explored the Red Sea and took account of its possibilities.
They consolidated themselves in Ceylon and opened up that market.
The} r set up their great depot at Malacca and discovered the sources
of the spices in Banda, Sumatra, Java, the Moluccas, Ternate, Tidore,
and so many other places. They visited the kingdoms of Siam,
Cochinchina, Pegu and several other realms, concluding trade arran-
gements. All within the space of fifteen years, with obstacles so
great, resources so meagre, men so few, and with such tremendous
handicaps that their successes have given them a claim for achieve-
ment ranking with the greatest, as the Portuguese navigators took
their ships so far and so regularly over the oceans of the globe.
All the while there was an annual movement of ships, backwards
and forwards between Portugal and the East. By present-day stand-
ards the ships they employed were almost wholly unfit for such
great journeys, the nautical instruments they used, the equipment of
their vessels, the problems of food and water for voyages of such
length, all presented difficulties of the greatest magnitude. The
vagaries of wind and tide had yet to be recorded and understood,
and terrible storms in many places and at the Cape, which King
John II of Portugal had, in a moment of optimistic enthusiasm,
christened that of “Good Hope”, took a tragic toll of shipping and
lives.
Everything conspired to discourage all except the most deter-
mined. It is to the credit of the Portuguese pioneers tha t they brav-
ed every danger storms, calms, fire at sea, disease, blood-thirsty
pirates, determined foemen, terrors known and unknown to serve
their sovereign, King Manuel who reigned in Portugal from 1495 to
1521.
Reports went back to Portugal every year and King Manuel
soon had a broad picture of the Asian panorama and he knew the
names of the principal countries in south-eastern Asia .
When Vasco da Gama visited India for the first time he and
his men were well received and in the conversations which took place
the men of Calicut recalled stories handed down by their fathers of


a strange race of men who visited the Malabar coast at one time but
who had ceased doing so some eighty years before. They “wore
their hair long and had no beards except around the mouths, who
landed wearing cuirass, helmet and vizor, and carrying a certain wea-
pon attached to a spear, their vessels being armed with arbalest; once
every two years they returned with twenty or twenty-five ships;
their vessels had four masts. But what people they were, and whence
they had come, the Calicutters were no longer able to say. The Port-
uguese could not suspect that these were the Chinese, for they had
not yet met them.” (6) Much less could they link these people with
the Cathayans mentioned by Marco Polo.
Two years later, in 1500, the second Portuguese squadron left
Lisbon for India under the command of Pedro Alvares Cabral. In
due course some of the Portuguese ships arrived at the Malabar coast,
for this was a particularly disastrous voyage and several of the vessels
were lost. Gaspar Correa, the historian who lived contemporaneously
with the events he describes, has given us a very minute account of
this second Portuguese voyage to India. He was in a privileged po-
sition to do this for in the course of his services in the Viceregal court
he had access to documents of some historical value and he could
listen to accounts by some of the men who actually participated in it.
His book, the Lendas da India , (7) contains the essence of the
documents, many of the originals of which no longer survive, and his
carefully written work is a splendid repository of facts based on those
documents, added to his own personal observations or first-hand
information obtained at times from the actors themselves in the great
epopee in which the Portuguese took such a prominent part in Asia.
His book contains errors, for he could not always consult the best
documents, which were in Portugal, but by and large the Lendas da
India can be said to be one of the best of the early books written
about the deeds of the Portuguese in this part of the world.
(6) A Journal of the First Voyage of Vasco da Gama , 1497-1490. Ravenstein’s
translation for the Hakluyt Society, London, 1898, p. 131.
(7) The Lendas da India, Vol. I, pp. 69, 226, and 621. Written in India by
Gaspar Correa early in the XVlth century, the book was very outspoken which pro-
bably explains why it was not published at Lisbon until 1858-1859, when it appear-
ed under the auspices of the Academia Real das Sciencias de Lisboa.


Gaspar Correa mentions the factory which was set up in Calicut
and in the course of the description he states that
“ . . . The Captain-major decided to live in the factory, and
ordered that his bedding and table service should be brought
from his ship. He desired that everything should be settled in
in the factory, so that he might see with his own eyes every
purchase and every sale, and the weighing of each transaction.
He ordered the Captains and other persons to withdraw on
board, those remaining with him being only the factor [Aires
Correa] and the scriveners, and twenty men-at-arms. Every
day the King [of Calicut] sent them food, and his Treasurer was
with them. He ordered that large houses should be built with
other houses for the attendants, and he ordered that a hundred
well-accoutred men should wait upon the factor and take his
orders. A house for service as the church was also prepared, as
well as one for the friars [who accompanied the Portuguese in
their ships]. There was room enough for all this because this
was the place that had been occupied by the Chins when they
had visited Calicut, and India, as has already been stated. The
people of the country called the site Chinacota , which means
‘the fort of the Chins’.”
The references made by Gaspar Correa to the Chinese who visit-
ed India two or three generations before the arrival of the Port-
uguese offer material for interesting speculation.
No Chinese, certainly, provided the Portuguese with the name-
they adopted and popularized and which is still used in the West to
designate the country known as CHINA.
Whatever the name given by others, to the Chinese their coun-
try was the “Celestial Empire”, Tien Chau though the com-
mon people called it, and still call it, “The Middle or Central Flowery
Land”, Chung Wah Kuo or Chung Kuo —the centre as it
were of the civilized universe. As if to stress the importance of this
viewpoint the Chinese maps of old show their country occupying not
only the middle but almost monopolising the whole page.
Other names have also been used among the Chinese people and
in their literature: Li Min the “Black-haired Race”; Hwa llsia


UK) or “the Glorious Hsia” from the ancient Hsia Dynasty; Ching
Tien ) or “The Dawn”, the name given by the Buddhists; Tung
Tu (&.£) or “The Land of the East”, so named by Mohammedans;
later still Ta Tsing Kuo or “the Great Pure Kingdom”, the
name of the Manchu Dynasty which was overthrown by the Republic
in 1910. With the collapse of the Empire came Min Kuo (ft. IU) or
Chung Hua Min Kuo meaning “Central Flowery Re-
public”. The present regime has given to the country the name of
llsin Chung Kuo () “New Flowery Republic”, literally “New
Central Flowery Land”.
For a long time scholars thought that the name Chin adopted
by the Persians to indicate China, also pronounced Tsin, came from
one of the feudal states in the Chou Empire (B. C. 1122). This
state occupied a large area embracing part of the present province of
Shan-si. As a matter of fact the province of Shan-si is often dis-
tinguished by the use of Tsin as a literary name even to the present
day. The porcelain from this country was known among the Per-
sians as Chini.
The celebrated Shih Huang Ti (j&M.'f) —often known as Chin
Shih Huang —ruled the dynasty known as Chin (B. C. 221),
and his name spread through the Asian world. It was he who built
the Great Wall and he it was who ordered the destruction of all the
books in his realm. It was thought at one time that through him
the name of Chin came to be known in Persia. Laufer and Pelliot,
the distinguished Sinologists, have described in recent years, however,
a Sanskrit work containing the use of the term Tsin as applied to
China antedating Emperor Shih Huang Ti. (8)
Significantly, in later times another Chin dynasty flourished in
a part of China (A. D. 1125-1234). It is sometimes called the
Kin (&) Dynasty pronounced Hum in Cantonese. These people
lived to the north of the Khitans and overpowering them adopted
the title of “the Golden Horde.” (9) They were subjugated in turn
(8) This subject of the name Chin in excellently summarized by Father Pas-
quale M. D’Elia, S. J., in Fonti Ricciane, Vol. I, Rome, 1942, pp. 8-9.
(9) Their ancient capital of Kitai, or Khitan, gave the name which early
Western travellers, am#ng them Marco Polo, immortalized as Cathay.


by another Mongol tribe, which under Genghis Khan wielded such
power. His descendants Ogotai Khan and Kublai Khan, the T’ai
Tsung and Shih Tsu respectively of the Chinese, founded the Yuan
(or Mongol) dynasty in China.
We should observe that in China nobody would call himself a
Chinese. He would be, in northern and central China, a “Man of
Han” (/H/v), from the Prince of Han, Liu Pang, who ruled from
B. C. 206 to 194. In the South, however, the people call themselves
“Men of Tang” (yf/w)— pronounced “Tong” in Cantonese.
The name Chin , for the country as well as the people, must
have been in common use most probably in south-western Asia at
the time when Vasco da Gama arrived in India and from this
circumstance was adopted by the Portuguese as China and eventually
used everywhere in Europe.
In this connection the evidence of a Portuguese, Galeoto Perei-
ra, who lived in China as a prisoner for several years until he
managed with the connivance of Chinese friends to get away in 1552,
is interesting. A translation in English, in the XVlth century, of
his description of China, contains this passage :
“We are wont to cal this country China, and the people
Chineans, but as long as we were prisoners, not hearing amongst
them at any time that name, I determined to learne how they
were called: and asked sometimes by them thereof, for that they
understood us not when we called them Chineans, I answered
them, that al the inhabitants of India named them Chineans,
wherefore I praied them that they would tel me, for what occa-
sion they are so called, whether peradventure any city of theirs
bare that name. Plereunto they alwayes answered me, yt they
have no such name, nor ever had. Then did I aske them what
name the whole Country beareth, & what they would answere
being asked of other nations what countrymen they were ? It
was told me that of ancient time in this country had bin many
kings, & though presently it were al under one, ech kingdom
neverbheles enjoyed that name it first had, these kingdomes are
the provinces I spake of before. In conclusion they said, that


the whole country is called Tamen, & the inhabitants Tame-
gines, 10) so that this name China or Chineans is not heard of in
yt country.” (11)
Nobody doubts that Chinese ships visited India occasionally,
and even Persia, either as traders or envoys in times past but except
for a comparatively short period early in the XVth century there
does not seem to have been any intensive regular traffic by Chinese
vessels. The celebrated sea-voyage from China to Persia, in which
the Polos participated late in the XHlth century, was of a political
nature and seems to have been an isolated effort bv the Mongols.
a O
It is known, however, that the Chinese had some knowledge of
the routes between the China Sea and the chief centres of trade in
the South, nan yang {&)'%). The great, though futile, military expe-
ditions sent by Kublai Khan in an attempt to secure the vassalage
of several places in South-east Asia indicate that the Chinese were
quite aware of their commercial value. Marco Polo, referring to the
Malabar coast of India, speaks of ‘‘ships coming hither from many
quarters, but especially from the great province of ‘Manzi’ (i. e.,
‘South China’).”
(10) Ta-Mmg, that is “Great Ming” the name of the ruling dynasty at the
time; Ta-Ming-Jen, that is “Men of the Great Ming”.
(11) Reproduced from Hakluyt’s Principal Navigations, Vol. 11, pp. 68-80.
Galeoto Pereira was a trader who was taken prisoner at the Fukien coast in 1549.
He managed to get out of China in 1552 or so. He wrote his description of China
shortly after his liberation and it was summarized and printed in Italian by Michele
Tramezzino, at Venice, in 1565. From the Italian a translation was made into
English, by R. Willes and printed by Richard Eden in his Historye of Travaile in
the II est and East Indies, London, 1577, from which it was reprinted by Hakluyt.
Galeoto Pereira’s work was drawn upon by Frei Gaspar da Cruz in his Tractado em
que se contam muito por extenso as cousas da China com suas particularidades, Evora,
1570, with due acknowledgment, and also in Frei Juan Gonzalez de Mendoza’s
celebrated and popular HiUoria de las cousas mas notables, ritos y costumbres del
gran Reyno de la China, first printed at Rome in 1585, of which a large number of
editions followed.
Prof. Boxer has prepared a work from a Portuguese manuscript of Galeoto Pe-
reira’s Description in the Jesuit archives in Rome, annotated by himself, to be
printed at Rome.


In fairly recent times Western scholars have been studying
Chinese texts for information regarding the Chinese expeditions into
the Indian Ocean, and from the studies of M. Paul Pelliot and Prof,
J. J. L. Duyvendak (12) we can see how important were the voyages
undertaken by the Chinese over a period of a few years in the XYtli
century, during the Ming dynasty. Of particular interest were the
seven great expeditions carried out between A. D. 1403 and 1433.
The first of these great voyages comprised sixty-two ships car-
rying a total of 28,000 men, the prime mover being Cheng Ho, the
chief court eunuch in China at the time. This was the rich period
of the great emperor Yung Lo (1402-1424) and although scholars
still speculate upon the purpose of the voyages, we may assume that
one of the purposes was probably to promote friendly relations with
the rulers of places along the old maritime route of the trade in silk
and porcelain from China to the Persian Gulf. Possibly also, and
even more likely, the Emperor sought to impress other peoples with
China’s might expecting thereby to bring these peoples under Chine-
se tutelage, to exact tribute and to add to his own prestige as the
'Son of Heaven’, converting the previous vague fealty claimed by
China into a real and effective suzerainty.
On the whole, the Chine se visitors were well treated and tributes
and presents from the whole of southern Asia and even from Africa
were collected. Gifts of animals like ostriches, elephants, lions, and
even a giraffe (displayed in Peking as a unicorn, the symbol of
Chinese imperial virtue) were carried to the Emperor by way of
adulation, and tribute was collected from many rulers. One or two
rulers resented the Chinese attitude and this led to hostilities.
When, for instance, the king of Palembang refused to acknowledge
the Emperor of China as liege lord he was taken prisoner to China.
Similarly the king of Ceylon assumed a hostile attitude and treated
the Chinese emissaries discourteously so the Chinese landed a strong
force, captured him and carried him and his family to Emperor
Yung Lo’s capital. A heavy tribute was then levied on Ceylon. It
was collected regularly until 1465.
(12) M. Paul Pelliot, Les Grandes Voyages maritimes Ckinois au debut du XVe
siecle. Published in the Sinological journal T'oung Pao, Vol. XXXI, 1935, pp.
237-452, and the sources given, and Prof. J. J. L. Duyvendak, The True Dates of
the Chinese Maritime Expeditions in the early XVth century, also in T’oung Pao,
Yol. XXXIV, 1938, pp. 341-412.


For some reason not yet satisfactorily explained these Chinese
expeditions into the seas of south-western Asia suddenly came to
an end. The death of Emperor Yung Lo seems to have brought
about a cessation of interest in lands beyond the boundaries of China.
The effete government of Emperor Cheng Tung (better known by
his throne title of Ying Tsung), who reigned from A. D. 1435 to 1449
and from 1457 to 1464, with its Court intrigues and corruption may
have acted as a deterrent to those who thought of expeditions to
foreign lands.
Then again, increasing activities by Japanese pirates and
adventurers on the coasts of China often in association with Chinese
seafarers might have served to immobilize numbers of Chinese war-
junks. These activities by the corsairs in the China seas became so
serious that important Chinese officials were appointed to guard the
coasts against the bands of Wa (dwarfs, or pirates), as the Japanese
were derisively called. (13)
Much has been made by scholars of the policy adopted by the
Mings at that time of cutting themselves off from the outside world.
The large-scale operations of the Tartars in Mongolia and Central
Asia, in the course of which Emperor Ying Tsung remained their
prisoner from A. D. 1449 to 1457, brought home to the Court the
dangers of inroads from the hinterland of Asia. This contributed
very probably to the intensification of the policy of seclusion, a po-
licy which was then cultivated assiduously, for the Chinese reacted
against foreign ideas with particular fear of the ever-present Mongol
threat. Simultaneously they strove to restore the traditional culture
of China’s past. Worst of all it served to hide the ever-growing cor-
ruption in high places, which weakened and undermined the struc-
ture of the Empire, of a court immersed in pleasure-seeking and do-
minated by ignorant eunuchs.
(13) There is scope for study in Chinese texts of the measures adopted by the
Chinese against the Japanese marauders during the Ming dynasty. The only ones
we know are by Li Kuang Ming, The Repulse of the Wa Pirates by the Provincial
and Extra-Provincial Armies in the Provinces of Kiangsu and Chekiang during 1551-
1561; and Ch’en Heng, The Invasion of China by Japanese Pirates during the Ming
Dynasty, in Yenching Journal of Chinese Studies, Monograph Series, Nos. 4 and
6, respectively, Peking, 1933 and 1934, and passim in Ryusaku Tsunoda and L.
Carrington Goodrich, Japan in the Chinese Dynastic Histories, Pasadena, 1951
(mimeographed).


But when the Chinese withdrew from southern Asia the memory
of their visits endured and Gaspar Correa quotes informants from
whom he learned that vast merchant fleets “from places like Malac-
ca, and China, and the Lequeos” had visited India, and that many
of the company on board had settled in India, leaving descendants.
In the space of a hundred years none of these remained; but their
sumptuous idol temples were still to be seen. Yule quotes Major for
a reference to Abdurraszzak that some of the seafaring population
of Calicut were in those days nicknamed Chini bachagan (China
boys). (14)
The return of Vasco da Gama to Portugal was followed by a
tremendous wave of enthusiasm at the Portuguese court. The voyage
proved that the sea-route to southern Asia was no mere wild dream
of Prince Henry’s. Not only did it yield a profit several times the
initial investment but it opened up vistas possibly of Portugal as
the leader among the nations of Europe in the titanic struggle then
being waged between Islam and Christendom.
Vasco da Gama and his men, furthermore, had wonderful things
to tell, of civilized peoples and the pomp of Asian potentates. More
important still was the evidence he brought, for da Gama
“presented at the dais on which the queen sat, the necklaces
and jewels and pieces of cloth given by the King of Cananor and
the King of Melindi, as well as the letters written on leaves of
gold, and a piece of amber, which the Queen esteemed most of
all, and also musk and incense, and articles of porcelain which
had been bought in Calicut.” (I 5)
The beautiful porcelains of the Mings, little known in Europe
except perhaps for rare and justly appreciated articles in Byzantium
and possibly Venice, were thus among the first of the exquisite and
greatly admired treasures taken to Portugal from Asia in that epoch-
making voyage which the Portuguese carried to such a triumphant
conclusion.
(14) Sir Henry Yule, The Book of Ser Marco Polo, London, 1928, Vol. 11. pp.
391-2.
(15) Gaspar Correa, Lendas da India, Vol. I, p. 141.


According to Gaspar Correa, tlie King of Portugal gave specific
instructions to D. Francisco de Almeida, the Viceroy in India (1505-
1509), and his successor Afonso de Albuquerque (1509-1515) to send
many articles of porcelain-ware to Lisbon. (10) These could be bought,
for although the Chinese no longer carried out great trading voyages to
India, merchants from China were to be seen in Malacca where Arab
or Indian traders bought the Chinese wares and carried them to In-
dia. In India the Portuguese could acquire these lovely products
from the potteries of China of the Ming era.
Of China itself, however, little was known and the King of Port-
ugal soon felt that the time had come for more positive information
to be obtained with regard to many places in the East, among them
China. It is more than likely that other references to China were
sent to Portugal but other documents bearing on the subject are not
available to us.
Dr. Armando Cortesao, the Portuguese authority on Portuguese
cartography, has drawn our attention to the evidence of the portolans
of the period. He points out that:
“the planisphere of Cantino, concluded in Lisbon in 1502,
is the first of the European maps to furnish a notion of the cor-
rect representation of the eastern coasts of Asia. Inspired pro-
(16) For half a century after the arrival of the Portuguese in India, Chinese
porcelain was worth in India twice its own weight in silver. (See Garcia da Orta,
Coloquios dos Simples e Drogas da India, Goa, 1563).
In Portugal the word porcelana was quite a common one, being adopted from
a word meaning a bowl or a goblet, from the form of a kind of conch, the mother
of pearl of which was used as the lining of the bowl of cups, etc. at that time in
Europe. Significantly, in the patois of Macao, the word porcelana is still used even
to the present day to mean a small bowl or a cup.
An indication of the appreciation shown in Portugal for porcelain from
China is to be found in Portuguese documents dating from as early as the first and
second decades of the XVlth century. In a list of valuables in the wardrobe of
King Manoel, who died in 1521, one may read: “Four articles of white Chinese
porcelain contained in woven baskets”; in the dowry of Princess Beatrice: “Six
bracelets of porcelain set in gold, and two articles of porcelain ware”, to quote only
two. (Archivo Flistorico Portuguez, Vol. 11, p. 392 and 417 ; Yol. 111, p. 454).
It is significant that the King’s estate also included Chinese brocades, silver-
ware, and Chinese paintings and silks {lbid., - Vol. 11, pp. 383, 392, 411 and Vol.
111, pp. 455 and 466).


bably by Arab or Malayan maps taken to Portugal by the Port-
uguese navigators, we are shown, for the first time, a coast-
line divorced from the fantasies of the Magnus Sinus of Pto-
lomey or the confused ideas regarding the East in the Catalan map
of 1375 and other maps of the XVth century. The representa-
tion of the Malay Peninsula though unduly lengthened south-
wards and greatly exaggerated as to size and the line to the
north, where it approaches China, show that the map was based
on details of a more positive nature, for the Gulf of Tonkin and
the Island of Hainan are indicated. The celebrated and mag-
nificent Portuguese planisphere of 1502 marks the beginning of
the objective cartography of the Far East.” (l 7)
King Manoel of Portugal even wrote a lengthy letter to the
King of Spain giving him a detailed account of the activities of his
subjects in Indian waters from 1500 to early in 1505. (,S) It is clear
from this letter that the Portuguese themselves were then still lack-
ing in precise information regarding many places in south-east Asia
and particularly as regards the Far East and the Chinese. In his
letter to the King of Spain, King Manoel mentions the Chinese truly
enough but states that “they are white men with fair hair and green
eyes. They are very strong. Their principal country is called Mal-
oliina whence come big and beautiful vases of porcelain, and musk,
amber, and aloes wood . . .” (l 9)
Of Malacca, however, the Portuguese had better information,
for the importance of this great trading centre was well known in
Asia. As a matter of fact, the ancients in Europe were aware of the
Golden Chersonese and its extraordinary wealth.
(17) Article by Dr. A. Cortesao, Expansdo Portuguesa atraves do Pacifica, in
Historia da Expansdo Portuguesa no Mundo, Vol. 11., chapter XI, Lisbon, 1939, pp.
162-167.
(18) This letter, translated into Italian, was published in Rome at the end of
1505, and was the first printed work on the subject. From it, readers could learn
of this interesting phase of Portuguese activity. Prosper Peragallo brought out an
annotated edition of this book in 1892, Carta de El-Rei D. Manuel ao Rei Catholico
narrando-lhe as Viagens Portuguese s a India desde 1500 ate 1505 , Lisbon, 1892.
(19) Op. cit. p. 16.


Sir Richard Windstedt, in his Malaya and its History , sum-
marizes Malacca’s position in the XVth century:
“ . . . imports attracted wholesale merchants from Gujerat
and Coromandel and Java and China to open warehouses in the
port, and brought with the south-west monsoon trading ships
from India and with the north-east Junks from China. Duarte
Barbosa tells how there came to the mediaeval port very fine
four-masted junks with cargoes of sugar, great store of fine raw
silk, porcelain, damasks, brocades and satins, musk and rhu-
barb, silver and pearls, gilded coffers, fans and other baubles.
In exchange for those cargoes the Chinese took away pepper,
incense, saffron, coral shaped and unshaped, Vermillion, quick
silver, opium, and drugs. Four-masted ships with rattan cables
and shrouds also came from Java, ships like no European type,
and the Javanese offered for sale finely wrought daggers and
spears, gold and the foodstuffs of which, throughout her history,
Malacca has always stood in need. Gold, indeed, was so abun-
dant, says Tome Fires, that the leading merchants kept their
accounts in bars of gold, and the richest merchants could dis-
charge three or four ships and reload them from their own
stock ... to mediaeval Malacca resorted merchants from Cairo,
Arabia, Turkey, Armenia, Byzantium, Persia, India, Burma,
Siam, Cambodia, Champa, China, and the Malay archipelago as
far away as Celebes. The merchandise exchanged at this en-
trepot half-way between India and China was such Malayan
produce as tin, cloves, nutmegs, mace, pepper, musk, camphor,
benzoin, sandal-wood, honey, wax, and slaves; gold from Pa-
hang, Sumatra, Java, Brunei, and Cochin China; tapestries, in-
cense, and seeds for dyeing from Arabia; cloths from Pulicat
and Cambay: Chinese silks and brocades and porcelain; silver
from Burma, Siam, and China; rosewater, opium, pearls, quick-
silver, saltpetre, copperwear and iron wear; gilded coffers from
Canton and birds of paradise to set in Turkish and Arabian
turbans.” (20)
(20) Sir Richard 0. Windstedt, Malaya and its History, London, 1948, pp.
33-0 and 104.


Malacca was not mentioned by Marco Polo, it is true, but other
places were identified. On the other hand, where were “Cathay”
and “Manzi” and “Zipango” ? The old Venetian had described these
places in glowing terms; where were they ? Mandeville, whose book
of Travels rivalled, and even exceeded in interest and imagination,
that of Marco Polo did so too. His book, in manuscript, was quite
popular in the XVth century. (21) And what was this “China” or
“land of the Chins” so frequently heard of by the Portuguese in In-
dia and elsewhere in southern Asia ? Were these not problems that
awaited solution ?
(21) The texts of Mandeville’s Travels and Marco Polo’s Booh circulated in
Europe in manuscript during the XlVth and XVth centuries, for printing had not
yet been invented among the Europeans.


THE MOST DISTANT PADRAO
“The true discoverer is not the man who first chances to
stumble upon anything, hut the man who finds what he has
sought. Such a one alone stands in a link ivith the thoughts
and interests of his predecessors .”
J. Burckhardt— “The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy.”
1 flira great deal of information covering the region of
southern Asia. The Portuguese had consolidated
their position in several trading centres in India and
elsewhere. Factories existed at Cochin, Calicut, Can-
nanore, Baticala, Mombasa, and other places, supported by fortresses
at Cochin, Sofala, Angediva, Cannanore, Kilwa, Socotra, Zanzibar,
and Mozambique. Preparations were being made also for the
occupation of Goa, to be the hub ©f Portuguese activities in Asia.
The king decided, therefore, to despatch an experienced captain to
* ‘discover” Malacca and to obtain more positive information regard-
ing the great extent ofterritory lying farther to the east. He chose
Diogo Lopes de Sequeira for the task. (22)
The Instructions given by the king to his emissary have
survived. From the document we observe that Diogo Lopes de Se-
queira was quite fully briefed on the equipping and care of the ships,
and also as regards the personnel, food and other supplies, etc.
He was given directions with respect to the route to be followed.
(22) Diogo Lopes de Sequeira was the son of the alcaide-mor of Alandroal, Lopo
Vaz de Sequeira, and was born in 1466. In command of a squadron of 4 naos he
was sent to Malacca in 1508. The mission to Malacca was only partially successful
and, returning to Portugal, he was sent, in 1516, in command of a fleet of 30 ships
to the relief of Arzilla in Africa. For his services he was appointed Governor of
India, serving with no great distinction from 1518 to 1522. He died in 1530, in
Portugal, aged 64.


Special reference was made to the western part of the Island of St.
Lawrence (renamed Madagascar years later), to look for mines of
precious metals reported to exist there and he was told to explore
Ceylon, Malacca, Sumatra, etc. He was also instructed to obtain
information regarding any Christian communities and he was to
trace the story of St. Thomas the Apostle, reported to have visited
the eastern coast of India in the first century of the Christian era.
With regard to the Chinese, the instructions stated specifically:
Item You shall ask after the Chijns, and from what part
they come, and from how far, and at what times they come to
Malacca, or to the places at which they trade, and the merchan-
dise that they bring, and how many of their ships come each
year, and regarding the form and type of their ships, and if
they return in the same year, and if they are wealthy merchants,
and if they are weak men, or warriors, and if they have arms
or artillery, and what clothes they wear, and if they are men of
large build, and all other information concerning them, and if
they are Christians or heathens, or if their country is a great
one, and if they have more than one king amongst them, and if
any Moors live amongst them or any other people that are not
of their law or faith; and if they adore, and what customs they
observe, and towards what part does their country extend, and
with whom do they confine.” (23)
Diogo Lopes de Sequeira reached Malacca in due course, landing
there on the 11th September, 1509. The story of this first Portu-
guese expedition to Malacca is well known and has been recounted
frequently, of how Diogo Lopes de Sequeira was well received at
first by the king of Malacca and of how, due to intrigues by Moslem
traders, a plot was hatehed to wipe out the Portuguese.
According to the Portuguese chroniclers the Portuguese pioneers
found Chinese junks at Malacca and, from the very first, the contacts
between the Farthest East and the Farthest West were friendly.
“The sole exception to the suspicious dislike with which the Portu-
(23) The document is in the archives of the Torre do Tombo, Corpo Cronolo-
gico, Parte I, Mago 6, No. 82. It has been reproduced in Cartas de Afonso de Al-
huquergae, Lisboa, Vol. 11, pp. 403-419, and in Alguns Documents de Archive Na-
cional da 'Torre do Tombo acerca das Navegagoes e Conquistas Portuguesas, Lisboa,.
1892, where the paragraph given above appears on pp. 194-5. It has subsequently
been reproduced in several other publications.


Photograph of document in the Portuguese archives referring to the erection of the padrao in China.
(See page 26)








guese were received,” explains Professor C. R. Boxer, “was afforded
by the crews of three Chinese junks anchored in the roadstead.
Their attitude in this first meeting between representatives of
furthest East and West is described by the contemporary Portuguese
historian, Joao de Barros, in the following terms:
“ 'Only three ships which were there, belonging to the
Chinese (a race which lives in the most distant Oriental country
which we know, which is the land of the Synas, referred to by
•classical geographers, and inhabiting such northerly regions that
they use cloth dresses, and other things after our manner) when
they saw our peoples’ apparel, in spite of their having been
warned by the Moslems that we were suspicious characters, yet
they forthwith gained a contrary impression, And the proof
they gave of this was that they rowed around our ships in their
boats, securely and confidently, and came very close to them;
in despite of the local rule that until the authorities had come
on board, nobody might go near them.’ (24) ”
The leader of the group of Chinese was an old seafarer who goes
down in history by the name which the Portuguese transliterated as
Cheilata. With him and his fellow countrymen the Portuguese had
friendly dealings. (25) With the ruler of Malacca, however, things
got so bad that Lopes de Sequeira was forced to leave the port
hurriedly to escape capture. A touch of the romantic is provided
by the account of how the Portuguese were warned of their danger
by a Malay woman who had fallen in love with one of the Europeans.
The Portuguese squadron put out to sea leaving behind Ruy d’Araujo
and thirty-two others who were on shore at the time and who were
then detained by the king of Malacca as prisoners. (20)
(24) C. R. Boxer, Notes on Chinese Abroad in the late Ming and early Mancha
Periods compiled from Contemporary European Sources (1600-1730) published in
Tien Hsia Monthly, Shanghai, 1939, p. 449, quoting Joao de Barros, Decada 11,
Livro 4, Cap. 111, p. 400 of the 1777 edition.
(25) Damiao de Goes, Cronica do Felicissimo Rei Dom Manuel, Lisboa, 1567,
parte 111, Cap. 11, f. 3.
(26) Among the Portuguese who escaped with Diogo Lopes de Sequeira was
Ferdinand Magellan, who was one of the ships’ pilots. It was on a subsequent trip
to Malacca that Magellan got some information regarding the location of the Spice
Islands, which he disclosed a few years later to the King of Spain, probably insin-
uating that it fell within the Spanish side of the meridian.


From his prison in Malacca Ruy d’Araujo was able to gather
considerable information about Malacca and the sources of its trade,
and in an interesting letter addressed apparently to Afonso de Albu-
querque, the governor of India, he furnishes a wealth of detailed
information regarding Malacca. He mentions particulars of the trade,
the forces at the disposal of the ruler, navigation and other matters.
An account is given of the trick played on the Portuguese when the
writer and others were taken prisoner, and he suggests that a Port-
uguese fleet should be able to effect their release with the greatest
ease.
The original document is somewhat tattered, with innumerable
worm-holes, but it can still be read. Touching upon the Chinese
who visited Malacca from time to time for purposes of trade, the
letter states:
“ . . . the Chinese come at the proper season which is in
April, and sail from Malacca bound for China in May
taking about 20 to 30 days for the voyage in each direction.
They bring . . . amber, damasks, cheap satins, colinjam (?),
camphor and some rhubarb and pearls . . . very fine alum.
Some eight or ten junks come each year. They take away much
pepper and some cloves ...” (27)
Ruy d’Araujo's letter also gives the names of twenty-one Port-
uguese and others, the survivors of the thirty-two who had been
imprisoned in Malacca. (28)
The Portuguese prisoners in Malacca had not long to wait for a
reply to this letter. The redoubtable Afonso de Albuquerque suddenly
appeared off Malacca on the Ist July, 1511, having touched at Pedir
and Pacem on the way. At Pedir he met “Joao Viegas & eight
Christians of the company of Ruy d’Araujo ; they had escaped from
Malacca.”
Albuquerque demanded the release of the Portuguese prisoners
but the king of Malacca refused to give them up. Albuquerque then
entered Malacca by force on the 15th August, 1511.
(27) Document in the Torre do Tombo, Gaveta 14, Mago 8, No. 21, and repro-
duced in Alguns Documentos, p, 219-226. It has also been reproduced in other
works.
(28) Ibid., p, 225.


Among the officers in the expedition was Jorge Alvares, who
was scrivener of the nao San Jodo Rumessa. This seems to be the
first mention to be found in history of this official, (29) He came from
the north of Portugal, being born in the town of Freixo de Espada-
-a-Cinta, close to the Spanish border.
Accounts abound of the double-dealing by the king of Malacca,
and of the extortions practised by him on traders who used to visit
Malacca as well as of the circumstances which led to the fall of the
city to the Portuguese, and the Malaccan king’s hasty escape.
It would not be out of place, however, to refer here to the first
meeting between Afonso de Albuquerque and Chinese traders in the
port. “At that time,” we read, “there were five Chinese junks in
the harbour at Malacca, and the captains of these, being very indig-
nant with the King for the robbery and tyranny he had exercised on
them in respect of their merchandise, offered their services to Albu-
querque to assist him against the Malays. With many thanks he
declined their offer ... In return they promised that should Malac-
ca fall into the hands of the Portuguese, every year more than 100
junks would go there with great quantity of merchandise.” (30) Albu-
querque persuaded the Chinese to stay and see with what spirit the
Portuguese would storm the place, and the Chinese showed their
desire for friendship by helping to row Albuquerque’s landing parties
ashore when they attacked and captured Malacca.
Having organized his administration in the city of Malacca, Al-
buquerque set about despatching expeditions in every direction.
Navigators were sent to the principal centres of south-east Asia:
the Spice Islands, Siam, and Pegu. All this is set forth at length in
a letter to the King of Portugal, dated the Ist April, 1512, with a
careful description of the places visited. “Malacca", Albuquerque
concluded, “is a very great place; it is the terminal of the voyages
of the traders from China.”
No evidence seems to exist to confirm a statement by Joao Men-
des de Vasconcellos regarding the activities of one Joao Dias de Solis
who was in the employ of the King of Spain and who had written a
(29) Corpo Cronologico, Parte 11, Mago 26, No. 136 in the Torre do Tombo
archives.
(30) F. C. Danvers, The Portuguese in India, London, 1894, Vol. I, p. 223.


letter reporting that “Afonso de Albuquerque was preparing a squa-
dron to proceed to the land of the Chins, whose country was 400
leagues inside the Portuguese-Spanish demarcation line,” (31) There
is little likelihood that such an expedition was sent on that occasion
to China for the records make no mention of a squadron. It is not
at all impossible, of course, that Albuquerque actually projected such
an expedition although he could not actually despatch it.
The efficient Albuquerque did not confine his attention to East-
ern activities for there is a document in Lisbon which shows that
he arranged for a Chinese to be sent as a visitor to Portugal. Albu-
querque took this Chinese with him from Malacca to Cochin in
western India, arrangements being made for him to sail to Portugal
from that port. (:{2)
Unfortunately no documents are available as evidence that the
Chinese gentleman reached Lisbon, nor is the visit mentioned in any
readily available work. We should very much like to have some in-
formation with regard to this strange visitor, probably the first Chi-
nese to set foot in Portugal, how he was dressed, how he made him-
self understood, what was it that interested him in distant Portugal.
Then, again, what sort of impression was created by this first
Chinese to rub shoulders with so many other people, of so many
races, in the streets of Lisbon! In the same way this visitor's im-
pressions would make interesting reading, but no documents seem to
be known describing this man’s visit to Portugal.
For that matter we do not have any proof that he actually
went there, only that arrangements were made for him to be sent
from India to the Portuguese capital.
In Malacca men continued hear at times of the Chinese, and
they spoke of the “land of the Chins." The wares of China were
attractive, the possibilities of trade were alluring, and in that great
(31) This letter by Joao Mendes de Vasconcellos in the Torre do Tombo, Ga-
veta 7-5, Mnco X, N.° 56 has also been reproduced in Alguns Documentos, p. 263.
Like Magellan he was hinting to the King of Spain that the Portuguese had en-
croached upon Spanish rights, a baseless and mischievous suggestion.
(32) The document referred to is in the Torre do Tombo, Cartas Missivas,
Mago 1, Xu. 205 —“Ordem de Afonso de Albuquerque a Louren§o Moreno para
dar a quantia de Issoo a urn China que embarcava para Portugal . . . pera suas ne-
cessydades e seu gasto.” —written at Cochim, 6-IV-1512.


movement of shipping, when land after land was being discovered
and the horizon of Western’s man view of the universe expanded so
wonderfully, there seemed to be great possibilities.
Dr. Armando Cortesao points out the significance of the inclu-
sion among the five maps by Francisco Rodrigues, dated 1512, of a
short rutter {i. e., Sailing Directions) entitled “Camynho da Chyna.”
(33) This is “the oldest known covering the voyage from Malacca to
the mouth of the Canton River,' 5 adds Dr. Cortesao, who is of the
opinion that Francisco Rodrigues drew upon information and maps
obtained in Malacca.
Afonso de Albuquerque mentions in a letter to King Manoel
that he had obtained from a pilot from Java a large map containing
the names of places in Malay characters. The original of this map
was lost, unfortunately, in the wreck of the Flor de la Mar on the
way from Malacca to Goa. But a tracing had been made of a por-
tion of the map, and this tracing was sent to the King. It showed,
-among other routes, “the navigation of the Chins.” (34) This interes-
ting map cannot be traced in Portugal; it was probably lost with so
many other valuable documents when the Royal Palace at Lisbon
was destroyed in the earthquake in 1755 or in that of 1531.
In due course Albuquerque left Malacca, returning to India,
and it was not until April, 1513, that four Chinese junks put into
the port of Malacca. “They did not bring any merchandise except
for a very little. They came as a squadron to get the feel of the
place. With them, as their captain, came Cheilata, the old Chinese
seafarer who had been met by Diogo Lopes de Sequeira five years
before.”
At this juncture Ruy de Brito Patalim (35) , Captain of Malacca,
decided to despatch a junk to China. It was a junk that had come
from Pegu, a new junk, the best they had seen in Malacca and
orders were given that the ship should be well equipped, and be
properly armed.
(33) The rutter is attached to the first of the 5 maps. See the Surma Oriental
of Tome Fires, London, 1944, a Hakluyt Society publication.
(34) This letter dated Ist April, 1512, has already been referred to. It was
reproduced in Cartas de Afonso de Albuquerque , Lisboa, 1884 Vol. I, p. 29-65, and
in Alguns Documentos, pp. 232-261.
(35) Ruy de Brito Patalim was the first governor of Malacca. He served
from 1511 to 1514. His letters describing conditions at Malacca and elsewhere
in south-east Asia are of great interest and have been published in Cartas de Afonso
■de Albuquerque, Alguns Documentos , etc.


Sailing from Malacca in the company of five other junks, in
May 1513, the vessel flew the Portuguese flag, and carried three
Portuguese on board: Jorge Alvares, his son, and another Portu-
guese as scrivener. A stone padrdo of the king of Portugal, to be
erected at the first Chinese landfall, was also shipped on board the
vessel.
Reporting this to King Manoel, by letter dated the 6th January,
1514, Ruy de Brito Patalim stressed that the Chinese visitors were
satisfied with the good report given to them by the Malay bandara
\i. e., Shah bandar] and other native officials of the city of Malacca.
“A junk belonging to Your Majesty,” continues the letter, “went
with two men of ours, one as Factor and the other as scrivener.”
Alvares’ son, a lad, evidently did not go in any official capacity.
The captain of Malacca reported also that emissaries had arrived
from the Kings of Siam, Pahang, Andraguiri, Menancabo, and Ciae,
and that friendly relations had been established with the Kingdom
of Pegu. His letter mentions that junks from China, as stated above,
had visited Malacca, besides others from Borneo, Paleacate, Choro-
mandel, Denaor, and Guzerat and that ships had gone from Malacca
to Java, Sunda, Bengal, Paleacate, and Timor. Regarding China
the letter does not give any information except for some indication
of the principal articles of trade :
“From China come amber, pearls, all kinds of satins and
damasks and porcelains, brocades and such things. The rulers
of China are tyrants, and they sell in great quantities. Their
land is the largest known in these parts. They take from
Malacca pepper, and many other kinds of spices that may be
found, and grain and gold, and many other things. They know
how to trade; from them can be obtained nothing except at the
proper value.
“Three junks have left Malacca for Sunda, to load pepper
for the monsoon to China, with a letter and a present for the
king. The junks belong to merchants of this place.” (36)
(36) Ruy de Brito Patalim also wrote to Afonso de Albuquerque who had then
returned to Goa. Documents in the Archives of the Torre do Tombo, Corpo Cro-
nologico, Parte I, Maso 14, Nos. 49 and 52. The first of these two documents has
been reproduced in Alguns Documentos where the citations given above appear on
p. 347.


Our attention is drawn to another letter in which reference to
this voyage to China is made, the first China voyage sponsored by
the Portuguese authorities at Malacca. Signed jointly by Pero Sal-
gado, Tome Pires, Garcia Chaim, and Pero Pessoa, “officials of Ma-
lacca,” the letter is also addressed to King Manoel. It states inter
alia that “A junk left here for China. It was a junk belonging to
Your Majesty, and it went in the company of other junks which
also went to trade. Of the merchandise in the junk one-half was
Your Majesty’s and the other half belonged to the hem dara
Uma Chain. In this way we shall pay for the expenses already made
and now being incurred. We expect the junk to get back within two
or three months, heavily and profitably laden, for there is no reason
for it to come otherwise.” (:i7)
In the Suma Oriental, written early in the year 1514, the com-
piler, Tome Pires, refers to the islands at the Mouth of the Canton
Kiver. He declares that they “are the islands to which our junks
and naos went” ... for they went to the Chinese “island of trade.’
The next governor of Malacca, Jorge de Albuquerque, (,w) des-
patched a report to King Manoel early in 1515, giving a great deal
of information regarding the activities of the Portuguese in south-
east Asia. He points out the extraordinary importance of Malacca,
with details of the trade carried on with Cambay, Bengal, Pegu,
(37) Letter dated 7th January, 1514, reproduced in Cartas de Afonso de Albu-
querque, Vol. 111, Lisboa, 1903, p. 89-91.
(38) Jorge de Albuquerque, Portuguese captain, was a nephew of Afonso de
Albuquerque. He served with great distinction in India. His first voyage to the
East took place in 1512 when he sailed from Portugal in the Nazare, in the squadron
of Jorge de Mello. In India he was given the important captaincy of Cochim, and
was then sent to Malacca as governor, serving from 1514 to 1516. To him, the
Portuguese owe a great deal for their early successes in the Moluccas Islands. He
returned to Portugal in 1519, but was nominated governor of Malacca once more.
Reaching Malacca he found that there was fighting to do, for the Sultan of Bintang
was attacking the Portuguese. Albuquerque succeeded in routing the Sultan in
1524. At the end of his term of service (1521-1524) in Malacca he returned to
Portugal where he ended his days in retirement.


C hina, Cochinchina, Siam, the Liu-chiu Islands, Luzon, Borneo, the
Moluccas, Banda, Timor, Java, and other countries . . . (39)
The document is somewhat deteriorated and fragments have
dropped out, but it is still legible. The passage in the document
which is germane to the reference to the first Portuguese who visited
China is contained, among the names of officers mentioned, in a list
of appointments in the Factory at Malacca :
Senhor Garcia Chainho e feytor e segu meu parecer serbebos
mnito bem / & com mnyta diligencia / hu dos escripvaes pero sall-
gado ho outro he francisqno perejra / ho outro he jorge a . . . q o
“fiz escrivam por se ome sofjejemete p yso / & vos Ja . . . do
Eem outras consas / como na yda Da chyna / Em que foy . . .
feytor de hu juquo De vosa alteza / e ser ho pm° home que poos . . .
“marquo (10) per vosa alteza / foy muy bem laa Recebijdo / / & os chiys fo . . . m
“com nosa companhja ...”
which duly put into readable form with the gaps filled in would read
Senhor Garcia Chainho e feitor, e segundo meu parecer scrvevos
‘muito bem c com muita deligencia, 6 hum dos escrivaes Pero Sall-
“gado, o outro e Francisco Pereira, o outroe Jorge Alvares* quem o
“fiz escrivao, por ser homem suficiente para isso, e vos ja ter servido
“em outras coisas, como na yda a China, em que foi por*
feitor de hum junco de \ossa Alteza, e ser o primeiro homem que pos o *
“marco (40) da Vossa Alteza, foi mui bem la recibido., Os Chinas iohja m*
“com nossa compania ...”
»
and in English the passage would read :
Sire, Garcia Chainho is Factor, and in ray judgment serves you
“very well and very diligently; one of the scriveners in Pero Sull-
“gado, the other is Francisco Pereira, and the other Jorge Alvares* whom
“I made scrivener, because he is qualified for this, and he has already serve d*
“You in other things, such as in going to China, when he went as
“factor in a junk of Your Highness, and was the first man to place the*
“mark (!')) of Your Highness, and was very well received there. The Chinese are pleased *
“with our company ...”
(39) Dated Bth January, 1515, It is to be found in the Torre do Tombo,
Corj>o Cronologico Parte 111, Mago 5, N° 87 and was first reproduced in Cartas de
Afonso Albuquerque, Vol. 111, Lisboa, 1903, p. 137, but it was first analysed and
interpreted, and thus brought to the attention of the general reader by Luiz Keil
m his booklet Jorge Alvares, o Primeiro Poftugues que foi a China (1513), Lisboa,
1933, p. 9.
(40) Padrdo, that is, a stone pillar surmounted by the Portuguese coat of
arms, set up in lands newly discovered by the Portuguese navigators.
(*) letters in italics have been filled in to complete the sense.


Tlie evidence which enabled Luiz Keil to complete the informa-
tion and thereby justify the insertion of Jorge Alvares’ name in the
worm-hole in the document, comes from no less an authority than
Joao de Barros, the official chronicler. Juxtaposition of the two
makes the information quite clear. In his Decadas, Barros states
that Jorge Alvares served in Asia and died in China, (41) “being
buried there at the foot of the stone padrdo, on which the arms of
Portugal were cut, which he, the said Jorge Alvares, placed there,
at the ‘island of trade’, one year before Rafael Perestrello went to
those parts.” (42)
(41) In the year 1521.
(42) Joao de Barros, Decadas da Asm, Decada 111, Livro VI, Cap. 2




JOURNEY’S END
With banners salt wind expand
And pennons trailing;
With wealth untold and a mind unknown,
And a power to love and make f riends of his own,
And a power to leave those he likes not alone,
Each new day pomes to me
Like a king from far east sailing
Over the sea.
Thomas Sturge Moore.
Keil we are indebted, we have just noticed,
f° r being the first to clarify the passage in Jorge de
~ -•Tym.jj; Albuquerque’s letter of the Bth January, 1515, when
Jorge de Albuquerque informed King Manoel of the
service rendered by “Jorge A. . . and it was from
Joao de Barros’s Decadas, written almost contemporaneously, i. e.,
about four centuries ago, that Keil found the passage from which to
fill in the gap. Due credit has thus been given, at last, to Jorge
Alvares for his epoch-making accomplishment.
As the first Portuguese, the first European whose name has
come down to us, to sail to China and to set foot on Chinese soil at
the Mouth of the Canton River, where all the foreign trade in south
China was conducted, Jorge Alvares has his place in his country’s
annals, and in those of the world.
About the ten months he spent in the Canton River, at the
anchorage of T’un Men, we know nothing, but conditions of life
among the Chinese have not greatly changed, and we need not find
it difficult to reconstruct some of his experiences.
In the centre of that anchorage there was an island, Lin Tin,
and Jorge Alvares was permitted to stretch his legs there. As a
foreigner he could not, without the Emperor’s permission, set foot
on the Chinese mainland but the islands at the mouth of the river
were allocated by the Chinese governmen tfor the convenience of


foreign traders; Lin Tin was one of these Fere he set up the
Padrdo of his king, the distinguishing mark whereby the Portuguese
commemorated each new land they discovered. Not long afterwards
his son died and, as the historian Joao de Barros records, the lad was
buried at the foot of the Padrdo.
During his sojourn there Alvares undoubtedly conversed,
through interpreters, with all manner of people : traders from Canton,
from the coast of Fukien and elsewhere in China, from Luzon and
the other islands of that archipelago, which came to be called the
Philippines, from Borneo, from Cambodia, from the coasts of Champa
and Cochinchina, from the Liu Chiu Islands (the Ryukyus of modern
atlases) and other places, and from Siam. From all these men he
gathered information, with the intention of passing it on to his
countrymen in Malacca. Among those in Malacca none was more
anxious to hear from him than Tome Pires, busily at work on his
detailed report, a geographical compendium, the Suma Oriental, which
he was preparing for submission to his king.
From the island at T’un Men, the Tamdo of the Portuguese
the landfall which Jorge Alvares gave to the Western world he
gazed over the expanse of water lying to the south and the sur
rounding islands. A light haze lingered over the scene but he could
see the land shapes clearly enough.
He saw precipitous Lanlao Island commanding the south-eastern
rim. Further south, on the horizon, through the light mist several
islands studded the prospect, among them Lo Man Shan (named after
the pirate “Man’’ whose activities have been perpetuated in the name
given by the Portuguese to the archipelago at the mouth of the Pearl
River estuary the Ladrones a name retained to this day, stand-
ard in ail the best charts and atlases).
At the south-western approaches of this great basin of water
was the little peninsula Hau OKing ( Ho-kiang in Cantonese) the
Macao of to-day dwarfed by the hulking form of the island, later
named Lappa Island by the Portuguese, and the dark green hills of
that region.
Landward and closer to him, across the stretch of waters to the
east, he could see towering Ching Shan, (now known as ‘Castle Peak’)
standing guard over the anchorage of T'un Men. A little to the
north, the headland of Nan Shan reared its form protecting the naval


station of Nan Ton, with the Imperial junks lying at anchor, under
the guns of a fort on little Ta Shan Island; and a considerable move-
ment of ships at the port of Nan Ton showed that it was an import-
ant town.
Due west the high peaks of Hsiang Shan District loomed over
Ki Ou Island and the land-locked anchorage of Kin Sing Men (pro-
nounced Kum Sing Moon , in Cantonese).
Northwards, the waters of the Pearl River narrowed into the
passage known as Fu Men (translated literally by the Portuguese as
“Boca do Tigre" and thus later by the British as the “Bocca Tigris”).
It was guarded, then as now, by the islands of Chuen Pee and Anong-
hoy, on the right, and Ty-Cock-Tau, on the left. Through this pas-
sage there was a constant coming and going of Chinese craft, plying
backwards and forwards between the anchorages of the great river
estuary and the celebrated trading city of Canton.
It was an interesting scene, beautiful to contemplate. There
were junks, too, from other places in China Swatow, Amoy, Ch’uan
Chow and other ports in the provinces of Kwangtung, Fukien and
Chekiang. Each of these vessels possessed distinctive characteristics,
hulls of varied construction, with brightly painted prows or floridly
decorated sterns. Among all these craft could be seen Imperial war
junks, their great banners proclaiming their office, to keep order and
warn off pirate craft that have always tried to prey upon peaceful
traders in this region. In the anchorages there were Cantonese and
and Fukinese cargo ships and river boats, as well as fishing junks
and, busily moving about from place to place, the übiquitous sam-
pans. But no Japanese ships were there; these vessels had been
proscribed because of their piratical depredations.
Alvares arrived in south China at a favourable period in China’s
history. These happened to be good days for the Chinese people.
Emperor Chang Te was fun-loving and easy-going, and the Court took
its lead from him. His officials were not overstrict to strangers, and
foreign visitors found life pleasant among the Chinese. Our Western
pioneer did not see, it is true, more than the very outermost fringe
of Chinese life, but he saw enough to realize that they were a friendly
people.
The year 1513 was an important one in the history of the west-
ern world. At the southern gateway to China, Jorge Alvares found


himself made welcome, and as he gazed towards the islands that closed
in that great basin of water he must have realized the significance
of his voyage. At his feet rolled the waters of the western edge of
the Pacific Ocean. In that very same year, Balboa, ten thousand
miles away, set eyes for the first time on the eastern shore of the same
ocean. Thus it was that two Iberians, unknown to each other, a
Portuguese in China and a Spaniard in Panama, made history to-
gether at both extremities of this mighty ocean.
The humid heat of the south China summer had settled over
the region by the time that Jorge Alvares arrived. He was no
stranger to the ennervating heat of southern Asia. It had dogged
him all the way from East Africa, across the Indian Ocean, at the Ma-
labar coast of India, on the voyage from India to Malacca and dur-
ing his stay in that important Malayan city.
With this heat had come those scourges which have ever afflict-
ed mankind in this region: the smarting skin eruption known as
“prickly heat’, and when the sun rode high the body would be bath-
ed in sweat and, without suitable clothing to offset the discomforts,
life must have been a veritable misery. Insect pests : cockroaches,
flies, whining mosquitoes whose stings irritated and, though the
Portuguese did not guess it, brought malaria. And bed-bugs, lice,
and other vermin. All this and more were never long absent in
southern Asia.
On the voyage from Malacca to China there might have been
light breezes in the South China Sea which would have tempered the
sun’s rays or made the nights more bearable, but in the anchorage
at the mouth of the Pearl River the heat of the summer season had
begun. Great thunder clouds gathered on occasion and passed over
the place, bringing sudden downpours of rain. These showers would
moderate the torrid air for a time, but the spells of heat would soon
return.
The sea in the great river mouth was tawny in colour, for the
rains of that season filled the South China rivers, carrying down the
soil of a vast hinterland to the river mouth, and mud-laden river
water extended far out to sea. It sparkled like gold when the sun
shimmered on its ruffled surface or it gleamed when the moonlight
touched its waves with silvern spangle, but in the heat of the day
the glare of the sun added to the discomforts of poor voyagers.


Yet there were compensations. The nights were generally endur-
able, and at times when there was rain for days on end the weather
could be cool enough. There was much to see: the way the women
carried their babies strapped at their backs, the use of chopsticks
instead of the fingers, to eat, the light and convenient straw hats that
were worn, the use of fans by almost everyone, the many uses
to which the Chinese put the bamboo, the practical way in which
the people rowed their boats, the many kinds of household goods sold
in little sampans that went from ship to ship, the great variety of
articles of merchandise, the porcelains, bronzes, lacquered ware were
a treat for the eyes, Alvares was certainly intrigued by the costly
ginseng, sharks’ fins, birds’ nests, ginger, grass cloth, and many other
novelties.
Then, again, he had a never-ending variety of strange usages and
customs to observe: the burning of incense sticks to propitiate the
gods, the pasting of red and gilt paper in appropriate places to bring
good luck, the ceremonies connected with various festivals, or the
elaborate and colourful rites when death was the unwelcome visitor
on some junk. And if some wedding had taken place there would
have been endless jollification and many strange and amusing antics
to amuse our stranger from the West.
For music our pioneer listened to the flutes or the Chinese man-
dolin or whistles which the sailors played, and he heard the plaintive
love songs and merry chanties sung by the seamen in the boats.
These sounds were broken into at times when fire-crackers spluttered,
or when gongs and cymbals crashed on some festive day. Games like
shuttle-cock, chess, cardplaying and the flying of kites also provided
entertainment and distraction.
The dresses of the folk proved how practical these people are.
The men wore thin black cloth that was cool and comfortable. As
for the women, they dressed in dark blue in a loose and becoming
manner with handkerchiefs round their heads. For funerals white was
worn and red predominated at weddings. The officials and their
suites had bright trappings which must have provided an endless
variety of interest. At their ceremonial occasions these Eastern peo-
ple wore gorgeous dresses that were a revelation for Western eyes.


Among the people in this anchorage, Alvares had the opportu-
nity to taste the cuisine of many lands, from the spicy food of warm-
er climes, to which he would have been no stranger, to the more
varied and subtly flavoured dishes of south China. He probably
tried the ordinary, daily meals of the folk among whom he lived and
he certainly joined in the larger feasts on days of celebration. There
were soups and meats and fowl and fish prepared in many ways, the
flavourings and sauces giving the food a piquancy and savoriness he
had never tried before. He ate noodles and new vegetables, cooked
in a variety of ways, also nuts and seeds. At ordinary meals and
all through the day tea would be drunk, but at ceremonial dinners
Chinese wine would be quaffed out of tiny cups, and he found that
the Chinese did not dislike Portuguese wine.
At each change in the seasons he ate the various fruits of the
region, persimmons, lichees, lungngans, caramholas, loquats, oranges of
several kinds, pumeloes, etc., the like of which he had never tasted.
The festivals of the Chinese, in particular, provided our visitor
with scenes that must have delighted him. The dragon-boat feast,
for instance, was spectacular and colourful, as the gaily decorated
boats raced along, the excitement of the races being accentuated by
the beatings of drums and much shouting. The feasts of the special
dieties of the fisherfolk, like that of their Tten Hau, were celebrated
with great devotion and enthusiasm. The feast of the Seven Sisters,
with its appeal to maidens, certainly proved entertaining. The
Moon Cake festival, with its special pies, could not have failed
to draw his attention. During these ceremonials there were great
clashing of cymbals and beating of drums, and much joyful shouting
and laughter, for the Chinese are a gregarious people, easily pleased
and demonstrative at times.
In south China, as the summer wore on, varied phenomena
made themselves felt. It might have been the green flourescence at
night where the prows of fishing junks or sampans cut ribbons ot
opalescent light on the dark waters. On some nights the “lightning-
flashes set the heavens ablaze with sudden terrifying peals of thunder
that threatened to bring the world about their ears.” There were
winds that came up suddenly and as quickly died away, and water-


The Eocca Tigris
(Shetch by Capt. R. Elliot, R. N.)


A Padrao


spouts which the Portuguese described as “a thing to strike terror to
our hearts, to see the clouds drinking up, as through a long spout,
the waters of the ocean.” Fogs and mists in heavy drifts hung
about the hills in a peculiar way.
Possibly also, heat of increasing intensity and a stifling stupor
gave some inkling of impending storm, presaging the approach of a
dreaded typhoon. If one of these storms had got near enough to
south China, as almost certainly one must have, Alvares and his
companions would have noticed curious cloud shapes hanging menac-
ingly in the sky, light ashgrey in colour, in tufts and curious forms,
growing darker as the hours went by, while a strange calm prevailed.
Boatmen then made for sheltered coves and the larger ships cast
out more anchors and trimmed down everything to meet the coming
storm, Alvares’ ship probably accompanied other vessels to some
land-locked anchorage, or was brought closer to the shore.
The sunset would have been truly terrifying in appearance, with
a glare of scarlet light which touched every cloud with the colour of
naked flame, growing darker, to end with an ever darkening crimson
glow and to merge into the blackness of the night. It was like the
grim foreboding of impending disaster. A strange quietness reigned,
and then there was a hint of wind. When morning came, the heavens
proclaimed the coming of a storm.
Overhead the clouds had become great jagged forms which
rushed across the sky and dissipated in rain and angry spray. Puffs
of wind ruffled the sea, and as hour followed hour the gusts grew in
frequency and force, racing white-caps chased each other as the waves
leapt higher and higher as the hours went by. The wind rose, no
longer in gusts but long howling blasts that sent great waves and
rollers crashing along the surface of the sea, which the wind whipped
up into lashing sheets of water.
Our Western visitor probably escaped the full force of a storm,
for his ship returned to Malacca, and the typhoon probably entered
the coast many miles away. Its effects would have been felt, however,
for several days, with long hours of wind and great downpours of rain.
Gradually the effects died down, and calm weather returned.
As the months slipped by and autumn came on the fiery heat
of the summer abated. There would be a chill in the air, at first by
night, and the skies would be clear, and changes appeared in the


heavens. Then would our Jorge Alvares see, possibly for a week on
end at a time, truly glorious sunsets, when, just after the sun sank
to rest, a great glow of light slowly blended into great coloured beams
old gold and pink and lavender and magenta broadening out
like some gigantic fan, as the zodiacal rays spread out a display of
pastel shades, in the glory of south China autumnal sunsets. Far to
the cast, like some dim reflection of the spectacular blaze, the mys-
tic “giegenschien” glimmered just above that horizon. The bright
rays would fade gradually into deepening indigo and violet and
then night drew its dark screen quickly over the sky. Like pin-
points of light on God’s velvet curtain the stars took up their vigil,
flickering silently all through the night.
Night after night, our visitor from the West feasted his eyes on
this magnificent spectacle. Autumn wore on and merged into the
months of winter. The colour faded out of the sunsets, the night
air became cold, the skies were gray, cold winds blew out of the
north, and drizzle would descend upon the prospect. There were
periods of fine weather, when merchants from Canton came, bringing
down wares of many kinds: mostly silks and satins and rich bro-
cades, and jewellery and precious stones, perhaps specimens of bright
green jade, but also curious novelties, and porcelain and bronzes,
and fragrant drugs. After much bargaining and haggling, over din-
ners and wine, at last all would be settled, the goods would be pack-
ed and properly stowed away.
Chinese New Year, the greatest festival of all, came. It was
celebrated late in January or early February, with much visiting
and eating and laughter. Everybody was dressed in gay clothes,
the children in new dresses, red and gilt paper signs would have been
pasted everywhere, new red banners would have been hoisted at the
masts, and by night great lanterns would be lit up. For days there
would have been no thought of work, and at last with a great dinner
the festivities would end.
Then the last heavy mists and fogs of late winter came down.
The northerly winds were superseded once more and Spring arrived.
It became necessary to get ready to go south, and all was bustle and
excitement as the ships prepared to leave.


In due course Jorge Alvares returned to Malacca from China,
most probably with the last north-easterly winds in March or
April, 1514. It must have been with some degree of anticipation
that he looked forward to seeing old friends again, to be able to re-
late his experiences, and Jorge Alvares turned away from the little
island at Tun Men.
He had much to report, of all that he had learned and observed
and heard, and it was a valuable loading that he took back to Ma-
lacca. From a Chinese source we learn that among the goods carried
away from China on this first voyage by a Portuguese was some tung
oil, which the Chinese have always used as an effective varnish for
wooden ships. The Portuguese soon began to make use of this oil
for their own ships and for many years found it very useful. (43)
Alvares could have returned to Malacca in November or Decem-
ber, 1513, but this is unlikely, as indicated in the letters written
by Huy de Brito Patalim and by Pero Salgado and his collegagues,
dated the 6th January, 1514 and the 7th January, 1514, respectively.
These letters mention that a Portuguese vessel had gone to China,
but that it had “not yet returned.” As a matter of fact the second
of these letters states specifically that at Malacca they expected ‘ ‘the
junk to get back within two or three months.”
Following the return of Jorge Alvares to Malacca two reports
were written and despatched to Europe. More important still a
detailed account of China was made by Tome Pires, and although
Pires states that he finished his manuscript in Malacca before the
end of January, 1514, it is just possible that additions were made
subsequently. Pires mentions that part of the later information
about Canton city was learnt from the “lugoes {i. e., people from
Jjuzon) who have already been there” but on the next page he makes
reference to “the voyages of our ships from Malacca to China.” It is
not impossible, therefore, that some of his information was obtained
from Alvares.
Jorge Alvares reached Malacca early in the year 1514 but the
next despatch of ships from Malacca to India did not occur until
November, 1514, the season for the westward sailings from Malacca.
(43) See Boxer’s Three Historians of Portuguese Asia (Barros, Couto and Boc-
•caro), in the Boletim do Institute Portugucs due Hongkong , No. 1, Macao, 1948.


No sooner did the news reach the Malabar coast of India that the-
Portuguese had reached China than Andrea Corsali, an Italian in the
employ of the Portuguese, (44) despatched a letter to Duke Giuliano-
de Medici, in Italy, to inform him that “our Portuguese made a
voyage to China.”
Dated at Cochin, in India, on the Cth January, 1515, this was
the first news of which we have any record sent from India to
Europe of the voyage (45) , and it contains a paragraph reading:
“The merchants of the land of China also make voyages to
Malacca across the Great Gulf to get cargoes of spices, and bring
from their own country musk, rhubarb, pearls, tin, porcelain,
and silk and wrought stuffs of all kinds, such as damasks, satins,,
and brocades of extraordinary richness. For they are people
of great skill, and on a par with ourselves (di nostra qualita), but
of uglier aspect, with little bits of eyes. They dress very much
after our fashion and wear shoes and stockings {scarce e calcia-
menti?) like ourselves. I believe them to be pagans though
many allege that they hold our faith or some part of it. During
this last year some of our Portuguese made a voyage to China.
They were not permitted to land; for they say ‘tis against their
custom to let foreigners enter their dwellings. But they sold
their goods at a great gain, and they say there is as great profit
in taking spices to China as in taking them to Portugal; for Tis
a cold country and they make great use of them. It will be five
hundred leagues from Malacca to China, sailing north.”
Corsali got his information at third hand and most likely did
not know the name of the Portuguese pioneer who had carried out
the voyage but he considered the news important enough to pass on
to Duke Guiliano without delay.
Another Italian in the Portuguese service also sent a report to
Italy. We may conjecture that it was based on Jorge Alvares’ pio-
neer voyage to China, although he, like Corsali, does not mention the
(44) Donald Ferguson mentions that Yule, Cathay and the Way thither , was
the first to draw attention to this fact.
(45) The translation is Yule’s, and has been reproduced from D. Ferguson,.
Letters front Portuguese Captives in Canton , Bombay, ] 902.


•explorer’s name. He was Giovanni da Empoli (46) and writing from
Cochin later in the same year (on the 15th November, 1515) he pass-
ed on the news to Italy of what the Portuguese were accomplish-
ing in Asia.
In the course of his letter he mentioned, among other things,
the exciting news of the discovery of China :
“From Malacca have come ships and junks,” he reports.
.. . '’They have also discovered China, where men of ours have
been who are staying here: which is the greatest wealth that
there can be in the world. The confines reach to High Tartary,
and are called Palascia (47) They are all white people like oursel-
ves ; they dress like Germans with all their fashions of garments,
such as fur-lined caps and jerkins. There are enclosed lands like
ours, and houses of stones like ours. They have great order and
law, and are very friendly towards us. The country abounds
with all fine white silk, and it costs thirty cruzados the cantare;
damasks of sixteen good pieces, at five hundred reals the piece ;
satins, brocades, musk at half a ducat the ounce, and less. Many
pearls of all sorts in great abundance; and many caps, so that
from there to here is made on them a profit of thirty to one.
There come from there amazing things; and to tell the truth, I
relate to you nothing of what is there. The ships bring spices
from there; so that every year there comes from Zamatra some
sixty thousand cantara of pepper; and from Coccin and the land
of Mallibari fifteen to twenty thousand cantara of pepper alone;
it is worth fifteen or even twenty ducats the cantaro. In like
manner, ginger, mace, nutmeg, incense, aloes, velvet, our gold
thread, coral, woollen cloths, robes. There come from there
somedrom (48) , cloth like ours, much white alum, and good ver-
milions : many horses and large carts are in their country.
Everything is sold by weight, both merchandise and provisions,
and live and dead animals; all by weight. They have many
grains: the great things are so many that come from there, that
they are amazing; so that if Ido not die, I hope before I leave
here to take a leap thither to see the Grand Khan, who is the
(46) Giovanni cla Empoli (1483-1518). For a biography see Archive Slorico
Jtaliano, App. 9-91.
(47) liadakshan.
(48) Ferguson believes that this is probably a copyist’s error.


king of Cathay; (49) for by land one makes a journey of three
months on horseback, all along a river, (50) as is the Rhine, crowd-
ed here and there with populous towns and cities, at the end
of which one arrives at Zeiton, (51) which is the said king’s who
resides there (52> .
“This year there will go ambassadors to the king with pre-
sents of value, and I hope to send thither a quantity of pepper
and other things; and the result of all you shall know.” (53)
Curiously enough these letters were sent to Italy, and from this
circumstance it has been suggested that these Italians were agents
who were spying on the Portuguese activities. The discovery by the
Portuguese of the all-sea route to India dealt a severe blow at the
trade in spices from which the merchants of Italy had amassed great
fortunes during the preceding centuries. It would be natural,
therefore, for the Italians to watch their Portuguese rivals most
carefully.
The letters sent by these Italians, as has been observed, were
based on hearsay but rather than wait for further confirmation the
writers sent their reports to their own countrymen in Italy as
promptly as possible.
The most important of all the reports, based very possibly to
some extent on information gathered by Jorge Alvares in China, was
that written by Tome Pires and incorporated in his Suma Oriental,
as we have already noticed. It is so accurate in many respects that
it must have come from a careful observer. Jorge Alvares was one
of the two Portuguese who were in a position to speak with authority
on the subject, and we can assume quite fairly that Alvares and
Pires met in Malacca. There is material here for speculation.
(49) This is a very interesting deduction, the credit for which should probably
be given to Jorge Alvares, whose voyage to China undoubtedly influenced the
drawing up of this letter by Giovanni da Empoli, as it probably did Corsali’s letter
and possibly, to some extent, Fires’ chapter on China in his Suma Oriental. Empoli
did go to China, in 1517, but he did not visit the Emperor, as he hoped to do, for
he died at Canton of dysentery.
(50) The Yangtsze River and the Grand Canal probably.
(51) The Zeiton of Marco Polo and other writers of the Middle Ages has been,
identified with Chuan Chow on the coast of Fukien province.
(52) An error, as Ferguson points out.
(53) Like Corsali’s letter, this letter has been reproduced from Ferguson’s-
Portuguese Captives.


With due acknowledgments to the Hakluyt Society ol‘ London
and to Dr. Cortesao, this section of the Suma Oriental is reproduced
in full, as an appendix at the end of the present study, with the
translation and annotations prepared by Dr. Cortesao (see Appendix).
A few additional comments have been inserted.
One very important conclusion arising out of Jorge Alvares’ visit
to China was the identification of China with Cathay. We have
noticed that Empoli refers to “the Grand Khan, who is called the
king of Cathay” and he refers to the city of “Zeiton” mentioned by
Marco Polo.
Pires gives us more details of the emperor's Court for he states
that “The city where the king lives is called Gambara. .. . This
city is in the kingdom of China, the king of wdiich is there some-
times in . . . Carnbarra, which is called Peqim.”
Dr. Cortesao points out that Pires was therefore the first Euro-
pean to identify the Cambalue of Marco Polo with Peking, (o4 >
thereby proving Cathay and China to be one and the same country,
anticipating by nearly a century the theory advanced by Father
Matthew Ricci with regard to this. Father Ricci did not know,
evidently, of Pires’ conclusion, although after Jorge Alvares’ voyage
the Portuguese seem to have taken this for granted, and then either
forgot it or considered this matter to be of little consequence. Then
again they might have purposely suppressed the information to
mislead others.
Pires seems to be the first Portuguese to use the name Canton ,
thus introducing an error in Europe which has never been corrected.
The Mohamedans Sulayman and Idrisi, earlier, in the XHth century,
referred to Kuang-fu, the correct form, while the Portuguese roman-
ization of the name Kwang-Tung, the province, as Canton for the
city, has perpetuated an error that has survived to the present day.
We have no means of telling if Jorge Alvares might have been res-
ponsible for this.
Pires has a lot to say about Canton. He mentions the import-
ance of this city, because of its trade, and states that the authorities
at Canton control the trade carried on “in the port of Tumo/ri ’ and
other ports. He refers to the substantial buildings in the city, and
gives the names of the main articles of trade He also touches upon
the way in which the ambassadors from tributary states were received
(54) Dr. A. Cortesao, The Surna Oriental of Tome Pires, (for the Hakluyt
Society). London, 1944, Vol. I, p. 177. (See note by Cortesao, p. 87 infra.)


at Canton, for the rulers of these countries “send their ambassadors
with the seal of China to the king of China every five years and everv
ten years, and each one sends him [i. e., the emperor of China], the
best there is in his country . . . each according to what he has.”
Canton, he is careful to explain, is “the key to the kingdom of Chi-
na.”
On the whole, Fires' information with regard to China is good,
but he makes a slip when, treating of Chinese customs, he refers to
the Chinese procedure in the matter of imperial succession. He states
that “the Kings of China do not succeed from father to son or nephew,
but by election in council of the whole kingdom. It always takes
place in the city of Camhara where the king resides, and the man-
darin who is approved by them becomes king.” Cortesao goes on to
point out that Fires had been incorrectly informed. Curiously enough
the same point of view seems to have been current even half a cen-
tury later, for we find Camoes who is often supposed to have vi-
sited Macao in 1557-1558 —repeating the same mistake, when lie-
states in Os Lusiadas:
“Estes, o Kei que tem, nao foi nascido
Principe, nem dos pais aos filhos fica;
Mas elegem aquelle que he famoso
For cavalleiro si;bio, e virtuoso”
Canto X , verse 130.
(These, the King who reigns, was not born
Prince, nor from Sires to Sons pass;
But they choose him who is most noted
As a wise and virtuous Knight.) (55)
More than one commentator has wondered why Camoes made such
a mistake. Did Camoes draw upon some manuscript copy of Fires’
Suma Oriental ?
(55) A paraphrase instead of an attempt at versification of which there are
several English editions. That by Sir Livingston Mitchell reads
“Of these, the King they have was not born or received
A prince, nor are his sons as such respected ;
They only choose him whose fame and merit lies
In being learned, virtuous, good and wise.”
The informants on whom the Portuguese relied for their information were pos-
sibly confusing the whole thing with the appointment of the Viceroys, members of
the Chinese hierarchy who secured their appointments from the results of the unique
examination system in Peking, which was evidently not properly understood by
the Portuguese in those times.


In Pires’ book one may read an excellent summary of the prin-
cipal articles of trade imported by China at the time. The import
tax on these goods is given, with a detailed explanation of the
weights used in China and how they operate. Pires uses a term which
seems to baffle Cortesao — fuseleira. Pires compares the Chinese cash
with the Portuguese ceitis:
“So many weights of such and such a foodstuff for one
fuseleira cash, which are current in the country like ceitis, and
for large merchandise and other purchases gold and silver is
used for money.”
Elsewhere he mentions “vessels of many sorts, vases of copper and
fuseleira, cast iron kettles, bowls, basins.” (56) We may be permitted
to advance the suggestion that he refers to brass.
Referring to goods exported from China, Pires mentions many
others. It is a fairly comprehensive list, although he seems to have
overlooked a number of items. He points out that “the chief mer-
chandise from China is raw white silk”, and going on to describe the
various articles of silk he mentions “loose coloured silks, many in
quantity, satins of all colours, damasks, chequered enrolados in all
•colours, taffetas and other silk cloths called xaas, and many other
kinds of all colours.” In an annotation Cortesao tries to identify
xaas as silk gauze. Might Pires not be referring to the sha chau
1) of South China ? Pie has evidently pluralized the word. (57)
In a list of the sources in China of various articles of merchan-
dise, Pires refers to “damasks, satins, brocades, xaas, loos from
Namqim and from AmqmN Namqim is identified by Cortesao with
Nanking, but he did not identify Amqm. Might it not be Anking?
Anking (-£/!), also pronounced Nganking, the capital of the pro-
vince of Anhwei, was with Wuhu and Nanking among the principal
producing centres of silk in the Yangtsze River Valley. Silk w r as not
produced extensively, if at all, in South China at the time. (r>B) '
As might he expected, Pires has a lot to say about the ports and
the peoples who traded in China. He mentions that junks from Ma-
lacca anchor “In the port of TumonN Those from Siam anchor, he
(56) Cortesao, The Suma Oriental, Vol. I, p, 125.
(57) See my article in Boletim do Institute Portugues de Hongkong: Macao in
1515.
(58) The establishment of Macao by the Portuguese and their increasing pur-
chases of silk for their Japan trade led, in time, to the building up of silk produc-
tion in the districts of Shun-te (XH&) and Hsiang-shan not far from Macao.


states, “in the port of Hucham. Our port of Tumon is three leagues
nearer to China than the Siamese one.” If our theory is correct that
the Island of Tumon is none other than Lintin Island, then it is likelv
* %/
that Hucham, would be a port in Lantao Island. (sy> It could have
been some form of pronouncing the name of a village on Lantao.
Then again it might have been the name of some other island in that
area.
We come, now, to a passage in Fires’ book which should be of
very great interest. On fol. 162 of the manuscript of the codex of
Fires’ work, there is a passage which reads:
“Alem do porto de quantom esta outro porto que se chama
oquem he amdadura p.° terra De tres dias E por mar huu dia &
huua noite este he o porto dos lequjos he Doutas nacoees mujtos
portos tem alem q sera largua cousa de comtar que ao presemte
nom fazem em noso caso somemte atee qmtom porq esta he a
chaue do Reino de chyna.”
Dr. Cortesao has translated this passage into English as follows:
“Beyond the port of Canton there is another port which is
called Oquem; it is three days’ journey by land and a day and
night by sea. This is the port for the Lequjos and other
races. It has many other ports, which it would be a long busi-
ness to tell of, and they do not concern us at present, except up
to Canton (Qmtom), because this is the key to the kingdom of
China.”
Dr. Cortesao has appended a short note to try and identify
Oquem as “Foquem or Fukien.” He does not seem to be satisfied
with his own identification, however, and believes “that Fires mixed
up the information he received.” It is obvious that the word
alem in the original context should be “besides” and not “beyond.”
As a matter of fact, Alem may mean either “besides” or “beyond” in
Portuguese, depending on the context. And without wishing to
split hairs with Cortesao with regard to the English translation, the
suggestion is made that “he amdadura p° terra De tres dias E por
mar huu dia & huua noite” should be translated: “by land it is three
days’ journey, and by water a day and a night.”
(59) The Hon. Mr. K. M. A. Harnett of the Hong Kong Government service
informed the writer that he remembered seeing on Lantao Island an old temple
bearing Siamese characteristics.


The passage would, then, read:
“Besides the port of Canton there is another port which is
called Oquem ; by land it is three days' journey, and by water it
is a day and a night. This is the port for the Lequjos and other
races. . .
On fol. 162 v. of Fires’ Suma Oriental there is another passage
which refers to the same place:
“Os lequeos chamanse guores (S 0) por quallqr destes nomes
sam . . . trata na China e em malaqa E as vezes em
companhia dos chijs as vezes por sy na chija tratara no porto
de foqem q he na terra da chijna Junto De quaratom nauega-
9am De huu dia & huua noyte . . .”
which Dr. Cortesao translates very correctly as:
“The Lequeos arc called Guores (00) they are known by
either of these names . . . They trade in China and in Malacca,
and sometimes in company with the Chinese. Sometimes on
(60) The term guores has puzzled the experts. It appears frequently in The
Suma Oriental of Tome Fires , London, 1944, and it is mentioned and commented
on by Prof. C. R. Boxer in his recent The Christian Century in Japan , (Berkeley
and Cambridge), 1951. Boxer says that scholars are divided as to whether the
Guores were Japanese, Luchuans, or Koreans settled in the Ryukyu (Liu Chiu)
Islands. He inclines to the view that this term was used to mean the Japanese,
but, he adds, “whatever the remote origin of the name, the Portuguese clearly took
it over from their Malay and Arab predecessors in Malacca, since Arab nautical
treatises of 1462 and 1489, quoted by Gabriel Ferrand, expressly identify the
Ryukyu with the island(s) of Ghnr or Al-Ghur.” Cortesao devotes considerable
space to a discussion of this name.
The earliest European reference to the Gores is in a letter written by Ruy de
Araujo in 1510, to Afonso de Albuquerque. Denuce, Les lies Lequios (Formose et
Liu-Kiu) et Ophir, believes them to be Koreans who settled in the Liu-Chiu
archipelago.
There is an island between Japan and Korean which was called in early Ming
times Goryu Shan , the modern Takashima (Japanese rendering). The natives of
this place were great seafarers in the days of the Mings and were often found in
various parts of the China Sea. Goryu Shan is noted as the place where a great
expeditionary force sent by the Mongol Emperor of China, Kubalai Khan, to con-
quer Japan, was destroyed by a typhoon in 1281. (See Ikeuchi, Genko no shin-
kenkyu, Vol. I, pp. 280-293 and Kimiya, Nisshi Kotsu-shi). This name might
have been commonly used by the Malays at Malacca for a few years, at the time
when the Portuguese first reached Malacca; it disappears from use very quickly.
The term japoneses was used by the Portuguese not long afterwards.


their own. In China they trade in the port of Foquem which is
in the land of China, near Canton a day and a night’s sail
away. (fil)
It seems, from the context, that Pires refers to one and the
same place, Oquem, on fol. 162, and Foquem , on fol. 162 p. The
additional k ‘F” in the second paragraph could possibly be a copyist’s
error for “11.”. In all likelihood he refers to the place known in the
days of the Ming dynasty as Ho-kiang ('<£&), Cantonese pronuncia-
tion, and by which it is known to the present day by Chinese who
are conversant with the topography of this region.
This could have been pronounced O-keng or Ho-keng in one of
the dialects of the seafarers in the South China seas, and it is one of
the names of the place we now know as MACAO. (<i2)
Chinese scholars know that Hau-chiing Ho Kiang in Can-
tonese, is a distinctive name which was given to this place during
the Ming Dynasty, Before that Macao seems to have been noted
for its salt trade, and at the time of the Northern Sung Dynasty
(A. D. 960-1127) it was known as Kin Tan Yen Tsang
that is the “Salt Depot of Kin Tau Wan”. Kin Tau Wan )
is an important rice producing area close to Macao.
The name Hau-ch’ing (SiJNfc) appears in the Ming Annals—the
Ming Shu (Vlii) —and it means “mirror-shaped-port.” Versions
like “oyster-shaped mirror” are common. Some Chinese writers have
referred to Macao as the lotus-lily but the commonest name in use at
the present time is 0 Moon. (C 3)
(61) Cortesao, The Sumo Oriental, p. 129.
(62) The omission by Fires of the letter II in the word Ho will not sur-
prise those who are conversant with Portuguese orthography of the period, i. e.,
■early in the XVlth century.
Persons familiar with this region know that it would be possible for boats to
sail from Canton to Macao in a day and a night, by the waterways flowing down
from Canton to the sea. Travel by land in this region, on the other hand, was and
still is impeded by the many channels of the West River Delta, and could take
three days. Fires would have been correctly informed, therefore, to say that by
boat the journey from Canton to Macao would take a day and a night, while the
overland journey, by day only, would require three days’ travelling.
(63) Other variants are known, for a short study of which see J. M. Braga,
The Western Pioneers and their Discovery of Macao, Macao, 1949, pp. 103-105 and
the authorities mentioned therein.


Traders from Fukien and the Liu Chiu Islands began to use the
port which we now know as Macao during the Yuan dynasty or even
earlier. It was already known at the beginning of the Ming dynasty
and two temples had already been built that of Leang Ma
and that of Kwan Yin The well known legend of how the
goddess Leang Ma saved the crew of a junk from shipwreck dates
from this period. This legend is commemorated by the carving of a
junk on a rock in the temple grounds at Macao. ((i4)
The first three reports written by Westerners were based very
possibly, as we have seen, on the voyage of Jorge Alvares, and we
may echo the feelings of Donald Ferguson when he states that “it
certainly seems strange that there should not exist among the
Chinese annals a full record of the events connected with the first
and subsequent visits of the Portuguese to China.” (oi,)
A few short paragraphs have been quoted by Chinese writers,
and are reproduced, infra., in this study, but the Portuguese
sinologues at Macao do not seem to have searched very diligently
among the Chinese records. The only reference available is that
translated by W. F. Mayers in Notes and Queries on China and
Japan , (66) which has been referred to frequently. Donald Ferguson
reproduces it in full:
“The following brief contemporaneous account of the
arrival of Fernao Peres de Andrade at Canton in 1517, when
Europeans for the first time [szc.] landed in China, does not
appear to have been hitherto noticed, and is not without interest,
as the earliest Chinese mention of European visitors. It is
quoted in a work on the Art of War, published under the' Ming
(64) The shrine of the goddess Leang Ma may still be seen, changed but little,
venerated by Chinese fisherfolk, and the object of poetical effusions as tablets and
other objects in the temple grounds at Macao testify.
(65) D. Ferguson, Letters from Portuguese Captives in Canton, 1902, pp. 39-42.
Dr. Cheng Tien-tse has informed the writer that he has found several references in
Ming records regarding Jorge Alvares’ voyage and those of his successors, and that
he proposes to bring out a monograph on the subject.
166) Vol. 11, Sept. 1868, pp. 129-130.


Dynasty, A. D. 1621, in the course of a description of cannon
and firearms:
“Ku Ying-siang says as follows: Fu-lang-ki is the name of
a country, not the name of a gun. In the year Ting-ch’au of
the reign Chengte (A. D. 1517) I was in office as Supervisor in
Kwang-tung, and was Acting Commissioner for Maritime Affairs.
There suddenly arrived at this time two large seagoing vessels,
which came straight to the Kwaiyuan [“cherishing-those-from-
-afar”] Post Station at the city of Canton, giving out that they
had brought tribute from the country of Fu-lang-ki [feringhi:
Franks ]. The master of the vessels was named Ka-pi-tan. The
people on board all had prominent noses and deeply-sunk eyes,
wearing Folds of white cloth around their heads, like the costu-
me of the Mohammedans. Report was at once made to the Vi-
ceroy, His Excellency Ch’en Si-hien, who thereupon honoured
Canton with his presence, (67) and who gave orders that, as these
people knew nothing of etiquette, they should be instructed
for three days in the proper ceremonies at the Kivang Hiao Sze
[the Mohammedan Mosque]; after which they were introduced.
It being found that Ta Ming Hwei Tien (Collected Ordinances of
the Ming Dynasty ) contain no mention whatever of tribute being
received from the nation in question, a full report of the matter
was transmitted to His Majesty, who consented to the transmis-
sion of the individuals and present to the Board of Rites. At
this time His Majesty was engaged in a tour in the Southern Pro-
vinces, and the foreigners were left in the same lodging with
myself for close upon a year. When his present Majesty ascend-
ed the Throne \i. e., the Emperor Shih Tsung who succeeded to
the Throne in 1521], in consequence of the disrespectful conduct
on the [foreigners’] part, the interpreter (68) was subjected to ca-
pital punishment and his men were sent back in custody to
(67) “The residence of the Viceroys being at that time Shao-k’ing Fu Ufcfa
[Shiu-Hing, Cantonese] says Mayers in a footnote, but Ferguson adds that
“According to the statement ofChristovao Vieira (one of the prisoners at Canton),
it was at Wuchau that the chief provincial authorities resided.”
(68) Mayers appends the following footnote: “This was Thome Fires, who
was despatched in charge of the presents from Canton.” Mayers is at fault; it
was the native interpreter who was beheaded.


Canton, and expelled beyond the frontiers of the Province, Dur-
ing the long stay made by these people at Canton they mani-
fested particular fondness for the study of Buddhist writings.
Their guns were made of iron, and five or six feet in length. . .”
Yet another Portuguese account of China dates from the same
period. It is contained in The Book of Duarte Barbosa, a geographi-
cal survey of southern Asia similar to that of Tome Pires but greatly
inferior to it. Like that of Tome Pires it remained in manuscript
and was first published by Ramusio, the Italian compiler of voya-
ges, as long ago as 1563. It was long known only through this Ita-
lian translation. The first Portuguese edition appeared only in 1813,
from an early Lisbon transcript.
An edition in English was brought out by the Hakluyt Society
in 1865, translated by Lord Stanley of Alderney, from a manuscript
in Spanish at Barcelona. A second edition by the Hakluyt Society
appeared, edited by M. A. Dames of the Indian Civil Service, in Lon-
don, 1918 and 1921, in two volumes. It is evident from the text
that Barbosa’s informant was not Jorge Alvares, for he states him-
self that he obtained his information “from trustworthy Moors [i. e.,
Mohammedans] and Heathens.” Barbosa’s description of China is
very poor, from which it can be presumed that his informants were
not personally familiar with their subject.










“Presents for the Queen”
(See page 12)
Drawing by Vicente Pacia.


AN EPITAPH
Under the wide and starry sky
Dig the grave and let me lie;
Glad did I live and gladly die
And I laid me down with a will.
This he the verse you grave for me:
“Here he lies where he longed to be;
Home is the sailor, home from sea,
And the hunter home from the hill.”
R. L. Stevenson
jhpalM rest °f the story is quickly told. Returning from
f China to Malacca, probably in April, 1514, Jorge Al-
vares was rewarded with an appointment in the
■ Factory there. But his services were soon needed
again. When Fernao Peres de Andrade was given
command in 1516 to be captain-major of the squadron bound for
China, for the purpose of conveying Tome Fires as Portuguese Envoy
to the Court of Peking, Jorge Alvares, as one who had experience
of dealing with the Chinese, was assigned to accompany him.
Before sailing for China, however, the ships were sent to Suma-
tra to load pepper for which there was a keen demand among the
Chinese. But one of the ships caught fire while loading and this
held up the voyage. After some delay the squadron returned to
Malacca for the final arrangements. They left for China, but had to
turn back because of a typhoon, while Duarte Coelho was sent to
Siam. In Malacca they found that Rafael Perestrello, who had
gone to China in 1515, and for whose safety fears had been express-
ed, had turned up returning from China with a cargo worth a
sizeable fortune.
This provided a stimulus and in 1517, according to Gaspar
Correa, the fleet sailed from Malacca. It consisted of the Esphera,
of eight hundred tons, as flagship, the Santa Cruz , with Simao d’Al


ca£ova as captain, the Santo Andre , commanded by Pero Soares, the
Santiago , with Jorge Mascarenhas in command, and four junks com-
manded respectively by Jorge Botelho, Manuel d’Araujo, Antonio Lo-
bo Falgao, and Martini Guedes. Jorge Alvares’ ship was held up
however for repairs and he stayed behind.
In due course Fernao Peres de Andrade and his squadron rea-
ched Tun Men where they found that Duarte Coelho had arrived
from Siam. They anchored at T’un Men and applied for permission
to proceed to Canton “to land the ambassador.” This was so long
in coming that after a short delay, during which a storm dismasted
two of the Portuguese ships, the Portuguese commander gave ins-
tructions for some of the vessels to weigh anchor and proceed to
Canton. Arriving there he saluted the city with a salvo from the
ships’ guns. This Western form of salutation was an innovation in
Canton and greatly surprised the inhabitants, eliciting comments from
the Chinese. “A large ship,” reported Hoh Ao, “suddenly appeared
at the capital of Kwangtung, and the cannons’ roar shook the earth.”
Eventually Tome Pires and his suite were invited ashore at
Canton, while Jorge Mascarenhas was sent “to discover the Liu Kin
Islands” Japan was possibly classified with the Liu Kin’s at that
time but, so he reported later, he was kept by contrary winds at
Chuan Chow, in Fukien, where he conducted profitable trade. Mean-
while Jorge Alvares arrived from Malacca with the news that the
Raja of Bintang was preparing to invest Malacca.
Leaving the Portuguese envoy at Canton, Fernao Peres de An-
drade returned with his squadron to the anchorage at T’un Men
where he made preparations to return to Malacca.
Before leaving China, Fernao Peres de Andrade issued an an-
nouncement in very friendly terms. “If anybody has suffered in-
jury,” he proclaimed, “or has anything owing to him by a Portuguese,
let him come forward to obtain every satisfaction.” This pleased
the Chinese very greatly.
It is significant that the Portuguese had several brushes with
pirates at the south China coast on this visit.
It was in September, 1518 that the Portuguese returned to
Malacca and there they found that there was fighting to do.
History records that Jorge Alvares was among those who acquitted


themselves well. In the defence of one of the outposts of Malacca
at a place called Pago, beset by a Malay force under the Rajah of
Bintang, he showed conspicuous courage. The Malay besiegers were
beaten off and then hotly pursued, being routed at the coast ot
Muar, where Jorge Alvares was in command of a gunboat, and where
again he gave a good account of himself.
One year later Jorge Alvares was sent to China again; on this
occasion he was ordered to accompany Simao Peres de Andrade. A
brother of the captain-major who visited China in 1517-1518, Si-
mao Peres de Andrade was also given charge of a squadron, likewise
as captain-major. The commanders of his ships were Jorge Botelho,
Alvaro Fuzeiro, and Francisco Rodrigues—Jorge Alvares seems to
have made his way to China in his ship separately. After reaching
Chinese waters Simao Peres de Andrade set about building a fort on
TTm Men Island, where he ordered the hanging of a member of his
crew for some infraction.
In due course the Chinese officials arrived to collect their taxes
and to remonstrate over the erection of a fort without first obtaining
permission from the emperor of China, as well as to protest over a
hanging being carried out on Chinese soil without conforming to
Chinese legal processes. Alleging that the presence of pirates
necessitated a fort, Simao Peres de Andrade lost his temper, a
heated argument followed and he assaulted one of the Chinese
officials. This captain-major’s high-handed action was severely
criticized by his own countrymen at the time, for the Portuguese had
made it a rule to maintain friendly relations with all peoples, Moslems
excepted. From the Moslems no quarter was expected and none
granted, but with others the Portuguese were expected to trade
peacefully. Simao Peres de Andrade was blamed, therefore, not
only for taking the law into his own hands but for other indiscre-
tions as well. To hold him in execration, the Chinese accused him
even of buying children “to eat”.
In spite of this unpleasant incident, Portuguese traders were
still allowed to visit the port of T’un Men, to trade. In fact, several
Portuguese were given permission to proceed from Malacca, to China
and they were well received by the Chinese.


Alvares was sent to China once more, and in 1521 he set out-
again for Tun Men. On the way he met Diogo Calvo and Francisco-
Rodrigues in their respective junks, and being the senior official
among them he was invited to take command of the little squadron.
Reaching their usual anchorage at the China coast, the Port-
uguese found that the resentment caused by Simao Peres de An-
drade's churlishness had not been lived down, and furthermore that
Emperor Cheng Te having died the Chinese officials had taken
advantage of the opportunity to order the Portuguese to leave Chi-
nese waters. They pointed out that Chinese etiquette required that
this should be done pending the decision of the new Emperor. The
Portuguese traders refused to leave, possibly awaiting payment of
merchandise or expecting to receive goods. Whereupon the Chinese
fleet attacked them, capturing Francisco Rodrigues’ junk, after kill-
ing several Portuguese. The survivors were then taken prisoner.
Subsequently Diogo Calvo’s vessel was also attacked, some prisoners
being captured there as well.
Before the affair could be satisfactorily settled Duarte Coelho,
Jorge Alvares' friend, reached the same anchorage on the 27th June,
1521, with two ships. There seems to have been a sort of respite,
for he was unopposed. He landed at the Isle of Trade where he
found his friend Jorge Alvares on shore, seriously ill. A few days
later, on the 6th July, 1521, Alvares passed away, on Tamao Island,
in the arms of Duarte Coelho and “he was buried at the foot of the
stone 'padrdo on which the Arms of Portugal had been engraved,
which he, the very same Jorge Alvares put there one year before
Raphael Perestrello went to those parts, in which year he buried a
son of his who had died at that time ...”
Luis Keil comments on the burial of our hero by his friend
Duarte Coelho, and exclaims: “What touching sadness it must have
been for this friend as he laid the remains of the father by those of
the son, in the spot where Alvares had first arrived and set up the
padrao of his King!”
To Barros, the Portuguese historian, we owe a pathetic com-
mentary on this death in far-away China:
“And though his flesh will be consumed in the soil of that
land of a strange faith, where for the honour of his fatherland


he placed that padrdo to mark his discoveries at the very ends
of the earth, the memory of his tomb will not be forgotten so
long as this our writing endures . . . *’
Keil adds: “A glorious epitaph forgotten by nearly every one!
Let us hope that the Portuguese in Macao will remember him, and
engrave in letters of gold the undying words of Joao de Barros, on a
new padrdo, where the sphere and the castles of the coat of arms of
Portugal may commemorate, in our times, in the Island of Ta-Mang,
the arrival of the first Portuguese who landed on China’s shore. ’
The Portuguese have not forgotten. A suitable statue has been
designed and executed by Mr. Euclides Yaz, one of Portugal s leading
sculptors, and it will be set up at Macao to recall an epoch-making
event in human relations. Standing before this statue the visitor
will be able to recall an accomplishment which will always be asso-
ciated with the name of Jorge Alvares, a man who certainly made
no claims to glory but who nevertheless created a new chapter in
history when he opened China to the Western world. (69)
All through history the poets have commemorated deeds such
as that of our doughty Portuguese pioneer, for he it was who opened
the door to continuous contact between China, a China that con-
sidered itself to be something superior, something unique, and that
other world which China ignored.
Few accomplishments had greater consequences than that first,
quiet contact between this man from the West and the Chinese
merchants and officials in China’s Isle of Trade. But its significance
was lost on the people of China who little understood that this man
was the harbinger of a stirring Western world, where active minds
would bring about great changes in the material, social, and political
aspects of the motives and conditions of mankind.
(69) Another Jorge Alvares in China is mentioned as a contemporary of our hero.
Christovao Vieira, a prisoner in Canton in 1524, writing to his friends at Malacca
mentioned him. He was a member of the company of Tome Fires, the Portuguese
envoy, and was imprisoned at Canton. He was killed by the scrivener of the prison
at Canton who, being drunk one day, had Alvares lashed so severely that he died
of his injuries after lingering for six days. It is not impossible of course that
Christovao Vieira had heard, in his prison, an account of Jorge Alvares’ death which
was different from that recorded by Joao de Barros, and that he was referring to
one and the same person.


It was inevitable that the Westerners should spread throughout
the world, but it was left to the initiative of the Portuguese to lead the
way. From among his countrymen, it was Jorge Alvares’s privilege
to be the first to find China and the Chinese, and for this his name
is honoured among his own countrymen as one to be remembered
among all those Portuguese who performed such memorable deeds in
Portugal’s golden age. (70)
(70) "Vet another Jorge Alvares is mentioned in the early Portuguese records.
He lived one generation later and is notable as being the merchant who met St.
hrancis Xavier at Malacca in 1547. He gave the holy priest a long description of
Japan which he wrote for him, offering to take the great missionary to Japan.
This he did in his ship in 1549. This Jorge Alvares remained closely attached to
St. Francis Xavier, for not only did he convey him to Japan, he carried him in
1552, in his ship the Santa Cruz, to Shang Chuan, off the South China coast.
M hen the saint died there he helped to bury him, and subsequently he assisted in
removing St. Francis’ remains from Shang Chuan to Malacca in 1553.


THE ISLE OF TRADE
“In every great discoverer there is a dual passion the
passion to see, the passion to report; and in the greatest this
duality is fused into one a passion to see and to report
truly. But not only for this purest of motives do men travel.
They wander by sea and by land; they feel the enchantment of
strange shies, lit at midnight; they draw near an unknown
coast with wonder ever renewed; they find fair prospect in
freezing cold or burning heat; they endure exile and the
rigours of privation, for curiosity or for pay. for the prospect
of gold, to find a trade or extend a religion, for conquest or for
settlement, as enthusiasts or in the plain course of profess-
ional duty .”
DR. J. C. BEAGLEHOLE.
K two points of interest linked with the voyage of
I J° r 8 e Alvares to China. One, that he was unques-
tionably the first Portuguese to be despatched ofh-
fefe!B9§gi cially to carry out this enterprise and, two, the iden-
tification of the “Island of Trade’’ the island of
Tamao, which Jorge Alvares visited, where he erected the king’s
mark or padrdo, where he buried his son in 1513, and where he, in his
turn, was laid to rest eight years later in the year 1521.
The memory of Jorge Alvares’ feat was forgotten, however, for
nearly four centuries, and for many years the credit for his exploit was
given to another. His name lapsed into obscurity, hidden in an old
worm-eaten document and in a little-read old chronicle, to be brought
to light by a few conscientious historians in recent years, as has been
stated above.
In great part the fault for this state of affairs can be laid at the
door of one Andrew Ljungstedt, a Swedish merchant, who enjoying
the hospitality of Macao set himself the task, in 1832, of writing a
history of Macao. Ljungstedt’s book appeared at Boston in 1836,
its publication sponsored by a number of American friends, and as the


book bad a fairly large issue it was given a very wide circulation. (T 1)
The book contains a great deal of interesting matter, and it was the
first book to give a comprehensive history of Macao up to the date of
its publication. In fact for a very long time it was the only history
of Macao in English or, for that matter, even in Portuguese, for this
subject was sadly neglected, although unpublished manuscripts
existed.
Based on material obtained in Macao, part of which was gather-
ed and compiled in manuscript at Macao by Bishop Saraiva, as
Ljungstedt himself admits, the book filled an important gap, for the
history of Macao was practically unknown up to then. Though full
of mistakes and misrepresentations as well as deliberate distortions
of fact, Ljungstedt’s book has, unfortunately, been accepted as auth-
oritative by almost every writer who has referred to the subject for
well over a century.
•/
For many years hardly any historians attempted to verify
Ljungstedt’s sources, and his mistakes and deliberate falsehoods have
been perpetuated, therefore, as writer after writer, drawing on him
as an authority, has passed on the prevarications which Ljungstedt
initiated.
*
* *
Jorge Alvares arrived in China, 1513, the first Westerner to
reach this country by sea, an honour of no little importance. Yet
Ljungstedt gave the honour to the second pioneer, Bafael Peresfcrello,
who as we have seen did not arrive in China until 1515 at the very
earliest, denying to Alvares, therefore, the glory that would be his
just due.
Ljungstedt states: “From Malacca, with permission of George
d’Albuquerque, captain of the place, Rafael Perestello took (1516)
his passage on board a Junk to China; of that country he brought
back some scanty information, but made an immense profit on his
adventure.” (72)
(71) Andrew Ljungstedt, An Historical Sketch of the Portuguese Settlements in
China, Boston, 1836. This edition was preceded by two shorter ones published at
Macao in 1832 and 1834 respectively.
(72) op. cit., p. 1. Every line of the quotation from Ljungstedt contains
errors of fact, as shown above.


In his bibliography, Ljungstedt claims to have consulted, among
several authoritative sources, the excellent Decadas de Asia by
Joao de Barros. It is obvious that he could not have done so with
any degree of care for Joao de Barros states categorically, as has
been pointed out, that “foi elle mesmo Jorge Alvares alii puzera hum
ano ante que Rafael Perestrello fosse aquelas partes; no qual ano que
ali esteve tinha enterrado hum seu filho que Ihe faleceo. . . ,” (,3) as
mentioned above.
Jorge Alvares’ voyage to China took place in 1513, and he re-
turned to Malacca in 1514. Rafael Perestrello was at that time (in
1514) still far away in India and had not yet reached Malacca. In
fact Bartholomeu Perestrello and his brother Rafael Perestrello ( ' 4)
did not land at Malacca until somewhat after Jorge de Albuquerque,
the new governor, did. And Jorge de Albuquerque did not reach
Malacca until the 6th of July, 1514, to be followed by the Peres-
trello brothers in a later ship.
Bartholomeu had secured the appointment as Factor of Malacca
and Rafael had been given the privilege of a voyage to China. From
other evidence we gather furthermore that Rafael Perestrello could
not have sailed for China in 1514, as he was still in Malaya in
January or February, 1515, when he and his brother were in-
volved in the death of the shah bandar of Malacca. (7o) Bartholo-
meu died not long after this affair and it was not until some time
later that Rafael Perestrello left for China. Allowing for the mon-
soons, it can be seen that Rafael Perestrello could not have sailed
from Malacca for China until May, 1515, at the very earliest, that is
almost two years after Jorge Alvares did, (76) as we have observed
previously.
(73) Joao de Barros, Decadas da Asia, Decada 111, Livro VI, Parte 2, p. 20.
See pp. 54 supra: “It was the same Jorge Alvares who placed a padrdo there one
year before Rafael Perestrello went to those parts ; in which year when he was there
he buried his son who died on that occasion.”
(74) For some particulars of the Perestrello family see Amat. di S. Filippo,
Biografia del Diaggiatori Italiani, p. 36. Donald Ferguson points out that Rafael
and Bartholomeu Perestrello were connections by marriage (perhaps brothers-in-law)
of Columbus.
(75) The Portuguese historians give a detailed account of this incident.
(76) The voyage was carried out in a junk belonging to a native merchant at
Malacca, one Pulate. A number of Portuguese accompanied Perestrello.


By accepting Ljungstedt without any attempt at verification of
his sources, foreign historians of China’s relations with \V estern
peoples have repeated this error continuously. Most o( the “authori-
ties 5 ' have fallen into the same blunder. (~)
At the turn of the century, C. A. Montalto de Jesus (in 1902)
and Donald Ferguson (in 1901) working independently and studying
the best European, i. e., Portuguese, sources clarified a number of
points. Some of their conclusions rectified Ljungstedt’s mistake
regarding the name of the first Portuguese to visit China, (78) but
except for a handful of scholars, these studies were practically
ignored by writers who should have known better. We find
Ljungstedt’s mistake repeated not only by British and American
writers but even by Portuguese historians.
It has been only in very recent years that writers of the stature
of Henri Cordier, Prof. C. R. Boxer, Prof. Paul Pelliot, and Dr.
Armando Cortesao, by paying conscientious attention to the subject
have served to influence the more careful. Thus it is that we find
that Jorge Alvares’ name is now, at long last, gradually coming into
its own, and recognized as the pioneer Portuguese to visit China, in
the year 1513.
Dr, Chang T’ien-tse, the author of Sino-Portuguese Trade from
1514-1644, Leiden, 1934, has found a number of Chinese references
which corroborate the Portuguese sources regarding the arrival of
Jorge Alvares in China. The old Chinese reports, so Dr. Chang
states, bear out the studies made in recent years regarding the
(77) e. g., Sir J. F. Davis, The Chinese, 1836 ; S. Wells Williams, The Middle
Kingdom, 1848; W. F. Mayers, N. B. Dennys &C. King, The Treaty Ports of China
& Japan, 1867, most of which have appeared in several editions, and which have
been, in turn, quoted by many others. Among these should be mentioned H, B.
Morse whose International Relations of the Chinese Empire, in 3 volumes, has often
been considered to be the most authoritative work on the subject. His references
to the early Portuguese in China are nothing more than a rehash of Ljungstedt’s
ideas.
(78) C. A. Montalto do Jesus, Historic Macao, Hongkong, 1902 and Donald
Ferguson, Letters from Portuguese Captives in Canton, Bombay, 1902 (reprinted
from the Indian Antiquary).


circumstances linked with this pioneer's arrival at the Pearl River
estuary. They prove that a Portuguese was at Tun Men, at the
time when Perestrello was still far away in India, and go to disprove
what Ljungstedt wrote well over a century ago at Macao.
It may be some time before Dr. Chang will be able to publish
the results of his findings, but it is interesting to know that in the
records of the Ming dynasty there is material to be found of the na-
ture mentioned. Historians interested in this phase of Western rela-
tions with the Far East will certainly look forward to the publication
of Dr. Chang’s researches.
❖ *
In the same way little attention seems to have been paid to an
identification of the place where the Portuguese pioneers landed.
The name appeared in the Portuguese chronicles as the IlJia onde se
fez mercadoria, Ilha de Mercadoria, Ilka de Veniaga or Ilka de Ninia-
ya, the Malay denomination for “trade"’ (7!,) or by an attempt to give
a Portuguese rendering of a Chinese word with the name of Tamdo,
or its variants of Tamam or Tamang.
By another curious circumstance, Ljungstedt was also one of
the first to attempt to localize Tamdo , and through another blunder
made by him, historians for over a hundred years have perpetuated
his mistake. In this way, Ljungstedt who is responsible for so many
errors regarding the history of the Portuguese in China, led the way
for others to follow. In the first place he disregarded the original
Portuguese accentuation in Tamdo, and by adopting the spelling
Tamdo tried to identify some place on the South China coast with a
sound similar to this.
To Ljungstedt “Tamao was a port on the island designated by
the name of San-chuem, San-chuen-shan and San-shan.” In a foot-
(79) From the Malay hernyaga, to trade or traffic. Adopted into the Portu-
guese vocabulary it was used quite frequently by the Portuguese in Asia during
the XVlth century and even later. Dalgado points out that the island of Tamang
or Tamao, which was the depot for Chinese trade, was called by the Portuguese, in
imitation of the Malays, the Ilha de Veniaga Mons. Sebastiao Dalgado, Glossdrio
Luso-Asidtico, Coimbra, 1919, Vol. 11, p. 412.


note he goes on state that it “is promiscuously used to indicate the
harbor or the whole island San-shan.” Elsewhere Ljungstedt repeats
that “Tamao on the northwest coast of San-shan, was a renowned
harbor, to which foreign and Chinese merchants resorted for the sake
of disposing of their respective investments. John de Barros and
other historians designate it often by the Malay word Beneaga or
Veneaga, which signifies a mart or place for mercantile business.” (80)
Ljungstedt’s mistake was repeated by nearly every other writer
after him, including almost every Portuguese writer on the subject,
not excepting the usually careful Montalto de Jesus. The latter
states, “The trade resort was then not far away from Macao, at the
port of Tamou (Namo Harbour) in Hau Chuen Island, adjacent
to Chang Chuen, or San-chuan, commonly known as St. John’s
Island.” (81 >
It came in part from a misplaced accent, when Ljungstedt used
mao instead of mao. This influenced several generations of writers
to look in the wrong place for an island on the China coast of con-
siderable historical interest.
Let us see, first of all, what the Chinese histories have to state,
and then refer to the Portuguese chroniclers. The early Portuguese
historians of the XVlth century, writing quite independently of any
Chinese sources, make statements that tally with the latter and
point to a logical localization of the place.
(80) A. Ljungstedt, op. cit., pp. 2 and 7. It will be noticed that Ljungstedt
used various pronunciations. The official name of this island would be Shang-
Oh’uan (JiJl|) in Mandarin. The Cantonese would be Sheung Chuen.
(81) C. A. Montalto de Jesus, Historic Macao, Hongkong, 1902, pp. 2-3’
Among other writers who are considered to be authorities and who helped to per-
petuate the mistake are S. Wells Williams, The Middle Kingdom , F. C. Danvers,
The Portuguese in India, A, F. Marques Pereira, and others. See J. M. Braga, The
Western Pioneers and their Discovery of Macao, Macao, 1949, where some of the
material used in the present study has already been discussed.
In part the error can be attributed to the fact that in later years the Port-
uguese and Chinese traders did trade surreptitiously at Shang Ch’uan. But there
is a big difference between an official trade centre and one that is unauthorized.


The Chinese records, to begin with, refer to the arrival of the
Fo-lang-chi (82) in the Tung-Kwan District in the
reign of Emperor Cheng-te (he reigned from 1506 to 1521), when
“a stone monument was erected by them.” (83; Further on in the
same records, the Tung Kwan Hsien-chih we find a
statement to the effect that “the port of T’un-Men-Kong is
the important port of the district of Tung-Kwan and in the
thirty-third year of Chen-Hua a castle was built there and the port
was for a long time greatly frequented by many foreign vessels.”
Chang T’ien-tse quotes Chou Ch’u-fei {C. A. D. 1178) to the
effect that “Palembang is an important thoroughfare on the sea-
routes by which the foreigners come [to China] and return. The
ships leave Palembang, sail due north, after having passed the Upper
and Lower Chu Islands, and sailing across the Sea of Kiaochih [Gulf
of Tonkin] they come within the confines of China. Those wishing
to make Kwang-Chow [Canton] enter the port of T’un Men.” (84)
In the Tien Hsia Ch’un Kuo Li Pin Shu there
is a quotation from a Memorial sent to the Throne, dated the eighth
year of the Emperor Chia Ching (•!?%). This Memorial was written
by Lin Fu (#-'£), Governor of Kwangtung and Kwangsi and concur-
rently Principal Imperial Historiographer. Though prepared some
(82) Fo-Lang-Chi pronounced Fat-Long-Ki in Cantonese, that is
the Chinese interpretation of the word Farangi or Firingi (Persian) or Al-Faranj,
Firanji (Arabic). A designation in a corrupted form to mean a Frank, possibly
linked with the Crusades, and meaning, among the Moslems, a European Christian,
just as the Iberians called all Mohammedans Moors. We find the word perpetuated
in a variety of other spellings such as Firinghee, Frangue, Fringe, etc. Yule calls our
attention to a Chinese notice of a present from the Pope to the Great Khan (about
A D. 1350) called “horses of the Kingdom of Fulang.” When the Portuguese
reached India they were called Francos or Frangues, and word must have found its
way to China that a race of Franks had put in an appearance in Asia. Vide Yule
and Burnell, Hobson-Jobson, London, 1903 and Mons. Sebastiao Dalgado, Glossdrio
Luso-Asidtico, Coimbra, 1919,
(83) See Chen Wen-fu, Wang Rung I-ni-ts'u Chi fc),
or Memorial Inscription for the 1-ai Shrine of Wang Rung, quoted in the Tung-
Rwan Hsien-Chih chapter XXXI, pp, lOb-lla.
(84) Chang T’ien-tse, Sino-Portuguese Trade from 1514 to 1644, Leiden, 1934,
p. 21.


years after the event to which it alludes, this Memorial makes a
categorical statement to the effect that
“In the twelfth year of Emperor Cheng Te (J£&) in the
Ming Dynasty, the foreigners from the Western Seas, called Fo-
lang-chi said that they intended to pay tribute and
went suddenly to Tung-Kwan Hsien and at that time
Mu Ting-chuh Commissioner of Civil Administration
permitted them to pay tribute and then sent a memo-
rial to the Throne.”
With regard to the importance of T un-Men as a port, there
are several other Chinese references but it will be sufficient to men-
tion two more. The Ling Wai Tai Ta states, “Foreigners
intending to reach Kwangtung come by way of Tu’n-Men”, while
Scenic Spots in Kwangtung states that “Nan Tou City (fof
Tung-Kwan Hsien used to be known as T’un Men in olden
times.’' Nan Tou was the seat of office of the Pei-wo Tu-chiu-hui
(ff ), Commander of the Coastal Forces, whose chief function
at that period was to guard the coast against incursions by Japanese
pirates, very active in those days. (85)
One finds no mention of the island of Shang Ch’uan as being the
port of the approaches to Canton. T’un Men is given as the leading
port of the district of Tung Kwan <88) —pronounced Tung Koon, in
Cantonese and this makes sense for this district is on east
bank of the Canton River, at the very entrance to Fu Men
now known to Westerners as the Bocca Tigris the gateway > the
(85) Cf. Ku T‘ing-lin, T’ien-hsia Ch’un-Ku, etc., Ch. CXX, p. 4b., quoted by
Chang Ting-tse Sino-Portuguese Trade, p. 41. See also tbe chapter on “Foreig-
ners” in Shue Wih Chau Chi Luk Ji) s■££).
(86) At the time of the Ming Dynasty. It was subsequently divided into two
districts: Tung-Kwan (%.£) and Sin An £) the latter comprising the secoiou
in which the British Colony of Hongkong came to be established. The northern
part of this area was also given the name of Pao An (s£■) but among the Chi-
nese of south China the district of Pao An is known to the present day as Tang
Kivan, or Tung Koon as they would pronounce it.


river mouth, (87) It commands the very approaches of the channel
to Canton.
Then, again, it is most unlikely that the Tung Kwan records,
or gazetteer, the Twig-Kwan Hsien-Chih would stress
so emphatically the arrival of foreigners in Tung Kwan if these
men arrived in another district. One searches in vain, furthermore,
for any reference to this event in the records of the Sun Hui district,
for the island of Shang Ch’uan, which Ljungstedt attempted to iden-
tify as we have seen, as “the island of Tamao”, is in the District of
Sun-hui It is on the route to Canton, truly enough, off the
coast of south China, but its distance from Canton is so great that
it could not possibly have been used as an important port at any
time in history.
The Chinese histories have listed the ports on the Kwangtung
coast where trade was permitted during the Ming Dynasty, and in
the chapter on “Foreigners” in the Tien-llsia Cliun Kuo Li Pin Shu
Volume CXX, one finds that these places were:
Hsing-ning
Kwang-hai {s>%) (89)
Wang-tung {%.'s), or Lak-ch’ieng-chee-t’an (90)
Hsiang Shan
(87) The Canton River, sometimes known as the Chu Kong (j^Lyt)—Pearl
River. The Chinese name of Pearl River comes from a mythological “pearl”
a little island in the river opposite the city of Canton ; the island has now disappear-
ed, being joined to the city by recent reclamations. This so-called river consists
of only a small stretch of river from Canton to the sea. Into it flow the North Ri-
ver ), the West River ® yx), and the East River Nevertheless, through
a misunderstanding of the terms, one notices that many Portuguese writers refer
to it as the Rio das Perolas (possibly suggesting that pearls are produced in it).
(88) Pronounced Sunning in Cantonese, an important town in the prefecture
of T’ai Shan, which is intersected by parts of the West River delta.
(89) Kwong Hoi, in Cantonese, a coastal town which has always been promi-
nent in foreign trade. Its historical importance is linked with the arrangement
made by Leonel de Sousa, the Portuguese captain-major, who settled with the Chi-
nese officials of this town, in the year 1553, the terms and conditions whereby
Portuguese merchants would be permitted to resume trading in South China after
the interdiction imposed in 1522. See J. M. Braga, 0 Primeiro Acordo Luso-Chines,
Macau, 1939, p. 11.
(90) Not identified.
(91) The city of Shekki is also known as the city of Hsiang Shan, as it is the
capital of this prefecture. It is some fifty miles north of Macao.


Lam Pai (>&&) (92)
Hau Ching (93>
Shili Tze Men (94)
T’un Men (fcfl) (95)
Hu Tau Men (MV) < 96)
but Shang Ch’uan which Ljungstedt mentions is not found among
these. Had Ljungstedt, with the facilities available to him in China
at the time, consulted Chinese scholars and not made wild guesses
he could have avoided this and possibly other mistakes. In fact, the
Chinese port for Canton continued to be the anchorage between Nan
T’ou and Lin Tin Island, and during the lifetime of Ljungstedt the
foreign opium hulks anchored there. This should have caused the
Swedish writer to look for a port in Tung Kwan and not in a distant
district such as that of Sun Hui.
*
He
Fortunately for the purposes of our history the Portuguese chro-
niclers give very careful particulars of the place where the Portuguese
pioneers traded in China. It is very likely that Fernao de Castan-
heda (1500-1559) and Damiao de Goes (1502-1574) obtained this
information from documents in Portugal, the originals of which no
longer survive. Gaspar Correa (C. 1495-G. 1565) who went as a
youth to India and continued in Government service, generally in
the Viceregal entourage until his death in India, could have consult-
ed documents and could have questioned the Portuguese who actual-
ly visited China, and his evidence is therefore particularly important.
(92) Lam Pai would be Long Pak in Cantonese, a town on the island where
the Portuguese traded prior to moving to Macao. To the island the Portuguese in
those days gave the name of Lam Pak Kao a pronunciation which is neither Man-
darin nor Cantonese. It lies some twenty miles west of Macao.
(93) Ho Kiang in Cantonese, that is, the Macao of to-day.
(94) The little anchorage just south of Macao lying between Macao, Taipa,
Siu Wong Kam, and Lappa, the two currents intersecting each other like the Chi-
nese character (-p), hence Sup Chee Moon in Cantonese.
(95) Tuen Moon, in Cantonese, where the Portuguese from Malacca first trad-
ed in South China waters, and better known in Portuguese records as Tamdo.
(96) There are two places bearing a name similar to this, one some ten miles
south-west of Macao and the other at the island called in Cantonese Tung Lung
Shan, also Lamtong Island, commanding the eastern entrance to Hong Kong Habour.


Upper Terrace of the ‘A-Ma’ Temple
at Han Ch’ing (Macao)


Engraving by R. Brandard.
Festival of the Dragon Boat
(Drawn by Thomas Allom)


Thus, Castanheda referring to the port where the Portuguese
traders to China carried on business states;
assi forao ate chegare a ilha da veniaga onde surgi-
rao, & esta ilha esta tres legoas da costa, & os Chis Ihe cha-
mao Tamao, & nos outros da veniaga : porq naquelas partes cha-
inao ao trato da mercadoria veniaga : & nesta ilha se faz ho trato
da mercadoria dos mercadores estrageiros q vao tratar a C hina
quo se aponsentao cm hua grade q hi ha, & dali na pode
ir nenhu a algu dos lugares da costa sem licega do conselho de
Cantao hua cidade q esta dali dezoyto legoa & ainda quado vao
nao entao dentro & pousam nos arrabaldes & ali faze seus tratos.
E pera se isto assi fazer & armar as frotas q andao por aqla
paraje, reside ho Pio, q he como almirante de toda aqla costa e
hua vila chamada Nanto q esta tres legoas da veniaga, & dali faz
saber ao coselho de Catao os jugos q ve & dode sam & o q que-
re, & q fazeda traze: ho conselho determ ina o qseha de fazer,
& se he cousa noua escreue ho logo a el rey pera q seja auisado
do q passa. ...” (97)
and the Portuguese in the episode described in Castanheda’s book
“partindo da ilha da veniaga foy surgir no porto de Nato que
esta na entrada de hu rio de hua legoa de largo, & por ele acima
esta a cidade de Cantao obra de vinte cinco legoas de Nanto.” (o *'
In English these passages describing the place where the Port
uguese anchored tell us that
“ ... and thus they proceeded until they reached the Isle of
Veniaga where they anchored; this island lies three leagues from
the coast, and the Chinese call it Tamao, m while we others
call it the Isle of Veniaga. In those parts trading in merchan-
dise is called veniaga. (loo> In this island trading in merchandise
is carried on by foreign traders who go to trade with the Chi-
nese who live in a large town there. From that place none may
(97) FernSo Lopea de Caafcanheda, il Hisl6ria do Descobrimcnto & Conquisla da
India qAos Portuguese* Lisboa. 1551-1561, Livro IV, cap. XXVIII.
(98) ibid.
(99) Note the spelling Tamdo, not Tamdo aa Ljungstedt has it.
(100) See Note 79 supra.


proceed to any of the places near the coast without the permis-
sion of the Council of Canton, a city that is eighteen leagues
away. And even when going there, ships do not enter but stay
in the offing and there carry on trade. To control this and to
arm the fleets that sail about in those parts, the Pi-o , (101) some-
thing like the admiral of all that coast, lives in a town called
Nanto, which is three leagues from the Isle of Trade, From that
town he advises the Council of Canton with regard to the junks
that come, whence they come, what they want, and what mer-
chandise they carry. The Council determines that which has
to be done, and if it should be anything new, writes concerning
it to the King so that he may be advised of that which goes
on ... ”
and the Portuguese in the episode described in Castanheda’s book:
‘ ‘Left the Isle of Trade and came to anchor in the port of
Nanto which is at the mouth of a river a league in width, and
higher up the river is Canton about twenty-five leagues from
Nanto.”
The name of the island of Tamdo appears frequently in the
pages of the Portuguese chronicles, written by persons who were liv-
ing at the time when the events they described took place and who
could therefore have obtained information from persons who actually
took part in the occurrences related or read official accounts.. and
reports concerning the places and persons mentioned.
Barros and Castanheda have both been cited, Castanheda
furnishing very important clues.
Damiao de Goes (1502-1574) referring to the Embassy conduct-
ed by Fernao Peres d’Andrade to China in 1517 mentions Tamdo in
the following terms:
“. . . chegou a XV Dagosto, do mesmo Anno, a ilha de ta-
manlabua, que sta situada tres legoas da terra firme, onde per
ordenan§a delßei ancoram todalas naos estrangeiras, que vam a
(101) See Note 85 supra. The Portuguese chronicles contain many references
to this official, whom Correa calls “o ahnirante ou Capitdo-mor do mar ” the Ad-
miral or Commodore of the Sea and in accounts of several episodes that occurred
in the waters of the Canton River mention is frequently made of him.


prouinQia de Cantam, que he hua das do Regno da China, onde
antes de chegarem acharam hua armada delßei que andaua em
guard a das naos que vem a seus portos por respeito dos cosai-
ros, de que naquellas prouingias ha muitos: Ho capitam desta
armada, spantado de ver has nossas naos, & modo de que vi-
nham, cuidando que era algum novo genero de cosairos encami-
nhou pera elles com toda sua frota a ponto de guerra, mas Fernam
perez sem dar sinal de se querer defender, nem offender foi seu ca-
minho direito ancorar na ilha de Tamam, aho qual ho capitam da
frota delßei que tambem veo surgir no mesmo porto, mandou
perguntar de que nagam era, & que buscaua, Fernam perez Ihe
respondeo ho que a9erca disso copria, pedindolhe que Ihe desse
pilotos pera ir a 9idade de Cantam despachar hum embaixador
que elßei de Portugal seu senhor mandaua a elßei da China, ho
capita Ihe mandou dizer que logo auisaria ho gouernador de
Nanto, hua villa junto da barra do rio q vem de Catam pera
que fezesse saber ahos gouernadores da 9idade, de sua vinda, ho
qual gouernador (a que chamam piu) ho madou visitar aho ou-
tro dia, fazedo-lhe saber que ja tinha despachado ho mesageiro
. . . de Nanto, que he obra de quinze legoas de Cantam ... Fer-
nam perez mandou apregoar em Tama, & em Cantam que se
hos Portugueses deuiam algua cousa ahos da terra, que Iho
fezessem saber pera mandar pagar tudo, do que todos forom
mui contentes, louuando ho bom modo que teuera em todalas
cousas que nego9eara ho tempo que alii steue, ho que feito, com
deixar hos senhores, & gouernadores de Cantam, & Tamam, &
de toda aquella comarqua muito contetes, & satisfeitos de sua
amizade, & conuersa9am . . .” (102)
which translated would read:
“. . . They arrived on the 15th August of the same year at
the Island of Tamam-labua, (103) which is situated three leagues
from the mainland, and where by the King’s laws anchor all
(102) Damiao de Goes, Cronica do Felicissimo Rei D. Manuel, Lisboa, 1567.
Parte IV, Cap. XXIII, ff. 29-30.
(103) No reason seems to be available to explain why Damiao de Goes used
this form instead of the conventional Tamam or Tamdo.


foreign ships proceeding to the Province of Cantam (104) one of
the provinces of the Empire of China. Before reaching the
place they met a fleet of the King on guard over the vessels
that come to the Chinese ports, because of the pirates, of whom
there are many in those provinces. (105) The captain of the fleet
was surprised to see our ships and the manner of their coming,
and thinking that they were some new kind of corsairs approa-
ched them with the whole of his fleet ready to give battle. But
Fernam Perez de Andrade without giving any sign of putting up
any defence or of offence went straight to the anchorage of the
island of Tamam. Upon which the captain of the King’s fleet
who also cast anchor in the same port caused them to be asked
what was their nationality and what they wanted. Fernam
Perez replied that which was necessary and asked him to-
furnish pilots to proceed to the city of Cantam, to despatch
an ambassador (,08) sent from the King of Portugal, his master,
to the King of China. The captain told him that he would in-
form the governor of Nanto a town near the bar of the river
that flows down from Canton, to inform the governors of that
city that he had arrived. This governor (who is called the
Pi-u) visited the Portuguese on another day and advised that a
messenger had been sent . . . Fernam Perez ordered the anno-
uncement in Tamam, and in Cantam, that if any Portuguese
owed anything to the people of that country, that he be advised
so that payment might be met of every claim. This very great-
ly pleased all those people, who praised the good manner in all
things during his stay there, leaving the gentlemen and gover-
nors of Cantam, and Tamara, and all the people of that country
very well pleased and satisfied with his friendliness and conver-
sation . . .
(104) It is interesting to notice that reference is made to the Province of Can-
lam, the. Portuguese form of spelling for Kwangtung (the province) which they
came to use for the city, and which they spelt Cantdo, through which came the
English Canton.
(105) This reference to the pirates in Chinese waters is interesting, and is
based on Portuguese reports, such for instance as that written at the time by Tome
Pires.
(I0G) This was Tome Pires, but Damiao de Goes curiously enough does not
mention hig name.


So far we have dealt with the evidence gathered by the his-
torians in Portugal from written reports or verbal accounts received
there. Let us now turn to the Lendas da India of Gaspar Correa (c.
1495-C.1565) who lived in India, and then to the most important of all
the accounts, the Suma Oriental of Tome Pires. Pires wrote his great
book in Malacca in 1514 or so, based on reports from the officials,
and Filipinos who visited Malacca. Very probably he talked with
Jorge Alvares, too, just after the latter returned from China.
There are also two letters written respectively by Christovao
Vieira and Vasco Calvo who were actually in Canton about the years
1522-1525, which corroborate a great deal of the other reports.
Both the books mentioned, the Lendas da India and the Suma
Oriental, are works of great importance written by men who were
trained observers. (107)
Gaspar Correa mentions that the Portuguese ships went
“to the island of Veniaga which lies eighteen leagues from the
city of Canton. All the traders sell and buy at this island, and
beyond this place no one may pass without the permission of
the governors of the city.. .. And this island of Veniaga is
three leagues from another island, (10S) in which the Admiral or
Captain-major of the sea is installed.” (10<J)
From the accounts of Castanheda, Goes, and Correa, therefore,
we learn that Tamdo was (i) three leagues from the mainland, (ii) three
leagues from Nan-tou, (iii) from eighteen to twenty-five leagues from
Canton.
In the letters written by Christovao Vieira and Vasco Cal-
vo from their prison in Canton, <110) we find several references to
(107) Correa’s work was not published until the middle of the XlXth century
while that of Tome Pircs was lost and was only published, in English, in 1944 when
Dr. Armando Cortesao found a copy in Paris not long before. Similarly the letters
of Vieira and Calvo were only published when Donald Fergurson translated and
edited them very ably in 1902.
(108) Possibly Ta-shan Island, close to Nan Tou.
(109) Lendas da India. Vol. 11, Chapter XIII, p. 524.
(110) These letters furnished excellent material for that exhaustive study of
the early contacts between the Portuguese and the Chinese, which Donald Ferguson
prepared and published at Bombay in 1901-1902.


this island. They refer to the arrival of Fernao Peres de Andrade
(in 1517) and furnish interesting particulars. In these letters we
can see references repeatedly to the place called indiscriminately
Ilha onde se fez mercadoria (Island were trade was carried on), Ilha
de Mercadoria (Isle of Trade), Ilha de Veniaga (Isle of Trade using
the Malayan term), Ilha de Niniaga (Isle of Trade a variant of
the spelling for the Malayan term). We also read of Nanto and
Canton and of “the river and the coast near Nanto." The Pi-o of
Nanto is also mentioned.
This first-hand information from men who were in China so
soon after the voyage of Jorge Alvares is of great importance, but
in their prison they did not know that their countrymen had
subsequently given the name of Tamdo to the “Isle of Trade.” (lll)
Most of the material set forth above, regarding the locality of
the Island of “Veniaga”, or Tamdo (which was evidently an attempt
by the early Portuguese to reproduce the sound of some Chinese
word), was included in a short article contributed by the present
writer in 1939 to Tien Hsia Monthly, published at Shanghai. Under
the title “The Tamao of the Portuguese Pioneers,” (112) a conclusion
was arrived at:
“Everything points to the locality of Tamdo as being in
the Chu Kiang (the ‘Pearl’ or, Canton River), in the Tung Kwan
District (^J —pronounced Tung Koon, in Cantonese), as it
is evident that the port of Tun-men (or Tuen Moon, depending
on the dialect used in rendering the Chinese character sounds
into Portuguese) could not have been in such a locality as Shang
Ch’uan, the seas in the vicinity of which are notoriously rough.”
*
* *
It is well to remember that the names of the places visited were
not furnished to the Portuguese pioneering sailors in Chinese cha-
racters which would have meant nothing to them anyway but
were pronounced and probably transmitted through an interpreter.
The pronunciation used by the persons with whom they came in
contact might have been that of the Court (the Mandarin) if they
(111) The letters contain some extremely interesting material, outside the
scope of the present survey.
(112) Tien Hsia Monthly, Shanghai, Vol. VII, No. 5, May, 1939, pp. 420-432.


were high officials, or Cantonese , or Fukmiese, or HaJcka, the verna-
cular spoken by the Chinese sea-farers who ventured abroad, or it
might have been Tanka , Hoklo , or some other dialect of the local
seafarers. Then again it might have been the version given by some
Malay interpreter.
The influence of varying sounds spoken by persons using such
different dialects, to which must be added the strange variations in
tones, almost mysterious to the untrained European ear, would not
have made it easier for the ears of Western sailors to grasp and,
much more difficult, to reproduce in suitable Portuguese spelling. It
is well to remember that very few Europeans in those days were
able to write at all.
We can safely suppose that the town of Nanto (mentioned by
Castanheda and Goes) the Nan-tou (mentioned by Pires) is none
other than Nan-t’ou, (&M) which was the principal sea-port in Tung
Kwan District {%.£.s&). Here it was that the Pei-wo (fHf£) of the
region resided. ‘‘The Pei-wo at Nan-t’ou was empowered to examine
all ships that came to visit Canton.” (U 3) He would be the Pio ( Pi-o)
or Pi-u of the Portuguese to whom Castanheda and Goes and other
writers respectively referred.
An island lying three leagues west of Nan-t'ou would be Lin Tin
Island. We would do well to remember that the old city of Nan-t’ou
is at the northern end of the town; the modern town has spread
southwards along the coastal strip.
“Tamao is undoubtedly T’un Mun,” states S. F. Balfour, “but
some difficulty in placing the exact locality is found owing to the
frequent references by Portuguese historians to an island.” (114)
We are inclined to the belief that the Portuguese linked the
name of the anchorage or passage (M) Men with the near-by island
of Lin Tin. “The name Tun Men —or garrisoned entrance —is still
given to the Castle Peak region,” continues Balfour. “The landmark
is in fact Castle Peak itself. Mount T’un Mun was called [in A. D.
969] Shing Shan or ‘sacred hill’. Its modern name of Ts’ing Shan or
Green Hill dates from much later. Its Buddhist name is Pu T’u
Shan.” < lls >
(113) Chang T’ien-tse, Sino-Portuguese Trade, p. 41, quoting Ku T’ing-lin,
Tien-Hsia Chun Kuo Li-ping Shu, Ch. CXX, p. 4b.
(114) S. F. Balfour, Hongkong Before the British, in Tien Hsia Monthly, Jan.-
May, 1941, p. 39 of the reprint.
(115) ibid., pp. 23, 26.


The modern name of Castle Peak has been given by the British,
possibly supplied by some Chinese. To the present day one of the
popular Chinese names for it is Tuen Moon Shan, in Cantonese,
literally “Garrison Entrance Hill”, from an old Chinese castle. (m) The
bay lying to the east of this hill is still known as Tuen Moon, in Can-
tonese. Some eight or nine miles (hence about 3 leagues) to the
east is Lintin Island.
Mr. Balfour adds: “Where was the island which the Portuguese
called Ilha de Veniaga or ‘island of trade’ and which Avas the centre
of the foreign trading community ? It has been very plausibly
argued by J. M. Braga in Tien Hsia, of May 1939, that it was at
Ling Ting—-the Solitary Island—in the estuary, but there is no
local tradition or Chinese text confirming it.” <n7)
Tun Men (or Tuen Moon in Cantonese) would seem to be the
name given to the entire anchorage, and the Portuguese could very
easily have applied the name of the anchorage to the island off
which they anchored. In that case the names of the various places
mentioned would have been :
Nan Tou (?sj4fi).. the town called Nanto or Nan-tou.
Pei-wo (fff#), the naval commander, called Pio, Pi-o, or Pi-u
by the Portuguese.
Lin Tin Island (&T), also spelt Ling Ting Island , the Isle of
Veniaga, or Tamao, three leagues from
Nan T’ou and about twenty leagues
from Canton.
La Shan Island (Jtik), the station of the naval command, refer-
red to by Caspar Correa as “another
island in which the Admiral is installed.”
In 1944, working in Europe on independent lines, Commander
Albert Kammerer, the distinguished French geographer, contributed
a notable article to Toung Pao, the well known journal on the history,
geography and culture of Far Eastern Asia. Entitled La Deemverte
de la Chine par les Portugais au XVI erne Siecle et la Cartographies des
Portulans, with notes by Prof. Paul Pelliot on the Chinese toponomy,
this work runs to 260 pages and goes rather closely into all the known
European sources to identify the various places visited by the. Port-
uguese pioneers.
(116) About 900 years ago there was an old Chinese fort on the northern
elopes of the hill, but no trace of it can now be found.
(117) op. cit., p. 41.


Chapter II of Kammerer’s study is devoted to a discussion of
Tamao, and is entitled La Premiere He da Yeniaga, Tamdo T'ouen
Men et la Station Navale de Nanto. In this long chapter not only
does the author discuss the historians, he consults a large number of
old Portuguese portulans, from that of Diogo Ribeiro (1529) to that
of Linschoten (159 G). Seventeen maps and planispheres are referred
to and he comes to the conclusion that “L-ile da Yeniaga est Lin-
tin.” a,B) The scale of the maps studied by Kammerer did not allow
him to pinprick the locality with every degree of certainty but was
sufficient to enable him to determine that the Isle of Trade was in
the vicinity of Canton and in close proximity to Nanto in Tung Kwan
District. This is very far distant, therefore, from Shang Ch’uan (the
San-chuen or San-shun of Ljungstedt) in the District of Sun Hui,
which is at least 40 leagues from Canton by the only official route,
* *
We come finally to Tome Pires, the factor of Malacca, (119) whose
long lost Suma Oriental , first written about 1 514, was recovered for
(118) Op. cit, pp. 62-70.
(119) Dr. Cortesao has summarized all the available material on the life and
activities of Tome Fires, in the introduction to his The Suma Oriental of Tome Fi-
res, London, 1944, in 2 vols. Cortesao estimates that Fires was about forty-three
years old when he went to India, in 1511, having held the appointment of ajK»the-
cary to the Frince for a number of years. He spent some months in India and
was despatched to Malacca, to take charge of the factory, and besides the work of
his office he took the greatest pains to find out as much as he could about the
products of south-east Asia and as many particulars as possible regarding the
countries of Asia. All this information was set down in the Suma Oriental which
he wrote in a remarkably short space of time. When an able officer was needed as
an envoy to be sent to China, Fires was chosen “in spite of Fires being a man of
the people, as the chroniclers do not forget to emphasize. . . . and the choice of the
modest but clever, industrious, experienced and well-brought-up Fires for the im-
portant post of ambassador to unknown China seems less extraordinary than it
perhaps appeared to some later chroniclers.” He reached China in the squadron of
Fernao Peres de Andrade, in August 1517, and after the usual delays in the case
of an envoy of a new country he left Canton for Peking in January, 1520. The
Emperor Wu Tsung (Cheng Te) died while Fires was awaiting audience, and pend-
ing the enthronement of his successor Fires was sent back to Canton. There he
was imprisoned with his entourage, and in due course he died in May, 1524, ac-
cording to one of the letters from the Portuguese prisoners incaeerated at the same
time as he was.


historians by Dr. Armando Cortesao when he discovered a complete
copy in the library of the Chamber of Deputies in Paris a few years
ago. (120)
Dr. Cortesao had first of all to decipher the original XVlth
century calligraphy and reduce the text to language which the mo-
dern reader might read, and to it he added an English translation
with scholarly notes. The edition was brought out by the Hakluyt
Society in 2 volumes, in 1944, and from it we learn that Pires report-
ed that
“Aquem De quamtom p a malaq a trimta leguoas estam
huuas Jlhas J unto com a terra firme de namtoo homde estam
os portos Ja Detremjnados De cada .s. pulo turnon E
out°s ...”
and
“Yam hos ditos Juncos De Malaq 3, amcorar a Jlha de
turnom como Ja he dito xx te ou xxx* 3, leguoas De quamtom
estam estas Jlhas Junto com a terra De nantoo huua leguoa
alamar Da terra firme aijj amcora os De malaq a no porto de
tumom ...”
which Dr. Cortesao translates as follows:
“Thirty leagues on this side of Canton, towards Malacca,
there are some islands near the mainland of Nan-t’ou [Namtoo) r
where are the ports already allotted to each nation, viz. , Pulo
Tumon (121) and others. ...”
and
“The said junks from Malacca go and anchor off the island
of Tumon , as has already been said, twenty or thirty leagues
away from Canton. These islands are near the land of Nan-
t’ou, a league to seaward from the Mainland. Those from
Malacca anchor there in the port of Tumon . . . ”
(120) Ramusio published in Italian, at Venice, a summary of parts of Pires’
work, in 1550, but did not seem to know the author’s name. In the form in
which it appeared it did not have much value. In the Biblioteca Nacional at Lis-
bon a manuscript of a portion of the Suma Oriental without the author’s name
forms part of Codex MS. 299 ; it is a XVlth century transcription of Pires’ ori-
ginal and in some respects coincides with parts of the Paris copy. Dr. Cortesao
discusses all these sources.
(121) Pires uses the Malay word pulo, meaning island. It would be good to
note that the Portuguese generally adopted the same practice of using the prefix
pulo. Note that Pires uses the spelling Turnon, which indicates that his informant
did not use the mandarin pronunciation, if it was the island of the T’un Men
anchorage to which he was referring.


This report by Tome Pires written immediately after, or just
before, Jorge Alvares returned to Malacca from China and the earliest
document, therefore, to describe the China coast, should set our minds
at rest in the matter of the identification of Tamdo. Pires uses the
name Turnon , it is true, but this could be the Cantonese T’uen Moon or
some such pronunciation of the characters and the distances
given by him bear out the contention that this “Isle of Trade” was
in the area of the entrance to the Pearl River, while the reference
to the proximity of Nan-t’ou, the city, should be conclusive evidence
of the place.
In this way confirmation is afforded for the various Chinese
references as well as those of the Portuguese historians, and con-
tradicts the wild guesswork of Ljungstedt.
In subsequent years, influenced probably by some dialect or
language, the Portuguese used the version of Tamam, Tamang or
Tamao, or they used the Malay version, the Isle of Veniaga.
Further evidence also comes from Dr. Cortesao who publishes,
together with Pires’ report, 0 Livro de Francisco Rodrigues (l2 ~ ) with
its translation. With Rodrigues’ book, Cortesao publishes the sket-
ches drawn by this cartographer. These were drawn at about the
same time as Pires wrote his Suma Oriental and included the earliest
maps of the region ever drawn by a European based on actual obser-
vation or information gathered from men who were familiar with the
places depicted.
Among these sketches was one of the entrance of the Canton
River showing among other places the anchorage for foreign junks in
Chinese waters. The locality is distinctly land-locked and it is not
difficult to reconcile the determination, from that map, of Lintin Is-
land with that which the early Portuguese called the Isle of Trade.
(122) Cortesao tells us that “so little is known about Francisco Rodrigues that
it is impossible even to attempt a biographical sketch.” His investigations lead
him to state that Rodrigues was one of the pilots “with very good knowledge and
able to make maps”, a qualification that set him above most other Portuguese in
India. The only maps by Rodrigues known to exit are those attached to the Paris
codex in which Cortesao found the Suma Oriental of Pires. From Rodrigues’ own
Book we learn that he took part in the voyage of the discovery of the Spice Islands
and that he visited the Red Sea. He then went to China in 1519, when he met
Pires again. “Many other namesakes of Francisco Rodrigues appear in the chroni-
cles”, adds Cortesao, “but they have nothing in common with the pilot, cartogra-
pher and captain, who left his valuable Book to posterity”.




A SHORT CHRONOLOGY
1498 —Vasco da Gama reached India.
1499 Vasco da Gama arrived at Lisbon and gave
presents of Chinese porcelain, etc. to the
Queen of Portugal.
1500 —Second Portuguese expedition, under Pe-
dro Alvares Cabral, despatched from
Portugal.
Portuguese captain-major was given accom-
modation at Calicut in the chinacota (“the
old fort of the chins.”)
1502 Planisphere by Cantino, in Portugal, con-
tained the earliest correct notion in Eu-
rope of the coastal outline of the Far
East.
1505 King Manoel of Portugal wrote to the King
of Spain, describing Portuguese accom-
plishments in Asia in which “Malchina ’
was mentioned.
Ceylon discovered by the Portuguese.
1508 King Manoel of Portugal sent Diogo Lopes
de Sequeira to “discover” Malacca and to
“ask after the Chins.”
150911th Sept.) —Diogo Lopes de Sequeira reached Malacca
where he had contact with Chinese junks.
He left hurriedly to avoid capture ; some
Portuguese, however, were detained as
prisoners in Malacca.
] 509 Ruy d’Araujo wrote from his prison at Ma-
lacca to Afonso de Albuquerque, describ-
ing conditions there and referring to “the
Chins.”


1511 (Ist July) —Afonso de Albuquerque appeared at Ma-
lacca, demanding the return of the Port-
uguese prisoners. Being rebuffed he cap-
tured Malacca (15th Aug., 1511). Among
Albuquerque’s officers was Jorge Alvares,
captain of the San Joan Rumessa.
1511 —Albuquerque sent Portuguese emissaries to
Siam, Pegu, and other places, while na-
vigators were despatched to “discover”
the Spice Islands, etc.
1512 (Ist April) —Albuquerque wrote to the King of Port-
ugal mentioning among other things that
“Malacca is the terminal for the traders
from China.”
1513 —Jorge Alvares was sent from Malacca to
China. He set up his king’s padrdo on
Tamao Island, and as his son died during
their visit the lad’s remains were buried
near the padrdo.
1514 (6th Jan.) —Buy de Brito Patalim, Captain of Malacca,
reported that a ship had been sent to
China.
1514 (7th Jan.) —Officials at Malacca wrote to King Manoel
that a ship had gone to China and would
return within a few months.
1514 (April or May) —Jorge Alvares returned to Malacca from
China.
1514 Tome Pires completed the writing of his
Suma Oriental , containing accounts of
Asian countries and a long description of
China and the Chinese, identifying China
as Cathay and Peking as Cambaluc.
1515 (Bth Jan.) —The Captain of Malacca (Jorge de Albu-
querque) wrote to King Manoel reporting
that “Jorge A ” had been given an
appointment at Malacca because he had
set up the King’s “mark” in China.


1515 (6th Jan.) —Andrea Corsali wrote from India to Duke
Giuliano de Medici, in Italy, reporting
that the Portuguese had found China.
1515 (15th Nov.) —Giovanni da Empoli wrote from India to
Italy giving the news of the first Port-
uguese voyage to China.
1517 Portuguese fleet, commanded by Fernao Pe-
res de Andrade, with Jorge Alvares among
the officers, went to China with Tome
Pires, the Portuguese envoy to China.
They landed Tome Pires at Canton and
then returned to Malacca in September,
1518, after creating a good impression
in China.
1519 Another Portuguese squadron, on this occa-
sion under Simao Peres de Andrade, went
to China. Jorge Alvares was among the
officers. Simao Peres de Andrade an-
tagonized the Chinese.
1520 —Returning to Malacca, Jorge Alvares ac-
quitted himself very well in the defence
of Malacca.
1521 —Jorge Alvares was sent from Malacca to
China once again.
1521 (Bth July) —Jorge Alvares died on Tamao Island, being
buried by his friend Duarte Coelho near
the padrdo which Jorge Alvares himself
erected there in 1513.




Chinese High-seas Trading Junk.
( Drawing by George Chinnery)
Courtesy of Toyo BunKo, Tokyo.


Engraving by W. Floyd.
View on river near Canton
(Sketch by Capt. R. Elliot, R. N.)


APPENDIX
The pages which follow are reprinted, with due acknowledg-
ments to the author, Dr. Armando Cortesao, and the publishers, the
Hakluyt Society (London), from the work consisting of the trans-
cription made by Dr. Cortesao of the original text in the Paris
Chamber of Deputies and his translation into English, of the relevant
section relating to CHINA, in
THE SUMA ORIENTAL
OF TOME PIRES
AN ACCOUNT OF THE EAST, FROM THE RED Sea
to Japan, written in Malacca and India in
1512-1515
and
THE BOOK OF
FRANCISCO RODRIGUES
Rutter of a Voyage in the Red Sea, Nautical Rules
Almanack and Maps, written and drawn in the
East before 1515
Translated from the Portuguese Ms in the Bibliotheque
de la Chambres des Deputes , Paris , and edited by
ARMANDO CORTESAO
in 2 volumes


(Published in Cortesao’s work on pp. 392-394, 455-460)
U
Segumdo o que as na9oes de qua deste leuamte
contain fazem as cousas da china gramdes asy na ter-
ra como Jemtes Eiquezas pompas estados/ & contas
outrs a que raais se creria com uerdade averemse em
noso portugall q nom na chyna (1) he gramde a terra
Da chyna De fermosos cavallos & mulas seg° dizem
he em gramde numero. //
Ho Rey da china he Jemtio de gramde terra he
Jemte he a Jemte da chyna branq a da nosa ahmra ves-
tem os mais panos pretos Dalgodam & diso trazem
sayos de cimq o qtos De nesguas asy como nos somente
sam muyto larguos trazem na chyna nos Jnuernos fel-
tros nas pernas a maneira De peuguas he em cima be-
tas bem obradas que nom chegua Do giolho p a cima &
trazem suas Roupas forradas De pelles cordeiras &
dout a s pelitarias trazem delles pelicas trazem coyfas
de Rede de seda Redomdas como peneiras pretas de
noso portugall / tern huu Jeito Dalemaaes tem na
barba trinta quoremta cabellos 9al§am capatos fram-
9eses De pomta De ladrilho muyto bem feitos. //
Comem todollos chijs porquos vaquas E de to-
das out a s alimarias bebem getill memte De toda sorte
beberaJes gabam mujto noso vinho embebedamse
grade memte he gemte fraqua & para pouco este q q a
se vee em malaq a sam De pouca Yedade & furtam
fol. 139
Reyno da chijna
fol. 139 v


(Cortesao’s Translation)
CHINA
According to what the nations here in the East
say, things of China are made out to be great, riches,
pomp and state in both the land and people, and
other tales which it would be easier to believe as true
of our Portugal than of China. (1) China is a large
country with beautiful horses and mules, they say,
and in large numbers.
The king of China is a heathen with much land
and many people. The people of China are white, as
white as we are. Most of them wear black cotton
cloth, and they wear sayons of this in five pieces with
gores, as we do, only they are very wide. In the
winter they wear felt on their legs by way of socks,
and on top well-made boots which do not reach above
the knee, and they wear their clothes lined with
lambskin and other furs. Some of them wear pelisses.
They wear round silk net caps like the black sieves
we have in Portugal. / They are rather like Germans.
They have thirty or forty hairs in their beards. They
wear very well-made French shoes with square toes.
All the Chinese eat pigs, cows and all other
animals. They drink a fair amount of all sorts of
beverages. They praise our wine greatly. They get
pretty drunk. They are weak people of small ac-
count. Those who are to be seen in Malacca are not
Kingdom of Ch ina
fol. 139 v.
The text in based on the English version by Dr. Armando Cortesao, in The
Suma Oriental of Tome Fires & The Book of Francisco Rodrigues issued by The
Hakluyt Society, London, 1944.
(The notes are those written by Dr. Cortesao in the edition mentioned. A few
additional notes have been inserted, but these are qualified with the present writer’s
initials J. M. B.)
(1) Prof. A. C. Moule pointed out to Dr. Cortesao how this assumption of
western superiority is an interesting contrast to the medieval wonder at the su-
periority of the East.


ysto a gemte baixa comem com dous paaos e altamja.
ou porcelana na maao esquerdo Jumto com a boq a &
com os dous paos sorvr esta be a guisa Da China. (2) //
As molheres parecem castelhanas tern sayas de
Refeguos E coses & sainhos mais compridos que em
nosa terra os cabellos compridos em Rodilhados p°
gemtill maneira em cima Da cabe9a E lamcam nelles
mujtos preguos Douro pa os ter & aßedor Da pe-
draria quern ha tern E sobre a moleira Joyas Douro
E nas orelhas & pescogio/poem mujto aluayade nas
fases he arrabiq® sobre elle E sam alcoforadas q se-
ujlha Ihe nom leua a vamtaJe he bebem como molhe-
res De terra fria trazem capatos de pomtilha de seda
he brocados trazem todas avanos nas maaoos sam Da
nosa aluura & delas tern os olhos pequenos & outs a
gramdes. E narizes com ham de ser. //
A terra Da china he de muj tas cidades fortalezas
todas De pedra & quaall a cidade omde o Rey estaa
chamase cambara (1) (3) ( . . . esta . . . yno da
homde o Rey cstcui
(1) In the margin of this paragraph there is an addition in the same hand,,
given between brackets above, representing perhaps a couple of lines omitted at
first by the transcriber after the word cambara. The manuscript was badly cropped
in binding, part of the words having been cut away. The text may, however, ho
reconstituted as follows :
“Esta cidade esta no reino da China, cujo rei esta la ka vezea como. . .
Cambarra, a qual se chama Pequim. Estas cidades estao longe do Cantao, na
terra firme.”


very truthful, and steal that is the common people.
They eat with two sticks, and the earthenware or
china bowl in their left hand close to their mouth,
with the two sticks to suck in. This is the Chinese
way. (2)
The women look like Spanish women. They
wear pleated skirts with waistbands, and little loose
coats longer than in our country. Their long hair is
rolled in a graceful way on the top of their heads,
and they put many gold pins in it to hold it, and
those who have them put precious stones around, and
golden jewelry on the crown of their heads and in
their ears and on their necks. They put a great deal
of ceruse on their faces and paint on the top of it,
and they are so made up that Seville has no advant-
age over them; and they drink like women from a
cold country. They wear pointed slippers of silk
and brocade. They all carry fans in their hands.
They are as white as we are, and some of them have
small eyes and others large, and noses as they must
be.
China has many cities [and] fortresses, all ma-
sonry. The city where the king lives is called Cam-
bara (3) [ln the margin of this paragraph there is an
•Chinese women
Where the king is.
(2) This is the earliest known European description of the chopsticks. ‘A
very good description too’, comments Prof. Moule. Hobson-Jobson, s. v. Chopsticks
has nothing earlier than F. Mendes Pinto’s description, c. 1540. Barbosa (11, 213)
also refers to the chopsticks. Pires’ account is better, however, perhaps because
he had actually seen Chinese eating in Malacca.
(3) Cambara or Peqim Peking. The Cambalu or Camhaluc of Marco Polo,
and Cambalech of other medieval writers. Though several cities had stood on or
near the site of Peking, this name was first used in 1403 by the Ming Emperor Cheng
Tsu (better known by his reign-title Yung-Lo), who moved his court thither in
1420. Peking, of course, means ‘northern capital.’ It seems likely that Tom 6 Pires
was the first European to call it by that name. It must he said, however, that
the Comentdrios (111, XXX), compiled from documents contemporary with Pires,
also refers to Pequim as the city where the King of China was. In their two long
letters of 1524, Cristovao Vieira and Vasco Calvo often refer to Pequim. The sur-
vival at that date of Cambara (Polo’s Carnhalu) is of considerable interest. It might
suggest that Pires knew of Marco Polo’s Book, though Cambara and Cambalu are
so different in spelling, and he does not mention the famous Venetian traveller
anywhere in the Suma. More remarkable still is the identification of Cambara with
Peking. Nearly a hundred years later Ricci reckoned as a discovery ‘il Cataio esser
la Cina e la corte del re del Cataio esser Pachino.’ Of ere storiche, Vol. I, p. 546.


Reisvasallosao Rey
da china sens tri-
butaries q the pn-
!/arn pareas.
Reis rasallos sent
ohrigacam de pa-
reas so meate pre-
sente.
chyn a . . . Rey esta . . . s vezes como . . . arra aqual
. . . ma peqim estas 9-idades . . . onJe de qato . . . ra
firme) he de gramde pouo & de mujtos fydallgos De
Jmfinjdos cavallos o Rey nunqua he visto do pouo
nem dos gramdes salluo de mujto pouquos por asy
estar em costume Dizem q mulas tem sem conto
como se fosse em nosa terra. //
Ellßey De champa ellßey De canchy china
ellßey dos lequjos ellßey de Jampon adyamte se
fara memcam Destes. //
EUR Rey de Jaaoa ellß ey De siam ellßey de
papee elßey de malaq a estes mamdam seus embaixa-
dores com o sello Da china a ellßey Da chyna De
cimq o em cinq o anhos &de dez em Dez anhos & cada
him Ihe mamda do melhor De suas teras do q sabem
que laa quere. //
De malaca Ihe mamdauam pimemta E samdallos
brancos alguu paao de boa graDura E asy De garo (4)
que he lenho alooes De butiq a anees De pedras fynas
pasaros (5) q vein De bamda mortos & cousas a estas


Vast ml kings of the
Kina of China ,
his tributaries
who pay him tri-
bute.
Vassal kings with-
out obligation of
a tribute [«.7to]
only [ give a ] pre-
sent.
addition to the text, in the same hand perhaps a
couple of lines left out here by the transcriber. The
manuscript was badly cropped in binding, part of the
words having been cut away. The text may, however,
be reconstituted as here given in italics:] This city is
in the kingdom of China, the king of which is there some-
times as ... Cambarra, which is called Peking (Peqim).
These cities are inland, far from Canton (Qato). It has
many inhabitants and many nobles with innumer-
able horses. The king is never seen by the people, or
the grandees, except by very few, because that is the
custom. They say he has countless mules —asif it
were in our country.
The king of Champa, the king of Cochin China,
the king of the Liu Kiu ( Lequjos), the king of Japan.
Mention will be made of these later.
The king of Java, the king of Siam, the king
of Pase, the king of Malacca. These send their am-
bassadors with the seal of China to the king of China
every five years and every ten years, and each one
sends him the best there is in his country of what he
knows they like there.
From Malacca they sent him pepper and white
sandal-wood, good-sized wood, and also garo (4) , which
is apothecary’s aloes, rings with precious stones,
birds (5) wdiich come in quantities dead, and things
(4) Gam, which further on is spelt garuu the Malay gam or gaharu, for the
calambac, eagle-wood or aloes. Orta (XXX) says that the Malays call the inferior
quality garro, and the very fine one calamhac. ‘Valentyn pronounces the gahru to
be an inferior species ... and different from the genuine kulambak . Marsden,
History of Sumatra, p. 160. Gaharu from the Skt. gam, ‘heavy’ —is a word of
trade and indicates the fragrant heavy wood. Burkill, pp. 198-9, 202. Dr. Lionel
Giles informs me that the Chinese name for garo is cJien-hsiang, ‘sinking incense’,
so called because it is heavier than water.
(5) Perhaps the birds of paradise from Aru and New r Guinea, and the brilliant-
coloured parrots from the Moluccas, which were brought to Malacca as referred to
by Pires further on. The Chinese also imported the hornbill and used the bill for
various carved ornaments. Cf. Moulc, Some Foreign Birds and Beasts in Chinese
Books, p. 259.


J'ol. 161 r
Como*fazem Rey
Regimemto do rreg-
no a cerq• dos que
navegd outr°
Regnos
lugares do mculr Do
Regno da chyna
semelhamtes chamalotes he cada him segumdo tem
estes embaixadores podem emtrar na chyna & sair. //
Estes embaixadores qmdo vam ao Rey nom o
vem somemte ho vulto do corpo Detras huua cortina
& daly Respomde estamdo sete espuaes espeuemdo
a palaura qmdo a diz asynam aqujllo os oficiaes
mamdaris sem o Rey poor a maao nem ser visto tor-
nanse a vijr E se levam De presemte mjll faz Ihe
do dobro & os embaixadores em peitas leixam
tudo laa & tornanse se verem ho Rostro nem a p a
Do Rey esta he a Vrdade & nom como diziam q
estavam quoatro homees asemtados a vista & falaua
com todos sem saberem quail he o Rey e estes embai-
xadores podem amcorar em a cidade de quantom
Como se dira no Diamte. //
Ho Rey da china nom sogsede De pay a filho
Nem sobrinho somemte por eleicam do coselho de
todo ho Regno am da semp na cidade De cambara
omde o Rey esta & o mandarim q se por estes aproua
fiq a Rey. // < 6)
Nom pode sair nenhuu chim pa a bamda De
siam Jaaoa malaq a pacee & dhy adiante sem licemca
dos Regedores de quamtom & pollas asynaturas da
licemga De poder sair he tornar Ihe leuam tamto que
ho non podem soportar & nom saem & se alguu es-
tranJeiro estaa na terra Da china Ja nom pode sair
somente senom he por do Rey & por esta li-
cemca se he Riq° fiq a sem nada / & quallqr Junco ou
naao que pasa os termos que Ihe sam postos pa am-
corar pdese a fazemda pa ellßey E a Jemte morre
por yso. II
Comecamdo dos termos De cauchy pa a costa
china ha fortalezas a pm a ayriam honde se acha o


fol. 161 r.
How they make a
king.
Law of the realm
concerning those
who sail to other
kingdoms.
Places by the sea in
the kingdom of
China.
like that, camlets; and each one according to what he
has. These ambassadors can enter and leave China.
When these ambassadors go to the king, they
do not see anything but the vague shape of his body
behind a curtain, and he answers from there, and
seven scribes write down the words as he says them;
the mandarin officials sign this without the king’s
touching it, nor being seen, and they return; and if
they take a present of a thousand he presents them
with double, and the ambassadors leave everything
there as bribes and go away without seeing the face
or the person of the king. This is the truth, and not,
as they used to say, that four men were seated in
view and that they talked to all of them without
knowing which was the king. And these ambassadors
can cast anchor in the port of Canton, as will he told
later.
The kings of China do not succeed from father to
son or nephew, but by election in council of the whole
kingdom. It always takes place in the city of Cam-
bara where the king resides, and the mandarin who
is approved by them becomes king. (6)
No Chinese may set out in the direction of Siam,
Java, Malacca, Pase and beyond, without permission
from the governors of Canton, and they charge so
much for signing the licence to go and come back
that they cannot afford it and do not go ; and if any
stranger is in the land of China he may not leave
without a licence from the king, and for this licence,
if he is rich, he is reduced to nothing. And if any
junk or ship passes beyond the bounds allotted to it
for anchorage, its goods are confiscated to the king;
and the people are put to death for it.
Beginning from the Cochin China ( Cauchy ) boun-
daries towards the coast of China, there are fort-
resses : first Hainan ( Aynam ) where they find the
(6) All this information is, of course, wholly incorrect. [See my remarks on
p. 42 supra. J. M. B.]


alJofar que vay a chyna E nantoo E quantom
E chamcheo (7) E out°s somente Digamos De quam-
tom que lie mor que todos E omde lie o trato Destas
ptes. I
este aynam he emsseada (8) e costa se Rio te
huuas ilhas ao mar Perto omde se pescar o alJofar
he gram ssoma delle &. //


seed-pearls that go to China —and Nan-t : ou ( Nantoo )
and Canton and Chang-chou ( Cham-cheo) (7) and other
places. Let us speak only of Canton, which is the lar-
gest of all and the trading centre for these parts.
This Hainan is a bay (8) on the coast, without a
river. Near it are some islands in the sea, where they
fish for seed-pearls. There are large quantities of
these.
(7) There has been some discussion about the Chamcheo or Chincheo of the
Portuguese, which has been identified with Marco Polo’s Zayton, the magnified porto
de Zaiton of Fra Mauro’s map (1450), corresponding either to Ch’iian-chou or
Chang-chou, or to both, in the province of Fukien. T’ien-tse Chang asserts that by
the name of Chincheo ‘the Portuguese evidently meant to include both the prefec-
tures of Ch’iianchow and Changchow', Sino-Portuguese Trade from 1514 to 1044,
pp. 70, 85. Other authorities, however, are not so sure that the Chincheo of the
Portuguese corresponds to any other place than Chang-chou, cf. Paul Pelliot, Un
average sur les premiers temps de Macao , pp. 66, 92, where he analyses Chang’s book.
Prof. Moule tells me that ‘ Zayton or Zeitun was certainly Ch’iian-chou, not Chang-
chou; but that does not prevent Chamcheo being Chang-chou. One would think that
originally Chamcheo was Changcheo, and that Chincheo was Ch’iian-chou; but they
were naturally and immediately confused. From the Chinese at a rather earlier
date, Ch’uan-chou was the port for foreign trade’. Yule had already remarked
that on ‘the old maps of the sevententh century . . . Chincheo is really Changchau,’
Marco Polo, 11, 239. It may be added that sixteenth century Portuguese maps,
such as Homem’s of 1554, Dourado’s of 1568-80, and others, show clearly that
Chincheo is Chang-chou, situated at the inner end of a bay dotted with several
islands. The spelling of Pires’ Chamcheo rather suggests Chang-chou. The map of
C. 1540 is the first on which I find C. de chimcheo; Mercator’s globe of 1541, repro-
ducing an earlier Portuguese map, has also C. do chincheo. Later maps have chim-
cheo or o chimcheo inscribed at the end of the bay.
(8) The Catalan map of 1375-81 is the earliest to represent Hainan Island, which
is called caynam, from Marco Polo’s Gheynan. The Cantino map has an ylha ana at the
end of what may correspond to Polo’s gulf of Cheynan, bounded on one side by Amu
(which in some texts is Ania) ; but neither Ana nor Amu can be Hainan. One of
Rodrigues’ maps (fob 38) shows the Gulf of Tong-King, with Hainan duly placed
to the east of the entrance to the Gulf; on Lei chou peninsula is written rnam
Uimom-rnam for Hainan, llirnom must correspond to King-Men or Lin-mun (Can-
tonese pronunciation), which means ‘Gate of the mountain range’, the name of a
town in Hainan. In a Lexique geographique des noms de lieux du Lei-K’ioung Tao,
published by Cl. Madrolle, we find ‘ Ling-Men Porte de la montagne, Ling-Moun
ICantonais); Nemg-Moun (local). Bourg dans la region montagneuse de Hai-nan,
district de Ting-an, Men,’ Hai-nan et la cote continentale voisine, p. 113. Lei-K’ioung


A cidade de quamtom (0) he omde o Regno todo
da china Descarregua suas mercadarias todas E asy
da terra firme como do mar mujtas a cidade De
quamtom he a boca da foz de huu gramde Rijo que
tern De prea maar tres bracas & quat 0 / a cidade que
se vee da foz esta asemtada em terra chaa sem momte
tern toda a casaria De pedra & £erq a da de muro q
dizem que he De sete bracas De larguo E outs a tam-
tas dalto E da banda da cidade Dizem que he alcam-


The city of Canton ( Quamtom) (9) is where the
whole kingdom of China unloads all its merchandise,
great quantities from inland as well as from the sea.
The city of Canton is at the entrance of the estuary
of a large river which is three or four fathoms deep
at high tide. The city, which can be seen from the
estuary, is situated on flat ground without any hills.
All the houses are of stone and surrounded by a wall
which they say is seven fathoms thick and as many
high, and they say that it is steep on the city side.
Tao, or Lei-Ch’iuug Tao, is the circuit (too) comprising the department {fn) of Lei
chou’, i. e. the peninsula of Kuangtung opposite to Hainan, and Ch’iung chou, the
northern part of Hainan itself. Lei chou and Ch’iung chou were so called throughout
the Ming and Ch’ing dynasties. Ting-an is a district ( hsien) south of Ch’iung chou
city, apparently on the western slopes of Ch’iung mountain. Ribeiro’s maps of 1527
and 1529 have C. daytum an obvious mistranscription from some earlier Port-
uguese map written on a peninsula corresponding to Hainan Island, which
appears as a prolongation of Lei chou peninsula. The same happens on the C. 1540,
which has Y. danid, and near it a tinhosa (Scurfy). The Gulf of Tong-King is
fairly well drawn on this map, much better than on later sixteenth century maps,
L. Homen’s map of 1554, D. Homem’s atlas of 1558, and Luis’ atlas of 1563 re-
present Hainan as a separate island, but without name; however, they have J. tin-
hosa. Two ridges united by a sandy isthmus form the island still called Tinhosa,
or Tai chau, separated from the east coast of Hainan by a three-mile wide channel.
Tinhosa, which afforded good shelter and supplies of water, firewood and fish, was
an almost obligatory port of call for the ships sailing to and from Canton or any
port further north. This still applies to-day, in some degree, cf. China Sea Pilot,
111 (1923 ed.)
(9) This is the earliest document known in which Canton, the modern form of
the name of the great city in southern China, occurs. It had been mentioned as
Hdnfu (probably Chinese Kuang fu , i. e. Kuang [ chou]fu) by Sulayman, and Sin-
ul-Sin by Idrisi, in the twelfth century, and as Sinkaldn by Ibn Batuta, and (Censca-
lan (Chinkalan) by Friar Odoric, in the fourteenth century. One of Rodrigues’
maps (fol. 40) represents the Canton River. See note on Pulo Tumon. The first
maps to record the name Cantam are, however, those of Ribeiro of 1527 and 1529.
It was thought until recently that the voyage of Jorge Alvares in a junk to the
Canton River, the first Portuguese visit to China, was in 1514. There are, however,
several documents showing categorically that Alvares’ voyage took place in 1513.
Pires also confirms the year of this voyage when, writing before or at the beginning
of 1514, he mentions China as one of the ‘places where our junks and ships have
been.’


Ylhas homde ancord
os Juncos De ma-
laqa
tilado ysto dizem lattes (10) q Ja alij estiuerom & tem
portos homde estam mujtos Juncos Gramdes vigiase
a §idade fechamse as portas sam fortes estes Reis q
disemos que tem sellos quamdo mandam seus embaxa-
dores fazem a mercadaria em a cidade Demtro E
senom fazem fora obra de xxx ta leguas De quarato &
de qamtom Ihe leuam a mercadaria De quamtom a
cidade buns dize q ha quoat 10 meses de amdadura E
outs 0 dizem quoat ro E out°s asy a verdade he qem
vinte dias a bom amdar podem amdar ho dito
camjnho. //
Aquem De quamtom pa malaq a trimta leguoas
estam lumas Jlhas Junto com a terra firme de nam-
too (11) homde estam os portos Ja Detremjnados De


Islands where the
junks from Ma-
lacca anchor.
So the Lugoes (10) say who have been there. And it
has ports where there are many large junks. The city
is guarded; the gates are closed. They are strong,
these kings of whom we spoke; they have seals when
they send their ambassadors. They trade inside the
city, and if not, they do it outside, some thirty leagues
from Canton, and take the merchandise there from
Canton. Some say that the city [where the king
lives] is about four months’ journey from Canton,
and others say four [weeks?] and others and this is
true —that they can do the said journey in twenty
days good going.
Thirty leagues on this side of Canton, towards
Malacca, there are some islands near the mainland of
Nan-t’ou ( Namtoo ), (11) where are the ports already
(10) Lugoes. This is the first European reference to the people of the Philip-
pine Archipelago, called Lugoes from its largest and north-westernmost island, Lu-
zon. The Philippine Islands are called ‘by the Indians Lugon, from the principal
island which is called Lugon’, as Pyrard de Laval (11, p. 171) says he learned from
the Portuguese. Galvao (p. 239) informs us that in June 1545 a Portuguese called
Pero Fidalgo left the eity of Borneo in a junk, and by contrary winds was driven
towards the north, where he found an island in nine or ten degrees, which they cal-
led dos Lugoes, because its inhabitants were thus named. This voyage is recorded
in the atlases of Luis and Dourado, in an inscription on a fanciful drawing named
Costa da lucoes (Luis, 1563) or OS LYCOIS (Dourado, 1580) . . . Galvao gives the
date of the first known Portuguese visit to Luzon, but it is quite likely that some
other Portuguese ships on the China voyage had called before at the Lugoes, either
on purpose or by accident. The ‘Account of the Genoese Pilot’ (Leone Pancaldo)
says that when, in March 1521, Magellan’s expedition arrived at the small island
of Malhon, in the south-eastern Philippine Islands, the natives informed them that
‘they had already seen there other men like them’, which suggests that possibly
even before 1521 the Portuguese had visited the archipelago. (Cardeal Saraiva,
edition, Obras completes, VI, p. 12G).
(11) Nantoo, or Nanto, as it is called by other early Portuguese writers, is
Nan-t’ou or Nam-t’au (Cantonese pronunciation), ‘an important town, in the San
On [Hsin-an] District, just outside the present British boundary’. J. M. Braga,
The ‘Tamdo’ of the Portuguese Pioneers, pp. 428, 429. By San On, Braga means
the District of Hsin-an which was anciently, and is now, called Pao-an. Nan-t’ou
is either (a) the District of Pao-an, or (b) the military port ‘in the Pao-an District’.
See next note. [See note on p. 64 supra. —J. M. B.]


cada nayao .s. pulo turnon (12) E out°s E tamto que os
ditos Juncos ali amqora ho sor de nantoo ho faz saber
a quamtom & vem lloguo mercadores estimar a mer-
cadoria & toma seus drrtos como se dira ao Diamte
entain Ihe trazem mercadaria feita de huua pte he da
outra tornase cada huu p sua casa. //


Engraving by Thomas Jeavons.
Chinese Pagoda —between Whampoa and Canton
(Sketch by Capt. R. Elliot, R. N.)


Engraving by A. Willmore.
Kite Flying
(Drawn by Thomas Allom)


allotted to each nation, viz., Pulo Tumon (12) and
others. And as soon as the said junks anchor there,
the lord of Nan-t’ou sends word to Canton and mer-
chants immediately come to value the merchandise
and to take their dues, as will be told later. Then
they bring them the merchandise made up from one
part and another. Each one returns to his home.
(12) Pulo Tumon, Tirnon, Tarnon, and Tamdo, or Ilha dn Veniaga (Island of
Trade), of the early Portuguese writers, was for long identified with Sanchuan
Island, but so unsatisfactorily that the problem has always provoked a good deal
of controversy. J. M. Braga showed more recently that Pulo Tumon is Lin Tin
island, which lies about the middle of the Chukiang, the Canton, or the Pearl River
entrance, nearer to the north bank. It seems likely that the Tumon or Tamdo of
the Portuguese corresponds to Tun-men or Tuen Moon 0, an old Chinese name for
an anchorage off Lin Tin Island, the pronunciation of w r hich in Cantonese has a
sound similar to the Portuguese version. ‘This would be the name given to the
entire anchorage, and the Portuguese could very easily have applied the name of
the anchorage to the island off which they anchored.’ The * Tamdo ’ of the Port-
uguese Pioneers, p. 431. Prof. Moule tells me, however, that ‘A recent and on the
whole reliable Geographical Dictionary ( Ku chin ti ming ta tz’u tien) gives Nan-t’ou
city as a name of the district city of Pao-on on the mainland. Tun-men (also
called Pei-tu) is the name of an island south of Pao-an; and there was a military
post called formerly T’un-men, but in the Ming dynasty Nan-t’ou, which was at
the anchorage or harbour south-east of Pao-an, So the text seems to be correct in
calling Tumon an island, and it is more likely that the harbour was named after
the island than vice versa. The ‘Lord of Namtou’ may be the magistrate of Pao-
an ( = Nan-t’ou), or the commander of the garrison at Nan-t’ou military post.
Further on Pires says that Tumon is 20 or 30 leagues distant from Canton (Correia
and Castanheda say 18 leagues): Lin Tin Island is really about 65 miles or 20 lea-
gues from Canton by river. Pires says also that Tumon lies one league (3.2 miles)
from Nan-t’ou on the mainlands The shortest distance between Lin Tin and Nan-
t’ou Peninsula is about five miles. Castanheda, Barros, and Gois say that Tamdo
or Tumon was three leagues from the mainland, but as the anchorage was on the
western side of the island and Nan-t’ou is eastwards, Pires’ information is not so
far out as it seems at first sight. Rodrigues’ map (fol. 40) is the first to show this
island, but bearing only the inscription : ‘off this island anchor the junks of China’,
meaning the junks which went from Malacca to the Canton River. It is situated
nearer to the north bank of a large river, which has written at its mouth: ‘The
mouth of the strait of China.’ Ido not know of any map with the name Tumon,
or the like, though Ilhas da veniaga and Ilhas de Cantam, which include Tumon,
appear for the first time on L. Homem’s map of 1554. Pires’ information shows
that before being the anchorage of the Portuguese ships, Tumon was already the
anchorage of the ships from Malacca ; in this he is confirmed by Rodrigues’ map.


Man° (los capitaees
da terra he mar
ern quamtom
fol. 161 v.
Afirmam que todos os que trazem mercadarias
De quamtom aas Ilhas ganha ties qat ro cimquo p° dez
E os chijs tem este costume asy por Ihe nom tomarem
a terra como po Receberem os drrtos das saidas Das
mercadarias alem da emtrada E o pincipall lie p°
medo de Ihe nom tomarem a cidade por que se diz q
he Riq a cidade a de quantom he ve cosairos mujtas
vezes Junto com ella he capitam desta cidade hi
taao (13) p a pin§ipall E cadano he huu capitam por
hordenamca Do Rey & nom pode mais estar haa out 0
capitam Do maar easy como ho da terra com Jurdi-
cam sobre sy ambos sam mudados caDano: //
Dizem que os chijs fezerom esta hordenamga de
nom podere hir a qmtom por Reyeo Dos Jaaos &
malaios que he yerto que huu Jumco Destas nagoees
desbaratam vinte Juncos De chijs Dizem que a chyna
he de mais De mjll Juncos que cada huu trata homde
Ihe bem vem mas he Jemte fraq a & segumdo ho medo
que tem a malayos he Jaaos bem certo sera que
huua naao De iiij e tonees faria despouoar qmtom a
qll Despouoada teria a china gramde perda. //
Nom tiramdo a groria a cada terra bem parecem
as cousas de chijna serem de terra homrrada & boa
& Riqa mujto & pa o soJugar o guouernador De
malaq a a obidiencia nosa avija mester nom tarn to
como Dizem por que he Jemte mujto fraca he ligeira
De desbaratar E afirmam as p as capitaees que mujtas
vezes forom la que com Dez naaos soJugaria ho go-
Vrnador das Imdias que tomou malaca toda ha china
nas beiras Do maar // E a chijna pa as nosas naaos


The custom of land
and sea captains
in Canton.
Jol. 161 v.
They affirm that all those who take merchandise
from Canton to the islands make a profit of three,
four or five in every ten, and the Chinese have this
custom so that the land shall not be taken from
them, as well as in order to receive the dues on the
merchandise exported as well as imported; and the
chief [reason] is for fear lest the city be taken from
them, because they say that the city of Canton is
a rich one, and corsairs often come up to it. Hi
Tado, (13) one of the chief people, is captain of this city,
and there is a captain every year by the king’s de-
cree, and he cannot remain [in office] longer. There
is another sea-captain almost like the land one, with
separate jurisdiction. Both are changed yearly.
They say that the Chinese made this law about
not being able to go to Canton for fear of the Java-
nese and Malays, for it is certain that one of these
people’s junks would rout twenty Chinese junks.
They say that China has more than a thousand
j unks, and each of them trades wdiere it sees fit; but
the people are weak, and such is their fear of Malays
and Javanese that it is quite certain that one [of our]
ship [s] of four hundred tons could depopulate Can-
ton, and this depopulation would bring great loss to
China.
Not to rob any country of its glory, it certainly
seems that China is an important, good and very
wealthy country, and the Governor of Malacca would
not need as much force as they say in order to bring
it under our rule, because the people are very weak
and easy to overcome. And the principal people
who have often been there affirm that with ten ships
the Governor of India who took Malacca could take
the whole of China along the sea-coast. And China
(13) Hi Tnao, i. e., the Hai Tao, an officer charged with coast defence. Chang
(p. 54) says that he was the commander of the fleet at Canton. It seems that
Pires mixed up the information he obtained.


Mercadarias q va-
lem na china q
vam De Malaq a
he via Jem de vinte dias ptem Daq na fym De Junho
pa boa viagem e em xb Dias Jram com vemto De
moil9am Da chijna ha noua memte navegaca pa bur-
ney & dizem q vam laa em qnze dias & q Ysto sera
sera De qujmze annos a este pte. //
A pimcipall mercadaria he pimenta De que com-
prara dez Juncos cadanho se tamtos la fore De crauo
noz pouq a pu9ho cacho mais algua cousa / emcemgo
compraram mujto Demtes Dalifamtes estanho lenho
aloees de butiq a copara mujta camfora De burney
comtaria Vrmelha samdallos brancos brasyll Jmfimdo
paao do que na9e em syngapura preto compra mujtas
alaqueqas De cambay a chamallotes escarlatas panos
De laas De cores Deixamdo a p ta todo o all sam cou-
sas De benese. //
Yam hos ditos Juncos De malaq a amcorar a Jlha
de tumom como Ja he dito xx te on xxx ta leguoas De
quamtom estam estas Jlhas Junto com a terra De
nantoo huua leguoa alamar Da terra hrme alij amcora
os De malaq a no porto de tumom & os de siam no
porto De hucham (U) o noso porto he mais perto pa a
china tres leguoas q ho de syam E pmeiro vem as
mercadarias a elle q hao out 0 . //
Ho sor De namtoo vemdo os Juncos faz lloguo
sabr a quamtom como sam Juncos em trades nas Jlhas
saem hos estimadores de quantom a estimare as mer-
cadorias Recebem seus drrtos trazem mercadaria tan-
ta q abasta/ easy a terra estaa em costume De tamto
valler tanto sabem De vos as mercadarias que queres.
E trazem as. //


.1/ erchandise of
value in China
that goes from
Malacca.
is twenty days’ sail distant for our ships. They leave
here at the end of June for a good voyage, and with
a monsoon wind they can go in fifteen days. From
China they have recently begun sailing to Borneo
(Burney), and they say that they go there in fifteen
davs, and that this must have been for the last fifteen
years.
The chief merchandise is pepper of which they
will buy ten junk-loads a year if as many go there
cloves, a little nutmeg, a little more pachak, catechu;
they will buy a great deal of incense, elephants’
tusks, tin, apothecary’s lignaloes; they buy a great
deal of Borneo camphor, red beads, white sandal-
wood, brazil, infinite quantities of the black wood
that grows in Singapore ( Syngapura ); they buy a
great many carnelians from Cambay, scarlet camlets,
coloured woollen cloths. Pepper apart, they make
little account of all the rest.
The said junks from Malacca go and anchor off
the island of Tumon, as has already been said, twenty
or thirty leagues away from Canton. These islands
are near the land of Nan-t’ou, a league to seaward
from the mainland. Those from Malacca anchor
there in the port of Tumon and those from Siam in
the port of Hucham. (u) Our port is three leagues
nearer to China than the Siamese one, and merchan-
dise comes to it rather than to the other.
As soon as the lord of Nan-t’ou sees the junks he
immediately sends word to Canton that junks have
gone in among the islands; the valuers from Canton
go out to value the merchandise; they receive their
dues; they bring just the amount of merchandise that
is required : the country is pretty well accustomed to
estimate it, so well do they know of you the goods
you want, and they bring them.
(14) Perhaps some of the islands forming or adjoining the Lantau Channel,
■such as Chung-chou, which lies about four and a half miles south of Lin Tin,
towards the sea. [Cortesao seems to be wrong in this. —J. M. B.j


Drrtos na China aas
mercadores q vam
De malaqua.
pesos da china gram-
des & pequos.
fol. 162 r. Mantimtos
daKoz triguo car-
ries gas pescados.
De pimemta pagam vimte por cento De brasill
cimq°emta por Qento & do pao de sijmgapura outro
tamto & ysto estimado tamto podera ter huu Junco
soldo a liura Recebem sens drrtos Das out a s merca-
darias a dez por cemto E nom vos fazem apresam
tem Vrdadeiros mercadores em sens tratos sam gram-
dememte Riqos todo sen emtemto he pimemta vem-
dem sens mamtimentos onesta memte Despachados
tornase cada huu a sua terra a Jemte baixa he pouco
cheguada a Vrdade E as cousas baixas de seus
sam to Das falsas E comtra feitas. //
A china he o nome De cem cates chamase piquo
entam fazes voso preyo qmtos piquos De pimemta
por huu de seda ou qmtos de tali mercadarias por
huu De p ta E asy hee E no almjzqr qmtos cates De
pimemta por huu dalmjzqr alJofar o picoll (15) tem
cem cates cada cate tem dezaseis taees cada taell tem
Dez mazes cada maz (16) tem dez pon/cada cate tem
vinte & huua on§a de noso peso cada trezemtos doze
cates de vimte E huua om9a fazem huu baar de ma-
laq a Da Romaa pequena: //
Todas estas mercadarias se vemdem a peso .s.
tamtos pesos de tall por huu De p ta &os mercadores
quamdo a leuam haa na terra amtre elles tamtos pe-
sos De tal mamtimemto por huu de caixas De fuse-
leira (17) q corre na terra como ceitis E nas mercado-


Dues levied in Chi-
na on merchants
corning from Ma-
lacca.
Weights in Ch ina
large and, small
fol. 162. r.
Foodstuffs: rice,
wheat , meat, chi-
ckens, fish.
They pay twenty per cent on pepper, fifty per
cent on brazil, and the same amount on the Singa-
pore wood; and when this has been estimated a junk
will pay so much in proportion. They receive their
dues on the other merchandise at ten per cent; and
they do not oppress you; they have genuine mer-
chants in their dealings. They are very wealthy. Their
whole idea is pepper. They sell their foodstuffs ho-
nestly ; business over, each returns to his own coun-
try. The common people are not very near to truth,
and the commoner things in their business are all
false and counterfeit.
Once in China, a hundred catties are called a pi-
quo; then you make your price: so many piquos of
pepper for one of silk or so many of such and such
goods for one of pepper ; and it is just the same with
musk, so many catties of pepper for one of musk,
[or] seed-pearls. A picoll (15) contains a hundred cat-
ties ; each catty contains sixteen taels; each tael
contains ten mazes; each maz (16) contains ten pon.
Each catty contains twenty-one ounces of our mea-
sure. Three hundred and twelve catties of twenty-
one ounces each make a Malacca bahar on the small
scales.
All these goods are sold by weight, to wit, so
many measures of such and such for one of pepper;
and when the merchants take it there is [an arran-
gement] among them in the country so many wei-
ghts of such and such a foodstuff for one of fus.eleira
(17) cash, which are current in the country like ceitis,
(15) Piquo or pico, picoll, or picul, is the Malay and Javanese pikul, ‘a man’s
load’, for the Chinese weight of 100 catties, equal to 133 1/3 lb. or about 60 kg.
(16) The value of the maz was variable in the different far-eastern countries.
Maz or ‘mace was adopted in the language of European traders in China to deno-
minate the tenth part of the Chinese liang or tael of silver’, Hobson-Johson s. v.
These weights are given quite correctly by Pires. Catty is the Malay kati, tael the
Hindi tola (through the Portuguese), mace the Hindi masha, and pan the Chinese
fen (also called candareen, from the Malay kondrin).
(17) [See comments on p. 43 supra. —J. M. B.]


Mercadorias q vem
da ckyna.
rias gramdes & outs a compras ouro E prata p° moe-
da. /I
A prinyipall mercadaria da chyna he seda branq a
crua em muyta camtidade & sedas soltar De cores
mujtas em camtidade getijs de todallas cores damas-
qos emßolados (18) de tauoleiro De todas os cores ta-
fetas & out°s panos De seda Rallos a que chama
xaas (19) & dout a s sortes mujtos de todas corres aljo-
far gramde copia De diuersas fei9oes polla mor parte
Desyguall trazem tambem Redomdo E groso he esta
a men parecer he tarn pincipall mercadaria na china
como a seda posto que elles contain a seda por cabe-
-9a de mercadoria / almjzqr em poo & em papos mujto
& bom certamemte / que nom Deue nada ao de pe-
guu I/ camfora De botica em gramde camtidade aba-
rute pedra vme selitre emxofre cobre ferro Rujbarbo
& todo nom vail nada / o que ate o presemte tenho
visto vem podre Dizem q damtes vinha fresco eu o
nom vy vasos de cobre de fuseleira tachos de ferro
Ifundido bacios bacias Destas cousas sem numero co-
fres avanos agulhas De cem maneiras Dellas muj to
sotijs & bem obradas em abastan9a he boa merca-
darja E cousas mujto De baixa sorte como de fram-
des vem a portugall manjlhas de cobre Jmfinjdas
vem ouro & prata E nom vy mujto & brocades a sua
gsa mujtos De porcelanas nom se fala no numero. /
Destas cousas que da china vem dellas sam da
terra da china dellas de fora he huuas de lugares no-


and for large merchandise and other purchases gold
and silver [is used] for money.
The chief merchandise from China is raw white
silk in large quantities, and loose coloured silks, many
in quantity, satins of all colours, damask, chequered
enrolados (18) in all colours, taffetas and other thin silk
cloths called xaas , (19) and many other kinds of all co-
lours; an abundance of seed-pearl in various shapes,
mostly irregular; they also have some big round ones
this in my opinion is as important a merchandise
in China as silk, although they count silk as the chief
merchandise musk in powder and in pods, plenty
of this, and certainly good, which yields in nothing to
that from Pegu; apothecary’s camphor in large quan-
tities, abariUe, alum, saltpetre, sulphur, copper, iron,
rhubarb, and all of it worthless what I have seen
up to the present has been rotten when it arrived;
they say it used to come fresh; I have not seen it
vases of copper and fuseleira , cast iron kettles,
bowls, basins, quantities of these things, boxes, fans,
plenty of needles of a hundred different kinds, some
of them very fine and well made, these are good mer-
chandise, and things of very poor quality like those
which come to Portugal from Flanders, countless
copper bracelets; gold and silver come and I did not
see much, and many brocades of their kind, and por-
celains beyond count. Of the things which come
from China some are products from China itsell
and some from outside, some of them from places
Merchandise that
comes from Ch ina.
(18) [See p. 43 supra for suggestion regarding the term used by Pires. J.
M. B.]
(19) Xaas, sash or shash, from the Arab shush, muslin —‘A band of a line ma-
terial worn twisted round the head as a turban by Orientals,’ Oxford English Die-
tionary, s. v. Sash. Prof. Moule tells me, however, that the Chinese sha ‘gauze’
is at least as old as the Han dynasty (206 B. C. -A. D. 200). The *of xaas in
Pires’ version is probably a plural. Is there any connexion between the Arabic
shash and the Chinese sha ? Apparently no; but xaas (if sis plural) may be simply
Chi nese.


meados mjlliores q dout°s Destas taes mercadarias-
empregaes nas q queres voso Dinheiro somemte no
almjzqr nom se acha tamto // Dizem que podera vijr
cadano atee liuu baar da china entoddles Juncos /
tem gramde camtidade dacuqr aterra da china he
bom /I ay him lugar q se chama xam9y e qe ha hy
almizcar te pouco & bom (In the margin in the same
hand:) “a §idade de q vee o almizqare se chama xan-
bu a qal he na chyna & // dize q e 9an9y ha as aly-
maryas de q tir a o almizcare.” (20)
vem os ditos Juncos da china a malaq a E nom
paguam Drrtos somemte presemte & estes presemtes
asy os dam segumdo for hordenanca Dos xabamdares
das taes na9oees xabamdar da china lequios & cau-
chy champa era o lasamane & deste oficio sam Riquos
hos xabamdares porque Despeitam os mercadores
gramdememte & por os ganhos serem grosos tudo se-
portam & tambem por a terra estar e costume de
aasy fazer E ssoportar. //
Os postos das mercadorias a seda bramca crua
he de chancheo sedas de cores de cauchy damasquos
cetijs brocados xaas loos (21) De namqim (In the mar


renowned as being better than others. You can spend
your money on whatever of this merchandise yon
fancy, except that there is not so much musk to be
found. They say that not more than one bahar comes
from China each year in all junks. The land of China
produces plenty of good sugar. There is a place
called Xamcy where there is musk; it has a little and
it is good. [ln the margin in the same hand are the
words:] ‘The city whence the musk comes is called
Xdnbu, which is in China, and they say that the
animals from which they get the musk are in Qancy.’ (20>
The said junks come from China to Malacca and
they do not pay dues, except for a present; and these
presents they give in accordance with the decrees of
the Xabandares of the different nations; the Xaban-
dar of China, Lequios, Cochin China and Champa was
the Lasamane; and the Xabandares have become rich
through this function, because they greatly overtax
the merchants; and these put up with everything
because their profits are large and also because it is
the custom of the country to do so and endure it.
Places where the merchandise comes from: the
raw white silk is from Chancheo ; coloured silks from
Cochin China ( Cauchy ); damasks, satins, brocades,
xaas, loos (21) from Nanking ( Namqim) and from
(20) Xamcy and Qanqy both seem to represent the province of Shensi, the
characters for which are pronounced Shansi. In English it is written Shensi for the
province in North-west China, simply in order to distinguish it from Shansi, the
province in North China, separated by the Yellow River where it flows north-south,
Prof. Moule tells me that this is derived from the early Missionaries Portuguese
(?) and certainly French to whom Chen and Chan provide a convenient distinction
without seriously distorting the sound.
Xdnbu may very well be Si-an-fu, capital of Shensi, the Kenjanfu of Marco
Polo (11, xli), who emphasises its importance as ‘a city of great trade and industry.’
Several early writers refer to the musk of China as coming from regions neighbour-
ing on Shensi, such as the Szechwan province, and from Tibet. See Yule, Marco
Polo, I, p. 279 ; 11, pp. 35, 49 ; Cathay, I, pp. 246, 316, etc.
(21) Crooke mentions a reference, in a Madras list of 1684, to ‘gold flowered
loes,' which is supposed to be a ‘name invented for the occasion to describe some
silk' stuff brought from the Liu Kiu Islands.’ Hobson-Johson, p. 514. But no
doubt the word really existed, as the pronunciation of loes in English and loos in
Portuguese has the same value. The Chinese lo means ‘coarse silk’. The s of Pi-
res’ loos, may be the Portuguese plural, the same as with xaas. Dr. Lionel Giles
suggests that the w ord loos might be derived from the Chinese 10-ssii, meaning a
thin kind of silk.


gin in the same hand:) “neste nanqm a todolos pahos
dalgoda& gramdes mercadores ha de peqim a nanqy
por Rios hu mes damdura &” & damqm (22) alJofar
de ayna camfora de botica De chamcheo & porque os
postos nom satisfazem porque as taes mercadorias te
sen conhecimento a v ta nom vou por aqi mais discor-
remdo. //
0 sail he gramde mercadoria amtre os chijs Da
china se espalha pa estas partidas & he trato De quj -
nhemtos Jnncos que o vem comprar & da china se
carrega pa out°s cabos sam os tratantes delle mujto
Riquos E amtre sy dizem a out°s / soes vos merca-
dor de sal pa falardes. //
Alem do porto de quantom esta outro porto
que se chama oquem (23) he amdadura p° terra De
tres dias E por mar huu dia & huua noite este he o
porto dos lequjos he Dout a s nacoees mujtos portos
tern alem q sera largua cousa De comtar que ao pre-
sence nom fazem em noso caso somente atee qmtom
porq esta he a chaue do Reino De chyna. //


Amqm\ (22) seed-pearl from Hainan (Ayna); apothe-
cary’s camphor from Chamcheo. [ln the margin in
the same hand]: “In this Nanking there are all the
cotton cloths and big merchants; it is a month’s jour-
ney from Peking ( Peqim ) to Nanking ( Ndnqy ) by ri-
ver”. And because [our knowledge of] these places
is unsatisfactory, and because this merchandise is
recognizable at sight, I will not discuss them any
more.
Salt is a great merchandise among the Chinese.
It is distributed from China to these regions; and it
is dealt with by fifteen hundred junks which come
to buy it, and it is loaded in China to go to other
places. Traders in this are very rich and they say
to one another among themselves ‘Are you a salt
merchant to speak of?’
Bevond the port of Canton there is another port
which is called Oquem. ; (23) it is three days’ journey
by land and a day and night by sea. This is the
port for the Lequjos and other races. It has many
other ports, which it would be a long business to tell
of, and they do not concern us at present, except up
to Canton ( Qmtom ), because this is the key to the
kingdom of China.
(22) Damqm or de Amquem might suggest Marco Polo’s Unken —or Vnquem,
as it appears in the first Portuguese Marco Paulo (Lisbon, 1502). Unken, however,
has not been identified with any similar Chinese name, so the chance likeness of
Amquem does not seem to have much significance. This part of the Chinese coast
is called costa de ucheu on Homem’s map of 1554. See note on Foquem. [See p. 43
supra for a suggestion that Fires was referring to Anking, also spelt Nganking, in
the province of Anhwei. —J. M. B.]
(23) Oquem corresponds to Foquem, or Fukien. Prof. Moule tells Cortesao that
the local sound of Fu is Hok, with an h which might easily be dropped, as the h
of Hainan was dropped. The Italian traveller Francesco Carletti brought home in
1603 a Chinese Atlas in which Fukien was transcribed by him as Ochiam. cf. Moule,
A Note on the Chinese Atlas in the Magliabecchian Library, p. 393, [See comments
on pp. 44-46 supra, for Ho-kiang (in Cantonese) or Ho-keng hence 0-keng —in
some other dialect and the great likelihood of this being MACAO. J. M. B.]


Dizem que na terra De china amda a Jemte da
tartaria E chaman-lhe tartall & a tall gemte he
bramca mujto De barbas Ruyvas amdam a cavallo
sam guerreiros he Dizem que da china vam a terra
dos tartaros em dous meses & que na tartaria trazg
cavalhos ferrados com ferraduras De cobre & ysto
deue ser porq a chijna vaise estemdemdo a bamda
Do norte E bombardeiros nosos Dizem que em ale-
manha ouuijrom Ja dizer daquella gemte & de huua
cidade q hos chijs nomeam q se chama (24) E que Ihes
pare§e q poderam hir pola ball via a suas terras em
pouco tempo & afirmano mas a terra por Rezam do
frio Dizem q he despouoada ha certos lugares amtre
os chijs & os tartaros sam os guores (25) & despois da
tartaria Roxia dize os chijs. //
E porquamto alem da china na terra Firme nom
se sabe ao presemte aqi mais terras com q malaca
trate fago pomto (1) (.. . direij das .. . nas as quaes .. .
e cani9y & . . . s// & as . . . adamasca . . . faze em
cauchy chyna & dive a malaqa . . . outro cus ... a
sen 5 fa .. . uns dize .. .ze de pedra ... re outros .. .
a fazem . . . a q . . . pedra q he . . & branca e o . . .
e// &as ... as de por9e .. . finas como .. .s & lou9a
. . . te se faze . . . de forma ...//) daquj por diamte
se falara das Jlhas & somente daquelas com que
malaca navegaa porque se de todas ouuese de dizer
nunca acabaria por Rezam da ymfynjdade delas/ B
aguora se dira dos lequjos & Jampom burneus &
lu9oees. //
fol. 162 v.
(1) A line here marks the beginning of an addition (between brackets above)
to the text, which is written in the margin, in the same hand. The codex was-
badly cropped in the binding, part of the words having been cut away.


They say that there are people from Tartary
{Tartarid) in the land of China and they call them
Tartars {tartall), and these people are very white with
red beards. They ride on horseback; they are war-
like. And they say that they go from China to the
land of the Tartars {tartaros) in two months, and that
in Tartary they have horses shod with copper shoes,
and this must be because China extends a long way
on the northern side, and our bombardiers say that
in Germany they heard tell of these people and of a
city named by the Chinese Quesechama, (24) and it
seems to them that by this route they could go to
their lands in a short time; but they say that by
reason of the cold the land is uninhabited. Between
the Chinese and the Tartars are certain places where
there are the Guores , (25) and after Tartary [is] Russia
(Roxia ), say the Chinese.
And as no inland countries beyond China which
deal with Malacca are at present known, I make a
stop. [A line here marks the beginning of an addition
to the text which is written in the margin, in the same
hand perhaps a couple of lines at first left out by the
transcriber. The manuscript was badly cropped in bind-
ing, the greater part of the words having been cut away
beyond possibility of reconstitution. See Portuguese
text.] From here onwards we will speak of the islands
and only of those to which [the people of] Malacca
sail, because if they all had to be mentioned there
would be no end because of their infinite numbers.
And now we will speak of the Lequjos and Japan
{Jampom), Burneus, and Lugoees.
fol. 162 v.
(24) Que se chama or q se chama , as it appears in the manuscript, means
‘which is called.’ It is possible that Pires wrote some word' or words corresponding
to the Chinese name for a city in Tartary, which the transcriber transformed into
q se chama.
(25) Who are these Guores? In this case they could hardly be the Lequeos.
Prof. Moule wonders whether they are not the Mongols (Moguors).


Os lequeos chamanse guores por quallqr destes
nomes (26) sam lequios he o pnyipall he o
Key gemtijo & toda a gemte / he vasallo do Key dos
chijs trebutarjo / a Jlha sua he gramde he de mujta
Jemte tem nauetas pequenas a sua guisa Juncos tem
ties ou quoatro q comtinoamente compam na chyna


LIU KIU
The Lequeos are called Guores —they are known
by either of these names. (20) Lequios is the chief one.
The king is a heathen and all the people too. He is
a tributary vassal of the king of the Chinese. His
island is large and has many people; they have small
ships of their own type; they have three or four
The Liu Kin (Le-
queos) Inland a.
(26) The earliest European reference to the Gores is in a letter written 6 Feb.
1510 from Malacca to Albuquerque, by Rui de Araujo who had been taken prisoner
when the treacherous attack was made against the first Portuguese to go there in
1509, Alguns Documentos, p. 223. Ferrand mentions two Arab manuscripts, dated
respectively 1462 and 1489, where the island Ghur is referred to as meaning Liu-
Kiu or Formosa (L’ile de Ghur = Lieou-K’ieou = Formosa). According to Ferrand
the 1462 MS says: P‘armi les eles celebres [du monde habite], on compte I’ile de
Likyu, qui est generalement connue sons le nom de Al-Ghur’; the 1489 MS has:
‘On y trouve des mines de fer [appele] al-ghuri. . . Son nom en langue djawi (in
this case the Chinese) est Likiwu,’ Malaka, 11, pp. 126 seqq. This would explain
the association of the name gores with lequeos. As far as we know, the first Euro-
peans to visit the Lequeos islands were Fernao Mendes Pinto, Diogo Zeimoto and
Simao Borralho, when they went to Japan in 1542, Peregrinagdo, cxxxii. Some
months later Pinto went again from China to the Lequeos, where he was shipwreck-
ed : he gives a description of the Ilha Lequia and his adventures there in ch. cxxxvii-
cxlvii of his famous book. C. R. Boxer supposes that the Gores who went to Ma-
lacca, as mentioned in the Comentarios, were meant to be the Japanese, Some
Aspects of Portuguese Influence in Japan, 1542-1640 p. 14. Crawfurd, Dictionary,
s. v. Japan. Denuce says that Gores is a ‘nom d’origine probablement chinoise et
qui parait deriver de Coriai, les Coreens’ ( Magellan , p. 164); according to Chassig-
neux, during the first half of the fifteenth century numerous Koreans sought refuge
in the Liu-Kiu archipelago. Rica de Oro et Rica de Plata, pp. 76 seqq. Whatever
the origin of the word Gores, Pires was the first European to identify it with the
Lequeos, or the inhabitants of the Liu-Kiu archipelago, from the Chinese name for
the present Japanese Ryukyu or Loochoo Islands. Formosa is, however, included
among these islands on old Chinese and some early Portuguese maps; and much of
what is said here seems to refer to Formosa rather than to Loochoo proper. In
his letter of 10 Aug. 1518, Simao Peres Andrade says: ‘There are in the sea [far]
from India other lands, which are isles called the Islands of the Lequeos, reaching
as far as the Tartars, where there are great gold mines, and all the merchandise
that exists in China, off [the coast of] which they lie two hundred leagues away:
they are white people like Germans.’ Torre do Tomho, Gaveta 15, Mago 17, N° 27.
On the representation of the Lequeos on Rodrigues’ maps (ff. 39, 42), see Appendix
11. Ribeiro’s maps of 1527 and 1529 have, west of Paragua Island, the inscription:
‘Those shoals have channels through which the Lequios go to Borneo and other


E nom tem mais trata na china e em malaq a E as
vezes em companhia dos chijs / as vezes por sy na
chijna tratam no porto de foqem (27) qhe na terra da
chijna Junto De quamtom nauega9am De huu dia &
huua noyte Dizem os malaios aa gemte De malaca
que de purtugueses he llequjos nom ha defereca so-
memte que os purtugueses compram molheres o que
os leqos nom faze. //


junks which are continuously buying in China, and
they have no more. They trade in China and in Ma-
lacca, and sometimes in company with the Chinese,
sometimes on their own. In China they trade in the
port of Foqem (27) which is in the land of China near
Canton a day and a night’s sail away. The Ma-
lays say to the people of Malacca that there is no
difference between Portuguese and Llequjos, except
that the Portuguese buy women, which the Leqos do
not.
parts.’ Penrose’s maps has a round mass of islands called as lecquas east of Canton,
between 17° and 20° (correct latitude 24°-30° N.) Homem’s map of 1554 has east
of I. fremoza a group of three islands called Ilhas dos lequios, and north-north-east
•of these another island called lequios ; in addition, all these islands and an imaginary
vast archipelago to the east are named, in large, Os lequios. Homera’s atlases of
1558 and 1568 have a similar representation, except for the imaginary archipelago
and large letters naming the whole. The atlases of Luis and Dourado have a group
of three large islands, running SSW NNE, which seem to correspond to Formosa,
the northernmost called lequio pequeno ; further north-east other islands, corres-
ponding to the Tsubu Shoto group, are called lequio gramde ; between the two groups
there are some small islands named Reis magos, corresponding to the Narabu
Shoto group, north of lequio gramde is the I. do fogo, corresponding to Nakano-
shima or Suwanose-shima, two islands with active volcanoes. The islands Reis ma-
gos and I. do fogo appear for the first time on the map of 1554, and then on the
others mentioned there.
(27) Foqem, or Foquem, must certainly be Fukien, the capital and main port
•of which is Foochow But the port intended need not necessarily be Foochow,
which lies some distance up the River Min, and would be less convenient for traders
than places like Amoy, for instance. From Canton to the nearest point of the
seacoast of Fukien province is about 350 miles by sea and about 250 miles by
land as the crow flies; Foochow is still 250 miles farther. On the other hand, the
main group of the Liu Kiu islands is 500 miles away, on the same latitude as Foo-
chow, which seems to point to this important Chinese port, or some other port of
Fukien province, as the more likely to be frequented by the Lequeos. Further-
more, in his two letters written from Canton in 1526, Vasco Calvo refers to the trade
•of the Lequeos with Fukien, but does not mention Canton (pp. 156, 163). It
seems as if Fires mixed up the information he received, and his Atnqm , Oquem and
Foqem correpond to Fukien, perhaps Foochow, which is called Fucheo by Pinto and
in the atlases of Luis and Dourado. It is curious that Mercator’s world map of
1569 and Ortelius’ Atlas of 1570 have a place called Fuquiau, near the coast but
not a seaport, between Cantan and Chincheo. [Dr Cortesao seems to be entirely
wrong. See comments on pp. 44-6 supra , and the suggestion that this place is
Macao. In all likelihood instead of Foqem the copyist should have transcribed
Hoqem, as explained on pp. 45-6 supra. We know that the Fukienese frequent-
ed Macao, possibly at times accompanied by Japanese seafarers and inhabitants of
the Liu Kiu islands —J. M. B.]




BIBLIOGRAPHY
.Albuquerque (Afonso de) Cartas de Afonso de Albuquerque, seguidas de documen-
ts que as elucidam Publicadas por Raimundo Antonio de Bulhao Pato,
Lisboa, 1884 (7 vols).
Alguns Documents de Archivo Nacional da Torre do Tombo acerca das Navegagdes e
Conquistas Portuguesas. Ed. Jose Ramos Coelbo, Lisboa, 1892.
Archivo Historico Portuguez
Balfour (S. F.) Hongkong before the British (Reprinted from Tien Hsia Monthly),
Shanghai, 1941.
Barros (Joao de) Decadas da Asia, Decadas I a 111 Lisboa, 1552-1563.
Boxer (Prof C. R.) Notes on Chinese Abroad in the late Ming and early Manchu
Periods compiled from Contemporary European Sources (1500-1750) in Tien
Hsia Monthly, Shanghai, 1939.
Three Historians of Portuguese Asia (Barros , Couto and Bocarro) in Boletim do
Instituto Portugues de Hongkong, Vol. I, pp. 15-44, Macao, 1948.
The Christian Century in Japan, 1549-1650, Berkeley and Cambridge, 1951.
Braga (J. M.) — Macao in 1515. Reprinted from Boletim do Instituto Portugues de
Hongkong, Vol. 1, pp. 187-196. Macao, 1948.
The Western Pioneers and their Discovery of Macao, Macao, 1949.
Castanheda (Fernao Lopes de) Historia do Descobrimcnto e Conquista da India
pelos Portugueses, Lisboa, 1551-1561 (2nd Ed., 1924-1933 4 vols.).
Chang T’ien-tse Sino-Portuguese Trade from 1514 to 1644, Leyden, 1934.
Ch’en Heng The Invasion of China by Japanese Pirates during the Ming Dynasty,
Peking, 1934.
Chen Wen-fu Wang Rung I-ai-ts’u Chi.
Correa Caspar Lendas da India. Ed. R. J. de Lima Felner. (Academia Rea[
das Sciencias de Lisboa), Lisboa, 1856-1860. (4 vols.).
Cortesao (Dr. Armando) Expansao Portuguesa atraves do Pacifico Chapter XI
in the Historia da Expansao Portuguesa no Mundo, Vol. 11, Lisboa 1939.
The Suma Oriental of Tome Pires and the Book of Francisco Rodrigues, Hakluyt
Society, London, 1944 (2 vols.).


Dalgado (Mons. Sebastian) — Glossario Luso-Asiatico, Coimbra, 1919 & 1921 (2.
vols.).
Danvers (F, C.) The Portuguese in India, London, 1894 (2 vols.).
D’Elia (P. c Pasquale M.), S. J. — Fonti Ricciane, Roma 1942-1949 (3 vols.).
Duyvendak (Prof. J. J. L.) The True Dates of the Chinese Maritime Expeditions
in the early XV century in the Toung Pao, Leyden, Vol. XXXIV, 1938, pp.
341-452.
Ferguson (Donald) — Letters from Portuguese Captives in Canton (reprinted from,
the Indian Antiquary), Bombay, 1902.
Goes (Damiao de) Gronica do Felicissimo Rei Doni Manuel, Lisboa, 1567 (2nd
Ed., Coimbra, 1926 —4 vols.).
Kammerer (Comdr. Albert) —La Decouverte de la Chine par les Portugais au
XVI re Siecle reprinted from T’oung Pao, Leyden, 1944.
Keil (Luis) — Jorge Alvares, o Primeiro Porlugues que foi d China (1513), Lisboa,.
1933.
Ku T’ing-lin Tien-hsia Ch*un-Kuo Li-ping Shu.
Li Kuang-ming The Repulse of the Wa Pirates by the Provincial and Extra-Provin-
cial Armies in the Provinces of Kiangsu and Chekiang during 1551-1561, Pe-
king, 1933.
Ljungstedt (Andrew) —An Historical Sketch of the Portuguese Settlements in China,.
Boston, 1836.
Mayers (W. F.), Dennys (X. B.) and King (C.) The Treaty Ports of China and
Japan, London and Hongkong, 1867.
Montalto de Jesus (C. A.) Historic Macao, Hong Kong, 1902 (2nd Ed., Macao,
1926).
Morse (H. B.) — The International Relations of the Chinese Empire, Shanghai, 1910-
-1918 —(3 vols.).
Orta (Garcia da) — Goloquios dos Simples e Drogas da India, Goa, 1563 (2nd Ed.
annotated by the Conde de Ficalho, Lisboa, 1891 2 vols.).
Pelliot (Prof. Paul) — Les Grandes Voyages maritimes Chinois au debut du XV e sie-
cle in the Toung Pao, Vol. XXXI, Leyden, 1935, pp. 237-452.
Peragallo (Prof. Prosper) Carta de El-Rei D. Manuel ao Rei Catholico narrando-
-Ihe as Viagens Portugueses a India desde 1500 ate 1505, Lisboa, 1892.
Ravenstein (E. G.) A Journal of the First Voyage of Vasco da Gama, 1497-1499'
(Hakluyt Society), London, 1898.
Tung Kivan Hsien-chih.
Wells Williams (S.) The Middle Kindom, New York, 1848 (2 vols.).
Wmdstedt (Sir Richard 0.) Malaya and its History, London, 1948.
Yule (Sir Henry) The Book of Ser Marco Polo, London, 1928 (3 vols.).
Vule (Sir H.) and Burnell (A. C.) Hobson-Jobson: A Glossary, London, 1903~


INDEX




INDEX
Abarute —lO7
Albuquerque, Afonso de —l3, 20-23,
79-80, 101
Albuquerque, Afonso, Cartas de —xiv, 22,
23, 25, 26,
Albuquerque, Jorge 25, 26, 29, 58,
59, 80
Alcagover, Sirnao —5l
Alguns documentos 22, 23
Almeida D. Francisco de 13
Aloes 14, 89, 103
Alum —2O, 39, 107
Alvares, Jorge —x, xi, xiv, 20, 49, 55,
56, 57, 71, 72, 80, 95
Alvares, Jorge, at Malacca 20, 26, 37,
40, 51, 52, 77, 79-80
Alvares, Jorge, his son 24
Alvares, Jorge, Monument xi, xv, 55
Alvares, Jorge, place in history —3, 24,
26-29, 31-32, 55-60
Alvares, Jorge, voyages to China, 24-29,
37, 47, 51-55, 57-61, 72, 80, 81, 95
Alvares, Jorge, (2) —55
Alvares, Jorge (3) 56
Amber —14, 20, 24
Andraguiri 24
Angediva 17
Anking 43, 111
Anong-hoy 31
Ao Ching {see Hau Ch’ing; see Macao)
Arabs —l3-15, 45
Araujo, Manuel de 52
Araujo, Ruy de —l9, 20, 79, 115
Aynara (see Hainan)
Badakshan 39
Bahar —105, 109
Balfour, S. F. 73-74
Banda —4, 26,
Bandara (see Shah bandar)
Barbosa, Duarte 15, 49
Barnett, K. M. A. 44
Barros, Joao de xn, 19, 26, 27, 29,
30, 54, 55, 59, 62, 68, 99
Baticala 17
Bengal 24, 25
Benzoin —l5
Bernyaga (see Island of Trade)
Bintang, Sultan of 25, 52, 53
Bird of Paradise 15,89
Black-wood —lO3
Bocca Tigris 31, 64
Borneo 24, 26, 30, 97, 103, 113
Botelho, Jorge 52, 53
Boxer, Prof. C. R. xn, 9, 19, 37, 45,
60, 115
Brass 43, 105, 107
Brazil-wood 103, 105
Brito Patalim, Ruy de 23, 24, 37,
80
Brocades— 13, 15, 24, 36-39, 43, 87,
107, 109
Cabral, Pedro Alvares 5,79
Calicut —4, 6, 12, 17, 79
Calvo, Diogo 54
Calvo, Vasco 71-72, 87
Cambaluc 41,80,87
Cambarra 41, 42, 87, 89, 91
Cambay 15, 25, 103
Cambodia —l5, 30
Camlets 91, 103
Camoes, Luis de 42
Camphor —l5, 20, 103, 107, 111


Cananor 12, 17
£ancy 109
Cantino 79, 93
Canton —l5, 30, 37,40-45, 47-49, 52,
55, 63, 65, 76, 89-103, 111
Canton River 23, 25, 29, 72 {see
Pearl River)
Captain of Malacca 23, 24, 25, 59,
80, 101
Carletti, Francisco 111
Cartographers xm, 13, 23
Cash —43, 105
Castauheda, Fernao de 66-68, 71-73,
99
Castle Peak 30, 73, 74
Catalan map 14, 93
Catechu 3 03
Cathay —7, 16, 40, 41, 80, 87
Catty 105
Ceitis 43, 105
((Celestial Empire» 6
Ceylon —4, 10, 18, 79
Chaim, Carcia 25, 26
Champa 15, 30, 89, 109
Chang-chou 93
Chang Tien-tse 47, 60-61, 63, 73, 93,
101
Chang Te, Emperor —3l, 48, 54, 63,
64, 75
Charts xm, 23
Ch’en Si-hien 48
Cheng Ho 10
Cheng Tung, Emperor 11
Chia Ching, Emperor 63
Chielata 19, 23
China, xi, xv, 3, 6-10, 12-16, 19, 20,
23-30, 38-41. 44, 45, 47, 49, 51-55,
57-60, 66, 68-77, 80-81, 83-113
Chinacota 79
China Sea —9, 32-36, 54
Chinese at Calicut 6
Chinese Atlas 111
Chinese at Cochin 5
Chinese imperial succession— 42, 91
Chinese landfall 24, 26
Chinese at Malacca 15, 18-24, 61-77
85
Chinese nationalism ix
Chinese officials 54-56, 71-75, 91,
101
Chinese ships —5, 9, 11, 15, 18-24,
79, 101
Ching Shan 30, 73
Ching Tien 7
Chini 7
Chins —ix, 7,8, 16, 18-19, 22-23, 79
Chopsticks 87
Chou Ch’u-fei 63
Chu Kiang {see Pearl River)
Ch’uan Chow— 31, 40, 52, 93
Chuen Pee 31
Chung Kuo 6-7
Ciae 24
Cloth 15, 39, 43, 85, 103, 111
Cloves —l5-20, 103
Coates, Austin xv
Cochin —5, 17, 22, 25, 38, 39
Cochinchina —4, 15, 26, 30, 89, 91, 109
Coelho, Duarte 51, 52, 54, 57, 81
Colinjam 20
Copper 15, 43, 107
Cordier, Henri 60
Cornelians —ll3
Coromandel —l5, 24
Correa, Caspar —5, 6, 12, 51, 66, 71,
74, 99 (see also Lendas da India)
Corsali, Andrea 38, 40, 81
Cortesao, Dr. Armando —x, 13, 14, 23,
41, 43-45, 60, 71-72, 75-77, 83, 85
(see The Suma Oriental of Tome Tires)
Cotton 85
Couto, Diogo do xn
Cruz, Frei Caspar da 9
Damasks —l5, 20, 24, 38, 39, 43, 107,
109
Dames, M. A. 49
Danvers, F. C. 21
Dias de Solis, Joao 21
Dourado 93,' 97
Drugs —l5, 36


Duyvendak, Prof. J. J. L. 10
East River 65
Elephants—lo, 103
Emperor of China 10, 29, 12, 48, 63,
69-70, 89, 91
Empoli, Giovanni 39, 40, 41, 81
Enrolados 43, 107
Envoys to China 42, 51, 68, 75, 80-
81, 89, 91
Esparteiro (Rear Admiral J. Marques)
xv
Factor 24, 26, 51, 59
Fans —l5, 107
Feringhi 48
Ferguson (D.) xiv, 38, 39, 40, 48, 59,
60, 71
Ferguson (D.); Letters from Portuguese
Captives in Canton xiv, 38, 40, 46
Ferrand 45
Fidalgo, Pero 97
Filipinos 26, 30, 37, 71, 97
Flor de la Mar 23
Fo-Lang-Chi {see Fu-lang-ki)
Foodstuffs —15, 105
Franks 48, 63
Freixo de Espada-a-Cinta 21
Fu-lang-ki 48, 63
Fu Men —-31, 64
Fukien —3O, 31, 40, 47, 52, 73, 93
Fuseleira 43, 105, 107
Fuzeiro, Alvaro 53
Galvao 97
Gama (Vasco da) xm, 3,4, 12, 79
Garo 89
Giles, Lionel —lO9
Ginger 39
Goa ii, 4, 17, 23
Goes, Damiao de 66, 68-71, 73, 99
Gold —l5, 24, 87, 107
Golden Chersonese ix, 14,
Golden Horde 7
Goryu Shan 45
Grand Canal 40
Guedes, Martim 52
Guores 45, 113, 115
Hainan 14, 91, 93, 95, 111
Hai Tao —lOl
Hakka 73
Hakluyt Society —x, xiv, 41, 49, 76,
83
Han 8
Han Ch’ing {see Macao) 30, 46
Ho Ao —■ 52
Ho Keng {see Macau) 30, 44, 46, 111
Hoklo 73
Homen 93, 95, 99, 111
Horses 39, 85, 113
Hsiang Shan 31
Hsin An 97
Hsing-ming 65
Hu T’au Men 66
Huchani 44, 103
Hwa Ilsia 7
Ibn Batuta 95
Idrisi 41, 95
llha de Veniaga ( see Isle of Trade)
Incense 15, 39, 103
India —x, 6, 13, 15, 16, 17, 23, 24, 40,
59, 79-81
Indian Antiquary xiv
Island of Trade 25, 53, 54, 55, 56,
57, 61-77, 80-81
Italians 38-40, 49, 81
Jade 36
Japan 52, 89
Japanese 11, 31, 45
Java —4, 15, 23-26, 89, 91, 101
Jewellery 36, 87
John 11, King 4
Junks —l5, 19-24, 31, 43, 58, 68, 95,
97, 103, 109
Ka-pi-tan 48
Karnmerer, Corndr, Albert 74-75
Keil, Luis —x, xiv, 26-29, 54, 55
Keil, Luis: Jorge Alvares, o Primeiro Por-
tugues quefoi a China xiv, 26-27
Khan 39, 41
Ki Ou Island 31
Kin Sing Men 31
Kin Tan Wan 46


Kin Tau Yen Tsang 46
King of Spain 21, 22, 79
King of Portugal 24-26, 29, 69-70,
79
Ku Ying-siang 48
Kublai Khan ix, 8, 9
Kum Sing Moon 31
Kwai yuan 48
Kwang Chow 63, 95
Kwang Hoi 65
Kwang Hiao-Sze 48
Kwang Tung 31, 41, 52, 65, 95
Lac-k’iem-kei-tam 65
Ladrones 30
Lam Pai 66
Lantao Island 30, 44
Lappa Island 30, 66
Leang Ma 47
Lendas da India 4-6, 12, 13 (see also
Correa, Caspar) 71
Leoqueos (see Liu Kiu Islands)
Li Min 7
Lin Fu 63
Lin Tin Island 29, 30, 44, 66, 73-77,
89, 99
Ling Wai Tai Ta 64
Lingaloes —lO3
Lisbon —xi, 13, 22, 23, 76, 79
Liu Kiu Islands 12, 26, 30, 44-47, 52,
109, 111, 113, 115
Liu Pang 8
Ljungstedt, Andrew 57-61, 61-62,
66, 77
Lo Man Shan 30
Lobo Falfao 52
Loh Tsoh-tseung xv
Loos 43, 109
Lopes de Sequeira, Diogo 17-19, 23,
79
Lotus lily 46
Luyoes (see Felipinos)
Luis 95, 97
Luz, Luiz Agostinho xv
Luzon —26, 30, 37, 97, 113
Macao —xv, 46, 47, 57, 58, 66, 111
Mace —l5, 29
Magellan 97
Maia, Manuel xi
Major, Henry —l2
Malabar ix, x, 5, 9 38-39,
Malaca xn, 3-4, 12-18, 20-26, 30,
32, 37-40, 43, 45, 51-53, 58-59, 66,
71, 75-77, 79-81, 85-109, 113
Malaca, King of— 18, 21, 89, 97
Malaya —l4, 15
Malays 19-23, 45, 53, 73, 101
Malchina 14, 79
Manoel, King xiv, 4, 13-14, 17, 21-
26, 29, 79
Manzi —9, 16
Maps xm, 13, 14, 23, 75
Marco Polo xra, 5,7, 9, 16, 40, 87,
93, 109
Mascarenhas, Jorge 52
Mayers, W. F. 47, 48
Medici, Duke Giuliano de 38, 81
Mello, Jorge de 25
Menancabao 24
Mendes Pinto 87
Mendes de Vasconcellos, Joao 21, 22
Mendoza, Frei Juan Gonzalez 9
Mercator 93
Middle Kingdom 6
Min Kuo 7
Ming Shu 46
Mings —ix, 9-13, 46-48, 64, 65, 99
Moluccas —4, 25, 26, 89
Mongols ix, 8, 113
Montalto de Jesus, C. A. 60, 62
Moreno, Louren§o 22
Moslems— 18, 19, 53
Moule, Prof. A. C. 85, 87, 93, 99, 107,
109, 111, 113
Muar 53
Musk —l4, 15, 38, 39, 105, 107, 109
Nan Tou 31, 64, 67-77, 97, 99
Nanking 43, 109, 111
North River 65
Nutmeg— 15, 39, 103
0 Moon 46


Odoric, Friar 95
Oquem {see Macao) 44, 46, 111
Ormuz 4
Orta, Garcia da 13
Os Lusiadas 42
Pacem 20,80,89, 91
Pachak —lO3
Pacific Ocean 32
Padrao 24-27, 30, 54, 55, 80, 89,
91
Pago 53
Pahang 15, 24
Palascia 39
Paleacate 24
Palembang 10
Pancaldo, Leone 97
Pao An 99
Pasee —2O, 89, 91
Pearl River —24, 31, 32, 61, 64, 65,
72, 77
Pearls 15, 20, 38, 39, 93, 105-111
Pedir 20
Pegu —4, 21-25, 80, 107
Pei Wo 64, 69-74
Peking —4l, 42, 51, 75, 80,87,89, 111
Pelliot, P. —7, 10, 60, 93
Pepper—ls, 20, 24, 39, 40, 51, 103,
105
Peragallo, P. 14
Pereira, Francisco 26
Pereira, Galeoto 8-9
Peres de Andrade, Fernao 47, 51, 52,
68-72, 75, 81
Peres de Andrade, Simao 53, 54, 81
Perestrello, Bartholomeu 59
Perestrello, Rafael 27, 51, 54, 58-61
Persia 10, 15
Pessoa, Pero 25
Peter, Prince xm
Philippine Islands 30, 97
Picul 105
Pirates 11, 31, 52, 53, 69, 70
Pires, Tome {see also Suma Oriental) 25,
30, 37, 40-52, 70, 75-77, 80-89, 93,
95, 99
Polo, Marco, xm, 5,7, 9, 16, 40, 87,
93
Porcelain —l2-15, 36, 38, 79
Porto lans 13, 75
Portugal 13, 14, 22, 23, 54, 79, 85
Portuguese pioneers 20
Precious Stones 36, 87, 89
Pulate 59
Pulicat —l5
Pulo Tumon {see Tun Men Island)
Quesechama —ll3
Ramusio — 49, 76
Rhubarb —l5, 20, 30, 107
Ribeiro, Diogo 75, 95
Ricci, Father M. 41, 87
Rodrigues, Francisco 22, 53, 54, 77,
83, 95, 99
Russia 113
Rutters 23
Ryukyu Islands {see Liu Kiu Islands)
St. John’s Island {see Shang Chuan)
St. Lawrence, Island of 18
St. Thomas 18
Salgado, Pero 25, 26, 37
Salt —lll
Saltpetre 15, 1 07
Sampans 31, 32
* San Joao Rumessa 21, 80
San Shan {see Shang Chuan)
Sandalwood —l5, 89, 103
Santa Cruz 1) —5l
Santa Cruz (2) 56
Santiago 52
Santo Andre 52
Saraiva, Bishop 58
Saraiva, Cardinal 97
Satin —l3-15, 20, 24, 36-39, 43, 107,
109
Scrivener 21, 24
Shah Bandar 24, 25, 59, 109
Shang Chuan 56, 62-65, 72, 75
Shao King Fu 48
Shih Huang-ti 7
Shih Tsu 8
Shih Tsung, Emperor 48


Shih Tze Men 66
Shing Shan 73
Shiu King 48
Siam —4, 15, 21, 26, 30, 43, 44, 52,
80, 89-91, 108
Silk 13, 15, 36-39, 43, 87, 105-109
Silva Rego, Prof. Fr. A. xil
Silver —l5, 107
Singapore —lO3, 105
Siu Wang Kum 66
Soares, Pero 52
Somedrom 39
Spain 14, 21, 79
Spaniards 32
Spice Islands —4, 21, 77, 80
Spices 40
Sugar —l5, 109
Sulayman 41, 95
Sulphur 107
Suma Oriental of Tome Pires xiv, xv,
23, 25, 30, 40-46, 71, 75-77, 80,
83-117
Sumatra —4, 15, 18, 39, 51
Sun-hui 65, 75
Sunda 24
Swatow 31
Ta Ming Hwei Tien 48
Ta Shan —3l, 74
Ta Tsing Kuo 7
Tael —lO5
Taffetas 43, 107
Tai Tsung 8
Tamao —3O, 54, 55, 61-62, 66-67,
80-81, 99
Tang 8
Tanka 73
Tartars 11, 113
Tien Chau 6
T’ien Hsia 74
Tien-Hsia CKun Kuo Li Pin Shu 65
Timor 24, 26
Tin —l5, 38, 103
Tong 9
Tonkin —l4
Torre do Tombo xi, uv
T’oung Pao 74-75
Tsin 7
Tumon 41, 43 (see also Tamao)
T’un Men Anchorage 29, 30, 52, 53,
54, 61, 63, 64, 72-77
T’un Men Island —3O, 37, 53, 54, 55,
. 66, 74, 95, 99, 103
Tung Kwan District 63-65, 72-73
Tung Kwang Hsien-cfiih 63, 65
Tung Oil 37
Tusks —lO3
Ty Kok Tau 31
Typhoon 33, 51
Uma Chatu 25
Unicorn —lO
Varnish 37
Vaz, Euclides 55
Velvet 39
Veniaga (see Island of Trade)
Venice —l2
Vermillion —l5, 39
Viegas (Joao) 20
Vieira, Christovao— 48, 55, 71, 87
Voretzsch (Dr. E. A.) —xiv
Wa —ll
Wang Tung 65
Weights —lO5
West River Delta 46, 65
Windstedt, Sir R. 15
Wong (Peter E.) xv
Wu Ting-chuh 64
Wuchau 48
Wuhu 43
Xaas 43, 107, 109
Xabandar (see Shah bandar)
Xamjy —lO9
Xanbu 109
Xavier, St. Francis 56
Yangtsze River 40, 43,
Ying Tsung, Emporor 11
Yung Lo, Emperor —lO, 11, 87
Yule, Sir H. 38
Zeiton 40, 93








