

ftp Inland mission.
Oar (Missionaries.
Q?lna’« (sm> M
EDITED BY
/T\/U?Y J^EED


SD
V




The Rev. J. HUDSON TAYLOR, M.R.C.S., F.R.G.S.


CHINA
SHORT SKETCH
OF THE
China Inland Mission,
Location of Australian Missionaries,
The Truth about Opium, &c.
EDITED BY
MARY REED.
Melbourne:
MDCCCXCII.




PREFACE.
China is one of the mysterious problems of the world.
To the politician it is an unknown quantity—certainly an
element of perplexity —in relation to all the great questions
affecting the well-being of Eastern lands; and possibly a
menace in the near future to all Western governments.
To the Christian, China and its millions presents a theme
of perpetual and absorbing interest. Within no other
empire is there such a vast aggregation of human beings in
one continent, and speaking practically one language.
One-third of the world’s heathen own direct allegiance
to the court at Pekin; and when tributary nations are
included, about one-half of heathendom is represented in
China.
The evangelisation of China not only means solving the
greatest political and social problem of the age, but the
breaking up of the devil’s intrenched camp, the storming
and capture of his chief citadel.
Those who are directing and those who are carrying on
this “holy war” deserve well of the whole Church of
Christ. They are its unconscious heroes and heroines.
Their splendid service for Christ is the Church’s vicarious
obedience to her Lord’s last command. How vast the
field, how awful the need, how inadequate the number of
workers employed, how insufficient the resources available,
but few seem to comprehend. These are facts that only
one here and there has made an honest attempt to estimate
in all their tremendous force and significance


The writer of this little book aims at so presenting some
of the elementary facts about China and its evangelisation,
as will lead to a thankful recognition of the grand founda-
tion-work already done, and to a juster estimate of the
vast work still to be done ere China can become what it
ought to be—the most splendid appanage of Christ’s
crown.
Miss Reed’s qualification for what has been to her a
labour of love is that she has herself been a worker in
this great stronghold of superstition and idolatry.
Not a few fascinating books on China and the Chinese
have been written by gifted travellers; the most of these are
wholly admirable in their own line. With them this
book does not enter into competition. It is a heart book:
it voices the cry of sorrowand need old as the Fall; it testifies
to the moral impotence of a godless civilisation; it fastens
upon the conscience that most fearful of British iniquities
—the opium curse of China; it pleads the cause of those
keenest sufferers in all heathen lands, the women and girls,
whose only escape from intolerable wrongs is by the ghastly
gate of suicide; and chiefly, it reiterates in its application
to China the Redeemer’s great command, “Go YE into
All the World and Preach the Gospel to EVERY
CREATURE.”
The writer, as a Missionary of the China Inland Mission,
speaks in these pages chiefly of that organisation—and
this, not in any depreciation of the other noble societies
prosecuting their Lord’s work in China, but as that which
she knows best, and as that which was from the first distinctly
called of God to carry the light of the Gospel into the far
interior. The story of the China Inland Mission has yet to


be published; and when it does appear, the record of the
calm heroic faith of its honoured founder, and the fact
that the whole of its great resources have been obtained
without solicitation from man, but in direct answer to
prayer, and as the result of implicit reliance in the promises
of God, will furnish not the least interesting and edifying
chapter of the great “Romance of Modern Missions.”
This book is an unambitious attempt to interest a wider
circle in China’s needs and claims; to call the Lord’s
remembrancers to fervent and believing prayer on its behalf;
and to point out a field of service in which eager and
consecrated workers may win immortal honour for their
Saviour’s name.
May the blessing of God so rest upon the perusal of
these pages that each of these results may be achieved.
ALFRED BIRD.
CONTENTS.
TRAINING FOR A LIFE WORK : Early Experiences of Rev.
J. Hudson Taylor. GOD IS FAITHFUL IN CHINA: How
the China Inland Mission was formed. SOME REMARKABLE
EXTENSIONS OF THE WORK; Australasia’s Contingent.
OUR MISSIONARIES IN CHINA. CHINA’S GREATEST
CURSE.


STATIONS
IN WHICH MISSIONARIES FROM
AUSTRALASIA ARE
LOCATED UNDERLINED WITH
RED.
Yun-nan
. . Misses Fysh and Aspinal.
Che-foo
. Mr. A. S. Devenish.
Kwei-yang
.. Messrs. Rogers and Burden.
Kao-yiu
. Misses A. & S. Garland, Cole-
Pau-ning
Lan-chau
Han-chung
. . Rev. C. H. Parsons.
.. Miss Sorenson.
., Rev. T. and Mrs. Southey,
Ning-kwoh
Ta-ku-t’ang
man, and Marie Box.
. Messrs. Burgess and Goold.
. Misses Chapman, F. Box, and
Goold.
Misses Booth and Steel.
Kwel-ki
. Misses Young, Bavin, and
Chau-kia-k’eo
.. Miss Lloyd and Mr. Joyce.
Fleming.
Studying at
Yangchau —Misses Henry anc
Harrison.
Studying at
Nganking — Messrs. Thomson,
Upham, and Entwistle.


CHINA
100 fast oF Greenwich l( 0
120
40
\ I
I (
T A -f J%
0 m/v/XtwaA y/ yy
40
TV X 0 J * ci
-v,
s
/ Si-ninO
LAN-CHAU ( f
KAN- su
(SHEN-SI
. i Tsinchau [
} SI -NOAN
\ ■ u t*s&Jp' & (fc ¥
A'' 1 Pdu t in G 1 Jfjf
/ \ PEH-CHI L| i K
,7 TdiYuen \ A-''Y M?
\ s h a n - s i ; c y y- 7 1 oL
,'/ r A / Asi-NAN 1 ’ a
< / L "i /° if#
I L '} i U SHAN- TUNG Wy A
1 # /-# y HWANG HA I %
/ .and %L 0jR
KAI-FUNG Vj U±i
HO - MAN \\r Kl^ virrr r m\r err a
V
TIBET '< ■ .f Han-c^niJ
X. ,She-ki-+ien J / ■ ZS,\.
A. v ~ / ! Ybndchau\A v
' •' 'v,-, / i-—
1 ' N -/„
/ # Pau-ning
Wan-Jven^
v / g fining klanq-
Fanchena* ' / NOAN- *^ S "4 hai
x hu}peh --j yrsah-y J'
NGANKINC Lfe,
30
30
_ / SZ-CHUEN / /
n u —'
'-'J _ \ h —'^^p ,m<3 P°
Bafarnj *f\P J
~'\ r
f\ (,
/ "(
r\ / V*,' J )
*) \ ) K WEI-YANG (
/ / 1 0 V -
/ 1 „y' YTakumnpy. j gh A K j anc
■ y Yuh-shanf *y))
7 i „ hjal ,
CHANG SHA ! Kl A N C - S4_^y '' \ \ W 410 ' 0^ 0
° j Kwei-k'i 1
HU-NAN ( 1
j \ FUH - KIEN JpUH-CHAU
• Bhami
20
j KWE1.-CHAU /
Tail yun nan S /-• \
— j f - \ J
YUN-NAN y— '
KWANC '
\ i
v v ; v
/ \ TONC-KINC
r_xr>n
KWEJLIN i r , r . ----, ) s A
(' v ' ‘‘ x i
KWANC -TUNG \Jr/ \% {L
- — V- ~ TA '^ A fc C
/ ' ' » HonfikonQ
CHINA SEA V-
20
SIAM \ f rtT
\ _ ill (tf
_A !lL_
A)) Scale of English Miles \
TJ — ■ " T 1
"AUO 120


' ■-* W ♦ M
. *
» ■
r i *-.<• : A
* * 4 * ' •
4 • • >’* - * .
'. : ' • , •• ■ i ; ••
* . • . • • ■ * ' V
- .V ■■ y'-:< ; . . ./;
* . /:•’ • -•> •
. . V■. ’
■ • * . . ■ .• -
*
,• * ■ » i • 1 ■ ♦
1 v • ' *jvi:
i * " ' 4 '' k ■
* ** . 1 . •' - •
-*. - •
A . , ’ V * . N , * '•- .V*
• > r 4, ; *
*
A> ,
... ; < . •-. . ■ .
* * • , -S -- .
! ■ . ‘3 V ■* . ■.
* ■ .** >*• * ; * . ■ V <■’* • *
;*•* • ■ • . ■ . v. •
... • * . /
» 4 , *
S • . * V • • ■ ' • • -i • .*»■ ,
»•. .#• 4 ■ •>/ ...
:v ?v * 1 • • ' ’
# * i ' 4 ►
. ♦*> r .
*>!?♦, .*
n . * i • ■ . - ■ < • •
■ ■ **■ ;* • " W ....
. < .
•'
. • • • :■ . .
■ ' . ' ’i . . ’ • : <; .
• ■» “ *
| • ... i , <V* ■
;J ■. ■ '■ ■i? -* . < ■
. * v *> • V
r *• . # . ‘ •»*' . '* * J
•• *
/ • /
. *• * V ■ .% ,


CHAPTER I.
TRAINING FOR A LIFE WORK.
Early Incidents in the Life of Mr. Hudson Taylor.
HE story of the China Inland
Mission is so closely connected
with Mr. Taylor’s own life that
we have thought it best to give
in detail several incidents that
occurred prior to his first de-
parture for China, and on his
arrival there, as they show how
wonderfully God led His ser-
vant to trust Him fully, and to live in entire dependence
upon Him.
It is interesting to know that the heart of Mr. Taylor’s
father was once deeply stirred as to the needs of China ;
his own circumstances made it impossible for him to go to
that heathen land himself, so he was led to pray that God
would call his son in his stead.
Mr. Taylor’s conversion was a remarkable answer to
prayer. One afternoon he took up an interesting-looking
tract to pass the time, intending to read the “ story,” and
leave the “ sermon” at the end. He was in a sceptical
state of mind at the time, but God’s Spirit used an expres-


sion which he read in the tract to his conversion, and he
was soon praising God in the old warehouse to which he
had retired. The same afternoon Mr. Taylor’s mother, 70
or 80 miles away, had gone to her room with an intense
longing for her son’s conversion ; she gave herself to
prayer, and resolved not to cease until she was assured of
the answer. Hour after hour she pleaded with God until at
length she could but praise Him, so strong was her con-
viction that she was heard. And the event proved how
well grounded was her confidence.
Not many months after his conversion Mr. Taylor dates
the time when he definitely consecrated all to God; it was
a deeply solemn hour, and though but sixteen, his whole
soul was filled with unspeakable awe and joy, as he was
conscious that his surrender was accepted.
Within a short time of his consecration Mr. Taylor’s
eyes were turned to China, and he felt sure that his life
service was to be for that great empire; as this impression
grew stronger, he sought to prepare himself, in every
possible way, for missionary work. He read all the books
on China accessible to him, and finding that medical
knowledge would be of much use, after a time of prepara-
tory study at home, he went to Hull for medical and
surgical training.
Referring to this time Mr. Taylor wrote :
Having the twofold object before me of accustoming myself to
endure hardness, and of economising in order to be able to assist
more largely the needy ones among whom I spent a good deal of
time labouring in the Gospel, I soon found that I could live at home
for very much less than I had any conception of. Butter and milk,
and expensive luxuries, such as bread and meat, I soon got rid of; and
I found that by living mainly on oatmeal and rice, with occasional


changes, a very small
sum would suffice. In
this way I had more
than two-thirds of my
income available for
works of mercy and
religious purposes; and
I found that the less I
consumed and the more
I gave away, the fuller
of happiness and bless-
ing did I become. Un-
speakable joy all the
day long, and every
day, was my happy ex-
perience. God, even my
God, was a living, bright
reality, and all I had to
do was joyful service.
It was a very grave
thought, however, to my
mind to contemplate
going out to China, far
away from all human
aid, and there to de-
pend alone on the liv-
ing God for protection,
supplies, and help of
every kind. I felt that
one’s spiritual muscles
CHINESE MUSICIAN.
required strengthening. There was no doubt that if one’s faith did
not fail, God would not fail; but then, what if one’s faith did fail?
I had not then learned that “If we believe not, He abideth faithful,
He cannot deny himself;” and consequently it was a very serious
question, not whether He was faithful, but whether I had strong
enough faith to warrant my embarking in the enterprise set before
me.
I thought to myself, “When I get out there I shall have no claim
on anyone for anything—my claim will alone be on God; and I must


CHINESE PRAYER CYLINDER.
learn, before I leave England, to move man, through God, by prayer
alone.” My kind employer wished me, as he was busily occupied,
always to remind him when my salary became due. I determined
not to do so directly, but to ask God to bring the fact to His
recollection, and thus to encourage me by answering prayer. As the
time drew near for my receiving a quarter’s salary, I was much in
prayer about it. The day arrived, but my kind friend made no
allusion to it. I continued praying, and days passed on, but he did
not remember, until at length, on settling up my weekly accounts on
Saturday night, I found myself possessed of only half-a-crown, and
that half-crown happened to be in one coin.
Still, I had hitherto had no lack, and I continued in prayer. The
Sunday was a very happy one. As usual, my heart was full and
brimming over with blessing. After attending the service in the
morning, my afternoons and evenings were filled with Gospel-work
in the various lodging-houses that I was accustomed to visit in the
lowest part of the town. It always
seemed to me as if heaven was begun
below, and that all that could be looked
for was an enlargement of one’s capacity
for joy, not a truer filling than I already
possessed. After I had concluded my
last service, about ten o’clock at night, a
poor man asked me to go and pray with
his wife, stating that she was dying. I
agreed, and on my way to his house
asked him why he had not been for the
priest, as his accent told me he was an
Irishman. He had been, he said, but
the priest had refused to come without
being paid, is. 6d., which he did not
possess, as the family was starving.
It at once occurred to my mind that
all I had in the world was this solitary
half-crown, and that it was in one coin,
and that, while the basin of water-gruel
that I usually took for my supper was
awaiting me, and there was sufficient in
the house for breakfast, I had nothing


for dinner next day. Somehow or other there was a stoppage
in the flow of joy in my heart; but instead of reproving myself,
I began to reprove the poor man, and to tell him it was very
wrong of him to let matters get into such a state as he described—
that he ought to have gone to the relieving-offlcer. He had been,
he said, and had been told to come at eleven o’clock the next morn-
ing, but he feared his wife might not live so long.
“Ah,” I thought, “ if I had only 2s. and a 6d., instead of half-a-
crown, how gladly would I give these poor people one shilling of it!”
But to part with the half-crown was far from my thoughts. I little
dreamed that the real meaning of this feeling was this—l would
trust God with is. 6d., but I was not prepared to trust Him without
any money at all in my pocket.
My conductor led me into a court, down which I followed him
with some nervousness, I had been there before, and had been at
the last visit so roughly handled, while my tracts were torn to pieces,
and I had received such a warning not to come again, that I felt
more than a little concerned. Still, it was the path of duty, and I
followed on. Up a miserable flight of stairs, into a wretched room,
he led me. and, oh, what a sight presented itself to my eye! Four or
five poor children stood about, their sunken cheeks and temples and
eyes all telling an unmistakable story of slow starvation; they had
evidently had little food for a long time; and lying on a wretched
pallet was a poor, exhausted mother, with a little infant, thirty-six
hours old, moaning, rather than crying, at her side, for it, too, seemed
spent and exhausted. “Ah,” thought I, “if I had 2s. and a 6d.,
instead of half-a-crown, how gladly they should have is. 6d. of
it!” But still a wretched unbelief practically prevented me from
obeying the impulse of relieving their distress at the cost of all
I had.
You will not think it strange that I was not able to say very much
to comfort these poor people. I needed comfort myself! I began
to tell them that they must not be cast down, that though their cir-
cumstances were very distressing, there was a kind and loving
Father in heaven; but something said within, “You hypocrite! You
to tell these unconverted people about a kind and loving Father in
heaven with half-a-crown in your pocket, and you not prepared to
trust Him with half-a-crown !” I was nearly choked. How gladly
I would have compromised with conscience if I had had a florin and a


sixpence ! I would have given the florin and kept the sixpence, for
I was not yet prepared to trust God without the sixpence.
To talk was impossible under these circumstances; yet, strange to
say, I thought I should have no difficulty in praying! Prayer was
a delightful exercise to me then, and I seemed to think that all I
should have to do would be to kneel down and engage in prayer,
and that relief would come to them and to myself. “You asked me
to come and pray with your wife,” I said to the man—“ Let us pray
and I knelt down. But I had scarcely opened my lips with, “ Our
Father, who art in heaven,” when conscience said within, “ Dare
you mock God ? Dare you kneel down and call Him ‘ Father,’
with that half-crown in your pocket ?” I went through such a time
of conflict as I have never known before or since. How I got
through the form of prayer I know not—whether the words uttered
were connected or disconnected I know not—but I arose from my
knees in great distress of mind.
The poor father turned to me and said: “ You see what a terrible
state we are in, sir; if you can help us, for God’s sake doand the
Word said, “Give to him that asketh of thee.” There was no
resource left, for in the word of a King there is power. I put my
hand into my pocket, and slowly drawing forth the half-crown, put
it into the man’s palm, telling him that it might seem.a small thing
to him for me to relieve him, seeing I was well clad, but that in
giving him the coin I was giving him all I had. What I had been
trying to tell him was all true —God really was a Father, and might
be trusted. The joy all came back in full flood-tide to my heart,
and I could say anything to him and feel it then, and the hindrance
to blessing was gone—l trust for ever gone.
Not only was the poor woman’s life saved, but I felt that I was
saved. My life might have been a wreck —would have been a wreck
probably, as a Christian life—had not grace at that time conquered,
and the strivings of God’s Spirit been obeyed. I well remember
how that night, as I went home to my lodgings, my heart was as
light as my pocket. The lonely, deserted streets resounded with a
hymn of praise which I could not keep in. When I took my basin
of water-gruel before retiring, I would not have exchanged it for a
prince’s feast. I reminded the Lord as I knelt at my little bedside
of His own Word, that he who giveth to the poor, lendeth to the
Lord ; and I asked Him not to let my loan be a long one, or I should


have no dinner next day ; and with peace within and peace without
I spent a happy, restful night.
Next morning for breakfast my plate of porridge remained, and
before it was consumed the postman’s knock was heard at the door.
I was not in the habit of receiving letters on Monday. Most of my
friends, as well as my parents, abstained from posting letters on
Saturday, so that I was somewhat surprised when my landlady came
in, holding a letter or packet in her wet hand, covered by her apron.
I looked at it; I could not make out the handwriting. It was
either a strange hand or a feigned hand, and the postmark was
blurred. Where it came from I could not tell. On opening the
envelope I found nothing written within; but inside a sheet of blank
paper was folded a pair of kid-gloves, from which, as I opened them
in astonishment, half-a-sovereign fell to the ground. “ Praise the
Lord !’’ I exclaimed ; “ four hundred per cent, for twelve hours’
investment—that is good interest! How glad the merchants of
Hull would be if they could lend their money at such a rate!” I
determined, then and there, that a bank which would not break
should have my savings or earnings as the case might be, a deter-
mination I have not learnt to regret.
I cannot tell you how often my mind has recurred to this little
incident, or all the help it has been to me in circumstances of difficulty
in after life. If we are faithful to God in little things, we shall gain
experience and strength that will be helpful to us when the more
serious trials of life beset us.


FTER some difficulties, and much
encouragement in his work at
home, on September 19th, 1853,
Mr. Taylor set sail for China. He
had for some time past, unknown
to his friends, been living in entire
dependence on God for temporal
supplies; he had proved the faith-
fulness of his God, and was thus
prepared for the trials of faith that
lay before him, not only on the voyage out,
but on arrival in China.
Mr. Taylor went to China as the first agent
of the “Chinese Evangelisation Society,” and
worked for several years under its auspices.
Some experiences met with on the way to China are best
told in Mr. Taylor’s own words. He writes:—
Our voyage had a rough beginning, but many had promised to
remember us in constant prayer. No small comfort was this, for we
had scarcely got outside the Mersey when a violent equinoctial gale
caught us, and for twelve days we were beating backwards and
forwards in the Irish Channel, unable to get out to sea; The gale
increased. When we had been out nearly a week, we lay to for a
time; but, drifting on a lee coast, were compelled at last to make
sail, and endeavour to beat off to windward. The utmost efforts of
the captain and crew, however, were unavailing, and on Sunday
night, September 25th, we found ourselves drifting into Carnarvon
Bay, each tack becoming shorter, until at last we were within about
a stone’s throw of the rocks. About this time, as the ship, which
had refused to stay, was put round the other way, the Christian
captain said to me, “We cannot live half-an-hour now; what of
your call to labour for the Lord in China?” I had previously passed
through a time of great conflict, but that was over; and it was a


great joy to feel, and to tell him, that
I would not for any consideration be
in any other position, that I strongly
expected to reach China; but if other-
wise, at any rate, the Master would
say it was well that I was found obey-
ing His command.
Within a few minutes after wearing
ship the captain walked up to the
compass, and said to me, “ The wind
has freed two points; we shall be able
to beat out of the bayand so we
did; and, though the bowsprit was
sprung, and the vessel seriously strained, in a few days we got out to
sea, and the necessary repairs were so thoroughly effected on board,
that our journey to China was, in due time, completed.
The voyage was a very tedious one. We lost a good deal of time
on the Equator from calms, and when finally we reached the Eastern
Archipelago (the monsoon being against us, it was needful to take
the eastern passage), we were again detained from the same cause.
Usually a breeze would spring up soon after sunset, and last until
about dawn. The utmost use was made of it, but during the day
we lay still, with the sails flapping, often drifting back, and losing a
good deal of what we had gained during the night.
This happened notably one day when we were in a dangerous
position to the north of New Guinea. Saturday night had brought
us to a position some thirty miles off the land, but during the
Sunday morning service, which was held on deck, I could not fail
to notice the captain look troubled, and frequently go to the side of
the ship. When the service was over I learnt from him the cause
—a four-knot current was carrying us rapidly towards some sunken
reefs, and we were already so near that it seemed improbable that
we should get through the afternoon. After dinner the long boat
was put out, and all hands endeavoured, without success, to turn
the ship’s head round from the shore. As we drifted nearer we
could see the natives plainly rushing about the sands, lighting
fires here and there. The captain’s horn-book informed him
that these people were cannibals, so our position was not a little
alarming.


After standing together for some time in silence on the deck, the
captain said to me, “Well, we have done everything that can be
done ; we can only await the result.” The thought occurred to me,
and I replied, “ No, there is one thing we have not done yet.”
“What is it?” he said. I replied, “Four of us on board are
Christians” (the carpenter and our coloured steward were Christians,
as well as the captain and myself); “let us each retire to his own
cabin, and in agreed prayer ask the Lord to send immediately a breeze.
He can as easily send it now as at sunset.”
The captain agreed to the proposal. I went and spoke to the other
two men, had some united prayer with the carpenter, and we all four
retired to wait on God. I had a good, but very short, time in prayer,
and felt so satisfied that the prayer was heard that I could not
continue asking; so very soon I went on deck again. The first officer,
a godless man, was in charge of the deck. I went up to him and
asked him to let down the clews or corners of the mainsail (the
corners of the sail were drawn up to lessen chafe from the flapping
of the sail against the rigging). He asked me, “ What would be the
good of that?” I told him we had been asking a wind from God,
that it was coming immediately; and we were so near the reefs by
this time that there was not a minute to lose. With a look of incre-
dulity and contempt, he said with an oath that he would rather see
a wind than hear of it! But while he was speaking I watched his
eye, and followed it up to the royal (topmast) sail, and there, sure
enough, the corner of the sail was beginning to tremble in the
coming breeze. I said to him, “Don’t you see the wind is coming!
Look at the royal!” “ No, it is only a cat’s paw,” he replied (that is,
a mere puff of wind). “Cat’s paw or not,” I rejoined, “pray let
down the mainsail, and let us have the benefit of it.”
This he was not slow to do : in another minute the heavy tread of
the men on the deck brought up the captain from his cabin to see
what was the matter; and, sure enough, the breeze had come. In
a very few minutes we were ploughing our way at six or seven knots
an hour through the water, and the multitude of naked savages
whom we had seen on the beach had no wreckage that night. We
did not altogether lose that wind until we passed the Pelew Islands.
So God encouraged me, ere landing on China’s shores, to bring
every variety of need to Him in prayer, and to expect that He would
honour the name of the Lord Jesus, and give the help which each
emergency might require.


CHAPTER II
GOD IS FAITHFUL IN CHINA
A N D I N G in
, Shanghai on Mar.
i st, 1854, many
and unexpected
missionary
difficulties awaited the young
A band of rebels had murdered
the officials, and taken possession
of the native city, against which a
large imperial army was encamped;
this was a source of much danger
and disquiet to the little European
community. Monetary difficulties
were also great, for the dollar, now
worth about 3s. 6d., had risen to
Bs. gd., and apartments were scarcely
obtainable in the settlement at any price.
The friends upon whom Mr. Taylor
had counted for help were —one dead,
and another left for America; but in Rev.
Dr. Medhurst, of the L.M.S., he found a helper, who pro-
cured for him his first Chinese teacher.
In the years 1855 and 1856 Mr. Taylor took several
missionary journeys with the Rev. W.C. Burns, of the English


Presbyterian Mission. They travelled and lived together,
oftentimes finding themselves “ in perils by the heathen ;
the anti-foreign feeling was very strong in some of the
districts visited, and many an attempt was made to rob or
even kill the missionaries.
An incident that occurred, when Mr. Taylor was on a
journey alone, gives us some idea of the hardships of those
early days in China. Having travelled a long distance on
foot, Mr. Taylor arrived at a city, searching for his servant
and baggage, which he had lost the previous day. To
help him he employed a man to make thorough inquiries
about the missing things. Mr. Taylor writes :
When he returned from a fruitless search, I said to him, “lam
quite exhausted-will you help me to find quarters for the night,
and then I will pay you for your trouble ?” He said, “Yes;’’ and we
set off in search of lodgings. At the first place or two at which we
inquired they would not receive me; for though on our first inquiring
they seemed willing to do so, the presence of a man who followed
us, and who, I found, was engaged in one of the Ya-muns, seemed
to alarm them, and I was refused. We now went to a third place,
and being no longer followed by the Ya-mun people, we were
promised quarters; some tea was brought, and I paid the man
who had accompanied me for his trouble. Soon after he was gone,
some of the people of the Ya-mun came in; they soon went away,
but the result of their visit was, that I was told I could not be
enter mined there. A young man blamed them for their heartless
behaviour, and said to me, “ Never mind, come with me, and if we
cannot get better lodgings for you, you shall sleep at our house.
I went with him, but we found the people of his house unwilling
to receive me. Weary and footsore, so that I could scarcely put
one foot before the other, I had again to seek quarters, and at length
got promise of them; but some people collecting about the door, they
desired me to go to a tea-shop and wait there till the people had
retired, or they would be unable to accommodate me. There was
no help for it, so we went, and waited till past midnight; then we left
for the promised resting-place, but my conductor would not find it,


he led me about to another part of the city, and finally, between one
and two a.m., left me to pass the night as well as I could.
I was opposite a temple, but it was closed; so I lay down on the
stone steps in front of it, and putting my money under my head for
a pillow, should soon have been asleep in spite of the cold, had I not
perceived a person coming stealthily towards me. As he approached,
I saw he was one of the beggars so common in China, and I had no
doubt his intention was to rob me of my money. I did not stir, but
watched his movements, and looked to my Father not to leave me
in this time of trial. The man came up, looked at me for some time
to assure himself I was asleep (it was so dark he could not see that
my eyes were fixed on him), and then began to feel about me gently.
I said to him in the quietest tone, but so as to convince him I was
not, nor had been, sleeping, “ What do you want?” He made no
answer, but went away.
I was very thankful to see him go, and when he was out of sight,
put as much of my cash as would not go into my pocket into my
sleeve, and made my pillow of a stone projection of the wall. It was
not long ere I began to doze, but was aroused by the all but noise-
less footsteps of two persons approaching—for my nervous system
was rendered so sensitive by exhaustion that the slightest noise
startled me. I again sought protection from
Him who alone was my stay, and lay still
as before, till one of them came up and began
to feel under my head for the cash. I spoke
again—they sat down at my feet. I asked
them what they were doing; they replied that
they, like me, were going to
pass the night there. I then
requested them to take the
opposite side, as there was
plenty of room, and leave this
side to me; but they would
not move from my feet, so I
raised myself up, and set my
back against the wall. They
said, “You had better lie down
and sleep; if you do not you
will be unable to walk to-


morrow. Do not be afraid; we shall not leave you, and will see no
one hurts you.” I replied, “Listen to me: I do not want your
protection —I need it not, lam not a Chinese—l do not worship
your senseless, helpless idols. I worship God—He is my Father
—I trust in Him. I know well what you are, and what your inten-
tions are, and shall keep my eye on you, and shall not sleep.”
On this, one of them went away, but soon returned with a third
companion. I felt very uneasy, but looked to God for help. Once
or twice one of them got up to see if I was asleep. I said, “Do not
be mistaken, I am not sleeping.” Occasionally my head dropped,
and this was a signal for one of them to rise ; but I at once roused
myself and made some remark. As the night slowly passed on, I
felt very sleepy; and to keep myself awake, as well as to cheer my
mind, I sang several hymns, repeated aloud some portions of
Scripture, and engaged in prayer in English—to the great
annoyance of my companions, who seemed as if they would have
given anything to get me to desist. After that they troubled me
no more; and shortly before dawn of day they left me, and I got a
little sleep.
Conscientious difficulties led Mr, Taylor to sever his
connection with the “Chinese Evangelisation Society,” so
that from the year 1857 he was cast entirely upon God
for the supply of all his pecuniary needs.
The way in which God supplied the wants of His
servant was often very remarkable. On one occasion, Mr.
Taylor tells us that he and Mr. Jones (a missionary with
whom he was living) had only one solitary cash (the
twentieth part of a penny) left.
Mr. Taylor writes: —
There remained on the 6th January, 1858, sufficient food in the
house to furnish a scanty breakfast. That partaken of, having
neither food for the rest of the day nor money to purchase it, we
could only cry, “ Give us this day our daily bread.”
After prayer and deliberation we thought that perhaps we ought
to attempt to dispose of something we possessed, in order to supply


our immediate need; but on looking round we saw nothing that we
could well spare, and little that the Chinese would purchase for
ready money. Credit to any extent we might have had could we
have conscientiously availed ourselves of it, but this we felt to be un-
scriptural in itself, as well as inconsistent with the position we were
in—namely, that of serving God, and subsisting on what He Himself
had given us, or might from time to time supply. We had indeed
one article which we knew the Chinese would readily purchase—an
iron stove; but we could not but regret the necessity for parting
with it. We set out, however, to the founder’s, and after a walk of
some length came to the river, which we had intended to cross by a
floating bridge of boats; but here the Lord shut up our path. The
bridge of boats had been carried away during the preceding night,
and the river could only be crossed by a ferry, the fare of which was
two cash each person. As we only possessed one between us, our
course clearly was to return and await God’s own interposition
on our behalf.
When we reached home we found that Mrs. Jones had gone with
her children to dine with a friend, in accordance with an invitation
accepted some days previously. Mr. Jones, though himself included
in the invitation, refused now to go and leave me to fast alone. We
carefully searched our cupboards, and though there was nothing to
eat, we found a small packet of cocoa. This, with a little hot water,
somewhat revived us; and again we cried to the Lord, and “the
Lord heard, and saved us out of all our troubles,” While still on
our knees, a letter arrived containing a remittance from England.
And this timely supply not only met the immediate and urgent need
of the day ; in the assured confidence that that God, whose we were
and whom we served, would not put to shame those whose whole
and only trust was in Himself, the writer’s marriage had been
previously arranged to take place just fourteen days after this date;
and this expectation was not disappointed ; for the mountains shall
depart, and the hills be removed, but His kindness shall not depart
from His people, neither shall His covenant fail. And though
during subsequent years our faith has often been exercised, and
sometimes severely, He has ever proved faithful to His promise, and
has not suffered us to lack any good thing.
Still more remarkable was the way God honoured His


servant’s faith in send-
ing support for the
Ningpo Hospital, which
Mr. Taylor had taken
the charge of in entire
dependence upon God.
We quote another
extract from Mr. Tay-
lor’s own account: —
In the autumn of 1859
Dr. Parker was suddenly
compelled to return to
Glasgow, with his mother-
less children, Mrs. Parker
having died of cholera.
He requested the writer
to take charge of the
Missionary Hospital at
Ningpo, which must other-
wise be closed. After a
few days of earnest prayer
for Divine guidance, the
writer felt constrained to
undertake it, relying on a
prayer-answering God to
furnish the means requisite
for its support. The funds
for its maintenance had
been hitherto supplied by
the proceeds of the doctor’s
foreign medical practice:
with his departure these
ceased. But had not God
said, that whatever we ask
in the name of the Lord
Jesus shall be done unto
us ? and are we not told to


seek first the kingdom of
God—not means to ad-
vance it—and all these things
shall be added to us ?
Such promises were surely
sufficient.
Eight days previous to
entering upon this respon-
sibility the writer had not
the most remote idea of
doing so; still less could
friends at home have an-
ticipated it. But the Lord
had foreseen the need,
and already funds were on
their way to supply it. At
times there were not less
than fifty in-patients in
the hospital, besides a large
number who daily attended
as out-patients. Thirty
beds were ordinarily al-
lotted to free patients and
their attendants, and about
as many to opium-smokers,
who paid for their board
while being cured of their
habit. As all the wants of
the sick in the hospital
were supplied gratuitously,
as were likewise the re-
medial appliances needed
by the out-patients, the
daily expense was con-
siderable ; besides which a
number of native atten-
dants were required, in-
volving their support. But
from the very first the


Lard provided all that was requisite for the support of the insti-
tution, in addition to what was needed for the maintenance of the
writer and his family, and the carrying on of the other branches of
missionary work under his superintendence. And when, nine
months later, he was compelled through failure of health to relin-
quish this charge, he was able to leave more funds for the support
of the sick than were placed in his hands at the time he under-
took it.
But not only were pecuniary supplies vouchsafed in answer to
prayer. Many lives were spared ; persons apparently in hopeless
stages of disease were restored; and success was given in cases of
serious and dangerous operations. In the case of one poor man,
both of whose legs were amputated under very unfavourable cir-
cumstances, healthy action took place with such rapidity that both
wounds were healed in less than two weeks. And more permanent
benefits than these were conferred. Many were convinced of the
truth of Christianity ; not a few sought the Lord by prayer, and
experienced the power of the Good Physician to cure the sin-sick
soul. During the nine months above alluded to, sixteen patients
from the hospital were baptised, and more than thirty others
became candidates for admission into one or other of the mission
churches in Ningpo.


FORMATION OF THE CHINA INLAND MISSION.
We are indebted for the following account of the formation of the
China Inland Mission to The Missionary Encyclopedia, in which
it appears, and for which it was written by Mr. Taylor himself.
He says:—
AILING health led to my return to
England in the end of the year iB6O,
and my first thought was for the
work I had left behind in the
Province of Cheh-Kiang, and for
the other unevangelised parts of that
province. Indeed, in the January of that
year, when I had no thought of returning
myself, I had written to a friend in
England:—
Do you know of any earnest, devoted young men
desirous of serving God in China, who, not wishing for
more than their expenses, would be willing to come out
and labour here ? Oh, for four or five such helpers!
they would probably preach in Chinese in six months.
In answer to prayer the means would be found.
“ During the voyage home it was my earnest
prayer that five such workers might be found
and sent out to China. This prayer was
answered. In 1862 Mr. Meadows, now the senior missionary
of the China Inland Mission, went out with his young wife,
followed in 1865 by four others.
“In the meantime constant thought and prayer and ever
deepening distress from the contemplation of the awful
fact that £ A million a month in China were dying without


God,’ brought home the conviction that something must
be done, and done without delay, in obedience to our Lord’s
command, to reach the people in Inland China. None of
the existing Missionary Societies were prepared to definitely
attempt the evangelisation of the Interior, and the urgent
necessity for a special effort was thus forced upon him.
“Great love for the noble Societies that were working in
China and elsewhere led to much anxious thought and
prayer for methods of working which would not interfere
with the supplies of men and money likely to reach them.
To divert supplies from one channel to another would have
added nothing to the missionary strength of the churches.
The new work must, if possible, aid all and injure none.
It was therefore determined to make no collections, to use
no personal solicitation, but to trust in God to send, in
answer to prayer, spontaneous donations for the supply of
the needs of the work.
“ It was also foreseen that to meet the vast needs of Inland
China all the volunteers obtainable from every branch of the
Christian Church would be required, and would prove all
too few; nor was there felt to be any insuperable difficulty
in working in the mission-field with members of various
Christian denominations. The new work was therefore
made interdenominational.
“ The needs of China were made known by the publication
in 1865 of a little book called China's Spiritual Needs and
Claims , in which it was shown that there were at that time
only ninety-seven Protestant missionaries actually in the
field; that these were all located in ten or eleven ports,
situated in seven of the eighteen provinces of China, and all,
with the exception of Han Kow(a port over six hundred miles


up the river Yangtse), on the sea border of China. There
were, consequently, eleven provinces without any missionary,
while the greater part of the other seven provinces, having
only missionaries in their three ports, was equally out of
reach of the Gospel. By public meetings, also, the same
needs were made known, and volunteers were invited to go
out to China, without any guarantees beyond those con-
tained in the Scriptures, to carry the Gospel to these needy
ones. The China Inland Mission was now definitely formed,
and Mr. Meadows and the other workers above referred
to were incorporated in it. On May
26th, 1866, Mr. Taylor sailed for China
in the Lammermuir, with the first large
party of volunteers, and the work has
subsequently been continued on the same
lines.
“When the band of missionaries,
mentioned above as sailing in the Lam-
mermuir, arrived in China, in the
autumn of 1866, they had immediate
experience of the difficulty of securing
residence inland ; it was only after many
ineffectual attempts that suitable premi-
ses were at last obtained in the City
of Hang-Chau. The brethren who had
preceded them had opened two other
inland stations, giving us when the
year closed, including Ningpo, where
the work first originated, four stations
with resident missionaries. In the fol-
lowing year four other inland stations


were opened, but not without riots in three of them.
In 1868 two new stations and out stations were peaceably
occupied. For the first ten years the stations opened were
all in four provinces—Cheh-Kiang, Kiang-Su, Gan-hwuy,
and Kiarig-Si; the income for these years averaged about
The number of missionaries, including their wives,
had reached forty-four, and they were assisted by seventy
native helpers and six Bible-women. There were still nine
provinces in which we desired to begin work, and a station
was opened in Bhamo, Upper Burmah, with a view to
entering China if possible from the west.
“Ten years later, in 1885, we had stations and resident
missionaries in seven of these nine provinces ; and in that
one year forty new missionaries went out, while the income
for the year was over
“All the missionaries connected with the China Inland Mis-
sion go out without guaranteed salary. Between 60 and 70 of
them are either possessed of private means or are supported
I
by special friends who are interested in them, and therefore
need no supplies from the general funds of the Mission.
“The history of the Mission affords numerous examples
of God’s faithfulness in hearing and answering prayer.
Sometimes the funds received from home have been wholly
inadequate; prayer has gone up to God, and unexpected
donations have been received from persons resident in
China. Remittances to distant parts of the country have
failed to reach their destination when due, perhaps owing
to the wreck of a mail boat in the rapids ; and though the
money has been ultimately recovered, considerable delay
has ensued. In some way or other the Lord has always
provided for the needs of His trusting servants.


“ On one occasion a mis-
sion station was wrecked
by rioters; every room was
entered, with one excep-
tion ; and whatever the
people thought worth
having was carried off or
destroyed. There were
four bedrooms on one
corridor; the first, second, and fourth were looted, the
third had the door ajar all the time, and lying on a bed
were the money supplies and the books of the station, the
money having arrived just as the riot was commencing;
providentially that room was never entered, and when
the riot was quelled the money and the books were found
untouched.
“Though the Mission embraces Episcopalians, Presby-
terians, Congregationalists, Methodists, Baptists, and a few
independent workers, all recognise each other as fellow-
servants of the same Master, happily meet when occasion
requires at the table of the Lord, and recognise each other’s
converts, however or by whomsoever admitted to the
privileges of Church fellowship, provided they are walking
consistently.
“The reader will probably
have noticed that the prin-
cipal distinctive features of
the China Inland Mission
are:—
“First. —Its interdeno-
minational character.


“ Second .—That the workers have no guaranteed salary.
“ Third. —That no personal solicitations or collection of
funds is made, voluntary contributions alone being received.
“Since its foundation to May, 1891, the China Inland
Mission has baptised in all 4633 converts, the yearly
average for the last six years being 480.”
In the number of China's Millions (the organ of the
China Inland Mission) for May, 1892, the total number of
missionaries, including those absent and those engaged in
studv, given is 499; the number of stations in which
China Inland Mission missionaries are located, 106; and
the number of provinces over which these stations are
scattered, 14. Well may we exclaim, “What hath God
wrought!”
Who that witnessed the outgoing of the pioneer band
of eighteen workers who sailed from England on May
26th, 1866, could have guessed “ whereunto this thing
would grow ?” The editor of Regions Beyond writes :
“Without any Society behind them, or any support guaran-
teed, breaking through the then recognised methods of
missionary organisation, and starting, as it were, on a new
venture, the first party of the China Inland Mission sailed
away in simple faith in God, and now ‘ the day of small
things’ for the China Inland Mission, inaugurated 26 years
ago with the start of the Lammermuir party, has passed
away. . . . The working of the mighty hand of God
in the history of this remarkable Mission fills us with hope,
courage, and strength for fresh missionary endeavour, and
inspires the soul with a new sense of the greatness of the
possibilities offered by the power and the promises of God.


“ The China Inland Mission, which, in the providence
of God, has been raised up mainly by the faith, patience,
labour, courage, and perseverance of one man, the Rev.
J. Hudson Taylor, and which in 1866 had only 18
workers, now (1892) numbers 499 missionaries, scattered
at 106 stations in 14 different provinces.”


CHAPTER 111.
SOME REMARKABLE EXTENSIONS OF
THE CHINA INLAND MISSION
afterwards
Mr. Taylor for China.
N the year 1888 Mr. Taylor
went to America to attend the
annual Christian Conventions
held at Northfield, Mass., and at
Niagara.
At these large gatherings of
Christians he was led to speak about
the needs of China. God deeply moved
the hearts of many there to think of
and pray for the heathen, which led
to some offering themselves for personal
service, and others to supply the means
for their support. So suitable were
the candidates that, although entirely
unplanned and unsought for, a number
and unsought for, a number
were accepted, and shortly
a party of fourteen left with
A very touching incident we cannot but relate here.
One of the band leaving with Mr. Taylor was a daughter
much beloved and valued by her parents. At one of the


farewell meetings her father, speaking with much emotion,
said, “My Susie is very precious to me, hut I have nothing too
precious for my Jesus!' After a few months life in C hina
the young missionary, during the intense heat of summer,
took fever, and died. On hearing the news of her death
the father could still say, “ There is nothing too precious for
my Jesus!'
Before she died, however, this sister had the joy of
knowing that her Chinese teacher, a heathen man, had
been led to know and trust her Saviour, not through her
words —for she could not speak much Chinese —but by her
consistent life.
A council was formed in Toronto, Canada, to continue
the work of selecting and training candidates, and sending
them out, as God should open the way. The work has
been prospered, and there were twenty-nine missionaries
in China sent out from Canada in connection with the
China Inland Mission in May, 1891.
Nothing too precious to give to Jesus !
Oh ! faithful, rejoicing soul—
Nothing too precious to bring as a tribute
To Him who hath made thee whole.
Nothing too precious to give to Jesus ?
Hush ! —listen ! for lips Divine
Make answer, “ Son, thou art ever with Me
And all that I have is thine.”


N March, 1890, the first missionary
went straight from Australia to join
the China Inland Mission in China.
The Rev. C. H. Parsons, who had been
curate tc? the Rev. H. B. Macartney, of
Melbourne, had been accepted, through
correspondence with Mr. Taylor, and
sailed for China at the above date.
About this time the minds of several
of the leading ministers in Victoria and
Tasmania, and others, were being
directed towards China. The departure
of Mr. Parsons, the return of the writer
through ill-health, and other things, had
brought before them the fact that the
spiritual need of China was very great, and almost entirely
neglected by the Christians of Australia.
There had been from time to time considerable interest
in missions to India, the Baptists having sent out a number
of successful workers to Furridpore, Mymensing, and else-
where. The Presbyterians had their missionaries from the
Colonies in the New Hebrides, under the able leadership of
the Rev. J. G. Paton. The Wesleyans had been forwarding
their missions in New Guinea and the adjacent islands.
The Church of England, too, supported agents in India
and New Guinea ; but towards China there had been sadly
little but prejudice, arising from the presence in the
Colonies of so many Chinese coolies, who had introduced
opium-smoking, and by their thrifty habits were competing
successfully with Europeans in many lines of trade. The


Miss Aspinal. Mr. Beauchamp. Mr. Burden.
Mr. Devenish.
Miss Fysh.
Miss Lloyd. Miss Reed. Rev. J. H. Taylor. Miss Steel. Miss Booth.
Mr. Burgess. Miss Sorenson. Mr. Rogers. Miss F. Box.
Australia’s first band of Missionaries for China, with Rev. J. H. Taylor,
H. M. Beauchamp, Esq., and Miss Reed.


general impression seemed to be that the opium-smoking
coolie was a fair sample of his race, whilst the presence of
such men as Mr. Check Cheong, Mr. Quong Tart, and
other able. Chinamen in our midst was quite forgotten.
In May, 1891, the Rev. A. Bird invited the writer to tell
at some meetings in Melbourne something of what she had
seen of the need of China. God gave great encouragement,
and after a series of meetings in Melbourne, Sydney was
similarly visited. Much interest was also created there by
my sister, Miss Reed, speaking with the aid of a lime-light
lantern on the manners and customs of the Chinese.
Several, at that time, came forward offering themselves
for missionary work in China, but as there was no officially-
appointed Council of the China Inland Mission in the
Colonies, it was impossible for candidates to go out other-
wise than via England. This was unsatisfactory; so the
Rev. Hudson Taylor was communicated with, and he
authorised by telegram the formation of an Australasian
Council of the China Inland Mission in Melbourne.
A letter was received shortly afterwards from Mr. Taylor,
intimating his intention of visiting the Colonies; and in
September, 1890, we had the great joy of welcoming him
to Melbourne, accompanied by Mr. H. M. Beauchamp and
Mr. Whitehouse. Mr. Taylor was able, during his short
stay, to visit most of the leading cities of Australia and
Tasmania.
Deeply used of God were the meetings in which he told
the story of his experience of God’s faithfulness in times
of need in China, and in raising up so many workers to go,
trusting in God alone, to the far interior provinces of that
Empire. His Bible-readings, too, were attended by many,


and were a means of strengthening hundreds in the life of
faith. Mr. Beauchamp spoke of China and full consecra-
tion in many places. Numbers of young men will long
remember his helpful words.
Meanwhile many suitable offers had come in for service
in China, and considerable sums of money had been sent
to the Hon. Treasurer towards the passage and outfit of the
candidates.
Some of the first that the Council were led to accept
were Miss Emma Fysh and Miss Sorenson, of Launceston.
Miss Fysh was a certificated nurse of much experience in
cases of typhoid fever. For many years her heart had
been drawn to think of China, and as the Lord opened
the way for her to go, she joyfully stepped forward to do
His will.
Miss J. Lloyd, of Melbourne, was another candidate.
Her long experience of fifteen years’ work for the sailors
of Port Melbourne made her offer a valued one.
Miss Aspinal, of Melbourne, had also had long experience
in work for the Lord.
Miss Faith Box was another who offered herself. She,
too, was accepted by the Council, as was Miss Steel, of
Falmouth, Tasmania.
Sydney gave one worker in Miss Booth. She had been
an earnest helper in the Y.W.C.A. in the city, and at
Summerhill. Her going was spoken of tearfully by her
many friends and co-workers, who felt that they were
losing one who could not easily be replaced. We rejoiced
for China. The Y.W.C.A. claimed the privilege of having
Miss Booth as their representative.
Adelaide’s Y.M.C.A. was honoured by sending three of


adopting the native dress. — See page 43.


its workers —Messrs. Devenish, Rogers, and Burden. Mr.
Devenish went out as the representative of the Y.M.C.A.
He and Mr. Rogers had been for some years working
amongst the young men of Adelaide. They were much
missed, but God raised up many to take their places, and
their going was thus a means of great blessing.
Mr. 0. Burgess was also accepted for work in China,
having previously spent a short time of training, under
Mr. G. Soltau, in Launceston, where he was much used in
Gospel work amongst the people.
Thus the first band of Australian missionaries for China
was made up. They fare welled from Sydney on November
12th, 1890. Before their departure, however, a number of
farewell services were held in Melbourne and Sydney.
These meetings were times of great power and blessing, for
not only were the hearts of Christians stirred to thinkof the
regions beyond, but many unconverted ones were led to
seek and trust the Saviour; and this occurred in families
where different members of the outgoing band were stay-
ing. Thus was God’s seal of approval set on the departure
of Australia’s first band of workers for China.
The second party left Sydney in the Menmuir, and
consisted of Messrs. Joyce, Entwistle, and Goold.
They were followed in February, 1891, by the Rev. J.
and Mrs. Southey, their three children and lady-help, and
the Misses Chapman, Fleming, Goold, Bavin, Marie
Box, and Henry. Mr. Southey was a clergyman of the
Church of England, and having been deeply stirred as to
China’s need and claim during Mr. Taylor’s visit, he left
his church and home in Ipswich, and with his wife and
three dear children he set out for China’s unknown shore.


Miss Chapman, daughter of the Rev. S. Chapman, of
Melbourne, was a trained nurse, and her experience has
already made her doubly useful in China. Her leaving
home was the means of stirring up much interest in the
dark land for which she was bound.
The next missionary to sail for China in connection with
the China Inland Mission was Miss F. Young, of Queensland.
For some time she had worked amongst the Kanakas, vith
much success. Some thought that she was doing wrong to
leave such a work ; but our sister knew that others would take
up the work she was leaving who would not be likely to
volunteer for service in the darker and more neglected
regions of distant China.
In August, 1891, Mr. and Mrs. Jose and the Misses A. and
S. Garland, Malcolm, Coleman, and Harrison sailed for China,
and Messrs. Thomson and Upham followed in September.
Many more candidates are applying to the Australasian
Council; several have already been accepted, and it is
hoped another party will be sent out shortly.
Thus God has raised up and sent from our Colonies, in
the last two years, 33, and, counting Mr. Parsons, 34 mis-
sionaries, to tell of His grace and love to those that sit in
darkness. All unasked, except of God, the funds needed
for the support of these workers have been sent in.
Some of those sent out are supported by individual
friends, some by the associations they have been connected
with at home ; but the majority from the general funds of
the Mission. It may interest the reader to know that the
sum of covers all the expenses of one missionary in
Inland China. Food is cheap; in places the writer has
bought six eggs for id., and meat for 2d. a lb.


Living as far as possible in native style, and making one-
self as nearly as can be one of the people, adopting the
native dress, &c., expenses are lessened, and the mis-
sionary is enabled to live happily, without stint or extrava-
gance, on the above sum.
Our Australian missionaries are now scattered over many
parts of China. Those who went out first, having acquired
some knowledge of the language, are settled in their re-
spective stations, and are already engaging in the different
branches of missionary work; others, lately arrived, are
still studying the language in the Training Homes at Yang-
Chau and Ngan-king.


STORY OF THE SWEDISH CONTINGENT.
HE latter part of 1890 saw a
most remarkable movement begin
among the Scandinavian Churches
y of the United States of America.
lts object was to take the Gospel
■ <*B* to China, and we give its story in
®>ir the words of Miss Guinness, who
was in Shanghai at the time when
id of these missionaries arrived: —
iy morning last (February 17th, 1891) the largest
arty that has ever yet landed upon the shores of
d Shanghai from San Francisco,
no less than thirty-five men and women, of earnest
entire consecration, to be followed next week (D.V.)
ers, making in all fifty of this one company,
mdinavian Churches of the United States belongs
F having sent them, as their representatives; and to
land Mission the privilege of receiving them as her
in the name of the Lord. Half of this band are
If are women; the majority are Swedish by birth,
v came originally from Norway. They all speak
more or less fluency, having resided in America for
ng from two to fifteen years.
ig doctrinally to different branches of the Scandi-
navian nnuich, but practically seem just like one large family,
united heart to heart in earnest longing for the salvation of China’s
perishing millions, and for the glory of God.
The history of this Missionary Band is a profoundly interesting
one, affording food for thought, and themes for thanksgiving, to all
who love to watch the majestic onward march of God’s providence


SCHOOL BOY.
in the world-wide evangel-
isation of these last days,
and in the quickening of
spiritual light and love in
truly consecrated hearts
in many lands.
Six months ago the Scan-
dinavian churches of the
United States had scarcely
begun to awake to a
realisation of their respon-
sibility in connection with
China’s needs and claims.
A little had been done,
and a little local interest
was felt —nothing more.
Now this large and earnest-
minded body of Believers
is stirred to its very
depths, and in proof of the
profound interest aroused
for China has sent forth
this devoted band of fifty
labourers, representative of
their various denomina-
tions, and supported, not only by their means, but by their
love and prayers. As is so often the case, God has used one
man, filled with His Own Spirit, to move the hearts of the
multitude. When the time was ripe He first filled and fired
His servant’s own soul, and then sent him back from Europe to
America to accomplish His Divine purpose. The Rev. F. Franson,
Swedish by birth, but a naturalised American subject, had been
evangelising during ten eventful years in his own native land, and
elsewhere on the Continent of Europe. So widespread was the
blessing attending his effort, and so uncompromising the nature of
his address, that opposition was aroused, and for the Gospel’s sake
he was twice imprisoned. But bonds could not restrain the bless-
ing, which swept over wide regions, carrying many precious souls
into the Kingdom.


In Germany Mr. Franson met with Mr. Hudson Taylor’s papers
about the thousand evangelists needed for China to carry the
Gospel “to every creature;” and, always interested in missionary
work, his soul was now on fire to help forward the fulfilment of the
Master’s last command. He was used of God to raise up in
Germany a very real spirit of consecration to this work, and formed
there the German China Alliance Mission, whose object it is to send
out at least fifty of the needed thousand.
When the first party was nearly ready to sail Mr. Franson left
Germany to return to America, longing to be used in the same way
amongst the churches of his own people in the United States. He
commenced his efforts in Brooklyn in the beginning of October,
1890, finding himself without a single volunteer, either man or
woman, or a single dollar to expend upon the work. But God was
with his servant, and His mighty Spirit was moving in many hearts.
Three and a half months later Mr. Franson arrived in the great
Western City of Omaha, lowa, to bid farewell to the first detachment
of this large company of fifty departing missionaries; and besides the
support of each one lovingly guaranteed by their own churches, he
had in his hand the sum of five thousand dollars, given him for the
general expenses of the work. Considerably over one hundred
candidates had applied, and those accepted had been most carefully
chosen and tried before they were approved. Extensive tours of
the churches had been made by little bands of four and five of them
together, and very marked spiritual blessing had followed their
efforts, souls being saved, and consecration deepened in every place.
On Saturday evening, January 17th, they rose from their knees in
that last blessed Praise and Prayer meeting, and marched, 300
strong, singing as they went, through the streets of Omaha city,
until they reached the station where the departing missionaries were
to take the train for San Francisco. “We are going to China to
tell the heathen of the love of Jesus !” was the answer to the won-
dering questions of the crowd —an answer that will live in many a
heart. And so they came, in simple faith that God who had guided
and blessed them thus far would certainly open a way before them
in China also, and though they hardly knew where or how they
would be received, they trusted in His loving care, and were not
disappointed. A warm welcome awaited them at the China Inland
Mission House, where there was room enough to take them all in,
and to receive, as well, the blessing that they brought with them.


The very same afternoon they set to work at the study of the
language, with the help of one of the best of teachers, and now all
are getting into Chinese garments, hoping to be transformed by the
end of the week, shaven heads and all complete !
In the letter that accompanied this first band Mr. Franson says
that their desire was to help to fill up the number of the 1000
Mission Evangelists prayed for by Mr. Hudson Taylor, and to be
associated with the China Inland Mission in this work. He also
mentions that the Lord put it into his heart to work up the
churches in America to give support, each Church to one missionary,
so that now the maintenance of all is secured.
Will all those who join us in praising God for this remarkable
work of His Holy Spirit amongst the Scandinavian Churches of
IN CHINA.
America, pray also for these dear
young labourers, that they may be
kept, fitted for great usefulness
in China, and blessed to the
ingathering of very many precious
souls.


CHAPTER IV.
AUSTRALASIAN MISSIONARIES IN CHINA.
(See Map.)
Yun-nan Province. —Miss Fysh and Miss Aspinal
are stationed in Yun-nan Fu, Yun-nan. This province is
situated in the extreme south-west of China.
Yun-nan is a most lovely city, as well as a very important
place; it is situated on the edge of a large lake, 48 miles
by 18; the climate is much more temperate than in many
parts of China, and Miss Fysh writes that she and Miss
Aspinal are in very good health, and already able to make
themselves understood by the natives.
The Province of Yun-nan is a very needy one. It
contains five million people, including several tribes speak-
ing quite distinct languages —the Tibetans, Folos, Shans,
Kah-chens, Ming-Kia, Miao-tsi, and others; labouring
amongst all these there are but twenty-one missionaries
located in five different stations, so that each worker has a
quarter of a million souls to care for.
Kwei-Chau. —Messrs. C. Rogers and F. Burden are
living at Kwei-Yang, the capital of the Province of Kwei-
Chau, which lies immediately north-east of Yun-nan.
Missionaries have been resident in Kwei-Yang for some
years, and there is now a most interesting work going on in
that city.


Only one other city in Kwei-Chau has missionaries resi-
dent in it. The province contains in all forty-eight walled
cities, each the ruling centre of a prsefecture containing
many smaller towns and market villages, and in only three of
these forty-eight cities or districts is the true light shining.
Truly the harvest is plenteous, and the labourers sadly few.
Si-Chuen. —In the great Province of Si-Chuen we
have one Australian missionary—the Rev. C. H. Parsons.
He is stationed at Pau-ning, the city from which Mr. Beau-
champ has so often gone out itinerating in the surrounding
districts.
In this province, with its twenty million inhabitants, the
China Inland Mission has eleven stations and forty-eight
missionaries.
The Church Missionary Society has recently started a
forward movement to this province, under the leadership of
the Rev. J. Horsburgh.
Several missionaries of other societies and colporteurs of
Bible societies are also at work in Si-Chuen, but what are
they all among so many ? Some fifty or sixty missionaries
to twenty million souls, or five times the population of
Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand. One hundred and
forty walled cities, and 130 of them unoccupied for Christ!
Kan-Suh. —We now turn to Kan-Suh, the province in
the far north-west of China. Our sister, Miss Sorenson, is
working in its capital, Lang-Chau. This city is noted for
its wicked and opium-smoking population.
Miss Sorenson was seven months on her journey from
the coast of China to Lang-Chau. Travelling was often
very trying; for instance, riding through a snow storm,
cramped in the small compass of a native boat by day and


night, at times en-
during the inde-
scribable experience
of riding in a spring-
less cart over rutty
Chinese roads, and
putting up at night
in the general sleep-
ing-room of a native
inn, through which
the pig would make
its way en route to
its bed in the hay-
stack !
Kan-Suh is a
province with some
three to five million
inhabitants; it contains 77 walled cities, only five of which
have missionaries residing in them.
Shen-Si.— The Rev. J. and Mrs. Southey, and the
Misses Booth and Steel, are stationed in the next most
easterly province, Shen-Si, at Han-Chung. Dr. and Mrs.
Wilson (China Inland Mission) and other workers have
been living here for some time, so that our Australian
missionaries found much to cheer them in a flourishing
medical mission and native church, &c.
The Province of Shen-Si is not a small one; it has a
population of some seven million people, amongst whom
thirty-one missionaries are working. Thirty-one mission-
aries to seven million people. Think of it!
Only a little more than four missionaries to a million souls.


Ho-nan. —Miss Lloyd is living at present in Chau-kia-
k’eo, in Ho-nan. This province is one of the most
attractive parts of China for mission work, as its climate
is healthy, and its natives a strong-minded people, with
much character and determination about them.
Our missionaries have had much difficulty in getting any
settlement in Ho-nan. Time after time they were driven
away, and it was only after much prayer and patience that
the present two stations were opened. Ho-nan is very
populous; fifteen million people live within its boundary,
almost all of whom have never heard the name of Christ,
and there are but nineteen missionaries resident there.
Miss Lloyd writes that she is very happy in the work
amongst the women of Chau-kia-k’eo, and was rejoicing
over one woman whom she had been privileged to point
to Jesus.
Mr. F. Joyce is also stationed in Chau-kia-k’eo, having
travelled there as Dr. Howard Taylor’s companion.
Shan-Tung.—Away in the promontory of Shan-Tung,
in the north-west of China, Mr. A. C. Devenish, of
Adelaide, is living at the Port of Chefoo. Shortly after
arriving in China he very kindly offered to help as teacher
in the Boys’ Collegiate School, for the sons of missionaries
and merchants resident in China, which has been carried
on for some years at Chefoo by the members of China
Inland Mission.
Mr. Devenish has had most encouraging times with the
boys there, and has been the means of leading several of
them to Christ. Our brother hopes ultimately to be at
work amongst the natives inland, but at present he is
engaged in this valuable work of training and teaching


the boys in the school; many of them, we trust, will be
China’s future missionaries.
There is quite a large settlement of the China Inland
Mission at Chefoo. Dr. Douthwaite superintends a hos-
pital there for the Chinese. Mrs. Schofield has two
schools for native children ; and Mr. and Mrs. Stook are
in charge of a Sanatorium, where our missionaries go
when needing a change.
Kiang-su. —Turning south, we next come to the
Province of Kiang-su, where the large China Inland
Mission Training Home for Ladies is situated, in the City
ofYang-chau.
You may generally expect to find some Australian sisters
there, those who have most recently left our shores. In
the Home our sisters meet earnest workers from Canada,
England, Ireland, Scotland, Scandinavia, and the Conti-
nent, all gathered there as members or associates of the
China Inland Mission to get their first insight of Chinese
life and ways, and learn something of the difficult language
before going to their appointed stations, it may be, in a
distant, isolated part of China. Miss Murray, a lady from
Glasgow, is at the head of this Home. Many will ever
thank God for her faithful, loving words, and remember
with gratitude lessons —deep lessons —of trust and patience
learnt within the happy home at Yang-Chau.
Yang-Chau is an immense city; some 300,000 souls live
within its walls. The few missionaries there who can
speak the language are sometimes almost overwhelmed
with the impossibility of reaching these vast masses, but,
praise God, they are seeing fruit of their labours, and it
has been our privilege to witness several baptisms of the


A CHINESE WELCOME.


A CITY GATE.
natives in Yang-Chau. Around this city, as a centre, lie
smaller cities, villages, and hamlets, containing thousands,
even millions, of people, who are still sitting in darkness,
in this “ well-supplied” sea-board province.
You may journey for ten days from Yang-Chau, and pass
in that time one hundred towns, only one of which has any
knowledge of salvation, whilst in the distance, as you journey,
you can count by hundreds hamlets and farmsteads where
the people have never seen a foreigner, never heard of
Jesus; where their forefathers have lived and died for
generations in absolute ignorance of the fact that a Saviour
has come.
Thirty-five miles north of Yang-Chau lies the City of
Kao-Yiu, where the Misses S. and A. Garland and Miss
Coleman are at present stationed. Kao-Yiu is very dear
to us, as the city where we lived and worked for a short
time, and we rejoice to know that there are several
inquirers there. Miss S. Garland writes that last Christmas
Day six of the natives stood up in a meeting testi-
fying their desire to follow
Jesus.
Ngan - hwei. We
next come to Ngan-king, in
the Province ofNgan-hwei,
where the Young Men’s
Training Home is situated.
Here, as in Yang-Chau,
workers of various nation-
alities and denominations
meet. Here our Aus-
tralian brothers have lived


for some months, studying and preparing themselves in
many ways for their great life work. Mr. Bailer, a very
able Chinese Scholar, gives the students much valuable
help in their studies.
Our brothers, Burgess and Goold, are now resident
at Ning-kwoh, a city considerably east of Ngan-king,
where Mr. and Mrs, Miller, China Inland Mission, have
been successfully working for some time.
Kiang-Si. —The last province we will notice particularly
is that of Kiang-Si, as several of our Australian missionaries
are now resident there.
In Kuei-Ki Misses Young, Bavin, and Fleming are
stationed.
Rapid progress has been made by the China Inland
Mission in Kiang-Si during the last few years; for in 1885
we had no missionaries there, whereas in 1891 there were
twenty-seven resident, and more have been added since then.
The work has been done chiefly by devoted missionary
sisters, helped by reliable native workers. At Yuh-Shan,
further up the Kuang-sin river than Kuei-Ki, the native
Church has grown, under the care and faith of dear Miss
Mackintosh, to considerably over one hundred members,
with many inquirers. Out stations have been opened in
the surrounding country, and our sisters are longing to
press on to the cities yet beyond them, that they too
may be occupied for Christ.
The work in Kuei-Ki, where our Australian sisters are, is
prosperous, too; Miss Gibson is at the head of it, and we
hear from time to time of fresh additions to the native
Church there.
At Ta-ku-tang, on the lovely Po-yang lake, also in


Kiang-Si,
Miss Faith
Box, Miss
Goold, and
Miss Chap-
man are at
present lo-
cated. It
is a beauti-
ful spot, and
very healthy. When in China we had the joy of witnessing
the baptism of four men and one woman, the first to be
immersed in the clear waters of this inland lake.
Beside the work of our sisters, much itinerating work
has lately been carried on by Canadian brethren and others
in the more southerly part of the province; but the extent
of Kiang-Si is great; it contains seventy-four walled cities,
besides many smaller towns and villages. Fifteen million
precious souls are to be found within its borders, so that
there still lie large districts entirely in the darkness.
Thus ends our short survey of the provinces in jvhich
our Australian missionaries are located. We have seen
something of the awful Spiritual needs of even the best
supplied parts. Let us think much of our beloved sisters
and brothers living daily face to face with thl; facts we
have mentioned, surrounded always by heathen darkness;
let us hold up their hands by prayer; let us go and help
them ourselves, if God calls us ; let us stir ourselves up, in
the face of China’s great need, to pray more and do more
for its evangelisation.


In the eleven inland provinces of China, in 1890, there
were still 913 walled cities, to say nothing of all the large
towns and countless villages which they represent, in
which you could not find one single missionary of
Christ. It is not much better in this year of grace, 1892.
Think of it! Nine hundred walled cities, and no
MISSIONARY !
Then think, too, of all the smaller towns and villages.
I have stood on the banks of the Grand Canal and counted
from one spot no less than forty-two such villages, all as .
utterly unreached and
uncared for as they were
a hundred years ago,
where the people are
still living in absolute
ignorance of their re-
demption.
Redeemed, and they do not
know it;
Saved, and they’ve never
heard;
Dying without Salvation
And all
because we have neg-
lected to take the bles-
sed news that a Saviour
has died.
Those of us who are
young, who have our
lives before us —one
life each, only one life
—what are we going to
COOLIE AT DINNER.


do with it ? Have you a definite and unmistakable
call to stay at home ? If so, can you not help to send
the glad message to some dark place ? God will show you
how.
But if not —oh, if not! —I earnestly pray you to definitely
consider before God what He would have you do.
Will you not say, in the words of another, “If God will
show me anything that I can do for the salvation of the
world that I have not yet attempted, by His grace, I will
do it at once.”


CHAPTER V.
CHINA’S GREATEST CURSE.
The Truth about Opium.
I have closely watched the effects of opium smoking on the Chinese since the
beginning of 1854, and have medically treated large numbers, both as in and
out-patients. In travelling, often living with them in junks and boats, jour-
neying with them overland, and sleeping in the same common guest-room in
native inns.
This habit of opium smoking is evil, and only evil, and that continually. No
words can give a true picture of the sorrow, the disease, the vice it engenders.
It is sapping the vitality and destroying the morality of the greatest heathen
nation in the world, and this under the iron tread of our so-called Christian
nation.
It is high time that the question was looked into by all earnest Christians. —
J. Hudson Taylor.
NE of the most awful wrongs done
by one nation to another is, surely,
the forcing upon heathen China of
the opium grown by the Christian
British Government.
It is an old story now of how, after
long resistance on the part of the
Chinese, they were forced into a
treaty, sanctioning free trade in the
poison, which has since ruined so
many thousands of the million-peopled Empire; but we
trust that the bringing back to our minds of the leading
facts of the case may lead us to a fresh sense of shame, and


of our responsibility, as individuals, to repair, as God may
show us how, the awful damage we, as a nation, have
brought upon a protesting heathen Empire.
Up to 1757 the selling of opium yielded no great amount
of profit, but in that year the trade fell into the hands of
the East India Company, and the merchants soon dis-
covered therein a most profitable source of gain. The
export of opium to China virtually commenced in 1773.
The taste for the drug soon increased, and in 1796 the
evils of opium smoking had become so great in China that
the Emperor resolved on utterly extirpating the vice. He
sentenced opium smokers to be beaten with the bamboo,
and afterwards increased the punishment to imprisonment,
transportation, and death. Henceforth the opium trade
was simply smuggling.
Dr. H. G. Guinness, writing on the subject, says:—
For forty-five years we smuggled it into their country by means
of armed vessels, manned by desperadoes; and when, stung to pas-
sionate resistance by the wicked and daring conduct of our smugglers,
they rose against us and resolved to put a stop to this infamous
traffic at all costs, we sent our men-of-war up their rivers, burnt
their junks, destroyed their forts, slaughtered their soldiers, scattered
their forces, and compelled them to permit the continuance of our
commerce, the main export of which was opium, and to pay the
expense of the war which our unrighteousness had provoked. Nor
did we stop here. Unsatisfied that this most profitable trade should
exist merely by Chinese sufferance, we took the opportunity, which
a later war and later victories over them afforded, to oblige their
Government to legalise the hated traffic.
In 1839, dreading the consequences of the exceedingly
rapid increase of this trade, the Chinese Government
suddenly roused itself once more to resolute action. A
Special Commissioner was sent from the Court to Canton


to put an end to the business. The first step he took was
to issue a proclamation demanding that every particle of
opium on board
the ships should
be given up to
the Government
that it might be
destroyed.
Finding, how
ever, that his
orders were dis-
regarded, he sur-
rounded the
foreign factory,
by sea and land,
thus imprisoning
two or three hun-
dred British sub-
jects, with the
alternation placed
before them of
submission or
death. Captain
Elliot, then Trade
Superintendent,
dared no longer
hesitate, and
handed over to
the Chinese Com-
missioner 20,283
chests, valued at
A CHINESE OPIUM SMOKER.


about two millions sterling, which he publicly destroyed
by mixing with it salt and lime. But the British would
not pledge themselves to cease the trade, and soon ships
containing large quantities of the drug were off the shore.
Some outrages on both sides then led to open war, which
was terminated by the treaty of Nan-King, whereby five
Chinese ports were thrown open to British trade, the
Island of Hong Kong ceded to us, consent made to pay
twenty-one million dollars for the expenses of the war, and
six million dollars for the opium destroyed.
Mr. Gladstone said of this war:—“A war more unjust in
its origin, a war more calculated to cover this country with
permanent disgrace, I do not know, and I have not read
of.”
Fifteen years of uneasy peace followed the first Chinese
war, during which time, through the five open ports, an
ever-increasing quantity of opium was being poured into
the country.
The British traders at Hong Kong constantly besought
the Emperor to legalise the traffic, using as an argument
the large revenue he might derive from it.
“ It is true,” said the Emperor, “ I cannot prevent the
introduction of the flowing poison—gain-seeking and
corrupt men will, for profit, defeat my wishes —but
nothing will induce me to derive a revenue from the vice
and misery of my people.”
A supposed insult to the British flag formed the pretext
for our second war with China.
Canton, that densely-populated city, was bombarded.
The scene that followed was awful in the extreme; to go
into its details would require nerves of iron, and would be


too revolting to both writer and reader. The carnage was
terrible. At the end of the long, narrow streets, crowded
with people, field pieces were set up, which felled by the
hundred, men, women, and little children, till the gutters
overflowed with their blood ! It is recorded that in one
scene five thousand soldiers were cut down by the sword
or forced into the broad river. Day after day shells w r ere
thrown into the heart of the panic-stricken city. Thirty
thousand people found their homes in flames. And what
was all this done for ? Because of a supposed insult to
the British flag, for which compensation had been offered.
Not securing the conditions they wished, after the capture
of Canton, the British forces proceeded to Pekin, which
was bombarded. The city surrendered; the beautiful
summer palace was plundered and burnt, the Emperor
having previously escaped, and soon the heathen monarch
was followed, and compelled to sign the treaty that
consigned his millions of subjects to be the victims of
the opium demon.
What a glorious triumph for Christian Britain !
What wonder that in China the missionary is greeted on
all sides by the words, “ Foreign devil!”
What wonder that, a short time ago, as one of our
missionaries stood on the banks of the Grand Canal,
seeking to interest a small crowd that had gathered in the
Gospel of Jesus, a woman, with a cup half filled with opium,
came up, and, holding it scornfully in her face, said:
“ Who brought the opium to China ? We don’t want
you, foreign devil. We don’t want your opium or your
Jesus.”
And now the trade has reached the prodigious number


one of India’s opium victims.— Sgg page 69.
of 80,000 chests per year, which contain enough opium to
poison the whole population of the globe thirteen times
over if they were unaccustomed to the use of the drug.
Is Opium Smoking Really so Bad a Vice ?
Hear what the women of China say.
The women of the villages near Canton, cursed with
opium, petitioned the missionaries as follows: —
When in youth we went to the homes of our husbands we did not
suffer from cold and hunger; but from the time our husbands and
sons smoked opium, the children that were dressed—our sons in red,
our daughters in green —in the twinkling of an eye came to rags;
ornamental halls and grand houses all vanished into smoke. They,


who before protected their families, are themselves reduced to the
appearance of beggars. The beds have no coverlets, the household
utensils have no food left in them; hungry, there is nothing for them
to eat; cold, there are no clothes for them to wear. The fault is surely
with opium.
In the distress it is difficult to give expression to the feelings that
fill the breast. There is no tear that we shed that is not red with blood.
The literati and Elders of Canton write:—
If Englishmen wish to know the sentiments of China, here they
are : —lf we are told to let things go on as they are going, then there
is no remedy and no salvation for China. Oh! it makes the blood
run cold, and we want, in this our extremity, to ask the question of high
heaven, “ What unknown crime or atrocity have the Chinese people
committed, beyond all others, that they are doomed to suffer thus?”
From the creation of heaven and earth until now, throughout all
the great continents of the world, nothing has been found to compare
with opium as a tremendous and persistent means of destruction, a torture
and a poison to mankind.
China hates the traffic. Her statesmen, literati, working
classes, and even her simple-minded villagers, all raise their
voices against “ the opium dirt,” and the foreigners that
bring it.
What do Christian missionaries say?
Their evidence is surely a weighty one; they mix with
all classes of people in all parts of the Empire, and have
ample opportunity of judging as to the nature and extent
of the influence of the opium pipe.
Dr. D. W. Osgood writes from Foo Chow: —
In my opinion the use of opium is an unmitigated curse. It is
true that the rich Chinaman who is well clothed and has good food
suffers less than the coolie who is obliged to diminish his food to
secure his opium; but it is equally true that rich and poor alike suffer
in the continued use of the drug. It causes indigestion, a general
loss of vitality, and in many cases a difficulty in breathing. The
confirmed smoker usually becomes impotent; his sallow skin,
emaciated form, and languid step, tell the story.


Miss M. Murray, of the Training Home at Yang-Chau,
says: —
In Yang-Chau alone there are five thousand opium dens. I don’t
think that we have entered a house yet where there has not been one
victim, sometimes two or three, to this terrible vice. In one house
where Miss Evans was visiting she found the father and mother of
the family lying on couches smoking opium. The father was reduced
to a mere skeleton—a painful sight—too weak to raise his own opium
pipe; a servant was kept for the purpose. But, thank God, it is not
quite dark; many come to us desiring to give up this vice. Sometimes
women we should not suspect will tell us quietly when they come to
know us, “ I smoke opium, too, but would like to give it up.” One
thing we notice : they all know this habit is sinful; there is no hesita-
tion about it when they are asked.
Mr. Stott told of a young woman, a victim of the opium
monster: she was married when fourteen to a young man
who was learning to smoke the drug; since then a fortune
had been spent by the young husband, his wife’s clothes
and bed sold for the drug, and he thrashed her dreadfully
when she could not find him more money. Some time ago
he drove her away, and now threatens to sell her!
Dr. Douthwaite says
Let me give you the history of the opium smoker—a typical case.
He begins with smoking twenty grains of the drug once a day,
probably for the relief of rheumatism or some other malady;
immediately his pains vanish, and he finds himself in that blissful
state of semi-consciousness, which is heaven to a Chinaman.
The next day he takes another dose, but finds its effects are not
quite so lasting as the first, so after a few days he has to increase
the quantity of the drug in order to satisfy his appetite, and before
many weeks are passed he is consuming from two to three drams a
day, which is as much as most working-men can afford.
By-and-by he finds that his strength is failing, and that if he
passes the usual hour for smoking he becomes nervous, and unable
to attend to business; he notices, too, that he is losing flesh, and


"it was dark when we arrived.” — See page 70.


that his skin is becoming very yellow ; perhaps his wife and friends
exhort him to give up the vice, and he accordingly chooses a lucky
day on which to renounce the pipe.
He is firmly resolved never to smoke again, and invokes the family
gods and the spirits of departed ancestors to help him to keep his
good resolution. All goes well for a few hours, but towards noon he
feels very nervous, and has no appetite for dinner. In the afternoon
he tries to work, but has no strength; the time for his evening pipe
comes on, and the craving becomes unendurable —still he has made
up his mind to conquer, and he means to do it. He goes to bed, but
cannot sleep; his back aches, his head aches, his whole body
aches, and the muscles of his legs twitch spasmodically; worse
symptoms come on, and in despair he flies back to his opium pipe.
In a short time his discomfort has vanished—he goes to sleep,
and awakes in the morning with the firm conviction that he is
doomed to be the slave of the opium pipe as long as he lives.
It is only too easy to picture the rest of the story. With
a constantly increasing craving for the drug must come a
correspondingly increasing supply, and to obtain this, if
the smoker be not wealthy, the furniture of the house and
the clothes which the wife and children wear, as well as
his own, disappear, one by one, to satisfy the insatiable
craving. At length the house must be vacated for a less
■expensive one, and at last they are found living in a mud
hut or wandering in the streets. Sometimes the wife is
sold, and the children too; and the miserable husband begs
the ashes from the richer man’s opium pipe, from door to
■door.
To have seen the opium smoker in the last stage of his
misery on the streets of some'great city in China is a sight
not to be forgotten. His chief covering is a garment made
■of straw. In the bitter cold of a snowy night he cowers along
the narrow street, keeping close to the wall, and muttering
a pitiful moan as he passes along—homeless, outcast,


shivering, his bones protruding, cheeks sunken, and eyes
hollow, cursed —a thousand times cursed —by the opium
a Christian (?) Government forced the Emperor to allow
free trade in, though he signed the treaty with tears.
Oh, my brothers and sisters, you who know and love the
Saviour, is it not indeed high time we woke to a sense
of the awful responsibility we bear as individuals towards
China ? We have wrecked her manhood and womanhood,
we have poured into her unwilling ports what has proved to
be her greatest curse. It is we who have thus cursed her.
And not only China, but India. Look at the picture we
give of “ One of India’s Opium Victims.” The taste for
opium is rapidly increasing in India, and she will soon be
as badly cursed as China if prompt steps be not taken to
check the growth and sale of the drug.
May God help us to pay the debt that we owe these great
heathen lands, not only by working and praying for the
successful issue of the present Anti-Opium Movement, but
by taking or sending the Gospel which we have so long
denied them.
The present great Anti-Opium Movement has been well
described as the “ Most Pressing Missionary Question of
the Day.” It is seeking, by stirring up publie opinion,
circulating information, and getting up petitions, to cause
a Bill to be passed through the House to prohibit the
growth of the poppy in India, except for medicinal purposes.
We cannot now stop China growing her own opium, but
we can do the only right thing for a Christian nation now
to do —to cease pouring into her ports 80,000 chests of
British-grown opium a year. Alas, the evil past cannot be
undone ! the present alone is ours.


A “LITTLE ONE.’’
Nor is the smoking of the drug the only-
injury that comes to China through opium.
Many are to be found there who, through
one cause or another—often sorrow brought
on by an opium-smoking relation—are
weary of life, and find, in swallowing a
small quantity of the poison, an “ easy and
effectual release from their troubles.”
Heart-rending are the scenes witnessed
by missionaries who are often called by
the anxious friends to save the life of the
self-poisoned one.
Miss M. Williams, of the China Inland Mission, writes
of an awful death from this cause: —
Laid out for death, in all his best clothes. We could see it was
too late ; the rattle in the throat told the fearful tale too well. We
told them so, but with tears they begged us to try, saying he still lived.
They forced open his mouth to try and give the remedies, but of
no avail; he could not swallow; and after a few minutes of anxious
watching we saw him breathe his last. I can never forget it; to see
him die—lost for ever—the very thought seemed to be more than I
could bear as we stood there. On their knees, and with tears
streaming down their faces, the mother and orphan children thanked
us for coming, and then turned away and kissed him, just like we
would have done, and began to wail and chant. The sad wail
seemed almost appropriate to the scene we had just witnessed —an
unsaved soul gone out of the world.
’ Miss Guinness writes in In the Far East of another
terribly sad case of opium poisoning. She says: —
It was dark when we arrived, and within the crowded hovel all
was gloomy and mysterious. The first thing to do was to get a
light. But, oh, how callous the people seemed ! In vain we begged
for a candle, urged them to procure us a lamp, and upbraided their
slowness.


It was at least a quarter of an hour before a miserable glimmer
made its appearance —a bit of bamboo-pith in a saucer of oil-*-
and we were able to see where the poor girl lay.
One glance convinced me that she was dying. The stiffened form,-
purple lips, swollen face, and laboured breathing, told their own tale.
Her mother had not only let her sleep, but had given her food
also—solid food —one of the worst things under the circumstances.
THE “ LITTLE SISTER.’
Now the poor, miserable woman was crouching behind her dying
child, wailing in her grief. I soon learned from the neighbours,
who crowded the room, and did not spare their reproaches, that it
was she who had driven the poor child, by her cruelty and hardness
that morning, to take the opium.
We did all we could, but it was too late ; and I would have left
after an hour or two, but they begged so hard for us to stay. The
poor girl soon became
unconscious, and it was
evident to all that she
was past hope. Then,
to my distress, they
began to change her
clothes, dressing her in
the best she had, that
she might die respect-
ably !
Her poor little feet
were re-bound, and
squeezed into her tiniest
shoes, and her gayest
clothing put upon her,
with her finest head-
dress of silver and blue
and scarlet. The poor
head fell from side to
side, the glazed eyes
staring unconsciously
on them all, as with
rude haste and loud
clamour they accomp-
lished their unnatural
task.


With heavy heart I stood and watched, and then, with surprise,
saw them lift the stiff, unconscious figure out into the darkness of
the other room. No one followed, but a burst of loud, unmeaning
wailing broke from the women and children. Calling Chang-Sao-
Sao, I hastened after the men, and there, in the outer room, I found
her laid on the mud floor, with only a straw mat under her, close
by the open door, through which the cold night air came blowing
in—j U st laid down in the dark and cold to die! Indignant, I called
to the people to come and see that she was not dead, scarcely even
dying yet, and made them feel her heart and hands.
Somewhat surprised, they gathered round; but the excitement
being over, they soon dropped off one by one, leaving us alone with
the mother and sisters of the dying child. It was late then, and we
could not leave them by themselves through the long, awful night.
They begged us to stay, the little ones holding my hands, with tears;
so I sent word to Mrs. Taylor, and sat down with the poor dying
girl in my arms.
Already she seemed almost choked with the thick matter which
made such a terrible rattling in her throat, and once she roused to''
almost consciousness, seizing my hand, and gazing all around with
imploring eyes. Of course we did all we could think of, and prayed
again and again, but it was too late; the poison was fast doing its
deadly work. Unconscious, she sank back into my arms, and we all
felt there was nothing more to be done. I got a pu-k’ai, and covered
her up warmly, and then sat down on the mud floor by her side to
watch the end. The little sisters—dear children of some eight and
ten years old—sat by me. The mother had gone away! The
brother and some men servants (they were not poor people by any
means) were asleep in the next room. It was midnight; I suppose
they were tired.
Presently a heavy sickening smell of opium came wafted to us
from somewhere near at hand! Quickly I looked up, and asked
who was smoking the deadly drug here and now ! The little sister
sadly replied:
“ It is mother in the next room; she is always smoking.”
“ Mother ! here and now ?”
•■Yes!”
Heart-sick, and overwhelmed with grief and shame, I bowed my
head beside that dying child. There swept over me an awful real-


isation of the part England had played in this devil’s triumph—the
heavy curse of my adopted people. I, an English girl, as I knelt
there by that dying Chinese girl, felt an awful “ fitness of things” in
the remorse and grief and shame that bowed me to the ground.
My people’s sin is mine. Oh that my grief and shame were theirs!
But, alas! it is too late for grief to avail anything here now. I can
only comfort the living, and watch beside the dying, helpless to save.
And for my people, too, it is too late ever to repair the unutterable
wrong that justifies the bitter answer lately made by an educated
Chinaman to a missionary :
“I don’t know about heaven,” said he, “but I know there is a
hell, for China has been a hell ever since you brought the opium
to us.”
Yes, we have forced upon them our opium, and it is too late ever
to undo that, for the whole Empire is just saturated with its deadly
poison. There seems scarce a house in which there is not one dead.
But by God’s grace we may yet do something for the living; we
may yet take the little children and lead them by the hand into
safer, better ways. We have given them our opium can we refuse
them our Bible —our knowledge of a Saviour, a Deliverer, a certain
Hope ?
Opium jwe forced upon them at the bayone.t’s point; for the
Bible and* the Light of Truth they cry with outstretched, empty.,
longing hands, and for help also to rid themselves, even now, from
their awful bondage to this dreadful drug. Oh, that Christian
England would arise as one man, and give of its best —its sons and
daughters, its silver and gold—determined that even now, late
though it be, all shall be done that can be done to save this people,
and purge our consciences from this load of guilt and shame !
*****
It is past midnight, and dark and cold; I look up, and see a
strange, sad scene.
The dying girl is weaker, the awful death-rattle louder, hoarser
than before. The little sisters have fallen asleep, their heads
pillowed upon her cold, stiff form. I take the younger in my arms,
and wrap my loose garments about her. The other wakes up, and
pillows her head on my knee. A little way off Chang-Sao-Sao is
sitting quietly watching, with a sad, grave face. For three long
hours we sit here thus—never-to-be-forgotten, awful hours, spent in


that low, dark chamber, face to face with that fearful death, and
with the consciousness of what it means.
Only this morning she was well and bonnie, poor girl! On the
threshold of womanhood, life just opening before her, and with no
thought of death. And now?—and now dying . . . poisoned . . .
self poisoned ... in her misery . . . with British opium!
Yes, and think! “ A million a month in China are dying without
God.”
The breathing is slower. The death-rattle longer, louder. No
one knows, no one cares much, except us! A long silence—one more
faint gasp—one quiver—and all is over.
I kneel beside her, and the children awake, looking up with sad,
strange eyes, wondering at my tears. By-and-by the mother and the
rest come in. The brother, without a word, fetches a bundle of
paper, which he burns upon the ground beside the dead girl’s face.
He says it is to “ Song” her “ tsien," or “ send her money” to the land of
shadows, whither she is gone. Sick at heart, I watch the sad picture,
and then try to tell them of Him who can rob death of all its terrors;
but they are too tired to listen, and my heart is almost too sad.
The little ones beg me to come again, and presently we go out into
the dark, cold night, and make our way home through the sleeping,
silent city. It is half-past three when we get in, and I sit down alone
to think about it all.
I have told it you just as it happened. It is a sad story, but no
description could convey a tenth part of its sadness.
It is only one of scores of such —hundreds, I suppose—that
happen daily in this vast sin-cursed land, where one thousand souls
every hour pass away to Christless graves.
No words can tell how thankful I am to be in China—to be here.
What they lose who might come and don’t! And what they incur,
also ! for hath He not said :
“If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death and those that
are ready to he slain; if thou sayest, ‘ Behold , we knew it not,' doth not He
that pondereth the heart consider it ? and He that keepeth thy soul doth
not He know it ? and shall He not render unto every man according to his
works?"
[the END.]


©fimo Ififoßel (flissiOß
Director-Rev. J. HUDSON TAYLOR, M.R.C.S. & F.R.G.S
Hustralasian Council*
Rev. A. R. BRACKET; Hon. JAMES CAMPBELL, M.L.A.
Rev. S. CHAPMAN; W. H? CALDER, Esq.; Dr. WARREN
Rev. D. O’DONNELL; Rev. H. B. MACARTNEY; Rev
W. L. MORTON; Rev. G. SOLTAU; Rev. W. P. WELLS
THEO. KITCHEN, Esq.
Hon. Treasurer
PHILIP KITCHEN. Esq., Power Street, Hawthorn.
Hon. Secretary
Rev. ALFRED BIRD, Auburn
District Secretaries :
Ballarat—
Geelong—Rev. ALLAN WEBB
Secretary for New South Wales —Rev. R. BAVIN, New Town
Sydney.
Secretary for South Australia — C. F. WHITERIDGE, Esq.,
Y.M.C.A., Adelaide.
Secretary for Tasmania —Rev, GEO. SOLTAU, Launceston


The • Pioneer
A MONTHLY RECORD
fHMsotonan> Mork in man\) Xante.
EDITED BY
MRS. G. SOLTAU and MISS MARY REED.
CONTAINS:
Articles on leading Missionary Questions.
Letters from our Australian Missionaries in China.
Current Missionary News from all Heathen Countries.
Special Notice of the Congo Balolo and other Missions in” Africa.
Portraits and Sketches of Eminent Missionaries.
Tidings from the New Hebrides, India, &c.
Illustrations.
PRICE, TWOPENCE.
Any part of Tasmania, New Zealand, New South Wales, or Western Australia,,
2S. a year.
Foreign Countries, Victoria, Queensland, and South Australia, 2s. 6d. a year.
Order from Miss Mary Reed,
Mount Pleasant, Launceston


MASON, FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON,
GENERAL PRINTERS,
516 LITTLE COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE.


UfAfp
6161-JO
fi4nto
N Cey




