

Reprinted from
THE MUSEUM
of
FAR EASTERN ANTIQUITIES
Bulletin N:o 24
1952
Stockholm 1953




CHINESE LACQUER OF THE MIDDLE
AND LATE MING PERIOD
BY
FRITZ LOW-BEER
The intention of this study is to continue and expand my work on early 15th
century lacquer, already published. 1 ) In trying to organize the material along lines
similar to those followed for the earlier objects, certain difficulties are encountered.
It mrtst be remembered at the outset that the period under consideration is much
longer, and there is a comparative abundance of material showing a greater variety
of shape, treatment and style. The material to be discussed is complex, and our
knowledge is scanty. Attribution to this period of a relatively large number of
specimens is based on some inconclusive, partly subjective evidence. But since I
am apparently unable to gather more detailed information concerning the objects,
I hope I may be excused for presenting the material in this imperfect condition. In
view of our lack of information concerning private, as opposed to Imperial work-
shops, the attribution of unmarked specimens is based primarily upon the style of
their decoration. 2 ) The products of the Imperial workshop vary subtly but not
the less noticeably. Moreover, we cannot be certain to what extent, or how quickly
the styles of the Imperial workshop were taken up by others. If, as seems very
possible, many of the private workshops were also situated in Peking, it may be
assumed that they were closely related to the Imperial manufactory. Such condi-
tions in turn increase the difficulties in deciding whether specimens without an
Imperial mark came from the Imperial workshop. The bases of some specimens
do not appear to be in their original condition: they seem relacquered, and it is
possible that some marks were thus obliterated. We do not know the rules which
regulated the use of the mark. The long gaps in the chain of Imperial nien hao
(only Chia-ching, Lung-ch’ing [one specimen only] and Wan-li marks are to be
found between the reigns of Hsiian-te and Ch’ien-lung) add to the difficulties. It
is significant that while my first paper ended with the reign of Hsiian-te, the present
article begins only with the 16th century. None of the relatively numerous pieces
which, though unmarked, may be attributed to this second period on various
grounds, has the five-clawed dragon motif. This means that we do not have a
single piece beyond the already recognized groups which could, with some justifica-
tion, be assumed an Imperial product of one of the »missing» reigns. This may be
just a coincidence.
27


The Imperial workshop does not seem to have maintained a large production, I
would estimate the number of known Imperial Ming lacquers at about two hundred
and fifty pieces, and the use of words such as »frequent», »many», or »numerous» in
this paper must always be understood within the limits of this scarcity. Since
Imperial pieces with apparently genuine date marks form the basis of this study,
it follows that these will be subdivided into Chia-ching and Wan-li groups.
With the above considerations in mind the material can be divided thus;
1. Products of the Imperial workshop:
a. Chia-ching:
(1) Carved.
(2) Painted and incised, or »filled in».
b. Wan-li:
(1) Carved.
(2) Painted and incised, or »filled in».
(3) One pair of painted cabinets.
(4) One specimen inlaid with mother-of-pearl.
2. Products of private workshops;
a. Carved.
b. Other specimens.
Group 1, a. Chia-ching.
The specimens belonging to this group are less closely interrelated than were those
of the early 15th century. The repertory of decorative motifs has been extended
and the repeated use of certain patterns seems to have almost disappeared. An
extensive use of both characters and symbols denoting longevity, happiness, and
other felicitations is characteristic of this reign. The shapes also are more varied.
Boxes frequently have curved sides; one box is in the shape of the character shou
(Fig. 81). 3 ) Dishes or plates are often round but two are trefoil (Fig. 56). There are
also round bowls of small size. The two rice measures (Figs. 61, 63) and the cylindrical
vessel (Figs. 53, 54) are very unusual and perhaps unique.
Carving still is the favorite technique and the »B» style 4 ) only seems to have been
used. In keeping with the »B» style the rims of vessels with carved decoration are
usually grooved, not smooth and rounded as are those of the »A» style done in the
early 15th century.
I have previously attempted 5 ) to show that a trend led from the relatively bold
design of the early 15th century to minute intricacy in Ch’ien-lung works. A com-
parison of the earlier specimens 6) with those reproduced here shows this develop-
28
BULLETIN OF THE MUSEUM OF FA$ EASTERN ANTIQUITIES


merit clearly. The composition is less bold than in the early 15th century pieces,
and the elements often have a restless quality which is sometimes reminiscent of
the flickering tongues of flames. 7 ) Many Imperial Chia-ching porcelains show the
same stylistic characteristics.
There is less evidence of the medium and its techniques influencing the design
of the decoration. Various diaper backgrounds appear frequently. There is never
quite the same integration of the design into an all-over pattern, as could be observed
on early 15th century specimens, B ) even where the background is left plain.
Decorative motifs are used with great freedom. Early 15th century specimens
could be arranged in three groups according to the principal decorative themes (A.,
flowers and foliage; 8., figural scenes; C., dragons and/or phoenixes), but this scheme
cannot be followed for the period under discussion. There does not seem to be a
single specimen of Group A, nor do we find figural scenes of the kind rendered on
examples of Group B.
Eive-clawed dragons occur on most pieces either as the primary decoration or as
borders, when the principal place is given to some longevity symbol or characters,
or to a combination of these. The dragons vary considerably. Generally they are
not so animated and vital. The bodies, often elongated and thin, are stiffer: the
gradation in the size of the scales, which in the early 15th century emphasized the
curves, has nearly disappeared. Frequently the snout is unduly prominent, and
appears tacked on.
1) Carved specimens.
The round box (Fig. 47) has a footrim 7 mm. high, decorated with a thunder
pattern. The curved edges carry a floral decoration, and the vertical sides a diaper
pattern. The carving is done in red over a buff background, the base and the inside
are red. The mark is cut with a knife and filled in with gold (Fig. 48).
The conception of the design of the panel on the cover resembles that of the
Yung-lo box mentioned in my earlier article. 9 Even a casual comparison shows the
relative lack of boldness in the 16th century design. Except for a gaping mouth
the dragon is rendered in the same position, but it is smaller in proportion to the
panel. On the Yung-lo design the clouds form an integrated background for the
dragon; here they are used mainly to fill the upper left of the panel, and a longevity
character, rocks, waves and peony branches have been added. There is less integ-
ration of this multitude of forms: more of the smooth background is visible,
increasing the prominence of the relief. This and the flickering character of the
cloud-tongues and the waves give an impression of almost nervous restlessness or
movement. The dragon itself is drawn in relatively strong lines but there is almost
no gradation of scales and the nose and antennae are very stiff.
The design of the decoration, Fig. 49, 10 ) may also be compared with another
earlier specimen. ll ) Again the composition of the Chia-ching piece is less bold and
F. LOW-BEER: CHINESE LACQUER OF THE MING PERIOD


less integrated. It is also almost symmetrical, with the rock and its breaking waves,
the character sheng (indicating »divine», »holy», »Imperial») and the cloud above it
forming a central axis. In spite of the indiscriminate use of clouds, unusually large
areas of smooth background are visible. The dragons have the thin, elongated
bodies typical of this period: compared with the flowing curves of the earlier dragons
those in Fig. 49 appear cramped.
The box shown in Fig. 50 is cylindrical with grooved rims. The cover is carved
in red with two five-clawed dragons among clouds, diving into the water from the
sky and upholding between them an unidentified object (drum? garden seat?)
decorated with trigrams. Above this is the character shou and at the bottom is a
rock surrounded by waves. The decoration is carved over a diaper background of
air and waves. 12 ) The side (Fig. 51) is decorated with cranes and clouds over an
»air» diaper background interrupted by cartouches containing peonies. The inside
and base are black; the six character Chia-ching mark on the base has been cut
with a knife and filled in with gold (Fig. 52). This box is more precisely and more
finely carved than the preceding. Such considerable differences in quality as are
seen in these two pieces do not occur among the early 15th century products of the
Imperial workshop. The treatment of the clouds, flowers, and leaves is very similar
to that of the box, Fig. 47. The dragons again have the elongated bodies seen in
Fig. 49. The left dragon, however, is striped like a tiger, not only on the body but
on the head. Its eyes and mouth also differ from the conventional type.
The cylindrical vase, Figs. 53, 54, is carved to an exceptional depth. The outside
is red; the inside and base are black. In the base is the six-character mark of Chia-
ching (Fig. 55), cut with a knife. The original gold filling has disappeared almost
entirely. The dragon and the clouds are carved over a diaper background of waves
and air. Although the principal decoration is unusually vigorous it still closely
resembles the box, Fig. 50, in style and execution.
The trefoil tray, 13 ) Figs. 56, 57, is again carved in red and it has a black base with
the six-character Chia-ching mark done in the usual way (Fig. 58). The principal
decoration has a diaper background of waves and air. This wave diaper blends to
some extent with the waves done in relief on the lower part of the field. The great
height of the central rock and the unusual quantity of crested waves are undoubtedly
due to the peculiar shape of the decorated space. The dragons have the same
elongated bodies as those of the two preceding specimens but their fifth claws have
been cut away. The various fabulous animals on the borders occur but rarely at
this time. One of the dragons of the outside border (Fig. 57) has its hind legs
replaced by wings.
The plate, Fig. 59, is done in red, green, buff and black. It has the usual Chia-
ching mark on the red base (Fig. 60). The design of the looped dragon is very
awkward. The fifth claw has been cut away. The scales are similar to those of the
dragon on the box, Fig. 47. The carving of the clouds and of the forked ribbon-
like flame above the dragon’s snout and behind and above its left foreleg differs
30
BULLETIN OF THE MUSEUM OF FAR EASTERN ANTIQUITIES


from that of the other pieces. Here these details are deeply hollowed, leaving only
high narrow contours.
The two square vessels, Figs. 61, 63, are alike in everything except the theme of
decoration. They differ from all other known specimens in variety of colors used
and in carving technique. Since I have never had an opportunity of examining the
piece shown in Fig. 61, I shall omit the description of salient characteristics. The
vessel, Fig. 61, is carved in red, dark brown, wine red-. The base carries a cut and
gold-filled Chia-ching mark (Fig. 62). The decoration of each panel consists of
five-clawed, rather agitated dragons with some rocks and a longevity character
over a diaper background. On the upper part the diaper consists of a kind of three-
lobed spiral which seems an entirely new feature. 14 ) On this piece it replaces the
usual »air» diaper and might, perhaps, be assumed to represent small clouds. On
the other piece, ls , Fig. 63, we find it between the usual earth and air patterns but
still as a »sky» background against which rocks, trees and other clouds stand out
in relief. In the bowl, Fig. 71, this diaper alternated with the conventional air
pattern as the background of the phoenixes. The design of the dragons follows the
usual Chia-ching practice of elongated bodies. The snouts and the zigzag running
along the spines are very prominent.
The other vessel, Fig. 63, has a decoration of Taoist figures, each of which is
accompanied by an animal. On the side illustrated this is a five-clawed dragon;
on another is a water buffalo; the third side has a goat or deer-like animal, and the
fourth has a creature which I cannot identify. The carving is on three distinct
levels. The lowest level is represented by the diaper pattern. On each of the four
sides the top level consists of the majority of the decoration. Between these two
levels is an intermediate plane, employed for various elements. On the side illust-
rated the top comprises nearly the whole Taoist figure, most of the clouds, rocks,
and some parts of the dragon. But the dragon’s body, some of the foliage of the
trees, the inside of the figure’s halo and the bottom part of his robe, and some of
the clouds are carved on this intermediate plane. The sunken impression thus given
can best be observed in the detail of the dragon’s head and looped neck, Fig. 64.
Here the eyes, eyebrows, snout, beard and contours are on the top level, with the
intervening space sunk to the intermediate plane. To some extent the coloring
increases the contrasts between these planes. The three-lobed spiral diaper is green
in the surface with tan layers underneath, the earth diaper is green over red over
tan. Most of the top level is cinnabar. The dragon’s body is done in tan, the inside
of the halo is a dark wine red, the lower part of the robe is dark brown. Some of the
almost straight horizontal clouds are also dark brown. Altogether the colors used
are: cinnabar, tan, green, wine red, and dark brown, I mention some specific
examples only of how these are used; a comprehensive description is difficult
because the combinations differ on each side. Attention should also be drawn to
the treatment of the clouds. Usually these consist of a center surrounded
by »tongues» which are derived from the same shape as on Fig. 47. Sometimes (for
31
F. LOW-BEER: CHINESE LACQUER OF THE MING PERIOD


example on the vase, Fig. 53) this center is more complex. In this case it consists
of four lobed spirals, but the basic structure is still the same. On the square vessel,
Fig. 63, we find two kinds of clouds. The spiraling clouds at the base of the rocks,
around the figure, and in the corners show ridge-like contours, and the clouds’
»bodies» slope sharply inward. These clouds are connected by wavy bands along
the top rim. The flat and almost straight horizontal clouds have contours indicated
by fairly shallow cut lines. These latter clouds are also to be found on the chest,
Fig. 66, where they are combined with spirals. The inside and base of the rice
measure are lacquered dark brown. The surfaces are not cracked and they appear
to have been relacquered. The mark (Fig. 65) is beautifully cut and I accepted it
at first as original. A close comparison with the marks on other pieces revealed,
however, that it is somewhat more elegant and less substantial. These other marks
are by no means wholly uniform but they all seem to be more solid, and individual
strokes are thicker. The mark here still looks like the work of an Imperial artisan,
and I think that the restoration work on the inside and base was done in the Impe-
rial workshop, perhaps during the 18th century. 16 )
On the three specimens shown in Figs. 66, 67, 68 the five-clawed dragons appear
only on the border decoration. Of these the chest, Fig. 66, is perhaps the most
unusual. 17 ) The decoration of the principal panels consists in the main of a large
pine tree in the shape of the character shou growing out of a rock which is surrounded
by flowers, foliage, and clouds carved over a smooth background. There is a marked
intent to preserve smooth planes and through this the prismatic shape of the chest.
This is accomplished primarily by an attempt at integration of details which is
fairly successful wherever the task was relatively simple, i. e., in the case of related
shapes such as the clouds or the pine-needles, which could be made to conform
easily to each other. The character of the surface is further preserved by the
curiously flat carving technique. The artisan has avoided undulating surfaces.
The boldness of the design on the center panel of the plate, Fig. 67, is reminiscent
of early 15th century style, but the motif peaches with the characters shou, lu,
fu 18 —is typical for the Chia-ching period. Though bold, the design is really rather
dull and stiff, owing to its symmetry. Individual lines also do not have the elegance
of those on earlier pieces. It is to be noted that the peaches are decorated with the
dobed spiral» background pattern. On the border the dragons’ bodies are unusually
long, probably because only two are used; their fifth claws appear to have been
cut away. The floral part of the border is very similar to the border of Fig. 47.
The plate has the six-character mark of Chia-ching on a very dark brown base.
The box, Fig. 68, is done in red and green over a yellow base. The foot is decor-
ated with a key pattern. The dragons again have elongated bodies. The inside is
black (which may not be original 19 ) and the base is red. It has the usual Chia-
ching mark.
The square eight-lobed tray, Fig. 69, is unusual in shape and decoration. The
nine four-clawed dragons are rendered without scales and the usual saw-toothed
32
BULLETIN OF THE MUSEUM OF FAR EASTERN ANTIQUITIES


line along the spine is replaced by one having spiral hooks at fairly distant intervals.
The symbols of lute, umbrella, sword and snake do not occur on any other specimen.
The black base carries an undoubtedly genuine mark (Fig. 70).
The bowl, Fig. 71, shows four phoenixes within lobed compartments done in red
over a green background. Two of these compartments have the dobed spiral))
background. The rather unusual top border appears in slightly changed form also
on the foot of the vase, Fig. 53. The base and inside of the bowl are dark brown; 20 )
Fig. 72 shows the mark.
2) Painted and incised or »f ill e d in» specimens.
In this group we find three specimens with dominant five-clawed dragon decora-
tion, including the single known lacquer specimen with a Lung-ch’ing mark.
The shape of the eight-lobed box, Figs. 73, 74, is similar to the early 15th century
specimen illustrated as Fig. 36 in B. M. F. EA. 22. The 15th century example is
six-lobed, probably owing to its small diameter, and it is proportionately much
higher in spite of the lack of a footrim; also, the sides slope at a much steeper angle.
The box, Figs. 73, 74, is lacquered red outside with black interior and base; Fig. 75
shows the mark. The dragon is done in buff with black spine, green mane and
reddish-brown eyes. The clouds and waves are buff, green and reddish-brown. The
borders are dark green and buff. The engraved lines are filled in with gold, much of
which has worn away. A comparison of the center panel with that of Fig. 47 shows
considerable similarity in the design of details. The composition differs because
there is no need to preserve a plane, but the drawing of individual clouds and
waves is very closely related. The dragon is shown in a slightly different position,
but it is very similar otherwise. The shape of its horns and antennae is nearly
identical.
The five-lobed plate, Fig. 76, is also red with a black base and the Chia-ching
mark (Fig. 77). The decoration is done in dark green, brown and gold. The dragon’s
body is unusually long and thin.
The box, Figs. 78, 79, 80, is of double-lozenge shape with curved sides, but it is
remarkable primarily as the only specimen with a Lung-ch’ing mark known to me.
It is considerably worn but the style of its decoration is identical with that of
Chia-ching pieces. The box is lacquered red excepting the curved sides, which are
buff. The decoration is done in various colors with the engraved lines filled in with
gold. The inside and base are red.
The s/mw-shaped box, Fig. 81, makes a somewhat freakish impression. Although
I saw this piece about eighteen years ago, I have no recollection of its colors and I
do not know where it is now. I think that its basic color is red. There is the usual
Chia-ching mark on its base. The decoration abounds with lucky symbols topped
by a five-clawed dragon holding aloft a peach-shaped panel containing the character
sheng (»sacred»). The drawing of the details of the decoration is the same as on
33
F. LOW-BEER: CHINESE LACQUER OF THE MING PERIOD


other pieces, but the composition is somewhat awkward, undoubtedly owing to the
curiously shaped surface. The ribbons interspersed among the symbols have the
sinuous flamelike quality mentioned before as typical of Chia-ching style.
The six-lobed plate, Fig. 82, is lacquered buff with a black base, and has a Chia-
ching mark (Fig. 83). 21 ). The decoration is done in red, black, tan, brown and dark
green. The engraved lines are filled in with gold. It might be mentioned that this
plate and its pendant piece are the only specimens where the principal decoration
is conceived in a relatively naturalistic rather than in an ornamental way. The
three cranes appear to move freely in »natural» surroundings. 22 )
Group 1, b. Wan-Li.
Among the products of the Imperial workshop during this reign we find a some-
what larger number of »filled in» specimens, a pair of painted cabinets, and for the
first time a mother-of-pearl inlaid example. The not too numerous specimens do
not show much imagination in the choice and arrangement of decorative motifs.
Dragons with and without phoenixes occur most often. Longevity and similar
characters have largely disappeared. The draughtsmanship has become rather
stereotyped. The design of the dragons follows along the lines observed during
Chia-ching’s reign. Elongated bodies seem to have become universal. Although
the dragons are occasionally rendered in fairly contorted positions (Figs. 85, 86),
they do not give the impression of violent movement primarily because there is
not sufficient tension in their contours.
Cyclical date marks occur frequently. Unfortunately we do not know what
rules or customs governed the application of such precise dates and it is impossible
to say why some pieces have just the usual nien Jiao or no mark at all. It seems
that this practice of applying cyclical date marks was confined to the lacquer
manufactory; we do not meet with it on the porcelains.
1) Carved specimens.
These are done in a style resulting from a compromise between »A» and »B».
The carving, though not of equal precision on all pieces, does not vary in style.
Diapered backgrounds have become the rule, but exceptions are to be found on
border decorations occasionally.
The round box with curved sides (Fig. 84) is done in red with dark green waves
and yellow »air». Inside and base are black. The decoration is conventional with
the exception of the central medallion of waves and flames. The Chia-ching box,
Fig. 50, shows a somewhat similar principal design and a comparison of the two
boxes discloses a further step toward that fineness and lack of boldness which found
its ultimate expression in the Ch’ien-lung pieces. This effect is achieved by the
relative profusion of small clouds and by the fine carving of such details as, for
instance, the dragons’ scales and the diapers. The border decoration is typical for
34
BULLETIN OF THE MUSEUM OF FAR EASTERN ANTIQUITIES


the period. The flowers and leaves are carefully drawn but there is only a faint
trace of the elegant flowing lines so noticeable on early 15th century specimens.
Conventionalization results in close hatching in the case of the veins of leaves. 23 )
The carving is unusually precise.
The cabinet, Figs. 85, 86, is inscribed Ta Ming Wan-li i yu nien chih, corresponding
to the year 1585 A. D. It is the earliest of the cyclical marks. All the dragons are
shown against a wave diaper background. The crude carving may, perhaps, be
seen best on the scales of the dragons. 24 ) The quality of the drawing can be illust-
rated best by a comparison of the dragons with those on the Yung-lo cabinet
and the Hsiian-te table. 25 ) The ascending dragon on the back of the Wan-li cabinet
is in a position similar to the principal dragon on the table top. The Wan-li dragon
has a rather long neck and a body of almost even thickness. The very violence
of its curves, however, defeats the designer’s purpose of indicating equally violent
movement. It interrupts the flow of energy from head to tail. It suggests the
wriggling of a snake on the ground rather than the soaring of a dragon. The striding
dragons on the bottom drawer may be compared with the same results with that
on the Yung-lo cabinet’s bottom drawer or with those on the border of the table
top. Once again lack of restraint can be observed in the treatment of neck and
back. The dragon arches his back almost like a cat. This gives his body an upward
movement not in harmony with the horizontal movement indicated by the striding
legs.
The bowl, Fig. 87, is dated Ta Ming Wan-li ping hsu nien chih or 1586 A. D.
(Fig. 88). It is lacquered buff over red, with red inside and base. The relief is
rather high (about 3 mm) which gives the bowl a heavy thick-walled appearance.
The dragon is rendered over a wave diaper background. Chronologically next
in this series is the plate, Fig. 95, with a 1587 date, but since it has no dragon
decoration, it will be discussed last.. Then there is a five-year gap.
The box, Fig. 89, 26 , is dated 1592 A. D. On the photograph the mark (Fig. 90)
does not look convincing. It is possible that the base was relacquered and the mark
recut. In such an eventuality the original date might well have been used. The
shape of this box is typical for the period, and may be found also on porcelain
boxes. The decoration is done over a background of »waves» and »earth» which
replace the usual »air» pattern. The floral decoration of the narrow borders and
on the corners has a smooth background. I have no description of this piece but
would assume this background to be yellow. 27 )
The large plate, Fig. 91, is dated Ta Ming Wan-li jen ch’en nien chih, correspon-
ding to the year 1592. It is lacquered red, the smooth background of the border
panels is yellow, the base is black (Fig. 92). The theme of seven dragon medallions
is unusual. The dragons are carved over a star-shaped diaper background. The
fifth claws have been cut away. The dragon on the right center medallion is in a
position similar to those of the Chia-ching box, Fig. 47, and of the Yung-lo box 28 ).
Its movement appears sluggish primarily because the body is so long that the
35
F. LOW-BEER: CHINESE LACQUER OF THE MING PERIOD


variations in its width become too gradual to be effective. Both the Yung-Io and
the Chia-ching dragon bring the head slightly lower down toward the neck, making
the curve of the neck appear more violent. The Yung-lo dragon’s tail is curved
much more strongly than the tails of both 16th century dragons. The Chia-ching
dragon has a shorter tail which begins to thin noticeably behind the hind legs. On
the Wan-li dragon the same movement is too gradual to be effective.
The box, Fig. 93, is dated 1595. It is carved in buff over a red star-shaped diaper
background; the floral border has a smooth background. Inside and base are red.
The fifth claws have been cut away. This box is very closely related to the bowl,
Fig. 87. On the bowl the dragon is done in a different position and over a wave
background but the general character is the same. There was, apparently, no
change in style during the nine years separating these two pieces.
The small plate, Fig. 94, seems to be the only unmarked specimen within the
Imperial group. 29 ) It is so closely related to some of the other pieces, however,
that I do not hesitate to consider it a product of the Imperial workshop. It is
lacquered red over green and yellow backgrounds. The base is black. The decora-
tion of the center panel is obviously a variation of the border shown on the large
plate, Fig. 91. The style, drawing and carving especially of the flowers and leaves
are almost identical, not only with that of the border of the plate, Fig. 91, but
also with that of all other specimens carrying this type of floral decoration.
The plate, Fig. 95, differs from the other carved examples in its very low relief.
It is red with a black base. It is dated 1587 (Fig. 96). There is an obvious intention
to minimize three-dimensional effects, and to approximate a »painted» impression.
This is increased through the wide use of finely engraved detail. The subject matter
of the decoration might indicate that it was inspired by some porcelain, it is rather
reminiscent of a five-color plate. The type of decoration a bowl on a five-legged
stand heaped with fruits and vegetables might well be called a »still-life» and
as such it represents a new development. »Still-lifes» do not seem to occur on any
lacquer specimens which could be dated earlier than Wan-li, neither do I recall
having seen any on porcelains of an earlier date. The »bowl» is engraved with a
floral scroll and the wings and bodies of the two butterflies and the two bees are
dotted and engraved with scrolls. The border on the reverse side is somewhat
crudely carved. Its design leaves much of the background free.
2) Painted and incised or »f ill e d in» specimens.
The brush-holder, Fig. 97, is in exceptionally good condition. 30 ) It is of an unusu-
ally bright red with the decoration done in green and yellow and black. The incised
lines are filled with gold. It is dated 1601 (Fig. 98). While the style of the decoration
is in keeping with the period, although the use of the shou character is rare, the
dragons are drawn in a singularly inept way. They seem to have been frozen in a
dance position, standing on one leg. Even their faces seem to express concentrated
36
BULLETIN OF THE MUSEUM OF FAR EASTERN ANTIQUITIES


stiffness. The symmetrical treatment of the rocks and especially of the waves
rising in the center increases the impression of stiffness.
The box, Fig. 99, is one example of a type of which at least two more are known. 31 )
It is lacquered red with dark green, brown, buff, yellow and black decoration. The
borders on the curved sides have a yellow background. The inside and base are
black. The mark (Fig. 100) reads Ta Ming Wan-li chi wei nien chih , corresponding
to 1619 A. D., incidentally, the last year of Wan-li’s reign.
The pair of small jars with Hsiian-te marks illustrated in the earlier article
probably belong to this group. 32 )
The cabinet, Figs. 101
in dark green, red and brown with the engraved lines filled with gold. The Wan-li
mark at the top of the back (Fig. 104) is painted in gold. It is possible that this was
originally a »double chest» with an upper part. The piece seems to be of excellent
quality. The decoration of the doors consists of two bold dragons rising from the
waves through clouds. There are at least two more dragons among the waves, 33 )
an unusual feature. The large dragons (Fig. 101) are similar to the right dragon
of the box, Fig. 84. The cloud formations are rather elaborate, but they do not
form a continuous chain. The use of the painted decoration for the sides and back
only would indicate that this technique was considered inferior. This may be the
reason why it seems to have been used rarely by Imperial artisans.
3) Painted cabinets.
The cabinet, Figs. 105, 106, is one of a pair. The decoration is painted in gold
over a brown background. The Wan-li mark is on the upper end of the back panel.
The arrangement of the front decoration is relatively simple. The main panels are
painted with dragons and clouds only. The dragons have very long bodies corre-
sponding to the comparatively long and narrow spaces. The border of the rear
is similar to such decoration found on the carved specimens.
4) Inlaid with mother-of-pearl.
The single example with mother-of-pearl inlay (Fig. 107) is being included in
the Imperial group because of the type of its mark (Fig. 108) and because of its
quality. The mark is inlaid with mother-of-pearl and the calligraphy seems good.
The box is black throughout and the inlay is green and pink. It is difficult to
describe the rather curious quality of the lacquer. It is not very brilliant but it
gives an impression of great solidity because of its perfect adherence to the body
material which is probably wood. The lacquer on the base is cracked but elsewhere
only a fine crackle is discernible under a magnifying glass. The style of the decora-
tion is typically Wan-li. The drawing of individual leaves is particularly charac-
teristic.
37
F. LOW-BEER: CHINESE LACQUER OF THE MING PERIOD


We now pass on to the products of private workshops. Some of the specimens
to be mentioned here are definitely »private» products. Some individual pieces
and even groups, usually of the carved variety, are being included here because
there is no real evidence for their attribution to the Imperial group. If we had a
fairly complete range of Imperial Ming lacquers then even such negative evidence
would be valuable. In the murky light of present knowledge we must still be
guided by this unsatisfactory evidence but we ought to bear in mind that some
attributions in this chapter are very tentative.
Group 2, a. Carved specimens.
Sir Percival David’s plate (Fig. 109) 34 ) is the only known lacquer specimen with
a Hung-chih mark. It reads Hung-chih erh nien corresponding to 1489 A. D. This
is finely engraved on the beam above the doorway of the palace. The door pillars
carry the inscription P’ing Ling and Wang Ming-tiao 3b ). The plate is carved in red
over diaper backgrounds in yello.w and dark green. The border of the back has a
decoration of panels with figures, phoenixes and dragons. The base is covered
with black lacquer with a deeply carved poem of the Orchid Pavillion between
fungus scrolls in relief. 36 ) The inside border shows four Taoist hsien riding on
a log, a carp, a bamboo leaf and a dragon, respectively, among waves and rocks.
The carving is in a fine »B» style and in relatively low relief. Overlapping details of
the decoration are on nearly the same level. This treatment adds to the general
impression of fineness. The scene is varied and full of rich detail which is done so
discreetly that there is no impression of overcrowding. The waves of the lake are
carved into the highest level of the relief and do not form a background pattern
as on the early 15th century specimens. 3 7) The sailboat and its occupants are
subtly carved between the waves at practically the same level. The top level of
the diaper is dark green, this has been largely worn away so that much of the under-
lying yellow is now on the surface.
The box shown in Fig. 110 has curved sides and a footrim 13 mm high. It is
carved in red over a dark green and yellow background. The inside and base are
black and at least to some extent repaired. On the inside of the cover is a four
character inscription painted in red but it is so much worn that it cannot be read.
The principal decoration is so closely related to that of the plate, Fig. 109, that it
must be a product of the same workshop, done at approximately the same time.
Although the design of the central panel is less rich than that of the plate, the
treatment of such details as roofs, lake and boat, the figures, animals and rocks in
the foreground is the same. The diaper background of the box is in better condition
but it also does not differ from that of the plate. The border decoration of three-
clawed dragons and floral scrolls is done over a smooth yellow background. The
footrim is decorated with a thunder pattern.
The octagonal box, Figs. 111, 112, is decorated with figural landscape panels.
38
BULLETIN OF THE MUSEUM OF FAR EASTERN ANTIQUITIES


The footrim, 13 mm high, carries a bold thunder pattern. The »B» style carving
is done in red over green and yellow diaper backgrounds. The relief is higher and
its various levels are much more distinct than on the two preceding pieces. Details
such as the brick wall of the terrace or the marking of the tree-trunks are carved
into greater depth. In this piece the »earth» diaper is lifted to a high level and done
in red only. The inside and base are black but they do not appear to be in their
original condition. There is no evidence that this box was produced by a private
maker. If the Imperial workshop in Chia-ching’s time made any pieces with figural
landscape decoration, their appearance must have been at least very similar to
this box. I believe that it was made in the 16th century.
The following four specimens, Figs. 113, 114, 115, 116, appear to be products
of the same workshop. 38 ) They are all carved over smooth backgrounds in a very
characteristic »B» style. The design is always crowded and very little background
is visible. Drawing and carving combine to give an impression of movement which
might almost be called tortuous. The carver seems afraid of leaving any flat or
smooth surfaces. Wherever the nature of the subject matter permits he has cut
sharply inwards from the outlines, which are left as narrow ridges. The effect is
increased through the use of many small details; larger ones are frequently broken
up into many rows of ridges which are separated by deep cuts. This can be observed
best on the rock and on the clouds of the box, Fig. 113, and on the dragon’s tails
and clouds of box, Fig. 115. The center panel of the box, Fig. 113, is decorated
with a variety of insects and other small animals, prune blossoms, pines, bamboo,
a rock and clouds. The same insects and animals occur on a round dish, and I
propose to call the entire group the »Insect group». The forms of the subject matter
especially those of the bamboo leaves and the insects combine with the abrupt
manner of carving to give the whole decoration a sharp and pointed aspect.
The tray, Fig. 114, is carved in a dark reddish-brown. The bamboo-like treatment
of the rim is unique. The rope-like appearance of the pine trunk is in keeping with
the general style of this group and this feature is found also on two other trays.
The principal decoration of the box, Fig. 115, consists of a pair of winged dragons,
clouds and scrolls. The dragons are drawn with elegant flowing lines and the general
impression is one of whirling movement differing somewhat from the sharp and
pointed aspect of the other pieces. The treatment of the border is very similar to
that of the other specimens, however. The black inside and base do not seem to
be in their original condition. The base carries a Hsiian-te mark which is undoubt-
edly a late addition. There is a footrim, 13 mm high, carrying a version of the
thunder pattern.
The peonies on the stem-cup, Fig. 116, are the same as those on the borders of
the tray, Fig. 114, and of the box, Fig. 115. The group seems to be sufficiently
related to the Imperial Chia-ching specimens especially through its use of the
»B» style to place it within the 16th century.
The bowl and its three-legged stand, Fig. 117, are lacquered in alternating layers
39
F. LOW-BEER: CHINESE LACQUER OF THE MING PERIOD


of black and red with the top in black. The bowl has a footrim decorated with a
thunder pattern which fits into the stand and cannot be seen on the photograph.
The inside and base of the bowl are lined with metal. The decoration of phoenixes
and peonies is carved over a smooth yellow background. The design is integrated
to such an extent that only very narrow areas of background are visible. The
peony flowers and leaves are highly stylized and the carving is rather flat. There is
no modelling within the petals or leaves. The rim of the stand is decorated with
peonies in four panels which are separated from each other by a relatively bold
star-shaped diaper. The style of the floral decoration is slightly related to some of
the borders found on Chia-ching and Wan-li specimens (Figs. 47, 92). A 16th
century attribution seems appropriate.
The following five examples represent a group carved in the »A» style. They are
all carved in red over red diaper backgrounds. The bowl, Fig. 121, and the stem-
cup, Fig. 119, are silver lined inside and on the base. The sacrificial cups, Fig. 122,
(there is a pair) are silver lined on the inside. The box, Fig. 118, has a Chia-ching
mark which I had accepted in 1936. 39 ) The inside and base have undoubtedly been
relacquered and the mark is clumsily cut. There are traces of old gold in the
characters. It is impossible to decide whether the mark has been recut after the
relacquering of the base or whether it is a new addition. The »old gold» could have
been applied to give it a more authentic look. It is worth noting that none of the
other pieces in this group are marked. Under the circumstances it would seem
advisable to disregard the mark entirely. In 1936 40 ) I attempted to demonstrate
that the decoration of this box would fit stylistically into a period lying between
Hsiian-te and Wan-li, and since then I have come to doubt the Hsiian-te attribution
of the box used for the demonstration. Of the five examples shown here the stem-
cup, Fig. 119, seems to have Wan-li characteristics. The drawing of the peony
blossoms and leaves has the slightly stiff curved lines of the period. The phoenix
seems related to those on the side of the metal-inlaid box, Fig. 131. The lizard-
dragon on the stem (scarcely visible in the reproduction) also occurs on the box,
Fig. 131, and on other pieces which are probably Wan-li. The decoration of the
four other pieces is conceived differently and it is also more sensitively drawn.
This can be best observed on the panel, Fig. 120. They may be earlier than the stem-
cup but I would not entirely exclude the possibility of a later date.
The box, Figs. 123, 124, was not available for inspection. The decoration is
carved. The »Guri» treatment above the footrim is unusual, especially on a box.
The style of the phoenixes and of the floral decoration is closely related to that of
similar details on the sides of the box, Figs. 131, 132. Both specimens show a wide
use of spirals in connection with the floral decoration. This is not to be found on
any of the Imperial pieces. It is curious that two examples differing so widely in
technique should be so closely related in the style of some of the decorative motifs.
Since the box, Fig. 131, has a genuine Wan-li mark, there can be little doubt that
the box, Figs. 123, 124, was made during the same period.
40
BULLETIN OF THE MUSEUM OF FAR EASTERN ANTIQUITIES


The dish, Figs. 125, 126, came to me from China with a Sung or Yuan attribution.
With the exception of the central medallion, which has a gold background, the
decoration is carved in light brown over red. The diapered circle framing the central
medallion is raised by 5 mm and curves outwards. The base is yellow. The bearded
and apparently non-Chinese kneeling figure carries on its head a tray with a chueh-
shaped vessel. The carving is done in pure »A» style. The raised frame of the central
medallion is to be found frequently on 14th century blue-and-white and red-and-
white porcelain dishes. The lizard-dragons occur on Ting yao specimens of the
Sung period but also and more frequently on Wan-li objects. The quality of the
drawing and carving is superior to any late Ming piece I have seen. Other carved
late Ming specimens do not show such large areas of smooth background.
Nevertheless, the floral decoration on the back (Fig. 126) seems to have a 16th
century character. The narrow outer border resembles the floral decoration on
the curved side panel of the Wan-li box, Fig. 89, and the border of the Chia-
ching box, Fig. 47. The treatment of the peony blossoms of the inner border is very
reminiscent of the early 15th century, but they are much smaller. The leaves again
show T the slightly stiff feeling characteristic for Wan-li. In addition there is the
somewhat fussy design of the ribbons surrounding the four lions. Since we do not
know any Sung or even Yuan specimens, it is impossible to come to any definite
conclusion concerning the date of this dish, but I am inclined to consider it the
work of an excellent maker of the Wan-li period.
The so-called »Guri» lacquers are a very difficult problem because there seems
to be only one dated specimen (Fig. 127) and their decoration is unrelated to either
other lacquers or porcelains. We do not know whether they were the products of
one or several workshops, or of any particular region. Dr. Maenchen-Helfen believes
that the hsi-'p’i mentioned in the Cho-keng-lu 41 ) were »Guri» lacquers, which would
place their origin at least as far back as the Yuan period. »Guri» lacquers are usually
lacquered in layers of alternating colors. Examples which seem to date from the
Ming period are done in red and black over a yellow background. The number
of color layers does not correspond to the number of lacquer layers, each color
layer consisting of several coats. If the top color layer is black, a predominant
black cast is given to the entire piece by making the subsequent black layers at
least twice as thick as each red layer. This thickness is achieved by applying a
greater number of coats of black lacquer than of red. If the top layer is red, which
happens rarely, the reverse procedure was followed and red is then the dominant
color throughout. These specimens may also differ in style and boldness of design.
Boldness, as for instance on the box, Fig. 129, results in relatively wide flat
or slightly convex top areas. The corresponding areas of the less bold center
decoration of the box, Fig. 127, are very considerably smaller. 42 )
The box, Fig. 127, is lacquered black and red over a yellow background. Interior
and base are dark brown. The four-character Wan-li mark (Fig. 128) is not skillfully
cut. At least parts of it seem to have been recut; possibly the whole mark is a later
41
F. LOW-BEER: CHINESE LACQUER OF THE MING PERIOD


addition. It is impossible to come to a definite conclusion because we do not know
how much calligraphic skill to expect from a private and perhaps provincial artisan.
The decoration on the cover with its large diapered area is certainly in keeping
with Wan-li taste. The sides are decorated with spiral-tendrils. The lacquer on
the inside looks »transparent» and has some rather old-looking cracks which add to
the general Ming appearance of the box. I do not doubt that the Wan-li mark,
regardless of its authenticity, indicates the right period.
The box shown in Fig. 129 is also lacquered black and red over a yellow back-
ground with dark brown interior and base. The only indication for dating this
box is its shape which seems to be typically Wan-li. Many blue-and-white porcelain
boxes of thet period have the same shape.
Group 2, b. Other specimens.
The bowl, Fig. 130, is lacquered dark brown; the decoration consists of silver
foil and mother-of-pearl inlay and gold lacquer painted on a light brown foundation.
The gold was originally accented with black which is now almost completely gone.
On the black base is a perhaps authentic Chia-ching mark painted in gold
lacquer on a red foundation. The two masks on the sides are later additions. The
style of the decoration and the appearance of the lacquer make a 16th century date
entirely plausible.
The long rectangular box shown in Fig. 131 is unusual in technique and quality.
It is lacquered black on the outside and red on the inside. Its frame is completely
bound in a now brownish metal which appears to be white or nearly white when
cleaned. The decoration on the top and on the sides (Fig, 132) seems to have been
cut or sawed of sheets of the same metal. Linear details within the metal decoration,
such as the folds of the robes, the roof tiles and the contours of the rocks, are engraved
and filled in with black lacquer. It is possible that this was achieved by overlaying
all decorated surfaces entirely with lacquer, which would then have been ground to
the level of the metal decoration. The figural scenes are arranged within three
lobed compartments. The spaces between these compartments are filled with lizard-
dragons and floral scrolls. The corners are bounded by elaborately lobed borders
creating triangular spaces filled with phoenixes (or cranes?) and clouds. The spaces
between the corner borders and the adjacent compartments are compressed and
inharmonious, with no relation between the proportions and speed of the opposing
curves. The sides are decorated with flowers and foliage, phoenixes and peacocks.
The inscription on the base is painted in red lacquer (Fig. 133). It reads Wan-li
keng ch’en Wang Lien-ch’u chih, giving the date as 1580 A. D. Wang Lien-ch’ii is
probably the makers name. 43 )
The covered six-legged tray (Fig. 134) is lacquered black. The diaper and the
flowers and leaves are inlaid with mother-of-pearl; the thin stems are metal wire.
The surface of the tray is decorated with floral scrolls similar to those on the cover.
42
BULLETIN OF THE MUSEUM OF FAR EASTERN ANTIQUITIES


The style of the decoration is very similar to that of the box, Fig. 107, but the
worksmanship is considerably coarser. There is no reason to doubt its late Ming origin.
The three-tiered box, Fig. 135, is also lacquered black but it has later been covered
with some colorless varnish to prevent the mother-of-pearl inlay from falling out.
The mother-of-pearl is quite thin, almost as on burgautee lacquers. The decoration
on the top of the cover represents a high official astride a horse, accompanied by
attendants, approaching a house with a man and attendant standing on its steps
waiting to receive him. The decoration on the sides is very similar to that of the
border of the plate, Fig. 91, and the flowers and birds within panels can also be
found on the borders of Imperial Wan-li five-color porcelain plates.
Fig. 136 shows one of a pair of black lacquered double-chests. 44 ) The front is
inlaid with thick mother-of-pearl, various colored stones and colored glass which
occasionally shows details painted in black underneath. 45 ) The sides are painted
with floral decoration supplemented with some thin mother-of-pearl inlay. They
show a close relationship to the group of boxes with apocryphal Hsiian-te marks
described in my previous article. 46 ) It seems likely that both the chests and the
boxes were produced by the same workshop.
Figs. 137 and 139 show two examples of a relatively frequent type characterized
principally by sides woven of bamboo fibres. Such pieces are often inscribed and
dated. The box, Fig. 137, is framed with metal. The bamboo weave shows a stag-
gered under-and-over pattern of X-shapes not visible on the photograph; these
woven panels are surrounded by thin strips of black lacquer next to the metal
frame. Top and bottom are lacquered black. The painted decoration on the top,
showing a figural landscape, is much worn, making it difficult to determine the
extent of the original color scheme. It seems that red, brown, green, white and gold
were used. The inscription, painted in gold on the base (Fig. 138) states that this
was the toilet box of Lady Kie from Sung and made in 1633 A. D.
The covered tray, Fig. 139, is lacquered red with narrow gold borders. Here the
bamboo weave has no pattern, and the quality of the painted decoration is inferior
to that of the preceding box. Blue, green, brown, white, orange and gold are the
principal colors. All panels are framed with gold lacquer. The inscription, painted
in red on the black base, gives the date 1634 A. D.
The box shown in Fig. 140 is an example of marbled lacquer. It is done in three
shades of red, buff and black, giving a vague spiral pattern. The marbled effect
appears to have been achieved through an uneven application of grounding material.
This was covered with layers of alternating colors of lacquer. Subsequent grinding
would bring out different colored layers, producing the marbled effect on top. The
inside of the box is brown. My attribution of this to the end of the Ming period
is based primarily on the similarity of its shape to that of porcelain boxes of the
Wan-li period 47 ).
The relationship between the lacquers and porcelains is much closer than it
was in the early 15th century. This is due primarily to the decreased integration
43
F. LOW-BEER: CHINESE LACQUER OF THE MING PERIOD


of the design of the carved lacquers, but also to the often more crowded decoration
of the porcelains. Five-clawed dragons usually have the same prominent snouts and
the same elongated bodies which are to be found on most Imperial lacquers. 48 )
The dragon on a Wan-li ink-slab in the Bloxam collection (now in the Victoria and
Albert Museum) 49 ) makes a dancing impression similar to that on the brush-holder,
Fig. 97. Flame-like clouds 50 ) and s/wm-characters 51 ) also accur frequently. A
Wan-li box in the Lauritzen collection in Stockholm 52 ) is closely related to the box,
Fig. 89; the main difference lies in the fact that the porcelain box has a pair of
dragons on the cover rather than a dragon and a phoenix. A small Wan-li plate
in the same collection 53 ) is very similar to the lacquer plate, Fig, 95. Floral
decoration typical for the Wan-li period occurs on a box in the Eumorfopoulos
collection 54 ).
It may be appropriate at this point to make a few corrections in Col. Strange’s
book, »Chinese Lacquer». 55 ). Surprisingly, this volume does not mention a single
specimen with a Chia-ching or a Wan-li mark. The attributions appear to have been
made haphazardly not only within the Ming period but also in the case of Ch’ing
specimens. We do not know any examples with Imperial Kang-hsi marks and it
seems somewhat hazardous to attribute any pieces definitely to that period. In
surveying Col. Strange’s Ming attributions I would consider those of the pieces
shown on the following plates to be correct: Pis. 111, IV, VI, VII (upper), VIII
(left), XI (this may be an Imperial Chia-ching specimen), XXX (late Ming), perhaps
XXXI, XL, XLI and XLVI. Of the others, the table, Pis. I, 11, is, of course,
Hsiian-te; PI. V is Ch’ing, probably Ch’ien-lung; PI. VII (lower) may not be Chinese
at all (there is certainly not the slightest ground for a Cheng-te attribution); PI. VIII
(right) is probably Japanese; Pis. IX and X, Ch’ing, probably Ch’ien-lung; PI.
XXXII: if these gold and silver lacquer boxes are indeed all Chinese they can
scarcely be earlier than the 18th century; PI. XLII: the dragon and, even more so,
the cloud pattern surrounding it, and the floral scrolls outside the panels suggest a
Japanese origin for this piece (even if it should be Chinese I would consider it to
be of the Ch’ing period); PI. XLIII: nothing is known about this type of work; it
may be Japanese or Chinese, but I would not consider it to be earlier than the 18th
century; PI. XLVII: the author rightly compares this to the covered bowl shown
on PI. XXIX (top); he is, however, mistaken in attributing it to an earlier period
than Ch’ing.
I have attempted in the foregoing to present as many examples of middle and
late Ming lacquer as was feasible. The catalogue was divided into Imperial and non-
imperial groups; these groups, in turn, were subdivided according to various
techniques. Within these categories most of the salient characteristics of style and
technique have been established. As regards private workshops, we still cannot be
sure that all the attributions made are chronologically correct. But there emerge
certain groups (for example, the »Insect groups») which have qualities so specific
that they must be the products of distinct manufactories. Whether or not future
44
BULLETIN OF THE MUSEUM OF FAR EASTERN ANTIQUITIES


research will uncover any precise geographical locations for these private workshops
remains to be seen. 56 )
In conclusion, thanks are due to: Dr. E. Zschocke, of the Herbig-Haarhaus AG,
Cologne, for numerous photographs and descriptions; Kojiro Tomita and Robert
Paul Dart, of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston; Alan Priest; Dr. Aschwin Lippe, of
the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, for translations of inscriptions; Cyril
Wallace, of the Royal Scottish Museum, Edinburgh; and Dr. R. E. Fuller and Dr.
Sherman E. Lee, of the Seattle Art Museum. I am particularly grateful to Everett
P. Lesley, Jr., for his help in the writing of this article.
NOTES.
: ) B. M. F. E. A. No. 22 »Chinese Lacquer of the Early 15th Century».
2 ) The relatively few translations of Chinese records dealing with lacquer, while mentioning various
workshops, individual masters and techniques, are of no real help in solving any of the problems. We
•cannot establish any extant pieces as the products of any recorded workshop or master.
3 ) Due to the fact that this article is considered a continuation of B. M. F. E. A. 22 I have numbered
the illustrations accordingly.
4 ) Burlington, p. 171, par. 2,
5 ) Burlington.
«) B. M. F. E. A. 22.
7 ) See the clouds in Fig. 47 and the ribbons in Fig. 81.
8 ) B. M. F. E. A. 22, p. 146, Fig. 4.
9 ) B. M. F. E. A. 22, Fig. 19.
10 ) Unfortunately I have no records concerning this photograph. It seems to represent the top of a
box or chest.
u ) B. M. F. E. A. 22, Fig. 35.
12 ) Burlington, p. 171, par. 5.
13 ) A companion piece is in the Museum fur Volkerkunde, Vienna.
14 ) It appears on only three other pieces: on the pendant, Fig. 63; on the bowl, Fig. 71; and on the
plate, Fig. 67.
15 ) Mr. Alan Priest and Dr. Aschwin Lippe have very kindly enabled me to make a thorough inspec-
tion of this vessel.
16 ) It should be pointed out that the photographic reproduction of inscriptions, especially when these
are gold-filled, is quite unreliable. Fig. 65 has been printed with too heavy a contrast.
17 ) Unfortunately I have no notes on the colors, size, etc. of this piece.
18 ) Meaning dong life», »good salary», and »happiness». The carving of this center is a compromise
between the »A» and »B» styles.
19 ) I have not seen this piece.
20 ) For another bowl with phoenix motif see Fig. 4, page 34 »The Illustrated London News», July
4th 1931; also Burlington, Plate II B.
21 ) A pendant piece with a slightly thicker body is in the author’s collection.
22 ) The miniature cabinet formerly in the Breuer collection, No. 774 of the catalogue of the Berlin
exhibition, January—April 1929, may also belong to this group.
23 ) See also Burlington, page 172, paragraphs 7 and 8.
24 ) Unfortunately the available photographs are not very good. I do not know how much detail
will be discernible on the reproductions.
45
F. LOW-BEER: CHINESE LACQUER OF THE MING PERIOD


25 ) B. M. F. E. A. 22, Figs. 24, 25, 16, 17, 18.
26 ) Unfortunately this photograph shows the decoration of the top upended.
27 ) The plate reproduced in »The Illustrated London News», July 4th 1931, p. 34, Fig. 3 and in the
catalogue of the Berlin exhibition 1929, No. 773 has very similar decoration.
28 j B. M. F. E. A. 22, Fig. 19.
29 ) See also Burlington, PI. II F, D.
30 ) It has been reproduced in colors in »Chinese Lacquer in the Royal Scottish Museum) by lan
Finlay, Apollo Miscellany 1951; also London catalogue No. 1417. In both publications it is dated 1602.
31 ) The Royal Scottish Museum, dated 1605 A. D., see London catalogue No. 1767; L. Michon, Paris.
32 ) B. M. F. E. A. 22, Fig. 45.
33 ) The photograph is not sufficiently clear to distinguish the details.
34 ) See also London catalogue No. 1405.
3r ’) lam indebted to Miss Sheila Yorke Hardy for these readings and for the description.
36 ) It was not possible to obtain a photograph of the back of the plate. I saw it thirteen years ago
and thought at that time that the poem was an addition, probably done by the Imperial workshop in
Ch’ienlung’s time.
37 ) Compare B. M. F. E. A. 22, Figs. 10 and 12.
38 ) I know of a few more pieces belonging to this group.
39 ) See Burlington, Pis. ID, II E.
40 ) Burlington, p. 172, par. 6.
41 ) »Materialien», p. 216, last paragraph.
42 ) Much »Guri» lacquer was made in Japan and the decoration of such usually red specimens is very
much bolder than that of any Chinese example I have seen.
43 ) This is the box referred to in B. M. F. E. A. 22, p. 164, par. 1.
44 ) The other piece is in the author’s collection.
45 ) This type of inlay seems to be mentioned in the Tsung-sheng-pa-chien. Cf. »Materialien», p. 221,
par. 2.
46 ) B. M. F. E. A. 22, p. 163, par. 3, Fig. 43.
47 ) Limitations of space have prompted me to concentrate on those pieces from private workshops
which I consider to be most characteristic.
48 ) Hobson, The H. J. Oppenheim collection, Figs. 126, 127; Zimmermann, PI. 57; Reidemeister,
Pis. 30, 36, 51.
49 ) Hobson, Fig. 189.
50 ) Reidemeister, PL 18.
51 ) Reidemeister, PL 32 (top); Hobson, The H. J. Oppenheim coll. PL 11, Fig. 151, The Bloxam coll.
Fig. 205, The H. B. Harris coll. Fig. 217.
52 ) Reidemeister, PL 38 (bottom).
53 ) Reidemeister, PL 49 (bottom right).
54 ) R. L. Hobson, »The George Eumorfopoulos Collection)), vol. IV, No. Dill.
55 ) Edward F. Strange, »Chinese Lacquen), Ernest Benn Ltd., London, 1926.
56 ) After completing the manuscript, the following three pieces came to my attention. A tray in The
Newark Museum (Herman A. E. and Paul C. Jaehne Collections) with the usual Chia-ching mark, has a
design similar to the plate, Fig. 59. The tray is carved in alternating layers of red, yellow and black
lacquer, with the surface decoration employing red and black. The technique is identical with that of
the two square vessels, Figs. 61 and 63, being carved on three distinct levels. A dated (1604 A. D.)
WanJi box in the collection of S. Junkunc 111, Chicago, similar to the box, Fig. 99, but much smaller
and lacquered light brown, is accented with silver lacquer. The dragons’ eyebrows, horns, tail ends,
claws, and the spikes of the spines, as well as the pearl and the crests of the waves, are done in this
color. I do not recall ever having seen silver lacquer on any piece before. The last piece is a box belong-
ing to the same collection, which should be added to the group of five examples carved in the »A» style,.
46
BULLETIN OF THE MUSEUM OF FAR EASTERN ANTIQUITIES


Figs. 119 to 122. It has floral and bird decoration and an apparently genuine Chia-ching mark, cut
with a knife and filled in with gold. The calligraphy is very good, and appears at least related to that
of the Imperial marks, but without comparative material at hand no precise estimate of its connection
with the Imperial workshop could be made. If this piece is Imperial, then the five examples described
in the text are Imperial, and it follows that we have an Imperial »A» style coeval with the definitely
established »B» style. In contrast to the »B» style group, in which marks and five-clawed dragons are
prevalent, the »A» style group contains only one piece with an indubitably authentic mark and, of
course, no five-clawed dragons. Thus we are faced with the possibility that the Imperial workshop
produced, in Chiaching’s reign, objects of a style radically different from the recognized »B» style.
ABBREVIATIONS.
B. M. F. E. A. = Bulletin of the Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities, Stockholm.
Burlington = F. Low-Beer and O. Maenchen-Helfen, »Carved Red Lacquer of the Ming Period*),
Burlington Magazine, October 1936.
London catalogue = Catalogue of the International Exhibition of Chinese Art, London, 1935/36.
Materialien = Otto Maenchen-Helfen, »Materialien zur Geschichte des chinesischen Lacks*), Ostasia-
tische Zeitschrift, Nov./Dez. 1937.
Hobson = R. L. Hobson, C. 8., and others, *>Chinese Ceramics in Private Collections*), London, 1931.
Zimmermann = Meisterwerke der Tiirkischen Museen zu Konstantinopel, Band 11, Altchinesische
Porzellane im Alten Serai, von Ernst Zimmermann, Berlin and Leipzig, 1930.
Reidemeister = L. Reidemeister, »Ming Porzellane in Schwedischen Sammlungen*), Berlin and Leipzig,
1935.
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS, PLATES 1-56.
Fig. 47. Box, Chia-ching mark and period, diam. 192 mm, height 98 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 48. Reverse of Fig. 47.
Fig. 49. Top of box or small chest, Chia-ching period.
Fig. 50. Box, Chia-ching mark and period, diam. 182 mm, height 85 mm, collection of Mr. Carl Kempe,
Stockholm.
Fig. 51. Side view of Fig. 50.
Fig. 52. Mark of Figs. 50, 51.
Fig. 53.1 Cylindrical vessel, Chia-ching mark and period, diam. 113 mm,
Fig. 54. j height 260 mm, courtesy Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.
Fig. 55. Mark of Figs. 53, 54.
Fig. 56. Tray, Chia-ching mark and period, length 255 mm, courtesy Fogg Museum of Art, gift of
C. Adrian Rubel, Cambridge, Mass.
Fig. 57. Side view of Fig. 56.
Fig. 58. Mark of Figs. 56, 57.
Fig. 59. Plate, Chia-ching mark and period, diam. 235 mm, courtesy The Royal Scottish Museum,
Edinburgh.
Fig. 60. Mark of Fig. 59.
Fig. 61. Square vessel (rice measure?), Chia-ching mark and period, length and width 324 mm, courtesy
The Royal Scottish Museum, Edinburgh.
Fig. 62. Mark of Fig. 61.
Fig. 63. Square vessel (rice measure?), Chia-ching mark and period, length and width 319 mm, height
163 mm, courtesy The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.
Fig. 64. Detail of Fig. 63.
47
F. LOW-BEER: CHINESE LACQUER OF THE MING PERIOD


Fig. 65. Mark of Fig. 63.
Fig. 66. Chest, Chia-ching mark and period, photograph courtesy Mr. C. T. Loo.
Fig. 67. Plate, Chia-ching mark and period, diam. 181 mm, photograph courtesy Messrs. Spink & Son, Ltd.
Fig. 68. Box, Chia-ching mark and period, photograph courtesy Messrs. Spink & Son, Ltd.
Fig. 69. Tray, Chia-ching mark and period, length 177 mm, width 175 mm, courtesy Museum of
Fine Arts, Boston.
Fig. 70. Mark of Fig. 69.
Fig. 71. Bowl, Chia-ching mark and period, diam. 100 mm, height 50 mm, courtesy The Metropolitan
Museum of Art, New York.
Fig. 72. Mark of Fig. 71.
Fig. 73. Box, Chia-ching mark and period, diam. 305 mm, height 160 mm, collection of Mr. Carl
Kempe, Stockholm.
Fig. 74. Side view of Fig. 73.
Fig. 75. Mark of Figs. 73, 74.
Fig. 76. Plate, Chia-ching mark and period, diam. 167 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 77. Reverse of Fig. 76.
Fig. 78. Box, Lung-ch’ing mark and period, length 259 mm, width 167 mm, height 133 mm, courtesy
the Barber Institute of Fine Arts, The University, Birmingham.
Fig. 79. Side view of Fig. 78.
Fig. 80. Mark of Figs. 78, 79.
Fig. 81. Box, Chia-ching mark and period, length 375 mm, width 325 mm, height 119 mm, photograph
courtesy Messrs. Spink & Son, Ltd.
Fig. 82. Plate, Chia-ching mark and period, diam. 167 mm, courtesy Seattle Art Museum, Seattle,
Washington.
Fig. 83. Reverse of Fig. 82.
Fig. 84. Box, Wan-li mark and period, diam. 312 mm, height 131 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 85. Cabinet dated 1585 A. D., rear and side view, length 410 mm, width 320 mm, height 380 mm,
photograph courtesy Mile. Densmore, Paris.
Fig. 86. Front view of Fig. 85.
Fig. 87. Bowl dated 1586 A. D., diam. 127 mm, height 70 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 88. Reverse of Fig. 87.
Fig. 89. Box dated 1592, length 263 mm, width 163 mm, height 88 mm, photograph courtesy Messrs.
Spink & Son, Ltd.
Fig. 90. Mark of Fig. 89.
Fig. 91. Plate dated 1592 A. D., diam. 382 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 92. Mark of Fig. 91.
Fig. 93. Box dated 1595 A. D., diam. 200 mm, height 100 mm, collection of Mr. Richard B. Hobart,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Fig. 94. Plate, Wan-li period, diam. 163 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 95. Plate dated 1587 A. D., diam. 255 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 96. Mark of Fig. 95.
Fig. 97. Brush-holder dated 1601 A. D., diam. 260 mm, height 229 mm, courtesy The Royal Scottish
Museum, Edinburgh.
Fig. 98. Mark of Fig. 97.
Fig. 99. Box dated 1619, A. D., length and width 344 mm, height 115 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 100. Mark of Fig. 99.
Fig. 101. Cabinet, Wan-li mark and period, width 1430 mm, depth 640 mm, height 2160 mm, courtesy
Herbig-Haarhaus A. G., Cologne.
Fig. 102. Detail of Fig. 101.
Fig. 103. Rear view of Fig. 101.
48
BULLETIN OF THE MUSEUM OF FAR EASTERN ANTIQUITIES


Fig. 104. Mark of Figs. 101, 103.
Fig. 105. Cabinet, Wan-li mark and period, width 590 mm, height 1600 mm, photographs courtesy
M. Theodore Culty, Paris.
Fig. 106. Rear view of Fig. 105.
Fig. 107. Box, Wan-li mark and period, diam. 213 mm, height 113 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 108. Mark of Fig. 107.
Fig. 109. Plate dated 1489 A. D., diam. 188 mm, courtesy Percival David Foundation of Chinese
Art, London.
Fig. 110. Box, probably Hung-chih period, diam. 222 mm, height 150 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 111. Box, probably 16th century, diam. 287 mm, height 214 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 112. Top of Fig. 111.
Fig. 113. Box, probably 16th century, diam. 287 mm, height 90 mm, courtesy Herbig-Haarhaus
A. G., Cologne.
Fig. 114. Tray, probably 16th century, length and width 170 mm, courtesy Seattle Art Museum,
Seattle, Washington.
Fig. 115. Box, probably 16th century, diam. 275 mm, height 95 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 116. Stem-cup, probably 16th century, diam. 156 mm, height 100 mm, photograph courtesy
Messrs. Spink & Son, Ltd.
Fig. 117. Bowl and stand, probably 16th century, bowl: diam. 210 mm, height 100 mm, stand: diam.
191 mm, height 90 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 118. Box, probably 16th century, length 143 mm, width 115 mm, height 70 mm, author’s col-
lection.
Fig. 119. Stem-cup, probably late 16th century, diam. 120 mm, height 113 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 120. Panel, probably 16th century, length 262 mm, width 188 mm, photograph courtesy Messrs.
Spink & Son, Ltd.
Fig. 121. Bowl, probably 16th century, diam. 182 mm, height 89 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 122. Cup, probably 16th century, length 110 mm, height 50 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 123. Box, probably Wan-li period, diam. 337 mm, height 170 mm, courtesy The Metropolitan
Museum of Art, New York.
Fig. 124. Side view of Fig. 123.
Fig. 125. Plate, probably Wan-li period, diam. 169 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 126. Reverse of Fig. 125.
Fig. 127. Box, probably Wan-li period, diam. 172 mm, height 42 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 128. Reverse of Fig. 127.
Fig. 129. Box, probably 16th century, length 182 mm, width 123 mm, height 80 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 130. Bowl, probably Chia-ching period, diam. 118 mm, height 66 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 131. Box dated 1580 A. D., length 707, width 177 mm, height 105 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 132. Detail of side of Fig. 131.
Fig. 133. Inscription of Fig. 131.
Fig. 134. Covered tray, probably Wan-li period, length 308 mm, width 183 mm, height 133 mm,
author’s collection.
Fig. 135. Box, probably Wan-li period, length 138 mm, width 113 mm, height 190 mm, author’s
collection.
Fig. 136. Double-chest, probably Wan-li period, width 1410 mm, depth 640 mm, height 2750 mm,
photograph courtesy L. Wannieck, Paris.
Fig. 137. Box dated 1633 A. D., length 413 mm, width 210 mm, height 91 mm, author’s collection.
Fig. 138. Inscription of Fig. 137.
Fig. 139. Covered tray dated 1634 A. D., length 267 mm, width 182 mm, height 100 mm, author’s
collection.
Fig. 140. Box, probably late 16th century, diam. 185 mm, height 75 mm, author’s collection.
49
F. LOW-BEER: CHINESE LACQUER OF THE MING PERIOD




Pl. 1
47


Pl. 2.
48


Pl. 3.
49


PI. 4.
50
51


PI. 5.
54
55
53


PI. 6.
56
57


PI. 7.
59
61


PI. 8.
64


PI. 9.
66


PI. 10.
71


PI. 11.
72


PL 12.
70
69


PI. 13.
73
74


PI. 14.
52
58


PI. 15.
76


PI. 16.
77


PL 17.
78
79


PI. 18.
81


PI. 19.
82


PI. 20.
83


PI. 21.
84


PI. 22.
85


PI. 23.
86


PI. 24.
87


PI. 25.
91


PI. 26.
88
92


PI. 27.
62
60
90
80


PI. 28.
93


PL 29
94


PI. 30.
95


PI. 31.
98
97


PI. 32.
99


PI. 33.
106
103


PL 34.
o
r-H
«N
O
rH


PI. 35.
96
100
104


PI. 36.
105


PL 37.
134
108
107


PI. 38.
135


PI. 39.
109


PI. 40.
no


PI. 41.
11l


PI. 42.
112


PL 43.
113
114


PI. 44.
115


PI. 45.
116
119


PL 46
117


PL 47.
140
118


PI. 48.
121


PI. 49.
122
123


PI. 50.
124


125
126


PI. 52.
127


130
138
133
128


PI. 54.
131
132


PI. 55.
136


PI. 56.
139
137




Printed in Sweden
Slanders Boktryckeri Aktiebolag,
GOteborg 1952
