

TfeTH- f'fnv
V /
It So
U»aal
■|> * boy
CHOWBOKIANA
NOTES ABOUT THE
ANTIPODES AND THE ANTIPODEANS.


f,
*
* ' % .
■
' ' '
i. \ 'l
%


CHOWBOKIANA
NOTES ABOUT THE
ANTIPODES AND THE ANTIPODEANS.


.
,
.


So much nonsense has been written of late about the
land of the Maori by interested persons, as well as by those
who know little or nothing about it, such numbers of
people have left their homes and their friends to their utter
ruin, attracted to its shores by false representations, that
the writer ventures to offer these notes, in the hope they
may contain scraps of information useful to those who
OUGHT NOT to go there.
The Quixotic people who interest themselves in such
trifles, as they are deemed by the mass of the Colonists, as
well as by such persons as the author of one of the latest
publications about N. Z., who is urgent for the speedy com-
mencement “ of the necessary coming war of extermination
of the Blacks ,” as he terms the Natives, may also gather
some notion of the present state, and future prospects of
the high-spirited aboriginal owners of the much-coveted
lands of the North Island.
THOMAS A. SCOT.
Bombay, 1875.


.
,
t •


THE PAKEHAS.


.
■
N
.


Sharp Necessity Mr. Darwin remarks, would alone induce any one
to emigrate, and certainly except under such pressure, persons of
refined tastes accustomed to the usages and comforts of civilized
life will do well to be very cautious in exchanging the most simple
home in the old, for one their imagination may picture in the ' New
Britain of the South' as its denizens designate New Zealand.
The distinguished author of the Origin of Species, in his
delightful narrative of the voyage of H. M. S. Beagle concludes
his remarks upon the country by saying, “we are all glad to leave
New Zealand, it is not a pleasant place, amongst the natives there
is absent that charming simplicity which is found in Tahiti, and the
greater part of the English are the very refuse of Society.” This
is severe, but it was written many years ago ; the time that has
elapsed since, has of course effected a very great change in the
character of the European population. Hundreds of estimable
families are settled in the various provinces; the plains of Canter-
bury are tilled by as fine a set of stalwart yeomen as are to be
seen in any part of England ; many of the proprietors of the large
squatting runs, and agricultural estates are men of good birth and
education, and a still larger proportion of the struggling smaller
settlers are persons who have held commissions in Her Majesty's
army and navy, graduates of Oxford and Cambridge, and others
of good standing at home, who in an evil hour for themselves in
many instances, have by the absurdly exaggerated accounts of the
facilities for getting on published by interested people, been induc-
ed to give up their professions and employments, and come out to
try and make money as sheep farmers or agriculturists in Maori-
land. ,
Were Mr. Darwin to re-visit the Australasian Colonies he would
probably regret having expressed his opinion so strongly respecting
them, especially regarding these islands then almost a terra incog-
nita. The middle one being absolutely so. He had seen but very
little of the. Northern one itself, the Beagle having only visited the


Bay of islands. Nothing was then known of its many attractions
even to a scientific traveller. Had he wandered amidst the peculiar
scenes of the Southern Cordillera, grand albeit stern in their wild
loneliness, amongst the lofty snow-capped, glacier-robed mountains,
seen the mighty rivers of ice descending through magnificent forests
nearly to the sea, he would have rejoiced to gaze again upon pictures
somewhat similar to those he so much admired in the straits of Magel-
lan —a portion of the globe worth visiting, but which too one is glad
to leave. Had he sailed between the imposing walls of Milford
Sound, and the other picturesque fiords of the west coast of the
Middle island, or ridden over the fair plains of the Northern which
stretch for more than a hundred miles along between the sea-shore
and the singularly symetrical cone of Taranaki rising from its zone
of woods. Still more had he, so ardent a student of the book of
nature stood upon the Terraces of Roto-mahana, and examined the
wonders of the Phlegrasan fields between the Volcano of Tongoriro
and the shores of the Bay of Plenty, opposite the great Solfatara of
White island; the hot lakes and streams, geysers, &c. &c., so well
described by Dr. Hochstetter, and the Honorable Mr. Meade, he
would have considered that it is not a mistake to recommend the
mere tourist to come across the ocean to visit New Zealand. On the
whole, nevertheless, it must be admitted, that the impression he left
them with, is that which most persons would still have to-day
on quitting its somewhat sombre shores, those at all events who
have seen more cheerful lands, and lived amongst more agreeable
people, —it is emphatically not a pleasant country to reside in at
present.
In the first place, although that accomplished voyager might
desire to modify somewhat his sweeping condemnation of its in-
habitants, still as, “ caelum non animam mutant qui trans mare cur-
runt,” most educated people would probably think on their arrival,
who had come across America, visited Virginia, and some of the
other States, that it would have been better to have settled there,
even in so far as having pleasant neighbours, and civil servants is
concerned. Unless circumstances chance to enable one to live in
certain very limited localities, most parts of New Zealand are any-
thing but agreeable to make a home in.
Manner, it has been observed, “ gets regularly worse as you go
from the East to the West, it is best in Asia, not so good in Europe,
and altogether bad in the western States of America, but nowhere is


it thought less of, than in a rough English Colony.” The writer in
the Contemporary Review must have travelled westward still from
California, and had New Zealand in remembrance, for Manner has
there surely reached the culminating point of badness, even amongst
remote Anglo-Saxon communities. In another generation the
arrangement of the cervical vertebrae will be altered in the native-
born whites of the Colony, where the ordinary perpendicular incli-
nation of the head, is changed for a peculiar sideways nod. Rough-
ness and want of consideration are especially noticeable amongst
the people to whom one would have imagined incivility to be
at least of “ little use.” The stranger coming to the seat of
Government from the western shores of that land where shoes
are imperfectly polished, is rather taken aback by the seemingly
studied rudeness of the employees of different kinds, clerks in public
offices, banks and other institutions, as well as of the shop-men,
innkeepers, cabmen or drivers of “ traps” as they term their hideous
street vehicles in Wellington, and other places in these islands, where
shoes for the most part are not polished at all. There appears to be
much virtue in the use of the production of Day and Martin.
In his observations upon New Zealand, a French gentleman re-
marks “ Tinsolence y'est a la mode, comme la familiarite best en
Amerique.” In the Canterbury Province things are somewhat better
than elsewhere; the influence not being quite lost of the earlier
settlers who were for the most part men of the same class as the
majority of those who took up the pastoral regions of Australia,
such as New England, and other districts of New South Wales, and
the southern portions of what is now Queensland, whom Colonel
Mundy in his “ Antipodes” represents as being of a very different
stamp from those who now by force of wealth gained in many in-
stances at the expense of their former masters, take the lead in these
provinces as well as in New Zealand, especially in its towns, where
the money-raongering and storekeeping class have it all their own
way.
In the Colonial Capitals the tone of Society for the time being
depends much upon the example set by the occupants of their res-
pective vice-regal mansions, and upon their being persons able
from their own social position and personal qualities to put and keep
people in their proper places. Lord Lytton, when Secretary of
State for the Colonies, addressed a letter to a newly-appointed
Governor somewhat in the style of Lord Chesterfield's to his son.


He impressed upon him very properly, “ that the more he treated
“ people as gentlemen, the more they would behave as such, that
“ merely sharp and clever Governors may be weak and detested,
“ and that the Queen’s Representative should not show himself
“huffy.”. New Zealand society is not likely to be improved in
its tone by a huffy Governor, who ignores the first instruction
altogether.
From the isolation of the different centres, the presence of a
Governor and his family at Wellington confers little advantage upon
the Colonists generally, few persons residing there except Govern-
ment officials, traders of for the most part of very inferior class,
money-mongers, Christian and Israelitish. The office might very
well be dispensed with altogether, the protection of Imperial
interests being entrusted to a Commission, of which the Com-
modore on the station, the President of the Council, and the
Judges might be ex-officio members. In the Australian Capitals
the case is somewhat different, and although the day is much to be
desired when there may be established “ the Dominion of Austra-
lia” under a Governor-General, still as to these large cities, the
settlers come from all parts of the country, a gentleman in the
position of Governor can do much good, and still greater benefit of
course accrues from the presence of a lady as the recognized head
of society, who has been accustomed to the amenities of high-toned
society at home.
New South Wales had been very fortunate in this respect for
many years, as Queensland is at present, and the influence of the
ladies who had occupied that position had, as remarked in an able
work on the Colonies published in 1860, much to do with making the
social life in Sydney so agreeable and refined as it was formerly.
The author of IT Asie et IT Oceanie having visited all the principal
cities of Asia and America as well as of Europe, says : —“ Si on me
“ demandait quelle est la ville ou je me suis trouve le plus heureux,
“je repondait, a moins que le souvenir de Tomsk ne Temportht,
“ Sydney. Melbourne est peuplee de demagogues, de republicaines
“ implacables d’ aventuriers enrichis, on Pegalite est plus parfaite,
“et moins supportables qu’ a New York, parce que la, e’est accep-
“ tee par tout le monde. Melbourne quoique vouee an commerce,
“et representant le Londres de V hemisphere Australe, comme
“ Sydney est la Paris Car si Melbourne rappelle les villes
V de TAmerique jamais ville ne fus pas plus essentiellement Anglaise


“ que Sydney —C’est une ville vieille deja, mfire, raffinee dans seS
“ goffts, pacifique, et gracieuse, literaire et artistiqne .... C'est
« la gaietie de ses habitants, la proprete de ses rues, la purete de
“ son ciel, les amusements et surtouts ses prominades et ses en-
“ virons rien n’etant a comparer avec les jardins de
“ Sydney, les mieux situee les meiux ombrage, et les mieux tenus
“ du monde.”
It may be disagreeable for the New Zealanders to have equally
severe remarks made regarding their social characteristics still, as
were published twenty years previously by Colonel Mundy,
Admiral FitzEoy and Mr. Darwin, and by one who had seen so
much of the world, and its most remote cities, but they are unfortu-
nately too well deserved. Speaking of the manners and bad con-
duct of the people in the New Zealand towns the same traveller says
indignantly —“ Je declare n ; avoir jamais rien vu de semblable, et
“ it faut que les Maories aient de bien solides qualites naturelles, ou le
“ volonte bien forte pour ne suivre P example de ceuxs qui devraient
“ en tout leur servir de modeles Je dois meme temps ajouter que
u je Aai toujours trouve P honnetete chez les Colons de Nouvello
“ Zelande ; ainse a Nelson je fus deux fois dupe le meme jour
“ Yoila n' en deplaise aux colons ce qu’ un Maori ne ferait pas...A
“ Wellington les blancs savent parfaitement s' approprier, &c. &c.,”
but this is enough from the pen of a traveller who had sojourned
amongst the inhabitants of the Steppes of Tartary, of China, and the
towns of the wild western States in the Gold fever times. Even in
the Colony itself the cupidity and dishonesty of “ the huckstering
denizens” of Wellington, Auckland and other towns, as Colonel
Mundy calls them, is notorious. Nor does the country itself appear
to offer much attraction to those who see much of the world as
sailors do, and neither Wellington nor its inhabitants please visitors
more to-day than they did at the time the authors quoted were
there. A late paper copies a paragraph from the Standard’s corres-
pondent on board the Scientific Expedition ship Challenger
now bn the Pacific. On leaving the harbour of that place. Port
Nicholson, he expresses himself much in the same words as Mr.
Darwin did. “It was with hut little regret we left the shores of
New Zealand , it being at this time of the year , mid-winter, a bleak
stormy, inhospitable place, void of amusements, and the residents
showing but little of that hospitality and kindness we had so recently
experienced in Sydney.”


Nothing strikes a stranger more than to see in that largo
Australian Capital, so great a sea-port, the crowds of orderly well-
dressed people on Sundays, or the holidays in which they so often
indulge. No squalor or wretchedness mar the scene, no drunken-
ness or rioting is seen in the streets, so very different from what
meets the eye in the towns of New Zealand, where the vice which is
ruining the aborigines is so prevalent, and its usual accompaniment
of foul language disturbs the passer-by as in Wapping or Bristol
wharves. Familiarity no doubt prevents the habit from being
regarded at the Antipodean islands with such aversion as it is now-a-
days amongst respectable people in Groat Britain as well as amongst
continental nations, and it is evidently looked upon there with the 4
same leniency it was a generation or two ago in the mother country,
when men still held with the good cheer-loving old Monk, that “qui
bene bibit, bene dormit, qui bene dormit non peccat, qui non
peccat, salvatus erit.
“I don’t know why people swear so hard in some parts of Cali-
fornia, says an amusing American writer, I have heard men relate
the most trivial incidents with such a torrent of imprecations that I
looked with amazement to see what there was in the matter to
provoke them so unreasonably, or arouse their resentment to such a
pitch of ferocity ; the other day one of the stage-drivers boasting of
a new whip-handle which a friend had presented to him, cursed it in
a manner so shocking, as the best piece of hickory he had ever seen,
that I positively was afraid he would swear the hat of his head.”
The abominable habit is prevalent enough in all the colonies, but
in no Australian or American city are respectable people liable to be
so shocked as in the streets of the towns and villages of New Zea-
land, in the smaller ones more particularly, where the young men
and boys shout across to each other in the most disgusting manner,
—The rising generation of “ mean whites” in both islands, but
especially in the northern one are fearfully profane, and most offen-
sive in their conversation; and the astounding profligacy of the first
settlers so bitterly commented upon by the writers of the day allud-
ed to, as actually astonishing the Maoris, has left its mark on the
manners and habits of their descendants in the settlements in
Cook’s straits, and to the north.
There is one, however,Taranaki which had a more innocent youfh
than the others. It has of course become much changed for the
worse since the war, which so completely desolated it, that measures


had to be adopted by the Government as expressed in the Gazette,
“ for the permanent re-ins t atement of the settlement of Taranaki and
its inhabitants.” Nevertheless it appears still to hold a high posi-
tion among the Provinces at the present day, taking absence of
crime as the criterion. It was found to be unnecessary for a Chief
Justice to risk his life time after time in landing through the surf,
which breaks with great violence very frequently upon its shores of
glittering but valueless titaniferous iron sand, even for the pleasure
of receiving his white gloves, so Sir George Arney has ceased to
hold a court of assize there. Originally settled by a respectable
class of emigrants from.the fair vales of Devonshire principally, the
little Colony with its village capital of New Plymouth was planted
in all completeness by people who came direct from home, and who
were for a long time totally isolated from the other settlements, a
circumstance that more than compensated for the primitive simpli-
city, and old-fashioned customs and habits, as well as ignorance,
it must be admitted, in which the young people for the most part
grew up to be men and women. The few natives then living in
their immediate neighbourhood had hitherto been innocent of much
intercourse with “ Pakehas,” i. e., strangers; of a foreign race, —
although in the first ships there came a few persons of education,
and good standing at home the majority of the emigrants were
men of the humblest origin, but were selected with care by the
promoters of the settlement as honest hard-working labourers : there
was no admixture of the bad class of " low whites” amongst its
population so prominent in other parts of the North Island. Hem-
med in by their mountain and dense pathless forests at the back,
by the harbourless ocean in front, and by powerful tribes of warlike
natives to the North and South, when disturbances arose, the plains
around the base of Mount Egmont were the principal battle-fields,
and there was nothing to tempt the “ huckstering traders', grog-
sellers, and loafers” whom Admiral Fitzßoy complains of so much,
when he administered the affairs of the Colony, to go to Taranaki,
to try and make money out of the shrewd west-countrymen. The
day will come ere long when this portion of the island will be one
of the most flourishing, as well as the most attractive. But when
that day does come, the old settler when complimented upon the
honorable reputation of the little State and its capital in years past,
will say with a sigh, “ nous avous changd tout cela,” and will look
back with regret to the times when the Maoris held possession, as
they still do to-day, of the beautiful plains from Waiongongoro to


Urenui, and who can wonder at their passionate attachment to the
fair land of their ancestors and at their trying to keep possession
of it ?
Where is the coward who would not dare
To fight for such a land P
It will scarcely he deemed a compensation to have got rid of
the incubus of the Provincial Government, as no doubt they will do
ere long, with its ridiculous local parliament, speaker, executive
ministers, &c. Unfortunately for the prospect of a pleasant state of
things socially, when this coast becomes peopled unless there should
be a large influx of settlers of a better class, to counteract their
influence, a very objectionable element is being at present intro-
duced. At the extremity of the Plain, about a hundred and
twenty miles from New Plymouth, is situated the town of Whan-
ganui, an offshoot from Wellington, the centre of a district already
becoming populous and rich, but its population principally, as
might be expected, is of a class, to whom were our authors to
re-visit New Zealand, they would apply the harshest epithets bestowed
by them upon the denizens of the parent settlement of Wellington.
It is indeed a matter for surprise, that surrounded by such influences
and examples, one now and then meets with persons born and
brought up in these places whose manners and tone of thought
would attract anywhere in the world, but they are f rari nantes in
gurgite vasto.’
The task of regulating society and the entree to Government
House becomes doubtless daily a more difficult and disagreeable
one in the Colonies, where the ultra democratic institutions have
broken down all the barriers, and so much territorial and political
influence has fallen into the hands of the wealthy lower classes, who
pride themselves on their money, and despise all claims of education
and good manners. It has been well said that to put the multitude at
the top and the few at the bottom, is a radical inversion of the pyramid
of society, which must inevitably tend to its downfall accordingly. A
lower class comes to fill the senatorial benches at each successive
election, few of the better educated and more qualified settlers now
caring to enter the lists; their political ostracism will soon be as
complete in New Zealand as in the United States of America where,
at all events, a man requires to have some talent, to gain a seat in
the House of Representatives. The natural consequence is, that all
the public offices from the highest to the lowest are gradually filled
up by men of worse stamp than formerly. The unscrupulous gamb-


ier, and sharp police office attorney may be found occupying the
most important positions, and the judicial bench itself as .'well as the
magisterial is deliberately and with “malice aforethought” degraded.
The effects of “ Kooraposh” or “hollow Bosh” as LordLytton terms
the “ government of the many, i. e., the ascendancy of the most igno-
rant and hollow,” are indeed thoroughly exemplified in New Zealand
and will come to be more severely felt yet.
In the account of the voyage of the Austrian Frigate Novara,
reasons are given for what the writer calls “ the high tone of Society
in Sydney spoken also of in such flattering terms by the author of
L’ Asie et L’ Oceanic. The Marquis de Beauvoir, whose account of
his voyage round the world with the Princes of the House of Orleans
was published in 1870, speaks of it still in much the same
eulogistic manner. He says, “ Melbourne was the city of gold, of
democracy, and of important business; Hobarton was a hospitable
country town. Sydney with all the stamp of the English gentleman
upon it, with the agreeable warm-heartedness of the Creolle, with a
picturesqueness born of a tropical sky, and of flowers and fruit whose
like is not to be found in nature. Sydney is the town of high life,
full of movement, of aristocratic society in the enjoyment of wealth
and of all the charms of the gay world.”
How loner it will continue to merit some of these encomiums is
questionable. The danger in bridging over the former impassable
gulph between the two sections of society was greater in that place
than elsewhere. Knighthoods and other distinctions have been con-
ferred in the Colonies lately so lavishly and with so little regard to
the merits of the recipients, that they go for nothing. So it does not
much matter who is added to the roll; people when they hear of a
new one being gazetted merely ask, how much has he paid ? Who has
got the douceur this time ? But when the Australians heard that a
hereditary title had been conferred upon a wealthy spirit-dealer of
Sydney—an honor they would have been pleased to have seen bestow-
ed upon the representative of the respectable family to whom the
Colony owed its start on the road of prosperity and progress, or upon
its foremost legislator, the bold and eloquent tribune of the people—
they were not a little indignant. They felt that a blow had been
struck which at once destroyed the hitherto well-ordered system of
things in that place, nor was its weight softened when a similar dis-
tinction was again given to another citizen, who of course followed
his compeer, and deserted the country for England, where their titles


might give them a position not likely to be conceded by their fellow-
colonists.
The New Zealand Capital never enjoyed any great repute, but
its character such as it was, has little chance of being elevated under
any of the influences now prevailing. The chief power in the Colony
is vested in, or rather usurped by an individual who may be “ good
at all things,” but is certainly “ better at a bet.” People inveigh
against him and his proceedings, caricatures such as this appear in
the shop-windows, but still Julius Vogel goes on, annihilates by one
means or another all opposition in the venal house of representatives,
controuls the Press by being a shareholder or Director in the various
companies he gets floated to buy up the principal newspapers, builds
a ministerial mansion, gives great entertainments, doubles his own
salary, quadruples his own travelling allowances, takes trips to Europe
and the adjacent colonies, with his family and private secretary,
travelling au prince at the expense of the community, and will con-
tinue to do so and to act as dictator so long as the power of borrow-
ing: remains.
O
The Colonists would do well to ask that the decoration he is so
ambitious of obtaining which has been refused by the leader
of the opposition, and one or two other gentlemen, prominent
persons in New Zealand, should be conferred upon him at once;
lie affixes the cabalistic letters C. M. G. already to his name, by
all means let him be knighted ; the order which claims the insulted
angels St. Michael and St. George for its patrons is a grotesque
enough travestie already, and is more ridiculous even than the once
valued Star of India, although nothing can well exceed the absur-
dity altogether on the part of the advisers of Royalty in bestowing
the honor of knighthood which is strictly a Christian institution
on Jew, and Paynim, money-dealers too of all callings the most
antipathetic to that of the true knight—
Sir Moses, Sir Aaron, Sir Jam-Ram-a-jee,
Two stock-broking Jews, and a shroffing Parses
Have girt on the armour of old Chivalrie,
And instead of the Red Cross have hoisted Bell’s Three.
It would be a cheap mode for the unfortunate settlers of New Zealand
before the day comes when every man will have to go to the coun-
try town to be taxed for his wife perhaps as well as his herds and
all things he may possess, to get rid the same time of this ipse lectus,
“ a se,” dictator by pensioning him off* with his full salary for life, the


amount at least appertaining to the office before he contrived to get
it increased, and much better than allowing things to go on as at
present, going from bad to worse, which they are sure to do, until an
opportunity is afforded him of ousting the present Agent General
from his position, and appointing himself to go to England in his
place. The management of affairs being vested in the hands of pru-
dent men, the universal corruption might be checked, and the calami-
ties be averted, which must inevitably come upon the Colony when
its credit is exhausted. When the borrowed millions are all spent.
When badly constructed Railroads, constantly being damaged by
floods unguarded against, and by landslips, with other uncompleted,
and in manv cases utterly useless works commenced to buy a vote,
are all that remain to them for the million sterling of interest alone
that the New Zealanders have to pay annually—and they find besides
that the best of the labourers they have brought across the seas at
such cost, are leaving their shores for those of Australia.
Under such a Ruler it is not to be wondered at, that the whole
tone of New Zealand Society has become tinged with the ‘ spirit of
the till/ and that all sorts of roguery and chicanery flourish —the
most objectionable individuals coming up amidst the scum to the
top. The looker-on although disgusted, cannot help being amused
in some measure by what he sees. He watches with curiosity the
canny Scotch writers (not writers to the signet) and other noisy
members who seated in the front ranks of the opposition are to be
seen night after night in the assembly chamber, foaming with indig-
nation as they denounce the “ apalling corruption,” &c,, &c., till he
sees them at last disappear from their places, and presenting them-
selves to the astonished colonists as Ministers of Justice, Police
Magistrates with comfortable salaries for life, or even seated on the
bench, arrayed in judicial robes. He witnesses the manufacture
of a Bank into a powerful political engine, a the Ring/’ i. e., the
Directors thereof, flourishing like green bay-trees, as did the Auck-
land band of conspirators who by cunningly depreciating the shares
of a gold mine, after its wealth had become known to them as
directors, were able to secure the whole of the shares for a song to
the ruin of many miserable widows and orphans, and go home, and
present themselves and their wives and daughters to Her Gracious
Majesty as specimens of the noble-minded founders of the ‘ Britain
of the South,’ and be made 0. M. G.’s.
Nowhere does success justify the means seemingly in public opi-
nion as it does in New Zealand. In no community, not in Georgia or


Alabama would things be tolerated that are done there witli impu-
nity under the present administration. If in one of these American
States, a chief official fond of “ taking miss,” lost a thousand pounds
or two at 100 in the evening, he would scarcely venture to ask the
hard-working farmer to pay his losses, as the meek struggling set-
tlers in New Zealand are called upon to do, and submit to without a
murmur, knowing that it is of no use murmuring. They are no longer
represented in Parliament, one man after another is sent up pledged
to endeavour to redress wrongs but in vain. It would do just as
well to lay all the papers on the table the first day of the meeting of
Parliament- and pass them in globo, pay the independent members
their guinea and a half a day for the usual 100 or 150 days, and let
them go back to their stores, their gin-shops and farms. There is no
opposition now—its quondam leaders sit hopeless and disgusted—
their followers are all bought, or an under-offer, excepting a few
public-spirited gentlemen; a very small band indeed, who finding it
utterly vain to attempt to make a stand, one by one retire from
public life in despair.
Although better and of course more under the control of the
law and police, than when Mr. Darwin visited New Zealand, much
cannot be said it may be gathered, in favor of the European popula-
tion generally. North of Cook’s Straits it may roughly, in miner’s
language be described, as composed of a sub-stratum of escaped
convicts and run-a-way sailors, upon which came to be super-impos-
ed a layer of mean Jews and other dealers, with here and there like
the rolled and worn pebbles of white quartz in a dark dingy con-
glomerate, and causing one equally to speculate upon the strange
circumstances that swept them there, are a few persons from the
better classes of English society, polished in manner and of good
character and standing,—above all, is now being deposited a hetero-
geneous drift from the sea-port towns, the work-houses, and refor-
matories of the mother country.


PART 11.
THE MAORI
ANECDOTES OF THE WAR.


V
,
4
,
.
. ' .
,
*


Mr. Darwin was, as any one would still be who came from the
fair islands of Polynesia, inhabited as many of them are, by the most
amiable,and until lately the happiest people upon earth, unfavorably
impressed with the Aboriginal as well as with the Pakeha inhabitants
of New Zealand. Time has not softened the Maori, or made him a
more agreeable companion speaking generally, than he was at the time
of the “ Beagle’s” visit, although he may not be so ready to eat you.
He has ‘ rubbed intellects’ with the Europeans, and finds that there
is no such great difference between them, as to cause him to enter-
tain any great respect for the Pakeha. The attitude of the natives
in later years is not to be wondered at, when the history of our
intercourse with them is considered, the testimony of all contem-
porary writers, corroborates Mr. Darwin’s statement that like the
unfortunate islanders of the Pacific generally, the Maoris at Auck-
land and other places came first into contact with the very lowest
class of Europeans, the very refuse of Society—the worst sort of
settlers, fellows whose only occupations were those of publicans
and special sinners, who lived a half-savage life, or rather as the
author of that capital book ‘ Old New Zealand’ says, a savage and
a half-life, being infinitely worse and more brutal in their con-
duct than the natives, whose fierce passions they excited against each
other, and whom they taught every imaginable vice. Indeed, as stated
b} r Colonel Mundy, the drunkenness and reckless debauchery of the
Pakehas actually astonished the Maoris. “I fancy if ever there was an
earthly Pandemonium, it existed at the Cook’s Straits whaling esta-
blishments at that time, where there was a fortuitous aggregation
of the wildest elements of society, nothing was wanted but to graft
upon it a convict penal settlement, from this New Zealand was
happily saved by the character for ferocity and treachery attributed
to the natives.”
At one time it might have been hoped that the influence of the
Missionaries and of such a man as Bishop Selwyn might have over-
come the opposition of the bad whites, which began early. In 1839
Captain Fitzßoy (afterwards Admiral and Governor of the Colony)


observes, “ embarrassments of many kinds are arising, one jealousy of
that influence which has enabled those who are jealous, to approach
the spot where they now stand, and oppose the Missionary as he
exerts himself to suppress licentiousness and the use of ardent spirits,
whilst assisting their early settlement the Missionaries were the best
friends of those adventurers who sought a livelihood amongst the
islands of the Pacific, in New Zealand especially, but when once
established, ingratitude and utter want of reflection became too pre-
valent/’ his companion at the time Mr. Darwin, says : ‘ It is strange,
but I have heard these worthy men say that the only protection
which they need, and on which they rely is from the Native Chiefs
against the Englishmen/ It is very much the fashion in the Colonies
as elsewhere to sneer at and run down Missionaries in general, as
the author of the chapter on the subject in “ South Sea Bubbles”
and other frothy writers do, but those only can be guilty of this
folly, who are totally ignorant of what they have accomplished, and
have only seen the class of men who come to places when the days
of danger are past, trading Missionaries “ teaching what Jesus did but
not doing as he did,” as Mr. Wallace in his “ Malay Archipelago”
says, after eulogising the Jesuits in the East, “ who do their work
thoroughly as of old, and have much to be proud of.” Mr. Wallace’s
friend and fellow-traveller in other regions Mr. Bates, in his charm-
ing book on the Amazon River remarks, “ the Jesuits were successful
in teaching the pure and elevated Christian morality to the simple
natives of Brazil. In 1759 the white colonists finally prevailed, the
Jesuits were forced to leave the country, and the fifty-one happy
villages went to ruin, since then the aboriginal race has gone on de-
creasing in numbers ... Is not a similar state of things now exhibit-
ed in New Zealand between the Maoris and the English Colonists ?”
The testimony of such distinguished men to the present and
past labours of the Jesuits, will be deemed by most persons more
deserving of credence than the flippant observations of the Earl,
or “ the Doctor” regarding them. But the writer was no doubt un-
aware of what they are doing still in the East, and had forgotten or
never heard of the great “ Reductions” as they were termed, in South
America, alluding to which Mr. Herman Merivale observes, the
Society derived no temporal wealth or power from the expenditure
of its best and noblest spirits in the secluded pursuits of the American
Missions, and on the whole whatever were the faults of the system
we shall hardly refuse to repeat the words of Southey “ there nevei


was a more absolute despotism : but there never existed any other
Society in which the welfare of the subjects temporal and eternal,
has been the sole object of Government.” Even if we do not go so far
as to say with Raynal “ that perhaps never was so much good done
to mankind with so little admixture of evil/’ The author of
«South Sea Bubbles,” a name well chosen—ventures to say
“I will back half a dozen Jesuits or Marists going the round of Poly-
nesia to do more to demoralize the people, and shake what little
hold Christianity has upon them than five hundred dissolute sailors—
if you want real mischief done, place your cause in the hands of a
few earnest and well-meaning men/-’ If the latter part of the sen-
tence refers as it seems from other observations to do, to Bishop
Selwvn and the lamented Bishop Patteson, those who have heard
even but a little about the good these noble men did in the Pacific
will read it with just indignation. The writer might study with
advantage Father Newman’s discourse upon ‘ Personal influence the
means of propagating the truth. Mr. Darwin, Admiral Erskine and
the authors of the respective cruises of H. M. S. Fawn and H.M.S.
Curacoa render a well deserved tribute of admiration of their
character, and testimony to the good results of the efforts of the
many brave men of all sects, who without the least thought for
themselves, or the slightest chance of personal advantage have gone
one after another, sometimes to the very same place, amongst the
savages of Papuan race in the South Seas, to fall unheard of; but
who paved the way at last for money-seeking adventures to follow
unfortunately in their steps to many of these islands. There is no
doubt that the Trading Missionaries soon became numerous, and
made their deteriorating influence felt in New Zealand. As early as
1843, Dr. Dieffenbach gives the names of ten of these people who
had acquired about a hundred thousand acres, at about sixpence an
acre, lands worth now from ten pounds even to twenty pounds.
One family in particular is conspicuous in the list which has tarnish-
ed by their rapacitv and land-sharking, a name that once stood high
amongst the natives as well as Europeans. This traveller contrasts
the conduct of these men with that of the Roman Catholic priests
“ whose humble and disinterested manner of living, and the superior
education which they have generally received, have procured them
many friends both amongst Europeans and Maoris, and many con-
verts.” To the other coarse beings entirely attached to material
interests, the future of the Maoris was a matter of total indifference
“ and they made no attempt to confront the carriers of deraoraliza-


tion, whom if they had been in earnest themselves, or if the country
had been in earnest, care might at least have been taken to see
that the flagrant offences of these corrupters met with the punish-
ment they deserved.” All they thought about was to secure
good estates for themselves, and make as much as possible out
of those lands under their control, set apart for the benefit
of the people they were supposed to be busy instructing. The
old Spaniards in their thirst for gold did not injure the abori-
gines of Mexico and Peru very much more than the Anglo-Saxon
colonists of the 19th century have the Maoris, in their desire to
gain possession of their ancestral lands. It is not enough for them
that in accordance with “ the mysterious agency at work by which
wherever the white man has trod, death seems to pursue the abori-
ginal,” they could not wait for their extirpation taking place in time,
but hastened it by wars, and ardent spirits. There will be no remains
seen by after-generations left by the colonists of New Zealand such
as in the wildest deserts of Arizona and Sonora, strike the traveller
with astonishment, testifying to the wonderful influence once acquir-
ed by the J esuit Missionaries, and success if not in proselytising, at
all events in civilizing the American Indians which they wisely set
about always in the first place.
The consequence of the torrent of profligacy that flowed into
New Zealand was that “the Anglo-Saxon communities established
amongst the natives of the North island and on the shores of Cook’s
Straits advanced from a bad infancy to a worse maturity. The sharp
practises of the white land-sharks enlightened the Maoris also as
to the true value of their lands, and when once awake to their own
interests they were not the men to doze again,—they not only stood
out for higher prices in present and future dealings, but repudiated
bye-gone bargains on the plea that they had been over-reached and
bamboozled, which undoubtedly was the case. The spirit of the till
that so powerfully rules the actions of the greater part of the
colonists is rapidly impressing itself on the native character and deal-
ings.” Twenty years or so, have passed since the above was written,
and have as Colonel Mundy prognosticated, developed the once
chivalrous, and industrious, though fierce Maori chieftain into a
greedy trader, or idle dissipated spendthrift. He feels now
that money is power, and although his personal Mana*—(some
* It* conveys the signification of independence and freedom as well as sovereignty
they speak of a road being made through the inland as destroying its “ Mana,”


thing more than feudal influence) is waning, the Government
having undermined it in a treacherous way, lie is content
to exchange the command of men into a good revenue, in some
cases many thousands a year, which he generally manages to squan-
der by reckless extravagance and intemperance. He feels that so
long as he has plenty of money, Pakehas instead of Maoris are his
slaves, and comes to believe from all he sees in the conduct of the
white men publicly and privately, that to gain the “ Ickipenny” is
the chief end of man. Being told that our wise and good men are
made magistrates, and that a J. P. is an important Rangatira, what
must the native Chief think of our social arrangements when he
goes to Wellington the seat of Government, and sees a magistrate
leave the Bench, and presently beholds him mounted on his rostrum
the top of a cart shrieking and gesticulating, as he seeks to gain
a bid of another ickipenny-six pence—for some old broken-down
Maori horse, which the justice-dispensing auctioneer at last knocks
down for five and twenty shillings —he sees many of the clergymen
now-a-days mucli more intent upon the prosperity of their sheep
and cattle than anything else. In the townships buying and selling,
cheating and scheming surround him, and he knows enough to
understand the rogueries of the low class of traders, grog-sellers,
and storekeepers ; whilst in the country he seldom comes in contact
with any of the few resident gentlemen, and still more seldom with
any of the fewer ladies who might give him a better idea of the
Rangatiras of foreign race; sometimes the Maoris happen to do so,
and express their astonishment at the great difference betwixt the
two classes of Pakehas and ask why it is so much more marked than
amongst themselves. Personal courage was the birthright of the
native Rangatira or gentleman. He finds that is by no means a
requisite quality to a man who comes to rule over his fellows amongst
the Pakehas. He sees two notable instances of this in the vis-a-vis
superintendents of the two Provinces of Taranaki and Hawke bay
The latter a minister of the Crown, rapidly appropriating to himself
the territories of the Ahuriri Chiefs, and yet he knows well, how he
was the first to turn and ride for safety, when danger threatened
the inhabitants of the plains around Napier and how the other
Provincial ruler was found the sole representative of the men of
Taranaki, amongst the women and children in the fort when the
Maori bullets were flying about outside that settlement, and is
puzzled what to make of the Europeans especially when he con-
siders the poor position of those who fought most bravely and well
4


against him in defence of their homes. Bishop Selwyn and Bishop
Abraham have gone, the name of the former acts like a talisman
still, every native being proud to tell you he knew him. In the
Government Mr. Weld’s successors have been for the most part men
without any manner at all, and there is nothing to raise the Pakeha
in the estimation of the proud old Chiefs as men, although they may
admire their shrewdness, and capacity in dealing.
As the Secretaries and Heads of departments at Washington,
did to the old Red Indian Chief who came to visit General Grant,
so do the colonial ministers appear vulgar to the Maori. ‘An im-
pressive manner had been a tradition in the societies in which he
lived, being of great use in such societies.’ To interrupt the grave and
proud Chief in his speech, even when he wasted time in recounting
his honors and those of his forefathers, more distant like Kinglake’s
Pacha’s than the ends of the earth, or when he mounted into the most
impassioned and fiercest but poetical phases of Maori oratory would
have been an impertinence that might have cost the perpetator his
life. One can imagine therefore the astonishment of the swarthy
senators, who represent the Native Race in the general Assembly at
Wellington, and who are amongst the most dignified and decorous
of its members, at the scenes which sometimes take place there,
presided over as its sittings are by a person very different from the
two previous speakers, who filled the chair it is said, with diginity
and power, and were free from that superlatively ceremonious
manner which Thackeray characterises as the “ acme of bad breed-
ing.” He will not be elected to the office again, it is confidently
asserted, his short tenure has been sufficient however to secure the
coveted knighthood. The President of the Upper House is not a
Knight, being a gentleman of established position he did not need
the supposed honor. The chair being so filled, it is not a matter
for surprise that the proceedings of the House which had hitherto
contrasted favorably with most colonial parliaments should frequent-
ly now be of the character they are. Last session, one of the Maori
members worn out by the conduct of a rude obstructive talker, rose
and making his bow to the speaker gravely asked through his in-
terpreter (each Maori member sits with one besides him) to be per-
mitted to take the offensive individual out on his shoulders, and lock
him up till the sitting was over—a most excellent addition to parlia-
mentary practice this would be indeed. New Zealanders may be
inclined to take credit to themselves, from the fact of the Maoris


having seats in the legislature, and point to the circumstance that
one is even a Minister of the Crown, as an evidence of the noble
consideration shewn to the native race. But with the mass of the
colonists any concession to them was from sheer necessity not from
choice. Man for man the Maori was found to be the equal of the
Pakeha- He could not take his lands by force, so is accomplishing
this the one paramount object of the Government stealthily by
degrees, whilst yielding after the nominal conquest of great part of the
island in many things, that are the very first in other countries which
would have been most properly insisted upon. The Maori evidently
agreeing with the expression of the old cynic, that the man who
speaks two languages is a rascal, makes the European learn his.
The documents and gazettes must be printed in his own tongue if
he is to pay any attention to them. He must be free to go and
come where he thinks proper, but the Pakeha must keep on his own
side of the Pale, on pain of heavy penalty or death. A Government
emissary wishing to have audience of some fierce chief of the old
school is met with a cartel such as the following, which was lately
put into the hands of a Commissioner attempting to enter a district
closed to Europeans. “Go you oh my letter to the Governor, or to
whoever you may be, if you are the Governor you must go back, if
you are a Magistrate you must go back, if you are a postman from
the Governor jmu must go back, or if you persist in coming here
you shall pay a hundred pounds penalty. Verily to an Anglo-Indian
the insults put up with are quite incomprehensible, and humiliating
to a degree that no ultimate success appears to justify a Queen s
officer being expected to submit to. The credit of having granted, or
proposed even the admission of the natives to a say in the manage-
ment of affairs will no doubt be claimed by the Yogel-McLean
Ministry, as well as of having thought of following the example of
neighbouring Colonies in making Railroads, and introducing Emi-
grants. But they have not even this item to set against the evils
attending the system pursued. In Judge Therry’s Reminiscences
of Australia published in 1863, after alluding to the repeal of part
of the treaty of Waitangi, whereby the right to possess and sell
their lands is recognized, he goes on to say “ indeed there has been
“ a recent proposal to admit the Native chiefs into the administra-
“ tion of the Government, and the Maori Nobility into the Legislative
“ Council, and further to concede to the Native Race a fair represen-
“ tation in the house of Assembly.” There is not indeed a single
important feature introduced by the present Government into their


programme which is not borrowed from the proposal of previous
Ministers, or had not been urged upon their consideration for years
in the public press, but Mr, Yogel has the tact to use other people’s
brains. No doubt his method of manipulating men and money,
are to a certain extent original, and strike strangers with as great
astonishment that they should be tolerated, as it probably did the
generality of New Zealanders to find a Judge using the term
“ Nobility” to persons they are in the habit of calling Niggers.
The Province of Ahuriri or Hawke Bay, not an inapt designation,
is the one in which the two races have come together on the most
intimate terms of late years. It is an open pastoral country, where
hostile bands could do but little mischief. Some of the large runs
are fortunately for the next generation of Maoris held on long
leases by the Europeans, from the aboriginal landlords. Their
tenants have managed in a good many instances however to obtain
the fee-simple of vast tracts upon very easy terms, and it is
very questionable whether many of the lands will remain in the
possession of the natives long. The Government, if individuals are'
unable to do so, is almost sure to dispossess them by some means or
other. One or two of the larger holders in this part of the island, are
men of a class of whom had there been more, it would have been
well for the natives, gentlemen who have dealt fairly with them.
There is very little doubt that if the North Island generally, had
been settled by persons of the stamp who composed the old Squatto-
cracy as it was termed, of Australia and Canterbury, there probably
would never have been any war. But greedy land-sharks have been
very busy there lately, and lessons have been taught the Maoris of
that Province too, they will not speedily forget, and which have made
them utterly to distrust the Europeans as a body, although they
may have faith in a few individuals; even their own Pakeha lawyers
whom they had taken to employ in order to protect themselves from
being plundered, are now looked upon by them with suspicion.
The case of Te-Hapuka is before their eyes, one of their most
noted warrior chieftains, a man who a few years ago could have
come down with a thousand braves, and swept the white men into
the sea, by merely holding up his hand, or possibly have consigned
them to the ovens. But he was a good friend to the strangers, and
worse for himself was the first to sell land on that coast to the
Government, and give the grasping Pakeha a footing. They see
him now impoverished, his ancestral lands gone, his carriage and


horses seized by a bailiff, and wicked disgusting farce, about to be
made a bankrupt, for a debt contracted to a low Scotch shylock of
Napier town who had swelled his fortune by his questionable deal-
ings with him and his people. It certainly is something for a man
to say he had served a writ upon and arrested the famous old Te-
Hapuka for debt, and perhaps this fellow is proud of his feat, and of
his name being remembered by the Maoris although it be with detesta-
tion, Fortunately the matter came under the notice of the Commis-
sioner appointed under the ‘Native Fraud Prevention Act’ for things
had got so outrageously bad, that a bill bearing that title was passed
by the influence of those who viewed the proceedings going on with
indignation, and dread also of the consequences. So the shameful at-
tempt to deprive the old chief of his remaining property was exposed.
The details were published in the Blue books, and reflect such disgrace
upon all concerned, that perhaps the expose may have the effect of
making such unscrupulous persons more cautious in future. It is
well nigh too late however in this Province, and it would have been
better had the Government interfered in time to prevent the aliena-
tion of large areas for nominal considerations and sanctioned leases
only. As an instance of how they were robbed, I may mention a
circumstance which came to light at the late sittings of the court of
enquiry held at Napier for the purpose of investigating the titles to
lands alleged to have been purchased from the natives. A young
lad of sixteen or eighteen, a principal owner of a large block alienat-
ed by his hape or subtribe to a storekeeper in the town to liquidate
their debt to him, was asked by the Judge what he got for his share
of the land. Four hundred pounds. Yes, said his Honor, I see the
block was sold for £4OO, but I want to know what vou got for it.
Four hundred pounds,—stupid boy ! your people agreed to sell for
that price but what did you receive ? what did you get into your
own hands ? oh me ! me got one puggaree !
The temptations to acquire fine estates and immense sheep
runs of from fifty to a hundred thousand acres for trifling sums was
too great to be resisted even by those whose office and position made
it their bounden duty to protect the natives, who have now the
mortification of discovering what fools they have been, and cannot
be expected to regard their new neighbours with the good-will they
might have done were they receiving a fair rental for estates which
would descend to their children. The change in the value of these
lauds came very suddenly. Sheep runs of from forty to fifty thou-


sand acres purchased for three or four thousand pounds within the
last few years, would now bring eighty to a hundred thousand ; two
pounds per acre being the average value of freeholds of this descrip-
tion —when a land-tax comes to be imposed, as it will soon, the scale
should be graduated in such a manner that the owners of these vast
territories got for so little, and in most cases not by fair means, should
bear a heavier burden. The thing is done however, and it is no use
locking the stable door when the horse is stolen. Upon what possible
plea the Government now claims a right to dictate to Native landhold-
ers any more than to European to whom they may sell, it is difficult
to conceive. If the Ministers and their supporters who have acquired
great estates so easily, were to set the example of making provision for
the descendants of the aboriginal owners of the magnificent properties
out of which they have been bamboozled it would be well, and look
much better than passing the Bill they have done preventing any one
in future acquiring lands directly from them as they themselves have
done, except some of their particular friends who by trickery are
able still to do so. It would have been more seemly had this measure
been thought of even a little, say twelve months sooner, before their
titles had all passed through the land’s Court, and the rich plains of
Ahuriri passed irrevocably into their possession.
The interference of the Government has somehow always been for
bad, as regards the native lands. Being landbrokers themselves, and
compelling sales to be made to the Crown only, and at nominal prices,
to be re-sold directly at high rate to the settlers was one of the causes,
indeed the real cause of the first troubles with the aborigines, whose
right to the soil with strange inconsistency it was pretended to recog-
nize. If from the first territories purchased from them, had been fairly
paid for and the claims of men who got great estates for a puggaree
been ignored, things would have been very different and eventually
the Maori Chiefs would have held the position they are entitled to,
of the real landed aristocracy of the Colony. It is too late I repeat
to interfere in the same manner again, instead of seeing that a rea-
sonable price is actually paid for lands bought from them, not mere-
ly promised, and doled out by degrees in goods charged for at fabu-
lous rates, and it only irritates the natives to insist upon their selling
to the Government agents, in order again, as in the earlier times of
the Colony, to make large profits out of what is called the Colonial
Estate, by re-selling small blocks at auction, and extracting the last
shilling from the new settlers, whom such endeavours are being


made to induce to come to New Zealand. The present Ministers are
not statesmen enough to see that every farthing taken from the
emigrant with small means, for land which he has nothing left
wherewith to cultivate and stock it, is so much lost to the country.
Had this most peculiar Bill been to prevent sales altogether, and
to encourage the Maoris to hold their lands and lease them to the
settlers, there would have been not much objection to be raised, and
it might have been taken as an evidence of the desire of its framers
for the good of the Race. But it is just another instance amongst
many of the selfish spirit which is so unfortunately characteristic of
the present administration of the affairs of this over-governed Colony.
Of course the passing of the Bill added at once immensely to the
value of the already acquired estates, and the introducers and sup-
porters of the measure derived in many instances great personal
advantages.
Without the enormous expenditure, and air of mystery which
envelopes the doings of the Land-purchasing or Native Department,
as it is called, its chief being facetiously styled Defence Minister,
it would be perfectly easy now to carry out the policy which expe-
rience has taught, and common honesty might long ago have suggest-
ed that it is better —seeing that sales direct to Europeans have so
long been sanctioned, —to take care merely that the natives are not
robbed, and obtain even at the eleventh hour the good-will and con-
fidence if possible, of a shrewd and warlike people by equitable
dealing, than to obtain possession of their territories first by cheat-
ing, then fighting, and after all having to pay for them, as is being
done in the case of the lands on the West Coast, nominally confiscat-
ed after the last war. There is no reason for doubting that if a pru-
dent and honest, at the same time firm and consistent, policy with
the Maoris could be carried out, and not interfered with by political
scheming, a fertile source always of trouble in New Zealand, or by
the treacherous conduct of the Pakeha-Maoris, as a class of low
whites are called who have lived much amongst them, and whose
advice is always mischievous, that the North Island—New Zealand
proper—would soon be as safe a country to reside and hold move-
able property in, as Australia or the Provinces of Canterbury, Otago,
&c., where the natives never very numerous were all but extinct
when the Europeans settled there. It Would tend greatly to this
desirable end if the services of the agents employed by the Native
Department were dispensed with altogether. A stranger travelling
through the country is reminded by the airs of these people, of the


agents in China, more Chinese in their mysterious demeanour and
sly ways than the Celestials themselves. It would be cheap indeed
to pension them all off with their full salaries, so long as things
remain quiet. Whilst the incomes of these gentry depend upon the
continuance of difficulties, so long will troubles crop up, and things
remain unsettled.
On the West Coast through the Taranaki Province Her Majes-
ty’s Mails are carried in a four-horse coach by a native contractor,
and the coachman is sometimes a Maori. This contractor is the
celebrated Honi-Pihama, a mild pleasant spoken Maori Rangatira—
gentleman —but upon this chief in war time comes the Berserker
spirit, and in battle his people say he is terrible to look upon, fiercest
of the fierce, as well as bravest of the brave, and withal a con-
summate General. It was he who so nearly captured Sir Duncan
Cameron and his staff at Nukumaru on this coast between Taranaki
and Whauganui. With remarkable daring in broad daylight, he
penetrated within the lines of the large army, overpowering the
pickets, and had reached within a few yards of the Commander-in-
Chief’s tents when alarm was given, and the armstrong guns fired into
the bush kept back his followers, and broke them up. There is
little doubt had his men all come up in time, the panic they would
have caused would have enabled him to carry out his adventurous
attempt, as in a very few minutes more, he would, having such
important prisoners, been able to dictate terms. As it was, in the
confusion very few of his 600 followers were shot, but he was so
enraged with their conduct, after making good his escape, and
bringing them off in safety, he declared from that time forward he
was a “ Pakeha,” and he kept his word, becoming a staunch ally.
Military historians are altogether silent, or very reticent about this
surprise. ‘The result Sir James Alexander naively remarks, was to
raise the Maoris in the estimation of the troops.’ Honi-Pihama’s
elder brother is a man of great personal courage, but not of the same
capacity, and Horn has always exercised the actind chieft»iinslnp.
He distinguished himself also by his daring ;--fool-hardy, and impru-
dent as the attempt was,—to attack with fifty men a column of fifteen
hundred soldiers on the march in the open country. Of course he
lost a great many of his braves who like himself had been worked
up into a state of fanatical enthusiasm by some Hau-Hau Priest.
The road over which Honi-Pihama’s coach runs, affords an
instance of the anomalous state of affairs in the colony, so puzzling
to strangers especially to persons coming from India. After travelling


two hundred and fifty miles and more from Wellington upon a fairly
constructed highway, when the coach does not run along the smooth
hard sea-beach, as it does for some distance, the traveller arrives at
a place called Opunake where there is an inn, a post office and
telegraph station, and other signs of civilization; he breakfasts, gets
on the box, the morning is lovely, the blue sea in the near distance,
and glorious the Peak of Mount Egmont towers close above him
capped with snow, everything seems delightful, and joyously he
lights his cigar. Suddenly the coachman pulls his horses off the
roadway, and recklessly drives down a bank amongst the tall flax
bushes, his cigar is gone, his hat knocked over his eyes by the stiff
leaves which meet nearly over the top of the coach, not having
quickly enough attended to the swarthy driver’s u look out! there is
no passenger but himself; fiercely and determinedly the Maori goes
shouting to his team deeper and deeper into the flax jungle, nothing
is to be seen but flax, and high toi-toi bushes, and he is so jolted
over the round boulders, and deep holes on the narrow track, that
he begins to think the banging about must be preparatory to hand-
ing him over tender to some of the tawny Jehu’s countrymen for
dinner. Where in the name of Tawhiao are you going? why do you
not keep the road ? he piteously exclaims; with a quiet smile his
friend replies, taihoa—patience—all right, bye and bye, good road, stony
r i V er—Stony River ? how far is that, when will we get there ? you
see sun ! it has not reached the zenith nearly. Sun there, pointing
towards the horizon apparently, then stony river ! And so for half the
day he crawls along, seldom getting more than four miles an hour
or so over this horrible track, seeing nothing, shaken and bruised
and all because he is in Te-Whitti’s country. Confound Te-Whitti,
who is Te-Whitti? says the enraged Pakelia. Hush! good man Te-
Whitti ! answers his companion glancing around, although he devoutly
wishes no doubt that his prophet would allow a halfway station, and
a change of horses on this weary stage, which in wet stormy weather
is an experience only to be understood by having been gone through.
This Te-Whitti is one of those clever unscrupulous individuals who
make their appearance from time to time amongst people of all laces.
The doctrine of this Maori Mahomet is that Melchesidic was the
symbolical prototype of the Trinity of Kings, Moses, king of
Righteousness, Jesus Christ king of Salem, Te-Whitti king of Peace.
The general belief of the Maoris is that they are Israelites, so he is
fond of comparing their treatment at the hands of the Europeans to
that of those of the chosen people by Pharoah and the Egyptians, and


preaches that the two races can never amalgamate any more than
the iron and clay of the feet of Nebuchadnezzar’s image, the iron of
course being typical of the Pakeha, the cruel crushing Pakeha. His
oratorical gifts are considerable, and his staying power prodigious,
he has been known to talk for twelve hours at a stretch, as happened
on the occasion of a large assemblage of his followers, come from
remote places to witness the first of the two Eesurrections that are
to take place, the first being that of the Maoris, which he had pro-
mised would occur on a fixed day. From Mokau, from Waikato,
from the Whanganui river, and the Pahs up near Tongoriro Volcano,
flocked to meet those dear to them the Hau-Haus, or king Natives,
and many friendlies also, loaded with presents and provisions for
long-departed fathers, mothers, brothers and sisters, wives and
children —bonnets, shawls, dresses, &c., purchased as they passed
along at the townships by the way. It was an occasion when his
utmost powers of persuasion were called forth, but he proved equal
to it; and the result of his impassioned oratory, appealing gestures
to heaven, feigned sotto voce conversations with the Deity (his
acting it is said was superb) was, that he gradually accustomed the
multitude to the possibility of the event being for urgent reasons
deferred until a future day, and they departed on the following
morning looking grave and disappointed, but believing still that it
will take place bye and bye, on a more auspicious occasion when the
dead warriors will arise in thousands, and drive the hated Pakehas
into the sea. But what has a charlatan of this sort to do with there
being no road, and a break of thirty miles and more in the telegraph
line, it may be asked, as this country was a portion of that confiscated
after the war, the Government might surely do as it thought proper.
Yes, it was confiscated, and the Minister for Native affairs could
have done exactly as he thought fit, especially in the matter of the
road, the opening of which distinctly stipulated for. But when
the road was completed to the points mentioned, it occurred to some
people that things were getting on too fast altogether. Where
would be the necessity for so many persons’ high salaries ? what
would be the excuse for maintaining a staff of Native Commissioners
and interpreters? wdiat was to become of their mysterious de-
portment, how could they continue by obscure hints as to the im-
portance of their secret services to delude people into believing any
longer in the necessity of their existence, if all these improvements
were quietly permitted by the most turbulent natives in New Zea-
land, as those of this coast have always had the reputation of being.


So one of these officials deeming his six or eight hundred a year
would be much safer if they were put a stop to, went to this Ti-Whitti,
and asked him if he had any objections to the road and telegraph
line being completed through this portion of the country. Objections !
said the astute Maori, most certainly I have the very greatest objec-
tions, and will permit neither one or the other —the first man crossing
the boundary stream to put up a telegraph pole, or break a stone on
the road will be shot, I cannot prevent it. After a good Korero-talk,
it was arranged that the coach might pass along the unmade track
as best it could, by paying three hundred a year to the Maori escort,
a boy generally being sent to save appearances, and Maori boys were
to carry the telegrams once a day between the stations ; for which a
similar sum was to be given. Te-Whitti and his people were delighted
with this unexpected windfall, and laughed heartily afterwards over
the matter as an excellent joke, seeing they had never dreamed of
opposition, living as they were by sufferance upon confiscated land.
The native department was also satisfied, and the Ministers laughed in
their sleeves, and so the matter remains.
At present people can travel anywhere except through the King’s
country (absolutely closed to Europeans) with perfect security. Coaches
run over very tolerable roads, some macadamized, and made fre-
quently by native contractors, far into the interior of the island, indeed
crossing it from Wellington to Napier, and thence by Taupo lake and
Rotorua—parties of ladies during the last two or three years have
visited these interesting regions—nevertheless it will be concluded
from the causes I have mentioned, and the general demoralization of
the race by their intercourse with the whites, that one might select
a more agreeable people to live amongst than the Maoris, who now
neither love, respect, nor stand in fear of the intruding Pakeha.
Although one cannot sympathize with those who instead of
blaming their own rash folly, or blind cupidity, seek to cast the blame
of the misfortunes that happened upon the incapacity of the com-
manders of the Imperial troops, possibly it might have been different
to-day had the armies so often worsted by small bodies of natives been
under more brilliant leaders, heaven sent commanders, able to accom-
plish feats next to impossible, for the war was a novel one. The soldiers
found themselves fighting against foes man for man their equals, and
in the singularly impracticable forest country far their superiors,
men too fighting for their country each with all the fire and enthu-
siasm of a William Tell. Even had Sir Duncan Cameron not been in-


terfered with hy the native office, and been at issue with Sir George
Grey the Governor,>and been able to have conducted the war entirely
as he judged fit, the ten thousand troops of the line under his com-
mand might have left the shores of New Zealand with the satisfaction
of feeling that all possible disturbances were over. For having
entered upon it, distasteful as the war was to the troops, who felt it
was an unjust one, they as w r ell as every Englishman of right feeling
would naturally have desired that we should have come out of it with
credit. The miserable story may be gathered from the short account
of it given by Mr. Fox, the late Premier and former Attorney General
of the Colony, one of the few public men holding power lately in New
Zealand who is respected privately, as well as in his capacity as a
statesman. He at least had the welfare of its inhabitants, native and
foreign, at heart, more than his personal aggrandizement, not having
imbibed the “spirit of the Till” which so powerfully influenced the
actions of his associates and successors. He explains many of the
circumstances which caused the utter destruction of the prestige of
English soldiers in the country, and made that campaign in which
so many brave officers fell trying to save the honor of their colors,
the most lamentable episode in the military annals of Great Britain.
No doubt it would be a serious matter were that most improbable
event a general outbreak to take place now ; or any falling out even,
occur with the powerful friendly tribes by whose means the Colonists
have held their position and possessions in the North island since the
Imperial forces wore withdrawn ; although much, very much credit
is due to the colonial troops, their numbers were small. They
showed the Maoris certainly that the Pakehas can fight, and gained
their respect accordingly, but they could not have done much without
their allies. Seldom have deeds more deserving of the Victoria
Cross and other rewards been performed by British soldiers, than by
many of these men whose names are scarce mentioned b}’ those who
have published accounts of what they have the assurance to call
the Rebellion of the Maoris, a people whom we had never conquered,
who had never ceded to us their country, (for the so-called treaty of
Waitangi made with bamboozled chiefs, unknown to, and having no
authority over those of other tribes, although it may be pretended to
be an evidence of acknowledgment of suzerainty, cannot be of
cession) who still maintain to this day in large districts the most
defiant attitude, and refuse to have any dealings with Governors,
native Ministers, or Pakehas of any description, and where under their


titular King a portion of this brave race strive to satisfy their burning
desire to preserve their nationality.
Gentlemen (especially those who have served as officers in Her
Majesty’s Service, perhaps more strongly even than civilians) travel-
ling through the country, who chance to hear of the gallant acts of
many of the colonial soldiers, cannot but be pained that historians of
the war have not rendered them their due. That brave deeds are
passed over unrequited and unrecorded, as were those of many officers
of the Indian Army in the Sepoy war, which had they been in the
Imperial Service would have been worthily rewarded and would have
raised them to high rank and distinction, whilst Victoria Crosses
and other decorations have been conferred upon men who did very
little to merit them, but who asked for them, as colonial premiers
and speakers clamour for knighthoods, and had interest to obtain their
desire.
General Sir James Alexander has published a Book entitled
“ Bush-Fighting,” in order as he says, “ that in justice to the forces
“ engaged, regulars and colonials, soldiers and sailors, their gallant
“ deeds and sufferings should be recorded, thus I have introduced the
“ names of every officer or private sentinel, soldier, or seaman, I could
t( discover, who is mentioned in any despatch or report of a creditable
“ action.” The General has in one respect fulfilled the task he undertook,
and in that volume mentioned an immense number of names. But
there are many who would have much preferred to have been passed
by unnoticed, rather than have had theirs introduced merely to be
slighted by faintest commendation, and the merit of the services
they performed given to others. It is very unfortunate that in com-
piling this account he had not obtained correct information, and had
the means of ascertaining the true version of many of the incidents
he relates, instead of having to depend upon ingeniously worded
reports sent in to Head Quarters, and published in Colonial Bluo
Books. Amongst many instances in which meritorious services, and
brilliant deeds have not met with deserved reward, one hears not of
one, but numerous acts performed by Captain Mace of the Taranaki
Mounted Volunteers, a small body of men then under the command
of Captain Des Voeux. General Carey, severe as he is in his remarks
upon the colonial troops generally, speaks in high commendation of
this corps, he says, “ even in most dangerous times, they rode long
distances carrying orders day and night alone or in twos anxious


to work, and ever fearless of danger, they were invaluable, and
amongst them he mentions Mace as “ the pluckiest fellow I ever
met.” It will be admitted that on the occasions mentioned, looking
at the facts, the manner that gentleman’s name is introduced, is scarce-
ly a fitting one.
“ Especial notice of the General was requested to be directed to
“ the noble conduct of Ensign Down, 57th Regiment; and Drummer
“ Dudley Stackpoole who while under fire from natives, not forty
“ yards from them, brought away wounded men, at the risk of their
“ own lives, their efforts being ably seconded by Private Antonio
“ Rodrigues, a mounted orderly of the Taranaki Militia who carried
“ two men off the field on his horse and galloped through a party of
u natives to take orders to Captain Shortt. Captain Mace and the
“ mounted orderlies generally were of good service in helping
“ the wounded and distributing the ammunition.”— Bush-Fighting,
page 86.
It would have been more correct to have stated that the efforts
of Captain Mace, and his orderly Antonio Rodrigues were ably and
gallantly seconded by Ensign Down, the fact being that the wounded
men were lifted close under the Maori rifles by the former on to An-
tonio’s horse, who brought them out, and gave them over to Ensign
Down, who was bravely pushing on to aid Mace, as usual in front,
dashing up to the enemy. Captain Mace’s gallant conduct in the affair
speaks for itself; just as might have been expected from a man of his
character, he made no claim it appears on his own account, but sought
to obtain the V. C. for his orderly Antonio Rodrigues, which he had
so well deserved, especially for the manner in which he charged
through the Maoris, having more than fifty shots fired at him as he
went with the despatch to Captain Shortt. But the Colonel com-
manding declined to recommend him for that distinction, as he desired
to get it he said for the credit of his regiment, but promised he should
have the first canteen vacant on the Coast, which would be better
worth his while having than the Victoria Cross—so it was given to
Mr. Down, a brave young officer, but whose claim to it was not the
greatest on that occasion. He poor fellow did not enjoy his honor
long, dying soon afterwards.


The two following incidents may be placed in juxta position.
Whilst General Alexander
makes the best of the circum-
stances under which Colonel
McNeill obtained the V. C.,
which are however stated very
differently by an eye-witness, he
makes no mention of the occa-
sion when Captain Mace having
gallantly undertaken to take
despatches for the Commander-in-
Chief at a place called Pariaka,
through a country known to be
swarming with armed natives fell
into an ambuscade, the first vol-
ley severely wounded his two
orderlies, one being shot through
the neck, and the other in the
leg ; holding the one almost dy-
ing man on his horse with one
hand, and his revolver in the
other, he brought both his
wounded companions off, the
Maoris seemed to respect the
dashing bravery and coolness of
their well known adversary, and
let him pass without firing
again.
“ Major McNeill, A. D. C.,
when returning from Te-Awamu-
tu accompanied by an orderly was
fired on by fifty or sixty natives.
His orderly and his horse rolled
into a potato pit concealed in the
fern, but the Major did not gallop
off, but waited, caught the horse,
helped the man to mount and car-
ried him off in safety to a party
engaged in levelling an abandoned
pah, and thus secured the Victoria
Cross —Bush - Fighting , page 160,
Without at all disparaging Major McNeill's courageous act, or en-
dorsing the often-expressed opinion that under the circumstances of
the position of the Maoris at the time the man fell, it was a V. 0., a
Commander-in-Chief’s A. D. C. could only have secured, there ap-
pears to be at least equal reason for its being awarded in the case
mentioned opposite, to Captain Mace, who had not even the strong
moral support the propinquity of a strong force of friends gives?
as General Alexander truly enough observes, and who brought off two
severely wounded men through the midst of the enemy, instead of one
unwounded, from a position of possible danger. It is not mentioned,
however, except in the general way e that Captain Mace and the men
of the force he belonged to were of good service as General Carey says


in carrying despatches. 5 The Colonial Minister Mr. Domett in recom-
mending to the Governor, Sir George Grey, who strongly concurred
in his suggestion, that some special order of merit should be conferred
upon distinguished Colonial officers, very properly says, “ that the
members of his Government desire to guard themselves fiom being
supposed to express an opinion that precisely the same distinctions
should be conferred upon them, as upon officers of H. M.’s Regular
Forces, which may be considered to be bestowed not merely as a re-
ward for particular service of more than usual merit, but of a long
course of these ordinary services satisfactorily performed, of which the
one that receives the distinction is only the complement making up
the sum of desert, of which such reward is the due acknowledgment.”
It would have been more graceful had this idea which was canvassed
at the time received support from the Commanding Officers in New
Zealand, and would have afforded them a more satisfactory mode of
fitting over the difficulty, than by making as little of brave deeds as
possible, unless performed by Regular soldiers.
A similar case as that of Antonio Rodrigues occurred in the
Waikato, when Captain Ring was shot at Orakan, a militia man lifted
him up under the breast-work of the Maori Pah and carried him out
on his back being severely wounded whilst doing so, he staggered on
with his burthen however until out of reach of the Maori bullets
when he met a soldier of the Regulars to whom he delivered his mor-
tally wounded officer, the soldier received the Victoria Cross, the poor
wounded militia man was passed over, and his brave deed went unre-
warded.
There was a most miserable affair happened on 6th April, 1861,
at Ahu-Ahu when the sorely wounded Captain Lloyd, and several
men were deserted by their companions, and left to be beheaded by
the natives —it is said the Colonel was asked by the fiery Mace to
arrest the officers there present, a course he mercifully to them did
not take, although perhaps he himself and such gallant soldiers as
Major Butler and Major Rose Russell, both distinguished men belong-
ino- to the same regiment might have felt that it would have been a
merited punishment to have cashiered them on the spot; but there
remains amongst the public documents of New Zealand, the General
Order, he caused to be read in front of the regiment, and also of every
corps serving in the Province, containing scathing indignant words,
such as seldom have been addressed by a British Colonel to his men,
especially in respect of the officers’ desertion “of their wounded


comrade whom they ought to have staid by to the last. - ” The con-
sequences of this melancholy affair were sufficiently disastrous. The
Maoris speak with unmitigated contempt of the conduct of the
“hoheas,” soldiers on that occasion still, which was made so much of
by the Priests. It was then seeing how much terror was caused
amongst the Pakehas, by the fierce attack of their warriors, they
promulgated the horrid Pai-Mariri religion, and caused the heads of
the slaughtered men, to be sent round to instil more fear into their
enemies, and inspire with additional courage the converts to the
New Creed. General Alexander noticing the affair merely relates
it as an instance of the necessity of caution, pointing out how when
he was with General D’Urban in Caffre land they kept a good look-
out, when they halted for a meal—and appears to have been un-
aware of the unhappy facts which elicited such strong expressions
from Colonel Warr, as he says, “ the survivors of the party brought
away the wounded, but were not able to save the remains of the
slain,” and yet strange to say he mentions how Captain Lloyd shot
three natives with his pistol after he fell with a broken thigh. In
the usual acceptation of the term, the survivors were the 100 men
who ran away and left their wounded comrades to be massacred,
but the whole of the troops in the Province and the rest of the
inhabitants were no doubt survivors and the puzzled reporter of the
affair cleverly thought of using the term in the account from which
no doubt General Alexander obtained his information. When the
news of the melancholy affair came in, Captain Mace with his
mounted volunteers galloped at once to the place, without waiting
as urged to do, for the Colonel had a strong force of Regulars, who
marched on, only to find the mutilated remains of their comrades in
possession of Captain Mace’s troop ; the enemy had gone. It appears
very singular that if the militia and volunteers were so little to be
depended upon, that they should have been entrusted with such
arduous and dangerous duties as were delegated to them on differ-
ent occasions, notably on 28th March, 1860, at the celebrated affair
of Waireka.
The garrison at Taranaki was then under the command of
Colonel Murray of the 65th Regiment, an officer who unfortunately
was best fitted for parade duties out of reach of war’s alarms. A
respected clergyman and his family and others being in a perilous
position surrounded by hostile natives, volunteers were called for,
to assist in bringing them into the settlement. Men of sixty and
upwards, and lads of fourteen and sixteen years of age, were amongst


those responding, and having had the old brown bess served out to
them, marched out full of pluck and determination; many never
had arms in their hands previously, although there were a few
in the ranks who had seen hard fighting, such as Mr. Messenger,
father of the Captain Messenger, who is often mentioned as so con-
spicuous for cool daring and judgment in the late war. The old
gentleman served as lieutenant on board the flagship at the bom-
bardment of Algiers in 1816, and on this unhappy day doing duty
gallantly as a private, was very severely wounded by the Maoris.
Colonel Murray in the narrative of the proceedings furnished by him
says, “1 have the honor to report for the information of the Officer
“ commanding the forces in New Zealand that on the 28th instant I
“ proceeded in command of a force to Omata, for the purpose of res-
“ cuing some European families stated to be in the hands of the rebel
“ natives assembled in considerable force at that village. The plan
“ of operations was, that Captain Brown in command of the militia
“ and volunteers, should proceed by the beach keeping the sea-coast,
“ and passing in rear of the natives who had built a Pah on the
“ Waireka hills, whilst I should proceed by the main road.”
Nothing could read more pleasantly, nothing seemingly could be
easier than to march along the sea beach, but it must be remembered
that to get to the rear of the natives, it was necessary for the
‘ settler fellows’ to fight their way through the enemy swarming
between the road and the beach, and armed with double-barreled
rifles, or for the most part with superior far-killing weapons—but
of course this was a matter of little consequence, what were such
fellows good for, but to be shot at ? and it was in accordance with
O '
the custom always observed in New Zealand, that the Colonial
forces should take the post of danger, and protect the Eegulars,
going out, it was always, (it will be seen in the reports of engage-
ments) volunteers or Forest-rangers to the front, and in coming
back they guarded from attacks on the rear. He goes on to say,
“ on reaching the spot named, I found the way clear and no trace of
‘‘natives anywhere near, but the sound of rapid firing about two
“ miles off, and towards the sea made it evident the volunteers were
“ hotly engaged.” So the gallant Colonel having detached a
small force to make a division in their favour, thought it his duty
to go no nearer himself, but remained firing at imaginary enemies
amongst the fern whilst the fight went on all day long below him.
A Maori Chief had said the day before to one of the settlers, “if you
come to attack us we will dance a war-dance, and shout, and then


the hoheas will run away, and wo will follow them and burn the
town/’ They found however that they could not intimidate the foe
they had now to deal with by their yells, and although armed with
much better weapons than the volunteers, and much moie numer-
ous, were kept at bay, and repulsed again and again, losing many
braves. As the day grew on. Colonel Murray says, considering my
“ force too small to keep our communication open should they attack
“us in foroe, I recalled Lieutenant Blake’s party, and Lieutenant
u Urquhart’s, particularly as the day was far advanced, and my
t( orders were to return by dark, I have received no icpoit of
(( Captain Brown’s proceedings who was too far off for observation
“in a gully with the natives above him. So he marched back to
town, —Captain Brown’s feelings in this gully, surrounded by ovci -
whelming numbers of Maoris can be imagined when he saw him-
self deserted, especially with very little ammunition left, having
sent in vain to Colonel Murray for some of that he was blazing away
at a distance —also the disgust of the intrepid Lieutenant Urquhart
who with 25 soldiers and a few blue jackets, had rendered good
assistance until ordered to return and leave the volunteers to their
fate. It is probable that Lieutenant Blake who came with a small
party from H. M. S. Niger would have refused to see the signal
of recall but he had been severely wounded, in pressing through
with Urquhart to their assistance —fortunately late in the evening
Captain Cracroft himself came up, having landed with a number of
his sailors, stormed the Pah, and saved the settlers, whose ammuni-
tion was all but expended. The whole thing was too much for the
brave sailor’s equanimity, and at his instance a court of enquiry was
held, but the result never transpired, Colonel Murray however
escaped being again exposed to Maori bullets. No comment upon
the gallant conduct of the Colonial force on this occasion appears in
the despatches. Of course they were fighting for their friends, the
young men fired with the desire to rescue the young ladies especially,
whom they believed in danger, and their blood was up being
challenged by natives personally known to them, and so they had every
reason for fighting manfully —there were few harder-fought engage-
ments during the war, and on no occasion did the natives suffer more
than they did at the hands of these boys.
A full account of all the wars with the Maoris will be written by
some unprejudiced person, it is to be hoped, ere long, including the
fighting that took place after the withdrawal of the Imperial troops.
The many brave deeds performed hymen unheard of out of New Zea-


land, may then be made known to their fellow-countrymen as they so
well deserve to be, if they are to receive no other acknowledgment.
General Carey says, “ I believe Mr. Mace lost much property
at the outbreak of the war, and I trust that the Government may
have found some means of rewarding him.” It is strange that so
good a soldier as he, should not have thought it incumbent upon
him to recommend that the distinction brave men most value
should be conferred upon one whose singular dash and courage
he extols, and should as Colonel Warre did in Antonio's case,
deem such natures would be equally well satisfied with mere pecu-
niary remuneration.
Many of those who did good service in the Queen’s as well as
the Colonial Volunteer and other corps, entered after their regiments
left the small standing army of New Zealand, called the ‘ Defence
Force’ which the Commander-in-Ohief, Sir Duncan Cameron, stated
had (( attained to a high state of discipline and efficiency.” It was
some time commanded by Colonel Nixon, a brave officer killed at
Bangiowhia, whom General Alexander had been acquainted with, he
tells us in his book in the Crimea, and in consequence goes so far as
to say, “ his corps under him acted .with greatest spirit and gallantry.”
It is now called “ the Armed Constabulary,” in deference to the ultra-
snobbishness, one can find no other word, and dislike to gentlemen
generally, amongst those who have the chief say in affairs, and
vote their pay—and in sympathy with the contemptible satisfaction
it gave a man risen from the ranks, to snub officers under whom he
had served as a private, and who had come to be his subordinates in
the colony; and also to enable those nominally to carryout their
boast who had said that they could control the Maoris without the
aid of troops, by means of the usual police. The Head of the Depart-
ment was still styled, the Defence Minister —Chief Land Broker would
be a much more suitable title for the part he has now to play—but
the Defence Force was altogether too aristocratic a designation. The
majority of its senior officers have held Commissions in Her Ma-
jesty’s Service, some of them in the Guards and most distinguished
regiments, as well as a large proportion of the non-commissioned
officers and troopers, many others of the latter being young men of
birth and education, the ranks being now recruited mostly with young
gentlemen coming to the colony, who can find no better emploj'-
ment, or who have done so expressly with the view of entering “ the
New Zealand army”—poor fellows ! Being in the force is a pretty


sure guarantee of a man’s steadiness and character, the discipline
being very strict, and regulations very stringent, so that it may
challenge comparison with any body of men, similarly constituted.
The idea however, that its officers should “give themselves airs”
as one of the members of the assembly complained they did, and that
a man receiving 6s. or Bs. a-day for carrying a rifle should consider
himself entitled to be treated with any consideration, and should talk
as their equals to the rich retired publicans and storekeeping M. P.’s
was as intolerable, they must be snubbed; so they were called Con-
stables, and their officers Inspectors, and Sub-Inspectors. Great is
the indignation, and astonishment evinced by these people, and the
wealthy citizens of Auckland, &c., who have made fortunes selling
grog, or more innocently tapes and needles, over their counters, to
find the few gentlemen scattered about in the country districts, enter-
taining at their tables, and making companions of persons holding
the position of a mere constable nominally; the fact is that in most
parts of the North Island, there are more gentlemen, by birth, educa-
tion and conduct, serving in the armed constabulary, than are to be
met with any other position. The assertion that the country is kept
quiet, and Maori insurrections repressed by means of common police
that one hears reiterated so constantly is simply false, and is a silly
mode of displaying the dislike very prevalent in the colony to men
whose profession gives them a status in society, the ministers and
their followers have no claim or chance of holding, outside the walls
of their assembly chamber. This armed constabulary numbering
under a thousand men forms a valuable neucleus of trained soldiers,
called by whatever name they please, which can bo expanded at any
moment. Every man in the North Island from 17 to 55 years of
age must enrol himself in some corps or another, and attend drill at
stated periods. There are numerous Volunteer Companies, Mounted
Yeomanry, and Militia, all of whose officers are Colonels, Majors , and
Captains , so that Military titles are as common as in America, and
the designation of Inspectors and Sub-Inspectors becomes after all one
of distinction, however unintentional, and unwished for.
Besides these there are the large well-armed force of the friendly
Arrawas under their leader and chief, Eopata, who holds Her Ma-
jesty’s Commission as Major, a born soldier under whom officers of
the Imperial force served during the war, and with pleasure, as he is
a quiet well-mannered gentleman withal. His force, with the Native
Contingent, was the principal reliance of the colonists during the


last campaign if it can be so called, when a million sterling was
expended in hunting Tito-Kawara and Te-Kooti—the latter corps
is composed of picked men from the friendly tribes, many of them
sons of influential chiefs, and is officered by Europeans,—dressed as
they are in jackets, and bright shawl kilts, and being enthusiastically
fond of all that appertains to the pomp and circumstance of war,
thoroughly up in their drill, they might stand side by side with the
“ Black Watch” or 93rd Highlanders, and not suffer much by compa-
rison. The great tribe of Nga-Puhis, the most numerous, and power-
ful one remaining, the time immemorial foes of the Waikatos, are
good allies also.
There is small danger therefore of any united opposition being
made to the advance of the Europeans. It is considered, however, that
it is best to put up with much, rather than to risk fighting against the
large forces of soldiers by instinct, who might be arrayed against the
Government, —so whilst by the land-buying policy the natives are
irritated on the one hand, influential malcontents are brought off on
the other. There should be some limit to paying this black mail, and
there is danger in conceding to unreasonable demands so constantly;
the Native Department does not appear to be aware that the Maoris
are men of equal shrewdness, and subject to like passions as Europeans.
It is to be feared that when the large sums the present administration
has had at its command to buy peace with are exhausted, a trouble-
some legacy will be left to its successors. For the sake of the Maoris
themselves they should not be treated so much as spoiled children, and
any outrage committed should be punished with firmness and deci-
sion. The lovers of peace amongst them, and there are many such
amongst the most influential chiefs, who know that war means des-
truction to their race, would wish to see this course pursued, and
would lend ready assistance in carrying it out. A vacillating timid
policy, such as at present pursued, may suit the purposes of persons
anxious to keep their official salaries, but it is most cruel to the abo-
riginal owners of the coveted lands, and is much more likely to lead
to local disturbances, which for the sake of the remnant of this brave
people are much to be dreaded. Another war would be apt to prove
one of extermination, and there are not a few people in New Zealand
who would like to see it, and long for the opportunity of “polishing
off the niggers,” as they declare their desire to be. It is abominable
enough to hear the “ low whites” speaking in this way, but it is almost
incredible, and truly sad to find educated Englishmen doing so. The


author of oiig of the latest publications, referring to Now Zealand,
a book which must have satisfied his bitterest enemy, expresses these
sentiments with the most astounding coolness. Forty thousand Maoris
he considers too formidable a number tor the safety of the intruding
Pakehas, and recommends that the three Colonies of New South
Wales, Victoria and New Zealand, should at once unite in reducing
their numbers materially. If a murder is committed near 13-n h-1,
perhaps this Chairman of Quarter Sessions and Queen s Counsel, may
advocate the decimation forthwith of the inhabitants of the shiie.
“ Cash rules the camp, the court,” no doubt amongst the Maoris
as amongst civilized nations, to their credit be it said, it is not so
potent in “ the grove,” The majority of the chiefs having everything
to lose, and nothing to gain by war, do not sympathise with King
Tawhiao and his Minister Rewi in their determined isolation. They
are aware of the mischief that arises from their not being aware fiom
personal observation of the rapid advance of the Europeans, and the
irresistible w r ave of population rolling in upon them fiom every point
of their shores, against which they are wise enough to see it is vain to
contend, and that the best thing they can do, is to make money out of
the Pakehas. Peace at any price, rather no bother with Maori maraud-
ers is as before observed the creed of the present ruleis, being that
of the head of the Native Department, whose scheme as chief Land-
broker for the Government, of purchasing up all the tenitoiies in the
hands of the aboriginal proprietors depends upon quiet being main-
tained, and herein the ablest chiefs also see that there lies another
source of danger, to their race, as things passed over lately, are taken
by the King’s people as unmistakeable evidence of weakness, and the
dread of their warriors entertained by the hated Pakeha.
General Sheridan complains (without very good reason however,
if we are to believe the stories in American papers) of the mode of
dealing with the Indians in the far west, —He says u when the white
man robs we send him to the Penitentiary, when he murders we hang
him, when the red-skin commits both outrages we give him more
blankets.” Most assuredly the u sugar and blanket policy as the
colonists call it has been carried to the most vicious extreme lately in
New Zealand. It is quite monstrous that the people should be taxed
as they are to support the enormous expenditure of the Native De-
partment, if atrocities like the murders of the Rev. Mr. Whitely, Mr.
and Mrs. Gascoigne, and their children, (instigated as they were by


vile white men) of Mr. Todd, and of Sullivan the other day are to
pass unpunished, and made out to be merely the result of private
quarrels. This being the dishonest and ignominious way adopted
lately of getting out of troubles of the kind.
In this pitiful policy which to a person coming from British India
appears equally unwise as it is degrading, the Ministry is supported by
the members from Otago, Canterbury, and other Provinces in the
middle island, where money only is thought of, and any such old-
fashioned notion, as defending British honor would be pooh-poohed
as childish. If a capitalist buys land from the Government, and the
unfortunate men he hires to work there, have their heads barbarously
hacked off with their own pocket-knives, and their hearts torn out
whilst still alive, as was the fate of poor Sullivan at the hands of some
Maori fanatics, of the hau-hau creed, that is their own fault for
going to places not within sight of a stockade. The friendly natives in
the neighbourhood of the place where this affair took place were most
indignant at its being passed over; the perpetrators were well known,
and might have been easily secured; and urgent telegrams were sent
to the chief of the Department at Wellington to ask leave to take and
bring them in. But this summary mode of dealing with such a
business would never have suited. A telegram was posted up from
Head Quarters at the Waikato townships, stating that ten days would
be given to the King natives to deliver the murderers into custody, the
colonial forces were mustered up, arms served out, settlers ordered in
from their farms, drilling went on vigorously, and galloping about in
all directions but the right one. Purukutu the ringleader and his
followers were given time to get well away into the recesses of the
King country, and the troops went home again, and the jubilant
ministers were able to meet the parliament, with the statement that
all was quiet, only a man or two, drunken Irishmen, it was hinted, had
been killed in some squabble with natives, —whereas the poor fellows
it was well known were working in a deep drain up to their waists
in water, improving a swamp sold by the Government, in spite of the
protestations of its rightful owners, when they were attacked and fired
upon in their helpless situation, and murdered in cold blood by these
Pai-Mariri fanatics, within a mile or two of the Head Quarters of the
troops and residence of the Government Agent for the district.
Hut the same course is pursued with the natives, which the
astute Vogel follows with the members of the House of Assembly.
Conscientious, quite-going, dull supporters of the Government are


put off with promises, whilst noisy troublesome place-hunters get
what they ask, and come back from the sumptuous repasts at the
Ministerial residence moulded by this undoubtedly clever Com-
prachico ” into humble servants of his will, so friendly Maoris like
those of Hawke-Bay are plundered of their possessions, whilst
truculent marauders and murderers are patted on the back, and
given more blankets, and money wherewith to buy Wai-piro fire-
water to kill themselves with. In this way the Government manages
to keep in power, by the deliberate demoralization of the Representa-
tives of the people and of the Maoris, and even to get credit for the
present seemingly flourshing state of the colony, due really to the
commercial prosperity prevailing throughout Australasia, and all
other countries affected by the unprecedentedly high price of wool
during the last four years, and locally to a considerable extent of
course, to the lavish squandering of the vast sums of money raised
upon the credit of the colonists, for the purpose of carrying out
similar undertakings in the way of introducing emigrants and con-
structing railroads and other public works, as have been prosecuted
for long in the neighbouring colonies, but with more prudence, and
vigour, although Mr. Vogel would wish to persuade people that the
scheme is his own peculiar invention. Already the debt of New
Zealand is two-thirds of that of all the Australian Colonies with their
two millions of inhabitants put together; so he certainly must be
accorded the credit of having initiated a scheme of borrowing on a
grander scale in proportion to the means of paying the interest, and
of spending the money as he the Colonial Treasurer thinks fit. In
these days the note a man sends to gay acquaintance, inviting him
to a Sunday dinner at the “ Star and Garter, or to his box at the
opera to listen to some syren in La Traviata may bear his device of
arms, a hand pointing to a star in the heavens, with the motto
denique coelum,—the Nobleman speculating in Railway or Gas Com-
panies closes his letter applying for shares with a seal semee as the
heralds say, of crosses of various forms with the words beneath, Ciux
Christi nostra corona, “auspice Christi,” or some such sentence re-
verently adopted perhaps by some devout or crusading penitent. The
Treasurer of New Zealand from his long connection with the Press,
thoroughly understands that the journalist whodaily meets his readers
with the asseveration that “ all the ends he aims at, are the truth’s,
his country’s, God’s,” goes further than mere thoughtlessness of the
unseemly incongruity, and makes the reservation, after he has served
his own—and so the press is bought, and utterly subservient for the
7


most part, and people at home and abroad are kept in ignorance of
what is going on.
Although in such a money-seeking community, it is scarcely to
be hoped for, still it is just possible that a gentleman may be found
willing to take the reins of Government who would be strong enough
from his force of character and position to cany out a thorough
reform in the various departments, and a nobler policy towards the
natives. One who would scorn to be a party to the cruel waiting
game which the present ministers receive so much credit for, tem-
porising in an ignominious manner, not from regard to the ultimate
advantage of the aborigines, but merely with a view to their own
personal aggrandizement, and for the satisfaction of their followers,
and the mass of settlers, who look forward with complacency to the
time when the Maori will be gone. It will scarcely be worth while
soon, proposing plans by which the remnant of this fine race of men
may be rendered a contented and thriving people. In a very few
years the persons who come to carry such out, will find only unin-
habited villages with the grass growing rank about the doors.
They will find but a few decrepid chiefs, and old miserable women
sitting ragged and dejected, their eyes bleared with the fiery poison
that has destroyed their race, thinking of the days when they were
more than a match for the Pakehas, who have taken their lands,
their rivers and bays, from whence the fishing canoes now rotting
on the beach were wont to be put out in the bright mornings, and
the air rang with the merry songs of their stalwart crews—and that
will be all. Any endeavour to stay the demoralisation, and to
arrest the rapid extirpation of the natives, the present system is so
surely bringing about, must be made soon. Many look anxiously to
the former Governor, Sir George Grey, coming from his retirement
in his isle of Kawaw and entering the political arena, as a last hope,
his known ability and influence with the natives, and determination
of character would be of greatest service at this juncture to his
adopted country.
If it is really the desire of the colonists to treat the Maori as
an equal, as so many profess to wish to do, it is absolutely necessary
as pointed out by Mr. Merivale in his exhaustive lectures upon Colo-
nies and Colonization “to exclude the settlers from contact with
them, and adopt the policy of insulation—that of the United States
and intrust them to the good offices of the Missionary”—a policy the
Maoris have themselves initiated, only with feelings, and for reasons


it would be well to see changed. They should be given to under-
stand that the whole of the “ King's Country/' if it is still possible
to induce them to put any trust in the word of the white man, is
to be inalienably theirs, that Europeans will only be permitted to go
there by the Government to reside, for educational, and similar pur-
poses — the expense of maintaining persons employed in such duties
being borne by the State. In a very few years if this were arranged,
and thoroughly believed in by the natives, no obstruction would bo
offered by them to the main trunk railway being carried across the
island by the most desirable and easiest route, and future genera-
tions would see the country inhabited by the descendants of the
ancient lords of the soil as well cultivated and prosperous as any
portion of the islands —the severest penalties should be inflicted upon
any European furnishing them with alcohol in any shape whatever in
the meantime, and the Chiefs should be given free passes on the
present Railroads, to induce them to cross the boundary line
and see for themselves the advantages enjoyed, and prosperity of
those of their own race, who have not been tempted by gold, but
have kept their lands, and settled down to industrial pursuits
amongst the Europeans. The very different spirit which influences
the present rulers of the Colony as regards the well-being of the
aborigines may be understood from the audacious speech of a
member of the Assembly in his place there, that no man had done
more harm in New Zealand than the late Chief Justice Sir William
Martin, unless it were Bishop Selwyn. Every one knows how strong
the feelings of the venerated Judge were regarding the treatment of
the Maoris in respect to their lands, and how it grieved him as it
did the noble Bishop to see the change for the worse that was
coming upon them, and their prospects in aftertimes—“ Civiliza-
tion may be thrown back, Mr. Bagehot has remarked, by the con-
quest of many very rude men over a few less rude men," the civili-
zation of the Maoris at one time quite hopeful has been rolled back
by very rude men indeed—the individual who made this rude as
well as false assertion was a Taranaki settler, a bullock-driving-
militia major, who was one of those urgent for the occupation of the
land at the Waitara, the first cause of all the subsequent troubles.
The vulgar Europeans call their tawny-skinned neighbours
“ Niggers," “ savages" and other opprobrious epithets more appli-
cable to themselves. They have their faults no doubt, chief amongst
them a great want of veneration in which they equal, if they do not
surpass the rising generation of low whites in the colonies, who pre-


sent a notable example of the effects of the use and disuse of particu-
lar organs. It must be admitted too that the Maoris generally show a
great lack of gratitude, but it is to be remembered that as a people
they have nothing to be grateful for to the Europeans, and indeed
have good reason for hating them, which as a race they undoubtedly
now do cordially in their hearts, and when their patriotic feelings are
roused in time of war, they overcome in individuals personal affection,
and gratitude for kindness shown to themselves by the unfortunate
white man, who falls beneath their tomahawk, as Caesar by the
hand of his friend Brutus. Against these failings their many good
qualities are to be placed. Their bitterest revilers must admit that
they possess an intuitive magnanimity, and are often quite chival-
rous in their conduct in war. The colonists were not exposed at
any time to sudden attacks from large bodies of natives under chiefs
of distinction, without fair warning, and civilized nations may well
take a lesson in humanity from the so-called savages. During the
last campaign when the commissariat waggons fell on one occasion
into the enemy's hands, he let them pass, and on another obeyed
literally the injunction ‘ feed your enemies' and sent boat-loads of
potatoes, &c., down the Waikato river to General Cameron. The
brave warrior chieftains disdained to fight with starving Pakehas,
At the Gate-Pah when an officer, Colonel Booth, fell into their
hands mortally wounded, a young chief at imminent risk of his own
life, went out of the Pah to bring him water. Ancient or modern
history as Mr. Fox says truly, records no story of greater courage
and determination than that of the heroic defenders of Orakau Pah;
without food or water, a small force held out for three days against
our well appointed troops, who surrounded them in overwhelming
numbers, pouring upon them shot and shell and all the deadliest
missiles of modern civilized war. Sir Duncan Cameron, with the
humanity of a brave man, urged them to surrender and save their
lives ; their answer was, “ this is the word of the Maori to you, oh
General, we will fight for ever, and ever, and ever!" He then
entreated them to send out their women and children, but they re-
plied, <( our women will fight you too." At last exhausted by hunger
and thirst, calmly and deliberately in the face of death, they aban-
doned their position, and in silent grim array, their women and
children in the midst, who uttered not a sound, without firing a
shot, they marched straight down on the double line of the 40th
regiment,—such was the effect of their defiant advance that the
greater part of this gallant three hundred made good their escape,


jumping over the heads of some of the first line of soldiers placed
under a bank, and walking straight through the second. In the
pursuit, which lasted for six miles, about a hundred of these brave
warriors fell, amongst them some females. General Cameron
would gladly have saved the devoted band “ from the terrific fire
of our troops” that fell upon them, and in his despatch could not
refrain from paying a just tribute of admiration to their heroism.
The Maori’s love of their father-land for which they have
fought so well, and to their respective localities is exceedingly
strong. Every inch of ground from the Southern extremity of the
islands to the North Cape had an owner, but the ownership as in
other patriarchal communities did not vest exclusively in the indi-
vidual, but in hapus, or sub-tribes the Heads of the families being
for the time the representatives of the title ; over all was the
<< mana” or feudal superiority of the Chieftain of the tribe. The
boundaries of their particular hunting grounds, as well as cultivated
lands, have always been most rigidly guarded. The celebrated
chief Renata made an eloquent appeal to the Governor that the
war might be stopped, and “ that it might be left to the Queen to
decide in this quarrel, namely, regarding the Waitara land, and as to
my right to set up a king, as a means of redress for wrongs not settled
by you, for the only wrongs you redressed were those against your-
selves, as for all those over the breadth of the country you left
them unsettled. What Maori is such a fool as to be mistaken about
the supremacy of the Queen of England ? or who would be such a
fool as to throw himself away in fighting in such a cause. No, it is
for the land, for land from time immemorial down to the arrival of
the Palcehas has been the cause of war in this island of ours .” It is
astonishing that dealing with such a high-spirited patriotic people,
the authorities should have allowed themselves to be guided appa-
rently by the extraordinary opinion expressed by Lord Grey “ that
the savage inhabitants of New Zealand have no right to property
in land which they do not occupy, and which have remained
unsubdued for the purposes of man”—an opinion of course given
by that statesman in perfect ignorance of the habits, and peculiar
phase of civilization obtaining amongst the aborigines of New
Zealand, and without reflecting that the same argument might with
greater force even be applied to the rights of the occupiers of great
deer forests in Scotland, the cotton lords and shoddy aristocrats
who now occupy for their own selfish amusement the lands once


tenanted by stalwart men, the pride and strength of their native
country, forced by the consequences of our so termed high civili-
zation to find new homes in distant regions of the globe.
The immediate caiise of the late war, was as is well known in
New Zealand at least, the determination of the Government, and a
certain clique of settlers to get hold as Mr. Fox says, “of the fat
and fertile fields of the Waitara, upon which they had long looked
with longing eyes,” and with such ill-disguised covetousness that
Wiremu-kingi the Chief of that district of Taranaki had years
previously addressed Governor Fitzßoy in earnest expostulation —
“Friend Governor, he exclaimed, the Waitara shall not be given to
the Pakeha —not whilst I live —do you not love your land ? England
the land of your fathers, as we also love our father’s Jand of the
Waitara ?
The more the circumstances are considered, the more one feels
convinced that Governor Gore-Brown was deceived and imposed
upon by his advisers. Being himself unacquainted with the langu-
age of the natives, he was obliged to depend upon translations made
by interested persons, otherwise it is not credible that a good and
able man, anxious as he was to maintain the right, would not have
been influenced by the speech of this same Wiremu-kingi at a
meeting at which he was present, when Mr. Maclean as head of the
Land-purchasing Department, or Government Land-Broker in chief,
endeavoured to persuade the Chief to sanction the sale of a portion
of his hereditary manor made by a man called Te-Teira.
“ Listen Governor, said he, notwithstanding Teira’s offer, I will
not permit the sale of Waitara to the Pakeha. Waitara is in my
hands, I will not give it up, ekore-ekore-ekore ! I will not, I
will not, I will not, I have spoken —Come, turning to his people,
arise let us go.” And without another word or look at the Governor
or other Europeans he and his people left the Assembly.
Mr. Maclean knew well that the seemingly rude manner of his
departure was not intended as an insult to His Excellency personally,
but as an emphatic avowal of his determination to resist, and of his
perfect contempt for Tiera. In spite of this warning and of the
remonstrances of other great chiefs such as Renata, who told him
“ that the Maori would not be daunted by his weakness, by his inferi-
ority in the possession of the implements of war, or by the small-
ness of his Tribe, that he sees his land going, and will not sit still,”


the Governor yielding to the pressing solicitations of the white men
headed by the then minister for native affairs, sent to the assembly
by a section of the Taranaki settlers, made arrangements for the
immediate occupation of thisWaitara land, and surveyors were sent
to measure it. The Maoris contented themselves at first with un-
armed resistance to their proceedings, and opposed them by sending
a party of old women to guard the land, the surveyor with his theo-
dolite fell into the embrace of one of these old witches, as the
Newspaper correspondent termed them : a reserve of men had cer-
tainly been posted near, but without arms in case of need, but the
old women wanted no help, and proved too much for the surveyors,
and they and their assistants were compelled to make an ignomini-
ous retreat, with the loss of some portion of their beards.
The irritation of the natives was not lessened by a manifesto
issued soon after, in which the Govermnent declared that Te-Teira’s
claim had been carefully investigated and declared to be good, that
payment for the land had been made to him, and that it now belonged
to the Queen. Again and again did the natives find the injustice
being done to them, was said to be on account of Her Majesty, whom
they were once inclined to worship in their hearts as a great unknown
benefactress. With the insolence of vulgar people, the native
Minister and his friends informed the Maoris that Tiera was a chief
they found of equal rank as Wi-Kingi, a statement received by
them with shouts of derision. You say replied Renata, because his
genealogy has been published by you Pakehas, therefore he is a
chief ! What about his genealogy ? would Wiremu-Kingi publish
his genealogy ? is it not known throughout the island amongst all
tribes ? He needs not to have his genealogy recounted—that is a
thing for a common man to do never heard of before. I know this
man Tiera, a fellow of little note; his name is Manuka, i. e. te tree,
scrub and nothing more. Wiremu-Kingi is a great Rangatira heard
of, and known by all tribes. Burke's Peerage would be little
esteemed by the Maori.
But the Government chose to risk every thing for this six hun-
dred acres at Waitara. Martial law was proclaimed, troops were
sent up, and the first shots fired in this “ unjust and unholy war,"
as it was designated in the Assembly by Dr. Featherston, Superin-
tendent of the Province of Wellington, one of the honest old States-
men of New Zealand, were fired by Europeans.
There seems to be no excuse for the rashness and folly of the


action taken by the Governor's advisers. Besides Wi-Kingi him-
self and Renata, other patriotic and hitherto friendly chiefs warned
them of the consequences. Wiremu-Tamehana anglice William
Thomson, the most powerful man perhaps in the country, and
more of an Englishman than a Maori in his habits, a personal friend
of the Governor and other gentlemen expressed himself in the figu-
rative language of his countrymen —“ Birds do not cry unless there
be an enemy in sight, except indeed in the morning and evening.
At day-break their song is heard, and in the evening, but not in
the daytime unless some bird of prey appears, they sit quietly in
the branches of the trees, and make no noise until they see the
great bird the Eagle that comes to destroy them, then all cry out,
large birds and small —there is a general cry." Bye and bye as the
danger appeared imminent he spoke plainly, “ If the Governor says
it is the land, I see through this also, but I do not speak of it, that
is not a matter to be spoken of at this meeting, it is a hidden word
that it is to be kept in the head, we intend to keep our lands,
and if the Governor comes to take another piece after this there will
be war." “You quote from Scripture, said Renata, that children
should obey their parents, quote to the Governor the other portion of
the same passage. Fathers provoke not your children to wrath."
Not only from the great Maori chiefs came earnest appeals to
the justice and proper feelings of the Governor but from men of
position also amongst the Europeans. The revered and learned
Chief Justice, Sir William Martin, put the legal bearing of the
matter in the strongest language. “No right of a British subject
“ is more dear and precious than this that the Executive Govern-
“ ment shall not use the force at its command to oust any man from
“ his land, or deprive him of any right he claims until the question
“ between the Crown and the subject has been heard and determin-
“ ed by some competent tribunal, some tribunal perfectly independ-
“ ent of the Government; this is a fundamental principle of the
“ English Government We the English subjects of our
“ Queen dislike nothing so much as to be intimidated into the re-
“ linquishraent of a right. Why should a Maori dislike it less ? On
“ the contrary the pride and passion of the race, the patriotism of
“ each class has always centred on this point; to fight for th‘ir
“ land to resist encroachment even to death, this has been their
“ point of honor. A chief who would yield to intimidation in such
“ a case would be degraded in the eyes of the people The


u one question to be asked is this, was it lawful for tbe Govern-
“ ment to take possession of the land by armed force ? There could
“be but one answer, It was not lawful.” An influential Taranaki
settler sent from the Province itself an urgent protest couched in
form of a petition as follows : —“ It is with the deepest surprise
“ and sorrow that your petitioner has heard 'that a resort to arms
“ in order to enforce an alleged purchase of an insignificant block of
“ land may be almost immediately expected. Your petitioner ad-
“ visedly uses the word, alleged, as he cannot possibly believe that
“ your Excellency’s Government would consider such a purchase as
“ a de jura or even a de facto one, much less that they would
“ attempt to take forcible possession of the block referred to, were
“ they thoroughly cognizant of the real facts and .circumstances
“ Further it would seem that Tiera’s allegation of his
“ own absolute interest, the allegation of one who has received
“ British gold, and who believes that he will be backed by British
“ bayonets, the allegation of one who has shown himself ready for
“ the sake of lucre to destroy his own tribe, and his own race, and
“to plunge the whole country into unspeakable calamities, is to be
“ accepted as final and conclusive so as to weigh down the testi-
mony of the great majority of the Tribe who, unseduced by money,
“ and uuintimidated by power, are prepared to seal their testimony
“ with their blood. Here at present for various reasons too numer-
“ ous to mention there is dead silence, no voice is raised at this the
“ eleventh hour. Your petitioner has therefore attempted a feeble
“ cry, but do not, let me beseech your Excellency, despise the cause
“ on account of its feebleness, the informality or the temerity of its
“ advocates ; the cause is a good and noble one ; it is not the cause
“ of this or that individual, of this or that section of colonial society,
“ but of humanity and justice.” The reasons alluded to by this
gentleman were patent enough to disinterested on-lookers. The
thought of the gold that would come to them from the Imperial
Exchequer had its influence with many. The fat contracts, the pos-
session of all these rich plains so long coveted was too tempting to
others, whilst the village politicians were swelled with their in-
creased importance and a militia Major foisted by the chances of
colonial life into the position of a Minister of the Crown, could not
but be dazzled with the idea of having some share in the ordering
the movements of a Commander-in-Chief.
Major Nugent, an able and zealous officer, commanding in the


district, pointed out the peculiarly difficult nature of the Taranaki
country for the operations of troops of the line; whilst it was most
singularly favorable for the desultory style of native warfare;
that a much larger force than Great Britain could spare for the
whole colony of New Zealand would be insufficient for the protec-
tion of the settlers on their lands; “ that in case of a collision be-
tween H. M.’s troops and the natives the Settlement would dwindle
to a mere military post.” Mr. Clarke, also one of the Commissioners
for native affairs under McLean, spoke out boldly and in plain
words, “ the natives will never tamely give up what they consider
their just rights if the Government is determined to put settlers in
possession of the Waitara land, which we cannot convince the
natives or ourselves honestly, that they have alienated, it must be
done at the point of the bayonet.”
The dying Wolsey said of his dread master, u that rather than
miss or want any part of his will he will endanger the loss of half
his realm;” so to compare small things with greater, mean actors
with distinguished ones, the small-minded men in power at this
time in New Zealand chose to risk the prosperity of the colony and
the lives of the settlers rather than lose their salaries and abandon the
position they had taken up. All remonstrance and warnings were
in vain; the Ministers forced the Governor to adopt what they
termed a vigorous policy, promising him that from most certain
information in their possession, no outbreak would be caused by
the forcible occupation of the Waitara with troops. Within a fort-
night of their doing so, the complete truth of Major Nugent’s*
prognostication was shown. Fifteen hundred settlers had aban-
doned their homes to the torches of the Maori warriors, and the
whole population of the Province was crowded within the fortifica-
tions of the little town of New Plymouth. The war, foretold as the
consequence of the proceeding by Wiremu-Tamehana, commenced
most inauspiciously for the whites. A most miserable war indeed.
No wonder the military had little heart to fight in such a cause.
The extracts quoted from such authorities as the two consecutive
Attorney Generals of the Colony, Mr. Swamson and Mr. Fox, are
* Major Nugent was too honest a man, and too active and outspoken an officer
to succeed in New Zealand, by some manipulation whilst he was serving gallantly in
the field with his Regiment, a junior officer employed comfortably in making a road
near one of the principal towns obtained a Lieut.-Colonelcy over his head, and Her
Majesty’s Service lost a good and useful soldier, who retired in disgust.


sufficient to show the untruth of the often-reiterated assertion that
the war was long determined upon by the Maoris who only sought
a pretext for commencing disturbances, and was the natural result
of the kin-gmovement. So far from this being the case, Mr. Fox
stated in his place in council when Premier, “ that # the great
“ national movement which has been seething in the native mind
<( for years past, is not, as the Duke of Newcastle has been taught
“ to think, based on a desire to get quit of British rule and British
“ civilization; but we recognize in it the desire of the Native Race
u for self-elevation : we see in it an earnest longing for law and
<e order and an attempt, not feeble or ill-directed had it only been
“ encouraged and guided, to rise to a social equality with our-
“ selves.” But any such real advance was the last thing a certain
class of New Zealand politicians desired.
To lower the native character, diminish the power of the
chiefs, and eventually to carry out the plan of the head of the land-
purchase department, render the Maoris as far as possible landless,
was their scheme, persistently adhered to, and unfortunately now
fast approaching completion. In a few years perhaps there will be
few in New Zealand who know what the Maori really was, and
what he was capable of in the days of his strength. Doctor Dieffen-
bach says truly f the natives have invariably shown a far nobler
sentiment of affection not only to their own country, but also to the
European discoverer, and the early missionary colonists, than the
imported race of shopkeepers, who pride themselves on their ignor-
ance of every thing that belongs to the original inhabitants. 3
Notwithstanding the deteriorating influence of his companion-
ship with the class of Europeans he sees most of, the Maori has not
lost his innate sense of self-respect. An instance of this occurred to
Sir George Grey during the latter part of the war at Taranaki. A
young chief, Bobirangi, came to him, and urged that a party of
soldiers about to proceed to a place on the coast, should be detained,
as they were sure to fall into an ambuscade. The station was not
very far from the settlement of New Plymouth and the warning he
gave was neglected, indeed the Governor said he did not believe a
word about the danger. The men went and to their deaths. Some-
time afterwards he met Bobirangi, and anxious to make him amends
for the slight passed upon him invited him into his quarters to take
a glass of wine with him. No Grey! replied the proud young
chieftain, you said I told a lie, I will not take wine with you !


The Maori is naturally of a warm and affectionate disposition
as seen in the everyday greeting of friends and relatives and in
their Tangis, i. e. crying over the dead. The victor often displayed
sincere affection towards the vanquished chief become his slave.
The Waikatos subdued and carried off into slavery the greater
number of the survivors of the Taranakis : sometimes in after years
they permitted the old men to return after years passed as nominal
if not actual servitors of their conquerors, to die on their ancestral
lands. It was no uncommon thing afterwards to see a powerful
Waikato chieftain come down with a strong body-guard to the west
coast to Tangi, and lament over the grave of an old Taranaki
warrior, to whom he had become attached whilst he dwelt with
him as a slave, fire a volley over it and return. The Taranaki men
on these occasions all went away, to prevent any collision or angry
words, leaving only the old women to point out the exact spot of
their last resting places.
Look at these cannibals making a fuss about a dead nigger !
said a man in my hearing as a Maori was being decorously carried
to his grave by his sorrowing friends and weeping relatives, the
women walking two and two with green wreaths of a certain rare
fern, the emblem of mourning, around their heads. The fellow came
from that land, in one of whose daily papers this year appeared the
following —“ at the funeral of Mrs. Rose Grollaghay last week at
Newry a quarrel took place about the property left; the coffin was
put down upon the road, and the relatives fought for the cows and
pigs; after the fight the coffin was lifted, but before it could reach
the grave another fight took place, the priest fled terrified, and the
corpse was ultimately buried without any religious ceremony.
The New Zealand branch of the Polynesian race, although so
singularly fierce and fearless in war, are by no means the deliberate-
ly and systematically cruel people they are so commonly stigmatized
as being by our countrymen, in whose own land was not long ago
permitted the peine forte et dure, quartering quick, and the market
places of whose towns have been the scenes of the slow roasting alive
of tender women, children and old people, and of many other horrible
barbarities practised during times of religious excitement by the dif-
ferent sects of Christians alike, upon heretics to their respective
creeds. We forget the unpleasant features of what are facetiously
called the good old times, but less than two centuries ago, the chief
occupation of the Ministers of the Presbyterian Church of Scotland


was hunting up, and burning reputed witches alive; the pleasant
old sport has lately been celebrated by a mimic performance at Bal-
moral. In the commencement of the last century, boys and girls
under twelve years of age were tortured and put to death in some
savage way or other for miraculously causing the death of cows and
pigs. Three thousand persons were murdered in England as witches
or wizards during the Session of the Long Parliament, and it is
estimated that not less than thirty thousand people were cruelly
tortured first, and then burned, hanged or racked to death under the
statute of Henry VI., for the suppression of this bete noir of igno-
rant barbarians. What right have we to talk of savages ? Kereopa's
murder of the Rev, Mr. Volkner for which he was not long since
executed, (having been taken and given up to the Government by
the Arrawas for a reward of a thousand pounds under their Chief
Ropata who holds Her Majesty's Commission as Major) appeared
probably to him an excited fanatic, as meritorious a deed as John
Knox considered burning a papist to be, and the revolting act he
committed on the occasion may have been repugnant to himself, al-
though he performed it in accordance with the time immemorial
custom of Polynesian sacrifices, from which Pomare, the gentle
Queen of Tahiti, derived the title of Aimatta or the Eye-eater.
To forgive is a word certainly unknown in the Maori's vocabu-
lary, He has the same strong feelings in their utmost intensity which
Sir Walter Scott attributes to the Highland chieftain, in the lines
we repeat with emphasis as the expression of heroic patriotism :
“ Through the depths of Loch Katrine the steed shall career
O’er the peak of Ben-Lomond the galley shall steer
And the rocks of Craig-Royston like icicles melt
Ere our wrongs be forgot or our vengeance unfelt.”
It took a much longer time to change the habits of our own an-
cestors when first brought into contact with a more polished people,
than it has done to induce the Maoris to adopt European customs,
and to appreciate the value of education. The native chiefs set an
example to many of the settlers in the care they take to have their
children well educated, and in their willingness to pay liberally for
the advantages they receive, and do not sympathize in the feeling
that is so common amongst the lower classes in the colonies, that
causes them to grumble at being obliged to pay anything for such
objects, and now prompts the people of great wealth to propose far
smaller remuneration to the instructors of their children than they
would presume to offer their cooks. If a European gives a donation


towards building a church, or school-house, he generally takes care
to have it duly chronicled in the papers, if he is one of the million-
aires, and gives a really large sum to build a college, he asks to be
knighted, Renata the Hawke Bay chief gives about a thousand a
year out of the rental of the lands left to him, to the sqhools in the
Province, but no one hears anything about it. We cannot wonder
at the feeling of disgust entertained by such men towards the grasp-
ing Pakeha, when they find that even in the matter of education,
opportunity is taken to make the money voted, be of service to the
hangers-on of the Government. A considerable sum being utterly
wasted in paying a handsome salary to a redoubtable member of
the Upper House of Legislature, the owner of tens of thousands of
acres of land, as inspector of native schools who was as Renata
objected unacquainted even with their language.
There is certainly a marvellous difference between the Te-Rau-
peraha of to-day, attired in velvet jacket of latest fashion, adorned
with gold rings, chains and charms, driving his well-appointed
vehicle and pair of well-matched horses down Pai-kakerika hill,
and his grim old father, the celebrated Te-Rauperaha of Maori
history, marching at the head of his braves, in his mat with
his dreaded Meri in his hand along that same coast by the narrow
war-path, on his way to invade the middle inland and literally eat
up its inhabitants, outdoing in his treatment of the conquered foes
their wives, and their little ones, the barbarities practised by the
favorite Israelitish heroes of the Maoris, in olden time. It was a
very imprudent thing in missionaries placing the Old Testament in
its entirety in the hands of the natives. You know Solomon ? said
a chief to a clergyman who had been pointing out to him the impro-
priety of having so many wives. Solomon great king, good man,
Solomon wrote the Proverbs ? Yes Solomon wrote the Proverbs, he
was a very wise man, a great king. Oh ! how many wives Solomon,
eh ? Kapai Solomon ! ! well done Solomon.
When we observe the manner in which the chiefs who occupy
positions of importance in the country as members of the Legislature,
magistrates, assessors, &c., fulfil their duties, it is impossible not to
be struck with the great natural capacity of the Maoris, and their
readiness in adapting themselves to the customs and habits of the
Europeans, like their cousins the Sandwich Islanders. With all
their faults were I to become a settler in New Zealand I should
prefer the brown man for my neighbours still, even deteriorated as


they are becoming as a race, to the majority o£ the rough whites,
especially those chiefs who do not drive their carriages, do not play
billiards at the hotels, but when you visit them are content to offer
a warm Maori welcome, and food cooked in the ovens of hot stones
as of yore, without preserved salmon and champagne or the singu-
lar compounds sold to them as such. The greater part of these
people twenty years ago, were in a much happier position, and
much less deserving of the appellations bestowed upon them, than
the mass of our unfortunate countrymen in the ‘ Black Country*
and some other parts of Great Britain, a paradise for the rich,
a land of want and misery for millions, to tell them they live
in Merrie England is indeed a bitter mockery. The Maoris do
not kick their wives to death with iron clogs ; as a race they
are particularly kind to their women and children, who are com-
panions and a pleasure to them, instead of being a burthen, and
concern to feed, and so often separated as they are all day long
are scarce known to their parents; they were industrious at that time,
frugal in their habits and sober, few of the young men and women
could not read and write, thanks to the old missionaries, presenting
too in this respect a great contrast to the state of things in England,
where as shown by the returns laid on the table of the House of
Commons not one in fifty of those on the lists of the national schools
can do either intelligibly. They were free then, secure from poverty ;
cannibalism and tribal wars had all but ceased, and they were with-
out the incentives to crime, to which the bulk of English labourers
are exposed, sunk too as they are below the code of morals, many
races of those we term savages have established, having to work
hard day after day from childhood till death to keep themselves
from starving, whilst they see the few enjoying the extremes! luxury.
The Maoris acted in those days according to their natural good
impulses, love of hospitality, and the sense of justice inherent in
man, not having learned the lesson taught in our own father-land
where the struggle for life makes men selfish and thankless, that to
be generous and honest in this life, is to be pretty sure of disap-
pointment and evil fortune. Those who have visited Japan will
doubt very much which is the most civilised country in the world
if civilisation should ensure the greatest amount of comfort and
happiness to the greatest number.
There are many villains amongst the aboriginals of New Zealand
of course, as amongst all other peoples, unscrupulous vagabonds


who would think no more, in war time at least, of shooting an old
Pakeha acquaintance from behind a flax bush, than a Connaught
boy would of firing his blunderbuss at his indulgent Saxon landlady
from the back of the hedge she had planted to shelter her murderer’s
garden. But there are many noble characters amongst them.
Nature’s gentlemen, who would scorn to express towards their
enemies the cowardly sentiments heard so frequently from the lips
of the white-men. —“ Give them plenty of rum, let the Niggers
kill themselves, the sooner they are all dead the better.”
It is well for them indeed that they were brave and warlike or
they would long ago have been landless, and have met with the same
fate as the aborigines of North and of Spanish America, Australia,
&c., at the hands of the Pakeha who has proved his utter reckless-
ness as to their future destiny, and comes to their country to make
money and go away, or to acquire an estate which should he make
his home, he desires to have none around whom he cannot in some
measure command. Referring to the past history of the neighbour-
ing colonies it will be found that when .Sir George Gipps was sole
ruler of Australasia, without responsible ministers, and having only
the advice of Mr. E. D. Thomson, (whom Colonel Mundy calls the
prince of colonial secretaries) the natives were jealously protected
as far as possible, and the murderers of black fellows were consigned
to the gallows. But upon the unfortunate aborigines of Australia,
whom it has been so much the fashion to represent as a species of
advanced gorilla, instead of being intelligent, quick of apprehension,
and most faithful and attached servants, the atrocities perpetrated in
later years have been fearful, in many districts especially of
Northern Queensland, where deeds have been perpetrated under the
eyes of the Government, which might bring a curse upon any com-
munity, in barbarity almost if not quite equalling the proceedings
by which the unhappy Tasmanians were annihilated. After its sepa-
ration from New South Wales then under the government of Sir
William Denison, a man not less firm than Sir George Gipps, the
management was handed over to an administrator without personal
experience of uncivilized races, or of the rougher class of Anglo-
Saxon colonists. Sir George Bowen. It was to him the letter upon
the whole duties of Governors was addressed by Lord Lytton, then
Secretary of State for the Colonies, and amongst his most particular
injunctions, was the advice “ to mark and study the idiosyncracies,
of the community, every community has one particular to itself.”


Sir George no doubt found no difficulty in discovering the par-
ticular one of the Queensland people, especially of the mass of new
occupiers of crown lands, many of them absentees represented by
overseers, who began to crowd into the untrodden wildernesses of
the new colony, men of a very different stamp from the old squatters,
and learned quickly that it was not easy, indeed of little use attempt-
ing to obey the immediately following recommendation (c to appeal
to those feelings which are noblest.” The cry was let the black
savages perish, and the classical Governor had only to report
oXeKOvro Se Xaoi.
The horses in the colonial coach were violent and unbroken
and ran away with it being totally beyond the control of the per-
son who hold the reins as first colonial secretary under responsible
government; a young man, without experience of any kind, anxious
to gain popularity with the mob, and too self-sufficient and arrogant
to listen to, or take advice from the gentlemen who originally settled
the country and under whose direction its affairs had hitherto been
quietly conducted. Well might Mr. Herman Merivale say “ the
present age is rich beyond precedent in such enormities.” It was
the transactions in Queensland that were the subject of so much
attention and indignant commentary at the time that gentleman
published the second edition of his lectures on colonization deliver-
ed at Oxford, in one of which he alludes “ to the ferocity and
treachery of civilized man too often of civilized governments”
in their relations with savages. But “ the tardy attempts of
the Governments of America, the Gape, and Australia to repair
the acknowledged crime” referred to by this eminent political
economist, have not as far as can be seen, yet extended to Queensland,
where the wretched aborigines were handed over to the tender
mercies of the black police and the stockmen. Mr. Merivale did
not find himself able to modify his expressions on this, as on some
other matters, but had to add an indignant pi’otest against the
course pursued with respect “to the decaying noble race of the
Maori.”
The Yales of the North island are many of them fertile and
inviting, and although their owners could not be swept of the face
of the earth in the same wholesale and easy way as the Australians,
the Government and the settlers have done fairly well in obtaining
possession of them by one means and another, but they have not
dared to do quite us much as they would have liked in the way of


annexation, and as they long ago would have done but for the
attitude of far-seeing patriotic chiefs like Wiremu-Tamehana,
Rewi, Renata, &c., and the consequences which followed their de-
termined resistance of the attempted spoliation. But the battle in
the end is to the strong and ever-increasing army of Pakehas, more
land is acquired daily, bought by way of, and the deeds of cession
are sometimes couched in affecting language “ under the bright sun
on this day of sale, I have wept over, and bidden adieu to the
territory I hereby cede to the Queen,” added one Maori chief before
he affixed his signature along with others to the document alienat-
ing the loved lands of his fathers ; little knows Her Majesty of the
villainies perpetrated in her name held sacred by the Maoris, by
men acting ostensibly as her servants.
Probably ere long the belief that it is fated so to be, will spread
into the hitherto jealously guarded king's' country, taking advantage
of which feeling the land-purchasing agents of the Government have
wrought upon the natives so successfully as to obtain many millions
of acres in one year. King Tawhiao, himself and his hitherto loyal
chiefs, their brains gradually destroyed by alcohol will come some
day and drink champagne with the Governor or Mr. Maclean whose
policy will be applauded accordingly by those who care nought for the
consequences to the Maori who is a thorough fatalist. He makes up
his mind that he is going to die, draws his cloak around him, sits down
in his wharre and the physician's efforts are vain, he dies. The
aborigines of New Zealand have made up their minds that they are
doomed soon to pass away, as the birds and other indigenous
creatures and plants do before the foreign invaders, and think
perhaps that it is just as well to eat, drink, and enjoy to-day—the
rulers of the country shut their eyes to the fact that the six-pence
or shilling an acre given for hundreds of thousands of acres at a
time is mostly spent in poisonous spirits, and that each sale
diminishes the number of the sellers. If care were taken even that
all fire-water sold to these unfortunate people was properly inspected
it would be well. But that is not in accordance with the “ spirit
of the Till” which governs their policy, and decoctions of nicotine
and blue-stone do their business quickly. No one can read Mr.
Wallace's interesting work on the Malay Archipelago without feeling
the utmost confidence in his statements, and the greatest respect
for the opinions of this earnest thinker, and acute observer, whose
expressions about the Jesuit missionaries one may well place against
those of the author of “ South Sea Bubbles” alluding to the ex-


cellent administration of the Dutch “ a Government respected every-
where by the natives of Sumatra, Java and adjacent island countries,”
he contrasts it with “ our own system which has always failed, we
Demoralize and Extirpate but we never really civilize, desolation
goes before us and civilization lags slowly and lamely behind. The
inhabitants of Celebes so lately as 1822 were sunk in the depths of
barbarism and were reputed cannibals, the change that has been
accomplished there, the order and comfort in which the natives live
around Menado, the pleasing sights which there meet the eye would
have all been unknown, had that country been subjected to an
antipodean policy, and instead of increasing in numbers, and im-
proving in every respect, their fate would have been sealed as that
of the unfortunate Maoris.
Some people talk much of the half-castes as a race likely to
become influential, but that is doubtful. They are fine, handsome
people, but their children are weak and short-lived, very liable to
consumption; they are too, like the progeny of dark aboriginal
mothers and European fathers generally, uncertain, and given to
inherit the least desirable qualities of both races. As in Samoa,
Tonga, Tahiti and the Sandwich islands, and indeed all places
where this same Polynesian race is found, they are proudest of
their maternal descent; as is most natural their sympathies are all
with their mother's people, and in every respect they have good
reason for feeling as they do. On that side they come from one
of the most distinct, pure, and most ancient races of men —who
these noble-looking brown men are, where their original home
will never be known now —but those who have seen much of them,
before their intercourse with Europeans, will deem them one of the
finest types of the human race.
On the whole it will be concluded that in so far as its inhabit-
ants are concerned, New Zealand is not exactly the most delightful
place in the world to make a home in at present, especially as in its
haste to grow rich and populous, crowding out thereby the aboriginal
lords of the soil by force of numbers, it is being flooded with the very
lowest class of Europeans from all countries, bringing more examples
of bad to the Natives, and most probably contagious diseases which
will decimate them, and render their extermination more speedily
completed. “ The word of the Maori, Ahi-na-maui or the land of
the god Maui, for the Maori” is vain ; despite the report presented
by Mr. Maclean himself to the Council in 1860, “ that the Natives


were smarting under wrongs arising from land selling” the Govern-
ment agents are rapidly securing their remaining territories, and then
landless wanderers, no longer self-respecting, fire-water will do
the rest.
So far as other matters are concerned, things will settle down
bye and bye, and twenty years hence it may be much pleasanter
than it is now. In fifty, possibly less, it may be a country of very
prominent importance and influence, especially if the fair island
countries of the Pacific should become settled by Europeans as Fiji
is being now, and the trade flow to Auckland instead of Sydney as
it might do to a considerable extent by the legitimate enterprise of
the colonial merchants. Possibly it may indeed become the most
influential of all the Australasian States, taking them separately, as
divided now, for although its progress may be retarded by bad
government and monitary difficulties brought upon it by political
charlatans, its resources are great and varied and these evils will
only temporarily arrest it. But these observations are intended for
the consideration, of those who cannot look forward to the years after
A. D. 1900.


PART 111.
NEW ZEALAND
ATTRACTIONS AND DRAWBACKS.


, a A A J A 3S 7/ a H -
■
■
*


It should be borne in mind by intending emigrants, that the
prosperity of these islands or at least of certain portions of them
may when little expected be seriously interfered with by causes
beyond the power of Legislators to avert. I merely say may be,
but Mr. Darwin in the same most charming narrative of the
Voyage of the Beagle remarks, “Earthquakes alone are sufficient
“to destroy the prosperity of any country, a bad earthquake
“ destroys our oldest associations in one moment of time.”
A recent visitor to San Francisco had been shown all that was
most interesting in that place by an old acquaintance, who remark-
ed one day, in a somewhat querulous tone, that he had not experi-
enced one of their earthquakes. Returning soon after however
from the theatre with his friend, he had an opportunity of trying
this to him —new sensational excitement —conscious of utter sobriety,
the pavement suddenly appeared to grow unstable, and the tall
houses to waver unsteadily on their foundations, and they were
fain to stop, and hold on by the iron railings, but it was a slight
shock, and the San Francisco friend shrugging his shoulders,
moved on, merely remarking in a disgusted way, ' Pretty Mean
Earthquake/ The tremblements de terre which have occurred in
various parts of New Zealand within the last twenty years, could
scarcely be designated ‘Mean Earthquakes/ The bravest natures
succumb under excessive sea-sickness, and the effects of violent
earth-sickness upon the human frame as well as upon the lower
animals are still more utterly paralysing. Under this influence
perhaps Governor Eyre came to somewhat too hasty a conclusion,
but no one who has read the account of that gentleman s journey
across the Australian deserts, or who is acquainted with his conduct
in Jamaica, will attribute to him a want of presence of mind, or
imagine that any lack of courage was the cause of his writing
the despatch recommending the abandonment of Wellington as
the site of a principal settlement.
The level ground there is of such limited area, that the inhabi-
tants are now forced to build upon land they reclaim from the
harbour. Some day, it may happen that a subsidence of eight or
ten feet may take place, instead of an elevation to a similar extent,
as occurred there in 1855, and the shaken-down edifices with their


occupants may be swept away by a high wave. People will cease
then to laugh at Mr. Eyre’s warning, and instead of assigning it
to pusillanimity, deem it to have been the wise conclusion of a
thoughtful man, that whilst the place was still in its infancy, and
vested interests were of no great consequence, it would be better
for the Government not to foster the building of a town in a situa-
tion inferior to many others in the islands, and evidently near a
focus of subterranean disturbance, such as Talcahuano and Con-
cepcion, and other places on the Sub-Andes coasts; often threaten-
ed, and destroyed at last in a single minute of time, when Mr.
Darwin was in the neighbourhood. He was at Valdivia on the day
of that great earthquake, a place some distance to the south, when
the rocking of the ground was also severe, and mentions particular-
ly that in the forest although he felt the trembling of the earth,
he saw no other effect.
In Hawke Bay district during 1862 there were many earth-
quakes, indeed the few inhabitants then in that province, had no
rest from alarms for months, although little was heard of their
experiences at a distance. At a place called Te-Aute, 30 miles
inland, the shocks were especially violent and at times the scene was
enough to appal the stoutest-hearted, as admitted by an eye-witness,
whose personal courage and coolness had often been conspicuous
during the war. It was indeed awful he said, to hear again and
again, the underground thunder approaching, sometimes with a
series of detonations like a cannonade, at others like the sound of
long trains of heavy railway waggons passing near, and as the
ground rose and sank, to see the lofty trees in the forest surging
and bending with loud groanings, and clouds of dust rising, the
large decayed ones falling, and great masses of rocks detached
from the summits of the hills crashing down through the woods
in one place to a lake, which was violently agitated, and “ swished
aboutleaving large areas of the bottom dry alternately, as the
waters rushed from one side to another, whilst the air was loaded
with mephitic gases rising from the cracks and fissutes opening
and closing again around. From the startling effect upon the
forest, these shocks must have been more severe than the ones
which did so much damage at Valdivia on the occasion referred to.
One can imagine what destruction would have been chronicled,
had there been any towns then in that neighbourhood, or had the
railway now in course of construction been made, as the saltatory


motion was accompanied by a gyratory one, that would have
destroyed most bridges. Below this elevated country lie the dreary
but rich plains of Karamu, Meannee, and Clive, which a depression
of a very few feet would submerge or render swamps. The buyers
of land there, at twenty and thirty pounds an acre, are few of
them aware of the appearance they presented then, as of a mere
crust seemingly over subterranean reservoirs of pitchy waters, and
fetid mud which jetted up from opening fissures, or welled up in
great bubbles, which burst darting forth eddies of poisonous
vapours. The country around Napier has rested since in com-
parative tranquillity, so for ages had that known as the Runn of
Cutch, until it went down twenty feet suddenly during the earth-
quakes of 1819 in Scinde. The New Zealand people build no castles,
no cathedrals, the tops of whose towers standing for a time above
the waters, like the fort of Sindree, might mark where lay the
“ splendid ” town allotments purchased at such absurd prices by
the speculators of the day, regardless of the suggestive features
of what they have oddly enough called Scinde island, and its surround-
ing salt marshes, warning them that what has been, may be again.
Centuries may possibly pass, large cities may rise up in these
places, and the memories even of such disturbances as have occurred
since the islands have been occupied by Europeans, may have faded
away ere any great catastrophe takes place, but at the same time it
is just as possible one may do so to-morrow. Persons of a nervous
temperament may as well bear the possibility in mind, and when
building their houses in Maori-land, recollect that it will be pru-
dent to construct them of wood, instead of brick, adobes or cob ;
otherwise on some stormy night when it tumbles down should they
be lucky enough to escape, they may find themselves in the situation
a lady did with her children at a place on the coast some eighty
miles from Napier, amidst the darkness and torrents of rain driven
by the violent gusts of a winter gale, crawling upon hands and
knees along the ground quivering and rising and falling like the
waves of the sea, to reach the lights flickering in the windows of a
neighbour's dwelling a hundred yards or two distant which being
well built of wood, at last gave shelter to the terrified creatures
after a weary contention with the terrestrial billows.
To those who have not tried it, the experience may seem an
interesting and novel excitement worth knowing; but few persons caie
a second time to lose confidence in their mother earth, and heai it


1870.
1872.
1873.
11
9
12
Wellington.
3
5
23
Whanganui.
1
2
3
Taranaki.
4
4
6
Nelson.
2
4
1
Queenstown Otago.
2
1
Dunedin.
2
0
1
Christ Church.
2
1
■
Taupo.
1
2
1
Napier.
roaring, to see great rents forty miles in length opening in its sur-
face, as on the south side of Cook’s Straits in 1855, or to watch the
hills nodding to each other as the settlers in the Wairarapa district,
and the Hutt valley near Wellington did during the earthquakes of
that year. That all is not stable and quiet the Colonists are constantly
reminded by the still active Volcanos, the wonderful assemblage of
Geysers, hot springs, &c.,in the North island, and the frequent occur-
rence of what the facetious San Franciscan called 'Mean Earthquake.’
The following is the list of shocks experienced in the islands
during the last three years :
A considerable number of these are recorded in the Meteorological
report as “ smart shocks,” but the majority were mere tremors. It
will be observed that Wellington has at all events pre-eminence in
this source of excitement, if it is denied other attractions. Whan-
ganui, another town of the same Province, appears to have been
much troubled in 1873, eight of the shocks being “ smart” ones.
There are many discomforts at present in life in the Bush in
New Zealand. The Bush in colonial parlance means everywhere out
of the towns ; the bleak plains of Canterbury and dreary uplands of
Otago destitute of all vegetation save coarse tussock grass, luckily
good for sheep, and a dwarf thorny shrub, are called the bush, as
well as the impenetrable forests of lofty trees, interlaced with
supple-jacks, and dense undergrowth which cover the western
portions of both islands. Pre-eminent amongst the disagreeables is
the want of servants. In America, the settlers generally can get
‘ helps’ of some description, but in many parts of New Zealand,
especially in the North island helps are not to be obtained upon any
terms, especially female ones. Speaking generally there is no
country through which I have ever travelled, where domestic
comfort is so little known, where one gets less for one’s money and


where ladies are exposed to such spirit-breaking, and health-des-
troying hardships. It has one recommendation, there are no
destructive indigenous animals to kill the stock, or endanger life,
no snakes getting under pillows, or coiling themselves in chignons,
or scorpions hiding themselves in one's boots. The Katipo, a small
spider is the only venomous creature of note, and it is rare, and
confined to certain localities fortunately, for small though it be,
its bite is as bad, if not worse than the scorpion's sting in its
consequences, causing paralysis in grown people, and death in
children. ‘Eothen’ Kinglake is eloquent upon the respective merits
of the fleas of various lands. They are abundant enough in New
Zealand, the sands in places swarm with them, and they deserve
a high place in his catalogue being übiquitous, relentless, and
especially hating the Pakeha. I have had opportunities of testing
the comparative prowess of mosquitoes in many countries, in
tropical ones, where each hour of the night has as Humboldt des-
cribes, its own armies coming up to the attack, and life is rendered
not much worth having, in consequence of the misery caused by
them. On the banks of the Canadian rivers and lakes, they know
what they are about, but for fierceness of onslaught and indomit-
able preseverance, few merit greater commendation than the black
warriors in the wooded and swampy districts of the North Island,
it is no use covering even your head over with your blanket when
camping out in a warm summer night, they will manage to get at
you somehow, and those as in the ferny plains near the sea, the
myriads of sand Hies give little peace to man or beast during the
day. The wood-cutters in the forests frequently look as if re-
covering from severe small-pox from the effects of the bites of these
small pests.
The climate has always been the grand point insisted upon by
emigration agents and others in their books, in which New Zea-
land excels all other countries in the world. This is sheer non-
sense—and is not a bit more true than the astounding statement of
Sir Charles Dilke, “ that the terrible results of the plentiful
possession of that Devil's agent, the Banana tree are seen in New
Zealand." Bunches of plantains can be bought in the market at
Auckland at a moderate price by those who are able to afford
such luxuries when the Mail steamers arrive once a month from
the Fiji Islands, but few inhabitants of Maori-land have ever seen
this beautiful plant growing, and fewer have ever tasted its fruit—


and it may be observed that fruits of all kinds are generally poor
and scarce with the exception of common peaches, and the smaller
kinds belonging to cold countries, gooseberries, currants, and the
like, except in one or two isolated sheltered localities such as
Nelson, Turanganui plain, and Mongoni in the north; the latter
may prove to be a fair vine-growing district.
Stretching as the islands do through more than thirteen
degrees of latitude open to the blasts from the Antartic Ocean,
and intersected in great part by a chain of mountains covered
with eternal snows, and the most extensive glaciers known almost
out of Polar regions, there are many climates between Stuart’s
island and the North Cape, all nearly as a rule exceedingly change-
able. Some provinces as Canterbury and Hawke Bay have a dry
one. On the plains of the former the annual rain-fall is only about
twenty-five inches. On the opposite coast at Hokitika, the chief
town of Westland, about a hundred miles distant as the crow
flies, one hundred and thirty inches may be taken as the average
annual allowance. The hot dry winds which sweep over the Can-
terbury levels, and in a lesser degree over those of Hawke Bay,
are withering and depressing in their effects as the sirocco in Malta or
southern Spain or the fierce blasts that come over the vast deserts
of the interior, and blight all living things on the Australian plains ;
whilst the frosts and snow storms of the plateaus of Otago and other
places in the middle island render the care of their nose and extre-
mities as necessary to travellers as in Canada nearly. So many people
suffered from ignorance of the proper treatment in cases of frost-
bite, that directions were published in the Canterbury Government
Gazette. The term boisterous may be applied generally to the
climate of these islands, and as to the suddenness of the changes of
temperature. Archdeacon Paul says, speaking of Canterbury parti-
cularly, “ the climate is a mixture of that of the south of France and
of the Shetland islands, when the weather is fine, I have never seen
brighter skies, or basked in more glorious sunshine even in Italy or
Portugal, but when a south-wester or drizzling south-east wind
sets in, I can hardly conceive anything more dreary and comfortless,
and to this we are liable at all seasons of the year, so that summer
may be turned into winter in a few minutes.” People are not indeed
liable in all parts of the country to be killed as happened the story
goes, to a way-farer in Wellington by a whale-boat drifting round
a corner, but generally in the islands although it may not blow


harder than it does sometimes on the coasts of England, it blows
much oftener. Wellington is an exceptional place. Cook’s Straits
being a funnel through which the gales blow with terrific force.
To these blustering winds it is due that many places are com-
paratively healthy, which otherwise would be very much the reverse
such as Christ-church and Wellington, where from the badness of
the drainage notwithstanding their influence, fevers are very preva-
lent, and in the former particularly, diptheria causes great mortality
amongst children. In Canterbury the death-rate amongst young
persons is very high, being one in every hundred and twenty —in
Taranaki amongst those of similar ages it is one in every three
hundred. Rheumatism and neuralgia are very common complaints
all over the colony, due perhaps to the want of electric storms —
thunder is rarely heard on the plains, and indeed generally through-
out New Zealand is not a common occurrence.
On the whole, however, although it is by no means deserving
of the encomiums so lavishly bestowed upon it, there is no objection
particularly to the climate on the score of salubrity—the three-score
and ten years are not likely to be exceeded by a larger proportion
of persons however there than elsewhere; now that population has
increased and there are people to die it is found that the death-rate
is equal if not greater than in the Australian colonies generally.
The plains of Canterbury, unpleasant as they are to live upon on
account of the blustering irritating winds, are healthy, but notwith-
standing ladies’ complexions suffer and are blighted as the gar-
dener’s hopes by the fierce north-westers. Nelson, although it has
its “ spout wind” possesses generally a happy freedom from des-
tructive gales, and is a pretty little place where the possessor of a
few hundreds a year may dream away life in seclusion from the
world amongst the hop gardens and apple orchards. The shores of
the Bay of Plenty, and of the Bay of Islands and other places in the
north, and the basin of the Waikato river are blessed with advan-
tages as to climate as great as those of many spots famed in this
respect ; and fair Taranaki the garden of New Zealand, as its deni-
zens love to call it, has despite the blasts which rush at times down
the sides of its beautiful mountain, tossing into wild confusion the
fronds of the forests of tree ferns which clothe the lower slopes,
enjoys generally a most genial atmosphere. In a word the climate
is good enough on the whole, and in some districts all that can be
desired. Unless it were the “Genteel people” for whom one of the


New Zealand hand-books says it is the most desirable place on
earth, few persons would come from home to vegetate in a colonial
town, where life is most uninteresting, where the same hum-drum
routine of existence has to be gone through, as in a dull country one
at home, the same tea-parties with the gossip and cicalata of the
street corners, the same, only worse executed generally c amor mias
and tanti pulpitis of such occasions' every thing is repeated in a
more wearying fashion —it is all very well the poets dream “ Beati
illi procul qui negotiisbut it is as well to be where one can some-
times go and hear the roar of the torrent, than be perpetually sur-
rounded by the utter stagnation of the swamp, “ things" are so very
little in the colonial towns, there is nothing to improve the mind in
such places; to live there is to be condemned to intellectual death,
and there are no amusements worthy of the designation: so I will
merely say that the situation of Auckland is beautiful there as at
Nelson and Taranaki the eye at least is pleased, as for the other
provincial capitals they have few recommendations, and Wellington
the present seat of Government as the “ Challenger's" people found
it, is a very odious place.
Dunedin is a well-built and well-situated town, but the bitter
blasts which in winter sweep the driving sleet, and in summer the
dust along its Princes' street, and George street, will serve to keep
the emigrant from the ancient city by the Forth, in lively remem-
brance of the most disagreeable features of his former home.
Otago, of which it is the bustling capital, was originally settled by
an inferior class of Caledonians chiefly from Glasgow and Paisley, and
of the Free Kirk persuasion, rough, grasping, and bigoted to a degree
scarce credible, unless one has chanced to have been in Invercargil,
a town in the extreme south, and heard one of their preachers
holding forth to his sympathising followers upon the sin of permitting
any one to come and possess the land in that country, but people of
their own chosen sect, the * only future inhabitants of Heaven' —as
for all others, even his own countrymen of the established Church of
Scotland he cries out, awa with them ! Awa with them ! with such
emphasis, that he makes one feel that could faggots be obtained on
the desolate treeless plains of the upper regions, to consume the
wretched heretics in the dreary gold-digging townships, he would
willingly apply the torch to light the Auto-da-fe, and would no
doubt equally readily lead on his congregation to the plunder of the
gold obtained by the poor diggers with toilsome labour, standing up
to their middle in the icy waters of these bleak regions. Of course


they could not arrest the tide of emigration from all quarters, and
of all classes, that poured into the Province when gold was dis-
covered, hut still the low Scotch element is predominant, not the
class of honest Scotchmen who live amongst its hills, but the pecu-
liar newly developed one found in the modern manufacturing towns,
the names of the Caledonian mountains and rivers have with the
bad taste that might have been expected replaced the native ones.
Dunedin has its Moray Place of course, and water of Leith, and a
lock of Burn’s hair is placed side by side with the feathers of the
Moa in its museum. But woe betide the visitor to that institution
who judging frou the touching memento, thinks he is amongst
simple people such as were contemporaneous with the great birds.
He will be in danger of learning a very hard lesson. Very few Scot-
tish gentlemen ventured to cast their lot there amongst their rough
countrymen in the earlier days of the settlement, otherwise Otago
might have gained a pleasanter reputation than it possessed, and
the peculiar proceedings for which it became notorious would not
have taken place. No run-holder was formerly safe who chanced to
offend the Provincial rulers or his friends; it is said, he was sure to
have his station proclaimed a reserve, and vice versa lands which
ought to have been open to the public, were held by special favorites.
The Provincial Superintendents as they are termed, and the Pro-
vincial Councils have done odd things often in New Zealand in the
way of legislation, but the Superintendent of Otago eclipsed them
all in the manner in which he availed himself of his powers; at
that time the seat of Government being at Auckland, communica-
tion with Dunedin would be accomplished most speedily by going
round by London, and he was able pretty much to do as he thought
fit as the following incident shows. A young man from home had
been sent out to his care, and his money placed in his hands for a
time, until he had acquired some colonial experience as the phrase
goes : when it expired and he wished to get it, in order to commence
some undertaking, he applied repeatedly in vain, and was at length
driven to have recourse to legal proceedings, and got a judgment
against his Honor, a most futile proceeding ! When the officer went
to put it in force, and convey him in default of payment to gaol, he
found himself check-mated in an unexpected manner, a supplemen-
tary Provincial Gazette had been issued. His Honor the Superin-
tesdent’s house was proclaimed a Debtor’s prison, and he had signi-
fied that it was his pleasure to appoint himself keeper thereof. It
was a cry to Lochow, the thousands were convenient, and might be


doubled meantime. There was not the excuse that there was no
institution of the kind existing in his Capital; on the contrary by
all accounts it afforded so much superior accommodation and shelter
than was easily to be obtained elsewhere, the difficulty # was to keep
people out. During the races on one occasion the Gaoler knew he could
not prevent his prisoners leaving their work, and going there if they
were bent upon doing so, and gave them permission to go to the
course, but threatened them with the penalty of no supper and no
bed if they were not back by a certain hour. All returned punctually
but one, and he was a captive of some note, so the guardian called
out “ here Dougal ma mon, rise and fetch Donald or tell him I’ll
steek the yett;” so Dougal went and brought his friend up breathless
with haste. This Donald was waiting his trial on a capital charge,
but to be shut out on a cold winter night was no joke, and to attempt
an escape into the wilds of Otago, a risk not to be run even in his
situation.
And now to come to the most important question for the in-
tending emigrant, for many would put up with all other drawbacks
to the country, if that could be answered satisfactorily, is New ;Zea-
land a place for an educated man, —a poor gentleman with a family
to go to in order to better his position ? I answer no, without any
hesitation, not as things are at present, unless circumstances should
occur to make a small capital serviceable it is the most hopeless
place imaginable. It is a hard thing to go into the wilderness and
subdue it in any country. Mr. Herman Merivale is correct in term-
ing “ the wilderness of New Zealand a most impracticable one, the
“ North island being either forest country, or overgrown with the
“ native ferns even more difficult and costly of extirpation than the
<< forest itself.” In no book that I have met with, except this gen-
tleman’s excellent lectures, is any allusion made to this most serious
difficulty in the way of the new settler, nor to the ruinous devastation
constantly caused by the armies of caterpillars, especially in newly
cleared fern lands near a forest: it is no uncommon thing to see a hun-
dred acres of young grass utterly destroyed in a week, eaten out by
the roots, or a field of wheat or oats demolished in a day or two by
this scourge. Grasshoppers are also nearly as formidable a pest as in
the American prairie countries. Those who talk about the lovely
ferny downs of New Zealand have little idea that this interesting
plant in great part of the country, forms an impenetrable jungle
eight or ten feet high with stems like walking canes, for which they


well serve. It is cut and then burned, the ground ploughed and
sown with grasses, but in the light soils it conies up again yearly,
has to be mown, and then burned in the swathe, but these repeated
burnings are most injurious to the top soil, the only method of
keeping it down is by pasturing heavily with young cattle, without
any regard to their own growth. They eat the young shoots as
they spring, but this process is one altogether beyond the means of
beginners with small capital. In Canada forest lands cost 4s. to ss.
an acre on credit, and tne expense of clearing may be put at £5 on
the average. The fern lands of New Zealand cost much more to
bring into thorough order, except on the East Coast, where in
some districts there being much lime in the soil, grasses flourish,
especially Rye, which grows so luxuriantly that it actually kills the
fern: but there sheep and ocher animals suffer from ergot, which
under the mild winter threatens to become a more formidable evil
than many dream of. Such lands too cost on the Ahuriri and Poverty
Bay plains ten pounds to fifteen pounds an acre. The Government
price for raw fern lands on the West Coast is £2 to £3 per acre, but
being put up to auction, in good situations they bring generally
much more, and must be paid for cash down. The majority of emi-
grants to New Zealand, accustomed to regard lands with English
notions as to value, in a country where such possessions have be-
come a luxury for the wealthy, are inclined to discount the far future
much too liberally and forget that in a new country the first consi-
deration is that they will produce a return to the present generation.
Rich forest land though it seems more formidable in appearance is
much safer for a working man with small means to commence with ;
as the price is much lower, and when cleared it is more productive.
On the west-coast of the north islands, all around the base of
Mount Egmont, cockVfoot grass thrives so well, that in two
seasons, the crop of seed from newly cleared lands, or rather half-
cleared, the trees being merely felled and burned, pays nearly for
the land itself, as well as for the rough clearing required, and the
cheapness of fencing in such situations is a matter of great import-
ance, for this is a very serious difficulty often in the way of the
biginner in most districts, where materials have to be brought at
great expense a long distance. The New Zealand timber is not
durable with the exception of puriri or iron wood, which is confined
to limited localities ; other fences are consequently often adopted,
such as gorse which is most objectionable; whole districts are ruined
by jungles of impenetrable gorse, that would delight a fox-hunter s
11


eye. Many a young settler has been ruined by bad fences. If he
purchases a ready-made farm without sufficient care, he will find
himself attacked at once by all his new neighbours, his imperfect
fences knocked down, his stock driven off to pound, or he has all
their cattle to feed, or perhaps is beset with actions for damages :
the “ new Chum” in the elegant phraseology of the country is
deemed fair game for all—at a place called Rangitiki, a farm was
pointed out to me, which for a short space had belonged to an unfor-
tunate gentleman from England, too unsuspicious and easy for New
Zealand, who after sinking a considerable fortune in the purchase
of the property from a Wellington storekeeper, left the colony in two
years a ruined man, literally eaten up and ruined by actions for
trespass brought by his neighbours, who had not dared to attack
the rich store-keeper in the same way. It is a hard country for a
gentleman to get on in, the word being used in the sense Francis
Ist of France gave emphasis to, when seeing his courtier’s faces
wear an expression of doubt about an assertion he made “ foi de
roi,” quickly added ‘ foi de gentilhomme,’ the mass of people in
New Zealand have no idea of the instincts of a gentleman, the most
unscrupulous as a rule are the most successful.
There is no country however probably in the wide world, unless
perhaps Victoria, where large fortunes have been made more easily
and with less exercise of the brain. Men who had not an idea
beyond the weight of a sheep’s fleece or tallow, who took up large
squattages, (or more commonly the case with the fortunate ones, like
the rough Scotch shepherds who own great part of that colony),
bought them cheap in bad times from the pioneers of Canterbury and
Otago had nothing to do but to sit still, and if they were free from
merchants or money-lenders’ accounts balanced every three months
with compound interest and mysterious charges for commissions,
&c., could not avoid success. These countries were so singularly
well adapted to the operations of the squatter, covered with natural
grasses especially suited for merino sheep, easy of access, not
subject to droughts or infested with dingos like Australia, no
natives to interfere with their quiet possession, a few or no shep-
herds were required. Those also who bought up the equally good
pasture lands of Marlborough and Nelson, from the short-sighted
provincial authorities, in large blocks at a few shillings per acre,
where likewise there were no difficulties to contend with of any
consequence, no forests or ferns to clear, as well as the people who


got large territories in Hawke Bay for a puggaree from the natives,
found themselves suddenly rich men when the rise took place a few
years ago in the value of such estates; chances may come again,
some day, such as were presented to people with a few thousand
pounds in 1870 and 1871, when properties were recklessly sacrificed
by the mortgagees, offering such wonderful opportunities for new men
making fortunes. One hears of a certain Croesus descended from
people elevated above their fellows in a manner unfortunate for them-
selves, however advantageous to the community, who was known in
his own colony by a soubriquet more expressive than complimentary,
and speculated largely at that time in New Zealand stations, secur-
ing enormous tracts of country with hundreds of thousands of sheep
for an outlay of about the same amount as immediately came in
as their annual return —a great loss to the Colony, the immense
income being of course expended in England as is the custom of the
majority of the Colonial nouveaux riches. This fortune will pro-
bably enable its possessor to become enrolled amongst the motley
crowd of knights of the peculiar order of St. Michael and St.
George.
It would not be a bad idea to put a certain number of C. M. G.'s
and K. C-M.G.'s up to auction every year, for the benefit of the chari-
table institutions. Those ingenious people who advertize arms found
and emblazoned must be sorely exercised to discover suitable Totems
and mottoes for this new order of Nobility, Some of them amuse
themselves at the expense of their employers, as the sarcastic Herald
who gave one of these magnates for his coat armour, a very suspici-
ous-looking tree, with the canting motto of f couper fait grandir’—
which appears to have reference to a story not told in old I rench
History, but. to one related in the " Felonry of Australia.” Were the
wives of these knights styled by the designation of Dame which they
are alone entitled to, it would be most desirable, as it might tend to
do away with this “ Ladyship” nuisance, as it is felt in the colo-
nies to be. Their ignorance is so great that these quondam cooks and
butchers' daughters who now enjoy this prefix, really imagine them-
selves to be on terms of social equality with ladies of birth and high
rank, whose nominal title is so absurdly the same. They could not
comprehend the agitation of the horrified usher, who exclaimed,
<Oh don't kiss her your Royal Highness ! Don't kiss her !! she is
not a real Lady !!! ' when he saw his deaf old Mistress, Princess
Amelia about to salute the wife of a City knight, thinking she was a


person of consideration. The wives of Judges and Knights of the
Bath should alone he so styled.
As beforementioned it is extremely improbable that such
facilities for acquiring rapid fortunes will occur again in the Colo-
nies. Properties will scarcely again be so ruthlessly sacrificed by
interested or stupidly short-sighted money-lenders to the ruin of the
old settlers and the making of new men, because the millions that
have been poured into the pockets of the Australian and New Zea-
land sheep farmers during the late years of plenty, have placed the
majority in a very different position from that ever enjoyed by them
as a class before—and the days are gone by, when a small capital
can be safely invested—to give even the means of living.
There are many fathers and husbands, many tenderly brought
up ladies, who would cheerfully resign the comforts of home, even
in their advanced years, and brave the rough life in a Colony like
New Zealand —make up their minds to brush their own boots,
saddle their own horses, cook their own food, milk their cows, and
hardest of all, to those unused to such things, wash their own cloths,
could they be assured that with limited means, by industry and
economy, they would be tolerably certain in the end, of securing an
independence, and making some provision for their children. To
such I say, go to Australia, and try sheep-farming on a free selec-
tion, or wheat-growing in that certainly rather hot and dry but
otherwise most satisfactory and respectable colony, South Australia.
Wine-growing, or silk-worm rearing on the Murray river, are occu-
pations which have a charm to many, although neither are very safe
pursuits to risk a small capital in, at all events for the unexperienced.
If tropical heat is not an objection, cotton or still better sugar
growing in Queensland, Fiji, or some other of the South Sea islands
may be thought of—try Natal or British Caffraria where labour is
cheap such as it is, Canada, Virginia or the Western States of
America, Oregon or Colorado, anywhere almost, rather than New
Zealand, where poverty in the man who cannot dig or plough, is as
unpardonable a crime as having typhus fever in Erehwon. In
these islands the Britain of the South, — ‘ a comical kind of Britian
this, Sir ! a Yankee Coachman observed, —you will receive not the
slightest assistance from the Government in settling upon the Crown
lands, for which a high price must be paid cash down, and very
little, if hindrance even is not met with from your neighbours, when
you have secured a few high-priced acres. The liberal terms offer-


ed by the Government of the various States, and the Commissioner
of the Railway lands in America to intending settlers in the
remoter districts, and the good-natured and kind welcome given to
new-comers by the farmers, contrast most favourably with the recep-
tion to be met with in New Zealand, it is stated by those persons
who have left it, and gone nearer home to that wide land. In New
South Wales, in Western Australia where there is at least plenty of
room, and in Queensland, the land regulations are framed with the
view of enabling a man with very small means to make a commence-
ment, and afford especial facilities for those persons with a limited
capital —a thousand pounds or so —to begin sheep-farming with
some chance of success, especially if he has a large family, for each
of whom he can take up a portion of land on deferred payments for
ten years with grazing commonage rights attached. Free selection
the system is termed. In these countries there is no Fern, and
grass has not to be sown. More men's hearts have been broken,
that is of the poor gentlemen class, and their prospects ruined by
Fern in New Zealand I believe, than by any plant man has tried to
contend with.
To the following classes New Zealand may be safely recom-
mended however. To the sober industrious artizan or farm labourer
it is indeed a paradise, wages are very high, and provisions plenti-
ful and cheap. In a very short time any steady labourer may
become a landholder, and a hundred acres will maintain in most
districts an industrious family in competence. Few of the original
working settlers about New Plymouth had more than fifty acres, and
on these small farms in that fertile region they have lived in comfort,
educated their sons and started them well in the world in many cases.
To the practical farmer who can plough his own fields, and whose
wife and daughters can do all the domestic work if he has a capital
of a few hundred pounds to begin with, few countries offer such
advantages, the more boys he has to help him the better. There
are considerable inducements also for the large capitalist, whether
he desires to invest in landed property, which may still be pur-
chased in situations where it must largely increase in value and
who requiring no immediate return, is not under the necessity of
employing high-priced labour but can afford to purchase estates for
the benefit of his children ; or merely seeks safe securities for money
with high interest. For retired Indian Officers who have long
ago broken their home ties, who have pensions and a capital
of some two thousand pounds saved, it is a good country to


settle in, the New Zealand winds renovate constitutions impaired
by long residence in hot climates in a marvellons manner. The
provinces of Canterbury and Otago and the breezy plains around
Mount Egmont, are especially to be recommended to such.
The latter district as a whole is the only one in the islands to
which the word, charming, can be applied so far as scenery is con-
cerned, you cannot get into any situation almost in the Province
without some attraction, and it has other very considerable advant-
ages looking to the future. No one as Mr. Swainson, a former
Attorney General, observes (whose work upon the colony out of
the hundred or so published is to be recommended generally as
containing the most reliable information) “ can speak of the soil
and scenery of New Zealand till he has seen the natural beauties and
ripening harvests of Taranaki.” As previously noticed native
difficulties have hitherto interfered with the progress of this Pro-
vince, the land is nominally confiscated but remains in the possession
of the Hau-Hau natives for the most part, many of the choicest
farms in the settled portion close to the town are leased from
aboriginal landlords of friendly tribes, who are very easy ones,
and often wanting advances from their tenants in the end generally
are foolish and improvident enough to lose the fee-simple. It has
had to contend also with the adverse action, or at all events the
gross neglect of its interests by the General Government, none of
whose members held any direct interest in its progress, as they
did in that of the much-favoured Province of Hawke Bay. But
to persons who have a moderate income to live upon meantime, and
can therefore afford to wait, the rich lands along the West Coast
when opened for sale must prove a desirable investment. In days to
come the slopes of Mount Egmont will be adorned with the villas and
mansions of rich merchants and settlers from other parts of the Colony,
attracted by the scenery, and by the salubrity of the climate, and
travellers coming from the Australian Colonies for change as they
do already to New Zealand, especially those from the burning plains
of Queensland, passing through this inviting region by the Railway
from Wellington to Auckland, which will be a most interesting trip
bye and bye, may be induced to think of making homes in so beautiful
a country, within a week's steaming of their own, where their
children will grow up vigorous and healthy, and where they them-
selves will be able with ease to avail themselves of the life-giving
waters of Rotoroa and Orakei-Korako.
The chief value of the Western Coast of the North island is in


its being peculiarly adapted for rearing fine sheep of long-woolled
breeds, cattle and horses. It is eminently a pastoral and dairy
country, as a grain-producing one it is inferior to Canterbury and
the Delta of the Waikato, but from the sheltered vales a little inland,
the farmers might compete with the Tasmanians in supplying the
neighbouring colonies with hops. Its chief drawback is that in
consequence of the lightness of the soil, the roots of the ferns pene-
trate deep, and it is more than usually expensive and troublesome
to eradicate. In many places also gorse is a very formidable
enemy to the farmer, but although its carrying capabilities when the
country is cleared are not equal to those of the low lying plains of
Turanganui and Ahuriri, (Poverty and Hawke Bay districts of the
colonist), sheep more particularly, but all stock will be found much
healthier, and less liable to epidemics on the West than the East
Coast —it will also, which is a matter of greater consequence, support
a much larger population than any other part of Hew Zealand.
To young men who cannot plough or dig and who do not
care to depend upon manual labour for their living, who possess
only the advantage of having received a liberal education of
no use in such a country, who have no possessions, or have spent
their early years in the Army and Navy, and have no income to
maintain them until some opportunity of getting employment occurs,
my advice is, do not think of coming to New Zealand; the colonial
military service is not easy even to enter.
It is a very melancholy thing to see men who might have been
useful to others as well as themselves elsewhere, possessing acquire-
ments which would have rendered them ornamental even in society,
and who might have done good service to their country in the pro-
fessions they have abandoned, reduced by pressure of want to being
cooks or grooms at roadside inns; and such instances are by no
means rare. There is no sympathy for poor gentlemen at the Anti-
podes, there being so few of their own class in the islands, and the
influences are wanting that might have guarded those in such an
unhappy positions who are not strong-minded enough to resist the
temptations of falling into bad habits. The man who would at
home have possibly been brushing his father's butler's boots, will
take pleasure in saying to the poor unfortunate, who landing without
money, and lacking energy or steadiness, has gone down and down,
“ here you Bill make haste and cook a chop for this gentleman’s
dinner," I heard of the very words being addressed to a poor fellow


who was heir to a hereditary title, and Was cook at a Wayside
hostelry.
Looking at the manner in which New Zealand is fast drifting
into all we most dislike in American customs and habits, to the pro-
bability, indeed the certainty, of its inhabitants being soon the most
heavily taxed community under the British flag, and at the same
time under the most galling of all tyranny, that of low born unedu-
cated representatives of the mob (in America they do chose the
foremost and most talented men as Senators) to the few advantages
present or prospective there are to compensate an educated man of
limited means for the roughness, utter seclusion and want of interest
or amusement in up-country life, I think that young men possessing
energy and a capital of a thousand pounds or two, would also do
better to go to any almost of the other British colonies or to the
western States of America, as well as persons with families, and
similar means. Two thousand pounds is not sufficient to begin very
hopefully with in this much over-rated country, where unimproved
land costs two to three pounds an acre, and wages are commonly so
high. The Government lands are in most of the provinces put up
to auction for cash. In Canterbury selection without auction is*per-
mitted, the minimum price being two pounds an acre, cash; but the
desirable lands have all been bought up, and those remaining are
either shingly plains or poor mountain slopes capable of maintain-
ing one merino sheep to every three acres. There is no system of
deferred payment which, as beforementioned, is a matter of such
paramount importance,, to the small capitalist, and enables such per-
sons to make a fair start in America and in Australia. Agriculture
does not pay at all if a small farmer has to employ labour, and to
commence stock-farming requires either a much larger capital than
£2,000 or a great risk to be run if a squatting station is purchased
on credit. Prices have gone up far too high to leave any margin
for profit, if wool should decline in price ; and the runs being now
fully stocked, nothing can be looked forward to by occupying new
country with the increase.
Life at an out-staiion on the plains of Canterbury, Otago,
Hawke Bay, or any of the open countries suitable for merino sheep-
farming is most monotonous and dreary. There is an absolutely
utter want of animal life. No sound of birds is to be heard as in
the lightly-timbered open savannahs of Australia. Nothing is to
be seen stirring in these uninteresting regions but a little lark


which makes a pitiful attempt to rise with a song, and suddenly
drops after ascending a few yards, seemingly thoroughly ashamed of
its feeble twittering, and a few small lizards now and then darting
from stone to atone.
A book has lately been published—Buffer's Birds of New Zea-
land, which is most creditable to the artist, the printer, and book-
binder, and will well repay the Government for any expense incurred
in its production, as an advertisement of the colony, whilst the
compiler is rewarded by having the inevitable C. M. G. added to
the string of capital letters he attaches to bis name, his desire to
secure the whole alphabet in that manner being so insatiable that
he besieges each successive minister, in a manner that might excite
commiseration to grant him the New Zealand war medal, because
he once saw some armed Maoris. Persons of an imaginative tem-
perament who come out to the beautiful romantic colony, the para-
disaical land, as it is called by the facetious writer who contributed
a review on this work to the Spectator, and who having read that
amusing production, have pictured to themselves their future “ home
on some sweep of rich flax-bearing country, or stretch of undulating
ferny downs, with golden-backed Aphanapterixes hopping about, and
other fairest and brightest of creatures around them,” will there listen
in vain for “the famous campanile with its silver tone ringing out the
Angelus in its stillness, and all the plumed choristers robed in many
colors taking up the strain of the morning concert,” which he informs
us rejoices the heart of the New Zealand settler. Had these sen-
tences been written with reference to Australia, (where ignoring the
description of its multitude of feathered inhabitants published in
Mr. Gould’s great work, he asserts there is silence in the forest), it
would have been somewhat a more reasonable picture of delights
utterly unknown in New Zealand. At the edges of the forests the
tui-tui’s, and two other small birds of very homely plumage are
pleasant to listen to, but generally there is absolute, most oppressive
silence. It is not to be wondered at, that so many of the shepherds
become insane, especially amongst the dreary mountains and on the
bleak plains of Otago, where the summer sun pours down its fierce
rays and all is dust and glare, no tree affording a blissful shade, to
shield their heads ; and when the howling gales in winter sweep
the snowdrifts high around the solitary hut, and the ice is two feet
thick upon the lagoons, the wretched lonely boundary rider, who
may once perhaps have sat at some merry mess-table surrounded


by his brother officers, or amongst pleasant companions at Oxford
or Cambridge, has not even the companionship of a bright fire to
cheer him in the long nights, but sits with his dog cowering over a
small stove heated with a little lignite brought from far, or a few
prickly thorns gathered in summer, and laid up for winter use. The
shrub which affords this poor supply of fuel in these regions is
called “ wild Irishman” by the settlers, and with a still more wicked
enemy to the pedestrian known as “wild Spaniard” or spear grass,
renders walking in the up-country of the middle island anything
but pleasant.
In some localities there is fair duck-shooting, but at present
the sportsman will find little use for his gun, except in the neigh-
bourhood of Auckland and in the Waikato where there is really
good pheasant-shooting ; the birds are a cross betwixt the Chinese
and English, or more generally the China breed unmixed, and afford
excellent sport with good dogs, for those who can walk through tall
fern, and shoot quick. Bye and bye there will be greater attrac-
tions in this respect, as deer of various kinds have been introduced,
and having no enemies to contend against, increase quickly. The
wild dogs and pigs, both descended from those brought by the
Europeans have plenty of the settlers' lambs in spring time, without
troubling the fawns. These pigs were in immense numbers formerly,
and are still very numerous in places. The middle island was quite
over-run with them. One settler gave a party of professional pig-
stickers a contract for ten thousand pig-tails at nine-pence each
and then another for six thousand, without quite exterminating
them on his run. Where they are not in such great numbers, in
some remote mountain gorge, now and then an old grisly boar may
be met with, worthy even of an Indian pig-stickers' spear, but
generally there is not much sport in hunting them, and they may be
knocked over by shying stones, successfully attempted by the gal-
lant lady Barker, as told in her account of “ Station life in New
Zealand.” The dogs derived from all sorts of progenitors, hunt in
small packs and would very soon become a formidable pest, but
strychnine is fast thinning their numbers.' Rabbits have become as
great a nuisance as in some districts of Victoria and Tasmania, hares
and partridges have also been introduced, perhaps the former may
as they have done in Victoria, in consideration of the wide plains they
have to people, think it judicious to have four or five leverets at
once, and to breed twice a year —but the wild cats the progeny also


of the domestic, which have spread into the remotest parts of the
forests, are dangerous foes to the partridges, and are fast extirpating
the indigenous wingless birds, and the unsophisticated small ones
also, which having no hereditary instincts about cats, build their
nests amongst the creeping ferns, and other climbing plants, which
clothe the trunks of the trees, and are therefore much exposed to
their ravages, as well as those of the rats, which being clever crea-
tures, with shrewd ideas as to the fitness of things, are growing
long claws, and becoming like squirrels in their habits. English
singing birds, knowing all about cats and weasels, are able to take
better care of themselves, and their young, and will soon supply the
want of native ones; already around Nelson and Taranaki, &c., the
mornings are joyous with the cheering song of multitudes of sky-
larks. Trout too, pakeha fish, as the Maoris call them are multi-
plying rapidly in the streams, but having at present such an abund-
ance of food grow to an immense size, and are too lazy to rise to
artificial flies, indeed they know little about flies at all, these being
very few which skim the surface of New Zealand waters, so may lose
the habit altogether, and the angler will tempt them in vain. This
want is probably the reason of its being the only country in the
world without swallows, so numerous in Australia and the South
Sea Islands, and its vast swamps have not tempted snipe to come
ns well as tire cuckoo.
With respect to the natural wonders, which I have said Mr.
Darwin even would have thought it worth while coming far to see,
they are only to be visited by those who can afford time and expense
in doing so,, and who do not mind roughing it. Distances in the
country with the present facilities for travelling in the interior will
be found long; the public conveyances, coaches and steamers and the
inns, hotels they are universally called, are infested too to an un-
accountable extent by a most disagreeable class of commercial
travellers of low caste, ‘German Jew pedlars and the like, offensive
in their manners and conversation to the last degree, who make
the use of such modes of travelling very unpleasant, especially for
ladies. The best way, as many persons would not care to ride
alone through unknown regions, and by unfrequented paths, is to
form a party, taking tents and pack horses, and in summer people
may ride thus through the island from. Wellington to the far north
visiting all the scenes of interest most pleasurably.
New Zealanders for the most part known very little of the


country they live in. The sheep farmers of Canterbury and Otago are
as ignorant of the wonders of Boto-mahana and Taupo as the hinds
of the Lothians are of the beauties of the Trossachs, and those who
have made money in the prosaic plain countries of these provinces
of the south, and have returned to England, speak of New Zealand,
a country they known nothing of, as Mr. Swainson says, especially
of New Zealand proper —they have never seen it. Its peculiarity is,
that although sombre and uninviting as Mr. Darwin and others
have thought it justly enough from its general appearance, the
scenery is exceedingly diversified, and it is curious to find in this
comparatively small country, so many wonderful and rare objects of
attraction; so much so that there are few things in foreign lands
that would take a native-born New Zealand colonist by surprise,
who had travelled over his own, unless it were finding himself
amongst people of polished and courteous manners, such as the
Japanese, whom he would of course have placed in the category of
niggers. It presents an epitome physically and socially of a large
portion of the globe.
It has its long chain of the Southern Alps, with peaks but a
few feet only lower than the summit of Mount Blanc, with perhaps
more extensive ndves and glaciers. That named the Tasman coming
down from Mount Cook exceeds in its dimensions the Mer-de-Glace
or the Bosson ; from a cave of dark blue-green ice at its extremity
issues the river of the same name, one of the chief branches of the
Waitangi, bursting up in a grand fountain visible from a consider-
able distance, as the Cashmere head of the Indus does.
It has its beautiful Kaikouras more striking as seen from the
Pacific on a calm winter morning, when the sun flushes with rosy
tents their sharp snowy peaks, than the Sierra Nevada under similar
circumstances from the deck of a Mediterranean steamer.
The ruddy Kaimanawas replace the Sierra Morena, and the
Whanganvi's pumice loaded waters, the Gruadalquiver.
A photograph of Taranaki mountain much resembles one of the
“ Matchless Fusiama of Japan ; it has its volcanos now quiescent
with their plains of lavas, sconce, and ashes beneath, and its active
one of Tongoriro, its geysers like Iceland, its great solfatara of
Whakari in the Bay of Plenty. The country near Auckland studded
with crater-cones presents a panorama very similar to the bird's-
eye view of the Puy-de-dome, and surrounding cones in Auvergne.


It has its terraces formed by the deposits from thermal waters, if
not so extensive as those of the wondrous region of the Yellow-
stone river, perhaps more beautiful in coloring and the marvellous
delicacy of their tracery; its deep fiords grand as those of Norway ;
its parallel roads more extended than those of Glen Roy; its sub-
merged forests; its stony plains covered with coarse yellow grass
sloping down imperceptibly to the eye, nevertheless rapidly, from
the eastern side of the Cordillera, intersected by great turbid
torrents, running in many channels amongst islands of bare shingle,
like those of eastern Patagonia, and as in that country too, the
western sides of the high mountains are clothed with dense dark
forests traversed by rivers of blue ice descending in both lands
nearly to the sea. Although brilliant humming birds flashing in
the sun, do not bring recollections of the Torrid Zone, as they do
flitting about amongst the snow flakes in the Straits of Magellan, the
graceful fronds of the tree ferns, lend a sort of tropical beauty to
the scene as they droop over the edges of the cliffs by the New
Zealand glaciers.
Far rolling plains and rising downs of ever unvarying yellow
hue, but without the bison and antelopes, lone and dismal as they
are under a leaden grey sky, recall those great pasturages of Nevada,
and eastern Colorado, when they have been long scorched by the
fierce summer sun, and their spring greenness and flowers are gone.
The barren pumice stone plains that occupy great part of the
centre of the North island are as forbidding as the alkali deserts of
America; portions of them up near Rua-pahu are absolutely stony
wildernesses; it has its rich tree fern gullies like Tasmania and
Southern Australia; its forests of grand kauri trees, less gloomy
and dark than the pine ones of the Columbia river in Oregon; its
many Pontine marshes with their booming bitterns, and without
their insalubrity; its beautiful running streams that ought, and some
day will be full of trout like those of the Colorado parks or the Scot-
tish moors; its gold-digging regions with their torn down mountains,
flumes and water-races, and villages, (cities with mayors and
corporations), but consisting of the usual streets of shanties built of
all sorts of odds and ends, and roofed with corrugated iron, more
dreary and forlorn-looking than most in California or Australia, and
the same wild gaunt-looking men in red shirts and high boots,
standing picturesquely on the points of the cliffs, rest on their pick-
axes and watch you as you pass by; its wild mountain gorges, where


you may chance to see as I did, a long string of Chinamen with
bleeding and frost-bitten feet dressed in their usual costumes and
bending under bamboos with their worldly goods slung at either end
coming down a precipitous slope, just as they would in some defile
of the Kuen-luen or Tian-shan, boldly having’pushed their way over
unknown mountains, and across never-before-trodden glaciers to go
from one gold field to another.
The hills bordering the river valleys may not be crowned with
the romantic ruins of the castles of wild robber barons, who were
wont to ‘ compel all men to their will/ but every eminence in many
parts of the north island presents memorials of troubled times, in
the scarped terraces, and other remains of the fortified Pahs of chief-
tains who were at all events fathers to, and protectors of their own
people, if terrors to their enemies. The gorge of the Manawatu is
wild and beautiful as that of the Rhine and its via mala is certainly
more dangerous.
The lakes in the south are as large as those of Switzerland, and
are as weird in their aspect as the latter may perhaps have been,
when the stone-axe-using men built their dwellings by their banks,
and their waves are tossed by far fiercer gales (sweeping down from
the desolate-looking mountains, so remarkable for their excessive
ruggid barrenness} than those which disturb the waters below
Fluellen, or the wider expanses of Geneva and Constance. In the
North Waikare-Moana possesses the softer beauties of Windermere
and from blue Te-Moana “ the sea” of Taupo, flows the Waikato
swift as the arrowy Rhone-
New Zealand has its battle-fields of yesterday, and its neglected
graveyards where lie the remains of British soldiers uncared for,
ns in the Crimea and elsewhere; its villages in the unsettled por-
tions of the north, where the houses are cloistered round a redoubt,
or wooden block-house as in the Western States, where you hear
the bugle calls, and the challenge of the sentinels, if you pass in by
night; from others in the South you listen to the Church bells ring-
ing in the quiet valleys, where they lie snug surrounded with green
fields enclosed by hawthorn hedges, redolent of the may and honey-
suckles as in England, only newer of aspect, and wanting the pic-
turesqueness of gables, and the charm of antiquity. On the plains
beyond, although you will not see twenty or forty thousand acres of
wheat in one vast continuous sea, as in California, you may see five
hundred or a thousand acre fields, rippling in undulating waves of


gold under the autumnal breeze, or not unfrequently being tossed
and parched up under the fierce sirocco-like winds that in a few
hours ruin the hopes of the farmer as in South Australia, and other
countries. It has its iron mines and coal mines, which at a future
day, will render some districts as displeasing to the eye of the lover
of nature, and greenness as parts of Northumberland and Durham ;
its petroleum and oil springs, although but on a small scale, like Ohio ;
its rivers being spanned by iron bridges, one after another, with rail-
way trains passing over them ; its harbours with puffing steamers
and tug-boats; its six and eight-in-hand coaches, and prodigies of
coachmen as America.
You may there study the simplicities of the stone epoch as well
as the eccentricities and duplicities of that of iron roads and tele-
graphs. Within a short distance as the crow flies (but remote in
consequence of the impassable forests and broken country which
intervenes) of towns with their gas-works, foundaries, cloth factories,
breweries, theatres and banks, there are villages, as in the Urewera
country, where the old men still living were in their prime when
the pristine stone tools and weapons were alone in use throughout
the island; where yet the gifts of the white man are all but unknown;
where the children run in terror and hide themselves from the evil-
eyed Pakeha, as in Central Africa, or as the denizens of the towns
on the South American Coast were wont to do, at the cry of Los
Ingleses. You put off to-day from some retired bay in a canoe
manned by stalwart paddlers, such as have been paddled for untold
ages in the Pacific, by people of this most ancient race, and being
put on board a passing steamer, leave the shore where you have
witnessed a war-dance wild and earth-shaking as may have been
danced under the oaks of England, where the Baal-fires still blazed
on her hills ; seen girls performing a haka, arrayed artlessly in nearly
the exact costume first adopted by Eve and her daughters, and so much
admired now in London theatres. To-morrow you will be where
people are “ presenting compliments,” and “ having the honor,”
where instead of going to see their friends, receive their haere-mai’s,
and rub noses, they wait until they think their acquaintances will
be from home, and leave bits of paper at their doors. You find
yourself the very next evening after having been entertained
with genuine hospitality by the unsophisticated children of
nature, wretchedly pinioned at a dinner table where yon
meet all the horrid Tadpoles and Tapers of little Lilliput, after-


wards you may smoke your cigar at their “ Bellamy's” and read
the evening papers, with news of what happened last week in
London or Hakodadi, or may be cruelly stuck up against a wall,
with the elders of the place, who stand there for hours watching
the gyrations of their daughters or perhaps wives, a little more
draped than the Maori girls, not dancing decorously however by
themselves as they did last night, but being whirled round and
round furiously, close embraced by men whom their guardians
never saw before, whose names they have never heard, and who
would probably cut them on the street to-morrow, should they
chance to make their acquintance, but who nevertheless are con-
tent to see them resting their heads lovingly upon their supporter's
shoulders as they go through motions more violent if not so grace-
ful as those of the Maoris, and the thought comes which is the
most civilized, and least eccentric performance, there can be no
question as to which is the most agreeable spectacle.
New Zealand has its Lords and Commons, its speeches from
the throne, its openings and prorogations of Parliament—its many
Bishops Catholic and Protestant, and numerous Archdeacons, and
the long-laid foundations at least of its Canterbury Cathedral—
its Judges and swarms of be-wigged attornies, the two branches
of the profession being amalgamated, with their ca-sa's and
fi-fa's, and all the uselessly expensive machinery of legal chicanery
in full swing—its colleges and chancellors and professors confer-
ring M. A. and B. A. degrees with utmost severity and gravity
upon the foremost of the very limited number of alumni who enter
their precincts—its valuable museums and scientific combatants,
good haters as elsewhere —it had its great birds like Madagascar
and it may be as some say, has them still—its race-courses with
their betting rings, their aunt sallys and thimble riggers. I
believe it possesses a punch and judy—its regattas; —at Auckland
they are pretty —its innumerable masonic and templar's lodges.
It has had its war with the brown men as America with the Bed j*
also its band of thugs under the monster Sullivan carrying on in
the portion of Canterbury, now called Westland, the most systeraa-
# It seems possible that young as it is the colony may distinguish itself as that
great country has done, by having its internicine war also of the south against the
north, since it appears by late papers, that money difficulties, “that teterrima causa
of all belli ” are rising up betwixt the two islands, and the southern one, through its
spokesman a warlike Indian Knight, declares it will pursue the course indicated “to
the bitter end,” if the paupers of the northern attempt to 1 touch its Land Revenue.


tic practice of killing, and burying, sometimes before they were
dead, all whom they met, but they are all hanged except the arch-
demon their leader, whom Sir James Fergusson let lose on condi-
tion of his taking himself off to America, or England, But neither
country would have him, so he is gone back again it is reported,
but this need not weigh upon the minds of people desiring to go to
New Zealand, whatever disadvantages and drawbacks the country
possesses, it is at all events one of the quietest and safest to live
in; burglars and professional theives are being industriously im-
ported certainly from England, and may force people presently to
think of getting bolts and locks to their doors, in the neighbour-
hood of the towns at all events, a matter hitherto not much attended
to. Up-country the settlers even in the immediate neighbourhood
of large Maori Pahs never dream of such a precaution, although it
has its discharged convicts as well as the Australias.
Against these colonies, especially that pretty and most com-
fortable island Tasmania, many people have a prejudice on this
account, not consulting statistics, and being unaware that in pro-
portion to the population now, there are fewer of this class in
them, than in the Mother Country. The objection too affects
New Zealand more now-a-days than even Tasmania where those
remaining are for the most part decrepid old men and women,
the others all left it, being permitted to do so, on condition of
not coming back. So great was the influx of expirees to the
Southern Provinces, that the Superintendent of Otago, as may
be seen by reference to the Colonial Blue Books of 1860, <( em-
“ phatically called upon his Excellency's advisers to strain every
“ nerve to prevent the country becoming a vast Penal Settle-
“ ment, and the Province of Otago the converging point of the
“ convict element of the Australian colonies." But considering
the number who reached its shores, (it being impossible to stem the
tide of emigrants of that class, after gold was discovered) and the
comparative absence of crime, it shows how much want and poverty
have to do with swelling the calendar. New Zealand was a land
where living was easy, employment at good wages being plentiful,
and there was little incentive to transgress the laws—the Japanese
in legislating to prevent poverty, have far surpassed us in the first
object of civilization, if that is to secure the greatest amount of
happiness to the greatest number.
Its numerous Emigration agents are writing up New Zealand^


as the Pearl of greatest beauty and value in the diadem of Eng-
land, returned Governors who have purchased land or have shares
in money-lending companies there, give glowing descriptions in
after-dinner speeches, the leading newspapers are seized with the
contagion, and in lengthy articles indulge in rhapsodies about the
« Wonder-land of the Antipodes,” the southern paradise—our ro-
mantic colony, and other epithets so seductive to those whose
■ ©yes are- looking across the seas for a new home. One hears about
the energetic, and noble pioneers of the Britain of the South, who
are returning bringing their sheaves with them. What is it that
has shed this halo of romance over it ? is it the memory of the
war prosecuted with such a loss of prestige, and such a waste of
money, against the unfortunate aborigines ? Their ancestors’ brave
defence of their country may well do so to the latest Maoris, who
in times to come read the story of their heroic deeds. Is it the
mantle of Yogelism, or universal political corruption and Koom-
posh that envelopes it ? Who are the noblest of England’s sons,
who are reaping “the well-earned rewards of their energy and
courage,” that the Times has heard of ? Are they the adventurous
bank directors who have played successfully with the funds in
their charge ? the money-lending huckstering storekeepers, alias
merchants ? The speculators in town allotments ? the Sydney
jews who changed into gold the muskets and ammunition
with which they supplied the natives to fight their countrymen
with from their stores in Auckland —the unscrupulous army con-
tractors—the Caledonian Mine Ring—the men who got large
territories for a Puggaree ? one can understand these people’s
sudden fortunes exciting the admiration of the poetic spirits of Lom-
bard Street, and inducing them to hazard their millions. But amongst
; t ] lQ fortunate New Zealanders, you will seek almost in vain for any
„ 0 f those who bore the burthen and heat of the day, and fought for
the homes they had made, when the proceedings of the Government
involved them in war. The greater number of the men who struggled
against the early difficulties and hardships in the northern island—
Now Zealand proper—will be found struggling with the many diffi-
culties and hardships—the fern—the caterpillars and grasshoppers
still.
It is a most matter-of-fact country generally. The “ Silent
people” never could have danced aanidst the high rank fern
jungle, or under the shade of the dark impenetrable forests.


Although there are sights worth coming far to see, they are gene*
rally weird and strange in their aspect, not romantic, —People
cannot have farms near Roto-maliana, or on the pumice stone terraces
of Taupo, or build villas in the wild inaccessible fiords of the west
coast.
Notwithstanding that there may be chances of success for
those mentioned, persons who take the trouble to read these dis-
cursive notes will conclude that if health or economy make it desir-
able to leave England, it is scarce desirable to go to live in an
Antipodean town, where everything is a very disenchanting repeti-
tion of what they have left, with all the tiresome conventionalities
and few or none of the graces —where all the chief annoyances
and discomforts people with limited incomes are exposed to at
home are intensified, and where except in uninhabited and uninha-
bitable places, the charm of sights and sounds, new and pleasing,
are utterly wanting—where men for the most part in the constant
struggle for something great to retire upon, leave themselves
nothing to retire to, having led lives in which, literature science and
the arts have all been forgotten and neglected for years. There
are many places near home where living is much cheaper, where mere
existence is as delightful as it can be for human beings, even for
those whose means are very limited, ‘ where all save the spirit of man
is divine.' If distance lends enchantment to the view, the interior
of Java is a paradise. Cashmere is now open, in either place life
need not be wasted in idleness. The slopes of the Lebanon are
preferable to those of the New Zealand Alps, and to many tempera-
ments the change from wheel-going Europe to the splendour havoc
of the east ” has, as Mr. Kinglake says, an indefinable charm, there
they find Rest.
One word more in conclusion to young gentlemen of a romantic
disposition who may think of crossing the Ocean, and from the
Woolshed on the plain going up the Wai-Makeriri river and over
the great Range, dreaming they may there see the lovely damozella
who suggested the superlatives Houris of Eeehwon —they will do
nothing of the kind. After travelling in a Cobb's coach and six
horses, wonderfully handled by an American Jehu, seated beside
Chinamen and German Jew pedlars, having matter-of-fact telegraph
poles, and wire fences always in view, as they cross the treeless
brown plains smothered with dust, although they will pass through
the Otira Gorge, one of the most romantic passes certainly traversed


by a mail coach which might well indeed serve as the gate to a
Terrestrial Paradise, they will arrive at the gold-diggers' town of
Hokitika on the Western Sea, —they will there find only dressed-
up bar-maids from Melbourne with little curls gummed across their
foreheads, serving out poisonous decoctions to half stupified diggers.
Well might Chowbok shudder at the recollection of the people
beyond The Range.


3 1508 02086907 4


.
.
