

Sj ty(£ "7
Cliristianity Contrasted with
Modern UnielieL
A LECTURE
DELIVERED BY THE
REV. CANON BROWNRIGG
IN THE
ODDFELLOWS’ HALL, SEPTEMBER 3, 1884.
His Worship the Mayor (Z. Fairthorne, Esq.,) in the Chair.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
PRICE THREEPENCE.
Profits will be devoted to the Benevolent Society.
Printed at the “Launceston Examiner” & “Tasmanian” Office.




ry*»fK
Christianity Contrasted with
Modern Unbelief.
A LECTURE
DELIVERED BY THE
REV. CANON BROWN RIGG
IN THE
ODDFELLOWS’ HALL, SEPTEMBER 3, 1884.
His Worship the Mayor (Z. Fairthorne, Fsq.,) in the Chair.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
PRICE —THREEPENCE.
Profits will be devoted to the Benevolent Society.
Printed at the “Launceston Examiner" & “Tasmanian” Office.




CHRISTIANITY CONTRASTED WITH
MODERN UNBELIEF.
The subject on which I address you is
“ Christianity contrasted with Modern
Unbelief/’ and the object I have in view
is to show that, each being judged of “by
its fruits/’ Christianity alone has claims to
universal acceptance.
“Christianity,” so called from Christ its
sublime Founder, dates back upwards of
eighteen hundred years from the present
time. For about three years it was
strengthened and encouraged by the per-
sonal ministry of Christ, but His death at
the hands of the Eoman power seemed for
a while to be the death blow to Christi-
anity itself. Of a sudden, however, it
sprung up, and spread with a renewed
vitality. What gave it that new start ?
From genuine and authentic documents
which have been handed down to us, we
learn that the crucified Founder of Christi-
anity “ rose again from the dead the third
day, according to the Scriptures” (1 Cor.
xv. 4), and to His disciples “ showed Him-
self alive after His passion by many in-
fallible proofs, being seen of them forty
days, and speaking of the things pertain-
ing to the Kingdom of God” (Acts i. 3), thus
reviving the hopes of His followers, and
infusing a new life into His church—a
vitality which, after the lapse of many
centuries, marks its existence and power
still.
The resurrection of Christ being thus the
very “ key-stone” in the arch of Christi-
anity, it has been a chief centre of attack
on the part of the foes of Christianity, but
despite all the varied and constant efforts
which have been made for the destruction
of that “key-stone,” Christianity stands
yet unharmed, as a witness, on the one
hand, of the weakness of the foe, and on the
other hand of the power of its Divine
Original.
As, then, the resurrection of Christ is the
renewed starting point of Christianity, it
will be desirable, before considering the
claims of Christianity to a supernatural
origin, briefly to examine that broad and
solid foundation on which the fact of the
resurrection may be reasonably accepted.
Now, on behalf of the resurrection of
Christ as a fact, there is evidence of an un-
impeachable character, such as I venture
to say would be accepted in any court ©f
justice, when due weight is allowed to one
most important consideration, viz., the
special and exceptional circumstances of the
case. Living witnesses of the resurrection
of Christ are indeed not producible, but
we have documentary evidence dating
back to within about twenty-eight years
after the resurrection ; and this is admitted
as a fact, both by the friends and by the
most learned foes of Christianity.
Those documents, namely, the epistles
of St. Paul to the Romans, Corinthians,
and Galatians, be it observed, quite apart
from the question of their inspiration, are
genuine historical documents. By the most
scholarly critics on the side adverse to
Christianity, they are admitted to be the
genuine letters of St. Paul. Eenan speak-
ing of these four epistles, says in his work
on “ St. Paul,” they are “ indisputable and
undisputed /’ and then he adds—“ The
most severe critics, such as Christian Baur,
accept them without objection.” (“Saint
Paul,” pp. 5,6.) If, then, eminent critics
like Eenan and Baur accept those epistles
as “ genuine historical documents,” no im-
portance whatever is due to that self-suffi-
cient assertiveness to the contrary on the
part of lesser personages, some of whom
probably know not even the letters of the
Greek alphabet.
It has been truly observed that “as
attestations and vouchers of historical
facts, no documents are more valuable than
the original letters of the personages who
were the chief actors in history. Hence
the diligence and care with which the
original correspondence of such persons is
preserved, collected, and edited, and pub-
lished to the world. And if this is ad-
mitted by all as a general principle of his-
torical criticism, how can it be denied in
reference to Christian history ? Was not
St. Paul a chief actor in the earliest his-
tory of the Christian Church ? And why
should not his original letters have the same
primary authority in that field of enquiry as
the original letters of any other historical
personage in any other field ? ”
Now, I have never met with any man of


even ordinary intelligence who would ven-
ture to deny that the original witnesses of
an event, provided they he truthful persons,
are the most reliable authorities; in fact,
are the only persons whose account of such
event could he appealed to with confidence;
and further, that the degree of such confi-
dence xvould increase in proportion to the
number of such truthful witnesses —for it
must be evident that the possibility of
collusion, or of trickery, or of deception in
respect of such witnesses would be practi-
cally impossible. For example, one truth-
ful person might narrate an event he has
witnessed, but being but one person you
might conclude from the nature of the
event declared to have been witnessed that
the witness, though believing himself to
be speaking the truth, had nevertheless
been deceived. If, however, you find a
second person narrating similar particu-
lars, and a third and a fourth doing the
like, with perhaps certain apparent dis-
crepancies in their narratives, but with
yet a large number of particulars in com-
mon, you irresistibly feel that the wit-
nesses are narrating the same event with-
out collusion, and with all the artlessness
of truth, and yon cannot but credit their
testimony. But how absolutely beyond all
doubt would you accept the narrative of
an event when it has been witnessed by
five hundred persons at once, whose truth-
fulness you have no assignable cause for
distrusting.
Without referring, beyond a passing
allusion, to the Gospel narratives concern-
ing the resurrection of Christ, I take the
earliest historical testimonies to that event.
those testimonies being the four epistles
of St. Paul I have already named. From
those documents the following particulars
are clearly deducible;—
Firstly. That the resurrection of Christ
was believed by the early Christians to have
been a fact; and beyond all question those
early Christians must be allowed to know
better upon that point than any man in
this nineteenth century.
Secondly. That the resurrection of Christ
was publicly proclaimed as a fact, and thus
a challenge was thrown down to all the
enemies of Christianity to refute that pro-
clamation, but it never was refuted.
Thirdly. That St. Paul declared as a fact
that he had seen Jesus alive after His
resurrection. It is doubtless easy to say
that “ Paul was deceivedbut such a
contention, in the absence of any evidence
to make it even probable, could have no
weight with any intelligent person. And
Fourthly. That the resurrection of Christ
was attested to as a fact by “ above five
hundred brethren at once/ 5 of whom more
than two hundred and fifty at least were
alive when St. Paul wrote that statement
to the Corinthian Church. I am
quite prepared for the reply that
“we have not here the separate
statement of these ‘ five hundred
brethren/ that they saw Jesus, but only
Paul’s statement to that effect.” If, then,
this be your answer, yon must adopt one of
these two alternative conclusions, viz.,
that in making that statement the Apostle
either told the truth, or he did not. Bear in
mind, however, that he made that state-
ment in support of his declaration to the
Corinthian Church that the resurrection of
Christ was a fact, there being some in that
church who taught that “there is no
resurrection from the deadand he
assuredly would not have so put himself
into the hands of his opposers as to make a
public statement which would have easily
admitted of contradiction had it been
false.
All these particulars are set forth in
those historical documents as facts, and
may be considered irrespective of the
question of inspiration. They are matters
of history, which no amount of sophistry
or vulgar quibbling can possibly set aside.
It is senseless, therefore, to deny the fact
of the resurrection on the ground that no
one could be found who could say, “ I saw
Jesus rise from the deadfor it were
obvious that if Jesus were seen alive at any
time, in any place, by any person or persons,
after His death, that fact must necessarily
have been preceded by the resurrection,
whether or not the act of rising had been
witnessed by any human eye.
But now, to the common sense and judg-
ment of all who question the fact of the
resurrection, I commend the following im-
portant facts, and these must be accounted
for in some reasonable manner before there
can be even the shadow of a foundation
for the assertion that the resurrection of
Christ is not a fact.
In the hrst place, if the resurrection is not
an historical fact, how came it to pass that
a few plain men, the greater part of whom
were from the humbler walks of life, suc-
ceeded in establishing a religion which so
completely supplanted Judaism, and so
rapidly overturned the idolatrous worship,
that in a famous letter, written between
a.d. 104 and a.d. 110 by the Pro-preetor
Pliny to the Emperor Trajan, he mentions
that in his province of Pontus and Bithynia
4


certain strange tenets had for some years does not admit the fact of the Resurrection,
been spread abroad (mark these words) in But admit the Resurrection as a fact, then
consequence of which the temples of the gods
were forsaken, the sacred solemnities inter-
mitted, and the sacrificial victims found very
few purchasers. .
In the second place, if the resurrection is
not an historical fact, how has it come to
pass that a certain rite —the Sacrament of
the Lord’s Supper—has in all enlightened
countries professedly Christian, since the
death of the Founder of Christianity, super-
seded the sacrificial rites, either under
Judaism or Paganism ? “ Manners, habits,
modes of thought, theories, opinions,
philosophies have changed. This rite has
outlived them all.”
In the third place, if the resurrection is not
an historical fact, how has it come to pass
that an entirely new and beneficent
system called Christianity has, in the face
of much opposition, and by the force of its
own inherent excellence, made its way in
the world, and is still making sure pro-
gress, blessing all who embrace it, the re-
presentations of its enemies to the contrary
notwithstanding ? To tell us, as some
have, that Christianity is “a splendid
guess,” while, indeed, such an acknow-
ledgment of its excellence should secure
for it universal acceptance, I would reply,
you are suggesting a cause which is
utterly unreasonable and incredible. Or,
again, to tell us that Christianity origi-
nated in myth, and has been strengthened
by a delusion respecting the resurrection
of Christ, would be equally unreasonable
and incredible. How little importance
will sensible persons attach to such
gratuitous assertions as that Mary Mag-
dalene, who was the first witness of the
resurrection, was a poor, weak-minded or
insane person, and that she got other
people to credit her story about the resur-
rection. Had it been true that she was
insane—an idea which none but the “weak-
minded ” would accept—such a fact would
rather have prevented the story of the resur-
rection being believed at all. But the genuine
historical documents, to which we have
referred, tell us (as we have already
noticed) that there were numerous other
witnesses of the resurrection besides Mary,
and hence if any man’s reason will permit
him to believe that all these witnesses
were insane or deluded, I should pronounce
Reason in such a case a very unsafe guide.
I would, therefore, challenge any man to
give a candid and reasonable account of the
facts I have adduced on any ground vjhich
all difficulty vanishes in accounting for
the existence of Christianity—the institu-
tion of the Lord’s Supper, the supercession
of Judaism, and the early triumphs of
Christianity over Paganism !
It may now be readily shown that Chris-
tianity—renewed in respect of its vitality
by the Resurrection of Christ —carries with
it the evidences of its Divine origin. I
invite your attention particulary to this,
because herein will be found one of the
claims of Christianity to universal accept-
ance, and because the like claims cannot
be justly set up on behalf of any other
system.
Foremost among the evidences of its
Divine origin I would place the Incom-
parable character of its unrivalled Founder.
Who could possibly have conceived of such
a character as that of Christ without a rea-
lity for its foundation ? That we find
in Jesus a character unique in all history
is admitted by every thoughtful mind.
And here let the rejectors of Christianity
bear their own testimony on this point. I
refer not now to those of a low, coarse,
ignorant, and scurrillous type who cannot
speak of Jesus except in language which
shocks all decent people, but of those higher
intellects of which W. R. Greg and Ernest
Renan are eminent examples. “It is diffi-
cult,” says Mr. Greg, in his " Creed of
Christendom,” “ without exhausting super-
latives, even to unexpressive and wearisome
satiety, to do justice to our intense love,
reverence, and admiration for the character
and teaching of Jesus. We regard Him not
as the perfection of the intellectual or
philosophic mind, but as the perfection of
the spiritual character, as surpassing all
men of all times in the closeness and depth
of His communion with the Father. In
reading His sayings we feel that we are
holding converse with the wisest, purest,
noblest Being that ever clothed thought in
the poor language of humanity. In study-
ing His life we feel that we are following
the footsteps of the highest ideal yet pre-
sented to us upon earth. Blessed be God
that so much manliness has been lived out,
and stands there yet, a lasting monument
to mark how high the tides of Divine life have
risen in the world of man!” (p.p. 168,
169.) . . “Such a one we believe
was Jesus of Nazareth, the most
exalted religious genius whom God ever
sent upon the earth, in Himself an em-
bodied revelation, humanity in its divinest
5


phase.” (Page 177.) Hear, too, the testi- therefore, could not have invented it, and
mony of Ernest Eenan. Commenting on
the death of Jesus, he thus speaks—
“ Rest now in Thy glory, noble initiator ;
Thy work is completed; Thy divinity is
established. Fear no more to see the
edifice of Thy efforts crumble through a
flaw. Henceforth, beyond the reach of
frailty. Thou shalt be present, from the
height of Thy divine peace, in the infinite
consequences of Thy acts. At the price of
a few nours of suffering, which have not
even touched Thy great soul. Thou hast pur-
chased the most complete immortality.
For thousands of years the world will extol
Thee. Banner of our contradictions. Thou
wilt be the sign around which will be
fought the fiercest battles. A thousand
times more living, a thousand times more
loved since Thy death than during the
days of Thy pilgrimage here below, Thou
wilt become to such a degree the corner
stone of humanity, that to tear Thy name
from this world would be to shake it to its
foundations. Between Thee and God, men
will no longer distinguish. Complete
conqueror of death, take possession of Thy
kingdom, whether, by the royal road
Thou hast traced, ages of adorers will
follow Thee/ 5 (“Life of Jesus,” page
291.) Again he says: “ Let us
place, then, the person of Jesus
at the highest summit of human great-
ness;” and again, “ But whatever may be
the unexpected phenomena of the future,
Jesus will not be surpassed. His worship
will constantly renew its youth, the tale of
His life will cause ceaseless tears. His suf-
ferings will soften the best hearts; all the
ages will proclaim that among the sons of
men there is none born who is greater than
Jesus.” (pp, 305, 311.)
It must not, however, be imagined be-
cause I have quoted in any way ap-
provingly these testimonies to the un-
equalled character of Jesus, that the
writers are orthodox in every other par-
ticular respecting even Jesus in His
character and teaching. These writers are
really hostile to orthodox Christianity. I
read their testimonies with a sorrowful
feeling that those who could thus write of
Jesus of Nazareth failed to recognise Him
as more than merely human—as “ God
manifest in the flesh.”
As furnishing now another evidence of
the divine origin of Christianity, I would
adduce Its pure and ennobling teachings,
Christianity from its very nature forbids
all possibility of an evil origin. Bad men.
yet, if the writers of the gospels and the
epistles wrote what they knew to be not
true, they must have been bad men, “ false
witnesses.” But looking into the precepts
of Christianity, will, any man who
claims to be possessed of unclouded reason
be so unreasonable as to maintain that bad
men would have written precepts, found
only in Christianity, by which they would
have stood self condemned ? Mark the
virtues which it universally enjoins—
humility, meekness, gentleness, forgiveness
of injuries, patience, sympathy, modesty,
love. These find no place as virtues to be
cultivated in the teachings of the most en-
lightened sages. Ponder its code of
morals, and contrast them with those of
the most celebrated nations of antiquity,
or with those formulated by modern re-
jectors of Christianity. It may, perhaps,
be said that some professing Christians do
not exhibit these virtues, or cultivate such
morals in their daily lives. That objection
is constantly advanced by some as excusing
their own personal rejection of Chris-
tianity. It is, however, a very delusive
and insufficient excuse, and in its bearing
upon our subject is a “side issue.” The
real question under consideration is not
the lives of professing Christians, but the
nature of Christianity, the character of the
Christian precepts, and I see no reason why
those who justify their rejection of Chris-
tianity on the ground of the insincerity
of certain professors, should not them-
selves accept Christianity, and by
consistent Christian living on their
own part not only put to
shame the unworthy lives of mere pro-
fessors, but also become living witnesses of
the regenerating and sanctifying power of
Christianity. Christianity must not he
judged by its professors, but its professors by
Christianity. In itself considered, the
distinctive excellence of its teaching is in-
telligible only on the recognition of its
Divine origin.
But its vast superiority over all humanly
devised systems of morality or religion,and its
marvellous adaptation to the diversified needs
of humanity, afford another evidence of its
Divine origin. How immensely superior
to Mahometanism and Confucianism
Christianity is, anyone may be convinced
who will impartially institute the com-
parison. To do so at the present moment
would carry me beyond the limits of time
at my disposal; 1 can but remind you of
the fact. But to some extent I may bring
6


this before you in reviewing the wonderful pronounced and practical than the “we do
adaptability of Christianity to the varied
necessities of mankind, and viewed from
this standpoint Christianity is without a
rival.
In Christianity we find a system unlike
anything by which it has been preceded
or accompanied, a system which has
transformed some of the most vil-
lainous and degraded of mankind
into “ new men,” and made their
lives a blessing to themselves and to others
—a system which has bound up the bleed-
ing heart, has poured into man’s spiritual
wounds a healing balm, has supported him
under the most trying circumstances, has
ministered consolation in the hour of dis-
tress, has sustained and encouraged the
martyr at the stake, has cheered the dying
and comforted the bereaved, has shown to
man Christ, not only as a Teacher and an
Exemplar, hut as a Saviour, has stirred up
the noblest aspirations in the heart of man
to go forth to elevate, not to degrade, the
human race, and has given to man the
purest and grandest conceptions of God.
All this and much more has Christianity
accomplished. No other system has ever
achieved such results, no other system is
adequate to produce them. But if
Christianity be so superior to these two
great religions of the non-Christian world,
need I contrast it with Modern Unbelief in
its varied forms of expression, under the
names of Atheism, Agnosticism, Ma-
terialism, Secularism, etc. ? Shall I tell
you why I ask this question? It is because
there is one important and vital point in which
Modern Unbelief, with all its alleged “ ad-
vance,” is immensely below the standard of
those two great systems I have above
referred to. Let me supply you
with the evidence. Men sometimes
speak contemptuously of the “heathen
Chinee ; ” let it be remembered, however,
that the “ heathen Chinee ” rises superior
to every form of Modern Unbelief which fails
to recognise positively the existence of God.
Confucianism is not merely a system of
morality—it is also a religion. In Con-
fucianism there is a worship of God
Himself, and in a treatise called “ The
Doctrine of the Mean,” by the grandson of
Confucius, the great Chinese moralist,
there occurs this passage —“ The cere-
monies of the sacrifices to Heaven and
earth are those by which we serve the
Supreme God.” (Ch. xix., 6.) Here we
have a distinct avowal of positive belief in
the existence of God, and something more
not know ” of the Agnostic, or the pro-
fessed uncertainty on this point expressed
by the Materialist or the Secularist.
But I must undertake to contrast Chris-
tianity with Modern Unbelief; and in pro-
ceeding to do so, there is one class of
unbeliever with whom it would be hopeless
to reason, and who, therefore, must sorrow-
fully be left alone until he is prepared to
hear reason on the subject—that class is
the atheistic. If there be an object on
earth which could be viewed with pro-
foundest amazement by devils, that object
would be the Atheist —the man that shame-
lessly declares “ there is no God.”
Atheism, in this sense, is unknown to those
fallen spirits. “ Thou believest there is
one God, thou doest well,” says St. James,
and then he adds, “ The devils also believe
and tremble.” (Jas. ii., 19.) That is to
say, they believe in the existence of God,
and tremble. Shall, then, the unbelief of
man be rebuked by the belief of even
devils ?
It is now with Agnosticism, as the typical
representative of much of Modern Unbelief,
that I shall principally deal, for Material-
ists and Secularists embrace it; and it is
the boast of Agnosticism that its position is
impregnable, that it cannot be dislodged,
and hence the conclusion is drawn—
premature and fallacious I venture to
call it —that it is tenable and sound. The
only reason I can assign for the untan-
gibleness of Agnosticism is just this, that
there is no argument in it to lay hold of,
as I shall presently explain.
But what is Agnosticism ? And what is
an Agnostic ? “ Agnosticism ” is a pro-
fession of “ not knowing ; ” an “ Agnostic ”
is “ one who does not know.” I obtain this
definition from a work I possess entitled
“ The Creed of a Modern Agnostic,” by
Richard Bithell, and it is therefore a
definition which is reliable. A clearer
idea of this definition may, perhaps, be
obtained if I explain that the Agnostic
does not say “ there is no God,” for then
he would be a professed Atheist; but his
language on this point would be thus—
“ There may be a God, but I don’t know •”
or again, he would not say, “ There is no
future state after death,” but “ There may
be, but I don’t know.” Now what argu-
ment is there here to lay hold of ? None
whatever. The Agnostic, however, tells us
that Reason is his guide. Now I shall sup-
pose myself to be addressing a really in-
telligent, candid, and thoughtful Agnostic,
7


one whose mind is honestly open to con- Nature. Look now into that hook, and
viction—one who is prepared to yield to a
fair and logical and reasonable conclusion,
whatever may be the nature or issue of
that conclusion. I thus particularise the
character of the one I would address, for
it will be evident that if any one of these
qualifications be wanting, the profession of
the desire to arrive at the truth must
necessarily be unreal, and the attainment
of any good result in the case of that man
must be hopeless. I shall, therefore, ad-
dress myself to an Agnostic of this cha-
racter, and for whose doubts I feel the
tenderest concern.
To such a man I would say —You tell
me you have reason and reasoning powers,
leading you to the inference that you
should rightly use your reason. On this
point we are quite agreed. I will now ask
you to bring your Reason to bear upon the
considerations I am about to present. I
will, however, at once remind you that
religion, while it is reasonable in the
highest degree, is not a matter of mere
reason. It is not Rationalism in the free-
thought sense. There are demands made
upon faith, and there is nothing unreason-
able in the fact of such demands. You are
called upon to exercise faith, and you do
exercise faith in the affairs of everyday
life; and you thus practically admit it to
be reasonable so to act in certain matters
of which you may not “ know ” anything
definitely.
Let me now beg your attention to the
following matters: —I begin with that
which must necessarily lie at the very root
of all intelligent religious worship —the
existence of God. Upon your own acknow-
ledged principles, you already admit that
there may be a supreme Something, which
we Christians call “ God,” but you tell us
that you do “not know.” Were it a mat-
ter of indifference whether there is or there
is not a God, or were it unimportant to
possess conclusive knowledge in reference
thereto, I would not trouble you with a
single word on the subject; but surely you
could not withhold the assent of your
reason from this thesis, viz., that if the
existence of God be possible, it is of the
highest importance we should diligently
enquire whether there is any reason for its
being probable that God does exist. As I
might not be at liberty at this stage of the
question to make any appeal to the Bible
for teaching on this subject, I would
appeal to another source of information a
book which is open to all, viz., the Book of
mark everywhere the evidences of design
which must necessarily imply a Designer.
Consider the marvellous skill displayed in
the constitution of all material things.
Ponder the wonderful adaptations of crea-
tures to the circumstances in which they
are to “ live and move ” —this itself an
evidence of forethought and of consum-
mate wisdom, implying the existence of an
intelligent Mind. Lift up your eyes to the
heavens, and ask yourself how it is that all
those wonderful systems of suns and
planets have come to he just as they are,
and just where they are; and hy what
manner of agreement, apart from the con-
trolling influence of an all pervading and
Supreme intelligence, they have preserved
their relative positions and distances in
respect of each other for countless ages
past. Will your reason rise no higher
than the crude and unreasonable assertion
that all this might he the outcome of
chance or of accident—that the whole
universe has probably no First Cause ? I
ask you, even though you should still say
“ I do not know,” to weigh a question of
probabilities, and now ask yourself which
is the more probable, that there is, or that
there is not a Supreme first Cause —God ? To
decline to answer such a question would he
an evident admission of a conscious weak-
ness on your part. Observe, the question
does not commit you to any positive
avowal of the existence of God, but only to
declare on which of the two sides —for or
against the existence of God —there is the
balance of probability. And now, were you
compelled to give an answer to this ques-
tion of probability, on which side would
your Reason give the favourable verdict ?
Surely you could not refuse the assent of
your Reason to this statement, “It is
more probable that there is than that there
is not a God.”
But let me enquire respecting a future
state after death. Concerning a future
state, you profess that “ there may be, but
you do not know.” The admission of the
“ may be,” on your part, removes the ne-
cessity, on my part, for any proof of the
possibility of a future state. Let us then
enquire whether it is more probable that
there is than that there is not a state of
life after death. You are doubtless aware
of the ancient doctrine of the transmigra-
tion of souls —that ancient belief that
after death the soul enters different animal
states and wanders about. You will say,
this is not a proof of 9, future state. I
8


quite admit it. lam not, however, dealing brought, or, as it were, to forecast con-
with proofs positive, but only with proba- elusions, but should let ascertained truth.
bilities, and in that doctrine of the trans-
migration of souls I perceive the assent of
the unenlightened heathen mind to the
more than probability that death does not
end all. I have conversed with Australian
aboriginals, and on this very subject of a
future state have learned from them their
beliefs. It was certainly not from
Christianity they had obtained any views
about an hereafter, for their notions on
this subject were grotesquely unlike those
of Christianity, but they, nevertheless,
expressed the instinct common to man that
after death there is a future state of
being.
And I am thoroughly satisfied you cannot
conceal from yourselves that you are con-
scious of a similar instinct; and this feel-
ing ivhich so universally prevails is in
itself, and quite apart from Revelation,
a most potent argument for the reality of
a future state. Now, even though
you should maintain your Agnostic prin-
ciples and say “I do not know,” yet
applying your Reason to the question of
probability, I ask you now, “Is it not more
probable that there is, than that there is
not a future state ?” Surely you will not
refuse the assent of your Reason to this
statement, “It is more probable that there
is, than that there is not a future state
after death.”
I will now refer to the question of a
Revelation from God to man. On your
Agnostic principles you could not con-
sistently say that if there be a Supreme
Being, He could not reveal to man a
knowledge of His will. This would be to
assert more than you could possibly
“know.” You do not “know” that God
has not given man a written Revelation
from Himself, and, therefore, in the absence
of this positive knowledge you cannot
reasonably refuse to admit the possibility
of a Revelation being made. I ask you
now to direct your Reason to the question
I am about to put. It is this : —Looking to
the evidence from nature of the goodness
and kindness of the First Cause—God—
(whose existence is admittedly more pro-
bable than not so) which is the more pro-
bable conclusion, that that First Cause,
God, would, or that He would not
vouchsafe to mankind some written Reve-
lation for his guidance ? Now, I hold it to
be a sound maxim that in the pursuit of
truth, men should not first ask themselves
to what conclusion should they like to be
and even probable truth lead them to that
conclusion, to which, as truth positive or
probable it ought to lead. In this, I
find something honest something to
admire. Should not Reason, therefore, on
the considerations named, allow the
admission that it is more probable than
not that there should be given to man a
written Revelation for his guidance ?
Now, such a Revelation we profess to
find in the bible. “ Eighteen hundred
years ago the Apostle Peter spoke of the
word of God which liveth and abideth for
ever”—(l Pet. i. 23.) That prediction has
thus far held good. About a hundred
years ago “ Voltaire boasted that it had
taken twelve men to set up Christianity,
but he would show that a single man was
enough to overthrow it. He ventured, too,
on a prophecy. He said that in a hundred
years the Bible would be a forgotten
Book. About the time we now write, it
should have been laid up in the collections
of antiquarians, and taken from its musty
shelf only as we take Chinese or Indian
idols to show our Sunday - school
children the absurdities of superstition.
Which of the two prophecies is it that
'stands fulfilled to-day—the simple-minded
Apostle’s, or the brilliant Frenchman’s ?”
I care not now with what you may
please to compare the Bible, or by what
means you may try it. It has stood the
assaults of ages, and yet survives in all its
freshness, and fullness, and power. Modern
discoveries in eastern lands throw a flood
of confirmatory light upon the fact of its
supernatural origin. Buried cities now
unearthed, declare with trumpet tongue the
Bible is from God. Assyrian tablets de-
ciphered by the skill and learning of
modern critics confirm the accuracy of its
history, and tell man to look above for its
divine source. The ruins of Babylon,
Nineveh, and Tyre, all tell the story of
its prophetic truth ; and the modern Jew
is a present witness of its superhuman
origin. If, then, according to Agnostic
principles you still affirm that you do not
know that the Bible is from God, yet ex-
ercise your Reason in a reasonable manner
in reference to it, not with that ignorant
carping criticism too commonly met with
among rejectors of Christianity, but with
a candid, generous, and enlightened spirit;
and then “if any man will do his will ”
that is, is minded to do God’s will—and
the doing of this would not involve one in
9


any wrong doing, then “he shall know of
the doctrine whether it he of God.” (John
vii., 17.)
It cannot be justly denied that if the
Bible could he proved to he untrue. Christi-
anity would speedily pass away. You may
soon see the tokens of this in the case of
those who tell you that they once believed
the Bible, and called themselves Chris-
tians ; but having, as they consider, dis-
covered the Bible to be an imposture, have
cast it aside,and with it their Christianity;
and what have they become ? Now, were
this instead of being exceptional to become
general, it is evident Christianity would
cease to be. Would this be, or would it
not be a dire calamity ? Quite apart from
the religious aspect, and solely from a
humanitarian view, I do not hesitate to say
that no more terrible calamity could hap-
pen or be conceived of. All those schemes
for the temporal benefit of humanity which
now owe their origin and existence to
Christianity would speedily be swept away,
and a gross communism andsocialism would
prevail. The advancement of humanity,
now the alleged design of Freethought in
its various ramifications, would be found
to be unreal and unattainable, because
lacMng the highest motives to morality and
well doing. Do you question this P Then let
me put Modern Unbelief upon its trial. I
have judged Christianity “by its fruits.”
I have reminded you of the fruits of its
teaching, and the good it has done for the
world, and is still doing, notwithstanding
the opposition it has so freely met. It
comes out of that trial right nobly ! But
will Modern Unbelief manifest such good
results ? Let us see. What has it done for
the world ? Where are the helps that it
furnishes for man under all the vicissitudes
of life ? —where is its comfort iu sorrow, or
sickness, or death P Where are its benevo-
lent institutions, its hospitals, its asy-
lums for the deaf and the dumb and the
blind ? Where are its homes for the aged
destitute pooor —its servants’ homes —its
sailors’ homes —its boys’ homes —its indus-
trial schools ? Where are its philan-
thropists and benefactors ? Where are its
temperance reformers —its humanitarians ?
Where are its enterprises for the abolition
of slavery, the civilization of barbaric
peoples, and the moral advancement of
mankind ? Where ? Where, indeed!
On the side of unbelief, perhaps
Voltaire and Robert Owen will be pointed
to as men who have done some good for
humanity in their day. Let this be
granted to the full extent to which it may
he borne out by facts. But it has been
justly remarked that these men “ are not
representatives of a system.” “ Voltaire
was a man by himself—a man of marked
individualism. And for every hundred
that followed him in his sneers and jibes
at religion, there was not one who adopted
his humanity. Nor does Voltaire’s general
character serve to adorn his principles.
His life was guided by a combined love
of money, love of pleasure, and love of
praise ; he was eaten up with vanity ; and
as a writer he was cynical, sneering, lying,
and most scurrilous and abusive, not
taking the trouble to conceal his antipathies
to what he believed to be Christianity, or
to offer any apology for the unrestrained
abuse he poured on its friends.”
In July 1880, a number of the New York
Herald contained a remarkable letter with
the signature of “Thurlow Weed,” who
some years ago was one of the greatest and
most conspicuous of American politicians.
The writer from whose tractate I am just
now quoting informs us “ that the letter
was occasioned by the public career of
Colonel Ingersoll, the Bradlaugh of
the United States. Colonel Ingersoll
goes about the country delivering ad-
dresses against the Bible and making men
infidels. Mr. Weed’s letter contained a
comparison between the work of D. L.
Moody and that of Mr. Ingersoll. Mr.
Moody led men to think of the highest of
all subjects, and while promoting their
salvation, stimulated self-control, temper-
ance, beneficence, and every other virtue.
The line of his progress was marked by the
reform of drunkards, the union of divided
families, the consecration of young men’s
energies to nobler objects, the drying up
of the sources of the world’s misery, and
the opening of fountains of benediction
and prosperity. What could Ingersoll
point to to match such work P What
drunkard had he reformed ? What home
had he made happy ? What life had he
rescued from selfishness, and made great
and noble ? The drift of Mr. Weed’s letter
was that tried by its fruits Christianity
was infinitely better than anything that
Ingersoll could substitute for it. The
letter was interesting not only as written
by a man who in his old age had under-
gone a great spiritual change, but as pre-
senting the view of a man of affairs—a
man who knew human nature, and under-
stood something of the forces by which
men’s lives are moulded. It showed that
10


in tlie view of such men it is only the
Gospel of Christ that is the Power of God
unto salvation, both for the life that now
is, and that which is to come.”
And now, in conclusion, kindly bear
with me while I address a few earnest
words from my heart to all who at the
present moment are not professedly on the
side of Christianity.
It is under a strong conviction of the
Divine origin and truth of Christianity
that I invite your serious attention to the
contrast between Christianity and Unbelief.
I present to you another very practical
subject for thought, and closely connected
with the matter in hand. It is this, man
dies but once ! It is quite possible that
some whom I now address, e’er this year
or this month shall end, may pass away
beyond the reach of human observation
into that
“ Bourne from whence no traveller returns.”
If in this statement it shall be found
that, unconsciously to myself, I have been
uttering a possibility which shall be fol-
lowed up by a reality, then but three or
four months, perhaps but a few days only,
remain to some one or other of you, either
for the increase and strengthening of your
unbelief, or for your acceptance of Christi-
anity. With the prospect of death as
something afar off, men may persuade
themselves that they are not afraid to die.
But let me remind you that there is an
absence of fear which is sometimes ex-
plainable on the ground that there has
been no previous realisation of the danger,
as when one might say, “If I had only
known the danger I was in, I should have
been very much frightened.” The peace
of mind resulting from such a cause is
delusive and fatal, because it produces no
arousing effects, and affords no security
whatever against the danger itself. Many,
very many, imbued with unbelief, and
with the prospect of a long life before
them, have declared their freedom from
the fear of death, but when the end came
an awful dread has seized their terror-
stricken consciences. So terrible were the
last moments of the infidel Voltaire, that
the nurse who waited upon the dying un-
believer expressed her horror at the sight,
and trusted she might never witness
such another!
By way of contrast to this I could
recount instances of a calm and peaceful
end —the “ safe in the arms of Jesus ”
which have come under my personal obser-
vation. There the power of Christianity
has supported the soul passing out of time
into eternity. Death has been robbed of
its terrors, and the life of faith in the
personal, living, resurrected Redeemer
spent on earth, has been surely exchanged
for the more perfect knowledge, the un-
disturbed peace, and the pure and holy
joys of the “ bright for evermore ! ” Such
scenes give strength to my convictions of
the truth of Christianity, and that there is
no other system which could take its place
and achieve such happy ends.
Experience, moreover, has shown that
principles which men think will carry
them comfortably through life cannot
always be trusted in the hour of trial. I
have somewhere heard of a young woman
whose loving father was an unbeliever, but
her mother a devout and earnest Christian.
From the father she heard nothing but the
teachings of unbelief, from the mother,
the opposite teachings of Christianity.
Which was she to believe P The hand of
sickness laid her low; her case was pro-
nounced hopeless ; death was at hand. The
father, distracted with grief at the pros-
pect ®f losing his only child, chafed, and
hardened himself in his unbelief. Very
shortly before her death she hastily called
for her father, and with tears streaming
down her eyes told him she would soon die,
and then with as much energy as her en-
feebled state would allow, imploringly
said, " Father, you tell me there is no God,
and no hereafter; mother tells me there
is a God, and a better world ; she tells me
to trust in Jesus, and He will forgive me
all my sins, and bring me to Heaven when
I die. Dear father, shall I believe what
you say, or what dear mother says ?” It
was a terrible question for him to answer
—a tremendous test of his principles.
He was face to face with an awful respon-
sibility, and must now decide for his
dying daughter one way or another. His
loving child was on the brink of eternity,
and in a very short time would close her
eyes upon this world for ever. For a
moment he stood speechless. A fearful
struggle raged within his own heart and
conscience; a death-bed was no place for
trifling. He dared not accept the responsi-
bility inseparable from the principles he
had held and taught, and with the deepest
emotion he replied —“ My darling child,
BELIEVE WHAT YOUR MOTHER SAYS!”
But when man comes to face death for
himself, as each man must one day, the
presence of that dreaded power will test
11


his principles to the utmost. In the pros-
pect of the sure approach of that “ last
enemy,” I would entreat your most serious
attention to this obvious fact — that if
Christianity is false, believers are, in
ONE SENSE, NO WORSE OFF THAN UNBE-
LIEVERS; but if Christianity is true,
THEN BELIEVERS ARE IN EVERY SENSE IM-
MENSELY BETTER OFF THAN UNBELIEVERS.
I have now a course to suggest. I do
not venture to question the right of men
to meet together to discuss what is called
« Freethought,” but I would most respect-
fully suggest that instead of meeting
together with a view to strengthen and
encourage each other in hostility to Chris-
tianity, it would be better to leave all such
meetings alone, and to employ precious
time in a renewed and more earnest study
of Christianity. If the existence of God
and a future state is even probable. Modern
Unbeliefis indefensible. Farbetterthan
all public platform discussions in reference
to the objections of Modern Unbelief to
Christianity would be private friendly
conferences on such subjects. And I need
hardly assure you how gladly, on my part,
I would avail myself of such opportunities,
and I commend this suggestion to your
notice.
Christianity has been a tried power, and
under no circumstance has it ever failed
the true believer. I have contrasted its
“ fruits ” with those of unbelief, and I find
that it (Christianity) meets necessities,
both temporal and spiritual, for which
Modern Unbelief takes no thought. Chris-
tianity, THEREFORE, STANDS UNEQUALLED
and alone, towering far above all the
highest conceptions of unaided reason, and
wields a power before which empires are
destined to fall; for “ the earth shall be
filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as
the waters cover the sea.” (Isaiah xi., 9.)
NOTES.
At the close of the delivery of this
lecture it was urged by a Secularist that
I had not stated “ what Christianity is.”'
It would not have occurred to me to men-
tion what I might reasonably suppose
every one would know —that “ Christianity
is the religion of Christ,” as “ Mahomet-
anism is the religion of Mahomet.” To
have treated of the distinctive teachings of
Christianity, beyond what I did represent
on that behalf, would have been imprac-
ticable for want of time and space, and
needless with the New Testament access-
ible to all enquirers or objectors.
Another argued “ that ‘ Freethought ’
was only about three years old, and so had
not had time to manifest its good results.
‘ Modern Unbelief ’ had not had time to-
produce benefits for mankind/’ People
generally will not be deluded by such an
answer. “ Modern Unbelief,” under its
(misnamed but) generic term “ Free-
thought,” is but the same spirit of unbelief
which has been manifested in preceding
generations. The same spirit of unbelief
is at work, only under new and pretentious
titles. It is not possible that two opposite
systems could have one and the same
original. If one is Divine, the other can-
not be so. Judged by “its fruits,” the
Divine origin of Christianity is sure and
unchallengeable. Ido not hesitate to
predict, both from “ the reason of the
thing,” and from “ the experience of the
past,” that Unbelief will prove to be as
inadequate for the promoting of man’s
every interest henceforth, as it has been
hitherto.
M. B. B.
Printed at the “Launceston Examiner ” and “ Tasmanian” Office.
12




s A' ■ A •' ' ■ • ■ ■' •
