

Christianity and War
A
Challenge to the Churches.
H. R. URQUHART, M.A.
1915.




This essay, “ Christianity and War," was delivered at
the Easter Conference of the Associated Churches of
Christ, held in Auckland, N.Z., in 1915. The author
desires it to be known that he derives no benefit what-
ever, pecuniary or otherwise, from its publication. It is
sent forth as an honest endeavour to help thoughtful
Christians to a clearer knowledge of the truth in regard
to the great subject of war.
“ To safe guard peace we must prepare for war.”
I know that maxim ; it was forged in hell.
ISRAEL ZANGWILL.


FROM
The Officer Commanding
24th COMPANY
Auckland Senior Cadets.
Auckland,
22nd Feb., 1915
To Officer Commanding
SENIOR CADETS
AUCKLAND.
SUBJECT: Resignation of Captain H. R. Urquhart.
In forwarding you my formal resignation from the Territorial
Forces of New Zealand, I wish to state briefly my reasons for so doing.
At the beginning of 1914 I attended the Student Christian Union
Conference of the Unirersity ot New Zealand, held that year at Wood-
ville. The deep spiritual tone of the Conference made a profound im-
pression on me and I began to inwardly question whether the Church’s
position in regard to war was Christian and tenable, and also to ask
myself whether I was right in holding a commission in the N.Z. Ter-
ritorial Forces.
I felt inclined to resign then, but unwilling to take any rash step
and fearing lest my new attitude might prove to be only temporary and
due to momentary religious enthusiasm, I decided to remain as I was
for the year 1914, and if at the end of that time I was still of the same
opinion to resign my commission. The result of the year’s quiet
thought and prayerful meditation convinced me that I could no longer
consistently retain my position as Captain and yet call myself a follower
of Christ. Hence my resignation.


I am aware that the fact of war breaking out in the middle of 1914
may lead to my present action being misinterpreted, but one who sin-
cerely desires to follow after truth must bear this and walk up to the
amount of light he possesses.
I shall not burden you in the meantime with further explanation,
but wish to state that my connexion with the Defence Department
has always been of the happiest—the conduct of every officer and
sergeant-major I have come in contact with has always been most
gentlemanly, helpful and obliging. I much regret the fact, especially
at this grave juncture, that the clash of National and Christian ideals
has thus for me led to the parting of the ways.
H. R. URQUHART,
Captain, 24TH Company
Auckland Senior Cadets.


The Arsenal at Springfield.
This is the Arsenal. From floor to ceiling,
Like a huge organ, rise the burnished arms;
But from their silent pipes no anthem pealing
Startles the villages with strange alarms.
Ah I What a sound will rise, how wild and dreary,
When the death angel touches those swift keys I
What loud lament and dismal miserere
Will mingle with their awful symphonies I
I hear even now the infinite fierce chorus,
The cries of agony, the endless groan.
Which, through the ages that have gone before us,
In long reverberations reach our own.
Is it, O man, with such discordant noises,
With such accursed instruments as these,
Thou drownest Nature’s sweet and kindly voices,
And jarrest the celestial harmonies?
Were half the power, that fills the world with terror,
Were half the wealth bestowed on camps and forts,
Given to redeem the human mind from error,
There were no need of arsenals or forts.
The warrior’s name would be a name abhorred!
And every nation, that should lift again
Its hand against a brother, on its forehead
Would wear for evermore the curse of Cain!
Down the dark future, through long generations,
The echoing sounds grow fainter, and then cease;
And like a bell, with solemn, sweet vibrations.
I hear once more the voice of Christ say, “ Peace ” 1
Peace I And no longer from its brazen portals
The blast of War’s great organ shakes the skies!
But beautiful as songs of the immortals,
The holy melodies of love arise.
LONGFELLOW.


CHRISTIANITY AND WAR.


INTRODUCTION.
In this solemn and awful moment of the world’s
history when the sleeping sword of war has at last been
unsheathed, and the long silent cannon is even now
speaking out its message of death ; when men in scores
are going down to their graves by sea and by land ; when
famine, destruction, and misery stalk abroad over our
fair earth, and when we realise that all this is the direct
result of a desperate struggle for independent national
life, it is essential that every man should have deep and
earnest heart-searchings so that he fail not in this hour
of need to prove himself worthy of the noble name of
man.
This is no time for hypocrisy—no time for smooth
platitudes —no time for anything but deep, life-throbbing
convictions, such as a man might utter did he know for
a certainty that he was to be summoned immediately
from this earth to appear before the judgment seat, when
he would face the end with set purpose and say to his
fellow men: —“ These are my most sacred convictions —
by these I stand, and by these I fall —life to me would
be but an empty vapour were it purchased at the expense
of what I here and now firmly believe to be God’s will
concerning my present life.” It may be that the man
called upon to enlist does not recognise God in the
Christian or in any sense, still if he be a man, his duty
is none the less imperative—he must be prepared to
champion his taking up of the sword or his refusal to do
so in the name of the highest and noblest principle he
acknowledges to be his guide.


Every true man in this crisis is solemnly called upon
by all he holds dearest and most sacred to make a mo-
mentous decision for himself. No other man can decide
for him. He may be helped by others —he cannot be
saved by them. Whether he decides to enlist or to -re-
main at home because of a higher vision, it must be,
only after he has summoned to his aid all the noblest
powers at his command has made himself right with his
fellow men in all past transactions as far as it is possible
for him to do so, and has fully weighed the whole matter
in the balances, realising clearly that the lives which
the Government calls on him to destroy —neither he nor
his Government nor yet any power on earth —can re-
create.
Many men, withou t doubt, have so weighed the matter,
earnestly and sincerely, and have yet on this occasion
taken up the sword —I honour them because of their
thoughtful and even in some cases prayerful considera-
tion of the matter, and though I cannot follow them in
their conclusions, I can admire them for their honesty
of purpose. There are thousands of men who cannot walk
with me in my religious convictions, but wherever a man
exists whose depths are so stirred by the present crisis
as to make him more earnest than ever in his search for
truth, and especially for a guiding principle of action in
reference to this war, he has my profound sympathy.
These pages, however, are not for him. Nor are they
meant for the smug, nominal Christian whose Christ-
ianity consists of the more or less generous payment of
pew rents and other Church charges, coupled with a con-
scious or an unconscions determination not to let true
Christianity touch his heart nor influence in any way
his business transactions, but whose personal interests
he zealously guards by proxy, at the seat of war, and by


tags of Scripture, at home.
Again they are not for the nominal Christian, be he a
church bishop or otherwise whose money lies invested
in Vicker’s or in Armstrong’s, in brewery ventures, or in
any other death dealing agency. Such men forgetting
that their treasure is to be laid up where neither moth
nor rust doth corrupt are not likely to be interested in
anything that does not point the way to greater and
still greater dividends. My appeal, kind reader, is not
to these but to an entirely different and more worthy
class. It is addressed to those only, who in deed and in
truth love the Saviour of men, and who sincerely desire
to follow him consistently, even though the road may
lead through the Valley of the Shadow of Death.


CHRISTIANITY AND WAR.
I—PURPOSE.
II.—THE FALSE CHRISTIAN ATTITUDE.


I—PURPOSE.
The purpose of this short essay should be clearly
understood at the very outset. It is written, not to con-
vince men, Christian or otherwise, that war is a terrible
thing and that peace is preferable. Most right think-
ing persons, whose hearts have not been rendered in-
human by greed of gold acquired at any cost or by lust
of power, will admit all that is necessary in this direc-
tion without argument —its purpose is to show that the
general attitude of the church to the present war —so
far as that attitude can be gauged by the statements of
its preachers is in large measure false and unchristian.
It desires to point out that there is urgent need for the
sincere Christian to take up an attiude in some respects
altogether different from that which his Church adopts,
and that this must be done, regardless of consequences,
whenever such a one is convinced that Christ’s way does
not lie along the beaten path of popular religious
opinion. It would urge, also, that material interests
must not in any way enter into the scales of the balance,
for even the man of the world who knows not Christ is
ready to abolish war when convinced that his material
interests may be safeguarded in some less expensive
way; and if this, my Christian friend, be your attitude
too, “ What do ye more than others? do not even the
publicans so ? ”
II.—THE FALSE CHRISTIAN ATTITUDE.
No nation can hope to wage war successfully unless
its rulers can succeed in securing tne co-operation of
their country’s religious leaders. It is imperative that
armies should be imbued with the belief that their war is
a holy one —that their God or Gods look down with
sympathetic interest on their struggles, and desire them


to succeed. The Burmese in their wars against the
British, were, time and again, hopelessly and easily de-
feated —their religion could grant them no sustaining
power —inspire them with no enthusiam —for to them no
war could be holy —no war afford a short and easy
passage to Nirvana —since the teachings of the Buddha
unequivocally condemned those who took up arms
against their fellow men, Buddha’s Thou shalt take
no life ” was absolute —it admitted of no exceptions
whatever—thus it was that the arm of the Burman was
at once weakened when he grasped the sword —all higher
light was from that moment, for him at least, turned to
utter darkness.
On the other hand, unseen battalions are ranged on
side of those who conceive the idea that the powers
above are with them —hence the imperative necessity of
the Church’s assistance in waging successfully any
great war. To the state any financial or other aid she
can render the Church in times of peace, is but an in-
finitesimal burden when compared to the moral advant-
age sho reaps when at the trumpet call of war, the
Church is found willing to march side by side with her
trained legions.
Although the early Christians were convinced that
their Master’s teachings precluded even the thought of
war—although many an early Christian was led to ex-
ecution because of his conviction expressed in the solemn
words “ I am a Christian and therefore I cannot fight ”
the Christians of to-day go forth in their thousands at
the State’s call backed up by the blessings of that Clergy
who profess to be followers of the “ Prince of Peace.”
Listen to a few of the false Church teachings of the
day expressed by men of whom, personally, I can only
think kindly, since they are strangers to me —but whose


ideas seem to me, nevertheless, wholly unchristian.
The Bishop of London speaking to a crowded meeting
at the Church House, Westminster, declared that it was
the first duty of women to encourage the perfectly noble in--
stinct, which made their sons, brothers or sweethearts go out
to stand for their country at the great second battle of
Waterloo. He would, rather die than see England a Ger-
man province. Now when the lawyer asked Jesus Christ
what was the great commandment, he was plainly told
that it was to love God with his whole heart and his
neighbour as himself. If this then is the first com-
mandment, our first duty as Christians is to obey it and
not that of the Bishop to go forth sword in hand to slay
our neighbour. The latter part of his unchristian state-
ment is in effect this : If England were conquered by the
Germans, in her dire hour of greatest spiritual need, the
Bishop would not be there to give what comfort he could,
his spiritual ministrations would cease —for he is pre-
pared to extend the Kingdom of God in his native
country only so long as British soldiers and sailors can
prevent its subjugation by Germany. If they fail the
Bishop hints at suicide as a way of freeing himself from
an unbearable position. Yet Jesus Christ, the professed
Master of this twentieth century follower, went about
doing good all his life in spite of the fact that his native
country was under the iron heel of Rome.
Here is another statement made by Archdeacon
Wilberforce in Westminster Abbey last January ; “We
must do our utmost to avenge the outrageous and pre-
meditated crime against humanity by one man who is
England’s archenemy.” Yet we read in Romans 12, 19 :
“ Dearly beloved avenge not yourselues, but rather give
place unto wrath, for it is written Vengeance is mine, I
will repay, saith the Lord.”
Coming nearer home we find our own Bishop of Auck


land declaring that the present war is a holy and a nec-
essary one. To the true Church, only the war waged
against sin with spiritual weapons, can possibly be holy,
and no war is necessary except in the sense that nations
must reap what they sow. If the Church has in the past
being sowing the true seed of the Kingdom of Heaven —
this present reaping is none of hers —if not, she must, in
humiliation, turn immediately from her evil way for she
cannot hope to wipe out her past sin by the perpetuation
of present sin.
Addressing the Maori Troops Bishop Averill said,
“When the pakeha came to N.Z., your ancestors were
engaged in intertribal wars. We are soon to celebrate
the centenary of the Rev. Samuel Marsden, who first
taught your ancestors that fighting against each other
was wrong.” He then went on to urge the Maori to
fight honourably and nobly for the British Empire when
their turn came to do so. Putting his statement in other
words, it amounts to this —tne Rev. Samuel Marsden
taught the Maoris the sinfulness of inter-tribal fighting;
the Bishop of Auckland urges them to remember this,
but in the same breath teaches them the righteousness
of international war, in other words, inter-tribal fighting
on a small scale is sinful —on a stupendous scale- nation
against nation, instead of tribe against tribe, it is glorious
and divine.
So far the statements quoted have been made by men
of the Established Church —In the Non-Conformist
Churches, however, of our city —I have heard the same
warlike thoughts expressed —and doubtless the Churches
of Auckland are not alone in this matter —only the
powers that be, do not give the same prominence to
statements made by ministers outside that Church which
boasts that seventy per cent, of the British at the front


are of her persuasion. Further, the faith of some min-
isters of the present day Church, in powerful armaments
is so rooted and strong that they are prepared not only
to bless the men behind the guns, but actually to in-
vest a portion of their money in the manufacture of
these death dealing weapons. The mission field starves
because it often lacks both men and money, and while
certain Christian men pray for the extension of Christ’s
Kingdom in the dark corners of the earth, they at the
same time, hinder that extension by investing their
money not in missionaries, but in guns which will ulti-
mately put an untimely end to the lives of many who
otherwise might have become powerful proclaimers of
the Gospel message.
Under the telling headline, “ The Church Militant,”
we are informed by a London cable that the Union Jack
is being displayed on many British churches as a visible
expression of their insistence on the duty of Christians
to respond to their country’s call. Religious leaders are
using all their influence, we are told, to emphasize the
duty of self-sacrifice for the welfare of the country.
Young men are everywhere urged to enlist.
Once again coming nearer home, in the January num-
ber of the New Zealand Military Journal, 1914, appears
an article by Major A. C. Temperley, entitled : “ Our
Schools and the Military Spirit —a Successful Experi-
ment.” It certainly opened my eyes and doubtless will
open the eyes of many more to read the following: “ The
Rev. J. L. Dove, Headmaster of Wanganui College, con-
ceived the idea of converting the school into barracks,
and handing it over body and soul to a soldier. He asked
the writer, who is the General Staff Officer of Wellington
District, in which the school is situated, to undertake
the job.


Apart from the question of the wisdom of handing over
the souls of some 200 boys to the care of Major Tem-
perley —one cannot but admire the clean cut attitude of
this Rev. gentleman and his continued loyalty to the old
Church spirit carried into his new occupation of teaching
and after all, one begins to wonder whether it would not
be better for our Bishops and other Church leaders to
give up the struggle to retain anything of the spiritual
and put an abrupt end to their inconsistency by adopting
the Rev. Dove’s solution, and handing over their
Churches as he has his school, to serve as military
barracks and recruiting stations.
But to my mind this is not the militant spirit of the
true Church. She should fight ever with spiritual
weapons against all that causes war —against the selfish-
ness of men inside and outside the Church which makes
countless thousands mourn —against the spirit of pride
and vanity in the Church itself —against everything
which, in any way, tends to cloud the truth that all
human beings —irrespective of race and colour —are our
brothers and sisters, because God is the kind Father of
all, and because in His image we all are made. The
true Church should certainly be a Militant one, but what
she has to fight, is the spirit rampant in the world, which
makes possible a condition of affairs such as is set forth
in another cable, also from London, which appeared in
the Auckland Herald, March 23rd, 1914; it is to this
effect: —


To strain every nerve and sinew in remedying such
an iniquitous wrong is the work to my mind, of the true
Militant Church —if she seeks a suitable text from


which to preach, she will find it in the first four verses
of the fifth chapter of the epistle of James, which read:
“ Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your
“ miseries that shall come upon you.
“Your riches are corrupt, and your garments are
“ motheaten.
“Your gold and silver is cankered ; and the rust
“of them shall be a witness against you, and shall
“ eat your flesh as it were fire.
“ Behold the hire of the labourers who have
“ reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back
“ by fraud, crieth : and the cries of them which
“ have reaped, are entered into the ears of the
“ Lord of sabaoth.”
If the Church cannot rise to this higher plane of mil-
itancy, she should cease to exist, for there is no need or
place for a false militant Church, capable of teaching
and practising nothing higher than the world out of
Christ can show —she will one day, persisting in her un-
christian attitude, be weighed in the balances, and found
wanting.


III.—THE TRUE CHRISTIAN ATTITUDE.


III.—THE TRUE CHRISTIAN ATTITUDE.
Thousands of Christian men to-day feel drawn in two
directions —to them there is no peace of mind, because
of the clash of national and Christian ideals, and so long
as they try to reconcile the two in respect to this or any
other war, so long must they expect hearts full of mis-
givings, and why ? Because they are seeking an escape
from the plain teaching of the Saviour— 4 No man can
serve two masters ” —and there is absolutely no escape.
They must, in such an issue as the one before us, when
national ideals clash clearly with Christian ideals,
follow one or the other, and this is the testing time when
men must declare their citizenship in no uncertain voice
whether it be of God or of men.
The world may, and does admit of double standards.
In morality, she makes a distinction between man and
woman in favour of the former ; in her national life, she
condemns in private individuals what in time of war she
commands as a sacred duty; but for the Christian, there
is, and can be only one standard, there must be no com-
promise for him, he must realise that he definitely re-
tards the extension of Christ’s Kingdom on earth when-
ever he subordinates Christian to national ideals.
Hatred can never vanquish hatred —Satan does not
cast out Satan—the Christian must not render evil for
evil, but must overcome evil with good. What has the
Almighty Creator of the Universe to do with all the petty
secrets of War Offices and of armament firms—with the
calibre of guns and with the projectories of bullets ?
Count your battleships and number your armies, if you
will, O Christian—but cease for ever to sing :
“ Sufficient is thine arm alone and thy defence is
sure.”


When the Son of Man cometh shall he find faith in the
earth ? Let us each silently and prayerfully answer
this question, and honestly settle the nature of that faith
whether it be in God or in man.
But whatever be your personal decision, it is the
Church’s duty to see that the faith of her children is of
the right kind. The true Church must emphasise more
than ever the universality of the fatherhood of God, and
the consequent brotherhood of man. It must teach that
the sacrifice Christ calls for, is a lifelong one of patient
service for humanity. It must realise that its supreme
duty is to witness to the power of the supernatural, the
spiritual over the natural and material —and to call men
to a life of absolute faith in God. Would she serve the
nation truly ? then this is not to be done by turning her
Churches into recruiting stations, but by showing the
world that she is prepared to follow in the footsteps of
her Master at any cost.
If her witness has been false in the past, the door of
opportunity is ever open, and there is all the greater
need for her to witness now to the truth of Christ’s
teaching. He himself summed up that teaching in the
words “ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy
heart, and with thy soul, and with thy mind, and thy
neighbour as thyself.” The Church fundamentally fails
when she wavers in this doctrine of love, for his Kingdom
can come only by that love which is faithful unto death.
The old law, “An eye for an eye and a tooth for a
tooth,” is not for the follower of Jesus Christ. He must
be guided by the spirit of the teaching contained in the
New Testament. That spirit must control both heart
and head—no cold mechanical reasonings from the
actual words of Scripture is sufficient for him —for he
knows that “the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life.”


If, on the prayerful and thoughtful reading of the New
Testament, he can imagine his Master Jesus Christ in a
crisis like the present, donning the uniform of the State
and, with well-sharpened bayonet, doing his share of
the hacking and of the slaying, saying at the same time,
“ Follow Me,” then a Christian would not be true to his
name and leader if he refused to follow. But the
“ Follow Me ” of Christ is far removed from this —its
spirit is contained in those unmatchable words :
“ For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink; 1 was a stranger, and
ye took me in;
“ Naked, and ye clothed me ; I was sick, and ye visited
me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me.” —Matt. 25,
35 and 36,
His message to those whose chief care was for the
physical life was this, “ He that saveth his life shall lose
it.” And when in after years His disciples felt that their
Christian ideals and duties clashed in part with their
national ideals and duties, they did not compromise,
they did not speak of expediency and seek to justify the
State in order to secure their own interests —but they
gave the only answer the true Christian can give to-day,
“ Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken
unto you more than unto God, judge ye, for we cannot
but speak the things which we have seen and heard.”
—Acts 4, 19 and 20.
If the Church had been faithful from earliest times to
the simple teaching of Jesus Christ and to His spirit of
humble service, methinks there would not now be suffi-
cient brutal selfishness in the world to make war pos-
sible. But the Church has found it just as difficult as
the world to follow Christ in this matter. The world
has openly said, “We will not, we dare not, follow the


life of Faith in God with respect to matters of defence —
we fear annihilation —we must have a visible protection
of guns and men. The Church on her part has said,
“Yes, Master, we know we ought to follow Thee, and
we will follow Thee, but not yet awhile, not until we
can do so just as safely and comfortably as the man of
the world, who knows Thee not.”
But this is not the true Christian spirit. The world-
ling does not know —it may be he does not even care
to know —what Christ would have him do. The true
Christian does know, and because of that higher know-
ledge, he must obey, for “to him that knoweth to do
good, and doeth it not. to him it is sin.” —James 4, 17.
The real need to-day is for Christian men and women
to stand and act out the teachings of l Christ in their own
lives, and not merely dream of the time in the dim
future when it maybe as safe to act on, as it is at present
to talk about, fundamental Christian principles. I feel
convinced that those who love their Bibles most, those
who best understand the spirit of His teaching, realise
that all they have learned from the Master is utterly at
variance with the spirit of war and all for which that
spirit stands.
To these there comes the call to stand firm and true to
their religious convictions —even though the whole
world [be against them, “ For we wrestle not against
flesh and blood but against principalities, against
powers, against the rulers of this world, against spiritual
wickedness in high places.
“ Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God,
that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and
having done all to stand.” —Eph. 6, 12 and 13.


IV. SCRIPTURAL DIFFICULTIES.


IV. SCRIPTURAL DIFFICULTIES:
That, in a sense, such difficulties exist, may be readily
admitted; these same difficulties are, however, in all cases
more apparent than real, and the more closely one can enter
into the spirit of the Master, the more surely do all difficul-
ties disappear. A full and thorough study of all these
passages would take up much more space than the limits of
this essay will permit. We shall, therefore, seek rather to indi-
cate the way in which these difficulties may be met than
attempt to offer in every case a complete solution.
The Old Testament teaching is a stumbling block to
many; they find there that God is often spoken of as the
Lord of Hosts, and as of leading forth the Children of Israel
to battle against heathen foes. And then we read in Malachi
3,6: “I am the Lord, I change not”; or again in James 1,
17: “ Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above,
and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is
no variableness, neither shadow of turning.” The argu-
ment then stands, if God in Old Testament times not only
permitted war but actually stood by the Children of Israel
in certain of their fiercest battles, and if God changes not,
surely the case is clear that the Christian may still take part
in at least so-called righteous wars.
In reply we should offer the following:—the wars en-
gaged in by the Israelites were undertaken at the definite
command of God received through recognised and accepted
prophets. When to me or to my nation a command comes
from God to take part in the present war in as definite and
clear a way as of old, I shall not only take up the sword,
but shall urge all Christians to do likewise. Such a com-
mand may come from hearts illuminated by an inner light,
but my heart says, “No—your weapons must never be car-
nal.” It may come from the spirit of the teachings of
Christ, but all such teachings point only to spiritual


weapons. Again, I cannot accept the reported statements
of great Church leaders as the voice of the prophets of God
—for these men seem to me to have too great a hold on
things temporal to be safe guides for things spiritual they
are, many of them, too interested in maintaining the present
organization of the world to attempt to bring in a better and
more Christian system.
As to the unchangeableness of God, that still stands.
The love and character of an earthly father has not neces-
sarily changed because he deals with his boy, now grown to
years of discretion, in a manner different from that in
which he dealt with him during his years of early childhood,
“Before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut
up unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed.
“Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us
unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith.
“But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a
schoolmaster.
“For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ
Jesus.” 1
The first period of training is now over for the Israel-
ites. and all, both Jew and Gentile have entered, or can
enter into the glorious light and liberty of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. We are under a new dispensation —we are
now able to understand more of the true nature of our God
and Father. Paul, writing to the Corinthians, says of some
of the Jews that “Their minds were blinded: for until this
day rernaineth the same vail untaken away in the reading
of the Old Testament; which vail is done away in Christ.
But even unto this day, when Moses is read, the vail is upon
their heart.” 2 Christian reader, when you would use the
Old Testament to defend anything which is opposed to the
spirit of the New, see to it that it cannot be truthfully said
1. Gal. 3, 23-26, 2. II Cor. 3, 14 and 15. - ... ... .


of you that when Moses is read, the vail which is done away
in Christ is still upon your heart.
In previous sections of this paper, we urged the im-
portance of following the spirit of the New Testament
teachings, and this was done advisedly, for without doubt
there are isolated passages even in the New Testament,
which at first blush, seem to inculcate ideas of war, Jesus
himself said, “Think not that I am come to send peace on
earth; I came not to send peace, but a sword,” 1 and again,
“He that hath no sword let him sell his garment and buy
one. ’’ 2 Then again the apostle Paul, speaking of subjection
to magistrates in Romans 13, says,
“Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For
there is no power but of God; the powers that be are or-
dained of God.
“Whosoever therefore, resisteth the power, resisteth the
ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to them-
selves damnation.
“For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the
evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? do that
which is good and thou shalt have praise of the same.
“For he is a minister of God to thee for good. But if
thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the
sword in vain; for he is the minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that doeth evil. ’’ 3
Yet in spite of the first two sayings quoted above from
the mouth of Jesus, when James and John asked whether
they should not command fire to come down from heaven
turned and rebuked them and said, “Ye know not what
and consume his enemies, even as Elijah had done, 4 Jesus
manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son of Man is not come
to destroy men’s lives, but to save them.” And again in
John 14, “Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you:
1. Matt. 10, 34. 2. Luke, 22, 36. 3. Rom. 13, 1-4, 4. Luke, 9-54.


not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your
heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. ’ ’
How are we to reconcile such seemingly contradictory
statements as these ? There must be such a reconciliation
possible, otherwise Christ is divided against himself, and if
this is so, His Kingdom cannot stand.
In the first place it is well to remember that the soldier’s
occupation, weapons and armour are often used in a sym-
bolic way in reference to the Christian and his life. As ex-
amples of the soldier’s occupation applied not to actual
warfare as we understand it, but to the spiritual war that
every Christian must wage, we have, “Fight the good fight
of faith” 1 ; “For though we walk in the flesh, we do not
war after the flesh” 2 ; “Thou therefore, endure hardness as
a good soldier of Jesus Christ” 3 ; the weapons also of the
soldiers have a figurative meaning in such passages as
“Take the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God” 4 ;
“Repent; or else I will fight against them with the sword of
my mouth” 5 ; while armour is as clearly used figuratively
in such passages as ‘ ‘ Let us put on the armour of light 6 ;
“Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to
stand against the wiles of the devil—the breastplate of
righteousness; the shield of faith; the helmet of salvation. 7
To take such expressions literally would be childish in the
extreme and it seems to me, that the earnest seeker after
truth who loves the Saviour sufficiently to have breathed in
something of His Spirit will never find that Christ teaches
him to wield carnal weapons, His warfare is not against
flesh and blood, but against all the unseen powers of dark-
ness—and for this reason, actual swords, guns and breast-
works are absolutely useless to him as weapons and as de-
fence. As his warfare is, so must his weapons be, both
spiritual.
Spiritual warfare is infinitely harder and more noble
1. Tim. 6-12. 2. II Cor. 10, 3. 3. II Tim. 2, 8. 4. Eph. 6, 17.
5. Rev. 2, 16. 6. Rom. 13. 12. 7. Eph. 6.


than material. To conquer oneself presents difficulties
undreamed of by the one who seeks only to conquer others.
It is a conparatively easy task to slay a man’s body—it is
much harder to put an end to the spirit that dominated
that body. A shell dropped from a passing aeroplane may
happen to kill the Kaiser of Germany, but that shell—no!
not even thousands of such shells will annihiliate the spirit
that dominated the Kaiser’s life and which has from him,
been breathed in by countless other Germans.
When Christ says, “I came not to send peace but a
sword,” and ag'ain, “Suppose ye that I am come to give
peace on earth? I tell you, nay, but rather division,” the
sword mentioned is certainly not one of actual steel. Both
the sword and the division referred to are fully explained in
that other passage which says, “For the word of God is
quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit and
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart.” 1 The meaning, then, is clearly
this:—the effect of the word of God is as a sword, cleaving
asunder and making a clear demarcation between the
spiritually and the materially minded, which henceforth
range themselves into two hostile camps.
Those who have laboured on foreign fields will realise
to the full, the meaning of the words that Christ came not
to send peace, but a sword, when they think of the instances
in which a father who stands by his old faith, will be moved
to hatred so bitter against a son who has embraced Christi-
anity, that he will even spit in his face, and inflict on his
hitherto loved child, all the indignities and cruel punish-
ments it is within his power to compass. Do we not now see
the truth of Christ’s words when he says, “Think not that I
am come to send peace on earth; I came not to send peace,
but a sword, for I am come to set a man at variance against
1. Heb. 4-12.


his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law, and a man’s foes
shall be they of his own household. ’ n
When Christ says, “He that hath no sword, let him sell
his garment and buy one,” surely the Christian is not pre-
pared to throw aside all his Master’s teaching in the oppo-
site direction for the sake of one text which apparently con-
tradicts that definite teaching. It seems to me that the
passage like similar ones is allegorical. Jesus was about to
be taken from his faithful disciples—and they were soon
to be left alone so far as Christ’s bodily presence was con-
cerned, to fight the great forces of evil. They were there-
fore to sacrifice personal comforts in order to quit them-
selves like men and make their victory sure. That they were
even yet too dull to understand Christ’s full import is
gathered from their reply, “Lord, behold here are two
swords.’’ Christ, raethinks, felt that their dull spiritual
understanding would be quickened after his death, and
resurrection, and his answer was, “It is enough.” What!
Two swords for eleven men! Surely if Christ had wished
to fight for His Kingdom by force of arms, he would have
used more wisdom than this. What would men think of the
general commanding the allied armies if he thought it suf-
ficient to arm every sixth man ?
Just after the conversation related above, Jesus, as was
His wont, went to the Mount of Olives, and here we see where
the real source of His power lay—he kneeled down and
prayed. And what of his disciples, did he urge them to have
those two swords in readiness for fear of attack? No, but
His loving words were, “Pray, that ye enter not into temp-
tation,” 3 and later he roused them from sleep, and again
urged the necessity of prayer; and when almost immediate-
ly after the multitude came out with swords and staws, the
dull disciples Wished to use those two swords, and one,
1. Matt. 10, 34-Si. 8. Luk* 82, 40.


whose weapon was sharper than his own spiritual under-
standing, smote off the ear of a servant of the high priest.
Jesus did not commend the faithfulness and bravery of His
warlike disciple—he rebuked him, and healed the wounded
servant.
Take, again, the ideas embodied in the opening verses
of the thirteenth chapter of Romans, already quoted. We
are told plainly that if we do that which is evil, we are to be
afraid; “for he beareth not the sword in vain, for he is the
minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that
doeth evil.” Here let it be first noted that we are to fear
those in authority if we do evil —a perfectly legitimate pro-
position—but the true Christian will surely not err in this
direction. The sword spoken of here seems to me to typify
the magistrate’s rightful power to inflict punishment on
evil doers. Let it be noted also that this sword, even granted
that it was an actual one of steel, was in the hands of a
magistrate who was an impartial judge, and not in those of
one who was personally interested in the dispute. In the
case of war, both injured parties take the law into their own
hands, and act as judges of their own case.
Then, again, there are clearly exceptions to this
obedience to higher temporal powers, for when Peter and
John were forbidden by such authorities to speak or teach
in the name of Jesus, their noble answer was “Whether it
be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than
unto God, judge ye, for we cannot but speak the things
which we have seen and heard, ’ ’
Again, it is argued that because Christ praised the faith
of the centurion soldier 1 and did not condemn his occupa-
tion, it therefore follows that Christ approved of war as a
profession. The conclusion does not necessarily follow from
the premises. All that we can say is that no record is left
of any conversation between Christ and the centurion on the
1. Matt. 8,9, 10.


subject of the latter’s lifework, there may have been such
a quiet talk notwitstanding. Even were this not so, our
friends would have proved too much, for surely there were
at least some things in this centurion’s life—possibly idola-
try—which so far as the record goes, Christ did not con-
demn at that particular time. Does this therefore mean
that Christ approved of these things? Surely not. The
true explanation to my mind is that Christ’s doctrine did
not consist merely of a tabulated list of things we should
not do—his whole thought was to bring men into a right
attitude of mind toward God, the Father of all, and to their
fellow men, who were their brothers. Love was to be the
key note, and the motive power of all his teaching. He
knew that once the love of God entered the heart, it would
act as leaven, and would in time transform the whole life—
the evil in the heart would be driven out by the “expulsive
force of a new affection.” All the transformation that
Christ wished for in the man’s life, would gradually take
place as the result of this seemingly simple though most
revolutionary doctrine.
There is, it may safely be said, no specific prohibition
in the New Testament, against many present forms of evil,
but all Christians recognise that these are evils to be fought,
nevertheless, in the name of Christ. It seems to me that this
is a special stamp of the divine teachng—namely, that men
should be guided by the essence or spirit of Christ’s life and
teachings—and that in many cases there should be no
“Thou shalt not” to guide the seeker after truth. “By
their fruits, ye shall know them.” 1
A Christian would certainly and unhesitatingly lay
down the sword for ever, were he confronted with a definite,
unmistakable-, and absolute command of his Master Jesus
Christ to do so—but it is infinitely better that there should
be no such injunction conveyed in so many words, and that
1. Matt. 7-20.


Christian men should be led to take this step of their own
free will, as the result of closer communion with God, and a
deeper, fuller understanding of the Spirit of Christ. In
the former case the mere outward assent has been given, in
the latter, the inward assent of heart and spirit. An
obedience which results in the loving anticipation of the
wishes ef the loved one is infinitely more worthy and Christ-
like than that which is secured by definite commands backed
up by an unquestioned, an unassailable authority and
power.


V. SECULAR DIFFICULTIES.


V. SECULAR DIFFICULTIES:
“But what of the Germans?” I hear a multitude of
voices asking. “Will they not speedily annihilate us if we
take up this peaceful attitude? Must we not defend our
loved ones? Are we to see them tortured before our very
eyes, and not raise an arm to defend them ? Are we to allow
the German hosts to destroy our homes and make havoc in
our fair land without opposition on our part ? ’ ’
Certainly not, if you, as a Christian, are unprepared to
do your duty unless the Germans first do theirs. Certainly
not, if you are unprepared to follow the spirit of the
teachings of Jesus Christ. Certainly not, if you have failed
to appreciate the full meaning of the passage, “Be not
afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no
more that they can do.” 1 Certainly not, once again, I em-
phatically say, if your most inspired and earnest prayer
cannot proclaim a full self-surrender, but can only say,
“Kind Heavenly Father and Saviour of men, I am pre-
pared to follow Thee on condition that I and my loved ones
are first guaranteed against loss and bodily suffering. ’ ’
But if it be otherwise—if you feel that once knowing
God’s will in the matter, you are prepared to obey him at
all hazards, and trust implicitly in his love, then take the
first step of faith by surrendering your carnal weapons to
the civil power; further light and guidance will then as-
suredly be yours, and you will know that peace of soul
which can never be yours until you have ceased the hopeless
struggle of trying to serve two masters. Christ said to his
disciples, “When they bring you unto the synagogue and
unto the magistrates and powers, take ye no thought how
or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall say; for the
Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought
to say,” and if this promise was theirs, surely if we render
Christ implicit obedience, the same Holy Spirit will not only
1. Luke, 12-4,


teach us what to say, hut also instruct us what to do in our
hour of trial and calamity. Are we to fear, then, for the ex-
istence of our nation, are we, the supposed enlightened
Christians of this twentieth century to strike no higher note
than the craven one of fear and dismay of those Jewish
priests and Pharisees, who in helpless bitterness cried:
“What do we, for this man doeth many miracles. If we let
Him thus alone, all men will believe on Him: and the Ro-
mans shall come and take away both our place and our
nation.” 1
Men will no doubt ask what is to become of Britain if
all her people act in this way. Will she not necessarily
cease to exist as a power, as the power amongst nations? In
the first place be it noted that it is an utter impossibility for
a nation as a whole to follow a certain policy based on
physical force for hundreds of years and then at a mo-
ment’s notice to turn completely, and immediately com-
mence to act up to the highest principles taught by the
Saviour in the Sermon on the Mount. Heiice the supposi-
tion is worthless.
But supposing it were possible for every individual of
the nation to take up the true Christian attitude immediate-
ly—with that action based on a profound conviction of the
sin of warfare arising from a sincere love of God as the
Universal Father, and of their fellow creatures as brethren,
and supposing again that the rest of their lives was in keep-
ing with this high Christian standard —then it may still be
open to the worldling to doubt the result, but the Christian
could not possibly fear, because he knows that righteousness
alone exalteth a nation, and he also knows that if such a
nation existed, it would make such rich spiritual discoveries,
that the whole world would be changed through its in-
fluence. If still in his heart, there lingers the fear of con-
sequences, then in God’s name, let him do his utmost to
1. John 11-48.


close all real Churches—to quench every spark of genuine
Christianity—let him close the mouth of every follower of
Jesus Christ, lest his nation become too Christ-like, and
be annihiliated.
The question, however, is not what would the nation do
under certain imaginary conditions, but what should the
individual Christian actually do here and now under the
present conditions, and to my mind there is only one answer
to that question.
But a multitude of voices still say how could the British
Government refuse to stand by outraged Belgium and by
her own sacred treaties and obligations? Perchance the
British Government could not, humanly speaking, do other-
wise than she has done—for nations, as well as individuals,
must reap as they have sown. But the British Government
is not a Christian Government in the full sense of that term.
It may and very possibly does contain not a few Christian
men—it may and does, in fact, embody in its policy, certain
principles which express more nearly, the spirit of Christ
than those embodied in the policies of many or, perhaps, of
all other nations—but still the fact remains that the British
Government cannot rise beyond the general average of
public opinion—it will not, it cannot mount higher than the
ideals of the individuals supportng it. The mass of the
British people still, in practice, though not in Church theory,
have their faith firmly fixed not in God, but in navies and in
armies. Only in a few things which are entirely out of their
immediate control, do they feel justified as a people in trust-
ing God, and in praying to him for relief. They will pray
as a nation for the breaking up of a severe drought, but
where, as in the ease of war, they themselves can apparently
carry out their own schemes independent of God, they count
their ships and men and strike a balance—God himself in
such cases is permitted to be present at their deliberations


only on sufferance —He is a spectator to be called on only
at psychological moments, to add to their effects but other-
wise to be kept at a respectful distance.
We, as Christians, certainly have no right to expect our
Government to act up to ideals much higher than the nation
as a whole is willing to embrace. We have no right to ex-
pect the authorities to adopt a high standard which the
Church itself cannot rise to. It is unreasonable in the ex-
treme to expect a Government to act on a high spiritual
plane when the nation it represents is living on the ma-
terial. But because the Government seems bound to act in
a certain way—the Christian must not lower his standard,
and follow their lead. An inveterate smoker may have done
irreparable injury to his tongue by inducing a cancerous
growth—he may in consequence have lost the power of
articulate speech, and be forced to communicate his thoughts
by means of his hands instead of his voice. He is driven to
act thus, not by the will of God, but because of his own
actions and of the inevitability of his reaping what he has
sown. But because this is so, it does not follow that the man
who, recognising that his body is the temple of the Holy
Spirit, has kept himself pure in this respect, and whose
organs of speech are hence sound as God intended they
should be—should feel compelled to act as does his diseased
brother, and refuse to communicate with his fellows, save
with his hands. In other words, your duty to your country
is not in every case what the State tells you it is—if you are
a Christian, you cannot afford, spiritually speaking, to crawl
because the State as a whole is unable to walk —nor to walk
because the State cannot run. Your duty is to act out
Christ’s teachings, and to rest assured that this is in the
best and truest interest of the particular nation of which
yeu are a member, and of the world as a whole of which you
axe a unit.


The work of the Christians of this age is to build up a
new fighting line in advance of the old. Though compara-
tively few in numbers, we must not waver—we must trust to
reinforcements coming up and they will come up if only we
are faithful. Thus only will a new, a nobler, a better, a
more enlightened public opinion be established, which shall
finally cause the abolition of war, because all the former
combatants have shifted the sphere of their fighting to a
higher plane, and because all have at length recognised that
war was essentially a man-made evil which flourished only
so long as it took to break down centuries of vicious routine
thinking.
Finally, Britain has, in some quarters, been blamed for
not being ready for war, thus tempting other nations to take
advantage of her unpreparedness. Any amount of this so-
called preparedness on her part would not have prevented
war. It might possibly have postponed the actual outbreak,
but that simply means bequeathing a legacy of war, of
hatred, of bitterness—to millions of God’s creatures yet un-
born. The true Christian has a nobler legacy to leave—a
legacy of peace, of love, of goodwill to men which the world
cannot give nor yet take away.
uAAJP "vv-c\ (\£^cL J
!W\Cj2 ) LUrU/ crvJL
fli-v^rCixA.
\A IWWA., ikl


VI.—PATRIOTISM.


VI.—PATRIOTISM.
The two opening words of what is commonly called
“ The Lord’s Prayer ” will, if properly understood, show
the Christian that any patriotism which demands the
annihilation of our brother man, is false. God is the
Father of all. We then, God’s creatures, are brothers,
irrespective of race or nationality, and one and all may
find salvation in Him. “ Then said Peter, I perceive
that God is no respecter of persons. But in every nation
he that feareth Him and worketh righteousness is
accepted with Him.” Acts 10, 34, and 35. Our
God is thus seen to be not a tribal God, but a
Universal Father. If we realise this, we shall
also realise that the British soldier who thrusts
the bayonet, as well as the German into whose quivering
body that bayonet is thrust, are both children of the
same Heavenly Parent —the German who fires the shell
as well as the Belgian peasant whose home is destroyed
by that shell are both sons of the same God : but they
do not fully understand this, else they would not, nay
they could not act thus.
At present, the highest form of patriotism is associated
with war and and with a display of brute force —he who
cannot violate his Christian conscienceby participating in
such a display, is in the eyes of his Government and of
his fellow men, not a patriot. The Christian, however,
must know of a higher patriotism —a patriotism which
substitutes a love of God for the so called love of one’s
country —and which shall never result in the selfish de-
fence of one’s privileges against the common interests of
mankind.
Prof. D. K. Picken, of Ormond College, Melbourne, in
an article to the “ Australasian Intercollegian ” entitled
“ Christianity and Patriotism,” says: —


“ The war is an integral part of our national history, or-
ganically linked with our past and in that sense inevit-
able. And every other attribute of our British citizen-
ship sinks for the time being into insignificance by com-
parison with the fact that we are individuals of a nation
which is involved in the most gigantic ‘ life and death
struggle ’ the world has ever seen.
“As a mere matter of commonsense organisation, the
affairs of the nation have been committed to its leading
men much more unreservedly than at ordinary times.
The rest of us have no choice but to put ourselves ab-
solutely at their disposal ; or, on the other hand, to re-
pudiate our British citizenship.”
This is but an example of the vicious unchristian
teaching by Christian men that is current at the pre-
sent time. Must we, as Christians, acquiesce in every-
thing that is an integral part of our national history, and
which is organically linked with our past ? If so, whence
would come reforms ? The affairs of our nation, we are
told, have as a matter of commonsense organisation,
been left in the hands of our nation’s leaders, whom we
have to follow blindly, or else repudiate our British
citizenship. In other words, the Professor prefers to
stand by the lower patriotism and for the time being, at
least, desert the higher; if we likewise cannot do this,
we are to repudiate our British citizenship. Better a
hundred times, I say, to repudiate it, than repudiate our
Christian citizenship by weakly crawling, in a spiritual
sense, simply because the nation as a whole cannot
walk.
Again, the Professor says, “ The men in control of the
nation’s affairs obviously have no time to deal with
doubtings and questionings. The time for these is past,
and the present national attitude is rightly to be taken


as the resultant of their past exercise. . . . The only
logical alternative to unquestioning loyalty in the present
crisis is radical denunciation and renunciation, departure
from British soil and permanent settlement in some
foreign land.”
In reply, I should say that the men in control of the
nation’s affairs are not thereby necessarily in control of
the lives of Christian men, body and soul—Christians
have entered into a sacred relationship with a Master
that the world knows not —a relationship which has led
in the past, and still does lead in the present, to a clash
between the wills of men in control of great State affairs
and the wills of those whose lives are controlled by
Jesus Christ. Again, we are not responsible for the
state of the world as we find it when first we attain to
years of understanding, but, in quitting it, we shall be
held responsible for the state of that part of the world’s
affairs, however small, which was within our power to
influence for the better. If we do not walk up to the
highest light within us, if from cowardice, from fear of
persecution or of unpopularity, we hide our light under
a bushel —then God will surely bring us to account. It
would be cowardly to leave one’s native land because its
Government would not live up to the high ideals de-
manded by Christianity, The true patriot will preach
his doctrine by life and speech so long as he is permitted
—if his countrymen will not listen and drive him from
the land, so much the worse for that country and for its
people.
That the Professor realises that war is contrary to the
spirit of Christianity can be gleaned from these words in
the same article : “ There must be effort to realise some-
thing, however little, of the Divine attitude towards war,
by studying the mind of Jesus. The controlling idea
here will be that the war is a climax of disobedience to


God’s will.” To my mind, there is little use in studying
the mind of Jesus on this or on any other burning ques-
tion unless we are prepared to walk up to the light
received as a result of such study, and this the writer
urges us not to do, at least, in the meantime. We are.
according to him, to follow our country’s leaders and
render them “ unquestioning loyalty,” while the Master's
quiet, but earnest “ Follow Me ” is to pass unheeded by
Christian ears.


VII.—CHARACTER.


VII—CHARACTER.
It is generally held by those who insist on the neces-
sity of war, that international fighting is a mighty
developer of the character of nations and of individuals.
That noble, generous, and true manly impulses, hitherto
seemingly dormant, are often revealed as the result of
the stern realities of war, is a fact that all men will
readily and gladly admit. We rejoice to know that our
British sailors and soldiers are second to none in their
generous and courteous treatment of the vanquished—
our blood tingles with pride to read of conquered
Germans rescued at the peril of the lives of our own
sailors and soldiers —it is undoubtedly a thing to be
proud of, that the men in the trenches can still be cheer-
ful, can still find pleasure in doing little acts of kindness
to one another, in spite of all their bitter hardships —it
is a grand thing to know that even for a brief space of
twenty-four hours the Spirit of Christ, on that memor-
able 25th of December, conquered the fell spirit of anti-
christ ; so that Briton and German could clasp hands,
could share each other’s luxuries sent by loving friends
at homo, and, for the time at least, call each other
brother.
If war were the only possible opportunity of calling
forth such noble traits of character, then possibly its
advocates would have a strong case in this direction at
least. But this is not so —the ordinary life of the nation
admits the exercise of all the nobility shown in war, and
infinitely more. Disasters by sea and by land, the shat-
tered ship, the entombed miners, the burning building,
the telescoped railway cars —these and many other
harrowing incidents of ordinary life are amply sufficient
to call forth all the noble qualities we have 'previously
mentioned —there is certainly no need to plunge nations


in war in order to bring out the noble traits of men’s
characters.
Apart altogether from overwhelming disasters, the
true man should find the depths of his soul stirred and
his noblest impulses called into being by the insistent
and sorrowful cry of the millions who patiently suffer
the wrongs of our present economic system. The fight
against the evils of the drink traffic, of the white slave
traffic, of unfeeling landlordism, of selfish capitalism, of
false religion, of ignorance, of disease, and of all other
things which hinder the true progress of mankind will
surely tax the energy and resources of the stoutest heart,
and develop the noblest of characters. Surely it will be
admitted that the character of David Livingstone was
one of the sturdiest, yet sweetest. Nevertheless, that
character was developed by a warfare, not against the
bodies of men, but against the ignorance and superstition
which dominated those bodies. And so it must ever be ;
the true Christian character is to be developed in a war-
fare against the spirit of sin, against the prince of the
powers of darkness. Our duty, as Christians, is not to
win the praise of men by following every line of action
the majority may dictate. Our one aim must be to
carry out God’s will concerning us. Let us ever remem-
ber Jesus Christ’s startling question, “ How can ye be-
lieve, which receive honour one of another, and seek
not the honour that comelh from God only ? ” John 5,
44.
Man, again, is called on to conquer Nature, not his
fellow-men. He must wrest from the soil the products
which are to be a blessing to mankind. His ingenuity
and physical powers will be called upon in a hundred
different ways to help provide for his own wants and
those of his fellows. Nothing is nobler than the honest
workman who takes a pride in his work, and who can


look the whole world in the face. His life is one of
construction, not of destruction —of blessing, not of
curse. It is work, not war, that is the true developer of
character. The Christian worker, at least, should be
able to say, God has given me this brain and all the
bodily powers which it controls ; it and they shall ever
be used to help my fellow-men. No power on earth shall
compel me to debase that brain by using it to outwit my
fellow-men either in business or in war —its keenness
shall never be used to track the enemy unawares and
shoot him down in his ignorance and helplessness—other
men may take advantage of me, but, God helping me,
I shall never take advantage of them, but shall ever
seek to imitate Jesus in going about and doing good.
That war has its debasing aspects, as far as character
forming is concerned, goes without saying. I read in
one of our leading daily newspapers the following head-
line ;
“ New Form of Sport—Crawling to the
Enemy.”
Then follows a “ thrilling account of a sniping encoun-
ter,” in which the following sentences occur :
“ The German was laughing and talking, I saw his
teeth glisten against my foresight, and I pulled the
trigger. He just gave a grunt and crumpled up.”
“Then a single German came through the woods
towards the Frencfy. I saw him fifty yards off. He
was coming along upright, quite carelessly, making a
great noise. I heard him before I saw him. I let him
get within twenty-five yards and shot him in the heart.
He never made a sound.”
“ They halted in front. I picked out the one I thought
was the officer. He stood facing the other way, and I


had a steady shot at him between the shoulders. He
went down, and that was all I saw.”
The article ends with these words :
41 They were pleased about the stalking. . . . All our
men have started it now. It is quite a popular amuse-
ment,”
The respectable daily paper makes no comment on
this damnable glorification of the human mind and soul
debased. Imagine a soldier writing home and describing
as a popular amusement the tracking up and shooting of
unsuspecting Germans, who have been, like himself,
made in the image of God. To be forced to do this thing
at all is shameful; but to glory in it, and treat the
slaying of men as a popular amusement, what shall we
say of it ? and what can we think of a paper that pub-
lishes such an article without comment ? Surely it is
evident that the war is completely debasing not only
many of our men at the front, but also millions of [those
far removed from the seat of war.


VIII. —ARMY CHAPLAINS AND THE
AMBULANCE CORPS.


VIII.—ARMY CHAPLAINS AND THE
AMBULANCE CORPS.
No true Christian can serve either as an army chap-
lain or as a member of the Ambulance Corps, If war is
opposed to the spirit of Christianity, then to do anything
which openly countenances war is as wrong as to
actively participate in the actual work of slaughter.
When you don the Government uniform and accept the
Government pay for services rendered —whether chap-
lain or ambulance man —you become part and parcel of
the Government’s fighting machine ; as necessary to its
successful working as is the man who handles the gun.
No army chaplain dare preach to his soldiers the full
gospel of Jesus Christ. In the warfare or to-day, Napo-
leon’s maxim, “ Mystify, mislead, and surprise the
enemy,” is just as important as it was a hundred years
ago. Here is an extract from an article which appeared
in the New Zealand Military Journal : —
“ Resourcefulness is to the soldier what cheese is to
the rat-trap. Used with a due regard to the object to be
achieved, it conceals the intention while preserving the
flavour of the bait, and inveigles the enemy into positions
of seeming advantage, and which in reality but spread
the toils that mean at least a good licking, and possibly
disaster and death. Knavery, used in the sense of cun-
ning, is permissible on the battlefield, and justifies the
expression that ‘All is fair in love and war,’ and for
this reason, when juggling with existence on the battle-
field, cannot be overestimated.”
Now, although this pernicious teaching is far from
that of Jesus Christ, no army chaplain would be per-
mitted to say aught against it. The chaplain is a tied
man —chained and fettered the moment he puts on the
Government uniform —he goes to the front a prisoner,


with a message he dare not tell, and which, if indeed
rashly uttered, would not be heard for the louder cry of
inconsistency arising from the man clothed in khaki, and
accepting military pay. If you would be a consistent
Christian, and you feel, as you quite well may, that your
duty calls you to the front to administer spiritual com-
forts, or to render medical aid, then you must go, clad in
your ordinary clothes, and at your own expense, or at
that of Christian men of like mind as yourself in this
matter. Then, whether chaplain or medical, you go a
free man with a full message, and your work will count,
because it is of God and not of men. If the Government
or military authorities will not permit assistance on
these terms —the responsibility rests with them, and not
with you. God will assuredly open other avenues of
service for all his willing servants.
to Ua-
\A-* a^C!L^>Aa^XL^-'\v
'Vv>uC-^l/vvA
$JjLe . 7
Oa a
|Wl£a Wv, Vwvcl ''i'toc ’^y
(U-2&&A-C6 tJiv_GAA
*V\A\ <


IX.—CONCLUSION.


IX. CONCLUSION:—
In conclusion, it seems to me after a prayerful and
thoughtful consideration of this weighty matter, that the
duty of the Christian is plain. The carrying out of that
duty may be hard—it may mean the reconstruction in great
part of your lives—it may mean to some Christian men in
this land, the closing down of that part of their business
which is directly concerned with the active prosecution of
the present war—it may mean the conversion of friendships
to enmities—it may mean that you will have to establish
secondary schools for your children at your own expense—
for you must be aware that all objectors who refuse military
duties are by our present New Zealand Defence Act, prac-
tically shut out from the benefits of higher education and
from the Civil Service—it may mean some or all of these
things as time goes on—but the true Christian will not let
such considerations influence his loyalty to Christ. Our
Saviour in these stirring times has yet many hard things to
say unto us. shall He, in sadness, be compelled to add as
to his wondering disciples of old, “but ye cannot bear them
now,” May the kind Father of all help us to pray in sin-
cerity and in truth, “Yea, Lord, speak, for with Thy help
we can and will bear them even now.” “Follow Me” is a
call coming with fresh and fuller meaning to many a
Christian to-day—the beginnings of a truer Christian ex-
pression may be small, but it seems ever to have been the
will of God to confound the great and strong by the small
and weak. To-day, Christian men and women everywhere
have tremendous opportunities placed in their hands—many
of the Churches and of the recognised Church leaders so
far have failed in this crisis—it is still left to individuals
from the rank and file to act humbly, and follow in the foot-
steps of their Master. When the scales fell from the eyes of
Saul after his short blindness—he went straightway and


preached Christ in the synagogue, and almost immediately
we are told that Saul increased the more in strength. God
grant that the scales may fall from the eyes oE Christians
the world over, and that they too, may straightway rise to
preach the new yet old, old doctrine of love—then they, like
Paul, will most assuredly increase in wisdom and in power.
The strength of the witness of the individual for Christ
in this matter will depend to a large extent on his present
and past witness for Him in all other matters—we cannot
expect to witness powerfully for Christ at a crisis when the
life has not witnessed consistently for Him in ordinary
times.
But here I must utter a solemn warning. Let no man
adopt the attitude herein set forth until he fully under-
stands its complete import. You must not, under any cir-
cumstances, accept it unless you are prepared, if need be,
to lose all for your convictions. There is always the possi-
bility of the call to make that sacrifice. The Socialists have
worked hard for peace—and some of them even now are
standing faithfully by their principles, and suffering ac-
cordingly—all honour to such men—but many of the
Socialists feel that all they have or ever will have is centred
in this life and in this world. With such a narrow vision, it
is not to be wondered at that the present strain has been
too great for the foundation of their structure and that
many have, for a time, forgotten the brotherhood of man
they once so eloquently preached. This doctrine will not
guarantee you against personal loss—if men who know
not Christ and care little for humanity adopt it—they may
lose all and then say in bitter remorse—this, then, is all
your doctrine leads to—away with it; but the Christian
dare not speak thus —for was it not their Master who said:
“The foxes have holes, the birds of the air have nests, but
the Son of Man has not where to lay His head,” and if it


should happen that for some the pathway lies along the line
of suffering, can we not still “rejoice and he exceeding glad,
for so persecuted they the prophets.”
But let none of us dwell overmuch on the possibility of
suffering loss, nor yet brood on the difficulties to be faced
and overcome, but let us rather rejoice that we are per-
mitted to take a small part in the extension of Christ’s
Kingdom on earth, let us remember, too, in the hour.of
trial and darkness, that he that endureth unto the end, the
same shall be saved, and that if we but follow our Master
steadfastly in deed and in truth, ever realising that our life
is to be finally judged, not by the numbers we have won over
to our standpoint, but by the honesty of purpose with
which we have witnessed to what we personally conceived
to be the truth, we shall be more than conquerors through
Him that loved us and shall be able to exclaim with Paul,
that we too, are “fully persuaded that neither death nor
life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.” 1
1. Rom. 8-38 and 39.


APPENDIX I.


A STILL LATER CABLE:
After what has already been written, this further information
regarding the Church’s position needs little comment.
The Jews of old were taught to offer only their best as sacrifice to
the Lord. We read in Leviticus I, 3 : “If his offering be a burnt
sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a male without blemish,” and again in
chap. 22, v. 19 and 20 : “Ye shall offer at your own will a male without
blemish, of the beeves, of the sheep or of the goats. But whatsoever hath
a blemish, that shall ye not offer; for it shall not be acceptable for you.”
In conjunction with this, let it be remembered that God gave of his
very best when it became needful that man should be redeemed;
“Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things such as silver and gold .... but with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot.” (1)
Yet, in spite of all this, the Bishop of London’s Ordination Council
decrees that only the blemished, the halt, the lame, and the blind shall
be retained for God’s service in the Church ; while all those who are
physically without such blemish are compelled by its fiat to do homage
to the great God of War.
I. Peter I, 18-19.


APPENDIX II.


Australasian Student Christian Movement.
AFFILIATED WITH THE WORLD’S STUDENT CHRISTIAN FEDERATION.
GENERAL s eor eta ry — ST A N LEY ADDISON, B.Sc.
Organ —The Australasian Intercollegian.
Chairmen of Departments—
D. K. Picken, M.A. F. H. L. Paton, M.A. J. Mackenzie
UNIVERSITY AND STUDENT VOLUNTEER THEOL. COLLEOE
COLLEGE. MOVEMENT DEPARTMENT.
Office: 225 COLLINS ST.. MELBOURNE. VICTORIA.
May 14TH, 1915.
MR. H. R. URQUHART,
Auckland, N.Zealand.
Dear Mr. Urquhart,
I duly received the Manuscript of your Essay. You will have had
my cable in reference to it. I am sorry if it had seemed to you that
we have been rather a long time in replying. As a matter of fact, the
Manuscript had to be gone through very carefully before we could
come to a decision as to whether to accede to your request regarding
publication, or not. I have had it looked into by persons specially
qualified to give an opinion, and they have advised me that it is not
the type of publication which it is considered the Student Movement
should put out at this time. As far as lam able to understand it, it is
not the point of view which is expressed that they do not agree with,
but rather the form in which it is put.
I am advised that there is a tremendous amount to be said along
the line which you have written, and it is thought that the best way of
saying it would be, if you would agree to it, to write an article or a
series of articles for the Intercollegian or some other paper. If this
course were adopted, it would mean that the Editor of the paper
chosen could consult with you to some extent concerning the matter to
appear in the article, and also its form. We have come to the con-
clusion, after considerable consultation, that the wisest method of
producing matter for the consideration of students at this time, is for
there to be joint consultation in regard to it. This ensures that when
this course is adopted, a fuller and more rounded-off expression can be
got, than can be achieved through a purely individual expression of
ideas.
I hope you will see my point, and that it will not trouble you unduly
to have the MS. returned. My impression is, that the thing you are
fighting for is of immense value, and it is possible that it would be
wise to get Whitcombe & Tombs, or some other publishing firm to
publish your Essay. For ourselves we think the better course is the
one I have suggested.
Yours sincerely,
STANLEY ADDISON.


Auckland,
June ii, 1915.
THE EDITOR,
“ Australasian Intercollegian,”
Melbourne.
Dear Sir,
Please accept my thanks for the return of the manuscript of the
essay, “Christianity and War,” and especially for your kind letter in
reference thereto.
I was well aware when I asked the “Student Movement Press” to see
to the publication of this essay that all the chances were against its
undertaking the task. You are sufficiently well acquainted with the
ways of the world and of the Church’s real lack of independence to
make necessary the giving ot mv reasons for so thinking.
I do not wish to pose as a prophet, but still I would undertake to
point out each and every passage in the essay your advisers consider
should be “rounded off.” Ido not need their help, nor yet that of any
editor to write matter sufficiently “rounded off’ to suit the most
fastidious. But the Church to my mind has all along done far too
much of this “rounding off,” and has shirked its nobler task of
“squaring up’.’
I have seen sufficient of vour own articles to convince me that personally
you are largely with me in this matter, and I rejoice to know that you
are so ably standing for a truer conception of Christianity. For myself
I have nothing but the deepest gratitude for the spiritual help the
Student Movement has rendered me, and while I shall still continue to
help the movement in every possible way I now realise that it has led
me along the path of truth as far as it dare.
Yours sincerely,
HARRY R. URQUHART


NEW ZEALAND POST OFFICE TELEGRAPHS.
§rigfn? f Melbourne. Date, 25-5-15.
U rquhart —Auckland.
Returning manuscript letter following.
Pittman
(Austral Publishing Company).
NEW ZEALAND POST OFFICE TELEGRAPHS.
Bdgin? f Christchurch. Date, 31-5-15.
U rquhart —Auckland.
Regret cannot publish MSS.
Returning it to-day.
Whitcorabes.
These further cables—the first from the Austral Publishing Com-
pany, which does all the printing for the Churches of Christ in
Australasia; the second from the well-known firm of Messrs. Whit-
combe & Tombs, N.Z.—merely show how far the Press is dominated
by the weight of public opinion and how difficult it is for views running
counter to that opinion to find means of adequate expression. In all
three instances these firms were guaranteed by me against financial loss
with regard to the matter of publication.
kXhaMj"
JLe \


Copies of this pamphlet may he procured at the Sun-
day School Book Depot, Auckland; from L. M. Isitt,
Stationer, Christchurch; and at the N.Z. Bible, Tract
and Book Society, Dunedin, Wellington and Invercargill.
[PRICE : 90. per copy.]


