

Pervv p«=^
'j C * . Ct l / W / W 1 j




Christmas on the Briny.
THE
INNOCENTS
ABROAD.
A Holiday Trip to the Abrolhos
Islands.
By W. B. CHRISTIE.
Constantine and Gardner,
Printers.




PUBLISHER’S NOTE.
The editor of the ‘’Geraldton Guar-
dian has to acknowledge with thanks
the author's courtesy in supplying
him with the following interesting ac-
count of a trip to the Abrolhos
Islands for publication in that paper.
It has been suggested that their re-
publication in booklet form might do
much to advertise these islands as a
holiday resort, and Mr. Christie cour-
teously gave his permission, h nee this
unpretentious booklet.




THE I INNOCENTS ABROAD.
CHRISTMAS ON THE BRINY.
(By W; B. Christie.)
"What shall we do with ourselves
during the holidays ?” was a question
put by o'ne to another amongst a do-
zen or so of the new and old residents
of Geraldton a few weeks ago.
"What about the Abrolhos ?’’ some-
one suggested. The idea caught on,
nnd Mr. George Baston volunteered the
use of his fishing boat the *' While-
away” to take a party of us for a
cruise round the islands. The offer
was accepted. The provisioning ar-
rangements were left in the hands of
Mr. Baston.
We were all to be aboard by mid-
night on Thursday, 24th December,
but an hour before that time most of
the party had staggered down singly
or in groups of two or three to the
Esplanade jetty, where the "While-
away” was moored. Some were ac-
companied by friends to see the party
safely cff.


At twelve o’clock the cry of “A
Merry Christmas” was reciprocated
from shore to deck, and ere we had
time to “blow the froth off,” the or-
der was given to cast off the shore
lines, and a few minutes later we were
gliding slowly and silently through the
maze of boats, which lay at their
moorings, out into the expanse of still
waters of Champion Bay, on whose
face the gentle land breeze left scarce
a ripple ; out on to the mighty deep,
on whose bosom some two or three of
our party were to distinguish them-
selves a® only landsmen can when they
“go down to the sea in ships.”
We ought to have been in bed, but
were sq interested/ in the navigation of
the Bay that our rugs were unrolled
on the deck, and from 1 the recumbent
lounge of the hard boards we watched
the leading lights of the Bluff as they
came into line, and, the helm being put
down, we stood out through the chan-
nel in the Five Fathom hank, under
the fitful and intermittent glare of the
revolving light of Point Moore, which
shot its rays far across the bounding
billows of the ocean. But they didn’t
bound much ; they simply rose and fell
in long heavy undulations, and as oUr
good boat climbed to the top of one.


and gontly slithered down, half side-
ways, in!o the trough beyond, some
of our party crept softly to the side,
and taking an apparent interest in the
sparkling ripples as they danced past,
remarked, “Ough-h-h,” while another
retorted “Ach h-h —remarks which
were quite irrelevant to the general to-
pic of conversation—about the memor-
able repolt of the shipwrecked crew of
the Batavia on Pelsart Island, under
the bloodthirsty “Captain General ”
280 years ago, when the attempt of
the Dutch to colonise Now Holland
came to an abrupt and tragic termin-
ation.
Pd nt Moore light faded from l view—
th« pliades—Aldebaran, Orion and Si-
rius—had passed their meridian, and
were slowly sinking to the West. Aon
emar had dipped into the bank of
clouds which lay over the southern to-
ri; on, Canopus blazed and twinkled as
he swept in his majestic circle round
the pole ; the Cross and its attendant
Centauro were clinging to their upper
culmination, when the grey of the
cast told us that Christmas morning
was about to break.
In the gathering grey the stars fad-
ed where they hung, and as the light
broadened, we saw that our horizon


was bounded by the heaving waters.
The fleecy and burnished clouds seem-
ed to part to make way for the sun
as he emerged from the eastern sea and
lighted up a glittering path direct to
our craft, as though he had singled us
out as the only participants of his
glory. Scarcely a ripple was on the
water. The sails flopped lazily, and
with every heave of the swell the boom
gave a dull thud as it jerked the main
sheet taut, a nd lazily swung back to
gather force for the next thud.
"Coffee. Who says coffee ?” shouted
the chetf, who was presiding at the
primus stove below. We all said "cof-
fee,” and a mug of that steaming bev r-
e.age, with a biscuit, was passed
round to all hands as we lay in our
rugs a' out the deck.
"How’s her head ?” someone called
to our skipper at the helm.
"Her head’s anyhow," growled Nich-
olas ; "we’re becalmed,” and the boom
gave another thud as we slipped over
the summit of the swell.
"What depth of water here ?"
"About twenty fathoms," replied
Nick,
"Any fishing here ?"
"No ; it’s a sandy bottom. Try if
you like."


Lines were g6t out, baited and
thrown over. How very true the de-
scription of fishing : “a long string,
with a hook at one end and a fool at
the other.” Xot a bite rewarded our
efforts, although we sat with the lines
till long after breakfast. We threw
over an empty match box. It bobbed
up and down beside us for a long time
till a little puff of wind blew us away
from it. and then ceased so that the
loom might continue its flopping, as
it toyed with the main-sheet. The con-
versation drifted from the Captain
General to the facility with which mu-
tinies could bo fomented on sailing
ships they weee becalmed. I'hen.
naturally, from l mutiny to slavery, and
the condition of Carolina was discuss-
ed, and the wisdom of the remark
made by the Governor of the northern
half of that State to the Governor of
the soutliern half—that it “was a long
time between drinks.” Ihe idea caught
on like a fish-hook to a trouser leg,
but it took Mr. Baston, who was in
charge of the locker, some time to find
the corkscrew. But when he did find it
-ah !
Fitful little puffs of wind tightened
the sails at fitful intervals, and sont
the waters sparkling behind us, as the


sun began t<3 sink towards the west.
As sundown approached, a steady but
light breeze began to waft us slowly
forward. The light clouds of the wes-
tern horizon were painted in bright
golden hues, and the sun sank be-
neath the waters a glaring ball of fire
amid the living flame into which he
had touched the burnished clouds which
overhung him.
“Plenty of wind by and bye,” re-
marked the skipper, as our sympathies
again went out to the slaves of Caro-
lina. Under the influence of the rising
breeze our boat danced merrily through
the waves until Nicholas, wh Q had
mounted the masthead, said he could
hear the distant roll of the breakers as
they broke over the coral-capped reefs
of the Abrolhos, and we must lay the
boat to for the night. The boat was
thrown up into the wind, and every-
thing made safe as the new moon sank
beneath the horizon, and under the
splashing music of the waters we roll-
ed into our rugs and were lulled into
that soft slumber which was only dis-
turbed by the hardness of the deck on
which we lay. An occasional “Ough—
h—h” or “Ach —h —” smote dreamily
on our oai's, telling us that some, at
least, of our party did not trouble


particularly whether the ducks came
home or the cows laid.
Thus was our Christmas spent. “Cof-
fee !” shouted Miles at about five
o’clock, and we roused up to find the
boat slightly careening under a pleas-
ant breeze, which was blowing us along
at about six ov seven knots. We had
drifted a good way back and norther-
ly during the night, and it was not
till near ten o’clock, before we sighted
Goss Island, the most easterly of the
middle group of the Abrolhos —a low,
sandy spit, rising only a few feet
a) ove the surrounding waters. Our un-
accustomed eyes could not distinguish
it from th; crested foam of a rolling
wave till long after our watchful skip-
per po'need it out to us, and told us
he was on the look-out for a beacon-
pole which was erected on its shore.
Passing this island at a respectful
distance, so as to keep well away fr Q m
its outlying reefs, the Wallaby and
Pigeon Islands hoVe in view, and, en-
tering the channel which lay between
them, sailed up to a sheltered cove,
which afforded good anchorage, and
dropped anchor at about noon, hav-
ing been thirty-six on a journey which
with a moderate breeze would have oc-
cupied about eight.


IMG EON AND WALLABY ISLANDS.
The channel narrowed till it was not
n ore than three hundred yards or so
wide. Pigeon Island lay on dur left,
with, deep water right up to its pre-
cipitous rocky ban':. The island is one
rfcky coral mass, wieh scarce a sign
of vegetation. Its surface is covered
with mounds of rocks thrown toge-
ther or built into rough walls gleam-
ing white in the sun, and we are told
that these stones were built up as they
were removed from the deposit of gu-
ano which was worked here. Sixteen
hundred tons of this useful manure
has been shipped from the island,
which has an area of perhaps 400
acres. Going ashore we find it a bar-
ren, inhospitable rock—a gull or
mollyhawk sits here or there—-a few
hover about, but there is no" sign, of
the bird life which we were prepared t G
see here in such, abundance. Since the
removal of the guano, the island ap-
pears to have been so disturbed that
the birds have almost entirely' for-
saken it. It is too rough to walk
a l 'Out on with any comfort, so, look-
ing round it, we return to the dinghy
and put off to the boat, where lun-
cheon is ready for us.


To the right, and about half a mi,e
away, is East W'ajllaby Island. From
the deck, we see the channel line clear
ly defined against the shoal water,
out of which the island rises. As four
of our party have to get 'back by
Monday to resume their business —’and
this is Saturday—some of those t who
are going to remain put off in the
afternoon to Wallaby Island to select
a camp in which to wait till the boat
returns from Geraldton, whither, she
is to start on Sunday morning. We
expect her to return by Tuesday, at
furthest. There is little likelihood of
rain,' and we are going to|!camp on
the beach, with the prospect of plenty
of sport in fishing and wallaby and
pigeon shooting. The dinghy puts off
with four of the party, her full capa-
city* but ere she has reached halfway
to the shore the water suddenly shoals
and they have to get out and walk
the . remaining distance up to their
knees in water,, over the sharp coral
rocks which form the base on which
the island stands. It is fortunate thj a t
we brought strong, heavy boots with
us, for the sharp coral would have cut
light i ones to pieces, and 1 it f would lee
impossible to walk over that stretch
of shallow watei? in the bare feet. The


prospecting party, returned in a couple
of hours' with a couple of wallabies,
rnd reported hiving found a good
wind-break, where, Mr. Drewry bad
camped some twelve months or so
ago. In the afternoon the dinghy was
again despatched with pro/isions,
coo img utensils, and a sail to cover
over the wind-break, and so provide a
shade shelter for the eatables. Those
lelt G n i oard the boat put out the
I’n's and in a very short time had a
good bucketful of small schnapper. Mr.
Hand dl proved himself to be the pisca-
toralist in-chief, and to the culinary
skill of Mr. Nathan we owed a de-
lightfully fried fish supper..
In the morning wading operations
h',d to bo renewed, while breakfast
was being prepared', and. bedding and
wat r, were transported t G the camp.
Our caso of beer was sensibly diminish-
inr. The Governor of North Carolina
would have his \ say, and, amongst
oth r things which we were to give was
an order to the boat to bring out
from Goraldton, was another case, so
as, t 0 give “His Excellency,” as some-
one remarked, a fair show. The trans-
portation of otir party and bedding,
however, took two trip* of the dinghy
ani in the hurry of dur departure.


the order for the beei; was forgotten,
and not thought of till the boat had
hoisted sail and was fairly under way.
One of the legal members of our, par-
ty thought ho could convey the mes-
sage by signs, and, ho’d'ng up a bot-
tle and shouting frantically, he ran
a’ong the shoal water towards the
boat, when, tripping O vor a sharp piece
of coral, ha fell headlon/g with a splash
into a deeper hole, amid roars of
laughter bom baat and shore, in
which further opportunity for convey-
ing the message to the fast receding
I.ioat was lost. We sadly realised that,
if not absolute teetotallers, we would
at least have to place ourselves on
short commons, as far as beer was
concerned, for the remainder of the
trip. Water which has been stored for
some days 'ox a boat s tanks is not the
pleasantest of drinking. . There were
eight days of the trip yet to do, and
only eighteen bottles of. beer and four
of whisky amongst six of us. Mr. Bas-
lon was placed in charge of the
li (Uor, while one other learned mem-
ber of the Bar was placed in posses-
s’on of our only, corkscrew, with strict
injunctions that neither was to listen
to the feyrtn voice of the Governor of
Carolina, except twice a day, and then


only when every mempcr of the parly
was present-an injunction which it is
gratifying to note, they both rigidly
adhered to.
W allaby Islaind is about three miles
long by a little over a. mile wide, and
is the hiMiest of the group. Sand-hills
have been blown to a height of about
50 feet, and cover a good portion of
the bare coral rocks, of which the is-
land is composed. The sand is mixed
to some extent with guanto, and for
the most part the island is well cloth-
ed with short scrubby vegetation.
About a quarter of a mile north of
our camp, which we named “ Point
Desolation,” a mast has been erected
on the summit of the highest hill as a
beacon to navigators of the intricate
channels in the neighborhood. Some
200 ydrds north-etast of this beadon,
on bare limestone rocks, is a natural
well, or gnamma hole, about ten feet
deep, with a good supply of drink-
able water. It is well for tourists t Q
know of the existence of this well, as
otherwise the islands appear to be de-
void 1 of fresh water. I
Wallabies are fairly numerous on
this island, but as the island is of
very limited extent, they should be
protected from imdescriminate destruc-


tion, except for food. A party with a
few guns would exterminate them all
in a week or two. Pigeons also are
fairly plentiful. Most of these islands
are merely banks of dead coral eleva-
ted only a few feet above the sea and
devoid of vegetation, and G n those few
exceptions which are capable of sup-
porting animal life, the game at least
should bel preserved as a possible
means of life to shipwrecked or wea-
ther-bound crews who may be compell-
ed to remain on them for some time.
The southern shore of the, island is,
for the most part, bare and rocky
bluff headland, but on the northern
side there is a pleasant beach extend-
ing up to Turtle Bay, the only ready
pretty and pleasant spot on the whole
island—or indeed on any which wo
visited. There the sandy, beach shelves
gradually out into deep water, v and
while there we daily walked the three
miles along the beach to the bay to
Lathe, and spend most of the day.
Plenty of sponges, known as the ab-
dominal variety, lie about on the
beach. They are, of course, dried, and
for the most part rotted by the wea-
ther and exposure, but some are of
fine texture, and,appear to show th a t
the waters may be worth prospecting


with a view to opening up the indus-
try, The pretty little Lesser Tern is
numerous among the bird-life, She lays
a brown spotted egg in exposed situa-
tions on the bare rock.ln the season
they are said to possess a delicate
flavor. Some hundreds were gathered.
Tuesday evening arrived, and no sail
was visible from our look-out on the
hill. Our last loaf was cut into for
supper, and, unless the boat arrived
socn, we would have, to ba 1 e a dam-
per,-but the difficulty was in getting
wood enough for the fire to ba’e it in.
We, however, had plenty of potatoes
and onions, and crayfish were plenti-
ful, so we were in no fear of starva-
tion, but it was disappointing for the
I oat not to have showed up. With a
few pigeons shot by Mr. Kidd and cur-
ried crayfish and vegetables, we regal-
ed ourselves, and washing our supper
down with our evening modicum of
beer, turned in on the sands and talk-
ed till we fell asleep. The wallabies,
unaccustomed to seeing men or dogs,
are exceedingly tame, and during the
night hopped about the camp within
a few yards of our beds..


RAT AND WOODED ISLAND.
The Post Offijce—Weather bound —Home.
Wherever one looks from Wallaby Is-
land, little ,rocky islets stand out from
the coral plateau, and many of them
can be waded to. West Wallalby is an-
other good-sized island a mile and a
half or so from our camp. There i|s,
however, a Weep fissure-like channel be-
tween it and us, and the! distance is
somewhat groat to wade on the sharp,
coral bottom which intervenes. \At low
tide this rocky plateau is almost level
with the water, but we found plenty
of oysters on the islets we visited.
On Wednesday wa looked anxiously
for the boat. Our stay on the island
was becoming monotonous, as we had
no means of leaving it except where
we could wade to. We knew that plen-
ty of fresh bread would be on board,
and some other supplies which we
found we required, as well as water,
of which we w'ere running short. About
three o’clock, just as we were giving
up hope of her arrival that day, a sail
was descried coining over the horizon,
and, in an hour or so more, all doulbts
of identity were dispelled as the white


hull of the “While-away” hove in
sight, and she bore down to her an-
chorage at Pigeon Island.
Although we had had a good steady
breeze during the four days of our
stay on Wallaby Island, the boat had
become becalmed on her way to Ger-
aldton, and the passage across had
taken some forty-eight hours. The tide
being high, we at once struck camp,
and shifted our chattels aboard that
even : ng so as to be reaa'y for an early
start to Eat Island, some 14 miles to
the south, next morning.
Rat Island is probably the largest of
the group, and is a level plateau of
coral standing about ton feet out of
the sea, with an area of about 500
acres. Here extomsive deposits of
guano have been worked, and a large
stone shod for sorting in, besides huts
and tram lines, were erected, • but the
island having been worked out, every-
th ng worth taking away has been re-
moved to the present workings at the
Pelsart group. Only the walls of the
buildings now remain. What was once
a good stone jetty runs a few chains
out into fairly deep water. A few
Italian fishermen reside hero, and,
with their half-dozen boats moored


near the jetty, give the, place , a cobn-
paratively busy aspect. We found them
most obliging In every way. As we ap-
proached, they put off in their dinghy
and' assisted us to our moorings at
the head of the jetty. After mooring,
we went ashore to prospect.
The island is well clothed with low
shrubs, and in, many parts there is a
dense sward of wild oats and silver
grass, while numerous patches of ice-
plant denote that ,the soil is rich in
nitrogenous matters. About a hun-
dred acres of soil could be got on this
island which would grow prolific root
crops.
What attracted our interest most was
the sea fowl. Millions upon millions
of sooty and noddy terns rose in
clouds, and circling round for a few
minutes, settled again. This is one of
the breeding grounds, and hastening
oer to the place, the birds rose in
clouds at our approach, and circling
round us, almost within roach of our
hands, resented our intrusion by their
deafening cries. Every shrub and bush
had from two to half a down nests On
it, all with one egg, on which the hen
birds were sitting. On our approach
the bird would rise, but in a few min-


utes would circle round to the nest
again, and settle on the egg within
three feet of us. Thousands were al-
ready hatched, and in all stages of de-
velopment, and we had to pick our
steps to avoid treading on them). The
old birds show a strong . parental in.
stinct, and resent any interference with
their -young by cries and savage pecks,
but with a little patience they soon
become quiet, and will sit beside the
young while you place yoiur hand on
them.. Here and there on clear patches
thousands of the young in all stages
of growth are gathered together, co-
vering the whole grouind, while a few
of the older birds hover about them l .
11 looks like a densely packed feather-
ed school, with their teachers in
charge. Every here and there are these
schools, while on and under every
bush there are stragglers apparently
playing truant. The noddy terns are
about the size of pigeons, with rich
chocolate plumage. They take posses-
sion of the bushes, while the sooty
terns seem to lay their eggs on the
bare ground without any attempt at a
nest Fn parts the ground is so litter-
ed with eggs that a foot can hardly |>o
put down without treading on them.


They mix freely amongst themselves,
and as they , rise in ' flight, every few
minutes, they can be compared to no-
thing better than an imnnen.se swarm
of bees, covering acres in extent, while
their deafening screeches drown i every
other sound.
In the evening we found the bea h
and rocks about the jetty literally
alive with crayfish, so, baiting >one of
our fish pots, we threw it over the
side, and before bed time had our
dinghy half full of fine crustaceans.
The young sebnapper and whiting bit
freely, and we had a good catch, Mr.
Randell maintaining his reputation as
piscatorialist.
New Year’s morning broke fine and
cleat - , and most of us spent the fore-
noon in further explorations of the is-
land, while our skipper and chef took
advantage of the Italians’
offer of their wood fire on which to
boil a dozen or so crayfish. Before
noon we bade our friends good-bye and
stood out down Zeewych Channel to-
wards Woody Island, some ten miles
south. This island seems to derive its
name from the fact that two man-
grove trees grow in a salt lagoon on
it. That is the only sign of wood


which it presents. There are a few low
shrubs, but on the whole vegetation is
scanty. Here considerable quantities
of guano have been secured, but the
island is now worked out. The island
is cut into two by a narrow patch'of
shoal water, through which we can
wade at low tide. Bird life here is al-
most as numerous as at Rat Island.
The western half of Woody Island is a
ring of dead coral surrounding a land-
locked central lagoon of salt water.
The sooty terns’ eggs are scattered a ll
about the margin of this lagoon, a nd
appear to be hatched by the sun’s
he a t, as eve saw none of the birds sit-
ting on the egigs. Almost every limb
of the mangrove trees has its noddy
tern, and the young are getting aib(out,
though unable to fly. On the other
half of the island the birds rise in mil-
lions, forming a black circling cloud
against the, sky. The lagoon,, though
mostly shallow, is in some parts very
deep. As we stand, on the rocky bank
wandering how this could have been
formed, without any visible connection
with the sea, a turtle of some 300lbg.
weight happens slowly along, and
raises its head to reconnoitre. On see-
ing us, he immediately dived and scut-


tied off for the deop water with as-
tonishing velocity for so ungainly a
form.
Our boat was moored to one of the
piles which once formed the end of a
wooden jetty erected here. We put
off to her in the dinghy in time for
tea. Some threw out the lines, but
Nicholas told us there was no hope of
fish there. We did not get a bite.
The wind rose steadily, and by the
morning it was blowing a stiff gale,
so taking in a reef on the mainsail,
we set out for the Pelsart group, some
To or 20 miles further south. The wind,
however, increased, a nd It was thought
advisable to run for shelter into a
channel between tw 7 o bare coral . islets
near the “Tost Office.” Why it is call-
ed the “Post Office” it is difficult to
understand 1 , for no one lives within
miles. On the extremity of one of the
islets a beacon of stone has been
built, about the size of a sentry box,
and it is said that this gave rise to
the name. Karnes are evidently very
easily suggested.
Ate had to beat in to our shelter.
The channel is not more than a hun-
dred yards wide, a nd flanked on either
hand by sharp coral roc><s, which


voraciously bite a hole in the bottom
of cmr boat if we came into contact
with them. The, islets are forbidding
in their aspect, and although oysters
are to be had on them, the dbSculty
of walking over the loose, sharp cor-
als make us glad tu return to the
boat, whore we may get below into
shelter from tho now howling gale.
The anchor drags a few yards now
and then over the rocky bottom, and
a second is got ready to throw over,
but happily the first at last catohes a
good hold, and keeps us in safety from
the fury of the wind.
Square Island, Wreck Point, “Bata-
via’s Grave,” and Pelsart Island are
visible in the distance to the south,
but the living gale keeps us weather-
bound at our moorings. All Saturday
nitght it howled and whistled tnrough
the rigging.
Poor old “Father,” who had hither-
to insisted on sleeping on deck, realis-
ed with Sir Joseph Porter, in ‘ Pina-
fore”'—
“When the breezes blow,! generally go
below.
And seek the seclusion of my cabin
grants.


And so do Ms sisters and, Ms cousins
and Ms aunts.” f
The gale was too Much for “Father,”
so he joined the others in the hold, as
our vessel writhed under the fury of
the blast and tugged at her moor-
ings.
Sunday morning broke with the wind
unabated. The long, spray-capped
ocean rollers could be seen over the
top of Pels art Island, as they thund-
ered over the reefs and churned £hem;-
selves into seething masses of foam.
There was nd hope of shifting that
day. Nicholas told jjs it would be
madness, to attempt to run to Gerald-
tan in.the heavy ( sea wMchi'had been
lashed up by the southerly gjale, and
it was hopeless to attempt to beat
against that gale to Pelsart or the
other historical places,we- wished to
visit. , Our bread ,was run out, and we
made pufi’-de-lunes, but the rolling of
the boat was not conducive to the
culinary art. The biscuit tin was
nearing the bottom, and' we were re-
duced to one biscuit a meal,/although
we had plenty of tinned meats, and
fish and some oysters. • The last two
bottles of beer were opened as the sun
approached the yard-arm, and were


skilfully divided amongst the eight of
Towards evening the wind and!
the sky became overcast, so it was de-
cided that as v soon as practicable, we
would start for home. Nicholas told
as the glass was falling again, and
someone remarked that the “Governor
of North Carolina” had' been finally
deposed at 11 o’clock, •, ~
By Monday morning the wind had
considerably abated, and the sea had
gone down apgood deal, so that by 10
o’clock it was pronounced safe to face
homeward. The anchor was hove, and
im a few minutes we • We're bowling
along homeward under a ■ still fresh
gale. Showers of sp,ray dashed gainst
the boat and sent most of us below.
As we approached the open sea, we
foutnd it stilt running quite as high
as we wanted it. It was too rough tos
think of cooking anything, so dividing
a Swallow and Ariel plum pudding
amongst us, “Father” and a learned
member of the Bar retired to the se-
clusion of the' hold to.assiduously cul-
tivate a thirst, which they thought
would arrive at maturity by the timle
we reached Geraldton. 1 ■


At noon. Wizard Peak, Mt. Fairfax,
and the Moresby Range hove in view,
an'd by. three o’clock our chef shouted
down that the lighthouse was visible,
and we would be at anchor by haUf-
past four.
Alas for the uincertainties of wind-
jam minig craft ! The breeze which had
been gradually dying, forsook us alt o '
gether, and we lay helpless, but not
motionless, on the heavy billows. We
had' ample time now to study the geo-
graphy of the coast lino from a dis-
tance as we rose and fell from the
trough to the crest of the seas. The
western horizon-was a se a of flame as
the sun' sank beneath the waves; the
stars came out and twinkled mocking-
ly at us to the music of , the thudding
boom as it jerked the maim sheet to
the end of the horse; steerage way
wlais lost, and we flopped 1 and flound-
ered round all points of the compass.
For seven weary hours we watched the
shore. Point Moore light blazed on us
in its intermittent flashes, the lights
of the town shot their rays across the
waters to us as we picked out those
of well-known hostelries with which we
were so familiar. They only accentua-
ted a thirst which had already arriv-


od at its full maturity, and it was not
till near eleven that at last we dropj-
ped anchor, and came ashore at the
pier, blistered, sunburnt, storm-tossed,
but full of life and hope.
Never were higher encomiums passed
on the excellent management' of the
Globe Brewery ! Never were more un-
stinted praise to the tasteful shill of
the brewer, as we performed the final
act of a ten days’ jnost en-oyaible out-
ing.
Constantine & Gardner, Printers, GeraUUoa.






The Abrolhos Islands.
INFLUENCE OF OCEAN CURRENTS.
THE ZOOLOGICAL PROVINCE
OF AUSTRALIA.
Although there are few places on the
Australian coast where one can spend
a more enjoyable summer holiday than
the Abrolhos, both on account of the
free and “simple life” they afford, and
the great historic interest they possess
as being the scene of the final catas-
trophe vhich befel the Dutch attempt
to colonise Australia in D>29 under the
unfortunate Pelsart, the islands them-
selves arc of peculiar interest, and
have givetn iise t G much speculation as
to their origin.
They are all composed entirely ol
dead ccral, here and there partially' co-
vered bv wind-blown sand, and for the
most part not rising more than ten
or twelve feet above the water, while
many of them do rot attain an eleva-
tion of more than three or four feet.


The,, are situated on the 29th parallel
of south latitude, and are probably
further removed from the Equator
than any other coral islands in th»
world, while the indigenous vegeta-
tion, such a» it is, belongs t© a lati-
tude well wdthin the tropics. It is a
curious speculation, therefore, how
these islands came t© exist ini their
present position.
VUien we ‘ lay to" on our recent trip
our boat drifted considerably north-
ward. while closer to Geraldton the
northeily current is still more defined.
These northerly flowing waters are the
cold waters of the Southern Oce a n tra-
velling into the equatorial regions,
where th«y are wanned and supply the
current which passes westerly and sou-
therly through the Indian Ocean, at-
taining its greatest velocity as it pas-
ses tlnough the Mozambique Channel,
them:.} round the Cape of Cood Hope,
and north-westerly through the Carri-
bean Sea to form the Gulf stream,
which takes a north-easterly course to
impart their warm, genial climate to
the British Islands
The equatorial current of the Pacific
is broken up and delayed in its course
it passes through the Indian Archi-


pela„o and Sunda Islands, and its wa-
ters become warmer than those of any
other oceanic waters on the globe,
while ;he current itself is split up and
diverted into innumerable directions,
whhh make navigation extremely intri-
cate and dangerous. It finally emerges
from this intricate maze of islands at
about latitude lo south and longitude
115 cast, where portion of its waters
join the easterly current to Mozam-
bique. and the remainder flows about
south by west, being kept from the
Australian shorts by the stream of
cool water fro n the Southern Ocean,
which hugs the estralian coast line
till it reaches w T ell into the tropics,
and merges into the warmer water of
Oceania between Sharks Bay and
Java, as a lower current. A glance at
the map of the wor’d will show exact-
ly ho.v the islands of the Indian
Archipelago would operate in forming
the intricacies of the currents along
the north-west coast.
Owing to the rotation of the earth
being from west to east, the tendency
of all currents in the ocean is to flow
westward, unless some local cause de-
flects them from that course. The most
notable example of this deflection is


the Gulf stream, while the next most
important is the Pacific current in its
ramifications through the islands of
the Indian Archipelago.
Pol ir waters always flow towards
the equator, still partaking, however,
of the westerly direction unless deflect-
ed by local causes ; and, being cold,
flow beneath the warmer currents,
which have been expanded by equato-
rial heat, until, being w-armed, they
gradually rise and mingle with the
equatorial currents, which, i n addition
to their westerly motion, a'so flow
towards the Poles, till, becoming cool-
ed, they ain't and merge with the Po
Jar waters, thus maintaining a con-
tinued circu'ation.
Thus the polar current which flows
northerly past Geraldton has come up
from the south of Australia, and being
deflected by the southern currents from
the Pacific and Indian Ocean, has been
pressed, as it were, against the coast
line, attain i*g its narrowest part as it
passes beyond Sharks Bay.
The longitude of the Afjrolhos Islands
is a' out UG-fIOE., and here we may re-
fer to a bottle w hich was picked up on
December 9th—two or three week's 1 e
fore our visit--on East Wallaby Island,


by Mr. F. Burton, which has an ini-
port ant bearing' on the question under
discussion. This bottl-j was thrown
over from the German ship Innsbruck
on the 2nd June in longitude 111-41i2.
and latitude 21 S., and, as mentioned
in the “Guardian” of 15th December,
which quoted the written paper it con
tained, was for the pin pose of determ-
ining the course of tho current from
that point. Me do not know how long
this bottle was on the beach before it
was discovered, but wo may be pretty
certain that the longest portion of its
period afloat would be after it arriv-
ed at the Abrolhos, in battling with
the local counter currents which ihe
islands themselves would produce. Dur-
ing th? six months which elapsed from
the time it left the Innsbruck, it had
travelled through 8 degrees of latitude
southward and 1-11 of longitude west-
ward— a distance of about 600 miles—
in nautical phrase, about south by
quarter west. The position 111-41
and 21 south would be a ! out 80 miles
west of Flaming Head, and although
we have no data on which to estimate
the rate o! the current, the bottle
gives us absolute information as ■ to
its direction--south by quarter west.


Australia, and the whole of what is
known a s the zoological province O'
Australia, stands on an ocean plateau
which rarely exceeds 100 fathoms in
depth; while immediately beyond it,
the ocean suddenly attains a depth of
from 1000 to 1,200 fathoms. The edge
of this plateau is at Lombock Strait,
between Lorn Lock and Sambawa Is-
lands, to the cast of Java, and passes
northerly through the Strait of Macas-
sar, between Celebes and Borneo,
thence easterly, embracing the Molucca
Islands and New Guinea, and souther-
ly between Australia and New Zealand
and embracing Tasmania, The Abrol-
hos a lso stand on this plateau.
Thus all the Pacific waters which
pass to the eastward of Celebes and
Loinibock pass over a considerable por-
tion of this plateau, where the water
is only 100 fathoms deep, and there-
fore absorb a much larger amount o,
equatorial heat than the waters to the
west of that lino do, where they at-
tain a depth of 1000 to 1,200 fathoms.
This (eastern water, of the Australian
province, heated by passing over the
Australian plateau, is the water into
which the oaptain of the Innsbruck
threw his bottle. Thus, while the cli-


mate of Geraldton is tempered by Uia
cool waters of the northern current
from the Antarctic Ocean, the Abrol-
hos have an undue share of warmth
transmitted to them by the heatidl
waters of the Pacific as they enter the
Indian Ocean. It is this undue share
of heat which places these islands in
the unique position of being the most
southerly coral formations of the
world. The coral insect can live and
work i n the temperature which the wa
ters of the Pacific convey to them' to
a latitude beyond which the same tem-
perature is denied elsewhere.
Thus most of the flora and fauna
of those islands are distinctly tropical
in their character, although their habi-
tat is situated six degrees outside the
tropics.
The Australian plateau is not a
mere geographical phenomenon. It it
more, and forms the boundary bet-
ween the zoologica* provinces of Aus-
tralia and Malay. To the east of
Lombock Strait everything—'birds, ani-
mals, fish and even molluscs —are dis-
tinctly Australian In their types. To
the west they are a* distinctly Malay-
an, and although Lombock Strait it
less than twenty miles in width, yet


the flora and fauna on either sida of
it are as distinct as though they were
teparaied by half the diameter of the
globe The birds, which could easily
bridge the distance in their (lights, or
the (ish, which could traverse the wa-
ters in an hour, remain distinct and
faithful t Q (he type of their own zoo-
logical province. In the flora, too, the
trees and shrubs, the grasses and the
herbs, true to their province, retain
their botanical individuality, with aa
much persistence as though separated
from their neighbors across the strait,
by the broad waters of a mighty ocean
and give a contradiction to the doc-
trine* of Darwinism that migration has
anything to do with the origin of spe-
ties, or that natural selection plays
any part i n permanency of races.
The whole surroundings go to prove
the truth of the observations of Agas-
■is—that e a eh zoological province has
brought forth life l>est suited to its
own chemical and physical environ-
ment, without reference t Q the life al-
ready existing in the neighboring pro-
vinces.


THEIR PHYSICAL CONDITION.
A SHRINKING WORLD.
Another point which forcibly strikes
an observant visitor t Q the Abrolhos.
is that the mass of most of the islands
is composed of dead coral, iv>th scarce
a trace of . soil except wheel the gua-
no deposits have, in a te.v localities,
become mixed with th;
sand, which has enriched such patche*
so that they now grow stunted shruns,
and on the richer of these patches a
species of wild oats, and silver grass,
Lotn of which have evidently 1 >OO,-1 in-
troduced. This is specially not’.e.abla
on Rat Island, v here particularly rich
patches aggregating probably I 0(»
acres, plrow a most luxuriant and
dense crop of these grasses. But Rut
Island was for a l° n g time worked fot
its guano deposits, tramways were
built and horses were stationed there,
so that # the seeds brought over with
their fodder h ive germinated in the
better portions of the island. These
portions would thus at once become
the favorite feed'ug grounds for the
horses, whose dropp ngs have further


enriched the land, till now it would be
caj able of cultivation with good re-
sults.
But it is the islands in their natural
state, such as the Wallabies, Pigeon
Island, Moody Island, and the numer-
ous islets which rise from throe or f o ur
to ten or twelve feet above the seaw-
all coming under the description of
“dead coral”—which attract attention.
The coral insect does not build above
water, nor does it build at all in wa-
ter beyond a moderate depth. How,
then, do these coral islands come to
exist in their present position ?
There are two possible explanations
for the existence of these islands. Ei-
ther the plateau on which they stand
has been upheaved, and thus pushed
them up from below, or the ocean it-
self has receded, and left them expos-
ed to the atmosphere. Either of these
would have caused the destruction of
the insects who build them. A review
of the evidence in support of these
causes will be of interest.
For land t Q be upheaved it must ne-
cessarily be removed to a greater dis-
tance from the earth’s centre than it
w r as previously, and there are only two
kinds of forces which can effect such a


removal. First, the recoil of volcanic
action at a distance. When we dis-
charge a gun, half i'he force of the
charge is expended in driving the bul-
let, and the other half in its reaction
against the shoulder. If wo push ft
weight, half the strength exerted is in
moving the weight, while the other
half is spent in holding our feet in po-
sition. And so with all forces —the am-
ount spent in accomplishing its object
is equalled by the resistance against
which the fores is acting. Thus, if a
volcanic effort were being made at, say
Karakatoa, which is the nearest vol-
canic vent to the Abrolhos, the force
expended in the outbreak would bo
equalled by a recoil acting on some
part of the viscid interior of the earth,
in the opposite direction to the seat
of force. So that if the seat of force
were to lie between Karakatoa and the
Abrolhos, one portion of the force
would have its visible effect at Kara-
katoa, while the other might drive
the molten interior backward beneath
those islands, and thus elevate them.
Rut in any case, by the displacement
of matter at the seat of force, a vacu-
um would be caused which. In its turn,
would be compensated for by the sub-


sidince of a portion of the earth's sur-
face, or ocean bed, to mah'e up for it.
As a rule, these subsidences are sud-
den, and, if they take place on landi,
are always disastrous. Thus the great
earthquake at Lisbon in 1775, was so
sudden that in less than six minutes
the land had sunk 600 ft., and of 60 -
000 persons assembled G n the new mar-
ble pier, not one of the bodies ever
rose to the surface. At the same time
a town in Morocco, with 10,000 inhab-
itants was swallowed, and not one es-
caped. At Kingston harbor, in Jamai-
ca, a similar subsidence took place
with equal suddenness, and for nearly
a century afterwards the remains of
warehouses could be seen a hundred
feet or so below the shipping. And so
on. Instances may be multiplied. The
Tiuiiii of Cutch in India, the sinking of
the South Island of New Zealand, the
disaster a t San Francisco, a n I the ca-
tastrophe of Messina, all are the ef-
fects of the same forces which result i n
the sudden alteration of relative lev-
f l here is another force w hich also
causes upheaval. If two subsidences
take place, causing what are known as
"deeps” in the ocean, in proximity to


each other, they net as wedges on the
ocean bed intervening, and force it up-
ward, often folding and distorting
stratified deposits, in a remarkable
manner, but always forcing ;t into
ridges and mountains which frequently
are volcanic. One of the most notably
instances of this kind of upheaval is
New Zealand. On each side of it is a
“deep,” caused by subsidence of the
ocean bed. These acting algainst each
other, forced Now Zealand up into
high rarjgcs, which at once became the
theatre of volcan o action. One of
these “deeps” lies '.o the oast of New
South Wales.
Another instance is the “deep” which
lies to the south of, and is the cause
of, the Australian Tnis ‘deep,’
acting aga : nst the “deep” to the east
of New South Wales, forced jp the
south-eastern Conner of Australia, and,
if any part of Australia should be vol-
canic, that is the part. It is only in
this part Q f our island continent I that
we find extinct craters, such as Mount
Cambier in South Australia, and many
undoubted volcanic vents in Victoria,
while much of Now South Vales is
also of undoubted volcanic origin, the
cause of which can only be sought in


the action of these two “deeps,”
against the other.
The Abrolhos (group extends for a
distance of about sixty miles north
*®d south, and if they had been up-.
he a ved by any such action as that
above referred to, the are a on which
they stand must have been broken up
into ridges and contorted, and its
original levels, therefore, must have
been altered relatively one to the
oth'r, while portions which were not
c: coral formation would a’so have
been forced above water. As these
islands, however, are all of that for-
mation, and all of nearly uniform ele-
vation, the evidence is pretty conclu-
sive that upheaval has had no share
in the cause of their appearance.
But subsidence of the ocean bed has
another and different effect, which
causes the appeararVoe of dry land
without upheaval. The world is con-
tinually shrinking in diameter at the
rate of about four feet in a year. The
S'lin’s present rate of contraction, as
determined I y astronomers, is four
miles in a century, that of the o a rth
is one mile in about fourteen centu-
ries.


Every volcanic outburst, every earth
tremor, is the effect of this shrinking
of the earth’s diameter, and there is
no out]muring of volcanic production
that is not accompanied by a compen-
sating, subsidence at some part of the
earth’s surface. But as the area of
the oceans is two and a half times the
area of dry land, it follows that five-
sevenths of the subsidences which take
place are in the ocean, and, therefore,
not visible to us, while much of that
which tabes place even on the land is
in inaccessible and uninhabited parts,
of which we have no cognisance. Thus
we know of but a very sma 1 ! propor-
tion of the subsidences which are con-
tinually taking place, although the
seismograph, a .n invention of recent
years, places on record very many
earth tremors of which w 7 e otherwise
would have no knowledge. AH these
tremors are the result of the settle-
ment of the earth’s crust, to accom-.
modate itself to the continually alter-
ing strain of which volcanic outbursts
ore the visible effect.
These subsidences of the ocean bed,
drain the waters off the shallower por-
tions, or oceanic p'ateaux, such as
that on which the A' roihos stnnd. Tf


the highest of these coral islands had
been built up to the water level, and
a series of subsidences in various parts
c/ the. ocean had taken place which
lowered the surface of the waters, say,
twelve feet, that would leave those is-
islands standing twelve feet out of the
water; while those portions of the
plate a u >n which the coral insects had
only built to within eight feet of the
surface, would be left four feet out of
the water, and the relative levels of
the islands would thus remain unalter-
ed.
One cannot sail amongst the Abrol-
hos group without being struck with
the unaltered relative positions in leyel
tvhioh they occupy, and, therefore, that
their existence to-day is due to sub-
sidences in the ocean’s bed which have
taken place in various parts of the
world, probably at various periods, to
tell us of seismic disturbances of which
we otherwise have no record.




