

! 9
• '
■ ■' .




Christianity and Civilisation.
THE ADDRESS
FROM THE CHAIR OF
18 8 4,
REY. GEORGE CAMPBELL,
REDFERN CHURCH, SYDNEY.
~ Published by Bequest.
SYDNEY— JOSEPH COOK & CO., 354, George Street,
and all Booksellers.
MELBOURNE—A. &W. BRUCE, 68, Elizabeth Street.
ADELAIDE and BRISBANE— Wesleyan Book Depots.
MDCCCLXXXIV.




Kws-s/Pee/ r isic
CHRISTIANITY AND CIVILISATION.
Christian Brethren—
A personal knowledge of the life and institutions of the age
in which he lives is essential to any man or minister who takes
an active interest in the progress of humanity, or in the advance-
ment of Christian truth and principles. It enables him to feel
the pulse of society, gauge its health and diseases, and discern
the character of the moral currents which circulate through its
entire frame. By this knowledge he learns the moral and
spiritual wants which crave for satisfaction; the vices which
degrade and the virtues which ennoble the life of the age ; the
springs of thought which sweeten or poison that life and the
bitter abuses and wrongs which cause the tears of suffering-
humanity to flow and raise the strong cry for redress and reform.
This knowledge of the life of the age in which he lives enables
the Christian man to apply intelligently those remedies he
believes will heal or alleviate its diseases and to extend the
sympathy he feels for humanity.
Equally essential to his sustained usefulness and courage in his
benevolent work and thought is an intimate acquaintance with
former ages, their life and institutions. The absence of such
intimate knowledge induces some good men to take a gloomy and
desponding view of the state of society and to speak in terms of
despair, almost of terror, of the hostile forces undermining the
Christian faith and destroying the sacred principles of Christian
civilisation. They cry, “ What is the cause that the former
days are better than these ?” and being unfamiliar with the
ignorance, the irreligion and unbelief of past centuries, “ they
do not enquire wisely concerning this.”
AVe are reminded by them of the passionate eagerness for
wealth, one of the chief vices of the European, Australian, and
American Continents; of the equally vicious, feverish and
restless pursuit of sensational and exciting pleasures; of the
sweltering vice and misery huddling together in the streets and
lanes of every great town and city ; of the prevalence of breeding
crime ; of the cool and deliberate onslaughts of sceptical science
led by leading minds against the Divine origin of Christianity, the
spiritual nature and destiny of man ; of the grave moral tendency
of certain philosophic theories, sheltering themselves under the
authority of recent speculations and discoveries, and we are re-
minded of the wave of doubt now sweeping over the minds of
the thoughtful and unthoughtful youth in every section of the
Christian Churches, alarming pious elders and arresting their
benevolent activities, and shaking the faith of even older minds,
in the older positive and accepted creeds.


In all this there is no real peril to Christianity nor cause for
alarm. Truth and goodness must ultimately prevail. From
intense intellectual activity Christianity has nothing whatever to
fear. The conflict between unbelief and Christian truth is as
ancient as Christianity itself, and has often been as virulent and
as deadly as at the present time. Moreover, modern ignorance
is not so dense and modern vice is not so appaling as the ignor-
ance and vice of any past age, since Christianity entered the
world.
The new things we of to-day really possess are a clearer
intelligence to discern the follies and ignorance and vices and
crimes of men, and a keener sensibility to sympathise with the
errors and miseries of humanity.
We are impatient. The progress of Christianity is too slow ;
men do not appreciate and approach the mighty ideals of moral
and spiritual life of the Lord Jesus Christ, with the same rapidity
and intensity as they do their aims in the basal material forms
of life.
In this discontent with present progress often deepening into
despondency lies one great secret of that very progress. Were
we satisfied with our present attainments, personal or social,
were we satisfied with our present Christian activities, with the
relative conditions of wealth and poverty, of capital and labour,
of landlords and the tillers of the land, effort and enterprise in
the Churches and states would be paralysed. Our life is brief.
The work is great. Little has been done compared with what
has yet to be accomplished before those grand ideals of humanity
shall be realised. We are in haste. The night cometh when no
man can work. The sun is dipping in the west, measuring off
our day’s work. But the work is (rod’s, to Whom one day is as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. His haste is
not our haste. His resources are not ours, time-life resources.
We cannot force His hand. He is the Sovereign of the present,
as of the past and of the future generations. And in the fulness
of His time, the Father of them all will complete His children’s
redemption!
THE CHRISTIAN IDEALS.
Eighteen hundred years ago the Lord Jesus Christ originated
Christianity, and deposited in humanity His superlatively sublime
ideals of the Divine personality and nature, of human character
and conduct. In His revelation God suddenly became the Father
of the human family, more than Creator, more that Sovereign,
more than Judge, the richest fullest Fatherhood, most pitiful and
most gracious, the mightiest conception of God the world has ever
known. In the matchless person of Christ man met and blended
with God, became His kin, His child, the son of His deepest love,
His most tender compassion. This lofty ideal of sonhood to God
brought with it the equally sublime ideal of the brotherhood of


man. In the Son of Man, men of separate nationalities ceased
to be strangers, aliens, or foreigners, but were brothers indeed.
Civic, social, and hereditary class distinctions were left behind as
men rose to the higher plane, and became heirs of God and joint-
heirs with Christ. Mutual love as deep, pure, and unselfish as
the love of Christ formed the practical basis of the union and com-
munion of men. As the love of God was universal, unhampered
by conditions, unlimited by time, unbounded by place, the
common brotherhood’s love was of the same universal nature.
Every vestige of guilt, every stain of sin, every element of wrong
and oppression has to be loved out of the world, loved out of
existence.
These peerless ideals of man and human life stretched beyond
time, and lit up eternity. Life and immortality were revealed.
In Christ death died. Guilt, the sting of death, was withdrawn.
The life of God became the life of man. “ Because I live, ye
shall live also.” Eternal youth in full rounded manhood, in
perfect purity, in perfect wisdom, in perfect peace, in perfect
moral strength, and in perfect love, in an ever-enlarging ministry
of benevolence, was the ideal and realisable life of man.
These immense possibilities are centered in Christ’s own person.
In Him these transcendent conceptions met and satisfied the
world’s deepest cravings. That Person is unique, solitary. A
Kingdom of God commensurate with humanity has concentred
round Him, held by His inherent attractive force, a vital and
deathless love.
This was a new religion, surpassing in grandeur and far-
reaching purpose anything the human mind had conceived or the
imagination had created. Philosophic Utopias, poetic Utopias
shrivel up under its warm, brilliant light. A kingdom of saved
men, sainted and embodying the richest beauty, the greatest
strength, and the most perfect unity—these mightiest ideals
constituted the mightiest religion, the most universal and com-
prehensive, and became in actual life the realised power of God
unto salvation to every one who believed.
This splendid religion touched the individual at the core of his
being, and powerfully influenced him to the outer rim of his
world-life. It redeemed him, and redeemed all his relations in
life. All life was made luminous, disclosing the hideousness of
sin, the disorganiser, the deranger, and the retarder of God’s
grand purposes ; penalty became more appalling, and punish-
ment more terrible under this heavenly light. The most influ-
ential institutions for the well-being of man sprang from its
bosom. By the poorest equipment the world has ever known,
and measured by its standard, the most likely to fail, Christ
Jesus passed into human history, and has accomplished for man-
kind the most stupendous triumphs, justified His loftiest claims,
His far-reaching prediction, fulfilled His wonderful promises, and
5


■with unexhausted vitality and energy He is to-day working out
His own sublime purpose to a glorious consummation. And,
therefore, in the words of Herder, that prediction and promise
are in ‘‘Jesus Christ himself, in the noblest and most perfect
sense the realised ideal of humanity.”
Christ is still in the world, in human experience, in human
history. His ideals transcend any actual attainments amongst
His most advanced disciples. He is far ahead of nineteenth
century civilisation. He is our “ Divinest symbol! Higher has
the human thought not yet reached.” “ A symbol of quite
perennial, infinite character, whose significance will ever demand
to be anew inquired into and anew made manifest.”
He is in our daily practical life, working in and by us His
ideals. His triumphs were never greater than at the present
hour. His name is above every name. Unto millions of human
hearts in _every nation He is precious. Viewed apart from mere
ecclesiastical organisation and sectional churchism at the present
time the spirit of Christ—which is Christianity—pervades and
influences humanity more intensely and intelligently, and more
extensively, than at any former period of the Christian era.
Christianity at this hour is the prime factor in the world’s civili-
sation. The spirit of self-sacrifice was never more real or more
comprehensive. Christian missionaries do most for “the nature
peoples.” By unselfish benevolence, by educational apparatus,
by the medical arts, by the elementary industrial appliances,
Christianity takes the side of the untutored savage races against
the so-called civilising traders. Under its benign inspiration,
superstition is losing its hold on the uncultured mind. H recog-
nises the rights of man—his original birthrights—against the
tyranny of brute force, of slavery, of wealth and privilege.
Christianity is the mother of genuine freedom of thought, and
inspires men to think, to prove all things. If at the present
time there is within the churches much doubt, there is more
strong and genuine faith in Christ and deeper conviction of the
truth of His deathless principles. In a word, we are persuaded
that Christianity is more deeply felt as an element of life, and
more influential in the individual, in society, in the foremost
institutions of modern Europe, and that its sublime ideals are
more profoundly understood and appreciated by the best thinkers
of the day, and more fully realised, than ever they have been
since the one hundred and twenty poor men and women assem-
bled in the upper room at Jerusalem and waited for the promise
of the Holy Spirit.
GUIDING THOUGHTS.
In the sequel to this address allow me to illustrate this state-
ment by a judicial appeal to history and fact in grouping great
salient features of moral history.


We must carry with us two or three preliminary remarks as
luminous thoughts to guide us in our investigation.
1. In the first place, in making this large and legitimate claim
for Christianity, we are gladdened to see that the higher analy-
tical criticism is most reverent towards Christianity as a moral
system. This is an immense advance on any former critical
generation. The age longs to be religious, we are informed, if
it only knew what to believe. It is unwearied in its praise of
the “ grand and simple creed ” of morals which is discovered in
the teachings and life of Christ. Amidst the gravest contro-
versies respecting the foundations of morality, the absolute
necessity for, and the supreme obligation of the Christian prin-
ciples of morality are fully recognised by the most subtle, and
perhaps the most formidable antagonists of superhuman Christi-
anity. They declaim against churches while they profess to
vindicate, and befriend the religion the churches misrepresent.
This state of mind is an enormous improvement on the licen-
tiousness and shallow denunciation which characterised the larger
number of last century’s ablest critics. Sincere men feel the
need of something to believe. They cannot live on barren
negations. A religious faith is a recognised want of the human
soul; and while candid and able minds are repelled by what
they have been taught to regard as Christian revelation, they
wisely cling to moral duty, to the moral ideals in the teachings
and example of Christ. Of course we believe those ideals are
unrealisable without the superhuman origin and inspiration of the
Lord Jesus Christ; without His perpetual presence and superin-
dence in the mind that strives after the fulness of the stature of
Christian manhood.
2. Theoretical critics in religion and in the higher walks of
political econo my in our day, are very far from discrediting religion
in the broad sense of the term, as a weakness, or a superstition, or
as the creation of priestcraft, to get rid of which is a leading duty
of the mature man. This was their attitude in some portions of
last century, especially when Butler wrote. It is very different
to-day. M. Henan says, “ All religions may be defective and
partial, but religion is none the less a olivine element in humanity,
and the mark of a superior fate.” “ The science of religion,”
says Max Muller, “ may be the last of the sciences which man is
destined to elaborate; but when it is elaborated, it will change
the aspect of the world, and give a new life to Christianity itself.
Then shall be established and reconstructed the true Civitas Dei
on foundations as wide as the ends of the world.”
Writing, not in the interests of Christianity, but of truth, M.
De Toequeville, estimating the value of democracy as the form
of government to which the tendency and trend of the modern
spirit moves, says,—“ The greatest danger attending the advance
of democracy is the disregard of every ideal consideration in the


passion for material comfort; and that passion has no check in a
democratic community hut religion .... I doubt whether
complete independence of religion and entire public freedom can
exist together. I am inclined to believe that where faith is
wanting, man must serve, and that in order to be free he must
believe.”
The voice of Henry George is being heard as no modern
writer on the burning questions of landlordism and the land,
capital and labour, wealth and poverty, is heard. Having re-
viewed the various Socialistic and Antisoeialistic theories
advanced for the solution of these perplexing problems, he says,
“ But it seems to me that the only power by which such a state
of society can be attained and preserved is that which the framers
of the schemes I speak of generally ignore, even when they do
not directly antagonise—a deep, definite, intense religious faith,
so clear, so burning, as to utterly melt away the thought of self.”
Thus the higher, most sincere, and able criticism clears the
ground, and points to a religious basis of life as absolutely
indispensable for the full development of the inoral nature of the
individual man, and for the attainment and preservation of the
social liberties and economic rights of society.
3. Once more, in our historical studies it is necessary to draw
a clear and clean distinction between Christianity and the
Christian Church, or Churches as ecclesiastical organisations.
The Church of Christ is that vast body of believing men who
fear God and work righteousness, dutiful and reverent to Him,
both within and without the historic Churches. Every impartial
student of the past ages will discover that the so-called Churches
of Christ often favoured practices, encouraged institutions, and
advanced claims which were a travesty of His teachings and
antagonistic to His spirit. The Church is the Body of Christ *
and the sectional Churches should be incarnations of His purity,
His love and His self-sacrifice which they have never been.
Christianity has often been wounded in the house of her friends.
Churches have sanctioned unjust laws, lust and ambition. Few
are free of the stains of the blood and tears of unrighteous,
unehristlike persecution. But the vital, regenerating and
ennobling spiritual forces of Christianity have been working in
humanity through, and often in spite of the imperfect social and
organic embodiments.
CHRISTIANITY AND FAMILY LIFE.
I. We begin with the cradle of society, the human family. One
of the darkest stains in ancient civilisation was the public ex-
posure of infants. The absolute power of life and death over
their offspring was conceded to the Roman parents. They had
the right of infanticide ; it was not a dead letter on the statute
books but systematically exercised according as poverty, parental
indolence or inconvenience dictated. Newborn infants were left


at certain fixed places to become the prey of wild beasts or birds;
to be rescued from death or starvation by men who secured and
trained the males as slaves and the females as prostitutes. It
was a recognised custom to expose- all deformed and sickly
children. So great was this evil, so abhorrent to the finer
instincts of the better Roman minds that poets, stoic philosophers
and historians in vain protested and declaimed against it.
This outrage on the nobler instincts of our humanity continued
for centuries, until the leaven of Christianity permeated the
parental heart and ultimately conquered the evil which neither
stoical jurists, nor ecclesiastical legislature could wholly destroy.
From the moment Jesus Christ took up infants into His arms,
and blessed them as children of the Divine Father’s family, as
unconscious citizens of the kingdom of Hod, their lives became
sacred, their preservation and training a bounden Christian duty.
Under the golden glow of the early Christian love, when Pagan
cruelty exposed its helpless infants, Christian charitv took them
up and provided homes and parents and asylums for them. From
Ibis Christian movement sprang a grand series of benevolent
institutions of a public and private character for the care and
cure, the comfort and education of the little ones exposed by
depraved parents to suffering, misfortune and every vice and
crime. And these monuments of pure Christian love are per-
petuated to the present hour in every Christian nation, and
wherever Christian Missionaries go, in counteracting the same
sad revolt against parental instincts.
The Roman father had absolute power over his children. He
could chastise them with impunity even to death. He could
chain, pledge, exile and sell as a slave his son or daughter. He
had perfect control over their property. He could choose a wife
for his son, divorce him from her and adopt him against his will
into another family.
Nor was this parental power a legal fiction, an inoperative
figment, but a paternal right exercised every day by Roman
citizens and continued for centuries after Christ. No student of
early history and morals can fail to admire the fine moral influ-
ence of Stoicism. During the early Christian transformation of
civil institutions it influenced Roman jurists and thereby became
an effective handmaid of spiritual Christianity. But to Jesus
Christ we owe the principle of perfect equality of rights of
children with the parents, after the years of manhood and woman-
hood are attained, while He reserved to the parents during their
lifetime the highest rights to the honour and reverence of their chil-
dren. The children had a personality to be equally respected in the
enjoyment of their rights and in the discharge of their duties as
that of the parents. This destroyed parental tyranny ; materially
influenced the customs ot private life long before it was crystalised
in legal forms. Here then is an undoubted evidence of the spirit


and tendency of Christianity to elevate and ennoble the original
rights of man, to control arbitrary power, to substitute affection
for imperialism, and to vindicate the claims of the solitary and
the weak.
CHRISTIANITY AND WOMEN.
11. Christianity is the most benign and influential friend of
woman she has ever known in any country, in any age. Her con-
dition under Pagan and other faiths, ancient and modern, contrasts
wonderfully with what she becomes when the principles of Christ
shape her individual and social life. In the older family institu-
tions her father had absolute control of her person and property,
and by marriage he transferred his rights to her husband. She
was in perpetual bondage. The object was to keep her property
in the family, and to keep her separate from public affairs. Of
personal, civil, social, or political rights she had none, except
such as her imperial master might confer. A court of her own
relations could inflict severest punishments. In the most polished
days of Roman civilisation there lay beneath this social disquali-
fication a supreme contempt for her moral and intellectual
nature. One philosopher alleges as the reason for her state of
tutelage, “ her levity of mind another Stoic, that it is “ due to
her infirmity of purpose.”
Unless he adopted a very lax form of marriage which sprang
into existence as a reaction against the rigid original Roman law,
the husband acquired his wife as a thing, and consequently held
her “ something better than his dog, a little dearer than his
horse.” She could earn nothing, own nothing. At the death
of her husband she shared his property as one of his daughters.
The annals of Rome record many examples of happy marriages
and heroic womanly devotion to purity. But is must be confessed
that, the contempt for her lack of intellectual and moral worth
found in the poets, satirists and historians of the imperial period
was generally merited by woman.
With Christianity came a new conception of woman of the
most noble and elevated character, which has steadily held on
its divine mission to the present time in every nation where
Christianity has become a recognised moral agent. Under
Christianity she became a sister, and therefore an equal of man.
This laid the foundation of the tendency to “ the personal and
proprietary independence of woman,” which, in modern times,
in nominal Christian nations, is culminating in the recognition of
woman’s rights in every department of social, legal, medical,
industrial, educational, and political activity.
All this woman owes to Jesus Christ. His ideal of her and
her relation to man swept up through the middle ages, and, long
after the Roman Empire had perished, gave reality and intense
interest to the chivalry of the 11th, 12th, and 13th centuries.
These ideals are still far in advance of modern attainments and
conceptions of women.


It is supposed by many of her modern advocates that she has
to work out her destiny by pursuing her interests and rights
apart from her natural relation to man, and that it is universally
true that she may achieve the highest perfection possible to her,
in solitary life, buch is not the Christian idea ofpnan, much less
of woman. We are bound together by the limitations of our
relations. Our life is a compromise. We accept restraints and
limits imposed by an instinctive relation that a higher ideal of
manhood and womanhood may be the result by the fuller dis-
charge of duties necessary to the richer development of that man
and womanhood. The ideal of man is not realised by his stand-
ing alone. The ideal of woman is not in solitary life. But the
modern tendency of the personal and proprietary independence is
to give to woman a place in municipal and political government:
to place her side by side with man in the race of industrial and
commercial life ; in one word, to unsex, to make a man of her in
working out her social destiny. Christianity gives her liberty and
equality to the full measure of her capacity ; but we must not at-
tempt to determine that her education is to be based on the assump-
tion that her life is to be one of celibacy, and that the marriage rela-
tion is only a “ parenthetical possibilitythat she has a relation to
the places and prizes of social life, independent of and apart from
the relation of marriage with all the dearest and most sacred
issues that relation involves. The first principles of a true
philosophy of human life lie in the marital relation. Her rights,
her duties, his rights, his duties, and their mutual obligations
are bound up with a true theory of the Divine institution of
marriage.
CHRISTIANITY AND MARRIAGE.
The Lord Jesus made an exception of the institution of
marriage. With it He is minute and specific. He publicly ex-
pounded its laws; He guarded its sacred obligations, and shed
a lustre over it as a holy thing. He saw the boundless evils
which would arise antagonistic to the deepest interests of
humanity by laxity of the marital relation—the shattering of
home-life, the neglect and ruin of children, the degradation of
women, the temptation to man to choose and set aside at the
caprice of passion and the utter destruction of family life from
which the whole stream of a people’s social and moral life is
sweetened or poisoned
The Master did not teach purity as some of the early Christian
fathers taught it. Their conception of purity developed ultimately
into the un-christian, dehumanising, and antisocial institution of
asceticism and celibacy. On this subject the Church has not been
true to the Author of Christianity. One of the darkest features
of the Church religion between the fourth and tenth centuries, is
the history of celibacy. It taught the mortification of the body,
perpetual virginity, and childless marriages, as of supreme value


in the sight of heaven. This doctrine drew off from family life
the most able, earnest and devout religious men during these
centuries, and completely cut off their legitimate line. Those
who were most sincere left no children, and therefore diminished
the inheritance of human good, while the morally weak, insincere,
and dishonest left offspring to chance and public protection, and
thus swelled the numbers of those exposed to every moral danger
and physical suffering. The system liberated a flood of licen-
tiousness and crime against families, and inspired hidden indul-
gence and unnatural vices.
No doubt it originated partly in an ascetic reaction on the
side of sexual purity as an extreme revolt against the boundless
licentiousness of the Roman Empire, and partly from an abnormal
ideal of human chastity, the unnatural strain of which average
humanity could not bear, and resulted in fearful excesses which
rivalled the worst days of Imperial Rome under the sacred
palladium of Christianity.
But Christianity was not responsible for the perversion of
natural instincts, and for the perversion of its own clear prin-
ciples, and such a system was a perversion of both. Christianity
purifies and never pollutes the life of man. In the presence of
Christ, in His teachings, in the presence of His apostles, and in
their teaching, we can enter every relation of life and breathe
the spirit of stainless purity.
MATERIALISM AND MARRIAGE.
If there is any aspect of materialism, and its practical sister
sensuality, which demands fearless exposure on the part of every
lover of his kind, of little children, every friend of woman and of
the State, it is that which, under the gnise of giving freedom
from the superstitions of religious creeds, insists that the sacred
sanctions of sexual relations which lie at the basis of the family
must be relaxed, and the marriage relation reconstructed on
another basis. Says one such teacher, “ Marriage is a doubling
of our duties and a halving of our rights.” “ The scientific
method,” says another, “has nothing in common with, or to
show in favour of, Biblical ideas of marriage.” This infamous
teaching claims the method of science as its guide, while it is as
false to history as it is unjust to Scripture on the question of the
marital relations. For example, Frederick Harrison, the apostle
of pure secularism, declares that Protestantism has only “a
dividing and anti-social and dehumanising influence ;” that under
it “ the power of the mother and the woman and the perpetuity
of marriage diminish, and its triumphs are towards divorce,
personal lawlessness, and industrial selfishness.”
We offer no apology for the errors of Protestantism, but we
must emphatically protest against the disingenuous insinuation
that evangelical Christianity is the enemy of the weak, of woman,
of family purity, and the friend of selfishness and personal law-


lessless. The Christianised mind would as soon think of recon-
structing the common basis of honesty and truthfulness as think
of reconstructing the Christian basis of the marriage institution.
We are on solid ground here, which must be defended against
all intruders. On this grave subject we are in perfect harmony
with the best ancient minds. Lucretius says, “ that the refine-
ment of the human race starts from chaste single marriage.”
And as another as significantly and tersely said, “ Lome rose by
the sanctity of family life, and fell when that sanctity was
undermined.”
We know what has happened during the ages since that fall.
The Christian idea of womanhood entered society. It recognised
her perfect equality with man in the sight of God, as a sister
and joint heir in Christ Jesus. It recognised her responsibilities
in the affairs and relations of life which fell to her lot. She
became one with him in the sacred unity of devotion and interest
by marriage, indissoluble except by death, or the one infamous
crime of unfaithfulness to the marital vow. She became his
coadjutor and co-worker in every good work. It gave birth to
the finest moral and benevolent ministries the world has ever
seen. Woman was ennobled in the Christian mind, and equally
removed from sensuality and asceticism. Any form of illicit
intercourse was regarded as sacrilege and a profanation of the
body, the temple of the Holy Spirit. Pagan society reproached
and taunted them for their modesty and purity. Chaste maidens
and faithful wives became a purifying element in the corrupt
mass of ancient society.
And when the barbarian Germanic and Keltic races swept over
Western Europe and took a place in history, they discovered the
same degraded condition of their women. Although singularly
chaste both before and after marriage, woman could be bought
or sold or killed by her husband. As also our own Anglo-
Saxon ancestors. Into these successively Christianity carried her
benevolent mission; up through all the ages, in all the people
she visits, through many vicissitudes, gradually but certainly and
effectively ameliorating the condition of women. It is impossible,
as Lecky says, to trace the annals of morals; but this we can
trace, the spirit and tendency and purpose of Christianity is to-
wards an ideal of womanhood far in advance of what modern
society has attained.
And should Christianity ever succumb to the attacks of her
enemies and “the sweet Galilean vision ” prove to be a myth,
and her ideals
*• Melt into air, into thin air,
And like the baseless fabric of a vision,
Leave not a rack behind,’’ —
woman will be the first to suffer. Let the selfish thorye
replace the lofty ideal, her degradation is certain and on her will
fall the heavy end of the melancholy result!


CHRISTIANITY AND SLAVERY.
_ Hl* It is doubtful if there ever existed an organised evil of such
gigantic dimensions and of such potency for creating human
misery as slavery. It was a bottomless pit of degradation, vice
and corruption. At the time of our Lord’s advent it had probably
reached its worst. Everywhere it ruled. Man was enslaved to man,
tribe to tribe, race to race, and nation to nation.
And yet, we are reminded, that the Lord Jesus never uttered
a sentence in condemnation of the terrible system, nor
raised a hand to liberate the poor and degraded slave. His
apostles even command slaves to obey their master and to remain
under the galling yoke. Still, we maintain, Christ was the friend
of the slave, and freed him, and will continue His benign work
until every man shall have his native rights. His method and
means of liberation are His own, and the mightiness and supreme
wisdom of these are vindicated by their latest results.
Christ came to save man from all bondage; to save the slave
and to save his master ; to individualise men in the first instance ;
to put the new spirit and new truth into the individual heart and
to energetically influence it in all the relations of life. The
enslaver required to be freed as well as the enslaved ; and this
was how Christ effected it. He revealed the grand ground-work
of our common humanity in the brotherhood of man. He saw
in the least and vilest, and taught men to see in them, his own
brothers. He was not ashamed to call them brethren and worthy
of redemption at such an infinite cost as His own precious life !
A new thing was seen among the early Christians. The slave
was recognised as a brother, a partaker of the divine nature, and
an heir of eternal life. At the love feast, at the Lord’s Table he
sat down with his master, ate of the same bread, drank from the
same cup and drew his deepest spiritual life and loftiest aspir-
ations from the same sacred source. He too was a son of God.
This was our Lord’s levelling up principle, lifting both master
and slave to a higher height and under brighter light, till they
beheld each other in their true relation, as joint heirs of God.
It was impossible that slavery could survive on that height, under
that light. The Cain-brotherhood died and the Christ-brother-
hood sprang in practical life.
Christianity gave the slave the status of a man. The Homan
slave had all the passions and propensities of a man without a
man’s rights or responsibilities. He sank, therefore, to deepest
degradation and merited the supreme contempt his servile con-
dition had induced. “ Nothing noble can exist in a slave,” cried
Cicero. Penal laws gave his master power to chastise his slave
even to death with impunity; the Christian Church held the
master guilty of a crime and excommunicated him for ever from
the Christian privileges. The civil laws offered little or no pro-
tection to the chastity of the female slave, the Christian society
14


sedulously guarded her honour as the honour of a sister. The
slave could not become virtuous after the Roman type of virtue.
The Roman ideal of human character was magnanimity, self-
reliance and courage, and his servile condition barred the slave’s
path to virtue. Christianity placed the highest type of virtue
within his reach. Obedience, gentleness, humility, submission
and resignation were neglected or held in contempt by the
Roman free man, but Christianity placed those virtues in the
first rank. The slave could cultivate them to perfection while
under the yoke, and rise to the highest dignity in the sight of
God. He was ennobled, he was enfranchised, without his civil
freedom. He could not, while remaining a slave, be a citizen in
the kingdom of the Caesars, but though a slave he became a
citizen of the kingdom of God! Christianity broke down the
distinction between the master and the slave and rendered free-
dom unnecessary.
Stoic moralists had seen long before this the natural equality
of mankind; all men, they taught, are by nature free, but the
exigencies of war enslave them. But these noble men had no
power to restore those original rights. Christianity had, and did
it. “ How can we keep in slavery the men for whom Christ
died?” the masters began to exclaim. How can we hold in
bondage those whom Christ has ransomed ? Are they not our
brothers ?
Emancipation commenced chiefly through the instrumentality
of Christian men, and by the Bth century of the Christian era
slavery in Europe was abolished. And wherever it reappeared,
it ultimately succumbed under the Christian influence, moulding
custom and influencing legislation, and ameliorating, where it
could not change, the condition of the slave. And on the
authority of Sir Thomas Smith, at the close of the 16th century
slaves were unknown in England; and the decline of slavery in
Eranee, he ascribes to the influence of Christianity.
MODERN SLAVERY.
British patriotism blushes, and Christian consciousness is
deeply pained, as we contemplate the introduction of modern
slavery of the African races. The skirts of Britain are stained
with the tears and blood of millions of innocent and unoffending men
and women whom she tore from their native shores, and consigned
to the unutterable sufferings and misery of slavery in her colonies.
And deeper and darker are the stains on the Spanish robes of
kings and princes for their larger share in the same infamous
slave trade.
The discovery of the American continent was the occasion and
maddened cupidity the cause of the outbreak of the African slave
trade.
The Roman Catholic Church by its popes and councils thundered
against slavery and promoted emancipation; and at the same time
15


taught the doctrine that the conversion of a stolen negro would
outweigh the sin of maustealing ; supported by all its in-
fluence the royal grants for the purchase of slaves ; and hy her
subsequent policy upheld the slavery planted in Spanish America.
Never was the irony of history more biting than when the
gallant ship Jesus sailed under the British flag to originate the
traffic in human beings, and when the Protestant Queen Eliza-
beth encouraged the trade and knighted John Hawkins, the
commander, as a mark of the royal favour for his successful
voyages. Anglican Bishops and Clergy favoured the trade and
wise Protestant theologians defended it on scriptural grounds.
The so-called Church of Christ, Catholic or Protestant, and
Christianity are not synonyms. Ignore this vital distinction and
the history of Christianity becomes a tangled skein a mass
of hopeless confusion. The errors and sins of the Churches are
laid to the charge of Christianity. Inspired by the Spirit of
Christ in one period, the Church takes the van in advancing human
interests and seals her sincerity by the blood of her martyrs.
At another period, inspired by low, mercenary or ambitious
motives she fights against the spirit Of Christ and His clearest
instructions. To-day she is persecuted, to-morrow she is the
persecutor; now fostering in her bosom scientific investigation
and then in the most intolerant spirit anathematising her ablest
thinkers, and devoutest sons.
What the British and Spanish nations, aided by their respective
Churches did to originate and support this horrid traffic, Christi-
anity in the interests of humanity and justice undid. It inspired
individual philanthropists and statesmen to rise and assert the
claims of the oppressed, to expose the anti-Christian principles of
holding human beings in bondage for personal or national
aggrandisement. Christianity inspired that great and noble
man William Wilberforee to initiate the public movement in
Britain in 1787, which culminated in one of the most illustrious
triumphs of Christian principle, by the passing of the Abolition
Bill, by which the British people paid twenty millions of pounds
to free the slaves in their colonies and made it impossible for a
slave to breathe in the British empire !
The force of an international conscience, created by Chris-
tianity, has destroyed slavery slowly in those other nations.
And our admiration and gratitude are still fresh from the con-
templation of such illustrious Americans as Garrison, Johnson,
Phillips, and Lincoln, whose religious convictions of the enormity
of the national sin of slavery brought them to the front, and
made them exponents of the Christian principle of brotherhood
which ultimately freed the American slaves.
The anti-slavery spirit of Christ moves through every land,
and has penetrated to the very heart of Central Africa in His
devoted sous. “ The open sore of Africa,” as Livingstone called
16


it, must be healed. And the cry of that noble Christian martyr,
as he knelt in his lonely hut and yielded up his wearied spirit,
has reached heaven, who has sent a loyal band of brothers to
heal it; among whom there stands out one at this hour in the
Soudan, whose unselfish devotion, whose love of the slave, whose
heroic and humane career, whose Christian loyalty and purity
distinguish him as a marvellous man, soldier, and philanthropist.
May the tears, prayers, and blood of General Gordon be rewarded
by the overthrow of slavery in that vast country, ere he closes
his eyes on this mortal scene !
CHRISTIANITY AND WAR.
IY, Does not red-handed war deal death and desolation to
humanity as she did when Christ came to our world? Yes, and
Christianity being the friend of man is the enemy of war, and
will not rest till war is slain. This lies at the basis of brotherhood-
peace between man and man, tribe and tribe, nation and nation.
Christ is the Prince of Peace and His followers are peace-makers.
This ideal peace inspired the early Christian with daring
enthusiasm to embrace death rather than fight his fellow-man
under the Poman Eagle. Spiritual Christianity has always
recognised the incongruity of Christian soldiery. But the ideals
of Christianity are so far in advance of civilisation that even now
she is compelled to make concessions to, and a compromise with
political conditions.
The mighty peaceful leaven has been at work to destroy in
her own way the hostile tendencies of man, and mitigate the
crime and cruelty and misery which flow from them, and to effect
a lasting victory over human selfishness and cupidity.
The wager of battle has disappeared, by which civil and tribal
disputes were decided in the blood of the disputants; duelling
has disappeared, by Avhich men of the same, or of different
nationalities, were required by the law of honour, to wipe out in
blood the stain of personal or social insult. Ambassadors are
now safe at foreign courts; and foreign residents are unharmed
when hostilities are declared. Among European peoples the
humane spirit of Christianity has secured the protection, in time
of war, of the aged, the sick, the helpless, women and children,
and each belligerent guards the wives and daughters of the
conquered people from the beastial passions of a maddened
soldiery. Prisoners of war are no longer slain, or imprisoned,
or enslaved, but exchanged at the close of the conflict.
International law is the creation of Christianity. All the
great European Powers are solemnly pledged to protect each
other’s wounded and dying in the field of battle, and, when
practicable, to find hospital accommodation for the ememy’s suf-
ferers. The ambulance corps, the military hospitals, the Red
Cross property, held for the use of the sick, are inviolable and
defended equally by both belligerents. Thus the spirit of Christ,,


11 love your enemies ’ ’ becomes incarnate on the very field of carnage,
and the spirit of love wrestles with the spirit of hate. This
century has seen realised the dream of good men in the estab-
lishment of international law. The Christian genius of Grotius
is enshrined with this latest fruit of Christianity. Mediation
between disputing nations has already averted war and secured
peace. Arbitration between nations, when the one has inten-
tionally or unintentionally inflicted injury on the other, is an
immense stride towards universal peace. And among many
settlements between disputants of recent years, none stands out
in such bold relief as the settlement of the “ Alabama Claims ”
between America and England. To the praise of Great Britain,
be it said, belongs the distinguished honour of accepting the
decision of the Geneva arbiters, by which she paid 15 millions
of money as an indemnity to America, for injuries done to her
commerce during the civil war. We cannot adequately estimate
the value of such a settlement. Two of the greatest commercial
powers in the world, in spite of the angry feelings of the war
party on both sides of the Atlantic, appealed to reason and not to
arms, to the permanent interests of their millions of subjects
and not to carnage. This is the most significant sign of Chris-
tian national enlightenment in modern times. Outside of nomin-
ally Christian nations in ancient or in modern times, nothing
approaching international law is known. The Mahomedan creed
makes such measures among Asiatic peoples impossible.
CHRISTIANITY AND CRIMINALS.
Y. Christianity is the friend of the fallen and the degraded, in
the lowest walks of human depravity. The criminal classes have
felt her benign influence. Christianity found the condition of
the ancient prisoner hopelessly terrible. Under the older cul-
tures there was no sympathy with the criminal, whether his crime
was nominal, or whether he had been nursed in vice. There is
scarcely a hint of any effort to soften his miserable condition;
to reform or educate him was undreamt of in those times. The
sexes were often huddled together in cells where air and light
were excluded; without sanatory convenience ; without medical
aid. Prisoners pined in prison for years without a trial till death
often relieved them from their misery. Over the dungeon doors
of ancient and comparatively modern times might be inscribed
the words of Dante, —
“All hope abandon ye who enter here.”
11l the fourth century, laws were framed by which the judges
were required weekly to visit the prisoners and supervise the con-
duct of the jailers. Before this, the philanthropy of Christ Jesus
inspired men to alleviate their sufferings and to regard them as
sharers of a common humanity.
The instructive contrast between the forms of punishments of
the past and present; of the condition and treatment of the


prisoners ; of the state of the prisons, and the provisions made
to promote the best interests of every section of the criminal
classes, is familiar to every observing mind. To what do we owe
this great change. Chiefly to Christianity. The biographer of
Howard, the prisoners’ greatest friend, in this and every Chris-
tian land, says, “ The midday sun is not more evidently the cause
of light and warmth and fruitfulness, than that Christian love
animated, induced, and constrained Howard to consecrate himself
actually to Cod’s service, and to sacrifice his life rather than his
fellow men should suffer, whom he might assist and relieve.”
Under no other religious system were such prison reforms
possible. Religious and secular teachers are set apart for their
benefit. The sexes are separated ; old and young are discrimin-
ately classified ; asylums, ragged schools and reformatories are
established. Degrading punishments are abolished. Torture and
physical mutilation —branding with hot irons, gouging out the
eyes, slitting the nose and cropping the ears—are cruelties of
the past. In one word, the function of Covernment, as defined
by William Ewart Gladstone, is being performed, namely, “To
make it easy for man to do what is right and difficult to do
wrong.”
Who can estimate the preventitive influence of such milder
measures ? Thousands of young children are rescued from a
life of possible crime and restored to the ranks of respectable
industry. And as public opinion becomes more completely
Christianised, Governments will become more paternal and adopt
wiser remedial and reformative methods to prevent the fall of
many as well as rescue the fallen.
Christianity and Industrial Life.
YI. We turn to social and industrial life, and are confronted
with the glaring inequalities of men, of the rich and poor, the
labourer and the capitalist, the landowner and land tiller, the
sinking misery of the lower classes, and the climbing luxury of
the upper classes. Commercial cupidity still grinds the face of
the poor man and the poor woman, till it is thin and pinched
with poverty. Things are very bad in many of the great cities
of modern Europe, perhaps worse in some respects than in any
past age. But a careful knowledge of the conditions of social
and industrial life, not merely in remote times, but within 200
years in Great Britain, Ireland, and the Continent of Europe,
will convince the impartial mind that these conditions are im-
mensely improved. The battles which have been fought for
civil and religious freedom have resulted in permanent victories.
The overthrow of industrial monopolies and guilds has opened
the fields of trades and manufactures to all comers. Hodge is
no longer bought and sold with the land he cultivates, or trans-
ferred as an appendage to the manor from sire to son. The
value of all kinds of labour has been immensely enhanced. The


common necessaries of personal and family life among the
artisans of to-day were the rarest luxuries of their forefathers.
The hours of working days are shortened everywhere. Toil is
not so hopeless to the vast majority of toilers. Ameliorating
elements have entered social life, to soften the to
elevate the taste, improve the intellect, and enrich the imagina-
tion. Facilities for travel have made the world wider ; the daily,
weekly, and monthly press lays on the supper table of the re-
motest cottage the doings and sayings of the world. Lectures
and literature remind almost the poorest man that he
“ Is heir of all the ages in the formest files of time,”
and can store his mind and imagination,
“ With the fairy tales of science, and the long results of time.”
Professor Emile de Laveleye, of Belgium, has recently in-
formed the world that Britain has worse laws than her conti-
nental sisters or her American cousins, and how much they need
mending to meet the wants of this wonderful mother age. But
he tells the world also that Britain is what she is in spite of her
bad laws, because she is Christian at the core and at the circum-
ference. Within and beyond the laws, the Christian activity,
enterprise, and self-sacrificing love are the secrets of Britain’s
greatness. He traces, as an impartial critic, her boundless pub-
lic and private charities, philanthropic and educational insitut-
tions, to her loyalty to the Gospel of the New Testament.
Still, there are bitter wrongs and grave inequalities forcing
, themselves on public attention and provoking public and private
revolt against civil and social order, and ecclesiastical pre-
tension. Sharpened intelligence, a truer sense of personal and
industrial rights, a consciousness of the tyranny of privilege and
the heartlessness of might against right, are qualities of mind
Christianity recognises and fosters. A love of justice and fair
play and humane treatment is her legitimate child. For in the
gospel of brotherly love lie the elements of a just communism.
Even in the dark heart of Nihilism, of Socialism, there is a divine
fire working blindly, which gives these movements a terrible per-
sistency. Christian men must yet openly recognise this soul of
truth in that dark body of error. The creed of many landlords
and land-grabbers, the creed of buying at the cheapest and sell-
ing at the dearest market, and the value of an article is what it
will bring—are not absolute truth. Under the shelter of these
infallible dogmas of political economy, men are guilty of grave
moral injustice, and violate the principles of brotherly love.
The unfortunate are crushed in the day of adversity ; the weak
struggler is sent to the wall; the industrious widow and, orphan
and single woman, whose unaided fingers must win their bread,
whose labour being plentiful is bought at the cheapest market, and
because they have no trade union at their back, are ground down
to starvation’s point, and often to despair. How can a Christian


become rich and get into easy, luxurious circumstances on the
spoils of his poverty-stricken brothers and sisters ? Depend upon
it, these commercial axioms do not define nor interpret the re-
lation of Christian brotherhood. Christian merchants, Christian
workmen, Christian buyers, Christian sellers, and Christian
manufacturers—not Christian men and merchants, Christian
men and buyers, Christian men and sellers—is Christianity. And
not, we most emphatically maintain, to drain the wealth from
the land by rack-rents imposed on the farmer, nor purchasing
labour at starvation prices, and then, when the bitter cry of dis-
tress comes to his ears, give a dole in charity out of his full
coffer to save the victims of wrong principles from the workhouse.
It must surely dawn on many a Christian mind that he has with-
held more than was right from the worker, and returns less as a
charity ! Here, then, is a fair field, white unto harvest, especi-
ally in the older countries, into which we earnestly pray God to
send forth labourers!
In this fragmentary effort to realise the historical and con-
temporary fruits of Christianity as the main and mightiest vital
force in civilisation, we have but touched the hem of a great and
exquisitely interesting theme. We have not ignored the other
civilising forces at work side by side with Christianity. These
work on the lower planes of mental and material spheres of life.
The medical, scientific, sanitary, literary, educational, legal, and
govermental institutions play a large part in human progress.
But Christianity furnishes the master motive to them all, and the
ideals up to which they vigorously struggle. The ideal beautiful,
the ideal good, the ideal true, and the ideal free, according to
the mind of God, she holds up to all men. And in working up
to them she inspires the purest instincts of our nature and gives
self-sacrificing love as the master motive. She lifts every duty,
every drudgery, every pursuit into the region of sacred obliga-
tion, creates a public and a private conscience, redeems life from
meanness, and ennobles the whole man !
THE CHURCHES AND CHRIST.
YII. We do not, however, shut our eyes to the sad fact that so
many who are confessedly and uneonfessedly influenced by Chris-
tianity, turn their backs on the Churches where the truth is
taught; or perhaps ignore or deny the superhuman claims of its
Author. We are also deeply concerned that so many skilled
workmen, whose lives are clean, should assume the attitude of
indifference to, or antagonise the claims on them of their best
Friend.
But we are more sadly concerned and anxious regarding the
unpalatable truth that no small share of the cause of this un-
happy estrangement lies at the doors of the Churches. They
have insisted on dogmas being accepted when there should have
been perfect freedom of thought. They have sundered what


God had joined, by distinguishing' secular and sacred persons,
places, and things, and divorced this world from that which is to
come —distinctions unauthorised by Scripture and derogatory to
Nature.
The Churches have assumed clerical, priestly, and ecclesias-
tical functions unfounded in the Gospel, or in reason. They
have acknowledged the equality of man within the pale of tire
Church, but have frowned upon every assertion of political
rights, and inculcated the duty of submission, resignation, and
passive obedience. They have usurped the right of God to rule
over man’s faith and conscience. They have too often taken the
side of privilege and capital, and left the industrial classes to
grapple, unhelped, with the great problems which burdened their
lives. The priests and preachers have too frequently appealed
to the superstition, the fears, and prejudices of the people,
rather than inform their reason and address their consciences,
and presented ignoble travesties of the Gospel of Divine love
and Christian brotherhood; and too often its sincere friends
have rendered the pure water of life unpalatable by narrow,
vindictive, partial pharisaism, by pompous ostenation and by a
spiritless insipidity ! In view of all this, are we not surprised
that so many have drunk of its living waters, and that in spite
of, all Christ has won and retains so many loyal hearts and
devoted lives in every rank and race of cultured and uncultured
men ?
We of the Free Churches in this free and happy land may not
be without sin in this grave matter. There are grave aspects
of ecclesiastical and priestly offences from which our principles
and invironment happily save us, into which I might remind
you that other and larger sections of the Christian community
have fallen. But recrimination is cheap rhetoric. We are not
without sin; let us, therefore, cast no stone at an erring sister
Church, but rather repent of and forsake our own sins.
Christianity is young, vital, vigorous at the heart of our
modern civilization. What she has done in the past, is doing-
now, is no adequate reason for her continued existence in the
future, if her work is done, and can do no more. She has toiled
1800 years, and yet it is but the third hour of the day. The
sun has not yet reached the zenith. She is just emerging from
the dim dawn-life. The noonday splendour is yet to come, when
her work will be still more glorious. Her eye is not dim, her
natural strength is not abated. Her eye is keen and clear to
see and search the weakness, the wants, the wickedness of
humanity ; to discern his sorrows, his sufferings, and the wrongs
of man. And her strength is equal to all demands, to supply
all wants, remove all weaknesses, to cure all sicknesses, and to
sympathise with all sufferers, to lift the lowest, and to purify
the vilest.
22


And with one word, my brethren, I close : I know of no means
by which to keep Christianity in onr own heart, in the Churches,
in the world, to do her great regenerating work, but to cultivate
nnweariedly a profound sympathy with the mind of Christ; to
live near Him; to preach Him, to unfold to the people His peer-
less excellence, His lofty claims, His soul-searching truths, His
infinite wisdom, His matchless compassion, and His unsearchable
love. To live that life, inspired by that love is to keep Christ
with us ; is to keep His ideals of life ever before us and to keep
and spread the vital energy which will realise these ideals in
human experience. And let us turn a face of steel against the
utilitarian selfishness which is sapping the manly interest of life,
and the purity of the inner relations of society. It is not selfish-
ness that has enriched the annals of human life we have gleaned
to-night, with its heroes and its saints. It is not selfishness that
bursts out in celestial splendour of noble deeds or sheds the soft
evening light on well-spent and benignant lives. It was not
selfishness that turned Paul’s back on the prizes of this world, or
impelled the first band of twelve valiant Christian brothers.
A glorious band the chosen few,
On whom the Spirit came ;
Twelve valiant saints, their hope they knew,
And mocked the cross and flame.
They met the tyrant’s brandished steel
The lion’s gory mane ;
They bowed their necks the death to feel
Who follows in their train 1
Nor was it selfishness that drove Howard to the prisons full of
plague and pestilence; that made John Brown die with the slave
girl’s kiss printed on his cheek; that impelled Wilberforce to
toil for the slaves ; that led David Livingstone to die in his rude
hut in utter loneliness. It was love; self-sacrificing love. All the
wrongs, all the evils, all the vices which have disappeared since the
Lord Jesus came, have been loved out of the world. All the un-
recorded triumphs over selfishness, temptation, appaling difficul-
ties have yielded to the love of God and the love of man. It is
the mightiest force in this Universe. The world is full of it, and
all religions will stand or fall as they create or do not create
unselfishness and love among men. Christ is the channel
through which flows to us down here the love of God our Father,
the love of common brotherhood, and by our hearts filled with
that love, will we as His disciples spread His name and His
kingdom among men. Now abideth faith —or the vision of Cod,
and hope —or the desire to be like Giod; and love —or oneness
with God. But the greatest of these is love !
Joseph Cook & Go., Printers, 354, George-strcet, Sydney,


