



CHRISTIAN ANTIQUITIES IN THE
NILE VALLEY


HENRY FROWDE, M.A.
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK
TORONTO AND MELBOURNE


A
3 X"
■1 R_
> " T|
■( *"
5 2
C/5
z
M
C
S — —
T . —
MAP No. 1.
SHENDI
NAGA
(TEMPLES)
MASSAWARAT
(TEMPLES)
CN
Q N
O
• >—<
■ N. EI *R<
M
z
<
Q
W
S
Q -
< %
*
O
<
03
02
<
& J**
Z
<
1—1
C/3 kL
NH
OH JFCJ
E r% T R
% U •
*
<
z
z
W
C/)
RO
O ■
CM M
rO *■
H* Z
1 < <
M *
#
CQ /
.1 s J
£
< m
EV
j&W
z
«<
S
O$
D
Q
S
O
3 U
H R-
<
Z
NN
w
H
W
0
J
0 2
H
ED DUE M


CHRISTIAN ANTIQUITIES
IN THE NILE VALLEY
A CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS THE STUDY
OF THE ANCIENT CHURCHES
BY SOMERS CLARKE, F.S.A.
HON. MEMBER OF THE COMIT& DE
CONSERVATION DES MONUMENTS
DE L'ART ARABE, CAIRO, AND
OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY, ALEXANDRIA
WITH MAPS
AND PLANS
OXFORD
CLARENDON PRESS


nr a, is -
V/
i 22 JU>l 1929
O-
"***!■* m^ y


, PAGE
7
. : . 16
• • -34
. 56
• 95
. 189
CONTENTS
CHAP.
I. HISTORICAL SKETCH 7
11. CONSTRUCTION . 16
111. DESCRIPTION AND DRAWINGS. SOBA TO HALFA , ... -34
IV „ „ HALFA TO PHILAE ... 56
V. „ ASWAN TO EL MADYNA . . 95
CONCLUSION . . 189
APPENDIX. LIST OF CHURCHES IN ARABIC AND TRANSLITERATED . 199
MAPS
NO. PLATE
1. I. SENNAR TO SHENDI .... preceding title-page
2. 11. KABUSHIA TO ABU HAMED . between pages 16 and 17
3. XXVII. FOURTH CATARACT TO MURSHID . ~ ~ 94 „ 95
4. XXVIII. GEZIRET THET TO ASFUN . . ~ 94 . „ 95
5. XLIII. ERMENT TO D£R EL BUKER . „ ~ 144 „ 145
6. XLIV. FASHN TO THE MEDITERRANEAN . ~ ~ 144 ~ 145


CORRIGENDA
P. 31, line 15 from top should read
(see Plates HI, iv, v, VIII, x, xi, xv, xvi, XVIII, xx, xxm, xxiv, xxxi,
XLV-LI, LIV-LVL)
P. 32, line 11 should read
(see Plates vi, vn, xn, XIII, xvn, xix, xx, xxm)
P. 52, line 3 should read
GEZIRET THfeT . MATUGA
„ line 13, for (Plate xxx) read (Plate xxix)


CHRISTIAN ANTIQUITIES IN THE
VALLEY OF THE NILE
CHAPTER I
HISTORICAL SKETCH
THE remains of ancient Egyptian buildings have, not unnaturally, absorbed
the attention of travellers and antiquaries, Christian antiquities, coming as they
do between ancient Egyptian and Saracenic monuments, have been unduly
neglected. In result, although the chain of history is, in fact, unbroken, we
might almost have supposed that, after a certain period, Egypt had ceased to
be. It may, however, be doubted whether elsewhere we have so continuous
a series of links, each allied in one way or another with those which went before
and with those which followed after.
The buildings which grew up under Christian influence have as yet been
but little studied, and it must be admitted that as we see them to-day, decrepit,
neglected, and ruined, they are not very attractive. If, in Egypt itself, i. e.
between Aswan and the sea, they are apt to "be overlooked, how much more
readily may they escape observation south of Aswan and far away into the Sudan,
where they are much more difficult of access ? Those who have studied that
interesting and valuable work, The Ancient Coptic Churches of Egypt, by Dr. A. J.
Butler, 1 will find that the plans of the churches I am about to describe differ
considerably from many of those published by him, but this difference is greater
in appearance than in fact. 2
The unproductive nature of many parts of the Nile valley and the sparseness
and poverty of the population will account for the indifferent construction of
the buildings. The intractable nature of the materials at hand, the great diffi-
culty in procuring timber, and the ignorance of the workmen have strongly
influenced their methods, as I hope to show later on. The materials for study
Clarendon Press, 1884.
* Sec plan of Mari Mina, p. 48 ; of Abu-'s-
Sifain, p. 78 ; of Amba Shnuda, p. 136;
of Sitt Miriam, p. 149 ; of Abu Sargali, p, 182 ;
of Sitt Borbarah, p. 236; of El Adra, p. 273 ;
of Amba Bishoi, p. 312 ; of A 1 Adra, Ddr
Suriani, p. 321 : all in vol. i of Mr. Butler's
book.


do not come to an end at Wadi Haifa, for the Christian faith extended itself far
away to the south into the Sudan.
' Of the means by which Christianity was introduced into the Sudan, who
the introducers were, and where they took up their abode in the country, nothing
is known with certainty. All the evidence which exists on the subject goes to
show that Christianity did not make its way down the Blue Nile from Ethiopia
into the northern Sudan, as some have thought and said, but that it entered
Nubia from Egypt, as did the civilization of the ancient Egyptians, and that in
the course of centuries it advanced to the southern end of the Island of Meroe,
where the Christian kingdom of 'Aiwa flourished in the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries. The Christianizing of the northern Sudan was the result of the
preaching of S. Mark in Alexandria, and the phase of Nubian Christianity known
to us bears the marks and character of the form of Christian belief and teaching
which were promulgated by the Jacobite (or Monophysite) Patriarchs of that
city. A considerable body of respectable tradition asserts that Christianity
was preached in Egypt before the close of the first century, and it is certain that
the new religion advanced southwards and spread quickly. The oldest authority
for this view is Eusebius, Hist. Eccles. ii. i 6.' 1
The evidences I am able to give in subsequent pages will, I think, entirely
support the view that Christianity entered the Sudan from Egypt.
It is not, however, my business to give a history of the rise and spread of
Christianity in the Nile valley, but only to approach the subject from the architec-
tural and archaeological sides. It will be sufficient to make a few bald statements
by which it may be seen how quickly the new faith spread. In proof of these
statements we find that early in its history it was considered necessary to
establish bishoprics, from which circumstance we may suppose that sundry
churches would also be built.
Towards the end of the second century three bishops were appointed. Early
in the third century this number had increased to twenty. Then came persecu-
tions under the edict of the Emperor Decius in the year 250, when doubtless no
little destruction of buildings accompanied the persecution, nor did these troubles
cease under the succeeding emperor Valerian. As persecutions began in the north
of Egypt, so would many of those who could escape fly towards the south, and
so spread the faith. In the reign of Diocletian (284-305) persecutions and
destruction of extreme severity were instituted. It is beyond doubt that by
this time Christianity, spreading throughout the country, had penetrated far to
the south, both into the Sudan and Abyssinia. 2
To account for the extraordinary paucity of Christian monuments in the
valley of the Nile, the peculiar characteristics of that valley should not be over-
looked. The sites of many churches are known, a few ruins of no little antiquity
1 The Egyptian Sudan, its History and 2 Those who would study this subject more
Monuments, by E. A. Wallis Budge, vol. ii, closely can consult Gibbon (cap. xv), Eusebius,
p. 288. Kegan Paul, Trench & Co., London, Bar-licbraeus, Butcher (The Story of the Church
1907. of Egypt), Budge ( The Egyptian Sudan).


still may be seen, but bearing in mind what their number must once have been,
the relics left to us are few and insignificant.
I believe that there are two main factors in producing the results above
referred to. One, the conformation of the valley itself. The other, the terrible
vicissitudes which the valley and its inhabitants have undergone since the beginning
of the Christian era. In all countries we find that by neglect or violence the
monuments have suffered more or less severely, but the entrance of an unfriendly
tribe or people in one part does not necessarily involve that the whole area of the
country shall be overrun and perhaps devastated. In our own times we have
seen the victorious hosts of Germany entering France, but what a large part of
that country never saw the enemy. A vast area of thousands of square miles
is not easily overrun.
But what are the peculiarities of the Nile valley distinguishing it from
most countries ? They are that from Cairo to Khartum there is not, in our
acceptance of the term, any open country. We find but one long trough, length
without breadth ; consequently all life, all buildings and monuments are perforce
planted close to the river side, along the floor of this narrow valley. How easy,
then, it has been for a devastating horde to overwhelm everything which lay in
its path. It may perhaps be said by those who know the Nile valley well that
when we find ourselves in the province of Dongola, and far south of it, the river
is not hemmed in by hills and crags—the valley is not a trough. This is true
enough : the cultivable area is considerably wider than it is north of the Second
Cataract, but, on the other hand, all life depends on the Nile itself and on the
very limited distance to which its waters can be carried over or penetrate below
the adjoining land. The population, the monuments, are and were at all times
to be found very near the river ; the river was also a main line of traffic. The
invaders, from whatever side they entered, always made their way up or down
the narrow strip which owed its life to the river, destruction and violence were
consequently centred on this strip ; no places could be found lying snugly far
away to the right or left and which could escape the stream of devastation.
The persecutions and destructions emanating from Rome must have accounted
for the disappearance of many churches, but we cannot doubt that new buildings
arose in their place.
It may throw light on my subject and support my contention if I give a short
statement of events beginning no earlier than the Mohammedan occupation of
Egypt.
Until very recently the principle on which all invading armies have moved
forward has been that of living on the country through which they pass, by
pillage and robbery. In the East, to this day, unless the country be under
European control, the peasantry suffer horribly, whether the army passing
through may be of their own kin or not. Wherever there is power there is plunder,
pillage, and crime. We have, in the Nile valley, to add to these miseries religious
hatred and animosities. The Mohammedans overthrew the churches ; the


Christians were equally willing to overthrow the mosques. If we go further
back, to the time before the Arab conquest, we do not find the Christians living
together in unity—very far from it. The different sects into which Christianity
in Egypt so soon split up were relentlessly intolerant of one another ; and in those
days intolerance took the form of annihilation, both for men and monuments, if
it might be possible. Finally, the Christian monuments themselves were not
built of enduring materials. Had it not been for the peculiarly conservative
nature of the climate, hardly a relic would now be left standing.
I have extracted from The Egyptian Sudan, 1 by Dr. Budge, the following
list, which does not pretend by any means to be exhaustive, but lays open before
us a history of violence, rapine, and destruction hard to beat.
The Mohammedan conquest of Egypt was effected April 9, 641, and thus
Egypt and such portions of the Sudan as were regarded as her possessions at
once became a province of the new Mohammedan Empire. About a year after
the conquest of Egypt 'Amr sent an expedition into Nubia with 20,000 men under
'Abd-Allah bin Sa'd. Soon after the return of 'Abd-Allah, the Nubians saw their
opportunity for revenge, and invaded Egypt with much success.
In 652 'Abd-Allah returned southward, crushing the rebellion with relentless
vigour. The Nubians were Christians. Their capital was at Old Dongola.
In the year 722 was ordered a general destruction of the sacred pictures of
the Christians in Egypt. The result was a rising of the Copts in the Delta. The
Coptic patriarch was imprisoned. The Nubians were so enraged at the ill-treat-
ment of their co-religionists that, under their king Cyriacus, 100,000 of them
marched into Egypt, and were only induced to return by the request of the
Patriarch, who was hastily liberated.
After this was great trouble with the Beja, i. e. the tribes of the eastern desert,
and at length, in 831, 'Abd-Allah ibn Jahan set out to do battle against them.
They were several times defeated, and at last a treaty was made with their king
Kanun. Amongst other things it was stipulated that the Beja were not to
mention with disrespect the name of Mohammed, or the Koran, or the religion
of God, nor to kill or rob a Muslim, nor to injure a mosque.
The Beja were a turbulent race, and by no means easily quelled. In 854
they invaded Upper Egypt, plundering Esna and Edfu. The Muslim troops
were quickly collected to set matters right (from their point of view). The Beja
were defeated.
In 956 the king of the Nubians attacked Aswan. The year following he was
defeated by the Muslims. A few years later the Nubians invaded Egypt and
took possession of the country as far north as Akhmim.
In 1005 a member of the 'Umayyad family took possession of Barka, defeated
the troops of Hakim, the reigning sultan of Egypt, and overran the country,
but presently found it necessary to retire south into Nubia. Here he was sup-
ported by the Nubians, but was ultimately defeated and beheaded.
The Egyptian Stiddn, by E. A. Wallis Budge, vol. ii, chap. xii.


In ii 73 an expedition to Nubia was undertaken by the elder brother of
Salah ad-Din (Saladin). He arrived at Kasr Ibrim (Primis), which was stubbornly
defended by the Nubians. They were defeated, their city destroyed and all its
inhabitants. It is further stated that about 700,000 men, women, and children
were made prisoners. We can accept these numbers if we like.
In 1275 the Muslims annexed the Sudan. Dawud, king of the Nubians, made
incursions into Egypt. After much fighting they were driven back. The
Muslims advanced into Nubia by river and by desert, seized fortress after fortress,
and slew many people. Many Nubians fled to the islands in the Nile. At length
Muslim domination was established.
In 1287 an expedition was sent into Nubia which raided the country for
fifteen days' journey south of Dongola. A garrison was established in Dongola.
Scarcely had the main army retired than the Nubians rose and drove out the
garrison. A second expedition was then sent into Nubia. When the second
expedition entered Nubia the soldiers massacred every one they found, burned
the water wheels, and fed their horses on the crops. Dongola was deserted, as
the people had fled to an island fifteen days' journey to the south. Shemamun,
king of Nubia, had retired still further south, but was deposed by his officers and
the clergy, who returned to Dongola, appointed another king, and he took the
oath of allegiance, undertaking to pay tribute to the Muslims. No sooner had
the Egyptian troops retired than Shemamun reappeared, his old soldiers flocked
to his standard; he attacked the newly made king at Dongola, cruelly killed
him, and was master of that country once more. He then made friends with
the powers in Cairo and agreed to pay the tribute.
In 1304 an expedition was sent into Nubia to replace on his throne Amai, who
had come to Cairo asking for help.
In 1311 there was more killing and deposing of kings in Nubia, the Egyptian
forces being also called in.
In 1365 there were terrible internal dissensions in Nubia. A Muslim force
was sent on the petition of one of the parties.
In 1378, 1385, 1395, 1397, were outrages of all sorts committed between the
Muslims and the Nubians. In 1403 Upper Egypt was in a state of desolation,
whilst Aswan ceased to belong to the Sultan of Egypt.
In 1412 the Hawara tribe attacked and defeated the Awlad Kenz, destroyed
the walls of Aswan, and reduced the town to ruins.
' From the facts derived from the works of Mohammedan historians referred
to above, we see that the raids and expeditions of the Muslims into Nubia which
took place between 640 and 1400, with one or two exceptions, were confined to
that portion of the country which lies between Aswan and Gebel Barkal, and
that speaking generally no serious attempt was made by the Khalifas to rule
or occupy the Sudan from Gebel Barkal to. Khartum.
' When we remember the conquests of the Arabs in Western Asia, Egypt,
and other countries, it seems certain that the Khalifas of Baghdad and their
II B 2


viceroys in Egypt would have liked to obtain possession of the Nile valley and
the adjoining countries, and we may be sure that they would have taken possession
of the lands which produced slaves and gold and ivory if it had been at all prac-
ticable. The chief object which stood in the way of their ambition was the
Christian kingdom of Nubia with the capital of Dongola, and there appears to
be no doubt that the tide of the Muslim Conquest from Egypt southwards was
stayed by it for about seven hundred years.
' Christianity became the official religion of Nubia in the first half of the
sixth century, and in spite of raids, persecutions, and the payment of heavy
tribute, the dwellers on the Nile clung both to their own language and to the
Christian religion, as they understood it, until the fourteenth century, when the
Christian kingdom of "Aiwa on the island of Meroe fell to pieces.
' The Christian Nubian kingdom, which extended from Aswan to the Blue
Nile, came to an end through internal dissensions ; and through the attacks made
upon it by the peoples who lived on the eastern, western, and southern frontiers.
' During the fourteenth century the negro tribes between the Blue and
White Nile began to obtain pre-eminence, and a century later, on the downfall
of the cities of Dongola and Soba, the capitals of the Christian Nubian kingdom
in the north and south respectively, the negro tribes found themselves to be the
greatest power in the country.'
These people professed to be followers of the Prophet.
The Christian religion (such as it was) in this part of the Nile valley quickly
withered away. Within a hundred years of to-day things have been no better.
I make the following quotations from Burckhardt. 1 At p. nhe tells us :
' Like all the villages I had hitherto passed, Gyrshe 2 is but poorly inhabited,
two-thirds of the houses being abandoned. The country had been ruined by the
Mamelouks, who remained here several months when on their retreat before the
Turkish troops of Mohammed Aly ; and the little they left behind was consumed
by the Turks under Ibrahim Beg, Mohammed Aly's son, who finally succeeded
in driving the Mamelouks out of Nubia, and across the mountains, into the plains
of Dongola. A terrible famine broke out after their retreat, in which one-third
of the population of Nubia perished through absolute want; the remainder
retired into Egypt, and settled in the villages between Assouan and Esne, where
numbers of them were carried off by the small-pox. The present inhabitants
had returned only a few months before my visit to these parts.'
At Wadi Kostamne Burckhardt relates that ' the Mamelouks fought a battle
with the troops of Ibrahim Beg and were routed'. They crossed the Nile to the
left bank, ' some of them continued their route southward, plundering in their
way all the villages.'
At p. 30 he tells us :
' In two hours and a half we reached the castle of Ibrim, which is now com-
pletely in ruins, the Mamelouks having sustained a siege in it last year, and, in
1 Travels in Nubia , by the late J. L. Burck-
hardt, London, John Murray, 1822.
2 Gyrshe is a village somewhat south of the well-
known temple of Kalabsha in the Nubian valley.


their turn besieged the troops of Ibrahim Beg, in the course of which operations
the walls were battered with the few cannon that were found in the castle, and
many of the houses of the village levelled with the ground.'
Burckhardt relates that the inhabitants of the district of Ibrim had become
quite prosperous :
' But the Mamelouks, in their retreat last year, destroyed in a few weeks
the fruits of a century. They took from the Wadi Ibrim about 1,200 cows, all
the sheep and goats, imprisoned the most respectable people, for whose ransom
they received upwards of 100,000 Spanish dollars ; and, on their departure, put
the Aga to death, their men having eaten up or destroyed all the provisions they
could meet. This scene of pillage was followed by a dreadful famine.'
These tender-hearted Mamelouks, followed in part by the Turkish soldiers,
made their way southward, passing many of those sites which will be mentioned
in these pages, until they at last arrived and settled in Dongola, where we may
be sure they behaved towards the inhabitants no better than before.
Before describing the plans and drawings here collected together, it will be
well to state the conditions which have largely controlled those who erected the
buildings which are to come under our consideration. Even before the First
Cataract is reached, the traveller on his way southward will observe that the
valley through which the Nile takes its way becomes very narrow.
He has passed out of the limestone formation, and is now in that of the
Nubian sandstone, which extends for a vast distance towards Central Africa.
Vegetation is confined to the banks of the river itself, where its waters have
deposited the rich alluvium. The rocky hillsides which rise above the banks are
absolutely barren, but here and there, where the retiring cliffs leave small bays,
the alluvium bears trees, chiefly palms, with crops of Indian corn and other food-
stuffs, according to the season. In some places the rugged hills come up to the
river, not leaving the narrowest strip of cultivation.
Between Aswan and Korosko there is on the east bank hardly any cultivable
land. On the west side considerable tracts, now covered with a thin layer of
desert sand, have once been cultivated. The shocking misrule of centuries from
which Egypt is but now emerging has reduced the Nubian valley to the utmost
desolation, but at no period in its history can it have supported a large or pros-
perous population. 1 Hence, since those of the Roman times, during which
several stately temples were built, no structures are left to us of any pretentions.
When the traveller arrives at Wadi Haifa he is at the northern mouth of the
Second Cataract. Whilst the First Cataract made an interruption to water-
trafhc of perhaps ten miles in length, which could be passed in boats during an
1 Since the Dam at Aswan was built, and the
Nubian valley south of it has become a vast
reservoir, the conditions above stated are changed:
from the Dam at least as far south as Derr all
the cultivable land is for several months sub-
merged, the trees are dead, the villages are either
gone or have been rebuilt at a higher level.
When the churches, &c., were built the valley
was in the condition I have described, and it
has therefore seemed convenient to retain the
account written before the submersion had taken
place.


average high Nile, the Second Cataract presents a much more serious obstruction.
It consists of a series of rapids covering a length of some 150 miles, and is in
a district so desolate and savage that it goes by the name of 1 El Batn'el Haggar
the Belly of Stones.
In a few places the rugged cliffs retire. In such places the Nile has deposited
its alluvium, and here settlements were made, as a small amount of cultivation
could be maintained. In these places we find the ruins of churches, commensurate
in size with the poverty of the inhabitants.
Still moving southward we pass out of the Batn el Haggar and enter upon the
flat plains of the ancient Christian kingdom of Dongola. Here indeed is a dreary
region, without the least interest or beauty to the eye, but its soil being level and
fertile, a very considerable area was cultivated.
The sandstone of Nubia is perhaps one of the worst building materials in the
world, coarse in grain, soft, and yet full of hard veins and imbedded pebbles.
The ancient Egyptians —as we see at Soleb and Sedegna, and the Ethiopian
rulers at Barkal (Napata), Nuri, and elsewhere —were sorely troubled by the truly
miserable materials at command. It is evident that in Meroitic times they made
use of burnt brick in large quantities: the soil yielded very good brick earth,
the abundant scrub in the desert provided fuel. The Christian builders followed
on the same lines, plundering the temples of their predecessors for stone and
brick, and burning brick where the old stock failed them. Differing, however,
from the use in Egypt and Nubia, they more frequently rested the roofs of their
churches on small monolithic columns of hardstone than on piers of masonry.
The columns which I have seen are generally of gneiss, and come, I believe, from
the quarries at Tombos near the island of Argo. As far south as Soba, that is
by water not less than 650 miles, the columns are of this material.
From what has been said it will be appreciated that the buildings which will
come under observation are for the most part both small and simple in their
construction. The alluvium of the Nile valley, formed into bricks, is the
material most generally used. In the Nubian valley, however, so steep are
the banks that even the alluvium is scarce, and fragments of stone from the
adjoining hills are the materials most readily available. These are set in mortar
of Nile mud. Wood is a rarity.
A short study of the annexed plates shows us how simple are the forms,
how small the spans of arches or roofs, and how unadorned by carved detail were
the buildings set up.
It is a thing by no means to be overlooked that when converted to Christianity
the Egyptians did not erect any churches in the traditional way in which the
temples of their forefathers had been built. They made a clean cut with the
past. We have direct evidence that they made use of parts of temples, converting
them to the purposes of a church, but taking great care entirely to hide the
architectural and sculptured adornments with which their interiors were decorated.
A thick coat of plaster covered the sculpture on the walls, the plaster being itself


covered with painted imagery of Christian saints, symbols, and so on. The
ceilings were similarly painted.
There is here a marked contrast between what has come to pass in most
countries where a fresh power and fresh modes of thought are introduced and
what has come to pass in Egypt. The victorious power of ancient Rome still
leaves its mark in innumerable regions, chiefly by the great works of construction
which survive its civilization. We see a Roman building and know it at once.
It may be in Britain, in Gaul, in Germany, in Asia Minor, &c. : the methods of
construction and the style of the building bear a stamp not to be mistaken.
For nearly four hundred years Egypt formed a part of the Roman Empire.
Some of the largest temples have inscribed upon them the names of Roman
emperors ; but where in Egypt are the buildings, built by the Romans in the
Roman manner, or where are the remains of them ? Certain parts of the fortifica-
tions (now destroyed) at Alexandria and the fortress built by Trajan at Old Cairo,
and now called the Kasr e' Shama'a, are I believe the only examples to be found.
There are certain peculiarities in the methods of building used by the masons
of ancient Egypt which differ entirely from methods made use of by the Romans.
But in Egypt these native methods have held their own. They are to be seen
even in buildings which have some little of the Roman manner and style about
them. Here, then, we have an intruding power absorbed, as far as its architec-
tural development is concerned, by the subjugated race. When Christianity was
sufficiently powerful in Rome to set up buildings for its own use, it did not intro-
duce a foreign style of architectural detail. Just as the people of the country
continued to talk their own language, so did they continue to make use of the
type of buildings they were accustomed to, only introducing such changes as were
necessary to accommodate a different ritual and a different spiritual outlook.
The architrave gradually gave place to the arch, but there is no sudden break
between the old and the new.
In Egypt, on the other hand, the new religion seems, when it set up its own
buildings, to have carefully made a thorough break in all ways with the old.
The plans were, of course, different, to suit the needs of the new ritual;
but the architectural detail also differed absolutely. Everything was introduced
from the north from over seas. Those elements which we know as Byzantine
dominated over anything native. Where we find carved decorative stonework,
or where we find painting, there is nothing in these to indicate that we are looking
on things Egyptian. Probably the Greek city of Alexandria had a potent
influence in this result.


___ _ A A
V V N "\
• t ~?v N\
'- - " JM \"s» -^sV
"j - % to c x \
: «v A \
a— b 3 rg'V N \
Vx 1A
M }\\ A
1.
CHAPTER II
I. CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY
IN dealing with a subject in which architecture plays a considerable part
it is important that when technical terms are made use of they should be clearly
explained. The writer and the reader must be placed in accord. In the present
case we shall be dealing with buildings constructed at different periods, and
showing methods of construction which are more or less typical of those periods.
We must do our best to make clear such differences as there are. In Egypt we
FIG. I. Egyptian Method of Dressing Stones
perceive differences of construction in the buildings set up under the old Egyptian
tradition ; then follow the Romans, the Christians, the Saracens, and finally the
degradation of modern times.
There can be no doubt that all works of a monumental character in ancient
Egypt were built under the influence of the government. This remark applies
as much to the earliest great works that remain to us as to those that were built
after Egypt was subject to Rome. It has been already pointed out that the
Egyptian builders had a traditional style of masonry which was continued under
Roman occupation. With but slight variations the temples engraved with the
names of Caesar at Dendera, Kalabsha, or Philae are built in the accustomed
methods of three or more thousand years before.
The Egyptian method was as follows (see Fig. i) : Large and often immense
blocks of stone were made use of, in some cases taken from the immediate neigh-


m
o
c\i
a
*-
•4
X)
M
m
N.
F-*
BERBER
►ATBARA
ED DAMER
u
O
as
W
s
U-
O
c/3
Q
5
>«
3
•
"to
Q
W
S
<
K
D
CQ
<
'm J
mm
m «
a m
o>2~'i
<i
\LB
w _
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
/
7
* T /
//
"■'A*
H
<
W
OS
a
"W
3
X
c n
O
CQ
C
MAP No. 2.
CO
/
/
*
/
t
/
i
/
/
/
/
A°/
/
/
/
/
/
fO
8
ON
\
—1
/
l>*
1*^


bourhood of the temples, but more often conveyed from considerable distances.
The blocks of stone were obtained from the quarry in a form already approaching
that which they were to assume in the wall of the building. The waste of material
in the quarries was small, as the blocks were taken from the matrix in a more
or less rectangular form, and in this form they were conveyed to the required
destination. The lower surface of the block was then dressed to a level"; the
ends of the block which were to adjoin neighbouring stones were also dressed
smooth. The sides of the block retained their rough quarry face ; and in this
condition the stones were placed in position in the wall. With so much of the
surface of the block still in the rough it was easy, without damage to the stone,
to move it about with the primitive appliances which it is evident the Egyptians
made use of.
When the stone was in position, the top was made level to receive the super-
incumbent course, and so the wall was raised, showing both on the outside and
inside of the building a rugged face of rockwork. Some buildings have never
been completed beyond this stage. When, however, the building was carried
to a further state of advancement, the mason cut away the superfluity of stone-
work until he reached the intended wall face, as, indeed, he would have done had
he been hewing the structure out of the solid rock. The block AAAA retains its
quarry face, except where it touches the adjoining blocks cc. When the building
was to be finished, all this superfluous material was cut away until the dotted line
BB was reached.
Another peculiarity found in the works of Egyptian masonry is that' bonding
stones' 1 are most rare. In consequence, when a wall was sufficiently thick to
require two or three rows of stones laid side by side, these were not tied together
by cross stones. All the blocks were laid ' stretchers ' 2 or longitudinally. It
is, consequently, a common thing to find that half the thickness of a wall has
fallen, leaving the other half standing in a perilous condition.
The Roman influence on this style of masonry was very slight. It is
seen in that angles are better bonded, and there is an increase of care in
the equipoise of large stones. It is also possible that better engines were
used for raising large blocks; but generally the methods remained as before.
Of true Roman masonry, executed in the Roman manner, there is little enough
to be seen in Egypt. So far as lam aware, there is none which will come under
our observation.
When Christianity first set foot in Alexandria it found as magnificent a city
of the Greeks as the world could show, but the new faith had to move discreetly
and hide its head in Egypt as elsewhere. We must suppose that the Christians
had to content themselves with poor and humble buildings. It could hardly have
been otherwise. ' Quarries and mines belonged to the Imperial Domain, and
were usually worked directly by the state, convict labour being employed under
1 English headers, French parpaings, German
Binder.
1 English stretchers, French carreanx, German
Laufer.


the direction of a military guard.' 1 Under these conditions the Christians
could not have made use of the quarries until the government tolerated
the faith.
At Alexandria the Christians found the old religion superbly housed. The
first converts were certainly not accustomed to see religion carried on in mean
buildings, and especial attention should be called to this fact, as it leaves us to
wonder all the more at the poverty of the churches that remain to us. There
are but two or three exceptions. We do not find ruins of buildings of considerable
pretensions that, having been ravaged and burnt, have risen from their ashes
shrunken and sad, but in their old quarters. The very beginnings of the oldest
churches which survive are, for the most part, small and insignificant. In previous
pages the persecutions under Severus (A. D. 193-211), Decius, and Valerianus have
been referred to. Liberty to exercise their religion was granted to the Christians
under the Emperor Gallienus (260-8). Then followed the desperate persecution
under Diocletian. It seems, therefore, reasonable to suppose that it cannot have
been until the time of the Emperor Constantinus (A. D. 313) that the Christians
got possession of the ancient temples, or had free access to the quarries.
By this time we must suppose that they had become accustomed to churches
of very small dimensions, grouped together as was the custom in Greece. They
had no desire to vie either with the majestic style of the temples of their
forefathers, or with the stately dimensions of the noble buildings which still
survived at Alexandria. Christianity, even in its architectural efforts, was an
absolute break with ancient Egypt.
Under the above conditions we find but few remains of churches built of
stone. Whilst there are such clearly-marked methods of construction amongst
the temple builders, a sufficient number of the most ancient churches does not
exist from which a method of masonry can be established.
The outer wall of the church at Der Amba Shnuda (the White Monastery
near Sohag) stands as a specimen almost by itself; but although the aspect of
the place resembles, not a little, that of an Egyptian temple, the masonry is not
the same. The blocks of stone were not set up in the manner shown in Fig. 1,
nor are the tool marks similar. That which is common to the two is an absence
of bond. The masonry, whilst it is not ancient Egyptian in method, is equally
removed from the method of the Romans, who never omitted the most careful
system of bonding.
The remains of the church at Dendera (Plate XLI), which are of very respect-
able masonry, show us an interesting link with the past. The blocks of stone
are dowelled to each other with wood dovetails, 2 so universal in the older
buildings. The church—well as it seems to have been built —was, however,
quite small.
1 A History of Egypt under Roman Rale, by 8 English dovetail, French queue d'aronde,
J. G. Milne, M.A., p. 127. Methuen & Co., German Schwalbenschwanz.
London, 1898.


Again, we have a good deal of clumsy detail, but showing a high antiquity,
in the church at Der Abu Hennes (see Plates LIV, LV, LVI). The original
scheme of the church can be traced, and it is exceedingly small. Whatever
command the Christians may have had of the quarries at this period, they made
but little use of them.
All this is somewhat remarkable and difficult to account for. Is there any-
thing to force on us a conviction that, early in the Christian era, the practice of
all the arts suddenly went out ?
The spirit of asceticism, of seclusion, of personal mortification carried to the
most loathsome, degree had spread over the country like a' dreadful disease, and
raged for several centuries. Lecky tells us much about it. 1 Whatever was
beautiful or pleasant or even cleanly was a source of moral evil, in the fevered
imagination of these deluded anchorites. Under such conditions how could
stately buildings be tolerated ?
A characteristic story is to be read in The Paradise of the Holy Fathersr
This most veracious chronicle gives us the histories of the anchorites, recluses,
monks, coenobites, and ascetics between A. D. 250 and A. D. 400. Amongst these
we find ' The Rule of Pakhomius at Tabenna '. In chapter xiv we learn ' How
Abba Pakhomius would not keep beautiful buildings '.
' The blessed man Pakhomius built an oratory in his monastery, and he
made pillars [for it] and covered the faces thereof with tiles, and he furnished
it beautifully, and he was exceedingly pleased with the work because he had
built it well; and when he had come to himself he declared, through the agency
of Satan, that the beauty of the oratory was a thing which would compel a man
to admire it, and that the building thereof would be praised. Then suddenly he
rose up, and took ropes, and fastened them round the pillars, and he made
a prayer within himself, and commanded the brethren to help him, and they
bowed their bodies, and the pillars and the whole construction fell [to the
ground], and he said to the brethren " Take heed lest ye strive to ornament
the work of your hands overmuch, and take ye the greatest possible care that the
grace of God and His gift may be in the work of each one of you, so that
the mind may not stumble towards the praises of cunning wickedness, and the
calumniator may not obtain [his] prey." '
That these diseased imaginings were not carried out to the letter is quite
certain. We find in nearly every building, ruinous as it may be, evidences
of paintings on the walls; we find the capitals of columns and the surfaces of
cornices richly and ingeniously carved; but, as works of architecture showing
any grasp, any aspiration towards dignity and majesty, the greater part of the
buildings are beneath our notice.
On the other hand, in the seventh chapter of his most interesting book
1 History of European Morals, by W. E. H. Lecky. 2 The Paradise of the Holy Fathers, translated
Longmans, Green & Co. New Impression, 1910, by Dr. E. Wallis Budge. Chatto & Windus, 1907,
vol. ii, pp. 101-232. vol. i, p. 310.
19 C 2


I#
nnn, '^niif[!f('-M
The Arab Conquest of Egypt, 1 Dr. A. J. Butler calls our attention to the fact
that, at least in Alexandria, the arts were still practised immediately before the
conquest.
As there is evidence to prove that the Arab conquerors availed themselves
of the knowledge possessed by the Christian craftsmen in the country, we must
suppose that the type of masonry we now see in the buildings of Saracenic style
was directly inherited. No doubt the first buildings the Arabs set up, such
structures, for example, as the Mosque of 'Amr, consisted of plain walls and a flat
roof of palm-tree beams ; a structure as completely without a touch of art as
are most of the modern buildings now set up in Egypt. But as the conquerors
became more firmly settled, so the assistance of the craftsmen was called in,
whilst it seems clear that Christianity and Islam moved side by side for a time
without serious collisions. The Arab did not come in, sweep everything before
FIG. 2. Arab Masonry.
him to destruction, and then, as far as the art of building was concerned, begin
afresh.
The fact remains that there is very little masonry in the churches. They
are nearly all of brick. Such stonework as still survives is very indifferent,
consisting for the most part either of carved capitals and cornices of the Acanthus
type, roughly executed, or of plain faces of walls which are bad in construction.
Whilst the heart of the wall consists of but poor rubble, it is faced with pieces of
stone, seldom larger than a man could easily lift, wrought only upon the surface
exposed, the other sides of the block being more or less formless, and generally
diminishing as they recede from the face (see Fig. 2).
We have now to consider constructions in brick. It has been stated that
the works of a monumental type in ancient Egypt were built under the influence
of the government. This applies to constructions in brick as well as to those
in stone. We have pointed out that, vast as were the blocks of stone made use
of by the ancient Egyptians, the system of masonry was faulty. This statement
is as true of the brickwork as of the stone. The bricks used in government works
were of sun-dried Nile mud mixed with tibn, i. e. chaff. They were very large
when compared with the sizes we find most convenient to use. The walls were
1 The Arab Conquest of Egypt, by A. J. Butler. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1902.


exceedingly thick, but the bricks were laid quite regardless of ' bond'. The
facing was neatly laid with alternate courses of ' headers ' and ' stretchers but
within the mass was all of headers, which were carelessly placed. In consequence
the bricks did not properly overlap and rest one on the other. It obvious
that a wall built so carelessly, even if it be 4-0 or 5-0 thick, can have but
little real strength, and can easily fall to pieces, which it usually has done in
a longitudinal direction, skins of bricks peeling off from the mass, more especially
if the lower courses have been attacked by damp or violence.
In their domestic work the ancient Egyptians did not make use of large
bricks. Bricks of about the size we now use were more convenient to handle,
both by the maker and the builder. The few remains that are left to us do not
show that the workmen were careful about ' bond ' even in these walls.
Of fine Roman brickwork we have no remains in the ecclesiastical buildings..
It is not impossible that there may still be in some of the churches brickwork
executed during the time of the Roman domination, but about it there is not
anything distinctive. The bricks are always small, and, except where special
reasons dictated, are always sun-dried.
In a few buildings the bonding is fairly good, and the courses alternate with
some regularity as ' headers ' and ' stretchers \ May we surmise that these are
the remains of the earliest churches ? Very frequently, whilst the ' stretchers'
are laid flat, the ' headers ' are on edge, the reason for this being obvious. The
material is so weak that unless the ' headers' were on edge they would immediately
break. When we reflect that nearly all the churches we meet with have been
repaired or reconstructed after devastations either by the Muslemans or by the
contending sects of the Melkites and Monophysites, and under conditions of
grinding poverty, we must not wonder that the bricks and the workmanship are
of the most indifferent.
The method of brickwork used in the churches does not differ from that used
in the mosques. The dome is not the usual covering for a mosque, only for the
tomb chambers so frequently attached to the mosques. The churches were, on the
other hand, very usually covered with domes and vaults, although many were not
originally built in that way, as we hope to show ; there was consequently more
science needed in roofing a church than a mosque, but, on the other hand, the
churches which survive are so very small that constructive difficulties were easy
to overcome. Crude brick, badly bonded, is the material chiefly made use of.
The internal surfaces are exceedingly rough, but they were in all cases covered
with plaster, and this was adorned with painting, both in patterns and figure
subjects.
Having thus shown the way in which materials were used at the time the
buildings we are to notice were constructed, it is now desirable to trace out as
far as we are able the system of their plan..
Most unfortunately the stately churches which we hear of as having existed
at Alexandria are entirely gone. Their number was considerable. There was


1 See Butler, Arab Conquest of Egypt, p. 52
7 Ibid. p. 339.
and note. Also same, p. 385 and note.
8 Ibid. p. 385.
2 Ibid. p. 385, note.
9 Ibid. pp. 115, 37 2 > 449'
3 Ibid. pp. 15 and 372, note.
10 Ibid. p. 372.
4 Ibid. pp. 115, 372-6.
11 Ibid. p. 47.
5 Ibid. pp. 47, 385 and note.
12 Ibid. p. 389.
6 Ibid. p. 73, note.
13 Ibid. pp. 15, 372.
22
the cathedral church of Angelion, 1 or Euangelion, the Arcadion, 2 the Church
of S. Athanasius, 3 of Caesarion, 4 of SS. Cosmas and Damian, 5 of S. Euphemia, 6 of
S. Faustus, 7 of S. John Baptist, 8 of S. Mark, 9 of S. Mary Dorothea, 10 of S. Michael, 11
of S. Sophia, 12 of S. Theodore. 13
The East is the land of hyperbole, but if we accept only half of the statements
made by ancient writers we find ourselves left in possession of some magnificent
results.
Of the Angelion : ' According to Dr. Botti the Angelion was originally called
the Arcadion, and the Arcadion was originally called Claudion. He further
identifies the Arcadion with the Hadrianon.' See Butler, Arab Conquest, p. 385,
who thinks these identifications hardly established, but tells us that Gregorovius
refers to Epiphanius as an authority for the statement that the Hadrianon was
turned into a church.
The Hadrianon was a magnificent structure, a temple, and must therefore
have formed a church of no little splendour.
Of the Arcadion : ' Eutychius (Migne, t. iii, cols. 1025-6 and col. 1030)
records that Theophilus built a large church in the name of the Emperor Theo-
dosius, covering it all over with gold, besides many other churches, such as that
of S. Mary and that of S. John : while as to the Arcadion he says : " ecclesiam
magnam Alexandriae struxit Arcadii nomine dicatam." This quite agrees with
the much earlier record of John of Nikion, who expressly states that the
Patriarch Theophilus built a magnificent church to which he gave the name of
the Emperor Theodosius, and another which he called after his son, Arcadius.
He also converted a temple of the Serapeum into a church which he called
after Honorius.' Butler, p. 385, note.
BRICK CONSTRUCTION
It may assist the reader to appreciate many things in connexion with the
buildings we are about to describe if he is at this point made acquainted with
the methods of construction in use when the churches were built, and which
methods are but now giving way to that hopeless meanness, ugliness, and poverty
of invention which seem to be one of the curses of nineteenth and twentieth
century civilization.
For domestic structures we have already pointed out that it was customary,
as far back as existing examples permit us to see, to use brick ; indeed, it is not
right to limit our remark to domestic structures, for there is evidence that in
certain cases temples also were built of the same material. Vast pyramids still


stand constructed of brick. The use of the arch was also known. I am not
aware, however, that anything in the nature of a domed roof has ever been
discovered, but had such a system of roofing been known, examples could hardly
have survived 4,000 or 5,000 years. 1 From the very nature of things we cannot
expect to find the remains of many ordinary houses. The material, Nile mud,
out of which the bricks were made, is capable of being used over and over again.
The moisture of the soil caused by the annual inundation soon reduces such bricks
as are exposed to it to their primitive mud. 2 It is, however, clear that the
ordinary house had its apartments covered with arched ceilings of brick, and
the houses were often of more than one story in height. Wood was evidently
scarce, and undoubtedly it was this scarcity which controlled the methods of
building. It penetrated most of the details of construction. The vaults were
formed without a centring, and arches were built in the same way. The largest
buildings were erected without scaffolds of wood.
The traditions of building above referred to were those which descended
upon the builders of the greater part of the churches, &c., we are about to describe.
The Bricks. Throughout the whole of the Delta and in the greatest part
of the Nile valley it is almost superfluous to say that the material for bricks,
the alluvium or Nile mud, is everywhere at hand. The Nubian valley, from the
First to the Second Cataract, is very narrow, and here things are different. The
steep and stony banks come close to the river, and in many places it is Nile
mud, suitable for brickwork, which is a rarity, rather than stone. In some parts
of the river banks the Nile mud makes better bricks than in others. Moulds of
the same form are used to-day by the brickmakers as have been found in the
tombs of ancient Egypt.
The commonest quality of brick is made of mud only, whilst a better quality
is made by mixing tibn (chopped straw or chaff) with the mud. A still harder
quality has, mixed with the mud and tibn, some animal dung. The bricks thus
made are not well formed —the fault of the maker and not of the method—and
are generally a little warped in drying. The bricks, fresh from the mould, are
laid in rows to dry in the sun, which they quickly do, and are turned over once
or twice in the process. The drying process should be continued for a good
time if hard bricks are required; the quality of the Nile mud is such that
the clay becomes extraordinarily hard and dense. Until we find ourselves in the
Sudan we observe that fuel is scarce; consequently it is not often that the bricks
are burnt, and it is rare to find burnt bricks used in the old churches except for
piers, arches, and occasionally at the lowest courses of the walls. The burnt
brick is of course less easily attacked by moisture than the crude brick. As soon
as we arrive south of the Batn el Hagar, the Second Cataract, we begin to find
many fragments of burnt brick, as has already been stated. The country is a
1 The little corbelled dome-shaped coverings to
certain tombs discovered by Mr. Reisner nearNaga
ed Der are in no sense true domes.
2 Whilst after buildings have been abandoned
it is remarkable how quickly the attrition of sand
moved by the prevalent wind will, under favour-
able conditions for its action, grind down a crude
brick wall to the level of the surrounding surface.


vast alluvial plain, affording a very good clay for the purpose. The desert country
extending on either side of the strip of cultivated land which borders the Nile
is thickly set with bushes and small trees, so that sufficient fuel is easily got.
The white ant is very active in these regions. This noxious little insect pene-
trates crude brickwork with the greatest ease, but cannot eat his way through
a tolerably well-burnt brick. Stone being bad as well as scarce, there is every
reason why burnt brick should be used, and we find it in vast quantities.
To give a hold to the mortar the surface of the brick is often scored by the
fingers of the maker as he shakes it from the mould. For building vaults there
is a special shape of brick, wider, longer, and thinner than a wall brick, made
more carefully, and with plenty of tibn. The upper surface of these bricks is
deeply scored with the first, middle, and third finger of the right hand.
The Mortar. The mortar used is in most cases of well-tempered Nile mud,
and according to the degree of strength desired, so is the admixture of tibn and
dung.
Way of building. It is very easy to see how the old buildings were set up,
as an examination of them shows the methods to have been the same as those
FIG. 3. Brick-mould and Gadoom.
still in use. As these methods are, as before said, dying out, it may be well to
describe in this place the building of a small house which I had put up at El Kab,
Mahamid, Upper Egypt, parts of it covered with a continuous vault, and part with
a dome. I adopted these methods of covering, not only because they are in
themselves far better against the Egyptian climate than wood in any form, but
because I wished to see with my own eyes how the traditional types of work were
done. The bricks were made and the carpentry —such horrible carpentry —done
on the spot. For my own part, I feel convinced that had I been able to transport
myself to the second century A. D., or 2000 B. C., I should have seen the work
done in the same way, except the building of the dome.
The work I am to describe was built partly in the year 1895 and partly
in 1896. A brickmaker having been found, he arrived with his tools, consisting
of a mould and a gadoom, a small adze (see Fig. 3). Having selected on the
river bank a place where he thought the Nile alluvium, called lyn, to be of
a suitable quality, some men were procured and the necessary material was dug.
The process consisted of making a hole, and intimately mixing the stuff that had
been moved with a fair amount of water. I had in the meantime to buy tibn.
The stuff in the hole was turned over sundry times in the course of a few days,
and then the tibn was thrown in and well intermixed. The work in the hole was


done partly by the feet and hands, and a little with the toria , a long-handled adze
used for agricultural purposes. When the brickmaker was satisfied with the
consistency of the mass, he began to make the bricks.
Having roughly smoothed away a few stones and pieces of scrubby vegetation
from a fairly level place on the dry bank of the river, a small boy supplies the
brickmaker with the lyn, which he deposits in the form of a little mound con-
veniently placed. With excellent judgement the brickmaker takes up with his
two hands just enough of the mud to fill the mould, slaps it down into it, brushes
his hand across the top, gently lifts the mould, which has had a little dust first
thrown into it to prevent adhesion. The newly made brick slides out through
the bottom of the mould, and remains until sufficiently hard and dry to be
turned over.
A man can make many more than a thousand bricks in a day.
I kept notes of the work day by day as it went on. Perhaps the most
vivid way of description will be to reproduce these notes.
Having decided to build a room which should be covered with a tunnel roof,
gabu, I marked upon the ground the measurements I thought suitable, and sent
for the builder. Four metres by seven, and the walls 0-50 thick on each side,
were the dimensions. The art of vault-building is already so dead that com-
paratively few builders can be found who can carry out such work. In our
village we boast of rather a celebrated artist in vaults and domes, who is sent
for even into Nubia.
. The builder came, and I was not a little surprised to find that he came without
ladders or apparatus of any sort whatever. Merely the few clothes he stood in
and a gadoom. He could build the vault four metres wide and as long as I chose
to have it, but the thickness and height of the walls I had projected did not please
him. The side walls must be thicker, and not so high.
He took a piece of boos 1 and made it to the length of a divcCa (i. e. from the
point of the elbow to the tip of the middle finger, plus the length of the middle
finger from the tip to the knuckle). This was supposed to be of the standard
length, 0-58 metres = 22f inches.
He found the room to be six and a half of these dira'a in its width. The
suitable proportion of thickness for the side walls he found by solemnly stepping
with his bare feet on to the place I had marked. He then set heel to toe until
three foot-lengths were marked (about half a foot's length in excess of what I had
proposed). Then he grinned and said that the wall would be of the proper
thickness. He tested the thickness of the end walls, two foot-lengths and a half.
This he approved.
With the builder came a companion, the maker of bricks.
My intention was to have the bricks made and the room built for a specific
sum and avoid the bother and loss of making my own bricks for the builder to
squander. This matter being explained, the builder and his friend fell to much
1 Boos, the straw of the Sorgum or Dhurra.
1074 25 D


' fiillliiii
talking and wrangling as to the price for making the bricks —per thousand.
It was settled at 3J piastres per mil = B \d. We agreed that the trenches for
foundations should be one dira'a deep. The walls to be of rubble stones and chips,
from the bottom of the trench to a height of one dira'a above the ground.
It will have been observed that the tools with which the brickmaker does his
work are few. The clothes he wears during the proceedings are equally simple
and few, and wisely so ; for dealing as he does with the tenacious mud, and
moving along frog-like over the surface of the ground, much clothing would be
a serious impediment.
The bricks being sufficiently dry and hard, building operations began, the
lower part of the walls, of rubble stones laid in Nile mud mortar, having been
already taken in hand.
The vertically of the faces of the walls towards the interior was occasionally
tried with a piece of string and a small lump of iron or lead on the end, but the
FIG. 4. Vaulting.
builder preferred a piece of wood of moderate length and not particularly straight.
Having built one piece of the wall with a face, as he considered, vertical, he would
test a new piece by the old, and in no time true verticality was lost, and as the
wall rose so matters got worse.
The builders were not careful about bonding the courses ; when they thought
about it, this was attended to.
No scaffolding is used. When the brickwork has risen too high for the new
courses to be conveniently reached from the ground, the builder stands on the
wall, and as it rises so does he.
The level from which the vaulted roof was to spring having been arrived at,
the wall at one end of the room was carried up to a height of some two metres
above the springing level (Fig. 4).
The vaulted or tunnel roof is then begun. A pole or, if it can be found,
a plank is laid across from wall to wall. The vault bricks are placed near at hand,
so that an assistant below can toss them up to his companion above. Sundry
pieces of broken pottery or small flat pebbles are also provided. The vault is
then commenced on the top of the side walls by leaning a brick on its end against


the end wall, with plenty of mortar to fill in the crevices. Another brick is then
laid leaning against the first, and so perhaps three or four in succession. Others
are stood on end on the top of those first placed, and canted inwards a little bit,
a piece of pottery or a pebble being inserted in the open end of the joint.
By the time the builder has retired backwards from the end wall some
little distance, and continued this system of placing bricks on end, those on the
right side leaning towards those on the left, it will be seen that he has at last
completed one ring of an arch, which not only spans the room to be covered
but leans away from the builder against the portions of rings he has already
completed. Between every voussoir of the arch a potsherd or pebble is placed,
and a great abundance of the mortar, rendered very tenacious, is used.
So tenacious is this mortar, assisted by the friction against the bricks already
laid, that I have seen the builder, beginning on his right hand, lay ten or twelve
bricks rising to the crown of the vault and even descending a little towards the
left, then go away to his dinner, and after some half-hour return to work, nothing
having fallen or been dislocated.
As shown in the drawing, the arches or, to speak more technically, rings,
thus built, which form the vaulted covering to the room, are only one brick
thick. Each ring of brickwork reposes against the ring previously built.
For all ordinary purposes the span and height of the vault is small. It
seems to be controlled by the height (about two metres) which a man can con-
veniently reach as he stands on a piece of wood crossing the room to be covered in.
Building a dome is a more scientific piece of business. Its size is not limited
as in the case of a vault, although it is obvious that if crude bricks only are used
they are not sufficiently strong in themselves to resist the strain or weight of
a large span. In the present case the room to be built and covered with a dome
was a square of 3*Bo on each side, internal measurement. The walls at the
ground level, o-80 thick. The inside face vertical, the outside battering. The
lowest parts of the walls were built in stone as previously stated in describing
the walls of the room. The bricks were placed in courses of stretchers laid flat
and headers on edge. The reason for placing the headers on edge is clear. The
material is so weak that, laid flat, it would have no value as a header (see Fig. 5).
The walls having been carried up about 1-50 from the floor level, preparations
were made for building the four diagonal arches to span the angles, and convert
the square into an octagon so as to carry the dome.
It should be stated that the measurements for deciding the size of each side
of the octagon were obtained in a very primitive manner. A piece of boos was
selected by eye of sufficient length. This was adjusted on the wall top, and
bricks set up to mark the ends. This process being repeated eight times, the
piece of boos was found to be too long. The ends were therefore reduced by biting
them off, a more delicate adjustment being thus secured than by breaking.
The process was continued until it was found that the piece gave the dimensions
of a side of the octagon which was to be built upon the square substructure. Three
27 D 2


more pieces of boos, the same length as the first, were then procured, and these,
placed across the angles, marked the position and span of the arches to carry
four sides of the octagon. Small pieces of stone from which the arches were to
spring were laid on the wall tops.
It was then necessary to establish the ' centres ' or moulds on which the
diagonal arches and pendentives of burnt brick were to be erected. To do this,
crude bricks were built up, without mortar, filling one angle of the square room.
The bricks were laid with headers flat, stretchers on edge. This pile of brick,
triangular on plan, was raised until the top was level with the adjoining walls
and the pieces of stone which were to carry the diagonal arches.
On the top of this pile of dry bricks was built with mortar the mould for
a semi-dome. This mould was a very neat affair after it had been well smoothed
over the back. Whilst the back was still wet, tibn was dusted over it; done,
no doubt, to prevent the mortar sticking to the mould when the arches were
built. Burnt bricks, very shapeless and soft, but harder than the crude brick,
were procured for the arches and pendentives. Hardly was the mould completed,
before the lower part of the mass of brick which carried it showed signs of bulging,
but a plank being propped against it sufficient security was established.
Two more corners of the room were then filled in with similar masses of dry
bricks to receive the moulds. To prevent these clumsy structures from falling,
as the first threatened to do, they were built with tlieir fronts curved on plan.
By the time these two were finished, the first being still propped with its plank,
the square room was nearly choked with lumps of brickwork.
Notwithstanding the science shown by the builders in adopting the plan of
a curved front for the second and third piles of brick, these both fell down during
the night. By this time the little room was so full of bricks and debris that it
was almost a solid. However, a clearance was made, and next day, taking better
care in the bond, the brickwork was reconstructed, and shortly after, the fourth
angle was filled and the moulds set up.
The arches which actually carried the diagonal walls of the octagon were
then built, the bricks by no means laid with their joints radiating towards the
centre, but set very flat and coming to a very clumsy junction at the crown.
Then followed the semi-domes or pendentives built right through to the angle
of the square with burnt brick. I could not observe that the brickwork of these
was built with any order; neither radiating towards a centre nor laid with care,
one course corbelled beyond the other.
The walls on the cardinal sides of the room being carried up between the
burnt brick arches, the base of the octagon was formed.
The pendentives were entirely buried in brickwork and left flat at the top
shown on Fig. 5.
The men then began to build the drum on which the dome was to rest.
Here three windows were to be made. The wall was much thinner than
that below, being but of two bricks in thickness and bonded as shown on Fig. 5.


I'niiiiiiiiii
~i 111 'i i \y
The construction of the windows was a masterpiece of ingenuity. They were
about 0-25 (9") wide.
The walls being raised to the necessary height from which the window
arches should spring, a little pile of four or five bricks was set up on either jamb,
with plenty of tough mortar between them like dough. One master craftsman
manipulated one little pile, one the other.
Each put a hand on the inner side of the pile and tilted it sedately and
slowly, giving it a curved form as it moved until the two touched at the top.
A cry, ' One more brick !' —in it went, and the little arch was complete. It
FIG. 5. Brick bond. Dome.
needed, however, abutment on one side. The other, for some reason, was
disposed to stand up.
The toe of the builder formed an admirable abutment until a few bricks
were set in place and the structure maintained itself in all its simple beauty.
The octagonal wall being raised until it was above the windows, a message was
sent to the dahabeah asking for the loan of a midrah (a long punting-pole). This
was laid across the top of the octagonal walls and adjusted so as to pass across
the middle. A centre point was established upon it. This was found by taking
a piece of string of the full length across the octagon and folding it into two.
To this centre point the string was tied with the knot at the top. The string
could then be freely turned in all directions. A knot on the string established
the length of the radius. One builder worked with one end of the string, one with
the other, and very quickly a ring of brickwork forming the lowest course of the
dome was laid. The string, the knots, and pieces of stone tied on the end of
the string to keep it in position are clearly shown on Fig. 5. The bond adopted
for the walls of the octagon and for the dome itself is also seen on this figure.


The dome; its form regulated as it the knots on the string, is truly
hemispherical. The bed-joints between the courses of brickwork are tilted a
little downward towards the centre point, but do not converge. Looking on the
outside of the dome, the successive rings of bricks are seen to be set one a little
within the other, after the manner of corbels. After the work had been carried
up perhaps half a metre, the bed-joints were laid radiating from the centre or
nearly so. The bricks were not cut, but more, mortar was laid where the bed-
joints were widest and scraps of pottery or flakes of stone were pushed in.
No scaffolding ,of any sort was used. At half-bricks are omitted
on the exterior of the dome. Into the holes thus made the bricklayers insert
their feet and so climb about as required. Immediately a ring of bricks is com-
pleted, the men have no hesitation in leaning on it.
As we approach the summit of the dome, the joints of the brickwork radiating
from the centre of the hemisphere, it is a source of wonder that, until a ring is
completed, the bricks do not fall down.
It is not a little astonishing to stand below and, looking up through the hole
in the middle, to see a course of stretchers being slapped firmly into place, sticking
in position until the ring be complete. There is but one man at work when the
ring becomes comparatively small—indeed there is not room for two —but nothing
moves, the bricks all retaining their places until he has worked his way round
from the starting-point. The successive rings are added to each other rather
slowly. When the hole in the top of the dome is reduced to ro in diameter the
bed-joints are no longer radiated from the centre of the hemisphere, they are
of equal thickness throughout, so that the crown of the dome consists of a very
flat cone. This is perhaps done, so that the final rings of bricks shall not be set
with their bed-joints too nearly vertical.
It should be stated that the interior surface of the dome is plastered as the work
proceeds. When the brickwork has been carried up about 0-50 the bricklayer
takes a lump of plaster, which is in fact the same as the mortar, and stretching
over from above, he spreads the material upon as large a space as he can reach,
and so on until he has worked his way round or joined up to the work of his
companions.
The closing in of the hole at the very summit of the dome is rather a hurried
piece of work, a hole of perhaps 0-30 in diameter. The two men did this with
a great deal of mortar mixed with the bricks, and accomplished it without any
failure. They then set up the finial, the lower part being of brick and mortar,
the crescent and the rod on which it is strung being ingeniously made by a travel-
ling tinker out of a petroleum tin.
After standing two or three days the exterior was plastered over with mud
mortar and the work was complete, except its final coat of lime wash.
I have given this somewhat full description of the way in which the little
building was carried out, because not only is the art of doing the work dying out,
but because it shows us the excessive contrast between the ingenuity and inde-


pendence of a simple folk having few tools and no ' tackle' and the dependence
that we Europeans place upon adventitious aid. There are in Egypt hundreds
of domes built in the manner above described and many of them are several
hundred years old, but it would be difficult to find a builder in Europe who would
not require for the work timber ' centres', ladders, and very many things which
he looks on as a matter of course and as absolute necessities.
Before describing the various plans and drawings here collected attention
must be called to the fact that the churches range themselves under three types,
A B and C.
Type A is of the plan we know as Basilican, consisting of a nave, ending in
an apse, of aisles north and south with galleries over, of a western bridge at the
level of the gallery floors, and of a stair, generally at the south-west angle, giving
access to the galleries and to the roof, which was flat. The nave, the aisles, and
the galleries were covered by tunnel vaults (see Plates HI, iv, v, VIII, x, xi, xn,
XIII, XIV, XV, XVI, XVIII, XXIV, XXXI, XLV-LI, LIV-LVL).
The above description holds good until we enter that part of the Nile valley
which begins south of the Batn el Hagar, or Second Cataract. It does not seem
open to doubt that the Basilican type of plan was here very general, but it must
have varied considerably from the type as above described and worked out in
the north. Instead of piers of clumsy masonry, small monolithic columns of
hard stone were made use of, separating the nave from the aisles (Plate HI).
I cannot find evidence of an upper gallery over the aisles, nor do I think that
as a rule the nave or aisles were vaulted. A vault, even of crude bricks, is rather
weighty and exercises thrust. The monolithic columns referred to are slim,
and unless very well set upon adequate bases would be insufficient to carry the
necessary arches and walls on which the vaults must rest, nor would they resist
the lateral thrust. When the buildings fell into neglect the thrust would quickly
act upon the columns, and the vault would push them over to the north and
the south. As a matter of fact the columns, very ilk set up as they are, are the
only parts of the building still standing, everything about them has been desolated
and ravaged, but they remain.
Vaults of burnt brick would be so heavy and exert so much thrust that
the outer walls of the aisles which must ultimately resist that thrust must have
been decidedly massive. This would mean, according to the method of building
common in those times and places, that a thick wall would present a fair face
but would be filled in with indifferent material. The facing masonry—bricks
or even stones—might be worth stealing, but the hearting would be left, and we
might therefore expect to find it; but it is not so. Every trace of the side walls
is gone. Fragments of broken brick lie around but not in any relation to the
walls of which they once formed a part.
I venture to believe that the walls were thin. The columns may or may
not have carried arches, the whole was covered by a flat roof of wood, no doubt
of Palm trunks and reeds, covered with a stout coat of mud.


Type B. A dome or domes form the more prominent part of the covering
to churches of this type and the plan is consequently modified from type A,
the better to support the roofs thus constructed. We find, however, the essential
subdivisions of the building the same. The apse, which, if it may be square
on plan, is worked by pendentives or other devices into a semi-dome overhead.
The nave has aisles north and south. The stair is not an essential feature of
this plan, from which we must suppose that to the churches of this type there
were not always galleries. The doors, opening north and south, are in their
usual places. The little rooms on either side of the altar are found and the
rectangularity of plan and of external appearance of the building is maintained
in both types of plan A and B (see Plates vi, vn, xn, xix, XXIII). Between
Shellal and Haifa we find these two rooms sometimes joined by a narrow passage
behind the apse. In the Batn el Hagar this narrow passage is very generally
made use of. What custom may have prevailed south of the Batn el Hagar
I am unable to say, the destruction of the walls is too thorough.
In both types the external rectangularity of the plan is always maintained.
In no case does the apse project beyond the east wall.
The type C is, it must be presumed, more recent in its development than
the types A and B, and, I venture to believe, did not come into being until
after the Arab conquest. History tells us that the churches were not un-
frequently plundered and their roofs burnt, the wood roofs were replaced by
vaults and domes of brick. Two very good examples of this transformation are
found at the Der el Abiad (Plates XLV-XLVIII), and at the Der Abu Hennes
(Plates LIV-LVI). When, however, the church was, from the first, intended
to be roofed with masonry, the whole area was covered with a series of small
domes, side by side, the supporting arches carried by little columns or slim piers
of brick or stone. Good examples of this type are found in Plates XXXIII, xxxiv,
xxxv, XLII, LII.
It is necessary to give the date when the various plans were drawn and
observations made which are here set down for the following reason. For
centuries decay has slowly eaten the antiquities. Now, with the increasing
commercial activity that has spread over the country, schemes of all sorts are
pressed forward, irrigation, mining, &c., and in two or three years changes are
effected which many previous centuries have not produced. For uncultivated
Philistinism let us commend ourselves to the Englishman in general and the
English engineer in particular. When their attention is called to it, the heads
of departments are not desirous that unnecessary harm should be done, but
they cannot be everywhere, and it is painfully obvious that the subordinates
are not instructed to use such care as the circumstances may admit of.
The destruction in the Sudan has been even more complete than elsewhere,
and for the following reasons. After its conquest by Mohammed Ali he endea-
voured to establish a variety of administrative buildings and works—as it was
supposed—of utility. Materials for these were required, so the orders went forth


to the local governors to find stones and bricks. The few temples, already
much plundered for assistance in building the churches, were made still further
to render up their materials, whilst the churches in their turn were levelled with
the ground and the bricks removed.
It is only under the present enlightened administration in the Sudan that
an effort is being made to guard and preserve what is left.
The plans here set forth have been drawn to metric scale and are, as far
as possible, either one-hundredth full size or, where such a scale came out too
large for the page, to one two-hundredth ; by adopting this method it is very
easy to compare the relative sizes of different buildings. The east end of the
church is always to the right hand unless special necessity compels a plan to be
set another way. The orientation of the buildings themselves is by no means
very exact.
To certain of the plans the name of Mr. Geoffry S. Mileham is attached.
I had many years ago made hurried drawings of the same buildings, but
Dr. Randall Maclver and Mr. Mileham, under the auspices of the University of
Pennsylvania, have carefully excavated and drawn them at leisure. I have to
thank the University for permission to make use of some of this work, which
is published under the name of Churches in Lower Nubia, by Geoffry S. Mileham,
edited by D. Randall Maclver. Philadelphia, MCMX.
It must be stated that there are remains of many churches both in Egypt
and Sudan not known to me and consequently not mentioned here. The constant
progress of scientific investigation, which has at last begun to interest itself in
Christian Archaeology in Egypt, discloses almost every year sites forgotten
until now. This book does not pretend to be an exhaustive catalogue. It is,
in fact, no more than a first essay.


CHAPTER 111
DESCRIPTION OF DRAWINGS
IT now becomes necessary to explain the various plans and drawings that
are here collected together. Others, better able to judge than I am, have stated
their convictions that Christianity entered the valley of the Nile from the north
and spread with considerable rapidity southward. I feel that the evidences
given us by architectural remains are altogether in favour of this view.
Why, then, it may be asked, do I begin my work with giving examples as far
south as I can go; and proceed, with the stream of the Nile, it is true, but
opposite to the stream of evidence, viz. towards the north. My reason is that
the more we approach the busy centre of government in the north and those
places where the population has most thickly accumulated, there we naturally
find the most numerous examples not only of destruction but of changes of
fashion. The buildings in the south have been ruined. The buildings in the
north have been ruined, re-erected, and the manner of them changed, as a study
of my drawings will show.
SOBA
PLATE 111
Soba lies on the right or northern bank of the Blue Nile about thirteen
miles above Khartum. It was the capital of the Christian kingdom of 'Aiwa,
but there is reason to believe that before this the place was already the site of
an ancient city, more especially as portions of a temple have been found here. 1
I visited the site in February 1910.
Of the remains of the temple, afterwards converted to use as a church and
referred to by Dr. Budge, 1 nothing could be seen. A plain of alluvial soil
stretches without a visible limit in all directions. It is thickly dotted with low
trees and a growth of prickly scrub. Interspersed are collections of broken
red brick, not rising high enough to be honoured with the name of mounds.
One of these, covering a considerable area, is the site of the building referred to
by Dr. Budge and seen by him in 1901. Rising from a slight depression in the
midst of another agglomeration of broken bricks may be found some small
monolithic columns.
The Egyptian Sudan, by E. A. Wallis Budge, vol. i, p. 324.


£
r
&
1
1 «"
— - — _ — -__s.
I
i '
3
m
©
CONJECTURAL GROUND PLAN OF CHURCH
EXISTING COLUMNS & BASES SOLID BLACK
CONJECTURAL _ ;
l -
1 1 1
( 1
' 1 « /
- . /
' : i
1 «i
L-J
1 1
1 ,
' 1
' .
1
l
i : <e
; ;
• i
! ■
i i
i i
i i
i t
i i
1 /"N
1 1 11
1 , V
1 1
' 1
1 1
'< i O
■ i
1 i
i i
; ! « O
1
;
\ '
i i
i i i
i
i •
a
/"* \
t l
«.
o
' O
SCALE 1^0


If
tip
? r
Little as there is to be seen, it is desirable to give a plan of the remains
existing at the time of my visit. 1 It may, I hope, be admitted that I have justice
in supposing such an arrangement of columns must probably belong to a building
of a basilican plan, and, from the lightness of their girth they probably supported
a roof of wood. The columns A, B, c are standing. The column D has fallen,
owing, it must be feared, to the ill-directed energies of some excavators who have
dug square holes against the bases of these columns for no assignable reason.
These columns are of gneiss, about 2-0 high. The lower end of the mono-
lithic shafts, which average about 0-62 in diameter, are left square (see Fig. 6),
but whether this formed a visible base, standing above the pavement, or was
partly or entirely buried, cannot now be determined, as the floor of the church
has been very much damaged.
At E is a drum of a column—of sandstone of the same diameter as the
columns above mentioned. It seems to be in position, and is so placed as to
form, as we may suppose, the westernmost support of a series of arches—five in
FIGS. 6 and 7. Soba. Base of Column and Capital.
number. At Fis a similar drum, also of sandstone. It comes in very properly
as a western support of a second arch in the southern range. At Gis a sandstone
drum which does not seem to be in position. From AtoE is 13-40 (about
fifty feet).
I have ventured to show, in dotted lines, how an apse may have existed,
terminating the church on the east with the customary chambers north and
south of it and passage joining them behind the apse. I make no conjectural
reconstruction of the west end, as we are at present entirely without information.
It cannot be supposed that there was a staircase, 2 as such a feature was not likely
to exist except where there were galleries and vaulted ceilings on which would be
carried the terrace roof.
At right angles with the line joining A and B, and consequently on the long
axis of the building, a trench was dug, hoping thereby to intersect the walls of
the apse. Trenches were also dug north and south with the hope of intersecting
the aisle walls, but every trace of solid structure had been removed. We passed
through nothing but broken bricks in utter confusion. Five capitals belonging
to the columns are lying about on the ground. One of these is very well pre-
1 February, 1910. how very often there was a stair at the west end
2 A study of the plans which follow will show of a church.


served (Fig. 7). It is a misfortune that it should be left, neglected and exposed
to violence, where it now is. It could so easily be removed to the museum
which is being formed at Khartum.
The masons' work upon the capital, as also upon the column, is done entirely
with the 'pick'. The consequence of this is that, with regard to the columns,
they are none of them truly circular in section, but are shaped merely by the
eye. The capital is well designed, not only as a sensible treatment of a very
tough material, but in a pleasing way to cover the transition from a form circular
below to square above. It will be observed that the abacus still bears a tradition
of the classic. It is not square on plan, but its sides are gently curved, as we
see them in the abacus of the Corinthian capital. The volutes at each angle
are ingeniously devised, whilst the symbol of the cross is prominently displayed.
In the case of other capitals, which are not a little damaged, they are hardly
so pleasing in their design as that above mentioned. Large leaves, somewhat
coarse and shapeless, are seen beneath each corner of the abacus, the whole
reminding us a little of the very clumsy capitals to be seen on the smaller
Egypto-Roman temple at Naaga. 1
This part of the Sudan is subject to periodical rains which last for but a short
time. They affect, however, to a certain extent the nature and surface of the
soil. The conservative conditions so remarkable in the climate of Egypt are
not found to the same extent in this part of the Sudan. The white ant is also
very active. The rains might easily dispose of much of the debris of crude
brick, the incessant north-west wind would assist in doing the same, whilst the
white ant would quickly reduce fallen timbers to powder, an easy prey to the
aforesaid winds.
That which no doubt gave the final blow to the remains at Soba was the
construction of the town of Khartum. Lepsius tells us 2 that, landing on the
site of Soba he found ' great heaps of red brick, destined for exportation'. ' This
material for building is transported in great quantities from Soba as far as
Chartum and beyond it. We disembarked and had scarcely got beyond the
thorny bushes nearest to the bank, when we perceived the overturned mounds
of bricks, covering a large plain, possibly an hour in circumference.' ' Nowhere
could walls, nor the form of buildings, be recognized.' What preceding centuries
had left, the nineteenth century has destroyed, as we find to be the case through
Egypt and wherever European influences have been introduced. Such poor
remains as are left are now respected. According to AM Salih, 3 ' Here ' (at
the town of 'Alwah) ' there are troops and a large kingdom with wide districts,
in which there are four hundred churches. All the inhabitants are Jacobite
Christians. Around it there are monasteries, some at a distance from the stream
and some upon its banks. In the town there is a very large and spacious church,
1 See Budge, The Egyptian Stlddn, vol. i, p. 330. 3 The Churches and Monasteries of Egypt, Abu
1 Letters from Egypt, Ethiopia and Sinai. Salih, Evetts and Butler. Oxford, Clarendon
London, H. G. Bohn, 1853, p. 162. Press, 1895, p. 263


skilfully planned and constructed, and larger than are the other churches in the
country ; it is called the church of Manbali.'
Mr. Crowfoot, who until recently acted as inspector of antiquities in the
Sudan, mentions sundry remains of churches which he has seen or been informed
of on the Blue Nile —at Alti (west bank), Rodis (east bank), Kasemba (west
bank), Arbagi (west bank), Hassa Hissa and Senaar; also at Katena on the
White Nile.
WADI GHAZALI
PLATE IV
On the left bank of the Nile opposite old Merawi, i. e. about six miles down
stream of Gebel Barkal (the ancient Napata), is the mouth of a wide valley called
the Khor abu Dom. At a distance of about two hours' ride up this valley we
come to a place where water rises to the surface ; here we see sundry palms,
dom-trees and signs of cultivation, together with a few houses; a very small
oasis, in fact, in a slight depression of sandhills and rounded granite rocks. It is
a lost and melancholy spot. In this place we find the ruins of a monastery to
which attention has already been drawn by Lepsius, who visited it in 1844.
He gives a plan of the church in Letters from Egypt, Ethiopia and Sinai , p. 219,
and particulars in the Denkmaler, Abth. I, 81. 131.
I visited this place January 11, 1910, and took certain check measurements,
by which I was able to assure myself how careful and accurate was the plan of
the church which Lepsius has published, for, alas, the whole group of buildings
is terribly ruined since his visit. This is the more to be deplored because there
are so few groups of monastic buildings now existing in the valley of the Nile.
In view of the remote position of this monastery, and its consequent chance
of escaping from the destruction that has so universally befallen the ancient
monuments near the river, there was a reasonable hope that here, at least, might
be found a fairly complete plan of a monastic establishment. As a matter of
fact, it is in a worse condition of ruin than the monastery of S. Simeon at
Aswan, the plan of which will be found on Plate xxix.
The monastery or der is enclosed by walls of stones collected from the
surrounding surface, and unwrought. They are laid in mud mortar. The walls
enclose an irregular figure with but small pretensions to rectangularity of plan.
They are of considerable substance. The church does not, however, stand parallel
with any of the surrounding walls, and is towards the south of the enclosure.
The chief entrance to the der lies towards the north. The doorway being
set back some two metres from the face of the wall the pieces of masonry on either
side stand towards it in the relation of flanking towers. The door-head, now
broken down, was of ill-wrought sandstone. Within the door was a passage
covered with brick vaulting and as much as 6-o long. Lying between the entrance
doorway and the church is a series of ruined chambers, packed together, seemingly
without plan, built of crude brick. Most of these chambers have been vaulted


with the same material. Some of the rooms were arranged on either side of
a central corridor, as described by Lepsius. Compare also plans, Plates VIII,
xxix, xxxix. One can trace the remains of a stair in crude brick with
a solid newel.
It is not, perhaps, fair to suppose that the place was, at first, quite such
an ill-digested jumble as it came to be in later times. The changes of very many
centuries had passed over it before it was finally abandoned as a monastery,
and even then it may have been, in part, used and re-adapted for habitations.
The brick vaults having everywhere fallen in, the floors of the rooms are
encumbered with the debris to a considerable depth.
To the west of the church are the remains of sundry chambers, their walls
built of unhewn stones set in mud mortar. A little doorway, with a roughly
dressed arch of sandstone, shows its head above the debris. This door opens
from one of the last-mentioned rooms into a narrow passage lying between the
west wall of the church and the east wall of the last-described chambers. The
walls of the passage are by no means parallel, for while at the north end
the passage is less than i-o wide, at the south end it is at least 2-0 in width.
According to custom, the church is without any doorway in its west wall.
Lepsius, in his description of the place, refers to the stone-built chambers
above described, and says, 'No doubt' this building ' belonged to the prior, and
a special side entrance led from it to the church'. On what authority does he
make this statement ? Nothing is in fact known of the monastic plan in the
valley of the Nile. No one can say whether it had crystallized into certain
accepted types of plan, according to the order for which the monastery was
built, as had been the case in Europe. It had been my hope, searching up and
down the Nile valley, to find sufficient examples of monastic buildings to prove
that there had been an accepted type of plan. Seventeen years of research have
left me as ignorant as when I began.
The ruins of a row of small chambers of brick lie along by the east wall of
the church ; there are, however, but few remains of walls south of it, i. e. between
the church and the south wall of the enclosure. This south wall is pierced by
a very small door which gives directly upon the ancient burial-ground.
The translators of Lepsius' letters quaintly inform us that ' two church-
yards are situated on the southern side of the convent'. We find, as a matter
of fact, two groups of graves, many of them very perfect and well preserved.
One group has about it the remains of what may have been a wall, the other is
quite unenclosed.
' The church, as high as the windows, was built of white, well-hewn stones,
and above that of unburnt bricks. The walls are covered with a strong coating
of plaster, and are painted in the interior. The vaulted apse of the three-naved
basilica is situated, as usual, towards the east.'
It is to be wished that Lepsius' description would still hold good. In the
drawing published by Lepsius before referred to, the spectator is supposed to


PLATE W
PLAN OF CHURCH FROM LEPSIUS
FIG. 1
SCALE 2 | o
(QENETTH
FIG. 2
THE APSE & EASTERN WALLS
ARE CONJECTURAL
SCALE


stand outside the north-west angle of the building. There is a great gap in the
north wall, as there is at this day. Through it we see the inside of the south
wall of the south aisle and can observe the windows in that wall. These occupy
an unusual position, being so low that they cut into the stonework, which is now
the only part of the aisle wall in situ, the superincumbent brickwork, at least
two metres high, shown by Lepsius, having been altogether removed. The
windows would have given abundant light to the aisles. In most cases the
windows, if there be any, in the aisle walls are kept high up.
The view through the before-mentioned gap in the north wall enables us
to see the central apse, the conch of which seems to be complete. An apse is also
shown terminating the south aisle, and another at the end of the north aisle.
An examination of the plan does not prepare us for such unusual features. The
arches forming the north arcade of the nave can be seen; small and low arches
standing on stumpy and clumsy piers of masonry, such as may be seen at Ham-
mam el Farki (Plate xi). These are all destroyed with the before-mentioned
apses. It is, in truth, very difficult to learn much by a study of this lithograph.
It is very ill done. No doubt the lithographer produced the best result he
could out of a very indifferent original sketch showing a place he had never seen.
The considerable mass of building which is shown in the Denkmaler is sadly
reduced. The stonework to which Lepsius refers, which being of the neigh-
bouring sandstone might better be described as yellow than white, is still seen
on the east, south, and west. The staircase at the south-west angle still stands
higher than the other walls, but the whole of the interior is now void, except
two small piers of masonry which probably formed the jambs-of the apse, and
two very similar piers which formed the eastern angles of the staircase and the
opposite chamber on the north. The vault of the apse is, as has been said,
entirely gone, and also the walls, to within a short distance of the floor. The
place is choked with the debris of broken red brick. Lepsius says most definitely
that above the white well-hewn stone was ' unburnt' brick. Can a slip of the
pen have admitted the word ' unburnt' in the place of ' burnt' ? I think this
must be the case.
The plaster on the inner and outer faces of the church walls is nearly all
gone ; but a few fragments remain. The outer enclosing walls of the der have
been overthrown in many places; the chambers within the enclosure are, for
the most part, a confused heap.
On comparing the'plan of this church with other plans of type A, it will
be observed that all of them are very much alike, and are all basilican. The
ruins I have described at Soba, and those we shall presently consider at Ginetti,
Dongola, and Sal, differ materially from the church at Wadi Ghazali, in - that
whilst the former have small monolithic columns on either side of the nave the
latter has solid piers of masonry. There can be no doubt that in this latter
building there were galleries or passages over the aisles; the stairs are a sufficient
proof.


1|._..„._ :i ;,:.;:|
I!
Are we to attribute this difference to ritual requirements—to the difference,
perhaps, between parochial and monastic churches—or may we not attribute it
to the fact that to drag monolithic columns, small as they would be, up the
valley to the site of the church was too serious a business, and that piers of
masonry were more cheap and easy to build ?
GINETTI
PLATE IV
On the island of Ginetti are the ruins of a church (visited Jan. 8, 1910).
Here we find six bases, as shown on the plan all in position. The columns
are of green gneiss, small monoliths of an average length of 2-20 to 2-40, and
about 0-65 in diameter.
The workmanship is with a pick. The columns are irregular in shape,
unequal in length, and careless in execution, as we observed to be the case at
Soba, and this remark holds good for all other sites and places.
FIG. 8. Ginetti. Capital.
FIG. 9. Ginetti. Elevation of Capital.
The column A differs from the others in that the capital is part of the same
piece of stone as the column ; in all other cases the capitals are separate.
The column A is still standing, and the bases of the others are, as shown on
the plan, in their proper positions. Six other columns are to be seen lying on the
ground, all unbroken.
The walls of the church are utterly gone; nothing but fragments of broken
brick lie around, and these are not in such a position as to indicate where walls
may have been. They are but formless heaps. It is therefore difficult even
to conjecture what the plan of the building may have been. The spacing of the
columns is somewhat greater than we find at Soba. We may suppose that the
nave" terminated, eastward, in the customary apse, but the base B on the north
is difficult to account for unless we suppose that, at least on that side, there was
a double aisle.
The capitals deserve a few words, differing as they do from the ordinary
type. The abaci, as shown in the drawings (Figs. 8 and 9), are remarkably


thick. On the face they bear a small cross in a circle. Under the abacus we
find a band of ornament. In the case of the standing column, where the capital
and shaft of the column are in one stone, the ornament consists of a meandering
line in low relief with pellets in each of the curves. A raised moulding forms a
neck mould. A more usual ornament beneath the abacus is a curved pattern
which, in a remote degree, reminds us of the egg-and-dart.
The effect of these simple capitals is excellent. They seem to be, as they
are, sturdy and strong, whilst the workmanship and design are admirably suited
to the stubborn material of which they are made.
OLD DONGOLA
Visited January 7, 1910. In the last century, as a seat for the government
of the province, an administrative centre was established and called New Dongola,
or more properly, El Ordi, in contradistinction to the old town of Dongola, which
is the place we are now concerned with.
Old Dongola was the capital of the ancient Christian kingdom of Dongola,
founded by Silko about the year 450. It was a place of considerable importance
and size, as the ruins testify. The place was invaded by the Arab conquerors of
Egypt in the year 652 ; the chief buildings, including the church, were battered
down, and the inhabitants sued for peace.
Abu Salih says of this place, ' Here is the throne of the king. It is a
large city on the banks of the blessed Nile, and contains many churches and
large houses and wide streets. The king's house is lofty, with several domes
built of red brick, and resembles the buildings in Al-'lrak ; and this novelty was
introduced by Raphael who was King of Nubia in the year 392 of the Arabs,
(A. D. 1002).' 1
The ruins of Old Dongola stand in an elevated position, in part overhanging
the river on the right bank of the Nile. A considerable area is covered with
broken red brick, and undoubtedly very much more is hidden beneath the drifted
sand, which is, as I was told, constantly encroaching, and threatens to cover the
few habitable houses that are still to be seen. From out of these masses of broken
brick there stand up in one or two places small monolithic columns of green
gneiss, tKe same material that we have already met with at Soba, and the
columns of about the same modest dimensions. Certain of them stand in
relation to each other as though they formed part of a church.
On a headland which stands immediately above the river are pieces of a
gneiss column and walls disposed in such a manner as to suggest that they too
form part of a church.
The most prominent object at Old Dongola is a rectangular mass of brick
masonry, which rises in two stories, and dominates the neighbourhood. It is
1 Abu Salih, p. 265. We should bear in mind tion. A very modest building becomes colossal
that Abu Salih was blessed with a vivid imagina- under his powers.of description.
43 F2


of no great size, being on plan but 24 metres by 18-0, but, everything around it
being in ruins, its apparent importance is thereby increased. It rises about
io-o from the present ground-level of the little eminence on which it is placed,
but as this has not a very level surface the elevation is somewhat greater in one
part than in another.
The lower story of this structure consists of five parallel corridors, their
ends opening into cross-corridors. These are closed above by tunnel vaults,
which have in some places fallen in and been badly repaired with beams, which
in their turn have decayed. This story, from the floor-level to the level of the
floor above, is about seven metres in height.
Above it, and approached by a very roomy stair, is an upper floor, consisting
of a square chamber in the middle with a corridor on each of its four sides. This
upper floor is barely 2-50 in height. It is roofed with beams, between which we
see reeds, the whole covered with mud mortar.
On the wall of the centre chamber, nearest to the stairs, has been found
beneath the plaster a piece of a painting which may be intended for Moses, as a
pair of horns project from the head. On the capital of one of four small columns
which help to support the wood roof is very roughly cut a cross. This upper
chamber is now used as a mosque, and has been so used for a vast number of
years, as inscriptions on the wall sufficiently prove.
It is claimed for this building, by some, that it was a church. If we examine
its plan we find nothing either in the lower or upper story to justify such a state-
ment. At any rate, its plan is so abnormal, so entirely unlike any other churches
that can be found in any part of Egypt or the Sudan, that I hesitate to admit the
claim. A small fragment of wall-painting and a very clumsy capital with a
rudely-cut cross upon it, a thing which may easily have been removed from
elsewhere, and the Christian symbol on which could have been hidden by a
handful of plaster—these two insignificant items are insufficient evidence.
The building, whatever it may have been, is well deserving of further study,
and stands greatly in need of careful repair and further excavations; indeed
the whole site, the places where we can see that evidently there were churches,
would probably repay scientific examination. In this might be included the
Wadi Letti, a district now desert, but once well cultivated. In this valley, it is
said, are the evidences of numerous settlements of the Christians.
SEDEGNA
PLATE V, FIG. I
Visited December 21, 1909. This place is called Nulwa by the inhabitants.
Here are the remains of a stone-built temple built by Amenophis 111. Imme-
diately to the south stand the lower drums of two columns made up of sandstone
plundered from the temple and reworked. These mark the site of a small church
of an interesting and unusual plan. The outlines of the outer walls of the building


can still be seen on the ground, formed of small, ill-formed fragments of sandstone
from the same source as the stone for the columns.
A reference to the drawing, Plate v, shows us that we are on the site of a
building of the modest internal length of 12-0. The nave ended towards the east
in the customary apse, which was flanked on the north and south by a small
chamber, these chambers being connected by a narrow passage behind the apse.
There are indications in the foundations at the west end that possibly there was
a stair at the south-west angle.
A study of the plans which succeed this one will show that it was very usual
to have a stair at the south-west angle leading to passages or galleries over the
north and south aisles. I could not see, in the ruins now under consideration, any
remains of the stair itself. Usually, when very much of the rest of a building is
gone, the greater mass of material used in building a stair with its solid newel leaves
its mark, as we have already seen to be the case in the monastery at Wadi Ghazali.
The superstructure has been so much ruined and plundered that only in
one place, in the north wall, could I find evidences of a doorway, and this not very
clear. Such a position is, it will be seen, almost universal for a doorway, with
another in the south wall exactly opposite. We cannot doubt that arches were
carried by the two columns.
East of the apse are foundations attached to those of the church, and
apparently contemporary therewith. How access was obtained to the apartment
that we must suppose stood here, whether it was connected by a doorway with
the church, who can say ? In no other plan that I have met with have I found
a room similarly placed.
SAINARTI
On the island of Sai, surrounded by debris of broken burnt bricks, are four
monolithic columns, the shafts about 3-0 high and 0-55 to 060 in diameter, of
green gneiss. Three of these are standing, the fourth is falling over, and is only held
in the present position by the debris around its base (visited December 19, 1909).
A description of the columns at Soba or at Ginetti applies in all general
particulars to these. They formed part of a church of the basilican type.
The capitals differ from those before described (see Figs. 10 and 11). Their
outline is clumsy. Beneath the angle volutes we see a band of shield-like forms.
These are but very slightly in relief and bear no decoration upon them. The
capital, which we may suppose to have fallen from the leaning columns, differs
altogether in its type from the capital already described.
KULB
PLATE V, FIG. 2
Visited December 15, 1909. On the west bank of the Nile, and opposite
the southern end of Kulubnarti, i. e. Kulb Island, are the ruins of a very singular
and interesting church—its plan, so far as I know, unique (see Plate v, Fig. 2).


W!~M
The church stands on a piece of level ground at the foot of some steep rocks,
and in a very picturesque position; indeed, now that we are in the Batn el Hagar,
all the sites are more or less attractive, owing to the mixture of cultivation, due
to the river close at hand, combined with the rugged and absolutely barren rocks,
cliffs, and slopes of golden sand which forni the background and setting to the
picture. In the midst of the small piece of level ground, a few rocks crop up.
These have been formed into a small platform, assisted by unwrought stones
brought from near at hand, and of unusual size for such a class of work.
We may observe that the plan of the church, as regards the east end, is in
the usual fashion, with a chamber north and south of the apse, and a passage
joining them, but the rest of the building is altogether away from the common
type. Instead of a nave and aisles, we find the whole area of this part of the
building covered by a dome, somewhat more than 7-0 in diameter. A square is
FIGS. 10 and 11. Sainarti. Capitals of Columns
converted to an octagon, so as to receive the dome, by arches thrown across each
angle. These arches are semicircular as well as the arches on the four cardinal
faces. Shallow transeptal recesses project from the side walls, by which arrange-
ment a great amount of stability is gained with the use of but little material.
Whether the building was continued westward cannot now be seen. There is
evidence that walls existed at right angles with the existing west wall; on these the
dome rested, in part, but whether there was any sort of nave cannot be affirmed.
The springing of the dome exists at the south-east angle of the square nave;
elsewhere, the thin shell of crude brick, of which it was built, has fallen in. At A
on the plan is a pier of crude brick. This can hardly be a part of the original
fabric. I venture to believe that, early in its history, the dome showed symptoms
of collapse, and that the pier was the result of an effort to keep it up.
The building is quite small in scale. The arches spring from about one
and a half metres above the floor. Its existing condition is sadly ruinous and
neglected. Excepting that the tunnel vault exists over the south-east chamber,
and that a fragment of the dome may still be seen over the south-east angle of the
square nave, the rest is roofless. A few rings of the arch opening westward stand


FIG. 1
TOEJB
j ( '|' "" ~ - j
i i i •
: i • •
• i
SEDEOIMA
SCALE 2k
SCALE jjo


NEAR SHEIKH . t
"St
m if 1
M B '
1 • i
i ;
! SCALE j^j
KOLOBNAMTl^
OJ
mmm l^j'
DP LATE "VII


in a precarious state. A few stones are thrust into breaches in the walls, and
here and there a thorn-bush. Whether these defences are to keep beasts out of the
sacred enclosure, or to keep beasts in when they are housed there, who can say ?
In any case, I believe the building to be quite unique in its way.
Some distance to the north of the last-mentioned church, near Sheikh Farrig,
is a diminutive ruin set in a little valley. A few mud houses near it. It is still
in the district of Kulb. This was visited on December 15, 1909. The plan is
given on Plate vi, Fig. 1.
The plan of the little church at Kulb belongs to the type B, that which was
characterized by having a small dome as a central feature.
In the present case the eastern end and the south side are ruined down to
the ground; we can only trace the lines of the walls by observing the rough
stones which formed the bottom course.
The little nave is but 2-0 wide. The whole building was internally but 8-50
long. The nave and aisles were covered with parallel vaults of crude brick. The
chamber at the west end of the south aisles has its vault at right angles with the
vault of the nave. This room is in the position in which we often find a stair,
but here there is no evidence of such a thing. A few painted figures, sadly
broken, can be traced on the fragments of the vaults which still cover a part
of the western end. The church was built of crude brick with vaulted roofs of
the same.
We are now in the region of crude bricks, and shall not again meet with
columns of gneiss or with fragments of burnt brick.
KULUBNARTI
PLATE VI, FIG. 2
The island (arti) of Kulb, visited December 15, 1909. At the south end of
this rocky and picturesque island, and close to a group of ruined houses dominated
by a ruined fort or watch-tower, are the remains of a small church of the type B,
built entirely of crude brick.
The external walls remain all round the building nearly to their full height,
which, it should be said, is something very insignificant, as the building is alto-
gether but 6-30 long in the interior, and 5-13 wide. On the ground plan there is
not an apse, but in many instances, whilst the plan at the floor-level was rect-
angular, the vaulted roof was gathered over so as to make a quarter dome above,
as it must have been here. The rooms north and south of the apse are found,
but are not joined by a passage. We also see a stair, before referred to as being
very usual, at the south-west corner of the building. I could not observe in
the building itself evidence of side galleries, and am induced to suppose that the
stair led only to the roof.
The little nave is less than I*s° wide; the doorways are so small that it is
inconvenient to pass through them. It is a matter of wonder how the service


of the altar could be carried on in a place so diminutive, and yet we find remains
of paintings, which must always have been in jeopardy. On the east wall at A,
is a ' Majesty', and on the side walls, right and left, are solemn rows of gaunt
apostles, all sadly battered.
GIMEI
PLATE VI, FIG. 3
The church at Gimei, although but small, is on a more ambitious scale than
the two last described, and is of the basilican type. It is well placed on a natural
mound of rock, assisted by art to form a level floor for the building. Visited
December 9, 1909. It is built entirely of crude brick, except the lowest courses
of the walls, which are of unwrought stone set in mud mortar. The plan shows
that the interior has been robbed of its piers and of nearly all internal features
except the base of the apse and the walls of the room on its south, which even
retains a part of its brick vaulted ceiling. It will be observed that there is not,
in this instance, a passage behind the apse. The doorways through the outer
wall are in the accustomed places, but there is an unusual feature at the west end,
for here we find the remains of a room, its length lying from north to south, and
still retaining a part of its vaulted tunnel ceiling. There is very much debris
encumbering the floor of this church. Its removal would perhaps reveal to us
how this room was entered. The external walls stand to a considerable height,
and are better specimens of brickwork than we usually meet with in the Batn el
Hagar.
GENDALIRKI
PLATE VII, FIGS, I AND 2
Somewhat to the north of the place last mentioned lies a group of ruined
houses, churches, and walls of some buildings the use of which I am unable to
determine. The two churches, which were visited on December 9, 1909, and
which are built entirely of crude brick, lie close together, and are in a ruinous
condition. They both belong to the type B, with small central domes.
In the case of Fig. 1 the scale of the building is a little in advance of the last.
We observe the rooms north and south of the apse, and the passage joining them;
also that on the floor-level the apse has a square end. As I could not find
evidences of entrance doors, I have not shown any on the plan. Probably they
were towards the western ends of the north and south walls.
In the case of Fig. 2, the east and south walls have been very completely
ruined. The internal length of the little building is but 8-o. Against the north-
east pier that carried the dome we see buttresses of crude brick, which, judging
by the vertical joint, have been added one after the other. Such bolstering up
of even the smallest buildings will be registered in several cases hereafter; indeed,
the careless way in which these poor little edifices were set up and had to be
propped is very surprising.


t* ! ! ooj i |
11"' "isl i '
' ! J i
1 I
i — — — — — — — — — — - —
PILATE VI
(QENDAL HRKI
FIG. I
SCALE 4
FIG. 2
SCALE t 4


The disposition of the vaulted ceilings can in all cases be traced even where
they have fallen in. A few fragments of battered painting can be seen.
GEZIRET THfcT MATUGA
PLATE VIII
The island on which this rapidly vanishing ruin may still be traced lies near
the northern end of the Batn el Hagar. The buildings, entirely of crude brick,
are nearly levelled with the ground. They were visited December 8, 1909.
A glance at the plan of the church shows us that it is of the ordinary basilican
type, and that buildings are in connexion with it on the north. There are also
traces of others on the south. The plan of the building to the north, with a
central corridor and rooms opening from it at the sides, is in exact accordance
with the corridor and lateral chambers already mentioned at the monastery in
the Wadi Ghazali (see p. 38).
A study of the plan of the Monastery of S. Simeon at Aswan (Plate xxx),
and of the Der el Megma (Plate xxxix), will justify my statement that here
we are on the site of a monastery—a small one, no doubt.
The church is of the orthodox basilican type, with the passage-way behind
the apse. The nave was three bays in length, and at the south-west angle was
the staircase. The doorways in the north and south walls are placed as usual.
That on the north leads into a space which may or may not have been an uncovered
yard. From this space we entered the corridor running northward, and out of
which, on either hand, opened a series of small chambers. At the north the
walls are so worn away that trace of them is lost. Very careful excavation
might, in this monastery, reveal a good deal. Buildings also stood on the south
of the church and very near to it. There are remains of what was, I think, the
enclosing wall of the Der, for, naturally, these buildings were always inclosed.
ABU SIR
PLATE IX, FIG. 2
Somewhat to the north of the place above described lie some ruins without
a name, so far as I could ascertain. They are to be found a little to the south
of the well-known rock of Abu Sir.
As my plan shows (Fig. 2), the apse and parts of the nave of the church
are still to be traced. Two arches, one at A and one at B, are still standing.
Over these the walls are carried up in such a manner as to suggest that there was
some sort of central feature raised higher than the roofs elsewhere. Without
excavation it is impossible to say under which type of plan, A or B, this building
should be classified. From the way the outer wall of the apse is finished, it is
fair to suppose that there was a passage behind it connecting the north and south
side chambers. The ruin is now a dwelling-place for cows and goats. The lower


J _ _ _ - . _ - _ 1
11 I
1 '
, 1 I t I I
I 1 I I I I 1
!
■ i >
it 1
i <
■ • ■ • q □ □ fa3
p *Jk !
g—|
SCALE
THET
iMTU(SA
PILATE VII


part of the walls, to a height of about two metres from the ground, is built of
rough stones, gathered from the cliffs near at hand ; the rest of the structure is
of crude brick. Visited December 7, 1909
ABD EL KADER
PLATE IX, FIG. I
North of the rock of Abu Sir, and on the hill-top, is seen a piece of masonry
known as Sheikh Abd el Kader. Immediately south of this, down by the riverside,
lies a diminutive ruin of crude brick; the holes in its venerable walls stopped,
here with stones and there with thorn-bushes, but very ineffectually. The plan
of this little building is given in Plate ix, Fig. 1. The arrangement is entirely unlike
those characteristic of a church. The central block, which is barely 4-50 square,
has on either side of it an additional building; the straight joints where the newer
walls abut upon the central block are very manifest, but the character and size
of the brickwork in all parts is so identical that it is impossible to conjecture at
what time the additions were made.
The central chamber is covered by diminutive barrel-vaults which rest in
part on the cross arches. A small chamber is set, crossways, in connexion with
this central chamber. At the point Aon the wall of the central barrel-vault is
painted a ' Majesty ' filling up the whole available space, and in all other parts
fragments of painting are to be seen, fairly well preserved ; indeed, no other
ruin I have met with in the Sudan retains so much of its paintings, nor, indeed,
so much of its roof. The tunnel vault, one end of which shelters the painting at
A, is, as to the other end, stopped short of the wall, and, so far as its ruined state
permits us to see, was carried up in the shape of a small lantern or dome, B, being
the chief source of light to this part of the interior. As for the two rooms right and
left of the central chamber, they are each of them covered by a brick barrel-vault,
and, as the drawing shows, one of them has a wide and open archway in the side of
it. The doorways elsewhere in the building are the most inconvenient little holes.
The interior of this building is very much encumbered with debris, which,
fortunately, has assisted to preserve the paintings. It is very undesirable that
any of this should be removed, unless such work is done by experienced hands
and at the same time careful copies are made of the paintings. The little building
is, unfortunately for its preservation, not far from the track of the tourist, who
is taken to the rock of Abu Sir. The tourist is a greater enemy to an ancient
building than the ignorant native. He takes away relics and mementos, crowds
into the little chambers, and blunders about with sticks, sunshades, and nailed
boots, doing more damage, innocently no doubt, than dozens of horned beasts.
This little place was visited December 7, 1909.
I must not fail to express my obligations to Mr. F. W. Green, M.A. Cantab.,
who assisted me in the measurement of the buildings described, and to Professor
A. H. Sayce, who, with Mr. Green, was my companion in the Sudan.


NEAR
SMEUBCIHI ABIO) EE KABMM.
FIG
SCALE TOT
FIG
PLATE
i v
t \
/ ,
1\ / 1
\ / •
/ *
• n /
I N /
:/ \ ;
I / N
I ' ■
SCALE tso


CHAPTER IV
DESCRIPTION OF DRAWINGS. HALFA TO PHILAE
WE have now arrived at the northern end of the Batn el Hagar—the
Second Cataract. The series of plans which follow are from ancient buildings
to be found between the Second Cataract and the First. This journey, which
I have made on two occasions, is best done with a dahabeah.
On the islands in the mouth of the cataract are several fragments of ancient
buildings, some of them probably Christian. This district is under the observa-
mXv '
.. w v» ✓ ' t- >:■ v
FIG. 12. Argyn. Terra-cotta Capitals.
tion of Dr. Randall Maclver, and in his capable hands will no doubt be presently
examined exhaustively. 1
Going northward from Haifa we first stop at Argyn. Very near to this place
—i. e. some ten miles north of Haifa, but on the eastern bank —some ruins are
observed immediately on the edge of the river. On examining these, they proved
to be the remains of a depository for terra-cotta (Fig. 12). The Nile has eaten
into a steep bank, and has revealed a considerable collection of terra-cotta
capitals and of pipes, piled one on the other in regular order. Some of the pipes
are laid parallel with the river, others at right angles to its course. Several layers
of them could be traced, the capitals always inverted on the top of the pipes.
The capitals were laid with their abaci close together, so that they covered the
pipes in their length. The material was of a good, well-burnt terra-cotta clay,
1 Some results have been published by the University of Pennsylvania. Churches in Lower Nubia,
by Geoffry S. Mileham, edited by D. Randall Maclver, MCMX.


bright red in the fracture, but generally with a thin whitish skin on the surface.
The length of the longest pipe dug out was 0-58, one end being perfect.
The capitals, clumsily made, do not closely agree with one another. Finger-
marks are visible inside. One cannot suppose they were made in a mould. The
treatment of the cap, with a cushion at the lower part and curls or horns at the
angles, so as to carry a square mass on a column circular in section, is such as
we find in stonework all through the Christian buildings of Egypt and in all
parts of Europe. It seems to be one of those obvious forms which were naturally
evolved wherever the difficulty had to be met.
The pipes—which, at first sight, might be taken for the columns on which
the capitals were to be placed—do not suit this purpose well. They are too large
in diameter. Outside they are covered with horizontal finger-marks of the
moulders.
There must have been a large quantity of the capitals and pipes placed by
the river side. Walking southward for twenty minutes, the shore was, all the
way, strewn with fragments, also with pieces of well-burnt red brick and a good
deal of broken pottery well made. No evidences of a kiln could be seen: no
clinkers, no walls marked by fire.
The capitals and pipes were absolutely embedded in and filled up with
alluvium, which is here very hard and solid.
The pottery must have been brought here and stacked for transportation.
We may ask ourselves, where was it made, whence came the fuel to burn it,
and, finally, to what market did it go ?
Dfeß EL BOHL OR BOLLOR
PLATE X, FIG. I
This place, on the west bank, lies a little north of Argyn, and about a quarter
of a mile from the river. It is placed where the ground rises very slightly. It is
built entirely of unbaked bricks, many very long (0*35 x 0-06 x 0-17), about
14 x 2J x 5f inches.
The walls that remain must be, for the most part, basements to a super-
structure, now, in almost all places, destroyed. It will be observed that the
chambers are in most cases without doorways. These chambers were covered
with tunnel vaults.
The plan of the church, a very small structure, can be easily made out.
Its floor level is well preserved. How the rooms west of the church and standing
on the basement were disposed of there is no means of ascertaining. Rows of
little vaulted cells or rooms, without any light but a small hole in the vault,
may be found in most of the buildings still standing in this part of Nubia. The
doorways are generally so small that it is only by stooping and going sideways
that one gets through. No sense of plan can can be traced, and in the houses
of the present day the same want of decent arrangement is seen.
1074 57 H


PILATE
©EMS EIL ESOIIXOIS
RUINS OF CHURCH
EAST BANK OF THE NILE
FIG. 2
SCALE 200


A study of the previous plans submitted to the reader will prevent him from
being surprised either at the very narrow chambers or at the restricted measure-
ments of the buildings. It will be seen that the plan of the church is quite normal
and belongs to type A. Towards the east is the apse, which does not show
outside, being imbedded between two small rooms. These, in the present case,
seem, by the evidence of straight joints in the brickwork, to have been enlarged.
West of the apse comes a nave of two bays, with arches opening into north and
south aisles, which had galleries over them. These were approached, as usual,
by stairs in the south-west angle, the westermost bay of the nave being bridged
across at the level of the gallery floors, so that the stairs at the south-west corner
could serve the gallery over the north aisle.
Between the building just described, which I venture to think must have
been a monastery, and the river are remains of crude brick houses. These are
called the Houses of Bohl, who is said to have been a great man in times past.
Fragments of grave-stones, on one of which I observed letters in Greek and on
another in Cufic, lie about. The pottery, many fragments of which are found,
is ribbed. Visited Jan. 13, 1894, and Jan. 15, 1899.
Near the ruins are long mounds of considerable height. These are at first
sight to be taken for mounds of sand, but they are in fact rows of tamarisks,
now dead and completely shrouded in sand. In many places such mounds are
seen : a proof that at one time there must have been considerable cultivation
and a population not a little in excess of the few people now to be found living
in this part of the valley.
SERRE
hammAm EL FARKI
PLATE XI
North of Argyn we come to the district of Serre. Between these places is
a small valley which lies immediately south of the building about to be described.
In the Berber language Farki is the word designating such a small valley as
we see here.
Hammam is the Arabic word for a bath, as every one knows : it is, however,
the custom amongst the fellaheen to call many ancient buildings ' Hammam',
especially if their outline be rectangular. Here, therefore, we have a combination
of Arabic and Berberine words. There is also another reason why the place
should have been called ' Hammam ', for quite near there existed, until recent
times, a warm mineral spring. To this people came from far and near, and
with their donkeys and camels destroyed the green crops of the owner of the
surrounding land, one Mousa Heri. Thinking he had suffered more than
enough, he decided to spoil the mineral spring, which he did by filling it with
stones, and so it remains to this day (Jan. 15, 1899), * s no l° n fi er frequented.
So far as I can gather this was done some thirty or forty years since.
59 H2


There is a tradition connected with this place which should be mentioned
here. There are said to be on the Nile banks four mineral springs of virtue.
I cannot ascertain the name of the most southern, but the next to it is the
well at Okasha; then comes the well now under our notice, Farki, and
finally, the baths at Heluan, near Cairo. The origin of these springs is not
wrapped in obscurity, but is as follows: Saidna Suliman (Our Lord Solomon),
being desirous that his people in these parts should have hot baths, sent down,
by his magical arts, two persons in each place to stir the central fires. Of each
pair of stokers one is deaf, the other dumb : consequently they cannot com-
municate very well with each other or the outer world. I use the present tense
advisedly, because these people, not having learnt that Saidna Suliman is dead,
are still stirring the fires. Hence the supply of hot water.
The building shown on Plates xi and xvi is one of the best-preserved ruins
of its class in Nubia. As is invariably the case, the apse is turned to the east.
The external dimensions of the building are n-8o x 16-70 (40 x 55 feet). The
nave is but 3-82 wide. The plan is of the type A.
To a height of 4-50 from the ground the walls are built of unmasoned stones,
selected from those lying on the rock surfaces round about. These are set in
a mortar consisting of Nile mud. Above this level the walls and vaults are made
of sun-dried mud bricks. The stonework inside the church is as rough as that
of the outer walls, but has been thickly plastered.
The aisles were tunnel vaulted in brick. That over the north aisle still
remains. The vault of the apse is also standing. The south wall, from the east end
to the stairs, is thrown down. As is shown on the longitudinal section, Fig. 1, the
western end of the nave is bridged by a gallery, over which was a window, which
must have been the chief source of light to the interior. Four very small windows
on each side of the nave opened into the upper aisles or galleries, and these again
had small windows in their outer walls. Even in Egypt, the light passing into
the church through these must have been very subdued; whilst such little slits
must have formed but very imperfect communications between the nave and the
galleries, if the latter were intended, as we may suppose, for use.
The apse opens towards the nave with an arch supported on either side
by nook shafts, which have, however, fallen. See also Fig. 2, Plate xvi.
Three recesses are made in the apse wall, and below these are the remains
of a centre and side seats. 1 Two very little doorways, one on either side, open
into two exceedingly small rooms which flank the apse and give the square
outline common to the exterior of all these churches. Traces of painting are still
seen on the plaster of the interior—figures in yellow or red on a white ground.
The pigments for these two colours are found, in some cases, ready for immediate
use—the red in nodules embedded in the sandstone, the yellow in the form of
veins.
1 See the plans of Abu-'s-Sifain, p. 78 ; Amba Shnuda, p. 136; and Abu Sargah, p. 182 ; all in Butler's
Ancient Coptic Churches.


I '
UJ| HHHI^^I
I GEOFFRY. S. Mll.EHAM,
FIG. 2 GROUND PLAN ' »™
SCALE njo
PLATE Xn
SIEIMIE. IHIAMMAM EL FAIR BO
FIG - 1 LONGITUDINAL SECTION LOOKING SOUTH
ON LINE X-X


To the south of the church just described, and separated from it by the little
valley in which was the thermal spring, are groups of crude brick houses, so
much mounded over with sand that the ground floors remain fairly perfect
beneath it. As the church stands quite detached, it does not seem probable that
these are the monastic buildings. Immediately west of the houses the cemetery
can be traced; the graves are marked by a ring of small stones round each of
them. There are remains of other houses on the north. 1
SERRE
PLATE X, FIG. 2
We next come to a church near Serre, standing on the rock a little above
the river and on the east bank. The plan belongs to the type A. It is in a very
ruinous state (visited Jan. 17, 1899). The north wall stands but 0-50 above the
ground. The apse has almost disappeared, whilst the south arcade is entirely
FIG. 13. Serre. South church from SW.
gone. The south wall of the south aisle is, on the other hand, preserved up to
a considerable height, and in it is a row of recesses or niches.
The broken base of the triumphal arch leading to the apse can be traced,
whilst the capital of one of the columns lies in the debris on the floor. Contrary
to custom, the external walls of the church are of sun-dried brick from the ground
upward. A course of rough flat stones is laid through the walls at a level which
seems to be that of the springing of the aisle vaults. There are not any ruins of
houses near. The building stands, as it seems always to have done, solitary
and alone. 2
1 Since the above was written the church
has been carefully excavated by Mr. Mileham,
to whom and to Dr. D. Randall Maclver I am
indebted for the plan and section here repro-
duced. It is called by them ' Church opposite
Debereh'.
2 This is called by Mr. Mileham 'East Serreh,
the South Church'.


FIG. 1
\ CHURCH \ SEISMIE
\ niriiilliilil'tUJJIIHiillii" »
Wl K IN ROCK ~~
\ M I II 1 STONE 'fcl
i FACING -c 11
'a J} J
p j \)i H* i 1 :
5 \ CENTRAL |
\\ \ CHURCH J |
V S !
|F 1 --JI
) SOUTH CHURCH
)| j I g£>
/ J I /// >\ G EOF FRY 5 MILEHAAt. Ales el Del, 1909.
GENERAL PLAN
SCALE Tooo"
SEISMS FIG. 2.A FIG. 3.B SEISMS
a (SHARK)
SCALE 2oo"
PLAN OF PLAN OF
CENTRAL CHURCH NORTH CHURCH
GSM Mens el del
PLATE XM


SERRE (SHARK)
DESERTED TOWN
PLATE XII
On the east bank of the river (visited Jan. 17, 1899). The plan of this town
is given, as it shows how near together three exceedingly small churches were
grouped (we shall find other examples) and how completely the Christian popula-
tion must have dominated this part of the river, having taken possession of an
enclosed site, which evidently belongs to a period far anterior to the introduction
of Christianity. Ancient Egypt is gone, and Christian Nubia is in possession.
This fact is proved by an examination of the enclosing walls. 1
Towards the middle of the enclosure and well up the slope are the remains
of a church, built of crude brick (see Fig. 2, A, Plate XII). This building is of
very small size, the external dimensions being but 9-0 x 7-75. It belongs to the
type B, having a dome in the middle. The tunnel vaults, which have covered the
aisles, seem to have had galleries above, as there is a stair at the south-west
corner of the building. It will be noticed that on the floor level the church does
not end towards the east in an apse.
The plan of the town shows two other churches, before referred to. Fig. 3, B,
Plate XII, is the plan of that just outside the walls on the north. This little
building, the external dimensions of which are but 9-50x7-15, belongs to the
type B, having a small dome over the eastern end of the nave. The rest is tunnel-
1 I venture to give the reasons for the belief
that these walls are much older than the Christian
occupation, but put them in a note, the subject
being somewhat technical and not actually
connected with the matter in hand. They may,
however, be of interest to the Egyptologist.
The site is a rather steep slope falling towards
the river. The walls are thick, about 3 m., and
are built of hard, well-baked, sun-dried bricks,
average size 0-32 XO-I5 x -09. Much timber is
built into the brickwork to assist in tying it
together, and mats of halfa grass can be seen in
the joints of mud mortar at every fifth course.
Where the ground is level the brickwork is laid
in horizontal courses, i. e. along the east face of
the town, and at each end of the north and
south walls. Where the ground falls quickly the
courses of brickwork slope with it, at an angle of
about 20° with the horizon. The courses do not
undulate as we find in some of the great brick walls,
such as those enclosing the temples at Karnak
or at El Kab. At the north-east and south-east
angles are remains of solid bastions. A ditch
has also been cut in the rock, and can clearly
be traced on the south, east, and north sides.
It will be observed that on the plan a road is
shown leading towards the north wall, but there
are not any indications of a gateway at this
point: indeed, as the slope on which the walls are
built is here rather steep, neither road nor gate
would be conveniently placed if in this position.
The old road, which can be traced by the river-
side almost without interruption, from the First
to the Second Cataract, lies nearer the water, and
is shown on the plan. From the river, the town
or fort was defended, whether by a wall or a quay
is not clear. Remains of stonework, in position,
are seen, in parts parallel with the river; other
parts, evidently base-stones of the enclosing wall,
and coming quite out to the water's edge, can also
be traced.
A road running through the town parallel with
the river is a usual feature, and in the present
case it lies at the lower edge of the slope, and
yet well removed above the water. The timber
bond, the halfa mats laid in the mortar, the
large, firm, well-made bricks, are found in
walls of very remote antiquity, such as those
of Usertesen, in the walls at Semneh and
Murgassy; and in these places, especially at
Western Semneh, the fortresses are not merely
walls, there are ditches and bastions for flank
defence.
The site of Serre has never been carefully
examined. There may be, beneath the remains
of the houses, traces of an Egyptian temple or
some means of identifying, more or less, the
period in which these walls were built. It must
be remembered that things are changing in
Egypt with startling rapidity. An artificial rais-
ing of the river surface by a few feet absolutely
obliterates ancient sites.


vaulted and without a stair ; some of the doors are but 0-45 wide (18 inches), and
too low to pass through without stooping. The bricks are large—o-38 x 0-20 x o*o7
—more of a tile than a brick, but ill made, and in that respect differing very
much from the bricks of the town wall. In this the courses are laid as we always
find them in Egyptian buildings, nearly all ' headers '. The bricks in the walls
of the churches are in alternate courses of ' headers and stretchers \ There are
neither timber bond nor halfa mats embedded in them, both of which we find
in the enclosing walls.
Lying amidst broken bricks on the floor of the southern church there is
a rectangular block of red granite, about 1-30 long, not so broad. The upper
surface is recessed, forming a long shallow basin. The top, ends, and sides are
wrought smooth, the bottom is rough. There are no traces of hieroglyphics, or
of any inscription on the block. It is not of the form of a font.
The rocky hill-side on which the houses are built is broken, partly by nature,
partly by art, into terraces, against and on which the houses are crowded so
closely that it is often difficult to see how they were approached. They were
of two and three stories in height. The little stairs, rising round square newels,
precisely as we see them in the church plans, are in many cases well preserved.
All the rooms were brick vaulted. The brickwork of the houses is much like that
of the churches. I would not venture to express an opinion as to their higher
antiquity. The mere dimensions of the bricks, and the careless way they may
have been laid, does not prove that the buildings made of them were necessarily
Christian or Arab —they might be much older. With the alluvium of the Nile at
hand any one could make bricks, as is the case to this day. When, however, it
became a case of the government directing work to be done, the material was
either of stone or of well-formed, well-dried brick.
There is evidence that the houses have not often been rebuilt. We observe
that the houses we now see stand on the rock, and not on a mass of debris caused
by the fall of their predecessors. The common thing is to find existing walls
standing on or thrust through mounds of broken brick and pottery many metres
in thickness. There is little if any glazed Arab pottery about, nor is there the
orthodox dust-heap just outside the town, such as will be referred to at Kasr
Ibrim. The Christians either established themselves in an unoccupied fort built
long before, or continued to live in the houses already built—a far more probable
thing. The whole must have been abandoned when Islam overran Nubia, at
which time frightful outrages were committed.
Such pottery as there is is chiefly of the ribbed type, generally found in
connexion with sites occupied before the Arab conquest. Also pottery of a finer
quality of paste, of bright red colour and patterned in black.
There is no evidence that the churches had been converted for use as mosques,
nor could we find the remains of any building like a mosque. The evidence is in
favour of the probability that this place must have been abandoned at an early
date, perhaps in consequence of the Arab conquest of Nubia.
1074 65 1


On Plate XIII is a plan of the south church, c on the plan of the town,
with sections, and also sections of the north church, Bon the town plan. Fig. 13
on p. 62 gives a view of the south church. The drawings speak for themselves.
FARRAS
PLATE XIV
This place lies a little north of Serre, and on the west bank of the river.
On a slightly raised mound is a group of buildings with the ruins of a church
in the north-east angle. This is, however, so much broken down that excavation
only—which I was not able to make —would give us the plan. The place is of
considerable interest, being surrounded by the remains of a wall of masonry : and
enclosing within its area, not only the church and attached buildings already
mentioned, but fragments of columns evidently belonging to an Egyptian temple.
FIG. 14. Farras.
Lying in the sand were observed two pieces of terra-cotta capitals, identical with
those already described, p. 56.
I was told that, in times past, there lived at Farras the Malik Kikelan ibn
Nyokel abu el Myia, Gidd al Alf (the King Kikelan, son of Nyokel, father of
a hundred and grandfather of a thousand). Tradition says he was Nusrany
(a Christian), and to this day, when neighbours wish to say something nasty to
an inhabitant of Farras, they call the man ' a son of Kikelan ', thereby implying
that he is not a pure Muslim. To show the castellated nature of the building
a sketch is given (Fig. 14). We look towards the north end of the ' kasr 'in the
church indicated on plan by the letter A. 1
DER EL KIERSH (ADDENDAN)
PLATES XV, XVI
This lies on the east bank, opposite Farras, on a bare platform of rock,
without a vestige of an enclosing wall or of a house near it. (Visited Jan. 19,1899.)
1 See also Churches in Lower Nubia , Plates
x-xx. Messrs. Maclver and Mileham have
excavated and drawn two churches here, and
Mr. F. IL Griffith, acting for 'the Oxford Excava-
tions in Nubia', is making further researches at
this place.


(SHARK) 9
UHI 'A" 1 """ 1 '
BJBJHBBJBI
i [MTntiRi
CROSS SECTION C C LOOKING EAST LONGITUDINAL SECTION D D
IP HATE Xl]
SEISISE
GSM Mens e& de>l.
SOUTH CHURCH
SCALE ~foo
CROSS SECTION A A LOOKING EAST
LONGITUDINAL SECTION B B LOOKING NORTH
NORTH CHURCH
CROSS SECTION C C LOOKING EAST
LONGITUDINAL SECTION D D
SOUTH CHURCH
LOOKING NORTH


@^\\
[/ OF MONASTERY
OF CHURCH
I A \ \ *
PILATE W
FAMI&AS
RUINS OF MONASTERY
BRICKWORK BLACK
MASONRY SCORED
SCALE 1000
RUINS OF MONASTERY?
A ASCENT TO TOWER
B REMAINS OF EGYPT.
B REMAINS OF EGYPT. TEMPLE
C COPTIC BRICKWORK
D REMAINS OF CHURCH
E COPTIC BRICKWORK


PILATE. IV
i | :
< SCALE Tm 1


The plan belongs to type A. The two columns to support the triumphal
arch are still in position. They are clumsily made of red sandstone. Their
capitals lie on the floor : there is a volute at each corner, and a feature midway
between curiously suggestive of a euraeus. Wrought stones are lying about,
which it seems possible may belong to the triumphal arch itself.
The apse is vaulted in the same manner as that already described (see
Plate xi) at Hammam el Farki. The outer walls are of rough stone to a height
of 3-40. Above this all is of sun-dried brick. The arches opening into the side
aisles are but 2-15 in height from the floor to the crown. Over these come
clerestory windows, unusually large. The nave and aisles were covered with
brick tunnel vaults ; that over the south aisle is still fairly well preserved. The
gallery above the aisles was lighted by seven windows, whilst a lower range of
three very small ones gave light directly into the aisle itself, piercing the side
of the tunnel vault.
There was a little window in the apse and one in each little side room.
Remains of an altar of burnt brick, 1-15 north to south, and -95 east to west,
stand between the columns of the triumphal arch. 1
DER ASH EL FADELAH. ADDENDAN
Plates xvi, xvii
This ruin lies to the south-east of the last. It is set back some half-a-mile
from the Nile. Between it and the river rises a slight hill of rock, with the result
that the der can only be seen from the south. It lies on the roadway, which,
avoiding the before-named hill of rock, travels round behind it.
The building is of unusual plan, but belongs to type B. It stands absolutely
alone on a plate of bare rock. Not a sign of any walls near it, nor even pottery,
except a few small fragments.
The structure is of sun-dried brick. The east end was square on plan. How
the vault was gathered over above we cannot now see. Outside the walls of the
north and south aisles were porticoes or corridors, it is not possible to say which,
and into these opened the two doors and some very small windows. The stair
shows us that there were probably galleries above, but the nave arches which
carried them are broken down. Such brick arches as can be still traced are well
built and of good form, superior to the rough work of the buildings previously
described. The bricks forming the arch converge to the centre, which is not the
customary way of arch-building in Nubia, and outside the ring thus built is
another, of bricks laid flat. At the west and east ends are little slit windows,
quite low down. The dome in the nave was exceedingly small. Whilst it
obstructed the interior it cannot have had any effect externally. There seem
to have been domes at each corner of the building in addition to that in the
middle. 1
1 This church is described fully by Mr. Mileham in Churches in Lower Nubia.


PLATE XVE
AIDDEMIDAKI
FIG. I
CROSS SECTION ON LINE B B LOOKING EAST
HAMMAMEL FAISEO
FIG. 2
SECTION LOOKING EAST ON LINE W W
CS.M. Mesis el deZ.


~ J ' ' f ~ V
1^1
HOME | j ~ A
m ■ JBI HHH ■
1 IBw
I ] |H^H
I Hni wBm
HH
_ —
PILATE 3W
ADIDEKIiM.N
LONGITUDINAL SECTION ON LINE A A LOOKING SOUTH
GSM. Mens efr cUls.
SCALE JOO


KASR EL WIZZ
Wizz is the Arabic for geese, but what the geese had to do with this place
is not manifest (visited Jan. 20, 1899). A somewhat pointed hill, rising con-
siderably above the Nile, bears the Castle of the Geese on its summit. There is
a considerable area covered with brick buildings, the vaults of some being still in
fair condition. I could not find the remains of a church, and was not able to
carry out any excavations, but the character of the brickwork and general
appearance of the place lead one to think that it must have been occupied by
the Christian community. Some wells of ancient Egyptian tombs are also pierced
in the hill, which lies on the west side of the Nile. 1
GUSTUL
Visited Jan. 21, 1899. This place lies on the west bank of the Nile. The
ground is covered with broken pottery (part Egyptian), whilst there are remains
of many brick buildings just visible above the sand. There are some roughly-
hewn capitals of columns, very similar to those already described at Der el Kiersh.
No doubt a church has stood here ; and there still remain the capitals of the
triumphal arch. The space on which the pottery is chiefly scattered is bounded
on the east by the Nile, but on the other three sides by lofty mounds of sand,
buried within which are dried tamarisks ; mounds similar in their nature to those
which extend from Argyn to this place. These trees must alone be sufficient
evidence that at one time the whole district was cultivated, and history supports
this view. Irrigation channels neglected for a very short period become choked
with drift sand ; this creeps over the fields, accumulates against such vegetation
as withstands it, and in a comparatively short time everything is buried.
GEBEL ADDEH
Plate xviii
Visited Jan. 21, 1899. This place is on the east bank of the Nile, standing
on a headland, very similar in position to Kasr Ibrim, to be hereafter mentioned.
The town is entirely ruined and deserted. There are a considerable number of
small red granite columns lying about, roughly made. Bad workmanship is
found in almost every case associated with Christian buildings, and these columns
and the capitals are but poor specimens of handiwork. The capitals are of red
stone, with clumsy volutes at the angles, and a projecting block between the
volutes very similar to those already described at Kiersh, opposite Farras. This
block has a curious resemblance to the Eureaeus. A capital of another type,
with a leaf coming under the angle of the abacus, is also to be seen. These
are scattered about amid the ruins, consequently it is difficult to associate them
with a particular building; but perhaps excavation beneath the debris would
reveal the remains of a church or churches.
1 Photographs of Kasr el Wizz are given by Mr. Mileham, Plate nr.


tO
1 (M
M
ipi
SCAL1
Id
©
Q
t=3
Id
a
©
h J
< !
m !
<$*j ;
0
I
I
■
I
d> m
H
1
i
1
1
1
i
I
I
& M,
1
m
1
I
1
l
1
1
PILATE


Near the north wall of the town, and about the middle of its length, are
three arches of crude brick, and near them are the lowest courses of an apse.
The building to which these remains belong has been used as a mosque, and the
apse has formed the kibleh. Some rough stone steps have been built up beside
it, forming no doubt the base of a mimbar (pulpit).
South of the town, and on the flat plates of rock lying near the water's edge,
are the ruins of a church of type A, Plate xviii. The building differs from those
previously described inasmuch as it has in part been faced with stone. As none
of the walls, however, rise more than -6o or -70 above the floor level it is difficult
to say whether the stonework remaining was more than a plinth. The building
has undergone great alterations. The north arcade has been almost destroyed
and rebuilt with considerable differences : this seems to have been done when
the place was made into a mosque. The piers carrying the little arches opening
into the aisles were originally all of stone, but have been patched and the arches
filled in with brick. One granite column of the triumphal arch still lies on the
ground. When the mosque was established, steps —probably for a mimbar —
were built, but if so it was on the left of the kibleh , and not on the right, as is
usual. South of the church are two square enclosures, one wall being common
to both. They are carelessly built of rough stones and mud mortar. The northern
enclosure has been a church, as is proved by the remains of a small piece of the
apse, in crude brick.
KASR IBRIM
Plates xix, xx
Measured January 23, 1899. The situation of this place is striking, perched
on the summit of a very steep cliff which rises sheer above the Nile : the ground
also falling away in all other directions. On the slope towards the north are
vestiges of the houses of the ancient Egyptians, their walls partly cut into the
rock. The top of the hill, enclosed within the walls, is quite covered with the
ruins of the town. In their midst stands a building, rectangular in plan, which
is the remains of a church built on a more ambitious scheme than any other
Christian building now to be met with between the First and Second Cataracts
(Plate xx). The orientation is not so directly towards the east as usual, con-
trolled perhaps by the fact that the town is far older than the church. A diligent
search did not, however, lead me to think that an earlier building had been used
as the foundations for the existing walls. Some large stones are found at the
south-west angle where the stairs are placed (one is 2-75 long, -8o high, and 70 on
the bed), but nothing proves that it has not been moved from elsewhere.
The plan of the building belongs to the type A. It has had double aisles,
but there is no evidence of a triumphal arch of greater richness than the rest of
the building, opening towards the apse. In sundry respects the plan is abnormal.
On comparison it will be seen that usually from the triumphal arch eastwards, the
apses of most examples are deeper than is that at Kasr Ibrim. There is an


absence of doors on either side —indeed, no evidence of any doorway could be
found in the east wall, which still stands to a considerable height. There
is no evidence of any way into the space behind the apse.
The best preserved piece of wall still retains its window openings, of which
a drawing is given (Fig. 15). Unlike the buildings already described, this church
is made of stone with the faces of the wall of dressed masonry, and with timber
bond. In ambition and finish it stands quite apart from the rest. The masonry
is thoroughly bad, there being nothing to tie the face stones to the rubble within.
In this it is quite Egyptian. The rainless climate alone has enabled the walls to
stand till now. The timber bond extends from Ato B. 1 At D there is a projection
as of a door jamb, but the line of wall with which it would correspond is quite
gone. Whether there was a narthex west of the wall GE cannot now be deter-
FIG. 15. Kasr Ibrim. Window and Wall,
FIG. 16. Kasr Ibrim. Arches.
mined. The pieces of wall, E and F, in which there are door-jambs, stand to
a height of several metres and are without timber bond. Large stones show in
the foundation of the wall GE wherever it is exposed, but they are combined
with quite small ones in a manner we do not find in ancient Egyptian buildings.
From G to H the wall has been completely overthrown and built up again,
roughly, making use of the old masonry.
From H to 1 the foundation courses of large stones are perfect, and a good
deal of the wall above. There are traces of timber bond.
From 1 to K all the lower courses of masonry remain, and some of those
above. At the angle I the larger stones rising seven courses are built as quoins,
and at this point it is clearly to be seen that the masonry of small stones is bonded
in with the large ones and is one work. Had it been the case that the basement
work with large stones belonged to an ancient Egyptian building we should not
find the stones of various sizes thus bonded together, nor should we find, as we
1 See Plate xx.


do, that this basement is no thicker than the walls above ; it would have been at
least twice as thick.
It will be observed that in the wall AB the arrangement of the windows
corresponds with the centres of the arches which are still standing, from which
fact and the similarity of the masonry we may assume them to be of the same
date as the wall.
At L stands a column of red granite, of rough workmanship, with a cross cut
upon it in relief. A similar column has been used as a door-sill in a neighbouring
house. It may be doubted whether this column is in situ. Digging around it
did not reveal a pedestal or base stone. The column is merely planted in the
ground, the lowest part of it being below the floor level. 1
The arcade is shown in Fig. 16. The arches are but slightly pointed, being
in form nearly semicircles. The pier v has not the spring of another arch towards
the west, but is carried up vertically. This piece of the pier is, however, recon-
struction. To judge by the windows, there were two more arches. In the piers
s and T, timber bond has been built in at half the height and also under the
abacus. Crosses in relief are carved upon the keystones of two of the arches, and
m the eastern arch are found two more half-way up. In the other arches, as in
the piers, are inserted stones here and there, carved with strap or knot work,
taken apparently from some other and older building. The crosses are clearly
made for the places where we see them.
On the timber bond, inserted under the abacus of the eastern pier, are traces
of shallow carving. On another piece of bond timber is a pattern with circles
and flowers in each.
The church was turned into a mosque, and we still see the remains of the
kibla, clumsily devised, and with a pointed arch. On the right, of it can be seen
the steps of the mimbar.
The upper part of the gallery stair is ruined. There is no evidence what it
led to. If there were, as probably there was, a gallery in the church, it was not,
as we usually find it, over the side aisles : for had it been, we should surely have
seen evidence on the south wall near the windows. It may only have been across
the west end or over the narthex.
The importance of Ibrim was considerable. The remains of ancient Egyptian
influence are much effaced, but no doubt diligent investigation would show more
than we see at present. The Romans garrisoned the place with four hundred
men, after it had been stormed by Petronius. The church is described for us by
Abu Salih the Armenian (at the end of the twelfth or beginning of the thirteenth
century) in the following terms : — 2
' In the land of Nubia is the city of Ibrim, the residence of the Lord of
the Mountain, all the inhabitants of which are of the province of Maris ; it is
1 See Plate LXI, A Report on the Antiquities
of Lower Nubia, 1906-7: A. E. P. Weigall.
Oxford, 1907. Issued by the Department of
Antiquities, Cairo.
2 The Churches and Monasteries of Egypt:
B. T. A. Evetts and A. J. Butler. Oxford,
Clarendon Press, 1895, p. 266.


enclosed within a wall. Here there is a large and beautiful church, finely planned,
and named after Our Lady, the Pure Virgin Mary. Above it there is a high dome
upon which rises a large cross. When Shams ad-Daulah, brother of Al-Malik
an-Nasir Salah ad-Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub the Kurd, brother of Shirkuh (an elder
brother of Saladin, died 1180 A. D.), marched into Upper Egypt in the Caliphate
of Al-Mustadi the Abbaside, after the extinction of the Fatimide dynasty,
in the month of Jumada the first of the year 568 A. H. (1173 A. D.), under the
government of the Ghuzz and Kurds he invaded this district with his troops who
accompanied him and with those who gathered together to him [as he proceeded],
and he collected the boats from the Cataract. In this town there were many
provisions, and ammunitions and arms, and the [troop of Shams ad-Daulah]
marched thither ; and when they had defeated the Nubians they left the town
in ruins, after conquering it; and they took the Nubians who were there prisoners.
It is said that the number of Nubians was 700,000 men, women, and children;
and seven hundred pigs were found here. Shams ad-Daulah commanded that the
cross on the dome of the church should be burnt, and that the call to prayer
should be chanted by the muezzin from its summit. His troop plundered all
there was in this district; and they killed the pigs. And a bishop was found
in the city ; so he was tortured ; but nothing could be found that he could give
to Shams ad-Daulah, who made him prisoner with the rest, and he was cast with
them into the fortress which is on a high hill, and is exceedingly strong.'
From the above description—however much it is, after the Eastern manner,
over-coloured—the importance of the place as a part of the Nubian kingdom is
very clear. The number of 700,000 prisoners, which would of course include the
residents in a large district, is very improbable ; the 700 pigs certainly could not
have had their residence in Ibrim itself. The followers of the Prophet naturally
made short work of the poor pigs. The description of the church is probably
somewhat inflated. The ' high dome ' must have been merely of wood, for there
are not piers or remains of such for a brick dome to have rested upon, nor does
the place as we now find it lend itself to such pieces of construction.
It took a long time for the Moslems to crush the Nubians, who were a Christian
people. The country was horribly ravaged, and from being a fairly productive
region it was by neglect and violence turned into a desert. The violence done
to the Nubian valley by no means ends with the destruction perpetrated by
Shams ad-Daulah.
The inhabitants returned and struggled on. The last we hear of the place
is related by J. L. Burckhardt, 1 and to this reference has already been made;
see ante, p. 12.
Near the gateway, on the north of the town, lies a capital of a column carved
in red granite (see Fig. 17).
In the depression, south of the town (when we speak of places on the Nile,
south is always up the river and north down the river, whether that agrees with
the points of the compass or not), there are remains of a kiln and of masses of
Travels in Nubia, by the late John Lewis Burckhardt. Second ed., John Murray, 1822, p. 30.


m
LJ [||
SI Sp|§ R
m Pro M I ij_
A B
1 ■ H
■ IH
■■ ■ |H
M ™
PILATE XK.
CHURCH S
NORTH OF
FIG. 2
PLAN
SCALEL7SO


(WALL
DOORWAY INSERTED H
' I GRANITE ■
@ L ■
. ; COLUMN D ■
KIBLA B B
A B K
p
PILATE XX
BSASIB mmm
FIG. 1
SCALE T^O
EIG. 2
SCALE W


broken pottery, very much fine red ware with patterns in black : late Roman
and Coptic.
A little to the north of Kasr Ibrim are the ruins of a small church of the
type B (Plate xix). In this example the central dome plays a really important
part as an internal feature, although externally it can have shown but little above
the tunnel roof of the nave. The apse is square on plan, but the vault over it
FIG. 17. Kasr Ibrim. Capital
was, by angle pendentives, made to take the favourite shape of a quarter-sphere.
Every part of the church except the dome was covered by tunnel vaults, none
of which are now perfect: the walls of the building are, however, well preserved.
On the walls are many inscriptions in Greek and Coptic. The church is perched
on a little shelf just above the roadway which passes between it and the river.
Some of the original hard mud floor still exists in the south aisle. It follows
the inclination of the rock on which the church is placed.
MADEYQ
PLATE XX, FIG. 2
This place is north of Korosko. Measured February 1, 1899. It lies on
the west side of the Nile, and well raised above it. There is a church of the
type B, with a dome forming the central feature. The walls to a height of about
3 0 are built of rough stone, above that of sun-dried brick. The piers which
carried the dome are of stone up to the springing of the arches. There was
not any gallery in this building, and consequently we do not find the usual stairs.
The east end is square on the plan, and there is an absence of the usual doors
giving access to the rooms from the apse. The construction of the church
is more careful and daring than in most examples. The arches under the dome
are as much as 3-15 high. The side walls seem scarcely adequate to withstand
the thrust of the tunnel vaults with which most of the building was covered, but,
although the greater part of these vaults have fallen in, the walls have not
been thrust outward. In the doorway at A, the thin slabs of stone set up on
end, and one set across at the top forming a door frame, still remain.
To the north of the church, at a distance of some three hundred yards, is
the burial-ground. Its position is unusually near the river, on the top of a low
1074 81 L


cliff which overhangs it. The cliff is of sandstone, full, not only of the customary
horizontal stratification, but of vertical faults which have divided the rock
into large rectangular blocks. Into the fissures between these blocks, the sand
and small stones having been removed, the bodies have been placed. Lying
as they do east and west, the fissures served well as graves. The tombs have
been mercilessly ransacked. Bones lie about in heaps, whilst the rich earth has
been taken to put upon the fields across the river. But little pottery is found
here. A few steps further north the bare face of the rock is covered to the
thickness of nearly a metre with rough stones and pieces of crude brick. These
are the remains of houses built over tombs. The bricks and stones are tumbled
together in heaps in order to find the graves beneath and to empty them for the
purposes above stated.
A few yards south of the church stands the building the plan of which is
shown in Fig. i (Plate xxi). What this building is I do not presume to say.
I venture to include it with the other plans on the chance that further research
may enable us to decide whether it is or is not a monastic building. The few
plans I am now able to give show buildings differing so materially from the
European types, we know so little of the monastic buildings of Egypt and still
less of those of Nubia, that who shall say this may not be a monastic building,
placed, as it is, so very near to the church ?
The walls are of rough stone with mud mortar. For spanning small doorways
stone slabs are used, for larger doorways arches of brick. The walls are varying
in height, but stand two and three metres above the ground. There is no evidence
of an upper floor or stair. 1
MAHENDI
PLATES XXI, FIG. 2, xxn
The best-preserved specimen of an ancient town between Haifa and Aswan,
and indeed it may be anywhere on the banks of the Nile, is Mahendi. That
it is ancient there is no doubt, but it may not be safe to fix a date for it as a
whole. The walls are of rough stonework, the stones for the most part unwrought,
but the hearting of brick well laid. I venture to suppose, in view of the regular
laying out of the plan of the walls, the square towers with approaches to the top
of them and of the well-planned gateways, that these walls are Roman in origin.
Over against the southern gateway there lies a large part of a figure, fairly
well sculptured, of a Roman eagle. Some stones, built into the gate towers,
have on them pieces of Egyptian sculpture in low relief. From their size and
good shape it may be assumed that many of the bricks are old Egyptian. It is
fair to suppose that we have here an ancient site, taken over by the Romans
and afterwards inhabited by the Christianized Egyptians. The walls, on the
north and south, are continued down the somewhat steep slope which leads from
1 See Report on the Antiquities of Lower Nubia. A. E. P. Weigall. Oxford, 1907, p. 96. Issued by
the Department of Antiquities, Cairo.


a
r — T "-l
I □
n —
SCALE 2?o
PILATE SSH
BUILDING ADJACENT TO THE CHURCH
FIG. 1
SCALE
FIG. 2


NORTH GATE
jl PLAN g
tik TOWN N\ g)
Tl SCALE5SW J / t I
'pi. (\ 8
Mffif )]
SOUTH GATE
PLATE Hi
MAHEKM


the general level of the town to the river side. The town itself is on the top of
this low hill; behind us on the west is a valley with steep sides, which acts by
way of a moat in defending, at least, a part of the enclosing wall.
Within the walls lie closely packed the remains of many houses, built of
crude brick. A sketch-plan of the assemblage of buildings is given in the south-
west corner. By this it can be realized how the structures were crowded together.
The streets are so narrow that a donkey with panniers could not move through
them. They are in many places vaulted over so that, above the ground level,
the houses formed a continuous mass. Observations made in the ruins of other
towns lead one to suppose that this was customary. Such a place must have
been a hotbed of diseases of all sorts.
In the middle of the town is planted a small church. It is nearly all in ruins,
but enough remains to show us that behind the apse there was a narrow passage,
as in other examples already given.
Outside the town walls, to the south, are the ruins of a church of type A,
somewhat better preserved (see Plate xxi, Fig. 2).
GARF HUSSEIN
PLATE XXIII, FIG. I
It is not easy to fix the type of this building. It is entirely of crude brick,
except three or four courses at the east end, which are of rough masonry. It
stands on a sharp slope, the west end being cut into the rock of which the slope
is formed. The walls of the church are more perfect in many respects than
those of any church hitherto described: a considerable part of them remains in
fair preservation nearly to the top. Although the building is by no means large,
the scheme of the individual parts is on a bigger scale than usual, while the
structure is more regularly laid out and carefully built than in most examples
described.
A study of the side-walls (see Fig. 18) shows that there were not galleries
or triforia over the aisles; we observe that the nave and aisles must have been
of the same height. The staircase, at the north-west corner, led right up to
the top of the walls, as we see by the ruins of it, and was not provided with doors
or openings half-way up to any galleries. We are, unfortunately, left in un-
certainty as to how the arches between the nave and aisles, and which carried
the brick vaulted roof, were supported. Their entire disappearance, whilst
other parts of the church are preserved, lead one to conjecture that there were
light piers of masonry, and even perhaps columns, which were worth stealing.
If there had been a dome over one bay of the nave, rising above the rest of the
roof, it might be expected that we should find evidence of the masonry to support
it, which would, we may presume, be more massive than the supports of the
roof generally. There are not such remains.
The apse is of unusual plan, neither square nor semicircular. There is


/ L_J 1_ L_
a narrow passage behind it, really the arrangement we have been familiar with
in the Batn el Hagar.
The side-walls of the church E, E (see plan) are complete up to the top;
the curves formed by the vaults where they engaged with the walls are well
marked.
The holes at F no doubt indicate the positions of the doors, but the door-
jambs have been broken away. The windows are well preserved, grouped in
couples, not an unusual feature, but in most cases the coupled lights are mere
slits, here they are well-formed window openings. Measured February 7, 1899.
QIRSCH
PLATE XXIII, FIG. 2
The town of Qirsch, now entirely desolate and abandoned, lies on the east
bank of the Nile on a steep slope of rock, terraced in an irregular way. It is
FIG. 18. Garf Husseyn side elevation. Interior.
FIG. 19. Qirsch. Sketch-plan.
surrounded on the south-east and north sides by a wall (see sketch-plan, Fig. 19).
This wall runs with much laboured work straight up the steep ascent, and is
built of rough unhewn stones set in a scanty supply of Nile mud by way of
mortar. I will leave the learned in these matters to decide the date at which the
town walls were built. I venture to suggest that they may be somewhat late
Roman work.
A roadway runs through the town from north to south; the churches are
on this road. There are remains of sundry houses near each church, outside
the lower walls. The church south of the town is of the basilican type with
a square east end, pendentives supporting the vault, which is of the usual' conch'
form. The piers which carried the side arches are gone. The springing of the
tunnel vault over the aisles can still be traced, also of the nave vault. Visited
February 7, 1899.
The church on the north side of the town was quite small. Its apse was
of a flattened curve on plan, like that at Garf Hussein and Mahendi. There
are remains of a narrow passage behind the apse. The nave was flanked by


E
o
FIG
icaADOflbcMtai: _
l-
E
SCALE 200
QmS>CM
FIG. 2
SCALE 200


PHEL^E
SMALL CHURCH F,G - 1
SCALE
LARGE CHURCH FIG. 2
B I a->v □□□□ odd I
■ I Nc
W* Wt u m m 1 JUJf
PILATE XXfIV


three little arches opening into the aisles. There was a stair to the galleries at
the north-west angle.
The building was of the basilican type
PHILAE
PLATE XXIV
On this island lived a considerable Christian community. The temple still
retains a few evidences of its having been used, in part, as a church. I cannot
do better than refer the reader to A Report on the Islands and Temples of Philae,
by Captain H. G. Lyons, printed by order of the Public Works Department,
Egypt, 1897. On the plan "of the island attached to the report it will be seen
that there are two buildings designated as churches, P and Q. The smaller of
the two (Fig. 1 on Plate xxiv) is undoubtedly a church of the basilican plan.
The orientation is very much towards the north. This was no doubt controlled
by the existing streets and buildings in the town.
A small stair is found in a very unusual position, namely, at the east end and
immediately to the right of the apse. 1 Certain flat stones are shown on the plan.
Those near the apse may suggest some arrangement of seats, a sunk line can
faintly be traced upon them and is indicated on the drawing. A large stone
may be a step. The groups of stones to the west may have been the feeble
foundations prepared for columns. The walls on three sides of the church—
the ritual north, west, and south —have four courses in height of squared stones
taken from the neighbouring temples. Above this the walls were of mud brick.
At the east end the masonry still exists, to a somewhat higher level. The column
which is shown standing in the apse has not, I believe, any ancient authority
for being in that place, but was set there a good many years ago when the building
was partly cleared of debris.
The larger building, letter Q on Captain plan above referred to
(Fig. 2 on my plate), must probably have been a church, as the fragments of
carved stone found in it were many of them adorned with crosses and such
designs as we find in the remains of ecclesiastical buildings. The plan suggests,
however, a building in the nature of a basilica or place of public assembly. For
the purposes of description we will assume that it stands east and west.
We find a very unusual arrangement at the east end of the building. Not
only is the east wall out of angle with the longitudinal axis, but little doorways
are seen in places for which we have no authority. One leads to a small stair,
accessible only through this doorway. The stair which we find in the other
church P, is accessible in two directions : those who used the stair are not neces-
sarily landed in the holy place—the haikal, where, so closely veiled, stood the
altar. At the west end of the building we also find a stair. We must suppose
that this was a means of approach to the galleries, which, considering the size
1 See plan of the southern church, Farras. Churches in Lower Nubia, Mileham and Maclver,
Plate xvii.
1074 89 M


of the building, must have been extensive. I am unable to admit that the
eastern stair can have been a means of public approach to the galleries. Apart
from the asymmetry of the eastern wall we find that there is a symmetrical plan
enclosed in outer walls which are asymmetric. A range of columns stood on either
side of the axis; beyond these were square piers, and on the south side yet
further piers of lighter section. The doorways are in abnormal positions. We
see two, opposite one another, opening into the eastern bay of the nave. In no
specimen of the basilican church plan which I have found do we see doorways thus
placed. Two more doors are found at the west end of the nave, and although
neither of these is quite normal, external conditions may have controlled the
arrangement. The very indifferent method of building, similar to the con-
struction of the church P, is perhaps as good an argument as any for this structure
being classed amongst the churches.
A good deal of the roughly paved floor remains in situ. In this are found
a range of square sockets as though they were to receive wood posts set into
them on certain occasions. For what purpose were these ? The space between
the small columns is not less than 6-50, a space which could only have been
spanned by a wood roof. Neither columns nor piers were sufficiently massive
to have supported brick vaults, even supposing that the builders were capable
of building a vault sufficiently wide. There is not any evidence which leads us
to such a conclusion.
The walls were built, for the lower few courses, of ashlar masonry taken from
the adjacent temples, above that they were of crude brick.
TYPE PLAN
PLATES xxv, XXVI
Before we enter upon that part of the Nile valley north of Aswan, where
we shall meet with plans of churches different altogether in arrangement from
those we have hitherto seen, it may be well to offer a type plan, a reconstruc-
tion of a church, built up from the various specimens we have studied. As
regards the basilican type, this is easy to do.
The plan speaks for itself (Fig. 3). We find the apse with a chamber north and
south of it. In the walls of the apse three recesses which rise above the seats.
The altar is so placed that the celebrant can pass round it. The triumphal arch
is seen west of the altar, with nook shafts in the jambs. It seems impossible
that in churches of this type and on so small a scale there can have been three
altars as the wall space at the eastern end of each aisle is very small. 1 On the
other hand, not a few plans are here collected which lead us to wonder how an
altar can have been used at all, especially as it was necessary it should stand free.
The position of the higab or screen which inclosed the haikal is clearly
indicated. This, judging by those we shall presently meet with, had, sometimes,
1 It has been stated by some that there must be at least three altars in a church.


Jn —Q —Q —0 —Q — uTi
TZ In I WwOiwl
n n r nnl ■ ■
F C
rl ■ ■ ■ l )^i
■ I
E D
ft ft ft ft ft ft
f ' I
w s • *
■sS I?
—F , , ., ., ...... 1
PLATE KV
TYPE PLAN
FIG. 1
FIG. 2
SECTION ON LINE A-B
SECTION ON LINE E-F
FIG. 3
FIG. 4
SECTION ON LINE C-D
FIG. 5
ELEVATION SOUTH SIDE
SCALE aso


one doorway —in the middle—sometimes two doorways with a little window in
the middle. It should be stated that none of the churches I have measured in
the Sudan were sufficiently preserved to retain any vestige of the higab.
The nave is separated from the aisles by clumsy piers of masonry, built of
rough unhewn stones picked up from round about. The longitudinal elevation
on the line AB shows the diminutive nature of these openings—more wall than
archway (Fig. i).
The section, looking west (Fig. 2), shows us the diminutive aisles vaulted with
a tunnel roof, above which was a gallery or triforium, which had exceedingly
small openings towards the nave pierced through the springing of the nave vault.
This section also shows the bridge across the west end of the nave, by
which, having ascended the stair in the south-west corner of the building, the
gallery on the north side could be reached.
The nave is seen, in this section, covered by its tunnel vault, the vaults over
the galleries being carried up to this same level so as to carry a flat terrace roof.
The chief source of light in the interior of these small churches must have
been the window in the west wall. Very small windows also existed, which are
shown in the external elevation and in the sections, which gave light to the
triforia, and through them a little would have passed on into the nave. We must
bear in mind that a very small opening will, in Egypt, give an abundance
of light. 1
The vault over the nave is shown, constructed in the same way as are vaults
still existing at S. Simeon, Aswffii (see Fig. 2, Plate xxx). This is conjectural
on my part, as no ruin I have met with preserves its nave vault, only the outline
of the springing and curves can be seen.
The external doors are seen, one to the north, one to the south, opening into
the western bays of the aisles.
The lower part of the walls to nearly half their height was generally built
of rough unhewn stone, set in mortar of Nile mud. Above this level the building
was entirely in crude brick. The external view gives a fair idea of this building
as it stood complete (see Plate xxvi, Fig. 3).
The interior surfaces were covered with whitewash and this again was
liberally ornamented with paintings, in earth colours, of a grim byzantine type.
The few pieces that are left make us regret profoundly that we have lost so much.
Archaic, conventional, as the fragments are, there is often an impressive dignity
about the simple workmanship that is very striking.
In Fig. 1, Plate xxvi, is given a general view of the interior of the type
church looking east. The higab or screen is shown with the door in the middle.
In Fig. 2 on the same plate is shown a sketch of the methods of construction
employed. The brickwork of the wall from Ato B overhangs slightly so as to
reduce the span of the vaulted ceiling. The rings of the brick vault are shown
inclined towards the east wall, following the method of construction described
1 See on this head, Mileham, Churches in Lower Nubia , p. 16.


TYPE PLAN
FIG. I FIG. 2
■ a .Sfehk,
|lBj\ „ I,-, rs /-x
iii b-rtif"\ 4#-
mini i r —' rb^'p^T
p— JS—J [
''ji' FIG 3
VIEW FROM THE SOUTH-WEST
PILATE OTI


on p. 26, Fig. 4. The vault of the apse roof is built in the same way. See
Mileham, Churches in Lower Nubia, p. 15.
Of the churches of the type B, namely with a dome forming the most pro-
minent feature of the exterior and being, as we may suppose, the chief source of
light for the interior, it does not seem practicable to make a type restoration
which can have the least value.
A study of the plans will show that the central feature was supported,
sometimes in one way, sometimes in another. We find piers especially con-
structed for the purpose, and we find that the dome, in other cases, rested merely
on continuations of the side walls of the nave. In some instances we see a direct
effort at a cruciform plan, in others there is none.


i"
r
3 £
> c
J *
*JS > 2
I 35 § 3 <?
I £; S £>
I\ §S a"
vol n
w (J »y
\\ j
1% <
Vk M >
0
H
rvi
MAP No. 3.
3
SEMNA CATARACT
1
* S3 H
tei +
t-3 .T^V
< s h A^
* £ a^.
C4 2 <f TP
< S 2 H .gV
m * a = ■
\ Ha m
S s Q <d A
T S 2 " » I
<f o £ o 1
/
£
/ 3 i
$ ~ o f
O £ 2 j
ISLAND OF GINETTI
WAD1
EL GHAGAI
.I 3
MURSHI1
SEMNA
KULB
KULB pja^
H 1
U
<
<
H
<
U
—1
Q _
I *§* [
A • A
• < 1
II C/2
4*
H
<
£
•-3
« HD c
I *
O
rK 1/3
O w
o* u. si
<! os
w
Pu z *"
o I g
c. w
Q 5
7 < Z
< < * <
S j <
w - _ •
K • ■ /y^*" <
z x z
< o
CQ D Q
o s
* £
UJ
Z o
—
O 3 § y#
M <t J J <
s £ O J §
5 c& w
3
E . 3
J
w
1 <
* s
□ <
5 J «jh
£ w 2
AO
30 3


1
L
r
n
M
*
f
■t-
M
o
r
D
M
r
c
M
M
'm
a
u
Z <
<< j
T
X
CD
ffS
•—1
-
CO
CD
4 s5
+
CD CU
< JjL
*
o
CO
ESN A
EDFU
X
w
J
w
w
o
Z
o
w
s
HH
CD
C£
<w
Q
H-l
u
CD
CD
X
X
X
OS
<
O
MAHENDl
MADEYQ 4#
PQ
W
CD
«
Tt-
«
o
Z
<s
% •—«
L OH
L «
V
X
w
z
w
X
Cl3
cm
Oh
<*
s
fC
'-t Jn"
CO <M
Tt
rv
: <*
r
a
S
£
w
Q
Q
<
£ s
§ z
Uf> 1
>£. tP
CD
<
Ctf
X
<
X
ARGYN*/ SERRE (SHARK)
<>
<
X H
X <w
< X
=• H
§ fc
.g £
N
4^0
& *^L,
CD x
o *
,S Q w
< § * s
c<j
t—H
to
1 TrJ OH W
0 — o
—


CHAPTER V
THE CHURCHES FROM ASWAN NORTHWARD
WE are, as yet, sadly ignorant as to any scheme of plan which may have
been commonly used in Egypt when building a monastery. The number of
these institutions was very great. Some, perhaps the majority, lay in secluded
spots, where the desert hills which border the Nile valley provided quiet retreats
in which they could be placed; but others were by no means so far removed
from the cultivated land and, consequently, from the residences of men.
The monasteries seem always to have been enclosed by a wall sufficiently
high to be, in a certain sense, defensible. 1 Such a protection was clearly necessary
for those monasteries which lay in the desert or on its edge : the desert tribes were
a lawless company. But where the buildings are as near the edge of the cultivated
ground as in the cases of the Der el Abiad and the Der el Ahmar, near Sohag,
or of the Der Mikhail at Nagada, the enclosing wall was not dispensed with. The
requirements of religious seclusion, if there were no other cause, made such a wall
more or less of a necessity.
THE MONASTERY OF S. SIMEON (DER AMBA SAMA'AN), ASWAN
PLATES XXIX, XXX, XXXI, XXXII
This group of buildings, lying, as it does, opposite the town of Aswan, is
retired in a valley on the west bank of the Nile, but yet near the river.
The building is of exceptional value, as in it we find a monastery, ruined, it
is true, but with its main features preserved. M. de Morgan has given us a plan
of the monastery 2 in the ' Catalogue ' which he began to publish, but which has
never been finished. I have ventured to reproduce this plan. It is the best
I could find ready to hand, but in many matters of detail is far from correct, as
are the sections he gives through the keep and through the church. In describing
the photographic view he prints north for south. Time has not permitted me
to make a measured plan, and, avoiding some of M. de Morgan's blunders,
perhaps to fall myself into others.
1 See notes (chap, iii) on ruins at Wadi Ghazali
and near Abu Sir. See also notes, p. 103, ex-
tracted from AbCi Salih.
2 Catalogue des Monuments et Inscriptions de
I'&gypte Antique, premiere serie, Haute Egypte,
vol. i, p. 130, 1894.


aswAN
| | | J I
PLATE XXK


It is not easy for the reader who has not visited one of these venerable ruins
to realize how difficult it is to take measurements, or make careful observations
within their walls. With no two walls parallel, no lines really vertical, consisting
for the most part of gloomy cellars which get their light from holes broken in the
vaulted ceilings of crude brick, with each apartment half filled with broken debris,
smothered in the finest dust, the thermometer probably over 85°, the unhappy
student comes out of one of these retreats in a deplorable condition, and can only
hope that' the blessed Nile 'in which he may wash is not too far away.
It will be observed that the plan (Plate xxix) is an irregular rectangle,
accommodating itself to the inequalities of the site. Its longer axis is north and
south. Leaving the western bank of the Nile, we enter the mouth of a small
valley, which takes a curve towards the north-west. Placed at the head of it,
and barely half a mile from the river, we see the fortress-like building considerably
above us, and visible from many places round about. We plough our way up
a sand slope, and, amongst broken rocks, we approach the eastern inclosing wall,
near the middle of which is the doorway (see Aon plan). This forms a small
projecting tower. The entrance is at the side, and at right angles with the arch-
way in the enclosing wall.
When the door was opened the visitors could not see directly into the court
of entrance. Such a plan of doorway is, of course, more easy to defend than one
through which the enemy could press straight forward. We find the same plan
in the entrances to nearly all the ruined towns in Nubia, and such a system is
also seen in all the genuinely oriental houses in Cairo or elsewhere in the east.
The ground slopes somewhat rapidly, rising in terraces from east to west,
but on the line of the north enclosing wall it as suddenly drops away. Within
the enclosure are two main groups of buildings. At the lowest level (that of the
entrance) lies the church (B) and its adjuncts, whilst at a higher level and almost
overhanging the north-west angle of the church stands the keep (c), with its
rows of arched cells in two stories.
The western end of the church is built right up against a terrace of rock,
within which are some chambers approached from the nave. This terrace
continues northward and was surmounted by a wall. In this way the space
within the enclosure was divided into an upper and a lower court. Even
when the lower court had been broken into, the upper—in which was the keep —
could have been defended for a considerable time. The only approach now
visible from the lower to the upper court is by a steep stair lying against the north
wall of the church. The lower courses of the walls are everywhere built of
rubble stones, rough from the hillside, and set together with Nile mud, where
any mortar can be seen. The upper part of the walls is built of crude bricks.
The whole was plastered over with a coat of Nile mud, which makes a rough
but quite enduring form of plaster in the rainless districts of Southern Egypt.
The only possible water supply to the monastery must have been from the Nile.
Piety and dirt went hand in hand in these monasteries.
1074 gy n


'
CQ
i
b
illll
Xv!y;';>v!;!;Xv
Xv'*X«:'Xv;ljX
tu
w
I I I 1 i i
CM 1
b
E I
-ir^c
11^
1 1
jr cr
o~
•Q
I fe
ff /7=
' <
w
11 (C
o
z
;j|
1 2
o
o
-J
(t
02
<
-J.. ..jgg
ESI
(
IL«J 2
I
m 1
)mi: V
J
. . - ....
F&SM?
_ "-y
r —.M.
\
'> \
/ V
1 / ,
J §
\
1 [
(
»
v'w
✓
(
\
\
/
\
v/
/ X
\
>
/
I ®
\^1
z
o
6
v.
g
S¥ : S : : : : : SS
1 ( /
w
CD
QC
✓
! 1 \
(X
A
/
/
\
\
\
* /
\
V, \
m
r
•<
yVu
>-'x
' >
\
✓
✓
4" £j
U Jo
ra |N
1^
V
y
z
\ »
U3
: V/
(
n
1
f
H
%
s
\
/'
/
\
>
'
/ \
\ *
y~:
N
✓
✓
\
@ ° < '
« ! s
Ji|
t <
X
✓
\
/
✓
s>.
K
\ /
\
*
' c
z N
PLATE XXX


\ /■
% ; *\ H ■
• • H I
H . ■
"""" ifi^™■^ —B^L^P"WIH|QH^^rtj
FIG * 2
PILATE MM
PLAN OF CHURCH LN DER SIMEON
FIG. 1
SCALE 255
SECTION ON LINE C D ( plate XXX)
LOOKING SOUTH scale do
SCALE 200


MONASTERY. S. SIMEON
IPILATTE XXXI


Entering the lower court by the doorway before described, we see straight
before us, and at a distance of but a few metres, a low brick wall, the east wall
of the church, now pierced by several holes. The chief entrance to the church
seems to have been in one place only, viz. in the north wall at the foot of the steps
going up to the keep. This building has been terribly ruined. The few attempts
at excavation that have been made have been done in so haphazard a way that
confusion is worse confounded.
By consulting the plan of the church (Plate xxxi, Fig. i) it will be observed
that the building stands east and west, that it consists of a nave with north and
south aisles, and that the eastern extremity was, as to its vaulted roof, triapsal —
a plan we shall see developed to its greatest dignity in the two monasteries near
Sohag (see Plates XLV and XLIX). A good deal of difference will be noticed
between M. de Morgan's plan of the church and that which I have measured,
the reason being that his plan was made before any excavations had been taken
in hand, except a small clearance at the East end. M. de Morgan's measure-
ments were made in 1893. The plan now printed I measured in January 1901,
and corrected in March 1908, between which dates the investigations above
referred to had been made.
Straight joints in the brickwork are shown on my plan in several places. It
will be observed that the walls enclosing the triapsal sanctuary are separate from
those lying west of them ; that the north side of the nave shows the bases of
rectangular piers irregularly placed; that the south side of the nave is cut off
from the aisle by a long piece of wall (which is itself divided into two parts)
standing on a wide bench of stonework. The crude bricks, rudely formed and
roughly laid, give no indications in themselves of the periods of construction.
Several hundred years may have elapsed between the setting up of one piece of
wall and of another piece adjoining it. There is no moulded or carved detail to
assist us ; whilst the plaster, no doubt painted, with which all the walls were
encrusted on their inner face is gone, except at the east end.
The outer walls of the building now stand to a height of about five metres.
At the west end the natural ground level is at the top of these walls. An examina-
tion of the north and south outer walls reveals to us how the respective aisles
were roofed. The north aisle was crossed by three arches. The westernmost
bay and the second from the west were covered by a vault formed by two inter-
secting tunnels —a very common method of vaulting a space more or less rectan-
gular, and set up without the aid of any wood ' centre '. The second and fourth
bays were covered by tunnel vaults, the easternmost being long. The arches
which opened from the nave to the second bay from the west must have been
very low, as their crowns must have been, we may assume, below the springing
of the tunnel. The spacing of the piers suggests that perhaps in this wall we
had the rather unarchitectural effect of two little low arches, flanked by two
larger and higher ones.
The indications on the south wall show us that the vaults were the


same over this aisle as over the north. We have also indications of two
wider arches, but not enough is left to tell us the arrangement above the stone
bench.
An examination of the west end shows that there was here also some vaulting,
and at about the same level as the vaulting over the aisles. At the north-west
and south-west angles small fragments remain and are indicated on the plan by
dotted lines. There has been masonry, now torn away at the angle of the pier
at D. I have ventured to conjecture that possibly a narrow gallery ran across
the west end, supported on pillars ; these I have shown in dotted lines. That
there should have been such a gallery connecting the upper stories of the north
and south aisles is strictly in accordance with the system we have already seen
as very general in the churches in Nubia ; but, on the other hand, I cannot find
the least evidence that such galleries existed.
It may be well to describe the eastern end of the church before we consider
the question as to how the nave may have been roofed. At present there remains
only the brick semi-dome which covers the easternmost apse, and the crown of
this is not more than from five to six metres above the floor. The three half-
domes opened into a square chamber, which may have been covered by a brick
dome. This chamber was connected with the nave by an arch, now in ruins. It
will be observed how very narrow this arch is compared with the width of the
nave—3-20 to 7-60. An examination of the plans of the two churches at Sohag,
the Der el Abiad and the Der el Ahmar, shows us that, although on a con-
siderably larger scale, all the three have a family resemblance. In each case the
arch leading to the sanctuary is narrow as compared with the width of the nave.
If, however, we refer to Plate xxiv, Fig. 2, giving us the plan of what is commonly
called ' the larger church ' on the island of Philae, we shall see that possibly
there may be another interpretation to the plan now under consideration. At
Philae we find that, whilst the north and south aisles were separated from the
nave by a row of rectangular piers, there were two inner ranges of columns,
corresponding pretty nearly with the width of the triumphal arch. If these
columns existed at the church of S. Simeon, the difficulty of placing a wood roof
over its nave ceases to present itself. If there were no such columns, the builders
of the church had to face the difficulty of a span of some 24 feet, which, in a
country devoid of timber, was no trifle. There is certainly no abutment which
could support or maintain a vaulted roof of this span.
To return to the east end of the church, the easternmost apse, square at
the floor level, is gathered over at the angles, and is thus prepared to receive the
vault, a half-dome, which covers it. The painted decorations of this vault are
still visible. A coloured plate showing this vault is given by M. de Morgan in
the ' Catalogue ' before referred to, but it is not a good representation, nor is it
very correct.
The arrangement of the doors leading from the apses to the small chambers
adjoining is not customary. The opening on the north side of the eastern apse


shows signs of having been broken through the wall, but it may be an original
doorway enlarged.
Leaving the church by the doorway in the north aisle, we find ourselves at
the foot of a narrow and steep stair, which gives access to the higher level on which
the greater part of the monastic buildings are erected. We are at once impressed
by the somewhat imposing and tower-like mass of buildings which rise above
us (Plates xxx and xxxn). The plan (see Plate xxx, Fig. i) which gives the
ground floor of this building makes it clear that it was not all set up at the same
time, and that certain walls have been enforced by masses of brickwork built up
against them.
It has already been stated that some at least of the monasteries were prepared
for defence, and further evidence in this direction may be obtained by a study of
the History by Abu Salih the Armenian, to which reference has already been
made. Describing the White Monastery at Atribis (Der el Abiad, Sohag), he
tells us, p. 237 : 'ln this monastery there is a keep ; and there is around the
keep and the monastery also a wall of enclosure, within which is a garden full
of all sorts of trees.'
Of the monastery at Samallut (p. 247) he says : ' Adjacent to the church is
a keep, which is large and high, towering above the walls.'
At the monastery of A 1 'Asal (p. 248) is ' the Church of S. George, enclosed
by a surrounding wall. It has two keeps and a garden.'
I could give further quotations, but will finish with one relating to Assiut
(p. 250). Abu Salih states : 'At Suyut on the western bank, there are sixty
churches ; and on the mountain there are churches hewn in the rock with the
pickaxe, and all of them have a keep.'
Later on (Plate LII) there will be given plans of a few of the rock-hewn
churches near Assiut. On examining them the reader may justly ask himself,
What can have been the nature of a ' keep ' in connexion with such a place,
supposing the keep to be a strong and commanding tower, the last point of
resistance, the stronghold, as we certainly understand it to be, in relation to
a mediaeval castle or place of defence ?
At the monastery of S. Simeon we see clearly that there was a large tower-
like structure which dominated all the enclosure. But in the case of the rock-cut
churches we have to climb up a steep path, until we are perhaps 200 feet above
the valley, and we then arrive at an excavation driven straight into the face of
the cliff. It may be an ancient tomb, or a quarry. The cliff rises perpendicu-
larly another 200 feet overhead. Where is the place for a ' keep 'or commanding
tower, or indeed the necessity for it ? If we may suppose that the keep was ' a
strong place', it might be a tower in some cases, or an innermost recess in the
cliff in others.
To return to the keep at the monastery of S. Simeon, Aswan. We enter by
a small doorway (E) in the east wall at its southern end. A narrow stair leading
to the upper story, and then onwards to the flat roof, rises in front of us. To


our right is another small doorway which gives into a long corridor, vaulted in
brick, and with rooms opening into it on either hand (Plate xxx, Fig. i).
Excepting at the extreme end, where the north wall is pierced by some very
small windows, there does not seem to have been any way of introducing daylight
to this corridor. Some of the rooms on the west side are provided with very
small windows or slits, high up in the wall: an uncertain ray might struggle
through such openings, but even then could only reach the corridor by passing
through the small doorways of the chambers. The corridor is vaulted, and so
are all the rooms, with a thin shell of crude brick. This shell is now broken in
numerous places, so that light penetrates everywhere. It is, however, difficult
to picture to oneself the frousty gloom in which the place must have been
enshrouded before it was reduced to ruins.
On the plan (Plate xxx) the parts shown in diagonal shading indicate those
walls which are of two stories in height, and which seem to have been built
before the parts adjoining to the north. This part we will venture to call ' the
keep \ Its southern and eastern walls have been strengthened, as we have
before stated. The lower parts of these masses of masonry are solid, but the
upper parts are pierced by narrow passages.
In the second room on the right of the central corridor is a large fireplace.
It is sadly ruined, but it seems that a flue rose from it in the thickness of the wall.
If the food was prepared in this unlighted and unventilated apartment, the one
exit being the door to the corridor, the monks must have enjoyed a fine smell of
cooking.
On the left or west side of the corridor, towards its northern end, we find the
remains of a large apartment, the brick vault of which had been supported by
a range of columns. Was this a refectory ?
I beg to be excused if I make a digression from the actual matter in hand by
trying to ascertain as far as I can what were the usual departments of a monastery :
it may be well to consult the somewhat confused accounts left us by Abu Salih.
By this means we may at least know of some things we should look for in exploring
such a building. Reference has already been made to his statement concerning
a keep. I will add one or two more. On p. 247, describing a monastery at
Samallut, we find there is not only an enclosing wall, but within it is a mill, 1
an oven, and an oil-press.
At the monastery of El Asal, before mentioned, a garden lies south of the
church and contains a mill 1 and the cells of the monks. Another garden is to
the north of the church. There is also a press for olive oil.
On p. 250 a monastery named after S. Severus is described. It is hewn out
of the top of the mountain. It possesses a keep, and a cistern which contains
a thousand pitchers of water, and is filled from the blessed Nile. There is a mill,
several ovens, and a press for olive oil. There are thirty monks. The gardens
lay in the level ground below.
This must not be mistaken for a water-mill. The motive power was an ox, an ass, or a camel.


On p. 257 reference is made to the monastery of An Nur. It possesses a
keep in five stories, and of skilful construction. Around, is an enclosing wall,
within which are 400 palm-trees.
From these notes and the previous quotations we may venture to establish
a few leading points regarding a monastery. We find that it was more or less
self-contained, and was enclosed by a wall. Such remains as are left to us show
that this enclosure usually approached a quadrangular form. There was at
least one church, and it will be seen that in many cases there were several, each
of these again containing several altars. There was the keep : the cells for the
monks seem to have been enclosed in this keep at the monastery of S. Simeon,
Aswan. There were ovens, mills, oil-presses, and, if the position was suitable,
a garden in which were grown palms and green food. In certain cases finely
constructed wells still remain, lined with ashlar and large enough to admit of
the ascending and descending chain of pots of the sakya.
The structure of the church itself, or even of a group of churches, formed
but one item in the various buildings enclosed by the surrounding wall. When
we reflect upon the necessity of storing grain, of housing the servants, and pro-
bably the cattle, as is done to this day in homesteads large or small, we can easily
see that within the enclosing wall must have been a considerable number of huts
and buildings. Hence, a monastery boasting of no great number of monks
would cover a considerable area.
From a study of such monasteries as I have been able to visit, or about
which information has been obtained, it is found impossible to establish any
uniform system of plan. The church or churches always stand east and west,
and they often lie along the east wall of the enclosure. The rest seems chaos.
Undoubtedly in many cases, owing to the strange and inaccessible places in which
the monasteries were built, plastered up against the face of a cliff, more like the
nests of starlings than the abodes of men, no uniform system of plan could have
been carried out. In but few cases can the church have dominated its surround-
ings in the magnificent way to which we are accustomed, for, in fact, there was
little or nothing of magnificence. Just as the ancient Egyptian temple stood
completely secluded within a brick wall, and was hardly to be seen above it, unless
the entrance pylon happened to be completed, so it was with the monasteries :
the great difference being that while the temple, itself carefully and massively
built, stood within solid and straight walls, the churches and their adjuncts, for
the most part mean and slovenly in their building, were hidden by an equally mean
crooked, and shabby enclosing wall.
Some further light may be thrown upon the subject of the Egyptian
monasteries by a study of The Paradise of the Holy Fathers , already referred
to. At p. 144 we learn the history of the blessed Pachomius, and it is
well worthy of our consideration, as it shows how very free from strict rule
was the life of the monk in the early times. The period covered by the histories
related in the Paradise is from A. D. 250 to A. D. 400. It may be that, later
1074 xos o


on, things became more crystalized. If so we may ask, Where are the remains
of the monastic buildings which would certainly have followed suit and have
developed a more fixed type of plan ? When we examine the very few broken
fragments of monastic buildings that are still to be found, it is difficult to suppose
that those of the earliest date can have differed from them materially, for it would
indeed be hard to say that there was any well-defined system of planning in the
buildings we now see. It would seem that before the time of Pachomius those
who were moved to adopt the religious life had not dwelt together in communities,
but had nested themselves for the most part in caves and cells ; we must also
bear in mind that the establishment of communities did not by any means put
an end to the ascetics who still lived—or, more correctly speaking, starved —in
the deserts and out-of-the-way places, and in great numbers.
The Paradise ( p. 144) relates as follows :
'ln the country of Thebes, and in the district thereof which is called Tabenna, 1
there was a certain blessed man whose name was Pachomius, and this man led
a beautiful life of ascetic excellence, and he was crowned with the love of God
and of man. Now therefore as this man was sitting in his cell there appeared
unto him an angel who said unto him, " Since thou hast completed thy disciple-
ship it is unnecessary for thee to dwell here ; but come and gather together unto
thyself those who are wandering, and be thou dwelling with them, and lay thou
down for them such laws as I shall tell unto thee." And the angel gave him
a book (or tablets) wherein was written the following :
' " I. Let every man eat and drink whenever he wisheth, and according to
the strength of those who eat and drink impose work ; and thou shalt restrain
them neither from eating nor fasting. Furthermore, on those that are strong
thou shalt impose severe labours ; and upon those who are of inferior strength,
and upon those who fast thou shalt impose light labours.
' " 11. And thou shalt make for them a cell, and they shall dwell together
three by three.
' " 111. And they shall partake of food all together in one chamber (or house).
' " IV. And they shall not take their sleep lying down, but thou shalt make
for them seats so that when they are sitting down they shall be able to support
their heads.
' " V. At night time they shall put on garments without sleeves and their
loins shall be girded up, and they shall be provided with skull-caps," &c., &c.
VI. And thou shalt establish the monks in four and twenty grades," &c.'
We learn from the perusal of these rules that the ordering of such a religious
community as was then established was something much less elaborate in all
respects than the rules developed in the west. Such a rule as that of Pachomius
did not demand such a group of well-ordered buildings as we find in the monas-
teries of Europe; indeed, the dirt and seclusion of the ascetic life must, we should
suppose, have coloured strongly the rule then instituted by the holy man.
1 The district or island of Tabenna lies on the right sharply to the west. It extends from near Kena
bank of the Nile, where, at Kena, that river turns to Kasr es Sayad. See Plate xliii, Map No. 5.


The number of monks rapidly increased :
'And there was living in that mountain about seven thousand brethren, and
in the monastery in which the blessed Pachomius himself lived there were living
one thousand three hundred brethren; and besides these there were also other
monasteries, each containing about three hundred or two hundred, or one hundred
monks, who lived together : and they all toiled with their hands and lived
thereby, and with whatsoever they possessed that was superfluous for them they
provided (or fed) the nunneries which were there. Each day, those whose week
of service it was, rose up and attended to their work ; and others attended to
the cooking, and others set out the tables and laid upon them bread, and cheese,
and vessels of vinegar and water. And there were some monks who went in to
partake of food at the third hour of the day, and others at the sixth hour, and
others at the ninth hour, and others in the evening, and others who ate once a day
only ; and there were some who only ate once a week.' ' Some worked in the
paradise (i. e. the orchard), and some in the gardens, and some in the blacksmith's
shop, and some in the baker's shop, and some in the carpenter's shop, and some
in the fuller's shop, and some wove baskets and mats of palm leaves, and one was
a maker of nets, and one was a maker of sandals, and one was a scribe ; now all
these men as they were performing their work were repeating the Psalms and
the Scriptures in order.'
A light is thrown upon the fact that the number of monks and monasteries
must have been very great by the account given of Oxyrrhynchus, p. 337, which
is as follows :
' And we came also to Oxyrrhynchus, a great city in Thebais, but we are
not able to relate all the wonderful things which [we saw] therein : for the
city is so full of the habitations of the brethren that the walls thereof are
thrust out with them, so many are the brethren ! And there are so many other
monasteries round about the walls, on the outside, that one would think that
they were another city, and the sanctuaries of the city, and the temples which
are therein, and all the spaces about them, are filled with the monks. And
besides these there were thirteen churches in which the people assembled, for
the city was exceedingly large. There was a place set apart for the monks to
pray in, in each of the monasteries, and one might think that the monks were not
very much fewer in numbers than the ordinary inhabitants of the city, for they
were so numerous that they even filled the [buildings at] the entrances to the
city, and some of the monks lived in the towers by the side of the gates thereof.
Now the people said that the monks who lived inside were five thousand in
number, and that five thousand brethren lived round about it." " Now we would
make known that which we have learned from the holy bishop who was there,
namely, that he had under his authority ten thousand monks and twenty
thousand virgins."'
Near to Anfinoe another great collection of monks is mentioned, and here
we see to this day a site now called El Medina, the ruins of a large assemblage of
buildings and of several churches, yet to be properly investigated.
I have ventured to make the above quotations somewhat at length as they
107 o 2


seem to throw a good deal of light on the matter in hand. We find the number
of monks to have been, in many cases, so considerable that a veritable town of
little cells, crude brick huts, must have been collected round the church or churches
which formed the nucleus. These must have been huddled together as are the
houses in a modern village. Such a collection of ill-arranged buildings as we find
in a village to-day can, if abandoned, quickly disappear, under the influences of
the infiltrated waters of the Nile flood and the pillage of bricks for use elsewhere.
Such groups of abandoned houses as are more or less preserved are always standing
upon rock or dry sandy soil.
Undoubtedly many of the monasteries must have stood in the midst of
gardens and cultivations —all trace of them has consequently disappeared.
Had there been a fixed system of plan with solidly constructed buildings, con-
siderable lengths of walling would, almost certainly, have remained to tell the
tale, as these are not overthrown as easily as are the walls of huts. Around
the churches at the Der el Abiad and El Ah mar (see Plates xlv and xlix, and
pp. 145 et seq.), which are immediately adjacent to the cultivated land, but not on
it, traces of the mud brick buildings can be seen and of the walls enclosing them,
but even here, or at Antinoe (El Medina), pillage has made away with the greater
part of the bricks and has not left us any trace of a comprehensive system of plan.
Another reason for finding so little may be revealed to us by the history of
the Blessed Pachomius and his Oratory. 1 It cannot have been a very solid or
well-built structure or it would not have been brought down so easily with ropes.
Herein it differed but little from most of the structures that are left to us : for
in these, where we find columns, they are, as a rule, so ill set up, and patched in
so careless a way, that we are left to wonder they have continued to stand at all.
The spirit of fiery asceticism, of discovering a temptation in even the poorest
effort at beauty, at a little glimmer of ' the lamp of sacrifice would war alto-
gether with stately buildings in which men had tried to do their best for the
glory of God. With the thousands of monks at command, nearly all men of
labour, we may rest assured that stately churches could have been built if it
had been thought right to have them.
In the group of monasteries still existing on Mount Athos we may perhaps
find something not altogether removed from the ancient monasteries above
described. There is usually found in each place a tall tower, which may
correspond with the keep. The churches are small, and several exist within
the enclosing walls. There is not found any systematic plan of buildings, as in
the west. 2
To return to the monastery of S. Simeon, we find the church not in actual
contact with the eastern end against the enclosure wall. The keep, with many
chambers which we may suppose to have been the cells for the monks, occupies
a central position. On the floors of some of these are enclosures, like troughs.
Can these have been beds ? A large apartment lying to the north, and, as it
1 p. 19. 2 See A thos, or the Mountain of the Monks, by Athelstan Riley. London, Longmans, 1887.


seems, not a part of the first building, may be the refectory. At the south-west
angle of the enclosure are a series of divisions which suggest stables, or stores ;
on the floor of another room are evidences of a mill; but as for the rest of the
buildings it is not safe to assign any uses to the various apartments, now all
roofless. Perhaps very careful excavation, taking particular note of the stuff
removed from each place, might reveal something to us. It will be observed
that in several places there are flights of steps which give access to the top of
the wall or of the flanking towers.
Having tried our best to find out at least some of those things which are
to be expected in a monastic plan, and having failed altogether in establishing
any normal system, it may be well to inquire what are those things which we
must look for in the plan of a church, but which, as experience will show, may
be placed not always in the same positions relatively to one another.
Having passed north of the First Cataract and entered Egypt proper we
find ourselves, as before stated, in face of a church plan and type of building
which we have not met with further south. The churches in the south resolve
themselves under two types, which I have, for convenience, called type A and
type B. The type Cwe shall now meet with differs from the others in several
respects—it is not of two stories in height—i. e. there are not galleries or
triforia above the aisles. Moreover, they have about them nothing of the
basilican plan, from the first they were built entirely of rough masonry and
brick, always roofed with small domes, wood has not played any part in their
construction. A hemispherical dome is supported on a square cell, bounded
by four walls, or, where a number of these domes are collected together, they are
supported on four arches, each cell opening into the other. Where the arches
meet they stand on a column or pier. The domes and cells being all of the
same size we arrive at a very picturesque interior, low, with many columns, and
lighted from above. The building is capable of extension indefinitely in any
direction. We find that in most cases this extension is not taken advantage of
to increase the building in any dimension but its width. This reaches its climax
in the Plan on Plate xxxv, Der Bakhum (Pachomius), at Medamm6t, where
we find four bays or cells from east to west, and not less than eight from north
to south. The architectural design of the type Cis clearly the outcome of the
rather poor material the artificers were compelled to make use of.
It may assist the reader if we proceed to describe what are the arrangements
and the pieces of furniture generally found in Coptic churches. 1 The orientation
of the building is scrupulously observed although it is not necessarily very exact.
So far as I know, it is only in a few instances where an existing building has, in
one or other of the parts, been converted to the use of a church that the orienta-
tion is at fault.
1 It may be objected that this description comes
rather late in the day. To the writer it seemed
useless to describe furniture and ritual arrange-
ments where the buildings under examination were
all ruins, nearly level with the ground. Not one
of the churches is capable of being used. Now we
are describing buildings some of which are in
regular use.


In the buildings about to be described there are generally several altars set
up in a row of eastern chapels, but there is always one more important than
any others in the building. The altar stands in a chamber prepared for it called
the haikal. So many altars, so many haikals. The number of altars varies :
some churches have but one, others a considerable number. Three seems a
favourite number ; this preference is said by some to be in honour of the three
Persons of the Holy Trinity ; by others, the three altars are said to correspond
to the Altar of Incense, the Altar of Sacrifice, and the Table of the Ark in the
Jewish Tabernacle. What is certain is that the necessity of having more than
one altar is due to reasons of ritual. No altar can, under any circumstances,
be used more than once in one day. The chief altar is almost always dedicated
to the patron saint of the church, but, as a study of the plans will show, it is not
easy to say, in many cases, which is the chief altar. The church is not necessarily
built with a manifest axial line.
The altar stands free of the east wall, so that the priest may pass round it.
It is of masonry, plastered, with a recess, usually in the eastern side, and has
a slight sinking on the top into which the consecrated table is set. 1 The altar
is enclosed by a solid screen, the higdb, which is the Arabic for a curtain or veil.
The word Iconostasis is quite unknown amongst the Copts. It will be observed
by an examination of the plans and drawings that the higdb is pierced, sometimes
by a central door, flanked by a small window on either hand, sometimes by two
doors with a small window between them. lam not able to give a reason why
one or the other method is preferred.
The higdb is made of wood, of brick, or of stone, and varies in height. It is
always well above the height of a man, but beyond that it varies a good deal
according to the dimensions of the church and the amount of display. In the
churches in Cairo, now frequently visited, the higdb is of wood and often very
much elaborated. In nearly all the churches in country places where money
was more scarce the higdb is of brick or stone and roughly constructed.
Passing through the higdb (having first taken off our shoes) we enter the
haikal. This includes all that part of the building east of the higdb. It may
terminate in an apse, or it may be square. In some churches there is a canopy
covering the altar. This is formed as a dome, is made of wood, and rests either on
four little columns or, where the space is very limited, on two horizontal beams
which run north and south from wall to wall. Except when the door of the higdb
is open the altar cannot be seen, and but little is in view even when the door
is open.
In a number of cases—especially when the church is an example of the basilican
plan, type A —there is a small door leading north and another south from the
haikal to the adjoining chambers. In Nubia and in the Batn el Hagar a narrow
passage is also found joining these chambers by a way behind the apse.
We must always bear in mind that, as Mr. Butler tells us, he had not visited
See Ancient Coptic Churches of Egypt, A. J. Butler, vol. ii, cap. i.


any churches but those in and about Cairo and in the Wadi Natroon. He occa-
sionally tells us that things are ' invariably' in this way or ' always' in another
way, whereas had he had the opportunity of examining more examples he would
certainly have withheld such definite statements. Nothing can, however, take
away from the extreme interest and value of his work, to which reference has
been made many times, and will be made many times more.
As those who have studied Mr. Butler's work will remember, the churches
of Cairo have their aisles for the most part in two stories, the upper floor of the
aisle or triforium (if we may call it so) having openings into the church. Here
the women assembled. Many of the churches already described in this book
had their aisles in two stories, but with very small openings into the nave. A
church of monks could hardly have needed the triforium for women, as the female
sex was rigorously excluded from the church and monastery.
The body of the church is, in churches of the type C, divided up by screens
of wood, or by screen walls of masonry. In one division will be the font, in
another the women's quarters, and so on. The shrinking of the population in
old Cairo has been the cause, as Mr. Butler shows, of the upper galleries in most
of the Cairene churches being abandoned by worshippers and of the nave being
subdivided in the manner he indicates, the whole congregation being accom-
modated on the floor level. The plans which follow will, however, show that these
subdivisions are by no means always in the same relative places. The haikal,
we may venture to say, is the only fixed point. The font, for example, is found
in various places. Very often it is in one of the chapels flanking the haikal,
but it may be —as it is at S. Mikhail, Edfu I—in 1 —in the western division of the
church, or as at Medammot, 2 in a remote corner. We must be careful to consider
whether in many cases the font is not a comparatively recent insertion. As long
as the building was the church of a monastery there could have been no use for
a font. Long since the monasteries were plundered and most of them done
away with. Certain of them —as, for example, in the cases of the Der el Abiacl
and the Der el Ahmar near Sohag —are now the equivalent to parish churches.
Houses have been built within the precincts of the ruined naves, and herein live
families demanding baptism and other rites of the church ; these houses have
but just been removed. Poverty and dusty squalor pervade, as a rule, every
part of the sacred buildings.
During the last twelve or fourteen years things have much improved in
Cairo and its neighbourhood. In the country there is as yet little or no change.
After leaving Aswan the first church I have to describe is
DER EL MALAK MIKHAIL, EDFU
PLATE XXXIII, FIG. I
This building stands to the west of Edfu on the edge of the desert. I cannot
find any mention of it in Abu Salih. Plan made January 23, 1901.
1 See Plate xxxur. « See Plate xxxv.


j I
~ x * V
PILATE SXXHDI
EIDFtU'
IDEDES MBKjm. MUmKL&HE
SCALE
METRES
®EHS§ E2> gJHIOIHIAm
I I I TOMB I . \B
■ i. ~ ' pi|^ ' gi
*''* r > m,s 'T "\fontb
/"j- ■
I ; B_r ■ ■ I
FIG. 2
DOORWAY
SCALK
METRES


The church is attached to crude brick walls, which are parts of structures
older than itself; the priest informed me that the church we now see was
built seventy or eighty years ago. It is interesting to observe that up to that
time there had been no change in the type of building from that which had
been used for many centuries. The Coptic church built to-day is a mixture
of things—smart, mean, and vulgarly showy. The domed roofs have been
abandoned : rough deal joists have taken their place, or it may be that the said
joists are hidden by a white plaster ceiling. Large windows are introduced, filled
with squares of glaring yellow, red, and blue glass. There is neither skill used in
the building, nor beauty in the result. The abomination of artistic desolation
has come in with the European. Timber is now imported in large quantities,
and of course any fool can put up a couple of walls and lay some pieces of wood
across.
Der Mikhail is the first example I have to give of type C, abandoning alto-
gether the basilican plan. The arches which carry the domes are slightly pointed.
The square, formed by four arches, is gathered to an octagon by small arches in
the angles, and on the octagon thus formed low walls are raised forming a drum,
and pierced by very small windows. On the drum rests the hemispherical dome,
also pierced by a few small holes. 1 No openings are glazed. The amount of light
thus obtained is quite sufficient, whilst the distribution of it, entirely from above,
is very beautiful. The altars are dedicated as follows : A, El Melak Mikhail.
B, El Adra (the chief altar), c, Bakhum (Pachomius). D, Hanna (John). The
font is far from the altars, in the westernmost division of the church. The screen
walls rise as high as the springing of the arches, are solid, and are only pierced
by small doorways.
I understand that the place set apart for the women is the westernmost of the
divisions. According to the arrangement in the Cairene churches, the next
division eastward would be for men ; the next, still going east, for the choir and
ceremonial of the church. That worshippers should be unable to see is of small
account in many of these buildings. They come 'to assist \
The internal effect of a church of this type is extremely pleasing. A pleasantly
diffused light enters by the small windows overhead. The numerous arches
carrying the domes give an effect of size and also of height quite beyond that
which the mere measurements of the building would suggest.
DER MAN AOS WA SHUHADA (Amonius 2 and the Martyrs), ESN A
PLATE XXXIII, FIG. 2
This church, according to tradition, was built by the Empress Helena. It is
to be feared that this is rather in the nature of a pious wish than a fact that can
be established. To have been founded by the Empress Helena gives an agree-
1 See Fig. 5, p. 29. under Diocletian, and is said to have been buried
*S. Amonius. A bishop suffered martyrdom at Sheikh Abada, adjoining'the site of Antinoe.
1074 x-ro t>
113 P


able distinction to their church pleasing to those who have it in charge. The
building, we see, cannot date from that period. It lies a little south-west of
Esna, just at the edge of the cultivated ground.
The consecration of the Church of the Martyrs at Esna is mentioned in the
Ethiopic calendar under the 19th day of the month Toba, and their festival on
the 19th day of the month Abib.
The walls are of burnt brick. The church stands within an enclosure wall,
more or less rectangular in plan. It is attached to the eastern side of the enclosure.
There are ruins of many brick structures within this enclosure which seem to
be remains of the monastic buildings. These I will describe in the words of
M. Wladimir de Bock. 1
' du rectangle, forme par les murs d'enceinte du couvent et
mesurant a peu pres 150 pas sur chaque c6te, presente, comme tousles couvents
coptes, un dedale de petites constructions vout£es en berceau ou surmontees de
coupoles et entourant l'eglise et un baptistere. Toutes ces constructions, dont une
partie a du servir d'habitations et de communs, remplissent le c6te ouest du
rectangle. Le c6t6 est est occupe par une cour dans laquelle se trouve une
saquieh, fournissant l'eau au couvent, et un long couloir vout6 pres de la porte
d'entree.
' Le baptistere, s£par6 de l'eglise par un long passage a decouvert, est form 6
par une assez grande chambre carree avec un grand font de baptfime 2 destine
aux personnes adultes. La coupole qui recouvrait le baptistere s'est effondree.
Deux rangees de cellules separees par un couloir voute sont accolees aux murs
ouest du baptistere. Au bout ouest du passage qui separe l'eglise du baptistere
et des cellules, lemur d'enceinte a une grande porte actuellement mur£e, bien
visible dehors. Le long du mur sud du couvent s'etend une longue construction
avec voute en berceau. Une construction semblable se rencontre pres des murs
est et ouest de l'eglise.'
M. de Bock goes on to describe various paintings which remain on the walls,
sadly damaged. On one he finds the date 502 of the era of the martyrs = A.D. 786.
The plan of the church is quite unlike that of the churches at Edfu. It
must be classed with the type B, but enlarged ; it seems not unlikely that it has
twice been added to. The first building is that to the south-east, and that with
which the chief altar is connected ; the second, that with two altars immediately
to the north of the east; the third, that with two altars and lying west of the
second. Later alterations have amalgamated the whole into a confused plan,
but have neatly included it into a rectangle.
We enter at the south-west and find ourselves in a species of south aisle.
North of this, and on the main axial line of the chief altar, are two spaces covered
with domes. East of these is a transverse apartment out of which the haikals
open.
There are three chambers opening eastward from the transverse corridor
1 MatSriaux pour servir a I'archiologie de *ls it not probable that the tank here mentioned
l'£gypte Chritienne, St-Petersbourg, 1901, p. 72. is for the service at the Epiphany ?


of the chief original church. In the middle is the haikal containing the altar.
It has opened with a wide arch westward towards the corridor, but the chambers
north and south do not show any openings to the west, as might be expected.
In the northern chamber the font is placed. It will be observed that the arches
on the axial line, and nearly all the others, have been very much reduced in size,
and are now hardly bigger than doorways. The walls everywhere are thin, and
with their wide arches as first constructed were doubtless unable to sustain the
weight of the domes, small as these are.
• Passing northward out of the transverse corridor we enter what I have
ventured to call the second church. Here we find the only elaborated piece of
architecture in the place. This is the little dome marked Aon the plan. The
octagon on which the dome rests is carried on pendentives ornamented with
stalactite niches, all the arches of which are of the flat-sided form —a detail
characteristic of the Fatamide period. There are two large brick structures here
which are tombs. The two altars are dedicated : B, Mari Girgis ; c, Sitt Miriam;
D, el Shuhada.
It will be observed that the higdb or screens which shut off the haikals are
all of the same type, and are provided with two doorways and a small opening
between them. This is the first time we meet with this arrangement, but the
reader will be introduced to others of the same type later on.
The original arches which carry the domes are all pointed, formed from
segments of a circle. Several of the arches in the altar screens have straight-
sided arches, as shown with dotted lines on the drawing—a form characteristic
of the Fatimide period (see Fig. 20).
I regret to say that I did not ascertain the dedication of the two altars in
the north-western church. In the north-west angle, under the central dome of
the church, is a clumsy combination of mud bricks and plaster—the Ambon.
From the architectural point of view attention may be called to the ingenious
way in which the vaulted roofs, north, east, and south of the central dome, are
devised. All the vaults and domes are of crude brick, and were set up without
the paraphernalia of scaffolding and ' centres ' which we think so necessary.
It is easy to build a tunnel vault, or to cover a square space either with a dome
or a vault made by two intersecting tunnels, but a difficulty presented itself in
this church. The arches on which the central dome rested rose too high for their
crowns to pass below the springing of a continuous tunnel over the north, east,
and south corridors. The builders got over the difficulty by starting with a
tunnel vault at either end of the corridor, and when the space between these two
vaults was reduced to a square they started the intersecting quadripartite vault;
the trouble was thus overcome (Fig. 21). We find in a few cases domes more or
less oval on plan—the longest axis at least one and a half times that of the shortest.
They were ugly to see and difficult to build, as the simple way of guiding them-
selves with a string and a knot, described in Chapter 11, could not be made use of.
I should wish to call attention to the resemblance that exists between the
115 P 2


'A ss^'-
1 i
first church (as I venture to call it) in this group at Esna and the plan (Plate xx,
Fig. 2) of the church at Madeyq in Nubia. In the town of Esna, near the post-
office, is a church which was stated to have been but recently built. Judging
by the poor appearance it presents, this is probably true. I describe it because
it is a specimen of what was done as soon as the strong European influence had
sway, and the ability existed to obtain quite easily timber of some size, brought
by ship from the Black Sea and elsewhere. The building covers about the same
area as the church already described at Edfu. Three walls cross the interior
from north to south, at intervals of about 4-0 one from the other. Each wall is
pierced by three arches. The space into which the three easternmost arches
open is divided by walls into separate chapels, each shut in by a screen or higdb
of coarse woodwork, with a doorway in the middle. The customary divisions
FIG. 20. Esna. Higdb.
FIG. 21. Esna. Vaulted roof.
for men and women are made by screens of roughly worked wood. The building
is not vaulted, but the spaces between the arches are spanned by palm stems
supporting a layer of reeds, on which rests a coat of crude bricks and Nile mud.
Holes are left, here and there, for light.
Dliß SHEHiD TADRUS EL MOHAREB (Theodorus the Warrior),
MEDINET HABU
PLATE XXXIV, FIGS, I AND 2
This church stands, alone, in the desert, somewhat to the south of the temple
of Medinet Habu, 1 and a little removed from the cultivated land which lies to the
east of it.
The plan was measured March 19, 1901. It is a good example of type C, and
1 Perhaps it should be stated for the benefit
of those who have not visited the ruins of Thebes,
that the temple of Medinet Habu, built by
Ramesses 111, lies on the west bank of the Nile,
opposite Luxor, and forms one of the group of
temples and tombs that have made that place
so famous.


ESpPp
\ * '■/ \
A - : I — j i " h!0:- B
f ■gtai
GROUND PLAN I i' :
SCALE I ; i (—] ,
1
PLATEmSW
IDEM TPIHIEOMMUS
MEIDMET IHIAEO
FIG. 1
1 0 1 2 3 4 5
SECTION ON LINE A B
LOOKING SOUTH
SCALE m
FONT
FIG. 2


consists of a rectangular nucleus, which I suppose to be the first building, to
which have been added one chamber on the south-east and an aisle on the west.
The whitewashed plaster on the walls was in too good a condition, both inside
and out, for me to discover—on the occasion of several visits I have paid —any
straight joints which, if I am right, should exist at the junction of the old and
newer pieces of building.
The roof consists of a series of domes, resting for the most part upon arches
which spring at a low level, not more than 1-75 from the floor. It will be observed
that there are four haikals towards the east; that, although these are rectangular
on plan, they are roofed by half domes ; and that the screens ( higab ) are not all
alike, two having doors in the middle, and two being provided each with two
doors. Each hi gab consists of a wall, not of a wood partition or screen. The
first range of domes immediately west of the altars has the supporting arches
carried not on piers or columns, but on what must be described as pieces of wall,
pierced by arches which open towards the aisles on the west. The domes of this
part of the church and their supporting arches rest on columns. These are of
hard stone, with capitals cut in a clumsy manner into leaves. I was informed
that the western aisle had been recently added as a place for women, hence the
holes cut piercing the original west wall of the church.
The screen cis of brick, the upper part of open work. It is set skew, so that
the view through the opening—towards the haikals —might not be interrupted. It
will be observed that the font is placed within the enclosure formed by this screen.
The higdbs are all of masonry; several stones bear crosses rudely sunk on them.
The domed building at the south-east is only approached through the
church. Within it is a tank sunk in the floor, which is filled from the outside.
The east and north walls of the church are incorporated with walls enclosing a
quadrangular area within which are sundry chambers and dens —dusty, ruinous,
and forlorn.
It will be observed that some of the domes covering this church are not circles,
but have one axis longer than the other. The building is lighted through small
holes in the domes. The effect is very picturesque, and whilst nothing can
exceed the simplicity of the whitewashed interior, many more ambitious buildings
are not half so pleasing.
The altars are dedicated as follows : El Adra ; Kladius (nephew of Tadrus);
Mikhail de Todrus ; El Malak.
Dfiß PAKHOMIUS (BAKHOM), MEDAMM6T
PLATE XXXV
This church lies a little north-east of the ruins of the great temple of Karnak.
It belongs to type C, and is the most curious example of that type I have
seen, with not less than five altars in a row. The building seems to have been
intended from the first to be thus arranged. For the external effect see Fig. 22.


PILATE SSM
mEDMMOT
11 'M ""*"" I m "
t '''8 > J""''"'H
' 'K
j''». ."■ D oil
shhh^lJL


The women have their own entrance at c. They are enclosed by screens of
woodwork, and are, at the best, considerably removed from the chief altar, which
is the midmost of the five. The font is in their division of the church. There is
a great want of adjustment and correspondence between the two westernmost
aisles and the aisle into which the haikals open. The wall, pierced with doorways
and some loophole windows, rises as high as the springing of the arches only ; in
consequence, to the eye, the church does not seem to be so completely cut in two
as it appears on the plan.
The hi gabs are all of masonry, and in this case have the doors in the middle.
The structure is built of burnt brick laid in mud mortar, and but a small part of
FIG. 22. Dcr Bakhum, Medammot.
the interior walls are plastered except in the domes. A few stones, carved with
crosses, are built into the walls here and there. The lighting is entirely from
above, by little windows or holes in the domes.
The altar in the chief haikal has a canopy over it of wood. This structure is
rectangular below, the posts on which it rests standing close against the altar.
It is not possible to pass between the altar and the supports of the canopy. It
is worked into an octagon above, and from its style and method of work is evi-
dently very recently set up. Attached to the top of the four posts, and stretched
between them, was—when I visited the church —a piece of woven stuff which
formed a lower and second canopy to the altar. The altar was in use when
I made these notes. Whether this piece of stuff is set up only at the time of
celebrations I could not ascertain.
The church has a rectangular enclosure of considerable size attached to it.
Measured, March 19, 1901.


Dfiß EL MALAK MIKHAIL, KAMULA
PLATE XXXVI
This church lies on the west side of the Nile. The width of cultivated ground
between the Nile bank and the Der is considerable. The cultivation ends, as
it always does, abruptly against the desert edge, which suddenly rises a few metres,
and is consequently above the possibilities of irrigation. As we advance a little
way westward into the desert we see before us the low crude brick enclosing walls,
sadly ruined, and the humble domes of the churches, like inverted cups rising
above it. A general view is given in Fig. 23. Near the Der is a large well for a
sakyeh. Many tombs are seen lying near at hand to the south and east. There
are two churches side by side, the larger of the two to the south. They are built
FIG. 23. Der Malak Mikhail, Kamula.
almost entirely of brick, very little of it burnt. A few fragments of stone are
seen on which are hieroglyphs, taken from some ancient temple. Measured,
March 20, 1901.
It will be observed that the churches are connected by a hole in the wall.
On the north side this hole is enclosed by an arch ; on the south there is not
anything to indicate that a doorway was intended. The way through is merely
a breach. This and other indications lead one to think that the two buildings
are not of the same period. The church to the north is, perhaps, the most recent
of the two. The wall surfaces within are not plastered except in the domes, and
here it certainly has been renewed. We do not see the original plaster.
The plan of the southern church is not such as we have before met with.
Not only are the three eastern recesses apsidal on plan, but the ends of the next
division of the buildings are apsidal, to the north and to the south. We can hardly
look on this as triapsal as at Aswan, or as the Ders at Sohag. The higdbs or screens
enclosing the altars are not alike. The central higdb has two doors and a little
window between them : this screen rises no higher than the spring of the arch
1074 121 Q


0
1' V ' fl
I / : ■
l_' * '
'''p^' v
B
PILATE XXXVI
BEES EEMAILAM: MEKHMIL,
I&AMULAM
FIG. 1
SECTION ON LINE A B
SCALE Too
FIG. 2
GROUND PLAN
SCALE sis


over it. The side chapels are completely cut oft by a wall, a part of the main
fabric, pierced by a central doorway, and little windows at the side. No altars
existed, at the time of my visit, in any of these recesses. It will be observed that
from the southern chapel or haikal (if it be one) a little passage leads off south-
west. It now ends in a heap of ruins.
The western part of the southern church has a doorway giving access to the
northern church, a mere hole in the wall, and in passing through this it is easy to
appreciate the fact that the buildings were set up at different times. We are
perhaps justified in supposing, by the way in which the western part of the
building is cut off by solid screens from the next division east, that parts of it
may have been the women's division. There are several features in this part of
the church for which I cannot offer any explanation ; when I visited the place it
seemed quite deserted ; but, as a rule, if one finds in an out-of-the-way place
(such as this is) the priest of the church, he is but a poor fellah —a humble, dirty,
ignorant creature, knowing nothing, and interested in nothing ; in result, infor-
mation of value is hard to get.
In the northern church the higab closing in the haikal (central chapel) is set
in an arch, provided with two doors and a little window between them. The
chapels north and south are closed in by walls, cutting them off altogether except
for central doorways, and flanked by little loopholes. In the southern of the
three chapels is an altar. In the central higab are set two pieces of carved
stone : a sketch (see Fig. 24) is given of one of them.
There was, I learnt, a carved stone over the little window between the doors.
This was removed about five years before my visits by the Director of the Depart-
ment of Antiquities, and is, we may suppose, in the Museum at Cairo, but as
that establishment does not provide labels for the objects exhibited one cannot
learn anything. I was informed by a gentleman who visited these and others of
the adjacent churches in the year 1894, and who gave me some notes, that the
dedications of the altars were as follow : First church—the haikal : Malak
Mikhail. Altar to the north : A 1 Paranon. To the south : Pachomius. Second
Church— haikal : El Adra. North altar : Mari Girgis. South altar : Tadrus.
But he did not tell me which he called the first or the second church.
Dfeß MARI BOCTOR (S. Victor), NAKADA
PLATE XXXVII
This church is built on a more ambitious scale than the last, and can be
classed in the type B. A spur of the desert hills advances into the cultivated
plane, above which it rises some 20 0, and on this the church is planted, com-
manding a charming view of the Nile valley. A considerable space, more or
less rectangular, has been enclosed by a wall, and within this space the church
is placed. The walls and the buildings within it are of small crude brick, well
laid, and very few are set on edge. The more modern the buildings the more
123 Q2


(TSlfc
certainly does one find that whilst the courses of headers are laid flat, the courses
of stretchers are set on edge—also, the more carelessly formed are the bricks.
We may be justified in thinking that there are indications of considerable anti-
quity in the present building. Measured, March 1901.
In constructing the church itself the precaution has been taken to make
use of burnt bricks for the courses resting on the ground and rising to about
10 above it. Unless this be done there is great danger that the salts with which
the ground is impregnated will turn the crude brick into powder —indeed, it is
not unusual to see stone and even granite quite disintegrated by the saline action.
Entering at the west, we find ourselves in a compartment, square on plan,
and with an aisle north and south into which it opens by an arch. These arches
are pointed (see Section 011 line A, B). The western spring of these arches
•• '• ' .• ' * - v ." \
FIG. 24. Malak Mikhail, Kamula.
FIG. 25. Dcr Mari Boctor. Carved capital.
rests on a clumsy column roughly cut, with its capital, of limestone (see Fig. 25).
These columns stand detached from the wall. An arch is also carried across
against the western wall resting on the columns. The appearance of things
suggests that the intention may have been to extend the church further to the
west. On the other hand, the brickwork of this wall is one with that of
the return walls. The eastern jamb of the arch shown in the section has been
at some time reconstructed. The impost from which the arch springs has been
raised above its old level, and now ranges with the imposts in the next bay to
the east. The southern arch of the first bay has not undergone this deformation.
It will be observed that there are an unusual number of doorways—not only one
at the west end, but also one in the north and south walls of the aisles. A door
at the west end is not usual.
The domes which cover the west bay and its aisles do not rest upon diagonal
arches as in the central dome. The brickwork at the angles is corbelled out,
course by course, following no particular lines, and so by degrees a rectangular
space below is prepared to receive a dome, more or less circular on plan, above.
A sense of duty keeps these domes in their places rather than any merits of


CM
d
PQ
$SO&SL v .. MM. ESOSSL.I^PL53753.
■™ nl
1'''T^--^* ; ' , J a .. Q|B
|o
- o
a
<
J
r>
PLATJE XXXVI
©EI® MM&H MDOT©M
NAKADA
PQ
<
U
Z
-4
z
o
z
o
I—l
H
u
w
73


construction. As the plan clearly indicates, the dome over the central bay stood
on four stout piers. This dome is now no higher than its neighbours to the
west, but it seems not unreasonable to suppose that at one time it was raised
on a drum, and that the weight of the superstructure was the reason for inserting
the piers and walls with which the four arches are fortified.
In the western arch columns were placed, carrying an arch built within the
original arch. The north and south arches are blocked by a central pier (see
section) carrying subarches. The eastern arch is blocked in the same way as
those to the north and south with long window-like openings. There is also
a doorway which with the side-openings forms a screen. It is to be supposed that
the original dome, notwithstanding these precautions, fell down, after which
the dome we now see was built. The filling-in to reinforce the arches is built
with headers on edge suggesting that it is of later date than the first structure.
Passing eastward, we enter the third domed space. Here we find that the
northern arch only has been reinforced by inserted brickwork. The eastern
aisle opens by arches to three chapels — haikals. The higdb of each is of brick,
and is provided with two doors and a central window. The font is in a miserable
little chamber to the south at c. North of the three haikals just referred to
is a fourth, provided with a screen of the same type as its neighbours. This may
not be an addition to the first building. In the section it will be observed
that under the central dome a supporting arch is filled below with a few steps.
It is not improbable that these lead up to the ambon, but no traces of that piece
of furniture can now be seen. On the south-west pier under the dome are
shattered remains of wall-painting on the plaster. Two figures are to be traced,
nimbed, and some lettering. One can make out the word ayios.
The altars in this church are dedicated as follows : The haikal —Mari Boctor
(S. Victor), El Malak (S. Michael), El Adra (B. V. M.), Mina.
DER ES SALIB (Holy Cross)
PLATE XXXVIII
Riding in an almost direct line from the Nile at Arabat for an hour we come
to the desert edge, which rises but a little above the cultivated ground we have
been crossing. We make for a group of churches. An enclosing wall, more
or less rectangular in plan, contains four of these. Two of them are built
against the east wall of the enclosure ; one is built up against these, the fourth,
recently re-built, touches the west and south wall. The priest and guard were
absent, so we climbed over the wall. No one could tell us the dedications except
an old man, who affirmed that the western churches were Es Salib and
Amba Shnuda (S. Sinuthius). Measured, March 1901.
Close by, to the east, lies another group of churches called Der Anba L'lff.
The plan of Der es Salib shows three churches in a row, the most important
being that to the south. Differing from the plans we have lately been examining,


>
JP.'' .
SCALE
w
£ ~ - - - - -
PILATE MXVffIU
NAKADA
FIG. 1
GFNFRAL PLAN
SECTION ON LINE A-B
SCALE


we here find a church of type A, the basilican, but which has undergone changes
subsequent to its first construction, the object of these changes being to replace
the original wood roof with brick domes. The building, of crude brick, consists
of an apsidal haikal flanked by another to the north and south, square on plan.
The central haikal opened westward with an arch. The springers, to a height
of about 0.75, still exist, and retain their plastered surfaces, on which remain,
from the feet to just below the shoulders, painted figures, vested. This haikal
is now shut in by a wall of burnt brick, an insertion, which is carried quite up to
support the dome. It is pierced below by two doors and a window between them.
There is a misshapen niche, not reaching to the floor, behind the altar ; also
a roughly-made recess on either hand.
The chapel to the south is very low, and covered with a tunnel vault. The
chapel to the north is not quite so low : its dome is falling in. These two chapels
are provided with higabs of brick, each of them pierced by doors. The bay
immediately west of the haikal is now shut off from the nave by a wall pierced
by a doorway. This, with other inserted walls, is shown on the plan by a different
tint from the original walls, which are solid black.
The brick pier, enclosing the easternmost of the southern group of coupled
columns, carries an inserted arch, twice the thickness of the original arch, which
can still be seen above it. The dome at the point c fits the more recent arch.
The walls east, west, and south of the chapel c retain a few traces of painting
on a coat of fine white plaster. A nimbus and a few scattered letters are
visible. The soffit of the arch is painted, coeval, I think, with that on the
walls of the bay c. The arch which must have existed on the north side of the
bay D is not visible. There is now seen only the inserted wall with a doorway
through it. The columns E are each of two stones, and are about 220 high,
surmounted by a square block 035 high. They are of sandstone, very roughly
cut. The lower part is hidden in an accumulation of brick rubbish. These
columns, taller than any others in the church, carried the triumphal arch, a few
of the springing bricks of which are visible. The arch has given place to the wall F.
Passing westward through the doorway in the inserted wall we enter the nave
now of three bays in length, formerly of five, or perhaps more. It is separated
from the aisles by an arcade of round arches resting on stumpy cylindrical columns
of sandstone, roughly hacked into shape. As an abacus to receive the arches
they are surmounted by clumsy square blocks. Traces of hieroglyphs can be
seen on the stonework. The spacing of the columns is not regular. A pointed
arch, resting on the columns G, G, now spans the nave, inserted to carry a dome.
A second dome, oblong in plan, has been built over the next bay to the west,
and this rests, as to its western side, on the wall H, H, with which the end of the
church has been closed, and its length reduced by two bays.
The south aisle was originally roofed with a continuous tunnel vault. This
has been replaced at a later date by a covering, with half domes at the east and
west end, and a tunnel in the middle. As the plan shows, brickwork has been


inserted in the form of an inner facing to the original south wall of this aisle.
The north aisle is now spanned by a pointed arch n, which assists in carrying
two domes.
The doorway at K may be original. It is now little better than a rough
hole. The opening at L seems beyond doubt not to be original. The wall M, M
is of small bricks, ill built, and seems recent, and yet it is prepared to receive the
arches of the arcade, now in ruins. It is too thin to resist the thrust of arches.
I have ventured to enter into details, not I hope too minute, regarding the
way in which the method of roofing this building has been changed, as it is the
first example we have met with of that which has completely altered the effect
of this and of other churches in the Nile valley. It is easy to appreciate that,
on a structure as small as this one, a timber roof well tied together would weigh
but little, and would not exercise any thrust upon the walls. A roof composed
of brick domes resting on arches demands a great change in the supporting
structure. The arches, heavy in themselves and exercising thrust, must be
carried on piers, and the thrusts must, at least to some extent, be resisted. When
we describe the Der el Abiad and the Der el Ahmar near Sohag, 1 the Der Abu
Hennes 2 near Sheikh Abadie (Antinoe), we shall realize more than we can in the
present case what radical changes have of necessity been effected to support
domed roofs. Some of the churches in old Cairo have been dealt with in the
same way —Abu Sifain, for example, where heavy piers of masonry have been
introduced to receive domes never constructed, and S. Bourbara, where a wood
and plaster dome was set up some thirty years since. Columns or small piers
of brick are engulfed in considerable masses of masonry, whilst the effect overhead
is absolutely different, the wood roof having given place to a series of domes.
Abu Salih gives sundry instances of the destruction of wood roofs and their
replacement by domes and vaults. A few examples :
p. 106. Monastery and church of S. Mennas. 'ln the month of Jumada the
first in the year 559, when the Kurds and the Ghuzz came with Salah ad Din,
Yusuf ibn Ayyub, and the king of the Franks was appealed to for help against
them, then this monastery and this church were burnt to the ground, except the
apse, and the northern and southern sides ofjfhe sanctuary, which were preserved
intact. These were restored, and domes and arches were built, and piers [were
set up] instead of the marble columns.'
At p. 186. The monastery of Nahya. ' The worms destroyed the timbers
of this monastery and the church, and so they were pulled down at the expense
of that Sayyid, who constructed instead of the roof [of timber] a vaulted roof,
and enclosed the columns within the piers [of masonry] and none of the columns
remained visible, except two ancient granite columns which stand in front of
the picture of the Lady, the Pure Virgin.'
p. 234. Kus. ' There was on the estate of Mara, an Arab, a church named
after the glorious saint and martyr George. In this church Mara replaced the
roof of timber by a new roof.'
1 See Plates xlv-li. * See Plates liv-lvi.


Not only had the churches to fear violence and fire, but the attack of the
worms, doubtless the white ant, which in some places and under certain con-
ditions proved very destructive.
The church we have been examining must be of high antiquity. As we
find that hieroglyphs can be seen on the columns it must be supposed that they
were not set up until after it had been permitted to rifle the temples; but,
on the other hand, it is evident that it suffered very serious damage so long
since that on the renewed surface of plaster, which overlay the older, paintings
of a very ancient type are found.
Lying over against the building last described, and on its northern side, we
find a second church, which can only be entered from the first. There are two
little chambers to the east with very flattened apsidal ends. In each we find
an altar, protected by a higdb, with a door in the middle and little windows right
and left. The domed roofs have in nearly all cases fallen, or are falling. The place
is sadly desolate. The structure cannot be of the same date as the south church ;
bad as the building of that is, this is worse.
West of the last described church we find a corridor, which opens from the
north aisle of the first described church and leads northward to a third. Here
we find a long chamber spanned by pointed arches, depressed, and rather flat-
sided (fattimide ?), The arches carry domes, which have partly fallen in. Open-
ing eastward from this chamber are three square cells, each with its altar—the
higdb in each case of brick, with a door in the middle. A door in the west wall
leads to another chamber, in ruins.
The dedications of the altars, as I was informed, are as follows: the southern
church, beginning from the south—S. Claudius, S. George, S. Gabriel; north
church—B. V. M., S. John, S. Michael. The friend who gave me the list of
dedications at D£r el Malak Mikhail (see p. 123 above) also obliged me with the
list of dedications at Der es Salib, the result of his inquiries. It differs materially
from my list. My friend's authority consulted was, lam sure, at least as trust-
worthy as mine. I therefore print his list, as my desire is not at all to prove my
statements, here or elsewhere, as absolutely correct, but to provide my readers
with all the information I can collect. This is the list. A, Church of the Holy
Cross (es Salib —the southernmost): north haikal —S. George, middle —S. Cross,
south —the Apostles. B, next church to the north, dedicated to B. V. M. :
north altar —S. Gabriel, B. V. M. C, north, church of S. John the Baptist:
north altar —S. Michael, centre —S. John the Baptist, south—S. Uriel.
Dfiß EL MfeGMA
PLATES XXXIX, XL
This D£r consists of a group of four churches, three attached to each other,
the fourth standing alone, west of them and more or less buried in the debris of
surrounding buildings. The group is enclosed by a wall, quadrangular in plan,


IDEM EH MEOM
PLAN OF iMONASTERY
■ ——-
■ I 1
■ ■■■■■■■ —(2) WELL
_
. SCALE 45o
PLAT IE XMK


©fens NA&AID>A
ABU HENNES
SCALE 2^0
mmLa 4p4||
1(1^^
I
PLATE XL


and set out with much greater care than we generally find to be the case. Towards
the east the wall is destroyed, but can be traced by a small line of brick rubbish.
The entrance is on the north. A small stump of solid brickwork remains on the
western side, and may have been the base of a turret defending the doorway.
A similar stump is found at the north-west angle of the wall. The wall is built
of small crude bricks, well laid.
The Der lies about 6 0 above the level of the cultivated ground, on a small
ledge of calcareous conglomerate, which is full of ancient tombs. The cultivated
ground is removed but a few hundred yards from the Der. It will be observed
(see Plan, Plate xxxix) that this D6r differs from the Der es Salib. It is not,
as that is, merely a group of churches, but is a combination of churches and
buildings such as we have already described at S. Simeon, Aswan, though less
elaborate. We shall find similar groups at the Der el Abiad and the Der el
Ah mar, near Sohag ; also the ruins of one are drawn on Plate VIII. In each
case the churches are not attached to the eastern wall of the enclosure. A little
depression, it can hardly be called a valley, lies over against the south wall, and
has been the cause of the slight deflexion we see in it where the group of chambers
about to be described is found. Here is a long hall running north and south,
with rooms opening from it on either hand, the whole covered with vaults of
crude brick (now in ruins) and built of the same material, well laid. The
entrance was at the north, and immediately to the east of the doorway was a
stair. Whether this merely gave access to a flat roof over the halls below or
to an upper story I will not venture to say. The plan of this group of hall
and chambers agrees very closely with that of the ' keep ' at S. Simeon; Aswan
(see Plate xxx). One cannot, however, suppose that this actually formed
part of a ' keep \ The walls are thin, I could not convince myself that there
had been an upper story ; and, finally, the building does not occupy the most
commanding position on the enclosed ground. There are remains of two little
loophole windows to each room high up in the wall. It will be observed that
the churches, except the small one of El Adra, have their entrance enclosed by
a wall. We find the church enclosure to be in the nature of a close within that
of the monastery.
The three churches standing together are dedicated —the northern to
El Malak Mikhail; the next, southward, to Mari Girgis ; the third to Abu
Hennes (S. John). There are strong indications that the three churches were
not built at the same time. The church of S. Michael is built up against that of
S. George, whilst the east part of S. Michael's is different in construction from
the west. The church of Abu Hennes is again distinct from that of Mari Girgis.
The Church of S. Michael
To begin with S. Michael's Church, which is chiefly of crude brick. It has
not, now, an external door, but is entered through a hole in the north wall of the
nave of the adjoining church of S. George, and this hole leads us into a western


corridor or antechapel, which may not improbably have been built on to the
west wall of S. Michael's to cover its doorways. Under these conditions it is
very unsafe to describe the plan of this church as we now see it, as if it were
a whole and complete design in itself, whilst we may with safety approach
the consideration of the plan of S. George's church as a thing complete in itself.
In the church of S. Michael we find an eastern corridor running from north
to south, of three unequal bays, covered with domes which are supported on
cross arches. The northern bay is the largest of the three. On the east it opens
by an arch to a haikal, which is, on plan, rather deeper than a semicircle. In its
walls are five shallow niches which do not reach the floor. They seem to have
been only intended for books, &c., and have no claim to architectural effect.
The higdb, of masonry, has two doors. South of this haikal we find two others,
one close by a brick higdb, with a door in the middle, the other by a wall or higdb
with two doors.
West of this part of the church there is a construction of two bays in the
direction east and west, and five north and south. A range of columns, carrying
the vaulted roof, passes down the centre. The northern column is of brick, the
rest are of stone—no two alike, either in height or diameter. They are sur-
mounted by capitals, of very amorphous shapes, passing from round to square.
Such an ill-assorted collection are these columns that they vary in height from
1-50 to 2-io. Very slight arches spring from the abaci of the capitals. These
arches support the vaults, which are not domes of true circular plan, but approach
a square.
The part of the church last described is not completely cut off from the part
east of it, for the wall of separation is pierced by three doorways, and in the
southern bay only does this wall completely fill the arch carrying the vault.
It will be observed that there is no agreement in the points of support between
the eastern and the western building. The vault of the eastern is also much
higher up than that of the western building.
Church of S. George
Passing southward we enter the Church of S. George through the hole before
mentioned, which pierces the walls of the two buildings, and oddly enough lands
us under the steep stair which gives access to the ambon, which must be described
hereafter.
The plan of this church differs entirely from that of the church of S. Michael
just described. We find a nave with north and south aisles, an apse, and a square
chamber on either side of it. It belongs to the type A, basilican.
The structure is, for the most part, of crude brick, but the arches and piers
are of burnt brick. The place has been terribly ill used, and has been repaired
and propped in a very clumsy way. It is now a neglected ruin. The nave ends in
the haikal eastward, with a well-developed apse, rather deeper than a semicircle.
Just above the floor level is a low plinth or projection of brickwork, possibly to


form a bench. The plan shows that this bench does not, at its western ends,
follow the line of the apse walls; the ends approach each other, so that the floor
of the apse is, on plan, nearly three parts of a circle. Two columns (B, B) now stand
on this bench, but it is very doubtful whether they occupy their original position.
They seem to have formed part of the higdb , which has been desperately pulled
about. At the east end of the apse is a shallow niche, not reaching to the
bench.
The wall-surfaces of the apse still retain, in places, the plaster, with remains
of very coarse painting on it. One can distinguish standing figures, with the
nimbus. There is also painting visible on the conch of the apse itself, which seems
to be of an earlier date. We see, in a circle, a large ' Majesty ' with a book on
the left knee. The right hand and the upper part of the figure are destroyed.
There are figures on either hand flanking the ' Majesty' so broken as to be un-
recognizable.
The screen or higdb is quite an ambitious work, and belongs to the type
with the doors and a little window between them (see Figs. 26 and 28).
Four limestone columns of unequal length, with clumsy capitals and bases,
are built up in the wall. I could not find any evidence that these four columns
had been connected by any sort of architrave : they seem to have been used
merely as stiffeners to the wall, and also as ornaments. As the drawing shows,
they are nearly buried. Little doorways are built in the side intercolumniations,
whilst a pointed arch, sunk in the face of the wall, surmounts the little window
pierced through the middle intercolumniation.
From the haikal, westward, the nave of the church consists of three bays,
opening with arches, to the north and south aisles. The easternmost bay is
wider from east to west than those west of it.
The north and south arches are very flat, and have in consequence pushed
over the piers and arches of the neighbouring bays towards the west. The piers
are rectangular on plan and terribly deformed. The roof of the nave is con-
structed in a way which I have not met with elsewhere (Fig. 27). Arches are
thrown across the nave from north to south. On the backs of these tunnel
vaults are built in the direction north and south. In the walls closing the ends
of these tunnels little windows are pierced, forming a clerestory above the arches,
which open towards the aisles ; each bay of the aisle is covered with a tunnel
vault. The scheme of construction is ingenious and strong, but has failed in
consequence of the extremely inadequate abutment at the western end of the
arcades. The clumsy fortifications have not succeeded in repairing the original
faults of design. The western arch, spanning the nave, is misshapen—semi-
circular in form; the east is misshapen pointed. The arch opening to the
haikal is quasi-elliptical, very flat and ugly, and is now propped by a pier built
on the top of the higdb (see Fig. 26).
The various inserted piers, walls, &c., are shown on the plan by a difference
of tint. Additions to the pier D have, with the pier itself, been painted with


3,1 i-ilp
g r. ? fjllj I' J, -■ r J]4*
iiig^aaa
figures. The screen EE is inserted. The eastern side of it is of the roughest
brickwork, unplastered; the western side is covered with fine white plaster.
The doorway with which it is pierced, and which has been bricked up, has
a band of ornament over its pointed arch : this is coloured red. There are
FIG. 26. Der Mari Girgis. Higdb.
traces of inscriptions scribbled on the surface of the wall and of painted
crosses.
On the north side of the nave, in the middle bay, is a platform standing
on little columns —the ambon, 1 no doubt. Its floor is rather above head level.
One walks under it to pass northward into the church of S. George. Two shafts
of columns, without capitals or bases, are under it. The floor of this platform
is of brick vaulting, exceedingly flat. The ambon is approached by stairs in the
north aisle.
1 See F on plan, Plate XL.


jU _ I L
The north and south aisles are provided towards the east with inserted
screens of brick, each of them pierced by a small arched doorway. That on the
south is blocked up. It was the same as that on the north, which is much
hidden by the ambon. The western face of the north screen is covered with flat
plates of sandstone built up on edge. A channelled moulding runs up the side
and a round-headed arch cut out of a single slab completes the doorway.
The western wall of the church is thin and is not provided with any piers
or counter forts to resist the thrust of the arches on the east. It is pierced by
three doorways, two of which are now bricked up. My notes, made on the spot,
conclude thus : ' The building is so altered, deformed and defaced that it is not
worth while making a section or elevation ! What is original, which are repairs ?'
FIG. 27. Der el Megma. Church of Mari Girgis
Adjoining the church is an apartment, to the south. This is entered by
a doorway in the middle bay of the south aisle. lam not able to say whether
it is an addition to the church or a part of the original building.
Church of S. John (Abu Hennes)
South of the building last described, and only touching it at the south-west
angle, stands the Church of S. John. This structure is somewhat akin to the
type B. We find a parallel in the church of Mari Boctor (see p. 123). It has
undergone one very serious alteration. The eastern bay A (the haikal), the
higdb or screen 88, and the vaults over these parts, have been entirely rebuilt,
and, I think, at no distant period.
The plan consists of a central bay, rather longer than it is wide, and opening
with arches on all four sides. West of it is a bay, square on plan. Aisles lie
north and south of these bays. What lay to the east we cannot affirm, but it
is not unlikely that the rebuilding followed the old lines, as the eastern wall is
certainly part of the original structure.
To begin with a description of the main lines of the church, the arch cc
1074 137 s


; g :zzr:„ —j
1 1 I
— » f ~ ■* ~ 1
J- :
Jp^
'"•* V; -r ______
tfe
of the middle bay is pointed; the arch at HH is semicircular; the arches
KK are pointed. It will be observed that the building shows a mixture of
pointed and round arches, which seem to have been used indifferently, but the
general impression the building gives is that it is decidedly later in its period than
the churches adjoining, that it is better set out, and has been built with more
care. Unfortunately but little science has been displayed, for it has given way in
all directions, and is, in nearly every part, supported by props and piers of clumsy
brickwork. The west wall is by no means sufficiently strong to resist the thrust
of the arches within.
The higdb is of burnt brick. It is of the type with two doors and a little
window between them. The arch cc is closed by a screen with a central door.
This screen is not part of the original masonry of the piers. The arch above the
screen was open. The arch at D, semicircular, has been built up solid. The
arch at G, which is similar to that at F, is built up solid with a doorway in the
FIG. 28. Der el Megma.
Carved Panel of Higdbs.
FIG. 29. Der el Megma. South Church. Tank.
middle. The arch H has been blocked, leaving a round-topped opening in the
middle, whilst considerable blocks of masonry have been piled up at the angles
11 to prop the piers from which this arch springs. The arches KK have been
supported by arches built within them. The inserted arch on the north rests on
the abaci of columns—short and clumsy, their capitals rudely carved with leaf-
work of a Byzantine type. On the south, the supporting arch rests on brick
piers. The capitals of Byzantine type above referred to give no clue to the date
of the arch they support. They were merely 'at hand ' and came in useful.
In the middle of the western bay is a tank sunk below the level of the floor : the
depth of it is I*2o (Fig. 29). The tank can be filled by a channel, fed from the outside.
A large piece of brickwork completely blocks the north aisle, and the south
aisle is also blocked by cross walls. There is a gap of some size in the south wall
of the south aisle, but this is now blocked, and through it passes the water channel
for the tank. There is evidence of a still larger gap in the west wall, also bricked
up, but nothing outside shows that the church had been extended in either of
these directions. A blocked opening can be seen in the middle bay of the north
aisle, but the most important doorway, judging by the way in which it has been
finished, is that at the extreme east end of this aisle.


'imp
fit
M
|r|
There is not in the building any architectural detail whereby we may assign
to it a date, except the shape of certain arches and the detail of the present
entrance doorway. This is an excellent specimen of rubbed brickwork closely
fitted together, in a style very commonly found in Cairo or other large towns.
The vault within the doorway is equally well made of rubbed brickwork. The
south wall of the church is built against another brick wall which has in it an
arched window-head of fairly good brickwork. A curved mark above this
window-head shows that a vault was once here. Possibly the existing church
is a rebuild of an earlier one. A few metres south of the church is a large well
prepared for a sakyeh, or chain of buckets, from which water could be run into
the tank before mentioned.
El Adra
Within the enclosure wall of the monastery, and between the church of
Mari Girgis and the group of cells, we find the remains of an exceedingly small
FIG. 30. Der el Malak. Church of El Adra.
church dedicated to El Adra. This little building is very symmetrical and
belongs to the type A (basilican). The haikal ends in an apse ; the altar lies
buried beneath rubbish, and, although small enough in itself, it nearly fills the
little haikal. The higdb or screen is of the type with two doors. West of
this is a sort of transept, which opens by an arch into a nave of three bays, with
north and south aisles. The nave opens to the aisles by an arcade of three arches
resting on small columns. In the east wall of the transept are traces of two doors,
now bricked up. The arch leading from the transept to the nave, small as it is,
has at some time been strengthened as to its piers.
The entrance to the church is in the eastern bay of the north aisle, and
opposite to it are traces of an opening bricked up. There is a gap in the wall at
the west end, but it is too small to have been a doorway, even for this toy church.
In entering, we pass through not less than three brick walls, laid one over against
the other. The building is sadly ruined. So small is it that when complete the
walls were not probably five metres high to the extremest limits. It is now
roofless, whilst debris and broken bricks have so thickly accumulated round about
139 s 2


that we descend several steps to reach the floor level. This too is encumbered
by heaps of fallen brickwork.
We found in this church a carved capital and fluted shaft of a column of which
a sketch is given (see Fig. 30). For safety this was taken away by us and placed
in the church of St. George.
At the north end of the enclosure wall, within which are the doors of the
three churches, are the remains of a building, square on plan. At the corners we
can see evidences of diagonal arches prepared to receive an octagon, which no
doubt was to carry a dome. The walls that remain are, however, so exceedingly
thin that it may be doubted whether the dome was ever set up, or, if it were,
whether it can have stood for many years. Measured, March 1901.
CHURCH AT DENDERAH
PLATE XLI, FIG. I
This building, of unusually good masonry, is built of sandstone, taken
undoubtedly from the Mammesium, with the walls of which its walls are parallel,
and close to which it stands. The blocks of stone are in many cases joined with
dovetail dowels of wood in the ancient manner, imitating the masonry of the
adjoining temple. The manner of placing the blocks is also the same. When
the wall is sufficiently thick to be built of two stones side by side, there are
not any bond stones running through it; the parallel thicknesses of which
the wall is built can, without impediment, fall away the one from the other.
The carved detail, of which there must have been a great deal, corresponds very
exactly with that which we find at the Der el Abiad and the Der el Ah mar near
Sohag, which will be described later on. The plan of the building was basilican—
type A—with many elaborations. Measured, December 1900.
NAG A'A ED Dfiß
PLATE XLI, FIG. 2
This church lies on the east bank of the Nile, nearly opposite Girgeh. Its
plan belongs to the type C; it is, internally, a picturesque and pleasing specimen.
The building, as we now see it, was not all constructed at the same time. The
two northern bays are an addition. The three haikals of the older building are in
plan neither apsidal nor rectangular, but a compromise between the two. Each
haikal is covered by a dome. The altar of the central haikal has a very good
canopy of wood, its four supports standing close against the altar as at Medamm6t.
The supports are connected by arches, the ceiling above is adorned with geo-
metrical patterns, and has a hanging border of pierced woodwork, the whole
thing is coloured, Modern ' Arab' style. It cannot be old, but is a good example
of its sort. The church has everywhere an unusual air of propriety and neatness.
The vestments, lying as usual on the altar, are clean and new. There is a small
lectern outside the haikal and a wood standing candlestick. The hig&b enclosing


FIG. 1
■ "NT V
I PLAN OF CHURCH EAST .'
T «
> «
i <
i •
I «
• I
• •
: ;
SCALE 200
ID)FELG FIG. 2
NA(SA EE) ID)EM
A A TOMBS ■ '.: Y —1
5 R-Jl
-J J, J-Ja •
H
PLATE XU


the haikals are of wood, and in each case with a door in the middle. They are
of commonplace geometrical pannelling, not deserving of particular mention.
West of the haikal we find the usual arrangement of domes carried on arches.
The columns to the springing of the arches are but 2-40 in height, to the crown
of the arches 4-30, by which dimensions we can tell how modest is the size of the
building. The dome immediately west of the central haikal is*somewhat more
ambitious in design than the others. It is carried on pendentives, which are
roughly worked into a sort of honeycomb pattern.
The pillars and arches are all of burnt brick ; the rest of the building of crude
brick, plastered and whitewashed in the interior. A system of construction
very common in Cairo is seen in this church. Instead of providing adequate
abutments to resist the thrust of the arches, there are blocks of wood built into
the capitals of the columns, and on these are placed the tie beams connecting
their tops.
The women use the part of the church screened off on the south. At the
east end of this is the font, B. This part of the church is approached from a
Mandara or reception room, which lies outside to the west. The Mandara is a very
common adjunct to a church.
In the addition to the church there is built on its north side a tank —a sinking
in the floor about 2-0 square, in the bottom of which is an octagon : in general
design much like the tank already described at Der el Magma and in the church
of Abu Hennes.
There are several tombs in the church, marked aon the plan. In the
south-west corner are three side by side, enclosed by a low wall: no entrance.
One of the tombs in the north part of the church is held in much reverence and
is covered by a piece of silk damask. We were told it was the tomb of a priest.
Unfortunately the priest of the church was away on the occasion of our
visit. The man in charge was sadly ignorant, and either did not know or was
unwilling to communicate anything to us. He said that the central altar
was dedicated to El Malak, the southern to Amba Shnuda, the northern to Sitt
Dimiana. This information I give with reserve.
D£R MARI GIRGIS, NEAR AKHMIM
Plate xlii, Fig. i
On the east bank of the Nile, nearly opposite Menshiya, there stands a
Der, raised on a low foothill advancing from the range of hills which enclose
the Nile on that side. The building stands but a short distance back from the
river. Sailing past one observes the rectangular enclosure wall, a low dome
rising above it, and just outside the entrance to the enclosure a pigeon-house,
which from a little distance with its two towers looks much like a small copy of
the Pylon of an ancient Egyptian temple. The site is evidently of no little
antiquity, but the existing church may not be very old. In plan it belongs to
type C. Measured, December 1892.


D
|
) \ 1/
j f
□ r. I
A
I B /7 B I B m/' I
I I Rb IE 3 1
H / « ■ B ■ . .H
fl| * II
VI B3' > \\ . . 'I
■ i' i EM \ /'••.* / • / m
■ /• ;• <■* % • v ' . v / • * / H
■ - ••• / '«• ■
I s / • • • ' W
® 9
rt '^i
I
I ■ / \ ■
PLAT EXILE
IDE® MAM ©E®(SHS
FIG. 1
NEAR AKHMIM
1
SKETCH PLAN "Too
Im l E^ _ _ ■N-P-.
i" "'•■ P—-f^-i s» ni-mp".Mii/
I \.J/' '*•: :/' ~\ : i ,-'' ''- : : :/' '••: >
k H; U' '•!; II 1
& ~i , , , .• •> •• I. . • ; ft
/•: . •• :\ : : * • :« >, s . :■•
1 «: :< '• • \ •• • . , : •• \ > ;;•
''i | '' i ! S "" | i ''"{ I ''\ '.
J nM ' |
SCALE 200
IDEM EtABMA°AKUIMM
FIG. 2
SCALE zoo


Entering the enclosure of the Der we see several small houses, low huts of one
story, flat-roofed, and from the doors of which there come forth not only the owners,
but chicken, sheep, goats, &c., after the manner common to all villages in Egypt.
The church stands against the eastern wall of the enclosure, which is quite
straight, and does not in this or in any other place I have visited show the apses
projecting on the outside.
The plan is very complete, consisting of a central haikal, apsidal in plan, and
one of the same plan on either hand. These are enclosed by higdb of brick,
each with a doOr in the middle and a little window on either side. The apses
are considerably deeper than a semicircle. It will be observed that there is a
doorway communicating between the central apse and those north and south of it.
The apses open westward by arches, which are closed up to the level of their
springing by the higdb.
Beyond the row of apses we find chambers north and south, rectangular in
plan, and approached by a door from the west. Probably one of these contains
the font. I could not see, for each room was full of straw and other farm produce.
West of the apses and rooms last described we find the nave of the church,
five bays in length from north to south, and two from east to west. It is roofed
with domes, the arches carrying which rest on four brick columns.
The west bays of the nave are separated from the east by wood screens with
doors in the middle. These only fill the three central bays. There is a doorway in
the west wall of the central bay of the nave, and also in the north and south walls
at their west ends. These doorways do not now communicate with the outside,
but open upon two side-chapels, which seem to be additions to the original plan.
Large openings, closed by wood screens, are made in the north and south
walls, so that the side-chapels are in very direct communication with the main
part of the church. The side-chapels end towards the east in apses, and at their
west end each of them has a doorway leading to the open. These doorways are
in each case provided with a screen of brickwork, forming a sort of lobby. The
side-chapels are covered in with domes.
It is instructive to observe how the north chapel has had a slice taken off it,
the apse vault and the domes being completely cut through, and the parts which
should be north of the inserted wall removed. So tenacious is the crude brick-
work that, notwithstanding this rough usage, the domes and vaults have held
together and do not seem the least injured. The internal effect of the church,
entirely plastered and whitewashed, and lit from above, is very charming.
D£R EL ADRA, AKHMIM
PLATE XLII, FIG. 2
A little further north, and on the same side of the river, we come to
Akhmim, where we find a church very similar in plan to the central part of that
last described. The apses are even deeper from east to west. They are flanked
by square-ended chambers. The higdb have central doors.


S=3
t=3
t=J
r-1
m
8
X H
UJ u -
z w
*
<0 X
a *
*#^0
#z=
Jf
lo® 1
m~uj
2 o
H
&
UJ
UJ
S
<
z
z
UJ
*
CO
<
J
J
<
L«< < s . x
2
X*V « UJw pL
z " s SSL
>
oc
<
UJ
x
UJ
X
X
H
Z
co
X
X
X
<
Q cO
Z X
fig
Q
0
UJ
CQ
<
b
SR ES
SAYYAE
Cm
R EL AHMAR
EL MALAR
ABBA L'lF]
ES SALlB
VIARI BOCTOR
EL MALAK
M EDI NET HAB
ERMENT cgi
/
•
H <UJ
Q °
3 z
5 W
- CJ
X eg
UJ ~
03 O
2 -
2
en
UJ
J *
<
<
u
CM
H
p*
to
s s
*
<
O
Q
55?
<
CO
2 os
s <m
$ Q
X jy
ug HP
< 40P
<i
£
%<
<
r^3
LO
•
0
CO
<
H
OS
(w
< s
o
*t
* <
—
X
w
o
2:
o
Q
>-
*
z
Q.
<
Q
*
A
5
oa
<
s
<
b
1 5
UC
Q
O ,
X'
£<<
S|Si5
•sii«i
*5 § 1 2
£g3jJ
h- , oo d w ,
<
CO ,^0
DER EL A
DER EL
EL BUKER
a:
UJ
CO
CO
o
ag
*
J
UJ
#j
K<
# ♦
s 5 ;
< f
Sz;
<f o
!•*#»
m
£*
<w
«
- / J
L "v"
\4
<
eg
J Q
w
Z CO
w w
vv
5 *
Q Z
•y < ,2 «
° * <§ <
o <
CO
*
3 H
co <-
eg
fir!
eg
<UJ
5
«
J
DER
MARI MINA
z 3
< «
CO
<
X
UJ
«—
,z
pj
w
Q
h
r
<
£
si
f
OASIS
OF
KHARCA


Eu
a,
a *
s<lC—
0' r 'T
/ r
< / A *
JM
3 f ]
l/j
J w <
n/uy c n
r n
_ >?«•
/ 2 ft*
*\ y o
/ I «i
" \ y z*
C/3 V A
C/3
I
<
•
vO
•
o
Z
a*
<
S
ro —— W »* > -fVYf ■
C\ 0 f r
\ <
\ tf
1 ®\ 3
\ # W
/ V *
/ 1 <
/ V s
/ A?
p i
I a
U> SI
O «<
54 O
■J
3 N
b *,,
< £
5 1 CO
•< S3 &
a ® o
00 t& <->
*
*#>
s fS « z zs% jr*
■ w gQ »o ft7»2 —
o *<Es 2. w* 8 1 2
32_dfa M »-' S t8a ¥j. 2t__S . _ B .. r/5 -
o
ft2
<
CJ
&
£ — S 7 OM ,
l—t K H* O "™
5 5hZ<
2 C>25 ~ $ Z o a-
ea< | g
5i^« S & J §<
/!*** 5 ffl O rf
— jfa
*z«►S 1
N§ S 'g C« {§ 4"^\
HW J «5J w *f "Z
.wga i - -* w
w
CO 32
53
« <
to
S
«<
d S
p
o 5
T *
n P-
«P
*
s
V 0 u;
\ A <
\ O y w
\\ & £ £>
\Y v. 7> , <z>
\\ H </>
\ i % r w
\\* M Q
\x& * / ffl
\\% §
\ r 55 32
) i <
£v & *
£\ «( CO
H \ 2? <J
£ \ « 1
o \ g *
* ) «
< x
\ w
5 N 5* w «§ $
£ s i £ * ? <*+ <
!* s - Ar
****"" "
t-
<;
$ * *
N •? S5
r _ *J
i
Qd JT
3
3 * T 32S S
*5 02
3 <<s
0Q Q
S
< <w $
aa Q <
W ft* P y c
s |*g <| M
o o OS w s (S 60
s.<g Z J
® r) »
(,K +< E 5 *
< 7 \ 5 s <
2 A \ fc S e
O \ J &] n
" >/
V —i - — H
rO \ H
>*
CM A *"
rO \ f
p?
lil <w
Q O
■< (
o
? 5


\ O r^r r ' - \ \
\ fcfv
The western part of the church is not covered by the ordinary system of
domes, but with vaults, rectangular on plan, except the two central bays. Over
these domes are raised, the dome immediately before the central haikal rising to
some height. To the north side an addition has been built with square-ended
eastern chapels. The western part of this adjunct is covered by four domes in
the customary way. There are three arches of communication pierced through
the north wall. Fig. 31 shows the internal decoration of this church : the bricks
FIG. 31. Akhmim. Interior decorations.
are coloured dark-red or brown, and the joints marked in white. The patterns
are traditional, and are the direct outcome of dealing frankly with the materials.
Fragments of decorations of this type are to be seen in many places.
DER AMBA SHNODA (EL ABIAD), SOHAG
PLATES XLV, XLVI, XLVII, XLVIII
This building is placed on the desert at the extreme western edge of the
cultivated ground. The rocky cliffs of limestone have at their feet an uneven
slope, which is, in fact, a part of the limestone rock, but is covered with a thin
layer of broken stone, sand, and debris. This ends somewhat abruptly, and the
alluvial soil lies against it like the water of a lake against its shores. On this
edge the church is built.
1074 145 T


The church is surrounded on its north, west, and south sides by a large
amount of debris of buildings, both of burnt and crude brick. Standing on the
top of the church walls, it can be seen that the space covered by the debris is,
roughly, a rectangle, with its longest axis north and south. In consequence of
the slope of the ground toward the east, the floor-level of the church is at its
eastern end at least 2-0 above the ground outside.
It should perhaps here be said that the stone rectangular building commonly
called the Der is but the church of the monastery with a long hall attached to the
south side. The Der, with its accommodation for many monks—its kitchens,
ovens, storehouses, &c.—included not only the stone building, but a great
number of brick structures, the ruins of which, as before said, lie around. These,
with the church, were included in a stout brick wall, the remains of which we can
trace clearly at the Der Amba Bishoi (El Ahmar), but which are not so easily to
be made out in the Der Amba Shnuda (see Fig. 37, p. 166).
In the winter of 1907 some excavations were made at this place under
the direction of Professor Petrie. 1 The site lying immediately to the south of
the church was investigated. In result, Professor Petrie is of opinion that the
existing church is the second built in this locality ; that the first church, the
central feature of a coenobitic establishment, lay within the site he examined.
Judging by the style of pottery, he dates this building, now destroyed, to the
time of Constantine. The building of which I submit drawings was built, as
he thinks, and as seems very probable, in parts from fragments of the first church.
On Plate XLIII he gives a plan, showing the relative positions of the first and
second buildings.
The external wall is built of white limestone, in blocks of considerable size,
and set in a hard mortar. Some of them are at least 2-0 long ; the courses
average 0.42 deep; the beds are horizontal throughout. The method of laying the
stones corresponds in many ways with one of the methods we see in older Egyptian
buildings, i. e. in the absence of bond. Stones are nearly always laid in the direc-
tion of the length of the wall side by side; the same has been observed at Denderah
(p. 140). It cannot be stated with certainty that the masonry was laid in the
old Egyptian manner (i.e. the stones set with the rough quarry face and the
final surface cut afterwards). From what I could observe, Ido not think they
were set in this manner. The tool-marks on the external surface of the wall are
not like those on an ancient Egyptian building ; they are made by a pick with a
toothed edge. It is not improbable that the external face of the outside wall
was finally dressed down after the stones were in place. Most likely the masonry
was not intended to be seen, but, following old tradition, was to be entirely
covered with a coat of fine plaster. Indeed, remains of a coat of plaster—
possibly original—are still visible, with colour. The south-west corner of the
enclosing wall has fallen down, and been rebuilt. The masonry here is very
1 These are described in Athribis, by W. M. F. Petrie, J. H. Walker, and E. B. Knobel, London. The
Egyptian Research Account, 1908, p. 13.


BTEM
(DER EL ABIAD)
NEAR SOHAG 6.
I BRICK BUTTRESS
BRICK BUTTRESS !
lH III 111
■BJ LH _ _ V™ UNDER
mm f| # • • • • • ; ™ ik - jM here ' J
J| = -y- ■; ■ • ' "'"
■ fT - "
||ljjj WELL AND APSE Jl BH
GROUND PLAN D
SCALE "200
PILATE XLV


PIATEIMM
IDEM Ek AlBHAID
FIG. 1
/| |'_ p ZUZZ! ™ l""" p ™ p p ————- n«rm == p■ v nym- ■ \ > ~J I | 1 ''^1l j^ 1' |^ ) | ' ■
REBUILT IN THE TIME '\ 'ii - ''■ i','"'' 'I' ■'''''I ' I .'''( '' ''.' ■I 1
I — '.' |','' |' i i' ' i' i vT
OF MOHAMMED A LI ,,777 , , '''■'! ■' '! 'r-VfrzH '
r- C L .~. .... ..- -- .. . ' "t ,' I,',I'l'l.'l.fcxjz
t — ,■ n i i i - r r- - -I- r —rV-M-- .I..L.
= _ - ■— — < : ■ ■ 1 ■'■ '■ 1 ■■
; I I 1 [ 1 ! 1 ) 1 1 ' | I | r r I '.
" — ' ' i '' i.' i 1 1 1 1 ' i 1 1 V-r
= ', , ',',' '*|
ELEVATION SOUTH SIDE \'i i ' i'
~L i 1 I ''
SCALE
FIG. 2
f itifliiitMli.il <Qi h in
\ 1 I iTl I I I 1 I I II I 1,11,111,1 1 I 1, 1 I 1 Hi' 1,1111," I
| /' '■' ri' ,' ''',''
r~ * *' * i i i i i i i i' i i i 'ii i' i' i 1 1 ~
I'll' 1 ' i i ' i' i i ' i 1 , ' "V 1 "
ij ii i r~^r n i i i r
' 1 1 V. ■ V i'.^'I 1 . 1
1 1 ,' '.'.'i '..Vl
I ' 1 l ' l' I i'i I.I.I. . rr
i»"i 1 »nwi syn gum g'u'i 1 i *i ' i 'm ' r"i"i 1 1 r "i'i 'i
S^==ji===jt===^?==r^r^^==^^^^v^n^jj
" '.■ A 1
I'I I. I I l~Tj
Ill I I I I
' I I ' l' I ' I ' l'
= . ■■'.
I— 1 III!
, 1|| 1 l' |'
1 —I —I ill r-
—— r-r~\ — rn — i — i —r~\ —
( i II i i j r
— . 1 —|—i —| —j—! —| — ■, —r^—
—— i —i —T- L -n —i —rn —i — .
Ill J—L—i—
ELEVATION EAST END
SCALE


• DEH& EILAMAB
SHOWING THE BUILDING AS IT
WAS IN 1907
SECTION ON LINE LOOKING EAST EAST END OF GREAT HALL
SCALE T5o
PILATE XJCVIL


M
IT
E1S EL ABU AID)
(CONJECTURAL RESTORATION)
FIG. I
1 I '
*. n *i
I
m
wm
r
*
. r
J : :
it" y
i
i
*
L-
m, t jm
■
• !
: .
* •
• *
• .
0 12)4 S 6 7 H 9 10 II 12 1) 14 |S 16 17 18 10 20
I
FIG. 2
FIG. 3
i j
i
-£
L
□ □
□
q
Jo ool
ODD
Si
a Q
j | J
u
J
u
= , «
J/L
r
J
f «:
i K 41"
nl!
n
n
r%
i r
r%
\ h
I" 1
ilnll.
I'rM 1
[pi.
- 1 — 1 y
• 1 S $ 1 9 10
it*
SECTION SHOWING
EAST END OF NAVE
NC
« i J
'■t 1 ■ ■
JITUD1
& 7 9 II 1) ts
1 1 1 1 1 1
[NAL ELEVATION
PILATE XEVHI


roughly laid, with wide and ill-made joints; I was told that the collapse happened
in the first half of the nineteenth century, and was repaired at the direction of
Mohammed Ali.
There is in this part a mere skin of stone, the inside of the wall being entirely
of burnt brick. No doubt very many of the stones used are from ancient buildings.
In a few cases the original surface has been retained, and some sculptures and
hieroglyphics can be seen ; but it may be safely assumed that in general the
stones have been entirely redressed. In the angles of the outer wall certain
large slabs of granite have been built in to act as angle ties. The walls of the
interior of the church are, for the most part, faced with masonry, but in many
places red brick is found. It may be doubted whether the bulk of these walls
is not of red brick.
The arches, capitals of columns, architraves, &c., are of limestone; the
columns of marble or granite. Many bases are of marble, some of granite.
The later additions to the building are all of brick —some burnt, some crude.
The stone used within the building, unlike that in the outer walls, is always in
small blocks.
A curious method of construction may be observed in the apses. Here,
immediately over the capitals of the columns and below the architraves, is inserted
a band of wood (see Plate xlvii). Beams, of small section, are seen on which
the stones of the architrave rested. In some cases these beams are built into the
surface of a flat wall, as bond timber. The architraves are built of such small
stones that without the support of the beams they could not have retained their
places.
The three apses at the east end of the church are vaulted with burnt brick.
There is no reason to think that these apsidal semi-domes are not original. Some
minor apartments were also vaulted. The apsidal ends of the narthex were
vaulted with burnt brick. 1 All other roofs and floors which can now be traced
were of timber. The preparations in the walls to receive the ends of the
beams are evident. Rainwater spouts were contrived to relieve the roofs at
the upper level; some spouts are also to be seen projecting from the walls
at a lower level.
It is more than evident that the vast numbers of religious who placed them-
selves under the direction of Shnuda could not possibly have lived within the
four walls of the building we are now describing. They enclosed but few sub-
divisions : A, the church ; B, the narthex at its western end; c, a very long
hall, lying on the south side of the church, and extending for more than half its
length ; D, a few apartments of moderate size, some attached to the eastern
end of the church, two stairs leading to the roof, and a well. Where, then, were
the bakehouses, the ovens, the kitchen, the storehouses, and, above all, where
were the lodgings of the many monks ? The galleries or corridors, which
evidently existed above the side-aisles of the church, and where our friends the
See Fig. 34.


archaeologists have stowed away the monks, were quite insufficient for their
accommodation.
Seen from a distance, the building has a very grim and solid aspect. It
consists of a rectangle, its long axis east and west. The east wall is 36.75 long,
the west 36.90, the north 74-60, the south 74-83. The outline bears a close
resemblance to that of an Egyptian temple, the external face of the wall sloping
backward as it rises.
Of doorways there are six—three large and three of less size. One large
doorway is in the west wall, and opens into the narthex. Another is in the north
wall, opening directly into the north aisle. A similar doorway is in the south
wall, and opens upon the large hall which lies to the south of the south aisle.
Of the smaller doorways there is one in the north wall, which opens on the foot
FIG. 32. General view of Der el Abiad.
of the stairs which rise in the north-east angle of the building; there is another
in the south wall, which opens into the large hall at its eastern end; there is
a third in the west wall, opening to the foot of the stairs. No doubt for the sake
of protection, and in part to strengthen the main outer walls, several of these
doors, and very much of the lower part of the outer walls, had been covered with
a thick armour of brickwork, partly burnt, partly crude. The north doorway
was, and still is, blocked with stone and with drums of columns, as we see in the
drawing, Fig. 33, and was not hidden by brickwork, but the smaller doorway in
this wall was entirely hidden. The large and small doorways in the western wall
were covered, and the eastern doorway in the south wall. The larger doorway
in this wall was, and still is, the main and only entrance in use. Outside it had
been encased with red brick, and reduced very much in size by inserting pieces of
granite. It was made but just large enough to admit a buffalo. 1
At the time the church was built it cannot have been intended that it should
have been itself in the nature of a fortress, or so many doorways would have
1 Not only did many people live within the boundaries of the church, but all their live-stock.


— tKK
FIG. 33. Der CL Abiad. North Doorway.
defeated that object. The whole country being then christianized, the sense of
security must have been considerable; and the church did not then stand, as it
now does, alone and exposed. It stood, as we have already seen, within a stout
rectangular wall, enclosing a large area, and filled with the houses of the monks,
with mills, barns, bakehouses, &c., &c., forming altogether the monastery. The
stone structure with which we now have to deal was the nucleus. It is really the
old Egyptian town over again—a stone temple in the midst of a mud-brick town.
The establishment dwindled and shrank until at last it was accommodated
within the stone structure which still remains. When repairs were undertaken
FIG. 33. Der CL Abiad. North Doorway.
in the year 1907, the incrustations of brickwork were removed and the doorways
were uncovered. It was very necessary to remove these incrustations, for built
as they were, for the most part, of crude brick, and the mortar being chiefly of
Nile mud, the salts in these materials had already eaten very considerably into
the masonry, and, all unseen, were slowly consuming the lower courses of the
walls.
At the top the wall is crowned with a cornice of a section almost the same as
that in common use on the ancient temples. The difference lies in the fact that
while the ancient architect always placed a bold torus moulding on each angle
of his buildings, and a similar moulding to form the lowest member of the
cornice, separating its hollow surface from the face of the wall below, in
the present case these mouldings are omitted.


Two ranges of recesses like windows are seen in the outer walls. Some of
these were windows, but the upper range of those on the south side seem all to
have been mere niches, and within are not to be traced. Above each window-
head a thin course of stone is used, possibly intended as a slab or architrave to
assist in carrying the stones above it during the progress of the building. This
narrow course of stone is to be seen not only over the windows, but is continued
on the wall face all round the building.
The doorway on the north face opened, as we have said, directly into
the north aisle of the nave. It is made of red granite ; it consists of two
door-jambs of several pieces, forming pilasters set flush with the stone wall face
in which they are set. These pilasters are surmounted by capitals of the
simplest hollow section, and these again are surmounted by the architrave.
This is in three pieces, a long piece bridging the opening and a small piece at
either end to complete the length. At the left, as we look at the doorway, we
observe on the end-piece parts of a figure in sunk relief, proving that the block
is taken from an ancient Egyptian building. On the architrave, and on the
capitals of the pilasters, are crosses, cut in relief, proving that these pieces of
granite were prepared for the positions they occupy. Above the architrave
comes the cornice of ordinary Egyptian section. This, in its length, is also in
three pieces, the centre piece still retaining traces of the reeded pattern with
which it was ornamented when it stood in its original place in a temple. The
doorway has been blocked up with pieces of columns, cornices, &c., &c.
The doorway in the south wall is nearly opposite that in the north. It is
also of granite, and has pilasters, architrave, and a cornice, the centre block of
which shows a pattern on it similar to that last described.
The doorway in the west wall was until 1907 covered with a mass of brick-
work. Pilasters, with capitals carved with foliage, carry an architrave of red
granite. This is a portion of the entablature from a Roman Doric building, and
is carved with a piece of a triglyph and the guttae below.
The granite has been coloured red. There are traces of painting on the
thin coat of plaster with which the whole exterior of the walls was covered.
The narrow course of stone over the windows was painted red, and a similar band
was below them. The intermediate surfaces were marked out with stone joints
in red, these joint-lines not corresponding, except by accident, with the actual
joints of the stonework. Over the north and south doorways a break in the
masonry of the walls is seen; a course of stones is missing, and the space is filled
with rubble. We have no means of knowing what has been removed from these
places.
At the south-west angle the wall has been rebuilt, 1 and here we find a rudely
formed plinth on the south and on the west faces. One buttress is also of stone,
its courses corresponding with those of the masonry of the wall. From this we
may suppose that the buttress and the reconstructed wall were set up at the
See p. 146.


same time. From age, and want of proper bond in their construction, the long
walls forming the north and south sides of the building had swerved not a little
from a true line. The north wall was set straight in 1907. The heavy brick
buttress had no doubt been built partly to protect weak places in the walls
and partly to support them. Against the south wall, and extending nearly from
the south-east angle to the entrance doorway, the lower part of the wall had
been cased with crude brick, now removed. The masonry of the walls in
general is in admirable preservation, although rent with considerable cracks
from settlements.
Entering by the south doorway, we find ourselves in a narrow vaulted passage
extending straight before us until we reach the wall which formed the southern
boundary of the south aisle of the church. Overhead we see a lintel or architrave
in red granite, carved with triglyphs and guttae, and evidently being a part of
the same architrave as that which has been made use of in the western doorway. 1
Advancing a few steps towards the north, we find ourselves in the nave of the
original church, now roofless, and still encumbered in part with modern houses.
A high wall of burnt brick is seen closing the eastern end of the nave, pierced by
a large pointed arch, walled up, and with a range of windows above. This wall
now forms the western boundary of the church, which has shrunk from a length
of 65 metres to one of 16. The original plan was very similar to that of an
ordinary basilican church, but differing in the disposition of its eastern end.
It will perhaps be best to begin our description of the interior with the east
end of the church, as being the most interesting and important.
From a rectangular space 10-50 by 6-8o there extend three apses—north,
east, and south—covered by semi-domes. The walls of the apses are decorated
with detached columns in two ranges, each surmounted by architraves. Between
the columns are niches alternately half-round and rectangular on plan. The
niche-heads are in all cases semi-domes, some carved with a shell pattern and
others with elaborately intertwined foliage. The vertical face of the architrave
is carved with flat sculpture. Over the central niche, lower range, of the eastern
apse a representation of the Holy Dove is cut on a projecting block.
It has already been stated that slight beams were built in under the archi-
traves. On the decay of these, clumsy brick walls were inserted with arched
openings in them, corresponding with the niches which are placed between the
columns. The brick walls above mentioned completely hid the original walls
of the apses, so that it was impossible to see their condition or the ornamentation
that was on them and framed the niches. This intrusive masonry was removed
in 1907, and timber was once more inserted in the old grooves.
The apses open into the rectangular space by three semicircular arches
slightly stilted. Towards the west, an arch supported on two columns completed
the rectangle. At present the rectangular space is surmounted by a dome,
1 In passing through this narrow passage we which lay parallel with the church on its south
have in fact traversed the width of the long hall side.


circular on plan. Brick piers, completely hiding the original wall-surfaces, have
been introduced to carry the arches on which the dome rests. From its plan,
and the lightness of its construction, it is impossible that the rectangular space
was originally surmounted by a dome. It must have been roofed with wood.
Advancing westward we find ourselves in a space with its long axis north
and south, and enclosed on the west by the brick wall which we see before us on
entering the nave of the church. This wall is undoubtedly coincident with
a division of the church which is original. Much of the pavement of the nave —
to be described hereafter —is original. It is at a level of 0-38 below the pavement
east of the wall, which pavement is also in part original. This is formed of
sundry slabs of red granite, bearing traces of hieroglyphs and patterns, terribly
broken up, chiefly in white marble.
It is not until we have studied the plan of the Der Amba Bishoi (Der el
Ah mar) (Plates XLIX, L, LI) that we understand the original plan of the Der
Amba Shnuda. We find that the wall, in brick, takes the place of two columns
and an arch, something in the manner of a screen, which by diminishing the
apparent width of the nave led the eye towards the much narrower opening in
the sanctuary. Whilst the width between the north and south range of columns
of the nave is not less than 11-50, the width of the arch opening towards the
three apses is but 5-0. Judging by the evidence given us in the Der Amba BishoV
it seems possible that the space enclosed between the screen of columns on the
west, and what I may be permitted to call the sanctuary arch on the east, was
treated after the manner of a transept. This part of the church at Amba Shnuda
has been so completely encased with later brickwork on its east side and entirely
destroyed on its west, that it is unsafe to speculate. One thing only is evident:
the change of level in the original pavement shows that there was some ritual
distinction between the eastern and the western part of the church at this line.
To return to the apses : the columns with which the walls have been orna-
mented vary considerably in length and have been pieced out, some by extra
fragments of columns, some by bases taller than their neighbours. The shafts
of the two columns of the upper range at the opening of the northern apse are
octagonal. The capitals of the columns are elaborately carved with the acanthus
leaf. The treatment of the middle leaf is such that the abacus almost disappears.
The western, or sanctuary arch, stands on two columns of marble. These
are raised on bases compiled of sundry pieces. The shafts themselves, not being
found sufficiently long, have had pieces of other columns added to them. At the
north side iron bands have been used to strengthen the column. So completely
are these columns buried on two sides by the brick piers, which have been inserted
to support the walls and carry the domes, that the original architectural treat-
ment of this part of the building is left to conjecture.
The ritual arrangement of the haikal part of the building may or may not
be original. As is shown on the ground plan, an altar stands in the haikal just
east of the chord of the apse. On either side of this stands a cubical block like
1074 153 U


a minor altar. 1 The haikal is now enclosed by a wood screen or higab, com-
paratively modern. The pavement within this screen, although much broken
about, seems to be old. At the entrance doorway in the wood screen there is
a step of some -o6 rise. It seems therefore possible that the present wood screen
occupies the site of an older one.
In the north and south apses there are no altars. There is no tradition in
the church that altars ever stood here. It seems, however, very difficult to
suppose that in so large a church as that under consideration there never was
more than one altar, when, in nearly all other Ders, three, four, or more are met
with. In the north apse is a slab of a very dark marble, set upon rough legs of
brick, and turned as far towards the east as the form of the apse will permit. In
the pavement below is a white marble altar slab, with the horseshoe cutting on
its surface, such as we find at Abu Hennes, and as figured by Butler {Ancient
Coptic Churches of Egypt, vol. ii, p. 8). In the eastern apse, behind the altar,
there are not any indications of a range of seats against the wall; indeed, the
level of the niche cills is sufficiently near the floor to make their existence
improbable. We are left, then, in uncertainty as to whether the haikal as it
now exists is part of the original arrangement, or whether the screen was not
more to the west, so as to include the three apses.
On either side of the eastern apse, right and left, and approached by doors
in the north and south apses, are small rooms. That on the south contains the
font; that on the north has beneath it a small crypt which, consequent on the
slope of the site towards the east, is actually above ground, but without any
window. It is approached by a little hole in the floor of the window recess in
the room above it. Through this room access is also gained to a stair which is
situated in the extreme north-east corner of the building. This stair leads up
to the terrace roof. The room on the right of the haikal has in its south wall
a doorway, until recently bricked up ; this leads into a small circular domed
room, which is approached from the west by an antechamber with a pair of
detached columns. Access to this antechamber is gained from the transeptal
space before mentioned. These rooms are each of them covered by domes
rising to a height of six metres above the pavement, whilst the large square room
to the south, also covered by a brick dome, rises to a height of nine metres.
West of the sanctuary arch, and occupying the place of the wall which now
encloses the church on the west, was—judging by the plan of the church of Amba
Bishoi—the point of junction between the nave and the sanctuary. It may be
surmised that the nave of the church possibly contained within it at its eastern
extremity some ritual arrangement of seats, similar in principle to the arrange-
ment of cancelli we still find in San Clemente—at Rome. The reason for making
this suggestion is that at a considerable distance west from the east end of the
nave we find a solid block of red granite cut into an ascent of five steps. This
1 We were informed that these were not altars : Amba Shnuda, and that there were not any other
that the central block was the altar, dedicated to altars in the church.


was covered by a canopy of brickwork, consisting of four arches supporting a small
dome. Was not this an ambon ? The floor of this part of the nave, though
sadly broken, retains very much of its original pavement. It consists of a series
of large slabs of red granite, taken from ancient buildings, as the remains of
the hieroglyphic inscriptions prove. These are laid alternately with smaller
slabs set angle-wise. Two small slabs are laid at right angles with these, and
at right angles with the axis of the nave, but are so insignificant in size that
they can hardly have been intended to form the arms of a cross. They must
rather be taken to indicate the position of some lateral passages, or exits north
and south through the cancelli. It has, however, to be shown by those learned
in such matters, that in the monastic churches of this remote period in Egypt,
any such ritual arrangement was in use as would demand cancelli 1
The nave and aisles of the church, from north to south wall, are not less
than 23-0 in width. The nave itself between the columns is 11-50 wide. Some
columns are of granite, most are of red brick, well built with hard white mortar.
The bases of many are more or less hidden by a long mastaba or bench. It
would be hazardous to say that any of them had not been interfered with even
at a very remote period. The intercolumniations are very unequal, whilst the
columns in the north range are not exactly opposite those in the south. Two
or three fragments of capitals surmount the columns.
Since the above was written, a good deal of rubbish has been removed, and
certain of the intruded buildings pulled down. A considerable number of carved
capitals from the columns have been found. We can now see that in the range
of columns on the north side of the nave alternate columns are of red brick,
whilst those between them are of granite. The first column from the east is
wanting, then we find a brick column, then follows granite, and so on alternately
till we come to the seventh. Alternated as they are with so much regularity,
we can hardly admit that the arrangement is accidental or the result of repair
after some calamity.
There is a doorway on the north side, now built up. The exterior has been
already described. It opened directly on the north aisle. Almost opposite is
another doorway, now reduced and built in with a small arch, and much disguised.
This doorway is pierced through the south wall of the south aisle, and has already
been described.
At the west end of the nave the wall is pierced by another doorway, on the
axial line of the church. All this end of the building was until recently in a state
of filthy squalor and neglect which cannot be described. The doorway was
nearly buried in refuse and debris. The opening is wide and rectangular, with
a relieving arch above the lintel.
The western half of the nave is obstructed by houses, several of them newly
built. In 1907 these were reduced in number, but not altogether removed.
1 In the small church at Philae (see Plate xxiv) are some stones on the floor which suggest that cancelli
may have been above them.
155 U 2


Two columns of stone are standing, as is shown on our plan, near the west wall.
The intercolumniation here is somewhat less than at the east end of the nave.
At a height of 5-0 m. from the floor of the nave a carved cornice may be
traced along the walls of the north and south aisles, and across the western wall. 1
Immediately above this large holes are prepared in the wall to receive the ends
of beams. It is evident that the north and south aisles were subdivided in
their height by a floor. Just at the top of the walls may be seen other cavities
which were prepared to receive the beams which carried the roofs of the aisles.
The level given us by these beams agrees very exactly with the rain-water
outlets which we see above the upper row of windows.
There are two ranges of little windows in the walls. Those in the north wall
would have opened, the lower on the aisle, the upper on the gallery above. The
doorway at the west end of the nave opens directly upon a narrow apartment
with its axis north and south.
This is the narthex. Its western wall is pierced by a doorway opposite
that which has been last mentioned, and, not very exactly, on the central axis
of the church. The outside of this doorway has been already described. The
inside is flanked with pilasters. Considering the small size of the narthex the
architectural effect aimed at has been considerable. Although on the ground
plan the north and south ends are square, by an arrangement of five columns
carrying an architrave the roof took the form of a semicircular apse. 2 The
columns, the architrave, and the vault of the apse are all standing at the north
end. At the south, one column only remains, but the walls show clearly where
the architraves and vaults have been broken away. The side walls of the
narthex, built of stone, are ornamented with niches, the dressings of which bear
the fantastic pediments, many examples of which are found in this church. 3
This room was originally covered with a ceiling carried on wood beams,
forming a floor, level with that of the galleries over the aisles. At a later date
a brick tunnel vault was built to carry the floor. When I first saw the church
in December 1892, very much of this vault remained. It has since fallen in and
cumbers the floor to a considerable depth. This part of the church was until
recently the refuse pit of the miserable and degraded community living within
its walls, a pitiable sight. This is the chamber described in such glowing terms
by Curzon, 4 but he saw a number of things which certainly never were there.
Our drawings show that the stonework of the northern apse is unadorned. The
enrichments spoken of by Curzon must have been of plaster—if they ever
existed—and of this there is no sign.
A plan of the monastery is given by Denon, 5 and this is reproduced with
corrections by Butler. 6 Both are so very incorrect that it is not necessary to
See also description of the church at Dcndcrali,
5 Travels in Upper and Lower Egypt, by
Vivant Denon, translated by Arthur Aikin, 2 vols.
London: Longman and Rees, 1803, Plate xxxvu.
p. 140.
• See Fig. 34.
» See Fig. 35.
8 Ancient Coptic Churches of Egypt, A. J. Butler,
vol. i, p. 352. Oxford : Clarendon Press, 1884.
4 Monasteries of the Levant, p. 131.


notice them further than to point out that in this as in so many other drawings
published by the French ' Expedition ' we must be more disposed to wonder
how they could do their work as well as they did (remembering the frightful
difficulties in their way), than to find fault; whilst Butler tells us very honestly
FIG. 34. Der CL Abiad. Narthcx,
that he has not seen the place, but has collected together such evidence as he
could gather.
South of the narthex is a large stair. The lower part of this has been terribly
knocked about and the upper quite destroyed. It leads up to the level of the
aisle galleries. It should be observed that a stair in this position, either north or
south of the western entrance of the church, is a feature common to a very large
number of the plans we have collected.
South of the stair we find ourselves in a quadrangular chamber, its dome


supported on pointed arches resting on short piers. The construction here is
entirely of burnt brick, and is evidently much later in date than that of the
adjoining stair, narthex, and church. This chamber is inside that part of the
building which we were told was rebuilt early in the nineteenth century.
Immediately east of this domed chamber lies the well. A reference to the
plan will show that the church does not fill the whole of the rectangle enclosed
by the outer walls, but that to the south of it there is an apartment 8-15 wide
and 47-0 long—a great hall. The proportions of this apartment are unusual, but,
long as the room is, we could not find any traces of cross-walls. The ceiling was
of beams, the recesses in the walls to receive them being visible. A carved cornice
marks the level of the ceiling. This cornice is similar to that seen in the aisles,
but is at a higher level. The lower row of gargoyles piercing the south wall are at
a level suited to throw off water from the floor over this ceiling. The walls of the
lower apartment are faced, like those in the church, with dressed stone. At its
eastern end there is a slightly recessed arch, flanked on either side by two
niches, and also a doorway, leading into a square chamber beyond. There is
also a door at the east end of the south wall leading outside the building.
The hall was dimly lighted .by the lower range of small windows which pierce
the south wall.
The wall dividing this hall from that part of the church which we have
designated as the transept is still preserved up to the level of the terrace roof.
This piece is pierced by a row of windows, which would have opened from the
transept to the low room above the long hall. They would have transmitted
but little light.
It is evident that at some period, sufficiently remote, a great deal of recon-
struction went on within the walls of the building. We have already referred to
the dome and piers built up within the south-west angle, and also to the vault over
the narthex. A series of domes have also been built within the long hall. Piers
and arches in burnt brick, with good white mortar, have been placed against the
north and south walls, carrying the necessary wall and cross-arches to support
the domes, which domes have, in their turn, for the most part fallen in.
The church must, on several occasions, have been plundered, but we did
not observe such marks of fire as a general conflagration of all the roofs would
have caused. The limestone of which the walls are built immediately tells of
fire, if it has suffered. The room east of the long hall is vaulted with burnt brick,
and it is hardly to be doubted that this is a part of the original building.
We now have to consider the church as it exists to-day, sadly shrunken
within its ancient walls. Whereas the building we see was but the church and
place of assembly of the original Der, and was surrounded on its north, south,
and west sides with a number of buildings, the state of things is completely
changed. Until recently, a group of families lived within the walls with the cattle,
poultry, and accumulated filth, as we have before stated. This, the noblest
church of which we have any remains in Egypt, the chief monument of the


Christians, was foul and disgusting beyond the condition of any other ruined
church, until in 1907 it came under the care of the Comite de Conservation. The
narthex was the common cesspit, and even inside the church, whilst holy offices
went on at the altar, filth accumulated in. the transept, and chicken marched
about unmolested.
The span of the nave is so considerable, and its construction was so slight,
that it could only have been roofed with timber. Beyond question the aisles, the
hall, and the narthex were thus covered. We cannot suppose that the nave was
left open, as, I believe, some have suggested. This is entirely at variance with
the universal custom of the country; it is, too, entirely at variance with
the basilican plan. We may dismiss this proposition at once. The same spirit
which influenced the plan and the carved details would devise a timber roof such
as was common enough on the north coast of the Mediterranean. This roof may
have been, and probably was, burnt or stolen long ago. It may possibly, if not
probably, be the case that after this misfortune the nave was never again roofed
over, but that such stone columns as were available were used again and others of
burnt brick were set up so as to carry the reconstructed aisles and the gallery
above. A thick wall was built across at the place where the screen of columns
had been (see p. 153). This wall was pierced in the middle by a wide arch, which,
judging by analogy between the plan of this church and that of Amba Bishoi, is of
the width of the opening formerly existing between the central intercolumniation
of the screen.
Timber being discarded, and also difficult to procure, the part of the building
to be roofed in anew was covered with domes. To prop the somewhat ruined
building, and to support domes circular on plan, it was desirable to provide
square spaces from which the domes could spring. This has been done with no
little ingenuity by building piers of burnt brick, which at the same time assist
some of the weakest parts of the original building.
The walls of the three apses are ornamented with two ranges of columns and
architraves as before stated. It is safe to assume that the apses have escaped
serious damage by fire and are original.
The result of building the massive piers to carry the domes, and of filling up
the intercolumniations, as before mentioned, had been to hide, in nearly every
part, the original surface of the walls. Since the walls filling the intercolumniation
have been removed we see the little pediments and columns ornamenting the
niches in the apse walls.
There is now a solid screen of woodwork enclosing the eastern apse. There
is a screen of more or less open woodwork enclosing the place for the women—
in the southern apse. Immediately on our left, as we enter, is a tumbledown
loft approached by a. crazy stair : this is the ambon.
Abu Salih gives (p. 235) a few particulars of the White Monastery, but does
not appear to mention the Red, which lies very near by. He says: ' The monas-
tery of the great Saint Sinuthius, near Ikhmim. In the monastery there is a very


V
*jIHB B^i
| |
JB PM u
IB m
I I
I I Ibj" -
p
I ll
o ■ ■
£ H ■
& ■ H|
N<
« H ■_] |_
<sS I I
I I
I zznNzU
I B
PLATE XMX


large church, 1 spacious enough to contain thousands of people, and within it are
the bodies of the two pure disciples, Bartholomew and Simon the Canaanite, two
of the Twelve Apostles.'—' In this monastery there is a keep, and there is around
the keep and the monastery also a wall of enclosure, within which there is a garden
full of all sorts of trees.' He then goes on to relate a story which shows that,
' never from the beginning has any woman entered into this church.'
We can hardly conclude a notice of this church without reference to the
wonderful statements made by M. Amelineau in his Vie de Schnoudi (p. 88) :
' L'ceuvre de ces braves gens (S. Sinuthius and his monks) reste aujourd'hui.
Pas une pierre n'a bouge.' We have already shown, and it is manifest to the most
unpractised eye, that the whole of the south-west angle has fallen and has been
rebuilt. ' Les murs, d'une grande profondeur, n'ont pas moins de 120 metres de
longueur sur cent en largeur.' They are, in fact, 75 metres by 36-85. 'On entrait
au monastere par deux portes qui se faisaient face et dont l'une a ete muree
depuis.' Three doorways were easily to be seen when M. Amelineau visited the
church, and none of them were entries to the monastery. ' Celle par laquelle on
entre aujourd'hui est d'une profondeur de plus de 15 metres : quand on y passe
l'obscurite fait le frisson. Les moines qui la traversaient etaient vraiment sortis du
monde.' This passage is but an insertion for purposes of defence, and is, on the
face of it, no part of the original building. ' A droite de cette porte se trouve la
"grande" eglise.' The sadly shrunken edifice now doing duty for the church,
M. Amelineau takes to be the church of the monastery.
M. Amelineau has taken the Coptic antiquities of Egypt so much under his
wing that excuse may be granted for discussing rather at length his statements
about the White Monastery.
D£R AMBA BISHOI (DER EL AHMAR), SOHAG
PLATES XLIX, L, LI
This building, like the Der Amba Shnuda, is placed on the desert at the
extreme western edge of the cultivated ground, which, however, does not here
slope up so rapidly as it does further south, where the other monastery stands.
The barren limestone hills are at some distance to the west. Unlike the Der
Amba Shnuda, it does not stand alone, but quite a number of houses lie to the
south and some to the east. North, west, and south-west is a considerable area
covered with brick debris. The rectangular space covered by these is still enclosed
by the remains of a brick wall. 2 It will be seen by reference to the plan how
small, compared with the space enclosed by this wall, was the structure of the
church which, with its adjoining hall, is now called the Der.
The external wall is built of burnt red bricks, which are small, and laid
with wide joints in an abundance of good white mortar. From the point of view
1 This statement is sufficient in itself to show that the building we now see was but the church of the
monastery. 1 See Fig. 37.
1 See Fig. 37.
1074 161 X


z' S I
LEVEL OF ROOF BEAMS ("i pM ', j 1 f
i u nfTjiji
LEVEL OF FLOOR BEAMS ' 1 V v ■■■ l ====^^M
■■ . |
|| [pg' # i 5^j j v pHgM
PILATE L
IDEM ELAIHIMAM
(DER AMBA BISHOI)
l< SECTION ON LINE A B SECTION ON LINE C D
SCALE


41
ih_pm
& €
(
(
t.
«i »
U J.
a If
fe\V
2 \ \
o \ V
fS i
ffi IL
In 1
N C
li*
a
9T. 1 l4J
(
C
I ✓ 11
—Iff
h\-
f
1 a c
w
11
pA
IJ_
c-i iirff-
(
C
V c
w
p\ $
fca- II
02
W
w
z
J
z
o
z
o
Lm
m
fi-l II
P £
©At® EILAIHIMAI^
•
SECTION LOOKING NORTH ,
- SCALE i
LATER WORK S®88 f~
1 II 1 1 1 1 II 1 1 1 1 1 II 1 11 1 II II 1 BACK OF CORNICE Ilium
Hb- j
fcl
LEVEL OF FLAT ROOF
lb
w tirr
OCDOODDQ
HOLES TO RECEIVE ROOF BEAMS
0 □
WINDOW WINDOW
S S B S
HOLKS TO RECEIVE FLOOR BEAMS
WINDOW
NORTH WALL
OF NORTH AISLE
M
,
L
u
w
<73
PILATE L.ll


of the bricklayer of to-day, who thinks so much of fine joints and the verticality
with which alternate joints should be placed one over the other, the brickwork
of these walls is not very good, but the prim regularity he admires does not
give a more sound piece of construction than the less regular work of old ; always
provided there is plenty of mortar. The bricks themselves are irregular in size,
and by no means very well shaped.
The enclosure walls are considerably thicker at the base than at the top,
the slope of diminution being on the outside face. They are surmounted by a
cornice of stone, the section of which is similar to that of the cornice of the
Der Amba Shnuda, the Egyptian Gorge, minus the astragal or roll-moulding
below it. The stones of which the cornice is composed are small, higher than
they are wide.
FIG. 35. Der el Abiad. Head of niche.
As regards the plan at the floor-level but little is left open to doubt except
the arrangements at the south-west angle where the well is; also the position of
the higab, for this there are no data to go upon. It would not be unreasonable
to suppose that it may have been placed in the arch immediately west of the
three domes.
On the next floor, the chief approach to which was by the stairs at the west
end, were deep galleries over the aisles. The levels of the gallery floors and
roofs are clearly indicated by the sockets in the walls which were prepared to
receive the beams and which still exist. There is not direct evidence whether
the columns in the nave were joined by arches or by architraves. Taking into
consideration the height of the columns and the levels of the gallery floors it
seems to me very probable that there were arches.
There is no evidence to show us how the galleries communicated with the
nave, nor can we tell how the nave was lighted. That there was a timber roof
and not a dome over the space now covered by the principal dome of the church
seems beyond question. The walls and arches both here and in the next bay west
were not strong enough to bear a masonry covering.
There must have been a timber roof over the whole structure. At the


* —Lt*—
time this church was built there were plenty of buildings in Italy covered with
timber roofs of a wide span. As one may be permitted to look upon the whole
scheme of the interior of the church as imported, the method of roofing would
be included, nor may we overlook the probability that there were timber roofs
in Alexandria.
The walls of the church itself are of brick, faced internally in many
parts with limestone, and in others covered with plaster. The columns are of
hardstone or granite, as are the bases. The external walls have two tiers
of windows.
Attention has already been called, in describing the church of Amba Shnuda,
to the pieces of wood inserted under the stone architraves of the apses, to assist
FIG. 36. Der el Ahmar, Sohag.
in keeping them in their places. In this church the system of inserting small
beams of wood is carried much further. Over the arches of the apses long pieces
are built in. These, if they had extended to the angles and been pinned together
where they crossed, would have been of no little value, as ties, so long as they
lasted ; but, merely built into the walls as they are, their value must be but
slight.
Following the curve of the architraves of the apses we find the wood, in
most parts, replaced by burnt brick. The masonry facing of the walls, which is
exceedingly thin, is also divided by a number of horizontal bands of wood.
Some are visible, whilst others are hidden by a fine plaster surface which has
been laid over the whole of the interior of the walls. In some places where the
wood is visible its surface is scored with vertical lines and crosses. This is done
with such regularity that one can hardly think it was only a means of giving
a ' key ' to the plaster.
The three apses at the east end of the church are vaulted with burnt brick ;
of the same material are the walls of the square structure above the arches of the


I
!'•
apses ; indeed, except the very thin casing of masonry with which the walls
are generally faced towards the interior of the church, every part is of burnt
brick.
The eastern end of this building has suffered less than that of Amba
Shnuda. The two have evidently been very much alike ; important features that
are missing in the larger church are here well preserved, and show us what the
other must have been. The buildings enclosed within the rectangular red brick
wall consisted only of : A, the church ; B, a large hall on its south side ; C, some
apartments attached to the east end of the church. Of a narthex there are no
FIG. 37. Der el Ahmar, showing brick enclosure wall surrounding the church and monastery
Scale 1:1000.
evidences. It seems unlikely that there was one, as there is not a doorway at the
west end of the building by which it or the church could be approached. That
there was a gallery over the aisles of the church is clear, because the holes are still
visible to receive the floor and roof beams, but where the stair was by which the
gallery was approached is not so evident. There are indications against the west
wall, over the place which is now a little chapel, which make it possible that the
stair was here. It will be found, on comparing together a considerable number
of our plans of churches, that a west doorway is not a common feature. A north
and south doorway are almost always found and a stair at the west end.
Seen from a distance, the building has the same air of solid simplicity which
characterizes the Der Amba Shnuda (see Fig. 36). Its outline bears a close resem-
blance to that of an Egyptian temple. The walls are also crowned with a cornice
similar to that at Amba Shnuda. Two ranges of windows are seen in the outer


i
walls. The windows are small rectangular openings, but, towards the outside,
they are recessed within pointed openings (see Fig. 38). It seems beyond doubt
that many of these windows are mere ornamental recesses, to give an air of
uniformity to the exterior ; others are pierced. In a few places a little plaster
adheres to the outside walls, but high up, where it would be best preserved, there
is none.
The doorways are two in number —one on the north, the other on the south.
That on the north opened directly into the north aisle of the nave. It consists of
a rectangular opening with pilasters, and lintel made of limestone. It is carved
most elaborately. The doorway in the south wall is opposite that in the north.
It is of the same rectangular form, and has pilasters with carved capitals on either
side, but it is so completely encased by a building attached to the south side of
the Der that it is with difficulty even the form of the doorway can be ascertained.
This doorway is now the only entrance, and is approached by a passage which
turns at right angles and is, in consequence, dark as night.
FIG. 38. Der el Ahmar. Details of window and column.
Entering by the south doorway we find ourselves in a narrow passage between
houses, and advance into a space which has been the nave of the church. A high
wall of burnt brick closes the eastern end of the nave. In the middle is a doorway
set in a cusped arch of brick. Sundry carved stones from various parts are
built in as ornaments to the doorway, and a little niche above it. This wall now
forms the western boundary of the church. The original plan was almost the
same as that of Amba Shnuda, basilican in type.
As we have done in the previous case, so in this, it will probably be best to
begin the more detailed description at the east end of the church, the most
interesting and best preserved part of the fabric.
From a square space 450 x 4-50, there project three apses, north, east,
and south, covered by semi-domes. The walls of the apses are decorated with
detached columns in two ranges, each surmounted by architraves. Between these
columns are niches. In the eastern apse the central niche is semicircular on
plan, the other two are square. In the north and south apses the niches are
semicircular on plan. The vertical faces of the architraves are not carved, but
the cornices are in every case decorated.


It has already been said that slight beams were built in under the architraves.
These having in many places decayed or been stolen, brick walls have been
inserted, with arched openings in them corresponding with the niches which are
placed between the columns. These inserted brick walls completely hide the
original walls of the apses and engulf the columns. Beyond the fact that there
are ornaments in the form of pilasters and pediments to each niche, we can say
no more. (In the year 1908 these inserted walls were removed.)
The apses open into the rectangular space by three semicircular arches of
stone, slightly stilted. Towards the west, an arch supported on two columns
completed the rectangle. This space is now surmounted by a lantern, square
on plan, and by a dome, all in brick. Heavy piers of burnt brick have been built
at the entrance to the eastern apse, but these do not reach above the springing
of the arches.
Above the arches we now see a lantern story surmounted by a dome. The
eastern side of this, up to the capitals of the pilasters which flank the little
windows, is original. The eastern half of the north and south sides is also original.
The middle of the western side has fallen, consequent on the collapse of the
western arch, but even here only the middle of the arch fell; the walls above the
haunches remained, and when the arch was reconstructed a niche enclosing
a window was built in in the place where there had probably been a window of
old. It seems hardly probable that this niche can be actually in its place. It is
hardly to be doubted that the arch fell, in which case the stonework above it
would not have escaped damage as this has done.
The original design of the lantern can still be made out. There were three
windows on the north, east, and south sides. From certain joints in the west
wall it seems possible that there were also three windows on that side. On the
other hand, as the remains of this side are still partly encased in their facing of
wrought masonry—a casing which did not exist on the other three sides —it
seems almost certain that the roof of the nave or transept enclosed this wall,
which was seen from the floor of the church. Except for the masonry above-
mentioned, the walls of the lantern are built of burnt brick. The little windows
within have sills and pilasters of stone, the intermediate surfaces plastered. To
carry the dome, the side windows, north, east, and south, have been built up.
This fact, with the thinness of the walls, and the insufficient abutment there
would have been to resist the pressure against the west wall, make it almost
certain that the square area could not at first have been surmounted by a dome.
Towards the west, an arch supported on two columns (the arch already mentioned
as having collapsed) completed the square.
Advancing westward from this arch we find ourselves in a space which
corresponds with that which we have called ' the transept' in Der Amba Shnuda.
It is now enclosed on its west side with the brick wall before mentioned, but this
wall has preserved for us the original arrangement. Built half-way into it are
four columns : two of them on a line with the north and south range of columns


of the nave, the intermediate columns, taller than their neighbours, ranging in
height and position with the piers, which assist in carrying the western arch under
the lantern. We are able to appreciate the architectural scheme by which the
eye was led forward from the wide nave to the narrow arch beyond it.
The pavement in this part of the church is probably original. It consists of
small squares of dark granite and basalt, inlaid upon bands of white marble.
On the line of the screen of columns there is a change in the floor level of the
building. The nave floor was evidently lower, but as none of it is preserved we
cannot say how much.
Most fortunately, the architectural features of all this part of the church are
far better preserved than is the case at Amba Shnuda, nor have they been so
completely cased up with brick buttresses and piers.
The four principal columns are monoliths. Their capitals are very elaborately
carved, with acanthus leaf-foliage, arranged very much after the manner of the
leaves on an orthodox Corinthian capital. Pilasters corresponded with these
columns, smaller pilasters corresponding with the shorter columns, which formed
part of the colonnade separating the aisles from the nave. Above the lower range
of pilasters we find more pilasters and niches forming an elaborate architectural
composition as seen from the nave.
The ritual arrangement of this part of the building as it now exists can
hardly be original. A solid wood screen extends from the front of one of the
brick buttresses to the other. As the buttresses are inserted, and take no place
in the architectural composition of the design, we cannot accept them as starting-
points for the original hi gab or screen.
The floor within the haikal and outside is at the same level. The pavement
does not help us. There is the usual solid cubical altar within the hi gab.
The north and south apses are without altars ; indeed, there does not seem
a place for them. In the eastern, as well as in the side apses, the columns stand
on a low plinth, just above the floor level - there is no place for a range of seats.
On either side of the eastern apse, right and left, are small apartments. That on
the right contains a font.
At the north end of the transept is a crazy structure up some steps, which
is used as the ambon. Beneath it are two ancient columns. It is doubtful
whether they have not been placed where they are merely to assist in support-
ing the floor of the ambon.
The area of the original nave and aisles of the church was at the time of my
last visit nearly all occupied by houses. One column, of black granite, stands
in sight on its original base close to the west wall of the present church.
If there are others they are enveloped in the houses. From indications on
the walls it is evident that here, as at Amba Shnuda, there was a gallery
above the aisles, and when we observe to what a height the decorative
masonry on the west wall of the lantern was carried we may assume that there
was a low clerestory.
1074 169 Y


The doorway already referred to (p. 167) opened directly into the north
aisle. The interior of this doorway is now covered with buildings. Opposite is
the south doorway. Here, as at the Der Amba Shnuda, it was necessary to cross
the width of the long southern hall before entering the church.
In the south-west angle of the nave a little church has been built. It seems
of high antiquity, but its walls do not coincide with the lines of any original walls.
Above it, on the inner face of the west wall of the Der, are marks which suggest
that there was once a stair in this position—probably the usual stair in the south-
west angle.
Immediately west of the little church is the well, which we may assume to
be old.
The arrangement of the ruined walls south of the apses, and a comparison of
this plan with that of the Der Amba Shnuda, make it evident that parallel with
the south aisle of the church lay a long hall. Of this we can give no particulars.
At the east end of the hall was a square apartment, traces of which can still be
made out. This room was vaulted.
Except that it is much smaller in its dimensions, there is no doubt that both
in plan and architectural treatment this church and that of Amba Shnuda were
very much alike.
It would be superfluous to enter into a more detailed description of these
churches. The material is now being collected, and is being prepared for
publication by the Comite de Conservation des Monuments de l'Art arabe, for
an exhaustive work, giving not only measured drawings in full of these most
precious monuments, but admirable photographs and coloured drawings.
A study of the plans of the triapsal churches raises some interesting questions.
Was it permitted that one screen should enclose more than one altar ? In the Der
el Abiad the eastern apse encloses three blocks of masonry, but whether each of
these is an altar I have not been able to ascertain : evidence is contradictory.
When we see how this church and that of the Der el Ahmar have been knocked
about, and especially how they are now contracted from their former proportions,
we may be justified in doubting whether the existing arrangements are not very
far removed from the original. Again, as the higab was essential, in order to
veil the mysteries celebrated at the altar, we should find ourselves, in the side
apses of the Der el Ahmar and the Der el Abiad, face to face with the following
difficulty. The altars, it is admitted, must face east, but the higab placed, as
it must be, across the mouth of the apse, would lie at one side of the altar. We
find no trace of such an arrangement anywhere. These difficulties are stated, but
no solution is offered : that must be left to those who have studied the ritual
and ancient customs of the Coptic Church.
If we compare the plans of the two churches last described with most of the
others here collected together, it will be found that the triapsal arrangement of
the east end is rare. We see it fairly well developed in the church of the monastery
of S. Simeon, Aswan, but in no other case. In none of these three churches does


there seem any preparation to receive more than one altar. We have to bear in
mind that the orientation not only of the fabric of the church, but also of the altar,
was always insisted upon. It will be shown later on how the orientation of
churches made in ancient tombs and quarries was contrived under considerable
difficulties.
In the church at the Der el Abiad it might be possible to get an altar into
the side apses, but in a clumsy way, and incommoded by doorways ; the side
apses in the church of the Der el Ahmar are, however, small and inconvenient
unless the altars faced north and south, which I venture to think we cannot admit
as possible. In the church of S. Simeon at Aswan altars might be placed in the
lateral apses and retain a proper orientation.
DER EL ADR A, GANADLE
PLATE LII, FIG. I
The ruins lie almost in a direct line west of Sidfa, a railway station a little
south of Asyut. After riding an hour and ten minutes we reach the village of
Ganadle, lying on the western edge of the cultivated ground. To reach the
village we pass a depression, as of an old canal, hardly dry even in April. Ganadle
is on the west border of this depression. In the village are an old Coptic church,
a new Roman Catholic chapel, and a chapel of the American Mission —religious
divisions are well maintained. The village stands on a mound, and is no doubt
a site of considerable antiquity. We then come upon the long slope of grits and
broken stone, worn down from the great range of cliffs which face us, rising at
least six hundred feet high. Quite at the foot of these cliffs, and immediately in
front of us, is a patch, a surface darker in colour than that of the surrounding
limestone cliffs. To the north of the patch are black marks indicating holes in
the rock. The opening of a barren jagged valley divides the cliffs immediately to
the south. Riding straight forward the dark patch gradually resolves itself into
the walls of the Der.
The cliff is here very vertical, but at a level of some 15-0 above the desert
is a ledge, partly natural and partly formed by the debris from the ancient
quarry. It will be well to explain that an ancient Egyptian quarry differs very
much from an ordinary quarry in England. The Egyptian did not generally
make a great hole open to the sky, and in getting out the stone waste a very large
quantity of it. In the case of the limestone cliffs, in which horizontal beds of good
stone are found between beds of material useless for building, the masons selected
the particular bed they approved of, and the quarrymen then proceeded to work
their way straight into the face of the cliff. The stone was extracted from the
rock in rectangular blocks somewhat in excess of the sizes required by the builders.
Pillars of rock were left at intervals to carry the superincumbent mass. This
neat method of extracting the stone left a series of chambers cut into the cliff,
and often extending to great distances. The ceilings were fairly level, the walls
171 Y 2


more or less vertical. By the insertion of a few walls of crude brick it was easy
to make very tolerable dwelling-rooms in corners of the vast chambers, as we shall
presently see to have been the case. Small churches were lodged in the quarries
under equally favourable circumstances.
As we approach the Der el Adra we first come, at the very foot of the slope,
to the well. This is really a fine piece of work. It must be about 50 in diameter,
and is lined right down to the bottom with well-laid masonry of rather small
stones. It must be at least 20-0 down to the water. An arch of masonry is
thrown across it, and the columns of stone still stand at the sides to receive the
sdkya, or water-wheel. Viewed from the well, we see the Der to be enclosed by
a wall on the north, east, and south sides, whilst the west is formed by the frowning
cliff. The wall is built for two-thirds of its height of squared masonry, with
buttresses at intervals, semicircular on plan.
We ascend a considerable slope towards great rectangular quarry holes,
yawning in the face of the cliff. On our left, in the north wall of the enclosure,
is the doorway of masonry, with a slightly pointed arch. The door is strengthened
with iron plates. Entering, we find ourselves in a desolate yard, the church
immediately on our right, in the north-west part of the enclosure. The yard is
not on a level, but slopes up rapidly towards the south. The surface of it is
littered with broken brickwork, crude bricks, burnt bricks, and small stones.
Sticking up through this medley are walls of rock, the thin partitions between
ancient tombs, the upper parts of which have been broken away. Judging by
this we must conclude that the place has been much quarried since the tombs
were made, and long before the Der was established. In all directions we see
the little square doors leading into rock-cut tombs, and, in addition to these, the
vast cavernous mouths of the quarries.
The church is not attached to any of the enclosure walls. It stands a little
way south of the north wall, leaving a space in which is the door of an ancient
tomb. This tomb is now used as a passage for the women to enter the rock
church —for there are two churches : the old, or church in the quarry, and the
new. The church —its domes seen from a distance, standing, as before stated,
in the north-west part of the enclosure —was built, we were told, some thirty-five
years since. It is laid out altogether on old lines, except that we find but three
instead of four divisions ; i. e. there are but three bays from east to west, and
not four. Each bay is covered by a dome. There are three altars : the north,
S. Makrufius ; the middle, SS. Peter and Paul; the south, Mari Girgis. The
higabs, of masonry, have middle doors flanked by little windows. In the outside
wall-face we see sundry carved stones used up, taken evidently from another
building, probably the predecessor to this one. The interior is everywhere
plastered and whitewashed. We found it unusually clean, and apparently not
in use. The plan is very similar to that shown on Plate LII, Fig. 2.
Behind this church, and lying directly west of it, lies an older church dedicated
to El Adra (Plate LII, Fig. 1). It is built in the mouth of, and is partly walled


pi " 1 new
church
I A n
SKETCH PLAN
I $
J jj | | I
H 1
H • ! ■
Hi
I •
i i
H \ H
H - >H
■ •IM
• • / H
'
■ I ■
I I ■ ■
■ IqI Uv_-.- / - > '*-...^ / 'B
'id*
4 f
I H
iplate n,im
©EM EL A©MA
©anA©LE
NEAR SIDFA FIG - 1
FIG. 3
miLMMLMZ
DIBONKA
FIG. 2
SKETCH PLAN
SCALE 200
FIG. 4
v.«j'


in by, an ancient quarry, which extends much further back into the cliff. The
new church is built up against the haikal of the old.
In this church, as in the newer, there are but three divisions, and not the
usual four; i. e. for women, for men, for the chorus, for the altar or altars. The
higab is of commonplace geometrical panelled woodwork, the door in the middle.
The wall, partly hidden by the higab, has, built up in it, sundry carved
stones, but dotted about in such a fashion as to suggest that they come from
some other place. On one stone is carved a scroll, in the interstices of which are
bunches of grapes and a bird pecking. On other stones are crosses, elaborated
in the customary way. The chief entrance to the church is at F down a dark
little passage, one side of which is formed by the rock. The partition DD is of
brick, not reaching to the roof of the quarry. At a height of about two metres
from the floor there is a grill of open brickwork. West of this, as shown on the
sketch-plan, is a considerable space, in the bowels of the cliff; whether this is
used as the division for the women we could not ascertain. A pillar of rock is
left supporting the flat roof. At E, painted on the rock, is a cross on a dark red
ground. This, we were told, marks the place where some very holy saint was used
to pray. The women enter the church at A, passing through a rock-cut tomb B,
and so gain access to the part of the church marked c, usually reserved for the
chorus. The Der is not now inhabited.
About twenty minutes north of the Der just described are the ruins of a con-
siderable town —El Medina el Sarga. This stands at the mouth of the Wadi el
Sarg, or Sarga. (It seemed uncertain whether the valley was called by the
name of Sarg = a saddle, or Serga =S. Sergius.) The face of the cliffs rising at
least two hundred metres, and forming part of the chain of rocky hills before
referred to which close in the western side of the Nile valley, is here broken by
an opening; the mouth of a narrow gorge, the Wadi Sarga, which runs north-
ward, almost parallel with the face of the cliffs, and suddenly turning at right
angles towards the east, opens to the Nile valley. From a very little way the
mouth of the gorge is not observed. Entering the valley we see the long low
openings of quarries, subdivided by pillars of rock. Entering these, each chamber
opening into the other, we find the walls recessed into many little niches, with
remains of brick walls which seem to have some relation to them. There must
have been a series of little rooms. At the east end of the quarry many
paintings are seen on the wall; in fact, we have before us the east wall and the
apse of a church. The side-walls of the church were evidently of brick, now
gone ; only where the rock was used for a wall does the painting remain. The
surface was covered with fine, hard, lime plaster— Gyps, as it is called in Egypt.
On this an excellent surface for painting can be got. In the conch of the apse
is depicted the Last Supper. The table is nearly rectangular, with one figure
very near it—on our right—as if receiving. There not being room in the little
apse to display the figures of all the apostles, some only are included, whilst the
rest are, with much simplicity, spread along on the wall-faces right and left of


the centre. In several places within the area of this church we can trace a hori-
zontal band of painted decoration, geometrical in character, of red, green, and
a purple black. The style leans towards Saracenic, but it includes oval forms
in the scheme —an uncommon development in anything Saracenic. The figures
are painted chiefly in outline, with red ochre and a little yellow and green pigment
here and there.
A second church can be traced west of the first. The conch of the apse, cut in
the rock, still remains, with a niche on the south side. In very faded green,
a decoration enclosing the head of the niche can be seen—a cog-wheel pattern.
There are a few inscriptions in Coptic, some well preserved, painted in red
on the white walls ; some also in Arabic ; and in pencil a low brute has stigma-
tized himself as having ' visited this location We need not say what country
he came from.
DRONKA, KAN I SAT EL MALAK
PLATE LII, FIG. 2
Dronka lies a little to the south of Asyut, at the foot of the long line of
frowning cliffs, which extend from Asyut to behind Sohag. The church and
a new village near it lie on the slope at the foot of the cliffs. A church is stated
to have existed here for many centuries, to have become very ruinous, and to
have been rebuilt on the old lines some years since.
The plan and general arrangement of the existing building are such as
thoroughly to justify the above statement, and in view of the disappearance of
so many of the old churches, of the utter and hopeless neglect in which others
are left, and of the fact that, now, new churches are not built following the old
and historical types, but are, as I have before had occasion to remark, examples
of a mean, unpicturesque vulgarity which it has been reserved for the nineteenth
century to develop in Egypt as in other parts of the world ; for these manifold
reasons I have ventured to preserve this plan.
It will be observed that the subdivisions of the plan are normal. The
western division of the building is for the women, next comes the division for
men, then the choir, and lastly the haikal. The northern altar is dedicated to
Amba Bishoi, the central to El Malak. The six eastern bays of the church are
covered with brick domes. The rest of the church, westward, is roofed with
beams, on which are laid reeds covered above with a flat of mud bricks. The
central bay of the men's division is, however, not flat-roofed, but is surmounted
by a small ogee dome of wood and plaster. The arches which carry the western
row of domes are already pushing over the piers on which they rest, which,
unless timely precautions be taken, will fall over into the men's division of the
church and lead to a general collapse of the whole structure. The font is in the
women's division. The higab has a single door in the middle.
Above the new village of Dronka is a range of quarries pierced in the steep
limestone cliffs before mentioned. Many of these quarries have had walls of


crude brick built into their openings, and have been used, and are now used, as
houses. Looked at from the green plain below, the houses appear like nests,
adhering to the face of the rock. Among these nests is the old church of El Adra.
The west end of the church is in the quarry, the eastern part is built up on an
artificial platform. As shown on plan (Plate LII, Fig. 3), the normal arrange-
ment for men, women, choir, and altars is maintained, and so important is the
true orientation considered that, at some inconvenience in construction, the
entrance is not at the east, i.e. where the approach ends, but within the quarry,
at the west of the church.
Except the haikal and chambers adjoining it, north and south, which are
domed with brick, the building is roofed with beams and a layer of mud resting
on reeds or boos straw. The flat ceiling of the quarry is higher than the roof of
the church, so that the necessary light is easily got in the roof from the open mouth
of the quarry towards the east. The higdb is of wood, in small geometrical
panels, but it does not seem to be old. All the internal surfaces of the church,
whether it be the rock in the south-west angle or the crude brick walls, are plas-
tered and whitewashed, with the exception of the "arch (of brick) opening to the
haikal. Here the bricks are coloured a dark red, the mortar joints being a vivid
white. All arches in the building are pointed. The screens which enclose the
women's and the men's division are of wood, nicely turned, and are superior to
what we might expect to find in so rough and primitive a building.
Mounting the stairs at B, we were shown over the eastern part of the
church, and on a projecting rock some walls of rubble stone. These were stated
to be the remains of a church, older than the present building. It may be so, but
there was not anything in the disposition of the ruins to show what the building
may have been. The whole village is nested away in the quarry, a most
strange and picturesque jumble of walls, pieces of rock, and little doors in
unexpected places. The houses are being deserted for the new ones built on
the plain below. Measured, April 1901.
DER EL ADRA, RIFA
PLATE LII, FIG. 4
This place is about an hour's ride south of the last. Its position is even more
remarkable than that of Dronka. Looking up from below, the first thing observed
is the deep shadow between the octagonal columns of the front of a large tomb,
in type precisely like those so well known at Beni Hassan. The ascent to the
village is by a steep climb, and then up steps cut in the hard limestone rock and
well worn. Some of the houses are built on a little shelf of the cliff, but the
greater part of the residences are ancient tombs, some with walled enclosures in
front to form an extra room or a yard, but many consist of the ancient tomb
chamber, or chambers only. Out of the little square doors of these we could see
the inhabitants, like rabbits, examining us. The little doors are less than a yard
square.


To reach the church the path leads through a massive archway, closed by
a door covered with stout hoop-iron. In the wall above it is a loophole to shoot
through. We enter a square space, a sort of hall, out of which certain of the
houses of the village are reached, or, turning sharp to the left, we mount a
slight ascent and find before us a little doorway spanned by a lintel. On this
is carved a pattern of foliage, very flowing in character, but which is made
by repeating the same design, alternately reversing it. In the spaces between
the foliage are animals ramping about —oxen (as it seems), a dog, a bird. The
whole has been coloured a vivid blue. Through this doorway we enter the
church. Here again it will be observed how much care has been taken to ensure
orientation. A narrow passage is contrived within the quarry chamber, leading
westward, until the men's division of the church is arrived at, and then, by a
doorway on the south, we are admitted to the church.
The church is divided up, in the customary way, for the women, the men,
the choir, and the haikal, with a chamber north and south of it. The higdb is
of wood; it is of elaborate geometrical panelling ; the interspaces are adorned
with inlay of bone. Over the door is an inscription in Coptic letters, and in
Arabic, of a very Cufic type. The screen is considered a great'wonder in the little
place, and they tell the tale that the man who made it made one other and then,
incontinently, died. The altar is dedicated to El Adra.
The church is very picturesquely lighted by a considerable hole in the roof
just before the haikal. The quarry roof extends, from the west, just far enough
to shelter this hole. The screen at BB is built of three arches resting on pillars,
all in brick. The wood screen is set against the eastern face of the pillars, and
is nicely executed in turned work. The screen enclosing the gloomy retreat for
the women is very open, with a lattice below and arched work above. The
interior of the church was, when visited, more neat and well kept than is usually
found —and in this poor little nest of houses glued against the face of the cliff!
Within the great tomb above referred to stands the little shrine of S. Tadrus
or Theodore, a small mud-brick structure roofed with a little dome.
Abu Salih (p. 214) refers to ' Rifah and Udrunkah' :
' Here there is a church named after the Lady, the Pure Virgin (El Adra),
two churches of the valiant martyr Theodore; a church named after the Saviour;
a church named after S. John ; two churches named after the martyrs Thomas
and Severus, and a monastery named after the great saint Sinuthius.'
Are we not justified in thinking that what in the translation are called
' churches ' are really the dedications of the little chapels or haikals grouped,
together so often in one building ?
It may be asked why in the plans of two of the churches, one at Rifa, the
other at Dronka, the method of drawing is not the same as is usually employed.
The lines indicating the walls, &c., are not ruled. This method of drawing was
adopted because anything more mechanical and exact is absolutely misleading.
1074 177 z


These humble little buildings, pathetic in their poverty, are hardly better built
than the cottages adjoining. And again, it may be asked, why give such full
descriptions of such poor little places ? The answer to this is, that probably very
soon these churches—which are, after all, hundreds of years old —will cease to
exist. As security and wealth increase, so the fastnesses in the rock are deserted,
the tomb dwellings abandoned, and the people go to live in houses among the
fields below, where they are more comfortable and nearer their daily work.
Anything worth moving is taken from the church, or stolen, and soon the neglected
building collapses or becomes a mere dust-hole, like the churches near Nagada
and Kamulah.
D£R EL AZAM, ASYOT
PLATE LIII, FIG. I
This ruin lies in a sequestered and desolate valley on the hill-tops immediately
west of Asyut. Around the ruins of the Der the valley on all sides is riddled
with graves, which have been systematically dug over and rifled. Coarse gar-
ments, bits of coffins, skulls, pieces of bodies with leather-like skin still adhering
to the bones—all these melancholy relics are scattered about. All materials of
clothing in which the poor folk were buried are of the cheapest kind. Blue and
white striped lebbas and gallabeas are seen —none of the ordinary indigo-stained
cotton now in use. In the midst lie the ruins of the little monastery. A sur-
rounding wall has enclosed a somewhat irregular form. The wall is built of
crude brick and stone intermixed.
The scanty remains of the church lie rather low, partly buried in its own
debris, and also in consequence of the number of graves which have been made
within the area of the church since it was ruined. Not only are graves within the
area of the church walls, but they are seen in the remains of adjacent chambers,
and indeed in every corner of the enclosure of the Der.
The church, so far as one can tell, seems to have been of the type A, basilican
in plan. The stump of a small square tower lies to the north, very near to, but
not touching, the church. For the plan of the Dgr lam indebted to the interesting
work of M. W. de Bock, Materiaux pour servir a Varcheologie de VEgypte chretienne,
St-Petersbourg, 1901. Visited, April 1901.
GEBEL ABU F6DAH
It is often a matter of considerable difficulty to ascertain the real name of
a place that is visited in the Nile valley. Accuracy is the last thing the fellah
cares about, and therefore why should you be more particular than he ? Asking
for Der el Gebrawi, a place on the east bank of the river, we were shown where
the place lay, across a mile and a half of cultivated land, but with a good deal of
flood water intervening. A guide was found, or we should have sunk into mire
and slime, and we contentedly followed him over a long causeway, passing


PEM EL AIM ASYOT
FIG. 1
I o yj
i i i i ■ METRES
FIG. 2
B1BM JMBO MEMOES
jjpJ T4|_
f[Mn|
SECTION ON M I I J
LINE B-B SECTION ON LINE A-A
PLATE LID


-V s *
"'~ ~ ~ ( ( a *6* o
a village, and then seeing before us, about half-way up the face of the cliff, a
tower-like edifice, gummed to the face of the rocks.
Crossing a bridge, seen in the sketch (Fig. 39), we ascended a steep path,
and found ourselves approaching the building, which is made of brick and stone,
and is thrust against a cave which seems ready to engulf its upper part. The
cave is made into the church. The haikal is a hole in the rock, much trouble
FIG. 39. Gebel abu Fodah. Der.
having been taken to make it face east. An artificial platform is made, on
to which this cave opens by walls, chiefly of rough stone cemented together
with Nile mud. These walls must be about 20-0 high, and are ornamented with
crosses in burnt brick. The foot of the wall is cased with a shield of stone,
pierced by a doorway now built up. The entrance now in use is not seen in the
sketch, being round the corner to the right. There is another door much higher
up, over which hangs a pulley, as seen in the sketch ; whilst from the top of the
doorway hangs a chain. There are foot-holes in the wall, entrance being obtained
by clinging to the chain and inserting the feet in the foot-holes.


Entering by the lower door, we find ourselves in a room occupying the width
of the tower. Out of this opens a doorway at some 2-o from the floor, with
a crazy ladder to reach it. Climbing the ladder, and passing through the door-
way, we enter a tortuous passage on a steep slope, a sort of winding stair. At
last we gain the platform at the top of the tower, and see before us the higdb or
screen shutting in the haikal. This screen is of the usual type —woodwork,
of small pieces, arranged in geometrical patterns, but without special interest.
The six openings seen in the sketch, at the top of the tower, are in the nature
of windows to the platform, and from them a very extensive view is obtained
towards the west across the Nile valley. The tower, which constitutes the Der,
can have accommodated but few people. No one was living there at the time
of our visit (November 28, 1903), nor are there houses nested about as at Rifa or
Dronka.
After we had left the place and sailed away, it was revealed to us that we
had been deceived by the obliging people, and it was then too late to find out
the real name of the Der, but it is so characteristic of the curious places in which
some churches are lodged that it seemed deserving of record.
D£R EL NAKHLA
This building, on the east bank of the Nile, has been so much patched and
covered with plaster and whitewash that it is not possible to dissect it and to
state how much is the original church and how much is additional. A study of
the plan leads us to suppose that the building has been enlarged.
The roof is formed partly of domes, partly of tunnel vaults. The higdb
are of brick, set in geometrical patterns, with bits of white limestone. On the
north side a small stair is arranged which leads to an upper level, at which
are two apsidal chapels. The church is dedicated to Amba Bishoi. Visited,
November 1900.
DER ABU HENNES
PLATES LIII (FIG. 2), LIV, LV, LVI
This church lies on the east bank of the Nile a little south of the ruins of
Antinoe. In some respects it is of unusual interest, as it shows us most clearly
the changes that have been made from a church of the orthodox basilican plan
(type A) and roofed with wood, to one roofed with domes and obstructed by
clumsy masses of brickwork in order to support them.
As it now exists, the church, of very restricted dimensions, consists of a
narthex at its western extremity, with a shallow porch leading to it (see Plate LV).
Over this porch is a platform. Passing through the narthex we enter the nave,
which is in three bays, each of them covered by a dome. The piers supporting these
domes are, in proportion to the size of the church, so large as completely to block
the interior, being pierced only by openings hardly larger than doorways. As is
seen on the plan, there are doorways next the walls of the church as well as on


—
L_
E>te MO MENKES 1
fi 2
111 ?
W W «
V X G
NhkjI '


©EOS AffiO MENKES)
c
,||# < ?JHH .* JH
["- 1 I H
j| .. _„ _... fl.
-4 j--j A
p/' B -AK |" T-T B \^M
* ■ ** * '
I r ncdi |
ill! H 5
|jpp Xj
C
SCALH W
PILATE LV


EH
%R ABD fr
SIEMKES)
ihT J a
*-i" Bi
Bf i
a M
91 <j
™ X
l* * J
*
1
i
•
B^B
J
9
w ■
o
1
I
i
I
»
l
•
H Ba
oi a™
1
i
i
fl9 -ii
o ■
fr 7
i
JH w
Hani
°z
So B
I
m
•
K|BSB M
H <
Bl u
BH cd
Sca
i
i
rf 2 ■
go L
•
i
i— 1 £"*
ofc B
Q ■
•i
•
u hb
c
i
i
VBBI
1
H 1
1 X
I M
STAIF
L w
1 *
" h
PC
<
UM
■Tj
HH
z
PLATE ILVH


the axis. A passage-way is thus obtained from one division of the building to
the other, not only by the central archways, but by the lateral openings. We
find, then, that the nave is divided into three—the westernmost division for the
women, the next for the men, and the easternmost for the chorus. East of the
chorus comes the haikal, terminating in an apse and surmounted by a dome.
On the south the haikal is flanked by a small chamber in which is the font.
On the north lies a chamber of greater size, in which is an altar. On the north
side of the nave is a long narrow chamber.
At the west end a few steps outside the porch lead down to the level of the
church floor, a descent of perhaps 0.50 metre. The north wall is, however, more
deeply buried, and at the east end of it the accumulation is so considerable that
it is easy to mount on to the church roof. The south wall is free from accumula-
tion, the ground level outside being almost level with the floor within. The
outer walls are, generally, of brick, but at the west end, parts have been encased
with masonry.
We will now describe the building more in detail. As we approach from
the west (see Fig. 40), the first thing we observe is the doorway, set in a porch,
which is built in advance of the main wall, and is flanked by masses of masonry,
semicircular on plan toward the west. There is a platform above the doorway
approached by steps from the north. The masonry flanking the doorway is faced
with ashlar stone, a thin slab alternating with a header. The northern end of the
west wall of the church is faced in a similar way. This style of masonry was
much in fashion with Saracenic builders, and was made use of to cover a multi-
tude of sins within. The porch and steps are additions to the original fabric,
and are separated from it by a straight joint.
Passing through the porch we enter the narthex, which is covered by a barrel
vault. In the southern wall of it is a niche, semicircular on plan, and built
close up against the east wall. In the east wall, and south of the east doorway,
is a shallow recess, perhaps for lamps or books. In the north end of the narthex
is a doorway, walled up. We were told that here was a stair leading to the roof.
Passing through the narthex we enter the nave, and can observe, here and
there, pieces of carved work, pilasters, cornices, and niches, which bear no relation
to the existing subdivisions of the building. A short inspection makes it very
clear that we are standing within the walls of the original building of a basilican
plan. It was of three bays in length, the centre of each bay being marked by
a niche in the aisle wall (see Plate LVI). At the eastern end of the nave is a pointed
arch opening to the haikal. The flat pilasters from which this arch springs are
original, and retain their carved capitals. The arch is, probably, of later date.
The apse walls are ornamented with three niches, whilst two little doors open
into chambers north and south. Either by violence, fire, or industry of the
worms, the original wood roofs disappeared and a more permanent system of
covering was substituted, by making use of masonry domes and vaults. Un-
fortunately, the material selected, crude brick, was as feeble as the skill of the
1074 185 A a


FIG. 40. Der abu Hennes. External view.
builders. To sustain the very small domes masses of wall have been inserted, so
large in proportion to the work to be done and the building itself that the ritual
subdivision of the structure only communicate by doorways, as we have already
shown, and are almost shut off one from the other.
Whilst the south wall of the church remains intact, nearly half of the north
wall has been taken down, and the building has been enlarged, as in shown by
difference of tint on the plan (Plate LV).
The section along the axis from east to west is interesting (see Plate LIV).
We can realize from it the absolute change of effect, both external and
internal, obtained by substituting a roof of brick domes for one of wood. The
effect of length is entirely lost and gives way to one of height.
A few quotations from Abu Salih are subjoined to show how frequently
these changes were effected.
FIG. 40. Der abu Hennes. External view.
On page 2, he states : ' He then undertook and carried out the reconstruction
of this church of S. James which had been burnt down: he built for it, above
the sanctuary, a lofty dome which could be seen from afar : he erected arches
and vaults.'
Referring to the monastery of S. Menas, he tells us (p. 106): ' this monastery
and this church were burnt to the ground, except the apse and the northern and
southern sides of the sanctuary, which were preserved intact; these were restored,
and domes and arches were built, and piers were set up instead of the marble
columns.'
Of the church of S. Mercurius he tells us (p. 120) : 'So they restored (the
church) and completed the sanctuary, and substituted for the roof of timber
cupolas and arches of baked bricks.'
Of the dangers attendant on wooden roofs he tells us (p. 127): ' (the church)
was roofed with great beams. On a recent occasion the blacks determined to
pillage this monastery, and they attacked this roof, so that they succeeded in
ruining the building.'
In another case he records (p. 186): ' The worms destroyed the timbers of


' o.»a »
this monastery and the church, and so they were pulled down at the expense of
that sayyid, who constructed instead of the roof [of timber] a vaulted roof, and
enclosed the columns within piers of masonry, and none of the columns remained
visible.'
Some drawings of the stone carvings to the niche-heads and capitals of
columns are given in Fig. 41.
EL MADYNA
This considerable group of brick ruins lies immediately to the south of the
ruins of Antinoe. What its history may be lam not able to state ; but the area
covered by it, the fact that the remains of three churches can be seen upon the
surface, without excavation —these things go to prove that it must have been a
T wifl'i 1 "''fir
iwwlllI 1 . Wmfi -
~ P 1-
—J 111 'J-i
.O D
•" Mill Hi
1
FIG. 41. Der abu Hennes. Capitals and niche-head.
place of no little importance. One ventures to ask the historian —if he can be got
to interest himself in this page of the history of Egypt —the following questions :
Does this place represent a Christian settlement existing contemporaneously
with Antinoe ? Was the Christian community forced to settle itself out here
whilst the people of the old faith still held possession of the Roman city ? Or do
these brick ruins represent a fresh settlement, made after Antinoe had been
deserted ?
A rough sketch-plan, not drawn to scale, is given, merely as an indication
of the relation of the churches to each other ; to a wall which seems to form part
of an enclosure on the east, and to the city of Antinoe on the north (Fig. 42).
Here are remains of the church B, of crude brick, terminating towards the east
in three apses at its eastern end —one north, one east, one south —as at Der Amba
Shnuda or Amba Bishoi (see Plates XLV and XLIX). The building was very
small, and no traces of stonework of any sort remain.
Another church, within the walls of which we excavated a little, lies south
of the last. Its total length, internal, is but 9-35- It consisted of a central
187 A a 2


jAyiSs? /bs^
STADIUM B. TRIAPSAL CHURCH
({"'% C. LARGE CHURCH RUINED
H II D. SMALL CHURCH
ji jl
% r I /
A TEMPLE | I 1 I \ \V$ y r >±
RAM ESSES U H ( ,1 V, » '
Z . I BRICK \ ''
tU I _ , ; — v \
E CLASSIC TEMPLE AHTINOE V. ) fc. \
OC / . '•■•■ C 4
/ ° ) : ;
STREET h /
aT
nave, terminating in an apse with a narrow aisle on either hand. Rough brick
bases 0-50 x 0-70 were found i-o below the surface of the drifted sand. The position
of these bases makes it probable that there is yet one more, which would give us
five arches opening into the aisle. The spring of the apse vault can be detected.
The unusual feature is observed of the curve of the apse showing outside the east
wall of the church (see plan, Figs. 42 and 43).
The structure, so far as it remains, is built entirely of crude bricks. Except
the vault of the apse, no indications of vaulting are seen. The church is filled
with sand and debris to a depth of fully one metre. A careful removal of this
would show whether there were not vaulting bricks in the rubbish.
Nearer to the ruins of Antinoe, and standing alone, are the remains of a con-
siderable enclosure of crude brick, quadrangular in plan. Hardly any walls
remain above the level of the sand, which has now drifted over the slight mound
made by the ruin. The scale of this church for such it was is much larger
than that of the churches we generally find in Egypt (Fig. 42, c). The only
part of the structure still seen clearly above ground is the lower part of the
eastern apse. This is unusually wide, not less than 7-05. On the south side are
the remains of a small rectangular room, with coarse paintings, nearly obliterated
(D, Fig. 42).
FIG. 42.


CONCLUSION
THE object I have set before me in making public the plans and drawings
here collected has not been to compile a catalogue of all the ancient Christian
remains in the Nile valley, but to provide a considerable selection, and thereby
to assist in throwing a ray of light on a subject that has hitherto received but
little attention. To make use of the words of Isaac Walton : ' I think fit, gentle
reader, to tell thee these following truths : that I did neither undertake, nor write,
nor publish this discourse to please myself. And, as I propose not the gaining of
credit by this undertaking, so I would not willingly lose any part of that to which
I had a just title ; and I do therefore desire and hope, if I deserve not commenda-
tion yet I may obtain pardon.'
lam painfully aware how imperfect many of the drawings are. To make
complete excavations in all of the buildings before drawings were made would
involve a terrible outlay, and indeed in some places, as, for example, in the Batn
el Hagar, it would be difficult to find the labour. The careless irregularities of
plan and construction in most of the churches is such that, to note them exactly,
would take hours, or even days, and yet the general scheme of the structures
would not be better illustrated thereby.
The ancient churches in Cairo itself and in old Cairo are purposely omitted.
An exhaustive study of these, with a fine series of drawings and photographs, is
being prepared under the auspices of the Comite de Conservation des Monuments
de l'Art Arabe. The materials are also collected for a similar monumental work
at the Der el Abiad and the Der el Ahmar near Sohag, two buildings which the
Comite has recently repaired with great care. The photographs and coloured
drawings of the rich ornamentation of these two churches will doubtless be
a surprise to many. The few drawings of these buildings here printed are no
more than seem necessary for the purposes of comparison and description.
The materials here offered for the consideration of the reader have been
many years in course of collection, beginning in the year 1893-4. The mental
attitude of the Egyptologist towards any study of Egyptian Archaeology, excepting
along his own lines, was, at that time, as unscientific as it was discouraging.
The Director-General of Antiquities could speak only with disdain of ' les mechants
Coptes '. He was guilty of cruel and absolutely needless barbarities at Medinet
Habu. One of the courts of this ponderous and impressive building had, at


a remote period, been turned into a church. Monolithic columns had been erected
and an apse constructed for the reception of the altar. The walls of the ancient
building had not been seriously defaced—indeed, it is probable that the work
done by the Christians had assisted to preserve the original wall sculptures, for
it was, as we know, their custom to cover with a thick coat of plaster the ' super-
stitious images ' of the old religion, and on this plaster to paint ' superstitious
images 'of their own. However, this page of history did not please the gentle-
man who was director-general at that time, so out the evidences must come.
At no little trouble and cost the monoliths were dragged away and are to be seen
lying outside the walls of the courtyard on its south side. And not only so, but
no plans, drawings, or notes were published. We must now, to find out how the
Christian community had tried to re-arrange the court to suit its own uses, refer
to a plan in the Description de I'Hgypte.
In the temple of Luxor, the same gentleman carried forward works of
destruction begun by others. After passing through the great court and
hypostyle hall of Amenophis 111 we enter what is now an open court, but what
had been a covered chamber, its roof supported by columns. To quote
Murray's Handbook 1 :
' This Hall was in early Christian times converted into a church. A niche
or apse was hammered out in the south wall and the ancient reliefs were daubed
over with frescoes, which have now nearly disappeared.'
I quote these words as they stand because they so well interpret the venomous
feelings displayed towards any work of ' les mechants Coptes '. As a matter
of fact, the ' niche hammered out' was a doorway, which, by slight alterations,
had been re-arranged as an apse, whilst the sculptures were covered with a thick
coat of plaster, on which were painted some exceedingly stately and monumental
figures—none better in Egypt. We may admit that for the purposes of a complete
study of the excellent wall sculptures it was necessary to remove these paintings ;
but it was a piece of unscientific barbarism to break them up without even
procuring careful copies. The monastic remains at Der el Bahari which encrusted
the beautiful temple were broken up in the same reckless way. It was sufficiently
obvious that they could not be maintained, but surely, careful plans and registers
should not have been neglected, as they were.
The Nile valley from Cairo to Khartum is not less than 1,720 miles in length.
Seeing the unwarrantable neglect with which this page of the archaeology in
Egypt was treated, and, as there seemed no one but myself willing to take the
matter in hand, I set to work upon the compilation and collection of materials.
A study of this nature has not any very attractive results to show. No
cartouche of a hitherto unknown king can be hoped for. The buildings, being
generally of crude brick, have no gems of carving to show, nor can we ascertain
their dates by varieties in the mouldings. That which would have assisted the
1 Egypt and the Sudan, eleventh edition. Edward Stanford, 1907, p. 390.


student, the painting of figures and inscriptions with which the interiors were
liberally covered, is nearly all gone. There is left but a study of bare mouldering
walls and fallen roofs.
It is not a matter of wonder that societies for the study of Archaeology could
not be induced to spend the money of their subscribers on things which gave so
small an opportunity to produce an attractive volume.
And yet there is hope. In the neighbourhood of Wadi Haifa Dr. David
Randall Maclver, working for the University of Pennsylvania, has made some
valuable researches, assisted by Mr. Geoffrey Mileham, and to them I am
indebted for many kind hints and corrections of my more hurried labours.
It was at the suggestion of Sir Reginald Wingate, the Governor-General of
the Sudan, that I examined the long line of country between Soba in the south
and Haifa in the north. It would be difficult to over-estimate the kindness,
hospitality, and ready help I received from him and all those who have the honour
to serve under him.
In England we know but little of the customs and ritual made use of in
the ancient churches of Egypt. Although it would be absurd to claim the
Christian buildings as distinguished examples of architecture, they have their
place in the history of that art. When these structures, for the most part so
humble, were built, architecture was not, as it is now, a mere matter of imitation
and masquerade. People did not ask 'in what style is your building', they
did not make use of ' period' furniture, nor did they devise a church so as
to look pretty, but to be at the same time quite unsuited to the ritual which
was to be carried on within. The ritual was, in those days, the kernel, the
building was the shell made'to fit. Under these circumstances it is unfortunate
that we know so little of the controlling motives which dictated the form of the
buildings under consideration.
In answer to sundry questions I have asked him, the following information
has been given me by Marcus Bey Simaika, whose very lively and intelligent
interest in the Christian antiquities of his country is well known. Regarding
the number of altars he tells me :
' There are as many haikals as there are altars, one place is not singled
out as the haikal, par excellence. Their number varies. Some churches have
one altar, others more. According to a popular work entitled Miracles of the
Virgin, the great church of Athrib, near Benha, had twenty-four altars. It is,
however, probable that this church, like that of Abu Sifain at Cairo—for example
—consisted of a group of churches which made up, amongst them, the large
number of altars above stated.
'The only exception I can name to the custom of placing the altars in
a row on the eastern side of the church is in the crypt of Abu Sargah, where,
owing possibly to the exiguity of the place, the central altar faces east, the side-
altars north and south.
f The practice of having three altars in a church is said by some to be in


honour of the three persons of the Trinity, by others that the three altars corre-
spond to the Altar of Incense, the Altar of Sacrifice, and the Table of the Ark
in the Jewish tabernacle and temple.
' It is, however, certain that there was a necessity to have more than one
altar, as no altar can under any circumstances be used more than once in one
day. The centre altar of three, the one almost always used, is dedicated to
the saint of the church, the others to other saints, thus contradicting the theory
of the three altars being dedicated in honour of the Holy Trinity. When two
altars are used simultaneously, only the priest at the middle altar sings the
service aloud, the other must read inaudibly.'
In answer to some questions I asked him about existing monasteries,
Simaika Bey gives me the following information :
' There are eight monasteries for monks: (i) Der Abu Makar; (2) Der Amba
Bisho'i; (3) Der Suriani; (4) Der el Baramus—all in the Natron valley; (5) Der
Amba Antonius; (6) Der Amba Bula, these two near the Red Sea; (7) Der
Amba Samouil, near the Fayoum; (8) Der el Moharrak, near Manfalout. With
the exception of the last named they are all in the desert, and lie at distances
varying from a six-hours' to a four-days' journey from the cultivated land.
They contain from 350 to 400 monks in all. There are five convents for nuns,
all in Cairo: (1) Mari Girgis; (2) Abu Sifain, in Old Cairo; (3) Haret er Roum;
(4) Mari Girgis; (5) El Adra, Haret Zeweila, containing about 100 nuns in all.
' With regard to monastic and parochial churches. There are and have
been parish churches from the earliest times. Each parish church is in charge of
one or more married priests, who are sometimes assisted by one or more ordained
monks. As a rule the chief priest or the vicar of the parish must be married.
' The word Der is properly applied only to a place where a monastery or
a convent exists, or has existed. A parish church is called kanessah, a corruption
of the Greek word ecclesia. The place is not called a Der even if it counts
amongst its ministers several monks. If, however, the church once belonged
to a monastic institution it retains its monastic title. Thus Der el Abiad and
Der el Ahmar have become parish churches long since, and are served by married
priests. They do not contain one monk, but are yet called Der.
' The number of bishops in Egypt is at present fifteen. This is much less
than of old.
' We read in the life of Simeon the forty-second patriarch, who lived towards
the end of the seventh century, that a synod was convened at Alexandria by
order of Abdil Aziz, which was attended by sixty-four Monophysite bishops
besides Melkite bishops and those of other sects.
' In the eleventh century a synod met at Fastat by order of the Khalif
Mustansir, and his vizir Amer-el-Goyush was attended by forty-seven bishops
under Cyril the sixty-seventh patriarch.
' It does not appear that after the Arab Conquest churches were often con-
verted into mosques. 1 They were generally pulled down and mosques built with
their materials.
1 Is there not a good reason for this ? What makes a suitable plan for a church is very ill suited
to a mosque.—S. C.


' Before as well as after the Arab Conquest, different sects tried to appropriate
the churches. We read in the life of Khayal (A.D. 744-68) that the Melkites
claimed the church of Mari Mina at Mariout. Abdil Malik, after hearing both
sides, decided in favour of the Monophysites. Again, we read in the life of
Theophilus, sixty-fifth patriarch (A.D. 970-95), in the reign of the Fatimite
Khalif Muez-adin-Allah, that the Melkite patriarch Arsenius (who was the
brother of one of his wives and mother of El Hakim) laid claim to the church
All Mu'allakah. After great difficulties the Monophysites gave to the Melkites
the church of Sitt el Adra in Kasr el Sham'ah, now known by the name of
Kasnet el rehan, of which they subsequently regained possession.'
I will venture on a few remarks with regard to the number of altars above
referred to.
With regard to the plans of churches south of Aswan (Plates 111 —xxiv),
it will be observed that in most cases the aisles are so narrow that it hardly
seems possible to have placed an altar at the east end of them, more particularly
as there is usually a door in the east wall of the aisle giving access to the
little room beyond (see Plates vi—xn, xv, XVIII —xx, XXIII, xxiv). On
Plates VIII, xvii, and xxxvi of Churches in Lower Nubia, Mr. Mileham shows
us that he found the traces of small screens at the east end of the aisles,
but in each case these screens are evidently so disposed as to mask the
door into the little room beyond. They are not higdb arranged in relation
to an altar. Convenience and decency of arrangement seem to have been of
but small account in the churches we have examined. There is in them all
very restricted space, but in the aisles of the churches in Nubia there is not
any space for the smallest of altars. Such indications as we now see are all
in favour of one altar only on the ground floor, and that in the apse. I will not
venture on a speculation whether there may have been any altar on the upper
floor.
When we examine the plan on Plate xxxi, Der Simeon at Aswan, we find
that the available space is not quite so restricted. In the description of the
building the question is considered whether there can have been three altars, one
in each apse. As for altars at the east end of the aisles, we are here met with
the old difficulty, want of space and doors very inconveniently placed.
When we find ourselves north of Aswan the conditions are much changed,
but even in this part of Egypt, when we meet in a few cases with a plan of
undisputed antiquity, we are faced with the same difficulties as above stated.
For example, at the Der el Abiad (Plate XLV) and Der ei Ahmar (Plate XLIX),
we find ourselves in the presence of two plans, purely basilican in type. There
does not seem in these any accommodation for three altars at the east end of the
church, unless two of them were faced north and south. The eastern ends of
the aisles and of the transeptal spaces beyond them are so much ruined that it
seems useless to speculate upon what may have been the arrangements. On
Plate LV is shown the plan of Der Abu Hennes, one of the best preserved of the
1074 193 B b


basilican plans. Here the narrow aisles and inconvenient doorways at once
declare themselves.
When we study the plans of the type C we find a great change. On
Plate XXXIII (Fig. 2), Esna, Der es Shuhada, the building can be made to
accommodate three altars very easily, and in this building we find not less
than five: one in that which I take to be the original church, and which could
have accommodated three ; and four in an addition on the north side.
On Plate xxxiv, Der Todrus, Medinet Habu, we may be justified in
thinking that the church, as first built, had three altars, and that the fourth was
provided for later.
On Plate xxxv, at Medammot, we find five altars in a row, and nothing
to indicate that all these haikals were not built at the same time.
On Plate xxxvi, Der el Malak Mikhail, Kamulah, it is hardly open to doubt
that we see two churches standing side by side. The southern is clearly prepared
for three altars, the northern may be the same.
At Der Mari Boctor, Nakada (Plate xxxvn), may we be justified in sup-
posing that the church was originally built for three altars in a row ?
On Plate XXXVIII, Der es Salib, Nakada, the southern and the northern
churches are prepared for three altars, the intermediate has at present two
only, but may there not in this case have been some alteration since this part
of the building was erected ? At present the eastern part of the little church
does not seem at all to fit the western.
Plate XL, Der el Megma, Nakada; it would be very difficult to squeeze
three altars side by side into the church of Abu Hennes, but there is room in the
other two churches.
At Naga' ed Der (Plate XLI, Fig. 2), the church seems to have begun with
three altars side by side. The two to the north are, we may believe, in an addition.
At Der Mari Girgis (Plate XLII, Fig. 1) and at Der el Adra the main building
seems in each case to be prepared for three altars. It can hardly be denied
that as regards plans of the type C there is a preference for placing three altars
in a row in haikals prepared for them.
As regards sites, there must be many places in which remains of ancient
churches will be hereafter revealed to those who search. In the Stidan investiga-
tions are yet in their infancy. In one district only has scientific examination
been made, and that is from Farras, the northern frontier of the Sudan, to Wadi
Haifa. There is yet much more to be done at the mouth of the Second Cataract,
both on the mainland and on the islands, the west bank of the Nile opposite
Haifa making an admirable point for head-quarters.
A reference to Maps 3 and 4 (Plates xxvn and XXVIII) establishes this fact.
There are certainly many ancient sites which I was not able to visit. There must
be some, we cannot doubt, on the east bank of the river as well as upon the west,
and we know they exist on the islands with which this part of the cataract is
thickly studded. To make a general survey, as I have done, a cavalcade of camels,


tents, &c., was essential, but for a detailed investigation of a district such a
following is both costly and useless. A couple of tents, a few trusted men who
understand excavations by experience, and who do not, after the manner of the
ordinary native, dig up and destroy that which one is looking for ; with these,
starting from a well-established head-quarters, short expeditions can be made at
a reasonable cost. It is also essential that the investigators shall be provided with
a boat. With regard to this there are difficulties. In many places in the Sudan,
especially in the Batn el Hagar, boats are not to be found. In others the native-
built nagr, a curious and interesting structure, described by Herodotus, and of the
shape of half a walnut, is the only vehicle. This antiquated machine will sail
indifferently well before the wind, but against it progress is nearly hopeless;
tacking is almost impossible. I have crossed the river in a nagr in half an
hour and been more than four hours in returning whence I started. These
boats cannot be rowed, and indeed have not any oars. The place of the one
oar is taken by a crooked pole, with which, as may well be supposed, but little
progress can be made. On the other hand, the wood—' sunt: Acacia Nilotica'—
of which the boats are built is exceedingly hard, and will resist the hard blows
and buffetings which it will certainly receive at one time or another from the
rocks against which one is easily swept by the swiftly rushing water. A folding
boat must be used with great circumspection; in many places it is not safe.
I have tried boats of two makes, and in neither case were the oars sufficiently
strong; those which are made in two pieces fitted together with a socket are
dangerously weak. To make use of a boat as the chief means of conveyance
is, I think, out of the question. Not only are the available machines such as
have been described, but, travelling in them, there is every chance, indeed
almost a certainty, that sites which should be observed will be passed by.
The native does not in the least distinguish between an outcrop of rock
and the foundation of a stone building. A modern brick structure set up in the
time of Mohammed Ah has the same, or indeed more, value in his eyes (being
probably better preserved) than the ruin of an ancient church or castle. The
traveller is, to no small extent, at the mercy of what these people have to tell.
The only reliable conveyances are the donkey, the camel, and one's feet,
the latter the best of the three, the others following.
There is most water in the river in the shorter months of the year; this is
consequently the best time to select, apart from the question of summer heat.
A capacious boat can be moved easily. On the other hand, the wind, persistently
blowing from the north-west, is perniciously cold. Often it is impossible to
make any progress towards the north, although floating on a powerful stream.
Haifa being reasonably accessible, head-quarters for the examination of
a certain part of the river can be established there and stores easily obtained.
From that place antiquities could be examined as far as the Dal Cataract.
As we go southward the next place, accessible with reasonable care, is New
Dongola. From Kareima (see Gebel Barkal on Map 3, Plate xxvn) the steamer
195 B b 2


makes the journey northward to New Dongola. Kareima is itself reached by
train from Atbara and Khartum. When there is sufficient water the steamer goes
beyond New Dongola as far north as Kerma. New Dongola or Kerma can be
made head-quarters for examining the antiquities northward to Dal and south-
ward towards Old Dongola. Old Dongola should, again, be made a centre and
head-quarters, as not only is there much to be investigated there, but close by
is the Wadi Letti, and other places lie on the river or in lateral valleys.
Between Old Dongola and Kareima (Gebel Barkal) it will be observed that
on Map 3 are many sites marked, and doubtless there are several more not yet
known. Here the steamers cease to run, as they cannot ascend the Fourth
Cataract.
It is said that in the Fourth Cataract are several ruins of churches; Lepsius
refers to some. The railway from Kareima to Abu Hamid is of no use for
investigation, as it does not skirt the river, and, if it did, the progress is too
rapid and the stations are too far apart.
Of the stretch of river between Abu Hamid and Khartum I cannot give any
information. Up to the present no one seems to know whether there may be
relics of Christian antiquity. It seems not a little remarkable, if it be true,
that whilst sundry ruins of churches are found south of Soba, none should
exist north of it, more especially when we reflect that Soba was a capital town,
a very considerable centre, and that there had been settlements of no little
importance at the places now known as Massawarat and Kabushia. Why
should not the Christians have lived there as other people had done before ?
The last head-quarters for investigation I can at present suggest is Khartum,
but probably Sennar can soon be added to the list.
Such information as we possess we owe to the interest of such inspectors and
others who may care to make notes. These gentlemen and those who are making
maps are not sent out by the government on archaeological missions. They
have not the time to spare nor the money to spend on excavation, nor are they
equipped for the work by previous study. Mere aimless digging does actual
harm. It would be better that the sites should be left untouched than that
ill-directed trenching and confused piling up of materials should result, as it
may do, in destroying evidence or, at the best, burying it in a mound of brickbats,
or, at the worst, even causing the downfall of that which might have remained
standing for many a long year.
Attention has already been called to the unfortunate efforts of well-
intentioned diggers at Soba. One cannot, however, speak with too much
esteem of those gentlemen, government inspectors, each having a considerable
area of country under his charge, who often quite alone move up and down
their districts, and, where many men would simply rust away in the dull routine
of their work, make interests for themselves, some in a study of ethnology, others
of the botany or geology of their districts, and others of ancient sites or objects
that appear to them to be deserving of observation. These are duly noted down


on the maps with which they travel. I have found no men more ready to impart
what they have observed than these gentlemen, and, indeed, without their kind
co-operation and that of the survey department, the Sudan maps would have
had but a few sites marked upon them. I can only express a hope that these
gentlemen will hold their hand at excavation, for reasons already given.
As regards the maps and investigations of sites, it may be observed by
a reader who refers to those I here submit and compares them with the maps
issued by the Sudan or the Egyptian Government, that the names of places
do not, in many cases, agree.
As the government maps do not agree amongst themselves, a diversity of
readings may be excused. Dealing, as the surveyors have to do, with countries
where there may not be any written language, or, if there be, where the people
are careless as to pronunciation, and, finally, where those who have to write down
the names do not know the value of the sounds, several different interpretations
of the name of one place are often to be found. Furthermore, the natives them-
selves neither appreciate nor are careful as to exactitude. Under such conditions
real accuracy cannot be attained.
To add to the difficulties, several varieties of transliteration from Arabic to
European languages are made use of, and are, it seems, current at the same time.
We arrive by train at a station where is written up ' Guergueh'; we look in a map
and find the same place written down as ' Girga 'or ' Girgeh '. The French find
it impossible to squeeze enough vowels into a transliteration; to them we owe the
melodious compound ' Mallaoui \ On the government map we find ' Mellawi
and so on. In quoting from Messrs. Evetts and Butler's Abd Salih, I, of course,
make use of their method of transliteration, and find a well-known town under
the name of ' Uswan'; others write it' Aswan'; at the railway-station it figures
as * Assouan'.
In the list of churches given by Simaika Bey and printed in the Appendix
may be observed sundry varieties of spelling. It is not for me to undertake the
enterprise of getting into harmony all the variations above referred to, as I am
quite unequipped for such an undertaking. Undoubtedly place-names in a
developing country are as yet very fluid. It may, indeed, be asked, What is the
authority for the names as now spelt in Arabic ?
It will be observed that the number of names given in the list (Appendix A)
is much in excess of the names indicated on the maps. This is explained by the
fact that I have done my best to indicate only those places where the churches
have about them somewhat of antiquity, or are reputed to have such remains.
It is needless to say that it has not been possible to visit all the churches
in Egypt. Whilst the people themselves neither know nor care—with the
rarest exceptions—about antiquities, no means are at hand for gaining informa-
tion that can be relied upon. I have had to be content without it.
Apologies are due to the reader for the style, or to speak more properly,
the want of style with which this book is written. It could hardly be otherwise.


Very much of it is in the nature of a catalogue, the items of which have been
collected year by year in not less than eighteen note-books, sundry sketch-
books, and many places, some of which have been visited five or six times. The
compilation of the matter has partaken not a little of the nature of excavation
in the aforesaid books, and is consequently not always as coherent as might
be wished.
I have already expressed my obligation to Mr. F. W. Green and Professor
Sayce. In collecting materials from Haifa northwards I have had the kindly
help of several friends, amongst others of Max Herz Bey, Architect to the Comite
de Conservation des Monuments de l'Art Arabe, of Mr. C. R. Peers, now the
Secretary to the Royal Society of Antiquaries ; to the late Harold Swainson,
to Mr. R. D. Wells, to Mr. Blackburn Daniell, and others; and last, but not
least, to kindly and intelligent assistance given me by my servants and sailors.


*3
3
aj
CJ
OJ
M
fj M ■+ lOVO
X
CJ
Ii
C
aJ
X
OS
"O
OJ
CJ
Cu
O
Si
as
"E,
_>4
X
as
X
O
_3
1. 5 5- 1 5
3
X
CJ
T3
3
0J
cu
a.
cj
3
3
w
u
X
-•>
4' T) 0 "B
£
CJ
0
4-4
as
3
<
3
CU
J
s
3
<rf
as
>
.3
2
"3 "0
<u
3
JJ
CJ
0)
X
3
■5,
40
aj
x
4—4
X
3
t-H
Si
J
X
H
4-4
a,
o
c
3
<
CJ
\
1
()
J
Ou
><
O
w
bO
W
.s
in
<4_
o
3
XI
CJ
X
-4-J
6
0
X
as
3
<
.£
<V
rt
a
u
2
*>
I
>4
3
3
3
CJ
CJ
2
1—1
C/J
o>
4-4
"53
c
aS
%
aT
:2
3
B
CO
aj
ch
XJ
CJ
3
3
3
X
-4-J
U
a
4-4
*u
H
Cu
cu
JC
4
la
- j, 3
X
3
CJ
CJ
.3
X
w
P4
w
to
(LI
X
CJ
3
3
4-4
3
CJ
X
£
OJ
to
OJ
X
•3)
4->
rt
</>
3
0
X
Cu
H
CO
X
o
tn
O
PQ
in
3
CJ
in
CJ
e
as
2
3
0
3
O
CJ
'3
E
O
-i->
.52
3
OS
3
OJ
CJ
to
to
CJ
0
2
0
•8J
g
X
CJ
3
CO
3
s
CJ
X
-i->
T3
3
.2
3,
£
as
01
X
0
0)
>41
3
<L)
CJ
2
"Hi
41
in
0
as 0
Q
E
<
rt
X
4-4
4-4
2
T3
3
O
bO
.3
c
OJ
£
in
CJ
3
4-4
CJ
CJ
*50
JO
(0
3
3
§
0
3
"c3
U
a£
X
X
* E
X
1—1
p
W
CO
w
E
CJ
E
o
o
e
<L>
X
C
X
>4
s
X
X
T3
CJ
4-4
CO
OJ
a.
to
OJ
X
4-4
to
X
Li
aj
3
0
4-4
.10
OJ
X
4-4
4-4
3
<n
0
T3
0
'3
01
a.
3
3
O
CJ
3
O
>s
0
aS
3
3
ts
3
3
3
m
to
H
Q
District
X
.2
2
V c
- rt
t E
3 - 0
3 CJ
c 2
CJ
CJ <0
0) ■£
X
Dh
E
aS
o
"55
w
3
X~
£
X
41
bo
3
a
a
'5
<
CJ
X
2 a *3 *5
3 0
CJ 3
3
CJ
CJ
X
DL,
<
u
<D
3
OJ
X
V
X
3
.2
ctf
aS
CO
O
3
N
W
►-> ox
> CP <
JC
H cu
~ 0
. X
o
HH
H
X
41
4-4*
X
CJ
3
.2
"3
£
>4
3
0
to
X
3
2
CJ
CJ
41
3
A.
•<
u
ti.52
.£ W
2 CJ
ca
"S
CJ
X
P-i
OJ
2
3
CJ
aS
"3
O
41
CJ
X
n
C
Cu
*3
TJ
c
co
3
3
as
.3
u
><
CJ
X
H
ffl
E
c«-i
0
to
CJ
X
OJ
£
OJ
3
as
3
CJ
X
a.
.3
3
CJ
3
bO
41
O
3
C
VJ
aggala
1 Abbassieh
oulac
[aret es Sakaytn
* 2
0 # s-t
C rt
< -s
'3
CQ
o
Q
O
E
H
T3
0)
T3
J3
o
.s
(M
•4->
X
CJ
CJ
X
4—4
0
4-4
as
3
bO
O
a,
0
OJ
x
CJ
X
CJ
>
rt
X
X
>1
41
"3
0
X
4-»
3
a!
OJ
3
O
me. I do
O
X
.2
2
OJ
X
N
. 4J
X 5
CJ
.2 2
IS'«
10
&
M
3
Qt
o
01
3
3
TJ
OJ
0
.0
X
0
4-4
w
h W « S
CJ 3
'3 O
O.X
0 rt
41
6
O
CJ
3
41
£
TT
'3
P-I
o
o
2
<D
x
£
CJ
X
4-4
X
bO
CJ
3
O)
OJ
X
3
.2
3
O
OH
CJ
to
0
X
-4-J
3i
O
3
O
3
.2
3.
A,
3
to
U 3
CJ 0
X 3
4-< *1-4
<*H (/)
O <D
«E
P.
V %
W X
. U
X
CJ
(4
H
CO
3
CJ
3
O
Si
X
as
OJ
£
CJ
are
OJ
2
3
to
ctf
T3
g
>>
HH
3-)
3
T3
4-4
"O
3
3
3
2
T3
CJ
to
0)
s
5
«
1-1 2
2 £
2 3 .x
X <3 ?3
.H J/5 X
2
0
C
3
S
OJ
_>
"CJ
CJ
CJ
Si
OJ
>
a!
X
1—1
X
CJ
X
£
in
as
X
CJ
3
OJ
X
.3
"3
CU
as
TJ
"3
CU
.2
41
.CO
OJ
X
H
to
O fS
UI
a
CJ
3
O
o
3
O
M
F-
_)
<
3
3
OJ
4-4
<
tongues. It is t
names as here
3
X
O
41
2
X
"to
to
0
CU
£
.8
1. Mari Morco
2. El Adra
3. El Mal&k M
4. Amba Rues
5. Es Sitt Dim
6. El Malak G
1 Cathedral Chi
are several Cathe
O
T3
CJ
3
X
3
O
CJ
bfl
.£
'S
X


i> 00 ON
O M N 00
10 vo
00
ON O w
<M CO
N W
N
lO NO l> 00
N N N N
>>.3
2 S3
s
<u
3
i
ra
a fa
.13IT,
k-M - '1 fc-
*«• rj,
i H if
-N N.
n
"S
1'
>9
• -S
_r>
M
"V-v
H* 1
mteenth century. 17 Serio
t. Cathedral. 19 Sevente<
/enteenth century. 23 A conv
tit. 27 A convent.
T
J s J
..TN .»o->
-3' ~ 2
■«\N •
-Tj| .
5 S :
£ 5 :
5 5
J zJ { ~
:>T\ -
Cathedral. 16 Sev<
•s since. 18 Ancien
<U 0
01 >
3 0
« u
<
3
3
<U .
" 3
J3 <U
>
3 pH
Governorate
o
u.
U
rt
. <U
X >1
rt ►>
£
O
3! 3
'O 0
2 ■§
20 Sevente
vent. 25 A cc
W "J3
(U <L)
& b
2 73
3 >»
c a
0 5
S C
<u
District
Mouski
Darb el Ahmar
ft ft
Sayeda Zeinab
Old Cairo
ft
i 5 5
5
£55
5 -
Mouski
ft
Darb el Ahmar
Old Cairo
a
ithedral. centi
fortress 24 A c
3 14-18.
43 _e U C «
•0 ca J3
c e EH
a flj 5? —
by the Comite de Conservatic
t. Cathedral. 10 Sevente
V °
Locality
Haret es Zeweila
Haret er Roum
tf n
Fom el Khalig
Old Cairo
tf ft
ft »
Roman Fortress
!
ft ft
-
_ 3
cj
S £
£
<3 5
PQ
- r
Haret Zeweila
a n
Haret er Roum
Old Cairo
ft ft
Comite. 13 Anci
rebuilt in 1870. Thf
1 its walls are the
jn
>,'3 .3
j? 3 -s
rt ."3
Dedication of Church
7. El Adra
8. Mari Girgis
9. El Adra
10. Mari Girgis
11. Mari Mina
12. Marcorius Abus-Sifain
13. El Adra bil Damchirieh
14. Amba Shnuda
15. Mari Girgis
16. A1 Adra bil Muallaka
17. A1 Adra bi Kasriet er Rihan
18. Es Sitt Borbara
19. ElKaddisan Sargius waWakl
20. El Adra bi Bablun
21. El Amir Tadros el Mishriki
22. Abukir wa Yuhanna
23. El Maldk Mikhai'1
a
u
*0
<
rt
<U
&
(J)
13
u
<0J
Q
■4-
25. Der Mari Girgis
26. Der el Amir Tadros
27. Der Abus Sifein
28. Der Mari Girgis
7 Ancient. Cathedral. Repaired
ments de l'Art Arabe. 9 Ancien
Ancient. Cathedral. Repaired
Repaired by Comite. 14 Burnt
is called 'Kasr es Shamm'ah', w


w PI
oo rt- lo <o i> oo a
O
M
M CI CO lO vo l> CO
MWMMMMMrH
ON O M
H PI N
22
CO Tf- uo vo
Pl PI PI PI
1
i
_»
1
I
\] -3
I 1 5 s
' A-
s$
"V
H 5 * . 5 ; :
.1
Sl^^l* =
n A v ti
J" 3, * =
v
-5 "1
;l 5 A .
P- H'
S3 5 3
-O
"1. \ :
4: ."3 5 4s
U\ . ? :
M») —— » «s
HI "
;i =
1 :
=111
: J"3 !)
£
41
<o
U
3
3
3^
=h-
t
3*
"b
n =5 .r* ° =a u =5
« * »?i
*S
!s
d&H* 1
J
4 4
-i
n
3*
u
c
(U
<u
Jc
bO
s
o
J
Sr.
41
"*2
8
<2
8
&
g
Q
.2
*C
T3
•8 -
JZ
CJ
U3
<3 5 :
s
£
"Ni
5>
cd r
X
<U
<
•S 2
J5 4J
§ jq C C - C C C
<U
03
£
<U
25
Dq
Damanhur
Abu Hommos
Rosetta
Neguila
99
Teh el Barud
99 99
5
. d,
8
<2
■!
.Vi
£
,-s
Tsi
°Q
OQ
.<0
• °5
c
flj
<u
u ~
oS
-*-J
-*-»
<
+->
15
J4
CJ
u
.3
15
C/3
"5
- .5
- 13 „ _
<u - - -
JZ
C/3
s s a
<3
5 c r
4)
s
5
Z Z 5
JZ
m
13
JZ
o
u
<
V
£■
<«
.-&>
<$
8
o
>4
>>
os 5-
■—* C3
*«3
w CJ
w
• >H 4_>
03
*5 JZ
Damanhur
Atfe
Rosetta
Dimatiu
Terraneh
Ezbet Abu Hamrah
Dahrieh
03
C
03
X
3
J=>
<
<U
JZ
o3
~ 5
2 O
03
—' 10 c
U e <3
■trl *3 G - b/)
5i ~ -a
JD <L) »ri
.5 JZ
<y os
.2 c *o
c c
JZ
a
u
<3
OS
s s
-w . H
b? «
rt *N
"O
<3
"O
3
t_
03
tn
m
o3
X
C
<u
o3
JZ
u
Bay el Arab
Behnai el Ghanam
Serss el Lianna
eS
4)
01
J4
%
s.
cd
<H
o
n
S
o
4)
W O
W
WWW § § §
N S W
C/3
OH
J3
U
1
s
CJ
>
o
*3
.3
X
CJ
Ui
3
St
.o
•CJ
.8
•8
II)
O (I)
2 'bp
o .is
S O
*c *c
<03 <03
El Malak Mikhail
El Adra
Mari Morcos
Mari Girgis
El Adra
El Adra
El Adra
El Adra
Mari Girgis
El Adra
El Adra
Amba Sarabamun
Amba SarabamOn
Mari Girgis
El Malak Mikhail
El Adra
El Adra
Mari Girgis
Mari Girgis
03
T3
<
w
03
Sh
"O
<
w
5
x:
£3
i .2
OS -
2 o
03 <TJ w
s < 'S
l
w w S
CJ
£
CJ
2
H pi
CO 4* UO vd t> CO ON
o
M
h ci co 4 io
M Hi M M M
vo d- co
ll M H
d\ o" h
M 01 N
ci
PI
CO
PI
4- in no"
pi pi pi


p-
•00 ON O M N ro 10 vo f- CO ON O
M N commcofococomcoco't
J
i
i
J = :
:
- £'
■3 i
x>
: =1
,d 4; ,3 4; ,3 1. 4; 2
1 S3 53 3 S s 3
2
>• « M «
'V
51,11 31
-if
i v-
. j' 3 5 3
t L : v>
*5
0
3
_3'
J
*>
1
£
x)
la 1
> I i
3 _ L
■3. ■%
•?
1- S
<1 —.
c
0
X
tn
t/i
a
(L>
CJ
X
4;
X
<u
(U
X
1?
n
4
./> — — "tk
] 3 . fc
.3s
D
3
3
_3"
L
3
D
c
<CS
m
<
«
n
0
a>
s
c/5
c/j
0
b
0
w
rt
c
0
S
Mudirea
X
0J
«3
<3
C
<u
3
a a
- 5
x
.Si
„ x ..........
a
X
O
5s
s, 3J S s
nh
£ 3
0 4,
•£»{
I 1,
District
c
a
E
X
w
<
c
a
6 a
X
in
<
JS
13
H
rt
rt* 5 -
N
'v •§
a a cc
« H
steries. Natrun Valley
-=• =j _D"
■311
IZ
_3-
Lo
L
S
S _D"
c
"a
CD
X
X
X
(D
C3
E
0
in
■
Locality
Sobk
Talia
Shatanuf
ctf
£
w
Bamam
Tukh en Nasara
» ;>
Ezbet el Baramus
Kafr el Zayat
Ebiar
9f
Berma
Mehallet Marhum
Tantah
Der el Baramus contains four churches
1. El Adra.
2. El Amir Tadros.
3. Mari Yuhanna el Meimidan.
4. El Malak Mikhail.
Der es Suriani contains three churches
1. El Adra.
2. El Adra.
<U
<U
X
<u
X
_c
"c3
X
X
§
X
13
<u
X
0
S-
X
a
t-
3
<2
m
c
"c3
c
0
0
u>
<rt
X
rt
1. El Kaddls Abu Makar.
2. Shuiukh Shihat et tesa'a wa arb
3. Esh Shahid Abuskhirun.
a,
(U
a;
X
<u
X
-4-1
rt
X
X
i
X
13
<
X-
<3
cn-
<3
X
<
E
0
cf
d
in
C
1
cs
1
W
CO
3
a
X
<
J-.
«u
Q
s
•<3-
O
s
0
3
cr
a
CD
CO
•»§£
8
.o
27. El Adra
28. Mari Girgis
29. Mari Girgis
.2
tuO
.b
0
*n
<03
s
0
CO
31. Mari Girgis
32. El Adra
33. Mari Girgis
34. El Adra
35. Mari Girgis
36. El Adra
37. Mari Mlna
38. Mari Girgis
39. Girgis
40. El Adra
3 ' in the keep'.


M N l> CO ON 0 M <N CO rt- in <0
. M M M M M M M
I> OC
H H
ON 0
M CJ
H
W CO
W CI
n —
33 =
-
.T :
U :
a
•>
I
3
3
z
J !!!S!!
} - J -a 13i Ai -\i 5 A =
■2 ni 4;j 4;i 1;J 4;
- S "
v v -9 — N ——■>
M M
=
J M » M
-
i
3
L
jvi ■
1 h t\*V
M 1 f %
"J 3- i
3'i
yj
#NI J >«N
f* "
4 ?
.11
i) Hi
-J «*•>
1%*
1
*§
v~
13
.3 1)
aS 33
CO J=
-M N g 3 5
U <U
O 3 rt
w co Q
3 3 S 3 3 3 3
3
3
5 5
2 5
J3
V
3
IH
aS
J3
CO
r
"L 3
l/J
§
2
.<o
£
■&■
5
«"Sk
oq
<o
**>*
.<o
•S
.<o
3 as "rt
as jj u
3 3 2
■M N c C
2J 2 c3
O 3 3
cl, co Q S
13
a
e C
•S
&> £ u
% § £
J2 CO as q :
■ „ J ij »c
5 5 ~ Jo 3 o
£ .£ .t;
co S S s :
3
.5P
*N
bC
as
N
J3
£
03
"rt H3
2 w tJ
s i c
a» as •-
xws
£
-
J3
o
u
3
JC
o
<u c
2 '2
■B • 5
« -*■
C "5
.= a
03 o
C . <
° o "H
:~ JS
o w "73
3 W X
m S
a,
<u
<U
j>t
<u
jr
-4->
# c
*c3
JC,
_*
i
<aj
-s
w
CO
.■&
1
o
-o M -5
"3 is 03
aS ±j u
co <u « -
■M N p 52
1- <L» C 5
O 3 J2
Ph CO Q §
Redanieh
Salamun el Kammash
| Kafr Yussef el Awad
Mit Damsis
Dakadus
Kafr Ibrahim Yussef
Mit Ghamr
05 _
fc- T3
Vl
<o -£
W Jc
— c n
W J3
6 8
U LH
aS 3
(/) W
# bp
*N
03 ;
bO
a!
N
c
c3
£
'o
CO
JS
3
<
03
rt
w
3
!£
aS
J3
CO
J3
U3
J" aS
3 bio
•5 c
<J
v
aS m
W co
*u
£
<u
CO
<4_
aj
w
a
>
a
w
.52
"5/3
J-.
O
is
aS c3
J3 U
(/) 03
oS Cxj
W u
•tJ 'rt
s w
« 6 -S
| < w
H «
u
«U
Q
1
s
3
.5
.8
1
<3
El Adra
El Adra
Mari Girgis
El Malak Mikhail
El Adra
Mari Girgis
El Adra
Mari Girgis
El Adra
Mari Girgis
El Adra
El Adra
Mari Girgis
Mari Girgis
Mari Girgis
a
c
as
E
5
3
3
<u
H : S
V] -C
« 1/5
T3 03
13 "
03 ct
M JD
- £
w <
aS
C
<c3
*£
M Q '
aS as
£J U<
13 • - t3
< <n <
— m
www
03 aS
Ih U
-O 13
< <
w w
aS
u
13
C
w
m' d co 4 io
t> oo d\ o" h ci co
M M M M
4- in
M M
NO ti-
H H
00
M
ON O
M «
M
N
oi
N
CO
N


j
i
V
rj-iovo 00 ON O W N COrt-iOVO ® o ii 1 5 1 12 t 2 E5
N N W N P) N COOOCOOOCOOOrOCOfOfO't't'T-t't't't't-tTl-iOiOiO'O
J
4; T ■a ,2 4; .3 "a ,3 4: ? % 4: i 4: . ,3
= a t; 1 ' "1 s f '\Sii $ "i
b b !>
n
JV 3>i i i i .]£ M M *i ff .]• "b
i\ f * \ $ % i i b 3 " Jl 3 b a-j
o: JT !D T ,
3 ' I i
Mudirea
fl) f, %
•3 s ~ cc ■
-* 5 5 I 5 5 5 5 5 5 ....... .... 5 . 5 2 O 25
Js j? «
<A O o s
District
Miniet el Gamh
>* *>
Tukh
Nakbas
Nawa
99
99
Galitib
99
99
Mahallet Kebir
n t>
Zifteh
99
i
99
Dessuk
99
Kafr el Cheikh
>> >>
Santa
Talkha
99
Cherbin
99
Tantah
Kafr el Zayat
Ktiesna
99
99
Locality
Tarut
Kafr Salama Ibrahim
Kafr ed Dfir
Benha
Kafr Atalla
Mostorod
El Kosheish
El Kalzam
Kom Eshfin
Sindibis
Galiub
Mahallet Kebir
Samanud
Zifteh
Masgad Wasef
Sombat
Dessuk
Kafr el Kheir
Kafr Yussef Hennis
Sakha
Kafr Suleiman Awad
Bousat
Nabaroh
Belcas
Beriet Belcas
Seberbey
Bassiun
Ebnas
Mit Behreh
Tukh Tambesha
Dedication of Church
24. Mari Girgis
25. Marcurius Abus Sifein
26. El Malak Mikha'il
27. El Adra
28. Mari Girgis
29. El Adra
30. El Malak Mikha'il
31. El Malak Mikhail
32. El Adra
33. Mari Girgis
34. Mari Girgis
35. Mari Girgis
36. Abanub en Nehlssi
37. Marcurius Abus Sifein
38. Mari Girgis
39. Es Sitt Rifkeh
40. Mari Girgis
41. Mari Girgis
42. Mari Girgis
43. El Adra
44. El Adra
45. Mari Girgis
46. Mari Girgis
47. A1 Adra
48. Es Sitt Dimiana
49. El Malak Mikhai'1
50. Mari Mina
51. Mari Girgis
52. Mari Girgis
53. El Malak Mikhail


•*-
X
to
to
v£>
to
M N
CO
rj- to vo t> CO Os O
HH
M
M
N CO
1H M H
10 vo
W M
00 OS
Hi M H
IS
OS
22
CO
■>4*
N
3
3
•5
J 1
1 1
3 *
-
•r
• 1
»•«
Mt
V
'V J3 ,
J 0 - t -a
0 1 v
£ 1 J 'V J J>
5 rN M
L)
* 1
J -N3 "j :
A- ,2
i) *-01 -
_3'^
11
<4
s%
&
1
>■%
-o
-3 —j
J !
u
U
5
D
'•%
X'
D
V
1
>o
>J.J
~k 1
M-
\
\
«>
=
1V N *•
■S B
IAI
X
A
VS
8
*3
ss
<S
1
.<o
£
•
1
te
<3
C
<u
S
5
£
X
03
O
E
<3
W
V
03
O
U
O
Q
District
as
c
03
03
a
E
o
W
13
_c
IS
aj
X
CO
bfl
13
S
x
<u
Si
aS
X -
B
w
-
1 X
- <U
N r; C: L L L
0
J=
- td
W <
E
<3
w
aS
03
•4-1
w
.f
<u
Si
<3
3
C
5 <L>
t/3
03
Si Si
3 <3
-5 c
"2 ®
aS u
H co
5
Si
3
X
X
as
H
aS
03
w
<4~»
O
a
0
j=
v)
M
<u
•C
4-»
Vh
O
cd '
u
13
aS
X
W
13
32
'3D
03
as
s
a!
in
C
CJ
(0
0
Locality
<3
13
X
<
<£l
a3
«
S-
aS
hfi
ai
K
13
aS
C
03
4->
c
<u
•
oq
ci
M
*C «.
E
*35
El Warrak
Gizeh
Manial Shiha
Mona el Amir
Tammuh
Om Khenan
Adawieh
B
<3
oS
w
13
($ -4->
U 03
2 fa *- c
as <g v£S O j; 3
u as 33 JX 3 T
<3 J3 X w S JJ
H S < W < S
XI
aS
N
W
—. 0)
as <U
•8 |
0 §
« a
0
5 g
-M
03 13
Si
<3
X
c
a!
CO
JT
"n
as
55
.2
'03
03
as
Q
*>c
H
X
co
S
•*-> *N
w
O
W
1—t QJ
W CO
w w
W
Dedication of Church
as
Si
X)
<
W
3
Si
13
C
w
as
i~
13
<
w
03
a
*C
3
u
as
§
IN
1 2 1
« < <
www
El Adra
Mari Morcos
Kozman wa Dimian
El Amir Tadros
El Kaddis Marcurius
El Amir Tadros
El Adra
03
'So
O
•c
<3
£
c
"C
w
13
E
<3
03
Si
3
«22
as 13 13
| < <
< W W
0
03
03
O
W
Si
CJ
as ai
13 s-
<rt 13
W <
03
W W
2
u
<3
w
*c
X
3 _
S3
s
"2 3
<U
Q W
•S2
'SD
Si
!3 as as
0 u t- 1
13 13
1 < <
S w w
*E
X
aS
X
O
X
aS
13
W
03
O
Si
13
aS
H
Si
E
<
W
•4-
lO
to
to
vd
to
w ci
CO
LO vo" CO On O
M
w
M
D CB 4
M M M
to vo"
M M
M
00* 6\
M M
O M
N N
ci
w
CO
N
■4-
N


H CI
CO rh in vo
o oo
OI
6
11
12
C\ O M N
MHMMMMI-ICJNN
™~
\o
] ;
0
.?
I' I
J 2'
3>3 j
"is t
3 -l 4
? -f J
13
•"S
J,
J
M
i
i
3- 3-
3'-\=\ : ,
3 }> ! "
t *
5 5
A?*
b
,m *) , r p ~ , r £> 3 3
y M **
5
-3
t
«>
1
D
4
1:
1
f
)•
X
'*3'
A
i
Hi
3
,
•«j\, -3
a
1
<*
__r\
3i
J
<0
cs
1'
33
1
5 4 S3 <5
03 3 -■
9 J
11
i^J
Tj o <1 -3. i V) -V
3 ""P
1 sT-
14 J
Hit
QQ
s
«
UH
O
.p w
<D *3
N
<2 <U
O w
5 .5 .5- 5
5 2
x:
a
i
- -
5 5 5
; s
<o
*
«
£
(M
U
OS S
CO
IU
a
°Q
*?*
<3
If)
■P .--
ri-j P
*3 1)
< PQ
5 5 2 5
3
to
3
£
"S -=
.•2 3
PQ W
5 5
<4-»
<Z3
5 s
3
1 s s »
bJ3 'P
« g 5 5 5
IS PQ
3
X
O
<U
>
CP
co
t-
s
# C
*3
C
O
oq
fej
.■a*
8
<s
c
o
S
"3
» .C
U CO
«U O
Q PQ
•| 5
3 c«
O S3
"aJ 2
4-> U JM
c a S
£ w •«
P T3
5 -a 5 -2
-14
J5
"3 B
<3
25 B
h ®
C/5 "qJ
<3 u.
-O «U
< Q
3
X
CO
-P 5
Jl
m Q
C
ti
co C
rt
c/>
•4_»
w
"a3
rt JJ r2
u u s
S *N g
Ashnein en Nassara
Der el Garnus
Sharuna
Abu Girg
D6r es Sankurieh
Kafr Sulia
Bardanuha
-4->
<u
co
<u
Q
c
u
<u
co
3
W
a;
~o
<u
2
to
C/j « PQ
tp U-t
w i
X
4-1
4-J
O
cu c
co
<3
g CO
X qj
1
6
«
.o
••2
«
.Vi
■s
CO
a
'5
O 3
•+-» «—<
C <3
< m
3 3
X X
e B
< <
CO
a
o »
c g>
< o * 2 2 2
PJ TJ T3 *D T3
| -c < « < <
<SUHHH
3
X
-14
.a i
••2 <ctf
o 13
■a §
<3 __
§ w
bD
a
"iS
a,
<
CO
2 §
<
w w
3 «
•2
~
i i
-14 -14
<3 <3 3
3 3 »T3
www
M&ri Girgis
EI Adra
El Malak Mikhail
El Adra
El Amir Tadros
Amba Itnasius er Rasuli
Amba Kastur
a
0
c
<
3
X
6
<
t-4
0
<u
to
3
C
O
£
CJ
■5 0
X
s -—' w
*C3
. '3 0
« X c
0 5
c w .2
o§ t3
C -14 .H
<3 *n
PS 0
3 J3 13
"c 10
£ —. -P
< W H
m d co
m d
co 4- »o so
l> 00*
d\ o"
H d
co t}- in
vo" t> 00 6\ 0* h d
X
H


W N CO -t IP 00 ON O W N CO t*- lO v£) t- CO 0\ 0
HMMMMM WHMH<N
M N CO
N O « N
o
3
*
li
1
3
3
$
?
j ' - •■■••■•••• • •
l 3 .== £3 * 3 r 11 I S 1 3 j ! 3 v *=
3» 3 lb- 3
■1
PA-
i
SWVnN'H W t 1; ■
=V :
• **
<*>
_OJ
«
s
P3
Q
<«
0
u
tD
to
<U
Q
c
u
<u
ifi
03
tO
Si
1
,<0
w
rt
<3 .fa -
k>
OS
§ W <
to
0
>
rt
c
JS
0
'—>
CO
T3
C
The Monastery of Amba Btila (S. Paul the Hermit) also in the E
Contains several churches (the number not stated).
a
PQ
cS
-O
B
<
o
T3
.VJ
£
.<o
CQ
8
o
•>}
Minieh
Der Sawada
Nazlet Ebeid
Damshir
Tuah
Talla
Tahnasha
Tahna et Gabal
Der Gabal et Teir
>> >> n >>
Albihu
El Maasara
Klossana
Kom Dafash
El Iba
Beni Ghani
Taha el Aameda
Balansora
Beni Ebeid
Gress
Kom el Zoheir
Abiuha
Manharry
ft
to
3
u
!>>
U
c/i
CJ
rt
o
<U
T3
CO
J3
o
u
3
J2
CJ
"rt
.a,
*3
c
*E
a.
<u
H
Dedication of Church
1. Mari Girgis
2. Amba Hur
3. Mari Mina
4. El Amir Tadros
5. El Adra .
6. El Kaddis Abu Bgul
7. Amba Barsum el Erian
8. Mari Mina
9. El Adra
10. Abu Makar
11. El Kaddis Abuskhirun
12. Mari Girgis
13. El Malak Mikhai'1
14. Mari Girgis
15. El Kaddis Marcorius
16. El Malak Ghabrial
17. Mari Mina
18. El Adra
19. El Malak Mikhail
20. El Adra
21. El Kaddis Marcorius
22. El Kaddis Marcorius
23. Abukir wa Yuhanna
24. Mari Mina


in so os 0 M N cn^mvo
W N N N PJ CO CO CO CO fO 00 CO
Hd00^»OVOl>00O\OMNr0^-
W M M M M
J
3
I
j. = s s s s s s = s a
% 3 5? tt# 1 . "], 1 5? 1
SiTS r r
U "
i -
5t J -v
* t-
it;
: ijjiijiira
5=5 3 3 $3it is
3 j. 3 3 3 5
'S, "5,
0,
O
X
M
S
V
X
It
.?"•]. J J i) N
ij U1 M»§ %
vi 24 J
cf J MI 1
0
OS
<U
C/5
A
A
•y
jt,
>
J
1
Mudirea
X
<U *J
'5-5 .'2
LZi M £ s. :
s <
§
1*
Co
~e
gj
Asiut
99
►4
01
OJ
03
£
V
<L>
CO
District
M
<03
.2 i i ._
M
OS - ~ «
Jo .. "2
< "
<3
co
V>
Mallawi
99
a
<u
Q
c
OT
c0
cs
W
*3
OT
<U
c
-C
a
>*
<3
£
<
CO
OS
c
>
<S^
Sanabo
9)
99
El Kassir
Kom Buha
Biblahun
Banub Zahr el Gamal
Kudiet el Nasara
Deirut el Sheriff
Der Moes
Delga
Locality
Abu Kirkas
Sheikh Tammi
Nezlet Asmant
Etlidem
Nazlet Haraz
Rerimun
Der Abu Yehnes
Der el Barsha
Mallawi
Kasr Hor
Hor
El Barsha
<*3
Tanda
El Sheikh Shebeka
El Bad ram an
>
0
c
X
0
CO
<
jy
CO
0
<
<u
£
a
C
J3
O
l— 1
cn
vj
El Amir Tadros
Mari Yuhanna
El Malak Mikhail
Mari Girgis
Mari Mina
El Malak Mikhail
Abu Yehnes
Amba Bshoi
El Adra
Abu Fanah
El Malak Ghabria
El Adra
c2
-c
Mari Girgis
El Amir Tadros
Mari Mina
El Adra
Es Sitt Dimiana
El Amir Tadros
Es Sitt Dimiana
El Adra
Amba Sarabamun
Mari Girgis
El Adra
s
.O
.5
■s
El Malak Mil
Mari Girgis
Mari Girgis
1
in so" t-» 00 ds 0" H
w a w a w oo co
pi en 4- in so"
CO 00 00 CO 00
4 oi co
4- uo so' i> 00' ds 0* 4 oi co 4-
M M. H M H ,


lOVO t> 00 0\0 W N COrJ-lOVO C-. 00 C\
HHHMH01010101010101C10101
w 01
CO TH lO CO t> 00
3
3
I
X\
U'tf U 11 <b"«> 3 4; Js 0 '
f J it 5 J 4> 1, = 3 f J f J
4'"-% 13,
\ H n t v
s "5, Vj
i
b
11
\ J
nit" i
His
° j.
J>
i
V |
Mudirea
a
o
JS
tn
s
<3
<
f
o
*£/) -
<
------
<L>
£
(m
O
03
<D
cn
•S
<3
.2 S 5 5 c
dj eS
Q §
.Vj
Co
CQ
c
s
vt
a
03
PQ
4)
c
<ctf
bX)
■ C
o
Locality
Delga
Nazlet Awlad Moi
Dashlut
Amshul
Kussieh
;;
Mir
tt
El Tanalieh
Balut
Buk
Beni Rafia
El Timsahieh
Es Sarakna
Om el Kosur
lanfalut.
iculars not given).
Adra.
Manfalut
Beni Kalb
Beni Shekeir
>> >}
Beni Addi
El Ezba
Ezalah
El Gawli
C/j
Ol
I-*
Dedication of Church
Mari Girgis
Mari Mina
Esh Shahid Abadlr
Mari Girgis
Mari Yuhanna el Mimidan
El Malak Ghabrial
El Kaddis Marcorius
Esh Shahid Klodius
El Malak Rapha'il
Mari Girgis
El Malak Mikhail
El Adra
El Amir Tadros
Mari Girgis
Mari Yuhanna
nastery of El Moharrak, near IV
Contains several churches (part
The principal is dedicated to A1
El Adra
El Malak Mikhail
El Adra
El Amir Tadros
El Adra
El Adra
El Adra
El Kaddis Marcorius
U0 CO 00 Ch O h M ro -t lo Vfl 00 ON fcr-!
MMMMHdNdClNClClClClN^
h oi
co 4 to cd i> cd


9
IO
H
M
01
M
CO rh to VO
M H H M
l> 00
M M
0\
M
0 H 01
01 01 01
00
N 01
U0 VO
N 01
H
01 00
to
VO
t>co o\
1
-
s
3
-
_3
->
J'
1
_3
->
A'
f
i
TO!
>M l>0
Al, 11-
' u
r -s
3A
H
I
I
>
O
11
1 •$
—> A
3
D
J
Ho
-5
1
%
1
1
1,1, J -
0. =s
*K
%
1
i
**
-m
.'1'
s %> 1 *>
1.
1
s
~7\ 3, - 1
■3 "•> ~jf
•f 5
Mudirea
-t->
<3
<
Bishopric of A siiit
s
"c/5
<
-
z z z.
tn
X
3
O
>*
O
<u
u,
X
District
a
3 5
G
aJ
£
5
<3
G
<
s
"c/5
<
H
n
d
o
J3
tn
Locality
sggu'a Beni Hussein
essreh
G
TD
*Q
a
<u
rt
J-.
rt cs
I JH jS tS
w
Beni Morr
Beni Eleig
E
rt
E
E
ca
ffi
Xi
G
<3
X
if)
G
o
•4->
X
O
. CQ
~ u
"O
ca
E
s
1 "§
■S S
O "c
-4-1
o
ca
XA
G
o
dS
Der Rifa
>> »
Musha
W
o
x;
VHH
o
la
<D
c/)
£ S W
J
iW W W
W
a <
Q
W PQ
<
~ Q
Dedication of Church
Mari Girgis
El Adra
Mari Mlna
Mari Girgis
El Adra
El Amir Tadros
El Adra
El Malak Mikhai'1
w
"3D
u
3 |
TJ
*C <3
<3
S w
El Kaddis Marcorius
Abu Ishak
Mari Fam
Mari Yuhanna
El Adra
Mari Boktor
Mari Boktor Shu
El Adra
Esh Shahid Abadir
El Adra
El Talata Fatieh
El Malak Mikhail
El Adra
CIS
O
M
HH
RT
X)
E
<
El Amir Tadros
El Adra
Mari Boktor Shu
d\ o
H
H
H
ci
H
co 4 to d
M H H H
t> oo
H M
cK
M
o" M ci
01 01 01
00 RJ-
01 01
id vo"
01 01
W
ci ob
■4-
ID
VO*
i> co d\


O W N CO LO VO C" 00 0\ O M N 00 rj-
HHHHMWHHHHNNNNOI
W N L> 00 O\0
H
11
12
3
3
l
««A
J 1
1
>6
*>
<4
J i
1'
11 V * r 3 3G.^
-% ~X
*> *> ; -I
Vv|
! "=> "I
"3 J
Mudirea
-J-*
o
« A S X S 5 S 5 R =
- 5 s
Bishopric of Abu Tig
4J
O
*U) Z 2
<
......
District
. „ "C
BX) <AS
H "rt ~ ~
a <3 CQ
in 5 ,Q _
<J <; W 2 5 5 S 5
5 2 2 2 2
bo
<3
JO 5 £
<
2 2 5 5 5 5
5 5
1 Seat of the Bishop.
Locality
Shatb
El Motiaa
El Zawya
Yacur
El Awana
;; ;>
El Chamia
Bawitt
)t
El Nawamiss
El Marawna
Der Tassa
Ezbet el Akbat
Kau el Shark
Zawyet en Nassara
Abu Tig
ft ft
El Massudi
El Zarabi
Der el Ganadla
» n »
El Ghanaim
ft ft
Awlad Liass
El Nekhela
Duena
El Aza'fza
Dedication of Church
Esh Shahld Marcorius
Esh Shahld Faltaus
Abi Tarbo
Esh Shahld Klodius
Mari Girgis
Es Sitt Dimiana
El Adra
El Amir Tadros
El Amir Tadros el Meshriki
El Adra
El Adra
El Malak Mikhail
El Kaddis Harmina
Mari Morcos
El Adra
Abu Makar
El Adra
El Malak Gabrial
Amba Shnuda
El Malak Mikhail
El Kaddis Macrofius wa el Adra
A1 Adra
Mari Girgis
Mari Girgis
Mari Miria
Mari Yuhanna
Mari Girgis
o m oi cb 4- io vo* oo* d\
HHMHHHMMMH
o H ci m 4
N N 01 01 N
4 oi oo
in vd oo d\ o
M
w ci
M H


CO
H
V 1'
rh to vo
H M M
00 ON
M M M
o
a
21
22
CO "*•
C* N
U0 VO
NM«
00
N
0\ O M N
CI CO CO CO
33
34
35
vo i> 00
CO CO CO
C\ O H
co rf- 4-
N
■<4-
3
I
;i
s
J-
■i
o
>o
S >T
3
•l"
5
J -
Ui
1
1151
si* 5
«>
1
*1,1
"^j,
3
~t-
W ■'
:: :
1 "
Vi^
5 b
i
t .1,1 J -> 8
* "i =
.1 "i b
'I. *-><
5
h
•-i
—>
M
|3i *
* *
j. J 3
4 *
'S
hi 1 *
J-
1
43
a
'tn
<
- - =
bo
O
District
bO
H
<3
<
s a 5
3
- - J
** H
a
-4-t
rC, -
s £ a
H
Locality
3
.N
'3
N
<
w
3
G
'3
G
3
Cfl «§
w c/5 "
(u i
<3 3 <3
Q W «/)
•5 «3
WWW
3
u,
-n 3
: 3 £
co w
4-> -U*
<u <u
*N *N
3 3
2 J5
>->
in
3 <
"3
£
x o
44
W
I
44
43
tn
W
II a
W H
03
<3
tn
N g
to
"3^5
'O
<3
w
"o5
*N
3
(/}
tn
1 n«
J* s
N 43
3 <u
55 O
3
JG
H
iS U g 3
3 •§ «
H W S
-S s
2 <u
N *«
3
N >
3 3
5 O W
—H W
W W
3
ba
G
3
W
tn
O
tn
0
Dedication of Church
3
T3
a
G
.G
£/)
3
43
£
<
c
<3 tf)
.£ <3
43 *u
44 o
in p
3
1 - s
o J2 .£2 .22
<2 -2 '03 <23 '3s 'Bb
T3 fQ .£ T3 .£ .£
-V
."5 3 rt . .P _. _
W < -2 C W C C
G <3 <3 <3
w w < S w S S
'3
43
44
s
3 <3
'O P
< S
w w
<3
PQ
3
£
tn
o
u.
<3 3
M |
•£ .22 .22 3 £ .2
jy '3D *Sb S "3D
U tn <3 Q
«g 6 O ~ a O
j Cu •
K 'C t W t
j- ,2 ,2 £ w 5
W § § <! W S
3
-Q
£
3
w
<3
JO
<
tn
O U C
'O T3 T3
W < < <
w w w w
«
<3
3
"3
w
12
JH
3
J3
C/3
JG
w
W
<3
PQ
3
tn
2 3
m *3
.£ 0
<u
7?
W
3 3
* S
w w
tn tn <3
00 P
3 3 •-!
&.£> |
5 3 •=
>o 3 .23 .22
£ S .2 '03 *03
3 3 rf 13 .h .£ rt
-G JZ 2 *H O O £
in en -v p -3
_, - < W "C 'C <
"5 *S — ~ —
w w w w S w
CO
M
4- in vo"
H H H
cd d\
H H M
o
N
h ci
N a
co 4-
N N
lO vo c~-
Cl N CI
CO
N
o\ o h ci
W CO CO CO
CO
CO
4- 10
co co
vo" i> 00*
CO CO CO
On O H
CO 4"
ci
4- .


H
N
co
rh lO VO t> 00
ON
10
11
M
co m
M M M
vo oo
M M M
ON
M
o
CI
M
N
01 (O +
CJ a w
IO
N
4 !
j
i
*$
i
1
%
—*>
*
_3
b
-
TO j :n>i
3 TO 11 TO "TO J
Ss ' J3> h 3 -2
" -a • ■ 5 5 $
-TO, x£ 13-
kill 3 1
* 3 f
ll
X — Y*
1 "1 ;
j Hi
H H
-J
*>
a
O
X
CO
B
as
X
U-i
o
4->
c3
1:
l'
3 '1
i)-l$ -4
t >4
31
=
w -
_3 -
U
n
"11
o
x>
. "1
- _5> t
a
>4
3
Y>
4l
I 3
1
*3
3.
HH
J
1
X
►—<
J
X
CO
CU
13
o
aj
in
&
<u
.S
<3
£
*55
1
X
<U)
3
L. Bishopric of Girgeh an
/3
J5
.<0
«5
O3
■U
x :
03
H
bJO
03
X
<3
C/5
..
*
- t :
*■ i 5
X!
aj
i - U)
- - -
o
CO
03
3
O
2
T3
<U
P2j
cu
X
H
.•&
ss
VJ
O
X
X
rt
13
pq
W
4-1
03
T-
OJ
N
<U
UH
W
£
03
T3
3
03
X
in
aj
'N
<u
O
V
(/)
tfi
a
>
x
X £
'1J
— X!
W C/3
bJO
03
X 5
<3
in
hn S-
™ & -
r; ttf) *
w K
*o
W g
2? s
x to x
*o «
W K <
<oS
o3
s
03 ?
03
W -
-
X
a
X
CO
C
s
X
c3
X
co
.5 ~
§ 2
*- $
;. (U CO
bp <
<C3 .
ffi w
oS
X
3
W
W
7 The White Monastery. See Plates XLV-XLVIII.
1
8
s
S
.g
•8
e
.<o
*e
0
03
u.
nj
<
W
to
'bb
I-.
6
<c3
2
Mari Girgis
El Adra
Esh Shahid abu Kolta
El Adra
Der Amba Shnuda
Der Amba Bshoi
to
<3
03
4->
*o3
"5
X
03
X
in
XI
co
W
Amba Begul
Esh Shahid Marcorius
Es Sitt Dimiana-
Mari Girgis
El Adra
Der esh Shohada
CO
_ o
t_
03 TO
J3 03
H 1
§ u E
-s
H
« W 03
S J3 p
CO M
w w <
s
<3
X
XJ
C3
W
03
X
B
<
03
TO
<3
C
X!
in g
OS T3
E
< W
OS
CO *3
bo co
•E RRC
03 TO
"C -s <
<RS E _-
S < W
03
C
3
oS
X
<3
"C
<03
H
oi
CO
4- IO
NO* t> CO
ON
O H
H H
C$
M
co '4- in
M H H
vo 00*
M M M
ON
M
o*
Cl
H
N
oi cb 4-
N « N
IO
N I


vo
N
t> 00
01 01
0\
oi
O H OJ
00 00 00
33
uo VO 0^
00 00 00 00
00
00
39
O " 01
4
43
tj- m vo
Tt* Tj" rj-
O 00
3-
J
q
\5
J
1
_3 -
->
i-
s
D
ra
_3
4;
3- g 3-1
•i't _V-
-
3-
1 3
A n
1-1
3- -
•T -1
ii
U
J'
3
bl 5
*x
•£ v
$
O
x>
3^J
O
x»
b *3 3 " r
■o
1'
>
s % s
> *
■]
'3,
•j
■\£!
•0 -2*
3
-5
* -V
3 =
u
53 "X- "S _D '
,1 i
'4 3
-V
Mudirea
Girgeh
Keneh
>>
District
c n
O
T3
Girgeh
- -
a
5 5 5
Baliana
5 5 5 5
5
5
5 5 5
-
Farshut
;;
y>
5 5
<
Locality
Girgeh
Shark Girgeh
-
El Zawatna
Bet Khallaf
El Zankur
El Elwanieh
Sheikh Marzuk
El Araba el Madfuna
Bardts
Baliana
El Baskia
Shark el Khiam
El Kaseh
-
Nahiet el Gabal
Bahgurah
Farshut
El Gabal
Nahiet el Kara
1
a
5
tfl
a
o
o
>3
M «S
£
S
'<3
J*
u
ctf
s
"c3
rt -5 n
£ r* rt
oj
Amba Shnuda
.s
-s
w w
'5b '5b
.b .is
•§ 2 °
<£ 'u "C
<nJ <oJ
w S S
53
<cd
s
w
Esh Shahld
Mari Girgis
El Adra
.52
fc/)
u
O
"C
<ctf
Amba Shnuc
El Malak M
Amba Moi'ss
El Adra
El Adra
Amba Shnuc
El Adra
Esh Shahid
El Malak M
cn w
'5b '5b
u u
o o 2
'u. # C <J
<rt <rt
IS S w
Amba Bidab
Amba Shnuc
vd
o
1> 00
01 01
d\
01
o m oi
00 00 00
00
00
rj- UO vd t~~-
00 00 00 00
CO
00
d\
00
o w q
TJ- 4" 4"
00
•rh
4- id vo
4" Th Tj-
CO
Tf-


M N t> 00 0\ O w N
M H M
CO Th in VO
H M M M
l> 00 ON 0
M M M CN
21
22
"V
f
3
3
_f
M
1
?
j - 5 " 5 ~ - = * ~ -
331 "VI S = 13 33-3
JII til .imr
?j3- "i 6
I ?
?
= 3 "3 "
HlJ* 1
J IN
S 5
3 1
= i
33
3
3 i'
*
\i 3 ■
•>
3
o
5 3 3 5 J a a 2
S - ~ ~
o %
>o
«
— \> 2
4i3
t
e
"S
s
J3
<L>
(U ~ ~ ~ ~
.<o
£
•§"
*S>
N^>
,<o
<0
<5
Naga Hamadi
Keneh
;;
yy
- W
0 £ £ £ £ £
W
rt
c
-C -
tn -
- <U
Q
u
o
x Z
-1
<5
8
o
El Kasr Wal Sayad
Essalmieh
Keneh
))
n
T3
<c^
bfl - - -
rt
2 es
ctf -O t-i
T3 rt _ <u
- C bO q bp J .
ctf etf <cs - ~ »
Q £ ffi
V)
* O
;;
El Ezab
Deshna
Tawabya
Es Sallamia
Ez Zina
Dedication of Church
Der Amba Balamun
Amba Bshoi wa Amba Psintaus
El Adra
Mari Girgis
Es Sitt Dimiana
El Malak Mikhail
El Malak Mikhail
El Adra
El Malak Mikhail
Der es Salib wa Amba Shnuda
Amba Andrawis
Mari Girgis
Mari Boktor
Amba Psintaus
El Kaddis Marcorius
Esh Shahid Estafanus
Mari Boktor
Amba Shnuda
New Church
New Church
El Adra
Der Bakhum
h d A 4
in iA oo* on o h n
H M H
CO
M
in io
M M M
iA oo d\ o
H H M N
w oi


M
t> 00 ON O h W CO
M W H M
f
■}
i;
i r * *
J
1'
j
s = i
*Vi- \
J 5 1 s J -
V§ J
I s a
s
Co
Mudirea
Keneh
c
<CJ
w
<
Bishopric of E
District
Naga Hamadi
Kus
Luxor
tt
Esna
i
tt
tt
tt
Edfu
Aswan
Locality
Hager How
,, el Ballas
„ Luxor
Luxor
Kamula
Hager el Ba'frat
El Rezikat
Esfun el Mataana
» )> »
» >> >;
Hager Esna
Hager Edfu
Aswan
15
Dedication of Church
Mari Mina
Mari Girgis
Amba Bakhum
Mari Antonius
El Malak Mikhai'1
El Amir Tadros el Mishr
Mari Girgis
El Kaddts el Fakhuri
El Adra
Es Sitt Dulaghi
Der esh Shohada
Amba Bakhum
El Adra
H
oi
CO TJ-
LO NO I>
CO Q\ 0 h ci CO
H H H H


INDEX
(Numbers refer to pages.)
Aameda, see Taha el Aameda.
Abada, 113.
Abadie, 129.
Abadir, see Esh Shahid Abadir.
Abanub en Nehissi (Samanud), 204.
Abbassieh, see El Abbassieh.
Abbasside, Al-Mustafi, 78.
'Abd-Allah bin Sa'd, 10.
'Abd-Allah ibn Jahan, 10.
Abdeen District, Churches in, 199.
Abd el Kader, 54.
Abd esh Shehid, see Kafr Abd esh Shehid.
Abdil Aziz, 192.
Abdil Malik, 193.
Abdu, see Kafr Abdh.
Abiad, see Der el Abiad.
Abifar, Church at, 205.
Abi Meghezel, Church at, 212.
Abi Tarbo (El Zawya), 211.
Abiuha, Church at, 207,
Abnub District, Churches in, 210.
Abu Bgul, see El Kaddis Abu Bgul.
Abu Dom, see Khor abu Dom.
Abu Fanah (Kasr Hor), 208.
Abu Fodah, see Gebel Abu Fodah.
Abu Girg, Church at, 206.
Abu Hamid, 196.
Abu Hamrah, see Ezbet Abu Hamrah.
Abu Hana, see Ezbet Abu Hana,
Abu Hennes (or Hennis), 19, 32, 129, 133, 137,
142, 154, 181 (182, Plate LIV, sectional
drawing; 183, Plate LV, plan; 184, Plate
LVI, plan).
Abu Homnos District, Churches in, 201.
Abft Ishak (El Hammam), 210.
Abu Kirkas District, Churches in, 207-8.
Abukir wa Yuhanna (Ben el Kiman), 200.
Abukir wa Yhkanna (Manharry), 207.
Abu Kolta, see Esh Shahid abu Kolta.
Abu Lamba, see El Kaddis abu Lamba.
Abu Makar (Abu Tig), 211.
~ (Der Gabal et Teir), 207.
(Natron Valley), 192.
~ ~ see Der Abu Makar and El Kaddis
Abu Makar.
Abu Salih the Armenian, 37, 43, 77, 103, 129,
1 59» *77. 186, 202.
Abu Sargah, 191.
Abu Sifain, 129, 191, 192.
Abu Sir, 52, 54.
Abu Sir el MMak, Church at, 206.
Abuskhirun, see Esh Shahid Abuskhirun, Es
Shahid Abuskhirun and El Kaddis Abuskhirun.
Abus-Sifain, see Marcorius Abus-Sifain.
Abus Sifein, see Der Abus Sifein and Marcurius
Abus Sifein.
Abft Tig, Bishopric of, 211.
~ ~ District, Churches in, 211-12.
Abu Yehnes (Der Abu Yehnes), 208.
Abu Yehnes el Kassir, 208.
Abydos, 214.
Abyssinia, Christianity in, 8.
Adawieh, Church at, 205.
Ad-Daulah, see Shams ad-Daulah.
Addeh, see Gebel Addeh.
Addendan, 66 (70, Plate xv, plan and sectional
drawing; 71, Plate xvi, sectional drawing;
72, Plate XVII, sectional drawing and plan).
Addi, see Beni Addi.
Adra, see A 1 Adra and El Adra.
Aga, 13.
Ahmar, see Der el Ahmar and Darb el Ahmar.
Akbat, see Ezbet el Akbat.
Akhmim, 10.
Der Mari Girgis, 142 (143, Plate XLII, sketch-
plan), 194.
Der el Adra, 144 (143, Plate XLII, plan), 194.
Akhmim, Bishopric of, 213.
~ Churches at, 213.
A 1 Adra (Belcas), 204.
~ ~ (Der el Moharrak), 209.
~ ~ (El Ghanai'm), 211.
A 1 Adra bi Kasriet er Rihan (Roman fortress), 200.
A 1 Adra bil Mu'allaka (Roman fortress), 200.
A 1 'Asal, Monastery of, 103, 104.
Albihu, Church at, 207.
Alexandria, 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 165.
~ S. Mark at, 8.
~ Synod of, 192.
~ Churches in District, 201.
~ Churches in Governorate, 201.
~ Bishopric of, 201.
Ali, Mohammed, see Mohammed.
Al-'lrilk, 43.
Al-Malik an-Nasir Salah ad-Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub
the Kurd, 78.
A 1 Mu'allakah, 193.
Al-Mustafi the Abbaside, 78.
A 1 Paranon, 123.
Altars, 110, 192, 193.
Alti, 38.
'Aiwa, Christian kingdom of, 8, 12, 34.


'Ahvah, town of, 37.
Amai, 11.
Amba Andrawis (Hager Nagada), 215.
Amba Antonious, 192.
Amba Antonius (Der Maimoun), 206,
(Bush), 206.
(Der Amba Antonius), 206.
„ ~ Monastery (Eastern Desert), 206,
Amba Bakhum (Hager Luxor), 216.
(Hager Edfu), 216.
(El Sawamaa), 213.
Amba Balamun, see Der Amba Balamfin.
Amba Barsum el Erian (Maasara), 205.
(Tahnasha), 207.
Amba Begul (Hager Edfa), 213.
Amba Bidaba (El Gabal), 214.
Amba Bishoi, 175, 181; see also Der Amba Bishoi.
Amba Boula, 192.
Amba Bsho'f (Der Amba Bshol), 203.
(Zagazig), 203.
(Der el Barsha), 208.
(Sidfa), 212.
see also Der Amba Bsho'f.
Amba Bsho'f wa Amba Psintaus (Essabmieh),
215-
Amba Bula (Bush), 206.
(Der Amba Bula), 207.
~ ~ Monastery (Eastern Desert), 207.
Amba Fam (Tima), 212.
Amba Hfir (Der Sawada), 207.
Amba Ibsada (Hager Minshah), 213.
Amba Itnasius er Rasuli (Kafr Sulia), 206.
Amba Kastur (Bardanuha), 206.
Amba Kolta (Rifa), 210.
Amba Mo'fssas (El Araba el Madfuna), 214.
Amba Psintaus (Hager Nagada), 215; see Amba
Bsho'f wa Amba Psintaus.
Amba Ruess (El Abbassieh), 199.
Amba Sama'an, see Aswan.
Amba Samouil, 192.
Amba Sarabamun (Batanun), 201
(Melig), 201.
~ (Deirut el Sheriff), 208.
Amba Shnfida, 126, 142.
(Old Cairo), 200.
(El Zarabi), 211.
(El Azai'za), 212.
(El Sawamaa), 213.
(El Elwanieh), 214.
(El Baskia), 214.
(El Kaseh), 214.
(Nahiet el Kara), 214.
(El Ezab), 215.
~ see Sohag and Der es Salib wa
Amba Shnuda.
Arriba Thomas (El Sawamafi), 213.
Ambon, 115.
Am6lineau, M., 161.
Amenophis 111, 44, 190.
Amir-el-Goyush, 192.
Amir, see El Amir, Der el Amir and Mona el
Amir.
Amonius and the Martyrs, 113.
'Amr, 20.
expedition sent by 'Amr into Nubia, 10.
Mosque of, 20.
Amshul, Church at, 209.
Anba L'lff, see Der Anba L'lff.
Ancient Egyptians, Civilization of, 8.
Angelion, 22.
Andrawis, see Amba Andrawis.
An Nur, Monastery of, 105.
Antinoe, 107, 108, 129, 181, 187, 188.
Ant, White, 24, 37.
Antonious, 192.
Antonius, see Amba Antonius.
Apkilug, see El Kaddis Apkilug,
Apostle Bartholomew, 161.
Apostle S. John, 208.
Apostles, figures of, 50.
Arab, see Bay el Arab.
Arab Conquest, 32.
masonry, 20.
Araba el Madfuna, see El Araba el Madfuna.
Arabat, 126.
Arabic place-names, 199.
Arcadion, 22.
Arcadius, 22.
Archbishop, Seat of, 201.
Argyn, 56, 57, 59, 73-
Arsenius, 193.
Arti (=island), 49.
Asal, see Al'Asal.
Asfar, see El Kom el Asfar.
Ash el Fadelah, 70.
Ashmun District, Churches in, 201-2.
Ashmunein, Bishopric of, 207.
Ashnein en Nassara, Church at, 206.
Asiut Mudirea, Churches in, 208-12.
Bishopric of, 210.
„ District, Churches in, 210-n
Asmant, see Nezlet Asmant.
Assirat, see El Assirat.
Assiut, see Asyut.
Aswan, 10, n, 13.
Der Amba Sama'an (S. Simeon), 38, 52, 92, 95
(96, Plate xxix, plan of monastery; 98,
Plate xxx, plan of keep and sectional draw-
ing ; 99, Plate xxxi, plan of church and
sectional drawing; 100, Plate xxxn, sketch
of monastery), 170, 193, 202.
Aswan Dam, 13.
Aswan District, Churches in, 216.
Asyut, 103, 171, 175.
Der el Azam, 178 (179, Plate LIII, plan).
Atalla, see Kafr Atalla.
Atalla Soliman, see Kafr Atalla Soliman.
Atbara, 196.
Atfe, Church at, 201.
Atfih District, Churches in, 205-6.
Athos, Mount, 108.
Athrib, 191.
Atribis (Sohag), 103.
Attareen District, Churches in, 201.
Awad, see Kafr Yfissef el Awad and Kafr Suleiman


Awana, see El Awana.
Awlad Kanz, n.
Benha, Church at, 204.
Beni Addi, Church at, 209.
Beni Ebeid, Church at, 207.
Beni Eleig, Church at, 210.
Beni Ghani, Church at, 207.
Beni Hassan, 176.
Awlad Liass, Church at, 211.
Awlad Morgan, see Nazlet Awlad Morgan.
Ayyat, see El Ayyat.
Ayyub, 129.
Ayyub the Kurd, 78.
Azalza, see El Azaiza.
Azam, see Der el Azam.
Aziz, see Abdil Aziz.
Beni Hussein, see Neggu 'a Beni Hussein.
Beni Kalb, Church at, 209.
Beni Mazar District, Churches in, 206.
Beni Mohammed, Church at, 210.
Beni Morr, Church at, 210.
Beni Rafia, Church at, 209.
Beni Shekeir, Churches at, 209.
Beni Suef, Mudirea, Churches in, 206.
B. V. M., 126, 130.
Bablun, see El Adra bi Bablun.
Badari, see El Badari.
Badraman, see El Badraman.
Bishopric of, 206.
~ ~ District, Churches in, 206.
Berba, see El Berba.
Baghdad, Khalifas of, n.
Bahari, 190.
Bahgurah, Church at, 214.
Beriet Belcas, Church at, 204.
Berma, Church at, 202.
Bahnasa, Bishopric of, 206.
Bet Khallaf, Church at, 214.
Ba'irat, see Hager el Bai'rat.
Bakhum (Pakhomius), 113; see also Medammot and
Amba Bakhum.
Bi Bablun, see El Adra bi Bablun.
Bibeh District, Churches in, 206.
Biblahun, Church at, 208.
Balad en Nasara, Church at, 206.
Balamun, see Der Amba Balamun.
Bidaba, see Amba Bidaba.
Balansora, Church at, 207.
Bi Kasriet er Rihan, see A 1 Adra bi Kasriet
Rihan.
Baliana District, Churches in, 214.
Ballas, see Hager el Ballas.
Bil Damchirieh, see El Adra bil Damchirieh.
Bil Muallaka, see A 1 Adra bil Muallaka.
Bisho'i, see Amba Bishol.
Balut, Church at, 209.
Bamam, Church at, 202.
Bishop, Chair of, 199.
Banga, Church at, 212.
Banub Zahr el Gamal, Church at, 208.
Seat of, 205, 208, 209, 210, 211, 213.
Bishopric of Abu Tig, 211.
Baptist, The, 209.
Akhmim, 213.
Baramous, 192.
Baramus, see Der el Baramus and Ezbet el Baramus.
Alexandria, 201.
Ashmunein, 207.
Bardanuha, Church at, 206.
Bardis, Church at, 214.
Asiut, 210.
Bahnasa, 206.
Behera, 201.
Beni Suef, 206.
Bar-Hebraeus, 8.
Barka, 10.
Barkal, 38, 195.
Esna, 216.
Barkal (Napata), 14.
Fayum, 205.
Girgeh, 213.
Gizeh, 205.
Barkal, see Gebel Barkal.
Barsha, see Der el Barsha and El Barsha.
Barsum el Erian, see Amba Barsum el Erian.
Jerusalem, 203.
Bartholomew, Apostle, 161.
Keneh, 215.
Bashar, see Mit Bashar.
Baskia, see El Baskia.
Koskum, 208.
Manfalut, 209.
Bassiun, Church at, 204.
Menufieh, 201-2.
Batanun, Church at, 201.
Batn el Hagar', 14, 23, 31, 32, 46, 50, 52, 56, 86,
no, 189.
Minieh, 207.
Sanabo, 208.
Bishops, 192 ; see also under Christianity.
~ Melkite, 192.
~ Monophysite, 192.
Battakh, see El Battakh.
Bawitt, Churches at, 211.
Bay el Arab, Church at, 201.
Bgul, see Amba Bgul.
Black Sea, timber from, 116.
Blue Nile, Churches on, 8, 12, 38
Boats, 195.
Beg, see Ibrahim Beg, 12.
Begul, see Amba Begul.
Behera, Bishopric of, 201.
Behnai el Ghanam, Church at, 201
Bock, M. Wladimir de, 178.
Boctor, 123, 126.
Behreh, see Mit Behreh.
Beja (tribes of Eastern Desert), 10.
Belcas, Church at, 204; see also Beriet Belcas.
Bohl or Bollor.
Deir el Bollor, 57 (58, Plate ix, plan).
Belly of Stones, 14.
Boktor, see Mari Boktor and Der Boktor Shu.
Ben el Kiman, Churches at, 200.
Bollor, see Bohl.
219
Benha, 191.
E e 2


Boos ( = straw of sorgum or dhurra), 25.
Borbara, see Es Sitt Borbara.
Bosrah, Church at, 210.
Botti, Dr., 22.
Boula, 192.
Boulac District, Churches in, 199.
Bousat, Church at, 204.
Bricks, use, composition, &c., 20, 21, 23.
use of in Meroitic times, 14.
pyramids of brick, 23.
brick-mould, 24.
method of making, 24.
effect of white ant, 24.
price of making, 26.
brick-bond, 29.
region of crude bricks, 49.
Bsho'i, see Amba Bsho'f.
Budge, Dr. E. A. W., 8, 10, 19, 34.
Building, materials, 14.
Nubian sandstone, 14.
Christian builders, 14.
roofs, 14.
columns of gneiss, 14.
effect of Roman occupation, 15.
Byzantine influence, 15.
differences of construction, 16.
influence of the government, 16.
Saracenic style, 20.
acanthus type of cornices, 20.
method, 24.
use of monolithic columns, 14, 31.
causes of decay, 37.
buttresses, 50.
arches, 70.
door-jambs, 70.
saline action, 124.
Buha, see Kom Buha.
Bula, see Amba Bula.
Bulos, see Er Rasulein Butros wa Bulos.
Buk, Church at, 209.
Burckhardt, J. L., 12, 78.
Burial ground, 39, 81.
Bush, Churches at, 206.
Butcher, (Historian), 8.
Butler, Dr. A. J., 20, 22, 111, 156.
Butros, see Er Rasulein Butros.
Byzantine elements in building, 15.
Caesar, temples engraved with name of, 16.
Caesarion, 22.
Cairo, in, 129, 189.
Abu Sifain, 191, 192.
Mari Girgis, 192.
El Adra, Haret Zoueleh, 192.
Haret er Roum, 192.
Museum, 123.
Governorate, Churches in, 199-200.
see also Old Cairo.
Canopy, 120.
Capitals, worked with ' pick ', 37.
shape and pattern, 37.
egg and dart ornament, 43.
illustrations, 36, 42, 46, 56, 81, 124, 139, 187
Capitals, terra-cotta, 56, 66.
cross in relief, 77.
red granite, 78.
black granite, 169.
Castle of the Geese, 73.
Cathedral church, 199, 200.
Central Africa, 13.
Chamia, see El Chamia.
Charky, see Gehat Charky.
Chartum, 37.
Cheikh, see Kafr el Cheikh.
Cherbin District, Churches in, 204.
Christianity :
introduction and extension, 8.
appointment of bishops, 8.
Christian builders, 14.
persecutions, 8, 18.
paucity of monuments, 8.
results of invasion, 9.
overthrow by Mohammedans, 9.
sects, 10.
history of invasion by Dr. Budge, 10.
access to quarries, 18.
Jacobite Christians, 37.
settlements in Wadi Letti, 44.
Church of El Adra, 139.
Our Lady, 78, 177.
S. John, 137.
S. George, 134.
S. Michael, 133.
Churches :
converted temples, 14.
arrangement under three types, 31, 109.
basilican plan, 31.
domed type, 32.
type after Arab conquest, 32.
400 churches at 'Alwah, 37.
churches on Blue Nile and White Nile, 38.
painting of, 14.
names of Roman emperors inscribed, 15.
destruction under Mohammed Ali, 32.
type plan, 90; also Plates xxv, xxvi.
sixty at Suyut, 103.
arrangements and furniture of Coptic churches,
109.
list of ' orthodox ' Coptic churches, 199.
Church, New, 215.
Civilization of ancient Egyptians, 8.
Claudion, 22.
Climate, conservative nature of, 10.
Comite de Conservation des Monuments de l'Art
Arabe, 159, 170, 189, 200.
Constantine, Emperor, 18, 146.
Construction ( see also under Building) :
method of dressing and laying stones, 16-17.
Roman influence, 17.
ascetic influence, 19.
Egyptian masonry, 17.
Roman masonry, 17.
Arab masonry, 20.
wood dovetails to connect blocks of stone, 18.
brick buildings, 20.
domestic structures, 22.


Construction ( continued):
brick construction, 22.
method of building, 24
vaulting, 26
roofing of churches, 31, 129.
monastic plan, 39.
position of windows, 41.
composition of walls at Serre, 64.
apse of unusual plan, 83.
cruciform plan, 94.
columns of green gneiss, see Gneiss.
red sandstone, 70.
red granite, 73.
Convents for nuns, 192.
Coptic churches, arrangements and furniture,
109.
Coptic Patriarch, Seat of, 199.
Copts, Rising of, in the Delta, 10
Cross, Holy, 126, 130.
Crowfoot, Mr., 38.
Cultivation, 13.
Curzon, Mr., 156.
Cyriacus, King of Nubia, 10.
Cyril, the 67th patriarch, 192.
Cyrus, S., 207.
Dafash, see Kom Dafash.
Dahrieh, Church at, 201.
Dakadus, Church at, 203
Dakahlieh Mudirea, Churches in, 203.
Dal Cataract, 195.
Damanhur District, Churches in, 201.
Damchirieh, see El Adra bil Damchirieh.
Damietta District, Churches in, 203.
Natives of, 207.
Damshir, Church at, 207.
Damsis, see Mit Damsis.
Dandara, Church at, 215.
Daniell, Mr. Blackburn, 198.
Darb el Ahmar District, Churches in, 200.
Dashasha, Church at, 206.
Dashlut, Church at, 209.
Dassia, Church at, 205.
Daulah, 78.
Dawud, King of the Nubians, 11.
Debereh, 62.
Decius, Emperor, 8, 18.
Deir, see Der.
Deirut District, Churches in, 208-9.
Deirut el Sheriff, Church at, 208.
Delga, Churches at, 208-9.
Delta, rising of Copts, 10.
Dendera, 16, 18.
Denderah, 140 (141, Plate XLI, plan).
Denon, Vivant, 156.
Der ( = monastery), 38.
Der, application of term, 192.
Der, see Kafr ed Der and Naga'a ed Der.
Der Abu Hennes, see Abu Hennes.
Der Abu Makar, 192.
(Natrun Valley), 202.
Der Abus Sifein (Old Cairo), 200.
Der Abu Yehnes, Church at, 208.
Der Amba Antonious, 192.
Antonius (Eastern Desert), 206.
~ Balamun (El Kasr Wal Sayad), 215.
„ Boula, 192.
Bishoi, 192 ; see also Sohag.
Bshol (Natrun Valley), 203.
(Hager Suhag), 213.
Buba (Eastern Desert), 207.
Sama'an, see Aswan.
Samouil, 192.
Shnuda (Hager Suhag), 213.
see Sohag.
Der Anba L'lff, 126.
Der Ash el Fadelah, 70.
Der Bakhum (Ez Zina), 215; see also Medammot.
Der Boktor Shu, Church at, 210.
Der el Abiad, see Sohag.
Der el Adra, see Akhmim, Rifa, Ganadle, Nakada
Der el Ahmar, see Sohag.
Der el Amir Tadros (Haret er Roum), 200.
Der el Azam, 178.
Der el Bahari, 190.
Der el Baramous, 192.
Der el Baramus (Natrun Valley), 202
Der el Barsha, Church at, 208.
Der el Bohl (or Bollor), 57.
Der el Ganadla, Churches at, 211.
Der el Garnus, Church at, 206.
Der el Gebrawi, 178.
Der el Hamam, Church at, 206.
Der el Kiersh, 66, 73.
Der el Magma, 142.
Der el Malak, 139.
Ghabrial (El Gabal), 205.
~ ~ Mikhail, see Edfu, Kamula, Nakada,
Der el Megma, see Akhmim, Nakada.
Der el Moharrak (Manfalut), 209.
Der el Moherrak, 192.
Der el Nakhla, 181.
Der el Sayeda el Adra (Haret Zuela), 200.
Der esh Shohada (Akhmim), 213.
(Hager Esna), 216.
Der es Salib, 126.
wa Amba Shnuda (Hager Nagada)
Der es Sankurieh, Church at, 206.
Der es Shuhada (Shuyda), 112, 113, 194.
Der es Suriani (Natrun Valley), 202.
Der Gabal et Teir, Churches at, 207.
Der Maimoun, Church at, 206.
Der Manaos wa Shuhada, 112, 113, 194.
Der Mari Boctor, 123.
Der Mari Girgis, 136, 142, 194 ; see also Akhmim
Cairo.
Der Mari Girgis (Haret Zuela), 200.
(Old Cairo), 200.
Der Mikhail, see Edfu, Nakada.
Der Moes, Church at, 208.
Der Naga'a ed Der, see Naga.
Der Pakhomius (Bakhom), 118 ; see also Medam-
Der Rifa, Church at, 210.
Der Sawada, Church at, 207.


Der Shehid Tadrus el Mohareb, see Medinet Habu.
Der Simeon, see Aswan.
Der Souriani, 192.
Der Tassa, Church at, 211.
Der Theodorus, see Medinet Habu.
Derr, 18.
Desert, Eastern, 206.
Deshna District, Churches in, 215.
Dessuk District, Churches in, 204.
D'hurra straw, 25.
Dimian, see Kozman wa Dimian.
Dimiana, 142.
Dimiana, see Es Sitt Dimiana.
Dimiatiu, Church at, 201.
Diocese, Patriarchal, 200.
Diocletian, Emperor, 8, 18, 113.
Diva'a (measure), 25.
Director-General of Antiquities, 123, 189.
Dom, see Kasr abu Dom.
Domed roof, system of, 23.
„ ~ method of construction, 27.
Dongola, 11, 12, 13, 41.
foundation of, 43.
downfall of, 12.
„ see also New and Old Dongola.
Dove, Holy, 152.
Drawings, description of, 34.
Dronka, Churches at, 210.
Kanisat el Malak, 175 (173, Plate lii, sketch
plan).
Duena, Church at, 211.
Duer, see El Duer.
Dulaghi, see Es Sitt Dulaghi.
Dust-heap, 65.
Eastern Desert, 206.
East Serreh, 62.
Ebeid, see Beni Ebeid, Nazlet Ebeid.
Ebiar, Churches at, 202.
Ebnas, Church at, 204.
Ebshaway, Church at, 205.
Ed Der, see Kafr ed Der.
Edfa, Church at, 213 ; see also Hager Edfa.
Edfu, plundered by the Beja, 10.
Der el Malak Mikhail (or Deir Melak Mikhail),
hi (112, Plate xxxiii, plan), 114.
Edfu District, Churches in, 216; see also Hfkger
Edfu.
Egypt, invasion by Nubians, 10.
Egyptian monuments, 7.
Egypto-Roman temple, 37.
Ekwa, Church at, 202.
El Aameda, see Taha el Aameda.
El Abbassieh, Churches at, 199.
El Adra, 113, 118, 123, 126, 133, 193 ; see also
Cairo, Der el Sayeda El Adra, Dronka, El
Kaddis Macrofius wa el Adra, Ganadle,
Nakada, Rifa, Sitt el Adra.
„ (Abifar), 205.
(Abi Meghezel), 212.
(Abnub), 210.
~ (Abu Girg), 206.
„ (Abu Sir el Malak), 206.
El Adra (Abu Tig), 211.
(Adawieh), 205.
(Akhmim), 213.
(Asiut), 210.
(Aswan), 216.
(Atfe), 201.
(Balad en Nasara), 206.
(Balansora), 207.
(Baliana), 214.
(Banga), 212.
(Bardis), 214.
(Batanun), 201.
(Behnai el Ghanam), 201.
(Benha), 204.
(Beni Addi), 209.
(Beni Eleig), 210.
(Beni Mohammad), 210.
(Beni Rafia), 209.
(Beni Shekeir), 209.
(Beni Suef), 206.
(Dahrieh), 201.
(Dakadus), 203.
(Delga), 208.
(Der el Baramus), 202.
(Der el Garnus), 206.
(Der el Hamam), 206.
(Der es Suriani) [2], 201.
(Der Gabal et Teir), 207.
(Der Rifa), 210.
(Dronka), 210.
(Ebiar), 202.
(El Assirat), 213.
(El Barsha), 208.
(El Battakh), 213.
(El Chamia), 211.
(El Ezab), 205.
(El Ezba), 209.
(El Kassir), 208.
(El Marawna), 211.
(El Meabda), 210.
(El Nawamiss), 211.
(El Sheikh Masud), 212.
(El Sheikh Yussef), 213.
(El Waadla), 212.
(El Wasta), 210.
(El Warrak), 205.
(El Zankur), 214.
(Esfun el Mataana), 216.
(Eskor), 205.
(Es Sallamia), 215.
(Etris), 205.
(Ezalah), 209.
(Ezbet Abu Hamrah), 201
(Ezbet Abu Hana), 201.
(Ezbet el Baramus), 202.
(Fadimen), 205.
(Faggala), 199.
(Farshut), 214.
(Fashn), 206.
(Ficha en Nassara), 201.
(Girgeh), 214.
~ (Gress) 207.
~ (Haret er Roum), 200.


El Adra (Haret es Zeweila), 200.*
Kafr Abdu), 205.
Kafr Atalla Soliman), 203.
Kafr Farag Girgis), 203.
Kafr Ibrahim Yussef), 203.
Kafr Suleiman A wad), 204.
Kafr Yussef el Awad), 203.
Kafr Yusef Semri), 203.
Keneh), 215.
Kom Eshfin), 204.
Kudiet el Nasara), 208.
Mallawi), 208.
Manfalut), 209.
Mansurah), 203.
Maragha), 212.
Medinet el Fayum), 205.
Menshat Masgid el Khadr), 205.
Messreh), 210.
Minbal), 206.
Minchah), 201.
Minshah), 213.
Mit Bashar), 203.
Mostorod), 204.
Nagada), 215.
Nazlat Said), 212.
Ousim), 205.
Port Said), 203.
Redanieh), 203.
Sakha), 204.
Sanhur), 205.
Sedud), 201.
(Shark el Khiam), 214.
(Shebin el Kom), 201.
(Shentena el Hagar), 205.
(Sidfa), 212.
(Sobk), 201.
(Suez), 203.
(Suhag), 213.
(Tantah), 202.
(Terraneh), 201.
Tuah), 207.
(Tukh en Nasara), 202.
(Zawyet en Nassara), 211.
(Zawyet en Naurah), 201.
bi Bablun (Ben el Kiman), 200.
bil Damchirieh (Old Cairo), 200.
El Ahmar, see Sohag and Darb el Ahmar.
El Akbat, see Ezbet el Akbat.
El Amir, see Mona el Amir.
El Amir Tadros (Abft Kirkas), 208.
(Bawitt), 211.
(Beni Shekeir), 209.
(Biblahun), 208.
(Bosrah), 210.
(Damshir), 207.
(Dassia), 205.
(Der el Baamus), 202.
(Der es Sankurieh), 206.
(Der Rifa), 210.
(El Timsahieh), 209.
(Mona el Amir), 205.
(Om Khenan), 205.
(Sanabo), 208.
E1 Amir Tadros, see also Der el Amir Tadros.
el Mishriki (Bawitt), 211.
(Hager el Bairat), 216.
„ ~ ~ (Ben el Kiman), 200.
El Arab, see Bay el Arab.
El Araba el Madfuna, Church at, 214
El Asal, 104.
El Ashfar, see Elkom el Ashfar.
El Assirat, Church at, 213.
El Awad, see Kafr Yussef el Awad.
El Awana, Churches at, 211.
El Ayyat District, Churches in, 205.
El Aza'iza, Churches at, 211-12.
El Azam, see Der el Azam.
El Badraman, Church at, 208.
El Bahari, see Der el Bahari.
El Bairat, see Hager el Bairat.
El Ballas, see Hager el Ballas.
El Baramus, see Ezbet el Baramus and Der el
Baramus.
El Barsha, Church at, 208; see also Der el Barsha.
El Barud, see Teh el Barud.
El Baskia, Church at, 214.
El Battakh, Church at, 213.
El Berba, Church at, 213.
El Bohl (or Bollor), see Der el Bohl.
El Chamia, Church at, 211.
El Cheikh, see Kafr el Cheikh.
El Duer, Church at, 212.
Eleig, see Beni Eleig.
El Erian, see Amba Barsum el Erian.
El Ezab (Etsa), Church at, 205.
El Ezab (Deshna), Church at, 215.
El Ezba, Church at, 209.
El Fakhuri, see El Kaddis el Fakhuri.
El Farki, 41, 59, 60, 70; see also Hammam el
Farki.
El Fayum, see Medinet el Fayum.
El Fezerat, Church at, 213.
El Gabal (Etsa), Church at, 205.
(Farshut), Church at, 214.
~ see Sedment el Gabal and Nahiet el Gabal.
El Gamal, see Banub Zahr el Gamal.
El Gamh, see Miniet el Gamh.
El Ganadla, see Der el Ganadla.
El Garaisa, see Ezbet el Garaisa
El Garnus, see Der el Garnus.
El Gawli, Church at, 209.
El Gazazrah, Church at, 212.
El Gebrawi, Church at, 210; see also Der el
Gebrawi.
El Ghanaim, Church at, 211.
El Ghanam, see Behnai el Ghanam.
El Goyush, see Amer-el-Goyush.
El Hagar, see Batn el Hagar and Shentena el
Hagar.
El H&kim, 193.
El Hamam, see Der el Hamam.
El Hammam, Churches at, 210.
El Iba, Church at, 207.
El Kab, 24, 64.
El Kader, see Abd el Kader.
El Kadi, see Nezlet el Kadi.


El Kaddis Abft Bgul (Talla), 207.
Abh Makar (Der Abu Makcir), 202.
Abuskhirun (Albihu), 207.
(El Shanaina), 212.
Abu Lamba (Tima), 212.
el Fakhuri (Esfun el Mataana), 216.
Apkilug (Fant), 206.
Ghabrianus (Maragha), 212.
Harmina (Ezbet el Akbat), 211.
Macarius (Etris), 205.
Marcorius (El Dfter), 212.
(El Gawli), 209.
(El Iba), 207.
(El Hammam), 210.
(Abiuha), 207.
(Kom el Zoheir), 207.
(Kus), 215.
(Mir), 209.
Marcurius (Tammuh), 205.
Macrofius wa el Adra (Der el Ganadla),
Tekla Himanut (Zagazig), 203.
El Kaddisan Sargius wa Wakhis (Roman fortress),
200.
El Kalzam, Church at, 204.
El Kammash, see Salamun el Kammash.
El Kara, see Nahiet el Kara.
El Kaseh, Churches at, 214.
El Kasr Wal Sayad, Church at, 215.
El Kassir, Church at, 208; see also Abu Yehnes el
Kassir.
El Katna, Church at, 212.
El Katsha, see Nazlet el Katsha.
El Khadr, see Menshat Musjid el Khadr.
El Khalig, see Fom el Khalig.
El Kheir, see Kafr el Kheir.
El Khiam, see Shark el Khiam.
El Kiersh, 66, 73; see also Der el Kiersh.
El Kiman, see Ben el Kiman.
El Kom, see Shebin el Kom.
Elkom el Ashfar, Church at, 212.
El Kosheish, Church at, 204.
El Kosur, see Om el Kosur.
El Kubra, see Sahragt el Kubra.
El Lianna, see Serss el Lianna.
El Maasara (Abnub), Church at, 210.
(Samalut), Church at, 207.
El Madfuna, see El Araba el Madfuna.
El Magma, see Der el Magma.
El Malak, 118, 126, 142, 175 ; see also Abu Sir el
Malak, Dronka, Edfu, Nakada, Der el
Malak.
Gabrial (El Massudi), 211.
Ghabrial (Beni Ghani), 207,
(El Nazla), 205.
(El Gabal), 205.
(Gehena), 212.
(Haret es Sakayin), 199.
(Hor), 208.
(Kussieh), 209.
El Malak Mikai'l (El Kabzam), 204.
~ Mikhail (Akhmim), 213.
(Bay el Arab), 201.
El Malak Mikhail (B6n el Kiman), 200.
(Beni Ebeid), 207.
(Beni Kalb), 209.
(Buk), 209.
(Damanhur), 200.
(Dandara), 215.
(Dashasha), 206.
(Der Abu Makar), 202.
(Der Amba Antonius), 206.
(Der Amba Bshoi), 203.
(Der el Baramus), 202.
(Der el Ganadla), 211.
(Der es Suriani), 202!
(Der Tassa), 211.
(Dronka), 210.
(El Abbassieh), 199.
(El Kaseh), 214.
(El Maasara), 210.
(El Kosheish), 204.
(Hager Nagada), 215.
(Kafr ed Der), 204
(Kamula), 216.
(Klossana), 207.
(Mansurah), 203.
(Miniatein), 201.
(Nagada), 215.
(Nazlet el Katsha), 206.
(Nazlet Emara), 212.
(Nezlet Asmant), 208.
(Rerimun), 208.
(Seberbey), 204.
(Sennures), 205.
(Shark Girgeh), 214.
(Sharuna), 206.
(Sheikh Marzuk), 214.
(Shenra), 206.
(Tanda), 208.
(Tukh Tambesha), 204; see also
Edfu, Kamula, Nakada.
El Malak Raphai'l (El Tanalieh), 209.
El Marawna, Church at, 211.
El Massudi, Church at, 211.
El Mataana, see Esfun el Mataana.
El Meabda, Churches at, 210.
El Meimidan, see Mari Yuhanna el Meimidan.
El Meshriki, see El Amir Tadros el Meshriki.
El Mimidan, see Mari Yuhanna el Mimidan.
El Mishriki, see El Amir Tadros el Mishriki.
El Missalla, Churches at, 200.
El Moharrak Monastery (Manfalut), 209.
El Moherrak, see Der el Moherrak.
El Motiaa, Church at, 211.
El Nakhla, see Der el Nakhla.
El Nasara, see Kudiet el Nasara.
El Nawamiss, Church at, 211.
El Nazla, Church at, 205.
El Nekhela, Church at, 211.
El Ordi, 43.
El Rehan, see Kasnet el rehan.
El Rezik&t, Church at, 216.
El Sarg (or Sarga), 174.
El Sawamaa, Churches at, 213.
El Sayeda El Adra, see Der el Sayeda.


El Sham'ah, see Kasr el Sham'ah.
El Shana'ina, Church at, 212.
El Shark, see Kaft el Shark.
El Sheikh Masud, Church at, 212.
„ Shebeka, Church at, 208.
Yussef, Church at, 213.
El Sheriff, see Deirut el Sheriff.
El Shuhada, 115.
El Talata Fatieh (Dronka), 210.
El Tanabieh, Church at, 209.
El Timsahieh, Church at, 209.
El Waadla, Church at, 212.
Elwanieh, see El Elwanieh.
El Warrak, Church at, 205.
El Wasta, Church at, 210.
El Wizz, see Kasr el Wizz.
El Zankftr, Church at, 214.
El Zarabi, Church at, 211.
El Zawatna, Church at, 214.
El Zawya, Church at, 211.
El Zayat, see Kafr el Zayat.
El Zoheir, see Kom el Zoheir.
Emara, see Nazlet Emara.
Embabeh District, Churches in, 205.
Emperor Decius, 8.
„ Diocletian, 8.
„ Gallienus, 18.
„ Valerian, 8.
Empress Helena, 113.
En Nasara, see Balad en Nasara and Tukh en
Nasara,
see Ashnein en Nassara, Ficha en
Nassara, and Zawyet en Nassara.
En Naurah, see Zawyet en Naurah.
En Nehissi, see Abanub en Nehissi.
Epiphanius, 22.
Epiphany, 114.
Erian, see Amba Barsum el Erictn.
Er Rasuli, see Amba Itnasius er Rasuli.
Er Rasulein Butros wa Bulos (Nazlet Emara), 212.
~ (Nezlet es Sakk) ,212
Er Rihan, see A 1 Adra bi Kasriet er Rihan.
Er Rossol, see Es Sada er Rossol.
Er Roum, see Haret er Roum.
Eshfin, see Kom Eshfin.
Esfun el Mataana, Churches at, 216.
E' Shama'a, see Kasr e' Shama'a.
Eshkaw, see Kom Eshkaw.
Esh Shahid Abadir (Dashlut), 209.
~ (Asiftt), 210.
Abu Kolta (Shandawil), 213.
Abuskhirun (Der Abu Makar), 202
Estafanhs (Kus), 215.
Faltahs (Edfa), 213.
„ (El Motiaa), 211.
„ (Nezlet el Kadi), 212.
(Shark el Khiam), 214.
Kiryakos (Tahta), 212.
(Sahel Tahta), 212.
Klodius (Mir), 209.
(Yacftr), 211.
„ Marcorihs (Akhmim), 213.
„ (El Zawatna), 214.
Esh Shahid Marcorius (Shatb), 211.
Tadros (El SawamaS.), 213.
Esh Shehid, see Kafr Abd esh Shehid.
Esh Shohada, see Der esh Shohada.
Eskor, Church at, 205.
Esna, Bishopric of, 216.
„ District, Churches in, 216.
Deir es Shuhada (or Der Manaos wa Shuhada,
or Der es Shuyda), 113, 194 (112, Plate XXXIII,
plan).
Esna plundered by the Beja, 10 ; see also H&ger
Esna.
Es S&da er Rossol (Atfih), 205.
Es Sakayin, see Haret es Sakayin.
Es Sakk, see Nezlet es Sakk.
Es Salib, see Der es Salib and Nakada.
Es Sallamia, Church at, 215.
Essalmieh, Church at, 215.
Es Sankurieh, see Der es Sankurieh.
Es Sarakna, Church at, 209.
Es Sawalem, Church at, 212.
Es Say ad, see Kasr es Sayad.
Es Shamm'ah, see Kasr es Shamm'ah.
Es Shehid Abuskhirun, 203.
Es Shehid, see Kafr es Shehid.
Es Shuhada, see Esna.
Es Shuyda, see Esna.
Es Sitt Borbara (Roman fortress), 200.
~ Dimiana (Akhmim), 213.
„ (Banub Zahr el Gamal), 208.
(Beriet Belcas), 204.
(Boulac), 199.
(El Awana), 211.
(Kafr Abd esh Shehid), 203.
(Keneh), 215.
(Kom Buha), 208.
(Tima), 212.
„ Dulaghi (Esfun el Mataana), 2x6.
~ Rifkeh (Sombat), 204.
Es Suk, Church at, 212.
Estafanus, see Esh Shahid Estafanus.
Es Sftri&ni, see Der es Suriani.
Es Zeweila, see Haret es Zeweila.
Ethiopia, 8.
Ethiopian rulers, 14.
Etlidem, Church at, 208.
Etris, Churches at, 205.
Etsa District, Churches in, 205.
Et Teir, see Der Gabal et Teir.
Euraeus, 70, 73.
Eusebius, 8.
Eutychius, 22.
Evangelion, 22.
Evetts and Butler, 197.
Excavations, Oxford, in Nubia, 66.
Expedition, French, 157.
Ezab, see El Ezab.
Ezalah, Church at, 209.
Ezba, see El Ezba.
Ezbekieh District, Churches in, 199.
Ezbet Abu Hamrah, Church at, 201.
Hana, Church at, 201.
el Baramus, Church at, 202.


Ezbet el Akbat, Church at, 211.
~ el Garaisa, Church at, 201.
„ Tatta, Church at, 201.
Ez Zina, Church at, 215.
Fadelah, 70.
Fadimen, Church at, 205.
Faggala, Church at, 199.
Fakhuri, see El Kaddis el Fakhuri.
Faltaus, see Esh Shahid Faltaus.
Fam, see Amba Fam and Mari Fam.
Famine, 13.
Fanah, see Abu Fanah.
Fant, Church at, 206.
Farag Girgis, see Kafr Farag Girgis.
Farki (=small valley), 41, 59, 60, 70 ; see also
Hammam el Farki.
Farras, 66 (68, Plate xiv, ruins of monastery).
Farrig, 49.
Farshut District, Churches in, 214.
Fashn District, Churches in, 206.
Fatieh, see El Talata Fatieh.
Fatimide dynasty, 78.
„ characteristics of style, 115.
Fatimite Khalif, 193.
Fayoum, 192.
Fayum Mudirea, Churches in, 205.
„ District, Churches in, 205.
„ Bishopric, 205.
~ see also Medinet el Fayum.
Fezerat, see El Fezerat.
Ficha en Nassara, Church at, 201.
First Cataract, 13.
Fodah, Gebel Abu, 178.
Fom el Khalig, Church at, 200.
Fortress, see Roman Fortress.
Fourth Cataract, 196.
France, German invasion of, 9.
Franks, King of the, 129.
French Expedition, 157.
Fust&t, Synod of, 192.
Gabal, see Der Gabal et Teir, El Gabal, Nahiet el
Gabal, Sedment el Gabal, and Tahna et Gabal.
Gabrawi, see El Gabrawi.
Gabu (=tunnel roof), 25.
Gadoom (=small adze), 24.
Galiub District, Churches in, 204.
Galiubieh Mudirea, Churches in, 204.
Gallienus, Emperor, 18.
Gamh, see Miniet el Gamh.
Gamoleh, see Kamula.
Gamoula, 178.
Gan&dle, Der el Adra, 171 (173, Plate hi, sketch
plan).
Ganadla, see Der el Ganadla.
Garaisa, see Ezbet el Garaisa.
Garf Hussein, 85, 86 (87, Plate xxiii, plan).
Garnus, see Der el Garnus.
Gawli, see El Gawli.
Gazazrah, see El Gazazrah.
Gebel abu Fodah, 178.
Gebel Addeh, 73 (74, Plate xvm, plan).
Gebel Barkal, n, 38, 195.
Gebrawi, 178.
Geese, Castle of, 73.
Gehat Charky, Church at, 201.
Gehena, Church at, 212.
Gendal Irki, 50 (51, Plate vn, plans).
Geological formation of Nile valley, 13.
German invasion of France, 9.
Geziret Thet, Matuga, 52 (53, Plate viii, plan).
Geziret Shandawil, Church at, 213.
Ghabri&l, see El Malik Ghabrial.
Ghabrianus, see El Kaddis Ghabrianus.
Ghamr, see Mit Ghamr.
Ghanam, see Behnai el Ghanam.
Ghanaim, see El Ghanaim.
Ghani, see Beni Ghani.
Gharbieh Governorate, Churches in, 202, 204.
Ghazali, Wadi, 38, 41, 52.
Ghuzz, 78.
Gibbon the historian, 8.
Gimei, 50 (48, Plate vi, ground plan).
Ginetti, 41, 42, 45 (40, Plate iv, plan).
Girg, see Abu Girg.
Girgeh Mudirea, Churches in, 212-14.
„ District, Churches in, 213-14.
„ Bishopric, 213.
„ see also Shark Girgeh.
Girgis, see Mari Girgis, Der Mari Girgis, and Kafr
Farag Girgis.
Gizeh Mudirea, Churches in, 205-6.
„ District, Churches in, 205.
„ Bishopric, 205.
Gneiss, Columns of green, 14, 36, 42, 43, 49.
Gorge, 164.
Goyush, see Amer-el-Goyhsh.
Graves, 39, 82, 133, 172, 178
Grave-stones, inscribed, 59.
Green, Mr. F. W., 54, 198.
Gregorovius, 22.
Gress, Church at, 207.
Griffith, Mr. F. LI., 66.
Gustal, 73.
Gyps (=plaster), 174.
Gyrshe, 12.
Hadrianon, 22.
Hagar, see Batu el Hagar and Shentena el Hagar.
H&ger Edfa, Church at, 213.
„ Edfft, Church at, 216.
„ el Balrftt, Church at, 216.
„ el Ball&s, Church at, 215.
„ Esna, Church at, 216.
How, Church at, 215.
„ Luxor, Church at, 215.
„ Minshah, Church at, 213.
„ Nagctda, Church at, 215.
„ Suhag, Church at, 213.
Haikal or Heikal (=holy place), 89, 110.
Hfikim, Sultan of Egypt, 10 ; see also El Hakim.
Haifa, 32, 56, 191, 194, 195.
Haifa mats, 64.
Ham&di, see Naga Ham&di.
Hamffin, see Der el Ham&m.


Hamid, see Abu Hamid.
Hammam, application of name, 59.
Hammam el Farki, 41, 59, 70 (58, Plate x, plan ;
61, Plate xi, longitudinal section and plan ;
71, Plate xvi, sectional drawing).
Hammam, see El Hammam.
Hamrah, see Ezbet Abu Hamrah.
Hana, see Ezbet Abu Hana.
Hanna (John), 113.
Haraz, see Nazlet Haraz.
Haret er Roum, see Cairo.
Churches at, 200.
es Sakayin, Churches at, 199.
Zeweila, Churches at, 200.
Harmina, see El Kaddis Harmina.
Hassa Hissa, 38.
Hassan, see Beni Hassan.
Hawara tribe, 11.
Hehia District, Churches in, 203.
Helena, Empress, 113.
Heluan baths, 60.
Hennes or Hennis, see Abu Hennes.
Hennis, see Kafr Yussef Hennis.
Heri, see Mousa Heri.
Hermit S. Paul, 207.
Herodotus, 195.
Herz Bey, 198.
Higab (=curtain or veil), no.
Himanut, see Kaddis Tekla Himanut.
Hissa, see Hassa Hissa.
Holy Cross, 126, 130.
Dove, 152.
Trinity, 110.
Hommos, see Abu Hommos.
Honorius, 22.
Hor, Churches at, 208 ; see also Kasr Hor.
How, see Hager How.
Hur, see Amba Hur.
Hussein, see Garf Hussein and Neggu'a Beni
Hussein.
Iba, see El Iba.
Ibrahim Beg, 12, 13.
„ Yussef, see Kafr Ibrahim Yussef.
~ see Kafr Salama Ibrahim.
Ibrim, 13.
Castle of, 12.
~ see Kasr Ibrim and Wadi Ibrim.
Ibsada, see Amba Ibsada.
Iconostasis, 110.
Iff, see Der Anba L'lff.
Ikhmim, 159.
Imperial Domain, 17.
Inscriptions, names of Roman Emperors, 15
Greek and Coptic, 81.
Coptic and Arabic, 175, 177.
Introduction of Christianity, 8.
Invasion, results of, 9.
Irak, see Al' Irak.
Irki, see Gendal Irki.
Ishak, see Abu Ishak.
Island of Meroe, 8.
Itnasius er Rasuli, see Amba Itnasius.
Jacobite Christians, 37.
Patriarchs, 8.
Jerusalem, Bishopric of, 203.
Jewish Tabernacle, 110.
John (Hanna), 113 ; see also Hennes.
John of Nikion, 22.
the Apostle, 208.
the Baptist, 209.
„ S. (of Damietta), 207.
Kab, see El Kab.
Kabushia, 196.
Kaddis, see El Kaddis.
Kaddisan Sargius, see El Kaddisan Sargius.
Kader, see Abd el Kader.
Kadi, see Nezlet el Kadi.
Kafr Abd esh Shehid, Church at, 203.
Kafr Abdu, Church at, 205.
Kafr Atalla, Church at, 204.
Kafr Atalla Soliman, Church at, 203.
Kafr ed Der, Church at, 204.
Kafr el Cheikh District, Churches in, 204.
Kafr el Kheir, Church at, 204.
Kafr el Zayat District, Churches in, 202, 204.
Kafr es Shehid, Church at, 203.
Kafr Farag Girgis, Church at, 203.
Kafr Ibrahim Yussef, Church at, 203.
Kafr Sakr District, Churches in, 203.
Kafr Salama Ibrahim, Church at, 204.
Kafr Suleiman Awad, Church at, 204.
Kafr Sulia, Church at, 206.
Kafr Yusef Semri, Church at, 203.
Kafr Yussef el Awad, Church at, 203.
Kafr Yussef Hennis, Church at, 204.
Kalabsha, 12, 16.
Kalb, see Beni Kalb.
Kalzam, see El Kalzam.
Kammash, see Salamun el Kammash.
Kamula (or Kamulah, or Gamoleh).
Der el Malak Mikhail, 121, 124, 194 (122, Plate
xxxvi, sectional drawing and plan).
Kamula, Church at, 216.
Kanessah (=parish church), 192.
Kanisat el Malak, see Dronka.
Kanun, King, 10.
Kara, see Nahiet el Kara.
Kareima, 195.
Karnak, 64.
Kaseh, see El Kaseh.
Kasemba, 38.
Kasnet el rehan, 193.
Kasr el Sham'ah, 193.
Kasr el Wizz, 73.
Kasr e' Shama'a, 15.
Kasr es Say ad, 215.
Kasr es Shamm'ah (Roman fortress), 200.
Kasr Hor, Church at, 208.
Kasr Ibrim (Primis), 11.
Kasr Ibrim, 65, 73, 75 (79, Plate xix, sectional
drawing and plan ; 80, Plate xx, plan).
Kasr Wal Sayad, see El Kasr Wal Sayad.
Kassir, see Abu Yehnes el Kassir and El Kassir.
Kastur, see Amba Kastur.


Katena, 38.
Katna, see El Katna.
Katsha, see Nazlet el Katsha.
Kau el Shark, Church at, 211.
Kena, 106.
Keneh Mudirea, Churches in, 214-15.
„ District, Churches in, 215.
~ Bishopric, 215.
Kerma, 196.
Khadr, see Menshat Masgid el Khadr.
Khalif Muez-adin-Allah, 193.
„ Mustansir, 192.
Khalifas of Baghdad, 11.
Khalig, see Fom el Khalig.
Khallaf, see Bet Khallaf.
Khartum, 11, 196.
~ Construction of, 37.
~ Museum at, 37.
Kliayal, 193.
Kheir, see Kafr el Kheir.
Khenan, see Om Khenan.
Khiam, see Shark el Khiam.
Khor abu Dom, 38.
Kibla, 75, 77.
Kiersh, see Der el Kiersh.
Kikelan, King, 66.
„ ~ son of, 66.
Kiln, remains of, 75.
Kiman, see Ben el Kiman.
King Kikelan, 66.
King of the Franks, 129.
King of Nubia, 43.
Kirkas, see Abu Kirkas.
Kiryakos, see Esh Shahid Kiryakos.
Klodius, see Esh Shahid Klodius.
Klossana, Church at, 207.
Kolta, see Amba Kolta and Esh Shahid abu Kolta
Kom, see Shebin el Kom.
Kom Buha, Church at, 208.
Kom Dafash, Church at, 207.
Kom el Zoheir, Church at, 207.
Kom Eshfin, Church at, 204.
Kom Eshkaw, Church at, 212.
Koran, 10.
Korosko, 13, 81.
Kosheish, see El Kosheish.
Koskam, Bishopric of, 208.
Kostamne, see Wadi Kostamne.
Kosur, see Om el Kosur.
Kozman wa Dimian (Manial Shiha), 205.
Kubra, see Sahragt el Kubra.
Kudiet el Nasara, Church at, 208.
Kuesna District, Churches in, 204-5.
Kulb, Sheikh Farrig, 45 (47, Plate v, ground plan ;
48, Plate vi, plan).
Kulubnarti, 45, 49 (48, Plate vi, ground plan).
Kurds, 78.
Kus, 129.
Kus District, Churches in, 215-16.
Kussieh, Churches at, 209.
Lady, Our, 78, 177.
~ picture of, 129,
Lamba, see El Kaddis Abu Lamba.
Land cultivable, 13.
Last Supper, painting, 174.
Lebbas, 178.
Lecky, W. E. H., 19.
Lepsius, 37, 38, 39, 41, 196.
Letti, see Wadi Letti.
Lianna, see Serss el Lianna.
Liass, see Awlad Liass.
L'lff, see Der Anba L'lff.
Limestone formation, 13.
Luxor, 116, 190.
„ District, Churches in, 215-16.
~ see also Hager Luxor.
Lyons, Captain H. G., 89.
Maasara, Church at, 205 ; see also El Maasara.
Maclver, Dr. D. Randall, 33, 56, 62, 66, 191.
Macrofius, see El Kaddis Macrofius.
Macurius, see El Kaddis Macurius.
Madeyq, 81, 116 (80, Plate xx, plan),
Madfuna, see El Araba el Madfuna.
Maghagha District, Churches in, 206.
Magma, see Der el Magma.
Mahallet Kebir District, Churches in, 204.
Mahamid, 24.
Mahendi, 82, 86 (83, Plate xxi, plan of church
84, Plate XXII, plan of town).
Maimoun, see Der Maimoun.
' Majesty,' 50, 54, 135.
Makar, see Abu Makar.
Malak, see El Malak.
Ghabrial, see El Malak Ghabrial.
Mikhail, see El Malak Mikhail.
Malik, see Abdil Malik.
Malik Kikelan, 66.
Mallawi District, Churches iu, 208.
Mamelouks, 12.
Mammesium, 140.
Manaos, 112, 113, 194.
Manbali, 38.
Mandara room), 142.
Manfalout, 192,
Manfalut, Bishopric of, 209.
~ District, Churches in, 209-10.
Manharry, Church at, 207.
Manial Shiha, Church at, 205.
Mansurah District, Churches in, 203.
Maragha, Churches at, 212.
Marawna, see El Marawna.
Marcorius, see El Kaddis Marcorius.
Abus-Sifain (Old Cairo), 200.
Marcurius, see El Kaddis Marcurius.
Marcurius Abus Sifein (Kafr Salama Ibrahim), 204
(Zifteh), 204.
Marcus Bey Simaika, 191, 199.
Marhum, see Mehallet Marhum.
Mari Antonius (Luxor), 216.
Mari Boctor, 123, 126 ; see also Nakada.
Mari Boktor (Der Bolctor Shu), 210.
(Hager Nagada), 215.
(Kus), 215.
(Musha), 210,


Mari Boktor Shu (El Gebrawi), 210.
Mari Fam (Abnub), 210.
Mari Girgis, 115, 123, 133, 172 ; see also Alchmim
Cairo, and Der Mari Girgis, Nakada.
Mari Girgis (Aklimim), 213.
(Amshul), 209.
(Ashnein en Nassara), 206.
(Awlad Liass), 211.
(Bahgurah), 214.
(Balut), 209.
(Bamam), 202.
(Beni Morr), 210.
(Berma), 202.
(Bet Khallaf), 214.
(Bibeh), 206.
(Bousat), 204.
(Damietta), 203.
(Delga), 209.
(Der Moes), 208.
(Dessuk), 204.
(Dimiatiu), 201.
(Ebnas), 204.
(Ebshaway), 205.
~ (Ekwa), 202.
~ (El Awana), 211.
~ (El Azaiza), 211.
(El Badraman), 209.
(El Elwanieh), 214.
(El Fezerat), 213.
(El Gazazrah), 212,
(El Ghana'im), 211.
(El Katna), 212.
(Elkom el Asfar), 212.
(El Maasara), 207.
(El Meabda), 210.
~ (El RezikAt), 216.
(Es Sarakra), 209.
~ (Es Sawalem), 212.
~ (El Sheikh Shebeka), 208.
(Es Suk), 212.
~ (Etlidem), 208.
(Ezbet el Garaisa), 201.
(Ezbet Tatta), 201.
(Galiub), 204.
(Gehat Charky), 201.
(Geziret Shandawil), 213.
(Girgeh), 214.-
(Hager el Ballas), 216.
(H&ger Nagada), 215.
~ (Haret er Roum), 200.
(Haret es Zeweila), 200.
(Kafr Atalla), 204.
(Kafr el Kheir), 204.
(Kafr el Zayat), 202.
(Kafr es Shehid), 203.
(Kafr Yussef Hennis), 204.
(Keneh), 215.
(Kom Dafash), 207.
(Kom Eshkaw), 212.
(Mahallet Kebir), 204.
(Mansurah), 203.
(Masgad Wasef), 204.
(Mehallet Marhum), 202.
Mari Girgis (Menuf), 201.
(Miniatein), 201.
(Minieh), 207.
(Minshah), 213.
(Mit Behreh), 204.
(Mit Damsis), 203.
(Mit Ghamr), 203.
(Naboroh), 204.
(Nahiet el Gabal), 214.
(Roman fortress), 200.
(Sahragt el Rubra), 203.
(Salamun el Kammash), 203.
(Sanabo), 208.
(Sedment el Gabal), 206.
(Serss el Lianna), 201.
(Shatanuf), 202.
(Sidfa), 212.
(Sindibis), 204.
(Talia), 202.
(Tarut), 204.
(Tima), 212.
~ (Tukh en Nasara), 202.
„ (Tura), 205.
Mari Mina, 193.
„ (Bassiun), 204.
(Ebiar), 202.
(El Meabda), 210.
(El Nekhela), 211.
(Fom el Khalig), 200.
(Hager How), 216.
(Manharry), 207.
„ ~ (Nazlet Awlad Morgan), 209.
, (Nazlet Ebeid), 207.
(Nazlet Haraz), 208.
(Sanabo), 208.
(Taha el Aameda), 207.
„ „ (Tahna et Gabal), 207.
Mari Morcos (El Missalla), 201.
(Ezbekieh), 199.
(Gizeh), 205.
(Kau el Shark), 211.
(Rosetta), 201.
Mari Yuhanna (Abnub), 210.
(Duena), 211.
(El Berba), 213.
(Om el Kosur), 209.
(Sheikh Tammi), 208.
el Meimidan (Der el Baramus), 202
~ ~ el Mimidan (Kussieh), 209.
Mariout, Mari Mina, 193.
Maris, Province of, 77.
Martyrs, Church of the, Esna, 114.
Mary, see Virgin Mary.
Marzuk, see Sheikh Marzuk.
Masgid el Khadr, see Menshat Masgid el Khadr.
Masonry, see Construction.
Massawarat, 196.
Massudi, see El Massudi.
Masud, see El Sheikh Masud.
Mastaba, 155.
Mataana, see Esfun el Mataana.
Matuga, 52.
Max Herz Bey, 198-


Mazar, see Beni Mazar.
Meabda, see El Meabda.
Medammot, Der Bakhum, 109, in, 118, 194 (119
(Plate xxxv, plan and sectional drawing).
Medina, see El Medina.
Medina el Sarga, see El Medina el Sarga.
Medineh, see El Medineh.
Medinet el Fayum, Church at, 205.
Medinet Habu, Der Theodorus or Todrus or Der
Shehid Tadrus el Mohareb, 116, 189 (117,
Plate xxxiv, sectional drawing and plan).
Meghezel, see Abi Meghezel.
Megma, see Der el Megma.
Mehallet Marhum, Church at, 202.
Meimidan, see Mari Yuhanna el Meimidan.
Melak Mikhail, see El Melak Mikhail.
Melig District, Churches in, 205.
~ Church at, 201.
Melkite bishops, 192.
Melkites, 193.
Menshat Masgid el Khadr, Church at, 205.
Menshiya, 142.
Menuf District, Churches in, 201.
~ Church at, 201.
Menufieh Mudirea, Churches in, 201-2, 204-5.
~ Bishopric, 201-2.
Merawi, 38.
Meroe, Island of, 8, 12.
Meshriki, see El Amir Tadros el Meshriki.
Messreh, Church at, 209.
Midrah (a long punting pole), 29.
Migne, 22.
Mikhail, see El Malak Mikhail.
Mikhail de Todrus, 118.
Mileham, Mr. Geoffry S., 33, 62, 66, 191.
Mimbar (=pulpit), 75.
Mimidan, see Mari Yuhanna el Mimidan.
Mina, see Mari Mina.
Minbal, Church at, 206.
Minchah, Church at, 201.
Mineral springs, 59, 60.
Miniatein, Churches at, 201.
Minieh Mudirea, Churches in, 207-8.
~ District, Churches in, 207.
~ Bishopric, 207.
Miniet el Gamh District, Churches in, 203-4.
Miniet Samanud District, Churches in, 203.
Minshah, Churches at, 213 ; see also Hager Min-
shah.
Mir, Churches at, 209.
Miracles of the Virgin, 191.
Miriam, 115.
Mishriki, see El Amir Tadros el Mishriki.
Missalla, see El Missalla.
Mit Bashar, Church at, 203.
Mit Behreh, Church at, 204.
Mit Damsis, Church at, 203.
Mit Ghamr, Church at, 203.
~ District, Churches in, 203.
Moes, see Der Moes.
Mohammad, see Beni Mohammad.
Mohammed, 10.
Mohammed Ali, 32, Plate XLVI, 148, 195.
Mohammedan conquest of Egypt, 9, 10.
~ overthrow of churches, 9.
Mohareb, see Medinet Habu.
Moharrak, see Der el Moharrak.
Moherrak, see Der el Moherrak.
Moi'ssas, see Amba Moi'ssas.
Mona el Amir, Church at, 205.
Monasteries existing, 192, 199.
in Natrun Valley, 202-3.
Monastery, Departments of, 104.
~ Red, 213.
White, 213.
Monastic plan of building, 39.
Monolithic columns, 14, 31.
Monophysite bishops, 192.
patriarchs, 8.
Monophy sites, 193.
Monuments, Christian, 8.
Morcos, see Mari Morcos.
Morgan, M. de, 95.
Morgan, see Nazlet Awlad Morgan.
Morr, see Beni Morr.
Mortar, 24.
Moses, Painting of, 44.
Mosque of 'Amr, 20.
Mosques, Overthrow of, by Christians, 10.
Mostorod, Church at, 204.
Motiaa, see El Motiaa.
Mount Athos, 108.
Mousa Heri, 59.
Mouski District, Churches in, 200.
Muallaka, see A 1 Adra bil Muallaka.
Mu'allakah, see A 1 Mu'allakah.
Muez-adin-Allah, Fatimite Khalif, 193.
Murgassy, 64.
Musha, Church at, 210.
Muslim conquest, 12.
annexation of Sudan, 11.
defeat of Nubians, 10.
Mustafi, see Al-Mustafi.
Mustansir, Khalif, 192.
Naaga, Egypto-Roman temple, 37.
Nabaroh, Church at, 204.
Naga ed Der, 23, 140, 194 (141, Plate XLI, plan).
Nagada, 95, 178.
„ Churches at, 215.
„ see also Hager Nagada.
Naga Hamadi District, Churches in, 215-16.
Nagr (=native boat), 195.
Nahiet el Gabal, Church at, 214.
Kara, Church at, 214.
Natebas District, Churches in, 204.
Nahya, 129.
Nakada :
Der Mari Boctor (S. Victor), 123 (125, Plate
XXXVII, sectional drawing and plan).
Der es Salib (Holy Cross), 126 (127, Plate xxxvm,
plan and sectional drawing).
Der el Megma, 130 (131, Plate xxxix, plan of
monastery ; 132, Plate XL, plan of churches).
Church of S. Michael (S. Mikhail), 133.
Church of S. George (Mari Girgis), 134.


Nakada ( continued) —
Church of S. John (Abu Hennes), 137.
Church of El Adra, 139.
Napata (Gebel Barkal), 38.
~ (Barkal), 14.
Nasara, see Balad en Nasara, Kudiet en Nasara
and Tukh en Nasara.
Nasir, see Al-Malik an-Nasir.
Nassara, see Ashnein en Nassara, Ficha en Nassara
and Zawyet en Nassara.
Native saints of Damietta, 207.
Natroon, see Wadi Natroon.
Natrun Valley, Monasteries and churches in, 202-3
Naurah, see Zawyet en Naurah.
Nawa District, Churches in, 204.
Nawamiss, see El Nawamiss, 14.
Nazla, see El Nazla.
Nazlat Said, Church at, 212.
Nazlet Awlad Morgan, Church at, 209.
Ebeid, Church at, 207.
el Katsha, Church at, 206.
Emara, Church at, 212.
Haraz, Church at, 208.
Neggu'a Beni Hussein, Church at, 210.
Negro tribes, 12.
Neguila District, Churches in, 201.
Nehissi, see Abanub en Nehissi.
Nekhela, see El Nekhela.
New Church (Deshna), 215.
(Tawabya), 215.
New Dongola, 43, 195.
Nezlet Asmant, Church at, 208.
„ el Kadi, Church at, 212.
~ es Sakk, Church at, 212.
Nikion, John of, 22.
Nile valley, Description of, 13.
Nubia, Christianity in, 8.
excavations, 66.
invasion by 'Abd Allah bin Sa'd, 10.
Raphael, King of, 43.
Shemamun, King of, 11.
Nubians, defeated by Muslims, 10.
defeated by Shams ad-Daulah, 78.
invasion of Egypt, 10.
Nubian sandstone, 13, 14.
Nulwa, 44.
Nuns, Convents for, 192.
Nfir, see An Nur.
Nuri, 14.
Nnsrany ( = Christian), 66.
Nyokel, 66.
Oil-press, 104.
Okasha, well at, 60.
Old Cairo District, Churches in, 200.
Roman fortress, 15.
Old Dongola, 10, 43, 196.
Om el Kosur, Church at, 209.
Om Khenan, Church at, 205.
Ordi, see El Ordi.
Our Lady, Church of, 78, 177.
Picture of, 129.
Ousim, Church at, 205.
Oven, 104.
Oxford excavations in Nubia, 66!
Oxyrhynchus, 107.
Pachomius, 19, 105, 109, 123
Rules of, 126.
Paintings, 92, 126, 128, 135, 175.
Painting of Last Supper, 174.
Moses, 44.
the B. V. M., 129.
Pakhomius, 19 ; see also Der Pakhomius
Paradise of the Holy Fathers, 106.
Paranon, see A 1 Paranon.
Patriarch, H. 8., the Coptic, 199
Simon the 42nd, 192.
Patriarchal Diocese, Churches in, 199.
Patriarchate, 199.
Patriarchs, Jacobite, 8.
Monophysite, 8.
Paucity of Christian monuments, 8.
Paul the Hermit, 207.
Pears, Mr. C. R., 198.
Pennsylvania, University of, 33.
Persecutions of Christians, 8, 18.
Persons of the Holy Trinity, no,
Petrie, Prof. W. M. F., 146.
Petronius, 77.
Philae, 16, 89, 102, 155 (88, Plate xxiv, plans of
small and large churches).
Philistinism, 32, 54.
Pictures, Destruction of, 10.
Pigeon-house, 142
Pigments, 60.
Pigs, 78.
Pipes, Terra-cotta, 56.
Plans, Scale of, 33
Population, 13.
Port Said District, Churches in, 203.
Pottery, 59, 65, 73.
Psintaus, see Amba Bsho'i wa Amba Psintaus and
Amba Psintaus.
Public Works Department, 89.
Pure Virgin (El Adra), 177.
Qirsch, 86 (87, Plate xxm, plan).
Quarries, Description of, 171.
ownership, 17-18.
method of quarrying, 17.
Tombos, 14.
Ramesses 111, 116.
Raphael, King of Nubia, 43.
Raphail, see El Malak Rapha'il.
Rasftlein, see Er Rasulein.
Rasuli, see Amba Itnasius er RasCili.
Red Monastery, 158, 213.
Red Sea, 192.
Redanieh, Church at, 203.
Refectory, 104.
Rehan, see Kasnet el rehan.
Reisner, Dr., 23.
Religious hatred, 9.
Rerimun, Church at, 208.


Rezikat, see El Rezikat.
Rifa {or Rifah) Der el Adra, 176 (173, Plate LII,
plan).
~ Church at, 210.
~ see also Der Rifa;
Rifkeh, see Es Sitt Rifkeh.
Rih&n, see A 1 Adra bi Kasriet er Rihan.
Rodis, 38.
Roman buildings remaining, 15.
~ Doric building, 151.
~ eagle sculpture, 82.
Roman fortress (Old Cairo), Churches in, 200.
Romans, 16.
Rome, San Clemente, 154.
Roof, method of construction, 37.
system of dome, 23.
description, 129.
Rosetta District, Churches in, 201.
Rossol, see Es Sada er Rossol.
Roum, see Haret er Roum.
Ruess, see Amba Ruess.
Sacred pictures, Destruction of, 10.
Sada er Rossol, see Es Sftda er Rossol.
Sahel Tahta, Church at, 212.
Sahragt el Kubra, Church at, 203.
Sal, 41, 45.
Said, see Nazlet Said.
Saidna Suliman, 60,
Sainarti, 45, 46.
S. Amonius, 113.
S. Athanasius, 22.
S. Bartholomew, 161.
S. Bourbara, 129.
S. Claudius, 130.
SS. Cosmas and Damian, 22.
S. Cross, 130.
S. Cyrus (of Damietta), 207.
S. Euphemia, 22.
S. Faustus, 22.
S. Gabriel, 130.
S. George, 103, 129, 130, 133.
S. James, 186.
S. John, 22, 130, 133, 177.
the Apostle, 208.
the Baptist, 209.
~ of Damietta, 207.
S. Makrufius, 172.
S. Mark, 22.
~ in Alexandria, 8.
~ Tomb of, 201.
S. Mary, 22.
S. Mary Dorothea, 22.
S. Menas, 186.
S. Mennas, 129.
S. Mercurius, 186.
S. Michael, 22, 133.
S. Paul the Hermit, 207.
SS. Peter and Paul, 172.
S. Sergius, 174.
S. Severus, 104, 177.
S. Simon the Canaanite, 161.
S. Simeon, see Aswan.
S. Sinuthius, 126, 159, 161, 17.7.
S. Sophia, 22.
S. Theodore (Tadrus), 22, 177.
S. Thomas, 177.
S. Uriel, 130.
S. Victor, 123, 126.
Sakayin, see Haret es Sakayin
Sakha, Church at, 204.
Sakk, see Nezlet es Sakk.
Salty a (=water wheel), 172.
Sal&h ad-Din (Saladin), 11, 78, 129.
Salama Ibrahim, see Kafr Salama Ibrahim.
Salamun el Kammash, Church at, 203.
Salib, see Der es Salib.
Salib wa Amba Shnuda, see Der es Salib.
Salih, see Abu Salih.
Sallamia, see Es Sallamia.
Sama'an, see Der Amba Sama'an.
Samallut, 103, 104.
Samalht District, Churches in, 206-7.
Samanhd, Church at, 204 ; see also Miniet Sa
manud.
Samouil, see Der Amba Samouil.
Sanabo, Church at, 208.
Bishopric of, 208.
San Clemente, Rome, 154.
Sanhur, Church at, 205.
Sankurieh, see Der es Sankurieh.
Santa District, Churches in, 204.
Sarabamun, see Amba Sarabamun.
Saracenic monuments, 7.
Saracens, 16.
Sarakna, see Es Sarakna.
Sarg (=saddle), 174.
Sarga, see El Medina es Sarga and Wadi Sarga.
Sargah, see Abu Sargah.
Sargius wa Wakhis, see El Ivaddisan Sargius.
Satan, 19.
Saviour, Church of the, 177.
Sawada, see Der Sawada.
Sawalem, see Es Sawalem.
Sawamaa, see El Sawamaa.
Sayad, see El Kasr Wal Sayad.
Sayce, Prof. A. H., 54, 198.
Sayeda el Adra, see Der el Sayeda.
Sayeda Zeinab District, Churches in, 200.
Sayyid, 129.
Seberbey, Church at, 204.
Second Cataract, 13, 14, 56, 194.
Sedegna, 14, 44 (47, Plate v, plan).
Sedment el Gabal, Church at, 206.
Sedud, Church at, 201.
Semneh, 64.
Semri, see Kafr Yusef Semri.
Senaar, 38. .. .
Sennar, 196.
Sennures District, Churches in, 205.
Serapeum, 22.
Serre, 59 (58, Plate x, plan of ruins)
Serre (Shark), 62 (63, Plate xn, plan of town and
plans of central and north churches; 67,
Plate XIII, plan of south church and sectional
drawings of north and south churches).


Serreh, East, 62.
Serss el Lianna, Church at, 201.
Severus, 18.
Shahid, see Esh Shahid and Es Shahid.
Shama'a, see Kasr e' Shama'a.
Shamm'ah, see Kasr es Shamm'ah.
Shams ad-Daulah, 78.
Shana'ina, see El Shana'ina.
Shandawil, Church at, 213 ; see also Geziret Shan-
dawil.
Shark, see Serre (Shark) and Kau el Shark.
~ eL Khiam, Churches at, 214.
~ Girgeh, Churches at, 214.
Sharkieh Mudirea, Churches in, 203-4.
Sharuna/ Church at, 206.
Shatanuf, Church at, 202.
Shatb, Church at, 211.
Shebeka, see El Sheikh Shebeka.
Shebin el Kom District, Churches in, 201, 205
Sheblanga, Church at, 203.
Shehid, see Kafr es Shehid and Kafr Abd esh
Shehid.
Shehid Tadrus, see Medinet Habu.
Sheikh Abada, 113.
~ Abadie, 129.
Abd el Kader, 54 (55, Plate ix, plans).
Farrig (Kulb), 49.
Marzuk, Church at, 214.
Masud, see El Sheikh Masud.
Shebeka, see El Sheikh Shebeka.
Tammi, Church at, 208.
Yussef, see El Sheikh Yussef.
Shekeir, see Beni Shekeir.
Shellal, 32.
Shemamun, King of Nubia, 11.
Shenra, Church at, 206.
Shentena el Hagar, Church at, 205.
Sheriff, see Deirut el Sheriff.
Shibrekhit District, Churches in, 201.
Shiha, see Manial Shiha.
Shihat, see Shuiukh Shihat.
Shirkuh, 78.
Shnuda, see Amba Shnuda.
Shohada, see Der esh Shohada.
Shu, see Der Boktor Shu and Mari Boktor Shu
Shuhada (Shuyda), 113, 115, 194.
Shfliukh Shihat, 202.
Sidfa, 171.
Church at, 212.
Sifain, see Abu Sifain and Marcorius Abus-Sifain.
Sifein, see Der Abus Sifein and Marcurius Abus
Sifein.
Silko, 43.
Simaika Bey, 191, 192.
Simbellawein District, Churches in, 203.
Simon the Canaanite, 161.
~ the 42nd Patriarch, 192.
Sindibis, Church at, 204.
Sir, see Abu Sir.
Sir el Malak, see Abu Sir el Malak.
Sitt Borbara, see Es Sitt Borbara.
Sitt Dimiana, 142 ; see also Es Sitt Dimiana.
Sitt el Adra, 193.
Sitt Miriam, 115.
Sitt Rifkeh, see Es Sitt Rifkeh.
Small-pox, 12.
Soba, 34, 36, 37, 41, 42, 45, 196 (35, Plate in,
conjectural ground plan).
Soba, downfall of, 12.
Sobk, Church at, j2oi t
Sockets square, in floor at Philae, 90.
Sohag. Der Amba Bishoi (Der el Ahmar), 146,
153. 154. 1 59» 175. 181, 187, 189, 192, 193
(161, Plate XLIX, plan ; 162, Plate L, sectional
drawing ; 163, Plate LI, sectional drawing).
Der Amba Shnuda (Der el Abiad), 18, 32, 95,
101, 102, 108, hi, 121, 126, 129, 133, 140,
142, 145, 159, 161, 166, 168, 187, 189, 192,
193 (147, Plate XLV, ground plan ; Plate XLVI,
elevation; Plate XLVII, sectional drawing;
Plate XLVIII, conjectural restoration).
Soleb, 14.
Soliman, see Kafr Atalla Soliman.
Solomon, 60.
Sombat, Church at, 204.
Son of Kikelan, 66.
Sorgum straw, 25.
Souriani, see Der Souriani.
Spanish dollars, 13.
Springs, mineral, 60.
Stalactite niches, 115.
Stones, Belly of, 14.
Sudan, 10, 32.
„ Christianity in, 8.
„ annexation by Muslims, 11.
Suef, see Beni Suef.
Suez District, Churches in, 203.
Suhag District, Churches in, 213 ; see also Hager
Suhag.
Suk, see Es Suk.
Suleiman Awad, see Kafr Suleiman Awad.
Sulia, see Kafr Sulia.
Suliman, 60.
Sultan of Egypt, io, 11.
Suriani, see Der es Suriani.
Suyut, 103.
Swainson, Mr. Harold, 198.
Synod of Alexandria, 192.
Fastat, 192.
Tabenna, 19, 106.
Tabernacle, Jewish, 110.
Tabhar District, Churches in, 205.
Tadros, see El Amir Tadros, Der El Amir Tadros,
and Esh Shahid Tadros.
Tadrus, 118, 123 ; see also S. Theodore.
Taha el Aameda, Church at, 207.
Tahna el Gabal, Church at, 207.
Tahnasha, Church at, 207.
Tahta District, Churches in, 212-13 ; see also Sahel
Tahta.
Tala District, Churches in, 202.
Talata Fatieh, see El Talata Fatieh
Talia, Church at, 202.
Talkha District, Churches in, 204.
Talla, Church at, 207.


Tamarisks, 73.
Tambesha, see Tukh Tambesha.
Tammi, see Sheikh Tammi.
Tammuh, Church at, 205.
Tanalieh, see El Tanalieh.
Tanda, Church at, 208.
Tantah District, Churches in, 202, 204.
Tarbo, see Abi Tarbo.
Tarut, Church at, 204.
Tassa, see Der Tassa.
Tatta, see Ezbet Tatta.
Tawabya, Church at, 215.
Teh el Barud District, Churches in, 201.
Teir, see Der Gabal et Teir.
Tekla Himanut, see El Ivaddis Tekla.
Temple, Egypto-Roman, 37.
Temples converted into churches, 14.
Terra-cotta capitals, 56, 66.
Terraneh, Church at, 201.
Thebais, 107.
Thebes, 106, 116.
Theodorus the Warrior, 116.
Theodosius, Emperor, 22.
Theophilus, Patriarch, 22, 193.
Thet Matuga, see Geziret Thet Matuga.
Thomas, see Amba Thomas.
Three Youths, 210.
Tibn ( = chopped straw or chaff), 23.
Tig, see Abu Tig.
Tima District, Churches in, 212.
Timsahieh, see El Timsahieh.
Tombos quarries, 14.
Toria (=agricultural adze), 25.
Traffic, Water, 13.
Trajan, Fortress built by, 15.
Transliteration, 197.
Travelling in Egypt, hints on, 195.
Trinity, 110.
Tuah, Church at, 207.
Tukh Tambesha, Church at, 204.
„ en Nasara, Church at, 202.
Tura, Church at, 205.
Turks, 12, 13.
Tyn (=Nile alluvium), 24.
Type of church after Arab conquest, 32.
Type plans of church, 91, Plate xxv; 93, Plate xxvi.
Types, arrangement under, 31, 109.
Udrunkah, 177.
'Umayyad family, 10.
Usertesen, 64.
Valerian, Emperor, 8, 18.
Vault-building, 25, 26.
Virgin, Miracles of, 191.
Pure, 177.
Mary, Church of, 78, 126, 130; see also El
Adra.
Virgin Mary, Picture of the Lady, 129.
Waadla, see El Waadla.
Wadi el Sarg, 174.
Ghazali, 38, 41, 45, 52 (40, Plate iv, plan
from Lepsius).
Wadi Haifa, 13, 191.
„ Ibrim, 13.
~ Kostamne, 12.
~ Letti, 44.
~ Natroon, 111.
~ Sarga, 174.
Waily District, Churches in, 199.
Wakhis, see El Kaddisan Sargius wa Wakhis.
Warrak, see El Warrak.
Wasef, see Masgad Wasef.
Wasta District, Churches in, 206; see also El
Wasta.
Water-wheels, 11.
Wells of Egyptian tombs, 73.
Wells, Mr. R. D., 198.
Western Semneh, 64.
White ant, 24, 37.
White Monastery, 159, 161, 213.
White Nile, 12.
Wingate, Sir Reginald, 191
Wizz ( = geese), 73.
Wood, Use of, in building, 23.
Yacur, Church at, 211.
Yehnes, see Abu Yehnes.
Youths, The three.
Yuhanna el Meimidan, see Mari Yuhanna.
Yuhanna, see Abukir wa Yuhanna.
Yusef Semri, see Kafr Yusef Semri.
Yussef, see El Sheikh Yussef and Kafr Ibrahim
Yussef.
Yussef el A wad, see Kafr Yussef el Awad.
„ Hennis, see Kafr Yussef Hennis.
Yhsuf ibn Ayyub, 129.
Ayyub the Kurd, 78.
Zagazig District, Churches in, 203.
Zahr el Gamal, see Banub Zahr el Gamal.
Zankur, see El Zankur.
Zarabi, see El Zarabi.
Zawatna, see El Zawatna.
Zawya, see El Zawya.
Zawyet en Nassara, Church at, 211.
„ Naurah, Church at, 201.
Zayat, see Kafr el Zayat.
Zeinab, see Sayeda Zeinab.
Zeweila, see Haret es Zeweila.
Zifteh District, Churches in, 204.
Zina, see Ez Zina.
Zoheir, see Kom el Zoheir.
Zoueleh, see Cairo.
Zuela, see Haret Zuela.


OXFORD : HORACE HART, M.A.
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY




