

p£TH PPtn j
KruGious PAMS
2 v








istorical Sketch...
By J, P. Drought and C. H. Campbell, 1.1. b.
T
M IFTY years have passed since the regular administration c
m IFTY years have passed since the regular administration of the services of the
Church of England was first established in Echuca. In Australia, where
yjv religious, civic, and social institutions have been established for but a com-
i paratively short period in the history of the world, all such institutions are
• modern as compared with those of the older settled lands of Asia, Europe,
and America, and a Church established for but fifty years might seem but a new one.
Time, however, will treat all alike, and in the years ahead, be it but half century or
many centuries, those interested will read with pleasure the annals of the doings of
their forefathers in Church work and establishment, and it may be those who are
devoted to the good old Church, even in this year 1913, will derive some pleasure and
interest in hearing of the deeds and continued efforts which have resulted in Christ
Church, Echuca, being what it is to-day, and it may be that in 1963 the then members
of the Echuca Church will, in celebrating their centenary, be glad to have before them
some authentic record of the earliest days of its establishment.


CHRIST CHURCH RECTORY.


None can deny for a moment that the Church of England, established in Echuca
with God’s help, has been a live and important factor in the rejigious and moral
uplifting of the people in this portion of the State, and that the history of its growth
and work here is worthy of being recorded. The Vestry of the Church, consequently,
has endeavoured here to present a resume of the most important events which have
affected the Church during the last fifty years, with brief mention of the names of
many of the men and women who have taken part in the loved work of maintaining
and improving the Church and its usefulness.
It must be remembered that fifty years ago the Colony of Victoria formed but
one huge diocese, the Bishop overseeing and controlling the scattered Church through-
out that wide territory being Dr. Charles Perry, who necessarily resided in Melbourne,
and could give little attention to a remote place as Echuca then was. Like many
other newly-settled, small towns in those days, Echuca was visited occasionally by
ministers of the different denominations, but as here related, in the year 1863 and in
the month of August the Church was definitely established.
The Venerable Archdeacon Crawford, of Castlemaine, was communicated with,
and, as a consequence, that reverend gentleman and the Rev. C. J. Martin visited
Echuca. A meeting of supporters of the movement was held in the Court House, in
Dickspn-street— a small vyooden building standing in what is now the Police Station
enclosure. Rev. C. J. Martin took charge of the work, and conducted services every
Sunday in the Court House, in Dickson-street, and was heartily supported by a goodly
number of the prominent citizens of the town. The names of some of the early
parishioners who were then making the history of the Church are well worth noting :


Henry Hopwood, George Redman, W. W. Moore, Dr. Strutt, P.M., J. Shackell, E.
Homan, R. R. Haverfield, C. E. Pascoe, M. J. Webb, C. C, Palmer, Dr. Newbold, J. B.
Burgess, J. Yewers, and J. P. Drought, were members of the first congregations.
The Rev. C. J. Martin, who was then a young and vigorous man, full of zeal,
soon commended himself to the people of Echuca, and success followed his pioneer
work. He was not only a good churchman, but a good citizen and sportsman. He
delighted in rowing on the broad waters of the noble River Murray, and it is related by
one who saw the incident—our well-known Registrar of Births and Deaths, Mr. J. P.
Drought —that one day the reverend rower, sculling fast down stream past the gangway
crossing, forgot the wire rope attached to both banks for holding the punt in position,
struck it sideways with his dinghey and was toppled into the water. Fortunately
he could swim, and he soon reached the bank, where the helping hand of Mr. Drought
brought him to terra-firma, dripping but safe and sound.
Events moved rapidly, and on the 7th of September, 1864, a little more than a
year from the first real establishment of the Church in Echuca, a meeting of the con-
gregation and other citizens was held in the Court House to arrange for the erection of
a suitable Church building. Archdeacon Crawford presided, and in addition to the
pioneer members whose names have been mentioned as prominent parishioners, there
were present Mr. George Higinbotham, Engineer-in-Chief of the Victorian Railways,
and Mr. Hardy, District Engineer for Echuca railway.
Mr. Hopwood is recorded as having moved :—“ That it is desirable in order to
meet the growing necessities of the town and neighborhood of Echuca to initiate im-
mediate and more active steps to secure the speedy erection of a suitable Church


edifice on the Church reserve.” Mr. W. W. Moore seconded that historical motion, and
it was carried unanimously. On the motion of Mr. Higinbotham, seconded by Mr. C.
C. Palmer, a building committee was appointed, consisting of the Rev. C. J. Martin and
Messrs. W. W. Moore and W. D. Chomley (Trustees), and Messrs. C, E. Strutt,
Hopwood, Yewers. Homan, Burgess, and Webb. Collectors were then appointed, and
the preliminaries for the erection of our present dear old Church were duly begun.
The same night the committee, appointed to collect money and manage the
affairs of the Church, held a meeting, and decisive steps were taken to ensure the
erection of a building without delay. Mr Burgess was appointed honorary secretary
of the committee, and Mr. Towers its treasurer. Messrs. Vahland and Getzschmann, of
Sandhurst, were asked to prepare plans and specifications, and steps were taken to
obtain the required money, liberal donations being promised in the room.
To help on the building of the Church Mr. Hopwood promised to donate 25,000
bricks, and Mr. Redman 20,000, which were duly delivered and stand now in the
walls sheltering us. Mr. M. J. Webb carted 10,000 of those bricks free of charge as his
special donation.
In the Riverine Herald of November sth, 1864, there appeared an advertisement
calling for tenders for the erection of a portion of the Church building, and on the
tenders being received they were referred to Mr. W. W. Moore for a report as to their
suitability. By December 7th following, the committee was in a position to accept a
tender for the erection of a portion of the present building, and Mr. Anderson’s tender
for erecting the chancel and vestry was accepted at a meeting on that date. It appears
that the name of Mr. Bunnett, Clerk of Courts, was then added to the committee.


CHAS. J. MARTIN.
1863-1865.
JOHN McCAUSLAND.
1865-1872.
JOHN GARLICK.
1872 1883.


The present Church grounds were then almost in their primeval state.
Box trees, gum trees and stumps filled the land, and it was almost “ away in the bush,”
as the centre of the town was then about the punt crossing, near the Bridge hotel.
The contractors getting to work the land was cleared and fenced and the erection of
the building started.
In October, 1861, arrangements were made for a visit of the Bishop of the
diocese, and on Monday, October 31st, the Bishop of Melbourne, the Right Reverend
Dr. Charles Perry, accompanied by Mrs. Perry, arrived in Echuca, Dr. Strutt (with
whom they stayed) and the Rev. C. J. Martin meeting them at the newly-opened
railway station. The Riverine Herald of November 2nd, 1864, gives an account of
that important episcopal visit.
A reception meeting was held at which there was a large and representative
gathering of churchmen, and an address was presented to his Lordship which is well
worth quoting. It ran as follows :
“ My Lord. —We, the Trustees and Committee of the Church in Echuca, on behalf of the members
thereof desire to offer our sincere congratulations on the occasion of your Lordship’s first visit to this
portion of your diocese. We gladly take this opportunity of bringing under your Lordship’s notice
the rising importance and rapid increase of this town and also the proportionate and lamentable
want of Church accommodation, and deeming the present visit of your Lordship as a means whereby
the interests of the Church may be greatly furthered, we indulge in the hope of being permitted,
during your Lordship’s stay amongst us, to submit to the consideration of your Lordship many
matters connected with the Church’s progress in this locality. Trusting that this visit of your
Lordship may be the earnest of many similar ones, and with our united wish for your Lordship’s
welfare, we have the honor to be, my Lord,
“Your Lordship’s most faithful and attached servants.”


The signatures to that famous address are not here recorded. They will be
found in the records of the diocese, but no doubt they were those of the trustees and
committee elsewhere mentioned in this record.
The Court House hardly giving sufficient accommodation for the increasing
congregation, St. George’s Hall —a new, commodious brick building in High-street,
adjacent to the Bridge Hotel—was during 1864 and 1865 used for the Church services,
and there on the 26th of April in the latter year a soiree was given to the Kev. C. J.
Martin, as a farewell, as he was then leaving for England.
By September, 1865, the first portion of the Church building had been completed,
for on the 7th of that month the Rev. J. McCausland, who had by then taken charge of
the parish, preached in the Church building in the morning, and in St. George’s Hall
in the evening. Evidently the lighting arrangements for the Church were not then
completed.
GROWTH OF THE CHURCH.
In May, 1860, a further tender of Mr. Edwards was accepted for the building of
the transept, and from then onwards until 1867 the committee was much engaged in
providing money and means for forwarding the work. Dr. Barker and Mr. Lewers, of
the Bank of New South Wales, appear during this period to have been active in helping
on the work, also Mr. Homan. By January 7th, 1867, matters had sufficiently ad-
vanced to allow of sittings being let and the furnishings provided, and willing hands
and purses were there to help in completing the good work. Mr. Bartholomew gave


the communion table, and others also made gifts. The Church services were during
this year held in the portion of the building completed, and the minutes show that Mr.
Webb tolled the village bell, and Mrs. Webb kept the structure free from dust.
In March, 1868, appear the first records of a tea meeting held for the benefit of
the Church, It was held in St. George’s Hall, in High-street, which in those days was
used as the Temperance Hall now is.
In May, 1868, the committee was preparing for a visit from the Bishop of the
diocese—Dr. Perry—and in that month a new committee was elected, the names of
those appointed being Messrs. Bunnett, Hopwood, Homan, Moore, Pollard, McCulloch,
Barker, Hartshorn, Archer, and Redman. Mr. Bunnett acted as secretary and treasurer,
and Miss Doolen played the harmonium, and later Miss Hatfield. Messrs. Moore,
Chomley and Martin were elected trustees of the Church property, and the names of
Messrs. Bunnett and McCulloch were afterwards added.
In 1871 affairs had so progressed that the question of erecting a residence for
the Rector was moved, and action taken to secure funds, plans, etc. Mr. Le Geyt and
Mr. Butcher by this time had appeared on the scene. The months and years rolled
on, and the committee of the Church appears to have had many difficulties to meet
and overcome, but the Church evidently grew and prospered.
In June, 1872, the Rev. J. Garlick took the place of the Rev. J. McCausland,
and for many years he held the honored position of Rector of this Church. Many
names well known to the older residents of Echuca appear on the minutes of the
committee meetings. Those of Franklin, Stephenson, Sugden, Carpenter, Kendall,




Coghill, Barry, Scudder, and Drought were prominent. Special efforts for raising
funds were evidently necessary in those days, for a bazaar and finance committee was
appointed in November, 1874 The list of donations of goods and material for that
bazaar tell ancient history, and among the donors appear the names of many well-
known citizens, viz. : —Messrs. J. Stokes, Luth, Bottom ley, Homan, Hatfield, Rosel, and
Milledge, all of whom lent their aid.
In the report of the election of the committee for 1873-1 appear further new
names —Dr, Gummow and Mr. Connibee being there. At that meeting the question of
raising money for the purchase of an organ was considered, and steps taken in that
direction.
On the 7th of May, 1874, the committee took steps to secure the Crown grant of
the Church land. Apparently they wanted to borrow money to extend the Church
building, as it was becoming too small for the enlarging congregation. As a result of
continued efforts financial arrangements were made, and on April Bth, 1875, a tender
was accepted for extending the Church building.
The extent of the Church’s financial operations at this time may be gauged by
the figures of the treasurer’s report in that year (1875). The debit balance to the
Building Fund was £l5B 2s. Bd., and the total of the Parochial Fund, “ Dr.’’ and“ Cr.,”
was £402 7s. Bd. Mr. C. C. Palmer by this time had become a member of the com-
mittee. An organist was appointed, showing that by this time an organ had been
secured.
In 1878 Mr. Donaldson, P.M., of Moama,
and Mr. Shackell was still on duty, and Mr. J.
was an active member of the Church,
R. Montgomery became a supporter.




The Girls’ Friendly Society appears as taking a part in the Church work at this
time ; also the Church Union, and in January, 1886, Mr. James Bowen appears on the
list of Guardians.
In July, 1887, the Rev. Wm. Cocks was appointed Incumbent in succession to
the Rev. Carlisle. The names, “Vestrymen and Church Wardens,” were at this time
adopted in the place of Guardians.
In 1890 another bazaar was held for the purpose of raising funds to complete
the School Hall building. The Rev. Mr. Cocks resigned in 1890, and was succeeded
by the Rev. S. Sandiford. In that year Mr. Wilding was taking an active interest in
the affairs of the Church and liberally supported it.
The Vestrymen and Church Wardens who signed the declaration as to the
faithful performance of duties in the following January, 1891, were Messrs. W. W.
Moore, C. C. Palmer, G. W. Rogers, E. Homan, James Bowen, J. T, Evans, F. Laussen,
R. H. Glazebrook, T. W. Dodgson, G. H. Francis, and A. H. Heinrichs.
In 1891 the records show that the School Hall was completed, and that Mr. E.
R. Reilly was then acting as Church organist. Mr. Whiteley’s name appears as
taking an active interest in Church affairs, also that of Mr. Lydiard.
A sale of gifts held during that year resulted in the funds of the Church being
benefited to the extent of over £3OO, Mrs. Milledge’s stall producing no less than £l5O.
The proposal to sell thirty feet of the Church land adjacent to the Palace Hotel
and London Bank was at that time mooted, but it was found that the Church authorities




were not agreeable to so disposing of Church property. It was also then suggested
that the choir be moved from the gallery to the body of the Church. That suggestion
was eventually carried out, but not till several years later.
In February, 1893, Mr. Laussen, who had long performed the duties of honorary
secretary for the Vestry, retired, and Mr. Jones was appointed in his place. Dr.
Fowler in July of 1893 had joined the Vestry, and for a time acted as secretary, and
Dr. Smith in 1894 had also joined, the names of Messrs. Rogers. Murray, Glazebrook,
Palmer, Moore, Pascoe, Wilkinson, Homan and Hayward being also then recorded as
forming the Church governing body. Mr. Hayward was in that year appointed secretary.
In March, 1894, the Incumbent, the Rev. S. Sandiford, after years of good work
for the Church, left for Daylesford, he having exchanged parishes with the Rev. B,
Rodda, who in April assumed charge of the parish, but unfortunately before long had
to take six months leave of absence owing to ill-health. The Rev. P. Presswell filled
the vacancy as Curate in charge.
The annual meeting in 1895 brings new names to light,, Messrs. Lind, Dowzer,
Newson and C. H. Campbell then appearing. Miss Rodda had then taken the position
of Church organist, the state of the finances precluding the proper payment of the
gentleman formerly in charge. In June of that year the Rev. B. Rodda was compelled
to resign owing to failing health. The Rev. G. VV. Kelly was appointed, and took
charge of the parish in August of that year.
Nothing of special importance occurred in the history of the Church for some
years. The finances were a source of constant trouble, as the Church owed a substan-
tial overdraft of nearly £2OO, and action was consequently crippled.


In 1897 Mr. Laussen, who had been an active worker in the Church and
Superintendent of the Sunday School, left for other parts of the colony. In May,
1899, the Rev. G. W. Kelly resigned after some years of useful service to the Church,
the Rev. A. Brain succeeding him in the month of June.
Further action was taken during this year with regard to the moving of the
organ from the gallery to the chancel, and eventually the instrument was placed in its
present position. The Rev. W. St. John Chase was in charge of the parish as locum
tenens —also his brother, the Rev. E. S. Chase —Mr. Brain having gone to England on
special business.
During the Incumbent’s absence in England considerable additions and repairs
to the rectory were effected at a cost of nearly £4OO. It may be mentioned here that
the residence has twice been thus added to. Originally a wooden cottage constituted
the rectory, which no doubt was considered a palatial building in the early days. The
next step was the erection of the four rooms now forming the front portion of the
house, the old cottage rooms being retained as a dining-room, kitchen, etc. Extensive
additions were now made, the old wooden structure being wholly removed and
substantial brick rooms being added at the rear of the second stage brick rooms,
which resulted in the present commodious dwelling. Needless to say, Mr. Brain on his
return from England in 1901 expressed himself as most pleasantly surprised at the
fine additions made to his place of abode.
In September, 1902, the Rev. A. Brain resigned, he having accepted the incum-
bency of St. George’s Church, Hobart, and shortly afterwards the Rev. A. B. Tress took


charge of the parish. The zealous and effective work done by Mr. Brain was much
appreciated, and his kindly and unselfish nature earned him hosts of friends in
Echuca.
Mr. C, Tatchell, Mr. Corke, and Mr. J. Douglas had by this time become
members of the Vestry. Mr. Deuchar joined, and Mr. A. J. Mitchell joined later in
the year. Dr, Stoney’s name appeared in 1903. In 1901 the School Hall was first
used for the Church of England High School, which the Vicar was instrumental in
establishing. By that year Mr. A. C. Ostrom had assumed an active part in the affairs
of the Church, and was one of the Vestry. Mr. VV. King was also taking part in the
work.
Church affairs ran smoothly under Mr. Tress’ regime, and nothing of great
moment occurred till June, 1906, except that at the Rector’s suggestion pew rents were
abolished and reliance placed solely on the regular liberality of the parishioners for
revenue.
Owing to Mr. Tress having succeeded his father at St. Stephen’s, Richmond, the
Rev. C. J. Chambers was temporarily appointed to the parish. Mr. Chambers faith-
fully fulfilled his duties, and left for another parish on the appointment of the Rev. H.
B. Hewett in February, 1907.
The Church, under Mr. Hewett’s care, and owing no doubt to his zeal and energy
and ability as a preacher and teacher of men, prospered greatly during the period of
his incumbency. The financial position was improved, the long-standing indebtedness
of the Church being cleared off, and large congregations constantly in attendance. The




experiment of raising regular revenue by voluntary Sunday contributions had proved
successful, and was assisted no doubt by the envelope system, and the sum contributed
has been so liberal that the financial position was no longer a source of anxiety.
Mr. Hewett himself was an enthusiast in musical matters, and with the
valuable aid of Miss Milledge, as organist, and the members of the choir, maintained
a high standard of Church music.
The Bendigo diocese having been formed, Christ Church, Echuca, came under
the supervision of Bishop Henry Langley, who frequently visited the parish and
stimulated the good work.
On the lamented death of the Bishop, his successor and brother, John D. Langley
(the present Bishop), was warmly welcomed in Echuca, and his kindly guiding and
helping hand has furthered the interests of the Church.
It would perhaps be invidious here to refer specially to the work of individuals
when all were working for the welfare of the Church and Christ Church in particular,
but the splendid self-sacrifice of the men and women who gave their time and talent to
the building up and maintenance of the splendid Sunday School in connection with
the Church should be noted.
The Church Guild has also done good work, and the Church of England Men’s
Society, established in 1911, has tended to attach men to the service of the Church.
Although not prominent officially, the good wives of the several Rectors have been able
to render fine service to the Church by their tactful and generous aid, and in many
ways they have earned the gratitude of those eager for the welfare of Christ Church and
its parishioners.


The events of the last years are well known, but still should be recorded. In
August, 1912, the much-respected Rector, Rev. H. B. Hewett, deemed it his duty to
accept the offer of the incumbency of St. Phillip’s Church, Collingwood, and his place
—one not easy to fill —was taken "by the Rev. J. C. Herring, who is now the Rector, and
who has quickly won his way to the hearts of his people, and by his tact and capacity
shown that he will in every way well care for the interests of the now fifty years old
Church.


O’irst Committee, 1563.
Messrs. W. D. CHOMLEY W. W. MOORE C. E. STRUTT, p.m.
H. HOPWOOD J. YEWERS E. HOMAN G. REDMAN
J. B. BURGESS M. J. WEBB
Office-bearers, 1913.
Cburcbwarbens:
Messrs. A. J. MOORE, j.p. W. KERR
A. C. OSTROM
IPestrgmeu:
STONEY
Messrs. W. R. G. CAMPBELL E. SIMS
S. J. BURGE
H. LEWIS
. H. ATKYNS
A. J. MAYFIELD W. H. CASTELL
Secretary:
Mr. W. H. CASTELL
Mr. A. C. OSTROM




