

Christ Church, Melton
JUBILEE
1872-1922




Christ Church, Melton.


Christ Church, Melton,
Victoria, Australia.
Jubilee of Consecration by Bishop Perry
1872-1922.
Secretaries of Jubilee:
Mrs. A. L. Rogers.
Miss E. Dora Staughton.
Preachers at the Jubilee Services:
Sunday, October Bth, 11 a.m. and 7.J0 p.m.—Rev. Canon
Raglin.
Sunday, October 15th, 11 a.m. —The Yen. Archdeacon Hayman.
7.J0 p.m.—The Vicar.
OKI'KT-HKAHKKS OF CHRIST CHURCH, MELTON, 1U22.
Vicar —Rev. A. Rae Campbell.
Churchwardens: Messrs. \V. Leake, J. F. Minns, and T, Horn-
buckle (Hon. Treasurer).
Vestrymen:—Messrs. George Minns (Hon. Sec.), J. Greig (Lay
Representative in Diocesan Synod), J. Parker, H. C. Wraith, J.
Ferris, J. Radford. R. McCorkell and E. Missen.
The Ladies’ Guild: —President, Mrs. A. R. Campbell. Vice-
President, Mrs. S. J. Staughton. Hon. Sec., Mrs. A. L. Rogers.
Hon. Treasurer, Miss Rose Minns.
The Choir:—Conductress, Mrs, A. L. Rogers. Organist, Miss
Essie Walters, A.L.C.M.
The Sunday School:—Superintendent, The Vicar. Teachers,
Mrs. Rogers. Mrs. Campbell, Miss Rose Minns.


Mr. and Mrs. Simon Staughton, Exford, Melton.


AN HISTORIC CHURCH
CHRIST CHURCH, MELTON.
The foundation-stone of this interesting Church was laid in the
year 1864, by Miss Staughton (afterwards Mrs. Spensley), daughter
of Mr. Simon Staughton, of Exford. The Staughtons are well known
throughout Australia as one of the great pastoralist families.
In the year 18 72, the Church was consecrated by the Right
Reverend Charles Perry, D.D., first Bishop of Melbourne. For many
years Melton was a part of the parish of Bacchus Marsh, but, in
1906, it was created a separate parish, the Rev. A. Styan Bendy
being the first Vicar. This was only made possible by the
generosity of the several Staughton families, who have always been
liberal supporters of the Church.
Shortly after the death of Mr. S. T. Staughton, M.L.A., of
Eynesbury, and in order to provide some fitting memorial of him,
the inhabitants of Melton and district erected a new Chancel, at a
cost of over £6OO. The foundation-stone was laid by Mrs. Tom
Staughton, in 1903. Contained in the new Chancel is a three-light
stained glass window, representing the parable of the Good
Samaritan, given by Mrs. S. T. Staughton, and affording an appro-
priate memorial to her late husband. The Chancel bears this
inscription: “Erected in loving memory of Samuel T. Staughton,
M.L.A., for many years Lay Representative of this Parish.”
On the evening following the dedication of the Chancel, the
Archbishop of Melbourne (the Most Reverend H. L. Clarke, D.D.)
preside:! over a public meeting in Melton, at which the Hon. Alfred
Beakin, M.H.R., Hon. Carty Salmon, M.H.R., and Mr. Robert Harper,
M.H.R., bore witness to the esteem in which the late Mr. Staughton
was held bv all classes.


Laying the Foundation Stone of the New Chancel.


On October 21st, 1003, Major-General Sir Edward Hutton.
Commanding the Commonwealth Military Forces, performed the
ceremony of unveiling a two-light window to the memory of the late
Captain Tom Staughton. Appropriately, the left-hand window
represents the youthful, all-glorious St. Michael in full armour with
the banner of the Cross. The window on the right shows the more
mature St. Joshua, also in a suit of mail, his shield carrying a full-
blazoned sun. At the foot of the window the inscription reads:
•‘This window is erected by his brother soldiers, in loving memory
of Captain S. Tom Staughton, D. 5.0., A.D.C., M.L.A.” Beneath are
engraved the names of Sir Edward Hutton and 38 other Officers,
Non-Commissioned Officers, and Privates.
In the west end of the Church is a very beautiful three-light
window, placed as a memorial to the late Mr. Simon Staughton, the
head of the family, and the pioneer builder of the Church. The
subject is a pastoral one: “And Abram took Sarah his wife, and into
the land of Canaan they came.” Beneath is recorded; “To the glory
of God and in loving memory of Simon Staughton, and Mary Susan,
his wife. Erected by their daughter, M. T. S. (Mrs. Spensley).”
The Staughton coat-of-arms occupies a centre panel.
These windows, together with the brass altar rails, given by
the friends of Captain Staughton, were dedicated by the Very Rev.
G. O. Vance, D.D., Dean of Melbourne, on the same day. The Church
also contains a lectern, the gift of Mr. Harold Staughton, and other
gifts of Mr. H. W. Staughton.
Another fine two-light window is on the south side of the
Church; one window representing Charity, and the other figuring
St. Paul. This was erected in memory of Mr. and Mrs. George
Minns, and bears the inscription; “In loving memory of George
Minns and Ann, his wife, erected by their children.”
There are many other valuable gifts in the Church, mostly of a
memorial character, viz.: The altar, the sanctuary chairs, gift of
Mrs. Spensley; the prayer desk, in memory of Councillor Robert
Hornbuckle, presented by his wife and children; altar cloth, gift of
Mrs. A. E. Small; carpet, gift of Mrs. Hay; chancel lamps and
brackets, gift of Mr. W. A. M. Blackett; the altar cross, in memory
of Mrs. C. Ferris and Lady Farmer, presented by their former
Sunday School scholars; altar book rest, in memory of Henry
Peachey and Catherine Miller, presented by their daughters; altar
vases, presented by Rev. W. T. Prentice; altar candlesticks, pre-
sented by Mr. J. H. Cunningham; mats, the gift of Mrs. J. F. Minns;
tablet on the north wall, erected in memory of William Fell White-
side, who died of wounds in France. June, 1916. erected by his
father and brothers.


A very fino Honour Board, presented by Mrs. S. J. Staughtoh,
contains the names of the Melton soldiers belonging to the Church
of England, and a brass tablet beneath bears this inscription: “In
loving memory of Captain J. T. Price, M.C., R.F.A., killed in action
at Vermelles, France, April 21st, 1916. Presented by his sister.
Mrs. S. J. Staughton.” The Honour Board was dedicated in 1919,
at a Special Sunday Service, by Captain Chaplain S. Buckley, M.A.,
at which there was a Guard of Honour, composed of local returned
soldiers, and the Last Post was sounded as the board was unveiled.
The Choir Stalls are all memorial—One in memory of George
and Eliza Minns, of Walsingham, Norfolk, England, presented by
their son, James, and his wife; one in memory of Henry George
Minns, presented by his nephew and niece. J. F. and PI B. Minns;
one in memory of Rev. George B. Rogers, late Vicar of the Parish,
presented by Christ Church Choir and Ladies’ Guild; one in memory
of Fanny E. Parker, presented by her nieces, Misses E. and R.
Minns. These stalls are very handsome. A very fine Union Jack,
placed behind the pulpit, is the gift of Miss Hornbuckle (now Mrs.
Knox).
The Vicars of Bacchus Marsh Parish (which included Melton)
were the Reverends Sabine, Cooper, Scott, Garlick, MacCausland,
Williams, Gibbs, and Brewer.
In 19 06, Melton became a separate Parish, the first Vicar being
Rev. A. Styan Dendy. After several years at Melton, this clergy-
man took up duty in England. He was succeeded by Rev. W. Perrc
Martin, who, in course of time, received a Parish at Brighton (Mel-
bourne). Rev. J. H. Allen was Vicar until his appointment as
Chaplain of the Church of England Grammar School at Geelong.
Rev. I l '. Stanley Love was incumbent at Melton till he became a
Military Chaplain. He was succeeded by Rev. George B. Rogers,
who, after a short but most successful ministry, died, after a brief
illness, in 1919, to the great sorrow of all the parishioners, by whom
he was greatly beloved. Rev. A. Rae Campbell, who was appointed
in Sept, of the same year, is still at Melton.
The following have been Hon. Secretaries of Christ Church,
Melton: —Mr. R. Parkinson (for a number of years), Mr. J. M.
Xickinson, Mr. James E. Minns (for 18 years), Mr. H. Hurley, Mr.
E. C. Kinnersly, and Mr. George Minns (the present Hon. Sec.).
The following have occupied the position of Organist:—Mrs.
Staughton, Miss Minns (now Mrs. E. L. Simpson), Mrs. Shebler.
Miss Rose Minns, Miss Scotson, Mr. George Minns, Miss Hornbuckle.
Miss Nyssen, Mrs. Martin, Mrs. Allen, Mrs. Chalmer. and Miss Essie
Walters, A.L.C.M. (the present Organist).
Photos are printed herein —The late Mr. and Mrs. Simon
Staughton, of Exford, Melton; the laying of foundation stone of new
Chancel; and a picture of the Church,


