

CHRISTIAN MIRACLE
A STATEMENT OF
THE CASE AND THE ARGUMENT
JAMES COSH, M. A.
Minister of the Presbyterian Church, Balmain ; Member of the Council of
St. Andrew’s College, within the University of Sydney ; and
Tutor in Exegetical Theology for the Presbyterian
Church of New South Wales.
Imbues:
S. T. LEIGH & CO.
1890.




n 3>^55/T
/ £-5
CHRISTIAN MIRACLE.
ONE of the distinguishing features of the Christian
religion is this, that it is a historical religion.
By that is meant not simply that it is a religion which
has a history (for that may be said of all other forms
of relig’on as well as Christianity); but what is
meant L, that Christianity is a religion which had its
origin in certain facts or events which actually
happened as matters of history, and further, that these
facts or events themselves constitute an essential
and integral part of the substance of this religion.
It is not a religion whose teachings consist of legends,
or myths, or fanciful stories handed down to us from
pre-historic times ; nor yet is it a religion whose
teachings consist simply of thoughts or ideas which
have come naturally or supernaturally into men’s
minds about God and about Divine things, but
which have no intimate or necessary connection with
any facts which have fallen out in human experience.
But Christianity is a religion which is founded on
actual facts ; and the facts on which it is founded are
facts which not only happened, and are proved to
have happened as matters of history, but which also
themselves—some of them at least—constitute a
part of the very substance and contents of the religion
itself. Therefore it is that we say of it that it is a
historical religion.
Now, many of the historical facts which took
place in connection with the origin and establishment
of the Christian religion are facts precisely similar in
kind to those which fall out every day in the course


of human experience. When we read the accounts
which tell us of the men who were the leaders and
actors in the great movement, and of the things
which they said and did and experienced in connec-
tion therewith, we feel that we are reading about men
who, in many if not in most points, were exactly like
ourselves, and about events and experiences sub-
stantially similar to those with which we ourselves
are familiar. We see in them the same human nature
working as works within ourselves—the same
faculties, the same feelings, the same relationships as
are to be met with among mankind everywhere.
We see also that the scenes and circumstances in
which they lived and moved, and the social customs
and institutions by which they were surrounded
were in many respects exactly similar to those to be
met with in the same and in other eastern countries
to-day. And such being the case, so far as it is the
case we have no difficulty at all in realising the
historical character of the events recorded, and
in believing most surely that these events did actually
occur.
But alongside of this class of events, and mixed
up with them most intimately, is another class of
events which are reported to have taken place in con-
nection with the origin and establishment of the
Christian religion. The events here referred to are
not such as we are wont to see fall out in the ordinary
course of history, but they are events of an altogether
extraordinary character, the like of which never took
place before and have never taken place since. It
is especially in connection with the life and work of
Jesus that this class of events is met with. In con-
nection, for example, with the birth of Jesus, a whole
series of very remarkable and altogether extraordinary
phenomena are said to have occurred, such as have
never been read of or heard of in connection with


any other birth. Then afterwards, when this same
Jesus grew up to be a man and came before the
public as a teacher and preacher of divine truth, he
wrought a large number of works, which are described
in the New Testament sometimes as wonders , some-
times as signs , and sometimes as powers , but which
have all this common characteristic—that they are
quite out of the usual course of human achievement.
He healed the sick, He cleansed the lepers, He raised
the dead ; and all simply by His word. These are
works the like of which no man before Him ever
did and no man since has ever done—at least, so
freely, so frequently, and apparently with such perfect
ease and naturalness. In connection with His death,
also, as well as in connection with His birth and His
public career, this same characteristic of extra-
ordinariness showed itself most wonderfully. When
He was hanging on the cross dying, there came
over the land a great preternatural darkness and
shaking; and it is even said that many graves were
opened and people who had been buried there came
forth. But most wonderful of all, on the third day
after His crucifixion, Jesus rose alive from the dead,
and in a transformed and glorified body showed
Himself alive to His disciples and had
intercourse with them forty days; at the end
of which time He went up into heaven before
their eyes and in that way disappeared, leaving
with them a promise to be with them always, even
unto the end of the world, and at the time appointed
of God the Father to return to them again.
Now all this is admittedly, and on the very face
of it, most extraordinary. This whole class of facts
is so much out of the usual course of history that
surely we might very well be excused, if at first sight
we should have considerable difficulty in realising
and believing that such things did actually happen.


They look so strange and so unaccountable, and at
first sight so highly improbable, that one almost feels
tempted to say that they cannot possibly be
historical. And yet they seem to come in so
naturally in these New Testament narratives; they
are so inextricably connected with the other and
more ordinary events of this history ; and they are
so congruous, so much in keeping with one another,
and with the whole historical development of which
they form a part, that, great as may be the difficulty
of believing them, the difficulty of explaining all or
any large portion of them away, or of detaching
them from historical Christianity without at the same
time utterly destroying it, or at all events changing
it very materially, is even greater still. _ Some,
indeed, of the minor or less important incidents
might be capable of being eliminated ; and some
especially of the healing miracles, might be capable
of some natural explanation. But with regard to
such things as the supernatural birth of Jesus,, or
His resurrection from the dead, or His ascension into
heaven, and with regard also to the perfect sinless-
ness of His personal character, it is impossible either
to eliminate such things as these, or to explain them
by any ordinary process known to us. So that,
whatever the difficulties may be that lie in the way
of our accepting the recorded miracles of Christianity
as historical facts, the way out of these difficulties is
obviously not to be found either in any such thing
as an explaining away of their extraordinariness, or
in attempting to separate them from their setting,
and then to hold on by what is left. For, in the
first place, they are and must always be recognised
as very extraordinary occurrences ; and in the second
place, they are and must always be recognised as
an essential and integral part of New Testament
Christianity. You can neither reduce them to the


level of ordinary and natural events, nor can you cut
them out and lay them aside as things of merely
accidental and not of fundamental importance. If
you do either, the residuum which is left may not,
indeed, be altogether valueless, but it will certainly
be a very different thing from New 1 estament
Christianity.
Seeing, then, that it is impossible for us, con-
sistently with our holding on to the Christian faith,
either to explain away or to eliminate the miraculous
facts which are said to have happened in connection
with the origin and establishment of that faith, the
problem which is set to us is, first of all, to find a
standpoint from which it will be possible for us,
with the full concurrence of our minds and hearts,
to believe that such things might have occurred ;
and then, secondly, to ascertain whether, and how
far, the evidence available suffices to establish the
fact that such things did actually occur. In other
words, what we have to find is, first, a position from
which the occurrence of such miraculous facts may
be recognised as not improbable, and belief in them
as not unreasonable ; and then, secondly, we have
to find positive evidence of such a kind and weight
as will warrant the conviction that the facts alleged
did actually take place.
Now, in considering this matter, the first thing to
be borne in mind is this : that here we are dealing
not with a number of isolated and independent
occurrences, but with a whole series of closely con-
nected and mutually related facts. Ihe miracles
of Christianity are not just so many events of an
extraordinary character, displaying extraordinary
skill or power or other qualities, but yet having little
or no connection with one another, and having no


very direct or necessary bearing on any common
end or purpose. But the miracles of Christianity
are events of an extraordinary character which took
place in the course of a very extraordinary historical
movement; they are events, therefore, which can
only be rightly understood and appreciated when
they are viewed in their mutual connections and in
their bearing on the whole of which they are parts.
Everyone knows that a thing may appear to be very
improbable and quite inexplicable if it is looked at
by itself and away from its connection with the cir-
cumstances and events in which it occurred ; and
yet that same thing may be recognised as the most
natural and appropriate thing in the world,
when it is looked at in the light of the con-
nection in which it occurred, and the pur-
pose it was meant to serve. And so any one of
the Christian miracles, when taken by itself, may be
felt to be very difficult of belief, and yet, when
viewed in the light of its connections and purpose,
may be recognised as the most natural and likely
thing possible. This, then, is the way in which we
should approach the consideration of the miracles of
Christianity, if we would understand their true
nature, and if we would reach a standpoint whence
we may be able to see their credibility and appre-
ciate rightly their place and purpose.
Now, the miraculous facts of Christianity have
this as one of their most distinctive characteristics—
that they all took place in close and direct connec-
tion with a special and extraordinary revelation of
God. The historical development of which they
form a part is, without question, the most extraordi-
nary development of which human history affords
any record. The case is not merely this—that about
the time of the appearing of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and during the course of his life and work in


Palestine, a number of very extraordinary events are
reported to have happened ; but it is this—that all
these events, and even the very appearing of Christ
Himself at the time, and in the way He did, are
events organically connected with a great historical
religious movement, the beginnings of which go as
far back as the times of the patriarch Abraham, and
the issues of which extend down to the present day,
and even now are only in process of realising them-
selves. Of this great movement, the characteristic
feature is the presence within it all through of what
is manifestly a special divine activity impelling it,
and a special divine purpose guiding and controlling
it. It is not the working merely of the human
heart and mind, originating thoughts and aspirations
about divine things, and trying to realise and give
expression to these in human character and life ; but
it is the working also of the Divine Spirit in contact
with human nature and life, suggesting thoughts of
God, and awakening hopes and aspirations with
regard to Him, and at the same time ordering
events and shaping human history—or at least a
part of it—so as to lead men on in these ways to a
true and growing knowledge of God’s character and
purposes, to an intelligent recognition of the end
towards which God in His Providence was working,
and to a constantly growing desire and expectation
of some fuller manifestation of Himself, to be made
later on, when the fullness of the time should
come. In other words, it is a historical development,
at the heart of which a special was all
along at work, and the outcome and issue of which
has been to give to the world a special and extra-
ordinary, that is, a supernatural revelation of God.
Now, if this be so, the natural and necessary con-
clusion will be, that in the working out of such a
special and extraordinary result it is more than


probable that, at some of its stages at least, events
of an extraordinary kind must have happened. The
special and extraordinary character of the entire
development, both in its process and in its result,
cannot be held as doing less than covering both the
possibility and the probability of extraordinary events
taking place in connection with it, and authentica-
ting these, should any such occur. In other words,
Christianity being itself the manifestation and out-
come of special working on the part of God, not only
within the domain of man’s inner experience, but also
within the region of fact and external history, we
need not be surprised if, at certain points in the pro-
cess of its origination and introduction into the world,
events of an altogether extraordinary character should
be reported to have taken place. Seeing that it
embodies and presents a special and supernatural
revelation of God, it may be set down beforehand as
in every way probable that in the process of bringing
it in there should occur at some stages particular
instances of special and supernatural action on the
part of God.
To this, however, it may be objected at the outset
that the claim which is put forward on behalf of the
Christian religion, that it embodies and presents a
special revelation of God, is a claim which is made
equally on behalf of other religions ; and further,
that to base the argument for the Christian miracles
on the supernatural character of Christianity as a
whole is to assume the very thing which needs to
be proved.
To the first of these objections it may be replied
that the fact that other religions claim to be divine
revelations, even though that claim were proved,
does not affect in the slightest degree the claim of the
Christian religion to be a special and supernatural


work of God. It is quite conceivable that other
religions besides Christianity might to some extent
have in them a divine element, and be justly entitled
to be regarded as in some respects and to some ex-
tent the work of God. If God was specially pre-
sent in one historical religious development, that
is no reason why He should not also be present in
a similar way in some other development of a simi-
lar kind. But whether this is so or not in any given
case, will require to be proved on its own evidence.
And if the Christian religion is entitled to be regarded
as a special revelation of God and the result of special
working on the part of God, the evidence that such
is the case will be at hand and will be forthcoming.
The claim put forward on behalf of other religions,
whether substantiated in any case or not, does not
affect in the slightest degree the evidence which
Christianity has to produce of the validity of its
claim ; and cannot, therefore, be held as foreclosing
or prejudicing consideration of that evidence when
it comes to be presented.
And, then with regard to the other objection—
namely, that to base the argument for the Christian
miracles on the supernatural character of Christianity
as a whole is to beg the entire question, and to take
for granted the thing which needs to be proved—the
answer is, that it is not so. For the Christian
miracles are not the only things in connection with
the Christian religion which attest the supernatural
character of that religion. The supernatural character
of the Christian religion as a whole' is attested and
established by a much wider range of evidence ; and
supposing it to be so attested on evidence, apart from
the particular miracles, then it is no begging of the
question, but it is in every respect a legitimate
process of reasoning to argue from the proved
supernatural character of the sytsem as a whole to


the possibility and even the high probability of
particular manifestations of the supernatural occurring
in the process of its production.
Our plan, then, will be to deal first with the
Christian religion as a whole, to trace the main
outlines of the general course or process by which
the system as a whole was wrought out and brought
in, and to take a comprehensive view of the general
character and contents of it as a completed system.
And if, when we shall have done this, we come to
find that, both in the process by which it was
wrought out and in the finished result of that process,
the Christian religion bears tokens and evidence of
its having been directed and controlled all through
by a special divine activity and a special divine
purpose, we shall then be in a proper position for
appreciating the probability or otherwise of those
particular miraculous facts which are alleged to have
occurred in connection with its origin and establish-
ment in the world.
Now, as respects, first, the process by which the
Christian religion came into existence and came to
be what it is, the peculiarity of the case is this—that
it was a process partly of historical development, and
partly of religious or spiritual development, and in
both aspects of it it was a development wrought out
under special and supernatural guidance and control.
As we remarked at the outset, the Christian religion
does not consist merely of thoughts or ideas which
have come naturally or supernaturally into men’s
minds about God and about Divine things—it is not
a mere movement or manifestation of thought about
such things ; but it is a religion which is rooted in
facts that fell out in the course of history, and the
facts with which it stands connected are, in some


instances at least, essential and integral parts of the
revelation it contains. It is a religion which was
wrought out through a long protracted historical
development, in the course of which events happened
in God’s Providence by means of which such as were
observant of these events, and were enabled by God’s
Spirit to discern the spiritual significance of them,
came to form certain conceptions of God’s character
and purposes and His methods of dealing with man-
kind. The conceptions thus formed, under the com-
bined influence of these external events and the
teaching of God’s Spirit, received later on, under the
influence of similar events and teaching, such expan-
sion or modification, such correction or confirmation
as they were found to require ; and in this way there
grew up within the sphere of this particular historical
development an increasingly clear and assured
knowledge of God and of Divine things, which
culminated at last in the coming of Christ and in the
sublime and heavenly teaching which has ever since
been associated with His name. When we trace
back the history of the origin of Christianity, and
look into the process by which it came into being,
this is what we see —that from the time of Abraham
onwards until the coming of Christ there was
manifestly going on in the history of the people of
Israel a gradual unfolding of the character and
purposes of God ; that towards this unfolding the
events which fell out in the national history of Israel
and in the individual lives of its prophets and leaders
were important contributing factors; and that the
successive stages of the process were so connected that
the earlier were the germs of the later, and the later
were the legitimate expansion and outgrowth of the
earlier. The peculiarity of the movement was this :
that it consisted of a continuous and connected series
of historical events, and that in and through these


events, interpreted as they were by the Divine Spirit,
there was wrought out a connected and progressive
development of religious knowledge and religious
experience. In its inner character the movement
was essentially a spiritual or religious movement,
but it was a movement also which connected itself
directly and always with external facts and events.
And inasmuch as these facts and events were both
in themselves and in their mutual connections quite
above the sphere of human arrangement or control,
the natural conclusion is that the entire development
was something more than the mere working of the
human mind and heart on the problems presented to
it—-that in point of fact, it was a movement in which
God Himself was in His Providence ordering events
in the outer world, and by His Spirit directing and
inspiring the minds of men so as to enable them to
gather from these events the instruction in regard to
religious and spiritual things which they were fitted
and designed by Him to convey. In other words,
the conclusion to be drawn from the way and manner
in which Christianity came into existence and came
to be what it is, is just this : that it is a special and
supernatural work of God, and that the spiritual
truth which it embodies and presents is a special
and supernaturally given Divine revelation.
As respects, now, the second source of evidence as
to the divine and supernatural character of the
Christian religion, viz., the character and contents
of the religion itself, it will be enough if we here
indicate how the case stands and how the matter
here referred to bears upon the point we are seeking
to establish. We have just shown that the way in
which the Christian religion came into existence was
by a process of historical and religious development
under supernatural guidance and control. What we
have now to add is this ; that the outcome and result


of this development has been the production and
establishment of a religion the character and contents
of which show it to be divine. As a matter of fact,
in this development there has been wrought out and
presented to the world a revelation of the divine
character and purposes which is not only superior to
all other forms of religion, but which in its most es-
sential and characteristic features is also quite unique.
In the first place, the conception of God which is
given in Christianity is acknowledged on all hands
to be the highest and worthiest conception of God
which mankind has as yet attained to ; and in the
second place, the exposition given in Christianity of
the relations between God and man, and of the way
in which these are to be harmonised and preserved
and perfected, is undoubtedly that which best accords
with the felt necessities of human nature, and best
satisfies the hopes and aspirations of the human heart.
In all ages and amongst all nations men’s minds have
been much occupied with such subjects as these.
The religious faculty, which, from its universality
and persistence, seems to be natural to man, has
kept itself at all times more or less actively exercised
on the great problems of the being and character
of God, and the mutual relations of the Divine
and the human, and the duties on the part of
man arising out of these relations. But the
thoughts which men in this way have come to
have about God and about divine things, even at
their best, fall very far short in sublimity and purity
and worth of the conceptions on the same subject
which are given in Christianity. Even to this day
no higher or worthier conception of God has been
presented to the world than that which has come to
us through that great historical development, which
culminated in the appearance of Christ and in the
establishment of the Christian religion. Even to this


day there is no religion that better satisfies the needs
of the human heart and conscience, or that better
meets the aspirations of the human soul than Chris-
tianity does. As a matter of fact, it is this religion
which has given to the world the best idea of God
which it yet possesses, and the best interpretation of
man’s spiritual nature and relations which it has yet
attained to, and the best provision for man’s spiritual
wants which has as yet been discovered or dis-
closed. In all these respects the Christian religion
stands distinctly superior to all other forms of religion
—so superior as to be quite unique, as unique among
the developments of history as the human species
is unique among the works of creation. Now, this
itself is amply sufficient to warrant the conclusion
that Christianity is in a special sense the work of
God ; and that the truth which it contains is a revela-
tion of the Divine character and purposes which has
been given by special and supernatural action on the
part of God Himself. The unique and distinctive
character of the Christian religion as a revelation of
God and of Divine things is an undoubted sign and
token that in its origination and introduction there
was —there must have been—some special exercise
of the Divine will and power. So that the evidence
derived from the way and manner in which it came
into existence is fully corroborated by that which is
furnished by the character and contents of the
religion itself.
But if the case be so—that the Christian religion
as a whole, both in the process by which it came
into existence, and in the character and contents of
it as a finished result, presents evidence of its having
been given by the special and supernatural working
and guiding of Almighty God—then we ask, what was
there to hinder, in the working out of such a result,


the occurrence of particular events of a special and
supernatural character also, such as those we meet
with in the Christian miracles ? If the development
as a whole, and in its ultimate result, is supernatural
where is the difficulty in believing that at some par-
ticular points in the process some particular mani-
festations of the supernatural occurred ? From the
standpoint which we have now reached, is it not
plain that the occurrence, in connection with the
origin and establishment of the Christian religion,
of some such extraordinary events as those known
as the miracles of Christianity, is not only perfectly
credible, but is in the highest degree antecedently
probable ? When we consider what Christianity is,
and what the process was by which it came into
existence—when we contemplate in its finished com-
pleteness the end to which all the historical develop-
ment to which it belonged was working, it seems not
only clear that events of an altogether extraordinary
character might naturally have been expected, but
it seems even morally certain that some such events
must have occurred somewhere in the process. The
supernatural character of the ultimate result seems
to demand that at some point or points in the
process a special divine initiative or intervention,
such as is implied in the Christian miracles, must
have occurred.
To this, however, it may be objected that,
although when looked at from the standpoint just
mentioned, the miracles of Christianity seem possible
enough, and even probable enough, in the abstract,
yet the Divine action which is displayed in these
miracles is so much out of the ordinary course of the
Divine method of working that it is practically very
difficult to believe that they ever did happen. Whilst
it may be quite true that on the pre-suppositions
mentioned there is nothing whatever to hinder the


occurrence of miracles, or to make belief in such
occurrences irrational, yet, as a matter of fact,
miracles generally, and the miracles of Christianity
in particular, presuppose on the part of God some
special intervention whereby, for the time being at
least, the uniformity of nature is interrupted, and the
continuity of natural processes is disturbed, and
such being the case, it is so far a presumption
against their having actually taken place. Even
allowing that miracles are possible, and in certain
connections even probable, yet, seeing that the course
of nature generally is uniform, the occurrence of
miracles must be * set down as so exceedingly
improbable as hardly to be credible at all.
Now, to many at the present time this is a real
difficulty, and a very formidable hindrance to faith ;
so much so, indeed, that under the pressure of it not
a few have felt themselves constrained to renounce
New Testament Christianity altogether, and have
sought refuge for their souls in a sort of sublimated
form of historical Christianity called _non-miraculous
Christianity. Ihe refuge adopted in such cases is
such a sorry substitute for the religion renounced
that if there be any legitimate method by which the
force of this objection from the uniformity of nature
can be obviated or satisfactorily met, it is well worth
while searching for it. ...
Perhaps the best way of meeting this objection to
Christian miracles, arising from the general uni-
formity of nature, is to enquire whether or not there
are any instances to be met with, in other depart-
ments/ of special working on the part of God similar
to that which is presented in the miracles of Chris-
tianity. Is the* Divine initiative or intervention
which is implied in the Christian miracles the only
instance of such intervention with the established
order of things, or are there any other instances in


which a similar intervention on the part of God may
reasonably be supposed to have occurred ?
Now, admitting that the course of nature is uniform
after such a course has been fairly established, is it not
the case that at certain points in the past history of
the world certain interruptions in the usual order of
things did occur, and new forms of existence came
into being ? For example, there once was a time
in the history of the earth when there was no such
thing as vegetable or animal life in it. Ihe course
of nature at that period included the action of
physical and chemical forces, but it did not include
the existence of any living creature or the action of
any of the forces characteristic of living organisms.
But at a certain point in the history of the earth this
order of nature was broken in upon somehow, and
a new order of things came into being, and a new
order of nature was established. Living creatures
appeared where no living creatures had been before ;
forces began to work in these living creatures which
were neither purely physical nor purely chemical
forces, but were the forces characteristic of life; and,
still further, along with the introduction of these new
forms of existence there came the introduction and
establishment of a new system of natural laws, in ac-
cordance with which these living forms ever since have
been originated, preserved, modified and reproduced.
Here, then, manifestly was an instance of interven-
tion on the part of God, and an interruption upon
the uniformity of nature, as nature then was, for the
purpose of introducing a new form of being into
the world, and a new order of things, and thereby
advancing the Divine Creator’s purposes.
Whether the method by which this was done
was one of specific creation or one of gradual
evolution—whether it was done by the direct
action of the Divine Will, or was brought


about by that Will acting through the medium
and agency of forces and laws already in exis-
tence, is a matter of no consequence whatever in
its bearing on the present argument. For it is not
the particular method by which it was done, but the
fact itself that such a thing was done, which is the
thing here insisted on. And the value of it lies in
this—that it shows clearly that when life was first
introduced into our planet there must have been an
interruption in the continuity of natural processes,
and in the uniformity of nature as nature then was,
exactly similar to those interventions in the usunl
order of things which are reported to have taken
place in connection with the origin and establish-
ment of the Christian religion, and which we
describe and characterise as the Christian miracles.
If, therefore, the general uniformity of nature is no
hindrance to our believing the miracle of the origi-
nation and introduction of life into the world, it
should not be any hindrance to our believing the
miracles of Christianity. The miracle in the former
case may not, indeed, be thought to be so great as
the miracles in these latter cases ; but, all the same,
the one was as much and as really an interruption
on the uniformity of nature as the others were.
It is further to be observed that the introduction
of life into the world is not the only other instance
of such an intervention on the part of God in the
usual order of nature. There once was a time in
the history of the world when there was no such
being in existence as man. The course of nature at
that time included the action of physical and chemical
forcesand the forces characteristic of life, but it did not
include the exercise of intelligence, or the moral
action of free-will on the part of any of the living
creatures then inhabiting our planet. But at a
certain epoch this order of things which then pre-


vailed was broken in upon somehow. Man appeared,
and with his appearance there came into operation
quite a new set of agencies and activities, and a new
order of nature was established. Previous to this
time the only forces in nature, so far as we know,
were physical and chemical forces and the forces
characteristic of life ; but now, with the introduction
of man, there was superadded the force of active
intelligence and of moral agency or free-will.
A new creature appeared in whom powers and
faculties of quite a new order manifested them-
selves, and whose appearance gave rise to quite a
new class of phenomena. Whatever the method
was by which this was done—whether man was
formed by a distinct and specific act of creation, or
whether he was formed by a gradual process of
evolution that matters nothing to the argument.
It is the fact of man s introduction into the world
that is the thing of value in this connection ; and the
value of it is this : that it is another clear and un-
doubted instance of Divine initiative, of an interrup-
tion on the part of God with the ordinary processes
of nature, exactly similar, so far as the processes of
nature are concerned, to that which we see again
exemplified in the Incarnation and in the other
miracles of Christianity.
I hus, it appears, when the subject is regarded
from the proper point of view, and when it is looked
at in the light of its connections, that the occurrence
of miracle in connection with the origin and introduc-
tion of the Christian religion is not only not impro-
bable, but is rather a thing to be expected. Still
further, the occurrence of miracle in such a connec-
tion is entirely in keeping with what has taken place
in other departments and in connection with other
matters, and thus the objection to the miracles of
Christianity as interruptions with the ordinary


processes of nature and the usual method of the
Divine working is shown to be of no real force or
application. And these points having been brought
out and established, the way is now cleared for an
examination of the miraculous facts which are said
to have occurred in connection with the origin and
establishment of Christianity, and for a consideration
of the evidence by which these facts are sub-
stantiated.
The miraculous facts connected with the Christian
religion extend over the whole period of its historical
development, but it is chiefly in connection with the
culmination of that development in the coming of
Christ, and in the establishment of the Christian
religion as a distinct institution, that the presence of
miracle shows itself. But even then, when miracu-
lous working was most abundant, the proportion of
miraculous events in relation to the entire movement
was not numerically large. All told, those recorded
in the New Testament do not amount to more than
between forty and fifty. This, of course, does not
represent fully the entire number of miracles that are
said to have been wrought by Jesus and His
Apostles, or that are said to have happened in con-
nection with the advent and mission of Christ. For,
in more than one passage of the Gospels, where
some of the wonderful works of our Lord are
recorded, the note is added that, “ many other signs
truly did Jesus in the presence of His disciples
which are not written in this book” (John, xx. 30,
xxi. 2 5). Of those recorded in the New Testament,
a very large proportion consist of miracles of healing,
only a few comparatively having been wrought upon
objects in inanimate nature. In regard, however, to
both the healing-miracles and the nature-miracles,


there is this to be noted—that they present a con-
siderable variety, not only in the circumstances
attending them, but also in the degree of importance
to be attached to them, and in the measure of extra-
ordinariness that characterises them. Whilst all are
wonderful and all are important, all are not equally
wonderful or equally important. Both in them-
selves as miraculous works, and in their spiritual
significance as vehicles or presentations of spiritual
truth, there is great diversity among them. And
whilst some might conceivably be allowed to drop
out of sight and be forgotten, and no great loss
result to the general cause, there are others of such
vital and fundamental importance that all that is
valuable and distinctive in the Christian religion may
be said to be bound up inseparably with them. For
our present purpose it is not necessary that we
should examine carefully every particular miracle
that is reported to have occurred in connection with
the founding of Christianity. It will be amply suffi-
cient if we direct our attention to one or two of those
which are acknowledged to be of first and funda-
mental importance.
Now, of all the miraculous facts connected with
Christianity, by far the most important are those
connected with the person of Christ Himself, and
with the personal experiences which He Himself
passed through during the period of His historical
manifestation. The miracles which He wrought
upon others w~ere indeed most wonderful works, but
they were nothing at all to the wonders which were
embodied in His own person, and realised and
exemplified in His own experience. The miracle of
miracles was this —that in the person of Jesus God
was manifest in the flesh ; that the life and character
which He displayed during His sojourn among men
was an illustration and exemplification in human


nature and under human limitations and earthly con-
ditions of the life and character of God ; and that in
His resurrection from the dead and His ascension
to heaven there was given to mankind a revela-
tion of the invisible world and of the reality and
glory of the future life such as had never before
entered into the heart of man to conceive. The
one miracle which includes all the others is the
miracle of the Incarnation, If that can be made
good, then in the establishment of it all the others
will virtually be established. For if the Lord Jesus
Christ is really God manifest in the flesh, then every-
thing else which is said about Him in Holy Scrip-
ture, and every wonderful experience He is reported
to have passed through, and every wonderful work
He is reported to have done, will be found to be so
natural and appropriate, so congruous and consistent
with that great fundamental postulate as scarcely to
require any other evidence to substantiate them.
It will be convenient, then, in dealing with this part
of our subject to begin with this—the miracle of the
Incarnation. The question, then, with which we
have here to deal is this : Is it true, as a matter of
actual fact, that in the person of Jesus Christ there
was a divine nature as well as a human nature ?
Can we certify ourselves beyond reasonable doubt
that what the Bible says of Jesus is true —this,
namely, that He was the Son of God as well as the
Son of man, or, as it is otherwise put, that He was
God manifest in the flesh ? The question with us
in the meantime is not the question of what such an
alleged fact means, or how it is to be explained or
accounted for; it is simply the question as to
whether or not this that is said of the personality of
Jesus is actually true —was Jesus Christ the Son of
God incarnate ? or was He simply a higher than
average specimen of humanity ?


Now, in dealing with this question, our first and
most natural course is to do as we do with other his-
torical questions, that is, look up our sources of infor-
mation on the subject, and see what the testimony
is of persons who were in a position to bear witness
in regard to the matter, if any such have testified of
what they heard or saw.
Now it is acknowledged that the four narratives in
the New Testament, called the Gospels, were the
work of men who either themselves were eye
witnesses of what they relate, or who obtained their
information from such as had been eye-witnesses.
They thus fulfil the first requirement of reliable
historical testimony, Still further, the writers of
these narratives are acknowledged to have been men
of moral integrity and truthfulness. In telling the
story of the life and work of Jesus, they had no dis-
position and no motive to do otherwise, than relate
simply and truthfully what they knew and what they
believed. More than even this, the story they told
was one well-known to many of their contemporaries
from the same sources as were open to them; for we
know that many oral traditions and many other
written narratives of the same events, besides these
four, were extant in the early days of Christianity ;
and it was because these four preserved in the most
complete and satisfactory form the common tradition
about Christ, that they survived, whilst all or nearly
all the others have perished. In addition to all these
facts, making for the credibility and trustworthiness
of the gospel narratives, there is the fact which any
of us can see for ourselves, that the whole style and
manner of the said narratives bear the air of truth and
genuineness. In fact, so great is the impression of
their truthfulness that, were it not for the miraculous
things which they relate, they would be accepted
universally without criticism and without question.


4 ‘ There is no historical work of ancient times which
carries on its very face such a seal of truthfulness as
these gospels do” (Schaff).
What, then, is the picture presented to us in these
narratives of the character and life of Jesus Christ ?
If Jesus was, as He is said to have been, the Son of
God incarnate, there must have been many things
about Him, and about His life and work, which would
show more or less distinctly this peculiarity of His
person. What, then, do these, the earliest and fullest
histories which we have of Him, tell us regarding
Him? Do they tell us anything which may serve to
indicate to us, or to assure us of the fact, that there
was in the personality of Jesus an element which
marks Him off as different from and superior toother
men ?
Now, the first thing to be noticed in this connec-
tion is the perfect sinlessness of Jesus. The picture
presented to us of Jesus in the Gospel narratives,
show him to have been a man of an absolutely stain-
less character and life. All other men, that we have
ever heard or read of, have had their faults and short-
comings : either they have had infirmities of temper
and disposition, or they have been partial and one-
sided in their judgments, or they have failed to recog-
nise fully or to discharge fully all their responsi-
bilities ; their lives have been marred or stained by
some failures or some falls. There is not one of
whom it can be said that he was absolutely faultless.
But here, in Jesus, is a man who forms a distinct
exception to this universal rule—here is a man whose
inner and outer life has been laid open before us
with the greatest minuteness of detail —a man whose
experience embraced within it occasions of the most
varied and trying kind, and who nevertheless was
able so to conduct Himself in all, as to leave on every
unprejudiced mind the impression that He was


absolutely without sin. It is not merely that certain
of the New Testament writers say this of Him, that
He was holy, harmless and undefiled and separate
from sinners, and that though tempted on all points
like as we are was yet without sin ; but it is this
also, that the details which they give of the circum-
stances and events of His life, all go to show that
these opinions, which these writers had of Him, were
opinions thoroughly consistent with and thoroughly
established by actual facts. Whether you look at
Him as an individual in the singularity of His own
personal character, or whether you look at Him in the
relations in which He stood to the men and women
around Him, and to God above, in either case it is
impossible to detect anything, on the ground of which
he could be said even so much as once to have failed
in duty, or transgressed the law of goodness and
purity and right. In person, character and life He
was stainlessly pure; and if love is the fulfilling of the
law in the mutual relations of social life, in this also
He was free from fault, for His whole life among men
was one continuous outgoing of love and compassion.
Whilst in relation to God, He was so completely
consecrated to God’s service and so perfectly acquies-
cent in the Divine will, that He never once rebelled
against the Divine requirements. In the most trying
crisis of His life He was able to say, “ Not My will
but Thine be done,” and when dying “ I have
finished the work which was given me to do.”
In respect, therefore, of personal character, it may
be taken as a generally acknowledged fact that the
Lord Jesus Christ occupies quite an exceptional
position amongst men. He is the one perfect
embodiment of sinless excellence, which the world
has been permitted and privileged to behold. No
other man either before or since has come near to
Him in this respect. To this day, even amongst


the most morally advanced races of mankind, the
life and character of Christ is the highest ideal of
moral excellence that the mind has been able to
conceive. It is the testimony of some of the best of
His followers that they never knew what God was,
until they saw Him revealed in Jesus. I ask, there-
fore, what other conclusion can legitimately be drawn
from this fact than simply this, that in the person of
the perfectly holy and sinless Jesus, we have a
specific manifestation or incarnation of the perfectly
holy and sinless God. Judging simply from what
the New Testament writers tell us of the life and
character of Jesus, we should say that, apart from
Divine inspiration altogether, they reasoned rightly
when they concluded from what they saw and heard,
that in Jesus they beheld God manifest in the
flesh. Divine inspiration was no doubt needed to
enable them to see this ; but once it was suggested
to them by Divine inspiration, their own observation
and reflection on what they saw and heard was
amply sufficient to establish in them the conviction,
that one so exceptionally sinless and pure must
indeed have been none other than the Son of God
in the nature of man.
But besides His perfect sinlessness of personal
character there is another thing brought to light in
the testimony of the gospel histories, which goes to
corroborate the conclusion that in the person of Jesus
we have a real incarnation of God ; the thing which
I refer to now is the testimony which Jesus
bore regarding Himself and His relation to God.
If Jesus was the Son of God incarnate, the perfect
sinlessness of His character and life was in perfect
keeping with such a peculiarity in His person. This
sinlessness is therefore most appropriately set down
as the first point in the evidence of His Divinity.
But over and above this, if Jesus was the Son of


God incarnate, then next to the testimony of His
own spotless life would come the account which He
gave of Himself, in the way of certifying us truly as
to who and what He was. A man who, in other
respects approves Himself to us of such lofty and
stainless character, has surely some good claim to be
heard and trusted, when He speaks about Himself
and gives information respecting His own person
and mission. Now, in the gospel narratives we
see that Jesus did not content Himself with
simply letting His disciples exercise their minds
about Himself and leaving them to draw their own
conclusions. But He distinctly unfolded to them
the fact that He had come from God, and that the
relationship which he had with God was one which
He had had with Him before the world was. When
Peter in the name of the other disciples expressed to
Him what their conviction and belief regarding Him
was —saying, “We believe and are sure that that
Thou art the Christ the Holy One of God” our
Lord so far from repudiating such a conviction,
assured them rather of its correctness, and felt
Himself greatly rejoiced in spirit, that they had come
to have something like a true insight into the
mystery of His person. In the later period of His
ministry our Lord spake often to His disciples on
this subject ; and His teaching was so explicit and
so emphatic, that, although it by no means clears up
the mystery of His person, it leaves no room for
doubt or question as to His peculiar Divinity. It
was not merely the opinion of His disciples that, in
order to account for and explain what they saw in
His life and character, it was necessary to assume
for Him the possession of a Divine nature and the
privilege of some peculiarly near relationship to
God : but it is the teaching of Jesus Himself that
that is the true explanation of the peculiarity of His


person and His mission. The claims which Jesus
puts forth for Himself are indeed very extraordinary:
but they are in the highest degree consistent with
His very extraordinary personal character : and
furthermore, as they are His own explanation, so
they are the best and most adequate explanation of
that most singular fact.
And here it may now be added, that this doctrine
of the Divinity of Christ not only furnishes the best
and most adequate explanation of-His spotlessly
perfect life, but it affords also at the same time the best
authentication of all the other wonderful things
recorded concerning Him. Because, if the Lord
Jesus Christ is the Son of God, possessed of the
Divine nature in such a sense that we are warranted
in saying of Him that He is God manifest in the
flesh, then, however little we may be able to com-
prehend or explain the great mystery that lies in
such an unique manifestation, this at least is certain
that it is a manifestation which, from the very nature
of the case, must involve much that is extraordinary
and quite beyond the range of common experience.
In particular, if it be the case that our Lord Jesus
Christ is the Son of God incarnate, then all the
other extraordinary things which are related con
cerning Him in Holy Scripture are nothing else
than the natural and appropriate outcome and
expression of this peculiarity in the constitution of
His person. It is this which most fully accounts for
and explains not only the miracles, which He is said
to have wrought when fullfilling His earthly mission,
but also those very extraordinary experiences
through which He Himself is said to have passed in
the same connection. It is this also which best
accounts for and explains the unique excellence of
the doctrine which He taught, and of the religion
which he gave to the world, as well as the singular


power which this religion has shown itself to have of
exalting and purifying the lives and characters of
such as come fully under its influence. So that we
may truly say that the miracle of the Incarnation is
the great miracle of the Christian religion ; the
supreme and all-embracing instance of that which
is its most distinguishing characteristic among
the religions of the world ; the true secret of
its unapproached excellence and its inextinguish-
able vitality ; the authentication of all its other
miracles, the explanation of all its past triumphs
and the pledge and guarantee of still greater
triumphs to come.
After the miracle of the Incarnation, the one that
comes next in the order of importance is the miracle
of the resurrection of Christ from the dead. This
also is an event that stands quite alone, and without
a parallel elsewhere within the range of human
experience. Notwithstanding this, however, the
evidence by which it is supported is so abundant, and
so varied and so strong, that it well deserves to be
regarded as one of the best known and best attested
of all historical facts whatsoever. So much is this the
case that there is absolutely no room left for uncer-
tainty, either as to the fact that He rose again from the
dead on the third day after His crucifixion, or about
the effect which that fact had upon the first disciples
and still continues to have upon all Christian
believers. If any event at all of an extraordinary
character is capable of being established by human
testimony, then there is no fact in the past history
of mankind which stands on firmer ground, or is so
well certified to, as the fact of the resurrection of the
Lord Jesus Christ. Although it was an event which
had been predicted by our Lord Himself, yet, as a
matter of fact, when it did happen it came as a great


surprise to all the disciples. At first, when He
showed Himself to them, they could not believe that
it was He. So little did they expect it, that it was
with the greatest difficulty they brought their minds
to realise it and accept it. But afterwards, when
they were no longer able to resist the evidence by
which it was assured to them, what was the attitude
of their minds respecting it ? Did they falter over
it for awhile, and then give up their belief in it ?
And was their belief in it such as was capable of
standing the test of cross-examination, or was it a
belief that after awhile broke down or ceased to have
any effect on them ? Does not everyone know that
so far from this being the case, the certitude of the
early disciples on this matter was a certitude from
which nothing was ever afterwards able to shake
them ; and, moreover, the faith which they had in
regard to this fact was a faith which inspired and
sustained and so possessed and controlled them, that
their whole lives afterwards were given up to the
preaching of it? Not only that, but rather than
keep silent on this point, they submitted to all sorts
of sufferings and privations, and even laid down their
lives, some of them, as witnesses for this great fact.
So far as historical certainty goes, it is impossible
ever to get better or more trustworthy evidence of
any fact than that which has been supplied us res-
pecting the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the
dead. No cross-examination of any witnesses in any
court of justice could by any possibility be more
severe or testing, than was the fiery ordeal through
which the witnesses for our Lord’s resurrection passed,
in their testifying to what they themselves had seen
and heard. So that on historical grounds we not
only have full warrant to believe in our Lord’s resur-
rection, but, as candid and reasonable men, we are
bound to admit that the fact must have been so.


The interest, however, which, as Christians, we
have in this event is much more than simply a
historical interest. Its chief importance for us, and
for all men, lies in this, that it is one of the essential
and substantive facts of the Christian religion, and
that in it there is given a specific Divine revelation
respecting matters of great and enduring interest to
us all, and concerning which we have no such clear
or assured knowledge given us anywhere else. This
is a point in our Lord’s historical manifestation where
there shines out in particular a whole flood of light,
respecting the future developments of that eternal
life which He came to give to as many as should
believe on Him. The resurrection of Christ is the
seal and token of the immortality which Christ
preached and promised. In Christ risen from the
dead we have a proof given to us, such as is not
given anywhere else, that death was not to Him the
end of life, and that, therefore, it will not be the end of
life to any who are His. In Him, also, as He
appeared to His disciples after His resur-
rection, we have an exhibition of what the
nature of the Christian life after death is. It
is a life, evidently, that is to be subject to other and
vastly different conditions from those to which we
are subjected now. It is a life, also, that is to be
clothed upon with faculties and powers such as we
do not at present at all possess. But with all about
it that is new, it is yet not to be an entirely new life,
but one in which our personal identity js to continue
unbroken, and in which our highest and purest
thoughts, and feelings, and interests, and affections,
are all to be preserved and exalted. All these things
are plainly shown to us in the resurrection-life of our
Lord, as that was manifested during those wonderful
forty days when He showed Himself to His
disciples. But more than all and better than all,


even of these things, is the assurance which is thereby
given to us, that our Lord who died for us is not
dead, but that He ever liveth to make intercession
for us and to work out His salvation in us. Our
faith in Him, therefore, is not faith in a dead Christ
but in a living and exalted Lord, who is able even
now to save to the very uttermost all who come unto
God by Him.
Can any one say that that is not a reasonable and
well-grounded faith ? Can any one say that a
religion, which embodies such wonderful manifesta-
tions of the Divine character and purposes, and
which carries along with it such wonderful attestations
of its Divine origin and authority, is not a religion
worthy of all acceptation among sinful and mortal
men ? Surely, in view of all that has here been
advanced, we are amply warranted in holding that
the Christian religion is one which has very special
claims, both upon our minds and upon our hearts ;
and that amongst these claims one of the weightiest
is that which is derived from the miracles which
attended its origination and introduction. For,
Christianity being what it is, these miracles are not
only in the highest degree worthy of belief, but they
are the natural and appropriate accompaniments and
expression of that which is its most distinguishing
characteristic and its unique excellence.
S. X. Leigh & Co., Printers, 155 Clarence Street Sydney.
