

CHRISTMAS UNIVERSITY
COMBLOUX 1946
INTERNATIONAL STUDENT SERVICE




CHRISTMAS UNIVERSITY
A report
of the
International session of Combloux
(20th December 1946 - 7th January 1947)
o n
"reform; of the university”
* * *
International Student Service
13 rue Calvin, Geneva, Switzerland


CONTENTS
Page
Introduction (Maurice Didier) .. X
Introduction to the problem "The Reform of the
University" (John Coleman) 7
Report of Commission I Culture and the University 13
The Cercle Inter-Facultes at Grenoble .. .. .. 17
Report of Commission II The University and Society 19
Report of Commission 111 The University Community 25
Group Reports
Photography group ~ .. «. 33
Choral group .. ~ .. 35
Theatre group 36
Radio group 38
University radio at Padua .. .. . • »• •• 41
The cover photographs were taken by Ebeid Saroufim.


INTRODUCTION
Maurice Didier
This session on the theme "Reform of the University" brought to-
gether for three weeks seventy five students and ten professors of
fourteen different nationalities (Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Denmark,
France, Great Britain, Holland, Hungary, India, Italy, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United States and Yugoslavia). It took
place in the magnificent setting of the student chalet at Combloux,
opposite Mont Blanc. ■
In order to understand the meaning and the interest of such a
session, it is useful to place it in relation to the interests and
concerns of present-day youth. After the war and the liberation,
in many European countries, the youth, and in particular the student
youth, who had taken a decisive part,in the struggle, was inspired
by a great desire for reform. Today, the development of student
syndicalism, the increasing participation of students .in the govern-
ment of the universities, the numerous study circles formed by students
to enable them to get to know their own problems better have all com-
bined to strengthen this desire and make:it. concrete. There la a
risk, however. Through lack of information or of technical knowledge
on the question, students and professors, may waste their efforts.
Twenty five years ago, a similar desire for reform failed for this
reason. Such a session, therefore, aims at. making known to the
universities the actual facts as.well as the theoretical problems which
condition university reform in the different countries. Its aim is
thus to examine and compare different experiences in order that each
participant may return to his country with a clearer idea of the
possibilities and limits of such a reform, and to show him how his
effort, which he may think to be isolated, fits into the international
picture, '
It is important, also, to give this conference its place in the
history of International Student Service. After six years .of war
and two years of reconstruction, when problems of relief were of such
urgency that they excluded all others, this first post-war cultural
session marks the revival of a long tradition. This is not the first
time today that the problem of the .reform of the. university has occupied
the attention of ISS. Already in 1930 r the conference at Oxford
stated the need for a completely new university. If, today, the
problem is a little different, it is, as we have said, because in
several countries students and university people have already taken
the offer<~ive. It is also because the development of certain means
of expression, like the radio and the cinema, have raised the problem
of a real cultural revolution in the university. In the face of these
problems, ISS must take up a position, state exactly its ideas, and
point out the main lines for research. This session is at the same
time a land mark and a first experiment. It is not satisfied with
giving students of various countries the possibility of discussing
the question. At the very basis of the experiment, there are some
assumptions on the direction in which it is necessary to look for
the ideal university : the extremely important role played by com


munity life and personal contacts, the importance of general culture,
the place of art (in particular music and drama) in the development
of youth, and the new part played by modern means of expression such
as the radio and cinema in the university - these assumptions have
found expression in a small "Christmas• University" lasting for three
weeks, where intellectual activities were only one element in a pro-
gramme including pbgrsical, artistic and practical activities. The
whole conception rests thus on different bases from those of the or-
dinary university.
Regarded, in this way, a better understanding is obtained of the
scope and limitations of this session. It was in no' sense a par-
liamentary conference or a congress where resolutions are taken and
transmitted to university authorities or governments ; it was a study
session and an experiment in a widening of the traditional university
framework-
The pattern of this small ''Christmas University'' was the following.
The conferences given by professors and experts dealt with key pro-
blems of the, crisis of the university. In fiftean-mihute talks,
the students themselves gave some factual information about the uni-
versities in their countries ►their organization, their shortcomings,
the remedies tried. Finally, all the students belonged either to a
commission or a group, the commissions dealing with research into
different aspects of the main theme of the session and the groups
undertaking certain artistic and practical activities,* Commission I
studied the problem "University and Culture", Commission II "Univer-
sity and Society", and Commission 111 "The University Community",
The four groups were the theatre and ohoral groups,which prepared
sdngs and short sketches for the main festivities during the session,
and who likewise discussed certain theoretical problems such as that
of drama in the. university; the radio group organized broadcasts inside
the Chalet and participated in making records which were sent to
Radio-Geneva and to Radiodiffusion franchise; the photography group
prepared a visual report of the session (in a big wall newspaper which
was, put up on the last day) and it'was also responsible for the pro-
jection of 16 m.m, talking films and for taking a film of the session.
Special importance was given to the festivities of Christmas and
the New Tear. For - each of these, there was a whole day of preparation.
On Christmas Eve, the national delegations performed Christmas legends
and Sang songs of their country. Then, following the tradition of
the Chalet, a procession was formed, lighted by torches, to go to Mid-
night Mass. On New Tear's Eve, the theatre group gave five versions,
serious and humorous, of "Tristan and Iseult". The evening continued
with.a fancy dress competition and a masked ball. Lastly, it is in-
teresting to note the.final soiree when the international character of
the Session was brought out by the theatre group with a musical and
dramatic piece, "The Watchman of Babylon", based on the myth of the
Tower of Babel.
The programme was therefore varied enough. To give a more exact
idea of the way in which it was set up, here is the first part of the
programme :
2


FRIDAY, 20 December
11
a.m.
Welcome by the Director
of the Chalet
12.30
p.m.
Lunch
2 - 4.30
p.m.
Skiing lesson with in-
structor
5.30
p.m.
First meeting - community
singing
SATURDAY, 21 December
9
a.m.
General meeting about the
Christmas festivities
9.30
a m.
Community singing
10.30
• \
a.m.
Meeting of radio, theatre
and choral groups. Prac-
tical work. Making of
torches, search for Christ-
mas tree, etc.
2 - 4.30
,p .m. :
Free time
4.30
p.m.
Tea
5.30
p.m.
Meeting of commissions and
groups
SUNDAY. 22 December
Morning free
2
p.m.-'
Maurice Didier : Introduo-
tory speech of the session
2.30 '
p m.
John Coleman !.' Introduction
to the problem of the Reform
of the University
4:« 30
p.m.
Tea
5.30
p m.
Meeting of commissions and
, groups
MONDAY, 23 December
9
a.m.
Malcolm Adiseshiah ; Uni-
versity Reform in South East
Asia
11
a.m.
Meeting of commissions and
groups
2 - 4.30
p .m.
Free time
PROGRAMME


MONDAY, 23 December
5.30
p.m.
Five part lecture ;
Material and Social Con-
ditions of Student Life,
Duccio Zampieri ; Italy
Vera Daniel ; Britain
Adela Navratilova: Czeoho-
Slovakia
Ebeid Saroufim ; Egypt
Patricia Butterfield ;
U.S.A.
TUESDAY, 24 December
9
a.m.
General meeting about the
Christmas festivities
9.30
a,m.
Community singing
10
a.m.
Meeting of delegations to
prepare for Christmas
2—3
p .m.
Free time
3 - 4.30
p.m.
Practical work
5.30
p.m.
Meeting of delegations
7
p.m.
Beginning of Christmas Eve —
international soiree
12
p.m.
Midnight Mass
1.30
a.m.
Midnight supper
3-4
a.m.
Dance
■WEDNESDAY, 25 December
Morning and afternoon free
\
9
p.m.
American delegation ;
The Racial Problem in the
United States
THURSDAY, 26 December
9
a.m.
Sven Bporklund ; The Pro-
blem of People’s Culture
in Sweden
11
a.m.
Commissions and groups
5.30
p m.
Five part lecture ;
Topography of Student Or-
ganizations
Goran Kjellberg : Sweden
Vittorio Bachelet: Italy
Claude Sarraute : France


THUESDAT, 26 December
(Five, part lecture)
Johan' Gondswaard :
Holland
Sidney Diamond ;
Britain
etc.
As such, the intellectual programme. of the session dealt with all
the crucial points of the university crisis - the. philosophical bases of
the university, the university and society, the problem of general culture
and of people's culture, and the cultural revolution of the radio and
cinema. These points, however, were not discussed in an atmosphere
as truly creative as that, probably,- of a, period in which greater changes
were taking place, such as the liberation, for instance. Moreover,
as we have already stated, the interest of the session was mainly
educational and technical ; thus, the object was not to put forward
some absolutely new aspects of the. question but to define and state
precisely some aspects already known. During the whole session a con-
cern for fact was dominant and that-allowed us to place the reform of
the university not on an idealistic plane but in its practical con-
text. The international character of the delegations made the ex-
position of the problem longer and more difficult, but,' on the other
hand, it enabled the students to become more critical and to' distin-
guish between what wds purely relative to th® situation in their own
country.and what was a general trend in university development.
Once back home, the students would be in possession of facts which would
prevent them from wasting their time.through,ignorance of what has al-
ready been tried.
•We must state,however, that we could not carry out the investigation
quite asfar as we would like to have done, first because of the lack
of knowledge .among students of their a:na. university problems ; second-
ly, because of the absence of a sufficient number of professors and
senior people who could not easily come during the Christmas holidays $
finally because of the necessity of studying the problem from all angles,
which sometimes prevented us from going deeply enough into it. As
such, the session has'to be considered^as a milestone. The work be-
gun in Combloux must be continued by. the students who were there by
discussing the problem in study groups or in debating circles in their
own university. It must be consolidated, by ISS, who will try to study
the different problems raised by means, of conferences and sessions
on specialized subjects which would go into more thorough detail.
The.result of the intellectual, work of this session, as it appears
in the following report, is to give a good survdy'of the different
approaches to the reform of the.university. As;such, the report can
be used as an instrument for investigating'this problem from all angles
and for providing students with points of reference for serious work
in this’.field. As for the work of the groups (theatre, choral, radio
and photography), it was the newest and most interesting part of the
experiment. It was certainly handicapped by lack of technicians and
experts. To obtain the full results we were hoping for, each group
should have been directed by a skilled expert who.would have been able
to give real instruction to an international audience. Our Christmas
■University sometimes had to rely upon.improvisation. In spite of this,
5


the groups achieved very interesting results and pointed out.some
new lines of research and work to the delegates. Without going into
detail about these four groups, the work of whom you will be able
to follow in the report, it is interesting to note one of them in
particular, the radio group, which really obtained something of great
value. This group was able to give three broadcasts inside the Chalet,
and, with the co-operation of Radio-Geneva, a number of records was
made, some of which were sent to Radio-Geneva and the others to
Radiodiffusion frangaise, For these recordings, not only the radio
group participated in the broadcasts but also some students who were
not working specifically in the group. In addition to this practical
work, the problem of university radio was raised by a delegate of the
Radio University of Padua and it was discussed in a full-length
meeting. Mr, Schaeffer, from Radiodiffusion frangaise, had brought
with him a recorded programme, "Planet Shell", which opened up new
vistas on radio technique. We also heard some, records made during
the period of fighting for the liberation of Paris, thus showing the
importance of the radio as a living witness,. Such achievements
must be considered only as the beginning of a serious effort to pro-
mote university radio and, in a more general way, the reconstruction
of culture by means of this technique. One of the best projects
which ISS could.support would undoubtedly be the organization of a •
session or conference on this specialized.subject with the participa-
tion of students, professors and experts..
But doubtless the most important result of the session was the C3?ea«“
tion cfa-real community of life and spirit, and the atmosphere of the
Chalet, des Etudiants and the Christmas and New Tear festivities"helped
very much to achieve this aim. The variety of the activities - in-
cluding sport, artistic, practical and intellectual work r made con-
tacts better and more profitable. It has once more to be stressed
that international centres such as Combloux are really of the utmost
importance in such cultural work. The main'defect of the university
today is the absence of spirit and .unity, and it is by means of such
living centres that it is possible to arouse fresh enthusiasm in old
institutions.
If we want to sum up the meaning or 7 such a session, no better
formula can be found than to say that is was a good exposition of the
problem. The students who came there were not charged with making
decisions; the aim of the session was not to bring about direct
changes in the university but to give a new and comparatively broad
idea of what can be done, and in which direction the work can be
carried on. The general atmosphere and the vitality of the com-
munity gave the students a general impression of what was the spirit
in whvoh to work. The programme of the commissions and groups,
although not perfectly carried out, provided-the students with the
methods to use in such an effort. Thus the session must be considered
as the beginning of our cultural programme. The emphasis must now be
put on comferences of a more specialized nature, on topics such as
the Theatre and the University, Radio and the University, Cinema and
the University, and Social Transformation and the University. This
will be the work of ISS in the next months and years. In conclusion,
we must remember that such work cannot be carried on without the help
and co-operation of students in every country and without a number of
individual efforts and experiments which could be co-ordinated and
crystallized in international meetings of this nature. Thus you must con-
sider the report we are sending to you less as an account of what has
been done than as an encouragement to carry on along these lines'and to
send us new suggestions and new ideas for the work we have begun.
6


LIST OF LECTURES
Sunday, 22nd December 1946
"INTRODUCTION TO 'THE PROBLEM OP THE REFORM OF THE UNIVERSITY"
by John Coleman, formerly lecturer in Mathmatics, Canada.
Monday, 23rd December 194^
"UNIVERSITY REFORM,IN SOUTH EAST ASIA"
by Malcolm Adiseshiah, formerly professor of Economics at
Madras University. India
Thursday, 26th December -194 b
"THE PROBLEM OF POPULAR CULTURE IN S’.EDEN"
by Sven Bjorklund, Rector of the People’s University at
Stockholm* Sweden
Friday, 27th December 1946
"THE EVOLUTION OF THE SCIENCES"
by Mr. Bouligand, Professor, at the Sorbonne
Sunday, 29th December 1946
"THREE MONTHS OF PARISIAN .THEATRE .
by J.M. Conty, Director of the School of Dramatic Art, Paris* Prance
Monday, 30th December 1946
"THE REFORM OF THE UNIVERSITY ■■ IN FRANCE"
Chombart de Lauwe, Charge de Recherches au Centre National de
la Recherche sciehtifique • Prance
Thursday, 2nd January 1947
"THE UNIVERSITY AND, THE MODERN STATE"
by Mary Hesse, lecturer in Mathematics .-at the Imporial College of
Science and Technology
Great Britain
Friday, 3rd January 1947 .
"INITIATION IN© RADIO EXPRESSION",
by Pierre Schaeffer, member of,Radiodiffusion frangaise • France


Monday, 23rd December 1946
Five part lecture
"MATERIAL AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS OF STUDENT LIFE"
Duccio Zatnpieri : Italy
Vera Daniel : Great Britain
Ade3a Navratilova : Czechoslovakia
Ebeid S'roufim ; Egypt
Patricia Butterfield : United States
Thursday, 26th December 1946
Five part lecture
"TOPOGRAPHY OF STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS"
GSran "Kjellberg : Sweden
Vittorio Bachelet : Italy
Claude Sarraute : France
Johan Gondswaard : Holland
Sidney Diamond : Great Britain
Monday, 30th December 1946
Four part lecture
"STUDENT TRADITION AND REVOLTS"
John Harley : Great Britain
Barbara Nugent : United States
Hans Blom : Holland
Desko Janjic : Yugoslavia .
Thursday, 2nd January 1947
Two part lecture
"THE LIBERAL UNIVERSITY"
Patricia Hochschild ; United States
"TEE MARXIST UNIVERSITY"
Laurence Cohen : France
Friday, 3rd" January 1947
Three part lecture
"THE INTER-FACULTY CIRCLE AT GRENOBLE"
Gilbert Lasfargues France
"UNIVERSITY RADIO AT PADUA"
Giorgio Battistella ; Italy
"NEW UNIVERSITIES - UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO AND UNIVERSITY OP ANTIOCH"
. Jean Murphy : United States


INTRODUCTION TO THE PROBLEM
"THE REE OEM OF THE UNIVERSITY"
John Coleman
The subject, "The Reform of the University", is rather wide
and since I want to.give you a picture of the whole field, of its •
breadth, of its .problems, I shall be extremely schematic in my pre-
sentation. I feel-justified in adopting this method because I
have written a little booklet, "The Task of the Christian in the
University", which discusses university problems from a general,
point of view, and goes into greater detail.
The University is an institution, and the reform of the Univer-
sity involves the reform of this institution. An institution al-
ways has a history, and in this case, a long and interesting history,
We might go back for its beginning to the remote ages in India,- but
for our practical purposes, it began la bhe Middle Ages. It is,
together with the Christian Churchy one of the two main institutions
that really took definite form in the Middle Ages and which exercises
a great influence on our life today.- In speaking about the mediaeval
University, it must be remembered that it was created to serve the
needs of the Middle Ages, is a characteristic of every institu-
tion that, having once, been formed originally to serve particular
needs, it does not like.to change, and'while society changes, many
institutions continue to function in their original manner. This
is the basic problem which we have to face in the reform of the
university. Therefore, you must first ask yourselves what were the
chief characteristics of the Middle- Ages in which they differ from
the contemporary epoch - characteristics that’ are relevant to our
problem, reform.of the university. There are two main onesj
(1) The society of the Middle Ages, was simpler than our society in -
that it did not have the technological development that influences
our life in so many ways, and it was simpler because, from 1000 A.D.
onwards, thinking men were dominated by one ideology » Christianity.
Thus it was simple both from an'ideological and a technological point
of view.
(2) Available knowledge in the Middle Ages was much more circumscribed,
thus it was possible for one man to have a comprehensive view of the
whole of knowledge. For example, Thomas Aquinas could have been said
to have a comprehensive view of the whole of knowledge. There, were
two basic sources of study, Aristotle and the Bible. There were many
commentaries on these two but there was nothing like the complexity
which you -see if you open the. prospectus of a modern university.
It was in such a society that the university was created. The
best book on the history of the university which I know is D.’lrsay’s
"Histoire des Universites". The Anglo-Saxons like to look back on
the Middle Ages through a romantic mist, through the Renaissance notion
of "truth for truth’s sake". It is often assumed that the only thing
which inspired the university man was a desire for truth. In fact,
however, the student in the Middle Ages was .. much more rowdy fellow
7


than the average European or American student of today. He went to
the university primarily in order to become trained for a better job
in society. The university was largely run for the clergy and the
lawyers. The Renaissance contributed to the university the maxim
"Art for art's sake - Truth for truth's sake". Even today, people often
argue that this is the right slogan for the university. This enshrines
a very considerable value ; , the idea that truth is something one
should serve. (The trouble is that the Bohemian does not serve truth,
he just tries to enjoy it.) The desire for knowledge is something
fundamental in man's nature. St. Thomas could describe man as a ration-
al animal because there is within him a desire to know. " If it was not
for that desire for truth, the university would never have been created.
But I think that nowadays the bad side of the slogan is, appearing. It
can only be relevant to the leisured class in society. It arose in
Italy in the flowering of the Renaissance, but it arose among the upper
class who had time to study art and truth, and it presupposes such a
group of people in society ; to make that a purpose of the university,
as people often seem to argue that we should, is to say that the uni-
versity is only a place for a few very privileged and wealthy people.
A factor to be taken into consideration in the history of the uni-
versity is the rise of science and the Industrial Revolution. This
it is which has completely broken down the mediaeval pattern of life,
allowing capitalism to develop and feudalism to break down. It is
the continual growth of various natural sciences, the development of
specialization,' the need for more and more technicians, which has led
tothe rise of engineering schools, technical schools, medical schools,
etc. All these really developed outside the old,framework' of the uni-
versity, which you might call the *arts university'. It is as Arts
Faculty that the university of the Middle Ages has really come down
to us. Because these engineering schools, etc. were built up outside
the original framework, it means that you have complete confusion and
you have started a number of institutions, each of. which has its own
vested interests and fights for its own glory. It is from this that '
the main difficulty arises when you face the problem of specialization.
If we want to reform the university, we must be aware of the forces
acting against that reform, call them conservative or reactionary forces
or what you will.
(1) First of all, there are the natural laziness and lack of imagination
of professors. The late Principal Davidson cf Primanuel Theological
College in Toronto, a very old and dignified man, once said to me,.
"Coleman, I know of no class in society which is more conservative than
university professors." That is probably an over-harsh judgment since
every class of society gels into its pattern. However, you know pro-
fessors, as I do, who, having prepared their lecture notes during the
first tvro years, continue to read them for another twenty years! That
is an example of natural laziness. It is a very real fact and we must
be aware of it ; it means that an institution carries on and nothing
changes, ■ There is a very good example of this in the system of educa-
tion in I n dia of which the pattern is that of the English schools, with
a system of examinations modelled on that of the British one, dealing
with subjects which will allow you to enter Cambridge and Oxford.
That.system is almost totally unrelated to the real needs of Indian
society. Why did it start? Because the English educators who went
out knew of no other system and they thought it a good, well-nigh a
perfect, one for the Indians. That illustrates my second point above,
lack of imagination.
8


(2) The second fact, which is more important, Is that economic
interests influence people. This produces different effects in
the university. For example, very few professors of Economics in the
United States will discuss any system other than that of Free Enter-
prise in their lectures. But it affects students too. Most students
enter the. university in order to prepare themselves for a job, a job
in society, and the most comfortable and easiest way of getting one is
to obtain one that does not run against the grain of that society,
that is, one nicely fitted in with the status quo. We know such
students, we all have the same tendency ourselves, to plug away at
examinations for a degree which will enable us to get a good job.
The radical ideas we have as students we give up a year after we have
graduated! A striking example of this can be found in a group of
West African students I met in Newcastle, They criticized strongly
a cocoa company in West Africa, but the warden of the House said,
"That is what all these boys say now but in actual fact, what will they
do? Nearly every one of them is getting ready to go and work for that
particular company in West Africa!" We have totake measure of these
conservative forces. The ideas current among students during the
war about the reform of the university have come up against the bed-
rock reality of the status quo which has prevented, in any real de-
gree, these ideas from being realized.
Let us now turn to four large areas where there.are criticisms
of the university,
(1) The first is the question of specialization. One of the needs
of society is for people who have a broad view of the ends which
society ought to serve and the same concept of how social processes
work so that these ends may be achieved. It - needs these people in
every stratum of society, in every type of job, because every pro-
fession, every part of society ought to be serving the ultimate ends
of that society. This can only be brought about by the people re- '
sponsible for the : particular area of life. In the Middle Ages, we
certainly had a good approximation of the.graduate with a comprehensive
view. But just because of the development of science and the in-
creasing specialization of every department of knowledge, professors
first, and students after, gradually tend increasingly to learn more
and more about less and less until they know a great deal about nothing.
I know engineering and medical students best. The engineer is be-
coming increasingly the most important man in our society. After all,
it is the engineer who will be in charge of', all the atomic energy when
it becomes available, and for the large scale planning at a technical
level which is necessary for distributing food and goods. Our society
is becoming more and more technical every day. For example, the manager
of the great concerns like International Nickel, who has to make de-
cisions about policy, is increasingly an engineer. In order to run
the recent war, the governments had to take engineers into their ministries
so that the cabinets could understand the technical problems involved.
For an engineer to have so much authority, so' much responsibility, in
society, he needs to have a wide view of the needs of society. In
actual fact, the training which the average engineer receives in a
polytechnic school in Europe, in Canada or in A m erica, is extremely
technical. He graduates as a "glorified plumber”, and the medical
student is in practically the same position. He spends wix years in
which he learns how to cut people up, learns about chemistry, etc.
He may have one course (and in advanced and progressive schools, even
two) in social medicine, but in most of the training at present in the
universities of the world, that is the only part of his training which


touches on the wide social purpose of the doctor. Even within the
Arts Faculty, the professors have become so obsessed with science
that the study of literature has become almost scientific he dwells
on the differences in punctuation between two texts, on which he wrote
his thesis. The process has already become so bad that everyone
sees it. It is going to get worse. Nothing c&n stop it if the
present situation continues. Universities will produce people more
and more specialized so that you will finally get a society that is a
complete anarchy.
This is the analysis which a very competent■committee of'Harvard
University has given in "General Education in a Free Society". This
book describes the whole problem of education, not only university edu-
cation. At the end, it comes forward ?/ith a suggestion that is appli-
cable to the Faculty of Arts at Harvard.- ■ Its proposal is that each
student should be required to take, certain general courses; for exam-
ple, courses in the three main branches of knowledge, as they have
divided knowledge : natural - sciences, humanities (philosophy and
history, etc.), and the part in between - social~sciences. Every
student must take a course -in each of-these three .■ This is hot a
new idea, it has been current in the United. States for two or three
decades. One type of thing which has been tried elsewhere is that of
the '- urvey■ course" - a very superficial survey by the professor of a
big area - the natural sciences, for instance - in two .hours a week.
The professor would .try to give a glimpse of mathematics, chemistry,
biology, etc.- The Harvard Report comes out against such survey courses
as being too superficial and the freshman is not able to understand it
anyway, so their.proposal has two distinct sides. . The method of pre-
senting these general courses will not be by making a survey but by
taking certain technical problems in each field and pursuing that pro-
blem to a fairly advanced stage ; secondly, these courses must not be
confined to the first year alone, but must be courses in each year
and must progressively become more difficult and more interesting.
Here is another attempt to avoid specialization. A medical stu-
dent in the University of Toronto formerly studied for six years • he
entered with matriculation at the' age of about 17 or 18, and then he
took a course lasting six years -a straightforward medical course.
Now the Medical Faculty has decided that the sort of history I have
described about specialization has caused that course to be so piled
up with junk that ■ something had to be done. Henceforth, during the
first two years of the course, the student will-.study in the Arts
Faculty and he will take various general courses. , These, courses will
include certain basic courses in Physics and Biology, but also Philosophy,
Politics, etc., an'd then the actual medical course itself will only be
four years. Instead of having as its object the production of a doctor
who knows everything about medicine, the object will be to produce a
general practitioner.- Then, if the student wants'to become a surgeon,
a pediatrician, cr anything el oe hewill have to take post—graduate courses.
( 2 ) Community life -of the University. In the Middle Ages, we find
instances,of communities of students living together with a professor,
under the paternal care of this professor almost in a family group,
which is the ideal pattern of community. Oneetill finds this at Oxford
and Cambridge, and, modelled upon the two English universities at Yale
and Princeton in the United States. But in most universities, you have
hordes, of students coming to large -classes for lectures, and the pro-
fessor scarcely knows the names of his students. How can the pro-
fessor get to know his students? In a class of 400 students, for example,
it is impossible. There is a tradition, and I think that I have found
it more in Europe than in North America, that the professor must be a


learned savant who only gives lectures on something extremely specialized.
He is scarcely aware that the students.are present. His interest is
in the subject!’ It was this sort of feeling that was in the' minds of
the Dutch students who, during the war, produced a newspaper devoted
simply to this question, "How to reform the university".
An ‘important factor in the breakdown of community life in the uni-
versity is the whole spirit of our society, an individualism which each
of us possesses to a greater or lesser extent. One goes to the univer-
sity in order,to get a job in society, and the whole spirit of western
man is one’which is self-contained. We do not lay sufficient em-
phasis on community projects in our universities. The, only thing
which has redeemed it is sport, perhaps.
I would like to describe an experiment in which I participated
myself in this connection. During my two years as professor at Queen's
University, I was Don of a "co-operative students *■' residence". A
group of students, ; having no place to-live , .rented a house and set it
up as a co-operative residence under the laws of the'province, with a
Don, a board of directors, and a hired cook. They cleaned the rooms
themselves, peeled potatoes, served at table, and’ sometimes swept the
floors. A Don in England rules the College Hall, but I did not do any .
ruling. This was done by the students themselves. I feel that that
was a marvellous thing. There were two houses with'36 student's,' and
it developed through student initiative. They weire- people responsible
for running a business concern, and they accumulated .a capital of 3,000.
dollars over a period of two to three yeafs.. Much more important than
that was that they were living together, in the spirit of, a community.
Shy students were taken care of, either by rough methods or by solicitude.
(3) Society. The whole relation of the university to society is in /
question today. In a way, this is the most fundamental question that
can be asked about the university. Like all institutions in society,
it has been used by the ruling classes to confirm their rule. It has
always been so and probably always will be so, to a greater or a lesser
extent. Oxford is completely independent of the government,. but it
is not independent of the ruling..class. It is precisely because,of■this
that the government has not been able to interfere with it! The univ-
ersity is an "ivory tower"; that is a common statement'and it means
that from lack of courage, from natural laziness, people who go to uni-
versities -.like to withdraw from, the battles of the day, they have not
sufficient energy,to participate in the struggles that are needed to.re-
form society. Professors need have no responsibility for the consequences
of the expression’of their thought, they are part of this ivory‘tower,
and so on . . ; , .
At present, there is no doubt that it is the experiment which is
going on in Russia which raises the question in its most vivid form, and
we can learn a great deal from this experiment, Tor example, in the
USSR, a great deal of the training of technical students consists in
working in factories, in talking with Trade Union people, etc. At the
moment, there is a very remarkable relationship between university and
society in Czechoslovakia. It seems almost unique. I gather that,
arising out of the complete participation of the Czech students in the
Resistance, they have become united with the ordinary population in a
way in which no other students are. There is somewhat the same sort
of thing in China, where the students study part of the time and the
other part they devote to teaching the people to read and write;


(4) The final point is a little difficult to formulate. It is what
•Chapter 111 in my book deals with, the "Problem of Faith". To my mind,
it is impossible for the university-to be neutral. Certainly it is
impossible for a professor to be neutral. It may be possible for a
mathematician to be so, but in practice for no other subject can a
professor be neutral. Anything he deals with has some consequence for
society and for our life. It has been the ruling philosophy of the
university in western society - in Europe and in North Aerica - and
also in China and India, that the university should be neutral, that
it should pursue an objective search for truth (as was the ideal of
the Renaissance), I think that that is nonsense, that, in fact, it is
simply a faqade which protects the ruling opinions, that while seeming
to be neutral, the university actually propagates a certain view of .
society, and this is inevitable. , If you grant that point, and some
of you may not, then you will see the extreme importance of the faith
which is being implicitly propagated now,at the present moment. There
are three main faiths which are in conflict today : Communism, Chris-
tianity, and Humanism (or Liberalism). Humanism is a faith in man,
coming from the Renaissance, end it takes ,into itself all of this new
enthusiasm for science. Now what should the, university do in such a
situation? Should it espouse one of these three? I would say that
actually most western universities espouse Humanism. The average pro-
fessor is a scientific, humanist. In opposition to pretended neutrality,
or to an espousal.of one particular doctrine which would involve a
sort of ecclesiastical' control, whether by Christianity or Communism
or a scientific Humanism, I would propose, as a possible alternative,
what- I call the Integral University. That would be a university
which would try to bring out. the main positions that are actually current
in our western society,and which would enable the student to see to the
bottom of things. It would not pretend to raise a structure of, say,
psychology or sociology, on nothing. The professor would be forced-
to make explicit upon what principal presuppositions he bases his ex-
position. We must try to create in the university an atmosphere, ex-
tremely difficult and well-nigh impossible, in which the main basic
attitudes to life might confront each other and criticise each other.
Finally, what do I see as the ultimate purpose of the university?
*t is rather a wide statement. The university is that institution in
society - and I include all that we think of by colleges, universities,
polytechnics, etc. - which has the job of exploiting systematically
truth for the service of man. By 'systematically', I mean something
done in an organized fashion. 'Eploitation' means- two things ; the
institution must give the knowledge which is available to students,
and secondly, it must expand knowledge. It is in the service of man
and therefore the university graduate is not being trained in order to
enjoy art for art's sake but he is being trained essentially in order
to give himself to the transformation and the improvement of society.


Report
of
Commission I
CULTURE AND THE UNIVERSITY
The main points studied "by Commission I were the following
(1) The university system in each country and the most important
problems arising.
(2) The problem of the philosophical bases of university structure.
(5) The problem of specialization and of general culture.
(4) People’s culture.
(5) The new means of expression radio and cinema.
(6) The problem of international culture.
We began with an account of the university system in different
countries. Without giving a report of these,accounts, only the follow-
ing points will be emphasized.; in the Belgian university, the differences
between the free universities and the State universities ; in France,
between the system of the State high schools, to which one is admitted
after a competitive examination, and that of the faculties for which
one takes an ordinary examination. We have also noted the great
flexibility in studying which exists in Sweden, and the importance of
the work necessary to become a university professor. But above all,
certain problems which arise in England and in America. The crucial
problem for England is that of university expansion. The Education
Act of 1944, which reforms secondary, school education and the education
of the people, requires 60,000 more teachers. ' Therefore, the whole
effort of the British university is focussed on an increase in the number
both of schools and teachers. In the United States, the university pro-
blem presents itself on a different scale, that of a great continent.
Each federal state controls its own- education system and this results in
a great variety, American university equipment 'seems to be the most
modern, and bold experiments in teaching have been made there.
Next we passed on to the question of the philosophical banes on which
the university is founded, Gerald Aspinall introduced the question by
an analysis of Arnold Nash's book, "The University in the Modern World".
This book begins with a strong criticism of the neutral university and
its hypocrisy. The university which, during these last twenty years,
has claimed to be neutral, really rests upon an ideology, that of sci-
entific humanism. It believes in science, in progress, and in the moral
value of objectivity. It has an optimistic philosophy, believing that
the development of those concerned with science leads necessarily to
human happiness, Nash opposes to conception that of the Nazis and
that of the Marxists, between whom, as a Christian and, a Liberal, he sees


points of resemblance. For instance, both have realized that tha’univer-
sity must be based on some kind of faith, whether openly admitted or
not.
On the other hand, Nazis and Marxists alike have the fault of want-
ing to impose on the university a purely political ideology. A possible
solution is that of the integral university which, though it is not de-
scribed by Nash, is in keeping with the critical part of his book.
This university would not seek to give a neutral education but would
allow all tendencies to be expressed and to be opposed freely and strong-
ly. Moreover, it would endeavour to give a synoptic view of all these
tendencies.
In the discussion, the justice of Nash’s criticism of the neutral
university and the fact that the whole university rests of necessity
upon a philosophical basis were at once admitted. Likewise, it was
generally recognized that the university is closely linked up with
the social and economic conditions of the society in which it finds
itself.
With regard to the integral university, it would seem impossible
to realize it in practice, although it has the advantage of not being
hypocritical like the liberal university. Besides, from the Marxist
point of view, the integral university is only an improved version of
the liberal university. In spite of its great freedom of discussion,
it would doubtless suffer from the same faults, (serving only a certain
class and being closely linked economically and socially with a capi-
talist system). Furthermore,,for a Marxist, the conflict of faiths
within the university is not due to the policy itself of the university
but to the fact that political and economic struggles penetrate and
make themselves felt within the university. However, everyone was
agreed that if the integral university is not considered as a goal in
itself but as an ideal working t in the university, it can be of service
both to the Marxist and to the’ liberal university.
The third point discussed was that of general culture. Agreement
was quickly reached that general culture was neglected in nearly all
universities. The British system, however, seems to be less deficient
from,this point of view because of the existence of the tutorial system
andbecause of Union and college life. Criticisms were raised concern-
ing over-specialization in;science, cramming for examinations, the
insufficient intellectual equipment of the students who come up to the
university, the tendency to over-develop intellectualism without pay-
ing sufficient attention to the formation of character and sense of
social responsibility; finally, the excessive academic emphasis of
university teaching.
These criticisms led us on to study various solutions proposed
or realized by certain countries ;
(1) A Belgian delegate, Mr. Thibert, proposed, under the title of '
IJniversitas Rediviva, the addition of a faculty for general culture.
In this faculty, there would be a two-year programme, giving students
the opportunity of studying the-subjects in which they are not specializ-
ing andat the same time of learning the methods and the approaches
of these subjects, their synthesis and their results. They would in-
clude Political Economy, Social Science, the physical sciences, Psycho-
logy, the Arts, Philosophy., comparative ideologies, and religion. Work
would be done either by means of lectures, in discussion groups, or in
study circles. Two essential criticisms were made of this plan, the


first "being that the addition of a new faculty would not radically re-
form the already existing system. This programme of general culture
should rather be included in the programme of the other faculties and
should be compulsory for all, The second was that this plan was con-
cerned with the intellectual training of students but not with the for-
mation of their character and of their sense of social responsibility.
What struck us at once in the Harvard Plan, presented by Miss Bennet
of the United States, was that the problem of culture is tackled right
back at the level of secondary school education. In reality, a struggle
exists between the teaching of the Humanities, with its cultural and
the necessity for the students to obtain a job. Thus the : Plan proposes
that the first years at the university should be devoted solely to
general culture. " Three groups of studies would be compulsory for several
years ; (1) the Humanities ; (2) Social Science ; (3) Pure Science.
Moreover, during these years, an attempt would be made to develop in
students the following main capacities ; (l) concentrated thinking ;
(2) clarity of expression ; (3) precise judgment ; and (4) discri-
mination of values. Lastly, a great part would be left, to training
through' extra-curricular cultural activities, such as clubs, study cir-
cles, artistic groups, athletics, etc. Likewise, the Plan stresses
the importance of giving more attention to action than to ideas, to facts
rather than to theory,.
The Dutch Studium G-enerale and the Civitas Academics are not only
projects but are already concrete realities, particularly at Leiden.
The Studium G e nerale is a series of evening lectures of a general cul-
tural character on Philosophy, Political Economy, and Literature ;
these are in addition to the.students * normal courses. The Civitas
Academics is on a larger scale,.. It is a collective term signifying
the whole university community - student's, professors, university tech-
nical personnel, and graduates. Its task is, on the one hand, to pro-
vide students, with better possibilities for integration in university
life, and, on the other hand, to help them develop their general cul-
ture and their social sense. The directing committee of the Civitas
Academica realizes these aims by encouraging students to take part in
student organizations, by setting up study cf.rcles and general cultural
lectures in the various" faculties, and by assisting the dramatics clubs,
the music clubs, etc. The Civitas Academica has a house, the "Prytande",
where professors,students and assistants meet each other on an equal
footing and dispose of rooms for meetings and, lectures.
Hext we examined the problem of people's culture. The problem has
arisen from the sole fact that .university students, at present, are drawn
mainly from the middl® classes and very little from the working and pea-
sant classes. At the age of fourteen, the latter have to give up all
possibility of further education ; as long as the social organization
does not allow everyone to go to the secondary school and to the univer-
sity, it is necessary to create schools and colleges for the culture of
the people in order to permit at least some to educate themselves and to
increase their technical knowledge. It is important, however, to note
that such schools and colleges are merely palliative arid a first step to-
wards a more radical reform in teaching.. With regard to actual instruc-
tion in the people's schools, .certain points were emphasised* Ous
must not try to impose on the people a ready-made culture developed for a
particular class. Teaching ordinary people ;is a valuable stimulus to
the improvement of pedagogical technique. In France, there exist
several experiments in people's culture. There are, for instance, a
Marxist experiment, the Hew University, and a Christian experiment, the


Cultural University at Marly,• Although, interesting by reason of their
methods, these two experiments fail by the fact that they are strictly
limited to active Communists or to Christian workmen. More promising
is the experiment "Peuple et Culture" which is endeavouring to make
a certain number of concrete cultural experiments in one town by es-
tablishing a House of Culture where all the cultural activities of the
town should be co-ordinated} workmen's education centres, Inter-Faculty
Circle, people's libraries, etc, A branch of "Peuple et Culture".,
"Travail et Culture", is developing new methods in the field of instruc-
tion by means of the theatre, cinema, reading, etc. In general, the
fault of all the French experiments is that they have too intellectual
a character and that they start out from theory rather than from fact.
On the contrary, the older experiment of the Danish people's colleges
seems to be founded upon needs rather than upon ideas. It was in the
middle of the last century that - -these colleges were established with the
aim of increasing the practical knowledge of Danish workers. It was
only afterwards that in these colleges instruction became wider and
included a programme of general culture. Likewise, mention was made of
the International People's College at Elsinore and the Swedish People's
University. (The latter has been discussed during the session.)
With regard to the relation of the university to the modern means
of expression, radio and cinema, which was the fifth point under dis-
cussion, there was the double problem ; (1) to raise the level of the
cinematographic and wireless productions by bringing these domains within
the scope of university teaching, and (2) to utilize these new mediums
in teaching practice (e.g. films of surgical operations, technical films
for engineering schools, use of records like those of Mr. Churchill for
the teaching of English, etc.). Moreover, this second utilization makes
teaching more vivid', enables it to extend its influence more widely
within the university and beyond the university, and to develop visual ■
and auditory education which are almost • non-existent up to the present.
In this connection, the possibility was discussed of establishing a
wireless university with the participation of the greatest scholars and
professors of a country ; this could be of great value for adult edu-
cation. As regards the possible influence in the university of modem
means of expression, the commercial situation of the cinema makes it
difficult. The radio offers more opportunity, and here progress may be
envisaged in three stages ; (l) the formation of listening-in groups
capable of making, serious criticisms of the programmes and of developing
a general reaction ; (2) attempts in wireless expression by students
in which they should specially avoid following the bad tendencies already
existing; (3) on the professional level, a renewal of the framework by
the introduction of new blood in the form of student broadcasters. It
is noteworthy that the university can give the radio an international
character better than any other means.
Finally, the problem of international culture was discussed. At
the veil beginning, it was pointed out that twenty years ago, an inter-
actional student gathering would, doubtless, have given excessive impor-
tance to an international conference like the present one, and would have
had the tendency to make hasty inferences concerning peace and internation-
al culture. The Commission was of,the opinion that student exchanges are
of particular value in developing international contacts, that at least
a year abroad should be made compulsory in every university in the world,
that if possible, an effort should be made to establish the regular use
of two or more languages in the universities,etc. For the moment, the
idea of international culture is Utopian but by international contacts,
students could learn two things ; (l) to know their own national culture
better, and (2) to put their own country and their own culture in their
true place with reference to other countries, and thus to try to become,
at least in the spirit, citizens of the world.


THE
CERCLE INTER-FACULTES
AT GRENOBLE
(An example of an interesting new institution)
The Cercle Inter-Facultes at Grenoble was born after the libera-
tion of the region. Professors and students met to discuss the
crisis of the' university, especially with regard to their own town,
and agreed that if it was not possible to bring about an immediate
total reform, they could at least remedy the main defects of which they had
taken note. This was, the reason for the creation of the Cercle
Inter-Facultes, whose aims are •
(1) to offer university culture on a wider scale by bringing up for
discussion a number of contemporary problems ;
(2) to try out some pedagogic experiments ;
(3) to relate university culture to popular culture ; •
(4) to arouse tbo interest of students in international problems,
and to help them to meet foreign students, discuss and work
with them ;
(4) to create among the students of all the different faculties
a feeling of solidarity and to try to revive the university
community.
The Cercle Inter-Facultes started very modestly with only a few
students (about 50) from the different faculties, and with one or two
small rooms which were lent by friends of the students. They began
very quickly to organize a small library consisting mainly of books
by contemporary authors of all; countries, this kind of book being rare
in university libraries. They set up a collection of gramophone re-
cords of classical and modern music, and also a collection of pictures
or their reproductionsthus giving the students the opportunity of being
introduced to the masterpieces of the great painters, both ancient and
modern. Then they began organizing some lectures given by students,
professors, and experts from outside the university. First'they held,
one a week, then two, and now it is possible to organize a lecture
every day. The idea of these lectures, is to treat the subject from
a synthetical point of view and to relate any given topic to, other
branches of knowledge. For instance, when a literarjr subject is, to
be discussed, the lecturer will try to show its philosophical, his-
torical, and even scientific implications. The subjects taken are
varied;- literary ; Paul Valery's Technique of Poetry, Henry Miller
or the Obsession of Purity, Maiakowski, Presentation of Jacques Riviere;
economic and social ; Alain’s Radicalism, The Algerian Problem, The
Colour Question in the United States; science ; Matter and Life,
Psycho-Physiology and Human Sciences ; music : recorded programmes
of Beethoven’s Kreutzer Sonata and Maurice Ravel's Concerto for the


left hand, and so on. Another method employed is to read together
and discuss the news items. Thus, last summer, after an enquiry
opened by a Parisian paper, "Should you burn Fafka?", the students
held a lively debate on the subject. In another direction, a mathe-
matics circle has been created in which mathematicians meet philo-
sophers and law students, and under the guidance of a professor, these
students try to understand the relations between these different sub-
jects ,
With regard to popular culture, we have helped students to meet
workers, although this kind of meeting is not easy to arrange. Some
lectures have also been given in the Cercle by syndicalists
on workers' problems. Picnics and camps have been organized with the
joint participation of students and workers.
As far as international culture is concerned, quite an important
Pi nee is given to foreign literature, political and economic problems,
and very often a foreign student living in the hown is asked to speak
about a problem arising in his country. All foreign students resident
in Grenoble are invited to the Cercle, therefore making it really inter-
national. During the summer, it is possible to do more, and the
Cercle is open to foreign students who come to visit Grenoble and the
Alps, lectures, picnics, and visits to museums and factories being
organized for them. During this period, foreign students par-
ticipate in the running of the Cercle. The Cercle works in close
collaboration with ISS; for instance, during the Study Tours of last
summer, a part of the tour made in France was the responsibility of the
Cercle,
Perhaps the most interesting part of the experiment of the Cercle
lies in the fact that it is entirely run by the students, who are
responsible for the administration, finance, and cultural activities.
Thus the Cercle develops the students' sense of responsibility and
makes them feel completely at home. In Grenoble, this is the first
experience of a real meeting place where the students do not simply
greet each other'but are a part of a real student and university com-
munity. When professors come to the Cercle, they are the guests of
the students and are welcomed as such, but it remains a student ex-
periment.
In conclusion, it must be said that the Cercle Inter-Facultes is
still on the way to finding a definite formula and it is' progressing
in different directions. The variety of its work is necessitated by
the variety of the defects in the present university organization.
It must be considered as a complement to the university, but it is also
working for a thorough reform of the institution which, in our days,
no longer deals with reality.


Report
of
Commission II
THE UNIVERSITY AND SOCIETY
Commission II had to deal with the question "The University and
Society". The discussions were often animated, and sometimes even
heated. This is understandable in view of the international make-up
of the commission whose members were thus representative of differing
political and social view-points. This whole problem presents it-
self in very different terms for each country because each one of them
is only the projection of its particular past, whether considered as
economic and social history or as a chain of political events. Instead
of the title "The University and Society", it would, perhaps,.be better
and also more realistic to take the title ’’TheUniversily and Societies",
thus emphasizing the plurality of the societies involved.
Before tackling the formal programme, it was logically necessary
for us to arrive at certain basic definitions, which involved an exami-
nation of the philosophical basis of the university. This meant that
with each of the particular problems before us, we had to try to throw
more light upon the whole "why and the wherefore" of the university
institution. Despite lively differences of opinion, the question was
reduced to the following points, which form the backbone of this general
introduction :
(l) Is there a university ideal independent of particular historical
conditions, or does such an ideal depend, on the contrary, solely
upon these conditions?
It immediately became apparent that each had brought with
him to the discussion the specific characteristics of his own
country. So much for the problem considered in space.
In time, starting from the point of view of historical
evolution, we arrived at the same conclusions. Whether the
universities wanted it or not, the pattern of each one corres-
ponded with the structure of their respective societies. The
march of time has proved it to us, : The mediaeval university
could not be in contradiction with the other social and spiritual
achievements of the Middle Ages, The Renaissance had to break
down, to destroy this university, just as it had brought about the
downfall of feudal society. The French Revolution, which opened
up the bourgeois era, also had, logically, to inaugurate a new
conception of culture and of pedagogy. Today, when capitalism,
the basis of this bourgeois society, is often opposed and some-
times destroyed, pedagogic conceptions no longer correspond to
the new historical exigencies, and the very idea of culture changes
and seems to expand.


( 2 ) IS the university the expression of one society or of one class?
We have seen above that the university has been able to
enter into opposition with society only in periods of crisis,
that is that it is closely linked to the social structure.
This is so usually because it forms an integral part both of the
legal and social structure, and above all because it is the uni-
versity which trains the leaders of society and which spreads
the letter's intellectual conceptions.
It is also, in normal times, the expression of one class,
more or less. However, there, as elsewhere, new forces penetrate
gradually and thus herald the approach of a revolution, or at least
of a crisis.
(3) Does the university presuppose a common belief among its members
or can it remain neutral?
The liberal conception has resulted- in making the university
an "ivory tower" which moulds a-political technocrats. Was this
neutrality sincere'or was it only a way of stopping the university
from becoming conscious of the historical evolution of our time?
The. different members of the commission were not able to agree
on this point, each having different experiences and also each
coming from a different affective background.
The proposal for an integral university does not seem to
us realizable within present national frameworks, in which con-
tradictions too often, too strong appear, If realized, it would
help to emphasize these struggles at an age properly reserved for
intellectual training. But, on the international level, the in-
tegral university seems to us a formula oo be envisaged. We are
living up to it a little here. We all want to profit from it on
a large scale because we have attained the necessary maturity and
alsp because it is a Way of international exchange which respects '
different forces and which can' bring them together to try and
understand each other.
After these difficult discussions, but nevertheless ones indis-
pensable for our commission above all, we had to discuss various pro-
blems which we grouped under three headings
(1) Is the university in the service of the State?
(2) The place of the student in society.
(3) Finally, the role of the student as a citizen in the life of the
nation.
(1) Is the university in the service of the State?
In discussing this question, we found two tendencies pre-
vailing
(a) The university is, and should be, in the service of the State;
that is the Marxist conception.
(b) The university should not be in the service of the State but
should detach itself as much as possible from historical


contingencies which may stand in the way of the search
.after bruth ; that is the liberal conception.
We analyzed, these two conceptions,which correspond to two
forms of society and of thought in complete opposition to one
another, and we agreed on the following solution • the univer-
sity aiiould uq an institution in society which serves the greatest
possible number of its members, but it. should avoid too great
a dependence upon the State. We have had sad examples of that
during recent years. The essential aims of the university
should be '
(a) to prepare the technical leadership of which society is
in need. This could be done in two ways :
(i) by a general education which would'show them the
general social and cultural background of their work;
(ii) and by a technical education necessary for their,
profession,
(b) to represent'in the wider sphere of higher culture the most
advanced group of society in order to guide this society
and help it. to evolve through successive adaptations.
(2) The place of the student in society.
Before considering the problems of culture and syndicalism,
we had to answer the question : Is the student considered as
a "minor" and should he be?
This question of the students' "majority" raises several
points ;
~ We agreed in defining present-day students as "minors" since
their relations with their professors are relations of dependence.
The universitas magistror urn studiorumque is dead; the univer-
sity is a professors’ concern, the students go there as strangers.
They are only there for a while, and, as a result, they have lost
the tense of their solidarity which creates community life, that
is, their traditions, it ::w: ctudeat revolts, and thus their
strength itself. On the administrative level, they play no
part except in Czechoslovakia, after the liberation. Here there
are university committees consisting of nine members, included
in this number being five students and one professor. In other
countries, ws do not. find this student participation on the ad-
ministrative level and. we have agreed that we should try to
follow the precedent o,f the Prague ,achievement. This is also,
true on the moral level where, at the most, a kindly fatherliness
reigns.
Student participation is all the more desirable because
it would exercise the abilities which would have to be developed
later on in the wider framework of society.
It was easy to agree nn the question of salaries for students
because the necessity for e-ch salaries is becoming increasingly


obvious, especially in face of difficult economic conditions
and the democratization of the university. The salary offers
the sole guarantee for this democratization 5 without it, the
university will remain the property of the classes whose economic
position is relatively easy.
Salaries must be subject to these three conditions ;
(a) a salary graded according to the parents' income ;
(b) a salary sufficient to enable the student to live without
working too hard, which only too often harms his general
culture and even his technical knowledge ;
(0) finally, the salary should not entail any obligation whatso-
ever, not even in administration.
This involves the fact that higher education would then
be possible only for the most intelligent and no longer a frame-
work within which the different economic forces in society are
represented.
Syndicalism ; Thus syndicalism becomes necessary since it re-
presents the framework into which student forces are directed.
Its role is two-fold : -
(a) to give priority to student claims on the university level
(academic council) and on the governmental level ;
(b) and. also to establish international relations.
Here are our three reasons for compulsory membership :
- the syndicate would have a wider character and also it would
be stronger and more representative.
- it would be recognized end helped by the university.
- finally, it is, perhaps, the only way of preventing the syn-
dicate from being in the hands of a clique.
With regard to its form, we hope that this syndicalism will
be, as far as possible, Unitarian and not pluralist. The best
solution would be a syndicalist federalism which would include the
following four sections :
- students
- graduates
-. young professors
- professors
What is more r . each of these groups would act in a different way
and even be in opposition to each other. But the great weakness
of student syndicalism lies in its lack of continuity owing to the
short period that each of us spends at the university. The solu-
tion to this seems to lie in the choice of a permanent general
secretary who could plan out the syndicate's line of action and
also ensure its continuity. Another solution which has been
found in Sweden is the syndicate of younger intellectuals who
are asufeiSS of it right from the very beginning of their studies.


Finally, it was unanimously agreed, it should be entirely out
of from political parties because supposedly it has other
aims and also in order to preserve its unity. Of course, the
solution also depends upon each country individually and above
all upon the question of knowing if the framework of this syn-
dicalism will be the nation or each university individually.
(3) The role of the student as a citizen in the life of the nation.
A question which has come up in history, and which can still
arise today is; Should the student enjoy special privileges?
With one accord, the commission’s reply was in the negative,
even although there are numerous historical examples indicating
the contrary, in particular in the arny, where the student still
enjoys special conditions enabling him to become an officer. In
the same way, on the wider national level, he should not be con-
sidered apart but as well integrated within it and thus responsable
for his actions.
Finally, the two key problems of this student participation
in the life of the nation were studied in consideration of the
two following relations t
(a) students - worlsneni
(b) students - youth
On the first point, it was unanimously agreed that the stu-
dent has everything to gain in mixing in society and particularly
with workmen. For example, the medical student could work before
he has finished his studies and this contact would already give
him a new outlook on the human and social problems of our time.
By means of a period in a factory, a science student would become
more skilful in his technique and would learn to consider men
apart from the machines on which they wear themselves out. It is
thesamefor law and arts students in other fields. Finally,
participation in popular culture would be both educationally and
professionally formative for the student. In this connection,
the student should not wait for advances from the workman, who is
too much in need of relaxation and who knows nothing of culture,
but he should go to him and show him the advantages of which he
is doubtless ignorant and give him the idea of caring for quality.
We strongly advise the students present here, and also other students
to take part in these efforts and achievements that are being
tried out in our different countries.
The second point, that of their relations with youth, seems
simpler. In this sphere, contacts are easier. We all sincerely
hope for a broad development of
- sport in common
- camps in common
- study circles and cinema clubs
- work in common, as, for example, recon-
struction in Poland and Yugoslavia.
More particularly, we think that contacts cauld be fruitfully
made with political organisations and above all with workmen’s


syndicates, like those already existing with the C.C.T. and the
C.F.T.C* in France. Youth hostels also, offer a framework within
which we recommend students to become integrated, for on both
sides, by this method - perhaps an easy yet a living one - young
people of different backgrounds will mix with students, each
teaching the other to understand each other better and perhaps
to establish more lasting contacts.
It is in the study of these particular problems, and more especially
in these recommendations, that the members of Commission II have parted
from each other content with having found themselves nearly always of
the same opinion with regard to practical solutions after discussions
of principle which seemed to bring them to a standstill.


Report
of
Commission. III
THE UNIVERSITY COMMUNITY
We conducted our investigation and study of the university, com-
munity and its breakdown under four principal, aspects : 1) historically
tracing the university from its mediaeval beginnings and recognizing
the similarities and differences between the ancient and modern ; 2) a
survey.of the normal university community and investigation into the
causes for its breakdown ; 3) suggestions for the reform and repair
of our dislocated university ; 4) an attempt to arrive at a fairly
well-defined conception of the desired university and to clarify methods
for its achievement.
History of the University.
In an effort to understand more clearly the university problems
which we face'today, and to be better prepared to tackle them, we con-
ducted a brief study of the history of universities, believing that we
might find reflected in such a, study the germs of our contemporary
maladies. '
Of the three earliest mediaeval universities, at Pavia, Bologna
and Paris, it is the latter which has exerted the most profound influence
on the structure of the modern university, especially of the Faculty
of Arts, The Carolingian period, which immediately preceded the creation
of the University of Paris, was the Agd of Grammar, characterized by
formalism, disciplined study, and an encyclopaedic tendency. The Period
of the University might be called the Age of Logic. It witnessed the
end of exterior perils of invasion and the interior disequilibrium of
Prance, and. th e re-organization and centralization of the country in .
the hands' of the monarchy established at Paris, This centralization
of power at Paris made possible the development of a strong pedagogic
force.
The university consisted of four faculties - Law, Medicine, Theo-
logy, and Arts - the latter was the least noble of the faculties, being
designed as a preparatory stage for the others and offering only a general
liberal education, as contrasted with the specialization of the rest.
Our present system of lectures, examinations and grades is directly
carried over from the mediaeval university system. In view of the rate
at which our society continues to progress and change, one might well
consider such factors in our education which have remained practically
static throughout the centuries as anachronistic in the modern ag"■
Two general principles were recognized by the Commission ;
1) The central purpose of the mediaeval university was to organize
systematically the diffusion of human knowledge, especially of theology


and philosophy, and to facilitate the understanding and increase of
the sum total of human knowledge.
2) There existed corporations - guilds of students and professor*
modelled on merchants' guilds, formed in reaction to the tremendous
power of the clergy over university professors and students, and also
as a means of working together to seek truth for truth's sake.
The University Community.
The university community may he defined as a community of students
and professors of different faculties living and working together and
directed to a Considerable degree by the student body itself. Every-
where this community has shown signs of breaking down at some point.
Before discussing.this dislocation, however, it is important to become
familiar with the normal university community.
The four different' types of British universities show varying de-
grees of community life. The most integrated exists in Oxford and
Cambridge, each of which is composed of many colleges, complete units
in themselves, where students and staff of all faculties come together
under one roof. This set-up and the tutorial system make possible a
close contact between students and faculty ; the general atmosphere
of these universities is one of quiet and serenity, enabling the stu-
dent to concentrate on his work, and directing his development., into
the traditional channels towards the "power of judgment".
Education is brought closer to the student and made cheaper by
the 'red brick' universities, situated in, and submerged by, industrial
towns. The buildings are scattered, and the students go to lectures
daily and do not reside there. The distinct division into faculties
further increases the difficulty of close contact, and the only organ
or centre of student opinion remains the Union, the student building.
The red brick universities are further notable for their early speciali-
zation.
London University, although here classed as a third type, may well
be.fitted into the foregoing category. It is in an industrial city, is
non-residential, and is distinguished from the red brick type only by
its essay system, which attempts to achieve closer contact between
students and faculty.
The fourth category consists of the Scottish universities, also
non-residential, with the exception of St. Andrew's, which has student
residences. The Scottish universities are also largely submerged by
the industrial towns in which they are situated. Student opinion is
organized and represented not only through the Union but also by a
Students' Representative Council.
There are- several factors operating upon the university today :
the greater number of students, (100$ increase expected) and the con-
sequent overcrowding and inadequacy of facilities and staff ; the
tutorial system, and also the pressure exerted upon educational insti-
tutions to produce exp-' is rather than the "amateur gentleman".
In France, there exists no student, community as we have defined it,
except in certain of the student co-operative houses.


In Italy, the university community has been abnormal since 1918
because of the ever-increasing number of students, and because of the
lack of political freedom among the students/ A Student Council has
been formed to defend students' interests versus academic tyranny.
Its aims are to bring student representation (i.e, the Student Council)
into the University Academic Authority, and to free the university from
its. dependence and consequent sensitivity to the financial and political
vicissitudes of the government.
In Holland, there exists at Leiden a Concilium composed ,of pro-
fessors, students and alumni, which takes an active part in determining
university policy.
In the United States, the integration of the community depends
largely on whether the university is residential or not. In all cases,
however, there are student organizations.and organs - notably student
government - which do much to maintain:a unified student body.
Breakdown’ of the University Community.
Having agreed that the university .community has broken down every-
where at some point, , we proceeded to examine the causal.factors in that
breakdown. The: causes were dealt with in two groups - external and
internal.
Internal Causes. ■
1) The fact of the continued increase in the number of students, a
favourable influence in that it shows a democratic tendency, has disad-
vantages also. This increase is due to several factors, among which
is the new stress laid upon university diplomas solely, for the material
security which they promise rather than for the intellectual background
to which they should attest. A second■factor in the increase of stu-
dents arises from our complicated modern society and the emphasis it
lays upon expertness and technical preparation. ■.
The disadvantages of this increase are that it makes close personal
contact between students and faculty impossible, and also contributes
to the general dispersion of the university community, physically and
spiritually. It creates a tendency towards individualism and anonymity.
2) There are economic factors which further contribute to the breakdown
of the university community. The buildings for classrooms and student
quarters are insufficient to accommodate the increased numbers. Classes
become larger and less effective ; residences also become like large
factories and lose the personal element. Financial resources are not
sufficient to correct this at the moment.
Furthermore, the great economic>pressure on both professors and
students contributes to. the breakdown. The economic insecurity of
the faculty prV ants them from spending sufficient time on research,
and makes it impossible,for them to ■ dispose of the facilities necessary
for research and general development. •, In the case of professors of
applied sciences, they are often tempted to spend a great deal of time in
er'-.ra-univcisity . wenk which is more . lucrative than their teaching
jobs, and consequently they do not spend’the desirable amount of time
on their courses.


There is a similar pressure on students. The fact that many of
them must work in remunerative positions to assure them of material
security draws many of them from the university community and contributes
toWardsits dispersion. In view of these factors, we must aim at mak-
ing the university community economically independent to permit both pro-
fessors and students to live as a part of a community.
3) There are, furthermore, general dispersive factors which operate on
all types of communities. These factors, again, should be rather con-
sidered as facts, the consequences of which may be good as well as bad.
The complexity and technicality of our modern society has still
not been adapted by man to his life. It has created anonymous masses,
and thus far man has failed to realize the values of a small community
as opposed to the phenomenon of huge anonymity.
The war has caused a general decline in morals and discipline. No
community•can be formed without a greater degree of social discipline
than we possess today.
Facilitated transportation operates towards dispersion. The faci-
lity of moving around does not favour the stability.of community life.
Also, as long as a tendency towards individualism prevails, it will
be difficult, if not impossible, to construct any kind of really inte-
grated community life.
It is our immediate task to fight these internal factors which lie
within our power.'
External Causes.
Both professors and students come mainly from the middle classes,
who have succeeded in gaining certain rights and advantages and seek to *
defend and maintain them. The first phenomenon, that of the high repre~
sentation of the middle class at the university, arises largely from
the process of economic selection. Students must be able to afford the
fees, and be able to remain at the same time dependent on their families
as non-contributing members to the family upkeep. In the same way, the
period of training for professorship is long, and also expensive. The
scholarship and student house facilities are not sufficient to make up
the individual financial deficits.
As a projection of the middle class, therefore, the university
serves as an instrument for the fulfilment of the aims of that class, and
its population must be prepared to protect its middle class interests.
(Example : under Fascism, university methods conformed to the Fascist
principles and theories.)
Another degenerating factor lies in our methods of instruction and
the lack of criticism in our university system, The lecture system
prevents small, informal discussions with professors, and similarly,
our examination system, which demands of a student only that he learn by
heart what the professor has said, discourages and prevents the forma-
tion of individual expression and theories. Furthermore, because of
the lack of criticism, many courses remain static and unchanging, while
the world progresses, advances and changes at a rapid pace.


Behind these internal and external factors, it was pointed out
that the breakdown of our university results from a structural fault
in our economic system* We need a series of economic reforms which
will permit all classes, instead of only the middle class as we see It
now, to attend institutions of higher education, Furthermore, our re-
search is not sufficiently free. Men must have greater opportunity to
revise and develop their ideas. In our present society, those in con-
trol are not interested in the dissemination of education and culture
among the people, for that, in turn, would now involve a demand for
greater freedom by those groups. (Example : Fascism prevented, as
completely as possible, the furthering of culture.) The University
and Society must be one ; we must take appropriate measures to over-
come the immense rupture between the two.
Thus, the universities might well be considered class institutions,
drawing both students and staff from the non-working and non-peasant
classes primarily.
The dislocation of the university may be considered as a reflection
and as a result of the conflict in society which we see today, as we pass
through a period' of political and social, transition.
Attempts to meet our problems.
Having discussed the causes for the dislocation of our universities,
we proceeded to investigate the conditions of those university insti-
tutions which might act as remedial influences.
Student Movements and Power.
British university students havefor the most part, little in-
fluence - in university government, although in the Scottish universities,
an honorary Rector is elected by the student body to protect its inte-
rests. Oxford.and Cambridge have only unofficial organs for expression,
while the red brick universities have official guilds of students.
The Americansystem of student government, comprising institutions
such as Curriculum Committees which serve as liaisons between admini-
stration, faculty and students, have considerable influence in the in-
terior government of .the university, but much less in the government
than in the administrative'policy as a whole.
The only occasion on which Dutch students have acted successfully
to influence university policy was during the war in 'reaction against
the Germans.
In Czechoslovakia, there are separate university, organizations and
a central one, all of which have the right to send resolutions and sug-
gestions directly to the government.
There is.a national Belgian .students* organization which, _however,
is ineffective. The other organization is founded on a religious
basis, and their power is rather limited officially to inter-group social
contacts.
The French National Student Union presents its resolutions and sug-
gestions to the government. Catholic and Protestant Federations also
exist, as does the Patriotic Unioh of Students. ,
There was general agreement on the suggestion that a strong student


movement is essential to our job of reforming the university, and that,
to this end, there must exist everywhere some, way in which the students
may take part in university policy, for theirVs is the greatest interest
therein.
In discussing the value of various types of student organizations,
unified or pluralist, political and religious as against a-political
and a-confessional organizations, some agreed that student groups must
respond, to student needs, of which there are three types : political
and religious, cultural, and economic and social. These types of or-
ganizations must in turn adjust themselves to the desires manifested by
the students. Some agreed, further,.that in considering the university
organizations, the. student must be looked upon not only as a student
but also as a member of society t and thus be drawn more directly into
the current of social and political change.
Communities of Life and Work.
The English universities differ on the type of community shared by
the university population. At Oxford and Cambridge, it is a community
of life as well as of work, while at the red brick universities, it is
solely one of work. . Scottish universities have a certain amount of
community of life and work.
In America, one finds a similar phenomenon, the community is one
of life and work in residential colleges, and includes both professors
and students, whereas in those colleges where the students do not reside,
it is only a community of,work..
In Holland, although there are some student clubs, there is actually
no community life among the university professors and students.
Czechoslovakian universities are communities of life more than of
work, while in Belgium, the community of life is restricted to a very
small number of,student houses , and, some "Pedagogies" for women students
which, however, contribute little to community life.
There was general agreement,on the fact that every university must
be one of life as well as of work, for although professional training
and specialization are important, the individual must be given an oppor-
tunity to live with his fellow members pf the community. Furthermore,
we must encourage the desires of both students and professors to live
and work together.
Student Houses.
. Czechoslovakian universities have student houses administered by
the students themselves, who are aided financially by the government.
There are also several of the self-help typie of house. There is,, at
present, a project under way for the construction of a university city.
Belgian students' houses are extremely-limited. There is one at
Brussels- housing about one hundred students.
In France, there are no student houses but rather "foyers" sponsored
■by various organizations, where the students may meet, and "Croupes
d'Etudes" for each subject taught in each faculty, where students and
professors come together'to work.


In the resident colleges and universities of the United States,
there are various types of student houses : dormitories, co-operatives,
self-help, and fraternity arid sorority houses. ’
There are no student houses in Holland, hut rather student clubs,
complete with all types of facilities put at the disposal of the stu-
dents. They are managed and financed by the student body.
(English student houses have already been discussed.)
We agreed that student houses constitute a necessary factor of
community life, but decided that in this field particularly, details must
be decided upon by 'each country individually.
There were several suggestions made by individuals but should not
be considered as group recommendations as the Commission did not have
sufficient time to discuss them in detail;
T) Buildings and technical faculties must be enlarged and expanded.
2) Professors should be given higher salaries so as to enable them to
conduct their research and study more easily, and also in order to give
them an opportunity to live as individuals in the non-academic world and
thus to transmit to their students the newest developments more rapidly.
Professors should, furthermore, be imbued with the .ideological aspect
of teaching so'that they may better realize their responsibility to the
■students as professors and friends.
3) Material resources■should be increased sufficiently so as to allow
students to attend universities with a minimum or preferably no finan-
cial {.nxieties, to permit them to devote their time and energy to their
job as studcnts : rather than to other vocations in order to pay expenses.
To this end, the system of scholarships must be expanded. Attention was
called to the Czechoslovakian system of student salaries,
4) More attention should be given to the development of favourable con-
ditions of work ; student houses and halls, sanatoria and rest houses, ;
unions and clubs, facilities for work and amusement, Students should
be given a greater sense of their responsibility and a greater sense of
solidarity and belonging, as concerns ihe university community.
5) Greater inter-university exchange on a national and international
scale for greater exchange of ideas and methods. At this point, the
Commissions considered the values of international student centres, re-
garding Combloux as the prototype of such centres. In a study of uni-
versity reform, the inter-social implications and international efforts
of Combloux must be considered. By bringing together students from all
social milieux and by relating the sum total to other social levels,
workers and peasants notably, an attempt is made to increase the under-
standing and comprehension of the various classes and groups in our
society.
The Commission examined further methods employed by various univer-
sities to affect some kind of internal reform of the university. The
Inter-Faculty Circle at Grenoble attempts to strengthen the community
of students and of students and professors of all faculties by organizing
lectures of general interest and small study groups where_all faculties
come together. The Circle is open to all students, but is not affiliated


with, any student organization, political or otherwise. The students
at Grenoble manifested by their participation a much greater interest
in cultural than in political problems.
The contrary ha 3 been found to be true in the work of the Inter-
Grande s-Ecoles Circle of Paris where political and social conferences
are most in demand. This Circle is an attempt to bring together the
faculties and students of the various Grandes-Ecoles in Paris. The
work is handicapped by lack of facilities for meetings and conferences,
but a system of weekends has been instituted whereby the various stu-
dent groups may come together. The Circle includes all political
groups but under the classification of groups for the study of a par-
ticular problem (Marxism,- Catholicism, etc,). The Circle is strictly
designed as a study group and is not established to defend student in-
terests.
Having examined various attempts and suggestions to reconstruct the
university community, we arrived at a point where we could finally give
a general definition of the, university community, and what we, as indi-
viduals, could do to repair the breakdown. The conception of the uni-
versity is associated with the ideas of human reason and the search for
truth. Its function is a dir 1 lectical'one. On the one hand, it must
turn out the necessary men for culture, and technical experts to serve
society or mankind. ,On the other hand, it should, as a community, serve
as a critic of society. This latter function is possible only in a
stable period. We, then, may define the university as a community of
students and professors seeking truth for the service of society or
mankind. Such a definition has several implications. It implies
first of all that the university be made accessible to all persons in
society, and that,- accordingly, material resources to permit such access
be provided. . It implies, secondly, that there be no discrimination
on any grounds whatsoever, and that the right of each group, religious,
political, or otherwise, to maintain its autonomy within the university
be respected, It implies, further, that the university must have means
for maintaining its community sense, via organizations of students, of
students and professors, and relations between the university and society.
The latter is an attempt to bridge the.existing gap between the univer-
sity and the society in which it exists. Furthermore, this definition
implies real international collaboration and co-operation.
Theforegoing is a very brief summary of the work of Commission 111.
By no means do we contend that we have exhausted the problem and its
various aspects. On the contrary, we wish to emphasize its incomplete-
ness, and rather extend it to the rest of the conference as an introduc-
tion and a suggestion. .We should like, also, to suggest that our work
as individuals, as students, and as members of ISS, may be considered
to have begun with this session. Each of us may take the experiences
and the information of the past three weeks back with him and there
elaborate it, adjust it, and apply it.


Report
of the
Photography Group
The aim of the photography.group was to make a good visual report
of the,session. It had been planned that from five to ten people
should participate in this group, which would be directed by a young
technician. Composed as it was, the group met some difficulties be-
cause of the small number of really good cameras. Every member of
the group should have had a first class camera as an ordinary one does
not permit of really efficient work in ;this field. As it was, the
group achieved four main purposes :
(1) to make a small wall newpaper for the 28th of December, thus
giving, d-H-the middle of, the session, a good .idea of what had been the
activities of the first days. Although time, .was very short, some
really good snapshots had been taken;
(2) to prepare a more elaborate wall newspaper for the last day of
the session; this occupied the whole wall of the common romm at Com-
bloux and it gave a complete idea of all the different activities,
serious and otherwise, of the delegates at the Christmas University.
This wall newspaper, which is now in Geneva, will probably be shown
at our next conferences ;
(3) to organise a photograph competition amongst all the delegates.
The four subjects on which the students competed were :
a) interior photographs ,
b) exterior photographs ,
c) snapshots of the session ,
d) and. photographs under the headings ;
i. ; Combioux as a cultural centre,
ii. Combloux as a rest home.
The competition was won, by a British delegate, Ebeid Saroufim, from
Egypt, and the second prize ?;as given to a French student, Jackie Petit,
the most notable photographs being Saroufim!s "Scotch girl in the snow"
and Petit's "The Chalet at midnight",. The whole group worked hard
taking interior photographs during,all theffestivities, not missing
any important event‘of the session. Some very interesting photo-
graphs were also taken during the visit to the factories, although
there, it required great technical skill to take snapshots in such bad
lighting conditions. ;
It would also have been very interesting if the photography group
could have made a film of the session. Unfortunately, the necessary
technical material could not be provided and it had been impossible to
obtain al6 m.m. camera for the group. However, we were fortunate enough
to help of the cine—club at Annecy (a small town near Com-
bloux) who sent a photographer with an 8 m.m. camera on the day of
the official reception (28th December), This shows the necessity of
a close link between the Chalet des Etudiants and the other cultural
33


centres in the neighbourhood. The cine-club at Annecy did not only
help ua in this way but the photographer also brought with him two
films which were shown during the session, one being "L'Etrange
Monsieur Victor" and the other one "The Liberation of Paris". The
ISS films were also shown on this occasion.
Although this aid came just at the right time, the photography
group would like to state that it is very important that the Chalet
should give students wider opportunities for making films as it is a
very important means of culture in our time. If the cinema is to
grow more and more important in the next twenty years for the spreading
of knowledge, it is quite clear that students.should be.in more fre-
quent contact with these technical matters. Nowadays, it would be
unthinkable, for instance, to consider books almost only as stuff to
be sold in order, to make a profit on them, and not as instruments for
intellectual work, I n the same way, it is quite unthinkable that the
cinema should be used almost only for commercial purposes, and is
not spread more widely in the universities where it would fee of the
utmost, importance. Combloux, at least, must show, not only theoreti-
cally but practically the importance of the cinema by enabling all the
students there to see and discuss films on the one hand, and to make
them themselves on the other.
In .view of , the difficulties the students of the. photography
group met during the session, it has been suggested that for the next
session, two things would be essential in ordqr to carry out really
effective work in this field
(1) a real expert should direct the work on photography and the
cinema, with the possibility of setting up a real pedagogic programme
on the art of photography and filming, and that this expert should
organize debates and discussions on the problem of photography and
the cinema inside the university ;
(2) great care should be taken to furnish the best possible technical
equipment by :
a) providing each student with a sufficiently good camera •
b) enabling the students to develop and print photographs in
the Chalet itself ;
c) gendering it possible to make a film in the Chalet.
The last suggestion of the group, and a very important one for
the development of this new means of expression, would be to organize
an ISS conference onthe theme "Cinema and the University".• Students,
professors and experts would be invited to this conference, and the
work would be devoted to :
(1) the art of the cinema in itself ;
(2) its possibilities of development inside the university ;
(3) and the possibility of the university raising the present
cultural level of the cinema, which is very often of a low stan-
dard


Report
of the
Choral Group
The choral group prepared a certain number of songs for the soirees
held during the session, and its members were inspired by the desire to
give an international programme. Their work was divided into two parts ;
(1) to teach the whole gathering of students some folk songs and very
simple Christmas carols ;
(2) and to rehearse, on their own, more difficult songs which they sang
in small groups of five to ten. .
Their task was made difficult by the limited amount of time available
for their preparations and by the overlapping of the theatre and choral
groups. However, the group was able to obtain some interesting results,
especially in the last soiree. But it seems as if there was a.- basic
fault in the set-up of the choral group in that it was not created on a
larger scale, as a musical group. It would doubtless have been possible
to contact some.students with instruments and records and thus to, have
organized some short concerts and programmes with commentaries, in this
way enabling the group to play a bigger part.
The group would like to note that, at present, speaking in a general
way, universities are only centres of intellectual and scientific culture
in which a very insufficient part is loft to art, and in particular
to music. This situation should be changed as music has an extremely
important formative quality, as illustrated by the prominence given
in the Middle Ages and by the Greeks, for example, to education by music.
Today, it seems that a complete lack of musical culture is tolerated much
more easily than a lack of culture in the technical sphere or in science,
The Dutch delegates pointed out that the student cinema at Amsterdam,
which is run by students and provides some of them with scholarships,
has taken the initiative of giving gramophone record concerts of classical
and modern music twice a week, with introductions by professors or
students of music, and this experiment has met with great success. This
proves that students are very interested in music. Another, prco fof it
in Holland is that orchestras arid student choirs recruit more members
each year. We should go further and include in this programme of
general culture a knowledge of the history of music, of folk music as
well as of classical music. It should even be possible to teach all
students a little harmony and analysis of music so that they are not
completely ignorant when they go to listen to music. At a higher level,
it is desirable that art schools, academies, schools of drama, diction,
and piegtic art should be in closer contact with the university as a whole.
The arts form an integral part of general culture, and they should not
be left on one side as they are at present. It would be a good thing
formusical sessions to be organ!zed at Combloux, in which there would be
programmes of piano, orchestral and choral music, side by side with dis-
cussions on musical culture and its relation to the university. It is
that which we should like to see £ achieved in the near future.


Report
of the
Theatre Group
The theatre group held four plenary meetings, each of which was
devoted to the preparation of a soiree, with’the exception of the
fourth when a discussion was held on "The Theatre and the University",
The three soirees were those of Christmas Eve, New Tear's Eve and the
final one of the session. On Christmas Eve, the French members of
the theatre group rehearsed a short pay by Gheon on the Nativity ;
in spite of having only a short time in which to practise, this play
was a success. The remainder of the first soiree was given by the
delegations, who prepared legends, charades., and songs of their coun-
tries. For New Year’s Eve, more time was devoted to the prepara-
tions and the group had been directed for a while by an instructor;
thus, a series of mimes were performed on the theme of "Tristan and
Iseult". One of these intepretations was serious, the others were
humorous or whimsical. There was a version in the style of Italian
comedy, an international version, and - a French one. For the last
soiree, the programme took on a different form : in the afterdSoonitself,
a mime was rehearsed on the theme of "Tower of Babel". This con-
sisted of mimes, dances and music,with the aid of the interior in-
stallation of Radio Combloux, Although it was only possible to give
a vague idea of what anaolalersment of this kind could be, this soiree
resulted in interesting new elements in the field of drama, but it
proved, as the other soirees had done, that it was extremely difficult
for a theatre group to work thoroughly in so short a period-of time.
The group would like a whole session or conference to be held, devoted
to the problem of the Theatre and the University, The problem could
then be discussed fully and really advanced work in the field of drama
would be done. It is one of the projects which would be possible to
'carry on, even if not in the immediate future; but the majority of
students is not well prepared by the university to undertake work in
this sphere in such a session. It would be a good thing if more
theatre groups were developed in the universities in order to arouse
the interest of students in dramatic art ; this would deepen the study
of certain authors who are generally only read (for example, Shake-
speare, Greek and French dramatists, etc.). Finally, the advantage
of developing the theatre in the university would be that a greater
artistic consciousness would be created in 7/oung people and it would
introduce a certain separation between commerce and the theatre, a
separation which, unfortunately, does not exist today.
In iv/3 meeting devoted to theoretical problems, the'theatre group
considered the problems set forth above and gathered together some in-
fo /nation on the situation of the university theatre in different coun-
tries. It is interenthjg co note certain cases :
Belgium : . The new university theatre group in Belgium is linked up
with the General Association of Students ; all students can receive
an education in drama, follow courses in diction, and so oh. This


group gives plays from national repertory in an effort to reintroduce
classical plays or to promote little-known plays. During the war,
performances were given to soldiers. Their aim is not only to act
in their own country but also abroad, and to receive university groups
from other countries to give performances in Belgium. It is interesting
to note, for wrrsiaple, that the university group of the Sorbonne will
go to Brussels and Louvain in February to play Greek comedies,
Holland ; In Holland, there is a large number of students from both the
men's and women's organizations who work in university theatre groups.
One of the most important events is the "lustre" whichtakes place every
five years and for which is rehearsed a play in the open air, written
by the students specially for this occasion.
Italy; In Italy, there is a number of university theatres who play
according to the traditional methods. The most important centres are
Rome and Florence. Padua, however, is introducing a new experiment,
the aim of which is to spread theatrical culture among the people. A
group has been set up which consists of 50$ professional actors and
50$ students, who perform ancient -and modem plays. ' These are of
particular value for general culture as theytry to give the play a
simple and sober character and to make dramatic art as direct as
possible* Although it is only, as yet, an experiment, it has already
met with great success.
United States r In the United States, there are colleges like Wassar,
for instance, where dramatic courses are given. Certain courses on
the theatre are famous, like those of the "Harvard .Work Shop" and of
the group of North Carolina.
France ; . Here, we note the "Antiques de la Sorbonne": group which, is
composed of students who perform traditional Greek and Latin plays
in French and in Latin.’ At Grenoble, new experiments.have been made;
there is a large people's theatre in which students and 1 workmen
participate together. A long play was given in the open air on the
14th of July last year,, on the theme of the war; there werehundreda of
of actors and thousands of spectators present. These experiments
are certainly well in line with the future of the people's theatre.
In conclusion, we should like*to stress the interest whhioh there
would be in holding a session of theory and practice on the problem of
the Theatre and the University. The university suffers in general
from intellectual ism, and the only culture it seems to accept is that
gleaned from books. Culture by means of art can be as deep and more
living for all students ¥/ho study literature and the arts ,and it
should occupy quite a different place in the university from that which
it is given today. Large meetings where students could promote
a dramatic ideal, a modem one and one for the people, would be of great
helpto the future evolution of the university.-


Report
of the
Radio Group
The programme of the international student session of Combloux in-
cluded in its programme the activities of a radio group, and among, the
delegations present at the Chalet, Belgium, France, Great Britain,
Italy, Switzerland and the United States had chosen members who were
to study this question in particular.
From the moment of their arrival at the Chalet, these students
showed a lively interest in Radio Combloux, of which they had known
nothing but the name until then. For the sake of those people not
present at this session, here, in brief , is what the delegates, of
different nationalities found. Radio Combloux is a small installation
set up for the students in the Chalet; they listen to the broadcasts
either all together in the common room or alone in their rooms.
Created about a year and a half ago, it began in a very modest way
but it has become gradually more up to date. At the present time,
it is made up of.a sound-proof studio and an administration cabin
where there are amplifiers and sound control instruments, as well as
electric signals. Two record turntables give musical synchronization,
or special noises-off in the case of radio adaptations of plays and novels.
This installation aroused the keenest interest amongst the students
of the Chalet, and a study circle grew up around the radio as a means
of expression. In spite of the continual change of'students at Com-
bloux, this group has always found sufficient members for its achievements
which were at first amusing, and then became better, little by little,
by means of a -technique which we rediscovered slowly on our own.
Work of.the radio group during the session ;
The practical work of the radio group during the session was
focussed on the three following points
(1) Initiation into the technique of the apparatus and the microphone.
(2) The presentation of descriptive reports,adaptations and so on,
(3) The study of the possibilities of the radio in the university, both
on a national and an international level.
It is obvious that the first meetings were concerned above all with
the first point, the majority of the students not knowing anything about
the utilization of material in the most expressive way. From the
moment when the members of the group had grasped the first basic elements,
got to know the different ways of using the microphone, had an idea
about noises-off, and so on, practical projects were begun - the drawing
up of texts, placing them on wave lengths, etc.
Each of the achievements of the group was discussed in commission,


basing it on their own impressions on the one hand, and on the enquiries
made after the broadcasts on the other. The following deductions were
made: -
First broadcast ; "Here is Radio Combloux". General impression good
as a whole.'• Interesting from the documentary point of view, lay-out
satisfactory as regards script. Success ofiinal climax due to its
humorous twist. The programme was too long, however, and its subject
was limited too much to the Chalet.
Second broadcast : "Le Campanier". Generally unfavourable impression.
Subject not adapted to mass listening-in, the latter being made even
more difficult by special conditions which distracted the attention of
the audience. In a tricky production, the technique was the factor
least discussed. Whether rightly or wrongly, the subject was held to be
melodramatic.
Third broadcast "Description of the official reception on the 28th
December". Generally speaking, it was well received by the audience, so
much the more so because it was made under mope favourable conditions
than the preceding one. In the form of a "skit", it seems to represent
the type of broadcast capable of amusing a body of students listening in.
Together with the preceding experiments, this programme confirmed for
the group the fact that the audience reacts very much better.when they
themselves provide the subject of the broadcast,
. The programme of the radio group’was heavily charged since it en-
visaged three broadcasts in the comparatively short space of a fortnight.
This fact compelled them to put on an early production which prevented
them from avoiding some of the errors eventually made. The members de-
plored the fact that their working conditions were not facilitated by
the formation of a homogeneous group. In fact, as the majority of the
delegations represented had signed up for several groups at the same
time, the radio group was not able to carry out their work with the
continuity necessary for it. That is why they could not concentrate
on the educational work envisaged.
The achievements made during this session show that students of
different talent and different nationalities take an interest in
wirelbss technique (the working out of programmes, etc.) which is
already keen and which can be increased. This experiment proves
that the radio and the university can be closely linked together. It
appears that in certain countries (the United States, Italy, and Swit-
zerland) , this link has been partly made in the form of a radio which
is put at the service of the university for the spreading of cultural
material. This form is insufficient in the opinion of the radio group
as it remains the same as that ordinarily used in the universities.
The broadcasts simply give, on a larger scale, the lectures of professors
do?,iweied in’the usual way.- This kind of link between radio and uni-
versity presents obvious advantages but they are rather limited.
Another method of linking up the radio and the university would be
to give students a more active part to play in this new means of ex-
pression. This could be done in three stages :
(1) first, by the creation of listening-in groups, similar to cine-
clubs, and destined-to establish among the members a spirit of
criticismj


(2) by the admittance of students, in so far as they are students, into
practical radio expression. This would have two ocnscqonees :
a) as. a result of having an inside knowledge of the technique,
members of the listening-in groups would be in a better po- .
sition to criticize the radio programmes ;
b) students would be able to express themselves either
i. in' order to ccmo into closer contact with other students
in their own university, and with other universities,
on a national and an international level, and, finally,
with the university as a whole and with the rest of
society ;
ii. or to become acquainted with a new means of expression
within the general framework of modern forms ;
(3) the selection being made among those students working as amateurs,
this would open up to a certain number of them the professional
dide of it and would give radio a greater chance of renewing it-
self by the introduction of more qualified cultural elements.
In conclusion, the members of the. radio group would like to express
that moot immediate wishes in order to enable students to achieve more
concrete results, The'group as a whole proposes that its members should
remain in permanent contact on the international level within the
framework of university•radio in order to develop more advanced experiments
in their respective countries. This system of co-operation could be
enlarged by means of exchange of students, techniques and programmes.
As a result, student interest in international university radio would be
aroused.


UNIVERSITY RADIO AT PADUA
When, in July 1945, a group of young students thought of or-
ganising a university radio, their aims 1 were not already completely
clear. They had;only an intuition that this medium would have been
of the most valuable use to any university organization. The station
was equipped with wireless' material which had been used by the uni-
versity during the fight for the liberation, and the students worked
very hard to repair the worn-out apparatus. They searched eagerly
for the material they lacked and began to draw up projects and to draft
programmes. But. in spite of their ardour and their good intentions,
their efforts were only very inadequately realized. It was only after
several months that, thanks to the help of the Rector of the University,
a medium wave-length station of limited force (250 w., 209 m.) was set
up. Thus, on the 13th of November 1945, after reaching some technical
agreement with the Italian radio, the first broadcast was made by the
Padua university radio, and this has been followed without interruption
(except for the summer vacation) by 320 days of broadcasting. Unfor-
tunately, the agreement with the Italian radio perceptibly reduced the
field of wireless activities planned out, but, at the same time, it
guaranteed the continuity of the broadcasts. There is, now, a daily
broadcast of an educational and informative character transmitted
at the same- time to a university audience and to any people who are in-
terested in culture. To make sure that the programmes have a scientific
basis which would be easily accessible to the public in general, a
commission composed of professors and experts, examines all the themes
presented for broadcasting --themes ranging from medicine to science,
from literature to drama, cinema, and so on. Although there is only
half an hour for broadcasting each day, it can be said that the Voice
of jiadua University is a really new element in the field of Italian
radio and constitutes an experiment interesting, perhaps, for the whole
of Su. ope, This has been made clear by the interest that the univer-
sity organizations in Switzerland and in France and the wireless
institutions of Switzerland and America have shown in this experiment.
This is also indicated by the fact: that, utter the broadcast given, by
the Voice of Padua University,' the Italian radio began to make trans-
missions on the national network under the headings, "Scientific news"
and "The university by radio".
Up to the present, 420 broadcasts have been made,and here is an
idea of their general character.. To keep up contact betweenstudents
and the young graduates of the whole region, during the broadcasts all
the scientific and cultural news which is worthy of interest is men-
tioned. Furthermore, to increase the spread of culture, lectures and
news general culture are given, and also talks on topics within
the framework of popular culture. Besides this, all the university
organizations born within the last two years, such as the university
theatre and the Arts Centre, which show a remarkable vitality, have
united, this year, with the radio to give the audience some inter-
national theatrical news and information about the thought and or-
ganization of universities throughout the world, and criticisms of art,
literature, and the cinema.


Moreover, through the medium of the centre of cultural exchange
with foreign countries, it has been possible to collaborate with some
scholars and-.writers, for example, Einstein and Somerset Maugham.
Such is the work accomplished by the Voice of Padua University during
its first year of existence. It is hoped that the future programs
of their broadcasts will be improved and that a greater number of
people will listen in. With regard to this, the new use of short wave-
lengths must be noted. Two transmitting apparatus, each of them of
100 watts, are.already in use, and two new ones of 50 watts each will
very soon be in use. Four pylons, 80 metres high, for the aerials
will be erected in the near future, By these means, the short wave-
length will complete the transmissions which, up till then, were
made only on medium wave-lengths from Hadio Padua. This initiative
fits in better with the aims of the founders of the university radio
and a new field of activities can be envisaged. Thus, radio relations
with European and American universities, exchange of new and immediate
scientific interest, etc. are foreseen.
The members of the university radio at Padua think that it would
be necessary to establish the basis of a new service which they would
like to call the "scientific radio", the aim of which would be the
exchange of news and, more generally, cultural exchange between the
different universities, research institutes, and so on. This service
would be of far more use than the scientific press and would also be at
the disposal of the public at large, who would thus find new possibilities
of widening their knowledge. By the utilization of the transmitting
apparatus already in existence and by setting up such apparatus in the
most important universities, an international network of university
radio would be created. Thus, it is proposed to constitute an inter-
national commission to co-ordinate university radio activities and,in
each country, it would be advisable to set up national committees towards
this end.
Thus one comes back again to the spin jf initiative of these
students. They are deeply convinced that alture does not represent
only a spiritual patrimony which must be alously guarded in the temple
of science and exclusively reserved for the richest class, but it is a
powerful woapon of progress, a means which, wisely used, can bring
people to mutual understanding and peace.
To achieve this aim, one can never say too often that the university
radio, dealing with the main problems of culture and sociology through
the voice of eminent professors, must find a wider comprehension in the
radio background of Italy and of the whole world.


LIST OF DELEGATES
BELGIUM DE BRUYNE, Alec 2 .rue Jean Has, Louvain
BE PAUW, Wilfred 78 Av. du Roi Albert,
(observer) Berckem, Saints Agathe
DEURINK, Gaston Marcel 68 rue Louis Hap, Bruxelles
THIBSRT, Hubert 26 rue Raikem, Liege
VAN BEN OSTENDE, Andre 100 rue de I'Avenir,
Mt. St. Amande, Les Gand
VAN DEN DRIESSCHE, L.G. 16 Square Clementine,
Ostende
DENMARK MOGENSEN, Knud Mikkelbryggersg. 5,
Copenhagen
UNITED STATES EEMST, Rosamond Hfitel de Russia, Geneva
BUTTERFIELD, Patricia " " " "
DAVIDSON, Janet " " " "
HOCHSCHILD, Patricia " » " "
KNOBLAUGH, Grctchen " " " "
MAYER, Arno J. 3 rue Emile Yung, Geneva
MURPHY, Joan Marie HBtel de Russia, Geneva
NUGENT, Barbara " " " "
ROONEY, Phyllis " " " ''
REYNOLDS, Elizabeth, Lee " " " "
SCHUPPER, Deborah " " " "
FRANCE ASSATHIANY, Mireille 139 rue Ranelagh, Paris 16
. AUPHAN, Michel 82 " " « "
BERTRAND, Maurice .2 rue Dr. Mazet, Grenoble
BOURBIER, Claude 7 rue Losueur, Paris 16
CHANET, Jean (vocai . 26 Av. Foch, Paris 16
culture)
CHAUFOUPNIER, Roger 169 Bd. Malesherbes, Paris
’COHEN, Laurence 7 rue du Lieuvin,, Paris 1$
DASSAS, Nico (technician) 12 rue Lacretelle,
Paris
FICHOT, Henri Louis 2 rue Singer, Paris 13
GRUVBIIHBR, Jean Pierre
(technici»n) 27 rue Paul Bert,
Asnieres, (Seine)
GRUEL, Henri fv ocal , 3 rue Singer, Paris
cull,ur§)
HEPER, Paul (yopslv... 42 rue du Dragon, Paris 6
culture)
■ JACQE, Henri Georges 10 rue de la Source, Paris
LASIH.RGUES , Gilbert 33 rue Lesdiguieres, Gr ..noble
MARIN, Rone, Georges 21 rue Sinson,. Sens (Yonne)
PETIT, J-ckie 17 rue de la Fontaine, Paris
PREVOT, Jean Michel rue Roger Burlieu, Paris 13
RABY, Roger Raoul 12 rue Thiers, Grenoble
EOUCAYROL, Jean Claude 38 rue de Courcelles, Paris
ROUMEGUERE, Pierre, J.C. 5 rue des Urselines,
Paris


ROSENBERG, Rone 50 rue’.Thiers, Grenoble
Si.RPj.UTE, Claude 12 Av, Pierre ler de Serbie,
Paris 16
SERBONNET, Jean Pierre 38 rue de Seine, Paris
(vocal culture),
SOUQUET, Georges rue Dupont Savilette, Grenoble
VILIAINES, ue Charles 76 rue Vauvenargues, Paris 18
WILBORTS, Yvette, Marie 110-de-Brehat (C6te du
Jose Nord)
GREAT BRITAIN ASPINALL, Gerald 6 Hughenden Road, Bristol 8
GALLIE, Elspeth 525 Alexandra Parade, Glasgow
DANIEL, Vera Joyce 7 Downs View, Bude, Cornwall
DIAMOND, Sidney 174 Monument Road, Birmingham
DICKINSON, June 5 rue Michel Chauvot, Geneva
HARLEY, John K. 205 Colinton Road, Edinborough
. SiiROUFIM, Ebeid Brasenose College, Oxford
ITALY BACHELET, Vittorio Via Buozzi 14, Rome
BATTISTELLA, Giorgio V.J. Nani No. 56, Lido di Venezia
CESSI, Carlo V. Carducci 31, Padua
DE BOSIO, Gianfranco Via Donstello 16, Padua
ZAMPIERI, Duccio 135 Flaminia, Rome
NORWAY AMII.IE, Axel . 134 Bd. Voltaire, Paris 11
HOLLAND BLOM, Anton, Hans 22 Leeuwenhoeks ingel, Delft
FABIIJS, Nantie Leizersgracht 824, Amsterdam
GONDS '7 A A PD, Jf-han Lange Kerhdam 85, A. Wass mar
Marius - .
LOK.KER, Catrioh , Dr: ft IQ, Utrecht
SCHILTHTJIS, Albertine Cavernin Lohmanplein 2 B,
SWITZERLAND KLEINERT, Jiirg Wuhre 5, Zurich I
SSVSDEN ENGwALL,■Marianne SveavSgan 115, Stockholm
KJEI LBERG, GCran L. Maison suedoise, Cite Uni-
versitaire, Paris 14
Gubbhusgat 5~9» Stockholm
MOSTROM, Birgiths Folkungagat 81, Stockholm
CZECHOSLOVAKIA LANG, Ivo Sultysowa 57, Prague 18
NAVRATILOVA, Adela Cechova 22, Prague 19
TRISKA, Jan Opletalova 38, Prague 2
VESE.LA, Eva Leskova 8 A., Bratislava
YUGOSLAVIA Jj.NJIC, Desko 5 Place Clavayson, Grenoble
(isere)


SPEAKERS
Monsieur Sven BJORELUND, Rector of the People’s University,
Johannesplan 3> Stockholm
Monsieur BOULIGAND , Professor of Science at the Sorbonne,
46 rue St. Andre des Arts., Paris 5
Mr. John COLEMAN, Secretary of the World's Student Christian
Federation, 13 rue Calvin, Geneva, Switzerland
Monsieur Jean Marie CONTI, Director of the School for Dramatic Art,
11 rue de Schelcher, Paris
Miss Mary B. HESSE, 15 Dornton Road, South Croydon, Surrey, England
Monsieur Pierre SCHAEFFER, Radiodiffusion frangaise, 6 rue du Bel
Air, Bellevue (S et 0).
Monsieur CHOMBART DE LAUWE, Charge de Recherches au Centre National
de la Recherche scientifique, Clairbois,
Rond-Point du Petit-Clamart (Seine)
MEMBERS OF THE ISS SECRETARIAT CHALET STAFF
AT GENEVA
ADISESHIAH, Malcolm (India) Therese and Roland ASSATHIAN^
DIDIER, Maurice (France) Directors
FERENCZI, Edmond (Hungary) Michel GIRaRD, Manager
FRYKHOLM, Yngve (Sweden) Paulette NCHI, Commissariat
NYBERG, Lars (Sweden) Renee GIRARD, Secretary
BALLIF, Rachel (Switzerland)
KENT, Sylvia (Great Britain)
ROBERT, Georgette (Switzerland)


