

M rvk&l UfcJidio m.
f fnyi U^-Mhd^UoUM§
CHRIST
OUR SANCTIFICATION.
BY
DOUGAN CLARK, M.D. •
GOULBURN:
PRINTED BY W. E. EILEY, HEEAID STEAM FEINTING WOEKS, AUBUEN-STEEET.
|| 1884 '
Price 4d.; or 3s. 6d. per dozen,




CHRIST
OUR SANCTIFICATION.
DOUGAN CLARK, M.D.
GOULBURN:
FEINTED BY W, E. EILET, EEEABD STEAM FEINTING WOEES, AEBEEN-BTEEET.




CHRIST OUR SANCTIFICATION.
|||iANY of the Protestant Churches of Christendom
|Sp| are at this time taking a lively interest in a
particular form of religious experience, known
variously as Holiness — Sanctification —Christian Perfec-
tion—Perfect Love—The Best of Faith—The Higher Life
—The Life of Faith—and Full Salvation.
This interest is not, as we think, a mere tempo-
rary and restless curiosity to hear and learn “ some
new thing,” but the expression rather of a felt need—
the need, on the part of Christians generally, of a closer
walk with God, and a deeper work of grace in their
souls. There are probably tens of thousands of con-
verted people to-day, on both sides of the Atlantic, who
have been forgiven much, and who love much, and
who, nevertheless, are mourning over their coldness
and deadness; the remains of carnality ; the tenden-
cies to sin ; the evil heart of unbelief; the roots of
bitterness ; the pride, and ill-temper, and impurity,
and covetousness, and envy, and selfishness, that still
cleave to them, and make their hearts too much like a
cage of unclean birds. Many of these, doubtless, have
made up their minds that there is no better state for
them in this life than a ceaseless struggle with the
inward corruption of their nature ; no separation of
the soul from sin until the death-struggle is separating
the soul from the body ; no deliverer, and no deliver-
ance on this side the grave. Others are earnestly


inquiring whether there is any hope of freedom from
the bondage of sin, even here —whether the same Saviour
who bore their “ sins in His own body on the tree,”
can likewise cleanse them “ from all sin;” and whether
a “ clean heart” and a “right spirit” are in any way
attainable while mind and body are still engaged in
active and vigorous service for Christ.
Now, if the plain teaching of Scripture and the
experience of thousands of living witnesses are worth
anything, then all these questions must receive an
affirmative answer. There is a Deliverer , and there is
deliverance. There is such a state as Holiness , Entire
Sanctification, Christian Perfection; sometimes received
very soon after conversion, sometimes at a later period,
sometimes postponed—always, however, except where
conversion itself is a death-bed experience, needlessly
postponed—till the hour of dissolution. It is the
privilege and duty of every Christian who feels the need
of this blessed experience, to press after it, and to
attain it noiv.
DEFINITION OF TERMS
Conviction is the work of the Holy Ghost on the
heart of the sinner; by which he is made to realize
his undone condition, and earnestly to desire recon-
ciliation with God.
Repentance is change of mind—a firm resolve to
take the necessary steps for securing salvation. It is
the result of “ godly sorrow ” for sin.
Faith is the acceptance of God’s mercy and grace
in Christ Jesus. The grace of faith, or the power of
believing, is the gift of God ; the act of faith, or actual
believing, is the exercise of that power. When God
presents His truth to us, it is not a matter of indiffer-
ence whether we accept or reject it. He holds us


accountable for the exercise of the faith which He has
given us. “He that helieveth not is condemned already.”
By “ repentance towards God, and Faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ,” the sinner experiences justification.
This is pardon, forgiveness, remission, absolution. By
the atonement made upon Calvary, the guilt of his
sins is taken away, their legal penalties remitted, and
his indebtedness cancelled. “ Jesus paid it all.”
He experiences conversion. This implies a change
of heart; a renovation and revolution of his whole
spiritual nature.
He experiences regeneration —a new birth; a new
life in his soul; a being “born again” of the incor-
ruptible Seed.
He experiences adoption. God takes him into his
family for Christ’s sake, and he becomes a son.
He experiences the witness of the Spirit, testifying
with his spirit that he is a child, and enabling him to
cry, “ Ahha, Father .”
Now, as justification is “ that act of God’s free
grace in which He pardons our sins, and accepts us as
righteous in his sight for the sake of Christ,” so
“ sanctification is that act of Divine Grace whereby we
are made holy.”
“ Holiness is sanctification in perpetuity.” It
implies heart purity, or freedom from sin. The term sin
is used in the Bible, either in the sense of sin com-
mitted—an actual transgression in thought, word or
deed; or sin indwelling —that depravity of heart which
leads to all sinful acts ; that inward cause of which sins
are the effects ; that nature which we have by inheritance
from our first parents in the fall. In the one sense,
sin is a voluntary violation of the Bivine law, in the other
it is an involuntary state of the heart; the one meaning
implies guilt, the other uncleanness ; the former requires
pardon, the latter cleansing. The individual who is
groaning under the burden of sins committed wants to


be forgiven ; the one who is sensible of his indwelling
corruption wants to be cleansed. One seeks justification ,
the other sanctification. Now, our definition of holiness
is intended to apply to sin in both these aspects. It is
freedom from the guilt of sin, freedom also from its
power, from its dominion —nay, from its very existence.
It is the privilege of souls that have first known their
transgressions forgiven by faith in the atoning blood of
Jesus, and then their hearts cleansed by the baptism
of the Holy Ghost. Their experience does not end
with Calvary, but goes forward to Pentecost.
GOD REQUIRES HIS CHILDREN TO BE HOLY.
None that believe in the existence of God will
deny that He is a holy being. Absolute purity is one
of His attributes. And in this He stands alone in the
universe. Neither man nor angel can ever attain to
the perfection of the Deity. But man was created in
the “ image of God ” —a state of moral purity —a state
of holiness and innocency —a state in which it was his
delight to commune with God, and do His will—a
state in which there was no tendency to sin, although
there was a susceptibility to temptation, and a liability
to fall. This purity and innocency being lost by dis-
obedience, the plan of salvation by Jesus Christ con-
templates nothing less than its restoration. In the
fall, our hearts are depraved—loving that which is
evil—inclined to sin—corrupt, deceitful, “ desperately
wicked and we need, therefore, not only the pardon
of our transgressions, but such a cleansing and purify-
ing of our hearts that we may love God supremely and
our neighbour as ourselves. He ivho does this is a holy
man.
There are doubtless differences which need not
detain us, between the perfection of Adam before the


fall and the Christian perfection which is the subject
of this essay. These differences arise chiefly from the
diseased and imperfect physical organization which
now appertains to our race, and which did not apper-
tain to Adam; in consequence of which, the mind,
through its connection with such a body, is liable to
false perceptions and erroneous judgments.
Mistakes in judgment will lead to mistakes in
practice even in the most holy person—and thus we
conclude that, while it is the privilege and duty of the
Christian to expect, in the fulness of Christ’s sal-
vation, a complete deliverance from sin, and a restora-
tion into man’s original condition so far as moral
purity is concerned; yet, in the present state of being, he
must ever be subject to weakness, infirmities, and
mistakes.
Now, in the Bible, the holiness of God is again and
again urged as a reason why His people also should be
holy. “lam the Lord your God, ye shall therefore
sanctify yourselves and ye shall he holy ; for lam holy
(Leviticus xi. 44). Again, in Peter i. 15, 16, we read,
“ As He which hath called you is holy, so he ye holy in
all manner of conversation ; because it is written, Be ye
holy for I am holy.” And Paul tells the Thessalonians,
“ This is the will of God, even your sanctification
Let us as Christians directly understand the extent
of our obligation in this matter. God will never com-
promise with sin—He will not reign in a divided
heart—“ Ye cannot serve God and mammon .” The
language that is half-Jew and half-Ashdod is not the
language of heaven. “Without holiness no man
shall see the Lord.” “ There shall in no wise enter
into (the new Jerusalem), anything that defileth,
neither whatsoever worketh abomination or maketh a
lie ; but they which are written in the Lamb’s book
of life.’'
Commands so imperative and assertions so positive


as these cannot safely be disregarded. They should
arouse every Christian from his lethargy, and speak
trumpet-tongued to the heart of every unsanctified
believer. Beloved reader, answer not to me but to
thyself, in the searching light of God’s Holy Spirit,
these questions. Having been forgiven, am I also
holy ? Has God’s will in reference to me, even my
sanctification , been accomplished ? Does the blood of
Jesus Christ cleanse me from all sin ? And if truth
compels thee to give a negative answer to these in-
quiries, then ask thyself further, When does God com-
mand me to be holy ? When am Ito be sanctified and
cleansed ? Is it far in the future when I shall have
grown in grace, developed and strengthened my
Christian virtues, and become more worthy of this
great salvation ? Is it on a bed of death, or just as I
am in the struggles of dissolution, that God wills my
sanctification ? Will my graces and virtues sanctify
me ? God give thee grace, dear Christian reader, to
answer—No, no, no, none of these can sanctify me.
It is Jesus that must sanctify me when I am dying.
It is Jesus that must sanctify me at any time in the
future. It is Jesus that can sanctify me now.
GOD ENABLES HIS CHILDREN TO BE HOLY.
This proposition follows as a necessary sequence
from the preceding. If our Father in heaven requires
us to be holy, it would be derogatory to His character
to suppose that He would not also enable us to be holy.
God is not an unreasonable tyrant who requires from
His creatures what He gives them no power to render.
He is, on the contrary, a Euler of infinite love, who
wishes His people to become, in the purity of their
renovated natures, like Himself; and who, if He
requires holiness from them, will not leave them


without the means and the power of attaining to this
holiness. He “has promised to make us holy.” The
work, be it ever remembered, is His, not ours—“ It is
He that worketh in us both to will and to do of His
good pleasure.” It is true that we shall utterly fail to
reach this pure standard by any efforts or any merit of
our own; but we can with confidence rely upon the
promises of God even for this great salvation. And
what saith the Scripture ? “I will turn my hand upon
thee and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all
thy tin.” (Isaiah i. 25.) If the base metals are all
removed, the alloy totally consumed, what is left but
the pure silver or the pure gold ? If all spiritual dross
and tin are taken away from a soul, that soul is holy.
“ Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and
ye shall be clean; from all your filthiness, and from
all your idols, will I cleanse you.” (Ezekiel xxxvi.
25.)
PRE-REQUISITES FOR THE ATTAINMENT OF HOLINESS.
First, it is necessary for one who would become
holy to believe that holiness is attainable. It is contrary
to the nature of things that an individual should make
a serious effort to do an act which he believes cannot be
done, or to attain a thing which he believes to be
unattainable. The human mind is so constituted that
it will not put forth a volition to accomplish a thing
which it believes quite impossible; and so if a man
rejects the doctrine of holiness —if he believes that
there is no possibility of getting rid of sin in this life
—if he thinks that, however heavy the burden, he
must needs carry it to the end—that he can expect no
deliverance till death comes to his relief—the result is,
that according to his faith, or want of faith, it shall be
unto him. There is just one way of receiving not only


holiness but every other Gospel blessing as well, and
that is hij faith. “If thou canst believe, all things are
possible to him that believeth.”
But secondly, it is not only necessary that one
who seeks holiness should believe in the attainability
of holiness, but also that he should earnestly and
sincerely desire to he holy : he must be convicted for sancti-
fication. He must be so enamoured of holiness that he
will determine to have it at whatever cost. He must
be willing to sell all that he has that he may obtain
the hidden treasure. Believing the doctrine already
proved, that God is able and willing to make him holy,
he must maintain a lixed, unalterable resolve, that
with this Divine aid the unspeakable blessing shall be
his own. It must be the constant petition of his
inmost soul. “ Create in me a clean heart, 0 God,
and renew a right spirit within me.”
HOW HOLINESS IS TO BE ATTAINED.
The blood cleanseth. The Spirit is distinctively
the Sanctifier. “He shall glorify me for He shall
receive of mine, and shall show it unto you.” There
is just one answer to every question implying any
spiritual want whatever. That answer is, Jesus. It is
by Him that God is able to supply all our need. If the
unforgiven sinner comes to us with the burden of his
guilt pressing like a mountain upon him, and in the
agony of his conviction asks, “ What must I do to be
saved ?” we do not hesitate to reply, “ Believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ.” We tell him the story of Calvary
—we show him the Lamb of God lifted up for his sins ,
we point him to the middle cross and bid him “ Look
and live.” Just so soon as he can withdraw his atten-
tion from himself, and turn believingly to Jesus , the


“ great transaction” is clone, and when he looks for his
sins again, he is delighted to discover that they are
gone. “As far as the east is from the west, so far
hath He removed our transgressions from us.”
But suppose the individual who asks our advice is
not an unpardoned sinner seeking forgiveness, but a
believing child of God seeking purity—one who has
been justified by faith in Christ, but still finds the evil
nature which he inherits in the fall struggling within
him and bringing him into captivity to the “ law of sin
in his members”—who finds the strong man bound
but not cast out, and who, in despair of being able to
do the good which he would, or to avoid the evil which
he would not, is ready to cry out, “ 0, wretched man
that I am ! who shall deliver me from the body of this
death?” Suppose that such an one enquires of us,
“ And what shall I do ? ” still the answer is just the
same as in the other case : “ Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ.” Believe in Him for victory as thou hast
already believed in Him for pardon. Cease to wage
an unequal contest with Satan by means of thy own
endeavours and resolves and struggles and prayers.
Turn the contest over to the Captain of thy salvation.
Do not seek to be justified by faith, and then sanctified
by works. Having begun in the Spirit, do not hope
to be made perfect by the flesh. It is just as much
the prerogative of Christ to cleanse as it is to pardon.
Thy own efforts will be just as powerless in casting out
the strong man as in binding him.
It is the privilege, and it ought to be the experi-
ence of every Christian, to be the temple of the Holy
Ghost. “ Know ye not that ye are the temple of God,
and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you ? ” But
before He will take possession of this temple and dwell
therein, it must be abandoned by ourselves and made
over to Him as its rightful possessor and occupant.
This leads us to speak—


OF CONSECRATION.
It is a confusion of terms to confound this with
Sanctification. The consecrating act is our own; the
sanctifying grace is from God. Consecration is neces-
sary to sanctification, hut not identical with it. Sanc-
tification implies consecration, hut it also implies more.
The term consecration, as we here employ it, means
simply the total surrender of ourselves to God—with
a fixed purpose to abandon every known sin and to he
wholly the Lord’s. The grace that gives us the power
to make such a total surrender is from God, but the
surrender itself is a voluntary act of our own. God
recognises our feeble human agency, notwithstanding
the fact that this agency without His Divine aid will
be entirely unavailing. Every consecration made
solely in our own strength, relying upon our good
resolutions and our firmness of purpose alone, will he
sure to result in failure. But it is necessary to bring
into exercise all the strength of will we possess in the
act of surrender, and then to rely upon God for ability
to keejt the covenant we have made with Him. That
is to say, w T e must do all we can, and every justified
Christian certainly has the power to do something in
this direction. When he came to Christ for pardon,
he was dead in trespasses and sins, and could only
surrender himself to be saved. But every forgiven soul is
measurably quickened— there is some life in him ; and
it is to this class—justified Christians —that Paul
addresses his admonition: “ Yield yourselves unto God,
as those that are alive from the dead, and your members
as instruments of righteousness unto God.”
The act of consecration ought to be made deliber-
ately and thoughtfully, with a full apprehension of our
relations to God, and a just appreciation of the fact
that, having wilfully wandered from Him and rebelled


against Him, we have, through His mercy in Christ
Jesus, been “ bought with a price,” and hence are
emphatically “not our oim .” Consecration must not
he a temporary thing, for a temporary purpose, hut it
must include the whole period of our existence, our
whole time, and our whole eternity. Many Christians
are willing to give up something to the Lord. Some
are willing to give up much. But the consecration we
are now considering requires us to give up all. It is
true that our wants in this world are many; but ‘ ‘ your
heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these
things.” We must trust ourselves wholly in His hands,
with an entire willingness to he, to do, and to suffer
whatever His sovereign will may ordain. (1.) We
must contentedly he what He would make us—vessels
of honour or vessels of dishonour —heralds of the
Gospel or doorkeepers of His house —missionaries
abroad or feeders of the flock at home —anything, or,
if such a thought were possible, nothing, in His
church. (2.) We must do what He would have us do,
and he just as ready to refrain from doing when He
bids us —go or stay —speak or be silent—work or wait
—march or halt —fight in the field or rest in thfi camp,
just as He may direct. (3.) We must suffer with
resignation whatever He permits to come upon us—
afflictions and temptations “if need be” —“fiery
trials,” if such he dispensed to us—loss of health, loss
of friends, loss of property, loss of reputation, if He
sees meet to deprive us of these blessings. Body, soul,
and spirit—mind, will, affections —time, talents, posses-
sions—all that we have and all that we are, must be
His —wholly His, and His for ever. If special tests of
our obedience are required, let us not fail to accept
them. Sometimes a very small thing is presented to
the mind of a seeker after holiness, some act to be done,
or some indulgence to be surrendered, and because of
its very insignificance he refuses to entertain the


thought, and so misses the blessing. In other cases,
perhaps some great thing or some intensely repulsive
thing has been set before the mind as what would be
required if a full consecration were made, and Satan
has whispered, You know you could never endure
that! and too often the soul that was on the point of
entering into rest has been driven back into the wilder-
ness for fear of these dreadful giants.
0, that Christians everywhere would cease to dis-
trust Christ—that they might realize that His “ pur-
poses are purposes of love ” —that His plans concerning
them are plans far more blessed than any that they
can devise for themselves, and that trusting Him fully
is only casting themselves into the arms of a loving
Saviour who will not require anything from them with-
out giving them strength to perform it —who will not
allow any affliction to come upon them in which He is
not afflicted—who will not lead them along any thorny
path without himself treading it with them—who will
not suffer them to be tempted above that they are
able, but will always “make a way of escape that they
may he able to bear it.”
Such a consecration as we have been considering,
made under the influence of the Holy Spirit, thought-
fully, unreservedly, irrevocably, and in reliance upon
Divine assistance, is necessary to the attainment of
holiness; because we cannot, with any show of reason,
believe that God will bestow upon us that w T ondrous
blessing while we are living in a state of voluntary
rebellion against Him. So long as we indulge any
known sin, or omit any known duty, we cannot have
the faith to believe that God will sanctify us wholly ;
and without faith it is just as impossible for the
believer to be sanctfied as for the sinner to be par-
doned. Christians are often complaining, and doubt-
less with justice, of their own lack of faith. There
are comparatively few who have a faith so clear and


appropriating as, in the language of the Saviour, to
44 remove mountains.” And if our faith is dim and
weak, is it not because our consecration is imperfect ?
Is it not because we are keeping back part of the
price ? By retaining a little self-life in our hearts, are
we not making it impossible that we should believe in
God fully, and trust in Him confidingly, and obey Him
implicitly ? Absolute and unconditional surrender to
God is what we must submit to if we would have a
faith that staggers not at the promises of God through
unbelief.
But consecration is not synonymous with holiness,
nor all that is requisite for the attainment of that
Messed experience. Consecration is a voluntary act
of our own, generally made in a formal and definite
manner, often in express words, and by many in
writing. By this act we surrender our all into the
hands of God, and enter into covenant relations with
Him. But the work of sanctification is His, not ours,
and so, after thus giving ourselves to him, we are to
rest in His promises; and
VII.
SEEK IN SIMPLE FAITH FOR CHRIST’S BAPTISM WITH
THE HOLY GHOST.
It is Christ, not his own faith nor repentance, nor
prayer, that justifies the sinner—albeit the repentance,
the faith, the prayer are all necessary to the bestow-
ment of pardon by Him. It is Christ—not consecra-
tion, nor faith that sanctifies the believer; albeit
consecration and faith are necessary to the bestow-
ment of holiness by Him. Both the one and the other
are needful. It is not sufficient to give all—we must
also take all. It is not enough that we lay our offering,
which includes ourselves and everything that pertains


to ns, on the altar. We must also believe that the
offering is accepted, and that “the altar sanctifieth the
gift.” Such a consecration as we have described can
not fail to find acceptance with God. The proof that
it does so does not lie in the fact of our believing, but
in the veracity of God. Hear what He says : “ Where-
fore come out from among them, and he ye separate,
saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing ”
consecration —“and I will receive you, and will he a
Father unto you; and ye shall he my sons and
daughters, saith the Lord Almighty ” — acceptance. It
is God’s unchangeable and everlasting Truth revealed
to us in His promises that determines the certainty of
the result. We know that our consecration is accepted
—not because of any preconceived feelings being
realised —not because of any rapturous emotions, or
any extraordinary visions, or exalted imaginations—
but because God says so. But, notwithstanding the
promises are yea and amen for ever, we shall not
realize them to be so to ourselves if we do not take
the Promiser at His word. The Christian begins to
live by faith; he continues to live by faith; he walks
by faith; he receives every gospel blessing by faith;
all his soul’s needs are supplied by faith.
Thus it happens that when the believer has given
up all, and made himself over to Christ as His, wholly
His, in unconditional surrender, and when he just
leaves the sacrifice upon the altar in childlike faith,
resting upon the Divine promises, the Holy spirit, in
His own time and way, comes into his heart with all
His cleansing virtue, with all His healing power.
This is the baptism of the Holy Ghost; this is “sanctifi-
cation of the Spirit,” mentioned in close connection
with “belief of the truth ” by Paul, and with “ sprink-
ling of the blood of Jesus ”by Peter. This experience
does not come to all in the same way, though its
effects are alike precious in all. With some it is a


Pentecostal effusion—the rushing of a mighty wind—
the whirlwind and the earthquake prostrating every-
thing before it, and causing its recipients to speak with
new tongues, and glorify God, whilst the multitude
wonder or scofk With others the blessing comes in
moments of quiet calm, when all outward commotions
have ceased, when the faculties of the soul are hushed,
and restful, and expectant; and it comes as a “ still
small voice,” whispering in the ear of the soul, and
diffusing a sweet and tranquil joy through the whole
spiritual being. By the inward baptism the heart is
cleansed—freed from the dominion of sin. “ Thanks
he unto God, who giveth us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.” In this spiritual baptism the
believer receives, also, the “ enduement of power.”
This is nothing else than a qualification for the work
to which God calls him—power to impress men’s
minds and win their souls to Christ. This is totally
distinct from, and independent of, learning or
eloquence, and is sometimes exerted without the
consciousness of its possessor by his very looks and
actions, strongly affecting beholders and evidencing
that he has been with Jesus. It is a mysterious
enduement, doubtless, but none the less real. Witness
the preaching of Peter on the day of Pentecost under
that wondrous baptism: “And the same day there
were added unto them about three thousand souls.”
No man can receive Christ into his heart, and have
Him to dwell there by faith, without an immense
addition to his effective energv. “I can do all
things through Christ which strengtheneth me! ”
The baptism is one; but there may be many successive
girdings and fillings according to God’s free mercy
and the believer’s individual need, as well as the
service to which he may be called. To the believer
who has thus been sanctified, there is need, no less
than before, of a constant abiding in Christ. In


sanctifying a soul, the Holy Spirit does not place it
beyond the reach of danger, nor beyond the possibility
of sinning. To every one who is sanctified there
conies a definite moment when we can say, “Jesus
saves me —saves me now” —“the blood cleanseth—
cleanseth now! ” If the same faith continues, when
another moment comes he can still say, “ it cleanseth,”
—and still another moment, “it cleanseth,” —and so
for a day, or a year, or a lifetime. Just as needful is
it that there should be a constant, momentary exercise
of faith in Christ for the maintenance of our spiritual
life, as a constant, momentary breathing to keep up
our physical life. The Christian’s life is a life of faith,
and a life of faith is a life by the moment.
VIII.
NAMES APPLIED TO THIS EXPERIENCE.
The experience is one; but it has received different
appellations, according to the prominent thought that
attends it in different cases. On account of the deeply
interior work of the Spirit—“ the life hid with Christ
in God,” the “hidden manna,” promised “to him
that overcometh,” —some writers speak of this full
salvation as the Interior Life or the Hidden Life. Be-
cause it elevates those who receive it into a spiritual
atmosphere above the range of earthhness and worldly
care, others call it the Higher Christian Life. With
others, again, the idea of rest is the prominent one—
rest from their own labours and struggles, and rest in
Jesus. These denominate it the Best of Faith. There
may be in some a slight shrinking from the positive
and unequivocal names, Sanctification, Holiness, Baptism
of the Holy Ghost. But these terms are Scriptural, and
therefore the best of all. It may be severe, but it is
doubtless a salutary test of our faith to be willing to
be spoken of reproachfully as among the Sanctified.


But let ns not be ashamed or afraid to acknowledge
with thankfulness any blessing, however great, any
salvation, however full, which is promised us in the
will of our Father. “This is the will of God, even
your sanctification.” “Holiness becometh Thy house,
0 Lord, for ever.” “Ye shall be baptized with the
Holy Ghost not many days hence.”
REMARKS.
“Thou shalt call His name Jesus; for He shall
save His people from their sins.” To he holy is not
to be perfect in body —it is not to be perfect in mind—
it is not to be infallible—it is simply to he freed from
sin.
And do those who are sanctified have no need to
watch and pray ? Yes, verily! They watch them-
selves little, but they watch Jesus much. “Lord,
what wilt Thou have me to do ? ” is their constant
inquiry. They desire a tender conscience that will
move at the slightest intimation of His will, as the
branch waves to and fro at the gentle touch of the
breeze. They watch, that nothing may separate them
from Christ. They watch, that they may retain pos-
session of the goodly land. If the enemy approach,
they watch, to be hidden in the cleft of the Rock.
And do they not pray ? Why, they-dwell in an atmo-
sphere of prayer; their life is a continual prayer.
They alone know what it is to pray without ceasing.
They, perhaps, exhibit in their prayers less agonizing,
and more resting, than others; less struggling, and
more believing; fewer importunate requests, and more
joyous thanksgivings; but none are oftener on their
knees, either in the closet or the public assembly—
whether for themselves or others —than the sanctified
believers in Jesus. And none take so much delight


as they in the prayerful perusal of the Holy
Scriptures ; they find them all aglow with the doctrine
of holiness, so precious to their souls. Every means
of grace, prized by one who is justified, is doubly
prized when he is sanctified. There is no self-
complacent resting in their state or attainments, as if
there were no further danger, and no more need of
care ; —their rest is not in what they have attained,
but in Jesus ! It is not that they have no need, but
that their need is all supplied in Jesus. It is not that
Satan has ceased to tempt them, but that they are
victorious in Jesus. It is not that they have no
sorrow, but that, in Jesus, their sorrow is turned into
joy. It is not that they have no care, but that they
cast their cares on Jesus. It is not that storms and
floods do not come, but that they are founded upon
the Rock—Christ Jesus. None so truly and so
humbly as they can adopt the language of George Fox
—“ We are nothing—Christ is all! ”
Such, reader, is this great salvation. It is for
thee, and for me, and for all who will accept it. Dost
thou believe in it ? Dost thou earnestly desire it ?
Art thou willing to pay the price of an absolute and
unconditional surrender to Christ, to obtain it ? Hast
thou faith to lay hold of it ? Then it is thine—“ and
we which have believed do enter into rest.” And
having entered in, let us not hesitate to honour our
Master, by confessing, on suitable occasions, what He
has done for our souls. “With the heart man
believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth con-
fession is made unto salvation.” We shall expect our
Saviour to confess us with His mouth before the
Father and the holy angels, for “the King shall say
unto them—Come, ye blessed of my Father,” &c.; and
shall we be backward in confessing Him with the
mouth before our fellow-men ? Our tongues must be


consecrated to him with the rest of our members.
We must render unto him the “ fruit of our bps.”
And this full salvation is the great need of the
church to-day. Christ “ loved the church, and gave
Himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it
with the washing of water by the word, that He might
present it to Himself a glorious church, not having
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should
be holy and without blemish ! ”
Such must be the bride of Christ —spotless, pure,
arrayed in fine linen, which is the “ righteousness of
saints.” When Zion shall indeed thus put on her
beautiful garments—when the Church on earth shall
awake and put on her strength—then shall she
“ arise, shine ; ” then shall she “ come up out of the
wilderness, leaning upon her beloved, clear as the sun,
fair as the moon, terrible as an army with banners.”
“ Moreover, the light of the moon shall be as the light
of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold,
as the light of seven days.”
Printed by W. R. Riley, Herald Office, Auburn-street, Goullairn.


