

ICk, lato OS PA N 8
Box II
Clmstmmti) ariir Ik iEorlk
0 -o o
INAUGURAL ADDRESS
DELIVERED BEFORE THE
ANNUAL ASSEMBLY
OF THE
Congregational Union of §onth Jln^tralia
NORTH ADELAIDE, APRIL 3, 1882
THE
REV. OSRIC COPLAND
CHAIRMAN.
PRICE THREEPENCE.
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street, Adelaide.




CHAIRMAN’S ADDRESS.
■Christian Friends—
In entering upon the duties to which you have called me I
must express the very high appreciation I entertain both of the
honour you do me and of the opportunity you afford me of
serving that part of Christ’s Church to which we belong. The
best response I can give to the former will be an earnest effort
to make use of the latter.
The subject which I have chosen for the opening address is a
somewhat familiar one ; but since it gains in interest every year
I feel that it is one not unworthy of being dealt with by the
Chairman of our Union. It may be said, indeed, that no
subject of greater importance can engage the thoughtful atten-
tion of the Christian Church in this or any age, I speak ot —
THE RELATION' OP CHRISTIANITY TO THE WORLD
It is scarcely necessary for me to say that the members of this
Council and of our Churches are in no respect responsible for
the views and convictions to which I give utterance, though I
am sanguine enough to hope that they will commend themselves
to the judgment and sympathy of all who hear and read my
words. My treatment of the subject must, however, appear
very imperfect. To deal with it at all satisfactorily one needs
to fall back upon a world-wide experience, combined with pro-
found spiritual insight, and to such I can lay no claim. At the
same time I am convinced that the Christian teacher is bound to
grapple with it, and what I have to say now is at any rate the
result of many years of anxious thought. Whether my opinions
meet with your approval or not I shall feel amply rewarded for
my effort, and fully justified for my boldness, if in any degree I
may help to sustain in your minds the grander and more exalted
conception of the life we are called to live here upon earth.
The relation of Christianity to the World appears to have
suggested a great many questions, and to have caused much
perplexity from its very first introduction. After waiting in
vain for “the end of all things,” the early Christians began to
realise that the necessities of their earthly existence still kept
them in very close contact with the world’s institutions,
amusements, interests, and employments. It was only
natural, therefore, that they should ask how, under the circum-
stances, they were to act; and early ecclesiastical history is full
of the answers given. Never, however, was the question more
eagerly put or more thoughtfully discussed than in the present


day. As a proof of this I need only allude to three series of
sermons on “ The Use and Abuse of the World,” preached in
London by several eminent men in the Episcopal Church ;to
several very able papers on amusements which have appeared in
the pages of The Congregationalist ; to the innumerable works
upon the subject of Science and Religion, issuing from Hie
Press ; and also to a recent address on “ The Stage as it is, by
that great dramatic artist, Henry Irving, whose praise at home
seems spreading in all the Churches as well as in all the theatres.
It so happens that we live in a liberal age. Traditions, pre-
judices, narrow lines, and all artificial barriers, are fast fading
away under the influence of those principles which Luther once
revived in the Church, but whose growth neither he nor the
Puritans after him could control. The spirit of free and search-
ing enquiry is abroad, and, instead of appealing to the past,,
men are bringing everything to the test of Scripture, inter-
preted in the light of a sanctified conscience. The result has,
however, greatly alarmed many good people. As they see one
after another of the old landmarks perish they lament, as Pascal
did many years ago, that, “ instead of there being an essential
distinction between the one (world) and the other, they are now
so mingled and confounded that the distinction is almost entirely
lost sight of. ” Whilst such fears as these tremble in the breasts
of some of our elders, an unwarrantable laxity too often cha-
racterises the life of many of our young people. lam sorry to
see that some of them are yielding themselves ud to the world
with all the enthusiasm of those who feel that the age is
liberating them from unreasonable restraints. To relieve
the fears of the former and recall the wandering steps of the
latter is no ordinary task ; for I cannot but admit that many of the
old positions are untenable, and many of the old arguments un-
sound. At the same time, the true method of meeting the
difficulty is sure to succeed best in the long run, and what 1
believe to be the true method I shall try to carry out in this
address.
Before we proceed further I should like you to ask yourselves
what you mean by Christianity. Some of us, perhaps, can
preach it better than we can define it. My own definition °f it
is this—a life of loyal, loving obedience to, and hearty sympathy
with, Jesus Christ, based upon an abiding faith in His atonement
for sin, a constant realisation of His presence, and a profound
admiration for His character. Christianity, of course, implies
more than this, but it is this in its essence and at its core, it
is not a set of rules, though it makes one ; it is not a creed,
though it writes one ; it is not a ritual, though it creates one :
and it is not a form, though it adopts one. Christianity is a
life—a life bearing the image of Christ—a life full of the love ol


Christ—a life devoted to the work of Christ—a life aglow with
the faith of Christ. What, then, we ask, is the relationship
which such a life bears to the world in which our Heavenly
Father has thought it wise to place us ?
Now, we shall admit that there is a sense in which Christianity
is in direct antagonism with the world—in which it would make
no compromise with it whatever—in which it is bound to over-
come it. “If ye were of the world, the world would love its
own : but because ye are not of the world, but I chose you
out of the world, therefore the world hateth you” (John xv. 19,).
“Our Lord Jesus Christ gave Himself for our sins, that He might
deliver us out of this present evil world” (GaL i. 4). “Love
not the world, neither the things that are in the world. For all
that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes,
and the vainglory of life, is not of the Father, but is of the
world” (1 John ii. 15). “Be not fashioned according to this
world” (Rom. xii. 2). This world we ought to define and set
forth in our religious chart as clearly as possible since its syren
voices allure so many upon its shoals and quicksands.
We cannot do better, then, than glance for a few minutes at
the various aspects in which the world presents itself to us to-
day as we regard it in the light of Him who once said with
deeper meaning than any of us have yet fathomed, “ I am the
Light of the world.” In that Light let us look at the great
world of Nature which has of late years become so closely
linked with Physical Science, and point out the true attitude of
Christianity towards the one and the other. Now, “ the Light
of the world” as it streams down upon our trees and flowers
and mountains and valleys and waves and rocks reveals to us this
remarkable fact—that “all (these) things were made by Him
(Christ), and without Him was not anything made that hath
been made” (John i. 3). Yes, our Lord made them, and if He made
them He loves them, and would have us love them too. Oh,
what a new meaning it gives to Nature to remember that the
hand that fashioned all her beautiful objects was the hand that
lifted the Cross for us. It follows of necessity that there must
exist a very subtle bond between Nature and Christianity.
Throughout the whole realm of the former I cannot find that
Christianity has any warning against intrusion into her mys-
teries. Rather does she encourage us to wander there at our
own sweet will. The giant peaks and virgin snows, the rushing
cataracts and swelling streams, the spreading clouds and rolling
seas, the useful herb and golden fruit, are they not the Time-
Vesture of the Eternal which Jesus Christ rather than “the
Earth-Spirit” weaves for God, sajing—
“ ’Tis thus at the roaring loom of Time I ply
And weave for God the garment thou seest Him by.”


It follows very clearly from this that the proper attitude of
Christianity toward Nature cannot be antagonistic. The same,,
therefore, must be said of Physical Science. Some Christian
men are afraid of science, but I hold that it is their scepticism
rather than their Christianity that is accountable for such fears.
The faith of a genuine Christianity has nothing whatever to
fear from true science. For, after all. what is science 1 Is it
not the thoughtful and patient study of nature—of its relations,
its order, and its causes ? Is it not the going beneath the
surface to discover the laws whereby God works ? Is it not in-
sight into God’s will ? For, as Charles Kingsley writes, “nothing
exists but Will. All physical laws and phenomena are but the
manifestation of that Will—one, orderly, utterly wise, utterly
benevolent.” What pursuit then can be more worthy of a
Christian than the scientific study of this mysterious physical
world ? The result in the end must be favourable to Chris-
tianity. “No matter,” says the author of “The Warfare of
Science,” “ whether science reveals new ideas of the Creator or
startling relations between His creatures; no matter how many
gyves and clamps upon the spirit of Christianity she destroys ;
the result, when fully thought out, will serve and strengthen
Religion not less than Science” (p. 149). Perhaps one of the
grandest contributions of recent science to the cause of Christianity
has been a re-statement of the great argument from design for
the existence of a God. The revelations of science are such
that it can be said with more truth than ever, “ The invisible
things of Him are clearly seen, being perceived through the things
that are made, even His everlasting power and divinity, that wemay
be without excuse” (Rom. i. 20). Whilst, however, science
enriches Christianity with fresh proofs and revelations of the
Father, Christianity also lays science under obligation. To
quote again the author above referred to—“ It (Christianity) has
fostered science often. Nay, it has nourished that feeling of
self-sacrifice for human good, which has nerved some of the
bravest men for these battles” (p. 9).
Between Nature and Christianity, then, we discover a golden
chain that modern science will only render more strong and
bright as it pursues its arduous and heroic path, until all
Christians have learnt the invaluable lesson that Carlyle learnt
when, as he tells us, his “heavy dreams had rolled away and
he was awakened to “anew heaven and a new earth,’ to “a-
universe not dead and demoniacal—a charnel-house with spectres
—but God-like and my Father’s.”
I shall now go on to speak of the great world of Humanity,
and ask how far Christianity affects our relationship with that.
Does it isolate the Christian from his fellow-men ? Some main-
ain that this is its tendency—that it is necessarily characterised


by an intense individualism. This is one of the great charges
brought against Christianity by the exponents of the Positive
Philosophy. But it is the very reverse of the truth. There is
infinitely more in the merciful and benevolent spirit of Chris-
tianity to link us with our race than in all the mystical theories
of Comte’s disciples. It belongs to the very genius of Christianity
to encourage love for our fellow-men —love for all men. Indeed,
Christianity in some of its aspects has not unwisely been spoken
of as “ The Enthusiasm of Humanity.” Certainly this enthu-
siasm was very conspicuous in Christ Himself. “ Love your
enemies” (Matt. v. 44), He said. And again, “ Thou shalt love
thy neighbour as thyself” (Matt. xix. 19). And again, “Go
ye therefore, and make disciples of all the nations” (Matt, xxviii.
19). What philosopher or democrat in his wildest dream about
the equality and fraternity of the race ever reached so high
a level ? Then this sublime teaching was consistently enforced
by our Lord’s behaviour towards men. Everywhere He came
into contact with people of all classes, and always treated them
in a brotherly way. Jew and Gentile, Roman and Samaritan,
publican and sinner, rich and poor, master and bond-servant,
were all welcomed by Him, and might all participate in His
blessings. Yea, He bore their griefs and carried their sorrows.
But Christianity goes still further, and teaches us the unity of
the race as nothing else does. “ God made of one every nation
of men” (Acts xvii. 26). His Fatherhood as taught by the Son
is the mightiest symbol of our unity we can ever possess. This
common parentage proves an universal relationship. It reveals to
us the fact that we do not stand alone—that we are actually part
of the great human family, and that what God has made us we
must continue to remain. “lam a man,” says the true
Christian, “ and nothing human is without interest to me.”
Another aspect of the world wherein our lot is cast is its
Social or Family life. Not unfrequently this has been regarded
as “ the world” from which we are to be severed. But the life
of Jesus, together with the teaching of the Epistles, convinces
us that Christianity finds no more congenial sphere than the
family circle. No doubt in the early history of monastical
institutions Christianity developed into something grand and
fair, but it has never appeared to so much advantage as within a
simple Christian home. Christianity finds in the family its most
congenial soil, and enjoys there its most signal triumphs. Those
conversions which the Holy Spirit brings about through the
sweet agency of the home are generally the most promising.
Indeed, I feel convinced that it is our best hope for Christianity
in the future that it will be more intimately allied with our
homes than in the past. It is true of our Lord Jesus Christ
that He remained unmarried—


“ That wedded love we prize so dear,
As if our heaven and home were here,
It lit in Thee no fire.
But who, 0 perfect, filial heart,
E’er did like Thee a true son’s part,
Endearing, firm, serene?”
Until thirty years of age Jesus Christ remained quietly at His
home among the hills of Nazareth, and it is not at all unlikely
that from His youth the responsibilities and duties of the head
of the household devolved upon Him. Then we know that
Jesus was very closely connected with that home at Bethany.
Are we not told that He “ loved Martha, and her sister, and
Lazarus” (John xi. 5). As for little children, I think Jesus
must have been exceedingly fond of gathering them about Him.
“Suffer the little children,” He said, “to come unto Me”
(Matt. xix. 14). It may also be added here that our Lord dis-
tinctly encouraged marriage. In one of His replies to the
Pharisees He once said, “Have ye not read that He which
made them from the beginning made them male and female,
and said —For this cause shall a man leave his father and
mother, and shall cleave to his wife ; and they twain shall
become one flesh ?” (Matt. xix. 4-5) If we turn to Paul’s
teaching on these matters we shall find it in perfect harmony
with the above. On one occasion, for some very special reason,
he discouraged marriage, it is true ; bat nowhere will you find
a loftier conception of the married state than in his Epistle
to the Ephesians. Does he not there declare the love of husband
and wife to be a type of that holy and heavenly love that exists
between Christ and His Church 1 After this who dare separate
Christianity from these social instincts, these family affections
that help us so much to understand the Father and the Son, and
which prepare us to take our place in our eternal home above (
“ What, therefore, God hath joined together let no man put
asunder” (Matt. xix. 6).
And now let me speak for a moment of the great world of
Business and Commerce. What has Christianity to do with
this ? It will help us very much in our reply to the question if
we bear in mind that Jesus was in business Himself until he
reached the age of 30. He was known not only as “the car-
penter’s son but also as “ the carpenter.” He probably made
chairs, and stools, and tables, and cupboards to order, and
charged the usual market prices for them. He would also help
to build houses, and take regular wages for His labour. We
ought also to remember that Paul did not hesitate, when occasion
required, to return to his trade. At Corinth he stayed with
those who worked in the same line of business as he had been
accustomed to in the past, and chose to make tents with them,


and so render himself independent of his somewhat niggardly
converts. Business, therefore, though connected with so much
that is degrading, is not necessarily so, or Christ and Paul
would have let it alone. Why, Paul goes so far as to urge it
upon the Tbessalonians as a Christian virtue that they study to
do their own business. Christianity almost seems to charge men
to enter upon the ordinary business and commercial pursuits of
life. We are, therefore, not at all surprised to find that many
of those who have ranked very high as true Christian men have
been very prominent in the mercantile community. As illus-
trations of this I need only mention such names as the Crossleys,
of Halifax ; Sir Titus Salt, of Saltaire ; Sir Edward Baines, of
Leeds; Sir Charles Reed, of London; Samuel Morley, of Bristol;
and George. Fife Angas, of South Australia. The strong, yet
sanctified common sense of these men assured them that their
faith in Christ and theirloveof righteousness did not excludethem
from the ordinary pursuits of this life. And they were right.
Christianity would go hand in hand with commerce to recover the
world for Christ. That grand missionary, David Livingstone,
never lost sight of this truth in all his wanderings, and whilst he
preached the Gospel in the heart of Africa, as earnestly perhaps
as it was preached anywhere, he did all in his power to open up
a path for trade. As the magi brought of their merchandise
and consecrated it at Christ’s cradle, so Livingstone and a
thousand others have brought of the world’s wealth and con-
secrated it at Christ’s throne, making us feel that not only is this
earth the Lord’s but also “ the fulness thereof.”
Much the same conclusion is reached if we turn to Politics.
Christianity cannot afford, neither does it assume, to ignore
them, notwithstanding the example of many of the early Chris-
tians. So far as I can judge, Christianity has never written the
words “forbidden ground” on the halls or courts of legislation,
save where the presence of the Christian compromised him with
the worship of idols. The Christian man has been called a
pledged reformer, and in remedying abuses he will find
in politics one of his most effective weapons. The preacher tells
us that “ righteousness exalteth a nation ” Then a Christian
man ought to seek righteous legislation. Let him demand both
righteous laws in his own country, and righteous transactions
also with other countries. Few have understood this matter
better than our puritan ancestors. The great Independents of
the Commonwealth fought not only for religious, but for civil
liberty as well, and I have no hesitation in saying that their
enthusiasm for the latter lent intensity to their pursuit of the
former. Of the great struggle that took place between the Parlia-
ment and Throne in 1645 the historian writes thus:—“Such were
the issues at stake, and so inextricably were religious questions inter-


woven with political ones, that it seemed next to impossible for
any man whose views were not hemmed in by his own little
parish not to take part in the far-spreading and momentous
strife” (History of Religion in England, Stoughton i. 419). I
don’t think I err when I say that most of the great religious
movements in our national history have been wedded to political
action. And I feel proud to think that the Congregationalists
have done, and are still doing, their part in maintaining this
alliance. In a recent volume of sermons on “ Church and
Chapel” preached by various clergymen of the Episcopal Church,
the Rev. R. H. Hadden, in his sermon on the Independents,
says:—“ln practice there is no religious community which
excels the Congregationalists in diffusing the Spirit of Christ
over our social, our national, and our political life (p. 29).
But we have higher testimony than this. Only last November
Mr. Gladstone, through Dr. Allon, presented to the Congre-
gational Lib ra ry at the Memorial Hall a set of his own works,
accompanied by the following note “My wish is to offer
somewhat th a t may serve to record my sense of the invaluable
service done by the Nonconformists during the Eastern contro-
versy of recent years to the cause of liberty and justice. Let
there, then, be no hesitation in our political action here. On
great public questions the spirit of Christianity prompts us to
give no uncertain sound, and occasionally no uncertain blow.
God grant that in the future history of our country we may sne
the fulfilment of the prophecy uttered, I think, by Dr. Arnold,
that “ the last triumph of the Gospel would be the triumph of
the Gospel in public administration.”
Turning from politics, we would go on to enquire what
Christianity has to say to Art and Literature. “The course of
nature is the art of God.” Through this glorious art God
reveals the hidden beauty of His Mind. But this beauty of
Mind or of Spirit as seen in God’s works is much more apparent
to some than to others, and so human art comes in to speak
of and interpret this beauty to ordinary minds. Thus it is that
in the picture, or the statue, or the poem we see more than
our own eyt s or thoughts could have revealed to us : we are shown
God’s glorious ideal beneath the actual and They belong
to the many voices in our hearts whose sound is not without
spiritual significance. Sir Frederick Leighton recently remarked
that it “is not on the wings of abstract thought alone that we
rise to the highest moods of contemplation, or to the most chas--
tened moral temper,” and that “ arts which have for their
task to reveal the inmost springs of beauty in the created world,
to unfold all the pomp of the teeming earth, and all the pageant
of those heavens of which we are told that they declare the £^ or y
of God, are not the least eloquent witnesses to the might and to


the majesty of the mysterious and eternal Fountain of alt
good things.”
“Art’s the witness of what Is
Behind this show. If this world’s show were all,
Then imitation would be ail in Art ;
. . . For we stand here, we,
If genuine artists, witnessing for God’s
Complete, consummate, undivided work.
If a man could feel,
Not one day in the artist’s ecstasy,
But every day, feast, fast, or working day,
The spiritual significance burn through
The hieroglyphic of material shows,
Henceforward he would paint the globe with wings,
And reverence fish and fowl, the bull, the tree,
And even his very body as a man.”
And is not all this in perfect accord with the spirit of Chris-
tianity ? Is not Christianity enriched by the treasures of God’s
beauty as well as by the treasures of His wisdom? It was once
said of the great statesman Burke that “his inspired fancy laid
all nature under tribute, and collected riches from every scene
of creation and every walk of artand the same thing may be
said |,to day of the inspired fancy of Christianity. 1 cannot
forbear, however, in the presence of so many preachers of the
Gospel, making a further quotation from the address by Sir
Frederick Leighton on art. “ The language of art.” he says,
“is not the appointed vehicle of ethic truths. Of these, as of
all knowledge as distinct from emotion, though not necessarily
separated from it, the obvious and only fitted vehicle is speech,,
written or spoken—words, the symbols of ideas. The simplest
spoken homily, if sincere in spirit and lofty in tone, will have
more direct didactic efficacy than all the works of all the most
pious painters and sculptors, from Giotto to Michael Angelo j.
more than the passion music of Bach, more than a requiem by
Cherubini, more than an oratorio by Handel. ” Of the connec-
tion of literature with Christianity I need say little. Its golden
streams flow deep and strong about us, bearing within their
bosoms the precious treasures of the heavenly world, and Chris-
tianity will be wise to appropriate them and make them hers.
Did not Paul introduce the treasures of an ancient literature
into his epistles, and did not our Lord Himself make use of them
in that wonderful prayer which He taught His disciples? Then,
if, as we said, Christianity is concerned with science and art,
literature is necessary to her as a medium of communication,
and as a method of instruction. Besides this has not Chris-
tianity immortalised her triumphs in the pages of literature? and
does she not fall back upon the histories of the nations for some-


of her grandest lessons? And as for the literature of song, it
has proved one of the most powerful instruments for good God
ever placed within her grasp. In regard to the daily Press we
have only to mark its vigorous attacks upon public abuses, its
stern denunciations of wrong, its attention to the sanitary
affairs of the community, its making possible the united and
concerted action of a nation, its power to kindle sympathy for
the oppressed, the bond which it creates not only among our-
selves but between different countries, and the blaze of light
which it sheds upon all our institutions— we have only to mark
all this to admit that in the daily Press Christianity may find
not a rival or a foe, but a helper and a friend.
And now I propose to deal briefly with the more vexed
question of the relation of Christianity to Amusements. Dr.
Stoughton, in his “ History of Religion in England,” tells us
that the strong popular reaction in favour of the Church at the
time of the Restoration was partly owing to the fact that “ the
sympathies of the Church were with the people in their amuse-
ments” (i. 13). Further on he says “the Puritans did not re-
cognise enough the need of providing innocent and healthy
recreations for the people. Man was regarded by them as a
creature made to work and worship—hardly ever to play .
the Puritans rushed to the extreme of putting down many manly
sports, and discouraging national pastimes, which, purified from
immorality, were adapted to promote national vigour, cheerful-
ness, and good fellowship . . . the restraints they placed
upon society in the day of their power were such, perhaps, as
more than anything else tended to alienate from them the
sympathies of a large portion of their fellow-countrymen. ” Now,
"Christianity comes as it were between the two. Whilst sym-
pathising with the people’s amusements, its aim is to purify
them from evil and regulate their indulgence in them. That
some kind of amusement is essential to a healthy body and
mind few can dispute; and Christianity, recognising body and
mind as God’s workmanship, bids us take care of them both; so
Christianity, you see, must allow for, if it does not provide, some
amusement. Recreation as found in amusement is as necessary
to our well-being as meat and drink and sleep. It is a condition
of healthy existence. We need, therefore, to be very caretul
lest we bring discredit upon Christianity by setting it, as the
Puritans were too apt to do, against the healthy instincts which
our Creator gave us. We ought also to be on our guard against
confounding Christianity with some artificial regulation of our
•own device, against making Christianity depend upon its
surroundings. Christianity depends upon faith and love, and
not upon circumstances. Father Taylor, the late sailor-preacher
•of Boston, used to allow questions to be put to him during the


service. On one occasion he had made some reference to that
sweet singer, Jenny Lind, who had just arrived in America,
when a tall person rose on the pulpit stairs and enquired
whether any one who died at one of Miss Lind’s concerts would
go to heaven. Disgust and contempt swept across Father
Taylor’s face as he thundered out at the fellow, “ A Christian
wiU go to heaven wherever he dies, and a fool will be a fool
wherever he is—even if he is on the steps of the pulpit.” We
need further, in speaking of amusements, not to confound the
actual wrong with the ideally right, lest in the recognition of the
latter, men overlook the former. We ought to discriminate and
so narrow down the controversy. I know that some regard this
as very unsafe teaching. They dare not acknowledge the good
in things evil lest the evil be overlooked, but I think the danger
of overlooking the evil is far greater when the good is not candidly
acknowledged. Besides this, the honest way is always the
safest way. If, as Henry Irving defines it, the drama is simply
“the art of human nature in picturesque or characteristic
action,” let us admit that it need not in itself be at variance with
Christianity. If graceful and rhythmical movement is both
healthy and natural, let us admit that in itself dancing need not
be out of harmony with Christianity, And if the game simply
sets our wits in motion, or gives precision and delicacy to our
touch, let us admit that the game in itself need notcome under the
condemnation of Christianity, Where, then, it will be asked,
is “ the world,” against which Christianity sets its face like a
flint—against which Christ warns us—“the world” wherein so
many are ruined and lost? Is it after all but a Puritan fiction ?
By no means. There is nothing sadder or more real in God’s
universe. “ The world hateth you” (John xv. 19), said Christ.
“ The lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the vain-
glory of life,” wrote John, “is not of the Father, but is of the
world” (1 John ii. 16). And, again—“Love not the world”
(1 John ii. 15). Now, I gather from these and similar words
that the world in its evil aspect is simply that in our institutions,
in our business, in our amusements, in our hearts that would
wean our affections from our Father in heaven. And it is
because there is so much of this in everything that it is called
“ the world. ” Whatever brings us into antagonism with God is
of “the world.” This is why “its works are evil,” why it
cannot know God or receive Christ.
To bring out this important principle let us just mention
again those aspects of the world upon which we have
touched in this address. If in our home or social life
we allow the love of wife, or child, or brother, or friend,
or parent, or lover, to interrupt our communion with our
Father in heaven, our home, though quiet and unpretentious, is


yet of the evil world, and must be resisted. If in our study of
physical science we foster in our hearts the pride and vainglory
that lead us to exclude the Creator, then our study—though
patient and profound—is undoubtedly of the evil world, and
should be corrected. If in our business we allow our whole
spirit to become absorbed, or our pursuit of gain to shut out all
higher pursuits, all the holy visions of our childhood, all un-
selfish and self-denying effort, then the evil world enters into
our business and corrupts it, and needs to be cast out. If in
politics we seek principally the emoluments of office, or the
favour of the great, or the gratification of a selfish ambition, or
the prosperity of a bad cause, or allow low party passions to
sway our actions, then the evil world can claim us as its own;
we become of it. If in literature or art we read or look at that
which stains the imagination with impure images, or raises
sensual thoughts and base desires within us, or suggests sceptic *1
thoughts of God and Christ, then the evil world has through
literature and art introduced its poison and its curse into our
soul. And if through our amusements we become unduly
excited, or averse to benevolent action, or disinclined for
prayer and meditation, or exposed to serious temptations,
then the evil world has cast its nets about us, and the sooner
we cut them asunder and escape the better. It is better
that we should deny ourselves the gratification of even a
healthy instinct than that its gratification should make us
“worldly” and imperil the soul. And it is this consideration
that impels me to make special reference to two of the amuse-
ments already alluded to above. I have admitted that
dancing considered as simple, graceful, and rythmetical move-
ment may be innocent enough ; but this only makes me the
more bold to assert that the late hours, the undue excitement,
the unhealthy refreshments, the indecent dress, and above all
the immodest attitudes of our modern round dances render
dancing as enjoyed in even Christian homes antagonistic to
Christianity, and wherever it is indulged in we enter into an
alliance with the evil world. So, also, in regard to the stage.
Admitting the definition of the drama given above to be correct,
it can scarcely be denied that the sensational plays, the exhibi-
tion of every species of vice, the mirth-provoking representations
of all kinds of villiany, the pandering to the grosser tastes of the
audience, the trading on woman’s beauty, as seen in the the-
atrical photographs of the day, the attraction which the theatre
has for the immoral and fallen, and the violation both of taste
and virtue in the vulgar exposure of the modern ballet render
the stage “ as it is,” defaced and degraded by the evil world.
It is all very well for Irving to speak of the ennobling subjects
that have “ been illustrated in the bright vesture and received


expression from the glowing language of theatrical representa-
tion.” This is by no means the aim of the modern stage,
however much Irving himself may keep it before him. Some
time ago the London Times summed up an article on “ Amuse-
ments” with these words—“ The stage not only exerts little or
no beneficial influence on the public mind, but sometimes acts,
where it does act, in an opposite direction. . . it is un-
deniable that the mirror which such representations offer to us
reflects very little which it does us good to see ” As illustra-
tive of these remarks I would refer you to the “ London Gossip”
which appeared in the Register of the 28th ult. The writer,
speaking of Mr. Herman Merivale, one of the most popular play-
rights of the day, says that his piece called “ Forget-me-not,”
owed its “ success very largely to the clever conversation carried
on between the female villian —an extremely wicked person—
and the reformed rake, who is after her, the most conspicuous
character in the plav.” And in reference to his new piece
entitled “ The Cynic,” he says it has but one really interesting
and leading personage, a kind of modern and much vulgarised
Mephistopheles, who resides in an apartment furnished in black
and red, and issues therefrom to scheme against the peace of
innocent people (too colourless to inspire respect), and to flash
about him bewildering volleys of verbal fireworks, all of
that lurid hue which might be expected from a source
absolutely and avowedly Satanic.” What Charles Kingsley once
wrote of the plays of the seventeenth century is only too true
of many of the plays in this. Their staple interest is dirt and
crime. Speaking of Shakespeare himself, Kingsley tells us that
what the Puritans “ hated in him was not his high art, but his
low art, the foul and horrible elements which he had in common
with his brother play-writers. True,” he continues, “there are
far less of these elements in Shakespeare than in any of his
compeers, but they are there, and what the Puritans hated in
him was exactly what we have to expunge.’'’ For myself, then,
I cannot see how we can patronise “ the stage as it is,” and not
involve ourselves in this evil world, and so come into antagonism
with Christianity and God. But it is urged that if Christians
would only attend the theatre it would “ soon be good enough,
if it is not as yet, to satisfy the best of them.” Don’t you
believe it. Why thousands of Christians attend the theatre to-
day, and the only result I can discover is, not that the stage
improves, or that crying abuses get remedied, but rather that
these Christian people quietly allow to their own spiritual detri-
ment what we here condemn. Is it not too true that spite
the increased attendance of Christians at the theatre, it is as
much as ever the popular resort of strange women, and that
multitudes of our young men find it inclining unto death, and


its “ paths unto the dead V’ After the recent revelations which
have been made in the daily Press about the theatres of these
colonies, I dare to say of them, what Dr. Binney once said of
the theatres of London—that it is “necessary to wink at the
attendance, or even to favour and facilitate the admission
of the frail and fallen of one sex, to gratify the depraved, or to
intoxicate and seduce the innocent of the other. ” What fellow-
ship, then, I ask, can Christianity have with such an unclean
thing 1
In speaking as I have done from this chair, of Christianity and
the world, I can assure you, brethren, that I have duly weighed
my responsibility to Christ. I have sought throughout neither
to encourage laxity of living on the one hand, nor on the other
to narrow the limits wherein the vast and far-reaching influences
of Christianity reside. It would be a real grief to me ever to
learn that the tendency of my teaching was either to cramp our
many-sided and complex nature, or to interfere with our glorious
inheritance of Christian liberty. Christianity with all its mani-
fold endeavours contemplates the fullest development of our
redeemed manhood, and the boldest use of our freedom in
Christ. But it can only secure for us the one or the other, as
it associates us with all that is true and beautiful in the world,
and severs us from what is impure, ungodly, and corrupt. And
where Christianity does this for a man we shall not complain
that there is no distinction between him and others. The line
will run through his whole life. He will shun the foul word,
the unchaste look, the wicked oath, the miserable lie, the un-
charitable remark, the impure book, the dishonest action, quite
as much as he will shun the scene of unhallowed frivolity, or
the haunt of revolting vice. And where it allows and encou-
rages his use of the world, it will yet keep that world ever in
the background, ever behind the Cross. I once saw a very
beautiful picture of the Crucifixion. In the foreground stood
our Saviour’s Cross, whilst the great city, with all its human
interests loomed in silent grandeur behind, with the shadows
settling upon it. What an illustration is this, I thought, of the
place the world should hold in our thoughts and affections,
especially in our last hour, when the shadows thicken upon
our spirits! It is there; yes, there with its struggles,
with its politics, with its social life, with its literature, with its
art, with its science, with its amusements, with its business—it
is certainly there ; but its place should be ever behind the Cross
—behind the Cross.
«n
W. K, Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street Adelaide.
