

CHRISTIAN POLITENESS
AND
COUNSELS FOR YOUTH
BY
THE CHRISTIAN BROTHERS




CHRISTIAN POLITENESS AND COUNSELS
FOR YOUTH


CHRISTIAN POLITENESS
AND
COUNSELS FOR YOUTH
BY
THE CHRISTIAN BROTHERS
A young man according to his way, even when he is old
he will not depart from it. —Prov. xxii 6.
As you would that men should do to you, do you also to
them in like manner.—LuiE vi 31.
CHRISTIAN BROTHERS
STRATHFIELD, N.S.W.
1937


Set up j printed and hound
in Australia hy
Halstead Printing Company
Ltd., Nickson Street, Sydney
193 7


INTRODUCTORY THOUGHTS
Charity, arising from supernatural and not merely
human motives, is the. real principle which should
direct our social relations with our neighbours. “As
you would that men should do to you, do you also to
them in like manner,” Luke vi. 31. “Good manners,”
says Cardinal Newman, “are the outward signs of
Christianity,” and Hilaire Belloc, the noted Catholic
writer declares;—
It seems to me
The grace of,God is in courtesy.
Young people sometimes appear to think that the
practice of politeness in everyday life suggests lack
of manliness and self-assertiveness but they learn a
little later in life that nothing is more admirable in
a youth than the attractiveness which the exercise of
courtesy gives to the truly manly character. Their
aim should be
Not only to keep down the base in man
But teach high thoughts and amiable words
And courtliness and desire of fame
And love of truth and all that makes a man.
A noted educationist stated in an address on an
important occasion: “I would willingly sacrifice half


of the learning my pupils have acquired from me if
such were necessary to ensure in them the character,
manners and tastes of a gentleman.”
To preserve ourselves from the pain of mind which
follows the discovery that we have, through ignorance,
offended against some social convention, the only safe-
guard is the careful acquisition of the necessary know-
ledge.
Maurice Francis Egan, whose book entitled A Gentle-
man can be highly recommended, says: “The only time
young people are privileged to violate etiquette is when
some older person does so; then they had better follow
bad form than rebuke him by showing superiority in
manners.” No matter how extensive the book-learning
of a young man may be, if he shows he is ignorant or
neglectful of the rules of etiquette, which all self-
respecting and cultured people observe, he will be
regarded as being badly educated.
“Manners,” said Edmund Burke, “are more impor-
tant than laws. In a great measure the law depends
upon manners. The law touches us but here and there,
now and then. Manners are what vex or soothe us,
corrupt or purify us, exalt or debase us, barbarize or
refine us, by a constant, steady, uniform, insensible
operation like that of the air we breathe in. They give
their whole form and colour to our lives.”


Most have met with the type of person who resents
the practice of a standard of manners higher than his
own as a display of self-importance and conscious
superiority. Value your own opinion more than his
and regard his intolerance as affording you an oppor-
tunity for the employment of dignified courtesy—a
practical testing of your own gentlemanliness under
provocation. An urbane, dignified graciousness of
manner will often make a convert to good manners.
Be guided by the standards of conduct and refinement
you know are sound, and do not let others order or
induce you to accept spurious substitutes. Otherwise,
as Tennyson says :
Thou shalt lower to his level day by day
What is fine within thee growing coarse to sympathize with
clay,
And the g'rossness of his nature will have weight to drag
thee down!
The formation of character must be based upon the
education of the .will, the controlling force of our
actions. The will cannot be said to be completely
educated without a full understanding of our social
obligations towards our neighbour.
Sow an act and reap a habit,
Sow a habit, reap a character,
Sow a character, reap a destiny.
A gentleman is the first to show appreciation for any
service no matter how small it may be and the last
to complain if he does not receive similar gratitude
from others. Courtesy is its own reward.


A professional man is called to give his services to a
client, or a young man enters an office for an interview
with a possible employer. His deportment, free from
over self-assurance or a timid obsequiousness, tells at
once in his favour. His speech, grammatical and free
from slang, his words undipped of their final con-
sonants, his pleasing tone of voice are further recom-
mendations. He must know exactly how to bear him-
self for
A little more and how much it is,
A little less and what worlds away!
A slipshod style of speech and the use of cheap
slang tend to lessen the self-respect of the speaker
and to discredit him in the esteem of educated people.
If we appreciate refinement we must show it in our
manner of speaking. A person who is never untidy
in his attire can give the effect of slovenliness in his
speech, and, by inference, in his thought, through care-
less enunciation. Correct speaking must be practised
in conversation with our fellow students if it is to be
effortless and almost automatic in the company of
others. A suspicion of the soundness of anyone’s
education is inevitable when he is heard to make such
errors as umberella for umbrella, droring for drawing,
feller for fellow, eh? and what? for / beg your pardon.
A young man brands himself as an inferior type in
the eyes of refined people if he disregards social con-
ventions, which, often seemingly trifling in themselves,
are most important in the effect produced on observers.
At the beginning of a professional career lack of full


knowledge of the rules of etiquette and good manners
will handicap immeasurably an otherwise capable grad-
uate. Short social shrift is given an offender and he
cannot subsequently plead ignorance as an excuse. His
ignorance makes him the more culpable.
Thoughtlessness, often accepted as an excuse for the
actions of the very young, will not be accepted in
general for him who is supposed to have reached the
age of ability to weigh values in conduct. If a boy
insists with himself on being exact in manners during
schooldays he will attain an effortless ease in behaving
correctly which will be an asset to him all his life. In
a grown youth thoughtlessness will usually be penal-
ized, in the ensuing loss of esteem of refined people,
as severely as full deliberation.
The urbanity and graciousness of the true gentleman
are evident in his relations with all, and his appreciation
of courtesy never allows him to excuse himself from
the obligations it imposes on him. Noblesse oblige
becomes the underlying mofive of all his actions; he
would scorn to lapse to a lower level of conduct. There
grows upon you in his presence the feeling of a name-
less charm in deportment, manners, speech, telling you
that you have met “one of nature’s gentlemen.” He
may move in any walk of life but the hallmark is un-
mistakable.
The true gentleman is charitable in his judgment of
others. He is ever ready to excuse the intention when


he cannot excuse the act. If in another he sees any-
thing that is blameworthy he is silent about it, unless
conscience requires him to act otherwise. He follows
in this Cardinal Newman’s well-known dictum: “It
is almost a definition of a gentleman to say that he
is one who never inflicts unnecessary pain.” When
we examine this famous saying in all its possible impli-
cations we perceive that it amounts to a paraphrase of
“As you would that men should do to you do you also
to them in like manner.” “There is no sign,” writes
M. F. Egan, “which indicates lack of culture so plainly
as the tendency to censure, to jibe, to sneer.” It is
thoughtfulness and consideration for others which
make our lives more pleasant and cheerful than they
would otherwise be.
A little thought will show any young man that, as
his parents have experience of life extending over
probably more than a quarter of a century longer than
his own, their opinions regarding the dangers of the
world must be more valuable than his could be. If
he pauses to reflect that he will probably think as they
do when he will have reached their age, he will spare
himself many a pang and useless regret for his early
mistakes of judgment. A noted author has left it on
record that during the later part of a long life he used
often to wish that he could actually be as wise as he, in
his early twenties, felt and believed he was.
A gentleman makes it his aim to place at their ease
all with whom he is associated. He adopts his per-
sonal manner to the needs of each disposition, being


kindly towards the bashful and merciful towards even
the ridiculous and absurd. He makes light of favours
when he does them while acknowledging those done to
him with a brief but definite expression of thanks. He
is scrupulous in abstaining from imputing unworthy
motives, for their actions or words, to those with whom
he disagrees, seeking as far as charity and reason will
allow him, to interpret everything for the best.
In controversy or debate a well-bred person will
be fair and generous to an opponent, will remember
that recourse to personalities or sharp sayings weakens
his case, and will not insinuate unworthy motives.
Many rules of etiquette are merely arbitrary and are
matters more of custom than of reason, but an indi-
vidual who- hopes to make a success of his career and
to reflect credit on his Catholic training cannot make
himself independent of these social restrictions. He
who disregards the requirements of etiquette brands
himself with the mark of inferiority in the eyes of
cultured people.
Correct behaviour as a settled habit becomes evident
in a person’s very appearance. His bearing, his gait,
his gestures, the customary expression of countenance,
all speak for him. This deportment resulting from
a combination of will-power, the knowledge and the
practice of good manners, proclaims the cultured gentle-
man.


A good heart and an unimpeachable character are
possessions beyond value, but a knowledge of etiquette
adds much to their influence on others. Virtue increases
its charm when it does not neglect good manners.
A person who has learned by experience the pleasures
of refined behaviour will never be likely to fall back
to a former lower level, but will rather recall with
shame the incidents of the days of his semi-uncouth
career.
An attitude of contempt for recognized rules of
conduct almost invariably arises either from gross
selfishness (the arch-enemy of Christian politeness) or
from culpable and prejudiced ignorance.
Invitations to formal functions necessitate the wear-
ing of special attire, e.g. a dress-suit for evening
functions and on some other occasions. Failure to
wear the particular attire required under such circum-
stances may imply either ignorance or disrespect to
those present.
Unimportant but temporarily fashionable manner-
isms may be safely disregarded provided that our
appreciation of etiquette is shown in our general de-
meanour. We are not expected to follow the silly
follies of the hour.
Cruel words break no bones, make no bruises, but
they may break hearts and lacerate feelings. If men


were as ready to employ their strength in inflicting
physical injury as they are to use their tongues to cut
others to the quick, human beings would be reduced to
the level of brute beasts.
Happiness, though the ultimate end of man, is not
his end here on earth.. Man’s chief end in this life
is moral growth, which is promoted by affliction and
misfortune. Questions which pertain to human affairs
must therefore not be decided exclusively from the
viewpoint of their contribution to human happiness.
Pursuit of pleasure for itself, as the main object of
existence, has vulgarizing if not degrading effects. It
dulls the sense of refinement and modesty by develop-
ing an overpowering selfishness, breaking down fine-
ness of character, which is such a great safeguard to
virtue.
The higher faith makes still the highest man,
For we grow like the things our souls believe,
And rise or sink as we aim high or low.


CONTENTS
INTRODUCTORY THOUGHTS v
I. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS - 1
11. EXTERIOR DEPORTMENT—ETIQUETTE
WHEN WALKING OR DRIVING - - 3
111. THE COUNTENANCE, THE INDEX OF THE
SOUL - 15
IV. ARTICULATION 21
V. CIVILITY—MODES OP SALUTATION-
INTRODUCTIONS 23
VI. ON RISING AND GOING TO REST - - 27
VII. THE TOILET 30
VIII. MANNERS AT TABLE 38
IX. VISITS AND VISITORS—BUSINESS CALLS
MORNING CALLS—CARDS —STAYING
VISITORS 56
X. LETTER-WRITING —NOTES OP INVITA-
TION-FORMS OP ADDRESS 64
XI. RECREATION ------ 70
XII. CONVERSATION 74
XIII. COMPLIMENTS 90
XIV. READING 91
XV. THE CHOICE OF COMPANIONS - - 98
XVI. SELF-IMPROVEMENT ----- 109
XVII. ADVICE TO STUDENTS - - - - 116
APPENDIX ------- 120


CHAPTER I
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
Politeness consists in easy and graceful manners
proceeding from a desire to please, and in careful
attention to the wants and wishes of others.
The Christian, at his entrance into society, should
be well instructed in his religious duties, and, likewise,
in those duties of politeness, without which virtue loses
much of its influence, and intellectual excellence
that respect to which it is so justly entitled.
Created to the image of God, and bound to imitate
a Redeemer whose every action was distinguished by
meekness and affability; destined, moreover, to fulfil
an important mission on earth, the Christian should be
animated with lively sentiments of benevolence to-
wards men, and should be careful that his conduct
in their regard should ever be the faithful exponent
of this feeling. If he has not the simplicity, meekness,
and dignity which should characterize a follower of his
meek and humble Lord, his deportment should be free,
at least, from everything rude, affected, or repulsive.
Man is born for society—to live and converse with
his fellow-man; therefore, in his conversation, in the
visits which he receives and pays, and in all the circum-
stances of life, he should know well the duties which
culture, reason, and religion prescribe.. The duties are ••
B


prudence in manner, circumspection in discourse,
honesty of purpose, due regard for equals and super-
iors, patience and meekness in dealing with persons of
peevish and troublesome tempers, charity on trying
occasions, a care to avoid wounding the reputation of
the absent by untruthful or evil reports, or the
modesty of those present by ill-timed praise or adu-
lation, a guard upon the eyes, a restraint on the tongue,
and the flight from whatever might infringe, in the
slightest degred, the sacred law of chastity. Such is an
abstract of the virtues to which, from infancy, young
people should be trained by those to whose care they are
entrusted. These virtues should be imprinted on the
memory and heart that they may be called into action
when occasion requires.
Parents, teachers and guardians should spare no
pains to cultivate the manners of those committed to
their charge; and young people, on their part, should
faithfully correspond with the efforts made for their
improvement. Both should remember that in early
life good habits can be more easily acquired, and
that the impressions then received will generally in-
fluence conduct and manners in after life. The pre-
cepts of a good education may sometimes appear to be
forgotten, they may seem to exercise but little influ-
ence on a young man’s conduct, but it is easy to dis-
cern, even in the midst of his greatest irregularities,
the good effects of those lessons of virtue and polite-
ness which he learned in childhood.
When Michelangelo had been several days employed
on a statue, giving what he termed a slight degree
of additional grace to one limb, and of energy to


another, a gentleman remarked to him that these
were trifles and unworthy of so much attention.
“Trifles, certainly,” he replied, “but trifles make per-
fection, and perfection is no trifle.” This observation
may be fitly applied to politeness, which manifests it-
self in a multitude of little things—such as a look,
the tone of voice, a kind word, an obliging act, an
air of satisfaction and of gratitude for kindness re-
ceived, little attentions which can be better felt than
described. Though these taken singly, may appear
trifling, yet, in the aggregate, they form the character-
istics of true politeness.
The source of. true politeness is in the heart in
which there should exist much goodwill to men and
a sincere desire to promote their happiness. When
politeness is practised in early life, it becomes a habit,
and its exercise, like that of other habits, will be
easy and agreeable. It should begin under the parental
roof and be cultivated in the daily intercourse of
domestic life. There, the passions, as they gradually
rise, can be placed under due restraint; the kindly
feelings can be most frequently exercised; the constant
interchange of good offices promoted; and the manners
formed to gentleness and courtesy.
The youth, who in the retirement of home, acts
towards his parents with reverence and love, and
towards his brothers and sisters with kindness and
affection, who seeks opportunities of rendering them
little services, and feels regret when he cannot contri-
bute to their happiness, who never indulges anger,
moroseness, or incivility, who is uniformly mild, ami-
able, and obliging, will find it easy to act in society
with sweetness and affability. On the contrary, he who


is wont to act with rudeness and incivility in the
bosom of his own family will never exhibit that ami-
able disposition, nor those polite and engaging manners,
which are so much prized in the world.
It is mentioned of a certain prelate, remarkable for
his mild and gentle manner, that, at home, in his
intercourse with his domestics, he preserved the same
meekness and courtesy which marked his conduct in
public life. Hence, he was never found to vary his
manner, but always and everywhere acted with singular
gracefulness and benignity, so as to command the
respect and win the esteem of all who approached him.
What a lesson for young people to accustom them-
selves betimes to the duties they must discharge;
never to act rudely or ill-naturedly nor to allow an
unkind look, an angry or offensive word, to escape
them; to be careful never to permit the sweet famili-
arity of domestic life to degenerate, as it too often
does, into neglect, rudeness, or incivility. They should
remember, that no courtesy can be sincere or lasting,
if the love of God, and a view to please Him, be
not its primary object. Whoever, in early life, learns
to regard God and His good pleasure in every act
of kindness he performs, will gradually be strength-
ened in love for others, and will be prompted, even
under discouraging circumstances, to render them
proper attentions.
There are two things very much opposed to polite-
ness, which, if indulged in, will prove fatal to its
exercise. The first is selfishness. The continual prefer-
ence of others, the unremitting attention to please
without embarrassing, the self-control necessary to re-
strain the heart and tongue under provocation, the


yielding, with a good grace, to humours and caprices,
and the number of little sacrifices which politeness de-
mands—all these appear intolerable to the man who
thinks only of himself, and who is a stranger to
the happiness which springs from the feeling of hav-
ing afforded pleasure to others. To a generous mind
such sacrifices become sources of pleasure, and rarely
fail to obtain many grateful acts in return from the
objects of its attention.
The second is moroseness of temper. A cheerful
disposition is a great blessing; it casts sunshine wher-
ever it appears. It contributes to the happiness of its
possessor, and diffuses joy and happiness around it.
How gloomy the condition of the house from which
cheerfulness is banished, through the angry, passionate,
or discontented temper of even one of its members!
Peace, union, and good feeling cannot dwell there;
coldness, estrangement and perhaps aversion take their
place, and the domestic hearth, which should be the
centre of light and happiness, becomes the abode of
trouble and gloom.
A person should never indulge a passion or feeling
which would occasion or increase so sad an evil. If,
unfortunately, in childhood, he has not been trained to
gentleness and piety, and later finds his temper head-
strong and violent, nevertheless, he should not despair
of its correction. As there is no natural disposition so
good that it cannot be made better, so there is none
so decidedly bad as not to admit of being improved and
corrected. He who said “Be still,” to the waves, which
instantly obeyed His voice, is ready to assist with His
grace those who are desirous of quelling the tumult
5
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS


of their passions. When evil propensities are subdued
and corrected they become means of sanctification.
Persons of very ardent and even violent tempers
have, by the grace of God and their own care and
watchfulness, become models of meekness, gentleness,
and sanctity. Of a youthful Duke of Burgundy we
read that during his early years he was an object
of alarm; that he was hard-hearted, irascible in the
extreme, even against inanimate objects, impetuous
to a degree of fury, impatient of the least control or
opposition even from season or climate, putting him-
self into paroxysms of rage that made one tremble for
his existence, stubborn in the highest degree, and pas-
sionate in the pursuit of every kind of pleasure. “But,”
adds the writer, “the prodigy was, that in a short space
of time, under the care of Fenelon, religion and the
grace of God made him a new man, and changed those
bad qualities into the opposite virtues. From the abyss
which I have described, there arose an affable, gentle,
patient, modest prince, austere only to himself, ob-
servant of his duties and sensible of the responsibilities
they entailed. His only object seemed to be to per-
form his actions as a son and a subject and to qualify
himself for the discharge of future obligations.”
Madame de Maintenon speaks in a similar man-
ner:—“We saw all those defects, which in the youth
of the Duke of Burgundy alarmed us so much, gradu-
ally disappear. His virtue kept pace with his years,
and so much had his piety changed him, that, from
being the most passionate of men, he became mild,
gentle, and complying; one would have thought that
mildness was his natural disposition, and that he was
innately good.”


St Francis de Sales was of so ardent a temperament,
that, to subdue it, he assures us, cost him twelve
years’ struggle; yet his meekness became so remark-
able, that it always appeared on his invariably serene
countenance. His appearance was so amiable and be-
nign, we are assured by his contemporary, St Vincent
de Paul, that he might have been regarded as the
living image of our Divine Redeemer.
The rudeness of others should not prevent us from
being polite to them. To treat them politely is the
best means of overcoming ourselves, and, very fre-
quently, of reforming them, whilst it secures to us
that peace of mind which springs from the reflection
that we have performed a good action.
In a certain family, there was a very disobliging
person, who would not put himself to any inconvenience
or make any sacrifice to oblige those around him. He
was so engrossed with his own little gratifications as
to be insensible to the feelings or wants of others.
Another member of the family, of a very religious
and sweet disposition, resolved to effect his reform. He
availed himself of every opportunity to oblige him,
anticipated his most trifling wants, and sought occa-
sions of contributing to his comfort. A great change
was soon visible; acts of kindness began to be exer-
cised, the disposition to do them was gradually ac-
quired, and this selfish being became afterwards re-
markable in the family for his polite attentions. The
person who had made the experiment was well rewarded
by the good feeling which the change produced, and
by the kindness which he afterwards received from the
veiy person whose disobliging manners he had thus
effectually corrected.
7
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS


To acquire habits of politeness, then, a person must
begin in youth, in his own home. He must cultivate
a deep reverence for his parents, a sincere affection for
relatives and friends, gentleness and courtesy to equals,
affability to inferiors, cheerfulness of mind, a desire
to please and oblige, a gentle, amiable manner of
acquitting himself of domestic duties, and all this, with
a view to God, and an intention to please Him. Such
a one, on entering into society, will find the practice
of politeness easy and agreeable; he will secure for
himself the respect of others, and, what is still better,
will obtain the blessing and approbation of heaven.
This chapter cannot be more appropriately concluded
than by the following extract from a description of our
Divine Redeemer’s intercourse with His apostles, by
a Father of the Society of Jesus. “They were men/'
he says, referring to the apostles, “for the most part,
without education, good breeding, or politeness; yet
never did He separate Himself from them—never did
He appear pained or dejected by their ill manners.
He instructed them with patience, reprehended them
with meekness, and gave them nothing to suffer. He
lived with them on a kind of equality, always ready
to serve them, and to receive their least services with
such sweetness and affability that hardly could it be
perceived that He was the Master.”


CHAPTER II
EXTERIOR DEPORTMENT—ETIQUETTE WHEN
WALKING OR DRIVING
Nothing contributes more to exterior dignity and
propriety of manners than exactness in preserving
the natural position and motions of the body. Young
persons are sometimes found to offend alike against
modesty and gracefulness; against the first by a bold
and forward manner, and against the second, by a silly
affectation, which renders the motions of the body
forced and unbecoming.
To lean carelessly on the elbow when speaking or
listening to others, to push anyone with it, or to
turn away, with a shrug of the shoulders, from one
who comes to address us are all contrary to good
manners. There are many ways of ridding ourselves
of troublesome or importunate persons without having
recourse to rudeness. Politeness and urbanity should
at all times be observed, and though we may avoid the
company of those with whom we do not wish to
associate, we should do so, as far as possible, without
wounding their feelings. This is in accordance with
the spirit of religion and with that principle of self-
respect by which the Christian should, on all occasions,
be actuated.
When standing, the toes should be turned out a


little, and the heels separated somewhat from each
other. The feet should not be moved restlessly from
one position to another, though, for sake of greater
ease, one’s position may be changed from time to
time.
In taking a seat we should select a high rather than
a low chair. We should not sit merely on the edge
or corner of the chair, nor throw the arm over the
back of it, nor rest the elbow on the back of another
chair to support the head, nor swing ourselves on the
chair as in a balance, nor tilt it, throwing our whole
weight on its back legs with the risk of disjointing
them. Neither must we rest our heads against the
wall-paper, thereby staining it. We should sit steadily
in a rather upright position, with the knees neither too
close nor too far asunder, and the feet neither stretched
out nor drawn in so close under the chair as to cause
the knees to project. We should not rest our feet
on the rungs of a chair, nor make a noise on the floor
by constantly shifting them. In moving our chair we
should lift it, not drag it noisily along the floor. This
is particularly necessary when rising from table, as
otherwise a most disagreeable grating sound is pro-
duced.
We should not sit with our back to any of our
company. Should we find ourselves so placed, we
should change our position immediately, offering at
the same time a word of apology. An apology is also
needed when we have unwittingly taken the chair which
has been vacated for a moment by another.
When sitting before the fire we should not occupy
an undue space, nor place ourselves in front of others


who may at least wish to see it. To do so argues
a total disregard for the comfort of others.
It would be wrong to select the best chair in the
room or an arm-chair in preference to an ordinary
one; but if invited to either we should take it without
hesitation. To take such a chair, in the first case, would
betray rudeness; to refuse it, in the second, would be
questioning the judgment of the person who offered
it. We should when seated assume an easy, graceful
posture, without carelessness on the one hand, or
formality or affectation on the other.
One should not stand while others are sitting, nor
sit while they are standing. If a gentleman who is
seated be addressed by a person who remains standing,
he should rise, and not reply in a sitting posture, un-
less desired to do so. Gentlemen always rise when a
lady enters the room.
Young people should avoid crossing their legs, keep-
ing their hands in their pockets, or assuming a loung-
ing attitude, as doing so shows want of respect for
those present. It must be remembered that, whatever
freedom we allow ourselves in this respect when in our
own homes, we must be careful to observe the strictest
decorum in church and in the homes of our hosts.
Many young persons so stoop when walking as to
appear like the aged or the feeble. The posture of
the body should be upright, the head erect, the shoulders
square, and the chest expanded. In walking, the arms
should not be swung too much, nor should they hang
stiffly by the sides; their motion should be moderate,
and the whole carriage easy, natural, and unconstrained.
A measured step, accompanied with an air of affected
gravity, is as much opposed to propriety as a careless


manner, which is the efiect of sloth or vulgarity. Per-
sons of a lively and ardent temperament should watch
over themselves more carefully than others; their man-
ner of walking, standing, and sitting should be well
regulated, and their gestures should be few, but be-
coming.
Many in walking drag, rather than lift, their feet. The
step should not be too long, nor yet affectedly short.
The pace should be moderate, without notable haste,
unless the nature of a person’s business require it.
Dignity of carriage and manners should at all times
be preserved. However, it is not meant that a young
person should assume the grave and thoughtful air of
one of maturer years; it is only necessary that his
deportment should be modest, graceful, and reserved,
without stiffness or affectation.
There is a grave demeanour which is indicative
of haughtiness; this is reprehensible in anyone but
particularly in a Christian, whose Divine Model was
“meek and humble of heart.” The exalted idea of his
spiritual origin and noble destiny, which every Chris-
tian should have, ought manifest itself in his conduct
in a sweet and amiable gravity.
There are some points of etiquette to be observed
when in the public thoroughfares:—
In walking three abreast the middle is the position
of honour. If there are only two, the person whom
we wish to respect should be placed on the right, but
when in the street, next the houses. In walking with
a lady, a gentleman always takes the kerb side. When
passing ladies a gentleman should be careful not to
force them off the path, but to take the outside himself;
neither should he break up a party by passing amongst


those accompanying one another. While talking to
acquaintances, it is wrong to block the footpath, thereby
causing inconvenience to passers-by. The common rule
of the pathway is to keep to the right, contrary to the
rule of the road in driving which is to keep to the left.
In some parts of Australia, however, the pedestrians
keep to the left. If a stick or an umbrella be carried,
care must be taken not to incommode others by our
awkward manner of holding it.
One should not so far forget himself as to whistle
in the street, in public vehicles, at public meetings, or
in any place where it may cause annoyance. The habit
of whistling is one that should be avoided, except, per-
haps, in private.
Some young persons when walking abroad, laugh
loudly and almost in the faces of those they may meet
—a strong indication of a thoughtless mind. Good sense
should teach us to have more self-respect, and more
consideration for others. Some speak in the streets
in a loud voice as if to attract the attention of the
passers-by. This is foolish vanity. The tone of voice,
whether in the street or elsewhere should be moderate,
not attracting the notice or disturbing the conversation
of others.
Formerly, when a lady met in the street a gentleman
to whom she desired to speak, the custom was for him
to walk a little way in the direction in which she was
going. This custom is less observed now. The lady
stops for a short conversation which is, by this means,
more readily terminated on both sides.
One should step into a car lightly, and, if possible,
in such a manner as not to turn the back on those
already seated. The gentleman alights first in order to


assist the ladies out. In like manner, when travelling
by rail, bus, or tram, the gentleman allows the lady
he escorts to enter first, but he alights before her. When
any lady wishes to leave a railway carriage the gentle-
man nearest the door opens it. She, on her part, ex-
presses thanks. We should be careful not to take up
a seat which has been engaged. There is usually some
article of luggage or apparel left on the seat during
absence to indicate that the place has been taken. It
is selfish to spread one’s luggage on the seats in order
to exclude others from the compartment.
A gentleman when travelling does not open conver-
sation with an unknown lady; the initiative belongs to
her—a privilege of which she should very rarely avail
herself. He may, however, inquire if she wishes the
window opened or closed, according to circumstances,
and he carries out her wish in the matter. In case
a porter is not at hand he may hand her parcels to
her when she alights or assist her with them to a
conveyance.


CHAPTER III
THE COUNTENANCE—THE INDEX OF THE
SOUL
The wise man says that a man of sense is known by
His countenance. “It is,” says an ancient writer, “the
mirror of the soul, the attestation of modesty, or the
witness of the corruption of the heart.” When our con-
duct is actuated by amiable and benevolent sentiments
the countenance is an object of edification. To render
it agreeable to others it must have nothing in its ex-
pression either severe or repulsive, nothing indicative
of levity or ostentation. It should exhibit an amiable
gravity, a pure disinterested benevolence, a calm and
thoughtful serenity, free from gloom and despondency
on the one hand, and from frivolity or dissipation on
the other.
The expression of the countenance, however, should
be varied according to the circumstances of place and
person. It would be improper and offensive to jest
and laugh whilst speaking to persons who are in
trouble, to address them in a gay or joyous tone, or to
converse with them on some sorrowful event with an
air of indifference. It would be alike improper, when
the conversation turns on amusing or agreeable sub-
jects. to assume a thoughtful or melancholy air.


With regard to his personal affairs, the truly wise
man preserves, as much as possible, a serene counten-
ance and a tranquil mind. As he ought to recognize
the will of God in all the events of life, and humbly
submit to the divine decrees, so his countenance should
ever express the calm and peaceful submission of his
soul. The countenance will, doubtless, from time to
time, reflect the inward emotions of the soul; but the
man of sense and virtue possesses sufficient self-control
to keep within just bounds his sorrowful or joyous
feelings.
In the presence of those whose age, virtue, or
station, merits particular veneration or respect, the
countenance should express kindred feelings, but with-
out childish timidity, the mark either of weakness
of mind, or of ignorance of the qualities of Christian
modesty. ;Men of advanced years or considerably
older than ourselves should be addressed as "Sir;”
from time to time, in the course of conversation,
the same mark of respect should be used. With our
friends we should preserve a gay and cheerful count-
enance, in order to contribute to their happiness and
render conversation more easy and agreeable. We should
be reserved with those with whom we are but slightly
acquainted, who are above us in station, or whose tem-
perament may not be well known to us, thus guarding
against familiarity which might not be agreeable to
them.
It may be observed that an habitual sense of the
presence of God has, in addition to the spiritual ad-
vantages attending it, a considerable influence in
moulding the expression of the countenance; for he
who is sensible of His presence, must, according to the


remark of one of the saints, feel that all the days of
his life are festive days, because he considers himself
as living in God, “in whom we move and have our
being.” He blends seriousness with joy through the
consciousness of God’s continual presence; and he
blends joy with seriousness through the firm and lively
hope that he is every moment receiving new graces
and blessings.
We should avoid wrinkling the forehead. A wrinkled
forehead is often the mark of a melancholy temper, or
of a haughty mind, which despises those whom it con-
siders its inferiors. Young people should be admon-
ished to stifle every sentiment of pride, and never to
suffer the least symptom of this dangerous vice to
appear. They should be occasionally reminded that
the poorest and most afflicted of God’s creatures have
been created by the same Almighty Being for the same
high destiny as they themselves, and have been re-
deemed with the same precious blood of the Incarnate
God; that we should regard them as our brethren
on earth, who are to be our future co-heirs in heaven,
and the representatives of Him who considers as done
to Himself the good or evil done to them. If this
salutary reflection were deeply impressed on the minds
and hearts of youth, the contempt and superciliousness
with which they sometimes treat their poorer fellow-
beings would never disgrace their conduct. How much
would the sum of human happiness be increased if
these sentiments received the attention they deserve!
The most beautiful ornament of the countenance is
modesty; it is the distinctive characteristic of God’s
servants. This modesty in the virtuous Christian suf-
c


fuses the face with a certain tinge, which an ancient
writer terms the hue of virtue. When the heart is
pure and upright, the least unseemly word or action
causes pain—a manifestation of that delicacy of feel-
ing to which the impious and gross-minded are utter
strangers.
Although the Gospel counsels us to turn the right
cheek to him who strikes the left, no one should ever
presume to raise his hand to his neighbour, under the
pretext that he ought to suffer it with patience. Of
all affronts, a blow on the face is one of the most in-
sulting; it is the effect of uncontrolled anger or of
mean revenge. He who is struck, should not, however,
avenge the wrong by a similar act, no matter what
the world may think or say. He should remember that
his Divine Master was struck on the face, and was,
during His passion, the object of blasphemy, contumely
and outrages. He should remember that the noblest
revenge of a Christian is to bear injuries with patience,
and to pardon those who insult him, thus imitating
the adorable Model of the elect, who prayed for His
enemies, and in death recommended them to the
mercy of His Heavenly Father. We cannot be always
masters of the first impulses of passion, but by watch-
fulness and restraint we shall be able to keep it under
control. Self-defence is permitted by the Command-
ments, but the right to resist must not be construed
as justifying the infliction of unnecessary injury upon
the aggressor.
Revenge was regarded even by the sages of an-
tiquity as a violent and malignant passion, and its
indulgence a proof of cowardice and weakness rather
than a mark of courage and magnanimity.


In pardoning an injury we may convert an enemy
into a friend; but though we may fail in attaining
this noble object we shall at least know that we have
sacrificed resentment to duty and performed a deed
worthy of the praise of all good men, and deserving
the approbation of God and His angels.
In Holy Writ, the eyes are called the windows of
the soul because its various feelings and emotions are
easily discernible through them. Therefore, their move-
ments should be regulated with great care. The looks
of the modest and humble are ever mild, peaceful, and
reserved; those of the proud and overbearing are in-
solent, haughty, and bold.
To turn the eyes lightly from side to side, without
fixing them on anything, is a sign of a giddy and un-
steady character. Good sense and politeness equally
forbid this fault. Some persons look at an object
with a kind of vacant stare. This may be when the
mind is very much occupied with important business,
but not unfrequently it indicates a mind habitually
distracted and incapable of attending long to any set
subject. Looking around, but especially behind one,
in church, indicates a lack of self-restraint quite out
of keeping with the reverence due to the House of
God.
To stare boldly at others is a great impropriety, but
to fix the eyes on any object calculated to sully that
purity of mind and heart which forms the Christian’s
richest treasure would not only be contrary to pro-
priety, but would also wound Christian modesty.
He who is truly grateful for the gift of sight—who
often reflects on its sublime destiny hereafter, namely,
the vision of God —“face to face, and as He is”—will


be far from making use of this precious gift to offend
its bountiful Giver. On the contrary, he will use it
as a means of serving Him and of elevating his mind
to the contemplation of that bright and everlasting
vision of which it is promised the enjoyment. The sight
of the heavens—the earth—the sea—a flower—will
remind him of his Divine Benefactor and fill his soul
with sentiments of love, gratitude, and admiration.
Happy is he who, from early life, has learned to study
well the great book of Nature and to make every ob-
ject in creation a means of uniting him more closely
to his Creator.
When in repose the mouth should not remain partly
open. An open mouth denotes feebleness of character
or possible defect in the nasal passages. In laughing we
should not make violent contortions of the face, nor
should laughter ever be boisterous. Every effort should
be made to avoid yawning in the presence of others.
Indeed it would be better to retire than, by yawning,
to give people to think that one is tired of their com-
pany. The hand or handkerchief must be placed be-
fore the mouth when yawning proves to be unavoidable.


CHAPTER IV
ARTICULATION
It is difficult to understand those whose utterance is
indistinct or who speak in too low a tone of voice or too
rapidly. In speaking, we should remember that our
object is to be heard and understood. We should,
therefore, assume a tone and manner suited to the place
and to our audience. Too loud a tone indicates arrogance
—too low a tone betrays childishness and timidity.
Avoid both extremes.
Those whose utterance is defective should endeavour
to remedy it in early life. A little care at this period
will enable them to overcome defects which do not
proceed from organic weakness or from mal-formation.
Much may be done, even in the case of stammering,
by speaking very slowly and breathing frequently and
deeply. Stammering is due, for the most part, to the
effort to speak while the lungs are insufficiently sup-
plied with air.
One general rule for improvement in articulation is
to select the words and syllables most difficult to pro-
nounce, and to continue to repeat them slowly and
frequently. The power over them will increase in-
sensibly, and the defect will in the end disappear.
Reading aloud for a short time each day to some


one capable of correcting us, or, failing such, reading
aloud alone, and watching carefully the words and syl-
lables which we are apt to pronounce indistinctly or
incorrectly, and likewise listening carefully to the read-
ing and conversation of cultivated people, are excellent
means of remedying defective articulation and pro-
nunciation.
Distinctness is much aided by speaking so that the
breath strikes against the hard palate, that is, the part
towards the front of the mouth. Speaking against the
soft or back part of the palate, besides leading to
indistinctness, injures the throat. A person should be
as ashamed of carelessness in speech as of untidiness in
dress.
22
CHRISTIAN POLITENESS


CHAPTER V
CIVILITY—MODES OF SALUTATION—
INTRODUCTIONS
It is important to remember that not only etiquette
but the law of charity itself requires us to observe to-
wards those who may have offended us, the ordinary
civilities of life. We should not, therefore, refuse to
salute them whenever we meet them.
When those who have not been on good terms
with one another meet at the house of one of their
friends, it is the worst possible form for them to mani-
fest feelings of coldness or ill-will. Respect for their
host alone—not to speak of the higher law of religion
—should teach them to repress their feelings on such
an occasion.
The modes of salutation should be particularly at-
tended to. With equals and inferiors the most ordinary
is a slight inclination of the head; with equals on
familiar terms, a gesture of the hand; and with those
who by their station or virtues are specially entitled
to respect, a raising of the hat. This last mode is
that which should always be employed when meeting
ecclesiastics and religious. The exalted dignity to
which they have been raised, and the reverence and


love we owe to Him whose ambassadors they are,
should inspire us with veneration for them. This
feeling should, as occasion arises, be accompanied with
its proper outward expression. The ring of a Bishop
is respectfully kissed on meeting him in private or
in public.
Children should be instructed to pay this tribute of
respect and reverence. As long as they respect religion,
so long will they respect its ministers. When they
cease to respect them, they will soon begin to dis-
respect religion also. It is well known that interior
respect is strengthened by its outward expression—
and the contrary is equally true.
The shaking of hands is accepted as an outward ex-
pression of affection and goodwill; hence it should
ever be an expression of these feelings, not dictated by
policy or dissimulation. In giving the hand, as in
everything else, cordiality should be evident. You will
spare the feelings more by not offering it than by
doing so with coldness and reserve. Some listlessly
extend a limp, lifeless hand; others offer but two or
three fingers: this savours of haughtiness; however,
too much vigour is to be avoided. There are some
who, unconscious of their strength, grasp the hand so
strongly and shake it so roughly as to give positive
pain.
The hand is grasped, gently pressed, and then quietly
released. A little observation of the manner of hand-
shaking adopted by people of good manners will suffice
to inform young people on this point. They should,
however, guard against affectation, and be guided
by well-established custom rather than by the silly


innovations of a season. Hand-shaking has passed
through many absurd phases.
Some persons are so ardent that they walk several
yards with the hand outstretched to meet their friend,
forgetting their awkward appearance. In parting with
one another in the street, men do not shake hands.
Hand-shaking is not indulged in so much of late as for-
merly. A gentleman never offers his hand to a lady
until she extends hers, unless they are on familiar
terms. A person should never reach his hand to be
shaken by a superior in rank, unless on terms of in-
timacy; otherwise he might seem to transgress the
bounds of reserve. If a superior reaches his hand,
it should, of course, be respectfully and cordially re-
ceived.
Should a lady bow to a gentleman acquaintance in
the street, the hat must be raised in acknowledgment.
It is also raised when two gentlemen salute each other
if either be accompanied by a lady. The gentleman
also raises his hat when the lady by whom he is
accompanied salutes her friend. If two gentlemen are
together and one of them acknowledges the bow of a
lady friend, the other also raises his hat as a mark
of respect.
The hat is also raised in the following instances:
when a gentleman apologizes to a lady; when he has
rendered her some service, such as handing something
she has dropped; when addressed by an unknown lady;
and when leave-taking. Gentlemen remove their hats
in the presence of ladies in a public lift. Remember
that a lady is at liberty to acknowledge or ignore her
acquaintances; therefore it is her privilege to salute
first. When saluting another in passing, the hat should


be taken off with the hand more remote from the
person saluted. Never merely touch your fingers to
your hat or school-cap.
A slight inclination of the head is made when pre-
senting anything to another or accepting anything
handed by another.
When a person, in company with others, meets a
friend or an acquaintance, he should not introduce the
parties to each other unless he has reason to believe
his doing so would be mutually agreeable. In making
the introduction the name of the person introduced
should always be mentioned first. If men think that
their acquaintanceship will grow with time they will
probably shake hands, otherwise they merely raise their
hats. The inferior in point of age or rank should al-
ways be introduced to the superior. The former raises
his hat slightly, but awaits the proffered handshake
of the superior in position.
A gentleman is introduced to a lady—not a lady
to a gentleman; as has been said, his name should be
mentioned first. Thus, you may say, addressing the
lady, “Allow me to introduce my friend, Mr Brown,
Miss Smith;” and then addressing the gentleman you
mention the lady’s name—Miss Smith. As a rule, on
introductions no one shakes hands, a bow being con-
sidered sufficient. However, if a gentleman is a par-
ticular friend or is intimately connected with her
family a lady may offer her hand. The host and hostess
shake hands with everyone received by them, even
those of their visitors whom they have not met before.


CHAPTER VI
ON RISING AND GOING TO REST
Sleep is necessary to our existence, but it should be
taken at suitable times, and with due moderation.
Children should be impressed with a sense of the ad-
vantages which attend early rising; it is one of the
best economizers of time; it promotes the health both
of body and mind, and assists in forming moral and
industrious habits. Sleep, if indulged to excess, im-
pairs both physical and mental energy, interferes with
the regular and efficient discharge of duty, and destroys
all relish for enjoyment except those of a coarse and
often pernicious nature. Hence, fixed hours for rising
and retiring to rest should be appointed, from which no
deviation should be allowed, unless health or some other
necessity requires it.
The sluggard seldom, if ever, prospers in business,
or attains any degree of eminence in his profession.
Many of those who have been remarkable for a healthy
old age, or for great intellectual attainments, have
acknowledged that they were indebted for these ad-
vantages, in a great measure, to early rising and to
their regularity in the distribution of time. Seven or
eight hours’ rest is as much as nature usually requires.
It should be remembered that a difference of two
hours each day in the time of rising, would, in the


ordinary average of human life, be equivalent to nearly
ten years, and, as has been well observed, “would add
ten years to a man’s really useful existence.”
Man is born to labour. The dawning of day should
remind him of this. How often is the order of nature
reversed! Much of the day is given to sleep, and fre-
quently the whole night is spent in foolish and even
criminal amusements, to the manifest injury of health,
and, what is infinitely worse, the neglect of every re-
ligious duty.
Every child should be trained to make the Sign of
the Cross on awaking, and to make an offering of his
thoughts, words, actions, and entire being to God,
by a fervent act of oblation, and with faith and humility
to beg the divine blessing and protection during the
day. He should then rise and dress modestly. He
should not at this time converse with others, or occupy
his mind with distracting affairs; his first thoughts
should be consecrated to recollection and piety.
When clothed, he should place himself on his knees,
and having recalled the presence of God, say his morn-
ing prayers devoutly. He should not permit business
or amusement to interfere with so holy and important
a duty. A Christian should never satisfy himself with
a few prayers said hurriedly while dressing. God
well deserves and strictly requires the homage of our
powers and of the affections of the heart. After
morning prayer he ought, if possible, to assist at Holy
Mass and receive the Blessed Eucharist. Whoever
has a true idea of the divine majesty of our Lord,
and of His love for man, will render Him this double
tribute of prayer and sacrifice.
Before retiring to rest children should respectfully
28
CHRISTIAN POLITENESS


salute their parents and the elder members of the
family. This act of politeness, besides being a duty,
is an excellent means of keeping alive that kindly
feeling which should subsist in the bosom of every
family.
A Christian should never retire to rest without hav-
ing adored God by humble prayer, thanked Him for
His benefits, implored His protection, made an exami-
nation of conscience in order to discover the faults
he may have committed during the day, and, after hav-
ing excited himself to sorrow for them, resolved, with
the grace of God, to spend the following day in a
manner more worthy of a child of God and an heir
of heaven. “The path of the just, as a shining light,
goeth forwards, and increaseth even to perfect day.”


CHAPTER VII
THE TOILET
Young people should be impressed with the necessity of
strict attention to all things relating to cleanliness,
whether of person or dress.
Cleanliness of person renders us agreeable to others,
it promotes cheerfulness, and is an excellent preserva-
tive of health. It bears a great analogy to purity of
mind, and naturally inspires refined sentiments and
a wholesome self-respect.
The use of the daily bath has now become almost
general and is highly to be commended, both from the
point of view of cleanliness and of health. Should
an ordinary bath not be available, a sponge bath may
be had without difficulty. Nothing is more invigorating
and healthful.
In cases of delicacy the cold bath may not be found
advisable, but in such cases the regular use of the
warm bath should be attended to. The skin plays a
most important part in getting rid of waste products
and, consequently, if its millions of little pores remain
obstructed in their functions we can hardly expect to
enjoy good health.
No matter how cold the weather may be, children
should be obliged to be thorough in their morning


ablutions. They should be taught to be liberal in the
use of water and soap so as always to be above re-
proach in the matter of personal cleanliness. How
very disgusting it is to see children whose hair, neck,
or ears proclaim neglect in this important particular.
The ears should not be cleared of superfluous wax
by means of a pointed instrument. Serious injury to
the drum of the ear has often resulted from this
practice. The ears should never be cleaned except in
private.
The hair should be scrupulously clean, and should
be kept well brushed and trimmed, and neatly arranged ;
but it should be remembered that, though a moderate
and becoming attention to the hair is necessary, yet too
much care of it, or excessive precision in its adjust-
ment, is inconsistent with Christian or religious
modesty.
The nails also require care; they should be pared or
filed regularly, but should not be cut too close. The
finger-nails should be brushed every morning with a
proper brush. If they have become blackened from
any cause they should be cleaned immediately. Their
shape should be attended to. If, now and then, the
flesh be separated from the lower part of the nail by
means of a needle-point or penknife slipped under
it, the crescent-shaped white at the root of the nail
will be preserved, and the annoyance caused by the
upturning of the skin will be prevented. The flesh
ought to be pressed back with the towel after washing
the hands. The nails should never be cleaned or pared
in the presence of others. The nails are often spoiled
in appearance by the vicious habit some people have
31
THE TOILET


of biting them. This habit is usually a sign of ill-
temper.
The teeth should be carefully brushed, and the
mouth rinsed with water, after meals. By this means,
particles of food, which would otherwise decay
and cause injury to the teeth, are removed. A soft,
rather than a hard, brush should be used for the
purpose. The teeth should not be picked with a pin
or a penknife; a medicated silk thread is safest; chil-
dren should not try the strength of their teeth by
bending or breaking with them hard substances not
meant for mastication.
Should anything have been taken into the mouth
likely to render the breath disagreeable to others, we
should endeavour to remove the ill-effects at once.
Great care should be bestowed in respect of cleanli-
ness of the feet, as nothing is more offensive than the
effects of neglect in this matter.
It is also important to attend to neatness in dress.
Our clothes should be thoroughly brushed, not showing
here and there bits of wool or traces of yesterday’s
dust; our boots, by being well polished, will be in
keeping with the rest of our attire.
Children should be careful not to forget their pocket-
handkerchiefs. This will prevent those improprieties
(particularly the offensive habit of sniffling) into
which their age and thoughtlessness may lead them.
In the use of the pocket-handkerchief, some offend
against propriety. They wave it about, or keep it
constantly in their hands, or frequently let it fall on
the ground, or lay it on chairs, tables, and other articles
of furniture. All these faults should be avoided. The
pocket-handkerchief should be seen as little as possible;
32
CHRISTIAN POLITENESS


it should be kept in the pocket and taken out only
when necessary. It should not be held merely by a
corner nor rolled into a lump, but handled gracefully
and used noiselessly, without violent action of the
hands, and returned immediately to its place. A per-
son should take care to provide himself with a fresh
pocket-handkerchief when about to pay visits or when
going into company. If the pocket-handkerchief be used
immediately before entering the house there will be
little need to use it during one’s stay, unless the visit
be a long one.
We should never handle the pocket-handkerchief of
another. Should he let it fall, it should be pointed to,
not reached to him. Modem politeness and refinement,
however, have very properly modified this rule in the
case of ladies and elderly gentlemen, and allow the
pocket-handkerchief to be handed to them.
When obliged to sneeze or cough, we should take
care, by the use of our pocket-handkerchief, to prevent
the unpleasantness to others that might otherwise oc-
cur. It is excessively rude and offensive to spit on
the floor, or into the fire, or even on the footpaths in
the streets. To spit on the floor in church is irreverent
as well as rude. When spitting is unavoidable the hand-
kerchief should be brought into requisition.
It is hardly necessary to say that the greatest care
should be taken regarding the regular and frequent
change of underwear. Those whose feet perspire in
an unusual degree should pay strict attention to this
point.
The reproach made to the Pharisees of making per-
fection consist in external observances, amongst which
D


they placed the washing of hands before meals, does
not dispense us from the duty of washing them when
we are about to sit down to table. To wash and dress
for dinner is not an ordinance of religion, but an
observance prescribed by cleanliness and propriety.
Apart from our own greater comfort, it is a mark of
respect for those with whom we associate. Further-
more, appetite is not likely to be improved if one is
obliged to sit down to table with others whose hair is
unkempt, hands unwashed, and dress untidy.
Children when old enough to dress themselves should
not be permitted assistance. It is an important part
of their training that they should be taught to dress
themselves neatly and becomingly without depending
on others.
How excessive so ever the heat of summer, it is
an impropriety to appear before anyone unless com-
pletely and modestly attired.
Rules on this subject would be quite unnecessary if
persons were only attentive to the dictates of propriety.
Too much liberty, it would seem, is sometimes permitted
in this matter, and yet reason and religion plainly
tell us that all should be done in order and with the
strictest decorum.
In the public baths, in school dormitories, or on any
occasion when necessity obliges young people to make
their toilet in the presence of others, they must be
extremely careful to see that perfect propriety charac-
terize their behaviour—mindful of the admonition of
St Paul: “Let your modesty be known to all men, the
Lord is nigh.” Needless to say, the use of comb
or powder-pad in public is quite unbecoming.


Dress
Our dress should be chosen with due regard to climate
and season that it may be a protection against the
many illnesses which follow from neglect in this re-
spect. It should, moreover, be a safeguard of humility
and modesty, instead of being an incitement to vanity
and impropriety. How far this is from being the
case is only too strongly evidenced by the excesses to
which the presen/-day fashion leads its votaries —ex-
cesses which have not only called forth the condemna-
tion of ecclesiastics, but which have even disgusted
the general public feeling. Parents who encourage or
permit undue freedom in this respect are blind to their
children’s physical and moral welfare.
Clothing, in regard to its quality, form, and general
appearance, should be consistent with the age and rank
of the wearer. It should at all times be strictly modest,
and never slovenly or untidy. The whole exterior
should exhibit great neatness and unaffected grace. The
true test of taste in dress is harmony of colour, un-
obtrusiveness of style, and suitability of material. The
real gentleman avoids all display in dress as he has no
desire that his clothes should attract particular notice.
When a person has not to leave his home or receive
visits, he may use any becoming dress. With people of
fashion, however, the lounge suit of the morning gives
way to those suitable when paying “morning calls,”
or attending evening parties. Cycling, shooting, hunt-
ing, have also their respective costumes.
The hat should be in keeping with the other parts
of the dress. It should not be worn merely perched


on the head, nor placed too far back, nor on one
side, nor so low as to cover the eyes.
The gloves also should be suitably chosen. At fun-
erals black gloves should be worn. And, generally,
when paying visits of condolence the dress should be
of a sombre tone of colour.
In visiting, the right hand should be ungloved in
order to shake hands with the hostess. In the street,
it is now the custom to give the gloved hand; the phrase,
“Excuse my glove,” is no longer heard. Formerly the
right hand glove was taken off on meeting a lady; this
is now done only by the old-fashioned.
At visits, gloves may or may not be taken off.
Should tea be served during a morning call, it is more
usual for gentlemen to remove their gloves. Gloves
are not worn by gentlemen at dinner-parties. Ladies,
on the contrary, wear them, removing them when they
sit down to dinner. It should be noted that in Aus-
tralia gentlemen rarely wear gloves, and ladies even
dispense with them on occasions when elsewhere it is
fashionable to use them.
At a formal dinner-party gentlemen wear a dinner
coat, white or black waistcoat, black trousers, and white
or sometimes black tie. A black tie accompanies the
dinner-jacket. Care should be taken that one’s shoes,
which on such an occasion are usually of patent leather,
show no trace of mud or dust.
Singularity in dress, and in the manner of wearing
it, should be avoided. The usages of the country in which
we live and of the circle in which we move, should
guide us in our choice of material and of style of
clothing. We must be careful, however, not to con-
form in all things to the customs which, at the moment,


may prevail. Fashion is whimsical and capricious;
we should not permit it to draw us into follies and
extravagances.
Be not the first on whom the new is tried,
Nor yet the last to lay the old aside.
Our dress should display neither vanity nor osten-
tation, as the man who places his delight or his ambition
in sumptuous apparel, degrades, while he seeks to
exalt, himself. Negligence, on the other hand, should
be equally avoided. It is usually the effect of sloth,
and is but too often accompanied by a neglect of per-
sonal cleanliness.. It should be remembered that an
unassuming simplicity of dress most befits a Christian.
It will serve to remind him of the modesty that should
characterize his conduct, and it will benefit others by
inciting them to follow his example.
37
THE TOILET


CHAPTER VIII
MANNERS AT TABLE
God does not forbid the relish which nature takes in
what is eaten, but reason and religion condemn sensu-
ality and gluttony. “Whether you eat or drink, or
whatever else you do, do all to the glory of God,” is the
admonition of St Paul. Necessity, therefore, should
be the motive of an action which is in itself an in-
firmity, rather than a perfection of our nature.
Food is destined for the preservation of health and
strength, but every kind of excess in its use should be
avoided. He who would preserve temperance in its
use, should confine himself, as much as possible, to
the ordinary hours of meals. Children, particularly,
require instruction on this matter, as, not foreseeing
the evil consequences, they often yield to the immediate
gratification of their appetites. Food is given to children
out of meals, but not to those of maturer years, whose
constitution or state of health does not stand in need
of such indulgence. To eat several times in the day,
and whenever one feels an inclination for food, is
detrimental to health. With regard to drink, the ad-
vantage of total abstinence cannot be too strongly im-
pressed upon youth. Apart from other considerations,
and merely as a matter of manners, it is well to remem


ber that anyone observed to have indulged too freely
in drink, loses caste completely, and is not likely,
nowadays, to be welcome in respectable society.' The
habit of self-restraint, even in what is lawful, will
grove, later on in life, a valuable safeguard against
the curse of intemperance.
Conversations whose only subject is eating or drink-
ing, are unworthy a rational being, much less a Chris-
tian. When such topics are introduced, we should
be careful not to speak of the good dinners of which
we may have partaken, and, still less, of the tables
to which we may have been invited. Conversations,
however, in due season, on matters of selecting a diet
are not here censured, because they are often not only
useful but necessary. Whosoever desires to preserve
health, without which he is more or less a burden to
himself and to others, must have regard to the dictates
of reason in the choice of food and drink.
Politeness should be observed even when a person
dines alone. On such occasions he should not seek to
free himself from those observances which intercourse
with civilized society requires. To do so would expose
him to contracting imperceptibly rude, or unbecoming
manners.
We should never fail to say grace before and after
meals; we should ask a clergyman to do so should one
be present. Much praise is due to those households
which have preserved this time-honoured custom. What
can be more unbecoming a Christian than not to invoke
the divine blessing on the food of which he is about to
partake, or not to return thanks for the benefits re-
ceived ! How can we forget that God is the Author
of every good, and that to His providence we are every


moment of our existence indebted for His preservation
and care of us?
In sitting down to meals, a person should be
neither too near the table nor too far from it. He
should not stretch back on his chair, nor yet keep him-
self bent too much forward. It is well to be a little
inclined, so that if any thing chance to fall it may not
fall on one’s clothing.
While one is waiting to be served, the hands should
be kept off the table. On no account should the arms
or elbows be placed thereon. The elbows should not be
spread out; they should be kept close to the side, but
without any appearance of stiffness or constraint. The
feet should be kept together so as not to occupy too
much space to the inconvenience of others. One leg
should not be crossed over the other.
When eating, only very small mouthfuls should be
taken. Loading one’s fork with large portions and
filling the mouth with food is excessively rude. Re-
member, the knife should never be put to the mouth.
The lips should be closed while masticating; neither
should one speak until one can do so with perfect
ease. If a person be addressed, while eating, sufficient
time should be taken to dispose quietly of the morsel
before replying. All the operations in eating and
drinking must be carried on silently. When we eat
soup, or take a drink, there must be no noise made by
the lips, nor gurgle in the throat. Noise made by the
lips when eating is very objectionable.
In drinking, a wine glass should be taken by the
stem in the right hand. You must not take long
draughts at a time, much less throw back your head
and invert your glass till it assumes an almost upright


position. Do not fill your glass to the brim. Do not
address another who is in the act of drinking. If a
fly or piece of cork gets into your glass do not blow
it out or remove it with your fingers.
It is vulgar to play with the salt-cellar and spoon,
knives, or forks, to finger the cloth or the crumbs
which may have fallen on it, to sponge up the crumbs
on your plate with a piece of bread, to tattoo with
your fingers on the table, to look curiously at the
plates of others, or to scrutinize others while they eat.
Be careful in eating not to strew your place with
bread-crumbs or fragments of any sort.
If you cannot avoid coughing at table, turn your
head slightly aside and place your handkerchief before
your mouth. It would be very rude to cough across
the table or to the discomfort of those near you. When
obliged to use one’s handkerchief at table, one should
do so as quietly as possible.
The knife, fork, or spoon must not be allowed to
fall upon or rattle against the plates, nor must a noise
be made scraping up the last morsel as if one’s object
were to clean the plate. It is well not to eat so very
sparingly of a dish as to make it appear that you did
not like it.
The handle of the knife and of the fork should be
held in the palms of the hands, not in the fingers after
the manner of holding a writing-pen. They must not
be used to gesticulate with in the exercise of one’s
descriptive powers. Never make a thrust with your
fork for bread.
You should not speak across your neighbour to a
third person, nor stretch your arm across him to pro-
cure anything for yourself or others. You should


politely ask him to “pass” the article to you, that is,
if the attendant is not present to do so. Do not hand
your plate to the attendants; they will perform their
duties unassisted by you. It is not usual to thank
those who wait at table. However, when they pick
up anything you may have dropped, or perform any
special service, a simple “Thank you” will be expected.
If you find anything amiss with your knife, fork,
spoon, or plate, quietly draw the attendant’s notice to
it and the article will be changed. On no account is
it to be wiped in the serviette or table-cloth. Of
course, never wipe your fingers in the table-cloth.
Should you find anything disagreeable on your plate
remove it quietly without drawing the attention of any
of the company to it.
Help yourself with the knife, fork, or spoon placed
for the purpose. Take salt only with the salt-spoon
and butter with the butter-knife. In taking butter at
breakfast put a small portion on your plate, but do not
spread it over a slice of bread. Break the bread into
small pieces and butter each piece as you require it.
Do not, at breakfast, bite off a portion of bread.
When, as at afternoon tea, thin slices of bread and
butter are served, you may double them in your fingers.
It is vulgar to drink from your saucer. If anything
you drink is too hot, do not blow upon it but let it
cool. The process of cooling may be aided by moving
the liquid to and fro with the spoon. The spoon should
rest in the saucer, never in the tea or coffee cup. The
custom of putting the spoon in the cup as a sign that
one has finished is out of date. Whoever presides at
breakfast or tea will take charge of your cup when


sent to be replenished. You need not empty it of any
tea or coffee grounds that may remain in it.
If a separate egg-cup is not supplied for each egg,
do not crush one egg into the empty shell of another.
We should never take a bone —even of game—in our
fingers to pick it; we should simply remove the flesh
with knife and fork.
Do not use a tooth-pick at table unless it is absolutely
necessary to do so; and then conceal the act as much
as possible. Do not let its irritating click be heard, nor
make a noise by sucking your teeth. You must never
make your fork do duty for a tooth-pick.
Should a bone or other such substance get into your
mouth, it may be ejected on the fork held to the lips
horizontally. It would be extremely rude to spit it
on the plate.
The Formal Dinner
When dining out, it is very important to arrive in
good time. It is quite sufficient to arrive within five
or even ten minutes before the hour named. A quarter-
hour’s grace is understood between the hour appointed
for dinner and the time of actually serving it.
On arrival, the guests leave hats, overcoats, cloaks,
and wraps in the hall or place appointed, in charge of
the servants. They are then shown to the drawing-
room. Should a gentleman be accompanied by a lady,
he allows her to precede him upstairs and to enter
slightly in advance of him.
It is well to remember that a guest should first pay
his respects to the hostess, though in doing so he
must pass by others whom he knows. Having been
greeted by the hostess —and probably by the host


shortly after—he may pay attention first to the ladies
and then to the gentlemen of his acquaintance who are
present.
During the few minutes which elapse before the
announcement of dinner he will be told by the hostess
or host what lady he is to take to the dining-room. If
strangers to one another, he is introduced; he bows,
but does not shake hands.
In going down to dinner, the host offers his arm to
the lady of the highest importance present, the others
follow, the hostess being last, accompanied by the
gentleman of highest rank. Each gentleman should
offer the right arm to the lady assigned to him. How-
ever, if doing so should place her next the balusters
in descending the stairs the left arm should be offered
in order that she may the better protect her dress.
The place at table for each guest is indicated by the
servant or perhaps by the host himself. Sometimes —
it is now the preferable plan—the names of the guests
are written on cards and laid at the allotted places.
Each lady sits at the right of the gentleman who
escorts her, and claims his attention during the meal.
It should not be forgotten that guests meet for a social
function and not merely to eat. They should, there-
fore, find agreeable subjects for conversation. One
may admire the flowers or other table decorations, but
the viands must not form a subject. It is well also to
avoid subjects of a political or controversial nature, as
they frequently give rise to heated discussions.
When invited out to dinner or evening entertain-
ments the members of the same family should converse
with the rest of the company, not with one another.
One should not be in haste to sit down, but should


wait until the host or hostess gives the signal. When
all are seated, the guest takes the piece of bread con-
tained in his serviette and places it on one side, and
then partially unfolds his serviette and places it across
his knees. It should not be shaken out and fastened
to the buttonhole as of old. The fingers and mouth
are wiped with it when necessary, and it is applied to
the lips before and after the act of drinking. It should
be used sparingly and gracefully, and not as related
of some rude people, much after the manner of a towel
to mop the face. A guest does not, at the end of
dinner, fold his serviette, but simply places it loose on
the table.
Bread is broken —never cut —at dinner. Only a
small portion should be taken at a time, in order to
avoid biting off what we require.
The menu card should be consulted in order that
we may know what courses are being served, and we
should decide at once which dish we prefer. We should
also decide promptly when wines are offered. It is
not necessary to partake of every course, but it is
better not to decline a number in succession as the
hostess might think her dinner not acceptable. One
can easily take a little, at least, of a dish while waiting
for another. No sign or gesture of impatience should
be manifested even should there be undue delay on
the part of those serving.
Dinner begins usually with oysters or other hors
d’ceuvres, as the preliminary courses are called. Oysters
if served on the shell, are taken with a fork—the shell
may be steadied with the left hand, or. both fish-knife
and fork may be used. Oysters are not cut but are
taken whole. Pepper, and lemon which is squeezed


over them, are served with them. The fork will usually
be sufficient with hors d’czwures.
Soup should be taken with the soup-spoon —not from
the point, but from the side, near the point; the spoon
should not be filled. Avoid putting your arm round your
soup-plate. If the soup-plate be tilted, it must be
from the point nearest the eater; the spoon must be
supplied by a movement from the eater, not towards
him. Soup should be tasted before salt is added.
Coupes are now used for soup so that the balance may
be drunk as from a cup.
Fried croutons are frequently served with soup;
however, if not served, do not break your bread into it.
A second helping of soup or fish is not taken.
When helped, it is not necessary to wait until others
are served. Do not begin until the vegetables, etc., are
served. You should eat slowly, but should aim at not
being last.
Fish is served after soup. Steel spoils the flavour
of fish, and, therefore, should not be used unless it is
stainless steel. Formerly fish was eaten with the fork
held in the right hand and a piece of bread in the left,
but the use of silver or plated fish-knives and forks
has now become general. Bread is always eaten with
fish.
Entrees generally follow fish, though in some cases
they are served after the joints. The dishes are pre-
sented, as is everything at dinner, except wine, at the
left-hand side. This enables the diner to help himself
conveniently with the right hand, or with both hands
if necessary, by means of the spoon and fork placed
for that purpose.
Care should be taken to help oneself without dis


turbing those sitting near. Entrees are eaten with a
fork if a knife can be dispensed with. Sweet-breads,
cutlets, and such like require fork and knife. When
the joints, game, and poultry are served, it is usual
to wait until the proper sauce and vegetables are
handed.
The knife and fork, when laid down during the meal,
are placed on the plate, one towards the right and the
other towards the left. If a second helping is taken,
they are left thus when removed by the waiter, but
when one has finished with them they are placed side
by side. Do not, in intervals of eating, place the knife
and fork with their tips resting on the edge of the
plate and the handle resting on the table, like oars
projecting from a rowing-boat.
After the entrees and joints, follow sweets and
cheese.
In dealing with sweets, a fork will generally be
found sufficient, but if they are accompanied by juice
or syrup, as is sometimes the case with pastry and
compotes of fruit, a dessertspoon will be necessary.
In some circles both spoon and fork are used, but the
use of either one or other is fully permissible.
There is often a difficulty as to the use of knife,
fork, or spoon. As a general rule, a knife should
not be used if a fork will suffice, nor a spoon if a fork
will serve our purpose.
Jellies, blanc-mange, and ice pudding are taken with
the fork or spoon. Ice pudding is eaten also with an ice-
spoon. Fruit-stones may be conveyed from the mouth
to the plate by means of spoon or fork; they should be
placed at the side of the plate. When fruit-stones are


large, they should be separated from the pulp of the
fruit on the plate, and not taken into the mouth at all.
Cheese is cut small and put with a knife on a piece
of bread or biscuit, and conveyed to the mouth with
the fingers which should not, however, touch the
cheese. The fashion of eating cheese from the point
of the knife has died out except among the old-
fashioned. Cheese straws are eaten with the fingers.
Savouries are eaten with a fork. Celery, watercress,
asparagus, corn in cob and artichokes are taken with
the fingers.
Asparagus is sometimes served with sauce poured
completely over it. It is then eaten with a fork; other-
wise it is taken by the stalk in the fingers and the
points dipped in melted butter.
When potatoes are served in their jackets a plate
should be placed to receive the skins. The fingers
should not touch the potatoes when peeling them. Peas
are eaten with a fork.
Before dessert is served, a dessert-plate with finger-
bowl and d’oyley, and a silver knife and fork are
placed before each person. If ices are served there
will also be a glass plate with d’oyley underneath, on
the dessert-plate.
The knife and fork are placed by the diner to the
right and left of the plate respectively; if ices are
not served the d’oyley is placed on the left-hand side
and the finger-bowl upon it.
Grapes and plums are taken with the fingers. When
the pulp has been extracted, the skin and seeds are
removed as unobtrusively as possible in the hollow of
the hand and placed on the plate; they should not be
allowed to fall from the mouth.


When strawberries are served with the stems, they
are taken in the fingers singly and dipped in sugar
and cream which are served with them. If the straw-
berries are served free from stems, they may be
crushed in the sugar and cream and taken with the
spoon.
Almonds, olives, raisins, cherries, currants, and
gooseberries are taken in the fingers. The skin and
stones may be dealt with as are those of grapes.
Bananas are peeled with the knife and fork, and taken
with the fork. Apples and oranges are halved, then
quartered; the pulp is taken with knife and fork. Pears
are cut in halves and peeled. Peaches and apricots
are peeled with knife and fork; some persons take them
in the fingers and peel them. Pineapples are taken
with knife and fork, and melons with spoon and fork.
After partaking of dessert the fingers are dipped in
the finger-bowl and wiped in the serviette.
The young guest should be acquainted with the
various glasses which form part of the “cover,” that
is, the dinner service laid for each diner.
A long-stemmed glass with wide, shallow bowl, or
else a small tumbler, is used for champagne. A green
or rose-coloured glass for hock; a small, ordinary glass
for sherry. A claret-glass is midway in size between a
sherry and a champagne glass. There are usually three
glasses laid for each diner according to the wines
served.
Liqueurs are given in tiny glasses with coffee.
Sherry is offered after soup; hock or Chablis with
fish; claret or champagne during the other courses;
claret, port, etc., with dessert. Claret, not champagne,
B
49
MANNERS AT TABLE


is the usual after-dinner wine. Cocktails are usually
served before the guests go to the dining-room.
The fashion of serving a multiplicity of wines is
giving way to the use of only a few. Many take only
one kind, and happily many persons take only water
or fruit cup.
Too much cannot be said on the necessity of extreme
moderation in the use of wine—not only from the
religious viewpoint, but also from the fact of dis-
grace attaching to anyone showing the least sign of
excess. Those who have adopted the wise safeguard
of total abstinence need have no difficulty in asking
for water. The attendants will supply any mineral
required.
“Taking wine” with people is now wholly out of
fashion. Toasting is also a thing of the past.
The terms “Port wine” and “Sherry wine” are vul-
gar ; “Port” and “Sherry” are used.
The ladies leave the dining-room at a sign from the
hostess to the principal lady guest. All the gentlemen
present stand while they leave, the gentleman nearest
the door holding it open while they pass out and closing
it after them.
Formerly, gentlemen spent a long time over their
wine and cigars, but this practice has changed. Fifteen
or twenty minutes is long enough for them to remain
before joining the company in the drawing-room. The
gentleman of highest rank leads to the drawing-room;
the host follows last. Coffee and liqueurs are served
in the drawing-room.
Though occasionally, especially in crowded assem-
blies, it is permissible, when there is urgent cause, to
leave the company unnoticed, this is not permissible at


a formal dinner. One should not leave a dinner-party
without taking leave of the hostess, unless doing so
would entail great inconvenience, such as sending a
servant for her. He should express his thanks —not
for his excellent dinner, but for the enjoyable evening
—and give his reason for withdrawing early. He may
then say good-bye to any others of his acquaintance
near, but he should not make the round of the rooms
to do so. It is needless to say that no one should make
an early departure; without substantial reason. It
would not be becoming in the younger guests to make
the first move towards departure—this should be left
to some of the older people present.
The host, or some member or intimate friend of the
family accompanies the guests to the door, when
leaving.
Small Dinner-parties
At small family dinners the soup, etc., are sometimes
handed round from one to another by the guests them-
selves. It is the custom to serve the ladies first.
When wines are passed round, the gentlemen, in the
absence of servants, attend to the ladies they have
escorted to dinner before helping themselves. Ladies
do not help themselves to wine.
On these occasions particularly, one should be care-
ful to see that those near are supplied with salt, pepper,
etc. Before helping oneself from the salver, the wants
of those adjacent should be attended to.
If, at a small dinner-party, there is time to shake
hands with acquaintances, it is correct to do so; but
when there is no good opportunity, an exchange of


bows, either in the drawing-room or when seated at
table, is sufficient recognition for the moment.
Should a guest arrive when the others are seated he
should not disturb them by a general handshaking—
a bow is sufficient. In like manner, should affairs
oblige one to leave before the others, he should do so
without disturbing the rest of the company. A word
of apology to the hostess is, however, requisite. The
terms of intimacy with those present and the particular
circumstances of the occasion must guide the departing
guest as to whether he may go without taking leave of
each one or not.
The duties of the host are; to carve well, preserve
a calm temper, and to evince a desire to place every-
one at his ease.
Though the details of the art of carving cannot be
entered into here, a few remarks on serving may prove
useful.
In helping soup only one ladleful should be served,
and less should be given as a helping to a lady.
Fish should always be helped with a fish-slice.
Beef and ham should be cut very thin; mutton some-
what thicker. Sauce should not be poured over fish
or vegetables, but alongside them.
The choice parts of fowl are the breast and wings—
the latter are usually served to ladies.
Helpings should be rather small than large; it is
vulgar to heap the plate with meat; a second helping
can be given if necessary.
The host should see everyone attended to, but should
not press anyone who has declined a second helping.
He should not praise a particular dish—the excellence
of everything at the table is taken for granted


He must not relinquish his knife and fork until all
his guests have finished.
He should not, during dinner, reprehend any of the
attendants for a mistake; he may, if necessary, call
them over and speak to them in a low tone.
At fashionable dinners it is usual to have the carving
done by attendants at side tables.
The hostess seldom carves, but she foresees every
want, and must be able to witness an accident with
stoical calmness.
The duties of every young person at table may be
summed up as follows. Select, if left to your choice,
the lowest place, but accept even the highest if
assigned to you; sit in a becoming posture at the table;
say, recollectedly, The Grace Before and After Meals',
be moderate in the quantity of food, and avoid all
avidity in the manner of taking it; let there be nothing
rude or affectedly polite in your demeanour; be atten-
tive to the comfort and convenience of others; let your
whole conduct be amiable and obliging; do all things
quietly and unostentatiously. In fine, treat those with
whom you associate in the manner recommended by
Our Lord, and you will not be likely to fail in the kind-
ness, courtesy, and respect which you owe them.
Afternoon Teas —Luncheons
At afternoon teas, the gentlemen present must make
themselves useful. They must be attentive in handing
cups, sugar, cream, and cakes to the ladies present.
Only when others have been attended to, may they help
themselves.
They should rise whenever a lady enters the room,
and also when one leaves, the gentleman nearest holding
53
MANNERS AT TABLE


the door open for her. Should he be asked to see her
down stairs she precedes. In fact, in entering and
leaving rooms ladies always precede gentlemen.*
When opening or closing the door, the handle should
be completely, but quietly, turned and the door closed
without the least rattle. Should anyone be passing out-
side at the time, the person closing the door should do
so gently, so as not to seem to close it in the face of
the passer-by. A door should not be closed, but held
open when a person is immediately followed by another.
Young people should be prompt to advance and open
the door for those who are elderly, whether ladies or
gentlemen.
A guest invited to luncheon does not inquire if the
hostess is at home, but says to the servant, “Mrs
expects me to luncheon.” Should he be on sufficiently
intimate terms to attend uninvited, he makes the usual
inquiry, “Is Mrs at home?”
Guests on arriving are conducted to the drawing-
room as at morning calls. Gentlemen leave their hats
and sticks in the hall. During the few minutes which
elapse between the arrival of the guests and going in to
lunch, the hostess should make strangers acquainted.
The introductions may be general; for instance, of one
gentleman to Mrs A , Mrs B , Mrs C ;
separate formal introductions are unnecessary.
The same formality is not observed in going in to
luncheon as at dinner-parties. “Shall we go in to
luncheon?” the hostess will probably say to the lady
of highest rank, who accordingly leads, the other ladies
following singly or in pairs, the hostess being last. The
* When descending any steep narrow stairs, such as that on
tram cars, where there may be danger of accident, the gentle-
man precedes.
54
CHRISTIAN POLITENESS


host, if present, and the other gentlemen follow. Guests
may sit anywhere they please. It is better, however,
for gentlemen not to group themselves together, but to
sit here and there round the table. Sometimes the
hostess, who occupies the top of the table, makes a
suggestion as to those who will take the principal places.
Luncheon is generally served within ten minutes of
the arrival of guests.
A late-comer is ushered into the dining-room and
his name announced. He should quietly make his way
to the hostess, shake hands, and offer a word of apology.
The hostess does not rise unless the new arrival
be a lady.
On leaving the dining-room, the hostess gives a sign
to the principal lady guest, and the ladies leave in the
same order as that in which they entered—the gentle-
man nearest the door holding it open. Should the host
be present, the gentlemen may remain for a short time
in the dining-room before rejoining the ladies. Fifteen
or twenty minutes is the usual time spent in the
drawing-room before departure. Coffee is generally
served in the dining-room, but sometimes in the
drawing-room.
Persons should be extremely careful not to call at
lunch-time unless they are perfectly certain of their
welcome. They should not accept invitations given by
the younger members of the family who may act with-
out the knowledge of their parents.
In taking leave, one’s first duty is to the hostess,
and then to any of those present with whom one has
conversed, a word, bow, or handshake being given
according to circumstances; but it is not necessary to
take formal leave of everyone present.
55
MANNERS AT TABLE


CHAPTER IX
VISITS AND VISITORS—BUSINESS CALLS—
MORNING CALLS—CARDS—STAYING
VISITORS
Justice, as well as charity, requires that we visit our
relations and friends, when they are sick, afflicted, or
in trouble. We should also visit in their trials those
with whom we may have had any misunderstanding, if
we can reasonably believe that our visit will be accept-
able. The Gospel commands us to love our enemies.
When can we so well comply with this duty, as at the
time they are labouring under afflictions? Even pagans
regarded it as a virtue worthy of man to do good to
those who injured them.
Justice requires that we visit our superiors at stated
times, to testify to them the respect and confidence
which they have a right to expect from us. Pupils
returning from boarding-school should visit their parish
priest and their old teachers. Charity requires us to
visit our inferiors, in order to edify, instruct, or con-
sole them; .or to render them such assistance as they
may require.
In all our visits, we should imitate the example of
our Saviour, our Master and Model. If He entered
the house of Zacheus, it was to bring salvation to that
house; if He visited Martha and Mary, it was to


snatch from the arms of death the brother whom they
loved; if He offered to go to the house of the cen-
turion, it was to effect a miraculous cure: thus, all the
visits of our Divine Redeemer were accompanied by
acts of beneficence. He is our Model; hence, our
visits should be neither idle nor useless.
Visits should not be made at meal times, nor at
hours inconvenient to the parties visited. People who
have little to occupy their own time, frequently and
unreasonably trespass on the time of others, and ren-
der themselves troublesome by their long and unsea-
sonable visits.
On arriving at a house, a person should not announce
himself by a loud knocking at the door, nor should he
speak in a loud tone of voice when his knock or
ringing of the bell is answered. Rapping at the door
should be done gently, yet so as to be distinctly heard.
A bell should not be rung with violence; between the
first and second rap or ring, a sufficient interval should
elapse to allow for the approach of a person to open
the door. It is not proper both to ring and knock.
The hat should be taken off on entering, and the
boots should be wiped on the hall-mat before pro-
ceeding to any of the apartments of the house.
While standing in the hall, it is exceedingly improper
for a visitor to hum a tune, speak loudly, finger the
furniture, or gaze through the windows.
A person should not enter a private apartment with-
out giving notice in some way, even though the door
should be open. A slight knock will suffice.
When we call upon another at his private office, the
hat should be taken off. If we find the person we want
to see, engaged with others, we should not interrupt


him, but remain at a distance until he is disengaged.
If invited to a seat, we should accept it.
Should others converse amongst themselves, we
should be careful not to listen, but to remove, if pos-
sible out of ear-shot. We should not stare at others,
nor scrutinize the furniture, pictures, or other decora-
tions. Should any letters or such papers be lying about,
we must be extremely careful not to let our gaze fix
itself upon them. If shown a paragraph in another’s
letter, we must confine our attention to the portion
intended for us, and not manifest curiosity regarding
the remainder of its contents.
The tone, language, and manner of a young person
during his visit, should be modest, respectful, and
indicative of quiet self-possession. With superiors, he
should be careful to avoid familiarity on the one hand,
and too much ceremoniousness on the other: the one
might be considered obtrusive, the other might em-
barrass. He should not prolong a visit beyond the
time which politeness, or the business he has to trans-
act, requires.
In visiting persons of distinction, he should sit while
the person visited sits, and rise when he rises. When
the person visited rises from his chair, this act should
be regarded as a signal for departure, and the caller
should never remain one moment longer than he seems
to desire. It is no small mark of politeness, and of
prudence too, -to know the exact time when our com-
pany ceases to be agreeable.
It is a great incivility to allow unnecessary delay in
receiving our visitors. If occupied, we should send
some person to receive them and pay them the neces-
sary attentions until we are disengaged. If the person


called on be writing when visitors enter, he should not
cover his paper or close his blotter so as to indicate
a fear that they would look into his private corres-
pondence.
When a person cannot remain with his visitors as
long as civility would dictate, he may, after a short
conversation, beg leave to retire, without even conceal-
ing that he is at the moment seriously engaged with
business which will not admit of delay.
We should receive our visitors with frankness and
cordiality, during their stay, manifest an interest in
their conversation, and, at their departure, accompany
them to the door. In seeing visitors out, the door
should not be closed until they have made their final
adieu. Dignitaries and public functionaries are dis-
pensed from these last ceremonies. They usually pull
the bell that the servant may attend as the visitors
leave.
Business calls are made in the forenoon when the
caller should send in his card. Calls of ceremony,
except when made by those on very intimate terms
with the family, are not made in the forenoon. In
fashionable circles, “morning calls’’ are made in the
afternoon between 3 and 6 o’clock.
On arrival at the house, the caller inquires if Mrs
So-and-so is at home. If the answer is in the affirmative
he gives his name, with the prefix Mr, or whatever
title he may possess, to the servant. He does not give
his card, unless acquaintanceship with the hostess is
very slight.
If he carries -an umbrella it is invariably left in the
hall. Formerly, hat and stick were left in the hall
only on the occasion of a formal invitation to dinner.


luncheon, etc. Nowadays, however, they are very gen-
erally left there also at “morning calls.” Elderly people
still observe the old custom of bringing them into the
drawing-room, and either holding them or putting them
in some convenient place, usually at the suggestion of
the hostess.
The servant leads the way to the drawing-room, and
announces the visitor. The right hand should be un-
gloved and free, in order to greet the hostess, who
advances partly down the room to meet her visitors.
Having shaken hands with her—the hostess always
gives her hand on such occasions—he greets any of his
friends who may be present, merely bowing to those
with whom he is only slightly acquainted.
The caller should not be precipitate in taking a seat,
which should be taken near the hostess. During his
visit he should enter into conversation with those near
him, although he may not have been introduced. The.
fact of meeting at the house of a common friend is
sufficient for the occasion. He must not, however,
whisper, or converse privately, or in a language not
generally understood by those present.
When in company he may not open his letters with-
out obtaining permission, nor take up a book for the
purpose of private reading. Should other callers enter,
those present should not leave immediately, lest it
might appear that they wished to avoid the new-comers.
When, however, one has stood up to go, it is better
to do so, as there is an awkwardness in resuming one’s
seat.
The minimum time for a morning call is a quarter
of an hour; the usual duration is from twenty minutes


to half an hour. However anxious he may be not to
outstay his time, the caller must not consult his watch.
Prolonged leave-takings should be avoided. A gentle-
man should not put on his hat until he reaches the
hall; it should never be worn while in the house, in
the presence of ladies.
The gentleman caller leaves on the hall table, as he
goes out, a card for the master of the house. As he
has seen the hostess, it is not necessary to leave one
for her. If he has seen both he need not leave any
cards. A lady caller leaves two of her husband’s cards.
In case the lady called upon is “not at home,” a
gentleman leaves two cards—for host and hostess; a
lady three—one of her own and two of her husband’s.
Cards are also left within a week or ten days after
an entertainment, such as, a reception, concert, dinner,
etc., to which one has been invited, whether the invi-
tation was accepted or declined. Except after an
invitation to dinner, they are merely handed in, without
any inquiries for the lady of the house.
Persons about to leave home for a long period,
sometimes write the letters, P.P.C. in the corner of
their cards. These are the initial letters of the words
pour prendre conge (to take leave). Such cards and
those returning thanks for kind inquiries may be sent
by post, as it may be impossible to make a personal
call; otherwise cards are not so sent.
On learning of the bereavement of any of our
friends, cards should be left promptly, and a call made
on receiving a card of thanks. Congratulatory visits
also should be made soon after the event which calls
for them.
In leaving a letter of introduction a card is left with


it. They should be simply handed in without inquiries.
It is sometimes better to send such letters and card by
a servant. To make a formal visit in order to deliver
it in person would expose one’s self to the danger of
an unkind reception. The person to whom the letter
is addressed might regard it as unwelcome, and might,
perhaps, inadvertently, show his dissatisfaction. By
handing it in with one’s card, the recipient will have
time to reflect and decide on the most courteous re-
sponse. In all probability he will call next day, or
leave his card; his attentions are then to be returned
within the week.
When a stranger comes to reside in the locality it
devolves on the residents to call upon him. Such visits
should be returned within two or three days.
A call should be made within a week or so to friends
with whom one has dined, or from whom one has re-
ceived an invitation to dine.
Cards should be of correct size and shape, and be
of the best quality of paper. The name with Mr, Sir,
or other title should be engraved, not printed. The
address is usually given in the left-hand corner, but
if not, it can be written in pencil, as occasion requires.
Ladies’ cards are larger than those of gentlemen.
Young ladies have not cards of their own. Their names
are engraved beneath those of their mothers. To
ensure correctness of style, it is best to have cards
supplied by a first-rate stationer.
“Staying visitors” should not forget ■to greet the
members of the household every morning on first meet-
ing them. They should be careful not to injure their
host’s property, for example, dog-ear his books or pick
his flowers without leave. They should be scru-
62
CHRISTIAN POLITENESS


pulously on their guard against the slightest manifesta-
tion of censoriousness, and endeavour to interpret every
word and act in the best light. They should ascertain
the “rules of the house,” and always endeavour to con-
form to them. If any plans for entertainment fall to the
ground it is better to observe silence regarding them.
At their departure, visitors should bestow liberal gratu-
ities on those attendants who have waited on them
personally.
They should, moreover, retain a grateful remem-
brance of their visit, being assured that nothing is more
despicable than to enjoy a man’s hospitality and after-
wards to abuse his friendship or his confidence. On
their return home, they should not delay in acknowledg-
ing their indebtedness by letter. Visits of this kind are
seldom prolonged beyond a week.
63
VISITS AND VISITORS


CHAPTER X
LETTER-WRITING—NOTES OF INVITATION—
FORMS OF ADDRESS
We often require to communicate our thoughts in
writing; therefore, we should endeavour to acquire
facility in English composition.
To write well, two things are necessary; a knowledge
of the principles of grammar, and a careful study of
the works of some good English authors. No amount
of good sense can entirely compensate for the want
of these things.
Among the several methods of acquiring a pleasing
style, transcription is recommended. Reproducing a
paragraph from memory, immediately after having read
it, then comparing it with the original, and continuing
this practice until a close resemblance is produced, is
also a good means of attaining success. This,
however, requires patience, and a perseverance not
always to be met with. The most practical method,
provided the individual can spell correctly and construct
sentences grammatically, seems to be to write his re-
flections on some matter or fact about which he has
been reading. This exercise, continued from day to
day, will not fail to give much facility in composition.
The style should be simple, natural, and interesting,
free from everything affected or pedantic, and suited


to the subject and to the person addressed. With
superiors, it should be grave and respectful; with in-
feriors, affable and kind; with equals—particularly our
friends and kindred-—it should be easy, lively, and
agreeable. Our letters ought to express what we would
say to our correspondents were we speaking to them.
They should be written in terms more polite, if possible,
than those used in conversation, because we can more
easily weigh our expressions in writing than in speak-
ing.
As to the arrangement, if the letter is to be written
on several topics, the most important should be reserved
for the last, so that the interest of the reader may go
on increasing to the close. This arrangement, however,
must depend, in a great measure, on circumstances, and
on the turn of thought of the writer. When all the
subjects are well considered in the first instance, each
will be likely to find its proper place, and there will be
no difficulty in selecting suitable expressions.
Letters of business should be short, precise, and to
the purpose, no preambles, no long details; everything
should be clearly and distinctly stated, so as to leave
no doubt of the intentions of the writer, and no room
for future misunderstandings or litigation. Business
letters are generally sent in oblong envelopes; square
ones are preferred for private correspondence. When
one is writing on business matters, the name of the
person or firm is usually placed at the head of the
letter. In private letters, it is put in the left-hand
corner at the end of the letter. Private letters should
never be written on paper with business heading.
Business letters and letters to those with whom one
is only slightly acquainted should begin, “Sir,” (or
F


“Madam”) ; “Dear Sir” (or “Madam”); and should
conclude with “Yours truly;” “Yours very truly;”
“Yours faithfully;” or “Yours respectfully.” To
friends one may conclude with “Believe me, Yours
sincerely,” or “Yours affectionately,” according to the
terms of intimacy existing.
In the case of companies the superscription should
run thus:—
Messrs Clery & Co.
James White & Co., Limited.
Except in business letters, abbreviations should not
be used. “Mr” and “Esq.” must not be used in the
same address. “Mr” is used in addressing business
letters even when “Esq.” would be used if writing to
a person’s private address.
Invitations should be replied to without delay. An
invitation to dinner should be acknowledged on the day
of receipt, or the next day at furthest, as otherwise
the hostess may not be able to fill the places of those
declining. No one should attend an entertainment after
having declined an invitation to it. In replying, the
lady of the house should be addressed.
Formal invitations are usually written in the third
person, and should be replied to in the third person.
Thus:—
Invitation
Mrs Blank requests the pleasure of Mr Dash’s com-
pany at dinner on Tuesday, the 14th March, at eight
o’clock.
Reply
Mr Dash has much pleasure in accepting Mrs Blank’s
kind invitation to dinner, on Tuesday, the 14th March.
66
CHRISTIAN POLITENESS


In accepting or declining an invitation, the present
tense, not the future should be used. If declined, the
reason should be stated. The expression “Presents
compliments” is now out of use. The letters R.S.V.P.
(Repondez s’il vous plait) is also falling into disuse.
“An answer is requested” is sometimes substituted,
and is written in the left-hand corner of cards of
invitation.
Many people dislike post-cards. At all events,
nothing should be written upon them of a private char-
acter, as otherwise much offence may be given.
In writing to a friend staying on a visit, the letter
should be addressed c/o (care of) the owner of the
house. It would be taking a liberty to address it as if
your friend were the proprietor.
Only the best notepaper should be used. The address
is usually embossed or printed in simple characters;
over-ornamentation should be avoided. Men should
use only white or cream-coloured paper and black ink.
When it is considered advisable to enclose an addressed
envelope, Esq. need not be written, after one’s own
name.
A letter requiring an answer should receive a prompt
reply. On this point politeness requires despatch. The
folding of a letter is a matter of consequence. A letter
should be so folded as to show the address of the
writer immediately it is unfolded. Letters to digni-
taries or notes of invitation should be sealed with
wax; in other cases, gum or wafer may be used. Letters
of introduction should not be sealed, but should be
giVen open to the person introduced. The address of
a letter should be written legibly, to prevent mistakes
in delivery.


It should hardly be necessary to observe, that no
one should ever read a sealed or unsealed letter not
addressed to him. The secret of letters should be
inviolable. If a letter addressed to another be found
open, the finder should seal it and forward it to the
party addressed.
From what has been said, it is plain that the writer of
a letter should consider well beforehand what he intends
to write; that he should arrange his subjects in order,
but without formality; that the style should be simple,
unaffected, and appropriate, the folding and the sealing
neat, and the signature and address written most
legibly. Attention to these things in early life will
create a methodical habit, and prevent much waste of
time in after years. A carefully written letter will be
a welcome gift to a person’s friends, and impress on
the writer’s correspondents a favourable opinion of
his politeness and education.
A letter to a Cardinal would be superscribed: “To His
Eminence Cardinal N.N.” It would begin with: “My
Lord Cardinal,” and end with: “I am, My Lord Car-
dinal, Your Eminence’s most obedient servant, .”
He would be addressed in conversation as “Your
Eminence.”
The Apostolic Delegate is addressed as “Your Ex-
cellency,” and correspondence is directed to: —
His Most Reverend Excellency ,
Apostolic Delegation,
North Sydney,
New South Wales.
When writing to an Archbishop address the letter as
follows:
68
CHRISTIAN POLITENESS


The Most Reverend (P. Clune), D.D.,
Archbishop of (Perth),
Archbishop’s House,
(Perth, W.A.)
Begin the letter thus: “My Lord Archbishop,” and
conclude with the words: “I am, my Lord Archbishop,
Yours most obediently, N.N.”
The above method of address will be used also when
writing to a Bishop. The only alteration is the word
“Bishop” for “Archbishop.”
If you have to speak to an Archbishop, address him
as “Your Grace,” and address a Bishop as “Your
Lordship” or “My Lord.”
Other dignitaries have their correspondence ad-
dressed respectively to: —“Right Reverend Monsig-
nor,” “Very Reverend Dean,” “The Venerable Arch-
deacon,” “Very Reverend Canon.” Such letters may
terminate: “I am, Dear Monsignor” (or equivalent),
“Yours most obediently and respectfully.”
When writing to a priest begin your letter thus:
“Dear Rev. Father,” or if you know him personally:
“Dear Father (Brown).” When addressing the en-
velope write: “Rev. (J. Brown).” Add the letters
P.P. to the name if he is a parish priest.


CHAPTER XI
RECREATION
Recreation should occupy a portion of each day, in
order that the mind may unbend after serious applica-
tion, and the body be refreshed after fatiguing employ-
ment. God, sensible of the weakness of man’s nature,
authorizes the relaxation necessary to repair and main-
tain that strength which serious occupation tends to
weaken.
The consecration of the seventh day after the Crea-
tion is a figure of the repose after labour which man
is privileged to enjoy. Our Lord Himself interrupted
His laborious missions to procure His apostles a short
but necessary respite, and the faithful, while yet ani-
mated with the fervour produced by His visible pres-
ence, devoted certain times to joy and relaxation. Their
joy was pure, without alloy; their relaxation partook in
nothing of indelicacy which has so sadly characterized
these latter times.
The amusements of a Christian should be regulated
by necessity, and should never transgress the bounds
of moderation. Health is often injured by confinement
in an unwholesome atmosphere. Many a life would
be saved if persons only attended to those simple things
—the air they breathe and the water they drink. Young
men engaged in sedentary occupations should find time


for some bracing exercise in the open air, such as a
game of football, tennis, cricket or handball. Exhila-
rating amusements of this kind develop and strengthen
the physical powers. The delicate ought not to join
much in field sports, excitement and fatigue being very
injurious for them.
A young person should be guarded as to the games
in which he takes part. With regard to out-door games,
which in themselves are healthful, he should see that
the time chosen does not interfere with his religious
duties, and that he conducts himself with courtesy and
good temper in the excitement of the contest. He
will be particularly on his guard respecting all sports
or games which involve anything in the nature of
gambling. Playing for stakes has led, times without
number, to the absolute ruin of the young. To-day the
spirit of gambling is more rife than for many years
back, and is daily producing disastrous results.
When one joins in any game for lawful amusement,
he should never allow himself to take unfair advantage
of his opponent. If he lose, he should take the result
calmly without betraying loss of temper; on the other
hand, should he win, he should not be vainly self-
satisfied at his success.
Children should be obliged to confine their recreation
to the place allotted to them; they should not, at school
or at home, be allowed to romp over rooms and up and
down stairs, indulging in horseplay, showing not the
slightest heed of injury to valuable furniture, etc. They
should not be allowed to cut their names on walls,
desks, or tables; to throw books to their companions,
instead of handing them. They should, even in the


most exciting moments, observe a courteous manner
towards those who may be associated with them.
Walks taken to places of special interest are a useful
form of recreation. When visiting museums and pic-
ture galleries, one should not point with stick or
umbrella at the various objects of interest. Sticks and
umbrellas are usually left at the entrance in charge of
an official.
It is impolite to point at a person of whom you
are speaking. Should necessity oblige you to point at
a distant object use your hand, not merely one finger.
Whenever the finger must be used, let it be the index,
not the little finger or thumb.
Conversation forms the most ordinary recreation
after meals. It should be cheerful, without levity, and
useful without seriousness or ostentation. We may
laugh, for there is a time for laughter; but our laughter
should be moderate and discreet. To laugh boister-
ously is rude; to laugh without reason is folly; and to
laugh indifferently at everything betrays levity and
imprudence.
Singing is an amusement agreeable to ourselves and
to those with whom we associate. A song of two
verses is sufficient. If the hearers desire more, they
will ask for it. It is to please others, not himself, that
a person sings. Before beginning, it is well to consider
whether the words are in any way inappropriate to the
occasion. A young gentleman has been known, who
so far forgot himself as to sing a humorous song
in the presence of an eminent lady to whose personal
defects the allusions applied, by which unfortunate mis-
hap all the company present were put to much confusion.
Many “comic” songs are intolerably vulgar.


If requested to play or sing, a person should not
refuse unless he is unable to comply. To refuse in
order to evoke repeated importunities is an exhibition
of vanity. A person should not be asked more than
once after a first refusal, which may arise from modesty
or hesitation, but the second refusal should be regarded
as final. In private company, the manner of the singer
should harmonize with the words and the intonations
of his voice, and, except perhaps in humorous songs
he should avoid action. When used, gesture should
be neither violent nor affected.
When accompanied, it is necessary for the singer
to thank the pianist at the conclusion of the song. Should
a gentleman be seated near a lady who is asked to play,
he should assist her by turning the pages of the piece.
The company should listen attentively to the perform-
ance.
At concerts, persons should not enter or leave while
an item is in course of performance. When one is
applauding, a clapping of the hands is sufficient, and
it should not be too loud. It is vulgar to applaud by
stamping or by making noise with one’s stick.


CHAPTER XII
CONVERSATION
Persons living in the world are, by the force of circum-
stances, obliged to see and converse frequently with one
another. Our conversations, whether of necessity or
recreation, should be marked by discretion, modesty,
and decorum.
According to the advice of the Wise Man, we should
weigh our words with weights of gold; and as we
attach great value to this metal, and use it with economy,
so, likewise, should we weigh well all the words we
utter, and not use them extravagantly or imprudently.
The good and upright heart suggests pure and vir-
tuous language, while the mouth of the corrupt utters
words of death.
Conversation, besides the pleasure it affords, is one
of the easiest and most natural means of acquiring in-
formation. It makes us acquainted with men and
their opinions, and with much that is useful respecting
the transactions and business of the world, its laws
and government. We learn many things which might
otherwise escape our notice. By communicating to us
the opinions and sentiments of others, it enables us
to form a standard by which we may estimate our own.
Through the mutual interchange of thought, which
conversation affords, we add to our stock of informa


tion, and make even our recreations contribute to our
improvement.
But notwithstanding the advantages it affords, con-
versation may be productive of very serious evils, as
there is nothing in which men permit themselves so
much liberty. “The tongue, though a little member . . .
is a world of iniquity;” “He who offends not by word,
is a perfect man.” The Royal Prophet prayed that a
guard might be placed on his mouth to preserve him
from the excesses of the tongue. How necessary it is,
then, to make ourselves acquainted with the rules of
conversation.
Truth
Truth is the first quality that should mark our
language. On no account should we utter a falsehood,
or be guilty of dissimulation or duplicity. The holy
old man Eleazar preferred death to dissimulation, and
St Cyprian the Martyr would not preserve his life at
the expense of truth. A lie is always sinful and de-
grading, and children, by not reflecting on the evils of
lying, too often become deceitful and insincere. “The
life of the liar shall be without honour; confusion
shall cover his face.” The prophet David admonishes
us that, if our days would flow happily, we must be
careful not to contract the disgraceful habit of lying.
The liar is guilty of many indiscretions, hurtful to
himself and his neighbour; if his honour is compro-
mised by a falsehood, he will not hesitate, on occasions,
to betray the secrets of his friends, or even sacrifice the
character of a neighbour. And what follows? The
liar is soon detected, his reputation is then tarnished,
and all confidence in his integrity destroyed; if some


of his friends still appear to confide in him, we may
reasonably question their prudence or their sincerity.
Equivocations are much to be condemned, because
they confound truth with and are used
for the purpose of shielding the liar from merited re-
proach. They are a species of falsehood, equally pro-
scribed by honour, politeness, and, above all, by the
spirit of the Gospel.
Newsmongers by profession are often untruthful.
We should never relate news, of the truth of which we
are not well assured. If it is doubtful, we should mention
it as such, and not attempt to add to its interest by
false or improbable narrations.
In a solemn inquiry once held by Cardinal Colonna,
the word of the youthful Petrarch, who, from his child-
hood, was known to have a sincere regard for truth,
and an utter abhorrence of falsehood, was as satisfac-
tory to his Eminence as the sworn testimony of the
other domestics. “As to you, Petrarch,” said the Car-
dinal, “you need not swear; your word suffices.” Hence
the advantage of a habit of truthfulness; but to acquire
this habit one should make it an inviolable rule to
speak with all sincerity on every occasion.
We should be careful to redeem, in due time, the
promises we have made, for few things render a man
more contemptible than breaches of his word. How-
ever, if honour and good breeding require this fidelity,
prudence equally requires that we never make promises
until we duly consider their consequences, and guard
against the inconvenience and embarrassment which
too great a facility in promising sometimes occasions.
We ought never, even in jest, use disguise or dis-
simulation. To Aristotle, the prince of heathen philoso


phers, is attributed the following apophthegm: “I re-
spect Plato, I respect Socrates, but I respect Truth still
more.”
Means of Rendering Conversation Agreeable
To profit by conversation, we must guard against
absence of mind and inattention to what is said, and
must treasure up every sentiment and opinion worth
preserving; while, to render our conversation agreeable
to others, we must have our mind well stored with
ideas, particularly on those subjects which form the
ordinary topics of conversation in society. We must
also have a command of language, with a certain grace-
fulness of delivery, without which our opinions, how-
ever just and well expressed, will lose much of their
value.
Correct pronunciation, grammatical construction of
sentences, suitable gestures, earnestness without vehem-
ence, and a certain ease and sweetness, blended with a
calm and modest dignity, contribute very much to en-
force our opinions and to impress our sentiments on
the ‘minds and hearts of our hearers.
“A well-educated gentleman may not know many
languages—may not be able to speak any but his own—
may have read very few books. But whatever language
he knows, he knows precisely; whatever word he pro-
nounces, he pronounces correctly; above all, he is
learned in the peerage of words; knows the words of
true descent and ancient blood at a glance from words
of modern canaille.”*
Few, it is said, possess all that constitutes the cor-
* Kuskln.


rect and agreeable speaker; but every one can, by
reading, observation, and reflection, combined with (!■'■
desire of rendering himself agreeable, considerably im-
prove his conversational powers, and become a welcome
member of any company which his station in life may
permit him to enter.
Conversation is sometimes rendered dull and uninter-
esting for want of suitable and pleasing subjects. On
going into company, a person should make choice of a
few, which, as occasion offers, he may be enabled to
introduce. He should relate but few anecdotes and
these should be short, should have connection with the
previous remarks, and be suited to the company. When
anything is mooted which seems to excite general in-
terest, another subject should not be proposed until that
under consideration is exhausted, or ceases to attract
attention.
For the most part people like to talk of their own
affairs. Conversing with an author, one has only to
inquire of his new book, with an artist, of his last
picture, with a student, of his approaching examination,
in order to give rise to a flow of ideas. To converse
too much, however, with persons on those subjects
alone which are familiar to them, would make
it appear as if one doubted their abilities, and
was desirous of ascertaining the full extent of their
information. St Francis Xavier used to treat with
sailors regarding the affairs of a sea-faring life; with
merchants, of their merchandise; and so on, gradually
conducting the conversation of men of all classes to
some religious topic in the end.
Another method of enlivening conversation, and one


which in the domestic circle would be exceedingly valu-
able, is for one person to read a paragraph or byo
from a book, continuing until some opinion or senti-
ment elicits remark, and becomes the subject of dis-
course. The reading should then be discontinued, its
object having been attained. Should the conversation
again grow dull, the reading might be resumed until a
similar effect is produced. Conversations of hours’
continuance, and of very improving character, have
frequently been known to originate in this way.
A really polite person will take care to address, indi-
vidually, a portion of the conversation to each member
of the company. This tends to engage the interest of
all, and to compliment each by the attention which is
paid him. It is an act of politeness briefly to mention
the subject of conversation to those who enter a com-
pany during its progress.
Titles are not frequently repeated in conversation.
They hamper too much that freedom of speech which
is so necessary to a pleasing intercourse. It is difficult
to speak with ease to him who stands upon a more
elevated plane. Even the King is only addressed “Sir”
in private, and the Queen, “Ma’am.” Those holding
important rank are well aware that obsequiousness is
ignoble and unmanly; they, therefore, prefer to come
to a common level with their interlocutors. Moreover,
respect can be manifested in the looks and tone of voice
quite as well as by words.
We should be reserved in the company of those with
whose character, profession, or circumstances in life
we are unacquainted, lest we say anything calculated to
wound or give offence. Once introduced to a person,
79
CONVERSATION


we should take care to remember his name, so that in
any future interview, we may know how to address
him.
Profane and Uncharitable Language—
Witticisms —Slang
Persons are sometimes met with who make a boast
of their irreligion. The word of God itself does not
escape their infamous raillery. The society of such
should be shunned, for, as St Paul says:—“Evil com-
munications corrupt good manners.” The state of such
persons is deplorable, for they glory in their sin, in
thus making the holy things of God the objects of their
ribald jests.
Religion, its ministers, ceremonies, and practices
should always be spoken of with great respect and
veneration. The fault of an ecclesiastic, whether real
or imaginary, should never be made the subject of
conversation. The noble sentiments of the Emperor
Theodosius ought to be ever present to our minds: —
“If I saw an ecclesiastic commit a fault, I would in-
stantly conceal it beneath my royal mantle.”
Not only should oaths, blasphemies, and imprecations
be banished from conversation, but the company of
those who utter them should be cautiously avoided.
There are other expressions, too, though not equally
criminal, from which we should carefully abstain; such
as, using unnecessarily, and without due respect, the
holy name of God; forms of expression resembling
oaths, etc. The profound reverence which every Chris-
tian should have for the Sovereign Ruler of the uni-
verse forbids the thoughtlessness and levity with which
His holy name is so often pronounced. Such levity


leads to indifference and often ends in habitual pro-
fanity. Conversations which tend directly or indirectly
to wound Christian modesty should never be tolerated.
A virtuous person is pained at the bare thought of
listening to such discourse.
It is contrary to true politeness, as well as to Christian
charity, to speak ill of our neighbours. Slander, al-
though unhappily so frequent in conversation, is none
the less criminal and indicative of a base and envious
soul. To repeat what we have heard from the mouth
of the slanderer is most blameworthy. We should put a
favourable construction on what we have heard; if
we cannot do so, we must believe there is a mistake,
and remain silent if we cannot excuse. To “do to
others as you would wish they should do to you,” is
a maxim containing all that is necessary to guide our
conduct relative to our neighbour’s reputation —a
maxim often repeated, but seldom acted upon.
It manifests great ill-nature and a great want of
charity to laugh at the mental or bodily defects of
others. We should remember that we ourselves are
full of imperfections, and that our defects, if not ex-
actly similar to those we ridicule, may, perhaps be
more discreditable. In ridiculing others, people often
only expose their own failings. An uncharitable jest
may excite laughter; its sting will not be forgotten.
It is rude and unfeeling to say that such or such a
one is lame or humpbacked in the presence of per-
sons who may be afflicted with a similar deformity. We
should be still more cautious not to upbraid those with
whom we converse about their faults or follies, nor to
use towards them injurious or contemptuous words,
nor to make remarks which we must know will give
Q
81
CONVERSATION


them pain. Irony, in addressing others, or in speaking
of them, should not be indulged in; mimicry should
also be avoided. We should never turn any of the
company into ridicule, so as to amuse ourselves or
others at their expense. To do so would be contrary
to religion, good nature, and propriety. “Mimicry, the
favourite amusement of little minds, has ever been the
contempt of great ones. Never be guilty of it your-
self, nor encourage it in others. It is the most illiberal
of all buffoonery. It insults the person you mimic,
and insults are seldom forgotten.”
If jesting be permitted, it should never be applied
to holy things; it should never attack reputation, merit,
nor the memory of the dead. It may be innocent, and
often is, but to be so many precautions must be used.
In good society, the punster is the greatest annoy-
ance. He generally endeavours to monopolize the con-
versation and expects that every one in the company
should be lost in fits of laughter at the little sallies of
his so-called wit. If he were to utter some rational
sentiment, if he were to adhere to some fixed opinion,
one could understand him, and either approve of his
views or strive to combat them with fair argument;
but, unfortunately, his principles are as changeable as
the colours of the chameleon. Every circumstance
furnishes him with matter for the exercise of his silly
fancy, and the most useful observation of a dissentient
auditor is straightway turned into ridicule. The pun-
ster may pride himself on the character of being a
gay and pleasant trifler, but assuredly he cannot com-
mend himself to the esteem of those whose opinion
is worthy of any regard. It is not, however, to be
supposed that a moderate use of witticisms is objec-
82
CHRISTIAN POLITENESS


tionable; on the contrary, it is both enlivening and en-
tertaining, but there is a very great difference between
what is occasional and what is frequent and unseason-
able.
The frequent introduction of proverbs is also unde-
sirable. Very often it is not as easy as it appears to
show the exact sense and the true application of those
wise old sayings.
It is impossible for those who indulge in the use
of slang terms to preserve an elevated tone of thought.
Unmeaning phrases ought to be avoided. A person
says, “It is awfully hot”—“frightfully dull,” when, in
point of fact, there is nothing awful or frightful about
the matter in question. Many expressions that are
objectionable and inelegant are frequently heard, such
as, “beastly dull,” “rotten,” “you bet,” “all jolly rot” —
phrases not particularly striking as examples of refine-
ment. There are numbers of others, but for the sake
of propriety we pass them over. Words are not to
be uttered at random, but weighed with judgment.
At all times, our diction should be pure, simple, and
intelligible—free from foreign, obsolete, or vulgar
phrases. If a chaste, correct, and beautiful style of
speaking be acquired in early life, it may easily be
retained ever after, but negligence or indifference in
youth, either in choice of words or the manner of
arranging them, will not, without much difficulty, be
overcome in later years. A certain person, who was
remarkable for the accuracy and elegance of his expres-
sions, was asked by a friend how he had acquired the
habit of speaking so correctly. He replied that from
his boyhood he accustomed himself to speak so, and
that it had later become quite natural to him, and
83
CONVERSATION


required no effort on his part. He said, moreover,
that he believed it would cost him as much effort to
speak incorrectly as it would a negligent speaker to
express himself with accuracy and propriety. “Choose
that which is best; custom will render it easy and
agreeable.”
Discretion in the Use of Words
To speak indiscreetly is to speak without reflection on
any subject that presents itself, to speak when we
should be silent, or to utter foolish or extravagant
sayings. Those who speak much are generally incon-
siderate in their language; the desire of speaking causes
them to talk utter nonsense; it rarely happens that
much talk is not attended with many faults. We should
restrain the tongue if we do not understand well what
is said, or know what to reply. We should observe
the times in which we may discreetly join in conversa-
tion, for it is levity and imprudence to express our
ideas at every moment. Our words, as the Apostle
advises, should be accompanied with grace and sea-
soned with wisdom.
To listen prudently, avoiding absence of mind or
inattention, is very important. The most refined and
agreeable compliment you can pay to others is to take
an interest in what they say. The best rule for young
persons in society is to listen a great deal, to speak
little, and always to the purpose. The babbling of a
thoughtless youth is very tiresome.
Avoid long sentences and roundabout forms in saying
what may be concisely expressed.
Talking of yourself in company is an impertinence.
Your affairs are of little concern to others, and they


should be kept secret As to the affairs of others, be
not inquisitive about them. In talking of matters that
in no way concern you, you may commit blunders,
and, should you wound anyone’s feelings, you run
the risk of losing his esteem. It is an intolerable vanity
in a person to praise himself or to contrast himself
or his conduct with the person or conduct of another.
Those airs of presumption and self-sufficiency, which
are so frequently assumed for the purpose of impress-
ing others with an idea of our importance, defeat their
own object, and excite the ridicule of those who witness
them. “Let another praise thee, not thy own mouth,”
says Solomon, “a stranger, not thy own lips.” A man
who praises himself shows clearly that he deserves
contempt.
However, we may speak at large of the virtues and
good deeds of others, taking care to avoid everything
like adulation and flattery. The praises bestowed upon
ourselves we should receive with modesty and thankful-
ness. It would be folly to get into ill-humour with
those who praise us, particularly if we deserve their
commendations owing to some action which we could
not well conceal.
Some take offence at the praises bestowed on others
or endeavour to derogate from them by speaking of
their foibles and weaknesses. We should rather add—
if it be in our power—to the praises bestowed. If we
cannot speak well of the individual in question, we
ought to be silent unless justice or charity requires
that we make known our opinion of him to those in
authority.
We should not speak of the present or the abser.r
85
CONVERSATION


in terms of excessive praise; nor should we, in com-
mending any one, offend against truth. If our relations
are praised for their good qualities, or good deeds, we
should modestly testify our gratitude, but not add to
their praises.
If, in visiting a friend, one perceives a present of
which he has been the donor, he should be careful not
to refer to it. A gift is always spoiled by any appear-
ance of ostentation. A favour bestowed in a patronizing
manner loses half its value. On seeing any article for
the first time, we should not give way to extravagant
exclamations of surprise or admiration. As a general
rule, we ought to be reserved in awarding praise, and
we should appreciate things according to their true
value.
To express astonishment on every slight occasion
is an evidence of much inexperience. An uneducated
person is enraptured at the sight of a highly-coloured
picture, while a person of taste, to whom its innumer-
able defects are visible, can hardly endure to look upon
it. Everyone, nowadays, should have some knowledge
of the works of the great masters in painting, sculpture,
and music. What is thought of him who has never
heard of Murillo, of Michelangelo, or of Mozart? It
is by study and experience that taste is perfected.
When time or opportunity does not allow one to
examine at leisure the separate biographies of those
great men who have made their names immortal, at
least the short articles, which treat of the various arts
and sciences in some good encyclopaedia ought to be
carefully perused, and the information they contain
accurately remembered.
86
CHRISTIAN POLITENESS


The Talkative and the Quarrelsome
Nothing is more disagreeable than the conversation
of incessant talkers, who put questions on the most
trifling things, or on those of which they should remain
ignorant. We should never put direct questions to
another when we have reason to think he would rather
not be interrogated. Even inquiries regarding health
should be made indirectly, so as to leave the individual
free to reply as suits his inclination.
There is a class of rude and troublesome persons—
travellers—who speak of nothing but their experiences,
the countries they have travelled through, the real or
imaginary dangers they have encountered, continuing
to repeat the same circumstances a hundred times over.
Such persons should avoid troubling others with their
narrations. Another class, at every phrase, will ask,
“Do you understand?” or “Don’t you know?” This
is very rude. They should finish what they have to
say and then, if they perceive that they have been mis-
understood, repeat it.
We should not be the first to answer a question not
addressed to us, and should wait until we shall have
given to others sufficient opportunity of replying.
We should not interrupt another when speaking, in
order to comment on what he says, or render his
remarks less ambiguous or less inaccurate. If we have
an observation to make, we may do so when he has
finished. If we unwittingly interrupt another in con-
versation we should instantly apologize. He who finds
that he has defended an erroneous opinion, or made a
mistake in what he has said, should acknowledge his
error. He should receive a correction frankly and
never take offence at remarks tending to set him right.


It would be excessively rude to say in debate, “That
is not true;” “You do not understand the matter;” “I
have my own opinion still.” A polite person would
say, “I think you must have been misinformed as to
the facts;” “It may possibly be a mistake;” “I thought
it was otherwise,” or something similar. He might,
instead, let the matter rest, or change the subject of
discourse, unless duty or charity should require him
to maintain his opinion.
If the views of an individual differ from those of
every other member of a company, he should be silent,
or state his opinions with modesty. He may state his
reasons for holding those opinions, but should never
betray too obstinate an attachment to them. The fact
of their being thus generally opposed is not, however,
a proof of their incorrectness, but it is a strong pre-
sumption.
The Apostle St Paul admonishes his disciple St
Timothy to avoid all dissensions. The spirit of con-
tention is directly opposed to the mildness so strongly
recommended in the Gospel. It is no less contrary to
the spirit and usages of polite society. Disputes spring
generally from presumption, and from the false idea
which people entertain of their own merit and ability.
Some persons dispute about everything. If anyone
expresses an opinion, this is to them the signal for
argument. The only mode of dealing with such per-
sons is to be silent, or to avoid their company. To
oppose them is to add fuel to the fire and supply them
with materials. A wise and prudent man will never
contend with such persons.
We should not dispute with others without good
reasons, nor enter into an argument merely to gratify
88
CHRISTIAN POLITENESS


the desire of disputing. When obliged to argue, we
should do so with great mildness, remembering the
words of the Wise :Man, that sweet words multiply
friends and conciliate enemies. We should, in the first
instance, express how far we agree with the opinions
just advanced, and show great reluctance to refuse our
entire assent. We should then politely state the reasons
of our dissent, avoiding all airs of superiority, and
never indulging in the glory of a triumph.
When a person feels it is his duty to oppose the
opinions even of his inferiors, he first considers calmly
what each has said, pointing out what appears to be
reasonable, and, having done full justice to the opinions
of each, he then mildly gives his own. This amiable
attitude, whilst it adds weight and authority to his
decisions, inspires respect, veneration, and love. He
who seeks to establish or vindicate truth is amply re-
quited when this object is attained.


CHAPTER XIII
COMPLIMENTS
Compliments, to be worth anything, must spring from
sincerity and kindly feeling.
Compliments should be well-timed, suited to the per-
son and the occasion, and should be seldom offered
directly, but as much as possible by inference, by a
hint, or by a comparison. In condoling with a friend
on the death of a relative, or the loss of a considerable
property or lawsuit, much should not be said on the
cause of the affliction. We should gradually divert the
conversation to other subjects or delicately introduce
some consoling reflections, and thus soothe the mind
of the sufferer.
The maxim of the Wise Man, that we should not
praise a man before his death, does not mean that we
should never use compliments, nor utter words of
commendation. It instructs us to be moderate in our
praises, as they too often serve as incentives to vanity.
We should carefully avoid the least affectation in
paying compliments. Our manner should be a faithful
expression of our sentiments, so as to leave no room
for any doubt of their sincerity. Compliments sug-
gested by artifice or flattery bespeak a deceitful heart.
The person to whom a compliment is addressed should
accept it unaffectedly and thankfully, without mani-
festing either satisfaction or indifference.


CHAPTER XIV
READING
Having alluded to the necessity of possessing a store
of useful knowledge, we shall now speak of the means
by which that knowledge may be acquired. Much valu-
able information may be obtained through conversation,
if we only know how to select companions, to listen
attentively to what is said, and to lead the person with
whom we converse to the subject in which he is most
interested, or with which, from his station, circum-
stances, or the direction of his studies, he must be best
acquainted. However, this is not always easily done;
but books, observation, and reflection, together with
occasional lectures on the subject we are reading, will
soon put us in possession of a large fund of informa-
tion, which by industry may be daily augmented.
Of all the sources of intellectual culture to which
young persons may have access, books are the most
valuable. We should, therefore, have regular times
for reading, with which nothing should interfere. Books
are always at hand. By them we are made acquainted
with events that have occurred in remote times and in
distant places; with the opinions and sentiments of
the wise of every generation; with the rise and fall
of States, and the causes which have led to their pro


gress and decay; with the discoveries of science at
each period of its history; with the lives of the great
men who have raised themselves to eminence in their
respective professions. By books we are made
acquainted with the history of the Church in each
successive age; with her glorious triumphs over the
enemies that have assailed her; with the actions of
her illustrious children, who, raising their thoughts
above this perishable world, have aspired to the glory
of an eternal kingdom, leaving us, by their example, a
powerful incitement to imitate them, that we may here-
after share in their happiness.
In fine, by books we receive light, instruction, and
amusement, enriching our minds with the labours of
those who have preceded us, that we may regulate our
conduct by the light of their actions. The love of
reading, therefore, should be cultivated early in life,
and some book always kept at hand, to which, from
time to time, we may refer.
The first and most necessary knowledge is that of
religion. A young person should remember that all
his efforts in this world should tend only to the attain-
ment of eternal happiness in the next. He should,
therefore, be well acquainted with the truths of his
holy religion, and the reasons on which they are
founded, that he may possess sufficient evidence of
the truth for his own mind, and, when necessary, be
prepared to give an account of the faith that is in him,
and put to silence the railleries of the scoffer and the
sneers of the infidel.
It is to be regretted that the young do not set more
value on the acquisition of useful knowledge. They
waste their time when it can be best employed; when
92
CHRISTIAN POLITENESS


information may be easily obtained, and habits of
study formed which would promote their happiness in
after life. They cannot be too often reminded that
youth is the time when knowledge can be most easily
acquired; that what is then learned is retained the
longest; and that the constant and useful occupation of
the mind in early years is, with the grace of God, one
of the best preservatives of purity of morals, without
which wealth, station, or intellect is of little worth.
Parents and masters sometimes discourage reading
under the pretext that it interferes with business or
school work. If the love of books degenerates into a
passion, and if the time is spent in reading which
should be devoted to the duties of one’s calling, such
discouragement is reasonable; but if reading is con-
fined to leisure hours, and if the books read are un-
objectionable, then it is very injudicious to prevent it.
The Choice of Books
A young man needs a judicious and intelligent friend
to help him in making a careful selection of the books
he should read. On the choice made of them depends
the good or evil of which they may be the medium.
Many modern books contain gross misstatements on
some of the most important events of history, and still
more, written often in an attractive literary style, are
filled with such infidel and dishonest sentiments, that,
to read them, is to expose both faith and morals to
imminent peril. Works like these can never be read
without danger; but in the time of youth, before the
mind is well grounded in solid principles, and the heart
formed to the love of virtue, the reading of such books
must lead to deplorable consequences.


There are three classes of books in particular
against which the youthful reader should be seriously
warned: (a) those that endanger faith; ( b ) those
which corrupt the heart; and (c) those publications
of fiction which serve only to fritter away time, and
unfit the mind for serious study or occupation.
Faith is the foundation of every virtue. “Without
faith it is impossible to please God.” Its truths, rest-
ing on His veracity, require our entire and unwaver-
ing assent. Whatever tends to weaken our faith or
subvert it, should be regarded with feelings of horror;
and yet how many works against the Catholic faith
and its holy practices are constantly issuing from an
infidel press, and are read with avidity by many young
persons!
The experience of the past furnishes ample testi-
mony of the evils such books have caused:—the pros-
pects of individuals blasted; the peace of families
destroyed; the most horrible excesses perpetrated; a
mighty nation revolutionized; the whole frame of
society unhinged; and the blood of Europe poured
like water upon her plains. All these effects feelingly
convince us of the malignity of their influence. The
youth who values his own happiness and that of society,
or who is desirous of promoting his eternal interests,
must never yield to the temptation of reading works
of an irreligious or even doubtful tendency.
Books which taint the purity of morals are still more
numerous than those dangerous to faith. They can
be procured in every city; they often find their way
even into the bosom of well-regulated families; they
arrest the attention of the youthful reader, inflaming
his passions in the retirement of home, and instilling


their poison so silently, yet so effectually, that they
often corrupt their victim before he perceives it. A
boy, on leaving school, may be remarkable for his
modest and unassuming manners; his respect and ven-
eration for his parents; his affectionate kindness to
his brothers and sisters; his devout frequentation of
the sacraments; his regular and edifying discharge of
his religious duties. But a change comes on and the
good impressions of his boyhood are gradually effaced;
he neglects his business; he no longer attends to his
religious duties, and, in the end, becomes a reprobate.
To one bad book, incautiously read, may be traced his
first wandering from the path of virtue. Had some
friendly voice been raised in time to warn him against
reading that bad book, he might probably have per-
severed till death in innocence and piety.
Nor is it alone against immoral works that the
youthful reader should be cautioned. The reading of
light, frivolous, and worthless publications, should also
be discountenanced. Works of this nature waste
time, enervate the mind, unfit it for serious and pro-
fitable study, and leave behind little else than a weak-
ened memory, and an understanding ill-suited for the
realities of life. This is the more to be deplored, as
there are many books on history, biography, and sci-
ence containing a large store of interesting informa-
tion, which could well supply their place.
A lady who attended well to the training of her
children, never permitted them, when the period of
their childhood had passed, to read works of fiction.
She supplied them with narratives from the Holy
Scriptures, and with biographies of good and great
men, who might serve as models of virtue or industry.
95
READING


She gradually directed the minds of the children to the
study of scientific works suited to their capacities. They
grew up a well-ordered family, remarkable for their
good sense and practical intelligence. A reverse of
fortune soon showed the value of the training they had
received. Their education became to them a source
of emolument, which enabled them to surmount with
honour and credit the difficulties of their position.
What books, then, it may be asked, are to be recom-
mended to young people? It is impossible, in a brief
work of this kind, to point out all that may be found
worthy of their perusal.
Some object to the “Lives of the Saints’’ as a work
of instruction, because the actions therein recorded are
not always suited for imitation, and might possibly
discourage ordinary Christians from entering on a life
of piety. It is true that God has raised up in His
Church, at every period of her history, chosen souls,
whose heroic deeds and noble sacrifices fill us with
admiration, but whose example, as seen in many of
their actions, we are not required, or even permitted
to follow. The reading of their lives is, nevertheless,
extremely useful. It shows us what our weak nature,
aided by divine grace, is able to accomplish, and it
stimulates us to discharge with fidelity the little which
God requires of us, in our respective stations, and to
compare our progress with what has been achieved by
persons like ourselves, to attain that everlasting happi-
ness which we also hope one day to enjoy. Hence, the
reading of pious biography cannot fail to be productive
of much good.
The youthful reader should be warned against the
ordinary fault of attempting to read too many books.


A few, well and thoroughly read, will supply him with
more useful knowledge, and will prepare his mind
better for future acquirements, than many read super-
ficially. To read with advantage he should choose a
judicious guide to direct him in the choice of books,
and read none without having first ascertained their
character. He should read slowly, attentively, with
reflection and a little every day. Though he may have
but few books, and little time to devote to them, he
will very soon increase his stock of knowledge. He
should take notes of those passages which strike him
most and should endeavour to fix well in his memory
three leading points: names, dates, and places. This
plan will help him to retain many important particulars
in his mind.
In taking notes of what we have read we should
never write in the margin of the book; the greatest
possible care should be taken of books, especially those
which may have been borrowed. They should not be
allowed to fall upon the ground, nor to be opened and
bent back.
The leaves should be kept perfectly free from thumb
marks and should not be allowed to become dog-eared.
In turning them, the finger and thumb should be used;
the latter should on no account be moistened by the
lips. If a book be covered with paper and carefully
treated, it may be read for years without showing
trace of use.
H


CHAPTER XV
THE CHOICE OF COMPANIONS
Fortunate would it have been for many now living,
had some warning voice admonished them in youth
to be careful in the selection of companions. All that
has been said of books may with equal truth be applied
to them. They influence, in a great degree, our tem-
poral and our eternal welfare. We insensibly adopt
the principles, imbibe the sentiments, and contract the
habits of the persons with whom we associate. If
our companions are good, they stimulate us to the
practice of virtue; if bad, they draw us down to the
depths of vice. It is related of many young men, that
while at school they preserved an unblemished char-
acter; but mixing afterwards in bad company, they
became notoriously wicked, and died in despair, re-
fusing the aids and consolations of religion. We read
of others, who, having abandoned themselves to a
sinful life, were, without a moment’s warning, struck
dead in the midst of their excesses.
Many of the evils existing among the junior mem-
bers of society, and many of the bad habits and con-
sequent misfortunes of its seniors may too often be
traced to the influences of bad company.
Elsewhere we have warned our young readers


against the evils of drink, a vice usually contracted
through the keeping of bad company. It is also
necessary to caution them against contracting the habit
of smoking. All authorities agree that this habit is
injurious to the growing youth. So great an evil is it
considered, that in some countries legislation has been
passed forbidding the use of tobacco by persons under
sixteen years of age.
Apart from the bad manners with which the prac-
tice is usually connected in the case of the young, and
apart also from the physical injury it produces, it
often leads to doubtful companionship with all its evil
consequences.
Companions are frequently chosen on account of
some agreeable qualities which they possess, qualities
sometimes of a questionable and suspicious character;
companions of real merit are left unnoticed, or perhaps
shunned. Attend to the following reference to real
friendship mentioned in the sixth chapter of Ecclesi-
asticus:—
“A faithful friend is a strong defence, and he that
hath found him, hath found a treasure. Nothing can
be compared to a faithful friend, and no weight of gold
or silver is able to countervail the goodness of his
fidelity. A faithful friend is the medicine of life and
immortality, and they that fear the Lord shall find
him.”
In the thirty-seventh chapter of the same book, the
Lord exhorts you “to be continually with a holy man,
whomsoever thou shalt know to observe the fear of
God; whose soul is according to thy own soul, and
who, when thou shalt stumble in the dark, will be
sorry for thee.” In the ninth chapter of the same


book, it is said, “Forsake not an old friend, for the
new will not be like to him.”
A young person’s ordinary associates should be the
members of his own family. He should study to make
home agreeable to himself and to them, and be per-
suaded that the happiness which home confers is purer
and holier than any that can be found elsewhere. How
much may a young man do in the bosom of his own
family—particularly if he is an elder member—to
promote its happiness, and contribute to its welfare!
He can comfort his parents in their domestic cares
and anxieties—instruct and guide his brothers and
sisters in the paths of virtue and knowledge; by his
kindness, courtesy, and polite attentions, he can increase
the happiness of each member of the household, and
by his encouragement and example, draw closer the
ties of natural affection, which bind all together. He
can feel that purest of earthly joys—the consciousness
of having discharged an exalted duty—and he will share
largely in the happiness resulting from peace, union,
and harmony, which his conduct will have thus pro-
moted. Happy indeed is the family that possesses such
a member. He is as precious as gold, and “as things
brought from afar.”
If, besides the resources of enjoyment which he has
in his own family and in his books, a young man seeks
other companions, he should be most careful in his
choice, if he would escape the dangers to which society
exposes him. His companions should be few, or they
will often prevent him from attending to his business;
they should not be much above him in station, or they
will lead him into extravagant expenses; they should
be free from ignorance and vulgarity, or he will reduce


himself to their level; they should be virtuous, or they
will lead him into vice, and practically religious, or
they will, by their maxims and loose conduct, draw
him from that regular attention to religious duties
without which he cannot preserve the friendship of
God, and finally secure his eternal salvation.
“Let everyone carefully avoid bad company,” says
M. Collet, “for in bad company the innocent become
perverse, and the wicked are confirmed in their dis-
orders. Such as associate with the wicked must expect
to be involved in their fate.”
“ ‘Be not deceived; evil communications corrupt good
manners.’ A little leaven corrupts the whole mass.
The grace of baptism, which has regenerated us; the
sacrament of confirmation, which has given us the
Holy Ghost, with the abundance of His gifts; penance,
which, re-establishing our strength, has communicated
to us a fresh supply; the Body of Jesus Christ, which,
to speak in the language of the Holy Fathers, has
deified us—all these favours have made us children
of the day, and placed between us and the children of
the night a barrier which shall subsist eternally. What
agreement, then, can exist between justice and iniquity,
between light and darkness, between Jesus Christ and
Belial?
“Rely not on your virtues, nor on the natural horror
you feel for certain excesses. In a week or two, per-
haps in a single day, or even less, the edifice which
you thought the most solidly established, may be under-
mined. Hold by experience: nothing in the world is
more decisive.
“Alipius, so celebrated in the Confessions of St
Augustine, had naturally an extreme horror of those


cruel spectacles of the amphitheatre in which the
Romans took a savage delight. Some young friends
of his, who, like himself, were studying law, having
met him accidentally, resolved to conduct him thither.
They laid hold of him with that sort of violence which
friendship seems to authorize but he said to them, ‘You
may force my body and place me on the steps of the
circus, but you cannot control either my mind or my
eyes, which shall assuredly take no part in the spec-
tacle; thus, I shall be there as if I were absent and
by this means I shall be superior to the violence which
you offer me, and the passion which enslaves you.’
Despite these protestations, Alipius was dragged to
the spectacle, and while the whole amphitheatre aban-
doned itself to those barbarous pleasures, Alipius
forbade his heart to take any part in them, and kept
his eyes shut. ‘And would to God,’ says St Augus-
tine, to whom we are indebted for this account, ‘that
he kept his ears shut also; for, hearing a loud cry, he
yielded so far to curiosity as to open his eyes; but
that was enough to inflict on his soul a far more
deadly wound than that which a combatant had just
then received. Thus his heart, more presumptuous than
strong, and weak in proportion as it relied on itself
rather than on God, was in a moment grievously
wounded. Cruelty crept into it at the bare sight of
blood, and Alipius, instead of turning away his eyes
from the sanguinary spectacle, kept them fixed in-
tently upon it. Imbibing ferocity without perceiving
it, he became intoxicated with this brutal pleasure, and
was no longer the same man who had been carried
thither by force, but a man of the same character as
those who composed the assembly. He returned home
with such ardour for those inhuman spectacles, that


he longed for nothing more than to be present at them,
and not only was he desirous of going to the amphi-
theatre again, but he even conducted others to it.
“ ‘After such a relapse/ continues St Augustine,
‘what could help him to rise but the hand of Thy
mercy, O my God! and this alone effected it. Thou
didst teach him to confide no more in any other than
in Thyself, and never to depend upon his own
strength; but amendment was not established till long
after. However, he always preserved the bitter recol-
lection of this occurrence, which, while it recalled to
his remembrance his past weakness, served him as a
preservative against future failings.’ ”
The pious and learned Rollin* proposes the holy
friendship which subsisted between St Gregory
Nazianzen and St Basil for the instruction of young
persons. “They had,” he says, “all the qualifications
that make children amiable—beauty of person, charm
of mind, mildness, and politeness of manners.
“Their education was such as may be imagined in
families where piety was hereditary, if I may be
allowed the expression, and whose fathers, mothers,
brothers, sisters, and grandfathers on both sides, were
saints.
“The happy dispositions with which God had been
pleased to favour them, they cultivated with care and
assiduity. After they had completed their studies at
home, they were sent separately into the cities of
Greece, which were then in great repute for learn-
ing, and placed under the tuition of the most excellent
masters.
“At last they met again at Athens. We know that
this city was then the centre of polite learning and
* Belles Lettrea, vol. iv.


erudition. It was likewise the cradle, as it were, of
the well-known friendship which subsisted between
our two saints, and the following extraordinary occur-
rence served very much to confirm, strengthen, and
perpetuate it. A strange custom existed at Athens
relative to those scholars termed new-comers. The
students began by introducing them into a numerous
assembly of youths like themselves, and there they
exposed them to all kinds of raillery and insolence,
after which they led them across the city in procession,
conducted by all the boys marching two-and-two before
them. When they reached the place appointed, the
whole company stopped, set up a loud shout, and acted
as if they would break open the gates.
“When the new-comer had been admitted, he was
restored to liberty. Gregory, who came first to Athens,
saw how trying this ridiculous practice would be to
the grave and serious character of Basil, and having
great influence with his companions, he induced them
to dispense with it in favour of his friend. ‘This it
was,’ says St Gregory, in the admirable account he
gives of the matter, ‘which began to kindle in us that
flame which has never since been extinguished, and
which pierced our hearts with a dart that is fixed there
for ever.’ ‘Happy Athens,’ he cries out, ‘thou source
of all my felicity! I went thither only to acquire
knowledge, and I found there the most precious of
all my treasures—an affectionate and faithful friend—
happier in this than Saul, who, seeking only for asses,
found a kingdom.’
“This relation, formed and begun as I have now
mentioned, grew every day stronger and stronger,
especially when these two friends, who kept nothing
secret from each other, mutually laying open their


hearts, discovered that they had both the same end
in view, and sought for the same treasure, namely,
heavenly wisdom and virtue. They lived under the
same roof, ate at the same table, had the same exer-
cises and amusements, and were, properly speaking, one
spirit, animating two bodies. ‘A marvellous union,’
says St Gregory, ‘which cannot be really produced by
any other than a chaste and Christian friendship.
“ ‘We both alike aspired to knowledge—an object
the most capable of exciting sentiments of envy and
jealousy, and yet we were absolutely exempt from that
subtle and malicious passion, and experienced no other
than a noble emulation. Each had a higher sense of
the glory of his friend than of his own, and sought
not the superiority, but rather yielded to the other.
“ ‘Our principal study and only desire was virtue.
We strove to make our friendship everlasting by pre-
paring ourselves for a blessed immortality, and by
withdrawing ourselves more and more from the things
of this world. We took the word of God for our con-
ductor and guide; we served as masters and overseers
one to the other by mutually exhorting each other to
the practice of piety; and I might say (if there was
not some kind of vanity in the expression) that we
were a kind of rule to each other, whereby to discern
truth from falsehood and good from evil.
“ ‘We had no conversation with such of our com-
panions as were rude, passionate, or immoral; we
associated only with such as by their modesty, circum-
spection, and wisdom, might encourage us in the good
designs we had formed; sensible that bad examples,
like contagious diseases, are easily communicated!’
“These two saints, as we cannot too often repeat
to youth, were always distinguished among their com


panions by their diligence and labour, by extraordinary
success in all their studies, by the facility with which
they acquired the sciences then taught at Athens—
polite learning, poetry, eloquence, and philosophy. But
they were still more remarkable for the innocence of
their manners, which dreaded the very shadow of evil.
“Both Basil and Gregory had great need of virtue
to defend themselves from the perils with which they
were surrounded at Athens, which then, of all cities,
presented the greatest dangers to morality, on account
of the vast concourse of foreign students, who brought
with them to that city their vices and irregularities.
‘But,’ says St Gregory, ‘we had the happiness of
experiencing, in that corrupt city, something like what
the poets tell of a river which preserves the sweet-
ness of its waters amid the saltness of the sea, and
of an animal which lives in the midst of fire. We
shunned the conversation and society of the bad; we
knew only two streets in Athens—that which led to
the church and that which led to the schools. As to
the entertainments, spectacles, assemblies, and festi-
vals, we were absolutely ignorant of them.’
“One might naturally suppose that youths such as
these, who kept aloof from society, who took no part
in the pleasures and diversions of those of their own
age, and whose pure and innocent lives were a con-
tinual reproach to the irregularities of their school-
fellows, must have been disagreeable to them, and have
become objects of hatred, or, at least, of contempt to
them. It was quite otherwise, however; and nothing
is more glorious to the memory of these two illustrious
saints, nor, I would venture to say, reflects more hon-
our upon piety itself, than such a circumstance. Their
virtue must have been very pure, and their conduct


very wise and discreet, thus to win for them the
esteem, respect, and love of all their companions.
“This was seen in a remarkable manner when it was
reported that they were about to return to their native
country. The grief was universal; lamentations were
heard on every side; tears flowed from every eye. The
people were about to lose the honour of their city—
the glory of their schools. Masters and scholars, add-
ing force and violence to entreaties and compliments,
protested that they would not consent to their depar-
ture. One of the two friends could not help yielding
to this extraordinary solicitation, which might rather
be called a conspiracy to detain him. This was Gregory;
and one may easily judge how much he was concerned
at it.
“I question whether it is possible to imagine more
perfect models for youth than those I have now de-
scribed. In them we find united all that can render
youth amiable and estimable: noble birth, great intel-
lectual requirements and incredible ardour for study,
wonderful success in all the sciences, polite and elegant
manners, modesty in the midst of general applause, and,
what infinitely adorn these qualifications, a piety and
fear of God which evil examples only strengthened
and confirmed.
“Besides the example of some illustrious Christian
saints, such as the two I have mentioned, young people
may also consider the saints of the Old Testament.
They will there see the youthful Samuel, by his piety
and virtue alike agreeable to God and men —‘And the
child Samuel grew up, and was in favour with the Lord
and also with men.’* They will see a holy king, who,
at eight years of age, following the example of David,


was ever careful to please God in all he did— ‘And he
did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and
walked in all the ways of David his father .’f Tobias,|
also, after he had spent his youth in innocence, avoided
the company of such as sacrificed to the golden calves,
showing nothing childish in his behaviour, and keeping
with all exactness the injunctions of the law from his
infancy. And Tobias educated his son in the same
manner, by teaching him from the dawn of reason
to fear God, and abstain from all sin. They will be
surprised to find, long before Christianity, a courage
truly heroic and Christian in the seven brothers of
the Machabees, who were all resolved to die by the
most cruel torments rather than transgress the law of
God — ‘We are ready to die rather than transgress the
law of God received from our fathers .§
“But youth must principally imbibe sentiments of
piety from the fountain of all holiness, that is, from
Jesus Christ our Lord Who, to sanctify childhood and
youth, was pleased to set an example, in His own per-
son, of the virtues which all should practise, by His
exactness in going up to the temple at the appointed
times; by His diligence in hearing the doctors; by His
application to do the work of His Father, and execute
the divine commands without consulting flesh and
blood; by His perfect submission to His parents; and
lastly, by the care He took in showing before God
and man, in proportion as He advanced in years, a
visible progress in grace and wisdom, the plenitude
of which He had received from the first moment of
His incarnation.”
* 1 Sam. ii. 26. t 2 Kings xxi. 2. t Tobias i.
§ 2 Mac. vii 2,


CHAPTER XVI
SELF-IMPROVEMENT
Self-improvement is the basis of all progress. In
proportion as individuals apply themselves to the work
of their improvement, so will families, and cities, and
states advance. We may safely venture to believe that
as long as we remain in this life, we shall never want
occasions to mourn over our condition, or motives to
urge us forward in the path of perfection.
It is necessary for a young man entering the arena
of life to be, above all things, well instructed in the
principles and practices of religion. It does not suffice
that he should have learned his catechism by heart;
he must understand its meaning and its application.
Nor must he neglect to improve the stock of religious
knowledge which he has acquired. Experience
proves that, after the lapse of a few years, the religious
ideas of those who abandon spiritual reading, pious
conversation, and attendance at sermons and religious
instructions, become vague, weak, and uncertain, so
that they can hardly tell the Principal Mysteries. Yet
there are many matters regarding faith and morals of
which an explanation could not be expected in a small
catechism, and with which, considering the various cir-
cumstances of life, it is highly important to be ac


quainted. It is only by the assiduous pursuit of truth
that we shall attain to its full possession.
All the knowledge in the world is of little service
without the grace of God. The principal channels
through which this holy grace is conveyed to our souls
are the sacraments; and the sacraments will profit us
nothing unless we have recourse to them with the
requisite dispositions; hence the importance of their
due appreciation and their devout frequentation. By
them we are enabled to rub off the angularities of our
character.
Next, perhaps, to the sanctification of the soul comes
the cultivation of the manners. Society cannot be held
together without some ceremonies. We should not,
however, judge the people of other nations by our-
selves, nor of former times by our own, since the
rules of etiquette have only a relative importance; but
it is our duty to study the manners of good society in
our own age and country, for it is hardly possible
to succeed in life without attention to etiquette. To
use a homely phrase, no fish out of water is more
uncomfortable than one who is ignorant of etiquette
in an assembly of the polite. “Manners make the man.”
They distinguish the gentleman from the boor; they
constitute one of the leading differences between a life
of civilization and a life of barbarism.
Of the power of manners Emerson says: “Give a
boy address and accomplishments, and you give him
the mastery of palaces and fortunes wherever he goes.
He has not the trouble of earning them.” And else-
where : “There are certain manners which are learned
in good society of such force that, if a person have


them, he or she must be considered and is everywhere
welcome, though without beauty, or wealth, or genius.”
It is of the utmost importance for a young man to
choose a proper state in life. He is not to run to
whatever position offers, but to consider carefully that
in which he can most securely work out his salvation.
Prayer and counsel are essentially necessary at this
period. Tacitus gave utterance to an admirable
aphorism when he said: “Evil counsels are matured by
haste, but good counsels by delay.” One should, there-
fore, be slow in arriving at a decision on a matter of
so much consequence. He should consult with wise,
prudent, and sensible persons. Nor will the light of
heaven fail the humble suppliant.
Whatever be a young man’s station in life, he should
endeavour by a faithful discharge of his duties to
render himself worthy of esteem. He should exhibit
a manly independence, and should not force himself
on the attention of others who are above him in rank
or who do not desire his acquaintance*
When one engages in any industrial, commercial, or
professional pursuit, it is absolutely necessary for him
to acquire a large fund of information regarding its
principles and practical operations; otherwise success
is out of the question. It is not enough to be smart,
honest, civil, and punctual; a person must also be intel-
ligent. Too common a defect among persons engaged
in business is narrow-mindedness. They read little.
They seldom converse on any other subjects than those
of their daily routine, and hence show the limited range
of their thoughts. The good man of business is not
* See a very interesting work, translated from the French,
Choice of a State of Life, by the late Bishop of Bruges.


content with a thorough knowledge of book-keeping,
with writing a respectable hand, with understanding
the nature of banking, with endeavouring to trace the
causes of the rise and fall of prices, with being a
judge of the different commodities brought into the
market and their suitability at a given time, with an
abundance of shrewd common sense to see the char-
acter of his customers; he applies himself each day
more and more diligently to an enlarged acquaintance
with the science of political economy in all its extent.
There he finds a very mine of information regarding
the details of trade and commerce, of agriculture and
manufacture, of capital and labour.
We must not suppose that the interesting science of
which we speak, has arrived at such a degree of per-
fection that all the principles now enunciated in con-
nection with it are indisputably certain. Not so; there
is one fundamental error pervading nearly all English
treatises on the subject; it is this: they are based on
self-interest. The one main end which their authors
seem to have in view throughout is the acquisition and
accumulation of wealth, as if man had no other nobler
object or more important affair in life to engage his
thoughts. In their systems, the poor man is often
theorized upon as an unproductive consumer, though
the Gospel has invested him with the sublimest dignity.
—“The poor you have always with you; whatsoever you
do unto them, you do unto Me.” Property may have
its rights, but it also has its duties, and not the
least of these is to assist the neighbour. The mind
of man was never intended to be merely a cold, calcu-
lating, logical engine, adjusting precisely the scales
of profit and loss, but rather a well-spring of beneficial


thoughts. We cannot doubt that it is lawful, by every
honest means, to realize a competency; it is a strict
obligation on many to do so. The evil of riches con-
sists not in their use, but in their abuse.
The advantages of judicious reading and study are
obvious. Let us bear in mind that there is no royal
road to real eminence in any department of learning.
The greatest scholars began with the elements. One
quarter of an hour given daily to any pursuit amounts
to nearly a hundred hours in a year. Many distinguished
men have been self-educated. Let a young man only
turn to good account the leisure moments at his dis-
posal every morning and evening, and he will enter
on the straight way to becoming an ornament to his
family, his country, and his religion.
It may not be out of place here to offer a word
of warning to the young against the danger of joining
secret societies. No matter how plausible the argu-
ments put forth, or how noble the ends aimed at may
be, we must most carefully avoid them.
People are sometimes lured by the social advantages
and the prospect of temporal advancement these so-
cieties may offer, and they may see nothing criminal
in their connection with them. It is a well-known fact
that the newly initiated are oftentimes unaware of
the inner workings of these societies, which have their
mainsprings in European centres, and are under the
control of infidel leaders, whose real object is the sub-
version of the Church and of all religion.
Even when the end is lawful and possibly praise-
worthy, one must never seek its realization by un-
lawful means, such as, binding one’s self by oath in
an unlimited obedience to leaders who may not hesitate
i


to exact of their followers the commission of crimes
in furtherance of their designs.
It is sufficient to say that the Church has strongly
condemned secret societies, and that it is impossible to
belong to them without incurring her severe censure.
It is well, in the midst of life, to think of death.
An admirable means of doing so is found in the insti-
tution of retreats, which are now becoming matters
of frequent occurrence.
In Australia, many religious congregations give facili-
ties for retreats in some of their monasteries or con-
vents. Persons desirous of spending a few days in
calm and serious reflection on the great business of
salvation are thus afforded an opportunity of doing so.
Such retreats, like missions, are attended with many
advantages, important and well known.
When a young man meets with success in his under-
takings, when the world and fortune shower their
smiles upon him, he is apt to be elated. Yet, according
to Bossuet, a long continuance of prosperity is often
the greatest disaster, alike to individuals and to empires.
He would, indeed, be foolish who should neglect to
prepare his heart for adversity, which is the almost
inevitable portion of mankind. The trials of life are
not to be staved off when they come in earnest. Still,
bitter as the bread of misfortune may be, there is
generally a wholesomeness about it that abundantly
compensates for its bitterness. If we could only be-
hold afflictions in their true light, we should frequently
discover them to be the greatest blessings. To be
forewarned is to be forearmed. We need not expect
to reach the kingdom of heaven without passing through
the crucible of tribulation. Our Divine Redeemer,


though He assures us that His yoke is sweet and His
burden light, nevertheless says, “If any man will come
after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
daily, and follow Me.”
A friend is an inestimable treasure; every young
man may find him in his confessor, in the Catholic
priest. That fatherly voice, which has sounded so
sweet in the ears of Catholics for almost two thousand
years, will ever be regarded with feelings of affectionate
reverence. In joy, in sorrow, in doubt, and in fear,
no less than in sad hours of error and sin, the young
man should learn to have recourse to this faithful
guide, the mystic helmsman appointed by our Lord
to guide the frail barque of our souls over the stormy
and perilous sea of life to the happy shores of a
blessed eternity. As the eagle encourages its young
ones to fly, so will the priest, in his gentle way, en-
courage young men to aim at everything that can make
them exemplary Christians and enlightened citizens.


CHAPTER XVII
ADVICE TO STUDENTS
The first obstacle to advancement in knowledge is the
pursuit of too many objects at the same time. To run
hastily from subject to subject in private study divides
the attention and enfeebles the energies of the mind.
We require time to form correct ideas upon any sub-
ject, and, consequently, the want of reflection leaves our
impressions faint and evanescent.
We should clearly understand what we require to
know, and how far we should proceed in the study
of it. It is quite evident that the more subjects one
pursues, the less time he has for each, and the less
improvement he can make in any one of them. By
confining our attention at first to what is of paramount
importance, steady and lasting progress will be secured.
We should avoid reading a multiplicity of books; our
aim should be to acquire solid knowledge, such, for
instance, as the study of a language; to read the
book that is most recommended to us on the subject
we are studying, and to confine ourselves to it until
we have mastered it. We should likewise beware of
hasty, rapid reading; to read so fast that the under-
standing has not time to digest, nor the memory to
retain the matter, is simply waste of time: to gain


knowledge requires a proper amount of time and
labour.
Some persons there are who never read a book
through; they take up one, and, after reading a little
of it, take up another, which in turn they lay aside
for a third, and so on. Or they begin a certain branch
of study, history, for instance, resolved to prosecute
it very earnestly; but, after a little while, they abandon
it for some other study. This way of acting dissipates
and unsettles the mind, and if constantly indulged in
may degenerate into a habit which it will be difficult
to overcome. We should read a book leisurely, and
with reflection, from beginning to end, and be able to
account satisfactorily for what we have read. When
once we enter on the study of any branch of knowledge,
we should follow it up with perseverance, until we
have acquired a facility in mastering it, and have made
as much progress in it as may suffice for the purposes
in life for which we have studied it.
Some study by fits and starts. A little studied every
day is better than a great deal at one time followed by
a long interval of interruption.
Form a proper plan of study. Begin at the elemen-
tary subjects, and thus lay a good foundation. Under-
stand first principles well, and you will not fail
to comprehend those that follow; then persevere ac-
cording to the method laid down by your instructors,
and check the tendency to deviate therefrom to follow
your own fancy. Upon this steady perseverance, real
and solid progress may be said to depend.
Endeavour to accustom yourself to concentrate your
attention upon the subject you are studying. Try, for
instance, to understand the meaning of an author; for,


unless we accustom ourselves to give to every word
and sentence its proper signification, our ideas thereon
will be indistinct and our conclusions erroneous. - Com-
pare the words and phrases of an author in one place
with similar words and phrases used by him in other
places, and try to understand the design of the writer
in the particular phrase in which the word is used.
In reading works of importance, first examine the
contents carefully, and after glancing through the book
cursorily, peruse each page slowly: by this means diffi-
culties will disappear.
In every department, whether of art or science, there
are certain fixed principles; we must learn these and
imprint them well on our mind, and so proceed in our
study of the subject. Thus, in physics, the doctrine of
gravitation is a fixed principle; again, in religion, it is
a principle laid down by our Saviour, that men should
do to others as they would wish to be done by.
In the progress of his investigation of any subject,
whether in philosophy, science, or any other branch of
human knowledge, the Catholic student must be
careful that his views on these subjects are ever in
harmony with the teaching of the Church thereon. In
this way alone will his study be safe and the conclu-
sions at which he arrives be in accordance with the
revelations of Immutable Truth. For in this world
the Holy Catholic Church alone is the depository of
the truths of Faith, being, as St Paul emphatically
styles it, the pillar and the ground of truth; and the
Sovereign Pontiff, as the supreme head of the Church
on earth, is infallible in the decisions which he pro-
nounces, ex cathedra, on any matter that comes within
the domain of faith or morals.


To cultivate the memory, we must exercise our at-
tention, strictly confining it to the subject in hand.
Moreover, we must arrange our subject, and classify
the details thereof under their proper heads and then
associate the facts in one case with similar facts in
another.
Frequent repetitions and reviews of the subjects
studied help very much to fix in the memory the
knowledge we have been acquiring; and if we accus-
tom ourselves to write out a fair abstract thereof from
memory alone, and compare this abstract with the
book, we shall do something still better.
Talking over with a friend what we have been read-
ing about, also serves to impress it on the mind. In
this useful conversation, however, we must guard
against a disputatious spirit, wherein one loses sight
of the main advantage to be derived, in order to gratify
the desire of gaining a victory in argument.
Lastly, we should make good use of our reflective
powers, often pondering over the subject we read about,
until we digest it mentally and make ourselves thorough
masters of it.


APPENDIX
The following points, as set out in sections, are in-
tended to summarize, and also to add to, the contents
of the preceding chapters.
REVERENCE
Be sure
To say “Good morning” and “Good night” to your
Creator in prayer.
To abstain from using the name of God in your
speech merely to secure emphasis.
To raise your hat while passing a church, convent, or
monastery.
To kiss a Bishop’s ring on meeting him or on being
presented to him.
To address an Archbishop as “Your Grace,” and a
Bishop as “My Lord.”
To salute respectfully all ecclesiastics and religious.
To offer to assist your parish priest in church matters
if your services are necessary or useful.
To visit your parish priest and former teachers on re-
turning from boarding-school.
To call on the parish priest on removing to a new
parish.
To abstain from looking around in church and from
staring at those who enter.
To show recollection and to adopt a becoming posture
at religious functions.


To be careful not to show any disrespect for your par-
ents’ opinions, especially in company.
To address respectfully persons much older than your-
self.
To show self-reverence, remembering that you are a
product of Catholic education.
Remember
That a Catholic church is a most sacred edifice.
There, the faithful come to pray, to hear Mass,
and to receive the Sacraments. There, Angels
keep guard. There, Our Lord dwells in the
Blessed Sacrament.
That when coming to the church, one thought should
be uppermost in your mind—-the thought that
you are coming into the house of God, into the
august presence of Our Saviour.
That when entering, you should take the holy
water reverently, put the tips of two fingers into
it, and then make the sign of the cross correctly
and reverently.
That by the sign of the cross thus made, you honour
each person of the Holy Trinity; you ask each
person very effectively, to bless you, to protect
you, and to prosper you in all your ways; you
honour and thank Our Holy Redeemer for having
suffered and died for you, and you fortify your-
self against temptation and danger.
That, going up to a front seat in the church in a
manly, reverent way, gives good example and great
edification, and is an excellent means of developing
strong moral courage.
That remaining in the rear of the church, stand


ing or sitting on one’s heels, when there are vacant
seats, is unworthy of a well-educated, right-
thinking Catholic man.
That without necessity you should never come late
for Mass nor leave the church before the prayers
after Mass and the sermon are quite over; nor let
yourselves give way to distractions during Mass or
during prayer.
That it is not enough simply to be in the church
during Mass, but that you must join with the
priest in offering the great sacrifice of the Mass
for the living and the dead; that you should al-
ways offer Mass (i) to give due honour and
glory to God, (ii) in satisfaction for the sins of
mankind, (iii) in thanksgiving for the benefits of
God to the world, and (iv) in petition for all the
graces necessary and useful for your spiritual and
temporal welfare.
That an intellectual, right-spirited Catholic should
have a great love for sermons and instructions.
They are the ordinary channels through which
God communicates his messages to you. “They
that are of God love to hear the word of God.”
That an intellectual, right-spirited Catholic should
take an active and a leading part in all parish
works. They have the first claim upon your atten-
tion and charity.
That intelligent, whole-souled activity in Catholic
societies, especially in a Catholic literary and de-
bating society, is an excellent means of gaining
rapid promotion and high position in life.' There
are many men to-day who hold high-salaried posi-
tions who were first put on the high-road to great


success because of their active association with a
Catholic literary and debating society.
That the road to high success lies open to every
young man who will get on to it by leading a
good, Catholic life, by fidelity to daily prayer, by
industry, honesty, courage, enterprise and perse-
vering determination to succeed.
That the great test of true Christianity, gentle-
manliness and manliness is chivalry—man’s polite
and charitable treatment of womanhood. A
Catholic man ought to honour and respect
womanhood for the love of God, for the love of
Our Divine Model—the Holy Redeemer —for the
love of Our Lady, for the love of his own mother
and sisters, for the honour of his own manhood.
That good, well-educated Catholics should be the
leaders and the leaven of society; that the refor-
mation and the welfare of the world are greatly
dependent upon the goodness, the example, and
the prayers and efforts of intelligent, good-living,
right-spirited Catholics.
SCHOOL LIFE—JUNIORS
Be sure
To salute your teacher with a morning and afternoon
greeting.
To stand erect when addressed or when addressing the
teacher.
To add “Sir” or “Brother” to your replies or ques-
tions.
To be tidy in regard to waste paper—to be careful of
school books.


To treat school furniture as carefully as you do the
furniture of your own home.
To be punctual—prompt in carrying out directions—
to explain unpunctuality.
To open and close doors and windows without noise.
To avoid wearing hat or cap in the schoolroom out of
class hours.
To abstain from tricks and practical jokes in school.
(They often end disastrously.)
To do the right thing because it is right and not for
reward.
To respect the privacy of your schoolmates’ desks.
To avoid boisterous play which endangers your com-
panions’ person or clothing.
To join in games instead of gossiping..
To regard stone-throwing at any time as most dan-
gerous, and therefore deserving of severe punish-
ment. (The result of throwing is often serious,
though the intention may be innocent.)
To keep within bounds—to ask all necessary permis-
sions.
To respect the cap and badge you wear. (You repre-
sent the school.)
To abstain from marking walls of buildings.
To avoid waste of water or food—to place scraps in
waste receptacles.
To rise when visitors enter the class room—to resume
seats when directed.
To reply clearly and distinctly to their greeting.
To open the door or gate for teacher or visitor if
nearest boy to it.
To excuse yourself if forced to pass by those in con-
versation.


To salute and greet your teacher on meeting him in the
street.
To avoid exaggeration when describing school inci-
dents at home.
To be anxious to make newcomers feel at home.
To avoid walking on school lawns.
To raise cap as mark of respect to the Blessed Sacra-
ment on passing the convent or Brothers’ residence.
To make short visits to the Blessed Sacrament when
near the church.
To behave well on trams, buses and trains. (Bad be-
haviour will bring discredit on both Church and
school.)
SCHOOL LIFE—SENIORS
Be sure
To salute your teacher with a morning and afternoon
greeting.
To salute less formally your particular school friends.
To extend towards all your fellow students the usual
courtesies during the school day.
To believe that “rough and ready” manners are not
sufficient for school life.
To practise at school what must become second nature
to you—good manners.
To understand that “Manners maketh the man.”
To remember that the playground also is a place for
the exercise of good manners.
To beg pardon of a companion if any action of yours
is seemingly discourteous.
To be wholehearted in your games without being
boisterous or deliberately rough.
To avoid a loud raucous voice in animated discussion.


To abstain from pushing by others, or through a group,
without a request to be excused.
To regard a self-restrained but cheerful demeanour
as a part of real manliness.
To abstain from offensive nicknames and unkind re-
marks.
To be considerate towards the weaker and the more
sensitive. (A bully is universally detested.)
To recognize the real difference between self-respect-
ing manliness and self-assertiveness.
To use correct English in playground discussions.
(Knowledge of correct English without practice
will not save you from confusing and distressing
slips after school days.)
To remember that loose playground habits of speech
are not easily discarded when conversing with
grown persons. (Correct speech in your inter-
views with others, will mean much to you in your
future career.)
To realize that there cannot be absolutely different
standards of good manners (except in minor de-
tails) for school, home and public life.
To be just and honourable in your dealings with other
schoolboys—to despise the taking of a mean ad-
vantage. (A preparation for an honourable career
amongst men—a training of character.)
To do the right thing because it is right and not to
receive approval or reward.. (More character
training.)
To be reliable and well behaved whether the teacher is
present or not. (Character formation again.)
To realize that doing one’s duty brings the most satis-
fying of all feelings of mental pleasure.


To have sufficient “backbone” to withstand those who
ridicule your standards of good conduct.
To do what you know is the right action whether others
do it or not.
To be firm without being offensive towards those who
criticize you.
To represent your school creditably in the streets and
in public vehicles.
To remember that your manners in public will be ac-
cepted by onlookers as the training of a Catholic
school.
To honour your religion by being a gentlemanly ex-
ample of Catholic education.
To understand that you can be, and must be, a gentle-
man, years before you can be a grown man.
To be unaffectedly civil to all though you may find
some temperaments objectionable. (Self-control
is an important factor in character formation.)
To respect the views of those whom you do not like
personally.- (Contempt is uncharitable and long
remembered by the injured person.)
To realize that training in self-control, when added to
good nature, produces an admirable personality.
To accept advice respectfully from those much older
than yourself. (You will be able to give advice
also when the passing years bring experience.)
To remember that, necessarily, you can possess the
development in judgment of a youth only. (You
cannot be as wise in youth as you will be when
more mature.)
To be willing to learn from others who have the ad-
vantage of being alive much longer than yourself.
(Do not brush aside advice as old-fashioned.


Youth is tempted to be over self-confident though
possessing only limited experience of life.)
To recollect that those who need advice most, like it
least. (Many in later life are the most severe
critics of themselves for the good advice they re-
jected in youth.)
To become conversant with school regulations and
school traditions and respect them by loyally ob-
serving them.
INTERVIEW WITH A POSSIBLE
EMPLOYER
Be sure
To answer with great care the advertisement of your
possible employer.
To remember that the first impressions made by your
letter or your interview are most important.
To create a good first impression by correct behaviour
—be dignified, courteous and respectful.
To be punctual; to be neat in person and attire.
To knock at the door of private office and await per-
mission to enter. Close the door.
To await an invitation to be seated; express thanks.
To rise on entrance of your possible employer or his
representative. Stand without stiffness at atten-
tion; again await invitation to be seated; wait till
he is seated.
To bow when first spoken to, if hand not offered to
you.
To acknowledge superior position and age by courte-
ous deference during the interview.


To be respectful in attitude without subservience or
timidity; be quietly manly without self-assertive-
ness.
To prove by your distinct, correct speech that you
understand and appreciate good English.
To avoid slang, mispronunciations, common gram-
matical errors. (Avoid “playground English” in
school life if you wish to become automatically
exact —knowledge is not enough without practice.)
To listen to questions attentively and with self-posses-
sion.
To have practised writing your name and address in
best handwriting; also figures. Mind how you hold
your pen.
To answer audibly and deliberately; to reply con-
fidently, exactly, without boasting.
To say enough without talking too much.
To refrain from replying too eagerly and so to inter-
rupt ; beg pardon if necessary.
To look directly at your interviewer; do not either
stare or avoid his gaze.
To sit erect upon your chair without stiffness or an
air of being ill at 'ease. Do not fidget with your
hat from hand to hand or with handkerchief.
To avoid resting feet on rungs of chair or tilting chair.
To use “Madam” or “Sir” fairly frequently in your
replies, especially if they are monosyllabic.
To avoid slouching or leaning against furniture, if
interviewed standing.
To abstain, if standing, from shuffling feet, gazing
curiously about, or keeping hands in pockets.
To have references or testimonials arranged in order,
to hand them politely to the person asking for them.
K
129
APPENDIX


To prefer acknowledgment of your holy religion to
gaining any temporal advantage.
To show yourself thus a creditable product of Catholic
education.
To meet brusqueness (which may be a test) by a
courteousness, self-respecting demeanour.
To make courteous inquiries, if left waiting unattended
for a very long time, regarding your interview or
its continuance. (This may be done deliberately
as a test of your initiative.)
To be careful not to refer to persons you know who
are already in the employment of the firm, unless
you have their definite permission and recommen-
dation to do so.
To wait till you hear what your duties will probably
be before stating whether you would like to do
this or not to do that. (You accept or reject the
employer’s conditions—he need not accept what-
ever directions you may have been given by those
in your own home.)
To express thanks politely for interview granted and
to depart without signs of resentment if your ser-
vices are not accepted.
PERSONAL HABITS
Be sure not
To walk with an awkward gait or bent shoulders.
To keep your hands in your pockets.
To expectorate (unless silently into your handker-
chief).
To laugh boisterously, especially in public (rowdiness
is not mirth).


To omit to turn aside to cough or sneeze or to use
your handkerchief quietly.
To forget to cover the mouth with the hand when
yawning is unavoidable.
To clear the throat with a nauseating noise and with-
out expectorating into the handkerchief.
To breathe with the mouth open.
To be constantly fingering your face or hair.
To be over-familiar in nudging, patting, or striking
others playfully.
To enter a private room without knocking and awaiting
permission.
To wear your hat if at all doubtful of the privacy of
a room, e.g., the more official parts of business
premises.
To carry a lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette into a
private house or office.
To pick up written matter from another’s table or
office-desk.
To hum a tune, whistle or drum with the fingers while
awaiting attention.
To leave doors open which were previously shut, or to
slam doors.
To appear obsequious or unduly self-assured before a
possible employer.
To fail to be self-possessed, quietly self-reliant and
courteous in interviews with a possible employer.
To show disappointment at want of success by chang-
ing to a discourteous manner. (Maintain your
dignity and self-respect.)
To omit to address as “Sir” strangers considerably
older than yourself in business interviews or in
public.


To be arrogant towards inferiors without regard to
their feelings.
To be afraid to say “No” if you are a total abstainer
when invited to take alcoholic drink.
To be too critical of the manners of elderly people who
may allow themselves little exemptions from the
conventions.
To come to a standstill near those who are conversing
privately.
SPEECH
Be sure not
To use slang or speak ungrammatically.
To clip final consonants.
To say winder for window, jew for due or dew, ketch
for catch, stummick for stomach, lawr for law,
gography for geography, chewsday for Tuesday,
eh? or what? for I beg pardon.
To use unnecessary superlatives or exaggerated terms.
To use lady inappropriately to replace the term woman.
To make errors you have often corrected in school.
To speak in a loud coarse tone to emphasize your
remarks (especially in playground discussions —a
common fault with junior boys).
To regard correct speech as unnecessary or over-
precise.
To neglect remedying slovenliness of speech as care-
fully as you would anything unbecoming in your
apparel.
To handicap yourself by careless enunciation and pro-
nunciation in applying for employment by personal
interview.


CORRESPONDENCE
Be sure not
To leave a letter unanswered (an act of pronounced
discourtesy).
To fail to acknowledge formal invitations in the third
person.
To sign a note written in the third person.
To omit to express by letter your thanks for special
favours or services.
To seal a letter of introduction. (Do not give such
letters too freely.)
To omit at the end of a formal letter the name and
address of the person written to.
To read another person’s correspondence without his
full permission. (One of the social sins “beyond
forgiveness.”)
To open letters addressed to others even if found by
you. (Post to the address indicated.)
To allow the eyes to rest upon what others are writ-
ing.
AT TABLE
Be sure not
To cause inconvenience by being late for meals.
To sit too close to or too far from the table.
To place your serviette under your chin or on your
breast.
To handle table implements or furniture while wait-
ing to be served.
To eat audibly—to make noise while drinking—to lift
the cup or glass too high—to blow upon hot liquid.
To bend over your plate to take each mouthful.


To bite pieces from a slice of bread or to break bread
into soup.
To load the fork with food or take large mouthfuls.
To put your knife to your mouth or drink from your
saucer.
To hold knife or fork incorrectly—to touch the blade
of the one or the prongs of the other.
To put your knife into the butter-dish or spoon into
the sugar-bowl.
To keep close to your plate dishes required by others.
To eat hastily or “clean” your plate.
To reach for what is not close to you.
To spread your elbows when cutting food or lounge
in your chair.
To allow anything to fall directly from your mouth to
the plate.
To turn your back to one person to speak to another.
To fail to salute members of your family at breakfast
with a pleasant “Good morning.”
To speak with food in your mouth.
To forget to attend to a lady near you or to pass dishes
to others.
To be confused at an accident at table or make com-
ments on any mishap.
To place your elbows or forearms on the table.
To use a toothpick at table or fold your serviette when
a guest.
To omit to offer your right arm to a lady whom you
are conducting into dinner unless to place your
companion next to the wall on a staircase.
To remain seated when ladies leave the table after a
formal dinner.


To explain your reasons for refusing any dish or to
discuss dyspepsia.
To place the tips of your knife and fork on the edge
of the plate and the ends of the handles on the
table (like oars projecting from a rowing-boat) in
the intervals of using them.
To omit to place knife and fork side by side on the
plate when finished.
To come to breakfast with untidy apparel.
To take notice of the mistakes of others in matters of
etiquette.
To cover a slice of bread with jam or butter. (Break
into pieces.)
To rise from table before the meal is finished.
DRESS AND TOILET
Be sure not
To neglect cleanliness of the body.
To wear soiled clothing (especially linen), or to be
untidy.
To neglect the teeth or finger-nails.
To trim the finger-nails in public.
To omit to polish boots and shave regularly.
To allow small hairs to project from nostrils or ears.
To wear clothes (or ornaments) in bad taste.
To appear at breakfast in a dressing-gown.
DRAWING-ROOM
Be sure not
To bring overcoat or umbrella into the drawing-room
no matter how short your visit is to be. (Hat and
stick are allowed.)


To omit to salute your hostess first or to bow to the
rest of the company.
To offer to shake hands with a lady or a gentleman
much older than yourself. (The initiative is theirs.)
To seat yourself-without being invited to do so.
To remain seated if a lady enters the room.
To fail to allow ladies to precede when entering or
leaving the room.
To omit to open the door for a lady who is leaving the
room, if you are the nearest gentleman.
To introduce a lady to a gentleman, one who is more
elderly to a young person or one of higher rank
to an inferior. (The reverse is, in each case, the
correct procedure.)
To talk over-loudly in order to show your self-assur-
ance, or to whisper to others.
To lounge on chair or sofa or tilt your chair back-
wards.
To monopolize the conversation or confine it to sub-
jects or people of little interest to those present.
To discuss your physical maladies or family troubles.
To seek to be witty by ridiculing others.
To repeat malicious rumours or uncharitable gossip.
To fail to be tactful regarding the feelings of all pre-
sent. (A true gentleman never causes unnecessary
pain to others.)
To introduce controversial topics into a general con-
versation.
To cut short the remarks of another by pushing for-
ward your own favourite topic. (Interruption is
unpardonable.)
136
CHRISTIAN POLITENESS


To contradict a statement in a downright fashion.
(Difference of opinion must be expressed tactfully
and with perfect courtesy.)
To be drawn into a heated argument with another
after joining in a general conversation. (Preserve
self-possession and change the conversation tact-
fully.)
To repeat time-worn humorous stories or to persist in
would-be witticisms or in punning.
To mimic absent people in the hope of anmsing those
present.
To appear sulky if feeling overlooked or listless when
spoken to.
To show repugnance to the conversation of a bore. (A
trying test of real politeness.)
To moisten the finger-tips in dealing cards or in turn-
ing over the leaves of books or periodicals. (Most
unhygienic.)
To show ill-feeling on losing at games.
To neglect elderly people in company even if some-
what deaf. (Another test of real courtesy.)
To read a book or letter in company unless after seek-
ing permission for an apparently good reason.
To cut others off from sharing the warmth of the fire.
To prolong your visit unduly.
To be evidently so anxious, through over-preciseness,
to avoid breaches of the conventions as to make
your manners strained and artificial. (You can be
at your ease without being forgetful of others.)


DANCING
Be sure not
To omit to ask your hostess and her daughters for
dances.
To introduce a gentleman to a lady without first pri-
vately obtaining her consent.
To offer your left arm to a lady unless to place her
next to the wall on a staircase.
To fail to supply your partner’s wants at supper.
To fail to express to your hostess your appreciation of
a pleasant evening.
To leave early, if called away, without excusing your-
self to your intended partners for subsequent
dances.
To attract unfavourable notice to yourself by exag-
gerated actions.
To indulge in dances of questionable modesty.
IN PUBLIC
Be sure not
To disobey regulations for traffic on footpaths or roads.
To brush negligently against other pedestrians.
To refuse to make way for other vehicles if driving.
To fail to apologize for any fault of yours.
To eat in the street.
To converse standing in the middle of the footpath.
To turn round to gaze after people or to point at per-
sons or objects.
To stare at any person on account of peculiarity of
manner or appearance.
To smoke in the company of others without permission
(except in places set apart for the purpose).


To precede ladies when entering a doorway or a public
conveyance.
To omit to raise your hat on meeting a gentleman
friend if accompanied by a lady unknown to you.
To touch your cap without definitely raising it.
To fail to acknowledge the salute of a stranger to a
lady in your company.
To omit to raise your hat to a lady with whom you are
unacquainted if you have occasion to address her
or after doing her any service voluntarily or by
request.
To get into conversation with strangers imprudently.
To be over-fussy or over-anxious in your politeness
to strangers. (Assist ladies and elderly gentlemen,
but use your judgment regarding others except in
case of real need.)
To rush for seats in a public hall or conveyance dis-
regarding women, children, and elderly men. (If
you lose a seat you retain your self-respect.)
To occupy more space than is necessary in a public
conveyance.
To interrupt an audience by entering during the per-
formance.
To push your way along a row of spectators to your
own place without apologizing.
To disturb, by talking, others who wish to listen.
(Selfishness is always bad manners.)
To look over the shoulders of those who are reading.
To be so petty and mean spirited as to vent ill-temper
upon inferiors.
To do a mean action the recollection of which will
cause you many an unpleasant reflection.


To fail to do the right thing because it is right—not
for reward. Noblesse oblige.
SPORT
Be sure not
To be unpunctual in arriving at the ground.
To forget that the game is the thing and not victory.
To win a point by deceit—to be unwilling to concede a
doubtful score to your opponent.
To lose your temper or criticize your fellow players.
To win arrogantly or lose sulkily.
To omit to congratulate a victorious opponent.
To cease your efforts because you are being beaten.
To display self-satisfaction at your own skill.
To make excuses for your defeat or grumble at mis-
fortune.
To show ill-feeling or dissatisfaction towards umpires
or referees.
To applaud in a purely partisan spirit as a spectator.
To lower yourself to shout abusive remarks.
To regard sport too seriously or take time for it from
your serious duties.
To discredit your school by unseemly behaviour on or
off the field.
Halstead Printing Company Limited,
Nickson Street, Sydney
