

CHRISTIANITY AND
THE HOME
By
The Very Rev, F. de WITT BATTY, M.A.
Dean of Brisbane
Price Is, 6dL
AUSTRALIA 1
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LIMITED
§3 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY
Registered by the Postmaster-General for
transmission through the post as a book


At the National Conference of the Church of Eng-
land Men's Society held at Ballarat at the beginning
of 1928 it was urged that the times call for a fresh
and up-to-date presentation of the fundamentals of
our Faith, with the teaching contained therein for
the guidance of thought and conduct. It was also
strongly urged that such a presentation would be
more welcome if it. were produced amid Australian
conditions and not imported. Moreover, in view of
the fact that the C.E.M.S. represents all schools of
thought in the Church, and therefore cannot be sus-
pected of encouraging sectional propaganda, the
National Council of the Society was requested to
undertake the work,
The result is this series of booklets. Their pur-
pose is the dissemination of truth in a short, con-
structive, readable form. They are designed primar-
ily for men, but it is hoped that they will be of
some use to all members of the Church, as also to
other inquiring minds. The Council counts itself
fortunate in having- secured the co-operation of the
Right Rev. R. Stephen, D.D., formerly Bishop of
Newcastle, as the Editor of the series.
While the Society is not to be held responsible
for each and every view expressed in these booklets,
it reminds readers that the writers who have gener-
ously assisted in this educational venture are men
whose scholarship and judgment are held in the
highest respect.
Very confidently, therefore, do I commend the
series to that wide public which cannot but he inter-
ested in topics so vital.
G, H. Gippsland,
National President of the C.E.M.S,


CHAPTER I
ON THE IMPORTANCE OF THE SUBJECT
The subject of Christianity and the Home is of
great and pressing importance for this reason,
amongst others, that the Home is the first and
greatest school of character.
The most important thing about any man is his
character, the stamp that his life has taken from his
environment and experience, the particular collec-
tion of likes and dislikes, of tastes and distastes, of
habits of thought and speech, of ways of behaving,
which make a man himself and mark him off from
everybody else in the world.
It is the most important thing because it deter-
mines his destiny. What he is determines how he
fares. For character cannot he successfully
assumed, A man may play the humbug or the
hypocrite for a while, but it is only a question of
time before be is known as he really is, and that
knowledge determines the world’s reaction to him.
'Whether he is trusted or distrusted, -whether he
•is liked or disliked, whether he is influential or
negligible, whether he succeeds or fails, depends
upon his character. There is nothing more import-
ant in the world.
CHARACTER AND ETERNITY
Or in the next world. His character is the one
tiling he carries with him across the frontier of


death, and it will determine for him whether the
environment on the other* side will mean happiness
or misery. Men sometimes speak as though the
doctrines of heaven and hell had been now rele-
gated to the limbo of outworn superstitions. And
in the crude forms in which they have sometimes
been taught, perhaps they have. But as statements
of eternal and inevitable fact they are surely as true
to-day as ever they were,
I sent my soul into the Invisible
Some message of the after life to spell,
And by and by my soul returned to me
And whispered: “I myself am Heaven and Hell.”
A simple illustration will suffice. Two men go to
a concert at which nothing' but the best, classical
music is performed. Watch them, and the different
effects the music has upon them. One of them is
entranced by it. He is living' in another and a
higher world. He is rapt above Time, and if you
asked him how long the symphony had lasted, he
could not tell you. Life for him has taken on a rich-
ness, a spaciousness, an intensity, such as it does
not ordinarily know. He is having life and having it
more abundantly. But the other man is profoundly
bored. See him shifting his feet and moving un-
easily in his seat, gazing despairingly at his pro-
gramme in a pathetic attempt to calculate how
much longer he Is. called upon to suffer, now study-
ing the audience in a vain endeavour to shut out
the distressing noise from his attention. What is
to the first man an experience of purest beauty, the
building of a house not made with hands, eternal
in the heavens, is to the other no more than a mean-
ingless succession of unpleasing sounds, Wherein
lies the difference? Not in the music, for that is
the same for both; but in the differing tastes of the
two men who are listening to it. The parable


scarcely needs application. Whether the environ-
ment of the eternal world will mean happiness or
misery must surely depend upon the tastes we carry
with us when we cross to the other side. Our char-
acter determines our destiny not only in the life of
this world, but also In the life of the world to come.
HOW CHARACTER IS FORMED
How, then, is character formed? The most im-
portant fact about It is that we form it for ourselves.
We are not sent into the world with a character
ready-made. And neither heredity nor environment
have any necessarily determining influence; for we
can rise above them or fall below them if we choose.
We make our characters for ourselves. And the way
we make them is very simple. It is by putting
our wills into operation, by making acts of moral
choke. Every time we choose to act this way
rather than that, we deepen some groove, we
strengthen some, bent, we make ourselves a little
bit more fixed in one direction or another, and we
make it a little bit more unlikely that we shall ever
change very much from being what we are. It is
this that gives such romance and such importance
to our ordinary daily lives. The great moments of
life are very few and far between. It is not very
often that we are called upon to face a really big
temptation, make a really big decision, or carry a
specially heavy load of responsibility. But such
calls do come sometimes, and, when they come, our
conduct In face of them is determined by how we
have spent the ordinary moments, by how we have
been accustomed to act in face of those little oppor-
tunities for moral choice which meet us every day.
Character cannot suddenly be assumed. There is an
old Latin saying, “Nemo repente fit turpissimus/'
which means that if in an emergency a man behaves


like a cad, it is because he is a cad. The converse
is equally true. Emergencies do but reveal the man,
and whether we play the coward or the hero in. face
of some great crisis is decided for us in advance
by the use we have made of the humdrum oppor-
tunities of our ordinary daily life, when nobody
was watching, when nothing of importance was
afoot, and when it did not seem to matter in the
least whether we decided this way or that. So it
is that the great battles of life are lost or won before
ever they come, to be fought,
CHARACTER AND THE HOME
And most of them are won In the Home, often
during early childhood. One of the really solid
contributions which modern psychology has made
to our stock of knowledge is the attention it has
drawn to the immeasurable good and the
irreparable harm which may result from a
right or wrong environment in childhood. The
Home, so we have learned, may be a factory of
saints and heroes; it may also be a factory of
criminals and degenerates. For it is in the Home
that there come those first encounters with the
enemies of man’s soul which offer him the chance
of victory or defeat in the greater battles of life.
Every day the child has to choose between what
is true and what is false, what is mean and what
is generous, what is honest and what is dis-
honest, what is right and what is wrong; and by
these little acts of choice he is determining his char-
acter, It was in the home at Nazareth that the
greatest Hero of all time formed that human char-
acter which has ever since set the moral standard
for mankind. In that home where He lived with
Mary and Joseph, “and was subject unto them/’ He
had His first experiences of that discipline of moral


choice by which the characters of men are made
or marred. And when, as must often have happened,
the little boy Jesus cheerfully detached Himself
from some engrossing game to run some errand at
His mother's bidding, He was forming- that char-
acter which presently enabled Him to say in the
supreme moment of His agony “Nevertheless not
my will hut Thine he done.” And if fathers and
mothers wish the best for their children, it they
covet for them noble and useful lives, they must
see to it that the standards of the Home are the
standards of Christ,


CHAPTER II
ON LOVE AND MARRIAGE
The foundation of the Home is marriage. We
may for convenience apply the word Home to
houses in which unmarried persons live, but strictly
speaking- the term is inapplicable. The family, and
with it the Home, come into existence with the
mating of a man and a woman in a union which is
intended to be lifelong. It is right therefore that
in any discussion of Christianity and the Home we
should begin with the discussion of marriage.
Marriage is a social institution. It is of such
importance to the community that the state has
everywhere insisted on regulating by law both its
beginning and its continuance. Its importance to
the community lies in the fact that it is concerned
with three of the main pillars upon which civilized
society rests, the Home, the due propagation of the
race, and the value of the plighted word. Without
the Home the state would lack the divinely-ordained
and most effective machinery for the training of
the characters of its citizens; without the due pro-
pagation of the race society would cease to exist;
and if men’s promises could not he trusted civiliza-
tion would be at an end. With Christian marriage
a fresh and still higher consideration has to be taken
into account. For the Christian marriage is more
than a promise ; it is a vow, and the third party to
the marriage contract is God Himself, And the


vow is a lifelong vow. It is to bind “until death
us do part.” Its permanence is independent of all
vicissitudes of fortune. It is to be maintained in-
violate “for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer,
in sickness and in health.” And since within that
vow Is contained the promise and potency of the
birth of children, the creation of new human per-
sons, it concerns the destiny of generations yet un-
born, and its consequences may last as long- as the
Universe itself. So great a thing is marriage, so
marvellous in the complexity of its relationships,
that it is small wonder that the Church warns us
that “it is not by any to be enterprised or taken in
hand unadvisedly, lightly or 'wantonly, but rever-
ently, discreetly, soberly, and in the fear of God,”
Those therefore who treat marriage (as it is too
often treated to-day) as though it were the private
concern of a particular man and a particular woman
are under a definite and dangerous illusion.
LOVE AND MARRIAGE
Nevertheless marriage begins with the most indi-
vidual of all experiences, the experience of falling
in love. What do we mean by that? The phrase
is used of a wide variety of emotional experiences
ranging from a purely physical attraction up to the
most romantic and self-forgetful devotion. And the
success or failure, the happiness or unhappiness, of
any marriage depends in the main upon what kind
of love it is into which the husband and wife fell.
For the Christian there, need never be doubt as
to the essential characteristics of true love. They
have been defined lor all time in the imperishably
beautiful words of the great apostle: “Love suffers
long and is kind; love envieth not; love vaunteth
not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave itself
unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily pro-


voked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity,
but rejoiceth in the truth; beareth all things, be-
lieveth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all
things. Love never fails.” To fall in love is
to come into this exalted condition in relation to
another. It is the realization- —sudden or gradual—
by one party to the experience that in the other is
to be found the mate who Is needed to make life
complete, And, more than this, it is the joyful
willingness of each to surrender so much of self
as is required to make the completeness of a perfect
union.
IX)VE AND PASSION
It will be seen at once how widely and deeply
this ideal differs from any mere physical passion.
Such passion is the desire to get, but love is the
desire to give. In such passion the desire for
physical union Is dominant, but in love the desire is
for a union of body, mind, and soul. And it is a
fact that in every experience of true love the bodily
passions immediately and miraculously cease to
assert themselves. That indeed might almost be
taken as one of the tests of love. The question
which a young man believing himself to be in love
should find himself putting to himself is not “Can
I persuade this girl to give herself to me?” but
“Can I give myself to her? Is it really she herself
with whom I am in love, or is it only the beautiful
body in which the self dwells? Can I be sure that
this love of which I am conscious now is of the
kind that will persist through all the changes and
chances of this mortal life? We may have to
face hard times as well as good, sickness as well
as health, age as well as youth, perhaps poverty
as well as comfort. Am I the comrade for her,
is she the comrade for me, in the great adventure


of life? Can I devote myself to her, body, mind
and soul till death us do part?”
THE UNIQUENESS OF MARRIED HAPPINESS
It is this requirement of all embracing' and last"
mg devotion which makes marriage based on true
love so utterly and uniquely happy, and which on
the other hand makes the happiness of marriage
based on anything' less than true love so fragile and
precarious a thing. .For the only valid standard
by which to judge the relative values of the differ-
ent forms of pleasure and happiness which are open
to man is the amount of man’s self which they
gratify. The pleasures of the senses satisfy only
a very little, and that not the most important, part
of ns. They are very intense, but of very short
duration. And he who seeks happiness along the
path that they indicate is following a will-o’-
the-wisp. They have their place in any complete
life, but it is a subordinate place. The only happi-
ness worth pursuing is that which satisfies the whole
of man’s nature, spirit, soul, and mind as well as
body. That is the happiness to which true love
points the way in marriage, and those who have
attained it know that it is unutterably greater and
more satisfying than any other happiness that this
world affords. Such completeness of devotion is
not to be attained suddenly or without effort. But
those who set out with a pure intention upon the
quest for it will find it, and in finding it will find
a life which is life indeed.


CHAPTER HI
ON THE FIRST PURPOSE OF MARRIAGE
The Marriage Service in the Revised Prayer Book
of 1927 has re-stated the causes for which matri-
mony was ordained. “First,” it says, “it was
ordained for the increase of mankind according to
the will of God, and that children might be brought
up in the fear and nurture of the Lord and to the
praise of His holy name/’ This is the natural order.
Marriage normally involves the production and
rearing of a family. The strength of the instinct
impelling to the act by which procreation may be
achieved is a witness to Nature’s urgent desire to
secure the perpetuation of the species. Marriages
which are, for some inevitable reason, childless may
indeed be greatly blessed of God and greatly service-
able to the community, and it must not be forgotten
that husband and wife form a family even when no
children come to crown their union. But willing-
ness to undertake the responsibilities of parenthood
is an indispensable element in any marriage which
is to be worthy of the name. And no marriage
deserves the name of Christian marriage which is
not accompanied by an earnest desire that, if it be
physically possible, the union should be blessed
with children.
THE SACRAMENTAL ACT
The physical act, characteristic of marriage, is the
sacramental expression of married love, And ir


the result in which it normally issues husband and
wife find the richest fulfilment of their mutual love.
For love by its very nature is creative, and of all
the joys which our human life affords the joy of
creation is the highest and the most satisfying. It
is a sharing' with God Himself of that experience
of which It is said that “the morning stars sang
together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy.”
The marital act is sacramental, an outward and
visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace given
unto us, for the. act which is the crowning symbol
of married love is also its enrichment and confirma-
tion. To degrade it to the level of a merely animal
impulse is sacrilege, to abuse it is profanation. The
act itself becomes a degradation if It be divorced
from the love of which it is the symbol and con-
summation, and the mutual love of husband and
wife can never come to its completion until the
bodily act has been achieved. That is why the
Christian Church has always been prepared to de-
clare null and void any marriage which has not been
or cannot be consummated by the characteristic
act.
THE EUGENIST AND MARRIAGE
The desire of husband and wife to be the parents
of healthy and happy children is, as has been said,
one of the prime requirements for a Christian mar-
riage, But It is possible, as we know to our cost,
for children to be born for whom the prospect of
either health or happiness does not exist. And
this terrible possibility has produced in our time
two characteristic movements, of both of which it
is necessary to take account in any treatment of
Christian marriage and the Home. The first is
the movement known as Eugenics, the second the
movement, for securing the artificial restriction of
the population.


The Eugenist claims that, by restricting the privi-
lege of marriage to those physically and mentally
qualified for the task of parenthood, the state could
eliminate from society the problem of the. unfit;
some indeed go further, and claim that the laws of
heredity are now so well understood that it would
be possible by judicious mating greatly to improve
the human breed. This latter claim is not justi-
fied by the facts and need not detain us long. it
is not true that our knowledge of the laws of here-
dity is such as to hold out any prospect of achieving
the promised result. Put quite crudely, the claim
is that men could be bred like cattle and with
correspondingly encouraging results. But this rests
upon a patent fallacy. The qualities which go to
make a good beast are all physical qualities and can
undoubtedly be secured by judicious breeding. But
the qualities which go to make a good man are not
primarily physical qualities at all, and are not re-
cognizably dependent on the laws of heredity, It
would be invidious to quote examples, but such will
occur to any well-informed person who sets himself
to think of cases where the marriage of distin-
guished parents has resulted in the birth of quite
undistinguished children, In breeding cattle we
know what we want and can usually get it. In the
breeding of men we do not know what we want,
and in no case can we be sure of getting it.
FITNESS FOR MARRIAGE
The larger eugenic claim can thus be dismissed,
and it is probable that it is only made by a decreas-
ing minority of eugenists. But what of the simpler
claim? Could we by restricting the right to marry
to those who after examination were found to be
free from any transmissible disease or tendency
eliminate one of the gravest of social problems?


And if so, should we? The answer to the first
question is very doubtful, the answ'er to the second
is more than doubtful.
In the first place, in spite of the confident claims
made by some eugenists, it is not really true to say
that we understand very much about the laws of
heredity even on the physical side. Certain facts
are known, but very few. And even with regard
to these opinion is divided as to whether legal in-
terference would be beneficial or otherwise. In
the second place, it would be impossible to secure
any general agreement as to what diseases or ten-
dencies should debar from marriage; the standards
which would be imposed would be unequal, and
cruel injustices would almost inevitably result.
And, in the third place, no examination would be
effective which did not secure the cordial co-opera-
tion of the person most concerned; and this would,
especially in the most urgent cases, be impossible
to secure.
But even if all these objections could be over-
ruled, would it be desirable that we should elimin-
ate the "unfit” from our population? The word is
so vague, and in the mouths of different persons
covers so many different things, Robert Louis
Stevenson was "unfit” in the technical sense, and
spent the greater part of his short life in a vain
search in different corners of the world for the
physical health which he never found. Yet the
world is the richer for his living, for the heartening
essays and the brilliant stories which he bequeathed
to our race. William Pitt was "unfit” when he
stood leaning on his crutch, his body swathed in
bandages and racked with pain in every fibre, and
breathed defiance at England’s foes. But he saved
the nation. The world owes more than, it com-
monly recognizes to some of those whom the eugen-


ists would eliminate, and this consideration .should
give us pause when we hear of their much-vaunted
panacea.
It is, of course, the duty of any who have doubts
as to whether they can fitly marry to consult a
doctor and discuss the matter fully and frankly. But
over and above that there are good grounds tor
believing that the evil of undesirable unions can
best be attacked on the positive rather than the
negative side, by education in the responsibilities
of marriage and in the social results of failure to
realize them, rather than by legal prohibitions.


CHAPTER IV
OF THE SECOND PURPOSE OF MATRIMONY
“Secondly.” says the Revised Prayer Book of Holy
Matrimony, “it was ordained in order that the
natural instincts and affections implanted by God
should be hallowed and directed aright; that those
who are called of God to this holy estate should
continue therein in pureness of living.” What are
these natural instincts to which the Prayer Book
refers? They are part of that apparatus of desire
with which Nature has equipped the human organ-
ism in order to secure attention to certain funda-
mental needs, the need for sustenance, the need for
rest, and the need for reproduction. The human
body needs food and drink if it is to continue to
live; therefore Nature has endowed it with the
instincts of hunger and thirst. It needs sleep if
body and mind are to continue to function and be in
health; therefore Nature has endowed it with the
apparatus of fatigue. It needs to propagate itself
if the race is to continue; therefore Nature has im-
planted in it those instincts to which the Marriage
Service particularly refers.
THE GRATIFICATION OF INSTINCTS
It is important to keep our thoughts of these last-
mentioned instincts in connection with the rest o£
the'make-up of human nature, and not to isolate
them as a thing apart. For the connection will


serve to expose the fallacy of many a specious argu-
ment advanced with regard to them. It will be
obvious for instance that the gratification of any
human desire can easily become an abuse if It be
gratified in a wrong way or to a wrong extent. The
desire for food does not justify the consumption
of every kind of food. Cannibalism is abhorrent to
the conscience and the taste of civilized man. The
man who uses the instinct of thirst as an excuse for
intemperance, and the man who woos an unnatural
sleep by the unnecessary use of soporific drugs are
alike recognized as degenerate. And so it is with
the sexual instincts. The social and moral experi-
ence of mankind combine with the terrible penalties
which Nature is apt to exact from illicit sexual in-
tercourse to prove that these instincts are intended
to be. gratified in monogamous marriage and in no
other way. The mating of one man with one
woman is the law of Nature and of God.
And again it is surely obvious that these instincts
are implanted not primarily for the self "gratification
of man, but for the securing of the particular pur-
pose at which Nature aims. The desire for food
is implanted in order that the human body may re-
ceive the nourishment which it needs, and the
pleasantness of a good meal to a hungry man is
but the. incentive which Nature has designed in
order to secure its purpose. To eat for the mere
delight of eating, for the mere pleasure of the taste
of the food in the mouth is recognized as gluttony,
and a thing to be abhorred. There are eases on
record of men who were debarred by disordered
digestions from an ordinary diet, but who dodged
the limitations imposed by Nature by eating freely
of the food whose taste they loved, and then imme-
diately taking an emetic, We do not admire such
men. And it follows that to take any instinct and


to use it merely as a means of sensual enjoyment
without regard to the purpose for which it was im-
planted is in the deepest sense unnatural and there-
fore wrong. And it is because the instincts of the
body can so easily get out of control, and solicit
us to gratify them in wrong ways or to a wrong
extent, that they can, and often do, become what
the Catechism calls “the sinful lusts of the flesh/ 5
THE FALLACY OF “NATURALNESS”
Sexual unchastity, the gratification of the sexual
instinct apart from marriage, is sometimes excused
on the plea that the instinct gratified is “natural,”
But this is a sophistry which has wrecked more
lives than any other. There is a serious fallacy
in this use of the word “natural/ 5 We can only
decide what is natural to any state of being when
we know the highest purpose which that being was
intended to serve. As the process of evolution pro-
eeeds, things which were natural in the lower stages
become unnatural in the higher. It is natural for
an ape to use his hands for climbing trees. But it
is not natural for a man so to use them, and, if he
does, he unfits them for the higher works of which
he is capable, for sculpture, for painting, for sur-
gery, It is always possible to take anything in-
tended for a high purpose and to use it for a low
purpose, but it is unnatural to do so, and it gets
spoilt in the, process. It is possible to use a finely
tempered chisel as a screw-driver, but if it is so
used it is spoilt for use as a chisel. So what is
natural to man is that which serves the highest
ends that it is given to man to achieve. And, as
St Paul reminds us in a profound passage (I. Cor-
inthians vi. 12-20), “the body is not for fornication
but for the Lord/ 5 and impurity, whatever form it
may take, violates the true nature of man.


THE CONTROL OF THE INSTINCTS
It is the glory of man that he can control his
instincts; so far as we know, he is the only creature
who can. It is also his safety. The body is an admir-
able servant, but the worst possible master, And of
all sad spectacles in the world there is none sadder
than that of a man who has abdicated the throne of
his personality and become the slave of his bodily
desires. The instincts of the body are in themselves
natural and right, hut, in order that they may re-
main so, they must be “hallowed and controlled A
otherwise disaster is at hand. It is a fine thing to
see a capable horseman riding a spirited horse, and
the more spirited the horse the finer the sight, pro-
vided the rider is in control. But let the horse get
the bit between his teeth and assume control, and
then we hold our breath and wait in agony for the
disaster which is almost sure to follow. So it is a
line thing to see a high-spirited, full-blooded man,
full of the joy of living - , so long as he is in control
of himself. But It his bodily Instincts get and re-
main out of control, we know that disaster awaits
him.
And they need not get out of control. Even in
the case of the strongest of them all, that with
which we are particularly dealing - , continence is
hard, but it is not impossible. The devil tries to
bluff us into thinking that the assaults of strong
bodily temptation are Irresistable; but It Is pure
bluff. They have been resisted before, they are
being resisted to-day by thousands of men who
bring to their marriage a life as pure as that which
they require from the wife of their choice. And
anyone who believes that he cannot overcome his
bodily temptations is believing a devil's lie; because
he can.


THE MODERN FORM OF THE LIE
The He faces us to-day in another and more
modem form. It is held by some that continence,
if not impossible, is at least undesirable. Psycho-
logy, so these devil's advocates would have us be-
lieve, has shown the danger of repressing any
instinct, and especially this strongest of all
instincts. But this is a gross and misleading exag-
geration. “Few doctors with a reputation to lose
will assert to-day that continence is impossible for
the normal man, or even that it will entail any
harmful consequences’* (Copec Report on the Re-
lation of the Sexes, p. 92). We expect chastity
from v/ometi, and, in consequence, in the vast
majority of cases we get it. If it were expected
with equal confidence from men, it is certain that
we should get it from them also. For there is no
ground for supposing that there was originally any
distinction between the sexes in regard to the
strength of the sexual desire. But, as civilization
has progressed, women have forced themselves to
acquire the art of chastity; and the experience of
millions confirms the belief that men can acquire
it too, provided that they seek it from the right
motives. And by the right motives is meant such
considerations as these: a sense of fair play which
will prevent any decent man from helping to rivet
on the daughter or sister of another man a fate
which he would regard as hideously impossible for
his own: a sense of social obligation which, recog-
nizing the ghastliness of the world-wide traffic in
women's honour and lives, refuses to contribute to
its maintenance: a sense of justice to himself which
creates the desire to make every physical act mini-
ster to the well-being of his whole nature and not
merely to the most easily perverted part of it: and a


sense of duty to God, the vision of Whose will
tor men is darkened and obscured by every act of
impurity. It will be noted that the fear of physical
disease and suffering is not here mentioned among
the right incentives to purity. And, Indeed, as a
mereAy selfish fear it has no right to a place in the
list. But it is at the same time probable that one
of the strongest influences helping to keep men
chaste is the knowledge that their sin may have
terrible consequences extending to generations yet
unborn.
THE ARTIFICIAL RESTRICTION OF BIRTH
It would be as impossible as it would undesirable
to treat of the controlling of the sexual impulse
without some reference to the widespread move-
ment for encouraging the limitation of families by
the use of contraceptives. And it is perhaps enough
to say that, If the line of argument suggested in
this chapter be sound, the practice stands patently
condemned. It is indeed most necessary that births
should be controlled, and that, for the sake of the
health of both mother and. child, there should be an
interval of at least two years between one birth
and another. By one of her wise provisions Nature
has given clear indication that this should be so,
But the only method of birth-control which can
accord with the Christian standard is the method of
self-control. And to say that this method is so
difficult as to be practically impossible is simply
untrue.


CHAPTER \ r
OF THE THIRD PURPOSE OF MATRIMONY
“Thirdly It was ordained for the mutual society,
help and comfort which the one ought to have of
the other both in prosperity and in adversity,” So
the Prayer Book goes on to say. A Christian mar-
riage is far more than an agreement to live to-
gether. It is in the highest sense a partnership,
in which each finds in the other the complement of
self, in -which all the interests of life are increased
by being shared. To the happily married this
partnership is a most blessed fact; they realize that,
even if marriage served no other purpose, that
alone would make it a thing for which to thank
God. But it is not a fact for all married couples.
There are, alas! many unhappy marriages, some for
reasons which are perhaps irreparable, hut more
because the conditions on which the happiness of
married partnership can be secured have not been
understood or observed. What are those condi-
tions?
SPIRITUAL AFFINITY
The first is spiritual affinity. Fundamentally
husband and wife must be at one, what St Paul
calls “of the same mind/’ in regard to the things
that matter most in life. This does not mean that
they must automatically agree in all their opinions.
It is not necessary, it is not even desirable, that they


should think on all subjects exactly alike. Indeed it
is almost impossible that they should. Man lives
largely by logic, woman by intuition, and while it
may be arguable which method is the better, it is
beyond argument that they lead to different points
of view. And the charm of woman- —if only she
would always remember it —lies not in her likeness
to man hut in her difference. But, granted all this,
it still remains true that for a real partnership in
marriage there must be a deep and fundamental
agreement in all the things that matter most. There
must be the same general attitude towards life. Hus-
band and -wife must admire the same things and
love the same things, think the same things funny
and the same things sad, have the same general
conception of Truth and Beauty and Goodness, The
verbs of each must be conjugated in the. plural, and
“we” and “our” must replace ‘T’ and “mine.” In
a famous passage St Paul has perfectly expressed,
though not specially in connection with Christian
marriage, the attitude of mind and soul which is
one of the prime requisites for a really happy mar-
riage: “That ye be of the same mind, having the
same love, being of one accord, of one mind; doing
nothing through faction or through vainglory, but
in lowliness of mind each counting other better than
himself; not looking each of you to his own things,
but each of you also to the things of others, Have
this mind in you which was also in Christ Jesus/*
MUTUAL CONFIDENCE
If marriage Is to be a real partnership there must
be mutual confidence between man and wife, There
must he nothing in the life of either with regard
to which there is unwillingness to share it, so far
as it can he shared, with the other. The husband
must be interested in the work of the house (it Is


well if, to the extent of his limited capacities, he
shares it), and the wife must be interested in the
problems and difficulties of his business or trade
and in his hobbies and amusements. There must be
no subjects which are dosed between them. Again
this does not mean detailed identity of tastes and
capacities—some of the happiest marriages are be-
tween those whose tastes differ so widely as to be
almost opposite. But it does mean that the whole
of the life of each should be open to the inspection
of the other, that there are no experiences which
either is unwilling to share, so far as they can he
shared, with the other. The happiest marriages
are those In which husband and wife are “real
pals.”
The flower of mutual confidence is a delicate one,
and can easily be made to wither and die. The
husband who is unwilling' to let his wife know
the full facts about his income is an example of
one who strikes at its very root, or rather of one
who has not even begun to achieve the attitude of
mind out of which mutual confidence can grow.
ABSOLUTE LOYALTY
That root is absolute loyalty, a loyalty unques-
tioned and unquestionable, a loyalty which springs
from the whole-hearted conviction that each is tor
the other in a class unique and apart, bound by a
tie of affection and devotion which transcends all
other human ties. “For this cause shall a man
leave his father and mother, and cleave to his wife,”
This does not mean that the married man or woman
must forsake old friends or refuse to make new
friends. There is room and need for other friend-
ships in the life of the married, provided that they
are friendships which can be shared. That is the
test, and friendships which fail to pass it not infre-


quently break up the happiness of married life. But
provided friends can be called “our” friends, they
are to be cultivated rather than abjured.
It goes without, saying that in any friendships
with members of the opposite sex the border-line
which separates friendship from sexual love must
be scrupulously observed, It can be crossed easily,
but not imperceptibly. The honourable man or
woman will know almost at once when love for a
friend has passed out of the region of brother-sister
love, in which alone it may lawfully dwell, and has
taken on the character which points to marriage as
its satisfaction. Should such a discovery be made,
there is only one. thing to be done, and it must be
done at once. All intimacy must immediately cease,
and, if it be impossible to avoid meetings, they
must be only in circumstances in which nothing but
the most ordinary conversation is possible. To some
this may seem to be hard counsel. But we are
dealing with Christianity and the home, and Christ
taught that the laws of sexual relationship are
broken by the illicit thought every bit as much as
by the illicit act. (St, Matthew v, 27-28.)
SELF-FORGETFULNESS
In the light of all that has been said It will be, seen
that Christian marriage will be a life of mutual
forgetfulness. Each partner to it will be governed
by the apostolic rule, “In honour preferring one
another/" Each will do homage to the spiritual
excellence perceived in the other. It will he a real
partnership of which mutual consent is the govern-
ing principle, in which, for instance, the claim to
the privileges of the married will not be made, un-
less it Is the desire of both. Such self-forgetfulness
need not be conscious, and, indeed, where there is
real love the process of achieving it will probably


always be imperceptible. All that is known of a
true marriage by those who have experienced it is
that it has brought them an unutterable happiness,
greater and more wonderful than any they have ever
known, or dreamed of as possible. But this is but
a proof that the needed self-forgetfulness has been
achieved. For a really Christian marriage is the
most convincing proof of the truth of Christ's pro-
found saying, that the way to find your life is to
lose it in some self-forgetful devotion. For such
a marriage is the gateway to the purest and com-
pletes! happiness that this world can give.


CHAPTER VI
ON DIVORCE
It is impossible to treat of Christian marriage with-
out also treating of divorce, for it is in this con-
nection that the Christian ideal of marriage conies
most sharply and obviously into conflict with the
standards of modern secular society, Christianity
took its origin in a decadent world, in which mar-
riage. had become debased to the level of a volun-
tary compact between two persons to live together
as man and wife for so long as it suited the desire
and convenience of both parties. It was part of
the moral laxity which preluded the fall of the
Roman Empire that complete release from the mar-
riage bond was obtainable upon the simple request
of either party. And there is a tragic humour in
the fact that a similar laxity in Soviet Russia is
being hailed by its admirers as a sign of social
progress. As against this laxity the Christian
Church developed, and has since maintained, an
exalted standard by which marriage is regarded as
a sacramental union of man and wife which creates
a new and indestructible spiritual fact and a bond
which is dissoluble only by death. The earliest
witness to the Christian standard is to be found
in St. Paul’s first epistle to the Corinthians, written
probably within twenty-five years of our Lord’s
crucifixion and fifteen years or more before the
earliest of the written Gospels, He says: “But


unto the married I give charge, yea not I but the
Lord, That the wife depart not from her husband
(but. and if she depart, let her remain unmarried,
or else be reconciled to her husband) and that the
husband leave not his wife” (I. Cor, vii. 10-1 I),
And the reason for this rigid injunction can be
inferred from two verses in the previous chapter;
“Know ye not that your bodies are members of
Christ? Shall I then take away the members of
Christ, and make them members of a harlot? God
forbid. Or know ye not that he that is joined to
a harlot is one body? For the twain, saith he, shall
become one flesh,”’ So, by the earliest voice with
•which Christianity speaks, the principle is declared
that the physical act to which marriage is the lawful
gateway is by its very nature sacramental, a sign
and pledge of lifelong union, and that even when
it has been indulged illicitly and motived by the
mere lust for sensual enjoyment it has consequences
which are irrevocable and indestructible. It is in
the light of this principle that we must approach
the study of the Christian view of marriage and
divorce, for only in the light of it does the meaning
of the New Testament teaching become apparent.
THE THREE KINDS OF DIVORCE
But first it is necessary to make a distinction.
For the word “divorce” is applied alike to three
separate and distinguishable things. In itself the
word divorce means no more than separation, and
applies equally to any process by which man and
wife are freed from the compulsion to live together.
And this freedom may be achieved by any one of
three methods, with regard to only one of which
does the Church differ from the civil power. It
applies first to what is more usually called “judicial
separation/'' that is, to those cases in which cohabi-


tation can he proved to the satisfaction of the court
to be psychologically undesirable and impossible,
and in which the court releases the parties from the
legal obligation to live together, and, where it is
desired, makes provision for the support by the
husband of his wife and of such children as are
unable to earn their own living. Here the only
effect of the court’s order is to cancel the otherwise
enforceable obligation for husband and wife to co-
habit, The court does not claim to have severed
the marriage bond. The couple still remain man
and wife, and if either went through a marriage
ceremony with anyone else, the marriage would in
the eyes of the law be bigamous, and the parties to
it liable to the appropriate penalties. Against such
judicial separation the Church has nothing to say.
It is recognized that, despite the. most careful pre-
cautions, cases where it is required will inevitably
arise, and that, where it is required, it should be
provided, and surrounded by every safeguard known
to the lawu
The word “divorce” applies secondly to those
cases where it can he shown that the marriage in
question has never been a true marriage, that it was
vitiated from the outset by the absence of some
condition which is essential to the validity of mar-
riage. In these cases the Court is approached
with a view to obtaining a decree of nullity, a
declaration that the parties to the alleged marriage
have in fact not been married at all. The causes
for which a decree of nullity may be obtained
are five in number:—(i) That there was no real
consent by both parties to the marriage, (2)
that one or other of the parties was of unsound mind
and so Incapable of consent, (3) that the parties
are related to one another within those degrees of
relationship which in the eyes of both Church and


State make marriage impossible, (4) that one or
other of the parties is physically incapable of con-
summating the marriage, (5) that one or other
of the parties was married already. In each of
these cases, if the facts are proved to the satis-
faction of the Court, the marriage, bond may he
completely annulled, or rather declared never to
have, existed. And here again there is no dis-
agreement between Church and State.
But with regard to the third kind of separation
to which the word divorce is normally applied
there is very serious disagreement. For in modern
times there has come into exi.ste.nce a view of
marriage which ignores the sacramental character
on which the Church insists, and makes it little
more than a voluntary contract which for a
variety of reasons can and should he entirely can-
celled.
CHRIST AND DIVORCE
Against such a view of marriage the Christian
Church has always protested and must continue to
protest, for it runs clean counter to the express
teaching of its Divine Founder. “Whosoever shall
put away his wife, and marry another, committeth
adultery against her: and if she herself shall put
away her husband, and marry another, she commit-
teth adultery” (St Mark x. xi, 12). And the reason
for this strict and unequivocal pronouncements is
given earlier in the same passage: “For this cause
shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall
cleave to his wife; and the twain shall become one
flesh: so that they are no more twain, but one flesh.
What therefore God hath joined together, let not
man put asunder.” And, as evidence that our
Lord's hearers understood Him in this strict and
unequivocal sense, we have the words, of St. Paul
quoted above.


It is true that in the version given in J3t, Mat-
thew’s Gospel our Lord’s words are qualified so as
to read: “But I say unto you, that everyone that
putteth away his wife, saving for the cause of
fornication, maketh her an adulteress: and whoso-
ever shall marry her when she. is put away com-
mitteth adultery.” And this qualification has
been taken by some to mean that, if either party
to a marriage is guilty of definite unfaithfulness
to the marriage vow, a divorce may be obtained
which will allow the “innocent” party to marry an-
other. This view is possible only upon, two pre-
mises, the soundness of both of which is open
to serious doubt; first that the qualification did
really form part of Christ’s teaching on the sub-
ject, and that the earlier version of St, Mark’s
Gospel, is the incorrect one, and, secondly, that the
word “fornication” really means adultery, and re-
fers to sin after and not before marriage. The
discussion of these two points is reserved for an
appendix. For the present it is enough to record
the conviction that, in the light of all the evidence,
it would appear certain that the characteristic
Christian principle, that the union consummated in
marriage is lifelong and indissoluble, is based upon
the teaching of Christ, and that no circumstance
can arise which would justify such a divorce as
would permit of re-marriage.
THE EXTENSION OF THE GROUNDS FOR
DIVORCE
But, even granted that there is room for differ-
ence of opinion upon the particular point raised
by the qualification in St. Matthew’s version, there
can be no two opinions among those who rever-
ence the authority of Christ upon the demand
which is nowadays made, and in many countries


conceded, for an extension of the grounds upon
which divorce, admitting of re-marriage, can be
obtained. Habitual intemperance, certified lunacy*
criminality, desertion for a specified number of
years, are all, it is claimed, suitable and adequate
grounds for divorce, and have been recognized as
such in the legal codes of more than one country,
and to them have been added in some places such
vague and elusive grounds as “incompatibility of
temperament/* To this demand the Christian
Church, basing itself upon the plain teaching of its
Founder, cannot do otherwise than offer the most
uncompromising resistance. In offering this resist-
ance it needs no other support than that of the
authority of Christ, But it can reinforce its op-
position by many considerations of another kind.
The extension of facilities for divorce removes the
whole question of marriage from the bedrock of
principle and founds it upon the shifting sands of
individual convenience, and gravely menaces the
stability of society. It tends enormously to in-
crease, and in those countries which have adopted
it has enormously increased, the demand for
divorce, and plays right into the hands of those
who for merely selfish reasons desire to be rid
of a bond which has become irksome. It tends
to create harder cases than those “hard cases’*
of which the admitted existence is held to justify
the extension of divorce. The cruelty, for in-
stance, of inflicting upon a woman slowly recover-
ing her mental balance under skilled treatment the
additional agony of wondering! whether her re-
covery will be completed in time to prevent the
dissolution of her marriage and the disappearance
of her home, can scarcely be too strongly insisted
upon. All this and much more could be said
in defence of the stern and uncompromising posi-
c


tion which the Christian Church feels bound to
take. And it can confidently be claimed that
this position is endorsed by very many competent
observers of human affairs, who, while not sharing
the convictions upon which it is held, are yet at
one with the Church in believing that the view of
marriage as sacramental and indissoluble is the
only view upon which human society can sately
be based. It was not a clergyman but a Judge
of the Divorce Court (Mr justice Deane) who in
evidence before a Royal Commission said that
"there are numberless cases” in -which women
married to poor men sin so as to be set free to
marry, and that he was convinced that “in an
enormous number of cases'’'’ brought before him
there was collusion, though it was impossible to
detect it. It was not a clergyman, but a famous
mental specialist (Sir Tames Crichton Brown,
M.D., LL.D., D.Sc., F.R.S.) who in evidence be-
fore the same Commission declared himself en-
tirely opposed, on general social principles, to the
proposed admission of Insanity as a ground for
divorce, and said: "A man may have been in an
asylum fifteen years, been divorced, and then re-
cover,” and, “I say that, if you allow insanity as
a ground, then you open the flood-gates ....
I do not see where you are to stop if you are to
allow insanity as a ground for divorce,” It is
obvious that the argument against permission to
divorce founded on the curableness of many cases
of insanity applies with still greater force to
drunkenness (as a ground for divorce). And with
regard to desertion if can scarcely be denied that
such a permission is in practice equivalent to
divorce by mutual consent, since it means that
divorce can be obtained whenever the parties to a
marriage agree to separate permanently.


Undoubtedly there are s< hard eases”: there
always must be, when a high social ideal Is being
maintained. But hard cases make bad law, and it
is better that a few individuals should be called
upon to suffer the disability of being debarred from
re-marriage than that the very foundation upon
which the stability of the state depends should be
undermined.


CHAPTER VII
ON PARENTS AND CHILDREN
Wmi the question of divorce is intimately con-
nected the question of the relationship of parents
and children. The connection is not always re-
cognized. Indeed it is one of the most significant
features of most modern discussions on divorce
that the children, who, after all, are most con-
cerned in the matter, are ordinarily left out of
account. Every child born into the world has a
natural right to the care of a father and mother,
and any rearrangement of the conditions of mar-
riage which interferes with that right is a wrong
inflicted on the child. It is part of that “despising
of these little ones” against which Christ so
solemnly warned us. For, as was said in the first
chapter, the Home is the earliest and finest school
of character, provided that the instruction given
and the environment provided are of the right
kind. What is the right kind? What should
be the relationship between parents and children?
No question could exceed these in importance, be-
cause upon the answer to them depend the creation
and the welfare of new human personalities.
EDUCATION
The word “education” means drawing out, and
its significance, which is often missed, is that the
process of education is not one of pouring facts


THE DEVELOPMENT OF TASTE 37
into a vessel previously empty of them, but of
eliciting from a living organism powers which
were already potentially present in it, Froebel,
the deviser of the best system of infant education
that has yet been devised, called it the “Kinder-
garten” system. Kindergarten is the German for
Children's Garden, and Froebel called his system
that, not because his schools were to be gardens
in which children could play, but gardens in
which children could grow, unfolding their charac-
ters and capacities as the flower is unfolded from
the hud. If his theory is right—and, subject to
certain considerations which need not detain us,
it is absolutely right-—it follows that the education
given in the home must aim at eliciting and not
repressing the personality of the child. There
must, of course, be prohibitions, and punishments
when the natural waywardness of human nature
makes itself too obviously apparent. But the
prohibitions must be made somehow to secure
the assent of the child and the justice of the
punishments recognized. Mere bald and unex-
plained repressions can do infinite and irreparable
harm to the character repressed.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF TASTE
Tastes proverbially differ, and about them there
is no disputing. And parents should be most
careful to avoid repressing as wrong any develop-
ment in the child of tastes different from their
own. At the same time a tremendous amount
can be done tor the right development of the
child's tastes even in the earliest childhood. The
reason why there is so much bad taste in the
world is that parents are so often utterly careless
as to the sights and sounds which surround their
children in their earliest years. If children have


been accustomed to nothing but the sloppiest
music and the crudest pictures, they will develop
a low standard of taste which it will be exceed-
ingly hard to correct in later years. But if the
child from tender years has had the chance to look
at the best kind of pictures and to hear the best
kind of music, a standard of taste will be formed
which will never need to be corrected, and will
serve to introduce him into a realm of beauty from
which he might otherwise be permanently ex-
cluded, The gramophone and the pianola, and the
excellent reproductions of the best pictures which
are nowadays so easily obtainable make this pos-
sible in almost any home. And parents who do not
feel themselves to he competent to choose can
always seek advice from those who are. It must
be remembered that the best in art and music
is not necessarily the most difficult or the most
elaborate. Some of the simplest tunes and pic-
tures are the best. The same applies to literature.
The books which a child is encouraged to read
should be most carefully chosen. For every age
of childhood there are to be had books which are
not only books for children but are also good liter-
ature, and these should be chosen to the exclusion
of the rubbish which is poured out in such pro-
fusion, The “Alice” books of Lewis Carroll;
Mrs Ewing’s Jackanapes ; and The Story of a Short
Lit &; R. L. Stevenson s Treasure Island', and the
altogether delightful poems of A. A. Milne, are
cases in point of such hooks no child should lack,
and these will serve to develop a sound literary taste
which will naturally pass on to stronger meat when
the intellectual digestion is ready for it,
REVERENCE FOR TRUTH
Tlie same applies to the love of Truth. It


should be the aim of parents to teach their children
nothing which will afterwards have to be unlearned
as being' untrue. A child’s curiosity is boundless,
and it is only a question of time before he begins
to ask questions which are difficult to answer. But
even in these cases it is imperative that the
answers given should not he evasive, and, still
less, untrue. It may not be possible or desirable
to tell a child the whole answer to his question,
but it is always possible to tell him part, and to
see that that part, so far as it goes, is scrupulously
true. To give an actual illustration; a child
suddenly asked his father what circumcision was,
after hearing the word in a passage read from
the Bible. The father, who was a wise and un-
derstanding man, was neither embarrassed by the
question nor evasive in his reply. He explained
that it was a mark made upon the body of the
child to signify his admission to membership of the
tribe, and that many primitive races to-day, in-
cluding* the Australian aboriginals, have similar
customs, A little thought will suggest to any
wise parent how other difficult questions of the
saxne kind can be answered truly and without
evasion. And It is imperative that they should
be so answered, for sincerity is the only possible
basis of right relationship between parent and
child.
THE TEACHING OF THE BIBLE
This reverence for truth is nowhere more needed
than in matters of religion. During the past
fifty years our view of the Bible, and especially
of the Old Testament, has been largely revolu-
tionized as the result of patient scholarly investi-
gations. We have learned to reverence the Bible
more than ever we did as containing a true


revelation from God, but we have also learned
to recognize that this revelation was a gradual one,
and that the Old Testament in particular is to be
regarded as the history of a people’s gradual edu-
cation in the knowledge of God. So we see that
not all the different books are of equal spiritual
value, and that the inspired writers, in conveying
their message, made use of the ordinary literary
forms of their day, and further that the Bible is
a text-book of theology, not of science or history,
and that the views of science, and history therein
conveyed are neither more nor less than the views
current in the writer’s day. In the early stories
of the book of Genesis we recognize the my thology
common to the Semitic races, though marvellously
purified and spiritualized. Of all this we must
take account m teaching the Bible to children, and
though it is specially the concern of the clergy and
the Sunday Schools, it is the duty of parents to
inform themselves of the facts and to see that in.
any - talks about Biblical subjects they are guided
by them. There is an excellent little book by Mrs
Frederic Green, called The Story of the Beginning,
which indicates the exactly right way to teach the
book of Genesis to even quite little children.
HERO-WORSHIP
What has been said, of Beauty and of Truth
applies equally to Goodness. The child must be
taught from his earliest years to admire the right
kind of persons and of actions. This is more
than ever necessary in these days of “crook”
films, plays, and books. The child is a natural
hero-worshipper, and any story of real goodness
appeals to all that is deepest and best in him. And.
after all, the doings of the good are every bit as
exciting and interesting as the doings of the bad.


The story of Philip Sidney going without the
water which his parched lips craved for the
sake of a humbler comrade whose need he
thought greater than his own, or of Cap-
tain Lucas cheerfully bearing the weight
of two sets of fetters through the scorching heat
of an Indian summer in order that a delicate com-
rade might go free, or of Private Thomas Mac-
fadzean, of the Royal Irish Rifles, in the last Great
War lying on a carelessly dropped bomb until it
exploded in order to save the lives of his mates,
are each an example of the kind of appeal to which
the heart of the child instinctively responds. And
if it can be shown, as it can be shown, that such
actions were made possible through the teaching
and influence of Jesus Christ, that He is the Hero
of all heroes, the great Captain of our Salvation
under whose banner we can march with confidence
to victory in the spiritual war, one of the founda-
tions of a true personal, religion has been securely
laid.
THE MEANING OF RELIGION
Much that, has been said so far in this chapter
may have seemed to those who read It remote
from the subject of Christianity and the Home.
But it has not been so in the mind of the writer.
Beauty, Truth, and Goodness are the attributes
of God, and in teaching children to love them we
are teaching them to love God Himself. And if
only the love of God could everywhere be so
taught, Religion would have a stronger hold on
the nation than it has to-day, and we should be
able to retain in active membership of the Chris-
tian Church many of those who nowadays almost
instinctively abandon it. For it is lamentably true
that the vision of God presented to the child's


mind in all too many cases is something other and
less desirable than that which Christ came to
show. The kind of teaching. about God which
is represented by such a phrase as “If you do
that, God won’t love you/’ is untrue in fact and
disastrous in result. If we represent God as a
kind of Almighty Spoilsport, always jealously on
the look-out for some infringement of His honour
or His restrictions, and invest the text “Thou God
seest me” with a terrible and menacing signifi-
cance, we must not be surprised it the child is not
attracted to Him or to anything connected with
Him, And yet such a conception or God is by no
means unknown in childhood, as many of us could
testify. But it is profoundly unchristian, almost the
exact opposite of the God of Whom Christ taught.
He was a God who was our Father, loving us with
a tenderness exceeding that of the sweetest im-
aginable mother, One who is all Goodness, Beauty,
and Truth, a Friend of the friendless, a Wel-
come!* of the penitent, a Comforter of the sorrow-
ful, and a Healer of the sick—One, in short, who
was just like Jesus Christ. “He that hath seen
me hath seen the Father.” In the light of such
teaching it is small wonder that the disciples,
though bewildered and dismayed by the turn
events had taken, felt that, come what might,
they could not desert their Friend. “Lord to whom
shall we go?” they cried; “Thou hast the words
of eternal life.” And our children would say the
same to us, If only we could teach them as He
taught.
THE INDISPENSABLENESS OF EXAMPLE
But our teaching must be by example as well
as precept. Whatever religion there is in the
home must be real and must he Christian. Child-


THE INDISPENSABLENESS OF EXAMPLE 43
ren have a keen sense of reality, and anything in
the nature of humbug or hypocrisy is speedily
detected. But if they see their parents regularly
and joyfully fulfilling the duties of religion they
will naturally do the same. It is greatly to be
desired that there should be a revival of the cus-
tom of family prayer, and that the prayers used
should be real and vital, and kept in close con-
nection with the life of the home. And it is no
less to be desired that fathers especially should see
the duty of attendance at public worship, as one
they owe to their children as well as to them-
selves and to their God. It is one thing to say
“Go to Church.;” it is another and better thing to
say “Corne to Church.” It is yet another and
the best thing of all when the children realize
that the invitation is one to enjo} ; ’ a prized privi-
lege, and not merely to fulfil a necessary but irk-
some duty. For a foundation of real personal
religion is indispensable in the parent who ■would
train his child in the love and fear of God. Most
parents ardently desire to do this, but of this, as
of so much else, Christ’s 'words are inexorably
true: “Except ye be converted, and become as little
children, ye cannot
This little book must end, as it began, with an
emphasis on the indispensable importance of the
training given in the Home, The child leaves its
home with its general attitude towards life already
largely determined. His moral standards have
been formed; his social ideals have been fixed; and
his power to appreciate spiritual values has been
made or marred. If the training- given in the
home has been of the right kind, he has but to
apply to the wider life to which he goes the lessons
there -learned in order to be sure of happiness and
true success., for there is no department of human


life to which the basic principles of right conduct
cannot be immediately applied, And the only really
right conduct is Christian conduct, and the princi-
ples which Christ taught are of permanent and
universal application. It is these considerations
that make the subject of Christianity and the Home
of such supreme importance.


APPENDIX
ON ST MATTHEW’S VERSION OF OUR LORD’S
TEACHING ABOUT DIVORCE
The questions raised by the discrepancy between
St Matthew’s version of our Lord’s teaching and
that given in St. Mark and in St. Luke reduce
themselves to two in number: —(i) Did the quali-
fication recorded by St. Matthew (“except for for-
nication”) form part of our Lord’s utterance., or
is It a modification of His words introduced by a
later editorial hand? (2) In either case, is its
meaning that adultery dissolves the marriage vow
and sets the parties free to contract another mar-
riage ?
With regard to the first question, there are
strong grounds for believing that the qualification
is a later insertion. St Mark’s story of our Lord’s
life is the earliest recorded and was written pro-
bably about the year 60, And for such report of
His sayings as it contains it would no doubt de
pend upon a collection compiled a good deal earlier.
St. Matthew depends very largely on St. Mark
(or upon some document so like it as to be prac-
tically indistinguishable from it) and incorporates
whole sections of if in his own Gospel. But
in doing so he does sometimes introduce modifying
clauses. For example, into his account of our
Lord’s interview with the rich young ruler he in-
troduces the qualification “If thou wilt be perfect”


(compare Mark x. 21, with Matt, xix. 21), so that
when in Matt. xix. 3 and 9, the qualifying clauses
“for every cause” and “except if he. for fornication”
are found added to the version given in St. Mark,
it is at least permissible to believe that they are
due to editorial insertion. Many scholars of high
repute would go further and say that the matter
did not admit of doubt. In his book. Marriage
and Divorce , Bishop Gore says (on page 23):
“It must be added that the critical conclusion that
the exceptive clause in the first Gospel is an in-
terpolation which really alters the sense of our
Lord's original utterance about marriage, and that
his real teaching is that given in St. Mark's and
St. Luke’s Gospels, represents an impressive com
sensus of scholars from Germany, France, America,
and our own country, a consensus of scholars,
moreover, who, as being mostly Protestants in
conviction, were predisposed in favour of the laxer
view of the marriage bond,” And Dr Chase says
of the additions in Matt, xix,: “That both these
phrases are an editorial insertion due to .St, Mat-
thew seems to me as certain as any conclusion of
literary criticism applied to the Gospels can be”
{What did Christ teach about Divorce? p. 40),
There are, however, scholars who would dissent
from this conclusion, and it must in fairness be
added that, even If the qualifications be recognized
as editorial additions, it does not follow that they
formed no part of our Lord’s original utterance.
We know that many memoirs of Christ were in
circulation in the early days of Christianity (see
Luke i, i~2) and that genuine sayings of our Lord,
which are not preserved in the written Gospels,
were yet well-known (see Acts xx. 35). And it
Is at least possible, that St Matthew took his ver-
sion of our Lord’s sayings about divorce from a


source, other and. more accurate than that used by
St, Mark, although this seems most improbable.
But, even if it were so, the second question has
to be faced. What is the exact meaning o£ the
qualification ? It has generally been assumed that
it means that adultery dissolves marriage, and that
the wife of an adulterer, or the husband of an
adulteress, becomes unmarried by reason of the
other’s sin, and is free to marry again . This as-
sumption is open to many and weighty objections,
and there are many scholars who hold that the
phrase does not refer to post-nuptial sin at all.
But for our present purpose it is enough to say
that there is no trace in the Christian writings of
the first three centuries of any admission that
adultery dissolves marriage and makes re-marriage
possible for the innocent party; nor is there any
mention of this passage in St. Matthew as one
which requires to be explained away in the light
of the regulations governing matrimony in the
early Christian Church. In face of this fact we
are justified in thinking it probable that our
Lord's teaching about re-marriage after divorce
admitted in practice of no exception.


Halstead Printing Company Ltd.
Allen Street, Waterloo
