

CHRIST AND
THE CRITICS
HILARIN FELDER, O.M. CAP.




CHRIST AND
THE CRITICS


CHRIST AND
THE CRITICS
A DEFENCE OF THE DIVINITY OF
JESUS AGAINST THE ATTACKS OF
MODERN SCEPTICAL CRITICISM
BY HILARIN FELDER, O.M.CAP.
TRANSLATED FROM the ORIGINAL GERMAN
BY JOHN L. STODDARD
Author of “ Rebuilding a Lost Faith ”
VOLUME I
LONDON
BURNS OATES AND
WASH BOURNE LTD.
MCMXXIV


APPROBATIO ORDINIS
Praesentium vigore annuimus, ut opus cui titulus Christ and the
Critics [Jesus Christas'] (t. I et 11, editio anglica) a P. Hilarino
Felder, in Provincia Helvetica S. Theologiae Doctors et Lectore
exaratum et a duobus Ordinis nostri theologis examinatum, servatis
aliunde servandis, typis mandari et public! juris fieri possit et valeat.
Romae, e Curia nostra generali, die 15 Julii, 1922.
Fr. JOSEPHUS ANT. A PERSICETO.
O.F.M.Cap., Minister Generalis.
mibtl ©bstat
F THOMAS BERGH, 0.5.8.,
Censor Depuxatus
smpr(matur
EDM. CAN. SURMONT.
Vicarids Generalis
Westmonastkfii
di* 3 a Januaniy 1924.
Hade and Printed in Great Britain


CONTENTS
PAGE
Introduction ------- i
I.—Christ and Sceptical Criticism - - i
ll.—Christ and his Believing Apologists - - 8
PART I.—THE SOURCES
Review of Christian and Non-Christian Sources- - 17
Chap. I.—The Genuineness of the Gospels - 26
i. —Genuineness of the Gospels and Recent Criticism - 26
ii. —Non-Catholic Proofs of the Genuineness of the Gospels 31
1. —The Uncanonical or Apocrypha} Gospels - 31
2. —The Non-Catholic Teachers - - - 34
3. —The Non-Christian Writers - - 38
iii. —Catholic Witnesses for the Authenticity of the Gospels 40
1. —The Canonical Gospels Themselves - - 40
2. —Early Church Literature - - - - 47
3. —The Universal Church Tradition - - 58
Chap. ll.—The Credibility of the Gospels- - - 66
i. —Their Credibility Disputed - - - - 66
1. —The Theory of Deception - - - 67
2. —The “ Natural ” Explanation of the Gospels - 69
3. —The Mythical Hypothesis - - - 71
4. —The Tendency-Hypothesis - - - - 74
5. —The Sceptical Criticism of the Gospels - - 75
6. —The Evolutionary Hypothesis - - - 79
ii. —The Proofs of Credibility - - - - 83
1. —The Gospels Themselves - - - 83
(a) The Synoptic Gospels - - - 84
(0) The Gospel of John - - - - 90
2. —The Evangelists - - - - - 98
3. —The Contemporaries - 105
4. —The Enemies - - - - - no
PART lI.—THE MESSIANIC CONSCIOUSNESS
OF CHRIST
Introductory - - - - - - -121
Chap. I.—The Fact of Christ's Messianic Consciousness 126
i. —The Messianic Testimony of Jesus to himself in
General ------ 126
ii. —Announcement of Christ’s Testimony to himself as the
Messiah - - - - - - 132
iii. —Development of Christ’s Testimony to himself as the
Messiah ------ 138
iv. —Completion of Christ’s own Testimony to his Messiah-
ship - - - - - - 142


PAGS
Chap. ll.—Content of the Messianic Consciousness of
Christ 148
i. —The Conception of the Messiah before Jesus Christ - 148
1. —The Conception of the Messiah in Old Testament
Prophecies ----- 145
2. —The Pharisaical and Rabbinical Concept of the
Messiah ------ 154
3. —The Apocalyptic and Eschatological Notion of
the Messiah .... - 163
ii. —Christ’s Idea of the Messiah - 170
1. —Rejection of the Messianic Notions of the Rabbis
and Apocalyptic Writers ... 170
2. —Adoption and Extension of the Old Testament
Notion of the Messiah - 177
Chap. lll.—Origin of the Messianic Consciousness of
Christ - - - - - -19 S
i. —Origin of the Messianic Consciousness of Christ ac-
cording to Modern Criticism - 195
ii. —Evolution of the Messianic Consciousness of Christ
during his Public Life - - - 206
hi.—Origin of the Messianic Consciousness of Christ at his
Baptism ------ 215
sv. —Preparation of the Messianic Consciousness of Christ
in the Consciousness of his Sonship - - 225
v.—Origin of the Messianic Consciousness of Christ in the
Consciousness of his Nature - - - 231
PART lII.—THE DIVINE CONSCIOUSNESS
OF CHRIST
Chap. I.—The Divinity of Christ in his Life - - 241
s. —The Divine Consciousness of Christ as a Whole - 241
1. —Friends and Enemies of the Divinity of Christ - 241
2. —The Human and Divine Consciousness of Christ 24S
3. —The Expressions of the Divine Consciousness
of Christ ------ 250
ii.—Christ’s Consciousness of his Divinity - 262
1. —Christ’s General Consciousness of being the Son
of God 262
2. —The First Revelation of the Son of God by Christ
in the Temple ----- 269
3. —Commencement of the Revelation of the Son of
God to the Disciples ... - 272
4. —Progress of the Revelation of the Divine Sonship
to the Disciples and People in Galilee - - 281
J. —Intensification of the Revelation of the Son of
God to the People and Disciples in Judea and
Jerusalem ----- 286
6.—Conclusion of the Revelation of the Divine Son-
ship to the Disciples and Judges in view of his
Death ------ 294


p
Chap. ll. —The Divinity of Christ after his Death - 307
i. —The Divinity of Christ after the Resurrection - - 309
ii. —The Divinity of Christ in the Early Church - - 317
1. —lts Representation in the Acts of the Apostles - 317
2. —Historical Genuineness of this Representation - 324
iii. —St Paul and the Divinity of Christ - - - 331
1. —Pauline Christology - - - - 331
2. —Origin of the Pauline Christology.—Paul and
Jesus ...... 346
iv. —The Synoptists and the Divinity of Christ - - 363
1. —The Divinity of Christ as Represented by the
Synoptists ..... 363
2. —The Synoptic and the Real Portrait of Christ - 375
v. —The Divinity of Christ as Represented by John - - 381
1. —The Characteristic Form of the Johannine
Christology - - - - - 381
2. —The Origin of the Johannine Christology - - 390
Conclusion ....... 406
Index of Authorities 413
Index of Subjects ------ 419


TtVa Xtyov<Tiv ot a vOpunroi etvai tov vlhv tov dvOpiairov ;
2v (i 6 Xpttrrbs o Yl6s tov Qeov tov fwvros.
Whom do men say that the Son of man is ?
Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.
Matt, xvi, 13, 16.


INTRODUCTION
I.—CHRIST AND SCEPTICAL CRITICISM
JESUS CHRIST! No other problem arouses to-day
keener, more universal and more serious attention.
Even if we leave out of consideration the world of pro-
fessing- Christians and Christian believers, seekers after
Christ are at present found in all classes of society, of all
degrees of education and in all categories of doubters, includ-
ing that of the wholly sceptical.
The proof of this is seen in the enormous increase in the
literature treating of the life of Jesus. Professor Albrecht
Schweitzer of Strasbourg recently asserted that the mere
enumeration of all the “Lives of Jesus” which have ap-
peared would alone wellnigh fill a volume. 1
“It is touching to see how everyone, from his own stand-
point and sphere of interest, finds himself occupied with
Jesus Christ, or wishes to have some part in him. Ever
anew is the spectacle, which the second century offered in
Gnosticism, repeated, revealing itself as a conflict between
all conceivable schools of thought for the possession of Jesus
Christ. We may commend our century at least for this, that
it is earnestly engaged with the question of the essential
character and value of Christianity, and that there is now
more research and inquiry into this subject than there was
thirty years ago. And in its method of groping its way and
experimenting, in the extraordinary and abstruse answers
which it evolves, in its caricatures and chaotic confusion—
yes, even in its hate, we see real life and a serious struggle. ” 2
Thus does Adolf Harnack, the head of liberal Protestant
theology, characterize the present longing for Christ; and,
God be thanked, he is perfectly right. Despite all appear-
ances to the contrary, the non-believing, intellectual world
of Christendom to-day is thrilled by a mighty feeling of
homesickness and a feverish longing for Christ.
The profoundest causes for this phenomenon lie, doubtless,
first of all, not in the modern intellectual world itself, but in
that fulness of truth and holiness which has manifested itself
in the person and religion of Christ, and always continues to
attract man, even when he would like by every effort to
escape it. Mankind, as such, undergoes the same experience
as Goethe, one of the greatest and most intelligent of men,
1 Von Reimarus zu Wrede, viii (Tubingen, 1906).
a Wesen des Christentums, 2 £. (Leipzig, 1905).
*■ I


and one whom many have sought to put upon the same level
with Christ, personally underwent. 1 The old philosopher of
Weimar, who was anything but a believing Christian, and
expressed himself for the most part only aesthetically about
the mighty revelation of Christ and Christianity, sometimes,
in the intimacy of the family circle, “ praised the sublimity
of Christ . . . always more seriously, more ardently and
with ever increasing emotion until he burst into tears.” On
one occasion he said : “I regard all the four Gospels as
absolutely genuine, for there is in them the reflection of a
greatness which emanated from the person of Christ, and
is of as godlike a kind as has ever appeared on this earth.
I bow before him, as the divine manifestation of the highest
principle of morality. . . . Let intellectual culture continue
to advance, let the natural sciences continue to grow in
breadth and depth, and the human mind expand as much
as it may, it will never go beyond the elevation and the moral
culture of Christianity as it shines resplendent in the
Gospels.” 2
The profoundest minds have always experienced in them-
selves the truth of these words of Goethe, 3 and discovered it
also in reading the history of the centuries. The higher
human civilization rises, and the more exalted the pinnacle of
the truth is from which it surveys the conduct of mortals, the
more it observes and admires the unique and mighty mani-
festation of Christ and Christianity, before which all others
fade and disappear like mist before the sun.
If the interest in Christ, and in all problems connected with
his person and activity, is even greater and more general in
our modern unchristian, or only half-christian, society than
it perhaps has ever been, this is not to be ascribed merely to
the circumstance that our age, in contrast to the rationalistic
period, exhibits a high degree of sense and comprehension
for historical considerations (though only such considerations
will ever do justice to Christ and Christianity); the credit for
it is rather due—though very undeservedly—to the very un-
belief of rationalism. And strange as this may sound, it is
nevertheless true.
On the one hand, the fruit which has gradually ripened
from the anti-christian rationalism of the last century is so
clearly poisonous and universally dangerous that mankind
now sees itself compelled to creep on its knees to the Cross,
if it is not to fall a victim to nihilism, atheism and satanism.
On the other hand, those rationalistic critics of Christ, whose
aim was to destroy all living faith in the incarnate God,
1 Friedrich Daab, Jesus von Nazareth, 49 (Diissddorf, 1907); Weidel,
Jesu Personlichheit (Halle, 1908).
2 Goethe, Conversations with Echermann, viii, 148 f., 203 (Leipzig,
1890).
3 cf. Pfannmiiller, Jesus im Urtheil der Jahrhunderte (Leipzig, 1908).


themselves helped to force science to consider again more
seriously and thoroughly the life of the Saviour. No less a
person than the rationalistic writer on civilization, Houston
Stewart Chamberlain, has said : “ Such men as Strauss and
Renan, two concave mirrors (one distorting all the perpen-
dicular lines, the other all the lateral), have nevertheless
effected an important work by directing the attention of
thousands to the great miracle of the manifestation of Christ,
and by thus preparing an audience ready to listen subse-
quently to profounder thinkers and more sagacious men.” 1
As a matter of fact, the majority of modern investigators of
the life of Jesus have already become more sagacious, juster
and —on that very account —also more conservative. Moreover,
this state of things will increase with every year. We shall
soon see that the rationalistic sons of those men regard
both the documents which treat of the life of Jesus, and also
the main outlines of that life, as having been made, in a great
measure, absolutely certain by critical research. Yet these
sons had inherited from their rationalistic fathers the dogma
that the Gospel in general, and all the separate Gospels, had
either been already historically condemned, or were still in
a state of arrest pending examination. Yes, even though the
majority of those atavistic prejudices have still remained,
the fundamental, a priori one against whatever of Christianity
has been handed down to us by tradition is disappearing.
Indeed, a most “ modern ”■ rationalistic investigator of this
subject thinks that he can safely predict of his school that
“ Modern theology will one day become perfectly honour-
able ” (Albrecht Schweitzer). “ Yet,” he at once prudently
adds, “ this is a prediction awaiting the future.” And to this
draft on the future, a still more rationalistic colleague from
the ranks of the laity adds the malicious comment: Quousque,
tandem, Catilina? 2
However this may be, rationalistic criticism, in spite of its
clearer insight into the original sources of the life of Jesus,
has not yet deigned to correct its inherited antagonistic
christology in a single point.
As for liberal Protestant research into the life of Jesus,
it is historically more conservative than in previous decades;
but, theologically, it can still rival the worst periods of
rationalism. Schweitzer, in speaking of this, rightly says :
“ Historical research into the life of Jesus did not proceed
from a purely historic interest, but sought the Jesus of
history, so that he might be an ally in its fight for freedom
from dogma. . . . Thus each succeeding theological epoch
has found in Jesus its own thoughts, and could not conceive
of his life otherwise.” 3
1 'Die Grundlagen des XIX Jahrhunderts, Bth ed., I, 227 f. note
(Mflnchen, 1907).
* Arthur Drews, Die Chrisiusmythe, ix (Jena, 1909). 3 ibid., 4.


This is even truer of the latest period of liberal theology
than of any which preceded it, for it recklessly cuts out from
the original Christian frame (which it then endeavours to
restore) the figure of Christ in order to copy it again accord-
ing to the foreshortened and distorted scale of its own subjec-
tive, and therefore wholly arbitrary, conception. Externally,
it holds fast to Christ and Christianity, but inwardly, and
practically, everything which is precious in them has a new
valuation put upon it, according to the critics’ private estimate,
and all the Christian ideas are falsified or renlaced by modern,
incommensurable properties.
On the whole, rationalistic theology becomes enthusiastic
about Christ and Christianity only so far as it thinks that
these represent freedom from dogma, contempt for the Church,
modern civilization and the modern ideal of humanity. There
remains in it hardly more than a faint semblance of what has,
at all times and from the very beginning, been understood
by the terms “ Christ” and “ Christianity.”
We are fully aware of the severity of this reproach, and
shall bring forward detailed proof for its justification in the
course of our work. Suffice it for the moment to refer to the
judgement of the philosopher and investigator of the life of
Jesus, Edward von Hartmann. He maintains that the “ Chris-
tianity ” of Christ in liberal Protestantism is actually more
sceptical than Islam, and is not essentially different from
reformed Judaism; and that ideas of modern civilization are
sailing about in it under a Christian flag, and adorned with
merely the name of Christianity. Yet this is heralded as
normal Christianity I 1 It is therefore undeniable that liberal
Protestantism “ can no longer claim the right, in any sense,
to be included in Christianity, and that it is as irreligious as
it is unchristian.” 2
“ Modern theology has become completely absorbed in the
idea of attributing its own religious ideals to Jesus.” 3
This inward falling away from Christ and Christianity,
perceptible in present-day Protestantism, is not limited to
scholarly books and learned men. It makes itself felt in one
college and school after another. It is already the fashion
in most of the universities, and forces its way into all the
guilds of the students, and into all departments of study.
D. Odland, Professor of Lutheran theology in Christiania,
justly complains that, for the last twenty-five years, in the
high schools of Germany there has prevailed a regular system
of “counterfeiting” in regard to religious ideas.' 1 Dr. Emil
1 Die Selbsterseltung des Christentums uni die Religion der Zu-
kunft, ii, 57, 60, 64 (Berlin, 1874).
3 Krisis des Christentums in der moiernen Theologie, and ed., xi
(Berlin, 1882).
3 Das Chnstentum des Neuen Testaments, xiii (Sachsa i. Harz, 1905).
4 Hartl, Moderns Leben Jesu jiir das Volk, in Theol.-frakt. Quartal-
schri/t, 722 (Linz, 1906).


Rasmussen even gloats over the fact that “in Protestant
countries half of the theological professorial chairs are occu-
pied by men who no longer believe in the divinity of Jesus.” 1
Professor W. Kruger has uttered the appalling statement
that the vocation of theological instructors is to destroy the
faith of youthful students and to cause scandal. 2
More and more does this unchristian Christianity of
liberal criticism transplant itself to the pulpit, acquire
control of the daily press, and make its way into all branches
of polite literature. The novels of Peter Rosegger 3 and
Gustav Frenssen,'* founded on the life of Jesus, exert an
especially baneful influence on both the higher and lower
classes of society. With these also are associated the
rationalistic popular books on the History of Religion, and
a thoroughly sceptical kind of literature for the masses, on
the Life of Jesus, of which an extreme “Modernist" sar-
castically says : “ While the criticism of the Gospel manu-
scripts advances with ever increasing boldness, and leaves
to us less and less of an historical Jesus, in popular religious
literature the number of works is increasing enormously
which aim at the glorification of the man Jesus, and seek to
make up for the lack of assured historical material with
unctuous phrases and a loud assertion of conviction. As for
the fine rhetoric, which is at present so conspicuous in the
treatment of this subject, the less historical material it has to
work with, the more approval it seems to receive.” 3
Thus the masses of the people are gradually becoming ripe
for spiritual apostasy from Christ and Christianity. Even our
youth are taught that the history of Jesus, as related in the
•Gospels, is very legendary and that his sublime deeds are
largely inventions.
Naturally there remains only one more step to take, from the
surviving external semblance and shadow of liberal Christi-
anity to the complete denial of the historical existence of Christ.
We have, therefore, recently observed without astonishment
that the left radical wing of rationalistic criticism has dared
to take this final step also, and has even denied the very
existence of Jesus. Yet in this there is really only one thing
to excite astonishment, and that is the fact that liberal
theology showed itself so amazed and indignant about it.
Certainly every attempt to undermine the complete histori-
city of Jesus, and to make the rise of Christianity com-
prehensible without a personal founder, must “go to pieces
1 Jesus, eine vergleichende fsychofathologische Studie, 158 (Leipzig,
i9pS).
3 Philipp Huppert, Der deutsche Protestantismus zu Beginn des XX
Jahrhunderts, 22 (Koln, 1902).
3 Frohe Botschajt des armen Siindners (Leipzig, 1906).
4 Hilligenlei (Berlin, 1905).
5 A. Drews, Chrislusmythe, viii f.


on the reef of facts.” 1 Houston Stewart Chamberlain writes :
“ The fact that the nineteenth century has fed itself on books
in which it was shown that Christianity originated quite
casually, by chance, as a phase of mythology or a dialectical
antithesis, or I know not what, or again as a necessary
product of Judaism, etc., will give in later ages eloquent
testimony to the childishness of our judgement.” 2 And yet
it was precisely the critical world of the nineteenth century,
the age of the sceptical criticism of the Gospels by Bruno
Bauer, and that of the mythical theory of Strauss, that could
allow such a thing to be put forward. From the standpoint
of the latest investigation of the Gospels and the other sources
of information about the life of Jesus, such an attempt is, how-
ever, at once condemned by every serious critic and historian,
whether he belongs to the rationalistic or the orthodox Chris-
tian school of thought. We need waste no more words on
this point here, especially as we must revert to the unpleasant
subject at another place (chap. II). So far, however, the
indignation in the camp of liberal theologians is compre-
hensible.
On the other hand, it must again be emphasized that the
liberal school of investigators of the life of Jesus has no
right to be excited over the latest deniers of Christ’s existence.
In any case, it reminds us forcibly of Assuerus, who flees from
his own shadow. For, however much it may refuse to
acknowledge it, the latest form of radical criticism, which
has become a veritable scandal, is really the offspring of the
liberal school. It is true, as we have already acknowledged,
this school has become, historically, more conservative, so
long as it is not necessary to apply these clearer historical
decisions to the domain of theology and christology. Tried
by this test, however, it is certain to fail at once. The
Gospel documents and the Gospels’ representation of Jesus
are genuine, it says, but in case these go beyond the Pro-
crustean bed of the liberal theory, they must be transformed
and abbreviated in the name of “criticism,” until almost
nothing more remains.
Liberal investigation of the life of Jesus is thoroughly
imbued with the spirit of negation. Its historian, Albrecht
Schweitzer, who holds such views, confesses frankly:
“ There is nothing more negative than the result of research
into the life of Jesus.” This means nothing else than “ con-
fusion and uncertainty about the historic Jesus.” 3 Harnack,
who is acclaimed enthusiastically by almost the entire rising
generation of modern Protestant theologians, has already
proclaimed a Christianity without Christ and christology.
“ Not the Son, but the Father only, has a place in the
1 H. von Soden, Die wichtigsten Fragen im Lehen Jesu, i (Berlin, 1907).
2 Die Grundlagen, i, 294. 3 Von Reimarus zu Wrede, viii, 396.


Gospel, as Jesus preached it.” 1 The Zurich theologian,
P. Schmiedel, has written the discriminating preface to
Smith’s Der vorchristliche Jesus, and elsewhere even affirms
lightheartedly : “No harm would be done to my innermost
religious assets if I were convinced to-day that Jesus never
lived.”
From that standpoint to Albrecht Kalthoff’s assertion that
we do not possess, for certain, a single word of Jesus, and
must reject entirely the historical character of the Saviour, 2
and then to the Christ-myth of Arthur Drews is evidently hot
far to go.
Moreover, both these spokesmen, in their attack upon the
existence of Jesus, expressly confess that the origin of the
views which they champion is to be ascribed to liberal
■ research into the life of Jesus. Kalthoff characterizes his own
mistakes with the remark that the “ prodigal son ” —the
modern sceptic—who does not yet wish to go back into the
sheepfold of the Church and to the old “ Christianity en
bloc,” cannot satisfy himself with the husks of liberal
Protestant theology, which “ empties Christianity of all that
once constituted its great strength and fulness,” and
“ clutches at the straw of the historic Jesus,” of whom,
however, nothing certain remains, except that he once
existed. The whole liberal' system of research into Jesus
rests upon the assumption that “ all the characteristics of
ancient Christianity, which are no longer suited to the man
of to-day, are to be treated as spurious accessories to the
Bible, or as additions and elaborations of a later age, or as
the work of incipient ‘ Catholic corruption,’ and conse-
quently are to be eliminated from the constituents of original
Christianity.” It is only necessary to carry out this simple
method to its logical conclusion to see that there will then
remain nothing more of the historical Jesus of liberal
theology. 3
Still more plainly does Arthur Drews assert that from the
standpoint of liberal investigation into the life of Jesus,
" the most advanced theologians proceed to controvert the
fact that Jesus ever existed at all .” 4 They are “ encouraged
to do this by the essentially negative results of so-called
critical theology. . . . The critical and historical theology
of Protestantism has itself poured such a flood of light into
the origins of the Christian religion that the question of the,
historical existence of Jesus loses all the paradoxical char-
acter which may have up to this time still adhered to it in
1 Wesen des Christentums, gi.
2 Die Entstehung des Christentums, i ff.
2 Kalthofi, Das Christusfroblem, 19; Religiose Weltanschauung, 184;
Die Religion der Modernen, ago.
4 Die Religion als Selbstbewusstsein Gottes, joB n.


the eyes of many. It has, then, really no longer any occasion
to get excited if anyone answers this question in a contrary
sense.” 1
The resultant despair in regard to Jesus Christ lies, there-
fore, wholly in the line of descent from such liberal Protestant
research, and is a certain symptom of the malady from which
it suffers. It is a confused, fevered dream of rationalistic
theology, not its wide-awake consciousness; for the latter
is not only permeated with the historical reality of Jesus,
but, in general, draws nearer and nearer to the traditional
conception of historical Christianity. No, it is its rational-
istic sub-consciousness, which excludes every supernatural
characteristic from the personality and religion of Jesus, and
finally has nothing left but a shadowy image, for which we
seek in vain to feel enthusiasm.
It is pathetic that the majority of those who are to-day
taking part most zealously in the study of Christ are once
more chasing a mere phantom—a fata morgana; so that the
paths of modern seekers after Christ lead them away from
him just in proportion as they fancy they are approaching
him. Even though a goodly number of believing critics and
theologians are still to be found in the Protestant camp—in
England far more than in Germany—it is, nevertheless, true
that the Catholic Church, as a Church, is the only one that
enters into the intellectual conflict in behalf of the divine
Saviour, with whom it alone throughout the centuries has
never broken faith.
lI.—CHRIST AND HIS BELIEVING APOLOGISTS
For positive Christianity Christ is everything. No believing
Christian permits this sacred conviction to be contested.
Even those who hold aloof from the faith also declare “ that
the earthly life of Jesus Christ constitutes the origin, source,
strength, and in the deepest sense the content of all that has
ever been known under the name of the Christian religion ”
(Chamberlain). This even those who dream of a Christianity
without Christ do not deny.
Adolf Harnack has written: “ The confession of the
Christian Church is that there is salvation in none other,
and that there is also no other name given unto men, by
which we can be saved, than the name of Jesus Christ. With
this confession it has begun; in this confession its martyrs
have died; and from this confession it still derives its
strength, as it did 1,800 years ago. It identifies with this
Person the whole substance of religion—life in God, the
forgiveness of sins, and consolation in suffering.” 2
1 Drews, Christusmythe, vi, ix.
2 Das Christenium und die Geschichte, 3 (Leipzig, 1904).


In a word, Jesus Christ is the beginning-, centre, final aim,
and heart of Christianity. No more is necessary in order to
perceive the whole purport of the defence of Christ against
the modern, negative standpoint ‘in regard to Jesus. Who-
ever co-operates in showing scientifically to the world the
portrait of the divine Saviour, and in establishing it firmly
in his own soul by the vital power of faith, accomplishes for
himself and for humanity a high and ever-enduring intel-
lectual and civilizing work, because Christ is “ full of grace
and truth.”
In view, then, of the conclusions which we have thus far
reached, it will not be surprising if we prefer to use the
words “ a defence of Christ ” instead of “ a defence of
Christianity.” Yet, in accordance with an old established
habit, we must make Christianity, as such, the principal
object of our investigation, and bring in the person of the
Saviour simply as a constituent, though certainly the most
important part, of this principal question.
Christianity in its foundation, expansion and development,
in its persecutions, its triumphs, its victorious course through
the centuries, and in its creative activity in the spheres of
religion and morals, science, art, culture, public life, the
family and the individual soul, is really not only the greatest,
mightiest and sublimest phenomenon of history, but a
phenomenon which- can never be explained without divine
intervention. The mere fact that Christianity exists is and
remains an obvious proof that its origin was divine, and that
its founder was an ambassador of God.
But to such considerations modern criticism is blind; and
if we could at one stroke eliminate from the world the
phenomenon of Christianity and its history, the inferences
drawn from them to Christ would nevertheless be rejected as
unscientific. In fact, in the circles of our opponents there is
not the least agreement as to what Christianity really is, and
it is always asserted—and it must be owned with some justice
—that “ the historical importance of Christianity cannot be
measured and correctly estimated without an aqcurate ac-
quaintance with this phenomenon [of the person of Jesus
Christ]. On the other hand, the contrary is not true, and the
figure of Jesus Christ is to-day obscured and removed from us,
rather than unveiled to our scrutinizing gaze by the historical
evolution of the Churches.” 1 Nevertheless, in consequence of
the latest criticism of the Gospels, “ the manifestation of the
one divine Man has been made so prominent that unbelievers
as well as believers cannot but recognize it as the source and
central point of Christianity.” 2
Thus the defence of Christianity cannot easily become a
1 Die Grundlagen, i, 221.
2 ibid., p. 228.


defence of Christ, which shall suit the modern world. But,
on the contrary, the defence of Christ is always the best
defence of Christianity, and is, above all, the one best suited
to our time. '
Even apart from this, however, it is a welcome circum-
stance that, both among- believers and unbelievers, interest
centres more and more upon the innermost core, the head
and heart of the Christian religion—the one and only Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ. Nothing is more adapted to
deepen and strengthen the orthodox point of view than to
rivet one’s gaze upon the God-Man. And if there exists any
hope whatever of reconciling the modern civilized world with
Christianity, the reconciliation will surely be effected in the
name and person of him of whom it was written : “ He is our
peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down the
middle wall of partition between us, having abolished in his
flesh the enmity ” (Eph. ii, 14).
Yet in order to meet the needs and demands of the present
age, the defence of Jesus Christ must, in reference to its
subject-matter, be otherwise constructed than a few years
ago. It is not radically different, for its essential substance
is and remains the old, unchangeable confession of the
primitive Church, that " Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God” (John xx, 31). Truth and error remain the same, and
with them also the apologia perennis remains the same. But
the enemy, according to the temporary condition of the world
and science, continually changes his method of attack, and
thereby forces the apologist to adapt himself to it in his
vindication of the truth. This is especially true in reference
to the Messiahship and divinity of Jesus Christ. ,
Thus our opponents’ attitude towards the foundations on
which the proofs of the Messiahship and divinity of Jesus
rest—namely, towards the sources and documents relating
to the life of Jesus —has become, almost over night, an
entirely different one. While sceptical criticism, until
recently, almost universally altogether denied the genuine-
ness and apostolic origin of the Gospels and of the New
Testament writings, to-day it is more and more disposed, as
we have already remarked, once more to assign these books
to their original authors and their proper age. It even con-
descends to recognize, on the whole, the honesty and literary
integrity of the New Testament writers. Yet it evades the
necessary conclusion as to the scientific credibility of the
sources of the life of Jesus by assuming that the sacred
writers have, consciously or unconsciously, not written the
true and actual history of Jesus, but have designed the
portrait of Christ according to the standards of the belief of
that time and with the embellishments characteristic of the
period.


If, therefore, the genuineness of the original New Testa-
ment sources has to be proved, another question also arises
to-day—perhaps the most important of all —whether the
Apostles and their pupils wished to write, and have actually
recorded, the history of Jesus, or merely the belief about
Jesus. That sufficient attention has not been paid to this
question in our apologetic handbooks and our larger works,
anyone can easily convince himself.
Also those who are concerned with the vindication of the
Messiahship and divinity of Christ ought, in the formation
of their lines of defence, to keep the attitude of modern
criticism, especially in its latest phase, more clearly in view
than is usually the case. We leave out of consideration here
how far this wish is justified in respect of the selection and
exposition of the proofs of the Messiahship and divinity of
Jesus. We shall have occasion to express our opinion on that
point in another volume of this work. But the consciousness
which Jesus had of his Messiahship and divinity is almost
invariably treated, in the presentation of the evidence, too
briefly and superficially.
Whoever has come into close touch with modern liberal
criticism —and it is against this that every defence of Christ
must be to-day directed —will confess that the problems of
the consciousness and personal testimony of our Lord have
forced, and are still forcing, all other problems into the
background. Did Jesus really know, and did he really
confess, that he was the Christ? Whence comes his Mes-
sianic consciousness? What is the nature of it? What did
he think of his Messianic activity and character? Did he
'mean to imply that he was absolutely a supernatural, divine
being or not? Did he conceive himself to be the Son of God
in the strict metaphysical sense, or has the divine christology
of the Church’s faith been formed only gradually under the
influence of Pauline, synoptical and Johannine ideas?
These and other questions are now of paramount interest,
and justify us in dividing our defence of Christ into two
parts—the first of which deals with the conscipusness of
Jesus, and the second with the evidence given by Jesus
himself for his Messiahship and divinity. Whether this con-
ception corresponds to the nature of the subject, in itself
considered, we do not inquire. It certainly does correspond
to the nature of antagonistic criticism at the present time,
and to the standpoint of its representatives. It is, however,
the duty and task of the peace-loving apologist to be as
conciliatory as possible to his opponent, and to take the
latter’s standpoint into consideration, although he may not
be able to share it.
Apart from its subject-matter, this is especially true of the
method of the defence of Christ. Who is Christ? Are the


Gospel, the person, the doctrine, the life and deeds of Christ
—that is to say, is Christianity —actual history? Did Christ
declare himself to be really the Messiah and God, and did he
furnish the evidence for his Messiahship and deity? That is
the one great historical question to which all others lead at
last.
Only by means of historical science is this question to be
answered, and only thus is the appearance of Jesus Christ
and Christianity on this earth to be comprehended and ex-
plained. It is true history cannot immediately and plainly
demonstrate the truth of the Christian revelation and of the
divinity of Jesus Christ, but it can prove the truth of the fact
that Christ represented himself as God, and his religion as
divine, and that he undoubtedly furnished proofs for this
assertion. And precisely in this do we see the scientific
guarantee for the credibility of Christianity. Faith cannot
be attested by means of history, but credibility can and
must be demonstrated. Faith is not a matter of science;
but it is the affair of science, and in this case also the affair
of history, to prove that our faith is scientifically based upon
the facts of revelation and Christianity, and is therefore
reasonable.
Now, it is true, modern criticism is always boasting of its
purely historical method, and asserting that it has passed
judgement upon primitive Christianity and its belief in Christ
scientifically by means of history. Nothing is, however,
more unhistorical than the procedure of negative criticism.
This has been already pointed out, and we shall, step by step,
be able to observe this everywhere. From Reimarus and
Bauer to Harnack and Wrede, all the adherents of the so-
called critical school approach the manifestation of Christ
with the philosophical presumptions of rationalism, which
claim that any supramundane intervention of God in Nature
and any supernatural revelation are impossible, and therefore
that everything supernatural in the life, words and works of
Jesus must at the very outset be stricken out of his history.
Richard Rothe and, after him, Otto Ritschl, utter the follow-
ing “ fundamental thoughts of an easy-going, cheerful Chris-
tianity ” —characteristic of the liberal school of Schleier-
macher, Albrecht Ritschl and Harnack : “ We know that
nature does not allow herself to be disturbed in her sacred
law of necessity by any miracles; we know that the fulness of
the idea of humanity is not poured into one individual, and
that even Jesus can have been only one genius among many;
we know that the accounts of his life are only fables, which
the childish imagination of his first, immature churches
lovingly wove about the portrait which had imprinted itself
indistinctly upon their recollection. . . . The historian must
not expect our age to accept the old ecclesiastical ideas,


however true they may be. For this age necessarily repudi-
ates everything superhuman and extraordinary.” 1
To the majority of the rationalistic critics even these views
are not extreme enough. Consciously or unconsciously, they
judge of the facts of Christianity from the philosophical
standpoint of agnosticism. According to this, “ human
reason is entirely limited, first, to phenomena—that is, to the
objects which come to external manifestation; and, secondly,
to the manner of their manifestation. Beyond this reason
may not and cannot go. Hence it cannot also lift itself to
God, and cannot know his existence outside of visible things.
It follows, therefore, that God can in no way be the direct
subject of scientific research; and as for history, God has in
no sense any part in it as an historical person. ... In the
person of Christ science and history can discern nothing but
a man. Accordingly, everything is to be eliminated from his
history which bears any semblance to the divine, and all his
discourses and deeds—in short, everything which is not in
keeping with his human character, position, education and
local and temporal environment is to be denied him.” 2
This is not the place to disprove philosophically the error
of rationalism and agnosticism. But it ought to be evident
at once that it is contradictory to the historical method to
adopt the rationalistic and' agnostic point of view as a
standard by which ,to estimate the person of Jesus Christ.
Only that method is historical which, without any previous
assumption, examines the facts of Christianity, and supple-
ments, or possibly corrects, one’s own religious and philo-
sophic opinions and views according to the result which has
-been historically established. If the modern investigation of
the life of Jesus had been conducted thus, it would never
have come, as it has, to the brink of ruin—a fact which is
acknowledged even by its adherents. 3
All the problems of this modern christology, and the whole
opposition of Modernists to the Christ of the Gospels, find
their explanation in the preconceived assumptions of ration-
alistic and agnostic philosophy.
If we, however, summon the opponents of the' Christian
revelation before the bar of fair, unclouded history, we, on
our side, must of course be equally scrupulous. In this case
we must not, as apologists, presuppose either the faith or the
scientific credibility of Christianity. Thus, all those matters
of christology which • become knowable only in faith and
through faith are excluded in advance from the defence of
Christ. To these belong the mystery of the hypostatic
1 Martin Kahler, Dogmatische Zeitjragen, i, 48 ff. (Leipzig, 1898).
2 Pius X, Pascendi.
2 A. Schweitzer, Von Reimarus tu Wrede, 4-11; Fr. Lipsius, Pra-
testanienblatt, 702 (Berlin, 1906).


union and the trinitarian relation of the Son of God to the
Father and the Holy Ghost.
But also the sources from which the truth about Christ and
Christianity comes to us must be here estimated merely from
the point of view of historical science, not from that of faith.
According to Christian belief, the stream of ancient Church
tradition bears along with it the gold of revelation, and
Catholic consciousness recognizes tradition as a true witness,
and, hence, as a source of supernatural faith. By the
apologist, however, the wealth of Christian tradition must be
weighed with the usual scales of historical criticism, and
regarded as purely historical material. According to faith
and theology, the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments have also a twofold significance. They are, first,
“divine books”—that is, books written under the special
inspiration and guidance of the Holy Ghost, so that God
himself is their chief author, although the human writer has
done his work in them as a free instrument of God. In the
second place, they are reliable, historical works concerning
the origin and development of revealed religion.
The apologist, however, must, from his standpoint, pay no
attention to the alleged inspired character of the Bible. He
must see in the sacred books of the New Testament merely
historical documents treating of the life of Jesus and primitive
Christianity, and he has first to prove that these documents
are original and credible before he builds up from them the
defence of Christ.


PART I
THE SOURCES




REVIEW OF CHRISTIAN AND NON-
CHRISTIAN SOURCES
SINCE Jesus Christ, even if considered merely as an
historical person, is the greatest man in the world’s
history, it is fortunate that more and better authenti-
cated accounts of him have been handed down to us
than of any other personality of the ancient world.
These accounts are partly Christian and partly non-christian.
The latter are few in number, but this is not to be wondered
at, if we reflect that “ Christ crucified was to the Jews a
stumbling-block and to the Gentiles foolishness ” (i Cor.
i, 23). Christianity appeared to the pagan Romans at first
only as a Jewish sect. As such, they naturally felt little
interest in it. There were also, in the first century after
Christ, innumerable cults and religious confessions in the
broad empire. Moreover, the Founder of the Christian
religious movement had lived only in a corner of the Roman
world, had been active for a yery brief time, and had called
forth no political revolution whatsoever. We cannot, there-
fore, expect that Roman writers would pay attention to him.
Suetonius mentions him cursorily in his biography of the
Emperor Claudius. 1 Tacitus, the sole consul in the year 97,
speaks of the execution of Christ under Pontius Pilate, and of
the rapid spread of Christianity and its persecution. 2 Pliny,
Governor of Bithynia, testifies in his letter to the Emperor
Trajan that the believers worship Christ as God, and have
been admonished by him to observe a strict morality. 3
Phlegon, the freedman of Hadrian, knows of the eclipse of
the sun at the death of Jesus, and mentions that the latter
predicted many events which had since then actually taken
place. Phlegon’s utterances must, however, be taken with
precaution, since he even confounds Christ with Peter. 4 The
philosopher, Celsus, who, in the reign of Marcus Aurelius,
first undertook to study Christianity minutely and to refute
it, boasts indeed of being acquainted with sources of informa-
tion concerning the life of Jesus until then completely un-
known. 5 But in reality he had not at his disposal one single
new fact. Apart from the Gospels, he was acquainted only
with current Jewish gossip. 6
1.
2
1 Vita Claudii, c. 25. 2 Anal., xv, 44.
3 Efist,, x, 96. 4 Origen, Contra Celsum, ii, 13, 33, 59.
5 id., 1.c., ii, 13.
• See Seitz, Christuszeugnisse aus dem klasstschen AUertum von un-
gldubiger Seite (Coin, 1906).


It is evident, especially in the Gospels of Matthew and
John, that the Jews gave themselves, from the first, all
imaginable trouble to pourtray the life of Jesus after their own
fashion. Even before the first Gospel had been written, a
nucleus of malicious legends had formed itself about the
name of the hated Nazarene. 1 In the course of the first and
at the beginning of the second century, the oral calumnies of
the Jews against Christ increased in number. We learn this
from Justin, 2 Tertullian, 3 and Hegesippus, 4 as well as from
the scoffer Celsus.® Soon after, some of these false stories
about Jesus were established in written form in the Talmud,
the great organ of the Rabbis after Christ, and were thereby
introduced into official Jewish theology. 6 After the fourth
century, the oral and written web of lies consolidated itself
more and more in a caricature of the life of Jesus (Toldoth
Jeshu), which is even now in the hands of many children of
Israel. 7 According to the confession of Jewish investigators
themselves, however, this whole tradition of the life of Jesus
does not represent the truth concerning the Saviour, but
merely the subjective views, wishes and feelings of post-
christian Judaism. 8 This is certainly the mildest judgement
that one could pronounce upon it. The Christians, beginning
with the Apostle Matthew, 9 have always stigmatized the
Jewish calumnies against Christ as patent lies and intentional
slanders. The most important Jewish source of information
concerning the life of Jesus is an unfortunately much con-
tested passage from the “Jewish Antiquities” of Flavius
Josephus, a Jewish patriot and subsequently Roman renegade,
towards the end of the first century. 10 We shall refer to this
later. 11
But so much the more zealously did Christian writers
endeavour to preserve the portrait and the words of the
Master after he himself no more walked on earth. Already
the Evangelist Luke can point to the fact that “ Many have
taken in hand to set forth in order a narration of the things
1 Matt, xxviii, 15.
2 Dialogus cum Tryphone Judceo, 17, 108, 117.
3 Ad nationes, i, 14; de spectaculis, c. 30.
4 Eusebius, H. E. ii, 23.
6 Origen, Contra Celsum, ii, 13 sqq.
6 See Franz Delitzsch, Ernste Fragen an die Gebildeten der jiidischen
Nation (Leipzig, 1880); Laible, Jesus Christus im Talmud (Leipzig,
1900); A. Marmorstein, Talmud und Neues Testament (1908), together
with the comprehensive article Jesus im Talmud, by Arnold Meyer,
in Edgar Hennecke’s Handbuch zu den N. T, Apokryphen, 49 ff.
(Tubingen, 1904).
7 Samuel Krauss, Das Leben Jesu nach jiidischen Quellen, 22 (Berlin,
1902).
8 See Krauss’s admissions, op. cit., 237. 8 Matt, xxviii, 15.
10 Antiquitates Jos. Flavii, xviii, 3, 3.
11 In the second volume of this work, “ The Miracles of Jesus.”


that have been accomplished among us, according as they have
delivered them unto us, who from the beginning were eye-
witnesses and ministers of the word ” (Luke i, i). Hereby
well meant, but not wholly satisfactory, records of small
extent seem to have been in the mind of Luke. The authors
of our Gospels added indeed the sifted material of these
written documents to the substance of their own Gospels,
which they already knew from the testimony of their own
eyes and ears and those of others, and thus created finally
their portraitures of the life of Christ. Critics of the Gospel
sources have busied themselves for decades with the attempt
to find out and reproduce the different sources used by the
Evangelists. But even if they should ever succeed in finding
a satisfactory solution of this literally and historically im-
portant problem, they would not thereby bring to light any
previously unknown documents of the life of Jesus. Those
original sources are already hidden in our Gospels, and their
historical worth is, in the last analysis, guaranteed only by
the Evangelists.
The so-called Logia, or “Sayings,” or “Discourses”
of the Lord still always form the principal theme for discus-
sion. Probably, or even only possibly, there was in the very
earliest times a collection of the sayings and discourses of the
Lord. Schleiermacher in 1832 “ discovered ” this when he
misunderstood a . note of Papias of Hierapolis. Papias
reports “ Now Matthew wrote down the Logia in the
Hebrew tongue. But everyone translated them as best he
could.” These words have been always and only referred to
our Matthew —that is, to his original Aramaic text, while
Schleiermacher wrongly applied 2 it to only one collection of
sayings and discourses. 3 The mischief that has since then
been made with these Logia borders on the incredible. As
a matter of fact, up to this time no one has succeeded in
establishing with certainty any trace of them outside the
Bible. The “ Sayings of Jesus ” which have been found in
recent times—as, for example, on the papyrus of Fayum in
Central Egypt, on that of Behnesa in Lower Egypt, 4 and
elsewhere—are interpolated Logia-texts. On the other hand,
many critics think that the collection of Sayings lies at the
basis of that special property which is common to the
Gospels of Matthew and Luke, in contrast to the Gospel of
Mark. Harnack has lately even attempted to reconstruct
1 Eusebius, H. E., iii, 39.
2 Proof given by Belser, Einleitung in das N. T., 251-253 (Freiburg,
3 Schleiermacher, Ueber die Zeugntsse des Pafias von unseren betden
ersten Evangelien in Theolog. Studien, 735 (1832).
4 See the complete literature on this subject in Ehrhard, Die altchrist-
liche Literatur und ihre Erforschung von 1884-1900, i, 124 (1900); and
Otto Bardenhewer, Geschichte der altkirchlichen Literatur, i, 389-391
(1902). (All published by Herder, Freiburg.)


the text of the Logia out of Matthew and Luke. 1 Yet it
remains questionable whether the Logia, or only a part of
them, are thus recovered. But even if Harnack’s supposition
should prove true, we should (let us once more emphasize the
fact) even in the Logia find no new source of information
about the life of Jesus, but only anew source of the Gospels.
Quite without reason some modern critics assert that the
Logia are identical with an original Gospel written by
Matthew. Not only does this identity rest on mere imagina-
tion, but “ probably the whole so-called original Matthew is
not the Aramaic primitive form of our Matthew, but a
fantasy, which first began to exist in the nineteenth century
through the mistake of an old passage in the writings of a
Church Father 2 . . . and has been already buried again at
the commencement of the twentieth century.” 3 In any case,
it is a biting irony on the impartiality of the criticism of
negation that anyone, with a total disregard of the real
Gospels, should have built up repeatedly the most airy
hypotheses on Matthew’s alleged original book of Sayings,
and have drawn from this “authentic” views about Christ
and Christianity.*
Exactly the same thing is true of the so-called original
Mark. Ever since the middle of the nineteenth century all
“ critical ” heads have been haunted by the dogma that a
short primitive Gospel forms the basis of our Gospel of Mark,
and, at a greater distance, of the other two synoptic Gospels
also. And how many times have we seen the text of
this original Mark reconstructed to the smallest details before
our astonished eyes. On closer scrutiny and more serious
investigation, however, the much-vaunted discovery of the
original Mark dissolved into thin air. Harnack already some
years ago was able to assert: “ The hypothesis that our
canonical Mark has replaced an ‘ original Mark ’ rightly
loses more and more adherents.” 5 At present this “ mutila-
tion [of the Gospel of Mark] through the hypothesis of a
primitive Mark, as well as its historical depreciation,” 6 is
almost universally given up as uncritical. We have said
that the original ante-evangelical documents concerning the
1 A. Harnack, Sfruche und Reden Jesu, die xweite Quelle des Matthaus
und Lukas, 88 ff, 175 ff. (Leipzig, 1907).
2 Of Papias. (See above.)
3 Richard Griitzmacher, Die Jungfraugeburt, 22 (Berlin, 1906); cj.
Th. Zahn, Einleitung in das N. T., ii, 294 £f (Leipzig, 1899).
4 So recently still Adolf Hausrath, Jesus und die N. T. Schriftsteller,
i, 178 (Berlin, 1908); cf. Otto Pfleiderer, Das Vrchristentum, seine
Schri/ien und Lehren, ii, 161 (Berlin, 1902).
5 Chronologic der allchristlichen Literatur, i, 700 (Leipzig, 1897).
• B. Weiss, Die Quellen der synoftischen Vberliejerung, 222 (Leipzig,
1908).


life of Jesus are incorporated in our canonical Gospels and
have thereby been saved for history. This statement must,
nevertheless, be a little modified. It appears that at least
a small part of those old materials was not used by the New
Testament writers. In old Christian literature there are
found here and there various utterances of the Lord, and
further items of information about Jesus Christ, or from him,
which we seek for in vain in the canonical writings of the
New Testament. These uncanonical fragments —the so-called
Agrapha, or “unclaimed” words of the Lord—may perhaps
in part contain the remainder of the so-called ante-evangelical
accounts. Yet the yield in historical material which the
Agrapha offer is very small, and in all cases very prob-
lematical. Moreover, in the best authenticated specimen
of the Agrapfia, there remains the possibility that it can
just as well be a later addition to the Gospels, as a frag-
ment antedating the Gospels, or a fragment of the Gospel
itself. 1
Only those Agrapha can be seriously considered which go
back to the oldest uncanonical literary monuments of Chris-
tianity, to the writings of the apostolic Fathers. Apart from
the New Testament books, we possess a number of old
Christian writings from the years a.d. 70 to 140, which
contain individual items of information about Jesus Christ
—the Doctrine of the Apostles, the Epistle of Barnabas,
the Epistle of Clement, the Epistles of SS Ignatius and
Polycarp,- and the Apologies of Quadratus and Aristides.
Their utterances are, indeed, very important, since they
confirm in all essential features the Gospel portrait of the
Saviour. Yet they do not offer any new, important narra-
tions exceeding those of the Gospels. Evidently there was
nothing really new to be learned about Jesus. Moreover,
the Gospels enjoyed such high esteem, and Christianity held
so firmly to the purely apostolical tradition, that representa-
tions of Christ, which did not originate with the Apostles,
would have had no prospect of success.
For that very reason writers eager for novelties sought to
put forged books into circulation bearing the names of the
Apostles. Such, for example, were the Proclamation of Peter,
the Acts of Peter, the Gospel of Peter, the Gospel of the
Twelve, the Gospels of Matthias, Philip and Thomas, and
1 See Nestle, Novi Testamenti Grad Sufflementum, 89 ff. (Lipsiae,
1896); Erwin Preusschen, Antilegomena. Die Reste der ausserkanoni-
schen Evangelien und urchrist. ttberlieferungen, and ed., 26 (Giessen,
1905); Alfred Resch, A grafha, in Texte und Untersuchungen tur
Gesch. der altchrist. Literatur, vol. XXX (1906); in regard to the value
of the Agrapha for Gospel research Resch expresses himself perhaps too
optimistically, pp. 387-398.


even a Gospel of Judas. 1 The most of these apocryphal
(“ secret ”) writings were invented by heretics for the pallia-
tion of error.
Sometimes, however, even foolish believers allowed them-
selves to commit such a “ pious fraud.” The apocryphal
literature originating thus is, indeed, not without value for
the history of the genuine apostolic writings, yet it cannot be
considered as a source of information concerning the life
of Jesus. Otto Pfleiderer is certainly right when he thus
expresses his opinion regarding the apocryphal writings:
“ We see that in this debris of apocryphal remnants of the
Gospels a great variety of materials has been jumbled
together; together with primitive rock from the primary
stratum of tradition are found also wonderful petrifications
from late formations. But as literary and historical monu-
ments, they have their incontestable importance.” 2
Moreover, the Apocrypha have come down to us only in
a fragmentary form. In the gradually increasing flood of
genuine and forged literary productions about Christ and
Christianity the Church accepted finally only such books as
she regarded as inspired, and therefore as Holy Scriptures
of the New Testament. But the science of history, which
does not allow the inspired character of the Bible, is also
bound to recognize the thousand-year-old tradition that the
truth about Jesus is to be found only in the New Testament. 3
The majority of the New Testament books belong to the
literary category of didactic writings. They bring out the
teachings of Jesus, but only here and there make an allusion
to his life. Of all the didactic writings the Epistles of the
Apostle Paul contain most historical information. The
genuineness of the Pauline writings, if we make no reference
to the pastoral writings and the Epistle to the Hebrews, is
regarded, even in liberal circles, as an established fact.
Wilhelm Wrede, an extremely liberal critic, has written on
this subject the following incisive words : “ The view which
is so widespread in Holland and uttered also sporadically in
Germany—namely, that all of Paul’s Epistles belonged to
a later age, we can now regard only as a great mistake of
criticism. Epistles like the First to the Thessalonians, the
Epistle to the Galatians, and the Second to the Corinthians,
refer in a hundred particulars and allusions with the greatest
definiteness to conditions such as are conceivable only but
a few decades after the death of Jesus. And the forger is yet
1 Tischendorf edited the editions of all the remnants of the apocryphal
Gospels, Evangelia apocrypha (Lipsi®, 1853); Nestle, N. T. Grad
Supplementum (Lipsi®, 1896) ; Preusschen, Antilegomena (Giessen,
1905); E. Hennecke, Neutestamentliche Apohryphen, and Handbuch
zu den N. T. Apohryphen (Tubingen, 1904).
2 Das Urchristentum, 2nd ed., ii, 171.
3 Oskar Holtzmann, Christus, 27 (Leipzig, 1907).


to be born who would know how to invent such uninten-
tional, individual, purely personal and instantly conceived
expressions as are here so numerous, and who could, more-
over, in the whole range of the Epistles put forward fraudu-
lently a finished and original personality as their author.” 1
Otto Schmiedel 2 remarks, in agreement with the foregoing:
“It is settled, therefore, that the genuineness of the chief
Pauline Epistles, and therewith the fundamental facts of the
life of Jesus, are assured.”
“It is true,” adds Adolf Harnack, “as the criticism of
the early history of Christianity has even to-day not yet over-
come the furthest extreme of radical censorship, there are
not wanting a few scholars who declare that all the Epistles
of Paul are ungenuine and forgeries of the second century.” 3
By serious critics, however, as has been said, only the
Epistle to the Hebrews and the pastoral Epistles—that is,
the two Epistles to Timothy and the Epistle to Titus—are
often objected to.
The Pauline origin of the pastoral Epistles is, nevertheless,
recognized more universally from year to year even in Pro-
testant circles. B. Weiss, for example, makes them really
equally genuine with the other Pauline writings. 4 Th. Zahn
alleges that “ the confidence with which for several genera-
tions the genuiness of these Epistles has been denied, before
that of all other'Epistles bearing the name of Paul, finds no
support in tradition.” 5 Rather do the pastoral Epistles have
to suffer simply because their contents will not everywhere
coincide with the preconceived doctrinal opinions of the
liberal critics. 6 It is, moreover, undoubted even by our
opponents—and that is the principal thing—that the pastoral
Epistles elaborate “ Pauline material.” 7 “ That they are
built up from the Pauline Epistles is a result of criticism
which need not again be proved.” 8
Also in regard to the Epistle to the Hebrews, its Pauline
1 Paulus, 2 f. (Tubingen, 1907).
2 Die Hauftfrobleme der Leben-Jesu Forschung, 2nd ed., 16 (Tubin-
gen, 1906).
3 A. Harnack, Ueber die Glaubwiirdigheit der evangel. Geschichie,
in Christliche Welt, 19th year, 318 (1905). Harnack publishes here
extracts from the lectures which he delivered at the Berlin University
in the winter term of 1904-1905.
4 B. Weiss, Lehrbuch der Einleitung in das N. T 3rd ed. (Berlin,
1897), and Das Neue Testament, ii (1902).
5 Einleitung in das N. T. i, 457 (Leipzig, 1897).
8 See proof in Zahn, of. cit., pp. 459-489 : Die Eehtheit der Briefe an
Timotheus und Titus; Johannes Belser, Einleitung in das N. T., 630-
652 (Freiburg, 1901), Die Eigenart und Eehtheit der Brieje an
Timotheus und Titus; Comely, Introductio in utriusque Testamenti
libros sacros, iii, 551 f£., ed. altera (Paris, 1892).
7 Harnack, Die Chronologic der alt Christ. Liter atur bis Eusebius,
i, 480 (Leipzig, 1897).
8 Harnack, id.


character is more and more conceded. Barth. Heigl 1 recently
came, after thorough investigation, to the conclusion that
there is no decisive argument against the direct authorship
of Paul. And even those investigators who deny the Pauline
origin of the Epistle do not call in question the fact that in
its import it goes back to Paul, or at least is intimately
related to him. On the other hand, they concede that the
Epistle was written in the lifetime of the Apostle to the
Gentiles, or, in any case, shortly after his death. 2 Thus it
unquestionably is to be regarded as a witness for Christian
opinions in the time of Paul. In case it was not a work of
the great Apostle its importance would rather gain than lose
thereby. It would then take its place near St Paul as an
independent witness to inform us about the original Christian
Church of those days, and to confirm the statements of the
Apostle to the Gentiles.
For research into the life of Christ the Pauline writings, in
particular, are invaluable. The powerful personality of Jesus
stood so vividly and constantly before the mental vision of
Paul that it lives again in his Epistles and takes plastic form.
Harnack estimates the historical value of his utterances as
follows : 3 “ We may be certain that what Paul informs us
about Jesus, as fact, is almost as reliable and valuable as if
the disciples had related it personally. I say almost as
reliable because a subjective element is never to be quite
excluded. But, on the whole, what Paul imparts to us of
the historical Jesus, as fact, must have corresponded to the
very earliest Christian preaching. There was never a con-
troversy on this point between the Apostles. ... If one
sums up what the post-pauline Christian writers down to
the beginning of the second century report, and what Paul
himself tells us of Jesus, one can truly speak of a fifth un-
written Gospel; and in a certain way this Gospel is even more
important than the four which we possess. However many
or however few details that fifth ecumenical may contain, the
great features of that portrait—the Teacher, the Prophet,
the Saviour, 4 sublimity in humiliation, holiness, love of
enemies, intercourse with sinners, the Cross and the mani-
festations after death—are testified to. Before all, however,
it is certain that this life of Jesus, however it may have
terminated, and this personality, whatever characteristics it
1 Verfasser und Addresse des Briefes an die Hebr 'aer (Freiburg, 1905).
* B. Weiss, Lehrbuch der Einleitung in das N. T., puts its date at
A.D. 65-66; Th. Zahn about a.d. 80; A. Jiilicher, Einleitung in das N. T.,
136, at about 75-85; Harnack, Chronologic, 479, declares, “as the only
sure thing,’* that the Epistle was written between 65 and 95.
3 Ueber die Glaubwiirdigkeit der evan. Geschichte, 319, 436.
4 Harnack adds : “ But not one miracle is reported by him.” But
how about Paul in l Cor. xv? And Quadratus (Eusebius, H. E.,
iv, 3,2)?


may have had, have laid the foundation for the declaration
of faith : ‘ This is the Lord and the Son of God.’ ”
Formal pourtrayals of the life of Jesus are contained, how-
ever, only in the four canonical Gospels. Precisely for the
reason that they proclaimed the Gospel—“ the glad tidings ”
—of Jesus Christ and his salvation, they received already in
the earliest times the name : “ Gospels of our Lord Jesus
Christ, according to Matthew, Mark, Luke and John.” The
Gospels are, in fact, nothing else than the classic sources
of information and the documents of the divine-human life
and history of Jesus Christ.
It becomes at once comprehensible, therefore, why, ever
since the days of incipient rationalism—that is, for about
one hundred and forty years —the question of the historical
value of these fundamental books of our religion has been
always over and over again asked and answered. From this
side and from that, out of the conflict of opinions and out of
serious research there has grown up an exceedingly rich and
almost unlimited literature connected with the criticism of
the Gospels. Attack and defence have been renewed in-
numerable times, in all conceivable positions, and with the
sharpest intellectual weapons. To-day we can estimate with
perfect confidence the results gained, which mean a brilliant
vindication of the Gospels. Even if the conflict may enter
into many a new' phase, another answer to these questions
is simply impossible.
The historical value of our Gospels depends, of course,
like that of every other source of history, upon two points.
One question is, whether they are authentic —that is, whether
they really originate from an epoch near, and from men who
themselves stood in proximity to the events described; the
second is, whether they are credible —that is, whether we may
rely upon these men and their narrative. Accordingly, we have
now to examine and put to the test the authenticity and the
credibility of the Gospels.


CHAPTER I
THE GENUINENESS OF THE GOSPELS
I.— Genuineness of the Gospels and Recent Criticism.
jA CCORDING to Christian tradition, the four Gospels
had their origin in the second half of the first
/ % century; the three so-called “synoptic” Gospels
/ % —that is, Gospels written from a common point
-*“• of view—originating between the years a.d. 50
and 70; the fourth, however, between 80 and 100. Tradition
also points out as the authors of the four Gospels, the
publican Levi, subsequently the Apostle Matthew; the disciple
of St Peter, Mark; the physician and pupil of St Paul,
Luke; and John, the son of Zebedee, one of the original
twelve Apostles.
It was rationalism that first attacked the correctness of
these assertions. In so doing it admittedly 1 did not allow
itself to be guided by historical arguments (though these are
the only ones which are decisive), but by preconceived
religio-philosophical opinions. It wanted especially at any
price to eliminate the supernatural entirely, and for this
purpose sought for a long time to undermine the credibility
of the Gospels, which are themselves in complete harmony
with the supernatural. Yet all the attempts to attain this
end broke down before the indubitable fact that we here have
to do with writings issuing from the immediate circle of the
disciples of Jesus and the Apostles.
Then Ferdinand Christian Baur and his pupil, David
Friedrich Strauss, were bold enough totally to ignore the
genuineness of the Gospels in order to create thus a clear
path for the rationalistic explanation of Christianity.
Strauss placed the origin of the Gospels at 150 years after
Christ, and certainly needed all that time as a support for
his airy hypothesis that the Christianity of the Gospels grew
gradually out of legends.
It was Baur himself who gave the death-blow to the
mythical theory of his pupil, but he invented the hypothesis
of “deception,” which, by the way, is equally valueless.
Appealing to the “ higher criticism,” he maintained that the
early history of Christianity ran its course in continual
1 Strauss, Das Leben Jesu, -jrd ed., pp. 86, 94 ff. (Tubingen, 1838);
Renan, Vie de Jisus, vi (Berlin, 1863); Schweitzer, Von Reimarus zu
Wrede, pp. 4, g, 15 (Tubingen, 1907).


antagonism between the so-called Gentile-Christian policy of
Paul and that of the party of Peter and the other Apostles,
which was more friendly to the Jews; but that finally the
hostile brothers became reconciled, and that then, in order
to close the previous line of cleavage, the four Gospels were
composed, being in reality documents resulting from a com T
promise.
According to Baur, “ Matthew’s Gospel ” appeared about
a.d. 130, and this was made use of about the year 150 to
produce the Gospel of the heretic Marcion, and to the work
thus formed was given the name of “ Luke.” Soon after, out
of Matthew and Luke was compiled the work known as
“ Mark ”; and, finally, about a.d. 170, the Gospel of “ John ”
first saw the light. 1
It was considered a great piece of good fortune to have
suddenly found all this out at one stroke, and thereby to have
turned all the old literature of Christianity topsy-turvy.
Baur became, on this account, the founder of the “ younger
Tubingen school,” which was very properly designated as
“ critical, with a distinct purpose,” although it called itself
“ historical.” Whoever did not agree with it was simply
declared to be lacking in a comprehension of “ higher
historical criticism.” Kostlin, Zeller, Schwegler and Holsten
went over entirely, Keim, Hilgenfeld, Volkmar and others
partially, into the camp of Baur.
Bruno Bauer went even further than the “ Master of
Tubingen ” in his unlimited criticism of primitive Christian
literature. 2 In the name of “ higher criticism ” the whole of
early Christianity and with it also the Gospels were trans-
formed into a seething cauldron, full of controversies, lies
and subtleties. 3
That was too much. These “ fantastic ideas” 4 could not
maintain themselves permanently. Even De Wette 5 pre-
dicted that such extravagant criticism would destroy itself;
and, like him, other thorough-going rationalists such as
Karl Base, Ewald, Schenkel and even Renan, refused to
follow the school of Baur. Soon every honourable investi-
gator was ashamed to be numbered with the “ Tiibingens,”
and once more men called to mind seriously the declarations
of primitive Christian literature, and sought to determine
thereby the age of the Gospels.
Thus, in the second half of the nineteenth century, criticism
1 Baur, Paulas der Afostel Jesu Christi (Tubingen, 1845); Kritische
Untersuchungen iiber die kanonischen Evangelien (1847).
2 Harnacb, Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte, 3rd ed., 51 note.
3 Bauer, Kritik d. evang. Geschichte des Johannes; Kritik d. evang.
Geschichte der Synoftiker; Kritik der Evangelien; Kritik der faulin-
ischen Briefe . 1 Schweitzer, Von Reimarus zu Wrede, 9.
5 Kurzgefasstes exeget. Handbuch zum N. T. Afostelgeschichte,
vol. V (Leipzig, 1848).


approached always nearer to the traditional views. The
first three, or synoptic Gospels, in the opinion of Theodor
Keim, 1 originated between a.d. 70 and 117; according to
Hilgenfeld 2 from a.d. 70 to 100; according to H. J. Holtz-
mann 3 between a.d. 68 and 100; according to B. Weiss 4
between a.d. 69 and 95; according to Adolf Harnack 5
between a.d. 65 and 93, or very likely still earlier; 6 and
according to T. Zahn 7 between a.d. 60 and 75. Thus
criticism comes in touch again with what tradition has to
say in regard to the time of the composition of the first
three Gospels.
In the question of their authorship also tradition has proved
itself more and more correct. Even if the school of Baur had
made use of such late dates in order forcibly to take away
the authorship of the New Testament from the Apostles and
their contemporaries, and thereby to diminish its credibility,
the Gospels, nevertheless, together with the earlier statements
about their age, came back again to Matthew, Mark and
Luke.
That Matthew was the author of one Gospel will, indeed,
be contested by no one; but, according to modern criticism,
it is questionable whether Matthew wrote only a very old
Gospel in the Aramaic tongue, or also in Greek the book
named after him.
The second Gospel is unanimously ascribed to the pupil of
Peter, Mark. Only Schmiedel and Loisy raise objections to
this idea, and thus give the impression of people who are
continually grumbling about something. 8
Liberal theology, however, refuses obstinately to allow the
third synoptic Gospel and the Acts of the Apostles con-
nected with it to be accepted as the work of Luke. Harnack
had recently to complain : “ The untenableness of the tradition
in regard to this is so generally taken now for granted that
scarcely anyone takes any more trouble to prove it, or even to
consider in the least the arguments of its opponents. One
seems no longer willing to acknowledge that such arguments
even exist. Julicher 9 sees in the ascription of the book to
Luke merely a ‘ quixotic ’ wish. So quickly does criticism
forget, and in such a partisan spirit does it entrench itself
in its theories I” 10 To-day, after Harnack’s exhaustive pre-
1 Geschichte Jesu von Nazara, I, 47 (1867); 111, 129 fi. {1872).
2 Historisch-Kritische Einleitung in das N. 7’.,46i ff., 515,609(1875).
* Einleitung in das N . T., 2nd ed (1886).
* Lehrbuch der Einleitung in das N. T., 3rd ed. (1897).
* Die Chronologie der altchristl. Literatur, I, 651 ff. (1897).
* Die Afostelgeschichte, 217-277 (1908).
7 Einleitung in das N. T., 11, 432 ff., 440 (1899).
, E. Wendling, Die Entstehung des Markus-Evangeliums (1908).
* Einleitung, sth and 6th ed., 406 (1908).
1J Lukas der Arzt, der Verfasser des dritten Evangeliums und der
Afostelgeschichte, 5 (Leipzig, 1906).


sentation 1 of the case, these theories also are finally con-
demned.
The Gospel of John has had from the earliest times a diffi-
cult position. On the one hand, it was already by tradition
assigned to a later date; on the other, its contents constitute
a great offence in the eyes of liberal critics. It has even
been believed that the Fourth Gospel may be discarded as of
no value. The most incredible views about its age and origin
have been advanced. In recent years, however,, critics have
been forced, in this respect also, to come nearer and nearer to
tradition. Thus, from a.d. 160-170 (according to Baur and
Bruno Bauer), they have gone back to 150-160 (Schwegler),
1 55 (Volkmar), 150 (Zeller), about 150 (Bretschneider, Scholten
and Matthes), 135-163 (Taylor), about 140 (Hilgenfeld, Haus-
rath, Thoma), 130-135 (Liitzelberger), 130 (Keim), iio-115
(Nicholas, Renan, Schenkel), and 100 (Aub£). 2
To-day the origin of the Fourth Gospel is again generally
assigned to the years of transition from the first to the second
century, although the authorship of John is for the most part
still doubted or positively denied by liberal criticism. A
synopsis of the controversy over the authenticity of this
Gospel is given by Watkins, 3 who at the same time cites also
the wellnigh endless list of modern critics who defend the
genuineness of the Johannine Gospel.
This list could now be still further increased by many names,
such as Karl Miiller, B. Bruckner, Gess, Kahnis, Schneder-
mann, Leuschner, Paul Ewald, F. Barth, Lobstein, Kaftan,
Resch, Koehler, Reynolds, Godet and others who are non-
catholics, to say nothing of the Catholics. On the Protestant
side there are arrayed against the latest attacks on the
Gospel of John especially the following ; Stanton, Drummond,
Sanday, J. Robinson, J. H. A. Hart, E. H. Asquith, and
C. R. Gregory. F. W. Worsley remains undecided whether
he should ascribe the Fourth Gospel to the Apostle John or to
the Presbyter John.
A large number of the later liberal investigators concede
that it is not possible to fail to recognize the Apostolic-
Johannine character of the Fourth Gospel. They seek, never-
theless, to eliminate its, to them, disagreeable doctrines by
making these out to be later insertions made in an earlier
Johannine manuscript—that is to say, they deny the unity of the
Gospel. This is the standpoint of Ammon, Christ. Weisse,
Renan, Alex. Schweitzer, Bertling, Delff, Wendt, Becker,
Linder, Bacon, Frey, Fries, Lepsius, Volter, v. Dobschiitz,
1 In Lukas der Arzt and Die Apostelgeschichte ; cj. Weiss, Die
Quellen des Lukasevangeliums (Stuttgart, 1907).
3 H. J. Holtzmann, Einleitung in das N. T 2nd ed., p. 476.
3 Modern Criticism in its Relation to the Fourth Gospel, pp. 313-350
(London, 1890).


Schiitz, Soltau, Johannes Weiss. The extremely liberal Prof.
Jiilicher of Marburg writes in opposition to all these theories
of dismemberment: “ The hypotheses of dismemberment are
already almost innumerable. Their aim is to prove that entire
passages of John’s Gospel have disappeared, while others
have been transplanted into erroneous contexts, and others
still are subsequent interpolations. Or else a considerably
shorter original Gospel of John is constructed, since it is
claimed by some that the ‘ Galilean portions,’ by others that
most of the accounts of miracles, and by others still that the
lengthy discourses of Jesus, were inserted later. These hypo-
theses, however, are to be rejected absolutely, for they break
down completely before the homogeneity, both in form and
content, of all the constituent parts of John’s Gospel.” 1
The latest of such hypotheses also, elaborated by Well-
hausen 2 and G. Schwartz 3 on the ground of Oriental and
Greek philology, and by Frederick Spitta 4 rather from a
critical-theological standpoint, merely confirm the judgement
of Jiilicher. The whole Johannine question can be clearly
stated thus : Is the canonical Fourth Gospel Johannine at all,
or is it not? The fact that a large number of liberal critics
seek to answer this question by Yes and No demonstrates
clearly that in the controversy over the Fourth Gospel, as well
as in the few remaining questions which are still disputed,
Tradition proves itself right after all.
Hamack wrote some years ago the well-known words ;
“ In the criticism of the sources of primitive Christianity we
are, without doubt, returning to tradition.” 5 To-day he can
say positively that this frank utterance, which then met with
violent contradiction, has been proven 6 by the facts. In
reality, the rationalistic criticism of the Gospels has made
a complete fiasco, and even the liberal school of Ritschl
and Harnack surrenders one position after another to the
historic tradition of the Church. Especially in the matter of
the authenticity of the Gospels, the points of difference have
already been reduced to an insignificant minimum. This
authenticity must have been, therefore, powerfully and mani-
festly established; that, at least, is the teaching which the
latest sceptical criticism gives us—namely, the negative proof
of the correctness of the Christian view of the origin of the
historical books of the New Testament.
Let us now scrutinize the positive proofs, which we divide
into ecclesiastical and non-ecclesiastical testimony.
1 Einleitung in das N. T., 6th ed., p. 353 (Tubingen, 1906).
2 Das Evangelium Johannis (Berlin, 1908).
3 Aforien im 4 Evangelium (Gottingen, 1907).
1 Das Johannes-Evangelium als Quelle der Geschichte Jesu (Gottingen,
1910).
6 Geschichte der altchnst. Lit., 3rd ed., 11, 1, p. x.
6 Lubas der Artzt, 111, f.


ll.— Non-Catholic Proofs of the Genuineness of the
Gospels.
i. The Uncanonical or Apocryphal Gospels.
The uncanonical or apocryphal Gospels have been often used,
since the time of Volkmar, as a pretext for attacking the
genuineness of the canonical, historical books of the New
Testament. “ There are also,” it is said, “ numerous false
Gospels; and if it was possible to ascribe these to the
Apostles, the possibility exists that the four Gospels recog-
nized by the Church may also have been attributed to the
wrong authors, and are therefore spurious !”
This objection can, however, in any case rest only on an
ignorance of the Apocrypha. These uncanonical fragments,
on the contrary, confirm clearly and in a threefold way the
apostolicity of the canonical Gospels.
First, in respect of their contents, the apocryphal are
imitations of the canonical Gospels. Whether they introduce,
under the false name of an Apostle, narratives which are not
found in the Gospels, or whether they adorn and amplify the
stories actually contained in them, they have always at their
disposal matter already existing in the genuine Gospels. The
oldest Church Fathers already called attention to this fact;
and now that the still existing fragments of the Apocrypha
have been collected and examined carefully, we can convince
ourselves of this step by step. 1
In the first place, the so-called “ Gospel to the Hebrews,”
the oldest piece of apocryphal writing and the one most
closely related to the canonical, had the text of Matthew as
a subject to work on, and introduced into it clumsy additions
which reveal themselves at once as forgeries. Thus, for
example, in the narrative of our Lord’s temptation it makes
him say : “So my mother seized me, and the Holy Ghost
took me by one of the hairs of my head and carried me off
to the lofty mountain of Thabor.” 2
The “ Egyptian Gospel ” of the Encratites (a sect of the
Gnostics) transforms the text of the genuine Gospels as much
as possible into a polemic against matrimony, and accordingly
changes the redemptive plan of Jesus expressed in his words,
“ I am come that they might have life,” into “ I am come
to destroy the works of the Feminine.” 3
All that we possess of the “ Gospel of the Ebionites ” (the
Gospel of the twelve Apostles) endeavours in the same clumsy
way to distort the words of our Lord in the canonical Gospels,
1 See Walter Bauer, Das Lebcn Jesu im Zeitaller der neutestamentl.
Afobryfhen (Tubingen, 1909).
2 Edgar Hennecke. Neutestamentliche Afokryfhen, p. 19.
3 ibid., p. 23.


and to give them an exactly opposite meaning. According
to this, the main purpose of the life of Jesus was the sup-
pression of sacrifices and the eating of meat. 1 The contents
of the fragmentary “ Gospel of Peter” correspond in their
main features to the parallel contents of the canonical Gospels,
only they are disfigured by “ coarseness and amplifications.” 2
The Gnostic Gospels correct the received apostolic Gospel
text by an appeal to private revelations, which are said to
date back to the Apostles. 3
Finally, the numerous “ Childhood Gospels ” indulge in
insipid legends about the birth and childhood of the Saviour,
in order to supply the deficiencies found in the Gospels of
Matthew and Luke. How well or how badly they succeed in
doing so may be seen from a few examples.
The “Gospel of Thomas” represents the five-year-old
child Jesus as playing by the ford of a stream, collecting
some of the flowing water into little pools and making it
there wonderfully pure. Then the child amuses himself by
making a paste of moist clay and forming out of it twelve
sparrows, and as he is disturbed in this by an intruder, he
cries to him in anger: “Thou unjust, godless blockhead,
what have the pools and the water done to thee? Lo, thou
also shalt now wither like a tree.” And so it happened. On
another occasion Jesus was jostled by a boy, and forthwith
causes him to die. Being reproved by Joseph for such a
“ naughty deed,” and “ having had his ear suitably pulled
for it . . . the child becomes indignant, and says : ‘ May it
be thy lot to seek and not to find. Thou hast acted very
unwisely.’ ” 4 In similar ways Jesus makes himself con-
spicuous in school and synagogue as a genuine enfant
terrible. 5
Even the “ First Gospel of James,” the least repulsive
of the “ Childhood Gospels,” is distinguished by “ the desire
to tell fabulous tales, and by curiosity to know all the details
about the birth of Christ and how his mother arrived at her
wonderful decision. 6 There is not wanting even a legend
about it, including a somewhat indecent story of a midwife
and some old wives’ gossip.” 7
If we compare, therefore, the fabulous, fantastic, involved
and often comical passages, which for the most part fill the
Apocrypha, with the text of the canonical Gospels, we find
at once that the former are imitations, distortions, amplifica-
tions and falsifications of the latter.
But shadow presupposes light, imitation implies an original,
and counterfeit coin proves the existence of the genuine, from
which these are copied. Consequently there must also have
1 Cf. Edgar Hennecke, Neutesiamentliche A pokryfhen, p. 26.
2 ibid., pp. 28-32. 3 ibid., pp. 34-44. 4 ibid., pp. 67 ff.
5 ibid., pp. 68 ff. 6 ibid., p. 49. 7 ibid., pp. 54-63.


been true Gospels for the very reason that there were false
ones; and the true must have stood in the highest esteem,
for otherwise so much trouble would not have been taken to
invent and circulate the spurious.
In respect to their origin, the apocryphal writings, together
and separately, claim to be derived from the Apostles or the
disciples of the Apostles.
Whether their writers thus attributed to some Apostle their
own ideas about Christianity and popular traditions about
Christ from an innocent attempt to do good or from mis-
placed zeal, in any case it was thought necessary to declare
the Gospel in question to be the work of either Peter, Andrew,
Philip, Thomas, Matthew, James or Judas; and the reason
why every such apocryphal Gospel was ascribed to the Apostles
or the Lord’s disciples can be found only in the firm conviction
prevailing at the time that only Apostles and disciples had
composed the Gospels which were universally acknowledged,
and, hence, that every Gospel which did not claim to be
apostolic, must itself be worthless.
Yet, even if the Apocrypha were not apostolic, the majority
of them are certainly very old. Hegesippus, who died about
a.d. 180, already writes of the apocryphal books, and says
that some of them had been written in his day. 1 The con-
temporary of Hegesippus,’ Irenseus, also complains that
“ The heretics appeal to an incredible number of apocryphal
and supposititious writings, which they themselves have
invented. ... In these they distort certain narratives which
are found in the Gospel.” 2
In fact, we possess even now fragments of apocryphal
Gospels which were written about the year a.d. 150. 3 The
Gospel to the Hebrews, which may be assigned to a date
between a.d. 65 and 125, appears to have been merely a free
translation and elaboration of the canonical Matthew. 4 But
if there was already, soon after the apostolic era, such an
extensive apocryphal Gospel-literature, then the models of
these—the canonical Gospels—must undoubtedly have origin-
ated in the apostolic age itself.
The fate of the Apocrypha was irretrievably sealed by the
fact that these false Gospels first appeared after the time of
the Apostles. For the reason that they were not apostolic,
they were, from the moment of their appearance, almost
universally rejected by the Christian communities, were ex->
eluded from public reading at divine service, and were con-
demned by the pastors and Fathers of the Churches as
1.
3
1 Eusebius, H. E., iv, c. 22. 2 Advers. Hares., i, c. 20.
3 S. Nestle, N. T. Grad Sufflementum; Harnack, Chronologic der
altchristl. Literatur, i, 589; Bardenhewer, Gesckichte der altkirch.
Literatur, I, 377 ff. ; Hennecke, Neutestamentl, Afokryphen, 22, 29, 46.
* Bardenhewer, id., 379 f.; Hennecke, id., n-21.


spurious productions. While in the Church there was never
expressed the least doubt of the genuineness of the canonical
Gospels, the spuriousness and insignificance of the apocryphal,
on the other hand, were positively established.
Thus the argument with which Volkmar tries to impugn
the authenticity of the canonical Gospels by means of the
apocryphal is finally answered. He says, indeed, that the
canonical Gospels in the “ Catholic Episcopate” of the early
times did find “ universal recognition,” but that other
(heretical) Churches had already at that time recognized
other Gospels also. 1 That is true; but such Gospels were
immediately exposed as being non-ecclesiastical, and their
heretical defenders were characterized as renegade Chris-
tians, because they introduced surreptitiously false, non-
apostolic Gospels.
The Apocrypha, therefore, in regard to their contents,
origin and fate give the clearest testimony in favour of the
genuineness of our four sacred Gospels.
We come now to speak of the position which the earliest
heretics took towards the Gospels,
2. The Non-Catholic Teachers.
The heretics of primitive Christianity were as firmly con-
vinced of the authenticity of the Gospels as was the Catholic
Church.
It is true, as has been said, that some heretics made use
of other, apocryphal Gospels also, in connection with the
canonical, in order to put their non-evangelical doctrines in
a better light. Moreover, they often chose out of the four
canonical Gospels one special favourite which best corre-
sponded to their views, and this they altered, on their own
responsibility, to suit their own requirements. The Ebionites,
for example, accepted only the Gospel of Matthew; the
Marcionites a mutilated version of Luke; the Cerinthians the
Gospel of Mark; and the Valentinians that of John. 2
Yet they contested only the credibility of the other Gospels
—that is, they asserted that the remaining Evangelists had
misunderstood or misinterpreted the teaching of the Lord;
but that all four Gospels originated from the Apostles and
their disciples, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John —that is to
say, that they were genuine—the heretics never doubted.
Mar cion indeed (about a.d. 117-138) swears by his version
of Luke’s Gospel, which he cut to his own pattern, according
to the bitter reproaches of Tertullian, 3 much as he liked. But
he never disputes the genuineness of the four canonical Gospels.
On the contrary, he alleges only that Matthew, Mark and
1 Der Ursfrung unserer Evangelien, 24 f. (1866).
! Iren., Adv. Har., i, 3.
3 Adv. Marcionem, iv, c. 2, 3; De came Christi, c. 2.


John have put a false interpretation on the apostolic doctrine,
while Paul and his pupil Luke have alone written it down
correctly.
“ Marcion first and Marcion only,” says Tertullian, “ he,
the improver of the Gospels; he, who so long had yearned
for Christ, has discovered this, lamenting that Jesus had sent
the Apostles too soon into the world, without waiting for the
protection of Marcion 1 . . . Thus Marcion corroborates two
things : first, that our Gospels were earlier, for otherwise he
would not have been able to improve them; and second, that
his Gospel appeared later, because it came out, as a novelty,
from an attempt to improve ours.” 1
Basilides, who died in a.d. 130, also acknowledges the
Gospels, and “ relates the history of Jesus exactly as they
do.” 2
He quotes also the text of the Gospels with the pre-
liminary remarks : “ Thus saith the Scripture,” or “ Thus it
is written,” or “ So it is said in the Gospel,” or “ Thus speaks
the Lord in the Gospel.” 3
Basilides quotes especially Matthew, 4 Luke, 5 and (im-
mediately after the year a.d. 100) John. 6
He even wrote twenty-four books Concerning the Gospel. 7
But in order to establish his Gnostic fabulous stories, he saw
himself obliged to invent' his own fifth Gospel. This he
ascribed to Matthias, the subsequently chosen Apostle, and
maintained that the Redeemer had entrusted to him his
(Gnostic) secret doctrine, which had remained unknown to
the other Apostles and Evangelists. 8
The Gnostic Valentinus (about a.d. 160) prefers to quote
John, 9 but cites also the other Gospels. 10 In order, how-
ever, to provide for his doctrine of aeons and “ conjuga-
tions,” 11 he does not interpret the Gospels literally, but
purely in an allegorical sense.
Much more important, however, is the attitude which the
Syrian Tatian assumes towards the Gospels.
He had been converted to Christianity by his teacher, the
philosopher and martyr, Justin, and had been received into
the Church at Rome. In consequence of the exaggerated
.severity of his views, he nevertheless soon left the Catholic
Church, returned to his home, and became head of the sect
of the Encratites, who were ascetics in regard to food.
In this capacity, between a.d. 172 and 180, he introduced
into the Syrian Church a Gospel which he had already com-
1 Tertullian, Adv. Marcionem, c. 4.
2 Hippolytus, Philosophum,, vii, n. 27. 3 ibid., n. 22, 27.
4 Clem. Alex., Stromata, iii, c. 1; Epiph., liar., xxiv, 5.
5 Hippolytus, Philos., vii, n. 26. 6 ibid., n. 22, 27.
7 Eusebius, H. E., iv, c. 7. 8 Hippolytus, Philos., vii, n. 20.
• Irenasus, Adv. Har., I, viii, 5; 111, xi, 7.
10 ibid., I, vii, 4; viii, 2.
11 ibid.. 111, xi, 7.


posed during the period of his Catholic life at Rome. 1 He
called this the Diatessaron, or The Gospel written by the
Four, or The Gospel of the Four. It contains a history of
the life and activity of Jesus, compiled out of the four
canonical Gospels—a harmony of the Gospels.
Even in the fourth century this Diatessaron was still the
only Gospel which was used in the Syrian churches, both
Catholic and non-catholic. 2 Ephraem, the light of the
Syrian Church, himself wrote a commentary on the Gospels,
having for its basis the Diatessaron. After the latter had
disappeared for 1,500 years, its text was reconstructed as far
as possible from Ephraem’s commentary, 3 and soon after an
Arabic translation of the Diatessaron * was also found, as well
as fragments of the original Syriac text. 5 According to
these publications, there is no doubt that Tatian regarded
our Gospels, and ours only, as genuine, and used them as
such; and these lay before him in the form and extent in
which we still possess them. 6
With Tatian is connected the Syriac manuscript of the
Gospels, which was discovered in the year 1892 in the
monastery of St Catherine on Mount Sina. This so-called
Syrus Sinaiticus , 7 which contains the four Gospels, “ was
translated about the year a.d. 400 from a Greek original,
which can hardly be later than the second century. Since
the text is almost perfectly preserved, this Syrus Sinaiticus
remains one of the most important—in fact, very probably
the most important—of all the witnesses for our Gospels.
. . . Whoever reads the Gospels in this form has them
before him as the Christians of 1,700 years ago read them.
It is noteworthy that the text of Tatian is most closely
related to this text, and that both texts prove the essential
integrity of our Gospels since the time of Marcus Aurelius.” 8
Irenaeus, the keenest and best informed student of the
history of heresies in the earliest times, is able, about
a.d. 180, to proclaim the fact before the whole world, Catholic
and non-catholic, that “ so great is the certainty in regard to
our Gospels that the heretics themselves give testimony for
them, and everyone proceeds to found his own doctrine out
of them. If, therefore, our enemies testify for us, and make
1 Cf. Harnack, Chronologic, i, 284 fi.; Bardenhewer, Geschichte det
altt. Literatur, i, 258.
2 Theodoret of Cyrus, Haret. fab. comp., i, 20.
3 By Zahn, Forsch. zu Geschicht. d. neatest. Kanons, i, 112 ff.
4 A. Ciasca, Taiiani Evangeliorum harmonitz arabice (Romas, 1888).
6 H. Goussen, Stadia theologica, i, 62-67; Harris, Fragments of the
Commentary of Ephraem Syrus upon the Diatessaron (London, 1895).
6 Cf. M. Maher, S.J., Recent Evidence for the Authenticity of the
Gospels: Tatian's Diatessaron (London, 1893).
7 German translation by Merx, Die vier Kanonischen Evangelien
nach ihrem dltesten Texte (Berlin, 1897).
• Harnack, Reden und Aufsdtze, 2nd ed., i, 320 (Giessen, 1906).


use of our Gospels, the proof which they produce in their
behalf stands sure and true.” 1
The Alogians alone, of all the heretics (a.d. 165-175), form
an exception. They rejected especially the Gospel of John
as unauthentic. In this, however, it is a question only of a
handful of foolish people, who appeared and disappeared,
without having left behind them any perceptible trace in the
early Christian Church.
Not even the keen-eyed Church historian Eusebius.con-
siders it worth while to make mention of them. Only
Irenmus , 2 their contemporary, and somewhat later Epi-
phanius, 3 give them a thought. From the description given
by both these writers we perceive that the Alogians con-
tested the authenticity of the Gospel of John in defiance of
all history and all historical foundation, and purely out of
doctrinal considerations. They believed that this Gospel
formed the chief support of the views of the Montanists,
which were diametrically opposed to theirs; and in self-
defence against the latter, and as a downright falsehood,
they made the assertion that not John, but the heretic
Cerinthus, had been the author of the Fourth Gospel.
This was, however, the most foolish assertion imaginable.
John’s Gospel is devoted almost entirely to the defence of
the real divinity of Jesus, while the doctrine of Cerinthus is
aimed essentially at the denial of this divinity and of the
supernaturalism of the Saviour. 4 Cerinthus was the intel-
lectual leader of a judaizing sect which wanted to whitewash
over the old rabbinical Mosaic law with a light coating of
Christianity. In contrast to this, John proclaims the full,
spiritual kingdom of Heaven, founded by Christ, the Son of
God. How, then, could Cerinthus have written the Fourth,
or Johannine, Gospel?
But even apart from this, the statement of the Alogians—
which was made much later—is proved to be a mere fiction by
the fact that Ignatius, Polycarp, Papias and the whole school
of John’s disciples in Asia Minor (the place where the Fourth
Gospel originated) ascribe this Gospel unanimously to the
Apostle John. Far from furnishing, therefore, an argument
against the authenticity of the Johannine writings, the
desperate attempt of the Alogians proves only that it was
impossible, even in one single point, to break down the con-
viction of all Christendom concerning the apostolicity of the
Gospels. 5
1 Adv. Har., 111, xi, 8.
3 Adv. Har., 111, xi, g. 3 Haret., li, 3.
4 Irenaeus, id., I, xxvi, 1; Epiphanius, id., xxviii, 1; and xxx, 14.
5 The Alogi. cf. Harnack, Chronologic der altchrisil. Litcratur, i,
376 f£.; Zahn, Einleitung in d. N. T., ii, p. 460; L. Duchesne, His-
toire ancienne de VEglise, i, p. 304; M. Lepin, L’origine du quatrihne
Evangile, pp. 211 ff. (Paris, 1907).


3- The Non-Christian Writers.
The non-christian writers, Jews as well as Pagans, testify
to the authenticity of the Gospels whenever they have occa-
sion to speak of them.
Judaism was pleased to assume the part of Mephistopheles
towards the Gospels—that is, it everywhere sought to distort
the facts related in them, and to make the Gospel’s concep-
tion of the persons of Christ and of his followers laughable.
While the Christians were bringing the Gospel to the
pagans, the Jews —according to St Justin —also sent ambas-
sadors into the whole civilized world who calumniated 1 the
Christian name to everyone who did not know of it, and
accused Christ of the blackest crimes. 2 The vilest means
were good enough for them in their fight against Christianity. 3
Wherever a pagan set himself to work to ridicule the Gospels,
the Jew also offered him his services in furnishing him with
the most childish absurdities about the Gospel history. 4 This
mass of lies was naturally transmitted from generation to
generation, till it found in the Talmud a permanent abode,
and developed finally, in the Toldoth Jeshu, into a popular
pseudo-gospel.
Of the real Gospel the Jews themselves, even the Rabbis,
knew in general extremely little. In the whole Talmud the
Gospel is mentioned only once, 5 and even in this passage,
which it is believed dates from a.d. 90 to no, the text of the
Gospel is incorrect and quoted merely from hearsay. 6 The
dense ignorance of the Jews in regard to the Gospels, as well
as their ardent hatred for them, is shown in the words of
Rabban Tarphon : “ By the life of my children, should the
writings of the Christians fall into my hands, I would burn
them, together with the names of God which they contain.” 7
However little confidence, therefore, the Jewish tradition
about the New Testament writings can inspire, reaching
back though it does into primitive Christianity, it is, never-
theless, very important for us, because it never and nowhere
dared to cast a doubt upon the genuineness of the Gospels.
And yet the proof of their spuriousness would have been
equivalent to saving the national honour of Judaism and to
an annihilating criticism of Christianity.
The pagan writers at first referred to the Gospels slight-
ingly and contemptuously. Lactantius 8 gives the reason for
this. Made fastidious by the brilliant and attractive language
1 Justin, Dialog, cum Try-phone, c. 17, 117. 2 id., c. 108.
3 Tertullian, Ad Nationes, i, 14.
4 Origen, Contra Celsum, ii, 13 et passim.
5 Treatise on Sabbath.
6 Cf. Laible, Christus im Talmud, 62 ft. (Leipzig, 1900); A. Meyer,
Jesus im Talmud in Hennecke’s Handbuch, p. 70.
7 Treatise on Sabbath. 8 Institution,, v, 1 ; vi, 1.


and descriptions of the classical writers, the educated pagans
felt no interest whatever in the books of the Bible, which
were written in a popular style and with a most unusual
manner of thought and speech. Moreover, the Christians
were anxious to conceal their sacred books from the pagans
in order not to expose them to dishonour.
Nevertheless, the Roman controversialists and sophists
knew how to get possession of them little by little, and then
began the fearful attacks of pagan science on the contents
of the Gospels. The eclectic Celsus, the Epicurean and
satirist Lucian of Samosata, the Neopythagorean Flavius
Philostratus, the Neoplatonist Porphyrius, Julian the Apos-
tate and others employed the whole power of their eloquence,
the most trenchant acuteness of their logic and the biting
sarcasm of their wit, to prove that the Evangelists had
written nothing but incredible absurdities. Yet never did the
Pagans let a doubt arise as to whether the Evangelists were
really the authors of the books ascribed to them. Rather do
they everywhere take it for granted that the Christian view
of the apostolic origin of the Gospels is based upon the truth. 1
Passing over all the others, let us refer to Celsus only,
who is not merely the oldest but also the ablest of these
writers who are hostile to Christianity, and of whom we, at
the same time, possess the most definite information. Celsus’s
book, entitled The True Word, was written in a.d. 178, and
was refuted by Origen practically sentence by sentence. In
fact, the latter has quoted in his reply nearly the whole text
of Celsus, so that Theodore Keim 2 could reconstruct the
greater part of it out of Origen’s answer.
There results from this, first, that Celsus knew our
Gospels well and had studied them. He even asserts 3 that
he is thoroughly familiar with the entire doctrinal system of
this Christianity of recent date and understands it perfectly.
He even boasts : “ I could still say much about the history of
Jesus —that is, much that is true, and not like the written
stories of his disciples; but I prefer to leave it unsaid.” 4 He
wishes to argue from the Gospels alone, as the books which
form the basis of Christianity, and thus to impale the Chris-
tians on their own swords. 5 Then he actually quotes, in the
course of his expositions, four passages from the Gospels.
He uses preferably the work of Matthew, yet brings in a
great number of texts also from the other Gospels, 6 and
these prove unquestionably that our Gospels lay before the
pagan philosopher in their present textual form.
1 Cf. Seitz, Christuszeugnisse aus dem Klassisehen Altertum von
ungldubiger Seite, pp. 40-81.
2 Celsus, Wahres Wort. (Zurich, 1873).
3 Origen, Contra Celsum, i, 12, 26.
4 id., ii, 13. 5 id., ii, 74.
0 Fr. Seraph. Muth, Der Kampf. des heidnischen Philosophen Celsus
gegen das Christentum, 176-183 (Mainz, 1899).


Of these he informs his readers expressly and repeatedly
that they were written by the disciples, 1 and that subsequently
many believers had fallen away from the “ Great Church,” 2
and had altered the text of the Gospels : ‘ ‘ Three or four
times, and even more frequently, they have changed and
spoiled the original, primitive text” until it exactly suited
their fancy. 3 But Celsus attacks and ridicules only the
contents and credibility of the Gospels. That these originated
with the Apostles, and that the apocryphal Gospels are merely
imitations and counterfeits of the real ones, is for him a
certainty. This testimony is crushing. Celsus criticises
Christianity, and especially the Gospels, in the sharpest way,
and was able to convince himself as to their genuineness or
spuriousness, and must have done so. Proof of their post-
apostolic origin would have been a veritable death-blow to the
hated Christianity.
If, then, he does not produce such a proof, it was only
because he felt himself unable to awaken a single doubt of
the fact.
Thus do the non-ecclesiastical authorities of antiquity
assert unanimously that the Gospels originate from the time
of the primitive Church, and, indeed, from apostolic circles.
But the ecclesiastical witnesses will give us still more exact
and certain information on this point.
lll.— Catholic Witnesses for the Authenticity of
the Gospels.
i.' The Canonical Gospels Themselves.
The canonical Gospels themselves indicate with the greatest
distinctness their apostolic origin.
The most obvious proof of the great antiquity of the Gospels
would, of course, be the existence of the original copies or
autographs of the Evangelists. We must, however, give up
this idea at once., Not one of the older manuscripts, whether
of a secular or religious character, has come down to us as an
original manuscript of its author. They were all written on
papyrus leaves—the only writing material of that time—
unless we accept clay tablets and stone inscriptions. The
papyrus, however, lasted only a short time, especially since
the Gospels suffered greatly by reason of their frequent,
almost daily, use. Thus the manuscripts of the Evangelists
had already disappeared, it seems, before the end of the
second century. Only the second and third hand copies of
them resisted the ravages of time, and after the end of the
third century parchment volumes replaced the papyrus rolls.
1 Origen, ibid., 13, 15, 16. 2 ibid., v, 59.
3 ibid., ii, 27.


Our oldest manuscripts of the Bible date from the fourth
and fifth centuries. Nevertheless, even that is a very great
age when we think that the earliest manuscripts of the Greek
and Latin classics come to us only with the eighth and ninth
centuries. Moreover, the biblical manuscripts of the times
immediately succeeding this era are incomparably more
numerous than the classical. The latter could be saved only
with difficulty and in very few copies, while we possess of the
New Testament alone over 3,800 manuscripts. 1
A comparison of these different manuscripts with one
another brings us, moreover, to a time much more remote
than the dates at which the individual copies originated. It
is true all agree with one another in the immense majority of
the texts. The different readings refer almost entirely to
small details, and even the most striking variations change
neither the least article of faith, nor the most insignificant
moral doctrine. 2
It is, nevertheless, a fact that a great number of these
textual discrepancies are found already in the biblical manu-
scripts of the fourth and fifth centuries, and, indeed, are of
such a kind that we must suppose that we have to do here
with copies of earlier models which, in their turn also, did not
belong to one and the same family of manuscripts, but repre-
sent different revisions of a still earlier epoch.
This brings us already into the third or, indeed, into the
second century. In this period, however, there existed not
merely one or two manuscripts of the Bible; it is true rather,
as we can conclude from the works of the Fathers, that the
New Testament was spread over the whole Roman Empire.
In all the churches it was read aloud at divine service, either
in the original Greek, or in the Latin and Syriac translations,
which were composed already in the second century.
But in those days the circulation and the multiplication of
books proceeded much more slowly than now, because every-
thing had to be written by hand. Plainly, therefore, the
original models were already existent at the beginning of the
second century. The Gospels must, then, certainly go back
to the period of the Apostles.
Not only have the latest comparisons of the Gospel manu-
scripts with the quotations made from them by the Fathers—
compiled by Hermann von Soden with astonishing technical
knowledge and patience—led to the evident result that the
ecclesiastical writers about a.d. 140 already used the pre-
decessors of those Gospel texts and Gospel manuscripts, as
we possess them still to-day, but the interval between the
1 Cf. C. R. Gregory, Die Griechischen Handschriften des N, T.
(Leipzig, 1908); H. von Soden, Die Schrijten des N. T. iti ihrer dltesten
erreichbareu Textgestalt., i, vol. 1-3 (Berlin, 1902, 1906, 1907).
2 See article Bibeltext in Wetzer and Weltes, Kirchenlexikon.


composition of the Gospels and the year a.d. 140 is “so
small that scarcely enough time remains for any essential
changes in the text. 1,1 Consequently the external historical
and critical stability of the New Testament proves that
our four Gospels go back to the apostolic age, and Have come
down to us from that apostolic era essentially unchanged.
But the internal features of the Gospels give us a still
clearer and more definite light upon this point. The know-
ledge of languages and linguistic forms displayed in them is
at once characteristic. From these we perceive that the
Evangelists, with the exception of Luke, were Semites,
speaking Aramaic.
The language of the New Testament has been studied
thoroughly in recent years, and examined in its minutest
idioms. Philologists have analysed sentence after sentence,
and have even numbered and weighed, so to speak, all its
phrases; and there has gradually arisen an entire library of
dictionaries and grammatical works concerning the New
Testament, in which the elements of the Gospel language
are established and compared with other contemporaneous
writings and documents.
The result of all these labours is that the Greek idiom of
the Gospels is proved to rest upon an essentially Aramaic
basis. We not only find there single Aramaic expressions,
such as Corban, Ephpheta, Talitha Cumi, Eloi, lamma
sabacthani, but the Gospels are thoroughly permeated with
Aramaic phrases and opinions.
Moreover, the most exact acquaintance with the popular
Greek dialects of that time never fully discloses the meaning
of the Gospels. Only a knowledge of the Hebrew-Aramaic
colloquial, popular speech furnisHes the key to a complete
understanding of the New Testament writings. These are
composed in that Hebraic-Greek idiom, which the Jews of
the first century acquired from their varied intercourse with
Hellenic Romans, and introduced into their literature through
their most important scholars, Philo (born 20 8.c.) and
Flavius Josephus (born a.d. 37).
The Gospels originate, therefore, from the pens of Christian
writers who had learned the Greek language more or less
accurately, but whose mother-tongue was the Aramaic
dialect which Christ and his Apostles used.
If the Evangelists are to be recognized from their speech
as Jews, they appear from their acquaintance with their
country to be inhabitants of Palestine.
They describe very minutely, with information about in-
numerable details, the places in which Jesus Christ lived and
worked. Geographical, topographical, political, historic and
religious conditions are mirrored on almost every page. The
Galilaean landscape; the lake of Genesareth and the life upon
1 H. von Soden. of. cii., 1646 ff.


its shores; the region bordering on the Jordan; the local
peculiarities of the smallest hamlets; the distances from one
village to another; the springs, gates, routes and paths; the
environs of Jerusalem; the monuments and objects of interest
of the Holy City—all these and a thousand other details are
clearly delineated. Accordingly, wherever the Palestine of
Christ’s time is now properly excavated and thoroughly in-
vestigated, it is seen that all the statements of the Gospels
agree precisely with what has been discovered. Only.men
who had originated in Palestine, or who, at least, had dwelt
or passed some time there could write thus.
If the preceding considerations make it extremely probable
that these Jewish-Christian Palestinians lived and wrote in
the first century of our Christian era, the supposition becomes
certainty from the knowledge of history which the Evangelists
possessed.
An historical event of the first importance coincided with
the early life of the primitive Church in Palestine—the
destruction of Jerusalem, which took place in the year
a.d. 70, razed ancient Israel to the ground and created new
and absolutely different conditions in Palestine. Before that
event there had been Roman dominion, tempered by an ex-
tensive autonomy under the Jewish Sanhedrim; after that
time there prevailed a complete and exclusive supremacy of
the foreign, Roman, rulers. Formerly there had been a pre-
dominant influence of the Jewish national population and
parties ; afterwards, a powerful subjugation of all nationalistic
efforts. Previously, a multiform religious life had existed,
passing from synagogue to synagogue under the leadership
of the Scribes and Pharisees, and, above all, an imposing
temple ceremonial at Jerusalem; subsequently, the Temple,
the heart of the Jewish nation, was swept away, the cere-
monial was made impossible, and the children of Israel were
left without a sacrifice, without an altar, without a sanctuary,
their whole religious life having been drained away. Before
then there had been an unrivalled national unity of the
people; afterwards, an Israel scattered throughout all the
world, without its own city, an alien among all'nations—the
“ Wandering Jew.” In short, the scene of the history of
the Jewish nation, that history itself, and the conditions of
the people were all completely transformed by the capture
and destruction of Jerusalem. 1
Now, whenever we open the Gospels, we are confronted
plainly by the Palestinian Judaism before the destruction of
Jerusalem. In clear, brilliant colours the Evangelists paint
for us the political, religious and social life of the time of
1 Josephus, Wars of the Jews, vi and vii; Schiirer, Geschichte des
Judischen Volkes im Zeitalter Jesu Christi, 3rd ed., i, 455-656; Bousset,
Die Religion des Judentums im neutestamentlichen Zeitalter, pp. gi-168
(Berlin, 1903).


Christ. The relations between the pagan Chief of State and
his Jewish vassals; the delicate conditions prevailing between
the foreign officials and the local Great Council; the fine lines
of demarcation in which the rights of the Roman judges col-
lided with those of the Sanhedrim—all take for granted the
continued existence of the Holy City.
Even to the smallest details the Evangelists are fully con-
versant with those times. The Roman-Jewish census, under
the Emperor Augustus and the Governor of Syria, Quirinus j 1
the Greek and Roman coins, which were in circulation
together with the former Hebrew ones ; 2 the famine under
Claudius ; 3 the expulsion of the Jews from Rome under that
Emperor ; 4 the tragic ending of Herod Agrippa I; 5 the
members of the whole Herodian dynasty ; 6 as well as other
personal conditions, are all well known to the Evangelists.
They understand also the complicated dealings of the religious
and political parties of those days—the Pharisees, the Sad-
ducees and Herodians, as well as those of the philosophical
schools of the Stoics and Epicureans. Before their eyes still
stands the magnificent capital of the country, with its monu-
mental belt of walls and buildings of the temple, together
with its priests and scribes, its gorgeous ceremonial and
intricate observances of the Mosaic Law.
Thus could write only those who had lived in Palestine
before the decisive war with Rome, and who, partly before,
partly after, the catastrophe of the year a.d. 70 had put their
experiences on paper and transmitted them to posterity.
John wrote only after the destruction of Jerusalem. The con-
flict against the Gnostic heresy, which forced him to take
pen in hand, began to be powerful only towards the end of
the first century. The three synoptic Gospels must, how-
ever, have appeared before the Jewish war. The prophecy
of the destruction of the city and .of the rejection of the
Jewish people is set forth in these Gospels as still unfulfilled. 7
If the frightful ruin had already stood before the eyes of the
synoptists as an accomplished fact, they certainly would not
have kept silent about the event. Indeed, the prophecy and
the fulfilment of that fearful tragedy would have thrilled their
hearts and affected their entire representation profoundly.
We may, however, go still further, and determine even
more exactly the personality of the Evangelists. From their
1 Luke ii, 1 ff.; Acts v, 37; Tacitus, Anna!., i, n; Cassiodorus,
Varia, iii, 52.
2 Matt., xvii, 26; xxii, 19.
3 Acts xi, 23; Josephus, Antiquilaies Judaictz, 111, xv, 3; Suetonius,
Vita Claudii, xviii.
* Acts xviii, 2; id., xxv. 5 Acts xii, 23.
6 Matt, ii, 1, 19; Luke iii, 1; xxiii, 7; Acts xii, 1; xxv, 13.
7 Matt, xxiii, 36; xxiv, 15, 24; Mark xiii, 1 ff.; Luke xix, 41 ff.;
xxi, 32.


knowledge of the life and activity of Jesus it is evident that
they belonged either to the immediate or collateral circle of
the Saviour’s disciples.
The personality of Jesus, his appearance in public, his
discourses and his deeds are drawn from life, and adhered to
with striking vividness. The Evangelists conduct us to all
the roads and paths trodden by his feet; they accompany us
into all the cities and villages where he preached; to the
solitary regions and the mountains where he prayed; and into
the houses and market-places where he healed the sick" and
raised the dead.
The whole Gospel history is related not only with astonish-
ing exactitude and certainty, but also with touching candour
and simplicity. Nowhere does the narrator obtrude himself;
nowhere does he bring out his own personal views and feel-
ings; and scarcely even does he mention now and then the
successes of the Saviour and the impression which his words
and miracles produced. Only that is recorded which trans-
pired before the eyes of the Evangelists, or had been seen
and heard by immediate eye and ear witnesses.
No later or foreign historian could have represented that,
and in such a way. The Evangelists must themselves have
been present, or at least have received the verbal accounts
or written documents concerning the “ glad tidings ” from
associates and disciples of the Saviour.
Nor is this all. By means of the individual characteristics of
the separate Gospels, even the traditional account can be tested
and confirmed, in accordance with which Matthew, Mark,
Luke and John composed the historical works in question.
First, Matthew. The earlier Church Fathers already recog-
nized the fact that the Evangelists pass over in silence what-
ever honours them, and report whatever humiliates them. In
the first Gospel the repast which Matthew gave to the Lord
after having been called to him is mentioned only casually,
while into the list of the Apostles the (to Matthew) un-
pleasant surname of “ the Publican ” is inserted. This of
itself should indicate that Matthew himself is the narrator.
Moreover, the first Gospel emphasizes in particular the
prophecies of the Old Testament and their fulfilment. On
this account it rightly became the Gospel of the Jewish Chris-
tians—a fact which agrees remarkably well with the primitive
tradition that “ Matthew published a Gospel among the
Hebrews, and in their language.” 1
Mark. In contrast to this, the second Gospel is evidently
intended for the pagans, and primarily for the Romans.
Jewish manners and usages are explained in this Gospel
because they were unknown to its readers. The Jewish money-
value is given in small Roman coinage, and we also meet
1 Irenaeus, Adv. Har., iii, i.


with Latin—instead of Greek —nomenclature in several places.
Everywhere Peter and the Petrine mode of preaching to the
pagans are here given the foremost place. Even the ex-
tremest of the liberal critics 1 see in this a confirmation of the
tradition that Mark has written this Gospel, as the Prince of
the Apostles preached it in the capital of the Roman Empire,
and especially for these Romans. 2
Luke. The third Gospel and the Acts of the Apostles
develop most fully the universalist programme of St Paul—
that of the Gospel, as “ the power of God unto salvation to
everyone that believeth, to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek” (Rom. i, 16). In respect to contents, form and
expression, these writings are thoroughly Pauline. 3 Their
author must have been a pupil of the Apostle to the Gentiles,
and by his use of technical medical expressions, observations
and opinions he shows himself clearly to have been a
physician. 4 No other can have written the third Gospel and
the Acts of the Apostles than “ Luke, the beloved
physician,” 5 and companion of Paul.
John. Finally, the character of the Apostle John is im-
printed on the Fourth Gospel throughout. The plastic cer-
tainty, the sublime serenity, the tender, glowing enthusiasm,
with which the portrait of the Saviour is brought before us;
the simplicity, the depth of feeling, and the ideal flights of
the thoughts, contents and representation of the entire book
are all undoubtedly Johannine. 6 Moreover, as opposed to
Harnack’s undemonstrable assertion, 7 John expressly claims
for himself the authorship of the Fourth Gospel with the
clearly defined words : “ This is that disciple who giveth testi-
mony of these things and hath written these things ” (John
xxi, 24); the disciple whom Jesus loved (John xxi, 20); who
also leaned on his breast at the Last Supper, and said : “ Lord,
who is he that shall betray thee?” who stood also beneath
the Cross, and to whom the Saviour commended his mother
(John xix, 26) —the beloved disciple—John.
Thus we derive from the Gospels themselves the conviction
that these, writings of Jewish Christians from Palestine were
composed in part before, in part shortly after, the destruction
of Jerusalem; and that the Gospels themselves bring us into
1 Jiilicher, Realenzyklofddie fitr frotestant. Theologie, 3rd ed., xii,
293; Wernle, Die synoftische Frage, 208-223 (Freiburg, 1899).
2 Eusebius, H. E., iii, 39; Clement of Alexandria, Hyfoty-p. in
1 Pet. v, 13; Eusebius, id., vi, 14.
3 Harnack, Lukas der Arzi; Die Afostelgeschichte (Leipzig, 1907).
4 Harnack, Lukas, 122-137; Hobart, The Medical Language of St
Luke (1882).
5 Col. iv, 14.
0 Cf. Zahn, Einleitung in das N. T., ii, pp. 466 ff.; Belser, Einleitung
in das N. T., pp. 343 ff.; Das Evangelium des hi. Johannes (Freiburg,
7 Die Chronologic der alichristltchen Literatur , i, 677; Wesen des
Christeniums, 13; see Zahn, id,, and in Realenzyklofddie, ix, 2807.


the immediate circle of the Apostles and their pupils, and
name for us as their authors the Saints Matthew, Mark, Luke
and John. Moreover, before the last Gospel has yet con-
cluded its testimony to itself, and before the Apostle of love
has published his book, the oldest writers of the Church
already raise their voices to testify clearly and unmistakably,
first, to the existence of the Gospels in general; then to the
three Synoptics; and, soon after, to all the Evangelists
together.
2. Early Church Literature,
The ancient literature of the Church appears from the very
first as an eye and ear witness for the Gospels.
Of course, only a few wholly casual utterances and reports
are to be expected from it in the first century. Only a few,
because we possess from that remote period hardly more
than a few small writings of Christian origin. These were,
moreover, simply pamphlets, and for the most part of such
a special character, that there was no reason for their touch-
ing on the question of the Gospels.
But even aside from this, primitive Christian literature
can at most only by chance define its position towards the
subject we are considering, for that was precisely an age
which had still seen and heard the Apostles and their pupils.
The Apostolic words and living tradition meant to it almost
everything. No need was felt of appealing to the writings of
those whose preaching was still in the memories of all. It
had not yet occurred to anyone to defend the Holy Scriptures,
for the reason that no one ventured to attack them. All
primitive Christian records, however, show an acquaintance
with the Gospels, make use of them, and take it for granted
that they are highly honoured by the Church.
The Syrian and the Alexandrian-Egyptian Churches are in
this respect represented by the so-called Teaching of the
Twelve Apostles and the Epistle of Barnabas —the lormer
composed in the last third of the first century, the latter at
its termination. 1
In the Epistle of Barnabas texts from the writings of St
Matthew 2 are twice quoted literally, while the sense of other
passages is lightly referred to. 3 The Teaching of the Twelve
Apostles quietly makes use of some thirty passages from
Matthew, one from Mark, and four from Luke. 4 In four
1 Funk, Opera Patrum apostolicorum, ed. 2 a, I, xii, xxii, ft. ; Batiffol,
Anciennes Literatures chritiennes; La littirature grecque, p. 72; Har-
nack, Chronologic der altchristlichen Literatur, i, pp. 410 ff.; Ehrhard,
Die altchristliche Literatur und ihre Erforschung, i, pp. 37 ff.; Barden-
hewer, Geschichte der althirchlichen Literatur, i, 76-98. -
2 Ep. Barnabas, iv, 14. All patristic quotations are taken from
Funk’s edition.
3 See Funk, id., i, pp. 642 ff. 4 ibid., pp. 640 ff.


other places it refers expressly to the Gospel in such words
as: “Thus it stands in the Gospel,” 1 “Thus you find it
stated in the Gospel of our Lord,” 2 “Act according to the
precept of the Gospel,” 3 and “As the Lord commands in his
Gospel.” 4
Therefore, exactly as we to-day quote the Gospels after
nineteen centuries, so they were quoted already at the end of
the first century, and taken for granted as well known. Yet
they are said to have originated in the second century.
Clement, whom Paul calls his fellow-worker, and whom
Peter appointed Bishop of the Church at Rome, wrote in the
years a.d. 95-97 a letter to the Corinthians, in which he
certainly does not quote and transcribe the Gospels word for
word, but makes use of at least ten passages out of the
synoptic Gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke. 5 Hence,
the successor of St Peter, “ in whose ears still echoed the
preaching of the Apostles,” 6 and with him “many others
also who had been instructed by the Apostles,” 7 received the
synoptic Gospels directly from the hands of their authors,
watched over them and transmitted them to posterity as a
precious treasure. Whether the Gospel of St John also was
in their possession cannot be positively determined. But if
not, it need not surprise us, for this Gospel originated almost
at the same time as the letter of Clement, and first appeared
in Asia Minor, so that it had scarcely become known yet in
Rome.
Immediately at the beginning and during the first half of
the second century we encounter in Asia Minor and Greece,
as well as in Rome, a number of the pupils of the Apostles
and witnesses of the apostolic era who already mention the
Gospels much more clearly and frequently. The more the
recollection of the direct, oral instruction of the disciples of
the Lord disappeared, the more the teachers of the Church
saw themselves compelled to remind the people of the written
records of the Gospel, although the main emphasis was always
laid on the unbroken doctrinal tradition of the Church.
Of the existence of the Gospels in the Syrian Church we
are informed by Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch. Ignatius goes
back far into the first century. He must have been born, at
the latest, bet\yeen a.d. 50 and 60, and was already a man
while several of the Apostles, and above all his kindred spirit,
John, the beloved Apostle, were still living. Soon after the
latter’s death, Ignatius himself died at Rome, where he was
thrown to the wild beasts during the reign of the Emperor
Trajan (a.d. 98-117). While awaiting martyrdom he wrote
seven letters, the genuineness'of which is no longer doubted
1 Didache, xv, 3. 2 ibid. ,-4. 3 id., xi, 3.
4 id., viii, 2. 5 F'unk, Of era PP. afost., i, 645.
• Irenasus, Adv. Har., 111, Hi, 3. 7 ibid.


by anyone. In this testament of his faith and love the words
and thoughts of the Gospels are forever on his lips. They are
not literal citations which he thus recalls to his churches —for
the earlier writers were accustomed to quote for the most
part only freely; but Ignatius on every occasion puts his
reliance on the apostolic books, and is thoroughly identified
with their ideas and even their expressions.
The synoptic Gospels certainly were in his possession. His
acquaintance with them is evident in most of the letters. 1
But he adheres with especial fondness to the Gospel of John. 2
His intimate knowledge of this Fourth Gospel is, in fact, so
extensive that the Protestant scholar, Theodor Zahn, is
moved to make this admirable observation : “ The amplifica-
tions of the utterances of Jesus found in John’s Gospel, and
the application of these to quite different conditions, pre-
supposes that Ignatius had already for a long time, both as
reader and preacher, paid much attention to the Fourth
Gospel. And he takes for granted a similar condition of
things also among the Christians in Rome and Asia Minor.” 3
Even Alfred Loisy 4 writes in agreement with this statement,
that Ignatius is penetrated with the teaching and spirit of
the Fourth Gospel to such an extent that he evidently must
have been acquainted with this Gospel for a long time before
the composition of his letters.
Remarkable also are utterances of St Ignatius about
the Gospels in general. When he occasionally imparted
admonitions, which he enforced by an appeal to the “ Doctrine
of Christ,” some Christians, as he himself informs us,
answered him: “If I do not find that written in the
archives—that is, in the Gospel—l will not believe it.” 3
The written Gospel, therefore, then existed; and men in
matters of dispute appealed to it, and held its words to be the
faithful exposition of apostolic truth. Ignatius even adds 6
that certain heretics were only too ready to be one-sided and
to swear by the letter of the Gospel instead of taking in
comprehensively the spirit of the whole written and oral
teaching of Christ. Comprehended in this sense, the Gospels
are “ the fulfilment of eternal life,” 7 and are “as worthy of
honour as was Christ, when actually present.” 8
In Asia Minor Ignatius is immediately connected with his
friend Polycarp. The latter was a pupil of the Apostle John,
I.
4
( 1 Eph. xiv, 2 ; Trail, xi, i; Philad. iii, i; Smyrn. i, 2 ff.; vi, 1; Polyc'.
»> 3 5 ii, 2.
2 Eph. xx, 2; Magn. vii, 1 ff.; viii, 2; Rom. vii, 2 ff.; Philad. ii, 2;
vii, 1; ix, 1. Cf. Boese, Die Glaubwiirdigkeit unserer Evangelien,
71-83 (Freiburg, Herder, 1895).
3 Zahn, Geschichie des neutestamentlichen Kanons, i, 905 (Leipzig,
1888),
4 Le Quatriime Evangile, i, 6 ff. (Paris, 1903). 5 Philipp, viii, 2.
6 id. 7 philad. ix, 2. 8 id., v, i, 2.


and was appointed by him to be the head of the Church of
Smyrna; 1 But he enjoyed also the instruction of other
Apostles “ and associated with many who had seen Christ.” 2
With visible emotion St Irenseus relates of his teacher: “ I
can still indicate the place where the- blessed Polycarp
preached . . . the addresses which he delivered to the
people, as he described his association with John and with
the others who had seen the Lord, and how he quoted their
words. Polycarp also reported all that he had heard from
them about the Lord, about his miracles and his teaching-, as
one who had received it from those who had seen with their
own eyes the Word of Life, and it was all in perfect agree-
ment with the Holy Scriptures.” 3
Of Polycarp’s works we possess only one piece of writing
which he sent to the church at Philippi in Macedonia 4 in the
year of the death of St Ignatius, together with the latter’s
letters. The whole communication is interwoven with quota-
tions from and allusions to the writings of the whole New
Testament. Besides the first three Gospels and the Acts of
the Apostles, almost all the Epistles of St Paul, the first
Epistle of Peter, and the first Epistle of John are made use
of. 5 The Gospel of John itself is not cited, yet even Holtz-
mann concedes that “ from the appearance of the satellite
(that is, the first Epistle of John) we can infer the existence
of the complete sun.” 6
The third authority at this time in Asia Minor is Papias,
Bishop of Hierapolis in Lesser Phrygia, “ a pupil of John,
a friend of Polycarp, a man of the olden time.” 7 He also
can claim to have seen and heard, together with his teacher,
John, many disciples of the Lord. “ From them,” he writes,
“ I found out what Andrew or Peter had said, or what Philip
or Thomas, or James, or John, or Matthew, or any other of
the disciples of the Lord had said.” 8 What he thus had
“ learned and had deeply impressed upon his memory ” 9 from
the most trustworthy sources, he compiled later in his work
entitled Explanations of the Sayings of the Lord. Unfortu-
nately we possess from this only small extracts, which
Eusebius, the father of Church history, has preserved.
Passing over the Gospel of John, the origin of which in
Asia Minor, where it appeared, was moreover known, Papias
1 Irenaeus, Adv. Hteer., 111, iii, 4; Eusebius, ff. E., v, 20, 24.
* Irenaeus, op. cit.
3 Irenaeus, Ad Florinum in Eusebius, H. E., v. 20.
4 See Lightfoot, The Apostolic Fathers, Polycarp, i, 629 (London,
1S85); Funk, PP. apost., I, xc ff.; Harnack, Chronologic der altchrisil.
Literatur, i, 384 ff.; Bardenhewer, Gesch. d. altkirchl. Literatur, i, 149.
5 Funk, id., 573; Bardenhewer, id., 151; Boese, id., 56 ff.
6 H. T. Holtzmann, Lehrbuch der hist.-kritischen Einleitung ins
N. T., 3rd ed., p. 469 (Freiburg, Mohr, 1892).
7 Irenaeus, Adv. fleer., V, xxxiii, 4.
8 Eusebius, //. E., iii, 39. 9 ibid.


gives in this work information about the synoptic Gospels.
He makes use of the third of these, without referring to it
by name. 1 But in regard to the origin of the other two, he
goes into details, as follows: “Mark, who had been an
interpreter for Peter, wrote exactly all that Christ had said
and done, so far as he recollected it. Not in its precise
order certainly; for he himself had not heard the Lord, and
also had not followed him as a disciple, but only later had
accompanied Peter. The latter arranged his discourses .with
a view to the needs of his hearers, not as one who wished
to present an orderly compilation of the utterances of the
Lord. Hence Mark has made no mistake, since he noted
down everything just as he recalled it, for. he was intent on
one thing only—to leave out nothing which he had heard, or
in any point whatever to be guilty of falsehood. . . .
Matthew, on the contrary, wrote down the utterances [of
Jesus] in the Hebrew tongue, and on this account everyone
translated them as best he could.” 2
From these words the critics have concluded that there was
at first only a Hebrew, or rather an Aramaic, manuscript of
Matthew, which contained merely a short collection of the
discourses of Jesus. This compilation of his words was,
later, made use of and enlarged by the separate Evangelists
until there grew out of it the first three Gospels, to which was
subsequently added the fourth—all of them being written in
Greek. Now, by the adoption of this theory the apostolic
origin of our Gospels would also certainly be established.
At most, the testimony of Papias about Matthew would be
shattered. But it will not do to play off a so-called primitive
Gospel of Matthew against a final Gospel of Matthew with
an appeal to Papias. The worthy Bishop of Hierapolis
evidently wishes to say only that the original Hebrew
Matthew, in contrast to the Greek Gospel of Mark, has not
been wholly understood by some who were scarcely half
acquainted with Hebrew, and “ everyone translated it as
best he could.” That the synoptics have elaborated and
enlarged a collection of sayings from a primitive Matthew
Papias does not say.
It was desired to infer the existence of a “ collection of
sayings ” from the fact that Papias designates the writings
of Matthew as Logia (utterances), not as a Gospel. But he
names the real Gospel of Mark in precisely the same way,
and calls his own work also Explanations of the Logia of the
Lord, and yet it was concerned with the discourses and deeds
of Christ and with the Gospel in the broadest sense of the
word. The Logia of Matthew, of which Papias speaks, are,
therefore, not only “ sayings,” but words and deeds of the
Lord, narratives and reports about the Lord—in short, the
1 Holtzmann, 1.c., p. 96. 2 Eusebius, l.c.


Gospel of Jesus Christ according- to Matthew. Thus did
Irenseus 1 and Eusebius 2 understand Papias, whose entire
work they knew. From him, indeed, they wish to produce
the proof that our Gospels, already in that “ancient time,”
were well known in Asia Minor and recognized as apostolic
documents.
In the Greek Church it was just the same. Aristides, a
Christian philosopher of Athens, addressed to the Roman
Emperor, Antoninus Pius, about the year a.d. 140, 3 a manu-
script in defence of the Christians. The apologist refers in
this to the Christian teaching with the remark : “ This is
the teaching of that Gospel which has recently been pro-
claimed. You also, if you read it, will perceive the force
which it contains.” 4 Then Aristides concisely summarizes
the principal events in the life of Jesus, and adds : All this
can be learned “ from the book of the Christians.” 5 Several
times more does this philosopher mention “ the writings” of
the New Testament, which together constitute “ the evan-
gelical Holy Scripture.” 6 Aristides, therefore, before the
pagan emperor and the great Roman public, is able to
appeal to the fact that the Christians possess several original
sources of history, which they call a Gospel, or evangelical
Holy Scriptures, and what he recounts of these agrees com-
pletely with the essential, fundamental characteristics of our
present Gospels.
About ten years later, the Roman philosopher, Justin
(a.d. 100-165), composed two works in defence of the Chris-
tian religion, as well as a controversial pamphlet, entitled
A Dialogue with the Jew Trypho. In the first Apology, 7
which he presented to the Emperor in Rome, Justin mentions
The Memoirs of the Apostles, called Gospels, 8 and certifies
that “ these memoirs of the Apostles and the writings of the
Prophets ” are read aloud on Sunday at the divine service of
the Christians. 9 In the Dialogue also he asserts that these
memoirs were composed by the ” Apostles and disciples of
Christ." 10
In view of the fact that he uses the plural here both times,
he evidently speaks of two “ Apostles ” (Matthew and John),
and of two “disciples” (Mark and Luke) —that is to say,
1 Adv. Hcer., V, xxxiii, 4. 2 H. E., 111, xxiv, 6.
3 Cf. Zahn’s Forschungen zur Geschichte des N. T. Kanons, V, 268-
280. Seeberg on Aristides’ Apology; Bardenhewer, of. cit., ii, 181 ff.
4 Rendel Harris, The Afology oj Aristides, xvii, p. 36 (Cambridge,
1891).
5 id., xvi, p. 5. 6 td., xv, i; xvi, 3; xvn, r.
7 Written after 148 : see Veil, Justinus der Phil, und Mart. Rechtferti-
gung des Christentums, xxxi; Harnack, Chronologic der altchristl.
Literatur, i, 278; Bardenhewer, Geschichte des althirchlichen Literatur,
i, 205.
8 Afologia Prima. n. 66. (The quotations are taken from Migne.)
• ibid., n. 67. 10 Dialog, n. 103.


of all four Evangelists. Moreover, a little before this, he had
quoted in one and the same sentence passages from all four
Gospels. 1 From the first three especially he quotes so often
that even the most outspoken rationalists concede that he
was in possession of our synoptic Gospels. 2 Traces of the
Gospel of John we find less frequently in Justin, yet several
passages appear there which can be taken only from him. 3
Hilgenfeld remarks in regard to this: “It is difficult to
deny even the use (by Justin) of the Gospel of John.”' 1
Harnack expresses a similar opinion : “ I will not deny that
Justin held the Fourth Gospel to have been written by the
Apostle John, and his judgement in regard to the origin of
the Apocalypse of the Twelve Apostles seems to me also to
be of great importance for the Gospel.” 5 Loisy also finds
that the christology of Justin is thoroughly Johannine, and
that the apologist makes use of this Gospel as an authority
of the same value as the Synoptics. 6
During the latter half of the second century heresies
increased in number as well as, to a remarkable degree, the
apocryphal Gospels of the heretics. Accordingly, the eccle-
siastical writers were obliged to defend the genuine apostolic
writings much more decidedly and positively. From their
testimony we see not only that the four canonical Gospels
were then in existence, and were ascribed to the well-known
Apostles and their pupils, but also that they existed exactly
in the textual form and contents in which they still remain
to-day. Let us again select our authorities from different
provinces of the Church, so that the universality of the
Christian faith in the Gospels may appear more clearly.
First of all, we come to the Canon of the Roman Church —
that is to say, the catalogue of the sacred writings which
were attributed to the Prophets and Apostles, and for that
reason could be read aloud at divine service. Such a cata-
logue, originating about the year a.d. 170, was discovered
by the distinguished scholar, Muratori, in the Ambrosiana in
Milan, 7 and since then has been reprinted, dated and dis-
cussed over and over again. B It is called, therefore, the
Muratorian Fragment. Among the books of the New Testa-
ment which are allowed in the “Catholic Church,” the
Canon of Muratori names four and only four Gospels —
1 Dialog, n. 88.
2 Volkmar, Der Ur sf rung unserer Evangelien, 91 (Zurich, 1866).
3 Cf. Boese, Glaubwiirdigkeit unserer Evangelien, 33 ff. ; Comely,
Introductio, iii, 2nd ed., 220 ff.; Alfred Leonard Feder, S.J., Justins
des Mdrtyrers Lehre von Jesus Christus (Freiburg, 1906).
4 Einleitung ins N. T., 66. 5 Harnack, Chronologic, i, 674.
6 Le Quatriime Evangile (1903), 14.
7 Antiquitates italics medii eevi, iii, 854 (Milan, 1740).
8 We follow the text of Tregelles’s facsimile Muratorian Canon
(Oxford, 1867).


namely, those which are still called the canonical ones. On
the contrary, another book, the so-called Shepherd, is re-
jected, because it “ was first written recently, in our own
time, under the pontificate of Pius [the First] in Rome, by
Hermas, the brother of the aforesaid Bishop,” who reigned
from a. d. 142-157.
Soon after the year a.d. 150, therefore, in contradistinction
to the Shepherd of Hermas, which had been published
“ recently and in our own time,” the Gospels were recog-
nized as writings of earlier times. But works of the second
century certainly were not called so. The Gospels, there-
fore, were in use in Rome at the very latest about the year
a.d. 100, and, moreover, were already then all united together
in one harmonious whole, consisting of four books. “ For,”
remarks the Canon, “ although different teachings are pre-
sented in the separate books of the Gospels, yet this variety
does no harm to the faith of believers, because all that the
separate Gospels contain concerning the birth of the Lord,
his sufferings and his resurrection, his life with his disciples
and his second coming, is revealed by one spirit of God.” 1
The more precise information contained in the Muratorian
Canon regarding the authors of the first two Gospels we do
not know, because the fragment breaks off at this place.
There can, however, be no doubt that it ascribes these
Gospels, in accordance with the universal tradition of the
time, to Matthew and Mark. The third it attributes ex-
pressly to Luke, the physician and companion of Paul, and
the fourth to “ John, of the number of the disciples.”
Soon after this, Tertullian (born a.d. 160), lived and wrote
in Africa, first as a Catholic and later as an adherent of the
Montanist heresy. His learned works are entirely interwoven
with texts from the Gospels, and from all his citations we
see that our Gospels were in his possession actually in their
precise and complete form. In fact, they could be recon-
structed for the most part out of Tertullian’s writings, so that
a German scholar, Ronsch, was really able to write a book
with the significant title : The New Testament of Tertullian;
reconstructed as perfectly as possible from his Writings
(Leipzig, 1871).
Tertullian emphasizes frequently and decidedly the apos-
tolic origin of the Gospels. In his work against Marcion,
who had produced a false Gospel of Luke, he says : “ We
affirm, first of all, that the source of proof which the Gospels
furnish indicates the Apostles as their authors. ... I main-
tain that this Gospel of Luke existed, from the very beginning
of its publication, in the apostolic churches and in all those
which were united with them through a common bond of
faith, while that of Marcion was unknown to most of the
1 Zahn’s reconstructed Muratorian Fragment. See Geschichte, ii, 139.


congregations, and, if known to any, was bitterly condemned.
The same authority of the apostolic churches supports also
the other Gospels, which we possess through them and after
them —namely, the Gospels of John and Matthew, as well as
the Gospel of Mark, which is designated as that of Peter,
whose interpreter Mark was. Similarly, the Gospel composed
by Luke is wont to be ascribed to Paul. What their pupils
have published the prestige of the masters preserves.” 1
Contemporaneously with Tertullian there taught in Egypt
Clement of Alexandria (born about a.d. 150). His youth,
as he himself says, went back to the first successors of the
Apostles. His teacher, Pantsenus, was actually a pupil of
those very old men who had known and heard the Apostles. 2
Appealing to the testimony of these elders, Clement first
mentions the formation of the three synoptic Gospels as the
work of Matthew, Mark and Luke, and then adds that John
wrote the last of all; for when he (John) had remarked that
in the other Gospels it is rather the physical side of the mani-
festation of Jesus that is presented, he, at the solicitation of
his friends, and moved by the Spirit of God, wrote a spiritual
Gospel. 3
This statement of facts is entirely confirmed by Irenceus of
Lyons, who wrote, between the years a.d. 174-189, his learned
work entitled Against Here'sies, in which he gives his opinion
of the Gospels with great clearness, thoroughness and com-
pleteness. He was so familiar with them that their words
flow spontaneously from his pen at every opportunity.. From
each of the Gospels of Matthew, Luke and John he quotes
nearly a hundred passages, and from Mark about a dozen.
Some of these are of considerable extent, and he also gives
repeatedly exhaustive reports about the contents of the
Gospels. His citations and records would, as in the case
of Tertullian, make it possible to reconstruct a great part of
the Gospels from his work alone. A comparison between the
review of the Gospels made by Irenaeus and that of the
editions of to-day reveals the incontestable fact that the great
Bishop of Lyons used and commented on our Gospels actually
text by text.
Of their origin he relates the following: “Matthew pub-
lished his Gospel among the Hebrews, and in their language,
at the time when Peter and Paul were preaching the glad
tidings in Rome and founding the Church there. After their
decease, Mark also, the pupil and interpreter of Peter, has
given us what had been preached by Peter. Luke, however,
a companion of Paul, has chronicled in his work the Gospel
1 Tertullian, Adv. Marcion., IV, ii, 4, 5.
2 Clem. Alex., Stromal., i, i; Hyfot. in Eusebius, H. E., v, 11,
vi , 13-
3 Eusebius, H. E., vi, 14.


as it was preached by that Apostle, After that, John, the
disciple of the Lord, who reclined upon his breast, published
his Gospel also while he was residing- at Ephesus in Asia.” 1
Far, however, from presenting his judgement about the
apostolic origin of the Gospels as his own view only, Irenaeus
appeals to a threefold guarantee for its truthfulness. First,
he is able to assert that he is uttering only the universal
faith of the Church of his time; 2 and he knew what this faith
was better than anyone else. Born and instructed in Asia
Minor, he had also lived in Rome for a long time, and com-
pleted his education there; and, finally, had also become
acquainted with the Church in France. Everywhere he had
investigated the doctrines of the Church with such an intense
desire for knowledge that Tertullian had already honoured
him with the title : Omnium doctrinarum curiosissimus ex-
ploratory His statements about the universal belief at that
time in the authenticity of the Gospels are, therefore, indis-
putable.
Irenaeus, however, goes further than the views of his con-
temporaries in the way of proof, and collects the reports of
the primitive ecclesiastical authorities almost up to the begin-
ning of Christianity. He tests every question in the light of
this oldest tradition, as he assures us very positively : “ When
a dispute arises over a question of any importance, must one
not go back to the most ancient churches in which the Apostles
have lived, and learn from them in regard to the affair under
consideration what is certain and well known? And even if
the Apostles had left us no writings, would not we have
been obliged to hold to the guiding line of the traditions
which they bequeathed to those to whom they entrusted the
churches?” 4 Above all, he wishes to have the question of the
Gospels settled by ancient tradition, and he accompanies his
information about the origin of the Gospels with the oft
repeated reference to the importance of tradition, from which
we ought not to depart; and Irenaeus finds this information
precisely in the men and writings of early Christian times.
Moreover, he can appeal to these also from his own ex-
perience. His teacher and predecessor in office in the
bishopric of Lyons, the saintly Pothinus, died in a.d. 177
a martyr’s death 5 as an old man of ninety years. He could,
therefore, give to his eager pupils the most precise informa-
tion about the proceedings in the Church as far back as the
first century. Furthermore, before Irenaeus Had come to
France, he had enjoyed in his youth in Asia Minor the in-
struction and intimacy of several pupils of John. Again and
1 Adv. Har., 111, i, 1. C}. Gutjahr, Die Glaubwiirdigkeit des
Irtndischen Zeugnisses iiber die Abjassung des 4 it an. Evangeliums
(Graz, 1904).
2 id.. 111, xi, 8. 3 Adv. Valentinum , v.
4 Irenasus, Adv, Har., 111, iv, 1. 8 Eusebius, H. E., v, 5.


again he refers to their testimony. 1 In important points of
doctrine he appeals expressly to them : “As those bishops
remember, who have seen John, the disciple of the Lord; 2
. . . As they testify, who have seen John face to face; 3
. . . As the Gospel and all the oldest Christians testify,
who have met John, the disciple of the Lord, and who assure
us that John has imparted this to them.” 4
The deepest and most lasting impression had been made
upon the youthful Irenseus by Polycarp, the old pupil of John
in the bishopric of Smyrna. Polycarp is always present to
his memory, and he sees him as he explained to him Chris-
tian truth, and as he had spoken of his intimate friendship
with the beloved disciple and other disciples of the Lord; and
had quoted their words. 5 Nothing had imprinted itself upon
his mind and heart so strongly and immovably as these im-
pressions received in youth from Polycarp. 6 He reminds his
former fellow-student, Florinus, who was about to fall into
the Valentinian heresy, of this teacher whom they had both
had in Smyrna: “In the sight of God I can testify that this
blessed, apostolic bishop, if he had heard anything of this
sort [the heresy], would have cried aloud, stopped his ears,
and exclaimed, as he was wont to do; ‘ O good God, for
what times hast thou preserved me, that I must experience
this !’ and he would have flee! from the place where, sitting or
standing, he had heard such things.” 7
The reason, however, why Irenseus always finds his sup-
port in Polycarp and the other bishops in Asia Minor in the
matter of the Gospels, as well as in his entire doctrinal system,
lies in the fact that they were pupils of John, and that the
“oldest” who had transmitted the faith to him “had been
the pupils of the Apostles, 8 had gone to school to the
Apostles, and had remained faithful to their teachings.” 9
Thus the latest witnesses whom we appeal to for the genu-
ineness of the Gospels are still, as it were, borne upon the
shoulders of the pupils of the Apostles; and their utterances
can be traced back, in connection with the older testimony
which had preceded them, even into apostolic tiipes. From
Clement of Alexandria through Pantsenus to the Alexandrian
disciples of the Apostles; from Irenaeus through Polycarp
and the other apostolic pupils in Asia Minor to “John and
1 Funk, Ofera PP. afost., anded., i, 378-389; Presbyterorum reliquid
ah Irenao servalee.
3 Adv. Har., V, xxxiii, 3.
3 1.c., V, xxx, 1.
• 1.c., 11, xxii, 5.
5 Irenaeus, Ad Florin, in Eusebius, H. E., v, 20.
• ibid. 1 ibid.
8 Des hi. Irendus Schrift . . , herausgegeben von Karapet Ter-
Mekerttschian u. Erwand Ter-Minassiantz, in Texte und Unter-
suchungen, xxxi, 1. Heft, p. 26 (Leipzig, 1907).
• Irenaeus, Adv. Har., v, 20.


the others who had seen the Lord from Irenasus to Papias,
“ the man of antiquity,” who had himself sat at the feet of
John and other disciples of Jesus; from Ignatius and his
circle of friends directly into the times of the Apostles; from
the most ancient Roman canon, which we still possess,
through Justin and Aristides to Clement, the successor of the
Princes of the Apostles, Peter and Paul, who had preached
in Rome the Gospel, which their listeners, Mark and Luke,
had then written down—these and many other lines of
antiquity, which cross and recross, all lead us in an unbroken
course back to the origin of the Gospels themselves. It is,
however, conceded by all our opponents that the Gospels
were considered genuine by Irenseus, Tertullian and Clement
of Alexandria down to Origen, Eusebius and the whole
theology of early times. We come, therefore, to the last
proof for the apostolic origin of the historical books of the
New Testament—viz. :
3. The Universal Church Tradition.
The concordant witnesses of early Christian literature do not
give merely their own personal views concerning the Gospels.
The declaration of Irenaeus, Tertullian and Clement of Alex-
andria and the Muratorian Fragment show that they regard
their opinions as an expression of the universal faith of the
Church. The whole Church ascribes the authorship of the four
Gospels to the apostolic men—Matthew, Mark, Luke and John.
In Alexandria, in Carthage, in Rome, Lyons, Asia Minor and
Greece this conviction is met with everywhere and among all.
According to evidence, therefore, after the year a.d. 150 belief
in the authenticity of the Gospels is universal in the Church.
Now this universal faith must go back to a genuine fact. It
would be truly a miracle of mystification and an unheard-of
falsification of history, if, from fifty to a hundred years after
the Apostles, such a unanimous tradition, recognized alike by
friend and foe, could be formed if it had not corresponded to
reality.
To this may be added another consideration of great
weight. The above mentioned universal belief of the Church
in the origin of the Gospels appeals to apostolic tradition,
and to the teaching and express testimony of the Apostles
and the apostolic era. Nothing is clearer and more evident
than this from the literature of the second century.
Origen, for example (born a.d. 185), sums up the result of
this in the following concise words : “I have learned from
tradition that the four Gospels, recognized without contra-
diction by the whole Church of God throughout the world,
were written by Matthew, Mark, Luke and John.” 1 Clement
1 Comment, in Matt. Prolog.


of Alexandria, the great teacher of Origen, repudiates indig-
nantly any appeal to the apocryphal Gospels, precisely
because they are not recognized as apostolic by hereditary
tradition. 1 In writing to the followers of Marcion, Tertullian
lays stress upon the statute of limitation of the canonical
Gospels, since their authenticity is supported by the testimony
of the apostolic Church, and this again rests on the guarantee
of the Apostles themselves. 2
That Irenseus continually appeals to the old apostolic tradi-
tion for the authenticity of the Gospels has been already
shown. The author of the Muratorian Fragment also ex-
presses the Church principle with the utmost clearness : “ No
writing, however old and venerable it may be, may be con-
sidered as sacred or canonical unless it is proven to. be
apostolic.”
Apostolicity is, therefore, made the principle of testing the
New Testament books. The test of apostolicity itself, how-
ever, was the apostolic tradition. Transmitted or not, that
was, in every case and in regard to every single book and in
all the churches, the decisive question. However Christian in
spirit the contents of a book might be; however old it was;
however worthy of esteem its author; and though upon its
title page might stand the name of an Apostle—all that was
useless if the writing in question was not proven to be
apostolic by the unbroken chain of Church tradition.
When the Syrian bishop, Serapion, learned that in a corner
of his diocese the apocryphal Gospel of Peter was accepted
as genuine, he forbade it with the severe reproof : “ Brothers,
we accept Peter and the other Apostles as we accept Christ;
but whatever falsely bears their names we, as being well-
informed, repudiate, since we know that no such book has
been handed down to us.” 3
Even documents really written by Apostles were rejected
by some individual churches, so long as the universal tradi-
tion in regard to them was not established beyond a doubt.
And thus it came to pass that some apostolic Epistles, as well
as the Apocalypse of St. John, were not at once in all the
churches adopted and considered as part of the Bible. The
apostolic tradition in regard to them had to be ascertained
before their authenticity could be recognized.
Now, the Gospels were accepted as apostolic in the years
a.d. 130-170. So far as the memory of teachers in the year
a.d. 170 could go back, the genuineness of the four Gospels
had been always firmly established on the basis of apostolic
tradition. The men, however, from whose hands the genera-
tion of that time had received this tradition had themselves
received it directly from the Apostles and the pupils of the
1 Stromal., iii, 13. 2 Tertullian, Adv. Marc., iv, 4, c.
3 Eusebius, H. E., vi, 12, 3.


Apostles. The chain between the first and second century,
between apostolic and post-apostolic tradition, is, therefore,
complete. Link by link, it stretches back to the days when
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John wrote their books. The
Gospels must be apostolic.
The apostolic tradition originated and moreover maintained
itself under such strict measures and precautionary rules that
fraud and deception are simply inconceivable.
The apostolic authors usually addressed their writings to
well-defined circles, parishes, or individuals. Matthew wrote
for the Christian communities in Palestine; Mark for the
Church in Rome; Paul intended his Epistles for the “ saints
in Ephesus, in Philippi, in Rome” ... or “ for the Church
in Corinth, in Thessalonica, in Galatia” ... or “for Titus,
Timothy or Philemon.”
In order to prevent those thus addressed from having any
doubt about the origin of their writings, the authors added
their own signatures (i Cor. xvi, 21; Col. iv, 18), and some-
times even called attention especially to the character of the
written letters (Gal. vi, n; 2 Thess. iii, 17). If they did not
give these writings personally to those addressed, they chose
as the bearers of them thoroughly reliable messengers, whom
they provided, when necessary, with personal letters of intro-
duction. In this way the first Epistle of St John is a voucher
for the authorship of the Fourth Gospel. Sometimes the
severest threats are made against those who should alter any-
thing in the text thus sent (Apoc. xxii, 18 ff.). In general the
Apostles themselves took great pains to preserve intact their
written and oral teaching (Gal. i, 7 ff.; 2 Thess. ii, 2, 15).
Under their supervision the New Testament writings were
still further circulated by the churches originally addressed.
Many writers of the sacred books were still living at the
time when their writings, and especially the Gospels, had
become already wellnigh the common property of the entire
Church. A mistake about the origin of the Gospels was,
therefore, among the contemporaries of the Evangelists, im-
possible.
The succeeding generations of Christendom also watched
over this inherited treasure with an equally great and pains-
taking anxiety and care. The copies of the original apostolic
autographs were, then, recognized as such only if there was
impressed upon them the attestation of those Christian
churches or persons who had received them from the
Apostles. 1 This attestation was verified, according to the
procedure common in apostolic times, by means of its own
credentials. Even the genuineness of the oldest writings of
the Fathers had to be vouched for in this way. The church
of Philippi had the collection of the letters of St Ignatius
1 Tertullian, Adv. Marc ., iv, 4.


confirmed and sealed only by Polycarp, the friend of the
disciple of John from Antioch. 1 Irenseus conjures the copyist
of one of his books to compare the copy with the original
conscientiously, and also to enclose with it this confirmation. 2
So much the more, then, did they watch over the origin and
preservation in their original form of the apostolic writings,
which enjoyed an incomparably higher esteem and importance
in the Church than the most venerable writings of the Fathers.
If, however, doubts did arise about the authenticity of any
writing, of even of any single text in it, recourse was had to the
ancient copies of the Apostles, which were preserved as long
as possible. Tertullian still admonishes the heretical teachers :
“ Go through the apostolic churches, in which the profes-
sional chairs of the Apostles still stand, wherein their
authentic writings themselves are still read—those writings
in which the voice of each Apostle still leaves its echoes, and
from the pages of which his face looks out again upon us.” 3
In addition to all this, the manuscripts of every church
were subjected to a continual twofold control — one, official,
by the superintendents; the other, public, by the faithful.
The guardianship of the sacred books was made the official
duty of the bishops and priests, and the copies intended for
divine service were preserved at their residences. 4 Under
their supervision, the readers —a special class of clerics—
guarded the treasure of the sacred scriptures ; 5 and it was
the duty of these men in case of necessity to defend them
with their lives. Whoever handed over the sacred books to
the pagans was regarded as an apostate and excluded from
the Church. 6 Also the falsification of the Bible was visited
with the severest penalties. A bishop of Asia Minor who,
out of imprudent zeal, had composed the Acts of Paul and
Thekla, and ascribed the work to the Apostle to the Gentiles,
was removed from office. 7 The apostolic Canon (60 or 59),
which, as regards its contents, belongs still to the second
century, orders the removal from office of anyone who allows
the forbidden writings to be read aloud as sacred, “ to the
ruin of the clergy and people.” 8
The Christian people, for their part, were very familiar
with the Holy Scriptures. These were read to them publicly
1 Polycarp, Ep. ad Philipp., iii and xiii.
2 Irenaeus, in Eusebius, H. E., V, xxxii, 2.
3 Tertullian, De prcescr., xxxvi.
4 Irenaeus, Adv. Hcer., iv, 32.
8 Justin, Afolog., i, 67.
* Augustine, De Baptismo, vii, 2.
7 Tertullian, De Baptismo, xvii.
8 Can. Apost., Ed. Hardouin, Acta Concil., i, 23. C/. Funk, Das
achte Buck der apost. Konstitutionen und verwandte Schriften; Das
Testament unseres Herrn u. die verwandten Schriften in Forschungen
*ur Christ. Literatur u. Dogmengesch., ii, 179 ff. (Ehrhard-Kirsch,
Mainz, 1901).


at divine service. l Justin mentions 2 particularly that every
Sunday there are brought out before the eyes of the congre-
gations by the readers “ the memoirs of the Apostles, called
Gospels.” Thus the people were well acquainted with their
contents and even with the text; and owing to their un-
bounded veneration for them they spied out with argus eyes
every innovation in regard to the transmitted Scriptures. The
churches also mutually supervised each other by means of the
constant and intimate intercourse which prevailed between
them, especially between mother and daughter churches, and
all important elections, decrees and events were communi-
cated to each other. How great the sensation would have
been if any one church had palmed off apocryphal writings
as apostolic, or even merely changed the text of an apostolic
manuscript.
The attempt in some churches to associate the Epistles of
Barnabas and Clement or the third Epistle to the Corinthians
with the apostolic books met with a veritable storm of indig-
nation. 3 Indeed, in the age of SS Augustine and Jerome,
the people of one province rose as one man in protest when
a bishop in the biblical story of Jonas had the name of a
plant translated as “ivy ” instead of, as formerly, “ a gourd.”
Nor did the disturbance cease until the gourd had once more
replaced the ivy in the text. 4
Thus the universal Church tradition is not only a living
proof of the genuineness of the sacred books, but also an
incontrovertible guarantee of their integrity.
Let us recapitulate. The Gospels are genuine.
The apocryphal as well as the canonical Gospels, the non-
ecclesiastical teachers and the ecclesiastical literature of the
earliest times, and the non-christian as well as the universal
Church tradition, all testify to the great age and the apos-
tolic origin of our Gospel writings. Whoever is not willing
to recognize this gigantic, critically indisputable body of proof
as compelling, must, with much more reason, reject all the
profane sources of history of ancient times, and therewith
abolish history itself. To deny the authenticity of the
Gospels is, therefore, a highly uncritical and unhistoric
procedure.
All the Gospels are genuine.
Modem liberal criticism, compelled by the evidence of
facts, has finally consented to recognize the authenticity of
the three synoptic Gospels. Those who still contest it out
1 Tertullian, De frcescr., xxxvi; Justin, Afol., i, 67; 1 Thess. v, 27;
Col. iv, 16.
2 Afol., i, 66, 67.
3 Zahn, Geschichie des neutest. Rations, i, 326 fi.
4 Augustine, Ef. 104, al. 88; Jerome, Ef. 112, al. 89, n. 21 ff.


of a morbid desire to criticize have at most a claim to the
sincere sympathy of their colleagues. On the other hand, the
majority of liberal Bible critics still persist in disputing the
Johannine origin of the Fourth Gospel. But this negative
attitude of many critics should not intimidate us. There was
a time —and it lies only a little way behind us—when men
declared much more loudly and triumphantly that the un-
authenticity of the Synoptics was manifestly and for ever
proven. Yet a few years passed, and the whole proud strong-
hold of the enemies of revelation was overthrown, and
already the leader of the liberal school announces that the
positions still remaining will, one after another, also fall,
acknowledging that the ancient tradition was right. 1
This event, as regards the authenticity of the Fourth Gospel,
ought to be realized all the sooner for the reason that the argu-
ments of the enemy stand in inverse ratio to his certainty of
victory. It is, above all, significant that this hostile criticism
appeals only to internal evidences, on which alone reliance
can seldom or never be placed. Some, like Otto Schmiedel,
reject this Gospel on account of its “ difference from the
Synoptics.” 2 Others, on the contrary, like Oscar Holtzmann,
condemn it because its narratives ‘‘ are, in a literary sense,
dependent on similar passages in the first three Gospels, and
therefore certainly none of the twelve Apostles has written the
Gospel of John.” 3 But while Oscar Holtzmann is always sus-
pecting John’s dependence on the Synoptics, Harnack 4 says :
“ There is some indication that John has read Luke, but more
than that cannot be said.” But neither dependence on the
Synoptics nor difference from them, so far as these really
exist, contradict the Johannine authorship. These difficulties
could at most be considered in a study of the credibility of
this Gospel. Whether they have any foundation or not, this
is not the place to investigate them. That should be done
rather in connection with an inquiry into the trustworthiness
of the Johannine Gospel.
In reality, all the prejudices against the genuineness of
John’s Gospel proceed, from first to last, from the alleged
incredibility of its contents. The doubts of the Johannine
origin of this document are not based upon “ positive observa-
tion of the text and positive far-reaching knowledge of tradi-
tion . . . but the representatives of such hypotheses were
united only in the negative decision that a personal disciple
could not have written the book, since its contents are held
to be incredible for various reasons, partly historical, partly
psychological, partly philosophical and partly dogmatic.” 3
1 Harnack, Chronologic der altchristl. Literatur, I, x ff.
2 Die Hauftfrobleme dcr Leben-f esu-Forschung, 18 (Tiibingen, 1906).
Christus, 33 (Berlin, 1903). 4 Lukas der Arzt. 159.
5 Zahn, Realemyklofadie fur frotestanlische Theologie, ix, 280
(3rd ed.).


The genuineness of John’s Gospel can, therefore, be doubted
only in so far as its credibility is doubtful. That the latter is
not the case will be shown later. Meanwhile, the external
evidence for the Johannine authorship is for us a guarantee
that the internal proofs, derived from the Gospel, also cannot
testify against its authenticity. If this is vouched for by the
unanimous, universally well-informed external tradition, then
a conflict between external and inner criticism is impossible.
Otherwise, it would be truly an unheard of and unique
phenomenon in the history of literature.
But, as appears from the investigation which we have just
made, the ancient tradition of the Church testifies to the
genuineness of the Fourth Gospel with the same unanimity as
it does to that of the other three. And this tradition shows
itself to be even more directly and clearly informed about the
origin of the Fourth Gospel than about that of the synoptic
ones. John, the author in dispute, lived considerably longer
than the synoptic writers, and, even at the close of the
first century, was still imparting to his pupils information,
which these in turn transmitted to us, partly directly, partly
through their disciple Irenseus.
One single consideration in favour of the claim of this
negative criticism is derived from the testimony of the
disciples of John. According to Eusebius, Papias stated that
there had lived in Asia Minor, contemporaneously with the
Apostle John, a presbyter of the same name. 1 Of course, the
critics did not hesitate for a moment to claim that this bishop
was the teacher of Papias and the author of the Gospel.
But Eusebius himself admits that this supposition that
another John, besides the Apostle, lived in Asia Minor is
based merely upon the mentioning of the name of John twice
in the preface of the work of Papias. It is clear how doubtful
such a conclusion is. “ John the Presbyter appears to be,
on the whole, an immature creation of critical necessity
and the imperfect knowledge of Eusebius.” 2 Without doubt
John the Presbyter is identical with the Apostle of the same
name. 3
But even if the existence of this “ double” of John, in the
writing of Papias, were proved, the question would still at
once present itself whether he, or the Apostle, had instructed
Papias and had written the Gospel. Now it is Eusebius
himself who indicates Papias as a hearer of the theologian
and Apostle John, and Irenseus cites the latter as an
Evangelist, with constant reference to his teacher, Poly-
carp, who was also a pupil of John. This alone would be
sufficient to establish the genuineness of the Fourth Gospel.
1 Eusebius, H. E., iii, 39. 2 Zahn, op. cif., 284.
3 Bardenhewer, Geschichte Her altchrisil, Literatur, i, 538 ff.; Lepin,
L’origine du 4 me Evangile, 87 ff. (Paris, 1907).


A thorough treatment of the Johannine question could be
given only in a monograph devoted exclusively to it; but,
apart from the previously mentioned Protestant authors, the
reader is referred to the investigations and representations of
Schanz, 1 Comely, 2 Pillion, 3 Batiffol, 4 Knabenbauer, 5 Mange-
not, 6 Fouard, 7 Calmes, 8 Belser, 9 Lepin, 10 E. Lahousse, 11
Dausch, 12 and L. Murillo. 13
The Gospels are genuine in the essential form of their text
as we still possess it. Our text of the Gospels is essentially
that of Origen, Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, Tatian,
Syrus Sinaiticus, Irenaeus and Justin —in fact, that of the
whole second century.
And the Gospels of the second century are in every respect
identical with those of the pupils of the Apostles and of the
Apostles themselves. Whoever, therefore, denies the essential
integrity of the Gospels is reduced to one of two alternatives :
either to assume that all those illustrious men of the second
century were deceivers, since they claim to have received these
Gospels from the first century; or else to assert that the
Church authorities of the first century betrayed the Apostles
and their pupils, since they falsified the texts of the Gospels
almost as soon as they appeared, and handed them down in
that form to their successors. Both these alternatives are
evidently incorrect. The universal tradition of the Church
and criticism of the text both give us the vital proof that
the Gospels (some unimportant and unavoidable variations
excepted) have been transmitted to us from generation to
generation unimpaired.
i.
5
1 Kommentar über das Evangelium des hi. Johannes (Tubingen, 1885).
2 Historica et criiica Introductio, iii, ed. altera (Paris, 1897).
3 Evangile selon S Jean (Paris, 1887).
* Six lefons sur les Evangiles, 4me ed. (Paris, 1892).
3 Commeniarius in Ev. secundum Joannem (Paris, 1898).
• Dictionnaire de la Bible, iii, 1167 ff. (Paris, 1903).
7 Saint Jean et la Jin de I'dge afostolique,
8 Vivangile selon S Jean, 1904; also L. Fonck in Zeitschrift fur hath.
Thiologie, 28th year (Innsbruck, 1904), pp. 545-570.
3 Das Evangelium des hi. Johannes, also Einleitung in d. N. T., i,
259-368 (Freiburg, 1901).
10 L’origine du 4tne Evangile; La valeur historique du 41116 Evangile.
11 Le frobUme Jbhannique (Bruxelles, 1908).
12 Das Johannes-Evang. (Munster i. W., 1909).
13 San Juan, Estudio critico-exegetico, 9-135 (Barcelona, 1908).


CHAPTER II
THE CREDIBILITY OF THE GOSPELS
I.— Their Credibility Disputed.
THE result of the investigations which we have
thus far made is that the Gospels bearing the
names of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, are
the work of apostolic hands. The problem of the
credibility of the Gospel history is thus brought
nearer to its solution. Quite apart from the question of
inspiration, the Christian Church saw, from earliest times, in
the apostolic origin of the historical books of the New
Testament the scientific guarantee that everything related in
them is true, reliable and credible.
“ This conviction,” writes Irenaeus, “ is so strong that
even heretics join in defending the Gospels, and everyone
proceeds to strengthen his doctrine by appealing to them.” 1
As often as the heretics attack the Christian faith, they take
refuge, first, in the canonical Gospels, and, later, in the
apocryphal ones, which must to some extent have been based
upon the apostolic Gospels. No doctrine could then be
successfully defended otherwise than by its real or pretended
agreement with the Gospel. Even in defending their posi-
tions against the orthodoxy of the Church the heretics
assumed, as a matter of course, that the Catholic teachers
would also appeal to the Gospels. The rejection of the testi-
mony of the Gospels would, of course, have blunted the
Catholics’ weapons; hence, since the heretical teachers recog-
nized the right to appeal to the Gospels, they prove clearly
how firmly convinced both sides were of the credibility of the
Gospel accounts.
If ever a sect, like the Alogi, made assertions to the con-
trary, we may be sure in advance that it was already outside
the pale of the Christian confession.
It is plain that the non-christians were obliged to attack
the contents of the Gospel as being unhistorical. The pagan
polemical writers —Celsus, Lucian, Porphyrius and Julian the
Apostate, like the Talmudists and Rabbis of the whole of
non-christian Judaism —attribute the Gospel narratives, for
the most part, to deception.
They found willing pupils within the Christian Church first
among the older rationalists of the eighteenth century. The
whole superficial philosophy of that century tended to sever
l Adv. Hcer., 111, xi, 7.


the connection between nature and revelation, and between
history and the truths of reason.
It considered true only that which it called “ natural ” and
“rational.” Nature and reason were regarded as the only
great, eternal and unchangeable facts. That age, influenced
by the teachings of Rousseau, believed that man has within
his reason all that he needs for time and eternity, and that he
has only to develop himself “ according to nature ” in order
to realize the ideal of humanity. A divine revelation, or,
indeed, anything supernatural, is neither desirable nor pos-
sible. Moreover, this conception of the world had no more
need of history. An historical event was neither a product of
reason nor of nature; yet it held within itself nothing that was
not already contained in reason and nature.
Thus did rationalism sunder the bond uniting religion and
revelation, and that between natural religion and revealed
religion. Every “ historical ” or “ revealed ” religion, in-
cluding even the Christian, when placed before the forum of
that “ philosophical ” century, was at best merely an obscura-
tion of the only true, natural religion; but for the most part
it was nothing but deceit and humbug. 1 It was from this
rationalistic point of vantage that the approach was made to
the critical attack upon the revelation and history of the New
Testament, so permeated with the supernatural.
i. The Theory of Deception.
The first to apply the incendiary torch of rationalism to
the Gospel was the Hamburg professor, Hermann Samuel
Reimarus (1694-1768).
Besides some other works, he wrote a book of 4,000 pages,
entitled A Vindication of the Rational Worshippers of God. 2
Yet he died without having published it.
Soon after, Lessing got possession of it, and published the
most important parts of it under the title of Wolfenbiittler
Fragments. It has been said of these that Lessing put
muzzles on them, as if they were dogs, yet that the dogs by
their barking and snapping frightened many people.
The most incisive Fragments are the third, called The
Impossibility of a Revelation which all Men could Believe as
Being Proven, and the seventh (also the last) On the Purpose
of Jesus and his Disciples. The impossibility of any super-
natural revelation is therein proclaimed as a principle, and
the whole biblical history, especially that of the New Testa-
ment, is stamped as a fraud. We quote here several leading
passages of these Fragments, that the reader may be able
to appreciate their author’s mode of thinking.
1 Cf. Harnack, Das Christentum und die Geschichte, sth ed., 4.
2 D. F. Strauss, Reimarus und seine Schutzschrijt, etc. (Leipzig, 1562).


Thus, in the third Fragment we read: “ Christianity
profited by the circumstance that it at first opposed to the
pagans nothing but the religion of nature and reason; re-
serving, subject to strict discipline, the mysteries of the faith,
which were already in existence, until the new converts had
been brought into complete obedience. For the purpose of
strengthening the Christian doctrine by means of pious frauds,
there were also composed all sorts of books, prophecies and
miracles, which, in the state of ignorance then prevailing,
found credence, thanks to an audacious system of deception ”
(p. 337). Again, “ The Christians are mere parrots (p. 343),
who do not fail to repeat what has been said to them.” If,
on the contrary, a rationally educated man, with strong
and well trained mental powers, and devoid of prejudice,
should come upon the Bible without knowing at all what kind
of a book it was, he would not only read it without emotion,
but would consider it to be either a romance and collection of
old fables of history, or a record of the folly and wickedness
of the best among the Jewish people, or an incomprehensible
ecstasy, or a perfectly comprehensible piece of trickery on the
part of priests ” (p. 343).
Like the Bible in general, the Gospel also is bluntly char-
acterized by Reimarus as a fraud. Christ (he claims) had
merely the intention of freeing his country from foreign
domination by plotting an insurrection against the Romans.
When this “system” of his had been frustrated, and the
disciples saw themselves betrayed, they tried to extricate
themselves from their dilemma by attributing to their cruci-
fied Master another intention and a second “ system,” alleg-
ing that in reality he had wanted to be not a political liberator,
but a spiritual Redeemer. To return to their old handicraft
was for them too unpleasant, for, through their continual
wandering about, they had become unaccustomed to work;
and they had also seen that the preaching of the kingdom of
Heaven had given their leader enough to eat, for the women
who cared for them had always provided well for them and
their Master.
Why not, then, continue this business? There would surely
be found simpletons enough to believe in the second “ system ”
about a Redeemer of all men. Hence they stole the corpse,
hid it, and announced to the world that he had risen from the
dead and would shortly come again to complete his redemp-
tion. “ Now, since the history of Jesus in the records of his
disciples, after the alteration of the system, is worded in the
most important points otherwise than it would have been
worded before the change; and since they relate as having
happened, things on which their new system chiefly depended,
and of which, before the alteration of their system, they knew
absolutely nothing; and since they omit from the history other
things about which, before that alteration, they must neces


sarily have thought; the result was that their new system did
not adapt itself to history, but history had to be made to suit
their new system. Jesus, therefore, during his life, had to be
made to say and promise—in fact, the whole Council had to
be made to do —things of which they had not previously the
slightest knowledge ” (p. 125). _ _
“ So,” he continues, “ we cannot but think that the disciples
of Jesus devised a different system for the presentation of his
views (whereby he becomes a suffering, spiritual Redeemer of
men), only on account of their disappointed hopes after his
death. For this reason also they composed the narrative of
his discourses and deeds. This narrative and system there-
fore are, so far, groundless and false ” (p. 127).
This was, however, going much too far. Even Semler,
a contemporary of Reimarus and Lessing, and himself a
rationalist and the father of “ critical historical research,”
felt himself compelled to refute these Fragments sentence by
sentence. They did not, however, really deserve so much
honour. Subsequent generations turned from them with
shame.
David Friedrich Strauss, the biographer of Reimarus, was
himself disgusted that the writer of the Fragments “ de-
clared at times that the facts in the Gospels, and at other
times that the Gospel narratives themselves also, were the
impostures and clumsy inventions of swindlers.”
Albrecht Schweitzer, who otherwise defends Reimarus,
nevertheless calls this hate-inspired apology “ a polemical
piece of writing, but certainly not an objective, historical
study. ... It was only a desperate hypothesis on his part,
adopted in order to ascribe the origin of primitive Christianity
to fraud.” 1
“ The Fragments,” says Schmiedel, “ are so thoroughly
rationalistic, in the bad sense of the word, and betray in
most respects so little historical and religious comprehension,
that science has long since turned from them to really im-
portant considerations.” 2 Otto Pfleiderer adds: “ This
example is significant of that want of a true historical sense
and psychological understanding of religious questions, which
is generally characteristic of that sort of rationalism.” 3
2. The “ Natural ” Explanation of the Gospels.
The problem before which rationalism saw itself placed
called always more loudly for a satisfactory solution.
Reimarus and Lessing had shown more clearly than ever
how immense the contrast was between the rationalistic
denial of a revelation and the Gospel history.
1 Von Reimarus zu Wrede, 22 ff., (Tubingen, 1906).
2 Die Hau-pt-probleme der Leben-Jesu-Forschung, p. 3, (Tubingen,
1906).
2 Die Entstehung des Christentums, p. 4 (Munchen, 1904).


Previous endeavours to reconcile rationalism and biblical
Christianity with each other had broken down,- and there-
fore the Heidelberg' professor, Gottlieb Paulus (died 1851),
attempted a new solution of the problem. 1
Mindful of the pitiable fiasco of the Wolfenbiittler Frag-
ments, and yet true to his rationalistic views, he let the
Gospel apparently pass for history, but interpreted it
“ naturally and rationally.” All its miraculous facts and all
its supernatural truths in general, whether it was feasible or
not to do so, were brought down to the level of purely
natural occurrences, and in every case the Gospel text was
condensed, abbreviated or enlarged, or else interpreted in
new and strange ways, till nothing more of the supernatural
was left in it.
To this end the “ natural ” explanation assumed that the
Evangelists had adapted themselves to the credulous, super-
stitious and otherwise false ideas of their readers and hearers,
and had either altered facts for certain psychological purposes
and reasons, or had simply repeated incorrect traditions.
They had also, in many places, left out connecting links in
the story, or added accessory circumstances, which had been
erroneously understood, or wrongly reported. Consequently
the text and facts of the Gospel had retained their “ miracu-
lous appearance,” of which they must be divested by the
“ natural ” explanation.
Here we have for the first time real, thorough-going Bible
criticism—complete, historical, philosophic rationalism. In
our subsequent treatment of Christ’s miracles, we shall have
to occupy ourselves with this “ natural ” explanation. Suffice
it now to say that it turned out to be so unnatural, insipid
and arbitrary, that it was easy for Strauss, who in other
respects held somewhat similar views, to destroy it scienti-
fically a few years later. Subsequently, however, it became
the favourite theory on which were constructed the romantic
biographies of Christ.
It was this alone that made possible the fanciful Life of
Christ by Ernest Renan. 2 This Life of Jesus lacks not only
all scientific value, but also all “ moral consciousness,” as
Luthardt 3 has remarked. “Itis a book in which only the
topography of Palestine, where the author travelled, is true,
and only the language of the writer is beautiful. All the
rest of it offends equally at every step both those experienced
in such matters, and also the Christian by its superficiality
and godlessness.” 4
The book owes its unparalleled success—in the first three
1 Kommentar über das N. T. (Liibeck, 1800); Das Leben Jesu als
Grundlage einer reinen Geschichte des Urchristentums (Heidelberg,
1828).
! La Vie de Jisus. I refer to the first French edition (Berlin, 1863).
* Schill, Die modernen Darstellungen des Lebens Jesu (Leipzig, 1864),
* Theologische Primifienlehre, p. 302 (Paderborn, 1905).


months eight editions were exhausted—to its fascinating
form and manner of presenting the subject, and above all to
the sentimental, frivolous and sexually suggestive style of the
French society novel. Renan, under the mask of assumed
piety, became to Jesus the modern Judas, with the sole dif-
ference that he made thereby much the better bargain. While
Judas had to be satisfied with thirty pieces of silver, Renan,
as the younger Dumas has informed us, received from the
Jew Rothschild a million francs for his Life of Jesus.
Renan, however, had sunk into obscurity long before his
death in 1892, and to-day no one would have the courage to
profess himself any longer an adherent of the “natural”
explanation of the Gospels which Paulus invented. Never-
theless, for the most part it is precisely the so-called critical
Lives of Jesus of recent times which have retained in many
respects the romantic mode of treatment peculiar to Renan;
and, If nothing else is possible, they too do not hesitate to
explain themselves “ naturally,” like Paulus, if only thus to
get rid of miracles and revelation.
3. The Mythical Hypothesis.
It was truly the irony of fate that David Friedrich Strauss
(1808-1874), who had condemned the father of the “ natural ”
explanation, Paulus, subsequently greeted the son, Renan,
as a kindred spirit, and stretched out to him “ his hand
across the Rhine.” 1 In fact, he practically returned to the
views of Reimarus.
But in Strauss’s mythical theory intentional deceit is re-
placed by the delusive “ undesigned, poetical legend.”
According to Strauss, the Christian legend simply developed
the equally fictitious ■ Messianic expectations of the Old
Testament still further, and wove out of both the Old and
New Testament myths a many-coloured mantle, which it
threw about the Jesus of history, in order to make of him the
Jesus whom we find in the Gospels. In his opinion, the
miracles especially are the “ mythical garlands, which en-
wreathe the portrait of Jesus of Nazareth.”
Already before Strauss various critics had applied the
mythical theory to the first and last pages of the Gospels—
that is, to the story of the childhood of Jesus and his resur-
rection—while they left undisturbed the real pith of the
Gospel narrative, from the baptism to the crucifixion.
The myth was, up to this time, as Strauss expressed it,
the State Portal through which one entered into the Gospel
history, and through which one also left it again; but
between the entrance and exit lay the crooked and winding
passage-ways of the “natural” explanation of Dr. Paulus.
1 Leben Jesu fur das deutsche Volk (Vorrede, Leipzig, 1864).


In his first Life of Jesus, 1 Strauss applied the mythical
hypothesis to the entire Gospel.
His bold undertaking was, however, already condemned in
advance by the fact that it is based upon three unproven and
thoroughly incorrect suppositions. In the first place, he puts
historical, primitive Christianity on the same footing with
prehistoric mythologies. Like these, he claims that early
Christianity originated from the pious imagination of the
people and its poets. This is, however, absolutely contrary
to common sense.
The legends of ancient peoples could come into existence
only because they lose themselves in prehistoric times. The
formation of myths takes place in the night of antiquity,
which knew of no writing, no chronology and no history,
which did not distinguish carefully between the world of
fancy and that of reality, and for that very reason dreamed
the dream of legends. Primitive Christianity, however,
existed in a time which was thoroughly historical, had even
reached the highest degree of excellence in historic composi-
tion, and passed by the myths of antiquity with a sceptical
smile. Such an age may still devise anecdotes connected with
important personages or legends associated with great events;
but it does not create a new mythical world.
The second basis of the mythical hypothesis is the alleged
spuriousness of the Gospels. Strauss was well aware that
myths can be formed only a long time after the events in
question. The generations directly following the event would
indeed be simpletons if they allowed themselves to be
deluded by mythical inventions. Hence Strauss transfers
the origin of the Gospels far down into the second century. 2
If, indeed, one single Gospel should prove to belong to the
first century, the whole mythical hypothesis would dissolve
into thin air, as the critic himself acknowledges. And it
actually does so dissolve, since we have proved the genuine-
ness of all the Gospels, and since liberal criticism also
ascribes at least the three synoptic Gospels to the first
century.
Moreover, Strauss had, first of all, rejected the genuine-
ness of the Gospels in order to complete the third support
for his hypothesis— the impossibility of miracles. In his
second Life of Jesus he confesses unreservedly; “If the
Gospels are really historic documents, the miraculous cannot
be eliminated from the biography of Jesus; if, on the con-
trary, the miraculous is incompatible with history, the Gospels
cannot be sources of historical authority.” 3 With Strauss
everything, therefore, depends on proving the impossibility
1 Das Leben Jesu kriiisch bearbeitet, vol I (1835); II (Tubingen,
1836).
* Leben Jesu kriiisch bearbeitet, p. 23, 13th ed. (Leipzig, 1904).
3 Lebeh Jesu fitr das deutsche Volk, p. 18 (Leipzig, 1864).


of miracles. Otherwise, his whole hypothesis falls to the
ground, and the Gospels are proven to be perfectly correct.
Now, in the works of Strauss no attempt is made to dis-
prove the possibility of miracles. He merely asserts that
“ through Hume’s discussion of miracles the matter can be
looked upon as settled.” 1 Whatever has been presented in
favour of miracles seems to him like “ apologetic jungles ”;
numerous certainly, “as field-mice in a dry autumn,” but
“ it cannot be expected from a scientific man that he should
mix himself up with such a rabble.” 2 Then he has recourse
to his “ peculiar apparatus for causing miracles to evaporate
into myths,” 3 expands his chest, and declares : “ The miracu-
lous is the heterogeneous element in the Gospel accounts of
Jesus, which is opposed to the historic treatment of them
. . . historical research nowhere and under no conditions
recognizes such a thing as having really happened.” 4
In other words, if we apply his pet names to the apologists
who believe in miracles, and some other remarks of his, to
the facts in the case, Strauss argues thus : “ Miracles are
impossible, because I assert their impossibility; but since,
nevertheless, miracles are actually related in the Gospel, the
Gospel history must evidently be a collection of legends.”
If it were not so sad, it would be comical to skip over the
most important problems of philosophy and history in such
an utterly frivolous way. On the whole, only one who, like
Strauss, surrenders himself blindly to the pantheistic philo-
sophy of Hegel, will, without evidence, consider the impos-
sibility of miracles to be philosophically proved, and recognize
this as a standard for judging all historical reality and state-
ments of facts.
It is true this repudiation of miracles has found, and still
finds to-day, the hearty approval of rationalistic and liberal
criticism. Nevertheless, this too now rejects the mythical
theory as such. Harnack dismisses it with the words : “ The
assertion of Strauss that the Gospels contained very much
that is mythical has not been verified, even if we allow the
very indefinite and erroneous idea of the mythical of which
Strauss makes use.” 5
Chamberlain remarks: “At the beginning of the nine-
teenth century ... it had become the fashion to explain
everything as ‘ mythical.’ In the year 1835, David Strauss
followed the example given him on all sides, and offered, as
a ‘key’ to the Gospels, the ‘idea of the myth.’ To-day
everyone sees that this alleged key was nothing more than
a new, obscure transcription of the still unsolved problem,
and that not an ‘ idea,’ but simply a being, who once actually
lived, as well as the incomparable impression of a Person-
1 Leben /esu fur das deutsche Volk, p. 118 (Leipzig, 1864).
2 id., pp. t6i ff. 3 id., p. 159. * id., p. 146.
3 Wesen des Christentums, 16.


ality, such as the world had never previously known, give
the ‘ key ’ to the origin of Christianity. . . . That Strauss
never had a conception of what a myth is and what mythology
means—as is evident from his confused jumble of popular
myths, poetry and legends—is a matter by itself. A later
age will be unable to comprehend at all the success of such
dreary productions as those of Strauss; learned, it is true,
but devoid of any profound insight or creative inspiration.
It seems as if, just as the bees and ants have need of entire
cohorts of sexless workers in their colonies, so we men could
not get along without the industry and the temporarily far-
reaching activity of such minds as, marked with the stamp
of sterility, flourished so abundantly about the middle of the
nineteenth century. The progress of historical and critical
research . . . causes Strauss’s mythological theory to be
regarded to-day as so dead, even from its inception, that one
cannot look through the pages of this worthy man without
yawning audibly.” 1
Moreover, even Strauss’s contemporaries and adherents,
especially his teacher, Baur, already saw that no undesigned,
poetical legend could create the Gospel, and that there was no
other way of escape than to return either to the historical
credibility of the Gospels or to intentional fraud on the part
of the Evangelists.
4. The Tendency-Hypothesis.
Ferdinand Christian Baur in reality dug up again the rusty
war sword of Reimarus. He thought that he could grind
down its ragged edges by transferring the fraud from the
evangelists of the first century to those of the second, and
by representing the Gospels as products of the post-apostolic
period, which deceived intentionally.
According to Baur, the Gospels were invented in the
course of the second century, as writings with a definite
purpose, in order to settle the conflict between Jewish and
Gentile Christianity, the Petrists and the Paulists—a con-
flict which had split in twain the early Christian Church—
and to enable the Catholic Church to subdue its opponents.
The pupils and adherents of Baur built still more exten-
sively on the same foundation, even if they adopted different
styles. Strauss also, although still retaining the word
“ myth,” gave a partial adherence, in his Life of Jesus for
the German People, to Baur’s tendency-hypothesis, for he
now designated conscious inventions as myths.
But all those arguments which had already crushed
Reimarus testify also against the theory of Baur. Whether
1 Chamberlain, Die Grundlagen des 19 Jahrhunderts ( Sthed.), i, 227 ff.


the fraud was committed in the first century or in the second,
Christianity and the Gospels cannot be the result of decep-
tion. Baur’s criticism of the New Testament was much
more severely condemned by serious scientists than that of
Reimarus, for the reason that he was just neither to the
first century, by flatly denying that it possessed the Gospels,
nor to the second, which he stigmatized as a perfect tangle
of quarrels and biassed lying.
Historical criticism, therefore, whether Christian or non-
christian, has thoroughly unmasked Baur’s style of making
history. “ The whole critical apparatus with which Baur
has disputed the old tradition rightly passes to-day for
worthless.” 1 And yet the abandoned root-stock of the old
Tubingen school still puts forth in modern theology many
a new shoot. We. can almost say that the assumptions of
the school of Baur have been universally abandoned; yet
there has remained in the criticism of the old Christian
writings an undefined mistrust, a mode of procedure sugges-
tive of an ill-tempered prosecuting attorney, or at least a
straw-splitting method, which still continually fastens on all
sorts of details, and tries to argue from them against plain
and decisive observations. Instead of adopting conscien-
tiously a “ fixed-intention hypothesis,” attempts have been
made to spy out all kinds of “ tendencies,” and to prove the
existence of a vast number of interpolations.
5. The Sceptical Criticism of the Gospels.
Bruno Bauer (1809-1882), an offshoot of the Tubingen
school of Baur, and at the same time a kindred spirit of
Strauss, adopted only the latest conclusions arising from the
fallacies of critics up to his time.
These had, little by little, undermined the whole Gospel
history—with the exception of the actual existence of Christ—
in order to get rid of revelation and miracles. They had not
succeeded. All efforts in that direction had proved arbitrary
and inadequate. Bauer went, therefore, to the extreme limit,
in order to dispute boldly not only the shell and kernel of the
Gospel, but also the historical existence of Jesus itself.
According to him, not merely the miracles, discourses and
events recorded, but the very personality of Jesus, which is
taken as the starting-point of the whole Gospel movement,
are a piece of religious fiction. He claims that Jesus is not
an historical figure, but an ideal portrait; and that the Greco-
Roman ideal of virtue had blended, at the commencement of
the Christian era, with the Jewish ideal of the Messiah. The
ideal of man, resulting from this, was what the most pious
pagans, as well as the most orthodox Jews, desired. A great
1 Harnack, Chronologic der altchristl. Literatur, i, p. 344, note.


poet —the “ very first Evangelist ” —personified this ideal, and
created the figure of Jesus. Then from among the readers
of this oldest of the Gospels primitive Christianity arose; and,
later, through further poetical activity, the four Gospels them-
selves originated. Finally, what was really only religious
poesy and deep religious art, was conceived by theology and
faith as history. 1
Nothing but hate on the part of Bauer could have dictated
such a strange theory. “In view of this hatred, which is
fully as pathological in character as is his senseless method
of punctuation, one has the impression of having to do with
a man who reasons perfectly rationally, but who talks to
himself, as if possessed with a fixed idea. . . . This holds
him always more firmly in its grasp, and makes him burst
out laughing ironically. What, then, are convinced apolo-
gists of Christianity to make of the scraps of the Gospel
which remain thus in their hands? . . . Violent hatred and
a wild desire to deprive the theologians of absolutely every-
thing, drive Bauer much further than his critical acumen
would have otherwise led him.” 2 “ Endowed with an un-
limited subjectivity, which subordinates the facts transmitted
by tradition to a preconceived idea, he has for forty years, in
opposition to all science and historic truth, indefatigably
taught men to regard the great figures of the New Testa-
ment, Jesus and Paul, as literary inventions.” 3
Naturally not only the “ theologians,” but also the critics
of all shades were indignant at such unheard-of vagaries,
which are their own strongest refutation. In fact, when
Bauer’s last book appeared, his life-work had been already
long condemned and forgotten. Nevertheless (and if it were
not true, one would not believe it possible), the banner of
Bauer’s worthless theory has recently been again unfurled.
The Dutch writer Loman, 4 the Englishmen Edwin Johnson 5
and John Robertson, 6 the Frenchmen Emile Burnouf 7 and
Hochard, 8 as well as the anonymous German writer, Verus, 9
have tried, with a manifest leaning towards the school of
1 Bauer, Kritik der evang. Gesch. des Johannes (Bremen, 1840); Kritik
der evang. Gesch. der Synoftiker (Leipzig, 1841-42) ; Kritik der Evan-
gelien (Berlin, 1850-51); Kritik der Apostelgeschichte (Berlin, 1850);
Kritik der faulin. Brie/e (1850-52); Christus und die Cdsaren (Berlin,
1877).
2 Schweitzer, Von Reimarus zu Wrede, 144, 153.
3 H. Kohler, Sozialistische Irrlehren von der Entstehung des Christ-
entums und ihre Widerlegung (Leipzig, 1899).
4 Theologisch Tijdschrift (1882, 1883, 1886).
5 Antiqua Mater (1S87).
8 Christianity and Mythology (1900); A Short History of Christi-
anity (1902); Pagan Christs (1903).
7 La Science des Religions, 4me ed. (1885).
8 Etudes d’histoire religieuse (1890).
8 Vergleichende Uebersicht der vier Evangelien (Leipzig, 1897).


Bauer and Strauss, to make the Gospel portrait of Jesus
comprehensible, as a result of the formation of pagan and
Jewish myths. Their assertions have met, however, almost
everywhere with the contempt they deserve.
More attention was paid to the equally worthless attacks
of the Bremen pastor, Albrecht Kalthoff. He knew how to
interest the socialists by the never failing trick of supporting
proletarian wishes and the Marxian view of history. He
derived the origin of Christianity from a socialistic popular
movement, and excluded an actual historical Founder, Jesus.
According to Kalthoff, Jesus is merely a personification of
the social hopes and needs of ancient socialism, which origin-
ated from the general ideal and the general wretchedness of
the Jewish-Grecian proletariat. 1 But this socialistic novelty
could not, of course, make thinking men doubt for a moment
the historic existence of Jesus. It was not only an exaggera-
tion of Bauer’s criticism, but a lack of real criticism in the
highest degree. 2
The latest denial of the historical existence of Jesus seems
to assume a more scientific character. The American William
Benjamin Smith 3 and the German Orientalists A. Jeremias, 4
P. Jensen 5 and Karl Vollers® developed the unsubstantial
theory of Bauer and his successors still further by the aid of
Oriental mythology and the comparative history of religions.
Finally, the lay-theologian, Arthur Drews, made a rSsumd
of all previous attempts in this line, and conceived from them
his impossible book —The Christ-Myth . 7
He conceived it, but certainly did not write it according to
historical reality. “It is the book of a critical theorist, who
merely through philosophic thinking and his own critical
view-point has lost all sense of the living marks of a per-
sonal reality. He rambles into the distance, yet does not
see what lies nearest him; he labours over the details of
mythical research and the representations of Oriental cults;
1 Das Chrislusproblem, Grundlinien einer Sozialtheologie, 2nd ed.
(Jena, 1903); Die Entstefmng des Christentums (Jena, 1904); Was wissen
wir von Jesus? (Schmargendorf-Berlin, Renaissance, 1904).
2 See Kalthoff answered by Franz Messert, Die geschichtliche Existenz
Christi, 4th ed. (1905); Thikotter, Kalthojfs Schrij't "Das Christus-
problem ” beleuchtet (Bremen, 1903); Henke, Die Zeugnisse aus der
ProfanUleratur iiber die Entstehung des Christentums, Protestanten-
blatt (1903), Nos. 19, 20, 25, 26; Weinel, Das Chrislusproblem, Ibid.,
Nos. 32-34; Steck, Die Entstehung des Christentums, Prot. Monats-
hejte, VIII, viii, 288 ff. (1904); Ad. Harnack, Christi. Welt (nineteenth
year of issue), p. 316 (1905); O. Schmiedel, Die Hauptprobleme der
Leben-Jesu-Forschung, p. 105 ff., 2nd ed. (Tubingen, 1906); Paul Mehl-
horn, Wahrheit und Dichtung im Leben Jesu (Leipzig, 1906).
3 Der vorchristliehe Jesus (1906).
4 Altbabylonisches im N. T. (1905).
5 Das Gilgamesch-Epos in der Weltliteratur (1906).
• Die Weltreligionen in ihrem geschichlichen Zusammenhange, 163
{1907). 7 Published at Jena, 1909.


puts all this together; unites it with mere academic intel-
ligence ; finds out what suits the perspective he desires; and,
consciously or unconsciously, rejects what could disturb the
course of his argument; and the whole is cut up with the
shears of an unsympathetic logician, who would like to
represent himself as wholly without preconceived ideas, but
who, in reality, is the most prejudiced person imaginable.
He is at heart dominated by his own critical point of view,
and indeed by the whole disintegrating tendency of our
radical age. He will have it that the whole figure of Christ
is nothing but a mere myth, a fantastic invention of a
religious purpose; and he insists that there has never been a
Jesus; hence his will becomes the father to his whole scheme
of reasoning. Only thus is the whole incredible artificiality of
his combinations and interpretations to be comprehended.” 1
Serious criticism, therefore, both liberal and orthodox
Christian, have in fact condemned this clumsy compilation
unanimously and with indignation. 2
Moreover, it deserves the honour of a refutation just as
little as does the sceptical theory of Bauer; or, to speak more
correctly, it bears within itself, like all the doubts of the
existence of Jesus since Bauer’s time, the most decisive
refutation. Whoever must first deny Gospels which were
written by eye and ear witnesses, and then must artificially
remodel the so-called “ ante-christian ” Christ out of all
possible varieties of old Oriental and Grecian fables, in order
to be able to doubt the real, historic Christ, has forfeited
every claim to be taken seriously.
And even if he should be able to tear the Gospels to pieces
and to weave his mythological patches into a winding-sheet
for them, the person of the living Christ would even then,
in spite of everything, shine forth, uncontroverted and indis-
putable, from the “fifth Gospel”—that is, from Paul, and
from the testimonials to Jesus, both Christian and non-chris-
tian, found outside the Bible. These alone are sufficient to
lift the existence of Jesus and the fundamental facts of his life
far above all doubt.
In addition to this, however, the fact that the Gospels—so
far as their essential characteristics and the historical truth of
the person of Jesus are concerned—are scientifically sure and
credible, can, in the present state of criticism, even in that
1 Fr. W. Forster, Autoritdt und Freiheit, 89 (1910).
1 See refutations by Fillion, Vexistence historique de Jisus et le
Rationalisme contemforain (Paris, 1909); R. Saitschick, Gedanketi
iiber Christus und Christentum, Hochland (May, 1909); K. Dunckmann,
Der historische Jesus , der mythologische Christus und Jesus der Christ
(Leipzig, 1910); K. Beth, Hat Jesus gelebt? (Berlin, 1910); C. Del-
briick, Hat Jesus Christus gelebt? (Berlin, 1910); J. Weiss and G.
Grutsmacher, Die Geschichtlichkeit Jesu (Tubingen, 1910); Chwolson,
t/ber die Frage, ob Jesus gelebt hat (Leipzig, 1910).


of thoroughly sceptical criticism, no longer be doubted by
anyone who has any idea of what the Gospels and criticism
really are.
6. The Evolutionary Hypothesis.
If radical scepticism of the Bible need not be any further
considered, then conservative Christian faith in the Gospels
has only one enemy left —the liberal School, whose founder
was Albrecht Ritschl, who died in 1889.
Its present chief is Adolf Harnack, and its most important
representatives are Hausrath, Weizsacker, Schurer, Bousset,
Heinrich Julius, and Oscar Holtzmann, Jiilicher and Well-
hausen. Their host of followers includes also by far the
majority of Protestant theologians. These are joined by
some deserters from Catholic circles, the so-called Modernists
—Loisy, Tyrrell, Minocchi and others.
Adolf Harnack’s Essence of Christianity may be described
as the most popular scientific catechism of the liberal line of
thought.
Inasmuch as this school, for nearly twenty years, has
occupied itself especially with historical matters, it calls itself
by preference the historical-critical School, and it has really
won for itself great distinction by its researches into ancient
Christian and biblical literature and history. It has freed
itself, in particular, entirely from the rationalistic and sceptical
criticism of the Gospels advocated by Reimarus, Baur,
Strauss, Renan and Bruno Bauer; has destroyed the last
doubts of the genuineness of the synoptic Gospels; and has
also, within certain limits, defended their-credibility.
It cannot, however, rise to a full recognition of their
historic value.
According to this school, the Gospels are not at all historic
pourtrayals of the life and teaching of Jesus, but the intel-
lectual precipitate of what Christians thought of Jesus and
his teaching at the time of the origin of the Gospels. There
is thus deposited in them, not the history of Jesus, or the
actual occurrences of his life, but the belief of the older
Churches. “Their devotional character was. for them the
standard of credibility. . . . They have described (of course
without any idea of the possibility of such a contrast), not
Jesus as he really was, but the Christ, as he appeared to the
heart of his Church, and as the faithful needed him.” 1
“ This biographical sketch [of Jesus] was, from the outset
drawn from the standpoint of faith, not from that of historical
fidelity.” 2
1 Ad. Jiilicher, Einleitung in das N. T., 327, sth and 6th ed. (Tubin-
gen, 1906).
2 Bousset, Jesus, 76, 3rd ed. (Tubingen, 1907); cf. J. Denner, Jesus
and the Gospel; Christianity justified in the Mind of Christ (New
York, 1909).


Moreover, when the Evangelists set about writing their
works, the original facts had already acquired, so to speak,
a history of their own, and thereby also had attained a con-
siderable development. “ The oldest records betray already
the most unmistakable traces of an elaboration of the historical
element, in combination with the ideal motives of dogmatic
speculation. . . . Jewish prophecy, rabbinical teaching,
oriental gnosis, and Greek philosophy had already mingled
their colours on the palette, from which the portrait of Christ
in the New Testament writings was composed.” 1 “They
surrounded his life with myths, 2 and, moreover, made out of
the Gospels a pourtrayal of the primitive Christian faith and
of their own wishes and hopes.” 3
From remote times, and indeed already during the life of
Jesus, there was mirrored in the minds of the disciples, not
a clear, historic picture of the Saviour, but the impression
•which he had made on them. And the more forcible this
impression was, so much the more did it continually force
itself upon their minds. Every further reconsideration of
this picture meant, however, a restoration and further develop-
ment of it.
Especially after the death of the Saviour, the disciples
wreathed about the portrait of Christ ever new embellish-
ments, and when they had presented to the believing masses,
which had not seen or heard the Lord, a memorial of the
Master characterized by enthusiastic eulogy, many a man,
from well-intentioned motives of love, wanted to add to it
some individual traits, acquired either from hearsay or from
inward experience, or from an unrestrained imagination (the
usual way of forming legends), until the portrait of the Christ
of faith was finally completed, which the Evangelists then
adhered to piously and faithfully.
The situation, frame of mind and intellectual tendency of
the Evangelists made it unavoidable that this portrait should
prove, through writing, still less historical than it was before.
“ How much had already become uncertain in their recol-
lection is shown by the contradictions between these ‘ synop-
tists ’ in regard to wholly indifferent things, such as names,
or statements about a place or time, or the occasion for a
discourse. To this (still further obscuring the question) must
be added religious interest as the only motive of their writing,
which yet is so entirely unlike that of the unprejudiced his-
torian. The Gospels are, in fact, not books of history at all,
but didactic writings intended to win believers. To pre-
1 Pfleiderer, Das Christusbild des urchristl. Glaubens, p. 4 (Berlin
1903)-
2 Or “ legends ”; but Hess can no more distinguish “ myth ” from
“ legend ” than Strauss could in the century before him.
3 Hess, Jesus von Nazareth in seiner gesch. Lebenseniwicklung
(Tubingen, 1906).


suppose in them any consideration for historical connection
would be unreasonable, and still more so to demand from
them an objective, historical understanding of the religion of
Jesus. The important thing to the Evangelists was to set
forth powerfully the supernatural, the incomparable and the
incomprehensible in their subject-matter. What has for them
the highest value is not what we should consider the best
attested facts, but what seemed best adapted to suppress
doubts about the divinity of Jesus, and to strengthen confi-
dence in him and his cause—such as the story of his trans-
figuration, his opened tomb, and his raising of the dead.
“ In the synoptic Gospels the writers wrestle too forcibly
with material often not understood by them, and frequently
actually repugnant to them. The real Jesus, whom they have
received, stands at an exalted height above the man, the
sketch of whose life they give us, with additions from the
Old Testament, Babylonian mythology, Jewish literature,
popular lore, primitive Christian theology, and poetic
art.” 1
According to this, the Christ of the Gospels is the Christ
of faith—the Christ of the churches and the faith-producing
legends, but not the Christ of history.
Historic criticism now desires “ to put the Jesus of history
in the place of ,the Christ of faith.” 2 The former stands far
below the latter. He is much more human; his teaching is
much more moderate, the actual facts in the case incompar-
ably more natural and plain. “To establish the real course
of events, one must go back further than the Gospels and
seek information from the earliest tradition.” 3 Historical
research must “ cut away the rank growth of legend ” 4 and
remove the historic kernel from a confused mass of evangelical
tendrils, leaves and faith-entanglements, and thus bring to
light the underlying Christ, buried beneath a superimposed
Christianity—the “ Gospel within the Gospel.” 5
That is, however, according to the assurance of some
critics, a desperately difficult undertaking. “ Only late
accounts, and those not written by eye-witnesses, testify to
us of Jesus,” sighs Wilhelm Wrede; “over the,amount of
true information which they undoubtedly contain, have been
deposited thick layers of legendary embellishments and his-
torical formations, furnished by the faith of later churches.
Only after a wearisome work of elimination, attended with
I.
6
1 Ad. Jiilicher in Paul Hinneberg’s Die Kultur der Gegenwart, I, iv,
43. 45 (Die Christliche Religion, Berlin, 1906); cf. Jiilicher, Neue
Linien in der Kritik der Evangelieniiberlieferung (Giessen, 1906).
2 Ad. Hausrath, Jesus und die neutestl. Schriftsteller, I, x (Berlin,
1908).
3 0. Holtzmann, Christus, 41 (Leipzig, 1907).
1 Bousset, Jesus, 26 (Halle, 1904).
5 Harnack, Wesen, 9.


many uncertainties, can we reach the kernel.” 1 “ Only with
effort,” says Wilhelm Bousset also, “and often perhaps not
at all, is it possible to separate in the tradition of our Gospels
what was the faith and conviction of the Church and what
was the real opinion of Jesus. . . . The belief of the Church
has painted over and gilded the portrait of Jesus.” 2
Other liberal critics find, on the contrary, that this work
of sifting and separation is not so difficult. According to
Harnack, “ The Gospel within the Gospel is something so
simple, something that speaks to us so powerfully, that it is
not easy to miss it. Extensive, methodical directions and
long introductions are not necessary to find the way to it.
Whoever possesses a clear apprehension of what is vital
and a true appreciation of what is really great, must be able
to see and distinguish it from the wrappings of contempor-
aneous history.” 3 “ For the most part the extraneous stands
out in contrast to the original so clearly —like the cut glass
from the diamond—that confidence in the genuine, which
maintains its unique brilliancy when placed beside any glitter-
ing sham, is truly not misplaced.” 4
Already at the first glance the critically trained eye will
find that the Gospel of John can “ scarcely anywhere be
claimed as an authority for the history of Jesus. Only a little
is to be accepted from him, and that with caution.” 5 “So
far as any ‘ history ’ at all is to be found in him, it has only
the purpose of being a transparent medium for profound
thoughts ... an allegory of the idea.” 6 “ The Jesus of
John’s Gospel can be held to be the hero of a religious
poem.” 7
On the other hand, “ the first three Gospels are not in-
capable of being used as sources of history.” 8 “ Certainly
these writings leave very much to be desired . . . and they
suffer from many imperfections. It is true, gross interpola-
tions from a later age are not found in them; but here and
there we see reflected in them also the conditions of the
primitive Church and the experiences which it had passed
through at a subsequent period.” 9 Of course “the good
faith of the three Gospels cannot be doubted . . . neverthe-
less, they have undoubtedly contained, even in their ancient
form, much that is legendary.” 10 What they report is “ a
mixture of truth and fiction.” 11 Thus, the story of Christ’s
childhood is not to be looked on as “ sacred history,” but as
“sacred legend,” 12 the “product of a pious imagination.” 13
1 Paulus, 2nd ed., i (Tubingen, 1907). 2 Jesus, 76.
3 Wesen, g. 4 Julicher, Die Religion Jesu, 45. 5 Wesen, 13.
* Rudolf Otto, Leben und Wirken Jesu, 15 (Gottingen, 1905).
7 Julicher, Die Quellen, 45. 8 Harnack, Wesen, 14.
• ibid., 15. 10 Julicher, Die Religion Jesu, 44.
11 Julicher, Einleitung in das N. T., 325, sth and 6th ed.
18 Otto, id., 22. 13 Julicher, id., 327.


The narratives of miracles appear either to have been “ evi-
dently exaggerated,” as Harnack 1 thinks, or they are entirely
later introductions and legendary accounts, “ which had for
a long time been passing from mouth to mouth . . . and
land to land, before they succeeded in being permanently
located in the written text.” 2
Finally, whenever facts or doctrines are brought out,
which are explainable only by supernatural power or revela-
tion, we must suppose that these do not belong to history,
but to legend and to the belief of the Church at the time of
the Evangelists. Even Mark—according to the majority of
liberal investigators the oldest Gospel—“ does not present to
us the first and most original deposit of evangelical tradition.
It is no more a source, but already a reservoir.” 3
The above is substantially the view of the modern liberal
school; and even though this hypothesis is presented by
individual investigators in very different shades of thought,
in the main they all agree, from the historical-positivist
wing of Harnack to the extreme left of the liberal-radical
group. The Modernists also, like Loisy, join in the chorus. *
In substance, all the liberal critics assert that the Gospels
are simply unreliable. That is to say, they do not contain the
original history of Jesus, but the belief of the Christian
Church between the years a.d. 70 and 100. This belief,
however, does not agree with what really occurred from the
beginning. Is such an asumption justified?
ll.— The Proofs of Credibility.
1. The Gospels Themselves.
The Gospels themselves are taken as the starting-point of
the evolutionary theory. In fact, no other support for it can
either be stated or thought of; in the latter case because the
procedure of our opponents is one of purely internal, evolu-
tionary criticism; in the former because it will be shown that
all external criteria militate against our opponents’ view. It
is, therefore, only a question whether this view' can in the
least appeal for support to the Gospels themselves. We must
investigate first the Synoptics, and then the Gospel of John.
1 Wesen, 16.
3 H. von Soden, Die wichtigsten Fragen im Lebert Jesu, 41, 3rd ed. -
(Berlin, 1907).
3 J. Weiss, Das dlteste Evangelium, 2 (Gottingen, 1903).
* Loisy, Le qme Evangile, 72 (Paris, 1903); Autour d'un fetit livre,
44i 83 (Paris, 1903); VEvangile et VEglise, 1, 15, 33, 2me ed. (Bellevue,
1903).


(a) The Synoptic Gospels.
Against the credibility of the Gospel history an appeal is
made to the relation of the first three Gospels to one another
—that is, to the so-called “ synoptic question.”
Prof. P. Wernle, 1 of BfUe, whose presentation of the case
may be pointed out as typical, “ solves ” the synoptic
question as follows. According to him, there is noticeable
at the first glance, “ in contrast to John, the extraordinarily
great affinity between the three Gospels of Matthew, Mark
and Luke. ... Not only are the histories and the words
of Jesus in them for the most part identical, but even in the
sequence of the narratives sometimes two, sometimes all three,
continue a long time in harmony, and the text in many verses
agrees in every letter. This intimate resemblance would
already be a sufficient reason for inquiring into the mutual
relationship of the three documents. Still more pressing,
however, does this question become in consequence of their
differences. Although they form a homogeneous group, as
contrasted with John, they show a strong lack of harmony,
as soon as they are carefully compared with one another. . . .
The problem which bears the name of the ‘ synoptic ques-
tion ’ arises from the, at first sight, puzzling connection
between such great similarity and such profound differences.
.. . Our hope of finding at once in the synoptics the
genuine, oldest tradition, after the exclusion of John, proves
deceitful, as is shown by the above-mentioned differences.” 2
On this account, the three Gospels are to be characterized
as works derived from others, and present the further
questions: “ Where do we find in the synoptic Gospels
the oldest traditions?” and “Which accounts prove them-
selves to have been 1 derived ’ and historically incapable of
use?” 3 In answering these questions, the critic finds that
the synoptic material was derived from a number of sources
—perhaps from an “ original Mark,” or a Greek “ Collection
of Discourses,” or from other “Traditions.” 4
In this case, we should have no more to do with the three
synoptics; and the question now would be, whether at least
the sources used by them (the original Mark, Sayings and
Traditions) are reliable. 5 This is, however, not necessarily
the case, since these go back in their turn to still more
ancient, and of course rarer, traditions, as the “ ultimate
source ”of information. 6 “In the course of this long journey
very much has fallen away, which for centuries formed a
1 Die Quellen des Lebens Jesu, pp. 32-87 (Tubingen, 1906); cf. Die
synoftische Frage (Tiibingen, 1899); Die Anfange unserer Religion,
2nd ed. (Tiibingen, 1904).
2 Die Quellen. 33. s id., 34. * id., 34-54.
6 id., 54 fi. » id., 55-81.


part of the established portrait of Jesus; . . . but, after all,
that is no great harm.” 1
Only now, however, do we encounter ‘ ‘ the last and greatest
difficulty. . . . The ultimate sources of information, which
we have reached in our investigation of the authorities—
viz., those oldest traditions, which Mark and the ‘ Collection
of Sayings ’ had gathered together, and the gleanings of
which Matthew and Luke retained . . . are always some-
thing different from Jesus himself. They contain the pos-
sibility of indistinctness and remodelling. They give' us,
first, the belief of the earliest Christians—a belief which had
grown up in the course of four decades, and had also been
changed. Between Jesus and ourselves there stands always
the belief of the primitive Church, as the object first to be
investigated. This belief of the primitive Church can go back
to Jesus himself wholly, or in part; it can also only be
carried back thither in the words and life of Jesus. There
is, therefore, no reason to despair or to give up the search.
A part of the work is already done when the task and its
difficulties are clearly recognized. And finally all this is still
not at all the principal thing. ... For us to-day all this
is of only secondary importance and the last thing to be con-
sidered. Saturated to excess with christology, we are long-
ing for God.” 2
Now, even one who is “ saturated to excess with christ-
ology ” will find the lynch-law justice meted out to the history
of Jesus, to say the least, poignant. Yet neither this recti-
linear “solution” of the synoptic problem, nor the synoptic
question in general, has the least thing to do with the sum
total of our knowledge of Christ and the credibility of the first
three Gospels. It is a purely literary, and not simply an
historical, question. It would be decisive for the historical
credibility of the Gospels only in case the Evangelists had not
themselves been contemporaries, and truth-loving eye and ear
witnesses of the life of Jesus. In that case, what they
report would have value, only so far as they drew it from the
old original sources.
But the Evangelists are themselves the original witnesses
and the original sources of Gospel history, and if they
amplify their personal knowledge of Jesus through the use
of other, written or unwritten, authorities, then they assume
also the guarantee for their purity and clearness. Whoever
might wish to contest this, and to cast doubts upon the
reliability of the synoptists, would have first to prove that
the Evangelists either used untrustworthy sources, or
augmented the trustworthy sources with untrustworthy
material, and thus beclouded them. To prove this, however,
2 Die QuelUn, 81-83.
* 83, 87.


is not possible; and so the synoptic question cannot be used
against the credibility of the Gospels.
On the contrary, should the critics succeed in giving any
scientifically certain answer to the synoptic question (until now
they have unfortunately not succeeded in doing so, and all the
alleged “ solutions ” are mere interrogation points), the credi-
bility of the synoptists would thereby be only strengthened.
Every proof to the effect that the synoptists made use of this
or that authority of an earlier date is also a fresh indication
that they did not look upon their task superficially. They
were not satisfied with what they themselves had seen, or
learned from eye-witnesses, but took their information also
from older and original documents.
The critics who still always rely so bravely on the synoptic
question as a means of discrediting the synoptic writers,
should consider most seriously the warning of Harnack : x
“ In the criticism of the origins of primitive Christianity
we are unquestionably retracing our steps towards tradition.
The task of criticizing internally these sources, and (in a
still higher degree) that of discovering the origin of doc-
trinal and historical tradition, and the way in which the
real history [of early Christianity] was formed, will probably,
a few years hence, appear to the majority of our colleagues
essentially otherwise than it does to-day. . . . There will
come a time—and it is already drawing near —when men will
trouble themselves very little more about the solution of
literary and historical problems in regard to primitive Chris-
tianity, because, in any case, all that is to be gained by it
will have become universally recognized. This, with a few
unimportant exceptions, will be the essential truth of tradi-
tion.”
The comparison of the synoptic Gospels between themselves
would turn out to the detriment of their credibility only in case
the presentation of history in the three Gospels should contain
substantial contradictions.
Contradictions, not mere differences. Considered from the
purely natural standpoint, as well as from that of the Catholic
doctrine of inspiration, the individuality of the separate
Evangelists, their personal talents, the origin and aim of
their creations are all so different, that their works also must
reveal numerous differences. The Protestant-orthodox doc-
trine of verbal inspiration certainly cannot concede this, as
may be easily conceived. And the Protestant-liberal higher
criticism, acting at the opposite extreme, will not adopt it.
“ They act as if they had before them documentary records
concerning the life of Jesus, and then subject these to a
hearing before a criminal court, where every contradiction
1 Chronologic der dltchristl. Literatur, I, x, f.


which has been brought out by cross-examination must serve
to prove the incredibility of one Gospel, or logically, in the
last analysis, of all four.” 1
Instead of this, the conscientious historian should remember
that it is a question here of fragmentary writings, which are
far removed from formal historical composition. If, therefore,
the planes of the Gospel representations do not exactly coin-
cide, it is to be remembered that the Evangelists did not
work at all according to one pattern, and that what they
report finds its complement in what they do not report. •
Should, however, a thorough agreement prove impossible,
and should there remain as a result some vanishing remnants
of different readings, nevertheless, historical research—and
this is also true from the standpoint of inspiration—is not
at all concerned with it. A. Deissmann also acknowledges :
“ For the history of the Gospels, and of their written and oral
origins, which often present questions of the most perplexing
difficulty, these different readings are, as far as the history of
the Gospel and the delineation of Jesus are concerned, for
the most part no greater problems than the critic of texts has
also to solve elsewhere ” in the treatment of biblical and non-
biblical authorities.
These different readings are clearly present ‘ ‘ by reason of
the character of that mass of tradition, which is a mosaic of
many separate reminiscences.” 2 Together with Deissmann,
Prof. Fritz Barth, 3 of Berne, rejects both the narrow-minded
method of Protestant verbal inspiration and also that of
liberal criticism. The far-sighted harmony of the Gospels,
characteristic of the Catholic school, as represented by
Joseph Grimm, 4 proves itself more and more to be the only
scientific method. 5
Accordingly, the comparison of the first three Gospels with
one another offers no support whatever for the liberal,
evolutionary hypothesis. If now we fix our glance solely on
the mass of facts contained in the synoptic Gospels, we gain
the positive and very definite impression that here the original
reality of the history of Jesus lies before us, and not a later
remodelling of facts, according to the standard- of belief in
the Church, and, as is asserted, of a speculative delineation
of Christ, partly legendary, partly an outgrowth of history.
Of course, within the limits of our study the entire Gospel
narrative cannot be examined and tested as to its earlier or
1 B. Heigl, Die Differenzen uni Widersfruche in den Evangelien,
Monatsblatter jiir hath. Religionsunterricht, 338 (Koln, 1907).
2 Deissmann, Evangelium und Urchristenium, in Beitrage zur
Weiterentwicklung der christl. Religion, 86 (Miinchen, 1905).
3 Die Hauftfrobleme des Lebens Jesu, 4-34 (Giitersioh, 1907).
1 Die Einheit der vier Evangelien (Regensburg, 1868).
5 C/. B. Bonkamp, Zur Evangelienjrage (Munster, 1909).


later origin. We single out one point only, and this assuredly
the most salient, most difficult and most important—the one
on which everything depends, and which concerns almost
exclusively both our opponents and ourselves —the views of
the Gospels concerning the Messiahship and Divinity of
Christ,
In the synoptic Gospels we find the Messianic views, as
the disciples held them just before the resurrection of the
Saviour. They expect the Son of David as an earthly
potentate and conqueror of the Romans. They revel in the
anticipation of his royal splendour, and are frankly eager to
secure for themselves the best places and posts of honour in
his kingdom, and all this not without jealousy, and in spite
of all the Master’s instructions. This idea of the Messiah,
however, corresponds exactly to the popular view. It is a
living example of Jewish popular life.
But the death of Jesus, his resurrection, the sending of
the Holy Ghost, and all that followed till the days when the
synoptists wrote, had given a drastic denial to that Messianic
faith. All was different; everything was the very opposite
of what had been hoped for, expected, and greedily enjoyed
in anticipation. Instead of flesh, there was spirit; instead of
a kingdom on earth, a kingdom of heaven; instead of the
national hero, a universally redeeming Saviour of sinners.
If the Gospels, as is alleged, had accommodated them-
selves to the belief of the days in which they were written,
then that previous conception of the Messiah, which men
had now been forced sharply to reject, both from the neces-
sary recognition of events and from personal conviction,
would have no more been presented. At this point surely, if
anywhere in the Gospels, the former history would have
been varnished over with the then existing theology of the
Church. How natural it would have been, for practical
pastoral reasons and out of tender consideration for the
Apostles, to regard the old Messianic dreams of the disciples
as idle fancies, and to consign them to oblivion ! But no;
the expectations concerning Christ, prevalent in those days,
are outlined in precise agreement with history, although
they were in contradiction to the Messianic belief of the
Church. Yet we are told that the Gospels are a portraiture
of the Church between a.d. 70 and 100.
Let us consider, first, the complete synoptic representa-
tion of Jesus. This puts the divinity of Christ so much into
the background that our opponents sometimes actually main-
tain that the writers did not know or teach it. Even if that
is incorrect, it nevertheless remains true that the first three
Gospels reveal to us the glory and divinity of Jesus in a
subdued light only, as it were through a veil.
His human nature, on the contrary, stands out in bold


relief, powerfully and plastically, everywhere in the first
three Gospels.
“ The synoptic Christ is a being of flesh and blood, who
mingles with men; like one of them, in spite of—or rather
in consequence of—the consciousness of his high mission.
He speaks and acts like a man; he seats himself at the tables
of the Pharisee and the publican; he is touched by the woman
who was a sinner; he converses, as a friend, with his
disciples; he is tempted by the devil; he is filled with sadness
in the garden of Gethsemani; he works miracles out ’of
sympathy, and hides them from observation rather than use
them as a proof of his mission; he is quiet and dignified
before his judges, and allows himself to be smitten and
insulted; the cry which he utters before his death is one of
anguish of heart and physical agony.
“ Even if we discover everywhere in his discourses, deeds
and sufferings, a breath of the divine, which raises him above
ordinary humanity—and even humanity at its best—it does
not remain less true that everything that he does and says
is profoundly human, permeated through and through, if we
may so say, with human reality.” 1
Now it is precisely our opponents who declare that at the
time when the Gospels came into existence, theological
speculation had already forced the Man Jesus quite into the
background, and ■ emphasized only his divinity; and that
formerly, and at the beginning especially, it had been entirely
different.
But in that case it is impossible that the synoptic Gospels
should be a feeble reproduction of the beliefs of the early
Church in contrast to real history, since their portrait of the
Saviour exhibits throughout those characteristics which are
pointed out by liberal critics as absolutely original and
entirely genuine, in contrast to the portrait of Christ in later
decades.
It is a most striking fact that it is precisely in Luke, who
writes the Gospel of Paul, that the human element in the
figure of Christ comes so decidedly into the foreground, while
its divine majesty is seen as through a veil.
Paul is usually made responsible for the adoption of the
doctrines of the divinity of Jesus, his supernatural existence
and atoning death. In any case, it must be conceded that
he brought out these doctrines with special emphasis, and
deepened the speculative belief in them which he had found
already in the Church, and that he in a certain sense created
this theology.
But, if this were the case, we should certainly expect
that Paul’s pupil, writing soon after his death, would bring
1 Loisy, Le 4me Evan gilt, 73 (Paris, 1903).


this speculative theology into his Gospel, if he had pro-
duced the contemporaneous, didactic theology of the Church,
and not the actual, original history. 1 Yet there is nothing
to be seen of any such infiltration. Luke is, in fact, so little
speculative and didactic that Harnack declares that the
Church, “ as soon as it became didactic—and that soon hap-
pened—preferred Matthew, and let Luke retire into the back-
ground. ” 2
At the time when the synoptists wrote there were, there-
fore, in the Church two lines of thought—one speculative, the
other historical. The first occupied itself with the theology
of the Church—that is, with didactic writings; the second
with the history of Jesus Christ, the Gospels. The fact that
both currents of thought flowed on quietly, side by side, is
also a complete proof that both the theology of the Church
and its belief were in harmony with the original history, and
that their mutual antagonism, insisted on by the liberal critics,
had no existence whatever.
(b) The Gospel of John.
As the synoptic Gospels are said to mirror the legendary
belief of their time, so in a still higher degree is the Gospel
of John believed to represent the views of the Church from
the end of the first century on, in opposition to history.
The Fourth Gospel is designated by critics as a theological
textbook, from which the state of the development of the faith
of that time can be exactly learned, but from which not the
slightest information about the life of Jesus ought to be
accepted.
In this Gospel not the actual, but the idealized life of the
Saviour is said to be described. John offers, therefore, not a
history, but a kind of religious philosophy—“ a piece of
theological, didactic writing in the form of a Gospel history,
. . . a doctrinal poem, which skims over the ground of
reality so boldly, that no historical biography of Jesus can
be derived from it.” 3
This “ solution of the Johannine problem ” is declared to
be one of the principal dogmas of historic criticism by nearly
all adherents of the liberal-protestant school. 4 Many liberal
investigators discover, nevertheless, here and there in John
1 Even Jiilicher notes this. See his Einleitung in das N. T., p. 292,
6th ed.
2 Harnack, Lukas der Arzt, p. 121 (Leipzig, 1906).
* Pfleiderer, Die Entstehung des Christentums , 224, 229 (Miinchen,
i9°s)-
1 Thoma, Die Genesis des Johannesevangeltums (Berlin, 1882);
J. R6ville, Le s,me Evangile (Paris, 1901); O. Pfleiderer, Das Urchristen-
tum, ii, 281-503, 2nd ed. (Berlin); Die Entstehung des Christentums,
224 fi; W. Wrede, Charakter und Tendem des Johannesevangeliums,
(Tubingen, 1903); P. W. Schmiedel, Die Johannes christen des N. T.
(Halle a. S., 1906); Das vierte Evangelium (Tubingen, 1906); Jiilicher,
Einleitung, 6th ed., p. 382 (Tubingen, 1906).


a grain of historical tradition, or even a small amount of
authentic information. 1
J. Wellhausen has recently seen himself obliged to acknow-
ledge the existence in John’s Gospel of important historical
constituents, which come near to the synoptic Gospels; and
this in spite of his effort to represent the original text of the
Fourth Gospel as free, poetic fiction about Christ. 2
Frederick Spitta wishes, on the contrary, to prove that
even the original text of the Fourth Gospel, and indeed pre-
cisely that text, is Johannine and historical. Wellhausen
has, in Spitta’s opinion, underrated the historical value of
this Gospel, and says that serious, thorough-going research
gives, as a result, “ a joyful confidence in the essential
character of a document which has always seemed to many
to be the most conclusive thing that the New Testament—
yes, that all the literature about the person and history of
Jesus —possesses; ... so that the Fourth Gospel, even
though it be only within certain limits, becomes again the
harmonious, tender and principal Gospel—that of the disciple
whom the Lord loved.” 3 Spitta even cannot, however, rise
to the recognition of its full historicity. But he often
arbitrarily and even despotically separates the text into
historical and unhistorical 4 constituents, and gives it as his
judicial opinion that “ The conservatives and the radicals, in
their judgement concerning this Gospel, are equally right and
equally wrong.” 5
In his attempt to land these views on Catholic soil, Alfred
Loisy suffered shipwreck. First he undermined, in part, the
historicity of the Fourth Gospel, 6 and then rejected it entirely,
declaring that the Johannine Gospel was only an allegorical,
didactic document, which clothed its deep religious ideas in
the form of a life of Jesus. 7
1 H. J. Holtzmann, Evang., Briefe u. Offenbarung Johannes, p. 23,
2nd ed. {Freiburg i. Breisgau, 1893); Bousset, Die Offenbarung
Johannis, p. 45 (Gottingen, 1896); Harnack, Wesen des Chrisientums,
13; Wendt, Das Johannesev., etc. (Gottingen, iqoo) ; Die Lehre fesu,
33 fi., 2nd ed. (Gottingen, 1901); Abbott, “ Gospels ” in Cheyne and
Black’s Encyclopcedia Biblica, ii, col. 1794 ff.; Soltau, Zum Problem des
Johannesev. in Zeitschrift fur neutest. Wissensch, 147 If. (1901); O.
Holtzmann, Leben Jesu, 34 ff. (Tubingen, igoi); Weizsacker, Das
afostolische Zeitalter, 517, 3rd ed. (Tubingen, 1902); H. von Soden,
Urchristl. Literaturgeschichte, 211, 230 (Berlin, 1905); G. Wobbermin,
Das Wesen des Chrisientums, in Beitrdge zur Weiterentwichlung der
christl. Religion, 351 ff. (Miinchen, 1905); Konrad Furrer, Das Leben
Christi, 2nd. ed., 19 (Leipzig, 1905).
2 Wellhausen, Das Evang. Johannis (Berlin, 1908).
3 Spitta, Das Johannesev. als Quelle der Geschichte Jesu, 401, 466
(Gottingen, 1910). 1 id., ix-xlvii. 5 id., viii.
• Revue du Clergi franfais, Nov. 1, 1899; Etudes bibliques (Paris,
1901).
7 Le nme Evangile, 75 ff. (Paris, 1903); Autour d’un -petit livre, 85 ff.
(Paris, 1903); against Loisy, see Lepin, L’origine du 4 me Evang ,
(Paris, 1905); La valeur historique du 4 me Evang. (Paris, 1907).


Otto Schmiedel argues that: “ The chief stumbling-block
is the fundamental difference between the Fourth Gospel and
the Synoptics, so that investigation into the subject results
in the statement: ‘lf John has the genuine tradition of the
life of Jesus, then that of the synoptists is untenable; if the
synoptists, however, are right, then the fourth Evangelist
must be rejected as an authority. There is no possibility of
a compromise. Every historian decides this matter immedi-
ately, as the critical theologian does. ’ ’’- 1
If we ask in what the fundamental differences consist
which necessitate this categorical “ either-or,” our attention
is called to the fact that the Gospel of John, both in style
and content, does not agree with the synoptics; and that, in
particular, the figure of Jesus here and there appears to be
different; being, in regard to its nature, genuinely human in
the synoptics, but thoroughly divine in the Gospel of John.
Moreover, in respect to the outward delineation of Jesus, it
is claimed that, according to the synoptics, he -worked prin-
cipally in Galilee and for the Jews, while in John’s Gospel the
theatre of his activity was preferably Judea and Jerusalem,
and he bestowed his salvation also upon the Gentiles. These
are the points of difference. 2
Far from setting the synoptists against John we claim
that, when carefully studied, all four Gospels unite in
peaceful harmony. In reality, merely a consideration of the
aim and purpose of John’s Gospel is sufficient to explain
all.
The last Evangelist wishes for his part to supplement what
the first three have either omitted or barely touched on. This
explains his silence about the parables and many of the
miracles which are recorded by the synoptists, and about the
institution of the Last Supper. This accounts, too, for his
giving us words and deeds of Jesus which had been left out
of the other Gospels, especially those of the eucharistic and
high-priestly discourses, and those concerning the washing of
the disciples’ feet, additional features of the scene of the Last
Supper, as given in the synoptics. Also the detailed accounts
of the activity of Jesus in Judea and Jerusalem, which are
rendered in a more condensed form by t'he synoptists, as well
as the concise summary of his Galilasan achievements, which
had been already minutely described in the first Gospels, are
all comprehensible from this point of view.
Another aim is also discoverable in John’s Gospel. The
synoptists wrote before the destruction of the Jewish nation.
They still hoped always to win over the chosen people to the
kingdom of God. They therefore laid as much stress as
possible on the points of connection between the Old and
1 Die Hauftfrohleme der Leben-Jesu-Forschung, pp. 18 ff, 120.
* id., 19 f.


New Testaments —the purely human element in Christ which
united Jew and Christian.
John takes his pen in hand, after God’s judgement has
already fallen upon Jerusalem, and after the Church has,
fortunately, wholly freed itself from the embrace of the dead
synagogue. Accordingly, he accentuates the points of separa-
tion between them —the thoroughly non-Jewish element in
Christianity, whereby the Church revealed itself in its full
spiritual independence and thus became sympathetic to the
pagans. Even in his wording and representation of Christian
doctrine, John, who is writing in Asia Minor, comes as closely
as possible to classic ways of thinking, feeling and speaking,
and even adopts the Greek idea and expressions about the
Logos, because these seemed to him admirably adapted to
serve as a vessel for the doctrine of the incarnate Son of God.
The incarnate Son of God was, on the whole, the great
thesis of this prophet among the Evangelists. While the
synoptists, out of consideration for the Jews, had to empha-
size the human side, and the Old Testament’s Messianic con-
ception, of the Saviour, John, in opposition to the Jewish-
Christian heresy, which represented Christ as merely a man,
was obliged to defend the supernatural grandeur and essential
divinity of Jesus. And not only that; in mind and heart alike
he feels the necessity of revealing to men, in his entire glory
and sublimity, the Master, whom he loved supremely, and
whom he, better than anyone else, had learned to know from
a most intimate companionship.
That was indeed one more reason why John preferred for
his pourtrayal the later Judaic and Jerusalem period, during
which the divine-human manifestations had already made
further progress than in the Galilsean period, when the Lord
first imparted to his disciples the fundamental ideas of the
new plan of salvation. The Apostle also, in accordance
with his purpose, selects for narration those episodes which
contain the most striking proofs of his thesis. Even the
miracles are chosen from the “ point of view of the self-
revelation and manifestation of the glory of the Son of
God.” 1
The Christ of John is the true Son of God, Who, out of
love to men, has come down to earth from the glory of the
Father, and has become flesh in order, as a man, to live with
men and for men. The Christ of the synoptists is the true
Son of Man, flesh of our flesh and blood of our blood, but
sustained by his Messianic dignity, and thoroughly imbued
with divine power and essence, in order to lift us up to God.
Thus are the alleged contradictions between John and the
synoptists solved by the higher unity of the entire Gospel. 2
1 Julius Grill, Die Entstehung des vierien Evang.,i, 45 (Tubingen, 1902),
* Cf. Worsley, The Fourth Gosf eland the Synoftics (Edinburgh, 1909).


From this it is evident that there is no justification for the
idea that Christ and christology are in John’s Gospel essenti-
ally different in character from those in the synoptic Gospels.
Harnack acknowledges expressly : “ If we have called John
a glorified Matthew because he shares with him his didactic,
apologetic purpose, one can just as well call him a glorified
Mark and Luke; for he agrees with the former in his
dominating intention of making clear the divine sonship of
Jesus; and like the latter (Luke) he wishes to pourtray Jesus
as the Saviour of the world by means of an historical narrative,
especially designed for the unbelieving Jews and the disciples
of the Baptist.” 1
Still more decidedly does Harnack’s colleague, Pfleiderer,
express himself; “It must be acknowledged that all our
Gospels occupy in principle the same standpoint, and the
difference between Mark and the other two synoptists, on the
one hand, and John, on the other, is only a relative difference
of degreed' 2 . The Gospel of John can, therefore, be real
history, in spite of its dissimilarity from the synoptists.
If, in addition to this, we consider in itself the essence of
John’s Gospel, we come to the conclusion that this is truly
history, and not an allegorical or symbolical vestment of
philosophical and theological ideas. 3
Personal occurrences in the life of Jesus are not presented
in general, undefined features, as is necessarily the case with
the hero of an allegory, but are carved plastically, con-
cretely and vividly from life, with an exact statement of place,
time and other circumstances.
When the Evangelist describes how the forerunner of the
Saviour bears witness to him, he introduces Jesus as follows :
“These things were done in Bethania beyond the Jordan,
where John was baptizing. The next day John saw Jesus
coming to him, and he saith : Behold the Lamb of God (i, 28).
The next day again, John stood, and two of his disciples, and
beholding Jesus walking, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God!
(i, 35). It was about the tenth hour (i, 39). The following
day, Jesus would go forth into Galilee (i, 43). The third
day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee, and the mother
of Jesus was there (ii, 1). After this he went down to
Capharnaum, he and his mother and his brethren and his
disciples; and they remained there not many days. And the
pasch of the Jews was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jeru-
salem (ii, 12, 13). After these things Jesus and his disciples
came into the land of Judea, and there he abode with them
1 Lukas der Arzt, 119 note {Leipzig, 1906).
* Das UrcTiristenium, i, 665, and ed. {1902).
s Cf. Knabenbauer, Commentarius in Evang. secundum Joannem, 27-
53 (Paris, 1898); see also Stimmen aus Maria Laach, vol. LXVII, 361-
371 (1904).


and baptized. And John also was baptizing in Ennon near
Salim, because there was much water there (iii, 22, 23). He
left Judea and went again into Galilee. And he was of
necessity to pass through Samaria. He cometh therefore to
a city of Samaria, which is called Sichar, near the land which
Jacob gave to his son Joseph . . . Jesus therefore, being
wearied with his journey, sat thus on the well. It was about
the sixth hour. There cometh a woman of Samaria to draw
water” (iv, 3-7). Then follows the whole lifelike scene at
Jacob’s well.
And so the narrative goes on from chapter to chapter, from
event to event, through all the activity of Jesus to the very
days of his Passion. 1 Everywhere we find luminous, radiant
colours and definite outlines, instantaneous photographs, so
to speak, eloquent, active, lifelike history, and not a trace
of mere allegory. Loisy himself cannot but acknowledge
that in many places the Evangelist gives accounts character-
ized by astonishing exactitude, but thinks he does so ‘‘in
order to give to his narrations the appearance of having been
reported by an eye-witness of the events.” 2
Then, above all, the days of Jesus’ Passion. With almost
the precision of a statistician, and with the deep emotion of
the disciple most closely concerned in them, John describes
them faithfully to the minutest details. “ Jesus went forth
over the brook Cedron, and entered into a garden on the
other side. Peter stood at the door without (xviii, 16). The
servants and ministers stood there, who had made a fire of
coals, for it was cold, and warmed themselves; and Peter
stood with them (xviii, 18). It was early when they led Jesus
from Caiphas to the hall of judgement. They themselves
went not in, but Pilate went out to them (xviii, 28, 29). Then
Pilate went into the judgement hall again (xviii, 33); Pilate
went forth again (xix, 4). He entered into the judgement
hall again (xix, 9); He brought Jesus forth, and sat down in
the judgement seat in the place that is called Lithostrotos,
and in Hebrew Gabbatha (xix, 13). And it was the parasceve
of the pasch, and about the sixth hour (xix, 14). The place
where they crucified him was nigh to the city (xix, 20). On
account of the Sabbath—for that Sabbath day was'an especi-
ally solemn one—the bodies ought not to remain on the
crosses (xix, 31). Near by was a garden and in the garden
a sepulchre—a new and unused one; there they buried him
because of the Jews’ preparation day, for the sepulchre was
nigh at hand (xix, 41, 42). The first day of the week, Mary
Magdalen cometh early, when it was yet dark, to the sepulchre
(xx, 1). Mary stood at the sepulchre without (xx, 11). Late
in the evening of that day, the first of the week, when the
doors were shut where the disciples were gathered together
1 ibid., p. 365.
• Le t,me Evangile, 87.


for fear of the Jews, Jesus came, and stood in the midst (xx,
19). And after eight days again his disciples were within;
Jesus cometh, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst”
(xx, 26). 1
Whoever has the least understanding of what history is
feels here its spirit—warm, living and pulsating. The
trembling, painful, sanguinary history of suffering is found
in every verse and every observation. How will the advo-
cate of the allegorical character of the Gospel fight his way
out of this difficulty? To say nothing of the portraiture in
general, how will he deal with the history of the Passion?
It is for him an enigma—a development and culmination of
the didactic poetry found in the Gospel—appealing power-
fully to the heart, yet in reality saying nothing. But the
Passion cannot in the least be interpreted symbolically, either
as a whole or in detail.
The allegorists believe that the discourses of Jesus especi-
ally should be characterized as merely poetical, or didactic
personal creations of the Evangelist, invented for the pur-
pose of ascribing his own ideas to the Saviour.; ‘‘ The
Evangelist does not separate what the historic Christ has
said or done from what he himself makes him say and do.
.. . For us such a procedure would mean a lack of
honesty. . . . Yet the Evangelist is not conscious of this
lack of honesty, because it corresponds to his vague manner
of thinking and his absolute indifference to mere facts.”
Thus speaks Loisy. 2 In other words, owing to his state of
mind, the Evangelist is not responsible for his sins against
loyalty and honesty ! After such a compliment, Loisy, with
a gracious wave of the hand towards the discourses of Jesus,
writes : “ The Evangelist makes Jesus say ”; and with these
words it is supposed to be proved that the discourse of the
Saviour which follows them is not the language of the Lord,
but a lifelike invention of the Evangelist, who puts the words
into the Saviour’s mouth.
Yet the Evangelist gives us also clearly to understand, by
the comments which he adds, that the utterances and dis-
courses reported by him are to be considered as historical.
In regard to the scene in the Temple, for example, the
Evangelist remarks by way of explanation : “ But he spoke
of the temple of his body. When, therefore, he was risen
again from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had
said this; and they believed the scripture and the word
that Jesus had said” (ii, 21, 22). The language used by
Jesus in regard to Lazarus, John explains thus: “ Jesus
spoke of his death, and they thought that he spoke of
the repose of sleep” (xi, 13). At his entry into Jerusalem,
Jesus connects with it a Messianic prophecy of Zacharias;
1 Knabenbauer, ibid., 366.
*Le 4 me Evangile, 891.


whereupon the Evangelist remarks: “ These things his
disciples did not know at the first, but when Jesus was glori-
fied, then they remembered that these things were written of
him, and that they had done these things to him ” (xii, 16).
By means of these and similar 1 explanations John represents
positively the words and discourses of Jesus, quoted by him,
as historical.,
These discourses are not monologues, as we might expect
in an allegorical work. On the contrary, they are interrupted
by objections, refutations, questions and answers. Now it is
the Apostles —the most ardent and zealous of all; now it is
the representatives of the people; or, again, priests and
Pharisees who interfere, turn aside, check or lead on again
the current of his words. (See chapters iii, iv, vi, vii, viii,
xi, xiii and xiv.) Only reality speaks and discourses in this
way.
Loisy, however, naively replies: “ The intervals which
occur during the teachings of the Saviour, such as inter-
ruptions, questions, murmurs and disputes among those
present are merely literary expedients to enliven and make
easier the development of the Johannine thesis.” 2 But one
tries in vain to find in Loisy’s writings any proof for this
incredible assertion. .
Loisy treats also the miracles of Jesus equally lightly. Yet
the narrations of John referring to these, too, evidently bear
the stamp of history: Think only of the miracles—reported
with astonishing clearness and preciseness—which Jesus per-
forms upon the paralytic, the man who was born blind, the
young man of Naim, the daughter of Jairus, and Lazarus.
To this Loisy can only proffer the objection that the entire
biographies of the people healed thus, or brought back from
death, are not reported ! 3 For this reason it is not a
question of actual facts, but only of symbolical representa-
tion !
But whenever the critic really attempts to carry out to its
conclusion the purely symbolical explanation of the miracles,
the whole inadequacy of his method is revealed.
Take, as one example only, the first miracle of Christ—
that of Cana. Loisy maintains that it has no historic char-
acter, and that it is all to be understood allegorically. By
the “ mother of Jesus ” must be understood the synagogue;
by the “ water ” the Old Testament teaching; by the “ wine ”
the blood of Christ; by the “ bridegroom” the Saviour; by
“ bride ” the Christian Church. 4 What, then, do the
stone jars” signify? and Cana? and Capharnaum, whither
Jesus goes immediately after? and what do the “brethren”
and the “disciples” mean, who accompany him? What
I.
7
1 Knabenbauer, ibid.. 167 ff.
3 ibid.. 83.
2 Loisy, id., 86.
4 id., 281-284.


must all that be, if it has no historic sense? “ Scenic
effects,” Loisy thinks; “concrete scenic effects.” But what-
ever he cannot drag into his system is for him “ concrete
scenic effect,” from the day at Cana down to Malchus and
his cousin, who are the “concrete scenic effect” of the
purely symbolic box on the ear 1 delivered by Peter !
Truly nothing more is needed in order to perceive that the
allegorical conception of the Fourth Gospel has broken down,
and that the only correct interpretation of John is the
historic one.
Yet let us first question the Evangelists themselves.
2. The Evangelists.
Did the Evangelists wish to present the real, actual history
of Jesus, or only that history in a legendary garb? And, in
the former event, were they capable of writing the history of
Jesus, just as he lived, without any legendary additions and
misrepresentations? The whole point lies there.
The answer to the first question is given in what has been
already said. The works of the Evangelists themselves, from
the first line to the last, from their first deep, fundamental
idea to their ultimate completion, are so constructed, that no
possibility of doubt remains that these men wish themselves
to be regarded as historians, and their writings as historic-
ally faithful representations.
Luke especially, whose critical ability is most highly prized
by our opponents, and John, to whom, least of all, historical
importance is conceded, both speak most plainly on this
subject. “Forasmuch as many,’’ it is said in the introduc-
tion to Luke’s Gospel, “have taken in hand to set forth in
order a narration of the things that have been accomplished
among us, according as they delivered them unto us, who from
the beginning were eye-witnesses and ministers of the word,
it seemed good to me also, having diligently attained to all
things from the beginning, to write to thee in order, most
excellent Theophilus, that thou mayest know the verity of
those words in which thou hast been instructed ” (Luke i, 1-3).
The determination to write history — pure, unadulterated his-
tory —could not be more definitely stated.
Like Luke, at the beginning of his Gospel, so John, at the
conclusion of his, writes : “Many other signs also did Jesus
in the sight of his disciples, which are not written in this
book; but these are written that you may believe that Jesus
is the Christ, the Son of God, and that, believing, you may
have life in his name (xx, 30, 31 ; xxi, 24). This is the
disciple who giveth testimony of these things and hath written
1 id., 281-841.


these things, and we [the Evangelist and his pupil] know that
his testimony is true ” (xxi, 24). It is evident, therefore, that
the Evangelist wishes to report what eye-witnesses have seen ;
and he himself, as an eye-witness, guarantees the truth and
reality of the facts related.
Moreover, the facts and the testimony of John are, so to
speak, audited and approved by the earliest readers of his
Gospel: “We know that his testimony is true.” And, there-
fore, on these facts and testimony is built up the beatific faith
that Jesus Christ is really and truly the Son of God. All
this proves clearly that John considers himself to be an
historian, and that the reality and actuality of the narratives
contained in his book ought not to be in the least assailed.
It is true, there was a time, and not so long ago either,
when this personal testimony was abruptly rejected, with the
assertion that no reliance is to be placed on the veracity of
the Evangelists. And so the Christian apologist, until a few
years ago, had to be able to prove the honesty of the
Evangelists from their personal character, no less than from
the contents, form and statements of their writings. To-day
the critics have done justice to them, at least in that respect.
In contrast to Reimarus, Baur, and their older as well as
their latest adepts, they now take pride in recognizing the
Evangelists’ universal love of truth.
Even in the case of John, to whom they still obstinately
refuse the rank of an historian, liberal critics reject any
suspicion of deception on his part. Indeed, it is precisely
because they will not, on the one hand, allow him to pass
for an historian, and, on the other, cannot doubt his veracity,
that they take refuge in the desperate hypothesis of “ John
the allegorist ” and “ poet-evangelist.”
The Evangelists, therefore, wish most conscientiously to
report the historic truth about Jesus, his life, deeds and
teaching. They write no line which they do not consider
absolutely correct. They relate no episode in the life of
Jesus, the actuality of which they do not believe. They do
not ascribe to the Saviour one single doctrine which they do
not, with absolute conviction, regard as a part of his teach-
ing. It would be a waste of time to expend more words on
this point.
Quite different, however, is the question : Were the Evan-
gelists capable of writing the history of Jesus? Did they
know the objective truth of the life of Jesus, and were they
qualified subjectively to report it correctly?
The subjective ability to make a suitable report was as
little wanting in the Evangelists as an honest wish to do so.
It is true they had not a high, scientific education 1 and
1 Luke alone “ had an education above the average and an unusual
facility in writing.” Harnack, Lukas der Arzl, 104.


critical precision; but these they did not need. It was not
a matter of solving deep problems, or of extracting the truth
from old bundles of documents, and examining it critically.
The task of the Evangelists was merely to write down per-
fectly concrete deeds, which had been enacted for the most
part in public and in broad daylight, and were of the
greatest simplicity.
Among these even the supernatural deeds and teachings of
Jesus make no exception. Their supernatural character in
no way alters or impairs their natural, outward phenomena.
The Evangelists had, moreover, neither to place a value on
the supernatural element in the miracles of Jesus, nor to
pass judgement on the supernatural element in his teaching.
They merely relate the deeds and words of Jesus. They
simply state, for example, that he caused the blind to see,
instantly stilled a tempest on the lake, called back the dead
to life, etc. For this there is no need either of critical train-
ing or of high intellectual culture. Normal senses, clear
vision, an unprejudiced judgement, practical common sense—
these are the principal things wanted. But these qualities
the Evangelists did possess to a high degree.
Nothing is more unjust than the assertion that they were
overwrought, credulous, and fond of the miraculous. There
is not a trace of fanaticism in their writings. On the con-
trary, we find everywhere calm, sober, passionless concep-
tions and descriptions.
Even where we should certainly expect an admixture of
personal temperament and judgement, they adhere to the
bare delineation of facts. They even relate miraculous acts
of healing, raisings of the dead and marvellous deeds in the
sphere of nature without the least expression of astonish-
ment. They also give accounts of the ill-treatment, abuse
and condemnation of their Master without allowing one word
of indignation or disapproval to pass their lips. They
pourtray even the death and resurrection of their beloved
Master as simply as if in those events they had only the
interest of the observer and narrator. Hence, although they
were not historians in the sense of Thucydides, the father of
critical historical composition, nevertheless they did possess
the most pronounced subjective ability to write down the
facts of the Gospels in accordance with truth.
But were they sufficiently acquainted with these facts?
How far did their objective knowledge extend?
Certainly a complete knowledge of the chronological
sequence and concatenation of events was. not theirs.
Papias, the disciple of John, had already noticed this in
regard to Mark’s Gospel. 1 It is at once evident also in
Matthew and John. Luke wishes, it is true, to “ write in
1 Eusebius, H. E., iii, 39.


order” (Luke i, 3) the facts of the Gospels; yet it is not
probable that he means by this the exact chronological order.
For this reason the Gospels are not historical works in the
strictest sense of the term, and do not offer, therefore, a
real, thorough-going “life” of the Saviour. Indeed, such
an one could not have been written on the basis of the
Gospels.
It is, moreover, clear that the Evangelists do not report
all the words of Jesus with absolute fidelity. Even the
inspiration of the Gospels, according to faith, does not
extend to every word of the text. This limitation of the
idea of inspiration rests upon a law of natural history with
which alone we have to do here—namely, that words cannot
easily be handed down from one age to another without
alteration, even were it only from the first generation to the
second. Some words have, indeed, preserved their imprint
indelibly for centuries, but they form the exception. It
follows from this that we, in many cases, cannot exactly
determine the expressions which our Lord used, especially
when his words are not understood by the individual Evan-
gelists in entire agreement; but the decisive words of Jesus
certainly did stamp themselves on the memories of his hearers
with imperishable fidelity, as we see from the Gospels.
As in regard to single words, so too in respect to indi-
vidual, secondary circumstances, the Evangelists sometimes
differ from one another. This proves that we should not
expect from them an infallibly certain and complete repre-
sentation of the accessory circumstances of historic facts
either by appealing to natural knowledge of the facts, or to
supernatural inspiration.
All this, however, has nothing essentially to do with our
question. We are concerned only to know whether the
Evangelists were well informed about the subject-matter of
the history of Jesus, and about its real facts and the actual
substance of his teaching. That must be answered emphatic-
ally in the affirmative.
In the first place, the last Evangelist, John, whose testi-
mony is most disputed, claims to be an eye-witness. In a
great number of passages in his Gospel also the eye-witness
reveals himself unmistakably. 1
He can expressly state : “ And he that saw it hath given
testimony; and his testimony is true; and he knoweth that he
saith true, that you also may believe ” (John xix, 35). “ That
which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which
we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and
our hands have handled, of the word of life —that we declare
unto you ” (1 John i, 1,3). Even though this ocular obser-
1 Cf. Knabenbauer, Der geschichtliche Charakter des 4 Evangeliums,
1.c., p. 368 ff.


vation may not refer, mathematically, to all the details of
the life of Jesus, it does concern itself with all its essential
events.
Under certain limitations this is true also of Matthew.
True, he was not an Apostle of the first hour, as John was;
and cannot therefore, as we perceive at once from his book,
be appealed to as an eye-witness for the whole Gospel.
Nevertheless, he lived through the most important period
and the most momentous events of the life of Jesus in
company with the Master.
We reach, then, the conclusion that the first Gospel rests
for the most part, and the Fourth Gospel almost entirely, upon
personal experience and ocular observation. And since both
these Gospels contain all the critical events in the history of
Jesus, we know these events themselves substantially from
the reports of veracious eye-witnesses.
As for the other narratives of things which they did not
know from personal experience, they had at their disposal
the oral, individual reports of the mother of Jesus and their
fellow-apostles.
This is wholly true also of Mark and Luke. These did
not themselves belong to the Lord’s circle of disciples, yet
they were for many years in daily and most intimate inter-
course with the Apostles and disciples. They were, therefore,
the best qualified ear-witnesses of the life of Jesus. We know
especially that Mark wrote down in substance the teachings
of Peter; while Luke based his writings, in particular, on the
sermons of Paul. For his history of the Acts of the Apostles,
St Luke made use of the most reliable accounts of numerous
eye-witnesses and of the teacher of the Gentile nations, Paul
himself—to say nothing of the fact that the author also
participated personally in many of the occurrences described.
Moreover, all four Evangelists had also, together with the
oral reports, written documents of the first generation. Luke
expressly tells us this in the words already quoted : “ Many
have taken in hand to set forth in order a narration of the
things that have been accomplished among us, according as
they delivered them unto us, who from the beginning were
eye-witnesses and ministers of the word ” (Luke i, i, 2).
The form of the text of the Gospels also—at least, that
of the synoptists—indicates the use made of such written
sources of information. On this the liberal critics especially
lay great emphasis. With considerable unanimity they assume
that Mark wrote the oldest Gospel. This and a further
document—“ The Sayings ( Logia) of the Lord ” —were, they
think, made use of by Matthew and Luke. Luke has, in
any case, profited by still another original manuscript—
probably the earliest—which was not known to the other two
synoptists. Perhaps also some special material of Matthew,


which we do not find in Mark and Luke, comes from an
unknown written source of a still older time.
We must, however, take great care not to ascribe too
much certainty to these assertions of New Testament literary
criticism, and above all must not attach too much importance
to them. It is remarkable how precipitately mere hypotheses
are credited as assured results, and how thoughtlessly even
some Catholic critics, especially in France, at once adopt the
separation of authorities advocated by the liberals, and
therewith assume 1 the priority of Mark’s Gospel and the
dependency of Matthew and Luke on the second synoptist,
although our traditional chronological order of the Gospels
cannot be weakened by any decisive arguments. 2
Our opponents reveal only too plainly that their standard
for answering the synoptical question is, from first to last,
nothing but the degree of the “Catholicity ” of the Gospels.
Thus, Jiilicher, in his introduction to the New Testament, now
so extensively used, says: “In my opinion the religious
attitude of Matthew turns the scales (in favour of the late
entry of Matthew’s Gospel). .. . He wrote a Catholic
Gospel, and its purely Catholic tone has won for it the first
place among the Gospels. ... To put this genuinely Catholic
Gospel at the head of the writings of the ancient Church is,
however, a most stupendous mistake.” 3 Of this “ unpreju-
diced ” theory of thfe sources of authority, even the Berlin
theologian, • Bernhard Weiss, writes as follows ; “ We shall
progress no further in our attempt to solve the principal
problems in the life of Jesus if we do not, by a study of the
original sources, learn to discriminate between the various
strata of tradition, present in our three oldest Gospels,
instead of construing them according to preconceived
notions.” 4
From the investigations of the origins of the Gospels thus
far made there results with complete certainty only this—that
the Evangelists had some written documents at their disposal.
It remains problematical what form those documents had and
how far they were consulted by the writers of the Gospels.
In any case, it must be characterized as an act of great
injustice that liberal critics remodel our Gospels by re-
ferring to documents which perhaps may never have existed
elsewhere than in the imagination of some modern book-
worm, and the contents of which cannot now be determined
at all. That “notes ”of great antiquity existed antecedently
1 Lagrange, Bulletin de Littirature ecclisiastique, p. 19 (1904); Bat-
iffol, Six lefons sur les Evangiles, p. 65 ff., Bth ed. (Paris, 1907).
2 See Introductions by Kaulen, Danko, Comely, Zahn, Belser, Bon-
kamp.
3 Einleitung in das N. T., p. 265 ff., 6th ed. (Tubingen, 1906).
4 Die Quellen der synoft. Evang. in Texte und Untersuchungen,
edited by Harnack and Schmidt, XXXII, iii, 255 ff. (Leipzig, 1908).


to the Gospels, from which the Evangelists could, when
necessary, draw their material, is of great interest for the
historian. But practically such notes have only a hypothetical
value, because they are not accessible as literary productions.
Compared with these objects of unknown and often imaginary
importance, not only the genuine texts of the Gospels, but
even the scanty traditions of primitive Christian times also,
retain their full validity.
So much the more weighty, therefore, as a source of
authority for the Gospels, is the unanimous testimony of the
primitive Christian Church, which may be truly called the
unwritten, original Gospel. No matter how many oral, or
written, individual testimonies may have been accessible to
the Evangelists, the universal tradition of the earliest Church
was for the Gospel, as a whole, of fundamental importance.
The whole “paleontological” period of Christianity is de-
pendent upon that.
It relies less upon individual oral reports, and still less 1
upon written sketches dating from the first generation, than
upon the universally known public tradition. The constant
admonition in the time of the Apostles 2 was, in effect, the
following ; “ Remember the words of the Lord Jesus. Keep
his word and testimony, his commandment and teaching,
which you have heard from the beginning. Think of the
commandment of the Saviour, brought and delivered unto
you by your Apostles.” (See Acts xx, 35; 1 John ii, 5,7;
2 Peter ii, 21 ; iii, 2.)
Throughout their writings the Evangelists always adhered
closely to this unwritten Gospel of the primitive Church. In
this opinion we are at one with the liberal school; but the
conclusions which they draw from this fact are in opposition
to those which we deduce from it. We see in it the clearest
and fullest proof of the historicity of those portions of the
Gospels which were not written down by eye-witnesses. In
fact, in so far as the Evangelists were not themselves eye-
witnesses of the events which they reported, they deserve
unlimited confidence only because their testimony is the testi-
mony of everyone else, and their representation the represen-
tation of the whole primitive Christian community —the entire
apostolic Church.
Now, since the whole Church, soon after the year a.d. 50,
unanimously held this opinion of Christ, as the Evangelists
tell us was the case, it must have evidently thought and
spoken of him thus also ten or twenty years before; for an
inference from the unanimous opinion of the second genera-
tion to the corresponding opinion of the first generation,
which had seen and experienced all those things with Jesus,
forces itself upon us as an historically necessary consequence.
1 In N. T. only Luke x, 1 ff.
2 Zahn, Einleitung, ii, 158-172.


The Evangelists pourtray correctly the real history of Jesus
precisely because they hold fast to the belief of the Church
of their time. The history of Jesus and the belief of the
earliest Christian Church must essentially agree.
Liberal criticism, however, sets them up in opposition to
each other. Instead of starting from the primitive Church,
in order to reason back thence to the real Christ, it starts
from its own modern views, and applies these, as a standard,
to the measurement of the primitive Church. And because
the difference between them is insurmountable, it does not
reach the conclusion that the liberal portrait of Christ is
unhistorical, but that the portrait of Christ made by the
primitive Church is legendary. This is the Achilles heel of
the whole liberal theology and history. In the following
section we shall examine still more closely the unreliability of
such Gospel criticism.
3. The Contemporaries.
Liberal evolutionary criticism starts from the influence,
growth and development of historical events caused by legend.
“Legend,” says Harnack, “is in many respects the worst
and never resting enemy of true history. It may be com-
pared to the climbing plant, which grows wherever history
grows. Almost contemporaneously with the great event and
the great man legend begins to climb upward, and the greater
those become the more rankly it grows. It surrounds and
encircles elementary events as well as mighty deeds, facts no
less than persons. It sends forth its creepers from tree to
tree, and the higher the trunk the more densely and com-
pactly it is covered. At last, the whole forest is interwoven
with a tangle of tendrils and foliage. One tree after another
is sucked dry and withers away. We see no more the
natural variety of different trees. Everywhere appears merely
the uniform foliage of the climbing plant. Only the insig-
nificant undergrowth on the floor of the forest remains un-
harmed. 1,1 Thus does Harnack with equal beauty and
exactitude describe the rank growth of legend.
Unwritten history, passing on without restraint and grow-
ing wild, becomes in time through the evolutionary working
of the legend actually transformed, and is finally crushed by
it. This may pass for a law of the science of history.
But this law cannot be applied to the Gospels : first, because
the Gospels are the contemporary representations of recent
facts; and, secondly, because their authors were put to the
test of accuracy by their own generation.
The school of sceptical criticism cannot yet entirely forget
1 Reden und Aufsdtze, I, 4, 2nd ed., (Giessen, 1906).


its experiences with the great conclusions of Baur, however
much it is convinced of their inaccuracy. To proclaim the
Gospel history to be a legendary caricature of true history
would indeed have some sense if one placed the origin of the
Gospels between the years 140-170, as the old Tubingen
school did. Then, at least, there would be, relatively, enough
time for the parasitic processes of the legend to have spread
themselves out; although even then only under the supposi-
tion of our opponents that Church tradition had not checked
the formation of legends, but, on the contrary, promoted it.
But we stand no longer under the spell of Baur’s dates for
the Gospels. The last Gospel was already written about the
year 100; and Matthew’s Gospel, according to the calculation
of liberals, was already in existence about the year a.d. 70.
On the ground of “very important observations,” some
critics assume that the Gospel of Luke “ was already com-
posed even at the beginning of the sixties.” 1 The Gospel of
Mark is universally looked upon as still older. Moreover, in
so far as Matthew and John are veracious eye-witnesses, the
starting-point of their Gospels must coincide with the events
described. Where, then, remains the time necessary for
legend-building? How could such legends have so altered
the history of Jesus within a period of from twenty to thirty
years?
At the most, within such a limited amount of time, the
growth of some small, unimportant accretions, suitable for
the formation of legends, might be thought possible. But it
is not a supposition of such things that our opponents present.
It is true, liberal criticism at one moment expresses the
opinion that the original events are only partially trans-
formed by the synoptists, but at another time it conceives
the contents of the Gospel and the entire portraiture of Christ
as being opposed not only to John and Paul, but in an equal
degree also to the synoptists themselves.
The “liberal” Gospel is a Gospel without a revelation,
without miracles, without a Messiah, and without an in-
carnate God—a mere product of modern civilization and
modern humanity—a Gospel without Christ or Christianity.
And now are we to believe that legend, within the space of
one generation, made this journey from the Gospel of the
primitive Church and the Evangelists to the modern
“original” Gospel? Such a supposition belongs to the
domain of fables.
The difficulty cannot be waved aside by paraphrasing the
notion and extent of the Gospel legend-formation, as being
what “ the first generation had experienced with Jesus
Christ ”; or as the “impression which the powerful person-
1 Harnack, Afostelgeschichte, 219 (Leipzig, 1908).


ality of Jesus made on his disciples ”; or as the “ subsequent
effect of the words and experiences of Christ”; or as the
disciples’ estimate of the portrait of their Master; or as
“the history of thoughts about the facts” of the life of
Jesus Christ. 1
However appropriate such a characterization of a real
legend may be, it has no application to the Gospels. The
Evangelists have left to us not their personal experiences
with Christ, nor the impression which he made upon them,
nor the subsequent effects of his words and actions, nor
their estimate of his worth, nor their thoughts about the
facts, but rather the facts, the words, the teaching, and the
life of Christ himself. They do not pourtray the Christ of
experience, but the living Christ. And for that very reason
their representations contain the history of Jesus Christ, and
have nothing to do with legends.
Another consideration which will confirm us in this view
is the checking of the Gospel history and its records by
contemporaries.
Liberal criticism takes no notice whatever of this circum-
stance. It builds up its evolutionary hypothesis with as
much boldness as credulous naivete, but it all rests on—air.
The foundation from which it starts is, in any case, the
supposition that the wild shoots of legend have in perfect
freedom more and more overrun the field of early Christian
history until the Evangelists welded history and legends
together to form the Gospel, and this without the opposition
of anyone; in fact, amid the unanimous applause of the
entire Church of that time. This fundamental supposition of
our opponents does not, however, hold good at all in this
case.
It could at best have done so only if the whole generation
of Christ’s contemporaries, the generation which had known
him, seen him and heard him, had died out with him, and
had given place to another which knew very little positively
about him. But this was not the case. A great number of
those who had known the Saviour, his life and public
career through daily experience, lived through the subse-
quent period also, down to the writing and publication of
the Gospels.
Hegesippus, in his Memorabilia (written about a.d. 180),
relates that “ Simeon, the son of Cleophas, who was of the
tribe of David,” suffered martyrdom at the beginning of the
second century, at the age of 120 years. Up to this time,
adds Hegesippus, the Church of Jerusalem had been guided
by men “ who had been privileged to hear with their own
1 Harnack, Reden und Aujsatze, ii, 10 f., 22 f.; Wesen des Christen-
turns, 6 i.


ears the divine truth.” 1 The apologist, Quadratus, 2 and
Papias of Hierapolis, 3 affirm that some of those who were
healed by Christ and were raised by him from the dead lived
until the time of Hadrian (117-138). When, therefore, the
Gospel of John appeared the generation of the contemporaries
of Jesus had not yet died out, and when the synoptists wrote,
a few decades before, those who had been of the same age
as Christ, and were still living, were in the sixties. Of the
somewhat younger contemporaries and hearers of the Saviour,
considering the tenacity of the Jewish race, probably about
half had survived ( cf. 1 Cor. xv, 6). Whether they were
believers or unbelievers, they could not possibly have allowed
the real history of Jesus to be so caricatured by grotesque
legends, and these to be circulated everywhere as a true
Gospel.
I say expressly “caricatured by grotesque legends,” for
in reality it might have been still worse. According to our
enemies’ supposition, the mere man, Jesus, sprang at a bound
before the eyes of his believing contemporaries into the
position of a worker of miracles, the Lord of life and death,
and a pre-existing supernatural being—yes, even to an actual
God, such as we find him, in the fifties, in the writings of
Paul, in the belief of the Church and almost simultaneously
in the Gospels. And everyone—Evangelists as well as their
readers and hearers—believed in this transformation; the
Gospel was to them neither poetry nor deception ; they wanted
to deceive neither others nor themselves; they accepted the
masquerade as sacred truth, and regarded the legend of the
Son of God as the true history of him whom they had known
as a mere man. But, then, surely this whole Christian society
would have been crazy, to use the mildest expression admis-
sible. Yet that is still the least difficulty.
If It were merely a case of some elaborated system, some
phantastic transformation, or a deification of the portrait of
Jesus, on the ground of “inward sentiments,” “impres-
sions,” “feelings,” and “soul-experiences,” as Harnack’s
school imagines, all would still be relatively comprehensible.
But, as has been already remarked, the evolution of the
Church’s faith was accomplished in company with, and by
reason of, external, tangible facts and obvious, manifold and
well-known history. The time, the scene, the circumstances
of the superhuman life and activity of Jesus, and the persons
participating in them, are characterized in minutest detail.' 1
It was, for example, in Corozain, Bethsaida and Capharnaum
1 cf. Gebhardt and Harnack, Texte und Untersuchungen, V, ii, 170
3 Eusebius, H. E., iii, 32. 2 id., iv, 3.
(Leipzig, 1889).
4 cf. Boese, Die Glatibwiirdigkeit unserer Evangelien, 114 (Freiburg,
18,5).


that his divine power of performing miracles was proved in
broad daylight and in the presence of all the people. In the
synagogue at Capharnaum, still used by the Jews, he drove
out the devil (Mark i, 21 ff.). In the house of Simon, whose
inmates were still there, he cured Peter’s mother-in-law of
her fever. To this house, on the day before the Sabbath, the
people brought their sick, and he healed them (Matt, viii, 14
ff.). Under circumstances which are minutely described he
also healed the man sick of the palsy and the servant of the
centurion, and raised from the dead the daughter of Jairus,
the ruler of the synagogue (Matt, viii, 5 ff.).
Would it have occurred to the community of Christians to
invent these and similar details, and would the Evangelists
have had the audacity to record them, if they had been
wholly or even partially invented? Must not the persons
appealed to, as witnesses, have disclosed the falsity of these
legends? And there were among them not merely believers
in Christ, but also enemies of Christ—individuals, groups
and entire villages.
Capharnaum and its neighbouring cities are reminded of the
miracles worked in them, and the severest accusations, re-
proaches and condemnations are on that account pronounced
upon them : “ Woe to thee, Corozain ! woe to thee, Beth-
saida ! for if in Tyre and Sidon had been wrought the miracles
that have been wrought in you, they had long ago done
penance in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, it shall
be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judge-
ment, than for you. And thou, Capharnaum, shalt thou be
exalted up to heaven? Thou shalt go down even unto hell.
For if in Sodom had been wrought the miracles that have
been wrought in thee, perhaps it had remained unto this day.
But I say unto you that it shall be more tolerable for the land
of Sodom in the day of judgement than for thee ” (Matt, xi,
21 ff.).
And as the Gospels reproach the country towns and
country people in Galilee, so do they upbraid also the leaders
of the nation at Jerusalem and the Scribes and Pharisees for
their unbelief, and the judicial murder which they had com-
mitted in the case of Jesus, although the latter had by his
miracles proved himself to be the legitimate Messiah. It
would, however, have been madness to write thus, if those
reports of his miracles and many other statements had rested
on nothing but fraud. The accused party-leaders, who were
well acquainted with the life and deeds of the hated Nazarene,
and who closely and scrutinizingly examined every report
concerning him, would have needed only to point out the
deception to be able, at one blow, to strike down these annoy-
ing accusers and their followers.
Instead of this, they had to hear, day after day, how this


Gospel was preached, both before and after its committal to
writing-, in the public streets and squares, and how the re-
proach of the judicial murder of the Messiah and the Son of
God was continually repeated anew. Yet not one of the
Pharisaical leaders in the controversy dared to give the lie to
these preachers and thus save his own honour and that of
his party and the nation. It is true, the Apostles were sum-
moned from time to time to appear before the tribunal, and
were commanded to keep silent (Acts iv, 5, 27 ff.; 2 Tim. iv,
9 ff.). But the charge was never brought against them that
their preaching and their Gospel did not coincide with the
actual history of Jesus.
This silence on the part of contemporaneous enemies is the
most eloquent defence of Gospel history; and we may add
that the liberal critics of to-day give their consent to this
compulsory vindication.
4. The Enemies.
The Gospels themselves, their authors and the contempor-
aries of the Evangelists emphatically contradict the supposi-
tion that the historical books of the New Testament are
merely legends, in which historic facts are mixed up with
romantic additions and pious embellishments. Consequently,
it is not the Gospels, but the liberal theories about them,
that are unhistorical. The more furious the enemy’s attack,
the more impressively does the superior historical power of
the Gospels prove its failure. We need not add anything
more to what has been already said, since all the objections
raised against the reliability of the Gospel history are refuted.
Yet there still remains unsolved the psychological problem,
especially persistent at the present time, How comes the
historical-critical school to put upon its programme for the
complete investigation of the Gospels and for the entire con-
ception of primitive Christianity the “ legendary hypothesis,”
which is, scientifically, simply untenable? Only the solution
of this problem will bring about full understanding both of
our foregoing defence of the Gospels and of our opponents’
criticism of them. Only through the solution of this problem
shall we succeed in perceiving that all that has been thus far
said was only a skirmish on the outer battle lines, while
fundamentally a much deeper intellectual conflict, based on
principle, is going on.
It would be, in fact, incomprehensible if the historical-
critical school persisted in misunderstanding the Gospel in
consequence of such frivolous pretexts as those which it
puts forward, and it would be most unjust for us to doubt
the scientific rectitude of so many able men. Some of them,
and above all Harnack, have rendered great services to the
history of primitive Christianity, as we have repeatedly


acknowledged, and in this connection most gladly recognize
again.
The criticism of former times attached great importance to
the fact that the primitive Christian tradition in regard to
history and faith reached its full development only after one,
or even two, centuries; that the most diverse peoples and
lands contributed to its contents; and that, in consequence,
old Christian literature, which asserts the contrary, is abso-
lutely unreliable. To-day, the “historical-critical school”
concedes that both the outer frame and the historical and
doctrinal tradition originating within it have been correctly
outlined by primitive Christianity. “ During the years from
a.d. 30 to 70, in Palestine, and more particularly in Jerusalem,
practically everything came into being and took place, which
subsequently underwent development.” 1 “ The chronological
framework, in which tradition has put the documents together,
is correct in all the principal points, from the Epistles of Paul
to Irenseus, and compels the historian to take no account of
all the hypotheses about the historical course of things which
deny this framework.” 2
In particular the “retrograde movement to tradition” is
more and more favourable to the age, authenticity and
reliability of the Gospels, owing to the historical researches
of men of all camps. Harnack announces that even in the
sphere of primitive Christianity the “ essential truth of
tradition (a few insignificant exceptions left out of considera-
tion) will, in a few years, acquire universal importance.” 3
In a word, because modern criticism has bethought itself
again of strictly historical research, and in proportion as it
remains true to the historic method of investigation, it is
coming more and more to the perception that the Gospels
and the tradition concerning them are right.
But why, then, does it not, after all this, accept these
historical books as they are? Why does it raise again in the
last court of appeal such objections to their reliability that
all previous decisions in the case are once more made illusory?
Why does it declare, in spite of the Gospels and their authors
and contemporaries, that the New Testament reports are for
the most part legendary creations?
For the simple reason that the Gospel history opposes the
modern liberal view. Whenever this view comes in collision
with Gospel history, the latter is measured by the standard
of the former, and so historical research is subordinated to
philosophic presuppositions.
The Gospel claims to rest essentially upon divine revelation.
Liberal rationalism, “ warmed up with fresh flavour, and
1 Harnack, Lukas der Arzt, iv.
2 Harnack, Chronologic der altchr. Lit., I, x.
3 ibid.


tempered by indistinctness ” (Schnehen), wishes to explain
every religion, the Christian included, by the purely natural
evolution and development of humanity. There is no question
of a revelation of God to men, or of any higher intervention
of divine power in human history. Only faith —blind, legend-
loving credulity—can dream of a revelation and the super-
natural.
It is this thoroughly prejudiced philosophy of history and
this historical method alone which have produced the evolu-
tionary criticism of the Gospels. So long as the text of the
Gospels presupposes nothing supernatural, it is considered
historical; but in so far as it speaks “ supernaturally,” it is
legendary. Either supernatural or natural—that is the start-
ing-point of sceptical criticism. According to this biassed
scheme the credibility of the Gospels is finally settled.
Renan confesses openly : “ The question of the supernatural
forms the basis of every discussion about matters of this
kind. . . . That the Gospels are partly legendary is evident,
since they are full of miracles and the supernatural. . . .
Not because it has been proved to me that the Gospels are
undeserving of an absolute faith in them, but because they
relate miracles, do I say : the Gospels are legends; it is pos-
sible that they contain history, but not everything in them is
historic. A rapid work of transformation was effected in the
first twenty or thirty years after the death of Christ, and this
imprinted everywhere on his biography the characteristics of
a legend. 1,1
In this respect the liberal school has never got beyond
Renan. It is true it does not acknowledge it with such
smiling cynicism as he uses. It is busily occupied, rather, in
covering its philosophical subconsciousness with rich his-
torical-critical drapery. Yet it would protest energetically
should one attribute to it any other than the purely natural-
istic conception and practical criticism of the Gospel. 2 Every
“ absolutely marvellous, wholly incomprehensible event . . .
and everything inscrutable, shows itself, in advance, accord-
ing to its subject-matter, to be dogmatic legend,” and must
be cut out, as a legendary excrescence. 3
Thus and similarly the watchword goes through all the
ranks of “theologians engaged in historical research.” The
starting-point of the legendary theory is, therefore, the evolu-
tionary view of life — a philosophical principle. This prin-
ciple is now, along the whole line, applied to the Gospels,
and the Gospel’s texts and facts are judged in accordance
with it. The critics curtly declare, with Harnack, that they
“ frequently cannot accept the representations and explana-
1 Vie de Jims, vi, ix, xlviii, xci, 13th ed.
2 cf. Harnack, Lukas der Arzt, iii f.
3 Bousset, Jesus. 2, 5, 3rd ed. (Tubingen, 1907).


tions of the first reporters.” 1 That is enough to characterize
a text or a fact as legendary.
Harnack’s Berlin colleague, Bernhard Weiss, himself
severely criticizes this method of procedure against the
Gospels with the words : “ At the root of many new repre-
sentations of the life of Jesus lies the idea that one must, in
order to comprehend correctly the essence of Christianity,
go back from the apostolic doctrine of Christ to the teaching
of Jesus himself ... in order then to cut out what may
have been formed first in the apostolic teaching under the
influences of contemporaneous history from descriptions of
the person and the words of Christ. To a real historical-
critical student especially, the complete hopelessness of this
undertaking must be at once evident. . . . The eliminating
process, attempted by criticism, is begun in accordance with
thoroughly subjective points of view and philosophical pre-
suppositions which are entirely foreign to historical investi-
gation.” 2
Prof. Wilhelm Wrede, certainly a good liberal investi-
gator, thus characterizes the historical method of his school:
“ Features which are considered incredible are cut out of the
text, and the sense is altered so that it may become historic-
ally usable” —from the rationalistic standpoint, of course—
“ that is, something is, substituted in the report which the
author never thought of, and this is given out as its historical
purport . . . although no one ever asks whether the real
essence of the report is not thereby destroyed. . . . This is
why so many judgements based upon ‘ taste ’ abound. The
number of arbitrary psychological interpretations of the
words, facts and contexts of the Gospels in literature is
legion. . . . Two things are common to all these manifold
attempts—the taking away of parts and the making of new
interpretations. . . . Every investigator proceeds finally in
such a way that he retains of the words handed down to us
just what can be adapted to his own construction of the facts
and his conception of historical possibility. Everything else
he rejects. The fact that the words lose thus more or less
the sense in which they were transmitted to us gives him
little concern.” 3
H. J. Holtzmann confesses : “ That there is justification for
such a charge cannot be doubted. Psychological suppositions,
1.
8
1 Harnack, Lukas der Arzt , iv. In Gegenwart, No. i of 1901, it is
interesting to watch E. von Hartmann balancing accounts with Har-
nack’s Wesen des Christentums —“ to show that even to-day an historico-
critical theologian of the highest impartiality is unfaithful to critical
methods and evolutionary viewpoints as soon as he comes to the teaching
of Jesus.” E. von Hartmann, Das Christentum des N . T., x (Sachsa,
2 Das Leben Jesu, i, it, 4th ed. (Stuttgart u. Berlin, 1902).
3 Das Messiasgeheimnis in den Evangelien, 2 ff., 85 ff. (Gottingen,
1901).


amateurish fancies, and adventurous guessing play almost as
fatal a part in all this literature, as do efforts to ‘ harmonize
the Gospels ’ from dogmatic motives and the violent treat-
ment of the authorities.” 1
The ultra-radical pastor, Albrecht Kalthoff, adds: ‘‘The
numerous passages in the Gospels, which must be struck
out by this liberal theology, stand on precisely the same
literary level as those passages out of which theology
constructs its historic Jesus.” 2
The separation of the historic from the legendary features
of the Gospels rests, therefore, on nothing but personal
choice, “ The transpositions and new connections made
are as numerous as the internal and external perversions of
the text.” 3 Most of the representatives of the so-called
modern theology, in making their excerpts, use the shears
according to the critical method loved by David Strauss :
that is, “ The mythical element in the Gospel is to be cut
out, and what remains is to form the historical core.” 4
In fact, even the most zealous adherents of the liberal
school confess that the Gospel criticism of the last few years
is nothing else than a return to David Strauss 5 and F.
Christian Baur , 6
In regard to W. Wrede, the latest renowned representative
of the “ historical-critical ” line of thought, the following
complaint is made by a modern theologian : “ We must, to
our regret, state it as a fact that the latest attempt to test
the material of Gospel history in regard to its historical value
leads us again at once into the track even of Bruno Bauer.” 7
Schweitzer declares the same thing in reference to the
criticisms of Otto Schmiedel and Hermann von Soden :
“ They run straight into the hands of Bruno Bauer.” 8
That is not quite correct, since the liberal school wishes to
save for the most part the external compass of the Gospels;
but it is true in so far as this school empties the Gospels of
much of their inner contents, denies all that is supernatural
and miraculous in them, and explains this as a legendary,
“mythical” ingredient. But now, according to Pfleiderer’s
own confession, “ the mythical and the possibly historical
features of the text are so inseparably interwoven that the
1 Das messianische Bewusstsein Jesu, 44 (Tubingen, 1907).
2 Das Christusproblem, 20.
3 Schweitzer, Von Reimarus zu Wrede, 294.
4 Kalthoff, Das Christus-problem , 27
5 W. Brandt, Die evang. Geschichte und der Ursprung des Christen-
turns, x (Leipzig, 1893).
6 Schmiedel, Hauptprobleme der Leben-Jesu-Forschung, vi, 2nd ed.
(Tubingen, 1906).
7 H. Zimmermann, Der historische Werth der dltesten t/berliejerung
von der Geschichte Jesu im Markusevangelium, 1 ££. (Leipzig, 1905).
8 Von Reimarus zu Wrede, 303.


two cannot be divided from each other without depriving the
latter also of their definite significance and retaining only an
indistinct shadow.” 1
Here, then, we really reach the final result of the liberal
criticism of the Gospels : “ Almost everywhere we are left
standing helplessly in the midst of uncertainties and sup-
positions.” 2 In his search for the “ Gospel in the Gospel,”
Harnack writes : “ We ought not to be like the child who,
in his attempt to find the heart of a plant, kept stripping it
of its leaves until he had nothing more left in his hand, and
was forced to perceive that precisely the leaves were the
heart itself.” 3 Such, however, has been his own experience
and that of his school. They thought they could tear out of
the Gospel one leaf after another, and transfer them to the
account of legend-formation, without detriment to the
Gospel’s heart. What one critic, however, for personal
reasons allowed to remain, another, just as autocratically,
cut away, until finally the whole was stripped bare.
Let us recapitulate. The starting point, the real strong-
hold from which liberal criticism proceeds and finally pro-
nounces our Gospels to be legends, is the rationalistic and
agnostic view. So long as the historical-critical school pro-
ceeds historically, and so long as modern historians occupy
themselves with history, they recognize more and more the
sterling value of the Gospels. Only in so far as they depart
from the strictly historical method of research does the
legendary theory gain importance. It is, however, an act
of violence to science to destroy a purely historic question
by means of a philosophical principle. Even if this philo-
sophical principle were not false, the procedure of liberal
criticism would be, nevertheless, unscientific.
The procedure of the legendary theory is no less unhistorical
and arbitrary than its starting point. Liberal criticism pro-
ceeds always in the very error which it wishes to shift off
upon the Gospels. According to its theory, the authors of
the Gospels allowed themselves unconsciously to be influenced
by the views of the contemporaneous Church in such a
way that they painted over the golden ground of objective
history, with the variegated colours of subjective impres-
sions. Yet in reality this reproach falls precisely upon liberal
criticism.
It starts out from its subjective view, constructs according
to that the modem “Gospel in the Gospel,” and finally pro-
duces a Gospel history which changes its hues to suit all
shades of the modern world of scepticism and of the personal
scholarly ideas of individual critics. As the radical W. von
1 Protest. Monatschrift, 172 (1906),
2 Bousset, Jesus, 9, 3rd ed. (Tubingen, 1907).
3 I Vesen des Christentums, 9.


Schnehen remarks ; “ As a permanent and essential nucleus
of the Gospel, practically nothing is of value which was held
to be most important by Jesus himself or his disciples—no,
only that is designated a ‘nucleus,’ which appears acceptable
to the theological freethought of to-day, or to which a new
interpretation can be easily given.” 1
According to this, not the Gospel of the Evangelists, but
the Gospel of liberal criticism, is, in the full sense of the
word, a romantic and fantastic pourtrayal of the history of
Christ and of primitive Christianity. “ All the latest literature
(of the school of Ritschl) about the life of Jesus can be
looked upon as the climax of theological romanticism, which
considers its ideals realized, and strives to prove that the
historic Jesus was the realization of this ideal.” 2
The final result of liberal Gospel-criticism is such that it
invalidates the criticism itself. In the name of historical
research it declares at first that the Gospels are in substance
trustworthy, and that “ there are no gross interpolations of
a later date. Only here and there we see reflected in them
the conditions prevailing in the primitive Church.” Finally,
however, the Gospels and their contents are, in the name of
its philosophical point of view, so transformed, that “ the
newly found presentation of the life of Jesus produces an
impression almost the opposite of that which the description
of our Evangelists makes.” 3 This contradiction between
the beginning and the end of liberal criticism is the sharpest
conceivable condemnation of that criticism. Like all other
attempts to explain the Gospel, without the essential historical
truth of the events related in it, so this one also shows itself
to be a hopeless task.
We have now reached the conclusion of our investigation
of the Gospels. We have had the experience of everyone
who is laying foundations. The work and effort are always
greater than they at first seemed. Yet, after all, not only
the foundation, but also a good part of the edifice itself is thus
built.
So is it with the composition of a defence of Christianity.
The Gospels form its foundation. When the authenticity
and credibility of these historical books are once established,
the apologist moves on firm ground. He has then the right
unhesitatingly to draw his proofs from every part of the
Gospels for the solution of all the problems which present
themselves. He is, therefore, freed from the trouble of
always examining anew the foundations, as he passes from
question to question and from text to text. The Gospels are
for him, in their full extent and in the strictest sense of the
word, historical authorities and scientific evidence.
1 Der moderne fesuskultus, 34, 2nd ed. (Frankfurt a. M., 1906).
2 Ed. von Hartmann, Das Christentum des N. 7'., 16.
3 M. Kahler, Dogmatische Zeiljragen, ii, 116.


If we, however, in subsequent pages now and then
demonstrate again in particular the reliability of certain
individual parts or passages of the Gospels; if we lay greater
stress upon the synoptic Gospels than on the Gospel of
John; if we finally give more prominence in the Gospels to
the words and personal testimony of Jesus than to the testi-
mony of the Evangelists, we do so for two reasons. First,
in order to meet the objections and prejudices of the critics
in a peaceful way, and to dispel them; and secondly, to show
that the enemies of Christianity exert themselves to.no pur-
pose in appealing from the unity of the Gospel text to
isolated textual difficulties, from the synoptic Gospels to
the Gospel of John, and from the Evangelists to Jesus Christ
himself.
With this acceptance of the results of the affirmative
criticism of the Gospels, the groundwork of the defence of
Christ and Christianity is, in a certain sense, completed.
Whoever comes to the Gospels with the firm conviction that
he has before him genuine and entirely trustworthy sources
of history will at once find in them also convincing motives
for the Christian faith.
Thus and in no other way did the Christians of the first
century and of all subsequent time, the learned and the un-
learned, come to a belief in the truth of the Gospels.
To-day also the Gospel still retains its divine power.
But it is necessary to read and hear it with an unprejudiced
mind, an honest will, and a prayerful heart. With an un-
prejudiced mind; for whoever is pledged to a preconceived
view, and takes that as a standard by which to judge of the
Gospel, will naturally become confused in regard to it. With
an honest will, to seek Christ and the truth of Christianity,
and to accept them when found; for faith is not alone a
matter of the understanding, but fully as much, and indeed
in a higher degree, an affair of the will. With a prayerful
heart; for faith must, above all, be considered as a precious
grace from God, “coming down from the Father of lights,
from whom cometh every best and perfect gift ” (James i, 17).




PART II
THE MESSIANIC CONSCIOUSNESS
OF CHRIST




INTRODUCTORY
jA FTER liberal criticism has fashioned the Gospels
to suit its purposes, it sketches approximately the
/ % following portrait of the person of the Saviour.
/ The man of Nazareth appears, first of all, as a
man among his fellow-men. He is nothing
more, and claims to be no more. There is no trace of his
having looked upon himself as the Messiah, expected by the
Jewish people, or of his having had even a faint idea of the
Messianic vocation. He only knew himself already very
early in life as a “Son of God,” that is, as a human being
specially favoured and endowed by God. By means of this
consciousness he came, either naturally or in consequence of
self-suggestion, gradually to the conviction of his Messianic
mission and dignity. He did not, however, yet dare to come
out openly as the Messiah and to declare himself as such.
Only at the end of his life, and especially before his judges,
did he energetically declare himself to be the Messiah-King,
and went to death for the conviction that he would come
again, in order to establish his Messianic kingdom.
Overpowered by the’ force of his words and personality,
the first disciples and the believers of the first century
idealized the portrait of the Saviour. They promulgated the
assertion that Jesus would not only unfold the spiritual
activity of the Messiah, at his second coming, but that he
had already unfolded it in his earthly life, which was a matter
of history. Yes, not only his life, but his death also was a
Messianic deed. He had died in order to redeem the world
from sin and spiritual bondage. Moreover, the Redeemer
had already existed previously, before his earthly life, in
heaven with God, and after his death had risen from the
dead, to return to his heavenly Father.
From this assertion to the complete deification of Jesus
had then been only a step. This step also has been taken
unquestioningly. The claims of the Saviour to be a child of
God have been interpreted physically and metaphysically,
and he has accordingly been declared to be the incarnate,
consubstantial Son of God.
In the synoptic Gospels, it is said, are still found trifling
additions showing the traces of such a retouching of the
historical portrait of Christ. But this process had already
made great progress in the faith of the Church of that time.
Paul has seen to it that the theology and christology thus
formed were practically and theoretically established and
developed. The imaginative formation of the faith, freely


exercised in the second and third generations of Christians,
did the rest, until the development of christological dogma
reached its conclusion in the writings of John.
This, in a few sentences, is the portrait of Christ as drawn
by Protestant liberalism as well as by Catholic Modernism.
Both consider this conception of him the only scientific one.
But while the Protestant school consistently condemns the
Christ of faith as a caricature, the Modernists, who call
themselves Catholic, utter the incomprehensible absurdity
that faith has, positively, or at least possibly, idealized the
historical portrait of Jesus, and has been right in doing so.
The honest searcher after truth, however, can have nothing
to do with such ambiguity. Either the Christ of faith is
identical with the Christ of historical science, or he is wholly
an illusion. Either the Messiah and the Son of God —and
about these two essential elements of christology the entire
question turns —proves himself to be a real manifestation of
history, or he cannot be for us an object of faith and convic-
tion. For faith holds firmly that its portrait of Christ is
based upon history, and agrees essentially with history.
Briefly, therefore, it is a question whether the Gospels and
other early Christian documents, which we have come to
know as reliable sources of information about the historical
life of Jesus, represent the Saviour as the Messiah and the
Son of God in the sense adopted by faith, or not. • We
should have a perfect right to answer this llfe-or-death
question for Christianity by appealing to all the declarations
of the above-mentioned sources, whether they are made
directly by Christ himself or by the disciples. For our line
of argument to prove the reliability of the Gospel sources
reaches its climax precisely in the evidence that the views
and reports of the Evangelists are not to be regarded as the
expressions of a faith at variance with history, but as thor-
oughly authentic reports, which are in accord with history.
Nevertheless, because our opponents are always hunting
out in the views of the disciples infiltrations of the later faith
of the Church, and appeal from them to the testimony of
Jesus to himself, it is expedient to deal with his artifice of
liberal criticism. What Christ has thought of himself and
said of himself must in any case be decisive in solving the
problem of his Messiahship and divinity. We take our stand,
therefore, first of all, on the direct consciousness of Jesus and
his testimony to himself, on the utterances critically con-
ceded as certain, which Jesus personally made regarding his
Messiahship and divinity. Moreover, provided, especially in
the inquiry into Christ’s consciousness of divinity, the Apostles
and disciples also are admitted as witnesses, that can happen
only in so far as their views may be traced back again directly
to Christ.


The problem of the Messiahship, which we first encounter
here, is a life-or-death question for Christianity. It is true,
among freethinking theologians, there are not wanting
those who would willingly give up the point of the Messiah-
ship with no fear that thereby Christianity would lose any-
thing. 1 Such a view, however, is comprehensible only from
the standpoint of a Christianity without Christ. For one
who does not adopt this singular standpoint the Messiah-
ship of Jesus is of central importance. Not only the believ-
ing representatives of supernatural Christianity, but also
good liberal partisans of a purely natural, evolutionary
Christianity are agreed in this, that “ if Jesus did not regard
himself as the Messiah that means the death-blow to
the Christian faith.” 2 “The name ‘Messiah’ includes the
assertion of the pre-eminence of Christianity . . . and con-
tains the certainty of a salvation to be found at most in Jesus;
hence Christianity will never give up this thought. . . .” 3
“ For what can ‘ Christ ’ mean other than the religion of
Christ, whether it be of Christ or by Christ? ‘ Christ ’ is,
however, really the translation of ‘ Messiah.’ ” 4
We understand thus why the Messiahship of Jesus stands
in the very front of modern research into the life and charac-
ter of Christ. A veritable flood of books and treatises about
the Saviour’s Messianic consciousness and testimony to him-
self has been poured out over the literary world in recent
times. It already needs real courage to toil through all these,
and yet the number still increases from year to year.
And just as the fulfilment of the Messianic hopes is a life-
or-death question for Christianity, so was the Messianic hope
the very heart of Judaism. The whole Old Testament drew
its vitality from the Messianic prophecy. The expectation
of the Messiah and the prospect of the Redeemer of Israel
formed in particular, shortly before the commencement of the
Christian era, the only great hereditary property of Judaism.
Everything else Israel had at this time wholly or nearly
lost. Its political freedom and independence were ended.
Since the year 63 b.c. the city of Jerusalem had been in
Roman hands. Twenty-three years later Herod of Idumea
1 Thus Harnack, Das Wesen des Christentums, 81-89 ( I 9°°) > K- Steck,
in Protestantische Monatshefte, 91 (1903); J. Wellhausen, Israelitische
und judische Geschichte, p. 380 (1907); Das Evangelium Marci, p. 71
(1903); Ed. von Hartmann, Das Christentum des Neuen Testaments, no
(1905); O. Frommel, Die Poesie des Evangeliums fesu, 150 (1906);
0. Kluge, Die Idee des Priestertums in Israel-fuda und im Urchristen-
tum, 40 (1906); A. Deissmann, Evangelium und Urchristentum in
Beitrdge zur Weiterentwicklung der christlich. Religion, 107.
2 Albrecht Schweitzer, Das Messiantdts- und Leidensgeheimnis, eine
Skizze des Lebens Jesu, vi (1901).
3 Oskar Holtzmann, Das Messiasbewusstsein Jesu und seine neueste
Bestreitung, 25 (1902).
1 H. J. Holtzmann, Das mcssianisehe Bewussisein Jesu, 1 (1907).


ascended the throne of David. The national temple stood
under the dominion of the Romans; the Jewish people paid
to Roman emperors the interest and taxes due to Jehovah;
the sons of God were conscripted into the legions of the
pagans and forced to daily defilements and to participation
in unlawful abominations. Nor was it better in the sphere
of spiritual religion. The narrow, statutory system of rab-
binical theology had replaced the elevating religious teaching
of the Old Testament. The learned Rabbis had, by their
eternal fault-finding, not only taken the spirit completely out
of the service of the Law, but had also in part deformed its
letter, and in part enveloped it with so thick a hull that the
original kernel could no longer be discerned. Everything
was ruined. 1
But Israel did not forget her Messianic vocation. All the
Jews looked with unfaltering confidence for the Messiah, in
whom their fathers had already believed, and whose portrait
and appearance the Prophets had delineated in ever clearer
outlines. The rabbinical interpretation of the Law had even
increased this longing still more powerfully. The writings
of the New Testament, as well as the oldest literature of the
Synagogue, point out to us the impatient expectation of the
Messiah prevalent among the Israelites contemporary with
Christ. The history of the Jewish war and of the destruction
of Jerusalem show that people ran after every phantom of
the so-called Messiahs, so thoroughly convinced were they of
the nearness of their Redeemer. For the fulness of time
had come. All the prophecies ran out about the reign of
Augustus.
Then suddenly came the news that in Bethlehem in the
land of Juda the “Messiah,” the son of David, the
anointed of the Lord, had been born—the light to enlighten
the Gentiles and the honour of the people of Israel. The
annunciation, the birth, the first years of the child Jesus are
surrounded by a garland of wonderful events and heavenly
testimonials, which alone exclude every doubt that the child
of Bethlehem, so long anticipated, was the divinely sent
Messiah. 2
This Gospel of the childhood of Jesus is rejected by liberal
critics simply because, in consequence of its supernatural
contents, it does riot agree with the philosophical views of
that school of criticism. Reasons of an exegetical-historical
nature are said to oppose the credibility of the Gospel of
Christ’s youth. His enemies content themselves with point-
ing out the supernatural and miraculous elements in it in
order simply to pronounce the verdict: “We have no
1 See H. Felder, Die Krisis des religiosen Judentums zur Zeit Chrisli
(Stans, iqoj).
2 See the first chapters of Matthew and Luke.


historical information about the childhood and youth of
Jesus, for what the Gospels of Matthew and Luke relate of
them is nothing but religious legends with no historical worth
whatever —all that belongs to the domain of pious myth, the
origin of which must be explained by the faith of the
Church.” 1 In the light of unprejudiced historical research
the statements of the first and third Gospels concerning the
youth of Jesus must be recognized as, historically, wholly
unobjectionable representations.
Jesus, however, wraps himself in silence even after these
revelations —with the exception of his unique appearance,
when twelve years old, in the temple—until the day when he
publicly enters upon his Messianic vocation and begins to
bear witness to it.
1 Otto Pfleiderer, Die Entstehung des Christentums, 61, 93 (Miin-
chen, 1905).


CHAPTER I
THE FACT OF CHRIST’S MESSIANIC
CONSCIOUSNESS
I.— The Messianic Testimony of Jesus to himself in
General.
FORMER thorough-going rationalists dealt sum-
marily with the testimony of the Saviour to himself
as the Messiah. In the good old days when David
Friedrich Strauss saw in the Gospels only a collec-
tion of legends and fables, which originated long
after Christ’s death, and when Ferd. Christian Baur ascribed
the historical writings of the New Testament, all and singly,
to a date far in the second century, it was the custom to
reject every proof of Messianic consciousness, and in general
every objectionable text of Scripture, with a wave of the hand
and the simple statement : “ That is not an utterance of the
Lord; that is a later addition.” We are, it is true, accus-
tomed also even now to hear such forcible language from
many a “historical-critical” investigator. But it finds no
longer such a ready acceptance as formerly, since they them-
selves now concede that the synoptic Gospels were com-
posed soon after the middle of the first century and even by
Matthew, Mark and Luke. Since the commencement of this
“ retrograde movement ” of Gospel criticism the denial of the
Messianic consciousness of Jesus has been for the most part
characteristic only of those radical controversialists who, not-
withstanding all the signs of the times, have still learned
nothing from, and forgotten nothing of, the precipitous
collapse of rationalistic and historical criticism. Only thus
is it explicable that, after the example of Bruno Bauer,
Strauss, Volkmar, and A. Jakobsen, many radical critics of
recent times, such as A. Loman 1 and A. Bruins 2 in Holland,
E. Havet 3 in France, James Martineau 4 in England, G. L.
Cary 5 and Nathaniel Schmidt 6 in America, P. de Lagarde 7
and Meinhold 8 in Germany, dispute the Messianic conscious-
ness of Jesus. But these attempts, as has been said, start
1 De Gids, ii, 118 (1888).
2 Heejt Jesus sich zelven als den Afessias beschouwd? (1893).
3 Le Christianisme et ses Origines y iv, pp. 15, 75 (ISS4).
4 The Seat of Authority in Religion, 326, 349 (1890),
5 The Synoptic Gospels , 360 (1900).
6 The Prophet of Nazareth, 131 (1905).
7 Deutsche Schriften, i, p. 69 (1887).
8 Jesus und das Alte Testament, 89, 101 (1896).


out with such a destructive criticism of the Gospels, and have
in themselves so little solid foundation that even the liberal
school of research would hardly pay serious attention to them
any longer.
The question entered an entirely new phase, however, with
the sensational book of W. Wrede, The Messianic Mystery
in the Gospels. 1 With a rare exhibition of criticism, as intel-
ligent as it is one-sided, this book seeks to establish the thesis
that the idea of the Messiahship was inserted only sub-
sequently into the record of the life of Jesus.
Partly in connection with Wrede, partly on their o\Vn inde-
pendent lines, these views have been advocated lately by
Adalbert Merx, 2 W. Stark, 3 Nathaniel Schmidt, 4 W. B.
Smith, 5 Bolliger, 6 and P. Kdlbing. 7
Julius Wellhausen takes his place at least among the
doubters. According to him, “ Jesus appears to have
acknowleged himself to be the Messiah in Jerusalem it-
self.” 8 The Saviour has not, however, declared himself as
the Messiah “freely and in plain words,” and “doubts
whether it ever was done at all cannot be suppressed.” 9
Yet with all this multiformity of views the above-named
critics with tolerable unanimity justify their antagonistic
attitude as follows : According to the representation of the
Gospels, they say, Jesus sometimes wishes to pass for the
Messiah, and at other times forbids any mention of his
Messiahship. This contradiction is explained by the sup-
position that Messianic ideas were only subsequently ascribed
to the Saviour. During his lifetime Jesus did not regard
himself as the Messiah. But after his death the disciples
imagined that he had risen from the dead, and precisely
through the fact of that resurrection had become the
Messiah. If, however, he was actually the Messiah after his
resurrection, then he had been already during his lifetime on
the way to the Messiahship. So at all events concluded the
disciples, and the oldest faith of the Church added that
Jesus had been the Messiah already during his earthly life,
and had also professed to be such. The synoptists made
this belief an enduring one by their writings. Yet in their
representations the historical substratum, tcrwhich the Lord’s
1 Gottingen, Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht (1901).
2 Das Evangelium Matthaus (1902) ; Die Evangelien des Markus und
Lukas (1905).
3 Jesu Stellung zum jiidischen Messiasbegriff, Protest. Monatshefte,
vi, 291.309 (1902).
4 The Prophet of Nazareth, 131 (1905).
5 Der vorchristliche Christus, 71, 81, 88 (1906).
6 Das Messiasgeheimnis bei Markus, in Schweiz. Theol. Zeitschrift,
98-132 (1906).
7 Die geistige Einwirkung der Person Jesu auf Paulus (1906).
8 Israelitische und judische Geschichte, 6th ed., 379.
9 Einleitung in die drei ersten Evangelien, 92; cf. 79-9 S (1905).


Messiahship was unknown, is still always apparent under the
Messianic retouching furnished by faith.
So runs this fine hypothesis, so ingeniously worked out. It
is, however, only “worked out”; it is neither an historical
composition nor an historical pourtrayal. It coincides at once
with the theory of the Gospels already rejected by us, accord-
ing to which the Gospels are said to contain, not the real
history of Jesus, but the history of him in the legendary
form given it by faith. Yet also, apart from this, that view
is, even from the standpoint of liberal criticism, wholly
untenable.
According to this criticism, as has been said, the Gospels
(in the present instance the Messianic passages written by
the Evangelists) merely represent the belief of the disciples
and the Church in the Messiahship of Jesus. But how is
this belief to be explained psychologically if Jesus had not
professed to be the Messiah?
“ The disciples believed in his Messiahship on the ground
of their belief in his resurrection,” it is said. But evidently
the exact contrary is true. They believed in his resurrection
because of their belief in his Messiahship. Liberal criticism
repudiates indeed the reality of the resurrection. According
to it, the belief in the resurrection is founded on purely sub-
jective imagination, not upon actual objective appearances
of Jesus after his death.
Those fantasies and the belief in the resurrection and
Messiahship which grew out of them presuppose, however,
that Jesus, during his life, had spoken to the disciples of
his Messiahship, and of his resurrection as a proof of
his Messiahship, and had thereby inflamed their powers of
Imagination. Otherwise, how should this have produced the
belief in the resurrection and in the Messiah precisely at the
time when the life of the Master had come to such a tragical
ending, and when his adherents despaired of him, of his
cause, and even of themselves? “Where has anything
similar occurred in the history of mankind,” Harnack himself
asks, “ that those who had eaten and drunk with their Master
and had seen him in the characteristics of his human nature,
not only proclaimed him as the great prophet and revealer of
God, but also as the divine director of history, as the
‘ beginning ’ of the creation of God and as the spiritual force
of a new life? . . . That they were able to grasp and firmly
to hold this sure hope; that in spite of his suffering and death
they beheld in him the promised Messiah ; and that they,
while under the influence of the usual Messianic conception,
had felt that he was the Lord and Saviour actually present
with them, and had taken him into their hearts—that is what
is astounding I” 1 And not only that. We must call it also
1 Harnack, Wesen des Christentums, 97.


something problematical and psychologically and historically
impossible if the disciples’ belief in the Messiah had sprung
merely from an imaginary resurrection, and if it had subse-
quently been transferred thence into the life of Jesus.
Just as little as Wcllhausen and Wrede are able to explain
the origin of the disciples’ belief in the Messiahship, just so
little can they explain the testimonies of the Gospels to the
Messiahship. We place ourselves again on the ground of our
opponents’ criticism of the New Testament. This recognizes
that the synoptic Gospels, even if they are enlarged by
legends, nevertheless contain a thoroughly reliable historical
foundation. Wellhausen and Wrede acknowledge this no
less positively than Harnack, Schiirer, Jiilicher and the whole
liberal school.
If, however, one thing in the Gospel is historical, it is
certainly the fact that Christ considered himself as the
Messiah, and professed to be so. Johannes Weiss says
forcibly : “ Our best and oldest (Gospel) tradition testifies
with a hundred voices to the fact that he (Jesus) understood
the movement which he started as Messianic in the full sense
of the word, and that he considered himself to be the
specifically chosen one, who was more than a prophet.
Simply to push aside this whole tradition, or to interpret it
to suit oneself, and to explain everything Messianic out of
the text is an unheard of abuse of power.” 1
Like Johannes Weiss, Harnack also declares plainly : “ Im-
portant scholars, and among them Wellhausen, have doubted
whether Jesus ever designated himself as the Messiah. I
cannot, however, agree with him; in fact, I find that we
must do violence to our Gospel reports to reach that desired
result. Already the expression ‘ Son of Man,’ it seems to me,
can be understood only in a Messianic sense (that Jesus
himself used it is not to be doubted), and we should have to
strike out entirely a story like that of the entry of Christ into
Jerusalem in order to carry out the theory that he did not
consider himself as the promised Messiah, and did not wish
to be so regarded. Moreover, the forms of speech in which
Jesus expressed his self-consciousness and his vocation are
quite incomprehensible if they are not determined by the
Messianic idea. Finally, since the positive reasons, which
are brought forward for that view, are very weak and in the
highest degree questionable, we can with confidence adhere
to the supposition that Jesus has called himself the Messiah.” 2
“ This part of the Gospel narrative appears to me to stand
the severest examination,” adds Harnack in his History of
i.
9
1 Die Predigt Jesu vom Reiche Gottes, 2nd ed., p. 64 (Gottingen,
Johannes Weiss also gives a thorough contradiction to Wrede
in his book Das dltesie Evangelium (1903).
2 Wesen des Christentums, 82 ff.


Dogma. 1 “The backbone of Christianity would be broken,
if belief in the Messiah were taken from it.” 2
The recent utterances of Emil Schiirer, 3 Adolf Julicher, 4
Oskar Holtzmann, 5 Paul Wernle, 6 O. Schmiedel, 7 Ad. Deiss-
mann, 8 A. Schlatter, 9 Fritz Schubart, 10 H. J. Holtzmann, 11
Loisy 12 and other trustworthy representatives of modern
liberalism 13 are just as positive.
In following- out this idea, Wrede also is finally forced to
go over to the most radical sort of scepticism. In order to
further his purpose, not only does he refashion the synoptic
Gospels by designating all their Messianic features as un-
historlcal, 14 but he says precisely of Mark, the oldest and
“most reliable” of the Evangelists; “Mark has no longer
any real conception of the life of Jesus.” 15 Only by such
presuppositions can Wrede derive the “ Messianic mystery
of the Gospels ” from “the effort to make the life of Jesus
on earth Messianic in character.” 16 This critic, therefore,
willingly or unwillingly, comes back again to the “ tendency ”
hypothesis of Ferd. Christian Baur, and, in fact, “ enters once
more into even Bruno Bauer’s line of argument.” 17
The Messianic consciousness and the Messianic testimony
of Jesus would, however, still be undeniable even if we
should accede to this destructive criticism of the Gospels, or
should actually destroy them altogether. The mere fact,
contested by no one, that the oldest Christian Church held
Jesus to be the Messiah, would alone prove incontestably that
Jesus professed to be the Messiah. Wilhelm Bousset well
says : “ One of the positions which appears to be sure and
impregnable, in spite of multiform controversy and ever-
repeated examinations, is the fact that Jesus considered him-
self the Messiah of his people. For our Gospels this pre-
1 Third edition, i, 62 (1894).
2 O. Holtzmann, War Jesus Ekstatiker? 133 (1903).
3 Das messianische Selbsibewusstsein Jesu Christi, 12 (1903).
I Die Religion Jesu und die Anfdnge des Christentums in Die Kultur
der Gegenwart, i, abteil 4, 55.
5 Das Leben Jesu, p. 107 (igoi); DasMessiasbewusstsein Jesu und seine
neueste Bestreitung (1903); War Jesus Ekstatiker ? 23, 28, 133 (1903).
6 Die Anjange unserer Religion, 31 (1904).
7 Die Haujt-probleme der Leben-Jesu-Forschung, 2nd ed., 55-65 (1906).
8 Evangelium und Urchristentum, 107.
9 Der Zweifel an der Messianitat Jesu (1907).
10 Der Messiasglaube der ersten Jiinger in seiner Entwicklung auf
Grund des synoftischen Selbsizeugnisses Jesu untersucht (1907).
II Das messianische Bewusstsein Jesu, 1-39 (1907).
13 VEvangile et VEglise, 2nd ed., 15 ff., 104.
13 The Jew B. Kellermann, Kritische Beitrage zur Entstehungs-
geschichte des Christentums, 9 (1906), severely and justly criticizes die
prejudiced, equivocal work of theological liberalism.
11 Das Messiasgeheimnis, 30 ff., 47 ff., 61 f., 87 f.
15 id., 129. 16 Wrede, id., 228.
17 Heinrich Zimmermann, Der historische Wert der dltesten Ueber-
lieferung von der Geschichte Jesu im Markusevangelium, 1 ff. {1905).


supposition is a matter of course . . . but we can gain from
our assertion a still surer point of departure than a line of
argument drawn from single passages of the tradition. We
know positively that from the beginning the belief prevailed
in the Christian Church that Jesus was the Messiah, and,
reasoning backwards, we can maintain that the origin of this
belief is simply inexplicable if Jesus had not acknowledged
to his disciples during his lifetime that he was the Messiah.
For it is indeed comprehensible that the earliest disciples of
Jesus, all of whose hopes had been shattered by his death
and burial, and all of whose notions of the Messiahship of
Jesus had been destroyed, should have returned to the belief
that Jesus was the Messiah under the impression of their
experiences with their risen Lord, if they had acquired this
belief earlier on the ground of the utterances and conduct of
Jesus. But it remains wholly inexplicable how this belief
could have originated among the disciples as something new
after the catastrophe. One must, then, suppose that those
wonderful experiences during the days of Easter created
something absolutely new in their souls in a purely super-
natural way and without any psychological means. But
precisely from a strictly historical point of view, this cannot
be accepted. From this retrospective consideration we arrive
at the result that Jesus, in some form or other, must have
considered himself as the Messiah, and must have imparted
this conviction to the disciples also. ... It will become
more and more evident that it is wholly useless to try to
invalidate by criticism this point of Christian tradition.” 1
In spite, therefore, of Wellhausen, Wrede and those who
agree with them, the fact may be accepted by both friend and
foe that Jesus did bear witness to himself as the Messiah.
On the other hand, most of the modern critics contest the
statement that he knew himself to be the Messiah and
testified to that fact from the beginning of his public
activity. Jiilicher, for example, affirms that “It is hardly
true that Jesus from the very beginning felt himself to be
the Messiah, or destined later to become so.” 2 Pfleiderer 3
writes categorically : “ It is certain, in any case, that Jesus
did not make his appearance at the outset with the Messianic
claims.” Paul Wernle thinks that “It would indeed be too
much to deny to him a belief in his Messianic vocation, but
how and from what point of time he considered himself as
the Messiah . . . these are questions which we can answer
only partially and approximately.” 4
For the most part, it is asserted that Jesus confessed him-
self positively to be the Messiah only towards the end of his
life, or for the first time before his judges. In this sense
1 Jesus, 3rd ed., 77 ff. (Tubingen, 1907). s id., p. 55.
3 id., p 100. 4 Die Quellen des Lebens Jesu, 83 (Tubingen, 1906).


Loisy says : “ It seems indubitable that the Saviour was con-
demned to death because he made claims to the kingdom of
Israel—that is, to the character of the Messiah. Yet, as far
as one can conclude from the memorials of tradition, this
occurred first before the High Priest and then before Pilate.” 1
“ In the course of his activity Jesus did not preach in order
to inform people of his Messianic character, nor did he
perform his miracles as proofs of his Messiahship.” 2 Ac-
cording to Bousset also: “The activity of Jesus was not in
any way decidedly Messianic. Perhaps it was first at the
entry into Jerusalem that Jesus proclaimed himself to the
people as the Messiah.” 3 Still more positively does E. von
Hartmann inform us that “ in the first period (of his public
activity) he is only the prophet of the approaching end of the
world and kingdom of God, and there is wanting in him . . .
at first, all consciousness of his Messiahship. Only at the
conclusion of the first period does this idea begin gradually
to take root in him, but even in the second period he alludes
to it only indirectly at first, and seeks in the judgement of
others a confirmation of the fact. In the third period he
proclaims himself the Messiah, first before his disciples and
then openly before the tribunal.” 4
It will be shown later, in connection with the inquiry into
the origin of Christ’s Messianic consciousness, why modern
rationalism lays such great stress upon this belated testimony
of the Saviour to his Messiahship. Meanwhile, it is possible
for us, by use of the Gospels, to bring proof of the contrary,
and to disclose the different degrees of Christ’s revelation of
himself as the Messiah.
ll.— Announcement of Christ’s Testimony to himself
as the Messiah.
In this connection we must go back to the appearance of
the forerunner. The preaching and baptism of John indicate
with such definiteness the nearness of the Messiah and his
kingdom (Matt, iii, 1-12; Mark i, 1-8; Luke iii, 2-18) that
the multitudes surmised that the Baptist himself was the
Saviour, and a formal delegation of the Sanhedrim went to
him to learn the real facts of the case (John i, ig). “I am
not the Messiah,” John declares positively, “but there hath
stood one in the midst of you, whom you know not. The
same is he that shall come after me, who is preferred before
me, the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to loose”
the intensely longed-for Messiah.
1 L’Evangile et I’Eglise, p. 52 (Paris, 1902). Also see Loisy in his
Les Evangiles synoftiques, i, 192 (Mafon, 1907).
2 Autour d'un -petit livre, 83 (Paris, 1903). 3 Jesus, 10.
* Das Christentum des neuen Testaments, 55 (Sachsa, 1905).


Soon after, Jesus presents himself for baptism. John
recognizes in him the one sent by God (Matt, iii, 13-15).
Heaven opens. The Spirit of God descends upon Jesus in
the form of a dove, and from above the voice of the Father
is heard clearly and distinctly : “ This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased ” (Matt, iii, 16 and parallels). It
cannot be doubted that Jesus saw in this procedure the
Messianic spiritual consecration and the recognition of him-
self as the Messiah by the heavenly Father (Luke iv, 18;
Isa. Ixi, 1 ; Matt, xii, 18; Isa. xl, 1-4; Acts x, 38). It will be
shown later that the expression “ Son of God,” in its applica-
tion to Jesus, and in the mouth of Jesus himself, denotes, if
not always his divinity, yet always at least his Messiahship.
It has this meaning also in the history of the temptation,
which immediately follows the baptism. The tempter sup-
poses and fears in Jesus the existence of the Messiah, the
Son of God. Yet he wishes first to assure himself of this.
“ If thou art the Son of God—that is, at least, the Messiah—
prove thyself to be so by thy works. The Saviour is pre-
dicted as being a miracle-worker; work, then, his miracles!
The Messiah is expected to be the destroyer of the satanic
power over the world, and the founder of a universal king-
dom of God; hence, receive from my hands the kingdoms of
the world!” That is, in substance, the language of the
tempter. Jesus indignantly repudiates the impostures of
Satan, but he silently accepts for himself the Messianic title
“Son of God” (Matt, iv, 1-11 and parallels).
The Messiahship of Jesus forms, therefore, the very
essence of the first episodes of the public life of Jesus.
John the Baptist announces and acknowledges Jesus as the
Messiah; heaven consecrates him and equips him audibly
and visibly with the means to be the Messiah; the spirits
also fear him and testify to him as the Messiah; and Jesus
himself in all this possesses the calm consciousness of his
Messianic dignity and mission.
Liberal investigators, of course, explain this prelude of the
Messianic revelation of Jesus in such a way that the miracu-
lous and supernatural disappear from it altogether. They
assume, for this purpose, that it is a question here merely
of a vision, in which the supernatural occurrences at the
baptism and temptation took place only in the mind of Jesus.
But the question whether it was a vision or an affair of the
senses, does not affect our problem at all. That the accounts
of the baptism and temptation are genuine, and that Jesus
appears in them as the Messiah, is universally conceded. We
shall later establish the fact that our opponents, with the
exception of the extremest radicals, are forced to the con-
fession that Jesus really reveals at the very outset of his
career a positive Messianic consciousness.


In this sense Harnack writes : “ The oldest tradition saw
in a spiritual experience of Jesus on the occasion of his
baptism the foundation of his Messianic consciousness. We
cannot verify it, but we are still less able to contradict it;
it is rather entirely probable that, when he made his public
appearance, he was fully convinced on that point. The
Gospels place the remarkable history of the temptation of
Jesus before the beginning of his public activity. This pre-
supposes that he already knew himself to be the Son of God
and the one entrusted with a definite work for the people of
God, and that he withstood the temptations which were
intimately connected with this consciousness.” 1
Now begins also the first indication of his Messianic
proclamation—at first only a gleam, as of the dawn. At
the beginning “Jesus naturally observed a modest reticence
about this mystery of his person and this sublime faith in
himself.” 2 But he had especially to take into consideration
the capacity of apprehension in those about him and their
Messianic ideas and preconceived notions, in spite of the
fact, and indeed precisely because of it, that he did not share
these notions. The necessity of reckoning with the ingrained,
misguided conception of the Messiah, characteristic of the
Judaism of the Synagogue and the Rabhis —that is the
point of view from which the whole testimony of Jesus to
himself as the Messiah must be judged. The defenders of
the Messiahship of Jesus have not sufficiently considered this.
On the other hand, all the difficulties of our opponents, who
deny wholly or in part the Messianic testimony of Jesus to
himself, would find their solution from this point of view.
Only thus, indeed, can it be understood why Jesus appears
to wish sometimes to proclaim and sometimes to conceal his
Messiahship; why he speaks of it so clearly at one time and
with so much reserve at another; and why, after such vast
efforts, he still finds so little faith.
Consideration of the popular views about the Messiah
determined him, already on his first appearance, to adopt the
title of the Son of Man. G. Volkmar, 3 W. Brandt, 4 Lietz-
mann 5 and J. Wellhausen 6 try to prove that Jesus has not
himself assumed the designation of the Son of Man, but has
only received this title owing to the subsequent transformation
of the Gospel history by believers. Yet this view not only
rests on a wholly distorted criticism of the Gospels, but has
1 Wesen des Christentums, 88.
3 Heinrich Weinel, Jesus im XIX Jahrhunderl, 109 (Tubingen, 1907).
3 Die Evangelien, oder Markus und die Synopsis, 197 (Leipzig, 1869);
Jesus Nazarenus , p. 153 (Zurich, 18S2).
* Die evangelische Geschichte und der Ursprung des Christentums,
562 (1893). ! Der Menschensohn (Tubingen, 1896).
• Skizzen u. Vorarbeiten, vi (Berlin, 1899); Das Evangelium Marci,
66 (Berlin, 1903); Einleitung in die drei ersten Evangelien, 2nd ed.,
123-130 (Berlin, 1911).


also been rejected by chosen experts in this field for the very
philological reasons on which that criticism thought it could
support itself. 1 As a matter of fact, Jesus calls himself, from
the very outset and down to his condemnation by the Sanhe-
drim, continually and by preference the Son of Man (Matt,
xxvi, 64; Mark xiv, 62 ; Luke xxii, 69). The name “ Son of
Man ” occurs thirty-two times in Matthew, fourteen in Mark,
twenty-five in Luke, and eleven times in John. Outside of the
Gospels it is found only three times in the New Testament
writings, 2 and also in the Gospels no one but the Saviour
gives himself this title. He never receives it -from his
disciples. 3
This name did not have the national and political signifi-
cance which the other Messianic titles had by degrees
acquired, such as “Christ” (Messiah, the Anointed), “Son
of David,” “ Prince of Peace” and “King of Israel.” For
that very reason, also, it did not excite, as the others did,
national hopes and passions. 4 It was thus best adapted to
become representative of the Messianic views of Jesus, and a
token of his silent, gradual revelation of himself.
In the Aramaic mother-tongue of Jesus, “Son of Man”
(barnasa) meant certainly merely a man. But ever since the
prophecy of Daniel (vii, 13) it had signified also the Messiah,
as he had been heralded in advance in the holy Scripture of
the Old Testament as the founder and Prince of the Messianic
kingdom, who was at some time to come again in the clouds
of heaven. Both interpretations were well known to the
people. 5
Now, because Jesus called himself the Son of Man in
contrast to all other men, he evidently did not understand the
word in its first meaning. He did not call himself “ man ”in
the general and usual sense of that word, but in the particular
sense connected with the Messianic passage in Daniel. 6 More-
over, from the first day on, he himself declared unequivocally
that he applied to himself the title of Son of Man in a Mes-
sianic sense ( cf. John i, 41, 45 and 49 with John i, 51). As
1 S. Dalman, Die Worle Jesu, 191-219 (Leipzig, i8g8); P. Fiebig, Der
Menschensohn (Tubingen, igoi); Fritz Tillmann, Der Menschensohn,
60-147 (Freiburg, 1907).
2 Acts vii, 56; Apoc. i, 13 and xiv, 14.
3 For the reasons of this, see Tillmann, Der Menschensohn, i6g-i76.
4 H. Wendt, Die Lehre Jesu, 436 (Gottingen, igoi); Weizsacher, Das
aposiolische Zeilalter, 106 (Tubingen, 1902); B. Weiss, Lehrbuch der
biblischen Theologie des N. T ., 55 (Berlin, 1893). _ Y
5 For the proof of this double signification of the expression barnasa
and its use, see G. Dalman, Die Worte Jesu , i, igi-217; P. Fiebig,
Der Menschensohn, 56; Tillmann, Der Menschensohn, 60-106.
6 See Dalman, id., 210, 217; H. J. Holtzmann, Lehrbuch der N. T.
Theologie, 250 (1897); W. Baldensperger, Das Selbstbewusstsein Jesu,
i6g (1892); J. Weiss, Die Predigt Jesu vom Reiche Gottes, 160 (igoo);
H. H. Wendt, Die Lehre Jesu, 426; Derambure, Le Fils de Vhomme
dans les Evangiles in Revue Augustin., 708-720 (1908) and 319-340 (igoq).


his activity progressed he concentrated into this title, as we
shall see, an ever-greater amount of dignity, character, deeds
of benevolence, rights and the vocation of the teaching, work-
ing, suffering and glorified Messiah.
Also extreme liberal critics like Renan, 1 Harnack, 2 Loisy, 3
H. J. Holtzmann 4 and others acknowledge that the name Son
of Man in the mouth of Jesus is undoubtedly Messianic in
meaning. Tillmann, after deep research, comes to the result
that “ no passage referring to the Son of Man is free from
a Messianic meaning, and that by far the greater number of
them allow this interpretation only.” 5
Jesus’ testimony to himself as the Son of Man was, there-
fore, equivalent to testimony to himself as the Messiah. The
Son of Man ascribes to himself absolutely the vocation and
the dignity of the Messiah, although he does not at first bear
the name Messiah. Indeed, precisely because he claimed to
be the Messiah was he at the outset obliged to renounce the
use of the name in public.
In any case, the name Messiah-Christ was not necessarily
connected with the plan of salvation promised in the Old
Testament. In consequence of their being anointed, kings
and priests had always borne this name. And because the
future Saviour was to be Priest and King in the full sense of
the word, this designation also suited him pre-eminently. It
is, however, given to him only three times in the whole Old
Testament. 6 Only shortly before the dawn of the Christian
era, 7 and only together with other titles (“ Son of David,”
“ King of Israel ”) was the expression “ Messiah ” made one
of the official titles of the expected Saviour. 8 Precisely at
this time, however, there came at length to be connected with
the name Messiah an idea which compromised the Messianic
cause itself.
In the popular imagination the Messiah was, first of all, a
political liberator. As the Son of David, he was, by his mere
appearance, to shatter with one blow the Roman yoke, re-
establish the Jewish throne, and, as King of Israel, lead the
people of the Law, and the life according to the Law, to
triumph. 9 Where such a frame of mind was prevalent it
needed only a breath to cause the flame of national aspiration
to flare up at once. A popular rumour of the presence of the
Messiah—that is, of the national hero—would be sufficient to
1 Vie de Jisus, 93 (Berlin, 1863). 2 Wesen des Christentums, 82.
3 Les Evangiles synoftiques, i, 193.
4 Das messianische Bewussisein Jesu, 50-75 (Tubingen, 1907).
5 id., 147. 8 1 Kings ii, 10; Ps. ii, 2; Dan. ix, 25.
7 Psalms of Solomon xvii, 36 ; xviii, 6, 8 ; A foe. of Baruch, xxxix, 7 ;
xl, 1; Ixxii, 2.
8 S. Philipp Friedrich, Der Christusname im Lichte der alt- und
neutest. Theologie, 29 ff. (Coin, 1905); Lagrange, Le Messianisme chez
les Juifs, 213 (Paris, 1909).
9 The proof of this is given in the next chapter.


kindle boundless political enthusiasm and call forth a general
“Messianic” revolution.
Willingly or unwillingly, Jesus would have been forced into
the leadership of this if he had simply called himself the
Messiah. A fatal conflict with the authorities would have put
a precipitous ending to his scarcely begun career and frus-
trated his whole work. Jesus would have been at once con-
demned, as, indeed, finally was the case, by the Jewish
Sanhedrim and Roman tribunal; by the former under the
charge of having been unable to prove himself the Messiah-
King; by the latter under the pretext of having wished to
prove himself the Messiah-King. In order to escape this
premature catastrophe, he prevented the too precipitate pro-
clamation of his Messiahship, and himself avoided assuming
the name Messiah.
It is true the first disciples, overpowered by the impression
produced by his language and his personality, suspect in him
at once the Messiah, and give him the Messianic title. “We
have found the Messiah!” cries out Andrew to his brother
Simon, after his first meeting with Jesus (John i, 41). “We
have found him of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets
did write,” announces Philip to Nathanael (John i, 45). And
shortly after his meeting with Jesus, Nathanael also con-
fesses : “ Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King
of Israel ” (John i, 49).
The demons also seek to proclaim his Messiahship through
the mouths of those they possessed. For “ they knew him ”
(Mark i, 34), 1 “ they knew that he was the Messiah” (Luke
iv, 41), “the Holy One of God,” “the Anointed One of
God,” the “ Son of God,” the “ Son of the most high God,”
who had come to destroy them. 2
Jesus accepts with joy the acknowledgement of the first
disciples, although, as it proved later, it was only a joyful
expression of faith and hope that the Master would prove
himself to be the Messiah (John i, 50). Yet he substitutes for
the titles “Messiah,” the “Prophet” and “King of Israel”
(to the Jews all these had the same significance) the title “ Son
of Man.” Also, he does not contradict the utterances of the
devils, although he admonishes them severely not to proclaim
him publicly as the Messiah.
Modern critics are greatly shocked at these prohibitions of
Jesus, and Wellhausen and Wrede conclude from them that
Jesus never felt himself to be the Messiah, while other
adherents of the liberal school maintain that at least at the
beginning of his career he had not yet believed in his Messiah-
ship.
1 “ That the devils recognize in Jesus the Messiah is now in any case
seldom contested.” Wrede, Das Messiasgeheimniss, 24.
2 Mark i, 24; iii, 12; v, 7; Luke iv, 34, 41; viii, 28; Matt, viii, 29.


Yet the very contrary is evident from the conduct of the
Saviour in this regard. He did not forbid the publication of
the testimony of the devils to his Messiahship because he did
not consider it to be true, but precisely because he did consider
it true. The Evangelists mention expressly that “he suffered
not the devils to speak, because they knew him ” (Mark i, 34).
“ And rebuking- them, he suffered them not to speak, for
they knew that he was Christ ” (Luke iv, 41). “He strictly
charged them that they should not make him known ” (Mark
iii, 12).
Jesus, therefore, does not repudiate faith in his Messiah-
ship, but forbids the publication of it, the spreading of the
report that he was the Messiah in the sense in which the
people had been waiting for their Christ so long and so im-
patiently. By a quiet, intensive mode of education, Jesus
wanted to convince, first his disciples, and then the wider
circle of his associates, of his Messiahship, his supernatural
Messianic nature and his spiritual Messianic vocation. Belief
in him as the Messiah was to originate and become purified
from within, and by reason of actual proofs; and his disciples
and the people were, from his own words and, above all, from
his works, to come gradually to the conviction that he was
the Messiah, even though he did not usher in the hoped-for
Messianic revolution. 1
Hl.—Development of Christ’s Testimony to himself as
the Messiah.
In order to render the minds of the people more receptive,
Jesus starts out immediately from the standpoint of the
preaching of the Baptist: “ Repent, for the kingdom of
Heaven is at hand ” (Mark iv, 17). The announcement of
the kingdom of Heaven —that is, of the kingdom of the
Messiah—forms the substance of his Galilean activity.
But how entirely different this message of the Son of Man
sounds from that of the forerunner! Above the Son of Man
heaven stands open, and the angels of God ascend and descend
above his head (John i, 51). The Son of Man has himself
descended from heaven, and will return thither again (John
iii, 1 and vi, 32, 33).
The Son of Man claims for himself, therefore, the whole
spiritual dignity and spiritual task of his vocation of the
Messiah, prophesied by Isaias (Ixi, 1; Luke iv, 18). The Son
of Man is come to proclaim the Gospel of the kingdom of God
(Mark i, 38), to call sinners to his kingdom (Matt, ix, 13),
1 Weizsacker says pertinently, Das a-postolische Zeitalter der christ-
lichen Kirche. p. 106 (1902) : “ It is on the whole to be concluded from
the whole course of the history of Jesus that he did not at first present
himself to his countrymen as the Messiah, but rather led them on to
accept him as such themselves.”


and to save the lost sheep of the House of Israel (Matt,
xv, 24). On this account the Son of Man speaks—as a teacher,
with absolute authority (Matt, v, 22, 28, 32-44) and as one
who has superior force, unexampled wisdom and divine power
(Matt, vii, 29; Mark i, 22).
The Son of Man is not bound by the Law of Moses (Matt,
xii, 8). In contrast to this Law and to the Old Testament,
the Son of Man, in his parables, discourses, and, above all, in
his Sermon on the Mount, announces the Law of the Messianic
kingdom (Matt, v, 1-7, 29). If the kingdom of the Son of
Man is superior to the Synagogue of the Old Testament,
it forms, on the other hand, a complete antithesis to the
kingdom of Satan. An insult to the Son of Man is equivalent
to blasphemy (Matt, xii, 31). The Son of Man will return at
the end of the world to act as Judge over the kingdom of God
(Matt, xiii, 37, 41). 1
To strengthen and to seal his supernatural Messianic
mission and preaching, the Son of Man also performs the
miraculous works , which were prophesied of the Messiah,
and served as evidence of his Messiahship. He subdues the
elements, heals the sick, frees those possessed of devils, raises
the dead, remits sins and performs new miracles in order to
prove his full authority to forgive sins (Matt, ix, 1-8; Mark
ii, 1-12; Luke v, 17-26). A continual, positive and over-
powering revelation of his Messiahship!
It is true he also often seeks to prevent the publication of these
Messianic deeds, 2 in order to free himself of any appearance
of vanity, and always in order not to stir up political Messianic
enthusiasm. How well grounded this foresight was is shown
on the occasion of the first multiplication of the loaves of
bread (John vi, 14). Moreover, in the working of his miracles
the chief point was not to endanger the Messianic cause by a
storm of enthusiasm, but to change the minds of the people
by a continual definite work, and to capture, as it were, one
position after another (see John vii, 3-6). In this way, how-
ever, all the people gradually learned to know him as a worker
of miracles, and were able to conclude from his works that he
was the divinely sent Christ,* although this Messiah did not
correspond to the national expectations of "the masses.
Jesus also recalls this to the mind of the impatiently
expectant Baptist, who had sent to him from his prison the
inquiry : “ Art thou he that art to come, or look we for
another?” Jesus answers : “Go and relate to John what
you have heard and seen ; the blind see, the lame walk, the
lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead rise again, the
1 The later utterances on the Parousia we pass over here because at
present we have to do merelv with the Galilean period.
3 Matt, viii, 2; ix, 30; Mark i, 43: v, 43; vii, 36; viii, 26: Luke
v, 12 ; viii, 56.
3 John v, 36; vi, 28; ix, 3 ; x, 25-38 ; xiv, 10; xv, 24.


poor have the Gospel preached to them” (Matt, xi, 2-16;
Luke vii, 18-23).
These words of Jesus to the disciples of John are only the
repetition of the words of Isaias, in which he depicts the
blessings of the Messianic period (Isa. xxix, 18; xxxv, 2;
Ixi, 1). The main thought in the answer of Jesus is, therefore,
this: “Compare what.the Prophets, especially Isaias, have
predicted of the Messiah with what you see me do, and then
decide for yourself whether lam the Messiah or not.” The
proof is convincing and compelling for one who is acquainted
with the Prophets, recognizes their truth and has an open
eye and ear. The Lord concludes this solemn testimony to
his own person with the serious, significant words ; “ And
blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.” Blessed
is he who shall not be offended in the Messiah, notwithstand-
ing the fact that the expected, popular Messianic deeds and
the national and political rebellion and liberation are not
accomplished. For this one thing was the stumbling-block.
All else agreed with the predictions; all the proofs of his
Messiahship had been furnished by him a hundred times. One
thing only was lacking—the great political act, which the
narrow-mindedness and blindness of the Jews regarded as the
special work of the Messiah. But he could not effect this bold
stroke without becoming a traitor to his spiritual Messianic
dignity and task. He could not declare himself to be the
Messiah in the sense in which the people wanted to have the
Messiah.
On the other hand, however, the people could not be
Induced to recognize his Messiahship. They praised God, it
is true, for his wonderful deeds, and said : “ A great prophet
is risen up among us, and God hath visited his people”
(Luke vii, 16). “ A great prophet ” —that was about the idea
of him that was generally held. Some said that John the
Baptist, who had just been beheaded, had risen from the
dead; others that Elias had appeared, who, according to
Jewish tradition, was to be the forerunner of the Messiah;
while others still declared that one of the old Prophets,
perhaps Jeremias, “had arisen” (Luke ix, 8, 19; Matt,
xvi, 14). Only occasionally did anyone ask in astonishment:
“Is not this the Son of David?” (Matt, xii, 23). “Son of
David, have mercy on us,” was the cry of the two blind men
of Capharnaum and of the Canaanite woman (Matt, ix, 27;
xv, 22).
These utterances of the people certainly show also that some
classes of the population were already near believing in the
Messiahship of Jesus. In Samaria, which did not share the
political ideas of the Jews regarding the Messiah, Jesus could,
without danger, expressly declare himself to be the Messiah,
and found many who believed in him (John iv, 39-42). Indi


viduals also, and entire families from among his Jewish
hearers, joined immediately the number of his disciples (John
iv, 53)' Under the impression produced by his miracles, great
multitudes of people thought, for a time at least, that they
had discovered in him the coming Christ 1 (John ii, 23),
although his own relatives refused to believe in him (John
vii, 5). After the multiplication of the loaves at Bethsaida
the people felt such enthusiasm that they cried out: “ This is
truly that Prophet that should come into the world”—the
Messiah. And they “ wanted to take him by force and make
him king ” (John vi, 14 and 15); that is, to proclaim.him the
Messianic national hero.
Only under the condition that he would carry out the
definite “ Messianic ” revolution of the State were the people
ready to recognize his Messiahship. How little reliance,
anyhow, could be placed upon the belief of the crowd, and
even on that of the larger circle of his disciples, was shown
at the conclusion of the Galilean period of his life. As soon
as Jesus put the coarse-minded notions of that larger circle
to the test, most of them fell away. Only the Twelve held
out through the crisis and remained steadfast (John vi, 66,
67, 70).
Among the twelve disciples faith had indeed taken root
more and more deeply. As we have seen already, from the
beginning the original disciples had shown a disposition to
believe. 2 It would, in fact, be absolutely unthinkable that
without such a disposition they would have followed the
Saviour. The first miracle at Cana also confirmed them in
their conviction (John ii, 11).
Yet the way to a positive, immutable and supernatural faith
in his Messiahship was still a long one. For a long time yet
they had to learn in the Messianic school of Jesus. Only little
by little did their minds open to the mysteries of the kingdom
of God, which the Master revealed frankly and confidentially
to them, in contrast to the mass of the people, so far, indeed,
as their powers of comprehension sufficed (Matt, xiii, 10-12;
Mark iv, 11). All the infinite patience of the Lord was neces-
sary in order not to despair of their progress (Mark iv, 13, 40;
vi, 50; vii, 18). Nevertheless, their faith grew stronger from
1 A comparison o£ this passage with Matt, xvi, 13-15 and John vii, 12
proves certainly that there cannot have been a complete conviction and
belief on the part of the masses.
2 John i, 37; F. Spitta in Das J ohannes-Evangelium als Quelle der
Geschichte Jesu, p. 424 (Gottingen, 1910), remarks with reason : “ The
assertion that the disciples of Jesus had recognized him as the Messiah
first at Cesarea Philippi, and that the Baptist had proved by his
question (Matt, xi, 3 and Luke vii, 19) that he could not have recognized
him as the Messiah, rests upon incompetent investigation. By the
synoptists nothing is reported differing from what we find in the
Fourth Gospel—viz., that the Messiahship of Jesus became manifest
from the time of his baptism.”


day to day, incited, above all, by the unbroken series of his
miracles. In their astonishment at the stilling- of the waves,
they fell at the feet of Jesus and cried out : “ Of a truth thou
art the Son of God !” Moreover, they proved, immediately
afterwards, that this had not been merely an act of passing
enthusiasm, but the expression of a profound conviction.
It was at Cesarea Philippi, quite at the conclusion of the
Galilean teaching and activity, that Jesus put to them the
searching question : “ Who do men say that the Son of Man
is?” But they said, “ Some John the Baptist, and other some
Elias, and others Jeremias, or one of the Prophets,” who,
according to Jewish opinion, was to precede the Messiah.
He saith unto them : “But whom do you say that I am?”
And he receives for the first time from the mouth of Peter
the positive answer : “ Thou art Christ, the Son of the living
God.” In his joy over this confession Jesus pronounced him
blessed. “ Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona, because flesh
and blood hath not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is
in heaven ” (Matt, xvi, 13-19).
Peter was not offended in regard to the Messiah, notwith-
standing the fact that he did not see him establishing the
material Messianic kingdom. Hence the blessing. The other
disciples also were now already equally advanced in the faith
(John vi, 69). Jesus was to them the Messiah, the Son of the
living God, although he still was not a Jewish Messianic king.
But that he would eventually become such a king and would
thus fulfil his essential task, as the Messiah in the Jewish
sense, they all still held for certain.
IV. — Completion of Christ's own Testimony to his
Messiahship.
And now there began a new phase in Christ’s testimony
to himself as the Messiah. The disciples recognized his
Messianic dignity and his Messianic character. They also
believed in his absolutely supernatural origin and nature,
although as yet they had not, as we shall see later on, entirely
clear ideas about his divinity. On the other hand, they con-
ceived of the vocation of the Messiah in itself and in its realisa-
tion in Jesus quite erroneously. It was most difficult to free
them from the idea that the Messiah was to appear radiantly
in worldly power and splendour on the throne of David.
Hence Jesus, from now on (i.e., after the confession of
Peter), began to show to his disciples that he must go up to
Jerusalem and suffer much from the Elders, the Scribes, and
the High Priests, and must be put to death, and on the third
day rise again (Matt, xvi, 21), and thus “ enter into his glory ”
(Luke xxiv, 26).
Formerly he had referred to the sufferings of the Messiah


only transiently and figuratively (Mark ii. 19 and parallels).
But now that the disciples believed on him, even though
they still mistakenly identified his Messianic vocation with
a brilliant political achievement, he taught them that the
Messiah's work reaches its climax in suffering and death and
in the glorification ensuing therefrom. This thought fills
almost the whole last part of the Gospels. And as he holds
up the spiritual and suffering Messiah in contrast to the
political Messiah, so does he set up, by word and deed (John
xviii, 36), in contrast to the worldly and secularized Messianic
kingdom, the religious and supernatural kingdom of God,
which will be developed from the smallest beginnings to world-
wide and heaven-high dimensions, and is not, as the Jews
supposed, to be conjured up at one stroke. From the day of
Cesarea Philippi on, the teaching of Jesus to his disciples is
concerned with this transformation and rectification of the
Messianic faith and the Messianic idea.
The success was not very pronounced. Even Peter, who
on that day had distinguished himself so brilliantly, was the
first who earnestly reproached the Saviour for his idea of
suffering (Matt, xvi, 22 ; Mark viii, 32), and who, even in the
hours of his Passion, thought the time had arrived to strike
a blow for the political kingdom of the Messiah (Luke xxii, 49;
Matt, xxvi, 51, etc.). The two sons of Zebedee, James and
John, disputed, even at a late hour in Christ’s life, about the
most influential and honourable positions in the Messianic
kingdom (Mark x, 37, 45; Matt, xx, 20-28). Yes, even after
the resurrection the disciples will not understand the teach-
ing about the suffering Saviour (Luke xxiv, 20-27), and the
old catchword still prevails among them, that now at last, and
now at once, must come the Messianic liberation from the
Roman yoke (Luke xxiv, 21), and the Messianic re-establish-
ment of the kingdom of Israel (Acts i, 6). Jesus had
explained to them plainly and forcibly the whole doctrine of
his spiritual Messianic vocation and work, but, though they
knew this doctrine, they did not yet apprehend it.
From this intellectual standpoint of the disciples we now
understand also the simultaneous attitude of Jesus towards
the people after the conclusion of his Galilean activity. How-
ever little understanding the disciples may have shown of the
revelation of his Messianic vocation, they yet believed, with
a few vacillations (John xvi, 30), absolutely in his Messiah-
ship. But in the great majority of the people both faith and
understanding were still wanting. Even the more progres-
sive among them doubted whether they had before them the
Messiah or only a prophet. Consequently Jesus could not yet
openly say to the crowd either that he was the Messiah, or,
still less, that he was the suffering Messiah and that his
kingdom was wholly spiritual.


Upon the confession of Peter, therefore, he again enjoins
upon the disciples to wait awhile for the public announcement
of his Messiahship (Matt, xvi, 20). Soon after occurred the
Transfiguration on Mount Thabor, glorified by the voice of
his Father in the presence of the pillars of the Law and the
prophets. Nothing was more calculated to confirm the dis-
ciples in their faith in his Messianic vocation. Yet Jesus at
once repeats his positive prohibition to speak to anyone of
this Messianic manifestation until the Son of Man should have
risen from the dead (Mark ix, 6 and parallels)—that is, until
he should have passed through suffering and humiliation into
glory, and thus should have proved unmistakably that he was
the Messiah and that only the spiritual idea of the Messiah is
the correct one.
Yet even if the keeping secret of the name of Messiah
from the people was still always enjoined, Jesus nevertheless
preached his Messianic mission always more and more clearly
during the last period of his activity.
Scarcely had Peter at Cesarea Philippi confessed the faith
of the disciples in his Messiahship, when Jesus collected “ the
people also with the disciples” and addressed to “all” the
burning words : “ Whosoever shall lose his life for my sake
and the Gospel shall save it. . . . He that shall be ashamed
of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful genera-
tion, the Son of Man also will be ashamed of him, when he
shall come in the glory of his Father with the holy angels ”
(Mark viii, 34-38). And another time, “ when great multi-
tudes stood about him, so that they trod one upon another, he
began to say . . . Whosoever shall confess me before men,
him shall the Son of Man also confess before the angels of
God, but he that shall deny me before men, shall be denied
before the angels of God ” (Luke xii, 1 and 8,9). In this and
similar ways does he proclaim himself before all to be the One
sent by God, upon the faithful recognition or denial of whom
depends eternal salvation or eternal condemnation.
The more plain, emphatic and public his testimony to him-
self as the Messiah becomes, the more evident also becomes
the miraculous Messianic proof of the absolute reliability of
his testimony. If previously he had somewhat limited the
publication of his miracles “ because his hour was not yet
come ” (John vii, 6) —the hour of his suffering and of his glori-
fication (John vii, 30) —towards the end of his activity he more
and more dispenses with those former precautions. He no
longer forbids people to spread abroad the fame of his works,
and performs his mighty deeds, for the most part, before
great multitudes and before the priests, the Scribes and the
Pharisees; in fact, even in the temple itself at Jerusalem
(Matt, xii, 9; Mark xi, 15; Luke xix, 45). And he continually
characterizes his miracles as a test of his having been sent by


God, and demands in this absolute faith (John ix, 3; x, 25, 32,
37; xiv, 10; xv, 24).
The eye-witness John continually mentions the success with
which this increasing Messianic revelation was attended. 1
“ There was much murmuring among the multitude concern-
ing him : for some said, He is a good man : and others said,
No; but he seduceth the people. Yet no man spoke openly of
him for fear of the Jews ”—that is, of the Scribes and Phari-
sees (John vii, 12 and 13).
Nevertheless, many from among the people believed on
him and said; “ When the Christ cometh, shall he do more
miracles than these which this man doth? The Pharisees
heard the people murmuring these things concerning him,
and the rulers and Pharisees sent ministers to apprehend
him” (John vii, 31, 32). But as Jesus, in spite of this, con-
tinued to make his impressive revelation, the faith of the
people increased also. Some said: “ This is the prophet
indeed. Others said, This is the Christ. But some said,
Doth the Christ come out of Galilee? So there arose a
dissension among the people because of him” (John vii,
40-43). Yet the number of those who believed steadily in-
creased (John viii, 30). In vain did the Pharisees determine
to put out of the synagogue every one who should confess him
to be the Christ (John ix, 22). They could no longer control
this great wave of popular enthusiasm. “If we let him alone
so, all will believe in him ” (John xi, 48), said the supreme
council. And, in fact, Jesus was already quite commonly
spoken of among the people as “ Christ the Messiah ” (Matt,
xxvii, 17, 22), and with each day the army of his adherents
grew greater (John x, 42; xi, 27 and 45).
Already the week of his Passion was approaching; and now
that the multitude, for the most part, believed in his Messiah-
ship, Jesus set to work, as he had long tried to do with his
disciples, to correct publicly the popular notion of the Messiah,
prevalent even among the masses who believed on him. The
Son of Man, he says, is not the longed-for Messianic king,
and his kingdom and his glory are not of this world. He is
not come to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give
his life a redemption for many (Mark x, 45). The way
to his infinite Messianic dominion and glory leads through
suffering, death and the grave (Matt, xxvi, 10-12; Luke
xix, 11, etc.). “For as the lightning that lighteneth from under
heaven, shineth unto the parts that are under heaven, so
I.
IO
1 It is simply impossible to controvert the genuineness of this Johan-
nine delineation. Only an eye-witness could observe so sharply and
feel so keenly. P. M. Strayer in The Self-Revelation of Christ, with
special reference to the Fourth Gospel, in the Biblical World, xxxii,
327-334, rightly points out that the development of the Messianic con-
sciousness and its acceptance by the people is pourtrayed most clearly
and precisely in the Fourth Gospel and is corroborated by the synoptists.


shall the Son of Man be in his day. But first he must suffer
many things and be rejected by this generation ” (Luke xvii,
24> 25).
Such words, however, were, to the people, absolutely in-
comprehensible (John xii, 37). They still unanimously adhered
to the idea that he was indeed the Messiah, but that, being so,
he was the Deus ex machina, who would soon ascend the
throne of David.
Such was the popular sentiment, under the influence of
which the great Messianic demonstration 1 was prepared and
realized at the beginning of the holy week. On the eve of
that week an exhibition of miraculous power, following closely
that of the calling of Lazarus to life, contributed the last
impulse to this movement. Two blind men of Jericho hastened
towards the Saviour, who was passing by with the multitude,
with the cry : “ Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on us 1”
And they received their sight (Matt, xx, 30 and parallels).
When Jesus thereupon was about to enter Jerusalem, the
people met him with shouts of “ Hosanna to the Son of
David !” (Matt, xxi, 9) “ Blessed be the King that cometh !”
(Luke xix, 38) “ Blessed is the King of Israel!” (John xii, 13)
“ Blessed is the kingdom of our father David, that cometh 1”
(Mark xi, 10) “ Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the
Lord !” to establish it (Matt, xxi, g). These were merely
acclamations to the national and political Messiah which they
discerned in Jesus, and this made the Pharisees furious :
“ Behold, the world is gone after him !” (John xii, 19). And
they resolved to destroy him at once.
Some days later Jesus stands before the highest tribunal of
the land. He is accused of being a popular agitator who lays
claim to the throne. That meant to the Romans a revolu-
tionary, to the Jews a false Messiah. But both the Roman
charge of his claiming to be a king of the Jews, and the
Jewish charge of his claiming to be a Messianic king, are
refuted by Jesus with the single utterance : “ My kingdom is
not of this world ” (John xviii, 36). Then he develops the
true, spiritually supernatural idea of the Messiah, and sets
the official seal upon his whole revelation of himself as the
Messiah, when he, under a sacred oath, affirms that he is “ the
Christ, the Son of God,” “the Son of the Blessed,” he who,
in his own character as the “ Son of Man,” shall sit at the
right hand of almighty God, and shall one day come again in
the clouds of heaven (Matt, xxvi, 63; Mark xiv, 61; Luke
xxii, 69).
But the more decidedly he rejected for himself the notion
of the Messiah, held by the Pharisees and the people, and the
more positively he applied to himself the true conception of
1 That the entry of Jesus into Jerusalem was a Messianic scene is con-
ceded also by Loisy, Les Evangtles synofliques, i, no.


the Christ, the more clearly he appeared to all classes of
Jewish society as a false Messiah.
A few hours later there were to be read upon his cross the
words, “Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews” (John
xix, 19). The Romans read this as meaning “ This Jesus of
Nazareth claimed to be a Jewish pretender to the throne.”
The Jews understood it as signifying “ This Jesus of Nazareth
claimed to be the Messianic King promised to the Jews.”
Jesus, however, had contended his whole life long against
this conception of his person and the Messianic office. The
steadily progressive revelation of himself as the Messiah had
had precisely for its object the avoidance of this terrible mis-
understanding. At the commencement, in the centre and at
the conclusion of his career he uniformly professed to be the
Messiah. Yet in an entirely different sense from that held by
his expectant Jewish contemporaries.


CHAPTER II
CONTENT OF THE MESSIANIC CON-
SCIOUSNESS OF CHRIST
THAT the views concerning the Messiah, held by
Jesus, did not agree with the official Messianic
ideas of Jewish society is clear from the fore-
going explanations. Christ’s positive notion of
the Messiah also is thereby partially revealed. Not
completely, however. The question remains: Did Jesus
entirely reject the common idea of the Messiah, characteristic
of rabbinical Judaism, or did he merely seek to correct it?
And, in the latter case, did he correct the popular notion of
the Messiah in regard to a special Messianic movement of
that time, or did he appeal from the Judaism of his contem-
poraries back to the canonical writings of the Old Testament,
fulfilling and transfiguring the Messianic prophecies of the
Prophets? Or did he give to the respective names and titles
of Messiah and Son of Man, which he assumed, a wholly new
and individual sense and substance?
The answer to this question is extremely important.
According to this, Jesus will appear to the world as a
universal Saviour in the sense of Christianity, or, on the
contrary, as an eccentric among the Jewish Rabbis, an apoca-
lyptical enthusiast, or even as a modern superman. Hence
the feverish interest which the latest criticism of this question
excites. These critics must concede to orthodox Christianity
the fact of Christ’s testimony to himself as the Messiah; and
so they try at least to diminish the substance of this testimony,
so that nothing positively Christian is left in it, and Jesus
appears only as an enthusiast or a Messiah of civilization.
I.— The Conception of the Messiah before
Jesus Christ.
In order to appreciate the point at issue, and at the same
time better to understand the attitude of Judaism to Jesus,
we must first sketch briefly the Israelitish and Jewish notion
of the Messiah in its fundamental lines up to the time of
Christ’s appearance. I say “ sketch briefly,” for it is only a
matter of gaining a general survey of the subject, from which
the Messianic views of the Saviour will then detach them-
selves more clearly. We must refer whoever wishes to inform


himself more thoroughly about ante-christian Messiahship,
whether of the Old Testament or of later Judaism, to the
special literature on that subject.
1. The Conception of the Messiah in Old Testament
Prophecies
We present the prophetical conception of the Messiah
found in the Old Testament much more briefly than the
rabbinical and apocalyptical ideas of him, and for an obvious
reason. The modern evolutionary-hi'storical criticism, with
which we are concerned, measures Christ’s Messianic con-
ception, first of all, not by the Old Testament ideas of the
Messiah, but by the rabbinical and apocalyptic notions of
him, which were nearer in time to the Saviour, and from
which Christ’s Messianic claim is said to be taken. Also
the following quotations of Old Testament passages are here
valued only as historical expressions of the older prophetic
ideas and expectations of the Messiah. The question whether
they are, in the strict sense of the word, prophecies, and were
fulfilled in Christ, does not belong to our present task. But
that these passages refer to the Messianic hope and person
cannot be seriously controverted. 1
The essence of the old idea of the Messiah is expressed in
the words Son of David, Son of Man, Servant of God, God
with us and the kingdom of God.
Son of David. According to revelation, God promised,
immediately after the Fall, to the misguided mother of the
race a descendant who should vanquish the seducer and
establish in opposition to his kingdom a kingdom of goodness.
“ I will put enmities between thee [the serpent] and the
woman, and thy seed and her seed; she shall crush thy head,
and thou shalt lie in wait for her heel ” (Gen. iii, 15). 2 After
the flood the promise goes over to the Semites through Noe
(Gen. ix, 25-27), and later particularly to Abraham, the first
1 The following works give more detailed information : Bade, Christ-
ologie des A. T. (1850-1852); Hengstenberg, Christologie des A. T. (1854-
1857); Reinke, Die messianischen Weissagungen bei den grossen und
lleinen Propheten des A. T., five vols. (1859-1862) 4 Bohl, Christologie des
A. T, (1882); Becker, Die Weissagungen als Kriterien der Offenbarung
(1890); Orelli, Die alttestamentl. Weissagungen von der Vollendung des
Gottesreiches (ISS2); Meignan, Les ProphHes d’ Israel et le Messie
(1894); Hiihn, Die messianischen Weissagungen (1899); Riehm, Die
messianischen Weissagungen des israelitisch-jiidischen Volkes bis tu
den Targumim (1899); Caillard, Jisus-Christ et les prophities mes-
sianiques (1905); Moller, Die messianischen Erwartung der vorexilischen
Propheten (1906); A. Schulte, Die messianischen Weissagungen des A.
T. (1908); Leimbach, Messianische Weissagungen des A. T. (1909);
Ernst Sellin, Die israelitisch-judische Heilandserwartung (1909); A.
Lemann, Histoire compute de Vidie messianique chex le peuple d’lsrael
(1909); Richter, Die messianische Weissagung in ihre Erjiillung (1905).
5 See also Zapletal, AUtestamentliches, 16-25 (1903).


ancestor of the Israelitish people. “ I will bless thee,” God
says to Abraham, “ and thou shalt be blessed. I will bless
them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in
thee shall all the kindred of the earth be blessed” (Gen.
xii, 2,3). “In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed” (Gen. xxii, 18). Jacob, Abraham’s grandson, be-
queathed the promise of the blessing and the Saviour of the
nations to the tribe of Juda: ‘‘The sceptre shall not be
taken away from Juda, nor a ruler from his thigh, till he
come that is to be sent, and he shall be the expectation of
nations” (Gen. xlix, 10). 1
This supremacy of Juda is handed down to David, to
whom again the promise is made : “ I will raise up thy seed
after thee . . . and will establish his kingdom. . . . He
shall build a house to my name, and I will establish the
throne of his kingdom for ever” (2 Kings vii, 11-16). Long
after David and his immediate successors had departed this
life, and their power had fallen, it is still always announced
that David, the Son of David, the offspring of the house of
David, at some future time shall reign for ever over Israel:
“ And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed
them, even my servant David; he shall feed them and he shall
be their shepherd, and I the Lord will be their God, and my
servant David the prince in the midst of them. I the Lord
have spoken it ” (Ezek. xxxiv, 23, 24). 2
But not only Israel, but also the Gentile nations are to be
the heirs of this Son of David, whom God will place as an
everlasting king upon Sion, the holy hill (Ps. ii, xliv, cix).
For he will replace the old covenant, concluded only with
Israel, by a new covenant, and the Jewish theocracy by a
new Messianic kingdom (Jer. xxxi, 31-34): “And in that day
the root of Jesse [David], who standeth for an ensign of
people, him the Gentiles shall beseech, and his sepulchre
shall be glorious” (Isa. xi, 10). “And many people shall go
and say : Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the
Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us
of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. For the Law shall
come forth from Sion and the word of the Lord from Jeru-
salem ” (Isa. ii, 3; Mic. iv, 1-3). “The earth is filled with
the knowledge of the Lord, as the covering waters of the sea ”
(Isa. xi, 9). In justice, peace, compassion and blessings shall
David’s Son reign “ from sea to sea and from the river unto
the ends of the earth . . . and all kings of the earth shall
1 See Lagrange, La frofhitie de Jacob, Revue biblique, pp. 525 ft.
(1898); Seydl, Donee veniat qui mittendus est, Katholik, xxi, pp. 159 ff.
(1900); Zapletal, Alttestamentliches, 26-54 (1903); Posmanski, Shiloh ein
Beitrag zur Geschichte der Messiaslehre, part I (1904).
2 See also Ezech. xxxvii, 21-28; Jer. xxiii, 5,6; xxx, 8,9; xxxiii,
15-26; Osee iii, 5; Amos ix, 11.


adore him, all nations shall serve him . . . and in him shall
all the tribes of the earth be blessed ” (Ps. Ixxi). 1
If in the “Son of David” there is conspicuous almost
nothing but the brilliant and beneficent glory of the Messiah
who is to govern as the head of the universal kingdom, yet,
on the other hand, he is depicted as the Servant of God, who
is to suffer and die vicariously for the sins of men, and thus is
to acquire the Messianic supremacy and glory. This side of
the Messianic expectation is especially emphasized in the
Psalms descriptive of the Man of Sorrows (Ps. xxi and Ixviii)
and in the songs of Isaias concerning the Servant of - God. 2
The Servant of God, chosen and anointed by Jehovah, and
equipped with all the gifts of the Spirit of God (Isa. xi, 2,3),
is to be a teacher, a prophet, a worker of miracles, and a
saviour in the full sense of the words. As such he is called,
not only for the salvation of Israel, but “ for a light and
redeemer of the Gentiles unto the ends of the earth” (Isa.
xlli, 1-7; xlix, 6). Nevertheless, he will be despised by men,
abhorred by the people, and proscribed by kings (Isa. xlix,
1-9). “Despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows”
(liii, 3), he gives his body to the strikers and his cheeks to
them that plucked them, and turns not away his face from
them that rebuked him and spit upon him (Isa. 1, 6). “He
was offered . . . and opened not his mouth; he shall be led as
a sheep to the slaughter ” (Isa. liii, 7). Under nameless suffer-
ings, deserted by heaven and rejected by earth (Ps. xxi, Ixviii),
with pierced hands and feet (Ps. xxi, 17; Zach. xii, 10), he
dies in the company of malefactors, he who had done no
iniquity, neither was there deceit in his mouth (Isa. liii, 8,9).
Suffering, distress and death come upon him only on our
account. “He hath borne our infirmities and carried our
sorrows. . . . He was wounded for our iniquities, he was
bruised for our sins, the chastisement of our peace was upon
him, and by his bruises we are healed. All we like sheep
have gone astray; everyone hath turned aside into his own
way, and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all ”
!Isa. liii, 4-6). He atones to God for the sins of the world
Isa. liii, 8, n). Thus does he fulfil the redemptive plan of
1 M. Giidemann, Judische Afologetik, pp. 51, 211 (1906), rightly says
that in the historic plan of the Jewish religion there was nothing which
could have promoted the subsequent national chauvinism; the Old
Testament notion of God, the notion of a united humanity, and the
duty of universal charity exclude in advance a national, chauvinistic
character of the Messianic vision of the future. See Meinertz, Jesus
und die Heidenmission, pp. 17-35 (1908).
2 Isa. xlii, i-i 6; xlix, 1-9; 1, 4-10; lii, 13; liii, 12; Iv, 4. The proof
that these songs refer to the person of the Messiah and not to the Jewish
nation does not belong here. See the copious literature on this subject
and on the Messianic prophecies, and in particular see Feldmann, Der
Knecht Goites in Isaias (Freiburg, 1907); Conrad v. Orelli, Der Knechi
Jahves im Jesajabuche (Lichterfelde, Berlin, 1908).


the Lord, “and shall justify many” (Isa. liii, n). Through
him “ all the ends of the earth shall remember and shall be
converted to the Lord, and all the kindreds of the Gentiles
shall adore in his sight ” (Ps. xxi, 28). The murdered Servant
of God shall, however, rise to a new life, and at the right
hand of God shall be satisfied with fulness of joy and pleasures
for evermore (Ps. xv, 10 and 11).
From this proximity to God he will one day return for the
Last Judgement, as the Son of Man, in the clouds of heaven, in
order to enter into his everlasting dominion over the Messianic
kingdom of God, which he had established and inherited
through his sufferings, death and resurrection. That is the
meaning of Daniel’s prophecy of the Son of Man : “ I beheld
in the vision of the night, and 10, one like the Son of Man
came with the clouds of heaven, and he came even to the
Ancient of Days, and they presented him before him. And he
gave him power and glory and a kingdom; and all people,
tribes and tongues shall serve him ; his power is an everlasting
power that shall not be taken away, and his kingdom that
shall not be destroyed ” (Dan. vii, 9, 13, 14). 1
In view of this unheard-of dignity and these supernatural
official functions of the Messiah, it is scarcely to be wondered
at that he is announced as God in human form, as Emmanuel
— God with us.
In numberless passages, which it is neither necessary nor
possible to quote here separately, the Old Testament pro-
claims the fact that God himself will come in his own person
to redeem his people. In the second psalm the Redeemer is
designated more exactly as the Son of God. The Psalmist
here attributes to the Messiah, constituted and anointed by
God, the words : “ The Lord hath said to me : Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee” (Ps. ii, 7). But most
clearly and emphatically does Isaias utter his prophecy con-
cerning the divine redeemer : “ The Lord himself shall give
you a sign. Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son,
and his name shall be called Emmanuel ” (Isa. vii, 14). That
God is really meant in the metaphysical sense of the word by
this Emmanuel, born miraculously of a virgin, is shown by the
fact that he is designated immediately after as the highest
Lord and possessor of the land of Israel, and is therefore
identified with Jehovah (Isa. viii, 10).
Then the prophet describes Emmanuel still more plainly as
the divine Messiah : “ The people that walked in darkness
have seen a great light; to them that dwelt in the region of
the shadow of death, light is risen. . . . For a child is born
to us, and a son is given to us, and the government is upon
1 In regard to the Messianic character of this passage, see the pre-
viously mentioned literature about the Son of Man, and Lagrange, Les
frofhiiies messianiquei de Daniel, Revue biblique, 494 ff. (1904).


his shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonderful, Coun-
sellor, God the Mighty, the Father of the world to come, the
Prince of Peace. His empire shall be multiplied, and there
shall be no end of peace; he shall sit upon the throne of
David, and upon his kingdom, to establish it and strengthen
it with judgement and with justice from henceforth and for
ever. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this”
(Isa. ix, 2,6, 7). 1
The dominion of God over the world, or the kingdom of
God in the world, was in general the sum total of all hopes
for the future. The whole Old Testament is filled 'with the
idea, which Jesus summarized in the words : “Thy kingdom
come.” By the Malkuth Jahwe, the kingdom of God, or
the kingdom of Heaven—Heaven is only a metonymic
designation of God 2 —the Holy Scripture means, according
to the use of the Semitic language, exactly the concrete royal
rights which God possesses over the world, and the exercise
of these by God on his part, and the recognition of them by
men on their part—that is, a kingdom which is governed from
heaven and consents to be entirely subject to heaven. 3
Precisely the latter—the recognition by men of the inalien-
able rights of God—is to be made a reality by the Messiah.
The kingdom of God and the Messiah are, therefore, correla-
tive ideas. All the traits of the Messiah unite here in one
central point. As the suffering Servant of God he makes the
founding of the kingdom possible; as the Son of David he
comes to its head; and as the Son of Man he will some day
return to establish it in glory. Since, finally, the Messiah
himself is “ God with us,” his dominion will be one with that
of God, and the kingdom of the Messiah becomes in the
highest sense God’s kingdom.
It is likewise clearly said in the prophetic announcements
that in this kingdom the earthly and political aspirations of
the people of the revelation also have their part. It does not
at all appear that the prophecies on this subject are to be
interpreted wholly and exclusively in a spiritual and religious
sense. Rather is it to be supposed that Israel, provided it
had not rejected the Messiah, would have inherited that tem-
poral and national blessing which from time immemorial had
been the reward for its fidelity to Jehovah, and which was
promised no less for the Messianic period than as an accom-
1 A more exact examination of the passages quoted from the Psalmist
and Isaias cannot be given in this space. The proof that the Messiah
was expected as God, in accordance with Old Testament prophecies, is
abundantly furnished by Simon Weber, Die Gotiheit Jesu in der
alttestl. OffenbarungsgeschicMe, in Jesus Christus, Vortrage zu Frei-
burg im Br., 43-68 (1908).
2 E. Schurer, GeschicTite des jiidisehen Volkes, 539 (Leipzig, 1898).
3 Lagrange, Le rigne de Dieu dans VAncien Testament, Revue
biblique, 36-61 (1908).


paniment of the spiritual and religious blessings of the Mes-
sianic kingdom. These formed, however, unquestionably
the principal thing, as is sufficiently evident from the state-
ments thus far made. The Messianic kingdom will bring the
perfect knowledge of God (Isa. ii, 2-4; xi, 9; Mic. iv, 1-3).
The whole people will be blessed through God’s presence, and
will find in him a refuge and help in every kind of distress and
time of need (Isa. iv, 4; xxv, 4). Above all, however, the
kingdom of God will be blessed by the full abundance of the
forgiveness of sins, promised by the Messiah and purchased
by his death. “In that day there shall be a fountain open to
the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for the
washing of the sinner and of the unclean woman ” (Zach.
xiii, 1). “In those days and at that time, saith the Lord, the
iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none;
and the sin of Juda, and there shall none be found; for I will
be merciful to them ” (Jer. 1, 20). “ I will forgive their
iniquity and I will remember their sin no more” (Jer. xxxi,
34). “If your sins be as scarlet, they shall be made as white
as snow; and if they be red as crimson, they shall be white
as wool ” (Isa. i, 18). “ I have blotted out thy iniquities as
a cloud, and thy sins as a mist; return to me, for I have
redeemed thee” (Isa. xliv, 22).
2. The Pharisaical and Rabbinical Concept of the Messiah.
The Pharisaical and rabbinical theology developed after the
return from exile, reached its climax about the time of Jesus,
and was thereupon edited in the writings of the Synagogue,
and especially in the literature of the Talmud. Although for
this reason the publication of almost all the rabbinical litera-
ture is subsequent to the time of Christ, it forms, nevertheless,
“ a source of priceless information for the age of Jesus Christ ;
for the foundations of the current of tradition here established
go back, not only to the lifetime of Christ, but far beyond it.” 1
For this reason we present in the following pages the
rabbinical views of the Messiah according to the oldest writ-
ings of the Synagogue, if still older sources are not at hand. 2
1 E. Schtirer, Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes, p. 112 (igoi); also
W. Bousset, Die Religion des Judentums im neutestamentlichen Zeitalter,
41 (Berlin, iqoffi
2 Thus the Talmud will be quoted, according to custom, simply by
treatise and folio page, and the Mishna by treatise, chapter and para-
graph. From the Midrashim we have made use of Mechilta, ed. Weiss
(Vienna, 1846); Si/ra, ed. Malbim (Bukarest, i 860); Si/re, ed. Fried-
mann (Vienna, 1564); Pesikta des R. Kohana, ed. Buber (Lyck, 1868).
Together with this oldest Midrash from the third century, some other
Midrashim have been used, the publication of which is later, but whose
essential contents rest, as is acknowledged, on ancient synagogal tradi-
tions —namely, Tanchuma, ed. Buber (Wilna, 1885), and several Rah-
both, ed. Wiinsche ( Bibliotheca rabbinica, Leipzig, 1880).


The picture thus gained will correspond essentially to the
rabbinical ideas about the Messiah prevailing at the time of
Christ. But no one at the present stage of investigation into
Jewish theology can guarantee that every particular feature
of them goes back to a period preceding the Christian era. 1
At the first glance it seems strange that the rabbinical
theology, and with it later Judaism, was not able to maintain
itself at the height of that notion of the Messiah, entertained
by the prophets, which we have just observed. It laid, on
the whole, little stress any longer on the prophetic writings.
In order to strengthen practical Jewish life as opposed to the
influences of their pagan environment, the Law —that is, the
613 Torah commandments (for such was the number that the
Scribes found in the Pentateuch) — became more and more
exaggerated at the expense of the real meaning of the pro-
phetical Messianic revelation. The Rabbis not only caused
the religious private life of the people to be entirely absorbed
in devotion to the Law, in comparison with which prayers
and sacrifices were much less important, 2 and not only made
the reading of the Torah also the central point of public
worship and of the whole religious consciousness of the com-
munity, 3 but, according to them, the books of the Law contain
the whole of religion, and the Torah is the revelation, in which
God has included everything that he in any way can reveal 1
through all eternity. The Law 5 existed even before the world,
and, accordingly, God already circumcised Adam before he
breathed into him the breath of life, 6 while the prophetical
and doctrinal books of Holy Scripture came only later and, as
it were, by chance. 7 The books of the Law will also exist
1 See Klausner, Die Messianischen Vorsiellungen des jiidisehen Volkes
im Zeitalter der Tannaiten (Berlin, 1904); Robinson, he Messianisme
dans le Talmud et les Midraschim (Paris, 1907); B. Stakemeier, II
Messianismo degli Ebrei al temfo di Gesit, Rivista di scienze teologiche,
35-45 (1910). On a broader scale write Schiirer, Bousset, and especially
A. Hausrath, Neutestamentliche Zeitgeschichte (1868-1873); Alfred
Edersheim, The Life and Times of Jesus, the Messiah, 1-110 (London,
1890); H. Kellner, Jesus von Nazareth und seine Afosiel im Rahmen
der Zeitgeschichte (1908); J. Felten, Ncutest. Zeitgeschichte, oder Juden-
turn und Heidentum zur Zeit Christi u. der Afostel, 133-189 (1910).
2 Shabbath 10 a and 30a; Jebamoth 105 a; Wajjikra rabba 29. After
the destruction of the Temple, study of the Torah Replaces sacrifices for
the atonement of all sins (Jebamoth 105 a; Tanchuma Achare moth 10),
even for past murders (Sifre 1316).
3 Sifre 13b and 40a, jer Shabbath 12c; Shemoth rabba c. 34.
Other books were only introduced as appended to the reading of the
Law (Tanchuma, Debarim Reeh 1; Rash Hashshana iv, 6).
4 Debarim rabba c. 8 on 5. Mos. xxx, 12; Taaniih 9a.
5 Sebachim 116 a; Shabbath 88b; Pirhe Aboth vi, 10; Mechilta 64b;
Bereshith rabba c. 1.
6 Tanchuma Parasha Noach 5. It is often stated that Sem had his
own school of instruction in the Law — e.g., Maccoth 23 b. According to
Bereshith rabba 63 Esau and Jacob had a dispute on the interpretation
of Law in their mother’s womb.
7 Nedarim 226; Koheleth rabba on i, 13.


eternally, while all the rest of the revelation will at some
future time pass out of validity and use. 1
This frightful exaggeration [of the Law] destroyed the
whole prophetical expectation of salvation. If the Mosaic
Law—that is, the Law as interpreted by rabbinical and
kabbalistic 2 exegesis, as the highest good and the only
thing which remains eternally—is all, then Mosaism can no
longer be a means to the end of Messianic redemption, and no
more a transient institution; it is then itself redemption and
perfection.
And it was really looked upon as such by the rabbinical
theology. According to this, Jehovah, by the revelation of
the Law on Sina, in order to make up for Adam’s fall,
offered to the chosen people his loving union, 3 and Israel
acceded to the proposal of its divine Bridegroom through its
acceptance of the Law. 4 Thus Judaism was redeemed on
Sina. 5 This act of redemption was to be the end of God’s
dealings, and the nuptial relation which had been created thus
between God and his people was to last for ever. Even
though Israel had frustrated this plan of God by its worship
of the golden calf, 6 yet so much at least is certain, that all
the revelation of salvation cannot surpass what was given on
Sinai. The aim of the historical development of the plan of
salvation is, therefore, to get back again, through the fulfil-
ment of the Law, what, through the episode of the golden
calf, had been lost. 7 It is no more a matter of inward justifi-
cation and of an atoning redemption from sin ; sin, atonement,
healing and justification, in the sense of Holy Scripture, are
unknown to rabbinical theology. The great means of redemp-
tion and the great act of redemption is excellence in matters
of the Law, and that only.
To complete this act of redemption is, however, not, of
course, the work of the Messiah. If justice and justification
are conceived of only as legal notions and as the outward,
legal justice,pf the nation and individual, then the nation or
1 Shemoth rabba c. 33; jer. Megilla i, 7.
2 See F. Weber, Jiidische Theologie auf Grund des Talmud und ver-
wandier Schriften, edited by F. Delitzsch and G. Schnedermann, pp.
109-124 (Leipzig, 1897); Schiirer, of. cit., pp. 419 ff.; Bousset, of. cit.,
128-138. * Bammidbar rabba c. 5 and 13.
4 Shir rabba on 1,2; Shabbafh 88 a; Pesikta 124 b. God offered the
Law even to the heathen, but they refused it ( Pesikta 199 b, 200 a;
Shemoth rabba c. 13). Therefore God cast them away for ever (Waj-
jikra rabba c. 13; Bammidbar rabba c. 2), while confiding for ever in
Israel ( Debarim rabba c. 3; Shemoth rabba c. 51), so that Jehovah and
Israel can never deny one another ( Wajjikra rabba c. 6) without com-
mitting unfaithfulness (Shemoth rabba c. 33).
5 Shir rabba on 1,2; 4,7; Bammidbar rabba c. 16; Shemoth rabba
c. 32.
s Pesikta 124 b; Shabbath 88a; Shir rabba on 1, 3.
7 Bammidbar rabba c. 17 : “ The Holy One, to whom be praise, hath
established the Law and the commandments that Israel may obtain the
life of the world to come.”


individual must alone and on its own account make itself just
through a mathematically strict balancing between debit and
credit, between the demands of the Law and their fulfilment.
These demands and fulfilments are noted down day by day,
reckoned up, credited and balanced. 1 He is wholly just whose
legal performances numerically equal the sum of the com-
mandments ; 2 relatively just is he whose life-balance shows at
least an absolute surplus of legal achievements. 3
Only when the balance of all the individuals and of the
whole nation corresponds to the budget of the Law—in other
words, only when all Israel is justified and made holy—d°es the
Messiah begin his work. Only then will the Redeemer come. 4
It is true his coming is immediately preceded by a period
of absolute lawlessness. The appearance of that period is
“like that of a dog.” 5 Elias will, however, appear in order
to create again respect for the Law, and thereby fully and
absolutely to justify Israel and to make it holy for the
Messiah. 6 Then, and only then, will the Messiah appear, as
the well-earned reward for fidelity to the Law; not as a grace,
much less as an act of redemption. 7
His redeeming work —if one can still speak of it as such —
consists in the fact that he, by word and example, encourages
and perpetuates faithfulness to the Law. As a perfectly com-
petent scribe, he will instruct 8 all the people in the Torah,
and even take upon himself its unbearable yoke ; 9 and he will
be “ loaded down, like a mill, with fulfilments of rabbinical
commandments. ” 10
That is all. A great Rabbi—nothing more; that is the
Messiah of the theology of the Synagogue. But a Messiah
who makes his appearance as a preacher of morals, and who
accuses this people, so faithful to the Law, and, above all, the
flower and intelligence of the nation—the Scribes and Phari-
sees—of guilt and sin, is at once condemned as a false
Messiah. Should he once disclose the necessity of a religious
regeneration for Israel, or should he wish to proclaim a
religion surpassing the Mosaism of the Rabbis, he is a traitor
to the Holy of Holies, a blasphemer. But also even the
censure, and still more the violation of one single rabbinical
iota, the healing of a sick man, or the plucking an ear of corn
1 Wajjikra rabba c. 26; Tanchuma, Wajjelech 2; Aboda Sara 2 a.
2 Shabbath 32 a. * Kiddushin 40 b; Pesikta 176 a.
1 Sanhedrin 97b; Shabbath 118 a; Shemoth rabba c. 25; Wajjikra
rabba c. 3.
5 Sola ix, 15 ; Sanhedrin 97 a; Shir rabba on 2, 13.
* Pirke de-Rabbi Elieter c. 43; cj. Matt, xvii, 10 ff.; Mark ix, 10 ff.;
Luke i, 16 ff.
7 It needed all the intellectual power of St Paul to make even the Jews
who had become Christians understand that they had not been justified
by the Law, but must become justified by Christ (see Rom. iii, 4,7;
Phil. iii).
8 Jonathan Tar gum on Is. liii, 5, 10-12; Shir rabba on 2, 13.
9 Jonathan Targum on Is. ix, 3. 10 Sanhedrin 93 b.


upon the Sabbath, association with a publican, or the omis-
sion of an ablution, marked him as a disciple of Beelzebub.
He only can be recognized as the true Messiah who, like the
Scribes, and even more than they, observes the Law with all
its additional stipulations, in all its subtleties, and with the
whole rabbinical barrier drawn around it. 1
The religious efficacy and redemptive activity of the Messiah
are, accordingly, not specifically Messianic; they do not sur-
pass those of Hillel or of an extraordinarily gifted scribe.
The Messianic activity and work of the Redeemer lie essen-
tially elsewhere. He has simply to toss the reward into the
lap of self-redeemed Judaism by founding the Messianic
kingdom; or, rather, by the re-establishment of the kingdom
of God in the form in which it had already existed on Sinai,
according to the fancy of the Rabbis; as a worldly—yes,
exceedingly worldly—theocracy.
In the opinion of the Rabbis, the kingdom of Heaven itself
came down to earth with the Lord on Sinai. 2 From that time
on, politics and religion were one and the same thing. To be
subject to any other sovereign than Jehovah meant to deny
the religious supremacy of God and even religion itself. Since
God had taken up his abode in the midst of his people, he
alone was that people’s King and supreme Lord, and his
dominion assured not only Israel’s predominance over the
Gentiles, who served him as his footstool, but it created para-
disaical conditions of every kind. God’s nearness banished
all the consequences of original sin and re-established the
blessed primitive state of the Garden of Eden in this terres-
trial kingdom of Heaven, until the earth should be merged
into heaven itself, and time into eternity. Thus did Nomism
imagine the first redemptive kingdom on Sinai 3 to have been,
and thus it logically imagined would be also its rehabilitation
by the Messiah.
On the first day that the entire nation shall keep the Law 4
the Messiah will appear, drive back the enemies of Israel,
compel the Gentiles to respect the Torah,® and establish the
Messianic dominion. 6
1 See Dellinger, Heidentum und Judentum, 773 (Regensburg, 1857).
2 Mechilta 73 b ; Pesikta 16 b ; Shemotk rabba c. 23.
3 Weber, op. cit., p. 271 ff.
4 If all Israel would repent even for only one day, and would keep
only one Sabbath perfectly holy, the Messiah would at once appear.
Pesikta 163 b; Shemoth rabba c. 25.
5 Weber, p. 385 ff. In this procedure, however, the formal conversion
to the Law and thereby the hope of Messianic salvation for the godless
Gentiles are excluded, according to Aboda Sara 3b ; Jebamoth 24b, etc.
Jewish proselytising propaganda had its justification only before the
coming of the Messianic era. Whoever is not already a Jew when the
Messiah comes cannot any more become one, and is at once excluded
from participation in the Messianic blessings (see Lagrange, Le Mes-
sianisme chez les fuifs. 284-287).
• Mechilta 59b; Pesikta 51a; Debarim rabba c. 1.


This is regarded as the continuation of the kingdom of
David and Solomon, 1 which, however, will be far surpassed
by the Messianic kingdom in brilliancy, splendour, might and
happiness. Jerusalem, the capital of the kingdom, will, at
the same time, be the metropolis of all the cities of the world. 2
Its ascendancy, grandeur and magnificence will be something
until then unknown. 3 In the midst of the city God will pile
up Carmel, Thabor and Sina, one on top of the other, and will
erect upon the summit the Temple, 4 visible to the whole
world. From there the Messiah, in the name of Jehovah, will
extend his sceptre. The vast Roman Empire, 5 which arose
only on account of Israel’s sins, will lie in ruins at fiis feet. 6
The non-Roman pagan nations will be obliged to pay tribute
to him and to the pious Israelites, as vassal states. 7
To serve the Messiah and the Jews in Palestine will be the
sole raison d’etre of the nations living outside Palestine. As
a beneficent Messianic king, the Messiah offers himself only
to the children of Abraham and only in the Promised Land. 8
Hence all the scattered remnants of Israel will return from the
dispersion under Divine leadership and assemble in Palestine. 9
There he will lavishly bestow the blessings of the Messianic
kingdom and era. All the sensuous delights of the Israelitish
kingdom of the Torah ever dreamed of will be realized—the
removal by the Messiah of every kind of sickness and distress,
wonderful physical beauty and vitality for the children of Israel,
and 10 a fabulous productivity of soil and plants. Women
will give birth to children daily. 11 Men will be twice as tall as
Adam, who measured one hundred ells in height : even the
dwarfs among them will reach to the pinnacles of the Temple. 12
No bunch of grapes will produce less than thirty casks of
wine. l3 Barley will attain the height of the palm-tree and
scatter meal about, already ground on demand, without any
need of harvesting first. 14 If roasted pigeons are added, then
the measure of the Messianic blessings will be full—a veritable
fairy life in fairyland.
Shall it therefore be said that the rabbinical attitude towards
the Messiahship had only earthly and political characteristics
and none that were also deeply religious ? God forbid 1 That
1 Pesachim 54 a. 2 Shir rabba on 1, 5.
8 Baba bathra 753 b; Sijre 65 a; Pesikta 143 ab.
4 Pesikta 144 b.
5 The world-power to be destroyed by the Messiah is, according to
the entire rabbinical theology, the Roman Empire (see Weber, 365;
Schiirer, ii, 532; Bousset, 204). 6 Sijre 86 a.
7 Tanchuma 19; Shemoih rabba c. 35. 8 Bousset, 216.
9 Schiirer, ii, 537. Unfortunately, Schiirer in his magnificent work
has not clearly enough distinguished between the rabbinical and the
eschatological and apocalyptic conceptions.
10 Bereshith rabba c. 12 and 26; Shabbath 30b; Pesachim 68 a.
11 Shabbath 30b. 12 Baba bathra 75a.
13 Kethuboth mb. 14 id., mb.


would be a complete misapprehension. Rabbinical Judaism
has never failed to recognize the importance of its historical
plan of salvation. It was, as we have said, convinced that
the Messiah would lead the Jews to the exact observation of
the religious Law of God in the Torah, and also would bring
those who were not Israelites to recognize it. Precisely in
that did the Synagogue see the spiritual worth and essential
character of the Messianic age and the Messianic kingdom.
The supremacy of the Torah, which, according to rabbinical
interpretation, was one with the supremacy of God, was to
make itself felt everywhere over the whole earth. So far
as this the pharisaical idea of the Messiah was thoroughly
religious, and even religious in a universal sense.
And not only in theory, but also in the practical conduct of
life, did the Jews show a great, in fact, an unheard-of zeal for
the hoped-for “kingdom of God.” 1 One must allow that
under the leadership of the Pharisees they were more en-
thusiastic for the kingdom of God than ever, and sought to
usher it in, not merely through a punctual observation of the
Law, but through an acceptance of the rabbinical “yoke.” 2
Precisely in order to increase the practical observance of the
Law and yoke, and so to bring about the Malkuth ]ahwe more
speedily, they also developed that intense missionary activity
of theirs, and compassed sea and land to make one proselyte
(Matt, xxiii, 15).
The immense mistake lay in the fact that this Messianic
conception, whether practical or theoretical, was applied to a
kingdom of God which in a secular and political sense had
acquired a changed value. The Judaists understood by this,
in spite of all pious phrases and pharisaical hypocrisy, essen-
tially a sudden change of things in the sense of the material-
ized, thoroughly worldly and particularly Jewish-Davidic
supremacy. They endured the Law and “yoke” principally
because these were the means to this political and national
purpose. The Messiah was longed for by all classes because
he was to hasten and assure the advent of their national
dominion through the enforcement of the Law. And even
Jehovah, who was to assume the government of Israel, must
for this purpose place himself exclusively at the service of the
Jewish national aspirations. He must become (excuse the
expression, since it is absolutely correct) a thorough-going
1 Malkuth Jahwe.
2 Not only in the Gospels (Matt, xxiii, 4), but also in the Talmud the
rabbinical fulfilling of the Law is always described as a “ yoke ” and
“ a heavy burden ” (see Gal v, 1). Even one solitary commandment is
exceedingly difficult to put into practice (Mechilta no a); but positive
commandments are concerned with everything, yes, everything (Sifra
on iii; Mos. 8, 25). Every object must be handled according to definite
rules; every kind of work—for example, ploughing or planting —must
be done in accordance with fixed, literal, theological instructions, other-
wise a grave sin is committed (Bammidbar rabba c. 17).


Jew of the Law, must take upon himself in every way both
Law and yoke, and put himself, with his heavenly royal court,
entirely under the orders of the Jewish Sanhedrim. 1 Every-
thing else that the Judaism of the Rabbis and Pharisees
dreamed of, beyond their theocratical national power and its
blessedness, was purely secondary, merely an accompanying
phenomenon. The Talmud often expressly assures us:
“ There is no other difference between the present world and
the era of the Messiah than the [present] servitude enforced
upon us by the kingdoms [of the GentilesJ.” 2
Let it not be said that the Jewish conception of the Messiah
first reached its sharply nationalistic and material climax in
the period after Christ. It is, rather, proved from the most
reliable sources that already in the time of Christ the Jewish
kingdom of God and expectations concerning the Messiah
had sunk to a political and material level. Even the Psalms
of Solomon, which were composed half a century before
Christ, 3 and express most ideally the Messianic conception of
the Pharisees, do not rise above the level just described.
According to their glowing pourtrayal, the Messiah will be a
just king, taught by God, and filled with the Holy Spirit, who
will rule a thoroughly holy and just people; that is, one that
is law-abiding and well versed in the practice of the Torah. 4
He will govern Israel “ in the fear of God and in the wisdom,
rectitude and power of the Spirit”; he will lead it “in the
path of righteousness, since he impresses upon all the fear of
God.” He will not extend his dominion only to the Gentiles.
“ He will direct nations and peoples with wisdom and equity.
He will gather the nations together under his yoke, that they
may serve him, and he will thus make Jehovah glorious over
the whole earth.” 5 The main thing, the essentially Messianic
element in him is, however, his Davidic kingdom, the secular
power with which he is to rule Israel, shatter its enemies and
purify Jerusalem from the Gentiles. 6 Not a single non-
Israelite is to dwell in the Messianic kingdom. Foreigners
will be allowed only to bring gifts to Palestine for the children
of Israel, and to stare enviously at their grandeur. 7 The
Messiah is wholly a political ruler, and the Messianic king-
dom a thoroughly secularized and nationalized “ kingdom of
heaven.” 8
We need only to open the Gospel to become convinced that
this conception in the Psalms of Solomon of the kingdom
and activity of the Messiah was by no means an isolated
instance. Wherever the Scribes and Pharisees appear in the
1.
II
1 For the proof of this, see my Die Krisis des religiosen Judeniums
zur Zeit Christi, 10-12. 2 Shabbath 63 a; Pesachim 68 a.
3 Oskar von Gebhardt, Die Psalmen Salomonis (1895).
1 Ps. Salom. xviii, 28-46.
• Ps. Salom. xvii, 23-27.
7 Ps. Salom. xvii, 30-34.
5 id., xvii and xviii.
8 id., xi, xvii, xviii.


Gospels, and wherever Jesus comes at all into contact with
official Judaism in province or capital, we recognize the same
materialized notion of the Messiah. We have had occasion to
prove that sufficiently in the foregoing chapter.
Nor were these views limited only to the homeland, Pales-
tine. The Hellenistic Jews in foreign countries thought the
same. Flavius Josephus knows only a Messianic king,
whom he, the renegade to Rome, hails in the Emperor Ves-
pasian.l According to Philo of Alexandria (who died about
a.d. 60), the Messiah has merely a military part to play, in-
cluding a fight against the enemies of the Law and of the
people of the Law, the victory and everlasting dominion of
this people, and its attendant luxury, wealth, honour and
corporate unity. 2
The rabbinical-Jewish Messiah is also, on that very account,
merely a man, both in origin and by nature. 3 Only the name
of the Messiah—that is, the plan of his mission—is ancient.
It is true, together with this ideal, the Palestine theology
admits also a real pre-existence of the soul of the Messiah.
This was, however, only in consequence of the rabbinical anthro-
pology, which believes all human souls to have been created
before the world, and kept in a sort of store-house in the
seventh heaven until the moment of their union with the body. 4
The Messiah is therefore a pre-existent and transcendental
being in no other sense than all other men are. Also, the
doctrine of the purely human origin and nature of the Messiah
was not at all a more or less disseminated dogma, but was
the common view of the rabbinical-jewish theology. The
Jew Trypho assures St Justin very positively : “ We all expect
the Messiah as a man born from human parents, and as one
who will receive from Elias, as soon as the latter shall appear,
the kingly consecration.” 5
That this opinion did not first appear at a time subsequent
to Christ is clearly evident from the Gospel, especially from
the dispute of Jesus with the Jews, whom he wishes to con-
vince out of Ps. cix that the Messiah is not merely an earthly
descendant of David (Matt, xxii, 42 and parallels). Only
through his zeal for the Law is he, like Abraham, Moses,
Job and Ezechias, 6 superior to the average man, and he
makes himself, precisely through this justification by the Law,
worthy of accomplishing the work of the Messiah. 7
If now we compare these rabbinical views, which were
current among the contemporaries of Jesus, with those of the
1 Bellum Judaicum vi, 5, 4.
2 Philo, De frcemiis, xiv-xx; De execrationibus, viii, ix, xix. Con-
sult E. Brehier, Les idies philosofhiques et religieuses de Philon d'Alex-
andrie (Paris, 1908); Lagrange, Le Messianisme chez les Juifs, 28-37.
3 Targ. Jonathan on Isa. xi, 1 ; Shir rabba 4, 8.
1 See Weber, § 46, 78. 5 Dialog, cum Try-phone c. 49.
« Bammidbar rabba c. 14; Bereshith rabba c. 85.
2 Bereshith rabba, 85.


Old Testament, the result is a very wide difference. The
narrow, national, materialistic power of the pharisaical
Messianic kingdom, pertaining to this world only, stands in
striking contrast to the world-embracing spiritual kingdom of
God. It is true it based itself upon the religious fundamental
Law of the Torah and had a theocratic character, but in prin-
ciple it was conceived as thoroughly earthly and political.
The figure of the suffering and dying Servant of God was
naturally no longer suited to this frame. It was the greatest
conceivable annoyance to the Jews. Only rarely did a Rabbi
dare to apply the descriptions of Isaias and the' book of
Wisdom (ii, 12-20) of the sufferings of the “just” to the
Messiah. Rabbinical Judaism was deaf and blind to these
Messianic prophecies. Dalman 1 and Lagrange 2 have clearly
demonstrated this state of the case, which apologists even
now often overlook. But the supernatural and supernational
Son of Man of Daniel became also detached from the phari-
saical notion of the Messiah, not to speak of Emmanuel.
Only the Son of David remained, the purely earthly and
Jewishly interpreted offspring of the great king, who was to
lead the national power of the Torah to victory.
3. The Apocalyptic and Eschatological Notion of the
Messiah.
Running parallel with the official Messianic notion of
rabbinical theology, and of the great mass of the Jewish
people was the eschatological and apocalyptic conception.
This bore more the character of a conventicle religion, scarcely
touched the masses, and represented a sect, in so far as it
based its conclusions on apocryphal books, in contrast to the
authoritative theology of the Synagogue, instead of evolving
its doctrines, according to the rabbinical rule, only out of the
canonical writings of the Old Testament.
The prevalence of apocalyptic ideas was in full swing
from 160 B.c. to a.d. 120. 3 Its more important literary pro-
ductions, in so far as they concern our purpose, are the
following: The Book of Henock,' 1 the original manuscript of
1 Der leidende und sierbende Messias der Synagoge im ersten nach-
christlichen Jahrtausend (Berlin, 1888).
2 Le Messianisme chez les Juifs, 236-251, 259.
3 For more exact information concerning the origin and age of the
separate apocalyptic writings, see Schiirer, Geschichte des jiidischen
Volkes, iii, 190-293 (1898); E. Kautzsch, Die Apokryphen des A. T., i
(Tubingen, 1900); P. Holz, Jiidische Eschatologie (Tubingen, 1903).
1 See Charles, The Ethiopia Version of the Booh of Enoch (Oxford,
1906); a Greek-German edition by Radermacher and Flemming, Das
Buch Henoch in Die griechischen christlichen Schrijtsteller der drei
ersten Jahrhunderte (1901); German translation by Beer, “ Das Buch
Henoch,” in E. Kautzsch’s Die Apokryphen und Pseudepigraphen des
A. T. ii, 117-210; L. Gry, Quand furent composies les paraboles
d’Hinoch, 103-141 (Museon, 1909), and Le Messianisme des paraboles
d’Hinoch et la theologie juive contemporaine, 143-154 (Museon, 1909).


which dates from the time of the Machabees, and whose most
important parts, the metaphorical discourses, 1 originated in
the last decades before Christ; the Book of Jubilees, or the
Little Genesis, from the time of John Hyrcanus ; 2 the
Assumption of Moses, written about six years after Christ; 3
the ante-christian Jewish portions of the Sybilline Oracles; 4,
and, finally, two manuscripts concluded only after the destruc-
tion of Jerusalem —viz., the Apocalypse of Esdras , s also
called the “ Fourth Book of Esdras,” and the Apocalypse of
Baruch . 6
The Messianic ideas in the apocalyptic writings are cer-
tainly often amalgamated with the rabbinical. Pharisaical
and apocalyptic views at the outset whirl about in a confused
mass. The older apocalyptic writers still held fast, however,
wholly or in part, to the earthly, temporal Messianic king of
the Synagogue; but when the prospects of the realization of
the Messianic-Davidic kingdom, after the downfall of the
Machabees and the beginning of the time of Herod, vanished
more and more, many zealots doubted whether they should
live to see it in this thoroughly corrupted world. They clung
now narrowly and exclusively to the prophecy of Daniel about
the Son of Man, who was to appear in transcendent might
only at the end of the world, in order to place himself at the
head of a supermundane kingdom of God.
In contrast to the hope of the future, previously held, which
had kept wholly within the limits of the present world, all the
Messianic ideas were now transported into the supermundane
and the hereafter. With the coming of the Messianic age a
new phase of the world will begin in the cosmological sense.
This phase of the final period is, in all respects, in violent
contrast to the present one. This temporal phase is under the
dominion of the powers hostile to God —viz., Satan and his
visible and invisible confederates. The future phase, in the
world hereafter, will be under the dominion of God and his
Messiah only. Both epochs are absolutely separated. The
earthly condition of the world must first be destroyed before
the supermundane Messianic phase can be ushered in.
Hence the Messianic salvation will come entirely from above,
to the exclusion of all earthly relations whatsoever. The earth,
on which it appears, will first be renewed from above, or else
1 c. 37-71.
2 Charles, The Book of Jubilees, or the Little Genesis (London, 1902).
3 Charles, The Assumption oj Moses (London, 1897).
* I use the edition of Joh. Geffken, Die Oracula Sybillina, in den
griechischen christlichen Schriftstellern der ersten drei ]ahrhunderte
(Leipzig, 1902).
5 The fourth Book of Ezra (Bensley, 1895); Leon Vaganay, Le prob-
lime eschatologique dans le quatri'eme livre d’Esdras (Paris, 1906).
8 Fritzsche, Libri apocryphi Veteris Testamenti (Lipsias, 1871),
German translation by Victor Ryssel; Die Apokalypsen des Baruch, ii,
402-457)-


be let down directly from heaven. The blessings of the Mes-
sianic age, even those which are wholly sensuous, will be
stored up in heaven until the coming of the Messiah. Above
all, however, the Messiah himself is, in his origin, nature, life
and work, entirely transcendental, pertaining exclusively to
the other world. Pre-existing in heaven, he will descend
thence at the conclusion of this earthly period, merely to
decide the fate of men, as Judge, and to set himself up as the
Messianic regent of the new world. In a word, while the
popularly conceived Jewish Messiah and his kingdom are
thoroughly earthly, and develop their activity in this world
and period, the apocalyptic Messiah belongs entirely to the
other world, produces his stage-effect (for one cannot call it
by any other name) by ushering in a new phase of world
history, and founds his dominion as a post-mundum kingdom
of heaven.
Many apocalyptic writers think that this kingdom will
last for ever, while others suppose that it will be relieved
after a longer or shorter period by the resurrection of the
dead, the Last Judgement and a condition of eternal duration
in heaven or hell. 1 Hence the modern writers on the subject
are wont to call the apocalyptic Messianic ideas eschato-
logical because in them everything is concentrated on the last
things, on the end of this period of the world and on the
succeeding transcendental Messianic world.
The eschatological element is also the only difference
between the rabbinical and the apocalyptic Messianic stand-
points. The stage manager, the stage itself and the mise en
seine are different in both; but fundamentally the same piece
is played, whether in one place or another—namely, that of
putting Israel, in a strongly materialistic sense, into a position
of national world supremacy. One would not believe it pos-
sible, yet it is really so. The Messiah will first subdue all the
enemies of God’s people and drive the kings from their
thrones and kingdoms 2 by the mere breath of his mouth and
the sharpness of his purely forensic judgement. 3 Then he
will award to the pious Jews dominion “ over the whole
earth, which is under heaven, and they shall reign over all
nations .. . and shall possess the whole earth.” 4 All the
1 See the representations of the eschatological apocalyptists in W.
Bousset’s Jesu Predigl int Gegensatz zum fudentum (1892), and Die
Religion des Judentums im neutestl. Zeitalter, 230-273 (1903); Paul
Volz, JiidiscTie Eschatologie von Daniel bis Ahiba (1903); W. Bal-
densperger, Die messianisch-afocalyftischen Hoffnungen des Juden-
tums (1903); Hugo Gressmann, Der Ursfrung der israelitisch-jiidischen
Eschatologie (1905); Gustav Honnike, Das Judenchrisienium im 1 u. 2
Jahrhundert, 69-74 (1908); Lagrange, Le Messianisme chex les Juifs,
37-136 (1909).
3 Oracula Sybillina iii, 652 ff. ; Henoch 46, 4-6; 52, 4-9; A foe.
Baruch 39, 7-40, 2; 70, 2-10; 72, 2-6.
3 Henoch 45, 3; 55, 4; 62, 2-11; 69, 27; IV Esdras 13, 25-28, 32-38.
1 Jub. 32, 19, c£. Henoch, 92, 4.


Gentiles shall fall down before them, shall render them
homage, cry to them for mercy and listen to their every
word. 1 They will cut the throats of sinners and mercilessly
kill them. 2 The Lord will deliver their enemies into their
hands, and their yoke shall weigh heavily upon them. 3 “ Then
shalt thou be happy, O Israel, and shalt mount on the neck
and wings of the eagle.” 4 “ And God will raise thee on high
and make thee float in the starry heaven, and thou shalt look
down upon thine enemies on earth, and thou shalt recognize
them and rejoice.” 5
Simultaneously with the national world supremacy, Israel
will be inundated with an abundance of all the sensible bless-
ings conferred by the Messiah. The old Jerusalem, the object
of longing to every Israelite, will be pulled down and super-
seded, and the Messiah will bring a new Jerusalem 6 which had
existed before the Fall in Paradise, had since then been pre-
served in heaven, and from there will now descend. 7 This
new Jerusalem will far surpass the ancient one in beauty and
splendour. 8 The Messiah will gather together in it all pious
Israelites. 9 “ All who have been killed or dispersed ” shall be
brought home again in chariots on the wings of the wind. 10
In Jerusalem, around the Temple, the tower of which will
stretch upward to heaven, 11 the happy Israelites will revel in
the protection and blessing of the Messiah. 12 “Bliss will
everywhere manifest itself, and peace will appear. . . ,
Health will descend in the dew, and sickness will depart. . . .
And joy shall prevail over the whole earth.” 13 The wild beasts
will come to serve mankind. 14 Nature will be fabulously pro-
lific. 15 On one vine-stock there shall be i,ooo vines, and on
one vine i,ooo bunches of grapes, and on one bunch i,ooo
grapes, and one single grape will give a cask of wine. l6
People will not become old and weary of life. At the age of
i,ooo years they will still be as children and boys. 17 They will
live till they have gotten r,ooo children. 18 Women will bear
children without pain; reapers shall not become weary, nor
shall builders be exhausted. 19 All the pious shall swim in
1 Henoch, 90, 30. 2 id., 94, 7; 98, 12. 3 id., 95, 3-7.
4 The Roman eagle is certainly here meant. See Schiirer ii, 540.
5 4 ssumptio Mosis 10, 8-10.
8 Henoch 53, 6; 90, 28, 29; of. Jub. t, 17, 27, 29; Orac. Sibyl!, iii,
657, 776.
7 Apoc. Baruch 4, 2-6; IV Esdras 7, 26; 8, 52; 10, 44-59.
8 Henoch 53, 6; go, 28; IV Esdras, 7, 26. 9 Henoch 90, 30.
10 id., 57; 90, 32. 11 Orac. Sibyll. v, 426.
12 IV Esdras 7, 27-28; T 2, 34; 13, 48-50. 13 Apoc. Baruch 73, 2.
14 Orac. Sibyll. iii, 787-794; A-poc. Baruch 73-74.
15 Orac. Sibyll. iii, 620-623; Henoch 10, 18-19.
18 Apoc. Baruch 29, 5-8; see Papias in Irenceus v, 33, 3, where instead
of 1,000, 10,000 is the figure given.
17 Jub. 23, 27. 18 Henoch to, 17; Apoc. Baruch 73, 3.
19 Apoc. Baruch 73, 2-3; 7, 74, 1.


riches. 1 The Messiah will bestow upon them all the joys and
pleasures which they can possibly desire. 2
We see that all this sounds as genuinely rabbinical as the
rabbinical hopes of the Messiah to be found in Mishna, the
Talmud and Midrash itself. Like the rabbinical ideas of the
Messiah, those of the apocalyptists are also a product of
narrow Jewish patriotism. 3 In both cases the kingdom of the
Messiah and the kingdom of God are looked upon as essenti-
ally a national, sensuously glorious world-power, at the head
of which Jehovah and his representative, the Messiah, are to
reign.
The eschatological and apocalyptic conceptions of the
Messiah are far inferior to the general Jewish conceptions
characteristic of the Synagogue. Although the Messiah of
the Rabbis is more or less identical with the national king, he
had, nevertheless, a very real and (viewed from the stand-
point of Jewish patriotism) also an ideal significance. He was,
by his own personal holiness and justice, to make himself the
Redeemer of the nation, though certainly only in a purely
earthly sense. He was himself, then, finally to consummate
the great national act, and so, with good reason, wield the
sceptre over Israel. The whole Messianic national drama is,
therefore, psychologically, from beginning to end, not badly
constructed by the Rabbis, even if it does remain only a
drama. But nothing of this applies to the eschatological and
apocalyptic Messiah. He does nothing, teaches nothing,
redeems nothing, and does not even exist on this earth. He
merely springs upon the stage as a Deus ex machina, drives
those who are not Jews out of the theatre, and amuses himself
at their expense, together with the remaining pious Israelites.
No wonder that this illogical Messianic r6le is not found at all
in many of the apocalyptic writings, and that they do not
even mention the Messiah, but only bring about the shifting
of the scenes—from this world to that, and from pagan to
Jewish power—by means of unnamed agencies, or even by
Jehovah himself, the God of the Jewish covenant.
With the Old Testament notion of the Messiah the eschato-
logical-apocalyptic notion has nothing more to do. The latter
takes from the Old Testament only the.model of Daniel’s Son
of Man, yet it detaches this from the Son of David, the
Servant of God and Emmanuel, as well as, in general, from
the whole teaching of the Old Testament concerning the
kingdom of God, and retains only an imaginary, ethereal
figure instead of the complete portrait of the Messiah.
1 Orac. Sibyll. iii, 783.
3 IV Esdras 7, 28; 9, 7-8; 12, 34; A foe. Baruch 40, 2; 73, 1.
3 It cannot, however, be denied that apocalyptic literature contains,
nevertheless, also many golden grains obtained from the Prophets cr
from a tradition which had been nourished by the Prophets.


We have herewith completed our pourtrayal of the Jewish
notions of the Messiah, one of which may be called the official
rabbinical Messianic conception, the other the eschatological
conception, officially forbidden by the rabbis. It remains to be
said that, together with the views which have been just men-
tioned, and which culminate essentially in the expectation of a
theocratical political kingdom under the supremacy of the
Torah as interpreted by the scribes, there were present
occasionally others also which struck a much more ideal and
deeply religious note.
And yet, although it is certain that these neighbouring
currents of thought existed, it is difficult to indicate them in
detail. Jewish literature leaves us almost in ignorance in this
respect. Yet some rays of light from the Gospels illumine
these circles of pious Jews, whose ideal of the Messiah was
derived principally from the predictions of the Prophets, and
therefore was far superior to the common Jewish notion in
simplicity and spirituality.
At the commencement of the Gospel of St Luke we at once
meet with such a circle. Zachary, the father of John the
Baptist, utters his views of the Messiah in the following
words : “ Blessed be the Lord God of Israel : because he hath
visited and wrought the redemption of his people; and hath
raised up an horn of salvation to us in the house of David his
servant; as he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, who
are from the beginning : salvation from our enemies, and from
the hand of all that hate us; to perform mercy to our fathers,
and to remember his holy testament; the oath which he sware
to Abraham our father, that he would grant to us, that, being
delivered from the hand of our enemies, we may serve him
without fear, in holiness and justice before him, all our days.
And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest:
for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his
ways; to give knowledge of salvation to his people, unto the
remission of their sins, through the bowels of the mercy of our
God, in which the Orient from on high hath visited us; to
enlighten them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of
death; to direct our feet into the way of peace ” (Luke i,
67-79).
Here the Messianic-davidic kingdom already has spiritual-
ized features ; holiness, righteousness, knowledge of salvation
and redemption of the people of Israel are essential charac-
teristics of the Messiahship. Yes, the Messiah will bring
salvation, light and peace to the Gentiles also, who sit in
darkness and the shadow of death. This is a high level of
Messianic conception, very remote from the average Jewish
mind; and yet it was so purely Jewish in sentiment and
expression that it could not possibly have been invented by
the Christian Evangelist. The Christians who had witnessed


the Saviour’s suffering-, death, resurrection, and ascension,
thought and spoke quite differently of the glorified Messiah.
A similar conclusion is reached by a study of the Messianic
ideas of the aged Simeon, who was a just and devout man
waiting for the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Ghost was
upon him. And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost
that he should not see death before he had seen the Lord’s
Christ (Luke ii, 25). He now takes the child Jesus in his
arms and praises God, saying: “ Now thou dost dismiss thy
servant, O Lord, according to thy word in peace, because my
eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared before
the face of all peoples; a light to the revelation of the Gentiles,
and the glory of thy people Israel ” (Luke ii, 28-32).
Here also the Messiah is no longer merely the glory of the
people of Israel which is to make the Gentiles feel the theo-
cratical kingdom of the Torah; he is also the light which is
to bring the religious revelation to the Gentiles as well as to
the Israelites. Instead of the glorious Messianic kingdom,
Simeon foresees in spiritual vision even the persecution and
suffering of the Messiah, when he says to Mary : “ Behold
this child is set for the fall and for the resurrection of many
in Israel, and for a sign which shall be contradicted. And thy
own soul a sword shall pierce” (Luke ii, 34, 35).
It is true it can with reason be objected (but not from the
side of rationalistic liberalism) that Simeon and Zachary had
attained to, a higher conception of the Messiah by means of a
special divine illumination. But it is none the less true that
the divine illumination was bestowed upon them precisely
because it found in them an instrument which had not been
weakened by narrow political and worldly views of the
Messiah. There were, therefore, certainly in Judaism at that
time spiritual oases in which the Messianic ideas of the
Prophets still lived.
We may go still further and assert that the number of those
who did not regard the national theocratic kingdom as the
chief characteristic and the principal work of the Messiah was
greater than might appear at the first glance and in the light
of the rabbinical and apocalyptic literature. Adolf Harnack
remarks in reference to this point: “ Among all those in whom
the moral and truly religious elements began to gain the
upper hand, the image of the political and warlike king must
have withdrawn itself, and that of the prophet, which had
always gently influenced their imaginations, must have taken
its place. It was hoped that the Messiah would bring God
near, would create, in some way, justice, and would free souls
from their torturing spiritual burdens.” That there were
then among the Jewish people those who believed and
expected such a Messiah, or did not at least reject him in
advance, already explains to us the history of John the


Baptist as we read it in our Gospels. How elastic the concep-
tions of the Messiah must have been—if this utterly un-
kindly preacher of repentance in a mantle of camel’s hair, who
announced to the degenerate people merely the approaching
judgement, could be himself taken for the Messiah 1 And
when we further read in the Gospels that not a few among
the people took Jesus for the Messiah, only because he
preached powerfully and healed by working miracles, 1 how
thoroughly changed the Messianic picture appears ! It is true
they saw in these works of the Saviour only the beginning,
and expected that the worker of miracles would soon discard
the last veil of concealment and “ establish the kingdom; but
this was enough for them to be able to greet, as the Promised
One, a man with whose origin and previous life they were
acquainted, and who had done nothing but preach repentance,
announce the nearness of the kingdom of heaven and heal
the sick.” 2
Nevertheless, when it really came to the point of recognizing
him definitely as the Messiah, in spite of the fact that he had
positively repudiated the establishment of the earthly Mes-
sianic kingdom, the higher conception of the Messiah, even
in that class of the people, did not stand the test, but rejected
him who dared to say : “ My kingdom is not of this world.”
II. —Christ’s Idea of the Messiah.
i. Rejection of the Messianic Notions of the Rabbis and
Apocalyptic Writers.
In view of the explanations thus far given concerning the
Old Testament, rabbinical and apocalyptic conceptions of
the Messiah, it should now no longer be very difficult to
determine in what sense Jesus claimed to be the Messiah.
The most obvious thing to be done is, first of all, to com-
pare the Messianic ideas of Jesus with those of the Rabbis,
because these were nearest to him in point of time, were
everywhere in circulation around him, met him wherever he
went, were on everybody’s lips, and were firmly rooted in the
heads of almost all his associates and of his people. It is
easily comprehensible that the evolutionary historical view,
according to which Jesus simply developed out of the Jewish
society of that time, makes the Saviour at once adopt the
generally understood, common idea of the Messiah held by
his rabbinical contemporaries.
But nowhere has the evolutionary theory suffered a more
decisive defeat than here. Between rabbinical Pharisaism and
1 That the Messiah would prove himself to be such by miracles and
prophetic knowledge was the opinion of all Jews. This is shown both
from rabbinical literature and from many passages in the Gospels.
2 Wesen des Christentums, 86 f.


Jesus exist the greatest differences imaginable. The more
important critics of modern times have not been able to shut
their eyes to this consideration. To-day almost all of them
give up the idea of seeing in the Messianic notions of the
Pharisees the model which Jesus is said to have copied.
It is true some Jewish scholars 1 still maintain that Jesus
united in his person simply pharisaical thought with a Gali-
lean temperament. Also, according to Ed. von Hartmann,
“ it never occurred to him to make the slightest change in the
popular expectation and conception of the Messiah and his
task.” 2 A. Neumann 3 and Otto Pfleiderer 4 assert, all facts
to the contrary, that Jesus adopted the ideal of the Messiah
with all the characteristics which it had for his time. Only
they prudently add that he did reject the warlike side of the
rabbinical notion of the Messiah, and that he did not wish to
be a Messianic king in the sense of a liberator of the people
and a conqueror of the Gentiles. 5 But the popular notion of
the Messiah had essentially only this one side, as is clearly
demonstrated by what we have previously adduced. Late
critics, therefore, who still describe the Saviour as the
rabbinical Messiah, are able to do so only from ignor-
ance of what the rabbinical notions of the Messiah really
were.
The question is, moreover, settled by the undeniable fact
that Jesus was persecuted and condemned to death by his
Pharisaical, contemporaries because he prohibited the
popular rabbinical conceptions of the Messiah, and opposed
to them his own personal, fundamentally different Messianic
ideas.
But did this Messianic idea of Jesus agree, perhaps, with
the eschatological and apocalyptic notions of the Messiah?
The evolutionary school must evidently assert this, unless it
is willing to give up the idea of seeing in Jesus only a
splendid personification and further development of ideas
already existing at the time. Hence the strong eschatological
tendency in the latest research into christology. Albrecht
Schweitzer, the historian of this research, entitles the chapter
of his book dealing with this subject “ Logical Eschatology,”
and proclaims himself the most extreme and decided leader of
the eschatological school. 6
The eschatological view of the life of Jesus had been already
1 Revue des Etudes Juives, t. Hi, 9 (1906).
2 Das Christentum des Neuen Testaments, 58 (1905).
3 Jesus, wer er geschichtlich war, 154 (1904).
4 Das Ur christentum, 2nd ed., i, 665; Die Enisiehung des Christen-
turns, 58 (1905).
5 Neumann, 1.c.; Pfleiderer, Enisiehung, 101.
6 Albrecht Schweitzer, Von Reimarus zu Wrede (Tubingen, 1906), and
also previously in his pamphlet, Das Messianitdts- und Leidensgeheim-
niss; eine Skizze des Lebens Jesu (Tubingen, igor).


introduced by Reimarus, 1 Keim, 3 Colani, 3 Volkmar 4 and
Wilhelm Weissenbach. 5
Wilhelm Baldensperger 6 undertook to judge all the Mes-
sianic utterances of Jesus from the viewpoint of eschatology.
For him Jesus is the fiery prophet who announces simply the
apocalyptic final catastrophe, in the sense of the Book of
Henoch, as immediately at hand, and represents himself as the
man who will speedily appear in the clouds of heaven to carry
out this catastrophe.
Johannes Weiss 7 connects the views of Jesus concerning the
kingdom of God entirely with this catastrophe. The king-
dom of God, instead of being a Messianic organization of
quiet and gradual development, which grows here on earth as
divine seed, and at the end of the world will be brought to
heaven as a precious harvest, whirls thither, according to
Weiss, in an apocalyptic hurricane, which destroys heaven
and earth, in order to create for itself room for a new world
era.
Now, last of all, comes Schweitzer, who reproaches his
predecessors because they acquiesced in the idea of interpret-
ing the Messiah and the kingdom of God eschatologically
instead of “ letting the whole public activity of Jesus, and the
events connected or not connected with it, be elucidated by
eschatology.” 8 Thus he drags the whole Gospel over to the
volcanic ground of the apocalyptic writings, attributing to
the Saviour a specially apocalyptic soul, and making him out
to be an apocalyptic fanatic who sees, thinks, preaches and
hopes for nothing else than a frightful cataclysm. 9
In Germany the eschatologists were joined, among others,
by G. Dalman, 10 Hollmann, 11 Zimmermann 12 and the Zurich
professor Arnold Meyer. 13 In transferring the ideas of the
German to French soil, Alfred Loisy evaporated them in his
usual way. 14
1 Schweitzer, Von Reimarus zu Wrede, 16-20. 3 id., 211.
3 Jisus-Christ et les croyances messianiques de son temps (Strassburg,
1864).
4 Jesus Nazarenus und die erste ckrislliche Zeit (Zurich, 1882).
5 Der Wiederkunjtsgedanke Jesu (1873).
• Das Selbsibewusstsein Jesu im Lichte der messianischen Hojf-
mungen seiner Zeit, 2nd ed. (Strassburg, 1892). A third edition with
another title appeared in 1903.
7 Die Predigt’Jesu vom Reiche Gottes, 2nd ed., 58-175 (Gottingen,
1900). 8 Von Reimarus zu Wrede, 347.
» id., 347-395. 10 Die Worie Jesu, 259 (Leipzig, 1898).
11 Welche Religion flatten die Juden als Jesus auftrai? 73 (1905).
12 Der historische Wert der dltesien Ueberlieferung im Markus evan-
gelium, 97, 128 (Leipzig, 1905).
13 Das Leben nach dem Evangelium Jesu, 5 (1905).
14 Loisy, VEvangile et I'Eglise, 53 ff. (Paris, 1902); Les Evangiles
synoptiques, 192 £., 212 f., 242 f. (Macon, 1907). He was joined by
Chapuis, Revue de Thiologie el de Philosophic, 15 f. (1904); Monnier,
La mission historique de Jisus, 39, 82 £. (1906); A. Causse, VEvolution
de Vespirance messianique dans le Christianisme primitif (Paris, 1908).


We must be grateful to the latest eschatologists that they,
in contrast to the halfway attitude of their predecessors, knew
how to adapt the Jewish apocalyptic ideas in their full extent
to the entire life of Jesus. As Johannes Weiss and Albrecht
Schweitzer both rightly claim, the watchword can be only
“ Either eschatological or not eschatological.” 1 Either the
apocalyptic eschatology can be carried out logically, genuinely,
and without exception, or we cannot suppose Jesus to have
been under the influence of the apocalyptic notions of his
contemporaries at all.
But this clear, resolute and logical statement of .the case at
once amounts to a refutation and decided rejection of the
eschatological and apocalyptic thesis. Merely a glance into
the Gospel, on the one hand, and into Jewish apocalyptists,
on the other, is sufficient to let us see the impossibility of
logically interpreting the life of Jesus eschatologically. The
life of Jesus is radiant with bright, sunny optimism; his whole
being is, together with the greatest moral seriousness, full of
joyous, cheerful sentiments which even scandalize the sancti-
monious Pharisees. The Jewish apocalyptic ideas, on the
contrary, emit poison through their gloomy pessimism, which
considers the whole world as hopelessly lost, since it looks
upon it as not only morally but physically evil. The Gospel
of Jesus, in spite of its strong tendency to deal with the future
and with the next’ world, is full of much that is real and
valuable in relation to this one. It is a unique union of the
Now and Then, so that the cleavages between this life and
the next are all bridged over, and its whole view of the
universe impels man towards something broad and great—a
mighty line passing through time and eternity.
The apocalyptic views are those of a somnambulist, to
whom the present is merely an appearance and an illusion,
without any connection with the aeon beyond this world of
time. Life in the present, therefore, is without value or
reality—merely a mode of reckoning with the future and
trifling with an approaching ghost. The Gospel of Jesus
insists strongly upon moral improvement, religious depth,
sincere piety and inward holiness (“ Be ye perfect even as your
Father in heaven is perfect”), and promotes this perfection
through untiring and undaunted teaching and admonition
from person to person, from circle to circle, from infinitely
patient labour on a small scale to intensive work upon the
masses. The apocalyptic school, however, does not take a
step to further the improvement and the ennobling of man,
and conceives the future Messianic age from a purely cosmo-
logical standpoint, devoid of any higher religious life and any
deeper union with God, and meanwhile thinks of nothing but
awaiting with open mouth and folded arms the signs from
heaven of the final catastrophe—“ The Jews require signs”
1 Schweitzer, zjj.


(i Cor. i, 22). The Gospel of Jesus, who works among the
people and suffers and dies upon the Cross for sinners, instead
of, like the apocalyptist, sitting down in a corner and writing
one of those wonderful books which can never sufficiently gloat
over the drastic punishment of the Gentiles and the beatifica-
tion of Judaism —the Gospel of Jesus, although imbued with
all possible love for its ancestral soil and for the chosen people
of God, is nevertheless thoroughly universal and remote from
all Jewish narrowness, and, above all, is opposed to the
national, political and material Jewish dreams. The eschato-
logical apocalyptist has eyes and ears only for petty, limited
Jewish patriotism and the chauvinistic, sensuously intoxicat-
ing music of the future. Truly, to try to bring together and to
blend in one the Gospel of Jesus and the later Jewish teachings
of the apocalyptists, is to turn the facts completely upside
down.
The best connoisseurs and historians of later Judaism, like
Bousset, Schiirer and Wellhausen, all of whom also belong
to the liberal Protestant school, pronounce every such attempt
hopeless. 1
In fact, the eschatologists accomplish their artistic feat only
by diminishing the differences of both sides. To Weiss,
Schweitzer and Loisy the apocalyptic appears only in its escha-
tological, futuristic form, while its national and political soul
is entirely, or almost entirely, overlooked. Baldensperger
places such a different estimate on the eschatological and
apocalyptic views that they can finally be defined as a
Messianic expectation, freed from the earthly political ideal,
and transported into the region of the supernatural. 2 That
the eschatological catastrophe, with the appearance of the
Messiah for the Last Judgement, is only the mould or melting-
pot which contains the worldly patriotic hopes of Judaism, is
forgotten by the rabid eschatologists.
They refashion the Gospel also in a similar way. What-
ever in any way suits their ideas of eschatology is retained as
genuine Gospel truth and the word of the Lord; but the
utterances and motives of Jesus, which are not eschatological,
are interpreted in an eschatological sense, and all that is un-
adaptable in this way is discarded as an unhistorical accretion.
Thus they succeed in forcing the toned-down likeness of
Jesus on to the toned-down model of the apocalyptic. But as
soon as the complete Gospel is compared with the complete
1 W. Bousset, Jesu Predigt in ihrem Gegensatz zum Judentum (1892);
Die judische Afokalyftik in ihrer religionsgeschichtlichen Herhunjt
und ihrer Bedeutung fiir das N. T. (1903); E. Schiirer, Das messianische
Selbstbewusstsein Jesu Christi (1903); Jul. Wellhausen, Israelitische
und jiidische Geschichie, 373, 386, 6th ed. (Berlin, 1907); Skizzen vi,
187 ff.
2 Baldensperger, Die messianisch-apokalyftischen HoJJnungen des
Judentums, 173 (Strassburg, 1903).


apocalyptic, the alleged kinship between them, to say nothing
of their alleged identity, vanishes.
This applies especially to the Messianic passages in the
Gospel. Eschatology would prove itself correct only if all the
Messianic utterances, without exception, identified themselves
with apocalyptic ideas —that is, if Jesus did not claim to be
the Messiah in the present world, but hoped to become so
only in the future at his second advent, and by means of this
second advent to preside over the Last Judgement. But the
utterances of Jesus in the Gospel say just the contrary.
Already, in his earthly life, his activity, his suffering and
death, Jesus claims to be the Messiah, and wishes to be con-
sidered as such. His return for the Last Judgement is only
the solemn conclusion, the highest and final triumph of his
Messianic revelation.
John the Baptist sends messengers to inquire of Jesus
whether he is the One who should come—that is, the Messiah
—and Jesus answers by pointing out the miracles wrought by
him, which, according to tradition, indicate the coming and
the presence of the Messianic era, and prove the performer of
these miracles to be the Messiah, who has already appeared
and is active (Matt, xi, 5; Luke vii, 22; Isa. xxx, 5; Ixi, 1).
If John, as the eschatologists assert without cause, 1 in making
his inquiry, had thought of the apocalyptic Son of Man
coming for the Last Judgement, then it is only so much the
more significant that Jesus energetically brings his answer
down to the level of present-day realities, and proves himself
to be the Saviour, who has already come and is already
engaged in Messianic activity.
In Cesarea Philippi, Jesus inquires what the views of the
multitude and the disciples are concerning the Son of Man as
he was then living before them. Peter confesses at once :
“Thou art the Messiah, the Son of God.” And Jesus com-
mends the Apostle, declares that his faith has been super-
naturally revealed to him, and corroborates it without the
slightest qualification. “ Then he commanded his disciples
that they should tell no one that he was Jesus, the Christ ”
(Matt, xvi, 20).
The woman of Samaria says to him ; “ I know that the
Messias cometh (who is called Christ): therefore when he
cometh, he will tell us all things.” The woman of Samaria,
therefore, is not speaking of the apocalyptic Messiah, who
will come only to judge the world, but the Messiah who “ will
tell us all things,” who will appear as a prophet, arid who is
moved by love for his people, not by speculations about the
approaching end of the world. And Jesus declares : “ I am
he who am speaking with thee.” The Samaritans, however,
fascinated by the charm of his speech, believed on him on
1 Loisy, VEvangile et VEglise, 54.


account of his teaching, and said ; “ We ourselves have heard
him, and know that this is indeed the Saviour of the world ”
(John iv, 25 and 41, 42).
Jesus asks the man who was born blind : “ Dost thou believe
in the Son of God?” He answered and said : “ Who is he,
Lord, that I may believe in him?” And Jesus said to him:
“ Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with
thee” (John ix, 35-37). Thereupon the Jews in the Temple
surrounded him and said to him : “ How long dost thou
hold our souls in suspense? If thou be the Christ, tell us
plainly.” Jesus answered them: “I speak to you and you
believe not. The works that I do in the name of my Father,
they give testimony of me” (John x, 24). Therefore, Jesus
not only claims to be the Messiah already here on earth, but
he casts in their teeth the fact that he has given the most real
and infallible proofs of his present Messiahship.
Soon after he has to justify himself before the highest
tribunal of the nation for this very confession. The High
Priest asks him : “ Art thou the Christ, the Son of the blessed
God?” “I am,” was the answer (Mark xiv, 61, 62).
Caiphas presses the question under the most solemn oath :
“ I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us if
thou be the Christ, the Son of God.” “ Thou hast said it,”
affirms Jesus (Matt, xxvi, 63). "Art thou, then, the Son of
God?” “You say that I am,” replies Jesus (Luke xxii,
67-70), and adds : “ You shall see the Son of Man sitting on
the right hand of the power of God, and coming with the
clouds of heaven ” (Mark xiv, 62).
Both question and answer are astonishingly clear. In vain
do the eschatologists assert that Jesus, by these last words,
wished to explain the confession that he is the Messiah in the
apocalyptic sense, that he will not become the Messiah until
he returns for the Last Judgement. 1 Rather does Jesus say
most emphatically that he is already the real Messiah, and
that he will come again, as the Messiah, at the end of the
world.
The Saviour expresses himself in precisely the same way
before Pilate. The Prefect asks him : “ Art thou the king of
the Jews?” —that is, the Messianic king? 2 “ Thou sayest it,”
answers Jesus affirmatively (Luke xxiii, 3; Mark xv, 2;
Matt, xxvii, 11). Yet he at once repudiates the possible mis-
conception that he claims to be an earthly, worldly Messianic
king: “ Thou sayest that lam a king. Yet my kingdom is
not of this world. For this was I born, and for this came I
into the world, that I should give testimony to the truth”
(John xviii, 36, 37). Thus Jesus claims to be the king of
1 Loisy, p. 54.
1 That this is the correct interpretation of the question appears from
Luke xxiii, 2.


truth, the spiritual Messiah, and this already now; in fact,
from the first moment of his earthly existence; not that he
will become the Messiah only at the future judgement. His
Messianic kingdom is not of this world, but it does exist
already in this world.
2. Adoption and Extension of the Old Testament Notion
of the Messiah.
We come thus unexpectedly to the positive development of
Jesus’ notion of the Messiah. This is proved already to a
considerable extent from the negative, repellent attitude of
the Saviour towards the rabbinical and apocalyptic Messianic
ideas of his contemporaries, just as every step which we have
still to take in regard to the Gospels signifies, at the same
time, a renewed rejection of these notions.
First of all, Jesus’ conception of the Kingdom of God.
According to the statements previously made, it may be con-
sidered certain that Jesus did not wish to found either a
worldly theocracy of a political and material nature, in the
rabbinical sense, nor a post-mundane theocracy of that nature
in the apocalyptic sense. Rather does everything indicate
that his ideal was directed to a spiritual, religious kingdom
of God, in this world at its commencement, in the next world
at its completion, and in its nature wholly supernatural. All
the positive utterances of Jesus regarding the kingdom of
God are confined within this compass.
The forerunner John had announced the nearness of the
kingdom. “Do penance, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand ” (Matt, iii, 2). Thereby he points to Jesus. Jesus
himself takes up the same line of preaching. “He came
preaching the Gospel of the kingdom of God, and saying :
The time is accomplished, and the kingdom of God is at hand;
repent and believe the Gospel” (Mark i, 14, 15). He also
sent out the Twelve at first with the simplest announcement
of the near approach of the kingdom into the world : “ Preach,
saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand ” (Matt, x, 7).
The coming of Jesus and the commencement of his activity
are equivalent, therefore, to the coming and beginning of the
realization of the kingdom of heaven.
The preaching of the coming of the kingdom is imme-
diately connected with the revelation of the miraculous powers
of the Saviour. Not only does he himself make his own steps
conspicuous by miracles, but he transmits the power of work-
ing them to his disciples and fellow-preachers of the kingdom :
“ Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out
devils ” (Matt, x, 8 and parallels). Through the performance
of these Messianic deeds the proof will be established, not
only that the kingdom is approaching (Luke ix, 10), but that
1. 12


it is already present: “If I by the Spirit of God cast out
devils, then is the kingdom of God come upon you ” (Matt,
xii, 28). He considers his victories over the devils as so many
blows directed against the kingdom of Satan, and as a
triumph of the kingdom of God which has already arrived.
In exactly the same way he also calls his other miracles into
the lists as proofs for the kingdom of heaven which has
already begun (Matt, xi, 4-6).
At the same time he sets about proclaiming the law of the
new kingdom. Moving through cities and hamlets, he
preaches his doctrine everywhere, in the synagogues, in the
market-places, on lakes and on the slopes of mountains. This
doctrine is so truly the Magna Charta of the kingdom of
heaven that it is laconically called the “ glad tidings [Gospel]
of the kingdom of God” (Matt, iv, 14; Luke viii, 1), “ the
mystery of the kingdom of God ” (Mark iv, 11), “ the preach-
ing of the kingdom of God ” (Luke ix, 2); “ the Law and the
Prophets were until John; from that time the kingdom of
God is preached ” (Luke xvi, 16). Even the humblest of those
who accept the message of the kingdom is, therefore, greater
than John himself, who was only a forerunner of the kingdom
(Matt, xi, 11; Luke vii, 28). Referring to his own person and
his Gospel, Jesus can say to the Pharisees : “ Lo, the kingdom
of God is within you ” (Luke xvii, 21).
A fundamental condition, therefore, for admission into the
kingdom is faith in, and acceptance of, the Gospel (Mark
xvi, 16; John iii, 18, 36). To this is added the spiritual second
birth, “ of water and of the Holy Spirit ” (John iii, 3,5), for
the forgiveness of sins (Mark iv, 12), as well as a new manner
of life on the ground of this spiritual second birth and in
accordance with the commandments of the Gospel (Matt,
vii, 21; xix, 8). Thus the kingdom of God presupposes a
complete spiritual transformation in every individual, and
requires, therefore, a decidedly chivalrous sentiment and
energy. Whoever does not prize and seek the “kingdom
of God and his justice ” above everything (Matt, vi, 33),
whoever “ putteth his hand to the plough and looketh back”
(Luke ix, 62), whoever does not put into the background,
and, if need be, abandon everything (Matt, v, 29; Luke
ix, 61; xviii, 29), and whoever is not ready to stake his own
life also (Luke xiv, 26) in order to gain the kingdom of God,
is not fit for it.
It is, therefore, easy to understand that the kingdom of God
can extend only slowly and by constant efforts. It will neither
announce itself by an earthly coup d'dtat, in the sense of the
Rabbis, with lightning speed and great external pomp, nor
will it fall from heaven as a complete Malkuth, in the apoca-
lyptic sense (Luke xvii, 20). At its beginning it will be small
and inconspicuous, so that the great ones of the earth will not


notice it at all. Very gradually, however, it will grow, like
the grain of mustard seed, until it becomes a tree, and will
work from within outward, like the leaven, till it has trans-
formed the whole world (Matt, xiii, 31 ; Luke xiii, 19). As
the grain quietly germinates, sends up its blades, grows into
ears, blossoms and finally is garnered in its maturity, so it is
with the kingdom of God (Mark iv, 26-29) and with the
children of the kingdom (Matt, xiii, 38). The Jews prove
themselves to be unfruitful soil; therefore the kingdom of
God will be taken from them and given to a nation yielding
the fruits thereof (Matt, xxi, 43). “ And this Gospel of the
kingdom shall be preached in the whole world for a testimony 1
to all nations, and then shall the consummation come ” —the
judgement (Matt, xxiv, 14).
The judgement is the gate of entrance into the kingdom of
God in the next world. It is closed against the kingdom of
Satan, and condemns to the punishment of hell all those who
on earth have belonged to the kingdom of evil. On the other
hand, it is opened to the children of the kingdom of God, who
finally inherit the kingdom prepared for them from the foun-
dation of the world (Matt, xxv, 34). The kingdom of God
on this earth is, both in its entirety and in its application to
the.individual man, only a commencement, a preliminary step,
a preparation, for the everlasting kingdom of heaven in the
world to come. In its final perfection, therefore, the kingdom
is not yet complete. It is only in the act of approaching, and
we must continually pray for its coming : “ Thy kingdom
come ” (Luke xi, 2). As often as Jesus speaks of entry into
the kingdom of God, he presupposes the kingdom, in this
sense, to be a future event (Matt, v, 20; vii, 21). Whenever
he pronounces the children of the kingdom of God on earth
blessed he promises them the kingdom of God in the next
world as a reward : “ For theirs is the kingdom of heaven.”
“For they shall see God.” “Then shall the righteous shine
1 In opposition to the assertion made by some radical critics that
Jesus wishes, in narrow chauvinism, to limit the kingdom of heaven
to the Jews, Max Meinertz, Jesus uni die Heidenmission (1908), and
Fr. Spitta, Jesus und die Heidenmission (1909), prove that the Saviour
wished to extend his Messianic salvation also to the Gentiles. See
J. B. Major’s “ Did Christ contemplate the Admission of the Gentiles
into the Kingdom of Heaven?” [Expositor, 385-399, Nov., 1909). Spitta,
who is certainly beyond suspicion, expresses himself thus (p. 109) : “ In
direct opposition to Harnack’s judgement, that the mission to the
Gentiles did not He within Jesus’ field of vision, I am not content with
the opinion that he imposed it on the hearts of his disciples after his
resurrection, but I maintain that this task formed the desire of his soul
from the very beginning, and that he not only did not abandon it when
Gentiles came in his way, but actually sought them out by travelling
where they were. One can, therefore, speak of Jesus as being really
the first Christian missionary, who not only laid the foundation for
Christian missions to the Gentiles by his ‘ intense universalism ’ but
whose own activity signifies its beginning.”


forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father.” “ And there
shall come from the east and the west and the north and the
south and shall sit down in the kingdom of God ” (Luke xiii,
29). “ That you may eat and drink at my table in my king-
dom ” (Luke xxii, 30). “ I will not drink from henceforth of
this fruit of the vine, until that day when I shall drink it with
you new in the kingdom of my Father ” (Matt, xxvi, 29).
If in this description of the blessedness of the kingdom
there are some discordant tones which remind one of sensuous
and earthly enjoyments, they are to be interpreted only meta-
phorically. The whole teaching of Jesus in reference to the
kingdom is so essentially spiritual, and he so effectually
excludes from it the coarse ideas of his contemporaries, that
we must see in the above expressions merely a strikingly
figurative representation of the supersensuous bliss and
blessedness of the kingdom of heaven.
It could not have been explained otherwise, either to the
disciples, who were thoroughly earthly in their ideas, or to
the Oriental, who always wants to speak figuratively and can
scarcely learn in any other way. Hence Jesus always pourtrays
the kingdom of heaven under the metaphor of a Passover
feast, a wedding feast, or a joyful feast, which he prepares
for his disciples, and at which he himself goes about to serve
his guests (Luke xxii, 16, 18). The unveiled picture of the
blessedness of the kingdom of God, invisible to mortal eyes
and incomprehensible to the carnal mind, is " the eternal life ”
near God and with God, together with the ineffable joys which
are connected with it.
Accordingly, the most important part and the completion of
Christ’s idea of the Messianic kingdom are located in the
future, not in the present. Jesus always directs our gaze
upward and forward, from the kingdom itself and life in it,
both of which go forward under many difficulties here below
to the blessed perfection of the kingdom of heaven. Hope,
expectation, longing for infinite perfection and blessedness in
the world to come—these form the fundamental character of
the religion of Christ and of Christianity.
Not exclusively, however. The founding of the kingdom
and its growth are accomplished in this present world. The
divine kingdom’s grain of mustard seed is cast into the earth,
germinates there, and grows and ripens its fruit before it is
brought into heaven by the harvesting of the Last Judgement
(Matt, xiii, 39). There will there be garnered only what was
here sown (Gal. vi, 7). Time on earth for the sowing, eternity
in heaven for the harvest, and between them the great day of
judgement, when the sowing and the reaping will be esti-
mated and valued according to their merits. In the Messianic
kingdom of Jesus there is nothing sudden, nothing irregular,
nothing partial. The idea of Christ and Christianity concern


ing the kingdom is that of a spiritual supremacy of God in
man and over man on earth, and eternal supremacy over him
in heaven, and, on the other hand, a spiritual approach to God
on the part of man here, and an indissoluble union with God
above; and all this through the mediation of Jesus.
In conformity with this is the interpretation which Jesus
gives to the title Son of Man. We know that he bore by
preference this Messianic title. 1 In Daniel vii, 23, etc., how-
ever, this appellation denotes the Messiah exclusively as a
supernatural judge of the world and a glorious prince in the
future kingdom of God. It is true Jesus claims to be the Son
of Man in this complete sense, and, indeed, in this sense
before any other; 2 but not exclusively. He prefers the title
Son of Man precisely for the reason that it, on the one hand,
in accordance with prophecy, expressed the future dignity and
glory of the Messiah, while, on the other hand, according to
the meaning of the word, it could be applied without difficulty
to the entire activity and life of the Saviour in this world.
Thus Jesus enlarges this official name for the Messiah
earthward and earthwide. As the Son of Man he becomes
the herald of the glad tidings of the kingdom and the bringer
of the work of salvation (Matt, xi, 19; xii, 32; xvi, 13;
Luke vii, 34; xi, 30). As the Son of Man he has the power to
forgive sins (Matt, ix, 6; Mark ii, 10; Luke v, 24), and, in
contrast to the Mosaic Law, to declare his own authority as a
teacher, and his own mode of action (Matt, xii, 8; Mark ii, 28;
Luke vi, 5). As the Son of Man he sows the seed of the
kingdom of God in human souls (Matt, xiii, 37), and calls
sinners to form a part of this kingdom (Matt, ix, 13; Mark
ii, 17; Luke v, 32). As the Son of Man he is come, not to
destroy, but to rescue; not to be ministered unto, but to
minister and to give his life a ransom for many (Matt,
xviii, 11; xx, 28 and parallels). As the Son of Man he has
not where to lay his head (Matt, viii, 20). As the Son of Man
he must suffer much, must be rejected by the people, must
be condemned by the scribes and High Priests, must die, and
on the third day rise again. 3 Only then does he come as the
Son of Man in the clouds of heaven, attended by angels, in
view of the whole earth, in order to judgfe the world, to inflict
the merited punishment of hell upon the wicked, and to bring
home the good into the kingdom of his Father. Accordingly,
Jesus certainly does not assume the name and title of the Son
1 See F. Bard, Der Sohn des Menschen. Eine Unlersuchung liber
Begriff und Inhall und Absicht solcher Jesus-Bezeichnung (Wismar,
1908).
2 Matt, ix, 27; x, 23; xiii, 41; xvi, 27; Mark viii, 38; xiii, 26;
xiv, 62; Luke ix, 26; xii, 8, 40; xvii, 22; xviii, 8; xxi, 27, 36 ; xxii, 69.
3 Matt, xii, 40; xvii, 9, 12, 21; xx, 18; Mark viii, 31; ix, 8, 30;
x, 33; Luke ix, 22, 44; xviii, 31; xxiv, 7, 26; John iii, 14; viii, 28;
xii, 34.


of Man merely in the eschatological meaning which it pos-
sesses in Daniel, but he puts into it the whole Messianic
vocation and the entire Messianic activity, which begins with
the incarnation and is fully consummated only in eternity.
Thereby the Son of Man takes the place of the Son of
David. Everything of spiritual truth which, according to Old
Testament prophecy, was found in the Messianic expression
“ Son of David,” is carried over by Jesus into the appellation
“Son of Man.” The purely temporal, earthly and political
conception of the Son of David, as it was held by most of his
contemporaries, had to be rejected by the Saviour. In fact,
in order to prevent an absolutely wrong idea of his Messiah-
ship, and not to become a traitor to his own person and cause,
Jesus saw himself compelled to renounce, in part, even the
formal title "Son of David,” based though it was on the Old
Testament.
God had from the beginning announced the Messianic
salvation as a dominion and a kingdom, and, correspondingly,
the Messiah as a ruler and king. This was the happiest figure
of speech that he could have chosen, and it also corresponded
perfectly to reality, in so far as it was conceived as spiritual,
not material and earthly. In order to make it still more
accessible, comprehensible and popular to the chosen people,
he announced the Redeemer as the King of Israel, and a king
from the most brilliant dynastic family —that of David—who
should rule for ever and bring an exuberance of blessings to
both land and people. Although these promises appear, for
the most part, in the garb of highly coloured temporal power
and splendour, yet they were evidently intended to be merely,
or at least chiefly, the figurative shell and external form of
the spiritual blessings and benefits of the Messianic age.
Even in those passages of the Old Testament, in which the
Messianic ideals assume the most intense national and
material colours, the Son of David still always appears as
a worker of miracles, a priest and teacher of truth and
righteousness, equipped with the choicest spiritual gifts of
God, and sent for the salvation and prosperity of all nations.
Unmistakably, however, the increasing tendency of the
Israelites to interpret the Messianic kingdom and its Prince,
the Son of David, more and more in a national and political
sense is revealed in the Old Testament; and when Jesus
appeared men understood by the “ Son of David,” as we have
seen, for the most part, only a national hero of the Jewish
race. Judaism had taken the shell and the form for the
essence and content of the Messianic prophecy.
Hence Jesus was obliged to shatter the shell, in order to
preserve the real, intrinsic substance of his Messianic person
and mission. He only suffered men to call him the Son of
David, and caused the figure of the Son of David to retire


behind that of the Son of Man; in fact, to disappear almost
entirely.
It is true he is announced in advance by the angel as the
“ Son of the Most High, to whom the Lord God will give the
throne of his father David, and he shall reign over the house
of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end ”
(Luke i, 32). Yet there follows immediately the thoroughly
spiritual interpretation of this supremacy : “ Thou shalt call
his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins ”
(Matt, i, 21). It is also true that the descent of Jesus from the
house of David is continually emphasized (Matt, i, 1-6; Luke
i, 27, 32, 69; ii, 4). For an abandonment of this lineage
would have been, not only a denial of the historical fact, but
would also have been equivalent to the abandonment of his
Messiahship, since the Messiah must come from the house of
David (John vii, 42). Also, when the multitudes greet him as
the Son of David (Matt, xxi, 9, 15; Mark xi, 10), he may not
refuse the ovation without denying his Messianic claims. And
even when the blind and distressed implore him, as the Son of
David, for help (Matt, ix, 27; xv, 22, 30), he heals and helps
them, not only from the infinite tenderness of his heart, but
because the Messiah, according to the prophet, was to prove
himself a worker of miracles (Isa. xxix, 18; xxxv, 2 ; Ixi, 1).
Yet he decidedly opposes the pharisaical supposition that the
Messiah, by nature, is only David’s natural descendant, and
in his vocation only a successor to David in a worldly kingdom
(Matt, xxii, 42 and parallels), and he never once in his whole
life calls himself the Son of David, in order not to recognize
the distorted rabbinical portrait of the Messiah as correct.
Moreover, the glorious title “Son of David” was less
suitable to the Saviour also because he claimed to be here on
earth, before all else, the " Servant of God,” the Redeemer and
the Saviour of sinners, in the literal meaning of those words.
Before he could enter upon his royal supremacy over the
kingdom of God, he must first bring it into the world and
again enrol individuals as well as humanity as a whole in
that kingdom, which, through sin, had been destroyed. First,
Mediator and Founder of the kingdom, then its King. In
this way, then, Jesus claims to be merely.the Mediator, Saviour
and Redeemer. As the Hellenic world conferred these titles
on its victorious hero-kings who brought to it political
freedom, so does Jesus also claim for himself the names of
“ Saviour” and “Redeemer.” He translates for himself the
word Messiah by the other title, “ Saviour of the world ”
(John iv, 25, 42). But for him it is a case of spiritual redemp-
tion from sin and guilt. Of him the angel had said : “ Thou
shalt call his name Jesus (Saviour, Redeemer, Deliverer), for
he shall save his people from their sins ” (Matt, i, 21). Now,
Jesus himself confirms this interpretation of his name, and


thereby outlines the principal programme of his Messianic
activity as that of redeeming people from their sins; “ The
Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which was lost ”
(Luke xix, 10; Matt, xviii, n).
No one who has read the Gospels will be able to doubt that
fighting- against the sin of guilty man, and bringing him back
to God, formed the one great occupation of the life of Jesus.
Not only was his religious activity concentrated in this, but
even the physical benefits which he conferred and the miracles
he wrought had always that one aim of redemption from sin
and its forgiveness. He heals the paralytic at the Pool of
Bethsaida, and admonishes him : “ Behold, thou art made
whole : sin no more, lest some worse thing happen to thee ”
(John v, 14). He frees the woman taken in adultery from the
hands of her pharisaical accusers, and says : “ Go and sin no
more” (John viii, 11). He takes the sinful woman in the
house of Simon under his protection, gives to her the com-
forting assurance, “ Thy sins are forgiven thee,” and remarks
to the astonished Pharisees: “ Many sins are forgiven her,
because she hath loved much ” (Luke vii, 47). And when the
Pharisees regard this as an intrusion into the domain of God’s
power, and, accordingly, as an act of blasphemy, Jesus asserts
and proves by the miracle that follows that “ the Son of Man
hath power on earth to forgive sins ” (Mark ii, 1-13). In a
word, the Saviour's activity aims practically ever and always
at effecting through his mediation the forgiveness of sins and
at dispensing it himself.
But also, and above all, it aims at earning and meriting the
remission of sins for men. We know that the mediator, in
the book of Isaias, is described as the Servant of God, who
takes upon himself the sickness and sin of the people, and
atones for them by his vicarious suffering. The Gospel applies
this prophecy concerning the Servant of God to Jesus, and
this Is done in an especially remarkable way in one passage of
the first Gospel (Matt, viii, 17). It is said there that the
miracles of healing which Jesus worked on men were done for
the purpose of fulfilling the words of Isaias : “ Surely he hath
borne our griefs and carried our sorrows.” With profound
truth the whole life of Jesus is thereby applied to the central
Messianic thought—that of vicarious atonement and redemp-
tion from sin and its consequences.
Nevertheless, the suffering and death of Jesus remain the
real act of redemption. We have already seen that Jesus
looks upon his Messianic vocation, above all, in the light of
his suffering, death, and subsequent resurrection. Even his
teaching and all the rest of his Messianic announcements and
activities pale before the stupendous fact of his suffering. At
the same time he declared continually that only thus can the
Old Testament prophecy be fulfilled, according to which the
Messiah must suffer and die, and in this way enter into his


glory (Luke xviii, 31 ; xxiv, 26; Matt, xvi, 21). He will thus
atone for the sins of mankind and redeem humanity through
his vicarious suffering as the Servant of God in the sense of
the Psalms and of the writings of the prophet Isaias.
Still more emphatically does he state this purpose of his
Messianic vocation in the words of John’s Gospel: “As Moses
lifted up the serpent in the desert, so must the Son of Man be
lifted up; that whosoever believeth in him may not perish,
but may have life everlasting. For God so loved the world
as to give his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in
him may not perish, but may have life everlasting'. For God
sent not his Son into the world to judge the world, but that the
world may be saved by him. ... lam the good shepherd.
The good shepherd giveth his life for his sheep” (John
iii, 14-17; x, ii)-
The answer which, according to the synoptic Gospels, he
gave to the sons of Zebedee is exactly similar: “ The Son of
Man is not come to be ministered unto, but to minister, and
to give his life a redemption for many ” (Matt, xx, 28).
With this great utterance in regard to his plan, into which
he compresses, at the commencement of the Passion Week,
the whole doctrine of redemption, are connected those other
words spoken on the night immediately before his death. At
the Last Supper he took bread, gave thanks, broke it and
gave it to his disciples, saying: “ This is my body, which is
given for you ” (Luke xxii, 19). Likewise he took the cup,
after the meal, and said : “ This is my blood of the new
testament, which shall be shed for many unto remission of
sins ” (Matt, xxvi, 28). There is no need of explanation,
and still less of proof, that Jesus himself, by these words,
represented his death as an atonement for the sins of mankind
and a redemption from sin.
It is, however, also just as certain that modern liberal
theology has no use for an atoning, sin-destroying Messiah.
Not only because it regards the Saviour as a mere man, who
is not in the least capable of such an atoning act, but, above
all, because it cannot concede to the man Jesus a real Mes-
sianic vocation, on account of its preliminary denial of a
supernatural revelation. It therefore sought, first of all, to
ignore entirely the Johannine words of Jesus and to brand-
mark the already quoted synoptical utterances about his aton-
ing work and death as later interpolations into the Gospels, or
as subsequent partial refashionings of the Gospel text. 1 But
no grounds are to be found for the critical rejection of these
1 Thus Johannes Weiss, Die Predigt Jesu vom Reiche Gates, 197-201
(1900) H. G. Hollmann, Die Bedeutung des Todes fesu nach seinen
eigenen Aussagen auf Grund der synoftischen Evangelien, 142-148
(1901) Loisy, Les Evartgiles synoftiques, i, 181 (1907). Previously
Loisy still maintained the genuineness of the passages of the synoptics
on this subject, but altered his views in union with Andersen, Das
Abendmahl in den zvei ersten Jahrhunderten nach Christus (1902).


synoptic passages. The Leipzig professor Ludwig Ihmels
justly remarks 1 that the whole reason for it lies in the fact
that these passages do not harmonize with the portrait of
Christ which the critics have fashioned. Their genuineness
is also recognized almost universally by the leaders of liberal
criticism, 2 and finally it is readily adopted by all critics, pro-
vided, on the other hand, that we consent to let the passages
in question pass for interpolations from the Pauline theology.
This only is the point that is seriously contested. Paul
continually announces in new ways and with the greatest
emphasis the forgiveness of sins and the removal of sins
through the death of Christ. That is the principal theme of
his Gospel, “that Christ died for our sins ” (i Cor. xv, 3);
that “ Christ died and rose again, that he might be Lord both
of the dead and of the living ” (Rom. xiv, 9); that “ Christ
died for all, that they also who live may not now live to them-
selves, but unto him who died for them and rose again ”
(2 Cor. v, 15); that “ Christ hath redeemed us from the curse
of the law, being made a curse for us ” (Gal. iii, 13); that
“ there is one mediator of God and men, the man Christ Jesus,
who gave himself a redemption for all” (1 Tim. ii, 5,6).
Harnack says : “ The death on the cross was of the greatest
importance to all Christians, but for Paul it was simply the
act and the work of Christ. . . . His preaching was the
proclamation of the redemption effected by the cross and the
resurrection. This furnished him with such an inexhaustible
amount of consolation and exhortation that everything else in
comparison sank into insignificance.” 3
In this all are agreed, and the fact is evident in all the
writings of the Apostle to the Gentiles. Opinions begin to
differ when the question arises as to the relation of the
Pauline doctrine of redemption to the doctrine found in the
Gospels and the writings of the Church. While all the New
Testament texts and all the subsequent Christian centuries
give us to understand that St Paul brought into a fully
and universally developed system the doctrine of redemption,
given in its germ and foundation by Jesus himself, and pro-
claimed far and wide by the first disciples, the modern critics
(according to whom the Messianic work of Jesus is reduced to
the eschatological announcement of the kingdom) tell us that
Paul is the inventor and creator of the doctrine of the atoning
and redemptive death of Jesus. It is claimed that it is owing
to his preaching, his writings and his powerful influence that
in so short a time the whole primitive Church conformed to
the new dogma of Christ’s redemptive work. Soon, it is said,
1 Wer war Jesus? 57 (Leipzig, 1908). See also K. Muller, Unser Herr,
31-33 (Berlin, 1006).
3 Harnack, Wesen des Christentums, 101 ; O. Holtzmann, Leben Jesu,
363 (1901); Wellhausen, Das Evangelium Matthdi, 122 (1904).
3 Harnack, Veber die Glaubwurdigkeii der evangelischen Geschichte,
in ChristUche Welt, 319 (1905).


he succeeded in bringing the whole Christian doctrinal system
into harmony with this theory of redemption, and even the
first three Evangelists had been no longer able to resist this
impressive thesis of Paul. They took, we are told, the idea
of the atoning death of Jesus from the Pauline Epistles, which
were already in their possession, and in particular they bor-
rowed from the first Epistle to the Corinthians the decisive
words uttered at the Last Supper. In this sense Johannes
Weiss, 1 Hans Heinrich Wendt, 2 Georg Hollman, 3 Paul
Wernle, 4 Bolliger,® Hausrath, 6 and other Protestant investi-
gators have lately expressed themselves, and Loisy 7 under-
took to proclaim their hypothesis as dogma, in the name of
criticism.
And the reasons for this? We may well be astonished to
hear them ; “ From all appearances the text of Mark concern-
ing the redemption of many through the death of Christ (Mark
x, 45) must have been inspired by Paul, and it seems as if this
Evangelist’s report of the Last Supper had been enriched by
Paul with the idea of redemption; Jesus seems to have
presented the chalice and the bread with reference to his
approaching death and the future reunion with his own in the
kingdom of God, without, however, setting forth the atoning
character and redemptive significance of his death. The words
of Jesus, as given by Luke (xxii, 19), which refer to his aton-
ing death, appear to have been introduced subsequently from
the Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians (1 Cor. xi, 24). Mark’s
representation of the Last Supper (xiv, 22, etc.) appears to be
based on a narration, similar to that of Luke, only what he
says of the ‘ blood of the new testament ’ must have been
introduced in accordance with the doctrine of Paul. The
second Gospel, so influenced by the editing given it by Paul,
must then, in its turn, have influenced the first Gospel of
Matthew. Originally a shorter account of the scene of the
Last Supper had, therefore, preceded the synoptic represen-
tation of it, in which, it is true, the thought of Christ’s
approaching death was present, but not the Pauline features
of the atoning character of that death.” 8 We can hardly
believe our eyes in beholding this artificial construction
of history. “It appears. ... it should be. ... it would
1 Die Predigt Jesu vom Reiche Gottes, p. 197 fi.
3 Die Lehre Jesu , 505 (Gottingen, igoi).
3 Die Bedeutung des Todes Jesu naeh seinen eigenen Aussagen auf
Grund der synoptischen Evangelien (Tubingen, 1901).
4 Die Anfdnge unserer Religion, 79 (1904).
5 Das Messiasgeheimniss bei Markus, 98-132 (Schweiz, theol. Zeitsch.,
1006).
6 Jesus und die neutestamentalichen Schriftsteller, i, 300, 308 (Berlin,
1008).
7 L'Evangile et VEglise, 60-73 (1902); Autour d'un petit livre, 122,
237 (Paris, 1903); Les Evangiles synoptiques, i, 96, 100, 116, 181 (1907);
ii, p. 340 (1908).
* VEvangile et VEglise, 72; Autour d’un petit livre, 237.


be ... it must be ... it could be . . . .” That is all!
And from this is drawn the conclusion that the passages of the
synoptists bearing on this point do not, therefore, belong to
the Gospel of the Saviour, but to the theology of Paul! A
more groundless criticism of the Gospels can scarcely be
imagined.
A closer comparison of the report of the Last Supper given
by Paul (i Cor. xi, 24), on the one hand, with the accounts
given by the synoptists, on the other, in spite of the great and
essential similarity of all these reports, reveal differences of
such a nature that the hypothesis of the Evangelists having
borrowed from the Epistle to the Corinthians is excluded.
This is especially true in regard to the atoning character of
the death of Jesus. Luke, the “ Paulist ” among the synop-
tists, omits, in describing the presentation of the chalice, the
words, “ This do ye, as often as you shall drink, for the com-
memoration of me ” —words which are found in the report by
Paul; instead of them the Evangelist introduces the words :
My blood, “ which is shed for you ” (Luke xxii, 20), a conclu-
sion which is not found in Paul. Mark and Matthew, on their
part, give expression to the idea of atonement at the presenta-
tion of the chalice, but not at the offering of the bread, while
in Paul we observe the exact opposite. According to these
two synoptists, Jesus adds to this the statement that his blood
will ... be shed " for many,” while the Pauline report of
the Last Supper does not contain these words. The second
synoptic principal passage, according to which Jesus “ gives
his life a redemption for many,” has no parallel in Paul. To
be sure, 1 Tim. ii, 6 is very similar, “ Who gave himself a
redemption,” yet there follow the additional words “for all,”
instead of the synoptic formula, “ for many.” Certainly
both expressions are substantially the same, but the difference
in form excludes borrowing on the part of the Evangelists,
especially if we reflect that the synoptic passage stands in
the midst of the description of an episode which in Paul
is wanting. In view of this context, the synoptists could not
have been borrowers, and Paul only could have been so, if
there were any borrowers at all. Hence the passages in the
Gospels which contain express statements about redemption
through Christ do not find their origin in the Pauline Epistles.
Moreover, the doctrine of redemption in itself cannot have
originated first from Paul and through him have been trans-
mitted to the synoptic Gospels. Our opponents could support
this assertion, at most, by the fact that the synoptic doctrine
of redemption does not differ essentially from the Pauline
doctrine. From this harmony they then unhesitatingly draw
the conclusion that the synoptists do not transmit to us the
views of the Saviour, but the theory of Paul. Remarkable 1
If the Pauline idea of atonement were not to be found in the


writings of the Evangelists, then they would doubtless say :
“ You see that Paul must have imputed this idea to the
Saviour, otherwise we should find it also in the Gospels.”
But since it does form a part of the Gospels also, they say :
“You see that the Evangelists ascribe these views to the
Saviour in order to please Paul.”
Evidently there is only one correct‘conclusion to be drawn
from the agreement of the Gospel and Pauline accounts —that
both report the same thing in accordance with two different
but concurrent sources of information, which can have had
their origin only in the reports of the first disciples,.and there-
fore go back to the utterances of Jesus himself. Willingly or
unwillingly, almost all the critics now acknowledge this to be
the case. 1
Moreover, we should arrive at a similar result even if the
doctrine of redemption were found only in Paul, and were not
at all recorded by the Evangelists, or only in connection with
Paul. For it is certain that “in the preaching of Jesus
Christ ... no differences existed between Paul and the early
Apostles. We may be certain, therefore, that what Paul
actually reports of Christ is nearly as reliable and valuable
as if the disciples of Jesus had themselves related it in
person. ... A controversy over these facts never occurred
among the Apostles.” 2
This fundamental view of Harnack about the Pauline
tradition of Christ is most clearly demonstrated in the ques-
tion that here concerns us. Paul does not bring out the
doctrine of the redemptive death of Jesus as his own view,
which is for the first time struggling for recognition in the
apostolic Church. Rather does he everywhere take it for
granted that it is familiarly known to all the churches to which
he writes, and forms a fundamental part of apostolic preach-
ing. He expressly says : “ I delivered unto you first of all
which I also received; how that Christ died for our sins”
(i Cor. xv, 3). This central doctrinal point of the Pauline
Gospel existed, therefore, before he wrote. The first
witnesses for Christ all preached it both before and contem-
poraneously with the Apostle to the Gentiles. It belonged to
the treasure of saving truth, held by the oldest Christian
generation.
1 See Jiilicher, Zur Geschichte der Abendmahlfeier in der dltesten
Kirche (1892); A. Harnack, Dogmengeschichte, 64 (1894); E. Haupt,
Ueber die ursfriingliche Form und Bedeutung der Abendmahlsworie
(1896); F. Schultzen, Das Abendmahl im N. T. (1896); R. A. Hoff-
mann, Die Abendmahlsgedanken Jesu Christi (1896); P. Lobstein, La
doctrine de la sainie cine (1899); W. Schmiedel, Die neuesten Ansich-
ten iiber den Ursprung des Abendmahls, Protestantische Monatshefte
(1899); J. Wellhausen, Das Evangelium Matthdi, 122-126 (1904); Das
Evangelium Luca, 121 (1904).
* Harnack, Ueber die Glaubwurdigheit der evangelischen Geschichte,
Christliche Welt, 319 (1905).


These facts are asserted, not only by the more orthodox
critics such as Karl Muller, 1 Paul Feine 2 and Julius Kaftan, 3
but also Wilhelm Wrede 4 and Johannes Weiss, 5 who try to
create artificially an antagonism between Christ and Paul,
but are unable to produce evidence that Paul’s doctrine of
redemption did not exist essentially in the first Christian com-
munity. In fact, Adolf Jiilicher is obliged to recognize the
fact that Paul “ has the support of the original Christian com-
munity in his teaching about Christ and the doctrines of satis-
faction and redemption.” Accordingly “the cleft between
Paul and ante-pauline Christianity has diminished remark-
ably,” and “we see sometimes Jesus, sometimes the first
Apostles, hold out the hand to him over the graves.” 6
A glance into the non-pauline writings of the New Testa-
ment confirms this statement. “ The blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanseth us from all sin ”(i John i, 7). “ You are
redeemed . . . with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb
unspotted and undefiled” (1 Pet. i, 19). Thus and similarly
do the writings of the first disciples speak to us, and what we
know in general of the first preaching of the Gospel from the
Acts of the Apostles amounts almost entirely to this—that
in Christ alone is salvation, deliverance, redemption and for-
giveness of sins. Again, Harnack cannot but acknowledge
that “ the confession of the Christian Church is that in none
other is there salvation, and that no other name is given to
mankind by which we can be saved, than the name of Jesus
Christ. With this confession it began; for this confession its
martyrs died; and from this confession it still derives its
strength to-day, as it did 1,800 years ago. It connects with
this Person the whole substance of religion, life in God, the
forgiveness of sin and consolation in suffering.” 7 And else-
where : “ That these two doctrines [death and resurrection for
our sins] were for the primitive Church the principal dogmas,
no one has yet doubted; even Strauss has not denied it, and
the great critic, Ferdinand Christian Baur, has recognized
that the oldest form of Christendom was built up from a
confession of faith in them.” 8 Christendom has never known
any other Gospel.
Whoever departs from it, puts himself at once outside
Christianity. But whoever asserts that this Gospel was the
work of Paul presupposes something impossible to have
really happened—namely, that at once, only a few years after
1 Unser Herr, 43 f.
2 Paulus als Theologe, 76-78 (Berlin, 1906).
3 Jesus uni Paulus (Tubingen, 1906).
4 Paulus, and ed., 90 (Tubingen, 1907).
5 Paulus uni Jesus, 5, 51 (Berlin, 1909).
* Paulus uni Jesus, 34 (Tubingen, 1907).
7 Das Christentum uni die Geschichte, sth ed., 3 (Leipzig, 1904).
8 Harnack, Wesen des Christentums, 98.


the death of Jesus, the Gospel of the Saviour was placed
upon an entirely different and essentially and knowingly in-
correct foundation, with the common, unanimous consent of
the first disciples, and, indeed, by means of a man who did
not belong to the circle of the disciples, but who, on the
contrary, humbly confessed himself to be a novice, and was
universally known as such. A criticism which must con-
descend to such a monstrous alternative is thereby simply
annihilated. It proves more clearly than all orthodox state-
ments that the redemptive death and the redemptive doctrine
belong to the innermost core of the Messianic preaching of
Jesus.
Let us now sum up the results which we have gained.
First of all, it has been shown to us that the Messianic views
of Jesus were wholly foreign to the Judaistic conception of
the Messiah, entertained by his contemporaries. He had, in
common with the rabbinical and apocalyptical theology, only
the thought of the Parousia— : the view of his return at the end
of the world. He rejected in the most decided manner the
national-political conception of the Messiah in every form,
and with it repudiated also in principle the only thing which
apparently still united him with the Judaism of his time—the
doctrine of the Parousia, conceived by it as something equally
national and political.
It is easy to see, therefore, that the more obstinately his
people adhered to the late Jewish Messianic expectations,
which were so fundamentally different from those of the Old
Testament, the more incomprehensible did Jesus as the
Messiah remain to them. The Judaism of the Synagogue
could acknowledge as the Messiah only a thorough-going
Rabbi, whose words, works, conduct and interpretation of
the truth adhered strictly to the narrow Talmudic system of
ordinances, and whose kingdom was a world power with a
purely Jewish provincial policy. The Saviour came, however,
relying neither on official rabbinism nor on an equally narrow
Jewish eschatology, but on the divinely laid foundation of the
Old Testament, and repudiating the erroneous ideas of the
Messiah which the Jewish narrow-mindedness of later years
thought that it found in the Old Testament.
Nothing is more evident from the Messianic utterances of
Jesus than his consciousness of the fact that he is upholding
and fulfilling in every respect the Old Testament notion of the
Messiah. Whenever he alludes to his “having come” or
“having been sent,” and however he may express himself
concerning his Messianic beginning, and whether he speaks
of his entry into the world, his teaching, his miracles, his
suffering, his death, or his resurrection, he always remains
conscious that he is fulfilling the prophecies and announce-
ments of the Messiah, given in the Old Testament; that


the whole Scripture must be fulfilled in him; and also that not
a word had been spoken of the Messiah by Moses and the
Prophets which was not to be realized in him.
If we compare the Messianic elements of the Old Testament
which we have disclosed with the Gospel’s actual Messianic
confessions and recorded events, the essential unity of the
Messianic conceptions, found in the Old Testament and the
Gospel, becomes at once evident. In both we find the Son of
David, the Son of Man, the suffering- Servant of God, the
Founder and King of the kingdom of God in this world and
the next. 1 Hence Jesus is able continually to appeal to the
Old Testament in proof of his Messiahship : “ Search the
Scriptures; and the same are they which give testimony of
me ” (John v, 39). With such and similar words he seeks to
turn the Jews, who are offended at his Messianic activity
(John v, 9-47), from their rabbinical pedantry in regard to the
Law to the real Messianic truth of Old Testament revelation.
Yet the Messianic idea of Jesus is not identical with that of
the Old Testament. He interprets prophecy concerning him-
self quite independently. It is undeniable that, together with
the intellectual, religious, universal and supernatural upper
current of Messianic prophecy, there flows also through the
Old Testament an adjacent current, which is very natural,
earthly and chauvinistically national. It is true subtle
intellects and stout hearts account for this by saying that
the latter is only the covering and symbol of the former.
But it was Jesus who first freed the Messianic idea entirely
from the bonds of all that was national, earthly and secular,
and with masterly decisiveness declared that every other con-
ception of the prophecy and expectation of the Messiah was
absolutely erroneous. This we have sufficiently proved.
Jesus also harmonises the Old Testament Messianic notion.
It was certainly no unimportant and no easily comprehensible
circumstance that all the Messianic prophecies refer to one
and the same person, and can find their fulfilment only in
that person. Hence the songs of Isaias about the “ Servant
of God ” were never, until the time of Jesus, referred to the
Messiah, so far, at least, as we can judge from the Jewish
writings still existing. To identify the Son of Man in Daniel
with the Son of David, and the kingdom of God, the construc-
tion of which was so difficult, with the glorious and perfected
kingdom, appeared possible, indeed, only to a very few. But
Jesus unites all this in genuine harmony in his own person and
work. He is the thoroughly supernatural, pre-existing Son of
Man in Daniel, but at the same time the truly incarnate Son
of Man, human in every particular. Both as the Son of Man
and Son of David he will enter upon his Messianic power and
1 Of Emmanuel and Jesus the Son of God we shall have something to
say subsequently.


supremacy, but only after he shall have preached, suffered and
submitted to death for the sins of humanity as the humble
Servant of God. By his teaching he enlists disciples for the
kingdom of God, by his death he makes possible the entry
into that kingdom, and in his resurrection and glory he takes
possession of it. Thus in him one prophecy after another
falls into line in the most perfect harmony, and the whole
Messianic conception of the Old Testament becomes one con-
tinuous prophecy; and this does not form a mere theory with
so many paragraphs, but is a living organism, incorporated
in the one living person of Jesus Christ himself. .
Jesus has thereby also idealised the Old Testament idea of
the Messiah. Nowhere does he try merely to copy prophecy
literally. On every occasion he fulfils the prediction in a
sublime and masterful way, without letting himself be always
limited by the same restrictions. He shows himself to be the
Lord of the Old as well as of the New Testament, saying:
“It was said by them of old time. . . . But I say unto
you ...” That is a declaration of majesty not to be mis-
taken. And he acted accordingly. What the men of old
neither conjectured nor conceived, he elevated till it became
the chief commandment of his kingdom of God —namely,
Love. What the ancients did not regard as feasible, he made
at once a fact —the proclamation of a Gospel of grace in
contrast to the law of fear. What men, in any case, had
formerly expected only as a secondary matter, he put in the
foreground of his Messianic teaching and activity—the re-
demption from sin and guilt through the vicarious suffering
and death of the Messiah. The Old Testament prophecies
of the Messiah may have appeared before the coming of
Christ as a powerful and brilliant light, but through their
fulfilment in Christ this light shone forth with such supernal
splendour that it appeared less as an illuminating touch than
as a shadow of Jesus thrown back from Christ upon the Old
Testament.
This is the specifically Christian idea of the vocation, work
and person of Jesus the Messiah, with the exception that the
divinity of Jesus has not yet been brought into consideration.
It is the fulfilment and the blessed and, glorious revelation of
the Old Testament Messianic conception, and at the same time
the correction and most positive rejection of the Judaistic
conception, as it was held by most of the contemporaries of
Jesus, whether of the rabbinical or apocalyptic stamp. The
modern idea of the Messiah, advanced by the latest higher
criticism, has nothing to do with it. To this school of criticism
Jesus is merely a successful impersonation of the Judaistic
ideas of the Messiah prevailing in his time. According to
this school, Jesus must have evolved either from the rabbinism
of the Pharisees or from apocalyptic eschatology, and must
i- 13


have incorporated now one and now the other of these, en-
hanced by his strongly individual and gifted personality. That
is all. It is comprehensible, therefore, that the modem theory
of evolution —for which no supernatural revelation whatso-
ever exists, but only natural development —cannot possibly
furnish any other solution of the Messianic problem, even
though such a solution contradicts, as we have seen, the facts
of history and in particular the testimony of Jesus to himself
as the Messiah.


CHAPTER III
ORIGIN OF THE MESSIANIC CONSCIOUS-
NESS OF CHRIST
I.— Origin of the Messianic Consciousness of Christ
ACCORDING TO MODERN CRITICISM.
THUS far we have demonstrated the fact that Jesus
bore witness to himself as the Messiah during his
whole public life in an ever-increasing and ever
more emphatic revelation, and interpreted the
essential character of his Messiahship also with
a unique and thoroughly sublime self-reliance.
But the more striking and remarkable these wonderful facts
are, the louder and more forcibly do the critics ask: “ How
came Jesus to regard himself as the Messiah? Whence did
he derive the conviction that he was the Messiah in the
sublime sense indicated? Where and how did his Messianic
consciousness originate?”
Not only in the opinion of orthodox believers, but also in
that of sceptics and unbelievers, this question forms “ on
essential part of'the inquiry into the essence of Christianity
in general.’’ 1 With the answer to this stands or falls either
the Christian conception, or the modern critical conception,
of the Person of Jesus.
For believing Christians the answer to this question is a
very simple one. They see in Jesus Christ the eternal Son of
God, who was sent by the heavenly Father into the world, to
redeem fallen humanity, as the Messiah. In this way the
entire mystery of the origin of the Messianic consciousness of
Jesus is solved. Jesus brought his Messianic vocation with
him from heaven to earth. His Messianic consciousness,
therefore, has its origin in his antecedent, pre-existent life.
It forms the root and basis of the incarnation and the earthly
life of Jesus, and is very far from having originated in this
life and having been gradually developed here.
Very different, however, is the opinion of the higher
criticism, from the religious-historical and religious-psycho-
logical point of view. Since it considers Christianity merely
as the result of the natural evolution of humanity, and as a
period of transition in the moral, intellectual and religious
development of the human race, it also considers the Saviour
Jesus Christ as only a member and a factor of this natural
evolution. It sees in him a mere man, without any previous
1 Ernst Ktihl, Das Selbstbewusstsein Jesu, p. 86 f. (Berlin, 1907).


life in heaven or any divine nature —a man like all the rest of
men. Only this man (whether in consequence of some fana-
tical self-deception, or through divine interposition remains
undecided) believed that he had an extraordinary Messianic
life-task to perform, and actually did fulfil this life-task for
the blessing of mankind.
Yet modem criticism, in claiming this, is placed before the
problem of how the consciousness of such a task and of such
an absolutely unique and unheard-of vocation could arise in
the man Jesus. Both the sceptical and half-sceptical schools
of criticism are bound to solve this problem, because otherwise
their whole conception of the Messiah and of the person and
work of Jesus Christ remains entirely without foundation. If
they do not succeed in giving to this a thoroughly satisfactory
and complete explanation, that is the best and most convinc-
ing proof that those schools of criticism have taken the wrong
course in offering to the Christianity of all the centuries a
thoroughly human conception of the nature and person of
Jesus.
It is clear from the outset that our opponents must explain
the Messianic consciousness of the Saviour psychologically, as
the result of a gradual evolution of the inner life of Jesus, and
that they cannot possibly explain it in any other way, and
ought not to attempt to do so. On the one hand, they wish to
confine even the Messiah-Jesus within the limits of natural
development and of the purely human view of history. On
the other hand, they proceed from the conviction that Jesus
really did not at first and from his own nature possess any
Messianic consciousness, although this undeniably appeared
in him at a later date. It revealed itself, therefore, midway
between the early and the later periods of his life. And
because this could not possibly have happened through a
supernatural revelation and the gift of divine grace (for our
opponents deny the possibility of these, on principle), the
Messianic consciousness of Jesus must have evolved itself
from his own natural experiences; that is, out of the incidents
of his external life and out of his inner ethical qualities and
condition of soul. It is on this standpoint, then, that the
rationalistic and rationalizing school of inquiry concerning
Jesus really places itself.
Rationalism denies any objective Messianic vocation of
Jesus, and accordingly supposes the Man of Nazareth to have
worked himself more and more into the Messianic conscious-
ness, grossly self-deceived, impelled by his deeply religious
nature, urged on by his associates and his successes, and
allured by his own imagination.
The classical example of this “psychological explanation ”
of Christ’s Messianic consciousness is always Ernest Renan’s
Vie de ]6sus. The French romanticist regards the extra


ordinarily perfect idea of God held by Jesus, and the spiritual
union with God resulting- from it, “ as to a certain extent the
potential germ of his whole power,” 1 and as the point of
departure for his later religious and Messianic development.
In contrast to Judaism, 2 Jesus recognizes in God his Father,
and feels himself united with him in such a constant and
profound intimacy as can only unite a child with his father. 3
“ God does not speak with him as with a stranger; God is in
him; he knows himself to be one with God, and he derives
from his own heart what he says of his Father. He lives in
the bosom of God by means of an uninterrupted revelation;
he sees him not, but he hears him. . . . He believes that he
stands in immediate intercourse with God; he considers him-
self to be the Son of God. . . . Not as if Jesus had come at
once to this high opinion of himself. It is, however, probable
that he thought from the very first that he stood in that rela-
tion to God in which a son stands to his father. ” 4
This blessed conviction of his conscious filial relation to God
forced him to convey to his fellow-men the same happiness.
He taught them, accordingly, to recognize God as a Father,
and to have intercourse with him as children and sons. That
seemed to him to be the true kingdom of heaven prophesied
by the Prophets—the ardently expected kingdom of God.®
The founder of this “ true kingdom of God, the kingdom of the
meek and humble, is the Jesus of the first days, those modest
and unclouded days when the voice of his Father found a purer
echo in his heart. At that time God really dwelt upon this
earth, for some months at least, perhaps for a year.” 6
Then came the unhappy change. Influenced by the preach-
ing of John the Baptist, by the extravagant Messianic hopes
of the class of people around him, and much more even by the
evolution of his own ideas, Jesus substituted for the inherent
kingdom of God, consisting of a sweet, childlike conscious-
ness of God, an external, realistically and at the same time
transcendentally conceived kingdom. An actual, theocratic
kingdom was to be founded, and in order to make the found-
ing of this possible the present sinful world was first to be
transformed by a sudden catastrophe into one that would be
supermundane and heavenly. A second and equally sudden
catastrophe was then at once to complete the supremacy of
God upon the new earth. 7 A radical revolution, which ex-
tended itself even to nature, was henceforth the fundamental
thought of Jesus. 8
That he himself was called to carry this revolution into
effect he could not for a moment seriously doubt. Yet, as has
been said, “ the conviction that he was the Son of God, the
1 Vie de Jesus, 53.
* id; ss-
-7 id.. 81-93.
3 id-. S 3. 54-
5 id., 56-63.
8 id., 85.
8 id., 54.
• id., 57.


confidential agent of his Father and the executor of his
Father’s will, was so deeply implanted in him, that it prob-
ably had not developed gradually, but had had its origin in
the very roots of his being.” 1 If, however, he was called to
complete the Messianic work of founding the kingdom of
God, he was evidently also called to rule this future kingdom
as the Messianic king. He was, therefore, in the full sense of
the word, the Messiah. 2 “ Possessed by this idea, which
dominated him ever more and more, from this time on, with a
truly fatal calmness, he pursued the course which his astonish-
ing genius and the extraordinary circumstances of his life had
indicated,” 3 everywhere proclaiming the glad tidings of the
immediate coming of the kingdom of God and preparing men
for it. 4 With his unexampled enthusiasm he awaited every
day the glorious dawn of the new age of the world. 5
Yet he was soon to see that he had deceived himself in
supposing that he could conjure up the kingdom of God
triumphantly and without great difficulties. Besides a small
community of believing disciples, there was also the great
mass of the people, and, above all, the party of the Pharisees,
which felt itself aggrieved by the fact that he set aside the
representatives of Mosaism, forced the Law itself into the
background, and dreamed of a Messianic kingdom, which
stood in violent contrast to their politico-national ideas of the
Messiah. And the more clear and profound the ideas of Jesus
concerning the kingdom and its coming became, the more
intense grew the opposition to the pharisaical Jews. These
already assumed a threatening attitude, and it could be fore-
seen that the issue would be an ominous and, indeed, a fatal
one for the Nazarene. Thus Jesus familiarized himself first
with the suggestion, and finally with the definite thought,
that he could not, as the glorious Son of Man prophesied by
Daniel, establish and rule the kingdom of God at once, but
only after preliminary suffering and passing through death
and the grave. 6 In reality, however, the idea of such a
kingdom of God was buried with him with his death. “ This
realistic view of the coming of God had been merely a cloud,
a passing error.” 7
This error, and consequently the Messianic consciousness of
Jesus itself, is, it is claimed, really only explicable and excus-
able when the psychological constitution of Jesus is taken into
consideration. Jesus was an enthusiast, an eccentric, an
exalti, an ecstatic, a visionary.
“ Carried away by an enthusiasm soaring to prodigious
heights, and compelled to adopt every day a more ecstatic
mode of preaching, Jesus was no longer free. . . . One was
often tempted to believe that he was irrational. He suffered
from feelings of anguish and spiritual distress. The impres-
1 Vie de J/sus, 85.
5 id., 219-228.
8 id., 94-
• id., 229-293.
8 id., 93-
7 >d-, 57-
4 id.. 93.


sive vision of the kingdom of God flickered constantly before
his eyes and made him dizzy. . . . His unusually passionate
temperament carried him at every moment beyond the bounds
of human nature. His work was no longer a rational
one. . . . Sometimes he was hard and strange. His dis-
ciples no longer understood him, and were seized with a
certain feeling of fear in his presence. ... At times they
regarded him as a madman.” 1 “The madman in him
bordered on the inspired man; only the madman has never
had any success. Never until then had insanity succeeded in
exercising, as Jesus exercised it, a decisive influence on the
progress of humanity.” 2
In this last confession lies Renan’s own condemnation of
his hypothesis of the origin of the Messianic consciousness of
Jesus. Quite apart from its being in contradiction to the facts
of the Gospel, a psychology of Jesus must be false which
stamps as a madman, or at least as a visionary simpleton, one
“to whom everyone of us owes what is best in him ;” 3 “ who
has created a movement, at the beginning of which a man of
colossal dimensions must have stood;” 4 “who has united in
himself all that is good and sublime in our nature;” 5 “who
stands at the summit of human greatness;” 6 “ who is for ever
unsurpassable, whatever the future may produce;” 7 and
“ whom all coming centuries will acclaim as the greatest of
the children of rrien.” 8
From such a double-tongued, contradictory and senseless
theory even the Überal-protestant school of critics turned with
an emphatic gesture of disapproval. In France itself Edmund
Stapfer, the dean of the Protestant theological faculty at
Paris, wrote the following forcible sentences : “ Jesus pro-
fessed to be the Messiah. That is proven; that is certain.
How did he come to do this? Through insanity, or not? It
seems to us that this is the only alternative that henceforth
presents itself to distinguish believers from unbelievers.” 9
“ Renan has said ; ‘ Blinded by his success Jesus regarded
himself as the Messiah.’ He was rational at the beginning of
his activity, but was no more so at its close, and his history,
as Renan relates it, is, in spite of all the excuses which the
latter brings forward for it, the history of the ever-increasing
over-excitement of a man who began with the sober sense,
clear vision and moral soundness of a beautiful and noble
genius, but who ended with a morbid mental exaltation
bordering on insanity. The word insanity has not been
uttered by Renan, but the thought of it is stamped on every
1 Vie de Jisus, 226, 227. 2 id., 55. 2 id., 202.
1 id., 319. 2 la., 326. * id., 320. 7 id., 327.
8 327. The thorough refutation of the psychiatrical and the
psychopathological criticism of Jesus follows in the second volume of
this work.
• E. Stapfer, Jisus-Christ avant son ministir e, 2nd. ?d„ xi (Paris,
1896).


page. Yet the facts certainly contradict such an explana-
tion.” 1
Thus does Stapfer ally himself with the “believers ”; that
is, by rejecting the harsh standpoint of the rationalists, he
assumes that Jesus did not imagine that he was the Messiah,
but that he was so in reality. Yet in this there is no mention
of the supernatural Messiahship of faith, either by Stapfer or
by any adherent of the liberal school. To them Jesus is
merely a genius, richly endowed by nature, or, if one prefers,
by natural providence, called to promote the evolution of
humanity in a religious direction, precisely as Plato and
Aristotle were called by God to promote scientific, and Michael
Angelo and Goethe artistic, evolution. Accordingly, if Jesus,
with all his greatness, was a mere man with a Messianic
vocation, not exceeding the human standard, human powers
and human nature, then his Messianic consciousness also must
have been developed by degrees and psychologically.
We see, then, that in reality the Man of Nazareth under-
goes, at the hands of the liberal school, exactly the rational-
istic treatment of Renan, with the sole difference that it
endeavours to represent his Messianic evolution as being
based on something objective, not as the phantasy of an
overstrained mentality. Essentially the holders of the liberal
theory of evolution have learned nothing since the time of
Renan. It resembles in almost every particular that of the
French “ decorative painter.”
Stapfer, like Renan, denies that Jesus possessed at first a
Messianic consciousness. It is true Jesus stood in an intimate
moral connection with God, and this union was so profound
and tender that God appeared to him as a Father and he knew
himself to be ethically a Son of God. 2 On this account he felt
himself impelled to accomplish something great for God, his
Father, and to bring about for others also their adoption by
God as children. Ever stronger and more emphatic became
this question of his inmost heart: “ For what purpose am lin
this world? What is my mission? What is the vocation of
my life?” And parallel to this question was the other : “ Who
will be the Messiah? When will he appear? What work will
he accomplish?” Eighteen years of such reflections pass, and
slowly but surely he comes to the steadfast conviction : “ I
myself am the Messiah.” 3 The crisis takes place at his
baptism. There he thinks he hears from above the voice of
his Father, which gives the decisive, affirmative answer to
his inward filial feeling and Messianic enthusiasm for God :
” Thou art my beloved Son. In thee am I well pleased.”
Now his Messianic vocation had become a fact. 4
1 Jisus-Christ fendant son ministire, 2nd ed., 3(30 (Paris, 1897).
2 Stapfer, Jisus-Christ avant son ministere, 89-91.
3 id., 92. * id., 132.


But how was he to interpret the Messianic vocation? He
was still firmly rooted in the earthly and political ideas of the
Messiah common to the Jews. The temptation, which “ was
not one separate and passing phenomenon, but extended
itself over the whole period of the life of Jesus following the
baptism,” freed him “ from the false ideas and all the in-
correct political views regarding the Messiah, which he had
shared with his entire people. He came out of the period of
Jhe temptation with the conviction that he must be a spiritual
and moral Messiah . . . that he will establish his kingdom in
the hearts of men and accomplish a purely religious work.” 1
Finally, his persecution at the hands of the Pharisees familiar-
ized him also more and more with the thought that he must
suffer and die, and that only after this he would come in glory
as the Messiah and find full recognition. 2
Loisy, 3 R^ville 4 and some German critics of liberal tenden-
cies reject, for the most part, this last-named development,
asserting that Jesus conceived his Messianic vocation, in a
spiritual sense, at once after the baptism, and that the idea of
suffering also was not absent from his mind. Yet in the main
they all agree with Renan and Stapfer. They suppose that
the Messianic consciousness of Jesus is not to be regarded as
having formed from the first a part of his nature, but as the
result of a gradual evolution. The foundation for it had been
laid in the first period of his life, through the consciousness
of sonship, which then appeared in him; through the occur-
rence at his baptism this became a positive certainty; and the
succeeding period of his public life, with its temptations and
experiences, strengthened, confirmed and clarified the con-
sciousness of his Messianic vocation. In regard to these main
points, we find, with some slight variations, a substantial
agreement in the views of Otto Pfleiderer, 5 Willibald
Beyschlag, 6 Adolf Hamack, 7 Johannes Weiss, 8 Hans
Wendt, 9 Oskar Holtzmann, 10 Bernard Weiss, 11 Paul
Wernle, 12 Konrad Furrer, 13 Adolf Julicher, 14 P. W.
I id., 162-176. * Jisus-Christ -pendant son minist'ere, 222.
3 VEvangile et I'Eglise, 55 (1902); Le IV EvangiU, 233, 252 (1903);
Les Evangiles synoptiques, i, 165, 183-186, 192, 206, 212, 242 (1907).
4 Jisus de Nazareth, ii, 3, 13-20, 198. 208' (Paris, 1897).
5 Religionsphilosophie, 2nd ed., ii, 186 fi.
• Das Leben Jesu, 213-255, 3rd ed (1893).
7 Das Wesen des Christentums, 86-89 (1900).
8 Die Predigt Jesu vom Reiche Gottes, 154-158 (1900).
9 Die Lehre Jesu, 91-102, 2nd ed. (1901).
10 Leben Jesu, 106-115 (19011.
II Das Leben Jesu, i, 271-328, 4th ed. (1902); Lehrbuch der biblischen
Theologie des N. T., 61, 7th ed. (1903).
13 Die Anfdnge unserer Religion, 27-38 (1904).
13 Das Leben Jesu Christi, 51-55, 70, 81-83, 2nd ed. (1905).
11 Die Religion Jesu u. die Anfdnge des Christentums, in Die Kultur
der Gegenwart, No. 4, 55 (1906).


Schmiedel, 1 Otto Schmiedel, 2 Wilhelm Weiss, 3 Wilhelm
Bousset 4 and P. W. Schmidt. 5
Wendt describes, perhaps most clearly, the evolution of
the Messianic consciousness of Jesus as follows : “ We may
assert, on the ground of the religious self-consciousness, in
accordance with which Jesus later judged and acted, that he
always felt himself a son in relation to God, so far as his
consciousness went backward to his childhood. Certainly this
filial feeling formed itself within him and grew broader and
deeper only gradually; but he did not work his way out from
an original condition under the dispensation of the Law,
characterized by a slavish spirit towards God, to reach, only
at a later date, a condition under the dispensation of grace
and free adoption. From the first he lived in the condition
and consciousness of a child of God. . . . During the period
of his public activity his view of the fatherhood of God, and
his consciousness that he himself stood in a purely filial rela-
tion to the heavenly Father, was the firm foundation of his
certainty that now the kingdom of God was coming, and that
he himself was the Messiah in this kingdom. In the period
which preceded his public appearance, however, this intimate
relation in which his knowledge of the fatherhood of God
and his own life in a state of sonship to God stood to the
establishment of the kingdom of God and to his Messiahship,
must have been still hidden from him. . . . The knowledge
that he himself was called by God to be the Messiah of the
promised kingdom of salvation had not been completely pos-
sessed by him for a long time previous to the commencement
of his Messianic work. He became aware of this revelation
which established his Messianic consciousness when he fol-
lowed the call of John the Baptist to the Jewish people, to
prepare, through penance, for the immediate coming of the
Messiah, and, as an evidence of such preparation, to be
baptized in the Jordan. ... At the moment when he under-
went the baptism of John he received the revelation, which
imparted to him his Messianic consciousness. The perception
was then given him that the Spirit of God, whose bearer and
representative the Messiah was to be, had been bestowed
upon himself. ... As the Son of God, in whom was first
perfectly revealed the promised relation of salvation between
God and humanity, he must be the Messiah, whose task it was
to bring to the rest of mankind the knowledge and realization
of this saving relation, and thus to bring about the establish-
ment of the promised kingdom of God. The assurance of
his Messiahship, thus suddenly and miraculously received,
1 Protest. Monatshefte, 267 (1906).
3 Die Hauft-probleme der Leben-Jesu-Forschung, 96-99, 2nd ed. (1906).
3 Jesus von Nazareth, 9 S. (1906). 4 Jesus, 79 f., 87 f. (1907).
5 Die Geschichte Jesu erzdhlt, 49-52, 57-59, 114, 120-122, 126 (1909).


was, however, followed by disturbing doubts. . . . And that
which made such a conflict possible for him, and threatened to
confuse him as to his Messianic vocation, was the number
and variety in the Jewish conceptions of the Messiah, which
until then had been kept hidden from him, and which he now
recognized would not be realized if he himself should appear
in that sense of the Messiahship and with the spiritual power
revealed to him at the baptism. . . . The net benefit accru-
ing to Jesus from his preliminary struggle with the tempta-
tions, which were directed, immediately after the baptism,
against his consciousness of his Messianic vocation, consisted
in his having acquired for his own sure possession the sud-
denly gained certainty of that Messianic vocation. Thereafter
he was not subject to ever-new mental agitation, caused by
inward scruples and doubts, whenever, in the practice of his
Messianic calling, he encountered temptations originating in
the prevalent Jewish conception of the Messiah or in the
obstacles continually presented both by his disciples and by
his enemies. Since he had at the start rejected this tempta-
tion, not briefly and superficially, but, on the contrary, had
overcome it quietly and thoroughly during a period of spiritual
conflict lasting for weeks, he could take up his public work
and teaching with wonderful clearness and consistency, and
with an immovable certainty of his Messianic consciousness
and of his conception of the kingdom of God.” 1
From these statements it is evident that the liberal school
is indeed willing to oppose to the merely imaginary Messianic
consciousness of Jesus one that is founded upon facts, yet
represents this, exactly as Renan does, as the result of his
subjective, psychological evolution. It begins with a protest
against rationalism, and ends with the final results of
rationalism.
The liberal-conservative group of Protestant theologians
recognizes in Jesus “ the Son of Man and Son of God from
heaven,” but does not recognize the real Son of God and his
divinity, and raises “ a most emphatic protest against all
attempts of the liberal school to apply to Christ the thought
of development found in the modem theory of evolution. . . .
The consciousness of Jesus that he was the Son of God and the
Son of Man mocks at all attempts at a religious-historical
explanation, and every theory of its evolution must be checked
by it. If not, it should comprehend clearly that it must first
destroy that consciousness of Jesus if it wishes, to explain it
in its way.” 2 We should hardly believe it possible to meet
with such words as these at the conclusion of an investigation
in which the liberal-conservative theologian of Konigsberg,
Ernst Kiihl, represents the self-consciousness of Jesus, quite
1 Wendt, Q 4, 55, 97, 98, 99, 101-102.
4 Ernst Kiihl, Das Selbstbewusstsein Jesu. 86 (Berlin, 1907 V


in the sense of the liberal school of criticism, as the result
of a gradual development. The filial consciousness of Jesus
has, it is true, according to Kiihl “ its ultimate rootlets in the
depths of his own being, which it outgrew organically by what
might be called a natural, spiritual necessity.” 1 That is,
however, all. Not even once is Jesus’ consciousness of son-
ship made identical with his consciousness of his own nature.
The latter is, rather, only the fostering soil in which the
former grows. Hence “we are never able to decide whether
the filial consciousness of Jesus took possession of him
through some intervention of God at a definite period of
his former life suddenly, irresistibly and overpoweringly, or
whether (which is for us psychologically more comprehensible)
it came into being gradually, like a mature fruit, after long
evolution. And if it did ripen thus in long evolution, did this
development proceed quietly, continuously and harmoniously?
Or was it connected with severe spiritual struggles and inward
conflicts? All these are questions for the answers to which
no means of historical and psychological demonstration are
available.” 2
According to Kiihl, we know only that the filial conscious-
ness, “ this inner feeling and condition of kinship which raised
him above all other men and united him with God, was already
a characteristic of Jesus when he came to his baptism.” 3 In
Kiihl’s opinion, also, it cannot be doubted that Jesus’ con-
sciousness of being the Messiah originated in his consciousness
of sonship, and, indeed, in consequence of his experience at
his baptism. “ Only this is certain—that the consciousness of
his sonship took on the form of Messianic consciousness in
consequence of the baptism.” 4 His baptism must “ surely be
considered as the natal hour of his Messiahship, and at the
same time also that of his Messianic consciousness.” 5
“ From the moment of his baptism Jesus was convinced of
his Messianic vocation and of his call to found the Messianic
kingdom. 6 The day and hour of the coming of the kingdom
and of his final Messianic triumphs he patiently left to God,
because, by reason of his consciousness of sonship, he
acquiesced entirely in God’s will. 7 During his first Messianic
work for his people, which was taken up and completed with
enthusiasm, Jesus certainly never doubted that these triumphs
would be, sooner or later, granted him by God. On this point
even the hostility of the leading circles could not shake his
confidence, so long as he had the sympathies of the people on
his side. But when the great change in the people took place,
when the flame of enthusiasm for him was extinguished . . .
then he saw that the day and hour of the completion of the
kingdom was to be postponed, and that all that the Prophets
1 id., 43. * id., 42. 8 id., 40. * id., 40.
5 id., 39. • id., 44-61. 1 id., 6r.


had written of the Son of Man, even all that Isaias (chapter
liii) had written of the suffering Servant of God, would find its
fulfilment in the Messiah; then he made the thought of suffer-
ing a part of his self-consciousness, in voluntary submission
to the divine will and in clear agreement with it. That was
the really great, bold and heroic act of Jesus.” 1
When Kiihl makes the thought of his coming suffering a
development of Messianic consciousness, which came to Jesus
only subsequently and, indeed, at a very late date, he goes
beyond even most of the representatives of the liberal school
which he attacks, and reverts directly to the .rationalism of
Strauss and Renan.
Thus the immense labour, in which the criticism of the last
two decades has wellnigh exhausted itself in trying to explain
intelligibly the consciousness of Jesus by the theory of psycho-
logical evolution, ends in a pitiful absurdity. It started out
with indignation at Renan, who had dared to describe the
Messianic consciousness of Jesus as the result of purely
psychological development, and it closes, since it brings out
the same assertions with various modifications, by saying
that Jesus had by nature no Messianic consciousness; that
the consciousness of sonship preceded the Messianic con-
sciousness as a preparation; that Jesus first acquired his
Messianic consciousness at the time of the baptism and by
means of it; and that this Messianic consciousness was
evolved to completion during the subsequent period of his
public life.
But all this in substance the French rationalist had also
said. Indeed, it will be shown that the modern critics them-
selves do not escape the absurd consequence resulting from
declaring Jesus, in the same breath, to have been the most
perfect flower of human intelligence, yet at the same time a
visionary suffering from insane phantasies. This criticism of
the modern evolutionary theory, pronounced upon itself, is
the sharpest subjective criticism imaginable. Its advocates
have certainly given themselves sincere and almost inconceiv-
able effort to prove the psychologically false portrait of Jesus
which Renan merely sketched, as an unsurpassable artist, to
be a real, scientific and historic picture. They have not suc-
ceeded in the attempt. The “psychological” development-
portrait of Jesus remains always an artificial construction. A
serious and unprejudiced examination of the separate positions
held by our opponents will fully convince us of this. Let us
begin with the alleged evolution of the Messianic conscious-
ness of Jesus during his public life.
1 id., 61-62.


ll.— Evolution of the Messianic Consciousness of Christ
during his Public Life.
We are acquainted with our opponents’ views about the
evolution of the Messianic consciousness. It is, however,
necessary to examine still more closely their lines of thought
and their “ proofs ” for the assertions made by them, in order
to judge of them with certainty. The transformation in the
Messianic ideas of Jesus begins, according to the modern
critics, after the episode of the baptism. Jesus, they say, left
the scene of the baptism with the firm consciousness that he
had been chosen for the Messiah. Our opponents of all shades
of opinion are, in fact, unanimous in thinking that “ Jesus,
when he made his public appearance, had already fully made
up his mind both as to himself and his mission.” 1 “No
competent judge of the matter who has respect for tradition
will, therefore, dare to cast a doubt upon the constant Mes-
sianic consciousness of Jesus after his baptism.” 2
We are assured, however, on the other hand, with equal
positiveness, that Jesus, immediately after his baptism, was
not yet sure “of the nature of his Messiahship ” 3 or of the
precise task which he, as the Messiah, had to perform, or of
the manner of his Messianic activity. “ Even if his experience
at his baptism did settle the great and vital question of his
being the Son of God, who had been growing to manhood in
obscurity, another scarcely less important question forced
itself upon him : In what sense was he to be the Messiah of
Israel?” 1 The Messianic consciousness of Jesus has still
always “ two souls. . . . His vocation means for him a
problem which only the future can solve. . . . An immense
burden was thereby laid upon his soul, and a problem con-
fronted him, the solution of which must have sometimes
appeared very difficult.” 5 “ The perception of the task which
the Father had entrusted to him could develop only by work
and by victory over every sort of resistance.” 6 “To such
a degree did Jesus, his whole life long, elaborate and purify
the Messianic title, assumed at first by inward compulsion.” 7
It was at first a question whether he should look upon his
vocation in the sense of the Jewish nationalistic conception of
the Messiah, involving the religious-political liberation of his
people, and hence the establishment of a secular and earthly
Messianic kingdom, or in the sense of a religious and spiritual
1 Harnack, Wesen des Christeniums, 88.
* Johannes Weiss, Die Predigt Jesu vom Reiche Gottes, 157; see also
Julius Kaftan, Jesus und Paulus, 13.
3 Hess, Jesus von Nazareth, 11.
4 Willibald Beyschlag, Das Leben Jesu, i, 231.
5 J. Weiss, Die Predigt Jesu, 156. • Harnack, Wesen, 89.
1 Wernle, Die Anfdnge unserer Religion, 34.


liberation and the establishment of a Kingdom of God founded
in the hearts of men. And if the latter course were chosen,
then he must again ask himself whether he could found this
kingdom now, in his earthly life, moving from victory to
victory and from triumph to triumph, or whether he could do
so only after having passed through suffering, death and the
grave, and only at his second coming, from heaven as the
Messianic Son of Man? These were the two problems, to
which the following period of his public life was gradually to
furnish the solution.
First, the question whether he was to be a political or a
spiritual Messiah, and to found a political or a spiritual Mes-
sianic kingdom. That this alternative weighed upon the mind
of the Saviour very seriously is proved, our opponents say, by
the Gospel history of his temptation, concerning which the
critics assure us “ that it was not one single passing fact, but
that it extended over the whole life of Jesus following the
baptism.” 1 “The same spirit which had given him the cer-
tainty of his vocation drove him with great violence into the
desert,” 2 where he was exposed to unheard-of conflicts with
the devil. According to the enemies of supernatural revela-
tion, this cannot, of course, be the historical report of a real
external fact, but only the “symbolic veiling” of an inner
psychical crisis 3 in Jesus, “ a psychological experience of
Jesus in a condensed symbolic form.” 4 “Translated into our
mode of speecli or thought, the powerful exultation and
blessed joy which he feels under the outpouring of divine love
and strength from above, yield suddenly to a profound agita-
tion. Doubts and cares press upon him. On all sides possi-
bilities are revealed to him, which he feels are temptations
and sinful paths. In short, violent inward struggles replace
the first blessed certainty and enthusiasm.” 5 The history of
the temptation “ is certainly the result of an inward conflict in
Jesus, through which, at the beginning of his public life, he
was forced to fight his way to a clear apprehension of the
course which he must follow in his vocation.” 6
“What does this mean? Evidently the repudiation of a
false, sensuous ideal of the Messiah. That is particularly
evident in the third phase of his temptation, the purport of
which was the offer of universal dominion at the price of doing
homage to the prince of this world. The ideal of an imme-
diate visible Messianic kingdom, a world kingdom which,
proceeding from Sion, should unite all nations under his
sceptre, presents itself before the mind’s eye of the newly
anointed. But he sees that such a kingdom can be established
1 Stapfer, ] isus-Christ avani son mini stir e, 152; cf. Kuhl, of. cit., 13.
2 J. Weiss, of. cit, 156. 3 Stapfer, l.c.
* Loisy, VEvangile et VEglise, 20,
5 J. Weiss, of. cit., 156. • Kuhl, of. cit., 13.


only by the aid of the Evil One and by the instrumentality of
worldly violence and intrigue, not by the agencies of spirit
and truth, which are alone divine. Accordingly he rejects it.
But the two preceding phases of his temptation also belong to
the same false ideal—a Messiah who, by the arbitrary use ot
his miraculous powers, could remove any external want that
he might feel, and who could avoid the burden laid upon him
by his vocation, and who then, by a bold act of daring,
crowned with success by God’s assistance (perhaps the attain-
ment of the nation’s independence), could capture at a stroke
the faith of the people. Such a Messiah was the necessary
preliminary requisite for erecting that Messianic world
kingdom of which the people dreamed. Starting from such
apparently innocent and insinuating preliminary conditions,
therefore, Jesus at that time examined point by point the
Messianic ideal, which the spirit of his people and of the age
had given him, until at last, fully realizing the point aimed at
and the means necessary to attain it, he saw its incompati-
bility with a divine purpose, and consequently recognized in
the spirit, which thus counselled and demanded, the tempter,
Satan, the opponent of God. To recognize him as such meant
for Jesus his instant rejection. . . . Jesus had, therefore,
first to test those popular expectations, which may perhaps
have exerted upon him a certain alluring charm, and hence he
had no fixed, definite Messianic ideal, which would in advance
have excluded those expectations.” 1
“ It appears that Jesus himself subsequently related figura-
tively to his intimates (to whom such instruction could be only
a blessing, in view of their ever-renewed hopes of a Jewish
kingdom) how the first profound contact of his soul with the
Messianic thought was a temptation to sin, a temptation to
consider the flesh as his weapon, and to attempt the path to
the Messiahship by means of insurrection and the sword.
These had already, it is true, been tried before his day unsuc-
cessfully, but would not God perhaps allow him, Jesus,
by these means to succeed? . . . This temptation to be
untrue to himself was not a mere passing one; he had first to
experience it, and finally to subdue it thoroughly. But the
result was a victory for his better, divinely begotten self. . . .
Jesus remains true to himself and to the thoughts which had
urged him onward at the beginning. God wishes to create
the new, blessed era from within, out of the hearts of the
pious.” 2
Stapfer, Beyschlag, J. Weiss, Kiihl and P. W. Schmidt
inform us, therefore, that Jesus had to fight out an actual
spiritual conflict with the Jewish political Messianic ideal,
which up to that time had been also his own. Only after this
1 Beyschlag, Das Leben Jesu, i, 234-236.
* Schmidt, Die Geschichte Jesu, i, 59, 60, 114.


long-continued crisis had been overcome did he arrive at the
firm conviction that his task was a purely religious and
spiritual one.
This assertion, however, contradicts in a twofold manner
the most positively assured facts. It is certain from the
synoptic reports 1 that the temptation came to Jesus only out-
wardly, without the slightest spiritual conflict, and without
in the least disturbing the equanimity and serenity of his
soul. Equally evident is it, from the history of the temptation,
that we are not justified in harbouring even the faintest sus-
picion that Jesus could have cherished any sort of inclination
to the political Messianic idea of his people. Rather does
everything indicate that he already then must have rejected
every profanation and secularization of the Messiahship with
the same decisiveness and the same inward aversion with
which he rejected them in the whole of his subsequent life.
This fact is so clear and incontestable that most of the
critics see themselves compelled to refuse adherence to
Stapfer, Beyschlag, ]. Weiss and Schmidt. “ They were not
fancies and ideals which had arisen from an evil, selfish
nature hostile to God, and from an inclination in Jesus to be
self-opinionated; an inference of those temptations from the
soul of Jesus in this sense is certainly to be repudiated. But
they were Messianic conceptions and ideals which had come
to him from without—that is, from the prevailing views and
traditions of his countrymen. . . . From the baptism on, one
of his fixed ideas was the perception that the true kingdom of
God was not a kingdom of earthly supremacy and the enjoy-
ment of external prosperity, but rather that those who wished
to participate, as true children of God, in the eternal life of
the kingdom of God, must, instead of ruling, serve others out
of love, and for the sake of heavenly blessings must give up
striving after earthly treasures. Since he could conceive of
his Messiahship only in connection with this idea of the nature
of the kingdom of God, and with the object of establishing
a kingdom of God of this sort, he was obliged from the
very beginning to recognize the necessity of himself, as the
Messiah, giving proofs of this loving service and of this
renunciation for the sake of the kingdom of God in a
specially high degree.” 2
Like Wendt, Oskar Holtzmann, 3 B. Weiss, 4 Wernle 5 and
other liberal investigators also maintain that the illusion of
the political r6le of the Messiah only reached his ear and
played around his fancy from without. It found no echo
in his soul. Rather did he recognize it “ unhesitatingly as
I.
14
1 Matt, iv, i-n ; Mark i, 12 f.; Luke iv, 1-13.
2 Wendt, Die Lehre Jesu, 90, 489 f.
3 Leben Jesu, 112, 113 £. * Leben Jesu, i, 314.
5 Die Anfdnge unserer Religion, 32 f.; see Harnack, Wesen des
Christentums, 21 f., 88 f.


Satanic,” 1 and cried out: “ No, those are voices of the devil
which appeal thus to my Messianic feeling. Away with
them !” 2
But if that is the case, where then remains the alleged
transformation and progressive evolution of the Messianic
consciousness of Jesus from the political to the spiritual ideal?
Both before, during and after the temptation Jesus immov-
ably, and in spite of all delusions to the contrary, holds fast to
the conviction that he is called to found a purely spiritual and
religious kingdom of God. The temptation brought to him
no new conception and no evolution of his Messiahship what-
soever. That is the epitomized meaning of all that has been
said.
Moreover, for the sake of argument, we have always taken
it for granted that in the Gospel account of the temptation it
•was merely a symbolical representation of a spiritual experi-
ence and of a discord which had gradually arisen in the soul of
Jesus, either from within (as Stapfer, J. Weiss, Beyschlag
and Schmidt maintain), or from without (as Wendt, B. Weiss,
Harnack, O. Holtzmann, Wernle and others assert). But
this presupposition stands in direct opposition to the words
of the Gospel. The synoptists speak of a strictly historical
occurrence, not of a dramatization of psychical conditions in
the soul of Jesus. This occurrence takes place outside the
soul of Jesus. In fact, it turns upon a dialogue between two
real persons—between the Saviour on the one hand, and
Satan the tempter on the other. It is sufficient to read the
Gospels in order to perceive this, and hence to acknowledge
that their text excludes any psychological change in Jesus
regarding the Messiah.
If, on the contrary, that supposition can be in any way
justified, then the literal historical text must be given up and
travestied into a parable of the soul-struggles of Jesus. The
origin of such a thought can only have been the wish to
establish an evolutionary historical progress in the life of the
Lord, and, above all, the liberal theologians’ fear of the
devil. Everyone will understand that this “ critical ” difficulty
does not deter us from holding fast to the Gospel text.
All the more is this justified because the conflict of Jesus
with Satan after the baptism corresponds perfectly to the
whole situation, and denotes a real and true advance in the
life of the Saviour. Even Loisy has recognized this correctly :
“ The consecration to the Messiahship, conferred at the bap-
tism, had, as its consequence, the temptation of Christ.
Avowedly the Messiah was to contend with Satan and conquer
him. . . . The decisive conflict, from which he was to emerge
as victor, was death. But if after his baptism he was already
considered as the Messiah, the opportunity of an encounter
1 Weiss, op. cit., 314.
2 Wernle, of. cit., 33.


with the devil had even then to be given him. Hence the great
scene of the temptation in the desert.” 1 It also agrees with
the attitude which evil spirits henceforth assumed towards
Jesus by seeking to publish abroad his Messiahship prema-
turely, and thereby to frustrate it. 2 Our opponents have,
therefore, no ground whatever for suspecting that the history
of the temptation was only a parable in which the spiritual
struggles of Jesus concerning his Messianic vocation are
allegorized.
If, nevertheless, one is determined to hold to such an inter-
pretation of the passages in the Gospels, then the problem must
first be solved how it happened that the psychological experi-
ences of Jesus were represented in the form of an actual
temptation by the devil. The answer can only culminate in
the alternative—either the orthodox tradition given by the
Evangelists has pictured to itself the temptation of Jesus thus,
or else Jesus himself has regarded the action of his spiritual
thoughts and feelings as an outward temptation by the devil.
The first of these hypotheses is plainly inadmissible for liberal
criticism, which proceeds from the fundamental standpoint
that the orthodox tradition of the earliest time has done every-
thing to glorify the human historical portrait of Jesus by
making it a heavenly and divine representation of Christ.
Here, however, in the history of the temptation, Jesus, on the
contrary, is lowered even to the sphere of diabolical machina-
tions. , Tradition, and therefore the Evangelists, cannot have
invented that history. It originates with Jesus himself.
Holtzmann expresses himself on this point as follows :
“Jesus informed his disciples of the inward conflicts which he
had experienced after the revelation of his Messiahship at his
baptism, making thereby the happiest use of some distinct
individual reminiscences in the classical form of this kind of
narration.” 3 Then, however, he would have to be charac-
terized as a rhapsodist and visionary, consequently as a man
whose consciousness is clouded by irrational ideas. 4 On this
point we agree again with Renan, and we say that the Liberal
idea of the evolution of the Messianic consciousness of Jesus
during the period of temptation thereby surrenders its own
position.
There now ensued, according to our opponents’ theory, an
interval of hopeful activity, during which Jesus believed that
he could establish the spiritual kingdom of God without delay
and without provoking a crisis. Then began ,a period of
1 Loisy, Les Evangiles synoftiques, i, 185-186.
2 See p. 138 of this vol. 2 Leben Jesu, 118; cf. no f.
4 Beyschlag also remarks : “ The visionary interpretation of the
history of the temptation attributes the story to the soul of Jesus; but
if these visions had come from his own natural heart, that would have
been a centre of evil thoughts; and if God had suggested them to him,
no one would know why and for what purpose,” of. cit., p. 233.


desertions and of difficulties occasioned by the people, the
Pharisees and the leaders of the nation; and now there
first gradually dawned upon the consciousness of Jesus the
thought that he must enter into his Messianic glory and
supremacy through suffering and death. This, according to
some isolated critics, is the second stage in the psychological
evolution of Jesus during his public life.
“ It was very natural for those who held the old conception
of the life of Jesus to attribute in advance the divine plan for
establishing the kingdom of redemption, as it subsequently,
in the course of events, came to be known —that is, God’s
determination to sacrifice his Son for the salvation of the
world ... to the soul of Jesus also, as a plan of which he
was fully conscious. Such a conception is at once repugnant
to us moderns. . . . To one who considers the matter with-
out prejudice and historically, it is evident that Jesus could
grasp the thought that he was fated to die only when, through
experience, the knowledge of an irresistible antagonism
between what he had to bring and the spirit prevailing in the
people forced itself upon him, and thus the inevitable breach
between himself and his people revealed itself. . . . The
public life of Jesus began under other constellations than those
which indicated the death of the cross. Jesus hoped to save a
people as such, which, of course, was possible only if it did
not reject its Messiah and nail him to the cross.” 1
According to Wernle, “ the Messiah was associated, in the
imagination of the Jews, with unalloyed heavenly and earthly
glory. ... In the soul of Jesus bitter experience with his
people ripened the thought of the necessity of suffering and
even death. . . . The Messianic glory became for him now
an aim, which does not fall to the lot of a favoured man
through any special fortune, but rather must be won by end-
less effort, renunciation, and even death, in obedience to the
moral law.” 2
Bousset remarks : “ The scene of Gethsemani points back-
wards. This clear apprehension of his fate, this submission
to God’s will, can have been given to Jesus only little by little,
as a result of severe conflict. Intimations, constantly growing
stronger, must have passed through his soul already long
before Gethsemani. The more clearly Jesus surveyed the
lack of results arising from his work among his people, and
the stronger the certainty became in him that this people was
travelling along the path to destruction and had been aban-
doned by God, the darker must have seemed to him also the
fate of his own life, and the more certain the feeling that his
activity must have a disastrous ending.” 3 “Into the sunny
picture, full of the highest hopes of victory, the gloomy,
1 Beyschlag, op. cit., 337-239.
• Bousset, Jetus, 87 £.
1 Wernle, of. cit., 34.


menacing forms of his enemies force themselves upon the
gaze of Jesus —the Elders, the High Priests, the scribes, the
whole Sanhedrim and those of the people who blindly obey it.
That they will pronounce excommunication upon him is doubly
certain if he claims his kingdom—excommunication and
death.” 1 Stapfer, 2 J. Weiss 8 and Ernst Kiihl 4 also subscribe
to these opinions.
If we ask their reasons for this, we are given only one—
namely, that Jesus began to speak openly and unreservedly
of his death only after the end of his Galilean activity; that is,
after the day of Cesarea Philippi. From this one fact that
Jesus did not earlier disclose his consciousness of approach-
ing suffering, the conclusion is drawn that he had had no such
consciousness at all. Every beginner in historical criticism
knows, however, how uncritical such an argumentum ex
silentio is.
It is rejected also by the most important liberal investi-
gators. Wendt, for example, says : “ From the fact that
Jesus first spoke to his disciples of his suffering 1 and death
after the confession of Peter, it of course does not follow that
he himself, precisely at that time, first recognized the destiny
of suffering that awaited him.”® “From this it does not
follow that the thought of death had now for the first time, or
only a little while before, occurred to Jesus.” 6 “ Jesus believes
himself to be the Messiah. But he knows that the Messiah is
to come in the clouds of heaven when he brings the kingdom
of God. So he himself, therefore, must be lifted up to God
before his glorious appearing. Whether he thought from the
very beginning that this would be effected by his death we do
not know.” 7 It cannot, therefore, be proved from the Gospel
that the consciousness of his (coming) suffering and death
came to him only gradually. This might well satisfy us, for
this is the very point to be determined in our inquiry.
But we can go still further and conversely say that from the
facts stated in the Gospels it is evident that Jesus, already
before the confession of Peter at Cesarea Philippi, was aware
of the tragic end awaiting him. The conviction of this breaks
forth already at Cesarea so definitely, so forcibly and so
naturally from the depth of his heart, that, far from being an
idea which comes to him now for the first time, it had been in
his mind secretly for a long time. Both Wendt and B. Weiss
remark this. “The inward certainty with which he asserts
the necessity of this fatality, and rejects the remonstrance of
Peter (Mark viii, 32), proves that he had already fought out
and conquered the temptation which this destiny of suffering
1 Schmidt, of. cit., 120; cf. 122-126.
* Jisus-Christ avant son ministire, 222 g.
8 id., 158. * id., 6i f. 8 Wendt, of. sit., e,Bq.
* B. Weiss, id., ii, 261. 7 O. Holtzmann, of. cit., 135.


offered to his Messianic consciousness and his Messianic faith-
fulness.” 1 Mark, moreover, “ especially emphasizes the fact
that Jesus began to speak then for the first time openly and
unreservedly of his death, not that he had not spoken of it at
all.” 2
He had already repeatedly informed his disciples in regard
to it, although less forcibly and in the form of allegory.
Before the confession of Peter he had told them that he would
give them his flesh and blood as food and drink, and that he
would go back to his Father in heaven (John vi, 48-63). Still
earlier he had represented himself as the sign of Jonas : “ For
as Jonas was in the whale’s belly three days and three nights,
so shall the Son of Man be in the heart of the earth three days
and three nights” (Matt, xii, 39, 40). And at a still earlier
date he had, in reference to his body, spoken of the destruc-
tion of the temple (John ii, 19-21), and announced that the
Son of Man must be lifted up like the serpent in the wilder-
ness, that whosoever believed on him might have life ever-
lasting (John iii, 14, 15).
In fact, according to the unanimous testimony of the
synoptists, already at the beginning of his public Work he
intimated to his disciples that they would lose him by death ;
“ But the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken
away from them, and then they shall fast in those days ”
(Mark ii, 20; Matt, ix, 15 ; Luke v, 34).
Accordingly, there was never wanting sufficient, even if less
positive, information regarding the suffering and death of
Jesus. Long before the Galilean crisis arose, and especially
long before the partisan fury of the Pharisees and of the
inflamed populace led anyone to imagine his ultimate fate,
Jesus was well aware that he must suffer and die.
Thus the psychological solution of the problem of Christ’s
suffering, as given by liberal investigators, is unmasked as
historically untrue. It is not the increasing crisis that
familiarizes the Saviour little by little with the thought of
suffering. His consciousness of coming suffering was present
earlier and independent of his successes or failures, and it
grew out of the depths of his own being. Moreover, he
announced his destiny of suffering, first in parables and as
it were through a veil, and then clearly and forcibly, not
because the opposition to him was at first small and later
increased in hatred and in numbers, but, on the contrary, this
revelation, as we have shown elsewhere, stood wisely related
to his whole system of instructing his disciples. This began
by directing their attention to the Messiah, and then by
awakening and strengthening their faith in him. Only then
could teaching concerning the import of the Messiahship be
begun and the transformation of their Jewish ideas of the
1 Wendt, of, ext., 489.
* B. Weiss, of. cit., 260 £.


Messiah be gradually accomplished. And the greatest, the
most difficult, and final step, consisted in making them
familiar with the idea of the Messiah’s suffering and death,
which was most antagonistic to their Jewish sentiments, and
which they could only fully grasp after Jesus had died and
risen again.
It is at once clear that holders of the nationalistic theory
must claim at any price a continuous evolution of the Mes-
sianic consciousness of Jesus, and that this evolution must
keep step precisely with the external circumstances of his
life. Otherwise, how could they still defend their favourite
thesis, according to which the Messiah Jesus was essentially
a florescence of his age and civilization, and his Messiahship
merely a result of that florescence? But let them not assert
such an evolution of the Messianic consciousness during the
public life of Jesus in the name of Gospel history! Even Loisy
writes : “ The Gospels contain actually no grounds for suppos-
ing an evolution which completed itself in the Saviour’s con-
sciousness and with relation to his manner of fulfilling the
task given him by providence. For such an evolution there
was lacking sufficient time, in view of the brief duration of
his public activity. . . . The very simple stock of thoughts
and impressions which constitute his Gospel appears to have
been present from the beginning—a purely religious and moral
conception of- the kingdom and of the conditions which lead to
it. Jesus appears perfectly equipped for his task as soon as
he begins to preach. The obstacles which he encountered
taught him nothing new, either regarding the import of his
mission or the essential conditions of fulfilling it.” 1
The hypothesis of the evolution of the Messianic conscious-
ness of Jesus during his public life must, therefore, be rejected.
There remains, however, the question : What are we to think
of the alleged origin of this consciousness before the public
life of the Saviour?
lll.— Origin of the Messianic Consciousness of Christ
at his Baptism.
Modern liberal criticism holds ajmost throughout firmly to
the supposition that the baptism of Jesus marks the moment
of the birth of his Messianic consciousness.
Among the more important investigators, only Karl von
Hase 2 and lately Bernhard Weiss 3 are of the opinion that the
faith of Jesus in his Messianic vocation was formed in him at
least subsequently to his twelfth year, and that it surely came
to absolute certainty before his baptism. The other critics
either explain with great positiveness the baptism in the
1 Les Evangiles synoftiques, i, 212 f.
* Geschichte Jesu, 255 £f. 3 Leben Jesu, i, 279-283, 294 it.


Jordan as the original “natal hour of the Messiah,” 1 and the
history of the baptism of Jesus as the “ historical birth of his
Messianic consciousness,” 2 or else they consider as “ prob-
able ” 3 and ‘‘in the highest degree likely” the view that
assigns the awakening of the Messianic consciousness to a
time previous to the baptism. 4
If we ask the reasons for such an interpretation, the
majority of the critics forthwith refer us to the fact that the
simplest, and, indeed, the only possible way is to represent the
Messianic consciousness as something historical and evolu-
tionary. Jesus is said by them to have felt, during his quiet
life at Nazareth, more and more that he was the “ Son of
God,” and accordingly to have “ thought himself into ” Mes-
sianic ideas and situations. The Baptist’s preaching of the
kingdom, and the popular movement called forth by him,
raised this psychological conception to the highest degree,
and when Jesus allowed himself to be baptized he thought that
he perceived inwardly, through God’s agency, the confirma-
tion of his psychical emotions, and so “experienced” his
Messianic vocation.
The representation continually recurring in these writers,
with but few divergences, is somewhat as follows : “ Jesus
had concentrated all his thoughts and mental powers upon
the smallest and most inconspicuous point—the secret relation
of his life to God. . . . Then the news from the Jordan pro-
duced an overwhelming impression upon the heart of Jesus.
He carried with him to the Jordan a secret question which was
to be addressed to God, and into which his whole previous
spiritual life condensed itself—namely, whether his hour also
had not now come to speak of what had been revealed to him
in secret communion with his heavenly Father. The solemn
agitation in his soul increased at sight of this community of
the baptized, these crowds of people without a leader and yet
susceptible to prophetic exhortation. It waxed stronger on
beholding the august form of the Baptist, who with impas-
sioned words was exerting to the utmost all his powers, and
to this was added a consciousness of the incomparably great
moment. Modestly and unobserved, Jesus also advanced to
request baptism—the Galilean before the preacher of repent-
ance ! But an overwhelming emotion secretly flooded his
heart, and when he emerged from the water, praying for and
vowing purity of soul in every temptation to sin, the ecstasy
seized him. He saw from the opened heavens the Spirit of
God descending upon him, and perceived signs from heaven,
which at last assured him that God was calling him to proclaim
his new faith among his people. . . . Jesus knew that he
1 Johannes Weiss, Chrisius, 23.
* Regensburg, 1.c., i, 219.
* Loisy, Let Evangiles synoftiques, i, 206. Hoysset, Jesui, 80.


had been sent to bring to completion the final era of the
world.” 1
We receive no further explanation. But that is regarded
as sufficient, since the Messianic consciousness of Jesus must
be merely the result of natural development, and this develop-
ment cannot be made credible otherwise than by the above
psychological fabrication.
But the question is precisely whether this psychological
fabrication, and with it the audaciously asserted origin of the
Messianic consciousness at the time of the baptism in the
Jordan, can be justified historically. Where the liberal in-
vestigators conclude their explanation a great interrogation
point must be placed. How and on what grounds can it be
proved that the subjective view of the defenders of the evolu-
tion theory corresponds to the objective facts in the life of
Jesus?
Only a few critics, particularly Willibald Beyschlag 2 and
Oskar Holtzmann, 3 find it worth their while to furnish this
proof. Proceeding from the conviction that Jesus, subsequent
to his baptism, had undoubtedly a positive Messianic con-
sciousness, they try to prove, on the one hand, that this con-
sciousness had been unknown to the Saviour before that
occurrence, and, on the other hand, that the communication of
that consciousness took place in connection with the baptism.
On the latter point Beyschlag writes : “ The narrative of
the baptism, uniformly placed by the synoptic Gospels at the
beginning of the public life of Jesus, is evidently intended to
inform us of the origin of his Messianic consciousness. It
describes how the Spirit of God descended upon him, and,
therefore, how he became the spiritually Anointed One, or the
Messiah, for that indeed is the meaning of this name. . . .
Heaven—that is, the upper, immaterial world—opened above
him as he was baptized by John, that it might send down upon
him in abundant measure its highest gift; gently, as it were
upon the wings of a dove, the Holy Spirit descends upon him,
whom, as a prophet, it will not visit only temporarily, but
upon whom, as the spiritually anointed, it will remain; and
what the symbols bring before his inward vision a divine
voice within him explains to his spiritual ear, combining the
words of Ps. ii, 7 and Isa. xlii, 1 thus : “ This is my beloved
Son., in whom I am well pleased ’ ’ —that is, my chosen
Messiah.'* Oskar Holtzmann 5 interprets the events at the
baptism in a precisely similar manner. ,
The fact itself, therefore, that Jesus was recognized, at his
baptism, as the Son of God, and that the Holy Ghost was
1 P. W. Schmidt, Die Geschichie fesu, i, 53, 56-57; similarly, Hess,
Jesus von Nazareth, n; Bousset, 1.c., 80; Stapfer, 1.c., 152; Loisy, Les
Evangiles synoptiques, i, 206, 40S, etc.
2 Leben Jesu, i. 224 2. 3 Leben Jesu, 99 2.
* Beyschlap, op. cit., pp. 216, 21S. 5 op. cit., p. 104.


then communicated to him, is supposed to prove the simul-
taneous awakening of his Messianic consciousness. But this
fact permits of another interpretation also, which has been
given to the occurrence at the baptism both by the Evangelists
and by all the Christian centuries—namely, that at his baptism
Jesus received, in presence of the forerunner John, his divine
attestation as being the Messiah, his visible, spiritual conse-
cration to the Messianic vocation, and therewith also the
supernatural announcement that the time appointed by God
for the fulfilment of the Messianic vocational work had begun.
“ That Jesus became the Messiah, as Luther became the
reformer—inwardly prepared for it, yet without having any
premonition of it—that the realization of his vocation . . .
came over him one day suddenly and with unexpected and
overpowering divine power,” 1 and that “at the moment of
baptism the consciousness of his Messianic calling was
awakened and came into existence through a meeting and
contact of his soul with his heavenly Father,” 2 does not at all
appear from the events at the baptism. Rather does every-
thing indicate the contrary. As Bartmann significantly indi-
cates : “ Christ himself receives it (the divine revelation at
the baptism) in thankful prayer, yet without excitement or
inquiry. For him it is no beginning, no turning-point in his
sonship, no revelation of a secret, no matter of faith concern-
ing which he might subsequently have doubts, no lofty height
reached by a moral struggle from which he could be again
thrown down, and no light from above which the earthly man
in the darkness of this life, of which even a spiritually endowed
Paul complains, longingly seeks for and joyfully retains. For
him it is the confirmation of an existing fact.” 3
To this, it is true, Oskar Holtzmann objects that the way
in which the events of the baptism took place indicates that it
was a matter of a real change and transformation of the con-
sciousness of Jesus. Holtzmann assumes at once that the
heavenly voice and the communication of the Spirit on that
occasion were not historical events perceptible by the senses,
but merely a vision, an inward, ecstatical experience which
“ happened only in the soul of Jesus, and throughout had
reference to Jesus only.” 4 The effect of this inward and
visionary seeing and hearing must, accordingly, also have
been an inward, “ complete transformation of his life ” and
consciousness. s
But this conclusion does not all result from Holtzmann’s
premises. However the events of the baptism may be inter-
preted, whether as an external or an internal experience, and
whether this was known to Jesus only or to other persons
1 Beyschlag, of. cit., 225. 2 id., 231.
3 Das Himmelreich und sein Konig, 124 f.
* of. cit., p. 105. 3 of. cit., p. 106.


also, does not alter the facts at all. In any case, the question
would remain whether Jesus actually received the Messianic
consciousness at his baptism, or whether only the final conse-
cration was conferred upon him by the heavenly voice and the
indwelling of the Holy Ghost; and in any event this latter
supposition would have to be answered affirmatively after due
consideration of the reasons already given.
But how about the premises themselves which Holtzmann
lays down? In the first place, was Jesus the only witness
of the heavenly voice and the descent of the Holy Ghost,
as Holtzmann and Wendt, 1 among others, assert? The
Gospels deny this; Matthew (iii, 16) and Mark (i, 10) simply
tell us that Jesus saw the heavens open and the Spirit descend
upon him. Whether the Baptist was also an eye-witness of
this is not said. It seems, however, to be taken for granted,
since it is at once remarked quite objectively of the heavenly
voice: “ And behold a voice from heaven saying, This is my
beloved Son in whom lam well pleased.” The representation
also makes the impression of having originated from the
Baptist, who also saw and heard these things. Still more is
this the case in Luke’s narrative, where the whole scene
is related from the standpoint of the observing Baptist;
“ Heaven was opened, and the Holy Ghost descended in a
bodily shapej as a dove upon him (Jesus), and a voice came
from heaven : Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well
pleased ” (Luke iii, 21-22). In the Fourth Gospel the report
of the baptism is actually attributed to John the Baptist, who
appears as an eye-witness. John relates that the Baptist had
long ardently desired to meet among his neophytes him whom
he, without knowing him personally, had proclaimed as the
Greater One—that is, as the Messiah. God had revealed to
him : “ He upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending
and remaining upon him, he it is that baptizeth with the Holy
Ghost.” As now Jesus comes before him and receives the
baptism of water, John perceives the Holy Ghost descend like
a dove and abide upon him, so that he can say of him posi-
tively : “ I saw and I gave testimony that this is the Son of
God” (John i, 26-34).
Thus the four Gospels report in entire unanimity that both
John and Jesus were eye and ear witnesses of the event.
Even Beyschlag recognizes the impossibility of limiting this
to Jesus only. 2
The proof also has been already furnished that O. Holtz-
mann, even though receiving for it the approval of the whole
liberal school of criticism, 3 is wrong in interpreting this as
1 op. cit., p. 97. 2 op. cit., p. 218.
3 Thus Furrer, Das Leben Jesu Christi, 69, 2nd. ed.; W. Balden-
sperger, Das Selbstbewusstsein Jesu, 160 fi.; H. Wendt, Die Lehre Jesu,
97; System der christlichen Lehre, ii, 289 f.; Bousset, Jesus, 2 f.;
H. J. Holtzmann, Neutestamentl. Theologie, i, 271; E. Schiirer, Das


a mere vision. How could both John and Jesus have had at
the same time precisely the same ecstatical experience, and
(according to the liberal theory) have merely imagined that
they saw the heavens opened and the descent of the Holy
Ghost, and that they heard the voice of God from heaven?
Rationalistic theologians will hardly accept this double
psychological miracle at a moment when, through their fear
of miracles and a divine revelation, they are contesting the
reality of the events of the baptism.
In addition to this, we have also the arbitrary attempt to
represent Jesus as a visionary, in contradiction not only to the
whole personality of the Saviour, but to the whole Gospel
account of the baptism, against the credibility of which a
valid argument has never yet been brought. Even critics like
Beyschlag and Kiihl reject the hypothesis that Jesus beheld a
vision at his baptism, because “ the tendency to see visions, as
we should have to suppose here in the case of Jesus, is found
nowhere else in his life,” 1 and because “ the whole impression
of the personality of Jesus . . . makes the supposition of
visionary conditions in his life quite impossible.” 2
Beyschlag and Kiihl, therefore, change somewhat the un-
fortunate hypothesis of a “ vision ’’ by limiting the abnormal
and fantastic convulsion (for there can be no question among
the naturalistic critics of any divinely produced ecstasy) to the
Baptist only, and add “ that, corresponding to the vision of
the Baptist, Jesus had an experience, by means of which he
acquired at once, as a spiritual certainty, what the Baptist
learned through a vision.” 3 But that is truly to fall from the
frying-pan into the fire. How could Jesus learn inwardly
exactly what John beheld in an ecstasy, and vice versa., with-
out a real supernatural coincidence? Of the contradiction
between this pretence at getting out of the difficulty and the
representation of the Gospel we will say nothing. The free-
thinker, Friedrich Spitta, passes judgement on it with com-
mendable frankness : “ TTie traditional view, held by critical
theologians, that in the events of the baptism it was a question
of a vision referring to Jesus only, and beheld by the Baptist,
messianische Selbstbewusstsein Christi, 13; B. Weiss, Leben Jesu, i,
299, 3°3; P- W. Schmidt, Die Geschichte Jesu, 57; W. Beyschlag, Leben
Jesu, i, 218 f.; H. Zimmermann, Der historische Wert der aliesten
Geschichte Jesu, 86 ff.; Fritz Scholl, Prot. Monatshefte, 180 (1907);
J. Bornemann, Die Taufe Christi durch Johannes in der dogmatischen
Beleuchtung der christlichen Theologie der vier ersten Jahrhunderte
(1906); Loisy, Le quatriime Evangile, 229; VEvangile et VEglise, 20,
2nd ed.; Les Evangiles synoftiques, i, 185 ; R6ville, Jisus de Nazareth,
ii, 5 ff.; E. Kiihl, Selbstbewusstsein Jesu, 39 ff. On the contrary side,
Fritz Barth, Die Hauftfrobleme des Lebens Jesu, 140 ff.
1 Beyschlag, of. cit., 219. 2 Kiihl, of. cit.. 41.
3 Kuhl, of. cit., 42, and similarly Beyschlag, of. cit., 219.


has been rightly rejected by A. Merx 1 as a modern illusion.
A voice from heaven and the appearance of a dove are there,
so that they may be heard and perceived by those present.” 2
Thus every attempt to explain the events of the baptism as
if they really gave to the Saviour the consciousness of his
Messiahship fails. On the contrary, everything indicates that
the baptism denotes, not the beginning of the Messianic con-
sciousness, but the commencement of the Messianic activity.
This conviction could be invalidated only by the proof that
Jesus, before his baptism—that is, when he came to the
Baptist—did not as yet possess the Messianic consciousness.
Once more it is O. Holtzmann who undertakes to furnish
this proof. In company with Strauss, he makes the Saviour
enter upon his journey to the region around Jordan for baptism
as a sinner in need of salvation, and as a man, who, like all
others, needed a change of heart and forgiveness of sins, and
who hoped to become, through baptism by water, a member of
the coming Messianic kingdom, and was far from regarding
himself as the appointed founder and future Lord of this
kingdom—namely, the Messiah. 3 In fact, Holtzmann holds
that the thought that he was the Messiah was so far from the
mind of Jesus that he had not joined this movement towards
baptism of his own accord, but had let himself be urged into
taking part in it by the example of those around him : “ As
Luther was actually forced into the Reformation, so Jesus
had to be forced into his work. It is, as it were, from a pre-
sentiment of persecution, flight and death on the cross that he
dreads to meet the mighty preacher of penance, whose words
are to unloose the forces still slumbering within him. . . .
Like so many others, Jesus also lets himself be baptized. A
determination thenceforth to live only in accordance with
God’s will, and the hope of thus participating in the kingdom
of God, have urged him also to baptism.” 4
In proof of these assertions, Holtzmann appeals to merely
one passage in the apocryphal “ Gospel to the Hebrews,” in
which it is said : “ Lo, the Mother of the Lord and his brethren
said to him [Jesus] : John the Baptist is baptizing for the
forgiveness of sins; we want to go and be baptized by him.
But he said to them : In what havs I sinned, that I should go
thither and be baptized by him ? Anything wrong that I have
said must have been said through ignorance. . . ,” 5
Now it would be very easy to point out that this text of the
Gospel to the Hebrews presupposes in Jesus sinlessness and
1 Die Evangelien des Markus uni Lukas, 14.
• Spitta, Das Johannes-Evangelium als Quelle ier Geschichte ]esu,
425 (Gottingen, 1910).
* Holtzipann, Leben Jesu, 99-103. 4 id., 102, 103.
s Nestle, Novi Test. Greed Suffl., 76; Hennecke, N cutest. Afokry-
fhen, 19.


Messianic consciousness, not sinfulness and need of redemp-
tion. It would, however, be a pity to waste a single word
over it. One can only feel amazement that so serious a critic
as O. Holtzmann does not blush to draw his conclusions from
so dark a source when the historical tradition of the canonical
Gospels flows so clear and limpidly.
This is not the place to demonstrate the absolute sinlessness
of Jesus from his life in the Gospels. It is sufficient to point
out that, according to the most indubitable representation of
Jesus in the Gospels, he did not at all come to his baptism as
a sinner and a seeker for salvation.
The two oldest reports of the baptism in the Gospels of
John and Matthew 1 express this with all the simplicity and
clearness that could be desired.
According to the Fourth Gospel, the Baptist publicly and
officially (John i, 19-25) announced the approach of the
Messiah, whose forerunner he was ; “ I baptize with water,
but there hath stood one in the midst of you, whom you know
not. The same is he that shall come after me, who is pre-
ferred before me, the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy
to loose” (John i, 26, 27). “The next day John saw Jesus
coming to him, and he saith : Behold the Lamb of God, behold
him who taketh away the sin of the world ! This is he of
whom I said, After me there cometh a man who is preferred
before me, because he was before me . . . that he may be
made manifest in Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with
water” (John i, 29-31).
While the Fourth Gospel adheres so steadfastly to the scene
in which John, after the baptism, makes the people acquainted
with the sinless and sin-forgiving Messiah who has thus made
his appearance, Matthew relates his meeting with Jesus before
the baptism. He had just pointed the latter out with the
words : “ I indeed baptize you in water unto penance, but he
that shall come after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am
not worthy to bear; he shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost
and fire. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly
cleanse his floor, and gather his wheat into the barn; but the
chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire ” (Matt, iii, 11, 12).
The Messiah is a judge and an avenger of what is evil, a
bringer of salvation and one who baptizes with the Spirit.
John recognizes as such the man who, immediately after this,
comes from Galilee to the Jordan to be baptized. In his
presence the Baptist becomes conscious of his own poverty of
soul and sinfulness, and instead of offering baptism for the
forgiveness of sins and for a preparation for the kingdom of
God to him, he asks to be himself baptized by him : “ I ought
to be baptized by thee, and comest thou to me?” (Matt, iii, 14).
1 Beyschlag also, Lehen Jesu, i, 219, and B. Weiss, Leben Jesu, i,
29;, 300 f., declare that the representation given by John, in connection
with Matthew, is the oldest, and originates with the Baptist himself.


This, at all events, presupposes sinlessness. Otherwise we
should have to suppose that the severe preacher of penance,
who cast the reproach of sin into the faces of the greatest of
this world, had wished to flatter obsequiously a sinful man
from Nazareth.
And Jesus does not reject the words of the Baptist as
unsuitable. On the contrary, he confirms this view of John
that he has no need of baptism and forgiveness, yet asks for
baptism for other reasons : “ Suffer it to be so now,, for so it
becometh us to fulfil all justice ” (Matt, iii, 15). He is willing
to submit to the baptism of John voluntarily, since it was the
will of God that all Israel should meet the coming kingdom
of heaven in the spirit of repentance (Matt, iii, 1-6).
Thus Jesus himself pointed out that baptism by water was
neither the only thing necessary nor especially a sign and
acknowledgement of sinfulness, but was, above all, the symbol
of a decided turning of the will towards God and the approach-
ing kingdom of heaven. Therefore it was fitting that pre-
cisely he should receive it who, sinless and at one with God’s
will, wished to call all men to the kingdom.
Wendt rightly says ; “If the main purpose of John’s
baptism of repentance had been the confession and bewail-
ing of sins hitherto committed, we should have to regard the
coming of Jesus to this baptism as very strange, and would
be able to see in it either an argument against the immaculate
purity of his religious consciousness or the exhibition of a
certain false modesty. But what John aimed at was evidently
a change of heart from sin to the positive purpose of properly
fulfilling the will of God. Hence it is quite comprehensible
that Jesus, not only in spite of, but precisely because of, his
consciousness of making a sincere effort to fulfil God’s will in
childlike obedience, felt himself compelled to let the baptism
of John be applied to him also. Thereby he put the seal upon
his determination to have in mind only the fulfilling of the will
of God, and gave to this moral and religious volition of his a
definite application to the approach of the Messianic kingdom
of salvation announced by the Baptist.” 1
B. Weiss expresses himself in a similar way. “ The sym-
bolism of John’s baptism,” he writes, “denotes merely the
complete termination of the life hitherto led, and the beginning
of a new and entirely different one. For the sinful people it
was the ending of their previous life of sin and the commence-
ment of a new, sinless existence, together with the solemn
confirmation of a thorough change of disposition. This for
one who was devoid of sin it could not be; but it confirmed in
his case also the conclusion of his former life and the begin-
ning of an entirely new one. It is true this previous life,
which he now wished, as it were, to bury in the waters of the
Jordan, had not been for him a sinful one, but it had been
1 Wendt, Die Lehre ]esu, 96 f.


devoted to the natural relations of his life, to his former
human professional calling and to his previous training. The
new life to which he rose from the baptismal waters was dis-
tinguishable from his former life, not by his sinlessness, but
only by the fact that it was thenceforth to be consecrated
entirely to his supreme, divine vocation. In this sense Jesus
saw, precisely in the command of God which summoned him
also to baptism, the long-expected sign from his Father that it
was now time to begin his Messianic career. It is true this
solution of the question also presupposes that when he came
for baptism he was already fully aware of his destined vocation
to be the Messiah of Israel.” 1
In reality the going of Jesus to baptism is only fully com-
prehensible through this presupposition. If Jesus was con-
scious of his Messianic vocation, then he came for baptism as
the vicarious penitent for the sins of others and as the Servant
of God, who made satisfaction for mankind, and of whom it
had been written in the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah that he
would not separate himself from his sinful people, whose sins
he would take upon himself, and whose unrighteousness he
would destroy by his own righteousness. This conception
alone corresponds to the line of thought found in the synoptic
Gospels, and is expressly and unequivocally represented by
John the Baptist in the Fourth Gospel as the only correct one.
Jesus there appears for the baptism by water as the long-
desired Messiah (John i, 27, 30) and as he who will confer,
not the preparatory baptism by water, but the Messianic
baptism of the Spirit (John i, 26), and as the “ Lamb of God ”
upon whom the sins of humanity are laid, and who “ taketh
away the sin of the world ” (John i, 29).
Only in this light also do we understand the progressive
revelation of God in the events of the baptism. Jesus comes
before the Father in personal holiness and perfection, and
completely prepared to consummate for sinful humanity Mes-
sianic penance and Messianic righteousness. Then heaven
opens, acknowledges him as the Messiah and God’s beloved
Son, and his vicarious atonement as being pleasing to God,
while the Holy Ghost, according to prophecy (Isa. Ixi, 1), seals
this beginning of the Messianic work by descending upon the
Saviour and abiding upon him. The evolutionary hypothesis,
on the contrary,, according to which Jesus came to his baptism
not only without any Messianic consciousness, but even with
a consciousness of personal sinfulness and need of redemption,
not only has no basis of fact, but explains nothing and con-
fuses everything, including its own line of reasoning concern-
ing the evolutionary theory. The artificially woven thread of
the natural development and preparation of Jesus, the equally
natural end of which was to lead finally to the birth of the
1 id., p. 208. Similarly Furrer, Das Leben Jesu Christi, 68 f., 2nd ed.


Messianic consciousness at the baptism, is promptly and
violently cut, and instead of the evolution so highly praised
by our opponents there comes a complete revolution in the
Saviour’s consciousness. For “ there is no psychological
transition possible from the consciousness of being a sinner
in need of salvation, like all men, to that of being the Saviour
from sin for all men.” 1
In consideration of this, the theory of Holtzmann is now
rejected by all eminent representatives of the liberal school of
investigation. Adolf Harnack expresses himself in regard to
it as follows : “ Unless everything deceives us, there lie behind
the period of Jesus’ life which is known to us no violent crises
and storms and no abrupt break with his past. Nowhere
in his sayings and discourses, whether he threatens and
punishes, or cordially invites and summons, or whether he
speaks of his relation to the Father or to the world, do we
perceive traces of spiritual revolutions which he has sup-
pressed or scars of a fearful conflict. In him everything flows
forth as a matter of course and as if it could not be otherwise,
as a spring bursts forth from the depths of the earth, clear and
unimpeded. Show us the man who at thirty years of age can
speak thus if he has survived intense conflicts of the soul, in
which he finally burns what he once adored, and adores what
he once burned! Show us the man who has broken with his
past in order, then to call others to repentance, but who, in
doing so, never speaks of his own repentance 1 This observa-
tion' excludes the possibility of his life having been passed in
spiritual contrasts.” 2 Similarly do B. Weiss, Beyschlag,
Konrad Furrer, Wendt and others repudiate every attempt to
support the hopelessly lost position of those who make the
Messianic consciousness of Jesus originate from the baptism
by saying that Jesus had been, before his baptism, himself a
sinful man in need of salvation.
IV.— Preparation of the Messianic Consciousness of
Christ in the Consciousness of his Sonship.
The general endeavour of those who hold the evolutionary
theory is rather to make the previous life of Jesus a continual
preparation and increasing training for the subsequent recep-
tion of his Messianic consciousness. The central point and
soul of this preparation is said to be his consciousness of being
the Son of God. Jesus, it is said, brought with him out of his
youthful years and out of Galilee such a highly developed
consciousness of sonship that from it, under the influence of
the popular movement towards baptism in the Jordan, the
Messianic consciousness had necessarily to make its appear-
ance, as the flower develops from the bud under the quicken-
IS
1 Beyschlag, of. (it., i, 228. * Wesen des Christeniums, 21 i.


ing rays of the sun. Here we get at the root of all efforts to
explain the Messianic consciousness of Jesus as a result of
gradual evolution.
The unorthodox Christian view is simply forced to eradicate
this root of its system unless it is willing to surrender and
give up its naturalistic explanation of the belief of Jesus
in his Messianic vocation. We have to do here, therefore,
not with individual groups, but with the whole school of
rationalistic and rationalizing investigators of the life of
Jesus. They all inform us exhaustively how, from the inward
disposition of the boy Jesus, and from the external circum-
stances of his environment, the conviction little by little arose
in his mind that he was the Son of God —that is, that he stood
in a loving or childlike relation to his Father in heaven, which
was not, it is true, based upon a physical sonship, yet signified
a very peculiar ethical sonship. Our opponents, indeed, assert
that the title Son of God, as Jesus understood it, has exclu-
sively this sense, and never means in Jesus essential divine
sonship—that is, his real divinity. We shall investigate this
problem later. For the present it is a question only of the
origin of this consciousness of divine sonship and of its
relation to his Messianic consciousness, however the former
may be understood. This conviction already showed itself
fully developed in the twelve-year-old Jesus in the temple.
Little by little this consciousness of sonship increased so much
under his own moral activity and under the influence of the
ideas of his time and surroundings, that he asked himself
more and more whether he was not called to make his fellow-
men also children of their Father in heaven, and thus to render
the Messianic work and kingdom a reality. His baptism gave,
then, the conclusive answer to this question by finally merging
his consciousness of divine sonship into his consciousness of
being the Messiah.
Out of many dramatic descriptions 1 of this psychological
development of Jesus let us select only one of the most sig-
nificant, at least in its main features.
Konrad Furrer represents it thus : “ It stands to reason that
in his father’s house he received early in life impressions of a
very vital piety. . . . Father and mother, teachers in the
village, and instructors in the law, shared in the task of
instructing the children in the Scriptures. We may, there-
1 See, for example, Hess, Jesus von Nazareth, 4-9; Schmidt, Ge-
schichte Jesu, 52-56; Wendt, Die Lehre Jesu, gi; J. Kogel, Das Messias-
bewusstsein Jesu, in Reich Chris/i, viii, 403-420; Stapfer, Jisus-Christ
avant son minis tire, 89, 188; Loisy, VEvangile et I’Eglise, 56; Les
Evangiles synoftigues, i, 408; Beyschlag, Leben Jesu, i, 175; ii, 57;
B. Weiss, Leben Jesu, i, 279. Strangely enough, B. Weiss, 280-283,
expresses the view that the Messianic consciousness developed from that
of sonship before the baptism, while Beyschlag, i, 224, supposes a
sudden transition at the moment of baptism.


fore, without hesitation, suppose that Jesus had early absorbed
all the treasures of this wonderful collection of writings. . . .
We cannot say in what year for the first time a higher percep-
tion of God awoke in that young soul. . . . The Gospels
give us only one, though certainly a very significant, report
of the child Jesus, when twelve years old, in the temple. There
the boy felt as if he were in heaven. He forgot the whole
world in order to let himself be instructed about God and
divine things by the wisest and most learned of his people.
That was tor him an unspeakably great joy. In order to
understand it we need only to remember how great and dis-
tinguished artists often show in early youth a consuming
desire for their art. . . . Who has not read something of
the kind of the renowned sculptor Canova or of Thorwaldsen
and others? As, therefore, these highly gifted artists ex-
hibited in their tender years an ardent longing for art, so did
the boy Jesus have a powerful yearning for the closest and
most lasting communion with God possible. . . . Jesus felt
the majesty of God most profoundly, and yet out of the depths
of his soul was forced this cry : ‘ Wist ye not that I must be
about my Father’s business?’ In the whole history of the
world there is no more certain fact than this, that Jesus felt
himself to be the Son of God, and that in obedience to the
strongest impulse of his soul he could not do otherwise than
call God ‘Father’ and himself his Son. . . . How comes
it that Jesus with such positiveness and steadfastness calls
himself the Son of God? To this we have only one answer :
His spirit, as no other since him has done with equal force,
felt and experienced in himself pure goodness, holy love and
limitless compassion as the supreme good. . . . With his
consciousness of divine sonship Jesus stands absolutely alone
in his time and in his world, for even the most pious men
among his contemporaries in their attitude towards God were
penetrated only by a consciousness of being his servants.
Hence there must have developed in him, out of his own
spiritual needs, a lofty sentiment, by reason of which he knew
himself to be called to perform a great and unique task in the
future. In other words, his Messianic consciousness has been
formed out of his consciousness ofeonship.” 1
This prettily devised hypothesis, condensed into three short
sentences, means that Jesus in earliest childhood acquired his
unique consciousness of divine sonship through the influence
of his disposition and education, but that his filial conscious-
ness, which was already complete in the twelve-year-old boy,
had nothing to do with his Messianic thoughts. On the
contrary, that consciousness developed itself more and more,
from his twelfth to his thirtieth year, in line with a combina-
tion of ideas regarding the divine sonship and the Messiah,
1 Konrad Furrer, Das Leben Jesu Chrisii, 46-55, and ed.


and so became the germ out of which, at the moment of the
baptism, his final Messianic consciousness sprang into being.
We must examine these three statements separately.
First, the alleged gradual development of the consciousness
of sonship to the Messianic consciousness, from the twelfth to
the thirtieth year of Jesus.
This is, in brief, a necessary invention, unless, indeed, we
call it a necessary lie, inherent in a confused way of manufac-
turing history. We actually possess not a single particle of
information about this period of Jesus’s life. The years of
his youth and early manhood are years of sacred stillness
and profound seclusion. Out of them not a sound reaches us.
The so-called “ Gospel of Christ’s youth ” breaks off abruptly
with the report of the twelve-year-old Jesus in the temple.
Moreover, the liberal critics insist upon recognizing in that
whole “Gospel of Christ’s youth” only the scene in the
temple as genuine and credible. 1 Indeed, when it appears to
them advantageous to do so, they deny or ignore even the
scene in the temple, or indulge in exaggeration concerning it
in the name of “ criticism.” “ With the baptism we tread for
the first time in the life of Jesus on historical ground,” 2 or,
“ Tradition has not preserved for us anything certain about
his development ; scarcely does it lift even once the veil which
is spread over his childhood, passed in the midst of numerous
brothers and sisters; hardly once does it name him “ car-
penter,” 3 or, flatly, “We know nothing of the history of Jesus
in the first thirty years of his life. . . . Never shall we dis-
cover through what inward development Jesus passed from
the certainty of being the Son of God to the other certainty of
being the promised Messiah.” 4
Very well; only this sort of criticism should then be honour-
able enough to confess that the representations which it gives
describing the passing of Jesus from the consciousness of
sonship to that of the Messiahship have their origin only in
the pleasing realm of fancy, and that the whole hypothesis
referring to them is every word pure invention.
Moreover, the presupposition also on which this hypothesis
rests is itself merely an artificial fabrication— namely, the con-
trast between the filial consciousness of the twelve-year-old
lad and his Messianic consciousness.
In order to understand this, we must again bear in mind
1 We shall take up the question of the genuineness and credibility of
the Gospel of Christ’s youth in Part 111. The account of the twelve-
year-old Jesus is almost universally regarded as historical by our critical
opponents. See, for example, B. Weiss, Leben Jesu, i, 253; O. Holtz-
mann, Leben Jesu, 76; Wendt, Die Lehre Jesu, 94; Stapfer, Jisus-
Christ avant son mini stir e, 58; Furrer, Leben Jesu Christi, 46.
2 Hess, of. cit., p. 11
3 Deissmann, Evangelium uni Urchristentum, in Beitrage lur
Weiterentwickelung der christlichen Religion, 83 (Miinchen, 1905).
* Harnack, Wesen des Christentums, 20, 87.


that, previous to his baptism, Jesus had spoken only once of
this filial relationship to God before he began his public
activity. It was precisely that voluntary confession of his ;
“ Did you not know that I must be about my Father’s busi-
ness?” (Luke ii, 49). That this consciousness of being the
Son of God excludes the consciousness of also being the
Messiah cannot, however, be deduced from the words of the
child Christ.
The very contrary appears to be the case. For what is the
Messianic vocation of, Jesus other than exactly his exclusive
absorption in his “ Father’s business ”? Even O. Holtzmann
interprets the.reply of the child Jesus thus: ‘‘The narrative
portrays to us the growing lad Jesus in a way exactly corre-
sponding to his future activity.” 1
We shall see later that the twelve-year-old boy really
revealed even a divine consciousness, and that, therefore, any
doubt of his having then been aware of his Messianic destiny
is impossible.
If, however, for the time being we do not interpret Jesus’
consciousness of sonship in the temple in that highest divine
sense, its Messianic import can nevertheless be certainly dis-
covered. We need only to ask how Jesus subsequently in his
public life understood the title “ Son of God ” in its relation
to the title of Messiah. From this consequence we can and
must then draw our inferences in regard to the opinion held
by him previously.
Now there is not the least doubt that for Jesus the name
“ Son of God,” from the time of his baptism to the day of his
death, was always equivalent to “ the Messiah.” Whether it
does not mean still more—namely, his metaphysical, essential
unity with his Father—must, as has been said already, be
investigated elsewhere in this work. Our exposition regard-
ing “ the fact of the Messianic consciousness of Jesus ” fur-
nishes for this unqestionable evidence. Indeed, our opponents
themselves are so convinced of it that they invoke and obstin-
ately defend the absolute identity of the titles “ Son of God ”
and ‘‘ Messiah,” as soon as the conservative critics show signs
of seeing in Jesus the Son of God, more than the Messiah.
Already, in the account of the baptism and temptation—
where the name Messiah is not yet found at all, but only that
of the Father or of the Son —all liberal and rationalistic critics
interpret the expression Son of God as a title of the Messiah.
Why, then, should they hesitate to adopt-such an exegesis
only precisely in the story of Jesus’ youth? For this reason,
and for this reason only : that the defenders of the theory of
evolution wish to have it so, and must have it so. If the
Messianic consciousness of Jesus has not been developed step
by step from his consciousness of sonship, then the entire
1 Leben Jesu, 76.


foundation would be completely taken away from the evolu-
tionary thesis in regard to Jesus. This calamity must, there-
fore, be prevented at all hazards, even at the cost of all
psychology and all genuine history.
The third assertion of the development of the consciousness
of sonship in the child Jesus is to be attributed finally to the
same theoretical evolutionary hobby. Ostensibly, according
to the modern school, the consciousness of sonship developed,
in accordance with psychological necessity, from the tempera-
ment and education of the child of Nazareth. Now it is, of
course, certainly true and evident that Jesus grew up and was
educated amid God-fearing associates and in the atmosphere
of the Holy Scriptures, like all pious Jews. But how was it
that precisely Jesus, and he alone, in distinction from all his
youthful contemporaries, educated in the same way, found in
this education and environment the proper soil to nourish his
consciousness of sonship? That is the mystery. Why did
such an ordinary and universal cause have in and in him
only, such an extraordinary and unique result?
Modern criticism replies : “ Because that cause met in him
an absolutely unique temperament, inclined to recognize pro-
foundly the fatherhood of God and to experience the truth of
it spiritually.” The existence of such a temperament can be
at once conceded. Yet thereby the question recurs with double
force; How could Jesus in his earliest years, and almost in
the cradle (for the psychological process is supposed to have
ended with twelve years), how could he, at an age which ante-
dates all serious contemplation and experience, have attained
to such extraordinary, unheard-of and unique knowledge and
experience concerning his filial relation to God? Every
attempt to solve this psychological problem must be con-
demned in advance as nonsensical and as doing violence to
normal human intelligence.
Yet, apart from this, our opponents’ attempt to reconstruct
psychologically the beginnings of Jesus’ consciousness of
being the Son of God could be taken seriously only under the
presupposition that we possess no historical information about
those beginnings. But this presupposition does not corre-
spond to the facts. The evidence of Jesus’ consciousness of
being the Son of God, in Part 111 of this volume, will show
that the Saviour gave very definite information on this sub-
ject, and that his estimate of himself contradicts the fantastic
views of modem investigators.
Among these, some of decidedly liberal tendencies have
also this impression. Gustav Dalman acknowledges that the
utterances of Jesus concerning his filial relation to God “ sound
as if Jesus had never known any beginning of it. It appears
to form naturally a part of his personality that he, in distinc-
tion from all others, expects to acquire the domination of the


world, and possesses an immediate knowledge of God, just as
a son by the right of birth becomes an heir, and by growing
up in close intimacy with his father from childhood comes
into a spiritual relation to his father peculiar to a child.” 1
Wendt says still more decidedly : “On the ground of the
religious self-consciousness in accordance with which Jesus
subsequently judged and acted, we are justified in assuming
that, so far back as his consciousness extended, he had always
felt like a son towards God. . . . From the very outset he
lived in the consciousness as well as in the condition of divine
sonship.” 2
V.— Origin of the Messianic Consciousness of Christ
in the Consciousness of his Nature.
Alter these explanations, no further proof is really needed
of the fact that the consciousness of divine sonship and the
consciousness of Messiahship were naturally present in Jesus
from the beginning, or, in other words, that they coincided
with his consciousness of his own being and personality.
As we have thus far sufficiently seen, all attempts to repre-
sent them as the result of a gradual evolution break down
completely. The rationalistic and rationalizing school of
research has made every effort to prove the beginnings and
development of the Messianic consciousness in the youth,
baptism, temptation and separate stages of the public life of
Jesus. And yet the result is always the same. When one
thinks one has discovered a further development or even the
beginning of this consciousness, or finally even a preparation
for it, every time, by a more careful investigation, there gushes
forth the full, clear spring of the Saviour’s perfect, complete
conviction of his Messianic work and vocation. The Messianic
consciousness of Jesus is and remains a mystery, before which
all evolutionary attempts to explain it prove worthless.
Willingly or unwillingly, the modern critics must themselves
confess this, since they have in vain strained every nerve to
support their theories. H. J. Holtzmann brings against these
critics the reproach of having “ recently given to research into
the life of Jesus the reputation of a being psychologically dis-
posed to a game of riddles and to an uncertain groping about
among odd fancies and suppositions. ’’* Deissmann thinks that
“ history has modestly and wisely let the natal hours of Jesus’
self-consciousness remain for us a mystery.” 4 Harnack adds :
“ How he came to the consciousness of tfie unique character
of his filial relation, and how he arrived at the consciousness
of his power and of the obligation and the task which were
1 Die Worte Jesu, i, 233. 2 Die Lehre Jesu, 93 £., 2nd ed.
3 Das Messianische Bewusstsein Jesu, 42 £. (Tubingen, 1907).
4 Evangelium uni Urchristentum, in Beitrdge zur Weiterenlwick-
lung der christlichen Religion, 106.


involved in it, that is his secret; no psychology will discover
it. . . . How Jesus came to the consciousness that he was
the Messiah we are unable to ascertain.” 1 “All that the
critics have said on this point,” remarks Albrecht Schweitzer,
“ rests plainly on experiments.” 2 Still more clearly Paul
Wemle writes : “ It is only honourable to confess that this
origin (of the Messianic consciousness of Jesus) is for us a
mystery, and that we know nothing about it. We can at
most say how the Messianic consciousness did not originate
in Jesus. Not through gradual reasoning and reflection ; these
never give certainty. From them may come, perhaps, the self-
consciousness of a clever theologian, but not that of the Son
of God. Not through the influence of his environment; the
voices of demons and of the world might have been able to
make his spirit falter, but never to impart to it divine cer-
tainty. Both explanations break down before the fact that from
the very beginning Jesus appears with perfect steadfastness
and unshakable certainty as the ambassador of God. Nowhere
is there a trace of hesitation, doubt, or a development from
presentiment to certainty. . . . He acts all his life under the
pressure of necessity. He knows that he is sent and impelled
by God; he has only the choice whether to obey or not.” 3 In
regard to this, Wernle expresses a further thought, which,
considered in itself, confirms the idea that the Messianic con-
sciousness of Jesus did not originate either earlier or later,
but was inherent in his nature. The Messianic consciousness
bears throughout the characteristics of his nature. Self-con-
sciousness and Messianic consciousness are in Jesus one and
the same thing, equally deep, equally certain, equally stead-
fast, equally unchangeable, equally natural, as only an innate,
never an acquired, consciousness can be.
From this impression also rationalistic scholars cannot
escape. Renan has already called attention to the fact that
“ the first thought of Jesus —the thought that he is the Son of
God, the trusted agent of his Father, and the executor of his
will—was so deeply implanted within him that this conviction
probably did not originate gradually, but went back to the
very roots of his being.”'* The Messianic consciousness of
Jesus is indicated, in the opinion of Loisy, by “a splendid
certainty of his faith,” 3 and is distinguishable as a “simple
and profound intuition.” Deissmann says : “ The Messianic
certainty of Jesus is his self-consciousness.”* Harnack adds :
“ In him everything streams forth as a matter of course and
as if it could not be otherwise. Thus does a fountain come
from the depths of the earth, clear and unimpeded.” 7
1 Wesen des Christeniums, Bi, 88. 1 Von Reimarus tu Wrede, 7.
3 Die Anfange unserer Religion, 31, 2nd ed. * Vie de Tisus, 85.
• Revue d’hisioire et de littirature religieuse, 91 (1904)
• Evangelium und Urchrislentum, of. cit., 106.
7 Wesen des Chrisientums, 21.


Ernst Kuhl expresses the same thought thus: “We no-
where come upon an act of Jesus which gives us any informa-
tion about the origin or development of his self-consciousness.
We find everywhere the same calm, steadfast opinion regarding
himself, and we receive everywhere the same clear, uniform
and complete impression of his personality. ... In any case,
this much is certain,, that one can judge fairly of the peculiar
nature of Christ’s consciousness of his divine sonship, 1 with
its serene clearness and its equable certainty in all the situa-
tions of his life, only if one recognizes without any mental
reservation or restriction the fact that its ultimate roots lie in
the depths of his own nature, out of which it has grown
organically, and, if we may say so, by a spiritual natural
necessity.” 2 “If Jesus found the Messiah in his own person,
he followed only a spiritual necessity of his being.” 3
We may go still further and say that Jesus was positively
aware that he was both the Son of God and the Messiah, not
only after the commencement of his earthly human life, but
that he was convinced that his divine sonship and Messiah-
ship, like his nature, had their roots in the supernatural world
and in eternity. He claims not only to have been chosen from
all eternity to be the Son of God and the Messiah by a call
from heaven, but to have himself come from heaven into this
world as the Messiah.
For the explanation of this statement we refer to the
thorough demonstration of his supernatural pre-existence,
which will soon follow. We can the more readily relieve
ourselves of the trouble of proving it here in relation to his
Messianic consciousness, as our opponents must agree with us
on this point also. Julicher says : “ The Evangelist who makes
Jesus declare that no man knoweth the Son but the Father,
and, on the other hand, that no man knoweth the Father but
the Son, presupposes in him also a consciousness which
originated from another world and era.” 4 Gustav Dalman,
by a philological estimate of the utterances of Jesus, comes
to the conviction that he derives his Messianic consciousness
from his supernatural divine sonship : “ For one who reads
the words of Jesus without dogmatic prejudices, no other
meaning can be found than that the MeSsiah is in reality the
Son of one higher than David—namely, God.” 5 B. Weiss
holds a similar opinion : “ However far Jesus looked back
into his past life, he knew of no moment when the love of God
had been bestowed upon him, and when God’s selection of
him had become an historical fact; he was conscious of
1 What is true of the consciousness of his divine Sonship is, according
to our explanation, true also of his Messianic consciousness, since both
blend in one.
1 Das Selbstbewussisein Jesu, 38, 43.
* H. J. Holtzmann, Das messianische Selbstbewussisein Jesu, 78.
4 Jesus und Paulus, 31. of. cit., p. 234.


having- possessed that love, ever since he had learned for
the first time to look up to God, and in that love he knew that
he had been chosen to be the Messiah. That, however, must
have led Jesus of himself to the consciousness that he had
possessed that love of God before his existence on earth
began, and that his life, as well as his selection for his
mission, had their origin in the depths of eternity.” 1
In wonderful harmony with this stands the Gospel’s
account of the childhood of Jesus, in which the Messiahship
and divine sonship are attributed to a supernatural origin,
birth and nature.
The angel Gabriel already brings from heaven the announce-
ment of the coming forerunner (Luke i, 5). The latter is
called John (Jochanan), which means “ From the grace of
Jehovah,” because with him the Messianic day of salvation
dawns, and because he will prepare his people for the coming
of the Messiah. On that account the angel prophecies to
Zachary : “ Thou shalt have joy and gladness, and many shall
rejoice in his nativity. For he shall be great before the
Lord . . . and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost even
from his mother’s womb. And he shall convert many of the
children of Israel to the Lord their God. And he shall go
before him (before the Messiah, the Lord) in the spirit and
power of Elias, that he may turn the hearts of the fathers
unto the children, and the incredulous to the wisdom of the
just, to prepare unto the Lord a perfect people” (Luke
i, 13-18).
Six months later the same angel Gabriel announces to the
Virgin Mary the supernatural conception and birth of the
Messiah and Son of God himself : “ Behold thou shalt conceive
in thy womb, and shalt bring forth a son; and thou shalt call-
ins name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the
Son of the Most High; and the Lord God shall give unto him
the throne of David his father; and he shall reign in the house
of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no
end. . . . The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
power of the Most High shall overshadow thee; and therefore
also the Holy which shall be born of thee shall be called the
Son of God” (Luke i, 31-35)- Joseph, the bridegroom of
Mary, is also then informed, through the apparition of an
angel, of the divinely supernatural conception of the Messiah
in the Virgin’s womb : “Joseph, son of David, fear not to
take unto thee Mary, thy wife, for that which is conceived in
her is of the Holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth a son,
and thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people
from their sins ” (Matt, i, 20, 21).
And again it is an angel who announces to the shepherds
near Bethlehem the birth of the Messiah Jesus with the words :
1 Das Leben Jesu, 4th ed., i, 281.


“ Fear not, for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy,
that shall be to all the people. For this day is bom to you a
Saviour, who is Christ the Lord, in the city of David. . . .
And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the
heavenly army, praising God and saying : Glory to God in the
highest; and on earth peace to men of good will” (Luke
ii, 8-14).
In the succeeding account of the child in the temple, Jesus
is likewise hailed as the Messiah by the aged Simeon, “ a just
and devout man, waiting for the consolation of Israel,” and
who “ had received an answer from the Holy Ghost that he
should not see death before he had seen the Christ of the
Lord ” (Luke ii, 25, 26). Now, “ when his parents brought
in the child Jesus ... he also took him into his arms, and
blessed God and said : Now thou dost dismiss thy servant, O
Lord, according to thy word in peace. Because my eyes have
seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared before the face
of all peoples, a light to the revelation of the Gentiles and the
glory of thy people Israel ” (Luke ii, 27-32).
As is well known, all the liberal critics are exceedingly
hostile to this wonderful garland of supernatural testimonials
which, according to the Gospel account of Christ’s childhood,
enwreathes the announcement, the conception and the birth of
the Messiah Jesus. They contest in particular the supposition
that Jesus, as the Messiah and Son of God, was pre-existent
and supernatural and supermundane in origin, nature and
vocation. As has been already said, we shall discuss this
criticism of the Gospel’s representation of Christ’s childhood
at a later point, when we consider the divine consciousness
of Jesus, because we can then first fully estimate the whole
profound import of those passages in the Gospels of Matthew
and Luke. The rejection of the Gospel’s history of his child-
hood is, from the philosophical and doctrinal standpoint of
rationalism and liberalism, a cardinal principle of self-defence
and self-preservation, however unhistorical and unjustifiable
such a procedure is. Any school of sceptical criticism which
would accept the Gospel’s account of Christ’s childhood, and
therewith the supernatural, supermundane origin of the con-
sciousness of Jesus, would stultify itself.
Only—and this is the curse of the whole system—this same
school of sceptical criticism is none the less compelled to sur-
render its position if it rejects the supernatural interpretation
of the consciousness of Jesus. For, as we have proved after
a serious examination of all the attempts of our opponents to
solve the question, and as many of our opponents have them-
selves had to confess, there is no natural explanation of this
consciousness. Jesus claims that he did not gain his convic-
tion that he was the Messiah and the Son of God by a gradual
evolution of his spiritual nature, and all the problems and


hypotheses by which it is nevertheless asserted that this con-
sciousness of his has been proved to be the result of a slow
development and evolution have broken down lamentably.
Thus the modern school of research into the life of Jesus
is compelled either to believe in that evolution of Jesus
against the evidence of all the historical and psychological
facts, or else to doubt its own system.
There is only one way out of this dilemma—namely, that of
attributing the Messianic and divinely filial consciousness of
Jesus to an ecstatic, visionary or absolutely deranged mental
condition of the Saviour; in other words, by claiming that
Jesus, in a state of ecstatic excitement, gradually worked
himself into those Messianic ideas, or in consequence of such
mental crises believed in a supernatural Messianic vocation
intended for himself from time immemorial.
Since the days of Renan and Strauss this assertion has
appeared repeatedly, down to the time of O. Holtzmann, 1 who
speaks of a not irrational ecstasy of Jesus, and to Loosten 5
and Emil Rasmussen,* who represent Jesus as insane and
epileptic. Rasmussen, the barbarian from the Scandinavian
north, declares that without exception all men who proclaim
themselves prophets are deranged, and that the “Messiahs ”
are still worse; and finally, in speaking of Jesus’s Messianic
consciousness, he is guilty of writing the following disgusting
sentence : “ Just as the man who suffers from constant irrita-
bility is a chronic grumbler, and as the man who cannot
escape being pursued by megalomaniacal ideas suffers from
megalomania, so a man who proclaims himself a Messiah or
a prophetic figure, or that he possesses a Messianic nature—is
also a deranged person.” 4
However monstrous such coarseness is, and however
repellent we find every attempt to represent the Saviour as
an exaltd, ecstatic or epileptic, and however energetically
many liberal investigators protest against it, the rationalistic
school of criticism cannot deny its responsibility for such
aberrations. O. Holtzmann is right, from a liberal stand-
point, when he® asserts with Johannes Weiss : 6 The Messianic
consciousness of Jesus “would be wholly incomprehensible
psychologically if it did not appear accompanied by religious
ecstasy.” If Jesus, from a mere man with purely human
consciousness, had developed into the Messiah, and had
attained to the consciousness that he was an ambassador
from God and the Son of God, more exalted than all the
Prophets, and that he came from heaven and united in himself
all power in heaven and earth, then he would have been not
1 War Jesus Ekslatiherf (Tubingen, 1903).
* Jesus Christus vom Stand-punkte des Psychiaters (Bamberg, 1905),
3 Jesus, cine vergleichende fsychofatische Studie (Leipzig, 1905).
* Jesus, 135. 5 Id., p. 10.
* Predigt Jesu vom Reiche Gottes, 155.


only an ecstatic visionary, but, in the full sense of the word,
a madman, as the most radical critics maintain.
This blasphemous assertion, which we shall refute in the
second volume of our work, really condemns itself. “The
facts contradict such a declaration,” we hear the Protestant
liberal Stapfer reply to Renan. 1 Since sceptical criticism is
forced again and again to fall back upon this historically
untrue psychology of Jesus, it has lately once more demon-
strated its inability to interpret the consciousness of the
Saviour historically by the evolutionary theory. Moreover, it
proves thereby that it is utterly impossible to judge of the
Messiahship of Jesus scientifically and with fairness if he is
regarded merely as a man.,
We come thus to the consideration of Jesus’ consciousness
of his divinity. First, this will throw complete light upon his
Messianic consciousness, for first and only from the stand-
point of Christ’s divinity do we come to understand how the
Saviour was able to apprehend from the very beginning his
whole Messianic vocation and activity. And first and only on
the ground of Christ’s divinity can the question be raised and
answered whether and to what an extent his human knowledge
concerning his Messiahship was capable of development and
increase, in accordance with the words of the Evangelist;
“ And Jesus advanced in wisdom and age, and grace with
God and men ” (Luke ii, 52).
1 See p. aoo of this volume.




PART III
THE DIVINE CONSCIOUSNESS OF
CHRIST




CHAPTER I
THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST IN HIS LIFE
I.—The Divine Consciousness of Christ as a Whole,
i. Friends and Enemies of the Divinity of Christ.
THE question of the Messiahship of Jesus is imme-
diately connected with that of his divinity. His
Messiahship and divinity form, in fact, the two
pivotal points of christology. Both are alike
infinitely important and essential in the conflict
raging about the incomparably sublime personality of our
Saviour. Only we will go, wherever it is possible, still more
deeply into this question of the divinity of Jesus —to the
central point of it, that is, to the very heart of Christ and
Christianity. Here also, therefore, we collide more violently
than elsewhere with the two fundamentally different and con-
flicting views concerning Christ—on the one hand, the positive
Christianity of faith and the science of faith, and, on the other,
the liberal pseudo-christianity of modern criticism.
The true, essential divinity of Christ has always been, is
now and will ever remain the ultimate criterion of christology,
and, this again the decisive characteristic of positive Chris-
tianity. This is recognized, not only by Catholics and ortho-
dox Protestant investigators, who still make a resolute stand 1
against a falling away in non-catholic Christendom from the
belief in the only-begotten Son of God, but also by the most
radical critics, who still have for Christ himself and Chris-
tianity at most a smile of pity.
Eduard von Hartmann, the philosopher of the Unconscious,
declares that Harnack’s attempt to understand the Essence
of Christianity without Christ’s divinity and without Christ
at all is a senseless comedy. He says : “ The essence of
i.
i 6
1 In recent times the divinity of Christ has been especially defended
in orthodox circles by Johann Kunze, Die ewige Gottheit Jesu Christi
(Leipzig, 1904); by Karl Muller, Der Glaube an die Gottheit Christi,
Biblische Zeitjragen, II Serie, i (Berlin, 1906); Johann Steinbeck, Das
gottliche Selbstbewussisein Jesu nach dent Zeugnis der Synoftiker
(Leipzig, 1908); F. Godet, Commentaire sur VEvangile de St Jean
4th ed. (Neuch&tel, 1904); and the English theologians G. B. Stevens,
The Theology of the N. T. (1901), and The Teaching of Jesus (1902);
R. L. Ottley, Doctrine of the Incarnation, in J. Hastings’s Dictionary
of the Bible (Edinburgh, IS9B-1904); W. Sanday, id., see Jesus Christ;
C. Fouard, The Christ, the Son of God (London, 1908); W. Hoyt,
The Lord's Teaching concerning his own Person (London, 1908);
H. P. Liddon, The Divinity of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ
(London, 1908); W. M. Macgregor, Jesus Christ, the Son of Goa,
3rd ed. (Edinburgh, 1909).


Christianity is contained in christology, or nowhere. Who-
ever rejects christology rejects also the essence of Chris-
tianity.” 1
W. von Schnehen, although a pantheistic Monist, answers
the question whether the liberal portrait of Jesus can be
characterized at all as “ Christian ” with an emphatic “ No,”
and adds : “ Christianity is faith in Christ . . . the Saviour
and the Son of God—that is, the Son of God and the Saviour
in the true meaning of those words, and not in any modern-
ized interpretation of them, which robs them of the religious
characteristics of their old, unequivocal meaning, and substi-
tutes for them a sort of general phraseology, which in reality
says nothing. In a word, Christianity is the religion of Christ,
and is faith in redemption only through the true Son of God,
Jesus Christ. . . . Truly one must either be blind, or have
most peculiar and no longer practical but purely personal
reasons, not to recognize in all this the ‘ Essence of Chris-
tianity.’ For a millennium and a half it was certainly always
understood so. The faith of Christians is faith in the divine
sonship and the redemptive work of Jesus Christ. To-day,
also, it is still the rule that the consciousness of the Christian
Church reckons with this fact. .. . Indeed,' outside of
Christendom one always understands by Christians those who
believe in the divinity of Jesus Christ, and in this sense
pray to him. The non-christian philosophy, in its most dis-
tinguished representatives, agrees absolutely with the ortho-
dox Churches in this view; the adherents of other religions,
so far as they know anything at all of Christianity, are of the
same opinion; and it has been reserved only for the liberal
rationalistic theology of the last 150 years to invent for its
own special need an entirely new ‘ Essence of Christianity. ’ ’
In the case of genuine rationalists, who will soon almost
without exception belong to history, we do not find this
strange, and just as little so in the case of the most modern
radicals, who are becoming more and more the heirs of liberal
Protestantism. Both frankly confess that they wish to be
non-christians and to work as such, and to try, both in prin-
ciple and in practice, to dechristianize Christianity. Truly
the rationalists, from Reimarus to Strauss and Renan, when
they contested revelation only, were still genuine dogmatists
in comparison with the radicals of to-day—Eduard von Hart-
mann, W. von Schnehen, Albrecht Kalthoff and others —who
repudiate every objective idea of God and all real religion.
But those, as well as these, acknowledge that their work is
that of a destructive undermining of the foundations of
Christianity.
With the liberals it is quite different. They all assume the
1 Die Gegenwart, 7, 210 (1901).
* Der moderne Jesuskultus, 7 f. 2nd ed. (Frankfurt. 1906).


robe of Christian theologians, clothe their modem ideas and
ideals in a Christian garb, and claim the honour of having
unveiled to the world Christianity cleansed of all impurities,
and of having portrayed it in its true “ essence.” In reality,
however, they throw away precisely what the whole world
regards as the deepest and most spiritual import of the
Christian religion, and, in particular, its soul—the divinity
of Jesus.
This reproach is applicable to all the liberal critics and
accommodating theologians. All of them, from the extremest
left to the furthest right wing of the school of Ritschl, deny,
in the name of true Christianity, the divinity of Jesus Christ.
This is, of course, comprehensible from the radical liberals,
who at the present moment set the pace in the Protestant
camp. Harnack has uttered for them the significant words :
“ Not the Son, but the Father only, has a place in the Gospel
which Jesus proclaimed. The sentence, ‘ I am the Son of
God ’ did not find its way from Jesus into his Gospel, and
whoever inserts it there, as a sentence in connection with
others, adds something to the Gospel. But whoever takes up
this Gospel and strives to know him who gave it to us will
testify that here divinity has appeared in as pure a form as it
ever can upon this earth.” 1
Only in appearance do the more conservative members of
the Ritschl-school reject this formula of Harnack. They talk
much of the divinity of Christ and are able on occasion to
grow quite eloquent in favour of it. But Albrecht Ritschl
himself did not at all understand by this the eternal and
essential divinity of the Saviour. His Son of God is a creature
with limited powers, not essentially different from us Chris-
tians. “In the affirmation of his divinity the religious valua-
tion of Christ finds only a very limited expression.” 2 Christ
is called God only in so far as he is historically the first in the
community of the kingdom of God, and thereby unique of his
kind. 3
It is true Julius Kaftan remarks very positively, “ So long
as a Christology exists it will be the doctrine of the divinity
of the Redeemer”; yet Kaftan makes the divinity of Jesus
resolve itself into a natural endowment, by means of which
the Saviour came into such a perfect spiritual unity and com-
munion with God as no other human being ever experienced. 4
Beyschlag speaks in a precisely similar way of the “ unique
majesty of Jesus, for which, in the last analysis, the erroneous
yet authorized name of divinity is not too high.” 5 Lipsius
1 Wesen des Christenlums, 91, 92.
* Ritschl, Lehre von der Rechtferti gung und Versohnung, iii, 389,
3rd ed.
• id,, 425 f., 438. * Julius Kaftan, Dogmatik, 424 £., 437 (1897).
5 Neutesiamentliche Theologie, i, 77, 2nd ed.


and Nitzsch dispute this, remarking- that one may indeed speak
of a “unique existence of God in Christ,” although the
affirmation of the divinity of Christ “is inexact and not
without error.” 1
Even Bernhard Weiss, who is looked upon as a kind of
intermediary between the liberal and positive schools of
thought, explains away the metaphysical consubstantiality of
Jesus with the Father into a merely moral similarity of nature,
by means of which he, above all other men, is qualified to
bring the highest revelation of God to mankind. 2
If the theology of the Ritschl school ever concedes the
divinity of Jesus, it conceives it, at most, in the sense of the
old monarchical theory, according to which the man Jesus
became God only in time and by means of his Messianic
vocation. “ Christ is for us God. Jesus has become God by
becoming Christ,” writes Schulz; 3 and Reinhold Seeberg, in
closest adhesion to Schleiermacher, declares : “ The will of
God, conducting the history of humanity to salvation . . .
united itself with the man Jesus from the first moment of his
existence . . . and permeated his feelings, thoughts and will.
Thus did the man Jesus become the Son of God.” 4
If the essential and eternal divinity of Jesus is even seriously
considered, Julius Kaftan 5 and other enemies of the left wing
of liberal theology do not think thereby of the divinity of
Jesus himself, but of the divinity of the Father standing
behind him. With this Harnack also can, of course, agree.
He wishes to substitute for the expression “Christ is God ”
the formula “ God was in Christ.” 6 In some such way every
critic finally succeeds in acknowledging a divinity of Christ
and at the same time in denying the divinity of Christ.
Edmund Stapfer even calls Protestantism fortunate on account,
of this confusion : “ I am convinced that this individualism is
to-day the wisest and the only possible thing for us. Every
Protestant believer manufactures his own christology for
himself, because every believer conceives of the divinity of
Jesus Christ in his own way, which is not the way of his
neighbour.” 7
The Modernists, who have abandoned Catholicism, es-
pecially Alfred Loisy, 8 agree with this entirely.
1 Lipsius, The Theology of Ritschl, 9; Nitzsch, Lehr buck der Dog-
matik, 497, 2nd ed.
2 Lehrbuch der biblischen Theologie des N . T., 58 ff., 6th ed. (Berlin,
1895); Leben Jesu, ii, 145 f. (Stuttgart and Berlin, 1902).
3 Die Gottheit Chrisii, 725 f.
* Grundwahrheiten der christlichen Religion, 115 ft.; Die Kirche
Deutschlands im rg Jahrhundert, 47.
5 id., 438. 6 Preussische fahrbiicher, i, 588 (1903).
7 La mart et la risurrection de Jisus-Christ, 340; Jisus-Christ -pen-
dant son ministire, 314.
8 See the good delineation of him by Lepin, Jisus, Messie et Fils de
Dieu, 238-267 (Paris, 1906) : La Diviniti du Christ d'apres M. Loisy.


All the modern enemies of the divinity of Jesus are united
only in the main point of view that Jesus Christ himself did
not claim to be God. Nowhere and never in his life, they say,
did he utter a word indicating a really divine consciousness.
Only after his death did the doctrine of his divinity gradually
originate in the Christian Church, although in no way based
upon the teaching of Christ himself. Let us examine these
assertions. •
2. The Human and Divine Consciousness of Christ.
The enemies of the divinity of Jesus will, in advance, have
nothing to do with the orthodox Christian position. Instead
of investigating the Christian point of view, according to
which Jesus professed and proclaimed himself to be God, they
oppose to it at once the negative antithesis “ that Jesus him-
self did not claim to be God on earth . . . and that he bluntly
declined the attribute of divinity and divine perfection.” 1 In
proof of this they appeal merely to the fact that he emphasized
his human consciousness with great clearness as compared
with his divine consciousness. Renan asserts that “ Jesus
does not for a single moment express the sacrilegious idea
that he is God.” “It is beyond all doubt that Jesus never
thought of professing to be an incarnation of God himself.
. . . There is not a trace of such a thing anywhere in the
synoptic Gospels. The Evangelists make him act merely as
a man. He is tempted; he is ignorant of many things; he
corrects himself; he changes his views; he begs his Father
to spare him trials; he is submissive to God as a son. He,
who is to judge the world, does not even know the day of the
judgement. He takes precautionary measures for his safety.
Shortly after his birth he has to be saved by flight, to rescue
him from men who wished to kill him. . . . All this proves
the fact that he was only an ambassador from God, a man
protected and privileged by God.” 2
The liberal criticism of to-day has remained true to Renan
on this point. Some of Harnack’s sentences sound very
much like those of Renan : “ He [Jesus] characterized the
Lord of heaven and earth as his God and Father, as greater
than he, and as the only one who is good. He is certain of
having from this Father all that he has, and all that he is to
accomplish. He prays to him, he submits to his will; and
in an intense struggle he seeks to discover this and to fulfil it.
His aim, strength, insight, success and his’hard necessity, all
come from this Father. So it stands recorded in the Gospels;
and there is nothing there which can be altered or falsely
interpreted. This personality that feels, prays, acts, struggles
1 Arnold Meyer, Was uns Jesus heule ist, 21 (Tubingen, 1907).
2 Renan, Vie de Jisus, 54, 173, 179 f. (Berlin, 1863).


and leads is a man, who unites himself with other men also in
relation to God.” 1
Many others speak in essentially the same way, among
whom (to mention only a few) are Wellhausen, 2 W. Bousset, 3
H. J. Holtzmann, 4 Chamberlain, 5 Paul Wernle, 6 Zimmer-
mann, 7 K. Thieme, 8 and Alfred Loisy,* the latest mouthpiece
of the Liberal school.
It cannot occur to us to deny that Jesus, before everything
else, felt and showed himself as man, and that his human
consciousness expressed itself in his life with plastic force
and fulness. First his humanity in its entire reality, then
his divinity in its spiritual fulness of truth; first the humanly
comprehensible, then the divinely supernatural, which
becomes known through and in the human nature of Jesus.
It is for this reason that Jesus comes into this world as an
infant in a manger, flees from his persecutors, and grows in
age, wisdom and grace in the sight of God and men (Luke ii,
40, 50 f.). It is for this reason that at the beginning of his
public life he submits like an ordinary sinner to the baptism
of repentance, with the remark that he must fulfil all justice
(Matt, iii, 15). For this reason he is led by the Spirit into
the wilderness, where he fasts, is tempted and shows that he
is hungry (Matt, iv, 2 and Luke iv, 2). On this account he
endures all the days of his activity the human weaknesses of
hunger, thirst, fatigue, sleep and other human afflictions. For
this reason also he is moved by all the varieties of feelings
known to the human soul —sympathy, tenderness, friendship,
pain, grief and tears. He feels drawn to the young man
who asks of him the way of life (Mark x, 21). He is moved
by compassion for the widow whose only son is being carried
forth upon a bier (Luke vii, 13). He has compassion on the.
multitude which has remained with him for three days, and
suffers hunger in the desert (Matt, xiv, 14 and parallels). He
groans in spirit, shudders and weeps at the death of his
friend Lazarus (John xi, 33, 35), and sheds tears over obdurate
Jerusalem at the thought of its ruin (Luke xix, 41). In the
garden of Gethsemani an indescribable sadness overpowers
him in view of his approaching end; his soul is sorrowful
even unto death; he falls in agony, and drops of sweat exude
1 Wesen des Christentums, 80.
* Skizzen und Vorarbeiten, vi, 188 (Berlin, 1899).
3 Das Wesen der Religion dargestellt an ihrer Geschichte, 251 (Halle,
1903). * Neatest. Theologie, i, 268 (Leipzig, 1897).
5 Grundlagen des 19 Jahrhunderts, i, 209, 3rd ed. (Miinchen, 1901).
8 Die Anfdnge unserer Religion, 26-37, 2nd ed. (Leipzig, 1904).
7 Der historische Wert der dltesten Ueberliejerung von der Geschichte
Jesu im Marhusevangelium, 144 (Leipzig, 1905).
8 Die christliche Demut, i, 131, 170 ff. (Giessen, 1906).
9 Autour d'un petit livre, no; Simples riflexions, 72 (1908); Quelques
lettres sur des questions aciuelles, 148 (1908); Les Evangiles synoptiques,
i, 193-


from all the pores of his body (Matt, xxvi, 37 and parallels).
He is, indeed, willing to die the most frightful of deaths and
to be buried in a rock-hewn tomb in order to complete the
tragedy of his human life. Even after his resurrection his
paramount desire is to furnish irrefutable evidence of the fact
that he has risen from the grave as a living human being.
The disciples at Emmaus recognize him in the breaking of
bread (Luke xxiv, 30). To the astonished Apostles he shows
his perforated hands and feet for them to handle, and he
eats with them honey and fish (Luke xxiv, 39-43). Thus
Jesus, from the first to the last hour of his life, stands as
a true and perfectly human man among men.
Just as plainly does he show himself as man in his inter-
course with God. In his will (Matt, xxvi, 39), in his words
(John viii, 28, 38), and his work (John v, 19), and in his
moral (Matt, xix, 16) and intellectual (Matt, xxiv, 36) per-
fection, he subordinates himself to his Father in heaven
as every creature ought to subordinate itself to him. The
glorification which comes to him in such abundance from his
miracles he wishes to transmit to the Father (Mark v, 19), as
he seeks, indeed, in everything to enhance the honour of the
Father (John viii, 49; xiv, 13). Like an ordinary mortal, he
turns to God the Father partly in order to pay him the tribute
of adoration, partly to beg for his help and support. The
Evangelists mention repeatedly his ardour in prayer (Matt,
xiv, 23; Luke ix, 18, 28). He passes whole nights in prayer
(Luke vi, 12). He can ask of his Father to send him more
than twelve legions of angels for his defence (Matt, xxvi, 53).
Also in working his miracles he often first raises his eyes to
heaven in prayer before he acts (Mark vii, 34; John xi, 38, 41).
In his prayer on the Mount of Olives he expresses the
sharpest distinction between his human will, which shrinks
from suffering, and the paternal will of God, to which he
submits in profound obedience (Matt, xxvi, 39 and parallels).
In his last agony on the Cross he finally feels himself for-
saken by God his Father, and, dying, commends his spirit
into his hands (Matt, xxvii, 46 and parallels).
Thus does Jesus Christ reveal himself as man in every
respect and in all the situations,of his life. In his body and
soul, in his will, intellect and actions he is a man like us
other men, “ in all things made like unto his brethren, yet
without sin ” (Heb. ii, 17; iv, 15). In fact, his human nature
appears in the self-consciousness of Jesus and in the repre-
sentation of that consciousness in the writings of the Evan-
gelists in such perfect naturalness, that we must see therein
a new, transparently clear proof of the fact that here every-
thing is described in accordance with reality; not, as the
liberals believe, in the twilight of history, already refashioned
by faith.


But—and this is the question which we have to do with
here—can liberal criticism legitimately draw the conclusion
from the fact that Jesus shows himself so decidedly as man
that he did not claim to be also God? Certainly not. Whether
Christ was God or not, the human side of his nature and
person would have had to come to expression in any case just
as decidedly. Not only because Christ was also a real man,
but also because, his divinity being presupposed, his divine
nature could reveal itself only in his human nature and by
means of his human nature, because he was God-Man—incar-
nate God.
An incarnate God thinks, wills, speaks and acts as man,
even when his thinking, willing, speaking and acting cannot
be explained merely from his humanity, but have their origin
in the depths of divinity. A man who, casting aside at once
the capacities, talents, forces and manners peculiar to his
race, should appear before us with a claim to be God, would
thereby also give us a proof that he understood the part he
was playing very superficially and that he was nothing but a
comedian, a Deus ex machind. The incarnate Son of God,
whether he presented himself to his fellow-men or to God,
remained the Son of Man, even when he gave proof of his
pre-existence with the Father, of his supernatural nature, his
likeness to God and his divinity in word and work. So it
becomes at once comprehensible that he had not only to
evince a decidedly human consciousness, but also to show that
this human consciousness revealed itself with much greater
clearness and publicity than the consciousness of his divine
nature and being, and why. Not only the theological, but
also the purely psychological estimate of the person of Christ
forbid the idea of his playing off his clearly marked human
consciousness against his divine consciousness. “ Monsieur
Renan, that clown in psychology,” as Friedrich Nietzsche once
called him, enticed subsequent liberal critics, in this respect,
into a very dubious path.
Even the few texts which apparently favour our opponents’
conception of the consciousness of Jesus, and to which they
always again and again appeal with tenacious narrow-minded-
ness, do not alter these facts.
Above all, the meeting of Jesus with the rich young man is
supposed to be decisive (Mark x, 17; Luke xvjji, 18). “ When
the rich young man addressed him with the words, ‘ Good
Master,’ Jesus answered, ‘ Why callest thou me good? None
is good but one, that is God.’ He has with these words dis-
avowed bluntly divinity and divine perfection.” Thus does
Arnold Meyer 1 decide, according to Hamack’s statement. 2
Alfred Loisy 3 also, W. Bousset, 4 and even the orthodox-
1 Was uns Jesus heute ist, 21 (Tubingen, 1907).
s Wesen, 80. 3 Autour d'un petit livre, 148.
4 Das Wesen der Religion, 251; Jesus, 92, 3rd ed, (Tubingen, 1907).


inclined Ernst Kuhl 1 hold the same opinion—incorrectly. In
the eyes of the rich young man Jesus was precisely not God,
but merely a wise Rabbi, exactly as he is in the eyes of our
rationalists and modernists. That being presupposed, it was
typical both of the nature and of the deep humility of Jesus
to give to God alone the honour by declining this expression
of human praise.
Moreover, Jesus, who saw in the form of address given
him by the young man merely a vain compliment, greatly
coveted by the Pharisees (Matt, xxiii, 7), “ rejects this
ambitious and superficial habit of bestowing titles, without
giving a thought to the question, whether he has a right to
the appellation ‘ good ’ or not. The rejection of that dis-
tinction has, therefore, nothing to do with the self-conscious-
ness of Jesus, but is a revelation of feeling, from which one
perceives how far removed he is from the Scribes and
Pharisees.” 2 Provided the expression does not contain the
praise of men, but a worthy recognition of God, Jesus lays
a definite claim to the name of “Lord and Master” (John
xiii, 13), and wishes to have it used in the sense of a good
and absolutely perfect Master, in which sense God in heaven
is called Father and Lord of all men (Matt, xxiii, 8, g).
Furthermore, our opponents take refuge in the remark of
Christ concerning the coming of the day of judgement: “ But
of that day or hour no man knoweth, neither the angels in
heaven, nor the Son, but the Father” (Mark xiii, 32). Here
is clearly and distinctly expressed the underlying thought
which Jesus wishes to impress upon his hearers—God alone
knows the day of the Last Judgement. No creature, even
though it is one possessing pure intelligence, has knowledge
of it. Even to the Son this secret is not made known, in so
far as he speaks merely from his own knowledge as a creature.
In so far as his humanity is connected hypostatically with his
divinity, and, above all, in regard to his divinity itself, he
also certainly knows this secret. But neither as man, nor as
God, does he know this for men. He has no commission
from the Father to communicate it to mortals. For, as he
explains elsewhere, “ It is not for you to know the times or
moments which the Father hath put in his own power”
(Acts i, 7).
Finally, the complaint of the dying Saviour on the cross :
“My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” (Matt,
xxvii, 46). He who in his greatest agony breaks out in this
cry of distress is the Son of God, hypostatically united with
the human nature, which is struggling with death. It is,
1 Das Selbstbewusstsein Jesu, 12-16 (Gr.-Lichter£elde, Berlin, 1907).
* Johann Steinbeck, Das gottliche Selbstbewusstsein Jesu nach idem
Zeugnis der Synofiiker, 39 f. (Leipzig, 1908); R. A. Hoffmann, Das
Selbstbewusstsein Jesu naeh den drei ersien Evangelien, 6 f.(K6nigs-
berg i. Pr., 1904). .


therefore, the man who feels himself forsaken, and who can
call God his God, and cry to him for help. The divinity of
Jesus is in no way excluded by the fact that his humanity
reaches here its highest, last and tragic expression.
Accordingly, when the liberal critics, together with Har-
nack, sum up the evidence against the divinity of Jesus in
the words, “ This sensitive, active, struggling and suffering
personality is a man who unites himself with other men in his
attitude towards God,” they have thereby really proved
nothing against the divinity of Jesus, but have only uttered
the truth well known to every reader of the Gospel, that Jesus
was truly and really man. Nevertheless, the question whether
Jesus was also God is not settled thereby, but, on the con-
trary, is now put forth for the first time. Now, first we must
ask whether all the utterances and actions of Jesus can be
explained by his human consciousness, or whether they, on
the contrary, find their explanation only in the fact that his
divine nature was united with his human nature in the one
person of the incarnate God and the divine Messiah.
3. The Expressions of the Divine Consciousness of Christ.
In approaching the answer to this question, we abstain for
the present from Christ’s express designation of himself as
the Son of God, and take into consideration only the expres-
sions of his divine consciousness in general. That this con-
sciousness cannot be measured by the standard of ordinary
men is recognized also by our critical opponents. Renan,
the master of fine phrases, is forced to the acknowledgement:
“ The faith, the enthusiasm and the constancy of the first
generation of Christians become comprehensible only by the
fact that at the beginning of the whole movement was placed
a man of colossal proportions. . . . This sublime person-
ality, which even now, day after day, directs the destinies
of the world, can permissibly be called divine, not in the
sense that Jesus had absorbed into himself all that is divine,
or that he was identical with the divine, but in the sense that
Jesus is that individual who has brought his species nearest
to divinity. . . . The position which he ascribed to himself
was that of a supernatural being, and he wished to be con-
sidered as a being who stood in loftier relations with God
than other men.” 1
The most modern of the critics in the liberal camp share
the views of this rationalist. Paul Wernle certainly speaks to
them as if he had read their thoughts when he says : “ Christi-
anity originated from the circumstance that a layman, Jesus of
Nazareth, appeared with a more than prophetic self-conscious-
ness, and drew men so closely to himself that they were able,
1 Renan, Vie de Jisus, 54, 3x9, 325 i. (Berlin, 1863).


even after his ignominious death, to live and die for him. . . .
It is clear that from these words [of Jesus] there speaks a
superhuman self-consciousness. And this is the secret of the
origin of Christianity. . . . Always modest, humble, moder-
ate, and yet with a superhuman self-consciousness. It is
absolutely impossible to invent such a spiritual life as this.
Revelation, redemption, forgiveness, help—all these he has
in himself and imparts them to those who yield to the im-
pression of his person. And just as his statements about
himself far surpass the ordinary, so also does his manner
of life. ... If he passes nights in solitary prayer, if in
preaching and healing he forgets food and rest, if he inter-
feres with nature, or if, himself moved by its mystery, he
seems to his associates as a being from another world and
to his puzzled relatives as one possessed of the devil—every-
where we have the same impression of the superhuman.” 1
P. W. Schmiedel confesses that “ the synoptists also depict
it (the portrait of Jesus) likewise with a sublimity, which
exalts him appreciably above human standards.” 2
Yet the same critics declare that Jesus does not claim to be
a superhuman being, much less God. “He stands throughout
as a man among men, with a feeling of the distance which
separates all creatures from God.” 3 “He does not surpass
the limits of the purely human. Before his soul Almighty
God remained in his entire sublimity, he did not force himself
to a place beside him. . . . He drew the dividing line
sharply.” 4 Everything extraordinary and superhuman in his
words and works has its foundation in the Messianic con-
sciousness of Jesus. In his nature he feels himself merely
human, but in his Messianic vocation exalted above men.
That is all. “ The mediator is throughout a man, without
exception, but he has received from God a special vocation
and commission for men, and thereby he surpasses them.” 5
Only that? Really no more than that? Let us briefly collect
the most important expressions of self-consciousness of Jesus
in order to enable ourselves to form an independent opinion in
regard to them.
Jesus makes plain to us his superhuman and absolutely
divine consciousness by comparisons, in which he contrasts
himself, on the one hand, with the created world, and, on the
other, unites himself closely with God.
In all his humility and modesty he yet knows himself to be
exalted above all creatures. He is greater t than Jonah and
1 Paul Wernle, Die Anjange unserer Religion, 26-29, 2n( t ed. (Tubin-
gen, 1904); E. Stapfer, ] isus-Christ fendant son ministers, 324, 337,
2nd ed. (Paris, 1897); Fritz Barth, Die Hauftfrobleme des Lebens
Jesu, 246 £f., 3rd ed. (Giitersloh, 1907); W. Bousset, Jesus, 90 f., 3rd
ed. (Tubingen, 1907).
2 Das vierte Evangelium, 19 (Tubingen, T 906).
8 Wernle, of. cit., 28.
* Bousset, of. cit., gi. Wernle, of. cit., 28.


Solomon (Matt, xii, 41); greater than Moses and Elias, the
witnesses of his glorification (Matt, xvii, 3); greater than all
the ambassadors of God in the Old Testament (Matt, xii, 41).
In him his disciples behold what prophets and kings had in
vain longed to see (Luke x, 24). The least in his kingdom is
greater than John the Baptist, who, nevertheless, was more
than all the prophets, yes, the greatest of all men born until
that time (Matt, xi, 9-11). David himself, whose son the
Messiah was to be, looks up like a servant to Jesus his Lord
(Matt, xxii, 43-45). No man and no angel can stand com-
parison with him. He is served by angels (Matt, iv, 11); a
word from him would be sufficient for the Father in heaven
to send him twelve legions of angels (Matt, xxvi, 53). The
angels are, in general, as much his as are the angels and
servants of the Father (Matt, xiii, 41; xvi, 27). At the last
day they will form his retinue of honour, like the household
of a king (Matt, xvi, 27; xxv, 31). At a wave of his hand
they will assemble the whole world before his face (Matt,
xiii, 41; xxiv, 31). He is something different from men and
angels. Exalted above both, he takes a rank and position
close to the heavenly Father (Mark xiii, 32). He admonishes
the disciples forcibly that they should call no one on earth
Master or Father; “ For one is your Father, who is in
heaven; . . . one is your Master, Christ . . . and all you
are brethren ” (Matt, xxiii, 8,9). Jesus conceives of the two
designations, Father and Master, as parallel; applies one to
himself, the other to the Father in heaven; and contrasts with
both the men who, while different from Christ and the Father,
are among themselves brethren.
If these comparisons between Jesus and the created world
already point, not only to a superhuman vocation, but to a.
nature in the Saviour which is throughout superior to that of
created beings, still more definite are those utterances in
which he compares himself directly with God. With mar-
vellous educative wisdom he starts out with the Old Testa-
ment idea of God and the Old Testament’s divine revelation,
because these were intelligible to the disciples and known by
all. He places himself on a par with God, and applies the
utterances concerning Jehovah to himself. As Jehovah alone
is Israel’s Lord to whom the nation is wedded, so Jesus is
the bridegroom of his followers (Mark ii, 19; John iii, 29),
and not merely the groomsman who is to lead the people to
God. While the Old Testament never speaks of the people of
a divine ambassador, such as Moses or Josue, but only of the
people of Jehovah (Num. xvi, 3, etc.), Jesus calls the society
of his believers exclusively his Church (Matt, xvi, 18). As
was said of Jehovah in the Old Testament (Isa. xxxi, 5), so
Jesus wishes to gather the children of Jerusalem to himself,
as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings (Matt, xxiii,


37). With the same absolute authority, exclusively his own,
with which God in the Old Testament sent out the bearers
of his revelation, Jesus also says; “ I send to you prophets
and wise men and scribes ” (Matt, xxiii, 34; Luke xi, 49). As'
Jehovah gave to Moses for himself and his brother Aaron the
assurance, “ I will be in thy mouth and in his mouth ” (Exod.
iv, 15), so Jesus also encourages the bearers of his Gospel:
“ I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adver-
saries shall not be able to resist and gainsay ” (Luke xxi, 15).
Jesus never introduces his discourses after the manner of the
prophets, “ Thus saith the Lord,” but, to the greatest amaze-
ment of his hearers, speaks like Jehovah himself, always in
his own person, “as one having power” (Mark i, 22). As
Jehovah is the Lord of the Old Testament Law, and as this
forms his own peculiar and inalienable right, so Jesus
declares himself to be the absolute Lord of this same Law.
Over against all human authority he sets his word of com-
mand : “ The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath ” (Matt, xii,
1-8). In other words, the Son of Man not only puts aside the
Old Testament by virtue of his Messianic power and vocation,
but he stands above the Old Testament, as its Lord and
Lawgiver who revealed himself indeed in the Old Testament
by his word and his prophets, but in the New Testament has
himself come to mankind in the person of the Son of Man. 1
Jesus applies, therefore, the Old Testament utterances of
Jehovah to himself without any limitation and in solemn as-
severation compares himself to the God of the Old Testament.
Hence, it is only a furtherance and deepening of this thought
when Jesus, as we shall soon see, removes every essential
difference between himself and God the Father in heaven by
his utterances in reference to the Son of God.
Secondly, Jesus expresses his consciousness of his divine
nature in the demands he makes on mankind in regard to his
person. Most remarkable is the demand of faith. This forms
the basis of all his discourses and actions. What he seeks
among the Israelites, but does not find in sufficient measure,
is faith (Matt, viii, 10). That which qualifies the Gentiles to
enter the kingdom of heaven before the Israelites is their
greater readiness to believe (Matt, viii, 10-12). To make his
disciples strong in faith is the principal aim of his admoni-
tions, 2 the most desired result of his prayers (Luke xxii, 32).
1 See the detailed proof of the correctness of this exposition in Schanz,
Markuskommentar, 142 (Freiburg, 1881); Knabenbauer, Commentarius in
Ev. secundum Matt., i, 471 (Paris, 1892); Comment, in Ev. sec. Marcum,
89 ff. (Paris, 1894); Tillmann, Der Menschensohn, 126 ff. (Freiburg,
1907) Anton Seitz, Das Evangelium vom Gottessohn, 408-413 (Freiburg,
1908) Wunsche, Jesu Konflikt mil den Pharisaern wegen des Aehren-
ausraufens, in Vierteljahresschrift fur Bibelkunde, i, 281-306 (1904).
2 Matt, ix, 2, 22, 29; xv, 28; xvi, 8; xvii, 19; xxi, 21; Mark iv, 40;
v, 34! x, 52; xi, 22; Luke vii, 50; viii, 25, 48; xvii, 5, 19; xviii, 8, 42;
John xi, 15, 25, 40-48; xii, 36-46; xiv, 1, 10.


Only twice do the synoptists inform us that Jesus marvelled;
once at faith and the other time at unbelief (Matt, viii, 10;
Mark vi, 6). In considering- his second coming, he is
especially impressed by the thought whether he shall find
faith on the earth (Luke xviii, 8). Now, one could, of
course, easily understand his demand of faith in his words
and his mission from God, even if he were no more than
a human Messiah. But his claim to men’s faith refers not
only to his words and his vocation, but directly to his
person. “ Blessed is he, whosoever shall not be scandal-
ized in me” (Luke vii, 23). Faith in the person of Jesus
is the way to escape eternal ruin and to have life everlast-
ing (John iii, 15-18). Faith in him is the work required
by God (John vi, 29), and unbelief in him the sin of the
world (John xvi, 9). Exactly in the same way as the disciples
believe in God are they to believe in him (John xiv, 1);
faith in the person of the Father and in the person of Jesus
are practically the same. Still more, they blend into each
other: “He that believeth in me doth not believe in me
but in him that sent me ” (John xii, 44). Whoever does not
believe in Jesus proves thereby his complete unbelief in God
(John v, 37). In a word, Jesus demands not only that men
should believe in him and his message, but that they should
believe in him and his person. The Last Judgement will deal
first of all with unbelief in his person, and then only with un-
belief in his teaching: “He that shall be ashamed of me and
of my words, the Son of Man also will be ashamed of him,
when he shall come in the glory of his Father with the holy
angels ” (Mark viii, 38). He makes himself the object and the
substance of faith. That would be absolute idolatry if Jesus
were merely a man with a supernatural vocation, and not real,
incarnate God. 1
Together with the demand for faith Jesus lays claim also to
unlimited love. He reproaches the Jews not only with un-
belief, but also with want of love for his person (John viii, 42).
He continually admonishes his disciples to distinguish them-
selves through their love to Jesus (John viii, 42; xiv, 15, 21,
23).. It is, however, not merely a natural love that he
requires of his followers. On the contrary, every merely
natural love must be subordinated to the love to Jesus.
“ He that loveth father or mother more than me is not
worthy of me; and he that loveth son or daughter more
than me is not worthy of me ” (Matt, x, 37). Even the
bonds of the closest natural love must be torn asunder when
love to Jesus would thereby be lessened. “If any man
1 How unprejudicedly the liberal critics oppose Jesus’s demand for
faith is shown by the laconic remark of Wrede : “ That he (Jesus) made
himself the object of faith or doctrine must be doubted, notwithstanding
some words in the Gospels which say so." Wrede, Paulus, 94, and ed.
(Tubingen, 1907).


come to me, and hate not his father and mother and wife
and children and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life
also, he cannot be my disciple ” (Luke xiv, 25). No man,
no man sent by God even, may speak thus. The command-
ment to love one’s neighbour says only : “ Thou shalt love
thy neighbour as thyself.” Jesus demands much more; who-
soever does not love him more than himself, whosoever does
not love him above all else, cannot be his disciple (Matt, x,
37-39). Jesus demands for himself the love of the whole
heart, of the whole soul and of the whole mind, the love which
we owe to God alone, and asks that we -give it in the same
way. He claims that men shall fulfil towards his person the
first and greatest commandment which is incumbent on them
in respect to God. Whoever fails in this love to Jesus fails
too in his love to God (John v, 42). Whoever hates Jesus
hates thereby God himself (John xv, 23). Both blend in each
other and both are alike — love to Jesus and love to God. That
is a claim to divine rights which penetrates life profoundly.
Moreover, Jesus allows himself to be worshipped. 1 We
read frequently that the friends of Jesus “ fell down before
him and worshipped him,” an homage which the Saviour not
only accepted, but praised and rewarded with miracles. It is
true, the expression ” fall down and worship ” may not, as a
matter of course, be interpreted as an expression of religious,
divine adoration. In itself it can mean merely the oriental
salaam; the homage of deep reverence which the servant
renders to his master and the subject to his king, and consists
in the fact that the former falls on his knees before the latter
and touches the ground with his forehead. This conventional
homage is meant when the Gospel says that the servant “ fell
down and besought him ;” 2 when the wise men from the East
and Herod himself wished to adore the new-born King of the
Jews as a king (Matt, ii, 2,8, 11); and when the Roman
soldiers “bowing their knees, adored him,” in order to mock
Jesus as a pretender to the position of King of the Jews
(Mark xv, ig).
But, provided the expression tt/joo-kwtjo-is, “ obeisance,”
is transferred from the profane to the religious sphere, and
hence becomes a form of religious homage, it means, accord-
ing to the usage employed in the language of the Gospels, in
the highest sense the latreutic worship which is due to God
alone. No man and no angel allows such a religious obeisance
to be offered him. When the centurion Cornelius “ falls at his
[Peter’s] feet and adores him,” the prince of the Apostles
reproves him with the words : “ Arise, I myself also am a
man” (Acts x, 25, 26). When St John before the angel of
1 See A. Seitz, Die Anbetung Jesu als Gottessohn in den Evangelien,
in Theologie und Glaube, 286 f£. (1910).
8 Matt, xviii, 26, according to the Greek original: adored.


the Apocalypse “ falls at his feet, to adore him, the angel
says : ‘ See thou do it not; I am thy fellow servant and of thy
brethren. Adore God’” (Apoc. xix, 10; xxii, 8,9). To fall
down in homage is the highest act of worship which the
believer performed to the honour of Jehovah in the temple at
Jerusalem (John iv, 20-22; xii, 20; Acts viii, 27), and which
the ancients continually render at the throne of God (Rev.
iv, 10; v, 14; vii, 11), and that “adoration in spirit and in
truth” which Jesus demands from the “true adorers of the
Father ” (John iv, 20-24), and of which he says : “ Thou shalt
adore the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve”
(Matt, iv, 10; Luke iv, 8).
Now, Jesus allows the obeisance or kneeling adoration to
be offered to him many times and on very different occasions.
The question is only whether it was, at those times, a matter
of religious adoration or merely of worldly homage. If we
leave out of consideration the concrete cases, as they are
reported in the Gospel, it may be supposed that the Jews with
their secular and political ideal of the Messiah might have
adored the Saviour, now and then, as the expected Master
Rabbi and national liberator, and therefore may have done
homage to the Messiah-King who was to destroy the Romans,
according to the secular manner of a court. Nevertheless,
the Gospel, as far as we see, contains not a single case of
obeisance of this kind. Jesus would have refused it just as
decidedly as he did the title and name of an earthly Messiah-
King, and protested against being called Lord and Master
after the manner of the Rabbis and being honoured as such.
As he considered his whole work and the significance of his
person as exclusively religious, he could also consent to
receive the honour offered to him only as religious homage.
Yet not only did he himself consider it so. In the sub-
jective feelings of those who paid him homage, the worship
offered him was always of a religious nature. It is true, in
various degrees. It sometimes happened that people who
honoured in the Saviour the possessor of supernatural miracu-
lous powers fell down before him involuntarily in religious
awe and hope without being in any way aware of his Messiah-
ship or of his divinity. That may have occurred in the case
of the Canaanitish woman, who adored him and said : “ Lord,
help me ” (Matt, xv, 25); and perhaps also in the case of
the leper, who “adored him, saying: ‘Lord, if thou wilt,
thou canst make me clean ’ ” (Matt, viii, 2). In other cases,
adorers cast themselves down before Jesus because, over-
whelmed by the power of his teaching, his person and his
miracles, they looked upon him as the Messiah in the true,
religious sense, sent from God, and endowed with divine
wisdom and might, without, on that account, regarding
and acknowledging him decisively and for- more than a


moment as God. Such was the man who was born blind,
who, after being healed and instructed by Jesus, hails
Jesus as the Son of God, “ falls down and adores him ”
(John ix, 35-39). Jairus also, the leader of the synagogue,
was for a moment animated by a similar religious sentiment
when he adored Jesus and begged for the resuscitation of his
dead daughter (Matt, ix, 18); arid likewise the man from
Gerasa with the unclean spirit, who cried aloud to him for
help, addressing him as the “Son of the most high God”
(Mark v, 6,7); and the disciples who, after the stilling of the
storm on the lake, and the walking of Jesus on the water,
“adored him, saying: ‘ Indeed, thou art the Son of God’ ”
(Matt, xiv, 33). In such circumstances, if he knew himself
not to be God, Jesus could not have allowed a purely religious
adoration to be offered him. For, in so far as it stood opposed
to something divine or even to a momentarily excited faith
in his genuine deity, it rested—under the aforesaid supposition
that he knew that he was not God—on superstition only. But
in so far as it was applicable to the Messiah as merely a
religious ambassador of God, it was a sin which Jesus, the
jealous defender of the rights of his Father, was compelled
to reject, as energetically as Peter and the angel of the
Apocalypse rejected the religious adoration offered them. But
if Jesus did not reject it, and allowed himself to be adored as
the Messiah,, he showed thereby a complete consciousness of
his incarnate divinity. So much the more is this true of those
cases in which, as we shall subsequently see, it is a matter
of adoring Jesus as the Son of God in the strictly christo-
logical sense of the word. So was it with the women and
disciples after the Lord’s resurrection (Matt, xxviii, 9, 17;
Luke xxiv, 52). It is clear that Jesus by accepting this
adoration confessed himself to be essentially God.
A third series of revelations of the essentially divine con-
sciousness of Jesus relates to his almighty works. Omnipo-
tence is the most convincing attribute of God and the most
comprehensible proof of divinity. Jesus himself sees therein
the manifestation of divinity, since he declares of God, in
contrast to men, that with him all things are possible (Matt,
xix, 26). But whoever reflects impartially upon the portrait
of the Saviour given in the Gospels receives undoubtedly the
impression that Jesus was omnipotent. Neither men, nor
circumstances, nor the powers of nature are able to interfere
with his life and actions. He never had to give up doing
anything which he had resolved to do, nor did he ever suffer
or experience anything which he himself had not wished.
Never and nowhere, as happened occasionally to the disciples,
did he lack the ability to complete, at will, even the most
difficult task, surpassing the powers of any mere creature.
His working of miracles is a proof of this. With unique,
h 17


divine omnipotence he heals every phase of suffering’ and
every disease of humanity, brings the dead to life, commands
evil spirits and compels the forces of nature to obey him. (See
the chapters on the “Miracles of Jesus,” in vol. II of this
work.) Every attempt to explain the miracles of Jesus other-
wise than by having recourse to divine omnipotence breaks
down completely. Jesus also is well aware that his works
are those of omnipotence and not the works of man. “ Thou
canst not make one hair white or black,” he says (Matt, v, 36)
of all men without exception, while he works as the Lord of
life and death, and this from his own inherent power. If he
sometimes indicates his miracles as works of his Father
(Mark v, 19; John v, 19, 20, 36; xi, 41; xiv, 10), performed
by the power of the spirit of God (Matt, xii, 28; Luke xi, 20),
he nevertheless identifies this power with himself, and bears
in himself the essential plenitude of divine miraculous power.
This proceeds from him as his own personal power and char-
acteristic. Whoever comes near to him has this feeling
(Matt, xii, 28). The power to perform miracles, therefore,
is his to use at any moment. He can employ it without first
appealing to God, when, how and as often as he wishes. One
single word is sufficient to accomplish the most miraculous
result. Miracles appear as a perfectly natural expression of
the inborn power within him. They stream forth as from a
limitless, inexhaustible spring, without in the least exhausting
or even diminishing its flow. This inexhaustible, ever fresh
source of divine omnipotence he possesses so independently
and so personally, that he imparts unlimited power also to
his disciples to work miracles in his name and by his orders
(Matt, x, 1; Mark iii, 15; Luke ix, 1). “ Heal the sick, raise
the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out devils; freely have you
received, freely give ” (Matt, x, 8). With these words he
sends his disciples out into the world. And their deeds corre-
spond to the assurances given them. They do cast out devils
and heal all infirmities and sicknesses (Mark vi, 13; ix, 37;
Luke ix, 6). They are able to report joyfully to the Saviour:
“ Lord, the devils also are subject to us in thy name ” (Luke
x, 17). After the death of their Master, the Apostles continue
in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth to heal the
sick, to cast out devils from those possessed by them and to
raise the dead (Acts iii, 6, 16; iv, 10, 30; ix, 34-42).
Still more astonishing than physical miracles is the spiritual
power of forgiving sins used by Christ. No prophet had ever
done that. At most, the prophets announced forgiveness in
the name of Jehovah (2 Kings xii, 13). Everywhere in the
Old Testament the forgiveness of sins is reserved for God
alone, as he alone can judge sinners. Not once did Judaism
ascribe the power to forgive sins to the expected Messiah. 1
1 G. Dalman, Die Worte Jesu, i, 215 (Leipzig, 1898).


The Pharisees, contemporaries of Jesus, thought the same.-
They denounced as downright blasphemy the arrogance of any
man forgiving sins (Matt, ix, 3; Mark ii, 7; Luke v, 21).
Jesus silently confirms the correctness of this view. But in
order to show that the Messiah is more than a man and
claims divine privileges, he not only forgives sins (Matt, ix, 2
and parallels), but expressly ascribes to himself the right to
forgive them, and proves by a miracle that he possesses this
absolute power in his own person (Matt, ix, 5-7 and parallels).
Indeed, he goes so far as to transfer this divine right of
forgiving sins in his name to his disciples; “ Whose sins you
shall forgive, they are forgiven them; and whose sins you
shall retain, they are retained ” (John xx, 23). “ Amen I say
to you, whatsoever you shall bind upon earth shall be bound
also in heaven; and whatsoever you shall loose upon earth
shall be loosed also in heaven ” (Matt, xviii, 18).
The power to forgive sins comes, moreover, only from the
essential Messianic vocation of Jesus of being the Redeemer
and Saviour of sinners. Jesus is come to seek and to save that
which was lost (Luke xix, 10). The saving consists in the
rescuing men from the condition of being eternally lost, in
which man finds himself in consequence of the guilt of sin
weighing upon him. It is accomplished, however, not by any
means merely by the fact that God announces forgiveness to
the sinner and pardons his sins. Rather are this forgiveness
and remission connected with the sacrifice of the life of Jesus.
Jesus expressly says that “his life is a ransom for many”
(Matt, xx, 28), and that his blood is the means for the remis-
sion of sins (Matt, xxvi, 28 and parallels). Jesus has, there-
fore, the full consciousness of such a value pertaining to his
life, his blood and his personality, that their sacrifice in death
forms a complete substitute for the offence given to God,
which is inherent in sin. It would be madness and blasphemy
if a mere man, and in any case a creature, should assume
such importance. “ The man who fulfils the prophecy that
God will redeem his people from all their sins, the man who
in his own person steps into the gulf which yawns between
God and the world, the man who ascribes to his own life a
value that can replace the infinitely great shortcomings of
mankind, and whose importance 'to the world is like that of
God, is the incorporation in a human person of God’s
willingness to save” I —the divine Redeemer in the form of
man.
With the right to forgive sins and with the sin-destroying
work of redemption there is immediately and logically con-
nected the right, which Jesus reserves for himself, of at some
time pronouncing the final sentence on the living and the dead,
1 J. Steinbeck, Das gothic he Selbstbewusstsein Jesu nach dem Zeugnis
der Synofliier, 55 {Leipzig, 1908).


as the Judge of the world. He has appeared to redeem the
world in humility and poverty; but he will come again at the
last day to judge the world, in divine glory and in “ his
majesty and that of his Father and the holy angels ” (Luke ix,
26 and parallels). He will not only take part in the judge-
ment, like the angels, the Apostles and the just, but he, and
he alone, in his own person will carry out the judgement in
divine omnipotence (Matt, vii, 23 and parallels). The judge-
ment and the final sentence are so exclusively his task that
even the heavenly Father will not participate in it: “For
neither doth the Father judge any man; but hath given all
judgement to the Son, that all men may honour the Son, as
they honour the Father” (John v, 22).
If Jesus, as Judge of the world, merits the same divine
honour and adoration that belong to God the Father, it is
evident that the Judge is not merely a human representative
of God, but God himself, just like the Father. For divine
honour and adoration cannot be transferred to any creature,
not even to a merely human representative of God. As man,
even as merely a humanly-considered Messianic Son of Man,
he would, moreover, be at most capable of carrying out, in
the name and by the order of God, the sentence pronounced
by God as Judge. Christ, on the contrary, will try the heart
and the reins and judge with omniscient keenness (Matt, x, 26
and parallels); he will judge men not alone from their out-
ward works, but from their innermost thoughts and senti-
ments, known to God only (Matt, xii, 36), and he will, as an
independent sovereign, render to each, according to the
measure of his deserts or of his guilt, everlasting life or
everlasting punishment (Matt, vii, 23; xvi, 27; xxv, 32-46).
Only the all-wise, all-just and almighty God can judge the
world thus.
In fact, the whole Old Testament also, down to the time
of Christ, had already announced that Jehovah, the Lord, the
true God, would execute the judgement of the world in his
own person. The judgement day is “ the great and dreadful
day of the Lord ” (Mai. iv, 5). “In the glory of his majesty ”
the Lord shall rise to execute judgement (Isa. ii, 19; Ixvi, 15,
16). The Lord will gather together all nations and tongues,
that they may see his glory (Isa. Ixvi, 18). “ The Lord my
God shall come and all the saints with him ” to the judge-
ment (Zach. xiv, 5). “ The Lord, the God of gods, our God
shall come” openly to the judgement, ‘‘and the heavens
shall declare his justice; for God is judge” (Ps. xlix, 1-6).
“ The Lord shall judge the ends of the earth ” (1 Kings ii, 10).
The Lord shall judge the world with justice and mercy, and
the nations with truth and equity (Ps. xcv, 12; xcvii, 8).
“ The Lord standeth up to judge : and he standeth to judge
the people” (Isa. iii, 13). In short, every doubt is excluded


that it is Jehovah, the Lord God, who, according to the
Old Testament, will personally conduct the judgement of
the world. Since, therefore, Jesus Christ confirms the Old
Testament teaching concerning the Last Judgement and
applies it to himself, and represents himself as the only
Judge of the world, he thereby unequivocally proclaims him-
self to be God.
We have thus far considered the superhuman consciousness
of Jesus as to his nature in general, without speaking of his
testimony to himself as the Son of God. It still remains neces-
sary to show in what spiritual connection this revelation of his
divinity stands with his Messianic consciousness. All the
utterances of his supernatural consciousness which have been
specified are made by Jesus Christ in his character of the
Messiah. No one who studies them carefully can doubt this.
Even our opponents agree with us on this point. On the other
hand, they assert that Jesus, as the Messiah, reveals thereby
no superhuman consciousness as to his nature, but merely a
superhuman consciousness of his vocation. Christ, they say,
has been fully aware that he was, by nature, a genuine man
like all other men, only he imagined that he had received from
God a Messianic vocation. From this Messianic r6le can be
explained the extraordinary and superhuman character of all
that Jesus asserted and thought about himself.
But, as we have seen, with such an explanation we arrive
at no result, especially if, like the liberal school, we look
upon the Messianic vocation of Jesus from a purely Jewish
point' of view—that is, if we make the Saviour proclaim
himself to be the Messiah only in the sense of contemporary
Judaism. But also every other conception of the Messianic
idea, unless it holds firmly to the divine Messiah, will not do
justice to the superhuman consciousness of Jesus. The utter-
ances in which Jesus, by his comparisons, on the one hand,
definitely distinguishes himself from the world of creatures,
and, on the other hand, puts himself on a level with God; the
practical demands which Jesus makes upon men’s faith, love
and honour; and the actual proofs of his divinity, which he
furnishes by his deeds of omnipotence, as a worker of miracles,
the forgiver and destroyer of sins, and judge of the world—
point not only to the Saviour’s consciousness of a divine
vocation, but also to his consciousness of a divine nature in
its fullest extent. Only by the fact that we recognize in Jesus
Christ the Messiah-God is the whole problem of his super-
natural self-consciousness solved. Accordingly, Christ not
only elevated the Messianic idea, characteristic of his age
and surroundings, from the low level of the national-Jewish
and worldly political views, but at the same time brought to
us the certainty that he, as the Messiah, must be also in every
particular the Messiah-God, and actually God. His Messianic


consciousness is, therefore, divine consciousness; His Mes-
sianic revelation is a divine revelation; and the Son of Man
is the Son of God.
ll.— Christ's Consciousness of his Divinity.
i. Christ’s General Consciousness of being the Son of God.
Together with the Messianic testimony for his divinity thus
far considered runs also a direct revelation of his divine son-
ship. Whoever has read the Gospel knows that Jesus calls
himself therein the Son of God and allows himself to be so
called. Even the most radical critics almost unanimously
concede the fact that Christ’s characterization of himself as
the Son of God goes back not only to the disciples, but to
Jesus himself. Only the meaning of this designation is
questioned. Does Jesus wish to represent himself as the
Son of God by nature, or has the expression on his lips
another subordinate significance?
Judged by our manner of thought and speech, this question
would be easy to answer. In the West we usually give the
name “ son ” only to one who in the literal sense has been
begotten by his father. With the Eastern, and especially
with the Semite, it is otherwise. For him the name of son
has not only the above-named meaning, but also a much more
extensive one. It is used in order to express every close con-
nection and kinship, every physical and moral communion or
relation, which in any way resembles the relation between
son and father. The Holy Scriptures throughout hold tena-
ciously to this linguistic usage. Whoever has been anointed
with oil is called a “ son of oil ” (Zach. iv, 14); whoever has
deserved death, or has been condemned to death, is called the
“ son of death ”(1 Kings xx, 31; 2 Kings xii, 5). The word
“ son ” is also transferred to the physical relations of lifeless
things. Thus the arrow is the “ son of the bow,” or “ son of
the quiver” (Job xli, 19; Lam. iii, 13); the threshed out
grain of wheat is the “son of the threshing-floor” (Isa. xxi,
10). Morally considered, the pupils of the prophets are “ sons
of the prophets” (3 Kings xx, 35); evil men are “sons of
Belial” (Deut. xiii, 13; 1 Kings ii, 12), “sons of perdition”
(John xvii, 12); the damned are “sons of hell” (Matt, xxiii,
15); the enemies of Jesus are “ sons of the devil” (John viii,
44); while Jesus calls the Apostles “my sons ” (Mark x, 24;
John xiii, 33). 1
Similarly and in an analogous sense we find also the expres-
sion “son of God” or “sons of God.” Above all, it was
natural to call the angels “ sons of God” in consequence of
their close connection with God (Job i, 6; ii, 1; xxxviii, 7;
1 In the English version the words t(kv o and filioli are often trans-
lated by the word “ children.” —Tr.


Ps. Ixxxviii, 7). For the same reason just men and true
servants of the Most High receive the title “sons of God”
(Wisd. ii, 13; Eccl. iv, n). In this sense it was allowable to
distinguish the Israelites by calling them “ sons of God,” 1
and the people of Israel the “son of God” (Exod. iv, 22;
Osee xi, 1). With still greater appropriateness the name
“son of God” was transferred to the representative of God
among the chosen people, to the anointed king in the service
of Jehovah (2 Kings vii, 14). The kings and judges of this
world in general receive this title (Ps. Ixxxi, 6).
It is, therefore, evident that the King of kings, the anointed
of God in the highest sense of the term, the longed-for
Messiah, deserved to be called the “ Son of God.” It is true
that he appears in the Old Testament only seldom under this
name, most distinctly in the second Psalm. Yet the title
" Son of God ” was certainly known and used as a Messianic
title about the time of Christ. The Book of Henoch and the
Fourth Book of Esdras testify to this fact (Henoch cv, 2;
4 Esdras vii, 28). 2 It is no less evident from the Gospels that
the Jews who were contemporaries of Jesus regarded the title
“ Son of God ” as Messianic (John i, 49; vi, 70; Matt, xvi, 16;
Mark xiv, 61). By this they meant for the most part only that
the Messiah was the Son of God in the moral, metaphorical
sense of the word—namely, that, as God’s ambassador who
brings salvation to Israel, he was superior to all mortals.
Sometimes, indeed, they thought of a metaphysical sonship
with God on the part of the Messiah, and, in connection with
the second Psalm, remembered the Emmanuel of Isaias, and
recalled the Logos-doctrine of the Books of Wisdom, and
the positive prophecy that God himself would come to rescue
Israel. Justin, the philosopher, still testifies of the Jews in
the second century : “ If we bring up to them the [Old Testa-
ment] passages which speak of the suffering of the Messiah,
of his being worthy of adoration and of his divinity, they are
compelled to confess that all that was prophesied of the
Messiah; yet they deny that Jesus was the Messiah, although
they recognize that the Messiah was to come, to suffer, to
rule and to be worthy of adoration, as God.” 3
How, then, did Jesus himself understand the title Son of
God, and ascribe it to himself? The whole Christian world
has at all times maintained that this was done in the highest,
metaphysical sense, and that Jesus has testified to the fact
1 Deut. xiv, 1; Isa. i, 2; xlv, 11; Jer. iii, 22; Os. ii, 1; similarly in
the N. T. the disciples and believers, Matt, v, 9, 45; Luke vi, 35;
John i, 12; xi, 52; 1 John iii, 1; v, 2.
2 Also in the Sibylline books (iii, 776), Messiah is called “ Son of the
great God.” Yet this passage may have been a Christian interpolation.
See Geffken, Die Oracula Sibyllina, in Die griechischen Schriftsleller
der ersten drei Jahrhunderte , 87 (Leipzig, 1902).
3 Dialogue cum Try-phone Judteo, c. 67,


that he was by nature the Son of God. The new school of
destructive criticism thinks otherwise. It asserts that Christ’s
consciousness of being the Son of God in no way overstepped
the limits of a purely human relation of Jesus to God the Father.
Individual modernists, and among them in particular Alfred
Loisy, 1 think themselves justified in supposing that Jesus
understood by his divine sonship nothing but his Messiahship,
and this only in the sense of a purely human, Jewish-apoca-
lyptical Messiahship; that in Jesus the Messiah and the Son
of God are synonymous ideas, and because the Messiah
belongs to the order of creatures only, so in regard to Jesus,
as the Son of God, one must not think of a kinship of nature
or of entire consubstantiality with God.
This certainly means turning things entirely topsy-turvy.
Even if it should be proved that the title Son of God was for
Jesus synonymous with the title Messiah, it would not by any
means follow that Jesus, as the Son of God, was not a super-
human being. For the enemies of orthodox Christianity, who
at once decide in advance that the Messiahship is to be
brought down to the level of the purely human, the above-
mentioned conclusion is certainly and cogently evident. But
we have already demonstrated that Jesus, as the Messiah, had
not only, in the highest sense, a superhuman consciousness as
to his vocation, but also a thoroughly superhuman conscious-
ness as to his divine nature. If, therefore, his divine sonship
were to prove equivalent to his Messiahship, we should,
precisely for that reason, have to recognize him as by nature
the Son of God.
But the view that Jesus understood by his divine sonship
merely the Messiahship is plainly false. It is true, those who
were possessed of devils, those whom he healed, the astonished
masses of the people and sometimes also the disciples called
him the Son of God, without thinking of anything but his
Messiahship. But that does not come into consideration here
at all. It is, rather, merely a question in what sense Jesus
himself applied the expression Son of God to his own person.
Did Jesus, when he called himself the Son of God, think
simply of his Messianic vocation? Loisy and those who are of
his way of thinking maintain this. But such an assertion
cannot find support in one single utterance of the Saviour, 2
while, on the contrary, the most of the utterances about the
1 V Evan pile et I’Eglise, 42, 53-57; Simples reflexions, 72; Les Evan-
giles synoptiques, i, 243; a brilliant refutation by Lepin, Jesus Messie
et Fils de Dieu, 280 ff. (Paris, 1906); Les Theories de M. Loisy, 304 ff.
(Paris, 1908).
2 Loisy appealed formerly to the confession of Peter and the utterances
of Jesus about the judgement. Now he confesses in his Evangiles synop-
tiques, ii, 363, 604-609, that these two texts also about the Son of God
are to be understood in the metaphysical sense. Hence, he bluntly pro-
claims them not genuine.


Son of God stand in no direct connection whatever with the
Saviour’s Messianic utterances.
Even those who positively deny the divinity of Jesus recog-
nize this. Harnack writes : “ Jesus himself has given to the
idea of the ‘ Son of God ’ a meaning, on account of which it
almost falls out of the Messianic scheme or does not abso-
lutely need this scheme for its comprehension.” 1 They go,
for the most part, so far that, exaggerating the facts of the
case at the expense of the Messiahship of Jesus, they assume
that the Messianic consciousness of Jesus has only grown out
of the consciousness of his divine sonship. 2 However mon-
strous such an assumption is, the statement underlying it is
nevertheless correct (as we shall soon convince ourselves) —
namely, that Jesus did announce his divine sonship already
before his Messiahship and independently of it.
The modernist equation—The Son of God —the Messiah,
and the Messiah = a man —must accordingly be entirely re-
jected. It attributes Jewish notions of the time to Jesus
Christ quite arbitrarily. According to the Jewish opinion of
that age, it is true, the appellation Son of God was for the
most part merely an honorary Messianic title, and the Messiah
was also merely a man—in both cases because official Judaism
at the time of Christ adhered to an earthly, national idea of
the Messiah. Jesus Christ, however, as we have shown, con-
ceived his Messianic vocation as something so supernatural
and divine that a merely human person was insufficient for
its' realization, but rather a divine man, a divine Messiah, was
required for that purpose. Hence, it is evident that he plainly
gave to the expressions “Son of God” and “Messiah” an
equally divine meaning; and, in fact, that precisely his
essential divine sonship was the foundation and condition of
his divinely Messianic mission and person. That this con-
ception of the doctrine of the divine sonship is really the same
as that of the Saviour, the following investigation will show.
For the present we affirm only that the divine sonship of Jesus
ought not he judged of by his Messiahship, and still less by
the Jewish idea of the Messiah.
In this, as has already been remarked, most of the opponents
of the divinity of Jesus are agreed. They are convinced that
the utterances of Jesus which relate to his divine sonship must
be investigated by themselves and independently of the Mes-
sianic question. We can obtain certainty as to what Jesus
understood by his divine sonship only by examining the mean-
1 Wesen des Christentums, 80; Wendt, Die Lehre Jesu, 421, and ed.
(iqqi).
J Renan, Vie de Jisus, 76 f£., 120 ff.; Edmund Stapfer, Jisus-Chnst
want son ministlre, 88 ff., 187 ff. (Paris, 1896); Harnack, Wesen, 80 f.,
87 £.; B. Weiss, Das Leben Jesu, i, 280 (1902); Lehrbuch der biblischen
7 heologie des N. T., 62, 288 (1903); J. Kogel, Das Messianische
Bewusstsein Jesu, in Reich Christi, viii, 403-420.


ing of his utterances in regard to it. In doing this the aim
in view must always be directed to the one alternative into
which the whole problem of the Son of God resolves itself :
“ Did Jesus claim to be the Son of God in a sense wholly
transcending the limitations of time and the powers of a
human creature, or did he reveal himself as the Son of God
within the limits of a creature's purely human relations to the
Father in heaven?”
Hostile critics assume in advance the latter supposition.
In their evolutionary view of the world, history and religion,
they declare at the outset, as a basic principle, that Jesus
applied to himself merely the common Jewish idea of the Son
of God prevalent at the time, although certainly in a some-
what more intensive way than that in which the divine son-
ship could have been described by the average Jew. Heinrich
Weinel, among others, expresses himself on this point as
follows : “ According to the use made of the word ‘ son ’ in
the Hebrew and Aramaic languages, one is not compelled to
think of a peculiar kind of origin for the ‘ son,’ but certainly
must think of an especially intimate relation to the ‘ Father.’
Jesus spoke freely of others also as ‘ sons of God ’ —that ye
may be ‘ children ’ of your Father in heaven. And he un-
doubtedly conceived this title in this sense, and fulfilled its
significance with the whole intensity of his love to God.” 1
In other words, Christ’s divine sonship is to be interpreted
according to the idea of divine sonship common to his con-
temporaries and his fellow-men. As in the Old Testament the
angels, the kings of Israel, and the Israelites themselves, and
in the New Testament the disciples and Christian believers
are called sons and children of God in consequence of their
intimate moral relations to God, so Jesus is said to have con-
ceived the title Son of God, not as an expression of his natural
relation to the Father, but as a token of his special spiritual
and ethical nearness to God. According to O. Pfleiderer,
“ Christ, although he is called the only begotten Son of God,
nevertheless appears as essentially the same kind of model,
known from earliest times, of pious men in general, filled with
the spirit of God.” 2 According to Harnack, the deeper
“ knowledge of God is the whole import of the name of son ”
as used by Jesus. “ Jesus is convinced that he knows God, as
no one else has done before him, and he knows that he has the
vocation to impart to all others this knowledge by word and
deed, and therewith to inform them of their adoption as
children by God. In this consciousness he knows himself to
be the Son, called and appointed by God, hence the Son of
God.” 3 Reinhold Seeberg expresses the same idea in direct
1 Jesus im neumehnten Jahrhundert, iii (Tubingen, 1907).
2 Die Entwicklung des Christentums, 31 (Miinchen, 1907).
3 Wesen des Christentums, 81; so Bousset, Jesus, 99, 3rd ed.


support of the hazy christology of Schleiermacher and Ritschl:
“ The will of God, leading the history of mankind to salva-
tion . . . united itself with the man Jesus from the first
moment of his existence . . . and penetrated his feelings,
thoughts and will. Thus did the man Jesus become the ‘ Son
of God.’ 1,1 Bernhard Weiss also substitutes for the meta-
physical consubstantiality of the Son with the Father a moral
similarity of nature, whereby the man Jesus is qualified above
all other men for the most intimate acquaintance with the
purposes of the Father and for their accomplishment in his
Messianic vocation. 2 Finally, Emil ScHiirer, in agreement
with these ideas, finds that the relation of the Son to the
Father is “ not a natural, physical or metaphysical, but an
ethical relation . . . analogous to the relation of all God’s
children to their heavenly Father, and yet having an intensity
which was unique by reason of a unique kind of knowledge
of God” and having also a corresponding call to reveal it. 3
This selection of quotations is sufficient to give us an in-
sight into the ideas of modern liberal theologians concerning
the Son of God. All of them, including the modernists, who
agree with Loisy admirably as to the equation, “ the Son of
God=the Messiah,” interpret Christ’s consciousness of divine
sonship as a spiritual and moral relation of the man, Jesus,
to the heavenly Father, precisely as every man can come into
connection with God and become a child of God. Only Jesus,
as the Son of God, stands one step higher than other men.
As his knowledge of God and his fidelity to his Messianic
vocation have in them something extraordinary, so the divine
sonship, resulting from it, is extraordinary. Yet it has not
transcended the limits of the purely human, nor broken
Christ’s purely natural relation, as a creature, to the Father.
Jesus is said also not to have professed to be the consub-
stantial Son of the Father in the sense of Christian dogma.
If we examine more closely in what way and by what means
the modern theology about Jesus arrives at this result, we find
again that it proceeds according to its usual rule of an
“exactly critical” treatment of the text. In advance one
must regard as already established what one wishes under all
circumstances to establish—namely, that the Son of God,
Jesus, has worked his way out of purely human conditions
and remains within the limits of those conditions. The utter-
ances of Jesus in the Gospels which do not lend themselves
to this view are unhesitatingly rejected as not genuine, but
those which show an appearance of complaisance are pressed
1 Die Kirehe Deutschlands im iq Jahrhundert, 294 (Leipzig, 1903).
* Lehrbuch der biblischen Theologie des N. T., 58-60 (Berlin, 1895);
Leben Jesu, ii, 145 f. (Stuttgart and Berlin).
* Das messianische Selbstbewusstsein Jesu, 10 ff. (Gottingen, 1903);
similarly, Rdville, Jisus de Nazareth , ii, n (Paris, 1897).


with violence into the procrustean bed of the “ natural ” theory
of the Son of God.
In accordance with this “critical” method of procedure,
the utterances of Jesus in regard to the Son of God in the
Gospel of John are entirely, and those of the synoptics partly,
eliminated or mutilated. Then these theologians announce,
with a superior air of unprejudiced research ; “ It is neither
paradox nor yet rationalism, but a simple statement of the
facts, as they lie before us in the Gospels, that not the Son,
but the Father only, belongs to the Gospel, as Jesus preached
it.” 1 That is true for one who is pledged to a Gospel trimmed,
fashioned and interpreted to suit the desires of the liberals.
But on every other kind of investigator such a procedure
makes the impression of an attempt at strangulation.
Only that solution deserves to be considered which deals
seriously and honourably with all the utterances concerning
the Son of God found in the critically sound texts of the
Gospels.
If, then, we first take a hasty general view of these utter-
ances of Jesus concerning the Son of God, it is palpably
evident that our opponents’ supposition is fundamentally
false—that the Saviour called himself the Son of God after
the manner of men, “ in analogy with the relation of all God’s
children to their heavenly Father.” Rather do we receive the
very opposite impression. Jesus claims to be the Son of God
in an entirely different sense from that which says that all
men are children of God, and that his filial relation to the
Father is such that it finds no application to men. As often
as Jesus speaks of his relations with his Father he uses con-
stantly and without exception the expression “My Father”;
and as often as he calls the attention of the disciples to their
childlike relation to God, there is the equally definite char-
acterization, “Your Father.” Never does he associate him-
self with the disciples and with men by the natural form of
speech, “Our Father.” It is true, in the Lord’s Prayer he
teaches the Apostles to pray, “ Our Father, who art in
heaven” (Matt, vi, 9). Yet Jesus only puts this prayer into
the mouth of the disciples. He himself does not pray so.
This is clear both from the distinct command, “ Thus therefore
shall ye pray,” and also from the added conclusion in reference
to forgiveness, in which again at once the term “Your
Father ” is used : “ For if you will forgive men their offences,
your heavenly Father will forgive you also your offences ”
(Matt, vi, 14). Even on those occasions in which Jesus unites
himself with the disciples before God, and when therefore it
would be certainly expected that he would use the collective
expression, “Our Father,” there stands, on the contrary,
“My Father”: “I will not drink from henceforth of this
1 Harnack, Wesen des Christentums, 91.


fruit of the vine until that day when I shall drink it with you
new in the kingdom of my Father ” (Matt, xxvi, 29). “ And
I send the promise of my Father upon you ” (Luke xxiv, 49).
“ Come, ye blessed of my Father, possess you the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world ” (Matt,
xxv, 34). Thus and similarly does Jesus distinguish un-
equivocally between his divine sonship and that of the
disciples and men in general.
Gustav Dalman, the best-informed scholar in respect to the
Aramaic language, spoken by Jesus, sees himself forced to
this confession : “ Nowhere do we find that Jesus proclaimed
himself to be the Son of God in such a way that merely a
religious and ethical relation to God is meant, which others
also could and should also in reality possess. . . . Jesus has
given men unmistakably to understand that he is not only
‘ a,’ but ‘ the ’ Son of God.” 1 The examination separately of
the most important utterances of Jesus concerning the Son
of God will strengthen this opinion.
2. The First Revelation of the Son of God by Christ
in the Temple.
The first words which have come down to us from Jesus
refer to his filial relations with the Father. At the age of
twelve Jesus had made the first Easter journey with his
parents to Jerusalem. After the conclusion of the seven days’
festival the boy remained behind in the temple, where his
anxious parents, distressed by his absence, found him after
three days, sitting among the Rabbis and astonishing the
teachers, already grey in service, by his knowledge of the
Law. In the agitation caused thus to her tender mother’s
heart, Mary addresses to him the mild reproach: “ Son, why
hast thou done so to us? Behold, thy father and I have
sought thee sorrowing.” Whereupon came this remarkable
reply from the wonderful child; “ How is it that you sought
me? Did you not know that I must be about my Father’s
business?” (Luke ii, 48, 49).
It does not matter whether Jesus meant “ in the house of
my Father,” or “ in intercourse with my Father,” or, finally,
“ in the sphere of work or nature of my Father” ; evidently
he means all that at the same time by the quite unlimited ex-
pression : “In what pertains to my Father.” Yet, however
we may exegetically circumscribe or extend these words, in
any case Jesus expresses in them his full, certain and com-
plete consciousness of being the Son of God, just as we find
it in his whole later life and in all his words and deeds. No
1 Die Worte fesu, mit Beriicksichtigung des nachkanonischen judi-
schen Schrijiums und der aramdischen Sfrache erortert, i, 230, 235
(Leipzig, 1898).


one can seriously doubt this. Even the harshest enemies of
the divinity of Jesus must confess : “ Already, as a twelve-
year-old boy, he felt himself to be the Son of God in the
unique sense of the term.” 1
If that is the case, then it is, above all, certain that Christ’s
consciousness of divine sonship is not the result of a gradual
psychological development. Jesus did not, little by little,
through progressive knowledge of God and continued con-
duct pleasing to God, come to the conviction that he was in a
unique sense the Son of God. And still less than inward
reflection did external circumstances, such as the eager Mes-
sianic expectation of his contemporaries or his own successes,
help to awaken and more and more to develop and strengthen
his consciousness of divine sonship. No, before such an
evolution could in any case have begun, Jesus’ consciousness
of divine sonship was complete in the tender years of child-
hood.
It is evident, however, that in these circumstances it also
cannot be called merely a moral consciousness of divine son-
ship. As every human ethical relation is developed and
strengthened and grows gradually through moral thinking
and acting, so the unique ethical relation of Jesus to the
Father, which our critics like to call the divine sonship of
Jesus, could only have germinated in his youth, grown in
his adolescence, and have come to maturity and full develop-
ment in complete manhood. It contradicts all the laws of the
psychology of children that a boy of twelve years, who had
been brought up in the humblest, most ordinary and most
obscure circumstances, should feel himself exalted above all
men, and actually know that he was the Son of God in a
unique ethical sense. Liberal critics remark very ingenuously
in regard to the words of the twelve-year-old boy : “ Here a
premature consciousness of divine sonship and of vocation is
taken for granted.” 2 Certainly the natural, human explana-
tion can make simply nothing out of such an early conscious-
ness of divine sonship. It must either, in defiance of all
criticism, declare the passages in the Gospels bearing on the
subject ungenuine, or concede that the consciousness of
divine sonship in the child Jesus was not inculcated and
acquired but was innate, because it was present before and
above any moral development; in other words, that it con-
sisted not of a merely ethical, but of a physical, or rather a
metaphysical relation.
The mere fact of the existence of a consciousness of divine
sonship in the child Jesus already reveals the glaring un-
naturalness of the natural explanation of this consciousness.
1 Bernhard Weiss, Leben Jesu, i, 279, 4th ed.
2 Wilhelm Hess, Jesus von Nazareth in seiner geschichtlichen Lebens •
entwicklung, 5 (Tubingen, 1906).


If we, in addition to this, consider the depth and the import of
the consciousness of divine sonship in the twelve-year-old boy
the last doubt disappears. Jesus claims to be the Son of the
heavenly Father precisely in that physical sense in which he
passed in the world as the son of Joseph. To the definite
words of Mary, “Thy father and I,” he makes the equally
definite explanation, “my Father!’ in heaven. The tertium
comparationis is not an ethical, but a physical, fatherhood.
Just for the reason and only for the reason that God in the
proper, physical sense is the Father of the child Jesus is
this child exalted above the mere sonshjp characteristic of
creatures which connects him with Joseph and Mary. As a
creature, Jesus should have spared his mother and foster-
father the anxiety and trouble which he caused them by
remaining in the temple. The words, “ How is it that you
sought me? Did you not know that I must be about my
Father’s business?” would appear very unchildlike in his
mouth if Jesus were merely a human child. No gentle child
would have allowed itself to speak and act in such a way
towards its parents.
The ethical divine sonship of the human child Jesus, which
is asserted by our opponents, required above all that he
should not neglect his duty towards his parents. For such
an offence is equivalent to an injury to God, and includes,
therefore, the denial of his alleged ethical filial relation to God.
Only by reason of the fact that Jesus is the Son of God
physically, and hence is himself God, do his earthly parents
become subject to him, and he can say with full right: “ Why
do you treat me like a mere human child? Do you not know
that I, as the Son of God, am raised above all human rela-
tions?” Well considered, therefore, the conduct of the child
Jesus in the temple and his announcement that he is God’s
Son are comprehensible only if Jesus is in the full and proper
sense of the words the Son of God and also God. By the sup-
position of a merely ethical divine sonship, the scene in the
temple would be inadmissible, in fact —may I be pardoned the
expression—immoral. The explanation of the freethinkers
invalidates itself.
Against this at most one objection could be raised—the
possibility that Jesus, although 'merely human, had been
instructed by God in his earliest years in regard to his future
Messianic vocation, and that he, relying on such a super-
natural revelation, had felt himself exalted above the usual
childish, human relations and obligations, and had already
then assumed the r6le of the Messiah. In fact, there are not
wanting critics who take refuge in the supposition that Jesus
received his vocation “ conveyed to him by revelation in a
condition of ecstasy. The beginning and the ending of his
Messianic consciousness, and therefore those of his con


sciousness of divine sonship also, pertain to the transcen-
dental.” 1
We do not need, however, to prove that the freethinker’s
view, which contests, on principle, all revelation, and wishes
especially to explain the self-consciousness of Jesus as some-
thing purely natural, cannot be seriously entertained. But,
apart from that, it is impossible that God should appoint a
boy as his ambassador and let him make his appearance as
the Messiah. Moreover, not one of the Evangelists looks
upon the episode in the temple as a scene pertaining to the
Messianic vocation. All the Gospels place the beginning of
the Messianic activity in the mature years of Jesus’s life.
Even Luke, who has preserved for us the incident with the
twelve-year-old Jesus, remarks later expressly: “Jesus was
beginning about the age of thirty years ” his Messianic
public appearance and activity (Luke iii, 23 and parallels).
Finally, even our opponents are unanimously of the opinion
that the Messianic consciousness of Jesus had its beginning
and the commencement of its development only with his
baptism. The consciousness of his divine sonship at the age
of twelve has in itself nothing at all to do with the Messianic
consciousness. The former appears much earlier and inde-
pendently of the latter. Son of God and Messiah cannot,
therefore, properly be described as equivalent expressions, as
is claimed by the school of Loisy. On the whole, every
explanation which applies to the Saviour’s consciousness of
divine sonship only the standard of human relations fails
completely. Already the child Jesus in the temple reveals a
consciousness which must be considered, in view of its origin
and import, as a strictly metaphysical divine sonship.
3. Commencement of the Revelation of the Son of God
to the Disciples.
Almost twenty years elapsed before Jesus expressed himself
further about his divinely human person. It is as though he
wished to lift the veil no more from the mystery which is so
difficult for mankind to comprehend. Yet, after the Baptist
had publicly acknowledged him to be the Son of God (John
i, 34), after the voice from heaven had sounded, “ This is my
beloved son, in whom I am well pleased ” (Matt, iii, 17), after
the tempter had divined in him the Son of God, and those
possessed of devils had hailed him as the Son of God (Matt,
iv, 1-11), and the first disciples had joyfully greeted him as
such (John i, 41, 45, 49) —although certainly without appre-
hending the deep significance of the divine sonship—Jesus
felt himself compelled to unveil more and more the idea of
the Son of God. This took place first in the masterful inter-
I Wilhelm Schulz, Protest. Monatshefte, 443 f. (igos).


view with the Pharisee Nicodemus. An honoured teacher,
Nicodemus belonged to that minority of the pharisaical party
which drew near to the Saviour to a certain degree so long
as he made no especially high demands upon their faith. By
his benevolent sentiment and high education Nicodemus was
capable of gaining a deeper insight into the person of Jesus
than was the case at that time even among the disciples.
In the first place, the Pharisee frankly acknowledges the
standpoint of himself and of the group that shares his views
in regard to the Saviour: “ Rabbi, we know that thou art
come a teacher from God; for no man can do these signs
which thou dost unless God be with him ” (John iii, 2). He
sees, accordingly, in the Saviour some teacher sent by God —
a prophet. Jesus takes up this acknowledgement, as a start-
ing-point, in order, in a wonderful dialogue, which in method
adapts itself to the usages of the school of pharisaical Rabbis,
to lead his questioner from that commencement up to the
heights of his divine and Messianic revelation.
Recognized as an ambassador from God and a prophet, he
directs the conversation immediately to the central idea, which
is the import of the whole prophetic revelation and the aim of
all the doctrinal teaching in Israel—namely, the kingdom of
God and the Messianic revelation. He unfolds to the aston-
ished “ master in Israel ” the fundamental requisites for the
foundation of the Messianic kingdom and the fundamental
conditions for entering into that kingdom, and thereby makes
always more clear his claim to be not only a prophet, but the
prophet—the God-appointed Messiah of the world (John iii,
3- J o).
This being taken for granted, he now prepares the way for
the proper knowledge of his Messianic person. In opposition
to the hybrid idea of the Rabbis, who expected in the Messiah
merely a man illumined and favoured by God—a “ son of
God ” in the sense of our liberal theologians—Jesus declares
that he is a transcendental, supermundane and heavenly Being.
The Messianic perception of God which he brings to men, he
draws from his own personal knowledge, hot from a revela-
tion and communication by the grace of God. The divine
message which he brings from heaven, and the profoundest
mysteries of the Godhead which he discloses, he has seen with
his own eyes. “ Amen, amen, I say to thee that we speak
what we know, and we testify what we have seen ” (John
iii, n).
He who is thus acquainted with heaven, and knows every-
thing pertaining thereto, from direct observation, must evi-
dently have been there. And, in reality, Jesus declares, by
referring to Daniel’s prophecy of the Son of Man, that he was
in heaven before his life on earth, that he came down from
heaven and that he will return again to heaven—in a word,
1. 18


that he is a heavenly being. “No man hath ascended into
heaven, but he that descended from heaven, the Son of Man
who is in heaven” (John iii, 13). 1 Thereby the modern
liberal idea of the Messiah and Son of God, which sees in
Jesus only a man especially favoured by God, is at once
excluded.
Jesus, however, goes a step further, and lays before
Nicodemus the keystone of the gradually developed revelation
of his person. After having elevated his person, his will and
his existence above everything merely human and mundane,
he now lifts himself also above all created beings both in
heaven and on earth, and affirms positively his essential,
metaphysical, divine sonship. He plainly declares the Son of
Man to be the only begotten son of God whom the Father has
sent into the world. It is true, the expression “ the only
begotten Son of God ” in itself allows always the double mean-
ing—ethical sonship through the gracious selection and adop-
tion of the man Jesus instead of a child, or essential sonship
through the communication of the divine nature. But in the
peculiar connection in which the designation “ only begotten
Son of God” here stands, the first meaning is not to be
thought of. Jesus himself excluded it in advance by declaring
precisely his superhuman nature, and by representing himself
as a heavenly being, who had existed with the Father before
all worlds. In fact, he already positively referred to his
participation in the divine spiritual nature by ascribing to
himself in his life on earth a direct knowledge and perception
of God and of the divine : “ We speak what we know and we
testify what we have seen.” Now he takes up this thought
again and reveals fully its divine content. Not only must the
world believe on the only begotten Son of God because his
knowledge and his words proceed from a personal vision of
God, but the world must also believe on the Son of God
because he is the whole import and object of divine faith.
And, accordingly, blessedness and eternal life are not only
announced to believers through the only begotten Son of God,
but the world becomes blessed through him, and in him
possesses eternal life. “As Moses lifted up the serpent in the
desert, so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever
believeth in him may not perish, but may have life everlasting.
For God so loved the world, as to give his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believeth in him may not perish, but may have
life everlasting. For God sent not his Son into the world to
1 Jewish tradition held firmly to the real pre-existence of Daniel’s Son
of Man in accordance with the Book of Henoch xlviii, 6, “ For this
purpose the Son of Man was selected and hidden in him (God) before
the world was created, and he will be with him to all eternity.” See
Paul Fiebig, Der Menschensohn, Jesu Selbstbezeichnung mit besonderer
Beriicksichtigung des aramdischcn Sfrachgebrauches, 122 (Tubingen
and Leipzig, tgoi).


judge the world, but that the world may be saved by him.
He that believeth in him is not judged; but he that doth not
believe is already judged, because he believeth not in the name
of the only begotten Son of God ” (John iii, 14-18). It would
be absolute blasphemy if an ordinary human being, were he
ever so gifted by divine grace, should use such language.
Only an essentially divine man can speak thus of himself.
It is true, some exegetes, among them recently also Johannes
Belser, 1 doubt whether the last quoted passages are to be
regarded literally as the words of Jesus, or as the reflections
of the Evangelist. Yet this doubt rests really only on the
arbitrary supposition that Jesus at such an early stage and in
the presence of a Pharisee could hardly have had such a deep
insight into the mystery of his divinity—a view which does
not require to be refuted. But even if it were well grounded
and just, the interpretation which we have given would not
thereby be at all weakened. For what John makes the Saviour
say in this passage, Jesus Christ said repeatedly, later on,
in other passages of the Gospel of John. In his report of the
conversation with Nicodemus, John confirms, as Belser him-
self remarks: “ the essential import of the utterances of
Jesus. . . . The words of the Evangelist are really nothing
but the words of Christ, which we meet with in the sub-
sequent discourses reported by John.” 3
Not only that. We encounter them in substance also in the
discourses of Jesus given by the synoptists (Matt, xi, 27;
xvi, 16; xx, 28; xxi, 37; Luke x, 21). Whoever, therefore,
like the liberal critics, appeals to the synoptists, excluding
John, will be taught by them that Jesus on other occasions
and before other hearers spoke substantially the same words
that he uttered to Nicodemus in the wonderful conversation
by night.
Thus, on a par with that conversation, in respect to time
and content, is the revelation of himself which Jesus made to
the seventy-two disciples on their return from their first mis-
sionary effort. 3 The messengers of the Gospel joyfully
related to their master the miracles which they had performed
in his name. Then Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and broke out into
a loud and deeply touching prayer,, in which he thanked the
Father and glorified him because he had hidden the kingdom
of God with its blessings from the wise and prudent of this
world, and had nevertheless revealed it to the simple and to
babes. Then he turned to the disciples with the words : “ All
1 Das Evangelium des hi. Johannes , 107 (Freiburg, 1905). On the
other side are Schegg, Schanz, Pillion, Keil, Weiss, Knabenbauer, etc.
2 Belser, pp. 107, no.
* Matt, xi, 25; Luke x, 17. See H. Schuhmacher, Die Selbstoffen-
barung Jesu bet Matt., xi, 27 {Freiburg, 1912); Leop. Kopler, Die
johanneische Stelle bei den Synoftikern und die Gottessohnschaft Jesu,
in Theol. Quartalschrift, 1913-1914.


things are delivered to me hy my Father, neither doth anyone
know the Father, but the Son and he to whom it shall please
the Son to reveal him ” (Matt, xi, 27). These words are found
not only in Matthew; Luke transmits them exactly the same
in substance, in spite of, a small variation : “All things are
delivered to me by my Father. And no one knoweth the Son,
but the Father; and no one knoweth who the Son is, but the
Father, and who the Father is, but the Son and to whom the
Son will reveal him ” (Luke x, 22).
This joyful utterance of Jesus gives us a surprisingly deep
insight into his consciousness of divine sonship and his most
intimate relations to the Father. “ All things are delivered
to me by my Father.” Jesus thinks here probably first of
the power which he has received from the Father to work
miracles and to overcome the kingdom of Satan. For he had
himself, shortly before, given this power to the disciples, and
now the seventy-two come to him with the joyful statement
that they had been able in his name actually to have dominion
over sickness, death and Satan. The Master takes occasion
from this to lead his disciples a step further, and to declare
to them that the Father has given him not only the sphere
of divine power, thus far tested, but really divine omnipotence.
“ All things are delivered to me by my Father,” or, as he will
express himself subsequently : “ All power is given to me in
heaven and in earth ” (Matt, xxviii, 18). Even our most
pronounced opponents, like Heinrich J. Holtzmann, 1 Loisy, 2
Richard A. Hoffmann, 3 and Eduard von Hartmann, 4 see
themselves compelled to acknowledge that Jesus in this
passage thinks himself in full possession of divine omnipo-
tence.
But the words of Jesus are not exhausted by these citations.
Among the “all things” which are delivered by the Father
to the Son is not only omnipotence but also omniscience—
absolutely divine knowledge. Not only because Jesus says
universally and without reservation, “ all things,” but because
he still expressly adds : “ No one knoweth the Son, but the
Father, neither doth anyone know the Father, but the Son
and he to whom it shall please the Son to reveal him.” The
knowledge and the fulness of truth and of the divine nature in
the Son is so infinite that only the Father can fathom it—“ No
one knoweth the Son, but the Father.” On the other hand,
the knowledge of the Son is so perfect that he and he alone
comprehends and fully grasps the divine knowledge and
nature of the Father, and that all the divine knowledge and
divine perception of his creatures flows from the divine know-
1 Neutestamentliche Theologie, i, 274 f. (Freiburg u. Leipzig, 1897).
2 Evangelium und Kirche, 63 (Munchen, 1904).
3 Das Selbstbewusstsein Jesu nach den drei ersten Evangelien, 25
(Konigsberg i. Pr., 1904).
4 Das Christentum des N. T., 66, in (Sachsa i. Harz, 1905).


ledge of the Son, as from an inexhaustible source. “No one
knoweth the Father, but the Son and he to whom it shall
please the Son to reveal him.” “The Son,” remarks Loisy,
“ recognizes only God, the Father, as perfect, and precisely
for the reason that he is the Son, exactly as God, the Father,
only knows Christ, his Son, because he is the Father—God.
The fundamental thought is the same as in the passage in
John : ‘No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten
Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared
him.’ M 1
In a word, the Son has a godlike, divine knowledge of the
Father, precisely as the Father also has a divine knowledge
of the Son. The knowledge of both, that of the Father and
that of the Son, is identical; both are equally divine and
equally infinite—two immeasurable suns, which mutually
illumine each other.
Jesus is, therefore, conscious of possessing the two attri-
butes of nature and action, which belong to God alone, and in
which the nature, the activity and the life of God are merged—
omnipotence of will and power, and omniscience of intellect
and perception. There can, therefore, be no more talk of
his being a mere man whom God, out of grace and compas-
sion, has endowed more richly than other human beings. The
unlimited divine knowledge and power of the Son can have
their representative and find their explanation only in the
divine nature of the Son of God.
This becomes still clearer through the absolute universal
equality, which, according to what has been said, exists
between Father and Son. No more explanations and proofs
are needed, but simply an unprejudiced examination of the
words of Jesus, in order to gain the positive impression that
Jesus was conscious that the Father is as the Son, and the Son
as the Father, with the single exception of the personal rela-
tion conditioned by fatherhood and sonship. In other words,
there exists between Jesus and the Father in the closest,
natural sense that relation which exists between the Father
and his only begotten Son —equality according to nature,
difference in respect to the two persons. It detracts nothing
from this that Jesus says, “ All things are delivered to me by
my Father.” On the contrary, every son must speak so of
his father. He has everything from the Father, his nature
as well as the personal relation, which distinguishes him from
the Father and at the same time unites him with the Father.
That Jesus claims to be the Son of God, as set forth in our
text, in this and in no other sense, the best known critics in
the camp of our opponents do not dare to deny. Gustav
Dalman, who investigates the words of Jesus only from the
standpoint of the philologist, writes : “ Between Father and
1 L’Evangile et VEglise, 47; H. Wendt, Die Lehre Jesu, 418 (1901).


Son there exists such a unique, complete and mutual rejation
that t of necessity, others can gain a share of this full know-
ledge of the Father only through the mediation of the Son.
The two sentences about the knowledge of the Son by the
Father and about that of the Father by the Son are not to be
divided and interpreted separately. They are to be regarded
merely as a formal oriental expression for the reciprocity of
perfect knowledge. . . . That which is true of a father and
son in general is at once applied to Jesus and his heavenly
Father. Here also the relation to God which was peculiar to
Jesus is one that cannot be transferred or changed. ... It
appears to be bound up with his nature.” 1 Contemporaneously,
Edmund Stapfer, the liberal-protestant theologian of Paris,
writes : “ Let us recall the great statement of Jesus, ‘ No one
knoweth the Son, but the Father.’ I say that on the strength
of these words it is impossible to define Jesus. He remains
exalted above and outside of all subtleties, or better, above all
the impossibilities of metaphysics; and he retains by reason of
these words, ‘ No one knoweth the Son, but the Father,’ an
incomprehensibility, which is one of the surest signs of his
divinity, and is a necessary element for all true worship.” 2
Harnack, with no less frankness, acknowledges that “ a formal
equality of Father and Son, who are separated only by their
names, and a relation between Father and Son, which never
had a beginning and remains always the same, are now
expressed [in the words of Matthew and Luke]. ... If
Matthew has already written thus, then his own christology
resembles very closely that of John in one of the most im-
portant points [the divinity of Jesus], even if the passage
is interpreted more conservatively.” 3 Alfred Loisy also is
ready to concede that “ in the words, ‘ No one knoweth the
Son, but the Father, and no one knoweth the Father, but the
Son,’ the actual divinity of the Son is taught.” 4 “The
equality of Christ with eternal truth is declared therein. . . .
The mutual knowledge of Father and Son is not represented
as a relation which has come into existence in time and is
now realized; it has rather the immemorial character of the
analogous utterances which one finds in the Fourth Gospel;
it does not establish the pre-existence of Jesus, but rather
takes it for granted.”®
Now, however, that the liberal critics have seen the im-
l Die Worte Jesu, 232 f.
* La mart et la resurrection de Jisus-Christ, 340, 2nd ed. (Paris, 1898).
s Sfruche und Reden Jesu, 210, 211 (Leipzig, 1907). Thereby Harnack
also demolishes the interpretation which he gives to the same text in his
Wesen des Christentums, 81, which Loisy had refuted and declared to
be “ a factitious and superficial explanation of the divine sonship of
Jesus ” ; Loisy, L'Evangile et V Eglise, 41-44.
1 Autour d’un fetit livre, 130.
5 Les Evangiles synoftiques, i, 194, 909 (1907).


possibility of interpreting the passage in the Gospels other-
wise than in the sense of the true divinity of Jesus, this
passage must also at once be called by them unauthentic, and
for the simple reason that in it the divinity of Jesus is taught,
and because it destroys the jugglery of the liberal exegetes.
Loisy does not feel inclined to seek for the proof of the
unauthenticity of our text, but relies simply on his funda-
mental principle that all those texts must be unauthentic
which contain the divinity of the Son, or in any way put
the Son on an equality with the Father. 1 By virtue of this
principle, the words contained in Matthew .and Luke cannot
be the words of the Saviour, but were subsequently ascribed
to him, as a wrongful justification of the oldest faith of
the Church in the divinity of Christ. 2 Because these words
in the Gospels remind one of the poetically conceived utter-
ances in the Psalms and Prophets, they are supposed to repre-
sent an old Church poem. 3 Already before Loisy, Brandt 4
and Pfleiderer 5 had resorted, in their extreme embarrassment,
to the same supposition. Their “critical” attempt was,
however, either ignored or directly repudiated by their own
partisans, since these words of the Gospels in their poetical
form are not unique in the utterances of Jesus; on the con-
trary, not a few utterances of his are so framed. 6
Wellhausen, 7 Paul Wilhelm Schmiedel, 8 and after them in
particular Harnack, 9 seek, therefore, another way out of the
difficulty. Forced to the confession that the text quoted is
entirely authentic, and “ belongs to the best sources of in-
formation about Jesus that we possess ” 10 —namely, the so-
called Discourses of Jesus, from which it passed into the first
and third Gospels, they try to break off from it at least a
fragment. The portion, “No one knoweth the Son, but the
Father ” (according to Matthew), or “ No one knoweth who
the Son is, but the Father ” (according to Luke), did not have,
according to them, its origin in that oldest source, but was
brought in from some other. 11 Therefore, this portion does
not contain the absolutely authentic words of our Lord!
Nevertheless, no critic can bring forward a single argument
to prove that the Discourses did not contain this portion; nor
1 Les Evangilts synoftiques, i, 243.
3 L’Evangfle et VEglise, 41; Autour d’un fetit livre, 130; Les Evan-
giles synoftiques, 909. * L'Evangile et VEglise, 45-46.
4 Evangelische Geschichte, 561 f., 576 f. (1893).
5 Urchristentum, i, 435, 576, 667 (1902).
6 Harnack, Sfruche uni Reden Jesu, 191 (Leipzig, 1907); cf. Fritz
Barth, Die Haufifrobleme des Lebens Jesu, 264 f. (Giitersloh, 1907).
Against Loisy, especially Lepin, Jisus, Messie et Fils de Dieu, 323-332.
7 Das Evangelium Maithdi, 57 f. (1904).
• Protest. Monaishefte, 2 f{. (1900); Das vierle Evangelium, 48
(Tubingen, 1906).
• Sfrucke und Reden Jesu, 189-216.
10 Harnack, id., 215. 11 Harnack, id., 192.


is it possible to prove it, for we are entirely in the dark about
the Discourses themselves. If it be conceded, however, that
the passage in dispute was not taken from the Discourses,
but was introduced from some other source, it does not at all
follow from this that it is not just as truly an utterance of the
Lord as the whole remainder of the text. The Sayings and
Discourses of Jesus are also, according to Harnack, only the
second source from which the Gospels of Matthew and Luke
are derived. The question whether both these Evangelists
took our text exclusively from the Discourses, or have made
use of still other sources for it, is merely a problem pertaining
to the history of manuscripts, and has nothing to do with the
credibility of the Gospel report. That credibility would be
endangered only if the whole, complete text in question had
not from the first existed in the Gospels themselves. Now,
however, Harnack writes, after investigating the manuscripts
and the testimony of the Church Fathers : “ All our witnesses
for Matthew and for Luke have it. The most obvious, because
the simplest, supposition, therefore, is that Matthew brought
it into his text.” 1 Because, on the other hand, one single
manuscript 2 of Luke has by chance omitted the words, “No
one knows who the Son is,” these words are said not to have
been written by Luke at all; and for that reason they are said
not to have been written really by Matthew also; indeed, the
whole passage in which they are found is to be regarded as
questionable and as furnishing no more proof in favour of the
divinity of Jesus. The theologian Fritz Barth, of Bern, thus
disposes of this unheard-of failure in Gospel criticism : “ Har-
nack’s reconstruction of the passage is as little convincing
as his restoration of the original ‘Our Father,’ and the
conclusions which Schmiedel draws from the reconstructed
text completely transform the sense of the passage almost
into the very opposite meaning.” 3
It would be incomprehensible how able critics like these
could adopt such abnormal views, if Harnack had not, at the
conclusion of his treatment of our Gospel text, made the con-
fession that he rejects it, not so much because of any critical
reasons connected with the text, as because the divinity of
Jesus is expressed in it: “ That is indeed sufficient to see
clearly the historical value of the utterances reported by
Matthew. . . . The canonical interpretation of the utterance
is Johannine and [therefore!] untenable.” 4 In precisely the
same way David Friedrich Strauss also had previously de-
clared ; “ This utterance, which in the first and third Gospels
stands quite isolated, suggests to us a fundamental view
1 Harnack, id., 204. 3 Cod. Vercell.
3 Die Hauftfrobleme des Lebens Jesu, 264. Equally sharply is Har-
nack’s attempt repudiated by E. Kiihl, Das Selbstbewussisein Jesu,
22 ff.
* Harnack, of. eit., 210, 211, note 2.


similar to that of the fourth Gospel, and appears therefore
as an addition—the idea of Jesus ... to exalt himself above
the human,” and must on that account be rejected. 1 Such is
“ unprejudiced ” criticism !
4. Progress of the Revelation of the Divine Sonship to the
Disciples and People in Galilee.
The revelation of the divine sonship of Jesus moves in ever
widening circles. Towards the end of his Galilean activity it
already addresses itself to the great masses of the Galilean
people.
It is true, Jesus may not yet lead them into those depths of
the mystery of the divine sonship into which he, according to
our text, allowed the seventy-two disciples to gaze. The people
possessed then about that degree of knowledge concerning
Christ which the Pharisee Nicodemus had when he addressed
himself to the Saviour. They regarded the Saviour as a
prophet. Some saw in him more than an ordinary prophetic
figure, and extolled in him a specially endowed ambassador
of God who was to precede the real Messiah. Sometimes
the multitude let itself be so carried away by the miracles of
Jesus —though for a time only—that it hailed him as the
expected national Messiah. This view of the people was
most forcibly, expressed after the miraculous increase of the
loaves of bread at Bethsaida, when the multitude wanted to
proclaim him as the Messiah-King with the cry : “ This is of a
truth the prophet that is to come into the world ” (John vi, 14).
Upon this Jesus takes occasion to give to the people in a
wonderful discourse precisely the same instruction which he
had once imparted to Nicodemus, who was of their opinion :
Jesus is the true Messiah sent by God; as such, he is not a
mere man, but a truly supernatural being, who had existed
previously in heaven, who by his own power saves mankind,
and is himself in his own person the salvation and eternal
life of men. “ This is the work of God, that you believe in
him whom he hath sent. . . . My Father giveth you the true
bread from heaven. For the bread of God is that which
cometh down from heaven and giveth life to the world. . . .
lam the bread of life. . . . This is the will of my Father
that everyone who seeth the Son and believeth in him may
have life everlasting, and I will raise him up in the last day.
... Not that any man hath seen the Father, but he [the
Son] who is of God, he hath seen the Father; Amen, amen,
I say unto you, he that believeth in me hath everlasting life.
I am the bread of life . . . the bread which cometh down
from heaven. ... lam the living bread which came down
from heaven ” (John vi, 29-51).
1 Leben Jesu fur das deutsche Volk, 203 £., cf. 198 fi. (1564).


This eucharistic prophecy and superhuman instruction in
regard to the Son of God were too lofty for the people and
even for most of the disciples. They wanted to recognize in
Jesus only a son of God who had developed upward from mere
humanity, and who, in spite of his divine sonship, still re-
mained a mere man (John vi, 42); in a word, the son of God
and the sonship of God in the sense of our liberal critics.
On this rock their faith was wrecked. “ After this, many of
his disciples went back and walked no more with him ” (John
vi, 67).
Only the Twelve remained and stood this test of their faith.
To the question of Jesus, “Will you also go away?” Simon
Peter answers : “ Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the
words of eternal life, and we have believed and have known
that thou art the Christ, the Son 1 of God ” (John vi, 68-70).
To the renewed inquiry of the Lord, “ Whom do you say that
I am?” Peter answers with the equally definite acknowledge-
ment : “ Thou art Christ, the son of the living God ” 2 (Matt,
xvi, 16). And Jesus makes this testimony of Peter his own
by praising it and pronouncing Peter blessed on account of it
(Matt, xvi, 17-19).
What is, however, the import of this? In any case, it is
certain that first of all and principally the Messiahship of
Jesus is thereby pronounced. Not only does Peter’s acknow-
ledgement in regard to the Messiah stand in all four Gospels
in the foreground, but Mark and Luke relate absolutely
nothing but this acknowledgement. “Thou art the Christ”
is the simple declaration in Mark’s Gospel (viii, 29); while in
Luke the statement is substantially the same, “ Thou art the
Christ [Anointed] of God ” (Luke ix, 20). In John, the title
“Son of God” is not positively certain, from the critical
standpoint, but, on the other hand, the title “Messiah” is
certain. And even Matthew, who gives the definite addition
“ Son of the living God,” nevertheless finally lays again chief
emphasis on the Messiahship. For, at the conclusion of his
report, he informs us that the Saviour forbade the Twelve to
speak publicly of what had happened, yet formulates this pro-
hibition in such a way that it refers to the Messiahship only :
“ Then he commanded his disciples that they should tell no one
that he was Jesus the Christ” (Matt, xvi, 20). Peter’s
acknowledgement at Cesarea Philippi is, therefore, un-
doubtedly to be regarded primarily as an acknowledgement
of Jesus as the Messiah.
What, however, does the future prince of the Apostles
think of the Messianic person and nature of Jesus? Is the
1 According to one reading, “ The Messiah, the holy one of God.”
* The scene described by John vi, 27-70, and the synoptical descrip-
tion in Matt, xvi, 16, etc., Mark viii, 29 and Luke ix, 20, stand not
only in close connection, but might be actually parallel passages. See
proof of this in Seitz, Das Evangelium vom Gottessohn, 252.


Saviour for him a mere man, who conceives of the Messianic
vocation according- to the rabbinical-Jewish or modern liberal
view, or is a heavenly, metaphysical nature united with the
man Jesus in one person, as the Christian faith supposes?
The answer really cannot be doubted. For fully two years
Peter had been a witness of the struggle of Jesus with that
humanized idea of the Messiah. In his parables, in the
demands which he makes on his hearers and in his whole
activity Jesus had more and more emphasized his super-
mundane and absolutely divine origin and nature. And now
he has just concluded the mighty discourse in which he
designates himself in direct terms, and also in the metaphor
of the bread from heaven, as the Messiah who, in accordance
with his origin and nature, emanates from heaven, who came
to earth only for the purpose of leading men to heaven, and
who is himself the eternal life of men. The Jews, who, a
moment before, had still given enthusiastic testimony to his
Messiahship (John vi, 14), turn away from him indignantly
because he requires them to believe in the superhuman,
metaphysical origin and nature of the Messiah Jesus. Yes,
even the disciples become disloyal to him at such a demand.
Only the Twelve stand firm. In contrast to Jewish unbelief,
which saw in the Saviour only an extraordinary prophet (Matt,
xvi, 14 and parallels), or was willing, at most for a moment,
to recognize him as a human Messiah (John vi, 14 and 65-67),
Peter from the midst of the Apostles raises his voice in the
decisive confession ; “ Thou art Christ; thou art the Messiah,
the anointed of God!” In such circumstances is it sup-
posable that he should have acknowledged the Master as the
Messiah merely in the Jewish-messianic sense of the term?
It is impossible, and Jesus himself assures us of the con-
trary. He had already on many occasions heard himself
hailed as the Messiah by the disciples, by those possessed by
devils, by those whom he had healed and by the astonished
multitudes, without ever showing any special joy on that
account. He was then hailed only as the supposed human
Messiah. Now, however, he congratulates Peter on his
confession of the Messiah, and derives this from a purely
supernatural revelation, in contrast to the Jewish, human
conception. He declares, therefore,' unequivocally, that Peter
believes in the superhuman, metaphysical personality of the
Messiah —in the Messiah who has come from heaven, such as
Jesus had long and with ever increasing clearness in word,
work and life proclaimed himself to be. It is true, to con-
clude from Peter’s subsequent conduct, he was still unable
to grasp the idea of the full divinity of the Messiah — Jesus;
but, even if he merely surmised it, it is, nevertheless, con-
tained in his confession which comprised the entire divine
Messianic announcement of Jesus.


Therewith he throws also a clear light upon his additional
designation of Jesus as the “ Son of the living God.” It is
of little importance whether we have to do here merely with
an added remark, which is equivalent to the Messianic indica-
tion, or whether “Son of God” stands as an independent
title beside that of the Messiah. According to what has been
said, the expression “Son of the living God” cannot be
apprehended, in the sense of liberalism, as an ethical or
theocratic son of God —that is, as a mere man who, in conse-
quence of his better knowledge and the love of God, assumes
the task of establishing the “ kingdom of God.” If the
Messiah in this passage is regarded as thoroughly super-
human and metaphysical, the same thing must be true of the
“ Son of the living God.” The height of Peter’s faith in the
Messiah indicates the height and depth of his faith in the Son
of God.
If, therefore, we fix our attention upon this alone, without
the other, we come to the same result. The Son of God, as
Peter acknowledges him, stands in complete contrast to the
Son of Man, as the Jews conceive of him. “ Whom do men
say that the Son of Man is?” asks Jesus. The disciples
answer: “ Some John the Baptist, and other some Elias, and
others Jeremias or one of the prophets” (Matt xvi, 14 and
parallels). Jesus said to them : “ But whom do you say that
I am?” Then Simon Peter answered and said; “Thou art
Christ, the Son of the living God.” The antithesis is as
perfect as it possibly could be—the Son of Man in the question
of Jesus; the Son of God in the answer of Peter. The
antithesis lets us “ perceive clearly that he who calls himself
only the Son of Man is, in reality, the opposite of that—
namely, the Son of God.” 1
If we take the title “ Son of Man,” as Jesus applied it to
himself, as an expression of his true humanity and at the same
time of his supernatural origin and nature, then the Son of
God, standing above the Son of Man, must evidently be the
Son of God in the proper sense of the word. Should one,
however, wish, with the liberal school, to understand by the
term “ Son of Man ” merely the man Jesus, the contrast
between Son of Man and Son of God would be not less
marked, since the Gospel “ assures us that the Son of Man
is at the same time the Son of God, and that the real humanity
of the Saviour harmonizes with his divine origin.” 2
Only by this supernatural conception of Peter’s acknow-
ledgement of the Son of God does it become comprehensible
that Jesus attributes this to a supernatural, divine source :
“ Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona, because flesh and blood
1 Dalman, Die Worte Jesu , 208 (1898); H. J. Holtzmann says the same
in Lehrbuch der N. T. Theologie, i, 257 f. (1897); and Loisy, Les
Evangiles syno-pliques, ii, 3 (190 S). s Loisy, id.


hath not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in heaven.”
If Peter can have his confession, not from men, but only from
God, it necessarily exceeds the earthly, carnal views of men,
who represented the Saviour as a mere man. However in-
complete the conception may have been which Peter formed
of the Son of the living God, his Son of God certainly sur-
passed any merely human standard. But if his Son of God is
to any extent more than a man, then the liberal critics also
must concede that it is “a metaphysical idea, a name for a
divine being, who is other than men in general, and by nature
has originated from God ” x — i.e., is the essential Son of God.
“Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God.” In contrast
to the great number of the sceptical and half-believing mass
of the Galilean admirers of Jesus, Peter means by these words,
“Thou art the true, actual Son of God, and therefore the
Redeemer of the world.” It is only a literal repetition, a sub-
stantial confirmation and a clearer and profoundly
spiritual conception of his confession at Cesarea Philippi,
when Peter subsequently asserts his own faith and that of
his fellow Christians in “ Jesus Christ, our God and Saviour ”
(2 Peter i, i).
In fact, in the camp of our opponents the voices are in-
creasing in number which confess that in Peter’s confession
at Cesarea the Messiahship and divine sonship are un-
hesitatingly expressed in the sense of Christian faith. Among
others, Van Manen, 2 H. J. Holtzmann, 3 G. Dalman 4 and
very recently even Alfred Loisy 5 speak to the same effect. So
soon, however, as sceptical science deigns to make the con-
fession that faith and the Gospel harmonize in this point, at
once the usual assertion is made, that the Gospel comes here
into conflict with actual history, and that the Evangelists, in
particular Matthew, have let themselves be prejudiced in this
account by the christology of the oldest Church.
This accusation is justified only by the fact that the tran-
scendental confession of Peter concerning the Messiah and
the Son of God, and respectively that of Jesus himself, who
approves of it, stands in contradiction to new rationalistic
theology about Jesus. Formerly Loisy asserted that this
passage in the Gospels contains nothing more than the idea
of the theocratical human Messiah, on which account its
genuineness and credibility were not to be doubted. 6 But
now Loisy is compelled to concede that this Gospel passage
teaches clearly the metaphysical divine sonship of Jesus, and
hence it is to be rejected as unhistorical and unworthy of
1 P. W. Schmiedel, Prot. Monatshefle, 296 (1S98).
2 Theol. Tijdschrijt, 184 (1894).
s Lehrbuch der N. T. Theol., i, 257 (1897).
4 id., 208.
5 Les Evangiles synoftiques, ii, 3.
• VEvangile el TEglise, 42, 57.


belief. 1 Konrad Furrer, in an equally arbitrary manner, allows
the words of Jesus to Peter to stand or fall according- as they
appear to testify for or against his own doctrinal opinion. 3
Against such a “ critical ” windmill it would be merely labour
lost to tilt.
The liberal' investigator, J. Weiss, who is certainly above
suspicion, rightly characterizes it as “ arbitrary radicalism ”
to try to invalidate the historical accuracy of Peter’s testi-
mony, 3 and Oskar Holtzmann says of the answer of Jesus to
this confession : “ What he [Jesus] replied to the confession
is given us only by Matthew (xvi, 7-19); but the import of the
words guarantees their genuineness.” 4
5. Intensification oj the Revelation of the Son of God to the
People and Disciples in Judea and Jerusalem.
The testimony to Jesus as the Son of God had caused much
disturbance in Galilee. The mass of the people, and even
most of the disciples, abandoned the Saviour; but the Twelve
came out of the crisis, on the contrary, strengthened in faith.
Jesus now turned with them to the country of Judea, in order
there, and, above all, in Jerusalem and in the temple itself,
to proclaim before the people, priests and scribes his divine
mission and divine sonship. He did this preferably at the
great religious national festivals, to which the Jews from all
parts of the country came in crowds. Already during the
Galilean period of his activity he had once gone to the Holy
City for a high festival, and on this occasion had begun his
divine revelation. The time had not then come, however, to
announce his divine sonship in metaphysical terms. He seized
first upon the practical, palpable and therefore more com-
prehensible side of the subject; he testifies and proves by
miracles that he does the works of his Father, is equal to his
Father in heaven in respect to power and efficiency, and
therefore is the divine Son of the divine Father. “ Amen,
amen, I say unto you . . . what things soever the Father
doth, these the Son also doth in like manner. For the Father
loveth the Son, and showeth him all things which himself doth.
. . . For as the Father raiseth up the dead and giveth life,
so the Son also giveth life to whom he will. . . . Amen,
amen, I say unto you that the hour cometh, and now is, when
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear shall live. For as the Father hath life in himself, so he
1 Les Evangiles synoptiques, ii, 3.
2 Das Leben Jesu Christi, 178, 2nd ed., (1905); similarly, Wilhelm
Hess, Jesus von Nazareth, 60 f. (1906).
3 Das dlteste Evangelium, 50 (1903).
4 Leben Jesu, 253 (Tubingen, 1901); also, W. Bousset, Jesus, p. 78,
3rd ed., says : “ We have the right to regard this report as historically
credible.”


hath given to the Son also to have life in himself ” (John v,
19-21, 25).
The Son does all that the Father does, even the Father’s
works of omnipotence. He does all this in accordance with
his own will, like the Father, because he has seen it when
with the Father, and he is able to do it all because he has in
himself life, power and omnipotence like the Father. This
announcement made by John, which Jesus subsequently
repeats again and again in different forms, is only another
variety of that revelation of his divinity to the seventy-two
disciples, recorded in the synoptic Gospels : “ All things are
delivered unto me by my Father, and no one knoweth who
the Son is, but the Father, and no one knoweth who the
Father is, but the Son.”
The same ability and power, proceeding from the same
inward, divine source, which belongs to the Son as well as to
the Father, prove the divinity both of the Son and of the
Father. His Jewish hearers, in spite of their obstinacy, were
well aware that Jesus declared himself to be in this sense the
essential Son of God : “ Hereupon therefore the Jews sought
the more to kill him, because he did not only break the
Sabbath, but also said that God was his Father, making
himself equal to God ” (John v, 18).
In reality, from this time on, the ferment which had begun
among the people in Judea and the increasing hostility of their
leaders press forwards ever more certainly to the catastrophe.
Yet this was not to break out until Jesus had given a still
more universal and incontrovertibly true proof of the divinity
of his mission and of his nature. The Saviour makes use of
the fact of his presence at the most brilliant annual festival
at Jerusalem to take up again his teaching on this point.
In several violent discussions in the temple during the days
of the Feast of Tabernacles, he gives further testimony in
regard to his work and his person (John vii and viii). Amid
continual confirmations of the more palpable proofs already
given of his equality with God, he now at the same time
promotes the ideal, doctrinal knowledge of his metaphysical
divine sonship.
In the course of the dialogue the Pharisees put to him the
question most plainly, “Who art'thou?” Jesus gives the
profound answer: “ The beginning, who also speak unto
you” (John viii, 25). Already just before he had given the
unmistakable declaration : “ You are from beneath, I am
from above. You are of this world; lam not pf this world ”
(John viii, 23). He is supermundane and superhuman, not
merely in his Messianic vocation, but also in respect to his
origin and nature. Jesus answers the demand of the Pharisees
to know something more precise regarding this nature and
origin by characterizing himself as absolutely supernatural


and divine, as the principle of life and the first cause of all:
“ I am, as I have always told you from the beginning, the
origin of all that exists.” The Evangelist adds expressly
that Jesus thereby spoke of his divinity, but that he was not
understood by the Pharisees (John viii, 27).
As the origin of the universe, Jesus not only shared before
all time the glory of the Father before the world with all its
visible and invisible creatures existed (John xvii, 5), he had
shared it from all eternity. “ Abraham, your father, rejoiced
that he might see my day,” he said further to the Jews; “ he
saw it and was glad.” Then they mocked him, saying:
“ Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen
Abraham?” Jesus said to them: “Amen, amen, I say to
you, before Abraham was made, I am” (John viii, 56-58).
Now, if he, who was not yet fifty years old, had already lived
before Abraham—that is, thousands of years previously—then
he must have had, besides and before his human mode of
existence, still another, older and supermundane existence and
nature. And if he says of this existence and nature, “ I am,”
not “I was,” or “I became,” as Abraham, does not this
mean precisely that for him there is no time, that he is from
eternity? Does he not by this say of himself what God has
said of himself and alone can say of himself, “ I am, that I
am ” —the eternal being?
And thus also the Jews actually understood the Lord. They
were convinced that Jesus meant to make himself equal with
God. On that account they tried to inflict upon him the
punishment of stoning, assigned for the blasphemer (John
viii, 59). And Jesus does not retract his words. He therefore
confirms the fact that he really professed to be God and, in so
far as that goes, was understood correctly by the people.
In order to remove any doubt of the correctness of this
apprehension, he announces to the people that he is the light
of the world. “I am the light of the world. He that followeth
me walketh not in darkness, but shall have the light of life ”
(John viii, 12). Thus speaks Jesus at the end of the Feast of
Tabernacles, which recalled the miraculous leading of Israel
through the desert and the revelation of God in the cloud of
light. For God is light. As the sun furnishes material light,
so God is the original abode and source of spiritual light—
truth. In many passages of the Old Testament, as well as of
the New, and in extraneous biblical literature, the being of
God is represented as light. 1
Exactly so does Jesus conceive of his nature and his sig-
nificance for the world. He is the essential, living and life-
giving saving truth, from which all salvation comes and in
which all salvation exists. Again and again he impresses
1 Julius Grill, Uniersuchungen iiber die Entstehung des vierten Evan-
geliums, i, 259-271, 308-312 (Tubingen, 1902).


this lesson on the Jews, and represents it readily by com-
municating-, in close connection, to the man who was born
blind, bodily light, as a symbol of the light that is spiritual
and divine (John ix). Nor does he conclude the announcement
of his person and his nature without again issuing to the blind
masses of the people and their blind leaders the solemn warn-
ing : “ Believe in the light, that you may be the children of
light. . . . He that believeth in me, doth not believe in me,
but in him that sent me. And he that seeth me, seeth him that
sent me. lam come a light into the world, that whosoever
believeth in me may not remain in darkness ” (John xii, 36,
44-46).
No man, no divinely sent prophet—therefore also no son of
God in the sense of the modern rationalists—can justly char-
acterize himself as the Light of the World, or assert that he
dispenses light out of his own abundance. Whoever does
that must feel himself to be God. For that reason, therefore,
Christ also, as the Son of God and Light of the World,
identifies himself immediately with the Father —with God.
“Whosoever seeth me, seeth the Father.”
Light is life and imparts life. Light appears in the biblical
revelation and, above all, in the words of the Saviour, as the
effect and the cause of life, as a force at once bestowing life
and conferring vitality.
God is, therefore, called the highest and only possessor and
giver of this force, and also simply “ the Life,” “ the Living
One.” In contrast to the lifeless idols of the heathen, and
to creatures who are in need of life, the true God is defined
in all the Holy Scriptures of, both the Old and New Testa-
ments as the essential Life and the Maker of the living. 1
The term “ Living God ” was the most unequivocal and most
popular expression for the monotheistic idea of God. Jesus
also loves to call his Father “ the living Father,” who “ hath
life in himself ” (John vi, 58; v, 26).
But he immediately adds that the Son also is “living,”
like God, and that he has, like the Father, life in himself :
“ As the Father hath life in himself, so he hath given to the
Son also to have life in himself” (John v, 26). Henceforth
this doctrine occurs again and again in the most varied ex-
pressions, and is illustrated by many ftietaphors and examples,
until it is finally moulded in the significant christological form :
“I am the way, the truth and the life ” (John xiv, 6). Quite
unmistakably the Lord thus applies to himself the most
popular and also in itself the most convincing attribute of
divinity—absolute Being and Life.
Moreover, he is an absolute Dispenser of life. As his
Father is the all-powerful Lord of natural life, and the in-
I.
19
1 See the exhaustive treatment of this subject by Grill, Untersuch•
ungen iiber die Entstehung des vierten Evangeliums, i, 225-259.


finitely good Author and Accomplisher of the supernatural life
of salvation, so the Son also is the personal principle of life
and salvation for mankind. He proclaims himself to be the
fountain of “ living water,” which “ springs up into life ever-
lasting ” (John iv, 10); the Vine, from which everlasting
vitality goes into the branches—that is, into the believers who
are united with him (John xv); the “Bread of life” (John
vi, 35, 48), the bread which came down from heaven (John vi,
51, 59), and “ gives life to the world ” (John vi, 33, 54). In
divine omnipotence he can affirm, “ Amen, amen, 1 say to
you, if any man keep my word, he shall not see death for ever ”
(John viii, 51). “ I give them [my sheep] life everlasting,
and they shall not perish for ever, and no man shall pluck
them out of my hand ” (John x, 28).
As a proof that he is the supernatural, absolute principle
of the life of mankind, he awakens Lazarus from physical
death, and, turning to Martha, expressly says : “ I am the
resurrection and the life; he that believeth in me, although he
be dead, shall live; and everyone that liveth and believeth in
me shall not die for ever. Believest thou this? She saith to
him : Yea, Lord, I have believed that thou art Christ, the
Son of the living God, who art come into this world ” (John
xi, 25 ff.).
In fact, this is the only possible answer to the Lord’s
question. Whoever of himself creates physical life, and from
himself imparts eternal spiritual life, and within himself bears
essential life, cannot be a created being. “ The vivifying
action of the power streaming forth from the Son is not
explicable merely by an intermediary action of the Son, but by
the absolute character of the foundation and fulness of his life,
willed and ordained by the Father himself. Whoever, like
Jesus, restores the dead to life, must essentially be creative,
life-giving power.” 1
Eternal First Cause, Light and Life, like the Father—there-
fore consubstantial and one in nature with the Father. “ I and
the Father are one ” (John x, 30). In this the christological
preaching of Jesus to the people reaches its climax. These
words are not to be understood merely as indicative of the
moral unity between Father and Son, but of the consub-
stantiality of both. Father and Son are one in the essential
principle, which lies similarly at the basis of the divine activity
of the Father as well as of the Son. They are one in the full
metaphysical sense, so that Jesus can assert: “ The Father is
in me and lam in the Father” (John x, 38). The consub-
stantiality and oneness are thus so clearly declared that the
Jews, shocked by the expression, cried out: “We stone thee
for blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, makest
thyself God ” (John x, 33). Accordingly, the common people
1 Grill, of. cit., p. 288.


also understood the Saviour to claim by nature to be God—
God in the same sense as the Father in heaven is God, in
contrast to every creature. And Jesus affirms that this is the
sense of his words, and that the people have understood him
entirely correctly (John x, 33-39).
Modern opponents of the divinity of Jesus also cannot resist
the same impression. They have only one thing to reply to
it: that this revelation of Jesus to the Jewish people is related
only by John. But, quite apart from the fact that the distrust
of John, as we have demonstrated already, is not justified, the
portrait of the Saviour drawn by John agrees in all its prin-
cipal features with that of the synoptists. Thus, in particular,
John’s account of the teaching of Jesus to the people in regard
to the Son of God is traced upon a synoptical foundation.
Professor Fritz Barth, of Bern, has to confess : “ We have
not the right to reject this contribution of John; for, although
the ideas in the fourth Gospel may be more firmly grounded
and clearer, . . . his portrait of Christ is, nevertheless,
essentially the same.” 1 Precisely for the last period of his
life, in which Jesus, according to the fourth Gospel, made to
the Jewish people the conclusive revelations of his divinity,
the synoptists also have preserved the corresponding episodes,
which reveal the same truth not less clearly and with still
greater lucidity to the people.
In view of his coming condemnation, Jesus, at the begin-
ning of Passion Week, relates to the Jews the parable of the
vintners; “ There was a man, an householder, who planted a
vineyard and made a hedge round about it, and dug in it a
press, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and
went into a strange country. And when the time of the fruits
drew nigh, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they
might receive the fruits thereof. And the husbandmen, laying
hands on his servants, beat one, and killed another, and stoned
another. Again he sent other servants, more than the former;
and they did to them in like manner. And last of all he sent to
them his son, saying: They will reverence my son. But the
husbandmen, seeing the son, said among themselves : This is
the heir; come, let us kill him, and we shall have his in-
heritance. And, taking him, they cast him forth out of the
vineyard and killed him ” (Matt, xxi, 33-39; Mark xii, 1-12;
Luke xx, 9-19).
No one could fail to understand the meaning of this parable.
The householder typifies God, the vineyard signifies Israel, the
husbandmen are the Jewish people, the servants are the line
of prophets, and by the “son,” the “one son, most dear to
him,” is meant Jesus himself (Mark xii, 6). Jesus, therefore,
in contrast to the prophets, is not a servant, but the Son of
God, and, moreover, the only, dearly beloved Son. If he were
1 Die Hauftfrobleme des Lebens Jesu, 266, 3rd ed. (Giitersloh, 1907),


merely a human Messiah—that is, a son of God in the figura-
tive sense—he would then be only the greatest and latest in
the ascending series of prophets. The contrast drawn between
the servants and the only, dearly loved Son would then be
quite absurd.
The rights pertaining to the Son reveal this still more
clearly. “ The position of the Son is . . . considered as one
of right, which lays claim to the whole family property. In
the case of the Son of God this can be a matter only of world
supremacy, and, indeed, such a one as no Jewish emperor
could exercise, but as God exercises it.” 1 Men, even the most
esteemed, and prophets, have only duties as servants, but no
rights. The Son, however, by reason of his nature, his birth
and origin, comes into the absolute, divine joint-possession
and co-regency of the world. There is evidently here no
question of a mere adoptive relation, but only of the Son of
God, Jesus, in the full metaphysical sense of the word.
Our opponents are not able to withstand this impression.
Some of them, therefore, try again to dispute the genuineness
of the parable of the vintners. First Jiilicher affirmed that
this parable was a pure allegory; that Jesus, however, never
made use of the allegorical, but only of the parabolic form of
discourse, and therefore he cannot have uttered the parable
of the vintners. 2 It is true, the untenableness of this theory
of the Marburg scholar has been strikingly proved even by
liberal critics ; 3 but that in no way prevents Alfred Loisy from
printing it anew, 1 and he asserts with the greatest confidence
that the parable of the vintners “belongs, it is true, to an
ancient tradition, which originated even before the final edit-
ing of our Gospels; yet it is not warranted to be an utterance
of Christ. ... In its traditional form the allegory of the
vintners appears to be a fragment of Christian apologetics.” 5
Because the allegory of the criminal vintners sounds “ Johan-
nine ” —that is, clearly declares the divinity of Jesus —it can-
not be an utterance of the Lord, although it is attributed to
the Lord unanimously by all three synoptists, and is also con-
sidered even by non-catholic critics, almost without exception,
as a genuine utterance of Jesus. 6
The High Priests and Pharisees felt themselves so hard hit
by this parable of the vintners that they resolved to put the
1 Dalman, Die Worle Jesu, i, 230 f.
2 Jiilicher, Die Gleichnisreden Jesu, Introduction (Freiburg i. Br.),
(1886).
3 Among others by Chr. A Bugge, Die Hauftfaraheln Jesu (1903);
P. Fiebig, Alijiidische Gleichnisse und die Gleichnisse Jesu (1904).
4 Etudes evangiliques, 57 (1902); Le's Evangiles synoftiques, ii, 318
(1908).
5 Loisy, Evangiles synojtiques, l.c.
6 Especially by H. J. Hcltzmann, Lehrbuch der neutest. Theologie,
i, 266; G. Dalman, Die Worie Jesu, i, 230; Wendt, Die Lehre Jesu, 419
(1901); O.'Boltzmann, Das Leben Jesu, 333-335 (1901); B. Weiss, Das
Leben Jesu, ii, 423, 4th ed. (1902).


Saviour to death at once (Matt, xxi, 45 and parallels). Then
Jesus came with fearless candour into their midst, and once
more put to them the decisive question : “ What think you of
Christ? Whose son is he? They say to him, ‘ David’s.’ He
saith to them, ‘ How then doth David in spirit call him Lord,
saying, ‘The Lord said to my Lord, Sit on my right hand,
until I make thy enemies thy footstool?’ [Ps. cix, I]. If
David then call him Lord, how is he his Son?” (Matt, xxii,
42-45 and parallels).
Protestant criticism has, for the most part, tried to interpret
these words of the Saviour as if Jesus wished to deny that
the Messiah was to descend from David, and that he himself
was a descendant of David. 1 Nothing is, however, more un-
justifiable than such a supposition. Even Albrecht Schweitzer
remarks : “ Far from repudiating in these words the descent
from David, Jesus, on the contrary, presupposes it in his
case.” 2 The conviction that the Messiah is David’s son was,
in fact, the common ground from which Jesus, as well as the
Jews, proceeded, in order to prolong the discussion concern-
ing the Messiah and concerning Jesus as the Messiah. It had
never occurred to a Jew to question the fact that the Messiah
would be a descendant of David, for the descent from David
had been predicted too often and too clearly in the sacred
books as a characteristic of the Messiah.
If Jesus had wished to disturb that belief, he would at once
have stood before the people as a false Messiah and a heretic.
On the contrary, he allows himself to be greeted and honoured
as the “ son of David.” It is true, this Messianic official title,
“ son of David,” did not designate merely a descendant of
David, but, above all, the Messiah himself. Yet, “as a matter
of course, it was thereby presupposed that the Messiah
actually was a descendant of David, and Jesus would have
hardly assumed that precise title if he had not found in his
physical descent from David, according to prophecy, the
verification of the appellation.” 3
1 With. Baldensperger, Das Selbstbewusstsein Jesu, 130 f.; H. J.
Holtzmann, Lehrbuch der N. T. Theologie, i, 244 ff. (1897); P. W.
Schmidt, Geschichte Jesu, 116, 156 f. (1899); Johannes Weiss, Die
Predigt Jesu vom Reiche Goties, 160 (1900); O. Holtzmann, Leben Jesu,
64, 319, 353 f. (1901); O. Pfleiderer, Urchristentum, i, 633, 2nd ed.
(1902); Stark, Prot. Monatshejte, 308 (1902); E. Schiirer, Das mes-
sianische Selbstbewusstsein Jesu Christt, 17 (1903); Weinel, Jesu im
19 fahrhundert, 285 (1903); Ed. von Hartmann, Das Chrisientum des
N. T., 55-60 (1905); W. Hess, Jesus von Nazareth, 97 (1906).
2 Von Reimarus zu Wrede, 392 (1906); similarly, G. Dalman, Die
Worte Jesu, i, 234, 260 (1898); H. Zimmermann, Der historische Wert
der dltesten Ueberlieferung von der Geschichte Jesu im Markus-
evangelium, 89 ff. (1905); Hans H. Wendt, Die Lehre Jesu, 425, 2nd ed.
(1901).
3 Wendt, of. cit., pp. 424-426. The real descent of Jesus from the race
of David is historically beyond all doubt. Dalman, of. cit., 262-266, and
especially Peter Vogt’s exhaustive monograph, Der Stammbaum Christi
bei den heiligen Evangelisten Matthaus und Lukas (Freiburg, 1907).


But, however firmly the Saviour held to'his Davidic origin
and Messianic dignity, just as emphatically did he teach a
supernatural origin and a divine dignity as the Son of God,
far exceeding the former. And, in fact, the latter is to be con-
ceived of as a true, essentially divine sonship, just as the
former is to be regarded as a true and essential Davidic son-
ship. This alone is the meaning of the disputation of Jesus
with the Pharisees. As the Son of God, he is the “ Lord ”
of David, his ancestor; as the Son of God, he sits at the
right hand of Jehovah and rules in divine power and glory.
And only in his quality as Son of God is he able to be the
Messiah—David’s son. “He finds in the fact that David
himself speaks of the Messiah, not as his son but as his
Lord, a proof of the fact that what constitutes in the Messiah
the basis and essence of his Messianic significance is not his
descent from David, but something else much higher. The
meaning of Jesus is that this something higher can he only the
relation which the Messiah has to God —his divine sonship.” 1
“ For one who reads the words of Jesus without any dogmatic
prejudice, no other meaning can result than that the Messiah
is in reality the Son of one higher than David—namely,
God.” 2 Even Alfred Loisy interprets this passage in the
Gospels thus : “ Jesus is not only the son of David, but the
Son of God, and this latter sonship outshines the former.”*
This is, however, sufficient for Loisy again to find fault 4 with
the text of the Evangelist, which is, nevertheless, recognized
by all critics as authentic. 5
6. Conclusion of the Revelation of the Divine Sonship to the
Disciples and Judges in View of his Death.
After Jesus had announced his divine sonship to the people
and-their leaders without any enduring success, he addressed
himself, in the last hours before his death, exclusively to the
narrower circle of his disciples. Ever since the days of
Cesarea Philippi, the latter believed in his supernatural
origin, and apprehended more and more also the divinity of
the Master. Now they were already so far advanced that
Jesus could not only impress upon them the fact of his divine
nature, but could partially disclose to them also his divine
spiritual relation to the Father. For the occasion of the
quiet, sacred ceremony of farewell, the Lord had intentionally,
as he himself says (John xvi, 5), reserved the profoundest and
1 Wendt, of. cit., p. 424. * Dalman, Worte Jesu, 234.
3 Les Evangilts synoftiques, ii, 363; also Le quatrikme Evangile,
628 (1903). 4 Les Evangiles synofiiques, l.c.
5 See, among others, H. J. Holtzmann, Lehrbuch der N. T. Theol.,
i, 238; Dalman, of. cit., 234; Ed. Stapfer, La mart et la rlsurrection
de jisus-Christ, 29 (1898); 6. Holtzmann, Das Leben Jesu, 353 f. (1901);
B. Weiss, Leben Jesu, ii, 384, 4th ed.


most important revelations for his disciples. “As one, when
parting for ever from the friend nearest and dearest to him,
is impelled to pour into that heart, with which he is so
intimate, all that perhaps has been concealed within the shrine
of secrecy, even from him till then, so in like manner does
the Lord, in this solemn hour of his final instructions, impart
with unreserved confidence to his disciples all that they were
able to receive into their minds, not yet exalted, and their
hearts not yet expanded, by the Holy Ghost.” 1
The basic thought of the wonderful farewell discourse and
of the accompanying high-priestly prayer is again, however,
the further initiation of the disciples into the -knowledge of his
divinity. So greatly does he advance this knowledge in that
last solemn hour that he can establish a complete contrast
between the faith of the disciples previously and now: “If
you had known me, you would without doubt have known my
Father also; and from henceforth you shall know him, and
you have seen him ” (John xiv, 7). Scales fall, as it were,
from the eyes of the disciples. Working their way out of
the hybrid light of half-belief into the dazzling sunlight of
faith, they perceive that they know and behold the Father
himself in the Son, and the divinity of the Father in the
divinity of the Son. With ray on ray and flash on flash does
Jesus light up for them this truth. “He that seeth me, seeth
the Father also” (John xiv, 9) —that is, consubstantiality and
unity of Father and Son. “ I am in the Father and the
Father in me” (John xiv, 11) —essential connection and
essential permeation. “ All things whatsoever the Father hath
are mine . . . Father, all my things are thine and thine
are mine ” (John xvi, 15; xvii, 10) —essential community and
essential reciprocity. The Son does the works of the Father,
who abideth in him. Whoever does not recognize and behold
the Son from and in his works, hateth both the Father and
the Son (John xiv, 10; xv, 24) —co-operation and reciprocity
in work. He that hateth the Father, hateth also the Son
(John xv, 23); and he that loveth the Father loveth the Son
also (John xvi, 27) —complete merging of the interests of the
Son in the interests of the Father, and vice versa. Jesus could
hardly have illustrated his divinity more clearly and more
forcibly.
And now, after he has opened his heart completely to his
disciples, and awakened in them the full consciousness of his
inward, divine life with the Father and in the Father, an
infinite longing fills him for a return to the glory of the
Father: “ And now glorify thou me, O Father, with thyself,
with the glory which I had, before the world was, with
thee ” (John xvii, 5). Only through voluntary humiliation
1 PaulKeppler, Unseres Herrn Trost. Erklarung der Abschiedsreden
und des hohepriesterlichen Gebetes Jesu, 3 (Freiburg, 1887).


has the Son come forth from his majesty in the Incarnation
(Phil, ii, 6 ff). His earthly life and suffering have merely cast
a veil over his divine glory. This is by nature the inherent
right and property of the Son from eternity, and will hence-
forth remain also for eternity. “ When Jesus prays, ‘ Glorify
thou me, O Father, with thyself, with the glory which I had
before the world was, with thee,’ So£a (glory) indicates here
the splendour of a divinely perfect, vital energy in conformity
with absoluteness of being (John v, 26) —a splendour in which
Jesus represented himself in his ante-mundane pre-existence
as ‘ God in God,’ and which is to come to him again after the
transition from the physical to the purely spiritual and merely
divine mode of existence. It is not a matter of the physical
idea of the splendour of a transcendental substance of light,
even if this also may have a share in it, but of the all-embrac-
ing (metaphysical and ethical) idea of the glory of an absolute
personal life.” 1
Thus does Jesus utter, on the eve of his passion, in that
intimate, family circle, the last words concerning the mystery
of his divinity; although from all eternity the Son of God in
the metaphysical sense and the possessor of the divine glory
of the Father, he laid in the hands of his Father his glorious
vesture, in order to complete his work on earth in a humble
human form. Now he returns to the Father from his earthly
pilgrimage in order, as God and Man, to enter again into the
possession of divine glory, and through it to render his faithful
disciples also blessed : “ That they all may be one, as thou,
Father, in me and I in thee; that they also may be one in us.
. . . The glory which thou hast given me, I have given to
them, that they may be one, as we also are one. . . . Father,
I will that where I am, they also whom thou hast given me
may be with me; that they may see my glory, which thou hast
given me, because thou hast loved me before the creation of
the world ” (John xvii, 21-24).
An attempt has been made to diminish the force of the
revelation of divinity contained in the farewell discourse of
Jesus, by attributing this discourse to the Evangelist John.
According to the theory of the liberal critics, John must have
transformed the farewell thoughts of the Lord, in a free
theological form, into the powerful address which we now
possess. Such a subterfuge is, however, as unfounded as it
is insufficient. Unfounded because, aside from all other
reasons, the farewell discourse shows itself to be essentially
an exact reproduction of the Lord’s words. 2 Theodor Zahn
writes significantly : “ In reply to the charge that John some-
1 Grill, op. cit., p. 316.
2 The passages quoted previously in regard to John’s Gospel furnish
proof of this. See also a short but very good exposition in Reppler’s
Unseres Herrn Trosi, 6-14.


times lets the discourses of Jesus pass over a vanishing’
border-line into his own theological style of utterance, it is
to be remarked that the very contrary can be proved.” 1 But
even if that charge were verified, it would still be insufficient
to explain away from the farewell discourse the proof for
the divinity of Jesus. Not only in its “Johannine” form
which we possess, but in its wonderfully profound contents,
even to its innermost core, this discourse is Jesus’s own
revelation of his divinity, and it is absolutely permeated and
interwoven with it. It remains, therefore, the highest witness
to the divine consciousness of Jesus, even if it be supposed
that it has been freely remodelled by John. ’ Only one who
simply eradicates to the last letter the farewell discourse and
the high-priestly prayer despotically from the Gospel can
escape the impression of its complete christological and
redemptive revelation.
The disciples were still under the impression of this full
revelation when the Saviour came before the judges of the
Sanhedrim for his last testimony to his divinity. Not as if
he could have let those judges and the surrounding crowd of
onlookers and agitators see into the depths of his divine
nature and life which had just been beheld. No; he was
obliged to begin again, where the incredulity of the Jews
had remained. He could let fall upon them merely the shadow
of his divinely human personality. And yet sufficient light
lay in his shadow to let the judges perceive that he claimed
to be the true Messiah of the world and the true, supernatural
Son of God.
He testifies to this in the most public way and before the
highest tribunal of the Jewish nation, the competence of which
Jesus also had recognized (Matt, xxiii, 2). The members of
the Sanhedrim had already been trying for a long time to
destroy the obnoxious man from Nazareth (John vii, 44;
viii, 59; x, 31, 39). Their plans, however, were without
result, because the hour of Jesus had not yet come (John
vii, 6). After the raising of Lazarus, their excitement rose to
such a pitch that the assembled High Council passed a
formal resolution in regard to the execution of Jesus (John
xi, 45-57); and it was not to be long before they succeeded
in getting him into their hands. Jesus was with all speed
brought before the High Priest and the assembled Council,
and the legal procedure against him was begun.
In the first place, however, it was not the duty of the
Saviour to make a confession concerning himself, or even
to let himself be interrogated. Jewish criminal proceedings
did not aim at obtaining confessions from the accused. 2 The
1 Einleitung in das N. T., ii, 564 (Leipzig, 1899).
2 The Mishna treatise on the Sanhedrim gives information concerning
the legal proceedings of that body. This treatise was written, it is true,


latter must, on the contrary, be convicted of guilt by means
of witnesses. Only after at least two witnesses, who had
been found to be truthful, agreed in regard to the accusation,
could he be pronounced guilty. If such evidence from con-
curring witnesses was not at hand, there was, it is true, a
second means. Jewish law recognized as such the adjuration
of the accused, in order to wrest from him an avowal.
So, then, a number of witnesses, hired by the councillors,
appeared against Jesus, and brought forward many accusa-
tions, by reason of which he was said to have forfeited his
life. But their testimony proved to be partly false and partly
contradictory. A concurring testimony was not to be obtained
(Matt, xxvi, 59-62; Mark xiv, 55-61). Consequently there
remained only one other means of securing the condemnation
of Jesus which had been determined on beforehand —the ad-
juration or confirmation by oath of the accused. Hence the
High Priest rises from his seat, puts the Saviour on his oath,
and addresses to him the greatest, most solemn and most
decisive question which an earthly court of justice ever put,
and by the affirmation of which Jesus would forfeit his life :
“ I adjure thee by the living God that thou tell us if thou be
the Christ, the Son of God.” Just as clear and definite as the
question of the chief judge is the reply of Jesus : “ Thou hast
said it; and 1 I say to you, hereafter you shall see the Son of
Man sitting on the right hand of the power of God and coming
in the clouds of heaven.” 2 Then the High Priest rent his
clothes, saying: “He hath blasphemed. What further need
have we of witnesses? Behold, now you have heard the
blasphemy. What think you? But they answering, said,
He is guilty of death.” 3
only in the second century after Christ, yet its definitions were applied
essentially already in the trial of Christ, as customary in lawsuits. See
the admirable and illuminating monograph by A. Taylor Innes, The
Trial of Jesus Christ (1899); and Stapfer, Le Sanhidrin de Jerusalem
au ler sikcle. Revue de Theologie, Lausanne, 105-ng (1884); Jelski, Die
tnnereEinrichtung des grossest Synedrions zu Jerusalem (1894); Schiirer,
Geschichte des judischen Volkes, ii, 188-214, 3rd ed. (1898); K. Kastner,
Jesus vor Pilatus (Munster i. W., 1912).
1 The Aramaic scholar, Dalman, in Die Worte Jesu, i, 255, thinks that
merely the word “ and” in the mouth of Jesus is due to the Greek
•trXtjy in Matthew and W in Luke, instead of the usual translation
“ yet,” “ however.” In any case, the meaning of the passage remains
the same.
2 Matt, xxvi, 62-64; Mark xiv, 61 agrees with Matthew in his account
with but one slight variation : “ Art thou the Christ, the Son of the
blessed God?” and Jesus said to him : “ I am; and you shall see the
Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the power of God and coming
with the clouds of heaven.”
3 Matt, xxvi, 65 ff.; Mark xiv, 63 f. agrees : “ Then the High Priest,
rending his garments, saith, ‘ What need we any further witnesses?
You have heard the blasphemy. What think you ? Who all condemned
him to be guilty of death.’ ”


This took place in an extraordinary night session of the
Sanhedrim. Since, however, in criminal cases a death sen-
tence could be pronounced only on the day on which the trial
was begun, 1 a second session was appointed for the next day
at daybreak (Matt, xxvii, i; Mark xv, i; Luke xxii, 66). 2
It is true, Jesus appeared there as a blasphemer, already con-
demned and therefore without legal rights. 3 Yet the San-
hedrists again repeated summarily the adjuration and inter-
rogation, as well as the condemnation of the Saviour, in order
to give to the trial a certain appearance of legality. They
brought him before the Council, and said : “ If thou be the
Christ, tell us.” And he saith to them : “If I’shall tell you,
you will not believe me. And if I shall also ask you [in order
to lead you to a knowledge of the real facts], you will not
answer me, nor let me go. But hereafter the Son of Man
shall be sitting on the right hand of the power of God.”
Then said they all: “ Art thou, then, the Son of God?” Who
said : “ You say that I am.” And they said : “ What need we
any further testimony? For we ourselves have heard it from
his own mouth ” (Luke xxii, 66-71).
Then the whole Council rose, and they led him to Pilate
(Luke xxiii, 1 and parallels), that the Roman procurator might
confirm and carry out the sentence in the final tribunal. 4 It is
true, the Jews endeavoured to bring up for his condemnation
accusations of a political nature before the pagan Roman
tribunal, which,'for obvious reasons, did not care to bother
itself about the alleged religious crime committed by the
Nazarene (Matt, xxvii, n and parallels). But as these proved
to be invalid, they demanded vociferously that Jesus should
be put to death in consequence of the religious confession
which he had just made, and on the ground of the Jewish
religious law: “We have a law, and according to the law he
ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God ”
(John xix, 7).
This inspection of the three stages of the trial of Jesus
should be sufficient to give us the invincible conviction that
1 Schiirer, of. cit., p. 211.
3 Luke’s account is only of this final session. See proof by Johannes
Belser, Die Geschichte des Leidens, der Auferstehung und Himmeljahrt
des Herrn, 282 f. (Freiburg, 1903). Moreover, in regard to form, both
sessions were illegal : the first, because criminal trials, in which a death
sentence was possible, could be appointed only in the daytime; the
second, because the treatment of such cases was forbidden on the day
preceding a Sabbath or a Feast Day (Sanhedrim iv, 1).
3 In view of the ill-treatment which the members of the Sanhedrim and
guards allowed to be committed against Jesus already before the session
(Luke xxii, 63-65).
4 Concerning the relation in regard to competence between the Jewish
and Roman courts —that is, between the Sanhedrim at Jerusalem and
the Roman governor—in the trial of Jesus, see Th. Mommsen, Romische
Geschichte v, 512, 2nd ed.; Rom. Sirafrecht , 240 note (1899); Innes,
1.c., 75 ff.


the Saviour confessed his true divinity before his judges.
Nevertheless, this is audaciously denied by the liberal school
of criticism. The question of the High Priest, whether Jesus
is the Christ, the Son of God, must, it is said, be interpreted
from the usual Jewish point of view. The Jews, and, above
all, the Sadducee, the High Priest Caiphas, had used the
words “ Messiah ” and “ Son of God ” as synonymous terms
for the same idea—namely, a Messianic king of the Jews, a
man especially beloved and favoured by God, who, precisely
because of this moral “divine sonship ” is called to the
Messianic work, the re-establishment of the Davidical theo-
cracy. Accordingly, Jesus is said to have claimed to be such
a “ Messiah ” and “ Son of God,” and only such. 1
Now, it is certainly to be conceded, and we have expressly
demonstrated it, that the Messianic idea of the Jewish con-
temporaries of Jesus did not for the most part exceed the
expectation of a political-theocratic king, and also that the
expression “ Son of God ” might mean only just this sort of a
Messiah-king. Yet proof was also given at the same time
that the Saviour contended against that superficial and worldly
idea of the Messiah, held by the Jews, with the whole force of
his words and deeds; that in accordance with his vocation, his
origin and his nature, he claimed to be the Messiah in the
supernatural sense of the word; yes, that the idea of the
Messiah, as personified in him, was precisely identical with
the divine Messiah. Accordingly, he did not claim the title
“ Son of God ” after the standard of the ideas of the Messiah
common to the Jews at that time, but announced by ever
clearer and more definite revelations his supernatural divine
sonship. A few days before, he had thereby brought the
masses of the people into a state of great excitement, and
the crisis which had now taken place was to be ascribed only
to his super-Jewish and supernatural revelation of the Messiah
and Son of God. Should he now, all at once, descend from
the height of his confession hitherto made, and proclaim
himself as the Messiah of the world and son of God in
another less divine and indeed thoroughly human, worldly
and national sense? Everyone can see that that is at once
unthinkable.
The confession of Jesus before the tribunal shows itself
1 Thus argues not only the liberal-protestant school, but also Alfred
Loisy, L'Evangile et VEglise, 42, 57; B. Rose, Etudes sur les Evan-
giles, 105-197 (1902); Hermann Schell, Afologie des Christentums ii,
310-313, 2nd ed. (1908). Rose and Schell concede, it is true, that only
the Sanhedrists have understood the answer of Jesus in the above sense,
while the consciousness of the divine sonship possessed by Jesus himself
referred to his essential divine sonship. In contrast to his former
assertion, Loisy now acknowledges— Les Evangiles synoftiques, ii, p. 6og
(1908) —that Jesus reveals at his trial a thoroughly divine consciousness,
on account of which the reports on the subject given in the Gospels are
not to be considered as historical.


rather to be a logical revelation of his supernatural Messianic
consciousness and of his metaphysical divine sonship. Already
at the first examination Caiphas puts the question: “ Art
thou the Christ, the Son of God, the Son of the Most
Blessed?” Jesus does not content himself by answering the
question in the affirmative. In order to exclude any possible
misapprehension, he expressly declares in what sense he
wishes to have both question and answer understood. “You
shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the power
of God, and coming in the clouds of heaven ” (for the world-
judgement). By these words Jesus unites his present con-
fession directly with the one which he, shortly before, had
made to his disciples and the Jews. He had, in connection
with Psalm-cix (Hebrew cx), and with Daniel vii, 13, declared
that he was that Son of God, who, sitting at the right hand
of Jehovah, takes part in the divine government of the world,
and that Son of Man who will sometime come again to judge
the world with divine power. 1 We have already seen that
Jesus thereby really raises himself above the Jewish notion
of the Messiah and son of God, and stamps himself as truly
the divine Messiah and the essential Son of God. Now,
under a sacred oath, he confirms this consciousness and pro-
fession of his personality.
Still more clearly is this the case in the second session of the
tribunal, described by Luke. Here the Sanhedrim at first
asks only about’the Messiahship of Jesus. “If thou be the
Christ,, tell us.” As Jesus confesses himself to be such, and
adds that the Son of Man will sit on the right hand of the
power of God, the judges understand at once that he thereby
claims to be equal with God. For this reason they all im-
mediately ask: “Art thou, then, the Son of God?” And
upon the renewed answer in the affirmative they condemn the
Saviour to death as a blasphemer. The crescendo — Messiah,
divine Son of Man and true Son of God is contained unmis-
takably in the words of Jesus. This even very radical critics
do not overlook.
According to Gustav Dalman, 2 “ Jesus is in reality, accord-
ing to his statement, precisely not the Son of ‘ Man,’ but of
‘God.’” Alfred Loisy 3 and N. Schmidt 4 similarly find that
Jesus uttered, not only in Luke’s Gospel but also in those of
Matthew and Mark, his complete consciousness of divinity
before the tribunal. If Loisy, Schmidt and other critics on
1 That, together with Dan. vii, 13, the whole passage in Ps. cx is
referred to by Jesus in his judicial confession, is explained also by
Dalman, Die Worfe Jesu, 254, and by O. Holtzmann, Leben Jesu, 374
(1901).
2 Die Worte Jesu, 209.
3 Les Evangiles synoftiques, ii, 609 £.
4 Article Son of God, section 20, in Cheyne and Black, Encyclo-
pedia Biblica, vol. IV, 4701 (London, 1903).


that account, and only on that account, doubt this report of
the Gospels, and assert that the synoptists, especially Luke,
have let themselves be influenced by the belief of their con-
temporaries in the divinity of Jesus, and have erroneously
represented the actual course of events at the trial, such an
“ unprejudiced ” criticism truly deserves not a word of refuta-
tion. Yet even Johannes Weiss 1 remarks : “ One may think as
one will about the literary origin of the text of Luke [regard-
ing the judicial confession of Jesus], but one ought not to
reject with scorn the light which it gives.” And W. Bousset
says : “ The scene of the trial, in spite of all the objections
recently brought against it, is in its essence historical.” 2
It is, moreover, labour lost when the school of freethinkers
attempts to weaken the confession of the Saviour before the
tribunal, whether it be in reference to its historical credibility,
or to its dogmatic import. Even if that confession of Jesus
in regard to his divine sonship made in his own words did not
exist for us at all, the members of the Sanhedrim themselves
and the populace, stirred up by them, give us clear information
concerning it. They convince us, on the one hand, that they
wanted to extort from the accused Nazarene the confession
of his supernatural Messiahship and metaphysically divine
sonship, and, on the other hand, that they really succeeded
in obtaining this confession to the fullest extent.
If we wish to know what the views and intentions of the
Pharisees, Sadducees, priests and scribes were at the trial
of Jesus, we must consult again the Gospel and search for
the real cause of their hatred against the Nazarene. It lies,
as we again and again have had to prove, in the fact that
Jesus abruptly rejected the idea of a worldly and national
Messiah and Son of God, and offered to them in place of it
his thoroughly supermundane and divine consciousness. “He
was the Messiah (and Son of God), and claimed to be so,
but in a sense which seemed to the narrow horizon of con-
temporary Judaism as blasphemous.” 3 Hence the movement
of hate against Jesus.
This movement degenerated into an attempt to murder
Jesus as often as he made the definite declaration that he was
the real, true Son of God. Ever since Jesus at the feast of
purification had distinctly uttered this consciousness of his
divine sonship (John v, 17) for the first time, “ the Jews
sought the more to kill him, because he . . . said God was
his Father, making himself equal to God ” (John v, 18).
Jesus’ claim to divinity led at times, during the Feast of
Tabernacles and on the sabbatical Exhodion Feast, to re-
newed efforts to seize the hated Galilean and to stone him
(John vii, 44; viii, 59). And again, shortly before his trial,
1 Die Predigt Jesu vom Reiche Goiles, 170 (1900).
• Jesus, 8, 3rd ed. 3 Dalman, of. cit., 259.


at the Feast of the Dedication of the Temple, an attempt was
made to murder him, justified by the same testimony that he
was the real, supernatural Son of God. “We stone thee,
because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God ” (John
x, 33); thus spoke the same agitators who soon after were
to sit in judgement upon Jesus.
If now, at the tribunal and for the purpose of obtaining a
sentence of death against him, they despair of every other
ground of accusation, and if they adjure the Saviour to tell
them whether he is “the Christ, the Son of God” and the
“ Son of the Most Blessed,” the meaning of their question is
plainly furnished. They certainly aim at tempting him to
make the same confession of his divine Messiahship and
supernatural divine sonship, and not merely to the conscious-
ness of being a national Messiah and a purely human son of
God, which would have been useless in securing his condemna-
tion and which had been repudiated by Jesus.
The Sanhedrists show, then, also by their sentence of coh-
demnation that Jesus had actually made that confession. They
find in the declaration of Jesus blasphemy, and condemn him
to death for this reason and no other. In theatrical indigna-
tion “ the High Priest rends his clothes and says : ‘ You have
heard the blasphemy. • What think you?’ Who all con-
demned him to be guilty of death ” (Mark xiv, 63 and
parallels). In a moment the whole excited populace take up
the cry, so that it echoes through the city, and rings in the
ears of the Roman procurator : “ We have a law; and accord-
ing to our law he ought to die, because he made himself the
Son of God ” (John xix, 7).
It is true, the Sanhedrists endeavour not to present to the
pagan governor blasphemy alone as a reason for condemna-
tion. They knew only too well that Pilate would neither mix
up in their religious actions, nor pay any attention to the
theocratical law of the Jews, which decrees the penalty of
death for blasphemy. 1 Therefore they appeal, not only to the
crimen Icescz majestatis divined (blasphemy), but to the' crimen
Icesce majestatis humance, alleged to have been committed by
Jesus —an insult and an act of Idse-majesM against the
Emperor. They say : “We have found this man perverting
our nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying that
he is Christ the king ” (Luke xxiii, 2). As, however, the latter
accusation proves to be absolutely without foundation and
false (Luke xxiii, 3 and parallels), the Jews in desperation go
back to the real reason —blasphemy, on account of which they
1 That Pilate will not meddle with the application of the religious,
Mosaic, penal law, but lets merely the Roman State law constitute the
rule of his court proceedings is perfectly clear, and is proved from the
demand of the Procurator in John xviii, 31. When the Jews insist upon
the death of Jesus by appealing to their law, Pilate answers ironically;
Take him you, and judge him according to your law.”


have condemned the Saviour, and through the force of this
they wish to obtain from Pilate the execution of the death
sentence. “We have our law, and according to our law he
ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.”
Blasphemy, and blasphemy alone, is, therefore, the only legal
reason which the Jews finally and seriously invoke for their
death sentence on Jesus. 1
Now, this confession of Jesus in the tribunal, before the
Sanhedrists and the unbelieving Jews, could, in any case,
appear as blasphemy only if Jesus attributed to himself divine
qualities, a divine nature and a metaphysical divine sonship.
The Mosaic Law orders in the case of a blasphemer: “ The
man that curseth his God shall bear his sin. And he that
blasphemeth the name of the Lord, dying let him die. All
the multitude shall stone him ” (Lev. xxiv, 15, 16). However
this law might or may be interpreted, it is clear, in any case,
that it was not applicable to Jesus if he proclaimed himself
merely as the Messiah in the sense of the popular Jewish
expectation—namely, as a theocratical king and a son by the
grace of God.
Such a Messiah and such a claim to divine sonship did not
blaspheme or dishonour the name of Jehovah in any way.
Otherwise the Messianic faith of the Jewish people and the
Sanhedrists themselves would be liable to a charge of blas-
phemy. Of this our opponents are as firmly convinced as we.
“ A claim to be the Messiah is in itself, especially in respect
to Jewish justice, no crime.” 2 “The belief of Jesus that he
was the Messiah might pass for madness or foolish conceit,
but not for blasphemy, so long, at all events, as the opinion
existed that a man of human origin would sometime appear
as the Messiah.” 3 “The mere affirmation of Messiahship
could not certainly have led at once to a death sentence on
1 Hermann Schell, Afologie des Christentums, ii, 311, 2nd ed. (Pader-
horn, 1908), very naively asserts : “ In what sense the High Priest and
the Sanhedrim understood the divine sonship is proved by the effect of
their accusation on Pilate and on his wording of the sentence. It was
a question in the accusation of his claim to be ‘ King of the Jews,’ not
of his claim to a divine nature.” Does not Schell really see, then, that
the High Priests and the Sanhedrim accuse Jesus as King of the Jews
only from a hypocritical motive, although the Saviour himself rejects
this accusation so emphatically? And did not “ the effect of their
accusation on Pilate ” consist in the fact that the Roman considered the
attempt to blacken Jesus with the assertion that he was King of the
Jews to be a thoroughly defamatory and inaccurate denunciation (Luke
xxiii, 3 and following)? Finally, also the “ wording of the sentence ”
does not prove that the Sanhedrists had the impression that Jesus
claimed to be King of the Jews. Only with biting irony at the expense
of the Sanhedrists (John xix, 20-22), who had charged the Nazarene
falsely with this political Use-majesti, did Pilate write above the Cross :
“ Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.”
2 P. W. Schmidt, Die Geschichte Jesu, 169 (Freiburg, 1899).
3 Oskar Holtzmann, Leben Jesu, 375 (Tubingen, 1901).


Jesus. . . . No one would ever have made a crime of blas-
phemy out of a simple assumption of the title of Messiah.” 1
“ The law had no prohibition and no rule in the case of anyone
declaring - himself the Messiah; it was not forbidden.” 2 “ Ac-
cording to Jewish law, the fact of perjury or blasphemy, which
is to be punished by stoning, and in presence of which the
judges rend their garments, can only be conceded if an impre-
cation or abuse of the name of God is really uttered. There-
fore, the mere assertion of Messiahship is, according to Jewish
notions, not blasphemy at all.” 3
The assertion of Jesus that he was the Messiah and the Son
of God, according to the Jewish, human conception, could at
most have given occasion for an ecclesiastical trial, in which it
would have had to be proved, on the ground of the acts of the
Saviour, whether he was the true Messiah or a false one.
Only the proof of his false Messiahship would have justified
a condemnation. 4 But nothing at all in the trial of Jesus is
said about anyone’s having called for the signs of the Messiah
and of having tested them in the case of the hated Nazarene.
On the contrary, the Sanhedrists appealed, as a legal ground
for condemnation, only to the confession of Jesus himself, that
he was the Messiah and the Sofa of God, who would sit at
the right hand of God.and would come again sometime as
Judge of the world. This testimony in regard to himself
forces from them, without any further consideration, the cry
of indigation: ‘‘He hath blasphemed. What further need
have we of witnesses? Behold, now you have heard the
blasphemy; he is guilty of death.” The blasphemy worthy
of death lay, therefore, according to the views of the stubborn
Jews, in Jesus’ confession that he was the Son of God, and
in that only.
That presupposes, however, that Jesus, in his estimate of
sdfsfsdf
20
1 Dalman, Die Worte Jesu, 257.
2 Adalbert Merx, Die vier kanonischen Evangelien nach ihrem dlte-
sten bekannlen Texte. Obersetzung und Erlduterung der syrischen im
Sinai Kloster gefundenen Palimfsesthandschrift, 11, i, 394 (Berlin,
1902).
3 Wrede, Das Messiasgeheimnis in den Evangelien, 74 f. (Gottingen,
igoi). Of the same opinion are Wilh. Brandt, Die evangelische
Geschichte und der Ur sprung des Christentums, 64 (1893); Alfred
Loisy, Les Evangiles synoptiques, ii, 6og (1908); and all the prominent
modern liberal critics. Only H. J. Holtzmann, Lehrbuch der N. T.
Theologie, i, 265 f. (Leipzig, 1897), and Das messianische Bewusstsein
Jesu, 31 ff (Tubingen, 1907), is of another opinion. “ But he proves
thereby only his own ignorance of the ideas of Jewish law,” remarks
Dalman pertinently.
* Perhaps by an appeal to Deut. xviii, 20-22, where the death penalty
is prescribed for one who has been proved to be a false prophet. It is
absolutely impossible that the Rabbis of the time of Jesus should have
proposed anything lighter in regard to blasphemy and the death penalty.
The later rabbinical law (Sanhedrim vii, 5) is, on the contrary, much
more formal, so that finally a death sentence could be only seldom pro-
nounced on a charge of blasphemy.


himself, “ ascribed to himself a grandeur which had never
been attributed even to the Messiah” I —a grandeur which
towered above every merely human conception of the Mes-
sianic nature, and apprehended the designation “ Son of God ”
in a metaphysical sense. Only if he “ meant that designation,
Son of God, in a supernatural and metaphysical sense did
there lie in the utterance of Jesus a detraction from the honour
of God, and a blasphemous claim to equality with God.” 2
“To say ‘I am the Messiah ’ was no blasphemy. To say ‘ I
am the son of God ’ did not mean to utter the name of God
blasphemously. Only if he did not confine himself merely to
the moral and religious idea of the sonship, but connected a
metaphysical conception of it with the expression, Son of
God . . . only then could the words of Jesus be considered as
a blasphemy against God.” 3 The Sanhedrists saw then in
Jesus a false prophet, who blasphemed Jehovah, since he him-
self claimed divine rank, and enticed the people to follow a
false God (Deut. xiii, 1-4). Such a false prophet should, ac-
cording to the Law, be killed at once (Deut. xiii, 5, 10), “ lest
at any time the wrath of the Lord thy God be kindled against
thee, and take thee [the people of Israel] away from the face
of the earth (Deut. vi, 15). Hence, the counsel of the High
Priest Caiphas : “ It is expedient for you that one man should
die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not ” (John
xi, 50). And on this account came the cry trom the furious
multitude : “ Away with this man. Crucify him ” (Luke xxiii,
18, 21). “We have a law, and according to this law he must
die, because he made himself the Son of God.”
But since they condemn the Saviour as a blasphemer by
reason of his own confession, the judges prove officially and
on oath that Jesus confessed not only that he was the theo-
cratical Messiah-king and human son of God, but also that he
was the divine Messiah and the essential Son of God, and that
he on account of this confession was put to death.
1 Dalman, op. cit., p. 257.
2 Wrede, Das Messiasgeheimnis, 75.
3 Loisy, Les Evangiles synoftiques, ii, 6og. In order to escape the
“ historically impossible ” conclusion (Wrede, 74), that Jesus understood
the title “ Son of God ” dogmatically and metaphysically, Wrede and
Loisy deny, at once and without any tenable reason, the credibility of
these passages in the Gospels. The scene in question is said to have
been invented by the Evangelist, or to have been retouched to harmonize
with the faith.


CHAPTER II
THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST AFTER
HIS DEATH
IW ITHERTO we have furnished proof that Jesus
■ himself, during his mortal life, revealed himself
flj as the true Son of God, as very God of very God.
B Not, indeed, in an immediate, lightning-like
revelation, like a Deus ex machind, who springs
down from heaven to earth. Rather does his revelation of
himself stand in wonderfully wise harmony, on the one hand,
with his human-divine person, in which he approached us,
and, on the other hand, with the human nature and limited
mentality of those to whom he announced his divinity.
Notwithstanding the fact that Jesus claimed to be God, he
not only had to allow his real and entire humanity to develop,
uncurtailed, but he was obliged to impose upon himself, in
testifying to his own divinity, a certain modest and tender
reticence. In his human nature and through the medium of
his human nature, he revealed himself as God. Externally,
however, in his whole appearance, he was only a man. Only
his superhuman wisdom, perfection and omnipotence caused
divinity to shine through the human element in his
person. Upon the human characteristics of Jesus the
divine traits stamped themselves only in fine, transparent,
spiritually transfigured lines of sublimity. Jesus could not,
therefore, appear before mankind with the direct announce-
ment:, “I am indeed In my outward appearance a man,
like all you men; but in reality I am the eternal Son of God,
begotten of the Father, the Creator and final aim of the
universe, and I demand accordingly at once adoration and
divine honour.” Whoever thoroughly understands the situa-
tion in which Jesus, as man, found himself in relation to
mankind will immediately feel that such language would have
been unsuitable and not conformable to the eternal wisdom of
God. Only as he actually did announce his divinity could he
have done so—little by little, with an increasing unfolding of
the truth, more practical than formal, rather through deeds
than through words.
Still another equally important reason determined such a
revelation of his divinity— the spiritual disposition in which
he found his Jewish contemporaries and, in particular, also
his own disciples. We have learned what this was sufficiently
in connection with the Messianic problem. Apart from some
elect souls, the people surrounding Jesus were so impervious


to spiritual things, so full of earthly, sensuous, nationalistic,
narrow-minded conceptions, that the Saviour could announce
to them his Messiahship only little by little and in continual
conflict with firmly rooted prejudices, and so indeed it was
for the most part made known. What would have happened
if it had been a question of the announcement of his equality
with God and his own divinity ? Then the difficulties to be
overcome would have been twice as numerous before he could
have reckoned on the slightest comprehension of it. It was
necessary, first, to call the attention of his hearers slowly and
gently to their prejudices, and to furnish them with proofs of
his Messiahship through signs and wonders. At the same
time, the Messianic notion of the disciples had to be reformed
and brought up from the low level of nationalistic Jewish
views. Together with this came the proof that the Messiah,
precisely as the Messiah, must be God, and really a divine
Messiah. And with this Messianic revelation of his divinity,
Jesus then caused another to appear, according to which he
proved himself to be the true Son of God in a metaphysical
sense, independently of his Messianic vocation and destiny.
We have proved this testimony of Jesus to himself to be an
historical fact, in spite of the modern criticism of Jesus, which
audaciously asserts that the Saviour himself never and no-
where declared himself to be the true Son of God, and that
only succeeding generations of his believing adorers had made
him God. We were able to follow even the separate phases
of the progressive revelation of the divine sonship of Jesus,
beginning with his first appearance in the temple to his con-
demnation to death. Therewith our task is really accom-
plished. If, nevertheless, in what follows the line is still
further advanced, and it is pointed out how the faith in the
divinity of Jesus made its appearance in the early Church from
the death of the Saviour to the end of the New Testament
epoch, it is done in order to proceed to the very last positions
of the enemy. He seeks precisely to assign the proofs of the
divinity of Jesus in the earliest times to as late a date as
possible, in order to draw thence the conclusion that the belief
in the Son of God cannot belong to the treasure of revealed
truth given by Jesus himself, but was a subsequent addition
and an embellishment made by believers. In opposition to this
it will be shown that this faith was at once the common
property of the original Church, and therefore must be
ascribed to the revelation made by Christ himself. Faith in
the divinity of Jesus, as it developed at once after the death
of the Master, under their eyes and in consequence of the
instructions of the risen Lord, and as it immediately passed
over to the first Christian generations as their most precious
inheritance, is only the reflection and echo of the divine self-
consciousness which Jesus possessed during his earthly life.


The faith of the earliest circle of disciples shows us, more
clearly than anything else, what Christ thought on this point,
and what he taught his disciples.
Fortunately the New Testament sources give sufficient, and
in parts even abundant, information about the position taken
in the first century towards, the central truth of the Christian
religion. Of the forty days after the resurrection, during
which Jesus appeared repeatedly to the disciples and asso-
ciated with them, the last chapters of the Gospels provide us
with information. The Acts of the Apostles then tells us of
the faith of the early Church in Christ, from Pentecost and
the first instructions down into the fifties. Meanwhile the
great Epistles of Paul appear, which pourtray very fully the
christology of the teacher of the Gentiles and of the Christian
Church during the fifties and sixties. Paul had not yet laid
down his pen, when it was taken up by the synoptic Evan-
gelists, who testify, as we have seen, just as clearly to their
faith and that of their contemporaries, as they represent with
historic fidelity Christ’s own divine consciousness. And soon
after the synoptists, John appears upon the scene, and gives
us, well on towards the end of ’the century, again as Apostle
and Evangelist, an account of that “which was from the
beginning and which he had seen with his own eyes of the
Word of life,” and what he and his brethren in the faith with
heart and mouth confessed concerning the true Son of God,
Jesus Christ.
I.— The Divinity of Christ after the Resurrection.
The impending death of the Master had been at all times
the stumbling-block of the inner circle of his disciples. Its
occurrence depressed both the joy and the certainty of the
faith of the Apostles. With the resurrection, however, ac-
cording to the representation of all the Gospels, their faith
re-entered their hearts triumphantly and for ever.
One only hesitated—Thomas, the most incredulous and
thoroughgoing critic of the Apostles. He had not been present
at the first appearance of Jesus after the resurrection, and to
all the reports of his associates he remained sceptical.
“ Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and
put my finger into the place of the nails, and put my hand
into his side, I will not believe ” (John xx, 25).
Eight days after, the disciples were again assembled, and
Thomas with them. Then came Jesus, the doors being shut,
stood in their midst and said, “ Peace be to you.” Then said
he to Thomas : “ Put in thy finger hither and see my hands;
and bring hither thy hand and put it into my side. And be
not faithless, but believing.” Thomas answered and said to
him : “My Lord and my God.” Jesus said to him : “ Because
thou hast seen me, Thomas, thou hast believed; blessed are


they that have not seen and have believed ” (John xx,
26-29).
Any doubt about the signification of this confession is
impossible. For the first time in the Gospel Thomas gives
to the Saviour the name “God” plainly; not merely “Son
of God,” but directly and emphatically “ Lord and God.”
The appellation “ Lord ’ ’ which is added to the name of God
is not at all accidental or of inferior value. We shall soon
produce 1 from rich material the proof that the appellation
“ Lord ” in the language of the disciples is identical with
“ Adonai-Jehovah,” the proper name of God. Both expres-
sions together represent for the Israelite the full and complete
name of God —“ Lord God, Jehovah Elohim, Kvpios o Geos.”
A more comprehensive and striking confession of the divinity
of Jesus is not conceivable than this—“ My Lord and my
God.” And Jesus makes this confession of Thomas his own,
by expressly confirming it and by pronouncing those blessed
who believe in his divinity without wishing to see with their
eyes the evidence of what is believed.
However indubitable the meaning of Thomas’s confession
is, equally certain also is its authenticity. Apart from all other
reasons, it finds its absolute confirmation in the Christian
faith of the whole Christian community associated with the
resurrection, of which we shall soon speak. On this account
it is for the most part regarded as historical, even by those
liberal investigators who are at variance with John’s Gospel.
Thus, for example, Johannes Weiss remarks : “ The words
of Thomas to the risen one in John xx, 28 —‘ My Lord and
my God ’ —are undoubtedly authentic.” 2
So much the more difficult, therefore, is it to observe in
silence how these same liberal critics either pass lightly over
the scene with Thomas, or, with a deep, sentimental groan,
try to get around the essential point of the confession of the
divinity therein contained. Thus, for example, Edmund
Stapfer, the Dean of the Protestant faculty at Paris, makes,
quite in the style of Renan, the following declaration : “ In
the presence of such a being, a being who has had such moral
grandeur and such sympathy, who has possessed such abso-
lute conviction, who has made such unheard-of demands, has
shown such thorough devotion, and has enjoyed such a deep,
intense and evidently certain life in and through God, the
exclamation of Thomas is not too strong and escapes also
from our hearts and lips. In the presence of Jesus we also
break out into this cry of obedience and adoration, ‘ My Lord
and my God !’ ” 3 Involuntarily one asks oneself how scholars
1 In the chapters on “ The Divinity of Christ in the Early Church ”
and “ The Divinity of Christ and Paul.”
2 Christus. Die Anfdnge des Dogmas, 29 (Tubingen, 1909).
2 Jisus-Christ -pendant son ministers, 351 (Paris, 1897).


with the reputation of Stapfer can seriously make acknow-
ledgements of this sort and yet, with apparently perfect sin-
cerity, deny the divinity of Jesus ! This riddle finds a solution
only in the words of Stapfer, in which he praises highly the
individualistic christology of modern liberal Protestantism,
and remarks : “ In Protestantism every believer makes his
christology to suit himself, because every believer conceives-
of the divinity of Jesus Christ in his own way, which is not the
way of his neighbour.” 1
The Thomas episode mirrors instantaneously the faith of
the community of disciples from the morning of the resurrec-
tion to the day of the ascension, on which Jesus departed from
this earth and returned to the Father. There is no doubt that
the faith of the disciples equalled that of Thomas. For we
cannot suppose that the “unbelieving” Apostle had more
faith than the disciples who believed. Moreover, and this is
the main thing, the disciples, as we shall soon see, already
after the day of Pentecost, appear with faith in Jesus as the
Messiah and “ the Lord, Adonai, Jehovah,” and exact the
same confession from all the new believers. They saw already,
in advance, therefore, in Jesus the Messiah and Lord, the
divine Messiah, and this faith must have developed powerfully
between Easter and Pentecost.
Whence came this change in the opinions of the disciples,
which up to that time had been partly unbelieving, partly
weak in faith? Without doubt, the resurrection itself had
brought about this mighty strengthening of their faith. The
resurrection is always appealed to by the disciples as the
principal proof and justification of their faith in the Lord and
Messiah. 2 Jesus had, indeed, continually put forward his
resurrection as a guarantee for his personal revelation and his
claim to their faith. But even without this, the disciples
would never have been able to attain to the conviction that a
man who had remained dead in the grave was the Messiah
and Lord of the world. Therefore with the death of Jesus
every ground of support and every hope had vanished from the
disciples’ hearts (Luke xxiv, 21), and only came back again
with the morning of the resurrection. He who claimed to be
Messiah and Lord must show in himself his power over death
and the world. The resurrection first became the sure pledge
that God’s kingdom would triumph, and that the Lord would
bring the schemes of men to the fulfilment of his counsels
(Acts iv, 26). Proceeding from these considerations, the
disciples saw in the resurrection not merely a miracle, or even
the greatest of miracles, from which they concluded the truth
1 La mart et la risurrection de Jisus-Christ, 340, 2nd. ed. (Paris,
1898).
2 Acts ii, 24, 32; iii, 15; iv, 10; x, 40; xiii, 30; xvii, 31; 1 Cor. xv,
12 ; 1 Pet. i, 3. etc.


of Christ’s Messianic and divine revelation of himself; they
rather regarded the resurrection as his immediate installation
into the position of the Messiah and Lord. They express this
view even in the drastic words directed to the Jews —through
the resurrection “ God hath made both Lord and Christ this
same Jesus, whom you have crucified ” (Acts ii, 36). By this
“ it is not said that he during his earthly life had not yet been
the Christ and Lord, but only that God had now raised him
to a position and had glorified him in a living form in which
he could prove to his Church that he is the Lord and Christ,
which he had already been before.” 1
In this sense Hamack is right when he says : “ Among the
surest facts of history is this, that it was not the Apostle Paul
who first brought into such prominence the importance of the
death and resurrection of Christ, but that he, in making this
recognition, stood in entire harmony with the early Church.
. . . They were regarded already by the intimate circle of
the disciples and by the original Church as fundamental. We
can rightly affirm that the permanent recognition of Jesus
Christ received its chief support here. On the ground of those
two dogmas the whole system of christology has grown up. ” 2
It is, however, incorrect to interpret this fact as if “ the
religion of Christ in the narrower sense” begins only with
the resurrection and only in consequence of the belief in the
resurrection. 3 It is not only the resurrection which first
established the faith in Jesus as the Christ and Lord, but the
resurrection in connection with the definite confession which
Jesus made during his life—that he was the Christ and Lord.
If Jesus had not given to the disciples this revelation before
his death, and made upon them the impression that he was the
Christ and Lord, even the resurrection could not possibly have
brought that belief in his Messiahship and lordship into exis-
tence. That is so self-evident that even Johannes Weiss cannot
but confess: “ The appearances of the Lord, however im-
portant they may have been, would not alone have been suffi-
cient to call forth a faith for which these men went to their
death. . . . They must have been convinced that with their
proclamation of this fact they were acting in harmony with
Jesus. . . . The faith of the first disciples has its roots not
only in their Easter experiences; it goes back behind Golgotha
to the impression made by his personality. . . . The oldest
faith in Christ extends back finally to the life of Jesus.” 4
Thus the faith in Christ and the christological confession
1 Th. Zahn, Skizzen aus dem Leben der alien Kirche, 294 f., 3rd ed.
(Leipzig, 1908).
2 Harnack, Wesen des Christentums, 97.
3 Thus Weinel in his Paulus: Der Menseh und sein Werk, 108 f.
(Tubingen, 1904), and thus Harnack evidently wishes to be understood.
* Johannes Weiss, Christus, 10-12 (Tubingen, 1969); Paulus und Jesus,
g (Berlin, 1909).


of the Church of the resurrection are grounded in the life,
teachings and consciousness of Jesus himself. Not merely
the positive believers, to whom the resurrection was a fact,
but also “to crown all, even those who adopt the modern
view,” and thereby deny the resurrection, must, as Johannes
Weiss acknowledges, 1 accept this explanation of the faith of
the disciples concerning Christ. There is absolutely no other
explanation. A consequence presupposes an antecedent. The
faith of the Church after the resurrection points to a corre-
sponding revelation of Jesus before his death. Of so little use
is it for liberal criticism to strike out from the Gospel the
resurrection and the consciousness of Jesus that he was
Messiah and God.
With these words we have in substance pointed out and
explained the views concerning Christ, as they are found in
the Church of the disciples after the resurrection. But refer-
ence must still be made in particular to the form in which,
then and subsequently, the faith in the divinity of Jesus was
for the most part expressed. • Thomas adored Jesus with the
words, “My Lord and my God,” which was equivalent to,
Lord God, Jehovah Elohim. The other disciples also must
have often done so. Most frequently, however, they use, as
appears from the closing chapters of the Gospels and the
opening chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, the address
and invocation, “ Christ and Lord.” It has been said already,
and it will be thoroughly demonstrated in the next two
chapters, that both forms of confession mean the same thing
respectively, that the religious title “ Lord,” given to the
Saviour, signifies neither more nor less than Adonai-Jehovah
—the proper name of God. This stands usually in the Old
Testament before the essential name of God (Lord God,
Jehovah Elohim), but it indicated also, in itself alone, the
true and only Godhead with special reference to its divine
dominion, dignity and exaltation over the world. 2
Why did the disciples and the early Christians prefer this
expression for the divinity of Jesus, while they called the
Father simply God ? The most obvious answer is to be sought
in the consciousness of the Apostles that this title best repre-
sents what is distinctive. Since of the full double name of
God “Lord God” (Jehovah Elohim, Kvptos o Geos), the
first word is applied to the Son and the second to the Father,
the godhead is designated as the union of both, absolutely
and unequivocally, entirely in the sense of the monotheistic
formula of the Old Testament, “ Hear, O Israel, the Lord our
God is one Lord.” But not only that.
In the name “ Jehovah, Lord,” the vocation and activity of
1 Paulus und Jesus, g.
2 See subsequently in the chapter, “ Divinity of Christ in the Early
Church.” 3


Jesus, as the divine Messiah, found their most perfect ex-
pression. In accordance with our previous statements, we see
that all the threads of the Messianic expectations in the Old
Testament unite in the thought that the Messiah, as spiritual
Founder and Prince of the kingdom of God, reigns over the
whole world and is its Lord. Spiritual dominion over the
world, divine power in the world, redemption of the world
and judgement of the world—these are the great achievements
and sovereign titles of the Messiah-King. That was already
the infallible guarantee for the fact that the Messiah is identical
with Jehovah, whose inalienable rights reached their culmina-
tion precisely in that absolute supremacy. Having attained
that height, the Messianic prophecy then announces also :
“The Lord Jehovah himself will come and save us” (Isa.
xxxv, 4).
Now the disciples had certainly conceived this just as little
as had the Jews contemporary with Jesus. It was almost
impossible for their long secularized conception of the Messiah
to rise to the Messianic ideal of the Old Testament. Even
though they gave to the Master the name of Lord, they under-
stood it, nevertheless, at first only as an expression of rever-
ence and high regard, and as a substitute for the appellation
“Master” (compare Matt, viii, 25 with Mark iv, 38; Matt,
x, 24 and John xiii, 13 with Matt, ix, 11 and xvii, 23).
Jesus himself, however, taught them ever more plainly to
call him Lord in an entirely different sense. He lets himself
be addressed as “ Lord, Lord,” as Judge of the world (Matt,
vii, 21; xxv, 37). And as there is only one Father, so he says
that he also is the one and only Lord and Master (Matt,
xxiii, 8). Then he performs, as an overwhelmingly convinc-
ing and withal a practical form of instruction, the masterful
acts of God in a long and ever-increasing series—healing the
sick, driving out devils, raising from the dead and forgiving
sins. In close connection with this, he reveals in words his
divine consciousness of being the Lord, which, immediately
before his death, he clothes in the prophecy : “ You shall see
the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the power of God
and coming in the clouds of heaven . . . with great power
and glory.”
There can be no doubt that, with the wakening and growing
faith of the disciples in the Messiahship of Jesus, their faith
in his supremacy also awoke and grew. The resurrection
gave to them palpable proof of the truth that Jesus was the
“ Christ and Lord.” It was not they who had invented these
sovereign titles and applied them to Jesus, but it was Jesus
who had educated them to do so. Just as the faith of the
Church of the resurrection in Jesus’s essential divinity goes
back to the impression of his personality and to his revelation
before his death, so also this special form, in which the faith


of the disciples makes its appearance, the faith in the Lord,
goes back to the vitalizing instruction of the Saviour.
Also, after the resurrection, the christological teachings of
Jesus are plainly designed to impress upon the disciples his
essential divinity, and preferably in the form of his divine
sovereignty. The consciousness of being God and Lord per-
vades the message addressed to Mary Magdalen at the first
appearance of Jesus after the resurrection : “ I ascend to my
Father and to your Father, to my God and to your God”
(John xx, 17). He who in a wholly personal way and in
contrast to other men knows himself to be the Son of God,,
and is conscious that he can by his own power and in his own
glory ascend to God the Father, must himself be God and
Lord.
It is in a feeling of being God and Lord that he, on the day
of the resurrection, shows to the two disciples on the way to
Emmaus, step by step, how the whole announcement of the
Old Testament concerning the divine Messiah refers to him-
self, and adds : “ Ought not Christ to have suffered these
things, and so to enter into his glory?” (Luke xxiv, 26).
His divinity and sovereignty also are revealed by him on
Easter evening, when be ascribes to himself the unrestricted
power to forgive sins—the highest divine and sovereign power
—and transmits this, as a sovereign, to the Apostles with the
words: “ Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose sins you shall
forgive, they are forgiven them; and whose sins you shall
retain, they are retained ” (John xx, 22, 23).
Eight days later he testifies that he has found among the
eleven Apostles faith in his person as God and Lord, and he
demands the same of the twelfth, Thomas : “ Be not faithless,
but believing. . . . My Lord and my God. . . . Because
thou hast seen me, Thomas, thou hast believed; blessed are
they that have not seen and have believed ” (John xx, 27-29).
Soon after, he elicits from Simon Peter by the Sea of
Tiberias the acknowledgement of his divinity and sovereignty,
and causes him to make good again his former threefold denial
by a threefold confession of love for his Lord, and to crown
this with the confession of the divine omniscience of Jesus :
“ Lord, thou knowest all things,” even the hidden depths of
my heart (John xxi, 15-17).
Jesus acts as Lord and God when he, by his own personal
power, promises to send the Spirit of his Father : “ I send the
promise of my Father upon you” (Luke xxiv, 49); and he
transmits to the disciples his own divine power of working
miracles in his name: “ In my name they shall cast out devils ;
they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up ser-
pents; and if they shall drink any deadly thing, it shall not
hurt them; they shall lay their hands upon the sick, and they
shall recover” (Mark xvi, 17, 18).


Finally, in the hour of his ascension there stream forth from
his divine consciousness those sublime words : “ All power is
given to me in heaven and in earth. Going, therefore, teach
ye all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever I have commanded you. And behold, I
am with you all days even to the consummation of the world ”
(Matt, xxviii, 18-20).
Jesus is the possessor and administrator of all power,
supremacy and glory in heaven and on earth. That is, in fact,
the most popular, and at the same time, scientifically, the most
complete transcription of the idea of “ Lord God,” “ Jehovah
Elohim ”; the transcription that conveys the meaning which
was familiar and perfectly comprehensible, especially to every
Israelite, and to everyone acquainted with the Old Testament.
Even Adolf Julicher remarks in regard to this : “ When, in
Matt, xxviii, 18, the risen Jesus takes leave of his disciples
with the words, ‘ All power is given to me in heaven and
in earth,’ after he has already (Matt, iii, 17) been announced
as God’s well-beloved Son, and meanwhile, between his
baptism and his last address to his disciples, has (Matt, xi,
27) imparted to them that his Father had given over every-
thing to him—what else is that but the confession of Paul
to the almighty Son of God?” 1
And since Jesus closes his earthly existence and finishes his
revelation “ in the name of the Father and of the Son and of
the Holy Ghost,” he puts himself on a level with God the
Father and the Holy Ghost. He unites himself with the
Father and the Holy Ghost in the one mysterious Trinity,
whose separate Persons possess the same divine sublimity,
efficacy and nature, and for that very reason exist in the
same divine unity : “ In the name (not in the names) of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.” And if he,
at the moment of his return to the Father and to the Holy
Ghost, promises nevertheless to remain by and with his
followers on this earth for ever, he proves thereby precisely
that he is raised above time and space, eternal and omni-
present, and that he has, in his divinity, existed before all
time in the bosom of the Holy Trinity, to which he now
returns in his divinity and humanity.
Thus Jesus, as he takes leave of the world, and at the
moment of his ascension and return to heaven, eliminates
every merely human and creature-like conception of his
person, his Messiahship, his sovereignty and his divine son-
ship. 2
1 Julicher, Paulus und Jesus, 30.
2 In regard to the genuineness of the trinitarian text, Matt, xxix, ig,
cf. (apart from the “ Introductions to the Gospel of Matthew ”) Lepin,
Jisus, Messie et Fils de Dieu, 334 ff. (Paris, 1906).


ll.— The Divinity of Christ in the Early Church.
i. Its Representation in the Acts of the Apostles.
Fortunately we know exactly how the original messengers
of the Gospel executed their commission as teachers in regard
to the person of Jesus, and how the early Church conceived
its faith in Christ. The physician and Evangelist Luke relates
it to us in his Acts of the Apostles. In that book the oldest
historian of the young Church draws the portrait of Christ
according to the discourses and deeds of the Apostles, begin-
ning with the festival of Pentecost up to nearly the end of the
first Christian generation. The Acts of the Apostles closes
with the first Roman imprisonment of St Paul, which began
very probably in a.d. 58-59, or, at the latest, 60. 1 Only the
second part 2 of the book of Luke, however, falls in the fifties.
The first and by far the greater part embraces only the first
twenty years after the Saviour’s death. We rely for what
follows principally on this oldest portion of the Acts of the
Apostles, since the period of the fifties is pourtrayed expressly
through the Epistles of Paul. Indeed, we lay the greatest
weight on the first nine chapters of the Acts of the Apostles,
which begin immediately with Pentecost, describe events
entirely within the year of Jesus’ death and the year im-
mediately succeeding it, 3 and contain especially the original
teachings of Peter, Stephen and Philip.
It is, then, a matter of the greatest interest to see that these
old ’*disciples proceed exactly as the Master himself had
formerly done. To their Jewish hearers, to whom their words
were at first uttered, they declare with all possible intensity
that Jesus is the Christ promised in the Old Testament:
“ Therefore let all the house of Israel know most certainly
that God hath made both Lord and Christ this same Jesus,
whom you have crucified ” (Acts ii, 36). That is the funda-
mental tone of all the teachings of the earliest days, (Acts
iii, 18; v, 42; ix, 20, 22; xvii, 3; xviii, 5, 28).
To prove the true Messiahship of Jesus, these preachers
of the Gospel make appeal to the miracles which the Man
of Nazareth performed, and which were known to many of
1 K. Kellner, Warm waren Petrus und Paulus in Rom? in Katholih,
11-38 (1887); P. Schanz, Das Jahr der Gejangennahme des hi. A fast els
Paulus, in Histor. fahrbuch, 199-222 (1887); Adolf Harnack, Chrono-
logic der altchristl. Literatur, 1, 233-239 (Leipzig, 1897); Belser, Zur
Chronologic des Paulus, in Theol. Quartschrift, 353-379, (1898); Fr. X.
Polzl, Der W elta-postel Paulus, 431-452 (Regensburg, 1905).
2 The first part ends in chap, xv, 35; then follows a transition to the
second part, which begins chap, xvi, 6.
3 Harnack, Die Chronologic der altchristl. Literatur, i, 237, puts the
conversion and earliest activity of Paul, recorded in Acts ix, still in
the year 30. Some other investigators suppose a somewhat greater
interval between the death of Jesus and the conversion of Paul.


their hearers from having seen and heard of them. “ Jesus
of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you by miracles
and wonders and signs, which God did by him, in the midst
of you, as you also know ” (Acts ii, 22, pentecostal speech of
Peter). In particular they emphasize, as a most important
feature, the fact that the Messiah Jesus had passed through
suffering, death and resurrection into his Messianic glory
(Acts ii, 36; iv, 27; x, 39; xiii, 23-37). It is constantly
declared by them that Jesus has become Lord and Christ,
or has been made so by God. Not as though during his life
he had not been Lord and Christ, but that he has now been
raised to a position, and has attained to a state of glory, in
which he finally and in the clearest way proves to the world
that he is Lord and Christ, and demonstrates it to his Church.
Starting from that point, however, these earliest preachers
announced also the divine sonship of Jesus. Already in his
Pentecostal teaching and the following speech of defence
before the tribunal Peter says : “ The God of Abraham and
the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob, the God of our fathers,
hath glorified his Son Jesus, whom you indeed delivered up
and denied before the face of Pilate. ... To you first,
God, raising up his Son, hath sent him. . . . For a truth
there assembled Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles
and the people of Israel against the holy child Jesus, whom
thou hast anointed. . . . Signs and wonders to be done by
the name of thy holy Son, Jesus.” 1 Philip demands faith in
“ the Son of God, Jesus,” as the first condition for baptism
(Acts viii, 37; it is true, the text of this passage is not wholly
certain). Faith in Jesus, the Son of God, forms an essential
1 Acts iii, 13, 26; iv, 27, 30. The Greek text of Luke does not, it is
true, translate the Aramaic words of Peter in these four passages with
l itis (Son), but with seals, which, indeed, means first “ child ”or “ son,”
but can also mean “ servant,” “ menial.” Yet it is certain that in
Biblical or Septuagint Greek, vcus is preferably used instead of viis,
when the reference is to the Messiah; as, for example, in the Book of
Wisdom ii, 13, compared with ii, 16 and 18. But also in the non-
biblical literature of the first century after Christ, Jesus is sometimes
called 6 ttcus toO Qeou, when the “ Sou of God ” is undoubtedly meant.
So in the teaching of the Apostles, ix, 2, 3 and x, 2, and the Epistle of
Clement of Rome to the Corinthians, lix, 2-4. But Luke, the author of
the Acts, of all the New Testament writers, “ stands nearest in his style
to the Septuagint Bible; he lived in the Greek Bible ” (Harnack, Lukas
der Arzt, 120 note 2), and the teaching of the Apostles, as well as the
Epistle of Clement, came into existence almost at the same time as the
Acts. Where, therefore, in the Acts the Christ Jesus is called 6 Tats toO
Oeou, this should certainly be translated “ Son of God.” So much the
more as in two of these four passages divine things are spoken of the
Saviour. In Acts iv, 30, Peter says that “ Signs and wonders are done
by the name of the holy Son ( 7rais6s ) of God, Jesus. Similarly, in Acts
iii, r 6, after Jesus had immediately before (Acts iii, 15) been called
“ the author of life.” The Peshitto has on this account translated the
ra is, referring to Jesus, in all the four passages in the Acts by the
word “ Son.”


element of the Gospel, as it was announced by the newly
converted Apostle to the Gentiles. Immediately after his
conversion, he “ preached Jesus in the synagogues, that he is
the Son of God ” (Acts ix, 20, 6 vlo s tov 0eoC). He declares
that it is written also of Jesus in Psalm ii: “ Thou art my
Son; this day have I begotten thee” (Acts xiii, 33).
Jesus the Messiah and the Son of God —these are, there-
fore, beyond a doubt cardinal points of the christology of the
original Church. Just as certainly also can it be proved that
the expressions “ Messiah and Son of God ” were not applied
to Jesus in accordance with human standards, but in the sense
of a divine Messiah, a Son of God by nature, and a God-Man,
Jesus.
It is true, in the discourses of the Acts, the human element
in Jesus is also strongly emphasized. The speeches of the
early preachers of the Gospel represent him as a man to whom
God has borne witness by signs and wonders, and whom he
has anointed and consecrated with the Holy Ghost and divine
power for his works (Acts ii, 22; x, 38). Of this same man
it is, however, also asserted that he is “the author of life”
(Acts iii, 15), and one who has in himself natural and super-
natural life and imparts it to others; that in him “ alone is
salvation ” and “that there is no other name under heaven
given to men, whereby we must be saved (Acts iv, 12);
that “all receive through his name remission of sins who
believe in him” (Acts x, 43); and that “ he is the Judge of
the living and of the dead ” (Acts x, 42). With such expres-
sions one cannot speak of a mere man, however favoured and
gifted. Such language is suited only to divinity.
Together with the Messiahship and divine sonship of Jesus,
emphasis is also continually laid in the Acts of the Apostles,
and already, in fact, in Peter’s pentecostal speech, on his
sovereignty. Jesus receives from all the original preachers
of the Gospel and from the entire early Church throughout
the name Kyrios, “Lord,” “the Lord,” “the Lord .Jesus
Christ,” “our Lord,” “our Lord Jesus Christ”—we meet
these appellations on almost every page. Kyrios is the proper
name of Jesus Christ. Anyone can convince himself of this
who turns over the pages of the Acts, to say nothing of those
writings of the New Testament in which the conditions of the
second generation are more specially pourtrayed.
What means, then, in the Acts of the Apostles the title
Kyrios, "the Lord,” given to Christ? We have already
elsewhere anticipated the meaning of this, and promised to
produce at this place the proof of our interpretation of the
name “ Lord.”
In itself the word “ Lord ” is a form of address which does
not signify anything superhuman or even extraordinary.
Precisely as in our language, so in that of the Semite (Matt.


xiii, 27; xxi, 30; John iv, 11; xx, 15), and of the Greek, 1 it
can be used as a form of politeness towards an equal or as
a sign of veneration and submission towards superiors. There
is no doubt that Jesus in his earthly life was addressed in this
sense, as Lord, by people who saw in him merely an ordinary
man and teacher.
But the designation of Jesus as “ Lord ” by the first Chris-
tians had nothing to do with this simple form of address. It
appears among them at once and continuously as a proper
name of an exclusively religious import. What they wished
to express by it must be shown by the linguistic usages of the
time in the Grecian, Jewish and Christian forms of speech.
The Greek contemporaries of earliest Christianity bestowed
the name Kyrios upon their gods, and, indeed, united with it
the idea of special divine might and sovereign power. Accord-
ingly, the God-fearing, pious man who had chosen some
divinity as his particular defender and patron called him his
Kyrios, Lord. 2 In so far as the Roman emperors allowed
themselves to be made equal to the gods, they also claimed
the title Kyrios Dominus. Augustus and Tiberius, it is true,
declined the divine appellation. But their successors had
themselves frequently enough entitled Domini, and, indeed,
always in connection with the divine honours bestowed upon
the living emperors. 3
Since, therefore, the Christians designated and honoured
Jesus as 6 K vpios, they placed him in opposition to the gods
and lords of paganism, not only as the one and only God and
Lord, but they placed Christ also especially “as the true,
divine Lord in contrast to the ‘ God and Lord ’ on the imperial
Roman throne.” 4 Therefore, the investment of Christ with
the title Kyrios denotes, in the light of the secular history of
the time, a recognition of the divinity of Jesus.
We are not, however, restricted to this proof alone. The
first Christians, indeed, justified their expression Kyrios by
the usage of the Greek language; yet this expression had its
origin in Old Testament and Jewish notions, and derived
its very definite meaning from that source. The divine proper
name Jehovah signified to the Jews living after the exile a
word which one should not utter and cannot utter on account
1 In Epictetus the physician is addressed as Lord (Diss. ii, 15, 5;
iii, 10, 15) by his patient; the soothsayer by him who questions him
(ii, 7,9); and the rhetorician by his admirer (iii; 23, 19). In letters the
father often receives from his son the title “ Lord,” as a relative does
from his kinsmen, and a superior from his inferiors. See the vouchers
for this in Adolf Deissmann’s Licht vom Osten, The N. T. and the
newly discovered Texts of the Greco-Roman World, 122, 125, 133, 152,
iss (Tubingen, 1909).
2 Proofs in Deissmann’s Licht vom Osten, 122 f., 128 f., 264 £E.
3 See Gustav Dalman, Die Worte Jesu, 271; Deissmann, op. cit., 114 ff.
265, 274.
* Gustav Dalman, of. cit., 271 f; Deissmann, of. cit., 233 ff.


of its infinite majesty and sanctity. Accordingly, wherever
the “unutterable name” Jehovah appears in the Bible text
it is provided with the vowels of the word Adonai and spoken
also as Adonai, “ Lord.” Adonai, Lord, has, therefore, the
same signification as Jehovah, God. 1
In the Septuagint, the Greco-Jewish translation of the Old
Testament, both names, Jehovah and Adonai are rendered
correctly and logically as Kyrios, “ Lord.” And, wherever in
the original text Jahwe ha Elohim stands, the Septuagint
translates it, according to genuine Jewish and Old Testament
usage, by Kvpios o #e6s—that is, the Lord God. Kyrios is,
therefore, the real proper name of the true God; and no
Palestinian or Greek Jew ever understood by the religious
designation “ Lord, our Lord,” anything other than the one
true God.
The Acts of the Apostles leaves no room for doubt that the
oldest Church adapted itself to this linguistic usage, by calling
Christ Kyrios, or Lord. In the no passages in which we
meet with Kyrios in the Acts, the designation in perhaps a
third of them refers directly to God, in another third directly
to Jesus Christ, and in the remaining third to God or to Jesus
Christ. The expression is evidently used indiscriminately of
God and of Jesus. For example, we find in Acts xi, 20 and 21
the surname Kyrios three times. The first time the reference
is to Jesus, the second and third times to God and Jesus
jointly. Very often it is impossible to decide whether the
name “ Lord ” refers directly to God or to Jesus, or to both.
The discourse glides imperceptibly from one to the other
(Acts ii, 47; ix, 28, 31). This fact is a clear proof how the
Lord Jesus is closely identified with the Lord God.
Moreover, in many places by means of further additions it
is expressly indicated that the appellation Kyrios, “Lord”
belongs to the Saviour as his own thoroughly divine name.
The Lord Jesus, through the mediation of Peter, heals the
paralytic (Acts ix, 34). The Lord Jesus strikes dowri and
converts Saul (Acts ix, 5-27). In the name of the Lord Jesus
and through the power of the Lord Jesus the disciples work
all their miracles (Acts iii, 6; iv, 7-12; xvi, 18). In the name
of the Lord Jesus they impart baptism for the forgiveness of
sins (Acts ii, 38; x, 48; xix, 5). Faith in the Lord Jesus and
the grace of the Lord Jesus bring salvation (Acts xv, n;
xvi, 31). For the name of the Lord Jesus Christ the disciples
sacrifice their lives (Acts xv, 26; xxi, 13). To the Lord Jesus
Stephen gave up the ghost (Acts vii, 59), just as the dying
Saviour gave up the ghost to his Father (Luke xxiii, 46). The
Lord Jesus is the “ author of life ” (Acts iii, 15), and “ Lord
of all ” (Acts x, 36).
I.
21
1 See G. Hollmann, Welche Religion hatten die Juden ah Jesus
auftrat ? 26 t. (Halle, 1905).


This sovereignty and dominion are, therefore, directly
divine attributes. They include precisely what in the Old
and New Testaments is looked upon as the mark of true
divinity: God is Jehovah, Adonai, Kvpios —that is, the
highest and unlimited Lord and Master of heaven and earth.
Since the early preachers of the Gospel, from the first feast of
Pentecost on, already proclaim, as a cardinal point of the
Gospel: “ Therefore let all the house of Israel know most
certainly that God hath made both Lord and Christ this same
Jesus, whom you have crucified” (Acts ii, 36), they put the
Lord Jesus Christ on an equality with the Lord God.
This is proven also from another very important point of
view—namely, from the position which the “ Lord" Jesus
Christ holds in the inner religious life of the first Christians.
The Christians were recognized from the beginning as “ in-
vokers of the name of Jesus ” and “ worshippers of the Lord
Jesus.” Without infringing on the worship of the Father,
which was, indeed, the same as the worship of the Son, the
early Christians passed from the Old Testament worship of
Jehovah to the worship of the “ Lord ” Jesus. It is true, the
Apostles in Jerusalem still took part in the religious services
practised by Israel, and paid visits to the temple at the usual
hours for prayer, in order to pray to the God of their fathers
with their people and for their people (Acts iii, 1; xxii, 17). 1
But together with this common bond, which still united the
Christians with the Jews, the former brought their special
knowledge of God also in their worship to an unequivocal
expression. This was done by the adoration and invocation
of the Lord Jesus. He formed, from the very first, the central
point in the specifically Christian religion and piety.
To Saul first, at his conversion, comes the commandment
of the disciple Ananias to call upon the name of the Lord
Jesus as a fundamental condition of baptism and forgiveness
of sins (Acts xxii, 16). Indeed, Saul had not yet been con-
verted to the Lord, when the Christians in Damascus, as at
Jerusalem, were already invoking the name of the Lord Jesus,
and the whole number of believers, in reference to this worship
of him, were simply termed the people who called upon the
name of the Lord Jesus (Acts ix, 14, 21). And still earlier,
the dying Stephen prays to the Lord Jesus for himself and
his murderers —just as Jesus himself had, on the cross, prayed
to his Father —“ Lord Jesus, receive my spirit,” “ Lord Jesus,
lay not this sin to their charge ” (Acts vii, 59, 60). In fact,
already at Pentecost Peter refers the words of the prophet
Joel, “ Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall
be saved,” to Jesus. For the discourse which the Prince of
the Apostles connects with this prophetic text ends in the one
1 See the account of Hegesippus concerning the indefatigable praying
of James in the Temple, in Eusebius, H. E., ii, xxiii, 6.


thought that Jesus Christ is the Lord, in whose name are
forgiveness of sins, salvation and blessedness (Acts ii, 21-38).
It is, however, doubtful whether Jesus or God is the Lord to
whom the Apostles prayed before Pentecost, and said : “Thou,
Lord, who knowest the hearts of all men, show whether of
these two thou hast chosen ” (Acts i, 24).
As we see, the early Christians do not content themselves
with an enthusiastic veneration and glorification of their
Master. No, they transfer to him the genuine invocation of
God and the adoration which is due to and is paid only to the
Most High God. They pray to the Lord Jesus, and expect
from him an answer to their prayers, grace and forgiveness
of sins, just as from God himself.
Of this central and thoroughly divine position of the Lord
Jesus in the religious life and prayers of the oldest Christians,
even the most pronounced enemies of the divinity of Jesus
are convinced, and are surprised at it. Johannes Weiss, for
example, expresses himself on this point as follows : “ In
order to explain what the use of the name ‘ Lord ’ meant for
the early Christians religiously, one would have to write out
the whole New Testament. For the formula ‘ our Lord Jesus
Christ ’ contains the religion of the primitive Church in
embryo. Obedient submission, reverence, a holy fear of
wounding him, the feeling of absolute dependence upon him
in all things, . . . gratitude, love, trust—in short, everything
that man can feel in regard to divinity, all that is expressed
in this name. . . . This looking upon God and Christ as
being on an equality, which exactly corresponds to the joint
sovereignty of both, is characteristic of the piety of the
original Church. As the Christians cry ‘ Abba, Father,’ and
pray to him, so, undoubtedly, they have prayed to Christ in
the most literal sense of the word, not only as an act of
homage, but also in the form of a request. Of this invocation of
the Lord we have several isolated instances; but such prayers
were surely vastly more numerous. The Christians, therefore,
actually stand in regard to Christ as they do to God. . . .
The moment when the first Christian addressed his prayer to
the ascended Christ is the natal hour of that religion, which
till the present day appears to many Christians as the true and
only authorized Christianity. Other modern Christians may
for themselves repudiate prayer to Christ and declare it to be
an error, but the historian must say that Christianity from its
earliest beginnings has practised the worship of Christ,
together with the faith in God the Father, as the to it perfectly
natural form of religion.” 1 Like Johannes Weiss, a number of
1 Johannes Weiss, Chrisfus, 24 f. (Tubingen, 1909). See also the
admirable treatment of the subject by Theo. Zahn, Skizzen aus dem
Leben der alien Kirche, 271-308, 3rd ed. (Leipzig, 1908), under Prayer
to Jesus in the Apostolic Age.


the most important Protestant investigators of various ten-
dencies also recognize that “the Lord Jesus Christ” in the
days of the original Apostles and the early Church is in every
respect made equivalent to God. This is the opinion of
Gustav Dalman, 1 G. B. Stevens, 2 B. Weiss, 3 K. Muller, 4
E. von Hartmann, 5 and Theodor Zahn. 6
Jesus Christ, therefore, from the day of the Church’s
foundation, was venerated, invoked and prayed to in place of
Jehovah; and the early Christians give significant and definite
expression to this practical recognition of the divinity of
Christ by transferring to Jesus the name Jehovah —Adonai,
Kyrios, Lord., This is the christology of the Acts of the
Apostles. 7
2. Historical Genuineness of this Representation.
In order to weaken, or, when possible, to eliminate, the
immense impression of this fact, one naturally takes refuge
again in the stereotyped expedient, that the Acts of the
Apostles was written comparatively late, and that it is
questionable how far Luke gives us in it the portrait of Christ
of the earliest generation, and how far this had been already
refashioned by the faith of the later decades. This charge,
which, in regard to the New Testament writings in general,
has been already refuted, is in particular absolutely without
foundation in reference to the conception of Jesus in the Acts
of the Apostles.
No less a man than Adolf Harnack, the leader of the liberal
Protestant school, has lately undertaken, in two masterfully
designed and executed monographs, the defence of the Acts
of the Apostles against the unheard-of accusation brought
against it by representatives in other respects of his own
views. 8 He describes the procedure of the latter with the
words : “ The book is alleged to be a comparatively late and
motley compilation, in which the editor contributed a small
but certainly a bad part; the autobiographical portions are not
the work of the author, but excerpts from some source, or else
purely literary inventions; historical mistakes are as numerous
in it as are the rents and badly concealed reparations; the
portrait of Paul is drawn with a bias, or from a lack of
personal acquaintance, and the description in the first chapters
1 Die Worte Jesu, 271 f.
2 The Theology of the New Testament, 266 (London, 1901).
3 Lehrbuch der biblischen Theologie des N. T 133 (Berlin, 1903).
* Unser Herr, in Bibiiscke Zeit- und Streitfragen, 133 (1906).
5 Das Christentum des N. T., 178 (1905). 6 id., 275 ff.
7 See also Mangenot, Jisus, Messie et Fils de Dieu dans les Actes des
AfStres (Paris, 1908).
8 Adolf Harnack, Lukas der Arzt, der Verfasser des dritten Evan-
geliums und der Afostelgeschichte (Leipzig, 1906); Die Afostel-
geschichte, Untersuchungen (Leipzig, 1908); Neue Untersuchungen
zur Afg, und zur Abfassung der synoftischen Evangelien (Leipzig,
1910).


is hardly more than an imaginary painting; Peter is repre-
sented in the style of Paul, and Paul in the style of Peter—but
who can count all the accusations which have been raised
against this book? And if they were only tangible accusa-
tions ! But since a large part of them have been conclusively
refuted, one has now almost more to do with a general mis-
trust of the book, and with fanciful ideas and patronizing
denials, than with definite objections; but mostly, however,
with the fruits of the mischievous method of hanging heavy
burdens on the slender thread of one single observation, and,
in the case of a New Testament writer, of making no allow-
ance for weakness or ignorance, but rather using these as
explosive material to blow up the entire book.” 1
It is, indeed, astonishing what violent attacks have been
made, even down to the most recent times, on the Acts of the
Apostles, solely because its contents, and more especially its
christology, have been to liberal critics a thorn in the eye.
In order to deal as they like with the contents of the Acts
of the Apostles, Luke, the pupil of the Apostles, must under
no condition be accepted as its author, although the unani-
mous Christian tradition, which can be traced back to the
middle of the second century, is in favour of Luke. In fact,
although investigators like Credner, B. Weiss, Klostermann,
Zahn, Renan, Hobart, Ramsay, Hawkins, Blass and many
others (to say nothing at all of Catholics) have proved the
correctness of this tradition, and although the liberals have
not* been able to bring one valid argument against it, almost
all of them, from Konigsmann, De Wette, Baur, and Zeller
to Wendt, Schurer, Pfleiderer, von Soden, Julicher and John
Weiss, have agreed in denying the authorship of Luke. Only
since Harnack has spoken, and has brought forth an over-
whelming mass of proof against the liberal critics in his
Luke the Physician, has the correctness of the tradition been
acknowledged.
Thereby also the date of the Acts of the Apostles has entered
a new phase. It is true, the fantastic wishes and assertions
of some critics, according to whom the “ Acts ” was not
written till the second century, had already given place to
the universal recognition that the book was written much
earlier. The liberals also are gradually, in considerable
numbers, approaching the views of orthodox investigators. 2
Nevertheless, Harnack had, until 1906, firmly held the view
1 Die Afostelgeschichte, 19-20.
2 As for the date of the Acts, F. Blass assumes it to be between
64-70, Acta Afostolorum, sive Lucae ad Theofhilum liber alter (1895);
B. Weiss gives it as about the year 80, Lehrbuch der Einleitung in das
N • T., 3rd ed. (1897); A. C. Headlam assumes for it the year 70,
Dictionary of the Bible, vol. 1, 30; Th. Zahn, about 75, Einleitung in
das N. T., ii, 1899; Knabenbauer, as shortly after 62, Commentarius
in Actus Afostolorum (1899); R. B. Rackham, as the year 64, The Acts
of the Afostles (1901); Belser, as 63, Einleitung in das N. T. (1901).


that Luke wrote only between the years a.d. 78 and 93. 1
Now, however, the Berlin critic himself contradicts the argu-
ments brought forward for the above date, 2 and adduces
“very weighty observations” which favour the view “that
the Acts of the Apostles [and therefore also the Gospel] were
composed already at the beginning of the sixties.” 3 The only
reason which deters the rationalistic scholar from finally
agreeing to this date lies in the miracles and prophecies
narrated in the Acts; for it would be almost impossible to
contest the historical authenticity of the records of those
miracles, and to declare them to be myths and legends, if the
Acts of the Apostles had appeared only from ten to thirty years
after the events described. 4
If the Acts of the Apostles was already written at a time
when many witnesses of the events narrated in that book were
still alive, and could test the truth of the representation given,
the further charge that the author has drawn from thoroughly
unreliable or even imaginative sources falls at once to the
ground. On the contrary, it can be proved with certainty
that Luke for the first part of the Acts relied on admirable
oral traditions and, indeed, on written sources also, while he
wrote the whole second half (chapters xvi to xxviii) partly as
an eye-witness, partly on the ground of the narratives of co-
operating witnesses. 5
This material—a source of information both autobio-
graphical and external, and written as well as oral —Luke
worked up with historical fidelity. This is vouched for not
only by his own assertion and the demonstrable conscientious-
ness of the historian, but also by the whole content and form
of his book. Luke makes throughout, not the impression of
“a wild enthusiast in the form of a physician,” as the
extreme liberal critics describe him; he is “ neither uncritical
nor credulous. . . . Credulous and uncritical writers of that
period brought out very different productions 1 Moreover,
this historian stands, in regard to the greater part of his work,
under a control than which one more severe can hardly be
conceived—namely, that of the Epistles of Paul. That these
writings are the productions of the moment, and originate
from a man of the most marked subjectivity, increases even
more the severity of the test. Yet only the over-scrupulous
and cavillers can fail to recognize that the Acts of the Apostles
1 Harnack, Chronologie der altchristl. Literatur, i, 246-250, 718 (1897);
Lukas der Arzt, 18, 115. 3 Die A fostelgeschichte, 217 fi.
3 id, , p. 219. 4 id., pp. 224, 225.
8 Harnack, Die Apostelgeschichte, 131-198; Lukas der Arzt, 65-111;
Th. Zahn, id.. Die von Lukas beniiizien Quellen, 394-425; Belser, id.,
Die Quellen der Apostelgeschichte, igi-213; W. Hadorn, Die Apostel-
geschichte und ihr geschichtlicher Wert, 10 fi. (1906), Das Evangelium
in der Apostelgeschichte (1907); H. J. Andrews," The Acts of the Apostles
(London, 1908).


has, in many dozens of important and unimportant passages,
stood the test which the Epistles of Paul mean for it. What
still remains, apart from a few trifles, is the description of the
apostolic council and that of the self-defence of Paul in the
last speeches, and in general his attitude towards the Jews
in his last sojourn at Jerusalem.” 1
But also these parts, which cannot be verified from the
Pauline Epistles, are unassailable. In fact, precisely that
which the critics have most contested in Luke “ bears the
stamp of historical reality,” and the critics doubt it only
because “ they treat their fanciful notions about the book
more respectfully than they do the great lines of the work
which they in part acquiesce in, as a matter of course, and
in part immediately criticize, because they know better.” 2
Harnack sums up his final judgement on the Acts of the
Apostles, based on the most thorough analysis and painfully
exact investigations, as follows : “ Viewed from almost every
possible standpoint of historical criticism, it is a solid, estim-
able and in many respects an extraordinary work,” 3 “ a
critically historical production which calls for the highest
recognition,”' 1 “a literary achievement of the first rank.” 5
In one point only does Harnack decide against the author
of the Acts—namely, in reference to the belief in miracles and
the reports of them. 6 And just in this point Harnack departs
from the orthodox Christian opinion of the Acts of the
Apostles. He cannot share the “prejudices” of orthodox
investigators who take miracles seriously. 7 But whoever
studies the Apostelgeschichte of the Berlin critic with an open
mind will find that the tables are turned, and that Harnack
approaches his judgement of the work of Luke with the
prejudice that there are no miracles; that this prejudice brings
a painful discord into his otherwise admirable work; that his
explanations and arguments become both threadbare and
astonishingly naive when he endeavours to keep clear of the
miraculous; that he lets his judgement, as an historian, be
obscured, and, in fact, finally be actually influenced by his
philosophical view which is antagonistic to miracles; and yet
that he cannot, after all, either deny Luke’s accounts of
miracles, or prove them to be “ legends growing with almost
inconceivable rapidity, 8 or myths, or in any way explain them
as natural events. Thus criticism will see itself compelled,
not only, as Harnack says, 9 in all other points, but also in
regard to the miracles in the Acts of the Apostles, to return
1 Harnack, Afostelgeschickte, 17-18. s id., 10.
3 id., 222, 3 id., jo.
5 Lukas der Arzt, 101.
* id., 18. Nevertheless, he “ absolves Luke from religious mysteries,
tricks of magic, pious absurdities, etc.” 7 id., 225.
8 id., 224. * id., 225.


to the traditional positions and to accept the work of Luke
as in all respects a faithful reproduction of the history of the
oldest Church.
This certainly means that the Acts of the Apostles, especi-
ally as regards christology, gives us historically positive
information concerning those first days of the Church. After
what has been said no more proof of this is needed. Jesus
Christ—the Person and the Gospel of Jesus Christ—forms,
after all, so emphatically the principal feature of the Acts of
the Apostles that the work itself could not be historical if its
christology were not historical. Moreover, the portrait of
Jesus, as it is sketched by the different Apostles and disciples
in the Acts, is, in spite of its general uniformity, so unique in
its details that we cannot possibly suppose that Luke
brought only his type of Christ—in case he may have had
a type of his own—into his book and into the preaching of
the first messengers of Christ. Even P. W. Schmiedel writes :
“ The portraiture of Jesus is more simple and agrees more
perfectly with the most authentic passages in the first three
Gospels than is elsewhere the case in the whole New Testa-
ment. It is hardly credible that this christology does not
originate from the oldest source.” 1 Moreover, the christology
of the book of Luke is so intimately interwoven with the un-
disputed facts related in it, that one without the other is not
to be thought of.
Even the formerly frequently asserted theory that the
speeches in the first part of the Acts, which contain the most
significant christological utterances of Peter, James, Philip,
Stephen and the newly converted Paul, may not be historical
but were composed by Luke himself, now proves worthless.
Of course they bear the imprint of the style of Luke, since
they were originally spoken in the Aramaic language. But,
with all the fineness and freedom of his linguistic portraiture,
Luke has altered his sources of information so little essentially
that we distinctly feel the Hebraic mode of thought and
expression of the original. Moreover, the added statements
in regard to places, dates and incidents which are added to
the story are so peculiar and exact that it would have been
impossible subsequently to invent them. Furthermore, the
separate speeches have throughout an individual stamp; so
individual indeed that we find in them the character and per-
sonality of the different earliest preachers of the Gospel, Peter,
James, Stephen, Paul and others. 2 Even Harnack, therefore,
does not consider these speeches as inventions or plagiarisms
from Paul’s writings, but as an “original possession” 3 (of
the Church), and he argues in favour of the existence of
1 Encyclopedia Biblica (Cheyne and Black), article Acts of the
Apostles, xiv, col. 48.
2 See Harnack, Apostelgeschichte, 101-110. 3 id., 109 f.


written sources from which Luke derived them. 1 In fact,
even if we were willing to concede that they were composed
freely only at a later date, their christological import would
still prove itself as belonging to the very first era. They
contain, as Johannes Weiss correctly asserts, “ such primitive
Christian characteristics, as refer back to the standpoint of
the oldest Church. . . . Whether they originate at a later
epoch or not, they contain, precisely in their christology, very
ancient ideas.” 2
This must still be especially emphasized in regard to the
christology of the “ Lord,” in which the divinity of Jesus is
expressed most clearly in the Acts of the Apostles. Our
opponents hold firmly to the assertion that Luke borrowed the
titles Lord, our Lord, and Lord Jesus Christ from the
Epistles of Paul, and smuggled them into the original history
of the Church. Against this two things can be said in reply.
First, the “ Lord-christology ” is such an essential part of the
Acts of the Apostles that the one must fall as an historic
monument if the other does. Paul has not brought that
christology into the Church, but has himself found it
in the Church. We meet with its first expressions already
before the ascension of the Lord—that is, at a time which
antedates the facts related in the Acts as well as the Epistles
of Paul. Paul himself furnishes us the proof that Christ, in
the primitive epoch described in the Acts, and, indeed, already
in the first Jewish-Christian Church, was called “ Lord ” and
“ ouy Lord.” This is made certain by the Aramaic formula
“ Maranatha”—that is, “ our Lord cometh,” or “ our Lord,
come !” 3 which “ must originate from the original Church.” 4
Paul has, therefore, only reproduced “ the name of Kyrios, 5
which came down to him from the oldest Church.” Instead
of calling Paul the inventor of the “ Lord-christology,” and
Luke its Pauline heir and plagiarist, as most liberal critics
do, both Paul and Luke must, on the contrary, have learned
to designate Jesus Christ as the “Lord” from the-early
Church.
Also the divine import which this name has in the Acts of
the Apostles was not at all, as the liberals wish to make us
believe, 6 taken from Pauline theology and by Luke construed
into the confession of the ancient Church. Again, Paul’s
Epistles themselves are a guarantee and a proof of the fact
that really the original Church in the very first years of its
existence saw and worshipped God in the “Lord” Jesus
Christ, as Luke reports. It is an undeniable fact, which we
1 id., 136-139, 184-186. 2 Johannes Weiss, Christus (Tubingen, 1909).
3 1 Cor. xvi, 22; Rev. xxii, 20.
4 Johannes Weiss, Christus, 24. s id., 26.
* Even Harnack, Lukas der Arzt, 101, remarks of the author of the
Acts : “ He who acknowledged Christ as the Kyrios . . . was a follower
of Paul.”


shall scx>n demonstrate minutely, that about the fifties, when
Paul wrote his great Epistles, all Christians—old Apostles
and novices, Jewish and Hellenic Churches —everywhere
adored and invoked the Lord Jesus Christ—in short, offered
him a truly divine worship. 1
Already, in the Epistle to the Romans, therefore, when
Paul is writing to Christians whom he has not taught, but
who had been previously converted and by other teachers
(Peter), he speaks of the divinity of Jesus as of a doctrine
which is universally known and conceded by all, and about
which there is still no dispute among Christians (Rom. ix, 5).
It is, however, clearly unthinkable that such a universal
phenomenon, which was regarded as the nucleus of the
Christian religion only twenty years after the death of Jesus,
should have merely a short time before found its way into
the Church. On the contrary, Paul, already when he from
a persecutor became a confessor of Jesus, must have come
to know the disciples at Damascus and the Apostles at
Jerusalem as worshippers of the Lord Jesus.
Nothing, therefore, is more unwarranted than the sup-
position that faith in the divine nature of Jesus “ was still
quite unknown to the oldest community of disciples.” 2 Even
Alfred Loisy recognizes, on the contrary, that the christo-
logical dogma “ has been contained in the primitive tradition,
as the germ in the seed, as a real and living element.” 3 And
Smith, the radical American, professor of mathematics and
theological writer, declares frankly : “ The Jesus Christ of the
original Christianity ” (by which he means the Christianity of
the oldest period and the first days of the Apostolic preaching)
“ was not human but divine, the King of all kings, the Lord
of all lords, the Saviour, the Redeemer, the protecting God.” 4
The Christians, therefore, were from the beginning wor-
shippers of their Lord; and the Church, from the first hour
of its existence, regarded the adoration of its Founder as God,
as the distinguishing expression of its being. “ There is no
Gospel of Christ which has not proclaimed him as a heavenly
Lord and King. The same men who sailed with Jesus on the
Sea of Galilee, and ate and drank with him, have with death-
defying courage and irrepressible joy proclaimed this same
Jesus as the Lord exalted to the right hand of God, who has
given to his followers divine strength and life, and made them
certain of heavenly perfection. The speeches of Peter in the
first part of the Acts bear eloquent witness to the fact that
1 See, later on, our “ Paul and the Divinity of Christ,” as well as the
admirable treatment by Th. Zahn, Skizzen aus dem Leben der alien
Kirche, 271-308, 3rd ed. (1908), Die Anbeiung Jesu im Zeitalter der
A-postel.
2 Pfleiderer, Entwicklung des Christeniums, 24, cf. 29.
* VEvangile et VEglise, 162 (1902).
4 Der vorchristliche Christus, 41, cf, 33 (19061.


the earliest apostolic portrait of Christ also was glorified with
divine splendour.” 1 Even though the separate character-
istics and the more minute elaboration of the divine portrait
of Christ may have been for many still very obscure, and
though the more exact execution and the theological and
speculative apprehension of it may have preoccupied the first
Christians but little, certain it is that the faith of the Church
in the divinity of Jesus Christ was already complete on the
first feast of Pentecost, and with that feast began its vic-
torious march through the world.
That points, however, with infallible certainty to the origin
of this faith —to Jesus Christ, to his own divine consciousness,
and to his own declaration of divinity. “There is,” writes
Sanday, 2 “ nothing more wonderful in the history of human
thought than the quiet and unobtrusive way in which this
doctrine, which is for us so difficult, took its place without
struggle and controversy among Christian truths.” And the
wonder increases when we think that the first confessors of
the divinity of Jesus acknowledge this faith openly and with-
out the least doubt immediately after the death of the Master,
although their Jewish ideas, which they had brought with
them out of the synagogue, must have encouraged anything
rather than a belief in the Messiahship and divinity of Jesus.
Their faith is and remains a riddle, in fact, a psychological
impossibility, if Jesus Christ himself had not educated them
up to this faith, and if he had not made upon the disciples im-
mediately and directly the impression of a divine personality,
and had not proclaimed himself to them as God. Hence it
must be true, when the first messengers of the faith assure
us that the supernatural and divine element, which they speak
of in Jesus, goes back to his own words and command : “ He
commanded us to preach to the people, and to testify that
he ... is the Judge of the living and of the dead ” (Acts
x, 42).
III. —St Paul and the Divinity of Christ.
1. Pauline Christology.
Already in the Acts of the Apostles we have found an out-
line of Pauline christology. What especially interested us
in this were the beginnings of the christological views of the
Apostle to the Gentiles, which existed already before the
fifties. Of how Paul subsequently preached about his Master,
and what he thought of him, his writings give us profound,
abundant and comprehensive information. But, in addition,
they teach us what the whole Church at that time thought of
Jesus Christ. For not only may the Pauline teaching be
regarded as an expression of the universal Christian doctrine,
1 Feine, Paulus als Theologe, 44.
2 Epistle to the Romans , 16.


but we gain from the writings of Paul the certainty that there
was only one general Christian view of Jesus Christ, and that
it did not occur to anyone to call it in question in any way.
Thus the testimony of Paul becomes the testimony of all
Christendom in the fifties and sixties.
We observe, in the first place, that in the following in-
vestigation we appeal to all the Pauline writings in the New
Testament. The most of these are conceded by liberal critics
to be, at all events, authentic. It is true, they still try to
invalidate the genuineness of the pastoral Epistles and the
Epistle to the Hebrews. But the reasons alleged for suspect-
ing them are not at all tenable.
Moreover, the fact is, after all, admitted that the Epistles
whose authenticity is thus doubted are in substance Pauline —
that is, they elaborate Pauline ideas. And precisely the
christological ideas of the pastoral Epistles and the Epistle
to the Hebrews agree essentially with those of the other
writings of the Apostle. Even if, therefore, we should wish
to eliminate the former, the Pauline portrait of Christ would
still remain essentially the same.
Then, however, the “non-pauline” writings, thus elimin-
ated, would, nevertheless, have to be regarded as additional
productions of the same period. Besides the one witness for
Christ, Paul, a second and a third would thus announce them-
selves, and confirm and strengthen the utterances of the great
Apostle; and so, instead of one problem, our opponents would
have to solve two or three. They have, therefore, in any case
no interest in placing the christological teachings of the
pastoral Epistles and the Epistle to the Hebrews near to, yet
apart from the christology of Paul.
Still less is it allowable to discern in Paul’s writings a
progressive christology. Our opponents, for the most part,
make use of the well-known theory of evolution, adopted by
the sceptical historians of religion in the case of Paul in order
to make it more comprehensible how the Apostle has come,
little by little, to the notion of his “ Super-christ,” in opposi-
tion to history and the real record of Jesus. He, who from the
first had brought with him an almost superhuman idea of the
Christ-Messiah, has, it is said, under the influence of the
resurrected and exalted Jesus, in whom he erroneously
believed, raised his ideal of Christ ever higher and higher;
and every later Epistle shows such a christological progress
and evolution in comparison with previous Epistles until
finally the loftiest flight and climax of idealization and meta-
physical speculation was attained.
Certainly a very prejudiced manipulation of history. There
is also not a sign of justification for it, to say nothing of
a single solid reason. Professor Karl Clemen, a biographer
of Paul, who is certainly above suspicion, teaches his fol


lowers that “ Paul preached already at the beginning' pre-
cisely as he preached later; in the writings of Paul there is
no evolution.” 1
Is,- then, the doctrine of the divinity of Jesus Christ found
in the Pauline christology?
The majority of liberal critics answer positively “ No.”
According to K. Weizsacker, the Christ of Paul is merely “ a
man in the sense of a higher, supermundane world, ... with
a spiritual body and an intelligence which thinks entirely in
accordance with the spirit of God.” 2 Bernhard Weiss explains
him also as “ a man, who before and after his earthly life
enjoys a unique supernatural origin and existence, which,
however, is in no way above the grade of a creature.” 3 H. J.
Holtzmann asserts that Paul teaches only a “ man character-
ized by a divine life on earth, and consequently also, in a
spiritual form of existence above the earth, in the sphere of
God.” 4 Otto Pfleiderer declares :“It is true, he [Paul], like
the primitive Church, considered him to be a Son of David,
a naturally born man and Jew; but that applied only to his
outward manifestation, which formed merely a short episode
in the heavenly existence of the Son of God before and after
his life on earth.” This Son of God is “a supermundane,
spiritual being, a heavenly man, an exact likeness of God ”
in fact, everything except the metaphysical Son of God. 5
Julius Grill defines the Christ of Paul as a “ celestial man,
a pre-existing primitive man in the sphere of divine being.”
“ Thq life of this celestial man is pure spirituality ... in
contrast not only to all earthly and material being . . . but
also to every creature-like nature, in so far as it . . . frees
itself-from the primal source of spirit and life.” 6
Harnack calls the Christ of Paul temporarily certainly a
“divine Being.” But that this expression must be inter-
preted in a human sense, appears immediately from this
adjoining declaration of the Berlin critic: “ Paul, led by
Messianic dogmas and convinced by the impression -thus
made, has founded the speculative theory that not only was
God in Christ, but that Christ himself possessed a peculiar,
heavenly nature.” 7
1 Karl Clemen, Die Grundgedanken der faulinischen Theologie,
in Theologische Arbeiten aus dem Rheinischen Predigerverein, Neue
Folge, 9 Heft (Tubingen, 1907); Paulus, sein Leben und Wirken
(Giessen, 1904); Die Entwicklung der christlichen Religion (Leipzig,
1908).
3 Das a-postolische Zeitalier, 120 f., 3rd ed. (Tubingen, 1902).
3 Lehrbuch der biblischen Theologie, 300 ff. (Berlin, 1895).
4 Neutest. Theologie, i, 94 (Freiburg u. Leipzig, 1897).
5 Das Urchristentum, 701 ff., 2nd ed. (Berlin, 1902); Die Entstehung
des Christentums, 143 ff.; Religionsfhiloso-phie, 264 f., 3rd ed. (Berlin,
1896).
* Untersuchungen iiber die Entstehung des IV Evangeliums, 68-70
(1902). 7 Wesen des Christentums, 116.


Eduard von Hartmann finds that the Christ of Paul, before
his earthly life, pre-existed not merely ideally but really, as a
spirit, yet not as a celestial man, or (what is the same thing)
as the Son of God, to which position he becomes exalted only
by his resurrection, yet in such a way that he always remains
a being subordinate to divinity.” 1
If we wish to lend credence to Adolf Jiilicher, we find that
Paul teaches, already working “ with a mythological way of
thinking,” that “ Christ is a celestial man ... a man like
ourselves, consisting of body and soul; both of which are,
however, of a celestial substance —in fact, of precisely that
substance which will also be ours in the period when all is
made perfect. God has, in all his works, brought him forward
as a Mediator.” 2 H. Wendt says in different words the same
thing, when he defines the Pauline Christ as an “ Incarnation
of a divine, pre-existent Spirit, in accordance with the Jewish
conception of the Messiah;” 3 yet not to be spoken of as
actually God.
O. Holtzmann similarly characterizes the christology of the
Apostle Paul: “ For Paul, in place of the real historic Jesus,
appeared the image of the Son of God, who once had been
active in the creation of the world, and who since then had
dwelt with God in a divine form as the celestial man.” 4
For Arnold Meyer “ the Christ of Paul is the celestial Son
of God ... a heavenly image of the Godhead; a mediator,
through whom the sublime Godhead had relation with the
lower world. ... It has not been possible for Paul, however
high his conception of Christ, to call him God.” 5 “ For Paul
he is the new spiritual man, originating from heaven . . .
who descended from heaven into this gloomy, earthly world,
with its evil powers and dominions, to redeem us from
them.” 6
This series of citations gives us sufficient information of
how the liberal school of critics for the most part regards the
Pauline christology. Among all their shades of views on
other subjects, the majority of liberal critics maintain that
Paul certainly teaches a Christ who pre-existed before his
earthly life in some kind of form in heaven, and, after his
death and resurrection, is continuing again his glorious life
in heaven —a celestial man, the Messiah of the Jewish
1 Das Christentum des N. T„ 218 I. note (Sachsa i. Harz, 1905).
* Die Religion ]esu, in Kultur der Gegenwart, i, 87, No. 4 (Berlin
u. Leipzig, 1906).
3 System der gottlichen Lehre, ii, 351 (Gottingen, 1906).
* Christus, 124 f. (Leipzig, 1907).
6 Was uns Jesus heute ist, 7 f., cf. 5 ff. 18-23 (Tubingen, 1907); cf.
Wer hat das Christentum begriindet, Jesus oder Paulus! 25 (Tubingen,
1907).
* Bousset, Jesus, 97 (Tubingen, 1907); cf. Der Afostel Paulus (Tubin-
gen, 1906).


Apocalypse; but that Paul does not concede to his Christ a
divine mode of existence and a divine nature. Really not?
The Epistles of Paul, examined without prejudice, say the
contrary. They teach the divinity of Christ clearly and ex-
pressly.
First of all, they attribute to the Saviour a thoroughly
divine efficiency, which he has exerted on this world of
creatures before, during and after his earthly life. Before his
life on earth, in union with God the Father, he created the
entire world. Again and again Paul attributes to the pre-
existent Christ the work of creation. The thing is so evident
that it does not even occur to the liberal investigators to deny
it. They do, however, assert that Paul regards his Christ—
relying on Neoplatonism and the pagan-Jewish doctrine of
spirits—only as a world-former,, a demiurge, and an inter-
mediary, through whom God organized the world. Christ is
“ the foremost of the mediating forces, through whom the
universe has been brought forth from God to a separate exis-
tence;” 1 there belongs to him only “a mediatorship in the
creation of the world,” 2 “a cosmic mediatory r6le,” since
“ God first forms the celestial man {Christ), and then, through
the latter’s mediation, the earthly man.” 3
But this means misunderstanding Paul thoroughly. Paul,
on the contrary, teaches : “ The Son of his love . . . who is
the image of the invisible God, the first-born of every creature.
For in him were all things created in heaven and on earth,
visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominations, or
principalities or powers. All things were created by him and
in him, and by him all things consist ” (Col. i, 13, 15-17). The
Son of God “made the world” and “upholds all things by
the word of his power” (Heb. i, 2,3). Jesus Christ is the
One, “ for whom are all things and by whom are all things ”
(Heb. ii, 10). Therefore, he is not a mere world-framer, a
spiritual being in human form, who is himself a creature, and
plays merely the part of mediator. Rather is Jesus Christ the
Creator of the world. He is the first-born Son of God, who
was brought forth by God before all creation; all spiritual
beings owe their existence to him; He is not the mere bearer
of a mediatory r6le, the instrument which God made use of in
creating the world, and which he then threw aside again, but
he himself “made the world,” “it is created by him,” and
“through the word of his power all things are upheld.”
“By him all things consist.” And, as the world owes its
origin to him, so he is also the divine final purpose of the
world; “ for him and by him are all things created. ” Exactly
the same as Paul elsewhere says of God the Father: “To us
there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and
1 Jtilicher, op. cil„ 87. 2 B. Weiss, of. cit., 301
3 H. J. Holtzmann, of. cit., i, 83 fi., 91 f.


we unto him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him ” (i Cor. viii, 6).
And like the Creator, so is he also the Redeemer of the
world, after it had through sin fallen from its origin and final
aim : “ God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself ”
(2 Cor. v, 19). “ When the fulness of time was come, God
sent his Son, made of a woman, . . . that we might receive
the adoption of sons ” (Gal. iv, 4-6). “ Even when we were
dead in sins, [God] hath quickened us together in Christ (by
whose grace you are saved), and hath raised us up together
and hath made us sit together in the heavenly places, through
Christ Jesus ” (Eph. ii, 4-6). “In whom we have redemption
through his blood, the remission of sins ” (Col. i, 14). He is
the source of grace and healing (2 Thess ii, 12, 13), of justifi-
cation (Gal. ii, 17; Eph. ii, 14-18), of salvation (1 Tim. i, 15),
of supernatural redemption and eternal glory (Col. i, 27;
2 Tim. ii, 10; iv, 18, etc.). Jesus Christ is, in a word, “the
author of salvation ” (Heb. ii, 10).
However, Paul is perfectly aware that “salvation,” super-
natural grace, redemption, blessedness and glorification are
the work and act of God. “It is not of him that willeth, nor
of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy ’ ’ (Rom.
ix, 16). “[God] hath mercy on whom he will, and whom he
will he hardeneth ” (Rom. ix, 18). From God comes the pre-
destination, from God comes the calling, from God comes
justification and from God comes glorification : “ And whom
he predestinated, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also
glorified ” (Rom. viii, 30).
On the one hand, therefore, both the creation and the
redemption of the world are the work and act of the Son of
God and the Saviour, Jesus Christ. On the other hand, both
creation and redemption are purely a divine act and a work
of divine omnipotence. It is clear that Paul thereby pro-
claims the divinity of Jesus Christ.
But omnipotence is only one of those divine characteristics
which Paul ascribes to the Son of God, Jesus Christ. He
extols no less emphatically his omniscience. Christ is to him
“ the power of God and the wisdom of God” (1 Cor. i, 24).
“In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge”
(Col. ii, 3). Thereby is expressed in substance John’s doc-
trine of the Logos, which reaches its climax in the statement
that Jesus is the wisdom, knowledge and word of God. As
such, the Christ of Paul has, of course, not only existed with
God before his earthly life, but there belongs to him a pre-
existence actually without a beginning— Eternity. Before all
worlds were made, he was produced from God, as “ the Son
of his love, the image of God, the first-born of every creature ”
(Col. i, 15). And since by him the creation was effected, and


thereby time itself was created, the chronological order and
the transitoriness of created things become all the more the
standard by which to estimate the eternity and immutability
of the Son of God. What is said of the eternity of Jehovah
in the Scriptures is now applied by Paul to Jesus Christ:
“ Thou in the beginning, O Lord, didst found the earth; and
the works of thy hands are the heavens. They shall perish,
but thou shalt continue; and they shall all grow old as a
garment; and as a vesture shalt thou change them. But
thou art the selfsame, and thy years shall not fail ” (Heb. i,
10-12). As God is extolled in the sacred books as the in-
variable and unchangeable, and on that account eternal Being,
so similarly it is also said: “Jesus Christ, yesterday, and
to-day; and the same for ever ” (Heb. xiii, 8).
The divine attributes of Jesus presuppose absolutely his
divine nature. Paul affirms this by praising Christ as “ the
image of God” (2 Cor. iv, 4), “the image of the invisible
God ” (Col. i, 15), “ the brightness of his glory and the figure
of his substance ” (Heb. i, 3).
Christ is not merely made, like man, “ after God’s image ”
(Gen. i, 26); no, he is, in accordance with his own nature, the
image of God, his own divine likeness. Thereby he is exalted
above all human spheres; the essential image of God can be
only a divine being.
Paul brings up this thought, found in the Epistle to the
Corinthians, again in his Epistle to the Colossians. He
asseijs that the divine likeness in Christ finds its explanation
only in the fact that Jesus is the first-born of God. In his
nature and substance Christ is born of God; in him “ all the
attributes of the Father are concentrated.” 1
This thought is in harmony with what is said in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, when Paul speaks of Christ as “ the first-
begotten ” Son of God (Heb. i, 6), as the Creator and
Redeemer of the world (Heb. i, 2), and the “ brightness of
God’s glory and the figure of his substance ” ; and therefore,
raised above all creatures, he “ sitteth on the right hand of
the majesty on high ” (Heb. i, 3).
As this image and essential likeness of the invisible God,
Christ is one Godhead with the Father. In contrast to the
polytheism of the pagan world, the Apostle declares power-
fully that “there is no God but one” (1 Cor. viii, 4). But
he at once and very emphatically unites, as this one divine
being, the two Persons, God the Father and the Son Jesus
Christ: “ Yet to us there is but one God, the Father . . . and
one Lord (Jehovah), Jesus Christ” (1 Cor. viii, 6).
Accordingly, Jesus Christ, who passed through this world
in human form, is not, after the fashion of men, a child and
1.
22
1 Johannes Weiss, ChriHus, 46 (Tubingen, 1909). Therefore he is
“ the firstborn before all creatures, the image of the invisible God.”


son of God by divine grace, but a child of God by nature.
And, in truth, he does not possess merely a portion, a ray, of
the divine nature, as the Gnostic doctrine of emanations said
of the world-framer. Rather does the whole and undivided
nature of God belong to the Saviour Jesus Christ. “In him
dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead corporeally ” (Col. ii, 9).
Only out of humble love to us has he assumed human
nature and a human form, although he had already existed
with the Father in a divine form of being, and even in that
form of a human servant he remained fully conscious of his
equality with God, and was entitled to divine honour and
adoration : “ Who, being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God; but emptied himself, taking
the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men, and
in habit found as a man; he humbled himself, becoming
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. For which
cause God also hath exalted him, and hath given him a name
which is above every name; that in the name of Jesus every
knee should bow, of those that are in heaven, on earth and
under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that
the Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of God the Father ”
(Phil, ii, 6-11).
Even scholars, who otherwise do not concede that the Christ
of Paul is God, cannot help recognizing that, according to this
passage in the Epistle to the Philippians, “ Jesus Christ has
existed from all eternity in the form of God in a godlike state
of being,” 1 and that he is a “ divine, pre-existing being,” 2
“ a divine power,” 3 “ a divine being.” 4
Having reached this high ideal point in his preaching of the
Godhead of Jesus, Paul now goes on to the explicit confession
that Christ is the Son of God, Lord and God.
Paul undoubtedly from the beginning conceived the naming
of Christ as the Son of God in the metaphysical, not in the
moral sense. For him the Son of God, Jesus Christ, is not
at all a mere man, specially beloved of God, a child of adoption
and grace. This is clear to every one who reflects that the
apostle wrote and preached in the Greek language and for
Greek readers. While the appellation Son of God, according
to Semitic linguistic usage, could mean an adoptive son as
well as a real, essential Son of God, the Greek connected
with it only one—the latter—signification. Moreover, in the
writings of Paul this conception of the title Son of God can be
demonstrated particularly and in detail.
1 H. v. Soden, Der Brief des Afostels Paulus an die Phili-pfaer, 45,
and ed. (Tubingen, 1906); also Ad. Jiilicher, Die Religion Jesu, 1.c., 86.
* Gustav Kruger, Dreieinigkeit u, Gottmenschheit, 86 (Tubingen, 1905).
3 id.
* Weinel, Paulus. Der Mensch und sein Werk, 245 f. (1904); cf.
Johannes Weiss, Christus. Die Anfdnge des Dogmas, 27 ff. (Tubingen,
1909).


At the first glance, it strikes us as remarkable that the
apostle uses the title Son of God in the most solemn passages
of his Epistles and in the most sublime utterances about Jesus
Christ. When he wishes to give prominence to the infinite
love of the Father and the immeasurable humility and con-
descension of Jesus, which is involved in the incarnation (Rom.
i, 1-3; viii, 3); when he wishes to prove triumphantly the
sublimity and blessing of the Gospel of Jesus (Rom. i, 9;
2 Cor. i, ig); when he desires to extol in jubilant strains the
certainty and divine blessedness of reconciliation and redemp-
tion through Jesus Christ (Rom. v, 10; viii, 1; Gal. iv, 6);
when he wishes to reveal overwhelmingly the whole might
and grandeur of the Saviour Jesus Christ (Rom. i, 4; Phil, ii,
9; Heb. i, 2); when he summons his readers to faith in Jesus
Christ (Gal. ii, 16, 20); and to his invocation everywhere
(1 Cor. i, 1-9); at the commencement and the conclusion of
the Epistles, where he calls down upon the believers the grace
and peace of God; in all these instances Paul calls Jesus Christ
preferably the Son of God. And correspondingly he also calls
God, in the most solemn moments and formulas of confession,
“ the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ ” (Rom. xv, 6;
2 Cor. i, 3; xi, 31). All this points clearly to relations on
the part of Jesus towards men and his Father in heaven
entirely unlike those which could result from an adoption of
the man Jesus, who is especially loved by God and is by him
selected to be the Christ—that is, the Messiah.
If we inspect the subject still more closely, it can be easily
seen how far removed Paul is from considering the title Son
of God as equivalent to the liberal notion of a “ Messianic
child of God, through favour,” or even to the orthodox
notion of the Messiah—Christ. The expression Son of God
in the writings of Paul nowhere passes for a synonym or
expression for Christ. Rather does it describe the more
intimate relations in which Christ, the Messiah, stands
towards God the Father.
Now, it is true that in several passages the love of the
Father to his Son is made especially prominent (Rom. v. 10;
viii, 3, 32; Gal. iv, 4; Col. i, 15); but even H. Weinel frankly
concedes that nevertheless “ very often the words Son of God
also stand, without any such sentiment, purely as a name for
the divine nature of the Messiah.” 1 And Johannes Weiss
points it out as erroneous to explain the passages in which the
love of God to the Son is strongly emphasized “ in such a way
that the sonship is only another expression for love, and that
because God so loved this being he is the Son of God. On
the contrary, because he is the Son, therefore God loves him.
. . . Not a relation of affection, confidence or adoption, and
not a figurative paraphrase of a moral or natural similarity
1 Weinel, Paulus, 252.


of nature, but here [in the writings of Paul] ‘ Son ’ means
what it is wont to mean—namely, descent from God. Not
in the sense of a peculiar form of his human birth . . . his
pre-existent Being has its origin already in God and certainly
in a unique way.” 1
Still more frequently than with the appellation “ Son of
God,” however, does Paul address the Saviour Jesus Christ
as “ Kyrios, Lord; our Kyrios, our Lord.”
It is clear from the Pauline writings that the Christians of the
time of the Apostle epitomized their faith in Jesus Christ most
frequently in the name Kyrios, Lord. The confession of faith
in Jesus, as the Lord, was considered as one of the holiest
acts of a Christian. “No man can say ‘ the Lord Jesus ’
but by the Holy Ghost” (i Cor. xii, 3). This confession is a
necessary condition of salvation : “ If thou confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart that God hath
raised him up from the dead, thou shalt be saved” (Rom.
x, 9). Hence this confession is to be on the lips of all: “ That
every tongue should confess that the Lord Jesus Christ is in
the glory of God the Father” (Phil, ii, 11). From this it is
evident that by the name “ Lord ” the Most High is meant.
In fact, we know that, for the contemporaries of St Paul
and for his fellow-believers, Jewish and Greek as well, Kyrios
was equivalent to Jehovah, Adonai, God. 2 Moreover, it can
be positively proved that Paul regards the title “ Kyrios” in
the above sense N and in no other.
Paul does not hesitate a moment by quotations from the
Old Testament, unrestrictedly to apply to Christ the terms
Kyrios, Jehovah and Adonai, which are there applied to God
(1 Cor. i, 31). Jehovah, who led the Israelites out of Egypt
and through the desert, is, according to the teaching of Paul,
none other than Jesus Christ (1 Cor. x, 4). The word of the
prophet Joel (ii, 32), “ Every one that shall call upon the name
of the Lord shall be saved,” Paul refers directly to the Lord
Jesus Christ (Rom. x, 13). In Ps. cii, 26, it is written of
Christ the Lord : “ Thou in the beginning, O Lord (Jehovah),
didst found the earth, and the works of thy hands are the
heavens” (Heb. i, 10). In short, Paul applies to Christ, the
Kyrios, the Lord, what is said in the Old Testament of
Jehovah.
If, therefore, the Kyrios-Christus is identical with the Old
Testament Jehovah, then, according to the exposition of Paul,
he is in the New Testament also on a par with God, is equal
to him and identical with him.
We see this most clearly and, at the same time, most
certainly from the religious adoration and invocation of the
1 Johannes Weiss, Christus, 35.
! See the argument in the previous section, “ The Divinity of Christ
in the Early Church.”


“ Lord ”by the Christians of the time of Paul. In contrast
to the pagans, who honour many gods and lords, the Chris-
tians honour only one God, the Father, and one Lord Jesus
Christ (i Cor. viii, 5). Thereby is expressed “the divine
position of Christ and the divine honour paid to him.” 1
This paying of divine honours to Christ as the “Lord”
was, at the time when Paul wrote his great Epistles—that is,
about twenty to twenty-five years after the death of Jesus —
the distinguishing mark of all Christians and the bond which
united them. Paul addressed the Christians at Corinth as
“ those called to be saints, with all that invoke the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ in every place of theirs and ours ”
(1 Cor. i, 2).
Many things divided the Jewish Christians in Palestine,
who still based their Christian piety more on the Mosaic Law,
from the Gentile Christians in the Empire, to whom the
Jewish forms of religious life were unknown. But all were
united and harmonious in their worship of the Lord Jesus
Christ. “ There is no distinction of the Jew and the Greek;
for the same is Lord over all,, rich unto all that call upon
him ” (Rom. x, 12).
The invocation of the Lord Jesus was not made merely for
the purpose of adoration and recognition of his glory, but also
for the purpose of petition and prayer. It is the Lord Jesus
from whom Paul and his fellow-Christians expect grace, help
and mercy. The Apostle wishes and begs for the Churches
grace and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ (Rom. i, 7). By Jesus’ personal mercy Christians are
brought into the state of grace (1 Cor. vii, 25; 1 Tim. i, 12).
All are saved through his mercy (2 Tim. i, 16, 18). The Lord
Jesus Christ is the eternal High Priest, who, in consequence
of his own experience in life, knows how to have, and really
does have, sympathy with the believers in all their conditions
and in all their need of help. For this reason everyone is to
approach in prayer the throne of grace and compassion, and
in prayer call upon God and the Lord and High Priest Jesus,
enthroned with him, for pity and help (Heb. ii, 17 f.; iv, 15 f.;
x, 19 ff.).
Paul commends himself also to the Lord Jesus in temporal
and bodily afflictions and infirmities (2 Cor. xii, 7-9; Gal.
iv, 13). He is conscious that all the vicissitudes and occur-
rences in nature and in human life depend upon the Lord
Jesus and are his dispensations (1 Cor. iv, 19). This pre-
supposes a faith that the “ Lord ” is the source of all grace,
that he possesses divine knowledge and divine might, and
that there is no sphere of human and worldly life, over which
he has not supreme power. This faith in the universal
participation of the Lord Jesus in the government of the
1 Johannes Weiss, Christus, 26.


world Paul, in agreement with the early Church, sums up in
the formula, “ sitting at the right hand of God ” (Rom. viii,
34; Col. iii, i; Heb. i, 3 ; viii, 4; x, 12; see Acts ii, 33 ; vii, 55).
So, then, Paul knows that he, even in regard to morals, is
thoroughly dependent on the Lord Jesus Christ, as the highest
and divine authority. The word and command of the Lord
is the guiding line and binding rule for all moral thought and
action (1 Cor. vii, 10; xii, 25). In every phase of his conduct
the Christian must seek the Lord : “ Whether we live, we live
unto the Lord; or whether we die, we die unto the Lord ”
(Rom xiv, 8).
Professor Johannes Weiss, of Heidelberg—not an orthodox
theologian, but a very liberal thinker—epitomizes this whole
religious relation of Paul and of the Pauline Christian churches
in the following words : “ For Paul Jesus himself is an object,
not only of faith, but of religious veneration. For him who
begs for ‘ grace and peace ’ not only ‘ from God our Father,’
but also ‘ from our Lord Jesus Christ,’ Christ stands on an
equality with God; . . . the practical piety of Paul and his
churches expects from him [Christ] the same as from God—
guidance, help, blessing. It gives to him not only praise,
but also addresses prayers to him. . . . Jesus is for the
Apostle not only a Mediator, Leader and Model, but also
absolutely the object of his religion.” 1
Now, this is self-evident, if Paul, in respect to the name
Kyrios, boasts of Christ that “ God hath exalted him, and
hath given him a name which is above every name; that in
the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of those that are in
heaven, on earth and under the earth, and that every tongue
should confess that the Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of
God the Father ” (Phil, ii, 9-11). The name “ Lord ” is, there-
fore, the highest of all names, surpassing everything, tower-
ing above every name of created beings, and conferring the
right to the highest and unlimited veneration from all beings—
the name of Kyrios, Jehovah, Adonai, God. Doubtless Paul
thinks here of passages such as Isaias xlii, 8 and xlv, 24,
and applies to Christ what God there says of himself : “ I am
the Lord God [ Kvpio's 6 6 to s] : this is my name. I will not
give my glory to another. . . . Every knee shall be bowed
to me, and every tongue shall swear” (acknowledge God).
Even Johannes Weiss remarks, concerning this appreciation
of the name Lord in the Epistle to the Philippians : “ Christ is
thereby exalted not only into a universal, divine sphere; he
actually takes the place of Almighty God. Here, therefore,
Kyrios can by no means have any less weighty meaning than
Theos.” 2
1 Johannes Weiss, Paulas und Jesus, 3, 72 (Berlin, 1909).
2 Johannes Weiss, Christas, 28; cf. J. Kogel, Christas der Herr,
Erlauterungen zu Philipp., ii, 5-11 (1908).


Other modem critics also recognize this fact. According
to B. Weiss, the Christ of Paul is the Kyrios, who “ at his
second coming appears with divine omniscience, such as only
the searcher of hearts can have ” (i Cor. iv, 5); who comes
again with divine power to effect salvation at the last judge-
ment, the administration of which itself already presupposes
his divine rank (2 Cor. v, 10), in “contrast to all human
mediation.” 1 With the greatest clearness Eduard von Hart-
mann says : “ The expression ‘ Lord ’ is in the Pauline Gospel
no mere polite form of address (as, for example, in Matt,
vii, 21); but signifies the Lord of the universe (Rom. x, 12),
to whom all things are subordinate, except him who has
subordinated all things to him . . . (1 Cor. xv, 27). Paul
uses the word Lord . . . interchangeably for God and
Christ.” 2
In order, however, to exclude the last doubt, Paul calls the
Saviour and Son of God directly God. Thus we read in the
Epistle to the Hebrews : “ To the Son ; thy throne, O God,
is for ever and ever” (Heb. i, 8). In his letter to Titus he
admonishes the believers, that they should show themselves
wholly faithful, “ that they may adorn the doctrine of God
our Saviour in all things ” (Titus ii, 10). Paul hopes for
“ the blessed hope and glory of the great God and our Saviour
Jesus Christ, w’ho gave himself for us, that he might redeem
us from all iniquity ” (Titus ii, 13). Jesus has been rejected
by the Jews, “ whose are the fathers, and of whom is Christ,
according to the flesh, who is over all things, God blessed for
ever” (Rom. ix, 5).
The opponents of the divinity of Christ feel, on the one
hand, the full force of this confession of Paul, and, on the
other, show their impotence against him. The God-Christ of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, sharing the throne of the Father,
is “no Pauline idea.” Can that be proved? As if that
idea were not repeatedly uttered by Paul in some other form 1
In regard to the passage in the letter to Titus, Johannes
Weiss remarks : “ Yes, if we have the correct text, he [Paul]
calls him absolutely our great God.” 3 As if also there were
a single trace of any other text in existence, which liberal
critics like to call the “ correct ” one. Also one tries in vain to
explain away from Christ the testimony of the Epistle to the
Romans, that “ God is over all things, blessed for ever ” and
to refer it to God the Father. Johannes Weiss is frank enough,
in the face of such attempts, to affirm that the text “can
refer only to Christ.” 4 But he finds this confession of Paul
“ very remarkable . . . unthinkable.” Therefore, it has been
“ rightly taken to be a violation of the text.”* With the
1 B. Weiss, Lehrbuch der biblischen Theologie, 285 f., 6th ed. (Berlin,
(1895). 3 Das Christentum des N. T., 178.
3 Christus, 68. 4 id., 29. 1 id.


right of the mailed fist of uncritical caprice, yes; for no one
can appeal here to any other right.
That Paul calls the Saviour God is, however, in reality
neither unthinkable nor remarkable, since he has used the
equivalent expression Kyrios in countless instances, as refer-
ring to Christ, and, according to Johannes Weiss himself, “ in
the use of the name Kyrios lies the bridge to the last and
highest utterances concerning Christ.” 1
On the other hand, it is also not remarkable that he does not
call Jesus God more frequently. Later, too, and, indeed,
down to the present time, Christ seldom receives from the
Church the appellation “ God,” but almost universally that of
the Son of God, or Lord. In the Apostolic period, however,
the title “ Lord ’ ’ was just as exclusively, and even more so,
the official and universally used title for Christ. It best ex-
pressed the divine position of Jesus towards the Father, as
well as to the world and to mankind. Since of the full double
title of God, ‘‘The Lord God” (Jehovah-Elohim, Kvptososec)s),
the former was given to Christ and the second to the Father,
the divinity and unity of both were clearly expressed. And,
moreover, one thus avoided the danger of wounding the
strictly monotheistic views of the Jewish Christians and also
of giving to the Greek Christians any occasion for a polythe-
istic, or dualistic, interpretation of the Christian idea of God.
Thus can the christology of Paul be outlined in its main
features. It really needs the courage of desperation, in face
of this, still to maintain the almost stereotyped declaration of
liberal criticism that the Christ of Paul is merely a pre-
existent, spiritual being, a celestial man, not essentially dif-
ferent from us men. The opponents of the divinity of Christ
themselves cannot really believe it. Thus H. J. Holtzmann
puts a great interrogation point before his Pauline celestial
man by remarking that the Apostle knows “ only of a man
with a divine element of life on earth.” 2 Pfleiderer examines
the Pauline assertions about the “celestial man ” Christ, and
comes finally to the conclusion that “ By them the essential
foundation of his divine sonship in the super-theocratical
metaphysical sense is positively laid.” 3 It is all very well
for Jiilicher loudly to proclaim his conviction that the Christ
of Paul “is a celestial man. . . . There remains the fact
that Christ is the most exalted among the mediatory forces.” 4
It must, however, also be conceded by him that “In the
Epistle to the Philippians, chapter ii, the pre-existence of
Christ Jesus in the form of God is unequivocally taught.
Only when the time had come did he lay this aside and assume
the form of a servant.” 5 According to H. Weinel, the
1 id., 28. 2 Ncutest. Theologie, i, 94.
3 Das Urchristentum, i, 227, 2nd ed.
4 Die Religion Jesu> l.c. t 87. 5 l.c. y 86.


celestial Son of God, Jesus, “ stands, on the whole, still below
God”; he is “not himself God”; and yet Weinel must
acknowledge that the Christ of Paul is a “ divine Being, 1
and that we find the beginnings of this doctrine most clearly
in the writings of Paul.” 2
Paul Wernle concedes that Paul places his Christ on the
same footing with the God of Old Testament revelation. 3
Then he continues : “ What wonder, if now the fulness of
the Godhead dwells in him [Christ] corporeally? . . . Son
of God, cross and resurrection are here [in the Pauline
Epistles] so interpreted that. . . the start is given for the
subsequent christological dogma.” 4 Arnold Meyer similarly
characterizes the Christ of Paul as “ the celestial Son of God,
who did not belong to earthly humanity, but lived in glory
and divine resemblance to God. The Son is the exact image
of the Father, and just as a Son—before all creatures —was
bom in the likeness of his Father, and bears within himself
his entire fulness. ... At last, however, the Father allowed
him to descend to this earth in human form for the final
redemption of humanity and of the whole world. . . . The
Christ of Paul becomes the God of this [Christian] people.”®
And yet “ this ” (Pauline Son of God) “ is not God ” ! 6
The two radically liberal critics, Wilhelm Wrede and
Gustav Kruger, express themselves on this point more frankly
and with manly courage. The former concedes at once that
Paul sees in Jesus, exactly as the orthodoxy of the Church
doe?, “ a supermundane, divine being ... an incarnate
divine being ... a divine Christ.” 7 The latter acknow-
ledges with equal frankness that “ this Christ of Paul is a
divinely pre-existent being. ... It is true, the divine being,
of whom Paul speaks, is not yet called by him the ‘ Logos,’
but even though the word is lacking, the fact is nevertheless
there.” 8
This unavoidable conclusion forces itself even on the
rationalist Renan. He says : “In the last writings of Paul
one finds a theory about Christ which presents him as a kind
of divine person; a theory which is thoroughly analogous to
that of the Logos, and which will subsequently take its final
form in the writings attributed to John. . . . The earlier
and positively authentic writings of Paul contain the germ of
this new form of expression. Christ and God are inter-
changed in them almost as synonymous beings; Christ exer-
1 Weinel, Paulus, 250. 2 id., 243.
3 Die Anfdnge unserer Religion, 238, 2nd ed. (Tubingen, 1904).
« id., 238, 243.
8 Wer hat das Christentum begrundet, Jesus oder Paulus ? 25, 31, 95
(Tubingen, 1907). 8 id., 23.
7 W. Wrede, Paulus, 84, 86, 87, 2nd ed. (Tubingen, 1907).
8 Gustav Kruger, Das Dogma von der Dreieinigkeit und Gottmensch-
heit in seiner geschichtlichen EntwicTdung, 86 (Tubingen, 1905).


cises divine functions; he is invoked as God; he is the con-
necting Mediator with God. . . . The veneration of Jesus
. . . assumes in Paul the proportions of a real cult of adora-
tion, which until then no Jew had shown to the son of a
woman.” 1
All this sufficiently proves that liberal critics do not accom-
plish the wonderful feat of eliminating the divinity of Christ
from the theology of St Paul. 2
2. Origin of the Pauline Christology.—Paul and Jesus.
It is precisely on this account that freethinking critics give
themselves such unspeakable trouble to put the christological
views of Paul in opposition to those of Christ and the first
Christians, and to brand the former as the clumsy result of
the most extravagant speculation and the morbid mentality
of Paul. They construct an explanation of the origin and
development of Paul’s idea of Christ somewhat as follows :
Before his conversion on the way to Damascus, Paul was
the most violent persecutor of Jesus, because he saw in
him the exact opposite of what he venerated as the Messianic
ideal. Saul was expecting the Messiah in the form of the
apocalyptic heaven-sent man; and, basing his theory on the
late-Jewish theory of angels, as well as on the Platonic-
Alexandrian and old oriental mythology, he pictured to him-
self this heaven-sent man as a supermundane, spiritual being,
as a pre-existing being intermediate between God and the
world, as a world-framer, a second Adam, etc. With such a
Christ the historical, earthly man Jesus had no similarity
whatever. Hence he seemed to Saul the personification of the
false Messiah.
Then suddenly occurred the great change near Damascus.
In a fancied vision Saul thought that he beheld the hated
Nazarene, Jesus, descending from on high in a celestial form
of light, just like the Messianic celestial man, and that he
spoke with him and declared that he was the Messiah so
longed for by him. Saul regarded this inward experience as
something actual, believed in it, and transferred his views
of the Messianic celestial man and intermediate being to the
historic Jesus.
Thus he became, after the event on the way to Damascus,
the founder of an entirely new christology. This is not at all
the continuation of the Christian line, which starts from Jesus
and runs across the first Apostles and the original Church.
On the contrary, it must be considered as a thorough trans-
formation of that line. In contrast to the Gospel of Jesus
1 Renan, VAntichrist, 76, 77, 79 (1873).
2 See W. Beyschlag, Die Cbrisiologte des N. T 176-256 (Berlin,
1566); Rich. Drescher, Das Leben Jesu bet Paulus (Giessen, 1900);
F. Prat, La T biologic de St Paul (1908).


and the early Church, it is something- new and secondary.
Our principle must, therefore, be : “ Away from Paul 1 Back
to the first disciples and to Jesus I” 1
This, in bold outlines, is the development and explanation
of the Pauline christology according to modern liberal criti-
cism. In substance all these ideas are found already in the
Tubingen rationalist, F. Christian Baur 2 and his pupil,
Holsten, 3 and also in Hausrath. 4 Their successors rejected
the hypothesis twice utterly, until it was completed in its
present seemingly refined psychological form.
Its latest representatives are chiefly Bruckner, 5 H. Weinel, 6
Paul Wernle, 7 Otto Pfleiderer, 8 Eduard von Hartmann,® and
Wilhelm Wrede. 10 That the Damascus episode was only a
vision, a religious experience, a revolution of the spiritual
life, is supposed also by Clemen, 11 G. Kruger, 12 and Johannes
Weiss. 13 The hypothesis of a vision passes now everywhere
as a dogma of liberal investigation. From the standpoint of
the “modern conception” the “experience” of Damascus
must be a vision.
This psychological, or rather. psychopathological concep-
tion, which is to make every supernatural influence of Christ
on Paul unnecessary, arid is to expose the Pauline christology
as a figment of the imagination, is interesting as a drama,
which could be entitled “The Tragedy (or, if preferred,
1 This explanation of Pauline christology has been recently rejected
on the Protestant side by Julius Kaftan in Jesus und Paulus, a friendly
polemical pamphlet against the popular books on religious history by
Bousset and Wrede (Tubingen, 1906); by Theodor Kaftan, Der Mensch
Jesus Christus, der einige Mittler zwischen Gott und den Menschen
(Berlin, 190 S); Paul Feine, Paulus als Theologe (Berlin, 1906);
Theologie des N. T., 230-593 (Leipzig, 1910); Arnold Ruegg, Der
Afostel Paulus und sein Zeugnis von Jesus Christus (Leipzig, 1906);
McGiffert, Was Jesus or Paul the Founder of Christianity l (Amer.
Journal of Theology , 1-20, 1909); W. Morgan, The Jesus-Paul Con-
troversy (Expositor, xx, 9-12, S5-SS). Of the above-named German
investigators, however, only Feine expressly recognizes the divinity of
Jesus in Paul’s writings. Ruegg and Julius Kaftan know how to
conceal their thoughts. Theodor Kaftan sees in Paul’s Christ merely
the human intermediary of salvation.
2 Paulus der Afostel Jesu Christi, and ed. (1866).
3 Evangelium des Paulus (18S0).
4 Der Afostel Paulus, 126 ff. (1872); cf. N. T. Zeitgeschichte, ii. 442 f.
5 Die Entstehung der faulinischen Theologie (1903).
6 Paulus. Der Mensch und sein Werk, 243 ff. (Tubingen, 1904).
7 Die Anfdnge unserer Religion, 153-244, 2nd ed. (Tubingen, 1904):
Die faulinische Theologie.
8 Die Entstehung des Christentums, 111 f., 132 f., 143 ff. (Miinchen,
1905); Das Urchristentum, i, 226, 2nd ed.; Religionsfhilosofhie, 718 ff.,
3rd ed.; Entwicklung des Christentums, 24 ff.
9 Das Chrisientum des N. T., 200 f., and ed. (Sachsa im Harz, 1905).
10 Paulus. and ed. (Tubingen, 1907).
11 Die Grundgedanken der faulinischen Theologie, 3 (1907).
12 Dreieinigkeit und Goilmenschheit, 76-86 (Tubingen, 1905).
13 Christus; Die Anfange des Dogmas, 34-65 (Tubingen, 1909); Paulus
und Jesus, 16 ff. (Berlin, 1909).


the Comedy) of Damascus, in three acts.” Everything
centres in the apparition of Damascus. Previous to that
apparition, Paul is supposed to have already accumulated his
christological ideas from Oriental, Greek and Jewish sources,
and to have elaborated them inwardly. On the apparition at
Damascus he transferred them, in consequence of a trick of
the imagination, to Jesus of Nazareth; after the apparition,
with even greater definiteness, in preaching and in speculative
thought, he gave permanent form to the christology thus
acquired, but with a total misapprehension of the doctrine of
Jesus and the primitive, historical tradition concerning the
real life of Jesus.
That is the Pauline show-piece of liberal criticism. Yet,
after all, it is really only a coup de thddtre, and a very unreal
one at that—only artificial work, not psychologically true art,
and above all not history.
Paul is supposed to have derived part of his christological
ideas from Oriental-Greek Gnosis and mythology, and to have
found the rest of them in the Jewish theories about angels
prevailing in his own land. But there cannot be any serious
talk of a gnostic-mythological vein in the whole christology
of Paul. Gnosis is nothing more nor less than the antipodes
of the Pauline theology. The doctrine of Paul and oriental
mythology likewise mutually exclude each other. Paul pro-
tests also in the most decided manner against every Gnostic
and mythological addition, and, in fact, regards it as his
life-work to contend most vigorously against the Gnostic and
mythological view of the universe. It is to be hoped that this
does not still need to be proved to anyone acquainted with the
Epistles of Paul and the Acts of the Apostles.
The contrary opinions of modern critics seem to be nothing
but interrogation points. For instance, Johannes Weiss
accepts at once the “ polytheistic, mythological character ” of
the Pauline christology, yet immediately adds the following
astonishingly naive confession ; “No one can prove that it
was precisely these Babylonian models, or whether it was
Egyptian or Greek ones, which through innumerable agencies
worked upon the Pauline idea.” 1 Otto Pfleiderer writes
similarly : “ The conception of Christ, as a supermundane,
spiritual being, as a celestial man exalted above the angels,
and as a primeval Son of God . . . goes perhaps still farther
back; we cannot as yet assert anything certain about it,
but there is, nevertheless, ground for thinking that already
in Indian legend the celestial spiritual being, which appears
in Buddha and other figures of redeemers, is designated as
‘ the great man,’ and that in certain Jewish-Christian Gnostics
the Redeemer-Spirit, which appeared in Jesus, is the same
which was first incorporated in Adam. And with this there
1 Johannes Weiss, Chrislus, 36.


was perhaps connected also the spiritual ideal man, whom
Philo found taught in the first chapter of Genesis.” 1
More thoughtful investigators substitute for this repeated
“ perhaps ” a categorical “ no.” A. Meyer acknowledges that
Paul opposes his Christ, full of love and seriousness, to all
other Gnostic powers. 2 Even the Logos doctrine of Philo,
which would first of all have to be thought of, is, according
to Paul Wernle, “too remote to come into consideration.” 3
Bernhard Weiss 4 considers “ the transference of any con-
temporary philosophical problem to Christ as undemonstrable, ’ ’
while H. J. Holtzmann smiles at the metamorphoses which
Paul has already had to go through in modern criticism.
“ First, the origins of his ideas have been purely Jewish; then
they became largely Greek; later on rather ‘ hellenistic ’;
soon again like those of the Old Testament. Now he forms
an unswerving continuation of the life-work of Jesus, and now
he makes a new start, which essentially ignores that life-
work.” 5 Paul Feine is finally no doubt right when he rejects
the derivation of Paul’s Christ from Greek, Hellenic and old
Oriental sources with the remark; “It cannot be regarded
as a sign of sound judgement if the attempt is made over
and over again in critical theology to construct the Pauline
christology out of that origin.” 6
The only real question is, whether the Apostle took his idea
of Christ from the Jewish Apocalypse. If Paul would pourtray
his Christ merely as an apocalyptic “ celestial man,” as our
opponents allow, then we could at least talk seriously about
it. But, as we have seen, the figure of Christ is, in the writ-
ings of Paul, thoroughly divine. The Jewish Apocalypse, how-
ever, does not know of any such figure. But also, quite apart
from the divinity of the Messiah, Paul’s teaching about Christ
stands in most violent opposition to the apocalyptic theory
of the Messianic celestial man. Not only orthodox theologians
but the whole liberal school must concede that the chief
characteristics of Paul’s doctrine of the Messiah were the
doctrine of grace and redemption, the love of Jesus for man-
kind, and his expiatory death for the sins of the world. There
is not a single genuinely liberal critic who has not contested
the Pauline christology for the very reason that it makes this
doctrine of atonement, grace and redemption the central point
of the Messiahship.
But this fundamental feature of Paul’s doctrine of the
Messiah is to the apocalyptic idea of the Messiah what fire
is to water. It is, therefore, a flagrant contradiction of facts
1 Die Entstehung des Christentums, 144 f. (Miinchen, 1905).
2 1.c., 19. 3 1.c,, 239.
1 Die Religion des N. T,, 140, 2nd ed. (Stuttgart und Berlin, 1908).
6 H. J. Holtzmann, Das messianische Bewusstsein Jesu, iii (Tubin-
gen, 1907).
• Paulas als Theologe, 32 (Gr.-Lichterfelde-Berlin, 1906).


when the liberal theologians designate the Christ of Paul as
an apocalyptic celestial man, and derive him from the Jewish
Apocalypse. Johannes Weiss now sets this forth with great
perspicacity, after surveying all the latest Pauline investiga-
tion. He writes : “ Whence has Paul derived this portrait of
Christ? From Jewish tradition? Where in the Apocalypse
(of the Jews) is it written that the ‘ King-Messiah,’ ‘ the Son
of Man,’ the ‘Judge ’ is at the same time the incarnation of
the love and grace of God? The theory that Paul, having
come to faith in the Messiahship of Jesus, has transferred to
him only the marks of the apocalyptic Messiah, here breaks
down. He could not have taken this chief characteristic of
the portrait of Christ from Judaism; here his own historical
experience has enlarged and transformed his Jewish portrait
of the Messiah in a most decided way. 1,1
Moreover, Paul himself asserts expressly that he neither
took his portraiture of Christ from the Jewish Apocalypse,
nor had known it previously, from any other source whatever,
before the apparition on the road to Damascus. In the Acts
of the Apostles, as well as in his Epistles, his idea of Christ
appears to the persecutor as something entirely new, unex-
pected and direct. Even Wrede must confess that “ Paul
cannot have been won over already through instruction before-
hand, so that the vision would become merely a secondary
affair. He expressly denied human teaching to have been a
foundation of his faith, and, in any case, the apparition must
have had for him the character of something sudden and over-
powering. 2
But let us suppose that Saul, at the time when he was
travelling on the mountain road to Damascus, had taken with
him his portrait of Christ already completed. Can what
occurred near Damascus be explained thereby in a natural,
psychological manner? Can any explanation of the fact be
given that Saul now, suddenly, in consequence of self-sugges-
tion and hallucination (for that is what our opponents assert),
transferred his ideal of Christ to Jesus, and believed it to be
incorporated in the hated Nazarene whom he was persecuting
(i Cor. xix, 9; Acts ix, 1; xxii, 3; xxvi, 9)? Evidently just
the opposite. Hallucination only strengthens the impressions
which a man has within him in a normal state. It would have
caused the hate of the Pharisee Saul to have been turned into
a veritable fury against Jesus and his claims to be the Messiah
and the Son of God. That would have been the only possible
result of the “vision” of Damascus. If Paul, on the con-
trary, in consequence of that vision, proclaims Jesus as the
Messiah, the Lord and God, it is not psychologically explic-
able; it is not natural, but either contrary to nature or super-
1 Johannes Weiss, Paulus und Jesus, 51, 14.
* Wrede, Paulus, 10.


natural. 1 But if the conversion of Saul to faith in Christ
cannot possibly be designated as a psychological result of the
Damascus episode, it is thereby also proven that it cannot be
merely a matter of a “ vision ” or of a subjective, imaginary
apparition, or of “ an inward view, an hallucination ... a
reflection of the soul, externalized, an objectifying of its own
consciousness.” 2
For such a vision there is wanting all real presupposition.
The liberal critics, it is true, are able to describe with great
enthusiasm and almost statistical exactness how this vision
occurred. The christological problem, and the question
whether Jesus of Nazareth was not, after all, the expected
Messiah and Son of God, “ might, we may suppose, have
moved the spirit of Paul on the way to Damascus; doubt as
to the right of his previous conduct and as to the truth of his
former faith, pierced his heart like a fiery dart, and put his
soul and body into a state of the most fearful excitement. If
we add to this the nearness of Damascus, forcing him to make
a speedy decision, and the lonely silence and scorching heat
of the desert, we shall be justified in the conclusion, that in
such circumstances the occurrence of a visionary experience
was not at all out of the range of other analogous experi-
ences.” 3 “It was, indeed, no wonder that a notorious
visionary and epileptic, in such conflicts of the soul, during
a fever in the desert (which was connected with an inflamma-
tion of the eyes and perhaps an inflammation of the brain), was
visited by an apparition of the Master of the Church which he
was*persecuting, as by an objective presentation of the doubts
of his own conscience.” 4 “ All this is connected with the con-
dition of nerves and brain, which caused him at times to have
convulsions and to see visions. ... In connection with this,
he felt nervous twitchings, which he interpreted as blows from
a messenger of Satan. When, therefore, he fell prostrate
near Damascus, saw a light, heard Christ speak, and then was
blind for some days, the analogy of experience demands that
we here also think of a vision, in which a profound psychical
process, which has reached the highest tension, is relaxed.” 5
These are nothing but phrases, which flatly contradict the
truth, as well as the text of the New Testament authorities.
Instead of being tormented by doubts and qualms of con-
science about his own conduct, and about the possible truth
of the utterances of Jesus, “ Saul was breathing out threaten-
ings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord,” when
1 Cf. E. Moske, Die Bekehrung des heil. Paulus, eine exegeiisch-
kritische Untersuchung (Munster, 1907).
2 Pfleiderer, Die Entstehung des Christentums, in f.
3 Pfleiderer, 1.c., 138.
1 Ed. von Hartmann, Das Christentum des N. T., 201.
5 A. Meyer, Wer hat das Christentum begrundet? 36, 69 f.; Die
Auferstehung Christi, 295-298 (Tubingen, 1905).


he set out for Damascus (Acts ix, i). According to his own
confession, he was actually foaming with a blind rage to
persecute Jesus of Nazareth even at the moment when the
apparition near Damascus occurred (Acts ix, 4; xxii, 4-8;
xxvi, 14).
The “ scorching heat of the desert ” and the “ desert-fever
with inflammation of the eyes and brain ” exist only in the
heads of our critics, as also the desert itself. 1
Moreover, whoever makes Paul a “ notorious visionary and
epileptic,” as Hartmann, the philosopher of the unconscious,
does; or a “ sufferer from a disease of the nerves and brain,”
as A. Meyer supposes; or, finally, with the novelist, Gustav
Frenssen, and the theologian and poet, Hausrath, makes him
a “ thoroughly ill man, tormented by serious nervous and
mental disorders,” and a “sentimental, even epileptic” sub-
ject of hysteria, will be branded as false by the work and
writings of the great Apostle 2 as well as by expert medical
opinion. 3
It is true, Paul has had visions, but not in the sense of the
vagaries of an unbalanced mind, as our opponents imagine
them, but in the sense of supernatural “ visions and revela-
tions of the Lord,” as Paul himself testifies (2 Cor. xii, 1), and
such as often occurred in the first Christian Church with its
wealth in gifts of grace.
Moreover, from such “visions,” which he continually
recognizes and designates precisely as such, 4 he wishes to
keep the incident of Damascus perfectly distinct. This is for
him a real, objective “ appearance ”of Jesus. It was a per-
sonal revelation of Christ, as real as the appearances of the
risen Lord, of which Peter, James, the Twelve and five
hundred disciples were witnesses (1 Cor. xv, 5-9). Jesus
revealed himself to him to see and to hear (Acts ix, 17, 27;
xxii, 14; xxvi, 16). During his entire life Paul never doubted
that he had seen the living Christ. To everyone he put the chal-
lenging question : “ Have I not seen the Lord?” (1 Cor. ix, 1).
Supported by this conviction, he ranks himself unhesitatingly
1 “For many hours south of Damascus there is no such desert at all.
The region is, in fact, very well watered and fruitful, and was formerly
much more so. Also that the simoon or sirocco has proved especially
favourable to the creation of visions seems to me hardly probable in this
locality.”—Chr. E. Luthardt, AUg. Ev.-L.uth. Kirchenzeitung, 396
(1906).
2 “ Are these writings the work of a fool, or a deceiver, or an epileptic
affected by sunstroke, or a crazy enthusiast? Is such achievement, as
his, psychologically comprehensible, as coming from such an origin?”—
F. Ballard, Konig’s translation, Die Wunder des Vnglaubens, 194 (Gr.-
Lichterfelde-Berlin, 1903).
3 See the opinion of Dr. Bliimke, in Riiegg, Der Afosiel Paulus und
sein Zeugnis von Jesus Christus, 108; Jiilicher, Einleitung in das N. T.,
26 ff.; Simon Weber, Die Gottheit Jesu u. die faulinschen Briefe, in
Jesus Christus, Vortrdge in Freiburg im B. t 69 ff. (1908).
4 Acts x, 9; xi, 5; xii, 7; xvi, 9; xviii, 9; xxii, 17; 2 Cor. xii, 1.


with the old Apostles, and is recognized by all as a disciple
and witness for Jesus of equal rights with them. Even hostile
criticism cannot invalidate this. “ Paul certainly understands
by the revelation, which he had received, not merely a gradual
enlightenment of his way of thinking and feeling. For him
it is a matter of the wonderful procedure of a certain moment,
when he saw the Lord in radiant glory—in this the allusions
in his Epistles agree with the Acts of the Apostles.” 1
Not only that. We have, moreover, the incontrovertible
evidence that Paul did not deceive himself when he attributed
to the Damascus apparition objective reality. A proof of,
this is the fact that the fellow-travellers of Saul were also
involved in the apparition; that “ the light from heaven shone
also around his companions, a light which surpassed the
splendour of the sun ”; and that under the powerful impres-
sion of the apparition all were thrown to the ground. 2 A
proof of the reality of the apparition is the blindness of Saul
in consequence of the brilliance, quite unbearable for his
physical powers of vision (Acts ix, 8); and a proof of the
reality of the appearance of Christ is finally the inward,
spiritual illumination and transformation, the moral and
religious new-creation of Paul, and his indestructible con-
sciousness that he must thereafter serve Christ with body
and life, with all his senses and powers, and with the dedica-
tion to him of his entire being.
All this proves, as Bernhard Weiss acknowledges, that the
appearance of Jesus Christ to Paul “ cannot be attributed to
a psychologically explicable vision.” 3 Unless liberal criti-
cism is willing to give up every sort of explanation, then
it must, willingly or unwillingly, deign to confess that an
actual, obvious apparition was vouchsafed to Saul near
Damascus, in which he saw with his own physical eyes the
risen and glorified Saviour, heard with his own physical ears
his voice, and received a corresponding inward revelation.
Now, from this apparition and revelation —that is’, from
instruction given by Jesus himself —Paul, first of all, drew
the material for his Gospel. “ The Gospel which was preached
by me is not according to man. For neither did I receive
it of man, nor did I learn it but by the revelation of Jesus
I.
23
1 A. Meyer, Wer hat das Christentum begriindet? 35.
2 Acts ix, 7; xxvi, 13. The unessential differences in the three reports
—Acts ix, 7; xxii, 9; and xxvi, 14 —are explained without difficulty.
See the explanations of Joseph Knabenbauer, Commentaria in Actus
Apost., 161 ff. (1899); F. X. Polzl, Der Weltapostel Paulus, 38, note 1
(Regensburg, 1905); Ruegg, Der Apostel Paulus, 53; Anton Seitz, Das
Evangelium vom Gottessohn, 496, note 6 (Freiburg, 1908). Only one
who, with Baur, Wendt, Pfleiderer and other critics, wishes to make
it entirely plausible “ that the details of this threefold narrative can
make no claim to exact historicity,” can find a contradiction here.
Pfleiderer, Die Entsiehung des Chrisientums, 132.
3 Lehrbuch der biblischen Theologie, 203 f.


Christ” (Gal. i, n, 12). And the essential point of this
revelation was again the christology, the mystery of the
Person of Jesus Christ, as the Apostle all his life after the
catastrophe of Damascus preached it. “ When it pleased
him, who separated me from my mother’s womb and called
me by his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach
him among the Gentiles” (Gal. i, 15, 16). That is the first
and most important source of the Pauline christology.
Of course, there can be no thought of Paul’s having
learned by that experience the whole Gospel and the whole
historical life of Jesus. But Jesus drew him thereby into a
vital association with his life, allowed him to have a wonder-
fully profound insight into his teachings, and convinced him
of his Messiahship and real divine sonship. The evangelical
and christological knowledge of Paul was supplemented and
in all respects completed by the fact that he penetrated into
the life and doctrines of the Master by the aid of the original
disciples, the original Church and the earliest traditions.
That was Paul’s second way of approaching Christ.
The liberal critics bar this way. Although their “ psycho-
logical ” explanation of the Pauline christology before and
at Damascus has proved itself an absurdity, they nevertheless
wish to play out the third act of the drama. After the event
at Damascus, Paul, it is claimed, further developed and
elaborated his christology in a fantastic manner, without any
regard to the real life of Jesus and to the historical tradition
of it in the early Church, and did so in accordance with the
imaginary vision on the road to Damascus, and on the ground
of his preconceived ideas of the Messiah, which he had already
brought with him to Damascus. His conversion “ drew him
away from all such connections, and also out of any con-
nection with the first Apostles, as men (what they once were
is, to him, a matter of indifference), and, indeed, from any
connection with the earthly Jesus, who is also crucified, after
the flesh, and is for him no more there. Paul lives only with
the Christ whom he had come to know ”* —that is, whom he
imagined he had seen. “ Thereby every human tradition is
rejected, even that transmitted by the first Apostles. . . .
Paul will learn nothing, but wishes rather to show and repre-
sent what he has done independently.” 2 Paul has “woven
into his Christian way of thinking, together with his own
experience, current opinions of his own time, and also pagan,
Greek, Oriental or Jewish-Gnostic traditions. ... If Paul,
as we suppose, grew up with such views from the time of
his youth, he must, of course, have absorbed them, and
cannot possibly have been subsequently aware whence he had
derived them.” 3 ' For the very reason that Paul uncon-
1 A. Meyer, Wer hat das Christentum begriindet f 72.
* id., 32. 3 id., 33.


sciously applied to Christ his own and others’ non-christian
ideas, and imagined that he had received everything, his
whole, complete portrait of Christ “ through the revelation
of God,” it can be finally again asserted that “it was not
Paul who created his Christ, but that his Christ (the imagined
one of his experience) laid hold of him, overpowered him,
and became too strong for him. . . . Hence we stand before
a mystery in religion, which mocks at every explanation.” 1
That is the end of the “psychological explanation” of the
Pauline christology. No liberal critic can give any other
than Meyer has given. At most, they honour the “second
founder of Christianity” with additional designations, such
as “the involuntary product of rabbinical speculation and
dialectics,” 2 a man with “ the most extravagant specula-
tions,” 3 a “ theological premature birth,” 4 “a brother of the
visionaries,” 5 “ a man who had become a fool through
boasting . . .” of “arrogant blindness . . . and proud self-
sufficiency,” which “scorned to learn doctrines from the lips
of the personal disciples of the Master, before he preached
them.” 6
That with such invectives the “ mystery that mocks at every
explanation ” is not psychologically explained is patent to
everyone. Moreover, the mere attempt to account psycho-
logically for the final christology, as Paul presents it im-
mediately after his conversion, proves itself immediately to be
unpsychological. Only in so far as it could be established that
Paid before the incident at Damascus carried about with him
his conception of Christ already complete, and that he at
Damascus simply transferred these ideas of Christ to Jesus
of Nazareth of his own accord and independently, could the
later Pauline christology be designated as a psychological
product and psychological development of his former life.
It has, however, been proved that this supposition is not
correct. Whoever, in spite of that, builds up a theory, upon
it is building a castle in the air.
But also, quite apart from the incorrectness of our oppo-
nents’ assumptions, the christology of Paul, after the Damas-
1 Meyer, 33.
2 Pfleiderer, Die Entstehung des Christentums, 141, 167.
3 Wernle, Die Anjdnge unserer Religion, 239, 2nd ed.
1 Richard E. Funcke, Die historischen Grundlagen des Christentums,
244 (Leipzig, 1904). 6 Wrede, Paulus, 15.
8 Eduard von Hartmann, Das Christentum des N, T., 171. Where it
is possible, the hateful representation of Hartmann is surpassed by
Fried. W. Nietzsche, Morgenrothe, 64-68, 182 (1881). The charge of
Hartmann and A. Meyer, Wer hat das Christentum begriindet? 32, that
Paul, after his conversion, did not wish to go even once to Jerusalem to
let himself be instructed, is contradicted by Ad. Jiilicher with the
remark ; “Hewould have returned at once from Damascus to Jerusalem,
but he knew that his former companions would quickly dispose of him if
be surrendered himself to them.” —Paulus und Jesus, 55.


cus episode, cannot be “psychologically” interpreted in the
above sense unless we come into contradiction with the in-
controvertible dates and facts of the Acts of the Apostles and
the Pauline Epistles themselves. According to them, the
great man by no means reasoned out and elaborated his
christology merely from his experience at Damascus —whether
this be regarded as a subjective vision of Paul or as an
objective appearance of Christ —and with complete disregard
of the real, historical life of Jesus and the tradition of the
original Church, in which the historical Jesus continued to
live.
Nothing is more untrue than the assumption that the
historical life of the Saviour was a matter of indifference to
Paul. True, it is hard to prove to what degree Paul in his
missionary preaching referred to single events and single
utterances in the life of Jesus. Certainly a mission to the
Gentiles could not be carried on without the communication
of abundant material from the life of Jesus for purposes of
narration. 1 The Epistles of Paul do not contain much of it,
for the precise reason that the historical life of Jesus was
already known to the Churches to which those letters were
addressed, and, again, because Paul did not wish to furnish
in them historical details, but to express his views about the
problems of Christian life. Nevertheless, there is sufficient
evidence from the Pauline writings that Christ was the chief
object of Paul’s preaching—in fact, the person and teaching
of Christ in just that historical conception which Jesus himself
had given to it. 2 Paul declares that he has admonished the
Church at Ephesus to remember “the words of the Lord”
(Acts xx, 24, 35). “The word of Christ” is to be used in
the Churches abundantly, and to be freshly brought to mind
in the most varied forms of teaching and spiritual hymnology
(Col. iii, 16). All instruction is to be joined to the “ sound
words of our Lord Jesus Christ ”(1 Tim. vi, 3). In any case,
Paul is conscious that his Gospel of Christ is identical with
the Gospel which Jesus himself preached (Rom. xvi, 25). He
expressly designates all preaching and all faith which do not
agree with the historical, real truth of the life of Jesus as
vain imaginings and as false witness against God (1 Cor.
xv, 12-17). The highest guiding-star of his faith and his
doctrine is “ other foundation no man can lay, but that which
is laid, which is Christ Jesus” (1 Cor. iii, 11) —that is, the
historical Jesus.
As evidence for the charge that Paul placed no value on the
historical Jesus appeal is made 3 to the confession : “ Hence-
1 Proofs in Johannes Weiss’s Das alteste Evangelium, 33-39 (Gottin-
gen, 1903).
2 For the thorough proof of this, see Zahn, Einleilung in das N. T.,
ii, 164-166 (Leipzig, 1899). 3 Weinel, Paulus, 244.


forth we know no man according- to the flesh. And if we have
known Christ (the Messiah) according to the flesh, but now we
know him so no longer ”(2 Cor. v, 16). But these words do
not at all contain a depreciation between the so-called historic
Jesus according to the flesh and the spiritual and celestial
Christ. From the whole Pauline theology, as well as from the
immediate context of this passage (see 2 Cor. v, 14, 15, 17),
the antithesis of “ flesh and spirit ” is equivalent to Judaism
and Christianity—that is, Paul’s former Jewish, and now
Christian, views of the Messiah. “As Paul also elsewhere
reckons Judaism as a part of the category of the flesh, and
declares it to be conquered and destroyed by Christianity, as
the religion of the Spirit, so he passes judgement on the ideas
of the Messiah, which he formerly had, whether they may
have been really rather apocalyptic in general, or Phari-
saical in particular.” 1 Thus, then, Paul does not express
himself in the second Epistle to the Corinthians in favour of,
but in the most decisive way against, the view of liberal
criticism. He had not himself created his Christ by attribut-
ing to Jesus inveterate Jewish ideas of the Messiah, but his
faith in Christ is genuine and early Christian, and rests on
the real, historical life and work of. Jesus himself. Jiilicher
also gives his opinion as follows: “An Apostle of Jesus
Christ, who should not have wished to know anything of the
earthly life of the Messiah, who, for the sake of his dogma,
should have passed over contemptuously, as ‘ weakness of
the; flesh,’ all that had become revealed through the sub-
missive figure of the Son of God, is a creation of the modern
habit of twisting conclusions, but not the Paul of history.
The friendly co-operation of Paul with other Evangelists—
for example, Barnabas and Mark —who certainly did not
practise any such wonderful seclusion, excludes the pos-
sibility that the Gospel history remained essentially unknown
to Paul.” 2
It can, then, also be actually proved from the Pauline
writings 3 that the Apostle to the Gentiles possessed a thorough
and definite knowledge of the life of Jesus; that the historical
person of the Saviour was always before his eyes; and that
therefore his conviction and faith in regard to the divinity
rested not only on the revelation of the glorified Jesus, which
had come to him near Damascus, but also on the conduct of
Jesus when on earth.
The assertion that “ the Pauline theology was something
almost wholly separate from the historical life and doctrines of
1 Feine, Paulus als Theologe, 39.
2 Jiilicher, Paulus und Jesus, 55.
3 See proofs in Feine, 45-150; Ruegg, 59; and especially in Titius,
Die neutest. Lehre von der Seligkeii, ii, 12 ff.; Kolbing, Die geistige
Einwirkung der Person Jesu auf Paulus, in f. (Gottingen, 1906);
Johannes Weiss, Das dlteste Evangelium, 33 ff.; Paulus und Jesus, 10 ff.


Jesus,” 1 yes, that it was in error about the whole humanity
of Christ, 2 stands in direct contradiction to this theology and
to all the facts of Pauline preaching. Even Johannes Weiss
pronounces untenable the statement “ that Paul really had
relations only with the celestial Christ, and, on the other
hand, had known practically nothing of the earthly Jesus, who,
in any case, played no part in his religious consciousness.” 3
Precisely, H. Weinel, 4 who has uttered literally this state-
ment prohibited by Weiss, has finally again to avow that
Paul has “ preserved for us the portrait of Jesus sharp and
clear. . . . We must not think that Paul knew nothing of
Jesus. On the contrary, his Epistles contain so much of
Jesus that he, even in the controversy which has just broken
out again about the historical truth of the person of Jesus, is
and remains the best and surest witness, and we must declare
all his Epistles to be unauthentic if we would put aside his
testimony. . . . And, however much he is occupied religiously
with the exalted and living Christ, just as clearly do we find
everywhere traces of his acquaintance with the narratives
about Jesus as they were subsequently incorporated firmly in
our Gospels.” 5
Moreover, the mere fact that shortly before and after the
death of St Paul, and in the Churches founded by Paul in his
missionary tours, the Gospels were written on the basis of the
life of Jesus, up to that time related and preserved by oral
teaching, proves exactly the whole absurdity of our opponents’
hypothesis, which denies to Paul a knowledge of the history of
his Master. How? The old Churches, in which Paul had
preached, and which he had himself for the most part founded,
possessed such an abundant knowledge of the words, deeds
and suffering of the Lord that the synoptical Gospels could
be composed out of it, and Paul, the head and educator of
these Churches, was without this knowledge? To put the
question is enough to answer it. This consideration alone
would necessarily cause the final elimination from Pauline
research of the liberal legend of Christ as merely an apoca-
lyptic celestial man. “ The thesis that the faith of Paul is
connected by no living bond with the historical personality of
Jesus will hardly disturb the theology of the future.” 6
In fact, Paul’s acquaintance with the life of Jesus is so
significant that sometimes the assertion has been made that
1 Pfleiderer, Entstehung des Chrisientums, 185.
2 Wrede, Paulus, 55. 3 Weiss, Chrisius, 32 f., 71.
4 “ In fact, Jesus hardly played any part for him (Paul) as a human
being.”—Weinel, Paulus, 244.
5 Weinel, 1.c., 246, 249. Similarly, Weizsacker, Das afostolische
Zeitalter , 118, 3rd ed. : “ Paul has doubtless known the Gospel tradition
about Jesus. . . . That he knows the utterances of Jesus is proved by
his citations. He uses them for the highest decisions in questions of
life and faith.” • Johannes Weiss, Paulus und Jesus, 72.


Paul derived it from a Gospel already put into written form.
That is certainly not the case, and not a single tenable
argument for such a supposition can be brought forward,
although the Gospel of Matthew in Hebrew surely already
existed. Also the view that the Logia—the Discourses —were
already accessible at the time of the Apostle in the Greek
Churches, and that Paul (as Resch tries to prove) is at every
step dependent on them, is questionable. Paul himself may,
however, be looked upon in a certain sense as the first Greek
Evangelist. Only from twenty to twenty-five years after the
death of the Master he has described his life in its most
important outlines.
The source, however, from which he drew his knowledge
was not, as our opponents assert, his own religious experi-
ence—Christ, psychologically learned by Paul—but the tradi-
tion of the first disciples and the original Church.
It is not merely an oversight, it is a gross and inexcusable
error, when Professor Arnold Meyer writes: “ Paul re-
jected all human tradition, even that of the first Apostles.” 1
As if the history and the Epistles of Paul did not declare the
very opposite of this! When Paul wishes to prove the re-
liability of his historical statements about Jesus, he appeals
to the Twelve and to the hundreds of witnesses and hearers
still living in the original Church (i Cor. xv, 5-7). The
historical knowledge of the separate facts concerning Jesus —
events, circumstances, in short, all “ the things that are of
Jesus ” 2 (Acts xviii, 25; xxiii, 11; xxviii, 31) —Paul received,
like the Corinthians, through the narrations of others who,
before him, had become acquainted with them (1 Cor. xv, 1-3).
Paul knew these bearers of the original tradition about
Jesus from a most intimate association of many years. First,
he gained exact information about Jesus during three years’
residence in Damascus, from that ancient Church, closely
connected with the mother Church in Jerusalem (Acts
ix, 19-25). Then he remained a short time with Peter and
James and the brethren at Jerusalem (Acts ix, 26-30; Gal.
i, 18-20). Then he spent six or seven years more in the midst
of the Church at Antioch, whose foundation the fugitives from
the mother Church in Jerusalem had laid (Acts xi, 25-30;
xiii, 1-3). On his missionary journeys also he was accom-
panied by the oldest members of the mother Church and was
aided in his preaching by Barnabas, Mark and Silas. Finally,
in order not to err in his Gospel concerning Jesus, he went
specially a second time to Jerusalem to the first disciples
(Gal. ii, 1 and following), in regard to whom he himself says :
1 Meyer, Wer hat das Christentum begriindet, Jesus oder Paulusf 32.
8 This expression, rd wepl toO' ’lrjaov, according to the linguistic usage
of Paul and Luke, as well as grammatically, must be understood as the
pergonal incidents in Jesus’ life, See Eph. vi, 22; Col. iv, 8, etc,


“ I communicated to them the Gospel which I preach among
the Gentiles; but apart to them who seemed to be something,
lest perhaps I should run, or had run in vain ” (Gal. ii, 2).
By means of this chain of witnesses Paul stands so posi-
tively in connection with Jesus, his life and his teaching, that
he can affirm that he had received his Gospel, as it were,
from the Saviour himself : “ I have received of the Lord, that
which also I delivered unto you ” (1 Cor. xi, 23). 1
What is left, then, of the preposterous assumption that
Paul has, on his own initiative, or, what is the same thing,
according to his own subjective “experience,” created a
Christ, who stands in contradiction with the real person and
history of Jesus and with the most ancient tradition? On
the contrary, Paul proclaims with the whole force of his
conviction that he preaches the divine man Jesus Christ
precisely as the Saviour himself has revealed himself, and as
the first disciples and the whole original Church preached him
and believed in him. He knows himself to be in the full
possession of the true portrait of Christ; he relies on the
essential identity of his own revelation of Christ with that of
the older Apostles and with that of Jesus, and even dares to
excommunicate everyone, though he were an angel from
heaven, who should preach another Gospel than that given
by himself and by tradition (Gal. i, 8,9). He verifies con-
tinually his preaching of Christ by that of the first Apostles,
and lets this go so far as to have the correctness of his teach-
ing confirmed by the assembly of the Apostles at Jerusalem,
in order not to err himself or to lead others into error. It is
abundantly proved from the old Christian sources that no-
where in the original Church—including the Jewish-Christian
heterodox teachers, the enemies of Paul —was there heard a
difference of opinion, or even a tiny discord, in regard to the
way in which the person of Jesus was pourtrayed.
And in the face of all that, are we to suppose that Paul
has, consciously or unconsciously, replaced the real, historical
Jesus by a fantastic, subjectively-experienced—that is, an
imagined—figure of Christ, separated it from all human rela-
tions, and clothed it with celestial dignity and a divine nature?
And, furthermore, that he, the novice, completed this swindle
already in the year of Jesus’ death, and then continuously
all his life repeated it in word and writing, without con-
tradiction, but, on the contrary, with the universal approval
of the first Apostles and the whole early Church, which itself
must thus have committed this blasphemous deception with
him, and allowed itself to be converted to the distorted Pauline
portrait of Jesus? Everyone must see the incorrectness, let
1 By this is meant —as Th. Zahn proves, Einleitung, ii, 171 —not a
personal revelation made to Paul —whether that of Damascus, or a later
one—but the indirect revelation by means of tradition.


us say, the whole monstrous character of such a critical
fabrication of history.
Paul, therefore, in his christology is at one with the im-
mediate Church of the disciples of Jesus. 1 All the assertions
that Paulinism grew outside of the latter, on Hellenic soil
and out of a Greek-mythological sphere of thought, are ex-
cluded by Adolf Jiilicher in the words : “No, the Christianity
of Paul also has grown on the soil of the original Church at
Jerusalem, and if Paul did once criticize the person of Peter,
he never criticized Peter’s Gospel. In every way he declares
(i Cor. xv, n) that there exists no difference between the
Gospel of Paul and that of the older Apostles; at most there
can be detected in his words (verse 8) a regret that they had
come into possession of the complete revelation so much
sooner than he.’’ 2
If anyone wishes to speak of a difference between Paul and
the older Apostles, it can be only a formal one : “ Paul
elaborates more sharply what was already there in reality.” 3
The Apostle to the Gentiles, it Is true, pours the same thoughts
that we find in the old disciples into other forms, and thinks
them out to a conclusion, as was natural to his lofty mind
and to the new world in.the midst of which he proclaimed his
Gospel. But he created no new Gospel and no new Christ.
Even decided enemies of the divinity of Jesus are convinced
of this. Julius Kaftan writes : “ I sum up my judgement
thus, that through Paul, and precisely through him and no
one'else, the Gospel of Jesus in primitive Christianity was
preserved, and thus became a power that has changed the
history of the world.” 4 According to Weinel, Paul “has
always preserved the connection with the first Apostles, and
even in a difficult hour of his life resisted the temptation
finally to tear away his Churches from the Jerusalem tradition
and thereby from (the historic) Jesus.” 5 Yes, the Jena critic
rejects the hypothesis of a Pauline transformation of the
earthly Jesus into a celestial-divine Christ so forcibly that he
falls into the opposite extreme, and ascribes to Paul the
credit for the fact “that the celestial Jesus has not entirely
concealed the human Jesus.” 6
Accordingly, just as little as there exists any essential dif-
ference between the christology of Paul and the original
Church, just so little is there any such difference between
Paul and Jesus. Again Weinel is obliged to confess : “In
the highest and last analysis Paul and Jesus are at one, how-
ever unlike their formulas may be, and however widely they
differ in their entire nature.” 7 This is a thought which
1 See the monograph of A. Castellain, St Paul, valeur de son timoi-
gnage sur le Christ, VEglise et la doctrine da Salut (Bruxelles, 1909).
2 Paulas und Jesus, 56. 3 Feine, Paulas als Theologe, 52.
1 Jesus und Paulas, 55. 8 Weinel, Paulas, 244.
6 Weinel, l.c. 7 Weinel, Paulus, 117.


Adolf Jiilicher puts into the following words : “ Even if there
are not a few differences between both [Jesus and Paul],
nevertheless, Paul has understood the Master, whom he has
never seen with his bodily eyes better than the Twelve,
and he is nevertheless the heir to his true spirit. ... In
the main thing Paul is at one with Jesus. . . . For even the
halfway unprejudiced it is hard not to see that Jesus is the
Creator, and Paul the receiver.” 1
And yet Jiilicher thinks that, in regard to christology, this
unity between Paul and Jesus comes to naught: “If we
gather together, as a whole, the scattered thoughts of Paul
concerning his Christ, it is evidently impossible to derive them
from the Gospel of Jesus, or even merely to put them at once
into friendly relations with him. . . . The Christ-mythology
of Paul appears like a ruthless violation of the portrait of
Jesus, so great in its simplicity, which we have gained in the
Gospels.” 2 Assuredly the Christ-mythology of Paul, as
Jiilicher and the liberal critics like to represent it, is a ruth-
less violation of the portrait of Jesus in the Gospels, just as it
is, as we have seen, a ruthless violation of the Pauline portrait
of Jesus.
In opposition to it, the Apostle asserts in regard to his
statements about Jesus : “I have received of the Lord that
which I have delivered unto you” (i Cor. xi, 23). And even
Jiilicher sees himself compelled to confess : “ The declaration
of Paul concerning his relation to Jesus referred of course to
the simple dependence of the Apostle on the Lord. In his
consciousness the all-dominating thing was that he might
preach in the whole world precisely what Jesus Christ wished
to have preached as his Gospel. . . . And he has not sup-
planted Jesus even unconsciously.” 3
Paul, therefore, has neither consciously nor unconsciously
changed anything in the Gospel or the portrait of Jesus.
Whoever honestly endeavours to compare the portrait of
Jesus in the Gospels with Paul’s portrait of him will per-
ceive the essential unity of both. He will find that the
Pauline preaching about the Son of God goes back to Jesus’
own conception of his divine sonship and divinity, and that
we possess in Paul a new confirmation of Jesus’ own utter-
ances concerning his exalted nature.
Hence the Berlin professor, Theodor Kaftan, is right
when he says : “ The watchword, which is given out to-day,
‘ Back from Christ to Jesus, and from Paul’s preaching of
Christ to the simple Son of Man of the Gospels,’ is unaccept-
able. . . . This watchword is valueless, because it is based
upon a false premise. The difference between the Christ of
Paul and the Jesus of the Gospels, on which this watchword
1 Jiilicher, Die Religion Jesu und die Anfdnge del Christentums, Bg.
2 Jiilicher, Pau\us und Jesus , 26, 27. 3 id., 11, 72,


relies, does not exist in the Scripture itself, but is dragged
into it. The Jesus, whom this watchword opposes to the
Christ of Paul, is not the Jesus of the Gospels, but the Jesus
of a new theology.” 1 Similarly Julius Kaftan writes: “If
anyone to-day wishes violently to separate Jesus and Paul, to
appeal to Jesus and to repudiate Paul, it is, when seen from
the standpoint of history, a high-handed proceeding. In
history they belong together, as the Lord, in whom we
believe, and the Apostle, to whom we owe the permanent
forms of this belief. . . . The modern separation of Jesus
and Paul will prove to be, in the further development of
theology and the Church, a transient error.” 2 In fact, even
such a liberal investigator as Hermann von Soden already
designates this error as outlived : “ The view formerly often
presented that Paul was in reality the founder of Christianity
is given up in scientific circles.” 3
IV.— The Synoptists and the Divinity of Christ.
i. The Divinity of Christ as Represented by the Synoptists.
We can summarize this briefly. The synoptic represen-
tation agrees with the divine consciousness, which Jesus
himself reveals in the first three Gospels. This consciousness
we have thoroughly and exhaustively estimated, beginning
with the revelation of divine sonship by the twelve-year-old
boy in the temple to the hour of his ascension into heaven.
It i£* true, with these the corresponding texts in John’s
Gospel were also continually taken into consideration, in
order to obtain a really organic picture of what Jesus Christ
said of himself. Yet every reader can easily separate the
Johannine elements. In this way, to use a somewhat un-
fortunate and unhappily too frequently employed expression,
he will have before him the characteristic “ synoptic Christ,”
in distinction from the “Johannine Christ.”
Only one thing is still wanting— the Gospel of the Child-
hood of Jesus. Hitherto this has not been considered, because
it lies outside of, and previous to, the sphere of the direct
testimony of Jesus to himself. Consequently it is more a matter
of merely arranging in logical sequence the divine features in
the Gospel of the childhood, in order to gain a comprehensive
idea of the divinely human person of Jesus held by the
synoptical Evangelists and by their Christian contemporaries.
While Mark opens his “ Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son
of God ” (Mark i, i), immediately with the appearance of the
1 Theodor Kaftan, Der Mensch Jesus Christus, 3 (Gr.-Lichterfelde-
Berlin, 1908).
2 Jesus und Paulus, 58. Similarly, Scott, Jesus and Paul, in Essays
on some Biblical Questions by B. Swete, 375 f. (London, 1909).
3 Die wichtigsten Fragen im Leben Jesu, 1, 2nd ed. (Berlin, igogl


Forerunner, and while the Fourth Gospel, apart from the
prologue, begins at once with the testimony of the already
convinced John the Baptist to Christ, Matthew and Luke turn
their gaze backwards, and pourtray historically the temporal
beginnings of the life of Jesus by means of the oldest tradi-
tion. Matthew undertakes this task in order to weaken com-
pletely the caricature which Jewish and especially Phari-
saic fanaticism had already put into circulation concerning
the life of the Saviour. Luke feels himself already, aside
from this consideration, compelled to “ diligently attain to
all things from the beginning ” in accordance with his very
decided talent as an historian (Luke i, 3).
Liberal criticism, it is true, asserts the contrary. It
affirms that both Luke and Matthew have allowed their
judgements to be clouded by mythological or legendary stories
of their contemporaries concerning the true and actual begin-
nings of the life of Jesus; and that their Gospel of the child-
hood, therefore, does not at all deserve to be taken seriously
by historical criticism. That has been the unanimous opinion
of rationalistic liberalism ever since the days of Gottlob
Paulus, David Fr. Strauss and Ernest Renan down to H.
Usener, 1 Hillmann, 2 P. Lobstein, 3 H. Holtzmann, 4 Harnack, 5
W. Soltau, 6 H. Gunkel, 7 Otto Pfleiderer, 8 Wellhausen, 9 Ed.
von Hartmann, 10 and T. K. Cheyne. 11 These are really
acrobatic feats, in which these and other more or less serious
critics outbid themselves in their attempts, first to criticize
the story of Christ’s childhood out of the canonical Gospels,
and then to make people believe that it was invented under
the influence of Hellenic and Oriental mythology and freely
imaginative Christian legend, and slipped surreptitiously into
the Gospels by the synoptists, if not by some later irreverent
hand. 12 This is not the place in which to deal with this
1 Religionsgeschichiliche Untersuchungen, 69 ff. (1889); cf. Geburt
und Kindheit Chrisli, in N. T. Wissenschaft, iv, 8 (1903).
2 Die Kindheitsgeschichte Jesu nach Lukas (1891).
3 Die Lehre von der iibernatiirlichen Geburt Christi (1896).
4 Lehrbuch der N. T. Theologie, i, 414 (1897).
5 Zu Luk i, 34, in Zeitschrift fur N. T. Wissenschaft, 53 (1901) ;
Dogmengeschichte, 95, note 2, 3rd ed.; We sen des Christeniums, 20.
* Die Geburtsgeschichie Jesu Christi (1902).
1 Zum religionsgeschichtlichen Verstdndnis des N. T., 63-70 (1903).
8 Das Christusbild des urchristlichen Glaubens, 21 ff. (1903); Entste-
hung des Christeniums 194 ff. (1905).
9 Das Evangelium Lucae iibersetzt und erkldrt (1904).
10 Das Christentum des N. T., 23, 30, 59 (1905).
11 Bible Problems (1905).
12 The latter is the recent supposition of J. Wellhausen, since, in his
commentaries on Matthew and Luke (Berlin, 1904), he frankly gives up
the story of the childhood, although even Harnack, Sitzungsber. der
Konigl. freuss. Akademie der Wissenschaft, 547 ff. (Berlin, 1900), and
Zimmermann, Theol. Studien, 250 ff. (1903), prove that the first two
chapters of Luke’s Gospel are from the same hand as all the rest of the
Gospel.


hypercriticism. A renewed discussion of it is also not at all
necessary. The full historicity of the Gospel of the childhood
of Jesus has been sufficiently demonstrated 1 in recent years
in numerous magazines and monographs by Protestants, as
well as Catholics, while the liberal critics have not brought
forth even one tenable argument against it, and maintain
their own specious reasons only by continual mutual contra-
diction. 2
The real and only reason why they attack the historical
genuineness and credibility of the Gospel of the childhood is
not at all an historical, but a philosophical one —the pre-
judiced, naturalistic and rationalistic view. According to this
view, the texts of the Gospel are divided into two classes —
one natural, the other supernatural. Whatever in the Gospels
and in the Christ of the Gospels is merely and purely natural
and human is pronounced genuine and credible. On the con-
trary, wherever in the Gospel and the life of Jesus super-
natural, miraculous and divine elements come into considera-
tion, a later insertion, or a myth, or at least a legend must
absolutely exist. Only one who, starting from this “ climax
of arrogant assumptions,” brings himself to restamp “the
oldest monuments of Christian faith ... as witnesses for
modern views,” 3 can and must violently strangle in par-
ticular the Gospel of the childhood.
The Gospel of the childhood lies wholly in the sphere of
supernatural revelation, and Jesus Christ appears therein
already as the divine Messiah and Son of God. It is true,
the human foundation of the portrait of Jesus shows itself
1 This literature in German, French and English is completely set
forth in P. A. Durand’s L’Enfance de Jisus-Christ d’apres les Evan-
giles canoniques, 65 ff. (Paris, 1908). Only the admirable book by
Bardenhewer, Maria Verkiindigung, Biblische Studien, vol. X (1905),
has been overlooked by Durand. Since then have appeared : J. Pfat-
tisch, Der Stammbaum Christi beim hi. Lukas, Katholik, 269-276 (1908);
Simon Landersdorfer, Bemerkungen zu Lukas, i, 26-38, Biblische
Zeitschrift, 30-48 (1909); V. Hartl, Zum Stammbaum nach Lukas,
id., 156-173, 290-302 (1909); Joseph Michael Heer, Die Stammbaume
Jesu nach Matthaus und Lukas, id., vol. XV (1910); F. X. Steinmeister,
Die Geschichte der Geburt und Kindheit Christi und ihr Verhdltnis
zu babylonischen Mythen, in N. T. Abhandlungen von Meinertz, ii,
1, 2.
2 Professor Richard H. Griitzmacher, of Rostock, remarks, in regard
to this contradictory criticism of the story of the childhood, in Die
Jungfrauengeburt, 25 f. (Gr.-Lichterfelde-Berlin, 1906), the following :
“ Faith in the ‘ certain results of science ’ breaks down when one sees
how its ‘ intellectual leaders ’ swear to the most pronounced contradic-
tions on their scientific oath. Indeed, there is hardly one domain
which, to such a degree as ours, can shatter even the simplest faith in
the certainty of scientific results; provided, of course, that one works
out the whole extremely voluminous literature (about the criticism of the
Gospel of the childhood) in all its details, and enlarges one’s knowledge
also of one’s own party limitations.”
3 Bardenhewer, Maria Verkiindigung, 6.


there sharply and clearly. The child Jesus, according to the
record of Matthew and Luke, comes into this world as a
human being and is subject to all human conditions. He is
conceived and sheltered for nine months in the womb of the
Virgin Mary. He is born in a poor hut of refuge, laid in
a manger, circumcised after eight days, and later presented
in the temple of the Lord, and ransomed with the money of
humble people. Then he passes through all the phases of
the usual human child, grows and develops physically, morally
and spiritually. In regard to this entirely human side of the
life of the child Jesus, as it is depicted by the synoptists, the
Apostle Paul can say : Christ Jesus “ debased himself, taking
the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men and
in habit found as a man” (Phil, ii, 7).
Through his humanity, however, his divinity is already
discernible from the first hour. Not with obvious clearness,
as in his later life and activity, yet corresponding to the
beginnings and first steps of the personal revelation of
God.
The angel of God brings from heaven the first announce-
ment to the aged priest, Zachary, that he would receive a
Son, whom he is to call the Child of grace (Johannes, or
“Jehovah hath shown grace”)—a sign of the approaching
Messianic age of grace. Joy and gladness are to accom-
pany the birth of John, “ for he shall be great before the
Lord [Kyrios, Jehovah], . . . and he shall convert many of
the children of Israel to the Lord, their God [Jehovah-
Elohim], and he shall go before him in the spirit and power
of Elias ... to prepare unto the Lord [Jehovah] a perfect
people ” (Luke i, 5-18).
The Lord God, before whom John will be great, before
whom he will go in the spirit and power of Elias, to prepare
for him the way and the people, is undoubtedly the coming
Messiah, Jesus himself. Isaias (xl, 3) and Malachias (iii, 1)
had announced that the Messiah would send out a messenger
and guide before him. The prophet Malachias had especi-
ally added : “ Behold, I will send you Elias the prophet,
before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.
And he [Elias] shall turn the heart of the fathers to the
children and the heart of the children to their fathers ”
(Mai. iv, 5,6). Relying on this utterance of the prophet,
everyone expected that Elias, or a prophet similar to him in
strength and spirit, would come to prepare the way for the
Messiah. This view is set forth already in the Book of Jesus
Sirach (xlviii, 10, n). From the New Testament it is
evident that this belief was universal among its Jewish con-
temporaries (Matt, xi, 14; xvi, 14; xvii, 10; Mark vi, 15;
viii, 28; Luke ix, 8; John i, 21). The theology of the Rabbis
held fast to the appearance of the forerunner Elias as to a


dogma. This is evident from the Gospels as well as from
the Mishna 1 (Matt, xvii, 10; Mark ix, 11).
Hence the aged priest Zachary could understand the
angel’s words only in the sense that his son, John, would be
the ardently awaited forerunner of the Messiah, and that this
Messiah was the Lord God in his own person. And in reality
Zachary did so understand the message of Gabriel. In the
prophetic song of praise which the happy father uttered after
the birth of his son by God’s grace, Zachary gives thanks
from his deeply grateful heart for the dawn of the Messianic
salvation, and adds, turning to John : “ And thou, child,
shalt be called the prophet of the Highest; for thou shalt go
before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways; to give
knowledge of salvation to his people, unto the remission of
their sins, through the bowels of the mercy of our God, in
which the Orient from on high hath visited us, to enlighten
them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death ” (Luke
i, 76-79). Here it is evident that John is not extolled in
general as a forerunner and preparer of the ways of God,
but very particularly as a forerunner and preparer of the ways
of the Messiah. Not to God in general, but to the Messiah
are therefore applicable divine names and attributes—The
Most High, the Lord, the Bringer of Salvation, the Bowels
of the Mercy of God, the Orient from on high, and the
Light, which lighteth all things. In the mouth of the Jew
every one of these names and titles was a powerful para-
phrasa of the divine name and nature of the Messiah.
Neither the Evangelists nor John the Baptist leaves the
slightest doubt of this. All conceive the vocation of the
forerunner, as well as the Person of the Messiah Jesus, in
the sense of the prophet Isaias : “The voice of one crying in
the desert: Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight
in the wilderness the paths of our God. . . . Say to the
cities of Juda—behold your God ! Behold the Lord God shall
come !” (Isa. xl, 3,9, 10; Matt, iii, 3 and parallels).
Six months after the announcement of the coming fore-
runner, the approach of the divine Messiah Jesus himself is
Proclaimed by the word of an angel to the Virgin Mary:
“ Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with thee; blessed art thou
among women . . . thou hast found grace with God. Behold,
thou shalt conceive in thy womb and shalt bring forth a Son,
and thou shalt call his name Jesus. He shall be great and
shall be called the Son of the Most High. And the Lord
God shall give unto him the throne of David his father; and
he shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever. And of his
kingdom there shall be no end. . . . The Holy Ghost shall
come upon thee, and the power of the Most High shall
overshadow thee. And therefore also the Holy which shall
1 Edujoth viii, 7; Baba mezia i, 8; ii, 8; iii, 4-5; Shekalim, ii, 5.


be born of thee shall be called the Son of God ” (Luke i,
28-33)-
The Son of the Virgin Mary will be Jesus, the Bringer of
Salvation, the redeeming, spiritual Messiah King. That is,
first of all, the fundamental meaning of the announcement to
Mary—the Messiahship of Jesus and his Messianic task and
work.
To this, however, is immediately joined the further ex-
planation of the person and nature of the Messiah Jesus.
Already the utterance that he will be for ever the ruler of
the kingdom of God to be founded by him points to his
eternal and therefore divine nature. This knowledge is
strengthened by the fact that the angel emphasizes his
supernatural origin, towering far above all earthly and human
relations. Not from man will Jesus be conceived, but from
above, from God. The Holy Ghost will come upon the
Virgin, and influence her with divine power from on high,
and this influence shall be like an overhanging shadow,
much as in the Old Testament the cloud hung over the
tabernacle and the temple of God, while the glory of the
Lord filled it within (Exod. xl, 34).
If already the intimate connection of Jesus with divinity
has been obvious, the angel Gabriel now directly declares
this supernatural origin, establishes it, and takes for granted
the divinity of the Saviour. Jesus will be called the Son of
the Most High and the Son of God because he, without the
co-operation of a man, is to be conceived and born by means
of a perfectly unique miracle of divine omnipotence. The
basis of the divine sonship lies, therefore, not in the bestowal
of special favour upon Jesus, and in the acceptance of him
in place of a child, but in the origin and birth of Jesus in
his being and in his nature. Jesus is not an ethical, or
theocratic, but a metaphysical Son of God.
This the angel confirms, soon after, in substance also to
the future foster-father of Jesus, St Joseph, with the words :
“ That which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost. And
she shall bring forth a son; and thou shalt call his name
Jesus. For he shall save his people from their sins” (Matt,
i, 21). Hereto the Evangelist remarks : “ Now all this was
done that it might be fulfilled which the Lord spoke by the
prophet, saying: Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and
bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel,
which, being interpreted, is God with us” (Matt, i, 22, 23).
In reality, Isaias announces the future Redeemer and Son of
a Virgin as “ God with us ” : “Behold, a virgin shall con-
ceive and bear a son; and his name shall be called Em-
manuel” (God with us); and “Wonderful, Counsellor, God
the Mighty, the Father of the world to come, the Prince of
Peace ” (Isa. vii, 14; ix, 6)., To this announcement the angel


Gabriel alludes, and Matthew understands his words cor-
rectly, when he regards them as a fulfilment of that prophecy
of Emmanuel. The import of the name given by the angel
is, moreover, identical with that Emmanuel prophesied by
the prophet and interpreted by the Evangelist. “ Emmanuel ”
is equivalent to “God with us”; “Jesus” in the older
Hebraic form is equivalent to “God is Salvation.” “God
is Salvation ” means the Son of the Virgin, in that he “ saves
his people from their sins.” “ God with us ” means the Son
of the Virgin because he, who as a human being has entered
into our race, is God.
Soon after the annunciation, Mary rose and went into the
hill country to the parents of the future John the Baptist.
“ And she entered into the house of Zachary and saluted
Elizabeth. And it came to pass that when Elizabeth heard
the salutation of Mary, the infant leaped in her womb. And
Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost, and she cried out
with a loud voice and said : Blessed art thou among women
and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And whence is this to
me that the mother of my Lord should come to me? . . .
And blessed art thou that hast’ believed, because those
things shall be accomplished that were spoken to thee by the
Lord. And Mary said; My soul doth magnify the Lord, and
my spirit hath rejoiced in God, my Saviour ” (Luke i, 39-47).
Elizabeth greets Mary as the mother of her Lord, her
Kyrios. The still unborn child Jesus is the Kyrios of the
highly, favoured mother of the Baptist. That is so rare and
extraordinary that evidently this title is not a mere polite
address. Neither the Greek nor Aramaic linguistic usages
permit one to address a child, and especially a still unborn
child, even were it a prince, from motives of earthly rever-
ence, as Lord, “Kyrios.” Mary’s child was, from a secular
point of view, in any case, but especially for her relative
Elizabeth, not a being to whom unusual reverence or any
lordly rank at all was due. The form of address “Lord”
can, therefore, have, on the lips of Elizabeth and in its
application to Jesus, only a supermundane and religious sig-
nification. We know, however, that Lord, “ Kyrios,” as a
religious form of address, was, according to Greek and
Aramaic ideas, always equivalent to Jehovah, God. That it
is to be so understood, particularly in this passage of the
Gospel, is plain from the context. Within a few verses the
expression “ Lord ’ ’ occurs again four times : “ Behold the
handmaid of the Lord” . . . “the mother of my Lord”
. . . “ blessed art thou that hast believed those things that
were spoken to thee by the Lord” . . . “My soul doth
magnify the Lord ” (Luke i, 38, 43, 45, 46). In the first,
third and fourth passage God is directly understood, and
there is no doubt that also in the second passage Mary is
1.
24


called the Mother of the Lord, because her child is God —
incarnate God.
Some months later, an angel proclaims to the shepherds
the birth of Jesus with the words : “ Fear not; for behold I
bring you good tidings of great joy that shall be to all the
people. For, this day is born a Saviour, who is Christ the
Lord” (Luke ii, 10). A little while before, Mary had made
the Saviour equal to God : “ My spirit hath rejoiced in God
my Saviour.” Now the child Jesus is called the Saviour,
therefore God. And still more definitely does the messenger
from heaven designate him as “ Christ the Lord ” —Messiah,
Jehovah, the divine Messiah.
Again a short space of time elapses. Then the saintly,
aged Simeon in the temple takes the child Jesus in his arms
and similarly praises God: “ Now thou dost dismiss thy
servant, O Lord, according to thy word in peace; because
my eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared
before the face of all peoples, a light to the revelation of the
Gentiles and the glory of thy people Israel ” (Luke ii, 29-32).
Jesus, the Salvation, the Saviour of the world, the Light of
all nations, the glory of the people Israel! We know all
these attributes. They have not merely Messianic but
absolutely divinely Messianic significance. They are simply
titles, in which the pious Israelite transcribed the ineffable
name of Jehovah, and which Jesus Christ applied to himself,
in order to bring nearer to his disciples his divinely human
personality. John the Evangelist uses them again, in order
to clothe in them the highest mysteries of the christology
and divinity of Jesus.
For the present, however, Providence closes the series of
its revelations concerning the divinity of the child Jesus. It
wished merely to call the attention of the world to the
coming of the divine Messiah. And these manifestations
were to remain limited to a small circle of chosen souls.
Yes, even these chosen souls beheld the mystery of the
divinity of Jesus only through a veil, and beheld it not by
means of their own visual power, but, as is continually
emphasized by the Evangelists, through the Holy Spirit,
by a supernatural, miraculous illumination, or by means of
instruction through heavenly messengers. Now the heavenly
voices also are silent, and the illuminations of the mind cease.
The hour of Jesus’ own revelation had also not yet come.
On the contrary. After all the miracles which surrounded
his cradle, the divine child must even flee to Egypt from the
persecutions of men. And after his return his juvenile life
continued in deepest obscurity in Nazareth. Luke, after all
his researches, can report of him only this : “ The child grew
and waxed strong, full of wisdom, and the grace of God was
in him ” (Luke ii, 40).
Then suddenly came a ray of divine light. The twelve-year


old child of grace discloses in the temple for the first time
his true, metaphysical divine sonship, as we have previously
shown. Then another interval of silence up to the age when,
in accordance with Jewish usage, the rabbinical teachers
took charge of his public instruction. Then, all at once, is
heard the voice of the forerunner: “ I am the voice of one
crying in the desert. Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make
straight his paths, as was spoken by Isaias the prophet.
Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill
shall be brought low . . . and all flesh shall see the salvation
of God ” (Matt, iii, 3 ; Luke iii, 4-6). “ I baptize with water,
but there hath stood one in the midst of you, whom you know
not. The same is he that shall come after me, who is pre-
ferred before me, the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy
to loose. . . . He it is that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost ”
(John i, 26 ff. and parallels). As John, the next day saw
Jesus coming to him, he said : “ Behold the Lamb of God,
that taketh away the sins of the world. . . . He must
increase, but I must decrease. He that cometh from above
[Jesus] is above all. He that is of the earth, of the earth
he is, and of the earth he speaketh. He that cometh from
heaven is above all; and what he hath seen and heard,
that he testifieth. . . . The Father loveth the Son, and he
hath given all things into his hand. He that believeth in the
Son hath life everlasting; but he that believeth not the Son
shall'f not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him ”
(John i, 29, 36; iii, 30, 31, 35, 36).
From this testimony of John stream forth whole sheaves
of divine and christological illuminating rays. Jesus is the
Lord, prophesied by Isaias, “ God with us,” the mighty God :
“ Prepare the way of the Lord, as Isaias hath said.” Jesus
is the salvation of God, and “ God is salvation ” for all
humanity. “All flesh shall see the salvation of God’’.cried
John at the approach of Jesus. It is Jesus, who can, as he
wills, dispense the Spirit of God, and hence disposes of
divine power and force : “ He will baptize you with the Holy
Ghost.” It is Jesus who can forgive sins and destroy the
sins of the world : “ Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh
away the sins of the world.” Jesus, externally a man like
other men, nevertheless in his higher nature comes from
above, from heaven, and is in consequence elevated above
everything earthly: “He that cometh from above, from
heaven, is above all.” Jesus, as a man younger than John,
is, in regard to this heavenly origin, older than his fore-
runner—a pre-existing being; ‘‘He that cometh after me,
is preferred before me.” Finally, Jesus is the well beloved
Son of the heavenly Father, and, as such, is the object of
faith, as is the Father himself : “The Father loveth the Son
and hath given all things into his hands. He that believeth
in the Son hath life everlasting.”


Moreover, John proclaims Jesus’ divine sonship, not from
his own impulse and personal knowledge, but by the inward
illumination of the Holy Ghost, and supported by the divine
manifestation which occurred at the baptism of Jesus, of
which the forerunner was the actual witness. 1 When Jesus
came out of the water after the baptism, “ Lo, the heavens
were opened to him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending
as a dove, and coming upon him. And, behold, a voice from
heaven, saying : This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased” (Matt, iii, 16 and parallels.)
These words form, from this time on, as it were, the sign-
manual of the whole synoptical consciousness of Jesus. Jesus
proclaims himself to be the Son of God in an increasing
revelation of himself to the Apostles, the disciples, the
Galilean people, the people of Judea and the Scribes and
Pharisees in Jerusalem; he corroborates this conviction of
his entire life and teaching in the face of death with a sacred
oath, and confirms it after the resurrection, until his ascen-
sion and return to the Father. And always and everywhere
he declares that he applies to himself the title “ Son of God ”
in the strictest sense of these words. He does not claim
to be a mere child of God through grace, or a mere theo-
cratic Son of God, but a true, metaphysical Son, of the same
nature and substance with the Father. We have been able
to ascertain this consciousness of divinity and of divine
sonship everywhere, and to observe its development step by
step. And, indeed, its essential characteristics are stamped
not only on John’s portraiture of Jesus, but on that of the
synoptists as well. We do not need to prove this fact a
second time. It is so clear and certain that not only con-
servative critics, but also the most important opponents of
the divinity of Jesus in the liberal camp concede to-day that
the synoptic Christ is the true Son of God and really God.
The hypercritical Professor W. Wrede proves that this is
already the case in Mark, and Mark is regarded by Wrede,
as well as by the liberal critics almost unanimously, as the
oldest Gospel. If Jesus is attested from the time of his
baptism, his temptation, and the confession of Peter down
to the scene of the tribunal, as the “ Son of God,” this
cannot be, in Wrede’s opinion, “ merely a theocratic name,
and just as little an expression for the love of God for Jesus
or for his human piety, but is the adequate designation of
the supernatural being of Jesus, . . . supernaturally and
metaphysically meant.” 2
1 John i, 32-34. Because the utterance of the Baptist concerning the
divine sonship of Jesus in John iii, 30, 35, goes back to this divine
manifestation recorded by the synoptists, it is also based on the writings
of the synoptists and may, therefore, be used here.
2 Wrede, Das Messiasgeheimnis in den Evangelien, 73, 75, 76 (G6t-
tingen, 1901).


It is true, Wrede tries to represent the texts of Mark,
which speak in favour of the divinity of Jesus, as unhistorical
opinions of the Evangelist. Johannes Weiss, 1 however, char-
acterizes such an attempt as “morbid scepticism,” and for
his part expresses his conviction as follows: “Faith,in the
Son of God is the necessary preliminary for the understand-
ing of the Gospel of the Cross ” (Mark). Not first in John,
but already in the critically incontestable Gospel of Mark,
“ the divine sonship is something supermundane, which can
only be known, if one has, like the Christian Churchy a faith
which forces its way through the appearance of lowliness to
its inner being.” 2
Wilhelm Bousset similarly says of Mark’s Gospel: “ This
oldest of the Gospels is already written from the standpoint
of faith (in the divinity of Jesus); for Mark, Jesus is already
not only the Messiah of the Jewish people, but the miraculous,
eternal Son of God, whose glory has illumined this world.
And it has been rightly remarked that in this respect our
three Gospels are different from the fourth only in degree.” 3
This view can also be read between and in the lines of
Adolf Harnack’s writings, however unwilling the Berlin
scholar is to confess such an ‘‘ essential retrogression ” in
our research into Christ. “Already,” writes Harnack, “the
Jerusalemite Mark has made of Jesus almost a divine appari-
tion, or has found such a conception already existing,” of
course because “ he and the authorities he cites have pre-
viously modified the tradition of Jesus according to the ex-
periences of the Christian Church.” 4 Even Adolf Jiilicher
rejects “the harshness of this view” of Hamack, and feels
that “ a divine apparition is an especially unfortunate ex-
pression for the play of colours about the head of Jesus, part
heavenly, part human, which begins to manifest itself in
Mark.” 5 In an unguarded moment, also, Harnack comes
boldly out from his game of hide and seek, and declares that
Mark agrees with John “in the dominating intention of
revealing the divine sonship of Jesus.” 6 Of the third Gospel,
however, he says : “ Luke writes without any tendency, or,
rather, he has only one tendency —to prove Jesus to be the
divine Saviour. ... In christology Luke approaches the
kind of conception which we find in John.” 7
If, nevertheless, the liberal investigators even to-day still
frequently preach an “ evangelical ” Christ, that is not God,
the extremely radical pastor, Kalthoff, rightly ridicules this
yes-and-no kind of theology. Catholicism and orthodoxy,
1 Das diteste Evangelium, 51 (Gottingen, 1903). 2 Id.
3 Bousset, Was wissen wir von Jesus? 30 (Halle, 1904).
4 Harnack, Lukas der Aret, 86 note.
5 Jiilicher, Neue Linien in der Kriiik der evangelischen t)berlie-
ferung, 70 (Giessen, 1906).
* Lukas der Aret, ug note. 7 Id., 117, 158.


then, would have understood Christ, from the first, more
correctly than liberalism. They have, at all events, the
Gospels on their side; and, indeed, not only John, but the
synoptists as well, who represent Jesus as God and God
incarnate. Only by an act of violence does liberal theology
seek to render this state of affairs in the Gospels obscure. 1
The radical, W. von Schnehen, pronounces a similar
opinion : “ The Jesus of whom these writings [of the Evan-
gelists] tell us is throughout not a man, but at least a super-
man. Yes, more than that; he is the unique Son of God,
the Christ, the coming incarnate God of the orthodox Church.
In regard to the fourth Gospel, this is, indeed, universally
recognized. . . . But the other Evangelists also have no
idea of informing us merely of a ‘ man ’ Jesus and of demand-
ing faith and reverence for such a being. No, the miracu-
lously born Son of the Virgin, pourtrayed in the Gospels of
Luke and Matthew, the Jesus who has risen from the dead
and ascended into heaven, as depicted in the first and third
Gospels, is just as little a mere ‘ natural man ’ as is the Christ
of John.” 2
Honest criticism, however radically it may proceed, must
therefore agree with this result, that the synoptists believe
in the divinity of Christ, and understand the historical person
of Jesus as a divinely human Person — Jesus. Mark, who, in
the opinion of our opponents, sketched the oldest and histori-
cally the most correct portrait of Jesus, expresses only the
principal import of his Gospel and, indeed, of the Gospels as
a whole, when he introduces the history of the Master with
the words : “ The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the
Son of God” (Mark i, i). And there can be no doubt that
Mark, like Matthew and Luke, conceives the Son of God
always and everywhere as “the one born of God,” 3 and that
they derive this conception from the revelation of Jesus him-
self, and consider their representation as an absolute proof
of the divine consciousness of Jesus.
This opinion of the synoptists concerning Jesus and con-
cerning their own portraiture of the life of Jesus gives us at
once the absolute guarantee that we have correctly estimated
the utterances reported by them of the consciousness of our
Saviour, as the consciousness that he was God.
Against all this one can object only that this fact does not
appear with sufficient evidence from the synoptic revelation
of Jesus Christ concerning himself; that the divinity of Jesus
does not lie plainly enough on the surface of the synoptic
Gospels; that not a single time in them does Christ call him-
1 Albrecht Kalthoff, Das Christusfroblem, chaps, ii-iv, 2nd ed. (1903);
Die Enistehung des Christentums, chap, i (Jena, 1904).
2 W. v. Schnehen, Der moderns Jesuskulius, 10 f., 2nd ed. (Frank-
furt a. M., 1906).
3 Gustav Dalman, Die Worte Jesu, 236 (Leipzig, 1898).


self God; and that, in fact, the synoptists themselves do not
give him this title positively. They let the divinity of the
Saviour be inferred rather from the words and works of
Christ and from his whole physiognomy, than express it
themselves unequivocally. And with all the divine sublimity
of the synoptic figure of Christ, the human side of the Saviour’s
portrait, nevertheless, is much more prominent and clear than
his divinity.
But this proves nothing against the fact that the synoptists
were convinced of the divinity of Jesus, and that they read
this out of the life of Jesus, but confirms, indeed, the fact
anew that the synoptic life of Jesus is truth, reality and history,
and not an embellishment on the part of the Church.
For the whole range of the synoptic Gospels this has been
already demonstrated thoroughly and in detail, in reply to
the modern evolutionary hypothesis of the liberal school.
It has also been shown in another chapter of this book, with
what infinite wisdom and prudence for the attainment of his
purpose Jesus acted, by making prominent, first of all, in
his revelation of himself,’ the human basis of his life and
person, and then only little by little building up the mighty
figure of his divinity. There is now still to be added here
only the proof that the personal conception and representa-
tion of the divine and human portrait of Jesus by the
synoptists maintains itself on the same level of historical
reality.
2. The Synoptic and the Real Portrait of Christ.
The assertion of liberal critics that our Gospels and their
views of Christ are to be considered merely as a reflection
of the Church’s Christ-legend, as it was forced upon them
by the contemporaries of the Evangelists, runs counter to the
incontrovertible observation that the synoptists nowhere refer
back to the life of Jesus the views which they personally, and
which all the Christian Churches of their time, then had of
Jesus. When the synoptists wrote' their Gospels, faith in the
divinity of Jesus was an undoubted common possession of
all true Christians, as it most certainly had been ever since
the resurrection of Jesus. That is the one great fact which
was established by our exposition of the divinity of Jesus
after the resurrection, the divinity of Jesus in the original
Church, and the divinity of Jesus as preached by Paul, which
also results from a study of the synoptic Gospels.
Accordingly, the idea might actually suggest itself that the
Evangelists had chosen this, their final point of view, as their
starting-point. They could easily have been tempted to
fashion their story of the life of Jesus in such a way as to
make it appear that the Apostles and disciples had, from the
very beginning of their calling and acquaintance with the


Master, believed in his Messiahship and divinity. Or, since
this would be equivalent to an obviously incorrect and dis-
honest act, they could, nevertheless, have given to their
representation an appearance, as if Heaven and the Saviour
himself, from the beginning of his life to its close, had
announced to all the world the Messianic and divinely human
nature of Jesus with explicit, formal definiteness. Or, again,
because such a portrait of Jesus was far removed from
historical truth and the actual facts, they could and might
have, nevertheless, finally followed the tendency—wherever
the divinity of Jesus in reality reveals itself in the historical
course of his life—to emphasize such traits strongly, and to
seek out and pourtray these by preference.
If the synoptic figure of Christ, as the liberal investigators
so confidently assert, was a pious attempt to embellish the
historical portrait of Jesus, then not only the last alternative,
but really all three of the above-mentioned alternatives, must
be able to be proved in the synoptic Gospels.
The contrary is the case. Instead of pourtraying the later
faith of the Apostles and disciples as existing previously,
or, at the very beginning, we go with them through the
whole unteachable apprenticeship of the original Apostles
until they, under our very eyes, in a long, wearisome ascent
and after many lapses, finally force their way out of the
spell of rabbinical Judaism, to the recognition and confession
of the Messiahship and divinity of Jesus. Instead of forcing
the ways of Providence and consequently falling into the
mistake of supposing that the sublime mystery of the person
of Jesus had come suddenly, all at once, to a still unprepared
humanity, and had blinded them by its splendour, the morn-
ing of the day of redemption, according to the synoptic
representation, first dawned faintly, and that there then broke
forth, modestly and prudently and with divine circumspection,
one ray of everlasting light after another, until at Easter the
brilliant sun of God’s truth shed its radiance over all lands,
and on Ascension Day stood high above the heavens. And
instead also of bringing out and marking especially only the
actual revelations and testimony of Jesus in regard to himself
and his divinity, these find their support so naturally, so
harmoniously and in such unaffected simplicity from the
natural and supernatural course of Jesus’ life, that we are
almost as much astonished at the human fidelity and simple
truthfulness of the representation, as at the divine events.
This sincere character of the synoptic writings forms the
sharpest imaginable refutation and repudiation of the modern
liberal criticism of the Gospels, as well as the most posi-
tive and incontestable defence of the synoptic portrait of
Christ.
This is shown most clearly from those very facts brought


forward by our opponents and exploited unjustly by them
against the divinity of Jesus —namely, that the man Jesus
stands so plainly in the foreground of the synoptic Gospels,
and that Jesus is never called directly God by the synoptists.
We know that among the Jews the real name of God “ is
uttered more rarely in the time subsequent to the exile, and
finally is no more uttered at all,” 1 unless in the cult of the
temple and in quotations from the Scriptures, in which the
name Jehovah occurred. But also in these “Adonai” was
spoken, instead of “Jehovah,” by an altered pronunciation.
As substitutes for the name of God, “ general expressions,
such as the Holy One, the Almighty, the Exalted, the Great,
the Lord of Heaven, the Lord of lords, King of kings,
Glory, Great Majesty, were used, but also the mere word
‘ Heaven.’ 2 Indeed, still more prudent and sometimes quite
colourless expressions were employed, such as the Voice, the
Height, the Place.” 3
Now, just as little as Jesus entirely forbade (Matt, xxiii, 2)
other Jewish religious usages, provided they had something
inherently good in them, just so little did he leave disregarded
the aforesaid custom of speaking prudently of God. It is
true, “ superstitious ideas and such as were foreign to the
true revealed religion, in regard to the nature of the divine
name, may have been conducive to the introduction of this
custom. Because it was thought that the name of God, if
uttered, might draw down into this world the divine Person
magically connected with it, men had scruples about speaking
it. But the decisive reason was, after all, the commandment
of the Decalogue (Exod. xx, 7): ‘ Thou shalt not take the
name of the Lord thy God in vain,’ and behind this lay a
genuinely religious awe of the Judge of the world, enthroned
in heaven. This awe Jesus has not wished to abrogate,
according to Matt, x, 28 and Luke xii, 5, but has himself
intensified it.” 4 In general, Jesus has broadly accommodated
himself to this habit of speaking of God more frequently in
indirect expressions, rather than always using the name of
God itself, 5 “ yet has done so in such a way, that he thereby
reserved for himself a position peculiarly his own through his
preferred use of the designation of God as Father.” 6
After all this, one easily comprehends that, and why, he
did not apply to himself the name of God. He would, by so
doing, have given great offence to both the people and the
rabbis, quite apart from the fact that he would also have been
completely misunderstood. If he had called himself directly
God, his Jewish contemporaries would have understood it in
1 Hollmann, Welche Religion hatten die Juden, als Jesus auftrai? 26.
2 id., 26 f.; also Dalman, Die Worte Jesu, 159.167.
3 Dalman, of. eii., 167-191. 4 id,, 190. 5 id., 150-167.
3 id., 190.


the sense that he claimed to be God and to identify himself
with the Father in heaven. But it was quite unmistakable,
when he, on the one hand, held exceedingly high the acknow-
ledgement of the Father in heaven, but, on the other hand,
also professed to be himself the Lord, the Almighty, the Truth,
Salvation, the Judge of the world, and so forth. These were
expressions in which precisely the Jew spoke of God, and
from which he could undoubtedly conclude that Jesus wished
to proclaim himself God.
When the synoptists wrote, no more consideration of the
Jewish forms of expression respecting the name of God was
any longer commanded. The Church had already almost ex-
clusively devoted its attention to the Hellenistic Jews and to
the Gentiles. Moreover, the Hellenistic synoptists felt them-
selves on this point just as little Jewish as on other points,
and their Greek readers did not even know that linguistic
usage of the Jewish rabbis. Already then was given also to
the Saviour, in whose divinity the Christians from the first
believed, the express title “ God,” although the appellations
most in use were always “ Redeemer,” “ Lord,” and “ Son of
God.” Remember only Paul and the Pauline christological
terminology.
If the synoptists, nevertheless, throughout and without ex-
ception avoid the name and designation of Jesus as “ God,"
it is a manifest indication of the originality and historical
truth of their portraiture of Christ.
This becomes still more evident in regard to the synoptic
representation of the humanity of Jesus.
It is really very remarkable how strongly the human side
of the life of Jesus is emphasized by the Evangelists. At
the time when the synoptists wrote, Jesus Christ stood
before the eye of faith as the first-born of the creation, as the
ideal man, the divine man, the divine Messiah and the Lord
of the world. He had proceeded from the bosom of the
heavenly Father, had come to this earth only to redeem
mankind, and had ascended again to the Father, in order to
participate in his divine glory, to reign with him, and at
some time to return with the whole heavenly host to judge
the world. Liberal critics even maintain that the Christi-
anity of that time, entirely abandoning the previous life of
Jesus, now concerned itself only with the “ Pauline christ-
ology of the exaltation.”
If, therefore, the synoptic Gospels had been merely an echo
of the theological speculation, or a result of the imagination
of the Christians of that time, they would have had to pourtray
the life and person of Jesus above all from that supernatural
and superhuman point of view. .The purely human and earthly
element would have had to retire wholly, or for the most part,
into the background.


But the synoptists bring- the child Jesus into the world as
a poor, wailing infant, in spite of his supernatural conception
and heavenly origin. And in spite of all the supermundane
manifestations and proofs of his Messiahship and divinity,
by which the history of the childhood and youth of Jesps is
glorified, they everywhere indicate the genuinely human
development of the boy Jesus. The Evangelists, who allow
us to behold, as through a veil, the divine countenance of the
boy Jesus, find it important and necessary to relate to us how
the Son of God at Bethlehem did not find even a shelter
worthy of human beings, how he had to flee to Egypt from
his persecutors, and how he grew up under the simplest
conditions at Nazareth in the carpenter’s family, and went
through a purely human process of development in all
respects. Indeed, they several times express themselves in
regard to this youthful period in such a way that we may
suppose that Jesus carefully preserved the mystery of his
divine inner life from his associates, and even from his foster-
father and Virgin mother. And in his later life also he
revealed it only so far aS it corresponded to the plan of
Providence to disclose little by little the mystery of his
divinity. Yet the divine revelation of himself always runs
along the thread of the naturally human destiny of Jesus,
and, before it reaches its climax, it appears for a moment
as if his divinity would be swallowed up in the nameless
human misery, which overwhelmed the Saviour, until he had
fully and completely paid to death the tribute of his human
nature.
We have elsewhere furnished proof that the humanity and
human traits in the life of Jesus form no argument against
his divinity. It is true, however, that this synoptic repre-
sentation is a destructive criticism of our opponent’s asser-
tion that the synoptists do not present the history of Jesus
according to its actual course, but that it is the Christ-legend
of the second and third generation of the Church which they
pourtray.
This assertion —only the old man’s staff of senile liberalism
—is so frail and rotten that truly candid liberal critics begin
to throw it away. “ The traditions of Jesus, which are found
in Mark and Luke, are older than is usually supposed,” con-
fesses Harnack. 1 “The whole impression of the person of
Jesus,” Weinel asserts, “as we gain it from the first three
Gospels, has already stood vividly before the soul of the
Apostle Paul, and determined his course of action.” 2 And
Pfleiderer confesses : “ The three oldest Gospels, which, it is
true, have been composed in an age subsequent to Paul, and
partly under the influence of Pauline ideas, have for their
1 Lukas der Arzt, 113.
2 Weinel, Paulus, Der Mensch und sein Werk, 249 (Tubingen, 1904).


foundation the tradition of the original Church, concerning
Jesus’ life and teachings.” 1
Still more decidedly does Johannes Weiss reject the view
that the post-Pauline Church, by reason of a disregard of the
real life of Jesus, has dreamed of nothing but an exalted,
glorified Christ, and that this way of considering him has
dominated the synoptists also. He says ; “ The early Churches
have, together with the formation of a theological doctrine
concerning Christ, attached also the highest value to the
keeping alive of the clear portrait of Jesus among them. . . .
Even if the early Churches did direct their thoughts to the
Exalted One, they had before their eyes a clear picture of
him to whom they prayed. For either they belonged to those
who had themselves seen Jesus, or they were under the im-
pression of the tradition of his deeds and words. On the
whole, the portrait, for which we are indebted to the love
and fidelity of the oldest disciples, is a convincing and a truly
human one. That the assemblies of these first Christians,
their conversations and their quiet hours of solitude were
filled with memories of the Master, and that they admonished
one another with his words, encouraged one another by his
example, and yearned for his love, we may take for granted,
even though we have no direct testimony to that effect. For
if they had not lived so loyally in the past, they would not
have transmitted to us the precious collection of the words
and narratives of the Lord so richly and admirably. . . .
The post-pauline literature falls back more and more on
reminiscences in the life of Jesus. . . . We have thereby
come to the period when it proved necessary to give to the
Church also a consistent portrait of the life of Jesus. The
first Apostles and eye-witnesses had died, and it was essential
to direct the flowing stream of oral tradition into a well-
regulated bed. Thus originated the first Gospels.” 2
Adolf Jiilicher summarizes the same conviction in the
following words : “ The whole tradition of the synoptists
goes back, after all, to the ‘ Early Church,’ and belongs in
this sense to the time of Jesus. The Jesus whom the
Church of Jerusalem had known is reproduced, even though
with unequal degrees of clearness, in the first three Gospels.” 3
Hence the synoptic portrait of Jesus is only the replica
of the real, historical, original life of Jesus, although, or
rather precisely because, the synoptic Gospels are based
upon the common Christian teaching, mirror the common
Christian faith, and (especially Matthew’s Gospel 4 ) were
themselves also books of the Church. Thereby falls to the
1 Pfleiderer, Die Entstehung des Christentums, 185 f. (1905).
2 Johannes Weiss, Christus, 69; 73 (Tubingen, 1909).
3 Jiilicher, Paulus und Jesus, 13 (Tubingen, 1907).
* Harnack, Lukas der Arzt, 120; Die Afostelgeschichte, 2 note.


ground not only the assertion that the faith of the synoptists
in the divinity of Jesus does not go back to the early Church
and to Jesus Christ himself, but it is also clear that the
Christian tradition of later generations held firmly to the
strictly historical life of Jesus; that, faith in the Saviour
went hand in hand with the history of the Saviour; and that
the contrast between the real Saviour and the alleged
Saviour embellished by believers did not exist in the old
Christian Church, but shows its ghostly form only in the
imagination of modern critics.
V.— The Divinity of Christ as Represented by John.
i. The Characteristic Form of the Johannine Christology.
The Johannine christology differs from that of the synop-
tists by its own special kind of representation and by an
entirely new form of expression.
The manner and representation of the synoptic christology
is more practical than expository, more indirect than direct,
more mediate than immediate, more insinuating than out-
spoken. The synoptists relate the life of Jesus simply,
without specially bringing out in doing so those features in
which the divinity of Jesus in particular revealed itself
characteristically, and without expressly emphasizing the
fact that, and how far, Jesus proclaims himself in his words
and deeds as the real Son of God. The first Evangelists
did not feel themselves at all called upon to speak of the
divinity of Jesus in an explicit, demonstrative manner of pour-
trayal. On the one hand, this doctrine appeared clearly
enough from the simple Gospel of deeds and events; on the
other hand (and this was the main thing), at that time within
the Christian Church no one assailed the specific, funda-
mental dogmas of Christianity—the Messiah ship, and divinity
of Jesus Christ. These truths were part of the undoubted
possession of all the Jewish and Gentile Christian Churches
and of all believers. We have been able to convince our-
selves of this, particularly from the Epistles of St Paul.
Some decades later, things were otherwise. After the
first enthusiasm was over, a reaction was visible among
some adherents of the Christian religion, and sometimes
even a partial return to the former Jewish and Gentile
ideas, from which they had only just escaped. The Gentile-
Christian elements in the Church, as is easily understood,
were not entirely free from the formerly cherished religious
views of the Greek popular philosophy. The Jewish Chris-
tians were drawn back to the national theology of the
Synagogue, and above all to the rabbinical and apocalyptic
views of the Messiah, which previously had held back the
majority of their race from faith in Jesus, and which now


drove even those who had become believers with irresistible
power back again into the depths of racial, national-Jewish
christology. After God’s judgement on Jerusalem had come
to pass and the visible nucleus of the indigenous nation had
vanished, the Judaists held so much the more tenaciously to
the ideal centre, to the nationally coloured portrait of the
Messiah, while the Hellenic Christians frequently combined
Jewish and Greco-Alexandrian elements with their Chris-
tianity. In this way the Jewish-Gnostic sects originated,
which either questioned or bluntly denied the true divinity of
Jesus, as well as his true humanity.
To meet these false doctrines of Cerinthus, of the Nico-
laitans and other heretics, John saw himself compelled to lay
express emphasis on the divinity and humanity of Jesus.
Against them, according to the unanimous testimony of
tradition, he wrote his Gospel. 1 It is true, he did this
primarily neither for the purpose of proving the divinity of
Jesus, nor in order to convert the heretics, but to strengthen
the Christian sentiments of his Churches in Asia Minor,
which possessed faith in Jesus Christ, by bringing as an
authentic witness the divinely human life and the divinely
human authentication of himself by Jesus vitally and forcibly
before their eyes.
John expresses himself very plainly in regard to this pur-
pose of his Gospel, and tells his readers that this is “ written,
that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God, and that believing, you may have life in his name ”
(John xx, 31).
In accordance with this purpose, the Evangelist unfolds
immediately and in striking sentences in the preface to his
Gospel, the entire programme of the Christian doctrine of
the God-Man —his eternity, his divine qualities, his divine
sonship, divinity and incarnation. Then he shows how this
programme was developed throughout the entire life of Jesus.
John the Baptist is a witness of it at the start, who pro-
claims the pre-existence of Jesus and his eternal being with
God before all time (John i, 15, 27, 30), his celestial origin
(John iii, 31, 32), his divine sonship (John i, 34) and his
divine and Messianic work of redemption (John i, 29). And
Jesus commends the Baptist for this christology and affirms
that John “ gave testimony to the truth ” (John v, 33-36).
Beginning from this point, Jesus himself preaches con-
tinually the truth of his divine sonship in ever-loftier terms,
and with ever-increasing emphasis. His mission from
heaven and from God forms the ever-recurring subject of
his conversation with his disciples and his public discourses
to the people (John v, 38, 43; vi, 38; vii, 16, 29; viii, 42;
xii, 49; xiv, 14). After he has granted to his hearers such
1 Iren., Adv. Hares., 111, xi, 1; Epiph., H<tr., LI, ii, 12; Hieron.,
De viris illusir., 9.


a glimpse into his wholly supernatural nature, he explains
to them his relation to God at length and under all aspects;
he had a personal existence with God before he came into
this world (viii, 58); he will return again to God as soon as
he has finished his earthly work—the redemption of humanity
(viii, 42 ; xvi, 28); he is the Son of God (iii, 16); and, indeed,
the only-begotten, formed out of the substance of God and
consequently a Son of like nature with the Father (i, 14, 18;
iii, 16, 18); he is God, like the Father (v, 18; x, 30-36; xx,
28). fn the unity of the being and nature of Father and Son
are grounded the divine origin and character of the teaching
of Jesus; what he himself, resting in the bosom of his Father,
has heard and seen, that he speaks of and announces to the
world (iii, n; viii, 26; xv, 15). Out of the same unity of
being and nature of Father and Son proceeds also the unity
of their activity (x, 30, 38; xiv, 9; xvii, 21); the Son doth
nothing which the Father does not do, as he, on the other
hand, doth all the works of his Father (v, 19).
These works give to the utterances of Jesus about his
divinity, first, decisive and’ infallible support. The Saviour
himself appeals to. his miracles as a reason for believing on
him (John x, 25; xiv, 12. “These were signs of his high
mission (ii, 23 ; iii, 2); they show in Jesus, who performs them,
a higher, superhuman and divine power, point to his filial
relation to the Father (v, 36; x, 38); and symbolize invisible
precedents and truths. Thus the miraculous multiplication
of the loaves was a symbol of the might and power of Jesus,
in common with that of the Father, of imparting true life
and nourishment of soul (vi, 26); the healing of the man
born blind was a symbol that Jesus was the Light of the
World (ix, 1, etc.), as God is, and brings to mankind spiritual
illumination. The healing on the Sabbath day of the man
who had been ill for thirty-eight years is not only a sign of
his miraculous power, but symbolizes at the same time the
truth that his activity is the expression of his perfectly
harmonious work with that of the Father, and that this
work consequently proves his right to sonship ” (v, 17). 1
In witness of the testimony which Jesus gives to big
divinity in word and work John brings forth his own
experience and that of his fellow-apostles and believers.
Only through the oral and practical training of Jesus were
the Apostles and disciples brought little by little to faith in
the divinity of the Master, overpowered by the evidence of
the grounds for faith which were furnished them. Still
living near the Evangelist in Asia Minor were a number of
the disciples of Jesus who had been witnesses of his preach-
ing of his divinity, and of the proofs of divine power exer-
cised to support the claim, and who confirmed the fact that
the christology of John was a reproduction of the teaching
1 Johannes Belser, Einleitung in das N. T., 322 (Freiburg, 1901).


of Christ (xxi, 24). Above all, however, John can appeal to
himself that, as an eye-witness, he gives his report con-
cerning Jesus, his life, his humanity, his Messiahship and
his divinity conformably to truth and reality. “ And he that
saw it hath given testimony,” he says, “ and his testimony
is true. And he knoweth that he saith true, that you also
may believe . . . that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,
and that believing, you may have life in his name ” (John
xix, 35; xx, 31). _ ,
Thus the Gospel of John, in its commencement, in its
centre and in its ending, is a forcible and well-grounded con-
fession of the true divinity of Jesus. The first lines of this
wonderful book express the divine christology in sentences
worthy to be chiselled in stone. The same doctrine rings
as a basic tone throughout the entire work, and in the final
chord dies tremblingly away, to the effect that here on earth
faith in Jesus, as the Messiah and Son of God, makes the
Christian a Christian and is the pledge of his future eternal
life. The confession of the metaphysical divinity of Jesus
is so much the distinctive mark of the fourth Gospel that
even sceptical critics acknowledge that the violent con-
troversy which has raged for a hundred years about this
Gospel is aimed only at the divinity of Christ proclaimed
therein. 1
Since John is presenting this Gospel of the divinity of
Jesus to the Churches of Asia Minor, he presents to them
again and very forcibly the same fundamental Christian fact
in a personal letter. The genuineness of this first Epistle of
John is, according to general critical opinion, conceded with
that of the Fourth Gospel. Those critics who deny the
Johannine origin of the Fourth Gospel see themselves forced,
nevertheless, to the acknowledgement that the latter, as well
as the three Johannine Epistles and the Apocalypse, belong
“to the same school .. . the Johannine school.” 2 Now,
according to the first Epistle of John, the Son of God, who
has given his life for us, is true God, and his mission and
act of redemption are for that very reason the greatest proof
of God’s love for us : “By this hath the charity of God
appeared towards us, because God hath sent his only begotten
Son into the world, that we may live by him . . . ” (1 John
iv, 9). “ And he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for
ours only, but also for those of the whole world ” (1 John ii, 2).
“ The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all
sin ” (1 John i, 7). “In this we have known the charity of
1 Otto Schmiedel remarks very pertinently in Die Hauftfrobleme der
Leben-Jesu-Forschung, 17 (Tubingen, 1906) : “For the last hundred,
and especially the last sixty years,,a bitter controversy has raged over
this Gospel; and it is not strange, for the fight concerning the divinity
of Christ is immediately connected with it.”
2 Eduard von Hartmann, Das Christentum des N. T., 246 (1905).


God, because he hath laid down his life for us” (i John
iii, 16).
Faith in the divinity of the Son and love of him is a divine
commandment and the best proof of faith in, and love of,
the Father : “ This is his [God’s] commandment, That we
should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ . .
(i John iii, 23). “ Everyone that loveth him who begot,
loveth him also who is born of him ” (1 John v, 1).
Faith in the divinity of the Son leads to the victory over
the world, and confers eternal life : “ Who is he that over-
cometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son
of God?” (1 John v, 5). “And this is the testimony, that
God hath given to us eternal life. And this life is in his Son.
He that hath the Son hath life; he that hath not the Son
hath not life. These things I write to you, that you may know
that you have eternal life; you who believe in the name of
the Son of God” (1 John v, 11-13).
But he that denies the divinity of the Son is a liar and
antichrist, and accuses God the Father and the Son them-
selves of false witness : “ Who is a liar, but he who denieth
that Jesus is the'Christ? This is antichrist, who denieth
the Father and the Son. Whosoever denieth the Son, the
same hath not the Father. He that confesseth the Son, hath
the Father also” (1 John ii, 22, 23). “He that believeth in
the Son of God hath the testimony of God in himself. He
that believeth not the Son, maketh him a liar, because he
believeth not in the testimony which God hath testified of
his Son ” (1 John v, 10).
This divine christology of St John offers absolute certainty,
because it corresponds to the original teaching of Christianity,
and goes back to the testimony of the Apostle, as an eye-
and ear-witness: “He that confesseth the Son, hath the
Father also. As for you, let that which you have heard from
the beginning abide in you. If that abide in you which you
have heard from the beginning, you also shall abide in the
Son and in the Father ”(1 John ii, 23, 24). “ That which we
have seen and have heard, we declare unto you; that you also,
may have fellowship with us, and our fellowship may be with
the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ . . .” (1 John
i, 3). “ And we know that the Son of God is come. And he
hath given us understanding that we may know the true
God, and may be in his true Son. This is the true God and
life eternal ” (1 John v, 20).
Just as clearly does John announce the divinity of Jesus
in the Apocalypse. 1 What the God of Israel had testified of
I.
25
1 For the thorough pourtrayal of the christology of the Apocalypse,
see F. Biichsel, Die Christologie der Offenbarung Johanms, Haller
Dissertation (1907); and especially Ermoni, La Cristologia dell’
Apocalisse, Rivisia di scienze iheolog., 369-383, 538-552 {1908).


himself by the Prophets, and what the same book of Revela-
tion says of the heavenly Father (i, 8; xxi, 6), that can Christ
also testify to himself: “I am Alpha and Omega, the first
and the last, the beginning and the end. ... I have the
keys of death and of hell” (i, 18; ii, 8; xxii, 13). To him
is due from all creatures in heaven and on earth the same
honour and adoration as to God. The seer of Patmos, who
once reclined trustingly upon the breast of Jesus, now falls,
as if dead, before the throne of God and at the feet of the
Son of God (i, 17), and describes with trembling hand the
glory he had looked upon. “ And I beheld, and I heard
the voice of many angels round about the throne and the
living creatures and the ancients, and the number of them
was thousands of thousands; saying with a loud voice: The
Lamb that was slain is worthy to receive power and divinity
and wisdom and strength and honour and glory and benedic-
tion. And every creature which is in heaven and on the earth
and under the earth and such as are in the sea and all that are
in them, I heard all saying : To him that sitteth on the throne
and to the Lamb, benediction and honour and glory and power
for ever and ever. . . . Salvation to our God, who sitteth
upon the throne and to the Lamb” (v, n-13; vii, 10).
And this putting of Christ on an equality with God is found
in a book in which even our critical opponents “ have always
believed they perceived the most authentic indications of the
original Christian sentiment, which has become to us perhaps
somewhat strange,” 1 and in a book which protests against
any kind of apotheosis and adoration of created beings (xix,
10; xxii, 9).
John, therefore, brings forward the divinity of Jesus in his
Gospel, in his first Epistle and in the Apocalypse in the most
outspoken and demonstrative way conceivable. This mode
of representation is in striking contrast to that of the
synoptists, who, it is true, report the testimony of Jesus to
his divinity, and let us see in their Gospels their absolute
faith in his divinity, without, however, so frankly making
the divine christology the sharply defined and clearly out-
spoken main thought and chief object of their writings.
The second difference which we notice between the Johan-
nine and synoptical announcements of the divinity of Jesus
lies in a form and conception, first met with in John, in the
name and doctrine of the Logos (Word), into which John
condenses all that he has to say to us of the incarnate Son
of God.
Whoever has carefully read the three older Gospels is greatly
1 Karl Muller, Unser Herr, 8 (1906). Ed. von Hartmann thinks that
the Apocalypse “ still stands entirety within the limits of Jewish Christi-
anity, and shows scarcely any traces pf Pauline influence.” —Das
Christentum des N. T., 246.


astonished when, at the beginning - of the Fourth Gospel,
he reads the following remarkable and in the highest degree
peculiar sentences : “ In the beginning was the Word : and
the Word was with God; and the Word was God. The
same was in the beginning with God. All things were made
by him : and without him was made nothing that was made.
In him was life : and the life was the light of men. And the
light [of the Logos] shineth in darkness : and the darkness
did not comprehend it. There was a man sent from God,
whose name was John. This man came for a witness, to
give testimony of the light, that all men might believe
through him. He was not the light, but was to give testi-
mony of the light. That was the true light, which en-
lighteneth every man that cometh into this world. He was
in the world : and the world was made by him ; and the
world knew him [the Logos] not. He came unto his own :
and his own received him not. But as many as received him,
he gave them power to be made the sons of God, to them that
believe in his name. Who. are born, not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. And
the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us, and we saw
his glory, the glory as it were of the only begotten of the
Father, full of grace and truth. . . . And of his fulness we
have all received : and grace for grace. . . . No man hath
seen God at any time: the only begotten Son who is in the
bosom of the Father, he hath declared him” (John i, 1-14,
16, 18).
Before John proceeds to the narration of the human yet
divine story of the earthly life and activity of Jesus, he
wishes in this prologue, first of all, to characterize the pre-
existent personality of the Word, and, indeed, at once, the
nature of the Word in itself (John i, 1,2). The Word is a
pre-existent and transcendent being. To him belong begin-
ning and eternity before all worlds. “In the beginning,”
when God had not yet created the world, 1 the Word was
already with God. 2 It is not a question here of a merely
external proximity of God and the Word, but of an inner
relation of being. The Word is a being similar to God, a
personal, divine being, God himself (verse 1). Only as such,
as a personal divine being, could the Word be with God from
eternity (verse 2).
A divine activity also is characteristic of this divine nature
of the Word (verses 3-5). The creation of the whole universe
1 This Johannine expression, “ In the beginning,” refers plainly to
Genesis i, r.
2 In the words, “ In the beginning was the Word,” the thought is,
indeed, at first simply of the period before the world; behind that, how-
ever, the idea of eternity merely, as it is included in that of divinity.
Julius Grill, Vntersuchungen iiber die Enistehung des vierten Evan-
geliums, i, 90 note, also 89-105 (Tubingen, 1902).


is an act of the Word, and in fact this creation of all things
out of nothing is so exclusively his work, that nothing what-
ever came into existence save through him. Every theory
of dualism as an explanation of the universe, and all thought
of a created being acting- as an intermediary, is thus ex-
cluded in advance (verse 3). To the creation is added the
revelation of the Word. As he is the cause and origin of
the material life and light, so is he also the bearer and dis-
penser of light and life —for the most part uncomprehended and
rejected by men—wherever these shine and flow (verses 4,5).
If, therefore, the Word has already directly, by his pre-
existent work of creation and by his revelation before Christ’s
coming, outwardly manifested himself, so too he has appeared
in the fulness of time directly and in person in Jesus Christ, in
order to complete the revelation of God to mankind and the
spiritual re-creation of the world (verses 6-18).
It was John the Baptist who first brought to men the news
that the Word had come into the world in a personal form,
and had presented himself as essential light and as a sun of
revelation to mankind, so that all might believe in the Light,
the Word (verses 6,7). Some understood this erroneously,
in that they mistook the mere man John for the Word, who is
essentially God (verse 8). But in the divine Word, who is the
true Light, that alone lighteth every man actually and truly,
and to whom the whole world owes its existence, very few
believed, when he himself appeared in his own world and
among his chosen people (verses 9-11). The few, however,
who did believe in him and received the Word through faith,
were thereby united with him spiritually and therefore
adopted as sons of God (12-13). This climax of revelation
and redemption, however, could be reached only by the Word;
the only-begotten, metaphysical Son of God, assuming human
nature and, as the true, God-incarnate Jesus Christ, pouring
out in abundance his grace and truth upon mankind, and
proclaiming and proving his divine glory visibly to men
(verses 14-18).
John now undertakes to relate how this revelation of the
divine glory, truth and grace, and of the divine nature and
personality of the Word, or Son of God, worked itself out
in the life of Jesus, in his works, in his teaching and in his
entire testimony to himself. As his Gospel is nothing else
than the testimony and proof of Jesus to himself as regards
his human nature, Messiahship; and divine sonship, so it is
also nothing else than a continuous commentary on the pro-
logue about the Word (Logos). Or, rather, this prologue
about the Word is only John’s synopsis of the Fourth Gospel,
taken from the life, the words and the works of Jesus and
concisely put together. It is not correct to say that John
presents no doctrine of the Logos, although he uses the word


Logos ; x nor is it right to assert that the Logos idea is found
in John only in the prologue to his Gospel, while everywhere
else the Anointed One, the Ambassador of the Father appears
in its place. 2 The word Logos certainly does not recur again
in the Gospel, at least, no more in the full significance of
the prologue. 3 Yet the fundamental ideas of the Logos
doctrine in the prologue—the pre-existence and eternity of the
Logos, his activity in creation and revelation, his human
nature, Messiahship, divine sonship, and divinity, and the
Logos as true, divine Light and Life, the visible glory of
God and the personified grace of God —these form the dis-
tinctive mark of the Fourth Gospel. 4 By the prologue, the
reader of John’s Gospel is conducted in a natural succession
of steps from the eternity of the Word through vast antiquity
and through that period of his activity which antedated the
creation of the world and the birth of Christ to the present,
in which the Evangelist, on the ground of his own experience,
informs us of the manifestation of the divine Saviour. And,
in fact, the result of this, report agrees in all respects- with
the prologue—Jesus Christ proves himself by his life, words
and work to be the divine Word, and the Light, Grace and
Truth, as well as the Son of God, who became flesh for us,
redeemed us through his suffering and will, through faith in
him and love to him, confer on men continually eternal life
and light.
The Evangelist himself declares authentically in his first
Epistle that the whole life of Christ and the whole christ-
ology of the Fourth Gospel—in fact, everything that John on
the strength of his own experience reports of Jesus on his
own eye and ear testimony—is to be considered as Logos
doctrine. At the very beginning of this Epistle he remarks
with an evident retrospective glance at the Gospel and a clear
outlook on the entire future import of his writings ; “ That
which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which
we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon
and our hands have handled, of the Word of Life . . . that
we declare unto you” (i John i, i, 3). Traces of the saipe
Logos doctrine appear in the further course of the Johannine
Epistle more than once. 5 In particular, the mystery of the
three Persons of God is expressed in the formula “ the
Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost ” (1 John v, 7).
Even the christology of the Apocalypse, which has been
so frequently brought into conflict with that of the Fourth
1 Theodor Zahn, Einleitung in das N. T., ii, 535 ff. (Leipzig, 1809).
2 Paul Schanz, Apologia des Christentums, ii, 633, 2nd ed. (Freiburg,
1897).
3 Nevertheless, see John v, 38; yin, 55 ;x,35 ; xvii, 6; xiv, 17.
4 See the admirable and thorough presentation of the subject by
J. Grimm, 1.c., 31-88, 285-384.
* See Grill, op. cit., 301-303, 312.


Gospel, finds support in the Logos doctrine. Christ is for it
the beginning of the Creation (iii, 14). He sits in glory on
the throne of heaven (iv, 2; v, 1). He overcomes the world
(vi). He is the sin-destroying Lamb of God, slain for
humanity (v, 6,8, 12; vii, 17). And “his name is called
the Word of God ” (xix, 13). Upon him the seer of Patmos
confers the attributes of God and demands for him divine
honour and adoration (see above).
St John uses, therefore, for the expression of his faith in
the person of the Saviour and especially in his divinity a
form peculiarly his own, which appears in no synoptic Gospel
and in no older canonical book of the New Testament what-
ever. Not as if he depreciated the other usual designa-
tions for Jesus Christ, such as Son of David, Son of Man,
Messiah, Son of God, God and so forth. We find all of these
expressions in John’s writings, and oftener than the term
Logos. But what all these expressions say at the same time,
John sums up in the one title used by him : the Word of God,
the Word of Light, the Word of Life—the Logos. The title
of Logos is for him the sum total of all christology, and in
particular the precise expression for the metaphysical divine
sonship and true divinity of Jesus. For this reason and in
this sense the Johannine form of christology—the name
Word, and the Logos doctrine itself—was handed down,
as an inheritance, to the Church science of succeeding years.
2. The Origin of the Johannine Christology.
Liberal criticism clings to the fact, just stated, of the
peculiar Johannine christology, in order to make people
believe that John arrived at his doctrine of the divinity of
Jesus in contrast to the teaching of Christ and of the older
New Testament writings, and in connection with the Hellenic-
Alexandrian philosophy. Pfleiderer, who represents this pet
theory of the modern investigators of Jesus, most exhaus-
tively and with the courage of desperation 1 sums up his view
in the words : “ The fourth Evangelist came to the apothe-
osis of Christ under the names of ‘ Logos ’ and ‘ only be-
gotten Son of God ’ . . . not, of course, through historical
tradition from the sayings of Jesus uttered for any such
purpose, which are still not discoverable even in the oldest
sources; and also not through mere reflection on the im-
pression which the historical person had made upon him.
. . . The explanation is much easier to find in the fact that
the fourth Evangelist was under the influence of the Hellenic
1 Especially in the following works : Das Urchristentum, ii, 25, 2nd
ed. (Berlin, 1903); Das Christusbild’ des urchristlichen Glaubens, 12
(Berlin, 1903); Die Enislehung des Chrisientums, 215-240 (Miinchen,
•QOS).


and Gnostic fantasies, prevailing in his time and environ-
ment, which he sought to join on to the older Gospel tradi-
tion.” 1 The Zurich professor, P. W. Schmiedel, adds in
a spirit of mutual understanding the following: “It ought
never to be doubted that he [John] has borrowed the'word
Logos and the ideas associated with it from Philo.” 2 Accord-
ingly, John carried over to the historical person Jesus the
pagan-Jewish Logos-ideas of Philo’s religious philosophy,
and thereby made of the man Jesus a Son of God , and a
divine person. That this is not correct is evident from all
our arguments concerning the divinity of Jesus. John is not
the first to teach the divinity of Jesus; but this divinity was
testified to by Jesus Christ himself, was adored by the
original Church, and impressed upon it by Paul and the
synoptists, even if not in the Johannine form and style of
representation. It is only a matter, therefore, of the second-
ary question, whether the fourth Evangelist derived this form
of his christology—the Logos doctrine —from a non-chris-
tian source —namely, from the Hellenic religious philosophy
of Philo.
The first philosopher who spoke of the “Logos” was
Heraclitus the “ Obscure,” of Ephesus, about 500 b.c. The
Logos is, according to his hylozoistic and pantheistic view,
equivalent to “ measure, law, reason and a rational order of
the world.” It is identical with the material, unconscious,
impersonal element (fire) which formed the world.
Anaxagoras, supported by the Heraclitian hylozoism and
pantheism, assumed, together with the material, world-form-
ing element, an immaterial, transcendental and conscious
principle which fashions and organizes the material world, and
hence is called vovs —that is, reason or idea, not Logos.
Plato brings this reason, which he also calls vovs, not
Logos, into close relation with God. The world-forming and
world-organizing reason is a quality of God. God made use
of it for world-building, because he himself is too exalted and
abstract to be able to come into touch with the world. The
Stoics restored the Logos to the place of the v<nk, as >a
world-forming principle, determining matter. They ap-
proached again also the hylozoism of Heraclitus in so far as
the Logos, which they generally called God, was yet essen-
tially identical with matter. Everything that is, must, accord-
ing to the Stoics, have in itself Logos (Reason); yet the
Logos must be thought of substantially. The Logos is the
soul of the universe; the universe is the body of the Logos.
The Stoics’ theory of the Logos is higher than the panthe-
istic-materialistic Logos theory of Heraclitus only in so far
as the Stoics’ Logos has intelligence and consciousness, and
1 Pfleiderer, Die Entstehung des Christentums, 225.
2 P. W. Schmiedel, Das vierte Evangelium, 118 (Tubingen, 1906).


is identified only with the finer elements, such as air and fire,
not with the coarser elements, earth and water. 1
Closely related to the Stoics’ doctrine of the Logos is the
Logos speculation of the Alexandrian-]ewish religious philo-
sophy. While the Jews of Palestine kept themselves as
much as possible aloof from Grecian thought, literature and
teaching, the Jews of the dispersion saw themselves drawn
into the Alexandrian religious and philosophical movement
of the minds of the time. Partly from apologetic reasons,
partly from a real inward enthusiasm for Greek philosophy,
they endeavoured to unite Mosaic theology and Hellenic
speculation, or, at all events, to shed light upon them
through mutual contact, and to make them scientifically more
profound. A rich and edifying theological-philosophical
literature affords a proof of this. One needs only to remem-
ber the Alexandrian books of the Old Testament, as well as
the Old Testament Apocrypha and pseudo-epigrapha. 2 The
philosopher of religion, Philo, devoted himself in particular
to this, more than to the dangerous reconciliation of Jewish
faith with Grecian culture. In doing so, he took from pagan
philosophy not only form and figure, but only too often also
materials and ideas, whereby the revealed truth of faith was
lost in Greek speculation. This was pre-eminently true in
regard to the fundamental view of the universe.
The monotheistic view of the universe was for Philo not
merely an inviolable truth, but precisely the truth, in opposi-
tion to Greek pantheism and materialism. Indeed, in order
to remove himself as far as possible from the pantheistic and
material idea of God, Philo, quite in the spirit of the con-
temporary theology of Judaism, conceived of God, not merely
as an absolutely one, spiritual, personal, supernatural being,
but as a being so exalted above everything earthly and
material, that there exists between him and the material
world a complete contrast. God is not merely different, but
absolutely separated, from matter. The latter has always
existed, as a second principle, together with God (Philo is
not conscious of the fact that with this dualistic view he
really gives up his monotheism), and when the world was to
be formed and organized out of it, God could not himself
directly come into combination with it in order to consum-
1 Whoever wishes to inform himself more precisely concerning the
Greek doctrine of the Logos will find ample information in the extensive
literature referring to it. We mention especially Max Heinze, Die
Lehre tiom Logos in der griechischen Philosophic (1872); Aall, Der
Logos, Geschichte seiner EntwicTdung in der greichischen Philosophic
und der christl. Literatur (1896-99); Ed. Zeller, Die Philosophic der
Griechen (1869-1903).
2 See the Apohryphen und Pseudepigraphen des Allen Testamentes,
published by E. Kautzsch in union with numerous experts (Tubingen,
1900).


mate the world’s formation. He employed for this an endless
number of intermediary beings, called Logoi. The Logoi—
that is, the sum total of the intermediary beings standing
between God and the world —have their origin and find their
unity in the one true Logos.
Now Philo defines this Logos as being connected, on the
one hand, with the Platonic voCs, and, on the other, with
the Logos of the Stoics. It differs from the latter only in
the fact that, as in Philo, it is neither amalgamated with
divinity, nor with matter, and therefore is not interpreted as
pantheistic or materialistic. Philo tries to rescue his doctrine
of the Logos from the swamp of Stoic materialism and pan-
theism by calling to his assistance the Platonic theory of
ideas, world-reason and the world-pervading soul. Accord-
ing to him, the Logos is the sum total of the divine ideas, in
accordance with which the world was to be formed —that is,
the rational, divine plan of the universe. At the moment
when God uttered in words this ideal world-plan or world-
thought, the Logos issued from God into a union with
matter. Through this union of the ideal world-plan with
matter, the actual world came into existence. The Logos,
therefore, became the world-creator, and remains continu-
ally the instrument wherewith God brings forth, preserves
and governs the actual affairs of the world. In a word, “ the
Logos of Philo is the condensation and essential unity of all
the forces which proceed from God, and thenceforth, inde-
pendently and rationally—that is, wholly in harmony with the
nature, thought and will of God —are working, world-creating,
world-maintaining and ruling in both the infinitely great and
infinitely little of the universe.” 1
It is evident that Philo has construed this doctrine of the
Logos exclusively in accordance with the propositions of
Greek philosophy. Only subsequently, and only -so far as it
is necessary and possible, does he try to gain support for it
from the Old Testament, Jewish views and mode of expres-
sion. The double meaning of the Greek word Logos—reason
(thought) and speech (word) —offered a point of connection
with the Old Testament doctrine of the divine Word, or
Word of God. In most cases where in the Old Testament
reference is made to the word or speech of God, the corre-
sponding Hebraic expression {dabar) of the original text is
rendered in the Alexandrian Septuagint by Logos. The
Logos, the Word of God, in consequence of the Old Testa-
ment, plays in the natural creation, preservation and govern-
ment of the world, as well as in the supernatural revelation
and mediation of divine salvation, a very prominent r6le; in
fact, in some passages, the Logos of God seems to appear
1 Julius Grill, Uniersuchungen iiber die Enistehung des vierten
Evangeliums, i, 143.


almost as an individual being’ together with God. If we
add that the extremely allegorical exegesis of the Alexan-
drian school was able to expand all the Logos passages at
will, Philo could without great difficulty succeed in harmon-
izing the Old Testament Word-Logos with his Greek Reason-
Logos.
Above all, however, Philo thought that he perceived in the
Books of Wisdom in the Old Testament a direct analogue
to the Logos of Reason. The “ Sophia,” or Wisdom of God,
appears therein, 1 not only as a quality of Jehovah, but pre-
cisely as the highest hypostatical principle of the creation,
guidance and government of the world and of all God’s
revelation to the world. For that reason, and, above all,
because the “ Sophia ” is also occasionally called “ Logos”
in the Book of Wisdom itself, 2 Philo made the Old Testa-
ment Sophia equivalent to his philosophical Reason-Logos.
“ It is true, Philo once differentiates the Logos from the divine
Wisdom, as if the latter were the former’s mother; and he is
pleased to represent this as the Mother of the universe,
which has God for its Father; it has, from the seed, which
it has received from God, given birth to the one, dearly beloved
Son and to this world as well; but it is clear enough from
a comparison of all his utterances that for him the Sophia
and the Logos are not essentially different—only two designa-
tions of the same divine intermediary being, which he repre-
sents, according to the connection, either as the receiving,
motherly principle, or as the active, creative principle.” 3
If now we compare the Logos of Philo with the Logos of
John, it is at once evident that the fourth Evangelist has
both the Logos name and also several Logos ideas in common
with Philo and the Alexandrian-Jewish popular theology.
This does not need to be demonstrated either in general or
in detail. On the other hand, however, between the Hellenic
Logos-doctrine of Philo (there is no need of considering the
Greek doctrine), and the Logos-Christ of John, there yawns
a mighty, impassable gulf.
1 Especially Prov. viii; Eccl. xxiv; Wisdom vii, 9.
* ix, 1; xvi, 12; xviii, 15.
3 Johannes J. Ign. Dellinger, Heidentum und Judentum, 845 (Regens-
burg, 1857). For the survey of the Logos doctrine of Philo, see
Grossmann, Qurestiones Philon. De Logo Philonis, q. altera (1829);
Gfrorer, Philo und die alexandrinische Theosophie (1831); Dahne,
Geschichtliche Darstellung der judisch-alexandrinischen Religionsphilo-
sophte (1834); Fr. Keferstein, Philos Lehre von den gottlichen Mittel-
wesen (1846); Siegfried, Philo von Alexandria (1875); Soulier, La
doctrine du Logos chez Philon d'Alexandrie (1876); J. Rfiville, Le
Logos d’aprls Philon (1877); La doctrine du Logos dans le IV Evangile
et dans les oeuvres de Philon (18S1); Fr. Klasen, Die alttestameniliche
Weisheit und der Logos der judisch-alex. Philosophic (1878); Drum-
mond, Philo Judceus, or the Jewish Alexandrian Philosophy (1888);
Ed. Zeller, Die Philosophic der Griechen, iii, 2 Part, 3rd ed. (1881);
Julius Grill, Untersuchungen iiber die Entstehung des IV Evangeliums,
i, 105-160.


In the first place, the Logos of John is, in the full sense
of the word, a person, while the Logos of the Alexandrian
philosopher, and of Greek philosophy in general, is only an
abstract idea. It is true, occasionally it seems as if Philo
were struggling with his own world of ideas, in the effort to
conceive of the Logos as a personal—that is, a self-existent,
conscious being. Some scholars even formerly believed that
he brought this so far as to personify his Logos idea. 1
To-day, however, critics unanimously recognize that the
Alexandrian-philosophical Logos is either a mere abstraction,
or, in any case, that, half as an abstraction, half as a distinct,
individual being, it “ floats indistinctly midway between per-
sonal and impersonal entity.” 2
In contrast to this, the Logos of John has been with God
before all worlds as a concrete, conscious person, has mani-
fested himself as a personal, divine being in the creation of
the world and in the history of salvation, and has finally
“ assumed in the Saviour a living, personal and distinctly
visible form.” 3 This is so'evident that even the enemies of
Christianity concede to us the proof of it. Only the Philo-
sopher of the Unconscious undertakes to cast doubt upon the
conscious personality of John’s Logos, and to put him in
this respect on a level with the Logos of Philo. 4
With the personality, a second essential difference in the
Logos of John is at the same time included—the incarnation
of the Logos. “ That the Logos could become flesh would
have been for Philo an impossible idea.” 5 “ Philo had as yet
known nothing of an incarnation of the Logos; it had no
place in his sharply dualistic view of the universe.” 6 “ There
can be no doubt that from these (philosophical) assumptions
it was utterly impossible to arrive at the thought of an incar-
nation of the Logos.” 7 This is so true, that the Christian
Gnostics, precisely because of their falling back'on Philo’s
ideas of the Logos, either directly denied the incarnation of
the Logos in Jesus Christ, or allowed the divine Logos to
enter into only an apparent and merely external connection
with Jesus. »
1 Heinze, Lehre vom Logos, zqi ff.
3 Zeller, Die Philosophic tier Griechen, Hi, 378, 3rd ed. Similarly,
Soulier, La doctrine du Logos chet Philon, 162 f.; Seville, La doctrine
du Logos dans le IV Evangile et dans les ceuvres de Philon, 26-29;
Drummond, Philo fudaus, ii, 223-273; Aall, Geschichte der Logosidee
in der griech. Philosophic, 217 (1896); Schiirer, Geschichte des jiidischen
Volkes, Hi, 556 f., 3rd ed.; Grill, op. cit., 139-144, 170 f.
3 Johannes Weiss, Christus, 64 (1909).
* “ On the point whether the Logos is to be conceived as personal or
not, John is no clearer than Philo.” —Ed. von Hartmann, Das Christen-
turn des N. T., 284 (1905).
* P. W. Schmiedel, Das IV Evangelium gegeniiber den drei ersten,
118 (Tubingen, 1906).
* Pfleiderer, Die Entstehung des Christentums, 227 (1905).
7 Grill, Untersuchungen, 329.


In regard to this Gnosticism, as well as to its Philonian
model, John speaks in his prologue these decisive words :
“And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us, and
we saw his glory ” (John i, 14) —that is, in the unity of the
historical person, Jesus, it came to a real and abiding union
of the divine Logos with the bodily and spiritual nature of
a unique human being. This confession is for John funda-
mental towards every Gnostic denial or subtilization of the
doctrine of the incarnation : “ Every spirit which confesseth
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God; and every
spirit that dissolveth Jesus is not of God ” (1 John iv, 2).
“ For many seducers are gone out into the world, who con-
fess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a
seducer and an antichrist ” (2 John 7). To prove the true
incarnation of the Logos, John then sets to work to relate
exactly what he had seen and heard of the Word of Life
(1 John i, 1). The Fourth Gospel is nothing else than the
concrete demonstration that the divine Logos has led a com-
plete divine and human life in the human person of Jesus.
The same Evangelist, who most fully represents the divinity
of the Logos-Saviour, has also represented Jesus in all
essential characteristics in his human nature, as scarcely one
of the three synoptists has done. 1
According to John, the Logos became flesh, and lived and
worked as a man, because he was the Messiah, the personal
instrument of God for the revelation to, and redemption of,
mankind. The Logos of John is that almighty Word of God
(“ God’s Logos ”), by which the whole universe was called
into existence; which has worked in the world ever since the
beginning of creation in the most manifold ways; which came
to the Patriarchs and Prophets; and which has gone, as a
living being, through the whole history of the chosen people,
and proclaimed himself everywhere as the future Messiah
of the world (John i, v, vii, viii, ix, x). Finally, this
divine Word has really become flesh in order to complete
among us his Messianic revelation and work of salvation;
to bring to us the grace of redemption by his whole earthly
life, teachings and expiatory death; and to remain to all
eternity the principle of all truth and grace. 2
The Logos of Philo has nothing to do with the Messiah.
The Alexandrian, it is true, shares fully the Messianic hopes
and expectations of his race, especially the national-political
1 See the detailed proof in Th. Zahn, Einleiiung in das N. T., ii, 539
Leipzig, 1899); Johannes Weiss, Christus, 83-86; R. H. Strachan, Ex-
fositor, 143 (Feb. igio). One must truly be colour-blind to be able
to assert, as P. W. Schmiedel does in Das IV Evangelium, 23, that the
only noticeable human feature in John’s portrait of Jesus is the utter-
ance “ Jesus wept” at the grave of Lazarus.
2 See the prologue of John’s Gospel, as well as the whole Gospel, as an
elaboration of it.


hopes. He describes 1 with satisfaction and in glowing
colours precisely that kind of a Messiah and those Messianic
expectations, which we have learned to recognize as rab-
binical and pharisaical Messianic ideas. In these, however,
the Logos is not mentioned in a single syllable. Indeed; “it
did not even occur to Philo to think of a connection between
this Logos idea and the thought of the Messiah.” 2 His
whole conception of the Logos was opposed to the doctrine
of the Messiah. It is true, Philo tries, as we have already
said, to harmonize his Logos with the “ Word of God ” and
with the “Wisdom” of the Old Testament, so that we
expect that he must surely go on from that point to a
Messiah-Logos. But he brings the conceptions Word-Logos
(“Word of God”) and Reason-Logos (“Wisdom of God”),
which, in the great connection of the Old Testament, cer-
tainly belong to the order of Messianic prophecy, 3 into union
with the Logos theory only by way of an appendage, and
with a complete misunderstanding of its Messianic character.
His Logos is, in any case, only fastened on to the Old Testa-
ment. In its nature and origin it comes solely from Greek
philosophy; it is identical with the Logos of Heraclitus,
Plato and the Stoics, as world-soul, world-idea, world-reason.
With this, however, the divinity of the Logos cannot be
compatible. The Logos has, in any case, a meaning and
place in Philo’s system and is capable of playing its r6le as
world-framer and world-director, only if and because it is
not of a divine nature. The nature of God is, according to
Philo, abstract being, “an abstraction, leading the mind
beyond the idea of personality. . . . From this conception
of absolute being there resulted such a contrast between
divinity and the world of finite and material existence, that
the thought of an immediate relation of causation became
unrealizable. The practical foundation of the universe was
put outside the domain of God, and, so far as it was not
included in the dualistic assumption of eternal matter, was
recognized in the intermediary being of the Logos.” 4 The
Logos is at once the dividing wall and the connecting link
between God and the world—no more. The making the
Logos equivalent to the “Word,” the “Wisdom” of God
has also no more signification. On the contrary, Philo con-
ceived precisely these two Old Testament notions absolutely
as intermediary beings, who stand in rank above the world,
but below divinity.
1 Cohn and Wendland’s edition of De framiis et f cents, 15 ff. (vol. v,
355 ff.); De execrationibus, 8, 9 (vol. v, 374 ff.).
2 Kruger, Dreieinigkeit u. Gottmenschheit, 100 (Tubingen, 1905).
3 See the article Logos, by Atzberger in Kirchen-Lexikon, viii,
97-125, and ed.
4 Grill, Untersuchungen über die Entstehung des IV Evangeliums,
17a.


The Logos of John, however, stands, as we have amply
demonstrated, plainly higher, not only than all men, but also
than all intermediary beings between God and men. He is,
before all worlds and from eternity, the God of nature: “In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God” 1 (John i, i). With this, the
sharpest conceivable antithesis to the Greek speculation of
Philo about the Logos, the first verse of John’s Gospel begins;
the following Logos-prologue carries this antithesis still
further; and the entire Gospel brings it to a comprehensive
conclusion. This contrast is no less sharply defined in the
first Epistle of John and in the Apocalypse. Gustav Kruger
also is of the opinion that “ for the Evangelist the Logos
is the central idea, by which to reveal what Jesus Christ, in
his divine characteristics, has been to him.” 2
If we summarize the main differences which in general
separate the Logos of John from that of Philo and also from
that of Hellenic philosophy, it is clear that the former cannot
possibly be derived from the latter.
John denies and combats the Hellenic and Philonian ideas
of the Logos, together with the Christian Gnostic ideas
which were akin to them, by keeping remote from the Logos
(Jesus Christ) precisely what is regarded in those specula-
tions as an essential element of the Logos doctrine—namely,
the Logos as an intermediary being, as a world-framer, a
world-soul, and the shadowy, abstract Logos of reason. On
the contrary, John predicates of his Logos, as essential,
precisely that which is wanting in the Logos of Philo and
the Gnostics. His Logos is that divine Person, who, un-
1 J. Grill very rightly argues that this Johannine doctrine of the
Logos resulted from the decided adherence of the Evangelist to the
Personality of God, just as the hybrid Logos of Philo was a sequence
of the abstract conception of the idea of God. “ Since the Evangelist
. . . holds firmly to the presupposition of a real, complete, personal life
of God, even in feeling and willing, he arrives at a conclusion which
gives to his Logos a signification thoroughly different from the nature
of the Logos of Philo. If God is a personality, then he is not to be
thought of without an object of his thinking and willing, knowledge
and love. If he is absolute being, this object must be included in
himself, and cannot come to him merely as an external being. If,
however, the objective in God is to be an adequate object of his
receptive and spontaneous activity, it must itself have just as truly the
character of the Absolute as of the personal. . . . The one, absolute
being appears thus as subject-object; not in a logically abstract sense,
but, so to speak, polarized in the real relation of person to person.
Thereby the idea of God has actually reached the highest possible degree
of vitality, and the Logos is elevated above the level of the intermediary
being.”— Untersuchungen iiber die Entstehung des IV Evangeliums, 175.
Thereby the liberal-Protestant scholar has at the same time suggested
(the further argumentation is a matter of dogmatics) that, and why,
John’s doctrine of the Logos brings no dualism into the Godhead,
although it indicates a number of divine Persons.
2 Dreieinigkeit und Gottmenschheit, 97 (Tubingen, 1905).


created and eternal, is the primal cause of all creation and
of all divine revelation in the created world and in mankind;
and in the fulness of time this person became man, lived
and worked in Jesus Christ, and completed the redemption
of humanity.
It is not worth while, therefore, to designate, with
Pfleiderer, the Logos christology of John as an attempt to
connect the Gospel history with Hellenic and Gnostic specu-
lation; or, with H. Holtzmann, to stamp it as “modified
Alexandrianism 1,1 ; or, even with Eduard von Hartmann, to
assert that the Logos of John was simply taken over “ from the
allegorism of Philo, and above all from the confused whims
of the Gnostics,” 2 and that “all that John brings out about
the nature of the Logos is not only also said, but strongly
emphasized by Philo.” 3 Such an estimate of the Logos-
doctrine of John contradicts the most fundamental facts of
the Fourth Gospel, and cannot be logically maintained by its
own advocates. Not to mention the caricature of the Johan-
nine christology of Hartrrjann, which is not to be taken
seriously, Pfleiderer himself, who finds again the Logos-
Christ of John not only in Philo’s writings but (to the great
astonishment of all critics) also in Jewish and Christian
Gnosticism—yes, in Greek, Eastern Asiatic, Babylonian and
Egyptian views 4 —sees himself finally compelled to concede
the decisive and essential difference between the Logos of
John and that of all other speculations. 5 Compressed into
one sentence, the whole wisdom of Pfleiderer would express
itself as follows: John has borrowed his doctrine of the
Logos from another source, but his doctrine of the Logos
is essentially the opposite of the doctrine thus borrowed.
The most important and circumspect opponents of the
divinity of Christ emphatically reject, then, even to-day this
“critical” explanation of John’s doctrine of the Logos.
Julius Kaftan remarks: “In the prologue the point in
question is that of a loose connection with the Hellenic
Wisdom, without conceding to this a great influence in the
representation of the Christian thoughts in the Gospel,
itself.” 6 “In the sense of its author the Fourth Gospel is an
intellectual unity; . . . the framing of it by Hellenism a
chance event of contemporary history.” 7
Julius Grill, on the ground of a most thorough knowledge
1 H. Holtzmann, Das Evangelium des Johannes, 45, 2nd ed.
8 Von Hartmann, Das Christentum des N. T., 284, 2nd ed.
8 id., 282.
4 Die Entstehung des Christentums, 225. For similar obsolete and
discredited attempts at explanation from modern times, see Grill, 1.c.,
206; von Hartmann, 1.c., 282. 8 Pfleiderer, 1.c., 227.
8 J. Kaftan, Das Verhaltnis des evangelischen Glaubens eur Logos-
lehre, in Zeitschrift Jur Theologie und Kirche, viii, 3 (1897).
7 J. Kaftan, Jesus und Paulus, 64 (Tfibingen, 1906).


of the Philo-Hellenic doctrine of the Logos, as well as of that
of John, expresses his conviction as follows : “ However strik-
ing the whole parallel connection is [between Philo and
John], it can hardly escape even a superficial observation that
a fundamental and essential difference in the Logos ideas of
the two writers makes itself felt throughout.” 1
The historian of dogma, Harnack, likewise declares : “ The
reference to Philo and Hellenism is not at all sufficient here
[to explain John’s christology], since it does not satisfac-
torily account for even one side of the problem. Grecian
theologians have not been operative in the Johannine theology
—even the Logos has little more in common with the Logos
of Philo than the name. . . . The prologue of the Gospel
starts out with a great being known to Hellenic readers—
the Logos; recasts and refashions this—combating implicitly
false christologies—in order to substitute for it Christ—that
is, to disclose it as this Jesus Christ.” 2 The aged Weiz-
sacker has expressed himself in like manner concerning “ the
relation between the Logos doctrines of John and Philo” :
“ Nothing is easier than to point out the great difference
between the two doctrines, and to prove that they rest
on fundamentally different views. And far be it from us,
indeed, to wish to avoid a recognition of the thoroughly
original Johannine formation. . . . We may perhaps go
still further, and say not only that John has not borrowed
the Logos of Philo, but that his doctrine is exactly contrary
to it.” 3
If, in fact, we compare what the Johannine doctrine of the
Logos has in common with the Hellenic Logos-doctrine of
Philo, with what separates the two, we might well let the
following serve as the positive result: “ The name Logos is
certainly common to both. That John took this word from
the contemporary philosophy of the schools and people is,
however, not therewith proven. Rather is it the case that he
had already found the name Logos used for Jesus Christ in
the Church. This was so well known and commonly used
that the Evangelist simply assumed it, as it had been given.
But whether the Church took the name Logos over from the
Greco-Alexandrian philosophy, or from the Old Testament, or
from both together, must remain uncertain.”
In a word, John has found at the time of his writing the
exterior frame, or shell, for his Logos doctrine all ready.
He adopted it, not merely because in itself it was very well
adapted to receive both the figure and the substance of the
1 Untersuchungen über die Entstehung des IV Evangeliums, 139.
2 Dogmengeschichte, i, 93, 3rd ed.; cf. Harnack, Über das Ver-
batims des Prologs des IV Evangeliums zum ganzen Werk, in Zeit-
scbrift fur Theologie und Kirche, ii, 189-231 (1892).
® Weizsacker, Die johanneische Logoslebre, in Jabrbiicher fiir Theo-
logie, vii, 708 (1862).


idea, but because, as a commonly understood point of
departure for christological instruction, it was especially
commendable, 1 and because the false Logos doctrine was
assailable only by opposing to it the true doctrine, while
retaining the Logos form. After he had purified it from all
the slag which heathen philosophy, Jewish theosophy, and
Christian Gnostic speculation had left in it, he poured into
the “ shell ” the pure and wholly sublime contents of the
Christian doctrine of the Logos, given by revelation, and
placed in the frame, prepared for it by Providence, the
thoroughly original Christian portrait of the God-Man, Jesus
Christ.
We say the original Christian portrait of the God-Man,
Jesus Christ. For however little the Johannine christology
may, in its nature, be identified with any kind of Logos-
speculation outside Christianity, just as little may it be set up
as opposed to the portrait of Jesus in the Christian Church,
before John’s Gospel, and designated as a novelty on the part
of the fourth Evangelist.
The modern talk—repeated ad nauseam —about the Christ
of John being in contrast to the Christ of the older Christian
writers—namely, the synoptists and Paul—is confused and
confusing. It can be understood—and is for the most part
also misunderstood—as if there had been in the Church
during the first Christian century three essentially different
conceptions of Christ—one Pauline, one synoptic, and finally
one Johannine. This, however, does not at all correspond
to the historical facts. True, Paul, the synoptists and John
rely upon three special, though parallel, modes of teaching
and traditions of the life and words of Jesus. The result of
this is necessarily also three distinctly different representa-
tions. With John this form of difference is greater, because
he not only can speak everywhere as an eye-witness, but
sees himself confronted with the beginnings of the Christian-
Gnostic heresy, which, in connection with the Jewish and
Hellenic speculation about the Logos, denied the true
humanity, Messiahship and divinity of Jesus. Thus he sees’
himself also compelled to elaborate the portrait of Christ as
completely and decisively as possible, and especially to pour-
tray the divinity of Jesus more demonstratively and in the form
of the true divine sonship and of the divine Logos ; and this,
as an eye-witness, he is qualified to do. We have already
expressly demonstrated this Johannine peculiarity.
I.
26
1 The idea of the Logos must have been just as well known to the
Church in its application to Jesus as the Logos name itself : “ The self-
evident introduction at the very beginning of a work plainly pursuing
a new course shows unmistakably that the Evangelist thought that he
might take for granted in his readers an acquaintance precisely with
this idea.”—Kruger, Dreieinigkeit und Gottmenschheit, 97.


But this peculiarity is purely external, and the differences
resulting- from it, as contrasted in the Pauline and synoptic
christology, are thoroughly unessential, and do not affect the
subject-matter itself. If we take away the Johannine frame
of the portrait of Christ and the Johannine, that is, the
contemporaneous, historical shell of the Logos doctrine,
Jesus Christ stands before us in the Fourth Gospel as that
divine Lord and Master who descends from the throne of
his heavenly Father to this earth, becomes man, and lives,
teaches and dies for us men, in order, as the Messiah, to
redeem the whole world. In proof of this essential unity of
the Johannine christology with that of the synoptists and
Paul, we can appeal to the whole foregoing investigation,
and conclude by pointing out that even hostile criticism
does not succeed in establishing the truth of the liberal
dogma of a christological antagonism between the Gospel of
John and that of the synoptists and of Paul.
With regard to the christological relation of the Fourth
Gospel to the synoptists, Adolf Hamack believes that he may
call John a “glorified Matthew.” 1 “Yet one can call him
also just as well a glorified Mark and Luke; for he agrees
with Mark in the dominant intention of bringing to light the
divine sonship of Jesus.” 2 Luke, however, “approaches in
christology the type of conception found in John.” 3 Har-
nack’s Berlin colleague, Pfleiderer, expresses himself even
more decidedly: “It must be acknowledged that all our
Gospels stand, in principle, on the same standpoint, and that
the difference between Mark and the other two synoptists and
John is only a relative difference of degree between the
various strata of theological reflection and ecclesiastical con-
sciousness.” 4 Bousset confirms this estimate, and writes:
“ The fact has rightly been brought out that in this respect
(the doctrine of the divinity of Jesus) our three Evangelists
are different from the fourth only in degree.” 5 Edmund
Stapfer goes still further: “ The Christ of the Fourth Gospel
in no respect exceeds the Christ which the synoptists let us
surmise. He helps us to understand the latter.” 6 Albrecht
Kalthoff remarks : “ The synoptic Christ , . . does not stand
a hair’s breadth nearer a really human conception of Christi-
anity than does the Christ of the Fourth Gospel.” 7
These admissions, made by good liberals and even by
ultra-radicals, agree, therefore, with those of the concilia-
1 Lukas der Arzt, ng note. 2 id. 3 id., 158.
* Das Urchristentum, i, 666, 2nd ed.; cf. Enistehung des Christen-
turns, 186.
6 Was wissen wir von Jesus? 30 f. (Halle, 1904).
* “ Le Christ du IV Evangile ne depasse en rien celui que les synop-
tiques nous font deviner. II nous aide i I’apercevoir.” —] Isus-Christ
pendant son ministire, 326 {1897).
7 Das Christusproblem, 21.


tory theologian of Berne, Fritz Barth, and of the orthodox
Protestant, Professor Johann Kunze, of Vienna: “We
have not the right to reject this Johannine contribution (to
christology); for even though the ideas in the Fourth Gospel
may be more strongly defined and more clarified . . . never-
theless, his portraiture of Christ is essentially the same.” 1
“ It is true, differences exist between the three synoptic
Gospels and that of John, but if we do not exaggerate
them artificially, and if we do not lift the Christ of John
into the mists of heaven, and drag the synoptic Christ
down into the dust of earth, then still always for one of
religious sensibility there is only one Christ, and no essential
difference between the two portraits.” 2 The same thing
is to be said about the relation of the Johannine por-
trait of Christ to that of Paul. “ Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, the Redeemer of the world, is for Paul, as well as for
John, the nucleus and the star of Christianity.” 3 Indeed,
the Pauline christology is still more closely related to that
of John than is that of the synoptists. It is not merely
identical with it, as far as the matter is concerned, but it
stands very near to it also in form. Fundamentally con-
sidered, we meet with the Logos doctrine of the fourth
Evangelist in all its principal points already in Paul,
although the Apostle to the Gentiles does not use the ex-
pression Logos. Anton Seitz has demonstrated this
thoroughly and profoundly. 4 It is, moreover, conceded by
our critical opponents. Ernest Renan has already called
attention to the fact that Paul “has set up a theory con-
cerning Christ which is entirely analogous to the doctrine
of the Logos, and later found its final form in the writings
ascribed to John.” 5 According to Harnack, the central
idea of the Logos-Christ was “ prepared in advance, in fact,
necessitated by the Messianic speculations, as the Apostle
Paul and other old teachers had presented them.” 6 Johannes
Weiss has “ found the fundamental characteristics of the
Logos-christology already in Paul," and so effectually that
to him “ the doctrine, after Paul, cannot say much more
that is new ”on the subject. 7 The Johannine “idea of the
Logos, with which the prologue begins . . . connects itself
doubtless with the combination of Logos and Christ already
existing in the writings of Paul.”* “This Pauline Christ,”
says Kruger, “is a divinely pre-existing being. ... It is
true, Paul does not yet call the divine being, of whom he
1 Barth, Die Hauptfrobleme des Lebens Jesu, 266 (Giitersloh, 1907).
2 Kunze, Die ewige Gottheit Jesu Christi, 22 (Leipzig, 1904).
3 Paul Wernle, Die Anfdnge unserer Religion, 447, 2nd ed. (Tubin-
gen, 1904).
4 Das Evangelium vom Gottessohn, 487-527 (Freiburg, 1908).
5 VAntichrist, 76 {1873). • Das Wesen des Christentums, 127.
7 Christus, 65; cf. 43-65 (1909). 3 id., 87.


speaks, ‘ Logos,’ but even if the word is wanting, the thing
itself is, nevertheless, there.” 1 And P. W. Schmiedel adds :
“ What Paul has said with increasing definiteness, only
without using the word Logos, is uttered here [in the pro-
logue] by the fourth Evangelist.” 2
If, then, the Johannine christology is different from that
of Paul and the synoptists only in regard to the form —the
“how” of its representation—since it says essentially and
practically the same thing of Jesus which the earlier writers
of the New Testament reported of him, one more conse-
quence follows : The christology of John is practically and
essentially identical with the whole preaching and tradition of
the early Church, exactly as we have proved it to be in
regard to the synoptic and Pauline christology. Agree-
ment with the doctrine of the early Church is also for John
the guiding principle in all his utterances concerning Jesus —
a principle which bears the stamp of the Evangelist himself :
“ Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father;
he that confesseth the Son hath the Father also. Let that
which you have heard from the beginning abide in you. If
that abide in you, which you have heard from the beginning,
you also shall abide in the Son and in the Father” (i John
ii, 23, 24). And his old disciples assert positively that the
Gospel of their master corresponds exactly to the original
doctrine. “ This is that disciple who giveth testimony of
these things and hath written these things [his Gospel].
And we know that his testimony is true ” (John xxi, 24).
The critics must subscribe to this decision concerning the
origin of the Johannine doctrine of Christ, even if they are
not willing to ascribe the Johannine writings to the Apostle.
The conciliatory Berlin theologian, Julius Kaftan, expresses
his conviction on this point in the following words : “ Jesus
and Paul are the first two members of that historic series
in which the development of our religion shows itself. The
Fourth Gospel, with the Epistles belonging to it, joins it as
the third member —the theology of John. Between Jesus
and Paul the preaching of the early Church, which Paul
found already existing, forms the medium of transition. . . .
Thus John joins Jesus and Paul as the third in the series.
And this series forms a straight line. The change of direc-
tion lies not in the substance of the Fourth Gospel, but in its
Hellenic frame, conditioned by contemporary history. . . .
That which constitutes its principal import is the continu-
tion of the line which leads from Jesus to Paul.” 3
With this is included the fact that the Johannine christ-
ology—in its essence and content, not in the Logos-form of
1 Dreieinigkeit uni Gottmenschheit, 86.
* Das vierte Evangelium, 118; cf, 112 f. (1906).
3 Jesus uni Paulus, 63, 67 (Tubingen, 1906).


its representation —is identical with the self-consciousness
and self-revelation of Jesus, precisely as we have proved it
to be in regard to the Pauline, synoptic and, in general, to the
original Church’s portrait of Christ. Indeed, the fourth
Evangelist appeals not alone to this identity; he can with
more right than any other canonical writer appeal to himself,
to his historical experiences, and to his own eye and ear
testimony : “ That which was from the beginning, which we
have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we
have looked upon and our hands have handled, of the Word
of life. For the life was manifested, and we have seen and
do bear witness, and declare unto you the life eternal, which
was with the Father, and hath appeared to us. That which
we have seen and have heard, we declare unto you, that you
also may have fellowship with us, and our fellowship may be
with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ ” (i John
i. J -3 5 c f • J ohn xix > 35 5 1 J oh n v, 20).


CONCLUSION
WE have reached the conclusion of our investi-
gations of the consciousness of Christ. The
results, to which we have come by the severest
historical and critical examination of the proper
sources of information, contradict throughout
the views of the most modem sceptical students of Jesus
Christ.
Proceeding from religious-philosophical and religious-his-
torical considerations of the doctrine of evolution, the liberal
school declares that Jesus himself never was, and never
claimed to be, anything more than a man, highly gifted by
nature, and destined for the further religious education of
the human race. At most, conscious of his remarkable
talents and high moral conduct, he applied to himself the
contemporary Jewish ideas of a future theocratic founder of
a kingdom, popularly called the Messiah, or Son of God.
Of being the Messiah and Son of God, as Christianity has
attributed these terms to Jesus, Jesus himself never had the
faintest idea.
How he was subsequently able to be designated as the
divine Messiah is, however, easily explicable, and can be
read between the lines of the Gospels and other early Chris-
tian writings. The confession of the disciples of the Messiah-
ship of their Master forms the beginning of the transforma-
tion of the man Jesus into the God-Man. “ Since Paul and
the first disciples had declared the man Jesus to be the Christ
(Messiah), they now also ascribed to him everything that
Judaism had, until then, believed and expected from the
Christ. And a halo of utterances bora of faith so quickly
enveloped the young carpenter and peasant of Nazareth that
soon his modest yet powerful figure almost completely
vanished from this magic cloud.” 1 “ From the day on which
ardent enthusiasm ventured to utter the words, ‘ Thou art the
Messiah !’ a mighty flood of faith rose to, and overflowed,
this Jesus of Nazareth, and never came to rest until the con-
fession, ‘ My Lord and my God ’ had borne him upward to
the throne of God himself.” 2 “A deep gulf separates not
only . . . the Johannine writings from the synoptic, but not
less the synoptic history of Jesus from the real one. . . .
The portrait of Jesus in our Gospels is entirely covered with a
varnish, which in places allows absolutely nothing more of
the original to be visible.”*
1 Weinel, Paulus, Der Mensch and sein Werk, 244 (Tubingen, 1904),
* id., Jesus im XIX ]dhrhundert, 108 (Tubingen, 1907).
3 Jiilicher, Neue Linien in der Kritik der Evangel, tlberlieferung,
70 f. (Giessen, 1906).


We have demonstrated, step by step, the incorrectness of
this pretended evolution of christology, and proved the
historical truth of the Messianic and divine consciousness of
Jesus. Two main points have forced themselves upon us
everywhere, and must be once more brought forward here in
our conclusion.
First: There exist no " deep gulfs ” between the christ-
ology of the early, and that of the generations and
literary sources of early Christianity. It is true, the form
and forcefulness of expression and representation, in which
the portrait of Jesus is delineated, differs in the individual
writers of the New Testament. Yet in them all, in Paul, as
well as in the author of the Acts of the Apostles, and in the
synoptists as well as in John, we found the unqualified con-
fession that Jesus is the Messianic Redeemer and the true,
essential Son of God. To this conviction the clearer-sighted
investigators, holding otherwise the most varied opinions,
can to-day no more close their eyes.
The Protestant conservative professor, Karl Muller, writes :
“ Nowhere in the New Testament is there to be found a trace
of evidence that people, who really believed in Jesus, have
in fact estimated him otherwise than as the Messiah of God,
who is invoked as God himself, and before whom men pros-
trate themselves, as to the divine Lord.” 1 The theologian
of Rostock, Richard H. Griitzmacher, expresses himself in
precisely similar terms : “At the beginning of the twentieth
century the unanimous result of the modern as well as of the
ecclesiastical interpretation of the New Testament—and
thereto later liberalism also gives its adherence in great
measure —is this, that the Church’s doctrine of the God-Man
Christ is fully justified in appealing to the New Testament in
its entirety, and has further developed its content only in
form.” 2 Adolf Harnack condescends to make fit least this
confession ; “ Already in the first two generations [therefore
not first after the appearance of John’s Gospel] everything
was said of Jesus Christ that men are in general able to
say.” 3 Still more definitely does Harnack’s colleague and
kindred thinker, Johannes Weiss, remark : “ A gradual evolu-
tion [of christology in early Christianity] is scarcely observ-
able.” 4 “Early Christianity is, at least in part, the religion
of Christ—that is, the inward relation of faith to the exalted
Christ stands in the central point. ... I do not conceal
the fact that I, together with the majority of modern
theologians, profess the (contrary) view, and that I hope
that this view will gradually prevail in our Church. But,
1 Unser Herr, 10 f. (Gr.-Lichterfelde-Berlin, 1906).
J Ist das liberate Jesusbild modern t 30 (Gr.-Lichterfelde-Berlin, 1907).
* Wesen des Christentums, 97.
* Johannes Weiss, Christas, 4 (Tubingen, 1909).


as an historian, I must say that it is far removed from the
view prevailing among the early Christians.” 1
The ultra-radical professor, Albrecht Kalthoff, of Bremen,
summarizes the same conviction in the words : “ The Christ,
of whom the old Christian writings tell us, is throughout not
a man, but at the least a superman, yes, more than this—
a Son of God, a divine Man. From the Church’s God-Man
a straight line leads back through the Epistles and Gospels
of the New Testament to the Apocalypse of Daniel, in which
the Church’s imprint of the portrait of Christ originated.
But at every single point of this line the Christ has also
superhuman traits, and never and nowhere is he what the
theology of the critics has wanted to make of him.” 2
All the wonderful talk about the gradual evolution of the
man Jesus up to the divine Man and divine Messiah-Christ
in the course of the first century, and the digging of
trenches between the original Christian, Pauline, synoptic
and Johannine christologies, is, therefore, a matter of exceed-
ingly hypothetical and fantastic dilettantism. We repeat
once more, that there is a formal difference in the way in
which the individual writers of the early Church expressed
and represented their confession of belief in the Messiahship
and divinity of Jesus. But there is no material, practical
difference between the portrait of Christ in the first, second
and third generations of Christian history. From the Church
of the resurrection to the Church of John, the Christians
unanimously beheld and confessed, in the Saviour, the Mes-
sianic Redeemer and true Son of God.
Secondly; This confession of the -whole of primitive Chris-
tianity is not the result of a retouching of the portrait by
believersj but goes back to the Messianic and divine con-
sciousness and confession of Jesus himself.
The assertion that the portrait of Jesus has been little by
little embellished through faith, and overlaid with a varnish
of divinely human and divinely Messianic qualities, could be
taken seriously only if separate strata of such legendary
transformations could be proved. But this is by no means
the case. From the pages of the whole New Testament only
one portrait of Jesus confronts our gaze, as we have just
seen—namely, the portrait of the divine man and the divine
Messiah. This appears to us there at once complete, without
the slightest approach to a gradual evolution from human-
messianic to divinely Messianic and divinely human. Accord-
ingly, it must be the essentially true reproduction of the
original, historical portrait.
This is actually confirmed also by all the New Testament
writers. What they report, after the death of Jesus, of the
1 Johannes Weiss, Paulus und Jesus, 4 f. (Berlin, 1904).
2 Die Entstehung des Chrisientums, c, (Jena, and Leipzig, 1904),


Messiahship and divinity of their Master, they do not at all
derive from the faith of their contemporary Church; no,
they are conscious that they are only testifying- to the Mes-
sianic and divinely human consciousness which Jesus had
revealed during his earthly life. We have been able to prove
this fact clearly by the authors of the Acts and of the synop-
tic Gospels, as well as by Paul and John. Not only that—
the direct utterances of Jesus and his testimony to himself
regarding his Messiahship and divinity also spoke just as
loudly and unequivocally from the Pauline, synoptic and Johan-
nine writings.
And even if we ourselves did not have these written records,
the unwritten testimony of the whole of primitive Chris-
tianity would undoubtedly say to us that Christ proclaimed
himself as Messiah and God. Even Harnack lays great
weight on the point that “ outside of the four written Gospels
we possess still a fifth, unwritten one, which speaks in some
respects more clearly and impressively than the other four—
I mean the entire testimony of the first Christian Church.
We can gather from it what the general impression of this
person was, and in what way his disciples understood his
words and testimony to himself.” 1
If liberal criticism lightly asserts that precisely only the
supernatural side of the early Church’s christology is not to
be regarded as the echo of the words and testimony of Jesus
to himself, then it is not the objective investigation of history,
but a secret wish that is father to such a thought. For the
subjective criticism which advocates the theory of historical
evolution —which is the basis of the denial of everything
supernatural—Jesus cannot be the Redeemer and incarnate
God. He must, as a mere man, have evolved himself from
the humanity surrounding him. Everything superhuman and
supernatural related of him can be only subsequent additions
and inventions of faith. Those books and passages of the
New Testament, which affirm the contrary, must, accordingly,
have come into it at a later date, or must in any case be
looked upon as legendary expressions of faith. If there still
remain any supernatural expressions concerning the person
and life of Jesus, this remnant also is either denied or newly
interpreted, until everything is made to harmonize with the
portrait of Jesus, which they themselves have drawn or
arbitrarily caricatured.
Thus, and thus only, according to the evolutionary theory
and the idea that Christ’s life was merely a phase of
“ religious history,” does one succeed in explaining the
consciousness of Jesus and the earliest Christian reports
concerning the Messiah and the Son of God, Jesus. Sceptical
1 Das Christentum und die Geschichie, reprinted in Harnack’s Reden
und Aufsateen, ii, 16 (Giessen, 1906).


criticism professes to have found and given to the world the
historical Christ, but in reality it has constructed its own
modem Christ in opposition to real history.
And also in opposition to all psychology, which is, if pos-
sible, still worse. The evolutionary, religious-historical theory
insists especially on the fact that the man Jesus has been
transformed into the heavenly Christ, the divine Man and
the divine Messiah through the psychological experience of
the disciples and the early Church. But if so, it is naturally
bound to show the connecting lines which are supposed to
lead from the purely human self-authentication of Jesus up
to the divinely human and divinely Messianic portrait of
him drawn by the disciples and early Christians. But this
immeasurable gulf is bridged only with an unlimited amount
of fantasy, not with legitimate psychology.
Indeed, how is it possible that the “young mechanic and
peasant of Nazareth,” whom the liberal investigators pour-
tray, could, shortly after his death, become exalted in the
circle of the disciples to that heavenly Christ, the world-
redeeming Messiah and the true Son of God? How is it to
be explained that the same men, who, only a little while
before, had eaten and drunk with him, and by reason of years
of intercourse had become convinced of his mere humanity,
could take him now for a superman and for the pre-existing
and essential Son of God? How is it thinkable, that the
Jews who were true to the Messiah, and to whom all idolatry
of a creature was an abomination, ever folded their hands in
prayer to the Jesus whom they had always heard pray to the
Father, and that they could worship him whom they had seen
live and die as a man? How comes it that all the Christians
of the early times, the old disciples, like the synoptists, and
Paul and John, all approved of this blasphemous deification
of a human being and joined in it, and also that in the whole
primitive Church not a sound of objection and indignation
against it was raised? How is it, we ask with KalthoflF, how
is it psychologically to be imagined that a “ Protestant-
liberal ” type of Jesus was laid in the grave and that a
“ Catholic 1,1 Christ rose from it?
Grutzmacher rightly says ; “ Liberal theology has not yet
comprehended that this religious-historical problem even
exists, to say nothing of attempting then to solve it.” 2 “In
not quite one decade (for the rise of the Church’s dogma is,
on account of Paul, not to be put back beyond the death of
Jesus) to enrol in the category of the gods a man about
whom men were still perfectly well informed, and to hang
about him every conceivable ornament of oriental mythology,
is the exact opposite of gradual evolution.” 3 How can it,
1 Kalthofi, Das Christus-P.rohlem, 26, 2nd ed.
* Jsf das liberate JesUshild modern? 39. * id., 40.


then, occur to the holders of the evolution-theory to cut so
deeply into their own flesh by accepting such an unpsycho-
logical and abrupt hypothesis?
The liberal evolutionary theory can give to such questions
at most the profound reply: That the exceedingly rapid em-
bellishment of the man Jesus, which exalted him to the divine
Man Christ, was brought about in consequence of the powerful
impression which Jesus had made upon the disciples during
his life, and in consequence of the visions of the resurrection,
which they imagined they saw after his death. That, how-
ever, is not to solve the problem of abruptness, but only to
push it into the background. On that very account, indeed,
it is a question of how the disciples, after the ignominious
death of their Master, could live with and worship him as
the risen Lord and Messiah, unless he had previously made
upon them the impression of being the divine Messiah as long
as he dwelt among them. “ For,” as even the liberal,
W. Bousset, remarks, “ it is indeed comprehensible that the
first disciples of Jesus, all of whose hopes had been shattered
by the death and burial of Jesus, and all of whose views of
the Messiahship of Jesus had been destroyed, came hack;
under the impression of their experiences with the risen
Jesus, to the belief that Jesus was the Messiah, if they
had gained this belief previously through the utterances
and the conduct of Jesus. But it remains perfectly inex-
plicable how this belief could originate for the first time
among the disciples after the great catastrophe; we should
have then to suppose that those wonderful experiences of
the Easter days had, in a purely magical way and without
any psychological mediation, called to life something abso-
lutely new in their souls. But, precisely from the standpoint
of the strictly evolutionary-historical theory, this cannot be
accepted.” 1
The mere attempt to explain the origin of the disciples’
faith in the divine Messiah by this psychological enormity,
and thereby to solve one riddle by another, is a direct blow
to their own evolutionary theory, and a clear confession that
the religious-historical and religious-psychological theory of
the sceptics has here reached the limit of its art.
There is only one true religious-historical and religious-
psychological solution of the existing problem—it is the
derivation of the faith of the disciples in the divine Messiah
from the divinely Messianic revelation of himself, made by
their Master. If our opponents’ form of science, known as
the “ strictly historical and strictly psychological school of
criticism,” wishes seriously to stand by its principles, then
it must demand, still more decidedly than even we believing
Christians do, that one should reason back from the faith of
1 W. Bousset, Jesus, 77, 3rd ed. (Tubingen, 1907).


the early disciples and the original Church to the divinely
human consciousness of Jesus Christ. Then it will have to
acknowledge that “ Jesus in his lifetime planted the only
seed from which Christianity grew into life after his death ; M1
that the christological dogma, in the full meaning of the term,
“has its roots in the preaching and teaching of Christ;” 2
and that “ to that extent the Church’s faith in Christ ... is,
in the last analysis, the effect of the victorious, and even in
death unbroken, conviction and faith of Jesus himself.” 3
Thus do the desperate efforts of modern unbelief to deny
the Messianic and divine consciousness of Jesus lead irre-
sistibly back to the conviction that Jesus himself was con-
scious of being the Messianic Redeemer and true Son of God,
and proclaimed himself as such.
1 Jiilicher, Paulus und Jesus, 69 (Tubingen, 1907).
2 Loisy, L’Evangile et I’Eglise, 164 (Paris, 1902).
3 Johannes Weiss, Paulus und Jesus, 9. (Berlin, 1909).


INDEX OF AUTHORITIES
Aall, 392, 395
Abbott, 91
Ammon, 29
Anaxagoras, 391
Andrews, H. ]., 326
Aristides, 21, 52
Asquith, E. H., 29
Atzberger, 397
Augustine, 61, 62
Bacon, B. W., 29
Bade, 149
Baldensperger, W., 135, 166, 172,
174, 219, 293
Ballard, F., 352
Bardenhewer, Otto, 19, 33, 36, 47,
50, 52, 64, 365
Barth, Fritz, 29, 87, 219, 251, 280,
291, 403
Bartmann, 8., 218
Basilides, 35
Batiffol, 47, 65, 103
Bauer, Bruno, 6, 27, 29, 75, 76,
77, 78, 126
Bauer, Walter, 31
Eaur, Ferdinand Christian, 26,27,
=B, 29, 74, 75, 79, 106, 114, 126,
130. 19°. 3 2 5> 347. 353
Becker, 29, 149
Beer, G., 163
Belser, Johannes, 19, 23, 46, 65,
103, 275, 299, 317, 325, 326, 383
Bensley, 164
Bertling, 29
Beth, K., 78
Beyschlag, Willibald, 201,206, 208,
209, 211, 212, 213, 217, 218, 220,
222, 225, 226, 227, 243, 346
Blass, 325
Boese, 49, 50, 53, 108
Bohl, 149
Bolliger, 108, 187
Bonkamp, 8., 87, 103
Boor, C. de, 107
Bornemann, 78
Bousset, Wilhelm, 43, 77, 79, 81,
82, 91, 112, 115, 130, 154, 155,
i 5 6. *59. i 6 S. 174, 202, 212, 216,
217, 219, 246, 248, 251, 266, 286,
302, 334, 373. 4”
Brandt, Wilhelm, 134, 279, 305
Bretschneider, 29
Bruckner, 29, 347
Bruins, 126
Buber, 154
Biichsel, 385
Bugge, Chr. A., 292
Burnouf, Emile, 70
Caillard, 149
Calmes, Th., 65
Cary, G. L., 126
Cassiodorus, 44
Castellain, A., 361
Causse, A., 172
Celsus, 17, 39, 40, 66
Chamberlain, Houston Stewart, 3,
6. 8, .9, 74, 246
Chapuis, 172
Charles, 163, 164
Cheyne, T. R., 364
Chwolson, 78
Ciasca, 36
Clemen, Karl, 333, 347
Clement of Alexandria, 35, 46, 48,
55, 57, S B > 6 S „ „
Clement of Rome, 21, 48, 318
Colani, 172
Comely, 23, 53, 65, 103
Credner, 325
Daab, Friedrich, 2
Dahne, 394
Dalman, Gustav, 135, 163, 172,
258, 284, 292, 293, 294, 301, 305,
306, 320, 374, 377
Danko, 103
Dausch, 65
Deissmann, Adolf, 87, 88, 123,
130, 228, 231, 320
Delbriick, C., 78
Delff, 29
Delitzsch, Franz, 18, 156
Denner, 79
Derambure, 135
De Wette, 27, 325
Dobschiitz, 29
Dollinger, 158, 394
Drescher, Rich., 346
Drews, Arthur, 3,5, 8, 77, 78
Drummond, 394, 395
Duchesne, 37
Dunckmann, K., 78
Durand, P. A., 365
Eckermann, 2
Edersheim, Alfred, 155
Ehrhard, ig, 47


Ephraem, 36
Epictetus, 320
Epiphauius, 37, 382
Ermoni, 385
Erwand, 57
Eusebius, 18, 19, 33, 37, 46, 50,
Si. 55. 5 6 . S B . S9> 6 4. 99. 322
Ewald, Paul, 27, 29
Feder, Alfred L., 53
Feine, Paul, 190, 331, 347, 349, 361
Felder, H., 67, 124
Feldmann, 151
Felten, J., 155
Fiebig, Paul, 135, 274, 292
Fillion, L. Cl., 65, 78, 275
Flemming, 1., 163
Fonck, Leopold, 65
Forster, Fr. W., 78
Fouard, C., 65, 241
Frenssen, Gust., 5, 352
Frey, 29
Friedrich, Philipp, 136
Fries, 29
Fritzsche, 164
Frommel, 0., 123
Funcke, Rich., E., 355
Funk, F. X., 47, 48, 50, 57, 61
Furrer, Konrad, 91, 201, 219, 224,
225, 227, 228, 286
Gebhardt, Oskar v., 161
Geffken, Joh., 164, 263
Gess, 29
Gfrbrer, 394
Godet, F., 29, 241
Goethe, Wolfgang, 1, 2
Goussen, H., 36
Gregory, C. R., 29, 41
Gressmann, Hugo, 165
Grill, Julius, 93, 288, 289, 290,
333. 387. 389. 393. 394. 395. 397.
398
Grimm, Joseph, 87, 389
Grossmann, 394
Griitzmacher, George, 78
Grutzmacher, Richard, 20, 365,
407, 410
Gry, L., 163
Giidemann, M., 151
Gunkel, H., 164, 364
Gutjahr, F. S., 56
Hadorn, W., 326
Harduin, 61
Harnack, Adolf, 1,6, 8, 12, ig, 20,
23. 24, 27, 28, 30, 33, 36, 37, 46,
47. s°. 52. S 3. 63, 67, 73, 75, 77,
79. 81, 82, 83, 90, 91, 94, 105,
106, 107, 108, in, 112, 113, 115,
123, 124, 128, 129, 134, 136, 179,
186, 189, 199, 201, 206, 209, 210,
Harnack, Adolf — contd.
225, 228, 231, 232, 244, 246, 248,
265, 267, 268, 278, 279, 280, 312,
3*7. 318, 324, 326, 327, 328, 329,
333. 364. 373. 379. 3 8 °. 4°°, 4°2,
403. 4°7. 409
Harris, J. Rendel, 36, 52
Hart, J. H. A., 29
Hard, Vinzenz, 4, 365
Hartmann, Eduard v„ 4, 116, 123,
131, 171, 241, 242, 276, 293, 334,
344. 347. 3S 1 . 3SS. 35 6 . 3 6 4. 3 8 4.
395. 399
Hase, Karl, 27, 215
Haupt, E., 189
Hausrath, Adolf, 20, 29, 81, 83,
iSS. i8 7> 347. 35 2
Havet, E., 126
Hawkins, 325
Headlam, 325
Heer, Joseph Michael, 365
Hegel, 73
Hegesippus, 18, 33, 107, 322
Heigl, Barth., 24, 87
Heinze, Max, 391, 395
Hengstenberg, 149
Henke, 77
Hennecke, Edgar, 18, 22, 31, 32,
33. 3 8 . 221
Heraclitus, 391
Hernias, 54
Hess, Wilhelm, 80, 206, 217, 226,
228, 270, 286, 293
Hieronymus, 382
Hilgenfeld, 27, 28, 29, 53
Hillmann, 364
Hippolytus, 3S
Hobart, 46, 325
Hochard, 76
Hoffmann, Rich. Ad., 189, 249,
276
Hollmann, Hans Georg, 172, 185,
187, 189, 258, 321, 377
Holsten, 27, 347
Holtzraann, Heinrich Julius, 28,
29. 79. 9 1 . ”3. 123, 130, 135,
136, 219, 231, 233, 246, 276, 284,
285, 292, 293, 294, 305, 335, 344,
349. 364. 399
Holtzmann, Oskar, 22, 03, 79, 81,
9 1 . i2 3> 130, 186, 201, 210, 213,
217, 218, 219, 221, 228, 229, 236,
286, 292, 293, 294, 301, 304, 334
Holz, P., 163
Honnike, Gustav, 165
Hoyt, W., 241
Hiihn, 149
Hume, 73
Huppert, Philipp, 5
Ignatius, 21, 57, 48, 49, 60
Ifamels, Ludwig, 186


Innes, Taylor, 298, 299
Irenasus, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 45, 48,
s°. 55* 56, 57, S 8« 59. 61 . 6 4. 66,
67. 382
Jakobsen, A., 126
Jelski, 298
Jensen, P., 77
Jeremias, A., 77
Jerome, 62
Johnson, Edwin, 76
Josephus, Flavius, 18, 42, 43, 44,
162
Julian the Apostate, 39, 66
Jiilicher, Adolf, 24, 28, 29, 46,
79. 81, 82, 90, 103, 129, 130, 131,
189, 190, 201, 233, 292, 316, 325,
334, 335. 33 8 . 344, 35 2 . 355* 357.
762, -373, 380, 406
Justin Martyr, 18, 38, 52, 53, 58,
61, 62, 162, 263
Kaftan, Julius, 29, 190, 206, 243,
244, 247, 3 6i > 363. 399. 4°4
Kaftan, Theodor, 347, 363
Kahler, Martin, 13, no
Kahnis, 29
Kalthoff, Albrecht, 7, 77, 114, 242,
373. 374, 402, 408, 410
Karapet, Ter-Merkerttschian, 57
Kastner, K., 298
Kaulen, 103
Kautzsch, E., 163, 392
Keferstein, Fr., 394
Keil, 275
Keim, Theodor, 27, 28, 29, 39, 172
Kellermann, 8., 130
Kellner, Karl A. H., 155, 317
Keppler, Paul, 295, 296
Klasen Fr., 394
Klausner, 155
Klostermann, 325
Kluge, 0., 123
Knabenbauer, 65, 94, 96, 97, 101,
253. 275, 32> 333
Kogel, J„ 226, 265, 342
Kohler, H., 29, 76
Kolbing, P., 127, 357
Kopler, L., 275
Kostlin, 27
Krauss, Samuel, 18
Kruger, Gustav, 338, 345, 347,397,
398, 401, 403
Kiihl, Ernst, 195, 203, 204, 205,
207, 208, 213, 220, 233, 280
Kunze, Johann, 403
Lactantius, 38
Lahousse, G., 65
Lagarde, P. de, 126
Lagrange, 103, 136, 150, 152, 153,
158. 163, 165
Laible, 38
Landersdorfer, Simon, 365
Leimbach, 149
L6mann, A., 149
Lepin, M., 37, 65, 91, 244, 264,
279. 316
Lessing, 67, 69
Leuschner, 29
Liddon, H. P., 241
Lietzmann, 134
Lightfoot, 50
Linder, 29
Lipsius, Fr., 13, 29, 244
Lobstein, P., 29, 189, 364
Loisy, Alfred, 49, 53, 83, 89, 91,
95. 96, 97. 98, 13°. '3 1 . Mo, 172,
176, 185, 187, 201, 206, 210, 211,
215, 216, 217, 220, 226, 232, 244,
246, 248, 264, 276, 278, 279, 284,
285, 292, 294, 300, 301, 305, 306,
33°. 412
Loman, 76, 126
Loosten, 236
Lucian of Samosata, 39, 66
Luthard, Christian Ernst, 70, 352
Liitzelberger, 29
McGiffert, 347
Macgregor, W. M., 241
Maher, M., 36
Manen, van, 285
Mangenot, 65, 324
Marcion, 34, 54, 59
Marmorstein, 18
Martineau, James, 126
Matthes, 29
Major, J. 8., 179
Meffert, Franz, 77
Mehlhorn, Paul, 77
Meignan, 149
Meinertz, Max, 151, J 79
Meinhold, 126
Merx, Adalbert, 36, 126, 221, 305
Meyer, Arnold, 18, 38, 172, 245,
245, 334, 345. 349. 3S 1 . 3S 2 . 353,
354. 35.5- 359
Minocchi, 79
M oiler, 149
Mommsen, Theodor, 299
Monnier, 172
Morgan, W., 347
Moske, E., 351
Muller, Karl, 29, 186, 190, 241,
324, 386, 407
Muratori, 53
Murillo, 65
Muth, Fr. Seraph., 39
Nestle, Eberhard, 21, 22, 23, 33,
221
Neumann, A., 171
Nicolas, 29


Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, 248,
355
Nitzsch, Fr., 244
Odland, 4
Orelli, Conrad, 149, 151
Origen, 17, 18, 38, 39, 40, 58, 65
Ottley, R. L., 241
Otto, Rudolf, 82
Papias of Hierapolis, 19, 20, 37,
S l . S 2. S B , 64, 65, 100, 108, 166
Paulus, Gottlob, 70, 71, 364
Pfannmiiller, Gustav, 2
Pfattisch, J., 365
Pfleiderer, Otto, 20, 22, 6g, 80, 90,
94. H 4. 117. 125, 131, 171, 201,
266, 279, 293, 330, 333, 347, 349,
35 1 . 353. 355, 358, 3 6 4, 380, 39°.
39 x. 395, 398, 402
Philo of Alexandria, 42, 162, 394,
400
Philostratus, Flavius, 39
Plato, 391
Pliny, 17
Polycarp, 22, 37, 49, 50, 57, 61, 64
Polzl, Fr. X., 317, 353
Porphyrius, 39, 66
Posmanski, 150
Prat, F., 346
Preusschen, Erwin, 21, 22
Quadratus, 21, 108
Rackam, R. 8., 325
Rademacher, L., 163
Ramsay, 325
Rasmussen, Emil, 5, 236
Reimarus, Hermann Samuel, 12,
6.7, 68, 74, 79, 172
Reinke, 149
Renan, Ernest, 26, 27, 29, 70, 71,
79. X 36, 197. 198, 199, 200, 205,
232, 245, 250, 265, 325, 345, 346,
364, 4°3
Resch, Alfred, 21, 29
R6ville, Albert, 201
R6ville, Jean, 90, 267, 394, 395
Reynolds, 29
Richter, 149
Riehm, 149
Ritschl, Albrecht, 12, 30, 114, 243,
267
Ritschl, Otto, 12
Robertson, John, 76
Robinson, 29, 155
Ronsch, H., 54
Rose, V., 300
Rosegger, Peter, 5
Rothe, Richard, 12
Rousseau, 67
Ruegg, Arnold, 347, 352, 353, 357
Ryssel, Victor, 164
Saitschick, R., 78
Sanday, W., 29, 241, 331
Schanz, Paul, 65, 253, 275, 317,
389
Schegg, 275
Schell, Hermann, 300, 304
Schenkel, 27, 29
Schill, 70
Schlatter, A., 130
Schleiermacher, 19, 244, 267
Schmidt, Nathaniel, 126, 127, 301
Schmidt, P. Wilhelm, 202, 208,
209, 213, 217, 220, 226, 293, 304
Schmiedel, Otto, 23, 63, 69, 77,
9°, 91, 114, 130, 202, 384
Schmiedel, Peter Wilhelm, 7, 28,
90, 189, 202, 251, 279, 285, 328,
39 1 . 395. 396, 404
Schnedermann, 29, 156
Schneheu, W. v., 112, n 6, 242,
374
Scholl, Fritz, 220
Scholten, 29
Schubart, Fritz, 130
Schuhmacher, H., 275
Schulte, 149
Schultzen, F., 189
Schulz, Wilhelm, 244, 272
Schiirer, Emil, 39, 79, 130, 132,
! S3. iS4. iSS. j 5 6 > i s9> i6 3. '74.
219, 267, 293, 298, 299, 325, 395
Schutz, 29
Schwartz, E., 30
Schwegler, 27, 29
Schweitzer, A., 1,3, 6, 13, 26, 27,
29, 69, 70, 74, 114, 115, 123, 171,
172. 173. WS. 2 93
Scott, 363
Seeberg, Reinhold, 52, 244, 267
Seitz, Anton, 17, 39, 253, 255, 353,
4°3
Sellin, Ernst, 149
Sender, John Salomo, 69
Seydl, 150
Siegfried, 394
Smith, William Benjamin, 77, 127,
330
Soden, Hermann v., 6, 36, 41, 42,
83. 9 1 . "4, 338. 3 6 3
Soltau, W., 29, 91, 364
Soulier, 394, 395
Spitta, Friedrich, 30, 91, 141, 179,
221
Stakemeier, 155
Stanton, 29
Stapfer, Edmund, 199, 200, 201,
207, 208, 209, 210, 213, 217, 226,
228, 237, 265, 278, 294, 298, 310,
• 3". 4°2
Stark, W., 127, 293
Steck, R., 77, 123
Steinbeck, Johann, 241, 249, 259


Steinmeister, Fr. X., 365
Stevens, G. 8., 241, 324
Strachan, R. H., 396
Strauss, David Friedrich, 6, 26,
67, 69. 7 1 . 72, 79, 80, 114, 126,
205, 280, 281, 364
Strayer, P. M., 145
Stiilcken, A., 3r
Suetor' is, 17, 41
Tacitus, 17, 41
Tatian, 35, 36, 65
Taylor, 29
Ter-Minassiantz, 57
Tertullian, 18, 34, 35, 38, 54, 55,
56, 58, 59. 60, 61, 62, 65
Theodoret of Cyrus, 36
Thieme, K., 246
Thikotter, 77
Thoma, 29, 90
Tillmann, Fritz, 134, 135, 137,
253
Tischendorf, 22
Titius, Arthur, 357
Tregelles, 53
Tyrrell, 79
Usener, H., 364
Vaganay, Leon, 164
Veil, 52
Verus, 76
Volkmar, 27, 28, 29, 34, 53, 126,
134. 172
Vollers, Karl, 77
Volz, Paul, 165
Watkins, 29
Weber, Ferd., 156, 158, 159
Weber, Simon, 162, 352
Weidel, K., 2
Weinel, Heinrich, 77, 134, 266,
293, 3 12 > 338. 339. 345. 347. 353.
3 6 °. 379. 406
Weiss, Bernhard, 20, 23, 24, 28,
”3. 135. 201, 202, 209, 210, 213,
214, 215, 220, 222, 225, 226, 228,
233. 244. 265, 267, 270, 292, 294,
324. 3 2 5. 335. 343. 349. 353
Weiss, Johannes, 29, 78, 83, 129,
135, 172, 185, 187, 190, 201, 206,
207, 208, 209, 210, 213, 216, 236,
286, 293, 302, 310, 312, 313, 323,
329. 337. 338, 34°. 34i. 342, 343.
344. 347. 348 , 35°. 356. 357. 3S B .
380. 39S> 30. 4°3. 4°7. 408. 4 12
Weisse, Christ., 29
Weissenbach, Wilhelm, 172
Weizsacker, Karl, 79, 91, 135, 138,
333. 353. 4°°.
Wellhausen, Julius, 30, 79, 91, 123,
129, 134. 137. 174. 186, 189, 246,
279. 364
Wendling, 28
Wendt, Hans Heinrich, 29, gr, 135,
187, 2or, 203, 209, 210, 211, 214,
219, 220, 223, 225, 226, 228, 265,
277. 293, 294, 295, 334, 353
Wernle, Paul, .84, 85, 86, 130, 131,
187, 201, 206, 209, 210, 211, 212,
232, 246, 251, 345, 347, 349, 355
Wobbermin, George, 91
Worsley, Fr. W., 29, 93
Wrede, Wilhelm, 22, Br, 113, 114,
226, 129, 130, 137, 190, 254, 305,
308, 345. 347. 35°. 353. 372
Wiinsche, 154, 253
Zahn, Theodor, 23, 24, 28, 33, 37,
4 6 . 47. 49. 54, 61, 62, 63, 64, 66,
103. 10 4, 3 12 , 323. 324, 325. 33°.
356. 3 60 , 389. 39 6
Zapletal, 149, 150
Zeller, 27, 29, 392, 394, 395
Zimmermann, Heinrich, 114, 130,
172, 220, 246, 293, 364




INDEX OF SUBJECTS
Acts of the Apostles, 317-331;
their authors, 324-326; their
dates, 326; their historical truth-
fulness, 325-326; their sources,
326; their christology, 317-324,
328-331
Adoration of Jesus during his
public life, 255-258; after the
Resurrection, 309; in the early
Church, 322-325, 340-343 5 in the
Apocalypse, 385-386, 389-390
Adoration, religious, of Christ,
256-257, 321-324, 330, 340-342.
306, 389
Agnosticism, 13
Agrapha, 21
Alexandrine Jews, their philosophy
of religion, 392; their teaching
concerning the Logos, 392-402
Alogi, and their attitude toward
the Gospel of St John, 37, 66
Announcement of the birth of the
forerunner, St John the Baptist,
366
Announcement of the birth of
Jesus, 367-369
Apocalyptic and eschatological
notion of the Messiah, 163-170
Apocalypse of Baruch, 164; its
Messianic conception, 165-166
Apocrypha of John, 9; their
genuineness, 384; their christ-
ology, 385-386, 402-404
Apocryphal Gospels, 31-34; their
content, 31-32; their origin, 33;
their fate, 33-34
Apocryphal literature, 22, 31-34
Apologies for Christ, 8-9; their
peculiarity, 10, n; their con-
tent, 11-12; their method, 12-14
Apostasy from Christ and Chris-
tianity, 3-7
Apostles, unanimity of belief after
the Resurrection of Christ, 309-
316
Apostolic fathers, 21
Apparition at baptism, an objec-
tive fact, not subjective, ecstati-
cal vision of Christ or of the
Baptist, 376-381; cf. Baptism of
Jesus
Appeal to Jesus in the primitive
Church, 324-326, 330, 340-342
Ascension of Christ, 316
Asserted development of the Con-
sciousness of Christ, 195-231,
235-236
Author of life —Jesus, 319, 321
Baptism of Jesus, 132; is not the
origin nor commencement of the
Messianic consciousness of Jesus,
215-225; revelation of Messiah
and Son of God at the same, 216,
37 2 , 373
Basilidians and the Gospels, 35
Beginning, supermundane, eternal,
divine —Jesus, 287
Blasphemy as reason for condemn-
ing Christ, 302-306
Book of Henoch, 163; its Mes-
sianic ideas, 165
Canon of the Roman Church, 58
Celestial man, Pauline, according
to liberal theology, 333-334, 344.
357
Cerinthus, 37, 383
Christ and Christianity, 8-10
Christ’s consciousness of being the
Son of God, 225-23;, 262-307;
liberal theory about his origin,
225, and significance, 262-267,
268; not temporal and worldly,
but eternal and supernatural,
230-237; not only ethical and
theoretical, but metaphysical,
262-316; and Messianic con-
sciousness, 196, 225-231, 260, 261,
262-268, 269
Christ’s denial in Protestantism
of to-day, 3-6, 75
Christ-Myth, 7, 27, 28, 75-78
Christ-seekers, modern, 1-2
Christianity of the liberal Pro-
testants, 4
Christianity, modern, 5, 196
Christology, synoptic, 88-90, 121-
122, 363-381; Johannine, 92-98,
381-405; of the Acts of the
Apostles, 317-331; Pauline, 186-
19 1 , 33'-3 6 3> 403


Conception of the Messiah, Old
Testament prophecies, 148-154,
167-170; Pharisaical. 154-163;
eschatological, 163-170; Chris-
tian, 170-194
Condemnation of Jesus, 146, 147,
176, 297-306
Consciousness of Jesus’ nature
as the origin of his Messianic
consciousness, 195, 231-237
Consciousness of suffering in
Christ, 143, 212-215
Credibility of the Gospels, 66-117;
according to the early Christian
conviction, 66; their disputa-
tion by the heathen and Jewish
polemical writers, 66-67; by the
rationalists, 66-67; by the theory
of deception of Reimarus, 67-
69; by the natural explanation
of the Gospels, 69-71; by
Strauss’s mythical hypothesis,
71-74
Criticism of the Gospels, rational-
istic, 26, 66; Reimarus’s, 67-69;
Paulus’s, 70-71; Strauss’s, 26, 71-
74; Fr. Chr. Baur’s, 27, 74; of
the school of Tubingen, 27;
Bruno Bauer’s, 27, 75-79; retro-
spection of Ritschl - Harnack
school, 28-31, 79, 126
Damascus, Pauline episode of,
346-354; evolutionary meaning
thereof, 346; not a psycho-
pathological vision of St Paul,
but an objective appearance
and revelation of Christ, 350;
not the only source of Pauline
christology, 342, 346, 361
Daniel’s Son of Man, 151-152, 181,
271, 301-302
David’s Son, Old Testament, 149;
Jewish-rabbinical, 134-135, 137,
146, 156; position of Jesus as
regards this Messianic title,
»34-»3.5. >37. 182-184, 212-294
Death of Jesus, his influence on
the faith of the disciples, 309,
311; its redeeming significance,
184-191
Deception-hypothesis, Reimarus-
Lessing, 67-69, Baur, 24-76
Demand for love by Jesus, 254
Demand of faith by Christ, 253-
254
Demons, their testimony to Jesus,
>37
Diatessaron of Tatian, 36
Divine consciousness, 248-250, and
revelation of the divinity of
Christ, 307
Divine consciousness of Christ,
his expressions, 250-262; ef.
Christ’s consciousness of being
the Son of God and revelations.
Divinity of Christ, 241 - 405;
Christendom, 241; denial by
rationalism, liberalism and
modernism, 242-245, 250; hu-
manity of Jesus, 245-250; in his
life, 245-306; after his death,
306; in the early Church, 317-
331; St Paul, 331-363; and the
synoptists, 246-262, 268-272; 275,
281, 282-286, 291, 294, 297, 306,
363-381; and John, 92, 273-275,
281-282, 286-291, 294-297, 302,
3°9-3>7. 3 8i -4°s
Early Christian christology, 316-
331, 406-412; its faith of the
Messiah, 317; its testimony to
the Son of God, 318-319, 331,
407; its adoration of Jesus, 322-
324; faithfully represented in
the Acts of the Apostles, 324-
331; not changed by St Paul,
329; cf. Pauline, synoptic,
Johannine christology.
Early Church and divinity of
Jesus, 308-331, 353-363, 404, 406-
412
Early Church literature and the
Gospels, 46-62
Early Gospels, 103
Ecstatic—Christ, 198-200, 205, 211,
216, 236-237 ; St Paul 350-351
Elizabeth and her sayings of the
Christ child, 368-369
Emmanuel, 152, 163, 167
Epistle of John, the first, its
genuineness, 384; its doctrine
of the divinity of Jesus, 384-
385; its doctrine of the Logos,
3?7
Epistle of Paul, 22-25, 33 1
Epistle to the Hebrews, 22, 331,
332
Eschatology, Jewish, 163; its
Messianic ideas, 164 - 169;
modern eschatology, 171; its
contrast to the Evangelical por-
trait of Christ, 173, 174
Esdras Apocalypse, 164; its Mes-
sianic ideas, 166
Eternity of Christ, 287, 336, 342-
343. 3 8 6, 388, 389
Eucharistic prophecy, 282
Evangelists, their knowledge of
languages, 41-42; their know-
ledge of country, 42; their know-
ledge of history, 43-44; their
knowledge of the life of Christ,


45; their . personalities, 45-46;
the tendency-hypothesis of Baur,
74; according to sceptical criti-
cism, 75-79; according to the
liberal school and the most
modern evolutionary criticism,
79-83; their proof opposed to
the latter, 83-117
Evolution, christological, 121, 193-
2 37. 333-334. 346, 406-412
Evolutionary explanation of the
consciousness of Christ, 196
Evolutionary hypothesis of the
liberal criticism of the Gospels,
79-”5
Existence of Christ, 5-7, 75-79;
denial by Bruno Bauer, 75; and
the modern radical criticism, 5,
75
Expectation of the Messiah at the
time of Christ, 123
Expiatory baptism—Johannine and
Jesus, 215-224
Extreme liberal investigators, 127
Faith of the Messiah of the Jewish
people, 134, 136, 140, 143-147;
of the rabbinical theology, 154-
163; of Zachary, 163 ; Simeon’s,
163; of the disciples, 87, 88,
137, 141-144; of the first Chris-
tian Church, 130, 317, 318
Farewell addresses of Jesus, 294-
2 97
Forgiveness of sins by Jesus, 182-
19 2 . 2 3 8 , 31S
Fragments of Wolfenbuttel, 67-69
Genuineness of the Gospels, 26-65!
and the newer and newest criti-
cism, 26; proofs for the genuine-
ness, non-catholic, 31-37: non-
christian, 38-40; Catholic, 40
Genuineness of the Acts of the
Apostles, 324-326
Genuineness of the Epistles of the
Apostle Paul, 22-25, 332
Genuineness of the Epistles of
John, 384
Genuineness of the unity of Father
and Son, 276-278, 286, 290, 294-
2 97
Glory of Jesus, 294, 315, 342, 386,
388, 389,
Gospel of James, 32
Gospel of John, its origin accord-
ing to the latest criticism, 29;
the Alogi, 37; its real origin
and author, 40-81; its credi-
bility, 90-117; particularly as
regards its christology, 91-97,
381-405; its recognition and
characteristic representation of
the divinity of Jesus, 92, 93.
381-384, 386, 390; John and the
divinity of Christ, 92, 93, 269-
272; 278-279, 281-288, 294-296,
303, 309-316, 376-405
Gospel of Peter, 32
Gospel of the Hebrews, 31, 221
Gospels, apocryphal, 22, 31-34
Gospels, canonical, 22-116; their
genuineness, 26-65; tbeir credi-
bility, 66-116
Gospels, the Fifth Gospel, 24, 409
Gospel of childhood of Jesus,
canonical, its credibility, 124-
125; its historical genuineness,
363-365 5 its christology, 124,
22c, 231, 266-269, 363, 365-371
Greek teaching of Logos, 390-392;
its relation to the Philonic, 392;
its contrast to the Johannine,
395-400, 401
Harnack - Kitsch] theology and
criticism, 3, 12, 30, 79, 196, 242
Heathen polemic of Christ, 38-40;
sources of information about
Christ, 17
Heavenly voice at the baptism of
Jesus, a significant event, 217,
37 2
Historical genuineness of Christ;
see Existence of Christ.
History of childhood of Christ and
evolutionary psychology of Jesus,
124-125,225.231; see also 266-269,
346
Holy Ghost and Jesus, 317
Human consciousness of Christ,
245.248
Human-divine nature of Jesns,
2 45" 2 S°. 3°7
Image of God, Christ, 337
Incarnation of the Logos, 386, 388,
389. 395 .
Intermediary, Neoplatonic-Phil-
onian and St Paul, 335, 344,'
346; and St John, 387, 390, 394,
398
Jahwe Elohim and the Lord Jesus,
3!3-3J6. 3!9-3 2 4, 329-33 1 . 337.
338, 339-34 2 . 343. 360-309. 374
Jesus and Paul, 346-360; no dif-
ferences between them, 359-360
Jesus Christ, 138, 177-181, 197,
202, 204
Jesus’ consciousness of being the
Son of God, not preparation of
his Messianic consciousness, 225-
230; not temporal and worldly,
but supernatural and eternal,
230-237; not only ethical and


theoretical, but also metaphysi-
cal, 241-306: see also conscious-
ness of being the Son of God
Jesus the Redeemer, 183-190, 259,
336
Jewish criminal trials and the
trial of Jesus, 281-287
Jewish fables concerning Christ,
18-19, 34
Johannine christology, 92-98, 382-
405; its characteristic form, 381-
586; its “ word ” form, 386-390;
its difference from the Greek,
Alexandrian-Jewish and Phil-
onic doctrine of the Logos, 390-
405; its relation to synoptic
christology, 91-94, 381, 396, 399;
its complete accord with Pauline
and early Church christology,
399-405; is identical with the
self-consciousness and self-reve-
lation of Jesus, 399-405
Johannine problem, 91-98
John the Baptist, his testimony to
Christ, 132, 175, 371, 383; his
preaching of the kingdom of
heaven, 138; his embassy to
Jesus, 139; witness of the theo-
phany at the baptism of Christ,
204; his penitential baptism,
219-221
Joseph, the foster - father; the
annunciation to him, 368
Jubilees, Book of the, 164; its
Messiahship, 165
Judgement scene and the court
testimony of Christ, 146, 147,
176, 297-306
Kingdom of God, see Kingdom of
heaven.
Kingdom of heaven, in the sense
of the Old Testament, 153; of
Pharisaical Judaism, 157-163 ; of
the Jewish Apocalypse, 165-170
Kingdom of Sinai, in rabbinical
theology, 158
Last Judgement and Judge of the
world, 151, 179, 249, 260
Legend or history in the Gospels,
80-115
Liberal-conservative christology,
its position to the Messianic
consciousness of Christ, 203-205 ;
to the divine consciousness of
Christ, 243-245
Liberal criticism and theology, 3-
8, 27, 81, 126, 192, 242, 245, 332-
334. 344-345. 364. 3 8i > 393. 4°6-
412
Liberalism and rationalism, 2, 66,
242, 250
I.ife of Jesus, 288-290
Light of the World, Jesus, 288
Literature on the life of Jesus, 1;
novels, 5
Logia, 19, 50, 279
Logos christology, according to St
Paul, 334-336. 403-404
Logos christology, Johannine, 386-
390; its origin, 390; its par-
ticular difference from the Hel-
lenic-Philonic Logos doctrine,
394-398; impossibility to derive
them from the latter, 398-400; it
has, in common with this, only
the name and the shell in which
St John poured the content of
the christological revelation, 400
Logos, the Greek, Alexandrian-
Jewish and Philonian, 390-394;
is neither person, nor man, nor
Messiah, nor God, 394-398; cf.
Logos christology, Johannine
Lord Jesus, application of this
christological title in the early
Church, 313, 319, 322, 328; as
presented by St Paul, 339, 340;
divine significance of this title,
3 1 3'3 1 7. 3 1 9-3 2 4> 330-33 1 . ?39‘
343. 344. 366-369: ‘t- Omnipo-
tence of Christ
Manifestation of the Holy Ghost
at the baptism of Christ, 217
Manuscripts of the Bible, 40-41
Maranatha, 329
Marcionic Gospel, 34
Mary, annunciation to, 367;
praised by Elizabeth, 368, 369
Master, “ good,” 248, 249
Messiah’s acts of redemption, ac-
cording to the Old Testament,
151, 153; according to the rab-
binical conception, 157; accord-
ing to the Gospel, 183; accord-
ing to St Paul, 185
Messiahship, 137, 138, 143, 144
Messiahship of Jesus, a life ques-
tion of Christendom, 122, 123,
195; in the foreground of the
modern research into the life
and character of Christ, 123; in
the early Church, 317, 318
Messiahship, the heart of Judaism,
123; Old Testament, 148, 154,
167, 168-170; rabbinical, 154-
163; eschatological, 170-194;
Philonic, 396, 397
Messianic conception, Judaism of
the Synagogue, 134, 136, 140,
142-144, 145-147, 154-163; re-
jected by Jesus, 134-13 S. '37.
13 8 . »4a, i45-*4 8 . 170-177. 206
Messianic consciousness of Christ,


126-237; denied by the rational-
ists, 126; radicals, 126
Messianic kingdom, see Kingdom
of heaven
Messianic mission and power of
the Sou of Man, 138; Daniel’s
conception of the Son of Man,
151, 181, 273, 2 74, 3 OJ
Messianic testimony of Jesus to
himself in general, 126-147; its
announcement, 132-138; its de-
velopment, 138-142; its contents,
138, 142-144, 145, 170-194; its
temporary concealment, 137, 138,
144
Miracles and rationalistic criti-
cism, 72.74, 96, 97, 327
Miracles of Jesus, 257, 258, 286,
517, 318, 382, 383
Mishna, 154; Messiabship, 155
Modernism, 121, 201, 245, 263;
cf. also the liberal criticism and
christology
Mosaism of the rabbinical syna-
gogue, 154
Mythical hypothesis of Strauss, 5,
26, 71-74; Drews’s, 7-77, 79
Natural explanation of the Gospels,
69-71
Nicolaitans, 382
Nicodemus and Jesus, 273-274
Nomism of Pharisaical Judaism,
155; its contrast with the pro-
phetical expectation of salvation,
156
Omnipotence of Christ, 138, 181,
182, 257-259, 276, 286, 315, 316
Omniscience of Christ, 281, 337
Original Mark, 20, 84
Original Matthew, 20, 51
Origin of the Messianic conscious-
ness of Christ, 195-237; not to
be found in a psychological
evolution of Christ, 195-205; nor
in the vocational experience of
Christ, 206-215; nor at the
baptism of Christ, 215-225; nor
in the consciousness of his Son-
ship, 225-231; but alone in the
consciousness of his nature, 231-
237
Papyrus of Fayum, 19
Parable of the vineyard of Jesus,
291-292
Pastoral Epistles, St Paul, 23, 331
Pathological judgement of Jesus,
198-200, 204, 211, 216-221, 235-
237; of St Paul, 346-353
Paul and Jesus, 362-363
Paul and the divinity of Christ,
330-363
Pauline christology, 331 - 363;
shows no change, 331; char-
acterization thereof by liberal
theology, 333-346; teaches- the
divinity of Christ, 335-346; not
derived either from the Oriental-
Greek mythology, nor from the
Jewish Apocalypse, 346-349, 361;
not sprung from a psycho-patho-
logical experience, 330-340; had
its source, on the one hand,
from the objective apparition
of Christ on the Damascus road,
and, on the other, in the teach-
ings of the original Apostles
and the earliest traditions, 354-
361; is in absolute conformity
with the original portraits of
Christ and that of Jesus him-
self, 361-363; has put forward
no new portrait of Christ, 328,
33 1 , 354-363; Pauline teachings
concerning salvation, 186-194
Pauline knowledge of real life of
Jesus, 354-360; sources of this
knowledge, 354-360
Paul not a visionary, 350
Peter’s confession at Cesarea
Philippi, 142, 175, 282-287;
credibility, 287; does not form
the beginning of the Passion of
Christ, 212-215, 282-287
Peter’s pentecostal speech, 319
Philonian Logos speculations, 392;
their connection with the Greek
Logos philosophy, 390-394; their
analogy to the Books of Wisdom
of the Old Testament, 394; their
difference from the. Logos teach-
ing of John, 395-400
Political Messianic conception of
Judaism, 134, 137, 140, 142-143,
145, 146, 154-163; never accepted
by Christ, 134-13 S, 137-14°. i4s‘
147, 170-177, 207
Popular books, historical, re-
ligious, 5
Portrait of Jesus, synoptic, 87-89;
122, 363.381; Johannine, 92, 93,
381-405; Pauline, 185-190, 331-
363; of the early Church, 317-
33G 354; liberal, 79-84, 121, 126,
241.246, 332-334, 344-345. 346,
3 6 4. 373-377, 406; eschatological,
171-178; liberal - conservative,
202-204, 243-245
Possessed, 137
Pragmatism of Christ’s revelation
to himself, 134, 137, 138, 139,
143-144, 214, 3°7
Pre-existence of Christ, 273-274,


278-279, 281-282, 288, 294, 295-
2 96. 335. 344. 367-365. 371. 3° 3 >
387-388, 389,
Pre-existence of the Messiah ac-
cording to rabbinical theology,
162
Prohibition by Christ of the pub-
lication of his Messiahship, 137,
138, M 3, *44
Prologue of the Gospel of John,
386-387, 396, 398
Prophecies, Messianic, 149
Proskynesis, 255-257
Psalms of Solomon, 161
Rabbinical theology, 154; see also
Messianic consciousness, rab-
binical
Radical criticism, 5-8, 27, 66, 126,
196; explanation of the con-
sciousness of Jesus, 196
Rationalism and liberalism, 2-3,
242, 249, 250
Rationalistic research concerning
Christ, 2-3, 12; criticism of the
Gospels, 26, 65, 126, 242
Religio - psychologic super-criti-
cism, 19S; explanation of the
consciousness of Jesus, 198
Reorganization of the Christian
standards, 4
Research into the life of Jesus,
by believing apologists, 8-14,
192, 244, by unbelieving, 1-8,
192, 241; by rationalists, 3, 193,
215, 243; by radicals, 6, 192; by
liberals, 4, 192-193, 242, 332-
334, 346, 364, 373, 393, 406; by
liberal - conservatives, 194-197,
244, 246; by modernists, 122,
192, 245, 263
Resurrection and the divinity of
Christ, 309, 317; Apostles’
belief, 309, 312
Revelation, 268-269; first, in the
temple, 269-272; commencement
of the, to the disciples, 272-281;
progress of the, to the disciples
and people in Galilee, 2SI-286;
intensification of the, to the
people and disciples in Judea
and Jerusalem, 286-294; conclu-
sion of the revelation of the
divine sonship to the disciples
and judges in view of his death,
294-306; after the resurrection,
3 0 9-3i7
Revelation in the temple of the
twelve-year-old Jesus, 226-231,
269-272
Revelation of the divine sonship
of Christ, 268-306
Romans, heathen, and Christi-
anity, is
Saviour of the world, Jesus Christ,
33S
Sayings of the Lord, 19, 50-51, 267
Sceptical criticism of the Gospels,
37. 75-79 . ,
School of Ritschl, 3, 12, 30, 79,
198, 243
Servant of God, 151, 183
Shepherds, annunciation to them,
369,370
Sibylline Oracle, 164, 160
Simeon the Elder, his knowledge
of christology, 169, 370
Similarity of the nature of Christ
with the Father, 276-278, 286,
291, 294-297
Son of God, meaning of this tills
in colloquial language, 242; in
its application to Christ, 243;
see also Christ’s consciousness of
divine sonship, 246-306; in the
synoptic Gospels, 246-251, 254-
260, 261-269, 274-278, 281-287,
366-368, 371-374. 379: in J ohn >
251-255, 261-263, 268-274, 279-
282, 288, 381-389; in the Acts of
the Apostles, 252-258; in Paul,
338-339, 359
Son of Man, why and in what
sense Christ assumed this title,
»34-i3 6 . 181
Sophia of the Old Testament and
Philo, 393-394. 396-397. .
Sources of the life of Christ, 17-
117; heathen, 17, Jewish, 18;
Christian, 18-19; see also Gos-
pels
Sovereignty and Christ’s position
as the Lord, 311-317, 3 1 9‘3 2 4.
3 2 9-33 1 . 339-343. 344. 366-369.
377. 3 8 S. 3 8 6, 389
Speeches of Christ, 19, 50-51, 279
Stoic preaching regarding Logos,
391-392; its relation to the
Philonian, 392; to the Johan-
nine, 394-400
Subjectivity of modern Gospel
criticism, 110-115
Subjectivity of the modern ideal
of Christ, 5, 81-82, 195-196, 236
Symbolic meaning of Christ’s con-
ception of baptism, 214-219
Symbolic meaning of the tempta-
tion of Christ, 201-208
Synoptic christology, its content,
87-91, 363; its characteristics,
87-91, 296-301; the relation to
the Johanmne, 94, 382, 401; its
harmony with the historical


portrait of Christ, 87-91, 364-
366, 396-402; see also 83-90, 96-
116
Synoptic Gospels, their origin ac-
cording to the newer criticism,
27.28; their genuineness, 40-65;
their credibility and historical
accuracy, 83-90, 98-115, 375-381
Synoptic questions, 83-90
Synoptists and the divinity of
Christ, 246-262, 267-273; 275-281,
282-286, 291-294, 297-306, 363-
381, 401
Syrus Sinaiticus, 36
Talmud, 154; its Messiahship,
155, its citations about Christ,
18, 19, 38
Teachings of the Apostles, 21, 47-
48. 315
Temptation of Christ, 133; its
meaning according to modern
criticism, 200, 203, 207
Tendency-hypothesis, Baur’s, 26,
74, 106
Theophany, see Baptism of Christ
Theory of vision about the baptism
of Christ, 216-220
Thomas, Gospels of, 32
Thomas, testimony of, 309-311,
3*4, 3*5
Toldoth Jeshu, 18, 38
Trinitarian revelation of Christ,
3*7
True word of Celsus, 38-40
Truth, Jesus, 289
Tubingen school, 27, 28, 74
Twelve-year-old Jesus in the
temple, his sonship and Mes-
sianic consciousness, 226-231;
his revelation of the Son of
God, 269-272
Untenability of the denial by the
extreme liberal investigators of
Christ’s Messianic conscious-
ness, 127-132; its origin, 195-
237; its asserted development,
196-231, 235-247
Valentinian and the Gospels, 35
Visionary state of mind of Christ,
198-200, 204, 211, 216, 217, 235-
237
Visionary state of mind of St
Paul, 346-354
Way, Jesus, 2SB-290
Works of Jesus, divine, 257-261,
276, 286, 315, 316, 335-337
Works of omnipotence by Christ,
255-261, 276, 281, 316, 335-337
World-framer, Neoplatonic and
Christian, 335, 337, 390, 398
Zachary, his Messianic concep-
tion, 168, 366; his prophecy of
Christ, 366-367
