

* 1
Christy-flnn
Visits Trana
1m Uj "l
Bertha rt. Johnston^


■I
WSSm
\c
JA


o* o°o
O o °o
V °o
o O
oo _°o
0 o/
4S&
o o° o ooCOOOOOOo ° °O O
®p° ta
00 00
O °
°C *
o n 0°
°c 0 o
O ~ 0°
~ O ■— V. ■ a ■■■ y n
li Christy-flrm i|
li Visits Trana 1?
feu
°°oc 000000000000o 0


Copyright, October 1944.
All Rights Reserved by Author


at -f:
— By The Same -======-.
-<x$><$> A uthor. <$*$><>-
N ovel:
“Stream of Years”
Poems:
"Tropical Nights ”
'W'


o,ueen Trania


Christy-flnn
Visits Trana
Bertha fl. Johnston^
Illustrated by
QWYH bUHCfIN
Printed by T. Willmett * Sons, Pty., Ltd., Flinders Street, Townsville,


7 o Christy
who lent
her name to
this hook.


/I 1
/j \
! j
' <i/


Once upon a time the author, known as the
“Story-lady,” each week visited a children’s rest
home, and of the many tales she told the little sick
children the old fairy stories were their favourites.
And always some child would ask: “Where are
they now?” Boy-blue, Cinderella, Old King Cole
and the many others. “Where are they now?” So
the “Story-lady” told them a tale about the fairy-
land where the old fairy favourites now live, and
she called the city, Trana.
There was no name given to the little mortal
who went to visit Trana. A name would be chosen
by the small listeners. Sometimes it would be a
girl’s name, sometimes a boy’s.
When the story was prepared for print a name
had to be given, so a little girl named, Christy, lent
her name. Ann was added in memory of a charm-
ing sick child who was quite convinced that she
was a fairy living among mortals.
That is the reason there is no picture nor de-
scription of Christy-Ann. The author has left it
this way for she would like each little reader to
be the mortal child who visited Trana.


Contents
Chapter I Page 1
The Fairy Poet
Chapter II Page 10
Christy-ann in Trana
Chapter 111. Page 19
The Banquet Hall
Chapter IV Page 28
The Raid of the Rain-Imps.
Chapter V Page 36
The Fairy Poet Tells Some Stories
Chapter VI Page 44
The House of “Want-to-be-Somebody-Else’


Christy = Ann
Visits Trana
CHAPTER I.
THE FAIRY POET
HRISTY-ANN, CHRISTY-ANN,” a small voice cried.
Christy-ann opened her eyes in astonishment and
wondered who was calling her name. “I’m here. Does anyone
want me?” she asked
The small voice answered, “When
are you going home for tea?
tired and I want to get out.”
“Why?” Christy-ann sat
up and looked all around her.
She even looked into the
branches of the big gum-
tree under which she was
sitting. Still she could see
no one. “Where are
you? Tm not stopping
you,” she said.


Christy-Ann Visits Trana
“But your hat is,” answered the voice quickly.
“Oh!” She dropped her book of fairy tales upon the
grass and picked up her hat; on a clover leaf stood such a
quaint little man dressed in green and brown. At first she
thought he was an insect; he was only an inch high, and his
suit fitted him so tightly it seemed more like skin than clothing.
His cap was of many colors which sparkled when he moved
his head.
She peered closely at him, blinked her eyes rapidly, then
peered again; “Who are you?” she asked in surprise.
He slid down the stem of the clover leaf, dusted his trous-
ers with the long tails of his coat, patted his coat into position,
titled his hat, stood at attention, then said:
“I was the fairies’ jester,
But r m their poet now,
So as the Royal Poet
I humbly make my bow.”
He stood up very straight, clicked his heels together and
solemnly bowed to her. So low did he bow that the tails of
his coat stood up like a bird’s tail.
“Goodness me! I believe you’re real,” she cried. “Did you
make that poem up or did you get it from somewhere?”
“Of course I made it up. Where do you think I got it?”
“I don’t know. I seem to have heard it before.”
“Maybe. I composed it some hundreds of years ago. It’s
not much of a poem, but it was my first attempt and it is an
introduction.”
“That’s true,” she answered politely. She did not want


On a clover leaf stood such a quaint
little man dressed in green and brown.


€ J/
= -#/


Christy-Ann Visits Trana
to offend her queer little visitor, and she did not want him to
go away until he told her more about himself. “Please tell
me where you live? Why you are here? And are you a fairy?”
she pleaded.
“One question at a time young lady, one question,” he
replied. “Yes, Fm a fairy. I live in Trana, which is the
largest fairy city in the world, and I’ve come in search of a
dewdrop.”
“You won’t find dewdrops at this time of the day.”
Christy-ann shook her head.
“It’s not exactly a dewdrop,” he explained. “It’s some-
thing more precious. The Sun Fairies saw it this morning and
told the Wind Fairies, who brought the news as quickly as
possible to her Most Gracious Majesty, Trania, Queen of
Trana who sent me to find the treasure and to bring it safely
back to our city. Oh, deary me!” he sighed. “I’m afraid
someone must have trodden upon it. I can’t find it anywhere.”
“Was it frightfully important?” asked Christy-ann
curiously.
“Very. We haven’t found one for ages and ages. You see
it is fairies’ tears and a baby’s smile mingled together and —,”
“Fairies’ tears?” she interrupted with surprise. “I never
thought that fairies cried.”
“Only on rare occasions,” he answered. “I’ve written
a poem about one. Would you like to hear it?” Without
waiting for her reply he began:
Old Jack Frost kissed a budding bloom
Which spring had reared through winter’s gloom.
So cold and bitter was his breath,
His biting kiss brought with it, death.


A k
IKJMm
Cbristy~Ann Visits Trana
Some fairies, who before the day,
With Joy and Laughter came to play,
Spied amidst the verdant grass
The dying bloom, so did not pass.
But stayed a crystal tear to shed,
Then fled before the dawn rose red.
Should mortals pass that way at morn,
They think a dewdrop’s newly born.”
Christy-ann clapped her hands, jumped up and skipped
round in a circle. Realising that her strange conduct needed
some explanation she knelt beside the royal poet. I always
do that when Tve got a secret that’s all my own,” she said. “No
other person has this one; only the fairies and me, so it s
sort of mine alone. The dewdrop secret! It smy first really-
truly fairy secret. I’ve had lots of pretended fairy secrets
before, but this one is the first truly one. It’s true, isn’t it?”
she asked anxiously.
“Why should I bother to write the poem if it wasn’t true?”
He took off his glittering cap and shook it at her. It made a
sharp, angry sound like insects hitting against a window.
Later on Christy-ann found out that he always did this when
he was annoyed. At the present moment she knew that she
had hurt his feelings so. “It’s this way,” she said quickly. “I
just can’t understand how a tiny fairy could cry a tear as big
as a dewdrop. Why it would be the same as if I cried a tear as
big as a lake. I just can’t see how it could be done.”
“You’re as stupid as you look! Who said a fairy shed the
tear? I said Fairies. The fairies cry and all their tears mingle
together. A baby’s smile swells it, and thus the crystal is
formed. There are dewdrops AND dewdrops. It’s the ‘and’


kind Fm talking about. Not often do fames cry and seldom
is a mortal’s baby out at dawn. This morning, however, the
milkman’s wife wanted to visit her mother so she left with
her husband on his milk truck. They got as far as this tree
when the truck stopped. He alighted to see what was wrong.
As the tools were under the seat his wife had to get out and
she sat beneath the tree with her baby. Of course the baby
being such a new mortal could see the fairies and so he smiled.
There now, you have the whole history.”
“Thank you very much indeed.” Chnsty-ann was eager
to please him. She was afraid he might not tell her why the
dewdrop was so precious. “Does such a dewdrop form a
jewel?” She asked in her best party manner.
“Not the sort you mean,” he answered. “I wouldn’t come
all this way for a bit of colored stone.”
“Fm sorry,” she said humbly. “Would you please tell
me what it does form?”
“It forms a crystal, which, when placed in a moonbeam-
bowl outside Queen Trania’s palace, turns into a fairy baby.
This is a great and rare event because fairies never die so
they don’t need babies to replace them, and once in a hundred
years or so is a fairy baby taken from a crystal. I hope you
now understand just how important it is that I should find
this dewdrop.”
“Oh, I do! Really, indeed, I do. I’ll help you look.”
Together they searched under the blades of grass, by
twigs and fallen leaves, in gumnuts, by green moss and even
under a ring of mushrooms, but not a trace of the dewdrop
could they find.
“Perhaps there’ll be another one tomorrow,” said
Christy-ann hopefully.


He did not reply. He was too busy climbing on to a mush-
room. When he reached the top he sat down with his legs
curled under him like a tiny tailor.
“You’re a very nice mortal,” he told her. “In fact the
nicest one I’ve ever met.”
“Have you met many?” Somehow Christy-ann did not
like to think he knew others besides herself.
“Now I come to consider, you’re the only one I’ve really
met. I’ve seen dozens but not to speak to. That makes no
difference, I know them quite well. It doesn’t alter my opinion.
Still! STILL!” he shouted.
Christy-ann, who was about to sit on the grass, saw him
put his hand to his cap which he had replaced when they
commenced to search. She stood still for she did not want him
to shake his cap at her again. How glad she was when at last
he placed his hands upon his knees!
v “I’m thinking,” he said. “Thinking so
that I can hear the thought-shutters
/ clicking over in my head.” For a few
f / / minutes he remained silent, then slap-
/( ///// P knee, and laughed and laughed.
fLi. { ; iM/ff At length he drew a deep breath, caught
\\ iMI fill hold of a coat tail with each hand and
' clapped them together while he sang:
“I’ll do it! Fie, foo; I’ll do it.
By gold and purple, yellow and green
I’ll take you back to see our Queen.
I’ll do it! Fie, foo; I’ll do it.”


“WHAT!” Christy-ann was too astonished to make any
other reply.
He laughed again and continued:
“By the whiskers on a poppy s stalk,
By the slow snail’s slippery walk;
This is what I’ll do for you,
And what I’ll do you will not rue —
I’ll take you after night’s begun,
So home you run, now home you run.
“Yes! Yes I’ll run as quickly as I can. First tell me where
I am to meet you and what time?” Christy-ann was breath-
less with excitement.
“That’s what’s wrong with you mortals, you never know
a thing. You’ve always got to be told every little detail. If
you oiled the hinges of your imagination-boxes you’d be a
lot better off. Tonight as the clock strikes twelve I’ll send
two moonbeams for you. When you see them meet under
your window, follow them and they’ll lead you to me.
“Thanks, oh! thanks,” sang out Christy-ann over her
shoulder as she raced up the path leading to her home.


8
CHAPTER 11.
CHRISTY-ANN IN TRANA
|J HRISTY-ANN’S bedtime was eight o’clock. Usually she
begged for a few minutes longer to read “just a teeny,
bit more’’ of her book, or to see if the baby kitten
was snugly in bed, or to put “one last stitch’’ in her dolly’s
frock.
This night however, she was all ready for bed at half-past-
seven. Her mother thought that she must be a very tired
girlie; but Christy-ann was not a bit tired; not the least little
bit, she was too excited. As soon as her mother had kissed
her goodnight and left the room, she jumped out of bed and
ran to the window.
There she sat, waiting and longing for the moonbeams to
come. They seemed such a long time arriving that she be-
gan to think the fairy poet must have forgotten, or that, per-
haps after all he was only a dream. She was so sleepy that
her eyelids kept on closing. She repeated her five-times-table
over and over again to keep herself awake. At length she
gave up watching and was turning from the window when she
heard the hall clock strike twelve. “I’d forgotten he said
twelve,’’ she whispered aloud. She ran back to the window
and had another look. To her joy she saw a bright moon-
beam hurrying across the lawn towards her window. Pre-
sently another moonbeam came scurrying along and joined
him; then Christy-ann knew that it was time for her to go.
She gave a cry of excitement, ran and put on her dressing-
gown and slippers, and crawled through the window to the
waiting moonbeams.


\^dm
Tm ready,” she whispered very, very softly, for she did
not want anyone in the house to hear her in case they pre-
vented her from going.
As the moonbeams moved along, Christy-ann was not sur-
prised to see they had legs; somehow she expected it. Over
the lawn, down the garden path and right up to the big gum-
trees they led her. There they found the fairy poet waiting.
He waved his hand; the moonbeams spread their wings, rose
in the air, drew their tiny legs up against their bodies and
glided swiftly out of sight.
The poet turned to Chnsty-ann. “You’ re here. By the
butter from the buttercup! you’re here,” he said holding
out his hand.
She shook hands with him and stared and stared, her
eyes girowing wide with wonder. “Why you’ve grown!” she
cried. “You’re nearly as big as I am.”
“You’ re as small as I am, you mean.” He laughed merrily.
You couldn’t fly to Trana the size you were, so I simply wove
a magic spell and you are now no larger than a fairy.”
“But I don’t want to be,” she commenced to sob. “I want
to be my very own proper size; not littler than anything.”
“You’ll be all right,” he comforted. “You couldn’t pos
sibly have come otherwise. Besides I’ll
weave another spell when you return
and then you’ll be your own size again.
Quickly, take my hand and hold your
breath.
“It’s a long swift trip we’re making.
By the hare’s soft paw,
By the eagle’s claw;
It’s a giddy flight we’re taking.”


At his words her tears ceased. She took hold of his hand,
and away they flew. She never had time to think about her
breath; indeed she felt as if she had no breath to hold, all
she could do was to gasp.
On, on they flew; over green fields, over housetops, over
valleys, over mountains, and sometimes right up amongst the
stars.
“Look out! Look out!” she managed to cry once, “We ll
be bumping into some of the stars soon.”
“Can‘t help it,” he called in reply. “We must reach Trana
before the moon enters her harbour. As for the stars, well,
they are not all stars. Some are gifts. I’ll tell you about that
later on. Ah! we’re nearly there.”
Christy-ann on looking down, saw what seemed to her to
be hundreds of rainbows rolled into a great, big shining ball.
When she reached the ground, she discovered that it was a
beautiful city, lit with rows upon rows of colored lights. The
poet and Christy-ann stood before a tall gate built of blue opals.
The knocker was a pearl hanging on a chain of rubies. The
fairy poet knocked at the gate, which slowly opened and they
entered the city of Trana.
Christy-ann blinked and blinked, for the many lights daz-
zled her eyes. Each light, which glowed with the vivid hues
of a rainbow, was in a golden bowl. The Queen’s palace and
the fairies’ houses were all built of opal chips. The lights shin-
ning upon them made the city look like an enormous opal.
“Oh!” breathed Christy-ann. “Oh, how wonderful!”
Hundreds of fairies flew overhead and soon a shower of
colored sparks began falling.
“Come,” said the royal poet, grandly offering his arm to


With regal grace the Queen came
slowly down the steps.


III
O.ueen Trania


Christy-Ami Visits Trana
her. “We must pay our respects to her Most Gracious Majesty,
Queen Trania.”
She took his arm and together they walked down the
beautiful fairy road to the royal palace. As they mounted the
palace steps fairy bells chimed and their tune increased in
volume with each step.
“Listen!” She held up a warning finger.
“Oh yes,” answered the poet. “As soon as anyone mounts
these steps the bells send a message to our Queen. Bow low
your head, her Most Gracious Majesty approaches.”
Chnsty-ann bowed her head, but kept peeping all the time,
for now she was in Trana, she made up her mind to miss
nothing. She wanted to see every little detail, so that she
could tell all about it when she returned home.
With regal grace the Queen came slowly down the steps.
On her head was an opal crown shaped like an upturned
daisy. In her hand was a wand, topped with a revolving ball
filled with colored fire which kept changing in color. Her
cloudy, blue robe was banded in pale gold. From her shoulders
flowed a long, greeny-blue train which had twenty small gold
clad fairies marching beside it. As the Queen walked, the tram
streamed behind her like a waterfall.
“Where did she get such a lovely dress?” asked Chnsty-ann.
“S-h! ” warned the poet then whispered back. “The court
dressmakers made it from the blue of the sky and the gold
of the stars. The train is really a wayward rivulet brought
to us by the great-hearted Ocean-mother. I wrote a song about
it. The Queen set it to music and now the twenty train fairies
always sing it for visitors; so you’ll hear it later on,”


Christy-Ann Visits Trana
“I—,” began Christy-ann, who was eager to tell him how
much she would like to hear the song.
“Hush!” He again warned in a shrill whisper. “Her
Majesty is nigh.”
When the Queen reached them she touched Christy-ann
with her wand. “Welcome, little mortal,” she greeted her.
“The Wind-fairies told me you were coming, thus I have been
expecting you.”
‘Tm so glad to see you all. How good of you to let me
come.” Christy-ann curtsied low just as she had been taught
for her school concert.
“Your Most Gracious Majesty, I failed in my quest for the
crystal,” cried the poet sorrowfully.
“Be not so sad,” answered the Queen. “You have brought
back a little mortal. Both of you have had a long journey;
you must be hungry. You shall dine with me, then we’ll show
Christy-ann our city.”
“I am honored, your Majesty.” The poet swept his cap
from his head as he made a deep bow. Up went his coat tails.
Christy-ann was surprised that the cap did not make an angry
sound, but this time made a low, sweet murmur like wind in
rushes.
“I, too, am honored, your Majesty,” she answered, and,
not to be outdone, made a full, royal curtsy holding out her
gown as far as her arms would permit.
The Queen smiled with pleasure and moved on. As she
did so, the poet stepped to her left and motioned Christy-ann
to her right; this done, they moved along with the Queen.
Never before had Christy-ann felt so important. It was a won-
derful feeling, slowly walking down the palace steps and
across the courtyard, while thousands of fairies bowed and
cheered.


The only ornament was a dew-
spangled spider’s web mounted on a
carved, gold stand.


*


CHAPTER 111.
THE BANQUET HALL
®HE banquet hall was a round building in the middle of
yip* the palace gardens.
Inside, a glow as bright as day lit the hall; as the Queen
entered the bright glow changed to a soft pink color. On the
floor was a carpet of pale-green moss; the walls were covered
with the linings from sea shells; the ceiling was of amber. A
round table was circled by stools draped in various colors, and
the only ornament was a dew-spangled spider s web mounted
on a carved, gold stand at the far end of the room.
Queen Trania sat at the table in front of the web. Her
flowing train rippled behind her chair, and it was guarded by
the twenty little train-fairy attendants.
Chnsty-ann, looking at the tram, thought it was very like
the rivulent at the bottom of her garden at home. So busy was
she with this thought, that the poet had to tap her twice to
let her know she should be seated. She took her place at the
right of the Queen and the poet sat on her Majesty’s left.
Two fairy men now marched up to the web and began to
tap the dewdrops with queer, knobby sticks; immediately
tranquil music filled the hall.
The meal was served on rose petal plates and the drinks
in cups fashioned from flowers; the knives and forks were
made from rose thorns and the spoons from the golden sta-
mens of daisies.


Christy-Ann Visits Trana
Christy-ann felt so happy that she began to sing to herself;
but the poet frowned and shook his head so she became silent;
then, remembering her party manners, she smiled at the Queen,
and by way of making conversation said:
“I see you have a round table. We have one, too. I mean
our King Arthur and his knights did. Oh! hundreds of years
ago. I expect you borrowed the idea from them.”
“No, on the contrary, the idea first came from us,” answered
her Majesty. “Old King Cole suggested it during one of his
visits to you mortals.” She gave a wistful sigh. “Old King
Cole is a great worry to me with his bad habit of wanting to
become a mortal. Several times he has been away and lived
as one. I don’t like my subjects to go away. We nearly always
get them back, but it’s very upsetting when they go.”
“I suppose so,” agreed Christy-ann politely.
The Queen looked very sad and did not answer. At length
she spoke to an attendant who stood by her chair. He moved
slowly backwards bowing all the while.
“Now,” said Queen Trania, “we’ll have a little music I
composed myself.” She was again all smiles. “My poet wrote
the words. It’s about my train which is really a rivulet, you
know.”
“So I’ve heard,” quickly replied Christy-ann, who was
eager to show how much she actually knew.
“You have? Have you, indeed?” The Queen spoke with
deliberation. “It seems that I can never be the first to tell a
story. But you won’t have heard the music. It’s my own special
treat I keep for visitors.”
“So Christy-ann clapped her hand over her mouth.
She very nearly said: “So the poet told me.” She stopped


It was a frolicing dance with the
fish-fairies throwing lighted bubbles
to each other.


\ \V'' (?f! j\%®=- ■ / ' / "'\ s ' / \\' A 7 , '


just in time and instead said:— “I haven’t heard the actual
story, I only heard there was one.”
However before the Queen had time to reply, the twenty
little train-fairies marched round the table, then formed a two
row semi-circle at the foot of her Majesty’s train.
The Queen lifted her wand above her head; and the two
fairy men who were playing soft music on the web, changed
their tune to a rustling melody; the twenty little fairies sang:
“A cheeky little rivulet
Went racing down a hill.
The gum-trees shook their sombre heads
And told her to be still.
But she would go her wilful way
Through the forest throng.
She danced and laughed, and as she danced,
She sang a cheeky song.
When day was spent, the rivulet
Thought, “No more I’ll roam;’
But, alas! she’d lost her way
And could not find her home.
So weary was the rivulet
As night began to fall.
Her song now changed to bitter sobs,
Her dance was just a crawl.
And when the Ocean-mother saw
She was too tired to weep,
She gently took her in her arms
And lulled her oft to sleep.”


Christy-ann thought the music sounded like choir boys
singing, and, on looking at the singers, she discovered they had
chubby, round faces much like small boys.
Tunny!” she exclaimed aloud.
‘I beg your pardon,” said the Queen.
‘I don’t mean your song,” she quickly replied.
“It’s not wise to utter your thoughts aloud,” answered her
Majesty with a smile. “Now please keep very silent while the
fish-fairies dance. They’re really the best dancers in my
kingdom.”
By this time the train was bubbling and moving and little
spurts of water rose from it. From each spurt sprang a fish-
fairy until ten of them stood on the moving train. When the
dance began the train was still. It was a frolicing dance with
the fish-fairies throwing lighted bubbles to each other. One
by one the bubbles went out; the train became a dark streak;
the dance turned to a slow crawl; two large white arms arose,
gathered the fish-fairies together and drew them out of si ght
through the centre of the train. The dance music ceased; the
train returned to its original greeny-blue sheen; the song and
dance was ended.
Everyone clapped and cheered. Queen Trama waved her
wand and the guests rose from the table.
Then the Queen, Christy-ann and the poet walked to the
window to view the city.
“Where did you get such lovely lights?” Christy-ann asked.
“Our fire-fairies smash opals and catch the sparks,” replied
the Queen. “Then they sort the colors and store each one
away in its own fireroom until we are ready to use it. The


“The rain-imps stole the fairies’ fire
Violet, and gold, and bright sapphire.
Across the sky they built an arch,
And over it the rain-imps march.
Man saw the fire; he liked the glow,
So called the arch a ‘rainbow.’ ”




trouble is the rain-imps raid our stores and so at times we have
to be very sparing with our lighting. Last autumn we had
only sixteen corner lights burning, for when we were away
attending Autumn s grand ball, the ram-imps planned a raid,
and, before we were aware of it, they had stolen nearly all
our fire.” ‘The Queen turned to the poet saying: “Tell the
little mortal your story of the raid.”
“Your Majesty, it is ever my pleasure to obey your smallest
wish,” he replied with great pomp. He stepped out, stood
erect and recited in his best manner:
“The ram-imps stole the fairies’ fire
Violet, and gold, and bright sapphire.
Across the sky they built an arch,
And over it the rain-imps march.
Man saw the fire; he liked the glow,
So called the arch a ‘rainbow.
“So that’s what they do with your fire,” said Christy-ann.
“No wonder I thought that Trana looked like a lot of rolled
up rainbows
Just then a bell chimed sweetly, another and another took
up the tune. “My!” she leant out of the window. “What’s
happening now?” she asked.
“It is the signal to warn us the rain-imps are again at our
stores.” The Queen unfastened her tram from her shoulders.
When freed, the train rippled away of its own accord, and on
each side of it marched the little gold clad attendants.
“Order the aeroplanes,” commanded the Queen. “It is my
desire that Christy-ann shall see the raid.”
Even before her speech was finished, a buzzing noise was
heard in the courtyard of the palace.


CHAPTER IV.
THE RAID OF THE RAIN-IMPS
fHRISTY-ANN became frightened when she discovered
the aeroplanes were live dragon flies.
“Aren’t they tre-men-dous?’’ she whispered to the Queen.
“You forget you are now the size of a fairy, and that’s
why the dragon flies appear so big. Don’t be afraid.’’
They seated themselves each upon a dragon fly, and, at
the Queen’s low, sweet command,
commenced their flight. How tightly
commenced their flight. How tightly
Christy-ann clung! How
wonderful she thought
it was; sitting there
swaying ever so quietly
yet moving so swiftly through the air.
Although the aeroplanes stopped when they reached the
scene of the raid, no one alighted. They all watched the flight
from their seats.
The storehouse was a cave. At the entrance to it strug-
gled a mass of fighting fairies and rain-imps. The rain-imps
were of a misty green color and dressed in coats made of
raindrops, which kept falling off them; as fast as one coat fell,
a new one came. Each imp carried a foxglove flower bucket
which he kept filling with fairy-fire as rapidly as he could
steal it.
The fairies flew round and round, pushing at the imps and
pulling at the buckets. Christy-ann laughed loudly as she saw


Suddenly the bucket broke right in
two and the imp was covered in dazz-
ling violet fire.




one fairy catch hold of a bucket, but the ram-imp clung
tightly. Suddenly the bucket broke right in two and the imp
was covered in dazzling violet fire. However he was not burnt
for the fire only rolled off him on to the ground and formed
a pool of pretty violet sparks. Eagerly the fairies collected
them and returned them to the store.
After the raid Chnsty-ann heard a fairy tell the Queen that
the loss was not great; for only the violet store had been
robbed.
At that moment the poet announced:
'Here comes fairy Wattleblossom
Riding on her ringed-tailed possum.”
‘‘l should say so,” said Wattleblossom as she flew from her
steed to Queen Trama’s aeroplane, “I heard the raid bells so
did not see why I should be left out of it.”
She alighted beside the Queen and, on looking round, spied
Christy-ann “Good heart of me! A mortal!” she exclaimed.
“They’re no novelty to me. I see lots of them. Is King Cole
still on guard at the blue room?” she asked the Queen.
“No. Boy Blue took his place this morning.
“Then,” said Wattleblossom, “let’s visit the store.” She
turned to Christy-ann saying, “I’m not fond of King Cole. He’s
a fat old tease.”
Queen Trania gave her consent for them to enter the
store and, without apparent motion, the ’planes settled out-
side the door of the cave.
When they entered Christy-ann saw that the store was
filled with many gold anvils. The fairy smiths had already


returned to their work. She watched them with
great interest as each took up an opal, placed it upon
his anvil and struck it sharply with a hammer;
hundreds of colored sparks flew off and fell upon
the floor. These were quickly collected by other
fairies who placed them in flower buckets and car-
ried them away.
“Would you like to see the rooms in which the different
colored fires are stored? We call them the firerooms,” asked
the Queen.
At Christy-ann’s assent she led them up a passage into a
glowing, golden room. “This is where the gold sparks are
kept,” she explained. Around the walls were many shelves
packed with buttercup buckets, each brimming over with
gold sparks.
The violet store contained buckets made from
violets, filled with violet fire; this fireroom was
knocked about for it was the room the rain-imps had
raided. The red room had red fire in poppy buckets.
The orange room had orchids for buckets filled with
orange fire. The green room had gumnut buckets
filled with emerald fire. The blue room had blue-
bells for buckets overflowing with bright sapphire
fire. Each room was guarded by a fairy sentinel. Wattleblossom
stopped and spoke to the one at the entrance of the blue store.
“This is Boy Blue,” she told Christy-ann
“The proper, truly one?” questioned Christy-ann eagerly
“The very same,” Boy Blue, himself, answered.
Christy-ann looked critically at him: “Where’s your horn?”
and “Where’s your blue coat?” she spoke severely.


They left the store.


m


When I returned to Trana I had no further use for them,”
he replied.
“Of course he hadn’t,” said Wattleblossom, who resented
any criticism of Boy Blue. “However don’t bother your head
over that. I’m no good at explanations. You’d better ask
her Majesty.”
Christy-ann turned to the Queen who smiled and said:
“If you would like to know the true history of Little Boy Blue,’
Old King Cole, Golden Locks, Cinderella, Little Bo Peep and
many others come with me. I can explain more to you after
you have visited the “Want-to-be-somebody-else” house.
She waved her wand. The poet joined them and they
left the store.


CHAPTER V.
THE FAIRY POET TELLS SOME
STORIES
SUTSIDE, the trees were singing a low melody. Near
them stood a big woman dressed in a flowing gown
made from clouds. Her body was transparent and her head
was square with a face on each side.
“How? Who? What is she? Listen, she’s
singing!’’ Christy-ann was almost breathless
, with excitement.
/ 7
A “Of course she is,’’ said Wattle-
blossom who was irritable at having to
leave Boy Blue. “What else do you
think Madam Season would do?’’
“Don’t annoy the child,’’ said the poet. “I’ll explain.’’
“Madam Season sings a song,
The trees begin to murmur.
Each new voice that joins the throng
Swells it grand and firmer.
When they reach the high top-note,
People, all unknowing,
Nod their heads and sagely quote:
‘Hark! the wind is blowing’.’’
“What a lot I’m learning,’’ said Christy-ann. “What are her
four faces for?’’


to complete one turn. At present
J 'ci \
Autumn is turned towards us and
Summer is facing your home. r;
.V cp ,
1 1 Q
h i < v
“What’s that she’s singing?’’
' V a (
“Keep silent, Christy-ann, and
you’ll hear.’’
m • i i •
“They are her four characters,” answered the Queen.
“You mortals call them, ‘Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter.
The face turned towards us is Autumn, the grey one is Win-
ter, the green one Spring and the golden one
Summer. Madam Season is never still, she re-
volves slowly and takes a full year
f a rnrrmlol-o nno fnvn Af nvpcpnf C L
Christy-ann stopped asking ques-
tions, and so heard Madam Season sing :
“Heigho! Heigho! A’day! A’day!
The leaves are decked in grand array,
The Wind-imps sing as they rush by,
‘Gay Autumn soon to earth will fly.’
They laugh, and dance, and shout with glee;
They blow the ships far out to sea;
They whistle through the window-sill,
And dare the pine trees to be still.
The leaves are dressed in evening gowns;
Purple, gold, and green and browns.
When Autumn comes to earth below
She gives a ball to which they go.
Tis frolic, mirth, and joy, and fun.
Oh! hurry along, the ball’s begun.
Heigho! Heigho! A’day! A’day!
Autumn now has come this way,”


Christy-Aim Visits Trana
‘So that’s what happens to the leaves,” said Christy-ann.
But how can Autumn come to earth when she’s only a face?”
How can a clock tell the time when it’s only a dial?” re-
torted the poet. “Madam Season only indicates where and
when Autumn is visiting.”
Chnsty-ann turned to the Queen and asked: “Do you think
Autumn would ask me to her ball?”
She certainly would,” answered her Majesty. “Last year
we were all there; but the ram-imps raided our stores and
robbed us of nearly all our fire so only a few of us will attend
this year.”
“When there’s a raid is anyone killed?”
The Queen laughed merrily. “No. Oh, no!” she said.
“The ram-imps are really our good neighbours and very
friendly, only they will insist on stealing our fire to build their
rainbows. We fight them to prevent them doing so, but no
one is hurt.”
“That’s good,” Christy-ann sighed with relief. “I wouldn’t
like Fairyland to have any hurts.”
“Neither it has,” answered the poet. “See,” he waved
his hand towards the moon. “Have you heard the story of
the moon?”
“About the man who gathered sticks on Sunday?” queried
Christy-ann.
“No, a different one altogether.”
“Then please do tell it to me,” she pleaded.
He cleared his throat, threw out his chest and began


A
//j >1
JpL
V
“A fairy bright eloped with night
Just at the close of day;
A fairy King so swift of wing
Follows them they say.
Across the sky as they speed high
Their flashing pinions beam;
And form each night the moon s white light,
From their silver gleam.”
“It’s a very nice story,” Chnsty-ann nodded thoughtfully
“All the same I like the man in the moon one better.”
“Fm not asking for opinions; Fm entertaining you.
“Even if you are, Fm entitled to my own opinion, aren’t I?
Maybe I like the man in the moon one because Fve known it
for such a long time.”
“Maybe; yes, maybe.” The poet was a
very peace-loving fellow who did not like
arguments. “I’ll tell you the story about the
stars,” he said.
“Let me sing it,” interrupted Wattle-
blossom, who at that moment came bustling *
up. “It’s much better when it’s sung and I’ve
a good contralto voice. I once won a prize.
In fact there are a number of people who
think I have a richer voice than Madam
Season.” She flew to a nearby tree stump,
stood upon it and began her song:


“The North Wind brought the pearly dew,
The South Wind brought the snow,
The East Wind cutely formed their points,
The West Wind made them glow.
Then sped they with their shining gifts
Into the sky above,
And gave them unto Mistress Night,
As tokens of their love.
Now, with a brilliant glow, those gifts
Send their lustre far,
And from each bright suspended gem
Shines a twinkling star.”
“My Goodness! Won’t I have a lot of secrets when I get
back?’’ Christy-ann skipped round in a circle.
“What’s that for?’’ demanded Wattleblossom.
However neither the poet nor Christy-ann enlightened her.
“I expect it’s your peculiar way of showing appreciation,’’
Wattleblossom supplied her own answer. She rose from the
tree stump and flying to them asked, “Don’t you think I have
a lovely voice?’’
“Of course I do.’’
“Indeed you have.’’
They answered together.
Evidently this satisfied her. She stretched her wings and
began dusting the yellow pollen off them with a tiny green
handkerchief. Suddenly, she exclaimed in a very loud voice:
“I knew they’d come!’’


So loud and unexpected was this remark that Christy-ann
jumped.
“Why not?” the poet replied.
“Little nuisances! They always make me appear draggled.”
“After they go, you generally freshen up.” The poet was in
a pleasing mood.
“That’s if there’s not too many of them.” Wattleblossom
spread her wings in readiness for flight. “Send someone for
my ’possum,” she cried. The poet ran away to do her bidding.
She turned to Christy-ann, “Forward little imps!” she said.
“Who?”
“The rain-imp children. What stupid questions you ask.”
Christy-ann could see that Wattleblossom was in a bad
mood, and so she was glad when the poet returned with
the ’possum.
Wattleblossom thanked him, then flew across to Queen
Trania, who was seated on a mushroom. She bowed to the
Queen, “Goodbye, your Majesty,” she said. “I must say I
don’t admire that mortal child. She hasn’t any imagination.
I’m not quite sure if she appreciated my singing.” She mounted
her steed and was soon out of sight.
“How did she know the rain-imp children were coming?”
Christy-ann was very curious.
“Listen!” The poet raised his hand.
“Why, it’s music!” said Christy-ann.
“That’s how Wattleblossom knew.”
“I do hope they come here, I want to see them.”


“You will, don’t worry, you will. It’s such a long time
since a mortal visited us, they won’t miss seeing you.
“Are there many rain-imp children?’’
“Millions and millions,’’ he answered.
“Goodness gracious! Why? Fairies have so few children,
so why do the rain-imps have so many?’’
“Fairies never die.’’ The poet stood on one leg. He was
beginning to feel tired. “But the rain-imps will build bows,
and, not satisfied with building them, they will march over them.
They are not sure-footed so hundreds and hundreds tumble
off and, as they fall towards the earth, they are blown to drops
by the wind-fairies. So you see they need lots of children to
replace the rain-imps who are blown to drops. Let’s go and
sit beside her Majesty. The imp children always dance round
her. Here they come.’’
Sure enough, like an avalanche, the little rain-imps came
dancing towards them. Quickly Christy-ann and the poet
joined the Queen, and they were soon surrounded by the imps.
Around and around them they whirled as they sang:
/yy/ln 'l "A little cloud of fleecy white
" y///]j{\\\ Chased to kiss a sunbeam bright,
'/ j' ! ' The sunbeam laughing shook his head
J * v// / And turning kissed the cloud instead.
Lo! patter, patter fell the rain
' A Upon a sunny summer’s plain,
And lured the children from a bower
To cry ‘Hurrah!’ for the sunshine-shower
Sunshine, sunshine, sunny, sunny sunshine.
Sun, sun, sun, sun, shiny, shiny sun-shower.”


They joined hands, and, in a long single file skipped back
into the shadow of the trees.
Such dear little green and silver babies they were, that
Christy-ann’s eyes filled with tears at the thought of them
being blown into raindrops.
The poet and the Queen were quietly shaking themselves.
Christy-ann put her hands to her hair and found it was as
moist as if she had been in a mist. She imitated the Queen
and the poet and shook herself; to her amazement she was
dry almost immediately.
“I think we had better hasten to the house of ‘Want-to-
be-somebody-else.’ Dawn approaches and Christy-ann must
away,” said Queen Trania.


CHAPTER VI.
THE HOUSE OF
'WANT-TO-BE-SOMEBODY-ELSE’
tIP HE house of < Want-to-be-'Somebdy"else was hidden by
large trees. It was built from emu eggshells and
looked like a dark green igloo. The several doors were made
of black and white quills, and the many windows, which were
wide open, showed parrot feather curtains. The inside walls
were lined with glowworms, the carpet on the floor was of
yellow down, and the only furniture was a number of beautiful
green and bronze couches made from the hard backs of beetles.
Many of these couches were occupied by sleeping fairies. In
the centre of the floor a large crowd of fairies was watching
a game of tennis. The players’ bats were made from gum leaves
and the balls were poppy seeds. Everyone stood to attention
when the Queen, Christy-ann and the poet entered; even the
sleepers arose from their couches to salute their Queen.
“A mortal,” one fairy whispered to another. There was
great excitement among them. “A mortal! soon every fairy
was whispering.
Queen Trania raised her wand; there was a whirr of wings
as the fairies flew to a side wall and pushed it until it turned
slowly round, displaying a rack of neatly stacked toadstools.
Each little fairy took a stool, and flew back to the centre of
the room. They placed the stools in three long, even rows
and sat upon them.


A mortal! It was such a long time since one had visited
them, and they had almost forgotten the incident. Now one
of them would be selected to go and live as a mortal! It was
thrilling! Some of them had been waiting years and years for
this moment. They sat cross-legged upon the toadstools with
their hands upon their knees.
Wondering what it was all about Chnsty-ann asked the
poet.
“They are the fairies who wish to become mortals,” he
replied.
“Surely no fairy would wish that!”
“It’s a sort of disease,” he explained. “Once I caught the
germ and stayed for several months in the house of ‘Want-
to-be-somebody-else.’ That was when I was her Majesty’s
jester.”
“Oh, you silly! silly poet! Fancy you wanting to be a
mortal.”
“I’m not silly.” He snatched off his cap and shook it at her.
Now that Christy-ann and the poet were the same size, the
cap made an awful noise, much worse than a steam roller
crushing a mountain of glass. “Please, oh! please stop.” She
held her fingers in her ears.
Queen Trania touched him with her wand. He ceased
shaking the cap and swept it in a curve as he bowed; quickly
its sound changed to a tuneful rustle. This done he tucked
his cap under his arm.
“He was my jester for several hundred years,” said her
Majesty. “A very good jester, too. I have always regretted
changing him.”


“I haven’t,” quickly spoke the poet. “Before I became
the court jester I was a handsome fellow. No wonder I lost
my looks.” He turned to Christy-ann. “You try being a jester,
and see if your face won’t alter.”
“I expect it would. You’ve still got a funny face.’ She
forgot herself and giggled as she looked at him, then she hur-
riedly apologized saying, “I’m sorry; really I am. What I
really mean is that your face isn’t one thing or another. It s
not serious nor is it funny, it’s really in between. It’s a sort
of— Oh! I don’t really know, but the nearest I can get is
that’s it’s sort of half-and-half.”
“Don’t try explaining; I’ve told you before your imagina-
tion-box needs oiling, it’s rusty like all mortals’.” The poet
became haughty. “By thinking pretty thoughts and serious
themes I’m regaining my lost looks. I flatter myself I’ll be
better looking than ever soon.” He stroked his cheek. “I’m
getting better looking every day. Day by day in every way I
am growing better looking. I always say that twelve times
every morning and evening. I understand that quite a lot of
mortals use the same formula.”
“So I believe. A Frenchman started it.
“Not exactly,” said the Queen. “One of my fairy subjects
took it with him when he went to live as a mortal. Dear, oh,
dear! it grieves me sadly when any of my subjects go to live
in Mortal-land. Still, we possess this power over them: if,
after they become mortals, we can immortalize them in prose
or verse or song, then at the end of their mortal life they re-
turn to us. If we cannot immortalize them they die as all
mortals do. Golden Locks, Mother Goose, Cinderella, Snow
White, Peter Pan, Wendy, Jack Horner, are some of the names
of the countless fairies we have reclaimed. Countless more have
passed on, although our poets have sung songs and told stories


A merry little boy with a turned up
nose, brown eyes and lock of straight
black hair, which hung over his fore-
head.


iy > 'V/ ( v", r ; .-^^Jw'AiK^^^'ASia^Tr~7~„
/ V ' »‘ x * 'I* T
1 v '•>. /. ! i0(ii|&T'* •; " ■ ~ •'*
..' *■ -Hz. ”'Tt'v •..:. •'■>■•■ ■'''•• ’ ”


about them into the ears of mortals, but for some reason or
other they have never been heard.”
“Any little boy or girl might be a fairy,” nodded Christy-
ann. “Do you think I might be?”
“That would be telling secrets,” smiled Queen Trania.
“Let us inspect the seated fairies, for you are to choose which
one is to be the next to go to Mortal-land.
They walked slowly up and down between the toadstools
and Chnsty-ann just couldn’t make up her mind which fairy
to choose. First it was a lovely girl fairy, then a dark-eyed boy.
From one to another she went. At last she shut her eyes tightly
and twirled round, then opened her eyes, blinked and the first
fairy she saw was a merry little boy with a turned up nose,
brown eyes and a lock of straight black hair, which hung over
his forehead. She pointed to him, This one, she said rapidly
before she could change her mind.
As soon as she uttered those words, there was a noise like
many aeroplanes commencing to land; the room became filled
with music and a hidden choir sang:
“Away, away the birds are calling
The dew is on the ground.
Dawn, with rapture fierce, enthralling,
Has spread his pinions round.
Orange, gold and amethyst,
Slate-grey and crimson-brown;
Each pinion spread with one request:
To urge Dame Daylight down.
Swiftly comes the conquering sun
Dispersing Dawn’s array.
His reign with splendour has begun,
Away! 10, it is day!”


The poet seized her hand, “Hurry! Hurry!’ he urged.
She hardly had time to thank Queen Trania before she
felt herself sailing through the air.
They landed by the open window of her bedroom and the
poet helped her into the room.
“Farewell, farewell
I weave the magic spell.
If you are wise
You’ll stay your size.
Farewell, farewell, farewell,’’ he sang.
“Goodbye, poet,’’ she called over her shoulder as she ran
to her bed. She snuggled under the sheets just as Polly, the
maid, entered the room.
Polly raised the blind and drew the curtains, then came
and stood by Christy-ann’s bed.
“I’ve a great surprise for you,’’ she said. Last night the
fairies brought you a darling little baby brother.’’
Christy-ann sat up. “So he’s here,’’ she cried happily. “I
knew he was coming. I even know what he looks like. He
has a merry little face, a turned up nose, brown eyes and his
black hair hangs over his forehead. I sent him.’’
Polly said, “What rot!’’ But then, Polly has never used
her imagination-box, so it is rusty and cannot be opened.


' / i i 1
|/\
(wSrd /
kL v


Registered at the General Post Office,
Brisbane, for Transtnisison Through
the Post as a Book.


f »
I
♦ \
i I
x * ) *
\
■
' •
■


■ : v ■ ■ v ■ ■ .■
,
*
' i ' ' . / • 1 • ' • ■ I
, • v • * », , , > ■ ! " - '
f ■ *• ".V v* r y A 5 « v » k, t y*y v • #’
■ ■ A $ .* Hi •$’ '■ ft $ ®! ’ I I . U,
.
i 4 A A . •> A ? '; ;■ ;*•... - ■ fl f.
j** .: "/ V' v ; > , v ■ n. ' ; ■> - , s^c:,^gysir^ s *«u-.- h.^Wm
a ; ; /> / ' ■ I ■*• > j -' 4; • v'' ; ■ ' t ■ r v*3«v r ' ''X kg '•'. v '-/V'
A
v ‘ ' :■ > ;■ : _ 4 ' iji ■,, ■ :., '■ -■■ -, ■' , ■■ ., -_
i*'. ! ' ■. >/ * i <- , , ‘it- ’ ' Y 1 k.iA ■.*..' ■ ■ 'w ., ,. - ' yk *\ [„?' <i ifa- V,
’V / ,i{ - l . I , ■■ I ' ' . v i' i \ ■ ’■ ■" ..• .■■' V -1
■ ‘fj 1 - f ■’ i ? v’ » ’ ?-a !; /’£! \ ■ : *\ f: . i\U y- |.
■ . / 7 * 7 ■. > \ h » \ \ ■ . (»;_ i. '■• \ |i
f
■•■■ ■ ■■ . ■ ■ ' •.■■'■■• ' ■ •'
' i ' '• "■•V‘ • i ' \ A .'V i '■ -*5 >; \ . / ?// % ; S W Jf < * ' p
. \ ! v ‘ « •> ' : k t fc-
' » - - _ ■ 1 • ; ; ’ f?
' ,yy fV-? v.-V s,
' l,nu 1 >
< > 4 iV -' 1 ' ‘ i / » ' . ' V \ , . v \s - '
'• M - '
, , • •• , ‘ ; v ' ' ■: * ' / |
■ - ,v '' , . ■■
' * "\% ' , '.'T. \ I , \ f [ A * 9
>, ■ ■ s •. ; if* <
\ . ’ ' r ' "• ■ ’ ' . . I
' \ ■•■•, A;\> , ’ * /V • 1 .. . I
■v \ *,\ l> '< v - f |;AAA AAI
A' A lv - ; 'v ’ ■ • * v > ' "< • ' *’v-. - ,■'!'■ i| ; A ■ j
■■ , '■■ • ' . ■ '
1flA'i ’AAA p S-am^
■
