

C.ei»lciOw'i i’AMS
Box Cj
CHRISTIAN ENTHUSIASM:
A Sermon by the Rev. CHARLES STANFORD, D.D.
( Transcribed from the “ Phonographic Pulpitvol. vi.)
Galatians ii. 20—“ I am crucified with Christ: neverthless I live ; yet not T, hut
Christ liveth in me : and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of
the Son of God, who loved me and gave Himself for me.”
In the course of a speech in the House of Lords not long since,
made with a view to cast the blame of certain disturbances in China
on the Christian missionaries there, and to show if possible that
their presence in such a land must always imperil the peace of
nations, it was said that, from the very necessity of the case, every
such missionary must either be a rogue or an enthusiast.
“An enthusiast!” We are willing to endorse, and even to pro-
claim, the second part of this dictum.
We look, however, at the structure of the word, take it in its
first meaning, and understand it to point out a man possessed by
the Spirt of God. True, usage, not etymology, determines the pre-
sent meaning of most words. But even usage sanctions the first
high meaning wo still retain for this word, although it sometimes
allows it to be desecrated for the conveyance of a base meaning.
Far back in time, an enthusiast was the most honoured of mortals.
When the tabernacle was set up, and a man of genius most rare
and exquisite was wanted for certain work in it that should stand
for a thousand years, and symbolize in various ways the glorious
truths into which angels desire to look, God called an enthusiast, and
said, “ See, I have called by name Bezalel, the son of Uriah, of the
tribe of Judah, and I have filled him with the Spirit of God, in wis-
dom, and in understanding, and in all manner of workmanship ; to
devise cunning works, to work in gold and in silver and in brass,
and in cutting of stone and in carving of timber. ”
Under the phrase “a man in whom the Spirit of God is,”
when Pharaoh wanted a chancellor, he sent for an enthusiast ;
when the King of Babylon, wanted a revealer of secrets, he sent
for an enthusiast—the Jew Daniel. In the judgment of the
ancients, any great and splendid miracle of poetry, or eloquence,
or art, was possible only to an enthusiast ; and we feel justified,
on grounds more solid, in expecting to find clear, calm intellect,
safe sound sense, and all the qualities that make a practical man in
the highest degree, only in one who is in the highest sense an
enthusiast, having all needful natural powers interpenetrated and
glorified by the Spirit of God.
On this account we take this word, we appropriate the word “ en-
thusiast,” so often flung at the missionary in scornful disparagement,
and we apply it to him in reverential praise, as a distinction that


marks a man, not like a brand of shame, but like a star of glory. And
no lower Qualification can be sufficient to fit anyone for the high
vocation of a Christian missionary. Whom shall the Lord send and
who will go for Him ? —or, being already in his place at home, who
is most likely, by representative agency to spread the truth abroad
in the best way ? The passive, neutral, respectable, the indolent,
selfish, tame, dull, average religionist > The mere doctrinist, whose
faiths, instead of being alive and part of himself are, like dry botan-
ical preparations, classified and kept in a book ? The man whose
religion is matter of social decorum, or safe investment, or cold
prudential instinct ? the man who studies hard to find how little he
can give, or be, or do, or suffer for Christ, and yet be safe ? —the
slothful man who, when a shadow moves, or a leaf rustles, says,
“ There is a lion in the way? ” —the timid man who follows Christ
afar off, makes his profession of faith under shelter, and travels in
the Christian way with slow, cautious, creeping steps ? No, all these
must be cleared out of the way. A century ago the first Lord
Lansdowne asked what he could possibly do to reform the profli-
gate people of Caine, and even the Arian, Dr. Price, said, “ Send
them an enthusiast.” It was sound advice. Only an enthusiast is
likely to be a divinely successful missionary to heathen abroad
or heathen at home. A man is wanted who is not only better
than other men are, but better than himself—a man who can say,
“ I am crucified with Christ : nevertheless I live ; yet not I, but
Christ liveth in me : and the life which I now live in the flesh I
live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave Him-
self for me.” Until we think through sentences like these, we do
not know how language can startle us with its intensity, what light-
ning can be flashed into one burning phrase, or what a world of
meaning can be shot into one word. It is the utterance of an
enthusiast, telling what an enthusiast is.
Let us try, the Spirit of Grace helping us, to bring out, thought
by thought, some of the thoughts contained in these words of
revelation, that so, whether our lives are to be spent in this or any
other land, we may be more effectual missionaries of Christ’s holy
gospel.
The first thing I see in this passage is that the enthusiasm after
which we should aspire is possible under great natural disadvantages.
The Apostle sets this before us in the line, “ The life that I now
live in the flesh.” Assuming this epistle to have been written from
Rome, if a stranger had stepped into Paul’s “hired house ” just at
the moment when these words were in the balance of expression,
when the scribe, with the inkhorn, was writing down these
words for him, I think he would have seen there, standing in the
lamp-light, a little, frail, bent old man, “Jew ” written in every line
of his keen, quivering face ; his bald head just fringed with grey
hair, an iron chain on his wrist, and perhaps a green shade drawn
over his eyes ; and what would have first met the view would have
been what the apostolical enthusiast means by the “ flesh.”
That flesh it was, of which the Corinthians spoke so slightingly


when they said—“ His bodily presence is weak, and his speech
contemptible “ the flesh ” that crushed his spirit until he cried
out, “ We that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened ; ”
“ the flesh” that always had “ a thorn in itthe shivering “ flesh”
that in the long, raw night so missed the “ cloak ” that was left at
Troas. The Apostle speaks of it here, and always, as you would
speak of a tenement in which you are living now, but in which you
will not be living long—the dilapidated hovel of humanity, that
house of life about which an old poet sings—
‘ ‘ The soul’s dark cottage, battered and decayed,
Lets in new light through chinks that time has made. ”
He always draws this clear and sharp distinction between himself
and his flesh—a distinction that is so wrought into the very texture
of his argument, that we are unable to treat it as a mere figure of
speech to decorate the surface. Distinct as the lamp from the
light—distinct as the nest from the bird—distinct as the ship from
the passenger —distinct as the house from the tenant —so distinct,
according to his imagery, is the flesh from the spirit. It is he
who has taught a suffering disciple to say, “ The suffering frame is
mine, but it is not myself. That is old, lam young ; that is weak,
I am strong ; that is ill, lam well. I wait for the redemption of
the body, but lam already redeemed. This arm has lost its elastic
strength, and 1 am sorry for the arm ; but the limbs are not the
life. lam learning to live without them, and when the right time
comes, 1 shall be able, quite naturally, to see without the old retina,
and hear without these ears, and move without this mechanism of
motion.”
Regarding the flesh, however, as a mere transitional contrivance
and a medium or instrument of life just for the present, it was
hard for an enthusiast to live in flesh like that of Paul. He
suffered so much from his eyes, that when he was amongst even the
rough Galatians, to whom he was now writing, they felt so much
for him that they would have been willing in their impulsiveness,
“to pluck out their own eyes and give them to him.” He suffered
so much from his hands, that when his great heart was full,
and he longed, in a glorious hurry of love to dash off a mis-
sionary letter to some distant station, he was unable to hold the
pen. He suffered so much from his shattered nerves, that his first
appearance before strangers was “ with weakness, and fear, and
much trembling.” Who can always be calm, and wise, and bold,
have a commanding presence, secure a fascinated silence, and do
the work of an enthusiast, when he always works in weakness ;
when pain, with its rough, rasping saw, is for ever crashing through
the sensibilities ; when the smallest frictional touches can sting
the life to agony ?
Yet such was Paul’s lot. The flesh in which he lived was tired
and full of pain ; it asked for sleep ; it seemed to need a home of
happy tenderness. It might have inclined him to say, “Let
me be still. Oh, my Lord, send, I pray Thee, by the hand of


him whom Thou shouldst send.” But he never consulted the
flesh—he always kept it under orders. Regarding his mis-
sionary work not as pastoral, but as evangelistic, as soon as it
was done in any place, and a church was planted, whatever the
flesh might feel, Paul went to some other place. When Crispus,
tlxe ruler of the synagogue, Erastus, the chamberlain of the
city, and Gaius, that hearty, genial gentleman, made the
place pleasant, we hear him say, “Ihave no more place in these
parts. ” Leaving the Corinthian Church to Corinthian pastors, he
went to preach the gospel in the regions beyond. Difficulties
chased other men from their stations—comforts chased Paul from
his. Mortal pains and fainting fits seemed only to kindle his
enthusiasm to greater activity, for they reminded him that his
time for working on earth would be short ; and when he was
uttering the words, “ The life that 1 now live in the fiesh,” I think
he placed a solemn emphasis on the word “ now. ” Now, for I only
live now ; now, for this point of time between two eternities is the
only point of time that I am sure of ; now, for the flesh is already
giving way ; now, for perhaps it may be now or never.
When we look at the text again, we learn, in the next place, that
the enthusiasm must be maintained by continued faith in Christ.
Paul goes on to say, “ The life I now live in the flesh I live by the
faith of the Son of God.” “ The Son of God ”is one of the
names of God. It means, we have been told, “ God of God. ”
No words of ours, however, can explain its meaning with scientific
precision, for no words of ours can, in this sense, make the inde-
finite, definite. It is sufficient for practical purposes to say that it
is the name of God as He is revealed in the person of Jesus Christ.
Christ is our life.
How His life is made to be at the same time our own is
a mystery of grace of which you have seen types in the garden,
where just now so many millions of God’s thoughts are spring-
ing and growing into beautiful expression. You once grafted
something on to a fruit tree. The process, though delicate, was
most simple. You only had to be careful that there should be
clean, clear, close contact between the graft and the tree. The
smallest shred or filament of wrapping round the graft would have
prevented the life of the tree from flowing into it. The weak,
bleeding graft was fastened on to the strong stem just as it was ;
then in due time it struck ; then gradually the tiny slip grew into
the flourishing bough ; and lately, as you stood looking at that
miracle of tender formation and soft bright flush, you almost
fancied it was conscious. It seemed to say—“l live, nevertheless not
I, but the tree that liveth in me : and the life I now live in the
foliage I live by faith in the shaft of the tree. I trust to the
tree only ; every moment I am clinging to it, and without it I can
do nothing. ” Perhaps it may seem out of keeping for me to use
this parable from the garden to represent faith. It will seem to
you out of keeping with the life of grace—the notion of that life
as a burning flame —as a passionate, fervent life. It may help us,


nevertheless, to understand the principle of life by faith. Still, if
you please, call it a burning enthusiasm ; but still remember that
it was in Christ before it was in you, and that it comes from Him
into you by faith in Him.
The perpetual transfusion of that Divine Spirit is possible
only through perpetual faith. 1 think that, in these words,
Paul here asserts the constancy of faith quite as plainly as
he does the constancy of the life that he lives by it. Exercising
faith day by day, he said on another occasion, “ Though our
outward man perisheth, yet our inward man is renewed day by
day,” thus teaching me to say—“ The grace that I have this
morning I had new this morning, through faith this morning. J
live now, through faith now.” We are naturally most reluctant to
maintain such an attitude of dependence, and to breathe such a
spirit of humility. “ The old fable of Prometheus,” as one has
told us, “shows how man would, if he could, steal the fire of the
Supreme, so as to live apart from and independent of Him. ” But
no ! —we must ask for it every day if we would have it every day.
We must pray without ceasing, if we would have light in our
breasts, a tire like that which always burned in David Brainard,
in answer to his faith’s constant cry, “ Oh, that I might be a
flaming fire in the service of my God.”
In the third place, we have here the declaration of a man whose
enthusiasm for Christ was heightened by the consciousness that he
was personally loved by Christ.
The great missionary goes on to say, “I live by the faith of the
Son of God, who loved me.” To one man the name God means
a force ; to another, fate ; to another man it means a spiritual
terror ; but to me, if I have Paul’s faith, it means a tender, con-
stant, glorious, infinite Friend, revealed to me under the name of
Jesus Christ. He loved me, and His infinite perfection never
changes—He loves me still, and will love me for ever. Yes, He loves
me. In his sight lam not a mere human cypher ;in His universe
I have not only a number but a name. He calls me by name, and
leads me out. He puts His hand upon me, and even now my soul
is vibrating to His touch. He walks with me in my Galilee ; He
sails with me in my poor boat; He often shows me on which side it
will be best for me to throw my net. His voice, falling upon the
tempest of my cares, stills them into perfect peace. The words of
love written by Him in this book are to myself personally, and I
can understand, through sympathetic insight, the meaning of that
disciple who said—“ lam persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things
to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able
to separate Hugh Kennedy from the love of God which is in Jesus
Christ our Lord. ”
It is impossible for a poor dweller in the flesh to feel that
he is himself so highly graced, so deeply loved by Christ, and
not be an enthusiast for Christ. He will say, “ I know the Lord—
there is but one. Does He want me ? May Igo on one of His


missions ? Lord, here am I : send me. To think that I should
ever sadly grieve Thy spirit, be dull to hear Thy voice, or slow
to do Thy will ! I will follow Thee into the serpent-haunted Avilder-
ness, or through the crowd of human furies. Only try me ; set
me to make some painful sacrifice, or do some daring thing. Bid
me come to Thee on the water, and see if I will not make the ven-
ture.”
“Yes,” says some worldly-wise man, “that is just what I
say ; your enthusiast is not a safe man ; he is not fit to be trusted
with affairs requiring delicate and careful judgment.” This we
deny. Such a man will sometimes fall into a mistake and be hurried
away into some sublime extravagance or noble rage ; but the blun-
ders caused by enthusiasm are nothing compared with those caused
by the want of it; and the most imprudent things done in the
church are done, not by its Edward Irvings, but under the influ-
ence of what are called “ prudent men”—men who never fling their
souls into great movements, who never feel the rapture of a grand
passion, who never favour a new thing ; spiritual refrigerators—
advisers, who pass for safe and wise mainly because a love has not
made them enthusiasts. In God’s affairs we act with soundest policy
when we act with most enthusiasm. Enthusiasm will not be wild-
fire, it will not be rash eccentricity, it will not be an explosive
matter likely to work mischief in the church or the world when it
is a love—a love kindled by Christ. “Strong Son of God, immortal
Love,” how can any evil come out of great love to Thee !
We observe again, that the enthusiasm here confessed is gloriously
roused by thankfulness to God for His unspeakable gift. That
gift of God is nothing less than God Himself. “He gave Himself
for me,” continues the apostle. The very life of God is one
glorious and perpetual giving of Himself away. This giving of
Himself is the only revelation of Himself. He never reveals Him-
self, never asserts Himself, but through this endless and infinite
flow of munificence. We never see Him, except we see Him giving
—the sun giving rays of glory, the fountain giving waters of life.
When, out of the light unapproachable of the one Godhead, there
emerge to us any revelation of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, these three are revealed by means of a giving. God giving
Himself to lost men as the Author of the gospel, is the Father ;
God, giving Himself through the miracle of the incarnation, to
accomplish the fact of the gospel, is the Son; God, giving
Himself to work by mystic influence on human hearts to make the
gospel effectual, is the Holy Spirit. In this and every other
revelation of God we only see Him in some act or process of giving
Himself away for some purpose of eternal righteousness or love.
Only let it be understood that though God gives Himself to us,
He does not force Himself upon us. It is in our power to make
“ the grand refusaland this the unbeliever does. There must be
a receiving as well as a giving, and it is only the joyful receiver of
the gift who can say, “He hath loved me and given Himself for
me.” This fact is adapted to arouse the enthusiasm of munificent


generosity. It furnishes us with a royal law, by which to regulate
all our Christian giving. Christians, Christ gave Himself to you ;
then give yourselves to Christ. Give! Give! Give! Give love,
give thought, give speech, give time, give the best of your best,
give from your hearts outwards. Sometimes in the course of the
collector’s rounds we meet with questions something like this —
“ I should be sorry to be singular ; what shall I give ? What is
usual? What will be expected of me?” The answer is, “What
man expects is no concern of ours ; but the least that Christ
expects is that as He gave Himself to you, you should give
yourself to Him.” Do that and you will find, by a Christian rule,
sure and fine as instinct, what is your own share in the financial
part of the enterprise. For your sakes, and not for His own,
Christ allows you to have such a share.
We are not sufficiently sensitive to the grace of this arrange-
ment. Some persons give to the mission fund as if they were
paying a rate, or conferring a favour; as if they only half believed
that Christ has ordained the money power as one of the powers ol
His cause ; as if, in travelling from place to place, the journey of
a missionary costs nothing more than the flight of an angel ; as if the
Philip of to-day might be “ caught away by the Spirit of the Lord,”
and then suddenly “ found at Azotus as if bills could be paid by
devout emotions or declamatory words ; as if lives could be
sustained on mere air ; as if ravens might be expected to bring
food to fainting prophets ; as if God had not ordained the system of
instrumentality ; as if miracles of Providence might be expected to
provide for the ministers of grace. But this is not God’s manner
of working. You are to furnish material supplies for moral
apparatus ; you are invited to make your very gold and silver
evangelical, and to cast it into the treasury in the spirit of the new
song—“ Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive riches.”
Think of the “ unsearchable riches ” covered under the great name
“ God and hear the touching question, “I have given all this to
thee—what hast thou given to Me ?”
We find, in the next place, that the utterer of these words felt
free to serve Christ enthusiastically, because, in Christ, he had
already suffered the punishment due to sin. “I am crucified with
Christ*” he says. He has just been telling us that he is dead to
the law, and now' he goes on to tell us that he was put to death in
this mystical manner. He, God, gave Himself for us, gave Himself
to be crucified. He took up our nature, just as it was, with the
burden on it, and so gave Himself to us and for us. From the
moment the angels’ song died away, He w r as always giving, until
He gave Himself to be crucified, and thus He consummated His
gift ; and even God could give no more. “ Now,” says St. Paul,
“ I am crucified with Christ.”
What does He mean by crucifixion ? In the word crucifixion
we find an inner and outer meaning—a soul and a body—spirit of
fact and matter of fact. As to the spirit of the wmrd crucifixion,
it means death for sin—death by open, awful, shameful, excru-


dating, uttermost infliction of punishment. The material cruci-
fixion was only the symbol of all this. Every sinner ought to be
crucified, and sooner or later, in one way or the other, under the
rule of righteous omnipotence, what ought to be, will be. But, by
an arrangement which we should have never thought of, and which
is the pure creation of infinite wisdom, having no analogy among
things finite, the sinner who trusts Christ is treated as if crucified
with Christ—crucified in the person of his representative. When
the accuser says to him —“ Sinner, you have to be crucified
through all eternity,” he can say—“No, I have been crucified
already ; I was crucified more than eighteen hundred years ago—
that is over and done with ; ‘it is finished.’ The law has had its
course ; mine is not a sentenced nature now.”
Many a man recollects the exalted moment when first he felt this.
Perhajis you do. Perhaps one day when your soul was shot through
by some great sorrow, yet when it thrilled with keenest life ; when
you felt your own eternity ; when for the first time you saw
sin, and knew that you deserved to die for it; when, in an agony,
you made the great venture and flung yourself on Christ: then, just
then, when life was collected into a point, while you were looking
to Jesus, you had a distinct assurance that the punishment for your
sin was exhausted when your Saviour died, and that the form on
the cross was yours— yours, yet not yours ; yours in Jesus. Ever
since then you have known yourself to be crucified with Christ,
and have felt free to be an enthusiast in Christ’s cause.
Sir Walter Raleigh, to found a gold mine at Guiana for the king,
went out on his last voyage under an unremitted sentence of death
that had been passed upon him fifteen years before. No wonder
that the magnetic consciousness of a sword dangling over him by a
hair should benumb his brain, distract his faculties, and turn his
enterprise into a long tangle of blunders and calamities ! Pity the
adventurer who goes out on a missionary voyage under an unre-
mitted sentence of death—the preacher of Christ crucified who is
himself yet to be crucified—the worker for Christ who works under
the shadow of his own cross—the man in chains who preaches
liberty to the captive! We are moved to say to him, “ Weep
not for others—weep for yourself ; spare your pity for others
—pity yourself. Trust Christ yourself; be safe yourself ; then
go out into the wilderness after that which is lost.”
Even when a person is really safe, but is not sure of his safety,
he will not work well ; at best, much of his time will be wasted,
and much of his spirit spent in mere inspection of self, or mere
perusal of evidence ; and while uncertain of his own interest in
Christ, it will be impossible for him to be an enthusiast for Christ.
Dispirited and terrified evangelists, mournful tellers of joyful
tidings, you are strangely inconsistent! It is not the Father’s
will that you should go on His errands of love with all that
weight of uncertainty at your hearts. He never meant his birds
and insects to feel more light and free than His children do.
You have watcher! the lark flying upward from the grass, waver,


and thrill higher and higher, till lost in the blinding glory of the
morning ; then, mounting higher and higher you have heard it
rain down music over the earth, fresh and lightsome as the spirit
of the spring. If God so fills the little birds with gladness, will He
not much more gladden you, Oye of little faith ? Why are you
not lighthearted ? Provision is made for it. You are trusting in
Christ, are you not 1 Then, of course, you have been crucified
already. You are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.
Grasp this great happinness. Dare to say, “I am crucified with
Christ.” Then, the ban lifted, the burden gone, and death
for ever passed—no more awaking fears or undefined misgivings,
you will be free to ring through the world the joyful music of the
Saviour’s name.
Observe still further, that the enthusiasm we advocate, while it
brings out distinctiveness, tends to overpower self-consciousness.
It inspires the confession, “ I live ; yet not I, but Christ that
liveth in me.” Self-consciousness, everyone knows, is a symptom.
If, while the setting sun lights the Alpine valley into a conflagra-
tion of glorious colours, the eye is conscious of itself ; if, amidst the
most delicious magic of music, the ear is conscious of itself ; if we
feel the heart to be conscious of its own heart-beats, we know that
there is something wrong with the body : and if, amidst Christ’s
work in the world any one of Christ’s workmen is prevalently con-
scious of himself, there is something wrong with that man’s soul.
Souls are dying of the pest that betrays its presence in this way.
It makes one victim suffer hunger for praise, and another to have
such a rage for publicity that he would rather stand in a pillory than
not be seen. Eratostratus could not build a temple, but he could
burn one—therefore he burnt the great temple of Diana rather
than die with his name unknown ! Thousands of lives are wearing
out through giving an emphasis of attention to themselves, greater
than they themselves can bear.
Even conversion will not at once annihilate self-consciousness ;
and where it has been the master sin before the vital change, it
will be the most harassing sin after it, the sin that most wars
against the soul ; the sin that, allowed to have its own course, will
make love itself die away into selfish sentimentalism, or degenerate
into a morbid vanity. What shall be done for the irritable egotist I
for the spiritual invalid, always needing a nurse ? for the sufferer
who has always just been stung by unkind words, like burning
arrows —arrows whose heads, jagged and broken in, will perhaps
prick and rankle in the soul for years 1 What shall be done to
help the sensitive Christian man who is for ever hurt, for ever
misunderstood, for ever slighted, for ever suspicious of being
suspected 1 and the sensitive Christian woman, who for ever
thinks her husband is so dealt with ?
There is no cure for self-consciousness but such enthusiasm as
St. Paul had. You must learn to say, “‘ I live ; yet not I, but
Christ that liveth in me. ’ I lived through the critical effects of
last week’s trial; yet ‘ not I ’ —l could never have done it—-but


Christ that lived in me. I take up my cross daily, and glory in
infirmities, and witness a good confession ; yet ‘ not I, but Christ
that liveth in me’—my mind is so filled with a divine light, my
heart with a divine love, and my working faculties with a divine
strength.” There are golden hours in the history of human
friendship, when hearts will so expand, affections so flame up and
commingle, that the spirits in fellowship, losing something of the
consciousness of separate personality, seem to interfuse each other
with the glow and glory of one life, and one friend lives in the
other. There are golden hours in the history of the friendship
between Christ and His disciples, when the energies of the will
are bent to associate themselves with His will, when the sinner
loses himself in the Saviour, and there is the submergence of self
in the divine perfection.
Oh, we must try for this ! We never shall be happy till we
have it—never enthusiasts. The degree in which we can say,
“Christ liveth in us,” the degree in which we are conscious of
Christ, will be the degree in which we cease to be conscious of
ourselves. As you have that, you will be able to work without
witnesses, to be independent of what man thinks, as is Niagara,
and, like the sun, to shine without waiting for praise. You will
not care even for your left hand to know what your right hand
does. It will be the same to you whether you are thought
nothing of or much of ; whether you work in obscurity or publicity.
Let this be your prayer—“ Dwell in my heart by faith, O Christ.”
“ Come in, O gracious force, I say !
Oh, Workman, share my shed of clay !
Then I, at bench, or desk, or oar,
With last, or needle, net, or pen,
As Thou, in Nazareth of yore,
Shall do the Father’s will again.”
The final phrase of the text, as now read, reveals to us the
secret of thepporerw r er and of the success that belong to enthusiasm,
“ Christ liveth in me.” The missionary needs two kinds of power.
The first is, the power that belongs to fit instrumentality. We
may imagine a dialogue like this between him and the secularist ;
“ What instrumentality are you using to effect what you call the
salvation of the world ?” “We preach Christ crucified. ” “ ‘Christ
crucified!’ Foolishness! You never mean that?” “Yes, Ido.
The preaching of the cross is to them that perish, foolishness ; but
unto us who are saved it is the power of God.” It is the chosen
instrument for the conveyance of His saving power ; all others are
non -conductors.
The second kind of power that the missionary needs is the
power that belongs to enthusiasm. If we have any vital efficiency,
it is only because Christ lives in us by the influence of His Holy
Spirit; or, in other words, we nmst be “ inspirited with the Holy
Spirit.”
Let a minister be able to say, “ I preach Christ, Christ only,
Christ crucified, Christ the Saviour, to everyone who consents by


faith to be treated as if crucified with Christ.” Let him preach
this while Christ lives in him, lives in his principles, lives in his
prayers, lives in his tempers, lives in his words ; and that man is
charged with the power of God. This power left out of calculation,
we have no hope for the conversion of the heathen. When we see
such a large part of the world now without a knowledge of Christ ;
when we look, dazzled, at India ; when we allow our thoughts to go
in search after Livingstone ; when we think of the nations and
tribes of equatorial Africa ; when, eager to preach the gospel to
people that sit in darkness, we find in some instances, as soon as
we reach them, that they have no words in existence equal to its
expression, the words for the new ideas having yet to be invented ;
when, in the very focus of creative action, amid waving palms,
wondrous flowers, miraculous revelations of the beautiful, and
under “ the innocent brightness of each new-born day,” we see
human life stained with depravity so vile, that the sight of it arouses
to an agony every power we have, in condemnation of the sinner,
and in sympathy with the God he sins against ; when we look at
these facts, we stand stunned with thoughts about the vast amount
of work that yet has to be done before the earth can be “ covered
with the glory of the Lord as the waters cover the deep.”
Although out, at God’s command, to do God’s work in the world,
by God’s appointed instrument, and in God’s strength, it would be
no wonder to me to find that there are moments of unbelief, when
facts like these seem as if they must kill the heart of a missionary,
and make him say in his remote solitude —“ It is enough. I must
give up ; it is of no use trying to make an impression on this
infinite wall of dead resistance, for I am no more able to stir
it than ‘ a fly can stir a pyramid.’ ” That would be no wonder
to me ; but what I do really wonder at is that anyone should
think that man can do the great work wanted without the
gospel, and without God ; that anyone should smile in proud
compassion at the folly of those who try to do it by the gospel,
and yet have no better substitute to offer for the gospel than
lectures on ice, or on dust, or on the principles of utility, or
on the structure of the human hand, or on the great stone book
of nature ; that anyone should believe that by human laws and
human literature, by the mere leverage of human power, and
the mere magic of civilization, the world can be lifted up from
its ruin, and its kennels of degradation turned into abodes of
peace ! lam ready to say to such a person, “ Oh, man, great is
thy faith ! Such belief in miracles, such fantastic knight-errantry,
such wild romance of expectation, we never meet with in our
company of believers —your faith makes our greatest faith look
little.”
I assume that no man worthy of the name of a man can look at
the heathen without trying to do something for them. Even if he
should not believe in a hell hereafter, he will, as sure as he has a
heart, try to save them from their hell now. It would be inhuman
not to try. Enthusiasts alone can succeed in this enterprise. We


want men like the apostles of Greenland and the fathers at Seram-
pore—men like Stephen Greeley, Richard Knill, Bishop Patteson,
John Hunt, William Burns, and others like-minded, known or
unknown on earth ; men on fire, men full of God, men who, by
the power of God living in them, can “ remove mountains,”
“ trample on impossibilities,” burn their way through tangled
wildernesses, and startle up dead nations with the gospel cry,
“ 0 earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord ! ”
Let me, in conclusion, earnestly implore you all from this time
to seek that enthusiasm of which I have been speaking. Oh, be
ashamed that you have no more of it. Spirits ! where are you ?
Souls ! saved souls ! souls that tremble with the flame of resistless,
tender compassion for the lost ! souls full of the spirit of God,
where are you ? I speak to souls ! Souls are looking at me through
those eyes, listening to me through those ears. Spirit ! spirit ! I
speak to you ! Can you say, before God, that “the life you now
live in the flesh you live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved
and gave Himself for you?” Can you say that? How can you,
unless you show more enthusiasm in the future than you have
done in the past ? Oh ! brethren, many of us humbly love Christ,
but few of us have reached that higher style of the Christian life
that deserves to be called enthusiasm—shall we not begin to-day ?
What must be said to those who have not even yet commenced a
life of faith in the Son of God ? Neglectors of the great salvation I
why do you neglect ? Is it because you are so occupied that you
have no time to give it attention ? But, behind the veil, behind the
veil, there is One, who, though He is giving attention every moment
to infinite millions of things, has found time to “ love you, and give
Himself for you.” Is it that you are benumbed, and weary with age
and care ? Then you mean to say that you have spent a long life in
refusing the love of Jesus ' Mark you ! the “ flesh ”in which you
now live is breaking up ; you will not have the offer of that love
much longer. You are dropping into a fatal sleep. Sleeper in the
snow ! arouse yourself, hurry to Him for refuge while He may be
found ! His door is not shut yet. Is it because you are young and
wish to know the world before you renounce it ? and just once to
feel the keen, sharp joys with which sinful novelties promise to
thrill your young life ? Is this moment a point of pause and hesi-
tation? This way, child ! —cometo Jesus! Come while you are young,
before you “ labour and are heavy laden.” Christ calls the young
to-day ! Spirit of youthful daring, sparkle of youthful hilarity,
tension of youthful nerve, young thought, young love, young hope;
let these powers be consecrated to Christ, and Christ will live in
them all, and make them all His own powers, working to accomplish
His purposes of salvation ! “ Who, then, is willing to consecrate his
services this day unto the Lord ? ”
“ Now unto Him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above
all that we ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us,
unto Him be glory in the church by Christ Joi«s, throughout all
ages, world without end. Amen.”
Walter May & Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop-street, Melbourne.
