

Christianity's Challenge
to Australia at War.
By REV. DAVID F. BRANDT, Chalmers Church,
SYDNEY, N.S.W.
These Sermons were preached in Chalmers Presbyterian Church,
Sydney, during February, 1916, and are published by the Managers
of that Church by special request of the Congregation.
C. Chalcraft, Printer, 123 Regent Street, Sydney.




Christianity’s Challenge to Australia at War.
AUSTRALIA UP TO AUGUST, 1914.
PREFACE.
We must all feel to-day that we are living in an entirely different at-
mosphere to what we were a few months ago. Then we were in peace and
probably many amongst us deemed our position to be absolutely safe —to-day it
seems as if our very foundations were being shaken. Our newspapers have
room for little else but War new r s, and the serious portion of our people have
little heart to read anything else but War News. This is all because in
August, 1914, news was flashed to us, that Britain had declared war against
Germany. At the time we were stunned —could it be true? Britain at
war, and above all, against Germany, whom we looked upon as foster-brother —
the Kaiser was blood relation with our own King. It must either be a mis-
take, or the proverbial ” (Storm in a tea cup.” But since then, we have
learned much, we know now to our cost, that Germany was not at that
time, nor had been for many years, our friend, but a scheming, plotting
nation —ruled by the mailed list of an accursed Prussian Militarism —long pre-
paring for war, and during the years of preparation, casting down JEHOVAH
and setting up MAMMON. Who wall forget that memorable August, 1914?
Surely none of us, and so long as we can recite it to our children, they wall
not forget it.
1 well remember what a staggering blow' it was to me. I wag at the
time in an important inland town in South Australia, and coming up the
street, after hearing the news, I met a stern professional gentleman of the
towm. He was a noble fellow of German origin, and with tears in his
eyes he staggered towards me, and said, “It’s awful.” In those days we
had no time to mediate, we could only rush men to the frontier, and make
such hurried preparations as w r ere necessary, but to-day, after eighteen months
of war, we have had time to take stock, and now' I want to ask the ques-
tion: What w’ere the conditions in Australia up to that time? August, 1914,
closes a chapter in our history. We will never be the same again.


SERMON No. 1.
AUSTRALIA AS IT WAS.
1. In this awful world conflict, Australia is challenged by Christianity.
We find now, that our only hope is in God. The man, who by this time,
has not learned that, is an absolute dullard. The difference between us and
our great Enemy, is, that we are influenced in tlie conflict by the powers of
Righteousness, they are influenced by the powers of Hell. Thus our cry to-day
is, that the principles of Christianity shall prevail, and that the world shall
be saved from the domination of horrid cruelty and anti-Christ. If we thus
appeal, and surely we do—for no one among us dares to say, that as far as
we are concerned, this is ought but a righteous war—we must be (prepared
to submit to CHRISTIANITY’S RIGHT TO CHALLENGE OUR ACTIONS,
AND MODE OF LIVING BOTH IN THE PAST AND PRESENT. We desire
to come out of this great conflict, and we believe we will, a purified sifted
people. Whatever else the war is doing for us, we believe that God is puri-
fying us by its means, and we cannot reap the full benefit of that purification,
neither can we submit to the pains of the chastening of God, nor any more
can we stand peaceful before God, after the conflict is over, unless the past
be confessed. The prodigal son stood peaceful and happy in the full glow
of his father’s love when he returned from his afflictions, because he said,
‘I have sinned against Heaven and in thy sight,” and we hope and believe
that when the war is over and the voice of tumult is stilled, that this fair
Austral land will stand purified before God, but ere that happy day .comes,
we are continually being challenged by Christianity, and the voice rings out
its question: What of your past? Were you entirely faithrul to God? Did
you walk blamelessly before Him? Did you honour Him in your living, and
worship Him with your whole heart? We dare not resent the challenge,
neither can we refuse to answer it, not only because we are appealing i
righteousness shall prevail, but because hitherto, and in all the affairs' of
national interest, we have claimed to be a Christian nation, and we surely
cannot resent being challenged by the power, whose name we have taken as a
national garb and cloak.
2. There can be no doubt, that the war found us unprepared, from a
military standpoint; we had made absolutely no provision for meeting an
invader. True enough, in the very last years we had instituted a wise system
of compulsory training on the part of our lads, and what effect that would
have had on the nation in future years, we can only surmise. At any rate,
August, i 914, found us totally unprepared—and why? Was it because we,’as
Christians, were totally opposed to anything military? I think not. We are
of the true British Stock, and Britain a professedly Christian Nation with
much faithful Christian records in her favour, has ever been a military people
forced to defend and maintain the little group of Isles that lie like jewels in
the North Sea. And, we as Britons, took as our heritage, this Australia, this
Greater Britain in the Southern Seas. We took it in God’s name, from. a
black and heathen race. Did we take it in a selfish spirit? It is a choice
land, fertile, and is capable of great production. Did we take it that we might
use its great fertility to enable us to eat, drink and be merry, and surfeit
our souls in licentious selfishness? If we did, we not only deserve to be
chastened by God, but we deserve to be wiped off the face of the land as
cumberers of the ground. We set up the barrier of a ”, White Australia,”
*nd why did we do it? If it was to keep our race pure and clean, that
we might all the better be fitted to work out an important destiny, then all
is well, but alongside of that, and most certainly inseparable from it,-lies
our duty of sending out that pure and clean manhood and womanhood into
the world to evangelise it, and making it a better world, helping to win it
for God. Did we do that? Is it not rather a fact, that whilst we spent a
few thousands in missions, and other world enterprises that make for the
glory of God, we at the same time spent many millions in liquor poured down


our throats, and in costly luxury that tends to make an effeminate and un-
worthy people? These are indisputable facts, and as we face them honestly
can we wonder that God has sent this terrible testing, and scourging of war,
bidding us send our best manhood forth into a great world conflict where the
supreme issue at stake is Righteousness. Can we wonder that God caused
a great testing of our womanhood, bidding them lay aside ease and luxury,
social selfishness, and careless living, and spend themselves working for sol-
diers. I do not pretend to be able to interpret fully to you God’s mind, but
I do believe we have an answer to the great question: “Why this War?”
as far as Australia is concerned in the fact, that when the searchlight is
poured into our National Soul, it reveals the fact, that up to August, 1914,
we were failing before God in our national life and nation-building at home,
and in the part we ought to have been worthily bearing in world events
abroad. I maintain that no people or race dare, in the name of Christianity,
which is God’s truth, take possession of a beautiful and highly productive
island continent like Australia, without being expected to use it as a home
base from which to influence His world and bear a worthy part in its re-
demption. This we have not done, and brethren, BY THIS WAE, GOD HAS
COMPELLED US TO DO IT. Not only that, but we are called upon to de-
fend hearth and home. He is a poor deluded creature, who does not realise
that this war has resolved itself into a defence of hearth and home. Let me
ask this very pertinent question: “Did we fully,consider that hearth and
home in the past days? Did not Australians for the most part fail to defend
their hearths and homes against a most insidious form of the very evil of the
accursed materialism we are now fighting against. I refer to the absence of
FAMILY ALTAR. In the past WE FAILED to defend our homes against
a spirit of worldliness, which would kill all that is pure and sacred and holy,
because there was no Family Altar to God, and I have no hesitation in saying,
that when we break the Family Altar down, we open the way and make it
easy for tne arch enemy of home life to come in, and now in this war, Chris-
tianity is challenging Australia. In effect it rings out its challenge: You
would not defend your hearth and homes, and now God has materialised that
insidious foe, and made it take the form of a relentless cruel Militarism, whose
merciless mailed fist threatens your very existence and life, and you must
fight it or see your homes pass into the control of a people that must be
accursed, for they have a thousandfold the brand of Cain on their brow.
3. A great force involved in the present war struggle, is that of Ma-
terialism. It is a very favourite and common verdict to say, that it is a
battle between Righteousness on the one hand, and Materialism on the other.
In part, that verdict is correct. Materialism in its very worse forms seems
to have taken possession of Germany, and the result of that is to crush out
all that is Godly. We cannot serve God and Mammon. When we realise that
it was the gross Materialism of Germany that blinded their eyes and made
them commit some of the greatest, horrors and atrocities that have ever dis-
graced warfare, we pray that God will crush out that spirit of Materialism,
it is only a fair question to ask ourselves, if our hands were clean in the
matter. We are on this occasion, dealing with the period prior to the war.
We have no desire to be over harsh or over lenient, and if we are honest in
our criticism of ourselves, we are forced to admit that before God pulled us up
on that memorable and tragic August, 1914, we were walking perilously near
the precipice. We were fast becoming saturated with and blinded by that
very force which we are fighting a deadly conflict against and which
has caused the whole world to reel and stagger because of the greatness of its
horrid cruelties.
Materialism is the curse of any people, and to be brought under its sway
only means one thing, and that is, absolute estrangement from God. Chris-
tianity’s challenge to Australia to-day is, to fight against the dangerous thing
and we surely cannot fight against it in foreign lands and by defeating our
enemies, cripple its power, without turning our back upon it at home. That


surely is only to be expected of honest people. If we face the challenge of
Christianity in this matter fairly and honestly, we are compelled to admit
that we were fast rushing towards that god, which by its awful grip over
the German nation has made them the bitter, cruel,' relentless foe that the
whole world now knows them to be. I believe that by our being compelled
to enter into this world struggle, we were saved from becoming what Germany
has become, and Christianity’s challenge to Australia is: Are we going for
ever to turn away from that danger and for ever turn our backs upon the
shrine of god of Materialism, or will we return like "swine to wallow in
the mire,’’ or like "dogs return to their vomit.’’ No self-respecting nation
can shirk that challenge. It is because of our Materialism that God has
brought this war upon us. Germany is the chief sinner, it is owing to her in-
solent plot and high-handed action in trying to tread little Belgium in the dust,
and march to France in soil turned to mud by the very blood of a heroic people,
that this evil has come to pass, but can we, in Australia, look into the face
of Jesus Christ and plead guiltless of sharing in that temper and attitude
towards Materialism! That would only be a falsehood, and an instance of
moral blindness; we, in Australia, as part of the whole civilised world are to
blame. The thing called Prussianism, that we curse to-day with curses loud
and deep, is only a virulent form of a poison, which is surely, and slowly,
infecting the blood of the whole human race. There has been a steady de-
cline in our ideals. When some have spoken of the Christian ideal, people
have shaken their heads and said it was A BEAUTIFUL VISION, but im-
practicable for a work-a-day world. When holy voices have repeated to
us the "Sermon on the Mount,’’ we have styled it A LOVELY DREAM. It,
when first uttered, was perhaps a lovely dream, but to-day, two thousand
years after the blessed Master gave that matchless utterance, it should be
engraven in the hearts of humanity, and we should, as a nation, be living in
obedience to it. If we had thrown half as much heroism, earnestness and
pertinacity into our endeavour to translate that beautiful dream into living
reality, as we have shown in the affairs of our material interest, we would
have been amply justified in asking if the present war, and our part in it,
was compatible with the teaching of the words, "Blessed are the peacemakers,
for they shall be called the Children of God.” It is of no value for us to
say, we have only done as other nations —that excuse will not prevail. True
enough, we cannot, nor would we, if we could, separate ourselves and our
interest from the Greater Britain. Nationally, we stand or fall with her, and
it is quite possible that God is causing us to suffer with her. The Balkan
States seem to-day, to be the storm centre, and the crux of the whole world
situation, and God will not allow us to forget that things would very probably
have been different to-day, and there would have been no Balkan crisis if
Britain had paid heed to the eloquent tongue and pen of Gladstone, nor dare
we forget that during the Armenian Massacres of 1894 —6, a whole people
were allowed to die at the hand of the unspeakable Turk, without a word of
protest from the great European Powers, who could have saved them, and
God never allows the blood of Abel to cry unheard, from the ground. I say
it is quite probable that, as part of the Great British Empire, we are paying
the price of that, but in no case, must we allow our thoughts to be drawn
from the main issue, and that is, that Christianity in the name of God and
the Christ challenges Australia for its Baal worship, and says, "gather ye to-
gether at Mount Carmel to try the whole matter.” Let me close this sermon
by asking the question, "Are we prepared to analyse the whole issue of the
war, from that point of view?”
Christianity’s great challenge to Australia in August, 1914, was "repent
ye.” It was a repetition of the Angel’s challenge to Ephesus long ago, "I
will remove thy candlestick out of this place except thou repent.” Are
we repentant? Oh, brethren, we will never be the same again; because of this
great and terrible war, our hairs are more grey, our brows more wrinkled, our


lives subdued, and our hearts sadder, but let us not be stony and hard-hearted.
Let us be just to ourselves, and honest to God, in believing this war is sent
upon us for the twofold purposes of bringing us back from sin and gross
Materialism, and giving us a high calling, in taking part in the protection of
the weak, and the setting up of God’s Kingdom on the Earth.
SERMON No. 2.
WHAT THE WAR IS COSTING AUSTRALIA.
In my first sermon I dealt with this subject entirely from the point of
view of Australia before the declaration of war on August, 1914. I tried to
make very clear this fact —that God had some great Divine purpose in thus
hurling us into the midst of a tremendous war-storm. Christianity, which is
God's truth, had challenged us for our failure to interpret the highest of
Christian ideals, and so translate them into actual conduct; also for our very
apparent drift towards Materialism, and also to call us to take part in a high
and holy calling—the saving of the world from the domination of a cruel
world power which is anti-Christ.
To-night I want to deal with the subject of the cost of the war. We can
only surmise what the cost of it will ultimately be, but there are certain
things we are sure of, and it is of them I will speak. There cannot be any
doubt in our minds, that war is a costly thing. In the matter of hard cash,
it is most costly. It seems as if it is costing Australia about FIFTY MIL-
LIONS a year at present. That is an immense sum for our limited popula-
tion. I do not think that, at any rate, for a generation Or two, money will
have the same value with us. 1 believe that Christianity is challenging us in
this matter, and making us spend the money we would not before this spend
for the salvation of the world. Our expenditure on missions and other great
world enterprises has been such a miserable amount. We Australians have
horded up wealth, and for the most part for selfish interest. For a hundred
years or more we have reaped a rich harvest from the highly-productive soil
of this fair continent, and we have not looked upon our gains as a trust from
God. What immense wealth there must be in Australia. The latest exhibition
of this is the recent War Loan, when the authorities asked for 10 millions and
got 21 millions, and that after all the immense expenditure that had gone
oefore. And yet this immensely wealthy Australia was a land where Churches
and other Christian enterprises had practically to come as "Mendicants im-
ploring" for money to carry on their work. Christian Missions in heathen
lands, as well as Home Missions, have been hampered, curtailed and re-
trenched, because of the lack of financial aid, and yet, whilst God’s work,
the spread of the blessed truths of 'Christianity have thus been starved, Aus-
tralia has been rolling in wealth. We are greatly in error if we think God
would tolerate that for long, and now we find Australia by means of the
great challenge that has come to her, being compelled to pour out that money
in millions for the crushing of a great "devil power." We will be blessed
by God if we look on it as such. Some of our Statesmen talk very fluently
about the "last shilling"; that is good, but it must not be a pouring out of
wealth till the past shilling is reached for self-glorification or world-power.
It must be, that the last shilling shall be spent, if necessary, as the widow
of gospel story cast her two mites into the Treasury of God. I say fear-
lessly, that our hands have not been clean in the spending of our monies, and
if we are to answer Christianity’s’ challenge and so justify ourselves before
God, we must place ourselves under a solemn pledge that when God sees fit
to remove the terrible testing from us, we will only use our wealth, reaped in
abundant harvests from the fair land that God has entrusted to us, for the
Glory of God and for the spreading of His truths in all places. Wealth is a
sacred trust, and the Holy Scriptures teaches that when the Master comes


he will require His oWn with usury. We do not proclaim about riches; we
have no desire whatever to laud the poor and condemn the rich. There are
remarkably 'few poor people in Australia, and God will require at our hand an
account of the wealth we have garnered from the broad fields, the depths
of the earth and the commercial enterprise. The end of this war is not
yet, and before that much-longed-for time comes, we might be all poor, as far
as money is concerned. Australia might become stripped of all her accumulated
wealth, but it -will be money well spent, if by the spending of it, we regard
our high ideals, and retain our national honour. If we are to fearlessly answer
Christianity’s challenge and to be justified in future years, we must not only
'during w r ar time, but in the years after the war, spend less money on selfish
interests and aggrandisement, as well as on sport and pleasure, and also
luxurious living and be a great deal more liberal in our spending on those
interests which make for the elevating and ennobling both of ourselves and
others.
2. Not only is this w r ar costing us much money, but it is also costing
us a very great deal in men. The loss of life is simply appalling, and Aus-
tralia has not been behind in contributing her quota. There are many small
white crosses at Gaba Tepe, Anzac, Suvla Bay and Lonesome Pine, and by
and bye, when the war is over, 1 think it wdll be a favoured pilgrimage of
many to that land to drop a tear and pay a loving tribute upon the grass-
covered mounds. The cost has been very great —no man dare attempt to set
a value upon the much rich red Australian blood that has been spilt.
Who will deny that it is in the nature of a challenge to us. The very
principles of Christianity are at stake. If gross materialism is to triumph
over spiritual power, if might is to perpetually triumph over right, if the
mailed fist is to throw down the cross from Calvary’s summit; it a Kaiser
that is either an incarnate fiend, or a raging lunatic, is to triumph over the
Christ, then all the principles of Christianity that have been jealously guarded
throughout the ages will be torn to shreds, and the whole wide world, instead
of going forward into light and betterment, will be plunged back into the
dark abyss from which it will never again emerge. These things will happen
unless men and more men go to fight, and thus the challenge was flung in
our faces by Christianity and THANKS BE TO GOD it was taken up and
thousands and thousands of men have left our shores, ready to die, if need
be, in a noble cause. I know I will not be accused of blasphemy if I say
it is but a reflection of a great event that happened long ago: 2,000 years ago
a cry rose up from a sin-stained, sin-burdened earth to God, and God made
the supreme sacrifice. He did not withhold his only begotten Sou, but de-
livered Him up to the cruel death of the Cross —the Cross was a fearfully
cruel thing, but it was very effective, for by the Cross of Christ, worlds are
saved. And now, 2,000 years afterwards the principles that emanated from
the sacrifice of Christ on the cross and that have only lived by His gracious
influence, have been threatened and all Christian nations —all peoples that
have thriven and lived by the principles of the Cross —are in duty bound to
answer the challenge that Chi’istianity flung in their faces on the day that
little heroic Belgium lay low in the dust —on the day when British hearth and
homes were threatened, not daring to ask the cost. It has, indeed, been a
great cost, and probably will be yet more. That’s the challenge of Christianity
to us in Australia. God says, “I gave my only begotten Son to save the
world, will you give your sons, your loved ones, to save others”?
Whilst we are considering this question of giving our men, our husbands,
sons, brothers, friends, we come face to face with a very grave problem,
which has for many years been a cankerworm in society. I refer to the
decreasing birthrate which has been very marked in Australia, as in Britain,
during the last few years. We have cause to believe that a most malicious
and damnable custom of child murder goes on in this land; whilst, on the


whole, our medical men and nursing staffs are too high-minded and big-
souled to aid and abet this, yet there are sufficient doctors and nurses to be
found in Australia, to make this accursed thing possible, nay even able to
thrive. I believe in this war, Christianity is challenging us for this very
matter. In a fertile healthy Heaven-blest land like Australia, there is no
excuse for a decreasing birth-rate, and for, so many childless women. There
are a great number of childless women, who feel it as a terrible cross upon
their soul and heart that they are childless. God in His wisdom has so
ordered their life. But whilst frankly admitting that, it is also absolutely
true that in Australia there are thousands of women whose lives are so
abandoned to utter selfishness that they have absolutely failed in God’s
sight, to fulfil the highest ideals of womanhood, and would we not be worse
than blind if we did not realise that God would for that, bring us into
judgment; and for race suicide, for we cannot call it anything else, God
has challenged us to sacrifice our young manhood; all the history of' the
ages tells us clearly that it is blood lor blood, and a life for a life. We hope,
and pray that in the light of events, Australia will for ever turn her back
upon that awful and unclean thing.
There is an aspect of it that we must consider, and we can do so with-
out in anyway transgressing the laws of dignity and fine feeling. Hundreds
and hundreds of our best young men have died, and probably will yet die,
in this'awful battle; that means that, instead of taking their place in the
domestic life of the nation and becoming the fathers of the succeeding genera-
tion, they are called upon to die in the cause of Righeousness, and there must,
of course, be a break in the next generation. I hope I will not be accused
of lightness or flippancy when I say that there wdll be a great increase in
the ranks of unmarried women. That is a very serious matter indeed in the
interests of any nation, but I venture to say those women will not be dis-
honoured, but highly honoured, for it is better to be the bereaved sweetheart
of a heroic and brave man, than to be the wife of a shirker and waster. All
I can say, is, God forbid that the pure and lovely womanhood of the rising
generation should be linked in marriage to the host of dirty, skulking black-
guards that abound in our home-land. I do not, of course, forget that there
are three classes of young men left yet; there is that type of fine young
men who yet have not felt their country’s call sufficiently strong to go to
war. I do not condemn them —I leave them to their own conscience; then
there, is an exceedingly large number of young men physically unfit to go.
We deeply sympathise- with them. Then, again, there is a number of men
who at present arc compelled by certain ties and responsibilities to remain
at home. I say again, emphatically. I do not have a word to say in con-
demnation of these men—matters will in time right themselves. But after all
this has been said, and reckoned up, there are still thousands of useless, dirty-
living blackguards, whose very presence in our midst pollute society. I say
again, reverently, God forbid that' these should be the fathers of the next
generation. It is thus clear, that we are face to face with a race problem
of gigantic magnitude and far-reaching significance. There are other aspects
of it that I cannot dealt with here, but believing as I do, that this is one
of the points upon which God is challenging us, something must be done, to
meet’ it; In the first place, it is time the matter was faced frankly and
publiely"in the interests of the nation at large. It has hitherto, been con-
sidered ks ‘tod; delicate a subject for, public treatment, and also as a per-
sona! matter, that should be left to private judgment. It is time to have done
with false and'tnoek modesty. .
.... . *<,.>(> '
The question of proepeatipa. is a holy one, it deals with the fountain of
life in . the race, and this ,great and holy thing, this • noblest of all passions—
the passion of motherhood and fatherhood is so carelessly dealt with —young
people are left in entire ignorance, and just at the very time when they
cannot help thinking, or enquiring about it, they are totally nnguided by
those who are older and experienced. Consequently the nation’s young life


imbibes notions and views that are false and artificial, and very often vicious,
concerning these very grave and important matters. It is time to have done
with this dangerous and really indelicate attitude towards the central fact
of life, and that in the interests of our national existence and continuity, a
frank and sincere treatment of it should be attempted. There are parents
who pretend to blush and hang their heads when told that, in the name of
God, they ought to prayerfully guide the feet and life-events of their own
children; yet, those parents have not the slightest objection to their children
going to a theatre or picture show, where there is a lewd and sinister sug-
gestion. If we are wise, if we are sane, we will surely see that in this
war, God is challenging us. In the past, when in the name of Christianity,
these questions have been raised, people have shaken their heads and passed
on; but to-day, in face of war facts, in face of the fact that hundreds of
the noblest and best will never come back to us, and that hundreds more,
by being maimed and battered, will be unable to take their right place in
nation-building, Australians are worse than fools if they do not give heed
and throw aside for ever that which, in the past, has been an unclean thing,
and return to God with clean hearts and hands.
3. Very briefly let me before I close, refer to another phase of the cost
of this war, and that is, that it. is being carried on at the cost of so much
sacrifice. Who can tell what it means to a wife to see her husband go over
the seas, to watch his troopship fade out of sight on yonder horizon, and
then return home knowing that for long months, at any rate, she must be
lonely and sad—nothing for her, but to watch and wait—or the mother, who
sends one son, or two sons, or three sons, or the sister or the sweetheart;
but it all means sacrifice, and that is Christianity’s challenge to Australia.
We have talked about sacrifice, we have preached the great sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross, we have spoken of the Father Who spared not His only be-
gotten yon, but delivered Him up; how shallow has been our conception of
this? Now it is God’s challenge that we shall know something of it prac-
tically. In Australia, there has been very little sacrifice, but now the day
is on us. Tlie question is: “Hhall we learn the lesson?” Let us not be
rebellious, let us bend to the burden, let us be purified by the experience, or
else if not, we should not again try to tell the story of the Great Sacrifice.
Does it not sound like the hollowest of mockery, to think that in the years
past Australians have fared sumptuously, sat in comfortable churches, in
peace and safety, and sung:—
“Saviour Thy dying love Thou gavest me,
Nor.would I ought withhold my Lord from Thee
In love my soul would bow,
My heart fulfil its vow,
Some offering bring Thee now,
Something for Thee.”
By means of this war, Christianity whose very essence and substance is
sacrifice, is challenging us to truly learn the lesson—is testing us to see if
we are in earnest. It cannot be denied that the greatest people and the
greatest nation is, those who have learned to spell sacrifice and how can it
rightly be learned, except by means of practising the principles of the
greatest of all sacrificial forces—Christianity. It is not sufficient for fathers,
mothers, sisters, sweethearts of our soldiers to learn —all Australia must learn
it, and to-day is the Jay. We have a chance to immortalise our very name.
Will Australia rise to the occasion?


SERMON No. 3.
MORAL ISSUES RAISED BY THE WAR.
In this sermon on “Christianity’s Challenge to Australia at War,’’ 1
want to deal with the question of MOKAL ISSUES RAISED BY THE WAR.
It is impossible for any nation to be plunged into a great war-storm without
having its existing moral issues affected and new issues thrust before it.
More especially is this true of Australia to whose people war is an entirely new
experience. I look on the war as a direct challenge to us, as a testing of our
moral fibre, and no one, I think, will deny that the test, the strain put
upon it, has been a very severe one.
1. In one way we gladly admit that the test proved a very satisfactory
one. In past years pessimists have more than frequently spoken and said
that young Australia was a degenerating race, that we were not of the same
fibre as our fathers, that we could not do what our fathers had done. By
means of the war the challenge was flung into our faces, and we had per-
force to take it up, and subsequent actions of Australians proved how base-
less had been the charges against us. Nothing greater in courage has ever
been displayed in any generation, nothing finer and more keen in resource,
steadiness under fire, and physical strength to endure long days in action
has ever been shown to the world, and now w r e have been challenged by
Christianity—for it is the principles that prove these things when applied to
men—we can for answer fearlessly before God and men point to Gaba Tepe,
Buvla Bay, Lonesome Pine and Anzac. But when Ave admit all this, and it
is only just and fair to admit it, those wdio have closely and keenly studied
the position have noticed that there is a somewhat alarming margin. I wish
to God that we could say that the men of Gallipoli were types of all Austra-
lia, but we cannot. I am going to deal with sport later on, "but here and
now, let me say, that on a race day, you can see car after car pass along
laden to overflowing with a certain very undesirable class of men, and we
know full well that these many hundreds who are merely “scalers,” “cheats,”
and gamblers, ” are entirely without any of the moral fibre —the courage,
resourcefulness, and patriotism that their felloAV Australians showed at Gal-
lipoli, and I say again the MARGIN IS TOO WIDE; if it w r ere only a few
scores of men, we should not be unduly alarmed, but when we know r it
amounts to many thousands, we are anxious, and w r e must admit that the
war has revealed this state of affairs to us. The question is: “How are we
going to deal with it?” Have Ave a Government and legislators who have
the courage to point out these things, and to deal with them? Have Ave
sufficiently strong public opinion to cause such an outcry, that the evil will
be remedied. That’s where the challenge of Christianity comes in. Surely
this fearful scourging of war is not to be in vain as far as avc are con-
cerned. Christianity shows us exactly AA’here we stand in the matter. It
says, “You have greatly depleted the ranks of your young men in churches —
they had the courage to go in God’s name.” You have done little or nothing
towmrds depleting the ranks of the scaler, the scout, the tick tacker, the
cheat, the gambler—the very cars that carry them to the races ought to be as
vacant as the young men’s peAvs in your church. Have you the courage to deal
with it? And here I want to confess lam a convert to Conscription. Really,
my soul loathes the Avord, but I am convinced that it is perfectly useless appeal-
ing to the class of men I have mentioned for they have no moral sense to
appeal to—they are so brutalised that brute force is necessary to bring them
to the mark. I believe that in a mixed society composed partly of men and
AA’omen, who are pledged to EVIL, SELFLSH and criminal ways, and who
do not acknowledge the rights of others, some-organised form of force is
absolutely necessary to hold them in check and prevent them from criminal
action. To me, conscription means more than merely securing sufficient men


to fill the gaps in the regiments, although'that is of great importance; it is
the only method so far as I can see, left to Christian Australia to seize hold
of that very large margin of evil passioned men and train and discipline them
and try to redeem them so far as is possible, and bring them up to the
level of Australia’s best manhood.
2. Secondly; I want to deal with the matter of sport. I will not dwell
very long on this point, but we cannot ignore it, for the reason, that “ Sport ”
occupies a very important and large place in the routine of Australian life.
It is a much-debated question, whether Australians are too fond of sport.
I am not going to discuss that here, but I believe that the challenge has
come to us now to show that we can push aside the idea of sport and show
ourselves capable of concentrating all our interests on the subject of National
Salvation, for I do look upon this war as involving the question of our National
Salvation. The question of whether Australians are too fond of sport or
not is one that might well be discussed in a debating society, but these are
abnormal times, and matters have to be dealt with in an abnormal way. It
is a very specious argument put forward by many, that we need sport in
these days to act as an antidote to the burden of the war, that is continu-
ally on our minds. That sounds very plausible, but we cannot help but
think that those who put forward that argument are for the most part
those people who don’t carry the burden on their minds, and who want an
excuse for their sporting proclivities.
I do not say that we should go about the streets mourning, nor should
we put up the shutters, or draw the blinds, but still we are forced to the
conclusion, that it is something in the nature of an insult to our intelligence
that so far as we are concerned, it is “SPOKT AS USUAL.” We have pre-
sumably not answered the challenge of Christianity. It is said in effect:
“You Australians are charged with making a god of Sport. Now is your
opportunity to disprove that accusation; cast down your idol.” We have not
responded. It is racing as usual, football as usual, cricket as usual, or if not
as usual, with very little diminuation. At the Stadium it is BOXING AS
USUAL. It is a deliberate insult to the Christian conscience that “pot
hunters” —for you cannot call them anything else —are allowed to run a
Stadium for profit, and can only do so by keeping at it, physically fit men
who ought to be at the front. We read in the papers, that Boxer “So and
So” is in the pink of condition. If he is in the pink of condition, he ought
to be at tue front with the Australian troops. While we are thus speaking
of sport, we cannot disassociate from it other amusements. Is it not a most
damning thing to the Christian conscience of this city, that during war time,,
and even when the most pressing burden of the war is upon us, that the
amusement given in almost half of the theatres and halls of this city nightly,
is full of filthy suggestion. Brethren, it’s simply absurd for us to claim
that this war has made Australia serious. It certainly ought to; if we have
any serious vein at all in our national composition, it ought to have shown
itself during tne last IS months, and I tremble like one of old times for
the ark of God in our midst. I fear that we, in Australia, are very like Bels-
hazzar of old, and I fear greatly that unless we answer Christianity’s chal-
lenge soon in a more forcible way, the hand of God wall write upon, the
walls of our national chamber, doom and curse. How offensive we must seem
before God, w r hen it can truthfully be laid to our charge, that every night
in this city of Sydney alone, thousands of men and women run roughshod over
the bodies of our heroic dead, to witness plays and pictures that are, to say
the least, suggestive, and that promote the very worst forms of the disease
that our brave boys died to stamp out. I say again, we are not to draw
our blinds and put up our shutters as if our hopes were dead. Our hopes
are not DEAD—thanks be to God they never wall be, so long as we are faith-
ful to*. Him Who is a God of the living. As long as people have healthy
bodies and healthy and clean minds, and as long as we live in the bright,


oalmy Australian sunlight, the champagne of life, will run joyfully through
our very being and with that tingling of life in us let us smile and enjoy
innocent recreation, but let it be clean and pure, for the clear-cut challenge
of Christianity to-day is to put away every unclean thing,
3. In the third place, I want to touch on political issues. I do not think
that any right thinking person will deny that in this war, God is clearly
challenging us to clean up our political halls. The only party politics that
greatly interest me, is God politics and devil politics—the politics that make
for the glory of God, and those that dishonour God. I hope the day will
never come when the church will brand me as Liberal or Labour, but I DO
hope the day will soon come when it will be necessary before a man can enter
politics, that he' have the hall mark of the Church upon him. One cannot
deny that a great deal of the politics of past days has been anti-Christian,
and God is challenging us in this war to say whether we are going to be
governed by laws that are divorced from all that is high and holy, or whether
we will travel along the lines laid down by the principle that ‘‘ Righteousness
exalteth a nation. ” It is for us to say, now at this time, when all the
nations of the world are being marked by God with brands that only Eternity
will erase, whether they are Christian or anti-Christian, whether we will be
branded with the hall mark of the Beast, or whether w 7 e wdll be marked with
’the nail prints, spear wounds or thorn scratches of Calvary. The challenge
is flung in our national face, and the matter is supremely urgent. Many of us
nave been strenuously fighting ever since war began for a national reforma-
tion. The accursed liquor trade wdiich, if it be left to flourish like the green
bay tree, will, by its damning shadows, cause all national greatness to fade
away, has up till this week been allowed to perform its dreadful deeds until
it culminated in last Monday’s disgraceful scenes. The State of New South
Wales is disgraced to-day because military law' compelled us to do w-hat we
should have done by civil law. We are thankful to God that even for a brief
space we have (j o 'clock closing of liquor bars, even if it did come by military
law, but it is a blot on our Christian profession. Is it possible to estimate
the gravity of it —1,000 men lost to the fighting forces of Australia, just at a
time when every man is needed and for what reason? Was it physical unfitness?
No, would to God it W'ere. It was because through unlimited opportunity for
indulgence in liquor and other vices being left in their path by a people pro-
fessedly Christian, these men became brutes, quite as brutal as any German
Kaiserism. Can we imagine the mockery of the whole thing? Sending our
best to fight and die to stamp out a world evil, praying that God will damn
brutal Kaiserism, and all the w r hile making it easy for men in our own land
to become slaves and victims to a brutality, quite as bad, and in one act
having to set aside a 1,000 of them. Brethren, Christianity’s challenge to
Australia in this war, is, to remedy these things. It asks us in straightout
speech, are you Australians in earnest in sending armies across the seas to
fight for Righteousness? If you are, says God, I challenge you to wipe out
Milson Island, is but a sequel to city streets infested by vile women;
wipe out Black Monday, with its fearful record of battered heads, a man
shot dowm wdiilst he was in the clutches of fiendish liquor—l,ooo men dis-
missed from the ranks. Are we going to wipe it out. If we are, it can
only be wiped out on our knees before God’s Altar, and the politician, if you
can call him such, that is primarily responsible, shall be wiped out. I hope
that the man who, because of his political position and very evident political
leanings to brewery and be'er, will be haunted day and night by the spectre
of that young soldier w r ho died on Central .Station last Monday night, in
such fearful circumstances, till he repent in sack cloth and ashes, and like
Nebuchadnezzar of old, greatly humiliate himself.
4. RELIGIOUS ORDINANCES. Let me now in the fourth place, say a
few w r ords concerning another matter that will show clearly whether we "are
answering Christianity’s challenge in the right way. I refer to the outward
signs of our desires to seek God. It is a common remark that the sparsely


attended churches are Australia’s greatest condemnation as far as this war is
concerned. Perhaps the criticism has been overdone, but it appears very
sound reasoning to say, that if Ave as a people Avere returning to God in our
troubles and afflictions, our churches would be full. There can be no doubt
that far too many people shamelessly rob God in the matter of attendance
before His altar, and in His Holy Place. I have long ago come to the con-
clusion that this Avar can only be won on our knees, and until Australians
come to their knees, the blood of our very best will continue to be spilt. It is
the challenge of Christianity. If Ave are fighting a righteous war, our proper
line of conduct is to abide under the shadow of the Almighty, to beseech God
greatly in prayer; and lioaa - can Australia be doing that, when thousands and
thousands and yet, again, thousands never boAv before God’s altar. ‘ It’s
simply mocking God for so many of our people to spend Sabbath mornings
and evenings in the surf, or some other such place, when they ought to spend
it’ in the church. I wonder if those that are splashing about in the surf hoav,
at this hour of prayer, realise that their very actions might cause much
Australian precious blood to be splashed about a foreign battlefield. We
have not to deal Avith men, WE HAVE TO DEAL WITH GOD. GOD ALONE
CAN CAUSE US TO WIN THIS WAR and the proper -place for everybody
at the set hour of prayer, is at the Altar. I ask you the straightout question:
If a visitor were to come from Mars or some other far-away planet to Aus-
tralia, and quietly look round, would he form the conclusion that our very
national existence was in peril? Would he form the conclusion that thou-
sands and thousands of our bravest and best Avere away fighting in a life and
death struggle? Would he form the conclusion that our very existence as a
self-respecting free people depended on our attitude Towards God? Would he
know that we are living the days under much stress and pain? I call you
to-night to witness that our position is perilous, let everyone here be fearfully
in earnest in their service of God.
SERMON No. 4.
AUSTRALIA AFTER THE WAR.
I am to-uight to give you the fourth of the special sermons on "Chris-
tianity s Challenge to Australia at War. ’’ The title of this evening' ’s sermon
is, "AUSTRALIA AFTER THE WAR.”
It might be said how can we speak on this subject till we know who
will win the war. Personally, I have not the slightest doubt who will win,
for I feel confident that we will be so able to answer God’s challenge in the
matter, that we will be drawn to God, as a refuge and a safety, and that
we will ultimately see our side prevail. That is the note I have tried to
strike all through these addresses. If we want to win we must turn to
God in a repentant mood. Without God we cannot win, but I think good
sense and sound judgment will prevail, and Australia will at this time turn
to God as a nation and a people. If we do not do that, and do not win the
war, then we will become a down-trodden people, crushed under the heel of
an arrogant militarism, and we need not trouble a great deal about after
the war, for we will simply have to do what insolent Prussian officers tell
us. That’s simply unthinkable, and Australia must rise up in this supreme
hour, to meet her destiny, and to live as a self-respecting nation with a firm
grip of God, and marching under God’s banners.
1. After the Avar Australia will be a NATION. Hitherto we have sim-
ply been "His Majesty’s Dominions over the Seas.’’ God grant we will
always be that, but now in this war, we have proved ourselves to have throAvn
off the stage of National Childhood, and become fully matured —we must be
admitted into partnership, and form a very solid partner in a great British


Imperialism. We will have the undeniable right to be admitted into all the
great National Councils of the British Empire. We must not only seek the
privilege, but we must be prepared to shoulder the responsibility. It is a
privilege to be a man, but it’s a grave responsibility, and the same applies
in national life. The great question is: Will Australia, after the war, when
she appears in the World Arena as a fully developed nation, prove herself
noble and worthy? Will we command respect? We dare not come as a new-
born nation on to the arena of world events as a “bounder,” neither must we
go about with a “swash buckling” spirit as if we thought God had made
the world entirely and exclusively for us. By a courteous and sincere spirit,
and rigidly honest line of conduct towards all nations, especially those who
to-day, are our loved and honoured Allies, we must COMMAND respect, and
in a right spirit we must DEMAND it. W T e thus see what a great responsi-
bility lies upon us. We know full well, and if we did not know it, the
world’s history would tell it to us very clearly, what are the qualities that
make for NATIONAL GREATNESS and NATIONAL CONTINUITY. We
must diligently seek to cultivate these. We do not want to be a nation
passing across as a meteor —we want to be an abiding nation, and that
nation can only abide whose people in their manner of life, in their hopes,
and in their national aspirations, are deeply rooted in the Eternal God. Sim-
ultaneously with this, our sudden development into a mature national life,
there must be a strengthening of the cords, a deepening of the foundations,
a digging deep, and building upon the rock. There must be no building of
our national life upon shifting sand, else the scriptural record of what
happened to the builder on sand long ago, will again be told of us—“AND IT
FELL.” Nothing would be more sad and pitiful in world records than if
historians in generations to come had to record the historical fact, that once
there was a Nation called Australia, that appeared on the world plane with
meteoric and dazzling brightness and illumined the whole world with the splen-
dour of its deeds, but it died and has been forgotten, because its people
failed to realise where life—continuous national life —had its origin. Chris-
tianity is challenging us to-day and says in effect: Are you Australians in
earnest in your pretensions that you are making about establishing the
cause of righteousness in the world? Are you in deadly earnest in your
claims to be a world nation, or are you like children playing at house-
building? Do you intend that your full, rich, young voice will be heard
in the re-making and re-modelling of the world, for it will come to that—l, for
one, believe that some very great changes will follow as a result of the war—
or are you going to be like a child, weary of your toy house-building, fall
back again to your sleep and your play? This is Australia’s hour of pain
and travail, but it is also her golden opportunity. She stands to-day as a
result of a great world upheaval, side by side with other great world powers
that have through the past generations toiled in building up their National
house —side by side with great expansive Russia, with France, with Italy,
names that appear on every page 'of world history for ages and ages past.
Brethren, it is wonderful, and I am fearful lest we be not fit. The challenge
is flung in our faces to-day by God, along with these other nations of great
and glorious history and power. God is using us to re-make and re model
His world—are we ready for the duty? We might think w r e are to-day,
when with the war fever hot in our blood; we have thousands of brave men
under arms, and practically all the wealth of our nation ready to be poured
forth, but when peace is declared, when that mailed fist so cruelly and so
arrogantly raised in threat to-day, is pushed down to side of the “bounder”
that raised it, when our strong men come home and settle down into peace-
ful pursuits, when our wealth is no longer wanted for war purposes, but is
ready for diversion into commercial channels, will we be able then to retain
our fitness for the great world call that has come to us?
2. I feel convinced that our call as a nation —our vocation —will not be
one of permanent military concentration; God forbid, I believe that the


vocation of Australia will be to establish in all the relations of life, both in
the domestic life of her own people and in the touch with other nations and
peoples, that law-abiding, liberty and justice, that kindliness and fair play,
the essence of all truly great things, which are the qualities that show them-
selves when a nation is at its best.
There must be a consecration of this beautiful land of Australia to high
and holy purposes; we must mark our enemies well and defeat them. We
must bring out into the open the traitors in our midst, and punish them. I
feel convinced that the foe and traitor, as far as Australia is concerned /
are not confined to Turk and German. The man who is using the war for
nis own gains, who is filling his own pockets, and all the time boasting of
nis patriotism which is but an empty boast, is a man who is a base traitor
to Australia, and he must be marked. When the war is over he must be
made to feel that there is no room for him in Australia. To-day our com-
mercial life is all out of joint, but when the war is over, and we can calmly
gather together the broken ends and the displaced joints of our commercial
life; there should surely be no place in it for those so-called business men
of to-day, who are making themselves rich out of their country’s calamity of
war. Their very riches ought to be as abominable as the thirty pieces of
silver that Judas Iscariot flung down on the Temple floor. The men who are
refusing to take away from our soldiers the curse of liquor, the men who
are staging and screening indecent and lewd shows and pictures to get big
returns, the men who run stadiums and keep fit and strong fellows punching
each other before the footlights and within the rope, instead of “punching”
our national enemies on the fields of Europe, These are the men in this
city who fly about in cars and push themselves to the front in society life,
who are content to stand at the ring-side with a timepiece and listen to the
“tick tick” that is to count a man out. I wonder if they have heart enough,
humanity and soul enough, to think of the wife who, at night lies sleepless,
.thinking of her husband in the trenches, listening to the “tick, tick” of the
clock, and wonders how long it will be before he comes home. That waiting
time must be awful for those brave women. The fact that a man knows he
is permitted to breathe the same atmosphere as they do, ought to make him
above the “tick, tick” business in a stadium—these men are traitors, and I
hope and pray that when Australia is, after the war, consecrated to high and
holy purposes, these traitors will be “outers.”
3. After this war is over we must be people with bigger minds. No
nation can be great whose people is small-minded, narrow and biggotted. All
spirit of parochialism must end, our people must be filled with a big im-
perialistic spirit. We must realise that now we are partners in a great Bri-
tish Empire, we must shoulder some of the great responsibility. Brethren!
i believe that up to now Australia has been too parochial, too shallow we
have somehow imbibed such a miserably narrow system of politics that many
people do not feel inclined to consider any system of politics outside their
own union. But God has in these days challenged us to look beyond our
own backyards or front lawns. There is a wide vast expanse of continent
there that God has given us as a heritage. What does God mean us to do
with it? Does He mean us to leave it in the hands of perigrinating mis-
sionaries, an odd cattle king, and odd waifs and strays? Such is unthinkable
BY A BIG MINDED IMPERIALISM, BY SANE LEGISLATION, by strong
ramifications of a commercial enterprise, we must use it and make it produc-
tive, and cause it to contribute its quota to the benefit of God’s wide world
The. very children that in the crowded city cry for bread, the men and women
who in crowded world countries are stifling for room, will, in God’s name
cry a curse on us, and rise up in judgment against us, if we let all that
vast continent lie idle, because of a miserably limited conception of
politics. God has given us Australia for a heritage, and to-day we are de-
fending it in God’s name, we are calling upon God to save our hearth and


home. God will answer us, I believe, but I solemnly believe too, that God
will challenge us and say; What do you mean? I gave you this beautiful
gift of an island continent, and because of your narrow-mindedness, because of
your lack of imperial ideas, you only peopled the fringe of it, and now in
your hour of peril you stand implorijig to be saved, a handful of people on
the fringe, instead of being backed up by the full productive powers of the
continent I gave you. After this war Australia must be peopled right across,
and that vast tract upon tract, that to-day is lying idle, must contribute its
quota to the sustaining of God’s world. If it does not, then we deserve to
have it taken from us, and given to a people that will use it. . The question
might be raised: We would have developed it, it we had the meansf 'Austra-
lians have poured down their throats in the last ten years in the shape of
liquor, enough wealth to have built railways and provided water to have
enabled what so many think to be a desert, but what is in reality a beautiful
country, to bloom and blossom like the rose. Do you think God will tolerate
that? Does it not sound like humbug and sham for Australians to cry aloud
to God to save their land when they have given to the Devil and to all
the powers of Hell the money that might have made it like unto a Garden
of Eden. We have even been too mean to give sufficient money to enable the
message of Christianity to be carried to the lonely pioneer and the deluded
aboriginal that wanders in loneliness over its vast surface. God give us after
this war BIGGER IDEAS, a greater Imperialism, a sense to know that it
is madness to take a continent and then people only the fringe of it, to crowd
75 per cent, of our population into cities to live on each other like leeches,
and expect to hold it against the world.
•4. I believe that after the war, Australia will be a more religious people.
This war has shown us the things that really do signify. We are prepared to
sacrifice ALL, so long as we retain our honour—the cause of Righteousness
must be upheld, even if it costs us the lives of thousands of our best men.
We dare not lag behind, we cannot forget that heroic Belgium will rise again
even amid the ruins of her ancient churches, to live a life she never lived
before; little Servia, Montenegro and Poland, equally heroic, will also rise
again as a resurrected people; we are told that Russia to-day is a people on
its knees before God in Faith. Italy, whose name is oldest in religious annals,
is yet fighting, not against Goths, but against Huns, ever more barbarous in
some ways than those that Attila of old led against her. It was so line to
read that France was perfectly calm and confident this week at Verdun, when
that terrific German onslaught was made. God has placed young Australia
with these in war, and the ties that are formed now are not going to be a
thing of a day or a year. These noble Allies are our National Companions,
and we must not be an odd number. We must be a sobered, religious people*
and such we can only be, if we put away all uncleanness from our midst. I
do not believe that Russia or France will go back to their alcohol. What about
Australia? De we realise that it is liquor that has caused Australia to be the
one nation of all the Allies that in this war period is marred with a mutiny.
Do we realise that Australia’s liquor, bill for 1915 would have financed all the
Allies in war for a whole week. That is God’s challenge to us now. Are we
for ever prepared to throw aside all uncleanness and sin—this is our opportun-
ity. No redemption of mankind was ever accomplished without shedding of
blood —previous blood being shed now for us, is for our redemption? Is the
day of our national redemption at hand?
4. Then, lastly, let me say that we must read the story aright in the
days to come. Our history must be truthful. We must teach our children that
Australia, in 1914, 1915 and 1916, stood side by side with great European
powers in a World Conflict, that hundreds of our best and noblest men died
in the war, not that we might increase our territory, or force our commerce
on unwilling nations, but that the great and holy principle of right might be


asserted, maintained, and defended. That is now emblazoned on our banners,
let Australia never depart from it —letus be a nation, a people pledged, con-
secrated to such a' high and holy destiny, trod forbid that our children in
any generation should have to go through another such war. God forbid
that we shall evef again be called upon to bring our men from peaceful pur-
suits, North, South, East and West, to go to war, but nevertheless, God grant
that Australia’s resources in all channels shall be ever ready to maintain
righteousness as a world force and power. There can be no righteousness save
that which has its sources in the Cross of Him Who died that men should be
accounted righteous. Christianity which embraces righteousness, challenges
Australia to-day, and Australia has answered nobly; let it not be only an
answer for a day or a year, but the answer of Australia in all her genera-
tions. Wherever there is a call to defend the weak and maintain the
cause of righteousness, will be the words that are common to us to-day:
“Australia will be there.”
[This sermon was delivered in the presence of the Consuls of all the
Allies.]
