

I
f*3«
dptriiitian
;■ •'
ITS
BT THE
REV. E. DEWHIRST,
Adelaide, South Australia.
I |
“HOW EEADEST THOU?”
\
JuWaute:
PRINTER; E. S. WIGG,
AND SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
MODE AND SUBJECTS
SHAWYEE, PRINTER; E. S. WIGG, PUBLISHER;


\ V- ■':f /h; -i
\ #£w. .'/
■V% ■


CHRISTIAN BAPTISM;
Jtloto and .Stoßjcds.
THE
HEY. E. DBVHIEST,
Adelaide, South Australia.
“HOW EEADEST THOU?”
<
Julchiitk:
SHAWYER, PRINTER; E. S. WIGG, PUBLISHER;
AND SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.


• .
*


1o 3 4.3 2
2 0 AUG 19 c
CHRISTIAN BAPTISM.
When our Saviour sent forth the first heralds of
Christianity, he charged them to teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. In that language He
instituted the sacred ordinance of Baptism; and in
the order of procedure he enjoined, first—teaching,
then—baptizing; and in the signification of the word
translated “baptize,” the subjects and mode of baptism
are sufficiently indicated. The advocates of believers’
baptism by immersion might well afford to stand or
fall by that passage. To their minds it affords all the
proof they need of the scriptural character of their
views and practice. But others holding that the un-
taught are the proper subjects, and that sprinkling is
the proper mode of Christian Baptism, views so op-
posite, that if erroneous they cannot but be detrimental
to true religion, it certainly must be highly important
thoroughly to discuss, in order rightly to conclude
upon the matter.
Dealing with the less important half of the question,
in the first place, we ask-*-what is the right- mode of
Christian Baptism ?


To ascertain this we must look to the meaning of
the term employed to denote the ordinance- It will
he at once perceived that it is not a translated term,
as wo find it in our Bibles, but is just letter for letter,
except the terminal, one, a greek word anglicised, or
adopted from that language into our own. It stands
precisely in the same predicament as the word schism,
and to find the meaning of it, we must seek after the
sense in which it is ordinarily employed in Greek
literature, and more especially the sense in which it
was used by the Seventy, who translated from Hebrew
into Greek the Old Testament Scriptures, as well as
by the Evangelists and Apostles.
The meaning of the term Baptism, as arrived at by
reference to these sources, is beyond all denial—
immersion.
Let any one of the reliable Greek lexicons which
are now employed be consulted, and the signification
of Paired) and PoraxiOo, from which paimon-a is derived,
will be given as “ to dip or immerse, to plunge, to dye
or colour, to submerge, saturate, or overwhelm.’'’ If
there be any difference in either of the two verbs, it
consists in pantm signifying to immerse, and PaimCro
conveying the additional idea of causing or making to
be immersed. The fontal idea in both is the same,
which is, to place under water.
Plutarch gives paimC <«, to plunge or immerse, as
we immerse things in water for the purpose of dyeing
or cleansing.
Basil says, “pairoCto, to plunge;” that is, to plunge
under, or to overwhelm in water. PairaCopai, to be
plunged, to be sunk. “ Suffering with those that were
plunged or sunk in the sea.”
Gregory Nazianzen “ That we may not bo
immersed or sunk (paxnoQuipsv) with the ship and the
crew.”


Used metaphorically, Plato says, “I, knowing the
youth to be overwhelmed (fiaimCopsvov) in sophistry. ’
Plutarch, speaking of Otho, says, “ He was over-
whelmed, or sunk in debts of fifty millions
of drachma?.”
Stephanos, in his Thesaurus Ling. Grrncse, the
greatest work of its kind ever compiled, says, “Among
Christians, the word PojroCeiv, when used to denote the
solemn rite by which we are initiated into Christ, is
not translated ; for we say haptizare (to baptize) ; and
those have been very justly disapproved of, who have
presumed to say, lavare (to wash), instead of haptizare
(to baptize), or washing for baptism .”
Cyprian, in several places of his writings, trans-
lates pccitTtCov-e; by tingentes (dipping). As in Matt,
xxviii. 19, he says, “ Teach all nations; dipping
them (tingentes eos) in the name,” &c. Herein he
follows the interpretation of Tertullian, his master,
who explains paicxi&tv by “intingere, to immerse .”
Not to multiply such instances of Pcwcm and PcraxtCra,
signifying to immerse, we may refer to the Septuagint,
where Hebrew words of well defined meaning are
rendered into Greek; and surely here, if a word
which in the Hebrew invariably means to dip is
rendered by the word pauxw or ponmCtu, and a word
which means to sprinkle is never rendered by pcraxm
or pauxiCw, it will sufficiently prove that Pctr.xai and
p»nxtCro signify to dip, and not to sprinkle.
The words referred to are, TABAL, and ZARAH.
The verb “tabal” occurs in Deut. xxxiii. 24, where,
blessing the tribe of Israel, Moses exclaims, “Let
Asher be blessed with children, let him be acceptable
to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil.
It is found in Ruth ii. 14, where Boaz said to Ruth,
“ Dip thy morsel in the vinegar.”


In Exodus xii. 22, we read, “ Ye shall take a bunch
of hyssop and dip it in the blood.”
In 2 Kings v. 14, it is said of Naaman, “ Then went
he down and dipped himself seven times in Jordan.”
No Hebrew scholar will dispute that the essential
meaning of tabal is to dip, and that in these passages
it could mean nothing else is evident, yet in every
instance it is rendered by the verbs panxo) or pairnji».
The word zarah, to sprinkle, occurs in Exodus ix.
8, where Moses and Aaron are instructed to take
handfuls of the ashes of the furnace and sprinkle them
towards heaven; in Exodus xxiv. 6, where we are
told Moses sprinkled half the blood upon the altar;
in Ezekiel x. 2, where coals of fire were ordered to be
scattered over the city; and in Ezekiel xxxvi. 25,
where new covenant blessings are thus promised,
“then will I sprinkle clean water upon you.’’
Now, in none of these instances do we find the
words Pctotcu or (founCio employed to render into Greek
the Hebrew term zarah, the evident reason of which
is, that they do not mean to sprinkle, but contrariwise,
to plunge, to immerse, and to dip.
Both these verbs, tabal and zarah, occur in a single
verse —Levit. iv. 6, where it is said, “And the priest
shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle of the
blood seven times before the Lord; ” and they are
rendered respectively by the words Pccjisi (shall dip,)
and itpoapavsi (shall sprinkle,) while the idea of pouring
in the following verse is rendered by exyeui, showing,
that as renderings for either sprinkling or pouring
Pauxo) and pa-reuCo) are essentially unfit, their meaning
being distinctly to immerse or dip.
Take in connexion with this the use of the word
parrao in the Greek Testament, and PcranCoo has the
same signification, and that immersion is the true


rendering of them will be additionally impressed upon
the mind. It is found in Luke xvi. 24, when the rich
man entreats “ that Lazarus may be sent to dip the
tip of his finger in water.” If some have said that
immersion is not the idea there, since it was only a
part of the finger that was to be placed in the water;
they have forgotten that it was a part only of the
finger that is spoken of— the tip. It was only the tip
that he desired might be dipped. The term is em-
ployed in John xiii. 26, where Christ says, “Heitis to
whom I shall give a sop when I have dipped if.” It
occurs too in Revelation xix. 13, where Christ is repre-
sented “ as having on a garment dipped in blood.”
Wherever in the Scriptures the idea is necessarily
immersion, there (kirno or its derivatives are always
employed, and the word is never used in any other
sense than that of immersion.
Human testimonials are of considerable service in
confirming this view of the signification of the word
baptism.
Grotius says, “ That baptism used to be performed
by immersion, and not by pouring, appears both
from the proper signification of the word and the
places chosen for the administration of the rite.”
John hi. 23, Acts viii. 38, and also from the many
allusions of the Apostles, which cannot be referred to
sprinkling. Rom. vi. 3, 4. Col. ii. 12.*
Vitrixga says, “The act of baptizing is the immer-
sion of believers in water. This expresses the force
of the word. Thus also it was performed by Christ
and the Apostles.” |
The Westminster Assembly of Divines say, “Buried
with him by baptism.” See Col.ii. 12. In this phrase
* Apud Poli Synops. ad Matt. iii. 6.
t Aphorism! Sanct. TheoL Aph. 834,


the apostle seemeth to allude to the ancient manner of
baptism, which was to dip the parties baptized, and as
it were to bury them under the water.”*
Calvin says, “From these words, John iii. 23, it
may be inferred that baptism was administered by
John and Christ by plunging the whole body under
water. Here we perceive how baptism was adminis-
tered among the ancients, for they immersed the whole
body in water.” |
Bishop Jeremy Taylor remarks, “The custom
of the ancient churches was not sprinkling but im-
mersion, in pursuance of the sense of the word (bap-
tize) in the commandment, and the example of our
blessed Lord.”|
Dr. Whitby says, “Tt being so expressly declared
here (Rom. vi. 4.) and Col. ii. 12, that we are “buried
to Christ in baptism,” by being buried under water;
and the argument to oblige us to a conformity to his
death by dying to sin being taken hence; and this
Immersion being religiously observed by all Christians
for thirteen centuries; and approved by our church ;
and the change of it into sprinkling, even without any
allowance from the Author of this institution, or any
licence from any council of the church, being that
which the Romanist still urgeth to justify his refusal
of the cup to the laity; it were to be wished that this
custom might be again of general use, and aspersion
only permitted as of old, in case of the clinici, or in
present danger of death.”§
Archbishop Tillotson says, in his works, vol i.
secar. vii., “Anciently those who were baptized put
off their garments, which signified the putting off the
body of sin, and were immersed and buried in the
* Annot. on Rom. vi. 4. f In Joan iii. 23. Comment in Acts viii. 38.
\ Ductor Dubitantium, b. iii., c. 4, r. 15. § Note on Rom. vi. 4.


water, to represent their death to sin; and then did
rise up out of the water, to signify their entrance upon
a new life; and to these customs the apostle alludes,
Rom. vi. 2, 6.”
Archbishop Secker says in his Lectures on the
Catechism, “ Burying as it were the person baptized
in the water and raising him out of it again, without
question was anciently the more usual method; on
account of which Paul speaks of baptism as represent-
ing both the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ,
and what is grounded on them-—our being dead and
buried to sin, and our rising again to walk in new-
ness of life.”
The candid and devout Doddridge, in his Family
Expositor, note on Rom. vi. 4, says—“lt seems the
part of candour to confess that here is an allusion to
the manner of baptizing by immersion, as most usual
in these early times.”
Baxter, in his Paraphrase on the New Testament,
on Rom. vi. 4, says —“Therefore, in our baptism we
are dipped under the water, as signifying our covenant
profession, that as He was buried for sin, we are dead
and buried to sin ; that as the glorious power of God
raised Him from the dead, so we should rise to live to
Him in newness and holiness of life.”
Whitfield, in his sermon on Rom. vi. 3,4, says,
“ It is certain that in the words of our text, there is
an allusion to the manner of baptism, which was by
immersion
Dr. Chalmers, in his Exposition of Rom. vi. 4,
says, “ The original meaning of the word baptism is
immersion ; and though we regard it (but why ?) as a
point of indifferency, whether the ordinance so named
be performed in this way, or by sprinkling, yet we
doubt not that the prevalent style of the administration


in the Apostle’s day, was by an actual submerging of
the whole body under water. We advert to this for
the purpose of throwing light on the analogy that is
instituted in these verses. Jesus Christ, by death,
underwent this sort of baptism, even immersion under
the surface of the ground, whence he soon emerged
again by this resurrection. We, by being baptized
into his death, are conceived to have made a similar
translation; in the act of descending under the water
of baptism, to have resigned an old life, and in the act
of ascending, to emerge into a second or new life.”
Dr. Campbell, whose work on the Four Gospels,
as a critical work, is beyond all praise, says, “ The
word panTt&iv, both in sacred authors and in classical,
signifies to dip, to plunge, to immerse ; and was ren-
dered by Tertullian, the oldest of the Latin fathers,
tingere, the term used for dyeing cloth, which was by
immersion. It is always construed suitably to this
meaning. Thus it is sv uStm, in water, sv lopSavrj, in
Jordan.”
Bossuet, the master and prince of all pulpit orators
that France has ever produced, speaking of dipping,
says, “We are able to make it appear by the acts of
councils, and by the ancient rituals, that for thirteen
hundred years, baptism was thus administered through-
out the whole church, as far as possible.”
Bishop Burnet says, “We know that the first ritual
of baptism was by going into the waters, and being
laid as dead backwards all along in them, and then
the persons baptized were raised up again, and so they
came out of them.”
The Encyclopedia Ecclbsiastica says, “ What-
ever weight may be in these reasons as a defence for
the present practice of sprinkling, it is evident, that
during the first ages of the church, and for many


centuries afterwards, the practice of immersion pre-
vailed, and which seems indeed never to be departed
from, except where it was administered to a person at
the. point of death, or upon the bed of sickness, which
was considered indeed as not giving the party the full
privileges of baptism.”
Mosheim, in the history of the first century, says,
“ The sacrament of baptism was administered in this
century ivithout the public assemblies, in places ap-
pointed and prepared for that purpose, and was
performed by immersion of the whole body in the
baptismal font.”
Of the second century, ho also says, “ The persons
who were baptized after they had repeated the creed,
confessed and renounced their sins—and particularly
the devil and his pompous allurements—were immersed
under water, and received into Christ’s kingdom, by a
solemn invocation of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
according to the express command of our blessed
Lord.”
Even Du. Halley, in his great and comparatively
recent work on the Sacraments, speaks thus of the
meaning of the word, “We believe that fkwiCa) is to
make one thing to be in another by dipping, by im-
mersing, by burying, by covering, by superfusion, or
whatever mode effected, provided it be in immediate
contact.”
The mode, then, of baptism would certainly appear
to have been by dipping or immersion. The testi-
monies selected are not baptist, but paedobaptist; and
they fully establish this point. Whatever the subject,
whether an unconscious babe, or an intelligent and
convinced disciple, whether a babe or a believer in
Jesus Christ, the method was dipping. Tertullian
distinctly says—“ Mergimur in aqua, we are dipped


in water;” and again —“ln aqua demissus, et inter
pauca verba tinctus, let down into the water, and
amid a few words, dipped.”
Baptism in the New Testament is first mentioned
in connexion with John, the forerunner of Christ.
He was the son of Zechariah and Elizabeth; conse-
quently of the Jewish priesthood. His baptism would
naturally be framed according to some ordinance exist-
ing among the Jews. Making proselytes from among
the Jews to the new dispensation that he was honored
to usher in, he would naturally adopt a mode of
baptism employed among the Jews. Now the baptism
of proselytes among the Jews, as Drs. Lightfoot and
Wolfius on Matt. iii. 6, and John iii. 23, affirm, was
uniformly by immersion. In the rabbinical laws, the
Hebrew word tahal , the meaning of which we have
seen is to dip, is always used for that ceremony. Take
this in connexion with the recorded baptism of the
multitudes who flocked to John in the wilderness, and
the baptism of our Lord himself:—
“ Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judsea,
and all the region round about Jordan, and were
baptized of him in Jordan confessing their sins.”
“ Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John,
to be baptized of him ; but John forbad him, saying,
I have need to bo baptized of thee, and comest thou
to me. And Jesus, answering, said unto him, suffer
it to be so now, for thus it becometh us to fulfil all
righteousness. Then he suffered him. And Jesus,
when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the
water.”
Where is there an idea of anything but immersion
here? Baptism of proselytes among the Jews was by
immersion. John was a Jewish priest, whose province
under the Jewish dispensation would have been to


baptize in that way; he baptized his proselytes in
Jordan ; he was there to do that because much water
was there. Christ, being baptized by him, is said to
have gone—not from the river , but —up out of the
water. And the poets were right who sang
“To Jordan’s stream the Saviour goes,
To do his Father’s will;
His breast with sacred ardor glows,
Each precept to fulfil.
Behold him buried in the flood,
(The emblem of his grave;)
Who from the bosom of his God
Came down a world to save.’’
“ Thus it became the Prince of grace,
And thus should all the favored race
High heaven’s command fulfil.
For that our condescending Lord
Should lead his followers through the flood,
Was heaven’s eternal will.
’Tis not as led by custom’s voice
We make these ways our favored choice,
And thus with zeal pursue.
No! heaven’s eternal sovereign Lord
Has in the precepts of his word
Enjoined us so to do.”
But to continue the stern facts that prove Christian
Baptism to have been by immersion. It is worthy of
notice, that the Greek church baptize universally in
that way. That church never was so corrupt as the
church of Rome, and the dispersion of its learned
pastors through Europe, when Constantinople bowed
to Turkish power, greatly contributed to the bringing
about of the glorious Reformation. There, at any rate,
they must have understood the meaning of the word
(BairaCro, for it was their mother tongue, and there they
have invariably dipped.
The language has greatly changed from the days
when Plato taught and Homer sung ; but not in those
words that denote the common actions of life. Nnmu,
still means to wash the hands, or face, or part of the
body; nXuvo, to wash clothes; Xoum, to bathe;
to dye; is used in a religious sense only; and


what that sense is, may be known from their universal
practice— immersion. It is indisputable that over all
the Greek church, baptism and immersion are con-
sidered synonymous terms.
In the Swedish, Dutch, Danish, and German ver-
sions of the Scriptures, the word paimo is rendered
respectively by the verbs doppa, doopen, dypper, and
tupfen, all of which signify to dip ; showing plainly
what the opinion formed by the classics of those
countries was on the meaning of pa-itvm. They held it
to be— to dip.
Db. Knapp, in his Christian Theology, on the mode
of baptism, says, “ Immersion is peculiarly agreeable
to the institution of Christ, and to the practice of the
apostolical church; and so even John baptized; and
immersion remained common for a long time after;
except that in the third century, or perhaps earlier,
the baptism of the sick, (baptisma clinicorum) was
performed by sprinkling or affusion. Still some would
not acknowledge this to be true baptism, and con-
troversy arose concerning it, so unheard of was it at
that time to baptize by simple affusion. Cyprian first
defended baptism by sprinkling when necessity called
for it, but cautiously, and with much limitation.”
Sib David Brewster, in the Edinburgh Encyclo-
pedia, published 1830, says, “ Baptism, derived from
the Greek verb pM-rtCm, to dip or tinge, is the
initiatory rite in the Christian religion. Baptism in
the apostolic age was performed by immersion. Many
writers of respectability maintain, that the Greek
verb PairnCto, as well as its Hebrew synonyme, some-
times denotes sprinkling; but the various passages to
which they appeal will lead every considering mind to
a different conclusion. The circumstances recorded
concerning the first administration are likewise incom-


patible with sprinkling. Had a small quantity of
water been sufficient, the inspired historian would
never have said that John baptized in the river
Jordan, and in Enon, because there was much water
there. The administrators and the subjects of bap-
tism are always described as descending into the
water, and after, ascending out of it. When Paul
affirms that we are buried with Christ in baptism and
raised again, he not only alludes to immersion, but
upon any other supposition, there would be no pro-
priety in the metaphor which he employs. We are
likewise said to bo saved by sia Xodtoou, the washing, or
by the bath of regeneration, where there is a manifest
reference to baptism performed by immersion. Imme-
diately after the apostolic age, however, trine immer-
sion was introduced either to signify the three persons
in the Trinity, or the three days that Christ lay in the
grave. But as the Arians, who rose in the fourth
century, maintained that this implied that the three
persons were distinct substances, it was laid aside for
a short time by the orthodox. It is impossible to
mark the precise period when sprinkling was intro-
duced. It is probable, however, that it was invented
in Africa, in the second century, in favor of clinics.
But it was so far from being approved of by the
church in general, that the Africans themselves did
not account it valid.
“ The first law for sprinkling was obtained in the fol-
lowing manner:—Pope Stephen 111. being driven from
Home by Astulphus, king of the Lombards, in 753, fled
to Pepin, who a short time before had usurped the crown
of France. Whilst he remained there the monks of Cressy
in Brittany consulted him, whether in a case of necessity
baptism performed by pouring water upon the head of
the infant would be lawful. Stephen replied, that it


would. But though the truth of this fact should he
allowed, which some Catholics deny, yet pouring or
sprinkling was only admitted in cases of necessity. It
was not till 1311, that the legislators in a council held
at Ravenna, declared immersion or sprinkling to be
indifferent. In this country (Scotland), however,
sprinkling was never practised in ordinary cases till
after the Reformation ; and in England, even in the
reign of Edward YL, trine immersion, dipping first
the right side, secondly, the left side, and last, the face
of the infant, was commonly observed. But during
the persecution of Mary, many persons, most of whom
were Scotsmen, fled from England to Geneva, and
there greedily imbibed the opinions of that church.
In 1556, a book was published at that place con-
taining ‘ The forms of prayer and ministration of the
sacraments approved by the famous and godly-learned
man, John Calvin,’ in which the administrator is en-
joined to take water in his hand, and lay it upon the
child’s forehead. These Scottish exiles who had
renounced the authority of the Pope, implicitly ac-
knowledged the authority of Calvin ; and returning to
their own country with Knox at their head, in 1559,
established sprinkling in Scotland. From Scotland
this practice made its way into England in the reign
of Elizabeth, but was not authorised by the established
church. In the Assembly of Divines, held at West-
minster, in 1643, it was keenly debated whether
immersion or sprinkling should be adopted ; twenty-
five voted for sprinkling, twenty-four for immersion;
and even this small majority was obtained at the
earnest request of Dr. Lightfoot, who had acquired
great influence in the assembly. Sprinkling is, there-
fore, the general practice of this country. Many
Christians, however, especially the Baptists, reject


it. The Greek church universally adhere to im-
mersion.”
We might also bring fonts and ancient usages in
Scotland and Ireland to bear testimony in favor of
immersion as the mode of baptism ; for the fonts, as
may be seen by reference to Simpson’s Ancient Bap-
tismal Fonts, in which nearly four hundred are de-
scribed, were of the average diameter of two feet, and
the depth one foot. This size admitted of the immer-
sion of the infant. No such size would be needed for
sprinkling. In his preface to the work, Simpson says,
“As immersion teas practised in this church until the
Reformation, and perhaps occasionally letter, as ivill
afterwards appear, all fonts were, up to that period,
made sufficiently large for the purpose.”
In the Canons of Councils, held at Perth, in Scotland,
in 1242 and 1296, the days of Wallace and Bruce,
there were compiled directions for the proper adminis-
tration of church service on the matter of Baptism :
the words given the minister to repeat, are prefaced
by this injunction, “Ante immersionem, dicantur verba
supradicta.” “ Before immersion, the aforesaid words
are to be said.”
In the Book of Common Prayer, the fonts were
required “to be filled with pure water; ” and the
priest, if the health of the child permitted, was re-
quired “ to dip it in the water discreetly and warily.”
Erasmus, contrasting the practice of the Dutch
church with the English in 1530, says, “Perfunduntur
apud nos, merguntur apud Anglos.” “ They are
poured upon among us, they are dipped among the
English.”
This practice is proved by a barbarous custom that
•prevailed in both Scotland as well as Ireland. When a
l id prevailed between two clans, the right hand of


male children was loft unbaptized, in order that, not
being immersed with the rest of the body, they might
with this unwashed, unchristened, unsanctified hand,
deal more deadly blows upon the clan with which they
were at feud. To this custom, the poet Leyden refers
in his “ Ode on visiting Flodden : ”
“And at the sacred font the priest
Through ages left the master hand unblest,
To urge with keener aim the blood-encrusted spear.”
Sib Walter Scott, in his Notes on this Ode, in
the “Minstrelsy of the Border,” relates the above-
mentioned custom to which those lines refer, and adds,
“ The same practice subsisted in Ireland ; as appears
from the following passage in Campion’s History of
Ireland, published in 1663 :—-“In some corners of the
land they used a damnable superstition, leaving the
right arms of their infant males unchristened, as they
termed it, to the end it might give a more ungracious
or deadly blow.” This speaks volumes respecting
immersion as the mode of baptism, prior to the Refor-
mation.
From Dk. Wall, we learn that, “in the early
history of the English church, the offices or liturgies
did all enjoin dipping, without any mention of pouring
or sprinkling. 11l 1549, first appeared the
for weak children.”
Evidence might be multiplied indefinitely for the
fact of immersion being the only mode of baptism for
the first fifteen centuries of the Christian era. What
is here given is merely a sample of the bulk that can
he brought. It alone will suffice.
Among the objections to the practice of baptism by
immersion is one drawn from the multitude supposed
to have been baptized on the day of Pentecost. It
should be remembered, that it is not recorded that the


were baptized the same day; it is only said that they
were added to the disciples; but supposing them to
have been baptized, the difficulty as to time consumed,
would lie as strongly against baptism by sprinkling, as
against baptism by immersion, since what consumes the
time is not the act of sprinkling or immersion, so much
as a reverent and solemn utterance over the candidate
of the words, which in both cases are adopted; and
the difficulty as to water is small, unless it should be
imagined that the candidates consumed or carried away
the quantity they were baptized in. As to exertion,
it was surely possible for the twelve, assisted by the
other disciples, whose number amounted to one hun-
dred and twenty, to baptize each of them fifty adults,
which would give 6,600, or more than double the
number required.
Some have objected, that the baptism of the Is-
raelites in the cloud and in the sea, (1 Cor. x. 1,2,) is
incompatible with the idea of immersion. The apostle,
in the context, informs us how they were baptized, not
by being sprinkled or washed, but by being under the
cloud, and by passing through the sea. With the
cloud above, and the walled water on either side, there
is certainly nothing contrary to the idea of immersion.
They were surrounded with water in a solid or sub-
limated state. But perhaps it were as well not to
attempt to establish or to oppose any mode of baptism,
from a passage in which no clear idea is conveyed,
and in which water ivas not applied at all. To con-
tend that spray and shower formed a baptism by
sprinkling, were a weakness of argument that would
argue a weakness of intellect; nothing more jejune,
trifling, and supposititious could he imagined.
Others have objected, that it was scarcely possible
that in the Jailor’s house water could be found in


which to baptize him, and his straightway. Such an
objection would obtain more readily in Lapland than
in Macedonia. A jail without a bath in such a city
as Philippi, were indeed a strange affair !
It is again objected, that the apostle Paul, referring
to Jewish purifications, employs the phrase .Siatpopoic
Pauxiop-ois, diverse baptisms; and that as some of these
purifications were by sprinkling, the term must denote
sprinkling. Had none of these purifications been by
immersion, a real difficulty would be presented; but
they being frequently by immersion, as an examina-
tion of the Levitical law will prove, the word is em-
ployed by the apostle in this instance according to its
established import.
Lastly, it is objected, that the washings—according
to the Greek, Baptisms —of cups and pots, and brazen
vessels and tables, or those ablutions which the Jews
practised before eating, could not be done by immer-
sion. Mark viii. 3, 4.
As it respects the former, the Jews were commanded
in their law to cleanse unclean vessels by immersing
them, “ whether it be any vessel of wood, or raiment, or
skin, or sack, or whatsoever vessel it be, wherein any
work is done, it must be put into water.” Lev.xi. 32.
How easy it was for them superstitiously to enlarge
this command, and immerse other articles not enjoined.
It may seem to an inhabitant of a cold country, to be
strange that the Jews should immerse themselves be-
fore eating. But all who are acquainted with the cere-
monial immersions of the natives of the East, will cease
to be surprised. Moreover, the learned Scaliger says,“ the
more superstitious part of them (the Jews) every day
before they sat down to meat, dipped their whole body.”*
* De Emend. Tempi. 1. vi. p. YU.


And Maimonides asserts, “ that whenever in the law
washing of the flesh or clothes is mentioned, it means
nothing else than the dipping of the whole body in a
laver ; for if any man dips himself all over, except the
tip of his little finger, he is still in his uncleanness.”*
“A bed that is wholly defiled, if a man dips it part by
part, it is pure.”f
That these baptisms, then, were immersions can,
with such testimony, be no longer a subject of reason-
able doubt.
In fine, it may be affirmed, “ that not only all the
branches of the Greek Church, but the whole Christian
world for the space of thirteen hundred years, practised
immersion as the only valid baptism. Sprinkling
or pouring was never tolerated except in case of
dangerous sickness, or want of a sufficient quantity of
water; and even then the validity of the application
was always disputed. Those who were thus baptized
by pouring were called clinics not Christians, and were
prohibited the priesthood. Never by any Christians
in any age, was sprinkling or pouring allowed in com-
mon cases, until the Council of Ravenna assembled by
the Pope in the year, 1311, declared immersion or
pouring to be indifferent. From that time the latter
gradually came into general use. It was not, however,
admitted into England till the middle of the 16th
century, and not sanctioned till the middle of the 17th,
when the Westminster Assembly decided “ that dipping
the person in water is not necessary, but baptism is
rightly administered by pouring or sprinkling water
on the person.”|
Leaving the mode of baptism, settled beyond all
* Hilchot. Mikvaol c, i, sec. ii
f Hilchot. Celim, c. xxvi, sec. xiv. Ikenius Antiq. Hebraic#, pars l.
c. xvm. sec. 6. Stackhouse’s Hist, of the Bible, b. viii„ c. i, p. 1234.
t Hr. Juclson. 1


hopeful controversy in favor of immersion, we may
pass to the consideration of the proper subjects of
baptism. Reverting to the passage originally started
from,we find the commission to run, “Go ye,therefore,
disciple me all nations, immersing them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”
That is the literal rendering. The verb, jiaßrpsuaaxe,
translated in the common version “teach” signifies to
make a disciple of, a learner—and jiaO-ipyj;, derived
from it, signifies a disciple, or learner; and in the
German translation by Martin Luther it is rendered
learner. The instruction then, given by the Saviour
was, that his disciples, or learners, should make dis-
ciples, or learners, of all nations, that is, make them
such as they themselves were. They were to do so,
not by baptizing them, but by preaching the gospel to
to them. Matt. xxi. 15. When, under their teaching,
any became disciples, ot learners, as they themselves
were, they were to be baptized. He that believeth,
and is baptized, shall be saved.
That the order of procedure was to make disciples,
and then baptize them as disciples, may be learned
from John iv. 1,. where it is said, “When Jesus made
and baptized moire disciples than John.’’ They were
made disciples first, and baptized as disciples after-
wards. There is no reversal in all the word of God
of this primitive and sensible order of things. John
preached repentance, and the multitudes he baptized
in Jordan, were baptized confessing their sins. Bap-
tism followed their repentance, as a consequence of it,
and did not precede it as a cause of it.
Whenever disciples are spoken of, and there is no
command to baptize any but disciples, they are spoken
of in such a connexion as to lead to the inevitable
conclusion that they were thinking and responsible


creatures. A few passages may be quoted. In the
passage already referred to, John iv, 1. baptizers and
baptized are described by the same term, disciples.
“If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and
mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and
sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
disciple.” “Whoesoever doth not bear his cross, and
come after me, cannot be my disciple.” “Why do the
disciples of John fast often, and make prayers, and
likewise the disciples of the Pharisees, but thine eat
and drink? ’ “None of his disciples durst ask him.’’
“And when the disciples heal’d it, they fell on their
faces, and were sore afraid.” “The disciples came
together to break bread.”
From these passages, which might be indefinitely
multiplied, it is evident a disciple was an intelligent
free agent, aud not a mere infant. They are repre-
sented as doing what infants could not do. Now such
the disciples were to make men, “ Go and disciple me
all nations.” Making them disciples they were to
baptize them, or as the real force of the word is,
immerse them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. ,
If the passages be consulted in which baptism is
spoken of, a great amount of direct and positive evi-
dence for adult and believers’ baptism will be seen,
and only the most distant and inferential support for
infant baptism, and even that drawn, as we shall show,
from very doubtful premises. We do not gain a
notion of children in all the accounts of John’s bap-
tism. A preacher of stern aspect and message, in a
desolate region, far from the haunts of men, he had no
ordinance for those who could not repent, and could
not confess, for helpless and unconscious humanity.
There is no mention of an infant; the whole terms of


the description assure us that there were none. Phari-
sees came, Saddueees came, Publicans came—all
Jerusalem went; but there is no word that gives us
the least hint that a single creature was brought.
Reason and Scripture both dictate the conclusion, that
not a solitary infant partook of that rite. They could
not repent, they could not confess sin; why then
should they partake of an ordinance, in connexion
with which repentance and confession were enforced ?
The same course of reasoning arises in connexion
with the declaration of our Lord —“ He that believeth
and is baptized shall be saved;” taken in connexion
with the language of Philip to the Eunuch, “If thou
believest with all thine heart, thou mayest.” Faith is
here taught to be a prerequisite of baptism —a faith of
the whole heart; the word heart, comprehending the
reason, the affections, the will; in short, the whole
man. Now children cannot believe; they have neither
mind to comprehend the truth, nor heart to embrace
it. How can they then be the subjects of an ordi-
nance, in connexion with which faith is not only
spoken of, but absolutely insisted upon ?
The language of Peter, when Pentecost was fully
come, and the commission given to make disciples,
and immerse them, was first opened, was, “ Repent,
and be baptized,” or dipped, as Luther has it; lan-
guage that could only be addressed to adults. “ Then
they that gladly received the word,” that is, who be-
came disciples, and certainly could not be children,
“ were dipped as the German of Luther reads. They
were believers, and were immersed.
Philip, driven by persecution from Jerusalem to
Samaria, opened the gospel commission there, and
endeavoured to make disciples of the people, preaching
Christ to them. He was honored with success; for it


is recorded, that “ they believed Philip, preaching the
things concerning the kingdom of God, and the name
of Jesus Christ; and they were baptized, both men
and women.” But while men and women are specified,
children are not so much as hinted at; nor could they
have the precedents of baptism here defined — belief in
the things of the kingdom of God, and belief in the
name of Christ. Men and women believed, and were,
as Luther’s bible again here says, dipped. In other
words, they were immersed upon a profession of faith.
When Philip afterwards baptized the Ethiopian
Eunuch, it was upon a distinct and emphatic profession
of faith in Christ. When he could affirm from his
heart his belief in Jesus Christ, that he was the Son
of God, “ then went they both down into the water,
and he was baptized,” or dipped, as honest Luther
says in his version.
Saul was no sooner brought to believe in Christ,
than he was to be baptized as a believer. Ananias,
putting his hands upon him, said, “ Brother Saul, the
Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way
that thou earnest, hath sent me, that thou mightest
receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost.
And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had
been scales, and he received sight forthwith, and arose,
and was immersed.” His faith qualified him for that
rite; and the fact of his receiving baptism at the
hands of Ananias, may prove inferentially, what some
have ventured to call in question—the baptism of the
first disciples and apostles of our Lord. If it was an
ordinance not necessary for them, why was it neces-
sary for the apostle Paul ? He that helieveth, and is
baptized, is a rule that had, in the times of Christ and
his apostles, no exception. The believing were bap-
tized and none others.


In the case of the first Gentile converts, we find
Peter preached to them “Christ, as having lived and
died and risen again, and as to be the ultimate Judge
of the quick and the dead. They heard the word;
t hey received the Holy Ghost; and they were com-*
manded to be baptized in the name of the Lord.*
They heard the word, they received the Holy Ghost,
they spake with tongues; they were therefore not
children, but adults; were believers, and not- uncon-
scious infants.
In the case of Lydia also; her heart teas opened,
that she attended to the things which were spoken of
Paul. She again was a baptized believer.
The Philippian jailor, having escaped the horrors of
suicide, listens to the preaching of Paul, and all his
household as well; for Paul and Silas, it is expressly
stated, spake the word of the Lord unto him, and to
all that were in his house; and he was baptized, he
and all his straightway ; and he believed in God with
all his house. He must he very clever who can see
anything hut believers' baptism there.
In Acts xviiL 38, we have an account of Paul’s
ministry at Corinth, and find that “ Crispns believed
on the Lord with a II his house* pv u.m -a ctzto and
many of the Cormthiaas, hearing, believed, and were
baptized." Here, then, is believers’ baptism, and
another ot the households, laid so much stress upon,
is clearly shewn to have been a household of believers.
Crispos and all his house believed on the Lord. Paul
himself, as we learn, from Ms Epistles,- baptized, this
believing family.
Leaving Corinth for Ephesus, Paul found certain
disciples, not children, as we learn, but persons who
had been baptized unto John’s baptism. He urges on
them faith in Christ; saying, ‘‘John verily baptized


with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the
people, that they should believe on him which should
come after him, that is on Jesus Christ.” When they
heard this they were baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus. “And when Paul had laid his hands on them,
the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spake with
tongues and prophesied. Surely these things are no
predicates of children—the faculty of prophecy, and the
gift of tongues!
After these references there can, I think, be no
doubt that believers’ baptism is scriptural, thoroughly
scriptural, and it is only with the Scriptures we have
at present to do. The Baptists, understanding by that;
term those who immerse believers in the Lord Jesus
Christ, can certainly regard themselves as upon a
scriptural basis. Their practice, and that of our Lord
and his apostles, certainly are one and the same. All
that has been adduced proves it. If infants were
baptized, where is the mention of it, and where are
the reasons of it ? There certainly is not the word
infant to be found in connexion with baptism through
the whole New Testament! There were men. there
were women , there were such as heard the word and
believed the word , such as prophesied and spake with
tongues; but while adults and believers are every
where indicated, where is the statement or example of
a child receiving the rite ? With all respect, we say
nowhere in the whole word of God,
The advocates of infant baptism, giving up all hope
of proving their correctness of procedure by example,
or command, seek to substantiate it by inference
and analogy; .and one of their most frequently advanced
arguments is drawn from the words of our Saviour,
“ Suffer little children, and forbid them not to come
linto me, for of such is the kingdom of heavenhi


Mark’s Gospel it is saaid that “ they brought young
children to him that he slhould touch them,” then he said,
“ Suffer the little childrten to come unto me, and for-
bid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God.
Verily I say unto you,, whosoever shall not receive
the kingdom of God as i a little child, he shall not enter
therein. And he took them up in his arms, put his
hands upon them, and! blessed them.” The gospel
narrative of Luke differs in no material particular
from that of Matthew mnd Mark.
It is clear that in these passages there is nothing
said about baptism. The children were not brought
to Christ for that purpose. It was that Jesus might
touch them, not baptize them. He does not give them
back to his disciples to immerse them, nor to sprinkle
them. He blessed them; he put his hands upon them,
and he taught a lesson from their comparatively guile-
less disposition, respecting the essential qualifications
of his believing people. But that he entitled them to
the rite of baptism is without a particle or shadow of
proof. He taught us how we should love them, and
foster them, and pray for them, but not how we
should baptize them.
We are met again by our opponents with an in-
ference that, as there were households baptized, and as
children form part of some households, it is probable
that infants were baptized.
Now the households concerning which we have any
mention, are Lydia’s, the Jailor’s, Crispus’s, and the
household of Stephanas.
It appears that Lydia was a woman of Thyatira,
residing in Philippi for the purpose of trade. It does
not appear that she had a husband or children. It is
more probable that her household was composed of
assistants in her business who, following her example,


believed and were baptized; for we are informed, that
when Paul and Silas left the city, they entered into
the house of Lydia, and saw and comforted “ the
brethren.”
In the case of the Jailor, we have already pointed
out, that Paul and Silas spake the word of the Lord
to all that were in his house; and that he rejoiced
believing in God with all his house. Listening to the
preached word, and believing in consequence, are no
acts of children. And all listened and all believed.
Concerning the household of Crispus it was the
same. He believed on the Lord with all his house.
And concerning the household of Stephanas, Paul
writes at the close of his Epistle/ 1 Cor. xvi. 15.,
“ That it is the first fruits of Achaia, and that they
have addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints.
Thus, in three cases out of four, there are circum-
stances amounting to positive proof, that the members
of those households were professing believers ; and in
the remaining case —that of Lydia, there is no hint
either of husband or offspring. What a shadow of a
shade on which to build the practice of sprinkling the
infants of the wide wide world!
But it is adduced that children have been connected
with their parents in covenant with God under a
former dispensation, and in consequence of that con-
nexion, received by divine appointment, the initiating
seal; their covenant connexion has never been dis-
solved, nor their right to the initiating seal disannulled.
By this is meant, that as children by circumcision,
received at their parents’ hands, were introduced
into the covenant made with Abraham; so now,
children, by baptism received at the hands of their
parents, are introduced into the covenant of grace.
Two or three difficulties ought to have presented


themselves to the advocates of infant baptism, in
adopting this reasoning: the first—that of proving
that, because children have been connected with their
parents in one covenant, they must, therefore, be in
every covenant; the second—that of proving there is
a strict agreement between the covenant made with
Abraham, and the covenant made with believers
under the gospel dispensation; thirdly—that of prov-
ing that baptism has come in the place of circum-
cision. at all; and lastly—if it have, to prove any
conformity in their practice, since that ordinance was
administered only to -male children, and always on the
eighth day.
The first position, that children having been con-
nected with parents under one covenant, must of
necessity be under every other, unless it were precisely
of a similar nature and conditions, is simply illogical
and absurd. Everyone must see that it does not
follow at all.
The second point; that there is a strict agreement
between the covenant to which circumcision was the
seal and the covenant of grace, cannot be established.
The covenant made with Abraham, while it had re-
ference to spiritual things, which are not hereditary,
and cannot descend from father to child independently
and of right, had reference to temporal blessings which
could, and the parent registered by circumcision his
child’s claim to those blessings. The grand matters
assured in that covenant (xvii. Gen.) were, “that
Ahraham should be a father of many nations ; that
God would be a God to him and his seed after him;
that the land of Canaan should be to his seed for an
everlasting possession.” This was a national covenant,
of a national religion, relating to national glory and
advantages : the new covenant is a spiritual covenant,


non-national; for Christ’s kingdom is not of this
world, and having for its promises “ non res Romanas
perituraque regna,” but spiritual blessings, the blessings
of grace and of glory.
There was a covenant made with Abraham when
he was called to leave his fatherland, and the objects
of relative affection, that had in it the great promise
that in him all the nations of the earth should be
blessed, and so looked much more like a spiritual
covenant. But that was made years before, and to it
no seal whatever was attached.
The covenants being then essentially different, it
cannot follow that children having received the
initiatory seal to the one, should receive of right and
of course, the initiative seal to the other.
Then, that baptism has come in the place of cir-
cumcision is very difficult of belief, there is so little
analogy between them. In the one, the command was
to parents and masters for their male children and
men servants; but in baptism, the command is to
believers, for themselves only. If we could find such
a passage as this, “ Parents love your children, and
dedicate them to God in baptismor, if we could
find in the writings of Paul to the Judaizing teachers,
who introduced circumcision into the Galatian church,
a passage such as this, “ Why return to circumcision,
baptism has come in its place all would be clear. It
would have been just the argument to employ against
their adoption of the rite of the old (economy, but we
do not meet with it. What baptism denotes is, our
union to Christ in death, burial, and resurrection,
death with Christ to sin and the world; our burial
with him in baptism, and our resurrection to walk
with Christ in newness and holiness of life. If, then,
baptism had really come in the place of circumcision


there could certainly be no propriety in administering
it to babes, who do not die to sin and the world; and
do not rise to life with Christ, and who, in the vast
majority of instances, from the font to the grave, give
no evidence whatever of such death and resurrection.
But of any, really deeming the covenants to be
identical, that both are the same, and that the initia-
tive seal only is changed, we would ask—Why depart
from the terms of ancient prescription ? why baptize
any save male children? why baptize on any other
than the day Jehovah appointed, the eighth day? It
is in direct disobedience to the command of God, if
you baptize on any other day; if you baptize a female
child; nay, you should baptize your infants your-
selves ; it was no part of the priest’s duty to circum-
cise; it was the parents’ duty; so baptizing, if it come
in the place of circumcision, must be no part of a
minister’s duty, but a parent’s duty: and as temporal
blessings were sealed under the old rite, they should
be expected under the new.
The fact is, that baptism has no connexion with
circumcision, or relation to it at all. It was adopted
from the mode of receiving proselytes into the Jewish
church, concerning which a few lines may be cited
from Knapp’s Theology, very pertinent to the case—
He says “The Talmud and its interpreters relate,
that the proselytes, as well circumcised as uncircumcised,
were initiated by baptism into the worship of the one
true God; and that this was a symbol of purification
from sin; and of their renunciation of heathenism;
and that they were then considered as ‘ born again,’
exactly the expression used by Christ, (John hi.) and
by Paul, (Titus hi.) respecting Christian Baptism.
The Talmudists make this practice very ancient, and
place it as far back as the time of Moses.”


This point has been gone into more at length than
some may think it entitled to, because it was here the
mind of the author of this tract hesitated most, when
investigating the question, and because he is persuaded
it is here many almost Baptists are kept from being
altogether such. Perhaps this part of the subject
may be best concluded by giving the opinions of
Dr. Halley, of Manchester, and Dr. Alexander, of
Edinburgh:—
De. Halley regards this argument for infant bap-
tism, drawn from the Abrahamio covenant as perfectly
untenable—“ After some anxious consideration, it
appears to me that the argument in favor of the
transmission of the sign of the Christian covenant,
from the believing parent to his children, founded
upon the transmission of the sign of the Abrahamic
covenant, through the hereditary line of Abraham,
fails in almost every particular. Independently of
the feebleness of its foundation, the administration of
baptism only to believing adults; the general opinion
that baptism is substituted for circumcision as a kind
of hereditary seal of the covenant of grace, appears to
be ill-sustained by scriptural evidence, and to be
exposed to some very serious, if not absolutely fatal
objections.”
To this may be added a passage from Dr. Alex-
ander’s Life of Dr. Wardlaw, published during the
last year, in which he refers to the supposed right
of children to baptism derivable by analogy from the
Abrahamic covenant:—“Turn it as I may,” he says,
“ this argument from the Abrahamic covenant, in
favor of infant baptism, always presents itself to my
mind as fallacious. The fallacy seems to me to lie in
a petitio principii, an assuming the thing to be proved,
viz., that the children of believers are, in virtue of


their parents’ faith, under the covenant. Let this be
proved, and there can he no further question as to
their title to receive tho sign of the covenant; be it
circumcision, or be it baptism. But I confess it does
not appear to me a paralogism to argue, that because
the natural seed of Abraham received the sign of the
covenant in virtue of their descent from him, by
which they were brought undoubtedly under the
covenant, therefore the natural seed of Gentile be-
lievers arc also to be held included under the covenant
and as entitled to receive the sign of this. There may
be a logical consequence here, but I confess it is as
yet hid from my perception.” Further on, he remarks
-—“To my mind, if baptism is to be regarded as
having come in the place of circumcision, the argu-
ment from the Abrahamic covenant lies altogether
with the Baptists and not with us. For, in virtue of
the relation of type and antitype, the natural
descent of the Israelites corresponds to the spiritual
descent of believers, that is, their succession through
one becoming the spiritual father of others; and con-
sequently as natural descent entitled the Jew to
circumcision as the sign of the covenant, it is spiritual
descent which alone entitles a man to receive baptism,
as that which under the spiritual dispensation has
come in the place of circumcision. Hence, as natural
descent from Jewish parents must be proved before a
child could be circumcised of old, so spiritual descent
by faith from those who have conveyed to us the
gospel, in other words, real conversion must be proved
before a man is entitled to be baptized. I do not
know whether our Baptist friends will think them-
selves the better of this argument; but, if they do,
I make them welcome to it; I think it quite as good
as that on the other side, but no better.”


Dr, Alexander’s candor must be admired, and Baptists
will be pleased with any argument which, not essen-
tially vicious, would go to prove baptism to be a rite
proper to a spiritual person, after conversion to God;
but the learned Dr. may rest assured that it is not by
parallelisms and analogies, and inferential surmises,
but by positive commands and multiplied examples
that believer’s baptism is established.
A moment’s pause may be here allowed to mm up
to the present point.
The plain facts then were, that persons were to be
made learners or disciples, and then to be baptized as
such; they were to believe and be baptized; wherever
there is an account of baptism administered by the
apostles, or their coadjutors, faith is mentioned, and
receiving the word gladly, or some other act of the
mind, peculiar only to the possession and exercise of
full reasoning faculties; that there is no case of the
baptism of an infant to be found in all the Scriptures ;
that there is no command given to baptize them;
that the inferential evidence in favor of infant baptism
totally fails; for the households baptized believed in
the Lord, consequently did not contain children. The
Abrahamic covenant was different from the covenant
of grace, and the rite of baptism wanting in all analogy
to circumcision, so as not to come in its place at all
On which side does truth be ? On the one side there
is a command, there are manifold examples; on the
other side, there is no command, there is no example.
Our Lord was baptized as an adult, Paul as an adult,
the three thousand as adults ; ail others as adults, bat
infants never. They were brought to Christ to be
touched by him, but not to be baptized ; he took them
in his arms and blessed them, but did not baptize them:
nor is there anywhere an idea or hint of their partaking


of that most solemn rite. On which side the truth lies,
cannot admit of a doubt. Let the Scriptures bo con-
sulted ; let the sure Word of Testimony, to which we
do well to take heed, bo our guide ; let the commendable
spirit of Berean inquisitiveness animate us ; let us hear
clear and loud above all human voices the utterances of
divine truth, and we shall assuredly gather and conclude
that baptism upon a profession of faith, baptism in
which a believer publicly puts on Christ, baptism of
such as can and do believe God’s message concerning
his Son Jesus Christ, and of such alone, is the only
heaven sanctioned baptism.
It will undoubtedly be interesting and instructive to
pursue this subject in the direction of Church History.
The ground now to be trodden is often supposed by
Psedobaptists to be all their own, and censure may be
incurred by the author of this tract, for risking a good
cause by leaving the sure Word of Testimony which so
supports and establishes it to take up a questionable
position. But the object in advancing, is to shew that
the evidence, even here , is entirely against those who
practice infant baptism, and that the post of their
imagined impregnability is one entirely untenable,
from which they will be compelled to withdraw : while,
should this view not be established, the citadel of Holy
Writ may again be returned to, where every ad-
vocate of believers’baptism may rest satisfied and secure.
Lest any should imagine that there is unfairness in
attributing to Paedobaptists a confident recourse to
church history, the language of Bishop Bossuet may
be quoted, who says, “Experience has shewn that all
the attempts of the reformed to confound the Ana-
baptists by scripture, have been weak, and therefore
they are at last obliged to allege to them the practice
of the churchy


In one of the Cyclopedias, Chambers’, under the
articles “Anabaptist,” there occurs the following state-
ment : “As none but adults are capable of believing,
they (the German Baptists) argued that no others are
capable of baptism, especially as there is no passage in
all the new Testament where the baptism of infants is
clearly enjoined: Calvin, and the other writers against
them are pretty much embarassed to answer this
argument, and are obliged to have recourse to tradition,
and the practice of the primitive church.
Also the Oxford divines in a convocation, held 1647,
acknowledged, “that without the consentaneous judg-
ment of the universal church, they should be at a loss
when they were called upon for proof in the point of
infant baptism,”
Church history and church practice, then, may
certainly be represented as favorite resources and
strongholds of those who practise the baptism of
children; how safely we shall now endeavor to shew.
Church history, so far as we have it in the Acts of
the Apostles, and so far as we may gather it from the
writings of the apostles, is, as we have already seen
directly against Psedobaptists. Baptism of believers
is over and over again mentioned, but of infant baptism
there is not a syllable or a whisper. What if it can
be shewn that the same silence reigns during the first
century, the second century, and almost until the
middle of the third ! What is the voice of the church
during the ages nearest bordering upon the apostolic
age ? What say the fathers ? If it can be proved that
their writings contain no reference to infant baptism,
and frequent reference to believers’ baptism, it will, it
is supposed be conceded that that is all a reasonable
person could require; and this, at least, may be
affirmed respecting the apostolic fathers.


By the apostolic fathers, is meant the Christian
writers of the first century; they were Barnabas,
Hennas, Clemens Eomanus, Ignatius, and Polycarp.
They have been read and re-read, have been searched
by all sorts of study lamps, and with the very best
classical spectacles, but no scintilla of statement has
been detected in them in favor of infant baptism.
There is express mention in them of the baptism of
believers ; but of infant baptism not a word. Their
testimony is identical with that of the New Testament,
and is just what might have been expected, and is all
that could be wished.
In the second century, we meet with Justin Martyr,
Athenagoras, Theophilas of Antioch, 1 atian, Irenmus,
and Clemens Alexandrinus. Now if their testimony
should be found to accord with that of the fathers of
the first century, and with that of the apostles of our
Lord, what else than presumption must they bo guilty
of, who make that testimony a ground of reliance in
the matter of infant baptism ; yet with the exception
of two passages in their writings, and both of them
very equivocal as will be shewn, there is a perfect
agreement; no mention of infant baptism, frequent
mention of the baptism of believers.
The passage in Ironseus which is supposed to give
countenance to infant baptism, is this ; “ Christ passed
through all the ages of a man, that ho might save all
persons through himself, all I say, who through him
are regenerated to God, infants, and little ones, and
children, and youth, and the agedit will bo seen that
there is no mention made here of baptism, but the word
translated regenerated, sometimes in the writings ol
the fathers is employed to denote baptism ; Pmdo-
baptists not only ask, why not here, but affirm that ot
necessity it must be so rendered in this passage. We


contend for the natural and common signification of
the word ; first, because the connexion requires it, and
secondly, because there is no sense in the representation
that all who are saved are baptized by Christ to God,
but there is a full and beautiful meaning when the
saved are represented as being regenerated, or made
alive by Christ to God; for by the grace and spirit
and truth of Christ, men are called and converted and
made new creatures in Christ Jesus. In what precedes
the passage, there is no reference to baptism; in what
follows, there is none; why then give to the word a
figurative meaning which obscures the sense, except
that, without that obscuration, there would not be even
a shadow of countenance given to infant baptism in
the writings of Irenseus.
The passage in Justin Martyr states, “ There are
many persons of both sexes, some sixty, some seventy,
some eighty years old, who were made disciples to
Christ from their childhood, ai ez naiStuv epaOTj-eußTioav tco
XptOTCO.
Now every good Greek scholar knows that ixaic,
of which TcatStov is the genitive plural, signifies a boy
or girl, not as yet adult , and that it does not mean an
infant. Had the meaning intended been from infancy
the word employed would have been worn not r.ait,
for naiSiov denotes a little child, which rats does not;
toci&ov is the word employed when Christ says “Suffer
little children to come unto meitat? denotes a
youth; sz iraiSwv, therefore, signifies from their youth,
and not from their infancy, and the word ejiaOjiTeußijaav,
signifies to be made learners, or disciples, which were
always persons capable of reflection and independent
action. There is in the passage nothing, therefore, but
that these aged Christians learned and loved the Scrip-
tures from their youth. There is no affirmation about


their baptism, but there is of their having become
disciples; doubtless at a suitable age, and on a pro-
fession of faith in the truths presented to their minds,
they were baptized; and baptized by immersion. If
the reasons for thinking so are desired, they are found
in the following extracts from the same writer:—
“Ishall now,” he says, “lay before you the manner
of our dedicating ourselves to God, through Christ,
■upon our conversion. * * As many, therefore, as are
■persuaded and believe that the things taught and said
by us are true, and moreover take upon themselves to
do accordingly, are taught to pray and ask of God,
■with fasting, the forgiveness of their sins, we praying
together, and fasting for and with them ; and then,
and not till then, they are brought to a place of water
and washed,” Src. He goes on to represent baptism as
“the believer’s second birth.” He observes “that with
Ids first birth the believer had nothing to do, being
born without his will or choice, but,” says he, “ in
obtaining remission of his sins in baptism, the penitent
makes his second birth ‘an act op his own choice.”’
“ After the believer is baptized, and so incorporated
and made one with us, we lead him to the congregation
of the brethren. * * Prayer being over, we salute
each other with a kiss. After this, bread and a cup
of wine and water are brought. * * This food
we call the eucharist, of which none are allowed to he
partakers but such only as are true believers, and
have been baptized in the later op regeneration
for the remission of sin.”*
These passages indicate very intelligibly what was
the custom of the church in the middle of the second
century in regard to baptism, how it was applied and


to whom it was applied, and it is a sufficient reason
for placing no reliance whatever upon the passage the
Psedobaptists try to make capital of, which led to the
introduction of these quotations. Can an infant be
seen here ? had they any part or lot in the ordinance
herein described ? Can an infant be baptized for the
remission of sins ? Can an infant be penitent ? Can
an infant fast and pray to God for the remission of
sins ? Can an infant make the second birth imaged
in baptism an act of his own choice ? Let common
sense declare.
From the writings of Origen, who flourished in the
former part of the third century, several quotations
concerning infant baptism have been made; but his
original works have principally been lost, and these
quotations have been taken from a Latin version,
made by Ruffinus. That version was so unfaithful,
by reason of the additions, retrenchments, and altera-
tions made by Ruffinus, and in his preface to his
version admitted to have been made by him, that it
can never be accurately ascertained when Origen
speaks, and when his translator. The learned Grotius
says, concerning Origen’s opinions on another subject
—that of the final punishment of the wicked—“ it is
difficult to ascertain them, all things being so inter-
polated by Ruffinus and for his unfaithfulness,
Jerome reproves him. Erasmus also says, “the reader
is uncertain whether he is reading Origen or Ruffinus.”
Dr. Wall also says that Ruffinus altered or left out
anything he did not think orthodox.
An impression prevailed that Origen had somewhere
said, “he was baptized in infancy,” but careful in-
vestigation fails to substantiate it.
There is one passage in the Greek of Origen which
represents infants as “desiring the sincere milk of


the word-" and Dr. Wall, in his learned work on
baptism, says, “ this does very much puzzle the cause,
and make it doubtful whether Origen be to be there
understood of infants in age, or of such Christian men
as are endued with the innocence and simplicity of
infants.” It will doubtless be remembered that the
same mode of address is adopted by the apostle, when
he says “as new born babes, desire the sincere milk
of the word that ye may grow thereby’’—language
addressed to strangers scattered throughout the then
known world, who knew temptation, loved the Saviour,
and whose faith and hope were in God, and who
therefore could not be children in age.
Tertullian, bishop of Carthage, lived in this same
century. He was thoroughly opposed to infant bap-
tism. Speaking of the practice which in his time
began to prevail, of baptizing at an early age, he
remarks : “ Our Lord indeed says ‘ Hinder not little
children from coming unto me .’ Lot them come when
they are youths, when they learn, when they are taught
whither they are coming. Let them become Christians
when they are able to know Christ. Why hasten that
innocent age to the forgiveness of sins ? In worldly
things men observe greater caution ; so that the con-
cerns of heaven are entrusted to those to whom
temporal goods would not be entrusted.”
It is only when we get away from the apostles and
the apostolical fathers, that we meet with the slightest
reference to anything but believer’s baptism. The
first century speaks nothing of the baptism of wow-
believers, which children of necessity are ; the second
Century is almost as silent. Whatever is brought from
the writers of that period to support the practice, can
only be made to do so, by bending and warping the
plain meaning of words. It was not until the middle


of the third century that infant baptism began to
prevail, and then only because the importance of the
ordinance became magnified. It came to be thought
necessary to salvation, and then was administered to
children when sick and in danger of death. From the
exceptional cases to the general practice of infant
baptism, the transition was comparatively easy; but
in connexion with this, as is the case with all innova-
ions, and under a new state of things, questions came
up, and among others, this,, “whether children might
be baptized before the eighth day or not ? A Council
at Carthage was called upon to decide this difficulty,
and affirmed that they might. Cyprian presided at
that Council, which was held in the commencement of
the latter half of the third century; but it was
not until the year 418, that at the instigation of Austin,
the Milevitan Council decreed the necessity of infant
baptism, saying, “It is our pleasure that whoever
denies thatnew-born infants are to hebaptized, lethimbe
anathema and yet history, nay, his own confesssions
tell that this same Augustine, commonly called Austin,
was the son of Monica, a Christian woman, who, at his
birth, ordered those ceremonies which were then
customarily pefformed on the children of Christians;
which were, signing with the sign of Christ’s cross,
and the application of salt; and not baptism; that at
one time in youth, he was siezed with a dangerous
illness, and earnestly desired to be baptized: his mother
was hastening to comply, when he recovered, and his
baptism was deferred. Nor, according to his own
account, did he receive baptism until he professed the
Christian religion at the age of thirty years. This was
the case also with Gregory Nazianzen, who was born
of Christian parents in the year 318, and was not
baptized till between twenty and thirty years of age.


Chrysostom, too, was born of Christian parents in the
year 354, and was not baptized until about twenty-
one years of age. St. Jerome and St. Ambrose may
also be instanced as persons who were born of Christian
parents, and yet not baptized until the full age of a
man and more.
From all this, it must be gathered that infant
baptism originated somewhere about the close of the
second century in Africa, and that it was pretty much
confined to that locality at first. That it gradually
gained ground in the third century, and just in pro-
portion as the saying efficacy of the ordinance was
supposed. Grotius will support this view. He says “It
seems to me that the baptism of infants was of old,
much more frequently practised in Africa than in Asia,
or other parts of the world, and with a certain opinion
of the greater necessity of it; for you will not find,
in any of the Councils, a more ancient mention ofthis
custom than in the Council of Carthage.”
Yitringa bears the same testimony —“ The ancient
Christian church, from the highest antiquity, after
the apostolic times, appears generally to have thought
that baptism is absolutely necessary for all that would
be saved by the grace of Jesus Christ. •It was, there-
fore, customary in the ancient church, if infants were
greatly afflicted and in danger of death, or if parents
were affected with a singular concern about the sal-
vation of their children, to present their infants or
children, in their minority, to the bishop to be bap-
tized. But if these reasons did not urge them, they
thought it better, and more for the interest of minors,
that their baptism should be deferred, till they
arrived at a more advanced age; which custom was not
yet abolished in the time of Austin, though he urged
vehemently the necessity of baptism, while, with all


liis might,—he defended the doctrines of grace against
Pelagius.”
V enema is more specific still. “ Tertullian has no-
where mentioned psedobaptism among the traditions
of the church, nor even among the customs of the
church, that were publicly received and usually ob-
served ; nay, he plainly intimates that, in his time, it
was yet a doubtful affair. Nothing can be affirmed
with certainty concerning the custom of the church
before Tertullian, seeing there is not anywhere, in
more ancient writers, that I know of, undoubted men-
tion of infant baptism. Justin Martyr, in his second
apology, when describing baptism, mentions only that
of adults. I conclude, therefore, that pasdobaptism
cannot be certainly proved to have been practised
before the times of Tertullian; and that there
were persons, in his age, who desired their infants
might be baptized, especially when they were afraid
of their dying without baptism ; which opinion Ter-
tullian opposed, and by so doing, he intimates that
psedobaptism began to prevail. These are the things
that may be affirmed with apparent certainty, con-
cerning the antiquity of infant baptism after the
times of the 'apostles ; for more are maintained
without solid foundation .”
“ Dr. Augusti says —“ The general introduction of
the rite of infant baptism has so far changed the regu-
lations of the church concerning the qualifications of
candidates and their admission, that what was formerly
the rule in this respect, has become the exception.
The institutions of the church during the first five
centuries, concerning the requisite preparations for
baptism; and all the laws and rules that existed during
that period, relating to the acceptance or rejection of
candidates, necessarily fell into disuse, when the bap-


tism of infants began not only to be permitted, but en-
joined as a duty, and almost universally observed.
The old ride which prescribed caution in the admission
of candidates, and a careful preparation for the rite
was, after the sixth century, applicable, for the most
part, to only Jewish, heathen, and other proselytes.
The discipline which was formerly requisite, prepara-
tory to baptism, now followed this rite.”
Neandek has shewn the derangement produced in
the whole church service by the introduction of infant
baptism, destroying the more ancient rank of the
catechumens. Speaking of the period between Con-
stantine and Gregory the Great (A.D. 312—590), he
says ; “ With reference to the two constituent portions
of the church assemblies, the catechumens and baptized
believers, the whole service was divided into two
portions; one, in which the catechumens were allowed to
join, embracing the reading of the Scriptures and the
sermon —the prevailingly didactic portion; and the
other, in which the baptized alone could take part,
embracing whatever was designed to represent the
fellowship of believers —the communion, and all the
prayers which preceded it. These were called the
missa catechumenorum, and the missa'fidelium, which
division must of course have fallen into disuse after
the general introduction of infant baptism.”
But the modern testimony to which I wonld attach
most importance is that which is found in Chevalier
Benson’s Htppolitus. The Chevalier has been many
years ambassador from the Court of Prussia to St.
James’s, and is one of the most learned men in Europe.
Speaking on the subject of catechumens, he says: —
“ The apostolical church made the school the con-
necting link between herself and the world. The
object of this education was admission into the free


society and brotherhood of the Christian community.
The church adhered rigidly to the principle, as con-
stituting the true purport of the baptism ordained by
Christ, that no one can be a member of the communion
of saints, but by his own free act and deed, his own
solemn vow made in presence of the church. It was
with this understanding that the candidate for baptism
was immersed in water, and admitted as a brother upon
his confession of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. It understood, therefore, in the exact sense,
1 Peter hi. 21, not as being a mere bodily purification,
but as a vow made to God with a good conscience
through faith in Christ Jesus. This vow was preceded
by a confession of Christian faith made in the face of
the church, in which the catechumen expressed that
faith in Christ and in the sufficiency of the salvation
offered by Him. It was a vow to live for the time to
come to God and for his neighbour, not to the world
and for self; a vow of faith in his becoming a child
of God, through the communion of His only-begotten
Son, in the Holy Ghost; a vow of the most solemn
kind for life and for death. The keeping of this pledge
was the condition of continuance in the church, its
infringement entailed repentance or excommunication.
All church discipline was based upon this voluntary
pledge, and the responsibility thereby self-imposed.
But how could such a vow be received without
examination ? How could such examination be passed
without instruction and observation ?
“As a general rule, the ancient church fixed three
years for this preparation, supposing the candidate,
whether heathen or Jew, to be competent to receive it.
With Christian children the condition was the same,
except that the term of probation was curtailed
according to circumstances. PEedobaptism, in the more


modern sense, meaning thereby baptism of new-born
infants, with the vicarious promises of parents or
other sponsors, was utterly unknown to the early
church, not only down to the end of the second, but
indeed to the middle of the third century Toward
the close of the second century, this practice originated
in the baptism of children of a more advanced age.”
Should it be urged, notwithstanding this amount of
evidence, that though there be no evidence in favor
of infant baptism in the first two centuries, yet the
prevalence of this practice in Africa, during the
third century, as appears from the Council of Car-
thage, in the year 256, and its general prevalence
through the whole Christian world during the fifth
century, afford sufficient proof that it must have been
of apostolic origin; I could equally prove, on such
grounds, that infant communion, which came into
universal prevalence at the same time, must have
been of apostolic origin.
Salmasius and Suiceeus. —“Because the eucharist
was given to adult catechumens, when they were
washed with holy baptism, without any space of time
intervening, this was done also to infants after ptedo-
baptism was introduced.”
Hospicianus. —“ The Lord’s supper was given to
to the infants of believers in the time of Pope Innocent
the first, of Cyprian, and of Austin, as well in Europe
as in Africa and Asia, and that as necessary to
salvation.”
Jerome, Austin, and other fathers, testify, “That
they who were baptized, not only adults, but also
infants, without any delay, received the Lord’s supper
in two kinds.”
Dr. Priestly. —“lt is remarkable, that in all Chris-
tian antiquity, we always find, that commmunion in the


Lord’s supper immediately followed baptism ; and no
sucli thing occurs, as that of any person having a right
to one of these ordinances, and not to the other.”
Yenema. —“ln the ancient church, those two
sacraments, (baptism and the Lord’s supper), were
never separated the one from the other. In the
thirteenth century baptized infants ceased to be
admitted to the eucharist.”
Dk. Wall. —“ That the Eoman church, about the
year 1000, entertaining the doctrine of transubstantia-
tion, let fall the custom of giving the holy elements to
infants; and the other Western churches mostly fol-
lowing their example, did the like upon the same
account; but the Greeks not having the same doctrine,
did continue, and do still continue the custom of
communicating infants.”
Why then do not the advocates of infant baptism,
become advocates of infant communion ? There is no
precedent nor command for it in the Sacred Scriptures,
but neither is there for infant baptism.
Infants cannot remember Christ, cannot examine
themselves, cannot discern the Lord’s body, and there-
fore ought not to receive the Lord’s supper. Is this
the reply ? Then, they cannot receive the word gladly,
cannot repent, cannot believe, and not being able to
comply with the requirements of baptism, cannot be
baptized. The arguments that would exclude them
from communion, would equally exclude them from
baptism.
Every argument also that would admit them to
baptism, would admit them to communion.
Ought children to bo baptized, because under a
former dispensation they were circumcised ? So also
because they were, under a former dispensation, ad-
mitted to the passover, they ought to be admitted to


communion. Ought they to be admitted to baptism
because they were connected with their parents in
covenant with God ? For the same reason they ought
with their parents to be admitted to communion.
Ought they to be baptized, because they are members
of the visible church? For the same reason they
ought to be admitted to communion. Ought they to be
baptized because our Saviour said “ Suffer little chil-
dren to come unto me, and declared that of such is the
kingdom of heaven,” &c. For the same reason they
ought to be admitted to communion. Does it lessen
the privileges which the church anciently enjoyed, to
withhold baptism from infants ? And does it not
equally lessen those privileges to debar them from
communion? Is it harsh, unfeeling, and injurious, to
exclude infants from baptism ? And is it not equally
harsh, unfeeling, and injurious, to debar them from
communion ?
The only reason why the advocates of infant baptism
do not advocate infant communion, is, because they do
not practise it.—Practising it, they could defend it just
as well, and no better.
In conclusion, dear reader, may it not be safely
affirmed, that baptism, as an ordinance of our Lord, is
by immersion ? The word, judged by its use in the
Greek, and by its renderings into other languages,
means nothing else than immersion. Only a desire to
uphold a false principle, or a dislike to the truth, can
put men on endeavors to seek any other meaning for it;
and any other meaning for it they assuredly will not
find. As Dr. Johnson said of the freedom of the will,
“ We know that our will is free, and there’s an end
on’t;” so may every classical Christian say of the mean-
ing of we know it is to immerse, and there’s
an end of it. For any instance in which it can be


supposed to mean less than immersion, a hundred may
he found in which it must mean as much as immersion;
and more it cannot mean. Let those who practise less
defend their practice.
May not, also, the proper subject of baptism be
affirmed to be a “ believer in Jesus ? ” Were children
ever baptized in the days of Christ and his Apostles ?
When and where ? Were they baptized in the first
or second centuries ? When and where ? For one
case of infant baptism that can be supposed, or inferred,
or fancied from scripture, a thousand specified and
demonstrated baptisms of believers can be instanced.
It is not more true that U follows Q in the English
language, than that baptism , in the word of God, fol-
lows belief. Until the first and second centuries were
past, and sacramental efficacy as a horrid notion came
up, the baptism of infants was never dreamed of. The
burial of a believer by immersion unto death, is the
only authorised baptism of the New Testament. Let
those who practise the contrary, defend it if they can.
It is the firm belief of the author of this tract, that
they who shall set their feet upon millenial times, will
see as little of infant baptism as of transubstantiation ;
the taught and the believing only then being baptized,
as in the church’s prime. And his earnest desire and
prayer is, that all who see with him, may feel it their
duty to repudiate as baptism, a mere sprinkling, of
man’s device, which may have been forced upon them
in their infancy, and to follow the primitive church in
the observance of the ordinance; so evincing their
love to Him, who said, “He that believeth and is
baptized, shall be saved;” and so fulfilling all righteous-
ness.


• ,
.
> \ ■
