

CHRISTIAN SOCIALISM
INTO. 1
The True Motto for our State will be—
%\it tfutljcxijoob of (bob ;mb tire ratberhoob of
Bill it


TO THE HEADER.
Fifty thousand people have listened to ray
Sunday lectures upon Christian Socialism as a
solution of the world’s great social problem.
At the urgent request of ray hearers, I have
completed arrangements to publish a resume of my
lectures, the first number of which is now placed
before you. Remember, I represent no sect,
society, or league. This is an absolutely indepen-
dent platform, and these lectures are simply my
contribution towards the question of the nineteenth
century.


THE SOLUTION OF THE WORLD’S GREAT
SOCIAL PROBLEM.
By the REY. PHILIP MOSES.
Christ’s kingdom slowly dawns upon the earth ;
Far off we see and hail the coming day,
And cheer us in the twilight with its joy.
Amidst the din ot whi> and strife of men,
The rotting p » Is ot crime and ignorance,
The greedy selfishness that eats and drinks
While brother m- n in wolfish famine cry,
His words of faith still ring with steadfast note
To lead the way to perfect victory.
The Australian Workman writes :
“It is strange that so many of the strong, masterful men of
to-day should he of Jewish blood. The fact that the great
captains of industry, many of the greatest authors, the great
princes of finance, and the great leaders of Socialistic thought,
should be of Hebrew extraction, is more than a coincidence. It
shows clearly the strength of the race; which, though scattered
to the four corners of the earth, deprived of temple, country,
and government, has still kept its individuality, and still refuses
to merge its racial existence into that of others. A strong and
virile people, with well trained brains and bodies, were the Jews
of old, and to-day they remain the same, generations of misfor
tune seemingly having but served to accentuate and strengthen
the virtues of past times.
“ The Rev. Philip Moses—the man who has awakened all
Sydney with the sound of his voice, who has brought the gospel
of Democracy to heart-corners where it never reached before,
and who to-day can command the greatest audiences in the city,
and with his magnetic speech sway them to his wishes—is a fair-
example of the power of the modern Hebrew.
“ An Australian by birth, and fired with an intense love fo
his country, Mr. Moses has travelled up and down this great


continent, visiting and lecturing in nearly every town, from
Normanton in the Gulf of Carpentaria to [Mount Bischoff in
Tasmania. Satisfied that in this land, where Nature with
jewelled hands has scattered broadcast her richest blessings,
there should be no honest poverty, no grinding pauperism, no
cruel hunger and distress, Mr. Moses believes that in the ethics
of Christian Socialism is to be found the one true and only
remedy for Australia’s sorrow.”
THE PEOBLEM STATED.
198,848,000 acres I An area two and a half times as large
as England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland. A climate unequalled
in the world. Soils, minerals, seasons, natural wealth of every
imaginable description. Our territory, New South Wales, is
absolutely the richest country on the earth. God in nature has
provided everything that his great wisdom could design for the
comfort and help of man. This—a free gift to us. No enemy
to fight. Under the civilising power of the rum bottle, the
rifle, and the Bible, the aboriginal population melted away like
the mist of the morning. Far from the old world’s maddening
strife, feudalism, militarism, and miscalled civilisation, we were
at liberty to develope a happy, prosperous, vigorous, free and
enlightened people.
ONE HUNDEED YEAES
have proved sufficient to destroy this magnificent opportunity,
to wither up like Jonah’s gourd all the bright ideals, the possible
chances, the hope of a reformed race, of a happy and contented
people. One hundred years to produce 672 landlords who
possess 22,567,753 acres of land, being more than half the good
land in the colony; and 457,030 adult men and women who
possess very nearly one grave apiece. One hundred years to
produce 2,311 people who own £206,245,642 worth of property,
being nearly 58 per cent, of the whole wealth of the community;
and 66 men and women out of every 100 adults possess an
average of
ONE SHIET APIECE.
One hundred years to produce the aristocracy of Potts Point,
Darling Point, Watson’s Bay, Darlinghurst Gaol, and other
favored localities ; and in the one year, 1892, to require to arrest
and send to prison 3,202 boys and 534 girls under 20 years of age,
and over 10,000 men and women ; to provide as paupers for
1,065 girls, 1,472 boys, 629 adult women, and t 2,914 adult men. To


show Christians how a woman can live and keep a family of
four children on
FOUR SHILLINGS AND FIYEPENCE A WEEK.
SCENE I.
“She got 2|d. worth of sugar, 24,d. worth of tea, 3d.
worth of meat, 2d. worth of vegetables, and 3d. worth of
bread. The tea and sugar last a week, the rest per
day.” (City Missioußeport, 1894, page 13).
One hundred years to produce a people that support, and
work, and pray for, among the Roman Catholics, one Cardinal,
seven Bishops, 295 clergy; among the Church of England, one
Primate, five Bishops, 333 clergy ; among the Presbyterians,
one Moderator, 156 clergy; among the Wesleyan and minor
Methodists, two Presidents and 167 clergy; among the Congre-
gational! sts and Baptists, two Chairmen and 97 clergy ; among
the small sects, at least 50 more ; a total of 1,090 ministers of
religion, to which we must add the hosts of the Salvation Army
officers, Sisters of Mercy, Jesuits, City Missionaries, Bible
women, &c., &c., supported at a yearly cost of £450,000 a year;
and in the year 1894 to look upon
SCENE 11.
“ One house I called at the person said, ‘We have just
been turned out for rent; we only lived in apartments,
and have nothing, only what you see.’ In the down-stairs
room was an empty case, and underneath the stairs lay a
few rags. The wife said, ‘ That is where my husband lays
to sleep.’ She then told me that she and three children
only had the same to lay on up-stairs, and to confirm her
statement she took me up-stairs, and sure enough there
were the rags, and an old coat to cover them. I looked at
the baby she had in her arms, and, poor little one, she
had bronchitis. I gave her some help at once, and wrote
a note to the manager of the Benevolent Society, who very
kindly gave her a mattress and blanket, and some food.
They are now getting along a little better.”
—City Mission yearly report, page 15, presented to the leading
Christ followers in the Y.M.C.A. rooms, May 14th, 1894.
Chairman, J. R. Fairfax, Esq. Present, the aristocracy of the
Church and State, supported by vice-regal patronage :
COLLECTION AND DONATIONS, £29 19s. 3d.!
being nearly one shilling and twopence per head for the
benefit of the
Are they poor, or are they robbed of their birthright ?
How does it come that such things are possible ? By what foul


rank crime lias this deadly, thrice-accursed poverty been rooted
here in our new country, in exactly the same proportion and
power as in the overcrowded mother land ? If to the man who
steals a loaf of bread to satisfy his children’s hunger, we allot
pain, disgrace, and imprisonment, what should he the penalty
dealt out to those who, by class legislation, have robbed
a nation of their land ? If to the street Arab of
Wexford Street — not born, hut literally damned into the
world : the bastard of a harlot, born in the Benevolent
Asylum, suckled on gin, familiar from earliest infancy
with all the unmentionable, unutterably horrible sur-
roundings of life in the slums—if, I say, when having
escaped (unhappy child) an early death —174-72 per 1000 will
die before they are one year old—a higher death rate than in
fog-stricken, demon-cursed London.
THINK OF IT!
Oh! Christians, followers of the lowly and gentle Nazarene
who came to preach his gospel to the poor — think of it ! Oh !
Freetraders, Protectionists, Boodlers, Monopolists, Land
Grabbers, Bankers, and genteel Bobbers of every kind—
think of it ! Oh ! wage-earning mugwumps, who on Tuesday,
17th July, 1894, allowed yourselves to be tricked once again by
the capitalistic press into voting in the representatives of the
Bobbers instead of the Bobbed— think of it ! I say, when this
child has grown to manhood and broken the laws of a God he
never heard of, and who has no eye to see or heart to pity such
as these; and smashed to atoms the laws of the State that is so
intent upon providing K.C.M.G. titles, cigars, and gallows ropes,
that they had no time to consider such a trifle as the common
human life, then a paternal government that has utterly and
horribly failed in its duty will tie him up to the triangle, and
with the whip will cut off the flesh from that human back made
in the image of God, and send him back to his den an utterly
hopeless wreck, pledged to fight against a society that has cursed
him even before his birth, till a happy, Christian ending upon
the gallows will launch him forth into a better and happier
world. Oh! horrible blasphemy! Most outrageous cant!
Dismal commentary upon the Gospel of Christ! But if the lash
is necessary for the back of this product of the social system,
what shall be the penalty for the men who, by their legislative
madness, have been the producers of this product ?
“ The Bich Man also died and was buried, and in
hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth
.Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom, and he
cried and said : Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and
send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in
water and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this
flame. But Abraham said; Son, remember that thou


in tliy lifetime recievedst thy good things, and likewise
Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted and thou
art tormented : Woe unto you that are rich, for ye have
received your consolation.”
CHAPTEE IL— The Eemedy.
My religion ib love—’tis the noblest and purest;
And my temple the Universe—widest and surest.
But it is with man’s soul as it was with Nature: the beginning of
Creation is—Light. Till the eye have vision the whole members are in
darkness Divine moment when over the tempest tossed Soul, as once over
the wild, weltering Chaos, it is spoken : Let there be light I
—Carlyle.
To sum up the Problem : Our social ruin is caused by
1 . A false ideal that makes gold the God of the State.
2. The ruling classes have stolen and obtained the mastery
of
(a) The People’s God;
(b) The People’s Church ;
(c) The People’s Heaven ;
(d) The People’s Hell.
Having thus secured the master key that governs humanity,
behold the invention of
1. A spurious Royalty of Birth.
2. An organisation of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, etc;, to
work in their interests, miscalled the Church of Christ.
3. The introduction of pauper-paid soldiers, to keep the
common drudges in their place.
4. A corrupt system of Parliamentary Party Government,
which exists to dazzle the eyes of the people with
glorious promises, while the actual work done is ever
and always in the interests of the classes and against
the masses.
o. The control of a corrupt daily press, by which the mass
of the people are moulded into the belief that the
existing state of society is perfect, and that this is the
best of all possible worlds for the rich. Let the poor
be thankful they have the pkivilege of toil.


The Remedy is Christian Socialism, by which will be won
back
(1) THE PEOPLE’S GOD
As revealed in the life of the Christ the Carpenter, the friend of
the poor and oppressed, the resolute agitator against all
monopoly, hypocrisy, and oppression, who received for his labor
the scoxteger’s whip, for his teaching a crown of thorns, for his
bravery a cross between two thieves. No £5OOO a year Lord
Bishop seats; no K.C.M.G. cross to adorn his breast; no dining
with royalty and masquerading as the first lords of the earth.
No; these, and such as these, were not yet dreamt about when
the despised Galilean came to bring the Kingdom of God upon
the earth. It is not here yet.
AS FOE HEAVEN AND HELL,
He preached no worlds of future pain or bliss,
To cheat the weak and rob the poor in this.
Thus Humanity having received back the master key, we
1. No Royalty ; only the royalty of merit.
2. All government shall be for the welfare and happiness
of men and women, and men and women only; that
the interests of commerce, meat and dairy industries,
mining, sugar, sheep, and shipping, all shall be made
subservient to the interests of Humanity.
3. The soldier with his sword, and the printer with his
press, shall serve the people, and force the monopolist
to disgorge his stolen wealth.
To assist in this, the greatest revolution the world has ever
seen, I founded my independent platform, where Sunday after
Sunday these many-sided problems are discussed ; and so I have
deemed it best in this, my first pamphlet, to present to my
readers somewhat of a summary of the whole question rather
than a report of any one or two of my lectures, though that will
be done at some future date.
IT IS UNFORTUNATE
that the advocacy of Socialism is so largely bulked in
the minds of the people with infidelity, so that the
two have almost become synonymous terms. The reason of this,
however, is very simple. The Church and Christianity of
to-day has drifted far away from the teachings of the greatest
of all Socialists —even Jesus Christ. Sinking down to the level
of a huge machine for the insurance of souls against fire in the
next world, those who fain would seek to translate the teachings
of the Master into practice soon find themselves cast out.
Nevertheless, the whole trend of society to-day in all civilised


and so-called Christian lands is directly towards Socialism. As
Dr. Roseby, M.A., LL.B., in his pamphlet on the Village
Settlement scheme, has well put it:
“The time has come when the present system of
social chaos, of anarchy and of injustice, shall give place
to one wherein there shall be a serious endeavor made to
give TO every MAN his own ; that there shall be a fuller
recognition of the just and Christ-like principle that
every man in our social system should be allowed to count
for one. The true principles of justice forbid that any man
should be entitled to appropriate to himself the fruits of
the labor of another. Not one counting for a thousand
men, while another counts for but the thousandth part of a
man; but every man counting at least for one.”
BUT SOCIALISM AND ANARCHY ARE ONE?
Are they ? Think! The trampling, crushing, elbowing,
fighting, and treading on each others’ heels which form fthe
existing type of social life, what is this but anakchy ; a
subverting of all law and authority in the interests of the few
against the many.
DANGEROUS CLASSES.
Yes! the most dangerous of all classes are those who,
fortified by wealth or social standing, or “ culture,” refuse to
listen to that cry of the people which, nevertheless, enters into
the ears of the Lord of the Multitudes.
“Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl; your
riches are corrupted, your gold and silver is cankered.
Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days.
Behold, the hire of the laborer, and rouseabout, and
shearer, and seaman, and tailoress, and shop-girl, and all
the hosts of under-paid and hardly-driven workers which
is of you kept back by fraud, crieth: and the cries of
them that suffer has entered into the ears of the Lord
of Saboath.” (James vi. 1 to 4.)
Yes, the dangerous classes are beyond all question, supported
and upheld by the
PRINCES, PEERS, PARSONS, PUBLICANS.
After these four fatal P’s. come the Landlords, Lawyers,
and lords of cash. These all hide behind the fortress of vested
interests, that crowning citadel of inhumanity. Let the reformer
turn which side he may, behold ;
The Landlord has a vested interest in the land.
The Banker has a vested interest in the cash.


The Prince has a vested interest in ignorance.
The Publican has a vested interest in beer.
The Parson has a vested interest in hell.
Against all these huge ramparts of iniquity the Christian
Socialist must hurl himself. They all exist for reprobation and
extinction. Towards these, the only true dangerous classes, the
attitude of the workers must no longer be one of compromise
or surrender, it must be one of
NO QUARTER
Thus we find ourself face to face with this, Life’s great
problem. We insist upon
1. The right of every man to himself.
2. The right of every man to the earth, the source of all
wealth.
3. The right of every man to the full product of his labor.
Surely not a very large demand; yet to obtain it will
require that the principles of Christian Socialism should become
an absolute and concrete foundation, upon which all the govern-
ment of the people shall rest; that the State shall control and
administer all works which, while supplying the common gene-
ral needs of life, are liable to become monopolies ; and that the
public interest demands that the “rights of property” must not
be allowed to over-ride the far greater rights of Humanity.
The deadly war of Competition; the direful strife to sell the
cheapest; the iniquity of regaiding man’s labor as an article of
merchandise, to be bought and sold under the law of supply and
demand ; the insisting upon that crowning lie of all— freedom
of contract —as between the master and the man —these all
must perish, be driven back into the outer darkness from whence
they should never have been allowed to escape to blast, ruin,
and degrade the man. Is there to be no better fate in store for
us and our children than is found in the death struggle between
the classes and the masses in England and America ?
A FAIR DAY’S WAGES FOR A FAIR DAY’S WORK.
It is surely as just a demand as governed man ever made of
governing. It is the everlasting right of man.
“Behold us here,” writes Carlyle, “so many
thousands, millions, and increasing at the rate of fifty
every hour. We are right willing and able to work, and
on the Planet Earth is plenty of work and wages for a
million times as many. We ask if you mean to lead us
toward work ? Or if you declare that you cannot lead us,
do you expect us to sit down and composedly starve ?


What is it you expect of us ? What of the coal and
cotton strikes and riots ? Some thirteen unarmd men
and women cut down! How ye came among us in
your cruel armed blindness, ye unspeakable county
yeomanry; sabres flourishing, hoofs prancing, and slashed
us down at your brute pleasure; deaf blind to all oua
claims and woes and wrongs : of quick sight and sense to
your own claims only! There lie poor, sallow, workworn
weavers, and complain no more now; women themselves
are slashed and sabred, howling terror fills the air, and
ye ride prosperous, very victorious! Ye unspeakable
one another, but set with one another, and all set against
the Evil Thing only.”
At the ballot box only can this great revolution be brought
into existence. Help! Help! Help! Dispel the death
clouds of ignorance, of sloth, of indifference! Never again shall
the workers of New South Wales rush so blindly into the abyss
of monopoly, greed, and grab, poverty, despair, and ruin, that
the Freetrade and Protection parties prepared so carefully on
that fatal 17th of July, 1894. For
Once to every man and nation comes the moment to decide
In the strife of truth with falsehood, for the good or evil side ;
Some cause God’s great Messiah, offering each the bloom or blight,
Parts the goats upon the left hand, and the sheep upon the right,
And the choice goes by fcr ever ’twixt that darkness and that light.


FIRST LECTURE.
CHRISTIAN SOCIALISM; HOW WILL IT AFFECT
THE WOMAN?
On Sunday night, July 7th, the Protestant Hall was one
sea of heads, and hundreds of people were turned from the
doors. Mr. Moses having announced that in previous lectures
he had dealt with Christian Socialism and how it will aifect
the man, the administration of justice, the fiscal question, etc.,
he would now discuss the still more important matter as to how
the new reform would affect the woman.
THE GREATEST OF DISCOVERIES
in this remarkable age of startling events was the discovery of
woman by herself ; and next to that, the discovery by man that
the other half of humanity was first of all to be classed as a
human being, and afterwards to be recognised as a woman.
Electric force, the steam engine, and all the other powers that
science has developed, cannot be compared with the extraordinary
influence and dynamic results that society has, and will, experi-
ence through this new revelation. Realising this great factor
in the social state, the question of woman suffrage assumes a
new phase, and we can no longer argue as to why a woman
should not be allowed to vote, but rather ask by what strange
delusion has the world been blinded to the fact that true
progress cannot be made in political life while one-half of the
people, and that the better half, are forcibly prevented from
exercising their prerogative at the ballot box.
STARTLING SOCIAL FIGURES.
On Sunday, April sth, 1891, the census of New South
Wales was carefully taken, and we have absolute knowledge of
the state and condition of the people. Our population on that
day is returned as consisting of 612,562 men, and 519,172
women, giving an excess of males of no less than 92,890. That
is, there are alive in the colony to-day 85 women to every
100 men; or to put it in another way, all things being equal,
15 men out of every hundred in the colony to-night could not


marry if they would; but worse than that, a vast number of
men would not marry if they could. On the day the census was
taken there were living in the colony not less than 100,000 men
and woman, all over the age of 21 years, unmarried. Curious
as the figures read, if you will think them over carefully, you
will see what a grave social wrong is being enacted amongst
our people, and you must face the question : Why is it that in
this new and magnificent country, the marriage rate is scarcely
equal to that of the poverty-stricken people of Great Britain ?'
The actual figures are, for the last ten years : In England, 7-84
in New South Wales, 7.75.
58,000,000 SHEEP
may be a witness of our marvellous prosperity, from a sheep’ s
head point of view, but the fact that our system of government
and social life has utterly failed to improve upon the conjugal
condition of the people—the very first step to human happiness
and prosperity, looms up before us as a startling condemnation
of our efforts at Parliamentary Government by fiscalism and
false religious sentiment.
WHY DO NOT THE MEN PROPOSE?
Because their social condition is such that thousands of our
honest, level-headed workers hesitate to take the responsibility
of a wife and family when, under the present deadly system,
they are scarce able to keep themselves. Still further, there are
no less than 11,000 deserted women and 3,500 widows out of the
191,500 who have sought the blessing (or otherwise) of matri-
mony.
THE PRESSURE OF WOMEN
in the industrial market always tends to depress wages, and yet,
since, unfortunately, the woman too must live, her competition
is unavoidable. Already we find 89,502 women wage earners,
the chief departments of which are industrial and factory work,
14-716; domestic service, 30-795; agricultural work, 4-164. If
the percentages are worked out, we have already, in proportion,
a larger number of women earning their own living than is
found in England. Not only so, but in every department of
life where it is practicable, the wages of women are forced down
to the lowest possible point. How strange to think of that great
meeting in the Centenary Hall of the business and wealthy men
of the community, representing in that gathering over £9,000,000
worth of money, all coming together to consider how
to maintain the existing order of things, with all its
evils; to consider how to cut the throat of the Labor
Party at the polls, where alone the social problem
can be solved; and yet not one single reference to Mr.
Justice Stephens’ statement made at the yearly meeting of the


Factory and Work Girls’ Club, that there were numbers of
women working in factories in this city fourteen hours a day, to
earn from ss. lOd. to 3s. 6d. per week. When in February last
MOSES STAETLED THE PEOPLE
by an account of the sweating of the women, the Daily Telegraph
stoutly denied his statements that the wages of many women
were not more than Bs. to 12s. per week, and the matter was
dropped because neither City Missionaries, church officials, or
Salvation Army officers dared to support me in my contentions,
though no one knew better than they how fearfully true they
were. Why ? Because some of those firms who deliberately
and systematically defraud the women of their pay, who grind
the faces of the poor, and who rob the widow and the orphan,
make great professions of philanthropy and religion, give
liberally to charities, and are sent to Parliament to make laws
for the people. The old prophets sent them to Hell, but we
have changed all that. They send their victims to Hell, and are
rewarded by all that wealth can do to make their lives comfort-
able.
NOW WHY IS IT
that women’s work is always under-paid ? How is it that her
entrance into any industrial department always ends in a reduced
wagejtoboth sexes? As a a rule, the employer pays the lowest wage
he can get the work done at. Why can he get women who will
consent to work at a lower rate than he could get men to work
at ? To answer this question you must recall the arguments I
brought forward in my lecture upon the living wage theory.
The wage of the man must be based in some degree so as to
support not only himself, but to at least partly support a wife
and family. If competition tends to drive wages lower, then
the supply of labor has to be limited to single men. The case
■of the woman is different. If she is a free woman, her minimum
wage will be what is required to support herself alone, and
since a woman appears to keep alive and in working condition
on a lower scale of expenditure than a man, her living wage is
regulated accordingly. Then the majority of women are not
absolutely dependent upon their own exertions for a living, and
so they can afford, and do consent, to lower wages, ignoring the
fact that in turn the lower wages so affect the men that they
cannot marry • and so the last state is worse than the first.
When the worker discovered that his wife and young children
were able to assist him to earn the living for the family, the
greatest step down towards the horrible slavery of the masses
was taken, while at the same time a new source of wealth was
opened to the capitalist, and he has not failed to utilise it for all
it is worth. Eemembering this, we can see of what vital impor-
tance it is that the economic condition of women should /be
altered. Christian Socialism —in obedience to the teachings of


the Master, who, by precept and example, restored woman to
her true place in society as the helpmate and equal of man—
demands
1. The woman’s right to herself.
2. The woman’s right to the earth, the source of all wealth
and the sole means of subsistence.
3. The woman’s right to the full product of her labor.
To obtain these fundamental starting planks, woman must
receive her political rights. I believe that it is here we
really find the objections of the Conservative party to woman
suffrage, in that it must inevitably alter her social and economic
position. Six classes of our community are deemed unworthy of
the suffrage, viz., Soldiers, Policemen,
CRIMINALS, PAUPERS, LUNATICS, AND WOMEN,
and this classing of the women with criminals, paupers, lunatics,
etc., is to be accounted for as one of those instances of moral
and national insanity which have been the marvel of all
intelligent students of social history. Christian Socialism, based
upon the Fatherhood of Grod and the Brotherhood of Man, is the
only means by which the great changes absolutely essential to
save humanity from the horrible abyss of poverty and distress
into which the great mass are steadily sinking, and is the only hope
for the social redemption of the woman. The release of women
from their false economic slavery will tend to solve those
grievous domestic wrongs which have been the greatest curse of
all. The compulsion of marriage in order to obtain a living;
the grievous suffering that so many thousands of women endure
so heroically, in order to keep a home over the head of her
children; the abomination of our public divorce court, by which
the State insists upon the public degradation of every woman
that is at last compelled to seek shelter in its unholy precincts;
these, and kindred questions, can only be solved by righting the
economic problems that lie at the root of our social wrongs.
You cannot say what a woman will do when she has the
suffrage, for the simple reason that we have no data to go upon.
Surrounded by the false environment of centuries of wrong,
encased in the hereditary swaddling clothes of a vicious social
position, we cannot tell what she will do when at last the State
receives her into the ranks of a human being. Neither have we
any right or reason to consider results. Just as in the slave
trade of America no progress was made until the people turned
their sight, and thought upon the one question of right or
wrong, so in the matter of the suffrage for women, the State
must give to all equal rights—the question of results must be
left out of the calculation.


There is no need to fear. The woman can he trusted to
•exercise the suffrage with at least as much care and discrimina-
tion as the average man—though that is not saying much. In
the light of recent events, I think it may he safely recognised
that had the women gone to the polls on the 17th July, the voice
of the ballot box would have been proclaimed in favor of the
party that sought to represent Labor, Humanity, and Justice,
instead of like a lot of mugwumps, the workers, going headlong
to support the old crowd of fiscal mongers, boodlers, and
monopolists.
IN THE HOME; IN THE CHUECH;
wherever women are given liberty, the results have always gone
to prove the amount of ability and intellect that in so many eases
is allowed to lie dormant and unused. The fact that the women
first realised the power and teachings of the Christ as the world’s
Saviour; that their fidelity, bravery, and constancy form the only
bright spots in the dark story of the Cross of Christ; the fact
that in so many ways she has proved herself to be worthy of the
highest honor and trust, is enough for me. The evidence is
altogether in favor of the woman; but even if it were not so,
the question of right is the one question that should be con-
sidered. Thus Christian Socialism comes as a white-winged
messenger of peace across the darkness and evil of the days in
which we live. If you are a believer in the life and teachings
of the Christ; if you would seek to leave the world better than
you found it; take up this movement earnestly, heartily,
generously, and at once.
Do Something ; do it now, with all thy might;
An angel’s wings would droop if long at rest,
And God himself inactive were no longer blest.


Copies of this pamphlet, One Penny each, or Ninepence per
dozen, can be had at the Protestant Hall daily, from 10 to 4,
and at the Lectures, which are continued every Sunday evening,
at 7.30.
As the result <of my own experience, you are recommended
to read the following books :
The Gospel of the Poor .. .. By David sox.
Politics for the People . . . . ~ ~
lx Darkest Exglaxd ~ Gexeral Booth.
Past axd Presext Carlyle.
Problems of Poverty ~ Horsox.
The Co-Operative Commoxwealth ~ Groxluxd.
Progress axd Poverty ~ Hexry George.
Lookixg Backward ~ Bellamy


%\)t Australian Workman:
Official Organ of the Australasian Labor Federation
CAETOONS BY ALFEED CLINT.
Published Weekly at 97J Bathurst St., Sydney.
Piiice One Penny. All Newsagents.
SOCIAL REFORM PAMPHLETS.
©lre Xabot fatter itt fatliament; What it Die
and What it Prevented . . By George Black.
Price Id. Per Doz., 9d,
iillap Settlements By Dr. Eoseby.
Price 3d. Per doz., 2s.
©be Ikibm" ilatfnm: An Exposition"
By Arthur Grieeith.
Price 3d, Per Doz., 2s.
©be ©EQllbonbs, OR The Bonded Yags. With Prefatory
Note by Sam Smith, Secretary Seamen’s Union and
Vice-President A.L.E.
Price Id. Per Doz., 9d.
Commercialism of ©O-baiT, and Other Subjects
By Mrs. W. H. McNamara.
Price 3d. Per doz., 2s.
All the above may be obtained from The Workman Office,
971 Bathurst Street, Sydney.
She Co-Openafine Printing Co.
Proprietors of THE AUSTEALIAN WOEKMAN,
971 BATHURST ST., SYDNEY.
Job Printing' of every description executed with Neatness
and Despatch.
11 amp b let Work a special it]).
Printed at “ The Workman” Office, Bathurst Street- Sydney.


Patronise
PERCY JtORPgRN
THE MODERN DRAPER,
- - 666 - - - BRICKFIELD HILL - - - 666 - -
.... FOE ....
ylasKionablc and
BLANKETS, SHEETINGS,
. . . GLOVES AND HOSIERY. . . .
REMEMBER;
666 l.iill.
THE REFORM DRAPER.


©
Are
P
loneer
The Best
DELICIOUS
Jellies
2* *
for
—
j
e
d
INVALIDS
For FLAVOR
j|
/ a|l)V
W
or
and
m
s
TABLE USE.
KEEPING
I';: JP Als
v&
—
f
Put up in
QUALITIES
they are
\robert
SMbee
Red Packets
Unsurpassed
Je Sp\ AHa Qo W
MflNUFACTURFlJV.
ARHURSTfcC'SyD
only.
Ask for
HARPER’S PIONEER JELLIES.
Printed at ‘ 7
7 le Anst,
tdinn Workman ” Office
Bath urst
Street, Sydney.
ROBERT HARPER & CO.’S
STAR OATMEAL
PIONEER JELLIES
