

'CHRIST OR WOU,ASTON?
X A IIIEI
TO H. N.
WOLLASTON’S
miss ©i pmtoi
“The Immortality of Man and His Futokk Punishment,
Briefly Examined in Three Sermons pkeaohkd
in Trinity Church, Melbourne,”
IN WH'OH RKI’UY THE STRONGEST
ARGUMENTS OF DESTRUCTIONISTS
ARE KEFO'I'EI),
V S’D .THE
CONSEQUENCES OF BRUTISM EXPOSED,
BY
J. A. lllllil.
i• i.* h sixrKX' i
Pbintkt* wT. Sjmtm, AT TUB Orviv.y OF THE “ Abstkaman Cmuwwan
Adtotatk,” 103 CiKuriti oK Stkkkt, Imtzrov, Mi um>t rn e.
1874.




CHRIST OR WOLLASTON?
it RS9IV
TO H. N.
WOLLASTON’S
®M®l!f 0®
“ The Immortality of Man and His Future Punishment,
Briefly Examined in Three Sermons preached
in Trinity Church, Melbourne, ”
IN WF T CH REPLY THE STRONGEST
ARGUMENTS OF OBSTRUCTIONISTS
ARE REFUTED,
AND THE
CONSEQUENCES OF BRUTISH EXPOSED.
Y
PRICE SIXPEUSTCE.
hinted by T. Smith, at the Office of the “Australian Chris'] ian
Advocate,” 103 Gertrude Steeet, Fityroy, Melbourne.
1874.




CONTENTS.
To THE KeaDER _
5
Introduction ...... g
I. —Contradictions y
ll. —Punishment
111. —Life and Death ...... 2.4
IV. —Destruction 29
Puture Punishment Commensurate wiih the
Duration of God’s Existence ... 25
Vl. —lmmortality 22
VII. Infinite Sin not Eternal Supremacy of Evil 40
Vlll. —Objections ... ...
Xl. —Consequences of Brutism 50




TO TXT 38 IR3B A 33388,.
Were the Bible as carefully perused as its authority demands, there
would he little necessity to gravely controvert Mr. Wollaston’s Chrisi or
Plato ; but it is alarming to see how wide-spread is the neglect of Clod’s
Word —man’s greatest boon in this world !
Mr. A. M. Henderson, of Melbourne, has both logically and scrip-
tural ly exposed Mr. Wollaston’s theory ; and had bis sermons appeared
in pamphlet form, so as to be generally circulated, \ might not have pre-
sented the present one to the world. 1 gladly direct the reader to the
sermons referred to, which will be found in the Victorian Independent for
April, May, June, and July, of the present year.
All that I desire the reader of the following pages to do, is to
honestly weigh every argument, not by his own reason, but in the light
of that word which will judge us at that great day, before he draws his
conclusion; and to remember that, in replying to a person, there is
necessarily the appearance of personality, though I have endeavoured to
avoid it as much as possible. I have goodwill toward Mr. Wollaston: it
is only his theory I condemn; and light is all that is needful to satisfy
anyone of its folly. My object has been, to supply facts for the con-
sideration of those who are apt to be led astray by one-sided and super-
ficial views of the subject, when presented with bold and positive
statements which, in the main, amount to nothing.
In concluding, I commend to the serious consideration of all, the
following passages from Thomas a Kempis’ De lmitatione Christi : —
“ Be not influenced by the authority of the writer, his reputation for
great or small skill in writing; but let the love of pure truth lead thee
to read.
“ Inquire not who speaks, but attend to what is spoken; for men
pass away, but the truth of the Lord endureth for ever, and Hod speaks
to us in divers ways without respect of person.
“ Hreat wisdom is not to be hasty in action, and not to stand too
obstinately by our own opinions.
“ The judgments of Hod are different from the judgments of men;
what pleases men is often displeasing to Hod.
“We generally judge of a matter according as it is pleasing or dis-
pleasing to us. For we readily lose our true judgment because of opr
own private likings, and are easily disturbed by the rebellion of our
own private opinions.”
Heeloxg, October, 1873.


1. Science does not propose to teach anything concerning man’s
future weal or woe, and therefore it is the extreme of rationalistic folly
to endeavour, by our reason, to understand the question of future
punishment. Indeed, to use reason well, in our enquiries after truth,
is to accept, with open heart, whatever God has revealed to us in His
Word, whether we are able to understand it or not. Whatever comes
from G-od must be right, irrespective of our capacity to comprehend it.
The difference between the sceptic and the believer lies just here. The
sceptic believes only what he understands from the Scriptures, and rejects
or doubts whatever he does not comprehend. The believer “ cordially
and fully acquiesces in the fitness, the wisdom, the correctness, and the
paramount authority of every oracle that bears the stamp of God’s own
inspiration.” He receives the Bible on the ground of authority —that it
is from God —and not on the ground of human reason. The person who
does not thus act, but objects to anything revealed in the Word of G-od, be-
cause he understands it not, is a sceptic ; and if not an out-and-out infidel,
is not far from that unenviable position. E. g., I cannot comprehend
how God existed from all eternity ; 1 cannot understand how Jesus Christ
could be God and man; how that the Father, the Son, and the Holv
Spirit are the one ever-living God ; how that God made all things out of
nothing ; and how the bodies of all, both saints and sinners, will be raised
from the dead, and be re-united to their spirits. But while I cannot
understand these things, it does not follow that any of them are contrary
to reason , but simply that they are above it —beyond the capacity of mv
mind to fully grasp, in the present stage of its development,
2. The same principle applies to the present controversy on future
punishment. ISTo man, at present, can fully comprehend it; and the man
who insists that he can, is a simpleton. It is superficial on the part of
Mr. Wollaston to attempt the task ; because, like the truths alread)
instanced, it is altogether above his reason, which, being finite, cannot
traverse the infinite to know the why and the wherefor. Hence, the
paramount duty of every mail is, first, to ascertain what God in His
Word has declared, and, having done so, implicitly receive it.
I* f f
2. I entqr not into the nature of future punishment, but upon its
duration. As to whether the fire of that punishment will be literal or
figurative is confessedly of little importance in comparison with its dura-
tion. It is notion the nature, but on the duration of future punishment


that Mr. Wollaston has delivered himself, and upon which he affirmed al
out of Christ, or unconverted, are as mortal as the brute creation. I
shall confine myself, therefore, to these two points ; and, in view of that
awful day of final reckoning, with God’s help, I shall endeavour to deal
honestly with truth.
CHAPTER I.
Contradictions.
Before replying to Mr. AVollaston, I notice his contradictions , which,
in themselves, are enough to destroy the whole theory he urges; as they
show that the man who makes them is not to be depended upon: his
reason must be at fault, or else his confusion must be most alarming.
1. In his preface, Mr. AVollaston objects to “ an infinite penalty for
finite disobedience in this lifeand yet, on page 1, he says “ that the
punishment of the wicked will be as everlasting as the reward of the
good,” which is endless, and therefore infinite. Here on one page, Mr.
AV. affirms that future punishment cannot be infinite, and on the next
that it will be —a palpable contradiction. But, I ask, was not Adam’s
sin infinite in its consequences ? What sin does any man commit that
does not send its influence into eternity ? Air. AV’s argument is therefore
as illogical as his contradiction is palpable.
2. On page 4, Air. AV., speaking of physical death, says, “ When I
say, Aly friend is dead, I mean . . . that he will never again throughout
eternity feel, or think, or move, or speak as a mortal man and yet, on
page 13, he says that the “ unsaved shall be raised again from the dead
at the last day by our great Judge ; and having received from Him the
due reward of our deeds, and endured a perfectly just and equitable
amount of suffering in hell, shall be consigned “as mortal children of
Adam to eternal deathand hence will again, “throughout" some por-
tion of eternity, “think, or move, or speak, as mortal men,” which is a
contradiction.
3. Air. AV. states, on page 5, “It would appear that, as human lan-
guage is inadequate to describe intelligibly the sufferings of the lost . . .
our Lord has recourse to a metaphor or figure of speech, which conveys to
us the nearest approach to the reality which it is possible for the human
mind to conceive, and that figure is fire. Now, you will notice that the
‘ everlasting punishment’ in this text is identified by Christ with the
‘ everlasting fire’ of the 41st verse, where He, as Judge, represents Him-
self as saying to the goats on 1 [is left hand, at the last day, ‘ Depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.”


In another place (page 6) . . . “ the Son of Man shall send forth His
angels, and they shall gather out of His kingdom all things that offend
and them that do-iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire . . .
There shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth-— another strong figure to
denote misery and anguish." So that, when Christ affirms that the wicked
shall go into everlasting fire , it means, according to Mr. W.'s own showing,
“everlasting misery and anguish;” and hence he refutes himself,
without seeming to know it! Truly, “ the legs of the lame are not equal.”
He also speaks of fire as a “ figure of speech and on page 6he speaks
of it as literal—that “ it would burn on and on until all its victims which
sustain it, as coals sustain a furnace, were utterly burned up and con-
sumed.” Another contradiction!
4. Next, on pages 9 and 10, Mr. W. denies “ that the human soul
was created immortal, incapable of death and destructionand says,
“ But I will go further than this, and say, advisedly, that we have over-
whelming evidence, in the page's of Holy Writ, that the human soul is
not by creation and nature immortal. There is not one doctrine in the
New Testament more clearly revealed than this —that man is not by
creation and nature immortal” (page 11). But notwithstanding this
assertion, made so “advisedly,” Mr. W\ tells us that man was “created
immortal,” that he “ once had an immortality derived from Grod.” “Grod
tells us, in His gospel, that His divine image—that is, immortality —in
which Adam was created . . . can only be restored to us in one way —by
and through the services and intercession of Jesus Christ, He will give ns
bach our immortality" (page 8). “Man had it once in Eden, an immor-
tality derived from Grod, who created him, body and soul, deathless.”
The “ sanctified and regenerated, having by faith in the Saviour of sinners
recovered Grod’s image, received back their lost immortality . : . will enjoy
an eternal never-ending peace” (page 14). “Advisedly,” then, Mr. W.
declares that “ man was created immortaland “ advisedly” he denies it,
and declares “that man was not created immortal!” And this affirmation
and denial he makes at one and the same time ' Has, then, Mr. W. lost
his senses ? Oh dear no ! this is only one of the pernicious effects of his
theory which has blinded his mind, and makes him state “ a&visedly” one
thing this moment, and also affirm “ advisedly” the very opposite the next,
to suit the indispensible demands of his theory, which otherwise could not
be made even plausible.
If, however, Mr. W . me&us th<xt 1113.11 W3S creiited immortal or, 3s he
put it, “ deathless” —and he lost immortality, would he tell us how this
could he ? If man was created deathless —or immortal. —how could he
become different? How coidd he become mortal, if he was created im-


mortal ? Is it not impossible ? And hence there is not a line of scrip-
ture that says “ man lost his immortality.” This is Mr. Wollaston—
not Christ.
5. Again. Mr. W. says, on page 5, that the punishment of the wicked
will be “ death,” and after giving several definitions he gives “extinction ;”
and yet, on page 13, he says, if we die “ unsaved, we shall be raised from
the dead at the last day by our great Judge ; and, having received the
due reward of our deeds, and endured a perfectly just, and equitable
amount of suffering in hell for our sins, we shall be consigned, as mortal
children of Adam, to eternal death.” “That a temporary penalty of pain
and suffering in hell will he inflicted by a just and righteous God upon
every impenitent sinner, in exact proportion to the guiltiness of his
offences; which penalty will be followed by eternal death, extinction of
life, everlasting destruction of soul and body” (page 16). Does this
“commend itself to our reason?” Is this “manifest and absolute
justice ?” Nothing could be more unjust. This sounds worse even to
reason than unending suffering! If death, or extinction of life, is the
punishment—as Mr. W. says it is—it must he manifestly unjust for the
sinner to suffer first in hell in “ exact proportion to the guiltiness of his
offences,” and then suffer eternal death besides, which is in itself also
declared by Mr. W. to be the punishment. Because, this would be two
punishments; and, as affirmed, each of them in itself is the “ exact pro-
portion,” or full penalty, of the sinner’s guilt. And then, if this suffering
in hell is to he followed by “eternal death,” which is also the full
punishment of the sinner’s offences, the Destructionists’ God is not the
God of the Bible. For this double penalty is a libel on the character of
God, being shockingly unjust and ridiculously absurd. Fancy a criminal
having measured out to him 20 lashes as the “ exact proportion for the
guiltiness of his offences.” 19 would be insufficient; 21 would be too many
and unjust. Think then that, after he receives these 20 lashes—the full
penalty for his crimes—that this “ penalty is followed” with 20 more,
which would he the exact double of what justice had awarded ! In such
a case, what a universal cry of condemnation would be raised against the
administrators of justice, for transgressing its sacred sanctions ! And
yet this is an exact illustration of what Mr. W. says God, whose throne is
established in justice, will do with the sinner. For eternal death is the
punishment; but before this takes place, God will “ inflict a temporary
penalty of pain in hell” in “ exact proportion to the guiltiness of the
sinner’s offences, which penalty will he followed by eternal death!”
Oh, horrible in the extreme ! Is this “ gospel,” good news, “ glad tidings
to the human family,” which Mr. W. boasts of in his preface? or is “it


not rather a terrible and revolting dogma,” being “exactly the reverse,
however much it mav rejoice the hearts of” Destructionists ? The false
theory of the Universalist, that all will be finally saved, is after all a
better gospel than this appalling theory of Mr. W.’s. But he cannot
mean what he has so “ advisedly” written ; and these palpable contradic-
tions show that his “ Christ or Plato ” is self-condemned. Can a man be
trusted who in writing a short tract with the greatest care, knowing that
every line would be criticised, yet at the same time could not do so
without exposing his reasoning to self-condemnation ? Can a theory be
accepted whose inexorable demands require unblushing contradiction,
injustice, and absurdity ? Can a theory that comes in such a manner be
thought (even by its best advocates) to be possibly true P And yet these
three characteristics enumerated mark all the books and tracts of Destruc-
tionists I have ever perused.
CHAPTEE 11.
Punishment.
1. Destructionists, like most ingenious sophists, shift their ground.
"When driven from one stronghold, they take the next that may afford
them shelter for a time. It used to be argued that the word “everlasting”
or “ eternal ” did not mean unending. But since this argument has been
exploded, not only by showing that a ion o n (eternal) is the strongest
word in the Greek language to describe any thing unending, and that it
is used to denote the duration of the existence of God, but especially
when it is applied, not to time, but to eternity, (which is not measured
by periods), it does, and must exhaust it; and therefore expresses endless
duration. This Mr. Wollaston believes. But still he has recourse to less
tenable ground to prove that the wicked will “cease to existviz., to
affix a meaning to the word “punishment” which it never conveyed.
This is but an attempt common enough with some writers to change a
well-established meaning to some technical phrase or interpretation which
it is considered the exigences of their theories absolutely require.
2. And here, before noticing this substitution, observe, that,
Mr. W. is not satisfied with the Saviour’s definition of the sinner’s future
penalty, which is the result of rejecting the salvation so freely offered,
but he must take the word out of Christ’s mouth and put another in its
place, and dictate to us what “ our Lord meant ” as though He who spake
as never man spake did not mean what He said. And then, the word he
substitutes is not so generally understood, even by philosophers, much
less by people generally, as the one he displaces, which every school boy
understands. That word is punishment. For confessedly, the substituted


“ death, is a mystery with all its solemn realities ”to most people. Why
then, from Christ’s words, “everlasting punishment,” does Mr.W. take
out the word punishment, and substitute the word death, which few
understand ? Doubtless to suit a theory which could not otherwise be
sustained. Because there is no such phrase as “ eternal death ”in the
Bible. “Everlasting punishment” is a Grod given phrase, but “ever-
lasting death ”is not. In view of this fact, why then, not be content
with the divine phrase in preference to the human one, especially when
the divine is understood by all ? To all men of honesty I put this
question. If Glod tells us “ all to speak the same thing” (1 Cor. 1: 10)
we cannot do so without “ speaking where the scripture speaks ” which
Mr. W. has not done ; he has employed an unbiblical phrase for a bible
term, and that too, at the cost of making what was clear to all obscure to
most. Mr. W.’s want of reverence for the Word of Grod, is here very
manifest. Because, while both words are Bible ones, both phrases are
not; and no one has a right to take a word from another part of Scripture
to alter a phrase, unless, indeed, the phrase as so altered is found in some
part of Grod’s word which speaks on the same subject. And, therefore,
as it is right to be “ silent where the Scriptures are silent,” it is wrong to
use the unbiblical phrase “everlasting death” for the one used by the
Lord “everlasting punishment.” When “death” in a few places in the
New Testament designates future punishment, it denotes the state or con-
dition of the wicked, but is not a definition of what the punishment con-
sists; because if it were so the phrase “everlasting death” would be found
in some part of Gfod’s Book. Hence the word punishment is the definition
or explanation of that future state of the wicked called “death not only
because it is so used by the Saviour and understood by all, but because
the noun death is never qualified by the word everlasting in Grod’s blessed
word. There we have “everlasting burnings” (Isa. 33: 14), “everlasting
confusion,” “eternal reproach” (Jer. 20: 11; 23: 40), “everlasting con-
tempt” (Dan. 12: 2), “eternal fire” (Matt. 25: 41), “eternal life”
(Matt. 25: 46), “everlasting Grod” (Rom. 16: 24); but never “eternal
death.” Here Mr. W. and Christ are in opposition again. Ido not, of
course, object to the word “ death’ ’ in stating the future penalty of the
wicked ; for, if Christ had used the word death, it would not have helped
Mr. W.’s theory in the slightest degree ; but I cannot allow the words of
Jesus to be torn and displaced for the purpose of concocting a theory
which no one can read in the Bible.
3. Mr. W. does not deny that punishment means “conscious pain,”
but he avoids meeting the question. He says, “It is maintained that
punishment, to he punishment, must of necessity consist of conscious


pain and suffering. This argument is not founded on fact or reason.
When a man is hung for murder, you will admit that the object of justice
is to punish him for his crime, and you speak of it as the punishment of
death. . . . "this punishment of death then, having only reference to this
present life, the mortal body, it is to him eternal, just as the death of the
brute is to it eternal . .. and who would venture to say that, in consigning
the criminal to death, as a punishment for his sin, he is consigned to a life
of pain and suffering after death?” This is a false issue. There is no
comparison between future everlasting punishment and the present temporal
punishment of such a criminal, and it is nonsense to talk about his tem-
poral death being “eternal." Whoever heard a judge say, “You shall
be eternally hung?” This would be monstrous. But what is heard is
this: “You shall be hanged by the neck until you are dead; and then
you go on to the bar of God to be judged, and may God have mercy on
your soul.” The hanging is not eternal, and the process of this death is
not; it is “ until” you are dead—no longer. And then you have to be
dealt with by God, clearly showing that all is not awarded here; that
after all he is still “consigned to a” state of “ pain and suffering” in some
sense after death, the denial of which is Materialism. The mixing up of
punishment endured in this world with the punishment of the wicked in
the world to come is thus deceptive, and shows how entirely Mr. W. has
failed to meet the argument introduced by himself. “ That punishment, to
be punishment, must of necessity consist of conscious pain and suffering,
and as the punishment of the wicked is ‘ everlasting,’ his agony must be
everlasting also,” which is sound logic.
4. The meaning of the word punishment is one of fact. The dic-
tionaries thus define it: —“ Punishment, pain inflicted for crime.” Eeid’s
English Dictionary. “Punishment, any pain or suffering inflicted by
authority on a person for crime.” The Standard Pronouncing Dictionary,
edited by P. Austin Nut tail. LL.D. (1870), and with this they all agree.
Punishment, then, undeniably is. “Any pain or buffering inflicted for
crime;” and, therefore, “everlasting punishment” is everlasting pain or
suffering inflicted for crime. “ The common” objection, then, of Mr. W.,
as of all Destructionists, that the wicked will cease to exist, “will not hold
good for a moment, and stands upon nothing but a desire to establish a”
sceptical, “ but most pernicious and unscriptural theory of future punish-
ment for sin.”
5. Indeed, if Mr. W.’s theory could be true, there could not he
punishment in any sense, long or short. Because it is manifest that
“punishment begins and ends with the consciousness of pain inflicted


because of guilt contracted through the violation of law, or the neglect of
duty.” That being the case, “No one dispossessed of conscious guilt can
be punished, but persons extinguished are dispossessed of conscious guilt,
therefore no one extinguished can be punished.” And hence the theory
of extinction does away with all punishment.
6. If we look at the original word for punishment — kolasin —we are
only the more confirmed in the above conclusion. The lexicographers
define kolasis thus:—
(1). Screvelius Classic Lexicon —“ Kolasis, punishment, correction,
restraint, hindered, torture, lop off as in trees.”
(2). Parkhurst’s Greek and English Lexicon (London 1845) —
“ Kolasis, to punish, punishment, torment.”
(8). T. S. Green’s Greek and English Lexicon of the New Testa-
ment —“ Kolasis, chastisement, punishment, painful disquietude, torment.’
(4). J. 11. Ball’s Greek and English Lexicon to the New Testament
(1859J —“ Kolasis eos ee (from kolazoo), punishment, torment.”
(5). Lyddell and Scott’s Greek and English Classic Lexicon (1861)
—“ Kolasis, a pruning, checking, punishment, chastisement, correction,
punishing.”
7. It will be seen that one of the above gives “lop oft; as in trees”
and another “ a pruning,” as a meaning of kolasis, as well as “punish-
ment” or “torment;” and, therefore, some Destructionists have assumed
that the wicked will on that account, in the next world, be extinguished.
This is catching at straws, and indicates how hard they are pushed to get
something to favour their idea. But even suppose we take the application
as thus used, it proves nothing for Destructionists; because to prune or
lop off sprigs or small branches is only to purge the tree, that it may bring
forth more fruit; and so far from extinguishing the tree or even destroy-
ing it, the pruning does the very opposite —makes it grow more luxuri-
ant. So that this forced application from the trees to men gains only
the opposite idea to the one so eagerly desired. No doubt, the wicked
will be pruned of their pride and power to do evil, but the thought of
extinction is not in kolasis. Kolasin is only twice found in the New
Testament, in Matt. 25 : 4(5, where it is rendered “punishment,” and
1 John 4: 18, where it is translated “torment.” “Because fear hath
torment .” It would not do to say, “fear hath pruning!” “ fear hath
lopping off!!” No; “fear hath painful disquietude;” “pain” as the
Douay Testament has rendered it, or “torment” as nearly all other
translators give it. And hence] the objections go for nothing, as I have
proved that, “without glossy or addition or subtraction,” that “punish-


ment is pain or suffering infflicted for crime,” and the future punishment
of the wicked being eternal, according to Christ, it is not “ extinction,
extermination ” as according to Mr.W*, but the everlasting suffering of
pain for crime, and from this conclusion it is scripturally and logically
mpossible to escape.
CHAPTER 111.
Death akd Life.
1. Mr. Wollaston’s favourite definition of punishment is “death.”
But this, so far from giving him any help, only “ makes a bad worse
for here it will be seen that confusion and absurdity are worse confounded.
He tells us that “death is the exact antithesis of life”—that eternal death
is everlasting destruction, extinction, extermination —the blotting out of
the sinner’s life or existence for ever and ever.” According to this, life
is “existence death, the “ exact antithesis,” is therefore non-existence.
This is the way all Destructionists define these terms. But the wretched
absurdity of all this will appear by adopting the universally-admitted rule,
putting the definition in the place of the word in the passages where it
occurs. If the definition is the right one, it will always make good sense ;
if wrong, its falseness will be manifest.
2. God said to Adam, “In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt
surely cease to exist ” (Gen. 2 : 17). l)id Adam cease to exist the day he
partook of the forbidden fruit ? Was he blotted out of existence then ?
Was he taken from the earth the day he transgressed? Adam existed on
this earth for over nine hundred years after this; but he was separated
from the Lord on that day. The union was broken. And lest he should
put forth his hand and “ take the tree of life” and live physically in the
body for ever, the Lord banished him out of the garden ; a fit type of the
future banishment of the wicked from before God’s presence. Spiritual
death is thus separation from God. “ Precious in the sight of the Lord
is the non-existence of the saints” (Psa. 116: 15.) Has the Lord delight
in the non-existence of His saints ? No ! but He Relights in their being
in His presence, and to be “ absent (separated) from the body is to be
present with the Lorddeath being a separation, their release or
separation from the body is therefore precious to God.
3. In the New Testament separation and not extinction is also always
the true idea of death. “ Let the non-existent bury their non-existent /”
(Matt. 8 : 22. No ; but let those separated from God by wicked works
bury those who being separated from God, in that state died or had their
spirits separated from their bodies. “ For this my son was non-existent
and is alive again.” . . “ For this thy brother was non-existent." (Luke


15 : 24, 32. Had the prodigal son ceased to exist he could not have come
back to his father, but being only separated he had but to return. “ The
hour is coming, and now is, when the non-existent shall hear the voice of
the Son of God ” (John 5: 25.) Here the non-existent could not believe
or hear the voice of Christ; but those separated from God could. “He
that believeth in me, though he were non-existent, yet shall he live” (John
11: 25). This would be awful nonsense, but it is easy to see how those
separated from God by wicked works could believe in the Saviour. “ How
shall we that are non-existent to sin live any longer therein ?” (Horn. 6: 2.)
Christians are not in non-existence to sin for they are liable to it, but they
are separated from it. “For to be carnally minded is non-existence\"
(Rom. 8 : G.) All unconverted men are carnally or fleshly minded, and
while they are therefore separated from God they are not in non-existence.
“ The last enemy that shall be destroyed is non-existence ” (1 Cor. 15 : 26.)
Xon-existence cannot do anything, and is therefore not an enemy, but
separation from this life causes most to fear, and is therefore an enemy.
“ To the one we arethe sav our of non-existence unto non-existence" 2 Cor.
2 : IG. Xo ; but those who being separated from God in this life, and
having rejected the gospel preached by the Apostles, they became a savour
of them unto a greater separation than the one the gospel found them in.
“If one died for all then were all non-existent /” (2 Cor. 5 : 14). Christ’s
death for all proved that all were separated from God, and they needed
the death of Christ to reconcile them ; but had they been in non-existence,
they would not have required it. “ For ye are non-existent, and your life
is hid,” etc. (Col. 3 : 3). While such rendering is absurd, we can under-
stand how the disciples of Christ are separated from the world to the
service of God, having their union with Christ in God hid from it. “ For
she that livethjm pleasure is non-existent while she liveth” (1 Tim. 5:6).
What a contradiction ! But a person can enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, and still remain separated from G-od and those pleasures that pass
knowledge. “ For if we be non-existent with Him, we shall also live with
Him” (2 Tim. 2 : 11). Christ was never in non-existence; but though in
the world, he was separated from it, and so are all His people. “ That
through non-existence he might destroy him that had power of non-
existence” (Heb. 2: 14). Jesus never put Himself out of existence to
redeem that which had no existence ; but for our sakes he allowed Himself
to be separated from His Father, which caused Him to cry in burning
agony, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me !” That forsaking
— separation —-was spiritual death ; and next there was the separation of
His spirit from His body, when He “ gave up the spirit,” which was
physical death. “ Christ shall judge the quick and the non-existent ” (2
Tim. 4; 1). “ Him that is ready to judge the quick and the non-existent ”


(1 Peter 4 : 5). How could Christ judge the non-existent? But He will
judge those who are apart from God, separated, unreconciled. “We know
that we have passed from non-existence" .. . “He that loveth not his
brother abideth in non-existence'' (1 John 3 : 14. This definition of death,
like all the samples, is ridiculous. We know the first children of God had
existence—were not in extinction —before they had any love, or knew
anything about their brethren. But their love of the brethren was a proof
that they were separated from the world, and devoted to the Master’s
service. Still, through not loving a brother was no proof that one was
extinguished, but it was that he was separated in heart from his Lord-
“ Trees whose fruit withereth . . . twic q extinguished" (Jude 16). How
could this be ? Jude describes apostates who had twice separated them-
selves from God, sensual, having not the Spirit, to trees twice separated
from the earth —“ plucked up by the roots.” It remained for Mr. W. and
the Extinctionists of the age to break through every bar of common sense, to
conceive of men “ twice extinguished” and yet walking about in the world
doing evil! “ And I saw the extinguished, small and great, stand before
God” . . . “ the extinguished were judged . . . the sea gave up the
extinguished that were in it; and extinction and hell delivered up the
extinguished which were in them” (Rev. 20: 13). How can Mr. W. even
apprehend how the extinguished, or non-existent, could stand before God ;
how the sea could give up that which it had not —the extinguished ; and
how that which had no existence could give up anything ? But while this
is impossible, anybody can understand how that the separated who are in
the sea and in hades will be given up at the “ great and terrib. e day of
account.”
4. Time would fail to go over all the passages in which “ death’’
occurs ; but these 28 instances are sufficient to show the utter absurdity —
the ridiculous nonsense of Mr. Wollaston’s definitions of death as
“extinction,” “ceasing to be,” “the blotting out of existence,” etc. Let
any one of his definitions be substituted for death, and the feffly of it will
appear equally with the foregoing. Death has no such meaning applied
to man as Mr. W. vainly supposes. It is the old conceit of the Sadducees,
who used the word death in the same way ; hence they were more con-
sistent than Mr. W., because death, with them, being extinction, they
could not see the use of a resurrection. And the only time the Lord ever
used the word in such a sense was for the purpose of condemning it—
“ God is not the God of the dead (extinguished), but of the living” Matt.
22 : 32, Rom. 14: 9). though “ David is dead, and the prophets
are dead,” yet they are all alive ; for death is not extinction, but only
“ separation.” Hence, “ the gospel was preached also to them that are


dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh”
(1 Peter 4:6).
5. Let separation be put in the room of death , and it will be good
sense always, irrespective of whether the death spoken of be spiritual or
physical. Spiritual death is the separation of the spirit from the favour
of God, for “ His favour is life,” and hence separation from that favour is
death. Physical death is separation of the spirit from the body ; and
therefore Job spoke of it as a u change." “If a man die, shall he live
again P All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change
come” (Job. 14: 14.) This is clearly shown in what Mr. W. is pleased
to call the “ parable” of the rich man and Lazarus, but which is no
parable, but a narrative , with the history of which the Jews of our Lord’s
day were doubtless acquainted. “ There was a certain rich man .. .
and there was a certain beggar, named Lazarus .. . And it came to
pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham’s
bosom. The rich man also died, and was buried ; and, in hell, he lifted
up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus
in his bosom. And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy upon
me ! and send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and
cool my tongue, for lam tormented in this flame ! But Abraham said,
Son, remember that thou, in thy life time, received thy good things, and
Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.
And beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed; so
that they which would pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they
pass to us that would come from thence” (Luke 16 : 19-26). Here there
is no extinction, but a separation from this world which changed their
positions, and the result of that separation from God to the wicked —as
Mr. A. M. Henderson has very truthfully put it —is “misery.” Hence,
“no amount of argument or sophistry can possibly convert” death into
extinction.
6. The text Rom. 6 : 23, Mr. W ollaston has taken to work future
future punishment out of does not speak of future punishment at all.
It speaks of the consequences, or wages of sin, to the saint as well as
to the sinner, which is physical death ; because “ death passed upon alt
men'' —good and had —‘ '‘for that all have sinned." For while doubtless
the wages of sin will go beyond the grave, yet it is not the future conse-
quences of sin that Paul is speaking of in this text. (See Rom. 5 : 12-18
and 6: 23.) But while sin sends all to the grave, the good fear it not:
even the poor thief had consolation given him—“ To-day thou shalt be
with me in Paradise” (Luke 23: 43). But this shows how little Mr. W.
grasps the scriptures in their connection. However, irrespective of this,


there is “ nothing more clearly revealed and more frequently taught by
Jesus Christ and His Apostles than” that the first death that all unre-
conciled men are in is separation from God ; and that the second death
will be a far greater separation, when Christ will say, “ Depart from me,
ye cursed, into everlasting fire —‘ into everlasting punishment’—prepared
for the devil and his angels.” Therefore Mr. W.’s notion of extinction
is “totally opposed to the teaching of God’s Word, and is unworthy of a
place in the” mind of saint or sinner.
7. Forasmuch as I have proved that death is separation, and it being
the “ exact antithesis of life,” it follows that the right idea of life is
union— either union of the spirit with God, which is reconciliation, and
hence spiritual life; or the union of the spirit with the body, which is
physical life. This will be put beyond a doubt by substituting existence —
Mr. W.’s definition of life in a few passages. In Him was existence , and
the existence was the light of men” (John 1:4). “ And ye will not come
unto me that ye might have existence “ Except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink His blood, ye have no existence in you” (John
5:40 ; 6: 53). “We know we have passed from death unto existence,
because ” etc. (1 John 3 : 14). “To be spiritually minded is existence
and peace” (Horn. 8:6). “ Being alienated from the existence of God”
(Eph. 4 : 18). We can understand how men are alienated or separated
from union with God, which is happiness, through ignorance, but we
cannot conceive how they can be alienated from the existence of God
which is everywhere. “He that hath the Son, hath existence; he that
hath not the Son of God, hath not existence'' 1 (John 5: 12). The
unconverted have not the Son of God, therefore the unconverted, accord-
ing to Mr. W., have not existence! But all these passages not only show
the utter nonsense of Mr. W.’s definition of life, but how antagonistic
he is to Christ. As again: “A man’s existence consisteth not in the
abundance of the things which he possesseth ” (Luke 12 : 15). Here life
is used in the sense of happiness which is the result of “ union with a
sound mind in a healthy body,” or the union of the human mind with the
mind of God. This fact shows that, it was impossible for God to promise
life to the wicked; and also the inconsistency of the phrase, “ Eternal
life in misery,” which would be “ eternal happiness in misery ” which is
a contradiction. Solomon used the word in this way : “ The excellency
of knowledge is, that wisdom givoth life to them that have it” (Ecel. 7 : 12).
All persons have existence irrespective of wisdom ; but they have not
happiness without it. Wisdom gives happiness, because it brings us into
union with God, and “the fear of God is” therefore said to be “the
beginning of wisdom.”


8. But Mr. W.’s speculation of life—“ eternal life” —is not mere
harmless nonsense, because it destroys the hopes of God’s people in
reducing the sum of all their future blessings, promised by God, to mere
eternal existence though he says that they are “ the conditions of the saved
and lost.” With him, “ eternal life” is eternal existence ; eternal life
is the sum of all future blessing ; but existence in itself is no blessing,
and hence eternal existence cannot be the sum of all the “ exceeding great
and precious promises” of the Bible. So that his definition of life cannot
be true in any sense, as it strips the scriptures of all their glory and the
saints of their hope of that “ eternal weight of glory” to be brought to
them at the revelation of Jesus Christ their Lord.
CHAPTEE IT.
Destruction.
1. Next, Mr. Wollaston tells us, that, destruction is extinction.
(Page 6.) So that if his argument on death failed, he would still have
extinction out of destruction. But he has as miserably failed here as else-
where. Of course he has quoted passages enough if that would do ; but
he forgot that it is not the number produced, scrap-doctor fashion, that
prove any thing; but their relevancy to the matter in hand. However,
there are not only not “two passages,” which are always quoted as stock
text by the advocates of extinction, but “ there is not one passage from
the first Chapter of Genesis to the last of Revelation” which teaches it
plainly, much less a “hundred,” which only show how reckless Mr. W.
is in assertion.
2. The two passages supposed to teach the extinction of the wicked
are Matt. 10: 28 ; 2 Thess. 1: 9. These are confessedly the strongest.
So much so, that S. Minton, M.A. declares that he would stake the whole
controversy on Matt. 10: 28; and yet his abuse of this portion of the
di\ ine record has been exposed over and over again. But there is such
a thing as shutting the eyes against the light of evidence.
3. This passage, “And fear not them which kill the body, but are
not able to kill the ,soul: but rather fear Him which is able to destroy
body and soul in hell.” Now, Christ does not say that He will destroy
body and soul in hell. Mr. W. says that, second, Christ does not say that
He will kill body and soul in hell, which He most certainly would
have done if extinction had been his idea, as He had used that word in
reference to men not being “able to kill the soul” in the same sentence.
Third, the word spirit, that is never said to die, is not in the passage, but
the word soul or life ; so, even if the Lord had affirmed that the soul


would be extinguished, it still would be questionable whether soul, in this
passage, meant spirit. But taking for granted that it means spirit, then
does destroy mean to extinguish? The original word is apolumi. Does
apolumi or any of it its cognate forms mean extinction ? The word is
found 92 times in the Greek New Testament, and is differently translated
in the authorized version. It is 31 times translated lost, loose, or loseth ;
33 times perish, perisheth, or perished; 26 times destroy, or destroyed ;
once marred, and once die. This fact alone explodes the theory that
apolumi (destroy) means extinguish or extinction, or cease to exist.
That it does not will be proved beyond the possibility of a doubt by
applying our unerring rule, in substituting extinction or any of its equi-
valents in a comparison of the passages where the word destroy (apolumi)
is used. In this way, those who know nothing about Greek will be able
to judge for themselves; and my object is to prevent them from being
carried away by the sophistry of Mr. W. and those of his school. They
always take for granted the thing which has to be proved, and which never
has nor ever can be, in the nature of things, demonstrated.
4. “ The wine runneth out, and the bottles cease to exist" (perish).
“Go rather to the extinguished (lost) sheep of the house of Israel.” “I
am not sent but unto the extinguished (lost) sheep of the house of Israel.”
“ For the Son of man is come to save that which was extinguished (lost)”
Matt. 10 :6; 15 :24 ; 18: 11. “ And the wine is spilled, and the bottles
will be extinguished (marred).” “The new wine will burst the bottles,
and be spilled, and the bottles shall cease to exist (perish).” Mark. 2: 22.
Luke 5: 37. “ What man of you having an hundred sheep, if he
extinguish (lose) one of them, doth not leave the ninty and nine in the
wilderness, and go after that which was extinguished (lost),” “ until
he find it?” “I have found my sheep which was extinguished (lost).”
“For this my son was dead and is alive again; he was extinguished
(lost) and is found.” “ Thy brother was dead and is alive again ; and
was extinguished (lost) and is found” (Luke 15: 4,6, 8,9,24,32.)
“ The Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was extinguished
(lost) ” (Luke 19: 10). “Destroy ( extinguish ) not him with thy meat
for whom Christ died” (Rom. 14; 15). “I will extinguish (destroy)
the wisdom of the wise ” (1 Cor. 1: 19). “ They (earth and heavens)
shall cease to exist (perish). . . . and as a vesture shall thou fold them
up, and they shall he changed" (Heb. 1: 11,12). “ The world that then
was being overflowed with water, ceased to exist (perished)” (2 Peter 3 ; G).
5. Here we have 19 passages, embracing nine different subjects, and
not only is no such idea as that of extinction in any one of them, but


the things are known to have had positive existence, and some of them
preservation, after they are said to have been destroyed. 1. The old
bottles, which were leather bags, existed after the rent was made in them
by the ferment of the new wine; though they were rendered useless, and
hence destroyed. 2. The destroyed sheep of the house of Israel were
still in conscious existence, as is also declared, after their destruction, by
the prophet: “ 0 Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself; but in me is thy
help” (Hos. 13 : 9). Jesus never went after those who had no existence,
as Mr. W.’s theory would compel us to believe. 3, The lost sheep out of
the hundred was not extinguished, but preserved, as it was carried home
alive. 4. The lost piece of money was preserved, for it was found. 5. The
destroyed prodigal son was not extinguished, for he came home himself. 6.
The destruction of the weak brother, through a strong one eating meat offered
in sacrifice to idols, did not extinguish him, though he was “grieved.”
7. The destruction of wisdom in the wise did not extinguish it, but only
rendered it useless, as in the case of Ahithophel, whose counsel the Lord
rendered of noneffect; but it did not cease to exist, for he afterward “ set
his house in order” (2 Sam. 17 : 14, 23). 8. The earth and the heavens
will be destroyed, and this destruction is defined to consist in their being
“changed”—“They shall be changed,” not extinguished. 9. The world,
being overflowed with water, perished—was destroyed, underwent a
change ; but was not extinguished, for we are living on it to-day. And
hence the same word (which is used to designate the destruction of all
these nine different subjects) found in Mat. 10 : 28, where G-od is said to
be “able to destroy soul and body in hell,” does not mean to extinguish
them, but to change them, or render them useless.
6. Indeed, this passage, so far from teaching extinction, just teaches
the opposite, viz., that the soul will exist jor ever, because man is unable to
kill it. He can kill all that is mortal, but he cannot kill the soul, which
is therefore opposite to the mortal body ; and we have seen that God will
not kill it, but render it useless in misery, or clothe it with an eternal
weight of glory for ever. Kichard Watson (whom Mr. W. has misrepre-
sented, with a number of others) says on this verse: “ Thus our Lord at
once declares the soul’s immortality.” ... “ Destroy soul and body. —
The meaning is not that the punishment of bad men in a future life is
annihilation, for the word is often used to express a continuance in a state
of wretchedness, as in Mark 1: 24.”
7. The next stock-in-trade text so confidently quoted to teach extinc-
tion, is 2 Thess. 1: 9. This contains olethros. “ The Lord Jesus shall
he revealed from heaven, with His mighty angels, in flaming fire taking


vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction,
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of His power; when
He shall come to he glorified in His saints,” etc. Olethros is found four
times in the Greek, and is always rendered destruction in the Authorised
Version. See 1 Thess. 5:3; 1 Tim. 0:9; 1 Cor. 5: 5. Mr. W.’s
definition of this word is extinction. “ Everlasting extinction” He says
again, that extinction is the act of “blotting out the sinner’s existence a
ceasing to he or to exist. Now, if the wicked cease to exist, how can the
act or process of that ceasing to exist be everlasting ? How can it be end-
less when it ceases “after a temporary punishment in hell?” The shot of
a gun does not consume a second of time. W ould it therefore be right to
speak of a single shot, qualifying it by the word everlasting ? An ever-
lasting shot! Is this not absurd ? Is it not a violation of common sense ?
The tick of a watch does not consume a second ; would, then, it be right
to speak of a single tick qualifying it by everlasting ? If a tick was ever-
lasting, then we would have perpetual motion ; which, however cannot be
attained by any combination of ticks, much less by one. But, in any
sense, it is ridiculous to say that either a shot or a tick is everlasting,
when all know that a single shot and a single tick cease, and hence cannot
be everlasting; so it is, in like manner, utterly impossible for everlasting
to qualify them. In like manner, and for the same reason, everlasting
cannot qualify extinction or a ceasing to exist; and therefore extinction
is not the meaning of the word destruction, which is qualified by everlast-
inq. The other occurrences of the word prove this beyond a doubt.
“ Deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.” Twelve months aft er
this, the flesh was destroyed ; and the same Apostle commanded that this
incestuous person in Corinth be received back amongst
“ Sufficient to such a man was this punishment, which was inflicted of
many ; so that contrariwise ye ought rather forgive him, and comfort him,
lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with over-much sorrow.”
2 Cor. 2 : 5-11. Now, this man was restored to the Church. Did he,
then, come into the assembly a skeleton, with all his flesh on his body
extinguished ? But suppose that in this case the flesh means the passions
or desires ; then, were the desires extinguished ? Did his desires cease to
exist, or were they only changed? Assuredly, they were merely changed.
Then, destruction does not mean extinction; and Mr. W. only begs the
question by taking it for granted that it does.
8. But some are determined to have extinction out of destruction in
some way, and quote the words, “ Whose end is destruction,” and remark,


“Now, if there is thus an end to the wicked, they must be blotted out of
existence.” This kind of argument would put out of existence in the
same way the righteous, the saintly, and the “ perfect man.” “ Mark the
perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace.”
(Psa. 37 : 37). Hence, this argument in extinguishing the perfect man
as well as the wicked proves too much, and therefore proves nothing.
Others, being logically compelled to give up the foregoing, advance this
objection: “ But if the wicked are ‘ punished with everlasting destruction
prom the presence of the Lord,’ they must be put out of the universe,
and therefore extinguished, since there is no place in the universe that
G-od is not; even if ‘ I make my bed in hell thou art there.' ” This only
captivates the ignorant, because the word “ presence,” as applied to God,
is used in two senses, viz., that of His immediate presence, and that of His
universal presence ; and it is in the former sense that it is applied to the
wicked. In the latter sense, the wicked and righteous are now in God’s
presence, but not in the former. The Christian, though he has the
Lord always before him, as it is written, “ I will never leave you nor
forsake you,” yet he is promised to come into or be presented before
G-od’s presence. “ Now,- unto Him that is able to keep ) r ou from falling,
and to present you faultless before the presence of His glory with
exceeding joy. (Jude 24). Again, the immediate presence of Jehovah is
thus described by the Psalmist, “In thy presence is fulness of joy; at
thy right HAND there are pleasures for evermore” (Psalm 16 : 11). The
righteous are not thus in the presence of the Lord now. To be
“punished,” then, when the Lord comes, “with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord” is to be banished from before His immediate
presence, from u His right hand," and rendered useless in misery for ever.
“Depart from me, ye cursed,” etc.; but not out of existence, any more
than the wicked who are not now in the presence of the Lord are out of
existence at the present day.
9. Again, another passage, where destruction is used, proves that it
cannot mean extinction —“ But they that will be rich fall into a snare,
and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction
and perdition.” Destruction here cannot mean extinction, because, after
destruction, they are to be drowned in perdition (apoleid). “The beast”
is said to go into perdition ( apoleian —Rev. 17 : 8, 11) ; and hence
destruction, or whatever else takes place before , cannot be extinction, since,
after the wicked are extinguished, they could not go into, or be drowned
in,perdition. Moreover, apoleia does not mean extinction, for “the
beast goeth into perdition and, instead of being extinguished, will be


“ tormented” for ever. It is rendered twice waste (Matt. 26 :8 ; Mark
14 : 14) ; once damnable heresies ; once pernicious ways; as well as destruc-
tion (Matt. 7 : 13; Phil. 3 : 19; 2 Peter 2: 1,2.)
10. Next, Mr. W. quotes, in support of his theory, 2 Peter 2 : 12,
where we have phtoran rendered “ destroyed but though9times found
in the Greek, it is never so translated elsewhere in the Common Version.
It is rendered 8 times “corruption” (Rom. 8 : 21 ; 1 Cor. 15 : 42, 50;
Gal. 6:8; Col. 2:22 ; 2 Peter 1: 4, and 2 : 12, 19). Having, then,
“escaped the corruption that is in the world, through lust,” is not
the extinction that is in the world ; as extinction, or that which has no
existence, cannot be met with ; but the polution, the contamination, which
is everywhere in actual existence in the world, and is to be carefully
avoided. But not only is Mr. W. unfortunate is this quotation of 2 Peter
2 : 12, but he is guilty of shamefully handling the passage. He says,
“St. Peter, speaking of the ungodly says, ‘Bat these, as natural brute
beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, shall utterly perish in their own
corruption.” Here the comparison the Apostle institutes is completely
destroyed, through Mr. ~W. “taking away from the words of the ” verse
without giving the slightest intimation of so doing. In the New
Testament, the passage reads, “ But these, as natural brute beasts, made
to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things that they understand
not, and shall utterly perish in their own corruption.” The point of
comparison, here is, not that beasts are made to be taken and destroyed,
for men are not thus made ; but that, as beasts, (which are made to be
taken and destroyed) rail, bellow, so these, “ presumptuous, self-willed,
rail at dignities,” “ rail against the things that they understand not.”
The American Bible Union translates this: “ Presumptuous, self-willed,
they are not afraid to rail at dignities; whereas angels, being greater in
strength and power, bring not railing judgment against them before the
Lord. But these, as natural beasts, born to be taken and destroyed,
ratling at things that they understand not, shall utterly perish in their
own corruption.” And this perishing in their own corruption does not
allude to future punishment at all, but to their debauched habits in this
world —“ having eyes full of adultery, that cannot cease from sin.”
And, so far from this perishing in their own corruption being their
extinction, the Apostle, still speaking of them, tells us, “ These are wells
without water, clouds that are carried with a tempest, to whom the mist
of darkness is reserved for ever.” 2 Peter 2 : 17. In whatever way
we look at Mr. AV.’s theory, “ It will not hold good for one moment, and
stands upon nothing but a desire to establish a ” sceptical, “ but most
pernicious and unscriptural, theory of future punishment for sin.”


CHAPTER Y.
Future Punishment Commensurate with the Duration op God's
Existence.
1. On page <>, Mr. Wollaston, commenting on Matt. 3 : 12, says. “He
will burn it up, reduce it to ashes, to be scattered to the four winds of
heaven.” This Mr. W. applies to future punishment; wdiereas the
passage has no reference to future punishment, but to punishment
inflicted on the Jews of that generation, for not bringing forth good
fruit after they had the Saviour and the gospel offered them. John
warned them to “ flee from the wrath to come,” and talk not about
Abraham being their father, declaring that the axe was then laid to the
root of the trees of that generation, and that every tree which brought not
forth good fruit should be hewn down and cast into the fire.” Says he, “ I
indeed baptise you with water unto repentance ; but He that cometh
after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: He
shall baptise you with the Holy Spirit, and with fire.” It is here stated
that the Jews John was addressing would be baptised with the “ Holy
Spirit and Fire”— the “Holy Spirit” to those of them who would
receive Him, as the hundred and twenty, who were so baptised with the
Spirit on the Hay of Pentecost; and the “ fire ”to those of them who
would not have “ him to reign over them,’ which happened to them in the
year 70-74, forty years after John announced these words, when Titus,
at the head of the Roman Army, surrounded Jerusalem ; and when by
God’s four judgments, “pestilence” “famine” “the sword,” and “fire,”
“ two thirds ”of them were cut off. “ And it shall come to pass, saith the
Lord, two parts therein shall be cut off and die.”. . . “ And I will bring
the third part through the fire ” (Zecli. 13 : 8.) The context (Matt. 3 :
7-12) shows that this was a temporal punishment then received. “Whose
fan is in His hand, and He will thoroughly purge His floor [the Jewish
floor, for at that time there was no other], and gather His wheat into the
garner; but He will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire,” according
to the prophecy of Malachi (4: 1,2). “For, behold, the day cometh
that shall burn as an oven ; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly,
shall be stubble ; and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the
Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch. But
unto you that fear my name shall the Bun of Righteousness arise with
healing in His wings ; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves of the
stall.” In that awful wrath which came upon the .lews in the “destruction
of Jerusalem,” we see the literal fulfilment of all this. Those who rejected
the Saviour, “all the proud,” etc., were consumed; but those who
received the Messiah,“you that fear my name,” were delivered, “escaped


to the mountains,” through the good providence of God. But to apply
these passages to future punishment, which speak only of punishment
in this life, is to quote without regard to the context.
2. This is further manifest by Mr. W.’s endeavouring to deprive Mark
9 : 44-48 of their natural power, by trying to show that, as the “ dead
carcases” were consumed in “the Yalley of the Son of Hinnom,” so the
unbelieving, when they die, shall be “ tormented with the gehenna or fire
of God r s wrath ; and the gnawing worm of anguish shall not die in them,
and the fire that burns them shall not be quenched, until body and soul
be utterly consumed.” What a caricature is this beside the passage!
“And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off; it is better for thee to enter into
life maimed than, having two hands, to go into hell, —into the fire that
shall never be quenched; where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not
quenched. And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off ; it is better for thee to
enter halt into life than, having two feet, to be cast into hell, —into the
fire that never shall be quenched ; where their worm dieth not, and the
fire is not quenched. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out; it is
better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye than,
having two eyes, to be cast into hell fire ; where their worm, dieth not, and
the fire is not quenched. For every one shall be salted with fire.” They
(the wicked) shall be salted with fire, and therefore preserved in it. It
is questionable whether in the Yalley of the Son of Hinnom fires were
kept burning ; but be this as it may, one thing is certain, that our Lord
declared that in hell (the future place of punishment) the fire there
would never be quenched, and not the worm, but their worm or con-
science dieth not. Here Mr. W. is directly against Christ.
Cheist says —
“ It is better for thee to enter halt
into life than, having two feet, to be
cast into hell, — into the eiee that
SHALL NEVEE BE QUENCHED ; WHEEE
THEIE WOEM DIETH NOT, AND THE
FIEE IS NOT QUENCHED.”
Me. Wollaston says —
“ The gnawing worm of anguish
shall not die in them, and the fire
that burns them shall not be
quenched, until bout and soud
SHALL BE UTTEELY CONSUMED” ! ! !
3. The Saviour’s repetition shows the emphasis and solemnity He
attached to these words ; but, regardless of this, Mr. W. denies what the
Son of God has affirmed three times in one and the same passage ! And
not only has he denied the words of Christ, but has added to them, though
it is written, “ Add not to His words, lest He reprove thee, and thou be
found a liar” (Job. 30 : 6). Reader, the question is not now “ Christ or


Plato ?” but whether you will follow “ Christ or Wollaston ?” seeing that
they are opposed to each other.
4. Next, Mr. W. says (page 14), “ The only portion of the Bible I have
not mentioned is the Apocalypse or Revelation of St. John ; and in that
book, there is one passage which is always quoted, in conjunction with
those two texts already referred to in the Gospels, to prove the eternal
duration of the sinner’s sufferings in hell (chapter 14 : 10, 11), ‘lf any
man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his fore-
head, or in his hand, the same shall be tormented with fire and brimstone;
and the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever.” Mr.
W. tells us that “we do not know for certain w T ho these worshippers of
the beast representas if that had anything to do with the duration of
future punishment. Then, he says it is not “ clear that this passage
refers to future punishment,” which any ordinary person has only to read
to see to the contrary. Again. He observes that the Book of Revelation
is “so crowded with allegory and glowing imagery, foreshadowing future
events, that no one can venture to dogmatize upon the meaning of its con-
tents.” But Mr. W. ought to know that images are not used for the
- purpose of destroying language, and making its meaning uncertain, but
for the express purpose of giving it strength, and making its reality all
the more clear. A figure of speech does not destroy the reality of the
idea which it communicates. God does not use these “ glowing images”
for the purpose of only frightening children, as Mr. W. would give us to
understand, but for the purpose of impressing the absolute certainty of
the truth they communicate upon our minds. But Mr. W. is strangely
inconsistent. When he finds the word “ death,” then it must be literal,
and its meaning must be extinction ; but when a passage like the above
asserts the unending duration of. future punishment, 0 ! then it is “so
allegory that nobody can understand it!” And yet, con-
cerning this same book, God says, “ Blessed is he that readeth, and they
that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are
written therein,” which no one could do unless he understood them.
5. Mr. W. intimates that this “ one passage” is the only one which
directly teaches unending punishment in Revelation ; and on page- 4, he
says it is “perfectly true that this (Matt. 25 : 46) is the only text in the
whole Bible which directly and dogmatically declares this doctrine of the
everlasting punishment of the lost.” Now, neither of these statements
are true ;it is true that they are both totally false. Without the aid of
these passages, or any other he has alluded to, 1 now produce other
passages which place the matter of unending duration of future punish -


ment beyond a doubt, to all who believe the Word of God, forasmuch as
the same words are used to express the duration of God's existence , the
duration of the future glory of the righteous, and the duration of the future
punishment of the wicked. The duration of the one is the same as the
other. In so doing, I shall refute another objection which appeared in
the Ballarat Courier of 19th March, 1873, from the pen of “ B. G.,” viz.,
“ That the phrase ‘ for ever and ever’ does not afford that support to the
dogma of eternal torment which ‘ ’thirty Years’ may think it does.”
“B. G.” then quotes from “J. M. Denniston, M.A.” to support him ;
which shows ignorance on his part, and, if the quotation is correct, decep-
tion on the part of “J. M. Denniston, M.A.” I give a few parallel
passages, and refer to others where the same words are used: —
6. Duration or God’s Existence.
“ To Him be glory and dominion, for
ever and ever (eis tous aionas ton
aionon) 1 Peter 5 : 11.
“ And sware by Him that liveth
for ever and ever (eis tous aionas
ton aionon) Eev. 10 : 6.
“ And one of the four beasts gave
unto the seven angels seven golden
vials, full of the wrath of God, who
liveth for ever and ever" (eis tous
aionas ton aionon) Eev. 15 : 7.
(See Gal. 1: 5 ; Phil. 1:17 ; Heb.
13 : 21; 1 Peter 4 : 11; Eev. 1 : 6,
18 ; 4 : 9, 10; 5 : 13, 14; 7 : 12 ;
11 : 15).
Duration of Saints’ Future
Glory.
“Andthey [God’s servants] shall
reign for ever and ever ( eis tous
aionas ton aionon) Eev. 22 : 5.
Duration of Future Punish-
ment.
“For He hath judged the great
whoi’e, which did corrupt the earth
with her fornication, and hath
avenged the blood of His servants
at her hand. And again they said,
Alleluia. And her smoke rose up
for ever and ever" {eis tons aionas
ton aianon ) Eev. 19 : 2, 3.
“ These [the beast and false pro-
phet] both were cast alive into a
lake of fire burning with brimstone.
. . . And the devil that deceived
them was cast into the lake of £re
and brimstone, where the beast and
the false prophet are, and shall be
tormented day and night for ever
and ever (eis tons aionas ton
aionon) Eev. 19 : 20; 20 : 10.
Here, then, we have the same words in the Greek New Testament in
the above passages uniformly translated “for ever and ever," used by the
Holy Spirit to describe the duration of the existence of God, the future
duration of the glory of the righteous, and the duration of the future
punishment of the wicked. So that the identical words, composed of the
same characters in Greek and in English, show that the torment of the


wicked will be as long as the existence of God and the future bliss of
the saints. In Rev. 19 :20 and 20 : 10, the punishment of the beast, the
false prophet, and Satan, and the future punishment of the wicked is, in
point of duration, completely commensurate with the existence of God.
The name of the lake of fire into which the beast, the false prophet,
Satan, and the wicked are cast, is called “The Second Death” (Kev.
21 : 8). Hence, “He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second
death” (Rev. 2:11; 20 : 14). 'lhe beast and the false prophet, though
put into the lake of fire before Satan, so far from being extinguished, are
still there when he comes among them, and are to be tormented for ever.
It is said, “ But these are only those who have deceived the people.”
True; but forasmuch as those who reject the gospel —the overtures of
G od’s mercy —fall through “ pride” “ into the condemnation of the
devil (1 Tim. 3:6), the punishment, in point of duration, is identically
the same. This is seen in Rev. 19 :2, 3, wdiere we have the punishment
of the great whore, mystic Babylon, the apostacy ; those who have deli-
berately rejected the Saviour. 1 herefore said Jesus, giving a description
of what the duration of that punishment shall be, “ Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels,” who
will be “tormented day and night for ever and ever.” But it is said,
that “ there shall be no night there,” and how can they be tormented day
and night ? “ There shall be no night there” only applies to the abode
of the blessed , not to that of the damned (Rev. 22 : 5). The words “ day
and night” are used to express, in their connection, to our minds the
unending duration of the torment; and, notwithstanding, sceptical minds,
who lean to their “ own understanding,” and trust not “in the Lord with
all their might,” will not believe it. But in whatever way the believer in
the Messiahship of Jesus looks at this great subject, the same thing is
taught; and I am therefore, without choice, inexorably driven to the
conclusion —that the duration of the future punishment of those who
reject the salvation provided for them in Christ will be as endless as the
existence of God or as the future glory of the saints, and consequently
“for ever and ever.” And hence, I expose the extreme erroneousness of
Mr. W.’s statements.
8. As space forbids my going over the whole ground, I here give a list
of other passages for the faithful student to scrutinize: —Isa. 33 : 14;
Jer. 23 : 40; Ban. 12:2; Matt. 8 : 12, and 22 : 13. How long is the
wicked to be in outward darkness ? See 2 Peter 2:17 ; Jude 13. Again,
the wicked are said to be cast into a furnace of fire (Matt. 13 : 42, 50,
and 18 : 8). For how long? See Matt. 25 : 41; Rev. 20 : 10. 'lhe
“ unjust and filthy,” after the judgment, are to be as long unjust and


filthy as the “righteous and holy” are to continue in their condition of
purity, which is “still,” always, for ever. And an honest man, guided by
the word of truth, can come to no other possible conclusion.
9. Mr. W. felt his manifest weakness in arguing out his theory ; and
therefore, to make up for what he failed in, on page 8 he says, “ What I have
said to you on this grave subject, has exercised my mind for years, and
has been the result of much careful thought, reading, and consideration.”
What of that ? Will that make it true ? I doubt not but that Bobert
Owen could have said the same with more grace ; as he said that he had
read five hours every day for forty years ! And this was one of his
weighty reasons for rejecting Christianity altogether ; though more mature
thought led him afterwards to receive it in a corrupted form. By such
sophistry as Mr. W.’s, I myself, eleven years ago, embraced the theory
I am refuting.
10. The Old Testament has been much abused by quotations from it
which are made to apply to the subject of future punishment, but which
have no reference to it. Mr. W. thus uses it—“ Behold, I lay before
you this day the way of life and the way of death though, like else-
where, he does not give it as it is in the Bible. There we read, “ See ! I
have set before you this day life and good and death and evil” (Deut.
30 : 15). “ Behold! I set before you the way of life and the way of
death: he that abideth in the city shall die by the sword” (Jer. 21: 8,9).
These passages, like all others in the Old Test ament, show that wherever
“death,” “die” (as “ the soul that sinneth it shall die”), “kill,” “slain,”
“devoured,” “ utterly destroyed,” “ utterly cut off,” “perish,” “con-
sume” or “consumed” (as, “the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat
of lambs: they shall consume ; into smoke shall they consume away
(Psalm 37 : 20) are found, there is not the least allusion, directly or
otherwise, to future punishment, which Destructionists have taken for
granted, but only to that inflicted in this life—to temporal death. Hence,
all arguments based on such passages are based on false premises, and
are therefore fallacious. God is called “ a consuming fire,” because He
went-“before the children of Israel as a consuming fire,” and destroyed
the heathen from before their face (Deut. 4 : 24, and 9 : 3).
the Hebrews well remembered it (Heb. 12 : 29). None of these passages
in the Old Testament have the slightest reference to the future; still the
Jews believed in the endless duration of future punishment from Isaiah
33 : 14; Jer. 23 : 40; Dan. 12 :2 ; and taught “the immortality of
souls.” The following from Josephus (Book xviii., c. i., 3,4, 5) abun.
dantly prove this :


11. “The (Pharisees) also believe that souls have an immortal vigour
in them ; and that, under the earth, there will be rewards or punishments,
according as they have lived virtuously or viciously in this life ; and the
latter are to be detained in an everlasting prison, but that the former shall
have power to revive and live again ; on account of which doctrines, they
are able to persuade the body of the people, and whatsoever they do about
divine worship, prayers, and sacrifices they perform them according to
their direction ; insomuch, that the cities give great attestations to them,
on account of their entire virtuous conduct, both in the actions of their
lives, and their discourses also. . . . The doctrine of the Essens is .this,
That all things are best ascribed to God. They teach the immortality of
souls ; and esteem that the rewards of righteousness are to be earnestly
striven for.
12. “ But the doctrine of the Sadducees is this, That souls die with their
bodies ; nor do they regard the observation of anything beside what the
law enjoins them ; for they think it an instance of virtue todispute with those
teachers of philosophy whom they frequent; but this doctrine is received
but by a few, yet by those still of the greatest dignity. But they are able
to do almost nothing of themselves ; for when they become magistrates,
as they are unwillingly, and sometimes by force obliged to be, they addict
themselves to the notions of the Pharisees, because the multitude would
not otherwise bear them.”
13. Thus it is seen that the Jews, as a whole, believed and taught “the
immortality of souls,” and that, consequently, the wicked would “be
detained in an everlasting prison;” and it was only the few Sadducees,
the ancient Destructionists, who denied it; and, accordingly, when they
were put into positions of trust, true to their principles, they became
unprincipled men, by “ addicting themselves to the notions of the Phari-
sees,” which they did not believe, merely “ because the multitude would
not otherwise bear them.” It was to this infidel class of men that Christ
said, “Do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the Scriptures,
neither the power of God?” (Mark 12: 24.) And so with truth the
same may be said to their modern brethren, who have so completely
imbibed their notions, and manifest both the same ignorance of the Scrip-
tures and the same disposition to “ dispute.”
14. Here it is seen that Mr. W.’s attempt to show that we are indebted
to “ Plato” for the idea that man possesses an immortal part is an insult
to ordinary intelligence, as the proof above given from J osephus clearly
shows that the Jews in our Lord’s day believed and taught the immortality


of the soul, and they had no connection with Plato. This is proved more
so by the fact that they knew and taught nothing about Plato’s purgatory
(the Acherusian Lake), which undoubtedly they would have done, if they
had got their ideas of immortality from him. No ; they got their ideas
from the Bible, though Mr. W. denies the fact. And so all Christians
have got their ideas on the subject from the same source, for not three
persons out of every hundred have ever read the writings of Plato, or
know what they teach. Whatever Origen may have got from Plato, one
thing seems certain, viz., that Mr. W. has got his “ inspiration from the”
Sadducees ; for his is the old idea of these ancient Materialists in a new
dress, and it was also taught by the hypocritical Seneca and a few other
small philosophers.
CHAPTEE YI. — Immortality.
1. This is the boasted stronghold of all Destructionists. I’or the
purpose of making good his case, Mr. Wollaston tries to prove that
“immortality” and “ eternal life” are one and the same thing. He says,
“An immortal life is a deathless life, and a deathless life is a life that
shall never die . . . hence, to attempt to attribute a meaning to one of
these terms which the other will not bear is only playing upon words, —a
distinction without a difference, a mere quibble of speech.” Immortality
and eternal life “are identically the same thing” (page 11). But the
“ quibble of speech” is altogether Mr. W.’s, who has not yet learned what
is immortality, nor that the Scriptures make a clear distinction between
the “terms” which he says are “convertible.” To show that they are
not “convertible,” I will substitute immortality for eternal life in a few
places. “To them who, by patient continuance in well doing, seek for
glory, and honour, and immortality, immortality" (Rom. 2:7). Here is
not only tautology, but the parties in gaining “immortality” would not
gain all they had been seeking for, which was “ glory and honour” beside.
Christ “ hath brought immortality and immortality to light, through the
gospel” (2 Tim. 1 : 10). Here it seen that “life and immortality” are
two distinct things. “ Now unto the king immortal, immortal, invisible,
the only wise God” (1 Tim. 1 : 17). In this passage, there must of
necessity be something more in the word “immortality” than in that of
“eternal,” because it is distinguished as possessing something over and
above “ eternal,” and surely the Holy Spirit could not be guilty of such
tautology. And so we read of a similar distinction in 1 Peter 1: 4 —“ To an
inheritance, incorruptible and undefiled, and that fadeth not away.” If the
word here, “incorruptible,” the original of which ( aphtharton ) is rendered
“immortal” in 1 Tim. 1 : 17, merely meant eternal, endless, we would not
have the additional words “and that fadeth not away.” It is therefore


certain that “ life” —“he that hath the Son hath life”—or “ eternal life,”
is not “ identical with immortality,” as Mr. W. has unwisely affirmed.
2. The truth is, that “ immortality,” as used in the New Testament
implies more than endless duration of being. It includes that, but a
great deal more, as is intimated in the above passages. It includes
incorruptibility , purity , or holiness also. Hence, though Satan is immortal
in the sense of endless existence, he is not so in the scriptural acceptation
of that term ; because he is corrupt, unholy. And it is, doubtless, because
of the idea of purity, or incorruption, being in the word, as well as of
endless existence, that it is not applied to man in his sinful state ; though
the mere fact of it not being applied to man, does not prove that he is not
immortal; for it is not applied to angels, the Holy Spirit, nor the Lord
Jesus, who are certainly immortal. Let, however, the fact be distinctly
remembered, that immortality, as used by Mr. W. and most people, in the
sense of endless duration, is not the sense in which the word is used in
the New Testament. In Mr. W.’s sense, or the popular sense, I have
already proved that all men are immortal, in proving that the wicked
will conciously exist for ever, and, for convenience sake, I will use it in
this sense, in which it is generally accepted.
3. Mr. W. boasts that God only hath immortality, and asks “If God, the
Creator, only hath it, how can man, the creature, possess it?” and his
proof (1 Tim. 61 15) is no proof at all. “ Christ in His times he shall
show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and
Lord of Lords ; who only hath immortality .” “ Does this not prove the
non-immortality of the soul of man?” I reply in the words of the Editor
of the Ecclesiastical Observer for March, 1873, page 102, “ The text in
question does not prove the non-immortality of man. If God were the
only being in all the universe who would live for ever, the words quoted
would be quite equal to express it; but they do not of necessity indicate
the non-immortality of all other. We say they do not express it, though
capable of expressing it, because the Bible makes known that there were,
when the words were written, other immortal beings. The immortality of
the Son will be as readily admitted as that of the Father. The angels,
who die not, were then certainly immortal. Enoch had been translated
that he should not see death; and Elijah had gone to heaven without
passing through the grave. These are certainly immortal; not merely to
be made immortal in a future age, but already so. God, when the
Apostles wrote, was not the only possessor of immortality. In what
sense, then, could it be said that He only hath immortality ? He only, of
all immortal beings, possesses immortality, unclerived , inherent , and inde-


pendent; the immortality of angels and men being His gift, and depen-
dent upon His will. ’Whether, then, He gives immortality to man only
in Christ, or has, in creating man, given him an immortal part, is not in
the least degree determined by this text.”
4. To help out the idea that man has no part about him which will
exist for ever, Mr. W. quotes, incorrectly, 2 Tim. 1 : 10 ; Rom. 2 : 7
(page 11), which I have correctly given above ; but neither of which is to
the point. The former says, that Christ “ hath brought life and immor-
tality (incorruptibility) to light, through the gospel;” but it does not
say that Christ hath created , or even restored them, which would be
essential in order to have the slightest resemblance to Mr. W.’s theory ;
but simply that they were brought to light , which proves that they were
previously in existence, and enjoyed before. Tor, though philosophers
and the Lord’s people (the Jew 7 s) believed that man possessed an immortal
part before the resurrection of Christ; yet it was not clear to them, and
especially to all, until it was brought to light by the gospel. The latter
passages show that it w'as incorruption, purity, they were seeking, in order
to have eternal life —the sum of all future blessing; for, “ without
holiness, no man shall see the Lord.” Hence, Dean Alford’s Translation
of the JS’ew Testament gives it thus —“To them who, by patience in well
doing, seek for glory, and honour, and incorruption , eternal life.” R.
Young’s Translation and H. T. Anderson's give “ incorruptibility” instead
of “immortality,” as in the Common Version. Because, if it meant im-
mortality in the sense of endless existence, it would be inadmissible, as
the phrase “ eternal life,” which immediately follows it, expresses all that.
And so we see Destructionists must “ support their belief by a Jorced
interpretation of some two or three texts of scripture which they suppose
favour their views ; and they “ are compelled, by their theory that” man
is on “the level of the brute,” to reject “ the only doctrine concerning the
destiny of the lost sinner taught in God’s Word.”
5. Mr. W. has misrepresented the belief of Christians on the subject of
immortality, as he has extravagantly represented them on future punish-
ment. Thus he speaks of the theory of the soul’s inalienable immortality,
“ inherent immortality.” What is believed is, that God, in creating mau
has given him a part that will, and must, from all we can know, exist
for ever. I affirm that the spirit of man, in this sense, is immortal; and
it is a matter, in common with all the children of God, that I am bound to
believe, as there is no possible way of escape, without becoming a sceptic.
My soul abhors the gross materialism which Mr. W. and all Destruc-
tionists teach ! It is true that they say the sinner will be raised from the


dead, and be put out of existence ; and many of them say that the soul
may be conscious from death till the resurrection; and others of them
believe that the soul will sleep, be perfectly unconscious during that time.
Many of them also declare that the unconverted, being on the “ level of
the brute,” when they die, cease to exist the same as the beast; but Hod
will bring them back again into existence at the resurrection, to punish
them, when they shall “ necessarily cease to be.” While others, seeing
that, in this case, there would be no resurrection, but a creating them over
again, having like all other animals ceased to exist at death, reject the idea
of their being raised or created over again for the purpose of putting them
out of existence a second time ; and affirm that infants, idiots, the heathen,
and unconverted persons, will not be raised from the dead no more than
the “ brute.” But they are not so very sure about the very wicked ! Dr.
Thomas taught that infants, idiots, and the heathen would not be raised
from the dead at all. What Mr. W.’s speculations are on this, he has not
seen fit to publish ; but he clearly shows that he is a Materialist —a charge
I will now prove from his own words.
6. “ When I say my friend is dead, I do not mean that he is alive and
suffering great pain of body and mind; but . . . that he will never again
throughout eternity feel, or think, or move, or speak as a mortal man ;
that his body will perish in the grave, be destroyed by its own corruption,
and be as water spilt npon the ground, which cannot be gathered up
again” (Hence, he does not believe in the resurrection of the body).
“ That fall, so far as his future life {existence, with Mr. W.) w r as con-
cerned, brought him down to the level of the brute” (page 4, 10). In the
May number of the Victorian Independent, there is a letter of Mr. W.’s,
explaining where he thought he was misunderstood on the question of his
ideas of the mortality of man. He there speaks of the soul being com-
posed of particles —A soul: Its component particles of spirit may not
perish, whilst as a soul it may be eternally destroyed.” Again, “The
composition of a human soul.” Next, in Christ or Plato, page 7, he
says, “The punishment of death is to him (acriminal) eternal, just as the
death of a brute is to it eternal.” “He (Adam) did eat, and did die,
body and soul. . . . We are all, then, thanks to Adam, by birth and
nature, mortal” (page 10). “On the level op the bbute,” and having
“souls composed of component particles,” and therefore altogether
material, our death is identical with that of “ the brute and forasmuch
as the brute has only animal life, it ceases to be at death, so the uncon-
verted man having only animal life, he ceases to be at death; and as this
extinction forbids the beast ever again throughout eternity to feel, or
move, so, for the same reason, it forbids man “to feel, or think, or move,


or speak” again for ever. And hence, by the demands of logic, Mr. W.
is, to all intents and purposes, an out-and-out Materialist, however much
he may try to disguise the fact. It would not do to come out with bold
infidelity all at once : a little at a time. But it is reasonable to suppose
that he who could resist “ for so long a time,” and at last, when oppor-
tunity presented itself, “ felt himself impelled, by a power he could no
longer resist, to unburthen his mind of what he had long and firmly
believed” (page 21), can also keep back the more ugly parts of that
infidelity, of which the above is a specimen, until the times permit him to
do so with safety to himself.
7. Materialists suppose that Job 10 : 18, 19, prove that a man is a
mere brute —“ Wherefore hast thou brought me forth out of the womb ?
Oh, that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me! T should
have been as though I had not been; 1 should have been carried from the
womb to the grave.” This, like the passage in Obadiah 16, is twisted,
added to, and misapplied. Job was neither speaking of the immortality or
non-immortality of the spirit, but merely that, if he had given up the
spirit (to God, who gave it) when he came out of the womb, no eye would •
have seen him ; for though they would have carried his body to the grave,
he, having left it, would uot have been seen by them, and so would have
been as though he had not been in the world ; and, therefore would not
have been undergoing the sorrow he was then enduring. R. Young's
Translation has the passage—” But why from the womb hast thou brought
me out ? I expire, and no eye seeth me. As 1 had not been lam ; from
the belly to the grave lam brought.” Also Obadiah 16—“ For as ye
have drunken on my holy mount, drink do all the nations continually ;
and they have drunk and swallowed, and have been as they have not been.”
Here is declared that as the children of Esau had done to the children of
Jacob, in cutting them off from the earth, so it would be to them and the
heathen nations, who would be “as they have not been.” And it is only
the madness of the preconceived theory that would go so far as to fetch
annihilation out of such passages, or to prove that man is on “ the level
of the brute.”
8. But these parties object to the fitting designation of “ Anninila-
tionists” without a proper reason. And Destructionists is no more an
application to them than to me, if they did not make a hobby of it, for it
does not express all that they imply, which is absolute extinction. And
since th e central thought, or cardinal idea, in their system is, that man is a
“ two-legged animal,” having a material soul, which is a composition of
“ component particles,” on the level of the brute, —so that the death of


man is to him just as the death of the brute is to it, —they ought to be
known by this central feature of their system, and recognised as
BBFTISTS ! —an appellation they ought to have the manliness to accept,
and not seek to be known under the false colours of Destructiontsts,
as their system is one of Bruttsm, and not Destructionism.
9. “Man, know thyself!” To do this, he must know that he has a
spirit over and above the brute. But it has been said, “ that the beast
has a living soul as well as man (Gen. 1: 30), and therefore man is nothing
above a beast.” How conclusive ! But the same word that designates
God is also used to designate man. That word is spirit ( pneuma ) —“God
is a spirit .” So that, according to the above line of argument, man has a
spirit as well as God, and therefore God is not above man!!! This
exposes the ignorance of the argument. So, just as spirit, when applied
to God, expresses more than when applied to man ; so soul, when it is
applied to man, expresses more than when it is applied to the beast.
10. When God said, “ Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return,”
He spoke, not of man’s spirit, but of his body, which was not created
immortal, as Mr. W. says. And it is just here that all Materialists go
astray. They confound the outward man with the inward man ; and re-
present the outward man as the responsible part. They apply to the
SPIBIT WHAT WAS SPOKEN. ALONE OF THE BODV. Job 84 : 14 shows the
distinction between the mortal body (the dust) and the ever-existent and
responsible spirit—“lf God set His heart upon man, if He gather unto
Himself his spirit and his breath ; all flesh shall perish together, and man
shall turn again unto dust.” Here, the dust , though called man, is the
outward and irresponsible man, and is only the flesh or body of man, which
(if God take from it the spirit and the breath (soul), it never being any-
thing else but mortal) will go back to the dust until the resurrection.
The whole man, then, consists of a body, soul, and spirit , which is not de-
fined in the first or second chapter of Genesis, though it is clearly implied;
but in the Book of Job, which is older than that of Genesis, the definition
of what man is, is put beyond a doubt:—“ But there is a spirit in man ;
and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding.” “The
spirit of the Lord hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty hath
given me life” (Job. 32 :8; 33 : 4). Here we have in man a “spirit,”
and also the “inspiration” or “breath of the Almighty,” which is the
soul. The oldest book of revelation thus-shows that man is a triune being,
having a spirit, a soul, and a body. The spirit, at death, only leaves the
clay tent or tabernacle, and goes to God, for the spirit is not mortal (2 Cor.
5 : 1-8.) “ Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was ; and the


spirit shall return unto God who gave it” (Eccl. 12 : 7). Coming to the
New Testament, the testimony on the subject is even clearer. The great
commandment shows the same distinction —“Thou shalt love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind”
(Matt. 22 : 37). Here we have the “heart,” “soul,” and “mind,” re-
presenting “body,” “ soul,” and “ spirit.” The Holy Spirit, through the
blessed Virgin, made the same distinction —“My soul doth magnify the
Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour” (Luke 1: 46, 47.)
Paul defines man, what he is, when he prays for his brethren —“ 1 pray
God your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ” (1 Thes. 5 : 23). Again —“The
word of God is quick and powerful . . . piercing even to the dividing
asunder of soUl and sptrtt, and of the joints and marrow” (Heb. 4 :
12). Thus we have “ line upon line, and precept upon precept” testifying
to the fact that man is a being possessed of three parts ; sometimes spoken
of as two —the mortal and the spiritual, the material and the immaterial,
the “outward man” and the “inward (or inner) man” (2 Cor. 4 : 16 ;
Eph. 3:16 ; Kom. 7:22 ; 1 Peter 3 : 4). “ The inward man” is said to
be “renewed in knowledge, after the image of Him who created him”
(Col. 3 : 10). Man is thus not said to be “created in knowledge,” as
though he had lost his divine image, but simply renewed in it. Man,
therefore, is not flesh and blood lihe “the brute he is only a partaker of
these; and “ though the outward perish, yet the inward man is renewed
day by day.” “ Forasmuch, then, as the children are partakers of flesh
and blood, He (Christ) also Himself likewise took part of the same”
(Heb. 2 : 14). As man is only a partaker of flesh and blood, he cannot
be fed by bread alone, like “ the brute, or outward man, the irresponsible
body;” but by ideas “ which proceedeth out of the mouth of God” he
must be fed, to make him happy. The “ inward man” is not material
composed of “ component particles,” for it is one, a unit; and hence it is
never said to die, or be raised again. “ Many bodies of the saints which
slept arose, and came out of their graves” (Matt. 27 : 52, 53) ; but it
would be strange nonsense to talk of the resurrection of a spirit! that
belongs not to the confines of mortality, and so cannot be fed by bread
alone, but is ever-existent. And it is, doubtless, because of this that the
Psalmist exclaims —
“ What is man that thou rememberest him ?
The Son of man that thou inspectest him ?
And causes him to lack a little of Godhead,
And with honour and majesty compassest him ?”
(.R . Young's Translation, Psalm 8: 4,5.) This is a satisfactory answer to
Job 7 : 17, IS —“ What is man that thou shouldest magnify him p and


that thou shouldest set thine heart upon him ? and that thou shouldest visit
him every morning, and try him every moment ?” It is because he is on the
“ level of the brute,” says Mr. W.! But God says, that it is because he
is not a little lower than even the angels, who die not; but because he
“ lacks a little of Godhead.” Man is not lower than the angels, who serve
him ; for he will be much above them, seeing that he lacks but “ a little of
Godhead,” which accounts for God setting His heart upon him ; and
hence he is God’s treasure over and above everything in the universe, for
“ where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.” God’s heart
being upon man, he is therefore God’s peculiar treasure, and will hereafter
be God’s owx companion for ever (Rev. 21 : 3), above all intelligencies
throughout God’s boundless universe.
11. I then ask, Would Ood, in creating man in His own image, cause
him only to lack a little of Godhead, and compass him with honour and
majesty, set His heart upon him, so that He should visit him every morning,
and try him every moment for thousands of years ; and' finally give the Won-
derful, Councillor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace, to be also a ‘partaker of flesh and blood, to make His soul, loaded icith
the world's quilt, an offering for sin, amidst the burning thirst , the horrible
darkness , and the indescribable agony of that reproach which rent His heart
while offering a sacrifice of infinite value, to redeem a creature mortal in soul
as in body ? —to redeem an animal on the level of the brute, whose death is
just as the death of the brute? Mr. W. has declared that He has, and his
theory compels him to so declare. And I hesitate not to say, that such a
declaration is blasphemous, and derogatory to the Word of God and to the
highest function of reason.
12. “ What man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man
which is in him ?” (1 Cor. 2 : 11). The spirit of man is an intelligence :
it “ knoweth.” And the nature of it shows that it was created to exist for
ever, as we know it is capable of continual expansion, so long as the food
for such expansion is vouchsafed to it from the supreme source of all light
and knowledge ; for, however long a man lives, and however much know-
ledge he may have gathered during his life, still he can receive more,
thereby showing that his mind —spirit —is capable of being indefinitely
expanded if he lived a thousand years. This is not so with the body, or
outward man : it can only receive a limited supply of food. Another fact,
too, —that the passions often cloud the mind; and therefore when the
mind is capable of such expansion here, what must it be when the mortal
coll—the body—is thrown off ? How much more then will the influx of
ideas expand the spirit throughout eternity! And if, for argument sake,


we suppose an impossibility, that the spirit could have a thousand “ com-
ponent particles,” each of these would be conscious subjects of thought,
and therefore equally capable of expansion ; which, in any case, would
prove the eternal duration of the human spirit. And, since the mind of
man is capable of indefinite expansion, it is, for that reason, equally
capable of continual knowledge. But we cannot conceive of a spirit being
divided, and so cannot conceive of its “component particles,” like Mr.W.;
for, if we could, then we could —forasmuch as God is a spirit —conceive of
the half of God, the quarter of God, or the eighth part of God !!! Pass-
ing strange that Mr. W. should speak of the “ composition of a human
soul,” which is just as ridiculous as if he would speak of the composition
of the spirit of God, “'spirit” being applied as a designation to both man
and his Creator. But, in defiance of reason and the laws of language,
Mr. W. has coined a phraseology of his own ; and then, with a boldness
amounting to absolute authority, tells us that his phraseology is used in
“ our conversation, literature, and laws!”
13. The simple fact that the human spirit is indivisible, a unit, having
no parts, being immaterial, proves that it is incapable of annihilation;
and that is inconceivable, in any sense, as no such thing is known in Ihe
universe, even in the material elements, much less can it be conceived
of in an immaterial one. Beside, how is it possible for a material element,
such as fire and brimstone, to act on that which has no parts —on that
which is immaterial- —to annihilate it P It is impossible. Man. then,
being possessed of a spirit, made in “ God’s image,” which the Scriptures
never say he lost, as they never intimate that any other being in the
universe but the Lord Jesus has the image of God; and as they never
say the spirit can die, but declare its eternal conscious existence in the
future punishment of the wicked, which shall be commensurate with the
existence of God. it follows irresistibly, from both reason and revelation,
that the “ inward,” intelligent, and responsible man will exist in weal or
woe “for ever and ever.”
CHAPTER VII.
Infinite Sin Not Eternal Supremacy of Evil.
1. But what God has emphatically affirmed, and which 1 have shown in
the foregoing, Mr. Wollaston calls a “ God-dishonouring theoryand
advances the stale infidel cavil that God will not inflict “an infinite penalty
for finite disobedience in this life, involving the inevitable consequence of
the eternal supremacy of evil.” But it has been already seen that he
contradicts himself in this finite disobedience question, forasmuch as he
declares that the punishment shall be eternal, therefore infinite. W e know


that Adam’s sin was infinite in its consequences. Indeed, so is all mali-
cious sin or disobedience infinite, sending as it does its influence into
eternity. If it were not so, the death of Christ, as an atonement, would
not be of infinite value. But sin is infinite. Satan’s suggestion that
caused one act of disobedience separated Adam and Eve “from the foun-
tain of life and happiness ; it has infused the poison of sin into their whole
constitution; it has infected their body, soul, and spirit with ten thousand
maladies; it has laid one hundred and forty generations in the dust of
death; it has clothed the earth with mourning, and cursed the very ground
from which we seek our daily bread. And remember, moreover, that it
has done all this by simply inducing man to sin—by leading him to disobey
his Maker, to eat
“ ‘ Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste
Brought death into the world, and all our woe.’
2. “Now, if sin, and that too (in the estimation of sceptics) a venial
sin, has done all this, —has brought all this ruin upon mankind, under the
government and administration of a just , and righteous, and merciful God, —
then I ask, 0 sinner! what must be the legitimate and necessarg conse-
quences of all the sins that any one of us has committed (and especially
the damning sin of rejecting the Saviour), unless indeed they be washed
away through the efficacy of that blood that alone can take away our sins !
You that make a mock of sin, —that speak of it as a light and trivial
matter, — go to the deathbed of the old , of the young, and behold what sin has
done ! Go into the graveyards and cemeteries oj earth, go among the skeletons
and scattered fragments of the dead, and behold what sin has done l Lift
vp the cu/rtain that separates Earth from Hades, the visible from the
invisible ; look upon the agonising souls of the damned, and behold what sin
has done /”
3. But all talk about finite disobedience not only indicates want of
observation in the nature of disobedience to God, but manifests ignorance
of the Word of God, or, what is worse, gross indifference to it; because
that Word tells us that sin is eternal— a point Mr. A. M. Henderson of
Melbourne has demonstrated to Mr. W. This we read in Mark 3 : 29,
“aionion kriseos .” The following translations of the New Testament
render these words as follows (indicated in italic letters) :
(1) American Bible Union: “ But is guilty of eternal sin."
(2) Douay Bible : “ But shall be guilty of an everlasting sin."
(3) Tichendorf’s Testament: “Of eternal sin."
(4) Dean Alford’s Testament: “ But is guilty of eternal sin ”


4. These authorities, so far as the meaning of the words are concerned,
are indisputable. Hence, as “eternal sin" is not finite, hut infinite disobe-
dience, it follows that punishment, to be in “ due proportion,” must be
commensurate with it, and therefore eternal. Now comes the question.
Does this “involve the inevitable consequence of the eternal supremacy of
evil?” By no means: nothing could be more illogical than such an
assumption. When a criminal is kept secure in prison, is the law which
inflicts the penalty upon him, or his evil, supreme ? Is not the law and
government, in such a case, supreme ? When, then, all the wicked shall
be separated from the presence of the Lord, into darkness for ever, away
from all the good, deprived of the power to inflict evil any more for ever,
will their evil thoughts, still retained against God, have the supremacy over
God and His law ? No ; and therefore it is contrary to sound reasoning
to talk as Mr. W. does about infinite or eternal sin “ involving the inevit-
able consequence of the eternal supremacy of evil.” So far from doing
so, it will do the very opposite; and eternal punishment, the result of
eternal sin, will be the “ inevitable consequence of the eternal supremacy
of” good. It is easy to understand how this can be, on the principle of
“ securing the greatest good to the greatest number,” which is the rule on
which all great and benevolent beings work. And who “ dare venture to
say that” the endless punishment of the wicked shall not have a conser-
vative influence over the universe of intelligencies or other worlds, to
prevent them from falling away from their allegiance to the King of kings?
This effect could not be produced by their annihilation; because, as ages
roll on, (1) these intelligencies might lose sight of it altogether, or the
distance from the time of the wicked’s annihilation become so great as to
cause them to doubt it, as many even now doubt the truthfulness of the
Bible; and (2) because extinction, in the nature of the case, could not
have the same effect in preventing or restraining them from sin, as the
thought of endless suffering. For, as the “ angels who kept not their
first estate, but left their own habitation, God has reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness,” instead of putting them out of existence, may
prevent other great spirits from falling away likewise ; and as the people
of “ Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them, in like manner giving
themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set
FORTH FOE AN EXAMPLE, SUFFERING THE VENGEANCE OF ETERNAL FIRE, ”
to prevent others from following the same abominations ; so is it reason-
able to suppose that the future punishment, always existing as a fact
before other worlds, may have an influence in restraining them from
sinning against their Creator and Governor (Jude 6,7). And hence the
eternal punishment can be a good, and not an evil, and will doubtless exist
as a necessity, God simply in this, as in other cases, making “ the wrath


of man to praise Him”(Ps. 76 : 10) ; and thus God will be “ all in all.”
5. This argument is based on the ground of reason , and holds good,
unless it could be proved that there are no other world or worlds of intel-
ligences, which no one would attempt to do, nearly all men admitting the
probability, if not the certainty, of their existence. And that such is the
case, seems clear from the following scriptures —Eph. 1: 9, 10, 18-23 ;
Phil. 2: 9-11; 1 Peter 3: 22.
6. It is true that God “ will reconcile all things unto Himself by Christ
whether things in earth , or things in heaven ” (Col. 1: 20), “ and under the
earth” (in the graves), and such as “are in the sea;” but the Scriptures
never say that He will reconcile all things in Hades and in Hell unto
Himself, which will, as we have seen, therefore remain unreconciled for
the eternal “ good of the greatest number.”
7. But Mr. W. thinks that the unending suffering of the wicked is incon-
sistent with the idea of “many stripes” if they deserve many, and “few
stripes” if they deserve few. But there is no difficulty whatever about
this. We know “ God will render to every man according to his works
and we know that the punishment will never end; while some will be
beaten with “few” and some with “ many stripes.” And hence, while
the severity of the punishment will not be the same to all, the duration
will. Say six criminals, different in degrees of crime, are imprisoned for
ten years. One is simply kept in prison, with everything comfortable
about him ; another is fed on bread and water; a third is fed on bread
and water, with hard labour; the fourth, in addition to this, is flogged
twice during the ten years ; the fifth, in addition to the bread and water,
is flogged four times during the time ; aud the sixth is fed on bread and
water, with hard labour, and receives the same number of stripes as the
others six times during the ten years. And so, though the duration of the
punishment would be the same in all the cases, some would be beaten with
“ few stripes” and some with “ many stripes.” And, in like manner, the
duration of the f uture punishment, being the same to all, is not opposed
to the idea of “many stripes” and the “few.” Mr. W. has blundered in
confounding the duration of futui*e punishment with its severity. And so
“ the common belief” of eternal punishment does not indicate what Mr.
W. lays to their charge so unjustly. But that God will inflict “ not one
stripe more, nor one stripe less, than we feel and acknowledge" to be
“ just and right,” is saying too much, being contrary to our observation
and the universal experience of punishment inflicted in this life.


CHAPTER YIII.— Objections.
I. Mr. Wollaston, on page 17, 18, says, “ Look at the other side of the
picture, and consider, I pray you, in what light a rational, and respon-
sible, and yet utterly helpless creature, such as man is.” Then, after
giving an unjust account of what is held to be future punishment, he shows
how the “natural argument of even the vicious and the reprobate,” whose
argument he sanctions, would look upon it. “ Here I am, a poor, weak
creature of clay . . . inheriting froth my parents, and without any fault
of my own, a sinful and corrupt nature, which inevitably leads me into
the commission of sins against God, for which I am responsible;” and
then, exaggerating the punishment, exclaims, “My whole'being revolts
against it; and my [vicious] sense of what is eternally right within me,
protests against a penalty so utterly, so infinitely, disproportioned to the
offence!”
2. Here Mr. W. is guilty of two blunders—l. Of laying down
false premises, viz., that man is “an utterly helpless creature, in-
heriting a corrupt nature which inevitably leads” him “into the commis-
sion of sins against God.” 2. Of representing God as holding such
responsible. Besides, this in itself is a contradiction ! For, how can
an “utterly helpless creature,” inevitably led “into the commission of
sins,” be responsible ? either by the law of God or that of common sense ?
Inevitable sin is a monstrous absurdity ! As Mr. W. has put it, man is
not responsible, and yet he is—a palpable contradiction. But man is not
an utterly helpless creature, inevitably led into the commission of sins ;
and the sinner’s damnation is owing entirely to his not accepting the
salvation offered. God’s testimony is very different to what Mr. W. says.
It is this : “ Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out
my hand, and no man regarded ; but ye have set at naught all my counsel,
and would none of my reproof ; I also will laugh at your calamity ; I will
mock when your fear cometh” (Prov. 1 : 24-26). So, also, Jesus said to
the Jews, “Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life” (John 5: 40).
3. Nor is it because “of being the children of Adam we perish everlast-
ing but, “ This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world
and men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil”
(John 3 : 19). Now, according to the gospel, the condemnation, or that
for which men will be punished, is not because they are the children of
Adam, as his sin is imputed to no one (Rom. 5 : 10, 18) ; nor is it because
men are sinners, for Christ has died for sinners (2 Cor. 5 : 19) ; but it is
just this—that they refuse to receive the salvation He offers, and will not


have him to “ reign over them ;” showing that they have both the power
and opportunity to do so. Whereas, all who receive the Saviour, by
repenting and being baptised, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the re-
mission of sins’ (Acts 2 : 88), receive the gift of the Holy Spirit, and
rejoice in “ the blessedness of those whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered” (Bom. 4 : 7).
I. Mr. W. would not, I am sure, have put this objection if he had
clearly seen where his logic would have led him. Because, not a “vicious,”
but an upright man, from his premises, would naturally reason as follows:
Here 1 am, a poor, weak creature of clay, on a “ level of the brute,”
and I know Grod is not a “respecter of his creatures;” and as He does
not hold the brutes responsible in a future life for evils they commit in
this, He cannot, on the ground of His “being not a respecter of His
creatures,” hold me any more responsible in a future life for killing my
fellows, lying, or any other kind of evil I do in this life, than He can hold
the cat responsible in a future life for killing the mice ; and hence, on
the ground of God’s justice, “my whole being revolts against” the idea of
any future punishment which Mr. W. talks about, for it is as clear as the
sun that, since 1 am altogether on “a level of the brute,” so that my
“ death is identical with the death of the beast,” there can be no such
thing as future accountability in any sense: and therefore, “ let me eat
and drink, for to-morrow I die.” Thus, the “natural argument” from Mr.
W.’s premises is bound to lead men who believe it into the commission of
crime, and strengthen the hands of evil doers ; and surely we have
enough of that without his effort!
5. But undoubtedly Mr. W. is a line apologist for evil doers, and not
only for them, but for the sceptical and moral of the world —“ good moral
men and women, unimpeachable in life and conversation, kind and just
and amiable.” He says, “ 1 dare not go and say that Glod will consign
these my brother men and brother sinners-to a horrible and eternal doom,
which 1 peel in my heart that they could not deserve.” JSo! that would
be horrible! And yet these, who reject the gospel, are more guilty than
the “ vicious and reprobate,” being more responsible ; as they have more
advantages of considering the claims of Christ. For if a savage, who has
always been led to look upon murder as a mere nothing, commits one, he
is not so guilty, in a moral point of view, as “ good men and women, unim-
peachable in life and conversation,” would be if they, from their stand-
point and relined sense of wrong in its various degrees, perpetrated this
foul deed. In like manner “ the vicious and reprobate” reject the Saviour,
hrough perhaps giving salvatiou little or no thought, owing to the eor-


ruption of their morals through unfavourable circumstances, and so cannot
realise the guilt of so doing, like the “ good men and women;” who, owing
to their superior advantages and knowledge of the nature of sin, look upon
rejecting the Redeemer as a dreadful thing ; and, after having all the proper
means of judging of the criminality of such rejection, yet wilfully and
deliberately refuse to obey the gospel, thus standing self-condemned.
And Mr. W. has the honour or the contumely of exonerating, in a great
measure, this latter class, as not deserving of so much future punishment as
the “ vicious and reprobate.” Here, again, he is in direct antagonism to
Christ, who said to such a refined class, “It shall be more tolerable for
Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment than for you (Matt. 11 : 22).
Tor “if ye were blind,” like them, “ ye would have no sin ; but now ye
say, We see; therefore your sin remaineth” (John 9 : 41). And I
hesitate not to say with the Saviour that it shall be more tolerable for
Sodom and Gomorrah, Tyre and Sidon, at the day of judgment than for
Mr. W.’s “ good men and women” who, with all their advantages, have
rejected the Son of God, and who, on account of these very advantages,
are therefore more guilty a hundredfold than the vulgar reprobate, atheist,
or murderer!
6. A special pleader who is determined to carry his point, hut who,
after having advanced all his arguments, feels the ground shaken under
him, naturally becomes vicious, and seeks to inflame the passions, and
thus captivate the less penetrating of his audience. In this way, Mr. W.,
at the close of his third and last sermon, pages 19 and 20, stoops from
dignified argumentation, and makes a special appeal to the feelings of his
people ; having for the hero of his exhortation a charming “ young girl in
the bloom of youth, a well-beloved child it may be of Christian parents,
who have done their best to bring her up in the fear and love of Grod . . .
She has no vice, is very moral and correct in her life, kind, amiable, and
obedient to her parents, possessing many virtues, and only lacks the one
thing needful . . . She dies . . . What is to be the fate (he exclaims)
of that poor child of sixteen, eighteen, or twenty who has thus died in
unbelief?” And, “You must accept that that poor child will be tor-
mented and tortured by Glod in hell fire for ever and ever . . . for a few
short years of folly,” or “that she will receive at G-od’s hands stripes so
few and so gentle as to be hardly felt at all; and . . . pass into the land
of forgetfulness, where . . . there will be no pain, no misery, no sorrow.”
And then, realising that he had got his own feelings worked into the hearts
of his hearers, Mr.W. bursts out thus, “ I may anticipate your response(!)
With one heart and one voice, you will declare for the last [as though
that had anything to do with it], that this is the only and uniform doc_


trine taught by the Son of God, and . . . throw off: for ever the fearful
incubus of A a hateful and unchristian dogma.” As this is only a passionate
exhortation, indicating the weakness of the theory, I ought to pass it with
a smile, and pity Mr. W., as he ought to know that this little difficulty of
his own creation cannot pass for argument. But I would rather help him
out with his whole theory in such cases. He hides the ugly parts.
7. For, Mr. W. affirms that it is only by faith any can be saved ; “ and
not having that faith, they lack the spiritual and eternal life, the divine
image, which constitutes immortality, and without which salvation is
impossible.” Here, not only does Mr. W. consign the “ young girl in
the bloom of youth, possessed of many virtues,” to extinction, but also all
young children from 16 years down to one day old that have not undergone
the spiritual change, by faith in Christ, which constitutes immortality—
they all must be “ blotted out of existence.” It matters not whether their
parents were heathens or devoted followers of Christ; oh, no ; “ faith in
Him alone can do this”—give them immortality ! So that all must be
destroyed—body and soul —in hell, and extinguished, without it! Thus,
about one-third of the human family, who die before they can possibly
have faith in Jesus Christ, which “alone can restore the divine image,”
are damned, according to the inexorable demands of Mr. W.’s theory.
Infant damnation, then, with a vengeance, is one of the cardinal points of
his, as that of all Extinctionists’ doctrine ! Eor there is no exaggeration
here ; it is a cold fact, “as an inevitable and natural consequence of
being the children of Adam, who lost God’s image” —“immortality;” but
it was rather an ugly fact to tell in connection with the “ young girl in the
bloom of youth.’' It would not have been so likely to have captivated his
audience. And he would hardly have had the boldness to cry, “ I may
anticipate your response. With one heart and voice” you gladly accept
that that tender infant, struggling on its pious mother’s bleeding breast,
with all others, and little boys and girls from one, two, three, four, five,
and up to sixteen, though without a single fault —altogether innocent—
and you can picture to yourselves many such dear little ones —who must
be damned —“ destroyed, body and soul, in hell,” and annihilated !!
8. But what becomes of such nonsense —such blasphemy —in the light
of the words of the Son of God, “ Suffer little children to come unto me,
and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God;” and “Except
ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven.” If Christ thus declared the innocency of little chil-
dren, their sinlessness, their immortality —“ of such is the kingdom,”
etc. —their salvation; and the Apostles affirmed that “ sin is the trans-


gression of the law” (John 3:4); that “ Christ died for the transgres-
sions that were under the first covenant” (Heb. 9 : 15) ; and consequently
for all that can possibly fall to the lot of infants, who cannot be sinners
until they know and “ temsgress the law,” or from full knowledge of what
Christ has done for them, deliberately refuse to accept of Him; I say,
how can Mr. W. have the hardihood, in the face of these facts, to declare,
“as a minister of Christ,” that “conversion” or “ faith alone can effect
immortality”—“ can restore the divine image,” and without which-there
is “no possible salvation ?” This shows the complete rottenness of Mr.
W.’s whole theory of immortality ! It cannot bear investigation. Where
have we a single line in the whole Bible that says man has lost his immor-
tality? If Mr. W. had to lose his life in default of finding such a state-
ment, he would assuredly lose it, for there is none in the Scriptures.
9. Then, too, the case of the “ young girl” is both exaggerated and con-
tradictory. For if “she had no vice, was moral and correct in her life, had
Christian parents who did their best to bring her up in the fear and love
of God, and she’was obedient to her parents,” then a “ saving knowledge
of Christ” was hers, and she is therefore saved, and cannot be annihilated,
as Mr. W.’s “cruel creed” would have her.
10. But this theory does more than consign all infants and young chil-
dren to annihilation. It consigns all the thousands of millions of the
heathen world from Adam to the end of time, including the Mohammedans ;
no matter how “good and moral, possessing many virtues,” such as
Socrates and “Cornelius” (Acts. 10: 1), who “possessed not a saving
knowledge of Christ,” without which salvation and immortality are
impossible, an dwhich in most cases is entirely owing to those circum-
stances over which, in this matter, they have no possible control, to hell,
to annihilation ! Such is the horrible demands of Mr. W.’s “cruel creed!”
I therefore “ vindicate the character of God before men, as an infinitely
just, and good, and merciful Being, against the charges of injustice,
cruelty, and wrong, which such a terrible and God-dishonouring doctrine
involves, by showing from His word that such a theory has no place
there.”
11. It is true that the Scriptures say, “He that believeth not, shall be
dammed” (Mark 16: 16.) but this implies that a man has before him all
the evidence necessary to enable him to believe. Hence, “ These things
are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God;” (John 20: 31.) And God never will punish any one for not doing
what was not within his power to do. If a man does not know the will


of God in Christ he cannot do it, and God’s Word does not hold him re-
sponsible for believing or doing that which the circumstances of his case
absolutely prevent him from accomplishing. And God’s Word gives
us another principle beside the ordinary plan of salvation (Mat. 28 : 19 ;
Acts 2 : 38), by which men will be “ accepted” by God, viz., “ That God is
no respecter of persons ; but in every nation he that feareth Him, and
worketh righteousness, is accepted with him” (Acts 10: 34, 35). “For
if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man
hath, and not according to that he hath not.” So that the thousands of
millions of the heathen world, and all others who through circumstances
are debarred from believing in Christ, or those who, believing in him yet do
not know the true plan of salvation, are not responsible for it ; and if
they serve God according to the best of those ideas which they may have
of God, He who is “uot a respecter of persons’’ in the matter of salvation
(since the death of Christ was for all men), and who will judge the world
in righteousness,” will save them. And thus, “if there be first a willing
mind, it is accepted according to what a man hath ; and therefore, from this
standpoint, “in every nation, he that feareth God and worketh righte-
ousness is accepted,” notwithstanding the dogmatic assertions of Mr. W.’s
“ cruel creed” to the cont rary ; which “ dooms all the countless myriads of
inhabitants of this globe in all ages and countries,” or “ 999 out of every
thousand of the human race,” to annihilation ; with the exception, as he
says, of “ that very minute fraction of the human family which will . . .
embrace the Lord Jesus by a living faith, and thus secure exemption
from it ?”
12. Mr. W.’s next objection against the endless duration of future
punishment is, “That it is quite contrary to fact that wicked men think of
eternal punishment at all, until perhaps they have committed a crime, and
that they are precisely the class of men who do not believe it.” So there
is no good in preaching it. “ Nor has it ever brought a guilty soul to the
cross of Christ” (page 22) ; and that men are not prevented from “ the
commission of crime” by the thought of punishment. Now, if this is so,
then the laws of civil society, which award punishment to transgressors,
are of no power to prevent them from committing crime ! But this the
world knows to be untrue, . from the fact that it in diets punishment of
various degrees of duration and severity, and we all well know that they
do prevent, in very many cases, the commission of crime. How often
would wicked men plunge the knife into their fellows, if it were not for
the thought of the penalty ! And would the Saviour preach “ everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels,” and declare that the wicked
would be cast into, or go into it—“everlasting punishment,” if such preach-


ing had no good effect to accomplish ? Would the inspired men of God,
Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Peter, Paul, and Jude, continue after their
Master in the same strain of preaching, if it was under no circumstance
calculated to arouse wicked men from their lethargy, and bring them to
the cross of Christ by the gospel ? And yet Mr. W. denies that it can
have any such effect! Then, will he tell us why it is presented in the
Scriptures at all ? But we know by observation that “ preaching hell and
damnation” in many cases have been the means of arousing men, and
causing them to think, when the preaching of “ the love of God” or
“peace and safety” had failed; and to continue to preach peace and
safety, in many cases, is like “ casting pearls before swine.” When men
have been awakened, to think by preaching punishment and wrath, then
they are able to appreciate the love of God, and in all humility place
themselves under the Saviour’s yoke. But here, as elsewhere, Mr. W. is
against Christ; and therefore, Christ or Wollaston ?
CHAPTER IX.
Consequences of Bhutism.
1. If Bruitsm be true, man is on “ the level of the brute,” and tbe
“ death of man is identical with the death of a beast.” Then the atone-
ment of Christ is striped of its glory, its necessity, its preciousness, and its
effect for good and salvation on men is destroyed. Because, in this case,
there is no more reason that an atonement should have been made for
man than for the brute, since they are both material, and when their
bodies mix with Mother Earth, no one will be able to tell the difference ;
and therefore there is no more reason why redemption should have been
for man than for the monkey. The redemption of man might have been
good in this case, but it could well have been dispensed with. There could
have been no necessity for it. It would not have been essential “ that
Christ must steeds have suffered” (Acts 17 : 3) ; because it would have
been easier for God to have blotted out our race, like any other race of
animals (many of which He has extinguished), and created another, than
to have given “ the brightness of His own glory, and the express image of
His person” to die as a sacrifice, and bear the unutterable contumely of
the sins of the world. There would not only have been no necessity in
the atonement, but there would be nothing very precious about it to induce
men to embrace its benefits as their only hope. Beside, it would seem
foolish, the cost being greater than the worth of the brutes redeemed.
Thus, without exaggeration, the theory of Mr. W. destroys the atonement
of Christ completely, and its effects for good upon mankind.
2. But the atonement of Christ was a necessity, and infinitely precious;


and anything that would weaken in value that necessity and preciousness,
which is the true basis of our hope, must be necessarily detrimental to the
glory of God, and a dreadful curse to humanity; especially when pre-
sented, as is the case with Mr. W., under the cloak of religion. Because,
open infidelity is better a thousand times than anything in the name of
godliness which would destroy or tend to destroy either the sufficiency, the
necessity, or the all-glorious preciousness of the atonement of the Lord
and Saviour ,Tesus Christ. Whatever may be said about the duration of
future punishment, one thing must be admitted, viz., that sin must be
measured by its penalty, or that the value of the death of Christ must be
closely measured by our sins and the worth of the human spirit. For I
naturally reason, that if Christ died to save me from a day’s pain, I would
feel obliged to Him ; if He died to save me from a year’s sorrow, my
thanksgiving would be greatly increased ; if He died to save me from 20
years’ suffering, my gratitude and devotion to Him would be in proportion
increased ; and if He died to redeem me from a hundred years’ torture of
body and mind, my unqualified devotion to Him would be such that I
would feel bound to serve Him proportionately, but still I would scarcely
feel bound to serve and love Him with all my powers of thought and
feeling throughout eternity. But if Christ died to save me from the hell
“ prepared for the devils and his angels,” from “ everlasting punishment,”
from “ their worm that dieth not, and the fire that is not quenched,” from
that “torment” the smoke of which “ ascendeth up for ever and ever,”
and from being “unjust and filthy still;” then, naturally, I can feel
bound by a force of gratitude—a motive overwhelming even to reason, to
love and serve Christ Jesus my Lord with all my redeemed and sanctified
nature, and praise Him with every pulsation of thought and feeling “ for
ever and ever,” believing that “eternity is too short to utter all His
praise.” And thus, placing myself unreservedly at His feet, I can declare
that—
“ Were the whole realm of nature mine,
That were a present far too small:
Love so amazing, so divine,
Demands my soul, my life, my all !”
3. This is the effect which the death of Christ produces, if it is believed
to be thus infinitely precious; but if considered in the light of Mr. W.’s
theory of Brutism, it strips the work of Christ Jesus of its native grandeur,
leaving it an absurdity.
4. This theory, too, that man is as mortal as a brute, that he has nothing
in him that will exist for ever, not only ignores the atonement, but it most


completely sets aside all idea of future accountability . If it is true, as
Mr. W. affirms, there is no human responsibility in any sense: all talk
about punishment is out of the question. He tells us that man’s soul is a
material composed of “ component particles that he is “on a level with
the brute,” and that his “ death is identical with that of the beast.” If
so, there can be no foundation or basis on which to hold man responsible
more than the brute. If God holds man responsible, and not the brute,
He would be a respecter of His creatures, for He would then pass by the
brute, which is said to be on a level with man. But God is not a respecter
of His creatures. According to the theory, there would be as much good
sense to speak of God being the God of the brute as of man; but while
God is the Creator of the beast, He is never said to be the God of the
brute. This would be an outrage against common sense ; but it would
not be so, if man was identical with the brute. And it would be most
unreasonable for God to blot out man’s existence at death, the same as
the brute; and, after five thousand years, or more, bring him back into
existence a second time —create him over again, solely too for the purpose
of putting him out of existence a second time ! God will not do this with
the brute ; and man, according to Mr. W., being identical with it, God
will not do so with him. Since God holds not the brute responsible in a
future life for evils it committed here, and man being on the “ level of the
brute,” having “no life but that which is identical with it,” and God
not being a “ respecter of His creatures,” in the nature of things it is in-
conceivable for God, on any possible principle, to hold man responsible in
a future life for evils committed in this. And. therefore, from Mr. W.’s
standpoint, it is as unreasonable and absurd for God to hold man account-
able in the future for lying, stealing, blaspheming, committing adultery,
or murder here, as to hold the dog accountable in the future for any of
its tricks or evils it commits in the world. Thus, since God does not hold
man responsible for what he does, society has no right to hold him re-
sponsible for anything he may do. Society has not a right to hold a man
responsible for what God does not; and, therefore, there ought to be no
law, no government; and no person, however wicked, ought to be
punished! Such is the logical and only conclusion from Mr. W.’s
premises—that’ the unconverted man has nothing more about him than
the brute, but his soul is on “ the level of the brute !” And it is, really,
as much infidelity as that advocated by Paine, I oltaire. Hume, Bosseau,
or Earnest Henan ; only it is more deceiving, being presented under cover
of Jehovah’s love, and therefore to be the more abhored. Because, if it
were avowed, like the infidelity of Thomas Paine and A oltaire, with it s foul-
mouthed blasphemy, it would die by the force of its own condemnation ?
as theirs did: if like that of Renan, with its tinsel, itwoidd fall fiat as his


charming eloquence when analysed and its sophistry exposed. Spiritism,
too, is self condemned; and Tlniversalism carries a lie on its forehead.
And though Brutism is not new, for it is as old as the days of the Stoics,
who taught it, yet its revival now, in a new dress, is new to most;
especially under the mask of Christianity. It is the latest form of infidelity.
When Satan is baffled in one way he soon tries another, and this time his
old game is under cover of Destructionism, which, when unmasked, is
Brutism, and therefore infidelity.
5. This is the way Mr. W. “does as much are as in him lies to stem the tide
of infidelity, by showing his brother-men, that” they are “brutes!” And
seems to think that it is a pity “he has no ecclesiastical authority or
status, either as a bishop, a dean, or archdeacon, or even as a canon of
the Churchin order that what he says might carry the more weight
with it! No doubt remembering Bishop Colenso, whose position gave him
great power in advocating his form of infidelity, the rejection of the five
books of Moses and the book of Joshua. But I would inform Mr. W.
that the day has come when religious truth must stand on its own bottom
by the force of its own intrinsic worth, (irrespective of the “ distin-
guished patronage” of great names possessed of ecclesiastical authority,)
as it must have the patronage of Heaven.
6. Thus, instead of “ stemming the tide of infidelity,” Mr. W. is only
increasing it, and I would much rather see him joining the ranks of his
sceptical brethren outside all churches, than acting as at present. I like
an honest sceptic, as I like an honest man, since I know that in most
cases men are made sceptical by the inconsistencies of such as Mr. W. in
believing that what is thus taught and practised is Christianity, whereas
if they were led to see that such is not the religion of Christ at all, but
only a corruption of it, they would likely become followers of Him who is
the only hope of guilty man.
7. Doubtless, Mr. W. however, will have the thanks of many sceptics,
as they look upon his position as a stepping stone to theirs. So will he
have the thanks of all those for whom he so earnestly apologises in his
last sermon. Nor will all the old Backsliders, Drunkards, Thieves,
Murderers, and Adulterers be hindmost in their thanksgiving and con-
gratulations to him for freeing them from future accountability in making
out a case for them that man is all material, and that his death is
indentical with that of the brute.
8. If the devil is to be put out of existence, as Brutists believe, it is a


pity that he had not been annihilated when he caused our first parents to
sin, instead of allowing him to do all the mischief, and then, after he could
do no more, put an end to him. This seems very unlike the wisdom of
God, but it is the wisdom of Brutism, from which wisdom may God
delivered His cause and people.
9. But 1 have done for the present. My task has been an easy one :
in refuting a new form of that which has been refuted often, and proving
from God’s Word that men are not brutes; that they are not “flesh and
blood” but only “ partakers,” as Christ was ; but that, having a spirit that
must exist for ever, if they deliberately reject the Saviour of sinners,
o’erleap every barrier placed in the way to hell, and reject God’s earnest
appeals to be reconciled, they shall be punished for ever or commensurately
with the duration of Jehovah’s existence ; and that in this God will make
“the wrath of man to praise him,” to the good and not the evil of the
universe.
10. I have been constrained to pen these few pages with the desire and in
the hope of being instrumental in the hands of God of saving some of my
fellow creatures from being ensnared by that species of infidelity which is
presented under, as we have seen, the guise of “ zeal for the truth,” but
which is utterly opposed to the truth as it is in Jesus. Hence, reader, the
question is not now, Christ or Plato ? but whether you will follow Christ
or Wollaston ? seing they are in conflict !”








