

Christ's College, Clobart.
T_A_S3VC^lSri^..
* ** ,,i,,, *^
On the 31st December next there will be a vacancy in the
office of Warden of Christ’s College. The Council desires that
the selection of the new Warden shall be made in England, and
furnishes the following particulars respecting the nature of the
appointment, and the qualifications required :
1. The intention of the founders of the College was to provide
a high class education for boys, and to give facilities for the
training of theological students. The latter function is at the
present moment in abeyance, and the chief business of the College
is to give the ordinary instruction of a good Grammar School, and
to prepare boys for the public examinations, including those for
Scholarships tenable at English Universities which are annually
awarded by the Council of Education.
2. The endowment of Christ’s College consists of landed
property vested in trustees, the net income from which exceeds
£'l,ooo a-year, besides other minor endowments. The premises
temporarily occupied by the College were built for the High
School of Hobart, which ceased to exist in July, 1885, They
comprise, in addition to a large schoolroom and classrooms, a
residence for the Warden, with accommodation for boarders.
There is a good garden, with a grass paddock, and a large playground
for the boys.
3. The emoluments of the office of Warden are a fixed salary of
£5OO a-year, or, at his option, a fixed salary with capitation fees,
under arrangements to be made after his arrival in Tasmania. He
will have a residence rent free, and the profits accruing from the
boarders. At the time of the opening of the College last year in
the High School premises, there were 100 boys in attendance. A
portion of the furniture for the accommodation of the boarders
is provided by the Council of the College.
4. The Warden must be a Clergyman of the Church of
England. The Council desires that he shall be a graduate in


honours of Oxford or Cambridge, and not less than 28, nor more
than 40 years of age. A public school man would be preferred.
The Warden should be a good classical scholar, and it would be
well that he should also be competent to supervise the instruction
in Mathematics. It is desirable that he should be acquainted
with the system of Science Teaching which has been introduced
into leading schools in England. It is essential that his capacity
for governing and training boys, and for securing the cordial
and effective co-operation of subordinate masters, shall have been
proved by practical experience in teaching and school management.
If not married, it would be necessary that the Warden should
have residing with him a relative who would be competent to
superintend the boarding arrangements at the College.
5. The Warden of Christ’s College is, ex officio, a member of the
Council. The assistant masters are appointed by the Warden, the
appointments being subject to approval by the Council. The
salaries of assistant masters are paid by the Council.
On behalf of the Council of Christ’s College :
ARTHUR DAVENPORT, 8.A.,
Archdeacon of Hobart.
CHAS. L. DUNDAS, M.A.,
Dean of Hobart.
T. STEPHENS, M.A.,
Director of Education.
Hobart, Ist September, 1886.


•
*
*
*


%
i
