

y ETH
11»u o
F i Bn
CHRIST OR PLATO?
*£fc.isio js pahs
Box ii
THE IMMORTALITY OE MAIN
HIS FUTURE PUNISHMENT
BRIEFLY EXAMINED IN
THE E E SEEMONS,
frmfrjefr in ©rinitg Cfruwfr, HUlJbwixnc,
BY
EL IST. WOLLASTON,
INCUMBENT.
SOLD ON BEHALF OF THE FEMALE REFUGE, COLLINGWOOD.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
IJiUlbounu :
MASON, FIRTH, & M‘CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
51 & 53 Flinders Lane West.


PREFACE.
After considerable delay, at the reiterated request of many persons
in various parts of the colony, I have consented to publish these Ser-
mons in pamphlet form, not because they by any means exhaust the
important subject of which they treat, or because I consider them
sufficiently well written to deserve publication, but for the two fol-
lowing reasons ;
1. Because I desire to enter an earnest and public protest against
the pagan, unchristian, and God-dishonouring theory, that He will
inflict upon man, hereafter, an infinite penalty for finite disobedience in
this life, involving the inevitable consequence of the Eternal Supremacy
of Evil; and to show that this doctrine is opposed to the plain and
uniform teaching of Holy Scripture.
2. Because my views on this subject have been grossly misrepre-
sented by many, who in ignorance or wilfulness have attributed to
me opinions which I never held, and words which I never uttered.
I leave it to the Christian reader to judge, whether I have in these
Sermons, cast any dishonour upon the name or gospel of Christ; asking
him, however, to remember that the doctrine of an eternal life of pain
and agony in hell-fire, as the future lot of the ungodly, can form
no part of the Gospel—for “gospel” means “good news,” “glad
tidings” to the human family; and such a terrible and revolting dogma
as even if it were true, can be neither “ good news” or “glad
tidings” to the fallen children of men, but exactly the reverse, how-
ever much it may rejoice the hearts of the devil and his angels.
Those w r ho desire to learn the truth and correctness of the views
concerning Future Punishment, which are so inadequately expressed
in these sermons, will do well to read the following valuable works on
the subject : — The Glory of Christ , Rev. S. Minton, M.A. ; Revelations
of a Future State, Archbishop Whateliy; Popular Ideas of Immortality,
Rev. R, Ker, M.A.; Endless Suffering not the Doctrine of Scripture,
Rev. T. Davis, M.A.; Duration and Nature of Future Punishment,
Rev. H. Constable, M.A., Prebendary of Cork; Eternal Punishment
and Eternal Death, Rev. T. W. Barlow, M.A., Fellow and Tutor,
Trinity College, Dublin. H. N. W.
“ Show thou the light. If conscience gleam,
Set not the bushel down ;
The smallest spark may send a beam
O’er hamlet, tower, and town.
“ Woe, woe to him, on safety bent,
Who creeps to age from youth.
Failing to grasp his life’s intent,
Became he fears the troth.”— Dean Alfm-d.


FUTURE PUNISHMENT
SEEMON I.
“ These shall go arc ay into everlasting punishment, and the righteous
into life eternal." — Matt. xxv. 46.
Before proceeding with the subject-matter of my sermon, I must say
a word or two of criticism on this text. For reasons best known to
themselves, our translators have chosen to render the Greek word
monion, which occurs in each clause of this verse, by a different
English equivalent. In the first it is “everlasting,” in the second it
is “eternal;” and the consequence has been, that many persons have
been led to believe—especially those who wish to believe it—that in
the original there must be a distinction between “everlasting” and
“eternal;” that the punishment of the lost, which is “everlasting,”
is not co-extensive with the happiness of the blessed, which is “ eter-
nal.” This distinction, however, is purely fanciful, and when our
Lord uttered these words in the Syro-Chaldaic vernacular of Palestine
(which the Evangelist afterwards translated into Greek) He said, and
meant to say, that the punishment of the wicked would be as everlast-
ing as the reward of the good, that the penalty of the lost would be as
eternal as the happiness of the saved. So that the passage should be
read thus :—“ These shall go away into everlasting (or eternal) punish-
ment, and the righteous into everlasting (or eternal) life.” This text
presents an insurmountable difficulty to the universalist, who—taking
his inspiration from the Christian Father Origen, the disciple of
the heathen philosopher, Plato (as I shall show you in my next ser-
mon) —consigns every soul that is not good enough for heaven to the
Acherusian Lake, or purgatory of Plato, there to suffer for a season
the penalty due to his sin, whence he will be at last restored to
God’s love and favour, to eternal life and blessedness. But if the
universalist believes in the divine authority of the New Testament
Scriptures, he must admit that these words were uttered by the Son of
God Himself just as they stand, and cannot possibly be perverted from
their original, obvious, and natural sense. And they declare emphati-
cally and authoritatively that the future punishment of the lost sinner
A 2


is eternal, everlasting, without end. And although it be perfectly
true that this is the only text in the whole Bible, which directly and
dogmatically declares this doctrine of the everlasting punishment of
the lost, yet it is abundantly implied by Christ and His apostles, who
continually speak of it as “death,” the “second death,” as “perdi-
tion,” as “perishing,” as “destruction;” all of which terms clearly
refer to its endless character—that the sinner’s future punishment will
last for ever.
But we have now to inquire what our Lord meant by “ everlasting
punishment.” We admit the fact of the impenitent sinner’s future
punishment being “ everlasting,” but in what does it consist ? We find
in the text before us that it is used as the opposite of, or antithesis to,
everlasting life —‘‘ These shall go away into everlasting punishment, and
the righteous into everlasting life.” The “punishment,” then, means
‘ ‘ death”— ‘ ‘ these shall go away into everlasting death. ” This is the uni-
form teaching of Scripture, which always describes life and death—
eternal life and eternal death—as the condition of the saved and the lost
respectively. And here are a few texts to prove it: —“ Behold I lay
before you this day the way of life and the way of death. ” “If ye
live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the spirit do mortify
the deeds of the body, ye shall live. ” “As in Adam all die, even so
all who are in Christ shall be made alive.” “To be carnally minded
is death, but to be spiritually minded is life.” “That as sin hath
reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness to
eternal life.” “For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is
eternal life.” So that “everlasting punishment,” which Christ him-
self declares is the lot of the sinner, is eternal, everlasting, never-ending
death. I need hardly remind you that the word “death,” in the
English language—and as we invariably use the term in our conver-
sation, literature, and laws—means exactly the opposite of “life,” just as
night is the opposite of day, and darkness of light. When I say, “My
friend is dead, ” I do not mean that he is alive and suffering great pain
and anguish of body and mind; but that he has ceased to live, that he
has come to an end of his earthly existence, that he will never again
throughout eternity feel, or think, or move, or speak, as a mortal
man; that his body will perish in the grave, be destroyed by its own
corruption, and be as “water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be
gathered up again.” That is what you and I, and all who use lan-
guage in order to convey our true meaning, understand by the word
‘‘ death”—the exact antithesis of “life.” And so we find our Lord Jesus
Christ and His apostles thus using it with reference to the souls of the
lost. Jesus, addressing the sinner, says, “Fear not them that can kill
the body, and are not able to kill the soul, but fear Him who is able to
destroy both body and soul in hell. ” Again, “Wide is the gate and broad
is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat.” “Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish.” “My
sheep shall never perish.” Our Lord then sufficiently explains in these
sayings what He means by “everlasting punishment,” or “everlast-
ing death”—that those who die in their sins shall perish shall be
destroyed body and soul in hell, and that when they die this second
death, they die for ever, are destroyed for ever, perish for ever. The


death of the soul hereafter, the Lord tells us, will answer exactly to the
death of the body here; both will cease to live, both will end their
existence, both will be blotted out of the book of life to all eternity.
And the apostolic writers abundantly confirm the teaching of their
divine Master. Only a very few of the many texts illustrating this I
will quote from the epistles. St. Peter, speaking of the ungodly, says,
“But these, as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed,
shall utterly perish in their own corruption.” He says again, “ God is
not willing that any should perish, but that they should be converted
and live. ” And St. Paul writes, ‘ ‘ They that be rich fall into temptation
and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men
in destruction and perdition .” He tells us that Christ will come a
second time “ in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them who know not
God, and who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lordand he speaks of those who oppose God’s truth
as the “ enemies of the cross, whose end is destruction .” And once
more St. Peter says that in his day false teachers “ wrested the Scrip-
tures to their own destruction .” Surely, brethren, I have quoted
sufficient from the spoken and written words of the Son of God,
and His inspired apostles, to satisfy you that they regarded this
“everlasting punishment,” denounced upon the sinner in the next
world, not as a temporary punishment, which after a longer or
shorter period should come to an end (as the universalist fondly
dreams) so that the sinner shall be restored again at the last to
God’s love and favour; nor do they mean that that punishment,
which is eternal death, will consist of eternal life spent in conscious
pain and suffering, in ceaseless agony of soul and body. They
mean exactly what they teach in so many words, without gloss,
or addition or subtraction, that the punishment for the sinner here-
after is death of the soul and body in hell; that that death is ever-
lasting, eternal, will never end ; and that that eternal death is ever-
lasting destruction, extinction, extermination—the blotting out of the
sinner’s life or existence for ever and ever.
Having, I trust, established the scriptural character of the doctrine,
that the future punishment of the wicked is everlasting punishment,
that that punishment is everlasting death, and that that death is ever-
lasting destruction in hell of body and soul, as the consummation of
that punishment, I pass on to inquire, What are the means whereby
this awful sentence is to be carried out? It would appear that, as
human language is inadequate to describle intelligibly the sufferings
of the lost, which precede and accompany the extinction of life, our
Lord has recourse to a metaphor or figure of speech, which conveys to
us the nearest approach to the reality which it is possible for the human
mind to conceive—and that figure or metaphor is fire. Now you will
notice that the “ everlasting punishment ” in the text, is identified by
Christ with the ‘ ‘ everlasting fire ” of the 41st verse, where He, as Judge,
represents Himself as saying to the goats on His left hand, at the last
day, ‘ ‘ Depart from Me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels. ” The death and destruction, then, of the sinner
will be brought about by his being cast into a metaphorical lake of fire.
In another place He says, when explaining to His disciples the parable


of the tares and the wheat, “As the tares are gathered and burned
in the fire, so shall it be at the end of this world ; the Son of Man shall
send forth His angels, and they shall gather out of His kingdom all
things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them
into a furnace of fire" And then He adds, “ There shall be wailing
and gnashing of teeth ” —another strong figure to denote misery and
anguish. Again He says, “ Wherefore if thine eye offend thee, pluck
it out and cast it from thee; it is better for thee to enter heaven
with one eye than having two eyes to be cast into ” —or the
Gehenna of fire. In the parable of Dives and Lazarus also, the
material element of fire is used by Jesus to symbolise the torments of
hell. And in the highly allegorical and figurative book of Revelation,
John describes the ascended Redeemer as saying, “But the fearful,
and abominable, and the murderers, and sorcercers, and idolaters,
and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which bumeth with fire
and brimstone, which is the second death ” —or the everlasting death of
soul and body. Now, brethren, what could have been the object and
design of our great Teacher in choosing the figure of a lake of fire as
the place of punishment for the lost ? What could it possibly have
been, except to impress upon us the awful fact, that that punishment
would be temporary suffering, followed by eternal death , destruction,
extinction of life ? And why should He speak of that fire as “ever-
lasting” and “unquenchable,” except to show that that fire would
thoroughly do its work on the sinner, that it would burn on and on
until all its victims which sustained it, as coal sustains a furnace, were
utterly burned up and consumed 1 John Baptist, in anticipation
of his Master, had said sternly to the godless Jews (that “generation
of vipers,” who sought to flee from the wrath to come) —using a parable
to enforce his teaching, and referring to the Messiah —“Whose fan is in
His hand, and He will throughly purge His floor, and gather His wheat
into the garner, but will Morn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.”
He will burn it up, reduce it to ashes to be scattered to the four winds
of heaven; and until the wicked have all paid the penalty of their
sin, and are dead, utterly consumed, destroyed, that fire, he says, will be
‘‘ unquenchable. ” That this is the teaching of Jesus Christ Himself, and
what He meant by “ everlasting punishment” and “everlasting fire,” is
strikingly demonstrated by that remarkable passage in the 9th chapter of
St. Mark, where He says to the Jews, “And if thy hand offend thee, cut
it off and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy
members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast
into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched, where their worm
dieth not and the fire is not quenched.” Now it is universally ad-
mitted, that our Lord, in this passage —borrowed from Isaiah, and
adapted by Christ to represent the same scene as that predicted by that
prophet at the last day—is referring to the Yalley of the Son of
Hinnom (Gehenna), a deep ravine, which runs round the south side of
Mount Zion, in Jerusalem, in one part of which, called “Tophet,”
in the reign of the wicked Manasseh, human sacrifices were offered up
to Moloch, the fire-god; and this Tophet, the Jews superstitiously
believed to be the gate of Gehenna, or place of future punishment.
In our Lord's time, this gorge or valley was the common receptacle


of all the dead cabases, carrion, offal, filth, and refuse of the great
city ; and to avoia noxious effluvia and infection, fires were kept
continually burning, tight and day, to consume all the solid matter.
From the horrible associations connected with this place, the deepness
and narrowness of the gorg>, the dense clouds of smoke emitted above,
and the perpetual or everlasting luiid fires burning below, this ravine
became to the Jews a type or figure of hell-fire _or Gehenna; and
knowing this, our Lord illustrate* the future punishment of the lost
sinner in hell by this material representation of it on earth. Now
it will be manifest to you that, in order to make this illustration
apposite, and of any value, we must understand Jesus to say, that
the soul and body of the sinner in hell shall be treated in the same
way as the dead bodies and other refuse matter were treated in the
Yalley of Hinnom ; that is, that they shall be utterly destroyed in the
metaphorical fire, as these latter were in the material fire. If he
meant to teach by this striking metaphor (as so many assume) that
the sinner, in hell (so far from dying or being destroyed) would spend
an eternal life in pain and suffering, then the parallel would not hold
good, there would have been no parallel at all, the illustration would have
been worthless. Our Lord’s teaching is evidently this—“ Just as in
the Yalley of Hinnom, which you Jews regard as the type of hell, the
carcasses are burnt in a perpetual material fire, where the worm that
is bred and lives in them does not die, and where the fire that is
kindled to burn.them is not quenched, until they are utterly con-
sumed ; so the wicked, impenitent, and unbelieving, when they die,
shall be tormented with the Gehenna, or fire of God’s wrath ; and the
gnawing worm of anguish shall not die in them, and the fire that
burns them shall not be quenched, until body and soul are utterly
consumed.” If, therefore, this metaphorical saying of Christ does
refer to the future punishment of the wicked, it can only teach that
the sinner is absolutely destroyed —exterminated in hell-fire, just
as the carrion was in the material fire—and no amount of argument
or sophistry can possibly convert it into the exactly opposite doctrine
of eternal life, spent in conscious pain and. suffering.
One point more, and I will conclude. It is maintained —in opposi-
tion to the view which I have taken of eternal punishment, and to the
plain and express teaching of the Word of God—that punishment, to
be punishment, must, of necessity, consist of conscious pain and
suffering ; and that as the sinner’s future punishment is certainly
“everlasting,” his agony and anguish must be “everlasting’ also.
This argument, however, is not founded on fact or reason. When a
man is hung for murder, you will admit that the object of justice is to
punish him for his crime, and you speak of it as the “punishment of
death.” You know, also, that that which an ungodly man most values
upon earth—beyond wealth, health, happiness, friends, reputation—
is his life ; and that to take that life is the greatest punishment which
can be inflicted upon him, and hence there is no punishment which he
dreads so much; and the law depends upon this dread or fear of
punishment, to deter men from the commission of crime. This
punishment of death, then, having only reference to this present life,
the mortal body, is to him eternal , just as the death of a brute beast is


to it eternal; its consequences are to him “everfasti'g,” never ending,
interminable; no power on earth can restore tha* natural life to him
which he has lost—it is gone for ever and ever; he is consigned, by a just
and righteous law, to everlasting punishment, vhich is everlasting death,
which is, moreover, everlasting destruction rrom the presence of his
fellow-men; and who would venture to say that, in consigning the
criminal to death, as a punishment for his sin, he is consigned to a
life of pain and suffering after death f The common argument, there-
fore, that “everlasting punishment” must mean conscious torment
and agony in hell for ah 1 eternity, never to come to an end, will not
hold good for a moment, and stands upon nothing but a desire to
establish a popular, but most pernicious and unscriptural theory of
future punishment for sin.
What I have said to you on this grave subject has exercised my
mind for years, and has been the result of much careful thought,
reading, and consideration ; and I have said it because I feel its vast
importance to you, as well as to myself ; and my object will be fully
gained if it will lead you all, who have not already done so, to examine
this matter carefully for yourselves, by the light of that volume which
has the Holy Spirit of God for its author ; and I feel convinced, that
if you will only do so in a humble and teachable spirit, and with a
sincere desire to learn God’s truth, you will soon come to regard this
doctrine of everlasting punishment with an interest you have never
felt before; and your sense of its overwhelming importance to your
best and highest interests, will increase in exact proportion to your
belief in it; for disbelief of this truth is very general, and is the cause
of the awful amount of ungodliness in the world, and of the appalling
loss of souls in the world to come. God tells us, in His gospel,
that His divine image—that is, immortality, in which Adam was
created, and which we lost in him when he fell in Paradise—can
only be restored to us in one way—by and through the services
and intercession of His Son Jesus Christ, as our vicarious Redeemer,
and sin and punishment bearer. Faith in Him alone can effect
this. The apostle declares that He is “the author of eternal life
to all those who believe in and obey Him that the “ wages of sin is
death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our
Lordand that if we truly repent of our sins, and forsake them, and
receive Christ into our hearts as our Lord and Saviour, and honour
Him in our lives, we can recover, by that act of faith and love, the
image of God—He will give us back our immortality, and we shall be
henceforth in a state of everlasting salvation. But God’s Word tells
us also that if we do not repent and turn to Him, give up our sinful
life, and believe in His Son Jesus Christ as our strength, our hope,
and our Redeemer from sin and condemnation, and serve Him—but
continue to live and die in sin and unbelief—then we shall not recover
the divine image—God will not give us back our immortality, but will,
after our natural death, raise us up again from the grave for a season
and punish us condignly, though justly and equitably, for having
wilfully refused His love, despised His Son, resisted His Spirit, and
rejected His salvation ; and not being in possession of eternal life or
immortality, which Christ alone can impart, and which can only


be obtained by faith in Him, as an inevitable and natural con-
sequence of being the children of Adam, who lost us God’s image, we
must die eternally, perish everlastingly—in our Lord’s own words, we
must be “destroyed, both soul and body, in hell.” Such is the
awful future of the ungodly and disobedient, the worldly and the
sensual, the selfish and the covetous. Brethren, God grant that it
may be none of yours. I conclude my address to you to-day with
the earnest prayer that the Holy Spirit may lead you, one and all,
so to embrace the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, as your Saviour,
by a true and living faith now, that hereafter He may not be your
Judge. Amen.
SEEMON 11.
“ The mages of sin is death; hut the gift of God is eternal life , through
Jesus Christ our Lord." — Rom. VI. 28.
The doctrine of an eternal life of pain and suffering for the lost of the
human family, as the punishment for their sin, is based entirely upon
the belief that the human soul is created immortal, incapable of death
and destruction—which is the common belief, and is accepted without
question or inquiry as a doctrine of God taught in holy Scripture; and
the inevitable consequence is, that only two alternatives are left to us
as to the future destiny of the body and soul of a sinner after death and
judgment. Since, according to this theory, man must live on for ever,
and Scripture declares that there are only two places for all men
hereafter (heaven and hell), and only two states misery),
it follows that one of two things must happen to him if he die in his
sin unsaved—either he must be forgiven, and restored at last to God’s
love and favour and heaven, after paying the penalty of his sin by a
just and adequate punishment in hell—which is the doctrine of
Origen, the Christian Platonist, and of the modern universalist; or,
he must live on an eternal life of pain and suffering, and consequently
never die—which is the doctrine of Tertullian and Augustine, and of a
large majority of Protestant Christians. No other alternative can
possibly be conceived of by the believer in the natural, inherent
immortality of the human soul; and as a matter of fact, we find that,
while most men believe, or profess to believe, in Augustine’s endless
life of pain in hell, many, whose whole souls revolt against its terrible
and appalling character, in their natural revulsion of feeling, fall back
upon Origen’s purgatory, and his theory of ultimate and universal
restoration to God. Both support their belief by a forced interpreta-
tion of some two or three texts of Scripture, which they suppose
favour their views, and both are compelled by their theory of the
A 3


soul’s inalienable immortality, to reject a third view of this subject,
which is in reality the only doctrine concerning the destiny of the lost
sinner taught in God’s Word, and which teaches it plainly, persist-
ently, and dogmatically in a hundred passages of the sacred volume.
Now, it may startle some of you when I affirm, without any fear of
contradiction, that this popular and common belief in the natural immor-
tality of the human soul, is not supported by a single text, or a single
line or word in the whole Bible, from first of Genesis to last of Revela-
tion ; and, moreover, that it is essentially a pagan doctrine, introduced
in the early days of Christianity into the theology of the church, by
learned Christian writers and preachers, who borrowed it from the
great heathen philosopher Plato, whose disciples they were; and is,
therefore, the doctrine of men, and not of God. But I will go
farther than this, and say, advisedly, that we have overwhelming
evidence in the pages of Holy Writ, that the human soul is not
by creation and nature immortal, that it is not the condition of
his being that man should live for ever either in heaven or in
hell. In the first place, we are distinctly told, what our reason
sufficiently attests, that God, the self-existent Creator —the eternal,
immortal, and invisible Jehovah—is the only possessor, as He is the
only source and dispenser, of eternal life or immortality. And here I
may remark that many persons seem to entertain the strange notion
that “eternal life” and “immortality” are not convertible terms, that
they do not mean the same thing. But I ask why ? ‘ ‘ Immortal ”
means “deathless.” An immortal life is a deatliless life, and a
deathless life is a life that shall never die, which lasts for ever, and
therefore it is an “ eternal” life, an everlasting life; hence, to attempt
to attribute a meaning to one of these terms which the other will not
bear is only playing upon words, a distinction without a difference, a
mere quibble of speech. “Immortality” and “eternal life ” are
identically the same thing.
But to resume —St. Paul, in 1 Timothy vi., thus speaks of God in
Christ—“He is the blessed and only potentate, King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, who only hath immortality And if God, the creator,
only hath it, how can man, the creature, possess it I Man had it once
in Eden, an immortality derived from God, who created him, body and
soul, deathless ; but he lost it in his fall, and all men lost it in him.
That fall, so far as his future life was concerned, brought him down to
the level of the brute. God said, ‘ ‘ Eat of that forbidden tree, and
thou shalt die. ” He did eat, and did die, body and soul; he lost his
eternal life, his immortality. And this is no mere fancy or theory,
for we are told distinctly that, after they had sinned, lest Adam and
Eve should put forth their hands and take of the tree of life, and eat,
and live for ever, the Lord God drove them out of the garden, and
placed at its entrance cherubim with flaming swords, or the “shekinah,”
which turned every way, to keep or guard the road to the tree of life.
We are all, then, thanks to Adam, by birth and nature, mortal, not
immortal, in a state of death, and not of life, of eternal death, not of
eternal life. But the text before us, which is only one of a multitude,
tells us that we may be restored to immortality, may recover our lost
life eternal, which was the “image of God” in which man was first


created; and it tells ns, moreover, how that blessing may be acquired.
“ The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.” So that immortality is a free gift of God to
all those who believe in His Son Jesus Christ, and serve Him, and to
none others. The great scheme of human redemption by the volun-
tary and vicarious sacrifice of Himself by the Son of God upon the
cross, as an atonement for sin, whereby men could recover the love
and favour of God, and their lost immortality, was not known under
the old dispensation of Moses. It was Christ who revealed that,
according to the apostle, “life and immortality were brought to light
through the gospel,” not through the law; and hence he says that
those who by “ patient continuance in welldoing seek for glory and
honour and immortality, shall find eternal life;” and if we are
to seek it, how can we possess it by nature ? And, brethren, the
multitude of passages in the New Testament which speak of
death and not of life as being the normal condition of fallen man,
and the fate of the lost hereafter, prove to demonstration that
the doctrine of man’s immortality is a pure human fiction. To
quote them all would be to occupy a quarter of an hour of your time.
I will, therefore, read only a few : —“He that hath not the Son hath
not life;” “Sin, when it is conceived, bringeth forth death;” “The
wages of sin is death “ The gospel is to the unbeliever the savour
of death unto death;” “If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die;”
“To be carnally minded is death;” “The end of those things is
death;” “If a man keep My sayings, he shall never see death;”
“He that believeth on Me shall never die;” “The ungodly bringeth
forth fruit unto death.” But enough. It is death, always death,
and never life—mortality of soul and body, and not immortality—
which is declared to be in God’s Word the spiritual condition of every
man by nature; and that immortality is the special work of grace,
the free and merciful gift of God to the believer in His Son Jesus
Christ, who forsakes his sins and serves Him; and that he, and he
alone, can possess immortality. “The wages of sin is death, but the
gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus'Christ our Lord.” There is
not any one doctrine in the New Testament more clearly revealed, or
more frequently or more authoritatively taught by Jesus Christ and
His apostles, than this—that man is not by creation and nature
immortal, and incapable of death and destruction; but is mortal and
perishable; and therefore the common and popular notion that the
soul cannot die as well as the body, but must of necessity live for ever
in heaven or hell, is totally opposed to the teaching of the Word of
God, and is unworthy of a place in the Christian’s creed.
And now, brethren, we come to make an important and necessary
inquiry. If the doctrine that the soul of man is by creation and
nature immortal, is not found in the Bible, and upon which alone, as
I have shown, the belief of an eternal life of pain and suffering for the
lost is based, where did it come from ? How came it to be introduced
into Christian theology ? I find no difficulty in answering these
questions. We easily trace its origin to Plato, the great heathen sage,
who lived 400 years b.c., and whose philosophy has coloured and
influenced the theology of the Christian Church in all ages, even from


apostolic times, and who had for his disciples the most able and influ-
ential of the Christian fathers, whose writings and preachings have, to
a very great extent, moulded the faith of Christendom. Plato—some-
times called the “ Divine Plato,” although a pagan, from the wonder-
ful resemblance of some of his intuitional views of God and man, to
those revealed in the Bible —Plato taught that the human soul could
not die or be destroyed, that it was in its very nature immortal—must
live on for ever. He held also that for the good in this world,
there was hereafter an eternal abode of happiness or Elysium;,
and for the very wicked, the worst of mankind, a place of
eternal pain and suffering, with its streams of fire called Tartarus,
whence none could ever throughout eternity come forth again. He
also taught that there was a medium place, or purgatory, which he
called the Acherusian Lake, into which all those too bad for
Elysium, but not bad enough for Tartarus, were cast at death, and
from which they issued forth again into upper air, after a purgative
and refining process in the fire. And this, you will observe in all its
features—its Elysium, its Tartarus, its purgatory —is precisely the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, which is essentially Platonic and
heathen. We see, then, in the philosophy of Plato (who died four
centuries before Christ was bom) the origin and almost counterpart of
the popular belief of the inherent immortality of the soul, and of the
twofold dogma based upon it—that everyone dying in sin must either
go to purgatory to expiate his guilt there, and then be restored to God’s
love and favour, or he must live on for ever and ever in torment and
anguish in hell. The first Christian writer who advocated this latter
doctrine was Clement Athenagoras, a Greek by birth, who settled at
Alexandria, and died about 200 a.d. ; almost contemporary with whom
was Tatian, in Mesopotamia; and lie was followed some thirty years
later by the famous Tertullian, the “ fierce African theologian,” as he
has been called. These views were opposed some 20 years after
Tertullian by the great Origen, who maintained the ultimate restora-
tion and salvation of all men, and not only of men, but of devils also.
This theory of Origen’s, however, did not take very deep root, and in
some 150 years after his death was well-nigh regarded as a heresy,
when Augustine, the celebrated Bishop of Hippo, in Africa, rose up
in all his mighty power, and crushed it out of the Christian Church
altogether by his writings, preaching, and authority, for more than
1200 years, when it re-appeared in its present form of universalism in
these latter days. Augustine, an ardent disciple of Plato, adopted,
like Tertullian, the complex Platonic theory of the immortality of the
soul, of everlasting torment in Tartarus or hell as the punishment of
the wicked, and of a medium place or purgatory; and this, as we know,
remained an article of the Christian faith for very many centuries,
until the Reformation, when the Protestant churches, just emerging
from darkness and ignorance, discarded Augustine’s or Plato’s purga-
tory (which Rome still retains), but perpetuated Augustine’s or Plato’s
hell, which is to this hour the teaching of many divines, and the
belief of a majority of the members of Protestant churches.
Such is the origin and history of the popular doctrines of the immor-
tality of the soul, and of an eternal life of pain and agony for the


impenitent and unconverted after death. But I must call your at-
tention to another important fact. Athenagoras, the first Christian
writer who advocated this dogma, as I said, died about 200 a.d.
There are still extant books, or portions of books, written by seven
well-known Christian fathers, who lived before Athenagoras, viz.;—
Barnabas (Paul’s companion), Clement of Rome (mentioned by Paul in
Romans xvi.), Hermas, Ignatius, Polycarp (disciplejof St. John), Justin
Martyr, and Theophilus of Antioch ; there were also two others, his
contemporaries, Irenaeus, and Clement of Alexandria. Barnabas, the
earliest of these, died about a. d. 90, or some fifty years only after the
death of Christ; and it is very singular, if this doctrine were true,
that not one of these writings should contain the Augustinian theory
of an eternal life of torment in hell for the lost sinner. It is scarcely
credible that these eminent confessors, half of whom were martyrs to
the faith, would not have referred to this dreadful truth, if it had been
in their day the doctrine of the Christian Church ; and the conclusion
we should naturally draw from this remarkable omission would certainly
be, that no such tenet was known to them, that it was introduced into
Christian theology subsequently to their times; and as a matter of
fact, we find no trace of this doctrine until 200 years after Christ.
In my last sermon I showed you that this terrible pagan doctrine—
which Tertullian and Augustine succeeded in imposing on the Christian
Church, through the influence of their great names, vast learning, and
fiery zeal and eloquence—receives no support whatever from the Word
of God, and that there is not one text, fairly quoted and honestly inter-
preted, which contains any such tenet as this, from Genesis to Revela-
tion. The Old Testament does not once refer to it; we may, therefore,,
safely assume that it was unknown to the authors of those ancient books.
In the New Testament there are twenty-one epistles, written by five
of Christ’s apostles, not one of whom speak of, or refer to, this frightful
doctrine, still less preach or teach it, for the obvious reason that they
did not believe in it; for if such had been the belief of the early
Christian Church, or they had been taught it by their Master, it is incon-
ceivable that it should have been excluded, from the twenty-one epistles,
which contain the doctrinal portions of the Gospel—the dogmas of the
Christian faith ; and, as I pointed out to you last Sunday, there are
only two passages in the whole of the four Gospels which contain the
teaching of Christ Himself, and which are always quoted as stock texts
by advocates of the Augustinian theory, which can by any possi-
bility be tortured or twisted into a crutch to support this view of
eternal punishment—Mark ix. 43, and Matthew xxv. 46 —both of
which texts, I believe and hope, I then satisfactorily disposed of, by
showing you that, fairly and critically examined and interpreted, they
were in perfect harmony with the universal testimony of the Bible
that the sinner’s future doom is not life, but death — mortality, not
immortality; not an endless life of pain, but the extinction of life ;
not everlasting existence, but everlasting destruction; that “the wages
of sin is death that if you or I die in our sin, impenitent, unsancti-
fied, unsaved, we shall be raised again from the dead at the last day
by our great Judge, and having received from him the due reward of
our deeds, and endured a perfectly just and equitable amount of


suffering in hell for our sins here —the “ many stripes” or the “ few
stripes,” as God’s omniscience alone can know that we have righteously
deserved—we shall be consigned as mortal children of Adam to eternal
death; we shall, in our Lord’s own words, be literally “destroyed
both soul and body in hell,” an “ everlasting death,” which will be
our “everlasting punishment, ” which in apostolic words is “everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord ” —and of our fellow-men.
Such is the uniform teaching of our Lord Jesus Christ and His apostles,
concerning the future destiny of the children of this world, of the un-
godly and unconverted ; whilst the children of God, the penitent and
believing, the sanctified and regenerated, having by faith in the Saviour
of sinners recovered God’s image, received back their lost immortality as
a free gift of God’s love and goodness, will enjoy an eternal, never-
ending life of peace, rest, joy, and blessedness with Christ and His
saints and angels in a glorious heaven. This is God’s own word—
“ The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.”
The only portion of the Bible I have not mentioned is the Apocalypse
or Revelation of St. John, and in that book there is one passage which
is always quoted in conjunction with those two texts already referred
to in the gospels, to prove the eternal duration of the sinner’s sufferings
in hell (chapter xiv. 10, 11) —‘ ‘lf any man worship the beast and his
image, and receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand, the same
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, and the smoke of their
torment ascendeth up for ever and ever.” Now, in the first place, we
do not know for certain who these worshippers of the beast represent,
or who or what this “ beast ” is whom they worship ; neither is it by
any means clear, that this passage refers to the future punishment of
sinners at all. Elliot, the prophetic writer, a great authority, thinks
it does not; but in the second place, whether it does or not, we cannot
put a literal interpretation, and base so awfully important a dogma as
that of the consignment of a human soul to an eternal life of agony in
hell, upon a single prophetic utterance, found in a book which is confess-
edly the most obscure, figurative, mysterious, and difficult ever written
—a book so crowded with allegory and glowing imagery, foreshadowing
future events, that no one can venture to dogmatise upon the meaning
of its contents.
I shall (n.v.) conclude my remarks on this important subject next
Sunday, and will now only add a few words of warning and advice to
what I have said already. And I say, first, do not be afraid of this
subject. Do not fear to investigate it for yourselves. Do not be de-
terred from ascertaining the truth or error of this, or any other doctrine,
preached from this or any other pulpit, as the teaching of God, by the
idea that you are meddling with matters that do not concern you, and
that they are best left alone ; that it is dangerous to look too closely
into the mysteries of godliness, or that your faith may be unsettled in
the doing it, and so forth. Listen not to these voices, for they are not
wise. It is your business, it does concern you, it is not best left alone,
it is not dangerous to look into it. On the contrary, in these days of
abounding and progressive infidelity, it becomes a positive and sacred
duty that you should search the Scriptures, earnestly, intently, to see


if these things are so or not, that you maybe prepared to repel, as our
Master did, the assaults of the Evil One upon your faith in His own
words —“ It is written.” You are bound, as Christian men and women,
to speak with certainty as to your own convictions of what the Word
of God teaches, and thus be always ready to “give to others a reason
of the hope that is in you.” The well-known saying of Chilling worth;
that the “ Bible, and the Bible alone, is the religion of Protestants,”
is a hackneyed, but a wise and true one, and our own Sixth Article of
Religion says —“Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary to
salvation, so that whatsoever is not read therein, or may be proved
thereby, is not to be required of any man that it should be believed as
an article of the Christian faith ; ” therefore it is your duty and your
interest to exercise freely the reason, and understanding, and talents
which God has given you to convince yourselves of the truth taught in
God’s word, and not to take it from the lips of other men on trust; and
sure I am that if you have faith in God, and approach the study of the
New Testament in a humble, earnest, teachable, and prayerful spirit,
He will enlighten you, and direct your hearts and understandings
aright, to see the truth as it is in Christ, and to maintain it unto the end.
That Word which “has God for its author, truth for its matter, and
salvation for its end,” can never suffer by examination, nor can it be
destroyed, or neutralised, by the heresies of man, ‘ ‘ for the word of
our God shall stand for ever.” And this is His word—“ The wages of
sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.” Amen.
SERMON' lA[.
“ Great and marvellous are Thy works, Lord God Almighty ; just and
true are Thy mays, Thou King of Saints." — Rev. XV. 3.
In my previous sermon I endeavoured, to the best of my ability, to
show you that the uniform teaching of Holy Scripture with reference
to future punishment is, that the penalty which a just and righteous
God will inflict upon the faithless and impenitent after death is an
“everlasting punishment,” that that “everlasting punishment” is
everlasting death, and that everlasting death is “everlasting de-
struction from the presence of the Lord”—eternal extinction of life,
and not an eternal existence of conscious pain and suffering in hell.
I shall not make any further appeals to the pages of Holy Writ, to
prove this doctrine to be that of Jesus Christ and His apostles,


because I have fully done so already; but I shall occupy our time
this morning in advancing some arguments in defence of it, which
I am sure will recommend themselves to your hearts and under-
standings, and which will, I think, confirm in your minds the positive
and reiterated statements of the gospel concerning this important
subject.
Now, the doctrine which I maintain that I have proved from the
pages of God’s Word is this—“ That a temporary penalty of pain and
suffering in hell, will be inflicted by a just and righteous God upon
every impenitent sinner, in exact proportion to the guiltiness of his
offences ; which penalty will be followed by eternal death, extinction
of life, everlasting destruction of soul and body.” And the very
first thing that suggests itself to the unprejudiced mind on view
of this doctrine, is its manifest and absolute justice and impar-
tiality. It recommends itself to our reason as the very thing that
a just and righteous Maker and Judge would do, and ought to do,
with His sinning creatures —namely, to punish them exactly according
to their guiltiness and deserts—no more and no less—the “many
stripes” if they deserve many, and the “few stripes” if they deserve
few. We recognise this equitable principle in the penal laws of the
land, the object and design of which, however imperfectly adminis-
tered, is to punish evil-doers in exact proportion to their offences
against society, even to taking by a violent death the life of a man,
who has himself violently taken the life of a fellow-man. When,
therefore, we are told in Scripture, not that every man who dies in his
sin, shall receive the same punishment of an eternal life spent in
torment, whether he deserves it or not (which is the common belief),
but that at the last day God will ‘ ‘ give unto every man according as
his work shall be,” and that “he shall be judged according to his
works”—that is, justly and equitably; and, moreover, that God will
take all things affecting the sinner into his consideration, as an earthly
judge does before pronouncing sentence, and then, having due regard
to the religious, social, and other privileges, opportunities, and advan-
tages which he may have enjoyed, or been denied, on earth, will
punish him just as He alone can see and know that he deserves to be
punished—not one stripe more, not one stripe less—then we feel and
acknowledge that this is infinitely just and right. We have not a
shadow of ground of complaint against God’s goodness and rectitude,
and we are forced into the exclamation, “ Justice and judgment are
the habitation of Thy throne “Just and true are Thy ways, thou
King of Saints !” This part of the lost sinner’s penalty is the judicial
act of God Himself, as judge, who hath said, “I will by no means
clear the guilty j” and who will thus vindicate to the whole world His
eternal justice and truth, and His hatred of sin and evil. The
consummation of his punishment, however—that part of it which
is “everlasting,” his eternal death and destruction, body and soul,
which will follow the infliction of the penalty of pain, be that penalty
long or short, heavy or light—is not the personal act of God, but it is
the natural and inevitable result of man’s fallen state, having been
bom, and lived, and died in sin, without Christ and the immortality
or eternal life which Christ alone can give; he has no life in him.


he must perish, totally and finally pass away for ever, be blotted
out of God’s Book of Life to all eternity. Death, and not life,
is the condition of his corrupt nature —dead by sin, dead in sin,
unrenewed by Divine grace, unregenerated by the eternal life of God’s
Son, which He imparts to all who believe in and obey Him, which is
immortality. As he came into the world, so he leaves the world, and
so he will be raised up again for a season, body and soul, and judged
and punished ; and then, having paid the full penalty of his sin, and
suffered all that he deserved to suffer in hell, he necessarily ceases to
be ; he drinks of the waters of Lethe, “the silent stream,” forgets his
misery, and falls asleep wrapt in the mantle of eternal death. And,
brethren, we see no signs of unrighteousness here. The sentence
is severe, no doubt, but it is the severity of justice. We see in
it no element of mercy, but then we do not expect it. We know that
mercy—free, abounding, and super-abounding mercy—is offered to
every one of us in this life, in the blessed Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
if we wilfully reject that mercy, what right have we to complain if at
the judgment-seat we do not receive it ? “ Whatsoever a man soweth
that shall he also reapthat we feel is just and right, and we are
assured that death cuts off every hope of reformation or salvation, and
therefore of mercy too.
Justice then closes Mercy’s door,
And God’s long-suffering is no more.”
We see nothing in this treatment of man by his Maker, to awaken in
us a sense of injury or wrong done, or of any disproportion of the
punishment to the offence; we recognise in it the eternal justice of
God’s dealings with the sinner, who has righteously incurred the
penalty of guilt, and we are forced to bow to the decree, and say,
“ Great and marvellous are Thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and
true are Thy ways, Thou King of Saints.”
But now, my hearers, look at the other side of the picture, and con-
sider, I pray you, in what light a rational, responsible, and yet
utterly helpless creature, such as man is,’would naturally view the
application to himself of Augustine’s Platonic doctrine, so commonly
taught and accepted as that of Jesus Christ and His apostles—viz.,
that the human soul is by creation and nature immortal, can never
die or be destroyed, even by God himself, its creator; but that if the
man die guilty of unbelief in Christ the Saviour, no matter what his
moral life and character may be, good or bad, he must be raised from
the grave and stand before the judgment-seat to receive his sentence,
not to a justly-merited punishment followed by eternal death, as
God’s Word teaches, but to eternal life, an endless and conscious
existence in hell, there to be tormented and tortured with unutterable
anguish and agony of body and soul, not by the devil, his great
enemy, but by God himself, his creator, for ever and ever; and that
this will be the horrible doom of all the countless myriads of inhabit-
ants of this globe in all ages and countries, with the exception of that
very minute fraction of the human family, which will repent of their
sins and embrace the Lord Jesus Christ by a living faith, and thus
secure exemption from it, and obtain everlasting salvation. Now,


when a man comes calmly to try and realise in his own soul some-
thing of the depth and breadth of this appalling doctrine—what
those words really mean, and what they imply, “An eternal, never-
ending life of conscious pain and torment in the fires of hell”—(which
not one person in a hundred ever does, a clear sign that it does not
influence their life and conduct one way or the other), he at once
loathes it, and rejects it as monstrous and incredible from its manifest
injustice and cruelty; and Ido not believe that any earnest man, in a
sound and healthy state of mind, ever yet thoughtfully examined this
subject, with a sincere desire to learn the truth, who did not feel—
though he may not like to give expression to his feelings—that if such
were, indeed, the doctrine of the Bible, either that Bible is not the
Word of God; or, if it be, that God, instead of being a just and good
and merciful Creator, must be a vindictive, cruel, and unjust tyrant,
who delights, not in mercy and in seeing His creatures happy, but
who revels in their misery and wretchedness. It must necessarily
create a burning sense of wrong and injustice in his breast against his
Maker, and ultimately drive him, as it has already driven thousands,
into infidelity and atheism. Would not such an one be likely
to argue in this way?—“Here I am, a poor weak creature of
clay, made by God, and placed in this lower world without my
own will and consent, inheriting from my parents, and without
any fault of my own, a sinful and corrupt nature, which inevitably
leads me into the commission of sins against God, for which I am
responsible to Him. My life here is a very short one—a few
years at most of weakness and error, of sorrows and trials, which,
compared to eternity, is infinitely less than one single drop of water
to the boundless ocean—a mere speck of time in the everlasting ages.
If, therefore, I were even the most guilty and depraved creature
under the sun; even if every moment of my life, from the cradle to
the grave, had been spent in iniquity and vice and crime, and that life
were extended to a hundred years, I still feel that He would violate
every principle of justice and equity, were God to consign me to ever-
lasting and ceaseless torments of body and soul in hell, as only a just
and adequate punishment for so infinitesimally short a time spent in
guilt and sin on earth. My whole being revolts against it, and my
sense of what is eternally right within me, protests against a penalty
so utterly, so infinitely disproportioned to the offence.” Such,
brethren, would be the natural argument of even an open and per-
sistent violator of the laws of God and man—the vicious and the
reprobate.
But there is another very large, and very different class of men, whom
the Christian charity of the 19th century also consigns to an endless
life of torment in hell, equally with the wicked and depraved—those
who are not wicked and depraved, but good moral men and women,
unimpeachable in life and conversation, kind and just, and amiable,
exhibiting many excellent qualities and tainted with no vices ; but
who, alas ! give unmistakable evidence that they are living for this
world alone, that they are not the subjects of Divine grace, and do
not possess “ the one thing needful,” a saving faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and therefore cannot inherit the kingdom of God and eternal


life. What is to become of these ? Are they to be treated in the
same way as the former—as the atheist, the murderer, the seducer, the
robber, and the blasphemer ? Theology answers, with Tertullian and
Augustine, “Even so; they, equally with the vile and vicious, the
profligate and abandoned, whether their years be less than those of
manhood, or they reach the allotted threescore years and ten before
they die—they must also lie down in everlasting burnings, and be tor-
tured for ever and ever, because they have not believed in the Son of
God unto salvation.” Now, brethren, with reference to this latter
class of men, who are morally good but spiritually dead, I admit as
fully as any one, that they have in their present natural state of
alienation from God no hope of salvation ; but that if they die as
they are, moral, excellent, and blameless as their life may be, they
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven above. They will, they
must, taste of the “bitter pains of eternal death,” because God has
linked salvation to faith in His Son Jesus the Christ; and not having
that faith, they lack the spiritual and eternal life, the divine life, which
constitutes immortality, and without which salvation is impossible.
I believe as firmly as any of you believe, that ‘ ‘ except a man be born
again he cannot see the kingdom of God ;” that that spiritual change
of heart and disposition, the work of the Holy Spirit which the Lord
calls “conversion,” and the church “regeneration,” must be effected
in the soul of every man before he can be admitted into the family
of God, and be made a partaker of everlasting life. I believe all
this heartily, because I find it plainly and repeatedly written in
the pages of the Word—but here I stop. So far I have the warrant
of Scripture, and am safe. Further than this I dare not go;
beyond these bounds I may not travel for the purpose of declaring,
in opposition to Scripture, that God will not ‘ 1 give unto every man
according as his work shall be,” and that He will not “judge him
equitably according to his works,” and of consigning my brother-men
and brother-sinners to a horrible and eternal doom, which I feel in
my heart that they could not deserve, which God will not impose,
and which he declares in His word He will not inflict.
But now, my hearers, leaving generalities, suffer me to bring this
matter nearer home to you personally, so that you may feel its im-
portance as well as see it. There is not, probably, one of us here
present to-day who has not some one near and dear to us by blood or
friendship—father or mother, husband or wife, son or daughter,
brother or sister, lover or dear friend—who is living without God in
the world—outside the ark of salvation—to whom the gospel has not
been “the savour of life unto life;” on whose account, therefore, if
we be believing Christians, we must very often be anxious and
troubled, because we know that if he or she should thus die in
unbelief and alienation from God, his or her future punishment and
eternal death are hopelessly sealed. For the purpose of my argument,
I must select a special case by way of illustration, and I will take by
no means an uncommon one, but one which is often met with by
ministers of the gospel, in the exercise of their pastoral duties. Every-
one who has had to do with the cure of souls (men or women, lay or
clerical) will probably call to mind such a case in their own experience.


There is a young girl in the bloom of youth, a well-beloved child it
may be, of Christian parents, who have done their best to bring her up
in the fear and love of God, and to lead her to the cross of her Saviour,
that she might obtain salvation through His blood; but hitherto without
success. She has no vice, is very moral and correct in her life, kind,
amiable, and obedient to her parents, possesses many virtues, and
lacks only “ the one thing needful,” to make her all that her Christian
friends could desire. A saving knowledge of Christ is not hers, which
she evidences by her love of the world, with its follies and pleasures,
and her disrelish for the things of God, and indifference to His spiritual
ordinances and the society of the godly and pious. Suddenly the hand
of God strikes her down ; she falls sick from some fell disease, which,
in spite of prayers and tears, and the physician’s skill, in a few days
terminates her life, and she dies and “makesno sign.” Now, what is
to be the fate of that poor child of sixteen, eighteen, or twenty, who
has thus died in unbelief outside the ark of salvation ? What is to be
her everlasting destiny 1 How do you sincerely believe a perfectly
just and merciful God will deal with her 1 Only two alternatives are
left to you. You must either accept the common and pagan doctrine,
which is that of Tertullian and Augustine, borrowed from the Platonic
philosophy, which assures you that that poor child will be tormented
and tortured by God in hell-fire for ever and ever, as a punishment for
only a very few short years of folly and vanity ; or you must accept the
uncommon and Christian doctrine, which is that of the Son of God and
His apostles, that she will receive at God’s hands whatever punish-
ment she justly deserves for her wilful disobedience to his laws, which,
in the case of one who died so young, and could only have been guilty
of comparatively few sins and no crimes, may be stripes so few and so
gentle as hardly to be felt at all; and will then die and perish, fall
into an eternal sleep, pass away for ever into the land of forgetfulness,
where, if there be no hope, no joy, no bliss, no peace, and no life; at
least there will be no pain, no misery, no sorrow, no despair, and no sin.
Now, my brethren, which of these two modes of procedure on the
part of an infinitely just, and good, and holy God towards the sinning
and guilty creature of His hand, recommends itself to your unbiassed
judgment, and to your enlightened reason and understanding, as that
most in accordance with the knowledge which you have acquired from
His Word, of the attributes and character of the great Creator and
Governor of the Universe ? lam sure I may anticipate your response.
With one heart and one voice, you will declare for the last—the just
and righteous one; and when you have learned—as, blessed be God,
I have learned—that this is the only and uniform doctrine taught by
the Son of God, and by His Spirit through His apostles, concerning
the future destiny of the lost of the human race, you will be able to
throw off for ever the fearful incubus of a hateful and unchristian
dogma, which converts an infinitely just and merciful and loving God
and Father into a ruthless, cruel, and unjust despot, and to join with
me in the grateful strain of praise and adoration, ‘ £ Great and marvel-
lous are Thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are Thy ways,
Thou King of Saints.”
Brethren, the principal reason why this terrible doctrine of an


infinite penalty of pain, as a just punishment for finite disobedience,
does not present itself to the mind with that revolting hideousness
which it is calculated to inspire in our breasts, is the utter inability of
human thought to conceive, or human language to express, what
eternity really means, or what an endless life of agony really involves,
and in our finite state we never can grasp the vastness of the idea.
We might, I think, reverently and without presumption suppose,
judging from our own sense of abstract justice implanted in us by our
Creator, that the same period of time spent in ‘ ‘ weeping and wailing
and gnashing of teeth” in hell, “ where the worm dies not, and the
fire is not quenched,” which the unhappy sinner had spent in guilt and
unbelief, and rejection of Christ’s salvation upon earth, would be an
adequate punishment for his offences against God. But if this were
too much to hope or expect, I still think we might humbly believe
that a few decades or centuries added to that term, or at least a
thousand years more of agony, would suffice to satisfy the justice and
vindicate the righteousness of God to the whole universe. But, no!
The popular Christian theology will admit of no compromise, no
concession; ten thousand times ten thousand of ages, and cycles of
ages, will not suffice it; only an eternity of torment for every sinning
soul alike, young or old, virtuous or wicked, and nothing but
that, will meet the demands of its insatiable and cruel creed !
Men and brethren, can you wonder that infidelity abounds, when
this is held as a Christian truth? Can you be astonished that men
who think seriously on this sad subject (and their number is daily
increasing amongst us), and who really believe that this hateful
doctrine is actually taught in the Bible, should reject a book which
contains so foul a libel upon the name and character of God, and join
themselves to the ranks of those who deny it as a revelation, and scoff
at and deride it as an inspired message from heaven ?
I have now said, not by any means all that I have in my mind,
but all that I have time to say to-day (and I have kept you too
long already), and all that I mean to say, at present at least, on this
most important and painful subject—in this place. I well know, and
have keenly felt, the great responsibility which rests upon me as a
minister of Christ, in venturing to disturb and oppose one of the long-
cherished religious dogmas and generally received views of good, able,
and earnest men in the Christian Church; and I cannot doubt that
some will regard it as an act of presumption on the part of one, who
has no ecclesiastical authority or status, either as a bishop, a dean, an
archdeacon, or even as a “canon” of the church; but I have felt
myself impelled, by a power which I could no longer resist, to
unburden my mind of what I have long and firmly believed to be the
true doctrine of God our Saviour, as revealed in His Holy Word, on
this important point. Of course lam well aware that I must in a
measure suffer for my boldness. The cold looks, sore feelings, and scant
sympathy of many, are sure to follow such a step as that of publicly
combating a popular view of a religious dogma, and I must accept
the consequences of my act. Some blame me for not keeping my
views to myself, on the ground that to disseminate them will do no
good, but only unsettle men’s minds, and shake the faith of some in


the true doctrines of the gospel. Some will regard me as having taken
the first step towards infidelity and atheism, not seeing that I am, in
thus speaking, not the enemy but the friend of revealed truth. Others
again will not easily forgive me, for attempting to rob them of the
pleasure and comfort which, singularly enough, they seem to derive
from the belief, that 999 out of every 1000 of the human race, including
(not of course themselves, but perhaps some of their nearest and
dearest friends) will be tormented and tortured by God, their Creator,
in the fires of hell for ever and ever; whilst others conscientiously
think that whatever truth there may be in the views I hold, it is
unwise and dangerous to preach them, “because,” say they, “if you
once allow wicked men to believe, that the punishment in store for
them hereafter is not eternal torment, but only temporary suffering,
you remove one of the strongest deterrents to the commission of
crimethat is, if men are only that everlasting agony in
hell is not the lot of the lost, a flood of iniquity would cover
the land, and the laws of God and man would be trodden under
foot more audaciously and flagrantly than ever. With regard to
the last objection, I can only say that it is quite contrary to fact
that wicked men think of eternal punishment at all, until perhaps
after they have committed a crime, and that they are precisely
the class of men who do not believe it; and the experience of 1400
years clearly proves, that the persistent preaching of the doctrine of
eternal torment does not deter men from sin, nor in any way make the
world better as a whole, nor has it ever yet brought a guilty soul to
the cross of Christ. Depend upon it, if God’s love to man, manifested
in the gift of His dear Son to die for him, and redeem him from
guilt, and sin, and condemnation, will not lead him to repentance, and
faith, and salvation, the terrors of an endless hell never will. More-
over, we have the daily experience before our eyes of men who are
rejecting the Bible as divine truth, solely because they have been
taught to believe that it contains a doctrine so hateful and revolting
to their sense of justice, and which they feel to be utterly unworthy
of an infinitely just and merciful God.
My justification, therefore, for preaching against it is threefold—
-Ist. To discharge my conscience before God, and to act honestly in
His sight and yours, in not disguising my sentiments and convictions
of the truth, whether they are called orthodox or not.
2nd. To vindicate the character of God before men, as an infinitely
just, and good, and merciful Being, against the charges of injustice,
cruelty, and wrong, which such a terrible and dishonouring doctrine
involves.
3rd. To do as much as in me lies, to stem the tide of infidelity, by
showing my brother-men. that the dogma which they have always
believed to be taught in Holy Scripture, and on account of which so
many are rejecting it as God’s Word, is not to be found there at all,
but is a cunningly devised invention of man, borrowed from the pagan
philosophy; and hence I may, peradventure, in some instances, at
least, be the means in God’s hands of leading them back to study
that Book with reverence and love, and to accept it as the true and
only revelation of God’s will to man —so that they may be enabled,


heart and soul, to join the great body of Christ’s Church, in praising
Him as a God of justice and mercy from this time forth for evermore;
and thus, at the last, be found amongst those who will join in the chorus
of saints who surround the throne of the Eternal, to sing the song of
Moses and of the Lamb, slain for man’s sin from the foundation of the
world —‘ ‘ Great and glorious are Thy works, Lord God Almighty ;
just and true are Thy ways, Thou King of Saints,”
May God forgive me if I have not preached His truth in this matter,
and may He accept and bless the word spoken, if it be according to
His Divine will, for Christ’s sake. Amen.
“I permit the Pope to make articles of faith for himself and his
faithful—such as, that the soul is immortal, with all those monstrous
opinions to be found in the Roman decretals. ” — Martin Luther.
“ To the Christian, indeed, all this doubt would be instantly removed
if he found that the immortality of the soul was revealed in the Word
of God. In fact, no such doctrine is revealed to us. The Christian’s
hope, as founded in the promises contained in the Gospel, is the
resurrection of the body.”— Archbishop WhateiAy.
‘ ‘ That the soul is naturally immortal, is contradicted by Scripture,
which makes our immortality a gift dependent on the giver.” —Richard
Watson.
“The doctrine of the immortality of the soul, and the name, are
alike unknown to the entire Bible .”— Olshausen.
“If ‘ eternal death’ means final death—death without any revival
—we can understand what is meant by ‘ death being the last enemy
destroyed ,’ viz., that none henceforth are to be subjected to it. But if
‘death’ be understood to mean everlasting life in misery, then it
would appear that death is never to be destroyed at all, since, although
no one should be henceforth sentenced to it, it would still be going on
as a continual infliction for ever. On the whole, therefore, I think
we are not warranted in concluding so positively concerning this
question (as some have done) as to make it a point of Christian faith,
to interpret figuratively, and not literally, “death” and “destruction,”
spoken of in Scripture as the doom of the condemned, and to insist
on the belief that they are to be kept alive for ever,” —Archbishop
Whatel^ y’s Future State.


*
I
• i
MASON, FIRTH, AND M'CUTCHEON,
PRINTERS,
FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.
