

CHRISTIAN
MISSIONS.
[NEW GUINEA']
BY THE
Rev: C Stuart Ross.
THOS. GEORGE [?] CO. OCTAGON DUNEDIN.




CHRISTIAN MI SSIONS
GUINEA.
BOERA: PI RTS STATION IN NEW GUINEA.
BN THE
REV. C. STUART ROSS.
DxrasTEiXJiasr:
MILLS, DICK & CO., PRINTERS, &c„ STAFFORD STREET.




Christian Missions
NEW GUINEA.
CHAPTER I.
CHRIST CARES FOR THIS HEATHEN.
ip y e i all the world, and preach the
® 0S P ©'very creature/' was the com-
Church's Head. Wherever sinners
can be found preach to them the Gospel
of Ohi’ist in all the fulness of its blessed
truth, and with all the wonders of its redeeming love
—offer them, in the name of Christ, and as ambassadors
for Him, eternal redemption through His blood. Those
are the terms of the commission, and if the Gospel has
not been preached to every one over all the earth, and
through all time, it is just because the successors of
the first heralds of the Cross and those who took up
the work after them in the ages that followed, were
not faithful to their trust, and responsive to the


Divine command. Here and there the page of early
Church History is luminous with some thrilling story
of noble and heroic missionary effort. Oolumba
and his Ouldeea carry the light of saving truth into
the darkness of the Druids* strongholds. Ninian, the
Cumberland Prince., preaches the Gospel to his
benighted countrymen. Boniface crosses the sea from
England with a great longing in his heart for the
conversion of the Pagan Germans. Onthbert, the
Apostle of the Lowlands, goes out into remote villages
in the wild mountains, recking nothing of cold and
hunger and manifold privations, in his zeal to bring
the people to a knowledge of the truth. And others,
their hearts all aglow with the fi.ro of Divine love,
force their way through innumerable obstacles, into
every region and country of Europe, bolding aloft in
their hands the lighted torch of saving truth. But
in the splendid triumphs of the Christian Church in
the Roman Empire, and in the boundless prosperity
and outward tranquillity which succeeded the tempes-
tuous times through which she had passed, the bright-
ness of her faith became obscured, and she lost that
singleness of eye to the Redeemer’s glory, and that
entireness of devotion to His service which lie at the
root of all true self-sacrifice, and constitute the ground-
work of all right impulse and successful enterprise on
the field of Christian missions. The Reformation came,
and the Roman Catholic Church, in order to recover


lost ground and to make up for defections in Europe,
sent forth her missionaries into heathen lands, some of
whom, like Francis Xavier, did a work which has never
died; and they will always hold an honoured place in
human records for their self-sacrificing toils in spread-
ing the knowledge of Jesus 5 name.
The religions awakening which stirred the slum-
bering Churches towards the close of last century, gave
a powerful impulse to Christie,n missions, which they
have never ceased to feel. A mighty longing grew up
in the hearts of many for the conversion of the tribes
and nations which were lying in spiritual darkness and
in ignorance of Christ, and societies sprang up on all
sides, which planted mission stations in dark centres
of the heathen world from which the savour of truth,
the leavening influences of the Word, went forth
all abroad.
A true missionary spirit is of incalculable advantage
to a congregation, and has an immense practical bear-
ing upon personal Christian life. There is nothing
that affords a clearer indication of a Church's vitality,
and of the vigour of its faith, than the manifestation of
a fervid interest in ihe salvation of the lost. The more
wo realise our own sin and misery, and the gracious
provision which the Gospel makes for the supply of all
our wants, the deeper will be our longings, and the
more energetic our endeavours to make others parta-
kers of our spiritual joy. When Divine truth becomes


a burning fire in the heart, and passes on from one to
another, kindling everywhere a sacred purpose of
consecration to the Lord, and a holy enthusiasm in
helping onward His kingdom, then we shall see the
heathen casting away for ever their idols, and adoring
the living and true God.
CHAPTER II.
NEW GUINEA.
■WAY up to the north of Australia,, some
twenty miles beyond the outermost fron-
, o tier of Queensland, lies New Guinea, the
largest island in the world. It is nearly
1,400 miles in length, and some 400 miles
across in its broadest part. It and the
adjacent Australian Continent would seem to have
been, at some far back period of the world’s history,
rent asunder by some violent convulsion of nature.
They are now separated from each other by Torres
Straits which are thickly studded with islands and
sand-banks, the busy scene of the pearl fisheries which
have recently developed into an'important industry.
“ The water is everywhere so shallow that it naturally
suggests a recent irruption of sea over very low land.
One reef connects both, so that crossing the Straits is


like sailing across a vast; lagoon.”* There you will find
tropical forests of marvellous beauty, where vegetation
wantons luxuriantly in a thousand forma of exquisite
loveliness. Lofty mountain ranges, the birth-home of
innumerable rivers, hide their summits amid mists and
snows. The Owen Stanley range which, forty miles
back from the seaboard, rises to a height of some
13,205 feet —nearly equal in altitude to our own Mount
Cook—is said to have a swarming population dwelling
in villages built on its ridges and spin's; and further
back than that there is a still loftier range which no
European has yet explored. The countless streams
which, in the rainy season, rush down the gorges and
valleys from those stupendous heights flood the low-
hmds and turn many of them into a vast morass, the
fertile cause of the deadly fevers which make havoc of
the health of the Christian teachers who have gone
there from other isles. The climate of the south-
eastern coast, which is higher than the other side, is
comparatively healthy, from the wholesome influences
which the trade-winds exert upon it. The country is
described as generally fertile, abounding with streams
and inland lagoons, which swarm with ducks, and are
the homo of alligators, of which the natives stand in
constant dread. There seem to bo two distinct races
inhabiting the island, the Malayan and the Papuan ;
* Life in the Southern isles.


which differ from one another in. colour and habits, and
in the way in which they treat their women. The
houses of the coast-tribes are erected on lofty piles,
provided at each gable with a verandah and a ladder.
They are thus secured against unwelcome visits from
alligators, and from reptiles of a venomous kind, as well
as from discomfort and loss in times of flood. In the
wet season, communication with their plantations and
with adjoining villages, is maintained by means of
their canoes.
The missionaries who have laboured there have
seen mournful illustrations of all the horrors of a
revolting heathenism. There the savages sit, or used
to sit, in the shade of their cocoa-nut groves, making
bows and poisoned arrows and spears, and preparing
themselves for a murderous attack on some village
which was slumbering in fancied security not very far
away, where they hope to catch hapless victims for
their cannibal feasts. Breaking their captives' arms
and legs, they cast them with horrible inhumanity
into their canoes, and leave them there in their bleed-
ing agonies till they return home from their barbarous
raid.* “ Night is sometimes made hideous by the
howling of wild beasts, the beating of drams, and the
anguished shrieks of the victims of pitiless cruelty,
and of horrid last. 3 ’j' The tribes ai>e engaged in inces-
* Calwcr Missionsblatt. t Rev. 8. McFarlanc,


Rant feuds and wars. They adorn themselves with
feathers, and paint their bodies with curious devices,
and their houses are decorated in ghastly style with
human skulls and bones. It was the custom on some
of die islands of the Straits, before Christianity got a
footing on them, to rear only two children in every
family. All over that number were strangled or
buried alive by the cruel parents as soon as they
were born.
The Rev. James Chalmers narrowly escaped with
his life on his first visit to the Aroma district. In
company with a teacher and a Loyalty Islander, lie
was on his way back to Kerepunn. A crowd of
Natives gathered about them, men and women, armed
with spears and clubs. The teacher heard some words
which left no doubt in his mind that they meant to
murder the mission party. “ I carried a satchel/’ says
Mr. Chalmers, “ which had beads and hoop-iron in it j
they tried to get it. I was in front, between two men
with clubs, who kept tolling mo I was a bad man. I
bold their hands, and kept them so that they could not
use their clubs. They tried hard to wrest his fowling-
piece from the Loyalty Islander. They tried to trip
us, they jostled us. On we wont. Two men, when
near the village came close to my back with largo
wooden clubs, which were taken from them by two
women, who ran off to the village. Things looked
black, and each of us prayed in silence to Him who


rules over the heathen. Soon a man came rushing
along, seized the club and tools: it from the man on my
left, and threw it into the sea. He tried to do the
same with the one on my right, hub did not succeed.
An old chief, whom we saw on our way up, came
hurriedly along to meet us, calling out c Mine is the
peace! What have these foreigners done that you
want to kill them V He took the teacher’s hand, and
another chief walked close behind me. We got on
board our boat, set sails and away for Kerepunn.
Before changing our clothes, we thanked God, our
Bather, for his protection and care over us. We felt
He alone did all; unsettled their thoughts as to who
first, where, and when, and it was He who gave ns
friends.”
A man and his wife arranged to go out and hunt
kangaroos, and told their son, a boy ten years old, to
remain at home and look after the house. Soon after
they went away, two of his young companions came
and asked him to go with them to the hunt, and he
went. They travelled for about an hour together into
the forest, and then both his companions, at a sign
agreed upon, killed him with their clubs, and cast his
body into the hush.
The parents of the dead boy came homo and asked
after their son. No one had seen him. His murderers
gaily danced and laughed while tho mother wept.
After the night had been spout in barbarous revels,


they told the sorrowing parents where the body of
their boy would be found. And why did they kill
him ? Because they wished to be regarded as men.
They thought it a praiseworthy and heroic act to shed
the blood of the unsuspecting child.*
CHAPTER III.
HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE MISSION.
®tHp W u ™ ea; sometimes called Papua, was
f slwMlg discovered by a Portuguese navigator,
some three centuries and a-lialf ago. It
J. ./W. was visited by a Spaniard later on, who
gave it the name of Isla del Oro, or Isle
of Gold, in the belief that the precious metal abounded
there. Our own Captain Cook touched at the south-
western coast in 1770; and just a century after that,
the condition of its heathen population awakened an
interest in the London Missionary Society, which sent
out Messrs. Murray and McParlane, as missionary
pioneers to break up ground, and to establish stations
in 1871. Eight Native teachers from the Loyalty
Islands were located on some of the islands in the
Straits, and in the following year (1872,) the arrival
* Misslonsblatt fi’ir Kinder,


of thirteen additional Native teachers and their wives,
added greatly to the strength and efficiency of the
Mission. Among them were Piri and his wife, from
Rarotonga, who had devoted themselves to the work
in New Guinea. Piri, who is a well built man, head
and shoulders above the Natives at Mannmatm, was
the first to leave the boat. lie happened to have on a
red checked flannel shirt, and when the crowd at the
river side caught sight of him they fled in terror at his
approach. But when Piri talked kindly to them and
gently assured them that their visitors wore only men
like themselves, and servants of the living God, they
came hack, one by one, and eventually carried the
teachers' goods to the Council-house, which had been
set apart by the chiefs for their use. In the evening,
the Natives informed Piri that it was his extraordinary
shin (shirt) which had frightened them and made them
flee at his approach.*
Piri is stationed at Boei’a, a well built village,
clean and straight, which lies some fifteen miles to the
west of Anuapata. It consists of throe rows of houses,
which are good for New Guinea, and as everywhere
else in that country, are built on stakes ten or
twelve feet high, some of them in and some of them
out of the sea. It contains about a thousand inhabi-
tants.
* Life in the Southern Isles.


In 1874 the Rev. W. G. Lawes joined the Mission
as Superintendent of the Malayan or Eastern branch,
with Port Moresby as his centre of operations; and
four years later on, a noble'contribution to the mission
cause was made by the native churches of Raiatoa and
Rarotonga, which sent twenty additional teachers to
the Mow Guinea field. And now difficulties and
disasters began to gather and thicken around the
heroic band that laboured there. The malarious
climate and the want of proper food seriously affected
their health, and some of them were removed by death,
while others foil victims to the treachery of those whom
they sought to evangelise.
In July, 1877, the Rev. James Chalmers arrived here
from Rarotonga (whore he had been labouring for some
ton years), on his way to join the New Guinea Mission.
His addresses in some of the Dunedin Churches and at
Anderson's Bay, wore listened to with intense delight;
and in the following mouth a groat public meeting was
hold in the Temperance Hall to bid him and Ins wife
God-speed in their heroic and arduous enterprise. The
building was crowded in every part, and those who
were privileged to be present then will never forget
the grand enthusiasm of that great audience. After
listening to the eloquent and fervid address which Mr,
Ohahuors gave, James Mackerras, Esq., in behalf of
three ’Dunedin merchants, announced that they would
take upon themselves the support of a Native teacher


in New Guinea for at least three years, and presented
to Mr. Chalmers £ls, the first year’s salary, in advance.
The Congregational Church Sabbath School, under the
superintendence of Mr. Brown, engaged to give im-
portant and substantial help to the Mission; and Mr.
William Somerville, the superintendent of the Ander-
son's Bay Sabbath School, with the hearty support of
all the teachers, arranged to contribute to the salary of
Piri, the Earotongan, who has been labouring with so
much heart and zeal for many years in that heathen
land. A member of the Church at Anderson's Bay,
generously donated the sum of £ls to help on the New
Guinea Mission work ; and when an appeal was made
by Mr. Chalmers, later on, for money to purchase a
boat for the use of the teachers there, mainly through
the interest and the exertions of Mr. Brown, of the
Congregational Sabbath School, the full sum required
was speedily contributed and remitted to its destina-
tion. Then after much anxiety and vicissitude in the
work, came tidings of the. irreparable loss which our
beloved brother had sustained, Mrs. Chalmers had
remained at her husband's side—a noble helpmeet to
him in the labours to which he had put his hand—until
failing health compelled her to seek change in some
more healthful and bracing climate. She went to
Sydney, but it was too late, nature's forces were too
far spent, and there she fell asleep in Jesus. And now
with singular devotion and zeal the missionary labours


on, grappling with, difficulties of no ordinary kind,
rendering important services to science by the publica-
tion of his journals, which are brimful .of sagacious
observations on the habits and customs of the people,
and on the physical features and products of the land;
but above all through his imperturbable courage and
Christian manliness advancing the kingdom of
Christ, and carrying material comforts and spiritual
blessings of immeasurable worth, to those poor be-
nighted races who are sunk so low and so bemired
with sin.
CHAPTER IV.
PROGRESS MADE.
preaching of the Gospel., the daily exhi-
-1 bition before the eyes of the heathen of a
pure and unselfish Christian life, the kind-
ness of a lowly, sympathetic helping love,
■which stoops to instruct and bless, cannot
fail to make a favourable impression on those savage
tribes. They cannot resist the goodness that makes
such sacrifices, and faces such perils to save them.
The truth will conquer. The full day of the meridian
splendour of Gospel light will shine on New Guinea.
That will be the glorious harvest from the present


sowing of toils and tears, and holy martyr-blood.
Wonderful are the conquests already made there by
the missionaries, supported by the teachers from the
isles, which have been already evangelised. Stations
have been planted, and, in some places, churches
erected, which are centres of Christian influence to all
the villages round about ; and school-books, catechisms,
and portions of Holy Scripture, have been translated
into the languages of various tribes.
The Murray Islanders long ago burnt their idols,
built a Council-house, established laws, and emerged
from barbarism into civilised and municipal life. The
Saibai Islanders, who had come under the power of
Gospel truth, were once visited by another tribe with
whom they had always been at deadly fend. They
refused to fight with them, and offered then# gifts to
induce them to go peaceably away. When, however,
they plundered their gardens and carried off the spoil,
they pursued after them, not to kill them, but only to
recover their food. When they had got it, they called
after the heathen, “ Hear, you people 1 Were we nob
Christiana, we would have killed you, but we have
become Christians, and our teacher says to us that we
should do good to those who injure us. ,! * The prayer
now ascends from some hearts which wore once very
cruel and hard, " 0 God, our hearts are dark, have
* Das Blend tier heUlcn.


Thou pity upon;us, and give us light!” A, cry for
teachers'comes to the missionaries from many of the
chiefs, and it is a saying of the Natives, " Where
teacher dwells, murders gradually cease.”
Piri says, in one of his letters to the Anderson's
Bay Sabbath, School, “ I teach the children in the
Word of God. Some of them know how to read,
others can put letters together and form words, and
others know only their letters. Some parents will not
allow, their children to come lest they might know the
Word of God. When they go to plant food they take
them with them, and they do the same whoir they go
fishing, or on any long journey. Some do really wish
to come to school, but their pai’ents object.”
The Rev. James Chalmers writes, " We are busy
getting wood for church-building, and hope to have a
good house up very soon. Assisted by two teachers
and two Natives, we are translating Matthew. I hope
to be able to keep at it until we have got to the end of
Mark. At odd times the teachers have translated
Catechisms, which I am revising, and with new hymns
may soon be able to send to press. I hope in opening
the new church to baptise a few Natives who are now
in class, and whose progress is cheering. I feel confi-
dent we have not much longer to wait j the wall gives
way and we must enter in.”
And, writing quite recently from Dilend, Hall
Sound, Mr. Chalmers says, "The Natives are all out


to-day cutting wood for a house. This is really the
only good harbour in all the Gulf, after leaving Port
Moresby. Some years ago we had a station on Yule
Island, just opposite; but two white men having been
murdered near here, the teacher was withdrawn, and
since then nothing has been done. Our hope is to
have stations here, Maiva, Kevai, Jokea, and Motumotu,
as soon as we can possibly get teachers j and at Naara,
Cape Suckling, where my friendly Queen is. The
Hood Bay massacre was a terrible blow to us, but, I
hope, not upsetting or disastrous. Light will arise in
the darkness, and this cruel massacre will not be for-
gotten or unblessed. At Kerepunu and Hula they beg
for teachers to supply the place of the murdered ones.
We have written to the various Institutions of the
South Seas, and hope soon to receive a number. God
help us to live out our little day for His praise and
glory! In all kinds of work abundant; if only Christ
is glorified, all is well.”


CHAPTER V.
SADARKA'S STORY AND ITS MORAL.
*Si Ar)ARAKA was a native pastor and evan-
gelist in Mangaia., and Ire told the people
rafsr® the following ancient story, to show how
,I 4 V the Gods once punished the sin of selfiah-
ness : —“Two men went fishing on the reef,
and, after many hours, both took up their
fishing-tackle and baskets to return home. One of the
men had been quite successful, and had a full basket.
The other, who had not obtained any, asked his fortu-
nate friend to give him a fish. The reply was, 'No :
get some yourself ; I will not part with mine.’ So
saying, he shouldered his heavy basket and marched
away. The other man walked behind, with his empty
basket. Now there was a small hole in the bottom of
the basket of the fortunate fisherman, but he was not
aware of it. Presently a fish fell through quite un-
known to its owner. This god-send was eagerly picked
up by the man behind, and put into his basket. Ere
long another fish fell through, and another, and
another. All these were gathered by the man follow-
ing. The hole in the bottom of the basket was
continually enlarging, so that the larger fish shared the
fate of the smaller ones. At length all the fish had


slipped away, and still the selfish man remained
ignorant of his loss. On reaching his home, he threw
down his basket before his wife, and desired her to
cook the fish. Thinking herself mocked, she bitterly
reproached her husband for bringing home an empty
basket. At this moment his eyes were opened, and
too late he discovered that he had lost all through
refusing to pity him who had none.”
“ Beware! said Sadaraka, lest we, who have our
baskets filled with Gospel privileges, should incur the
anger of God through failing to pity those who are
still in heathen darknesg, so that eventually f the first
shall be last, and the last first, 5 It is meet that the
heathen should he fellow-heirs with us of the grace of
life. Once more, let us watch carefully against little
sins. Beware of falling off in prayer and reading of
the Bible. Tbe little hole at the bottom of the basket,
because it was unnoticed, went on increasing until the
unhappy man had lost all. 5 ’
That was a very simple and practical sermon; and
the story of the fish is an apt illustration of that Word
of Scripture, “ There is that withholdeth more than is
meet, and it tendeth to poverty. 5 ’ I commend it to
your earnest consideration with the prayer that the
Lord may deliver us all from a contracted, and narrow,
and selfish soul.
Do the interests of the heathen lie very close to
your heart, my brother ? Or are you indifferent


whether they be brought into the kingdom o£ God or
not ? Indifference on this subject may arise either
from ignorance of obvious Christian duty, or from an
appalling condition of spiritual death. If it be due to
the latter cause, I do not say that it ia your funda-
mental and primary duty to contribute of your means
to our mission funds j there ia a duty that lies. nearer
to you than that, that much more deeply concerns you
than that; —it is to receive the Gospel message your-
self, and to be personally reconciled to God. When
I lie world ia dislodged from the heart, and the love of
Christ takes the room of the love of earthly things,
you will he constrained to serve him with all your
might, and you will contribute in all the ways which
may be open to you, to the spreading abroad in the
world of the knowledge of his blessed name. Those
who have any sense of obligation to Jesus, whose bands
are loosed, and whose sins are taken away, who have a
higher and brighter outlook than others aboutthem who
are animated by the sordid spirit and walking on the
low lying level of mere woi'ldly life, —those who have a
new name written upon them which gives them right
to an inheritance in our Father’s house,—oh, they
cannot but love the heathen for Jesus’ sake, and gene-
rously will they give out of the Lord’s own abundant
gifts to them, for the extension of His kingdom, and
for the promotion of His glory in the dai’k 'places of
the earth.


The sum .contributed by the whole Church of Otago,
during the past year, for missions, did not come up to
£I,OO0 —scarcely a twenty-fourth part of the Church’s
entire revenue from all sources. That fact is not
creditable to us. We should do better than that. Let
us pray for a mission revival in Otago. Let us pray
that Divine truth may become to us a very real and
unutterably precious thing,—that it may become a
burning fire in our hearts, constraining us to speak and
act, and to multiply our efforts a hundredfold for the
advancement of the Holy Redeemer’s cause. Then
shall the Maoris, and the Chinese, and the inhabitants
of New Hebrides, and of New Guinea, walk in the
light of the truth, and lift up their voices in songs of
praise unto our God.
With joy and peace shall then be led
The glad converted lands;
The lofty mountains then shall sing,
The forests clap their hands.
Where briers grew ’midst barren wilds,
Shall firs and myrtles spring ;
And Nature, through its utmost bounds,
Eternal praises sing.
Mrs.' Lawrie, wife of the missionary at Aneityum,
in a letter addressed to Mrs. Edmonds, Anderson’s
Bay, says, <r We have just received the Pilgrim’s
Progress, the Hymn Book, and the Shorter Catechism.
These the Natives have paid for; also the whole Bible


in their own language. Last year they sent l,loolbs.
of arrowroot as a missionary contribution to the Foreign
Mission Fund of the Free Church of Scotland. This
year they have heartily agreed to prepare and send
Home the whole crop of arrowroot (which will be much
larger than it was last year’), to aid in sending a mis-
sionary to soma of the heathen islands of this group.
The great want of this Mission is men,— Christian men
and women, who are willing to leave all and follow
Christ, and go forward bravely and cheerfully in the
name and strength of our great Lord and Master, and
do battle in these dark places of the earth against the
armies of Satan.” May the Lord of the harvest send
forth many labourers into His field! May He put it
into the hearts of many to say, (< Here am I, send me 1”
Oh, Christian parents, keep the misery and the
needs of the heathen much before the minds of your
little ones. Cultivate in them the grace of giving to
the Lord. Train them to little acts of self-denial ; to
cheerful sacrifice of their own desires and pleasures for
those who are less highly privileged than themselves,
and who are all astray from the Good Shepherd's fold ;
and pray, oh, pray for those who are far away in
heathen lands, labouring amid perils and discourage-
ments of no ordinary kind, for the elevation of the
fallen, and for the salvation of the lost.
Can wo, whoso souls aro lighted
With wisdom from on high,


Can we to men benighted
The lamp of life deny ?
Salvation ! 0 salvation !
The joyful sound proclaim,
Till each remotest nation
Has learned Messiah’s name.
Waft, waft, ye winds, His story ;
And you, ye waters, foil ;
Till; like a sea of glory,
It spreads from pole to pole 1
Till o’er our ransomed nature,
The Lamb for sinners slain,
Bedeemer, King, Creator.
In bliss returns to reign.
MILLS, DICK & GO., PRINTERS, &c., STAFFORD STREET.


