

Tpem- t2.tr uhgious. pahs
AN ADD P V E S S
THE
REV. THOMAS JONES,
CHAIRMAN OF THE
CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION OF VICTORIA.
1878-79.
MELBOURNE:
PUBLISHED FOR THE PROPRIETORS OF THE “VICTORIAN INDEPENDENT ”
BY STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




AN ADD P V E S S
THE
REV. THOMAS JONES,
CHAIRMAN OF THE
CONGREGATIONAL UNION AND MISSION OF VICTORIA.
1878-79.
MELBOURNE:
PUBLISHED FOR THE PROPRIETORS OF THE “VICTORIAN INDEPENDENT
BY STILLWELL AND CO., COLLINS STREET EAST.




Cairgregatiomil Habit anti ||ltssion
OF VICTORIA.
THE opening meeting was held in the Collins-street Church,
on Monday, October 14th.
The Rev. Thomas Jones, as Chairman of the Union, de-
livered the following address, a shorthand report of which has
been specially obtained for the Victorian Independent : —
I will speak, he said, of
CHRISTIAN ENTHUSIASM.
■Our Churches are well formed bodies, perfect after their fashion,
and I am not aware that they need any constitutional change.
As mere organised bodies they are comely enough, and they
are not without some degree of life and strength. They work
easily, quietly, philosophically, and cautiously, like a man
of seventy years of age, who is careful in all his move-
ments, and afraid of doing too much. But you must excuse
me, when I say that you are wanting in the strength, and
vigour, and energy, of a young man of twenty-five. You are
■old before your time.
THE TIME-SPIRIT,
■or spirit of the time, acts upon the Churches and their religion
dike a refrigerator. Under its influence the doctrines of religion
lose their warmth, the expanding emotions of the Churches are
■cooled and condensed, and our institutions too often resemble the
•chariots of Pharaoh in the Red Sea, which moved “ heavily.”
I have mentioned the “ Time-Spirit,” and I wish the reporters
to take down my words bn this subject as accurately as possible,
because I am in danger on both sides. I wish to speak with
perfect fairness of the Spirit of the Time in which we live, and


as it appears here in Victoria. The Latin deity Janus is repre-
sented with two faces, looking in different directions. It is an
apt symbol of the genius or spirit of the present time. I will
try to paint those faces to you. The first is that of Super-
stition. It looks back into mediaeval times with a longing,
yearning desire to reproduce in the nineteenth century the re-
ligious life and customs of those distant ages. I confess freely
—perhaps you may not all sympathise with me—that to me
this face of Superstition is not beautiful. It is old, haggard,
withered, wrinkled, lean, mean, and hungry (laughter and ap-
plause), and it is wonderfully wanting in clear young in-
telligence, and in the understanding of the present age.
I have no desire to say one hard word about any
human being on the face of this earth, but this haggard
Superstition has wandered down by mistake into the nine-
teenth century. Avaunt! Go back to thine own haunts ! The
second face in this time-spirit—in this Janus of oui’s —is that
of Science, which is turned towards the future. It looks ex-
pectant, as if anticipating some glorious new apocalypse. It is.
young and ruddy, brave, and daring. This youthful face
of Science is to me very beautiful, and I delight to gaze-
upon it. Yet in the face of the Science of Melbourne and of
the nineteenth century throughout Christendom —in that face
which I am clumsily trying to describe—there is an unutterable
sorrow, a hesitancy and a doubt. It looks into the future, but
there is a want of confidence. The greatest authors in
Europe are the most sorrowful. The words of the greatest
writer in Europe to-day sob with sorrow. But let me-
put aside the faces of Janus, and speak of the men whose
teachings at the present time cause so much alarm to some
Christian people. These men are not content with the mere-
appearances of things. They are trying earnestly to work their
way into the mystic work-room of Nature, to enter into the-
“ Holy of Holies ” of the material world, to understand how
nature’s work is done. Their desire for knowledge is intense,
and they are inspired by a noble earnestness to accomplish


their purpose. They are open-minded and fair, ready to
modify and correct the opinions they have formed when new
discoveries prove that these opinions are doubtful or incorrect.
Thirsting for knowledge with a burning thirst, they welcome
new light from whatever quarter it may come, and new light is
continually bursting in upon them. May we not imitate them
in this respect ? Has all the light that is in God’s
Holy Bible, in the wonderful human consciousness, and in
the tragic history of the nations who have lived upon this earth
been exhausted ? Is there nothing new 1 Has the oracle of
eternal truth said the last word ? Ministers of the Gospel, are
we sure we are always acting wisely when rejecting new light?
For my own part I will keep all the windows of my spirit right
open. I will receive every new light from science, history,
speculative philosophy, theology, or from whatever quarter it
may come. (Applause). Believe me, friends, there is more
light in the Bible than we have yet seen ; there is more
light in the human heart than we have seen; there is more
light in the history of the Church of Christ than we have seen ;
and the sooner we are ready as Churches to receive the new
light the better will it be for us and for this colony. (Ap-
plause.) We are immensely indebted to the great men of
science of former ages and of the present time, because the
humane and beneficent civilisation under which we live is
largely owing to their labours. Having made these statements,
as I was bound to do in order to be just and truthful, I must
add, and I do it with profound sorrow, that many of the leading
men of science of to-day—men of immense ability, men of
splendid education and culture, able teachers, the waves of
whose influence play round the whole globe, are determined
doubters with regard to the truth of the Gospel, the existence
of a personal God, and the future life of the human spirit.
My subject is “ Christian Enthusiasm.” Gentlemen of the
Independent Churches, and of the Baptist and Presbyterian
Churches here, we are not the children of captivity. You know
we are the children of liberty and of light. Our fathers


welcomed every new thought, from whatever direction it came.
(Applause.) I now come to my subject. We need renewed,,
reverend, determined, calm and thorough enthusiasm, to
meet the double-faced Janus of the age in which we live. But
let me distinguish between things that differ, and pray do not
judge me until I have finished.
CHRISTIAN ENTHUSIASM EXPLAINED,
The enthusiasm I speak of does not mean fanaticism in any
of its ugly forms. That can answer no purpose except to
bring the Churches and their religion into contempt in.
the sight of all thoughtful and cultured people. By all means
let us avoid fanaticism, and possess our souls in patience. Let
our Churches keep their minds sound and rational, for assuredly
in our day we need all the good strong sense we can command.
Neither is the enthusiasm I am speaking of by any means
simple revivalism. You may be certain that artificial, spas-
modic, convulsive efforts will not accomplish the purpose we
have in view. They may galvanise a Church, or a village,
or a city into the semblance of spiritual life for a season ;
but they are wanting in continuance and regularity, and
oftentimes in wisdom, and when they cease, a cold
spiritual depression remains. (Applause.) The enthusiasm
I speak of is quite a different thing. Turn up your best
dictionaries, and you will find that the word means inspiration
hy a superhuman power. You have seen—at least I have—a
dull, heavy, smoky, melancholy fire, just able to send forth
smoke and nothing more. It was a dismal object to contem-
plate, and you grew cold in looking at it. That is Indifference
—a Church having a name to live, but is dead. I have also
seen another kind of fire, sending forth wild hissing flames,,
and showers of red sparks which threatened to consume the
whole neighbourhood. That is Fanaticism. There is a third
kind of fire, which I have often seen. It has no black-
ness, no sparks, no hissing flames. It is a calm, deter-
mined, white heat. I have seen it melt the hard iron ore,.


and cause it to stream forth like rivers of water at the
breaking up of a long frost. That is the enthusiasm we
need—not a sleepy indifference, not a wild hissing fanaticism,
not the blue fire, but the white heat, the fire that burned
in the hearts of the Hebrew prophets—the holy passion that
constrained the Apostles —the noble feeling that caused the
first Christians to die for the faith, and to wrap around them
the burning robes of martyrdom with a glad smile, —the
“ Enthusiasm of Humanity ” which led the’Saviour of the world
to embrace the cruel cross. This is what our Churches want;
this is what our ministers need. (Applause.)
THE OBJECT OF CHRISTIAN ENTHUSIASM.
But you ask me what is the object of this enthusiasm ? Well,
I will not answer the question in the usual way. I will
answer in the spirit of the Bible. For what are we to be
enthusiastic 1 ? I call upon you educated men, you writers, you
ministers, you professional men, you politicians, to be enthu-
siastic—for what I —for setting up the Kingdom of God in
Victoria, (Applause.) What is that Kingdom? It means
knowledge, it means education, it means intelligence, and
justice, and righteousness, and generosity; magnanimity in
religion, in the press, and in commerce; it means love, and
joy and hope ; and blessedness for all the people of this colony.
I am determined that the setting up of this Kingdom shall be
my aim while I am with you—God knows how long that may
be. You may call me an enthusiast, if you will, but there is
method in the madness, gentlemen, —(applause)—and I call
upon you all to be enthusiastic for setting up this Kingdom of
God here and now. (Applause.) The blessed time, “the
Golden Age ” of the Gentile nations, was always placed in
the past. Their founder was some chief, or sage, or warrior
who had been. The Greeks had their Hercules, the Homans
their Bomulus, the Scandinavians their Odin, and the Cymry
their Hu Gadarn, or their “Mighty Hugh,” who, being
a Welshman, was of course the greatest of all the Titans.


(Laughter.) It was different with the Jews. The Golden Age
to them was in the future. They were always, with
longing eyes, looking to the distant future for the Great
Teacher, the Strong Deliverer, the King of Men, the Saviour of
Humanity. I should like to walk here on my platform for a
while, and to speak of the reign of the Messiah. My purpose
is to create an ambition in you to have a splendid Victoria.
The reign of the Messiah, as described in the Hebrew scriptures,
is a glorious vision. The scene is laid in the distant future.
The Messiah is a Being possessing divine perfections.' His
throne is high and lifted up, surrounded by a halo of ineffable
glory. On His head are many crowns, and on His vesture a
name is written—“ King of Kings and Lord of Lords.” All
His laws are wise, just, pure, and merciful, and they are obeyed
by all the nations of the earth from the rising to the setting
of the sun. War has ceased; the smoke of the last battle-
field has been blown away ; and the heavenly hush of peace
has come at last. Knowledge and religion are universal. “The
light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun ; and the
light of the sun shall be ... as the light of seven days,”
that is, as if seven suns burned together in the heavens at the
same time ; or, as if the splendour of seven days poured itself
into one. Disease is banished—banished by science, banished
by the progress of knowledge, banished by pure religion, and
banished by a lofty, divine morality. “ The child shall die a
hundred years old . . . and as the days of a tree are the
days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of
their hands.” The earth is fruitful as Paradise ; the wilderness
blossoms as the rose ; the desert is fragrant as the garden of the
Lord ; and the whole world is filled with joy. “ The tabernacle
of God is with men, and he will dwell with them,” and then
comes a sentence which, an American author says, Robert
Burns could never read without weeping—“ And God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes.” Men and angels unite
in singing—“ The Kingdoms of this world are become the
kingdoms of our Lord, and of His Christ . , , Halleluia,


the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth . . . And He shall
reign for ever and ever.” That is the reign of the Messiah.
(Applause.) But do not think that this is an adequate descrip-
tion. My words are only a feeble, cold engraving. For the
great, warm, glowing, living picture, you must go to the Bible
itself, and there behold the beautiful vision of what the world
shall be when the Kingdom of God is established. (Applause.)
Shall we join to have truth everywhere, fairness everywhere,
justice everywhere, generosity everywhere, brotherly kindness
everywhere 1 in politics, in newspapers, everywhere brothers !
(Applause.) We have just met here for a few years. The hush
of eternity will be on us soon. Let us then live a noble life
while we are together. Let us be enthusiastic for setting up
the Kingdom of God in this beautiful colony. (Applause.)
the Christian’s creed.
I remark again that our creed demands that we should have
this Christian enthusiasm. We believe in Almighty God, the
Creator of the heavens and the earth. We believe that He is
not mere force or energy infinitely extended through space—
no mere law, but our Dear Father —that is the way Luther
renders the “Abba Father” of the Bth of Romans, in his
German translation —Our Dear Father, who loves us with an
everlasting love, and ever thinks of us and for us. And we
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Son of
Man, the Saviour of the World, The King of Men, who was
crucified, dead and buried, who rose again from the dead,
ascended into heaven, and sitteth for ever at the right
hand of God in “the heavenly places,” where He continues
infinitely concerned about us. We believe that there is a Divine
Spirit; that every human heart is a temple more hallowed than
that of Jerusalem ; and that in every faithful heart the spirit
of the Infinite God dwells, quickening, beautifying, purifying,
re-arranging, strengthening, comforting, and preparing it for
the great glory that shall be revealed. Our creed extends
beyond death, for we believe in the eternal life which God has


promised to those who love him. Oh !ye delegates and repre-
sentative men of this colony, let these great principles sink into
the depths of your souls ! Wrap them around your hearts!
Let them he there as well as in your intellectual creed, and you
will go from the Melbourne meetings inspired, full of a burning
eloquence you never possessed before. If there be a Day of
Judgment, can Ibe indifferent ? If there is a Calvary, where
my best friend died, can Ibe indifferent 1 If the Infinite God
condescends to come into my poor, broken, sinful heart, can I be
indifferent 1 If there is a heaven, where we shall meet again
with our dear ones—husbands, wives, and children—can we be
indifferent 1 Gentlemen, indifference ill becomes your creed !
Gentlemen, indifference in the shadow of Calvary ! Indifference
within the hearing of eternity ! Indifference on the banks of
the river of death ! May God inspire your hearts, for it ill
becomes you to be indifferent! (Applause.)
THE infidel’s CREED.
I have given you a brief outline, however imperfect it may
be, of our Christian Creed. I saw the outlines of another creed
in a day-dream given to me some time ago. I gazed, and
the vision that opened before my mind was this : —Man was
evolved from matter by the blind senseless power of material
laws. There was no design in creation, for no designer exists.
Life is a series of pains, weaknesses, confusions, and blank
disappointments, and ends in death. It is vain to cry for
help in the great struggle, for no God exists to listen to our
tearful voice. The bitter end comes, and we die and are reduced
to our original material elements. The bodily form is destroyed,
our life is extinguished like a lamp plunged into the depths of the
Southern Ocean, and our personal conscious existence is blotted
out by the cruel tyrannical hand of death. As I looked upon
this terrible vision—this may sound like poetry to you; I hope
there is some poetry in it, but it was a reality in my experience,
and, God be thanked, it cleared away soon—as I stood and
looked, the horror of great darkness fell upon my soul, despair


took possession of my spirit, my heart was sick and faint,
my best emotions were frozen into ice, like streams of water in
a polar winter, because there was nothing left worth living
for. As I stood there, bewildered and appalled, looking upon
that hideous ghastly face of infidelity, a firm, small, tender,
loving, and pathetic voice reached my ear from the glorious
Gospel of the Blessed God, saying :—“ My child, this vision is
not true ; this is a phantasmagoria, an ignis fatuus, an appari-
tion of the night. There is a Creator, and He has a purpose in
your existence; there is a God, and he will hear your tearful
cry for help. A Saviour has appeared, and has obtained for
you everlasting redemption. There is a better country beyond
the flood of death ; you shall meet with those again whom
you have loved and lost.” The winter of my spirit melted, my
best emotions flowed forth, enthusiasm for my own well-being
and for the eternal well-being of my fellow-men returned,
and the glow and joy of summer—the summer that God makes
in the heart of the Christian man—came, and I was glad. Life
was ecstasy, and heaven was in the distance. (Applause.)
Dear brethren, we will continue to hold this Gospel and to love
it more and more, for it kindles and supports our spiritual life
and makes us strong to do and to endure. It is the sun in our
otherwise dark firmament. Let all the clouds of error be
cleared away, that its golden light may shine upon our zig-zag
path. The Gospel of Jesus Christ is a tree of life planted
by the right hand of the Almighty in our poor desert
earth. Water it, if needs be, with your tears; tear away the
parasites and let it grow, for it brings forth abundant fruit, and
the leaves are for the healing of the nations.
REAL FAITH WILL CREATE ENTHUSIASM.
Beal faith in this Gospel will create enthusiasm in ministers
and people of all denominations—l shall have something to say
of denominations by-and-bye; you will like that better. Quarrel*
ling and fighting are real elements in human nature, especially in


theological human nature. (Laughter.)—Real faith in this Gospel
will create in the Churches, and in their ministers, a spirit of
enterprise and noble ambition. There is such a quality as
Christian prudence, which is the relation of right means for
given ends. This prudence we must have, my brethren ; it is
not enough to have a good and great cause to work for, we
must use wise means for its attainment. This is a law of the
Church of Christ. “If a man strive for masteries, yet is he not
crowned except he strive lawfully.” But there is, on the other
hand, a kind of thing called prudence, which is the very reverse
of the wisdom I have spoken of—a prudence that will dare
nothing for Christ; a prudence that is content to walk in the
poor beaten path of custom and habit; a prudence that acts
only on the defensive, and never makes an aggressive movement
into the camp of the enemy—that is cowardice in the garb of
prudence. The prudence that sails round the coast from year
to year, and never goes boldly out to sea, under the impulse of
divine zeal and love—that is spiritual indolency in the robes of
wisdom. The prudence that stands trembling in the presence
of every new thought, that is alarmed at the progress of science,
that shivers at the thought of the advancement of knowledge,
is unbelief in the garments of faith. Had the apostles possessed
that prudence, the Gospel would have died there and then at
Jerusalem, and you would never have heard of it. But they
were filled with another spirit ; they attempted great things
—new things, divine things—and they succeeded. They made
the name of Christ known to many nations. They banished
the heathen gods from their lofty Olympus; they gave a new
direction to the human family by their noble efforts, and
changed the destiny of the world. Do you think that we can
change the destiny of Victoria 1 ? Where is the apostolic zeal?
—the strong belief in truth? We are a poor edition of the
Apostles, We believe, but we believe and make haste. We
believe in running the race of revivalism as fast as we can ;
but the Bible says : “ He that believeth shall not make haste.”
Calm and quiet, like the law of gravity, the real Christian


stands there and says: “ I know I have the truth; I know
that God is, and that my Saviour lives.” Shall we thus become
strong 1 Say “yes.” (Applause.)
THE IMPORTANCE OF ENTHUSIASM TO CONGREGATIONAL
CHURCHES.
Now, I am not going to speak disparagingly of any body or
denomination, but I must speak the truth. The importance
of this holy enthusiasm to our Congregational Churches is very
great indeed, for the following reasons; We have no imposing
ceremonies in our public worship to attract attention; we have
no grand appendages attached to our names to give them glory
and splendour in the sight of men. We have no “ apostolical
succession ” except the succession of Faith, Hope and Charity.
(Applause.) The faith that sees the invisible, the noble hope
that “ wanders through eternity,” and the charity that embraces
all mankind. (Applause.) We have no regenerating baptism,
except the baptism of that Spirit which quickens the souls
of men into a new divine life—the baptism of the Holy Ghost,
of which all other baptisms are mere signs and symbols.
(Applause.) lam very glad that we have no lords spiritual.
We have no infallible fathers in God (applause), and do not
want them. (Laughter and applause.) We have no dogmatic
authoritative priesthood, possessing special prerogatives which
do not belong to all Christian men and women in the world.
The finest thing about you, my brethren, is that your
ministers every Sunday stand up in the presence of their
congregations, and have the noble manliness of saying—not
“ We are your lords and masters, fathers, and rulers ” —but,
“Ye are a holy nation, a chosen generation ; ye men and
women, ye are the royal priesthood, and we are your servants
in the Gospel of Christ.” (Applause.) Read the Gospel, and you
will find that Christ tells us distinctly not to call ourselves
“ masters ” in the Church of God, and not to call any man
“ father,” because One is our Father who is in heaven.
You can do what you like; but that is what He says,


and there is no mistake about it, for it is as clear as daylight.
Now, seeing that we reject all these things, as a childish
playing at religion, as pretentious myths and foolish
legends, which have come down to the 19th century from
mediaeval times, what have we to depend upon 1 I answer
that we have three things—the truth of the Gospel, the promise
of the Holy Ghost, and the spiritual life—the zeal and
enthusiasm of our Churches. Have this enthusiasm, and you
prosper; lose it, and you fail. I have looked upon old
trees in England, that had done battle with the storms of 500
winters, at last, like everything else in this world, being obliged
to give way to time. They became old, worn, and were decaying
and dying, but out of reverence for the old trees the farmer
had placed props and stays to hold them up. There are
Churches like those trees, surrounded by props and stays. They
are revered, but they are old and decaying as everything, but
downright simple reality, must decay. You have no external
appliances to hold up your Churches. They must grow
from the force of their spiritual life, from the strength of
their Christian enthusiasm, or they will decay, wither and die,
and disappear from the face of the earth.
SOURCE OF CHRISTIAN ENTHUSIASM.
The source of this enthusiasm is in Jesus Christ. Now, I
want to lead you into distant history. Edward Gibbon, in his
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, endeavours to show by
what means the Christian religion gained such a remaikable
victory over the established religions of the earth, and he
mentions five causes, which I will now enumerate, my purpose
being to show that Jesus Christ is the sole life of His Church.
The first cause given by that fine historian, who walked
like an emperor through the centuries, and who took any
amount of trouble to verify his statements, is—“ The inflexible
zeal of the Christians.” But I ask, whence came that zeal 'I
The splendid Roman Empire was falling into fragments. Faith
in truth was dying out, especially among educated men.


Pilate, the Roman official and representative man, said to the
Saviour “ What is truth V' as much as to say, “ Where is it 1
Who can find it 1 It is not discoverable.” When the enthu-
siastic Paul declared his faith before King Agrippa, Festus
exclaimed, “ Paul, thou art beside thyself; much learning doth
make thee mad.” The heathen priests, in going up to the
temples at the time of sacrifice, smiled at each other, as much
as to say, “ This has no meaning, and we know it has none.”
Well then, I ask, whence came this new zeal for truth, and
this new desire to do good in the world ; this new zeal, which
you find in the first and second centuries of the Christian era 1
There is but one reply. It came from Jesus Christ. He
brought truth down from heaven with Him, opened it like a
map before the minds of men. They were charmed and
fascinated with the unfolding of the glorious revelation, and it
kindled in their hearts an intense and undying enthusiasm for
doing good to their fellow men. (Applause.)
The second cmise is thus given : —“ The doctrine of a future
life, improved by every additional circumstance which could
give weight and efficacy to that important truth.” But again
I ask, how came the Christians to believe in that future life
with such sure faith, whilst others held it in suspense, or
rejected it as utter madness 1 “ The writings of Cicero repre-
sent in the most lively colours the ignorance, the errors, the
uncertainty of the ancient philosophers with regard to the
immortality of the soul.” These learned, cultivated Greeks
and Romans, with longing yearning hearts, looked into the
black darkness of death, endeavouring to see some spark of
light beyond. Sometimes they said, “We have, we have seen
light !” At other times they shook their heads and said, “ No,
it was a mistake ; there was no light.” Whence then came the
faith of the Christians in the future state 1 From Christ ! He
said, and they believed Him, “ I am the resurrection and the life
—I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish. He
that believeth on me, though he die, yet shall he live.” He
thus spread before their minds the reality of the future life.


They looked upon it with unspeakable wonder and delight. A
noble enthusiasm grew up in their hearts, and a faith in the
eternal reality of the invisible world, which never wavered, but
burned brighter and brighter to their dying day.
The third cause given by Gibbon is “ The belief of the early
Christians in miracles.” Now, I like this part of my subject,
and could devote a whole night to it. The spiritual world
seems more real to me than the material. To the early
Christians the world was not a machine kept in motion by its
own springs and wheels and curious contrivances; but it was a
living reality, permeated, saturated, and surrounded by the
energy of the infinite God. They had no “ Theory of the
Universe ” built up between them and the everlasting Father.
Deriving their spiritual insight from Jesus Christ, they believed
In'in when he said, “My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.”
He had healed the sick, given sight to the blind, unstopped the
ears of the deaf, and asserted his power over disease, weakness,
and death. They believed in these things, and hence their zeal
and their enthusiasm to spread abroad their knowledge of Jesus
Christ. They were right in thus believing. “ Natural super-
naturalism ” is a wise saying, for it is the only reasonable
explanation of our own existence, and of the stupendous universe
of which we form a part. The true philosophy is this : the
divine is seen in the human, the miraculous in the common, the
supernatural in the natural, the infinite in the finite, and the
working of the Blessed God in the things He has made.
(Applause.) A great writer has said : —“ If you could stretch
forth your arm and touch the sun, you would wonder; but the
real wonder is that you can put forth your arm at all.” The
putting out of the arm is the miracle. When the
Israelites saw the “ small round thing,” like hoar frost,
covering the ground, they called out, “ Manna ” —What is this 1
It was a strange thing, which they could not explain.
Can you explain the phenomena by which you are sur-
rounded 1 Matter ! What is that 1 Gravitation ! Galvanism !
Magnetism ! Spirit! Life ! What are these 1 A man dies,


and we walk from room to room slowly, draw tlie blinds over
the windows, and speak in whispers. The man is dead,
and we are full of wonder and astonishment. He was a
dear father, or, perhaps, it was a dear beloved mother. A
dread power has been at work there, and the dear one has
sunk in the battle of life. Brethren, you were x'ight
to show your reverence on the occasion of death, but the
wonder is not Death, but Life ! Do not be astonished if
you lay me in a cemetery of Victoria; do not say a strange
thing has happened, and that the little eloquence he had is
now frozen upon his dead cold lips, but remember that the
miracle was that he lived for sixty years ! We call ourselves
dust, but it is more proper to call ourselves water, as our
bodies are composed of seventy-five per cent, of water, and only
twenty-five per cent, of dust. And is not that a mystery %
God ! I thank thee that I live ; I thank thee for the miracle of
life, the ecstasy of life, the mystery of life ! From mystery,
through mystety, into mystery ! From God, upheld of God,
back to God ! (Applause.) We are apt to allow our civilisa-
tion to make us think that we know a great deal more than
we do. When a tribe of barbarians first saw fire—a spiritual
looking thing to them—dancing about among dry wood, one
of them put his hand down to feel it, but drew it back instantly,
and said, “It bites !” He took good care not to put his hand
into it a second time, but he threw in a stick, and then ex-
claimed, “It eats dry wood, and lives. ” He could not give a
better explanation. But does any one even now know what
fire is? The fashion now is to call it motion, the creed of
some of our philosophers being that nothing is, but that
everything is going to he by-and-bye. Well, you see the first
Christians believed in miracles, in the “ natural supernatural ”
believed, as I believe, that if God were to retire from this world
now, we would be all like statues, dead and cold in the morning.
In him, by a miracle, we live, and move, and have our being.
This is religion ; this is reverence. (Applause.)
The fourth cause mentioned by Gibbon is this—the pure and


austere morals of the Christians. The historian says, “ The
lives of the primitive Christians were much more pure, and
more austere than those of their pagan contemporaries.” But
how came this about 1 Whence did they derive their concep-
tion of and love for this pure morality ? It came from Christ*
He was “ Holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners;”
and the Christians “ beheld His glory, the glory as of the only
begotten of the Bather, full of grace and truth.” He set before
them a character pure as the snow on the highest Alps, beauti-
ful as the many-coloured rainbow, and spotless as the azure
heavens ; and they, contemplating His character, were changed
into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the spirit
of the Lord.
One cause more and I have done with Edward Gibbon. The
last cause he assigns is this —“ The union and discipline of the
Christian republic, which gradually formed an independent and
increasing state in the heart of the Roman Empire.” Now, do
not suppose from the word “ state ” in this sentence that the
primitive churches were composed of one great organisation,
like the ecclesiastical organisations which exist in Christendom
to-day ; for the historian says-—“ The societies that were con-
stituted in the cities of the Roman Empire, were united
only by the ties of faith and charity. Independence and
equality formed the basis of their internal constitution.’*
And again he says—“ Every society,” that is to say, every
church, “ formed within itself a separate and independent
republic . . . and these little states maintained a mutual
as well as friendly intercourse of letters and deputations.”
Once more —“ it was soon established as a custom and as a law,,
that the bishops of the independent churches,” that is the
ministers, for there were no bishops then, or, rather, every
minister was then a bishop—other bishops than these were of
later invention—“ that the bishops of the independent churches
should meet in the capital of the province at the stated periods
of spring and autumn.” Now, these sayings refer to the-
Christian churches in the first and second centuries, and they


present a perfect picture of tlie Independent Churches of
Victoria of to-day. (Applause.) They were independent of
each other—so are we. They held mutual and friendly inter-
course one with the other—so do we. The only ties that
united them were faith and charity—so it is with us. Their
ministers met for friendly consultation and prayer in the spring
and autumn of the year—that is exactly what we are doing.
By the aid of the microscope men are able to see in animal
organisms a transparent, colourless, viscid, structureless sub-
stance. They call it now bioplasm. Ten years ago they called
it protoplasm, but bioplasm is a better term. It is a wonderful
revelation; one of the most wonderful things ever discovered.
That viscid substance throbs and surges with life, like an ocean in
a storm. It has the marvellous power of turning dead matter
into living matter, and it builds up from dead matter the
complete human body—brain, artery, nerve, bone, and muscle.
It is structureless, as far as science goes. It is soft, colour-
less, transparent; building, building, building! Weaving,
spinning, constructing! Taking matter, and making some
of it into brain, some into skin, artery, bone, muscle,
nerve ! Structureless—without organisation ! Dear brethren,
it is an awful place down there in the mystic region
of the infinitely small! Up yonder, in the region of the
infinitely great, you have God; but here He is more wonderful!
You can never explain the meaning and the building of that
bioplasm but by having Intellect behind it, because, if it does
not show Intellect , what can 1 The force that moves it must be
Divine, It is “ the finger of God.” In that throbbing, struc-
tureless, viscid substance you have the meeting-place of the
Almighty God and the material universe. Well, now, go back,
will you, with me, by the help of the microscope of history,
to the first Christian churches, 1800 years ago, and look upon
the “ little states,” as Gibbon calls them. They throb and
surge with new life, new truth, new faith, new purposes, new
loves, and new ambitions. They grow and multiply; they
communicate their spiritual life to other people; they convert


that dead heathen matter into living Christian matter ; old
things pass away; a new state of society springs up, and a
Christian civilisation is constituted. (Applause.) My point is
this. How came this to pass'? Whence did these “ little
states,” in the depths of former ages, derive their life ? From
Christ! The Master said to His disciples, “ Without Me ye
can do nothing.” This is exactly as if the sun said to the
flowers of the field, “ Without me ye cannot grow, nor become
beautiful. My light gives you beauty, and your fragrance
is produced by my influence.” Brethren, just as the flowers of
the field are dependent upon the sun, so are we dependent upon
Christ. We must have constant communion with the glorified
Redeemer, the great Head of the Church ; for He is “ Christ
our Life,” and without Him we can do nothing. (Applause.)
THE RESULTS.
How, good and great results may be expected from the state
of mind I have described. For one thing, this enthusiasm
would bring the necessary supply of gold into the Master’s
treasury. Farmers in England open channels in their fields
to convey the rain-water into the places where it is most
needed,* and they thus invite nature to send showers of rain.
They tempt the aged mother to be kind, but in the time of long
drought nature seems to harden her heart, and does not respond.
Now and then she may sprinkle a dew-like shower, as an indi-
cation of what she could do, if disposed. But change the
temperature of the atmosphere, and behold the result. The
clouds dissolve ; great showers descend; the water channels
overflow their banks; the thirsty earth drinks her full, puts forth
her growing energies, and the harvest is produced. I know a
little about the doings of our societies here and in England,
especially of her secretaries and their many ways, contrived
with deep and subtle genius, for opening channels that the golden
stream to flow, but in the Churches, as in nature, there are
times of drought, when the great rain does not descend ; when
only slender, dew-like showers are given, and the channels are


almost dry. But change the spiritual temperature of the
Churches, infuse into them the enthusiasm I am speaking of, let
them be possessed with the love of Christ, the faith of the
apostles, and the genius of the first Christians, and gold shall
not be wanting. It is very important to you what kind of
ministers you are to have here in the next generation. Well,
as a second result of this enthusiasm I am speaking of, you may
expect divinely qualified men to rise up in the Churches for
the work of the ministry. There is a kind of noble helplessness
in the strong enthusiastic men whom God sends forth to preach
the Gospel of His love. They can say truly, in the words of
St. Paul, “ Necessity is laid upon me ; yea, woe is unto me, if
I preach not the Gospel.” These men are possessed, mastered,
upheld, and carried along by the divine force that is in them.
It is healthful to read the lives of such men. How strong they
are ! although many of them are physically weak. How loyal
to Christ; how tender-hearted and loving ! Firm as the granite
rock ! Veritable spiritual Samsons, carrying terror into the
camp of the Philistines! Let Martin Luther be converted, and
then woe betide the Papacy. Let Paul be called, the strong and
enthusiastic Paul, and in a short time the gospel shall be preached
“ from Jerusalem and round about unto Illyricum.” But before
we can expect an army of such men in Victoria, the spiritual state
of the Churches must be much higher than it is at present..
The chilling winter winds do not cause the fields to grow; it is
useless to seek the fruits of the glowing south amid the ice and
snow of the freezing north ; you cannot find the rose of health
on the pale face of death ; and you cannot expect inspired
ministers from uninspired Churches.
Let us then have Christian enthusiasm, and by calm, continued,
regular work, do our part in setting up the Kingdom of God in
this country. There are earthquakes, thunderstorms, and tem-
pests in Nature, but the harvest is produced by her quiet
operations. The mysterious laws, the noiseless dew, the
tender rain, the soft breeze, the calm firmament, and the
silent sun here are her great powers. Agitations and


excitements have their place in the history of religion;
but the great work is to be done by calm, determined,
and continued labour. We should work from principle, and
with the regularity of Nature’s laws. There is a great power
in this unceasing effort. How firm and fast is the rock on the
high mountain side ! The mightiest stox*m cannot shake it
from its place, the wildest tempest beats upon it in vain, and
the thunder sends forth peal after peal, but the rock returns the
echo as if laughing at the feeble attempts. And yet the con-
tinued, persistent drops of water will loosen it, and cause it
to fall into the valley below. Thus what we do may not be
great; but let it be regular and by law—let drop follow drop—
and what cannot be done by violent agitations shall be accom-
plished by quiet, constant work.
THE WORLD OF HISTORY.
In conclusion, I would like to cast a glance at the glory that
shall be revealed. The world of prophecy is very different from
the world of history. The future shall be more glorious than
the past. Reading history is sorrowful work. I have often
sat on a form in Hyde Park, listening to the hum of the great
city in the distance. It was not a joyous sound, but dull,
heavy and monotonous. It seemed like a great sigh arising
from the mighty heart of England, caused by some unspeak-
able sorrow. In reading history, we listen to the hum of
distant ages. It is not a joyful sound; but a sound full
of tears, and sorrow, and agony, telling of misery, wretched-
ness, and death. It is “ the whole creation groaning in pain
together until now.” History is a sigh rising out of the bosom
of the past. Reading history is like listening to a funeral
oration. The speaker may be eloquent, his periods perfect,
his voice sonorous, and his imagination sublime; but
there is the presence of death , and it spreads a gloom over all.
History may be written eloquently, and we may be charmed
with the power and genius of the author, but there are the
facts of sin, injustice, unrighteousness, unfairness, partiality,


wickedness, sorrow, and misery which make the thoughtful
reader sad. History is the funeral oration of the past
—fall of sadness. Once more, reading history is like walking
in a vast burial-ground. The former ages and generations rest
there in silence. There the slave lies, freed from his master;
the frost of death hath sealed the lips of eloquence; there lies
the king, without his crown—all in the silent, silent burial-
ground ! And as you walk down from generation to genera-
tion, you read the writings on the graves, and you are made
sad. History is the sorrowful inscription on the tomb of the
past.
THE GLORIOUS FUTURE.
We will turn now to the future—the future, the glorious
future ! —to the world of prophecy, the glorious world of
prophecy ! Look there, will you 1 Ignorance, with its con-
tracted brow, and brute unconscious gaze, is not to be seen.
Idolatry, with its ugly gods and horrid rites, has disappeared.
Tyranny, with its gloomy prisons and cruel chains, is not to
be found. War, with its scowling face and harsh thundering
voice, is not present. The wild, despairing scream of infidelity
is not there. The sallow, hungry, shivering figure of poverty
has no place in this vision. The forms I behold are
a sisterhood of angels. Knowledge is there, radiant with
smiles of light. Religion is there, fair as the moon, pure as
the sun, and beautiful as the opening of the morning. Liberty
is there, with outstretched hands blessing the redeemed nations.
The angel of peace stands there, and at her feet a little lamb
sleeps in the lion’s mane. The heavens are opened, and the
benedictions of the Infinite God are falling upon a redeemed
Victoria—a redeemed world—and for this you are to be
enthusiastic. (Applause.)
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.






