

ammmm
GERTRUDE HART




' cJ&CoyJ fyJsrHJi,,
fi"OmLu,
ttT**v � Uyy^J








CHUBBY AND PIP






She climbed the steps and looked about her


�urn?��'?? AND
GERTRUDE HART
HUTCHINSON & CO.
( Publishers ) Ltd.
LONDON AND MELBOURNE


MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN,
AT GAINSBOROUGH PRESS, ST. ALBANS.
BY FISHER KNIGHT AND CO., LTD.


GEORGE SUTTON
A Man of Great Gifts
and a Rare Friend I


%


CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I. A GHOST HUNT ! . . . 13
11. THE HAUNTED HOUSE . . 39
111. CHUBBY DYES HER HAIR . . 54
IV. IN WHICH PIP IS JEALOUS ! . 71
V. ?TWO ARE COMPANY !? . . 83
VI. GETTING READY FOR CHRISTMAS ! 105
VII. CHRISTMAS EVE . . . 120
VIII. SILVER-HEELS CHANGES OWNERS ! 134
IX. THE BUSHFIRES BREAK OUT . 146
X. RED FEBRUARY . . . 168
XI. CHUBBY TAKES COMMAND ! . 179
XII. RED LAWSON SMILES ! . . 189




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
She climbed the steps and looked about
her ..... Frontispiece
He saw her seize a long, tough bough and
strike lustily, again and again . .80
Chubby never forgot the last lap of that ride 192




CHUBBY AND PIP
Chapter I
A Ghost Hunt!
IT WAS VERY HOT IN THE LOFT!
Chubby Drummond stopped typewriting
to wipe away some trickles that were find-
ing their way down her nose. Phil Penrose
always declared that, if you could get up a
realty good sweat, it made freckles fighter.
So she endured.
Aunt Anne suggested that she should move
down to the shady end of her den for the
summer. It was much cooler there, but the
view wasn?t so wonderful. Still, it was rather
nasty to be in a steam bath all the time, with
splashes of perspiration decorating a manu-
script that wasn?t conspicuous for tidiness at
the best of times!
It was almost tea-time. Wigsie often set
the table under the chestnut tree that was
second-cousin to the one Longfellow had
written about, her father insisted: it could


have sheltered a smithy, and the largest
blacksmith on record!
Splash! That was a bigger drop than
usual; and landed in the centre of a sheet
that was the best she had ever typed!
Chubby frowned, and dried her face vigor-
ously. Then she jumped?Pip had made a
sudden appearance! He stood looking at
her critically: one heavy plait of hair was
untwisting itself, and she sighed and gave it
an impatient toss. Do what she might, the
long tails would not stay tied. If only Kittie
would let her cut some junks off, or, better
still, allow her to have a bob like other
girls.
Phil Penrose grinned. ?Got you, that
time! You?re getting nervy, Chubs!?
?I was miles away! ? she confessed crossly.
?Time you came back, then. It?s too hot
to type, silly! ?
The window was open; and he swung his
legs over the sill. He was growing rapidly,
and was thinner than ever. Chubby thought
it was a terribly unfair world: if only she
could have given him some of her flesh, and
he had spared her an inch or two of height,
it would have been much better for both of
them. With so many good things to eat at


The Sycomores, and mountain air to supply
hunger-sauce, the consequences were plain
to see!
Dr. Ted had failed her yesterday when she
had consulted him about it. ?What?s the
odds, Ginger?? he had demanded lazily.
She had answered soberly: ?Do you think
it would do any good if I had one liquid
day a w r eek ? Mrs. Morrissy says she has
reduced nine pounds in a fortnight! You
have barley-water, and orange drinks ?or
lemon drinks, I forget which ?and eat raw
fruit!?
The doctor had laughed dryly. ?It?s up
to Mrs. Morrissy to give that unfortunate
stomach of hers a rest occasionally. I'll tell
you when to start dieting, Chubs: at present,
there?s nothing to worry about.?
He was assuring himself that she was a
splendid advertisement for Mount Pleasant,
in spite of the new crop of freckles under her
eyes. Her mouth had a sunny sweetness;
and her strong, white teeth were shapely and
well-cared-for.
She had sighed heavily over this decision:
she had hoped that Dr. Ted would tell her
what to do so that she could turn herself into
a slender girl like Sylvia Beauchamp. You


saw perfectly thrilling advertisements in the
papers, sometimes; and the treatments were
always "Absolutely harmless!?
She came back to present surroundings,
and Phil Penrose, with a start. He scowled.
?If Pm in the way, I?ll go: you don't seem
to be in the mood to talk. I had something
special to tell you, too; but I?ll save it for
another time.?
Chubby was repentant in a moment.
?Don?t be scotty, Pip! ? she entreated.
He thrust his hands into his pockets
moodily. ?I certainly don?t intend to stay
if I?m not wanted!?
She knew that his temper was always
uncertain when there was a mail in and he
had not heard from his father. She joined
him at the window.
?It is too hot to write,? she offered
pacifically.
?Anybody but an idiot would have known
that!?
Chubby tossed her head. ?I had reached
the part where the wicked princess was
changed into an icicle, and put into The
Cave of Frozen Things ?
Phil grunted. ?Trying to cool yourself
down?? he inquired superciliously.


?Well, if you imagine things hard enough,
they get real.?
?Do they ? What a muff you are, Ginger!
Say . . . there?s something thrilling happen-
ing in the village . . . there?s a ghost I?
?What?? cried Chubby?alert in an
instant.
?A g-g-ghost!? whispered Pip mysteri-
ously, satisfied now that he had created a
sensation.
Chubby eyed him delightedly. Of all
things in life, ghosts were the most interest-
ing. ?Go on! ? she entreated.
Phil?s eyes grew solemn. ?He?s been seen
several times near Splitter?s Hut; and he dis-
appears as suddenly as he comes. I?ve got
an idea that he is living in The Haunted
House! ?
Chubby shivered happily. Everybody in
Silver Creek knew the story of the deserted
cottage that Red Lawson had built for his
bride. He had bought the furniture and laid
out the garden, and then war had come, and
he had gone to the Front. The girl had
married someone else; and Red had never
returned to the township.
It was a gloomy-looking place: rank with
weeds and shut in with creepers. Quite a


number of the townsfolk declared that there
were strange lights in the desolate rooms;
and they spoke of a hammer that had never
been moved since Lawson drove in his last
nail.
?Is it a white ghost ?? Chubby asked. Phil
sniffed.
?A white ghost?? he mocked . . . ?he?s
far more uncommon than that! ?
?Go on, Pip dear . . . it?s beautifully
creepy! ?
?Well, you listen! Twice he has frightened
girls on Swamp Road! You can?t see his
face ... at least, one woman did, and she
has been hysterical ever since. She thought
it was the devil.?
?O-o-h! ? gasped Chubby Drummond.
Phil glanced at her more tolerantly: she was
taking it just as he wanted her to take it.
?There?s something pretty 7 queer about it,
Chubs. Old McQuean was talking to Tom
Dennis about him to-day; it was his grand-
daughter who got the scare. And the ghost
has been walking again this week. . . .?
Again Chubby shivered. It was funny to
feel cold water going down your spine on
a hot day! ?Where, Pip?? she asked
anxiously.


?Same place?Swamp Road! Chubs .. .
someone has got to get to the bottom of this:
it won?t do to have girls frightened, you
know. Are you on for a stunt ??
She considered gravely. ?Swamp Road ??
she breathed. Phil frowned.
?What is making you so tiresome to-day ??
he demanded; ?it makes me wild when
people repeat words after me.?
Now, Swamp Road had rather a bad repu-
tation in the township; it led past paddocks
that were full of tussocky grass, and infested
with snakes. She pointed this out, and Pip
shrugged his shoulders.
?Knew you?d be scared! We are not going
into the paddocks, and snakes don?t come out
at night.?
?But they might be sleeping; and they
wouldn?t like it if we trod on them!?
?All right?if you don?t want to come, say
so, straight out. There are loads who would
jump at the chance! ?
?But I do want to come if you are going,?
choked Chubby dismally: it would be
simply dreadful if Phil started to do things
without her!
?Please yourself: you make so many diffi-
culties. If you?re frightened, I?ll go on my


own. I thought you?d be thrilled to bits!
?I?m not frightened; but nobody likes
snakes-
He whistled shrilly. She went on hur-
riedly: ?What are we going to do??
?Go to the cottage and watch till he comes.
What?s the trouble??
Her face had fallen. ?I?m not going to
worry Aunt Anne again . . . I?ll never for-
get her face last time . .
?All right! I might have known you?d be
tiresome: you used to be able to keep a
secret.?
?I?m not a tell-tale?? flashed Chubby
indignantly. ?But I?ll have to let her know
that I?m going somewhere.?
?You?re out to spoil the whole show!?
grumbled Pip. ?Anyone would think we
were setting sail for the North Pole! I?ll
meet you at Splitter?s Hut, and then we can
decide what we are going to do. To-night;
and if you don?t turn up by eight o?clock
I?ll know it?s off as far as you are concerned.?
?I?ll come! ? cried Chubby stoutly.
?Good! I must do some swotting now;
exams next week . . . won?t you come a
cropper with your spelling??
?I know!? she replied dejectedly.


Phil Penrose swung down the ladder, and
Chubby went in search of Miss Manners.
She was tremendously excited at the thought
of what lay before them: nothing could be
half so thrilling as hunting a ghost ... a
real ghost who had frightened people. . . .
Aunt Anne was lying back in her chair,
her book on her lap. Drummond was busy
in the orchard, and his wife was with him;
her golden head bobbing in and out through
the trees as she followed the harrows. It
was a peaceful scene, and Miss Manners
watched it tranquilly: summer was always
better for rheumatic folk, and the new diet
that Ted Blair had prescribed was working
wonders. She wasn?t feeling nearly so lonely,
either; though it seemed incredible that she
should have got used to banging doors and
the hurry of a sturdy figure with a flaming
head. When Chubby came round the trellis
Miss Manners found herself smiling.
The child was racing, as usual . . . her
shoe caught in the ball of silk that was lying
on the grass beside the knitting-needles. She
tripped, and looked penitent.
?There I go ?? she sighed, ?I got it all
round my feet. Do you suppose I?ll ever
stop being clumsy, Aunt Anne??


The old lady laughed dryly. ?Hard to
say! Your hair is redder every day: that
I do know! ?
Chubby was busy with a tangle: one of
the strands of silk snapped.
?Never mind!? said Miss Anne brusquely,
and went on: ?Whatever have you been
doing to get yourself so flushed ? And your
dress looks as if you had been lying on it!?
It was crumpled, Chubby admitted. With
all her heart she envied girls who could keep
cool and neat on hot days. She threw her-
self down on the lawn and began to plait her
hair.
?Aunt Anne,? she began eagerly, ?Pip and
I want to do something dreadfully interest-
ing to-night, and I can?t tell you what it is.?
Miss Manners eyed her shrewdly: her
memory was sufficiently vivid of sundry
other adventures. . . . The comfort was
that the guest-houses were filled to over-
flowing with tourists who sauntered along
the roads these beautiful evenings!
?Very well ?I?ll put you on your honour,
child! Phil has no balance; and yours is
the steadier head.?
Chubby Drummond?s cheeks flamed.
Aunt Anne really was a darling!


?I?ll be careful,? she promised.
Miss Manners took the tousled ball of
jumper silk. Her fingers were painfully
twisted, and she eyed them thoughtfully.
?You can only be young once, Chubby;
older folk realize that much oftener than
children dream. When I was your age I
did all sorts of reckless things; I think of
them sometimes and wish I could live them
over again. I used to ride like the wind:
no horse was too spirited or fast for me. And
now, I cannot go too slowly. . . .?
Chubby nodded: it must be terrible to be
old and have rheumatism! Her aunt looked
kindly at her. ?You may move my chair
nearer to the table: Wiggins will soon be
coming out with tea. Just give me my
sticks . . . carefully, now! ?
She rose painfully, and Chubby helped
her. It was always jolly when Aunt Anne
had tea with them. She was doing this
oftener since the warm weather had set in:
it was almost as if she liked their company.
She did not even complain when one of the
heavy red plaits whipped her face; though
Chubby was certain that it had flicked her
eye!
When the old lady was seated comfort-


ably and her cushions plumped up, Chubby
Drummond raced down the orchard like a
young colt. The next thing was a trip over
a root ?and a heavy fall. She was up
in an instant: her knee was bleeding, and
she bound it with a rather grubby hand-
kerchief.
The trees were laden with apples: Jona-
thans, and Five Crowns, and Rome Beauties;
and a host of others that she did not know
the names of. Her father loved working in
the orchards: he said you couldn?t expect
the sun and the rain to do everything! His
face was getting tanned, and she never lay
awake now and wished she could cough
instead of him!
Kittie Drummond had grown plump, and
her skin was the loveliest colour. She looked
up as her rowdy girl romped into sight, and
shook her head. The fall had ripped one of
the tan stockings, there was a gaping hole
over the knee and a long scratch on the
freckled nose. Mrs. Drummond was always
worrying about her Ugly Duckling: it
seemed hard in a way that Ron should
have all the beauty! Garry reassured her
more than once with a consoling: ?Wait till
she shoots up and surprises us all! It?s a


winsome face, Kitten, and her hair is
ripping!?
He thought so again as she joined them.
There was the colour of a shell in Chubby?s
cheeks, and her eyes were wide and starry.
There was something rather splendid about
her at times.
Kittie had a suggestion: "We?re going for
a walk along the Upper Road after tea,
Chubs: would you like to come??
Chubby?s face lengthened. That was the
worst of life ?you had so often to choose
between nice things!
"I can?t,? she answered soberly, ?I?m going
somewhere with Pip.?
Her mother shrugged her shoulders. Phil
Penrose seemed to her a most unattractive
boy. Drummond laughed.
?What's in the wind this time?? he
queried. ?Some wild and woolly adventure ??
?I promised not to tell. Aunt Anne says
I may go.?
?That?s all right, then. Don?t turn the
horses out of the livery stables in the village
or anything like that! And don?t go too far
into the bush, Ginger!?
?No. We?re not going far. I?m bursting
to tell you, Daddy!?


He gave her a comical smile. ?That means
we must sit up to-night . . .You seem to
find plenty to interest you in Silver Creek ?
and yet I heard somebody talking about its
dullness to-day! I?ll make one condition ?
take Punch with you.?
Her face fell before she gave her sober
promise: ?I will, Daddy!? She was afraid
this might be all wrong and not according
to Pip?s plan. You couldn?t tell how ghosts
would regard dogs; it was very puzzling.
But when father said you were to do any-
thing, you did it!
Wigsie came out with the gong at that
moment, and Chubby set out for the house,
her plaits flapping over her shoulders. Her
daddy and Kittle followed more slowly;
lingering a little, as sweethearts will. To
Drummond life was going well: the smell
of the soil was the best tonic in the world,
and no day was ever too long.
Wiggins had put a great bowl of flowers
on the table and had made some of her
famous Spanish cream. By that, you knew
that she was in a good humour, though she
was never exactly cheerful. Garry had
christened her Mrs. Gummidge, and she
certainly did Teel things more than other


people!' But she made ripping gooseberry
snow; and to-night there was a puffy, golden
sandwich filled with lemon butter. What
was the use of making up your mind to diet
when there were such nice things to eat?
All through the meal Chubby?s thoughts
kept wandering to The Haunted House and
the ghost. Pip?s stunts were usually worth
while, and this one promised to be ripping.
The sun was setting when she started out:
there was an amber light in the west, and
fluffy, rose-coloured clouds sprayed into deli-
cate, feathery plumes over Mount Difficult.
Punch was in a languid, serious mood, and
this was just as well: she wasn?t quite sure
that Phil would regard his presence with
favour.
Just what they were going to do if they
really encountered the ghost she did not
know. Splitter?s Hut stood in a clearing
where the timber had been dense; it was
always fascinating because there were heaps
of scenty chips and fallen logs laced with
maidenhair fern. The trees had been giants,
and Chubby liked to dream of them stand-
ing tall and majestic with the sunlight
filtering through their boughs, or moonlight
playing on satiny trunks.


she heard his signal of ?Mo-poke . . . mo-
poke . . . mo-poke. . .
There were wild violets in shady hollows,
and the scented geranium leaves smelled
delicious when you crushed them. The
fences were log, and a harbour for snakes,
her father declared, but Chubby made for
the gap at the comer.
The cicadas were shrilling down by the
weir: they were so noisy that they fairly
made your ear-drums tingle. The Airedale
went crashing into the bush after rabbits and
Chubby called him back. She was telling
herself that Pip was going to be late when
He sauntered into sight and grumbled
roundly about Punch. "He?s sure to dash
out at the wrong moment and bark, or do
something ridiculous!" he complained.
?What on earth did you bring him for?"
Chubby explained, and he shrugged his
thin shoulders. You always had to put up
with nonsense of one kind or another when
you took girls on an adventure: either they
got silly ideas into their heads or their parents
did, he assured her.
The colour had died from the clouds, and
there was a wonderful clear green in the sky.
Phil had brought a box of mulberries from


The Lodge garden, and they sat on the river-
bank and made their mouths purple with the
ripe fruit.
?What are we going to do when we find
the ghost?? asked Chubby doubtfully. It
was such a perfect night, and the water
looked so quiet and beautiful: there was
scarcely a ripple except in mid-stream where
the current moved lazily. She would have
loved to sit still and watch the moon rise.
Phil was lofty. ?We won?t do anything,
of course, silly! If I were on my own I
would act differently; but your people would
never forgive me if I let you run any danger.
You see, Chubs, he?s either a real ghost, or
he?s playing ghost: I don?t know which
would be worse.?
Chubby sighed. There were times when
Phil talked as if he were dreadfully grown-
up: he seemed to go miles away from her.
He grumbled on:
?Punch being here makes things difficult:
he?s such a lumbering beast. I had planned
to go to The Haunted House, but with that
blessed dog hanging on to us we?ll have to
be cautious. I think I?ll hide in one of the
clumps of trees in Swamp Paddock .. .
What?s the matter now??


?It?s full of snakes . . .? objected Chubby
feebly.
Phil Penrose snorted. ?You?d better make
tracks for home and go to sleep: I?ll get on
better alone.?
Her face fell. ?You don?t mean that,
really, Pip??
Now Pip was seized here with a memory:
of a night when he lay in bed getting better
from diphtheria, and bored stiff with even-
body and everything . . . and a flaming
head appeared at the window . . . and it
was old Chubs ?come to buck him up!
?No, of course I don?t; but you really are
tiresome, you know. Everything depends on
keeping quiet; and if that wretched beast
thinks he sees a rabbit he?ll dart out, and
the ghost will do the disappearing trick! I
suppose we couldn?t park him somewhere in
the village??
?No !? mourned Chubby; ?Daddy wouldn?t
have let me come if I hadn?t brought him.?
?All right; but don?t blame me if things
go flat. Perhaps it would be better if you
took him on to the house ?
?Which house ?? questioned Chubby, with
little shivers going down her back.
?Which house?? scoffed Phil. ?The


Haunted House, of course ?you could hide
on the verandah, the creepers are so thick;
and you?d be in the middle of things with
a vengeance. I?d be really giving you the
post of honour if I let you do that. But
don?t let Punch bark, whatever you do. If
you see the ghost, you?d better keep quiet
till I come . . . I?ll give you ten minutes?
start, and if he hasn?t turned up I?ll slope
along. The main thing, Chubs, is to keep
perfectly still; I just hope he won?t uncover
his face: they say it?s perfectly awful.
You?re sure you won?t scream or anything
like that??
Chubby was indignant now. ?Of course
I won?t scream; but don?t be longer than
ten minutes, will you, Pip??
She wasn?t scared, but The Haunted House
was dreadfully lonely, and she had never
been near it at night before. Phil might
scold her for bringing Punch, but it was
good to have him there: he looked so sturdy
with his anxious face and his kind eyes. He
wagged his tail at the moment, and held up
a paw. Perhaps he realized how she was
feeling ?
Phil went on mysteriously: "Don?t go into
the house until I come; they say he carries


a light from one room to another ?ten to one
he?s hiding something . . . money, or loot.
It would be perfectly scrummy to find out.
You?d better start, old dear!?
Chubby Drummond nodded. The dusk
had fallen suddenly: it often did that in the
hills. One minute you saw all sorts of purple
shades on the mountains, and the next there
was nothing but shadow. Not for worlds
would she have let Phil Penrose know how
her heart was thudding: she hoped he would
not hear it!
She set out sturdily enough, and Punch
followed, keeping close. As if he realized
that she was more frightened than she had
ever been in her life.
The lights of the village twinkled at her:
they looked beautifully near. And the stars
made her think of a time when she was
watching beside Crazy Kate in the shack on
Mount Difficult. She knew Who lit them,
and that He would be near, too. He always
was when you were scared!
Now and then there was a rustling sound
that made her remember slithery things with
flat heads and spiteful eyes; more than once
Punch darted forward. But he quickly
returned: perhaps he knew that he was on


guard ? The frogs in the swamp half a mile
away were tuning up . . . plonk-plonk . . .
plonk-a-plonk! They sounded friendly.
She drew an extra deep breath when she
came to a gap in the fence. There were slip-
rails here, and they were down. The track
that shone out greyly in front of her led to
the deserted house.
It was a winding path, and there were
tussocks on both sides. Maidenhair fern
threaded the coarse spears of green, and
she trudged on, wondering how far behind
Pip was. At length she reached the garden
gate: it swung open on rusty hinges, and
behind it The Haunted House rose, dark and
terrible.
Chubby glanced about her fearfully, and
then went on. It was the most desolate
garden she had ever seen; the one at The
Laburnams had been wild enough in places,
but it was nothing like this! The paths were
slippery with weeds and moss, and the grass
was rank. The climbing roses on the
verandah tangled and trailed, and com-
pletely shaded the windows.
She climbed the steps and looked about
her. In the dead stillness there were all sorts
of queer sounds, and she hoped that Phil
c


Penrose would come soon. As her eyes
grew accustomed to the gloom she saw that
there was a deck-chair on the verandah.
Exposure to the weather had made the can-
vas rot and sag: she tried it carefully, and
decided that it would not stand her weight;
she crept along the uneven boards, and a
spider swung out from a slender web and
brushed her face! She started, nervously.
The sky was growing lighter: there would
be moonlight soon. A shadow moved from
the tangle of blackberries at the end of the
garden: at first she thought it was the ghost,
but it was only Phil Penrose, treading
cautiously up the path.
?Luck out to-night!? he grunted; ?no sign
of him. I knew he wouldn?t show up when
you brought that confounded dog; they
don?t like dogs.?
He was in one of his sulky moods, and
Chubby decided that it was time to shake
him up.
?I?m going home! ? she declared. ?I don?t
like this place, and it?s full of spiders.?
He followed her rather meekly. Chubs
had been game, all right?it was a pretty
nervy business, this!
?Don?t get your hair off,? he grumbled,


?and you needn?t be in such a hurry; it?s
a gorgeous night, and the moon will soon
be up.?
She breathed more freely when they were
through the gate: that house with the trail-
ing creepers was hateful ?and the garden
was trying to tell her something sad. . . .
They went soberly up the road and along
the river-bank. The moon came out behind
the hill: it didn?t bound like the sun did ?
but it looked like a fire at first, and then
rounded into a great globe?red-gold.
?Going to be a hot day to-morrow, Chubs,?
Pip reflected.
?Yes. Do you really think he is a ghost,
Phil??
?Well, it?s just as bad if someone is dress-
ing up. We?ll run him to earth, and then
we?ll get hold of Constable Conlan. It would
be no end of fun.?
?Would they put him in prison ?? Chubby
sighed. She hated the thought of having
anything to do with that.
?I suppose so; they would fine him, any-
way, and serve him jolly well right. It?s a
cowardly thing to frighten women and girls.?
Chubby sat with her chin in her hands,
pondering. ?Do you think you would be


frightened if you came across him, Pip??
Phil Penrose yawned. There were times
when old Ginger asked awkward questions.
He wasn?t scared, naturally; boys never
were ?but he felt more comfortable in the
open, with the moonlight making a silver
net upon the water. . . .
?We?ll be able to go blackberrying soon,?
he asserted. ?Mrs. Mollie wants to make
jelly, and she says we?ll have a picnic. That
must be Blair on the Upper Road?his horn
is growlier than anyone else s. I wonder he
doesn?t get a car, they?re cheap enough.?
?It?s a lovely side-car to ride in! ? protested
Chubby.
The boy laughed. ?When Dad comes back
he is going to get a Chrysler?unless he
decides to go for a long trip instead. If he
does that, he?s jolly well got to take me this
time. How about coming too, Chubs ?
You?d have real adventures, then!?
?I don?t believe they would be a bit better
than the ones we have!? cried Chubby
Drummond.
Pip whistled. ?You?re in a fighting mood
to-night, Gin-gin!?
?Well, I don?t care; Australia is a wonder-
ful country ?Daddy says so, and he s seen


others! Besides, you?d be horribly seasick.
Pip?Aunt Anne has asked Keith Bollen to
come up for the whole of the Christmas
holidays; isn?t it great??
?Who is Keith Bollen?? growled Phil
Penrose, knowing perfectly well that he
was exasperating Chubby.
?I?ve often told you about him ?great fun,
and good-looking, too.?
?All right, you needn?t rub it in! I know
I?m as ugly as a monkey. I may be going
away myself for the holidays.?
Chubby?s face fell. ?Oh, Pip.
?You wouldn?t miss me; you?d have
Bollen! Anyway, Ron will be here, and
you?ll be so full of him you won?t see any-
one else.?
?I?m not a scrap like that, and you know
it.?
?Oh, don?t get sentimental! ? growled Phil
sullenly.
Chubby Drummond sighed. She had been
making such gorgeous plans, and none of
them would be complete without Pip.
?No one takes your place,? she gulped;
?I?d be dreadfully miserable if you felt out
in the cold; and we?re going to have ripping
times. Aunt Anne is going to have a Christ-


mas tree for the sick children, and I was
thinking out some thrilling plays . .
Phil unbent. ?You?ll have to see to it that
they?re not sloppy. They must have plenty
of pep in them: fighting and smuggling ?
heaps of adventure. You?d better let me
look after that part of the business.?
Chubby beamed. ?Let?s talk it out! ? she
suggested happily. They moved closer
together, and the moonlight danced upon
the river. They did not see a figure moving
down Swamp Road towards the deserted
house. But when they turned to go home
Pip gave a low whistle. There was a fitful
light in the haunted cottage: it moved from
window to window.
?The ghost!? he hissed in a mysterious
voice.


Chapter II
The Haunted House
The next day phil was down to
it with toothache. Mollie Seton marched
him off to the village dentist, and he returned
from this visit importantly. He explained
to Chubby that Harrison had shot something
into his jaw, and before he knew what was
happening the tooth wa� out. But he looked
pretty white, and confessed that his head was
aching like the mischief.
Chubby found herself with a couple of
hours on her hands, and a sudden impulse
seized her. She wasn't a bit afraid of The
Haunted House in the daylight; and if she
could find out something it would be ever
so thrilling!
She went slowly in the blazing sunshine;
her bag of books?one of the straps was
rather uncertain ?hanging over her sturdy
shoulders. Holidays soon . . . and no more
lessons to learn for weeks and weeks!
She went into the shop at the comer: it
was rather a dingy place, but there were


speckled oranges in the windows, and she
knew that they were extra-sweet because she
had had one in her luncheon that day. She
bought a couple and peeled them as she went
along.
The roads were hot and dusty, but the
mountains were all shades of purple and
blue, with flying shadows. She trudged
over the bridge and shut her eyes to the
delight of cool water that laughed over
yellow stones. It would have been so good
to paddle, and her feet were aching; but
her purpose never wavered. She turned
from the tangle of blackberry bushes and
went up Swamp Road.
More than once she thought longingly of
the river; but it wasn?t in her to turn back.
The slip-rails were down, and she took the
winding track, wondering what would meet
her at the other end. Of course, ghosts only
walked at night. . . .
In the daylight she saw that there were a
few flowers blooming in the neglected beds,
and some mignonette. A blackbird fluttered
from the big gum in a near paddock and
caught up a worm. Somehow, things never
seemed so lonely when there were birds
about.


She saw, with a sense of excitement, that
the front door was open. It was almost as
if she were acting out the fairy story of Three
Bears. Everything was dead still, and she
stood for a moment on the verandah, glanc-
ing fearfully about her. The door opened
into a room; treading on tip-toe, for it
seemed rather dreadful to go in without
being asked to do so, Chubby entered.
There was dust everywhere: she could
have written her name on the table that
stood exactly in the centre, with a mat and
bowl on it. The chairs had stiff, leather
seats and very straight backs, and over the
mantelpiece was a framed portrait?an
enlargement?of a girl with a pert face and
a mass of light, frizzy hair. Chubby did not
like her much; but someone had loved her ?
Red Lawson, perhaps!
The place smelt musty, and, in spite of the
fact that it was rather dark, it had a bare,
staring look. The furniture wasn?t a bit
like Aunt Anne?s; and though there were
cushions they were gaudy and quite the
wrong colours. The clock on the mantel-
piece had plated cupids that were a bit like
the ones they put on wedding-cakes!
A ray of sunshine came slanting into the


room: it made a bar of yellow that seemed
to be alive, and some doves in a garden at
a distance began to coo. Chubby was certain
they were saying: ?You?ve got to go-o-o-o
. . . you?ve got to go-o-o.? She answered
impatiently: ?I know I have, but I want to
see things first! ?
She did not know when she began to feel
drowsy. She made her way into the kitchen,
where, to her surprise, she found some dishes
on the table. They had been washed, but
they were piled in untidy heaps, as if the
someone who had used them had not cared
what became of them after. There was a
candlestick, too, with a half-burned candle.
She discovered this with a start of appre-
hension. So that part of it was true . . .
the ghost really did carry a light from room
to room?
She thought this out as she sat in the big
cane chair that was drawn up to the table;
but her thoughts wandered and became
terribly confused. Her head drooped until
it banged quite hard on the table. She
rested it sleepily on her outstretched arm,
and the next thing she knew was that she
was pulling out one of Pip?s teeth with a
tin-opener, and he was telling her to hurry


up; that she would be sure to break it, and
that it was hurting like the mischief! He
scowled crossly at her, and she had to remind
herself that it could not be very nice to have
a tooth taken out without the proper instru-
ments! She was labouring to explain that
she was doing her best when a crash made
her jump and Pip's face disappeared in a
sudden darkness. She called out to him, but
he did not answer, and there was another
deafening rumble that seemed to shake the
room. . . .
She rubbed her eyes and sat up. At first
she could not remember where she was; the
floor was certainly trembling, and she knew
that the sound that had aroused her was a
long peal of thunder. At first she could not
shake off the deadly drowsiness that made
her blink stupidly; then she realized that one
of the swift storms that come so often in the
hill-country had gathered while she was
asleep; and the folk at home would be
wondering where she had got to.
There was a window just above the table:
it showed great, black clouds that were rush-
ing tow?hrds each other and making a
tremendous boo-00-oom when they met!
Chubby had always fancied that when


clouds rushed together like that you could
hear the noise they made! The lightning
was very vivid: it cut the sky in quivering
lines that went zigzagging down to the
ground.
She was still trying to shake herself awake
when she discovered that she was not alone
in the house. The kitchen door stood open,
and sitting with his back to her in the chair
with the rounded arms was a man.
She drew a long, choky breath: it must
be the ghost!
He seemed to be watching the storm, but
the extraordinary part of it was that, even
when he spoke to her, he did not turn his
face. Phil had said that he usually kept that
covered. . . . Her heart began to race.
?Well, Miss Sleepy-head ?so you?ve conde-
scended to wake at last???
It was rather a nice voice : not exactly the
kind you would have expected from a ghost.
Ghosts always spoke in low, mysterious
whispers that made your blood curdle! She
had often wondered what it would feel
like to have her blood curdle, but this
funny, chumed-up feeling that made her
breath come in gasps must be the very
thing!


She choked out an uncertain: ?Oh ... is
this your house ??
?It is; or it used to be. I suppose it still
is.?
He spoke curtly, as if something were
troubling him, Chubby thought. She won-
dered why he did not turn and face her: it
felt so queer to be talking to the back of his
head. . . .
?I was looking for the ghost,? she informed
him, hoping he would not be offended. He
gave an odd laugh.
?Who told you about the ghost? Though
there are plenty in this place, to be sure. . . .?
He broke off abruptly: the child would
not understand that the house was full of
spectres .. . buried dreams, and hopes! It
had been folly to come back. . . .
Chubby stood her ground valiantly. ?Phil
Penrose heard them talking about it in the
village, she said sturdily. ?We didn?t know
whether he was a really-truly ghost, or some-
one dressing up. And I thought if he did
that I would tell him that it wasn?t fair to
frighten women and children.?
She had plunged into the heart of her
subject in her usual, blundering fashion.
It was mean of him to keep his face turned


away like that, and rude, too; it was time
somebody told him the truth!
He shrugged his shoulders, and again he
laughed. It was the strangest laugh Chubby
Drummond had ever heard: it sounded
almost like a sob!
?So I frighten people, do I ? But you?re
not frightened . . . how does that happen??
She did not know how to answer this. She
wasn?t really scared; but she did wish he
would look at her. The clouds parted at
the moment to let some bronzy-sunlight
through: it filled the room and gave it a
strange glare. Just then, the man wheeled
round. . . .
It wasn?t fear that Chubby experienced
then: something gripped her heart, and she
felt icy-cold! His eyes reminded her of
something terrible she had once seen ... a
dog that had been run over by a motor, and
she had tried to help. . . . He had licked her
hand before he died. . . .
Now Chubby was not a soldier?s daughter
for nothing: her father had told her what
shrapnel could do; and once he had taken
her into a hospital ward where some of his
old comrades were cot-cases. She hated
war; and at sight of this twisted face with


the smile that was not a smile, and the
deeply scarred cheek she wanted to sob her
heart out. If she had only seen him at once
she would never have said that dreadful
thing about frightening women and children.
She would never forgive herself.
She went to the chair and knelt beside it.
There were tears in her eyes, and the man
saw them. She reached up her hand
dumbly. . . .
?Well?? he asked slowly.
She gulped. ?Did it hurt terribly?? she
asked.
His eyes were smiling now, she was cer-
tain: they looked very gentle and under-
standing. She did not know what to say:
what could she say without wounding him ?
Her mother had always despaired over
Chubby?s downrightness and lack of tact;
but her good angel was surely at hand at
this moment?
He answered quietly: ?It hurt quite a lot,
and that wasn?t the worst of it.?
?No?? asked Chubby Drummond sorrow-
fully. She crept nearer to him: she was
never shy with anyone who was suffering,
you simply couldn?t think of yourself when
people were in pain. She reached up her


hand and touched his cheek, softly. He sat
very still, and he did not shrink. Perhaps
there was something healing in the awkward
touch; it carried him back to the hospital
when the Sister?they had all been Sisters
to the boys ?had tended him with compas-
sion, never with revulsion.
He forgot that she was a child: she was
someone to cling to in a dark hour.
?So they call me a ghost in the village,
do they?? he went on; ?if you had a face
like this, would you go about in the daylight
more than you could help, little girl??
?My name is Chubby,? she told him.
?It suits you. I think I should have called
you Sturdy! And you did not answer my
question.?
She bit her trembling lip; truthfulness con-
tending with pity. ?You were fighting for
us! ? she cried. ?I am proud of soldiers . . .
my daddy was one! ?
He bent his head; the rain that had fallen
with tropical fury had ceased, and the storm
was rolling away to the distant hills. The
air was wildly sweet: it carried scent from
the drenched flowers.
?Yes ... I fought for you, and such as
you,? he answered bitterly; ?but that doesn?t


make much difference. I frighten them?l
frightened the girl I was to have married.?
?0-oh! ? gulped Chubby miserably. ?Are
you Red Lawson ??
?All that?s left of him; crawling back to
spend a few weeks in the place that was to
have been his home. . .
He had forgotten that he was speaking to
a child. Chubby had taken his hand and
was patting it affectionately. At this minute
footsteps sounded on the verandah, and an
anxious voice called:
?Ginger ... are you there, old dear??
Chubby started up penitently. ?Daddy
? ? ? �h, I didn?t mean to stay so long: I
went to sleep!?
Drummond stood in the doorway, looking
from his Red-head to the man in the chair.
Chubby was in her usual rumpled condition:
the perspiration had been dripping from her
face to her arm as she lay asleep, and her
hair was damp about her forehead. He did
not quite know what he had feared
when she had not returned at her usual time
from The Lodge, he had rung Mollie Seton
to ascertain her whereabouts. Phil had
suggested that she might be ghost-hunting
on her own; you never could tell what old


Chubs would be up to, he complained!
Inquiries in the village had roused Garry?s
fears: there were vague stories about a
mysterious, prowling figure that had been
seen going in the direction of The Haunted
House; and, if the man in question were
playing ghost, there might be a dozen rea-
sons for his conduct, all of them ugly.
Drummond set off hot-haste, more uneasy
than he would have cared to acknowledge,
and his relief knew no bounds when Chubby
threw herself into his arms in her usual
boisterous fashion. He stroked the thick,
bright hair and let her lead him to where
the hunched figure sat motionless, his head
in his hands.
Chubby explained. ?It?s Red Lawson,
Daddy, and he was dreadfully wounded in
the war. ... I was wondering whether
Doctor Ted couldn?t do something for his
poor face. . . ??
Garry strode forward. ?Red, old chap!??
he cried in his hearty fashion. The man
turned, and the two soldiers looked at each
other with the understanding that unlocks
words. Lawson rose heavily to his feet.
?Had a bad time, lad?? asked Garry
Drummond. And added: ?I had a bit of


a dishing, too . . . gas! You missed that?
Good!?
Chubby saw that they had forgotten her!
She stole softly out and watched the ragged
clouds flying past on their way to Mount
Difficult.
When her father joined her, he smiled
gravely: old Ginger had the knack of
getting into the middle of things, without
doubt! She followed him down the steps
penitently.
?What will you be up to next, darlin? ??
he asked in all seriousness.
?I meant to be back in good time!? she
jerked. ?It was going to sleep that kept me,
you see??
She was beginning to feel very hungry,
and this suggested a punishment. ?Do you
think I should go without any tea?? she
asked contritely.
?H?m . . . we?ll see what Aunt Anne says
to that.?
Aunt Anne was inclined to be testy: the
storm had brought on one of her severe
headaches, and she had been really anxious.
But the end of the matter was a hearty meal
and a hot bath, and bed for the culprit. Her
aunt declared that you never could tell what


germs were shut up in these deserted houses:
where there was dirt and gloom there was
always trouble; and Chubby must cultivate
discretion and curb her impulses!
It was dreadful having to go to bed so
early on an evening when the air was still
and sweet after the thunder. Chubby
sighed heavily as she drew up the blinds
and saw her father and mother set out
through the orchard. They were laughing
as if they were amused about something, and
she longed to join them.
She was just snuggling down again when
she heard the tap-tap of her aunt?s sticks
in the passage. Miss Manners gave her a
searching glance. ?In bed? That?s right.
You really must try to be more thoughtful,
Chubby; you?ll be getting yourself and all of
us into a terrible pickle one of these days,
and you?re a big girl now, you know.?
?Yes. I?m ever so sorry, Aunt Anne!
The trouble with me is that being sorry
doesn?t keep me from doing silly things next
time! ?
It was getting dark, almost too dark to
see the smile that made Anne Manners look
years younger. She went on slowly: ?If
that man had been what they supposed him


to be in the village, you might have had a
fright that you would have remembered all
your life! You must not do this sort of thing
again, Chubby/?
?No. It was such a hot afternoon, Aunt
Anne, and you see I went sound asleep. I
didn?t mean to stay so long . . . honest
Injun! ?
?That is no excuse, my child.?
?No,? agreed Chubby, forlornly.
?I have a horror of these closed-in houses
?your hair must be thoroughly washed
to-morrow, and it always looks redder than
ever when it has been washed.?
It was that assertion that was responsible
for an experiment that ended disastrously.
It proved the last straw that broke this
particular camel?s back!


Chapter 111
Chubby Dyes Her Hair
The day dawned just as usual,
except that Chubby was very absent-
minded. She carried with her a guilty con-
science, and in consequence was anxious to
please. She offered to clean the knives for
Wiggins?Aunt Anne hated stainless ones,
declaring that you could never make them
really sharp?and was so eager to do her
ordinary jobs that her mother looked at her
in amazement. But she never guessed what
eventful hours these were, any more than she
guessed how Chubby?s heart throbbed with
anxiety and anticipation . . . how rosy the
dreams that lured and beckoned and made
the hours drag.
Phil had sauntered over in the morning
with a suggestion of a gully which he asserted
had lyrebirds in it. They had met at the
lower gate, just as she was preparing to toil
up the Mount with a heavy mail and some
loaves of bread in the big basket. He was
testy when she excused herself, and told her


CHUBBY DYES HER HAIR 55
loftily that if she did not want to come there
were others who did; declaring, supercili-
ously, that her hair was rather more of a
flame than usual.
Chubby dimpled happily. After to-day
he could never tease her about that
again!
He went on rudely: ?I can?t think why
Mrs. Drummond doesn?t get it cut: it would
look a heap better. All the girls are shingled
or bobbed nowadays. It?s old-fashioned,
and it isn?t even pretty!?
She agreed cheerfully to this. Her eyes
were full of sparkles, and afterwards Pip
remembered this fact.
?Good thing for you that it?s thick,? he
drawled offensively; ?it would be even
worse if it were thin and scraggy. . . .
Lettie Collins always looks as if she has
had her head under greasy water! But if
it were short it wouldn?t show at all when
you have your hat on.?
Chubby answered dreamily; ?Kittie likes
it in plaits, Pip; and I wish you would let
me forget my hair!?
He grinned. ?Nobody could forget it ?it
flames like a beacon. We?re a couple of
beauties, all right; I?ll be more freckles than


skin, soon! Want me to help you up the
hill with the basket??
They balanced it between them on a long
stick. Chubby was aching to tell about the
miracle that was to happen that afternoon,
but she bit the impulsive words back. She
would not let anyone into the secret until
she appeared with beautiful brown hair!
Phil studied her curiously: there was
something doing, and he would have given
a great deal to know what it was. When
they reached the side porch Miss Manners
met them and suggested that he should
spend the day at The Sycomores. Chubby's
expression of dismay made her realize that
she had blundered somewhere: she noted
the quick, indrawn breath and the sudden
pallor.
Chubby waited miserably: this was her
one chance till next week . . . and probably
Pip would say yes, just because he knew he
wasn?t wanted!
He explained elaborately that he had
promised to be elsewhere, and Chubby
smiled sunnily in utter relief. As he took
his departure she called after him: ?You
might have tea with us, Phil . . . you could
easily walk back this way. . .


CHUBBY DYES HER HAIR 57
He made a face at her, and said conde-
scendingly: ?If I'm not too tired, or have
nothing else on/?
She saw him vanish with a contented sigh,
and Aunt Anne watched her with an amused
chuckle. Children really were absurd
creatures. Usually the boy jumped at any
chance to be at The Sycomores: but they
had evidently made separate plans for the
afternoon. She became engrossed in her
correspondence, and forgot all about them.
Dinner found Chubby absent-minded, and
almost oblivious to the toothsome, stuffed
cold lamb which was Wigsie?s speciality.
There were new potatoes, and peas that
melted in your mouth . . . but the moments
dragged. ... At last the house settled down
for the siesta that everybody at The Syco-
mores indulged in now that summer had
come in earnest. Everybody but Chubby,
on this Saturday of blazing sunshine.
She climbed to her loft with a flushed face;
and Punch followed lazily. Everybody was
asleep . . . no . . . Wiggins was scrubbing
the kitchen . . . never had she taken so
long! At last, with a thrill, Chubby saw
her make her way to her room with a pile
of magazines, and knew that she would not


reappear until four o?clock for afternoon tea.
She stole into the house ?there was always
plenty of hot water, and she filled a big can
to the top, only spilling a few drops on the
rapidly drying linoleum. The whole world
seemed to be dozing; the horses from the
saw-mill were making their way down the
trolly-track on their last journey till Monday
morning. They would shortly be turned out
into the paddock where the shelter-trees were
casting deep shadows like blots.
Chubby caught sight of her flaring head
when she struggled out with the heavy can
of water: it seemed to be on fire! Never
again! She chanted this to herself over and
over in a soft ecstasy: it seemed to be too
good to be true!
She climbed the ladder slowly: once the
can tilted and the scalding water splashed
her left foot, but she scarcely noticed it. The
next trip brought a bucket of cold water and
an empty can . . . she had already secured
two large towels. . . .
Punch watched proceedings with quiet
interest. She hugged him lovingly: he was
inclined to be reddish, too, but it didn?t
matter with dogs!
Aunt Anne had given her a striped green-


CHUBBY DYES HER HAIR 59
and-white blind for the windows. Chubby
undid the ropes and it slid down, making her
beautifully private. She lifted her typewriter
to the floor and removed the table-cover,
then she sat down to undo a precious white
packet that was tied with chemist?s string and
had a written label . . . permanganate of
potash.
She eyed the magic crystals with awe: it
had been such luck to overhear that con-
versation in the village when she had gone
to match some silk for Aunt Anne! Two
of Mr. Marsh?s ?young ladies? had been dis-
cussing the dyeing of hair, and the one with
the sandy eyelashes said that there were full
directions given in My Lady?s Boudoir for
turning red to brown! You got sixpenn?orth
of permanganate of potash and it brought
out the most gorgeous shades!
Chubby could scarcely wait till her parcel
was untied. The day before, Miss Manners
had given her five shillings for pocket-
money ; she had planned to take back
tobacco for her father and sweets for Kittie
and Aunt Anne ?it was lovely to give things
to people! She shopped rapidly, and then
made her way first of all to the newsagent?s,
where she obtained her copy of My Lady?s


Boudoir, and then to the chemist?s. The
shop was very cool, and there was a delect-
able smell of soaps and perfumes. There
were also great bottles of green, and amber,
and crimson?the heavenliest colours! The
grey-haired man who served her asked her
whether she wanted the crystals in case of
snake-bite, and wondered at the rush of pink
into her cheeks. She did not answer, and
he gave her directions as to quantities if Miss
Manners were going to use it for drains. . . .
When she reached the Lower Road she
took out the precious magazine and gloated
over the picture on the cover. The girl in
the hammock had glorious hair: it shone as
if it had been polished, and was nut-brown.
. . . Chubby wondered whether it had ever
been red. The worst of the business was
that there was a whole night to be lived
through before the great experiment: it
seemed a lifetime to wait!
When the blind was secured she tipped the
contents of the packet into the empty bucket,
then she poured on the hot water, stirring
the mixture with a large spoon she had taken
from the kitchen table-drawer. It went
rather a curious colour, but she was too
excited to bother about that. She tried a


piece of typewriting paper in the dye, and
it came out a wonderful brown!
She had studied the directions till she knew
them by heart. The first injunction was to
carefully wash the hair! Chubby did every-
thing vigorously, and some of the soapsuds
splashed on to the floor. Her face was
flushed with excitement when she started on
the important stage of the proceedings; it
felt just a bit like a fairy story! She knelt
down and dipped her head into the bucket
. . . Lady Pamela ?the writer of the sketch
?said that the best results were obtained by
rinsing the hair under a running tap after
every strand had been saturated several
times. Chubby flung back the dripping
locks, and wrapped the towel round her
shoulders. . . . Water was laid on in the
stable, so this was a simple matter.
She knew all the horses now, and she
called softly to them as she passed. Silver-
heels whinnied a greeting, and she stopped
to pat the sleek forehead. If all had gone
well the damp hair would be almost the
shade of the mare?s shining coat ... a little
darker, perhaps; but that would be all the
better.
She peeped through the chinks in the big,


dosed door. Everything was quiet at the
house . . . her father was still sleeping in
his deck-chair on the shady side of the lawn:
he had not moved since she had last seen him.
When she was satisfied that the tap had
done its work thoroughly she climbed back
to her den. It was a very hot day, and it
shouldn?t take long to dry her hair. She
propped up the mirror she had brought from
her bedroom, and drew a sharp breath.
Gorgeously dark . . . she was certain that
it was going to be a perfect success! And
then she noticed the purplish-brown stains
on the bathroom towel, and the fact that her
forehead had some queer, yellowish blotches !
What mattered most of all was that her linen
frock looked as if someone had been doing
splash-work on it, and that there was one
large, egg-shaped spot right in the front!
This sobered her delight for some minutes
till she reflected that the chemist would tell
her what to do. . . .
She sat by the open window with the blind
half-pulled up. The sun was so fierce that
she began to feel a bit sick. The thick mane
was not drying nearly so quickly as she had
thought it would, and she hoped nervously
that they would not call her for afternoon


CHUBBY DYES HER HAIR 63
tea before she was quite ready. . . . Over
and over again she pictured the wonderful
moment when she would appear with a
lovely brown head. . . .
More than once she shook off a troubling
remembrance of a woman who had lived on
the opposite side of the road from The
Labumams. Her hair had been a light,
mousy-brown, sprinkled plentifully with
grey, and she had come back from the city
one day with dingy black curls that looked
harsh and ropy . . . Kittie had said that it
served her right for being so vain, and had
added that the grey hairs would have
softened her wrinkles!
Reaction had now set in in earnest, and
Chubby read anxiously through the article
in My Lady?s Boudoir once more. Lady
Pamela was comforting: ?If a little of the
natural gloss should be lacking at first, pro-
cure a bottle of Roger & Calebs brilliantine
and apply with a toothbrush,? she advised.
On the same page was a treatment for
freckles that sounded most convincing. She
must show this to Pip! And Lady Pamela
said that, if you wished to be slim and wrote
to her enclosing stamps, she would tell you
how to accomplish this!


The sunshine poured in, and the perspira-
tion began to stream down Chubby?s face.
The ends of her hair were drying?and were
certainly much darker. . . .
She had just decided this when Wigsie
came out on the side verandah and beat the
gong vigorously for afternoon tea. Chubby
swung down the ladder and made her way
to the porch where fern-balls and hanging-
baskets blended with the green-and-white-
striped blinds and made everything look
deliciously cool.
They were all there . . . Kittie cried out
in dismay: "Chubs . , . what have you
been doing to your hair??
Chubby flamed. It really had happened,
then ?
Her father turned lazily, and Aunt Anne
put on her glasses. There was the oddest
smile about her lips. None of them were
struck dumb with admiration ... it was
like throwing a cracker that had missed fire!
Drummond began to laugh helplessly.
Chubby glanced pleadingly at him. Her
mother frowned.
"You never know from one day to another
what Chubby will be up to,? she declared in
the old, worried manner. "Tell me at once


what you have been doing, you dreadful
child! ?
The answer was a gulp. ?You?ve got
such beautiful hair . . . I?ve always hated
mine! ?
?Don?t be so ridiculous!? flared Kittie.
Garry strode over to the culprit and turned
her round. Then his eyes twinkled. ?Great
Scott, Kitten . . . she?s been dyeing it!?
Aunt Anne laughed dryly. She had never
seen anything quite so absurd or pitiful as
the abashed face, and the mass of extra-
ordinary colours that had once been a
red-head!
?You are a very naughty girl!? admon-
ished Kittie Drummond; ?your nose looks
as if it had been bruised all over, and you?ve
ruined that towel . . . and your dress!
Garry . . . you really must say something
this time!?
Chubby had forgotten the towel, it was
still in her hand. She eyed it forlornly.
Spotted and stained from fringe to fringe
? ? . was it possible that her hair looked
anything like that ? If so, perhaps they
would let her have it cut off! A gleam of
hope pierced the depths of her dejection.
It was so ugly,? she choked, ?none of


you liked it . . . you were always teasing
99
me. . . .
Her mother sighed. ?What did you use,
Chubby?? she demanded.
?Permanganate of potash; they tell you
how to do it in My Lady's Boudoir.?
Garry whistled. ?You?ve done it now,
Ginger . . . you?ll be spotted like a leopard!
Have you looked at yourself??
?Not since it was dry.?
She stood very still, her splendid mass of
hair spraying out around her. It was every
shade under the sun, her father assured her.
But he said it kindly; noting the trembling
lips and other significant symptoms.
?You?ve ruined Aunt Anne?s good towel,
and your frock. ... I don?t know what we
are going to do with you! ? Kittie com-
plained. ?I can?t think what Ron and Keith
will say when they come. . . .?
Chubby strangled a sob. She was always
doing the wrong thing!
?Well,? decided Aunt Anne briskly, ?it?s
no use crying over spilled milk. It?s done,
and it can?t be undone. All I hope is that
the wretched stuff hasn?t taken the gloss out
of your hair; it was getting quite decent!?
Chubby gave her a grateful glance. ?I?ll


CHUBBY DYES HER HAIR 67
buy another towel,? she jerked. ?Was my
hair really getting nice, Aunt Anne??
Miss Manners qualified. ?As nice as red
hair ever is, child! Some people seem to
admire it, but we?re not all made alike.?
Kittie Drummond sighed. ?There are
times, Chubs, when I wish you had been
a boy.?
?You don?t wish it more than I do,? jerked
Chubby dolefully.
Her father chuckled. ?I can?t fancy those
sturdy legs in pants, Ginger. Oh, I forgot
.. . you?re not Ginger any longer! We?ll
have to find a new name for you! ?
This was dreadful . . . everything had
gone wrong, it seemed! Wiggins brought
out afternoon tea, and nearly dropped the
tray in her astonishment. ?Law?s sake, Miss
Chubby, whatever have you been doing?
Your hair was bad enough before, I should
say! And I?ll be bound you have made a
fine mess, somewhere.?
Chubby?s heart was as heavy as lead. ?I
did spill a little in the loft, Wigsie. . . . I?ll
clean it all up.?
She stood looking from one to the other
wistfully. None of them understood. Not
even Daddy, though his eyes were twinkling.


?The end of this will be that we shall
have to send you away to school,? declared
Mrs. Drummond dejectedly. Anne Manners
started to pour out tea. She was disconcerted
at the surge of feeling that swept her at
thought of Chubby going away. There had
been times lately when she had assured
herself that she had only existed before
the advent of the Drummonds at Mount
Pleasant.
Phil Penrose?s decision was that Chubby
had gone piebald. Some of the thick strands
had escaped altogether, and the whole effect
was dispiriting. Before she went to bed that
evening, Chubby sought her father.
?Will it ever wear off, Dad?? she asked
anxiously; and added piteously: ?It won?t
be like this for life, will it??
She had studied herself in the long mirror
in her wardrobe, and the result was profound
dejection. Garry patted the plump shoulder
sympathetically. It was no use reassuring
her by the reflection that beauty was only
skin-deep; he knew, or he guessed, that in
the heart of every girl-child was the longing
to be pretty! She had scrubbed the stain on
her nose till she had all but taken the skin
off; and her eyes were big and sad. Her


CHUBBY DYES HER HAIR 69
mother had been very cross about the ruined
frock, and it was all a bitter disappointment.
Drummond thought, as he had often
thought before, that there was something
rather splendid about his Ugly Duckling;
that night he told her so. He knew how full
her heart was when she gulped and turned
her head away; and he took one of the
thick plaits in his hand and looked at it
affectionately.
?God makes everything to match, old
dear," he assured her. ?People with red hair
have extra-good complexions; and as you
get older the colour will darken."
?Really, Daddy??
?Really! Anyway, I wouldn?t change my
copper-top for any youngster in the world.
Honest, Chubs, I?ll miss my ginger girl for
a while! ??
?Perhaps if I washed it in strong
soda ...??? she suggested in rather a
croaky voice. ?It might come out more
quickly ? I don?t mind what I do, Dad!"
Drummond groaned. ?For heaven?s sake,
kid, leave it alone. . . . Time will do the
trick: it mends quite a lot of bungles."
Dr. Ted Blair?s comment was a dismayed:
?You won?t have any germs in that hair,


Chubs: you?ve disinfected it well and
truly! ?
He undid one plait and surveyed the
rippling mass critically. ?Next time you
want to try an experiment of this kind,
Ginger, use a toothbrush ?gets it better into
the roots, they say!?
?There won?t be any next time!? gulped
Chubby miserably.


Chapter IV
In which Pip is Jealous!
Nothing ever happened as you
wanted it to, Chubby decided when,
at the last moment, Keith Bollen wrote to
tell her that his parents were going to take
him with them on the American trip. He
explained that the family doctor had got it
into his head that he was outgrowing his
strength, and had suggested that the sea
voyage was the remedy. He was rather
dejected, and his low spirits added to the
disappointment his news occasioned.
Chubby told Phil Penrose all about it as
they went along the Upper Road one even-
ing; and was very cross with him because
he laughed superciliously.
?You don?t know what a dear he is!? she
cried indignantly. ?He?s got the jolliest
manners, and never hurts your feelings.?
Pip sniffed contemptuously. ?Don?t I
know ? I?ve read about his sort in books:
they always die young?and it's a mighty
good thing they do. I can?t bear prigs.?


She turned upon him stormily. ?He?s not
a prig?he?s full of fun. It?s just . .
Phil thrust his hands into his pockets.
?Say it! ?he admonished. ?It?s just that he?s
different from me! I?m jolly glad he?s not
coming for Christmas ?so that?s that! I
suppose you?ll go down to see him off ? Will
he be too polite to laugh at the mess you?ve
made of your hair? You?re lucky that that
beastly stuff didn?t rot it and make it come
out at the roots. Some dyes do that. Of
course, there?s time yet!?
Chubby made no answer: Pip was in a
queer humour. He went on moodily: ?You
may make sure of one thing, I?d have made
myself scarce if your precious Keith had
honoured Mount Pleasant with his high-
and-mighty presence. I detest boys with
manners. . .
?You won?t like Ron, then! Daddy
always says he should have been a knight
of olden time. . . .?
Phil shrugged his shoulders. ?I?d give him
away with a pound of tea, if he belonged to
me! I?ll be glad when the holidays are over;
kids who go to public schools always give
themselves airs and have swelled heads. You
needn?t expect to see much of me, Chubby! ?


Now Chubby Drummond knew that public
schools were a sore point with Pip. He
looked so bad-tempered that she was sorry
for him. She realized with a sensation of
worry that Christmas was going to be an
awkward time! If Ron was patronizing, as
he was almost sure to be, Phil would get
waxy and go off by himself. That would
spoil everything.
He went on rudely: "He?s a musical
genius, isn?t he ? Dad took me to hear a
kid-violinist one time: he wore a Little Lord
Fauntleroy costume, black velvet with a
sash, and a lace collar! I thought I was
going to be sick! ?
Chubby began to chuckle; anything more
unlike Ronald could scarcely be imagined.
"He has gorgeous eyes,? she said mis-
chievously.
"Better and better! ? flashed Phil Penrose
sarcastically.
He had had to wear glasses lately: big,
tortoiseshell-rimmed, bi-focal ones. They
made him look rather like an owl, and
certainly did not improve his appearance.
"He can?t help being good-looking,?
flamed Chubby, who was nothing if not
clannish.


?You can have him! I'll bet he has long
lashes, and a pink-and-white skin like a
girl?s! ?
?He?s got a fearful lot of prizes,?? sighed
Chubby, who had not distinguished herself
at exams.
Phil swaggered on: ?He would have!
Anyway, I?ve all sorts of plans for the
holidays.?
He advanced this with such an air of
mystery that Chubby became curious.
?You?ll tell me?? she begged.
?All depends. The one thing you may be
sure of is that I won?t play gooseberry. I?ve
never done it yet and I don?t intend to start.?
For a couple of days after that, Pip kept
himself to himself; but when Chubby
returned from the trip to town, he con-
descended to get down from his high horse
and listen to her accounts of shopping, and
how she had felt when the big mail steamer
had moved out from the pier, and there was
that sickening space of whirling water, and
the streamers that broke so quickly. . . .
?It?s odd the way you feel as if you?re
all stomach when people go away from
you,? she told him, quite churned up at the
remembrance.


He nodded. ?It?s a lot worse when
it?s your father, Ginger. . . . You?ve got
yours. . .
Chubby?s warm heart melted. ?I know.
There will be a mail in before Christmas,
won?t there??
?Hard to say. It all depends on whether
he is near a place where he can post. Any-
way, men forget everything when they are
shooting big game.?
?He won?t forget! Phil, the shops are
wonderful this year. ... I had nearly two
pounds to spend . . . Aunt Anne and Daddy
made it up between them! Last year we just
pretended that we were filling stockings. . . .
And we passed The Laburnams ?Whelan
the Wrecker was there, and it looked
dreadful ?just heaps of bricks! George Reid
hadn?t forgotten me ?
Phil Penrose whistled. ?Cats don?t remem-
ber ?they like anyone who gives them plenty 7
to eat and a comfortable place to sleep in.
Give me a dog, any old time.?
Chubby expostulated. The tabby had
uttered his own particular mew when he
had seen her, and had watched her go with
almost the old anguish in his eyes. She was
certain he hadn?t forgotten her!


Pip changed the subject to a sarcastic:
?What did Bollen say about your hair??
?Nothing. He looks fearfully white and
thin, Pip.?
?Fading away? I told you what would
happen! Some kids have all the luck. I
wouldn?t call the King my uncle if I could
go off with my dad. I shall, some day.
When does your precious Ronald come??
?Next week. He had dinner with us, and
then we went to pictures; it was great. Phil,
do you know, Doctor Ted thinks something
can be done for Red Lawson?s face . . . isn?t
it ripping ? He took him to a specialist, and
they say it will be a long job, but that they
will be able to fix up his nose. With a
rabbit?s breast, or something ?
Phil broke into contemptuous laughter.
?Rabbit?s breast!? he mocked. ?They do it
with a bird?s breast, you silly?l was reading
about it the other day!?
Chubby felt aggrieved. ?Well, anyway, it
is going to make a lot of difference. And
they are going to do some skin-grafting . . .
I said they could have some of mine if they
liked. They have to cut it out . . . what are
you laughing at, Pip; you are getting ruder
and ruder!?


Pip gurgled helplessly at thought of
Chubby?s milk-white skin on Red Lawson?s
weatherbeaten face.
?You are an idiot, you know, Chubs; when
they do anything like that they have to get
as near the colour as possible; it would look
as bad as ever if they didn?t?sort of rain-
bow effect, you know! You meant well, old
thing,?? he finished patronizingly. The truth
of the matter was that he was still a bit sore
over the fact that Chubby had run the ghost
to earth all on her own.
?They are going to do it in Aunt Anne?s
new hospital . . . did you know that it
would be partly ready for Christmas, Pip??
?I heard something about it; there?s no-
thing very wonderful about that, Ginger?
they only had to build on an extra wing:
it was quite a decent house before.?
?Of course it was decent, or Aunt Anne
wouldn?t have bought it! But they had to
repaint it, and put fresh wallpapers in every
room. ... Doctor Ted says it will be the
best private hospital out of Melbourne!
There?s to be a children?s ward, and three
sun-porches, and a theatre . . . Pip, why do
they call the place they operate in a theatre ??
"Ask me another! I?m not fond of doc-


tors like you are. May have something to
do with the shape of it ... I don t know.
Must have cost Miss Manners a heap of
money! Of course, she?ll get it back ?she?s
got a pretty shrewd head, you take it from
me, Chubby Drummond!?
Chubby flamed. ?She isn?t doing it for
that: she has plenty already?she says that
many a life is lost for want of proper atten-
tion, and that it can?t do sick people any
good to have to take them down to
Melbourne, even if the ambulances are com-
fortable ! If you ask me, she s a darling . . .
it seems so funny ?I used to think she was
such a cross old thing: I simply dreaded
coming to live with her. And now it would
be awful if I had to go away.?
?See to it that you behave yourself then;
she won?t stand any larks, and you do get
into scrapes, Chubs. As that stuff is wearing
off your hair it looks worse than ever! We?re
a good-looking pair, no question about that! ?
He said this with his old, cheerful grin. They
had reached the bridge over Silver Creek,
and the blackberry tangle on the other side
made a high wall. The frogs were croaking
in Reedy Pond, and the evening was very
still. Chubby?s thoughts were still on Aunt


IN WHICH PIP IS jealous! 79
Anne?s thrilling venture. Fair Haven was a
large, rambling house on the side of a gentle
slope: the rooms were big and sunny, and
Dr. Ted had said it was an ideal building for
a hospital. He was whistling more than ever
these days, and his practice was steadily
growing; he had confided to Chubby that
the prospect of a car that would climb the
steepest track was within easy distance,
thanks to Miss Manners. . . . And then he
had reddened unexpectedly, and Chubby
had wondered why. Once or twice he had
started to say something about Mrs. Mollie
and then had stopped right in the middle!
But he was always willing to talk about Fair
Haven, and the wards that had so many
windows. There was a blue room, and a
pink room, and a primrose room. It was all
tremendously interesting. He had assured
his eager listener that they would be able to
do quite important ops. in the theatre that
was to have the most up-to-date equipment;
and he repeated Aunt Anne?s statement that
many a valuable life would be saved by
taking things in time.
m The blackberries were beginning to redden.
?When they?re ripe we?ll have to pick lots
and lots,? Chubby reflected; ?Aunt Anne


wants buckets of them for wine that Wigsie
makes. It?s not the kind that makes you
drunk, Pip?it?s be-autiful!?
WIXXi.,
Phil shied a stone into' mid-stream, and
they watched the circles widening and widen-
ing. Chubby started at sound of a stealthy,
gliding movement in the rushes near the
bridge and made hurriedly in its direction.
The boy watched her lazily: old Chubs was
always getting the wind-up about something.
He saw her seize a long, tough bough and
strike lustily, again and again. Her plaits
rose and fell with her vigorous efforts; finally
she called in triumph: ?I?ve done it, Pip
. Tve really killed it this time!?
He roused himself listlessly and joined her.
The big, black snake that had been wriggling
its way to the creek was still twitching spas-
modically: it looked as if it had life in it;
but it was past doing any mischief: Chubby
had seen to that! Its back was broken in
more than one place, and its head was pulp.
She surveyed it with pride. ?I wanted to
do it by myself,? she explained. ?Pip?
don?t they really die till the sun goes down ??
?Don?t know: no one knows. People say
all sorts of things . . . You?ve made a good
job of him, Gin. . . .?


He saw her seize a long, tough bough and strike lustily,
again and again




She stood, thinking deeply. ?Tip . . .? she
ventured at length.
?Well ??
?Couldn?t we carry him home ? I?d love
Aunt Anne to see him.?
?Silly-billy! ?
?Well, you?d want to show it to everybody
if you had killed a great thing like that! ?
?All right?don?t get your hair off! You
couldn?t make more fuss if he were a boa-
constrictor! I?ll see if we can fix him on a
pole and take him between us.?
He got quite enthusiastic over this part of
the business. They started out for Mount
Pleasant, walking very carefully, and
Chubby?s cup was full when old Magnus
from Ferny Bend stopped them with an
admiring: ?Shouldn?t wonder if that?s the
big un Ive seed off and on every day for
a week. Got him down by the bridge, didn?t
ye ? Aye, he s the very feller, missie. . . .?
At The Sycomores there was as much
excitement as the heart of child could desire.
When Miss Manners joined her nephew, she
said, dryly: Chubby will tackle most things
as she goes through life: she never knows
when she is beaten! ?
?Like someone else I know,? agreed Garry,


82 CHUBBY AND PIP
with an affectionate glance at the worn face.
Preparations for Christmas went apace:
there was Ronald?s break-up and his numer-
ous prizes to gloat over. Phil Penrose kept
well out of the way for the first day or
two.


Chapter V
?Two are Company!?
The odd part of it was that pip
did not play gooseberry . . . and the
unexpected happened!
Ronald was so much the hero of the occa-
sion that Chubby grew surprisingly shy. He
looked very splendid and so grown-up that
she did not throw herself into his arms as she
had meant to do. Everybody who loved her
was aware of 'Chubby?s strangle-hold/ as her
father called it; but a sense of strangeness
held her back and checked her usual impul-
sive demonstration of affection.
Perhaps Ronald was feeling a bit awkward
too, she wondered ? His arrival reminded
her of the evening they had first come to
Mount Pleasant, and Aunt Anne?s distant
reception of them had scared them. It was
all so different now. There were days when
she was silent and a trifle grim; but Chubby
knew that that meant suffering bravely
endured, and tried to go about the house
quietly. And then, suddenly, the keen eyes


would grow warm and kind. The odd part
of it was, as she explained to Dr. Blair: ?I
realty love Aunt Anne . . . you know,
Doctor Ted ?right down in my heart!?
He laughed, and pulled her hair, and
reminded her that the heart in question
was an outsize one. And then they talked
about Fair Haven, because the new hospital
was never long out of his thoughts. And
Chubby made a good listener. She knew
that the beds that were already being
set up in the children?s ward had dainty
covers and extra-comfortable mattresses, and
there were to be jolty pictures all along
the walls.
?There are lots of things that bother doc-
tors, Chubs,? he confessed with a frown,
?and we are still fighting quite a number of
diseases in the dark. But we know that
cheerful surroundings are half the battle, and
we?re going to make Fair Haven talked about
all over the State.?
She was unusually thoughtful. There was
an ugly remembrance tugging at her heart
. . . of a time when Ronald had w T ritten
hateful things about Aunt Anne and had put
the letter in the wrong envelope, so that it
had reached the mistress of The Sycomores


instead of the one for whom it had been
intended!
She put her fear into words: ?Doctor Ted
. . . do you think that Aunt Anne will go
back into her part of the house when Ron
comes ? She was so terribly angry with him
that time she read what he had said about
her. . . . And it has been so jolly to have
her with us at meals. . .
Blair considered. He was always honest
with Chubs, and he knew Miss Manners. She
did not readily forget an injury.
?It?s this way,? he reflected. ?It was a
nasty business, old dear; and when distrust-
ful people get a jolt like that it is apt to linger.
If Ronald had said to her face what he said
behind her back, she would at least have
respected him. Anyway, he must fight it out
himself. We?ve got to pay for our blunders
?good thing we have! ?
The day of Ron?s return Chubby went
about with rather a worried feeling. Her
first sensation of relief came when Wigsie
set, as usual, Miss Manners?s place at the
head of their table. She wasn?t going to
shut herself away. . . .
Ronald was as full of confidence in him-
self as ever; he had done well at school, and


had made himself popular with boys and
masters. He greeted Aunt Anne in his easy,
courtly fashion, and waited upon her as if
she were his first and last thought. She
wasn?t quite herself, Chubby decided: there
were hard patches of colour on her cheeks.
But she listened while the boy chatted on
about one exploit and another. He was try-
ing to win her back to approval of him;
Chubby Drummond was certain of that.
There was just a hint of heartache in the
realization that he would probably end by
doing this. Not that it mattered so long as
Aunt Anne kept a little comer for her. . . .
In the end they made a merry meal, and
when it was over the boy carried Miss
Manners?s chair to the lawn, shook up her
cushions and took her sticks for her. This
had been Chubby?s job, but he took it upon
himself as if he had been used to doing it
all his life. His mother watched him ador-
ingly: Ron had such gracious ways with
him. ... It was Garry who noted the wist-
ful expression in his Red-head?s eyes, and
knew what lay beneath it.
?Come for a walk, Kitten! ? he called, ?and
let the youngsters go off on their own. They
have got heaps to tell each other.?


Mrs. Drummond looked disappointed.
"Ron wanted a chat with Aunt Anne,
Garry?and to show her his prizes.?
"They will keep. Lots of time ahead.?
Kittie rose. "All right, but, for heaven?s
sake, Chubs, behave yourself ?she gets into
all sorts of pickles, Ronald! Did you ever
see anything so distressing as her hair??
He laughed. "Dolly-dye isn?t in it. Why
didn?t you do it properly while you were
about it, Ginger??
Her father came to the rescue once more.
"It?s almost back to normal, and we?ve all
of us done foolish things in an attempt to
improve nature. Shouldn?t wonder if our
Chubby had the laugh at us yet; I noticed
the other day, in one of the papers, that red
hair is going to be the colour this year! ?
She flashed at him a look of passionate
gratitude that caught at his heart. What a
lover she was ?this Chubs! She could dis-
like, too, to some purpose! Aunt Anne
nodded her head and called her back, taking
one of the thick plaits into her hand with
an awkward caress. After that, it seemed as
if nothing mattered.
Ronald saw the little interlude, and was
whistling under his breath when Chubby


joined him. ?How is the old girl behaving
herself, these times?? he asked. Adding:
?It?s to be hoped that she?s got a short
memory; you seem to have got on her soft
side.?
Chubby flamed, face and neck: she did
wish he would keep away from that ?the
first night he was home! It brought back
the misery she had almost forgotten. Ronald
saw the angry colour, and gave her shoulder
a pat.
?You take everything so seriously, kid;
hang it all, it was only a blunder: if she?s
any sense at all she?ll see that! If I hadn?t
had the bad luck to use the wrong envelope
the skies would still have been blue! In
any case, I?ll square it with her and get into
her good graces, you see if I don?t! ?
?I don?t see that squaring her has anything
to do with it ?? spluttered Chubby. ?You
hurt her, horribly!?
?Did I ? I must make amends then.
Don?t you worry. Ginger, I?ll soon have
her forgetting that it ever happened. Do
you want me to fall on her neck and dis-
solve into tears??
?I don?t want you to do anything you don?t
mean! You ought to say you are sorry.?


?Well, that?s easily done; it was beastly
awkward for me, I?d have you know ?when
so much depended upon it. Who on earth is
this??
This? was Phil Penrose, wandering dis-
consolately along the road, and not a pre-
possessing object. His hair was longer than
usual: it jutted over his forehead in a straight
thatch. His freckles were more pronounced
as summer advanced, and Ron Drummond
gave him a careless scrutiny as they drew
nearer.
?Shades of Harold Lloyd! ? he whispered.
?Do you know it, Gin-gin??
Chubby frowned. ?It?s Phil Penrose,? she
explained worriedly; ?I?ll just hate it if you
two don?t like each other, Ron.?
Ronald thrust his hands into his pockets.
?I thought it was something out of the Zoo! ?
he drawled insolently. ?Do you really want
to stop and talk to it??
?Of course I do. P ?i ?p!? called Chubby
Drummond, hurrying after him. Pip pre-
tended that he had not seen her, and she
started to run. ?Don?t be mean! ? she cried
beseechingly. Still he sauntered on. She
reached him, hot and breathless, one tail of
hair uncoiling.


?Didn?t you hear me ?? she demanded. ?I
want you to meet Ronald.?
He scowled a surly: ?You don?t want me.?
?We do. Don?t be silly, Phil Penrose.?
He hesitated for a moment, and then
muttered: ?Oh, all right?l suppose I had
better get it over.?
Ron strolled leisurely towards them: his
manner was amused and condescending.
Chubby stood her ground with a defiant:
?Ron ?this is Phil Penrose: you?ve heard
lots and lots about him!?
Ron inclined his head graciously. His
manner was that of the public schoolboy
who is inclined to be tolerant with the
home-taught youngster. ?How do you do,
Penrose?? he asked affably.
Phil gave rather a bored smile. ?Quite
well, thanks,? he drawled. Ronald glanced
at him curiously, and decided that he was
not to be patronized. So much the better.
?Chubby talks no end about you,? he
declared, ?we ought to be good pals.?
Pip thawed instantly, and the end of it was
that the three set off quite happily, taking
the Upper Road. And then the most
unexpected thing happened?before they
had walked a mile Chubby discovered that


?two are company!? 91
they had almost forgotten her existence!
This was a state of affairs quite unreckoned
with: Ron's spell was working to some pur-
pose, and the younger boy was looking up
to him in much the fashion of a puppy with
a full-grown dog! They exchanged experi-
ences, and talked of matters in which she
was an outsider. She listened in dumb
wonder at first: this couldn?t be Pip ? But
it was, and he was utterly ignoring her! She
stood it gamely for a while, and then, find-
ing that any effort to join in the conversation
made them impatient with her, she began to
lag behind. Even then they did not seem to
notice, till Ronald asked a casual: ?Where
are you off to, Ginger??
?Home! ? she replied with spirit.
?Right! Tell them I may be a bit late:
Penrose is going to show me Smugglers?
Cave. Sure you can find your way back??
Chubby nodded: her heart was as heavy
as lead. Smugglers? Cave was always a place
of enchantment; and she could not under-
stand that Pip should care to go there with-
out her! The world seemed upside-down as
she went heavily back to Mount Pleasant.
Phil had not even looked at her. . . . She
had pictured him sulking: imagining him-


self left out in the cold . . . but she had
never dreamed that he would turn her down
like this!
Now Chubby Drummond was very human
indeed, and though she was hurt and lonely
it wasn?t long before her temper flared in
earnest. They were mean pigs, both of
them ?to act like this the first evening that
Ron was home. There was such a lot to
talk about ?the plans for Christmas ?and all
sorts of interesting things.
Once or twice she looked after them?
perhaps Pip would be sorry by now and
ask her to join them. ... He did not turn,
and they went on round the bend, and so
out of sight.
Evening shadows were heavy on Mount
Difficult. It would be gorgeous in the cave ?
mysterious and creepy. If only Keith Bollen
had not gone to America . . . she would
have showed Ron and Phil Penrose some-
thing. . . .
She reached a flat, grey rock that swung
out over the mountainside, and decided that
she would sit there a while, watching the
misty bloom on the tree-tops and the
dusk settling over the valley. She was
buried so deeply in thought that she did


not hear the purring of a car as it climbed
the steep road; did not realize that any-
one was near till a voice cried: ?Hello,
Chubs . . . what are you doing on your
own ??
It was Dr. Ted! There was still someone
left in the horrid old world who was friendly
and unchanged! His eyes had the kind
expression that his patients so often spoke
about. He jumped down and swung his
long legs over the edge of the boulder in
much the same way that he had swung them
when he sat beside Chubby in the loft at The
Laburnams all those years ago. . . . He never
hurried you when you were in trouble ?and
he never interrupted.
When he had 'found out the state of
Denmark, as he put it, he talked seriously.
''You've got to pull up your socks, old dear,?
he reflected; ?if you don?t life is going to hit
you hard! You feel things too intensely,
Gin-gin, and it?s the very mischief and all
when people do that. Square up to circum-
stances and let them see that you?re not afraid
of them laugh at them, and toss your head
and they?ll go slinking away! They can
bully us a bit, you see, and we must never
let them think that they have got us down.


If they once get that into their heads they?ll
stamp ... to some purpose.?
?Yes!? sighed Chubby, desperately sore
over Pip?s treatment.
Ted Blair watched her anxiously. Too big
a heart .. . poor old Chubs! To such, life
was a problem. ... He went on in his
kindly, worried fashion, telling her that God
was big enough to tackle all our perplexities.
Chubby slipped her hand into his. She
knew ?or she guessed ?the little Rector of
St. Judes ?the pretty church on the side of
the hill ?spoke like this, often. When he
prayed, you felt as if everything got
simple; and Aunt Anne said that she
had patience with him because he lived
his religion, not like some people she could
mention!
Blair knew that Chubby was feeling better
already, small firebrand that she was! He
seemed to think it was quite natural that she
should be annoyed because Pip had gone
off with Ronald leaving her to her own
devices.
?I was in a flaming temper,? she confessed.
Ted Blair laughed. ?I?m not worried
about that; I?d sooner see you scotty than
injured, Chubs. People who are always


feeling 'put upon? are jolly bores, you take
it from me! They see slights where none
are intended, and they end by making
everybody about them miserable. They get
nervy, and nerves are things to be avoided
like poison. Boys are heartless brutes, old
thing, and Pip is rather more selfish than
most. Let him see that you don?t care a
cuss, and you?ll soon have him to heel. Like
to come for a spin ??
Chubby?s eyes sparkled, and the dimples
came in earnest. The long man wondered,
as he had often wondered, how life was going
to treat this bundle of impulses and emo-
tions : she lived at such pressure! Down in
the depths?up in the skies!
The new car was a beauty?it slipped
along in an effortless way that spoke of
perfect adjustment, Dr. Ted explained. He
seemed very happy these times, and full of
plans for the future. She felt important,
sitting there beside him, watching the gloved
hand on the wheel: realizing that they were
going to pass Smugglers? Cave, and that
Ronald and Phil would see her. . . .
They overtook the boys, and she waved a
careless greeting. The doctor noted this, and
grinned approvingly.


They went on and on; the mountain on
one side and a steep drop to the gully on the
other. Chubby had never been so far as
this, and she was loving every minute.
Presently, they turned into a track that
climbed a stony rise, and followed a musical
creek whose low banks were lined with ferns.
The rocks jutted out here and there and
sheltered maidenhair. There was musk by
the rustic bridge; the evening air was sweet
with the smell of mould and growing things.
Then they came to slip-rails, and the doctor
pulled up.
?Like to come with me ?? he asked. ?We
are going to see a little chap who is often
lonely. . .
Chubby nodded, and thought as she had
often thought that there were very few
people like Dr. Ted. The garden they
passed through was wild and neglected, and
the house they were making their way to
was wattle-and-dab, with wooden chimneys.
It looked very dilapidated, and there was
something about it that reminded her of
Crazy Kate?s.
The front door stood open as if somebody
were expected, and they went in without
knocking. Doctors never knocked unless


they were compelled to, Ted Blair explained
briefly. There was a narrow, dark passage
with a bilious, green paper that had wreaths
of bright blue-pink roses on it, and from this
they entered a room where the furniture
appeared to have been made of boxes! She
saw a forlorn-looking bed with a patchwork
quilt; it sagged dreadfully in places and did
not seem at all comfortable.
In the bed was a boy with the thinnest face
Chubby Drummond had ever seen, and
great, blazing, dark eyes. You could have
drawn a line round the crimson patches on
his cheeks, she was certain. Dr, Blair
motioned her to a wooden chair, and
perched himself on the bedside, lifting the
small invalid with deft, gentle hands, and
shaking up the pillows. They were great
pals, she decided, as she saw the adoring
way the child watched every movement. He
looked more comfortable already?Dr. Ted
was wonderful when you were sick ... he
seemed to know by instinct how to lift you
and put you into the right position.
He explained presently that Tom had irons
on his leg?it seemed terrible to put irons
on anyone so thin ?and that you often had
to hurt people in order to make them better.


A woman hurried in: she was untidy and
dirty, and her hair kept falling about her
face; but her eyes were full of welcome and
gratitude. She listened dully while directions
were given, and Chubby was afraid that she
didn?t understand much of what was being
said to her. They stayed a long time, and
Ted Blair bathed Tom?s hot face and hands,
and lifted him out of bed while the mother
made it. Nothing was really clean: it was
dreadful when elsewhere there were apple-
green rooms with white, white sheets, and
pillows, and puffy eiderdowns. . . . When
you were ill you wanted dainty things more
than ever.
Blair spoke of this as they went down to
the car.
?His mother means well, Chubs, but she?s
too poor, or too sad, or too tired to bother
about matters; she could, you know, even
in surroundings like these . . . there?s an-
other good soul on the other side of the
Mount who keeps her home spotless, though
she hasn?t any more money to spend than
this one. That is what worries a doctor . . .
he may do his utmost, and then neglect or
uncleanliness undoes all his work.?
Chubby said: ?Yes,? sadly. And then put


an anxious: ?Is Tom really going to get
better, Doctor Ted??
?Sure . . . when the conditions are altered.
That?s why I say a big ?God bless Anne
Manners? when I realize what she is doing
for this place. Like to see a fairy story come
true? Right! I think it might buck you
up a bit to-night.?
She hadn?t the faintest idea as to where
they were going; Dr. Ted was always full
of surprises. The car ran swiftly down the
mountain and they turned into an unfamiliar
portion of the township. Chubby?s cheeks
were pink, and her imagination always gave
her wings. They came to a big gate that
stood wide open as if they were expected?
or someone was expected ?and then there
was a winding drive round lawns and
shrubberies. At last a white house lay
smiling at them. She was sure this wasn?t
fancy, and the doctor chuckled a happy:
?You?ve hit it in one, Chubs ?it was always
a cheerful place, but we?ve jammed in a lot
of extra windows that are going to catch the
sunshine and bring health and strength to
sick people. I?m a bit of a boy over this
venture ?it isn?t always that dreams come
true! Your Aunt Anne says it is the soundest


and joiliest investment she ever went into,
and I won?t be a scrap surprised if she is
right. She isn?t thinking of interest on capital
expended when she talks like that, though
I?m certain we shall make it a paying con-
cern ?she is seeing roses on pale cheeks.
Looks pretty good, don?t you think ??
Chubby was trying to swallow a lump in
her throat. She had only seen Fair Haven
from the distance before. It had, originally,
been a large guest-house of the better kind,
but something had happened to it ?was still
happening?for there were piles of bricks,
and a cement mixing-board and scaffolding
where the new wing was being carried out
to the right. The main portion of the build-
ing was finished, and Dr. Blair hurried her
in through the wide hall door. The floor was
polished and shining, and when they entered
the first ward she caught her breath.
The long row of windows looked out over
the valley, away to a misty distance and a
range of foothills that were purple in the
growing dusk. There was still a hint of
summer twilight, and the evening was very
still. Here again there was a polished floor,
and beds on either side, gay with eiderdown
quilts. The doctor switched on softly shaded


?two are company!? ioi
lights, and pictures started out on the walls:
Bubbles with his fairy pipe and eyes of
wonder. ... In the centre, the Christ-Child
in the manger, and the Wise Men offering
their gifts! Chubby went closer .. . she
thought that He was looking beyond what
they had brought Him . . . His eyes were
wide and mystic. Perhaps He had just been
wakened out of sleep, and was a little
frightened by the strange faces . . . you
were always confused when you first woke
up ? He must have been a lovely baby to
play with.
?O-oh!? she whispered gruffly, ?I wish we
had been living then, Doctor Ted!?
Blair gave her an affectionate glance.
?YouTe not the only one who wishes that,
Chubs, old dear . . . He healed the sick . . .
the ones we can do nothing for!?
He led her to the bed under the largest
window. The eiderdown quilt was gay with
roses, and the sheet was folded down over
it as though someone were coming to it very
soon . . . Wigsie always folded the sheets
like that after tea-time.
?Think Tom will like this??
Chubby Drummond gasped. ?Tom ... ??
she choked. This was almost too wonderful


even for a fairy tale! She thought of the
untidy room and the dirt . . . and blinked
away some tears.
?How will you bring him here, Doctor
Ted?? she asked. She was thinking of the
rutty track, and the way they had had to
leave the car far below. . . . Blair screwed
up his eyes, laughing at her concern.
?I used to be rather good at carrying folk
one time, Ginger?l don?t think I have for-
gotten. We?ll park the car where it was
to-night, and I?ll do the rest. Plenty of
cushions on the seat ?and then straight to
bed, where Sister Garrick will look after him.
She?ll be backwards and forwards all through
the night?but he?ll probably sleep like a top
once we get hold of him in earnest. His
mother tells me he never calls her, however
bad the pain gets . . . but that will soon be
over. I wish to God I could collect all the
neglected youngsters and bring them to Fair
Haven. . .
Chubby touched his arm gently. ?I think
I should like to be a doctor when I grow
up!? she whispered.
He grinned at her, then: ?What about the
writing? I?m afraid, Chubs, that soft heart
of yours would play you traitor. ... It


hurts badly when you do your best and
then get beaten! Like to see the place where
we?re going to cut out disease and do all sorts
of interesting things??
She followed him into a room that had no
comers. It was brilliantly white, and there
were strange, shiny objects that were steri-
lizers, it seemed. . . . She did not like it
nearly so well as the cheerful ward; but the
doctor looked about him with eager eyes.
Anne Manners had spared no expense: it
was a perfectly equipped theatre, and it was
going to mean a great deal to Silver Creek.
He told Chubby how careful you had to be
with instruments ?lives might depend upon
absolute cleanliness ?and all the time she
was thinking of Red Lawson and his twisted
smile. It must be so dreadful to have to
smile when you were feeling sad!
?When will you bring Tom ?? she asked.
?To-morrow. There?s only one more bad
night for him to get through, and he won?t
know himself when he slips into his new
pyjamas and his dressing-gown. Hospital
isn?t the worst place in the world when you
are feeling ill, Chubs, and we?ve got hold of
some extra-special nurses. By and by, when
Tom is a bit stronger, there are things we


can do for him. Sister Carrick is as hopeful
as I am about that.?
Chubby put an eager: ?Is Sister Carrick
anything like Mrs. Mollie??
He laughed, and reddened a little.
Chubby had a trick of measuring one
person by another, always. . . .
?Not in the least: she is little, and fat,
and she has merry, grey eyes. Now I must
spin you along to the Mount Pleasant gate,
and then you can tell Aunt Anne about
things. Patients to see, Ginger, and Sister to
meet when the train comes in. We?ve got
busy days ahead!?
She had quite forgotten her disappoint-
ment about Pip, he reflected, as he put her
down and turned his car. You had only to
appeal to Chubby?s sympathies for other
people and she straightway lost sight of her
own woes!


Chapter VI
Getting ready for Christmas!
AS THEY SPUN THROUGH THE
darkness Chubby chatted happily about
the preparations for Christmas. They were
going to have dinner at night, she explained,
and Wigsie was to have help with the wash-
ing-up. Mrs. Mollie was coming??And of
course you, Doctor Ted ?? she entreated. He
admitted that that was his present intention
if somebody did not get sick at the last
moment with over-eating: that sort of thing
happened quite often on Christmas Day!
Of course, there were a dozen different
reasons advanced for the disturbances, he
asserted ?Mrs. Morrissy, for instance, would
be certain to complain that she had been
?overdoing it lately, what with me widowed
sisters childer to look afther, doctor dear,
and wan thing or another!?
Chubby confessed that it would be her first
turkey . , . that she had often looked at
them on the marble slabs in the poultry
shops and wondered what they would taste


like. . . . And of course they sounded
gorgeous in The Christmas Carol\ But
Aunt Anne?s was an extra-special?it was
strutting about in the yard as if it were very
proud of itself ?it seemed a bit sad that it
would have to be killed ?it had such glossy
feathers!
? ?Butchered to make a Roman holiday! ? ?
quoted Ted Blair with a twinkle in his eyes.
?Yes,? agreed Chubby soberly, adding the
information that Wiggins was going to make
a wonderful stuffing, and that there were to
be pork sausages sitting up round the huge
bird, and heaps of baked potatoes. The
puddings had been made for weeks, of
course ?Aunt Anne did not like anything
that came out of a tin. And there were
threepences and sixpences in the Christmas
Day one . . . and a golden sovereign that
had been in the china cabinet for years and
years . . . the little, lacquered cabinet that
smelled of camphor, and had all sorts of
treasures in its tiny drawers!
As they neared the lower gate she put an
anxious question: ?When are you going to
start Red Lawson?s face, Doctor Ted??
?After the holidays: it?s going to be a long
job, Chubs; you see, it should have been


done straight away. But he?s willing to risk
it, brave lad! We?ll have to keep him in
hospital some months and do a bit at a time.
So long, old dear . . . see you soon! ?
Chubby went slowly round the drive. The
garden was full of summer scents, and the
clove-carnations greeted her like old friends.
She loved flowers with a passion that almost
hurt ?there was always an achy feeling when
you were fond of anything or anybody, she
reflected. As if your heart had been made
too big for your body! There was one clump
of trees where the fairies danced on moon-
light nights?she had almost seen them!
The grass was always green there, and Aunt
Anne said that in the spring it was golden
with daffodils.
Punch came bounding to meet her, and
they went on together to where Miss Manners
sat in the porch, reading under the electric
light.
?I?ve seen it!? cried Chubby as she threw
herself down on the steps.
?Seen what, child ? Don?t let that dog be
so boisterous, he?ll tear your dress!?
?Fair Haven . . . and the ward with the
pictures?where Tom will be, you know! ?
?Tom ? Oh, yes, the poor child from Stony


Rise, I remember. How did you come to
hear about that?"
?Doctor Ted took me to see him, and then
on to the hospital."
?Where are Ronald and Phil?"
There was no evading Miss Anne when she
wanted to know anything. Chubby was well
aware of this, and answered quickly: ?Up at
Smugglers? Cave.?
?Why weren?t you with them ?"
?It?s a long way, you know," explained
Chubby jerkily.
?H?m! ? grunted Aunt Anne unbelievingly.
She knew by instinct that something had
gone wrong with Chubby?s evening: Ronald
was probably more interested in plans of his
own for one reason or another. If folk were
wise they left youngsters to settle their own
differences: no good ever came of interfer-
ence. She would watch, however, and put
down any attempt at superior airs and graces
on the boy?s part!
Chubby Drummond was in an unusually
thoughtful mood as she watched the lights
in the village grow brighter.
?It seems so strange to think that we did
not know you this time last year,? she
breathed.


Miss Manners gave her dry laugh. "You
hadn?t a very flattering opinion of me, young
woman! ?
No answer. There was nothing that could
be said, because Chubby wouldn?t have hurt
Aunt Anne for anything in the world, and
yet she couldn?t deny the truth of the blunt
statement. The grim voice went on merci-
lessly: "I can?t say I admire that portrait
you drew of me!?
The colour rushed into Chubby?s face and
neck: it felt as if somebody had poured
scalding water into her veins! The shrewd
eyes that were watching so intently softened
... it was a shame to tease the child! But
Aunt Anne?s methods were too set to be
altered; and she probed on: "Why didn?t
you tell me that Ronald was responsible
for that sketch, Chubby ? It wasn?t a
crime ?
It seemed that, for one reason or another,
this question could not be answered. Code
of honour, no doubt?the boy had exacted
a pledge . . . saving himself at his sister?s
expense! Anne Manners shrugged her thin
shoulders. Her eyes were gentle, Chubby
decided. . . .
"If you?ve given your word, that ends it,


of course. Above everything in this life, I
value loyalty, child ?even when it is mis-
taken. But, if you are going to take the
blunders of other people on your shoulders,
broad though they promise to be, you won?t
have too easy a time in this world. You will
make ?and keep?a few friends. You won?t
probably be popular, because in the end the
very ones you have defended will turn upon
you! But we can?t alter natures. Tell me
what 3 7 0u thought of Fair Haven!?
Chubby?s face broke into sparkles. "Oh,
Aunt Anne, it is a dream! I told you I
met Doctor Ted on Upper Road, and he
took me first to see Tom ... in that awful
place. . . .?
The witch had gone! The Fairy God-
mother was smiling at Chubby Drummond,
as Aunt Anne said briskly: ?You think he
will like his new bed ? There are a lot of
shiftless folk about, my dear, and other
people have to help them out when they
get into hopeless muddles. It?s the children
who suffer worst. Ted Blair tells me that an
operation will do wonders for the boy: he is
young, you see.?
She sighed heavily, and Chubby nodded
understandingly. Aunt Anne was thinking


that, when you were old, you just had to
bear things!
?Cant Doctor Ted do anything for your
rheumatism,? she asked sorrowfully, ?now
that he has that wonderful hospital ??
Miss Manners smiled. ?He does his best,
child ?he saves me quite a lot of pain; and
science is advancing in many directions, you
know: they may yet discover a remedy for
my trouble.?
?Oh ?that?s good! You know, you are
looking heaps better?you used to go to bed
early every night, and now, quite often, you
stay up with us! ?
The keen eyes softened as if this statement
had given pleasure. ?Do you like me to stay
up with you, Chubby??
?Oh ... of course! It wouldn?t be a bit
the same without you . . . like a band with-
out a conductor!?
Aunt Anne laughed helplessly. You never
got weak sentiment from this youngster?the
thought that was in her mind at the moment
tumbled out, helter-skelter! A band con-
ductor! Miss Manners had been called a
good many things in her time ?never any-
thing like this! Then she sobered, remem-
bering last year?s solitary Christmas: her


own fault? She might have saved much
dreariness if she had had a little more faith
in human nature! She could not picture
The Sycomores now without the Drummonds
?Garret with his cheery, boyish ways
even the doll-wife, Kittie, had her attractions.
. . . And Chubby . . . and Chubby , . .
downright?warm-hearted . . . true! That,
best of all!
?So you approve of the hospital? They
seem to have made a good job of it: Ted
Blair is satisfied and so I must be.?
?Haven?t you seen it yourself?? Chubby
asked ?a little perplexed at this.
?Well, I had the plans, of course: I pay
for nothing of which I do not thoroughly
approve. But I cannot stand disorder ?or
anything in the making. I like the finished
result. On Christmas Eve, if the weather is
suitable, I am promising myself a visit of
inspection and a little celebration. There
will be a Christmas Tree for the small
patients, you see; and that determined
doctor of ours insists that I shall see the
present-giving . . . and say a few words to
the patients.?
Chubby gave an ecstatic whoop. ?How
heavenly, Aunt Anne!?


?You?ll be tumbling down those steps if
you?re not careful! I?m afraid there won?t
be anything heavenly about it?l am no
good at pretty speeches. But we shall get
through with it, I dare say.?
It might have been half an hour later that
Ronald came swinging along the path with
his boy?s grace and his careless greeting. He
had grown much taller, and was very hand-
some indeed, Chubby considered, as pride
in his appearance warred with resentment.
He approached his aunt in his customary
easy fashion, and then glanced at Chubby
amusedly.
So this is where you are ? What do you
think of her deserting me the first evening
of my return, Aunt Anne??
Chubby blazed indignantly: it wasn't fair
that Ron should always throw the blame on
other people!
?I like that! You made it very clear that
you didn?t want me! ? she flared.
He raised his eyebrows. ?Green eye, eh ?
So far as I am concerned, you may keep
your precious Pip; he?s the weirdest speci-
men I have ever struck. Sulked all the way
home. . . .?
Miss Manners glanced shrewdly from the


boy to the girl?Chubby never looked her
best when she was cross. She wondered
what made the temper die out as suddenly
as it had risen, and the dimples appear . . .
evidently Ronald was puzzled, too. They
did not know that that reference to Phil?s
sulks brought comfort and assurance to a
real hurt! Pip liked to be Master of Cere-
monies?and, of course, Ron had been
endeavouring to impress him and keep him
in the background! Dr. Ted was right
every time ... in a day or two he would
be trying his hardest to make up!
?Time this tired youngster went to bed,?
announced Aunt Anne. ?Off you go, dearie
?it will be a long day to-morrow! ?
Chubby had not felt sleepy, but when Miss
Manners spoke as decidedly as that, there
was nothing for it but instant obedience.
She stretched herself lazily and sprang
up, throwing her arms impulsively round
her aunt?s shoulders. Ronald Drummond
watched in amazement: the action was
clumsy, naturally?coming from old Chubs
?it sent the book in the knotted hands spin-
ning on to the porch floor; but the kiss was
undoubtedly returned, and that with much
heartiness. Then a choked ?Good night,


Ron! ? reached him, and he answered it with
a judicial ?Good night?get up in a better
temper, Ginger!?
The stocks in the round bed were throwing
off a strong perfume. The was
an old-fashioned place, he reflected, wonder-
ing why the old lady with so much money
should cling to out-of-date gardening and
antiquated ways! Now that they were
alone, her face looked worn and haggard.
?There is just a little matter to be adjusted
between us, Ronald,? began Anne Manners
stiffly.
He started uncomfortably. It had to come,
he supposed?he might have been sure that
she would resurrect that almost forgotten
incident. And how to get out of the business
with honours, he did not quite know. Appar-
ently there was no help for it but to face the
music and get into the old girl?s graces by
hook or by crook!
?Aunt Anne,? he said coaxingly, throwing
himself on the steps at her feet, ?I?ll admit
that that letter must have looked pretty
rotten.?
?Rotten is the right word! ? answered Miss
Manners grimly.
?Well, what am I to do about it? I


can?t explain, worse luck ?but I do honestly
apologize.?
The tone was light, careless, it roused
resentment: it took her back into the years
when this boy?s grandfather had flattered
and caressed ?and ignored injuries. . . .
History was repeating itself, as it had a trick
of doing!
?Do you think an apology meets the case,
my lad ??
?Well, hang it all, Aunt Anne! If it
doesn?t, what am I to do? What can a
fellow do??
?I don?t know: that is something I cannot
help you with!?
Ronald was plainly aggrieved, and his
chin looked stubborn. He never once
guessed that a simple ?I?m sorry!? would
have gone far to make amends. It was
absurd, of course, but Anne Manners told
herself that these children of Garry?s had
come close to her heart. More than anything,
she craved affection from them. She had
won it so far as Chubby was concerned ?
her caresses were clumsy, but always sincere.
The boy was a different proposition. She
saw in him the man who had won her heart,
and then treated her treacherously! If he


?'? v 4
had showed any real feeling at the moment,
she would have done her best to bury dis-
trust and a deep hurt. Even as it was, she
tried to compromise with herself by remem-
bering that lads were thoughtless, and that
perhaps he had not meant what he had said!
But the doubt persisted. He did not ring
true!
He gave her a winning smile and said
coaxingly: ?I wish I hadn?t written that
letter, Aunt Anne! ?
She searched his face keenly and answered
curtly: "I wish you hadn?t, Ronald.?
To his immense relief, voices came from
the orchard: his father?s and Kittie?s.
"Where?s Chubs?? asked Garry Drum-
mond, glancing round anxiously for his
youngest.
Miss Manners answered absently: "I sent
her to bed: she wears herself to shreds in
spite of her sturdy frame.?
"She wears other people, too,? declared her
mother gravely. She was dreadfully afraid
that Aunt Anne and Ronald were not get-
ting on as she had hoped they would; and a
trifle resentful over the old lady?s inclination
towards Chubby.
Anne Manners chuckled amusedly. ?She


keeps us alive, and she?s as honest as the
daylight. Time and life will smooth the
comers, never fear!?
She reached for her sticks and rose stiffly.
Ron sprang up with a courteous ??Let me
help you in, Aunt Anne! ?
She shook her head. ?I want to have a
chat with your father, Ronald.??
They went towards the house together,
and Kittie Drummond glanced anxiously
after them. ?Nothing wrong, is there,
Ron??
He shrugged his shoulders. ?How should
I know ? She?s an unforgiving old beggar.?
?Do be careful, darling!? cried his mother
adoringly. He looked superbly handsome,
she told herself happily. He bent and kissed
her. ?It seems to me,? he grumbled, ?that
the more careful you are, the less she likes
you. Chubby has dug herself in all right!?
?I can?t think why!? reflected Kittie; ?she
is always in one bit of mischief or another.
, . . And with it all, such a lovable little
soul. . . .?
They heard Miss Manners laughing as she
went stiffly along the hall. Mrs. Drummond
said thoughtfully: ?She is far more human
than she was, and your father is a different


man. So that we must take the bad with the
good.?
Ron threw himself at his mother?s feet:
every movement was supple and full of
grace. ?I?d like to know how old Chubs got
through the crust! ? he mused, plucking some
heads of clover from the lawn.
But this ?like many another valuable
recipe?could not be passed on! Chubby
certainly could not have enlightened him as
she brushed her hair and listened with a
dimpling smile to repeated calls of: ?Mo
poke. . . . Mo-poke. . . . Mo . . . poke,? from
the hedge by the orchard.
Pip was sorry already!


Chapter VII
Christmas Eve
The last few days before
Christmas were crammed with excite-
ment. Phil was in an unusually good
humour, for there had been a bulky letter
from Malay, and a cheque as well as a pre-
sent that wasn?t to be opened till the day
itself. . . . His artist-guardian paid one of
his flying visits of inspection, and bestowed
upon him a gaily painted canoe and five
brand-new pound notes. There was a
delirious visit to town, and Mollie Seton,
who went with them, declared afterwards
that she had had the time of her life!
They took the early train, and did the
round of the shops, contriving to lose each
other on occasion so that certain mysterious
parcels might be collected and put aside for
the hanging up of stockings on Christmas
Eve! Aunt Anne had been a Fairy God-
mother in truth, and Chubby had more
money to spend than her wildest dreams had
anticipated. They consumed many ices, and


in the afternoon Mrs. Seton took them to the
movies. When evening came, they stowed
themselves into the train in rather a dis-
hevelled condition, with so many fascinating
brown-paper packages and boxes that
Chubby Drummond declared that it was a
good thing they had a whole compartment
to themselves! She had insisted on pro-
curing balloons for the sick boy from Stony
Rise; one of these looked like a seasick
sausage, Phil Penrose declared. It kept
blowing about and getting into their eyes,
and at last Ronald stowed it away on the
rack. They watched the smudge of the city
and the blur of lights slip behind them, and
settled down to eager comparing of notes and
plans for the great day!
On their way from the Silver Creek
Station, they saw Dr. Blair outside the post
office. They pulled up and Chubby nearly
fell out of the car trying to attract his atten-
tion. Then there was more chattering, and
afterwards they drove round to The Lodge
and deposited Mollie Seton and Pip. Christ-
mas was in the air: the most marvellous
Christmas yet. . . . The very creek seemed
to be singing a welcome.
Chubby was hugging to herself a secret


with which she only had been entrusted.
Aunt Anne, who professed to dislike modem
ways, had overcome her prejudices so far as
to purchase a smoothly mnning car! It was
one of the latest Pontiacs, and was stored
in a local garage until it should make its
appearance on Christmas Eve, driven by one
of the village chauffeurs, who was to take
them all down to Fair Haven and the magic
Tree in the children?s ward. Afterwards,
Miss Manners meant Daddy to have lessons
and to get his licence!
The ceremony in connection with the
Christmas Tree was to be left in the hands
of Chubby and Phil Penrose and Ronald;
and there were long discussions under the
chestnuts as to what form this should take.
It was Phil who finally assumed charge and
became Stage Director. His schemes were
wildly fantastic, and Chubby Drummond
was afraid they were much too elaborate to
be carried out; but when Aunt Anne was
consulted, she said that Christmas only came
once in the year, and, after all, if money
couldn?t be used to bring happiness to people,
it was a poor affair!
The evening was calm and beautiful. Dr.
Blair had been up in the afternoon, and had


declared that it would do Miss Manners all
the good in the world to take part in the
opening of her own hospital. . . . And then
the dark blue, streamlined car purred gently
round the drive, and they packed themselves
in and drove to Fair Haven. Chubby was
sure it must be a dream ?so many wonderful
things were happening!
There were six children in the long ward,
and the Sister had given them their tea early
so that they might be ready for the big event.
Chubby scarcely recognized Tom in his gaily
striped pyjamas: he was propped up with
puffy cushions, and his eyes were big and
bright. He looked better already.
There was no formal opening of Fair
Haven: Miss Anne disliked fuss and cere-
mony of any description. She went round
to the different beds, and must have had
something kind and quaint to say to the
small occupants, because, when she left, they
were smiling as if they had liked her. Then
she was established in a beautiful easy
chair, and her face, with its two soft patches
of colour, was younger and sweeter than
Chubby had ever seen it.
There was an air of expectancy about
patients and doctor and nursing staff, and


presently from the garden stole the clear
notes of a carol. The youngsters did not
know that the singers were ones who would
be listened to with delight by any Melbourne
audience ?they only knew that something
was happening that was unexpected and
thrilling. There was ?Good King Wenceslas?
and ?The First Noel,? and one that Chubby
loved best of all, about ?
?The Little Lord Jesus,
Asleep in the hay .
Anne Manners looked as if tears were not
very far from her eyes; and Dr. Blair whis-
pered : ?Jolly nice of them ?they are staying
down at Valley View, and offered to slip
along as soon as they knew that we were
giving the kiddies a treat!?
After this the young Drummonds and Phil
Penrose disappeared mysteriously, and a
while later there came a thundering rap
at the door. Sister Garrick?s mouth was
rippling with amusement as she received a
long envelope and carried it to the doctor.
They read the enclosure together and Blair?s
lips were twitching. . . . Pip was certainly
doing things in great style!


The communication was from Santa Claus,
to the effect that he had been delayed in his
journey from the North Pole by blizzards
and a blinding snowstorm, with drifts so deep
that it had at times been almost impossible
to get the sleigh through; and cold so intense
that his Eskimos ?always inclined to be
lazy beggars ?had been unusually hard to
manage. He ended with the assertion that
he hoped to arrive shortly!
This letter being read out to the children
with due solemnity, and received by them
with something approaching awe, there came
a jangle of bells, and the wide glass doors
were thrown open to admit a sledge with
gaily coloured rugs. It was rather higher in
build than sledges usually are; being, in fact,
the wheeled stretcher that would be used
later to take patients to the operating theatre
. . . but it was entirely convincing with its
jingling bells and its perspiring Eskimos.
Chubby was all but melted in her furs, for
the evening was warm and still; but Pip had
insisted on making every detail realistic. He
was hot, too, he protested, in his wig and
beard, and the long robe that was loaded
with cotton-wool!
?Tell him to get on with the business,?


whispered Ronald irritably. ?Hang it all,
Chubs ?we?ll suffocate! ?
The screen was taken away from the Tree
. . . it was a lovely young pine, and it
twinkled with tinsel and coloured candles
that had been lighted a few minutes before.
Pip was enjoying himself hugely, and his
get-up was effective in spite of the fact that,
as all the world knows, Father Christmas
should have azure eyes! He had daubed his
lids with blue paint and smeared the same
colour liberally beneath; he had powdered
and rouged his cheeks until the original
freckles were covered over; and he told
the listening assemblage about his perilous
journey with the whirling snowflakes blind-
ing his sight, and the drifts becoming rapidly
impassable. He assured them that he had
wondered more than once whether he should
get through in time, for his Eskimos were
lazy dogs and would not hurry! He pointed
superciliously to them as they stood literally
panting in their heavy furs. . . . Chubby
had borrowed an old squirrel-coat from Aunt
Anne, and, in addition, was wearing some
sables that a distant relative had sent to
Kittie one year because the style of them
had gone out of fashion. . . . Her face was


flushed, and she badly wanted to tell Pip
what she thought of him for keeping them
waiting while he delivered his lengthy
speech; but, of course, nobody in their senses
ever dreamed of interrupting Santa Claus!
Anne Manners saw the perspiration pour-
ing down her cheeks and began to laugh
rather helplessly. Phil was in the full tide
of his eloquence, and might have gone on
much longer, but that, in reaching out his
arms with a grand gesture, he overbalanced,
and, slipping on the polished floor, went
down on all-fours! He recovered himself
with much loss of dignity and continued to
abuse his clumsy steeds.
?That young ?un is getting too big for his
boots,? grunted Ronald testily. ?Can?t you
think of a way to speed him up, Ginger ? I'll
die of heat apoplexy in another minute, and,
if you get any redder, you?ll catch on fire! ?
At length Father Christmas came to the
end of his speech, and turned to the real
work of the evening. Nobody had been
forgotten: there was a fine Meccano set for
Tommy, and when Ronald and Chubby
reappeared after an absence in which they
had shed their uncomfortable wrappings,
they were dispatched to the various beds


with fascinating parcels that brought excited
cries from the small patients.
?Another minute and I?d have choked!?
Chubby whispered to Miss Manners with one
of her impulsive hugs. Aunt Anne was the
Fairy Godmother to some purpose to-night,
and the slight flush on her withered cheeks
made her look much younger and happier.
It was easy to believe that, years and years
ago, as Dr. Ted and Daddy insisted, she had
been a handsome girl!
She was holding a little court, and seemed
to enjoy the fuss they were all making with
her. Sister Carrick and Dr. Blair were going
into details about the running of Fair Haven
that sounded dreadfully interesting, Chubby
informed her brother; and before they left
for home, she blew out such of the coloured
candles as were still burning on the stately
Tree. By this time tired children were
slipping down on their pillows, eager hands
grasping firmly the newly acquired treasures.
Perhaps they would dream about them!
The sky was bright with stars as they
drove back, and the one large one that
always seems bigger and brighter at this
festive season made Chubby think of the
picture in the long ward and the Wonder-


Baby! And then she fell to scolding Pip for
keeping them in their hot cloaks while he was
holding the floor and making a speech that
was far too long!
?It was a good get-up! ? he bragged, feel-
ing rather pleased with himself and inclined
to take the credit of the whole performance!
?Not bad! ? remarked Chubby Drummond
judicially. ?But you might have said some-
thing nice about Ron and me instead of
abusing us, Phil Penrose! It was simply
s-s-sweltering in those awful coats! ?
He grinned. ?Take some of your fat down,
my child! ?
Dr. Blair had driven Mollie Seton back to
The Lodge: she had looked lovely that night,
with the colour of a shell in her cheeks and
her hair shining like red gold. They had
gone off very happily together?Christmas
made you feel like that, Chubby reflected ?
as if you wanted to give something to every-
body! She knew that Dr. Ted had bought
a present for Mrs. Mollie, because he had
shown it to her ... it was the daintiest
wristlet-watch, and there were tiny diamonds
set along its dial.
When they reached The Sycomores, and
the driver had gone home after what he


called ?a regular Christmas supper,? Aunt
Anne explained that, when Garret obtained
his licence, the car was for the use of the
family, and was her present to them all;
that perhaps she had been getting into a rut
the last few years, and the ride had certainly
affected her less than she had imagined it
would. Chubby understood that this little
speech was hiding a twinge of pain, because
to her aunt, horses were rather more than
horses ?they were friends, and she hated to
see anything put aside.
As they were exclaiming over the beauties
of the blue coupe and examining what her
daddy called ?the latest gadgets,? Pip made
his way to Chubby?s side.
?Chubs! ? he began with evident difficulty,
?I didn?t mean to be a pig the other night.?
?When?? she asked absently.
?Oh, you know . . . when Ron and I went
to Smugglers? Cave. It was mean, but I
didn?t enjoy it a bit.?
?That?s a good thing!? replied Chubby,
who was more honest than tactful.
?Yes. I came round to The Sycomores
ever so late and gave our call, but I suppose
you were fast asleep??
?No, I wasn?t.?


?Were you mad with me??
Chubby?s eyes danced mischievously. ?I
thought it wouldn?t do you any harm to miss
me a bit! That?s why I just adore Aunt
Anne ... if she likes you, she doesn?t put
you aside just because someone new has
come along.?
?But, Chubs ... I didn?t mean it that
way ?honestly! ?
?Perhaps you didn?t. Anyway, it?s Christ-
mas. Isn?t it scrumptious to think you?ll be
here when we open our stockings to-morrow
morning! ?
?Awfully decent of Miss Manners,? grunted
Phil, vastly relieved that the storm had
blown over with old Ginger.
They had great fun after that, filling the
various stockings which were really pillow-
slips; and there was much coming and going
in the big house where the lights were flaring
until after midnight. It was like old times,
Anne Manners reflected ?Christmas had
always been celebrated on a large scale in
the days when her parents had been alive
and the different branches of the family
had come together. She thought of the last,
solitary one, and shuddered as she heard
Chubby?s delighted squeals of laughter, and


heard the pattering footsteps about the halls
and in and out of the rooms. There was no
separate establishment these times . . . she
had ceased to wish for it. Her own portion
of the house was sacredly hers; but, for the
rest, the Drummonds came and went as they
pleased!
At length all was in readiness, and they
tumbled into hot baths with the realization
that they were tired and sleepy, but very
thrilled at anticipation of what was to come
to-morrow! It might have been an hour
later that Chubby awoke to the loveliest
music ... it seemed to come from the
garden, and she was sure the singers
were the ones who had visited the hospital
earlier in the evening. Their voices were
like golden bells in the hushed air, and they
sang:
?While shepherds watched their flocks by
night,? ?The Little Lord Jesus? once again
. . . and ?It came upon the midnight clear.?
Last of all there was: ?Christians, awake!
Salute the Happy Mom ?
This roused the ire of Wiggins, who
thumped along the hall and, putting her head
out of the window, expressed herself tartly
to the effect that there were ?Christians as


wanted their night?s rest, with a big dinner
to cook termorrer.
Chubby gurgled, and there was the sound
of soft laughter from the lawn. They called:
?A Merry Christmas, everybody!? And
Chubby, from her window, cried: ?A Merry
Christmas!? She hoped Aunt Anne wasn?t
asleep, but there was no sound from her
room. . . . She had missed one of the
loveliest parts of Christmas Eve!
A few seconds later there was a move-
ment outside, and a cautious voice cried:
?Chubs! ?
?Yes ?Pip . . . you must speak sofdy.
There?s nothing wrong, is there ??
?Of course not! I?ve been with the Carol
Singers; they?re no end of sports. Ginger ..
?Yes?? she yawned, drowsy in earnest
now.
?You are a sleepy-head. ... I just wanted
to wish you a Happy Christmas before any-
one else did . . . it?s morning, you know! ?
?I know! That was awfully jolly of you,
Pip. . . . Happy Christmas to you. . . .
Phil grinned as he picked a careful way
round to his room. Old Chubs was a
dormouse, right enough! But she was a
sport, too.


Chapter VIII
Silver-heels Changes Owners!
IT WAS EARLY DAWN WHEN CHUBBY
woke. Her stocking was bulging in the
most fascinating manner; and there were, as
well, parcels of different shapes and sizes
safety-pinned on to the sides. She sat up
and blinked: her eyes were as heavy as
lead, and she remembered that, after all, it
had not been nearly so long a night as
usual.
She could hear Wigsie moving about in the
kitchen: since the warm weather had set in,
the old woman got up at unearthly hours,
and did her work so that she could rest later
on. There was a strong girl to do the
cleaning?she rode over from the town-
ship every morning and went back in the
evening?and it did not do to mention
her to Wigsie, because she could not
bear to think that she needed help of any
description!
Chubby heard her shuffling about in slip-
pers so as not to disturb ?the family,? as she


called them; once you were used to her, you
took no notice, although she was careful to
keep away from Aunt Anne?s side of the
house.
Chubby scrambled out of bed and gave a
soft greeting to Punch. He was under her
window and he wagged his tail vigorously
when he saw her. Then she began to
examine the contents of her stocking: there
were all sorts of good things in it. Pip had
given her an illustrated edition of Treasure
Island and a most gorgeous Hans Andersen.
Kittie and Daddy had contributed rather
a puzzling gift . . . riding breeches and
tunic!
There were boxes of handkerchiefs ?a
fascinating riding-whip from Dr. Ted. . . .
Chubby?s face grew more and more puzzled
till, from the very last slim parcel, which
contained soft leather riding-gloves, she drew
a letter! It was from Aunt Anne, and it was
quite, quite unbelievable. . . .
Dear child,
A Happy Christmas to you! You will
find my real present in the end stall of the
stable. I hope you wont ride her too hard
or break your neck, but well have to risk


that. From now on, Silver-heels is your very
own, and I need not tell you to look after her
well. Much love from
Your affectionate
Aunt Anne.
Your saddle was to have come last night,
hut I suppose there is delay with the Christ-
mas rush!
Chubby could contain herself no longer:
the air was simply rent with squeals of
delight which brought Phil from his sleep-
out, looking very tousled and rather cross.
?What on earth is wrong?" he demanded.
And then: ?I suppose I had better wish you
a Happy Christmas, Ginger, but don?t bring
the house down! ??
She was dancing excitedly. ?Silver-heels
.. . Pip .. . Silver-heels! I love her so
much already that I feel as if something
would burst.
Garry and Kittie appeared at the moment,
and there were gay greetings called, and
boisterous hugs; even Ronald submitted to
be raced off to see the riding-kit, and con-
fessed that his present was a slouch hat
that would hide most of the obnoxious hair!
He had forgotten to put it in her stocking?


but she might depend on it being the right
affair. . . .
Chubby was blazing with excitement. ?Do
you suppose Aunt Anne is awake, Dad ?? she
cried anxiously.
He laughed. ?If she has managed to stay
asleep through all this clatter, she is a clever
woman! ? he teased.
?Do you think I might go and see ??
It was just at this moment that Garry
Drummond had a sudden memory of a
letter Miss Manners had written when she
had proposed their coming to Mount
Pleasant. She had clearly defined boun-
daries, and had stipulated that they should
rigidly keep to their side of the house. It
seemed strange to reconcile the solitary, dis-
trustful woman she had been with the one
they had become familiar with lately!
?She won?t bite your head off on Christmas
morning, I expect,? Kittie reflected; ?but
knock softly, Chubs, if you can. . . .?
?I can . . . I?ll just give the weeniest tap;
but something will happen if I wait any
longer without thanking her. . . .?
She flew down the hall and they heard a
door slam. ?Hopeless! ? shrugged Chubby?s
mother.


Outside Miss Manners?s room, Chubby
Drummond waited till a tired voice bade
her enter. ?Did I wake you?? she asked
penitently when she saw that the blinds were
still drawn.
Aunt Anne shook her head. ?You may
pull them up, child, and let Christmas morn-
ing in! ? she said affectionately.
Chubby did so, and then threw her arms
round the thin shoulders. ?I?m wishing it to
be the nicest Christmas you have ever had,
darling Aunt Anne!? she whispered.
Anne Manners held her closely for an
instant. ?I think it is going to be just that,?
she answered brusquely. ?It might easily be
so, Chubby! ?
?I?ll bring your stocking: it?s a nice fat
one! Will you unpack it while lam here ??
coaxed Chubby wistfully.
?You may do that for me. Carefully,
now! ?
The old lady raised herself upon her
pillows: there was a tinge of colour in her
cheeks. It was many years since she had
attached any personal significance to Christ-
mas : it had simply been a matter of so many
cheques to various charitable institutions,
and occasional boxes of groceries and fruit


to deserving cases in the village. Now, there
was this absurd child with her extravagant
bursts of affection to stir her heart with
sensations half-pain, half-pleasure. Chubby's
own present to her had been so care-
lessly tied that one of the puffy cushions
she had selected for her aunt?s par-
ticular chair was bursting its bounds. It
looked rather inebriated, and she surveyed
it anxiously.
There was another in like condition, and
a note which Miss Manners read with a
comical pucker of brows:
Dear Aunt Anne,
They are to keep your hack from
acheing. . . . Loads of love from
Your Chubby.
Chubby watched her anxiously. ?Do you
like them? They are nice and fat, and I
thought you would like the colour. . . .?
?I like them very much, child; it was a
kind thought?but when will you learn to
spell??
?I was afraid I had got it wrong: perhaps
the typing will make me more careful ?
Aunt Anne ?when your heart gets so full


that it feels as if it would burst, you can?t
talk properly, can you??
"You can?t, indeed, Chubby!?
"And I don?t know what to say about
Silver-heels . . . you?re just the dearest
darling that ever was to give her to me! I
thought, if you don?t mind, that I would hug
you ever so carefully and then go and tell
her that she belongs to me
Anne Manners seemed to understand. She
returned the hug heartily enough. ?Run off
and get that part of it over,? she laughed.
And then: "I would not have given her to
anyone else, Chubby!?
That made it better than ever. The day
was laughing at her, Chubby Drummond
was certain ?it was all gold and sparkles.
She danced through the house and over
the lawn to the stable where Silver-heels
was nosing her food daintily. She whinnied
softly as her new mistress crept up and laid
her hand lovingly on the glossy neck. You
must always be gentle with horses, Chubby
knew. . . .
?Oh, you loveliest!? she whispered in an
ecstasy. ?Silver-heels . . . Silver-heels . . .
you are going to be my very own!?
The mare talked to her with liquid, beauti-


ful eyes?they were fast friends, these two,
and had taken many a trip to the little
chattering creek where the water was so
clean and good to drink. But never in her
wildest dreams had Chubby Drummond
imagined that they were going to really
belong. . . ,
Later, Wiggins expressed her soul on the
subject of "Them as has nothing better to
do than to go about and keep decent people
from their night?s sleep . . . screeching
their lungs out and calling it singing, no
doubt! ?
She was only half-angry, because she had
been specially pleased with the padded slip-
pers that Chubby had given her, together
with a large box of the butterscotch that was
her favourite sweet! She admitted that, for
all her hoydenish ways, Miss Chubby was on
the thoughtful side; and she busied herself
with preparations for the dinner in a less
dejected mood than usual. The big house
had had an extra polishing the day before,
and the girl from the township was, in conse-
quence, free to wait upon her and see that
she did not get over-tired.
There was another thrill when old Magnus
drove up the hill in his antiquated dray, and


deposited the saddle, which, it seemed, had
arrived at the Silver Creek Station by the last
train on Christmas Eve. He explained that
he was passing, in any case, and that "it was
neither here nor there to drop it at the big
house, and wish Miss Manners the Compli-
ments of the Season! ?
Wiggins gave him a cup of cocoa and some
hot scones, and he went contentedly away
with a handful of silver and a large tin of
tobacco. Miss Anne insisted upon him taking
a huge slice of the rich Christmas cake as
well.
It was a wonderful moment when Silver-
heels paced sedately up and down the drive
and Chubby had her first ride. Her hair
flamed till she seemed on fire, and Dr. Blair,
whose patients had been merciful for once,
smoking on the lawn beside Mollie Seton?s
deck-chair, watched lazily ?at peace with the
whole world. He was to see horse and rider
under very different conditions some weeks
later. . . .
Miss Manners noted, with the practised eye
of the perfect horsewoman, that the child sat
easily and did not fret the mare?s sensitive
mouth. ... For all her impulsiveness, she
had a gentle hand.


They talked of Red Lawson, who would
soon be in hospital. His Christmas Day had
been gladdened by a visit from Chubby and
Pip that morning with such presents as he
would accept from his new-found friends.
You could always give tobacco, Miss Manners
had reflected; and Chubby had invested in
comfortable slippers for the time he would
be in hospital! And there had been a
hamper as well.
When they went off to bed that night there
was so much to think over that the children
were certain they would not sleep. The great
surprise of the day was a silver-toned radio
set which was Miss Anne?s present to her
nephew. She admitted that it might be
pleasant to hear a good concert occasion-
ally, and that in some ways it was well to
march with the times! She listened to a
rendering of Dickens?s Christmas Carol with
a strangely softened face, wondering if
there were not still some Scrooges abroad,
with their self-absorption and their love of
hoarding. . . .
A swift mountain storm had developed
towards late afternoon. It brought rain and
a cold wind, so that they were glad to gather
around the fire while the old enchantment of


Tiny Tim took possession of them; and they
almost saw the poulterers? shops with their
rows of giant turkeys ?and the fog in the
London streets . . . and the spirit of cheer
that at length reached and melted the miser s
heart! It was as real as that! Chubby
shuddered as the Ghost clanked his chains ?
and even Pip admitted that it was ?rather
well done?? ?though he was certain that he
could have managed to get a more creepy
tone into the Spectre?s voice.
He kept very quiet, though, and from his
mournful expression, Chubby was certain he
was thinking of his far-away father. She was
extra-kind with him in consequence. They
had muscatel raisins and nuts, and pulled
giant bon-bons . . . and at last it was all
over.
?And a good thing, too! ?? grunted Wigsie.
She assured them that there would be cold
food on Boxing Day, with ?that great ham
a?most untouched, as you might say ?and
half a turkey to spare, to say nothing of a
huge lump of beef as would feed an ordinary
family for a week! ?? She declared that Miss
Anne was walking more stiffly than usual,
and predicted a fine bout of bilious attacks!
But she had enjoyed herself in her own


fashion, and retired early with a pile of
magazines that were packed full of sensation
and romance. Everybody had praised her
cooking and had given her a special vote of
thanks!


Chapter IX
The Bushfires Break Out
SO JANUARY CAME AND WENT, AND
the hills were explored far and near.
Phil hired a horse from the local livery
stables; he wasn?t going to let a girl get
the better of him if he knew it! The old
comradeship was restored, and there were
glorious races along smooth stretches of road,
with Chubby?s plaits whipping her face and
her eyes full of sparkles.
Ronald had discovered friends of school-
mates at the guest-house two miles out of the
village, and spent a good part of his time
with them. He was learning to play golf,
and there were excellent links available.
Red Lawson went into hospital at Fair
Haven for his first treatment. It called for
dogged courage on his part and infinite
patience on Dr. Blair's; and there was a little
probationer who did her best to coax him
back to faith in womankind with her cheery
kindness and common sense. She laughed
at him and bullied him as if his face had


been like that of ordinary people. . . It
helped him to forget. And the good food
and attention was building his strength up.
When Garry Drummond came back from
the city with his licence, he made them all
laugh with his absurd account of his blunders
and the Irish constable's comments. He was
a capable driver, and Miss Manners began to
look forward to the evening trips when the
blessed mountain freshness took the place
of the day?s heat. Kittie and Ronald went
with her, while Chubby and Silver-heels rode
beside them part of the way and then turned
back for a leisurely canter along the Lower
Road.
There were two country concerts that
month, and Ron played at each. Pip said
disgustedly that his head was swelling
visibly, and though he went to hear him
on both occasions, he sat and gloomed while
Chubby nearly clapped her hands off. It
seemed to her that everybody must be
admiring the boy whose sensitive hands
could bring such music from his violin.
Aunt Anne listened to her enthusiastic
accounts of the performances rather grimly,
and hoped the boy wasn?t getting too much
adulation ? But sometimes, when he played


to them in the evening, her eyes softened
perceptibly. Perhaps she was thinking of
the time when she had been handsome Miss
Manners . . . Garry wondered?
Her temper was still uncertain, and she
would rap out bitter speeches. Dr. Ted was
consoling. ?She?s not the kind to grow
wings, Chubs, old dear ?perhaps that is why
we like her so much: she is always herself.
And once you get into her heart, you stay
there.?
?Of course, I?m dreadfully careless,? sighed
Chubby contritely. ?I left my saddle on the
back porch last night instead of hanging it
up in the stable. She was really angry! ?
?Well, you must remember next time, and
be honourable about it, Ginger?she paid a
lot for that saddle, and it?s up to you to take
care of it. I guess she often envies you ?
there was no fence she wouldn?t take in her
day, they tell me; it?s stiff luck that that
wretched business settled in her bones as it
has! I?m getting a specialist to come up and
give her an overhaul: I?ve come to a bit of
a dead-end myself. That?s the worst of our
profession, Chubs ... it hurts pretty badly
when you can?t stop pain . . . and then you
hear folk say that we are hard-hearted! ?


He was looking across the distance to the
hospital, and his eyes were sad. He was
always dejected when he was up against
something that was too big for him.
?How is Red?? she asked sorrowfully.
Things weren?t going too well here, and
sometimes it eased him to talk matters out,
he said.
He sighed heavily. ?It?s the devil and all,
Chubs ?sometimes I think we had better
have left him alone. He says we can?t make
him look worse than he does now, but that?s
cold comfort. The grafting has taken, but
I?ve done all I mean to do for some weeks:
he has the pluck of fifty?l?m getting down-
right fond of the fellow! We?ll give it a rest
and then start again. He goes off for long
prowls in the hills, and I often wonder
whether he will come back. . . .?
He had forgotten for an instant ?till he
saw Chubby?s face whiten. He put his hand
on the bright head.
?I shouldn?t have said that ?I was talk-
ing to myself! It?s always a compliment
when you do that with a pal?understand?
Cheerio. . . .?
She watched his car disappear round the
bend in Lower Road. It must be terrible


when you wanted so badly to help people
and couldn?t!
February was unusually hot. Often at
night, when they gathered on the lawn and
set the sprinklers going, they saw red flares
on the hills where a fire was smouldering.
The air grew thick with smoke, and Wiggins
sighed and told stories of the days when
the countryside had been devastated, and
people in thickly timbered country trapped
and burned. Given long grass and weeks
without rain, and you were bound to have
trouble, she declared, what with tourists all
over the bush and settlers burning off without
rhyme or reason!
If it had not been for the danger to home-
steads and livestock, the clearing of scrub
and undergrowth was a godsend, Aunt Anne
declared; fire was a good servant, but a bad
master! February was usually an anxious
month; March brought the keen frosts and
the mountain mists, even when the days were
hot, and there was always the chance of a
steady downpour of rain.
The last week of Ronald?s holidays, Phil
Penrose was a problem. When the three of
them started out together, either Pip sulked
and went off by himself, or he and Ron took


BUSHFIRES BREAK OUT I5 1
it into their heads to have a stunt of their
own, and Chubby was left at a loose end.
Or she would have been but for Silver-heels,
who was ready to serve her little mistress at
all times and seasons. Chubby told Aunt
Anne that she thought Silver-heels must be
like the wonderful strawberry mare Winnie,
in Lorna Doone ! She certainly understood
a great deal of what was said to her, and was
a real pal when the boys went off on one of
their long excursions!
Ronald played systematic court to Miss
Manners: he was always at hand to plump
up her cushions or to pass her her sticks.
She accepted his attentions somewhat grimly :
she was doing her duty by the lad, but her
trust had been sadly shaken. He would
make his way in life as much by his charm
of manner as by his ability, though he did
not seem lacking in this direction; but she
kept a wary eye upon his doings, and was
far from impressed.
The night before he went back they were
all out on the lawn. The day had been
unusually oppressive, and the sun sank
behind smoky clouds that were sombre and
lurid. As it burned its way through them,
it seemed to set them on fire. There was not


a breath of air, and the trees looked as if the
vitality had been drawn from their leaves ?
even the huge chestnuts were drooping and
dispirited. The sprinklers whirled languidly,
and Punch stretched himself out as if it were
a trouble to breathe.
Wiggins had been gloomier than usual,
shaking her head and prophesying disaster.
Every time she came from the house they
could see her looking over to the mountains
and frowning. When she could not get any-
one to listen to her grumbling, she grumbled
to herself; and yet, however weary she was,
she kept going.
?We don?t have too long a life, Miss
Chubby,? she would protest; ?we best get
at it while we can: dear knows what we?ll
be put to after!?
She seemed to regard Heaven as a school
where lessons were corrected and you were
kept in to do impositions! Anyway, she
would insist, ?You never could tell what it
would be like!?
She declared that Punch would pass out
before the summer was over: he?d lived
longer than might have been expected, as it
was! And she was sure that Miss Manners
was sickening for something. Her conclu-


BUSHFIRES BREAK OUT 153
sion was: ?Ten to one, she?ll git ill and be
took to her own hospital, pore dear ?after
all the fuss and gifting ready! You prepare
for other people and then git carried off your-
self ! There was Mrs. O?Sullivan, over by the
Divide: planning out her husband?s funeral
to the number of neighbours as would come
back for a drop of whisky and a bite of
something to eat . . . and what happened?
She was buried herself, three-?weeks-come-
next-Tuesday; and Paddy drinking himself
blind every night in the village since. And
that?s life for you! ?
Even Chubby grew depressed by these
constant outpourings: it seemed to her that
Aunt Anne was looking thinner and whiter
than usual, and she did wish Punch would
stop panting!
The night was breathless, and perhaps
they were all feeling a bit sad because, this
time to-morrow, Ronald would be away. His
mother was going with him, and would be a
few days in town settling up some business
that Miss Manners had entrusted to her. And
altogether nobody was quite natural, and
Chubby did wish Pip w T ould come over. . . .
Ronald was full of plans for the year; he
was eager to get back, and, when Anne


Manners was out of hearing, he informed
Chubby that Silver Creek was too sleepy for
words and altogether behind the times.
?Aren?t you going to miss us, Ron?? she
asked wistfully.
He answered loftily: ?Of course, but a
fellow can?t be tied on to his family?s apron-
strings. Besides, there?s the future to think
of ... I am to choose my own profession
?rather decent of the old girl, isn?t it??
Chubby ignored this, though her cheeks
flamed. She was tremendously proud of
Ron, but she did wish he would play the
game! He was everything that was polite
with Aunt Anne, and then, behind her back,
he would speak disrespectfully of her!
?What are you going to be?? she asked
under her breath. He was so dreadfully
grown-up, these times . . . every year would
take him farther and farther from her.
?I don?t know: the law, probably. I
couldn?t be a doctor, Chubs ?sick people
bore me to death, as it is. But barristers
have rather a good time, and I?ve always
come top in debating. Plenty of time
yet!?
Chubby was picturing him in gown and
wig?he would look very handsome. And


he would love cross-examining witnesses and
making speeches. . . .
When she and her father drove back from
the station the following morning there was
smoke everywhere, and the heat was stifling.
There might have been no hills . . . and a
dry, north wind was rising: it seemed to
crackle and to drive everything before it ?
already it was tearing bark from trees and
flinging it about as if it were angry.
They stopped at the post office for the mail,
and Garry came out to the car with rather
a grave expression on his face. A fire had
started at Wombat Creek and was making
towards the State School: the head master
had sent the children home, and some of the
elder scholars and the teachers were staying
to make a break round the school building
and the residence. The trouble was that
everything was as dry as tinder, and the
continued heat was adding to the danger.
The Sycomores looked inviting with its
drawn green-and-white blinds. They were
straining at their ropes, though, and flapping
and groaning. It was good to get inside to
cool, darkened rooms.
Lessons at The Lodge did not start till next
week, and Pip rode over at about ten o?clock


in a mood that made him anything but an
enlivening companion. Anne Manners rang
Mollie Seton and suggested that she should
stay at Mount Pleasant for a few days, as
Chubby would be missing her brother.
Mrs. Seton?s voice sounded relieved: Phil
had been restless and irritable, and the artist-
guardian had taken it into his head to pay
a visit to Silver Creek to get some ?smoke
effects,? as he phrased it! He was staying
at one of the hotels, but was coming to her
for meals, and Pip had resented this fact and
was showing his most trying side. She would
be very grateful to have him off her hands
for a while!
They were all a little unnatural: it was
like waiting for a thunderstorm to break . . .
there was threat in the air and in the pall of
smoke that crept nearer and nearer. . . .
The ice-man brought a sensational report.
It was always understood that fire would not
cross water, but this year it was doing just
that ?leaping from bank to bank. Wombat
Creek was all but boiling, he added, and the
wind was acting as bellows. . . .
Wiggins stood listening, her apron over her
head to shield her from the glare. When she
came away from the long interview, she was


BUSHFIRES BREAK OUT 157
more talkative than ever. She was especially
indignant with ?them tramps, as is a lazy
lot, and thinks nothing of throwing away a
cigarette as soon as they have finished with
it.? She ended up with a significant: ?We?ll
all know where we are soon ?with week-
enders coming up and burning off rubbish
at all times and seasons ?and them modem
hussies with their ?fags,? as they call them!
If people must smoke, why not have a honest
pipe as goes out when it is done with ??
The ice-man had informed her that the
guests at the various tourist resorts were
getting panicky and were going back to
town; and there would only be the ?locals?
in the village and the hills ?before you could
say knife!?
She poured this out to Chubby Drummond,
bidding her keep it to herself and ?not to
worrit your auntie, who looks as if she might
be dropping in her tracks any minute! ?
Chubby caught her breath. ?You don?t
think Aunt Anne is really sick, do you,
Wigsie? If she is, we must let Doctor Ted
know at once. . . .?
Wiggins sniffed. ?There you go, imagining
things as doesn?t exist! When people git old,
you can?t count on them like as if they was


young and strong. But she don?t need no
shocks if we can keep them from her. She
may have to know, pore soul, if the fire gits
a holt! It swep? down on Ferny Hollow like
a wall; and it don?t take no notice of houses
as solid as The Sycomores ?you can?t shut
doors on flames, Miss Chubby! Whatever
comes or goes, the missus must not be
worrited. . . .?
In the end, it was this idea that took root
in Chubby?s mind: Aunt Anne must be pro-
tected ?even from anxiety.
She searched her father out and asked
very quietly what they were to do if the
fires reached them. He took her face into
his hands and looked into her troubled eyes.
?Anybody been scaring you, Ginger?
They are not within miles of Mount
Pleasant.?
?Might they come, Daddy??
He hesitated for a moment: he had always
treated his Red-head with confidence.
?It?s this way, Chubs ?we are in a better
position than nine out of ten: there is a lot
of cleared land and not much timber. The
ones who are in real danger are those who
are surrounded by forest, and they have to
be thought of first. A wind like this is the


the top,?
laughing and jesting ... to certain
death or
disablement. ... In this child!
very mischief. If the worst came to the
worst, and it bore down on us from the back,
we?d fight it; that?s all. lam not afraid of
your courage ?you have good old British
blood ?and we might have to rely on you
quite a lot.?
She squared her shoulders, her eyes fear-
less and splendid. ?You would let us help,
Daddy . . . Pip and me ? It . . . would be
rather fun!?
He turned his head for an instant. The
same spirit that had taken the boys ?over
"'Of course you?ll help, but you may have
to face something a lot harder than that,
my girl. Any danger that threatens The
Sycomores is mild compared with that at
Wombat Creek and the neighbouring town-
ships. I don?t like some of the indications,
to be frank! And I promised to help if I
am needed ?the call may come any minute.
Understand? If I have to go, I shall leave
you in charge here, and you will be worrying
your small soul-case out about your daddy,
if I know anything of my Chubs! Now
that is just what I don?t want you to do. I
should like to picture you holding the fort


and keeping cool . . . and being sure that I
shall come back!?
He stood watching her with an odd tight-
ness at his throat . . . God bless her ginger
head! If real danger came, it would find
her ready. He had never stood between her
and the east wind, and she could be trusted
in any emergency. But there were hideous
things happening about them . . . horrors
that were trying the nerve of veterans! He
was glad Kittle was out of it. . . . He went
on quietly:
?Now, we?re supposing that the unlikely is
occurring?and I am away) and the fire has
slipped round the shoulder of the low hill
behind The Sycomores and is coming on
from the one danger-point?the timber pad-
dock ! In that case, Colonel all hoses on
taps ?and play on the outbuildings, you and
Private Penrose! You have, of course, rung
up the post office and there will be help
on the way ?they have a finely organized
brigade, and it will be out before you know
where you are. So that there is no need to
worry. . . . Sandie Macleod is on the spot,
and even though the pressure of water is
bound to be poor, it will keep matters on the
damp side. You and Pip between you could


BUSHFIRES BREAK OUT
pull out some of the bran-bags in the stable
and soak them ?but only if the trouble comes
near. . . . The main thing is to keep Aunt
Anne?s mind easy?l don?t need to tell you
that! ?
No ... he didn?t need to tell her that:
she had full control of herself, child though
she was. The stuff of which splendid women
are made, he reflected.
She answered swiftly: "Don?t you worry,
Daddy, I?ll look after things here, and I won?t
let Aunt worry the least little bit. And I?m
not frightened ... at least ... if even I
was a hit frightened, it wouldn?t matter so
long as I didn?t let anyone know, would it??
He laughed and ruffled her hair. "That
sounds a bit involved, old dear, but I know
what you mean. The bravest folk are in a
blue funk when it comes to the pinch; but
they act as if they didn?t care, and that?s the
best kind of courage. I?ve seen the lads
white to the lips . . . hut they went on. Was
that the ?phone ??
When he rejoined her, she knew by his
face what he was going to say.
"Marching orders, Chubs; they are calling
for volunteers. And I?m leaving you in
charge, my dearest!?
L


She clung to him for a moment, convul-
sively. ?You won?t run any risks, Dad?
You?ve got to remember your cough. . . .?
?I?ll remember, Precious!??
She gulped. He so seldom called her that.
?There won?t be anyone there to remind you
to take care, Daddy! ?
?But I have promised you, and I keep my
word. Soldier to soldier! ??
He knew that that would steady her. She
went down the hill with him to the lower
gate, where he was picked up by a car-load
of anxious-looking men. He took with him
the remembrance of a flaming head, and eyes
that were wide and beautiful. Again he was
glad that Kitten was out of it ?there might
be pretty grim work before they were
through.
Chubby lingered till the humming of the
car had died in the distance. The air was
heavy with smoke; it almost stung the
breath. Sometimes, it drifted away in a
dark cloud, and a group of trees stood out;
then it closed down again and there was no
suggestion of mountain ranges.
Pip came towards her as she climbed the
hill: he had discarded his coat and his
freckles were enormous.


?Where on earth have you been?? he
demanded testily.
She answered jerkily: ?Daddy has been
called to go with the volunteers ?they are
taking a party to Wombat Creek: the fire
is near the schoolhouse.?
He whistled. ?Wish we could go?they
may have to let us help yet! Lots of kids
do. . . .?
?We?ve got to look after The Sycomores
and Aunt Anne.?
?That?s slow business ?the fires are miles
away.?
?They might come, though.?
?Rubbish, Chubs!?
?Dad says that we must get ready, in case.
There?s heaps we can do.?
He thrust his hands into his trousers
pockets. ?What a chance for Our Local
Correspondent,? he drawled. ? ?Gallant
efforts on the part of two young firefighters
result in homestead being saved.? Can you
see it?done in headlines, Gin-gin ? Just one
word of caution ?it won?t do for you to get
too near the scene of action: that hair of
yours would act as a torch now that it is
getting back to its natural colour, and would
start a fire wherever you went ?weather like


this! What are you going to do first??
?Collect all the buckets and fill them ?get
to it, Phil Penrose, and stop talking! Any-
body can skite! You?ll have to go into
Parliament when you grow up! We?re to
fix the hoses on the different taps. And Aunt
Anne is not to know that there is any
danger.
?Anything else while you?re about it,
General? Eyes right . . . quick march. . . .
Halt! ? He threw back his head and held an
imaginary rifle: old Chubs was taking com-
mand in earnest! They screwed on the
hoses and discovered that there was the
merest trickle of water.
?I could have told you that: everybody
will be using it! ? quoth Phil contemptuously.
?It wouldn?t damp a foot in front of it!?
Chubby looked wan. ?I?ve just thought
of something, Pip: we must keep the stable
doors open; horses get dreadfully scared
when there is fire near ?they run back into
it. . . . It would be simply terrible if any-
thing happened to Silver-heels!?
In the presence of real distress, Phil tried
to comfort her. ?Honest Injun, kid, there?s
only one chance in a hundred that it will
come as far as this! And if it does, we?ll see


BUSHFIRES BREAK OUT 165
to Silver-heels! I feel as if it is going to be
rather thrilling. . .
As soon as he began to view it in the light
of a stunt, Pip was all attention. They
gathered together and filled every bucket on
the place, and then got out the bran-bags.
?We?d better not hose these until there is
need,? Chubby reflected sagely, ?Aunt Anne
might be cross if we spoiled the bran for
nothing! ?
All the time the smoke thickened and came
nearer. ... It was impossible to see even
the nearest Mount, and the wind tore at the
trees as if it were in a fury with them. Anne
Manners was prostrated with one of her
blinding headaches: she was content to lie
in her darkened room and let Wiggins
minister to her. When Chubby stole in to
see if the pain was any better, she displayed
no curiosity as to what was taking place
outside. So that that part of it was easy. . . .
She said she was certain that there was a
thunderstorm coming, and that it was a good
thing the fires were so far away. She had a
cup of tea and some thin bread-and-butter
for her dinner, and then thought that it was
possible to get a sleep! Chubby had been
afraid that she would be questioned as to


where her father was, but Aunt Anne
appeared to be satisfied that matters were
going on as usual, and that there was nothing
to be apprehensive about.
The room was very quiet, and Chubby
Drummond waited until she saw the pain-
drawn face relax and heard the even
breathing. She slipped away, nearly over-
turning a chair in her efforts to make a
silent retreat. Perhaps, when she reached
that mysterious stage known as ?growing-
up,? she would have more command over
ungainly limbs ? Chubby wondered! Every-
thing in that beautiful room was so still and
orderly that she felt more awkward than
usual when she was in it . . . and miles too
big!
Pip had thrown himself down under one
of the largest chestnuts. The smoke was not
so thick there, he declared, and it was fairly
cool. She sat beside him, watching.
?Aunt Anne is fast asleep! ? she informed
him briefly.
?Jolly good thing: save her from worry-
ing.?
Pip?s manner seemed different . . . she
glanced quickly at him. ?Do you think the
fires are any nearer, Phil ??


He pulled at some of the yellowing chest-
nut burs and then let them drop with an
exclamation as the sharp spines pricked his
fingers. ?Listen to the wind, and don?t ask
foolish questions, Chubs: it must be gallop-
ing! If it keeps on like this till evening, it
will be ever so much closer. You can smell
it quite plainly, too. , . . We won?t be able
to go to bed, of course.?
?No!? agreed Chubby. The heat was
suffocating, and above the tumult of the wind
was another sound. ... A distant, muffled
roaring!


Chapter X
Red February
WIGGINS WAS IN ONE OF HER
most trying moods, declaring that they
would be burned in their beds and that the
Government ought to do something about it!
It was useless to remind her that the wireless
announcer spoke of hundreds of volunteers
who were being hurried to the different out-
breaks; she said that it was easy to talk
about it being ?Red February,? but there
should be laws passed to make people more
careful about lighting fires and such-like!
Towards afternoon it grew very dark, and
numbers of birds made their appearance,
driven from their haunts by the ever-
increasing heat. They flew low and they
seemed exhausted; they had forgotten to be
afraid of anything but the terror that came
on them so rapidly and blinded and bewil-
dered them.
Chubby got shallow dishes and filled them
with water. ?If we keep very still, they won?t
mind us,? she whispered. Phil was dubious


about this; but a few minutes later a magpie
drank thirstily, and after that many of the
weary little feathered creatures gained con-
fidence. Just before tea-time a mopoke
with great, tragic eyes dropped almost at
Chubby's feet and looked at her sadly and
wonderingly. She spoke to it and coaxed
it: it made no effort to get away. . . . Pre-
sently she lifted it gently and even ventured
to stroke the soft head.
?Oh, Pip . . .? she cried in anguish, ?look
at its poor eyes! ?
Phil Penrose grunted, more disturbed than
he was willing to acknowledge. When
Chubby was not looking, he advanced a
cautious finger and ruffled the silky feathers.
?I suppose,? he admitted, ?they are wonder-
ing what it is all about ? Just like we should
be if we were wakened out of a sound sleep
and found our home on fire! They must
have come miles and miles. . . .?
?Do you think it will live, Pip??
?No, I don?t; ten to one its throat is
scorched: birds don?t have much strength.?
She gulped. Its eyes were so beautiful and
so mournful; perhaps it understood that they
were trying to help it ?
At three o?clock the ?phone rang. Chubby


flew to it and took down the receiver with
trembling hands. She wasn?t used to the
?phone, and she did hope she wouldn?t make
a mess of any word that might come through.
Then her heart began to bound in great,
jumpy throbs. . . .
?That you, Chubs? Dad speaking, from
Wombat Creek. Eh? Yes, it?s pretty hot,
but everything is O.K. so far ?we have
burned a big break and are hoping for the
best. Aunt Anne all right ? Good! If your
mother should ring up from town, tell her
that all is well, and don?t let her know where
I am ?no occasion to bother her with that
sort of thing. We?re taking it in shifts, and
?what?s that? I?m feeling fine! Don't
know when I?ll be back ?they say there
is a storm on the way?it can?t come too
soon. Yes, I'm remembering, old dear. .. .
Cheerio! ?
Chubby's cheeks were blazing with excite-
ment when she hung the receiver up, and the
hours dragged till, just before sunset, the
wind dropped, and the smoke-pall lay
heavily over village and ranges. Then even-
ing deepened to dusk, and they saw what
was happening. . . .
The mountain to the right was on fire


not just here and there, but everywhere, it
seemed! What had looked like torches last
night had joined and were massing; it was
possible to trace the line of the log-fences of
clearings. Giant trees made flaring beacons
against the sky, and sometimes there was a
sickening crash that told of the fall of a forest
beauty . . . Chubby had always loved those
stately white gums! Woe was in her heart
and a growing fear ?there had been no word
from Daddy since, and Aunt Anne would
soon have to know that he was with the
fire-fighters I
The mopoke had crept under one of the
deck-chairs, and it sat perfectly still. She
dug some worms for it, but it would not
eat; only watched her solemnly as if it were
asking questions she could not answer.
Then Anne Manners came on to the
porch: she looked very white and tired, and
Chubby ran to meet her. She would have
to know now. . . . She took it as a matter
of course; naturally, Garret would want to
do his share, but, with the dropping of the
wind, the danger would soon pass. She was
so certain of this that Chubby felt much
better; and she cheered up perceptibly when
Dr. Blair made his appearance. He threw


himself down on the lawn as if he were tired
out. He assured them that sickness did not
stop because bushfires were raging in the
district; indeed, the general strain on the
nerves was good for no one. He had had
a trying day, and was anxious about Red
Lawson who had left hospital without saying
a word to anyone. He had been restless for
some hours, they remembered, and it looked
as if he had become fed up and had decided
to quit. Not to be wondered at, of course,
but disappointing!
Chubby interrupted, eagerly. ?He?s gone
fire-fighting! ? she declared; ?he would not
want you to know because he would be afraid
you would stop him, Dr. Ted! ?
Blair sat up. ?By Jove, Ginger, you?ve got
it! I never thought of that! He?d be invalu-
able, too: he knows every 7 mile of these
ranges.?
?Is he fit?? Miss Manners asked.
?No . . . but he wouldn?t take rhat into
consideration: who could blame him ? If he
thought there was a kiddie in danger nothing
would keep him back Tommy worships
him! I was idiot enough to get hot and
bothered about him making tracks, but I
believe you are right, Chubs! ?


Chubby nodded. When there were big
things happening, naturally you wanted to
help!
?Aunt Anne,? she coaxed, presently,
?couldn?t Silver-heels and I do something?
If the fires are still bad to-morrow, I could
ride back and forward with messages, or
carry provisions?l?d be dreadfully careful! ?
Anne Manners tapped restlessly on the arm
of her chair with one knotted hand. Nobody
knew better than she that Chubby was aching
to be up and at it! Every time a great tree
fell, carrying to the undergrowth a fresh fury
of red-hot coal and shower of sparks, she
would start, and her eyes dilate. It was not
fear for herself ... it was remembrance of
an idolized father whose healing lungs would
be drawing in that stinging air! Macleod had
come back from a trip to the township with a
sensational rumour of lives in danger at one
of the saw-mills, and of fire that was sweeping
down on a cluster of houses set in the heart of
the timber! And Garry had not ?phoned
again . . .
Presently, Chubby drew attention to the
quiet mopoke. Dr. Blair went with her, and
shook his head. ?I can?t promise to do any-
thing, old dear . . . birds have such a slight


hold on life. And they won?t do as we tell
them, you see, even if we really understood
what was wrong with them! ?
Her face showed nervous strain; it was not
altogether the mopoke she was worrying
about. ?What?s wrong, Ginger??? he asked
affectionately.
?I?m worried about Daddy: it would be
so dreadful if he got his cough back again.
And he only ?phoned once, you see.??
?I see; but there might be a dozen reasons
for that. They won?t let him take risks; I
had a word with Brennan and Halliwell, and
they are going to look after him ?they have
had a bit of First Aid experience, and are
great chaps. Feel better? That?s good! Of
course it isn?t pleasant work, and nobody
likes smoke; but real men can never keep out
of this sort of thing and real girls and
women ask God to watch, and try not to
worry . . .?
He saw her clench her hands, and knew
that he had touched the right chord. ? I'll try,
Dr. Ted! ? she promised valiantly.
?Of course you will; that goes without say-
ing. And sometimes it takes more courage to
stay at home than to be in the thick of it.
It?s quite possible that you may be able to


lend a hand to-morrow; we'll see what Aunt
Anne says about it ?always supposing you
give your word of honour not to go into
danger 1?
Chubby gasped. ?Oh, Dr. Ted, you are a
trump! I must do something, or burst!"
He grinned. ?We must endeavour to pre-
vent that; it wouldn?t be a scrap romantic.
Now, where?s your sick bird ??
It had crept into a quiet comer; and he
stooped down and looked at it very sadly.
Then he shook his head. While they were
watching, the little life went out . . .
?Better so, old dear ?it was suffering!
Give it a funeral, and write an epitaph! ?
?It drank some water,? said Chubby
gruffly, ?but it would not eat: perhaps I
didn?t get the right things for it ? It had the
loveliest eyes . . . .?
?It couldn?t swallow, probably! ?
?Do you think birds go to Heaven??
He smiled, very gently. ?Why not ? There
is heaps of room in God?s beautiful sky,
Ginger?if He cares for the sparrows, He?ll
surely look after mopokes! Now I must get
home and have a bit of sleep: there?s a pretty
sick girl at Boulder Creek, and I must be
there before dawn.?


?No fires that way, are there ??
?No fires that way. I?ve got a notion that,
before we?re much older, there will be a
terrific thunderstorm, and that will put an
end to all the trouble.?
He lingered a few minutes chatting with
Anne Manners, suggesting that they should
get Macleod to carry their bedding outside so
as to get the first, cool breath that might stir.
Wiggins was gloomily prophesying that the
whole of the country would go up in smoke
??afore this bout is over!? But she made
Miss Anne?s bed as carefully as if the whole
village were coming along to inspect it.
Just as Chubby was getting into her
pyjamas after a cold shower, the ?phone
went. She could not hear the first words for
her thudding heart-throbs.
?We?re beating it, Chubs ?and six of us
are turning in for a snooze; you wouldn?t
know us if you saw us ?baths will have to
wait! Two fresh car-loads of fine chaps
landed out a few minutes ago, so we?ll be able
to have a real sleep. What?s that ?hoarse ?
Not a bit of it; just weary, and I?ve known
clearer air than this. We?ve got the beastie
under for the time being, and that is all that
matters. Let Aunt Anne know that all is


going well. Eh? Sleeping out, to-night?
That?s sensible, my girl. I?d give a lot for
some of Wigsie?s famous orange-cup. . . .
All serene, Red-head . . . look after your-
self, and I?ll give you a tingle in the mom-
? ? }}
ing. . . .
Chubby passed this information on ex-
citedly; and then they settled down for the
night. Pip had chosen the hammock for his
bunk, and swung languidly back and
forward.
The mountain blazed steadily: it looked
like a volcano ?very splendid, and terrible.
The tall trees shuddered ?red to the heart ?
and fell with monotonous regularity. Before
she realized that she was sleepy, Chubby was
in Dreamland. She thought that she and
Silver-heels were riding up a crimson track,
and that she was trying to balance a huge jug
of orange-cup that had splinters of ice in it,
and clinked deliciously. But it would spill
over, and she was afraid it would all be gone
before she reached the schoolhouse where
thirsty men counted the moments until she
arrived. Once, she saw Red Lawson ?at
least she thought it was Red Lawson, but his
face was quite smooth and unscarred, and he
gave her a sunny smile . . . And then Dr.


Ted was there, saying gently, and very
sadly, ?When people get to Making-Up-
Place, Chubs, everything comes right; even
wounded faces . .
She woke with these words ringing in her
ears. And it seemed odd . . . because, of
course, Making-Up-Place was Heaven!


Chapter XI
Chubby takes Command!
The sun was up earlier than
usual, or else it seemed so because they
were sleeping outside. Chubby thought some-
body had flashed an electric torch before her
eyes, and she woke rather crossly. Pip, of
course ... up to his tricks!
up to his tricks!
She blinked drowsy lids; but he was no-
where in sight, and at length she realized
where she was, and that the orchard trees
were shrouded in smoke! The storm had not
come yet, and they were facing another
anxious day. How eventful it was to be she
was not to discover till later.
Phil had had his bath in the creek. He
assured her on his return that it was pretty
warm already, and that Wigsie had come
out for Aunt Anne before dawn, and had
helped her into her room. He did not think
she had slept much, nor had he; but old
Chubs had made up for both of them, and
had snored at the rate of no allowance! He
tried to figure out the displacement of air


caused by one heavy snore, and Chubby
scoffed at him. She wondered why she was
feeling so tired.
After breakfast she rode into the township
for the mail: there was a letter from her
mother to them all. It told of great heat in
the city, and the alarming reports that were
coming over the air about the bushfires. She
took it for granted that The Sycomores would
be safe. It was addressed to Chubby, and
she felt very important in consequence.
Most of the residents of Silver Creek had
been sitting up all night: there were fresh
outbreaks that were causing anxiety, and
some disquieting rumours of loss of life,
though no details were to hand as yet. If
the north wind revived, the trouble would
begin all over again. . . .
The air was dead still at the moment, and
the water under the bridge gleamed like
metal. The current moved sluggishly and as
if it had no life.
They were finishing morning tea at The
Sycomores when Drummond rang up. He
hoped to be back in the afternoon for a spell.
And then, while he was speaking, the dread-
ful thing happened ... he broke off in the
middle of a sentence, and though Chubby


cried distractedly, "Are you there, Daddy?
. . . Are you there . . . ?? there was no
answer! Finally, in an agony of fear, she
hung up the receiver and then rang the
Silver Creek post office. The reply was not
reassuring: the line from the schoolhouse
was interfered with, communication had
ceased, and it was supposed that a burning
tree had fallen across the wires. They were
making inquiries and would let Miss Manners
know later.
Chubby stood trembling. . . . Daddy had
said that Aunt Anne was not to be worried
about anything. . . . She was trying to think
it out when there came the tap-tap of sticks
along the hall.
"Anything wrong, child??
Chubby nodded; for an instant it seemed
as if the words would not come. It was then
she knew Anne Manners for all time. . . .
She came stiffly forward, and the mother-
look on her face was the most beautiful thing
you could imagine. Chubby ran to her and
held her as if she could not bear to let her go.
"Daddy was talking to me one minute, and
the next he wasn?t there ! ? she sobbed.
Miss Manners steadied herself and
answered cheerfully: ?Of course he was


there; that sort of thing happens constantly
when there are bushfires ?a tree falls and
the line is broken! ?
?That?s what they said at the post
office. But it was dreadful . . . like some-
one dying. . .
?Well, it certainly wasn?t that, my girl; we
must find out what is really the matter. You
and Silver-heels had better get away at once.
Go to the village first and ask them which
track is safest, and then come back and we?ll
see what we can do.?
Chubby?s hug nearly upset Anne Manners?s
balance, but she made no protest. She knew
how the sturdy heart was aching, and that
the only way to mend matters was to let her
get going!
?I won?t be long?l know you?ll be wor-
ried. Are you really going to let me find
Daddy? And may I take the big water-
bag full of orange-cup?? begged Chubby
Drummond, the remembrance of her dream
full upon her.
Miss Anne laughed. It was probably the
first time on record that a fruit drink had
been carried in a water-bag!
?We shall see! You couldn?t possibly keep
it cool under these conditions, you know.?


That had not occurred to Chubby. When,
on her return from the village for the second
time, she prepared to set out on the greatest
adventure of her life, she looked rather like
a gallant boy in the riding-suit that made her
ever so much slimmer. Her face was flushed
and earnest, and there was something in her
eyes that brought a lump into her aunt?s
throat. Perhaps she was acting unwisely?
the child was full of daring. . . . Still, she
had given her word of honour, and Chubby
would not risk Silver-heels if she did not
think of herself!
Pip was inclined to be supercilious over
the whole project. Once again he was to be
left out of things! Miss Manners saw the
sullen expression about his mouth, and set
him to work, reminding him that he was
needed at The Sycomores, and there were
always those who had to stay at home ?that
it would not do for him to take unnecessary
risks with his father so far away . . . and
that she felt responsible in his absence. In
any case, she could not be left with just
Wiggins and Sandie Macleod!
He brightened when she said this, carried
her chair to the coolest comer under the
trees, and waited on her quite deftly. She


talked to him about Malay, and he told her
some extraordinary stories. It was possible
he believed them, and in any case they were
entertaining and kept him from brooding.
For one who, in time past, had professed to
be indifferent to children, Miss Manners was
rather understanding.
Chubby rode steadily: she was really help-
ing at last! There was a hamper of good
things strapped securely to the saddle, and
Aunt Anne had put in a pound of her best
tea and a bottle of milk. And some tobacco.
She had to go through the township in order
to take what was considered the clearest
track to Wombat Creek, and the little man
from the corner shop came out with a small
sack of oranges for the fire-fighters. They
were wizened, but he guaranteed that they
would find them juicy and sweet! Chubby
apologized to Silver-heels for loading her
up like this; it wasn?t exactly fair to take
things for granted ?and in any case the
mare wasn?t going to have the easiest time
in the world, with smoke that stung the
eyelids!
The villagers gave her a little cheer as she
set out. All over the country unusual things
were being done . . . and the child had grit


CHUBBY TAKES COMMAND! 185
and common sense. . . . Besides which, the
track they had indicated was quite clear as
yet.
The heat was terrific; as she approached
the forest the crackling sound became more
apparent. Here and there were patches of
green; once she crossed a creek by a shallow
ford and let Silver-heels splash backwards
and forwards to cool her feet.
A mile farther on she came across a party
of men who were burning a break. She left
with them some of the oranges and they gave
her directions, telling her it would be pretty
warm near the schoolhouse, by all accounts!
If the Government meteorologist would only
send along something in the way of rain, he
would be the most popular man in Victoria,
they assured her!
Chubby never forgot the last lap of that
ride. She had had to leave the main road
and take a side-track. And it was good to
remember that even brave men were afraid
when they faced the firing-line. . . .
?We?ve got to get through, Silver-heels!?
she whispered, wondering whether, after all,
they were going to be able to do it.
She rode over a stretch of heathland that
in early spring had been a garden of soft


rose-pink and dazzling white. A few hun-
dred yards away a giant gum was blazing,
and a bough fell, letting loose a shower of
sparks. A line of red ran along the dry
grass.
?Quicker, Silver-heels, darling!? coaxed
Chubby Drummond. The mare responded
?she was getting nervy, starting at every
crash, hating the smoky air and the heat,
and the unusualness of it all. A fear seized
Chubby . . . suppose . . . suppose she should
lose her head and rush right into the danger
instead of away from it?
Half an hour later they reached an open
space where charred stumps and blackened
ground told a pitiful story. Chubby glanced
about her with dilating eyes and a growing
sense of miseiy. The bridge was still there,
though one or two of the piles had been
burned through. . . . But there was no
schoolhouse. . , . She had ridden past this
place more than once, and she knew the
exact position it should have occupied.
There was just a smouldering heap with
twisted, blackened iron, and the three large
tanks had fallen from their stands. There
was no sound of life about.
She thought of the way her father?s voice


again!
?Please show me where to go . . she
entreated . . . ?dear God . . . dear God!?
She knew it was an answer when she heard
a shout of; ?Ginger ... for the love of
Mike!"
had suddenly broken off, and a surge of
desolation swept her.
?We?ve got to find them, Silver-heels! ? she
gulped. She knew that you did not need to
kneel to be able to pray: God could hear
just as easily from the back of a horse! Her
prayers were always natural, and though it
seemed as if she could find no words, her
whole heart was begging . . . begging. . . .
Because, if anything like this happened to
Daddy, the world would never be right
He had come from the other side of the
creek, and there were others with him. They
were dreadful sights with their grimed faces
and smoke-reddened eyes, but Chubby had
never seen anything so beautiful. They gave
her a rousing cheer, and perhaps that did
more to steady her than anything else. She
remembered that they must be thirsty and
that she was carrying comforts for them. . . .
The bag of oranges fell to the ground with
a thud. After she had given her father a


feverish hug, she turned with a guilty: ?I
suppose they?re all squashed! It wouldn?t
be me if I didn?t spoil everything.
Oh, and there is orange-cup in the water-
bag. . . .?
Her father patted the sturdy shoulder.
?Some girl, Chubs! That ginger head of
yours is the best sight I have had for a
month of Sundays! How on earth did Aunt
Anne let you do this??
She told him then: the interrupted sen-
tence and her fear. . , . The hamper was
unpacked and Miss Manners?s health drunk
. . . and Chubby?s . . . with more cheers
and a tiger!
Overhead, the sky was altering.
Behind the yellow-grey clouds there were
others piling up, dazzling white and full
of promise. She must ride back to Mount
Pleasant quickly, they told her . . . there
was still work for them to do, but they would
be along presently. And when the storm
came, it would come to some purpose.


Chapter XII
Red Lawson Smiles!
This was perhaps the hardest
thing she had had to do ... to leave
Daddy and go back! But she had done
her work, and soldiers always obeyed orders.
. . . So she set out, and the first little cool
puff of wind fanned her cheeks and told her
that the worst was over.
A group gathered about her when she rode
into the village: eager questions were put
and answered, and she had never felt so
important ?she was really mattering more
than the postman! The men had assured
her that the breaks they had made were
answering, and that the little group of houses
was safe for the time being . . . until the
rain came!
Down by the second bridge, she came
upon old Magnus. He stopped to gather the
latest news and was inclined to be talkative.
?Terrible bad, the fires do be this year,?
he asserted mournfully; ?won?t be under till
rain come. Heard tell about our Doctor??


Chubby?s heart began to thump. ?What
doctor, Mr. Magnus??
He shook his head. ?You needn't bawl,
missie; I can hear ye! There?s only one as
we calls our Doctor; the chap down to The
Saddle don?t count. Young Blair, to be
sure.?
The strain of the last few hours was telling
on Chubby?s nerves: she began to tremble
and her eyes were fearful.
?What do you mean?? she faltered.
The old man pulled the pipe from his lips
very deliberately. There was nothing he
liked better than passing on a piece of
information that no one else had got hold
of.
?I was up to Summers?s store ?where
the gully turns ?happen you knows it ?
Summers, he gives a better price for eggs
than them chaps in the township: takes six
dozen, he does, every week ?
?Yes?? gasped Chubby. ?Go on, Mr.
Magnus! ?
?Don?t ye hurry me, missie, bad news
always keeps! Doctor Blair, he went up
Rocky Bend towards morning; when he
didn?t come back, they knowed as something
was wrong. Some says one thing, some


RED LAWSON SMILES! IQ 1
another; but it looks as if the fire caught him
?great shame, that! ?
The bush was going round and round in
the strangest way. Chubby sat forward till
her head was touching the mare?s mane.
?Please, Mr. Magnus, try to tell me ... do
you mean that something has happened to
Doctor Ted ??
?Surely, missie, you may take my word for
that! They haven?t found the body yet; I
be going into the village to tell them they?d
best send out a search-party.??
Chubby?s voice failed her, she seemed to
be speaking through a growing darkness.
Old Magnus looked at her anxiously: she
had been mortal fond of ?Young Doctor,? as
everybody knew. . . . He rambled on. ?The
fire must a-got into that there thick scrub
near the Bend; 'twould have to cross a clear-
ing, but there?s been no accounting for it
this year ?it comes sudden when you think
you're safe. There be big trees there, too,
you could hear them falling.?
Chubby remembered that with a sick
sensation: the deadly crashes that were like
heavy blows. . . .
?Please go on, Mr. Magnus-
?He were coming back from a case, and


IQ2 CHUBBY AND PIP
they gums was blazing up to the side of the
track. And one of ?em got him!?
?Who said so ? They don?t know in the
village, because I've just come from there.
It can?t be true.
?Didn?t I tell ye I was bringing word
myself, missie ? It?s him all right, because
Stevens, the postman, rang up for him to
come quick to his wife; she was took bad
with colic. And his housekeeper, she tells
postie that Doctor isn?t back. Some of ?em
says that Red Lawson is missing, too. . . .?
It wasn?t fair to turn Silver-heels again, so
near home, Chubby knew; but she must find
out somehow! It couldn?t be that Dr. Ted
was killed . . . ? She kept seeing him smile
?that funny, crinkly smile that made the
world seem such a good place. . . . And
there was the new hospital . . . and Tommy
. . . and Red . . . and all the others he was
going to help. . . . God simply wouldn?t let
that happen ? He had taken care of Daddy,
and He would take care of Dr. Ted. . . .
She rode first to the surgery and gave the
low call that always brought him out. No
answer. ... At last the housekeeper came.
?Everybody in the district seems to be want-
ing Doctor!? she said testily.


ifo . % fe w If i * * t mJ*te
mM"' %?. Zl v^.-.xm,,'i
v ,. Jf W
Chubby never forgot the last lap of that ride




RED LAWSON SMILES! *93
?Shouldn?t he have been back before
this?? Chubby asked.
?Indeed he should; there?s an urgent case
at Fair Haven, and I?ve rung up everywhere
I could think of.?
?You don?t think he can have been caught
by the fires?? asked Chubby desperately.
Somehow, she couldn?t bring herself to speak
of the disaster old Magnus had insisted on.
?No, I don?t; he?s too much good sense to
get into danger when he knows that other
lives are depending on his.?
Chubby Drummond rode off, hugging
those words to her heart. This time she
made her way to The Lodge: Mrs. Mollie
would know what to do. . . .
The garden was very dry; Mollie Seton
had been there recently, because there was
a book face-down in the hammock and a
writing tablet and pencil. Chubby knocked
at the closed door, and when, after repeated
efforts to make herself heard, there came no
answer, she took the tablet and wrote in a
shaky hand:
Dear Mrs. Mollie,
Please come along to Rocky Bend as
soon as you get home: old Magnus told me


Dr. Ted had been hurt by a jailing tree. I
have gone there. Dear Mrs. Mollie ?God
wouldn't let such a friteful thing happen,
would He?
Love from
Chubby.
P.S. ?Please come quickly.
She put this on the doorstep and laid the
book upon it so that it would not blow away
if the wind rose again. Then she swung
herself over the saddle, and Silver-heels and
she set out once more.
The track to the Bend was steep and
rocky; the storm was gathering rapidly, but
she was deaf to the peals of thunder that
muttered and growled, blind to the dense
masses of cloud that packed and massed, and
always promised. . . .
Her breath came sobbingly, and she told
God that even if the awful tree had caught
Dr. Ted, she was sure He would not let him
die when he was needed so badly! She
reminded the Giver of Life of the widow?s
son who had been quite dead . . . and then
had been brought back. ... It was Chubby?s
own way of praying, and perhaps unortho-
dox; but it lifted a load from her heart and


shut out that ugly?? They haven?t found the
body yet. . .
Of course they hadn?t! There was no body
to find! But, if he were injured, he would
need help. . . . The way seemed endless: in
the distance ?how far ahead she could not
Tell ?there was that hideous, roaring sound
that meant a volume of fire. . . . Silver-heels
started nervously; perhaps she would refuse
to face it?
It was growing very dark, and now the
thunder was closer. She must be near Rocky
Bend! There were charred, smouldering
stumps here and there, and a red mist swam
before her eyes. A jagged line of lightning
tore the sky across and ran to the earth. It
cut the darkness like a knife and showed her
a figure bending over something that lay on
the track.
She sent out a thrilling cry . . . ?Doctor
Ted . . . oh . . . Doctor Ted!?
He glanced up and saw her against the
glow ?her hair flaming like a glory and her
child?s face touched with something more
than beauty.
?What?s the trouble, Ginger? Steady, old
dear . . . you mustn?t tremble like this. . . .
He lifted her down and stood supporting


her, watching the quivering lips and the
stains of fatigue under the eyes ?and the
look of strain.
?Old Magnus said that you were killed
that a tree had caught you. ... He said . . .
?All right, Chubs darling; it?s quite all
right! Perhaps you had better have a cry:
it will get it out of your system! ?
He held her closely, alarmed at the long,
shuddering sobs that shook her sturdy frame.
Presently, she said with a gulp: ?I won?t be
silly any more, I really wo-o-won?t! But it
was seeing you suddenly?Magnus said you
were dead.
?Silly old Moke! He?s been having too
many spots, as usual! ?
He was deliberately turning her face away
from the something that lay in a huddled,
unnatural position a few yards distant.
Large drops of rain fell on the dusty road:
they spat a little as they reached red coal
and white ash.
?It is coming, thank God! ? cried Ted Blair.
?It takes God to put out bushfires like these,
Chubs. . . . The danger will soon be over.?
There was a sad expression upon his face
?it puzzled her. He hurried her towards
a cave on the mountainside: it was large


enough to shelter Silver-heels as well as
themselves, and he told her absently that the
storm would soon be on them, and that she
must wait a while till he could go back with
her. He seemed ill-at-ease . . . almost as if
he were hiding something from her. Sud-
denly a memory seized her, and she put an
abrupt question.
?Doctor Ted . . . when I saw you first,
you were stooping over someone on the road
... or it looked like someone. Has anybody
been hurt as Mr. Magnus thought you had
been hurt??
He started. She had guessed a part of the
truth and must necessarily know, later on.
He answered without evasion: ?Yes, Chubs!
But, you see, sometimes Heaven means a
great deal to people who have had a rocky
spin?ones like Red Lawson, for instance.
Because, Up There, they do all sorts of
wonderful things?heal broken bodies and
mend scarred faces much better than the
most skilful surgeon can down here. Under-
stand ??
She drew a difficult breath. ?Oh . . . was
it Red who was caught by the tree ??
?Yes, and he went the soldier?s way, think-
ing more of the other fellow than of himself!


I can?t feel quite good about it yet, Chubs,
because he gave his life for me . . . saw
what was coming and pushed me hack ! We
were walking down the track to my car: he
had been fire-fighting all the night and was
done in, but happier than I have known him.
He didn?t suffer ?that is the best part of a
miserable business. I moved the branch that
did the mischief, but it was too late. And I
put my coat over him till somebody could
reach us from the village. I sent word by
a chap who was passing, and he evidently
came across Magnus, who probably had had
a drink or two too much and got mixed up
in his account of things. I?m sorry you got
a fright, kid. . . . There comes the rain! ?
At first it looked as though the sky were
opening; then the deluge that was to last all
night and most of next day was let loose.
Once, Chubby turned a pitiful face to Blair.
"It?s raining on Red.
"Soldiers don?t mind rain, Chubs! If he
can see it ?and I think perhaps he can ?he?ll
be glad that there will be no need to watch
the fires to-night. Someone bigger, and more
able than we are, has taken hold! ?
She was badly shaken: he knew that by
the way her colour came and went; she had


?It was all a mistake, Mrs. Mollie . . . old
Magnus got things mixed up. And it was
poor Red . . . not Doctor Ted . .
deep affections, and Red Lawson?s tragedy
had a close grip on her imagination.
They might have waited the best part
of an hour when they heard an anxious
voice calling; ?Chubby . . . where are you,
Chubby ?? And it was Mollie Seton, with the
rain on her beautiful hair, her brown eyes
troubled and worried.
She was panting a little after her climb.
and when she saw Dr. Blair the colour rushed
into her cheeks till they were like briar-roses.
?You?? she cried. ... ?I thought . . ?
Chubby was certain they had forgotten her
existence as they stared at each other: it was
just, she told her father afterwards, ?as if
there had been no one else in the world!??
She began a stammered explanation:
Then she saw that neither of them was
taking any notice of her! Blair had caught
Mollie Seton?s hand and was holding it in
one of his bear?s grips, while he said in a
funny, muffled sort of way: ?You dear girl
. . . all my life I?ll remember this. Did you
really care, Mollie??
She nodded, her eyes bright with tears.


"Chubby left a note ... I thought you
were dead. . . . And it seemed as if life had
stopped.?
Chubby went farther into the cave to find
Silver-heels. Her head was spinning: Dr.
Ted was looking at Mrs. Mollie as Daddy
looked at Kittie . . . and she liked it!
By and by they remembered her. Blair
ruffled up her hair and took her face in his
hands.
"Thanks, Chubs old pal! ? he said in such
an odd way! And then he turned to Mrs.
Seton. . . . ?We ought to tell her first, you
know, he declared. Mollie was like a lovely
rose, Chubby thought; and something had
happened that had made them both very
happy!
"By and by, when the fortune is made?
or even before,? Dr. Ted cried, "two people
who have been very lonely are going to have
a home together. Ginger! And one of them
can t believe it yet, because he is such an
ugly beggar! ?
"You are not a scrap ugly!? flashed
Chubby indignantly.
He grinned in something of his old
fashion. "Compared with her!? he ex-
plained. "Remember telling me that her


hair was long enough to sit on, Chubs, old
lass ??
Chubby was feeling distinctly uncomfort-
able. When you had made the Fairy
Prince happy with the Fairy Princess, you
always left them alone together ?there were
all sorts of things they wanted to say to each
other! In Fairyland, of course, there was
magic, and you just had to wish to become
invisible! In real life, there was Silver-
heels. . . .
?I ought to get back to Aunt Anne!? she
informed them awkwardly. ?I love the rain
. really I do, Doctor Ted!?
It was not so heavy at the moment, and
she was longing to get back with her won-
derful news. Half-way down the track, she
met in with a party of weary men returning
from a long vigil, and told them of Red
Lawson?s sudden death. Dr. Ted would
need help . . . and you were never too tired
to do things for other people. . . .
The road was muddy already, and the
smoke had rolled away like a great curtain.
Once more there were mountains ?clear in
places ?misted over in others. Almost the
old, beautiful look to range and valley.
Almost ?not quite, for there were acres of


burned timber and miles of desolated
country.
They spoke of a funeral with military
honours for Red Lawson; and those who
saw him said that he was smiling . . . really
smiling. As if it had been an honour to give
his life for the man who had come to be
known as ?our Doctor!?
Silver-heels took the climb at Mount
Pleasant in gallant style; and, best of all,
Daddy was resting on the sun-porch with
Aunt Anne! The rain could be trusted to
do its work properly, he explained, as he
lifted Chubby from her saddle. She was
thoroughly exhausted by this time, but there
was much to tell.
Pip was inclined to be fractious. He was
quite sure that he should have gone with
her; girls were well enough in their own
way, but they got nervy at the wrong
moment.
?I didn?t get nervy, did I, Daddy?? pro-
tested Chubby indignantly. ?At least,? she
finished with her customary truthfulness,
?not till it was all over. Pip ... if this rain
keeps on, there will be the most scrumptious
mushrooms . . . Wigsie says they grow as
large as soup-plates on the flats.?


Phil shrugged in his superior fashion. ?I
wouldn?t give you a thank-you for those
great things,? he declared; ?you always go
for size, Chubs! Anyway ?there won?t be a
sign of them till March.?
?It?s almost March now! And February
has only twenty-eight days 1 ?
?You?re telling me!? he drawled. ?You
must hang on to the last word, Chubs; and
I suppose you?ll be putting on no end of frill
now because you are the ?bush heroine? up
to date! They?ll be interviewing you and
putting your photo in the papers. . . .?
She did not flare up at him as he expected;
instead, she told him of those awful minutes
when she had reached Wombat Creek and
had found a smouldering heap of twisted iron
instead of the schoolhouse. But when she
went on to speak of the ride up to Rocky
Bend, her voice got gruffer and gruffer, and
broke at last in the most extraordinary man-
ner. It did not help matters to discover that
Phil?s eyes were brimming.
?You needn?t put on airs,? she croaked;
?you are crying, too!?
?Rats!? muttered Phil Penrose. There
was a frog in his throat, but it was only
because Chubs was dealing out the sob-stuff


at the rate of no allowance! And, anyway,
bushfires got everybody down. Of course,
he did not take in that yam about Lawson
having a new face. . . . Blair had just said
that to buck Chubby up!
?You?re getting sleepy, Ginger!? he
declared.
?I?m not; and if I were, anybody would
be, stupid, after riding miles, and miles, and
miles through burning timber. . . .?
??Miles, and miles, and miles!?? he
mocked. She did look played out, poor kid:
she would be good for nothing to-morrow!
?And then miles!? protested Chubby
Drummond. He was beginning to work it
out as a mathematical problem when he saw
that she had slipped down in her chair in
rather a listless fashion. Just then, Aunt
Anne came across to them and glanced at
the weary figure.
?She has lived two lives to-day!? she said
quietly. ?Say good night to her, Phil, and
we?ll get her off to bed.?
She was all but asleep then, and so did not
hear his gruff: ?Great kid, Chubs! You?ve
only to be sick or in trouble to find out all
there is to her. I tease her no end, but it?s
good for her, Aunt Anne. . . .?


Afterwards, Chubby could remember
nothing of her unsteady progress to the bath-
room, or of tumbling into bed. Her dreams
were disturbed, and in most of them she was
riding through a wall of fire and trees were
falling about her.
In the middle of the night she woke with
a start: it was still raining steadily and the
air was deliciously fresh. But the best part
of the waking was to find Aunt Anne coming
painfully in through her open door. She
bent and gave the flushed face a warm kiss,
and Chubby threw her arms about her neck.
?Haven?t you been to bed??? she asked.
?I could not sleep: your father and I have
been talking. It has been a worrying day,
child.?
?Aren?t you a darling?? cried Chubby
Drummond lovingly. She supposed Aunt
Anne had switched on the light as she came
in, for it was burning, and of course it had
been put out as usual ... or had it? She
could not remember.
Miss Manners patted the hot hand. ?I?m
going to sit beside you till you go to sleep
again.?
?You?ll be tired out! It?s lovely to have
you there, though ... I keep seeing things.?


Anne Manners seemed to understand. She
talked on quietly about the rain and what it
was doing for the fires, putting them out as
you would put a candle out with an old-
fashioned extinguisher! By and by there
would be grass on the blackened area, and
ferns. And autumn was the most beautiful
time of all in the hills.
"Aunt Anne,? asked Chubby drowsily,
?you are glad we came to Mount Pleasant,
aren?t you ??
?Very glad, my dear.?
?I am, too.?
There was a lot more that she wanted to
say, but somehow everything was going into
the distance, . . . Towards dawn she woke
again. Aunt Anne was asleep in her chair
and there was a soft colour in her cheeks. . . .
Next day the gentle rain brought mists of
milky-white. Chubby watched Pip while he
made a model aeroplane. One day he would
build a real one, he assured her, and they
would fly to Malay. But she would have to
reduce her weight, so as not to overbalance
things!
Dr. Blair rang up. ?Feeling O.K. ? Good!
I?ll be over shortly. Of course I?ll bring
her. . . . What did your aunt say? Not


surprised? Did you think she would be,
Chubs ??
There was no doubt about it, grown-ups
were frightfully interesting and were always
doing unexpected things!
Phil's comment had been a rueful: ?Now,
perhaps, Dad will let me join him in Malay ?
If he thinks I am going to let any other bally
woman teach me, he?s vastly mistaken.?
?But . . exclaimed Chubby blankly,
?Mrs. Mollie will go on teaching us, Pip!?
?Will she ? She'll have enough to do look-
ing after Blair. He?ll get frightfully selfish ?
they all do! ?
?Anyway, the wedding is not to be for ages
and ages ?quite six months. Wigsie says
that he couldn't possibly take a bride to that
old house. . . .?
?What did Wiggins say about it all??
demanded Phil Penrose.
?She said, Tore things?they little know
what?s before them.' Wigsie always seems
sorry for married people.?
?They?ll survive!? pronounced Pip with
one of his wise expressions. ?Say, Chubs?
we?ll go mushrooming in a day or two!?
Chubby chuckled. ?I thought they didn?t
come till March??


with you, don?t try to have the last word!?
?I don?t ... at least . . .?
?You think a lot of silly things. I can tell
you one thing?no one will ever take you on
with that hair! And if ever you do meet
anyone who is silly enough to fall in love
Pip whistled. His eyes, behind the Harold
Lloyd glasses, were twinkling. Chubby
would be Chubby to the end of time, he
decided. Then he reminded her that her
mother?s train was almost due! They ran
down to the gate to wait, borrowing Wigsie?s
big umbrella to shelter them from the rain
that was thickening as evening came on. It
would be cold enough for a fire ... a fire
that did not harm anyone ?but was nice and
cosy and friendly!
THE END




?
#
A I
/V
. F|2�3
Eh A
\


fc
I j
??
'


