

GERTRUDE HART












CHUBBY






There was a card lying across the keys : With love from Aunt Anne.
(See page 138)
[Frontispiece


CHUBBY
GERTRUDE HART
HUTCHINSON & CO.
(Publishers) Ltd.
LONDON


MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
AT GAINSBOROUGH PRESS, ST. ALBANS
BY FISHER, KNIGHT AND CO., LTD.


WILLIAM P. HURST
who
first took Chubby by the handl




CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I. INTRODUCING THE DRUMMONDS . 15
11. SAYING GOOD-BYE . .. 2$
111. MOUNT PLEASANT 4�
IV. THE DREAM LOFT 5�
V. U THE CHILD dislikes me? . . 59
VI. THE SKETCH BLOWS OUT OF THE WIN-
DOW 69
vii. pip ..???? 85
VIII. CRAZY KATE ..... 94
IX. BUSHRANGERS! 102
x. pip?s throat feels queer ! . .123
XI. TELLING GOD ABOUT PIP ! . . 129
XII. CHUBBY BREAKS HER WORD . . 136
XIII. WHEN THE SUN SET . . . 145
XIV. THE SENTENCE .... 149
XV. CHUBBY SETS OUT . . . 159
XVI. CHUBBY TAKES HOLD . . .
XVII. THE STARS COME NEAR ! . . 187


\


ILLUSTRATIONS
There was a card lying across the keys : With love
from Aunt Anne . . . . .Front
. Frontispiece
Facing page
?Dr. Ted, is daddy very sick ?????? 33
?You don?t like me, child ?? . . . -4^
She buried her face in the pillow, and the sobs came
in earnest .......
? I knew God would send you.?


0


CHUBBY
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCING THE DRUMMONDS
Chubby reached for her third apple, and munched
busily. It was a juicy Jonathan with the reddest
cheeks imaginable ; and she swung her sturdy legs
over the outside wall of the loft, and watched some
clouds that looked for all the world like the whipped-
up white of egg that Millie set floating on custard
when they had a treat for Sunday?s tea !
She was always dreaming, and yet, if you had
looked at her, you would have wondered why.
Dreams go with beauty, as everybody knows, and
Chubby Drummond was very ordinary indeed,
with a round face that had just escaped being
square, as Dr. Blair informed her every time he
came to look at her tongue, and scold her?with a
twinkle in his eyes ?for eating too many ice-
creams.
Her forehead was the despair of her pretty
mother : there were acres of it, Chubby would have


told you with a sigh ; and her nose was far too
short. Her mouth was wide, and her hair was
red ; it was all rather hopeless. Ted Blair insisted
that her feet took a good hold of the ground ; but
they were great chums all the same, for the tall
doctor who whistled at an unreasonable patient,
and went about on a motor-bike with the growliest
horn that anybody had ever heard, was ugly too !
Now, this loft was the most delicious mixture
of sunshine and shadow that the heart of child
could desire. One end was open to the weather,
and the other ?where dreams lay thickest?was
dark, and cobwebby, and full of mystery. Chubby
was certain that there was a treasure hidden there ;
and there were boxes with old-fashioned dresses
that made the most scrumptious costumes imagin-
able for the dramas that were enacted from time
to time upon the uncertain floor.
She was manager as well as leading lady, and
Keith Bollen, the tall, good-looking boy who lived
in the big house over the road, was the knight of
olden time. It was thrilling to twist her long hair
into a coronet and put on trailing frocks, and be
the gracious beauty who leaned over her balcony?
a somewhat unsteady trestle?and bestow favours
in the shape of ribbons begged from Millie, the maid.
Millie was huge, and shapeless, and good-natured ;


and her one idea of ?gentility,? as she phrased it,
was what she called ?lingry ribbons.?
On these occasions, Chubby forgot her generous
powdering of freckles, and the unmanageable name
which daddy assured her might be effective in
that mysterious time, years and years away, when
she should be grown up !
Those were enchanted hours wdien Keith bowed
low over her hand. In fancy she wasn?t Chubby
Drummond at all, but Lady Rosamond, slim and
beautiful, with raven locks that were parted softly
in the centre.
Ronald had the looks of the family : his skin was
as fair as a girl?s, and his eyes made you forgive
him anything. Chubby worshipped him.
There were just the two of them, and a good thing,
too, Dr. Blair had declared more than once, lately.
Because, ever so long ago, there had been a War,
and daddy?only he wasn?t daddy then ?had
been gassed ! Even now, sometimes, he coughed
dreadfully, and couldn?t always go to the office.
And Chubby had a healthy appetite, and a trick
of tearing her clothes !
Every time she came home with a new rent, the
brown-eyed girl who was her mother looked at her
tragically. It was terrible to be short of money,
it seemed ! Millie said : ?It?s all along of them


blarsted Germans,? and assured her that she
must be a good kid, and not worry her ?pore
father.?
That meant that there must be no racing through
the long hall; and no grumbling when there
didn?t happen to be a joint at the week-end.
Chubby sighed as she finished her apple. It
was one of those days when fairies were about :
they made the cobw T ebs look like spun silk, and
danced through the shaft of sunlight that ended in
a golden pool. It would have been so easy to be
happy if she could have shut out the sound of a
racking cough.
Suddenly, there arose a familiar and hideous
honking, and Ted Blair hurried in through the
lower gate. He stayed in the house for what
seemed like years, and then there came a quick?
?l?ll find her, Mrs. Drummond ; you go back to
Garry ; this move will be his salvation. What?s
that ? It?s this blanky old house that is doing
the mischief ; it?s damp, you see.?
He whistled as he crossed the yard, and Chubby
gave him ecstatic welcome as he swung himself up
the ladder, and then stood, hands in pockets,
eyeing her inquiringly.
?Hello, Ginger ! Dreaming about buried trea-
sure, or thinking out a new yarn ? Give us an


apple, Greedy ?and we?ll talk about a thrilling
adventure !?
She selected an extra-special Jonathan from the
case in the dark corner, and fell to polishing it
busily. ?It?s bigger than the ones I had,? she
explained.
He set his teeth in it, and bit crisply, sitting
beside her, and swinging his long legs over the
wall. She knew he had something to tell her.
?Dr. Ted,? she began, ?I heard you come last
night.?
?Of course you did, Chubs ; you gave a sigh that
would have floated a ship. What about it ??
?Is daddy very sick ??
He drew his brows together in a frown. He
never lied to children, especially when they looked
at you with honest, troubled eyes. Best get it
over without delay.
?It?s this way, you see, kid. The Laburnums is
a very old house, and old houses are the mischief
unless you can do all sorts of things to them.
Slates break on the roof, and gutters leak, and rain
gets in. People who cough want loads of sunshine
and fresh air : they shouldn?t work in offices. And
when they have wives and kiddies, they need to
make money.?
She listened with strained attention. If only


she were grown-up, and had written the book that
was to take the world by storm !
?They ought to live out of doors ; but how are
they to do that unless a fairy godmother turns up ?
Oh, they do, sometimes, even in real life ! Some-
thing has happened, Chubs : something that means
getting right away from town, and trams, and
crowded streets, and beastly figures that won?t add
properly when you are tired.?
Chubby nodded soberly; she knew all about
that; she had always hated arithmetic.
?Now, you listen hard. Away in the distance
there are hills. On the side of one of them there?s
a house with great, sunny rooms, and orchards that
are full of apples. That?s where the fairy god-
mother lives, though most folk call her faddy and
difficult. But that is just because she has lived
alone too long. She thinks people are out to
cheat her. But I know that she can do some
mighty decent things, sometimes.?
Chubby Drummond gulped. It sounded terribly
like Great-Aunt Anne who lived at Silver Creek,
and had quarrelled with almost everyone ! She
had quarrelled with dad, years ago, because he
would not marry the girl she had picked for him.
Kittie ?the children at The Laburnums always
called their mother Kittie?had told them about


that, with her pretty laugh, and her cheeks as pink
as a rose.
Dr. Ted was picking his words : he knew
Chubby, through and through.
?She?s doing something kind, now. She has
thrown her home open to a wdld family of Drum-
monds ?know anything about them ? She doesn?t
realize what she is doing, of course . . . want to
want to
punch me, Ginger ? Garry is to be her manager,
and there will be plenty of milk, and eggs, and
cream, and everything you can think of ; sounds
like a bit of a thrill, doesn?t it ? There?s a high
road, and a low road, and white gums down by
the Creek ; and blackberries as big as plums on
the river fiats. Going to like it ??
Chubby shook her head. Not even to please
Dr. Ted could she pretend that she would like
living with Aunt Anne ; nobody could who was
honest! The only time she had come to see them
she had found fault with everything ; and after
she had gone Kittie had cried, and had wondered
whether ?she had really spoiled Garry?s life ??
And they had all been miserable.
Blair gave the twisted smile that meant he was
worried. He frowned a quick ?Now, we?ve got to
get down to tintacks, Chubs. Your father is a
pretty sick man ; the only chance is for him to get


away to the hills. That?s the first fence. Are you
over it ??
She nodded, catching her breath.
?The Laburnums needs a fortune spent on it :
it will probably sell, because the new tramline is
sending values up. That would lift the heaviest
load from your daddy?s shoulders. And he loves
mountains as much as you love lofts. Got that ?
Now, we?ll drive ahead. Miss Manners? bark is
worse than her bite ; she has had a lonely life, and
though that has been her own fault, it doesn?t make
affairs any easier. She has to hobble about with
two sticks because she has had so much rheuma-
tism that it has made her stiff. You remember
that, when she gets nippy ! Nobody likes to have
hot gimlets boring into their bones. . .
He was certain that this was the right chord to
strike : Chubby?s heart was a ridiculously soft one.
But he also knew how tenacious her affections
were, and that she was already, in imagination,
saying good-bye to her dearly-loved loft, and the
garden with the veronica bushes, and the laburnums
and the cherry trees. She clung to the shabby
furniture, and the hundred and one objects that
were part of her life. New pleasures never pushed
out the old ones with her ; just as her decrepit
gollywog still held a cherished place in her atten-


tions, though he had lost one eye, and his attenu-
ated leg was in a splint.
?Will there be a loft ?? she jerked. He laughed
in sheer relief.
?Will there what ? Aunt Anne likes horses a
lot better than she likes cars ?you?ll probably have
a pony of your own to ride. I was born at Silver
Creek, and The Sycomores is some place. Buck
up, kid !?
She was trying her level best to do just that ;
there was fine stuff in this Chubby who would
never be beautiful. Suddenly a harrowing thought
seized her, and she turned to him with dismay.
?Oh, Dr. Ted . . . you won?t be there !?
She blinked away some of the tears he had
always assured her were out-size, or even E.O.S.
But he grinned at her in the oddest fashion.
?Don?t you be too sure of that; I?ve only been
doing locum for Dr. Cumberland, you know ; and
he?ll be back from America in a couple of months.
As a matter of fact, Chubs, practices cost money,
and I haven?t made my fortune up to date.?
Her eyes were growing bigger and bigger : they
were rather splendid when they glowed like that,
showing her soul. She waited breathlessly.
?Now, the long and the short of it is, that Miss
Manners has a project for a private hospital at


Silver Creek, and there?s no resident there at
present. Eh ? It might be worth my while to
work up a practice of my own : what do you say ?
Take care, you?ll be over the side, and we don?t
want any broken bones to add to the problem . . . !?
He regarded her with concern ; her temperament
was so utterly at variance with the sturdiness of
her frame. Then he sprang nimbly to his feet.
?I must get on, young ?un ; tons of work waiting.
This is going to be a bad year for ?flu ; an attack
of that in town would just about finish your dad.
Besides . . . we?re British . . . and that means
we never funk a situation. You?ve fighting blood,
Gin-gin . . . live up to it !?
He whistled as he bundled down the ladder ;he
was far too thin for his height, and his hair stood
out like a thatch. Chubby waved to him thought-
fully. Silver Creek was beginning to seem pos-
sible !


CHAPTER II
SAYING GOOD-BYE
That night there was a family gathering in the
shabby room where the carpet was so threadbare.
Chubby had her own hassock where she sat and
hugged her knees; and George Reid?the big
tabby cat ?stretched his lazy length on the hearth-
rug. Drummond sat forward in his worn easy-
chair ; he was smoking, and some of the lines had
gone from his face. It was a larger fire than
usual.
The move was going to affect Ronald more than
any of them, the anxious girl-mother decided, as
she got out the darning basket and heaved a sigh
over its bulging contents. Things were always
done at the last moment in the Drummond family ;
Kittie?s best friend could not truthfully have called
her a good manager.
Chubby was sorting out a box of treasures on
the rug ; her mother gave her a worried glance.
u You mustn?t take rubbish, Chubs,? she said
plaintively. Garry Drummond took his pipe from
his mouth.


??Tisn?t rubbish to her, Kitten. Hang it all,
we?re not going to regard The Sycomores as a
gaol! I?ll see to it that lam worth my screw ; and
be sure you?ll earn your tucker !?
Kittie darned faster and faster. The yarn kept
breaking, and she wouldn?t have carried off a
prize in a competition, but her colour was like a
briar-rose.
?I do hope the children won?t annoy Aunt Anne.
Chubby, like an angel?learn to shut doors
quietly !??
Chubby shrugged her shoulders. It was all very
difficult ! Her father uttered a consoling, ?There
will be the bush to let steam off in, Ginger ; and a
gorgeous garden.?
?Yes !? agreed Chubby dejectedly. ?Is Aunt
Anne very sick, daddy ??
Kittie eyed her with sudden relief. One might
always depend on Chubby?s warm heart. Her
carelessness was a proverb ; but her sympathy
boundless.
?Very sick,? she answered quickly ; ?we might
all be cross and exacting if we had pains in our
bones, and had to use sticks. It?s Ronnie?s music
lam worrying about; she?ll be bound to dislike a
violin.?
The boy with the bronze hair and dreamy blue


eyes gave a quick frown. ?Oh, cut it out, mum !?
he entreated. He was sketching busily, and pres-
ently produced the result. Chubby chuckled
over the picture of a tall, gaunt woman with a hook
nose and fierce eyes. She was standing in a door-
way, looking down at a depressed group of travel-
lers the size of dwarfs. There were boxes and
bundles piled around them, and underneath Ron
had printed in his best style :
?Is this all the luggage ??
Drummond laughed uneasily. Ronald bade fair
to be the pride of the family, with more than one
gift that was outstanding, and music-magic in his
long, sensitive fingers.
The fire was crackling and sputtering. In the
bookcase near, Anne of Green Gables kept company
with Stevenson?s Treasure Island , and a full set
of Dickens. When We Were Very Young had fallen
rather drunkenly against Bleak House. Chubby
always put books back in a hurry.
Suddenly her father roused himself. ?What the
mischief is that noise ? Seems as if it is coming
from the bathroom !?
A minute later they heard him ?biting off
words,? as Chubby Drummond would have phrased
it.
?Anything wrong ?? asked Kittie anxiously.


Her nerves were not in their best form this evening.
?Some little wretch left the tap running, and the
spigot in?there?s quite a mess, Kitten !?
She threw down her darning. ?I wish I hadn?t
any children !? she cried heatedly, looking up at
her husband despairingly.
?You?re tired, girl; it has been a trying day.?
?I did it !? confessed Chubby contritely. ?I?ll
clean it up.?
Garry looked from one to the other of ?his
womenfolk,? as he called them, and his eyes were
twinkling. ?Go to it, you little demon, and we?ll
have some fried potatoes to console us. Then
we?ll slope off to bed, and dream of orchards, and
creeks, and big, friendly mountains.?
That was the best of dad ?he knew when you
were feeling so gulpy that you couldn?t help doing
silly things. Kittie went back to her pile of stock-
ings rather drearily ; with Chubby?s it was usually
a case of fitting a barrel to a bung-hole !
?All right?we didn?t have much tea, any of us,?
she reflected. ?Ron, get out your violin and play
?Humoresque? ?my nerves are jumpy.?
Chubby listened as she mopped up the water in
the bathroom. The lino was old, and there were
many holes ; she could not make it look nice.
When she had finished, she went soberly to the


safe for the cold potatoes. There were a lovely
lot: Millie, who was having her evening out, was
always wasteful, the small mistress declared. Per-
haps the child?s mind was wandering, or her fingers
shaky, she did not know which : there was a crash,
and the left-overs from midday dinner stared for-
lornly at her from the floor. The plate lay in
fragments : it was the best china, too : one of the
last of a set that Kittie prized !
Chubby?s heart was as heavy as lead ; she always
did clumsy things when she wanted to be most
careful! She carried the broken bits of crockery
to the room where Ronald was pouring out his soul
in melting notes. He lifted his eyebrows at her
over his fiddle, and Kittie said pathetically : ?Oh,
Chubs ! I shan?t have an easy moment when we
go to Aunt Anne?s ; your fingers are all thumbs !?
It was here that Drummond had an inspiration :
they would have some fried fish from the shop
round the corner, and chips ; the occasion de-
manded a celebration, he declared ! In any case,
the family fortunes were looking up. He said this
so cheerily that Chubby?s heart lightened ; they
had had to be careful with every penny lately.
Exciting days followed. An agent went through
the house, and was rather supercilious. There
wasn?t much that was valuable from his point of


view ; and of course he didn?t know the associa-
tions that made them precious. Millie worked
early and late, scouring and polishing, and Chubby
heard her confiding to ?the girl next door? : ?She
ain?t much good at ?ousework, ain?t Mrs. Drum-
mond, but there, she was brought up a lydy, and
as pretty as Mary Pickford : you can?t ?ave every-
thing. It a?most makes you think there might be
something in gitting married, the way the master
looks at her. As if she was good to eat ! Them
pitchers ain?t always right : you?d think by them
that nothing was interesting but gitting tired of
your own man, and off with someone else?s. Speak
of life as you find it, I say ; and though the Drum-
monds might ?ave no money, nobuddy could say
they was anythink but ?appy. If ?e only ?ad ?is
?ealth, pore chap !?
Keith Bollen was openly envious of the move
to the hills, and suggested that he would get his
people to come up to Silver Creek in the holidays.
They had a last and thrilling drama in the loft ;
but though Chubby broke down in the final scene
and quite ruined one of Ron?s most telling speeches,
he forgave her, even though it did not sound nearly
so effective when he repeated it.
Her real good-bye to the shadowy old place was


said without any witness. It had been swept and
cleared, and all the mystery had gone ; even the
cobwebs were missing, and the sunshine streamed
in over bare boards. She halted on the ladder,
calling a tearful farewell, and George Reid, who
had been nosing round in some perplexity, gave a
plaintive cry. She tried to explain the situation to
him ; and she hoped he understood.
They buried the gollywog with much ceremony.
Ron dug a grave, and Keith came with a black
band on his arm. Chubby chanted a dirge that
Robert would have recognized, in
a rich, mournful voice. To be sure they both
spluttered when she came to the part about ?the
hunter? being ?home from the hill,? and declared
that she was mixing Golly up with George Reid.
The tombstone was a broken cricket-bat, on
which was printed :
To
The Memory
of
Golly.
A Faithful Friend.
This was all very affecting; but the worst
wrench of all was when George Reid was borne
away by one of Chubby?s schoolmates. It seemed


that Aunt Anne detested cats ; and only tolerated
them in the stables because they kept down mice.
The big tabby turned agonized green eyes upon
his mistress when she bade him a sobbing good-bye ;
and a few minutes later Ted Blair discovered her in
the nursery, crying her heart out. It was then
he told her about Punch, the shaggy Airedale at
The Sycomores.
?Ugly, Chubs, but a great cobber,?
She was glad, somehow, that he was ugly ; but,
when dinner-time arrived, and she came upon
George Reid?s empty platter, it was hard to keep
cheerful.
People kept coming to look over the house;
they were patronizing for the most part, and
Kittie?s cheeks grew pinker and pinker. Once or
twice, Chubby showed them through, but this
wasn?t exactly a success.
?You know, darling, you do show your feelings
too plainly,? her mother protested. ?I don?t want
you to be hypocrite ; but you fairly scowled at
that old lady who said that the furniture was
shabby !?
?It was daddy?s chair ?
?I know ; it is trying. But we are poor, and
everything is shockingly worn out.?
?They needn?t be horrid about it, all the same.?




?Dr. Ted, is daddy very sick ??
(See page ig)


?Of course they needn?t ; but you?ll have to be
more careful when we are at Mount Pleasant. It
won?t do to offend Aunt Anne, Chubs.?
The day of the sale was a nightmare. It began
with a scrap-breakfast, and Kittie was dreadfully
nervy. A red flag flew over the gate, and a man
went up and down the streets with a bell. The
neighbours trooped in without knocking, and
looked at Chubby as if she were in the way. George
Reid made his appearance early in the morning
sniffing about the bare, unfriendly rooms, and
uttering heartbroken cries. He was only half-
comforted when Chubby took him in her arms and
gave him a tearful caress.
People poked into corners and turned chairs
upside-down to look at the springs, while the
Grindles from the single-fronted house in the
cross-street seemed to be in three or four places at
once. They had always been kept at a distance,
before, and had no intention whatever of buying
anything, Kittie declared crossly; it was just
curiosity.
Every article of furniture had a number, and the
nursery table was knocked down for two shillings,
and was dear at the price, the buyer grumbled,
what with ink-stains and scratches. The brass
preserving-pan which Chubby had toiled over for


an hour brought one and sixpence. It was all very
worrying.
When the furniture was disposed of, the auc-
tioneer grew respectful. The house was certainly
old, but the property was a valuable one. Chubby?s
heart began to thump ; it was so strange to hear
it described as ?This desirable gentleman?s resi-
dence, with a frontage of 100 feet to Grover
Street ?a frontage of 150 feet to Plane Street, and
a depth of 325 feet; the garden being laid out in
lawns and flowers, and an orchard in full bearing.?
The orchard consisted of three apple trees, one
mulberry, two apricots, two plums, four cherry
trees, one nectarine, one peach, and two almonds.
Chubby felt desperately homesick already, and
listened attentively while the clear voice went on :
?Altogether, ladies and gentlemen, with a couple
of hundred pounds expended upon it, the house
may be turned into a modern proposition, suitable
either for self-contained flats, or a delightful resi-
dence. Will somebody give me a start
Thank you, sir . . . five hundred pounds . . .
He did his utmost, but Chubby was certain that
he took bids that were never offered. In the end,
The Laburnums was passed in for a private offer,
and the agent advised the Drummonds to come
down in price.


None of the purchasers seemed in a hurry to take
away their furniture, and there was one more night
in the old house. They slept on mattresses on the
floor, and everybody was tired out and inclined to
be testy.
Next morning Chubby went round to say good-
bye to her schoolmates. The lump in her throat
kept getting bigger and bigger. Ron was moody,
and Kittie palpably nervous ; it was reassuring
to see Daddy striding about with the eager eyes of
a boy.
Ted Blair went to the station with them. He
bought oranges, and a big box of chocolates which
he presented to Chubby with a twinkle. He was
so certain that they were going to have a jolly
time that her spirits revived. Then the train
moved out from Flinders Street, and every turn
of the wheels took them farther from the crowds
who couldn?t even know that the Drummond
family had torn up roots, and were going to live
with an old woman who didn?t really want them !
The grey-haired man in their compartment was
irritable ;he scowled every time Chubby called out
at some rapidly passing wonder that was touched
with the glamour of a spring evening. He had a
big wart on his nose, and perhaps that made him
bad-tempered, she decided. Ron was still sullen,


and his quick ?Oh, shut up, Chubs !? damped her
spirits on more than one occasion.
It had been a day of farewells and heartaches ;
she tried hard not to remember the tragic expres-
sion in George Reid?s eyes as he was carried off for
the last time, and she wondered whether he
would find his way back to his old home that
night ?
They were rushing through country lit with
wattle-gold, and the sweet-briar made arches hung
with scented roses. Sometimes they crossed
bridges where the creeks reflected sunset colours,
and shone like mirrors. Soon they would reach
the foothills, Drummond explained. He looked
years younger.
Chubby was certain that the train-wheels kept
throbbing out, ?He-is-going-to-get-well-again. He
. . . is . . . going . . . to . . . get . . . well . . .
again. . . .?
Kittie?s mind was on boxes and bundles. Once
she said fretfully, ?I am sure they did not put the
green trunk in, Garry.? And he smiled and
reminded her that they had seen it being hoisted
into the guard?s van, and that one lock had
sprung.
There was a wait of twenty minutes at a station
where they had tea and sandwiches. They were


the ordinary brand of station sandwich, and the
tea tasted as though it had been stewing for
hours ; but, by this time, something in the air was
getting into Chubby?s blood. She collected the
cups in a business-like fashion and set out for the
refreshment-room.
Then they were off again, through beautiful
scenery, climbing all the time. One mount ?
Steep Hill?had a siding of its own, and Chubby
declared that the porter called out ?Steep Hell !?
Drummond thought it was quite likely that he
did.
There were shadows of weariness under Kittie?s
eyes, and her pretty face was pale. She was
wondering whether Aunt Anne would send anyone
to meet them, and whether it would be better to
call Chubby by her real name ; they would have to
make a start some time, she supposed, and it might
be well to get used to it.
Nonsense !? protested Garry, noting the forlorn
expression of his child?s face. He knew by instinct
how she was feeling : as if the old, familiar life
were being rolled up and put away like the carpets
The Laburnums. He gave one ruddy plait a
tug, and smiled down into the wistful eyes.
She s our Chubs, and Ginger, and whatever we
feel like calling her,? he declared. ?What?s good


enough for us is good enough for Aunt Anne.
Hang it all, Kitten, she isn?t going to be trimmed
into shape like a hedge ! We?re going to have a
rattling fine time ; and make a lonely old lady feel
as if she has folk of her own !?
Chubby sparkled. Daddy and Dr. Ted made an
adventure of everything.
The air blew softly in through the windows ; it
was scented and cold, and she felt as if she could
eat it. The mountains were creeping nearer ; they
looked purple, and dark against the sky. They
were talking to her, she was certain, but she could
not understand what they were saying.
Kittie?s face grew more anxious and puckered ;
she complained that Aunt Anne did not like her,
or, at least, that she disapproved of her. This
puzzled Chubby, who thought some people must
be hard to please.
The train puffed heavily into the heart of the
mountains as if it were carrying a load that made
it breathless. Outside the Silver Creek platform
there were cars and coaches, and Drummond went
in search of a driver. When he came back, he was
whistling.
?The man will look after the luggage, Kitten,?
he explained ; and added a cheery, ?Buck up !
We?ll soon be home !?


It was the way he said this that reassured
Chubby: he seemed like a happy boy. Kittie
answered despondently that Aunt Anne might have
sent someone to meet them ; she should have
known that they would be feeling strange and
homesick.


CHAPTER 111
MOUNT PLEASANT
They drove through the Main Street ; it had old-
fashioned verandas, and sometimes, in the middle
of a row of shops, a tiny cottage came right up to
the footpath.
There was the forge Dr. Ted had told her about ;
the blacksmith had been working late, for there
was still a glow of fire near the big bellows, and a
lumbering draught horse was being led into the
street.
Groups of people were waiting outside the Post
Office for the evening mail; they must have
brought it on their train, Chubby reflected impor-
tantly. Just before they crossed the first bridge,
she looked for a house Dr. Blair had told her
about : the garden seemed friendly. She told
herself exultantly that soon there would be a name
upon a brass plate :
Edward Blair, M.D.
Physician and Surgeon.
And underneath, his consulting hours.


The creek was singing over a stony bed ; it took
abrupt turns, and the water was shallow. Black-
berry bushes hung over the banks, and there were
tree-ferns. They crossed another bridge, and
struck into a red road.
In a small clearing, a camper was preparing his
dinner ; he was grilling steak over a fire of logs,
and the smell was delicious. Two puppies ran into
the paddock and barked at them ; one was a fox
terrier with a black patch over his eye ; the other
looked like a sheep dog. Some trees had been
felled, and the fragrance of newly sawn wood
mingled with the grill.
Suddenly they turned sharply to the right and
stopped at a gate with ?The Sycomores? done in
rustic letters upon it. There was a steep hill to
climb now, with what the driver explained were
hairpin bends. He told them that letters were left
in a hinged box on the gatepost by any of the
neighbours who chanced to be in the township.
Once Angus Macpherson from Blackwood Lodge
had driven out with more on board in the shape of
liquor than he could well manage, and an important
document for Miss Manners had come to light
three days later, when he had got over his booze,
and found sufficient courage to face the old lady.
She had given him the length of her tongue, and


had put the fear into him for nearly a month !
?She?s ain?t so black as she is painted when you
get to know her,? Coachie declared, and added with
a look at Garry Drummond : ?Beg pardon, sir. I
forgot you was relatives.?
Drummond laughed amusedly ; he was drinking
in long draughts of air that was like wine. Pres-
ently the branches closed over the top of the coach,
and, in the distance, there were lights twinkling
through the trees. Miss Manners had her own
electric light plant, they were told ; made things
cheerful, and, if she couldn?t afford it, who could ?
But she wouldn?t hear tell of a motor ; kept to her
phaeton, with a steady cob to drive it. Used to
be a fine rider, they said, ?before the trouble
settled in her bones.?
?That?s true,? Garry reflected. ?I?ve heard my
father talk of the way she could take a fence.?
Dusk was creeping down the hills ; it came so
suddenly that they could scarcely distinguish the
fruit-trees in bloom. These ran in rows down the
slope, and there was honey-sweetness in the cold
air. At the end of the avenue the drive wound
through shrubs and smooth lawns. The windows
of the big house shone as if they might be welcoming
weary travellers.
The driver pulled up with a flourish, and busied


himself with boxes and cases. When they were
dumped together on the veranda, Ron whispered
that it was just like his sketch ! The hall door
stood open, and a softly shaded light showed a
rich carpet, and a grandfather clock in the corner.
They heard the tap-tap of sticks, and Chubby drew
a long breath.
Great-Aunt Anne came slowly forward, leaning
heavily upon her canes. She was tall and thin,
and it seemed a long way up to her face. Her hair
was a harsh grey ; her eyes keen and searching.
Her mouth closed tightly as if it might have been
shutting words back. She was evidently annoyed
about something, and surveyed the group as if she
were a constable with a warrant for their arrest.
?I expected you by the noon train,? she began
curtly. ?Your wire said, ?Coming to-day.? ?
Kittie gasped. Her curly hair had loosened
about her face, and she was lovely in her con-
fusion.
?Oh, I?m sorry, Aunt Anne ; that was my fault.
I was flurried, and I never remember details, do
I, Garry ??
He laughed, the sunny laugh that made Chubby
feel as if the world were a wonderful place.
?We invariably do the wrong thing, Aunt Anne.
If you put us down as a collection of irresponsibles.


you won?t be disappointed. You don?t look a day
older.?
She looked less grim at that. ?The odds of what
I feel, Garret. It really doesn?t matter, only I
have my dinner in the middle of the day, and
everything at The Sycomores goes by rule. This,
of course, is Ronald ; and this ?
Ron was noted for his courtly manners ; his
father often declared that he had been born in the
wrong century. He had all the tact that Chubby
lacked, and it did not forsake him now. The old
lady glanced at him as though a memory had
stabbed her.
?And that is Kathleen ? She isn?t like either
of you, or, indeed, any of our family. Your
mother, Garret, had beautiful hair !?
Garry gave his ugly duckling a reassuring smile.
?Chubby?s will darken as she gets older.?
?Nonsense ! Red hair is red hair ; and this is
flame.?
?Ginger . . . for pluck ! We call her Ginger,
as often as not, but she?s usually Chubby or Chubs.
I am afraid she will not answer readily to anything
else, Aunt Anne.?
All this time they were standing in the hall. Miss
Manners might be rich, but she wasn?t very
thoughtful, Chubby decided. She looked straight


into the shrewd eyes, and Aunt Anne gave a short
laugh.
?You don?t like me, child ??
Kittie interposed nervously. ?She is tired with
her journey, and sleepy too.?
The old lady led the way down the hall. ?She
has the Manners honesty, apparently,? she said
carelessly; ?it means hard going, but it pays in
the long run.?
The house was huge ; it would have swallowed
The Laburnums twice over, and then there would
have been something to spare. There were wide
halls and narrow halls, and, at length, Miss Manners
indicated a half-open door.
?I will say good night. Wiggins will show you
your rooms, and I dare say you will want to get to
bed early. We don?t keep town hours at The
Sycomores, and you had better get into our ways
at once.?
She nodded at them in a fashion that was not
unfriendly. Chubby had an odd fancy that Aunt
Anne was envying them ; that there was a lonely
sound in her voice as she finished with : ?You will
be hungry, and I am sure the day has been trying.
Good night to you all.?
Tap-tap went the sticks along the hall; it must
be awful to have to walk so slowly and painfully !


Wiggins ?she preferred to be called by her sur-
name, she assured them with a sigh ?jerked herself
into the scene. She was a small, spare woman
whose nose and chin threatened to meet. Her jaws
worked incessantly as if she were chewing some-
thing ?Wrigley?s Spearmint, Chubby suggested?
but they discovered afterwards that this was merely
habit.
She showed them dejectedly into a cheerful room
with a glowing fire. Here tea was set ?such a tea
as Chubby had sometimes dreamed of. It looked
a bit like one of the illustrations in The Saturday
Evening Post that daddy sometimes brought home.
There had been spare meals at The Laburnums for
long enough, but here was cold chicken and ham,
cream and honey-scones and cake. A great bowl
of golden-and-red jelly stood in the centre of the
table, and there was a wonderful salad in a white
china dish.
Wiggins shook her head at them mournfully.
?If I was you, I?d just lay your hats by for the
present, and have something to eat. I?ll show you
your rooms, after.?
They agreed with alacrity, and, after a hearty
meal, she appeared again and led the way down
the hall. Chubby felt as if she were in a dream,
when, after going through one room after another,


they came to her own, with an apple-green bed-
stead, and wardrobe and dressing-table with swing
mirrors. The eiderdown quilt showed apple-blos-
som on a green ground ; there were frilled pillow-
shams, and two long windows with apple-blossom-
and-green chintz curtains. It was simply gor-
geous, she decided.
The bathroom, which was to be their own, had
an electric heater, and, after they had steamed
themselves to some purpose, they went straight off
to bed. Chubby?s nightie was missing, and Kittie
got very flurried till she discovered it, rolled into a
tight bundle, and stowed away in a box of books !
She came in to say good night, last thing, looking
like a child in her blue kimono with her curls wet
from her bath, and her cheeks rosy. Chubby clung
to her and kissed her repeatedly.
?I?ll try to like Aunt Anne,? she muttered
drowsily.
?That?s my good chick : it?s so beautiful to
have hot water without any bother, Chubs darling,
and all that good food will make daddy strong.?
?Will it always be as nice as it was to-night ??
Chubby asked wistfully.
?Quite. You go to sleep, and dream all sorts of
good things. Did you say your prayers ??
Chubby looked guilty. ?I said ?Thank God !?


but I was too tired to think of anything else,
to-night. It mightn?t have been a proper kind of
prayer. . . .?
Kittie held her close. ?He knows when little
girls are sleepy,? she said comfortingly.
?That?s a good thing,? answered Chubby heavily.
She was fast asleep before her mother switched the
light off ; her red hair streaming over the pillow
in wild confusion.
She dreamed that, just as they were leaving
The Laburnums, she remembered that she had
left her best dress in the nursery. She ran back
to the house to find it full of strange people who
told her that it was their house now, and scowled
at her as if she had no right there.
Kittie called crossly that they could not wait
unless she hurried, and finally, they drove off,
without her. When at length she found her dress,
she ran to run after the car crying despairingly :
?Wait for me . . . I?m coming . . .? and
Ronald laughed as if it were the biggest joke in
the world to leave her behind. The frock kept
tangling her feet, and the road was so long ! She
stopped a tram, and explained to the conductor
that she had no money, but that she was Chubby
Drummond, and that she must catch the train for
Silver Creek. While she was doing this, the tram


? -i?? . * ? ---
ou don?t like me, child ??
(See page 45)




started, and the people on the dummy laughed at
her as Ron had done.
When she reached Flinders Street Station after
a weary walk, the train had gone. She found a
porter to whom she confided her trouble, but his
face got redder and redder, and bigger and bigger.
Finally, it changed to that of the old gentleman
they had travelled with, and he kept saying
crossly : ?Can?t you keep still for one moment ??
Then, her mother appeared, and assured her
that she had kept them all late, and had delayed
the starting of the train, and would probably be
brought up to court and fined. She was certain
that Aunt Anne would be furious. Finally, the dress
which Chubby was still carrying, after trailing on
the ground and tripping everybody, changed into
a green eiderdown quilt that was smothering her.
Then, someone threw a great, yellow ball against
a window !


CHAPTER IV
THE DREAM LOFT
Chubby sat up and opened her eyes. There was,
indeed, something yellow against the window, but
it was the sun streaming in and flooding the room :
it had bounded up from the mount that looked
so near, and so friendly.
She yawned lazily; then slipped from under
the blankets with a sigh. On the fence were three
kookaburras : they saw her, and chuckled. She
longed to stroke the sleek heads, and the wings
that had lovely blue feathers somewhere. She was
sure the biggest bird was winking at her, and it is
possible he was, for Chubby was a comical sight
at the moment, with her great mane of hair catching
fire, and her eyes only half open.
The jacks were laughing hilariously, one after
the other, and then all together : they were still
chuckling when Mrs. Drummond put her head
round the door.
?I thought you?d never wake, Chubs ; it?s nearly
nine o?clock. Run along and have your shower,
and don?t make too much noise,?


Ugh . . . but the water was cold ! It stung
like icy needles till Chubby was glowing all over.
She dressed in double-quick time, and trod
cautiously along the hall till she found an open
door that led into an enchanted world, all sparkle
and glitter.
Kittie followed, anxiously. ?You turned the
tap off, didn?t you, darling ? This isn?t town, you
know, and we mustn?t waste water. Garry has
had the first good night for months ; he was up
with the dawn. Ron is still asleep ; I don?t know
what Aunt Anne will think of us. Go and find
daddy, and tell him that breakfast will be ready
in about ten minutes.?
She bent and gave the happy mouth a warm
kiss : in spite of everything, she felt younger,
and lighter of heart. If Garry were to recover,
nothing else mattered.
Chubby danced along a winding path, and felt
as if the mountains, and the trees, and even the
road in the valley held out welcoming hands.
As she went, her hair flaming in the early sunshine,
she heard padding footsteps : a wet nose was
thrust into her hand, and she cried ecstatically :
?Punch ! Oh, you beauty !?
Dr. Ted had told her about Punch, the sandy
Airedale with the rough coat and anxious eyes.


It is probable that never before in his life had
Punch been called a beauty ; but it is certain that
he approved of Chubby. He advanced a heavy
paw, and she shook it vigorously. She wasn?t
faithless to George Reid ; it wasn?t in her heart
to forget anything she had ever loved, but he had
such dear eyes ?and he looked as if he might be
lonely, too !
Drummond came through the orchard gate,
and Chubby couldn?t have told the reason for the
difference in his face, but her heart gave funny
beats that were out of time.
He patted her sturdy shoulder ; he hadn?t been
kissing any of them, lately : but she knew, as she
knew most things about her father, that he loved
them quite as much. His eyes twinkled as he glanced
from the dog to the child.
?Two red-heads !? he cried.
Wiggins came from the kitchen and beat a
gong. She eyed them sorrowfully, and informed
Chubby that it was only the other day that ?Missus
noticed Punch was gitting old !?
She had fried curly bits of bacon, and poached
a great dish of eggs : the coffee smelled delicious,
and there was scalded cream with the porridge.
Chubby was ravenous, and so was Ronald :he
had sauntered in after they were all seated. They


talked as fast as they ate, which was Drummond
custom. Then they went into the golden day
where there was a new world to explore.
Miss Manners heard the merry voices, and sighed.
She had had a wakeful night, and, in her heart,
she was doubtful as to the success of this experiment.
She had lived alone for so many years that she
regarded any change with apprehension. How that
red-haired child was laughing !
She saw them go into the long orchard:
apparently, the doll-wife was leaving her work to
look after itself ! No doubt that sort of nature had
its compensations : usually, someone acted provi-
dence for those who could not look after them-
selves. Garret was plainly very much in love with
her.
Anne Manners sat up and watched them shrewdly.
The sun had caught Chubby?s hair : there was
something rather splendid about the thick mass.
Her eyes lingered on the boy : he walked with his
head erect, and a swing of the shoulders that
brought memories back in a flood. Just so, had his
grandfather walked in the days when the mistress
of The Sycomores was a girl with a heart that was
impulsive and generous. She shook her head
impatiently, as if she would thrust away unwel-
come thoughts. After all these years?to flush


and tremble like a sentimental miss! It was
ridiculous.
The orchard trees were frothing over with bloom.
The scent was intoxicating ; and blackbirds, and
thrushes, and magpies were everywhere. Chubby
had never seen so many birds in her life : one of
them was feeding fledglings at the top of a white
gum; another, nearer, and lower down, was
dropping choice morsels into hungry beaks, opened
wide. It was funny to hear the squawking end in a
satisfied gurgle, half-strangled in the throat.
There were wild violets in plenty, white and
purple, with a faint sweetness that was all their
own. Chubby could not realize that it was real,
yet. They went to see the fowl-runs where Rhode
Island Reds scratched busily, clucking importantly.
When Chubby discovered a clutch of chickens,
soft, and yellow and cuddlesome, she took The
Sycomores to her heart, once and for all; and there
was one turkey gobbler that glared indignantly
at the intruders, blowing himself out like a High-
land piper, Garry declared.
A tall, gaunt Scot whose name was Sandie
Macleod was ploughing between the apple trees,
and flocks of birds marched after the gleaming
wake of his shares. The jacks followed, from tree
to tree : there were six at one time on a dead limb.


They sat side by side, and their great beaks shone
in the sunlight.
Ronald was the only critical one of the party.
He grumbled at the distance from town, and
wondered how he was to get backwards and for-
wards to school ?
The creek twisted and turned among the black-
woods : Chubby decided that that must be the
white gum Dr. Ted had talked about near the
bridge?the one the fairies danced under on moon-
light nights ! One paddock was yellow with butter-
cups, and all the world seemed turning to gold,
except where the peach trees blushed against a
long line of apricots with soft, pinky-white
blossom.
There were raspberry canes on the flats, and rows
and rows of strawberries. The fruit was reddening,
and it tasted quite different from any that was in
town. Through gaps in the trees the creek gleamed
like silver.
When they climbed back to the house, they were
as hungry as hunters. Wiggins informed them that
dinner would be ready as soon as they were, and
that the girl who rode over from Wombat Creek
every day to do the cleaning had made the beds.
Kittie got very pink and ashamed, but Garry
laughed.


6 Chubby
In the afternoon, Miss Manners sent word that
she would like a talk with her nephew and niece :
Chubby discovered a hammock under some cherry
trees, and Ronald went off by himself. It was a
novel experience to he and swing and look up
through green boughs and white bloom to a sky
of forget-me-not blue; but presently the spirit
of adventure called, and Chubby set out on a
quest that ended in the most wonderful dream loft
in the world.
The stable was fascinating, to begin with : sleek
horses munched lazily in their stalls, and there was
a ladder that drew like a magnet. She could never
explain her passion for lofts : they brought
dreams that could be shared with no one else.
She knew He understood the strange fancies that
came and went : perhaps He sent them to make
up to her for her ugliness ?
She climbed up and up : down below her
was the steady munch-munch, and the occa-
sional stamp of a foot. One strawberry mare
in the farthest stall turned her head, and gave
the child a startled look from wide, beautiful
eyes.
It was a darling loft : there were no gaping
boxes, and a total absence of the spicy apple scent
that had been part of the one at The Laburnums.


Aunt Anne?s apples were kept in cool sheds with
proper shelves and cases, Garry had said.
There were heaped bran and chaff bags, plump
and sweet-smelling : Chubby clambered over them
till she reached the windows that were flung wide
to sunlight and the glory of purple hills. The
breeze was lazy, and was loaded with health to be
drawn into vigorous lungs.
She decided that she would write her first letter
to Dr. Ted, here : she would tell him about the
journey, and the orchards, and the birds. And
Punch. Perhaps it was the natural result of days
of bustle that had gone before this one ; perhaps
the warmth of the afternoon sun streaming in?or
the munching of the horses in their stalls. Whatever
the cause, Chubby fell asleep on the bran bags,
with a smile of utter happiness on her face.
It was such a sleep as all Aunt Anne?s money
could not buy for a sick frame, and a lonely old
heart.
She dreamed that the fairies flew in on a slanting
sunbeam, and poised themselves about her, whisper-
ing and laughing, and promising! But they
shuddered away when the witch made her appear-
ance on a broomstick that she kept knocking
against the floor. Her hat was sharply pointed,
and her fingers thin and grasping. Were they


really afraid of her, or only pretending ? Chubby
did not think that fairies were afraid of any-
thing ! The witch looked terribly like Aunt Anne
at first, though she had twinkling eyes, and her
mouth was rather sweet when she smiled. She
began to talk in a loud voice, and then. . . .


CHAPTER V
?the child dislikes me?
Chubby sat up with a start, and rubbed her eyes.
At first she could not find her bearings ; there
was a lovely, fresh smell, and the sunshine was
pouring over her. Someone was talking?it
sounded like the witch?every word as distinct as
if it were being chopped off.
?It will be better for Ronald to be a boarder at
Grammar : he can never go backwards and for-
wards from here. He tells me that he has a chance
of doing well, and there is nothing to gain by
wasting time. The music is, of course, another
matter : it is harmless enough so long as he isn?t
bitten with the craze for appearing in public.
That, I should certainly dislike.?
Kittie interrupted eagerly. ?Oh, we wouldn?t
think of him doing anything like that, Aunt Anne,
but it would break his heart to give up his violin.
Garry?there is our biggest worry over !?
The old lady grunted, ?Money means little to
me, and I have no fancy for leaving a lot to be
squabbled about when I am gone. If I spend it


in my lifetime, I see what becomes of it, and
there is no occasion for injury, afterwards. In
any case, a sound education is essential for a boy
who wants to make his way in the world : when he
chooses his profession, I shall see that he gets his
start. After that, he must fend for himself. Chubby,
as you call her, is a different proposition. I take it
that she is an ordinary child, with no particular
gift ??
Chubby had the idea that the sunshine was
laughing at this moment because she was just an
ordinary child. She was still rather drowsy:
when she was really awake, she must go down and
let them know that she had overheard.
Kittie answered soberly. ?You are quite right ;
Chubby is just Chubby. Generous, and loving,
and not any more mischievous than children
usually are at her age. She is careless and thought-
less, of course, but when you get to know
her ?
Miss Manners gave a dry chuckle. ?I don?t
think that the good child of the story book has
ever appealed to me : she is certainly honest ;
which is saying a great deal.?
Kittie laughed as though she were relieved.
?Oh, she?s absolutely honest and truthful, isn?t
she, Garry ? Too much so, at times, for one?s


comfort. Whatever she feels, she shows : she
would sooner be rude than deceitful.?
?I can quite believe you, my dear Kathleen ;
her aversions would be as strong as her affections,
and as definitely shown. At the moment, the
child dislikes me.?
?Oh, no ! Aunt Anne !?
?Oh, yes ! my dear niece ! Not that it matters ;
you have come here on a business footing, and I did
not take either sentiment or relationship into
the matter. What on earth is that noise ??
Only Chubby, scrambling down the ladder, and
losing her footing in her hurry. She fell three
rungs, and was limping slightly when she confronted
the little group on the lawn. She wasn?t pretty,
or brilliant like Ron?but she played the game.
Her cheeks were blazing as she gasped out : ?I?m
sorry ?I couldn?t help hearing?l was in the
loft!?
Kittie puckered her brows, but Anne Manners
gave a short laugh.
?Oh . . . you were in the loft ? Who told
you that you might go there ??
Chubby?s face was fiery : it had always seemed
to her that lofts were her special property, just as
the bush is free to all who love it! Drummond
came to her rescue.


?If you offered Ginger a palace or a loft, she
would choose the latter, Aunt Nan.?
The old face flushed ?it was years since any-
body had called her Nan. She was Miss Manners
to most people ; and Aunt Anne to the few who
were blood of her blood. Garry had spoken
impulsively, and there was affection in his tone.
She knew him too well, after years of independence
of her, to attribute the familiarity to any but the
real cause.
Chubby plucked up courage. ?I didn?t mean
any harm, really, but lofts are so beautifully away
from everything, and so near the sky.?
The shrewd eyes searched the freckled face.
?So you like to be away from everything. What
is the reason for that ??
The question actually rattled ?it might have been
the witch who was speaking. ?You?ve got to be
quiet when you?re thinking out stories,? she said
dreamily.
Miss Manners shrugged her shoulders, and
Kittie cried anxiously, ?Oh, Chubs, dear, don?t be
silly !?
Garry Drummond interposed. ?There?s a method
in her madness, Kitten : you didn?t know that we
had a budding author in the family, Aunt Anne ??
Miss Manners laughed shortly. ?T see ?she


isn?t an ordinary child, after all ? Rather a remark-
able couple, this of yours, Garret ; a musician?
and a writer !?
Chubby made a discovery at this moment :
Aunt Anne wasn?t sneering. Was it possible she
might turn out to be a sport, after all ?
A quick question was shot at her. ?Are you
bright at school, like your brother ??
Chubby shook her head dejectedly. ?Not very,?
she admitted. ?I love English and history, and
even geography, because you can make pictures
of the places ; and I adore reading about volcanoes.
But I hate arithmetic, Aunt Anne ; and things
like that.?
?That?s no crime, I suppose, though you?ll
never be successful if you are not good at figures.
What kind of stories do you think out, you
ridiculous child ??
Chubby threw herself on the lawn near the old
lady?s chair. She had the expression that invariably
came when she was ?chasing dreams? as she
phrased it. Her eyes were wide and clear, with
sparkles of broken light in them.
Fairy stories,? she confessed, ?and adventure
ones. When you write them yourself, you can
always make them come out right in the
end.?


?That?s an advantage, of course,? Miss Manners
agreed.
? Chubs adores ogres,? asserted her father,
stretching himself lazily on the grass, and picking
some heads of clover. ?Her ogres are quite con-
vincing.?
?Good!? snapped Miss Anne briskly, ?and
witches, of course ? You can study me for that !?
Now Chubby had considered this very thing.
She flamed till her father whispered that her hair
would catch fire ; but even he was not prepared
for the ashamed: ?I meant to, Aunt Anne!?
Kittie gasped, and looked despairing. Chubby
carried truthfulness to absurd lengths : there
would be disaster before they had been a week at
Mount Pleasant ! She felt relieved when she saw
a flicker of amusement in the sombre eyes.
?Have you changed your mind then, child ??
Chubby nodded. ?It?s this way she appealed,
?you like people to think that you are vexed with
them, but all the time you are really the fairy
godmother. Of course it would be simply ripping
to turn you into the godmother in the last chapter !?
Garry chuckled under his breath, and leaned
on his elbow, watching Miss Manners. The thin
lips seemed to grow fuller and sweeter ?that,
probably, was due to the half-smile that crept


round them unwillingly at first, and then decided
to stay. Chubby heaved a sigh of relief ; caught
sight of Ronald in the distance, and bounded to
meet him with a yell of delight.
Kittie said nervously : ?Chubby has atrocious
manners, Aunt Anne, I hope you?ll excuse her ?
Miss Manners eyed the pretty, flushed face
keenly?the chit would always be apologizing for
her ugly duckling, she decided!
?I like honesty,? she said deliberately. ?I like
it better than anything in the world. The one thing
I never forget or forgive is deceit or hypocrisy ;
please remember that, Kathleen. Chubby and I
will get on well enough ; she will, at least, never
pretend an affection she does not feel. That
counts for much with me.?
She rose slowly and stiffly, and made her way
back to the house, disdaining offers of help.
Drummond piled clover-heads into small, scenty
heaps. ?Gorgeous, isn?t it, Kitten ??
?Almost too good to be true : those grocery
and meat bills used to haunt me, day and
night.?
?Poor darling ! Aunt Anne has a fine heart; I
always told you that. It is just that life has soured
her.?
Kittie pouted a petulant ?I don?t see why it


need, Garry ?she has everything that money
can give.?
?Yes, but what is that ? You heard her say
that she liked honesty better than anything in
the world ? If my father had been straight with
her, things would have been very different : if
even he had told her the truth in the end, instead
of leaving her to find out !?
Kittie yawned. ?What do you mean ??
?She was engaged to him once, you see, and my
mother came between them. She was beautiful
and winning, everything Anne was not. She was
handsome, they say, but proud and reserved ?
few people understood her. He didn?t; and,
when he lost his head, he hadn?t the courage to
tell her how matters stood. They were married
before she realized what was going on ; and she
shut herself away from everybody, and grew hard.
Little wonder, you know?it was a rotten way to
treat her.?
?I can?t imagine her loving anyone.?
Drummond smiled. ?Can?t you, dear ? I can ;
and I?m going to tell you something that will
astound you. Before we have been here many
weeks, she is going to love old Chubs : the youngster
may offend her hopelessly, over and over again,
and there will be battles royal; but already she


knows that she will have straight dealing from
our red-head ; and that will matter more than
anything to Aunt Anne.?
?You never told me this before, Garry ?
?It didn?t seem mine to tell. But I know your
soft heart, Kitten, and she?s being generous with
us ?I, for one, want to make up to her, a bit
We can do it, you know.?
?I wonder ? Oh, I?m sorry for her, and all that,
and she is sparing nothing for Ron?her face
softens every time he comes near her.?
?He is like my father : she won?t trust him too
thoroughly, even though her heart goes out to
him. I may be wrong, of course, but I don?t think
so. To-morrow, I must go into business matters
with her thoroughly?there is one loafer who
should be fired.?
He stretched himself luxuriously, and reached
for his pipe. ?No more stuffy office, darling ; you
wouldn?t believe how good that is ! I was getting
to the stage when the figures danced across the
sheet, instead of keeping to their own columns.
This place should be worked so that it will run on
ball-bearings ; there is leakage in more than one
direction, unless I?m greatly mistaken.?
?So long as Aunt Anne doesn?t interfere ! She?s
had her own way so far ; and she?s domineering.?


?I know ; but she?s a tired woman, and it has
worried her when she has realized that the reins
were slipping from her fingers.?
?H?m !? reflected Kittie dubiously.
He laughed. ?The old bellows seem to be work-
ing better already,? he said wistfully.
?Oh, I know, Garry : I?m grateful to her for
giving us this chance ! And of course we needn?t
see too much of her. She oppresses me.?
?We?ll get disgracefully fat ! Who cares ??
?Not I,? agreed Kittie contentedly. Who
wouldn?t be happy when Garry?s eyes looked like
that ? The sunshine was glorious, and the air
scenty and invigorating. No more cheese-paring
and wondering whether there must be one meatless
day a w r eek. . . . Ron?s future assured. . . .
Kittie?s cup was full. She was even prepared to
forgive Aunt Anne for not appreciating her !


CHAPTER VI
THE SKETCH BLOWS OUT OF THE WINDOW
When Ronald and Chubby reached the lower gate,
they discovered that somebody had brought
the mail. It wasn?t possible that Dr. Ted had
written yet ?there hadn?t been time, unless he
had posted a letter last night. He had, though !
She tore the envelope open with unsteady fingers,
and devoured the uncertain handwriting?doctors
always wrote badly, he had told her.
Chubs, old dear,
Pll be bound you have found your way
to the loft before this, and have made friends with
Punch. Some dog, isn?t he P lam wondering what
you have decided about Aunt Anne, because, do you
know, I won?t be a scrap surprised if you and she
are pretty good friends, some day !
Everything is O.K. here: one of my well-to-do
patients has been to see the agent about The Laburnums,
he has fiats on the brain, and nothing suits him better
than to buy up big, rambling houses, and turn them
vito self-contained flats? as the advertisements


say. 1 loathe them myself; 1 never did take to
rooms where your head was out of the window when
your feet were toasting themselves at the fire ! 1 like
places where there is room to turn round, and you can
grow flowers and vegetables.
Do you know, Gin-gin, when I was a nipper, 1
used to say that 1 was going to be a market-gardener,
and raise pumkins ?Til do it, too, when 1 come to
Silver Creek. Tell your dad to loaf for a few days ;
Til soon be along to watch him.
Give my love to the hills and the creek. Been
paddling yet ?
Think out something nice to say to Aunt Anne
for me. Tm staring at a blank wall, and wishing it
were Mount Difficult, that's the view Til get from my
surgery window. It's a beggar to climb, but we'll
do it, some day ; and, in the meantime, you can hunt
out Bushranger Rock, and Smuggler's Cave, and tell
me what you think of them.
Don't eat too much cream. Chubs : I shudder to
think of any increase in circumference. Want to
pull my hair ?
Tours lone-lily (is there such a word?)
T. B.
I'm missing you already, kid.
Oh, and by the way ?if you should come across a
Mrs. Seton ?Christian name, Mollie ?you might


tell her that I shall be starting practice in Silver
Creek , shortly. Ton?ll know her by her ripping hair :
a few shades darker than yours , Copper-top !
When Chubby had read this twice, she and
Ronald set out for the house, carrying the loaves
that the baker had left in the box. Miss Manners
looked from her window and saw them coming.
Chubby was hatless, and her hair flared in the
sunshine. She was struggling up the slope when a
half-loaf fell and rolled down the hill. She set off
after it, but Ron climbed on, whistling. Once
again, the resemblance to his grandfather struck
Anne Manners with a pang : head, and figure,
and way of walking . . . would he, also, accept
favours as his right, and think lightly of the one
who bestowed them ?
Five minutes later, Chubby toiled into sight :
she had been hurrying, and she was panting.
Letters, Aunt Anne !? she cried gustily. She
sent both children to the dairy for a drink of milk,
and Wiggins showed them the pans with the
crinkled, yellow cream. Some of it would be made
into butter, later in the day. The milk in the big
tumbler tasted nutty ; and they had some home-
made biscuits that were delicious.
When they set out again, Ronald was in an


unusually thoughtful mood. They found a log
bridge across the creek, and dangled their feet till
the ice-cold water ran over wriggling toes. The
sunshine slanted through the branches of the white
gums, and made a golden, shifting network that
danced and threaded the swift stream, and was
never still.
Chubby sighed with satisfaction. ?Isn?t it
scrummy ?? she breathed. ?You?re going to like
it, aren?t you, Ron ??
?It? meant Mount Pleasant, and The Sycomores,
and the new life.
He ignored this, with a testy ??I say, Chubs, I
nearly got into a frightful mess this morning. I
thought I had destroyed that sketch I drew of
Aunt Anne asking whether this was all the luggage
you know ??
?I know.?
?It must have blown out of the window, and of
course, she must find it ! She asked me whether I
had done it, and I tell you, I was in a beastly funk.?
?I don?t see why ?it was only fun. What did
you say ??
?I?m hanged if I know : it was an awful minute,
and her eyes were like gimlets. Bet your sweet life,
she wouldn?t have looked at it as fun. Gin . . .
you won?t go back on me ??


Chubby gulped : it seemed to her that the gold
was fading from the dancing network.
?I?m not a tell-tale,? she flashed.
?I know you?re not ; but you blunder into
things, and it won?t do to offend the old girl at
the start ?you take it from me, she would be a
fair terror if she got going : she?d hit the roof.?
?I thought you liked her, Ron ? You made a
big fuss with her ?
?Oh, she?s all right, but it wouldn?t do to let
her know about that sketch.?
?I said I wouldn?t give you away,? jerked
Chubby miserably. He gave her hand a pat.
?Course you wouldn?t, old thing, on purpose.
But she is sure to ask you.?
?If she does, straight out, I?ll have to say.?
?Right ! Then you?ll be a mean little toad and
sneak, and I hate sneaks.?
He pulled his socks and shoes on, and, without
another word, set off towards the township.
Only once before he had been scotty like this, and
he had not spoken to her for days.
All the happiness of the afternoon had gone, and
she wasn?t in the least surprised when a black
cloud reached and blotted out the sun. She put
her stockings on, heedless of the fact that one was
on its wrong side ; gave a heavy sigh, and slid


along the log to the bank. Her heart felt like lead,
but presently the road seemed to be calling her,
and she followed. It twisted and turned in the most
alluring fashion ; and every now and then, through
a break in the trees she could see the mountains.
They were a wonderful, misty blue.
The creek ran by the side of the track ; it gurgled
and chattered merrily, and she told herself that
she would have to get used to lonely walks now
that Ron was going back to school.
It was very still under the trees. She had gone
about a mile when her heart began to act in the
strangest manner: it thumped, and pounded,
and sent the blood into her cheeks till she felt as
if they would burst. Stretched across the path
was a long, slippery-looking thing that could only
be a snake !
It lay perfectly still, but of course she could
not tell how much longer it would do that. If she
were going to live in the bush she must get used to
snakes, and learn how to kill them. Dr. Ted had
explained that you should never get in between
them and where they were going : but suppose
you did not know where they wanted to go ?
She hunted for a stout stick : armed with this,
she approached the reptile, and commenced the
attack. The first hit must be a hard one because,


naturally, the snake would resent being hurt . . .
the best way was to break the back as near the head
as possible, she remembered !
Her eyes were wide with fright : the wretched
thing must be asleep . . , that would make it
easier, of course. With a tremendous effort, she
brought the stick down heavily, again and
again. . . .
She had not noticed the smooth roll of wheels,
had not noticed anything till an amused chuckle
made her start.
?Don?t waste energy on a dead snake, child !?
It was Aunt Anne . . . leaning forward from
the seat of a low phaeton ; the kind you never
saw, nowadays.
?Oh !? wailed Chubby, ?that was why it didn?t
move ? I thought it was asleep. Isn?t it stiff luck,
Aunt Anne ? I wanted to make sure that I could
do it?l was fearfully scared ?
The old lady noted the rapid pulse in the throat :
the dilated eyes, and general look of woe. Some
childish quarrel with the brother, no doubt.
?I daresay you?d have killed it even if it had
been alive. Jump in?we are going as far as The
Falls.?
It was the funniest sensation riding in that
phaeton. The awkward youth who fed the fowls,


and chopped the wood, and milked the cows ?
there were two beautiful Alderneys at Mount
Pleasant ?was driving. Chubby wondered it he
ever shut his mouth ?perhaps his buck-teeth made
that difficult ?
Presently they came to a bend where the creek
tumbled over the rocks to a crystal pool, and
Miss Manners made Joe pull up, while Chubby
scrambled down some slippery steps to get a
nearer view of the waterfall.
They went back through a spatter of rain :
Aunt Anne said it was always raining in the hills.
When they reached The Sycomores, Chubby helped
the old lady out, standing sturdily during the
process.
Her last words roused a quick fear. ?After you
have had your tea, child, come to my sitting-room :
Wiggins will show you where it is. We must have
a little talk.?
She answered dejectedly : ?Directly after tea,
Aunt Anne ??
Miss Manners frowned. ?You must listen to
what is said to you, Kathleen : you young folk
pay no attention to your elders these days.?
Kathleen ... it seemed to send Chubby miles
away !
Even the dread of the coming interview could


not spoil her appetite : there was cold roast beef,
and salad, and all sorts of good things. Ron
ignored her, and was specially attentive to his
parents. At length, when everybody had finished,
Wiggins said dolefully: ?If you?ll come now,
missie, I?ll show you where to go. Be careful what
you say ?the mistress has one of her bad attacks
of the rheumatiz coming on, and she gits a bit
crusty.?
With the feeling that she was going to her
execution, Chubby started out. One minute she
wished the hall would stretch out for miles : the
next that it would end, and that she could get
it over. Her father had given her a pat as she
passed his chair.
?Buck up, Ginger !? he whispered, ?Aunt Anne?s
bark is always worse than her bite. You look as
though you had stolen the cream and broken the
jug r
She nodded : of course daddy did not know.
She was to go straight in, Wiggins told her.
She never forgot her first impression of that room.
It was long and lofty, and it had windows that
opened on to the veranda ?somehow, that fact
was comforting.
The storm was gathering over the mountains,
and the air was so still that it scarcely stirred the


curtains. A low growl of thunder met her as she
crossed the threshold, and a flash of lightning lit
up the pictures and the old-fashioned furniture.
Chubby stood waiting : her dress was crumpled,
and there was a tear in the hem ?she must have
caught it in the stick. Kittie would be vexed :
but that was in the distance.
The room was full of faint sweetness : she
supposed it came from the bowl of roses on the
table in the corner. As the minutes passed, and
still there was no sign of Miss Manners, Chubby
glanced about her. There were soft, rich colours
everywhere, and water-colours with gilt mounts
and narrow frames. She had never seen such a
thick carpet : she looked fearfully at the spot on
which she had been standing : her soles always
had to be extra-heavy, and perhaps they were
making dents ?
The mantelpiece was of marble, and on it was a
photograph that reminded her of Ron when he
was smiling. She was so engrossed that she did
not hear the tapping of sticks ; did not turn till
the old lady was almost at her side. Then, she
started violently, and caught the edge of a valuable
bowl. It did not fall, but it was a bad beginning.
She explained hurriedly. ?I was looking at that
photo.?


?So I saw. It is your grandfather.?
?But he looks so young !? cried Chubby foolishly.
?He was young when it was taken : we alter
as we get older. I suppose you find it hard to
realize that I was once a little girl like you ??
?Yes !? answered Chubby promptly.
Aunt Anne laughed her short laugh : there
would be blunt truth from this child, always.
She went stiffly to her chair, and Chubby took her
sticks and brought her a hassock.
?Ron is like granpa !? she ventured.
?Very. Put the lights on, child ; it is getting
dark.?
She found the switch after some aimless blunder-
ing, and a soft glow flooded the room ; then she
waited apprehensively till Miss Manners beckoned
her to take a chair.
?I?m not going to bite you !? she asserted
tartly.
Chubby flamed : she hoped drearily that it
would be over, soon. On the other side of the house,
Ronald was playing Schubert?s ?Slumber Song,?
and Kittie was stumbling through his accompani-
ment ; music had never been her strong point.
Miss Manners settled into an easier position :
what a clumsy child this was, with her square
forehead, and her mane of fiery hair ! She would


be sure to break something that mattered before
she had been in the house a week. She was palpably
nervous at the moment.
?I must see what Mollie Seton can do with you,?
she began. Chubby interrupted :
?Has she hair something like mine ??
Aunt Anne laughed shortly. ?Like yours ?
I should hope not. You mustn?t break in like that,
child ; when older folk talk, younger ones must
listen : you surely know that ??
Chubby flamed. ?I am sorry, but you see Dr.
Ted told me about her in his letter to-day.?
?I daresay. Her husband was killed at the
Front ; not that that was any calamity, though I
suppose she believed in him : women always do
believe in scamps. She is taking charge of a boy
whose father has gone to the Malay States, shooting
big game in the jungle, or some nonsense of that
sort. Why folk can?t stay in their own country
I don?t know ; especially when they have children.
If she will teach you as well as Philip, it might
be a good arrangement. There is nothing settled
yet, so don?t build on it : if it falls through, you
must ride to the State school.?
Chubby?s face fell at this, and Miss Manners
noted the fact : evidently, the child?s inclination
lay in the direction of Mollie Seton ?it could but


be tried. One thing was certain, she could not
hide her feelings.
Chubby?s eyes were glowing : Dr. Ted?s Mrs.
Seton and a boy who might help to fill the dreadful
blank Ron?s absence would make ! She always
got on better with boys than with girls : they
might tease, but they did not look superior when
she did something awkward, or tore her dresses !
Aunt Anne leaned back as if she were tired :
Chubby got up hurriedly, and stumbled over the
hassock.
?Let me fix your cushions ?? she begged. ?I?ll
try not to hurt you.?
?Judging by your usual efforts, I?m not too
sanguine,? the old lady replied dryly. ?See what
you can do? put that one lower?lower, still.
Yes, that is certainly more comfortable.?
It was while she was plumping the cushions up
that Chubby Drummond made a discovery:
on the small table at her elbow was that awful
sketch ! It seemed to grow and grow, and she
turned hot and cold in a breath. A sneering voice
put a question. ?You recognize this, do you ??
?Yes !? answered Chubby desperately.
You know who is responsible for it, apparently??
?Yes.?
That was over! ?It?s not a capital offence,?


remarked Miss Manners shortly, ?I still retain my
sense of humour. You may go.?
Chubby went. In her miserable heart, she was
certain that Aunt Anne regarded her as the culprit.
The day that Ronald went back to school it
was raining heavily, and everybody was depressed.
He was quite aware of the fact that he was returning
under altered conditions ; more as Miss Manners?
nephew, than as Garret Drummond?s son. He
would be able to throw out casual references to
?our place in the hills,? and, altogether, hold his
own with the best. If only Chubs would buck up ?
it would be too dreadful if she cried !
As they drove away from the station to The
Sycomores, the trolley-track gleamed like a double
line of silver. The horses were taking their last
load for the day to the saw-mill in the heart of the
forest. Chubby never saw them now without a
tight feeling in her throat; Wigsie had assured
her that they only lasted two years at that game :
that the rough track, and the steep climb ?took
it out of their hearts.? She must ask Dr. Ted about
that.
They looked sleek and patient, clanking their
chains, and plodding through the rain with the
truck piled high with provisions and fodder.


The Sketch Blows Out of the Window 83
To-morrow, they would come down with timber?
it didn?t seem fair to put them to such heavy
work without asking them whether they were
willing !
That night, everybody was out of sorts : Chubby
had a weep after she went to bed. Her father had
suggested toffee-making in the earlier part of the
evening, but it wouldn?t set properly, and they
had all been glad when supper-time came. The
wind was shrieking round the house, and Wiggins
informed them that that was nothing to what it
could do in winter, and that they would be fine
and sick of the hills, then !
Drummond reminded her that there was summer
to come first, and autumn ; but she found no
comfort in that. Hot days brought flies and
mosquitoes, and ?them as wanted country life
could have it, so fur as she was concerned.? This
was rather amazing, because it was no time since
Wigsie had been pitying people who had to live
in streets ; ?pore, white-faced things that has to
alter the colour of their cheeks with paint, and
such-like !?
She had a profound contempt for city folk, but
if Melbourne were no good, and the country worse,
where were you to go ?
In her lonely room, Miss Manners sat and knitted.


More than once, she found herself listening for the
ringing laugh that she was growing used to. Of
course the child would be fretting after the boy for
awhile : the comfort was that the young forgot,
quickly.
For a week, Chubby wandered about miserably,
and Miss Anne woke up to the fact that something
definite must be done for a child who was not
particularly troublesome, though Wiggins had
certainly grumbled when she had found a collection
of tadpoles in the bedroom basin ; and the bed
with the apple-green eiderdown was fairly often
what she termed ?cluttered up with truck !?
She had no engaging ways like Ronald : was as
ungainly as a colt, and her hair was unmanageable.
She seldom remembered to shut a gate, and on one
occasion, Joe had had to go five miles in search
of Clover, the Alderney heifer. But she had owned
up like a Briton ; and that was much to the good.
Once, the old lady had found a handful of wilted
wild flowers left on her window-sill, and had
wondered whether the child was beginning to like
her ?


CHAPTER Vll
More and more, the loft grew to be a place of
dreams. Punch learned to climb the ladder, and
Chubby talked to him till he made funny little
noises as though he were trying to answer.
For days, nothing was said about Mrs. Seton,
and then Kittie said : ?School next Monday,
Chubs ; you are to have dinner with Phil Penrose
in the middle of the day. It is a splendid chance
for you ; Mollie Seton is a 8.A., and a born teacher.?
Chubby nodded and hunted out her books.
They were woefully battered. For a whole morning,
she laboured over sums ; the results were never
quite near the answers, but her father comforted
her by telling her that there were other things in
life beside arithmetic; and he was sure that
Mollie would be pleased with her English?all
except the spelling !
Then came a golden Saturday. Chubby decided
to do some addition and multiplication, and Punch
lumbered after her. He slipped on the end rung of
the ladder, and had to be helped, but they made


their way to the nest among the bran bags, and
settled happily. He watched his chum wistfully ;
she wasn?t giving him as much attention as usual :
she was making strange marks on a slate, and
rubbing them out with a wet sponge. If Dr. Blair
had been anywhere about, he would have assured
her that her sighs would have floated a fleet of
ships !
Presently, Chubby?s cheeks grew scarlet. From
the lawn came the sound of a new voice : it was
deep and rich, and it was saying : ?I brought Phil
over to make friends with Chubby ?you won?t
mind, will you ??
The stranger looked quite a girl, with dark eyes
and simply ripping hair, Chubby decided breath-
lessly. Aunt Anne was laughing almost merrily;
and there was a boy standing awkwardly near
them.
Presently Drummond called cheerily : ?Chubs,
you monkey ?come here !?
She gulped, and scrambled down with more
haste than care. Her hair was in wild disorder ;
there were bits of chaff on the crumpled dress,
and gaping holes in her stocking. But her father
told himself that there were times when Chubby?s
eyes were very splendid. They were full of depth
to-day, with broken lights that made them wistful


and sweet. He knew that she was terribly nervous ;
and he put his hand on her sturdy shoulder.
?Come and see Mollie Seton, and Phil,? he said
affectionately.
Everybody glanced up as they rounded the
gable. Kittie?s eyes went miserably to the unruly
mane of hair : Aunt Anne shrugged her shoulders,
and Mrs. Seton laughed in such a friendly fashion
that Chubby forgot her nervousness.
She heard a low-voiced ?So this is Chubby ?
I?ve heard such a lot about you from Dr. Blair.
Come and speak to Chubby, Pip !?
The boy lounged forward. He had mournful
eyes, and his skin was as freckled as a plover?s
egg. His hair grew like a thatch, and he was very
thin. He wasn?t a scrap interesting ; he was just
bored, and superior ! He didn?t say a word unless
he was spoken to, and then he drawled. Chubby
could have wailed.
Mrs. Seton watched them with an amused
pucker of her brows. Finally, she bent and
whispered : ?He?s a surprise-packet, Chubby,
and he?s missing his father dreadfully !?
That made a difference, of course. It must be
simply awful to have your father all that distance
away.
Phil eyed her morosely ; he was in an ugly mood.


If it hadn?t been for that wretched attack of ?flu
in the winter, he might have gone to Malay too,
and seen the roads with the gaily-dressed natives,
and the elephants, and the rajahs. And the tin
mines, and the smuggling; and the brigands!
Instead of all this, a woman to teach you instead
of school with other chaps, because an idiot of a
doctor had said you must live in the hills, and
spend most of your time in the open air ! It was
maddening !
Chubby made a desperate effort, and growled in
a voice that sounded to her like a trumpet with a
cold in its throat : ?Would you like to come
down to the creek, Phil ??
He gave her a scowl. She wasn?t pretty, or
affected : perhaps she would be all right ? So she
showed him the tree where the mopoke came on
moonlight nights, and her delight knew no bounds
when she found that he had read Treasure Island
till he knew it by heart, and could repeat :
?Fifteen men on a dead man?s chest,? in a manner
that was bloodcurdling. She showed him Bush-
ranger Rock ; it stood out like a landmark, and
Pip assured her that, in his opinion, bushranging
must have been jolly interesting, almost as good
as smuggling.
He made her flesh creep with uncanny stories,


acting them with his hands ; and they were soon
exchanging confidences. He rather liked arithmetic
and algebra, she discovered : there were ways of
tumbling figures together that made sums quite
easy, he informed her loftily. You must know all
about multiplication and addition if you wanted
to make money ; and, if you meant to travel, you
had to have cash, unless you went as a stowaway !
He had thought of doing that on his dad?s boat;
it would have been no end of fun.
He grew increasingly gracious as he saw that he
was impressing Chubby Drummond; and so
started the friendship that made Mount Pleasant
a glorified loft where, any day, there might be a
new and thrilling drama staged. The Upper Road
wasn?t an ordinary track to Phil Penrose : it was
a highway along which, any moment, Robin Hood
and his Merry Men might come riding with mellow
horns to wake the echoes, and lusty songs.
There was never monotony where Pip was
concerned : more than once already, Mollie Seton
had all but regretted her guardianship, shared, as
it was, with an irresponsible artist who came for
an occasional week-end to Silver Creek, and spent
most of his time wandering about the hills, sketch-
ing. He consoled her with a casual: ?Why worry,
dear lady ? Pip is born to be hanged, and if we


resign ourselves to that from the start, it will save
grey hairs. Make up your mind that he will either
set The Lodge on fire, or let the horses out of the
livery stables in the village, and then you may be
agreeably surprised. His father was just such
another, and he has turned into a fairly respectable
member of society. A wanderer, I grant; but
what can be more delightful than wander-
ing ??
That, seemed to end the matter. He gave Phil
liberal pocket-money, assured him that he hoped
for the best while fearing the worst ; and went
back to his city studio.
Two days after Mollie Seton brought him over
to Mount Pleasant to make friends with Chubby,
he disappeared for a whole day and night. They
scoured the countryside, and eventually, found him
fast asleep in the old hop-mill, towards dawn of a
windy morning. Chubby took him roundly to
task, and, in the end, marched a shamefaced
culprit into Mrs. Seton?s presence.
?He did not mean to worry you,? she explained ;
?he says he always walks off his bad tempers.
He climbed into the mill, and was so tired that he
went to sleep. He won?t do it again.?
Mollie looked sceptical, but for a few days, Pip
was all that could be desired, in spite of sunshine


that flooded the track and mountain, and made
both children long to throw lessons to the four
winds.
Chubby wrote ecstatically to Ted Blair. The
letter was full of her new companion.
He tells the scrummiest tales, Dr. Ted, and he's
going to be a detective or else an explorer, he hasn?t
quite made up his mind which. He didn?t like being
taught with a girl at first, because he says they're
usually worrying about getting shoes muddy, or
tearing stockings. I told him there were always
holes in mine, and he said he had noticed it the first
time he saw me, and that, if I inked my feet, they
wouldn't show so badly.
I simply adore Mrs. Seton: her hair is long
enough to sit on, and her mouth goes into the dearest
ripples when she smiles. Tou'd never think she was
a 8.A., but she's disappointed if you don't learn your
lessons.
I heard Aunt Anne tell mother that it was a good
thing her husband didn't come back from the war.
Perhaps it's just as well that she's a widdow. (/
can't remember whether there ought to be two d's
in widdow f)
Loads of love, from
Chubs.


P.S. T he last fairy story I wrote , the witch turned
into a godmother , it was so thrilling. And dad
scarcely coughs at night, now. We are going in to
post this , and I?ll throw a kiss to the white house
gate because your name will soon be there !
P.S. 2nd. 1 talk lots about you to Mrs. Mollie:
she seems to like me to.
Blair?s reply was prompt.
It sounds all right , old dear : and 1 quite agree
that it is as well that Mollie Seton is a ?widow? ?
you were too generous with the d?s, there! Her
husband was a rotter , but the war gave him his chance
to make good. I was with him when he ?went west ?
and I think he was sorry he had given her so much
worry. You see , Chubs , she was very young when
she married him, and we make lots of mistakes when
we are young.
She has ripping hair , hasn?t she ? But I didn?t
know it was long enough to sit on !
So the witch turned into the fairy godmother?
Pve a notion that she may do that very thing ?in
real life. Chin-chin .. . Ginger.
Tours always ,
Ped Blair
You might tell M. S. that Pm looking forward


to blowing in sometimes , when I come up. I rather
like your Pip. I remember that hop-mill; in the
good old days many a load of hops was stored there.
Perhaps there?s enough of the scent of them hanging
round to account for the young beggar going to
sleep ! P. B.


CHAPTER VIII
CRAZY KATE
The days grew longer and hotter : there were
striped blinds on the verandas, and, when the
sunshine slanted through the sycamores, the under
part of the leaves looked as though they had been
gold-dusted.
There were fat, red strawberries now, lying on
the clean straw that the gardener put between the
rows : they tasted ever so much better than the
ones in shops, because you could pick them for
yourself.
Chubby informed Dr. Blair that Aunt Anne was
a brick, and that she was getting quite friendly ;
hobbling stiffly out on her sticks when the family
gathered on the lawn. The nights were wonderful,
with the stars shining like lamps.
Pip made his way over quite often, and they were
great pals. Kittie was growing plump, and daddy
said she was like the sweetheart he had courted
years ago. He did some of the fallowing himself,
and it was fun to watch the birds squabbling over
the fat worms that turned up.


The letters invariably ended with a wistful
?Aren?t you coming, soon ??
Phil?s freckles were more pronounced as the
spring deepened. Mollie Seton smiled every time
she looked at him, Chubby fancied. Perhaps the
frail little mother who had died of consumption
when he was a baby might have found beauty in
his odd face : no one else could possibly have done
so. She had always had a warm corner for him
when, after missing him for an hour after the
receipt of his father?s first letter, she had discovered
him in the summer-house, sobbing his heart out.
At first, he was fiercely angry at being discovered,
but was soon won by her frank sympathy, and
interest in the traveller : he even showed her one
part of the treasured communication, and gloomed
while he watched her face. There were still times
when Pip was desperately father-sick.
Chubby was certain that there were days when
Mount Difficult frowned angrily. The rocks stood
out as though they were going to hurl themselves
down, and a great deal of the timber was dead.
In the evening light, the bare branches seemed to
be threatening arms ; and the tall trunks made
barred lines for the moon to climb through.
There were few settlers on the mount; but, on
one ledge, half-way up, Crazy Kate had built her


humpy. Nothing matched: one window was
higher than the other, and the chimney?a mixture
of wood and bark, with a tin funnel at the top ?
leaned drunkenly to the right. It had a desolate
look, for Kate hated flowers as she hated trees. She
said they were always mocking her ; and when
Chubby heard her story, she did not wonder at
that.
Kate?s husband had been killed while felling
timber : he was so crushed out of resemblance
to the strong man everybody had respected, that
the visiting doctor had taken his broken body to a
neighbour?s place in the village. It was spring,
and the hills were red with heath : there were
daffodils nodding and laughing in the borders of
Kate?s garden, the daffodils they had planted
together. And when, as mercifully as they could,
they told her that Bill would never plant bulbs
with her again, something had snapped in her brain.
She had left the little home on the banks of the
creek, and gone off to Mount Difficult; away from
everybody. The villagers saw to it that she was
provided with food and clothes, and, for the rest,
they left her to watch for her man. He had always
come back that way, she told them ; and winter,
and spring, and summer and autumn, after her
simple tasks were done, she would sit in her door-


way, listening for the steps that had always brought
her happiness.
She had a few fowls and bees, and sometimes she
rode down into the village on an old, grey mare,
disposing of her produce, and buying groceries and
meat. There was always someone to give her a
meal, and listen to her rambling talk before she
went back to her hut and her dogs. She had a
cow, and she grew vegetables, carrying water for
these from a spring that bubbled out of the moun-
tainside, and made a green patch about a hundred
yards from her door. The villagers insisted that
God had put it there on purpose for the poor,
crazed soul; for it was the only one on Mount
Difficult.
Chubby was smitten with the desire to visit
Kate, and take her some cookies ; but Pip was
listless until she informed him that Wigsie had
said that the mad woman knew where you could
find gold on the hillside.
?Who said ?? he asked contemptuously.
?Wigsie. You?re not listening, Pip, and it?s rude
to look away like that when you?re being told
something.?
Phil whistled : Chubs could hit the roof on
occasion, and thereby earn his respect. He had
never liked your meek sort!


?Where is the gold ?? he went on, unbelievingly.
?In an old shaft about a mile from her hut.
You can get down quite easily.?
?How do you know ??
Chubby looked mysterious. ?I saw it myself,
so you need not look so superior. I haven?t told
another soul!?
?Just as well you didn?t, you?d have had half
Silver Creek setting out. You should hear my
father talk about ?rushers? ?he has been in the
West, and seen them. If you can hold your tongue
a bit longer, we?ll see what we can do. We might
strike it rich, and then I?d go straight off
to Malay and give dad a surprise. What?s the
matter ??
Chubby looked miserable : for an instant, she
wished that she had kept the wonderful secret
to herself. If they found any gold, Pip would
go away ! She might have known that that would
be his first thought.
?There may not be any there ; most likely the
Silver Creek people would have known all about
it if there had been. Anyway, it would be pretty
hard to get it out, wouldn?t it ??
?What?s the shaft like ? is there a ladder ??
?I don?t know, Pip.?
?You?re a fine one, Chubs, from the way you


talked, I thought you knew all about it. Is it
covered in ??
?No; it?s open.?
?Deep ??
?Right down to the middle of the earth,?
breathed Chubby with unction.
?I expect so ! Can you see the bottom ??
?Ye-es !? she admitted honestly, but unwillingly.
?Something like a quarry : I?ve seen hundreds
like that in West Australia. We?ll see what
we can do : if you?re scared, you can go
home.?
?I won?t be scared.?
?All right; see that you don?t, because I?ll
know all about it before we?re much older. You?re
only a girl, of course, and all girls are easily
frightened.?
?They?re not ! I?m game to do anything you
do, Phil Penrose.?
?That?s right?get your hair off ! If you lost it
properly, the next lot might come in brown ?
?I?m not worrying about that?it?s not such a
dreadful colour ?
?Depends on your taste,? grinned Pip, ?some
red hair is pretty. But yours is just scarlet :
almost as bright as the paint they put on pillar-
boxes !?


?And your freckles are the biggest I?ve ever seen!?
flared Chubby Drummond.
Pip chuckled. There was some fun in poking
old Ginger up : you could make sparks fly.
Suddenly, she sobered.
?Pip ?would you really go to Malay if you had
the money ??
?Wouldn?t I ? You try me, that?s all. But,
if we found a lot of gold, you could come too,
stupid! I might let you have a ride on an
elephant.?
?I?d sooner have a nice horse. I believe you?d
be sea-sick on an elephant. Unless it?s a camel
I?m thinking of ??
He laughed condescendingly. ?You do mix
things up gloriously, Chubs, of course it?s a camel:
I?ve seen thousands of them in the West. They
scream like fifty factory whistles, and when they
get angry, they eat their drivers. . . .?
He lowered his voice to a hissing whisper, and
Chubby shivered : when Pip was in a mood like
this, he was thrilling. There were times when
she was certain that he was making up the stories
as he went along, but they weren?t any the less
interesting because of that. She was glad he had
thought of taking her to Malay, though she could
not leave The Sycomores, and Dad, and Kittie,


Crazy Kate
and even Aunt Jane. With Phil, every road led
to Malaya, and the adored father; he seldom
talked about him, but, when he did, his voice grew
gruff and choky. Chubby had quickly learned that
she must listen without comment.


CHAPTER IX
BUSHRANGERS
The Adventure ?they always called it that ?was
undertaken on a still night when the fairies were
dancing beneath the white gum trees. Chubby
loved the silky boughs from which they dropped,
one by one ?green elves, and tiny, quaint brownies.
Pip grinned in his superior fashion when she told
him about them : in most things she was more like
a boy than a girl, and she never let a fellow down.
If she liked to believe in fairies, it did not bother
him !
For days, Mollie Seton had been certain that
there was something in the wind. More than once
she saw them climb the hill to Bushranger Rock ;
they had greedily absorbed all she had to tell them
about it, and the early days when the forest was
dense, and clearings far apart. Chubby loved to
hear about the pioneers who had worked doggedly
on, felling great trees and grubbing out roots.
When sickness came, Mollie said, there was no
doctor or nurse, and sometimes graves had to be


dug in the bush, and left for the wild flowers to
cover them.
There were many stories in connection with
Bushranger Rock : at one time it had given shelter
to ruffians who watched for travellers, and robbed
and sometimes injured them.
Pip was inclined to be critical about this ; he
accepted little on trust. You must give him
chapter and verse, and he liked his own thrillers
best.
When the cheque came from Malaya that made
the excursion possible, he went into the village, and
returned with a bulky parcel, about which he main-
tained a mysterious silence. He presented Mollie
Seton wdth a box of sweets that was the best Silver
Creek could boast ; and a few minutes later she
saw him making his way up to the Rock, carrying
the big package with him.
She told herself that, in all probability, the
youngsters were going to act out some of the wild
doings that were attributed to the locality : it took
such a little to set their imagination working. A
blanket, and a few feathers from the fowl-yard,
and some crayons, would transform Pip into a
realistic Red Indian, and Chubby would plait her
abundant hair so tightly that it would bring tears
to her eyes, and sit in the door of an improvised


tent, listening unmoved ?Indians were always
stolid ; even the squaws ?to bloodcurdling yells,
and the brandishing of a tomahawk !
Phil knew how to scalp, he assured her : you
gathered the hair into a knot with one hand, and
then ... of course you never scalped your own
squaw : you just went for Pale-Faces !
They had been devouring Fenimore Cooper for
weeks, Mollie remembered. . . .
The eventful night was still and cloudless ; it
followed a day of brilliant sunshine, when the
crickets were shrilling down by the weir, and a heat-
haze shimmered between the valley and the
mountains.
Drummond and his wife had gone to the city on
business connected with The Laburnums ; they
were to be absent for a couple of days, and Chubby
saw the train disappear with an odd tightness at
her throat. She had sent fervent messages to
Ron, whose school reports were making them all
proud of him ; and she did not do her lessons well
that day. Mollie knew that it was unreasonable
to expect anything else, and she let the children go
an hour before the usual time.
Pip had the absorbed expression that was cus-
tomary when he was planning some adventure ;
Mollie wondered what world they would wander


in, and whether they were to be yelling Indians
for the rest of the afternoon, or pirates, setting out
for wild doings on a raft they had constructed and
moored in a bend where Silver Creek was at its
widest and shallowest. She wished them good
luck, and left it at that.
After they had cruised about rather aimlessly
for a little while, Phil propounded his scheme. At
first, though it filled Chubby with longing, she
shook her head. It did not seem right to do any-
thing like that while daddy and Kittie were away !
Pip shrugged his shoulders. What could possibly
go wrong with a couple of hours up at Bushranger
Rock in broad moonlight ? For days, he had been
storing provisions in the cave behind the boulder,
he assured her : biscuits, and bags of sugar, and
tea. All she had to do was to get some milk from
Wigsie?a ginger-beer bottle would be the best to
to carry it in?and they could boil the billy he had
hidden there, and have no end of a time.
Afterwards, they would piny at bushrangers ;
she could be the traveller, surprised and
captured?only, she must not scream too loud,
in case anyone was passing on Lower
Road !
In the end, they decided that he should come to
the orchard gate after tea, and give his famous


mopoke call. They would be home by supper-
time.
They parted at the bridge, and Chubby trudged
on through still heat. The blinds in Miss Manners
room were closely drawn ; that meant that she
had one of her bad headaches. To-morrow she
would come out with a face as white as paper, and
deep lines beneath her eyes.
Wigsie was mournful. ?You be quiet, missie,?
she admonished. ?Dear knows what will happen
to the missus if she is disturbed, and her laying
there with a face as white as the piller !?
It was dark and cool in the big house ; the grand-
father clock was ten times louder than usual,
Chubby was certain. She had tea with Wigsie in
the kitchen to save bother, and helped with the
washing-up afterwards. Then she begged the
bottle of milk, which was given to her graciously,
with a melancholy :
?Dear knows there?s plenty going to waste.
With all her money, the pore soul can?t buy health,
more?s the pity ; though I will say she seems more
contented-like since your dad come to look after
things.?
Chubby put the china away, and was careful not
to let anything drop. She wrote a note in her best
hand.


Dear Aunt Anne ,
Just in case you should wonder where we were ,
Pip and I have gone to he bushrangers up at Bush-
ranger Rock. Don?t be fritened if we?re a bit late.
Chubby.
P.S. ? l?m sorry your head is aching. Love from
Chubs.
Wiggins had taken herself off to her room, and
there were lessons to do. The story on Camping
Out had more than a touch of realism.
Her fingers were shaking with excitement when
she slipped up the hall, and put the note on the
rug-box outside Aunt Anne?s quiet room.
She went into the garden and waited. Pip could
imitate bird-calls in a perfectly wonderful way, and
when she heard three mournful cries of ?Mo-poke?
she buckled on the leggings her aunt had given her
as a protection against snakes.
Punch followed her through the orchard. It was
moonlight?and the grass was as green as though
it were day.
She gave the answering call?a gurgle so like a
magpie?s that Garry, who always insisted that his
ugly duckling would have a voice some day, would
have chuckled if he had been listening. To be
sure, her tongue felt too big for her mouth, and the


performance sounded wobbley to her. Presently,
she heard a complaining ?What a time you?ve been,
Chubs. I thought you had funked it at the
last.?
?I came as soon as you called, Pip !?
?It seemed ages, anyway. Got the milk ?
Good !?
Chubby said the moonlight got into your blood,
and made you feel as though all sorts of wonderful
things might happen, any minute ! In the dis-
tance, the creek chattered and laughed ; they
could see it gleam through gaps in the trees. They
turned away from it, and took the foot-track up
the hill. By and by, they would cut into Upper
Road : this wound round the mountain.
The light was so brilliant that, more than once,
Chubby?s heart gave a leap : the twisted sticks
lying across the path were curiously like snakes.
Beneath them, in the village, groups of people
sauntered down for the mail.
?What did you tell Mrs. Mollie ?? Chubby asked
once as she stopped to recover breath. Pip eyed
her loftily.
?What should I tell her, Chubs ? You?d think
I was a baby in arms ! I said I was going for a
walk, of course.?
Chubby plodded on : Phil flourished his staff at


sound of a stealthy rustle in some blackberry
bushes.
?Snake !? he said casually. ?You needn?t be
afraid, Ginger ; I?ll fix any we meet.?
He led the way with the assertion that there had
been a tramp hanging about the hills the last few
days, but he would soon settle him if there were
any trouble. The moonlight cast inky shadows,
and it was so quiet on the mountainside that they
could hear the croaking of frogs from Reedy Pond,
and some tourists laughing on the road below.
Chubby felt as if they were climbing up to the
moon ! She puffed less when they struck into the
gentle gradient of Upper Road, and Pip assured
her that she would have to eat less or take reducing
tablets, unless she wanted to be like old Granny
Meadows who had to have her door widened every
now and then. He suggested going without break-
fast, as a start.
?The worst of it is,? sighed Chubby, genuinely
distressed about her sturdy proportions, ?all the
things I like are fattening ! Cream, and cake ?
?Cut them out !? frowned Phil Penrose.
?I won?t ; I don?t care if I am fat !? returned
Chubby Drummond with spirit. ?Anyway, you?re
much too thin, so you needn?t brag.?
He whistled. Old Chubs was getting wild?she


wasn?t one of your placid kind, thank heaven ; if
she had been, they wouldn?t have got on half so
well. He loved to see her in what he called a red-
hot, flaring temper.
Near an abrupt curve, Bushranger Rock sprang
suddenly out. It commanded a view of mountain
and valley and township, and the inner side was
hollowed. Here, in the wild times that a few of
the oldest residents remembered, the outlaws had
concealed themselves, springing out on their victims
to loot and often to injure. Now that they were
really here, Chubby was sure that some of the
terrifying stories must be true !
Pip laughed at her, and told her of dreadful
happenings ; he showed her a dark stain on the
rock, where, he declared, a man?s brains had been
dashed out. A movement in the scrub made them
start, and Punch growled, deep down in his throat.
Presently, in the distance, they heard a sharp,
staccato bark.
?Fox!? whispered Phil in rather a relieved
fashion ?for a moment he had been wondering
whether it was the tramp. ?Pity I didn?t bring
my pea-rifle, it might have come in handy. Any-
way, there are no wolves in this bush. Get some
chips, Ginger, and we?ll make a fire ; it?s cold up
here.?


The summer warmth had gone suddenly, as it
so often does in the hill-country at night. Chubby
collected kindling, and they soon had a cheerful
blaze in the rough hearth that was built of small
rocks. It might have been the identical one the
outlaws had used years and years ago, for it w r as in
a sheltered position, and Pip was certain the smoke
could not be seen from the village.
He enjoyed himself vastly, swaggering about and
giving lordly directions ; showing Chubby how
the bushrangers would crouch, waiting for their
prey.
?We?ll act it out, when we?ve had something to
eat,? he decided. ?You and Punch shall be the
settlers, coming along in one of those old-fashioned
wagons. What have I said that amuses you ??
?You said ?y ou and Punch,? ? gurgled Chubby.
?He?ll have to be the horse,?
?Which was just what I intended. The impor-
tant part is the bushranger?s, of course. I?ve got
a mask that will take some beating. Fish out the
billy, Chubs?what is up ??
?We forgot to bring the water, Pip !?
?Oh, did we ? I carried it up this afternoon,
and got some pork sausage from the township, too.
I didn?t remember bread, Chubs?we?ll have to eat
biscuits with it, and they?ve gone limp !?


Chubby suggested propping them on twigs and
toasting them; she felt ever so much happier
since they had built the fire ; it wasn?t nearly so
eerie.
They decided that the toasted biscuits were great,
though they could not make them very brown,
and the twigs they used as forks had a trick of
catching fire. The pork sausage was dreadfully
tough, but the billy-tea was the best of its kind.
Pip had invested in a number of depressed jam
tarts, and a slab of fruit-cake. They finished off
with apples, and then staged their scene.
It was a pity there was no audience, Chubby
reflected ; it didn?t require much stretch of imagi-
nation to picture herself coming along in the rough
wagon ; a trifle anxious, because everybody knew
the bushrangers were somewhere in the hills.
Punch made rather an indifferent horse ; he would
persist in turning and licking her hand, and yawn-
ing as though he were growing sleepy. The
moonlight cast the strangest shadows on the
track. . . .
She came on sturdily, her hand on the dog?s
collar. In the end, when Pip dashed out, he pre-
sented such a terrible sight with his long mous-
tache and beard, and the rolling eyes that gleamed
through the holes in the mask, that she shrieked


Bushrangers \ \
most realistically; and the Airedale growled, and
then barked furiously.
??Hands up !? cried Phil Penrose. ?Oh, good
life, Chubs, that?s not the way to do it; you?ll have
to go back and try again !?
They went through the same performance several
times, but Chubby began to yawn so disgracefully
that Pip was disgusted.
I knew that you?d spoil it by getting sleepy, or
some nonsense like that,? he grumbled. ?Of course,
if you can?t really keep awake, you can?t, I sup-
pose !?
He set about collecting gum boughs and making
a bed : girls had to be looked after, naturally ; his
dad had always told him that. The trouble was
that he so often forgot that old Chubs was a girl!
?There you are,? he said at length. ?I?ll do
sentry-go while you have a snooze. Your hair will
be a sight for sore eyes?don?t you ever brush it,
or anything like that ??
She sighed heavily. ?You might let me forget
my hair, Pip ; I don?t like it any more than you
do, but I didn?t choose it for myself.?
He looked at it quizzically. ?It doesn?t look
nearly so red in the moonlight; I expect you?ll
dye it when you get a bit older ! You could make
it a lot tidier if you brushed it, I?m sure ; and you


ought to cut junks out of it ?it?s far too thick.
I?ll do it for you, if you like, only you?ll need extra-
sharp scissors.?
?I don?t like ; and I do brush it, every night :
twenty times.?
?You ought to do it a hundred times, only you?d
never keep awake. Come to think of it, it does
look a bit glossier than it used to.?
Chubby?s lips trembled. ?If I had been able to
pick my own hair, I?d have it coal-black, and I d
have parted it in the middle.?
?And a pretty sight you?d have looked with a
centre parting and that big forehead.?
?You needn?t remind me of that, Phil Penrose ;
I hate my forehead.?
?Why ? If you want brains you must put up
with being plain-looking.?
?I don?t see why !?
?Girls don?t know much, anyway. Go to sleep,
and I?ll wake you when it?s time to go back.
?Won?t you be nervous, Pip ?? asked Chubby
drowsily.
?I like that ?much good you are ! I wouldn t
be nervous in a jungle ; I wish dad had taken me
with him. If I ever go over, I?ll send you a tiger skin.
?Do they have tigers in Malay ?? sighed Chubby,
half-asleep.


?Bet your sweet life they do, and lions. At
least, I may be mixing it up with Africa. Anyway,
there are elephants, and great snakes that climb
trees ; and they coil round you, and c-r-rush the
life out of you . . . and the orchids grow up in a
night and hide your bones, and nobody knows
what has become of you till a hunter makes his way
through the tangled undergrowth and finds a gug-
gug-gug-ghastly skeleton. ...?
He chanted this dramatically ; but Chubby?s lids
were too heavy to keep apart any longer.
?I don?t care if they do,? she yawned, burrowing
into her bed of gum leaves.
Pip strode to and fro, and in fancy, his staff was
a rifle. He almost wished the tramp would come ;
it would be so thrilling to talk about, afterwards.
Nobody could call Ginger a Sleeping Beauty,
though her hair did look quite decent with the
moonlight turning it to soft fire ! She was a good
sort, all right ; almost as nice as a boy; better in
some ways, because he could order her round. He
would let her sleep for awhile, and then they must
make tracks ; it would have been no end of fun
staying out all night, but grown-ups made such a
fuss about that sort of thing. They forgot they
had been young, once. . . .
Punch paced beside him, still distrustful of the


beard. Presently, he made his way to Chubby,
and, putting his head between his paws, dreamed
of the wire-haired terrier near the village, and the
big St. Bernard whose bark was so loud and deep.
The night was growing cold ; Pip reflected that
it wouldn?t hurt if he gave himself a spell by the
fire : even sentries didn?t pace up and down all
the time, he supposed.
He threw on some logs and gum leaves ; they
made the loveliest smell as they caught and flared.
The smoke curled up till it seemed to reach the
moon ; there was something odd about that moon
?he was sure it was grinning at him, and it was
lop-sided, too 5 it looked, for all the world, like a
face with mumps. As he watched, the smile grew
broader, and broader. . . .
He wondered what sentries did to keep their
eyes open when they were so desperately sleepy ?
Then, before he knew it, the moonlight shone over
a slumbering camp ; far beneath, the residents
were going to bed, and there were only a few
stragglers on the roads.
Chubby wandered in Dreamland. While the
smoke curled up and lost itself in leaping flames,
and the logs fell into flaky coals, she and Pip were
making a track through a jungle. They had to
hack their way with a tomahawk, and sometimes


Bushrangers
their feet slipped on swampy ground. But it was
tremendous fun. They chopped bits from the
trunks of giant trees, starting back when a twisted
bough turned into a great snake that puffed and
hissed. There were marvellous flowers that looked
like faces ; they grew everywhere ; on the logs, and
over huge leaves.
Once, they came upon a pile of bones, and a grey
skull grinned up at them. She remembered Pip?s
story, and shut her eyes ; but he swaggered on and
called to her to come, laughing at her for being
such a baby. And a yellow moon came very near
?its face kept swelling and swelling till, all at once,
it burst, and scattered into thousands of stars.
She ran after some of them, thinking she could
catch them ; and Phil shouted that she must not go
too far, because there were Red Indians on the
farther bank of the sluggish stream. The trouble
was that she could not stop running ; she went on
and on, over a slender, swinging bridge that swayed
under her feet. It made her feel terribly dizzy.
Before she realized it, she was in the midst of the
encampment : there were tents dotted here and
there?wigwams, Pip informed her loftily, when
he joined her. The warriors sat by huge fires,
smoking, while the squaws got the meals ready.
All the time, canoes glided down the river, and


hundreds of Indians got out; they were in their
war-paint, and their faces looked ghastly ; Phil
warned her that it would not do to make them
angry.
The trouble was, Chubby told herself drowsily,
that you could not possibly know how to prevent
that ?it was as bad as getting between a snake and
its hole. Perhaps they did not like Pale-Faces ?
They began to mutter, and did not seem at all
friendly?presently, one of the chiefs came towards
her with a bloodcurdling yell and took her plaits
into his hard, awful hand ! She could not move ;
something had happened to her feet ?it was terri-
fying ! She could only glance up at him entreat-
ingly, and hope that Pip would fly to her rescue.
The Indian gathered her hair into a thick rope ;
she knew what he was going to do . . , never again
would they be able to tease her, and call her
Ginger. , . .
She gave a strangled sob and opened heavy eyes.
The Red Indians had vanished, and the canoes,
and the wigwams. The camp-fire was burning,
though, and someone very tall was bending over
her. She thought dizzily that it must be the tramp,
till she heard a merry ?Wake up, Sleepyhead . . .
I?ve been pulling your hair for the last ten minutes,
at least !?


Bushrangers
She blinked energetically, and rubbed her eyes.
She fancied at first that she was still dreaming, but
it was a lovely dream this time, for Dr. Ted was
grinning down at her !
?Oh !? she cried joyfully, ?I thought it was a
Red Indian Chief trying to scalp me !?
He nodded, amusedly, ?You were making such
an infernal noise, Chubs, that I would not be sur-
prised at anything. You?re a precious pair of
Babes in the Wood, aren?t you ? What next, I
wonder ??
She glanced about her in a bewildered manner ;
everything was getting tangled up ?canoes, and
Indians, and scalping-knives, and Dr. Blair. But
he was beautifully real as he puckered his brows in
the old, familiar fashion.
?Go easy, kid; you?re half-asleep still. I
thought I?d take you by surprise, and I?ve done it,
to some purpose. I suppose this is the gay Pip ??
He indicated the sentry who had fallen asleep at
his post ?still grasping his imaginary rifle. Chubby
looked concerned.
He was doing sentry-go ; he?ll be dreadfully
worried when he knows he went to sleep. He was
on guard.?
?We must certainly save his feelings, then.
Perhaps, if you let out a sufficiently convincing


yell, he might think someone was attacking you,
and spring to the rescue, old dear !?
She carried this out so successfully that Punch
started to bark in a deep, baying tone. Ted Blair
shrugged his shoulders. ?Mercy ! If there?s any-
one awake in Silver Creek, they?ll think you are
being murdered !?
Phil roused himself with an effort. ?Coming !?
he muttered. ?Hands up, whoever you are !?
He looked rather a scream, Chubby thought.
His mask had slipped, so that the whites of his
eyes were most alarming. Blair surveyed him
tolerantly.
?I?ll show you a better make-up than that,
Penrose,? he asserted, winning the boy?s heart from
the start by that simple ?Penrose? !
Chubby began a fire of questions, and the doctor
answered patiently: ?One at a time ?you?re a
distant relation of ?Wee McGregor,? all right, Gin-
gin ! I sent my luggage up by the evening train,
and came to Silver Creek on my bike ; got to The
Sycomores to find you missing just about a quarter
of an hour after Miss Manners had read your
note.?
?Was Aunt Anne very cross ??
?She wasn?t exactly pleased, but I don?t think
it?s a hanging matter ; it was better to own up.


She had had a good sleep, and her head was better,
so that?s that. I rang up Mollie Seton, and Master
Phil will sleep at The Sycomores to-night. My,
but this air is good ! I?ll tell you all the news
to-morrow. George Reid is settling down?able
to consume a reasonable amount of nourishment.
I called round this afternoon to inquire after his
health, and found him sitting up and taking
notice.?
?Have you come to stay, Dr. Ted ??
?Sure ! Those who want the city can keep it.
We?re going to have a picnic to-morrow ?Echo
Tunnel, most likely. Been there, yet ? No ?
Good ! I think Mrs. Mollie might come if we asked
her nicely ! Now, quick march. Wiggins is wait-
ing up for the prodigals ; she was certain some-
thing dreadful had happened, and was prophesying
all sorts of dismal things when I left, though she
promised coffee when we got back. On the whole,
you?re being let off with a light sentence. Killed
any snakes yet ??
Chubby nodded. ?One and a half. At least,
one was dead before I thumped it, and the
other ?
Phil was recovering himself, and explained, ?I
had only just gone to sleep when you came,
sir ?


Blair grinned. The boy was an odd specimen,
with his freckles and his mournful eyes. Too thin
?and inclined to stoop ; jerks would correct that.
Chubby yawned incessantly as they went down
through the bright moonlight.
?Is it very late ?? she asked penitently.
?Close on twelve ; good thing I arrived when I
did, or Aunt Anne would have had a search-party
out.?
They stole quietly into The Sycomores ; but
Chubby had the fancy that Aunt Anne heard them.
The light was burning in her room ; and it went
out as soon as they trod softly along the hall.
Wiggins was tired, and inclined to be fractious.
Dr. Blair poured out coffee, and after they had had
supper it was a matter of ?lights out.? The appie-
green room had never looked so nice. Chubby
tumbled into bed before she remembered that she
had not brushed her hair ; she resolved to do some
extra strokes in the morning. Pip was really
unfair, sometimes ; and his own thatch needed
attention. Still, it wasn?t red?and he was only
a boy.


CHAPTER X
pip?s throat feels queer
Echo Tunnel was part of the water-scheme by
which Melbourne was supplied. You could send
your voice ringing under the arch that roofed a
dark glitter, and it would come back in the eeriest
manner : it seemed to Chubby that there must be
goblins there !
They had a wonderful day. First of all, they
followed the race to the concrete tank where the
water churned and bubbled as if someone had lit
a fire beneath it ; from this it was sucked into a
huge pipe that carried it under the hill to another
tank from which it ran on between its channel
walls, and the pines that went straight and dark,
and smelled so nice. Phil was gloomily interested,
and assured Dr. Blair that he was going to do
engineering work when he grew up : something
that would count.
Chubby noticed that the doctor was very gentle
with Pip, and she wondered why. Perhaps he was
thinking of the consumptive mother ? Mollie


Seton was certain to have told him about her, and
he always hated to hear people coughing.
They boiled their billy where a baby creek
chattered over a stony bed; there were puffy
scones with a thin, brown skin, and piles of sausage-
rolls, with loads of goodies from Mount Pleasant.
Wiggins had put in cold chicken with sage-and-
onion stuffing and some pinky ham; Chubby
sighed with sheer satisfaction.
Afterwards, Dr. Blair lit his pipe and smoked
contentedly. Phil grew restless, and set out in
search of adventure, commandeering Chubby in a
lordly fashion that made Mollie Seton smile.
?Those two are good for each other,? she re-
flected. ?Notice the difference in her hair ? Pip
told her it would grow darker if she brushed it
enough.?
The doctor grinned thoughtfully. ?Jove, but
this is good, Mollie ! I hope I won?t get lazy here
with so little to do. I shall walk to most of my
patients; that ought to keep superfluous flesh
down ??
He advanced this seriously, and she laughed :
he was such a long, lean chap that there didn t
seem to be any danger of superfluous flesh. In
any case, she assured him that there would be
plenty to do ; last year, Silver Creek had had a


bad outbreak of diphtheria and scarlet fever ; he
must stir the Borough Council up about drains.
His face sobered, and he put rapid questions,
passing on to Phil Penrose?s family history. She
told him, and he frowned. ?I must get him on to
physical jerks ; teach them outside as much as
possible. Good ! Chubs is the best possible com-
panion for him ; she?ll mother, but she?ll brace ;
and she doesn?t fuss. I won?t forget that business
last night?her first anxiety was that his feelings
must be saved because he had gone to sleep on
sentry-go. Wonder what they?ll be up to next ??
He was watching Mollie Seton, wondering how
soon it would be possible to tell her that she had
been dreaming long enough ; that it was sheer waste
of time to go through life mourning a man who had
never been worthy of her. Seton?s death had
saved him from disgrace, and that was all you
could say for it.
He spoke of his plans, and the prospect of estab-
lishing a hospital; if Miss Manners could carry
through a scheme she was interesting herself in,
there would be an up-to-date place with a well-
equipped theatre.
Mollie listened. ?She?ll carry it through ; I like
Anne Manners.?
?So do I. It looks as if Chubs has got below


the crust. Wiggins said in that doleful way of hers
last night, ?So sure as the missus gits interested in
any thing, it is took away from her.? Here
they come !?
The children were returning. Phil slouched along
as if he hadn?t an interest in the world.
?Pose !? laughed Mollie Seton ; ?he likes you to
think he is bored stiff with everything, whereas, in
reality, he doesn?t waste a minute.?
Chubby celebrated the picnic by getting down
to what Dr. Blair declared ?an outsize bilious
attack.? She did everything with conviction, and
Pip assured her that she was as green as grass.
She had to fast for two whole days, and, by that
time she was sure that her stomach was ? turning
over and over.?
When she was ready for school again, Phil, who
had not been himself for some hours, developed a
headache and a temperature, with other symp-
toms that made Mrs. Seton pack him off to bed,
and send for the doctor.
Pip was grumpy and inclined to be testy. He
didn?t know what they were making such a fuss
about, he protested ; his throat wasn?t exactly
sore, only queer. If they really wanted to know,
it felt as if someone had rammed it full of cotton-


wool! He just wanted to be let alone to sleep it
off?that wasn?t too much to ask, surely ?
Ted Blair looked at the throat in question : felt
the rapid pulse, and read the thermometer. The
boy watched him with glassy eyes, and wished he
would go away when ?a fellow wanted to sleep !?
There was more to do, it seemed. A hypodermic
was charged, and jabbed into his thigh. He had
the feeling that he was floating in the air, and yet
he was as heavy as lead ; and he was aching all
over, too. Somebody had lit a fire in him ; he
couldn?t understand that, because he was shiver-
ing .. . it was stiff luck, because he and Chubs
had arranged to go gold-hunting one day this
week !
When at last he was allowed to lie down, he felt
wide awake : it was too bad ! The doctor and
Mollie Seton went together along the garden path
and stood for a minute talking at the gate. Phil
forgot that he had asked them to leave him alone,
and felt injured. If they knew how ill he was
feeling, they wouldn?t have left him, he felt sure !
In the gateway, Dr. Blair explained : ?I?ve taken
swabs, but there?s no doubt whatever ; the cases
are increasing at Wombat Creek. The worst of it
is that the folk are scared stiff about anti-toxin ;
they have a superstitious terror of what they call


?the needle.? So far as Phil is concerned, you?ve
probably saved a lot of bother with gargling so
promptly, but he?s not robust, and his heart will
need care. It will be the devil and all to keep
Chubby away ; I?ll have to frighten the soul-case
out of her. I?ll send a mixture from the village for
you to use for your own throat ?I don?t want you
on my hands ... as a patient,-anyway ! And, if
there?s anything you need, ring?any old hour of
the day or night.?
He went off with a worried face. He must see
Chubs without delay.


CHAPTER XI
TELLING GOD ABOUT PIP
Chubby was scribbling in the loft, and rather for-
lorn. She could not understand why she should
be kept away from The Lodge because Phil had a
headache ; and it was such a glorious day. The
sunshine was like liquid gold on the trees ; her
feet were aching for a run. She gave a joyful cry
when Ted Blair scrambled up the ladder and found
his way to her over the bran-bags.
?Some loft, kid !? he began.
Chubby nodded, sighing heavily. He sat down
beside her, much as he had done that other time
at The Laburnums, The mountains were glorious,
purple and indigo, melting to soft greys and lilacs
in the distance. She searched his face.
?Is Pip very sick ?? she asked with a gulp.
?So-so, Ginger ; he?s got a beastly old throat :
the kind of throat that means bother if it?s not
taken in time.?
She waited, wordlessly. He went on gravely :
?There?s diphtheria about, and it looks as if that
is what is wrong. Good thing those sausage rolls


were too many for you, and kept you from school,
otherwise I?d have to isolate you, and that wouldn?t
have been all the fun in the world. As it is, you
must give me your word of honour that you will
stay away from Phil until I tell you it is safe for
you to see him. I don?t want any risk run with
your dad. Dip. is bad enough for a boy, but it?s
the mischief and all with an adult. Understand ??
Chubby?s colour came and went, and her eyes
widened. People died with diphtheria, some-
times. . . .
?Is Pip going to die ?? she demanded.
?Great Scott, no ! He?s pretty miserable, and
doesn?t want to be disturbed, and you can best
help by keeping away till I say the word. I won?t
make it a day longer than I can help. But that is
absolutely necessary, Chubs ; and you?re too good a
sport to give us any more worry.?
He spoke confidently, and her face brightened.
?Won?t it be risky for Mrs. Mollie ??
?As a matter of fact, it will, but she knows what
to do, and nurses rarely take infection. I?ll keep a
close eye on her.?
Chubby?s face was sober. ?Rita Holland had it
once, and Betty used to slip along the veranda
and call to her through the window. She didn?t
feel nearly so lonely, then.?


Blair frowned. He saw what she was driving at
only too clearly.
?Phil isn?t lonely, you take it from me. He?d be
as cross as a bear with a sore head if he were to be
disturbed, and would growl to some purpose. He?ll
sleep most of the time, and I?ll come over every
day and let you know how he is getting on. The
rest you must trust to Mollie Seton and to me.
Cheerio !?
She saw his cycle disappear in a cloud of dust on
Lower Road. Her heart had a queer achy feeling ;
but it wouldn?t do to have red eyes, because daddy
and Kittie were coming home.
They had only meant to stay a couple of days,
but they had been away over a week, and, though
the wire said, ?Returning to-night?s train,? Chubby
wondered drearily whether there would be another
disappointment.
Wiggins delayed tea, and she watched from the
loft till she saw a coach round the turn of the road.
Aunt Anne was reading on the lawn.
They re coming!? Chubby cried ecstatically.
Her dress was crumpled, but that was nothing new ;
perhaps it was the awkward age, Miss Manners
reflected. There was a suspicious quiver about
her lips?she was probably fretting about that
queer lad Penrose.


?Go to the gate to meet them,? she suggested ;
?but don?t run all the way, Chubby?you tear
yourself to ribbons. I can?t think how it is you
keep your flesh as you do !?
She seldom said Kathleen now?the absurd name
suited the child, somehow! She watched the
sturdy figure till it was out of sight outh and
strength . . . how good it would be to turn back
some of the pages of life, and be able to run down
a hill again ! Far more thrilling than a steadily
accumulating bank account !
She fancied that Chubby had got over that first
shrinking from her. She had an honest soul, and
an affectionate nature, though she hadn?t the
boy?s look or his winning manner. She would
blunder to the end of time.
When the coach stopped in the garden drive,
Anne Manners was reminded of that other arrival;
and yet it was very different. Chubby rushed to her
with an impetuous ?Aunt Anne, couldn t you have
tea with us, just for once ??
She really meant it, and Garry smiled in that
sunny way of his, and told her he would carry in
her special chair, and put it at the head of the
table.
A painful flush stained her withered cheeks, and
her tired heart quickened its beat. Was this what


she had been missing all these years?the affection
of her own kin ?
Chubby was wildly excited; she insisted on
carrying Miss Manners? plate of soup instead of
passing it up the table. Just as she reached the big
chair, it tilted over, spilling some of the contents.
Kittie said reproachfully, ?Oh, Chubs?dear??
but Miss Anne came to the rescue.
?It?s an old carpet, Kathleen, and the child did
her best. I?ve spilled things myself, more than once.?
She did not guess at the passion of gratitude
that swelled Chubby?s heart at the moment, or how
nearly she escaped a boisterous kiss. Perhaps she
would not have objected ? Drummond saw his
red-head check her impulse with difficulty, and was
almost sorry.
There was news in plenty. The Laburnums was
sold, and an army of workmen had taken posses-
sion. The flats were to be two-story, with outside
stairs. George Reid had caught an enormous rat;
and Keith Pollen?s people were going to America
for a trip. He was going to Grammar as a boarder,
and Ronald was looking splendid ; working hard,
and bidding fair to be top of his class. He sent
love to everybody, a special share for Aunt Anne,
Kittie explained. She was wearing a new dress,
and was flushed and pretty.


Keith had sent an immense box of chocolates for
Chubby, and hoped she hadn?t forgotten the old
loft, and the ripping times they had had with Lady
Rosamond.
?I?m not !? choked Chubby. And then : ?Daddy
?Pip is dreadfully ill; he has diphtheria !?
?Stiff luck!? answered Drummond somewhat
anxiously. He was wondering whether his ugly
duckling had been running any risks ? Miss
Manners explained, and he was partly relieved, but
still a bit apprehensive.
When the presents were unpacked, there was a
beautiful edition of Dickens for Chubby, and
Kittie had purchased a length of spun silk that was
almost the colour of the apple-green bedstead.
Enough for two frocks, she explained.
All the time, that dreadful lump would keep
rising in Chubby?s throat; it was such a perfect
night, and Pip would be fretting his heart out ?he
hated being in bed at any time.
They sat outside till it was quite late, and there
was something mysterious about Aunt Anne?s
manner. Once Chubby heard a low ?I hope it will
come to-morrow; these firms are so dilatory ; it
will take the child?s mind off her worry; she
misses the boy, and frets over him. You?re sure
you impressed upon them the necessity of forward-


Telling God About
ing it without delay ? It would have been better
to have brought it with you if we had only been
certain when you were coming ; but, of course,
your movements were uncertain.?
Chubby was sure she would be awake hours and
hours thinking about Pip, but, in the end, she
decided that God knew more than she did, and He
did not go to sleep. This had always puzzled her.
He must get so dreadfully tired, never shutting His
eyes ! And then, there would be so many prayers
to listen to ?it must be confusing ! But He said
you were to ask when you wanted anything.
She knelt much longer than usual beside her bed,
because she kept seeing Pip?s face, and thinking of
that awful throat. Rita Holland?s had almost
closed. . . . Finally, she choked out : ?Please
God, make Pip better soon, and don?t let him be
too lonely without his father !?
It was strange, and she didn?t know why it should
be so, but, so soon as she had told God all about
Phil, she felt better. It was just as if she had been
trudging up a hill carrying something that was too
heavy. And Someone strong and gentle had caught
up to her and had taken her load from her !


CHAPTER Xll
CHUBBY BREAKS HER WORD
Chubby had never quite lost that early impression
of a big yellow ball being flung against the window
when the sun rose ; only it got up so much earlier
these times.
The hours dragged terribly ; no school to look
forward to, and no Mrs. Mollie, and no Pip. When
Dr. Ted rang up after breakfast to say that he was
no worse, Chubby gulped. He must be very ill if
that was all that could be said.
Just before noon, Miss Manners sent her down
to the gate to bring the mail. The lid of the box
was gaping, for there were parcels as well as letters.
Leaning against the post was a big, oddly shaped
package addressed to ?
Miss Chubby Drummond ,
Care of Miss Anne Manners ,
The Sycamores ,
Mount Pleasant ,
Silver Creek.
Her face flamed, and she knelt down and looked


at it as if she could scarcely believe her eyes.
When she lifted it, it was far too heavy to carry, if
she took the other parcels as well. So she toiled
up first with the letters and the rest of the mail;
dumped her load on the kitchen table, and then ran
down the hill to gloat over the queerly shaped
package that was her very own. With dazzling
imagination to keep her company, she started the
return journey.
From a shady corner of the lawn, Miss Manners
saw her coming. Her hat had fallen off and the
thick plaits were uncoiling; that was nothing
unusual. It was the radiance on the face that
stirred old blood. . , .
She panted like a small steam-engine as she
hurried along the garden path. Her eyes were full
of sparkles, and yet they were wistful as her lips
parted to let her eager breath escape.
?I put the mail in the kitchen?? she jerked.
?O-oh?l was nearly over then !?
?Take care, child ; you are always in such a
hurry : you are quite breathless.?
?I?ll get the letters, and the other things, and
then undo it here, may I ??
Drummond, sauntering round the house a few
minutes later, whistled softly. Chubby was on
her knees, undoing knots with trembling fingers.


Even in the midst of tense excitement, she remem-
bered that Aunt Anne did not like string cut!
Beads of perspiration gathered and ran down her
nose, falling on the brown paper.
She was so absorbed in her task that she had not
noticed his coming. There were several coverings
to fold back, but at last she came upon a box that
was the queerest shape she had ever seen. It was
high in one part, and low in another. Her heart
began to pound, and pound. . . .
A baby Underwood typewriter ! There was a
card lying across the keys and it was inscribed :
With love from
Aunt Anne.
She turned in an ecstasy. ?Aunt Anne . . .?
she croaked huskily, ?oh, you darling Aunt
Anne !?
The sounding kiss she bestowed upon the
withered face was salt with perspiration, but Miss
Manners did not bother about that. She patted
the crimson face awkwardly, and said in a matter-
of-fact way : ?We must see what we can do to fit
the loft up for you as a workroom. A steady table
will be the first requirement. Genius always loves
an attic, it seems !?
Chubby wasn?t listening then ; she was crooning


over her precious machine. She had discovered in
the parcel a ream of paper ; it was marked ?Bank,?
and the long cardboard box held an oil-can and
bottle of oil, a brush, and two extra ribbons.
It was the most wonderful fairy-tale come
true !
That afternoon they all set to work in the loft.
Miss Manners hunted out one treasure after another,
and decided that the smaller table in the laundry
was the best for the purpose, because you must
have something solid for a typewriter. The long
drawer underneath would serve for manuscript
and stray papers, and Chubby must learn to keep
things in proper places, and grow tidier. Of
course authors were excused a good deal, she
chuckled; but still, if you caught them young
enough and trained them, it might be possible to
effect a cure ! Chubby wanted to hug her?Aunt
Anne must really think that she would write, some
day ?
The only shadow on the moving-in was the fact
that Pip was out of it all; and, even though he
could be told about it, it would not be the
same.
Wiggins stained the boards with a quick stain
that had been left over from the kitchen floor ; the
bran-bags were piled at the farther end, and Miss


Manners produced a gaily coloured rug. A chair
from the hall was discovered to be the right height
for the table, and a round cushion made it beauti-
fully comfortable. Chubby was too excited to eat
a proper tea, though the cold corn beef was tender,
and there was red beet, which she loved, and
pineapple and cream. She hurried back to her
loft.
Next day her father put up shelves for her
cherished authors : Mary Grant Bruce, Isobel Ann
Shead, and Ethel Turner. Daddy-Long-Legs snug-
gled up to Kingsley?s Water Babies , and Alice-in-
Wonderland. It was rather a shabby collection, to
be sure, but that only made it the dearer.
At last everything was ready ; the floor looked
lovely, though Wigsie said it must be polished
every day to keep it shining ; and the rug was
gorgeous, Garry showed her how to move the
carriage of the typewriter, and put the paper in,
and manipulate the magic keys. Chubby decided
that the first story should be about a fairy god-
mother !
When she was alone, she had the cry that she had
been putting off. It needed Pip to make it perfect.
He would have laughed at her, of course, but she
would not have minded. Just as the sobs were
breaking in earnest, Dr. Ted made his appearance,


striding up the ladder two steps at a time, and
looking at her with his old, comical smile. Pip
couldn?t be dying, or he wouldn?t be so
cheerful, though, of course, doctors never
showed their feelings. If they did, patients
would imagine all sorts of worrying things, he
had told her.
?Getting on famously,? he assured her cheerfully.
?Mustn?t expect impossibilities, you know, Gin-
gin?dip. doesn?t go away in an hour. But the
anti-toxin is getting to work, and driving the poison
out of his blood. Once that is gone, we can begin
to build up his strength.?
Chubby?s eyes asked a great deal that she was
too gulpy to put into words. At length, she
inquired anxiously : ?He hasn?t lost his freckles,
has he, Dr. Ted. It wouldn?t be Pip without his
freckles.?
He took her face in his hands ; her colour was
coming and going a bit too quickly.
?Great Scott, no ! I believe they?re bigger than
ever. You take it from me, Chubs, the young
rascal isn?t going to die to slow music ; he?s not
the sort of patient you read about. He wants to do
everything he shouldn?t do, and it will be the
dickens and all to keep him in order. Feel
better ??


She choked. He thought, as he had often
thought, that life was going to be hard for Ginger,
unless she slowed down and let her head rule her
heart for a change. She was obeying orders, but
even the precious typewriter hadn?t taken the place
of her arrogant little chum !
So the days dragged. Every morning the doctor
whirled over to The Sycomores in a cloud of dust.
At first he was cheery enough ; the throat was
clearing and the fever dropping gradually. This
was always better than a sudden leap down ; less
strain on the heart, he explained. But Chubby,
who was quick to read his face, guessed that he was
keeping something back.
The fact was that, with the disease beaten, Phil
was finding the hill of convalescence a steeper one
to climb than Mount Difficult. He kept slipping
back, in spite of Mollie Seton?s dainty cooking, and
as much care as though he were a prince of the
blood-royal.
?He wants rousing !? his physician said moodily,
as he and Garry Drummond paced the lawn. They
were immediately beneath Chubby?s den ; though
they had forgotten that fact. ?He?s fretting, the
young scamp ; about his father, or Chubs ;he
won?t say what the trouble is. I?ve tried coaxing
and bullying, and neither has any result; he?s as


listless as a lovesick girl. Usually, when a young-
ster rounds the corner, he bucks up ; but you
can?t get him to take interest in anything. I got
him a bloodcurdling Indian story, and he turned
a few pages and put it down. Weak as a kitten,
worse luck ! I wish to heaven his father hadn?t
gone so far away ; seems odd the way folk deposit
their children as if they were parcels ?to be left till
called for.? He?s got his mother?s constitution, I
am afraid.?
Chubby felt her throat tighten. Pip?s mother
had died of consumption !
She was always hearing things she wasn?t meant
to . . . she scraped the leg of her chair so that he
should know that she was in the loft; but the
doctor went on testily : ?That?s the worst of my
job ; you get a patient round from an illness, and he
goes back on you. You can?t put your fingers on
the cause, but he fights against you ! He?s a queer
kid won?t mention Chubby?s name ; just gives a
grunt when he gets her messages. All the same, I
caught him howling his eyes out over one of her
letters. lam afraid he is missing her more than
he will own.?
Chubby sat very still; she had heard enough to
rouse her wildest fears. She forgot the Under-
wood, and the story that was to be written one day


soon ; nothing mattered at that moment but Pip !
If he couldn?t interest himself in Indians, something
had to be done. It meant breaking her word, and
that was a terrible thing to do ; they would never
trust her again. But Pip simply had to get better.


CHAPTER XIII
WHEN THE SUN SET
She reasoned it out to her own satisfaction : Daddie
had Kittie, and Aunt Anne, and Ronald ; but Phil
had no one who really belonged but his father, and
he was in Malay. He must be frightfully unhappy
if he cried ... he wasn?t the crying sort.
The sunset was making the boughs of the gum-
trees creamy-pink, and there was a curious light
everywhere. It was like a transformation-scene in
a pantomime ; the heat was suffocating, and the
air very still. Bad enough when you could move
about and find a cool place, but awful to lie in bed,
so weak that you couldn?t get up without help !
Chubby?s healthy life had held few illnesses ;
she remembered measles, and whooping-cough, and
one attack of influenza when she was light-headed,
and had fancied that she was a giant boot, and that
she must keep on walking, mile after mile. Her
head throbbed as though it would burst, and her
throat had been so sore that it hurt even to swallow
water.
She knew that God could cure Phil, but old Mr.


Cameron, the Presbyterian minister who preached
in the church on the side of the hill, said that
sometimes we had to help to answer our prayers ;
that we must do our part, not because God could
not manage it Himself, but because it was only
fair for us to do our bit !
Chubby knelt beside her chair, and prayed an
odd little prayer. She told the God who knew her
better than anyone else did that she was going to do
a dreadful thing, and break her word of honour ;
that Pip was very ill, and that he needed her.
That she would go right away from The Sycomores
after she had seen him, so that she would not carry
germs to anyone ?here some of Chubby?s out-size
tears fell on her fingers?but that it would not do
to let Pip fret. And she prayed that Dr. Ted might
not be too disappointed in her, because that would
hurt terribly !
She stole down the ladder cautiously. The
house was quiet; Aunt Anne had gone for a drive,
and her father and mother had spoken of walking
into the village for the evening mail. Chubby
trod gingerly into the bathroom and washed her
hands vigorously. Dr. Ted always scrubbed and
scrubbed before he went into a patient?s room, and
she must be careful, even though she was just
going to talk to Pip through the window !


She crept out by a side door, and wished her
heart would not give such hard thumps. She
would have to keep away from them all for weeks
and weeks, most likely ; but you always had to
give up something for people you liked, and Pip?s
father could not come to him.
By the time she reached The Lodge her breath
was coming in quick gasps. It was almost as bad
as breaking into a house ?the house of someone you
were fond of, too ! Mollie Seton would be dread-
fully worried. . . .
For a few minutes Chubby stood still, thinking
deeply, and watching rosy clouds that were floating
away to the east. They were like beautiful feathers
sailing on a sea of palest green.
Now she was passing under one of the big
chestnut trees : they had been doing their lessons
there, lately. The difficulties of the position
suddenly got up and hit her. Suppose Mrs. Mollie
v\as in Phil s room ? Or that Dr. Ted came ! It
was going to be far more difficult than she had
imagined. For a while, her heart failed her : then,
the remembrance of Pip lying still, and rejecting
his Indian book, nerved her on. Whatever happened
she must not turn back.
She wondered rather miserably where they
would send her, and her mind travelled to a long


row of isolation tents she had. once seen in the
grounds of a hospital. She would be away from
everybody she knew: and it would be lonely
while they were waiting to see whether she had got
a germ. . . .
She was near enough now to see Mollie Seton
in the hammock under the cherry trees. Her first
impulse was to run forward and give her an
impulsive hug : it seemed years since the old,
happy days. But it looked as though God were
really helping. ... He had let Mrs. Mollie be
out of the house !
No burglar ever trod more stealthily than
Chubby Drummond, round the path hedged with
hazel-nuts, and on to the back veranda.
The hammock still swung to and fro. It seemed
as if every board had a separate creak ; and her
breath kept catching in the weirdest fashion.
Sometimes it hissed, and sometimes it broke
altogether. All the time she heard accusing voices
that came from the trees and even the ground.
They were saying: ?You have broken your
word . . . Tou . . . Have . . . Broken Tour
Word r


CHAPTER XIV
THE SENTENCE
Phil knew every mark on the wall, by now. There
was really nothing else to do when his eyes were
too weak to read, and every time he tried to lift
his arm, it ached like the mischief. All very well
for them to say he was getting better ?he knew
his own feelings best : doctors might be mighty
clever with anti-toxins and all the rest of it, but
they didn?t know how to put strength into a
fellow.
When evening came, the sunshine poured in
and played round the knot in the third panel of
the three-ply. It turned it into a fierce eye that
glared down at him. He was sick to death of
grown-ups, and was sure there were forty-eight
hours to every day. Nights were even worse. And
Blair was talking about getting up ! It was useless
to protest that he was too weak to move, and that
he wished to goodness they would let him alone :
it was bad enough to be lifted into the chair while
his bed was made. He was certain his temperature
went up each time this was done, though the


doctor said ?Rats !? And his heart raced till it
made him feel wobbley and sick. He had all sorts
of weird sensations, if they only knew it !
Phew . . . but it was stifling ! He kicked the
sheet down languidly, and tried to raise himself
on his pillows. They were burning, or he was
burning.
Half an hour ago, Mollie Seton had given him
a cool drink, and had suggested a sleep while she
had a breath of air in the garden. As if you could
turn that sort of thing on as you turned a tap !
Nothing to do but lie and think, and wish you
were in Malay ! Or that Chubs would make her
appearance!
Phil heaved a prodigious sigh, and then raised
himself on his elbow, listening. Someone was
walking along the veranda ; creaking over two
or three boards, and then stopping for a second
before coming on again. Someone who had no
business there, evidently. Well . . . let them
come !
It wasn?t Mrs. Mollie, and it wasn?t the doctor :
he knew their steps by heart. He must be dreaming,
and precious weak to get so excited at sight of a
head of flaming hair, raised cautiously above the
window-sill. A gruff voice whispered : ?Pip . . ?
don?t be frightened . . . it?s only Chubby!?


The great moment had arrived?she could see
him trying to struggle up from where he was
lying, low down on his pillows. Her heart hammered
and thumped : she had heard Dr. Ted say that
when people were seriously ill, they kept slipping
down in bed ! She was vaguely relieved when Pip
waved a thin hand at her, and croaked in the
queerest way : ?Hello, Chubs?you?ll catch it if
they see you ?you oughtn?t to be here, you know !?
She choked back an uncertain : ?Aren?t you glad
I came, Pip ??
He grinned, such a shadow of a smile. His face
was terribly thin, and his neck had a great hollow
in it. ??Course I am ; I?m sick to death of my
own company, and you get fed up with seeing the
same faces every day. Mrs. Mollie has been awfully
good, you know : I nearly died. Did they tell
you ??
Chubby nodded : somehow the big effort had
fallen flat ! She had pictured Pip overjoyed to
see her, and there he was, scarcely turning his
head: his throat looked as though it would
snap . . . She propped her arms on the window-
sill ; and her eyes were shining.
?Can you see me, Pip ??
He laughed weakly. ?That hair of yours is like
a torch ;it would show in the dark. You?d better


hop away, though, you may come again to-morrow
evening if you want to, Mrs. Mollie always takes
an hour off about this time. How?s Punch ??
?Missing you,? answered Chubby forlornly,
?and so am I : dreadfully.?
?Good business ! When I get better, we?ll
have some stunts.?
Her face beamed : this was more like the old
Phil.
?I?ve lots to tell you, Pip ?Aunt Anne has given
me a typewriter : a baby Underwood. And I have
a table in the loft, and a rug, and Wigsie stained
the floor ; it?s so jolly.?
He scowled. ?I couldn?t get up that ladder
if you were to pay me : you don?t know what it
feels like to be ill!?
?But you?re getting better, Pip; people are
always weak after an illness.?
?Much you know about it : I have to be lifted out
of bed every time it is made. At first they weren?t
able to do even that : Mollie Seton used to turn
me on my side, and changed the sheets that way.
And I pretty well fainted, every time,? he finished
with pride.
Her eyes were wistful. ?0-oh!? she sighed.
?Dr. Ted will have to give you a tonic.?
?Got one now ?beastly stuff, too : isn?t doing


me a scrap of good. Better make tracks, Gin-gin ;
it won?t do for you to be caught.?
?AH right. Get better soon, Pip, there?s a dear.?
She waved to him, and tiptoed along the
veranda, feeling comforted till she remembered
that he had spoken of her coming to-morrow. By
to-morrow, she would be in a tent !
A storm was gathering over Mount Difficult :
the clouds were inky, and thunder muttered. She
wondered where Dr. Blair would send her, and a
surge of home-sickness came over her.
She had taken the Mount Pleasant track when
she remembered that she must go to the village and
give herself up ! She could not even say good-bye
to them all!
She hoped she would meet no one she knew on
the way : it was a bit like the lepers in the Bible
who had cried ?Unclean?unclean !? as they went.
The creek didn?t look silvery to-night ; it was
dark and homed, but then, nothing was the same?
it couldn?t be. She went on doggedly, choking back
a sob when she reached the gate with the brass
plate.
There were no patients waiting, and the house
was in darkness : she heard the clock in the hall
strike. They would soon be missing her, and
wondering where she was. She did heaps of naughty


things, but this was the first time she had broken
her word !
She sat down on the steps ?Dr. Ted must have
been delayed at a case : he did not know that a
miserable little girl was waiting for him, or he
would have hurried.
The storm broke with a crash : a few rain-drops
spattered down, and then the deluge was upon
them. Sheet-lightning played over the village :
one minute you could see houses and people, and
then there was inky-blackness.
The gate clicked at length, and Chubby started,
nervously : her heart took a wild leap into her
throat.
The doctor took the hill quickly: when he
reached the house, he switched on lights in surgery
and waiting-room, and stood looking down at
Chubby quizzically. There was something wrong ?
she wasn?t herself at all. He took her chin in his
hands : strong, gentle hands ?and his eyes asked
questions. She tried to speak, but no words would
come.
?Feeling sick, Ginger ?? he asked anxiously.
It seemed strange that he should say that : for
an instant she wondered whether she had caught
diphtheria ?she wasn?t a scrap afraid, and of course
she deserved it. She shook her head. He drew her


down to the step again, 'and sat beside her.
?What?s the trouble, Chubs ??
She bit her lip, and then gasped ; ?Dr. Ted
I?ve been to see Pip !?
He whistled, and she put her hand on his arm.
?I know?l broke my word. You?ll never trust
me again, that?s what hurts most !?
?Suppose you tell me all about it?this isn?t
like you !?
?I was in the loft when you told dad that Phil
was fretting, and that he was missing me?and
not getting better. I thought if I went on to the
veranda, and called to him through the window
it mightn?t do any harm so long as I came straight
to you, afterwards ? I didn?t go near The Syco-
mores, and you may send me away. I?m sorry I
broke my word, but not sorry I went ?you couldn?t
be when you saw Pip. . .
The last words broke in earnest. Blair drew his
brows together, considering. She did not dare to
look at him, or she would have seen that his lips
were amused.
?So you?re ready to go into isolation, eh ? That?s
the least you expect ? The worst of it?or the best
�f is that you always tell on yourself, Chubs !
Made up your mind to solitary confinement ??
?Yes.?


It was really over, and he was still his old,
kind self. The world wasn?t going to stop ! He
went on, gravely : ?The court martial finds the
accused guilty on one of the counts, but is inclined
to take a lenient view of the situation owing to
the age of the culprit, and the fact of previous good
conduct. There are other extenuating circumstances
notably the giving of herself up. The sentence . . .
?Yes ?? gasped Chubby. Rain was sweeping the
valley, and the air was sweet. The frogs in Reedy
Pond were having a concert to themselves.
?The sentence,? went on Dr. Blair, ?is that the
accused must not repeat the offence till permission
is given by the medical officer in charge ! She must
keep away from The Lodge for twenty-four
hours. . . .?
?O-oh !? cried Chubby in an ecstasy. There
was no one in the world like Dr. Ted !
?I?ll have a phenyle bath to-night, if you think
I?d better ?? she suggested.
?Good ! Penitence could go no farther ! Don?t
swallow any of it, by the way ; we are not out for
more sensations !?
The look of strain was leaving her face ; and
her eyes were more natural. He went on cheerily :
?We?ll take the rest as read. Don?t go into his
room till I tell you, and don?t stay too long ; the


young rascal is pretty weak. I?ll move his bed
nearer the window : a wise man never takes
risks where throats are concerned.?
?I?ll be careful!?
?Right ! If Mrs. Seton knows you are on duty,
she might be persuaded to take a little walk. Or
a drive, for that matter ?I?ve invested in a car,
Ginger ! Perhaps you can persuade Pip to buck
up ; he?s too lazy to get out of his own shadow.
I?ll ring The Sycomores, and say that you are
with me, and then we?ll make tracks? try out the
new car, eh ? What?s that ? Shall I ever trust you
again ? Sure ! You told, you see !?
Rain was falling steadily as they turned into the
cutting. The doctor talked as he drove. ?In a day
or two, we?ll get Pip into the garden, and then
you?ll be able to relieve Mollie Seton quite a lot;
he?s a handful, believe me. If you can keep him
amused it?s more than we have been able to do.
But don?t go too near him.?
That was all that w'as ever said ; but, when he
paid his visit to his patient next morning, he found
Phil demanding to know why he shouldn?t get up
for an hour that day !
?It?s beastly hot in bed, even with a sheet over
you,? he growled, ?and anyway, I?ll get weak if
I?m coddled too much, sir !?


?Good !? answered Ted Blair promptly. Pip
could not understand the look that flashed between
doctor and nurse at the moment : he would have
been enlightened if he had followed them to the
gate.
Mollie was laughing. ?I saw her coming from the
distance, but I judged it to be one of the occasions
when it is wise to put the telescope to the blind
eye ! She crept round the house as if she were a
burglar, and I badly wanted to follow and see the
fun. But that would have spoiled everything. She
did not attempt to go into the house.?
Blair chuckled. ?I?ll never forget the sight of
her ?she was waiting on the steps, and she was quite
ready to be packed off to isolation camp without
saying good-bye to them at home, though it would
pretty well have killed her. There?s something
big about old Chubs : she?ll go through fire and
water for anyone she loves. I say, Mollie?sure
you are looking after yourself and getting proper
rest ? I won?t have you knocking up, you know,?
His eyes were concerned, and she reassured him.
?I can still sit up and take nourishment,? she
asserted.
?We?ll hand the case over to Ginger, now. And
I?m looking for results !?


CHAPTER XV
CHUBBY SETS OUT
For a fortnight longer, Pip gave himself the airs
of an interesting invalid. Mollie Seton heaved a
sigh of relief whenever Chubby Drummond?s
sturdy figure appeared at the gate. One hot evening,
when he came upon a disconsolate group in the
garden, Dr. Blair indulged in plain speaking.
You try and forget that you have been sick,
young man : shake yourself up, and remember
that there are other people in the world. How far
have you walked to-day ? Not enough, by half.?
Phil scowled, and muttered something about
being deadly tired. The doctor shrugged his
shoulders.
That s nothing ; you?ll feel tired for quite a
bit, yet; but you?re well on the mend. Ready,
Chubs ??
?She is going to read out to me, sir,? Phil
assured him morosely.
Not on your life ! She is coming with me to
Smugglers? Cave ! if you buck up, I?ll take you?
day after to-morrow.?


A gleam flickered in the mournful eyes.
Smugglers? Cave was no end of an interesting
place.
?I couldn?t walk half so far as that,? growled
Phil unwillingly.
?You?re not being asked to, so there?s no need to
make a martyr of yourself; you?re not lively
company at the present time, I can assure you.?
Chubby ran out to the car, wondering a little ;
it wasn?t like Dr. Ted to be so severe ; and the
remembrance of Pip?s thin face always made her
gulp.
Blair went on. ?We?ve got to be firm, old dear :
everybody goes through this stage after a bad
illness : you don?t want to make any exertions,
and nobody else can do that part of it for you.
It?s a case of grit your teeth and forge ahead :
presently, it gets easier, see ??
She saw, thankfully : she was always quick at
picking up a thought. He proceeded cheerfully :
?We?ve got to pull together, here : when Penrose
grumbles, don?t take any notice : flabby muscles
must be exercised, or they stay flabby. We?ll
soon have him at his old pranks again.?
It was the next day that the awful thing
happened. There had been showers in the night,
and the sky looked as though it had been washed


o
-


\ ; 'V v '
... ??-?
She buried her face in the pillow, and the sobs came in earnest
(See page 163)


clean, and dyed a deeper blue : white clouds
rested on Mount Difficult, and the pansies in the
round bed lifted impudent faces, and blew out
their cheeks in the quaintest way.
After she had done some typing?her spelling
was still erratic, and the spacing wouldn?t come
right?Aunt Anne told her to take Silver-heels
down to the creek for a drink. Now, Silver-heels
was a strawberry mare with greyish-white half-
stockings, and the two were fast friends. She would
nose the running water daintily, and then take
long, satisfying draughts.
Chubby took her to her favourite bend : very
soon now, Ronald would be home for the holidays.
She wondered how Phil Penrose and he would get
on together ?
There were letters from him in the box j one to
his parents, one to Aunt Anne?one for herself.
She could not get back with them quickly enough
and Silver-heels was in a mood to stop every now
and then and bite off succulent grass : it was
really thoughtless of her ! Chubby hurried her into
her stall and gave her a repentant pat because
she could not be expected to know that a little
girl was impatient to read her letter !
Miss Manners was on the front porch : there
were deep lines beneath her eyes?that meant that


she had one of her bad headaches. She took the
mail listlessly.
?Your face is scarlet, child,? she said absently.
The tone was abrupt, but Chubby understood
her now. Her hair had uncoiled from its plaits,
and flamed about her in red abundance ; glossy
from vigorous brushing. Aunt Anne noted the
merry tilt to the mouth : she would never be a
beauty, but possibly ?when her frame had
lengthened, and she had learned to hold herself
properly, she would be more like other children ?
A few minutes later, Chubby curled herself up
in the pergola whose climbing roses had been
such a glory that year. There was something
puzzling about Ron?s letter : he had never written
to her in this stiff manner, before.
1 am good for quite a lot of class prizes, they think ,
and the old professor thinks so well of my progress
that he would like me to have a better violin. Tou
have been so liberal with me that I scarcely like to
pass this on, dear Aunt Anne.
Chubby?s cheeks were flaming. She glanced back
to find ?My dear Aunt Anne ?
In an instant, she knew what had happened :
Ronald had written the two letters at the same


time, and had put them in wrong envelopes !
She should have noticed sooner ! She ran to where
the old lady was leaning back in her basket-chair,
and then realized that something terrible had
happened.
I m so sorry, Aunt Anne, I read a whole page
before I found out that this was your letter.?
Miss Manners gave a strange laugh. ?Did you
really ? Master Ron has made a bigger mistake
than you realize it s ill work looking after other
folks children ; and history has a way of repeating
itself. Take this, and tell your brother to be more
careful next time. Not that it matters : it is
always better to know.?
Her voice was icy-cold, and her eyes.
?I?m sorry, Aunt Anne!? she faltered.
?Don?t pretend?whatever you do ! I was a
fool to be taken in, for one instant. All my life
people have fawned on me for what they could get
from me. Don?t attempt to explain or excuse,
child. I have been a foolish woman, and have got
my deserts. You may go.?
All the sunshine had died out of the sky ; it
seemed to Chubby that a great, dark curtain had
been dropped over the radiant blue. The wind was
sobbing through the trees on Mount Difficult,
and when she looked back, Miss Manners was


staring into the distance. The lines about her
mouth might have been inked, and her face was
stony.
Chubby fled to her room and climbed on to her
bed, heedless of the fact that she was crumpling
the clean quilt that Wigsie had put on that morning.
The whole world seemed to have crashed down
on her as she read Ronnie?s schoolboy scrawl. It
told her that she must have been pretty clever to
wangle a typewriter out of Aunt Anne, and that
he would be glad to know how she managed it.
And it went on :
She can't live for ever , people with rheumatism
always have bad hearts. She is hound to leave me
something decent in her will because I remind her
of grandfather , she was ratty about him , one time ,
they say. So don't cut me out altogether , Ginger ?
I thought by now that you and she would have been at
each other's throats : when you dislike people , you
usually show it so plainly.
There was more, but something had got into
Chubby?s eyes, blinding them. Aunt Anne must
have read that beastly thing he said about not
living for ever .. . and grandfather! The
remembrance of the grey, drawn lips was like a
blow !


Aunt Anne would never believe now that she
was fond of her ; she would think all sorts of
dreadful things ! She had been afraid of her until
she had come to know her, but Chubby Drummond
never did things by halves, and when her heart was
touched, it was touched to some purpose. Though
she did not realize it, she had been steadily courting
her great-aunt, trying hard to win her affection.
She buried her face in the pillow, and the sobs
came in earnest : the kind of sobs that hurt.
Anxiety mingled with her grief, for she remembered
Miss Manners saying once that she never bothered
about people who disappointed her: that she
simply ruled them out of her life. Probably, she
would send them all away from The Sycomores,
and daddy would get thin, and start coughing
again. It was too awful to think of ! His face had
been filling out, and getting nice and brown ;
and his eyes were full of sparkles as he went
whistling about his work. Only yesterday, Aunt
Anne had said that the place was a credit to
him . . . and she had been planning all sorts
of improvements !
Chubby could hear the tap tap of angry sticks
along the veranda, and down the hall : when
she was weak, they went slowly, as if they were
feeling their way, when she was well, and in good


spirits they were brisk. They were quick and
sharp, to-day ; and the bedroom door was shut
with a bang.
Her head always ached when she was upset
about anything, Chubby remembered miserably.
She would lie on the couch at the foot of her bed,
and draw the blinds to shut out the sunlight.
Perhaps she would cry herself to sleep. Although
that did not seem quite natural : perhaps she
would feel better if she could have a good howl ?
you always did ! It was just as if the tears washed
something right out of you !
Kittie and daddy had gone into the township,
and Dr. Ted was with a case that was giving him
anxiety. She had waved to him earlier in the
morning as he had driven up the track that led
to the sawmills. He might be hours and hours
away. So there was no one to talk to. She was
angrier with Ronald than she had ever been in
her life : it was a dreadful thing that he had done.
She slipped forlornly off the bed, and made her
way to her den. Silver-heels was munching busily,
she whinnied softly, and nozzled her mouth against
Chubby?s flushed face. There might not be any
more trips to the creek together. . . .
Upstairs, the typewriter ?its cover was off,
she noticed guiltily?flashed a welcome from bright


keys. She remembered that treasured ?With love
from Aunt Anne,? and again her temper blazed.
She would write a letter to Ron that he would
not forget in a hurry . . . but that wouldn?t
make up for leaving the loft ! It seemed to Chubby
that life was one long succession of getting fond
of lofts, and then saying good-bye to them !
If only Dr, Ted had been home ... he put
everything right ! He would say the things she
was too choky to say, even if Aunt Anne gave her
the chance ! What would really happen would
be that she would shut herself away for days ;
and then, when she did see them again, she would
be so displeased and icy-cold that it wouldn?t be
possible to get near her.
Suddenly Chubby remembered that there was
still God. He could reach Aunt Anne when nobody
else could.
From the window, the room with the closed
blinds looked like a tired face with shut eyes.
The house was deadly still; Wigsie was in one of
her dejected moods, and Punch had gone off with
Joe. There was such a weight of loneliness and
misery in Chubby s heart that, if the angry woman
had realized it, things might have gone very
differently.
The truth was that Anne Manners was fighting


an old battle, and a bitter one. She had grown
used to the merry family party : the feeling of
having folk of her own about her. But, once again,
she had been deceived and betrayed : history was
going to repeat itself.
It did not make the position any easier when
she remembered that she had only herself to blame,
for breaking through what should have been
purely a business arrangement. She had told
Garret that she would keep to her side of her
house, and that she expected them to keep to theirs.
Instead of which, she had allowed her feelings to
be worked on by simulated affection, and had
broken through the determination to live her life
as she had lived it for many years. She had even
fancied they were pleased when she joined them :
more fool she ! They were merely showing her the
attention that a rich woman always receives from
hopeful relatives.
The colour flared in her thin cheeks as her mind
repeated words that cut to the bone. ?She can?t live
for ever, people with rheumatism always have
bad hearts. . . .? The boy was calculating on
that !
She placed against that the fact that life had
been fuller and sweeter lately, there had been a
man?s business instinct to guide her, problems that


had worried her had been lifted. At least, she had
not come out on the wrong side of the ledger,
there.
And Garret was decidedly better for the open-
air life : his shoulders had straightened and
broadened: the nights had brought refreshing
sleep instead of coughing. The girl-wife had
seemed grateful too. But how was one to be sure ?
Perhaps the deepest hurt of all had been the
reference to Chubby?s dislike for her ! She had
imagined the child transparently honest, even to
her own disadvantage. Even now, she could not
believe that it had been pose . . . though the
boy was sceptical as to any affection in that
direction !
Miss Manners shut out the thought of Chubby?s
evident misery as she had turned away. That
might have been its root in shame at being found
out ! Better that she had been a poor woman?
she would, at least, have known where she stood.
As the years slipped away, and each milestone
brought old age nearer, one longed the more for
love : for something warm and live to make one
forget increasing weakness !
A blinding headache made thought confusion j
she turned her face from the golden day, and tried
to shut out the memory of eyes that had begged


to be believed : lips that had trembled in a con-
vincing fashion. . . . Ted Blair would probably
laugh at her and call her a silly woman : he swept
cobwebs from the sky with as little ceremony as
that. And he, at least, was real. But an old wound
had been probed, it was still raw. . . .
Did they talk about her unhappy story in such
an open manner that a schoolboy had knowledge
of it ? Of course, her engagement, and the breaking
of it, had been public property at the time . . .
but she had never dreamed that it was still
remembered and commented on. ?And I remind her
of grandfather. . . .?
He did. And, behind the winning ways, was the
same canker.
Her room was as dark as her mood. She must
learn to steel herself, and live her own solitary life
again.
Hours later Dr. Blair returned to the township
to find a quiet house, and a casserole in the stove.
His housekeeper had gone to visit a sick relative
at Ferny Bend, and had left him something easily
managed. He had been fighting hard for a life,
and he had won ; but he was tired out, and the
day had been full of petty vexations. There were
times when folk were trying, do what you would
for them !


The dinner smelled appetizing, but he happened
to go to his surgery first, and to discover on the
waiting-room table, a letter in Chubby?s unmistak-
able writing.
The envelope was bulky, and he shrugged his
shoulders with a weary determination to attack
the casserole first. In the end, he opened the
envelope. There were sheets to wade through,
and an enclosure in Ronald?s hand. He scanned
this with a frown of perplexity, then went on to
Chubby?s explanation.
She had typed this, and, as she had not yet fully
conquered her machine, the result was confusing.
Sometimes she used close, sometimes double, and
even treble spacing.
On the surface there wasn?t much to get hold
of except that Ron had addressed his letters to
the wrong people, and had cooked his goose so
far as his aunt was concerned ! Serve the young
rascal right? pretty contemptible, after her good-
ness to him ! He read on :
T�u don't know how awful it feels , it has given
Aunt Anne one of her bad headaches. She has pulled
down the blinds and gone to bed ; do you think she


will send us away from The Sycamores ? It would be
so dredful just when daddy is getting better. If only
I had some money, it wouldn't be so bad, but even then,
he does love this place so much ! / !
And, the worst of it is, dear Dr. Ted, that she will
never know how fond 1 have got of her, because, if 1
were to tell her that, she would think that 1 was pretend-
ing. ((Pm not very good at spacing yet, am I ?)))))
1 was fntened of her at first, but 1 think she is
wonderful ?gorgeous : and I wish I could make her
understand. I could kill Ron for saying that about
my disliking her ; it isn?t true, and it was mean !
YOU DON'T LIKE PEOPLE BECAUSE THEY
GIVE YOU THINGS. You like them because you
can't help it. x x x x x x x x x x
Love from
Chubs.
Dr. Blair blew his nose fiercely : poor old kid,
as usual, she had hit the mark. She was evidently
desperately unhappy : the pages were blotted and
smudged as if tears had fallen upon them. If he


had had the handling of Ron Drummond at the
moment, he would have given the young scamp
a trouncing he would not have forgotten in a
hurry.
Ginger . . . with a heart as big as her sturdy
body ! It was too bad. Of course, it would be a
comparatively easy manner to knock sense into
Miss Manners, she was so much more human, these
times. But his face sobered at the thought of the
drawn blinds and all they indicated. She had done
that throughout her life ; shutting out God?s
sunshine, and brooding over her wrongs. Maybe
her head was aching; poor, distrustful soul.
There was a postscript he had missed.
I must make some money somehow , Dr. Aed, in case
Aunt Anne sends us away. She sent Micky Ryan
off at a day's notice , and it would be awful if dad got
his cough again. Ahe worst of it is that you have to
wait such a long time before you can make money by
writing , and sometimes you starve , don't you P I
forget which one of the famous authors didn't have
enough to eat , one time , but it can happen , can't it P


P.S. 2nd. This is a long postscript, hut Pm going
to Mount Difficult to see if Crazy Kate will tell me
where to get the gold, 1 met her one day and she said
she would. 1 meant to wait for Pip, but Pll go halves
with him if 1 find any so he mustn?t be cross. Kate
said there were great big nuggets in one part of the
shaft. Pve taken a hammer and a chissle, and will
you please ring up The Sycamores and let Aunt
Anne know that 1 am all right ? I can?t get back
early you see ; it?s a long way, and I might have
to hunt about if Kate isn?t there.
These kisses are for Aunt Anne, and 1 really
mean them, Dr. Ted dear.
Chubby.
xxxxxxxxxx xxxxx
1 used capital letters because they?re big kisses.
When he got to the end of this the doctor?s face
was grave. Crazy Kate had been harmless enough
for years, but one never knew how long that state
of things would continue. There were cases on
record where mental trouble suddenly took an
acute form, and there had been indications that,
she had been increasingly restless lately. More
than once townsfolk who had visited her to do her
a kindness had been repulsed, and she had even


thrown stones at some of them, and sent her dogs
after them. A child?s blundering might rouse
opposition, and Chubs was always over-trustful.
The casserole smelled inviting, but it must wait :
one mercy, doctors were used to long fasts when it
was necessary ! He stuffed some apples into his
pocket, and remembered that he was always
advising his patients to eat more fruit!


CHAPTER XVI
CHUBBY TAKES HOLD
The doctor left a note for his housekeeper in case
he was detained, and set out, more apprehensive
than he cared to admit. The village was full of
ugly rumours : the witless woman had been
keeping closely to her shack, and had not been
into Silver Creek for over a week. All were agreed
that a time must come for her to be put away, but
those who remembered her happy girlhood among
them, and the tragedy that had overtaken her,
were reluctant to move in the matter.
It is not possible to drive a car up Mount Difficult.
Blair knew that his motor-cycle could only go
part of the way to the hut. There had been talk
in plenty about the Progress Association cutting
a track round the mountain to a point that com-
manded a glorious view ; but it was going to be
an expensive business. Kate had ridden down
to the village, and had worn a rough bridle-
path.
He cycled as far as Beacon Rock, and then was
forced to leave his machine : the steep ascent had


I ill
?-
?I knew God would send you.?
(See page 180)




found out its bad humours, and it had run heavily,
and at times protestingly.
The evening was close ; the sunset promised a
blazer on the morrow. There was something of
threat in its fierce beauty, and a fiery light struck
back, staining the rocks with vivid orange and
crimson. Lizards wriggled across the track, and
once a snake went its gliding way.
After the Rock, the scrub was denser. Here and
there a narrow opening showed the direction Kate
was used to take. He remembered with satisfaction
that Chubby was a fearless youngster ; and, to
be sure, she had visited the hut before. She wasn 5 t
partial to snakes, and it was a lonely climb for any
child with possible danger at the end of it.
She had evidently got it firmly into her head
that they were to be sent away from The Sycomores,
and that, nothing short of finding gold in the
abandoned shaft would keep her beloved father
from getting back the dreaded cough ! There
were the makings of a splendid woman in Chubby
Drummond; but this last escapade made him
more than uneasy.
Kate had evidently been friendly when they had
met; but that stone-throwing development had
ugly significance ; and your mental person, how-
ever frail as to appearance, has enormous strength.


At best, the child might have a nasty fright; and,
in spite of her sturdy appearance, she was highly
strung.
He struck at length into the bridle-path that
was the one used by Crazy Kate. As he climbed
steadily, sweating with the heat and unwonted
exercise, he told himself that he was getting flabby,
and must walk more.
There is a good deal of dead timber on Mount
Difficult. Fires had raged down its rugged sides,
taking toll of many a giant gum ; and there is
little vegetation but that of stunted scrub. It
abounds in boulders, and though, in heath-time,
there is colour and to spare, it has a grim, for-
bidding look. To-night, the sunset did not deal
too kindly with it, as it picked out the harsh
features and emphasized them.
It was impossible to determine the time at
which Chubby had set out ; she must have been
gone some hours, and much might have happened.
His anxiety increased as he went on.
Phew ! It was hot ! More than once, he halted,
and sent his voice ringing out in a lusty coo-ee.
There was no answer, and he climbed doggedly.
The fiercer lights had faded when he gained a
ridge from which he could see Crazy Kate?s shack
in the distance. The western sky was flooded with


amber, melting into a luminous sea-green : clouds
massed here and there, forming the banks of a
lagoon. He wished old Ginger could have seen
them.
At this point there was a plateau, and he strode
forward. The dogs had not heard or seen him yet :
the poor brutes were gentle enough if you went
the right way to work with them. When, at length
they caught sight of him, he whistled to them,
and they ran to meet him, barking in a spasmodic,
dejected way. They were plainly thin and seemed
in need of a square meal.
As he approached the hut, he was uneasy at
the absence of life. The waning light was full
upon the windows, setting them on fire. The
listlessness of the half-starved beasts emphasized
the stillness. It was uncanny.
Probably Chubby had found Kate in a quiet
mood, and had coaxed her as far as the shaft.
She would be utterly fearless, and, on that very
account, would be safer than if she felt and showed
apprehension. But there was a lurking fear in
Ted Blair s heart, and he would have given a good
deal to have seen the flare of a red-head !
The scene was desolate beyond words. The
shack was of the roughest description, and some
night, a wilder gale than usual would demolish the


flimsy structure. The absence of any attempt
at garden made it bare and unlovely, and this
was the most pitiful indication of all, for Kate had
loved flowers. He remembered the tangle about
the little home she had gone to as a bride !
The chimney leaned drunkenly to one side, and
the windows were crooked. They had merely been
placed there to let light through, without design.
Still, there was no sign of the poor creature, or
of Chubs. He told himself that his first supposition
was the correct one, and that he would find them
in the vicinity of the deserted mine. The door
of the hut was open, but this might mean little or
nothing ; Kate had no treasures to lock away.
Something hung in the doorway ; a sheet that
had probably once been white was suspended
there. A voice reached him .. . old Ginger?s .. .
speaking in low, soothing tones.
?Are you any cooler, Kate ? Your head is so
hot it must ache dreadfully. I?ll fan you again ;
and it will soon be night.?
In utter relief, Dr. Blair thrust aside the wet
sheet and strode into the tiny room. Kate was
tossing on her bed, and Chubby sat beside her,
like a faithful watch-dog. She glanced up with a
cry of delight, and ran to meet him.
?I knew God would send you ?she is so sick !


I could not make her cool whatever I did, so I
damped the sheet and hung it up the way Kittie
did when Ron had fever. It was pretty dirty,
Dr. Ted but I thought it would be better than
nothing !?
He grinned down at her in the old, cheerful
way, she would never realize the load that had
been lifted from his mind ! He did not know what
he had feared, but it had been something rather
nasty.
?Much better than nothing : it was quite a good
scheme. How long have you been here ??
?Since the morning : her clock has stopped, so I
couldn?t tell the time. She slept for awhile, and
when she woke, her eyes were so gentle and
pretty. . . .?
He sat on the bed, and took the thin wrist in his
fingers. The pulse jerked and was thready : now
and then it skipped a beat.
?Feeling tired, Kate ?? he asked kindly.
The child was right : they were pretty eyes
now that the wildness had died out of them.
?Yes ; better now ; the little girl has been so
good.?
?Does your head ache ??
She had fallen into a stupor, and did not seem
to hear him. He knew that no one would ever


need to fear Crazy Kate again ; her stone-throwing
days were over, and the heart that was worn-out
with grief had almost finished its work : it was
running down in much the same fashion as her
clock. As it slowed and slipped a beat, the clouded
brain was clearing. It sometimes happened this
way.
The sheet swayed in a breath of mountain wind
that had suddenly risen. He glanced in its direction.
?We can dispense with that now old dear, it
was a capital thought. The heat has gone for
to-night, and we?ll let the good west wind do the
rest. It?s a kind wind?the west wind.?
He spoke absently, and Chubby hurried to do
his bidding.
?Is Kate very ill, Dr. Ted ?? she asked anxiously.
?Very ; hearts get tired out you know when
they have worked too hard, and done too much
fretting, and the heart is the mainspring. You
can put a new spring in a watch or clock, Ginger ;
but we haven?t found a way to put a new heart in.?
?No !? she agreed sorrowfully. She was pale
with fatigue; and the red of her hair flamed
against the half-light in the quiet room.
?We doctors try to wind it up sometimes, and
it goes for a while, but the beat gets faint again.
We do all sorts of strange things Chubs :we bring


people back to life, and suffering against their
wills : and we?ve got to ?that?s the worst part
of it ! That?s what makes doctors grow old before
other folk do : it?s the mischief and all. . .
He stroked back a strand of hair that was
falling over Kate?s forehead. ?It used to be such
pretty hair Chubs?Bill was always proud of Kate?s
curls. She wore nice frocks, and neat shoes?and
she sang about her garden, and was kind to every-
body, That?s the Kate who has come back:
she won t ever give anyone trouble again ! Perhaps,
while she is sleeping, she is dreaming of the home
by the creek that she used to keep so clean and
bright. She was always waiting by the gate when
Bill came home.?
Chubby nodded. It was easy to picture that
while the face on the pillows looked so sweet.
She wondered why Dr. Ted was talking so much
of the days before poor Kate?s brain was
touched.
He smiled encouragingly : he was going to ask
a stiff thing of a child, and he wanted to quieten
fears that would surely come while she waited for
the help he must get without delay !
He put his hands on her shoulders. ?I?ll have
to leave Nurse Chubby in charge while I slip down
to the township and bring back some medicine.


You?ll have a lonely time before I get back,
kid. . . .?
?I?ll be all right !? cried Chubby sturdily.
?You see,? he explained, ?the only one I could
leave with Kate is someone I could trust
absolutely !?
Her cheeks flamed, and her eyes were stars.
?Someone I could trust absolutely /? That was the
nicest thing Dr. Ted had ever said to her ! She
gulped, and saluted. She couldn?t find words at
the moment, her throat was too croaky.
He gave her the old, boyish grin. ?Knew I could
depend on you ; doctors depend on their nurses
more than some of them are willing to acknowledge !
Now for directions : you can?t do much till
I get back ?most likely she?ll sleep, and I?ll
be as quick as ever I can. Sure you can
manage ??
She blinked away some tears that would come.
She hoped he would not see them, because she
wasn?t going to cry ... it was just . . .
?Sure !? The voice was gruff, but the emphasis
was reassuring.
?Not nervous ??
?No !?
?Good ! That was a silly question to ask of a
digger?s daughter, wasn?t it ? I?m proud of you,


Ginger, and so will they all be. I?ll ring The
Sycomores, and report ?
She was struggling hard for composure; he
was vastly relieved when he saw the quaintest
smile Chubby had ever given. It twisted her
trembling lips, and at last it found her eyes. He
had said he was proud of her?that made every-
thing possible. It would soon be night, but he was
leaving her in charge, and you were never frightened
when you had somebody else to think of.
He did some rapid thinking. If Sister Maitland
happened to be still at The Glen House, she would
put aside everything but the urgency of the case,
and come to Kate?s aid. She was supposed to be
resting, after a strenuous year : but your true
nurse is never too tired when she is needed.
In the meantime, here was Chubby. Her hair
shone like a glory, and there was something very
splendid about her eyes. She was struggling
hard to put aside her own disappointment, as he
knew. The gold-hunt had ended in caring for a
woman who had all but reached the end of a weary
journey ! She did not know that, and he was
determined that she should not. She was facing
a big enough ordeal as it was !
He answered the mute question she could not
utter.


?Don?t you worry about Aunt Anne ?I?ll see
that she jolly well understands. She was upset,
you see, and she wanted to hit out and hurt some-
one else. Lots of us are made that way, but we?re
always sorry afterwards. She takes my word.?
Chubby bit her lip, and put her hand up to hide
its trembling. He must not think she was funk-
ing. . . .
He took her face in his hands and regarded it
lovingly.
?Ginger ... for pluck !? he said softly. She
squared her shoulders.
?Like me to light up for you before I go ?
there?s bound to be a lamp or candles about ?
?No, you get away, Dr. Ted. I?ll manage.?
He patted her hand and gave it a hard grip.
Then he cried : ?You?re going to be a ripping
woman one of these old days Chubs !?
After that, there was nothing she could not
have done ; and he knew it. She went with him
to the edge of the plateau, and waved till he was
out of sight. Then, hurried back to her post.


CHAPTER XVII
the stars come near
The dogs whined softly at intervals, and settled
themselves at the door. She fancied they knew
how dreadfully scared she was in this lonely place,
as she listened to breathing that seemed to get
slower and weaker, and occasionally caught in the
strangest way.
The wind died as suddenly as it had risen, and
dusk crept down the hills. It was going to be extra
dark, or perhaps that was because there were no
houses near, and no cheerful lights, except far
below, where they twinkled in the streets of the
township. She tried to pick out the hill where, by
and by, Dr. Ted would be taking the steep path to
his surgery.
There was an old lamp on the safe with the
broken leg that the witless woman had mended
m a fashion of her own. She lifted it down and lit
it; then turned the wick low. She knew that
nurses shaded sleeping eyes from any glare.
She sat on the doorstep ; the stars were growing
very bright; they were bigger than usual, she


was certain, and they were coming very near.
Of course you were closer to them on a mountain
and besides, perhaps God had remembered the
shadows in Kate?s room, and had lit some of His
very own lamps ? They shone out brilliantly
against a sky that was like deep-blue velvet.
The dogs were still uneasy, though they had
stretched their noses on their paws, and seemed
to be asleep. Chubby supposed they were having
nasty dreams.
Once they roused themselves and ran towards
the line of gaunt trees that stood out like a land-
mark. There was something unfriendly about
them to-night.
By now, Dr. Ted should have reached Beacon
Rock; after that he would cover the ground
quickly : it would be downhill all the way. She
was comforting herself with this when she fell
asleep, waking with a start, and wondering why she
felt so uncomfortable. The sick woman was stirring
restlessly, and Chubby made her way to the bed
to find that Kate was stretching out her hand
as if she wanted someone to cling to. It was the
strangest feeling when she grasped the cold
fingers. They should not be like that on a
hot night, . . .
?Please God, send Dr. Ted soon !? she begged.


And again : ??Please God . . . don?t let me be a
coward !?
She did not mind Him knowing how frightened
she was : how her heart thumped when there
were queer, rustling sounds from the bush, or a
fox gave his thin bark from the distance. There
were wombats in the neighbourhood; pig-like
animals that got into vegetable gardens and
grubbed up potatoes : Chubby hated them, and
hoped they would not find their way here ! To be
sure, there was little to tempt them !
She remembered nervously that foxes robbed
fowl-yards ; and that Kate?s was badly protected,
with the fence broken down in several places.
Most of her fowls roosted in the trees : she could
not remember whether foxes could climb ? In
any case, the dogs might keep them away : they
were barking quite a lot. But they always returned
to Chubby after one of their restless prowls ;
as if they knew that Kate was sick, and that she
was on guard.
Her patient was stirring; once, she laughed
happily and muttered : ?The daffodils are early
this year, Bill, and the flowering peaches have
never been so good. We?ll put in more pussy-
willow ... if I can make enough with my
flowers I?m going to buy that five acre block on


the flats, and we 5 !! grow small fruits, then you
won?t have to go into the forests ; I?m afraid of
those big trees . . . you?ll be careful, won?t
you dear ? I?m scared that you 11 be caught,
some day. . . .
She broke off with a quick moan, and begged
for a drink. Chubby remembered the spring,
and went through the starlight to where it bubbled
into a rocky basin, ice-cold. She filled a jug and
moistened the dry lips. Kate drank thirstily and
seemed quieter when her face was bathed.
Down in the village, a St. Bernard was baying :
his deep notes were comforting and brought back
remembrances of friendly meetings on the road.
He had kind, beautiful eyes ; and a wonderful,
tawny coat.
Chubby thought longingly of her den, and the
apple-green room, and Aunt Anne. Dr. Ted said
he would make her understand ; and he always
kept his word.
Once again, she went for a fresh lot of spring-
water, and bathed Kate?s head and face. They
were hot, and this puzzled her, because the white
fingers were so cold. . . .
Chubby Drummond went back to the doorstep
and watched the stars till they seemed to be
dancing all over the sky. They were acting in the


strangest fashion, and she began to feel rather
giddy. Finally, after falling into lines and marching,
they packed into one glowing mass, and that was
the last she remembered until she was in dream-
land, and kept stumbling over rocks that were
yellow with gold. At first she was able to break
the nuggets out quite easily, but when she had
piled them into a heap, and stooped to put them
into a bag, someone kept pulling her back. She
panted and struggled, but it was Aunt Anne,
and she was saying sharply : ?What a foolish child
you are . . . you can?t carry all those stones !?
Chubby cried imploringly ; ?It?s gold Aunt Anne,?
and was answered with a contemptuous : ?I know
*t eave it alone .. . gold never made anyone
happy. . .
This was puzzling, and so was the fact that the
glittering nuggets grew bigger and bigger, and
seemed to be flying into the sky ! They were
turning into stars, and sparkled and twinkled. .
They were great lamps now, and were saying
something ... or somebody was saying some-
thing. . . .
She tried to open her eyes. Voices . . . and
a cheery whistle . . . had there ever been any-
thing so heavenly as that ? Because it was real.
Hello ! came in Dr. Blair?s cheery tones, ?all


in the dark, nurse ? This is Sister Maitland, and
she is ready to relieve, and to take on night duty.?
Chubby drew a long breath. He was treating
her as if she were a real nurse. . . . But she was
still too dazed to give a proper report !
They went inside ; the dim light showed a white
uniform, and a face with grey hair, and bright
eyes, and the jolliest mouth. Sister Maitland?s
nose turned up in the funniest way imaginable,
and she put a kind hand on Chubby?s shoulder.
?So this is the little nurse ? Dr. Blair told me
how clever you had been : you have probably
saved me quite a lot of worry, and our patient
much discomfort.?
Our patient ! Chubby wanted to hug the big
woman who set to work as if she knew exactly
what to do. It was good to know that her responsi-
bility was over, even though she guessed that both
the Sister and Dr. Ted were regarding Kate as a
very sick woman indeed. She had slipped down
from her pillows, and there were great shadows
under her eyes, and about her mouth.
It was amazing how soon the room looked
different. Sister Maitland had brought a suit-case
with clean sheets in it, and pillow-cases, as if she
had known how dirty everything was ! She made
the bed without disturbing Kate at all; and


then Chubby heard something said about a 30th
of strych. and saw Dr. Blair dissolve a tabloid
and charge his hypodermic, and shoot the needle
up till a small bubble broke on its tip before
inserting it in the wasted arm. Then he sat on
the bed with his fingers on Kate?s wrist.
?More kick in it now,? he said absently, ?we?ll
give her another 30th in about an hour?s time.
Seems a pity we?ve got to bring her back to it,
doesn?t it ? She?ll probably rally for a day or two.?
He set out some bottles, and went back to the
bedside, while Sister moved about as if she were
used to this sort of thing. At last he said soberly :
?We?ll be off if you are sure you can manage ?
I?ll be back about dawn, but I want to take this
tired youngster home. There won?t be a change for
some hours at least.?
She assured him that there was no need for him
to linger, and Chubby strangled some prodigious
yawns. It seemed miles and miles from The
Sycomores here, and the thought of her apple-
green room was comforting. The stars would
always be her friends, now.
They did not say much as they scrambled down
to Beacon Rock ; Dr. Blair had brought a powerful
electric torch, and this showed the way splendidly.
She found herself counting the minutes till she


could snuggle down in bed, and listening stupidly
while he explained that he had commandeered a
motor-cycle from the village, his own having
gone on strike in the most outrageous fashion !
She thought its red light, shining through the
darkness, was the loveliest, cheeriest thing she had
seen for years.
After that, she did not realize much. She was
lifted into the side-car, and there was a swift
rush through air that was fresh and sweet. Trees
and rocks flashed past in a mad race as they went
down and down ... it was the strangest sen-
sation. When Dr. Ted spoke to her, his voice
sounded miles away, and though he was saying
something about Aunt Anne, it did not seem to
matter. Nothing mattered but getting her head
down, and going off to sleep. Afterwards, she
remembered how weird he had looked with his
huge goggles on, and a cap pulled low over his
forehead. A bit like a diver. . . .
Presently he saw that the heavy eyes had closed
in earnest : she was dead to the world, poor child !
It was almost a pity ?she would have enjoyed
every minute of the rush through the night, and
the stillness of the streets where the houses were
so many blank faces.
The Sycomores stood out like a beacon ?blazing


a welcome : she would have been thrilled to her
warm little soul if she had seen it. He took the
track that passed The Lodge, and here, too, the
porch was brightly illuminated.
Mollie Seton heard his honk-honk, and came
down the path, her eyes shining softly. They looked
past him to the side-car where a mass of red-hair
flared against the brown rug.
?Completely done in !? he explained.
She tucked the fur more closely about the sturdv
shoulders?the night had grown sharply cold.
?What a little woman it is !? she whispered.
?You?ve said it ! She?s lived several lives to-day,
and taken Kate over a rough patch of road. She
hasn?t stirred since we left Beacon Rock. Say . . .
Mollie ... in the years to come, Chubs will
keep the man who loves her guessing . . . they
say that is the secret of a woman?s charm, don?t
they ??
He spoke awkwardly ; there were times when
he felt strangely shy with Mollie Seton. When her
eyes looked as they were looking just now, and her
hair was loosened about her face. He had seen
her like that more than once lately, after a night-
watch. Flushed, and tremulous.
She laughed ; her rich, throaty laugh. He was
just a big boy, doctor though he might be !


?Take her home !? she cried, smoothing back one
heavy strand of hair that was falling over Chubby?s
forehead ; ?it?s a thousand pities she couldn?t wake
in time to enjoy the importance of it all! Miss
Manners has been ringing at short intervals all
the evening : she seemed to think I would know by
instinct what was happening. It was all I could do
to prevent Pip setting out for the Mount : he as good
as told me that we were all a set of bunglers ;
and that it was a mercy he was getting better !
They take themselves so seriously ?these children!?
Ted Blair grinned. ?Do the young beggar a heap
of good to think of someone beside himself, just
now.?
?He worships Chubby in his odd fashion : it?s
extraordinary the way that youngster has insinu-
ated herself into our hearts. I often wonder where
the charm lies, and I can?t decide whether it is her
honesty or her daring, or the wholesome sweetness
of her ? She has depth, too !?
He considered gravely. ?I?ve asked myself that
very question, often enough, and failed to answer
it. It?s just Chubs ?generous to a fault ?giving
and spending herself with everything she does,
and blundering into situations that overwhelm her.
I suppose we must get on. . . .
Mollie Seton smiled. Someone else could blunder,


The Stars Come Near
too; and if the village gossip, who lived a
few hundred yards down the road could have seen
him lingering at her gate at this unearthly hour,
there would be talk and to spare, in Silver
Creek.
?Off you go !? she suggested, and turned to find
Phil Penrose half-way down the path in his pyjamas,
a bewildered expression on his thin face.
You people woke me up !? he grumbled, ?first
that beastly honking, and then talking. I thought
something had happened. Is Chubs all right ??
Quite all right fast asleep. Go back to bed
Pip, we don t want a chill on top of excitement !
You may go over to Mount Pleasant first thing in
the morning.?
He nodded sullenly. ?She?s having all the fun !?
he complained.
Dr. Blair laughed?at the queer figure, and the
discontent. ?Good hand at grousing, old man !?
he called, there hasn?t been much fun in this
stunt ! And if you don?t get into your room in
double-quick time, I?ll put something extra nasty
in your tonic !?
?You couldn?t make it nastier than it is !?
grumbled the boy.
?You don?t know what I can do yet. Off with
you. . . .?


He stumbled into the house, and Dr, Blair
gave Molhe Seton?s hand a close grip.
?Lots to tell you, soon ?? he muttered. The odd
part of it was there always would be lots to tell
her !
Now, Chubby could never understand why she
should remember Dr. Ted lifting her into the side-
car and being tucked up, and seeing trees rush at
her, and then nothing else till she opened her
eyes and saw what looked like dazzling rows of
lamps. They weren?t lamps, either . . . they
were the windows of The Sycomores, blazing as
though the house were on fire !
Perhaps that was a dream ? There had been so
many, that night. And yet she thought it must
have been real, because there were so many
surprising things that turned out to have actually
happened that wonderful night. Kittie hugging
her up closely as if she were too precious to let
go ? an d her father, taking her into his arms,
and croaking in the queerest way : ?My old Chubs !?
over and over again ! His voice sounded as if
his throat were packed with wadding ; and yet
he hadn?t a cold, for she asked. . . .
But the most marvellous part of that coming
home was Aunt Anne?s behaviour. She had
hobbled down to the lower gate ; and was waiting


there. And her eyes looked as if she had been
crying ! She bent over the side-car, and held out
her arms with a quick : ?Thank God, child
I thought something had happened to you.? And
she kissed Chubby with close, warm kisses ! It
must have been awkward for her to do this, because
she had to lean on her sticks !
?It wasn?t a peck, either,? Chubby explained
to the doctor next day, ?it was right on my mouth-
one after another. I thought at first I must be
dreaming.?
He laughed. Not that time, old dear, you did
plenty of dreaming on our way down ! I spoke
several times, but not a word could I get out of you!?
?Did I snore, Dr. Ted ??
Did you what ? You made more noise than the
bike ! I was terribly offended ; when I take young
ladies for a ride, I like them to be interested in
what I am saying !?
She wondered for an instant whether he really
meant this ; but he threw himself down on the
lawn as if he were tired.
?Anything else you would like to know ? I?m
at ease with the world, and entirely at your service
for the next half-hour. For heaven?s sake, red-
head-move out of the sunshine ! You?ll set fire
to something if you don?t.?


She wriggled into the shade. Her plaits were
coining undone as usual, and he surveyed them
with interest. Mollie was right, it would be wonder-
ful hair one of these days. Since she had taken
more care of it, it was getting quite a wave, and it
was splendidly vigorous. He lit his pipe and
smoked contentedly.
?Dr. Ted, did you see Aunt Anne last night, or
just phone to her ?? she asked wistfully.
?Did I what ? I scorched over to Mount Pleasant
at such a rate that I nearly came to grief over old
Ryan?s cow ?she was stretched half-across the
road ! I?m afraid I must have dislocated the tip
of her tail, good cratur . . . but that?s a circum-
stance ! I found Miss Manners in a fine ?dither?
as a Scotch lady of my acquaintance would put it,
and explained the situation with as much eloquence
as time would permit. Then, I left her with your
letter to digest, and I think she must have liked it,
on the whole, in spite of the spacing. We had great
hopes of that typewriter, Ginger, but I have
visions of an editor who will tell you one day that
your manuscript is the worst that comes into the
office !?
He said this so gravely that Chubby looked
concerned. Then went on lazily : ?You are not
going to be turned out of The Sycomores, and the


typewriter won?t be packed up and sent to a
charitable institution ! Even Ron isn?t to be taken
from Grammar, though he jolly well deserves a
lesson, and will get it when he comes up at Christ-
mas. Aunt Anne will try conclusions with him,
and treat him to a little plain English : what we
call nervous Saxon, Ginger ! Understand ? And
next time you contemplate a stunt of this kind,
consult me first ... if your mother and Garry
hadn?t been detained in the township, they would
have had so many more hours in which to be
anxious. You?re a frightfully impulsive kid. . . .?
She considered this, her eyes wide and serious.
Most of her worry had gone when she had seen
that queer alteration in Aunt Anne?s face ; and
had felt the touch of old lips that were warm and
comforting.
?I?m sorry, Dr. Ted. But Aunt Anne is a perfect
darling !? she croaked. When Chubby?s emotions
were aroused, she always got that gruff sound in
her voice.
?Good ! Knew you?d arrive at that conclusion
sooner or later.?
?Did it do her any harm, walking down to the
gate, last night ??
?Probably hurt her quite a lot?all the best
things in life cost something, Gin-gin. You


mustn?t expect impossibilities, you know, or look
for sprouting wings ; she isn?t built that way.
She?ll still have difficult moods?natures don?t
change in an hour, and she?s had some bad jolts.
We might have been a jolly sight worse if we had
had the same experiences. There will be days
when you will think she has gone back to her old,
grim self; but she has a great heart, and I
fancy you?ve got into it. Just you remember
that.?
Chubby?s eyes sparkled. Suddenly her thoughts
went to a lonely shack on Mount Difficult, and she
asked anxiously; ?Is Kate going to get better,
Dr. Ted ??
?Depends on what you mean by better, old dear.
She?ll sleep quite a lot, and then she?ll wake up and
find Bill! Silly folk who don?t know any better,
call that death, Chubs ?but you and I know it
isn?t ! It?s just God?s surprise for us ?and He
never does things by halves. She?ll grow prettier
flowers than ever ?don?t you worry about Kate ?
she?s going to be happier than she has been for
years. She kept asking for you this morning, The
little girl with the kind hands,? she called
you.?
Chubby?s face was eloquent ; she was still keyed
up, after her trying experience. It was just at this


moment that she caught sight of Phil Penrose. She
sprang up and ran to meet him.
?Pip . . .!? she yelled .. . ?PIP !?
The last plait uncoiled as she went, and the thick
mane tossed about her shoulders and whipped her
face, Phil eyed her distastefully.
?Your hair is undone, Chubs !? he complained.
And then : ?Get any gold ??
She shook her head ; he needn?t have reminded
her of that !
He went on in his superior fashion ; ?You might
have known that you couldn?t pull a stunt like
that off on your own. Wait till I go with
you !?
Chubby nodded. And then a strange thing
happened to Pip. A memory seized him of a
summer evening when he was out of sorts with the
whole world, and had looked up to see red hair
flaming against a darkening window. Nobody
would have dreamed of crediting him with senti-
ment, but he put that occurrence away with some
others that belonged exclusively to the adored
father !
He was thinner than ever, and the climb had
brought shadows under his melancholy eyes.
?Do you think you can get up the ladder ??
Chubby asked hurriedly. ?You haven?t seen my


den since it was fixed up, and I?ll let you try my
typewriter, if you like !?
Aunt Anne saw them making their way to the
loft, and smiled to herself. Days such as these
seemed to belong specially to children 1
Chubby caught sight of her, and waved
ecstatically !
THE END


�
?


A3Z3.2
H3QSck
C N Ct>fy).


.. -t
. >




11l 111 111 I ll lll mumi*
3 1508 02112240 8


